DANIEL 



THE PEOPHET. 



NINE LECTURES, 



DELIVERED IN 



THE DIVINITY SCHOOL 



pfi i ;:,,.-,...., 

1 I '' . 1 ",' ,! 



THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, 



WITH COPIOUS NOTES. 



BY THE 

REV. E. B. PTJSEY, D.D. 

j \\ ' 

REGIUS PROFESSOR OP HEBREW, AND CANON OF CHRIST CHURCH. 



SOLD BY 

JOHN HENET AND JAMES PAEKEE, OXFOED, 

AND 337, STRAND, LONDON; 

EIVINGTONS, WATEELOO PLAGE, LONDON, 

AND 41, HIGH STREET, OXFORD. 

1864. 

The right of translation is reserved. 



: '''"'A -fciwi-te'.^-" '' 



b 



5 



PLYMOUTH: 

PRINTED AT THE PKINTING-PRESS OF THE DEVONPOttT SOCIETY. 

1864. 



PBEFACE. 

The following lectures were planned, as my contri- 
bution against that tide of scepticism, which the pub- 
lication of the " Essays and Eeviews " let loose upon 
the young and uninstructecl. Not that those Essays 
contained anything formidable in themselves. Hu- 
man inventiveness in things spiritual or unspirittial 
is very limited. It would be difficult probably to in- 
vent a new heresy. Objectors of old were as acute 
or more acute than those now ; so that the ground was 
well-nigh exhausted. The unbelieving school of 
Geologians had done their worst. Chronology had 
been pressed to the utmost long ago. The differences 
of human form and of language lay on the surface. 
The Jews had tried what pseudo-criticism could do 
against the prophecies as to our Lord and His Church. 
German rationalism had been deterred from no theory 
in regard to Holy Scripture, either by its untenable- 
ness or its irreverence. The Essays contained nothing 
to which the older of us had not been inured for some 
forty years. Their writers asserted little distinctly, 
attempted to prove less, but threw doubts on every 
thing. They took for granted that the ancient faith 
had been overthrown ; and their Essays were mostly 
a long trumpet-note of victories, won (they assumed,) 
without any cost to them, over the faith in Germany. 
They ignored the fact, that every deeper tendency of 

a 2 



IV PEEFACE. 

thought or each more solid learning had, at least, done 
away with something shallow, something more ad- 
verse to faith. They practically ignored all criticism 
which was not subservient to unbelief. Yet the Es- 
sayists, Clergymen (with one exception), staked their 
characters, although not their positions, on the issue, 
that the old faith was no longer tenable j that it was 
dead and buried and the stone on the grave's mouth 
fast sealed. Their teaching was said to be "bold." 
Too "bold" alas ! it was towards Almighty God ; but, 
from whatever cause, its authors shrank, for the most 
part, from stating explicitly as their own, the unbe- 
lief which they suggested to others. They under- 
mined men's faith, without denying it themselves in 
such definite terms as would materially risk their of- 
fices or positions. This, however escaped notice ; and 
the shock was given, not by the things which were 
said, (for the same had been said more clearly in pub- 
lications avowedly infidel,) but that the faith was at- 
tacked by those, who, from their position, were ex- 
pected to be its defenders. Eegarded as, (what the 
Essays were, after a time, understood to be,) a challenge 
to the Church of England to admit their misbelief 
as allowable denial of truth, it has not befallen me 
to read another book so cowardly. Had the writers 
ventured, in plain terms a , to deny half the truths, as 

3 "First then to ascertain the real meaning of the passages ex- 
tracted, and I must say that this is no easy task. If the author 
had studied to express his sentiments ivith ambiguity, I doubt if he 
could have leen more successful" Dr. Lushington on Dr. Williams, 
Judgment, p. 18. " I turn to Mr. Wilson's own words. It is in- 
deed to be regretted that Mr. Wilson in his Essay has frequently 
expressed himself in language so ambiguous as to admit of opposite 
constructions." Dr. Lushington, Ib. p. 33. " This sentence is 



rBEFACE. V 

to the Bible or the Faith, which they suggested to 

open to diverse interpretations, and some of its terms are self-con- 
tradictory." Ib. p. 34. " Mr. "W's use of these contradictory terms, 
' supematurally communicated speculation,' together -with his im- 
puting blame to those of the Clergy who would base the Church of 
Christ, as a society, upon the possession of this ' supematurally 
communicated speculation,' rather than upon ' the manifestation of 
the divine life in man' might leave upon some readers the impres- 
sion that Mr. W. doiibted whether the JToly Scriptures had been 
supematurally communicated, and that he doubted -whether the 
doctrines, as distinguished from the moral teaching of Chrsitianity, 
were the necessary basis of the Church. Without saying this im- 
pression of this passage is false, I cannot say that is necessarily the 
true, especially considering this is a criminal case. As a criminal 
charge, this Article cannot be supported." p. 34, 5. "The drift of 
all the reasoning contained in these passages is to prove that sub- 
scription to the xxxix Articles does not impose on the Clergy the 
obligation of honestly believing them to be true and binding on 
their consciences." Ib. 38. 

" What is meant by 'passing by the side of the first five Articles, 
and ' as to the humanifying of the Divine word and the Divine 
personalities, without directly contradicting impugning or refusing 
assent to them ?' The Clergy are bound by the King's declaration 
to take the Articles in their literal and grammatical sense ; the first 
five Articles are the most important of all. Is it consistent with 
their literal and grammatical sense to ' pass by ' them ? I think 
not. Is it consistent with the declaration that ' they are agreeable 
to the Word of God ? ' If so, why pass by ? Is it consistent with 
the declaration ' I do willingly and ex animo subscribe, &c ? ' I 
think not. And yet, according to Mr. W., the clerk is to 'pass by' 
these articles ' without directly contradicting, impugning or refusing 
assent to them.' In my opinion, this is not possible. I think that 
the substance of what Mr. W. has written is this ; to suggest modes, 
by which the Articles subscribed may be evaded, contrary to the 
King's declaration and the terms of subscription." Ib. p. 39, 40. Of 
the other writers, the Rev. Prof. Powell was soon removed from 
human judgment to the Judgment-seat of God. Mr. Pattison con- 
tented himself with shewing the weakness of Evidence- writers of 
the last century, without hinting on what, grounds men's faith in 



VI -PREFACE. 

others to deny, they would have aroused the indigna- 
tion of the whole believing people of England against 
them, that they denied such truths and remained mi- 
nisters of the Church of England. 

Others, who wrote in defence of the faith, engaged 
in larger subjects ; I took, for my province, one more 
confined but definite issue. I selected the book of 
Daniel, because unbelieving critics considered their 
attacks upon it to be one of their greatest triumphs. 
The exposure of the weakness of some ill-alleged point 
of evidence has often thrown suspicion on a whole 
faith. The exposure of the weakness of criticism, 
where it thought itself most triumphant, would, I hop- 
ed, shake the confidence of the young in their would- 
be misleaders. True ! Disbelief of Daniel had become 
an axiom in the unbelieving critical school b . Only, 
they mistook the result of unbelief for the victory of 
criticism. They overlooked the historical fact that 
the disbelief had been antecedent to the criticism. 
Disbelief had been the parent, not the offspring of 
their criticism ; their starting-point, not the winning- 
post of their course. 

In other books of Holy Scripture, disbelief could 

Jesus and His Gospel rests. He did not mention doctrine, except 
to say that the command to destroy the Canaanites and the eternity 
of future punishment are "questioned," (he does not say "denied,") 
by "natural conscience." Continued study of Professor Jowett's 
Essay makes one think sadly, " What does there remain of Chris- 
tianity, which the writer can believe ? " 

b "Auberlen indeed defends [Daniel] but says, 'Die Unaehtheit 
Daniel's 1st in der modemen Theologie zum Axiom geworden.' " 
Dr. Williams in Essays, p. 76. " It is one of the highest triumphs 
and most saving facts of the more recent criticism, to have proved 
that the book of Daniel belongs to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes." 
A well known writer, now dead. 



PREFACE. Vll 

and did sever what, if true, (as it is,) was necessarily 
Divine, from what admitted of being represented as 
human. Eejecting what, if they accepted, they must 
own to be from God, they assigned to man the hu- 
manised residuum. They laid down, to their own 
satisfaction, that the miracles, related in any histori- 
cal book of Holy Scripture, were magnified represen- 
tations of the real truth , or that insulated prophecies 
were inserted after the event d ; or that a long-lived 

c e. g. Davidson, Introd. " The narratives of the Pentateuch are 
usually trustworthy, though partly mythical and legendary. The 
miracles recorded were the exaggerations of a later age." i. 131. 
" It is only neccessary to examine the history as it lies hefore us, 
to find in it a mythological, traditional, and exaggerated element, 
forbidding the literal acceptation of the whole. The 'ten miracu- 
lous plagues, which spared the Israelites, while they fell upon the 
Egyptians the crowd of extraordinary interpositions of Jehovah 
in hehalf of the people as they journeyed through the wilderness, 
shew the influence of later traditions on the narrative, in dressing 
it out with fabulous traits. The laws of nature are unchangeable, 
God does not directly arid suddenly interfere with them on behalf 
of his creatures ; neither does he so palpably or constantly inter- 
meddle with men's little concerns." Ib. 103. "The Almighty 
does not violently interfere with the eternal laws of nature which 
he established at first." Ib. 221. "In regard to the miraculous 
element connected with these plagues, it appears that the national 
traditions account for all that appears as miraculous. We resolve 
what is miraculous in the plagues into a traditional element," &c. 
Ib. 225. "The narrative of the passage of the Eed Sea must not be 
viewed as literal history. Later traditions exaggerated the event, 
surrounding it with wonder, &c." Ib. p. 430. "The traditional and 
mythical (in the passage of the Jordan) are perceptible. A mira- 
cle is made out of a natural event." add p. 470, 1. ii. 41, 2. 450. 
iii. 32. 279, 80. 347. 

a "It [Jacob's prophecy] has the form of a prediction; but it 
is a tiaticinium post eventum." (Dav. i. 198.) i. e. a falsehood, pro- 
fessing to be "a prophecy," but written "after the event." So 
i. 338, of Balaam's prophecy ; i. 428, of the prophecy of the judg- 



Vlll PREFACE. 

prophet lived to recast his prophecies, and gave to 
his prophecies of nearer events a definiteness which, 
(they stated as confidently as if they had lived and 
had heard them,) they had not when he uttered them 6 , 
or, if the events prophesied were too remote to be so 
accounted for, that the prediction must have been 
given close upon the events, when human sagacity 
could, (they held,) foresee them f , and then, without 
prejudice to their unbelief, they could afford to admire 
what they claimed to be man's own. The old pro- 
phets, (they tacitly assumed,) were inferior to them- 
selves; still, for their own times, they were, "samid 
frailty and national contractedness," above their age. 
The book of Daniel admitted of no such compro- 
mises. Its historical portions are no history ; for the 
people, as such, had, in the period of their Captivity, 
no history. The period was like one of those in the 
book of Judges, whether of oppression or of rest, in 
which their whole condition exemplified God's Pro- 
vidence and dealings with them, and no marked change 
occurred. Jeremiah had bidden them, in God's name, 
live as peaceable denizens in the land of their capti- 
vity. " ll Build ye houses, and dwell ; and plant gar- 
dens and eat the fruit of them ; take ye wives, and be- 
get sons and daughters ; and take wives for your sons 

ment on the rebuilder of Jericho ; ii. 452, of predictions in the 
Judges ; ii. 450, of others in Samuel ; iii. 32, of those of Isaiah as 
to Sennacherib and Hezekiah ; iii. 99, 100, as to some of Jeremiah. 

e Davids, iii. 146, 7. and 150, of Ezekiel. 

f Dav. i. 383, of the predictions in Deuteronomy; iii. 15, of Is. 
xxi ; iii. 19, of Is. xxiii ; iii. 98, of Jeremiah's prophecy of the 70 
years' captivity of Judah. 

s Dav. ii. 456. Comp. Dr. Stanley, as quoted below, p. 257. 

u Jer. xxix. 5-7. 



PREFACE. IX 

and give your daughters to husbands, that they may 
bear sons and daughters ; that ye may be increased 
there and not diminished. And seek the peace of the 
city whither I have caused you to be carried away 
captives, and pray unto the Lord for it ; for in the 
peace thereof ye shall have peace." Their habits in 
their subsequent dispersions make it, in itself, proba- 
ble, that they followed the advice. The Psalms of 
the captivity describe them as waiting for God. But 
a dissolved people, individuals scattered amid an over- 
whelming population, with no unity save that of their 
faith, has no history, unless it rebel. For history is 
of changes. These had no power to change. The 
history then in Daniel relates not to his people ; nor 
was it Daniel's office to record the history of his own 
administration in the position to which, for the pro- 
tection of his people, he had been raised. The book 
of Daniel then has nothing of the nature of secular 
history ; it records only certain events whereby God 
acted upon the Heathen Monarchs in whose keeping 
His people, the depositories of His revelation to man, 
for the time were. And these events were mostly su- 
pernatural. The prophecies also are one connected 
whole ; they admit of no dislocation ; they speak de- 
finitely of a long period far beyond Daniel's time. 
To the nearer future there was nothing to add. The 
restoration from the captivity, the date of that resto- 
ration, the name of the conqueror who was to grant 
it, had been foretold already. In this respect, there 
was nothing left but to await the flowing-by of the 
seventy years \ The temporal prophecies in Daniel 
join on with those of Isaiah and Jeremiah. 

1 Davidson says, "Deliverance from Babylon is not predicted. 



X PKEFACE. 

The former prophets had predicted the destruction 
of Babylon by the Medes and Persians, and the resto- 
ration of Israel. The visions in Daniel shew the suc- 
cession of world-empires, beginning with the descrip- 
tion of the Babylonian world-empire and its displace- 
ment by the Medo-Persian. Thenceforward, there is 
no break. They are outlines, shaded here and there, 
and at times more strongly, which embrace the whole 
space from Nebuchadnezzar to (as every one admits) 
Antiochus Epiphanes. Many a cleft is purposely left 
out of the picture ; as the years of Nebuchadnezzar's 
worthless successors ; or the century and a half of the 
miserable kings of Persia from the gathering of the 
storm against Greece by Xerxes until it rolled back 
under Alexander ; or lesser intervals in the yet later 
period. Whatever details are given, the prophecies 
are neither chronology nor history. But since there 
V prophecy from the time of the Babylonian empire, 
there is no date between that empire and the reign of 
Antiochus Epiphanes, where men could place the wri- 
ter. For, by placing him at any intervening point, 

That event, "which might he considered of greatest importance in 
the eye of a Hebrew seer living in Babylon whither he had been 
carried captive, is unnoticed." (iii. 174.) The prophets, who fore- 
told the judgment of the Captivity, were also themselves consoled 
by the prediction of the close of that judgment, (e. g. Ezek. xi. 
13-20.) or God foretold by them that close, as He ever, in this life, 
mitigates judgment by hope. Davidson assumes the spuriousness 
of Jeremiah's prophecy of the restoration after the 70 years, the 
later date of prophecies of Isaiah which predict the destruction of 
Babylon and the restoration of Judah from it, and then, since, on 
those and the like assumptions, that deliverance would not have been 
prophesied before, and would have been predicted then, he argues 
that Daniel too, had he lived then, must also have prophesied those 
same events, had he prophesied at all. 



PREFACE. XI 

they would have invented to themselves a prophet, 
who should speak of things past as if he were prophe- 
sying them, and yet prophesy, with equal distinctness, 
those. yet to come; half-forger, half-prophet. Men 
had then no choice "between believing all and disbe- 
lieving all, compressing into the time before Antiochus 
Epiphanes, as best they could, whatever they could 
not evaporate into a mere ideal, and, as in the ancient 
fable, laying the amputated and disjointed limbs 'of 
the old prophet, piece by piece, into the cauldron 
whence was to issue the renovated form of the Daniel 
of the 19th century. 

One propnecy only, which fills up outlines of the 
earlier prophecy, stops with the Old Testament Anti- 
Christ, Antiochus Epiphanes ; the others exhibit in 
the distant vista, the final establishment of the Gos- 
pel, the second Coming of Christ, the Kesurrection. 
There being then no choice but to believe all or disbe- 
lieve all, a school to whom it was a postulate, that 
Almighty God did not reveal Himself to His creatures 
except through their human reason, and that He did 
not interfere in His own creation, must make its choice 
to disbelieve all. 

This being the real root of the objections to the 
book of Daniel, I felt that any answer, which should 
only consider critical or historical objections, must 
fail of its end, because these are mere outworks, thrown 
up to keep men off from the real issue, as to prophecy 
or miracle. I therefore set myself primarily to shew, 
1) that let men place the book where they would, there 
is in it definite unmistakeable prophecy ; 2) that such 
definite prophecy as the minuter prophecies in Daniel, 
the foreground of more distant and larger prophecy, is 



Xll PEEFACE. 

in harmony with the whole system of prophecy, as well 
in the Old Testament as in the prophecies of our Lord. 
In the notes, I have set myself to answer, more in 
detail than an oral lecture admitted, the criticisms, 
which have been raised as pleas for an unbelief which 
was antecedent to criticism. This I did, in. order to 
meet the pseudo-criticism on its own grounds, for the 
sake of those who would see ; well knowing that the 
grace of God alone could touch those who now wish 
not to see. I have also, here and there, pointed out 
how the pseudo-critical argument recoils. 

In the sketch of the gradual gathering of the Canon, 
my argument was concerned with its close, not with its 
beginning. For the main point, in which its history 
bore on the book of Daniel, is, that it was closed be- 
fore the date, where unbelievers place, and must place, 
their pseudo-Daniel. Since the wildest criticism now 
places but very few of the older books later than the 
Captivity, the different theories, devised to remove 
them from the date when they were written, affected 
not this argument. But I have pointed out tokens of 
a gradual formation of the Canon k , because the ration- 
alist school assumes as a convenient starting-point, 
that the books of Holy Scripture were .-first collected 
into one whole after the captivity. In regard to its 
close, I have entered into the grounds alleged to bring 

k The genuineness of the Pentateuch occupies two 8vo. volumes 
of Hengstenberg. Obviously, the argument could not be condensed. 
Forty years of study have only shewn me the more, both from lan- 
guage and the subsequent books of the Old Testament, the evi- 
dence of its genuineness, -which I already believed on the autho- 
rity of otir Lord. In examining for my class the first volume of 
Dr. Colenso, I could only be amazed that any mind could be sha- 
ken-by such arguments. Faith, of course, could not. 



PEEFACE. X1U 

down the date of Bcclesiastes, Ezra, Nehemiah, and 
the Chronicles, both in disproof of the later closing of 
the Canon, and in illustration of the sort of criticism, 
which is used to prop up foregone conclusions. 

But nothing is gained by a mere answer to objec- 
tions, so long as the original prejudice, "there cannot 
be supernatural prophecy," remains. Be the objec- 
tions ever so completely removed, unbelief remains 
unshaken, because these objections are put forward to 
delude others, scarcely to blind itself; for they who 
believe not, know well that the ground of their unbe- 
lief rests on their conceptions of God and of His rela- 
tion to man, not on history. And therefore, while I 
have conscientiously read every thing which has been 
written against the book of Daniel 1 , and have met 

1 The 3rd part of Dr. Davidson's Introduction to the O.T., which 
contains what he hag Written against the hook of Daniel, had not 
appeared, until the four first lectures were printed. But his work 
is only a reproduction of the rationalist German works which he 
either epitomises or translates. I have not met with any new 
argument or even an old argument more forcibly put in it. The 
Hebrew criticisms are transferred from the German writers, some- 
times in a way which implies ignorance of the elements of Hehrew. 
Thus, Stahelin (Einl. . 36.) alleged in proof of the lateness of the 
books of Kings, "the aramaising suffixes 2 Kgs. iv. 2,3, 7." Dr. 
Davidson (ii. p. 37,) gives this, " ^ for $ 2 Kgs. iv. 2. r?}> for & 
2 Kgs. iv. 7." The first, " '.$ for -j!?" may mean ; "r$ is for i? which 
the Masorethes pointed i)V, but which they ought to have pointed 
rk, although i^> not ^ is their uniform punctuation." But in 2 Kgs. 
iv. 7. Dr. D. overlooked >ye/i, 'j', which Stahelin meant, although 
they are marked by the Kri, and lighted upon <?)>, the regular fe- 
minine Imperative, " go," which he supposed ought to he t&, al- 
though $, as being masculine, would have been a "false con- 
cord." Again, Stahelin had said of the title of Proverbs xxxi. 
tes wiip; -ip s NV9 $9 ^ D r" '"Wi "The words of king.Lemuel; the ut- 
terance which his mother taught him," "Hitzig and Bertheau 



XIV PEEFACE. 

every argument in those writings, my own conviction 
is, that the point really at issue remains, when they 
are answered. For the real objection is, that God 
should reveal Himself to His creature man, in any 
other way than by the operation of man's natural rea- 
son, or that He should tell man any thing, "beyond 
the grasp of eye or hand." 

It is mere dust in people's eyes, that some speak of 
the present conflict, as a question of reconciling phy- 

maintain, that ^a cannot thus, 'without the Article, be united with 
Lemuel, that therefore it must stand in the stat. constr. with K^D 
l Ung of Massa.'" p. 414. Dr. Davidson (ii. 338.) says, "The 
word Massa is not a proper name, because N^D -^n ^Q j> 'Lemuel 
king of Massa,' is not Hebrew. To make it good Hebrew, 1^9 should 
have the article prefixed." Were there even any such place as 
'Massa,' any one knows that what Dr. D. says is not Hebrew, is 
Hebrew; and that what he says would "make it good Hebrew" 
is not Hebrew. As matter of history, Dr. D. tells us, " It is in- 
correct to say, as Hengstenberg and many others have done, that 
the series of opponents to the authenticity of the book of Daniel 
was opened by Porphyry in the third century. Porphyry was not 
the first impugner of Daniel. Hippolytus, a Roman bishop and 
orthodox Christian writer, also referred the work to the Maccabse- 
an period and Antiochus Epiphanes, as we know from his explana- 
tions of his book, partly Greek and partly Syriac." And for this 
he refers us to Ewald in the Grb'tt. gel. Anz. 1859. p. 270, 1. St. 
Hippolytus an "impugner of Daniel! " Ewald says nothing of 
this ; but only alleges a certain amount of agreement of exposition 
as to the Seleucidas and Ptolemies. Yet S. Hippolytus believed 
that the prophecy of the 70 weeks related to Jesus and ended in 
Him ; that the 4th empire was the Eoman, that it would last to 
the end, that Anti- Christ was yet to come. I see not what point of 
contact there is between his expositions and Porphyry's, save those 
which are common to Porphyry with all Christians, all but the 
unbelief that they were " vaticinia post eventum." In Dr. Da- 
vidson's "series of opponents to the authenticity of the book of 
Daniel" there is a cleft, from Porphyry the Heathen to Collins the 
Deist, of 1400 years. 



PREFACE. XV 

sical science and theology. Men can hardly be so 
wilfully blind as to think it. The contest runs along 

m I deeply regret to see that Bp. Tait, in minimising or apologi- 
sing for the opinion, expressed by the Judicial Committee upon 
the inspiration of Holy Scripture, inadvertently aids this delusion. 
He says, "It is satisfactory to feel asstired that no Clergyman of 
the Church of England can be called upon to maintain the unwar- 
ranted position that the Bible is an infallible guide in questions of 
physical science." (Preface to Five Discourses on the "Word of God, 
p. viii, &c.) The like -words are ascribed to him in a speech in 
Convocation. "He did not think that the Church -was in dan- 
ger, because the highest Court of Appeal had said, that a Clergy- 
man was not legally liable, because he held that statements with 
regard to physical science in the Bible were not the inspired "Word 
of God." The Court of Appeal did not limit their opinion to 
"physical science." To imply that it did, would be to deceive 
ourselves and others. This was not the issue raised by Dr. "Wil- 
liams or Mr. "Wilson. In regard to Dr. "Williams they pxit indeed 
a non-natural construction on his words, which no honest man 
could accept. The misbelief of Dr. "Williams on the inspiration of 
Holy Scripture was virtually condemned by the very terms in 
which he himself was acquitted, as the heresy of Pelagius was 
condemned at the Synod of Diospolis, which reversed the judg- 
ment of S. Augustine and the African Synod as to himself. In 
regard to Mr. "Wilson the issue on the one passage before them was 
definite. Mr. Wilson stated, "the word of God is contained in 
Scripture, whence it does not follow that it is coextensive with 
it." (Essays, p. 176.) The Committee, in their opinion, laid down, 
as Bp. Tait quotes them, that " it is not a contradiction to the law 
of the Church to affirm that any part of the Canonical Scriptures 
of the Old and New Testaments, however unconnected with re- 
ligious faith or moral duties^ was not written under the inspira- 
tion of the Holy Spirit." It justified Mr. Wilson's statement in a 
way condemned by the two Primates. (The ABp. of Canter- 
bury's Pastoral, p. 10, 11. ABp. of York's Pastoral, p. 10-13.) 
But there is nothing to limit the Committee's opinion to "physi- 
cal science." Probably it would cover any denial of the histori- 
cal truth of any history in Holy Scripture, as when Mr. Wilson, 
(although the passages were not before the Court,) denied "the 



XVI PKEFACE. 

the whole range of God's Eevelation and of. man's 
thought. What should be one universal harmony 
jars with one discord of rebellion. The fact of God's 
Eevelation, and the tokens which He gives of His re- 
vealing Himself; His Being in Himself, and the mode 
of His Being, His Character, His Attributes, His re- 
lation to us His creatures, His rights over us, His 
care and Providence towards us, what it is befitting 
for Him to Be or to reveal, how He shall reveal what 
He does reveal, what condescension towards us we 
shall allow Him to use, in consideration of His high 
Epicurean dignity, what aweful Justice we may ad- 
mit Him to possess, consistently with our "moral 
sense" of what His Attributes should be every 
thing is alike disputed : only men use courteous lan- 
guage towards Him, as to a dethroned Monarch, "Who 
is to be treated with respect and the semblance of 
royalty, provided that He transgress not the bounds 
which His creatures assign to Him. Alas that, 
while they are laying down the laws upon which it 
beseems their Maker to act, they forget that He is 
their Maker, that these brave words of their's are 
but like the speeches in the mouth of a player ; that 
the great reality, now veiled, is at hand; and that 

thorough, reliableness " of almost all the history in Holy Scripture, 
to "the time of the divided kingdom," (i.e. nearly half of the 
Old Testament, Essays, p. 170.) or implied the existence of an " ad- 
mixture of legendary matter or embellishment in" the Gospels, 
(Ib. p. 161.) and the want of "exactness" in that of St. John. 
(Ib.) He spoke of "the dark patches of human passion and error, 
which," he said, "form a partial crust upon" Holy Scripture. (Ib. 
p. 177.) 'People only blind themselves and others, when, with 
such books or those of Dr. Colenso's before them, they speak of 
the relation of physical science to Holy Scripture as the leading 
question of this day. 



PREFACE. XV11 

their God, "Who bears so long with, our presumptions, 
will shew indeed, as He has said, "whose word shall 
stand, Mine or their's. n " 

Physical science is made a battle-field, because it 
is the favorite study of the day ; the mistake made 
about Galileo is a convenient lo Psean over theologi- 
ans. Theologians used wrong inferences from Holy 
Scripture once; therefore we are to mistrust what ? 
the inferences of Theologians ? No, but the Bible it- 
self. And yet not we, in common life, but scientific 
men, use the same language as before Galileo, " the 
sunrises, the sun sets," the self-same language as the 
Bible uses. The mistake was not in the language 
of the Bible, but that men argued from language, 
adapted, (as language relating to visible phenomena 
must be,) to the phenomena whereof it speaks, as 
though it necessarily contained scientific truth. The 
claims of geology do not even touch upon theology. 
The belief that creation, at least, dated backward for 
countless ages, was current in the Church some 1400 
years before Geology. " Six thousand years of our 
world," says St. Jerome , " are not yet fulfilled ; and 
what eternities, what times, what originals of ages, 
must we not think there were before, in which An- 
gels, Thrones, Dominions, and the other Powers served 
God, and, apart from the vicissitudes and measures of 
times, subsisted, at the command of God ! " "Almost 
all the teachers of the Church throughout the world," 
says a later Greek writer P, " teach that the whole spi- 
ritual and angelic being existed before this world out 

n Jer. xliv. 28. in Tit. c. i. quoted by Petav. de Angel. 

i. 15. Opp. iii. 38. P Grsec. Script. MS. ib. n. 22. See S.Basil 
in Hexaem. Horn. i. S. Greg. Naz., S. Chrys. and others, ibid. 

b 



XV111 PREFACE. 

of nothing." Holy Scripture expressly speaks of the 
stellar system, as existing before the foundation of 
the earth. " ^ Where wast thou, when I founded the 
earth ? declare, if thou knowest understanding. "Who 
laid the measures thereof, for thou knowest 1 or Who 
stretched out the line upon it? Whereon are the 
foundations thereof sunken ? or who laid the corner- 
stone thereof ? When all the morning stars jubilated 
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy ? " 
And this agrees with the remarkable parenthetic men- 
tion of "the stars" in Genesis, when, in the detailed 
account of the creation of the sun and moon and of 
their offices for our earth, there are appended the sim- 
ple words, " and the stars," as though it was intend- 
ed only to guard against the error, that they might 
otherwise be thought to be uncreated. Then, there 
is nothing to connect the time spoken of in Gen* i. 2. 
with that of the first great declaration of the creation 
of all things in the beginning. " In the beginning God 
created, the heaven and the earth." Eather, of the 
forms of speech, which could have been chosen, to ex- 
press past time, that has been chosen, which least 
connects the state, when the earth was one vast waste, 
with the time when God created it. Both were in 
past time ; but there is nothing to connect those times 
together 1 ". First, we have, as far back as thought can 

9 Job xxxviii. 4-7. 

r The substantive verb not being used in Hebrew as a mere co- 
pula, had Moses intended to say that the earth was " waste and 
desolate " when God created it, the idiom for this would have been 
vftj inn pxrii, (omitting the verb,) just as there actually follows, 
ninp '.49 Vs ^nj, " and darkness on the face of the deep." The in- 
sertion of the past verb, n^ t n, has no force at all, unless it be used 
to express what was the condition of the earth in a past time, pre- 



PREFACE. XIX 

reach, creation, in the beginning, of all those heavens 
of -heavens through those all-but-boundless realms 
of space, and of our earth. Then, detached from this, 
a past condition of the earth, how far separated from 
it, is not said, but not a condition in which God, Who 
made all things very good, ever made any thing 8 . 

vious to the rest of the narrative, but in no connection at all with 
what preceded. Such connection in Hebrew might have been ex- 
pressed by {"jxn 'iipi, " and the earth became " or " was," &c. or by 
the omission of the verb. Moses was directed to choose just that 
idiom, which expresses a past time, anterior to what follows, but in 
no connection of time whatever with what precedes. Yet, on the 
other hand the " and," by which v. 2. is united with v. 1, shews 
that v. 1. does not stand as a mere summary of what follows. The 
revelation, " In the beginning God created the heaven and the 
earth," declares a fact by itself. To this is added that other fact, 
"And the earth was (in the past, but at some unexplained time) 
" void and waste." The explanations, given to get rid of this sim- 
ple statement, illustrate its force. 1) The statement that v. 2. is a 
mere summary, is precluded by the "and." 2) The explanation 
"In the beginning, when God created the heaven and the earth, 
the earth was, &c." besides being unnaturally artificial, is ungram- 
matical. It must have been pun nn). 3) That of Ewald from 
Eashi, "In the beginning, when God created the heaven and the 
earth, (and the earth was then a chaos,) God said, Let there be 
light," is yet more unnaturally artificial, and has the simple sense 
of mankind against it. So would no Hebrew have written ; so could 
no reader understand it, except he wished it. Human will can 
persuade itself of any thing. 

8 The words tohoo va-bohoo, (obviously forming one idea, from 
the alliteration,) are, in the two other places in Holy Scripture 
where they occur together, used of desolation. Jeremiah (Iv. 23.) 
predicts a future desolation, in pointed reference to the former con- 
dition of the earth. The sentence, " I saw the earth and lo, tohoo 
va-tohoo," is as near being a quotation of Gen. i. 2, "And the 
earth was tohoo va-bohoo," as any words could be, which did not pre- 
serve the precise grammatical structure. The addition, "and to the 
heavens, and their light was not," exhibits the heavens as they were 
when the earth was tohoo va-bohoo, and before the light was creat- 

b2 



XX PREFACE. 

What follows is connected with this state. First, we 
have a contemporary condition, (as it is expressed in 
Hebrew,) " and darkness upon the face of the deep ; " 
then a contemporaneous action, of more or less dura- 
tion, "and the Spirit of God broodm^ upon the face 
of the waters ; " then successive action, (as this too is 
expressed in Hebrew,) "And God said;" which is con- 
tinued on through the rest of the history of the Crea- 
tion. It seems then that God has told us, in the two 
first sentences, just what concerned us to know, first, 
that He created all which is ; then, how He brought 
into order this our habitation which He has given 
us. "What intervened between that creation " in the 
beginning " and that re-modelling for our habitation, 
does not concern us ; and on this God is silent. He 
tells us the first and the last, that He created all 
things, and that He prepared this our beautiful earth 
for us, and created all things in it and ourselves. In 
the interval there is room for all the workings of God, 
,which Geology speaks of, if it speaks truly. The his- 
tory of the Creation in Genesis falls in naturally with 
it, in that it does say that this our mysterious habita- 
tion, which God has made the scene of such wondrous 
love, Avas created "in the beginning," i. e. before the 
time of which it proceeds to speak. Another period 
of undefined duration is implied by the words, "And 
the Spirit of God was brooding upon the face of the 
deep." For action, of course, implies time, in which 
the action takes place. And this action was previous 

* 

ed, on the first day. Isaiah xxxiif. 11," He shall stretch out over 
it the line of tohoo and the stones of Moo," i. e. He shall, as it were, 
measure it out, not to he huilthy line hut to he destroyed, also re- 
lates to an utter desolation of what.had once heen heautiful. 



PREFACE. XXI 

to that of the first " day" of the creation, which be- 
gins, like the rest, with the words, "And God said." 

Geology, then, may pursue its course, with belief, 
not unbelief, for its condition; only let it not be cre- 
dulous, (as the way has too often been,) of any thing 
which tends to unbelief, eager to find grounds to dis- 
believe Scripture, averse only to believe it 1 . 

In like way, as to the flood. Scripture is in har- 
mony, when it speaks of the water having, before 
God created man on the earth, covered the whole 
earth, and of its having again covered it at the flood. 
The assumption of a partial deluge, in any sense 
which would not contradict Scripture, would meet no 

* "Between the first and second, and between the second and 
third, verses of the Biblical history of the creation, revelation 
leaves two great white pages, on which human science may write 
what it will, in order to fill up the blanks of natural history, 
which revelation omitted itself to supply, as not being its office. 

" Of each of these 'cartes blanches 7 revelation has only given a 
superscription, a summary table of contents. The first runs, ' In 
the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.' How this 
was, how long it lasted, what followed thereon, what evolutions 
and revolutions took place, down to. that state of things which v. 2. 
describes, it says nothing. Let human science fill up the void, if 
it can. 

" The 2nd 'carte blanche' has the summary inscription, 'the earth 
was void and waste, and the Spirit of God was brooding on the 
face of the waters.' What influences the Spirit of God, "Which 
brooded over the waters, had upon them, what operations and for- 
mations It called forth in them, revelation says not. 

' ' Bevelation has, in the superscription of the two 'cartes blanches, ' 
laid an ever-firm and immoveable foundation, which leaves none 
for Atheism or Pantheism. Experience, combination, and specula- 
tion, investigation, and philosophy of nature or of religion, and 
Theology may try to build further on this foundation. But no 
other foundation shall any one lay than that which is here laid,' 1 
Kurtz, Bibelu. Astronomic, 1853. p, 433, 



XV111 PREFACE. 

of nothing." Holy Scripture expressly speaks of the 
stellar system, as existing before the foundation of 
the earth. "1 Where wast thou, when I founded the 
earth ? declare, if thou knowest understanding. "Who 
laid the measures thereof, for thou knowest ! or "Who 
stretched out the line upon it? Whereon are the 
foundations thereof sunken ? or who laid the corner- 
stone thereof ? When all the morning stars jubilated 
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy ? " 
And this agrees with the remarkable parenthetic men- 
tion of " the stars " in Genesis, when, in the detailed 
account of the creation of the sun and moon and of 
their offices for our earth, there are appended the sim- 
ple words, " and the stars," as though it was intend- 
ed only to guard against the error, that they might 
otherwise be thought to be uncreated. Then, there 
is nothing to connect the time spoken of in Gen. i. 2. 
with that of the first great declaration of the creation 
of all things in the beginning. " In the beginning God 
created the heaven and the earth." Bather, of the 
forms of speech, which could have been chosen, to ex- 
press past time, that has been chosen, which least 
connects the state, when the earth was one vast waste, 
with the time when God created it. Both were in 
past time ; but there is nothing to connect those times 
together 1 . First, we have, as far back as thought can 

9 Job xxxviii. 4-7. 

r The substantive verb not being used in Hebrew as a mere co- 
pula, had Moses intended to say that the earth was " waste and 
desolate" when Grod created it, the- idiom for this would have been 
wij ink fiKfi], (omitting the verb,) just as there actually follows, 
rip j? Vs sn5>n], "and darkness on the face of the deep." The in- 
sertion of the past verb, nyyj, has no force at all, unless it be used 
to express what was the condition of the earth in a past time, pre- 



PREFACE. XIX 

reach, creation, in the beginning, of all those heavens 
of -heavens through those all-but-boundless realms 
of space, and of our earth. Then, detached from this, 
a past condition of the earth, how far separated from 
it, is not said, but not a condition in 'which God, "Who 
made all things very good, ever made any thing 5 . 

vious to the rest of the narrative, but in no connection at all with 
what preceded. Such connection in Hebrew might have been ex- 
pressed by -fiNn 'npi, " and the earth became " or " was," &c. or by 
the omission of the verb. Moses was directed to choose just that 
idiom, which expresses a past time, anterior to what follows, but in 
no connection of time whatever with what precedes. Yet, on the 
other hand the " and," by which v. 2. is united with v. 1, shews 
that v. 1. does not stand as a mere summary of what follows. The 
revelation, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the 
earth," declares a fact by itself. To this ig added that other fact, 
"And the earth was (in the past, but at some unexplained time) 
" void and waste." The explanations, given to get rid of this sim- 
ple statement, illustrate its force. 1) The statement that v. 2. is a. 
mere summary, is precluded by the " and." 2) The explanation 
"In the beginning, when God created the heaven and the earth, 
the earth was, &c." besides being unnaturally artificial, isungram- 
matical. It must have been pun ( nm. 3) That of Ewald from 
Rashi, "In the beginning, when God created the heaven and the 
earth, (and the earth was then a chaos,) God said, Let there be 
light," is yet more unnaturally artificial, and has the simple sense 
of mankind against it. So would no Hebrew have written ; so could 
no reader understand it, except he wished it. Human will can 
persuade itself of any thing. 

8 The words tohoo va-lohoo, (obviously forming one idea, from 
the alliteration,) are, in the two other places in Holy Scripture 
where they occur together, used of desolation. Jeremiah (Iv. 23.) 
predicts a future desolation, in pointed reference to the former con- 
dition of the earth. The sentence, " I saw the earth and lo, tohoo 
va-bohoo," is as near being a quotation of Gen. i. 2, "And the 
earth was tohoo va-lohoo," as any words could be, which did not pre- 
serve the precise grammatical structure. The addition, "and to the 
heavens, and their light was not" exhibits the heavens as they were 
when the earth was to/too va-bohoo, and before the light was creat- 

b2 



XX PREFACE. 

What follows is connected with this state. First, we 
have a contemporary condition, (as it is expressed in 
Hebrew,) " and darkness upon the face of the deep ; " 
then a contemporaneous action, of more or less dura- 
tion, "and the Spirit of God broodm^r upon the face 
of the waters ; " then successive action, (as this too is 
expressed in Hebrew,) "And God said 5" which is con- 
tinued on through the rest of the history of the Crea^ 
tion. It seems then that God has told us, in the two 
first sentences, just what concerned us to know, first, 
that He created all which is ; then, how He brought 
into order this our habitation which He has given 
us. "What intervened between that creation " in the 
beginning " and that re-modelling for our habitation, 
does not concern us ; and on this God is silent. He 
tells us the first and the last, that He created all 
things, and that He prepared this our beautiful earth 
for us, and created all things in it and ourselves. In 
the interval there is room for all the workings of God, 
.which Geology speaks of, if it speaks truly. The his- 
tory of the Creation in Genesis falls in naturally with 
it, in that it does say that this our mysterious habita- 
tion, which God has made the scene of such wondrous 
love, was created "in the beginning," i. e. before the 
time of which it proceeds to speak. Another period 
of undefined duration is implied by the words, "And 
the Spirit of God was broodm^ upon the face of the 
deep." For action, of course, implies time, in which 
the action takes place. And this action was previous 



ed, on the first day. Isaiah xxxiii. 11, " He shall stretch out over 
it the line oftohoo and the stones oflohoo," i. e. He shall, as it were, 
measure it out, not to be built by line hut to he destroyed, alsore- 
lates to an utter desolation of 'what.had once heen beautiful. 



PREFACE. XXI 

to that of the first " day" of the creation, which be- 
gins, like the rest, with the words, "And God said." 

Geology, then, may pursue its course, with belief, 
not unbelief, for its condition ; only let it not be cre- 
dulous, (as the way has too often been,) of any thing 
which tends to unbelief, eager to find grounds to dis- 
believe Scripture, averse only to believe it*. 

In like way, as to the flood. Scripture is in har- 
mony, when it speaks of the water having, before 
God created man on the earth, covered the whole 
earth, and of its having again covered it at the flood. 
The assumption of a partial deluge, in any sense 
which would not contradict Scripture, would meet no 

* "Between the first and second, and between the second and 
third, verses of the Biblical history of the creation, revelation 
leaves two great white pages, on which human science may write 
what it will, in order to fill up the blanks of natural history, 
which revelation omitted itself to supply, as not being its oifice. 

"Of each of these 'cartes blanches' revelation has only given a 
superscription, a summary table of contents. The first runs, ' In 
the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.' How this 
was, how long it lasted, what followed thereon, what evolutions 
and revolutions took place, down to that state of things which Y. 2. 
describes, it says nothing. Let human science fill up the void, if 
it can. 

'< The 2nd 'carte blanche' has the summary inscription, 'the earth 
was void and waste, and the Spirit of God was brooding on the 
face of the waters.' "What influences the Spirit of God, "Which 
brooded over the waters, had upon them, what operations and for- 
mations It called forth in them, revelation says not. 

' ' Eevelation has, in the superscription of the two 'cartes blanches, ' 
laid an ever-firm and immoveable foundation, which leaves none 
for Atheism or Pantheism. Experience, combination, and specula- 
tion, investigation, and philosophy of nature or of religion, and 
Theology may try to build further on this foundation. Bxxt no 
other foundation shall any one lay than that which is here laid," 
Kurtz, Bibelu. Astronomic, 1853. p. 433, 



XX11 PEEFACE. 

difficulty of science. A flood, which would cover 
Mount Ararat, would cover the globe. This objec- 
tion is mere anthropomorphism, as if any miracle 
were "hard" for God. The difficulty as to the ani- 
mals found, each in their several habitats, in Austra- 
lia, New Zealand, &c, is properly no scientific difficulty. 
It lies on the surface. But it presupposes, that the 
"rest" of God, spoken of in Genesis, implies that He 
created nothing afterwards ; which is contrary to our 
Lord's words, " My -Father worketh hitherto and I 
work," and to the fact that He is daily and hourly 
creating those myriads of human souls which He in- 
fuses into the bodies prepared by His Providence. 
Science has, on the other hand, to account for the 
fact, that the known population of the world is much 
what it would be, according to recognised rules of 
the increase of our race, dating from the received 
Chronology of Noah, and starting with six persons u . 

u See a remarkable article by Moigno in Les mondes, 1863. T. i. 
p. 516, 17. (Prof. Price kindly pointed it out to me.) It includes a 
calculation by "Mr Eati de Bruns, one of the most distinguished 
scholars of Cauchy, now Professor at Turin," that, starting from 
the received Chronology of the Mood " B.C. 2348, and taking as the 
annual increase r^, & number not far from that which represents 
the annual increase of the population of Erance, you would light 
on the net number of the population of the earth 1400,000,000. 

Europe 275,000,000. 

Asia 755,000,000. 

Africa 200,000,000. 

America 60,000,000. 

Australasia ' 3, 000, 000. 



1293,000,000." 

M. Faa de Bruns has included Noah alone with his 3 sons and 
their wives, which is obviously wrong, according to the Bible and 
the multiplication of the human race ; but at the close of 4200, (the 



PKEFACE. 

Hough as such calculations must needs be, they whol- 
ly exclude the fabulous unbroken antiquity which 
some claim for the human race. 

In this thickening strife with unbelief, it is of much 
moment for the Church and for individuals, that we 
do hot allow unbelievers to choose for us our battle- 
fields. Eationalism, in its assaults, ever chooses 
what is obscure, avoids what is clear; it chooses 
what is minute, it avoids what is comprehensive ; it 
chooses what is negative, it avoids what is positive ; 
it chooses what is at a distance from the centre of 
the faith, it avoids the central truth, or would fain 
hide it in the cloud of dust raised in the subordinate 
controversy. " Most," said Claudius v of the German 
paraphrasts of St. John's Gospel in the 18th century, 
"frizzle at the evening cloud which floats over the 
surface of the full moon ; but the full moon behind is 
left in its still repose." Science, at one time, ridicul- 
ed the history of the Creation, because Moses spoke of 
light as existing independently of and before the sun. 
Science now owns that Moses was right in distinguish- 
ing light from the luminary w . Yet, untaught by ex- 
perience, men still press inferences from a science, not 
as yet a century old, against that same history, forget- 
ful or ignorant, that that same chapter which they 
impugn, first of Holy Writ declared that truth, which 
Heathen philosophy never dreamed of, against which 
it struggled and- still struggles, but which the hun- 

number of the years from the Flood) the increase is so rapid that 
the substitution of the real number, 6, does not make a difference 
(Prof. Price tells me) of more than thirty five years and 25 days. 

v See Claudius' "Wercke (1774,) T. i. p. 9. "Paraphrases Evan- 
gelii Johannis,." &c. w TN,Gen. i. 3-5. -itei? Ib. 14-16. 



XXIV PREFACE. 

dreds of millions of Christians and of the heresy of 
Mohammed, and they themselves mostly, acknow- 
ledge, absolute creation atthe will of God, Heathen- 
ism conceived only of an eternity of matter developing 
into life, or of a deity, in its weary loneliness, evolv- 
ing worlds out of itself and embodying itself in them, 
in order to be no longer alone, itself not the author 
of life, but the life itself, such as it exists, insensate, 
irrational, or sinning, in the various: gradations of ex- 
istence in the world. The cosmogonies of the ancients 
were pantheistic, atheistic, or, at best, developement 
of prseexistent matter. Over against all these, Mo- 
ses enunciated, as simple, undemonstrated truth, "In 
the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." 
Men ask us to account for those thousands of years, 
which Geology claims, as if our faith were to depend 
upon our knowing the answer. Eaith asks them in 
return, how they account for the fact, that, through 
Moses, that truth of the creation was made known, 
which human reason cannot explain, which even now 
it relegates as far back as it can, in order to prevent 
the dread reality of its Personal Creator from pressing 
so closely upon it, while yet it is constrained to ac- 
knowledge the fact of the Creation. God speaks still 
through His words, "In the beginning God created 
the heaven and the earth," and the soul, which lis- 
tens, is sure that the truth spoken so simply, so sure- 
ly, so umnistakeably, so alone, so different from all 
speculations of philosophy, is from Him. In the 
possession of that truth, which God first taught the 
world through Moses, faith, yea, and God-enlightened 
reason too, is sure that there is some solution for the 
claims of Geology, be they what they may. 



PREFACE. XXV 

This has been, for some thirty years, a deep con- 
viction of my soul, that no hook can he written in 
hehalf of the Bible like the Bible itself. Man's de- 
fences are man's word ; they may help to beat off 
attacks, they may draw out some portion of its 
meaning. The Bible is God's Wordj and through it 
God the Holy Ghost, "Who spake it, speaks to the 
soul which closes not itself against it. 

But if defences are weak, except as far as God 
enables us to build them, or Himself "builds the 
house " through man, defences, not built as He would 
have them, will not only fall, but will crush those 
who trust them. The faith can receive no real injury 
except from its defenders. Against its assailants, 
those who wish to be safe, God protects. If the 
faith shall be (God forbid !) destroyed in England, 
it will be not by open assailants, (such as the writers 
in the Westminster Eeview, &c.) but by those who 
think that they defend it, while they have themselves 
lost it. So it was in Germany, nationalism was 
the product, not of the attacks on the Gospel but of 
its weak defenders. Each generation, in its contro- 
versies with unbelief, conceded more of the faith, un- 
til at last it was difficult to see what difference there 
was between assailants and defenders v . Theology 

w I stated tills in my " Collegiate and Professorial teaching," p. 
53 sqq. and explained some things which, at 27, I purposely left 
unexplained in my early book on Germany. Many things in it 
were crudely said ; I was also over-sanguine about the restoration 
of faith, then beginning in Germany. But my sympathies were 
solely with that revival of faith ; my strictures were solely directed 
against the "human system" built up in Lutheranism. Nothing 
which I wrote had any bearing on the English Articles, whose posi- 
tive teaching I ever valued, or any part of the Catholic faith, in 



XXVI PREFACE. 

was one great grave-yard ; and men were disputing 
over a corpse, as if it had life. The salt had " lost 
its savour." The life was fled. 

A writer x , who seems to think exclusive adherence 

which, (as I acquainted myself with Rationalism as a duty,) God 
ever, in His goodness, preserved me, -without any temptation to 
part with any of it. I say this, because some are fond of quoting 
an early work of mine, the remaining copies of which I withdrew 
some 30 years ago. 

x It seems to he almost a principle with Dean Stanley, to hold 
that to he uncertain which is assailed. Conviction, amid contradic- 
tions of truth, seems to him undue dogmatism. His mind hasheen 
remarkably characterised, as one which, "having a poetical faculty 
of seeing resemblances, lacks the philosophical power of seeing dif- 
ferences." In his lectures on the Jewish Church, worthless hea- 
then or Jewish tradition (some of it entitled Mohammedan, as 
drawn by Mohammed from Ms apostate Jewish teacher,) is mixed 
up with Scripture truth, wherever it adds a poetic feature to the 
history. But the impression is given, that most is alike tradition; 
of which some being patently absurd and untrue, an atmosphere of 
haze is thrown over the whole. Hints are given, as occasion sug- 
gests, of the uncertainty of the date of this or that portion of 
prophecy, against which German Rationalism has declared, as if it 
were of no account. He does not seem to be conscious, what he 
is parting with. He speaks, e.g. of "innocent questions about 
the date of the book of Daniel," (J. Ch. p. 467. comp. p. 423) 
when the question is, " Is that book Divine? or human, claiming 
to b'e Divine ? " One who teaches on these subjects, ought to 
have made up his mind upon them. And so, of course, would 
Dean Stanley, had he thought it of any account. Meanwhile, 
truth and doubt are mixed up together; and to censure denial of 
truth, is to secure his sympathy with the denial. The truth of 
the Old Testament history, in its details, is apparently presuppos- 
ed throughout his work; at the close (p. 521,) Dr Colenso's attacks 
on the Pentateuch are endorsed, and we are told to reckon the 
"errors and defectsof the Old Testament" "amongst its safeguards." 
p. 522. The same habit of indefiniteness extends to doctrine also, 
even as to the doctrine of the Atonement. Indeed, he seems unable 
to grasp or to state any doctrine definitely. 



PREFACE. XXV11 

to definite truth the great antagonist to the mind of 
Christ, would have us to agree to differ in every par- 
ticle of faith, yet to hold ourselves to be one in one 
" common Christianity." Like the Pantheon of old 
Rome, every thing is to be inshrined in one common 
Temple of Concord, not of faith or minds or wills, but 
of despair of truth. Nothing, in this new school, 
is to be exclusively true, nothing is to be false. 
]STo words are to have any exclusive meaning. 
Every one is to decypher the old inscriptions as he 
likes, so that he do not obtrude that meaning upon 
others, as the sole meaning. "Everlasting" is to 
one to mean " lasting for ever," to another, for what 
seems to be " an age, " as men say ; " atonement " is, 
to one, to mean only " being at one " with God some- 
how, by imitation, or admiration of the " ? greatest 
moral act ever done in this world ; " to another, if he 
likes, it is to be that Act of God's aweftil Holiness, 
which human thought cannot reach ; to one the Bible 
is to be, if he wills, " the word of God," so that he al- 
low his neighbour to have an equal chance of being 
right, who holds that it " contains" somewhere "the 
word of God," i. e. a revelation, of no one knows what, 
made, no one knows how, (it may be through man's 
natural faculties, or his own thoughts or mind,) and 
lying no one knows where, except that it is to be some- 
where between Genesis and Eevelations, but probably, 
according to the neo-Christianity, to the exclusion of 
both. We are to recognise together, that God the 
Holy Ghost " spake by the prophets," yet not so as 
to exclude their being fallible in matters of every day- 
morality. The authority of Jesus is to be respected ; 
y Prof. Jowett on St. Paul, ii. 591. 



XXV111 PEEFACE. 

yet not so far but that modern critics may be held 
to know more then He, our God. These things (as 
far as they have been yet applied,) are, of course, the 
beginning, not the end. On the same ground that 
"everlasting," in the mouth of Jesus, is to be an am- 
biguous word, so, and much more may we be called 
upon to hold that "grace," "faith," nay, "God," are 
ambiguous words, and to harmonize with those who 
hold, like the Pelagians of old, that "grace" is God's 
gracious help through man's natural powers, and only 
so far the help of God, in that man received those 
powers from God; or that " faith" is faithfulness ; or 
that "god" may (as the Arians taught) designate a 
secondary god, and that the Mohammedans may 
perchance hold the right faith, since the Socinians 
declared themselves their " nearest fellow-champions 
for the faith of one supreme God without personal!" 
ties or pluralities 2 ." 

The servants are less than their Lord, from whom 
they have their authority. In compass the misbelief 
is larger, in essence it is less to misbelieve, that 
"grace" is the working of man's natural faculties, 
or "inspiration" their quickened exercise; it were 
all one to say that "revelation" is man's own thought, 
as to say that Jesus, the Fountain of truth and the 
Truth, used one ambiguous or (God forgive it !) igno- 
rant word in matter of truth. 

It seemed, to one a , the extreme of Theological hos- 

z " Epistle Dedicatory to. Ameth Ben Ameth Embassador of the 
mighty Emperor of Eez. and Morpcco to Charles II. King of Great 
Britain," re-printed by L.eslie, Works, i. 207-1 1 . fol. see p. 209. and. 
Leslie's letter, Ib. p. 217. The Socinians never attempted to deny 
the genuineness of the document. a Rev. H. B'. Wilson in 

the Daily $fevs. Mr Maurice admits the fact, hut blasph.em.es (Jod, 



PREFACE. XXIX 

tility, that I said, that they who deny eternal pu- 
nishment, as inconsistent with the attributes of God } do 
not really believe in the same God. This, to any 
mind which reflects ever so little, is self-evident. For 
it is God Himself, "Who is revealed in. His attributes. 
They then, who hold that what Jesus revealed as to 
God, is inconsistent with the attributes of God as 
they themselves believe of God, do not believe in God 
"Whom Jesus revealed. To speak the truth, as I did, 
thus plainly, (mournful as that truth is,) is alone real 
faithfulness to God and true charity to man. It is 
Jesus Who said, " b He that believeth not, shall be 
damned." Who those shall be, He Alone is the 
Judge. Of this we are sure, that they will be those 
only, who, through fault of their own, reject Divine 
truth. But, since the rejection of truth, as well as 
unholiness of life, will have to do with the final doom 
of man, then, not to state the truth as explicitly as we 
can, to allow truth and falsehood to be jumbled to- 
gether in one evershif ting kaleidoscope of opinions, to 
allow that all may have an equal chance of being 
right, and so, (since they are contradictories,) that 
all have an equal chance of being false, is treason 
to the God of truth, and cruelty to the souls of man. 
We have been blamed already, that we do not 
" c consent to be taught, even by an enemy, and 
accept the faith however imperfect, the adoration 
however inconsistent, offered to Him, WTio most 
assuredly would never have broken that bruised reed 
or quenched that smoking flax." This is but an 
instance of that variegated use of terms, which de- 

4 

"Whose aweful Justice Christians adore. Letter to the Bp. of London. 
. b S. Mark xvi. 16. c Dr Stanley's Farewell Sermon, p. 1 8, 1 9. 



XXX PREFACE. 

stroys all definiteness of meaning. It is not the 
one or other - " harsh or revolting expression," in 
M. Benan's "Life of Jesus," which has so shocked 
Christian Europe. It is the intense and entire un- 
belief which underlies the whole of that patronising 
novel, in which the supercilious insolence of supe- 
riority, which makes allowance for its God, is more 
sickening even than its hinted blasphemy. Of course, 
there can be no vestige of "faith" or "adoration" 
in that dreary picture, which describes a young 
enthusiast, who had once " the germs of a true fana- 
ticism 3 ," at one time (le probably not involving him- 
self in innocent f!J frauds, whereby people tried to se- 
cure to him the title of son of David," which, how- 
ever, " he accepted 6 ," but who finally became a "won- 
der-worker ' against his will, conniving at fraud in 
the resurrection of Lazarus, falling short of " s the 
delicacies of the critical spirit [of the 19th century] 
whereby good faith and imposture are irreconcile- 
able terms." Jesus was born a Jew, and " ^material 
truth has little value for an Eastern. He sees all 
through his ideas, his interests, his passions." I can- 
not bring myself to translate or accumulate the blas- 
phemies. They are essential to M. Eenan's concep- 
tion of Him Whom he once believed in as his God, 
for whose " decline and fall " he now apologises, as 
the faults of his age and nation, to which he "bent 11 ," 
sooner than " * renounce his mission." "Faith," of 
course there cannot be, in one who would explain as 
human, what our Lord declared to be Divine. The 
"adoration" of one, who, by force of circumstances, 

a Eenan, Tie cle Jesus, p. 326. e Ib. p. 287. f p. 257 sqq. 
g Ib. p. 252, 3. l' Ib. p. 239. J Ib. p. 264-9. 



PREFACE. XXXI 

is to have fallen short of the morality of the 19th 
century, would be the hideous mockery of those who 
bowed the knee before Him, and mocked Him, say- 
ing, " Hail, king of the Jews." M. Eenan believed 
once 5 now he only thinks that his former belief 
makes him the better judge of his Judge Whom he 
has rejected. Dr Stanley bids us '"think of our 
controversies, as they will appear, when we shall be 
forced to sit down at the feast with those whom we 
have known only as opponents here, but whom we 
must recognise as companions there." "Would God, 
it may be so ! Joyous, besides its joy in God, will 
be that reunion of His redeemed, when those who 
have been severed for awhile, through no wilful re- 
jection of the truth, shall, in the sight of the Ever- 
blessed and Adorable Trinity, together see and adore 
the perfect Truth. Yet in order that it may be so, 
they who, through no merits of their own but through 
the mercy of OUT God, have that one truth which He 
has revealed, are bound the more not, through any 
fear of man, or faint-heartedness, or sloth, or dread 
of repelling an already alienated world, to soften 
or pare down the truth with which we are entrusted. 
Bather, let the world say what it will, or the more 
because it proposes this deadly peace, in which we 
are to iinite in one apathy of despair of God-given 
truth, we must bear about with us the Apostle's 
words ; Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, 
and one convert Mm, let him know, that he which con- 
verteth the sinner from the error of his ivay shall -save a 
soul from death and shall hide a multitude of sins. 

i The Bible, its Form and Substance, p. 92. 
S. MARK'S DAY. 1864. 



CONTENTS. 



LECTURE I. 

Introduction. Real grounds of objections raised to the book of Daniel, its 
prophecies and miracles. Unity of his book. His character one through- 
out. The Chaldee and Hebrew portions are from the same writer. Ground 
of the variation of language. No Greek words, except the names of two 
or three musical instruments, which were imported with them. Musical 
instruments in Daniel not Macedonian. Macedonian Greek words in Da- 
niel a fiction. Early intercourse between Greece and Assyria. The pesan- 
terin of Daniel on Assyrian monuments. The Hebrew of Daniel and his use 
of Aryan words agree with his time and circumstances. Remarkable dif- 
ference of the Aramaic of Daniel and Ezra from that of the Targums; the 
basis of the Targums was early. Shallow criticism on the Aramaic of Da- 
niel repeated in, the Essays and Reviews. Cumulative evidence from the 
union of such Hebrew and Aramaic as those of Daniel. . . . p. 1 57 



LECTURE II. 

The prophecies of the four empires, Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Greek, Roman, 
and the establishment of the kingdom of Christ during the fourth Empire, 
Balaam's prophecy as to the Eastern and Western Empires, i. Circum- 
stances and characteristics of the revelation of the four world-empires to 
Nebuchadnezzar. Daniel's prophecy of the kingdom of Christ conceded. 
Greatness of the admitted prophecy. Inconsistency of rationalist objec- 
tions. Both the metals and the parts of the human form in the image of 
Nebuchadnezzar's dream significant, in regard to the 4 empires. Characte- 
ristics of the 4th empire, ii. Correspondence of the parts of Nebuchadnezzar's 
dream of the 4 Empires with Daniel's vision ; of the 2nd Empire with the 
Medo-Persian ; the third with the Macedonian. Heaviness, characteristic 
of the aggressions of the Medo-Persian Empire ; activity and intelligence 



CONTENTS. XXX111 

of the third ; terribleness and permanent subdual, of the fourth. Periods 
distinguished in the fourth Empire in Daniel's vision* The ten " horns" 
or kingdoms belong to a later period, yet are simultaneous. Contrast of 
Roman Empire With those before it in Dionysius. The kingdom of God 
the chief subject of Nebuchadnezzar's dream and Daniel's vision. The titles 
" the kingdom of God" taken from Daniel and part of the popular belief be^ 
fore Christ came. Belief in the Messiah, as Man but more than man, also 
rested on his prophecy before our Lord, as shewn in the book of Enoch. 
Title, " Son of Man," as used by our Lord, taken from Daniel. Daniel 
prophesied the worship of the Son of Man. iii. Symbols in Daniel's second 
vision, which are explained, in Daniel, to represent Persia and Greece, cor- 
respond respectively with those of the 2nd and 3rd Empires, and disagree 
with those of the 3rd and 4th. Antiochtis Epiphanes does not correspond 
to the Anti-Christ either of the viith or xith chapter of Daniel. Contrast 
of his character with that of the Anti-Christ in Daniel ch. xL Rationalists 
miss the special character of this Anti-Christ and pervert the prophecy ol 
his death. It is in conformity with nature, that there should be types of 
Anti-Christ Eastern tradition of the 4th Empire and of the Messiah derived 
from Daniel. ; p. 58 99. 



LECTURE 111. 

Attempts to make out four Empires, (subtracting the Roman,) Which should 
end with Antiochus> Four different experiments tried. The advocates 
of each solution agree in holding the other three to be untenable, i. Ewald'si 
The 1st Empire^ the Assyrian, and Daniel an adaptation of an earlier 
Assyrian Daniel, who is to have prophesied the overthrow of the Assy- 
rian empire. Ezekiel's mention of Daniel, in each placej suits Daniel him- 
self. Grounds of the selection of Daniel with Noah and Job as examples 
of righteousness, and of the order in which Ezekiel names them. No ex- 
planation of Daniel's being named in Ezekiel, unless he was the prophet 
No ground for Ewald's imaginary Daniel. Daniel's vision on the Hidde- 
kel. Rivers, places of prayer among the Jews. The human-headed winged- 
lion of Nineveh was an essentially different symbol from the eagle-winged 
lion of Daniel ; probably it, as well as the human-headed bull, was a reli- 
gious symbol* certainly not a symbol of Assyrian empire. The lion or eagle 
were symbols of Babylon, as well as of Assyria, ii. Babylonian Empire 
under Nebuchadnezzar not a distinct empire from that of his successors! 
Greatness of the Babylonian empire, under him, both in conquest and 
internal policy. Medo-Persian inferior to Babylonian, Faineant character 
of Nebuchadnezzar's successors ; in no sense a separate empire, iii. Medo- 
Persian empire owned never to have -existed as two. Its unity presup- 
posed in Scriptures which Rationalists allege the writer of the book of Da 
niel to know, and in Daniel himself. The authority of Darius stated in 
Daniel to have been delegated. Xenophon's account likely, confirmed in 
part against Herodotus by Inscriptions. Policy of placing Median Vice-King 

C 



XXXIV CONTENTS. 

at Babylon. Evidence from Daniel that he spoke of the Medo-Persian em- 
pire as one. Inferiority of Persian empire to Nebuchadnezzar's, its immedi- 
ate degeneracy after Cyrus, and permanent miserableness. Disagreement 
of the symbol of the Persian empire in ch. 8. from that of the 3rd Empire in 
eh. 7, andiv. of symbols and prophecies as to Alexander's successors from those 
of the 4th Empire. Alexander's successors were one kingdom, only as one 
with him. Alexander's central plan, to Hellenise Asia, and blend Greece 
and Asia, followed by his successors. Union of Jews and Greeks in Egypt, 
Cyrene, and Asia Minor. Lasting influence of his plan in God's Providence. 
No ten-fold division in Alexander's empire. Failure of the varied attempts 
to make out ten kings of Alexander's successors, or three who should 
be uprooted. Attempts contradict Daniel and history. Roman world- 
empire conld not be foreseen at the date of people's alleged Pseudo-Daniel, 
174, B.C. Evidence from the 3rd Sibylline book and from the 1st book of 
Maccabees, that Roman Empire was not anticipated. . . p. 100 161. 



LECTURE IV. 

The prophecy of the 70 weeks and of the death of the Messiah, and the 
attempts to make the 70 weeks end with Antioclms Epiphanes. General 
character of the prophecy ; why the date, although fixed within a limited 
time, may not have been fixed precisely ; only four possible dates, from 
which the 70 weeks could be counted, ending in four exact years ; groimd 
for selecting the 7th of Artaxerxes: his date: agreement of the whole period 
of 7 and 62 weeks, and of the 7 weeks by itself, with history ; " strait of 
times ; " the three years and a half, our Lord's ministry ; indications of a 
fourth passover in His ministry ; main subjects of the prophecy, the gifts of 
pardon and righteousness and of grace at the end of the 490 years ; " holy 
of holies," not "the holy of holies ; " " anointing," in Daniel's time, spiritual 
only ; the title " Messiah," current in and before our Lord's time, derived 
from this place, since here only it is used absolutely ; extent of prophecy 
combined as to the Messiah, before our Lord came ; " cut off" always used ' 
of death, inflicted by God or man ; two-fold aspect of cessation of sacrifice ; 
the general scope of the prophecy not varied by various renderings; 
connection of the destruction of the city and the temple with the cutting 
off of the Christ ; fulness of the prophecy, as fulfilled exactly in the Gospel. 
Unnatural explanations, to get rid of the prophecy. Supposed non-fulfilment 
of Jeremiah's prophecy, which all knew to have been fulfilled, and its eking 
out by Daniel's ; impossible construction of the words, " 72 weeks, the 
street shall be built ;" absurdity of making the 4th year of Jehoiakim the 
starting-point. Impossible problems which unbelief had to solve in regard 
to the prophecy of the 70 weeks. Corrodi's theory and admissions. Shifts 
of Marsham. Eichhorn's capricious amendment of Marsham's theory, 
dishonest criticisms, unnatural expedients. Paulus' arbitrary amendment of 
Eichhorn's arbitrariness. Bertholdt's theory, that 62 is a 'round number'and 



CONTENTS. XXXY 

unnatural expositions. Re-casting of old theories in opposition to Hengsten- 
berg. Wieseler's unnatural expedients and admissions. Lengerke's fantastic 
theory incontrovertible in his own eyes. Ewald's two attempts to take 
the numbers in their natural order; arbitrary dates assumed by him, and 
arbitrary expedients to get rid of the superfluous years. Mutual exchange 
of theories. Assumption that the fault as to the chronology was Daniel's, not 
their's, contrary to their own assumption that the writer knew the history; 
the charge recoils, since the years are too many for their theory, not too 
few. Naturalness of the interpretation that Jesus was the Messiah said 
to " cut off," owned by Hitzig. Rationalist agreement, in pulling down 
only ; their disagreement in constructing. Table of their variations as to 
the 70 weeks. Their failure as to the last week, the supposed agreement 
of which was to be the basis of the whole. Dates in the reign of Epiphanes, 
Events at its close ; his death no relief to the Jews ; the 2300 days pro- 
bably had a double fulfilment. Events of the last 7 years agree with no 7 
years of Epiphanes ; aggravations of the failure ; unmeaningness of the 
meanings imported by rationalists into the prophecy. Contrast of the 
whole prophecy with the rationalist expositions of it. The Messiah was not 
expected, when, according to Daniel, He was not to come ; when, accord- 
ing to Daniel, He was to come, He was expected. ... p. I(j2 231, 



LECTURE V. 

The minuteness of a portion of Daniel's prophecies is in harmony with the 
whole system of Old Testament prophecy, in that, throughout, God gave a 
nearer foreground of prophecy, whose completion should, to each age, accre- 
dit the more distant and as yet unfulfilled prophecy. 

Argument of rationalists and the Essays against the prophecies of Daniel in- 
volves the denial of all supernatural prophecy. Prophecy, and prediction, 
which the Rationalists distinguish from it,are alike human, accordingto them. 
Indications of minute prophecy, throughout the Old Testament. 1) Test 
given to distinguish the true prophet from the false, Dent, xviii. 20, 21. 
2) Straggle between the false prophets and the true. 3) Urim and Thum- 
mim. 4) " Enquiring of God." 5) " The Seer." Old Testament prophecy 
related to a nearer or a more distant future of temporal judgment and mercy, 
and the Redeemer. Predictions to the Patriarchs. Continuous fulfilment 
of the blessings of Jacob and Moses, a continuous witness of God's foreknow- 
ledge and Providence. " Until Shiloh come ; " no temporal fulfilment can be 
made out. Series of individual prophecies. Prophecies to the ten tribes. 
Minute temporal prophecies to Israel end in larger. Succession of prophets 
in Judah. Prophecies of the Christ, connected with Jerusalem, imply that 
it would continue In being ; prophecies against Sennacherib and Babylon ; 
prophecies of exact dates ; ends of cities foretold, minute but varied ; Jere- 
miah's distinct unvarying prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem, and les- 

' ser intervening prophecies. Jeremiah and Ezekiel foretell details of the cap- 

c2 



XXXVI CONTENTS. 

ture of Jerusalem ; the event improbable to the Jews beforehand ; prophecies 
on individuals. Isaiah's and Jeremiah's detailed prophecies of the capture 
of Babylon ; genuineness of Isaiah xiii, xiv. and of Jeremiah 1, li. Ezekiel's 
prophecy of the duration of the two kingdoms and as to Egypt; its 40 years' 
desolation and' permanent abasement ; decay in Egypt before its temporary 
recovery under Amasis ; the 70 years of the captivity ; Zechariah's prediction, 
of Alexander's victories in Palestine and of the subsequent victories of Jews 
over Greeks, utterly improbable, but very definite and accurate. Rationa- 
list expedients to get rid of them, and their failure. Daniel's predictions 
suited to a transition-state. Daniel a teacher for the times before our Lord. 
In the Gospel also, and in ,the prophecies of our Lord, there is a foreground 
of minuter prediction and a large future. Rationalist misstatements as to 
prophecy. Capture of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar ; gradual concessions of ra- 
tionalism. Fulfilment of God's judgments slow through His mercy. Pro- 
phecy independent of time, unless time is expressed. Daniel has all the va- 
rieties of prophecy p. 232 291. 



LECTURE VI. 

On the proof of the genuineness of the book of Daniel, furnished by the date 
of the closing of the Canon of the Old Testament, and by the direct reference 
to it in the Canonical Scriptures, and in other books before or of the Macca- 
bee period. 

Josephus' statement of the closing of the Canon, and of the ground, why it 
was closed about 400 B. C. The intervening period before our Lord, one of 
much mental activity. Date of the Wisdom of the son of Sirach fixed by the 
mention of Simon son of Onias and Euergetes in his grandson's preface, early 
in the 3rd cent. B. C. His grandson attests that the Canon was closed when 
his grandfather wrote. The lowest date of the son of Sirach, and the exis- 
tence of his book out of the Jewish Canon, prove the early date of Daniel. 
The son of Sirach alludes to the Canon. Tradition, insisted upon by ra- 
tionalists, as to Nehemiah's collecting the scattered books of the Canon, re- 
lates, not to an original collection, but to the gathering of books already in 
the Canon, -which had been dispersed. Gradual formation of the Canon. 
The Pentateuch laid up from the first ; gradual accessions implied in Scrip- 
ture itself. The Pentateuch an authority before Jeroboam's schism. Each 
later prophet presupposes the earlier prophets. Gradual accessions of the 
historical books. Probable date, of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Ruth ; the Books 
of Kings before the close of the Captivity. Prophetic documents probably 
embodied in the Books of Kings. Gradual formation of the Psalter ; the 
first book wholly David's ; the 5th book alone implies times after the Cap- 
tivity; no one Psalm contains any indication of the Maccabee period; 
those selected as such belong to the Captivity. The Psalter probably transr 
lated by the LXX before the Maccabee times. The accession of Proverbs 
of Solomon, in Hezekiah's time, to the collection already existing, shews 



CONTENTS. XXXV11 

that ch. xxx, xxxi. alone can be later than Hezekiah. Job quoted from early 
times. The age of the Canticles and Lamentations unquestioned. Extent of 
Hagiographa exstant before the captivity. Invalidity of the arguments 
from languag'e or history, that Ecclesiastes was not written by Solomon. 
Book of Esther written by a contemporary; the Chronicles prior to the book 
of Ezra and by its author ; they allude to nothing later than Ezra ; the one 
genealogy, alleged to prove a later date of the book, does not prove it, even 
if it is part of the book. The book of Ezra is one whole ; tbe Chaldee 
portion, written by a contemporary, inserted by Ezra. Invalid arguments 
against authorship of Ezra. Nehemiah wrote the book which bears his 
name. Thoughtless objection founded on the use of the different names of 
God. Use of those names in Nehemiah. The name of Jaddua did not ori- 
ginally stand in Nehemiah. Careless objections to the book. Coincidence 
of Nehemiah and Malachi. Principle of the Jewish arrangement of the 
Canon ; hagiographa, sacred books by men in secular office. Jewish distinc- 
tion between writing through the spirit of prophecy and by the Holy Ghost. 
David and Daniel, both being prophets, were placed on the same principle 
among the hagiographa. The "silence of the son of Sirach" would have 
been remarkable, only if Daniel had been placed among the prophets. Direct 
evidence of the existence of the book of Daniel before Antiochus Epiphanes. 
i. Use of language of Daniel's prayer by Nehemiah. ii. Two of Zechariah's 
visions presuppose Daniel's prophecy of the 4 empires ; one, very obscure, 
unless explained by aid of Daniel's prophecy, iii. Book of Baruch, written 
probably soon after the close of the Canon, incorporates much of his prayer, 
iv. Testimony to Daniel in LXX version of Pentateuch, v. The Jewisk 
writer of the 3rd Sibylline book, about 170, B.C., quoted book of Daniel, 
found nothing in it to support his temporal hopes, vi. Extreme accuracy 
of the first book of Maccabees. Internal evidence of exactness of Matta- 
thias' speech. Exact, but simple reference to book of Daniel in it. First 
book of Maccabees, probably before B.C. 125, certainly before B.C.. 105, 
History in the 1st book of Maccabees contradicts unbelieving theories as to 
the book of Daniel, vii. Evidence from the Greek additions to the book pf 
Daniel, the historical mistakes of the translator and his falsifying of the 
prophecy of the 70 weeks, to make it bear oti the times of Epiphanes. Long 
interval between the book of Daniel and its translation owned by oppo- 
nents, viii. Book of Enoch. The doctrine of the Messiah as the Judge gf 
the world in it taken frojn Daniel ; that of the angels altered from the doc- 
trine in Daniel. Date of the book probably not later than Judas Macqi- 
bseus or Simon, any how not later than John Hyrcanus. Testimony of our 
Lord stands alone, as infallible. ,.,...,,. p. 292^393. 



LECTURE VII. 

On the " historical inaccuracies" falsely imputed to the book of Daniel, and 
the "improbabilities" alleged, i. Agreement of dates in Daniel together, and 



XXXV111 CONTENTS. 

with other Seriptui-e and Berosus. Dates of Jeremiah's reign, ii. Name of 
Belshazzar as eldest son and co-regent on the monuments. Nebuchadnez- 
zar called his father, Belshazzar Nebuchadnezzar's son, because no name in 
Chaldee for " grandfather" " grandson." Wide use of " father" " son" 
in Hebrew, iii. Rationalist credulity as to date of " Susa." Susa, probably 
capital of Cyrus before the capture of Babylon, iv. "Satraps," an office es- 
sential to large Asiatic empires, Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian, Median, Ma- 
cedonian under Alexander and his successors. Cyrus only substituted Per- 
sian for native Satraps. Number and distribution of Satrapies varied. The 
monuments furnish more Satrapies than Herodotus. Lesser divisions un- 
noticed, v. Den of lions, rationalist fable about it. The Chaldee term for 
it implies no confined space, vi. Classes of Magi. Porphyry speaks of three 
distinct degrees in the highest, the priestly order of the Magi. Daniel, 
like Strabo, speaks of different kinds of Magi, according to their employ- 
ments. Error of Eubulus, from whom Porphyry took his account. No old 
account of threefold division of Magi. Egyptian priesthood divided into 
four, five or more classes. Parsee priesthood, Desturs, Mobeds, Herbads, 
modern and ritualistic. Three of Daniel's four classes of Magi, very distinct- 
ly marked, vi. Education by Magi not against conscience, nor supervision 
of them ; large unsuperstitious learning of Chaldees. II. Alleged improba- 
bilities, i. Insanity of Nebuchadnezzar, probably a very rare form of mono- 
mania. Yet, humanly too, admitting of recovery. Correspondence of his 
physical condition with other cases of insanity. Insanity does not hinder 
consciousness or memory. Wonderful self-analysis of the Pere Surin, when 
outwardly like one insane. Dr. Browne on the praying of the insane. 
Force of evidence in true un-understood facts, ii. Alleged silence of histo- 
rians as to Nebuchadnezzar's insanity. All believe facts on insulated testi- 
mony. Tradition of Abydenus probably relates to facts recorded by Daniel. 
Interruption of Nebuchadnezzar's great works mentioned on his monuments, 
iii. His imperfect conversion, iv. His edict true to our deepest nature, v. His 
golden image had a political end. Extent of king-worship, vi. His image 
probably, on pxwpose, disproportionate, vii. Edict of Darius in harmony 
with the known Persian belief, probably political, viii. " Intolerance" not 
unknown to Babylonians or Persians. Evidence of religious character 
of wars from the Inscriptions. Persian oppression of Egyptian religion. 
x. Daniel did not court danger, only did not deny God. xi. Idle objections 
as to decree of Darius and history of Belshazzar. xii. Alleged " lavishing 
of miracles," three miracles, when heathen sought to destroy the faith 
and insulted God. False statements, in order to make out the miracles 
to have been objectless. God had not cast away His people. Cyrus had 
no human motive for releasing the Jews. Daniel probably made known to 
him Isaiah's prophecy. No proof, that the miracles were wasted on the 
heathen ; they have been instructive to believers at all times since, Force 
of evidence from uniform correctness in varied and minute details of his- 
tory, customs, &c. many of which would be known only to a contem- 
porary , 394-401, 



CONTENTS. XXXIX 



LECTURES VIII. AND IX. 

The points of doctrine and pr jictice mentioned in the book of Daniel, which 
are alleged to indicate a date later than that of the prophet, are identical 
or in harmony with the teaching of the other Scriptures of the Old and 
New Testament ; nor was any doctrine or practice, mentioned in the Book 
of Daniel, borrowed from Parsism. 

Summary of doctrines and practices alleged to be " later." There is no a pri- 
ori ground, why God should not have revealed through one inspired -writer, 
what He did not through another. 

i. Divinity of the Messiah. No trace of the doctrine in the 3rd Sibylline 
book, .) The king addressed in Ps. ex, superhuman. Inapplicability of the 
Psalm to David, fulfilment in our Lord. "Sit Thou on My Right Hand," 
said to Jesus as Man, because He is God. 6.) In Ps. xlv. rationalists own, 
among them, that 1) "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever," is address- 
ed to the Object of the Psalm, 2) that He is God, and 3) that the words should 
so be rendered. Non-natural, contradictory, and ungrammatical construc- 
tions of the words, grammatically most simple, c.) Evidence of the Divinity 
of the Christ from Psalm ii. Close union of the Messiah with God in it own- 
ed by the Jews also. Emphasis on the words " kiss the Son." The words 
' have no other meaning, d.") The king in Psalm Ixxii. has Divine attributes. 
His empire is in all time and clime, while He is out of sight, Himself a per- 
petual Personal source of blessing and a perpetual Intercessor (see Addenda.) 
Isaiah's prophecy of the Child to be born, Who should be called "Mighty 
God ; " that, from David's line, when in low estate, should issue One, 
using Divine power. Micah's, Zechariah's, Malachi's prophecies of the Di- 
vinity of the Messiah. Daniel's prophecy of Him, as Man yet more than 
man. All prophesy the same truth with the same clearness ; arbitrariness 
of rationalists, in assuming that Daniel did prophesy the Divinity of Christ, 

and that the rest did not, and in their inference p. 462-491. 

ii. Daniel foretold the Second Coming of Christ apart from time. iii. The be- 
lief of man's immortality lay in the history of his creation and of his fall ; 
evidences of that belief in the history of the Patriarchs, in God's declaring 
Himself then' God after their death, belief in reunion contained in the " be- 
ing gathered to his people ; " belief in man's immortality cherished by the 
expression " God took him " of Enoch and Elijah ; the term, appropriated 
by Psalmists, Ps. xlix. Ixxiii. David knew of the Beatific Vision of God, 
Ps. xvii. Ps. xvi. prophecies of the Resurrection of Christ. Other indica- 
tions of the expectation of eternal life in the Psalms, of general judgment, 
and of the second death. Distinct prophecy of the resurrection of the flesh 
in Job ; of our Lord's and onr's in Him in Hosea ; of our's in Hosea and Isaiah. 
Isaiah's prophecy of the resurrection of the good and bad, of the punishment 
of evil spirits and evil men ; Ezekiel's knowledge of the resurrection of the 
body. False notions of the amount of truth in the Zend books ; doctrine of 
the resurrection unknown to the earlier books ; "perpetuation of life" distinct 
from Resurrection. The Bundehesh, in which are the most approximations 
. to the truthj probably of the 7th century after Christ ; its illustrations of 
the resurrection borrowed from Christians. ...... p. 491-513. 



iv. The doctrine of Angels, their numbers, nature, interest in us, as revealed 
before Daniel. " The Angel of the Lord," throughout the O. T. probably a 
created Angel, with special Divine Presence* The "Angel-interpreter" 
of Job. The Seraphim, the Cherubim. " The Angel of the Lord " proba- 
bly Michael. The doctrine of Angels in Daniel the same as in other Scrip- 
tures. The revelation in Danielj that other nations, besides the Jews, were 
under the care of Angels, in harmony with Daniel's relation to the Heathen 
world. Daniel does not associate the creature with the Creator ; " gods of 
counsel," in Heathenism, astrological only. ....% p. 513-525. 

Doctrine of Angels earlier than Magism. Imperfection of the supreme god 
of the Aryans ; time, light, space, co-existent with him. Zoroostrism only a 
modification of Vedism ; dualism in its earliest writings. The six Amesha- 
cpentas, too near to the supreme god of Parsism, yet mere genii of the same 
sort as other genii of Parsism ; supreme god of Parsism prays to them ; ex- 
tensive devotedness to Mithra, Anahita, the Haoma, probably coeval with 
Parsism. Parsee genii, or gods, dependent upon man. Prophets warned Is- 
rael against idolatries of Babylon and Persia. Men borrow idolatries or trick 
out then- own false systems, do not refine the errors of others. Parsee tra- 
ditions against the antiquity of their books ; their present books, unauthen- 
tic traditions. No developement or corruption in the Zend books before 
Christ. No one likeness between Amesha-^pentas and Archangels, p.626-646. 

V. 1. Fasting prescribed throughout the O. T. Fasting of the day of Atone- 
ment ; that of women regulated ; public and private ; abuses of it attest its 
use ; Daniel's fasts such as are prescribed by Joel ; all self-affliction forbidden 
by principles of Parsism. v. 2, Objections to Daniel's prayer, v. 3. "Prayer 
three times a day," the natiu-al filling-up of prayer morning and evening ; 
David mentions it in Ps. Iv. Parse.e worship of the five times of the day, 
wholly unconnected with prayer to God thrice a day. Traces of Parsee 
prayer to the sun three times a day, subsequent to our Lord, but immaterial. 

p. 546-558. 

v. 4. Daniel's advice to Nebuchadnezzar about alms ascribes to them no " ma- 
gical effect," but agrees with the N. T. Summary. To answer objections 
can only prepare for faith, which God gives. The temptation of this day 
truth-sacrificing compromise. The objects of our faith as certain to us as 
our being. * p. 558-564. 

Note A. The Aryan words in Daniel explained by Max Muller. p. 565-570. 

Note B. Alleged indications of the " lateness" of the Hebrew of Daniel. Ec- 
centric character of the alleged proof. Words and idioms of Daniel, i) pe- 
culiar to himself ; ii) common to the middle as well as the later age of He- 
brew ; iii.) those in common With the later age ; iv.) those revived from the 
Pentateuch, or v.) adopted from Bzekiel p. 571-594. 

Note C. Rare words in Daniel, retained or lost in the Syriac, later Chaldee, or 
at the date of the LXX p. 594-8. 

Note D. Aramaic words in Daniel, lost or rare in the Targmns or Gemara. 

p. 598-606. 

Note E. Variations in the LXX of Daniel, indicative of a long period having 
elapsed between the writing of the book and its translation. p. 606-619. 

Note F. Temporal prophecies, alleged by Dr Stanley, as being equally defi- 
nite with those of the 0. T p. 619-627. 



DANIEL THE PROPHET. 



LECTURE I. 



THE book of Daniel 5s especially -fitted to be a battle 
field between faith and unbelief. It admits of no half- 
measures. It is either Divine or an imposture. To write 
any book under the name of another, and to give it out 
to be Ms, is, in any case, a forgery, dishonest in itself, 
and destructive of all trustworthiness. But the case as 
to the book of Daniel, if it were not his, would go far be- 
yond even this. The writer, were he not Daniel, must 
have lied, on a most frightful scale, ascribing to God pro- 
phecies which were never uttered, and miracles which are 
assumed never to have been wrought. In a word, the 
whole book would be one lie in the Name of God. The 
more God, as we shall see, is the centre of the whole, the 
more directly would the falsehood come into relation to 
God. The book truly ascribes to God, that He gave wis- 
dom to Daniel to interpret the visions of Nebuchadnezzar 
and Belshazzar ; that He delivered the children from the 
burning fiery furnace and Daniel from the den of lions ; 
that He revealed to Daniel things to come, the largest 
and the least, comprising successions of Empires and 
Christ's Kingdom, with some exact dates and minute de- 
tails. The miracles it implies, the prophecies it avers, to 
have been recorded by Daniel a contemporary. Either 
then we have true miracles and true prophecy, or we 



2 Introduction. 

should have nothing but untruth. An apology for the 
supposed forger, such as those put out by some Germans l , 
and lately in England 3 , is utterly untenable and imino^ 
ral. "The truth seems/' says one 3 , "that starting, like 
many a patriot bard of our own, from a name -tradition- 
ally sacred, the writer used it with no deceptive intention, 
as a dramatic form which dignified his encouragement of 
his countrymen in their great struggle against Antio- 
ehus." Doubtless the book of Daniel was, and was meant 
to be, an encouragement in all that desolate period after 
prophecy had ceased, to mitigate their trials, and especi- 
ally that one, which wrecked the faith of so many, the 
persecution of Antiochus. For it shewed them visibly 
before their eyes, that God, in Whose Hands all things 
are, knew the whole course of events and overruled them. 
But it was no encouragement at all, except on the belief of 
its truth. Yet a writer could not more distinctly claim, 
that the prophecies which he delivers were revealed to 
himself. It is idle to deny a " deceptive intention," when 
the writer, had he not been Daniel, would have deceived 
first his own people, and then the whole Christian world, 
until now. Strange, that some who deny the "deceptive 
intention" of the writer, adduce the declarations made 
to or by Daniel, that the prophecies were true, as a proof 
that they were false. Yet wherein differs this from our 
Blessed Lord's own assertion that His words were true 8 , 
that He is the Truth 4 ? St. John avers his own truth 5 , 
St. Paul 6 also, and Jeremiah r . The assertion in Daniel 
is not more frequent than in St. Paul. Once only it is 
made in Daniel's own person : else it is made to assure 
the first recipient of the revelation. Daniel impresses 

1 De Wette speaks of it as " the intelligent act of a patriot," Einl. 257. 
Zunz, an 'enlightened' Jew, (Gottesdienstl. Vortr. d. Juden, p. 318 sqq. 405 
sqq.,) and Lengerke, ( 15.) excuse it from habits of the tinies. Bleek does 
not seem to think such fraud needs excuse. (Schleiermacher, &c. Zeitschrift, 
iii. 250 sqq. 23.) It was " necessary for his end, prophecy having ceased in 
the time of the Maccabees." (1 Mace. ix. 27. iv. 46. xiv. 41.) Einl. p. 593. 

2 Essays and Rev. p. 76. 3 S. John v. 31, 2. vii. 18. viii. 14, 17, 18, 40, 
45. xviii. 37. * Ib. xiv. 6. 5 Ib. xix. 35. xxi. 24. 6 Acts xxvi. 25. 
2 Cor. vi. 8. 1 Tim. i. 12, 15. iv. 9. 2 Tim. ii. 11. Tit. iii. 8. 7 xxvi. 15. 



Introduction. 3 

on Nebuchadnezzar, the dream is certain and the interpre- 
tation thereof sure 6 ; Gabriel gives the like assurance to 
Daniel 9 ; Daniel repeats it 10 . In some way, this is to be- 
tray in the writer's mind an uncomfortable feeling that 
on good grounds he would not be believed 11 ; although the 
like assurance implies no such fear in St. John, St. Paul, 
and Jeremiah : and yet while thus accrediting himself, as 
being what he is not to be, a prophet of the future, he is 
to have no " deceptive intention." The assertion of the 
truth of his prophecy or interpretation is to be intended 
to guarantee their truth, being (as these say) false ; and 
yet he is to have had no "intent to deceive." More con- 
sistent is Hitzig's 13 undisguised statement; "when the 
books Coheleth and Wisdom claim to be Solomon's, we 
see in this disguise simply that the author has chosen 
a certain vehicle : the case of the book of Daniel, if it 
is assigned to any other, is different. Then it becomes 
a forged writing, and the intention was to deceive his 
immediate readers, though for their good." A deceit 
which would fall under the sentence of God against those 
who say, l *Let us do evil, that good may come ; whose dam- 
nation is just. 

The moral law, written in the hearts of the heathen, 
strongly condemned forgery 14 even when not ungodly. It 

8 ii. 45. 9 viii. 26. x. 21. xi. 2. 10 x. i. 

11 "On the other side, the author betrays his mask through the repeated 
assurances that his prophecies contained truth." Lengerke, Einl. 13. n. 11. p. 
Ixxiii. "With the words, and the dream is certain, Sec. Daniel is to be designat- 
ed as a true genuine prophet and interpreter of visions : for the later Jews called 
the older prophets, TTJOTO! opdcretas or iriffrol ev 6pd<ret, and the later prophets of- 
ten appeal to their faithfulness and reliableness." Id. on Dan. ii. 45. p. 87. " It 
is true. True, even Jeremiah remarks with emphasis (xxvi. 15. comp. 12. 
xxviii. 9.) that he speaks truth, as also the Apostles (1 Tim. i. 15. iv/9.) but 
here (as in x. 1. comp. xi. 2.) the addition is made, to guarantee the age of 
the book." Id. Ib. viii. 26. p. 404. B Vorbemerkungen z. Daniel, 6. 

Rosenmuller speaks out, imputing the direction to seal the book (as hfc thinks, 
viii. 26. x. 4. 9.) and the change of language from Hebrew to Chaldee, to fraud, 
in order to give to the work the appearance of having been written in the cap- 
tivity. Proojm. p. 28, 30, 1. K Rom. iii. 8. 

14 Hiivernick (neue Untersuch. iib. d. B. Daniel, p. 10.) instances the ba- 
nishment of Onomacritus by Hipparchus to whom he had rendered great ser- 

B2 



4 Introduction. 

was reserved for persons within Christianity to apologise 
for it 1 . 

It is well to have so clear an issue before us. Porphyry, 
in the well-known attack upon Daniel in his work "against 
the Christians," saw how direct the issue was between him 
and Christians. "Daniel," says S. Jerome 2 , "not only, 
as do the other prophets, writes that Christ should come, 
but also teaches at what time He should come, and ar- 
ranges the kings in order, and numbers the years, and 
announces the most evident signs. Porphyry then, see- 
ing all these things to have been fulfilled, and unable to 
deny that they had taken place, had recourse to this ca- 
lumny. On the ground of a partial resemblance, he con- 
tended that those things which Daniel foretold as to An- 
ti-Christ at the end of the world had been fulfilled under 
Antiochus Epiphanes : whose assault is a testimony to the 
truth. For such was the accuracy of the Prophet's words, 
that to unbelieving men he seemed not to have foretold 
the future, but to relate the past." A modern school, which 
has disbelieved with Porphyry, has echoed Porphyry. 
Out of some remaining respect for Holy Scripture or 
for Christian belief, it evaded the question of the truth or 
falsehood of Scripture where it could, consistently with 
the maintenance of its unbelief. If it could generalise a 
prophecy, so that it should not seem to be a prophecy, 
it did so. It adopted non-natural interpretations of pro- 
phecy, and so admitted the books which contained it. It 
objected not to admit the author, if it need not admit the 
prophet. Hence arose all those modern interpretations 
of prophecy, as relating to Hezekiah, Zerubbabel and the 

vices, for falsifying Musams ; (Herod, vii. 6.) the blame attached, not only to 
Cynaethus, (Scholl. on Pindar Istlim. iii. 55. Eustath. Scholl. on Horn. i. 1.) 
but to Solon for forging a verse of Homer on Salamis. (Plutarch, Solon, c. 15. 
Diog. Lert. i. 48) [This, however, if true, had political consequences.] " He- 
rodotus scruples not to lay bare dishonesty which stained the sanctuary, and 
to disgrace the memory of a bribed Pythia, whom he mentions by name." vi. 
66. Dahlmann, Forschungen, ii. 103. l Lengerke apologises for Heathen 

forgeries and the book of Daniel with them. ( 15.) He could see no moral wrong 
in untruth, unless it had a malicious intent. 2 Pnef. in Daniel. 



Introduction, 5 

like. If a prophecy, like those more definite prophecies 
of Daniel, admitted of no wresting, there was no choice 
left, except to acknowledge prophecy, or to deny the ge- 
nuineness of the book. Of course, other grounds must be 
found to veil the nakedness of unbelief; but it is manifest 
from the writers themselves, that the central argument is 
this ; "Almighty God does not or cannot work miracles, or 
reveal the future to His creatures. Therefore, since mi- 
racles or prophecy are impossible, a book which contains 
an account of miracles must be written long after the al- 
leged miracles are related to have been worked ; a book 
containing predictions beyond the unaided sagacity of man 
must have been written after the events which are pre- 
dicted." This is laid down broadly by that class of wri- 
ters ; it underlies every so-called critical argument used 
by them ; it crops out continually where it does not, as 
with avowed unbelievers, stand in the forefront. Four or 
five idioms are found, a poetical form, which happens 
also to be Aramaic, and then follows some such statement 
as, " Besides, had Isaiah written this, it would imply a 
knowledge of the future." And it is obvious, all the while, 
that the real ground lies, not in those half-dozen idioms, 
to which no one who has any idiomatic knowledge of He- 
brew would attach any weight, but in the fact that the 
chapter of the prophet contains, if his, undeniable pro- 
,phecy. It has even been laid down as a test of the date 
of the books of Holy Scripture 3 ; " Wherever, in the He- 
brew Scriptures, there are numerous myths and legends, 
[miracles] as in the history of the patriarchs, of Moses, 
Balaam, Samson, Elijah, there we have uniformly rela- 
tions, not committed to writing until long after the events. 
Where, contrariwise, the facts appear natural, as in the 
books of Ezra, Nehemiah and the Maccabees, there the 
relation, although not always, is contemporaneous with, 
or shortly subsequent to, the events. This is an historical 
canon of unquestionable validity. Hence it follows that 

3 Knobel, Prophetismus A. Hebraer, ii. 401. quoted by DeWette, Einl. 
255*. ed. 7. 



6 Introduction. 

not Daniel, but only a writer long subsequent, can be 
the author of our relation, and so of our book/' 

The same writer says 1 , "To maintain the genuineness 
of Isaiah ch. 23, and yet to refer it to a siege of Tyre by 
Nebuchadnezzar more than a century later, as Jerome, 
&c.do, is impossible, in that, in Isaiah's time, there could 
be no anticipation of it, much less a confident and definite 
announcement of it. If any would refer the prophecy to 
that event, he must at least, with Eichhorn, Rosenmul- 
ler, Hitzig, hold it to be spurious." 

More broadly yet 3 , " The main argument for the later 
date of our Gospels is, after all, this; that they, one by one 
and still more collectively, exhibit so much out of the life 
of Jesus in away which is impossible,." [i. e. miraculous.] 

A recent unbelieving writer, speaking of a late Ger- 
man answer to the objections against the "book of Daniel, 
says 3 , "As to the visions and prophecies of the later part 
of the book, the Author describes the clearness with which 
the events are described in ch. 8, 10, 11, up to the time of 
Antiochus Epiphanes, which is, in fact, to give up the 
whole argument for the book concerning prophecies pro- 
perly so called." 

Such statements, however often they occur in books of 
unbelieving criticism, plainly have nothing to do with 
criticism or historical enquiry. They assume, in each 
case, the whole question about which criticism can be en- 
gaged. If any of us, on our side, say ; " our Lord, being 
God and having a Divine knowledge, pronounced 1 Daniel 
to be a prophet and quoted words of his as prophetic and 
as still to be fulfilled," we do thereby mean to close up the 
question of criticism. We, on grounds extrinsic to the 
book of Daniel, believe critical enquiry to be superseded 
by Divine authority. We feel satisfied, of course, that 

1 on Is. p. 160 sqq. 2 Baiir, Grit. Untersuchung. iib. d. Evang. 

1847. p. 530. 3 Westminster Review, N. 40. p. 544. A German 

reviewer puts the issue more nakedly ; " Unless, with Auberlen and others, 
one will abide by the pure miracle of supernatural inspiration, the book Da- 
niel is incomprehensible, except as the expression of the first Maccabee rising, 
embodied in writing." The same is implied in Essays and R. p. 76. 



Introduction. 7 

there can be no real grounds of criticism, contradictory to 
that Divine authority ; and, in fact, the deeper any critical 
knowledge is, the more subservient it is to that authority. 
But we do not pretend that this antecedent certainty of 
our's belongs to the province of criticism. As little, 
plainly, does the opposite denial of the abstract possibi- 
lity of prophecy. -Those who use the argument call them- 
selves "unprejudiced," simply because they are free from 
what they call our prejudices. But of course one who 
lays down, that such a book cannot have been written at 
a given time, because, in that case, it would contain defi- 
nite predictions of the future, as much prejudges the 
question on the ground of his antecedent anti-doctrinal 
prejudices, as he can allege of us, that we decide it on 
our doctrinal prejudices, i. e. on our previous belief. His 
major premiss is, <f Since there cannot be either prophecy 
or miracle, a book claiming to contain definite prophecies 
or a contemporary account of umnistakeable miracles 
cannot belong to the period to which it is ascribed :" his 
minor is, " The book of Daniel does make such claims/' 
Our major is, "Whatever Jesus has said, is true;" our 
minor is, " He has said that Daniel is a prophet." This 
whole ground, on either side, is antecedent to criticism. 
Their denial of the possibility of miracles and prophecy 
denies, in fact, to our Creator powers which we possess 
ourselves, of regulating our own work, or communicating 
to others beforehand our own designs. It has its source 
in an utter ignorance of God, and is to be remedied by 
a knowledge of Him and of ourselves, our Creator and 
His creatures. 

But, although the belief as to the prophecies of Daniel 
must be part of my religious being, since it is inseparable 
from my belief that Jesus is God, this in no way interferes 
with the examination of these prophecies in themselves. 

I cannot indeed examine them, as one who doubts. 
No one who believes in Christ, can or ought to assume 
that to be doubtful, upon which Christ has set His seal. 
So it is as to the whole substance of the faith and each 



8 Introduction. 

detail of it. Our own knowledge is certain, and we shall 
never win others to our certainty of faith and knowledge 
by ass'unring the character of persons who have them- 
selves to arrive at faith. Even in matters of certain human 
knowledge, men do not ignore their own knowledge, in 
order to impart it to others or to remove their objections 
to it. Nor can I make-believe, as to what I do not be- 
lieve, that these objections to the book of Daniel have 
any special plausibility. I select them out of the flood 
of pseudo-criticism with which we have been inundated, 
because the school which propagates them has given out 
its achievements here to be al one of the greatest triumphs 
of modern criticism." "Crimine ab uno disce omnes." 

Since none of those petty questions, which people set in 
the foreground, are their real central grounds of objec- 
tion, but rather the fact that the book of Daniel does con- 
tain unmistakeable prophecies, I will apply myself to 
these points ; 1) to shew that even if, per impossible, 
the book of Daniel had been written at the latest date at 
which these men venture to place it, there would still 
remain clear and unquestionable prophecies ; 2) That those 
definite prophecies which were earlier fulfilled are not out 
of, but in harmony with, the rest of the Old Testament ; 3) 
That even apart from the authority of our Lord, the his- 
tory of the closing of the Canon, as also the citation of 
Daniel in books prior to, or contemporary with Antio- 
chus, establish the fact that the book was anterior to the 
date of Antiochus Epiphanes, and so, that those definite 
prophecies are, according to this external authority, not 
history related in the form of prophecy, but actual pre- 
dictions of things then future. And then, I will answer 
every objection alleged against the book, whether as to 
matters of doctrine or history, which shall not have re- 
ceived its answer in the course of the other enquiries. 

But first, it may be best to mention some points, which 
were questioned in the last decennia of the last century, 
but which are conceded on all hands now. 

1 Bunsen, Gott in d. Gesehichte, i. 302. 



Unity of the Book of Daniel. 9 

1 . No one doubts now that the book of Daniel is one 
whole 2 . That hacking school of criticism, which hewed 
out the books of Holy Scripture into as many fragments 
as it willed^ survives only in a few expiring representatives. 
It reigned with an Oriental despotism in Germany for a 
time, but is now deposed even there. Bertholdt, (follow- 
ed by Augusti,) who so dissected the book of Daniel and 
ascribed it to nine different authors of somewhat different 
dates, was constrained to admit that the authors of each 
accession to the book were acquainted with the fore-ex- 
isting portions ; that they were, in fact, successively con- 
tinuators of the portions which previously existed, each of 
the later writers imitating the style and language of those 
who preceded him. A tacit admission, of course, of the 
unity of style and language which pervades the whole, 
while the assumption of such a close imitation betrayed 
the arbitrariness of the theory. It admitted identity of 
style and manner, and denied the identity of the author. 

But no less is that other theory of Eichhorn now re- 
jected by all, that the Chaldee and Hebrew portions of the 
book are by different authors. Besides the general proofs 
of the unity of the whole, the division of the languages 
does not coincide with any obvious division of the book. 
There are in the book two chronological series ; the one 
containing the six first chapters; the second, the six 
last. The first is chiefly historical, in which the chief 
persons acting are the kings reigning in Babylon, Nebu- 
chadnezzar, Belshazzar, or Darius ; while Daniel or his 
companions are instruments in the hand of God, passive 
or subordinate. The revelation is conveyed to Nebu- 
chadnezzar in his dreams, or to Belshazzar by the hand- 
writing ; Daniel is but the interpreter of what has been 
conveyed to the king. In the last six chapters, the reve- 
lations are made directly to Daniel alone. In one chap- 
ter (the IXth) there is some personal history of Daniel, his 
study of Jeremiah's prophecy, his self-humiliation and 

2 De Wette, Bleek, Von Lengerke, Gesenius, even Hitzig, Ewald and Stii- 
helin, admit the unity of the hook just as fully as those who believe its divinity. 



10 Unity of the 

prayer, upon which God unfolded to him that hrief much- 
containing series of prophecy from the restoration of Je- 
rusalem to the Death of the Messiah and its destruction. 
But here he himself is the recipient of the revelation. Yet 
hoth in the order of time and in the language, the two 
divisions (so to speak) overlap one another. Both series 
are chronological in themselves ; hut the first extends be- 
yond the date when the second hegins. The first series 
consists of six narratives, selected with one object, four 
of the six from the reign of Nehuchadnezzar, the fifth 
from that of Belshazzar ; the last from that of Darius the 
Mede. The second series, the visions or revelations to 
Daniel, are also dated, like the ancient prophecies, and 
that, at four successive times ; in the.first and third years 
of Belshazzar, in the first year of Darius son of Ahasu- 
erus, and in the 3rd year of Cyrus. So that after having, 
in the histories, gone on to the reign of Darius, we go 
hack again, at the beginning of the second series, to a 
date a little .earlier, the first year of Belshazzar. 

But these two series are not distinguished by language, 
nor can the Chaldee portion of Daniel make a whole. 
Daniel, after having related in Hebrew the early history 
of himself and his companions, passes naturally into Chal- 
dee in the answer which the Magi made to the king, 
when he required them to tell him his forgotten dream. 
But the Chaldee does not cease with that portion of the 
book which is connected with the history or the public 
events of the empire. The first of Daniel's visions is also 
in Chaldee. This is not what we should have expected ; 
perhaps it has at some time puzzled some of us, its rea- 
son not being obvious. The connection is in the subject. 
The vision of the VHth chapter is a supplement to the 
revelation in Nebuchadnezzar's dream. It too relates to 
the four great empires of the world. It expands that first 
disclosure to Nebuchadnezzar, fills it up, continues it. 
The prophecies which follow relate more especially to Is- 
rael. Those events, then, or prophecies, which belonged 
to the revelation of God to the heathen, were written in 



Book of Daniel. 11 

the language of the then great heathen empire. They 
were for the world, and were written in the language 
common to the people of God and to the world, a lan- 
guage understood through all that then populous tract 
from the Persian Gulf to Damascus, the seat, in early 
times, of so many Christian Churches. The prophecies 
which bore especially upon Israel or the time of our Lord's 
first Coming, were written in the language of the ancient 
Prophets. As a slight instance of the same ground of 
varying languages, Jeremiah wrote in Chaldee a single 
verse which he gave to the Jews as an answer to the Hea- 
then among whom they were 1 , Thus shall ye say unto them, 
The gods who heaven and earth made not, 
Perish from earth and from tinder heaven shall they. 
These intersecting lines of arrangement and this hid- 
den ground of order in the book of Daniel, in themselves, 
imply the oneness of the author's hand. The book is ar- 
ranged upon a real plan ; its languages are chosen upon a 
distinct principle. Yet neither the ground of its arrange- 
ment nor the principle of the variation of the languages 
are explained in the book itself; nor are they obvious at 
first sight. Amid apparent want of unity on the surface 
of the book, there is a real unity in the whole, resting on 
the unity of the plan of the writer. 

Besides this, it has been noticed how the first part of 
the book prepares for what follows ; how the subsequent 
parts look back to the first. The account of Daniel's three 
years' education in the wisdom of the Chaldees accounts 
for his falling under the king's decree, that all the wise 
men should be slain ; the mention of his three companions 
and their qualifications in ch. i. is introductory to their 
elevation in ch. ii.; and both, to their accusation in ch. iii 2 . 
The mention of the carrying away of the sacred vessels ch. 
i. is preparatory to the account of the desecration of them 
by Belshazzar, ch.v. The narrative of Belshazzar's im- 

1 Jer. x. 11. 2 ii. 49. is alluded to in iii. 12. as an aggravation of the alleged 
disobedience. Their accusers represent it as the greater ingratitude, that cer- 
tain Jews, (i.3.) elevated so high by the lung, yet refused obedience to him. 



12 Unity of the 

pious feast alludes throughout to points scattered over 
the whole previous history ; DaniePs having been brought 
captive by Nebuchadnezzar from Judaea; his wisdom, as 
acknowledged by Nebuchadnezzar, and as ascribed to the 
spirit of the gods in l him ; his being placed at the head 
of the Magi ; Nebuchadnezzar's exceeding greatness, his 
subsequent insanity as the punishment of his pride, and 
his restoration, upon his acknowledgment of the supre- 
macy of God. The emphasis on the titles, "Belshazzar 
the king of the Chaldeans was slain and Darius the Mede 
received the kingdom 2 /' alludes to the vision of the suc- 
cession of empires, earlier and later in the book 3 . The 
chapter closes with the statement of the succession of 
Darius the Mede, which prepares for the independant 
history in ch. vi. The vision in ch. vii. is an expansion of 
Nebuchadnezzar's dream. In the short authentication 
of the vision of the kings of Media and Persia and the 
king of Greece in ch. viii. Daniel expressly refers to the 
former vision 4 . The revelation as to the 70 weeks is re- 
lated to have been communicated to him by Gabriel, 
ivhom, Daniel says, / had seen in the vision at the begin- 
ning 5 , i.e. in ch. viii. as related. 

The contents of the prophecies are also progressive. 
The revelation in ch. vii. (as before said) is expansive of 
that of ch. ii. Ch. viii. developes still more fully one part 
of that revelation, viz. the relation of the 2nd and 3rd of 
those kingdoms, and most especially that point of deep- 
est interest, warning, instruction to the Jews, the way in 
which the third kingdom, that of Greece, would, in Anti- 
ochus Epiphanes, try their faith for a time, and be brought 
to nought 6 . Ch. ix. in the prophecy of the 70 weeks, 
gives a summary of the trial-time before the Coming of 
the Messiah, fixed their expectations so that they should 
not look for it as near nor yet at an undefined distance, 
describes it as a time of mingled mercy and judgment, of 
mercy to the many with whom the covenant should be 

i v. 11, 14. comp. iv. 8, 9, 18. [5,6, 15. Ch.] 2 v. 30, 1. [v. 31, vi. 1. Ch.] 
s ii. 39. vii. 5. 4 viii. 1. 5 ix. 21. viii. 9-12. 23-26 



Book of Daniel. 13 

confirmed ; of judgment, on Jerusalem. The xith chapter 
developes with great fulness certain prominent events in 
the relations of two kingdoms of Alexander's successors, 
selecting those which most affected the Jewish people. 

The histories are also in like way selected with one 
object, the way in which the true God was glorified amid 
the captivity of His people in a heathen Empire. The 
relations in the first 6 chapters, differing as they do in 
kind, have this one end. God it is, Who gives knowledge 
and skill to the four youths above all the magicians and 
astrologers in the realm 7 . God, from Whom Daniel ob- 
tains knowledge of Nebuchadnezzar's dream 8 . He it is 
Who giveth wisdom to the wise and knowledge to them that 
know understanding*. Before Nebuchadnezzar Daniel de- 
preciates himself j this secret is not revealed tome for any 
wisdom that I have, more than any living 10 ; he ascribes it 
wholly to the God in heaven that revealeth secrets 11 . Nebu- 
chadnezzar, at the end, acknowledges the God of Daniel, 
as 13 God of gods and Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets. 
The delation of Shadrach Meshach and Abednego, as far 
as relates to themselves, ends simply in their restoration 13 ; 
its main issue is the decree, that none in the whole em- 
pire should speak any thing amiss against their God, be- 
cause no other god can deliver after this sort u . In Nebu- 
chadnezzar's edict upon his restoration to reason, men- 
tion is made incidentally only of Daniel, and that, in the 
king's appeal to him to explain the dream, not for any 
wisdom of his own, but because the spirit of the holy gods 
is in thee 15 . With this the king begins and ends. The 
end of the relation is, that the king praises and honors 
the King of heaven and owns the justice of His ways 16 . 
The whole history of Belshazzar is God's vindication of 
His honour against the insolence of the sensual prince. 

God it is, in sum, Who changes times and seasons 17 , Who 
removeth kings and settcth up kings, Whose are wisdom and 
might ; He it is Who giveth either to any who have either, 

7'i. 17-20. 8 ii. 17-23. 9 Ib. 21. 10 Ib. 30. 22, 28, 45. a 47. 
is iii. 30. Ib. 28, 29. 15 iv. 9, 18. w Ib. 2, 3, 37. V ii. 20-22. 



14 Unity of the Book; 

whether it he His own servants or the Heathen king 1 . 
He delivereth those who trust in Him 3 ; His dominion is 
for ever ; His kingdom on earth, not like the kingdoms 
of men, indissoluble 3 . The same is the manifest object 
of all the temporal revelations in the following chapters. 
In all those histories, moreover, the human agent is 
brought in without his will; he speaks, but it is not by 
his own wisdom ; or he is delivered, but it is not by his own 
strength ; and then he retires from sight. Daniel's ex- 
position of Nebuchadnezzar's first dream is occasioned 
by his being involved in the decree, which doomed all 
those, educated as he was, to die 4 ; in the second, he comes 
in obedience to the king's edict 5 ; in the third, he is called 
for through the intervention of the Queen-mother 6 . To 
Daniel the historian it is all one, through ivhom God Avas 
glorified. Every thoughtful child has probably, on hear- 
ing the history of Shadrach Meshach and Abednego, 
asked, "where was Daniel }" The history suggests but 
does not state the answer. Those only were punished, 
who were accused. Daniel's three companions had been 
promoted at the request of Daniel, not for any services 
of their own. With these the accusers began 7 ; they did 
not venture upon Daniel yet. It is no uncommon art of 
human policy to begin by attacking the inferior, in order 
to prepare the way for the real object, the destruction of 
one who stands in higher favor. The first attack is a test 
of the probable success of the later, and may be made 
with less risk. So then the glory came to God through 
the three youths, and Daniel, in noble self-forgetfulness, . 
left unstated the grounds of his non-participation in their 
steadfastness. In the time of Darius, the attack upon 

i ii. 37, 8. iv. 25, 35, 36. v. 21, 26, 28. 2 ii. 28, 9. vi. 16, 20, 22, 3, 27. 

3 ii. 44. iv. 3, 34. vi. 26. " ii. 14 sqq. 6 iv. 8. v. 10-12. 

7 iii. 8, 12. It is probable that the command was purposely not extended 
to those in the position of Daniel. For in iii. 27. mention is again made of 
the three first classes named in iii. 3. " the satraps, sagans, pechahs ;" hut be- 
sides these, we hear there, for the first time, of ministers of a higher rank 
than the satraps, and who stood in direct relation to the king, the "haddabere 
malca," " the king's councillors." Daniel was one of these (ii. 49.) and, as 



Character of Daniel. 15 

Daniel seemed to be the safer, because his services had 
been to another dynasty. With this withdrawal of self 
coincides the character of the great revelations, of which 
he became the channel. The first most comprehensive 
revelation is given not to himself, but to the Heathen 
king. Of this, he is but the expositor ; of the rest, he 
is only the receiver ; these too he does not understand, 
until they are explained to him. As to what is not ex- 
plained to him, he is a vehicle to others of revelations s 
which are hidden from himself 8 . He returns from his 
revelations, in which God had shown him somewhat of 
the fate of empires, to do the king's business in the king's 
palace ; but he mentions even this, only because he had 
intermitted it, when sick by reason of the awefulness of 
the revelations 9 . 

The character of Daniel himself runs one and the same 
through the book, majestic in its noble simplicity. As 
a revealer of God in a Heathen Court, and as raised to 
high dignity in God's Providence for the sake of his 
brethren, he occupies, in this temporary dissolution of the 
political existence of his people, a place somewhat corres- 
ponding to that of Moses at the beginning. Like Moses, 
he was educated in the highest wisdom of a people famed 
for its wisdom. Even this likeness has its unlikeness. 
In Moses God manifested not His wisdom but His power. 
Yet, as the wise of the Egyptians were put to shame by 
the power of God wherewith He clothed Moses the shep- 
herd, so He paled thereputation of the wisdom of the Baby- 
lonian Magi by His Spirit which He placed in the captive 
boy Daniel. But the resemblance lies only in the common 
principles of God's Providence, whereby He, at extraor- 
dinary times, raises up, singly for the most part, extraor- 
dinary instruments of His own, to effect His Will. Man 
has but two great gifts of God to direct against Himself, 
wisdom and power. The conflict must ever lie in these. 
In Joseph the slave, and Daniel the captive, God put to 

such, certainly he was not included in the letter of the edict. Probably the 
" councillors " were intentionally excepted. 8 xii. 8, 9. 9 viii. 27. 



16 Unity of tht Book ; 

shame Egyptian and Babylonian wisdom, in that through 
them He taught their monarchs what their own wise men 
could not teach them. But therewith the likeness ended. 
Neither Joseph nor Moses are originals from which Da- 
niel could (as men have said,) be a copy 1 . 

The book of Daniel gives but a slight hint, that Da- 
niel was formed amid suffering and privation, in that, in 
his person, the prophecy of Isaiah to Hezekiah was ful- 
filled 2 , of thy sons which shall come from thee shall they 
take away, and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the 
king of Babylon. Thither, with several other Jewish 
youths, he, himself of royal blood, was taken while yet a 
boy, and placed in the care of the chief of the eunuchs. 
His name was changed as well as those of his three chief 
companions ; a badge of servitude 3 , destined to obliterate 
the memory of their early home, and, in the case of these 
Jewish children, of their God. All of them had, before, 
borne names commemorative of their God. " 4 God is 
my Judge." " 5 The Lord gave graciously." " 6 Who is like 
God ?" 7 The Lord helpeth." Two of these, where the 
meaning of the new name can be ascertained, were changed 
into idol-names. "Bel is the Prince." " Servant of Ne- 
go." Nebuchadnezzar' himself alludes to the significa- 
tion and object of Daniel's new name, 8 Daniel, whose 
name is Belteshazzar, after the name of my god. He was 
probably now about 14. For Plato relates of the Persians, 
" 9 After twice 7 years have passed, those whom they 
call royal instructors receive the boy " to educate. The 

1 As Lengerke imagined. 2 Is. xxxix. 7. It appears from their being 

put in charge of the master of the king's eunuchs. (Dan. i. 3.) Josephus re- 
lates it simply as a fact. Ant. x. 10. 1. 3 i. 3. " This is deemed by some 
a right of ownership ; for, when they buy slaves, they change their names, 
that, even in the change of name, they might recognise their servitude." 
Theod. " The master, having bought a slave, then, wishing to show him 
that he is master, changes his name." " That the imposition of names is a 
symbol of mastership, is plain from what we too do," &c. S. Chrys. Serm. 12. 
in loc. N. T. Opp. iii. 121. See such changes among the Egyptians, (2 Kings 
xxiii. 34.) Babylonians, (Ib. xxiv. 17.) Persians, (Ezr. v. 14. Esth. ii. 7.) 

4 V37 5 -Ti j n 6 ^<r 7 'T?.'J>?, 8 iv. 5. Ch. 8. Eng. 

Alcib. i, 37. Huv. p. 21. 



Character of Daniel. 17 

three years, during which he was to be taught the learning 
and tongue of the Chaldtsans 10 , would bring him to 17; but 
according to Xenophon n , 16 or 17 was the age of the 
adults, at which they entered upon the king's service. As 
he was taken captive in the third year of Jehoiakim, 
when Nebuchadnezzar was at the head of his father 
Nabopolassar's ariny and was not as yet king, some time 
in the second year of Nebuchadnezzar coincided with 
the time when he was to stand before the king, entering 
upon his service. It was then in boyish faithfulness to 
the law of his God, that he, about 14, refused the king's 
meats 12 , which, (as being connected with idol-sacrifices, 
and the animal food thereof being killed with the blood,) 
were forbidden to him by the law 13 . Hosea's prophecy 14 , 
they shall eat unclean things in Assyria, shews how diffi- 
cult it was to avoid them. God says by Ezekiel 15 , the 
children of Israel shall eat their defiled bread among the 
Gentiles whither I will drive them; and Ezekiel protests 
to God, Ah ! Lord God ; my soul hath not been polluted. 
It was part of that simplicity of boyish faith, which is 
the herald of future greatness, that, in uncompromising 
obedience to the law of his God, he, the soul of the action 
of his three companions, trusted that God would uphold 
his health and strength, as well through the pulse as 
through the forbidden food. He tells us that it was so, as 
a simple fact. Even now too God protects religious 
abstinence. "I have remarked," Chardin relates 16 , "that 

10 Not what we call Chaldee, which is Aramaic, rvcng, in Daniel ii. 4. Ezr. 
iv. 7. but the Medo-Persian which the Magi brought with them. 

11 Cyrop. i. 2. 8. K Jjflg from the Persian. See further note A. at the end. 
It is clear from Dan. v. 2-4. that the royal banquets were liable to be mixed up 
with idolatry. Libations of wine and offerings of a first portion (comp. airapxti, 
cwrtJpxecreaj) to the gods were held far and wide to consecrate the meal, and so, 
being idolatrous, did to the Jews desecrate them. Hav. quotes Strabo (xvi.3, 
26.) alleging that the Nabatseans [Babylonians by origin, see on Obad. p. 242, 3.] 
offered libations of wine to the sun. The D'^3, cakes offered to the " Queen 
of heaven " in Jer.vii. 18. xliv. 19. were probably Babylonian. "Judging it to 
be a defilement to partake of such things, since they, serving their idols, re- 
ceived for good cheer the portion set apart thence for them." Polychr. 

13 Idol-sacrifices, Ex. xxxiv. 15. eating with the blood, Lev. xix. 26, &c. 
M ix. 3. K iv. 13, 14. 16 MS. Notes in Harmer, Obs. 59. ii. 110. 

c 



18 Unity of the Book ; 

the countenances of the Keehicks (kashishin, monks) 
are in fact more rosy and smooth than those of others, 
and that those who fast much, I mean the Armenians and 
Greeks, are notwithstanding very beautiful, sparkling with 
health, with a clear and lively countenance." 

But whether God did unusually bless that meagre sus- 
tenance or no, boys do not foresee, that, amid abstinence 
from the vices which surround them, God gives power of 
mind and body, which others, through sinful self-indul- 
gence 1 , destroy in themselves. The faith was the same, 
in whatever way God answered it. In that same strong 
faith, he, with his companions, obtained from God that 
knowledge of Nebuchadnezzar's dream and its meaning, 
which saved him from death. In that same simple faith, 
in his advanced age, he continued, like the Psalmist 3 , to 
pray three times in the day, openly, when the penalty was 
the den of lions. 

Yet with this uncompromising duty to his God, he 
shews, where he may, a subject's deference. What re- 
spectful tenderness there is in that explanation of the 
dream, whereby Nebuchadnezzar's impending insanity 
was foreshewn to the king 3 . He sat astoniedfor one hour, 
and his thoughts troubled him. The king had to encourage 
him to speak ; so amazed was he at such a reverse to such 
greatness. We almost hear the accents of tenderness and 
sympathy with which he spake. With what gentle words 
does he exhort him to those acts of mercy and righteous- 
ness, whereby the chastisement might yet be averted, *Let 
my counsel be acceptable unto thee if it may be a lengthen- 
ing of thy tranquillity. He longs that God may yet re- 
verse the doom, which he had to announce, s The dream be 
to them that hate thee, if, by mercy to man, the king would 
but place himself within reach of the Mercy of God ! To 
the impious Belshazzar he had to announce the imminent 
judgment of God ; yet then too with what longing re- 
membrance does he look back to the days of Nebuchad- 

1 Rycaut gives a horrible account of the pages at the Ottoman court. 
2 Ps. lr. 17. 3 iv 19. 4 Ib. 27. 



Character of Daniel. 19 

nezzar, his greatness, glory, honour, humiliation, repent- 
ance 5 . Human greatness is, when unabused, a majestic 
sight ; for 6 the powers that be, are ordained of God. They 
are reflections of His Supremacy. The greatness of Ne- 
buchadnezzar was probably the more elevated, as being 
the first who changed the robber-tyrant-domination of 
Assyrian or Babylonian might into organised rule. Da- 
niel's admiration of that greatness, (uniformly as the gift 
of God,) shews itself alike in the explanation of his dream 
of that majestic statue which depicted his glory ; in that 
of the hewn tree which betokened his extreme humili- 
ation ; and in the description of it to Belshazzar, when 
Nebuchadnezzar was with the dead, and his empire was 
within a few hours of its dissolution . The memory dwells 
in the mind of the aged seer, as of a glorious sight which 
had faded. Even of the weak king, who had let himself 
be entrapped into a law which constrained the condem- 
nation of Daniel, he dwells on all the good side, his re- 
luctance to execute the decree, (which perhaps with safety 
to his throne he could not recall,) his sorrow at it, his in- 
effectual desire to evade it, his one night's repentance. 
They are few words of his own which he has preserved ; 
but they are in the same gentle respectful tone ; 7 Before 
thee also, O king have I done no hurt. Yet the love of his 
home and of the country which God had chosen for His 
people, lived through all those years of a lifelong absence 
and greatness. We see it in the aged man of fourscore 
and three years, streaming back on that life of 69 years 
of exile. It is told us incidentally. But for the decree of 
Darius we should not have known it. " 8 When Daniel 
knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house, 
and his window being open in his chamber towards Jeru- 
salem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day and 
prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he did afore- 
time" What a yearning for the dust of the city of his God 
does there lie in those two words, towards Jerusalem; what 
a life of longing prayer in those closing words, as he did 

* v. 18-21. u Rom.xiii. 1. " vi.22. 8 Ib. 10. 

c.2 



20 Unity of the Book ; 

aforetime. Yet he prayed toward Jerusalem., not simply 
as his native land, but in memory of the prayer at the dedi- 
cation of the temple ; ccl If they shall bethink themselves 
in the land whither they have been carried captives, and re- 
pent and return unto Thee ivith all their heart and pray 
unto Thee toward their land which Thou gavest unto their 
fathers, the city ivhich Thou hast chosen and the house which 
I have built for Thy name, then hear Thou their prayer, 
and forgive Thy people. 

That same earnest longing we see developed in that 
full and deep outpouring of his soul 2 , when, in the first 
year of Darius, the 70 years of the captivity were all but 
accomplished ; we see the intensity of his love for the 
city of his God, which with his bodily eyes he was no 
more to see. We hear it in words, which now too ex- 
press the yearnings of the soul, longing for the resto- 
ration of one's country or of the Church. One who 
could doubt their truth, knows nothing of prayer or of 
the voice of the soul. It were a psychological contra- 
diction. We see that same longing again a little later, 
in the third year of Cyrus, in those unexplained words, 
fn those days I Daniel ^uas mourning three weeks of days. 
The cause of the mourning is hinted in the subsequent 
vision, where Gabriel says, 4 The prince of the kingdom of 
Persia idthstood me one and twenty days. It is related by 
Ezra 5 ; The people of the land hired counsellors against 
them to frustrate their purpose all the days of Cyrus king 
of Persia. 

This Jove survived an unbroken political greatness of 
70 years. The stripling of 17 sat in the king's gate (" in 
the Porte," as we say, retaining the Oriental term,) Presi- 
dent over all the Colleges of the wise men 6 , and of the 
whole province of Babylon. ' Daniel continued even unto 
the first year of king Cyrus, are the simple words; but 

1 IKgs.viii. 47-50. 2 ix.4-19. 3 x.2. * x. 13. 5 iv.4,5. 

6 Dan. ii. 48. ^a ''D'?n- l ?3 h% J'jipJi lit. " chief of the sagans [prefects] over 
all the wise men of Babylon." Each college or division of the Magi had its own 
head, and Daniel had the supervision of all. 7 i. 21. 



Character of Daniel. 21 

what a volume of tried faithfulness is unrolled by them ! 
Amid all the intrigues, indigenous, at all times, in dynas- 
ties of Oriental despotism, where intrigue too rolls round 
so surely and so suddenly on its author's head ; amid all 
the envy towards a foreign captive in high office as a 
king's councillor ; amid all the trouble, incidental to the 
insanity of the king or to the murder of two of his succes- 
sors, in that whole critical period for his people Daniel 
continued. We should not have had any statement of his 
faithfulness, but for the conspiracy against his life under 
the new Median dynasty which knew not those past years. 
8 The president and Satraps sought in vain to find any oc- 
casion against him concerning the kingdom ; forasmuch as 
he was faithful, neither was any error or fault found in 
him. The picture is the greater, because the lines which 
mark it are so few. They are a few simple touches of 
truth. It is the fact, which is so eloquent. It is not 
the language of panegyric to say, Daniel continued, even 
unto the Jirst year of king Cyrus ; Daniel was in the gate 
of the king; this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius 
and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian 9 . The force of the 
words is not drawn out ; but, as perseverance is the one 
final touchstone of man, so these scattered notices com- 
bine in a grand outline of one, an alien, a captive, of that 
misused class who are proverbially the intriguers, favor- 
ites, pests of Oriental courts, who revenge on man their 
illtreatment at the hands of man 10 ; yet, himself, in uni- 

8 vi. 4. 9 i. 21. ii. 49. vi. 28. 

10 Ctesias gives most fully the lists of Eunuchs, who had " influence with " the 
different Persian kings, from Cyrus (" with whom the Eunuch Petisakas had 
great influence," Pers. n. 5.) downwards. Ib. n. 11. 13. 20. 27. 29. 30. 39. 45. 
49. 53. He mentions also some of their intrigues and assassinations. Of their 
character in Christian times, Gibbon does not speak more strongly than S. Atha- 
nasius, who calls them " a pleasure-loving race, that has no serious concern ; " 
" scarcely entrusted with household service." <! The law forbade them to be ad- 
mitted into any Ecclesiastical Council." Yet they were always causing evil 
by their intrigues. In the Arian persecutions under Constantlus, " it was the. 
Eunuchs who instigated the proceedings against all." (S. Ath. Arian Hist. 
38. Hist. Tracts p. 251, 2. Oxf. Tr. see also Ib. p. 287.) So Chrysaphius the 
Eunuch, the friend of Eutyches, was the author of the Eutychian troubles, 



22 '< Unity of the Book ; 

form integrity, outliving envy, jealousy, dynasties ; surviv- 
ing in untarnished uncorrupting greatness the 70 years 
of the Captivity ; honoured during the 43 years of Nebu- 
chadnezzar's reign ; doing the king's business 1 under the 
insolent and sensual boy Belshazzar ; owned by the con- 
quering Medo-Persians ; the stay doubtless and human 
protector of his people during those long years of exile ; 
probably commissioned to write the decree of Cyrus which 
gave leave for that long-longed-for restoration of his peo- 
ple, whose re-entrance into their land, like Moses of old, 
he was not to share. Deeds are more eloquent than words. 
Such undeviating integrity, beyond the ordinary life of 
man, in a worshipper of the One God, in the most disso- 
lute and degraded of the merchant cities of old, first mi- 
nister in the first of the world-monarchies, was in itself a 
great fulfilment of the purpose of God in converting the 
chastisement of His people into the riches of the Gentiles. 
A self-laudatory school has spoken much of the lauda- 
tion, as they call it, of Daniel, as being unnatural, on our 
belief that he was the author of the book. To me cer- 
tainly much more striking is his reserve about himself. 
A chief statesman in the first Empire of the world, he 
has not recorded a single voluntary act of his own. Con- 
ceive any mere human writer, occupying such a position 
as Daniel had, a chief adviser of a great monarch, and a 
great protector doubtless of his people, saying not one 
word of all the toils, plans, counsels of those 70 years, 
nothing of the good which he furthered, or the evil which 
he hindered ! And, amid this self-abnegating silence, what 
is the self-laudation ? Literally this, that God gave him 

.through his influence with Theodosius, and of the horrors of the latrocinium of 
Ephesus. (see Petav. de Incarn. i. 13.) The heathen Lampridius speaks of 
them, as the " sole destroyers of princes ; " (Vit. Sev. c. 66.) Gihbon sums up, " If 
we examine the general history of Persia, India, and China, we shall find that 
the power of the Eunuchs has uniformly marked the decline and fall of every dy- 
nasty." (c. 19. n. 7.) Gibhon speaks of the pernicious influence of the Eunuchs 
" under the third Gordian," (c. 7.) their evil ascendancy over Constantius, 
,(c. 19. beg.) Honorius, (c. 31.) Arcadius, (c. 32. at length) and Theodosius 
the younger, (c. 34.) 1 viii. 27. 



Hebrew and Chaldee from one hand. 23 

and his companions wisdom above the rest of the youths ; 
that this was proved on their examination ; that Daniel 
relates, in all simplicity, the Queen-mother's account 
of the skill given to him by God in interpreting difficul- 
ties, which moved Belshazzar to send for him ; that the 
envious Presidents could find no crime whereof to accuse 
him; that the angel Gabriel thrice spake to him, as 
greatly beloved 1 *. If not fact, this were blasphemy ; other- 
wise, how differs it from that touching title by which St. 
John loves to call himself, the disciple whom Jesus loved! 
Whatever mention, however, Daniel makes of himself 
(although not self-praise,) it is one and the same through 
the book ; and so, even opponents have acknowledged 
herein an evidence of its oneness. It is, in fact, unity 
amid diversity. 

There is another characteristic of true history, visible 
throughout the book, statements which need but can re- 
ceive explanation. Daniel was not writing continuous 
history, but recording facts in which God's glory was 
manifested. As a contemporary writer, he presupposes 
that things would be understood, which then were no- 
torious. He does not guard his relations ; he does not 
explain more than is needed for his immediate end. 
Those for whom he immediately wrote understood him, 
To those of a later age those allusions, even if not under- 
stood, presented no difficulties ; for the truth of the pro- 
phecies guaranteed their truth. These I will consider 
hereafter. Now, I will only say, that that free unembar- 
rassed style which troubles not itself about making clear 
its own truth, is visible throughout Daniel. 

It is equally conceded, that the language and style both 
in the Chaldee and Hebrew portions of the book are such 
as belong to one writer. Even De Wette ranks this uni- 
formity among the proofs of its unity. " s The similarity 
of style binds together the Chaldee and Hebrew por- 
tions, not only in themselves but with each other." 
ii. It is now conceded, that there are neither Greek 

2 ix. 23. x. 11, 19. 3 Einl. n. 256. 



24 "Greek words" given up by all, 

words, nor Graecisms l , beyond the names of two or three 
musical instruments. In the ignorance of general philo- 
logy at the close of the last century, words whose Semitic 
origin was not obvious, or which belonged to the Indo- 
European family, nay, some whose Aramaic origin is ob- 
vious, were assumed to be Greek. Kerads 2 , an indige- 
nous Aramaic root, common to Syriac Chaldee Samaritan, 
was assumed not only to be from a common root with 
Kijpva-a-ci), but to be the very word ; kerods 3 was to be the 
same as Krjpvg:, partemim 4 was to be TrpoTt/m (which is, 
of course, not even Greek 5 ,) pattish 6 to be ireTaa-os ; ne- 
bidsbah 1 * to be vofjtiarfui ; pithgam 8 to be <0eyjua (none of 
which last Greek words would suit the meaning of the 
passages.) Then, among the names of musical instru- 
ments employed in Nebuchadnezzar's solemn dedication, 
mashrokhitha was to be avpij^; sabka was not to be, (what 
it was) the original Semitic name which the Greeks, 
adopting the instrument, pronounced crafi^v/cr], but was, 
despite of the Greeks themselves, to be the Greek word ; 
soomphonia was more naturally thought to be avpfywvia ; 
khitharos was probably icidapi?, our K guitar ;" and pesan- 
terin, -\fra\Tijpiov. Of these 9 or 1 alleged Greek words, 
(two are from the same root) improved philology swept 
away at once all which are not names of musical instru- 
ments j three roots belonging to the Aryan family, two 
probably being genuine Chaldee. Of the four musical in- 
struments, mashrokitha has probably a common Sanskrit 
root with ffvpi^, but is a genuine Aramaic word ; sabka 9 
is the Aramaic name of the instrument which the Greeks 

1 This was an imagination of Bertholdt, e. g. p. 248, 752,3. wherein he neg- 
lected Greek idiom as well as Chaldee. 2 ri? v. 29. also Syriac and Sam. ; 
in Sanscr. krus, (whence Gr. K^piiaata, Kplfa, itpdfai) Germ, kreischen. Ges. 
The Arabic use is borrowed probably from the Aramaic, yet is not exclusively 
Christian. 3 jV^i iii. 4. also in Syr. and Arm. 

4 ni?$ns Dan.i.3. also of Persian nobles, Esth.i.3. vi. 10. see Note A. at the 
end. 5 It should he evrifioi. 6 B>^9 ktib or B3 kri iii. 21. also in Syriac. 
weratros is " a broad brimmed hat." ? n$pj probably from 131? see Ges. 

8 0*1$ iii. 16. iv. 14. Ezr. iv. 17. v. 7, 14. see Note A. 

9 K^ap a "harp," from Semitic ^D, is'f. comp. Shabaka Ar. Melit. Zab. "in- 
tertwined ; " n#V, " net ; " shabaka Ar. SMbke Melit. Id. 



except two or three musical instruments. 25 



called o-a/i/Sww?, inserting the m, as the Zabians and Mal- 
tese 10 did in the Syriac aboobo, " reed, pipe," an insertion 
familiar to us in Horace's "ambubaia 11 ," "female flute- 
player." But the Greeks themselves say that the o-a/*/3w7 
was " 13 a Syriac invention," as indeed it has a Syriac, but 
no Greek, etymology. Now, whether there remain two 
or three musical instruments, this would be nothing more 
remarkable, than the corresponding fact, that Greeks im- 
ported Syriac or Hebrew names of instruments, together 
with the instrument themselves, as Kivvpa, vcfySXa 13 . We 
know that the Babylonians loved foreign music also, and 
that they saddened their Hebrew captives by bidding 
them, u sing to their harps some of the songs o/Zion. Isa- 
iah, foretelling the destruction of Babylon, says, 15 Thy 
pomp is brought down to the grave, the noise of thy viols. 
(nebaleica.) Babylon was a city of merchants 16 ; she ex- 
ulted in her ships 17 . Her manufactures found their way 
to Palestine in the days of Joshua 18 . The Euphrates 
connected Babylon downwards with India, and above 
even with Armenia 19 and the line of Tyrian commerce, 
and, through Tyre, with Greece. Nebuchadnezzar had, 
himself, at enormous expense, connected it with the Per- 
sian Gulf, by a gigantic navigable canal 20 . We know 
the rival lines of commerce, that from Sardis by land 
across to Armenia 21 and, beyond, to Susa ; and that from 
Petra to Babylon 22 , a transit both from Egypt 23 and Tyre. 
Tyre again had its own Northern line, through Tadmor 
(Palmyra) to Tiphsach (Thapsacus) and thence South- 
ward to Babylon 2? . 24 Thapsacus was the North-Eastern 



10 amboob, Zabian ; lenboob for el enboob, Melit. Ges. v. 

11 Hor. Sat. i. 2. 1. M Juba, Hist. Theatr. iy. in Athenseus, iv. 77. p. 391. 
Dind. 13 from "top, "??}. " Sopater says that the vdp\a too was a Phoenician 

invention." (Ib. p. 390.) Strabo says, " some musical instruments have Bar- 
barian names, Nablas and Sambuke and Barbitos and Magadis and many 
others." x. 3. 17. a?)A.os is probably from tyt}, " perforated," " pipe or flute." 

" Ps. cxxxvii. 2. K xiv. 11. 16 Ezek. xvii. 4. Is. xliii. 14. 

vii. 21. w Herod, i. 194. w Rawl. Herod. Ess. 8. i. 512. 

The canal is shewn on Spruner's map. 21 Herod, v, 52. ffl Strab. xiv. 
4, 2. see on Joel iv. 10. p. 144. a See Heeren, Ideen, ii. 127. iii. 402, 3. 

24 1 Kgs. iv. 24. [v. 4. Heb.] 



26 Names of things travel with them, 

extremity of the kingdom of Solomon ; and the line of 
commerce, for which doubtless he built or rebuilt Tad- 
mor l , was, at least, more than four centuries anterior to 
this date. The intercourse of Greece with Tyre, in Ante- 
Homeric times, is evidenced by the use of a Phoenician 
or Hebrew word to designate " gold V Asia, from the 
Tigris Westward, was systematically intersected with 
lilies of commerce. Sardis and Babylon were proverbi- 
ally luxurious. It were rather a marvel, if the golden 
music-loving city s had not gathered to itself foreign mu- 
sical instruments of all sorts, or, if, in a religious inaugu- 
ration at Babylon, all the variety of music which it could 
command had not been united, to grace the festival and 
bear along the minds and imaginations of the people. 
The Greek names are but another instance of the old re- 
cognised fact, that the name of an import travels with 
the thing. When we speak of tea, sugar, coffee, choco- 
late, cocoa, cassia, cinnamon, tobacco, myrrh, citrons, 
rice, potatoes, cotton, chintz, shawls, we do not stop to 
think that we are using Chinese, Malay, Arabic, Mexi- 
can, Hebrew, Malabar, S. American, Bengalee 4 , Persian 
words, and we shall continue to use them, even though 
they were originally misapplied, and we know that the 
word tobacco was the name, not of the plant but of the 
vessel out of which the natives smoked it. When Solo- 
mon's ships brought him the peacocks, apes, ivory, almug 
or algum-wood, they brought with them also the Sanskrit 
and Malabar names of the ape, (which passed thence into 
Greek and our European languages) and of the Algum 
wood ; the Tamul name of the peacock, and the Sanskrit 
of the elephant & . There is nothing stranger in our find- 

1 Ib. ix. 18. 2 xpt5<roj from {Tiri, add &pir7), scymetar, from ann ; (wo. 

from run. 3 Is. xiv. 4. 4 The authority, except for the Hebrew 

Arabic Persian words, is Adelung. 

5 see in Ges. v. tjip, '?ij, D'?n^. Prof. Max Miiller approves of these etymolo- 
gies and adds for the algum wood (which had hitherto baffled Philologists) the 
Malabar and Sanskrit " valguka." Science of Language, p. 203. The pronun- 
ciation in the Chronicles, (2 Chr. ii. 8. ix. 10, 11.) "algum," is then nearer 
the original than that in the Kings, "almug." 1 Kgs. x. 11, 12. 



Musical instruments in Daniel not Macedonian. 27 

ing Greek instruments of music in Nebuchadnezzar's 
time at Babylon, than in the Indian names of Indian ani- 
mals and of an Indian tree having reached Jerusalem 
under Solomon. Perhaps there is a trace of the trade in 
female slaves, for which Phoenicia was early infamous, 
900 years before Nebuchadnezzar, in the Pentateuch, 
there being no etymology for the Hebrew word u concu- 
bine," " pilegesh," or " pillegesh," in any Semitic or other 
Eastern language, while it does correspond with the Greek 
Tra^Xa^, " maiden." 

The Greek names of musical instruments being then 
only evidence of indirect commerce between Babylon and 
Greece, the evidence was to be eked out by calling them 
" 6 Macedonian instruments." In regard to pesanterin, 
this was to be proved, in that the Alexandrians, like the 
Dorians of old, are supposed to have changed the X into v j 
and so "pesanterin" might lie a Doric or Alexandrian pro- 
nunciation of tyaXTqpiov. Only, in fact, 1) although the 
word fydkrripiov occurs in the LXX. and other Greek 
translations of Holy Scripture 7 , and sometimes in classic 
authors 8 , the form tyavTijpiov never does occur. The 
Greek translators of Daniel render Pesauterin by 
TjraX-n^jtoi;. 2) If it had occurred, being a Doric form, it 
would have been obviously the Doric name for the instru- 
ment, Doric music being ancient and celebrated, whereas 
any special Macedonian music is unheard of. Nor is it 
likely that there ever was such, since we are here on 
later historic times, and we know, in detail, of ^Eolic, 
Doric, Ionian, Lydian, Phrygian music, and have no hint 
of Macedonian. The Dorians were, of old, established 
in Crete, with which both Assyria and Tyre were in 
proximate intercourse. A change of consonants which 
the Macedonians, (if it had been so) would have retained 
from the Doric, could have been no proof that a word, 
had it existed, was not Doric but Macedonian. We 
might as well say, that any word which we retain in use 

6 Essays and Rev. p. 76. from Ges. v. pBJP?. 
7 See Tromm or Schleusner, sub r. s See Scott and Liddell, sub v. 



28 Macedonian Greek words in Daniel 

from old French or Saxon, " oyez " or w yclept," was a 
proof that any older writing in which it may occur be- 
longs to the 19th century, not to the period from which 
it is retained. In truth, the n being pronounced against 
the palate like 1, only somewhat harder and lower, 1 and 
n are notoriously interchanged, not in Greek dialects only, 
but in all languages. It is one of the acknowledged 
changes in the Semitic dialects, both in themselves and 
with each other \ as it is between ourselves and the Ger- 
mans 2 . But 3) there is no proof whatever, that the 
Macedonians ever did substitute the n for the I 3 . Sothen, 
as relates to "pesanterin," we have an imaginary dia- 
lectic variation to account for an imaginary Greek word, 
whereas the change is according to, the recognised prin- 
ciples of all languages. 



1 Gesenius, who v. ptM8? accounts for the word in that " 1 was changed into 
n after the manner of the Macedonian dialect, which (dialect) was from the 
time of Alexander received among the Syrians and Alexandrians," accounts 
for it rightly under ^ ; " 1 is not seldom hardened into n, as dys Ar. zanam, 
and in popular Arab, zanzala for zalzala, earthquake ; sansala for salsala, a 
chain : frequently in foreign words, as pflipg from tyaXTTiptov ; margonitho 
(Syr.) margelitha (Ch.) from papyaplrris ; Isriin and Israil ; Michain and Mi- 
chail. Zab. Enshebeth, for Elizabeth." In Heb. we hare yra, yr$ ; pjj, J^ ; 
nj^j, nji}^ ; if'oj, vrfc ; and also fjj, (whence Dan. nj-tj,) Targ. jn^> ; Bochart adds, 
(Phaleg p. 520.) 3pj Ar. lakaba ; lympha, J/^^TJ ; lutra, ewSpis ; pulmo, irvetficai'. 
Ges. refers to Scheid in Diss. Lugd. p. 953. for instances within theArabic itself. 

2 erme ermine ; kumme? cummin ; himme? heavew ; orgeJ orgaw. 

3 " There seems to be no trace of any such word as if<wH)pioi/. The change 
of A into v is not exemplified in any of the words known to be, or by Gram- 
marians said to be, Macedonian. Of the words in which it is exemplified in 
profane writers, (pivrarai is pure Doric ; (Epicharmus fr.) yiwro is Homeric ; 
fvOeiv, fifyriffTos are Theocritean ; qlvTis (which Ahrens questions) is in Pin- 
dar ; Sevra, is said to be Doric by Grammarians. There remains, possibly to 
countenance the Macedonian theory, ehupevd ; Vi^'^g in LXX. 1 Chr. xv. 16. 
But this, as you say, could only indicate a Doric or .SSolic affinity in the 
Macedonian dialect." Letter of Rev. J. Biddell, Fell, of Ball. The reading 
f\ti(j>fvd is an accidental variation of the Vatican MS. of the LXX. The 
Alexandrian MS. has 'E\i<j>a\d ; 15 others and the Comp. have A. ; in v. 21. 
conversely the Vat. MS. has alone ''S.vfyava.ias, 4 MSS. have ''EKityavaias, ; the 
Alex. Aid. xi. and 3 others have 'E/U^aAofcw ; 10 others have also the two A.. Con- 
trariwise, for the Hebrew Mikneahu the Vat. has MafceAAefa ; another, Ke\\ta, 
v. 18. but all have the Hebrew n in v. 21. Such changes probably arose in 
copying from dictation and indistinct hearing-. 



a fiction. 29 

In the " Macedonian word, symphonia," we have, fur- 
ther, an imaginary meaning 4 attached to an ordinary 
Greek word, and, because Antiochus Epiphanes is relat- 
ed to have danced in a wild way under the stirring of the 
symphony, "concert," of music, it is assumed that the 
"symphonia" was some one instrument, and that, Ma- 

4 Gesenius alleges two places of Polybius, as authority for a Greek instru- 
ment, <rvfi<l>cavla. In the one, it is manifestly " concert" (quoted by Athenceus 
x. 52. p. 439. Cas.) " The concert stimulating him, the king [Antiochus Epi- 
phanes] jumping up danced and jested with the actors, so that all were 
ashamed." The other is equally clear, with Athenseus' reading 1 ; " If he Ijeard 
of any young men feasting any where, he came in with a jar [of wine] and 
music, so that most, for the strangeness, rose and fled." There is no other 
place where trv^uvla even seems to he a single instrument ; and indeed the 
name contradicts that idea. In Latin S. Jerome corrects those who so misin- 
terpreted the word in S. Luke xv. " Some Latins think wrongly that the 
symphonia is a sort of organ, whereas the concordant harmony in the praises 
of God is signified by this word. For ffv^wvia is expressed in Latin by eon- 
sonantia," (Ep. 21. ad Dam. n. 29.) S. Augustine in Ps. 41. ed. Bened. has 
symphoniaci, " a band of music," not, as was of old read faultily, symphoniam. 
(Du Cange s. T.) Others explain the word of some one instrument, shewing 
by their contradictions that they had no certain knowledge. Isidore (Orig. ii. 
21.) and Ugutio (Du C.) describe it as a drum ; Glosses on Prudentius (A. D. 
405 ,)sistrum or trumpet; Mamotrectus, "lyres;" others, "pipe." Ven. Fortu- 
natus (A.D. 530,) uses it in poetry for a powerful wind-instrument. Later, 
" sweet " is its epithet. (Nic. de Braya and Joh. Molinet in Du Cange.) Du 
Cange supposes the " chifonia" of old French poetry to be derived from it, (an 
instrument hung on the neck of itinerant minstrels.) ib. Others identify the 
Italian sambogna. Menage (whom Gesenius quotes for this) says, " It is be- 
yond question that sambogna is derived from Sambucina, diminutive of Sam- 
'buca ; sambucina, sambncna, sampogna." (le orig. della ling. Ital.) In what- 
ever way later writers may have'understood the word, there is no evidence of 
any actual instrument called " symphonia," until times when it would be alto- 
gether a new instrument. Many repeat from Ges. as a fact, that " in Syria 
and Asia Minor it is called sambogna." This could only be true of itinerant 
musicians ; but is without authority and probably a mistake. In the passage 
of Polybius, I have supplied the only meaning which Kepa/Jou can have, and 
which, in the Greek of Polybius, it may perhaps have. There is, however, no 
instance in which Kepdfiiov, without the addition of olvypifv, olvov, is used of a 
jar of wine. It may, however, have been intelligible from the context, that 
the king brought it as his contribution to the feast. The Keparlov however of 
Diodorus (Exc. ii. 577.) is still more unintelligible. Kepdnov is used of the 
hornlets of a prickly crab ; of a slight projection of the uterus ; but not as a 
diminutive of fte'pas, either as a drinking horn or as a wind-instrument. Hem- 
sterhuis (on Lucian D. Dial. xii. p. 233, 4.) referred to by Wess. on Diod. 
does not even name it. 



30 Retreat of unbelieving criticism. 

cedonian* In the absence of all evidence that the Greek 
word symphonia was ever used of any single instrument, 
German critics of the most opposite schools have found 
for the Chaldee instrument a not improbable etymology 
in Aramaic x . 

Criticism then, as it became more accurate, retreated, 
point by point, from all which, in its rashness, it had as- 
serted. First, it gave up the so-called Grsecisms ; then 
that there were any Greek words in Daniel except three 
of the musical instruments; then, that there was any 
thing incredible in some Greek musical instruments be- 
ing used at Nebuchadnezzar's solemn religious festival : 
lastly, this crotchet, that two of the musical instruments 
were Macedonian words, must give way likewise. Yet 
at each stage these pseudo-criticisms did their work. 
Those who disbelieved Daniel believed the authority of 
the critics. " 2 To fix the time in which this chapter (i) 
was written we have a date in the Greek [not Greek 
but Aryan] word ' partemim/ according to which we can 
hardly go further back than the time of Artaxerxes Lon- 
gimanus." " 3 The use of the Greek [Aramaic] word ' ne- 
bidsba' leaves no doubt that this chapter (ii) must have 
been composed in the times after Xerxes." And so on. 

I have treated this question of the mention of Greek in- 
struments, on what I believe to be the only philosophical 

1 Meyer and Havernick prefer the etymology from tpb " a reed ;" " thence" 
says Meyer, "jte'p (like jtevj from pin) and then an adj. stat. emphat. tqfi'p (the 
form of the word in Dan. iii. 10. Keth.) This is confirmed by the Copt. <mi&i 
arundo, [perhaps the original of <rl<j><nv, siphon, tube, which has no satisfactory 
Greek etymology] tibia; and tibia itself is perhaps Semitic, as rohr (reed) rohr- 
bein . (thigh-bone) rolirpfeife, a reed-pipe, also used of some organ-pipes. 
K$JD?D would be formed from this by the insertion of the 0. See above p. 25. 
Fiirst, in like way, says of NJjspiD, " since the Greeks themselves did not so 
name the instrument, it is perhaps Semitic." He mentions the same etymo- 
logy, as also another given by Meier, jpo cover (coll. Ar. tsofno or tsofono, a 
leathern vessel for washing or drawing water : tsafno, tsofono, tsafna, a scrip 
or leathern tablecloth ; tsafano, scrip ;) then a Hebrew intensive adj. form 'jbo 
resolved into 'j&'p. stat. emph. N$)'D. Meier himself rightly regards this as im- 
probable, although the Arabic meanings, being unconnected with the others 
of the root, are probably derived from some other dialect. 

2 Bertholdt, Dan. 6. p. 98. 3 Ib. 7. p. 61. 



Intercourse between Greece and the East. 31 

ground, the fact of an old and extensive commerce be- 
tween Babylon and the West. "The name travelled 
with the thing," is an acknowledged principle of phi- 
lology. It needed not that a single Greek should have 
been at Babylon. Tyrian merchants took with them the 
names of the wares which they sold, just as our English 
merchants transmitted the names of our East Indian im- 
ports with them into Germany, or the Spaniards brought 
us back the American names of the products of the new 
world, or at this day, I am told, some of our Manchester 
goods are known by the name of their eminent manufac- 
turer in Tartary, where the face of an Englishman has 
probably been scarcely seen. Yet the actual intercourse 
of the Greeks with the East is now known to have been 
far greater than was formerly imagined. Brandis thus 
opens his book " on the historical gain from the decy- 
phering of the Assyrian inscriptions ; " 

" 4 Long before the Greeks began to write history, they 
had, as friends and foes, come into manifold contact with 
the empire of the Assyrians. That Assyria took part in 
the Trojan war, as Ctesias and others 5 related, no one 
would give out for an historical fact ; but the battle and 
victory of Sennacherib in the 8th century B. C. over a 
Greek army which had penetrated into Cilicia is fully 
attested by a relation out of the Babylonian history of 
Berosus 6 . On the other hand, the extensive commerce 
of Greek colonies must not unfrequently have led Greek 
merchants into Assyrian territory. Did they not pene- 
trate even to the inhospitable steppes of Russia on the 
Dnieper and the Don 7 ? The most important however 
must have been the intercourse with the Assyrian pro- 
vinces of Asia Minor, especially with the countries bor- 
dering on the Black Sea and the Mediterranean, and cer- 
tainly with Lydia also ; which, as appears, for above 500 
years until near the end of the 8th century B.C., was de- 

4 Histor. Gewinn aus d. Entziff. d. Ass. Inseimft. p. 1, 2. 5 Diod.ii. 22. 

6 Fragm. Hist. Gr. ed. Miiller. ii. 534. t Heeren's Ideen. i. 920 sqq. 

[from Herod, iv. 24. (see Rawl. on Her. iv. 17. T. iu. p. 14, 16.) coll. Strab. xi. 2. 16.] 



32 Intercourse between Greece and Assyria. 

pendant upon Assyria 1 . In Cyprus too, where the Greeks 
traded and the Assyrians had established themselves even 
in earlier times, these nations must have come into ma- 
nifold contact. That Greeks came to Assyria itself as 
merchants, must remain conjecture only ; hut certainly 
Esarhaddon who, first of the Assyrian rulers, had a paid 
army, was accompanied by Greek soldiers also on his 
marches through Asia 8 . Be this as it may, Anaximan- 
der's map of the world 3 (he was born about 610, B. C.) 
implies an accurate acquaintance with the East. That 
the Westerns generally took more part in the revolutions 
of the East than we should have thought, appears from 
the fragment of a poetical address of Alcaeus to his 
brother Antimenides, who had won glory and reward 
under the banner of Nebuchadnezzar V The name of 
Javan or Greece occurs in the inscriptions of Sargon 
among those from whom he received tribute 5 . We know 
that articles of luxury formed part of the tribute to As- 
syria 6 . Sargon's statue found at Idalium commemorates 
his expedition against Cyprus 7 . More recently, Labyne- 
tus I. of Babylon had been present at the great invasion 
of the Lydians by Cyaxares 7 . It was no great matter for 
monarchs who transported a monolith obelisk from Ar- 
menia 8 , and moved those colossal bulls 9 , and brought 
cedars from Lebanon 10 , to import a few Greek musical in- 
struments. Either way then, whether as spoils of war or 
articles of commerce, Greek instruments of music might 
easily have found their way to Babylon. In the monu- 
ments even of Sennacherib, "the Assyrian Generals," 

1 Niebuhr, Vorlesung. iib. alt. Gesch. i. 405. 

2 Abydenus in Euseb. Chron. Arm. i. 53. 3 i. e. the fact that he could 

.construct a map of the world. " Anaximander the Milesian, hearer of Thales, 
first ventured to depict the world in a map." Agathemerus, Compend. Geogr. 
in Hudson's Geogr. V. Scriptt. T. ii. " He first described the circumference of 
earth and sea." Diog.Laert. ii. 1. 4 Strabo, xiii. 3. 2. 5 Rawl. Herod. 
Essay vii. T. i. 474. 6 Ib. 465. Fox Talbot's annals of Essarhaddon in 

Journal of Sacr. Lit. N. 17. p. 72, 3. Layard, N. and Bab. p. 356. 

"> Her. i. 74. 8 Diod. ii. 11. 9 See the description from the has re- 

lief in Layard, N. and Bab. c. 5. p. 104-114. or the bas-relief itself in the Bri- 
tish Museum. 10 Ib. p. 118. 357. 644. Rawl. Her. i. 475. 



The Pesanterin of Daniel,, on Assyrian monuments. 33 

'says Layard n , are represented as " welcomed by bands of 
men and women, dancing, singing and playing upon in- 
struments of music. We find from various passages in 
the Scriptures, that the instruments of music chiefly used 
on such triumphant occasions were the harp, one with 
ten strings, (rendered viol or lyre in some versions, hut 
probably a kind of .dulcimer) the tabor and the pipe; pre- 
cisely those represented in the bas-reliefs. First came 
five men ; three carried harps of many strings, which they 
struck with both hands ; a fourth played on the double 
pipes, such as are seen on the monuments of Egypt, and 
were used by the Greeks and Romans. They were blown 
at the end like the flutes of the modern Yezidis, which 
they probably resembled in tone and form. The fifth 
musician carried an instrument not unlike the modern 
Santour of the East, consisting of a number of strings 
.stretched over a hollow case or sounding-board." "The 
Santour of the East " was recognised by Gesenius as the 
Pesanterin 1 ^ of Daniel. Even the two ways of spelling 1S , 
which occur in Daniel, recur in the modern Arabic instru- 
ment u . The Psaltery, as described by S. Augustine 15 , 
corresponds with the " Santour", as recognised by Layard 
.on the bas-reliefs of Babylon. 

. Bert holdt, who invented Grsecisms for the book of Da- 
niel, discovered also Rabbinisms, as he thought, but none 
which he could allege. It had been nothing surprising, 
if the Hebrew which Daniel spoke or wrote had been 
less pure than belonged to his age. First minister t at a 
foreign court, using probably Aramaic as his ordinary 
language, diligently instructed in the Aryan language of 
.the Magi, he knew Hebrew probably only from the remi- 

11 Nin, and Bab. c. 20. p. 454. 12 " the p being 1 cast aside at the 

beginning 1 (as talma for Ptolemy,) and in or i from the end." v. j'"iajp. 

13 with the a iii. 7. and the n Ib. 5. 10. 15. (varying in the MSS.) 

14 It is written in Arabic with slight variations, YtMD, 1TUD, Tiros, TTUD, TIUS. 

15 in Ps. 32. n. 5. "That hollow-wood, like a tabor, on which the strings 
rest in such wise that when they are touched, being from it set in a tremulous 
motion and from that cavity gathering sound, they are made more sonorous ; 
this wood the cithara has in the lower .part, the psaltery in the upper." 

D 



34 Allegations of the late date of the Hebrew 

niscences of boyhood, and from the study of the law and 
of the prophets who had been before him. The use of 
Syriac or Median words belongs to his situation ; they 
fit in with it. Bertholdt conceded thus much. "An 
acute enquirer of our time 1 ," he says 2 , "thinks it very 
conceivable that the language of Daniel, taught as he 
was in the language and learning of the Chaldaeans, 
living under several Babylonian kings, under Cyaxares 
the Mede and under Cyrus the Persian, at court and in 
high office, might take precisely such a colour, as to be- 
come unlike all other remains of Hebrew antiquity, arid 
sink below the Hebrew of Ezra, Nehemiah and the book 
of Esther, although far older than it. But if Daniel's in- 
tercourse with Chaldeeans, Medians, Persians in succession 
occasioned certain peculiarities' in his diction, then the 
Hebrew style which we should expect would be one con- 
forming to the language of the Chaldees, Medes and Per- 
sians. Chaldaisms, Medisms, Persisms could, according- 
ly, be nothing strange in the Hebrew portion of his book ; 
the approximations of his expressions to Rabbinism must 
remain the mark whereby the later date of this book is 
quite clearly to be recognized." A definite issue ! But 
where is the proof? Bertholdt offered none. In his ful- 
ler introduction, he rejected the obvious remark of Staiid- 
lin which he had before admitted, dropped the imputation 
of Rabbinisms, but appealed to his own critical tact, that 
the Hebrew of Daniel must be two centuries later than 
Ezekiel, Jeremiah, or such Psalms as were written during 
or soon after the captivity. He himself, he says 3 , " could 
not support this by proof in that place, without taking 
up the room required for other more necessary investi- 
gations." An "accurate critical history of Hebrew and 
of its developement would," he thought, u supersede the 
necessity of appealing to his own philological feeling, and 
would make it plain to sight, that the author of the last 
five chapters of Daniel must have lived a considerable time 

1 Staudlin, Neue Beytrage, p. 115. 
* Bertholdt, Dan. Einl. p. 28, 9. 3 Einl, ins. A. u. N. T. 388. iv. 1537. 



of Daniel given up by all now. 35 

after Haggai, Zechariah, and Malaehi." A commence- 
ment of such a history of Hebrew appeared two years later 
from one who shared all Bertholdt's doctrinal prejudices ; 
but Gesenius * simply classed Daniel in the "silver age 5 ' 
of Hebrew, with Ezra, Nehemiah, the Chronicles, Esther, 
and some older books. The words, which he selects as 
characteristic of that age, occur chiefly in those histo- 
rical books and in Ecclesiastes, some in Job -, and but 
few in Daniel. Bleek, and De Wette, after a careful ex- 
amination of the Hebrew portion of Daniel with a view 
to the question 5 , for the time distinctly renounced Ber- 
tholdt's notion of the lateness of the style of Daniel ; and 
Bleek seemed to think it a gain if any how the style should 
prove nothing one way or the other 6 . Even Ewald has 
no thought except of three marked periods of Hebrew wri- 
ters 7 ; that before David ; that before the Captivity ; and 
the decline, upon and through the Captivity. He classes 
together the language of Ecclesiastes, the Chronicles, 
Daniel. 

It were an easy, but unsatisfactory, way, simply to 
shew that the words alleged by Von Lengerke 8 , and 
transferred thence to the Introduction of De Wette 9 , as far 
as they prove any thing, coincide with the age and circum- 
stances of Daniel. This however would only have been 
an answer to the individual. I have therefore examined 

4 Gesch. d. Hebr. Spracheu. Schrift. Leipz. 1815. 

5 " Bertholdt and others maintained that the Hebrew of Daniel fell far below 
that of the very latest book of the O. T. ; but Bleek has given up the ground, 
since we have no standard for the gradual decay of the language after the 
Captivity. I confess that a fresh comparison of the Hebrew style of the book, 
with a view to the present work, yielded few or rather no results. The style 
is sometimes careless and unclear (as ix. 26. W j'Ni xi. 6. tynp) and has harsh- 
nesses (as xi. 7. tea for to? f?jj ;) the idiom is also sometimes strange (as on^'o 
for ' peace' xi. 6 ;) else there is but little deviation ; especially if one takes into 
account that the style is prophetic, to which belongs the use of the apoc. fu- 
ture, as [na$]] rrjjp afc" xi. 10." Hall. Encyc. 1813. Daniel, p. 10.) 

6 Schleiermacher, &c. Theol. Zeitschr. iii. p. 596. 212, 3. In his posthumous 
Einleitung, he insists on the Greek musical instruments, but drops the subject 
of the style. 1 Ausf. Lehrb. d. Hebr. Sprache 1855. p. 22, 3. 8 D. Such 
Daniel, 1835. p. Ix. Ixi. 9 They do not occur in his Einleitung ins. A. T. 

ed.iv. 1833. and are in the posthumous edition, 1852., probably in that of 1844. 

D 2 



36 The Hebrew of Daniel agrees with his 

expressly for this object every notable word and idiom 
used in the Hebrew 'of Daniel, and have set down under 
four heads, 1) what is peculiar to Daniel; 2) what he has 
in common with the middle period of language, i. e. words 
or idioms, not occurring in the Pentateuch, but received 
in books free from the influence of Aramaic; 3) what 
Daniel has in common with the later writers, i. e. words 
or idioms which, \n, our remaining Hebrew, do not occur 
before the times bordering on the Captivity, as Jere- 
miah ; 4) what, like other of the sacred writers of the same 
date, he has revived out of the Hebrew of the Pentateuch. 
The enquiry was simply historical, where any words or 
idioms employed by Daniel occurred in previous or con- 
temporary Hebrew 1 . There is, for the most part, little 
characteristic in any of this language. In very many 
words or idioms, which do not occur at an earlier date, 
there is no reason from the nature of the language; why 
they should not. The unchanging East has not our 
variations of language. The inhabitants of Mecca still 
speak, in its purity, precisely that same Arabic in which 
the Goran was written 12 centuries ago 3 . What is cha- 
racteristic, however, falls in with the time of Daniel. 

1. It is manifest from that number of words or idioms 
peculiar to the book of Daniel, that, like every other He- 
brew writer, he moulded the language in which he wrote, 
freely for himself. It is not the language of one, who 
writes after received models in a dead language. Like 
all the other sacred writers, he uses the language of 
those who went before him 3 . When describing a vision 
like one of Ezekiel, he uses language of Ezekiel. But 
he does not, in the least, copy the style of Ezekiel, and, 
in fact, his Hebrew is freer from unusual grammatical 

1 See NoteB. atthe end. I have not noticed idioms which, occurring through- 
out all periods of Hebrew, belonged to the unchanging store of the language. 

2 The late Professor Freytag (author of the Arabic Lexicon) told me this on 
the authority of an Arab, who, being too late for the solemnities of the Haj, re- 
mained at Mecca till the following year. 3 See Introduction to Hosea, 
p. 6. Joel, p. 94. Obadiah, p. 228, 230, 1. Jonah, p. 252. and on iv. 2. p. 284. In- 
trod. to Micab, p. 289. 



time and circumstances. 37 

forms than that of Ezekiel. It could not have been 
formed upon it. 

2. It should he observed, how the style of Daniel varies 
with his subjects. One may say that there are four dis- 
tinct styles in Daniel, a) the simple narrative, (as of ch. i. 
and elsewhere.) b) The impassioned language of his pray- 
er (ch.ix.) with which his short thanksgiving in the Chal- 
dee portion remarkably corresponds. Of the 4 verses of 
that thanksgiving, two are, for cadence and language, as 
remarkable as any in Hebrew 4 . c) The purely prophetic 
style of the prophecy of the 70 weeks, d) The condensed 
descriptive prophecy of ch. xi., in which every phrase cha- 
racterises an event or a course of events, yet so that while 
we can now, with the light of history, identify the events, 
no one could, beforehand, make a history from them. 
The simplicity of the narrative, the pathos of the prayer, 
the solemn stateliness of the prophetic style, and the vi- 
vid condensation of this historical prophecy, combined in 

, one, are no slight evidence of the grasp which the writer 
had of the language wherein he wrote in styles so varied 5 . 

3. The Aryan or other foreign words occur almost ex- 
clusively in the Chaldee of Daniel, and, with one excep- 
tion, they occur solely in his narrative. That one excep- 
tion is, that the technical word for the "royal meats," 
"pathbag," to which Daniel had been accustomed, is once 
repeated in the same exact sense in the prophetic portion 
of the book 6 ; but it is a word altogether naturalised in 
Syriac, and so probably in the Aramaic of Daniel's time, 
although unknown to the later Chaldee. Of all these 
foreign words it may be said, that they do not enter into 

4 Dan. ii. 21, 22. vehoo mehashne 'iddenayya v&zimnayya, meha'deh malkeen 
umelrakeem malkeen ; yaheb chochmfitha Ifichakkeemeen, umande'a leyade'ei 
beenah. hoo gale 'ameekatha umesattfiratha, yada' mah bach&shGka, oonfihira 
immeh sliera. 6 Hitzig, with his wonted arrogance towards the pro- 

phets, says, " The bare fact that the author meant to write Hebrew, throws off 
this garb on the first occasion, and writes Aramaic for 6 chapters together, with- 
out any ground, beyond the historical portion, proves that the Aramaic style 
suited him best, the Hebrew was burdensome to him." Heidelb. Jahrb. 1832. 
p. 119. followed by Leng. p. xxxi. On the grounds of the. variation of the Ian- 
guages see ab. p. 9, 10. - 6 xi. 26. 



38 Use of foreign words in Daniel 

the prophet's ordinary style, nor do they in any way in- 
fluence it. All of them are technical names 1 , relating to. 
foreign offices, dress, food, musical instruments, which 
Daniel had occasion to speak of, and without which he 
could not describe what he has to describe. He uses fo- 
reign names of foreign offices, just as we have received 
into English the Arabic names, Caliph, Sultan, Vizier, 
Emir, Cadhi, &c. or the Persian Pasha. Up to the time of 
the captivity there were in Hebrew two foreign names 
of offices only, one as old as Solomon, the etymology 
of which is lost, (Pechah 2 ) the other from the time of Isa- 
iah 3 . To these, Daniel, from his situation in the Baby- 
lonian Court, adds eight more, two of which only are men- 
tioned elsewhere in Holy Scripture; e< Satrap'Mn Ezra and 
Esther; " treasurer " in Ezra only, and with a different 
pronunciation. DaniePs word, gedabar, could not have 
been taken, (as some theorised) from Ezra; for in Ezra, 
as in Syriac, it is gidsbar. They are probably dialectic 
differences. Another Aryan word of the same class, 
partemim. nobles, occurs in directions given by Nebu- 
chadnezzar, and is probably employed as having been so 
used 4 . It is twice used in the book of Esther of Persian 
nobles, but was unknown in Syriac, and occurs once only 
in Chaldee, being retained out of the Hebrew in one of 
the two passages of Esther. Names of dress are more 

1 Officers, Hammelzar, (Dan. i. 11, 16.) achashdarpehin, (Dan. iii. 2, 3, 27. vi. 
2, 3, 4, 7, 8. in Heb. Ezr.viii.36. Esth.iii. 12. viii. 9. ix. 3.) gedabar, (in Ez- 
ra, gidsbar, i. 8. Heb. vii. 21. Ch.) dethabar, (Dan. iii. 2, 3.) sarca, (Dan. vi. 3, 4, 
5, 7, 8.) Aryan. Tiphtayya, prob. from a root now only in Arab. (Dan. iii. 2.) 
haddaberin, (Dan. iii; 24. 25. iv. 33. vi. 8.) adargadserin, (Dan. iii. 2, 3.) Aramaic. 
Dress, Sarbal, (Dan. iii. 21, 27.) pattish, (Dan. iii. 21.) hamnuk,(Dan. v. 7, 6, 
29.) Aryan: carbal, (Dan. iii. 21.) probably Aramaic. Food, pathbag, Aryan. 
(Dan.i. 5, 8, 13, 15. xi. 26.) Musical instruments, karna, mashrokitha, sabka 
(iii. 5, 7, 10, 15.) and probably sifonia (iii. 10.) or soomfonia, (Dan. iii. 5, 15.) 
Aramaic ; kitharos andpesanterin, (iii.5, 7, 10, 15.) Greek. I have not counted 
the word pithgam, " word," in the Chaldee of Daniel, because, although Aryan 
originally, it was naturalised in all Aramaic, and is one of its most common 
words. It occurs in the Chaldee of Daniel, not in his Hebrew, as it does in that 
even of Ecclesiastes (viii. 11.) and Esther (i. 20.) 2 see Note A at the end. 

3 Is. xli. 25. prophesying of Cyrus. 4 Dan. i. 3. In Esther i. 3. vi. 9. 

it is used of Persian nobles. 



suited to his. time and circumstances. 39 

likely to survive ; and so two out of the three Aryan terms 
in Daniel lived on in ordinary Syriac 5 ; the 3rd is re- 
tained out of the Chaldee in the Syriac translation of 
Daniel, but disappeared out of the language; a fourth 
name of dress, probably Aramaic, was lost. The Chaldee 
as well as the Syriac retained the name of the Greek in- 
strument kathros ; else the Chaldee retains even fewer 
of these terms than the Syriac, It has been noticed how 
this use of Aryan words exactly corresponds with the si- 
tuation of Daniel 6 . Those who invent a later date for 
the book of Daniel can attempt no real explanation how 
a Jew who, according to their hypothesis, lived in Pales- 
tine about 163, B.C., should be acquainted with Aryan 
words, which related to offices which had long ceased to 
exist, or to dress which no one wore, words which were 
mostly obliterated from Aramaic, which (as far they sur- 
vived) were inherited only from DaniePs text ; and several 
of them were misunderstood or not understood by Ara- 
maic translators, or by Jews who, on the unbelieving the- 
ory, were almost his contemporaries, and yet these words 
have been verified to us by the opening acquaintance with 
the Aryan languages. 

I will add here, how four Syriac words which have been 
singled out by the opponents of Daniel as being in some 
way, marks against his Hebrew, fall in with his situa- 
tion. 1) Aphadno, "his palace." The word survived in 
heathen 7 and Christian 8 Syriac as well as in the transla- 
tion of the Scripture 9 , and was also, in a slightly varied 
form 10 , probably introduced into Arabic from the Syriac. 
It must have been known in Mesopotamia, since it be- 
came the name of a place, Apadnas n , near Amida on the 
Tigris. But it was wholly lost in Chaldee 12 , was unintel- 

5 see Note C. 6 Delitzsch, in Herzog's Real-Encyclop. v. Daniel, p. 274. 

1 Chron. Edess. in Ass. B. O. i. 390, 1. See note of Ass. p. 391. Ges. 

8 Assem. Acta Mart. i. 166. S. Ephr. ii. 393. iii. 220, in a quotation as if 
from Holy Scr. (Bernstein Coll.) 9 In 1 Chr. xv. 1. S. Eccl. xxi. 5. for O!KOS 
inreptity&vov. Ges. 10 phadano, "apalace built aloft," phaddana," built such a 
palace." (a denom.) u Procop.de tedif. Justinian, ii. 4. Reland, p. 571. E It 
remains only in one proverb, and a doubtful reading, Jer. xliii. 10. Buxt. p. 181 . 



40 Remarkable Syriac words in Daniel. 

ligible to all the Greek translators 1 , and, was rendered in 
the Syriac translation not according to the meaning of 
the actual Syriac word, but according to the common 
meaning of padan 8 , which forms part of the name Padan- 
Aram. 2) Ashaph, which occurs in the Chaldee 8 , as well 
as the Hebrew 4 of Daniel, occurs in no other Hebrew or 
Chaldee. Many as are the Hebrew names of those who, in 
different ways, used divination, this name occurs no where 
in Holy Scripture, except in Daniel. It is a common 
Syriac term, and probably represents some character of 
Aramaic divination, with which Daniel became acquainted 
in Babylon. 3) Rasham, (we know from the Chaldee 
of Daniel) was the official term used of the king's signa- 
ture 5 , which, when it was affixed, was, according to the 
Medo-Persian law, unchangeable! Daniel uses it alike in 
his Chaldee and Hebrew of that which was written irre- 
versibly 6 . 4) Palmoni, "a certain one, " is remarkable as, 
apart from one passage of Daniel, only occurring as a very 
rare Syriac word. It was formed out of two Hebrew 
"words which survive only in conversations recorded in 
the Old Testament 7 , [n Syriac also, as Theodoret attests, 
it still, in the 4th century, survived in the spoken lan^ 
guage 8 . Else, except in one passage, it was lostfrom the 
written language and disappeared from the native Dicr- 
tionaries. It was then doubtless part of the Aramaic, as 
spoken in the time of Daniel. 

The modern opponents of the book of Daniel have been 
constrained to admit that the Chaldee of Daniel is nearly 

1 The LXX. omit it altogether ; Theod. has Apadano or Ephadano ; Aq. Apha- 
dano ; Symm. 'nmoffTCwiov avrov, " his stable ;" S. Jer. (in Greek) " his 
throne." 2 "a smooth place." Pesh. Dan. xi. 45. 3 Dan. ii. 10, 27, 11. 
iv. 4. v. 7, 15. 4 i. 20. ii. 2. 5 Dan. vi. 9, 10, 11, 13, 14. Of the 
writing on the wall, Dan. v. 24, 25. Ch. of that " written in the Scripture of 
truth," Dan. x. 21. Heb. 7 Ruth iv. i. 2 Sam. xxi. 3. 2 Kgs. vi. 8. 

8 Theodoret, explaining the word <pe\^o>vi, as retained by Theod". (as also 
by the LXX. and Aq.) r&v riva, " such an one," adds, " The Syrian language, 
which is akin to the Hebrew, attests this." Barhebrseus too (about A. D. 

1 270.) still used the word, which he wrote as in Daniel, (in his Scholia on 

2 Kgs. vi, 8.) for the common Syriac word "phelon." (Bernstein from Vat. 'MS.) 
But the Peshito does not use it for the Hebrew phrase, and in Daniel the ortho- 



'.Aramaic of Daniel and -Ezra.. '41 

identical with that of Ezra, and is as distinct as his from 
that of the earliest Targums. The Aramaic of Ezra con- 
sists chiefly of documents from 536, B. C. the 1st year of 
Cyrus to the 7th year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, B. C. 
458. The documents are, a decree of Cyrus embodied 
in one of Darius Hystaspes 9 ; two letters of Persian Offi- 
cials to the kings 10 ; rescripts of Pseudo-Smerdis 11 , Darius 
Hystaspes 13 , and Artaxerxes 1S . The first series is knit to- 
gether by a short historical account in Aramaic by a con- 
temporary M . Of the documents, the rescripts were pro- 
bably written in Aramaic, it being the custom of the Per- 
sian kings to have the letters written to each people in 
his own language 16 . If, moreover, they were translations 
at all, they would probably have been translated into 
Hebrew, the language of the rest of the book of Ezra. 
This Aramaic then is any how the Aramaic of the first half 
of the 5th century before our Lord ; most of it probably 
is original Aramaic of persons, not Jews. Some of Da- 
niel's Aramaic is stated in his book to have been written 
in the first year of Belshazzar 16 , about 542, B. C., 6 years 
before the earliest of the documents in Ezra, and some 64 
years before the latest. The great similarity between the 
Aramaic of these writings is such as one should expect 
from their nearness ; at the same time there is variation 
enough utterly to exclude any theory that the Chaldee 
of Daniel could have been copied from that of Ezra. 

On the other hand doubtless the practice of delivering 
orally translations of the Scriptures read in the Syna- 
gogues, began in the time of Ezra 17 . It is certain, more- 
over, that these were not left to the arbitrary or extempore 
efforts of each officer in each synagogue. The Turgeman 
was not to be under 50 18 ; his was one of the most honour- 
able offices in the Synagogue 19 . The paraphrase was learn- 

graphy is corrupted into " phelumene," (transposing the u) as would happen 
in a word not belonging to the written language. The Arabic has folo, folano 
(span, fulano,) folaniyyo. Freyt. Lex. iii. 372. 9 Ezr. vi. 3-5. w iv. 11-16. 
v. 7-17. u iv. 17. K vi. 6-12. 13 vii. 12-26. u Ezr. y. 4. 15 Esth. 
iii. 12. viii. 9. 16 vii. 1. ^ Neh. viii. 8. Buxt. Tiber, c. vii. p. 34. JS Juchasin, 
f. 44. 2. Buxt. Lex. p. 2644. w Zunz, Gottesd. Vortr. d. Juden, p. 332. 



42 Early date of the basis of the Tar gums. 

ed by heart 1 . The instances of the paraphrases expand- ' 
ing the text, while he translated it, are obviously exception- 
al 3 . The Talmud speaks of the Targuin as an authority, 
without which this or that passage could not be under- 
stood 3 ; which, of course, implies an old and, in their 
opinion, certain tradition from times nearer the living lan- 
guage. In reference to the Paraphrases of Onkelos and 
Jonathan, they explicitly say, that they received them 
from those before them 4 . Jonathan lived a little before 
our Lord 5 ; Onkelos was a pupil of Gamaliel 6 , and so lived 
about the same time. The Chaldee which they represent 
was certainly anterior, probably long anterior, to them- 
selves. For the Chaldee Paraphrases had doubtless taken 
a definite form, before the Greek translation was ven- 
tured upon. Any how, it is probably prior to the time 
of Antioclius Epiphanes, who died 163, B. C., certainly not 
much later than his date. The question then, which any 
opponent of Daniel has to solve, is this, "whence this 
marked agreement between the Aramaic of Daniel and 
Ezra, and this marked difference of the Aramaic of both 
from that of the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan? 5 ' Men 
are dishonest to themselves and to others, when they try 
to escape from this broad question under cover of the dust 
of other counter-questions. Such questions as, " 7 why was 
not the Aramaic of Daniel more pure, if his, seeing that 

1 Zitnz, p. 8. quoting Mishna Megilla, c. 4. 5. 10. Tosefta, ib. c. 3. j. MegUla, 
4. 1. Megilla, f. 24. a. Sota,f.39. b. 

2 "TheTargumist, or interpreter, sometimes used a license of expatiating: in- 
stances oftb.isarcHier.Bicc.f.65.4. Sanh.f.20.3.Bab. Berach.f.28.1." Light- 
foot, Horse Hebr. ad Matt. iv. 23. add ad Luc. iv. 16. 3 Hott. Thes. phil. p. 256. 

4 " R. Jeremiah, or, as others, B. Chaiiah B. Abba, says, 'The Targum of the 
Law Onkelos the proselyte spake it from the mouth of R. Elieser and R. Joshua ; 
the Targum of the prophets Jonathan B. Uziel spake it [ultimately] from the 
mouth of Haggai, ZachariahandMalachi.'" Megilla, c. 1. f.3. 1. Wolf,denom. 
et orig. Targ. B. H. ii. 1138. 5 Our Rabbins taught ; ' Hillel the elder 

had 80 disciples, of whom 30 were meet that the Shechinah should rest upon 
them, as on Moses. The greatest of all of them was Jonathan B. Uziel.' " 
Bava Bathra, c. viii. p. 134. Succa, f. 28. in Wolf, ii. 1159. Hillel taught about 
32, B. C. Id. Wolf, ii. 1148. 7 Bleek, in Schleierm. ZS. Th. iii. 

p. 214. In his (posthumous) Einleitung, Bleek had ignored the whole argu- 
ment from language, p . 557 sqq. 



Evasions of the real point at issue. 43 

he was taught it in a king's court ?" " 8 Why does not the 
Aramaic of Daniel and Ezra vary more, seeing that it is a 
Jewish patois which was formed at Babylon, and that it is 
the character of all patois to vary?" " 9 Why does the Ara- 
maic of Daniel and Ezra vary at all ? n ought to receive and 
can receive their answer ; but they do not touch the real 
question. The answers in brief are, 1) Daniel was taught 
the learning and tongue of the Chaldcsans 10 , i. e. an Aryan 
dialect and an Aryan literature, which the Chaldees 
brought with them, not Aramaic, which Daniel himself 
distinguishes from it' 11 . 2) The assertion, that the Bibli- 
cal Aramaic is a patois, is simply an assertion. It does 
not follow that the Hebrew of Daniel and Ezra is less 
pure than that of Onkelos and Jonathan, because it is dif- 
ferent. The Aramaic of Daniel and Ezra is the Aramaic 
of Babylonia ; that of Jonathan and Onkelos, the Ara- 
maic which developed itself in Palestine. A certain num- 
ber of definite Hebrew inflections (if such) would not 
make a patois. 3) The slight variations between the Ara- 
maic of Daniel and Ezra are in conformity with their 
slight difference of age. But these are petty surface- 
questions. The question as to the book of Daniel, (it 
must always be borne in mind,) lies only between the 
real date of the old age of Daniel, about the middle of the 
6th century, B.C., and the death of Antiochus Epiphanes, 
164, B.C.; a distance of 370 years. No one pretends that 
any intermediate date is possible. His prophecies are as 
detailed in the latter as in the earlier part. Either all 
must be prophecy, or all must be fiction, the relation of 
the past in the form of prophecy. All petty questions 
then, " 12 how long the language, as we find it in Ezra, 

8 DeWette,Einl.l833.p.322. IrihisEinl.,1852ed.7. De Wette condensed 
his statement into the two words, " grounds of spuriousness lie in the corrupt 
Hebrew and Ghaldee" without alleging an instance of the corruptness of the 
Chaldee, p. 346. 

9 Hitzig, Heidelb. Jahrb. 1832. ii. p. 119. Lengerke (p. xxxi. ii.) sets, side by 
side, the two contradictory arguments of Hitzig and De Wette. 10 Dan. i. 
4. What we call Chaldee, the Jews in Hezekiah's time, (Is. xxxvi. 11.) Daniel, 
Ezra (iv. 7.) call Aramaean. u ii. 4. K Bertholdt, Einl. p. 1527. 



44 Peculiarities of Biblical Aramaic; 

lasted/' are but dust in people's eyes ; for no one imagines 
that it lasted to the 2nd century, B. C. If the Aramaic of 
Daniel had heen an imitation of Ezra, it must have heen 
like Ezra; whereas the resemblance is in principles, not 
in details ; the variations are such as never could have 
occurred, if the one had imitated the other. It is absurd 
e. g. to suppose that one, meaning to copy the style of ano- 
ther in order to make his work seem to belong to the age 
of the writer whom he copied, half-copied an idiom of that 
other, which lay before him. The slight variations in a 
phrase, when both are correct according to the princi- 
ples of the language, imply that each writer had an in- 
dependent knowledge of the language, and wrote inde- 
pendently. 

In the earlier stage of the controversy, it was assumed, 
on both sides, that those nice shades in certain forms of 
speech, which separate Biblical Aramaic from the Ara- 
maic of the .Targums, were Hebraisms. Ail which was 
said about " impure," " corrupt," Chaldee, " patois," &c, 
presupposed this. Some of those forms might be He- 
braisms, It has been recently pointed out, in a very 
careful analysis \ that this was a superficial solution, since 
some of the principal variations are forms which do not, 
or scarcely, occur in Hebrew. There must then be some 
wider solution, which shall take in the non-Hebrew vari- 
ations. The diligent and accurate author of that Essay 
pointed out that they could be accounted for on no other 
ground than that such was the Aramaic of the period. 
He noticed also, that some of these variations are to be 
found in West Aramaic or Syriac, indicating that, in 
the time of Daniel and Ezra, the Western and Eastern 
Aramaic were not so much separated, as they were sub- 
sequently. With this it agrees, that many of these 
peculiarities of Biblical Chaldee occur in Samaritan also, 
which, although the extant memorials are not earlier 

v In a condensed essay on " The Chaldee of Daniel and Ezra" in the Journal 

for Sacred Literature, Jan. 1861. p. 373-91. by J. Me. G. (I am permitted to say, 
the Rev. J; Me. Gill.) - - 



difference from Aramaic of the Tar gums. 45 

than the Targums, still, on account of the severance of 
the Samaritans from the Jews, must be pretty nearly the 
Chaldee which they brought with them from Eastern 
Mesopotamia, some dialect of Aramaic. 

1 can here but give (as I am permitted to give) an epi- 
tome of those condensed observations, referring to the 
treatise itself for details, as also for the proof that these 
variations are not Hebraisms; adding only, which of 
these variations are found also in Samaritan. 

The differences of the Biblical, from the later Aramaic, 
belong, in the main, to an earlier stage of language. 

1) In the Chaldee of Daniel and Ezra, the stronger as- 
pirate h, is used, where, in the Chaldee of the Targums, 
it is nearly effaced. This occurs so manifoldly, as evi- 
dently to invoh r e a principle of language. It is found in 
the characteristic letter of three conjugations 2 ; in verbs, 
whose last letter it is 3 ; in infinitives of derived conjuga- 

2 1) Hafel, A/el ; " in 96 cases, (80 in Daniel, 16 in Ezra,) whereas there are, 
of Afel, only 2 cases in Daniel, 1 in Ezra." " In 35 other cases, tliis n is re- 
tained after the preformants of the future and participle, while in 25 it is drop- 
ped." "In Hebrew, there are but six words, in which the .n of Hifil is retain- 
ed after the preformative ; and of these, 5 are in 's." "In the Targums, there 
is no instance in which the n is retained in the regular verb," although " in 
verbs '3 it is very frequently employed in the present, and retained in the fu- 
ture and participles. This is occasionally the case also in verbs p, and with some 
verbs NB." Ib. 382,3. In Samaritan, Hafel is frequent. "In no conjugation 
did the Samaritans come nearer to the Hebrew forms, than in this (Afel;) and 
first, the instances of the n are most frequent ; not onlyin words beginning with 
y, where the weakness of the letter might seem to occasion the change, but in 
many others also." Uhlemaim, Gram. Samar. 23. The word pvr is adopt- 
ed as a whole in Syr. and Arab. The Samaritans have both p'K Uhl. Gr. 27. 
and JDV) Id. Lex. p. 5. 

2) "Hithpeal and" 3) "Hithpaal occur 18 times in Daniel 4 times in Ezra. 
On the other hand, eth is used .6 tunes in Daniel ii. 45. iii. 19. iv. 16. vi. 8. vii. 
8, 15. In 4 of the 6 cases in Daniel, the punctuation is ptj as in Syriac." "The 
same word occurs with !j ii. 45. flit ii. 34. In iii. 19. both the forms occur in 
different verbs, 'Vo^ii and ^nyx." Ib. p. 384, 5. In Samaritan both forms are 
common. " Since the Samaritans often interchange x and n, forms result like 
the Hebrew Hithpael. But although in some words these forms are to be ac- 
counted as Ethpael, yet in others, where there is no trace of Pael in Samaritan 
or of the corresponding Hebrew form, they must rather be .considered as be- 
longing to Ethpeel, as, jniro swear. Gen. xxv. 33." Uhl, 20. . 3 - seep, 47, &. 



46 Characteristic differences of 

tions l ; " in the feminine of participles always in Daniel, 
in adjectives usually 3 ", in the emphatic form, which in 
Chaldee represents the Article 3 ; in the pronoun 1 4 ; and 
three particles 6 . All these peculiarities occur in Ezra as 
well as Daniel, and with the remarkable agreement in 
both, that, although in a lesser degree, they do use the la- 
ter forms also. The language, then, was apparently still 
in an unfixed state. They are not Hebraisms, because 
many of the forms do not belong to Hebrew ; all occur 
in Samaritan. It is a law of all language, that gutturals 
weaken, as time goes on. 
2) Two conjugations, which still existed in the time of 

1 " In Daniel 20 times, in Ezra 4 times ; with N once only in Daniel, ii. 24. 
in a word written with n, Ib. 12. vii. 16. twice in Ezra." Ib. 386. In Samari- 
tan, the infinitives of all the derived conjugations end in n. 

" Id. ib. " In the Targums n is only used after N ; in Biblical Chald. there are, 
in substantives, adjectives, participles, 58 instances in Daniel, 7 in Ezra. Three 
nouns are written both ways in Dan. ; (vii. 12. and iv. 24 ; vii. 5, 7. and iv. 13. 
ii. 40. and 42.) one in Ezra, (iv. 10, 15.) Other variations are, rrvft adv. Dan. 6 
tunes, f}'?c adj. Dan. v. 12. and the numerals /TIQ adv. Dan. 3 times, Ezra twice ; 
tfiq adj. Dan. twice, Ezr. once; np^p Dan. 5 times, Ezr. vi. 15. N^f Ezr. vi. 4." 
Ib. 386. In Samaritan, " the feminine ending, in far the most cases, is n, es- 
pecially such feminines as are formed from Masculines ; not a few end in 3 or '. 
[for m, n'.] Uhl. 41. n is not a Samaritan feminine ending at all. 

3 "N is the most usual ending, hut n occurs 11 times in Daniel, 11 times also 
in Ezra." Ib. 385. "The two forms occur even in different words in the same 
verse, and in the same word in the same writer. In fact, only 4 words have 
n only, and three of these occur but once each, Ezr. vi. 2. vii. 17. Dan. ii. 38 ; 
the fourth twice only, Dan. vii. 7, 19." Ib. 385. where the several variations 
are given. In Samaritan the Status Emphaticus always ends in n. " In the 
singular Masc., n, pronounced with the vowel , is added, so that it does not 
differ from the Fern. sing. abs. ; so also in adjectives, which stand in the sta- 
tus Emph., when the substantive does. . So also nouns ending in end in .T ; 
the ending ' becomes nx. In the Plur. Masc. p or D' become n> (Ch. ;-) In 
the Fern. sing, n becomes nn, which is added to feminines ending in or 1 ; in 
the Fern. Plur. j and JK are changed into nn and nnK (Ch. n-) this last is far the 
most frequent." Uhl. p. 113-15. 

4 " ,-i3N occurs frequently [13 tunes] in Dan. and Ezr. ; NJK Dan. ii. 8. Ezr. 
vi. 12. the plur. is rung* Ez. iv. 16. Nina? Ezr. v. 11. Dan. iii. 16, 17." Ib. p. 388. 
In Sam. also niK is more frequent than MN. 

5 i) no "what," Dan. ii. 22. Ezr. vi. 9. "what ? " Dan. iv. 32. no "?y "why?" 
ii. 15. no? " how ! " iii. 33. i n?, " what," Dan. ii. 28, 9. 45. Ezr! vii. 18. HB}> 
" why ? " Ezr. iv. 22. nn^> i " lest," Ezr. vii. 23. but n N!^> " as to what." Ezr. 
.vi. 8. Sam. no, noa, ma, no^msD. Uhl. Lex. p. 40. 



Biblical Aramaic and that of the Targums. 47 

Daniel and Ezra, were, the one mostly 6 , the. other whol- 
ly 7 effaced ; and a conjugation 8 was formed, unknown 
to Biblical Chaldee. 

3) A fuller orthography, implying a more prolonged 
pronunciation of vowels, (Daveed for David,) has long 
been recognized as belonging to the later Hebrew of the 
O. T. The same difference, though more extensive, is ob- 
served between the Biblical Chaldee and the Targums 9 . 

4) There are forms in Biblical Chaldee, common with 
Syriac, which shew that, at the time when it was written, 
the dialects of Assyria and Syria, East and West Aramaic, 
were not so much separated as in the time of the Targums. 
It is like the fusion of dialects in Homer. Here too the 
Eastern Aramaic became softer in the time of the Tar- 
gums 10 . 

ii) jrjqs "together," lit. "as one," Dan. ii. 35. Sam. (Uhl. Lex. p. 32) ; with 
K Syr., Targg. iii) rAfor *sS, "not," occurs once in Daniel, iv. 32. as tfy does 
also once in Hebrew. Deut. iii. 11. The Masoretes corrected both. 

6 Hofal. "It occursin Dan. 11 times ; ii. 10. iii. 13. iv. 33. (twice) v. 13, 15, 
16, 20. Ti. 24, 18. vii. 11. Ezr. iv. 15. " Ib. see Winer, Gr. Chald. 12. 5. p. 41. 
n9pr| (Dan. vii. 4.) seems to be an anomalous Hofal form ; njpvj is still more 
anomalous, but must be a sort of Hofal. Dan. vi. 48. 

1 The inflection of the passive participle by the affirmatives of the preter- 
ite, Dan. v. 27, 8. viii. 4. (twice) 11. (twice) 12, 27. Ezr. v. 14. The participle 
is used for the 3rd person masc. without inflection. Dan. Y. 30. vi. 4. vii. 6. 
Winer, 13. 2. p. 42. Me G. p. 384. 8 Ittafal, instead of Hofal. 

9 " Yodis inserted in the Afel forms without suffixes in the Targums," (p. 
377.) whereas, in Daniel, it nowhere occurs except in verbs 'J? (as 3fl3 Dan. ii. 14. 
forms of D<pn 13 times, JIJ'JD Dan. vii. 2.) and in the Shafel y\tf Dan. iii. 17, 28. 
vi. 28. but ni'g'D Dan. vi. 28. " It is vised also generally in such forms as p'jft, *p'fyp 
in the Targums ; '' (Ib.) whereas Daniel nowhere inserts the vowel-letter, and 
uses the form 16 times without it. (The cases are, ip^p Dan. ii. 29. Ezr. iv. 12. -up 
Dan. ii. 46. fcrij Dan. iii. 8. vi. 13. r\$$ Dan. iv. 8, 17. py] Dan. vi. 21. te^f Dan, vi. 
25. aij; Dan. vii. 9, 10. Even the pass. part, is so written in aj; Dan. vii. 14, 22. 
3fl; Dan. vii. 26. Also the form p3r?n Dan. ii. 44. [r$tri Dan. iii. 28. Sift: Dan. iv. 
13. In Targg. mostly ^Bijflij or V'BjjflN) "The same difference is seen in nouns 
e. g. njjn Dan. iii. 2, 3. Ezr. vi. 16, 17. but in Targg. ?, even though followed by 
Dagesh forte. In Bibl. Ch. TR, fern. ^ ; but in Targg. *n, fern. T|K?. Very fre- 
quently such words as nqiq Dan. v. 11. Ezr. vii. 25. jp^p Dan. vii. 14. jr^>$ Ezr. 
vii. 19. occur in the Targg. with 1 after the first radical." Ib. So, for ITO Dan. 
ii. 11. you have lYiD in the Targg. 

10 The N, however slight its pronunciation, could not have been so soft as 
the '. 1) " In Syriac, as in Biblical Chaldee, the n of words KS is mostly retained 
after preformants in the inf. and fut. peal ; even if dropped, ' is not substituted ; 



48 Characteristic differences of 

5!, This correspondence of the Biblical Chaldee with the 
Syriac best explains a form of the substantive verb, found 
only in Biblical Chaldee, alike in Daniel and Ezra, yet in- 
sulated from all other Semitic forms, and one of the most 
remarkable phenomena of Biblical Chaldee 1 . 

in the Targums it is always substituted." (Inf. with t Dan. ii. 9. fut. Dan. 
ii. 7, 36. iii. 29. iv. 30, 32. vii. 23. Jer. x. 11. K twice dropped, inf. Dan. iii. 
2. 19. Ezr. v. 11. r>Nn (noun) Dan. iv. 14. Ezr. vi. 9. TD'D Targg. 

2) " In verbs K^>, K remains throughout the future. Afel fut. does not in- 
sert ' (as the Heb.) but agrees with the Syriac." p. 37 8. " There are 19 such! 
cases in all ; fut. Dan. 6, Ezr. 6 ; partic. Dan. 5, Ezr. 2. Daniel has the con- 
tracted form NTO, and 4 ending in n ; and, in the same verse with n, he has 
once . v. 12. (Ib. 381.) The Targums have always \" (Ib.) " The derived conju- 
gations, in the 3rd sing, present, end in ', as in Syriac, not as in Hebrew, and 
so are not Hebraisms." (p. 378.) "In Daniel, there are 5 such forms ; in Ezra, 
3." (p. 381.) " The 3rd present Peal has .1 11 tunes in Dan., twice in Ezr. ; s 7 
tunes in Dan., once in Ezra ; in Targg. is the most frequent ending even of the 
present Peal." [In Samaritan, the 3rd sing. pres. Peal ends in K or n ; the de- 
rived conjug. only in % but there are exceptions with 1^> ; very rare with "h" 
Uhl. p. 71, 2.] " Even in the words written rh in the present and fut. Peal, 
M remains in the other conjugations." " The act. part. Peal ends 41 tunes in n ; 
mij 13 ; njjj 22 ; and 6 other cases, 3 of which end in K also : 6 in K only." No 
case of \ " Ezra has a passive part, m? v. 11. ; Dan. has n 3 times ; fuo, v. 25, 
26 ; ' twice." " Some of these occur in the Targg." (Ib. p. 378, 9.) " In the Inf. 
and Part. Peal. K and are equally [?] frequent" [in the Targg.] Winer, Ch. 
.Gr. 23, 1. " In the Inf. construct, K always remains ; (Dan. 7 tunes, Ezra 
8 tunes.) the Targums always have V (p. 380.) The Sam. Inf. is HK . In the 
fut Peal, Bibl. Ch. and Syr. have N [Dan. 17 times, Ezr. 3.] Daniel has 7 times 
n m (with K, however, elsewhere in the same 3 words) Targg. always ." 

3) In verbs iji, the participle plur. masc. has K (JIN 1 ? &c.) when the Targg. 
have '. The form with K occurs 9 times in Dan., in Ezra once ; (as in the Syr. 
.masc. abs.) (Ib. 382.) In 9 out of the 10 cases, the Kri would conform it to the 
Targum orthography with ', so strange was it to those accustomed to the 
later Chaldee. 

4) The form sjjip (the emphatic plur. of nouns in - in the Bibl. Chald. and 
Syriac) is in like way corrected by the Kri into '*<D1i3. The old form must have 

'sounded fuller. 

The punctuation 'asj Dan. v. 2. is Syriae. (C. B. Mich. him. Syr. 13. Ges. 
Thes. s. v.) " The Targg. have uniformly K^K_, "the father," for " my father." 
(Ib. 389.) 

1 The use of ^ instead of the ' in the future, sjn^ (Dan. 7 tunes, Ezra 6 tunes.) 
'mgji (Dan. iv. 22.) )toj> 3 m. pi. (Dan. 4 times, Ezr. 2.) ^ 3 f, pi. (Dan. v. 17.) 
"In these three forms 3 m. sing. 3 m. and f. pi., the West-Aramaic or Syriac has a 
as a preformant, (which was itself questioned as anomalous. See Hofmann, 
Gr. Syr. 56. p. 175.) But the V and 3 continually interchanged. See onthe 
form at length Beer, Inscrr. Sem. in JEg. repert. i. 18. inserted by Maurer in 
his" Commentary, ii. 84-7. 



Biblical Aramaic and that of the Targums. 49 

6. Daniel and Ezra use unabridged, and so, older forms 3 . 

7. The Biblical Chaldee has pronominal forms nearer 
the original Semitic pronoun, and Daniel the older form 
of the two 3 . 

8. Other pronouns or particles are used in a form which 
ceased to be used in the Targums *. 

9. "In regard to the use of n, in the Biblical Chaldee 
the older uncontracted forms prevail; in the Targums 
*the later contracted forms ; but there is considerable va- 
riety 5 ." In part, the Biblical agrees with the Samari- 
tan Chaldee. 

2 1) i, as the sign of the genitive, a relative, and conjunction. It occurs 254 
times in Daniel, 89 times in Ezra ; (see Fiirst, Cone.) p ^ i. q. DN <? Dan. ii. 9, 
The antiquity of the form is evidenced by the proper name am *i " of gold, " 
i. e. a place abounding in it. Deut. i. 1. 

2) "&$ " there is ;"'O'NS^" there is not." 'B'!j occurs 7 times in Daniel, ' 
6 times, besides the form 'frtrvtjKS, "it is not," Dan. ii. 11. which presupposes 
''O'lj. In Ezra each occurs once. (Fiirst, Cone.) There are traces of a regular 
inflection with the pronouns, (as hi );>j in Hebrew) 4 such instances occurring 
in Daniel, (see Furst, Cone. p. 58.) In Samaritan and Syriac this inflection with 
the pronoun is complete. In both, the absolute form is r'K, n^. In Samaritan 
this form remains, even when the words are so inflected. (Uhl. 36. p. 90, 1.) 
In Syriac, when so inflected, the ' occurs before the pronouns. (Hofmann, 
146. p. 377.) The is wanting also in the Arabic fe"K, fe"^, although, in Arabic, the 
fe^ only remains in one idiom, as the counterpart of fc"V. In Hebrew, the form 
occurs in the proper name, Sij'O'N, " God is." Pr. xxx. 1. " The Targums have 
always the shorter form n'ij and n'V," or n;V. 

3 1) jiart Dan. 3 tunes ; and iari Ezra 9 tunes ; for Jjj or jan of the Targums. 
2) Daniel has always (13 tunes) the primitive form nijus i. e. the primitive 

Sanscr. Semitic, nn i. q. tu, and the demonstrative |Nt. This is contracted even 
in Hebrew into n^is ; corrected always in Daniel by the Kri into the run of the 
Targg. 

* 1) tiVsj, they;" Dan. iii. 12, 13, 21, 22, 23, 27. vi. 6, 12, 16, 25. Ezr. iv. 21. 
v. 9,vi. 8. (twice) ; not in Targg. 2.) fljn emph. demonstr.; Jer. x. 11. Dan. 16 
times ; Ezr. 14 times : as part of compound nft nn-p? Ezr. v. 23. adverb, iqx 
njT Dan. twice ; nf) TON? Dan. twice ; fin ^ Dan. iii. 16. Ezr. 6 times ; njn ^3j? "75, 
Dan. 6 times, Ezr. vii. 17 ; af| npnp p, Dan. vi. 11. ; fifi? Jer. x. 11. Dan. twice ; 
Ezr. v. 7. (see Furst, v. p.) The Maltese has dan, dana, (masc.) din, (Una, 
fem. (Vassalli, Gr. Melit. p. 147. Ges.) The Sam. has p. The Targg. have 
mostly the lengthened form js, (fi Eccl. xi. 6.) jnrr, jn'n, jn'K, jnj, )n?, )^a, )n 
JJ1?. Buxt. p. 556. i. e. they have forms which the Biblical Chald. never has, 
and none have the form of the Bibl. Chaldee. 3.) tfy 4) Jffi 5) )Hg see be- 
low, p. 54. 6)viK, )Vx, (see below, Note D.) 

5 Ib. p. 390. On the same principle that Daniel writes nj-g^t not nnij, j is re- 
tained in Hofal, rn^n Dan. v. 20. [omitted in Ezr. v. 15. vi. 15. and Targg. in 

E 



50 Differenced/ 'Biblical Chaldeefrom that of the Targums. 

10. In one word, haddabar, " councillor," there is pro- 
bably a trace of the Article in its Hebrew form. For the 
.word has no Aryan, but has an obvious Semitic etymolo- 
gy. In Sam. Chaldee also, the same Article is prefixed 
as a demonstrative to pronouns, nouns, participles 1 . 

11. The Hebrew plural ending, im for in, occurs in two 
words in Daniel 2 , and in a third in Ezra 3 . The two ter- 
minations are used in Samar. Chaldee, and that indiffer- 
ently, even when two words are closely united together, 
as two nouns joined by the copula, or the substantive 
and adjective 4 . 

12. According to the punctuation, there was a dual at 
the time of the Bibl. Chaldee 6 , which existed also in the 
Samaritan Chaldee 6 , but was lost in the time of the Tar- 
gums. 

13. There is a correspondence in other vowels between 
the Biblical Chaldee and the Hebrew 7 , as distinct from 
the Targums, inexplicable except on the ground of a real, 
accurate tradition 8 . 

14. A letter seems to have, at least, become less used, 

Afel] in the inf. Hafel of pp; Dan. vi. 24. [omitted in Hafel present, iii. 22.] in Ha- 
fel present, Dan. v. 2. 3. Ezr. v. 14. vi. 5. (not in Targg.) in jnj Peal after pre- 
form, (fut. Dan. ii. 16. Ezr. iv. 13. inf. Ezr. vii. 20.) never in Targg. " In Sa- 
maritan, in the future, the instances are not rare, in which the J is retained." 
Uhl. Sam. Gr. 26. 3. Ann. 

yiy., 3 fut. Peal for JTP, occurs 6 tunes in Dan., once in Ezra, and is the only 
form used by either. Buxtorf noticed one instance only in Targg. (Ps. ix. 21 .) 
among many of yy., as also jnx, J>TN. Hengst. has noticed another, Ruth iv. 4. 
The noun JFUD is frequent in the Targg. (see Buxt.) probahly taken from Daniel. 

1 Uhlem. p. 116-8. 2 iv. 14. vii. 10. 3 Ezr. iv. 13. 

4 Uhlem. p. 104. 5 There are five duals in Daniel, ii. 34. 45. vii. 47. 

(ii) one in Ezr. vi. 17. There was no temptation, any how, to make j;rij3 dual, 
(when Daniel speaks of " ten horns,") except a traditional knowledge that it 
was so. 6 Uhlem. 42. iii. p. 108, 9. 

"' " There are only 6 Heb. segolates, [nx, V0, o)n, j-ijj, oyo, D^, of which |aN 
frequently, fig occasionally occurs in the Targg. ; nyo is written oyo 8 times in 
Dan. [not DJ at all] 17 times in Ezra ; and D^>x, 3 times in Dan. D^s [obx 5 
times, ND"?S emph. 8 times] On the other hand, 20 Chaldee nouns are pointed 
as segolates in Dan., some pretty frequently ; and 11 such nouns in Ezra, some 
also pretty frequently." Me. G. p. 377. note. Besides this, is the correspond- 
ing feminine ending .... in nTunn Dan. ii. 34. nTi$!< Ib. 45. 

8 The whole system of Hebrew and Chaldee punctuation implies a minute 



Chaldee ivords in Daniel, unknmun to later Chaldee. 51 

between the times of Biblical Chaldee and the Tar- 
gums 9 . 

It may be added, that even in the space of those six 
chapters of Daniel, there are a cer-tain number of words, 
which do not occur in the Targums or Gemara ; quite as 
many or more, probably, than would be found in any six 
chapters of any of the Hebrew historical Scriptures. 
They are not technical words, which there might not be 
occasion to use elsewhere, (as offices or dress or instru- 
ments, the names of which were disused with the things ; ) 
but ordinary words of the language. Some of these, which 
are lost in the later Jewish Aramaic, survive in Syriac 10 . 

And now you will be able to see, how utterly superfi- 
cial it was, when an unbelieving German critic 11 picked 
out two plural pronouns, in the form in which they are 
united with other words, as a proof that the .Aramaic of 
Daniel was later than that of Ezra, or what is the cha- 
racter of such a sentence as this. " 13 Not only Macedo- 
nian words, such as symphonia emdpsanterion" [which are 
not Macedonian] " but the texture of the Chaldee, with 
such late forms as ji3^>, [3 and J!?N, the pronominal nand n 
having passed into j, and not only minute description of 
Antiochus's reign, but the stoppage of such description 

knowledge of the spoken language, whose prominciation is fixed so carefully. 
An artificial system, invented subsequently, would not have had its anomalies 
or its minuteness. The punctuations, which seem anomalous at first sight, 
are still found to proceed on a principle. The old tradition, which ascribed 
them in the main to times, when the language was ceasing to be spoken, those 
of Ezra and the great Synagogue, seems to me the most probable. 

9 The w. For $-, "increase," Dan. iii. 31. vi. 26. Ezr. iv. 22. the Targg. have 
always sap ; for tc$y, " great, greatly, " (Dan. 12 times, Ezr. once) the Targg. 
have 'iip pi. px'iip. In like way as for ttgnqt?, " witness," Gen. xxxi. 47. the 
Targg. have Npnqp. ^gg'^B, "wise," Dan. vii. 8. $?V Dan. v. 11, 12, 14. In 
Targg. mostly VSD. Buxt. Nj'f , hate, Dan. iv. 19. mostly Kg, rarely with er. Buxt. 
-<$? Dan. iii. 27. vii. 9. mostly -yo. 10 See Note B at the end. 

11 Hitzig, Heidelb. Jahrb. 1832. p. 119, 20. "We observe on our side, for the 
time and only as an example, that in Ezra the form nearest to the original 
nb^, Dh^> always stands, Ezr. v. 3, 4, 8, 9. vi. 9. Contrariwise in Daniel always 
the jta^, which originated in the effacing of the D ; notwithstanding this, Dr. 
Hengstenberg will have it, that the book of Daniel is genuine, on the ground 
of the character of its language also, i. e. that it was composed before the book 
of Ezra." ESS. and Rev. p. 76. 

152 



52 Shalloiv German criticism ondialdee of Daniel 

at the precise date 169, B.C., remove all philological and 
critical doubt as to the age of the book." The history is 
as bad as the philology ; but of this, hereafter. Why 
these three forms should have been selected, it is difficult 
to say. They ought to be three wondrously characteris- 
tic forms, to determine the age of a book ; whereas they 
are three of the most ordinary. But the assertion in- 
volved must be this. " It can be proved that, in the time 
of Daniel, the plural pronoun of the 2nd person in Chal- 
dee was written with the m, and not with the n ; and 
that the ending n was not at that time added to other 
pronouns which, in Hebrew, end in eh." The supposed 
proof must be that the forms in Daniel are not found in , 
Ezra. For there is no other Aramaic to serve as a stan- 
dard, in comparison with which these are to be pronounced 
to be "late forms." Both statements are plainly false. Of 
course, it was on one principle of pronunciation, that the 
pronominal forms, horn "them," com "you," were written 
with the m, as in Hebrew or Arabic, or the n, as in Sy- 
riac and Samaritan. The two forms always go together. 
The Hebrews and Arabians used the m exclusively ; the 
Syrians and Samaritans used the n exclusively. But there 
is no language in which m was used for the one pronoun, 
w for the other. Of both pronouns, Daniel has only 
the form of the Western and the Samaritan Aramaic. 
Ezra has both forms ; as, indeed, the more Hebrew form 
lingered on in the Chaldee of the Targums. Of the third 
person, Ezra uses most frequently the same form as Da- 
niel ; the more Hebrew form occurs almost exclusively in 
the context of one conversation which was reported to 
the King. The 2nd person occurs only 6 times altogether 
in Ezra; 5 times in the more Hebrew form, once in that 
used by Daniel 1 . The criticism breaks down, then, both 
in principle and in fact. In principle, because l)the form 

1 Ezra uses the form jin, 15 times ; D'n, 10 times ; he uses D3, 5 times ; |i3 once, 
(the only time that it is joined with a verh.) He uses Jin with three preposi- 
tions, D'n with two of them. "Their God" is twice expressed with the oh ; 
" your God " twice with the Db ; " their companions " is expressed 6 times with 
the ]\n. Else the Dh is used with three, fin with 4 ordinary words. Both forms 



breaks down both in principle and in fact. 53 

in Daniel is the most usual Aramaic form j 2) the cor- 
responding 1 form, hon, is the most common in Ezra; 3) 
both these forms horn, com, which are to be characteristic 
of the earlier Aramaic, occur in the Targums also. Tn 
fact, because the actual form, con, the existence of which 
in Daniel is to prove the late date of Daniel, occurs in 
Ezra also, and so can, on the hypothesis, be no "late form." 

The second case is more marvellous. Den, in Chaldee 
and Samaritan as also in Maltese, corresponds to the He- 
brew demonstrative, tseh. Daniel and Ezra alike use, not 
den, but the emphatic form, denah, while the Targums do 
not use the denah of Biblical Aramaic, nor den, but dein, 
according to the principle of the later language, to employ 
the more lengthened form. So then in later Aramaic a 
form is used, which is not found in Biblical Aramaic ; 
and the Biblical Aramaic does not use the form of later 
Aramaic. The Biblical form became obsolete in the time 
of the Targums ; the age of the Targumists revived a form 
not used by Daniel and Ezra. 

But the broader allegation of the Essayist is, that, in 
the Aramaic of Daniel, " the h had passed into the n" in 
both den, this, and illeen, these, and that this change is an 
evidence of later language. The major premiss must be, 
that " it is known that, in Daniel's time, they had not so 
passed." The h does not "pass into the n" at all : n is not 
one of the letters into which h ever passes. The facts are 

are used in the same verse, as v. 3. So that I see no explanation of the varia- 
tion, except that both forms were alike in use in Ezra's time. The several in- 
stances are ; 

tin 1 ? v. 3, 4. repeated v. 9, 10. tsr^J vii. 24. 

onq^g v. 5. vii. 16. brr]$ v. 9. 

Dhnrip?> v. 10. 
v. 10. 

> v. 3. repeated v. 9. vii. 24. 

^s vii. 17, 18. 



iv. 20. v. 3. ji,T^> v. 1, 2. jtataj v. 2. 
iv. 9, 7, 23. v. 3. vi. 6, 13. jinn^s? vi. 18. 
3 Ib. jirvgpii jinjprqn vii. 17. 

': vii. 21. 



5.4 These (i later forms" in Daniel belong to all Aramaic, 

these. The primitive forms of the two words are da 1 , this, 
as found in Daniel ; el, these. Da, as a demonstrative, 
is, in fact, a different pronunciation of the Hebrew dseh, 
and is connected with a large range of demonstrative 
pronouns in the Semitic dialects 3 . This shorter form is 
lengthened in various ways in Semitic languages by ad- 
ditions at the beginning 3 and the end 4 . One of the ad- 
ditions, made probably in the infancy of the language, was 
that of the 2nd person, which occurs in Biblical Aramaic 
and in Arabic, not in Syriac or Samaritan, nor, in this 
pure form, in the Aramaic of the Targums. It strength- 
ened the demonstrative in a way which we can scarcely 
express, " hoc tibi." Jn this way, we have the illec of 
Daniel and Ezra 5 , and the deec, and dac of Ezra 6 . 
Another Aramaic ending, applied more manifoldly, and in 
more dialects of Aramaic, is en. It is used in the ordinary 
pronoun, they ; in the demonstrative, these; and, by Daniel 
and Ezra, in the particle of time, then. Thence we have 
in Daniel alone, a form lengthened from the deec in Ezra, 
dicceen 7 . From it, we have, in Daniel and Ezra only, the 
particle of time, edain 8 ; from it the form den was made, 
which, in Daniel and Ezra, exists only in the emphatic 
form, denah 9 ; from it we have the holein or ailein of 
Syriac 10 ; the illein of Samaritan Aramaic n , used in five 
places in Daniel. 

We cannot suppose an ending, so widely spread and 
so rooted in the language, to be a " later form." It is an 

1 KJ four times. Dan. iv. 27. vii. 8. and in the phrases iff? NJ "the one against 
the other" v. 6. N? |ON? "one from the other." vii. 3. 

2 dsu, Arab, dsa, JEtli. da Malt. Nasor. In Syriac and Samaritan it occurs 
only in lengthened forms. 3 Kin Syr. probably corresponding to the 
Heb. mrr ; hSdsa, hadsa. Arab. 4 mm, for Heb. n$o Sam. Uhlem. 14. p. 31. 

5 Dan. 10 times ; Ezra, 4 times, see above, p. 49. 

* -ft masc. !)^ fern., each 6 times. They correspond with the Arab, dsaca 
dsaleca, and the Malt. daka. 1 Dan. ii. 31. vii. 20, 1. 

8 ps (i. q. Heb. 'IN with / added) Dan. 20 times ; Ezra 8 times. )nt?3 Dan. 23 
times ; Ezr. 3 times. (Fiirst, p. 10 b 11.) 9 see above, p. 49. 

N 10 holein is the common Syriac form ; ailein is rarer, perhaps older, see Hof- 
mann, Syr. Gr. 45. p. 161. 

11 They use ^N. ^n as the Heb. n^ri,) Uhl. p. 31. 



and are Combined with exceptional archaisms. 55 

integral part of the language, as much as ov or urn in 
Greek and Latin. As far as the evidence goes, it would 
shew in this case also, that the language, in the time of 
Daniel and Ezra, was in the same unfixed state, as other 
idioms imply it to have been. There was, then, no one 
word, appropriated to signify "these." Jeremiah has 
once eeleh 1 ^ Ezra has it once also 13 . These are instances 
of the Hebrew form" of the pronouns occurring in Aramaic. 
But it was not the prevailing form in Ezra's time. Ezra 
four times used another form, illeec, which occurs yet of- 
tener in Daniel u , a form obsolete in the time of the Tar- 
gums. Daniel employs this which, not occurring in Sy- 
riac or Samaritan, was probably the more antique form, 
ten times u , whereas he uses five times 15 only the form 
illein, which is the Samaritan form, and the Syriac ending. 

In sum, then, these endings, which are to be so cha- 
racteristic as to establish the later date of the Aramaic of 
Daniel, are endings belonging to all Aramaic. The other 
forms are exceptional archaisms apparently in the lan- 
guage both of Daniel and Ezra. The variations as to the 
use of two of the three words supply a part of the larger 
evidence, (if it were needed) of the independence of Da- 
niel and Ezra; the third furnishes part of the proof of the 
difference of their language from that of the Targums. 
Criticism, which should have made endingis, which are an 
integral part of the language, which occur not in one 
dialect of it only but in three, not in one case, but in se- 
veral, characteristic of a later date of a book in which they 
occur, could not have been even imagined in any well- 
known language. It would have carried on its face its 
own refutation. 

In fine, then, the Hebrew of Daniel is ^exactly that 
which you would expect in a writer of his age and under 
his circumstances. It has not one single idiom, unsuited 
to that time. The few Aryan or Syriac words remark- 
ably belong to it. The Chaldee marks itself out as such, 

12 Jer. x. 11. Ezra v. 15. The Kri corrects !{. 14 See above, p. 49. 
15 ii.40,44. vi.3,7. vii. 17. 



56 Cumulative evidence from the use of such Hebrew 

as could not have been written at the time when, if it had 
not been a Divine and prophetic book, it must have been 
written. 

No opponent has ever ventured to look steadily at the 
facts of the correspondence of the language of Daniel 
and Ezra, and their difference from the language of the 
earliest Targums. 

It is, plainly, cumulative evidence, when both portions 
so written are united in one book. Over and above, the 
fact, that the book is written in both languages, suits the 
times of Daniel, and is inexplicable by those, who would 
have it written in the time of the Maccabees. No other 
book; or portion of a book, of the Canon, approximates 
to that date. The last book, Nehemiah, was finished 2| 
centuries before, viz. about B.C. 410. 

The theory of Maccabee Psalms lived too long, but is 
now numbered with the dead 1 . Only one or two, here and 

1 " The existence of Maccabee Psalms, to which Bertholdt appealed, as one 
of the surest proofs of the later closing 1 of the Canon, is contested not only by 
Bleek (Schleierm. ZS. p. 203.) and Hassler (de Ps. Maccah. Ulm. 1827.) but 
even by De Wette, (Comm. z. d. Ps. ed. 2. 3.) and Gesenius (Vorr. zu Gram- 
berg's Religionsid. p. xii.) and it is granted that, in the whole Psalter, there 
is no Psalm later than the times of Ezra and Nehemiah." (Hengst. Auth. d. 
Dan. p. 238. note.) Even Ewald an&Dillmann have since granted the same. 
" All the later Psalms, whose contents admit of or require a historical expla- 
nation, can be fully explained out of the circumstances of Israel down to Nehe- 
miah, and are explained out of them alone. To refer them to later relations 
does not hold, as matter of interpretation." Dillmann (ub. d. Bildung d. A. T. in 
Dorner, Jahrb. iii. 460.) Ewald even contends, 1) that the Psalms were collected 
into one whole, before the writing of the Chronicles ; and that 2) a consider- 
able interval must have elapsed between the completion of the titles, the latest 
part of the whole, and the LXX. ; in that it misunderstands or alters arbitrarily 
much contained in them, while it agrees in the main with the Masorethic text 
of the Psalms themselves. (Poet. Biich. i. 205, 6. add his Jahrbucher, vi. 20-32.) 
It was one of the paradoxes of Hitzig to place Ps. i. ii. and the last three books 
(Ps. Ixxiii. d.) in Maccabee times, and even as low as 85, B. C. "through 
very rash exegesis and precarious combinations ; me, at least, his grounds only 
convinced as to Ps. 74. 79. 80. and 83," says even Grimm (Kurzg. Exeg. Hdb. 
Einl. z. 1 Mace. 9. p. xxvii.) No one could find in these, Maccabee Psalms, 
who did not wish to find them ; Ps. 79. is quoted as Scripture in 1 Mace. vii. 
6. Dillmann considers these Psalms in detail. Ib. 460-8. Hupfeld, too, with 
whom it is a ruling passion to contradict Hengstenberg, assents that there are 
no Maccabee Psalms. 



and Chaldee, as are combined in Daniel. 57 

there, who believe little besides, believe in this phantom 
of a past century. But, even if such Hebrew, and (which 
is utterly inconceivable) such Aramaic, could have been 
written in the times of the Maccabees, it would still have 
been inexplicable that both should be written. 

If the object of the writer be supposed to have been, 
to write as should be mostly readily understood, this 
would account for the Aramaic ; but then one, who wrote 
with that object, would not have written in Hebrew 
what was of most interest to the people, what was most 
especially written for those times. If his object had been, 
(as was that of Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi) to write in 
the language of the ancient prophets, then Ire would not 
have written in Aramaic at all. The prophecies in the 
Chaldee portion of Daniel are even more comprehensive 
for the most part than those of the Hebrew. Had such 
been the object, one should have rather expected that, 
with the exception of the prophecy of the 70 weeks, the 
languages should have been reversed. For the Aramaic 
portions confessedly speak most of the kingdom of the 
Messiah. 

The use then of the two languages, and the mode in 
which the prophet writes in both, correspond perfectly 
with his real date ; they are, severally and together, utter- 
ly inexplicable according to the theory which would make 
the book a product of Maccabee times. The language 
then is one mark of genuineness, set by God on the book. 
Rationalism must rebel, as it has rebelled ; but it dare not 
now, with any moderate honesty, abuse philology to cover 
its rebellion. 



LECTURE II. 



The Prophecies of the Four Empires, Babylonian, Me- 
do-Persian, Greek, Roman, and of the establishment 
of the Kingdom of Christ during the Fourth Empire. 

Two great subjects of prophecy in Daniel, plainly and 
on their surface, extend into a future beyond the sight of 
one who lived even in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes ; 
1) the prophecies of the fourth Empire ; 2) that of the 70 
weeks and the Death of the Redeemer. 

Before entering on the first, let us advert to the ancient 
prophecy of Balaam, in which the conquest of the East 
by the West, and the subsequent perishing of the Western 
Empire in its turn, are predicted in the plainest terms. 
They are the words with which Balaam's prophecy closes. 
They are without a figure, and relate to things (he him- 
self says) far distant. l He beheld the Kenite, and took 
up his parable and said, Strong is thy dwelling place and 
place in the rock thy nest j for the Kenite shall be for a prey, 
until Asshur shall carry thee, (Israel,) away captive. And 
he took up his parable and said, Alas ! who shall live when 
God doeth this ? And ships shall come from the side of 
Chittim*, ire. (as is well known) Cyprus, and shall afflict 
Asshur and shall afflict Eber, (i. e. the country beyond 
the river,) and he too (who should so afflict them) shall 
perish for ever. Balaam foretold the quarter whence 
they should come, not the people who should come. 
For as yet they were no people. But Cyprus was a 

1 Num. xxiv. 21 24. 2 D'?i?TD 



Balaam's prophecy as to Eastern and Western Empires. 59 

great link of East and West by sea. Tyre early subdued it, 
and held it subdued, as a station for its commerce 3 . It 
would contrariwise be the last station, when the West 
should invade the East. Unbelieving criticism avers 
that Balaam's words " 4 refer to an incursion of Greeks 
into Cilicia in the time of Sennacherib, and are a pro- 
phecy derived from the event." In plain words, these 
writers assert that this prophecy, which stands in the 
Pentateuch as contemporary with Moses, was in fact, the 
relation of an event, 750 years subsequent to Moses, by 
some writer who falsely alleged it to have been foretold. 
The explanation, upon which they have ventured, may 
serve for a foil to the truth. They from the West, both 
Alexander and the Romans, did afflict the great Em- 
pires beyond the river ; we know how Alexander and his 
empire in turn perished ; how the Roman empire was bro- 
ken, although it still lives on, because it was not to be 
destroyed until the end. That inroad on Cilicia, related 
by Polyhistor 5 , was in itself of no account, no joint or 
systematic effort. For Greece did nothing in common be- 
tween the Trojan and Persian wars 6 . There was no com- 
mencement of centralisation or common endeavour, un- 
til B.C. 560, 140 years after the time of Sennacherib. 
The Greek marauders did not march against Sennache- 
rib, but Sennacherib against them; he defeated them, al- 
though with considerable loss, "and set up his own image 
in the place as a monument of his victory, and had his 
prowess and valour engraven in Chaldee, as a memorial 
for the time to come." Can any one seriously assert that 
he honestly thinks that this description of the afflicting 
of Asshur and Eber, and the utter perishing of him who 
so afflicted them, relates to one battle, far from Assyria, 
in which a marauding party was defeated ? 

Such an outline of prophecy as to the world's Empires 

3 Hengst. de reb. Tyrior. p. 55, 6. 

* Von Lengerke, p. Ixxx. from Hitzig, Begr. d. Kritik, p. 55. v. Bohlen, Einl. 
z. Gen. 17. 5 in Bus. Chron. Arm.T. i. p. 43. 6 Time. i. 12. 17. 

Grote, Greece, c. 28. 



60 Circumstances and characteristics of revelation 

probably lingered on in Mesopotamia, Balaam's home, 
when this new flood of light burst upon the Heathen 
world. Nebuchadnezzar, now in the second year of his 
reign, was already a conqueror. He had succeeded to a 
parent who was a conqueror. According to Berosus, 
" ! his father Nabopolassar, hearing that the Satrap, ap- 
pointed in Egypt and the parts about Coele-Syria and 
Phoenicia, had revolted, and being himself no longer equal 
to fatigue, committed to his son Nebuchadnezzar, who was 
yet in the prime of life, some parts of the army, and sent 
him against the rebels. Nebuchadnezzar defeated him 
in pitched battle and brought the country again under his 
rule. At this time his father fell sick at Babylon and died. 
Nebuchadnezzar, hearingof his death not long afterwards, 
set in order the affairs in Egypt and the rest of the country, 
and, having commissioned some of his friends to transport 
to Babylonia the prisoners of the Jews, Phoenicians, Sy- 
rians, and the nations in Egypt, together with the heavi- 
est part of the army, himself with few attendants went 
across the desert to Babylon." There "he received the 
government which had been administered by the Chal- 
deeans, and the kingdom which had been kept for him by 
the chief of them, and ruled over all his father's empire." 
The young monarch, who had already shown himself 
so energetic and victorious, had in his mind, not only his 
subsequent career of conquest, but, (which, in any mind 
of large grasp, ever follows close upon those thoughts,) 
what would be the end of all. It is a striking picture of 
the young conqueror, that, not content with the vista of 
future greatness before him, he was looking on beyond 
our little span of life, which in youth so fills the mind, 
to a future, when his own earthly life should be closed. 
O king, says Daniel 3 , thy thoughts came up upon thy 
bed, what should come to pass hereafter. To him God re- 
vealed, how empire should succeed empire, each great in 
its day, each misusing its greatness, until, at last, a king- 

1 in Jos. c. Ap. i. 19. more correctly in somethings that in his Ant. x. 11. 1. 

2 ii. 29. 



of the four world-empires to Nebuchadnezzar, 61 

dom should come, not founded by human means, and so 
not by human means destructible, which should absorb 
all empires into itself, and should itself endure for ever. 
It is remarkable that this vicissitude of human things, 
this marked outline of the succession of Empires till our 
Lord should come, is laid open, not to the believing He- 
brew, but to the Heathen monarch. The king is the organ 
and first depository of the revelation ; Daniel is but its ex- 
positor. This change in the organ of prophecy is in re- 
markable harmony with those former revelations through 
the Prophets. To them the foreground is the kingdom of 
God, as already existing among them. Apart from their 
office of moral and religious teachers, the developement 
of that kingdom was the subject of their prophecies. 
Prom this foreground they looked out on the powers of 
the world, as they bore upon His people, and as they 
should hereafter be absorbed into it or be punished for 
their misdeeds against it and against God in it. To Ne- 
buchadnezzar, at the then centre of earthly greatness, 
God exhibits, as his foreground, the Empire of the world 
as it should develope in its different stages, until it should 
be confronted at last by the Kingdom of God, and uni- 
versal obedience should be claimed, not by any one Em- 
pire of this world, but by G od in His Kingdom. The form 
exhibited to Nebuchadnezzar is one ideal form, man in 
colossal majesty. The separate world-monarchies are but 
successive parts of one whole. The human commanding 
figure stands, ^its brightness excellent and the form thereof 
terrible, until the end. Human power, consolidated by 
human wisdom, has a majesty, lent to it by God, even 
while it abuses the God-entrusted gift. Three of these 
world-monarchies were to be displaced by the succeed- 
ing; the fourth by one, wholly unlike the four, not made 
with hands. 

Of the last of these Empires, (strange enough) no one 
has been found to doubt that it is the Kingdom of Christ. 

3 ii. 31. 



62 Greatnessoftheadmittedpro2)hecyoftheMngdomof God; 

The greatest of all miracles is conceded; the less is ques- 
tioned. It is owned by those who set these prophecies at 
the very latest, that, nearly two centuries before our 
Lord's ministry began, it was foreshewn that the kingdom 
of God should be established without human aid, to re- 
place all other kingdoms and to be replaced by none ; to 
stand for ever, and to fill the earth. Above 18 centuries 
have verified the prediction of the permanency of that 
kingdom, founded, as it was, by no human means, en- 
dowed with unextinguishable life, ever conquering and 
to conquer in the four quarters of the world ; a kingdom 
one and alone, since the world has been ; embracing all 
times and climes, and still expanding; unworn by that 
destroyer of all things human, time ; strong amid the de- 
cay of empires ; the freshness and elasticity of youth writ- 
ten on the brow which has outlived eighteen centuries. 
This truth, so gigantic, so inconceivable beforehand, so 
inexplicable now except by the grace of God, was, (it 
is granted,) foreseen, foreshewn. Nay more, it is granted, 
that, the Prophet believed that He, the King of this new 
kingdom, was to be more than man ! The question then 
is ; " Did the soul which grasped this truth, err (for 
it comes to this) as to some 150 years ?" Porphyry was 
consistent ; for he denied both. Having apparently re- 
jected Christianity, as too hard for him, he wrote against 
Daniel as a part of a whole. In his times men had 
witnessed, for 2 \ centuries only, the inherent vitality of 
the Gospel. They predicted the date of its expiry *. But 
in men who call themselves Christians, and who believe 
in some sense that the Gospel is the power of God, it is 
strange to grant or maintain so much, and yet to dis- 
pute what, if they believe what they say, is comparatively 
so little. When Infinity has been granted, the endless 
Kingdom of the Infinite God ; it seems strange to dispute 
about an atom, some 150 years of our narrow time. Yet 

. i S. Aug. de Civ. D. xviil. 53, 4. in Ps. 40. 1. Ps. 70. 4. Baronius, A. 
304. viii. gives two inscriptions of Diocletian in Spain, "nomine Christianonun 
deleto :" "superstitione Christi ubiqne deleta, cultu Deorum propagate." 



inconsistency of rationalist objections. 63 

so it is. The question is this, " Granted that the author 
of our book was right in predicting the founding of a 
kingdom of God, which should not pass away, was the 
fourth kingdom in which he foretold that it should arise, 
that of Alexander's successors, and did he himself, living 
(according to different rationalist hypotheses) during or 
shortly after the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes, wrongly 
look that the kingdom of God should be founded soon after 
the death of that Old Testament Anti-Christ, B.C. 164? 
or did he expect that kingdom to come, when it did come, 
in the time of the Roman Empire, as almost all have 
believed from our Lord's time until now ? " For if the 
4th Empire was the Roman-Empire, then we have a tem- 
poral prediction too, beyond the sight of one who lived 
even in the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes. 

It is allowed on all hands, that the four beasts in Da- 
niel's vision in the first year of Belshazzar correspond 
exactly to the four empires represented in the image ex- 
hibited to Nebuchadnezzar. To the king God chiefly 
revealed that which most concerned him to know, the 
beginning and the end, the greatness of the power given 
and to be given to him by the King of heaven, and the 
nothingness of the mightiest human power, compared 
and in collision with the Kingdom of God. To this end, 
after briefly saying, that the second kingdom should be 
inferior to his own power, and that the third should rule 
over the whole earth, he dwells at length on the fourth 
kingdom, as symbolised by the strong, all-subduing, all- 
crushing iron, yet itself, with all which went before it, the 
whole fabric of human power, as being, before the King- 
dom of God, like the chaff of the summer-threshing-floor 
which the wind carrieth away, and there is no place found 
for them. The intense nothingness and transitoriness of 
man's might in its highest estate, and so of his own also, 
and the might of God's kingdom, apart from all human 
strength, are the chief subjects of this vision as explained 
to Nebuchadnezzar. 



64 Both the metals and parts of human form significant, 

Yet although thus much only was explained to the king, 
the symbol represented much more. The image, as one, 
represented the one principle of human Empire ; in its ma- 
nifold parts, it pourtrayed not only a manifoldness, but a 
variety in the successive Empires. The symbols which 
are explained shew that there is a meaning in the corres- 
ponding symbols, which are not explained. In regard to 
the first and the fourth empires, those represented by the 
head and the legs, both the parts of the human figure and 
the metal of which, in the statue, they consist, are ex- 
plained in their symbolic meaning. Then, doubtless, the 
parts of the human figure and the metals have, both of 
them, their symbolical significance, in regard to the second 
and third empires also. The head of gold has an unity, a 
magnificence, an insight of its own. It is not only the 
first empire in time ; the conception of the whole idea of 
world-empire lay in it, and in him whom chiefly it repre- 
sented 1 . And so again, at the other extremity, in the 
fourth Empire, not only is the iron substance of the legs 
alluded to, as symbolical of heavy iron might, but the hu- 
man form too, in that he speaks of its subduing all things, 
trampling them under foot, (as is said more fully in the 
next vision.) The inferiority of the 2nd empire to the 
first, then, doubtless is symbolised by the pale silver, as 
compared with the gold, inferior not in value only but in 
solidity and power of resistance, more liable to impression 
from without. The form moreover in the human figure 
is two-fold ; nor only so, but the right is stronger than 
the left. The kingdom then, which was to succeed Ne- 
buchadnezzar's, was not only to be inferior to it, but was 
to be compounded of two parts, the one stronger than the 
other *. The symbol already suggests the Medo-Persian 

1 Hofmann, Weissag. u. i. Erfiffi. i. 278, 9. 

2 Ib. 279. "The chest is twofold and unequal ; the heart, the centre of the 
circulation of the blood, belongs to one side only. Then the arms hang on 
both sides of the chest : they especially have activity ; the chest, firmness. Medes 
and Persians are the two sides of the chest, the arms stretch out from the chest, 
yet are not severed from it ; so Pheenicia and Egypt stretched out on the 



in regard to the four Empires. 65 

Empire. The third Empire, in its dark lowering colour, 
is to us even at first sight remarkably combined, "the 
belly and thighs." Yet the lower part of the human figure 
singularly combines the greatest activity and strength 
with the dullest, most inactive, proverbial sluggishness. 
Just so were the two parts of Alexander's empire con- 
trasted. The old fierce energy of Egypt and the Mesopo- 
tamian powers was gone. " 3 The loins of Greece held to- 
gether the belly of Asia, yet could not impart to it its own 
activity. As the most active part of the body, the centre 
of its strength, motion, power of turning, is in closest near- 
ness with that, which will simply be carried, so, in the 
kingdom of Alexander, was the then most stirring and 
self-adapting people with the mere passive East." It re- 
minds us involuntarily of the contrast, which impressed 
itself on Aristotle 4 , of " the thoughtful and contriving but 
spiritless character" of the Asiatics, and "the spirited and 
thoughtful " genius of the Greeks, which would enable 
them to "rule the world, if" concentrated by "one go- 
vernment." The third Empire, one at first, is then repre- 
sented in the thighs, as two great portions ; not closely 
united together as the two sides of the chest, but one 
only by their common connection with the upper part, 
or in them continued. Nothing could more exactly re- 
present those two subdivisions of Alexander's empire, the 
account of which is expanded to Daniel in ch. xi, those 
by which his people were most affected. 

The kingdoms of the Seleucidse and the Ptolemies, ever 

one side, the territory of the Lydian empire with the Greeks of Asia Minor on 
the other, controlled from the centre of the empire, yet ever inclined to make 
themselves independant, and often successful. Alexander, before he attacked 
the centre of the kingdom, mastered the two arms which the Persian king had 
once stretched out, so full of peril to Greece." 3 Ib. 280. 

4 In, his well known passage (Pol. vii. 7.) speaking of Us own (Alexander's) 
tune, " The nations in the cold countries and those around Europe are full of 
spirit, but are rather wanting in thought and contrivance ; -wherefore they 
retain their freedom, but have no fixed polity and cannot govern their neigh- 
bours. Those of Asia are thoughtful and contriving, but spiritless, wherefore 
they abide in subjection and servitude. But the Greek race, as it occupies the 
mid-space between them, so it partakes of both ; for it is both spirited and 

F 



66 Characteristics of 

at variance with one another, had no unity, they were in 
no sense a kingdom, except as they were connected with 
the great Empire-plan of Alexander. They were continu- 
ations of Greek predominance over the nations of Orien- 
tal character in Asia Minor, Egypt, Syria, Assyria. They 
carried out that interpenetration of the Greek and Ori- 
ental nations, which Alexander must have contemplated ; 
they Hellenised Egypt and Western Asia, and unknow- 
ingly prepared the way for the Gospel by diffusing, 
through means of their Greek cities, the language in 
which it was to be given. 

In the fourth Empire we have again strength, ending 
in division; strength yet greater than in the third Empire, 
ending in greater division ; yet, even in its division, re- 
taining to the end, in its several portions, its original 
iron might. Its chief characteristic is its strength. It 
is likened to the metal proverbially strong ; it is strong as 
iron 1 ; and it crushes all successively. Forasmuch as 
iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things ; and as 
iron that breaketh all these, it shall crush and break. It 
is an annihilating power, which leaves to that which it 
conquers, no trace of its existence, but itself replaces it. 
Twofold in its form, as the Roman power, itself one, came 
to be divided into East and West, it ends in yet further 
division into ten kingdoms ; and the iron commingles 
itself with a material as plastic, as itself is unyielding, 
potter's clay. This, as Daniel interprets it, expresses 
partly the mingled strength and weakness of the later 
condition of the empire, strong, as before, in some parts, 
yet side by side with weakness, partly the union of this 
fourth empire with that which was foreign from itself, 
through intermarriages, the seed of men 2 , whereby how- 
ever the two powers do not cohere. History down to An- 
tiochus Epiphanes exhibits nothing of this sort. There 
was no such subdivision into ten ; no three which were 

thoughtful ; whence it abides free and with excellent polities, and is able to 
rule the world, if it should come to have one government." 
1 ii. 40. * Ib. 42. 



the fourth Empire. 67 

uprooted. An union moreover between the Seleucidse 
and Ptolemies by intermarriages would have been an 
union of like, not of unlike, materials. It wpuld have 
been a cementing of the kingdom within itself, iron with 
iron, not iron with clay. There were also (as we shall 
see) only two such alliances between the two houses, and 
even those on no one policy. The ancient explanation 
corresponds best with the symbol, that the Eastern and 
Western Empire subdivided still further. " 3 When Ger- 
mans and Slaves advanced partly into Roman ground, 
anyhow into the historical position of the Roman Em- 
pire, their princes intermarried with Roman families. 
Charlemagne was descended from a Roman house; al- 
most at the same time the German Emperor Otho II. 4 
and the Russian Grand-Prince Vladimir 5 intermarried 
with daughters of the East-Roman Emperor. This was 
characteristic for the relation of the immigrating nations 
to Rome ; they did not found a new kingdom, but con- 
tinued the Roman. And so it continues to the end of all 
earthly power, until its final ramification into 10 king- 
doms. To attempt now to mark out these would be as 
misplaced, as to fix the Coming of Christ, [with which 
they stand connected] tomorrow or the next day." 

Even an opponent has said ; " 6 It is in favor of this 
interpretation [of the 4th empire as the Roman] that the 
two feet of iron can be referred to the Eastern and Wes- 
tern Empire." 

This dream of Nebuchadnezzar is confessed on all hands 
to be expanded in the first vision of Daniel. Nebuchad- 
nezzar's dream had represented human empire in its in- 
telligent, well-proportioned might. It was man's power 
as formed, in some measure, in the image of God. The 
substance, the strength, the character, of the several em- 
pires were different ; the form was one. Daniel's vision 
exhibits them on another side. The four winds of hea- 

3 Hofmann, p. 281. 

4 see 1'Art de verifier les Dates, ii. 2. p. 103. 5 A. D. 989. Ib. 250. 

6 De Wette, Hall. Encycl. art. Daniel. He adds that, in his opinion, the 

F 2 



68 Duration of events expressed in the vision. 

ven are driving at once upon the great sea, that repre- 
sentative, throughout Holy Scripture, of our troubled 
world 1 ) and out of it there arise four forms of more than 
human strength. The terrific and wasting power of the 
world-empires is exhibited under the image of brute force, 
four great beasts 2 , diverse one from the other. A sort of 
unity is given to them, in that they are all exhibited at 
first to the prophet's eye at once. God shews them to 
him first, as He Himself sees all things, at once 8 ; then, as 
they arose in fact, succeeding one another. Nor did they 
arise of their own power. " 4 Not without being acted on 
by the winds of heaven, does the sea send forth those 
beasts ; not without being set in motion by the powers 
above, does the heathen world form itself into those great 
empires." 

The intervals in the vision are marked very distinctly 
by the words, 5 / continued gazing, till After this I 
gazed on, and lo, After this, I gazed on in the night vi- 
sions and lo, / continued considering the horns and lo, 
/ went on gazing till the thrones ivere set 1 ivent on gaz- 
ing because of the great words / gazed on, till the beast 
was slain ; / gazed on in the night visions, and behold, 
one tike a Son of man came in the clouds of heaven. The 

European kingdoms " can only in a very figurative way be looked upon as a 
continuation of the Roman Monarchy, and that the number 10 cannot be ve- 
rified in them ; yet it has its difficulty to make out the ten kings according to 
the other explanations." See farther in Lect. 3. I only cite him, as an instance 
how that interpretation, so far, commended itself to one on the extreme op- 
posite side. * see Is. xvii. 12. Babylon is "the dragon by the sea." 
Ib. xxvii. 1. Pharaoh, Ezek. xxix.3. add xxxii.2. comp. Rev. xiii. 1. xvii. 1, 5. 
xxi. 1. "The sea is the world." S. Ephr. 

2 as Ps. Ixviii. 30. Ixxiv. 13, 4. Is. and Ez. n. 1. Jer. li. 34. 3 vii. 3. As in 
Rev. viii. 2. the " seven trumpets " are given at once, sounded successively. 

4 Hofm. 283. 5 rttq njg vii. 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13. ft'iq ^sssvo vii. 8. lit. " I was 
(one) considering," much as people say in idiomatic English, " I was a' con- 
sidering." The substantive verb with the participle never means in Hebrew or 
Chaldee mere relative time, but always marks an abiding and continued condi- 
tion. See Ew. krit. Gramm. 282. p. 537. Winer, Gr. Chald. 47. The idiom 
occurs in Daniel ii. 31, 34. iv. 7, 10. and in this ch. vii. 2, 21. and in his Heb. 
viii. 5. )'?D w;rr. On the like use of the participle as a Hebraism in the N. T. 
see Buttmann, Gramm. d. N. T. Particip. n. 26. p. 266. 7. 



Rapid overthrow of Babylonian Empire. 69 

idiom in all these cases expresses an abiding condition, 
a period during which the objects displayed to Daniel re- 
mained before his sight, and he gazed upon each, until 
the next came. The continuance of the sight before him 
in the vision implies a duration of that which is exhi- 
bited. Once only, in the course of the vision, is the idiom 
omitted ; and that, in remarkable correspondence with 
the circumstances. Daniel saw this vision in the first 
year of Belshazzar ; just at the close, then, of the Baby- 
lonian Empire, and just before the beginning of the Medo- 
Persian. As to the Medo-Persian Empire alone, which 
was to come at furthest in a very few years, he does not 
use the idiom. After closing the account of the Babylo- 
nian, a man's heart was given to it, he proceeds, and be- 
hold another beast; as describing an event which was 
immediately to follow. 

In the first year of Belshazzar, when Daniel saw this 
vision, the sun of the Babylonian Empire was now setting. 
It was setting, (as it seems,) in its grandeur, like the tro- 
pic sun, with no twilight. It continued in its integrity, 
until, through the weakness of its rulers, it sank at once. 
Daniel sees it in its former nobility. As it had been ex- 
hibited to Nebuchadnezzar under the symbol of the rich- 
est metal, gold, so now to Daniel, as combining qualities 
ordinarily incompatible, a lion with eagle's wings. It had 
the solid strength of the king of beasts of prey, with the 
swiftness of the royal bird, the eagle. Jeremiah had lik- 
ened Nebuchadnezzar both to the lion 6 and the eagle 7 . 
Ezekiel 8 had compared the king, Habakkuk 9 and Jere- 
miah 10 , his armies, for the rapidity of his conquests, to 
the eagle. So he beheld it for some time 11 , as it had 
long been. Then he saw its decay. Its eagle-wings were 
plucked-, its rapidity of conquest was stopped j itself was 
raised from the earth and set erect; its wild savage strength 
was taken away ; it was made to stand on the feet of a man. 
" 12 In lieu of quickness of motion, like eagle's wings, is 

6 iv. 7. xlix. 19. 1. 17, 44. 7 xlix. 22. xvii. 3, 12. *> i. 8. 

10 iv. 13. Lam. iv. 19. i ijj rvjn nirt vii. 4. see n. 5. 12 Ibn Yech. 



70 Bear, symbol of Medo-Persian Empire, 

the slowness of human feet." And the heart of mortal 
man 1 was given to it. It was weakened and humanised. 
It looks as if the history of its great founder was alluded 
to in the history of his empire. As he was chastened, 
weakened, subdued to know his inherent weakness, so 
should they. The 'beast's heart was given to him, then 
withdrawn, and he ended with praising God. His em- 
pire, from having the attributes of the nohlest of beasts 
yet still of a wild beast, is humanised. " 3 The last em- 
pire ends in God-opposed blasphemy and perishes by the 
direct judgment of God/' 

The second beast, the bear, corresponds with the solid, 
heavy chest of Nebuchadnezzar's statue. The two-fold 
division and the relative strength of the two sides, the 
one stronger than the other, recur in this symbol also, in 
that the bear is raised up on one side 3 , ready to use the arm 
in which its chief strength lies 4 . It lifts itself up hea- 
vily, in contrast with the winged rapidity of the Chaldsean 
or Babylonian conquests. The three ribs in its mouth 
correspond accurately to the three kingdoms which the 
Medo-Persian empire swallowed up, the Lydian, Babylo- 
nian, Egyptian 5 . It is bidden, Arise, devour much flesh, 
in conformity with the greedy, " all-eating 6 ,' 3 character of 
the animal. Waste of human life was a characteristic 
of the Persian Empire in its heavy aggressiveness. Heavi- 
ness was, after Cyrus, the characteristic of its wars. 

It never moved, except in ponderous masses, avalan- 
ches, precipitated upon its enemy, sufficient to overwhelm 
him, if they could have been discharged at once, or had 
there been any one commanding mind to direct them. 

1 B>JK, with the idea of weakness, as in isfag. 

2 Hofmann, 284. 3 according to the pointing, ne'pg ; or, if KD'pq, " lifts 

up one side." 4 see Rev. xiii. 2. Oppian singles out " the right hand," 
Cyneg. iv. near the end, quoted Boch. Hieroz. iii. 9. ii. 132. Leipz. 

6 " Cyrus, the first king of Persia, subdued the whole East to the Helles- 
pont ; Cambyses his son, Egypt and Ethiopia ; Darius Hystaspes, the Scythi- 
an Nomads in the North." Theod. Rather, " Thrace." But it is questionable 
whether he permanently subdued more than the sea-coast, comp. Her. v. 2. 
and 10. 6 w<!i/i<j>a,-yov. Aristot. H. A. viii. 5. see others in Boch. 1. c. p. 143. 



Heaviness, characteristic of Medo-Persian Empire. 71 

Like Attila or Timour, they wielded vast masses of hu- 
man strength on their enemies ; their armies varied from 
300,000 on slighter expeditions to a million. Darius' 
army, with which he marched through the desolate re- 
gions of Scythia, was counted at 700,000, exclusive of his 
fleet of 600 ships 7 , which would add a naval force of 
120,000 men 8 . Xerxes' expedition against Greece resem- 
bled more the emigration of vast hordes, than an army ; 
they were calculated at ahove two million and a half of 
fighting men 9 . Artaxerxes Longimanus, his successor, 
gathered two armies, each, it is said, exceeding 300,000 
men, to subdue the single province of Egypt 10 . The first 
was defeated chiefly through 200 Athenian ships 10 . It is 
noticed how Artaxerxes gathered his army from all 
quarters to resist his brother Cyrus the younger n . Xe- 
nophon tells us that deserters and prisoners counted it 
1200,000, and that it was actually 900,000, a contingent 
of 300,000 not having arrived in time 13 . Even its last un- 
warlike king brought an army of 500,000 13 , or 600,000 14 to 
the battle of Issus ; and, two years after its defeat, he 
gathered 1000,000 15 , in splendid array 15 , to cover the plain 
of Gaugamela, a multitudinous host from all the nations 
yet left under his sway, to be mostly but the spectators of 
his disgrace. 

"When the Persians first became a conquering people," 

7 Her. iv. 87. 8 At 200 to each trireme, vii. 184. 

9 Her. vii. 185. The Greeks believed that 3 millions were gathered against 
them at Thermopylze. Her. vii. 228. Xenophon calls it " a countless array." 
Anab.iii x 2. 13. 10 Diod. xi. 74, 75. 

11 Diod. xiv. 22. Their gathering place was Eghatana. " But when those 
from India and some other nations, were hehindhand on account of the dis- 
tance," &c. He gives its numbers from Ephonis at " not less than 400,000." 

12 Anab. i. 7. 10. ]3 Diod. xvii. 31. Arrian says, on the authority of 
Ptolemy Lagi, that 110,000 were slain, ii. 11. 14 Arrian, ii. 8. 12. 

15 " 1000,000 foot, 40,000 horse, 200 scythed chariots." Arr. iii. 8.8. Arrian 
mentions Indians near Bactria, Baetrians, Sogdians, Sacian allies, Arachoti, 
and the mountaineer Indians, Arians, Parthians, Hyrcanians, Tapyrians, 
Medes, Cardusians, Albanians, Tacesinae, those on the Red Sea, Uxii, Susians, 
Babylonians, with transplanted Carians, and Sitaceni, Armenians, Cappado- 
cians, Csele-Syrians, Mesopotamians. Diodorus states the foot at 800,000, the 
horse at 200,000, the chariots at 200. xvii. 53. 



72 Heeren, "Heaviness, characteristic of 

says Heeren \ " it was their uniform practice to streng- 
then their armies by means of the conquered nations, 
who were forced to accompany them on their further 
advances. But when they had founded and organised 
their Empire, and were lords of all Asia from the Indus 
to the Mediterranean, it would have involved endless dif- 
ficulties to collect troops out of lands so distant. To do 
this on all little occasions, such as internal disturbances 
or easy wars, would have been as unmeaning as impos- 
sible. Still it continued to be their practice, that, on all 
great national undertakings, whether directed to the en- 
largement of the empire in distant lands or to meet 
mighty aggressions from without, such musters were 
made of all the subject nations, as is shewn by the great 
arrays under Darius Hystaspes, Xerxes, and even under 
the last Darius. 

" Even the preliminary preparations were of immense 
extent. The king's command issued to all nations of the 
empire, directing what each was to contribute, in men, 
horses, ships or provisions 3 . The commotion occasioned 
thereby throughout Asia lasted, before the expedition of 
Xerxes, for four full years 3 . Time was required, before 
the contingents out of the distant countries could be 
brought together. 

" For all in common there was one rendezvous ; in Xer- 
xes' expedition, this was in Cappadocia. Here all those 
contingents out of all provinces of the empire met to- 
gether, each led by its Satrap. In the war itself these re- 
tained no command, the officers were taken from thfc Per- 
sians. This was a privilege of the conquering nation, 
just as it was among the Moguls and Tatars. The sub- 
ject nations were treated as property, and were called 
slaves, in contrast with the Persians 4 who on their side 
were called Freemen. Such was the relation of the na- 
tions to each other ; towards the king the Persians were 
as little free as the others. 

" The order of march in their own territories was mar- 

i Ideen, i. 513-18. 2 Her . iv> 83 . viii 2L a Her . vii . 2 0. * Her. vii. 9. 



aggressions of Medo-Persian Empire." 73 

vellous; rather there was scarce any order. The men 
were not even separated according to nations 5 , but form- 
ed an immense chaos. In the midst was the Icing with 
the Persians ; the baggage went before. As they advanc- 
ed, the inhabitants of the countries through which they 
passed were driven on and had to swell the multitude 6 . 
So the mass grew continually ; the baggage must have 
become incalculable 7 . The most inconceivable thing is 
the provisioning. In the countries through which they 
passed, corn had to be laid up long before ; other was 
brought by ships. Else the hordes had to provide for 
themselves. Meals were ordered for the king and his at- 
tendants ; but were given at such an expenditure, that 
this alone exhausted the cities 8 . The king and his gran- 
dees had their tents, the rest encamped under the open 
heaven 9 , which must have unavoidably entailed a number 
of diseases. 

" On approaching the enemy's country, the army was 
divided according to nations. This was connected with 
a muster which the king commonly made. Hence the 
document in which Herodotus has preserved to us an ac- 
curate list of the nations in Xerxes' army 10 . The muster 
took place in Europe. Little instructive as the scene may 
be for military men, there could scarce be one more in- 
teresting to the observer of nations. The history of the 
world gives no instance, in which such a multitude and 
variety of nations was compressed into one spot of the 
earth, as appeared, each in his peculiar costume and arms, 
on the plain of Doriscus. Herodotus counts and de- 
scribes 56 nations, which served by land, horse and foot 
or part in the fleet 11 . There were Indians in their cotton 

5 Her. vii. 40. 6 As, e. g. the Thracians. Her. vii. 110. 

I " The numher of women-bakers, concubines, eunuchs, baggage-horses and 
other beasts of burthen, and of dogs, Herodotus says, was countless." vii. 187. 

s Her. vii. 118. " Ib. 119. 10 vii. 59-100. 

II " Herodotus says that all the nations were horsemen, hut that the Persians 
employed some only as such. (vii. 84.) They were limited by the means of sub 
sistence. The whole number of fighting men he fixes at rather more than 2 



74 Perfect agreement of the bear with the Medo-Persian, 

dress, and Ethiopians from beyond Egypt, clad in skins 
of lions; the black Walruchs from Gedrosia and the No- 
mad tribes from the steppes of Mongolia and the great 
Buchary ; wild hunting tribes, like the Sagartians, who, 
without weapon of bronze or steel, caught their enemies, 
like the animals they hunted, in leathern lassoes, and 
Medes and Bactrians in rich array ; Libyans with 4 horse 
chariots T , and Arabs upon camels ; Phoenician mariners 
with numerous squadrons, and Asiatic Greeks compelled 
to fight against their countrymen. Never did despotism 
exhibit a spectacle, which began so splendidly, to end so 
pitiably." 

Every lineament then of the description agrees with the 
Medo-Persian empire ; the heavy fierceness and the de- 
structiveness of the animal ; the prominence given to the 
one side ; the three ribs, which can receive no explanation 
as to any other empire. 

Of the third Empire, the characteristics are swiftness 
and insatiableness of conquest, and four-fold division. 
The panther 2 , an animal, insatiable above every other 
beast of prey, gifted with a swiftness which scarce any 

million. We, in our days, hare ,seen France alone, by a like conscription, 
send towards a million of fighting men into the field. In itself then, it is 
nothing strange, if out of the vast Asia and no small portion of Europe and 
Africa one and a half as many again could be brought together. (Her. vii. 
185.) The counting- by 10,000s was a Persian custom in such expeditions. 
Witness Darius in his Scythian expedition ; the sum told was engraven on 
columns. (Her. iv. 87.) This counting then is certainly no fable, nor the sum 
any exaggeration of Herodotus. Whether it was misstated in the Persian 
documents, we have now no means of judging." : Her. iv. 170. 189. 

2 " Most naturalists have arrived iit the conclusion that the Leopard and 
Panther are one and the same animal." Museum of Nat. Hist. p. 113. " It is 
about a third less than the tiger." " The size varies, and independantly of 
this, there occur varieties from dark brown to black. The size of the spots and 
the arrangement of the rows vaiy without any variation in the essential cha- 
racters." Giebel die Sauge-Thiere, p. 875. Dr. Rolleston. I have substituted 
the word "Panther," for the "Leopard" of the E. V. because at present the 
name " leopard" is popularly used of a smaller animal ; of old, it was used to 
designate the larger animal, which was supposed, on account of its size, to be 
a cross betwen the lion and the pard. (Bochart.) The Panther is next in size 
to the Tiger, whose habitat is more Eastward. Dr. Rolleston tells me, " The 
extreme point of the Tiger's westward distribution seems to be the Southern 



and of the panther with the Macedonian Empire. 75 

prey can escape 3 , is represented yet further with four 
wings. The subdivision of the Empire is indicated by 
its four heads. Its colour in the animal corresponds to 
the brass of the image ; its swiftness to the activity of 
the loins and thighs in the image. Probably moreover, 
the multiplication of the heads means more than the sub- 
division of rule. The human head was, in the dream of 
Nebuchadnezzar, a symbol of human intelligence. Pro- 
bably these heads, like the four-headed creatures in Eze- 
Idel's vision 4 , looked all ways, E.W. N. S. Their so 
looking was in itself a symbol of circumspection, of mani- 
fold versatile intelligence. This remains further to be 
developed in the next vision. 

But, again, the chief object of interest in the vision, as 
in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, is the 4th Empire. For the 
living creature which represents this, there is no name. 
No one creature can express itsterribleness, not even if the 
attributes of different creatures, (as in the symbol of the 
lion with eagle's wings) werecombined topicture it. Only, 
words expressive of terror and might are heaped, the one 

slopes of the Caucasus, which was the Eastern boundary of the Leopard's dis- 
tribution, its western boundary being the Atlantic, as the Tiger's Eastern is 
the Pacific ocean." 

3 " It is borne," says S. Cyril, " with swiftest course against what it wills, 
and runs with feet so swift, that no track is seen nor any imprint left on the 
ground." on Hos. xiii. 7. The Abbe Poiret (in his Voyage en Barbarie, 1789. 
i. 224.) gives this account of the Panther ; " The Arabs have assured me that 
they fear the Panther more than the lion, both for themselves and for then* 
flocks. It is of the nature of the tiger. Its rage is to drink its fill of blood, 
and, when satisfied with it, to see it flow and, as it were, to bathe in it. Its 
fury is never slaked ; but seems even to gam fresh nourishment, the more 
victims it destroys. If it precipitate itself in the midst of a large flock, unless 
chased away, it leaves nothing alive. It breathes only blood, carnage, death. 
It attacks all animals except the lion, and conquers all. Extremely light in 
its course, it is fleeter than any ; its motions are so subtle, so prompt, that it is 
difficult to escape it. Thickets, ditches, even small rivers cannot arrest it in 
its course. It lightly clears them all, and if the creature which it pursues, 
escape into a tree, the Panther, notwithstanding the bulk of its body, is there 
as soon. Thus it declares war against the inhabitants of earth and air. The 
bird, too young to leave its nest, although placed at the summit of the tallest 
tree, becomes its prey. The thirst of blood is seen in its look : its eye is always 
sparkling "with anger and rage." * Ezek. i. 10. 



"JQExceeding terribleness again characterises thekth Empire. 

upon the other, to characterise it. We have the terrible- 
ness which was ascribed to the aspect of the image, as a 
whole ; and the strong might, which was the property of 
the fourth kingdom in it, and that, exceedingly ; and 
Daniel framed apparently a new word, to enforce the con- 
ception of its strength. He calls it ^terrible and mightful 2 
and strong exceedingly, diverse from all the beasts before it, 
vrtth. great iron teeth and nails of brass, which should not 
only devour, like the hear, but should stamp the residue 
with its feet. "In the former beasts," says S.Jerome, 
"there are single tokens of terribleness; in this there are 
all." The beast of the Revelations, which was framed 
after this description of Daniel, is combined of the first 
three of Daniel. s The beast which I saw was like unto a 
leopard, and his feet as the feet of a bear, and his mouth 
as the mouth of a lion. 

Of the last Empire, like the first, Daniel sees not only 
certain characteristics, but a history. Intervals of its his- 
tory are marked. It embraces a long period 4 . The beast 
appears at first with the ten horns at once, as the third 
beast with its four heads. Its characteristic is stupen- 
dous strength, as that of the third is manifold intelligence. 
But although, in order to manifest its unity, it appears as 
one whole, the explanation shews that the ten horns belong 
to a subsequent stage of its existence. For first its cha- 
racteristic crushing power and its use of that power are 
dwelt upon; 5 The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom 
upon the earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms, 
and shall devour the whole earth and shall tread it down 
and break it in pieces. Then, after this, the ten horns are 
explained to be kings or kingdoms which should issue out 
of it. 6 And the ten horns out of (i. e. going forth from) 
this kingdom are ten kings that shall arise. Throughout 

1 vii. 7. 2 'J(?13N. The root exists only in Arabic in this sense, whence 

in Heb. DjjpD, " loins," as the seat of human strength. In the extant Aramaic, 
the root has only the meaning " wished for,' lingered." No other was found 
either by Quatremere or Bernstein. 3 Rev. xiii. 2. * 

4 see ab. p. 68, 9. 5 vii. 23. 6 24. 



The ten horns or kingdoms later but simultaneous. 77 

these prophecies the king represents the kingdom, and the 
kingdom is concentrated in its king. The kings then or 
kingdoms which should arise out of this kingdom, must, 
from the force of the term as well as from the context, be 
kings or kingdoms which should arise at some later stage 
of its existence, not those first kings without which it 
could not be a kingdom at all. For these do not arise 
out of it, but are a part of it. We could speak of the 
United States, or (should we erect these into independent 
states hereafter) of India, the Canadas, the Australasian 
Colonies, as arising, springing out of the kingdom of Bri- 
tain. We could not speak of our own line of sovereigns, 
as kings who came forth from the kingdom of Britain ; 
for they were all along an integral part of it. The king- 
dom never existed without them. 

These 10 horns or kingdoms are also to be contempo- 
raneous. They are all prior in time to the little horn 
which is to arise out of them. Another, he says, shall 
arise after them, and it diverse from the rest ; as the whole 
kingdom should be diverse from those kingdoms which 
were before it. Yet the ten horns or kingdoms are to 
continue on together, until after the eleventh shall have 
risen up ; for it is to rise up among them and to destroy 
three of them. The description, in itbelf, implies, that the 
ten horns symbolise ten kingdoms, not ten kings only. 
For in this way only could the two traits be compatible, 
that the eleventh was to come up among them and yet 
after them. One could say of the new kingdom of Italy, 
that it came up after the other kingdoms of Europe, and 
yet among them. But one could not say of the king of 
Sardinia, that he arose up among the kings his predecess- 
ors, who were of necessity dead before he arose. To arise 
up after, and yet among, are incompatible, except when 
those former things abide. 

So then, within the period of the fourth empire, there 
are these distinct periods, 1) the time until it is divided 
into the ten portions symbolized by the ten horns, as, 
before, it was represented as ending in the ten toes ; 



78 Periods distinguished in the fourth Empire. 

2) the period of those ten horns. 3) That in which the 
eleventh, diverse from the rest, held its sway. This also 
is marked to be no brief time, both from the events in 
it, and from the wondering lengthened contemplation of 
the Prophet : 1 1 continued narrowly observing these horns; 
and, behold, there came up among them another little horn, 
before whom three of the first horns were uprooted; and 
behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a 
mouth speaking great things 2 1 continued gazing then be- 
cause of the voice of the great words which the horn spake ; 
I gazed on even till the beast was slain, 3 1 gazed on, and 
the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed 
against them. 4) The period after the destruction of that 
power and of the whole fourth kingdom which is to perish 
with him, indicated by the words; And the rest of the 
beasts, the other kingdoms, their dominion was taken 
away, yet their lives were prolonged on to a season and 
time, 4 i. e. on to the time appointed by God. The sen- 
tence seems most naturally to relate to a time after the 
destruction of the 4th empire ; for it continues the de- 
scription. It does not seem to be simply an account of 
what God had* done afore-time to those former empires, 
viz. that when He took away their world-rule, He left them 
in being as nations, but of something which should be 
after the destruction of the fourth. This however will be 
made clear when the time comes. 

The latter part of this, being still future, we cannot 
explain certainly. Prophecy is not given to enable us to 
prophesy, but as a witness to God when the time comes. 
This prophecy reaches on to the end of time. Much of 
it is confessedly expanded in the Revelations, as still to 
come. It would then be as inconsistent in us to attempt 

i vii. 8. 2 11. 3 21. 

4 RV] !&! *&' PI C- 1- Hek- "W ) i s a "^finite time, as in the phrase KM?J a^ ill. 
28. iv. 33. Ezr. v. 3. See also vii. 25. and in Heb. Eccl. iii. 1. Neh. ii. 6. and in 
the N. T. 6 Koipbs S. Luke xxi. 8. xp^vovs % Kaipobs Acts i. 7. 1 Thess. v. 1. 

6 v. 12. depends apparently on v. 11. "I gazed on until the beast was killed 
and his body destroyed and the rest of the beasts, their dominion," &c. 



Permanent subdual, characteristic of it. 79 

to explain it, as it would be in the school of Porphyry, not 
to explain it. For, according to^them, it relates to past 
facts. They assume the book to have been written in the 
times of Antiochus Epiphanes, to relate to his times, 
and to be intended to influence his times. Then, they 
are bound by their own hypothesis to explain it, if 
they can, with reference to those times. For, according 
to them, it represents past facts. The impossibility of 
pointing out these has, since Porphyry's time, been one 
chief rock, on which those theories have been wrecked. 

Christians can point out the correspondence of the 
fourth Empire, as far is incumbent on them, viz. in its 
beginning. Crushing power was the characteristic of 
the fourth beast. Permanent subdual distinguished the 
Roman Empire. Other Empires swept over like a tor- 
nado. They ravaged, extorted submission, received tri- 
bute. But their connection with the states whom they 
subdued, was loose and disjointed. The title "king of 
kings," which Assyrian 6 , Babylonian 7 , Persian 8 , assumed 
in succession, was a boast which confessed weakness. 
They had not the power of consolidating into one the dis- 
jointed materials of their greatness. The plans of Nebu- 
chadnezzar, Cyrus, Alexander, the previous founders of 
world-Empires, failed in the hands of unworthy succes- 
sors. Rome kept in dependence on itself all which it ac- 
quired, inferior yet still integral members of its polity. 
Dionysius, comparing it to the empires before it, especial- 
ly the Assyrian, Persian, Alexander's, says 9 , " If any one, 
considering the governments of which we have any ac- 
count in the past, apart and as compared with one ano- 
ther, would judge which had the largest rule, and wrought 
the brightest deeds in peace and war, he will find the Ro- 
man far to surpass all before it, not only in the greatness 

6 Hos. viii. 10. Is. x. 8. and Merodach-baladan's title, Is. xxxix. I. 

7 Ezek. xxvi. 7. Dan. ii. 37. comp. Is. xlvii. 5. 

8 Ezr. vii. 12. Strab. xv. 3. 7. Amm. Mar. xix. 2. 16. Persepol. Cuneif. 
Inscr. in Grotefend ; Pehlevi coins in De Sac. Mem. s. diverses Antiq. de Perse, 
p. 87, 8. Ges. on Is. x. 8. 

9 Antiq. Rom. i. 2-4. see Newton on the Prophecies. 



80 Diony sius, contrast of Roman with former Empires ; 

of its empire and the splendour of its deeds but in its du- 
ration until now. For the Assyrian Empire, of fabulous 
antiquity, held but a small part of Asia, The Median, 
which destroyed the Assyrian and gained awider rule, last- 
ed no long time, but was overthrown in its 4th generation. 
The Persians, who subdued the Medes, mastered at last 
wellnigh all Asia; but, invading Europe also, they brought 
over to them not many nations, and their empire conti- 
nued not much more than two centuries. The Macedo- 
nian Dynasty, which destroyed the Persian Empire, sur- 
passed in extent of empire all before it : yet neither did 
it flourish long, but on Alexander's death began to de- 
cline. For being rent asunder straightway by his suc- 
cessors (Diadochi) into many governments, and having 
strength to last out to the second or third generation after 
them, it was internally weak, and at last was effaced by 
the Romans. Nor did it either subdue all land and sea. 
For it did not conquer that wide Africa except about 
Egypt, nor all Europe, but advanced only Northwards as 
far as Thrace and westward to the Adriatic." 

" Such was the acme and might which the most illus- 
trious Empires, recorded in history, attained, and they 
decayed. But the^pity of Rome rules over the whole ha- 
bitable and inhabited earth, and the sea, not only within 
the columns of Hercules, but the ocean too, as far as ships 
may venture. It, first and alone of all in all recorded 
time, made East and West bounds of its sway ; and the 
period of its might is not brief, but such as no other city 
or kingdom ever had. Since it subdued Macedonia, 
which at that time seemed the most mighty on earth, it 
has now, for 7 generations, ruled without rival, barba- 
rian or Greek. No nation, so to speak, disputes her supre- 
macy or declines to obey her." 

Abating what is the language of panegyric, Rome had 
consolidated a dominion different in character from any 
before her and wider in extent. 

Such was the aspect of the successive kingdoms, such 
their outline. But, the chief object of interest, that 



The last strife Heaven and earth. 81 

chiefly expanded, as in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, is that 
in which they should end, the kingdom of God victorious 
over the evil of the world. One verse is assigned to each 
of the first three kingdoms ; one verse contains the ex- 
planation of them all ; the rest of the vision and the ex- 
planation is occupied with that great conflict. We see, 
on earth, l the little horn with eyes like the eyes of a man, 
man's intellectual acuteness, and the mouth speaking great 
things, setting himself over against God 3 , destroying the 
saints of the most High, essaying to change worship 3 and 
law ; and all is, for the allotted time, given into his hand. 
On the other side heaven is opened to us ; we see the 
Throne of God, and the Eternal God, and the judgment 
set, and the books opened, the records of man's deeds and 
misdeeds ; and one like a Son of Man in Heaven ; like man, 
but not a mere man ; Man, but more than man ; in the 
clouds of heaven, to Whom, as Manx's givenpower and glo- 
ry and kingdom ; all peoples should serve Him, and His do- 
minion should last for ever. It is a sublime picture ; man, 
with his keen intellect, a look more stout than his fellows, 
overthrowing kings, doing his own will, speaking against 
God, placing himself over against Him as His antagonist, 
having, for a set time, all things in his hand; and above, 
out of his sight, God, enthroned in the serenity of His 
Majesty, surrounded by the 1000s of 1000s of heavenly 
beings who serve Him ; and, near Him, One in human 
form, born of a human birth, yet, like God, above in the 
clouds of heaven, the darkness shrouding Him from hu- 
man eye, but reigning and to reign for ever, His king- 
dom neither to pass away by decay nor to be destroyed by 

1 vii. 8, 

2 HlffytJt vii. 25. t^f air. A.y< lit, ad latus, is probably i. q. "13$ over against," 
" opposed to," like *=!$ Dan. x. 13. comp^ adverstjs* 

3 |'j?l " set times," i. e. probably " the times" of the set feasts, (as we speak 
of sacred " seasons,") and so the worship of those times. In Onk. it stands for 
onyio Gen. i. 14. and Jon. puts "Jjflfi 'ffil for ijns Zeph. iii. 18. and IJHD JDT Lam. 
i. 4. Pseud. Jon. paraphrases nvi' njro " feasts" by K*ISNJ nrio JIM Lev. xxiii. 2. 37. 
by '! Ib. 4. 44. Else JS! is used of the place of sacred assembly, Num. i. 1. Is. 
xxxiii. 20. but IJTO is retained of the festival, Ley. 1. c. Lam. i. 4. Hos, ix. 5. 

G 



82 The title 'Kingdom of God,' taken from Daniel. 

violence. " l God is patient because He is eternal." Be- 
low, all is tumult ; above, all is tranquillity ; the heavenly 
King over against the earthly potentate, until the last 
blasphemy draws down the lightning upon him ; the voice 
of his great words ascends, the judgment of God descends. 
Because of the voice of the great ivords which the horn 
spake, I beheld till the beast was slain, and his body de^ 
strayed and given to the burning flame. 

The vision, in all its parts, corresponds to Nebuchad- 
nezzar's dream; onlyj whereas that mentions the beginning 
of this kingdom of God, as well as the annihilation of all 
human power by it, this exhibits mainly the last rebellion 
of man and its subdual. Its fulfilment we cannot, of 
course, point out, because the end is not yet s , but we canj 
at least, own its harmony and oneness with the Gospel; 
At the same time we shall see the impression which the 
prophecies of Daniel made on those to whom they were 
given. 

1) No one hesitated about S. John Baptist's meaning 3 , 
Repent ye, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand. ^All 
men mused whether he were the Christ or no. It was a 
known class among the Jews, who waited for the king- 
dom of God 5 ; the same, of whom it is said, that they 
6 waited for the consolation of Israel, '''looked for redemp- 
tion in Jerusalem. The Pharisees demanded of Jesus 8 , 
when the kingdom of God should come ? They understood 
His answer, ^The kingdom of God comet h not with obser- 
vation. The kingdom of God is within you. The king- 
dom of Gody the kingdom of heaven, occur in the Gospels; 
as names, as well known to the whole people of the Jews 
as faith, hope, charity, worship, or any other religious 
term. They are not explained, but are assumed to be 
understood. Our Lord embodied the title in His prayer 
which He gave us, Thy kingdom come. The kingdom of 
Heaven occurs exclusively, the kingdom, almost exclu- 

1 " Patiens quia ffitenras." 2 S. Matt. xxiv. 6, S. Mark xiii. 7. 

S. Luke xxi. 9. ' 3 S. Matt. iii. 2. 4 S. Luke iii. 15. s S. Mark xv. 43. 
S.Luke xxiii. 51. S.Luke ii. 25. ? Ib. 38. 8 Ib. xvii. 20. Ib. 20,. I, 



Its king, Man, but more than man. 83 

sively, in S. Matthew's Gospel, as being written especially 
for Jewish converts j but he has also that other term more 
frequent in S. Luke, the kingdom of God 10 . Of these equi- 
valent terms, the kingdom of heaven is especially suggested: 
by Daniel's words u , the God of heaven shall set up a king- 
dom ivhich shall never be destroyed, as also by the con- 
trast with those kingdoms of man, which should arise 
from the earth 1 -. The kingdom is the word of Daniel 13 . 

2) The King of this kingdom was to be of human birth 14 , 
like a son of mortal man, and therefore not a mere man; 
accompanied by angels to the Throne of God, in that Ma- 
jesty which had, before Daniel in this place, been spoken 
of God only, coming with the clouds of Heaven. 

As God manifested Himself in the cloud in the Exo- 
dus 15 , the wilderness 16 , the tabernacle 17 , or the temple 18 , 
as the clouds hide from us what is beyond them y so they 
are spoken of as the visible hiding-place of the Invisible 
Presence of God. To ascribe then to any created being a 
place there, was to associate him with the prerogative of 
God. Holy Scripture says of God, l9 He maketh the clouds 
His chariot ; 20 clouds and darkness are round about Him' 
31 His pavilion round about Him were dark waters and thick 
clouds of the sky: ~ z the clouds are the dust of His Feet : ^be- 
hold the Lord rideth upon a siuift cloud, and shall come into 

10 TJie kingdom of Heaven, occurs 32 times in S. Matt, (see Schmid, Cone, 
v. ovpavAs ;) the kingdom, 6 times ; S. Matt. iv. 23. viii. 12. ix. 35. xiii. 19. 
38, xxiv. 14. the kingdom of God, 5 times. In S. Luke the kingdom of God 
occurs 33 times ; in S. Mark 15 times ; S. John iii. 3-5. ; Acts, 7 times ; S. Paul, 
11 times ; Rev. once. (Schmid, v. 0a<nAe/a) the kingdom, S. Luke xii. 32. 

11 Dan. ii. 44. ^ Ib. vii. 17. w vii. 18, 22. * 

14 e>JMT53. Ib. 13. The -13 "son" expresses descent, as J| in Q-j^ja in Heb. When 
in Syriac, a compound word, barnosho, had been formed, the etymology was 
forgotten, and the compound word came to signify " man," so that it could be 
used even of Adam ; not so, while they remained two words, (as in Ch.) The 
book of Enoch speaks of the Messiah, not only, in reference to Daniel, as the 
Son of Man, but (from Gen. iii. 15.) as " the Son of woman, sitting upon the 
throne of His glory " Ixi. 9. Oxon. Ixii. 5. Dfflm. 

15 Ex. xiii. 21, 22. xiv. 24. w Ex. xvi. 10. xix. 9. xxiv. 15, 16, 18. 
xxxiv. 5. Deut. iv. 11. Judg. v. 4. w Ex. xl. 34. Lev. xvi. 2. Num. ix. 19. 
X.34. xi. 25. Js IKgs.viii.lO. 2Chr.v.l3. Ezek.x.4. Ps.civ.3. 

20 Ib. xcvii. 2. 51 Ib. xviii. 11. Nah. i. 3. M Is. xix. 1. 

G 2 



84 Belief in the Messiah, as more than man, before our Lord 

Egypt. It says, * one like a Son of man came" with the clouds 
of heaven. It says the like of no other, save in prophecy 
of that evil being who said, z lwill ascend above the heights 
of the clouds ; I will be like the most High. 

Even before our Lord came, the description was recog- 
nised as relating to the Messiah. The passage was cited 
in the book of Enoch 3 , when affirming the pre-existence of 
the Messiah "before the creation of the world and for 
ever 4 / 5 that He was the Revealer to man 3 , the Object of 
prayer 5 , and would be, to all nations 6 , the stay, the light 
of nations 7 ; the hope of the troubled 8 ; the righteous 
Judge 9 , with Whom the saints should dwell for ever 10 . 
'Anani, ' He of the clouds', continued to be a name of the 
Messiah 11 ; and the Jews, unable to distinguish beforehand 
His first and His second Coming, reconciled the account 
of His humiliation and His glory by the well-known solu- 
tion ; " 12 It is written of king Messiah, and see, with the 
clouds of heaven One like a son of man came; and it is writ- 
ten, meek and riding upon an ass. Be they [Israel] wor- 
thy, with the clouds of heaven ; be they not worthy, meek 
and riding upon an ass." Caiaphas understood it and all 
which it claimed for Him, his Judge, Who was arraigned 
before him, and Whom he had adjured by the living God, to 
say whether He were the Christ, the Son of God. 13 Thou 

1 Dan. vii. 13. 2 Is. xiv. 14. 

a ch.xlvi.1-3. "Then I beheld the Ancientof days, Whose head was like white 
wool, and with Him Another, Whose countenance resembled that of man. His 
countenance was full of grace, like one of the holy Angels. Then I enquired of 
one of the angels who went with me, and who shewed me every secret thing, 
concerning this Son of man ; who He was ; whence He was ; and why He accom- 
panied the Ancient of days. He answered and said to me ; This is the Son of 
man to Whom righteousness belongs ; with Whom righteousness has dwelt, 
[dwelleth, Dillm.] and Who will reveal [revealeth D.] all the treasures of that 
which is concealed," &c. Abp. Laur.transl. 4 xlviii. 3. 5. bd. 10. 8 "In 
that hour was this Son of Man invoked before the Lord of spirits, and His name 
in the presenceof the Ancient of days," xlviii. 2.Dillmann renders "was named." 
6 xlviii. 4. 7 xlviii. 3. 8 Ib. 4. 9 Ixi. 5. Ixviii. 39. 

10 Ixi. 17. " Tanchuma, 13. 2. Ver. quoted by Beck, Targ. Chron. 

p. 54, 5. Breshith, R. on Gen. xxviii. 10. in the time of Mart. Pug. Fid. P. iii. 
iii. 9. 6. p. 769. ed. Carpz. H Sanhedr. Chelek, f. 98. 1. Mart. p. 344 . 

Schottg. i. 1151. la S. Mattxxvi. 63, 4. 



came, founded on this prophecy of Daniel. 85 

kast said ; Nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall 
see the Son of Man sitting on the Right Hand of Power 
and coming in the clouds of Heaven. Caiaphas under- 
stood, and thereon condemned Him for blasphemy. Once 
more our Lord applied the words of Daniel to Himself, 
14 'All power is given unto Me in heaven and in earth. The 
title, the Son of Man 15 , as employed by our Lord, is the 
more remarkable, in that He always uses it of Himself 
as to His work for us on earth ; no one ventures to use it 
of Him, except that S. Stephen points to the commenced 
fulfilment of His prophecy to Caiaphas, I6 lsee the heavens 
opened and the Son of Man standing at the Right Hand of 
God. Our Lord called Himself the Son of Man," i. e. 
He Who was foretold under that Name in Daniel. 

3) Daniel foretold, not a kingdom in Israel only, not a 
conversion of the Heathen only, but that He Who sat 
above, in a form like a son of man, should be worshipped 11 
hy all peoples nations and languages, and that this His 
kingdom should not pass away. And to Whom have peo- 
ples nations and languages throughout the world, millions 
on millions, and hundred millions on hundred millions 
in successive generations, looked to and worshipped as 
their King, hereafter to come to be their Judge ; Whom 
have they confessed in their Creeds all these centuries 
since any questioned it, as Him " Whose kingdom shall 
have no end," save Him Who came in the form of a ser- 
vant, like a Son of man, in Judaea ? 

iii. These two visions of the four empires both ended 
with the end of time, with the destruction of all human 

" Ib. xxviii. 18. from Dan. vii. 13, 14. 

15 It occurs 34 times in S. Matth. ; 14 times in S. Mark ; 26 times in S. Luke ; 
10 times in S. John. (See Schmid, Cone. v. vi&s.) It is not used after the 
Resurrection, except when the Angels repeat our Lord's words before His 
Death, (S. Luke xxiv. 7.) and by S. Stephen in reference to His prophecy. 

16 Acts vii. 56. V vii. 14, 27. It is the same word, under which the 
three youths had refused the worship to Nebuchadnezzar's image ; (Dan. iii. 
12, 14, 17, 18, 28.) it is used of Daniel's worship of God ; (Dan. vi. 17, 21, 
Ch. 16, 20. Eng.) Artaxerxes uses the verb of those, who serve God in His 
temple, (Ezr. vii. 24.) and the noun, of Divine Service. (Ib. 19.) [all.] 



86 Symbols of the Mo Empires, which are explained 

power, the everlasting kingdom of Christ. The next vi- 
sion, which developes a part of Daniel's former vision^ 
stands in remarkable contrast with it,in its limited extent. 
It developes the account of two of the four kingdoms, just 
those two which had been touched on most slightly be- 
fore ; but has nothing of the kingdom of God, of the Com- 
ing of Christ, or of the end of the world. It is one de- 
tailed picture of an intermediate portion of the history ; 
of events which meantime much affected God's people, but 
which were comprised in their history. The vision is of 
the more moment in the interpretation of the rest, be- 
cause its symbols are authoritatively interpreted in the 
Prophet himself. 

The two empires represented to Daniel are, that of 
Persia under the symbol of the ram, that of Greece, in 
the person of its first monarch, under that of the he-goat. 
Daniel, in his vision, is himself in Susa in Elam, the seat 
of the future Persian Empire. Heisees the Medo-Persian 
world-empire forming itself, (as then, in the 3rd year of 
Belshazzar, it actually was,) and the higher, he says, was 
shooting up (lit. ascending l ) at the last. The empire 
united in itself the strength of two .kingdoms, the later 
of which was the mightiest ; as, in fact, Persia, which be- 
fore was the chief dependency on Media, by a revolution 
rather than by a conquest, absorbed Media into itself. 
The .ram, its symbol, butted West and North and South ; 
for itself came from the East. Westward, it conquered 
Babylonia, Syria, Asia Minor; Northward, Colchis, Ar- 
menia- Southward, part of Arabia, Egypt, JEthiopia. It 
did according to its will 2 , great, proixd, mighty things 3 . 
No beasts (i. e. no power,) could stand before it, neither 

1 i. e. as he was -gazing. The Part, thy is of relative -time. 
8 See Her. iii, 31. " ^i viii. 4. see on Joel ii. 20. p. 124. Thereis no 
Special allusion to Persian pride, of which Greeks (Herod, i. 89. 134.) and La- 
tins (Amm. M. xxiii. 6. 80.) speak. Daniel says, just afterwards, of Alexander, 
'that he waxed very great, or dide,rceeding':g'reatly,~iKQiy.'? r! im > viii. 8. Pride is, 
-of course, inseparable from the greatness and success of unregenerate man. 
-Alexander Was as much intoxicated with it as the Persians. Both did great 
things, and acted as great, i. e. proudly. 



in- Daniel to be Persia and Greece. 87 

could any deliver out of its hand. Scripture joins toge- 
ther the meridian and the sunset. The power arose, as- 
cended to its zenith, fell. The fall is the issue of all hu- 
man greatness, which man, whether exercising it or suf- 
fering under it, loses out of sight ; and so God brings it 
home to him. The he-goat, as described in an image 
which has been admired in classic poetry 4 , speeds from 
the West over the whole earth without touching the 
ground, slays the ram and tramples upon it. In its turn, 
the Persian Empire has no internal power to resist, and 
none to deliver it 5 . The he-goat is represented (accord- 
ing to the well-known symbol of Persepolis,) with its one 
beautiful horn bettveen its eyes ; wonderful symbol of 
strength and intelligence. As it became strong, its horn 
-was broken. In the midst of designs, the vastest and 
most multiform probably, which intelligent ambition ever 
conceived, when not yet 33, Alexander perished. But for 
the marsh-fever of Babylon, aggravated by intemperance, 
they might have been fulfilled. Then grew up the four 
beautiful horns in its .stead towards the four winds of hea- 
ven, i. e. as it is explained, four kingdoms from that same 
-nation, but not in his power. No one has.ibeen found to 
doubt that by these are intended Alexander's four suc- 
cessors, the Diadochi, who collectively held whatever 
.survived of his Asiatic conquests and his own dominions, 
subject to the rule of Greece, The network of Greek iu- 
.telligence still lay spread over the whole compass of terri- 
tory, which Alexander had laidsopen. The power of mind 
continued, although the might of strength was broken. 
The vision again, as to this empire too, hastens to the 
end, the latter time of this kingdom*?. Then all the evils, 
which the people of God had had to endure, were concen- 
-trated and intensified. The office of Alexander's empire 
.was to prepare the way for the Gospel, by spreading 
,Greek intelligence and the Greek language over Asia. 
.Wegt of the Indus. We are familiar with the language, 
"to Hellenise Asia." Antiochus Epiphanes mistook 

4 ^Sn. m 805-10. ,. -* riu. 7. 6 viii. 23. 



88 Symbolsof Persia fyGreece correspond with those of '2nd f 

office, directed against God what was to be subservient 
to God, and, in his mad self-will, profaned the temple, 
stopped the daily sacrifice, and would have trampled out 
the worship of God. The vision closes with the extinc- 
tion of this Anti-Christ of the Old Testament ; l he shall 
be broken without [human] hand ; the sanctuary shall be 
cleansed. 

To which empires, then, of the four do these two corre- 
spond ? The Persian Empire is symbolised by a strong but 
heavy animal, the ram, corresponding to the bear of the 
preceding vision; the threefold direction of its conquests 
answer to the three ribs in the bear's mouth ; the pre-emi- 
nence of the one of the two horns, to the greater power 
of striking attributed to the one side. So also as to the 
Greek Empire. The characteristics of the Grecian Em- 
pire, as given here, are exceeding swiftness and four-fold 
division. But these are precisely the characteristics of 
the 3rd Empire in the dream and the vision. Only in 
this later symbol it is explained in addition, that this 
four-fold division should not exist from the first. No 
one symbol could represent the whole without, being un- 
natural. The oneness was represented in the four-head- 
ed, four-winged panther, fierce and destructive, as all hu- 
man conquests are, yet sagacious and beautiful, as the 
panther is above other beasts of prey, carrying in its four- 
headed empire, acute intelligence. The successiveness 
was symbolised by the horns. The one horn could be re- 
presented as replaced by the four horns. Such a change 
did not destroy the oneness of the living symbol. The 
one head could not have been exhibited as replaced by 
four, without interruption of its oneness by death. 

Either of these identifications, the he-goat with four 
horns with the four-headed panther, or the ram with 
the bear, involves the other. For the symbol relates to 
two consecutive empires. It is cumulative evidence, 
when each has a visible agreement with the correspond- 
ing symbol in the previous vision. Conversely, it is an 

i.viii.25. 14. 



3rd Empire, disagree with those of 3rd 8f 4th respectively. 89 

aggravated disagreement with the previous symbols, 
when, in order to make out the fourth empire to be the 
Greek, the two symbols of the 8th chapter are fitted to 
two in the 7th, with which they severally disagree. The 
four-horned he-goat, i. e. an empire, as it is explained, 
divided into four kingdoms, cannot agree with the 4th 
Empire, whose division into ten is marked by the ten 
horns of the terrible beast, and the ten toes of the image. 
Nor can the heavy ram, with its two horns, be identified 
with the superhuman swiftness of the four-headed leo- 
pard. The correspondence of the two symbols, each to 
each, in the one case, and their disagreement each from 
each, in the other, leave no question but that the third 
empire is the Grecian. But the third Empire being the 
Macedonian, there remains for the fourth empire, only 
the Roman. 

Nor is it any objection to this, that, in this way, oppo- 
sition to God and anti-religious persecution occur both 
in the 3rd and 4th empire under the symbol of a little 
horn, yet with a visible difference even in this symbol. 
For in the Grecian empire the little horn issues, not from 
the empire itself, but from one of its fourfold divisions. 
Out of one of them [the four beautiful horns] came forth 
a little horn. Antiochus Epiphanes came out of one of 
the four kingdoms of Alexander's successors, and that 
kingdom existed in him, as the fourth horn issued in the 
little horn. But in the fourth empire, the born proceeds, 
not out of any one horn but, out of the body of the em- 
pire itself. It came up among them, [the horns,] wholly 
distinct from them, and destroyed three of them. Such 
a marked difference in a symbol, otherwise so like, must 
be intended to involve a difference in the fact represented. 
And why should there not be, under the fourth empire, 
an antagonism to the true God, concentrated in and di- 
rected by one individual, as it was in and by Antiochus 
in the third ? Human nature repeats itself. What man 
has done, man will do. We, Christians, look for an Anti- 
Christ yet to come. Our Lord forewarned of him and his 



90 Antiochus Epiphanes does not correspond to the 

deceivableness 1 . S. Paul describes such an one as Daniel 
speaks of 3 . Isaiah had before foretold of him and his de- 
struction 3 . This is now, thus far, a question of interpre- 
tation only. Why should we not suppose Daniel to have 
meant what our Lord and His Apostles meant ? Cer- 
tainly Daniel himself makes a difference between the 
God-opposed power symbolised in the little horn of the 
8th chapter and that in the 7th. For the opposition to 
God in the eighth is manifestly the persecution by Anti- 
ochus Epiphanes, and ends simply in the death of the 
individual and the cleansing of the visible sanctuary. 
In speaking of the great God-opposed power, in which 
the Fourth Empire should centre, he speaks of a shaking 
of the world's powers, such as the world has not yet seen. 
What he speaks of in plain reference to Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, had its exact fulfilment in him. Had he meant 
that other description for him, it would have accorded 
also. The opponents of Daniel can find no escape from 
this, through assertions that the prophecy did not corres- 
pond with the event. For their hypothesis is, that Daniel 
is describing past events. Their other assumption, then, 
that the writer described the same event, in the one 
case, so exactly, in the other case, in a way so radically 
different, they leave unexplained and inexplicable. 

But it is said, that Antiochus Epiphanes is again spo- 
'ken of in ch.xi. and, that, after his destruction, the resur- 
rection of the dead is foretold. This, if so, would prove 
nothing. It would only be that same foreshortening, 
which we find throughout Holy Scripture, and in our 
Lord's own prediction, first of the destruction of .Jerusa- 
lem, and then of His 2nd Coming to judge the world. 

But although Antiochus Epiphanes, the great sifter of 
the faith before our Lord came, is again in part described 
-in the xith chapter, there are traits, which have nothing 
to correspond to them in Antiochus, which are even the 
exact contradictory of the character of Antiochus, but 
which do reappear in St. Paul's account of the Anti- 

i S. Matt, xxiv.24. SThess. ii. 3, 4. 3 Isaiah xiv. 13, 14. 



Anti- Christ either of the 7th or llth chapters of Daniel. 91 

Christ to come. The image of the Anti-Christ of the Old 
Testament melts into the lineaments of the Anti-Christ 
himself. Antiochus was a propagator of false religions, a 
would-be-destroyer of the true. He opposed God, but he 
worshipped and was zealous for his false gods. " In two 
great and right things," say two heathen historians 4 , " his 
was a truly royal mind, in gifts to cities and worship of 
the gods." " 5 In the sacrifices 6 [sent] to the cities and in 
the honour to the gods, he surpassed all who had reign- 
ed before him. This one may judge from the temple of 
Jupiter Olympius at Athens and the statues around the 
altar at Delos." In his great show at Antioch, in which 
he wished to outdo the Roman games, " 7 The number of 
statues was past telling. For the images of all gods or 
daemons, yea and of heroes also, which are named or ac- 
counted of among men, were borne in procession, some 
gilded, some arrayed with cloth of gold, and to all there 
were appended the corresponding myths, according to 
the transmitted stories, in costly array." And this cul- 
.ture of Heathen worship continued to his death. " 8 At 
Antioch too, having promised a magnificent temple of the 
Capitoline Jupiter, not with a gilded ceiling only, but its 
whole walls covered with gold-plating, and many other 
things in other places, he did not complete them, because 
his reign was very short." One trait only of the anti-reli- 
.gious character of Anti-Christ was true of Antiochus also ; 
he shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods. 
Blasphemy against God is an essential feature of any God- 
opposed power or individual. It belongs to Voltaire as 
much as to Antiochus. All besides has no place in him. 
9 Ife shall exalt himself and magnify himself above every 
god ; and he shall not regard the God of his fathers, nor re- 
gard the desire of women nor any god; for he shall mag- 
nify himself above all. Stit in his estate he shall honour 
the god of forces, and a god whom his fat hers fcneiv not shall 

* lAv. xli. 20. from Potybins. 

5 Polyb. in Ath. v. 21. p. 94,a. Cas. 6 Qvulais. Gron. corrects Supeeuc 

with Liry. 1 Pol. Ib. 23. p. 195. a. * lay. Ib. jd. 36-39. 



92 Contrast of the character of Epiphanes 

he honour tvith gold and silver and with precious stones 
and pleasant things. Thus shall he do in the most strong 
holds with a strange god whom he shall acknowledge and 
increase with glory. Not only is all this alien from the 
character of Antiochus, but, in its essential traits, it be- 
longs to an apostate from the truth, not to one who, like 
a heathen, should exchange one error for another. It 
would be no blame to a heathen, not to regard the gods of 
his fathers, nor to honour gods whom his fathers knew not. 
The characteristics of this infidel king are (1) self-exalt- 
ation above every god; he shall magnify himself above 
every god ; (2) contempt of all religion ; (3) blasphemy 
against the true God ; (4) apostacy from the God of his fa- 
thers ; (5) disregarding " the desire of women ; " (6) the ho- 
nouring of a god whom his fathers knew not. Of all these 
six marks, one only, in the least, agrees with Antiochus. 
Even if we translate the words, the gods of his fathers 1 shall 
he not regard, this, as is attested by Polybius and Livy, 
was the very opposite of his character. For he was more 
zealous in their worship, than any of the kings before him. 
He was even a propagator of it. Like the Imperial perse- 
cutors of the Gospel afterwards, he thought, we are told 
by the author of the first book of Maccabees, to hold 
his kingdom in one by oneness of worship. " 2 King Anti- 
ochus wrote to his whole kingdom, that all should be one 
people, and every one should leave his own laws; so all 
the heathen agreed according to the commandment of 
the king." What Antiochus forbade, was exclusiveness. 
People might worship what they liked, so that they did 
not refuse worship to the state-gods. Non-Greek Hea- 
then could fulfil the king's commandment by the worship 
of the Greek gods, without abandoning their own. To 
the Jews such worship involved the abandonment of 
God, who had forbidden it. On the same principle as 

1 Bertholdt, Lengerke, &c. interpret " Syrian gods." But the Syrians were 
one, and one only of the nations, held in subjection by the Greek kingdom. 
They were in no sense the fathers of the Seleucidse. 

4 1 Mace. i. 41, 42. Josephus alludes to this decree in his summary of the 
speech of Mattathias which alludes to it. Antt. xii. 6. 2. from 1 Mace, ii, 19. 



with that of the Anti-Christ in Daniel) ch. xi. 93 

Hadrian afterwards, Antiochus called the temple at Je- 
rusalem "the temple of Zeus Olympius," the Pan-Hel- 
lenic god ; and that on Gemini, " of Zeus Xenios 8 ," or, as 
Josephus says 4 , at the request of the Samaritans also, 
of Zeus Hellenics. 

The spoiling of temples which is related of Antiochus 
was an irreligious act, according to their light, yet it was 
not so uncommon B as to form the groundwork and occa- 
sion of the picture of anti-Theism. Daniel relates . the 
capture of even the sacred vessels of the temple of God, 
as one of the ordinary events of captivity. Nebuchad- 
nezzar is, notwithstanding, described as the " Servant of 
God," as having his kingdom and his glory given to him 
by God. No punishment came upon him for this. It 
was the direct and purposed insult to God, in the licen- 
tious and sensual desecration of those vessels, the idola- 
trous triumph over God, which brought down the judg- 
ment on Belshazzar. Seleucus Philopator had attempt- 
ed, through Heliodorus, to plunder the temple at Jerusa- 
lem. The act, in itself, is no more than has been done 
by the Catholic sovereigns of Spain and Portugal, and 
lately in Italy, in employing to secular purposes what had 
been given to God. 

Since it was suggested that the desire of women might 
be the Syrian goddess, Mylitta 6 , the Germans have com- 
monly adopted the explanation. Yet there is nothing 
in the revolting and also unnatural worship of Mylitta, 

3 2 Mace. vi. 3. 4 Jos. Ant. xii, 5. 5. gives the letter of the Sa- 

maritans and the rescript of Antiochus to Nicanor. 

5 Xerxes attempted to plunder Delphi ; (Her. viii. 35-9.) the sacred war was 
occasioned by its actual plunder. The ^Etolians destroyed the temple of Do- 
dona ; ( Polyb. iv. 67.) Antiochus the Great had lost his life in attempting to plun- 
der a temple of Bel in Elymais. (Strabo xvi. 1. 18. p. 744. Cas.) A Parthian 
king succeeded in spoiling temples of Athene and Artemis there. (Ib.) Valerius 
Max. justifies the Roman Senate for a decree to "melt the golden and silver 
ornaments of the temples to pay the soldiers," in the civil wars of Marius and 
Sylla. (vii. 6. 4.) Sylla, to the same end, spoiled three temples, Delphi, that 
of ^Esculapius at Epidaurus, and of Jupiter at Olympia. (Died. Exc. ii. 614.) 
Diodorus remarks on the wealth of that of Olympia, as having been unspoiled. 
That of Delphi, the Amphictyons gave up to Sylla. Dio Fragm. 122, 3. 

8 This was devised by I. D. Mich. ; then adopted by Ges. v. 



94 Rationalists miss special character of this Anti-Christ; 

which should entitle that degrading worship to be called 
'the desire of women. Nor can I bring myself to think that 
Daniel, in a picture of the sin of Antiochus, would men- 
tion the abstinence from such a worship as a portion of 
that sin. And that the more, when Antiochus, in a de- 
gree frightful in his shamelessness even to Heathen, wal- 
lowed in the degradations which desecrated that worship. 
Nanaea, whose temple Antiochus attempted to plunder, 
was very probably worshipped with Heathen abomina- 
tions. But there was nothing characteristic in this at- 
tempt, that it should be singled out as exhausting the 
three descriptions, Neither shall he regard the gods of his 
fathers ; nor the desire of women, nor any god shall he 
regard. 

But, further, these insulated attempts at explanations 
miss entirely the fact, that the whole of the character cen- 
tres in the one point, that intensity of pride and competi- 
tion with God, which we know of only in Satan and in 
the Anti-Christ to come. This is the recurring trait ; l he 
shall exalt and magnify himself above every god ; he shall 
not regard the God of his fathers ; nor the desire of women 
nor any God shall he regard ; for he shall magnify him- 
self above all." The character is a blank denial of God^ 
not a forgetfulness, nor a practical impiety, nor insolent 
spoliation ; but a self-idolatry, a self-deifying, which shall 
compete with the true God, and look down on all besides, 
as being himself greater than they. Even his god is of 
his own creation ; 2 a strange god whom he shall acknow- 
ledge. and increase with glory. It is not strange gods, but 
one strange, unknown-of, god whom he shall recognise, 
and, by recognising, shall magnify. The prophecy re- 
markably corresponds with that which, in the Revela- 
tions, is still future, where 3 the second beast causeth the 
earth and all that dwell therein to worship the first beast, 
giving to them a god whom they should adore. 

And yet, according to the school of Porphyry, he who 

1 NcwaTa 2 Mace. i. 13, 14. "Nani," according to Sergius in Bar Bahlnl, is. 
" the planet Venus." Ges. on Is. ii. 33. ~ xi. 39. 3 Rev. xiii. 11, 12. 



pervert the account of his 'death: 95 

so described Antiochus, knew him and his history per- 
fectly, and truly pictured his deceits, flatteries, treacheries, 
successes, disgraces, anger, corruptions of God's people. 
Whence then this utter deviation in describing acts which 
must have been still more public and notorious ? In the 
8th chapter, where Daniel did pourtray Antiochus, every 
trait corresponds ; we are at a loss for nothing ; not a word 
is without meaning. What then is the inference as to 
this description, of which only one line is in common with 
Antiochus, and that one line, belonging to every sort of 
blasphemer ? What can be the inference, but that Anti- 
ochus is not intended ? If you have two portraits by one 
hand, the one resembling its original, the other wholly 
unlike, you doubt not that it represents some other man. 
Again as to his end. The end of Antiochus was briefly and 
strikingly characterised in the 8th chapter, a sudden yet 
not violent death, amid a life of war and plunder. The 
end of this Anti-Christ is also clearly marked. He shall 
place the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the 
glorious holy mountain, yet he shall come to his end and none 
shall help him. Like Sennacherib of old, he is in the Holy 
Land, between its two boundaries, the Dead Sea and the 
Western Sea 4 , (the Mediterranean,) shaking his hand 
against the holy Mountain, mount Zion ; and he perishes. 
The writer of the book, on the unbelieving hypothesis, 
knew of the end of Antiochus. He died of grief at Tabes, 
a town of Persia. "In what glorious holy mountain 
he encamped," S. Jerome justly says 5 , "he [Porphyry] 
cannot say, nor can he prove that he encamped between 
two seas, and it is absurd [as Porphyry did] to interpret 
the two seas to be two rivers of Mesopotamia." 

There is, then, no place for this Anti-Christ in the 
times of Antiochus Epiphanes. Yet the supposed identity 
of this Anti-Christ with him who is spoken of in the for- 
mer vision, is the only plea for confounding the 3rd and 4th 
Empires. Even the Jews in S. Jerome's time looked 
upon this prophecy as having still to receive its fulfil-" 

4 see on Joel ii. 20. p. 123. * on Dan. xi. 44, 5. 



96 Types of Anti-Christ, in conformity with nature. 

ment. et l From this place onwards, the Jews think that 
Anti-Christ is spoken of, that, after the little help of J'u- 
lian, a king shall arise who shall do according to his own 
will, and lift himself up against all which is called god, 
and speak great things against the God of gods, so that 
he shall sit in the temple of God, and make himself god, 
andhiswill he performed, until the wrath of God he fulfill- 
ed; for in him shall the end be. Which we too understand 
of Anti-Christ," The shadow was projected before. "As 
the Saviour," says S. Jerome, " had Solomon and the 
other saints as types of His Coming, so we may rightly 
believe that Anti-Christ had as a type of himself that most 
evil king Antiochus, who persecuted the saints and pro- 
faned the temple." Good and evil have grown together 
all through this world's history : all good foreshadowing 
and concentrating in Him Who alone was good ; all evil 
having its diverse counterparts in those more signal mani- 
festations of evil, and culminating at last in the highest 
antagonism to good and God. Even apart from revela- 
tion, it is, in itself, in conformity with human nature, that 
as good is intensified, so is evil. 

Such is the natural meaning of these great series of 
prophecy, as developed from themselves. It is an inter- 
pretation older than the Gospel. For Josephus, shews, 
beyond all question, that he believed the fourth Empire 
to be the Roman 8 . The belief still lingers on, but slightly 

1 S. Jer. on Dan. xi. 36. 2 on Dan. xi, 21, 2. 

* " These things (Dan. Yiii. 9-14.) it befel our nation to suffer under Anti. 
ochus Epiphanes, as Daniel saw, and, many years before, wrote down what 
should come to pass. In like manner Daniel wrote also concerning the em- 
pire of the Romans and that it shall be made desolate by them." Ant. x. 11. 
fin. The well-known reserve in speaking of the stone which should break in 
pieces the 4th empire had no ground but his fear of his Roman masters. He 
speaks of it, as yet to come. He paraphrases Daniel's explanation to Nebu- 
chadnezzar. " The golden head designates thee [Neb.] and the Babylonian 
kings before thee ; but the two hands and shoulders shew that your rule will 
be destroyed by two kings [Medo-Persian] : and their's another will destroy, 
clothed with brass [Macedonian] and this another will cause to cease, being like 
iron in might, and will subdue altogether, on account of the nature of iron ; 
this being stronger than that of gold and silver and brass. Daniel also ex- 
plained to the king about the stone. But I do not think good to relate this, my 



Eastern tradition of the 4 Empires, and of the Messiah. 97 

disguised in the East. The Parsees still have a tradition 
which speaks of the four Empires from one root, after 
which the Saviour is to come. " 4 As is evident from 
the Qtutgar, Zertusht requested of Ormusd immortality. 
Then shewed Ormusd, the all-knowing Wisdom, to Zer- 
tusht; he saw a tree with such a root that four trees 
sprang from it, a golden, a silver, a steel, and an iron. 
Then said Zertusht, ' Ruler, Greatest of all in heaven 
and earth, I have seen the roots of a tree, from which four 
trees have sprung/ Ormusd spake to the holy Zertusht ; 
Of this one the root which thou seest (is the world) and 
these four trees are the four times which are coming: 
this golden, when I and thou are speaking, and Kota9p- 
shah receives the law, and the body of the Dews is broken 
and they hide themselves; this silver is the rule of the 
royal Artashir; the steel is the rule of Anoshe"revan- 
khosru, son 'of Kobat ; that formed of iron is the evil 
reign of the Dews," &c. " B After this kingdom of the 
Dews, [the fourth kingdom] comes, according to the Per- 
sian doctrine? Sosiosh the Saviour." These are broken 
fragments, petz'ified remains, 1 as it were, of an ancient be- 
lief, which, in its day, when living^ prepared doubtless for 
the Gospel. We have the result attested in the times of 
the Gospel, in the well-known passages of Suetonius and 
Tacitus. Suetonius mentions the extenfrof the belief; Ta- 
citus, its source* . Suetonius says 6 , " an ancient and settled 
opinion had become very prevalent in the whole East, that, 
it was in the fates, >that; at that -time, persons going forth 
from Judaea should obtain the empire of the>world. This, 
which, (as the event -subsequently showed) was predicted 
of the Roman Emperor, the Jews, ^drawing to themselves, 
rebelled." Tacitus 7 ; "most [of the Jews] had an im- 
planted conviction,, that it was contained in the ancient 

task being to write the past and present, not the future. But if any one, ea- 
ger for the truth, does not shrink, from curious search, wishing to learn, (if.it 
may be) about things uncertain, let him be at pains to read the book of Da- 
niel ; he will find it in the sacred writings." Ant. x. 10. 4. 4 Bahman 
Yesht. MS. of Prof. Spiegel, imparted by him to Delitsch. Hall. Enc. Art. 
Daniel, p. 27.6.. note. 5 Delitsch, ib. 6 Vespas. c. 4. * Hist. v. 13. 

H 



98 Eastern traditim in Jtornqn. historianfi 

writings of the; priests, that at that very time the JEast 
should prevail, and persons going forth out of Judaea 
should ohtain the empire of the world, which amhiguities 
had predicted Vespasian and Titus, But the common 
people, according to the wont of human cupidity, inter- 
preting in their own favour this exceeding fated greatness, 
were not turned to the truth even by adversity," 

Whether or no they believed their own interpretations, 
the two Roman historians are witnesses to the fact, that 
this inew kingdom was to be founded than. It was not 
a vague expectation, that the East should prevail, but 
tha.t it should prevail th?n.. Both agree, that the new 
king was not to come forth from the East any where or 
a.ny how, but from the despised Judaea. Both agree that 
this persuasion was of old ; "it was an ancient and set- 
tled opinion 1 ," says Suetonius ; "it was in the ancient 
writings of the priests,"- says Tacitus. The kingdom of 
Ghrist had been foretold by Solomon ^ and Isaiah 3 . The 
time had been defined only by Daniel. Yet, according 
to. the Porphyry school, these writings, which Tacitus 
thought so ancient, were not older than their own Terence. 

But we have yet nearer witness. We have seen that 
'Daniel's prophecy was handed down in a disguised form 
among the Persians, The firstfruits of the Heathen were 
from that very order, of which Daniel was made the 
head. Over and above the natural meaning of those gifts 
which the Magi brought in their hands, they came with 
the certain conviction, that one was there bom king 
of the Jews, and that the Child so born was the Object 
of Divine worship. They knew Whom they sought, why 
they sought Him. The star fixed the immediate time, 
which seemingly they had long looked for. They ask only 
the precise spot where He was to be found. Unbelievers 
may deny the being of Daniel or the Gospel of S. Mat- 
thew. The agreement of the two histories they cannot 
deny. It is not brought out on the surface ; it lives in 

1 Percrebruerat Orients toto vetus et cpnstans opinio. 
? Ps. Ixxii. . . ix. 6, 7. xxxii. 



and journey ofy* Magi, derived from y* date i 

the facts. Nebuchadnezzar, it was recorded, on the in- 
terpretation of his dream, made Daniel chief of the go- 
vernors over all the ivise men, or magi of Babylon*. It is 
foretold in the book of Daniel, (no one disputes this,) 
that a kingdom should be founded in the 4th empire, the 
King of which should be like a Son of man, Whom all peo- 
ple, nations and languages should worship 5 . The first 
worshippers of Him, Whom now many millions out of all 
peoples, nations, and languages worship, were from that 
same school, over which Daniel is related to have been 
set . 6 Behold, there came wise men, (magoi,) from the East 
to Jerusalem, saying, Where is He that is born King of the 
Jews f For we have seen His star in the East and are come 
to ivorship Him. ^When they came to the house, they saw 
the young Child with Mary His mother, and fell down and 
loorshipped Him. Truth brings out the hidden harmony, 
when unbelief can only, with a dull dogmatism, deny. 
While we give account of the lesser points, they are 
these larger agreements, on which one who wishes to 
know the truth should dwell. "Granted," sums up S . Je- 
rome, "that these things are said of Antioehus, how in- 
jureth it our faith ? was anything said of Antichrist in 
the former vision [the 8th chapter] when the prophecy 
was completed in Antioehus? Let him [Porphyry] dis- 
miss doubtful points, and holdfast to what is plain. Let 
him say^ Who that stone is, which was cut out of the 
mountain without hands, grew into a great mountain, 
filled the world, and brake in pieces the four-formed 
image ; Who is that Son of man, Who should come in the 
clouds, and stand before the Ancient of days, and to 
Whom a kingdom should be given, which should have 
no end, and all people and nations and languages should 
serve Him." 

Lesser questions easily receive their light, or, without 
injury to the faith, remain for the time obscure, when the 
eye has once seen the central truth. 

4 Dan. ii. 48. * Ib, vii. 13, 14. 6 S. Matt. ii. 12. 7 Ib. 11. 

H2 



LECTURE 111. 



Modern attempts to make out four Empires, which 
should end with Antiochus Epiphanes. 

IT is assumed in rationalist interpretation, that the 
Fourth Empire is no empire later than the Macedonian, 
to which Antiochus Epiphanes belonged. For else there 
would be prophecy. And since it is an axiom or postu- 
late of the school of Porphyry, that there should be no 
prophecy, facts must in some way be made to square 
with this first principle. There is to be no allusion to 
the Roman Empire ; for, in the time of Antiochus, hu- 
man foresight could not yet discern that it would become 
an Empire of the world. 

But if the Greek Empire is to be the fourth Empire, 
which are the other three? The sum must be made up, 
though one of the items is withdrawn. 1, 1, 1,and0have 
somehow to be made 4. The result is accounted to be 
infallibly certain : else God must be admitted to have re- 
vealed to His creatures a future which they could not 
foresee ; which, it is assumed, is impossible. Yet no one 
can dispute that there are four empires; How then is the 
subtracted fourth to be replaced ? The process has been 
tried upon all the remaining three. Two halves are some- 
how to become two wholes. Only, agreed as this school 
is as to the result, they have been nothing less than 
agreed as to the process whereby it is to be arrived at. 
Every possible combination has been tried. 



Attempts to invent a 4 th Empire earlier than y e Roman.lQl 

1) Nebuchadnezzar alone was made the first Empire; 
the weak descendants of his house, the second. 

2) The Medo-Persian Empire was divided, so that the 
Median shouH become the second Empire, the Persian 
should be the third. 

3) Leaving both these in their integrity, the Macedo- 
nian Empire was divided, Alexander alone being made to 
constitute the third Empire; his successors, amid the 
weakness of their perpetual divisions, the fourth. This 
was Porphyry's expedient 1 . 

4) Lastly, all three Empires were left entire, and the 
Empire, which was subtracted at the end, was replaced 
by one added at the beginning. Ewald was rightly dis- 
satisfied with all those former solutions ; yet, with the 
contempt for the necessity of any evidence, which so often 
characterises German theory, he assumed, that Daniel 
lived, not at Babylon but at Nineveh ; that " 2 the winged 
lion traditionally meant the Assyrian Empire." "The 
bear" then became " the Babylonian symbol; the leopard 
that of the Medes and Persians, while the 4th beast re- 
presented, as is not uncommonly held," says Dr. Wil- 
liams 3 , "the sway of Alexander." 

Now of these theories, (as happens so often) each con- 
cedes by turns so much of the truth as it can afford. Out 
of the four theories, the adherents "of three concede or 
contend that the Babylonian Empire in' its integrity is 
one entire Empire; three maintain the saine as to the 
Medo-Persian ; three, as to Alexander arid his successors. 
So that the traditional interpretation of; I may'say, both 
the Jewish and the Christian Church, nay, of the Hea- 
then world before Christ, has, in each case, the" support of 
three out of the four parties, which 'oppose it*. No one 
for a moment hesitates to admit whatever, in order to 
make out his case, he is not constrained to deny. Each 
in turn opposes the other, just as much as the old esta- 
blished explanation. Then, in regard to their disagree- 
ment among themselves, the one makes that rapid re- 

i S. Jer. on Dan. vT. 7. ' 2 Essays and Rev. p. 76. " 



102 ~EwaWs groundless ground. Ezekiel speaks 

sistless conqueror, Nebuchadnezzar, to be the sluggish 
bear; two make the Medes and Persians the swift Leo- 
pard ; one makes Alexander's successors, who fell, one by 
one, an easy prey, into the Roman empiref the all-crush- 
ing iron, or that beast, which was more terrible, mightful, 
world-trampling, than all which preceded it. 

But apart from this, each is, on the first view, untenable 
and baseless. I will take them in order. 1) The grounds 
alleged for assuming an Assyrian empire to have been 
the first of the four, are these ; that the Daniel, mentioned 
by Ezekiel, must have been older than the Babylonian 
captivity; that the lion may have been a symbol of the 
Assyrian empire; that, in the last vision recorded in the 
book of Daniel, the vision in the third year of Cyrus, 
Daniel is spoken of, as being by the river Hiddekel or 
Tigris, on which Nineveh lay, whereas Babylon lay on 
the Euphrates. The first of these arguments . implies 
the falsehood of the book of Daniel ; the last assumes its 
minute accuracy, and traditional knowledge of slight facts 
as to Daniel's person. 

In regard to the first, it has been remarked long ago, 
that Ezekiel names as characteristics of Daniel, qualities 
which appear in him in early life. In the eleventh year l , 
(i. e. as Ezekiel dates, of Jehoiachin's captivity ^ B.C. 
588,) Ezekiel, in his prophecies to the prince of Tyre, 
.says in irony ; 3 Behold thou art wiser- than Daniel ; there 
is no secret that they can hide from thee. Of the mani- 
fold varieties of human wisdom, Ezekiel selected that 
form, for which Daniel was celebrated 4 in the 2nd year 
of Nebuchadnezzar, i. e. the 5th of Jehoiakim, B.C. 606, 
eighteen years before this da,te. It is that for which the 
king praises the God of Daniel, that He is a revealer of 
secrets, seeing thou couldesf reveal this secret 5 , In asking 

i Ezek. xxvL 1. 2 Ib. \. 2, 3 Ib. xxviii. 2. 

4 Dan. i. 17, 20. .As for these four youths, God gave them knowledge 
and skill in all learning and wisdom.: and Daniel had understanding in all 
visions and dreams. In all matters of wisdom of understanding, that the 
king enquired of them, he found them ten times letter than all the magicians 
and-astrologers that were in hit realm. 5 Ib. ii. 47. 



of Daniel, such as he had been already long known. 103 

him to explain his own later dream as to himself, the king 
says to him, e no secret troubleth thee. The Queen-mother 
spake of him to Belshazzar, ' 'shelving of hard sentences and 
dissolving of doubts were found in the same Daniel. One 
who had his wisdom from God, but was placed by a hea- 
then king as head over those far-famed wise-men, the 
Magi, might Well stand as an eminent pattern of Divine 
wisdom in man. Tyre and its prince boasted themselves 
against the people of God in its overthrow^ and plumed 
themselves on their human wisdom and sagacity. It is 
an anti-Theistic boast. Human wisdom would he wiser 
than Divine. The prince of Tyre claimed, by his wisdom 
to have created all this wealth for himself 8 . He despised 
Hebrew wisdom and the wisdom of God in it, because it 
was oppressed. The event, Ezekiel says, should shew. 
Plainly, unless Ezekiel had meant to speak of a contem- 
porary, over against the contemporary prince of Tyre, 
the wisdom of Solomon had been the more obvious in- 
stance to select. 

In the other place in Ezekiel 9 , God says, that, when 
the time of His judgment upon the land was come, whe- 
ther it were famine, or noisome beasts, or the sword, or the 
pestilence, no righteousness of any individuals in it should 
avert His then irrevocable sentence; and, as pre-eminent 
instances of righteousness, He gives Noah, Daniel and 
Job. It is objected, "How came Ezekiel to mention Da- 
niel his contemporary ? and, if he did, how came he to 
place him between those two ancient patriarchs, Noah 
and Job?" 

The objection tacitly assumes the thing to be proved, 
the non-Divinity of prophecy. It assumes that Ezekiel 
spoke with a mere human judgment. Human judgment 
dares not pronounce even as to the holiness of those of 
greatest promise, until perseverance unto the end shall 
have sealed up their life. Ezekiel says in the name of God, 
that God so pronounced. Then there is nothing more re- 
markable in this, than in other cases in which God pro- 
's iv. 9. ? v. 12. 8 Ez. xxviii, 4, 5. _ Ib. xiy. 13-21. 



104 Grounds of selection of Daniel with Noah 

nounced as to men, yet living and not as yet fully tried. 
Such was Noah himself 1 , and Joh 3 , and Abraham 3 , and 
David 4 , Jeremiah and S . Paul. Saul was but just convert- 
ed, when, in answer to the demurring of Ananias, God said 
of him, he is a chosen vessel unto Me 5 . Jeremiah was yet a 
youth, when God said to him ; 6 JBefore I formed thee in the 
belly, I knew thee ; and before thou earnest forth out of the 
womb) I sanctified thee., I ordained thee a prophet unto the 
nations. The same was said of S . John Baptist ; 7 He shall 
be great in the sight of the Lord ; he shall be filled with the 
Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb. Any how, 
then, Holy Scripture is in keeping with itself. . No one can 
consistently deny that Ezekiel's words could relate to a 
living contemporary, unless he deny also that Samuel 
could have spoken those words of David, nay and deny 
every other judgment pronounced in Holy Scripture as to 
the living. Daniel now, in the 6th year 8 of the captivity 
of Jehoiachin, had, according to his book, passed through 
some twelve years of greatness, trying above others to 
men, for its novelty and his youth. There is then, at least, 
nothing inharmonious in the selection of Daniel, to be 
united with Noah and Job. Rather it has a special force, 
that God joined with those two great departed patriarchs, 
a living saint. The Jews, as they trusted afterwards be- 
cause Abraham was their father 9 , so now they hoped that, 
amid their own unholiness, they should be spared for the 
righteousness or intercession of others. To cut at the 
root of this hope, God singles out the great living ex- 
ample of righteous life, and pronounces him, in this early 
life, one of His chief saints, and says, that, though not 
he only, but two also of the greatest before him, were 
among them, their holiness should be unavailing except 
for themselves. The eyes of all the Jews must have been 
the more fixed upon Daniel, the more marvellous his rise, 

i Gen. vii. 1. * Job i. 8. ii. 3. 3 Gen. xviii. 17-22. 

< 1 Sam, xiii. 14. 5 Acts ix. 15. 6 Jer. i. 5. t S. Luke i. 15. 

8 Ezekiel so dates ch. viii. 1. in the sixth year, in the sixth month. He dates 
eh. xx. in the seventh year, in the fifth month, * S. Matt, iii, 9. S. 
Ui. 8. S.John viii. 83, 39. 



and Job, as examples of righteousness. 105 

at that early age, from being a captive boy, though of 
royal blood, to be ruler over the whole province of Baby- 
lon, and chief over the governors of all the Magi of Baby- 
lon. The more depressed their lot, the more they must 
have looked to him, whom God, in His Providence, had 
so raised up to be a bright star in the night of their cap- 
tivity, a protection to themselves, declaring the glory of 
their God. 

In this case, also, had not the selection of a contem- 
porary had an especial force, we should have looked rather 
for one of the names of the righteous men of old, who in- 
terceded with God, as Abraham. But Noah, Daniel, and 
Job, do all agree in these things; 1) that all had had espe- 
cial praise of God, over against the world. Noah was the 
unlistened-to preacher of righteousness during those 120 
years in which the flood was delayed. God singles out Job, 
in answer to Satan who had been 10 going to and fro in the 
earth and walking up and down in it, as his domain, and 
his kingdom. " u How greatly Daniel's piety and prayer 
weighed in that scale, wherein Belshazzar was too light, 
the fact may attest, that he, like David and Abraham, and 
afterwards, the Virgin at Nazareth 13 , was marked out as 
one greatly beloved, whereas the word of God comes to 
the contemporary prophet, son of man." ' . 

2) All the three stood too, as representatives of a dis- 
tinct relation of God to the world; Noah at the head "of 
the newly cleansed and as it were reborn world ; " Job, as 
a worshipper of God in purity among the heathen world ; 
Daniel, as the revealer, to the heathen world, of that king- 
dom, which was hereafter to supersede and absorb the 
kingdoms of the world 14 . ; "- - r 

The order in which the three saints stand is explained 
by the application which Ezekiel makes of their history. 
All were holy, all interceded ; but Job was heard, for the 
time, least of all. It is a climax of seeming failure 15 . To 
Noah, his wife and his three sons and their wives were 

10 Job ii. 2. See Ziindel, Daniel, p. 264. Ib. p. 266, 7. S. Luke i. 27, 8. 
13 Dan. ix. 23.x. 11. M Ziindel, p. 267. Havern. onEzek.xiv.l4.p.2Q7. 



106 Agreement of Daniel in Ezekiel with the Prophet ; 

given ; Daniel delivered his three friends by his prayer to 
God ; Job was for the time bared of all. He ^sanctified 
{his sons and daughters'] and rose up early in the morning, 
and offered burnt offerings, according to the number of 
them all, for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned ; 
and he saved neither son nor daughter. In Job especially 
was that fulfilled, which Ezekiel gives as the result of the 
whole, " 2 though these three men were in it, they shall 
deliver neither sons nor daughters, they only shall be 
delivered." 

The mention of Daniel, then, by Ezekiel, in both cases, 
has the more force from the fact that he was a contem- 
porary; both correspond with his actual character, as 
stated in his book. Granted the historical truth of Daniel, 
no one would doubt that Ezekiel did refer to Daniel, as 
described in his book. But then the objection is only the 
usual begging of the question. " Ezekiel is not likely to 
have referred to Daniel, a contemporary, unless he was 
distinguished by extraordinary gifts or graces." " But his 
book not being genuine, there is no proof that he was so 
distinguished." "Therefore," &c. 

Scripture is in harmony with itself. Ezekiel is the first 
witness to the book of Daniel. The book of Daniel ex- 
plains the allusions of Ezekiel. No other explanation 
can be given of Ezekiel's words. Ezekiel manifestly re- 
fers to one, well known to those to whom he spoke ; one, 
as well known as the great Patriarchs, Noah and Job. 
Such was Daniel, under whose shadow they of the capti- 
vity lived. But, apart from him, where is this man, re- 
nowned for his wisdom, holy as the holiest whose memo- 
ry had survived from the foundation of the world; whom 
the Jews would recognise at once, as they would Noah 
and Job ? " He does but name him," says an opponent 
rightly 3 , " because he could presuppose that he was al- 
ready sufficiently known by all as a pattern of righteous- 
ness and wisdom." Three answers have been attempted. 
1) The usual resource of perplexity; "The verse of 
1 Job i. 5. "- xiv. 16, 18. 3 Bleek, p. 284. 



'failure to find any other solution. 107 

Ezekiel was interpolated V No one holds this now 6 . 
2) Ezekiel was supposed to have referred to some well- 
known person of remote antiquity 6 . But where was such 
an one ? It is a paradox to pass by the historical person, 
and to assume that there was one, who for antiquity could 
be placed with Noah and Job, of whom the memory was 
familiar to the contemporaries of Ezekiel, preserved by 
tradition through all those centuries, yet of whom not a 
trace survives. This school is fond of the argument "ex 
silentio." They all (though, as we shall see, wrongly,) use 
it as a palmary proof of the non-existence of the book of 
Daniel in the time of the son of Sirach, that he does not 
name Daniel among the prophets. Yet, in the same 
breath, they assume the existence of one, whom no one 
but themselves ever thought of, in order to disprove the 
existence of him who is known to history. They assume 
that Ezekiel and his people knew of one like Daniel for 
wisdom and holiness, whom in all those centuries no one 
mentions, in order to deny or question the existence of 
Daniel himself, whom Ezekiel's words pourtray, just as 
he stands in his book. Truly they give us a shadow for 
the substance. This theory too has probably died with 
its author 7 , having lived its 36 years. 

3) Ewald so far modified the theory, that he invented 
a Daniel, who was to have lived at Nineveh shortly be- 
fore its destruction, prophesied there, and was in a man- 
ner the type of Daniel himself. Ewald allows that it is 

4 Bernstein in Tzschirner's Analekten, i. 3. p. 11. 

5 " Interpolation in the above passages of Ezekiel cannot be assumed with- 
out the greatest arbitrariness." Bleek, Ib. 285. 

6 Bleek, ib. 284, 5, " In both places, one should much rather conjecture, that 
he thought of a celebrated man in antiquity, than of a contemporary who lived 
with him in exile," &c. "a person of antiquity well known of yore," repeated, 
Einl. p. 607-9. J)e Wette followed him for a time, e. g. Einl. 253. ed. 4. 
Lengerke, 18. p. xciv. Knobel, Prophet, ii. 397. ^ Bleek said, 
Einl. 607. (1860) " Most of those scholars, who set the composition of the 
book at a later date, and do not receive its details as historical, accept this, viz. 
that Daniel and his 3 companions were historical persons, Jewish exiles, dis- 
tinguished in Babylon for piety and wisdom, who attained to favour and good 
repute, even with the rulers of the land." Even Eichhorn held this as certain, 



108 Ewald does not solve the difficulty -which he urges. 

clear from Ezekiel, ffl that, at least in the beginning of the 
6th century (B.C.,) Daniel was the historical type of that 
rare union of the same two virtues, in which he shines 
in the present, much later, book, viz. moral purity and 
wisdom." He infers that, because Ezekiel " 3 speaks of 
Noah and Job after the well-known books [Genesis and 
Job] so he did of Daniel ; this book, which Ezekiel pre- 
supposes his readers long to have known, must be differ- 
ent from the present ; Ezekiel contemplates Daniel, as a 
hero of antiquity who was perfected and long since had 
disappeared from sight, as much as Noah and Job; ac- 
cording to the historical horizon of EzekiePs contempo- 
raries Daniel must at latest have lived in the Assyrian ex- 
ile more than a century before : there, as an Israelite, per- 
haps at the court of Nineveh, he became distinguished 
for those great virtues ; there, perhaps he became the sub- 
ject of a book, which may have been early known to 
EzekiePs contemporaries in that same country ." 

It is no uncommon resource of unbelieving criticism, 
to raise a difficulty, which itself cannot solve, and, having 
employed it against the belief, which it wishes to uproot, 
to assume that all was proved, which had to be proved, 
ignoring the fact that it has itself no explanation to give 
of the supposed difficulty which it has urged against the 
truth. Ewald's "perhaps's" leave the fact of the men- 
tion of Daniel between Noah and Job, just where it was. 
The series, Noah, Daniel,' Job r is plainly* riot chronolo- 
gical. No .theories as to the date of the book of Job 
could make it so ; for Ezekiel speaks, not of the book, 
but of the blameless man. The disparity of above 1700 
years between Noah and Daniel is not materially lessened 
by the subtraction of one or two centuries. Take any se- 
cular instance. Were one to join the name of Wellington 
with Alfred and Coeur de Lion it would not mend the dispa- 
rity of date, to substitute Marlboro ugh for Wellington ; 

Einl. 612, 13. and Rosenm. in Dan. 1. De Wette, Einl. 1852, floated be- 
tween Bleek, Ewald, and history. 325. . l Propheten, ii. 560. 
2 abridged from Ewald, Propheten, ii. 560. 



"Credulity of the incredulous.'? 109 

or if one were to join Bp. Wilson with St. Augustine and 
St. Cyprian, the substitution of Andrewes would not bring 
the modern Divine perceptibly nearer to the early Father. 
We should feel equally that time did not enter into the 
grounds of their being brought together. There is a 
meaning in associating a contemporary with the great 
departed. Saints of all ages are one glorious company 
before God. Time is no element in estimating those who 
shine for ever in the glory of God. We classify stars ac- 
cording to their several magnitudes, wherever in our ma- 
terial heavens they may shed their lustre. This unity 
of glory formed the oneness of those whom Ezekiel exhi- 
bits in one constellation, Noah, Daniel, Job : Job he men- 
tioned last, since his outward lot was most akin to that 
which he had to predict. Both the blending of them in 
one, and the outward order used by Ezekiel, correspond 
with the actual facts in Scripture. The invention of that 
phantom-Daniel at Nineveh explains nothing; but con- 
cedes the point, that the disparity of time is of no ac- 
count, since it admits that disparity into its own theory. 
It was strikingly said, " a good book might be written 
on the credulity of the incredulous 8 ." If Scripture had 
required us to disbelieve the existence of one in historical 
times, and to believe the existence of an ideal person cor- 
responding to him, with a whole history about him which 
no one recorded ; that God, e. g. had raised up a prophet 
in Nineveh to foretell its impending overthrow, and he 
had prophesied it truly ; that the memory of this prophecy 
and the outlines of the prophet's marked combination of 
excellencies lived on for centuries, although not the faint- 
est trace of his existence appears in history, it would 
have been thought a hard requirement. Yet this is but 
what the critical school announces to us as a certain fact, 
and would have us receive it thankfully in exchange for 
our Divine belief. " Ewald is right/' said Bunsen 4 , "that 
Daniel was led captive in the first Assyrian invasion, and 
lived and prophesied in Nineveh, not in Babylon ." "If 
3 Sur 1'Incredulite des Incredules. 4 Gott in d. Gesch. i. 515, 6. 



110 Visions on the banks of rivers, probably as places 

we assume that the old real Daniel was carried captive by 
the Pal of Scripture, and sOj probably, by the Sardana- 
palus of the Assyrian monuments, some 21 years before 
the overthrow of the old Dynasty and the conquest of 
Nineveh by the founder of the new, many points are ex- 
plained, in regard to which the critical school has not as 
yet been in condition to give an answer. It is intelligible, 
that the holy and gifted man, who prophesied in .Nineveh 
and announced its destruction, appears two centuries af- 
terwards as the seer and prophet in and of Babylon, &c." 
and, in his summary, Bunsen relates, as facts, 

al Daniel was a noble pious man, a saint and a seer 
from the middle of the 8th century (B. C.) reverenced by 
his fellow captives, the Jews in Nineveh. Traditions and 
popular songs were early full of his sayings and prophe- 
cies, as also of his wonderful distresses, sufferings, de- 
liverances. In all is an unity of the personality unmis- 
takeable ; the personality of a man who united exalted 
wisdom and righteousness with the eye of a seer." 

For all this confident statement, there is not one shred 
of evidence. 

But 2) " 2 We still see Daniel on the Hiddekel, or Tigris, 
the river of Assyria, but which is here called the great 
river, Babylon's river, the Euphrates." "If the scene," it 
is subjoined, " had been Babylon under Darius, the river 
must have been the Euphrates." 

Daniel, just at the close of his life, when his secular 
offices, apparently, were ended, received his last vision, 
when on the bank of the Tigris 3 . Rivers, in later times, 
were often the places of devotion. "On the sabbath," 
S. Luke says 4 , "we went out of the city by a river's side, 
where prayer was wont to be made." A decree of the 
Halicarnassians gives leave, " 5 that those of the Jews 

1 G,ott in d. G. 536. 

" Ib. and Essays, p. 76. 3 Dan. x. 2-4. 4 Acts xvi. 13. 

5 in Gronov. Decret. Rom. et Asiat. pro Judseis, p .22. Wolf, Curae in Actt. 
1. c. p. 1236. Vitringa (Synag. Vet. i. 2. p. 218) quotes two more instances. 
Wolf also quotes Aristeas, Hist. hex. Intt. p. 33. and refers to Zorn, Diss. de 
Scholis quas ant. Judsei prope a lac. et fluv. ripLs, &c. exstruxisse perhibentnr. 



of prayer. <f flPinged lions" 111 

who willed, men and women, should keep the sabbaths, 
and perform their rites according to the Jewish laws, and 
make oratories by the sea, according to their country's 
wont." It is commonly thought that they resorted there 
for the facility of making their customary ablutions 
before prayer. A time of prayer is, any how, a time in 
which God is likely to vouchsafe visions to those to whom 
He does give them. Daniel was come to the close of 3 
weeks in fasting and prayer. In like way, Ezekiel re- 
ceived his first vision 6 , as he was among the captives by 
the river of Chebar ; and in a former vision, Daniel was 
in his vision 7 by the river of Ulai. What led Daniel, 
in that third year of Cyrus, to the banks of the Tigris, he 
has not told us ; but since Babylon on the Euphrates was 
only 40 Roman miles from the Tigris, it was not so far 
removed from it as Gloucester on the Severn from Ox- 
ford on the Isis. Strange ground of questioning a per- 
son's identity, that, in the course of a book, he mentions 
his having been in two places, 40 miles apart !. 

But 3) we are reminded 8 that winged lions have been 
disinterred from the mounds which cover the temples and 
palaces of Nineveh. It is argued then, that the winged 
lion was the emblem of the Assyrian Empire, and, it is 
quietly assumed, "not, of the Babylonian;" and so, since 
in the book of Daniel it is the symbol of the Babylonian, 
this could only have arisen in the misapplication of the 
ancient Symbol. The lion with eagle-wings in Daniel is 
then itself to be a proof of the existence of some ancient 
tradition of four empires, of which the Assyrian was 
the first. 

Now, 1) considering the close connection of Assyria and 
Babylonia, in worship, in language, in writing, in art, 
nothing could be less certain than that Babylon and 
Nineveh would not have had the same symbol of their em- 
pire, if either had had any known symbol at all. Both the 
lion and the eagle, as the kings of birds and beasts of prey, 
were too obvious symbols to be characteristic of any one; 

6 Ezeh, 1. 1. 7 Dan. viii. 2. Bunaen, Gott in d. G. i. 540. 



112 . Human-headed Assyrian lion, an essentially 

power. Twelve lions supported the arms of the throne of 
Solomon on its six steps 1 . Both eagle and lion are used 
by Ezekiel as symbols of Babylon 3 . The eagle was the 
standard of the Parthians, and Persians; it was adopted by 
Alexander on his coins, and inherited by the Ptolemies ; 
was used by the Romans after Marius 3 ; the two-headed 
eagle became the symbol of the Roman Empire of the 
East ; it was assumed by the German Empire; the black 
eagle is the standard of Prussia ; the lion is emblazoned 
on the arms of England. 

2) The human-headed lion of the Assyrian monuments is 
not the eagle- winged lion of Daniel. For just that which 
is most characteristic of the Assyrian figure, the human 
head, is designedly omitted from the symbol in Daniel. 
The symbols of the beasts, in Daniel, in themselves, ex- 
press brute might, the fierceness of conquering empire. 
If intelligence is intended to be expressed, the idea is 
conveyed by a separate symbol. The eagle-winged lion 
of Daniel received no symbol, characteristic of humanity, 
until it ceased to be eagle-winged. * 1 beheld, Daniel says, 
till the wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up 
from the earth, and made to stand upon the feet as a man, 
and a man's heart was given it. A man's heart is also a 
different symbol from a man's head. The symbol in 
Daniel expresses superhuman strength which was lost, 
when it was humanised. In the Assyrian symbols, on 
the other hand, the animating characteristic is the human 
countenance, serene, majestic, intelligent, penetrating, 
benevolent 5 . Superhuman strength, is there, but in en- 
tire repose. The majestic form, as beheld in front, is re- 
presented as motionless, its broad chest resting on its 
solid legs, side by side. The wings are pourtrayed as 
closely folded on its back, traced slightly upon it. All is 

1 1 Kgs. x. 19, 20. 2 see above p. 69. 

3 see e. g. in Hofmann, Lex. v. Aquila, and coins of the Ptolemies in 
Smith's Biogr. Diet. 4 Dan. vii. 4. 

5 " The expression was calm yet majestic." Layard, Nin. i. 65. Those now 
in tbe British Museum seem to me unmistakeably to express those other attri- 
butes also. 



different symbol from eagle-winged lion of Daniel. 113 

i 

subordinated to the human head ; it seems almost to 
speak. The eye, by a bold design stands forth from the 
head, as if even the cold stone could gaze; the benevolence 
of the rounded cheeks is heightened by the almost smile 
of the lips, the chin enveloped in the grave solid beard. 
The rest of the massive figure gives one idea, strength 
in perfect repose; the countenance, in its varied expres- 
sion, is the soul of the whole. This is the more evident, 
because the expression in the human-headed lions and 
bulls is precisely the same. The animal-symbol must 
have been altogether subordinate, because it varies, with- 
out varying in the least that expression of mind, which 
arrests the gazer. When brute force is meant to be re- 
presented, it is figured in all its fierceness, as in the colos- 
sal lion with vast wide-open jaws, found in one of the 
temples at Nimrud 6 . It expresses devouring fierceness 
and rage, and these alone. Instead of that calm human 
head, are the vast jaws outstretched, as if ready to devour, 
and purposely disproportioned for magnitude to the rest 
of the colossal figure 7 , because the object was to express 
terrible fierceness. 

6 British Museum Catalogue of Antiq.p. 81. Bunsen overlooked all this in his 
statement ; " It was a lion with eagle's wings, and a human heart, vii. 4. [not 
together] and so doubtless with a human countenance [this is in no way. im- 
plied.] Certainly it is also said, ' it stood on feet like a man,' which is to be 
interpreted doubtless of the king of that empire, emblematically, not in the vi- 
sible figure." (Jott, &c. i. 540. Thus, to produce the resemblance, two symbols 
are omitted, the stripping off of the eagle's wings and the standing erect ; one 
is added, the human head. The Assyrian symbols were yet further varied. 
" I ascertained," says Layard, " the existence of a 2nd pair of winged human- 
headed lions, differing from those previously discovered in form, the human 
shape being continued to the waist and furnished with arms. In one hand each 
figure carried a goat or stag, and in the other, which hung down by the side, 
a branch with three flowers." Layard, i. 68. 

7 The length of the whole figure, (12 feet 3 inches,) is twice that of the 
average length of the animal (6 feet ;) whereas the upper lip (from the centre 
to the angle of junction) is i of the whole, 2 feet 1 inch ; the lower lip, 1 foot 
5 inches ; in the living animal it is 5 inches, not -& of the whole length. The 
gape from the lower lip to the upper immediately below the nose, in the Nim- 
rud lion, is 15 4 inches ; in the living it would be about 5. The measurements 
of the Nimrud lion were kindly supplied me by W. H. Coxe Esq. British Mu- 
seum ; those of the actual annual by Dr. Holiest on. 

I 



1 14 Human-headed lion certainly not a symbol of Assyrian 

3) It is clear, then, that the human-headed lion was 
not the symbol of Assyrian Empire. For the lion- 
element of the symbol was wholly subordinate, and 
identical in meaning with that of the bull. No one can 
study those wondrous forms, the human-headed lion and 
bulls of Nineveh, and fail to see that they are both one 
symbol. Both are simply symbolic of strength ; not of 
victorious strength, like a conquering empire's ; not of 
Strength put forth, but simply of strength possessed. 
Both figures. stood indiscriminately or together at the 
entrance of the Assyrian temples or palaces 1 . We have 
no right to select the one of two figures, which suits us> 
as the symbol of Assyrian power ; and we have no state- 
ment whatever, that either of them was so accounted. It 
was plainly no symbol at all of Assyrian power ; for the 
lion as well as the bull is represented as defeated. " 2 The 
winged human-headed lions and bulls, those magnificent 
forms which guarded the portals of the Assyrian temples 
are not only found as separate sculptures, but, like the 
eagle-headed figures, are constantly introduced into the 
groups embroidered on the robes. It is worthy of obser- 
vation, that, whenever they are represented, either in con- 
test with the man, or with the eagle-headed figure, they 
appear to be vanquished. Such is also the case on cylin- 
ders* Frequently a human figure is seen suspending them 
in the air by the hind legs, or striking them with a mace. 
I have already ventured to suggest the idea which these 

1 Layard found both together at Arban on the Khabur in Northern Mesopo- 
tamia, Layard, Nin. and B. 275-8. So also at Koyunjik, (Nin. and B. 229, 30.) at 
Nimrud, (Nin. T.i.47App. p. 374. i k 376. 10. a b c 378. 381. 383. 384. 386. 
390.) " I saw at once that the head must belong to a winged lion or bull, simi- 
lar to those of Khorsabad and Persepolis." Ib. i. 65. See Porter's Travels, 
Plate xxxi. T. i. 585. xxxii. p. 591. xxxv. p. 598. Lassen in the Allg. Eneycl. art. 
Persepolis, p. 361, 2. " Chairs, tables, and couches, are adorned with the heads 
and feet of the bull, the lion and the ram, all sacred animals." Ib. 474. add 300. 
302. see also n. 4. 

2 Layard, Nineveh, ii. 460. add 458. At Bavian, " the Assyrian Hercules" is 
represented, " strangling the lion between two winged human-headed bulls 
back to back, as at the giant entrances of the palaces of Kouyunjik and Khor- 
sabad." Nin. and B. 214. 



empire ; probably, a religious symbol. 115 

singular forms were intended to convey, the union of the 
highest intellectual and physical powers ; hut certainly 
their position with reference to other symholical figures 
would point to an inferiority in the heavenly hierarchy. 
Although the Andro-sphinx of the Egyptians was the type 
of the monarch, we can scarcely helieve it to have heen 
so amongst the Assyrians ; for, in the sculptures, we find 
even the eagle-headed figure, the vanquisher of the hu- 
man-headed lion and bull, ministering to the king." 

4) Very probably both the human-headed lions and 
bulls, and perhaps conversely, the lion-headed men 3 were 
religious 4 , not political symbols at all. Lions, hulls and 
cherubim were on the bases in the court of Solomon's 
temple B . Ezekiel saw, in his vision by the river Chebar, 
four-faced creatures, each with the face of the lion, the 
bull, the eagle, the man, fulfilling God's bidding, going 
ivhither the spirit was to go, turning not when they -went 6 . 
It seems most probable, that the symbols of the powers 
of nature, including man's intelligence, which he saw 
around him, as entering into the heathen worship, he saw 
in his vision, subordinated to and fulfilling the will of God. 

I have dwelt longer on this theory, than it deserved, 
because it has been emphatically recommended to you. 
Strange that such a superstructure could be built on the 
three facts, that Ezekiel mentions Job after Daniel, that 
Daniel saw a vision on the Tigris, that there were eagle- 
winged human-headed lions at Nineveh. A compeer of the 
author's dismissed it more summarily. " 7 Ew;ald's conjec- 
tures have something very improbable and unfounded 
By such assumptions the explanation of the origin of the 
book is no way facilitated ; rather it is embarrassed." It is 
a strange phenomenon of the human mind, that men could 

3 Nin. ii. 461. " lion-headed, eagle-footed, human figure." N. andB. 462. 

4 So Layard conjectures, i. 70. " The winged bull with the human head is 
evidently a pure Assyrian type. Its position in the religious system seems to 
be identical with that of the Androsphynx ; and, in the mythic groups as in 
the architecture, they both occupy the same place. Power was probably typi- 
fied indiscriminately by the body of the lion and the bull." Ib. ii. 461. 

s 1 Kgs. vii. 29. i. 10-12. " Bleek, Einl. p. 610, 

i2 



]]Q Babylonian Empire under Nebuchadnezzar alone 

so lose their perception of the nature of evidence. Yet 
unbelief cannot altogether part with a theory which it ac- 
knowledges to be baseless. It serves at least, like clay to 
the American savages, to stop craving after truth. It af- 
fords something to say, something to bribe the conscience 
with, even amid the consciousness that it is base metal. 
"Any how," says a recent writer 1 , "this assumption makes 
it conceivable up to a certain point, how this sphere of 
working was assigned to Daniel ; only one must wish 
their hypothesis a securer historical basis !" 

ii. The 2nd theory, that Nebuchadnezzar personally was 
the first empire, his successors the second 3 , was rested on 
Daniel's words to the king, thou art this head of gold, 
and on his statement, that the second kingdom should be 
inferior to him j which, it is assumed, the Medo-Persian 
Empire was not. But, plainly, this cannot be the mean- 
ing of the text, since, nine times in the context, the sym- 
bols are said to represent, not mere kings but kingdoms 3 ; 
the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom ; after thee 
shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another 
kingdom of brass, and the fourth kingdom shall be strong 
as iron; the kingdom shall be divided ; the kingdom shall be 
partly strong ; and over against all these, it is said, the 
God of heaven shall set up a kingdom; and the kingdom 
shall not be left to other people, but it shall consume those 
kingdoms. 

The words then shall be inferior to thee, must signify 
" inferior to thee in thy kingdom ; " in other words, " infe- 
rior to thy kingdom as it exists in thee." 

In Nebuchadnezzar, the Babylonian monarchy reached 
its meridian. It had risen in the 20 4 years of his father 
Nabopolassar ; its greatness culminated in his own 43 

1 Stahelin, Einl. p. 357. 2 Hitzig (Jahrb. 1832. 2. p. 131.) 

Redepenning (Theol. Stud. u. Krit. 1833. p. 863.) who follows him, says only, 
" It hath every thing for it, according to the words, Thou art this head of 
gold, to consider Nehuchadnezzar and his Dynasty as separate, and so to find 
in this chapter four rulers not 4 Empires, as was the wont according to the 
old interpretation." '< ii. 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44. 4 Berosus in 

Jos. c. Ap. i. 19. Alex. Pol. in Eus. Chr. Arm. i. 44., or 21 years, in Jos. Ant. x. 6. 



not the 1st Empire; Medo-Persian inferior to it. 117 

years 6 . God recognised him by Jeremiah as, 6 My servant, 
Nebuchadnezzar. Of him He foretold to those who were 
concerting with Zedekiah to rebel against him, 7 Edom, 
Moab, Ammon, Tyre, Zidon, that it was in vain. He had 
given all their lands into the hands uf Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon, My servant, and all nations shall serve him, 
and his son, and his son's son. Jeremiah speaks directly 
of those nations to which Judah could specially look for 
help, including Egypt 8 j but the recesses of Arabia, Kedar, 
and Hazor 9 , would not lie too deep to be reached by his 
armies. Two writers on Indian history 10 and "Dio- 
cles in the 2nd book of his Persian history 11 ," Josephus 
says, "make mention of him." " Megasthenes," he says, 
"through the 4th book of his Indian history, tries to 
shew that he surpassed Hercules in valour and in the 
greatness of his deeds. For he says that he subdued the 
greater part of Libya and Iberia/' " 13 and settled colonies 
of them on the right of the Pontus." The mention of Ne- 
buchadnezzar in Persian and Indian histories implies 
some vast % extent of conquest ; the more so, since Megas- 
thenes, whose history, as such, is highly spoken of 13 , wrote 
of Nebuchadnezzar throughout one book 1 *. And when 
Ezekiel pronounces the destruction of Egypt by Nebu- 
chadnezzar, and foretells 15 that Pharaoh shall meet in the 
grave Asshur and all her company ; Elam and all her 
multitude ; Meshech, Tubal and all her multitude ; Edom, 
her kings and all her princes ; the princes of the north, 
all of them ; and all the Zidonians, fallen by the sword; 
certainly the most natural interpretation is, that they 

5 Beros. in Jos. c. Ap. i. 20. Alex. Pol. 1. c. Can. Ptpl. 

8 Jer. xxv. 9. xxvii. 6. xliii. 10. 7 Jer. xxvii. 3, 6, 7. 8 xliii. 8-10. xM. 

9 xlix. 28-33. 10 Philostratus and Megasthenes in Jos. Ant. x. 11. 1. 
11 Ib. K Id. inEus.Praep.ix.41. 13 " Megasthenes, and Eratosthenes, 

approved men." Arr. Alex. v. 5. M Josephus, both in his Ant. and c. Ap., 
uses the expression, " Megasthenes, in the fourth book of his Indica, through 
which (8t* ?js) he tries to shew that this king surpassed," &c. Cocc. would, in the 
Ant., correct, 8t" &v. Megasthenes denied that any made any conquest in India, 
except Dionysus, Hercules and Alexander. Accordingly he denied that Nebu- 
chadnezzar did. Strabo, xv. 1. 6. p. 687. Gas. 15 Ezek. xxxii. 31, 32, 18, 22, 
24,26,29,30. 



118 Greatness of Nebuchadnezzar's conquests ; 

too were conquered by Nebuchadnezzar. We know this 
of the first and the last, Asshur, Edom, Zidon; and so 
doubtless it was true of the intermediate, Elymais, the 
Tibaren and Moschi, and whomsoever besides he includes 
among the princes of the north, such as Gomer and To- 
garmah 1 . Ezekiel speaks of these defeats and slaughters 
as having actually taken place; and he speaks of them in 
connection with the victories of Nebuchadnezzar. 

The colonies of Tyre in Africa and Spain are likely to 
have submitted to him, after the subdual of the mother- 
country. There is then no ground to charge Philostra- 
tus with exaggeration, when he says that Nebuchadnez- 
zar " 2 advanced to the columns of Hercules." "Berosus 
related much besides of the great king ; " and Josephus 
adds 8 that much was contained in the Archives of the 
Phoenicians, agreeing with what was said by Berosus 
concerning the king of Babylon, that he subdued Syria 
too and the whole of Phoenicia." Megasthenes added 4 , 
that he subdued Egypt also. It has been thought, not 
improbably, that the Egyptians disguised their defeat by 
Nebuchadnezzar in their account of the dethronement of 
Apries by Amasis, and that Amasis was, in truth, a tribu- 
tary king, placed on the throne, according to the policy 
of those times, by Nebuchadnezzar 5 . Josephus relates 6 , 
that Nebuchadnezzar " invaded Egypt with the view of 
subduing it, slew the then king and set up another." The 

1 Tlie house ofTogarmah, of the north quarters and all his bands. Ezek. 
xxxviii. 6. 2 In Strabo, 1. c. This combination is suggested by Tholuck, 

DiePropheten,p. 130. 3 c. Ap. i. 20. 4 in Syncellus, p. 221. D. Fragm. 
Hist. Gr. ii. 416. 5 Sir G. Wilkinson, in Rawl. Herod, ii. 386, 7. Tholuck 
suggests the same, referring to the statement of Herodotus, (iii. 16.) that the 
Egyptians put a good appearance (a-e/j.vovv) on the indignities offered to the corpse 
of Amasis ; in fact, falsified the history, Die Proph. p. 128. 

6 Ant. x. 9. 7. Josephus places the commencement of the expedition in the 
5th year after the destruction of Jerusalem, and so in the course of 584, B.C. 
and in Nebuchadnezzar's 23rd year, but says that it was directed against Caele- 
Syria (first) and that, after he had got .possession of it, he warred against the 
Ammonites and Moabites, and so marched against Egypt. This would natu- 
rally presuppose that the siege of Tyre took place then ; only, it must have be- 
gun earlier. 



greater greatness of his internal polity. 119 

death of Apries or Pharaoh Hophra, (571, 5/0, or 569 7 ,) 
was a few years after the fall of Tyre 8 , upon which fol- 
lowed an expedition of Nebuchadnezzar against Egypt 9 . 
But conquest was the least part of the glory of Nebu- 
chadnezzar. He must have had the command of well- 
nigh unlimited human strength to accomplish his works, 
and this doubtless he gained by conquest. The works 
themselves were partly of magnificence and luxury ; but 
they also indicate a mind, religious 10 , as apolytheist, and 
concerned about the internal prosperity of his Empire. 
His capital was guarded by those stupendous walls, whose 
giant height, enclosing a space of above 130 square miles 11 , 
secured the provisioning, as well as the defence of the 
city; embankments on the Persian gulf against the irrup- 
tion of the sea 12 ; a reservoir for irrigation, 40 farsangs 
(about 138 miles) in circumference and about 20 fathom 
deep ; navigable canals, one of which, the Nahr Malka 
[king's river,] still retains its name 13 ; (others are attributed 
to him 14 ;) enormous embankments along the Euphrates, of 

7 Brugsch (Hist, d' Eg. p. 256.) places the death of Apries, 571, B.C. Sir 
G. Wilkinson, 569, B.C. (Rawl. Herod. ii. 387.) Movers says "The reign of 
Apries is fixed on all sides, on the mean, for the years, 588 or 89 570, as are 
few dates in ancient history." ii. 1. 457. (Tholuck, D. Proph. p. 130. note.) 

8 According to the number of years, assigned by Phoenician historians (in Jos. 
c. Ap. i. 21.) to the rulers of Tyre after Nebuchadnezzar's 13 years' siege, the 
end of that siege fell in B.C. 574, For the whole sum to Cyrus' capture of Ba- 
bylon B.C. 538, was about 36 years, thus ; " Baal reigned 10 years ; Ecnibal, 
Judge, (i. e. Sufet,) 2 m. ; Cheleb,-. Judge, 10 m. ; Abbar, high-priest, 3 m. ; 
Muthgon and Gerastrat, Judges, 6 years, Balator reigning 1 year between ; 
Merbal, from Babylon, 4 y. ; Hirom, his brother, also from Babylon, was in the 
14th year of his reign, when Cyrus took Babylon," in all, 35 years + 3 months, 
+ x months of Hirom's 14th year. But 538 + 36=574. The beginning of the 
siege would be 587, B.C., the year after the capture of Jerusalem. 

9 The last prophecy of Ezekiel against Pharaoh Hophra (xxix. 17-20) is dated 
in the 27th year of Jehoiachin's Captivity, i. e, 572. 

10 See the account of his rebuilding of the temple of Borsippa in the Inscr. of 
Borsippa translated by Sir H. Rawl. Journ. As. Soc. T. xvii. " Rawl. 
Herod. Essay viii. n. 13. p. 511. from Strabo, xvi. 1. 5. ^ Abydenus in 
Bus. Praep. Ev. ix. 41. 13 The Armakalis in Euseb. from Abydenus. 
j&JD-in for N3^>5 in}. Abydenus also mentions the Acracanos as his work. 

. M "One portion of the extensive Nahrawdn, eastward of the Tigris." (Ches- 
ney, .Exped. ii. 160.) "It is believed that the Pallacopas was cut by him." (Ib.) 



120 Faineant character of Nebuchadnezzar's successors. 

which that at Bagdad exists to this day 1 ; hesides the re- 
building of almost all the cities of Upper Babylonia, 
" a upon the bricks of which scarcely any other name is 
found," attest the practical concern of the great conquer- 
or for the well-being of his realm. Deep as is the reve- 
rence in the East for those afflicted by insanity, and well- 
ordered as may have been the provisions, at least in the 
case of the decease of a monarch 3 , yet it indicates an af- 
fecting respect for the great monarch, that his nobles 
waited patiently those 7 years in which he was afflicted, 
and then returned to him 4 , and his glory was greater 
than before. 

After hih decease, the Babylonian empire only awaited 
its fall. His son, Evilmerodach, was slain after a vicious 
reign of two years 5 . Nebuchadnezzar's line was still 
continued in his son-in-law and his son's murderer Nerig- 
lissar, who, if he was the Nergalshareser, one of Nebu- 
chadnezzar's princes present at the capture of Jerusa- 
lem 6 , B.C. 578, must have been in advanced age. Yet 
his son, on his decease, about 3 years afterwards, was 
but a lad 7 . Things, then, must have been very disorgan- 
ised, that he, " 8 shewing many signs of a bad disposition, 
was beaten to death by his friends," after a reign of 9 
months. Then succeeded Nabonid, or Nabunahit, the La- 
bynetus of Herodotus, whose son Belshazzar was entrust- 
ed with the government of Babylon, his father having as- 
sociated him in his throne 9 . Of Nergalshareser nothing 

1 Rawl. p. 513. The embankment of Bagdad was identified by Sir H. Rawl. 
Ass. Comm. p. 77. note Ib. 2 Rawl. p. 512. 

3 Upon his father's death, the kingdom was held for him by " the chief of 
the Chaldeans " (Magi) until he could return. Berosus. see ab. p. 60. 

4 Dan. iv. 36. 5 Berosus in Jos. c. Ap. i. 20. Berosus says, that he 
" governed carelessly and dissolutely." 

6 Jer. xxxix. 3, 13. Rab-mag, " chief of the Magi," (ib.) might be added 
as a title to distinguish the one Nergalshareser from the other; and this would 
agree with the title " Rubu-emga " given to Nergalshareser in the Inscrip- 
tions. (Sir H. Rawl. in Rawl. p. 518.) But Rab-saris (chief Eunuch) is not an 
appellative ; (ib.) for it follows on the name Sarsechim, v, 3 and on Nabushas- 
ban, v. 13. This makes it doubtful, whether Rab-mag either is an appellative. 
f, about 14. 8 Beros. ib. 9 See Lect. 711. 



Division of Medo-Persian Empire owned to be untrue. 121 

is recorded, and no memorials remain, except some traces 
of a palace 10 . Of Labynetus, in a reign of 17 years, his- 
tory only records an unfulfilled alliance with Croesus, in 
union with Egypt, against the rising power of Cyrus 11 , 
some defensive works of baked brick on the Euphrates, 
and the defeat, after which he shut himself in Borsippa, 
and was sent into honourable exile in Carmania 12 . With 
such successors, the glory of the Babylonian empire could 
only be spoken of, as now concentrated in Nebuchadnez- 
zar. Only as the Empire was seen in him, not in his de- 
generate successors, could it be said that the following 
world-empire should " be inferior." The dynasty lived 
on, as that of the Bourbons was prolonged after Louis 
XIV. but its glory expired before itself. 

I have given this lengthened explanation of the words, 
Thou art this head of gold, because it illustrates Holy 
Scripture. It was not needed to point out the weakness 
of the theory, which would erect the faineant successors 
of Nebuchadnezzar into a distinct world-empire; and 
which would represent these kings, who murdered their 
predecessors only to sink into inactivity or passivehess, 
to be the much-devouring bear, with the three kingdoms 
between its teeth. This theory is as marked by its dul- 
ness as the first by its wild contempt of evidence. 

iii. The third theory, which divides the Medo-Persian 
Empire into two, a Median and a Persian, is admitted by 
its supporters to be contrary to the fact. They assert it 
truly to be an error ; they could not but see, that some 
places at least in Daniel were distinctly opposed to it. 
Yet they scrupled not to impute the error to Daniel, sim- 
ply on the ground of that one statement, that, on the 
death of Belshazzar, king of the Chaldaeans, ^Darius the 
Median received the kingdom, being about threescore and 
five years old. Now if there is one theory, in which this 
critical school is agreed, it is the acquaintance of the Au- 
thor of the book of Daniel with the previous books of 

10 Rawl. p. 518. Her. i. 77. 

12 Megasth. in Arm. Chr. p. 60, 1. Dan. r. 31. Eng. vi. 1. Ch. 



118 Greatness of Nebuchadnezzar's conquests ; 

too were conquered by Nebuchadnezzar. We know this 
of the first and the last, Asshur, Edom, Zidon; and so 
doubtless it was true of the intermediate, Elymais, the 
Tibaren and Moschi, and whomsoever besides he includes 
among the princes of the north, such as Gorner and To- 
garmah \ Ezekiel speaks of these defeats and slaughters 
as having actually taken place ; and he speaks of them in 
connection with the victories of Nebuchadnezzar. 

The colonies of Tyre in Africa and Spain are likely to 
have submitted to him, after the subdual of the mother- 
country. There is then no ground to charge Philostra- 
tus with exaggeration, when he says that Nebuchadnez- 
zar " 2 advanced to the columns of Hercules." "Berosus 
related much besides of the great king ; " and Josephus 
adds 3 that much was contained in the Archives of the 
Phoenicians, agreeing with what was said by Berosus 
concerning the king of Babylon, that he subdued Syria 
too and the whole of Phoenicia." Megasthenes added 4 , 
that he subdued Egypt also. It has been thought, not 
improbably, that the Egyptians disguised their defeat by 
Nebuchadnezzar in their account of the dethronement of 
Apries by Amasis, and that Amasis was, in truth, a tribu- 
tary king, placed on the throne, according to the policy 
of those times, by Nebuchadnezzar 5 . Josephus relates 6 , 
that Nebuchadnezzar " invaded Egypt with the view of 
subduing it, slew the then king and set up another." The 

1 Tlie house of TogartnaJi, of the north quarters and all Ms bands. Ezek. 
xxxviii. 6. 2 In Strabo,!. c. This combination is suggested by Tholuck, 

DiePropheten,p. 130. 3 c. Ap. i. 20. 4 in Syncellus, p. 221. D. Pragm. 
Hist. Gr. ii. 416. 5 Sir G. Wilkinson, in Rawl. Herod, ii. 386, 7. Tholuck 
suggests the same, referring to the statement of Herodotus, (iii. 16.) that the 
Egyptians putagood appearance (crfftvovv) on the indignities offered to the corpse 
of Amasis ; in fact, falsified the history, Die Proph. p. 128. 

6 Ant. x. 9. 7- Josephus places the commencement of the expedition in the 
5th year after the destruction of Jerusalem, and so in the course of 584, B.C. 
and in Nebuchadnezzar's 23rd year, but says that it was directed against Ceele- 
Syria (first) and that, after he had got possession of it, he warred against the 
Ammonites and Moabites, and so marched against Egypt. This would natu- 
rally presuppose that the siege of Tyre -took place then ; only, it must have be- 
gun earlier. 



greater greatness of his internal policy. 119 

death of Apries or Pharaoh Hophra, (571, 570, or 569 7 ,) 
was a few years after the fall of Tyre 8 , upon which fol- 
lowed an expedition of Nebuchadnezzar against Egypt 9 . 
But conquest was the least part of the glory of Nebu- 
chadnezzar. He must have had the command of well- 
nigh unlimited human strength to accomplish his works, 
and this doubtless he gained by conquest. The works 
themselves were partly of magnificence and luxury ; but 
they also indicate a mind, religious 10 , as a polytheist, and 
concerned about the internal prosperity of his Empire. 
His capital was guarded by those stupendous walls, whose 
giant height, enclosing a space of above 130 square miles 11 , 
secured the provisioning, as well as the defence of the 
city ; embankments on the Persian gulf against the irrup- 
tion of the sea 13 ; a reservoir for irrigation, 40 farsangs 
(about 138 miles) in circumference and about 20 fathom 
deep ; navigable canals, one of which, the Nahr Malka 
[king's river,] still retains its name 13 ; (others are attributed 
to him 14 ;) enormous embankments along the Euphrates, of 

7 Brugseh (Hist, d' Eg. p. 256.) places the death of Apries, 571, B.C. Sir 
G. Wilkinson, 569, B.C. (Rawl. Herod. ii. 387.) Movers says "The reign of 
Apries is fixed on all sides, on the mean, for the years, 588 or 89 570, as are 
few dates in ancient history." ii. 1. 457. (Tholuek, D. Proph. p. 130. note.) 

8 According to the numher of years, assigned by Phoenician historians (in Jos. 
c. Ap.i. 21.) to the rulers of Tyre after Nebuchadnezzar's 13 years' siege, the 
end of that siege fell in B.C. 574. For the whole sum to Cyrus' capture of Ba- 
bylon B.C. 538, was about 36 years, thus ; " Baal reigned 10 years ; Ecnibal, 
Judge, (i. e. Sufet,) 2 m. ; Cheleb,-_Judge, 10 m. ; Abbar, high-priest, 3 m. ; 
Muthgon and Gerastrat, Judges, 6 years, Balator reigning 1 year between ; 
Merbal, from Babylon, 4 y. ; Hirom, his brother, also from Babylon, was in the 
14th year of his reign, when Cyrus took Babylon," in all, 35 years +3 months, 
+ x months of Hirom's 14th year. But 538 + 36=574. The beginning of the 
siege would be 587, B.C., the year after the capture of Jerusalem. 

9 The last prophecy of Ezekiel against Pharaoh Hophra (xxix. 17-20) is dated 
in the 27th year of Jehoiachin's Captivity, i. e. 572. 

10 See the account of his rebuilding of the temple of Borsippain the Inscr. of 
Borsippa translated by Sir H. Rawl. Journ. As. Soc. T. xvii. u Rawl. 
Herod. Essay viii. n. 13. p. 511. from Strabo, xvi. 1. 5. B Abydenus in 
Eus. Prsep. Ev. ix. 41. 13 The Armakalis in Euseb. from Abydenus. 
KVsD-Ti for K$]Q "inj. Abydenus also mentions the Acracanos as his work. 

14 "One portion of the extensive Nahrawan, eastward of the Tigris." (Ches- 
ney, : Exped. ii. 160.) "It is believed that the Pallacopas was cut by him." (Ib.) 



120 Faineant character of Nebuchadnezzar's successors. 

which that at Bagdad exists to this day 1 ; besides the re- 
building of almost all the cities of Upper Babylonia, 
" 3 upon the bricks of which scarcely any other name is 
found/' attest the practical concern of the great conquer- 
or for the well-being of his realm. Deep as is the reve- 
rence in the East for those afflicted by insanity, and well- 
ordered as may have been the provisions, at least in the 
case of the decease of a monarch 3 , yet it indicates an af- 
fecting respect for the great monarch, that his nobles 
waited patiently those 7 years in which he was afflicted, 
and then returned to him 4 , and his glory was greater 
than before. 

After his decease, the Babylonian empire only awaited 
its fall. His son, Evilmerodach, was slain after a vicious 
reign of two years 5 . Nebuchadnezzar's line was still 
continued in his son-in-law and his son's murderer Nerig- 
lissar, who, if he was the Nergalshareser, one of Nebu- 
chadnezzar's princes present at the capture of Jerusa- 
lem 6 , B.C. 578, must have been in advanced age. Yet 
his son, on his decease, about 3 years afterwards, was 
but a lad 7 . Things, then, must have been very disorgan- 
ised, that he, " 8 shewing many signs of a bad disposition, 
was beaten to death by his friends," after a reign of 9 
months. Then succeeded Nabonid, or Nabunahit, the La- 
bynetus of Herodotus, whose son Belshazzar was entrust- 
ed with the government of Babylon, his father having as- 
sociated him in his throne 9 . Of Nergalshareser nothing 

1 Rawl. p. 5 13. The embankment of Bagdad was identified by Sir H. Rawl. 
Ass. Comm. p. 77. note Ib. 2 Rawl. p. 512. 

3 Upon his father's death, the kingdom was held for him by " the chief of 
the Chaldeans " (Magi) until he could return. Berosus. see ab. p. 60. 

4 Dan. iv. 36. 5 Berosus in Jos. c. Ap. i. 20. Berosus says, that he 
" governed carelessly and dissolutely." 

6 Jer. xxxix. 3, 13. Rab-mag, " chief of the Magi," (ib.) might be added 
as a title to distinguish the one Nergalshareser from the other ; and this would 
agree with the title " Rubu-emga " given to Nergalshareser in the Inscrip- 
tions. (Sir H. Rawl. in Rawl. p. 518.) But Rab-saris (chief Eunuch) is not an 
appellative ; (ib.) for it follows on the name Sarsechim, v. 3 and on Nabushas- 
ban, v. 13. This makes it doubtful, whether Rab-mag either is an appellative. 
v, about 14. 8 Beros. ib. * See Lect. vii. 



Division ofMedo-Persian Empire owned to be untrue. 121 

is recorded, and no memorials remain, except some traces 
of a palace 10 . Of Labynetus, in a reign of 17 years, his- 
tory only records an unfulfilled alliance with Croesus, in 
union with Egypt, against the rising power of Cyrus 11 , 
some defensive works of baked brick on the Euphrates, 
and the defeat, after which he shut himself in Borsippa, 
and was sent into honourable exile in Carmania 12 . With 
such successors, the glory of the Babylonian empire could 
only be spoken of, as now concentrated in Nebuchadnez- 
zar. Only as the Empire was seen in him, not in his de- 
generate successors, could it be said that the following 
world-empire should " be inferior." The dynasty lived 
on, as that of the Bourbons was prolonged after Louis 
XIV. but its glory expired before itself. 

I have given this lengthened explanation of the words, 
Thou art this head of gold, because it illustrates Holy 
Scripture. It was not needed to point out the weakness 
of the theory, which would erect the faineant successors 
of Nebuchadnezzar into a distinct world-empire; and 
which would represent these kings, who murdered their 
predecessors only to sink into inactivity or passivehess, 
to be the much-devouring bear, with the three kingdoms 
between its teeth. This theory is as marked by its dul- 
ness as the first by its wild contempt of evidence. 

iii. The third theory, which divides the Medo-Persian 
Empire into two, a Median and a Persian, is admitted by 
its supporters to be contrary to the fact. They assert it 
truly to be an error ; they could not but see, that some 
places at least in Daniel were distinctly opposed to it. 
Yet they scrupled not to impute the error to Daniel, sim- 
ply on the ground of that one statement, that, on the 
death of Belshazzar, king of the Chaldaeans, l3 Darius the 
Median received the kingdom, being about threescore and 
five years old. Now if there is one theory, in which this 
critical school is agreed, it is the acquaintance of the Au- 
thor of the book of Daniel with the previous books of 

10 Rawl. p. 518. " Her. i. 77. 

12 Megasth. in Arm. Chr. p. 60, 1. " Dan. v. 31. Eng. vi. 1. Ch. 



122 Self-contradictory allegations of rationalists. 

Holy Scripture. They urge against it, that he uses lan- 
guage of Ezekiel, (as he does adopt a few expressions a ,) 
that he speaks of the sacred writings which he studied, 
as "Scriptures," and implies therehy that there was, when 
he wrote, a collection of sacred books ; they allege, even 
untruly, that he copied the prayer of Nehemiah, and form- 
ed his Chaldee on the study of that of Ezra. This theory 
of copying does not solve the fact of their resemblance, 
but it is essential to the unbelieving hypothesis. Then 
it is absurd to suppose, that one so acquainted with the 
book of Ezra and with the prophets before him should not 
have known, that Ezra records that the prophecy of 
Jeremiah, which he relates that he studied, was fulfilled 
through Cyrus, or that Ezra inserts in his book the pro- 
clamation of Cyrus, the Lord God of heaven hath given 
me all the kingdoms of the earth, or that Cyrus was foretold 
by name, as the deliverer of Israel from Babylon, in the 
prophecies of Isaiah. It is absurd to suppose, even on 
the unbelieving theory, that the writer of the book of 
Daniel would frame a history contradictory to what he 
knew to be the statements of the books which he studied. 
But the theory directly contradicts the book of Daniel 
itself. For Daniel speaks of Darius himself, as having a 
delegated royalty ; and in this same chapter, as well as 
every where else, he speaks of the kingdoms of Media and 
Persia, as one. 

His two statements as to the authority of Darius are, 
1) that he received* the kingdom, 2) that he was made 
king 8 . Both statements imply a delegated authority. 
To be "made king" implies that he had the authority, 
not of his own right, but, from some other authority which 
made him king. God *, the people 5 , a superior power 6 , 

1 See note B at the end. 2 vi. 1. Ch. y. 31. Eng. 3 ix. 1. 

4 1 Sam. xv. 11, 35. 1 Kgs. iii. 7. 1 Chr. xxviii. 4. 2 Chr. i. 8, 9, 11. Samuel 
in God's name, 1 Sam. viii. 22. xii. 1. 5 Judg. ix. 6, 16, 18. 1 Sam. xi. 15. 
1 Kgs. xii. 1,20. xvi. 16,21. 2 Kgs. viii. 20. (the great men, x. 5.) xi.12.xiv.21. 
xvii. 21. xxi. 24. xxiii. 30. (mighty men, 1 Chr. xi. 10.) 1 Chr. xii. 31, 38. (ii.) 
xxix. 22. 2Chr.x. 1. xxi. 8. xxii. 1. xxiii. 11. xxvi. 1. xxxiii. 25. xxxvi. 1. 

6 Abner, Ishbosheth ; 2 Sam. ii. 9. David, Solomon ; I Kgs. i. 43. 1 Chr. 



Daniel states that Darius had a derived authority. 123 

are, in different places of Holy Scripture, said to "make" 
a person, "king." The corresponding expression, "made 
a person king," was used of the acts of Pharaoh Necho 
and Nebuchadnezzar in setting kings over Israel 6 , and of 
the purpose of Syria and Ephraim towards Judah. It is 
even remarkable that the idiom- is so little used in regard 
to God. It is never used of God's ordinary providence, 
but only of the first appointment of a king in Israel, or 
by David and Solomon when speaking to God, and in 
God's answer to Solomon 4 . It is then contrary to the 
idiom, when men, to avoid the inference, say, that the 
words, was made king over thelandofthe Chaldasans, mean, 
that he was so made by God 7 . 2) So again the word, "re- 
ceived," in Chaldee 8 as well as in Hebrew 9 , always means 
"received from another, giving or offering." It never 
means " took " as a right, at his own will ; (this would 
have been expressed by another word 10 j) it always means, 
" received what came to him from another." 

Who Darius the Mede was, is a matter for secular his- 
tory. The name Daryawesh is confessedly an appella- 

xxiii. 1 . Rehoboam, Abijah ; 2 Chr. xi. 22. Pharaoh Necho, Jehoiakim ; 2 Kgs. 
xxiii. 34. 2 Chr. xxxvi. 4. Nebuchadnezzar, Zedekiah ; 2 Kgs. xxiv. 17. 2 Chr. 
xxxvi. 10. Jer. xxxvii. 1. Ezek. xvii. 16. Syria, Ephraim and the son of Rema- 
liah, in Judah if conquered, the son of Tabeal ; Is. vii. 6. Ahasuerus, Vashti, 
queen ; Esth. ii. 17. [all the cases in which spfypij is used, viz. 48.] 

7 Lengerke's expedient. De Wette and Bertholdt render ungrammatically, 
" was become king ; " Maurer avoids it ; Rosenmiiller, " was made king by the 
Medes and Persians ; " but a conqueror is not said to be made king of the people 
whom he conquers, by his army. He conquers with them. Hitzig; "The choice 
of the passive is to indicate that he did not become king according to the ordi- 
nary course of things. He did not become king of Babylon, as a matter of course 
in his own time by succession, but had first to be made king by human agency, 
viz. through the army led by Cyras. It is scarcely the writer's meaning that, 
he was so made by God." (iv. 14.) " Darius the Mede was set as king over the 
Chaldaean kingdom, (probably by Cyrus,") says even Paullus, iib. d. 3 erst. Ev. 
iii. 418. 

8 Gifts from the king, Dan. ii. 6 ; the kingdom (from God,) Ib. vii. 18. 

9 Persons offering themselves, 1 Chr. xii. 18 ; offerings, Ez. viii. 30 ; a gift, 
Esth. iv. 4 ; a choice offered, 1 Chr. xxi. 11 ; God's appointments, Job. ii. 10 ; 
[ii.] instruction, Prov. xix. 20 ; an observance, Esth. ix. 23, 27 ; the things 
brought by the priests out of God's house, 2 Chr. xxix. 16 ; the blood of the ani- 
mals sacrificed, Ib. 22. 10 n$ or Kjfj. 



124 Traces of a king Darius before Hystaspes. 

tive \ and so, it is consistent with his being known in se- 
cular history by some other name. There is a probability, 
that there was a king of Babylon at this date, known in se- 
cular history too by the name of Darius. It ispossiblethat 
the Darius, who, (as Megasthenes relates 2 ,) expelled for a 
time from Carmania Nabonedoch, the last king of Baby- 
lon, to whom Cyrus had committed the government of that 
province, may have been Darius Hystaspes. But as Na- 
bonedus was probably not young at the time of his ac- 
cession, being selected by his fellow-conspirators for the 
throne 3 , and he reigned 17 years in Babylon, and was again 
restored 4 by this Darius who removed him, it is probable 
that this Darius was a contemporary of Cyrus, not one 
who came to the throne 15 years later. For if this Na- 
bonedus was 40 at his accession to the throne of Babylon, 
he would have been 72 in the first year of Darius Hystas- 
pes, and of a very advanced age to be restored to the go- 
vernment of a province subsequently. 

The Daric is said also to have been named not from 
Darius Hystaspes, but " 5 from an older king." 

Be this as it may, it is a question of secular not of Bi- 
blical history, whether Cyrus placed on the throne the 
Cyaxares II. of Xenophon, or Astyages, or neither, but a 
Median, a descendant of their celebrated sovereign A- 
chashwerosh 6 , (Cyaxares.) Xenophon, although writing 
a historical novel, may very possibly, (like great modern 
writers of " the historical novel/') have, in great points, 

1 from dara Pers. (the end esh being a Persian termination [see Ges. s. v. 
p. 350.] as in tihs.) JOhari Sanscr. signifies ' hold,' ' rule,' which falls in with 
the interpretation of Herodotus, ipelris. (vi. 98.) This agrees -with the 
cuneiform inscriptions, Darheus or Darieush, (Grotefend in Heeren. T. xi. 
p. 347.) Dareioush, Dareiouoush (S. Martin, Journ. As. Fev. 1823. Ges.) or 
DARaYaWUS. (Ib. App. 83.) 2 Chron. Arm. i. p. 61. 

3 Berosus in Jos. 1. c. 4 " depulit aliquantulum," Lat. transl. of 

Arm. Chron. which, I am told, is accurate. 6 Harpocration, sub v. 

Schol. ad Aristoph. Eccl. 545. 

6 In like way, Frawartish, in Media, claimed the Median throne, and Sitran- 
tachmes, a Sagartian, that of Sagartia, as descended from Cyaxares. " I am 
Xathrites, of the race of Cyaxares." " I am king of Sagartia, of the race of Cy- 
axares." Behist. Inscr. col. ii. par. 5. 14. in Bawl. Her. ii, 598. 602. : 



Xenophon's account likely Isaiah's prophecy. 125 

known the historical truth and adhered to it. Certainly 
as to the fact that Cyrus himself was of royal birth 7 , he 
is borne out by the inscriptions 8 against Herodotus. Xe- 
nophon also, in another case, speaks of the family of Cy- 
rus, as one who meant to write history. He sets his own, 
as an historical statement, against their's 9 . But when al- 
most all Herodotus' account of Cyrus is embellishment, 
and the evident object of Xenophon is to adorn his hero, 
they have no authoritative weight for any statement, un- 
less they are supported from without. Probably those who 
quote Herodotus so freely against Holy Scripture would 
be surprised, if they made clear to themselves, what an 
almost nothing they themselves believe of the account 
which they so employ. He needs to be confirmed by 
Holy Scripture, not Holy Scripture by him. But, in fact, 
there is not the shadow of contradiction. There would 
have been contradiction, had Daniel said, that Darius the 
Mede reigned in his own right ; but he says exactly the 
contrary. Daniel tells us more than Herodotus ; but that 
" more" is in conformity both with other Scripture and 
external authority. 

Isaiah, in that wonderful prophecy of the destruction 
of Babylon, ch. xxi, a prophecy acknowledged even by un- 
believers 10 to have been prior to the event, assigns to Per- 
sia the first place, but to Media, the second 11 ; Go up, O 
Elam; besiege, O Media. In another prophecy, he speaks 
of the Medes alone as fierce instruments of its destruc- 

1 Cyrop. i. 2. 1. 8 " the son of Cambyses, the powerful king." "Brick at 
Senkeereh in Lower Chaldaea." Sir H. Rawl. in Rawl. Herod, i. 250. note. 
264. note. 9 " When he came to Media, he, with the good will of his father 
and mother, marries the daughter of Cyaxares, whose exceeding beauty is still 
spoken of. But some of the historians say, that he married his mother's sister. 
That maiden would have been altogether an old woman." Cyrop. viii. 5. end. 
Cyaxares' daughter was his first cousin, granddaughter of Astyages ; but if, as 
Herodotus said, (i. 109.) Astyages had had no son, she would have been, not 
the granddaughter, but the daughter of Astyages and his mother's sister. 

10 "Is. xxi. a prophecy which, as is now recognised, is to be placed before 
the actual fall of Babylon." Lengerke, p. 209. So also Ges. Is. p. 64850. 
Ewald (Proph. ii. 394.) supposes it, in his way, to have been spoken during the 
approach of Cyrus. u xxi. 2. 



126 Medes and Persians united before Babylon. 

tion 1 . Jeremiah foretells, that God would bring against 
Babylon 2 an assembly of great nations from the North 
country; 3 a people, a great nation, and many kings from 
the coasts of the earth; and then he specifies by name*, 
the Lord hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the 
Medes. Neology is constrained by its hypothesis to sup- 
pose the prophecy to have been spoken close on the event ; 
but then, in consistency with itself, it is constrained to 
grant that it is accurate. The Medes then, under Cyrus, 
had a prominent place in the siege and destruction of 
Babylon ; and that, according to the custom of the East, 
under their own subordinate kings. Just this same sub- 
ordinate relation is contained in the well-known Chal- 
dsean tradition, preserved by Megasthenes. " 5 It is said 
by the Chaldaeans, that, going up upon the palace, he 
[Nebuchadnezzar] was overmastered by some god and 
thus spake/ 1, that Nebucodrosor, foretell to you, O Ba- 
bylonians, the calamity which will overtake you, which 
Bel, my forefather, and the queen Beltis are alike unable 
to persuade the fates to turn aside. A Persian mule will 
come, aided by your gods, and will bring slavery upon you. 
Whose accomplice shall be a Mede, the boast of Assyria. 3 " 
Josephus uses the same language, saying that " 6 the city 
was taken, Cyrus, king of the Persians, having brought 
an army against it " and then speaking of "Darius who, 
with Cyrus his kinsman, destroyed the Babylonian Em- 
pire." What marvel then, that, bound up as Media was 
with Persia, a large portion of its power, Cyrus, in whose 
career of victory Babylon was but a part, should commit 
its government to one in whom he could confide, while he 
himself was engaged in foreign conquests ? The policy 
of placing a Vice-king at Babylon is in accordance with 
the previous history of Babylon for a long time under the 
Assyrian Empire, and with the actual relation of the Medes 
to the Persians. The Median Empire had been destroyed, 
more, probably, through the personal defects of its sove- 

1 xiii. 17. 2 1. 9. 3 1. 41. 
' li. 11. 28. B in Bus. Prap. Ev. ix. 41. p. 456. 7. 6 Ant. x. 11.41. 



Medes and Babylonians still unbroken. 1 27 

reign, than through any decay in the nation. Their for- 
midable rebellion against Darius Hystaspes, in conjunc- 
tion probably with the neighbouring Armenians, in which 
the whole army quartered in Media joined, and which was 
finally repressed by Darius in person, shews that they 
were still unbroken 7 . They had energy for a new revolt 
against Darius Nothus 8 , some 116 years later, B. C. 409. 
The Babylonians, in like way, by their repeated rebellions, 
(the first of which was carefully arranged, as soon as the 
confusion from the usurpation of Pseudo-Smerdis made 
room for it 9 ,) shewed that, though betrayed by their secu- 
rity and by the weakness of their kings, they were more 
easily conquered than retained. Their resistance, in the 
first revolt against Darius, was more courageous than that 
against Cyrus. Only after two pitched battles they shut 
themselves up in their walls 10 ; and the traditions of their 
desperate expedient to prolong the siege 11 , and of the stra- 

? In the Behistun Inscription translated by Sir H. Rawlinson, (As. Soc. T. x. 
p. 195 sqq. revised in Rawl. Herod. ii.590sqq.) Darius mentions nine countries 
which revolted from him, " Persia, Susiana, Media, Assyria, Armenia, Parthia, 
Margiana, Sattagydia, Susiana." Media and Armenia alone offered a determined 
resistance. Darius first sent Hydarnes, one of the seven, against Media ; then 
Dadarses, an Armenian, against Armenia, who thrice defeated them ; then 
Vomises a Persian, who twice defeated them ; then, all three armies having 
waited for Darius, he moved from Babylon and defeated Phraortes, who met 
him in Media. (Beh. Inscr. col. ii. Par. 6-13.) There is nothing to connect then- 
revolt with the Median, except the neighbourhood and the fact, that their 
five defeats fell between the first and last of Fravartaish. But Parthia and 
Hyrcania are said to have " declared for Fravartaish ;" (Ib. 16. and col. iii. 1.) 
so he may very possibly have been the centre of the whole, and all may have 
been one movement (as Sir H. Rawlinson conjectures,) under a representative 
of the old Median monarchy to throw off the Persian yoke. Monarchs do not 
record their reverses, so we have only an account of one side. Prof. Rawlinson 
conjectures not improbably, that the successes against the Persians, attributed 
by Herodotus to Phraortes, father of Cyaxares, (i. 102.) really belonged to 
this Fravartaish, i. p. 409. 8 Xen. Cyrop. i. 2. end. 

9 " During all the time that the Magian ruled, and the seven conspired, in 
all this time and the confusion they prepared for the siege ; and somehow they 
escaped notice." Her. iii. 150. Darius places this first revolt early in his reign, 
soon after he had gained the sceptre, the Susianians rebelling at the same time. 
(Behist. Inscr. col. 1. par. 16.) 

10 Beh. Inscr. col. 2. 18-20. They first disputed the passage of the Tigris ; 
then fought near Babylon. n Her. iii. 150. 



128 Policy of placing Median Vice-king at Babylon 

tagem of Zopyrus T , involving self-sacrifice especially ab- 
horrent to Persians and the sacrifice of 7000 Persians, im- 
ply the memory of no easy conquest. Two revolts against 
one king, and a third against his successor 2 , were evidences 
of a strong surviving energy. Babylon then, probably, 
could not be safely left to itself; and it was a wise policy 
to attach the Medes by placing over it, out of their royal 
line, as Vice-king, one who, by reason of his age and ap- 
parent softness of character, would have no temptation 
to revolt, and who would find, in Babylon, no old associa- 
tions or support. To transplant the Babylonian king to 
Carmania, and to place a Median over Babylon, was a 
policy correlative to that of removing disaffected popula- 
tions. An account, as credible as any, mentions a con- 
tinuance of this policy, that Cyrus placed his second son 
as Satrap of the Medes, Armenians, and Cadusia 3 . 

That same distinction of the Medes continued. Medes, 
it has been remarked 4 , alone of .all conquered nations, 
were employed in offices of confidence in the Persian Em- 
pire. Cyrus employed Mazares, a Mede, to quell the re- 
volt of Sardis 5 ; on his death, he appointed another Mede, 
Harpagus 6 , to continue the war, and subdue Ionia, Caria, 
Caunus, Lycia, the government of which last appears to 
have remained in his family 7 . A Mede, Intaphres, sub- 
dued Babylon on its first revolt 8 . In Darius' account of 

1 Ib. 153 sqq. It was part of the alleged stratagem, that 7000 Persians should 
be given up to be slain. Herodotus does not mention the battles, nor Darius 
the stratagem, but he only relates the results, and what was to his glory. 

2 The 2nd revolt was, when Darius was " absent in Persia and Media." Beh. 
Inscr. Col. iii. P. 23. 14. Ctesias relates the revolt against Xerxes, when engaged 
in his Greek expedition, and says that they slew his general. (Pers. 22. p. 69. ed. 
Biihr.) Plutarch alludesto a revolt against Xerxes; (Apoph. Regg. p. 688. Wytt.) 
Herodotus speaks of his spoiling the temple of Bel ; (i. 183.) Arrian (vii. 17.) and 
Strabo (xvi. 1. 5.) of his destroying the temple, Arrian says, after his return 

rom Greene. 3 Xen. Cyrop. viii. 7. 11. Ctesias makes Cyrus assign 

to him three Eastern Provinces, Bactria, Parthia, Carmania. Pers. 8. Herodo- 
us (iii. 30.) is contradicted by the Behist. Inscr., in that he places Cambyses' 
murder of his brother when in Egypt. 

4 Bawl. Herod. T. i. Essay iii. on the Median Empire, p. 402. n. 7. 

s Herod, i. 356, 7. Ib. 162-176. ? Rawl. on Herod, i. p. 312. n. 2. 

8 Behist. Inscr. col. iii. par. 14. Ib. Prof. Rawlinson also instances Datis at 



Close connection of Media with Persia. 

his quelling the great revolts against him, Persians and 
Medes are, in various ways, named as especially united 9 . 

Media was allied to Persia by its common Aryan de- 
scent 10 and by nearness" of language 11 . Media " capta fe- 
rum victorem cepit." Persia had then too that pliancy 
and plastic character 13 , which distinguishes it now. Com- 
posed of separate tribes ls up to the time of the revolt of 
.Cyrus, (if the account of Herodotus be true 14 ,) or of his war 
with Media, Persia adopted apparently the institutions 
of its more civilised conquest. It appears to have joined 
on its history to that of Media 15 , to have adopted its laws, 
as it did, subsequently, its religion. Even such an ex- 
ternal change as that of the adoption of its dress 16 is sig- 
nificant. It was the adoption of the more elegant and 
luxurious attire for its own simple hardy dress. Persia 
continued to rank Media next to itself. 

But, on whatever ground Cyrus placed Darius the Mede 
as Vice-king over Babylon, there is not a plea for think- 
ing that Daniel speaks of a Median Empire distinct from 
Persia. The account of Daniel, throughout, expresses 
the contrary. The first mention of Darius the Mede oc- 
curs, as the fulfilment of the writing on the wall, explain- 

Marathon, (Her. vi. 94.) Ms sons, commanders of Xerxes' cavalry, (Ib. vii. 88.) 
Tachamaspates, employed to bring Sagartia into subjection. (Behist. Inscr. 
col. ii. par. 14.) Ib. 9 " Persia, Media, and the other provinces," col. i.' 

11, 12, 14 ; " the army of Persians and Medians that was with me, " ii. 6. iii. 
" I sent an army of Persians and Medes, " " no man, neither Persian nor Mede, 
who would dispossess him," i. 13. 10 See Rawl. Essay iii. p. 401. 

11 Ib. n. 8. u Herod, i. 135. 13 Ib. 125. 

14 If Prof. Rawlinson's conjecture (p. 128. n. 9.) be right, we have no ac- 
count of any conquest of the Persians by the Medes. 

15 In the book of Esther, mention is made of the book of the chronicles of, 
the kings of Media and Persia, (x. 2.) Media being placed first, as the history 
of the Mngs of Media necessarily preceded that of the kings of Persia ; whereas, , 
speaking of the present time, the writer places the Persians first ; the power of^ 
Persia and Media, (i. 3.) the seven princes of Persia and Media, (i. 14.) the 
ladies of Persia and Media, (i. 18.) the laws of the Persians and the Medes. 
(i. 19.) The state documents, which were originally deposited in the Record- . 
office at Babylon, were afterwards transferred to Egbatana in Media, (Ezr. vi. 
1, 2.) probably as the ancient depository of documents. 16 Her. i. 135.. 
vii. 63. See the woodcuts in Rawl. Herod, i. p. 276. 

K 



130 Evidence from Daniel that he spoke 

ed to Belshazzar by Daniel. In that writing, Mene, Mene, 
Tekel, Uphdrsin, the Persians are referred to, and that 
prominently. All the words of that writing contain, not 
an ambiguous but a twofold and" so a fuller and more 
pregnant meaning 1 , as explained by the Prophet himself. 
z Mene signifies at once, "numbered" and "ended;." 
8 Tekel, "weighed" and " light " on the weights ; * Peres, 
"divided" and "^Persian." A word, subsequently, at 
least, rare 5 , is purposely chosen 6 to bring out the "Per- 
sians" prominently. The two nations conjointly were to 
have the world-empire, which was now in the hands of 
the Chaldees; but the pre-eminence of the Persians is 
expressed in the word foretelling it. The word " and 
they are parting," also means "and Persians." There 
is also the direct explanation, and is given to theMedesand 
Persians. He does not say, " is given first to the Medes 
and then to the Persians," given, as these would say > first 
to Darius, then to Cyrus. A thing is not divided, which 
is given to two persons successively. It is given whole 
to each. He says, "is given." It was the last doomed 
night of Belshazzar and of the Chaldsean Empire. It was 
already night. For the hand- writing had been seen some 
time before, written where the light of the chandelier fell 
on it 7 . The Medes and Persians must have been already 
in motion. The city, buried in its revelry, was virtually 

1 So far Lengerke too agrees. 2 KID is "counted" and "counted to the 
end," whence in Arabic it signifies " defined," and the noun, " the term defined, 
death." 3 Vjjp with allusion to V>p, " light," " is weighed." 

4 pprjn "and (they are) dividing," 2) " and Persians." 

5 Buxtorf, (whom Gesenius follows,) noticed only one instance in which 
the verb on? is used in this sense in the Targums, 1 Sam. ix. 13. Kifopo'-i? 
" breaking and distributing food." Caspar! (Zeitschr. f. Luth. Theol. 1841. 4. p. 
130) adds another, 2 Kgs. iv. 39. where it is for the Heb. nfe "shred," (orig. 
"split.") Its common meaning both in Syr. and the Targg. is, "spread," i.q. Heb. 
fan?. Here it is the same as the Heb. 019. 

6 Lengerke says, " the ground is, that there was no suitable word where- 
' with to allude to the name, Mede." p. 265. 1) This is not true. The root 

no, "measure," existed in Chaldee then, as appears from rma Ezr. iv. 20. rnf) 
Ezr. iv. 13. TO. 24. This would have furnished a verbal allusion. 2) The 
verbal allusion is chosen 'to give greater emphasis to the meaning, to impress 
it. Of course, the meaning would not be sacrificed to the emphasis. 1 v. 5. 



of the Medo- Persian Empire as one. 131 

already in their hands. They were all-but-marching along 
the half-dried bed of the Euphrates, to take possession of 
what God had given into their hands. It was given. 
Two sentences relate the fulfilment of the words in the 
close of the first empire and the commencement of the 
second. *In that night was Belshazzar, king of the 
Chaldceans, slain. And Darius, the Median, (in contrast 
to the Chaldcean,} received the kingdom. The word, re- 
ceived, in itself, implies one from whom it was received. 
But, apart from this, it would have been no fulfilment 
of the words, had Darius succeeded independently. Half 
of the prophecy would have failed, which the statement is 
made to prove. The law also, which was in force, (it is 
thrice said) was the laiu of the Medes and Persians 9 , i. e. 
a law which had been originally the law of the more 
cultivated Medes ; but which, since its adoption by the 
Persians, was become the law of the Medes and Persians. 
The term belongs to the recent times of Persian conquest, 
when the memory of the Median origin of the law was 
fresh ; and much of law could not have been added by the 
Persians. Perhaps it was used by the councillors of the 
Median Vice-king out of national feeling. Yet the term 
was the most accurate which could have been used. Had 
it been a mere Median empire, the law must have been 
" the law of the Medes n only. 

The titles, "Mede," "Persian," are strictly personal. 
The empire was Medo-Persian : (as under the name Bri- 
tain, we think chiefly of the three or four nations first 
combined in its kingdom, not of the dominions which 
have accrued to it.) Cyrus, strictly speaking, was Perso- 
Median, his mother having been a Mede. Darius was a 
Mede. Their personal nationalities, Darius the Mede, 
Cyrus the Persian, do not imply that the empire was Me- 
dian or Persian, and not rather Medo-Persian.' 

The fact, that there was only one Medo-Persian empire, 
is stated in the precisest terms in the vision which fore- 
tells its destruction. A living symbol cannot, without be- 

8 v. 30, 31. Eng. vi. l.Ch. vi. 9, 13, 16. Ch. 8, 12, 15. Eng. 

K2 



132 Medo-Persian Empire in Daniel one. 

coming unnatural, correspond in all details to the thing 
symbolised. Change had to he represented in such wise 
that the symbol itself should not he destroyed. The sym- 
bol of the ram having been chosen for the Medo-Persian 
empire, the shifting relation of its two parts could not he 
pictured, without offensiveness and untruth, in the body 
of the animal. It is represented in the horns. As in the 
dream as to himself, Nebuchadnezzar saw the tree, which 
represented his fortunes, growing^ and cut down, so Da- 
niel sees the Medo-Persian empire from its first formation. 
The body of the ram represents the aggregate of tribes, 
Median and Persian, which were united throughout its 
existence. Each was an aggregate of tribes in itself, the 
Median, of six, the Persian, of ten, tribes. Both were 
joined together, as England and Scotland. The body re- 
mained numerically the same, neither increased nor di- 
minished, whichever was dominant. This could not have 
been more vividly represented than by the oneness of the 
animal, while the horns, the symbol of power, varied. 
The vision gives briefly its rise, its prosperity, its fall. 
The angel explains it to represent the kings of Media and 
Persia, not of Media and Persia successively, but toge- 
ther; for it remained to the end what it was at the begin- 
ning ; it was the ram with two horns, the king or kingdom 
of Medo-Persia, when its horns were broken, and it was 
trampled under foot. 

In regard to the other objection, that the second Em- 
pire is said to be inferior to Nebuchadnezzar in his great- 
ness, it is not improbable that the Persian was inferior, 
even in extent, to the empire under Nebuchadnezzar. 
But neither extent nor numbers constitute the superiority 
of an empire. Else the Chinese would be, for its numbers, 
far the first of modern empires; and, in extent, Russia. 
The Turkish empire would be far superior to any Euro- 
pean ; and the British empire, as nothing but for its East- 
Indian dominions. But, in every thing which does consti- 
tute the greatness of an empire, the Persian was very far 

1 iv.-8.Ch. 11. Eng. 



Persian Empire inferior to Nebuchadnezzar's. 133 

inferior to Nebuchadnezzar's. Cyrus himself ''was a great 
instrument of God, not only, like all great conquerors, as 
the scourge of sin, but towards His own people. The 
edict in behalf of the Jews is one of the most remarkable 
events in the history of the world ; one, fullest of conse- 
quences. Personal character too, as a heathen, he must 
have had, since Isaiah describes him as one, whom right- 
eousness called to her foot z , as its disciple. God gave the 
nations before him and made him rule over kings. He in- 
verted the relations of the Medes and Persians; two great 
empires, the Lydian and the Babylonian, fell before him. 
But his plan of universal empire left him no time to con- 
solidate his work, and, while his plans were stretching 
out to India and to Egypt, perhaps even to Europe 3 , he 
fell, in conflict with some wild nation*, (it is not known 
which,) who defeated and slew one, who was lord of na- 
tions from the confines of India to the encircling sea which 
bounded Asia, the Mediterranean, JSgean, Black Sea. 
But, of all his imperial greatness, his tomb at Pasargadae 
is his only memorial. The conqueror had seemingly nei- 
ther the special genius nor leisure for internal organiza- 
tion. He left none of the works for the good of his people, 
which distinguished the reign of Nebuchadnezzar. Even 
in his own reign, we have that sure token of bad govern- 
ment, public measures undone through corrupt influences 
around the sovereign. Cyrus allowed his own edict to be 
in great measure neutralised, and his policy towards the 
Jews changedj because his councillors were bribed. The 
people of the land weakened the hands of the people ofJu- 
dah and troubled them in building, and hired counsellors 
against them to frustrate their purpose all the days of Cy- 
rus king of Persia even until the reign of Darius king of 

2 Is. xli. 2. 3 Cambyses in Egypt, and Darius Northwards, seem to 

have been carrying out his plans. According to Ctesias, (c. 6.) the Indians 
supported the Derbices against him, doubtless as holding themselves to be 
menaced. 4 The Massagetse according to Herodotus (i. 214 ;) the Derbices, 
according to Ctesias. (Exc. 6-8.) Xenophon's account, that he died in his bed, 
seems only devised to gire room for a philosophic discourse. (Cyrop. viii. 7.) 
In Herodotus' time, there were " many accounts" of his death, (i. 214.) 



134 Immediate degeneracy of successors of Cyrus. 

Persia 1 . An epitome of Persian misrule ! It was, in a 
prince who had felt the power of God, the self-same prin- 
ciple of mis-government, which led the sensual Xerxes to 
sell to Hainan for 10,000 talents of silver the lives of all 
the Jews in his dominions, as an alien, uncongenial, race, 
scattered through all his provinces, and then to squander 
on his favorite the price of their blood z . The successors 
of Cyrus the Great degenerated at once. The mad Cani- 
byses, whom even the Persians are said to have desig-r 
nated as ^despotic," the "^tradesman" Darius, were suc- 
ceeded by Xerxes, who, uniting the vices pf both to a sen- 
sualising voluptuousness, prepared for the downfall of 
Persia by his stupendous but impotent aggression on 
Greece. The expedition of Alexander was (as it stands 
so pointedly in Daniel 5 ,) the natural and legitimate result 
of the exhibition of inherent weakness in the multitudi- 
nous force of Persia. That vast wave, in which the accu- 
mulated hosts of Asia seemed ready to submerge the tiny 
republics of Greece, dashed itself upon them, was broken, 
and recoiled. The failure of Darius at Marathon was 
but the mistake of one who, after the tide of victory over 
the Ionian Greeks, superciliously despised his foe 6 . Xer- 

1 Ezr. iv. 4, 5. 
2 Esth. iii. 8-15. 3 titffirtTW Her. iii. 99. 4 Kairr)A.os Ib. iii. 89. 117. 

5 xi. 2. 3. Bertholdt and Lengerke, acknowledging this connection, think it 
above " the Jewish writer," and accuse their Pseudo-Daniel of supposing that 
there were only four kings of Persia, whereas Ezra mentions Artaxerxes. 
S. Jerome says well ; " Idly does one write, ' Darius, who was conquered by Alex- 
ander, was the 4th king,' who was not the 4th, but the 14th after Cyrus. Ob- 
serve that, having enumerated four after Cyrus, he passed over 9, and passed 
on to Alexander. For the prophetic spirit cared not to follow the order of his- 
tory, but to touch on the marked, points." The Epistle, however, of Alexander 
to Darius after the battle of Issus, so often quoted, has no bearing on this, since 
he is referring to wrongs in his father's time and his own. (in Arr. Exp. ii. 14. 
7-9.) The whole of the Persian history was future in the time of Daniel, the 
omission was the usual prophetic fore-shortening, of which St. Jerome speaks. 

6 Only 6400 men fell on the side of the Persians ; (Her. vi. 117.) and the 
10,000 heavy-armed Greeks formed a front as long as the Medo-Persian,. 
weakening their centre only ; " both the wings were deep." (Ib. 111.) The 
triremes, in which the Persians were embarked, 600 according to Herodotus, 
(vi. 95.) 300 according to Plato, (Menex. p. 190. Tauchn.) would (according 
to Herodotus' calculation, vii. 184.) convey 138,000, or 69,000 men. They had 



Miserableness of Persian Empire. 135 

xes evidently meant to overawe, gathered for foar years 
the varied hordes of his vast empire, and failed. The vast 
bulk of the Persian empire was ever crumhling through 
intestine disorganisation. The internal arrangements 
which were made, had a view rather to the better col- 
lecting of tribute in preparation for those expensive wars, 
than to the good government of the people. 

The defeat of Xerxes closed the 60 years of its seeming 
prosperity: for 150 years more 7 it held together, because 
Greece was divided. But it did nothing for mankind; it 
left no memorial of itself. There is not a trait in its his- 
tory upon which the human mind can dwell with interest, 
save the one scene of the kindness of Artaxerxes to Ne- 
hemiah, scarce any, from which human nature does not 
turn away 8 . Its heterogeneous elements were not more 
assimilated after two centuries, than at the first. Its con- 
nection with its provinces consisted in the appointments of 
satraps with the state .of kings, military governors, and 
governors of the garrisons which kept them in check ; and 
the contribution, on the part of the provinces, of fixed tri-' 
bute, of contingents of troops when required^ or, in times 

also pressed Greeks on their way, (Her. vi. 99.) and had cavalry, but these not 
numerous; (10,000. Nepos Milt, c. 4.) "The aggregate crews of all their ships 
must have been between 150,000 and 200,000 men ; but what proportion of 
these were fighting meii, or how many actually did fight at Marathon, we have 
no means of determining." (Grote, Greece, T. iv. 468.) Darius is said to have 
led against Thrace 7 00,000 men, apart from the fleet of 8600 ships, (v. 87.) 

7 Platsea, 480. B.C. Arbela, Sept. 331. 

8 " Through those unhappy undertakings against Greece in the last six years 
of his reign, Darius saw the splendours of all his former glorious undertakings 
darkened. From that moment Persian history exhibits to us only the mono- 
tonous account of cabals, internal disturbances and expeditions against the 
Greeks, which occasioned on their part and justified maraudings and wars 
against the great king. The Greeks [in Xerxes' time] could use their vic- 
tories unhindered, in that Xerxes was involved in most distressing relations in 
his own family, and left war-concerns wholly to his satraps. Under Dariusj 
the Empire sank wholly ; for the Satraps became almost independent princes ; 
the king was governed by a woman, Parysatis, and 3 Eunuchs ; and Greek mer- 
cenaries formed the core of the royal army, as well as those in the several sa- 
trapies. The horrible savageness, treacheries, murders, maimuigs, we cannot 
relate in a general history of mankind, since the Persian courtiers are only of 
account to those like them : for mankind they are an abhorrence." Schlosser, 
Weltgescli. p. 269. 



136 Disagreement of the symbol of the Persian Empire 

of peace, of eunuchs and replenishers of the Persian ha- 
rems. Government by favorite, often revengeful, Queens, 
or by eunuchs, was the order of its policy ; fratricide, a 
path to the throne, or a condition of its tenure. The jea- 
lousies or even mutual wars of its satraps, in that they 
kept each other in check, were thought to be the safety 
of its government. Its external history, in every instance, 
shewed its internal weakness. Its provinces rebelled and 
re-rebelled ; some succeeded in detaching themselves. 
Even in its more prosperous times, the petty prince of 
Salamis in Cyprus held the Persian power at bay for 10 
years 1 , and was at last acknowledged by them as a tribu- 
tary king. Egypt had three brief dynasties of native 
princes 2 , during the period of Persian rule. Its employ- 
ment of Greek mercenaries, and its intrigues with the 
Greeks of Europe, attest its sense of its inherent weak- 
ness. Its chief wars were to quell the revolts of its own 
satraps. Like a volcanic country, the internal, unsubdued 
force, which periodically shook it, was felt in the earth- 
' quake, now here, now there, but underlay the whole em- 
pire. At the battle of Arbela, in which the Empire fell, 
its million of men were drawn out of twenty only of the 
46 provinces, which had supplied the armament of Xerxes. 
The inferiority then of the 2nd Empire to the first un- 
der Nebuchadnezzar is no ground why the second should 
not be the Medo-Persian. For it was inferior in every- 
thing which constitutes an Empire. Nor could the sym- 
bol be adapted to the Median empire alone. A world- 
empire, which lasted two years, would in itself be an 
absurdity, which it would be insolent to fasten on the 
book of Daniel. But no explanation whatever could be 
given of the three ribs in his mouth, or of the command to 
devour much flesh. Again it would be a strange incon- 
gruity, that the third Empire should be represented by 
symbols implying activity, in the 2nd and 7th chapter, 
and, if it was to be the Persian, by the heavy animal in 

1 See Grote, Hist, of Greece, c. 76. T. ix. p. 27-32. 
2 Dyn. xxvffi. xxk. xxx. Brugsch, Hist, d' Eg. c. 17. p. 279-285. 



in ch. 8. from that of the third Empire in ch. 7. 137 

the 8th ; or that the four heads in the 7th chapter should 
not symbolise the same as the 4 horns in the 8th, hut 
should relate to a different empire. But, over and above 
this, the four heads have no possible explanation as to the 
Persian Empire. They exist simultaneously. Even ra- 
tionalist interpreters explain the four horns in the 8th 
chapter as representing four contemporary kingdoms, 
those of the four successors of Alexander. Much more 
must the four heads be powers existing together. And 
not only so, but, even waiving this, not even in succession 
can four kings of Persia be pointed out, to answer to the 
four heads. For in the xith chapter to which these writers 
appeal, five are probably spoken of 3 , and prophecy breaks 
off with Xerxes, because his invasion and failure were the 
far distant causes of the expedition of Alexander, the earn- 
est of its success. The explanation of the four heads by 
those four kings is inconsistent alike with the believing 
or unbelieving hypothesis. With the believing, because, 
although prophecy foretells the truth in part only, it does 
not foretell what is untrue, and it is untrue that the Per- 
sian Empire was four-headed. On the unbelieving, be- 
cause it is absurd to make mere silence an argument of 
ignorance, when yet a 6th king, Artaxerxes Longimanus, 
is mentioned in the book of Ezra, with which, on the ra- 
tionalist hypothesis, the writer of the book of Daniel was 
well acquainted *. 

iv) There remains yet the paradox, that, seeing that 
the first empire must be the Babylonian and the 2nd the 
Medo-Persian, (for so far the maintainers of this paradox 
see clearly,) the number is to be filled up by making Alex- 
ander himself the 3rd empire, his successors the fourth, 

.s There are yet three kings," (xi. 2.) naturally means, three after Cyrus, 
viz. Cambyses, Pseudo-Smerdis, Darius Hystaspes ; and then " and the 
fourth," means the fourth who was yet to be, viz. Xerxes. 

4 The argument was dishonest in those writers, because they well knew that, 
in the xith chapter, kings both of the Ptolemies and the Seleucidse are not 
alluded to, whom the writer, had he lived after the event, must have known 
of. But what was no argument of ignorance in the one case, could not, of 
course,, have been so in the other. - 



138 Incompatibility of symbols and prophecies as to 

To this it would seem to be answer enough, "then the 
empire of the successors of Alexander was to be stronger 
than that of Alexander itself." Terribleness, crushing 
might and deed, permanent dominion, are the charac- 
teristics of the 4th empire. But in the vision, which is 
expressly explained of the Greek Empire, it is said, "four 
kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not in his 
power, 1 " [the power of the first king ;] and again, " 2 when 
he [Alexander] shall stand up, his kingdom shall be bro- 
ken and shall be divided toward the four winds; and not 
to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he 
ruled" There could not be two pictures more opposite 
to one another. In both visions, those in the 2nd and the 
7th chapter, the exceeding strength of the fourth empire, 
in contrast with those before it, is dwelt upon ; the fourth 
kingdom shall be strong as iron, forasmuch as iron break- 
eth in pieces and subdueth all things; as iron that breaketh 
all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise : a fourth beast 
dreadful and forceful and strong exceedingly, and it had 
great iron teeth; it devoured and brake in pieces and 
stamped the residue with the feet of it } and it was diverse 
from all beasts tftat were before it 3 . 

An empire, stronger than all before it, cannot be meant 
to be the same as that, of which it is emphatically said, 
that it should be weaker than that before it. 

Again as to the facts, cast your eyes on the picture of 
the two chief of Alexander's successors, the Seleucidse 
and the Ptolemies, in Daniel himself. Two dynasties 
equally balanced against each other ; at one time the king 
of the South superior, at another, the king of the North ; 
multitudes given into his hands ; casting down ten thou- 
sands but not strengthened by it ; unable to stand ! See 
the tide of war reeling, ebbing, flowing, from North to 
South, and from South to North. One king of the South 
(Ptolemy Euergetes) prevailing and carrying away cap- 
tives 4 ; the king of the North [Seleucus Callinicus] fail- 

1 viii. 22. 2 xi. 4. 3 a. 40. vii. 7. 4 3d. 8. 



Alexander's successors with those of 4th Empire. 139 

ing in his invasion of Egypt 5 ; Antiochus the Great invad- 
ing Egypt, and defeated by the wretched Ptolemy Philo- 
pator, yet he too, casting down many ten thousands, but 
not strengthened by it 6 ; then Antiochus victorious and 
Egypt powerless, but the victor checked by the Romans 
and perishing 7 ; then a raiser of taxes 8 (Seleucus Philo- 
pator ;) then 9 a vile person (Antiochus Epiphanes) work- 
ing deceitfully, strong with a small people, his fraudulent 
victories checked at last by Roman power. Where, in all 
this division, is the surpassing, iron strength of the 4th 
kingdom or the terribleness of the 4th creature for which 
no name could be found? If this, as is said, was the de- 
cay of the fourth kingdom, that decay began from the 
very existence of those separate kingdoms as described by 
Daniel. Its strength was no where but in Alexander 
himself. Two intermarriages alone are alluded to in D a- 
niel 1Q , or took place between the Seleucidae and the Ptole- 
mies ; and these two, on no common principle. The marr 
riage of Antiochus Theos with Berenice, daughter of 
Ptolemy Philadelphus, was not, like those in Teutonic 
empires, to cement two nations against others whose 
strength was dreaded. It was simply away of ending a 
war, of which Ptolemy was weary u . It was the policy of 
Antiochus the Great alone, to unite Egypt with him 
against Rome. One gntermarriage is not characteristic 
of the policy of an empire. Again, it is said that * the at- 
tempt to cement their strength by intermarriages ' is a 
characteristic of Alexander's successors. These inter- 
marriages belong to the decay of the fourth empire in Da- 
niel, when the iron strength, symbolised in the iron legs 
of the image, was gone, and there had succeeded to it the 

6 Ib. 9. It should be rendered ; And he [i. e. the king of the North] shall 
come against the kingdom of the king of the South, and shall return to his 
own land. 6 10-12. * 13-19. 8 20. 9 21-23. 

10 Dan. xi. 5, 17. ll " Ptolemy Philadelphus, wishing, after many 

years, to end a troublesome struggle, gave his daughter Berenice to Antiochus 
to wife, and. conducted her as far as Pelusium, and gave countless thousands 
of gold and silver under the name of dowry. Whence she was called <f>epvA<popos, 
dowry-bringer." S. Jer. on Dan. xi. 6. 



140 Alexander's successors one kingdom, only as one with 

mixed strength and weakness in the toes, the iron min- 
gled with-the miry clay. But of those two marriages, the 
one took place in the 2nd generation of the Seleucidae; 
the other, in that of Antiochus the Great, who broke the 
strength of the Syrian kingdom against the Romans. 
When then was the time of strength, if this was its decay ? 

The successors of Alexander were not, in any sense, 
one kingdom, except as the fragments of his empire ; as 
the parts are equal to a whole. They had no unity. They 
themselves claimed to hold their kingdoms as his success- 
ors. Four kingdoms could not he one, except as repre- 
senting that one from whom they descended. Daniel too 
leaves the two out of sight altogether, and speaks of those 
only whose history touched the people of God. But these 
were throughout their history in perpetual conflict. 

They were one, douhtless, in the Providence of God. 
It matters little, how much lay in the mind of Alexander, 
whether his Greek cities were to he links of commerce, 
or means of blending East and West into one, or bands 
of his dominions, or centres of civilisation, any or all of 
these. Certainly his enquiry of Aristotle, as to the best 
mode of colonising 1 , shews how deep the plan lay in his 
mind. His instantaneous perception of the value of the 
site of Alexandria, and his choice of a situation whose 
value the circumnavigation of Africa has not lessened, 
and the experience of 2000 years have confirmed, imply no 
ordinary scheme. " He founded," Plutarch says 2 , " above 

1 Aristotle's work was entitled "Alexander, or concerning colonies." Diog. 
Laert. V. 22. Ammonius says, " or what, being asked by Alexander the Mace- 
donian, he wrote concerning the kingdom, and.how colonies should be made." 
Stahr, Arist. ii. 63. Droysen, Hellenism, ii. 589. 

2 Plutarch de fort. Alex. i. 5. Wytt. He relates as facts ; " He taught the 
Hyrcanians to many, and the Arachosii to till the ground, the Sogdiani to che- 
rish, not to slay then- fathers ; the Persians to reverence, not to marry their 
mothers. The Indians (Bactrians and Caucasians) worship Greek gods ; the 
Scythians bury, and do not eat, their dead." "Asia being civilised, Homer was 
then- study, and the sons of Persians, Susians and Gedrosiisang the tragedies 
of Euripides and Sophocles. Myriads received and receive the laws of Alexan- 
der. They would not have been civilised, had they not been subdued, Egypt 
would not have had Alexandria, nor Mesopotamia Seleucia, nor the Sogdians 



him ; to Hellenise Asia, Alexander's central plan. 141 

70 cities among the barbarous people, and sowed Asia 
with Greek troops 8 . w Apart from garrisons, towards 70 
cities, founded by him or by his generals at his command 4 , 
have been traced in Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt, Mesopo- 
tamia, Media, Hyrcania, Parthia, Aria, Margiana, Dran- 
giana, Arachosia, Paropamisus, Bactria, Sogdiana, India 
on the Hydaspes, Acesines, Indus ; in modern terms, in the 
whole of Turkey in Asia, Egypt, all habitable Persia, 
North, East, and South, and beyond it, in Beloochistan, 
the Deccan, Cabool, Afghanistan, the Punjaub, and yet 
Northward, in Khorassan and Khondooz to Bokhara and 
Turkestan. The main characteristic of this colonization 
is the evident purpose to establish Greek cities along all the 
lines of communication by land or water. It is marvellous 
to follow the march of that wonderful genius, and to ob- 
serve him seizing each important spot, alike in Egypt, in 
the long civilised countries of the Euphrates and the Ti- 
gris, and in lands but lately known to European energy 
or curiosity ; conquering, not to desolate but to settle with 
fixed populations. " 5 Media was girt round by Greek 
cities." At the pass of the Caspian Gates, in the rich 
valley of the Herat, at the confluence of the Indus and 
the Chenab, or in the valley of the Jelum, or the mouth 
of the Indus, or on the Persian gulf, Alexander, with in- 
tuitive intelligence, seized the points which became bands 
of the intercourse of nations. " 6 Merv, Herat, Kandahar, 

Prophtliasia, nor India Bucephalia, nor would Caucasus have been encircled by 
Greek cities, whereby savageness was checked and extinguished." 

3 reXetri. The troops unfit for active service, (Arr. iv. 3. fin. 22, 6. Ell.) or 
the Greek mercenaries who so wished. Diod. xvii. 83. (Droysen, Hellen. ii. 614, 
616, 622.) He purposed so to settle in Persia " the Greek mercenaries who 
had served Darius and Satraps." Pirns, i. 25. 5. 

4 Droysen,ii.Anhang. Die Grundungen Alexanders. 587-651. 5 Polyb.x. 27. 
6 Droysen, ii. 649. " The colonies were thickest, when it was the question 

of occupying the road, which leads out of India to the narrow pass of the Gabool, 
and of protecting it, Southward around the Paropamisos, and Northward over 
the height of the Caucasus down to the Oxus. Three lowlands with their dou- 
ble streams lay beneath the towering mountains of Iran. On colonising these 
especially Alexander employed the utmost diligence. The country of the Eu- 
phrates and the Tigris, being so much nearer to Europe, was more accessible 



142 Alexanders plan of blending Greece and Asia 

attest to this day, how surely Alexander chose the most 
important points, while Prbpthasia [it is thought, Furrah] 
protected the connection with the S. W. towards the Ker- 
manian Alexandria [Kerman.] They are the knots in the 
great net of this natural line of intercourse, which inter- 
sect Iran, and, at the same time, in a military aspect, 
the most important points." 

But it would have been little in comparison, to have 
guarded that intercourse by Greek stations. Over and 
above, Greek and Barbarian were blended \ and the Greek 
element, from its greater force of character, would have 
ultimately prevailed, and outwardly leavened the whole. 
This union of Greek and Barbarian in the colonies on 
equal terms, demented by his celebrated intermarriages, 
when above ten thousand Macedonians, Urged by him, 
followed his example in taking Persian wives 2 , prepared 
the way for the predominance of Greek mind, far other- 
wise than a military occupation could have done. The 
same purpose shewed itself in his different blendings 
of choice native and Macedonian troops, both in the pha- 
lanx and in the cavalry 3 , in his proposed education of the 
children of Macedonian soldiers from Persian mothers 4 , 
and in that large plan, found in his papers, " 5 of the joint 
colonisation of cities, and removal of persons from Asia 
to Europe and conversely, in order to bring those greatest 
continents into mutual harmony and the love of kindred 

to colonisation : the king bestowed double pains on the country 1 of the Oxus and 
Jaxartes, the Indus and Hesydrius. [the Sutlej.] " 

1 See ab, p. 141. n. 3. 2 Arr. vii. 4, 5-end. 6. 3. in Phot. cod. 91. 

3 The different measures were ; 1) Training 30,000 youths from the newly 
founded cities, with Macedonian arms and tactics. Diod. xvii. 108. Arr. vii. 6. 
2) The admission of Sogdian, Arachosian, Drangian, Aryan, Parthian, Sacian, 
horsemen, in the ranks of the Companions, and that, so as to form -| of the 
whole, a 5th squadron being added on their accession, not of the Asiatics apart, 
hut Macedonians and Asiatics being blended in each squadron. Arr. ib. 3) In 
the remodelled phalanx, the posts of honour and the Macedonian arms were 
reserved to Macedonians, but, in number, the Persians were 3 to 1 ; the three 
first soldiers, in the file 16 deep, and the last, being Macedonians, the twelve 
intermediate being Persians. Arr. vii. 23. 

4 Arr. vii. 12, 3. being 10,000. Diod. xvii. 110. Diod.xviii. 4. 



followed by his successors. 143 

by intermarriages and intimacies." A grand conception 
of union, to be realised only by Christianity. 

Yet this extension and infusion of Greek intelligence 
and energy is just the one token of unity between his 
kingdom and those of his successors. Seleucus Nicator 
is related to have founded above 60 cities, " along the 
length of his whole empire,' 5 "whence," Appian says 6 , 
"many Greek and Macedonian names of cities still exist 
in Syria and among the Barbarians above it." He speci- 
fies 5 in Parthia, one in India, Scythia, and Armenia. 
This was in our 2nd century. (140, AJD.) The cities 
founded by Alexander's successors have been traced 7 in 
each well-known province of Asia Minor, Bithynia, Pon- 
tus, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Phrygia, Lycaonia, Lydia, 
Pergamus, Troas, Caria, Lycia, Pisidia, Pamphylia, Cili- 
cia j in Syria, Mesopotamia, Babylonia, Susiana ; on the 
Tigris ; in Armenia, Persia, Media, Parthia ; on the Jax- 
artes, the Indus, and even East of the Indus, near the 
Ganges ; in Arabia also, on the Red Sea, in Egypt and 
Cyrene. 

Nor did the followers of Alexander imitate him only 
in colonising. The blending of races was continued ; and 
very remarkably in part, through the position given to 
the Jews on the ground of their faithfulness to their so- 
vereigns. The early Ptolemies and Seleucidee multiplied, 
as they thought, faithful subjects, and prepared a seed- 
plot for the Gospel. We are told expressly that the two 
founders of the two lines, Ptolemy Lagi in Alexandria 8 , 
Seleucus Nicator in the then third 9 city of the known 
world, Antioch, and in the other cities of his vast portion 

6 Syr. 57. * Droysen, Hellen. ii. 651-747. 

. 8 Ptolemy Lag!, " understanding that those from Jerusalem were most reli- 
able as to their oaths and fealty, (from the answer which they gave to the em- 
bassy of Alexander after he had conquered Darius,) having located many of 
them in the garrisons and given them equal rights of citizenship with the Ma- 
cedonians in Alexandria, took an oath of them that they would keep fealty to 
the descendants of him who gave them this charge. And no few of the other 
Jews came of their own accord into Egypt, invited both by the goodness of the 
soil and the liberality of Ptolemy." Jos. Ant. xu. 1. Jos. B. J. iii. 3, 4. 



144 Union of the Jews and Greeks in Egypt, 

of the Empire of Alexander 1 , gave to the Jews equal 
rights with Macedonians. In religion only they were 
Jews ; as members of a polity they had sometimes special 
privileges bearing on their law and religion, else they 
were Alexandrians, Antiochenes, Ephesians 3 . It is stat- 
ed, on the authority of extant documents, that this union 
of races, too (as well as that between the Persian and 
Macedonian,) was begun by Alexander s , carried on by 
his successors. This moreover took place to such extent 

1 "They [the Jews] obtained the honor from the kings of Asia also, having 
served in the army with them. For Seleucus Nicator, in the cities which he 
founded in Asia and in lower Syria, and in the metropolis itself, Antioch, con- 
ferred on them citizenship, and made them rank with the Macedonians and 
Greeks who were settled therein, so that this citizenship remains even now 
also." Ant. xii. 3. 

2 "His [Apion's] marvelling, how, being Jews, they were called Alexandri- 
ans, betrays the same ignorance. For all who are invited into a given colony, 
much as they may differ in race, take their name from its founders. Those of 
us, who dwell at Antioch, are called Antiochenes. For Seleucus, the founder, 
gave them citizenship. And so too in Ephesus, and the rest of Ionia, they bear 
the same name with the natives, the Successors [of Alexander] having given 
it to them." Jos. c. Ap. ii. 4. . 

3 " Alexander gave them [the Jews] a place to dwell in, and they obtained 
equal rank with the' Macedonians. I know not what Apion would have said, 
had they been settled near the Necropolis and not near the Palace, and were 
not their race now too called ' Macedonians.' If then he [Apion] has read the 
Epistles of Alexander the king, and has met with the rescripts of Ptolemy Lagi 
and the kings after him, and has lighted on the column which stands in Alex- 
andria and contains the rights, given by the great Csesar to the Jews ; if, I say, 
he knows these things, and, knowing them, has dared to write the contrary, he 
is unprincipled ; if he knew nothing of them, he is ill-instructed." "Alexan 7 
der collected some of our people there, not for want of such as should colonise 
the city which he founded with great earnestness. But carefully proving all 
as to good faith and probity, he gave this distinction to our people. For he 
honoured our nation, as Hecatseus too says of us, that, for the probity and good 
faith which the Jews evinced towards him, he gave them in addition the terri- 
tory of Samaria, to hold free from tribute. And Ptolemy Lagi too was like- 
minded with Alexander as to those who dwell in Alexandria." Jos. Ib. This 
early equalising of the Jews with Alexandrians is recognised in the edict of 
Claudius ; "Having learnt that the Jews in Alexandria were from the first 
called Alexandrians, having been settled there together with the Alexan- 
drians straightway at the earliest period, and having received from the kings 
equal citizenship, as appeared plain both from their letters and from the or- 
dinances," &c. (in Jos. Ant. xix. 5, 2.) : 



Cyrene and Asia Minor. 145 

that of the population of Egypt consisted of Jews*. 
" 5 Ptolemy Lagi when he wished to have strong hold of 
Cyrene 6 and of the other cities in Libya sent Jews to set- 
tle there." "This people," says Strabo 7 , "hath now 
found its way into every city, and it is not easy to find a 
spot in the world, which hath not received this race, and 
which is not overpowered by them. Many other places 
have imitated Egypt and Cyrene in this too, that they 
support especially bodies of Jews, and are enlarged to- 
gether, using the hereditary laws of the Jews. In Egypt 
at least a settlement has been assigned them apart, and 
great part of Alexandria has been set aside for this nation. 
And they have an Ethnarch of their own, who administers 
the affairs of this nation, hears causes, takes charge of 
contracts and ordinances, as if he were the ruler of an in- 
dependent polity. In Egypt then the nation gained great 
power." Nor was this intermingling only in large places. 
Josephus 8 mentions decrees in favor of Jews, not only at 
Ephesus, Laodicea, Miletus, Pergamus, Philadelphia, but 
in Delos 9 also. 

In this case Greece was the recipient. Actively, it 
concentrated its energy of colonisation chiefly on the 
" 10 lands around or within the Tigris and Euphrates;" 
" 40 new cities can still be counted in Upper Syria be- 
tween Mount Taurus, Lebanon, and the Euphrates." And 
these were undoubtedly only a portion 11 . The Ptolemies 
" 12 colonised southward on the coast of Abyssinia, and that 

4 " The Governor, [Flaccus,] knowing 1 that the city and all Egypt have two 
sorts of inhabitants, us and these, and that there are not fewer than 1,000,000 
Jews dwelling in Alexandria and the country from the steep slope towards 
Libya to the confines of ^Ethiopia," &c. Philo, Cont. Place, ii. 533. Mang. Dio- 
dorus sets the whole population at 3,000,000 only. See on Joel iii. 19. p. 143. 

5 Jos. c. Ap. ii. 4. 6 " In the city of the Cyrenians there were four 
[classes ;] the citizens ; the agriculturists ; the resident aliens ; and fourthly the 
Jews." Strabo in Jos. Ant. xiv. 7. 2. 7 1. c. 8 Ant. xiv. 10. 

Ib. 8. and 14. 10 Droys. Hell. ii. 748, 

11 fhe traditions still extant in no way inform us of the whole extent of 
Greek colonies, founded in the first century especially of Hellenism. How 
many cities do we find only named once ; of how many is the notice only ac- 
cidental." Id. ib. B Ib. 748-51. 

L 



146 Lasting influence of Alexander and his successors. 

so solidly, that, far into Christian times, the Greek main- 
tained itself together with the native element, rivalling 
too the advancing Arab," 

In both Asia and Egypt, Alexander laid the founda- 
tions ; in hoth his successors huilt on, towards an end in 
God's Providence which they knew not. But even man's 
" rough-hewing his ends," which God so " shaped," was 
no chance work. Letters were the hereditary province 
of even degenerate Ptolemies. The Septuagint, the dia- 
lect which, uniting the depth of Hebrew with the intel- 
lectual precision of the Greek language, was to be the 
vehicle of the revelation of the Gospel, the Greek of 
Alexandria modified by the Old Testament, were produc- 
tions of the peculiar character of the third Empire in 
Alexander and his successors. Alexandria and Antioch, 
early conquests of Christianity, chief sees and schools 
of thought, were their joint production. Nisibis and 
Edessa, where Eastern tone of thought prevailed, the 
great schools of the Christian East l , had felt the intel- 
lectual influence of the Greek mind. This and much 
more, which was in the purpose of God, was first deve- 
loped in distant centuries ; but it illustrates the oneness 
of the empire of Alexander and his successors, that 
these worked out, in an inferior degree, yet remark- 
ably, the characteristic conception of the great intel- 
lectual conqueror, the largest-minded probably, whom the 
earth ever saw. 

These colonisations were the great and lasting influ- 
ence of the Greek empire. They involved, of necessity, 
a mixture of races, in which the energy of Greek charac- 
ter and mind must needs predominate over the weaker 
Persian. Its influence continued. " 3 It was no new 
idea in Alexander, to complete the military occupation 
of the subject countries through colonies ; but the cha- 
racter of his foundations shews, that military objects were 
by no means his sole motives. His immediate and more 

1 See Assem. de Scriptt. Syr. in Bibl. Or. T. i. prol. and 270, 204, 351. n. 2. 
353. 2 Droysen, Gesch. d. Hell. ii. 589. 



Tenfold division in 4th Empire, not in Alexanders. 147 

distant successors 3 carried on his work more or less in Ms 
spirit ; the result, in most countries, was the lasting foun- 
dation of Hellenism. Even the barbarian occupations 
of the Parthians or Sacse could not at once extinguish it. 
The Arsacidse, to the latest times, call themselves on their 
coins, ' 4 friends of Greece :.' the Parthians despised king 
Vonones, because he had estranged himself from Persian 
ways, and was encircled by Greeks 5 . Seneca still says 6 , 
( What mean Greek cities in the midst of barbarian coun- 
tries ? what means the language of Macedonians among 
Indians and Persians?' Even the Barbarians, who pe- 
netrated to India, had, as it seems, for above a century, 
Greek letters and words on their coins. In truth, the 
language in which the Apostles preached was a language 
of the world." 

There is no tenable way, then, in which the Empires of 
Alexander and his successors, either together or apart, 
can be made into the fourth Empire. Not together ; for, 
counted together, they make the 3rd not the 4th Empire ; 
not Alexander's successors alone, both because they are, 
in no sense, by themselves one empire ; and the theory 
patently contradicts the symbol in both visions, which it 
ought to explain. There is no possible explanation more- 
over, either way, of the tenfold division of the fourth em- 
pire, expressed alike in the toes of the image and the horns 
of the fourth beast, nor any solution, how, if the little 
horn(the llth) were Antiochus Epiphanes, he overthrew 
three of those ten. The theory fails doubly in that which 
is to be its mainstay. The little horn of the 7th chapter 
is to be Antiochus Epiphanes ; in truth, lest there should 
be prophecy ; ostensibly, because it is so in the 8th. But 
granted to these interpreters, for the time, all which they 
ask; that the ten horns are individual kings, not kingdoms; 
supposing too, for the time, (what contradicts the text,) 
that 7 out of the ten kings need not be contemporaneous 
with the 1 1th who is to overthrow three of them ; still 

3 Diadochol and Epigonoi, see Diod. L 3. Strabo xv. end. 4 Philhellenes. 
6 Tac. Ann. ii. 2. 6 Consol. ad Helvid. 6. T. iii. 363. ed. Frisk. 

L2 



148 Attempts to make out ten kings 

the interpreters cannot make out either the ten kings or 
the three, specified in the vision. Porphyry's expedient 
of making up ten kings out of those in any kingdom " who 
were most cruel 1 " [i.e. to Israel] failed both in princi- 
ple and in fact. In principle, because there is no indica- 
tion of this limitation in Daniel ; in fact, because no such 
ten kings could be found. It is doubtful whether Por- 
phyry specified any. Later writers have enumerated the 
10 any how 2 ; some kings, with whom Israel was in no 
way concerned ; some who were its benefactors 3 ; three, 

1 "From Alexander to Antiochus he [Porphyry] enumerates ten kings who 
were most cruel ; and these kings he sets down, not of one kingdom, e. g. of 
Macedonia, Syria, Asia, Egypt, but he makes a succession of kings out of dif- 
ferent kingdoms, in order that what is written of a mouth speaking great 
tilings may be understood, not of Antichrist but of Antiochus." S. Jerome on 
Dan. vii. 7. 

2 Junius, Piscator, Polanus, Grotius and Colh'ns (following Grotius) did not 
trouble themselves to make out more than 10, counting Antiochus Epiphanes 
twice, as the last of the ten horns, and as the " other little horn," which " came 
up among them :" (contrary to language and sense.) Junius, Piscator, Po- 
lanus, count them, Seleucus Nicator, Antiochus Soter, Ant. Theos, Sel. Cal- 
linicus, Ptolemy Euergetes, Sel. Ceraunus, Ant. Magnus, Ptol. Philopator, 
Seleucus Philopator, Ant. Epiphanes. Grotius, out of 14 or 15 kings alluded 
to in ch. xi, selected 9, adding an apocryphal king, Ptolemy Eupator. The real 
kings were, Ptolemy Lagi, Sel. Nicator, Ptol. Euergetes, Sel. Callinicus, Anti- 
ochus M., Ptol. Philopator, Ptol. Epiphanes, Sel. Philopator, Ant. Epiphanes. 
Collins adopted this. (Scheme of Lit. Proph. p. 162.) Rosenmuller (or whomever 
he followed) adopted a third enumeration, adding Antigonus and Demetrius 
Poliorcetes before the division of the four kingdoms, taking 6 Ptolemies, Lagi, 
Philadelphus, Euergetes I., Philopator, Epiphanes, Philometor, and the two last 
of the Syrian line before Epiphanes, viz. his father and brother. Since there 
were eight Seleucidae, (including Ant. Epiph.) and seven Ptolemies down to 
this date, 1365 different combinations of 11 might be made out of these 15, 
each as good as the other, i. e. all equally bad, since there is no ground for 
selecting one rather than another. There would be a fixed principle in select- ' 
ing either house, the Ptolemies or the Seleucidae ; but either house furnishes 
less than ten, both together more than ten. If any begin earlier with Rosen- 
muller, the possible changes would be still more absurdly manifold. Yet Hit- 
zig begins with Alexander, and is followed by Hilgenfeld, 1. c. 

3 1) Seleucus Nicator, the author of privileges to the Jews which lasted till 
the times of Josephus. (Jos. Ant. xii. 3.) 2) Ptolemy Lagi, who took Jerusa- 
lem indeed by fraud, yet bestowed afterwards such privileges on the Jews, 
ranking them with Macedonians, that many Jews migrated into Egypt. (Ib. 
c.l.) 3) Ptolemy Philadelphus. (Ib. c. 2.) 4) Ptolemy Euergetes. (Jos. c. Ap. 
H. 5.) 5) Ptolemy Philometor and Cleopatra. 6) Antiochus the Great. (Ant. 



of Alexander's successors, and failure. 149 

who began with harshness and repented 4 . But if the ten 
horns were to represent kings at all, there must plainly 
be some unity, some common ground, for which they were 
to be selected out of the many successors of Alexander 
who were called kings ; some one relation to the fourth 
empire as a whole. Of late, then, they have been sought 
in the Syrian kingdom, to which Antiochus Epiphanes*be- 
longed. These however were not 10, but 7 5 . Nor were 
there any three of them, nor indeed any three at all, whom 
Antiochus Epiphanes overthrew. And yet there have 
been no lack of guesses, who might be meant by those 
three, who, on the unbelieving hypothesis, were contem- 
porary with the writer, and whose signal fall he is to have 
witnessed. Three kings of Syria have been chosen, three 
of Egypt, the assassin of Seleucus Philopator, and a king 
of Armenia 6 . Of these, the Ptolemies would be excluded 
by the fact, that the three kings are of the number of the 
10, and that it is senseless to bring the Ptolemies into the 

xii. 3.) And, generally, Josephus appeals to, as exstant and accessible in his time, 
"rescripts of the king's of Egypt after Ptolemy Lagi." (c. Ap. ii. 4.) 7) Even 
Seleucus Philopator, for a tune at least, bore the expenses of the sacrifices at 
Jerusalem. (2 Mace. iii. 3.) 

4 Ptolemy Lagi, (Ant. xii. 1.) Antiochus M., and even Ptolemy Philopator,* 
(3 Mace.) or Physcon, according to the Latin of Jos. c. Ap. ii. 5. 

5 1) Seleucus Nicator, 2) Antiochus Soter, 3) Ant. Theos, 4) Seleucus Cal- 
inicus, 5) Sel. Ceraunus, 6) Antiochus the Great, (whom Appian calls "6th 
from Seleucus, who, after Alexander, reigned over Asia' about the Euphrates," 
'Syr. init.) 7) Seleucus Philopator. 

6 Artaxias was chosen by Porphyry, Harenberg, Rosenmuller, Herzfeld. 
(Gesch. d. V. Isr. i. 424.) 

Antiochus (lie Great, by Junius, Polanus, Piscator. 

Seleucus Philopator, by Junius, Polanus, Piscator, Broughton, (Works, 
p. 190.) Calmet, 1'Empereur, Grotius, (Collins) Hitzig. 

Heliodorus, by Calmet, Harenb., Bertholdt, Maurer, Hitzig, Leng. Hilgen- 
feld; (Apok. p. 26.) "will do at apinch,"("passtauchnochzur noth.") Herzf. 

Demetrius, by Brought. 1' Emp. Calm. Grot. Berth. Maur. Hitz. Leng. 
Hilg. ; "will not do in any case." Herzf. 

Ptolemy Philopator, by Junius, Polanus, Piscator, I'Emp. Grot. 

Ptolemy Philometor, by Porph. Brought. Harenb. Berth. Ros. Maur. 
Leng. Hilg. ; " will do, but is one of the ' former horns,' only if Ptolemies be- 
longed to them." Herzf. 

Ptolemy Physcon, by Porphyry, Rosenmuller, 



150 Failure to make out 3 kings 

line of Syrian kings 1 . One wonders too, what place 
1) Artaxias, the first of his line, could have here, who in 
no way belonged to the successors of Alexander. Once a 
general, then a Satrap under Antiochus, then, by aid of 
the Romans, an independent king 2 , he was defeated and 

perhaps taken 3 by Antiochus, and had to fulfil certain 

<i 

1 In order to connect Ptolemy Philometor with Syria, Bertholdt, Lengerke, 
'Davidson (Home, Introd. ii. 909.) have a fable, that " his mother and guardian 
Cleopatra wished to place him on the throne of Syria." Of this there is not 
a vestige in history. On the contrary, Cleopatra maintained friendly rela- 
tions with her brother Ant. Epiphanes until her death. Even then his guar- 
dians, Eulseus an eunuch, and Lenseus a Ceele-Syrian slave, declared war, not 
for Syria, but for the old cause of strife, Cselesyria. (Diodorus in Mai Scriptt. 
Vett. p. 75. -S. Jerome on Dan. xi.22. Polyb. xxviii. 19.) A Syrian, perhaps 
a Caele-Syrian, party held aloof from Epiphanes at first, but even they took no 
active measures. They were Syrians, whom Antiochus won by pretending to 
pardon. S. Jerome says, " Antiochus Epiphanes, to whom the dignity of king 
was not at first given by those who in Syria favoured Ptolemy ; but afterwards, 
by simulating clemency, he obtained the kingdom of Syria." Bertholdt argues 
that " since Philometor obtained the kingdom of Syria at the end, (1 Mace. 
xi. 13. Polyb. xl. 12.) there is no doubt that his mother destined him for it at 
the beginning." In 1 Mace, it is only said, " at Antioch, he set two crowns 
upon his head, the crown of Asia and of Egypt." Josephus supplies the fact, 
that he did this unwillingly, and proceeded, both out of natural moderation 
and for fear of the Romans, to decline the kingdom of Syria, and persuaded 
them to accept Demetrius Nicator, the great nephew of Epiphanes. (Ant. 13. 
4. 7.) This account of his unambitious mild temperament coincides with all 
his conduct to his brother, and the judgment of Polybhis. (Hist, fin.) Diodorus 
moreover, says that he " did not desire the kingdom, but wished to acquire 
Ccele Syria, and agreed with Demetrius upon common action, that Ptolemy 
should have Ccele Syria as his own, and Demetrius his paternal kingdom." 
in Miiller, Fragm. Hist. ii. p. xvi. 

2 Strabo's account is, " The Persians and Macedonians gained possession of 
Armenia ; then those who held Syria and Media ; lastly Orontes, descended 
from Hydarnes, one of the 7 Persians, was its viceroy; then it was divided in 
two by the generals of Antiochus "the Great, who warred with the Romans, 
Artaxias and Zariadris ; and these ruled it, the king entrusting them: when 
he was defeated, they, joining themselves to the Romans, were made inde- 
pendent, and were entitled kings." (xi. 14, 15. p. 532. Cas.) 

3 App. Syr. 45, 6. 66. Diodorus says nothing of his capture. C. Miiller doubts 
Appian's accuracy in this. S. Jerome says, " We know that Antiochus fought 
against Artaxias, but that he [Artaxias] continued in his ancient kingdom." 
Appian's statement, as a proof of the prowess of Antiochus, that he took Ar- 
taxias, even if true, implies that Artaxias was not slain, and, If so, his restora- 
tion, on the sudden death of Antiochus and the confusion consequent on it, 
would have followed as a matter of course. 



who should be uprooted. 151 

conditions imposed upon him 4 . This, of course, implies 
that he was set at liberty, else he could not have exe- 
cuted them 5 he was not uprooted, for he transmitted his 
throne to his own descendants 5 . Not less marvellous are 
the rest, whether Ptolemies or Seleucidee. 2) Antiochus 
the Great, father of Epiphanes, perished in the attempt 
to plunder a Persian temple, while Epiphanes was a hos- 
tage at Rome. 3) Seleucus Philopator was poisoned by 
Heliodorus his treasurer, who wished to seize the crown 
for himself, while Antiochus was returning from Rome, 
yet not further than Athens 6 . 4) Heliodorus, while "forc- 
ing his way to the throne 7 ," (not as yet reigning) was 
"cast out," not by Epiphanes, but by Attains and Eumenes, 
who set Epiphanes on the throne, "courting his favor 35 
against the Romans. 5) Demetrius was sent as a hostage 
to Rome by Seleucus Philopator, his father, to replace Epi- 
phanes 8 ; he was not dethroned by Epiphanes, but lived 
to succeed him, murdering his son Antiochus Eupator 9 . 
6) Ptolemy Philopator defeated the father of Epiphanes, 
and died while Epiphanes was yet a boy 10 . 7) Ptolemy 
Philometor. His guardians were defeated by his uncle 

4 [Antiochus] "having conquered him, compelled Mm to do what was enjoin- 
ed." Diod. Fragm. in Muller, Fragm. Hist. Gr. ii. p. 10. The fragment comes 
in order, after the mention of the joint reign of the two Ptolemies, Philometor 
and Physcon, B.C. 170-165, and so at the end, not (as Herzfeld) at the be- 
ginning of his reign. 

5 Tigranes, (the son-in-law of Mithridates) was his descendant. (Strabo 
ib.) His line continued until about A. D. 20-30. 

6 App. Syr. 45. Bertholdt and Lengerke say that Porphyry ascribed the 
murder of his brother to Epiphanes ; Porphyry says nothing of AntiochusEp. 
but that " Ptolemy Epiphanes was plotting [war, not assassination] against 
Seleucus, (quod Seleuco sit molitus insidias) and therefore was himself poisoned 
by his captains ;" on occasion of a speech, implying that they were his "walk- 
ing treasure," to defray the expenses of the war. Diod. in Mai Scriptt. Vett. 
ii. 71. S. Jerome. ? is -rty kpxhv Pia&nevov. App. Ib. 

8 " Seleucus freed his brother Antiochus from being hostage to the Roman's, 
giving in exchange his own son Demetrius." App. Ib. The change of host- 
ages, after a time, was part of the treaty with Rome. 9 App. Syr. 47. 

10 Ptolemy died B.C. 205. But the eldest son of Antiochus was born B.C. 
221. (See Clinton, Fasti H. ii. 316. n. s.) Epiphanes, who was his 5th son, 
could not have been born before B.C. 217. or have been above 12 at the death 
of Ptolemy. 



152 Completeness of failure to make out the 3 kings. 

Epiphanes ; but it was the policy of Epiphanes to reign, 
if he could, over Egypt through his nephew, Philometor. 
He kept him therefore prisoner for a short time, " under 
the guise of friendship y " pretending to provide for the 
boy's interests V The Alexandrians, however, at once 
made his brother king, and expelled Antiochus. '^Epi- 
phanes profited nothing, for he could not hold the king- 
dom, being rejected by the soldiers of Ptolemy, who re- 
stored Philometor to liberty." A boy-king, who falls into 
an uncle's hands, is treated by him with show of friendship, 
and is restored at once, within the year, by his own peo- 
ple, is neither subdued nor uprooted. All know how Po- 
pilius protected Egypt against Epiphanes. Philometor 
survived Antiochus 18 years ; his brother arid successor, 
8) Euergetes II. or Physcon, survived him 47 years. In- 
stead of being uprooted by him, even Philometor lived to 
see the line of Epiphanes extinct and his brother's grand- 
son dependent upon him for restoration to the throne of 
Syria, and to restore him. 

The words of the vision are, before whom three of .the 
first horns were plucked up by the roots. In the explana- 
tion it is said, he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall 
subdue three kings. Antiochus, degraded as he was by 
his sensuality, had no ordinary talents 4 . He was a tho- 
rough dissembler, able to hide his purpose and skilful to 

1 Parcens puero et amicitiam simulans. S. Jer. on Dan. xi. 21. 

2 Pueri rebus se providere simulans. Ib. "He, [Antiochus] cutting short the 
[Rhodian] ambassador, while yet speaking, said* ' there was no need of many 
words ;for the kingdom did belong to the elder Ptolemy; that he had more- 
over long been reconciled with him ; that they were Mends ; and now, if those 
in the city [Alexandria] wished to bring him back, he, Antiochus, was no ob- 
stacle,' And so he did." Polyb. xxviii. end. 3 S. Jer. xi. 27. from Porph. 
" When Antiochus had warred against Egypt and taken his crown, the Alex- 
andrians committed affairs to the younger, and, having chased Antiochus, they 
rescued Philometor, and it was called the 12th year of Philometor, the first of 
Euergetes." Porph. in Bus. Ann. i. 239. see further Polyb. xxvii. 17. xxviii. 
1. 16. 17. esp. 19. xxix. 8-11. Jos. Ant. xii. 5. 2. Diod. 1. c. Prideaux, Conn. 
B. 3. A. 173, 171. 109, 8. and Clinton, Fasti Hell. iii. 318-21. 386-8. 

4 " He was both energetic (vpaKriic6s') and worthy of the name of king, save 
the stratagems as to Pelusium." (Polyb. xxvii. end.) "Antiochus, who held 



New theory and its failure. 153 

execute it ; he was engaged, throughout his reign, in war 
and was successful; and yet, as a note against these mis- 
interpretations, he uprooted no one king. 

Schemes, so various and so contradictory, could not 
leave an easy conscience. So Rationalism, like a restless 
sleeper, turned round on the other side, and took, so far, 
the true interpretation, that the ten horns were, not kings 
hut kingdoms, and that three of those ten were over- 
thrown. "I agree," Bleek said" 5 , "with Auberlen, that the 
ten horns of the fourth Empire cannot be meant of ten 
successive Syrian kings, (as Bertholdt, v. Lengerke, Mau- 
rer, Hitzig, Delitzsch, think) nor of kings, some Syrian 
some Egyptian, (asRosenmiiller, &c. and Porphyry of old) 
but rather of the single portions into which the kingdom 
was divided. The mention of the little horn, as arising 
amidst the ten horns, constrains us to conceive of ten 
kings, or rather kingdoms, existing contemporaneously, 
arising out of the fourth kingdom. I will not deny that 
this occasions a degree of difficulty as to the reference to 
the successors of Alexander, in that ch. 8. speaks of four 
monarchies as arising out of that of Alexander after his 
death. However, the portions ofhis kingdom, which were 
formed into independent kingdoms, may have been count- 
ed in different ways, and so, as ten, according to the ge- 
. ixerals, who, in the partition 323, B. C., obtained the chief 

that acquisition by war was the strongest and noblest title." (Id. xxxvii, 1.) 
" He governed Syria and the neighbouring nations with vigour, having Ti- 
marchus as Satrap in Babylon he warred against Artaxias, king of Armenia 
and, having taken him, died, leaving a nine-years-old boy, Antiochus, to whom 
the Syrians gave the name Eupator, on account of his father's valour. The 
senate was pleased, that Antiochus shewed himself brave in a little space, and 
speedily died," (App. Syr. 45. 6.) Of his dissimulation Polybius gives a vivid 
picture, after the decisive act of Popilius. " The games just over, Tiberius 
[Gracchus] came as embassador, in truth to see how things lay. Hun Antio- 
ehus received so dextrously and friendlily, that Tiberius could not suspect any 
designs, or any appearance of soreness on account of what had happened at 
Alexandria, but even condemned those who said aught of the kind : and this 
on the ground of the exceeding courtesy of his reception. For besides other 
acts, he gave up his palace, nay almost his crown, to the embassadors, whereas 
inwardly he was most hostilely disposed to the Romans." xxxi. 5. 
5 Jahrb. f, Deutsclj. Theol. v. p. 60, 1. 



154 Assumed division of Alexander's 

provinces.'* So then he selected ten out of the Satrapies 
allotted to Alexander's officers. 

This abandonment of ground, taken up by former im- 
pugners of the proph.ecy, is a confession of its untena- 
bleness. But the new position is as patently untenable 
as the old. For 1) the division B. C. 323, modified B. C. 
321, was not of kingdoms at all, but of satrapies in and 
under a nominal kingdom. The memory of Alexander 
was still respected. His weak brother Aridaeus was made 
king, " : on condition that the Alexander, whom Roxana 
was about to bear of Alexander, should, when born, reign 
with him, which also took place as soon as the boy saw 
the light." Perdiccas was made guardian ; the Satraps 
were appointed by him, under the crown, just as there had 
been Satraps under Alexander himself 2 . The object of 
the appointments was, not to increase but to lessen the 
power of those appointed, removing them to a safe dis- 
tance 3 , and separating them. Some of the more distant 
satrapies were continued to the self-same persons. " 4 No 
one at this moment talked of dividing the empire. Per- 
diccas, profiting by the weakness of Aridaeus, had deter- 
mined to leave to him nothing more than the imperial 
name, and to engross for himself the real authority. Still, 
however, in his disputes with the other chiefs, he repre- 
sented the imperial family and the integrity of the empire, 
contending against severalty and local independence." 
So again at the re-arrangement, B.C. 321, at Triparadisus 
in Syria. It was still done in the names of the kings. 
" 5 Antipater made a second distribution of the Satrapies 
of the empire, somewhat modified, but coinciding in the 
main with that which had been drawn up shortly after the 
death of Alexander." Perdiccas, Antipater, Polysper- 
chon, were successively guardians of the weak or infant 
representatives of Alexander. They held nominally the 

1 Arrian,in Phot. cod. 92. p. 69. Bek. Dexippus, in Phot. cod. 82. p. 64. 

2 See Grote, Greece, xii. 321-3. 3 "He proclaimed as Satraps those whom 
he suspected." Arr. 1. c. * Grote, xii. 431. 6 Ib. p. 454, 5. 



kingdom into ten, patently untrue. 155 

one empire, until the murder of AlexanderJEgus, B.C. 310. 
The remaining years until the battle of Issus, B.C. 301, 
were spent in a struggle, whether any general of Alexan- 
der should succeed to his universal empire. The strug- 
gle was not hetween satrapies but between talented ge- 
nerals. 

2) Even of these satrapies there was no division into ten. 
Justin, representing prse- Christian authority 6 , mentions 
twenty eight 7 j all, who speak of that division, agree in the 
great outlines. 

6 Trogus Pompeius was about 20, B. C. (see Smith, Biogr. Diet. v. Justinus.) 
Diodorus probably soon after B. C. 8. (see Ib. v. Diodorus.) 

7 The distribution of the Satrapies, according to Justin, (xiii. 4.) Diodorus, 
(xriii. 3, 4.) Arrian, (in Phot. Cod. 92. p. 69. Bek.) Q. Cwrtius,(x. 30. end of 
his work,) Dexippus, (in Phot. cod. 82. p. 64. who, Photius says, here as else- 
where mostly agrees with Arrian,) was, as follows, 

1 Macedonia and Greece, Antipater. (Justin.) T/ie parts beyond Thrace, to 
the Iltyrians, Triballi and Agriani, Macedonia, Epirus, and all the Greeks. 
Craterus and Antipater. (Arrian.) 

2 Egypt, part of Africa and of Arabia; (J. Diod.) Egypt and Libya and 
parts of Arabia, bordering on Egypt ; (Arr.) Egypt and the nations of Africa 
in its domain; (Curt.) Egypt and Libya and the parts beyond, bordering on 
Egypt; (Dex.) Ptolemy Lagi. all. 

3 Syria, Laomedon. J. Di. A. De. with Phrenicia, C. 

4 Cilicia, Philotas. all. 

4 Illyrii, Pliilo. J. 

5 Media greater, Atropatus. J. Di. Media, Python. Di. A. C. De. 

6 Media lesser, father in law of Perdiccas. J. 

7 Susiana, Scynus. J. 

8 Phrygia greater, Antigonus. J. ; with 9, Di. A. C. De. 

9 Syria and Pamphylia, Nearchus. J. 

10 Caria, Cassander, J. A. C. Asandros. Di. De. 

11 Lydia, Menander, J. A. C. De. Meleager. Di. 

12 Phrygia lesser (on the Hellespont, Di. A. C. De.) Leonatus. al)S 

13 Thrace and countries on Euxine, Lysimachus. J. Di. A. 

14 Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, (J.) and all the adjoining countries (Di.) 
and all bordering on the Euxine to Trapemus, (A. De.) and to subdue all to 
Trapenfus, (C) Eumenes. all. 

15, 16, 17. Bactria the farther, and countries of India, their former prefects 
retained. J. 

15 Paropamisii and borders of Mount Caucasus, [Indian,] Oxyartes (king of 
Bactria Di.) J. Di. De. 

16 Lands between Hydaspes and Indus, Taxiles. J. Poms. De. 

17 The rest of India, his own kingdom, Taxiles. De. Porus. Di. 

18 Colonies founded among Indi, Pithon. J. De. 



156 Assumed division of Alexander's empire 

3) In the arbitrary selection of ten, not the " chief pro- 
vinces " but chief individuals of Alexander's generals have 
been chosen. Of the countries which Alexander ruled, 
and which were held by Satraps in that first distribution, 
this selection of ten includes Macedonia, Greece, Thrace, 
lesser Phrygia on the Hellespont, Greater Phrygia (and 
as some say, Pamphylia and Syria) Caria, Lydia, Cappa- 
docia, Paphlagonia, Syria, Palestine, Media, Egypt. It 
omits, any how, the Eastern portion of the Empire, Meso- 
potamia, Babylonia, Persia, Susiana, Parthia, Sogdiana, 
Carmania, Hyrcania, Aria, Drangiana, Arachosia, Ged- 
rosia, Bactria, Paropamisus, and the countries under 
the Caucasus, India; and even Cilicia, perhaps Illyria; 
held, as these were, under 15 or 16 Satraps. Yet of these, 
Babylonia was the centre, whence the kingdom of the 
Seleucidae took its rise. 

In utter hopelessness then, one of the last of these cri- 
tics declares " ten " to be a " T round number " " for the 
many larger and lesser kingdoms which were formed out 
of what Alexander left behind him." Only, no such king- 
doms were formed ; and ten kingdoms would be a strange 
"round number" for twenty eight satrapies. On this 
theory Daniel, when he speaks of " four kingdoms " into 
which Alexander's empire was to be divided, is to mean 
what he says, the "four kingdoms " of his successors ; but 

19 Aracliosii and Gedrosi, Sibyrtius. J. Di. De. 

20 Drancce and Arians, Stasanor. J. Di. De. 

21 Bactrlans, Amyntas. J. 

22 Sogdiani, Philip. J. De. with 23 Di. Dexippus, (in Photius' text,) assigns 
them a 2nd time, to Scopas. 

23 Partitions, Stagnor, J. 

24 Hyrcanians, Phrataphernes, J. together with 26, Di. Radaphernes. De. 

25 Carmanians, Tleptolemus, J. Tlepolemus, Di. Neoptolemus. De. 

26 Pei'sians, Peucestes. J. Di. De. 

27 Babylonia, Archon, J. Di. Seleucus. De. 

28 Mesopotamia, Arcesilaus, J. Di. Archelaus. De. 

" Many also remained undistributed [i. e. to Greek Generals] under their 
native rulers, as they were appointed hy Alexander." A. " Those who were 
over India, the Bactri, and Sogdiani, and the other inhabitants either of the 
Ocean or Red Sea, were to retain the right of rule in the bounds which each 
had." C. i Herzfeld, Gesch. Isr. i. 425. 



into ten kingdoms contradicts Daniel and history. 157 

when he speaks of the "ten kingdoms" of the 4th empire, 
he is to mean, not "ten kingdoms" but, 28 Satrapies; and 
when he says, that three of the ten kingdoms are to be up- 
rooted, he is to mean, not kingdoms or satrapies, but three 
kings 2 . As to these three kings, who are to have been 
uprooted by Antiochus, the later rationalist criticism has 
concentrated itself upon four, out of which to select them, 
although not more than three persons are found to agree 
as to the same three. They are, Seleucus Philopator, 
poisoned while Antiochus was returning from Rome; 
Heliodorus, who never reigned ; Demetrius, who was ne- 
ver dispossessed, but who did reign afterwards ; and Pto- 
lemy Philometor, who never ceased to reign and who 
survived Antiochus and his house. And this is to be 
consistent harmonious literal interpretation of Holy 
Scripture ! Such interpreters can hardly believe them- 
selves. 

The negative evidence then, that no scheme can be 
made out, whereby the four Empires, pourtrayed to Da- 
niel, can be brought within the limits of the times before 
Antiochus Epiphanes, coincides with the previous direct 
evidence that the fourth empire is the Roman. For the 

2 Herzfeld, i. 424. Bleek, (p. 68. note) yet more marvellously, makes the "lit- 
tle horn" to be at once Seleucus Nicator, the most powerful of Alexander's ge- 
nerals and the founder of the kingdom of the Seleucidse ; " and also Antiochus 
Epiphanes who, according to the horizon of the vision and of the book gene- 
rally, appears as the last ruler of the Seleucidae." And yet, since Bleek's Da- 
niel was to have survived Epiph., he would have lived under his son Eupator at 
least. The " horizon of prophecy" might, of course, be at any distance, with- 
out implying that such was the end of the Empire, any more than the visible ho- 
rizon is of the world. It is the utmost point of vision, given supernaturally to 
the prophet. But it is absurd to represent a contemporary as speaking of one 
as the last of his line, of whom he knew, that he was not the last of his line. 
Bleek also maintained, that the little horn of ch. 8. and ch. 7- was to he the 
same, and yet he was to be two individuals, separated by 105 years, one of whom 
was to overthrow three kingdoms (which he did not,) and the rest of the cha- 
racter was to be filled up by the other. And the three horns, which the " little 
horn" uprooted at the last, are to be Antigonus, (whom Nicator defeated, not 
alone, but in alliance with Ptolemy Lagi and Lysimachus,) and then Ptolemy 
and Lysimachus, the Diadochi, with whom he united in parting Alexander's 
empire. Ptolemy restored Seleucus to his satrapy, but was never even at war 
with him, and survived him. 



158 Roman Empire could not be foreseen even so 

Roman was the next world-empire which succeeded the 
Greek in Alexander and his successors. 

Men will hardly turn round and say, 'that, in the times 
of Antiochus Epiphanes, it could have been foreseen that 
the Roman commonwealth, with its annually changing 
Consuls, would become a kingdom, and that, a kingdom 
of the world. Men's consciences will surely hardly allow 
them. All these various strivings by Porphyry and his 
recent followers, to make the four empires end with Alex- 
ander's successors, bear witness to their conviction, that 
it was beyond human sagacity, within any time which 
could be assigned to the book of Daniel, to predict the 
Roman Empire. Else they would not have invented so 
many farfetched and contradictory ways of excluding it. 

But look at its state, 164, B.C. the year when Antio- 
chus Epiphanes died. A generation only (37 years) had 
passed since the close of the 2nd Punic war, when the 
war had been carried to its own gates ; Carthage, its ri- 
val, still stood over against it. It was felt by Romans to 
be a formidable foe. Witness the "delenda est Carthago," 
and the unscrupulous policy adopted in encouraging the 
aggressions of Masinissa. Enriched by the commerce 
of the West, Carthage was recovering its resources, 
and fell through its intestine divisions. Egypt and Antio- 
chus had lately mustered powerful armies : Perseus, king 
of Macedonia, had been but recently defeated, and might 
have repelled the Romans, but for his timidity and avarice. 
They had defeated Antiochus the Great, and, by their 
enormous fine for the expenses of the war, had crippled 
him. But, true to their policy of dividing and conquer- 
ing, supporting the weak whom they feared not against 
the strong whom they feared, they had diminished the 
empires, which were their rivals, by giving a portion of 
their possessions to the weaker, to be taken at their own 
will hereafter. Who should foresee that all these nations 
should remain blinded by their avarice ; that common 
fear should never bind them in one ; that they should never 
see, until their own turn came, that Rome used her in- 



late as the date of people's Pseudo-Daniel, 174, JS.C. 159 

struments successively, and flung each aside, and found 
some excuse of quarrel against each, as soon as she had 
gained her end ? The absence of any such fear on any 
side shews how little human wisdom could then foresee 
the world-empire, which as yet existed only in the embryo; 
and which the nations, whom Rome in the end subdued, 
were, in God's Providence, the unwilling, unconscious, 
blinded, instruments of forming. To us it seems incon- 
ceivable that no experience should have opened men's 
eyes, until it was too late. Each helped in turn to roll 
round the wheel, which crushed himself. 

Rome had at that time (B. C. 164.) no territory East 
or, except Sicily, South of Italy. Masinissa held the 
throne of Numidia ; Rome had not a foot of ground in 
Africa. In Spain, she only held so much as had before 
been in the power of Carthage, the Western and Southern 
Provinces, now Catalonia, Valencia, Murcia, Andalusia, 
Grenada: two centuries almost elapsed before it was 
finally reduced. Gaul and Germany were almost un- 
known countries. Even Cis- Alpine Gaul had not been 
formally made a Roman Province ; Venetia was friendly ; 
Carniola unsubdued; Istria recently subdued; (B. C. 177.) 
Illyricum had been divided into three, yet left nominally 
free. The Battle of Pydna had destroyed the kingdom 
of Macedon four years before, (B. C. 168.) but it seemed 
as if Rome knew not how to appropriate territory. It 
took nothing which it could not at once consolidate. Ma- 
cedonia was only divided into four independent Republics. 
The territory which it required Antiochus to cede, it 
gave to JEumenes : Lycia and Caria, which it took from 
the Rhodians, it made independent. 

Such was the impenetrable mask which it wore ; every- 
where professing to uphold the weak and maintain jus- 
tice ; every where unjust, as soon as the time came ; set- 
ting free in order to enslave ; aiding, in order to oppress. 

But we have two Jewish documents, the one probably 
a little after the death of Antiochus Epiphanes, the other 
not later than the death of John Hyrcanus, (B. C. 105.) 



160 Roman Empire unanticipated ; 

which shew two very different aspects of the Jewish mind 
toward the Romans, the one in Alexandria, the other in 
Palestine. Yet in neither is there the slightest apprehen- 
sion of Roman greatness. 

The 3rd Sibylline book is now generally held to be the 
work of a Jew in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes l . It 
threatens unhesitatingly, that all the evils which had been 
done by the Romans to Asia should be requited with 
usury upon them. 

2 What wealth soe'er Rome hath received from tribu- 
tary Asia, Asia shall again receive thrice-told from Rome, 
and shall requite to her her baleful insolence. And how 
many soe'er from Asia have waited in the houses of Ita- 
lians, twenty-fold as many Italians shall be serfs in Asia, 
and shall incur payment ten thousandfold. 

"O delicate, o'er-wealthy, virgin daughter of Latin Rome, 
often intoxicated by thy much-wooed bridals, a servant 
thou, thou shall not be espoused in the world. Oft shall 
thy mistress shear thy delicate locks, and, executing ven- 
geance, shall cast things from heaven to earth, and from 
earth again shall lift them up to heaven, because mor- 
tals were entangled in a wicked and unjust life. And 
Rome shall be rume, (a street.)" 

The first book of the Maccabees, on the other hand, re- 
lates the simple unsuspecting trust, which Judas Macca- 
bseus had in the Romans in the reign of Demetrius, son 
of Antiochus Epiphanes, as if they were wholly unambi- 
tious, conquering only, when assailed. " 3 Now Judas had 
heard of the fame of the Romans, that they were mighty 
and valiant men and such as would lovingly accept ah* 
that joined themselves unto them, and made a league of 
amity with all that came to them; and that they were 
men of great valour. Besides, how they destroyed and 
brought under their dominion all other kingdoms and 
isles that at any time resisted them ; but with their friends 
and such as relied upon them they kept amity, and that 

1 See Lect. vi. 2 Orac. Sibyll. iii. 8. v. 350- 64. T. 1. p. 123, 4. ed, Alex, 
s 1 Mace. viii. 1, 2, 11, }2, 



Jewish Sibylline book and first book of Maccabees* 161 

they had conquered kingdoms both far and nigh, insomuch 
as all who heard of their name were afraid of them yet 
for all this none of them wore a crown or was clothed 
with purple to be magnified thereby ; moreover, how they 
had made for themselves a senate-house, wherein 320 men 
sat in council daily consulting alway for the people, to the 
end they might be well-ordered, and that they committed 
their government to one man every year, who ruled over 
all their country, and that all were obedient to that one, 
and that there was neither envy nor emulation among 
them." 

The immediate result of Judas' application to the Ro- 
mans was a mere defensive alliance between the Romans 
and their confederates on the one side, and the Jews on 
the other, couched , in terms of studied equality 4 ; and a 
message to the Jews, that the Romans had written to 
Demetrius; " 5 Why hast thou made thy yoke heavy upon 
our friends and confederates the Jews ? If therefore they 
complain any more against thee, we will do them justice, 
and fight with thee by sea and by land." 

The writer of the book of Maccabees had as yet had no 
reason to think this simple kind-hearted judgment of Ju- 
das wrong. Rome, although powerful, had, as yet, given 
no grounds to apprehend its ambition. The facts coin- 
cide with the instinct of Porphyry and his followers, that 
no one could have anticipated, in the days of Antiochus, 
that Rome would become the empress of the world. He 
then who foretold it must have had, on this ground also, 
a Divine foreknowledge. 

4 Ib. 22-30. s Ib. 31, 2. 



M 



LECTURE IV. 



The prophecy of the 70 weeks and of the Death of the 
Messiah, and the attempts to make the 70 weeks end 
with Antiochus Epiphanes. 



IN the first year of Darius, the term of the Captivity was, 
according to the prophecy of Jeremiah, all but com e. Ba- 
bylon was conquered ; the captors of God's people were 
captives ; but their own bonds were not broken. For the 
term, although all but come, was not ended. It was one 
of those seasons of breathless expectation, by which God 
teaches to man intense dependence upon Himself. De- 
liverance was at the door; the deliverer was come, but 
there was no token of deliverance. God had revealed the 
future through, or to, Daniel. But what was within the 
reach of man's powers, He left to the exercise of those 
powers. So Daniel sought to learn the term of the Cap- 
tivity, where God had revealed it, in the prophecy of Jere- 
miah. / understood, he says l , by the Scriptures the num- 
ber of the years, which the word of the Lord was to Jeremiah 
the Prophet to fulfil as to the desolations of Jerusalem, se- 
venty years. And he set himself to do that which Jeremiah 
foretold that they should then do. z After seventy years 
shall be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and per- 
form My good word toward you, in causing you to return 
to this place. Then shall ye call upon Me and shall go and 
pray unto Me, and I will hearken unto you. On that deep 

1 ix, 2. in reference, in the words too, to Jer. xxv. 11, 12. 
2 Jer. xxix. 10, 12. 



General character of the prophecy. 163 

fervid prayer, in which Daniel, adoring God's judgment 
and mercy, confessing his own sins and the sins of his peo- 
ple, besieged God, as it were, to have mercy upon His holy 
city, His people, His sanctuary which was desolate, God 
anew uplifted the veil which lay upon futurity. 

The prophecy of the 70 weeks defined much more close- 
ly the period of the Coming of the Messiah, of which the 
two visions of the four empires had already given an out- 
line. Daniel had himself survived the first Empire, and 
seen the dawn of the second. In the fourth, He, like a 
Son of man, was promised. But would those 2nd and 
3rd Empires be as brief as the first ? Would two succes- 
sive lives, long as his own, see the rising of that fourth 
empire, in which He was to come ? Would He, a Prince 
of peace, as Isaiah had prophesied, come to be a shelter 
amid the terrific power of the fourth Empire, which, in 
the end, He was to break in pieces ? Such thoughts 
could not but occupy the mind of Daniel at that crisis of 
the fortunes of his people, and the passing away of the 
first of the three world-empires interposed before the es- 
tablishment of that, in which the Redeemer was to come. 
The answer embraces those thoughts, but goes beyond 
them. Daniel had prayed for his people and his holy city. 
In harmony with that revelation of a world-embracing 
kingdom, but not of this world, contained in the visions 
of the four empires, Daniel's mind is carried beyond his 
own people, his holy city and the visible sanctuary. The 
temporary restoration of the city is promised, but in strait 
of times ; the restoration of the temple and of sacrifice 
are implied, since they were anew to cease and to be de- 
stroyed. But the prophecy went beyond all things visi- 
ble, both in what it promised and in what it took away. 
It promised forgiveness of sins, everlasting righteousness, 
a Messiah, who was to be cut off and yet to confirm a 
covenant. It took away all things visible, on which, as 
images of that which was to come, they had hitherto rest- 
ed. It took away all which was local and visible j for He, 
the Messiah, was to make all sacrifice to cease and city 

M2 



164 Probable reason, why the date was not fixed precisely , 

and temple were to be an abiding desolation. A definite 
period, counted by sevens of years, is assigned, within 
which this purpose of God was to be accomplished. 

The period, which should elapse before the Coming of 
Christ, is fixed as nearly, we suppose, as it could be, with- 
out destroying man's free-agency. Man was still to be 
on his trial, whether he would reject God. God, in reveal- 
ing the future, still preserves unimpaired His own great 
law of His creatures' free-agency. Our redemption was 
to be wrought by the death of our Redeemer at His crea- 
tures' hands. He was l the Lamb slain from the founda- 
tion of the world. All sacrifice foreshowed His Death ; 
David 2 and Isaiah 8 had foretold it ; and now it was again 
to be foretold through Daniel. Perhaps it woulcl have 
been impossible for man to have fulfilled this, which lay 
in the counsels of God, had he known what he was doing ; 
or, if he had, the sin would have been irremediable. Je- 
sus pleads it, as a ground of forgiveness, that His execu- 
tioners knew not what they did 4 . We are told of those 
who stirred up their passions 6 , had they known it, they 
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. It may be, 
that, on these grounds, He did not declare, so that it 
should be certainly known beforehand, the precise year 
when the Messiah should come and should be cut off. 
But He intimated that time with sufficient nearness, to 
create the expectation which did arise, to awaken men's 
minds, to predispose them to listen and to obey. What 
He does, He does not unprepared. 

The interval, which God assigned, had an evident refe- 
rence to the 70 years of the captivity. That number had 
a bearing on the broken sabbaths, in punishment of which 
Moses had foretold that the land should enjoy her sab- 
baths 6 in the captivity of his people. Seventy years were 
the term of their captivity; seven times seventy years 
was to be the main sum of their new period of probation, 
in the possession of their land and of their restored city. 

1 Rev. xiii, 8. 2 Ps. 3d. 

. (s. Uu. 4 S.Lufce xxffi. 34. 1 Cor. ii. 8. 6 Lev. xxvi. 34. 



yet fixed within a limited time. 165 

The date, whence^ those 490 years began, is described, 
not absolutely laid down. But it is described in words 
which leave no large or uncertain margin, ' from the go- 
ing forth of a commandment to restore and rebuild Jerusa- 
lem unto Messiah the Prince. Above three thousand years 
had flowed by before ; above two thousand years have 
flowed away since. The event, which was to change and 
regenerate millions upon millions, was fixed beforehand, 
within some surplus upon 490 years. The choice of the 
form of prophecy was itself prophetic. Greek and Latin 
philosophers too, (probably from some real mysterious 
connection of the number with the developement of man's 
frame,) have known of "weeks of years 8 ." To the He- 
brew, the 7 times 7 spoke of that recurring Jubilee year, 
when all debts were released, slavery was ended, every one 
was restored to all the inheritance which had, during the 
half-century, been forfeited ; slight, joyous, ever-recurring 
.picture of the restoration, for which all creation yearned 
and groaned. There could not be any ambiguity to the 
people's mind. The period could not be "70 weeks of 
days," i. e. a year and about 4 months. The events are 

1 Dan. ix. 25. 

8 " Which some of the poets have said, who measure age rats I0$o/u<g<r<, by 
the sevenfolds." Aristotle (quoted Liddell and Scott, v. t/35.) " Heraclitus and 
the Stoics say, that man's perfection begins about the second 7th." Plut. de 
Plac. Phil. v. 23. (ib.) Censorinus mentions the opinions of many who soi count- 
ed ; " Solon makes ten parts of human life, so that each age should have seven 
years. To these 10 hebdomades of Solon, Staseas the Peripatetic added two, 
and said that the space of a full life was 84 years. Varro mentions that in the 
Etruscan books of the Fates the age of man is described by 12 hebdomades, in 
that it could be protracted to 12 times 7 years, by deprecating the fated pe- 
riod through sacred rites. Of all these, they seem to have come nearest to na- 
ture, who have measured human life by hebdomades. For that, almost after 
every seventh year, there is some new developement. As you may see in So- 
lon's elegy. For he says that in the first seven the teeth are shed ; in the 
second, &c. In the 2nd hebdomas however, or at the beginning of the 3rd, 
the voice becomes thicker and unequal. Physicians too, and philosophers have 
written much as to these hebdomades. Some say that those years are most to 
be observed which are made up of 3 hebdomades, i. e. the 21st, 42nd, and 63rd. 
The 63rd is made of 9 hebdomades, or 7 enneads." [de Die Nat. c. 4.] "Varro 
adds, that he too had entered the 12th hebdomada of life, and, up to that 
day, had written 70 hebdomadas of books." Gell. Noct. Att. Ui. 10. 



166 The decree spoken of, a decree of God through man. 

too full for it. Seven weeks, (to go no further,) was no 
period in which to rebuild the city. It remained then to 
understand it, according to a key which God had given 1 , 
of a sevenfold period of years. 

The decree spoken of was doubtless meant of a decree 
of God, but to be made known through His instrument, 
man, who was to effectuate it. The commandment ivent 
forth 2 from God, like that, at which, Gabriel had just said, 
using the same idiom, he himself came forth to Daniel. 
But as the one was fulfilled through Gabriel, so the other 
remained to be fulfilled through the Persian monarch, in 
whose hands God had left, for the time, the outward dispo- 
sal of His people. In themselves, the will and decrees of 
God are in all eternity ; but His immutable decree seems 
then to go forth, when He, in Whose hands are all things, 
so disposes men's wills, that it comes into effect. But, 
since there was no decree at all in favour of the Jews before 
Cyrus B.C. 536, it might be startling enough to one who 
does not yet believe in prophecy, that, even from Cyrus, 
the 490 years come within forty-six years of our Lord's 
Birth ; and that, although there were four different edicts, 
from which the 490 years might begin, these too admit of 
no vague coincidence. They do but yield four definite 
dates. There is a distance of 90 years from the 1st of Cy- 
rus to the 20th of Artaxerxes Longimanus, but the dates 
within those 90 years, from which the prophecy could seem 
to be fulfilled, are only four. Those dates are, 1) The first 
year of Cyrus 3 , B.C.536; 2) The third year of Darius Hys- 
taspes, B.C. 518, when he removed the hindrances to the 
rebuilding of the temple 4 , interposed by Pseudo-Smerdis 5 ; 

1 Ezek. iv. 5, 6. 2 ix. 23. lyj tqt; 25. lyi syb ja. 3 Ezr. i. 1-4. vi. 3-5. 

4 Ezr. vi. 1-12. Zerubbabel and Shealtiel, encouraged by Haggai and Zecha- 
riah, resumed the building of the temple in the second year of Darius ; (Ezr. iv. 
24. v. 1. 2.) they were accused to Darius, (v. 3-end) and thereon they received 
the decree, which would be in the next year. 

5 The grounds for identifying Artaxerxes (Ezra iv. 7, 11, 23.) with Pseudo- 
Smerdis are ; 1) the enemies of the Jews seem to have sent to each successive 
king of Persia. They hired counsellors in the days of Cyrus, (iv. 5.) They ac- 
cused the Jews in the days of Ahasuerus. (iv. 6.) They wrote to Artaxerxes, 



Four such only ; date of Artaxerxes* accession. 167 

3) The commission to Ezra in the 7th year of Artaxerxes 
Longimanus, B.C. 46f 6 ; 4) That to Nehemiah, in the 20th 

(iv. 7, &e.) and subsequently to Darius, (y. 6 sqq.) But Darius being Da- 
rius Hystaspes, the two intervening names can be no other than Cambyses 
and Pseudo-Smerdis. Ezra, who mentions them, says that the temple was 
finished in the 6th year of Darius, (vi. 15.) and so, before Artaxerxes Longi- 
manus. 2) Pseudo-Smerdis was a religious persecutor, destroying temples and 
worship. (Behistun Inscr. c. i. par. 14. in Raw]. Herod, ii. 595.) 3) "We know 
that Darius undid acts of the usurper, (Ib.) and this is more likely than that 
kings of Persia should reverse their own formal acts, (which were held sacro- 
sanct, from the relation in which they were supposed to stand to Ormuzd,) or 
those of their predecessors. Both names, Ahasuerus (i. q. Xerxes, see Ges. 
Thes. v. BJVuytjJS p. 75.) and Artaxerxes, were names of honor. 

6 I have adhered to the authoritative Chronology of the reigns of Xerxes and 
Artaxerxes. Diodorus (xi. 69.) says that Xerxes was murdered by Artabanus, 
Jifter reigning more than 20 years, when Lysitheus was Archon at Athens. 
Ol. 78. 4. B. C. 465. "According to the Canon; he died N. E. 283, i. e. after Dec. 
17. B.C. 466, and lief ore Dec. 17. B.C. 465, which coincides with the year of Ly- 
sitheus." Clinton. (Fast. Hell. B. C. 465.) Eusebius agrees with this. Ma- 
netho also assigns the same length to the reign of Xerxes, 21 years, (quoted 
by Africanus ap. Syncell. p. 75. D. Clinton, F. H. c. 18. ii. 380. note.) This 
length of reign corresponds with the dates assigned to his father Darius, and 
to Artaxerxes, to whom 41 years are given by Manetho, (Ib.) 40 by Diodorus, 
(Ib. and xi. 69.) which agrees with Tlmcydides, (iv. 50.) who mentions his 
death in the Archonship of Stratocles B. C. 42. (Clinton, p. 380.) The acces- 
sion of Artaxerxes, after the 7 months of the assassin Artabanus, would fall hi 
latter parts of 464, B.C. 

The difficulties, raised by Krtiger and insisted on by Hengstenberg, (Christol. 
iii. 167-179.) relate to Greek Chronology chiefly, in that Themistocles arrived 
at the court of Persia when Artaxerxes had recently come to the throne, (Time, 
i. 137.) and addressed his letter to him. (Ib.) But it is said that there are too 
few events to fill up the tune from Platoea B.C. 479, to B. C. 465, and, specifi- 
cally, that Themistocles, whose flight followed immediately on thedeath of Pau- 
sanias, passed by the Athenian fleet, while besieging Naxos. (Thuc. i. 137.) 
But, it is alleged, that Pausanias was so precipitate, that the discovery of his 
treasonable correspondence is not likely to have been delayed until B. C. 466, 
and that Diodorus places the victories of the Eurymedon, which were later than 
that of Naxos, B. C. 470. (xi. 60, 1.) But, first, as to Pausanias, although in the 
first instance, his conceit, at the prospect of Persian greatness, absurdly betray- 
ed him, (Thuc. i. 130.) there is no reason that he should not have learned expe- 
rience, after he had been twice sent for to Sparta for trial. (Thuc. i. 131. 133.) 
He must have had prolonged communications with Artabanus, since the suspi- 
cions of the bearer of the last letter were aroused by the fact that "no one of the 
messengers before him had returned,?' they having, in fact, been put to death 
at the request of Pausanias. At Sparta, moreover, where he was of course 
watched, greater precautions were absolutely necessary. He had betrayed 
himself, when a t a distance, in Thrace, at Byzantium and Colonce of Troy. 



168 Date of Artaxerxes reign ; ground for selecting 

year of the same Artaxerxes, B.C. 444. These would give, 
as the close of the 490 years, respectively, the end of 46, 
B.C. 29, B.C. 32,A.D. 46,A.D. 

(Thuc. i. 130, 1.) Diodorus also (xi. 54, 5.) placed the ostracism of Themisto- 
cles, at the earliest, in the Archonship of Praxiergus ; (Ol. 77. 2. B.C. 47) but 
Pausanias did not open his plans to Themistocles until after this time, when The- 
mistocles was in exile at Argos. (Plutarch, Them. c. 23.) The sojourn also of 
Themistocles at Argos was of long duration, since it is said, that " he had his 
abode there, buttiisi<edrepefrfe<%(eiri<j>oiTSi)the rest of Peloponnesus." (Thuc. 
i. 135.) This agrees with the time ordinarily assigned to his flight, after that 
the Lacedaemonians, upon the conviction and death of Pausanias, had demanded 
that he should be brought to public trial, viz. 466, two years before the accession 
of Artaxerxes B.C. 464. 

The date of the siege of Naxos is proximately determined by the expedition 
against Thasos which followed after the battle of Eurymedon, which itself 
was bubsequent to that of Naxos. Por the expedition against Thasos was si- 
multaneous with the attempt to settle 10,000 Athenians and then- allies at what 
became Amphipolis ; (Thuc. i. 100.) but this attempt was 32 years after the 
like destruction of those led by Aristagoras of Miletus. (Ib. iv. 102.) But his 
attempt was in the 3rd year of the Ionian war, B. C. 497. (See Clinton, F. H. A. 
497. 465. and T. ii. p. 317. c. 9. Amphipolis.) The revolt of Thasos then was 
in 465, and the siege of Naxos may very probably have been in the preceding 
year. It is by an evident oversight, that Diodorus, having put together the 
victories of Cimon, from Eion which was reduced at last by famine (Her. vii. 
107.) to the victories at Eurymedon (as he had, just before, the history of The- 
mistocles,) stated that they took place in one year. (xi. 63.) Probably it was 
the date only of the reduction of Scyros. (Grote, v. 410. note.) The hints of 
Thucydides and Herodotus suggest, (as Grote first pointed out,) a large series of 
events between B. C. 477, the beginning of Athenian ascendency, and B. C. 
465, ample to fill up the period ; viz. the reduction of fortresses held by the Per- 
sians ; the gradual change of the Athenian "headship" (hegemony) to "rule ;" 
the decline of the Delian synod ; the change made, at the wish of the allies, 
when tired of active service, from personal service to contributions in money 
and, ultimately, to tribute ; implying also a period of naval and military ser- 
vice on the part of the Athenians, which obtained to them that ascendency. 
Eion, Scyros, Carystos, Naxos were the scenes of events, which were but 
specimens only of a large whole. (See Grote, Greece, c. 45 p. 390-415.) Doris- 
cus, when Herodotus wrote, had repeatedly been besieged, and as yet in vain. 
(Her. vii. 106. Rawl. iv. 93. note 1.) 

Further, Justin (iii. 1.) represents Artabanus, as unapprehensive about Arta- 
xerxes, being "quite a boy" (puer admodum) and, on that ground, feigning that 
Xerxes had been murdered by his other son Darius, who was a youth. It is 
said to be improbable, that Artaxerxes should be thus young, if his father had 
reigned 21 years. But Justin contradicts hinufelf. For, in the same place, 
he speaks of Artaxerxes as " a youth," (adolescens) and ascribes to him the ra- 
pid counsel and the strength of one matured. Artaxerxes, he says, on learning 
the treason of Artabanus, ordered a review of the army the next day, in which 



his 7th year, as the starting-point. 169 

But further, of these foul*, two only are principal and 
leading decrees ; that of Cyrus, and that in the seventh 
year of Artaxerxes Longimanus. For that of the 20th 
year of Artaxerxes is but an enlargement and renewal of 
his first decree ; as the decree of Darius confirmed that 
of Cyrus. The decrees of Cyrus and Darius relate to the 
rebuilding of the temple ; those of Artaxerxes to the con- 
dition of Judah and Jerusalem. 

But the decree of Darius was no characteristic decree. 
It did but support them in doing, what they were already 
doing without it. 

The decree of Artaxerxes was of a different character. 
The temple was now built. So the decree contains no 
grant for its building, like those of Cyrus l and Darius 2 . 
Ezra thanks God that " He had put it into the king's 
heart, to beautify (not, to build) the house of the Lord in 
Jerusalem." On the other hand, the special commission 
of Ezra, was s 'to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, 
according 1 to the law of thy God, which is in thy heart, and 
to set magistrates andjudges,which may Judge all the people 
that are beyond the river. These magistrate*, had power 
of life and death, banishment, confiscation, imprisonment, 
conferred upon them 4 . It looks as if the people were in 
a state of disorganisation. Ezra had full powers to settle 
it according to the law of his God, having absolute autho- 
rity in ecclesiastical and civil matters. The little colony, 
which he took with him, of 1683 males (with women and 

the skill which each had in arms should be tried ; and when Artabanus came 
armed to it, he proposed to him to change his breastplate with him, (his own, 
he pretended, being too short,) and then, when he had taken it off, thrust him 
through with his sword, and had his sons apprehended. 

These are the only weighty objections alleged. They hare not made any 
impression on our English writers who have treated of Grecian history. I have 
considered them, out of respect to Hengstenberg, who attaches much weight 
to them, and so assumes as the terminus a quo B. C. 455, being, as he thinks, 
the 20th year of Artaxerxes, but, according to the usual Chronology, his llth 
year. His era differs then only by 3 years from that which I have adopted, af- 
ter Prideaux. (Connection, ii. 14 sqq.) It is also preferred by a Lap. ad loc. 
and, of older writers, by Aquinas in Dan. Opp. T. xviii. p. 37. 

1 The decree of Cyrus, as relates to the grant, is embodied in that of Darius, 
yi. 3-5. 2 vii. 27. a Ib. 14, 25. < Ib. 26. 



170 Agreement of the whole period of 7 and 62 weekt>, 

children, some 8400 souls) was itself a considerable ad- 
dition to those who had before returned, and involved a 
rebuilding of Jerusalem. This rebuilding of the city and 
reorganisation of the polity, begun by Ezra and carried on 
and perfected by Nehemiah, corresponds with the words 
in Daniel, From the going forth of a commandment to re- 
store and to build Jerusalem. 



The term also corresponds. Unto Messiah the Prince, 
shall be seven weeks and threescore and two weeks', \. e. the 
first 483 years of the period, the last 7 being parted off. 
But 483 years from the month Nisan (March or April, as 
the year might be,) 458, B.C., in which Ezra had his own 
mission from Artaxerxes and began his journey 1 , were 
completed at Nisan, 26, A.D. which (according to the or- 
dinary belief that the Nativity was 4 years earlier than 
our era) would coincide with John's Baptism, soon after 
the beginning of which, the descent of the Holy Ghost 
upon our Lord at His Baptism manifested Him to be 
the Anointed with the Holy Ghost 3 , the Christ. 

Further still, the whole period of 70 weeks is divided 
into three successive periods, 7, 62, I, and the last week 
is subdivided into two halves. It is self-evident that, 
since these parts 7, 62, 1, are equal to the whole, viz. 70, 
it was intended that they should be. Every writer wishes 
to be understood; the vision is announced at the beginning, 
as one which is, on thought, to be understood. 3 / am 
come to give thee skill and understanding ; therefore un- 
derstand the matter and consider the vision. Yet, on this 
self-evident fact that the sum of the parts is intended to 
be the same as the whole, every attempt to explain the 
prophecy, so that it should end in Antiochus Epiphanes, 
or in any other than our Lord, (as we shall see,) shivers. 

1 " Upon the first day of the first month, began he to go up from Babylon." 
(Ezr. vii. 9.) The date " the 7th year of the king " is in v. 8. The Attic year 
beginning with Hecatombzeon, nearly our July, the first year of Artaxerxes, 
which fell in the Archonship of Lysitheus, coincided with 46| B.C ., the seventh 
year with 45f , and, since the Jews retained the order of their months, even 
while they dated the years like their masters, the first month in the 7th year 
would fall in Nisan, i. e. the spring of 458, B.C. 2 Acts x. 38. 3 ix. 22, 23. 



and of the 7 weeks by itself, with history. 171 

On the other hand, the subordinate periods, as well as 
the whole, fit in with the Christian interpretation. It 
were not of any account, if we could not interpret these 
minor details. " De minimis non curat lex." When the 
whole distance is spanned over, it matters not, whether 
we can make out some lesser details. Men helieve that 
Mount Athos was severed, because they can trace here 
and there a portion of the canal. Science assumes, as 
certain, whatever is presupposed by what it knows al- 
ready. But, in the prophecy of the 70 weeks, the portions 
also can be traced. The words are ; From the going forth 
of a commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto 
Messiahthe Prince, shall he seven weeks 41 and threescore and 
two weeks ; street and wall 5 shall be restored and builded ; 



4 The Jews put the main stop of the verse under nyiy, meaning to separate 
the two numbers, 7 and 62. This they must have done dishonestly, DTOn \yth 
(as Jarchi says in rejecting literal expositions which favoured the Christians) 
" on account of the heretics," i. e. Christians. For the later clause, so divided 
off, could only mean, " and during 1 threescore and two weeks street and wall 
shall be being restored and builded," i. e. that Jerusalem should be 434 years 
in rebuilding, which would be senseless. Yet critics, who correct the text ad 
libitum, have all at once discovered in this case the value of the tradition of 
the Hebrew accents. Leng. p. 446. Hitz. p. 161. 

5 The construction of the E. V., street and wall, is the most natural, both in 
itself and in the context, since pairs of words are used in this prophecy ; " on 
thy people and on thy holy city ; " " to seal vision and prophet ; " " to restore 
and to build ; " " the city and the sanctuary ; " " sacrifice and oblation." The 
Verss.alsohaveso understood it. oiKoSo/tTje^o-eraj els ir\d,Tos /col els pj/coj, LXX. 
irepireixos, Theod. Aid.; Terxos,Theod. Vat.;muri,Vulg.; "street," Syr. ;cr/a/ijua, 
Gr. Ven. They may have had a traditional knowledge, that piri, orig. " fosse," 
may have been used of any " fence." Else a " fosse" was not a " fence" ac- 
tually used for Jerusalem ; for the circuit of Jerusalem then lay along the brows 
of hills, so that there was no occasion for a fosse, the declivity of the hill being 
more than any fosse. Nor is there any trace of a fosse around any part of the 
then Jerusalem. Nor is there any extant instance, in which jnri or j"T0 is 
used even of a " fosse." ]"irt in Targ. Job xxxviii. 25. corresponds to nVj^i 
"watercourse ;" and in the Baba kama c. 5. is said to be used of a ditch, broad 
below, narrow above ; (Buxt. Lex. col. 833.) In other instances, in Abulvalid 
and Kimchi, it is used of a narrow incision. But the word }>nij etymologically 
signifies, " a thing cut," and may, in the living language, have been used by 
a metaphor, analogous to na^, " cut, cut off, inaccessible." The meaning, "wa- 
tercourse," would itself also have a good sense, "street and watercourse," 
since the supplies of water so provided were so essential to the well-being of 



172 The first period of 7 weeks or AQ years. 

and in strait of times. And after threescore and two weeks 
shall Messiah be cut off. 

Obviously, unless there had been a meaning in this di- 
vision, it would have stood, " shall be threescore and nine 
weeks" " not, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two 
weeks." For every word in this condensed prophecy has 
its place and meaning, and the division would be unmean- 
ing, unless something were assigned to this first portion. 
The text does assign it. It says, the street shall be restor- 
ed and be builded ; and that, in troublous times. 

The books of Ezra and Nehemiah give the explanation; 
Ezra came to Jerusalem, B. C. 458 j he laboured in restor- 
ing the Jewish polity, within and without, for 13 years 
before Nehemiah was sent by Artaxerxes, B.C. 445 1 . Ne- 
hemiah, as governor, laboured together with Ezra for 12 
years, from the twentieth year even unto the two and thir- 
tieth year of Artaxerxes the king, twelve years 2 . Then 
he returned to the king, and after an undefined time, at 
the end of days 3 , he says, obtained I leave of the king, and 
came to Jerusalem. The interval probably was not short; 
for there had been time for corruptions to creep, in, nor 
is the king likely to have sent him back soon ; else why 
should he have returned at all ? The mention of Elia- 
shib's son, Joiada, being high priest then, in place of 
his deceased father 4 , fixes this second visit probably in 
the reign of Darius Nothus, in whose 1 1th year Eliashib 
is said to have died 5 . The expulsion of one of his sons 
who had become son-in law to Sanballat, and regulation 
of the wards of the priests and Levites, are among the last 
acts of reform which Nehemiah mentions in his second vi- 

the city and to its defence against an enemy. Still this would involve the use 
of an uncommon word in the place and meaning of a common word. 

2. In support of another rendering, and the street shall be luilt, yea, it is 
determined; and in straitness of times, is the use of nyjfu 27. rwTDj 26. and of 
fni? Is. x. 22. explained nyvjj Ib. 23. Probahly asn Nah. ii. 8. is used with alike 
parenthesis; see ib. But, against it, is the unlikelihood, that words, so natu- 
rally conjoined, should be altogether severed. 

1 Neh. ii. 1. 2 Ib. v. 14. 3 Ib. xiii. 6. 

4 Neh. xiii. 28. coinp. xii. 10, 22. 6 Chron. Alex. Olymp. 78. p. 162,3. 



" Strait of times." 173 

sit ; with them he closes his book. Now from the seventh 
year of Artaxerxes to the eleventh of Darius Nothus are 
45 years. B ut it was in the period of the high priesthood 
of Joiada, not precisely in the very first year, that this re- 
form took place. We have any how for the period of the 
two great restorers of the Jewish polity, Ezra and Nehe- 
miah conjointly, a time somewhat exceeding 45 years ; 
so that we know that the restoration was completed in 
the latter part of the 7th week of years, and it is prohable 
that it was not closed until the end of it 6 . In regard to 
the strait of times, amid which this restoration was to take 
place, the books of Ezra and Nehemiah are the commen- 
tary. Up to the completion of the walls, there was one 
succession of vexations on the part of the enemies of the 
Jews. Their abiding condition they confess in both pe- 
riods to God ; 7 /or our iniquities we have been delivered 
into the hands of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to cap- 
tivity, to a spoil, and to confusion of face, as at this day. 
And now for a little space grace hath been shewed from the 
Lord, to leave us a remnant to escape to give us a little 
reviving in our bondage. For bondsmen are we, and -in 
our bondage our God hath not forsaken us. In Nehemi- 
ah ? s time, the great public confession of sin closes with 
the same statement ; ^Behold we are bondsmen this day, and 
the land which Thou gavest to our fathers, to eat the fruit 
thereof and the good thereof, behold, we are bondsmen in it ; 
and it yieldeth much increase unto the Icings which Thou 
hast set over us, because of our sins ; and over our bodies 
they have dominion, and over our cattle at their pleasure, 
and in great distress are we, 

The next division, 62 weeks, completes the period up 
to the time of the Messiah. Its two extreme points were 
marked, its beginning by the close of the 7 weeks or 49 
years, its end by the Coming of the long-longed for, the 

6 This explanation of the 7 weeks is brought out by Prideaux, Connection, 
P. 1. B. 5. p. 47-50. and 17 sqq. Even Winer, Real-Lex, v. Nehemiah, admits 
that he is probably right as to the date of Darius Ochus, the 45 years. 
7 Ezr. ix. 7-9. 8 Neh. ix. 36, 7. 



174 Three years and a half ; our Lord's ministry. 

Christ. It is in harmony with the other prophecies of 
Daniel, that what is filled up in one place, is bridged 
over in another. In the vision of the 4 Empires, the 2nd 
and 3rd are but slightly touched on ; the brief notice is 
expanded in the viith and xith chapters. Other prophe- 
cies had, as their foreground, the events of world-em- 
pires. The subject of this was the people of God and the 
Messiah. 

The ever-recurring character of prophecy is thus ap- 
parent here also, that those two points, which concerned 
them most, are the most prominent ; the restoration of 
the polity in the nearer future, and, in the distant future, 
the crowning acts of God's mercy and judgment, the 
blessings in Christ and the close of the temporal relation 
of God to His people. The intervening period would 
have occupied a disproportioned place here, and so is 
omitted. 

Not in, but after those threescore and two weeks, it is 
said, Messiah shall be cut off', and there shall not be to 
Him, i. e. as the context implies, the city and the sanc- 
tuary shall be His no more. Then follows the subdivision 
of the last week, or seven years, wherein He was to be cut 
off, since He was to be cut off, and yet not in the 69 weeks. 
He shall make firm a covenant with many during one week ; 
and in the midst of the week He shall make sacrifice and 
oblation to cease. He speaks not of a temporary suspen- 
sion of sacrifices, but of the entire abolition of all which 
had been offered hitherto, the sacrifice 1 , with the shedding 
of blood, and the oblation*, the unbloody sacrifice which 
was its complement. These the Messiah was to make to 
cease three years and a half after that new covenant be- 
gan, whether this was at first through the ministry of the 
Baptist or His own. It seems to me absolutely certain, 
that our Lord's ministry lasted for some period above three 
years. For S.John mentions by name three Passovers 3 ; 
and S. Matthew's mention of the disciples rubbing the 
ears of corn 4 relates to a time near upon a Passover, later 

i n?J 2 nr>. 3 ii. 13.vi.4. and thelast. 4 S. Matt. xii. 1 sqq. 



A fourth Passover implied. 175 

than the first, (for John had been cast into prison %) yet 
earlier than the last but one, for it preceded the feeding 
of the 5000, which itself preceded that Passover 6 . This 
bears out the opinion, which is in itself nearly certain, 
that, the intermediate feast, mentioned by S. John, is the 
Passover 7 . Our Lord's parable of the fig-tree virtually 
asserts, that a period of some three years of special culture 
of God's people had preceded. 8 Behold, these three years I 
come seeking fruit vn thisfigtree and find none; and that 
one year remained, let it alone this year also. The curs- 
ing of the barren fig-tree and its instant withering 9 , just 
before His Passion and the final pronunciation of its sen- 
tence 10 , seems to be the symbolical declaration, that that 
year of respite was over, and its doom was fixed. 
The city was devoted, the punishment irreversible ; the 

. 6 Ib. xi. 2. 6 Ib.xiv. 15. S. John vi. 4-10. Siisskincl brought out 

the argument, (in Bengel's Archiv. i. 186-194.) and observed that, even if the 
corn were ripe before the Passover, it would not have been ripe some weeks 
before it, yet the history in S. Matt. xii. must have been, at least, some weeks 
before that in S. Matt. xiv. which was itself before the Passover. 

7 The feast, S. John v. 1., must have been one of the three great feasts, l)be- 
cause of the addition, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, i. e. He went up in 
consequence of that feast. 2) No other feast is called " a feast of the Jews," 
i. 'e. one binding upon all. The dedication-feast and the feast of Purim were 
not of obligation, and the feast of Purim was kept any where. (Jos. Ant. xi. 6. 
end.) 3) The first Passover had been spoken of, a few verses before, as the feast. 
(iv. 45. twice.) Had a different feast been intended, it would have been speci- 
fied. 4) The Passover alone is spoken of in the Gospels as the feast. (S. Matt, 
xxvi. 5. xxvii. 15. S. Mark xv. 6. S. Luke ii. 42. xxiii. 17. S. John above.) 
The feast of Tabernacles is named, S. John vii. 2. " Since the Jews held the 
Paseha to be the special and first feast, the Evang. at times defines it further, 
the Paseha, the feast of the Jews, was nigh ; at times not, there was Paseha, 
feast of tlie Jews." Chron. P. p. 406. S. Irenseus adds the Paseha ii. 22, 3. Cod. 
Sinait. has the art. 5) The events in S. John ii. 23-iv. 54. require more space 
than from Paseha to the least of Tabernacles. 6) The words, there are yet 4 
months and then cometh harvest, (S. John iv. 35.) imply that the next feast was 
Paseha. The assumption, that the feast, S. John v. 1., was the feast of Purim, 
has nothing in its favour, and is excluded by Siisskind's argument (n. 6.) and 
by grounds 1, 2, 3, 5. Hengst. notices in addition, (from Reland, Antiq. iv. 9. 
and Schickard,De Festo Purim, Grit. Sacr.iii.p. 1185.) that the feast of Purim 
was celebrated in such sort, that our Lord would not have been present at it, 
and that it was not held on the Sabbath, whereas the festival, S. John v., in- 
cluded the Sabbath. 

S. Luke xiii. 7. 9 S. Matt. xxi. 19. > Ib. xxiii. 34-39. 



176 Main subject of the prediction 

Messiah's office would be, not with the people as a whole, 
but with the many who would be saved out of it, with 
whom the new covenant would be confirmed. The re- 
maining 3 years probably mark the time, during which 
the Gospel was preached to the Jews, before the preach- 
ing to the Samaritans shewed that the special privilege 
of the Jews were at an end, and that the Gospel embrac- 
ed the world. We have not the chronological data to 
fix it. 

But the fact of these several periods being prophesied, 
and the last, above six hundred years before, is the body 
not the soul of the prophecy ; it is not that which bears 
chief evidence of its divinity. 

Human history recurs in cycles. l The thing that hath 
been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done is that 
which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the sun. 
Empires fall or rise gradually ; so the prediction of the 
fall or rise of an empire within such latitude might have 
left the fulfilment uncertain. The main subject of Da- 
niel's prediction is single and alone in time, and reaches 
on through eternity. From eternity to eternity there 
hath not been nor shall be its like. Men may dispute 
whether it hath been ; they cannot dispute that, for 1800 
years, what Daniel predicted has been believed to have 
been. The conception remains the same, even antece- 
dent to our conviction of its truth. That then, which was 
foretold to Daniel, in answer to his confession of his own 
sins and of the sins of his people, of their iniquities and 
transgressions, and to his prayer for pardon, was a promise 
of absolute forgiveness of sins. Seventy seven-times are 
determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to close 2 
the transgression, and to seal up sins, and to make ^reconci- 



1 Eccl. i. 9. 2 The meaning of K??? is clear from the context, whether 

it be derived from A? (i.q. K\ela and KOS\^U) "shut, hinder," then, "close;" 
or i. q. nV? 1) " complete ; " 2) " finish," bring to an end. N|J? does not indeed 
occur elsewhere in Piel, but that is no reason why it should not. 

3 153, when God is the subject, signifies "forgive;" when man, it is the 
" atoning for," " making the typical propitiation for sin ;" covering it by male- 



Gifts of pardon and grace at close of 490 years. 177 

liationfor iniquity. Sin was to be done away, hid out of 
sight, forgiven. The words, which Daniel had so often 
repeated in his deep intercessory prayer, sins, iniquity ; 
transgression, the thought of which lay so heavy upon him, 
are now repeated to him in mercy, to assure him the more 
emphatically through that threefold repetition, that God 
would put them away as if they had not been. But the 
mere removal of sin is imperfect. The threefold comple- 
ment is added ; to bring in everlasting righteousness, and 
to seal up vision and prophecy, and to anoint a Holy of 
of holies. These were to be gifts of God at the close of 
that 70th week ; to be given, as they had never been given 
before, and the righteousness, so given, to last on to eter- 
nity. The very delay is a token of its greatness. God's 
gifts are with usury. It was no common forgiveness of 
sins, the publication of which was to be delayed, accord- 
ing to the letter of the prophecy, at least half a thousand 
years. They were not the past sins of his people, such as 
had brought upon them the captivity. The words are 
quite in the abstract, transgression, sins, iniquity. The 
fulfilment would have fallen short of the prophecy, unless, 
not their sins only but, sin in the abstract had been re- 
mitted. They were not only to be remitted ; they were 
to be replaced. Hitherto there had been continual sacri- 
fice for sin, a symbolical remission of all sins on the Day 
of Atonement, wonderful for its completeness as a picture, 
but incomplete ; even because that wonderful picture was, 
year by year, renewed. Hitherto, there had been many 
atonements for man's several sins. God here speaks of 
one act, atoning not for particular sins, but for sin. Once, 
in the future, at the end of the 70 weeks, there should be 
an atoning for all iniquity, i. e. for all of it, past, present, 
or to come. Then, all sin was to be atoned for, and He 
Who ended and forgave it, was to bring in everlasting 
righteousness. Bring in ! Then, it was to dwell, to make 
its abode, to have its home, there. Everlasting ! Then it 

ing that offering, for the sake of which it is covered, or put out of God's sight. 
The context implies, that it would be one act, which should so atone. 

N 



1/8 Gifts of righteousness : sealing up all prophecy. 

was never to be removed, never worn out, never to cease, 
not to pass with this passing world, but to abide thence- 
forth, coeternal with God, its Author and Giver. Right- 
eousness had been promised before, as the gift of the 
times of the Messiah. It is what man, being made for 
God, yearned and yearns for. l l bring near My righteous- 
ness, it shall not be far off'; and My salvation shall not 
tarry ; and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel My 
glory. % My righteousness is near. Lift up your eyes to the 
heavens and look upon the earth beneath ; for the heavens 
shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old 
like a garment, and they that dioell therein shall die in like 
manner ; but My salvation shall be for ever, and My right- 
eousness shall not be abolished. My righteousness shall be 
for ever, and My salvation from generation to generation. 
It was the close of that great prophecy of our Lord's aton- 
ing Death ; 3 My righteous servant shall make many right- 
eous. Jeremiah had foretold, that God would raise unto 
David a Righteous branch, and that the name whereby He 
shall be called should be, The Lord our Righteousness. Da- 
niel foretells the same ; his prophecy joins on with theirs 
in substance ; but he, first, adds the time of its fulfilment. 
And in that fulfilment, all prophecy was to be fulfilled. 
All hitherto had been a longing for that hour. That hour 
come, God set His seal upon vision and prophet. Their 
first office was fulfilled. To seal up vision and prophet, is 
not, to seal up any one vision or prophet. The words are 
purposely placed undefined, in order to mark that they 
are to be understood without any limitation, not of any 
one vision or prophet, but of vision 4 and prophet gene- 
rally. As our Lord said, ^All the prophets and the law 
prophesied until John. It is all one, whether by the word:, 
seal, we understand, set His seal to, " accredited," as our 
Lord speaks, G Him hath God the Father sealed; or "com- 



1 Is. xlvi. 13. 2 Ib. li. 5, 6, 8. add xlv. 17. 3 Is. liii. 11. 
4 jhij is used collectively Is.i. 1. 2 Chr. xxxii. 32. So both pHiij and 
2 Chr. ix. 21. Kleinert, Aechtheit les. p. 11. 5 S. Matt. xi. 13. 

6 S. John vi. 27. So of man's corresponding act in believing, Ib. jii. 33, Jip 



" Holy of holies," not "the holy of holies." 179 

pleted 7 ." Daniel says before, what S. Peter said near 600 
years after, when the events came to pass ; 8 those things 
which God before had shewed by the mouth of all- His pro- 
phets, that Christ should sitter, He hath so fulfilled. The 
remaining clause, and to anoint an ^ill-holy, must be spi- 
ritual, since all else is spiritual. It cannot he spoken of. 
the natural " holy of holies," which, in contrast to the holy 
place, is always "the holy of holies 9 ;" never "holy of 
holies." Still less is it the material temple, as a whole, 
since the temple, as a whole, is never called by the name 
of a part of it. " Holy of holies," lit. " holiness of holi- 
nesses," i. e. AlLholiness, is a ritual term, used to express 
the exceedirjg holiness, which things acquire by being con- 
secrated to God. It is never used to describe a place, but 
is always an attribute of the thing, and, in one place, of 



that hath received His testimony, has set to his seal, (eff^pdyiffev) that God 
is true. 7 Dtj^i, " sealed," receives its nearer defi- 

nitions from the object with which a thing is sealed. It is determined by the 
context. A thing was sealed in a purse, to be retained, Job xiv. 17 ; a deed, 
covenant, letter was sealed, to be authenticated, Jer. xxxii. 10, 11, 44. Neh. 
x. 1, 2. 1 Kings xxi. 8, So in its metaph. use, God is said to seal the stars', e. 
ifijl, as it were, " sealed them up," withholding them from shining, Job ix. 7 ; 
to seal the hand of man, c. |, hindering him from using it, Job xxxvii. 7 ; He 
sealeth up their- (man's) instruction, c. |, i. e. impresseth it on him, Ib. xxxiii. 16. 
So here sin is " sealed up " to be put out of sight, seen no more ; vision and 
prophecy are sealed, i. e. authenticated. The use of the word, although dif- 
ferent in the two clauses, is not ambiguous, being, in each case, ruled by the 
context. So further Pineda on Job xxxvii. 7. 

8 Acts iii. 18. "What is this which he says, to seal up vision and prophecy? 
That all prophets announced of Him, that He was to come, and had to suffer. 
Since then prophecy was fulfilled by His Coming, therefore he said, that vision 
and prophecy were sealed, because He is the seal of all the prophets, filling up 
all things which the prophets heretofore announced of Him. For after the 
Coming of Christ and His Passion, there is no more vision or prophet to an- 
nounce that Christ should come." Tert. adv. Jud. c. 8. p. 215. Rig. 

9 QV'^ci v~$ is used 18 times of " the holy of holies," (Ex. xxvi. 33, 34. Num. iv. 
4, 19. 1 Kings vi. 16. vii. 50. viii. 6. 1 Chr. vi. 34. (49. Eng.) 2Chr.iii.8,10.iv.22. 
v. 7. Ezek. xli.4.) and these with one exception (1 Chr, vi. 34.) occurring in the 
first directions about it, in the law or the building of the temple or Ezekiel's 
symbolical temple. It is used also in one place of "the holy place," as being re- 
latively the holiest place for that purpose, the consuming of the sacrifice. Num. 
xviii. 10. " The holy of holies " is even oftener spoken of under another name, 
TM (16 times.) 

' * 2 



180" Anointing" a term now wholly spiritual. Title "Mes- 

the person, who is spoken of. l lt is most holy. * Aaron 
was separated, to hallow him all-holy. The destruction of 
the temple,as having been previously profaned, is the close 
of this prophecy 3 . The prophecy promised an All- holy, 
which should he anointed, for the holy place which should 
be destroyed ; as our Lord speaks of 4 the temple of His 
Body. At His Birth He was announced as, 5 the Holy 
Thing ivhich shall be lorn of thee. The Holy One 6 became 
His title, Who Alone was without sin. The devils knew 
him, as the Holy One of God' 1 . 

Anointing was the well-known symbol of sanctity 
through the Spirit of God. The Lord hath anointed thee, 
Samuel said 8 to Saul, captain over His inheritance ; and 
then, the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou 
shalt prophesy and shalt he turned into another man. 
When Saul had forfeited the gift, Samuel, at God's com- 
mand, anointed David, *and the Spirit of the Lord came 
upon David from that day forward. The " holy oil " had 
probably long been lost. Any how, it was among the 
things which the Jews missed in the 2nd temple. Mate- 
rial anointing had ceased. But anointing had entered 
into the symbolic language of prophecy in respect to the 
Christ. 10 Tlie Spirit of the Lord God is upon Me; be- 
cause the Lord hath anointed Me, to preach good tidings 
unto the meek. He hath sent Me to bind up the broken- 
hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and to those 
that are bound, a great deliverance n , to proclaim the ac- 
ceptable year of the Lord: and, 12 Thou lovest righteousness 
and hatest iniquity ; therefore God, thy God, hath anointed 
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. 

This symbolical meaning of the anointing is fixed by 
the next words of the prophecy ; unto Messiah the Prince. 

1 Ex. xxx. 10, 29, 36. Lev. ii. 3, 10. vi. 10, 18, 22. [17, 25, 29. Eng.] vii. 
1,6. x. 12, 17. xiv. 13. xxiv. 9. xxvii. 28. Ezek. xliii. 12. It is used in appo- 
sition to the thing spoken of, Ex. xxix. 37. xl. 10. Ezek. xlv. 3. 

2 1 Chr. xxiii. 13. 3 ix. 26, 27. 4 S. John ii. 19, 21. 

5 S. Lukei. 35. rl> ayiov. 6 Acts iii. 14. iv. 27, 30. 1 8. John ii. 20. add 
S. John x. 36. xvii. 19. ^ S. Mark i. 24. S. Luke iv. 34. 8 1 Sam. x. 1. 6. 

9 Ib. xvi. 13. 10 Is. Ixi. 1, 2. n tfipnj??, intensive. ls Ps. xlv. 7. 



siah" current in 8f before our Lord's time,fromthisplace. 181 

The word is repeated. The last of the six blessings was, 
to anoint an All-holy ; "limshoach kodesh kodashim." 
He resumes at once, "unto one Anointed, a Prince." "'ad 
Mashiach nagid." No one, wishing to he understood, 
would unite so closely words, relating to the same pe- 
riod of time, the end of the 70 weeks, had they not related 
to the same object; "to anoint an All-holy ;" "unto one 
Anointed" The words probably fixed the use of the name 
Messiah or the Messiah, Christ or the Christ, as that of 
the long-expected Redeemer. In the time of our Lord, 
the Name was in the mouth of all, Samaritans as well as 
Jews, the Messiah; Messiah. When Messiah cometh ls , said 
the Samaritan woman. We have found the Messias 1 *, was 
S. Andrew's announcement to his brother Simon. Where 
Christ should be born 15 , was Herod's enquiry of the Chief 
Priests and Scribes. The revelation to Simeon was, that 
he should not see death, until he had seen the Lord's Christ 16 . 
The angels so announced His birth to the shepherds, 
17 Unto you is born in the city of David a Saviour, which 
is Christ the Lord. l8 All men mused of John, whether he 
were the Christ or not. In answer to the formal deputa- 
tion of priests and Levites, la he confessed and denied not, 
but confessed. lam not the Christ. Unbelieving Jews said 
to our Lord, 20 how long boldest Thou us in suspense ? If 
Thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. Caiaphas adjured Him 
to say 21 , whether He were the Christ, the Son of God. The 
people, impressed by Him, ask 23 , Do the rulers indeed 
know that this is the very Christ f The name was not taught 
them by our Lord ; they knew it already. It is the Chris- 
tianity of prophecy, existing, so far, in the minds of the 
people, before it was revealed in act. Although, moreover, 
the name Messiah occurs absolutely here only in Holy 
Scripture not (as it is every where else 23 ) " the Anointed 

13 S. John iv. 25. yietrarfas as a proper name, without the Article, represented 
by the Greek XpurrAs. " Ib. i. 41. rbv Me<nrfez/ i. q. rbv Xpurrdv. 

15 S. Matt. ii. 4. 16 S. Luke ii. 26. V fl,. 11. 

w Ib. iii. 15. w S. John i. 20. iii. 28. 20 Ib . x . 34. 

21 S. Matt. xxvi. 63. S. Mark xiv. 61. S. Luke xxii. 67. ** S. John vii. 26. 
?? mn mq occurs 11 times ; ta^i? 10 times ; siqT? 6 times ; aftp 



182 Extent of prophecy, combinedas to the Messiah, beforeXt, 

of the Lord," "Thy Anointed/' His Anointed," "the 
Anointed of the God of Jacob," or "-the- anointed priest," 
but, as a proper name, Messiah, " Anointed/' they knew 
that He, so spoken of, was the same Whom other Scrip- 
tures taught them to look for. They knew, (we learn it 
from their own mouths in the Gospel,) where He was to be 
born l , that He was to be of the seed of David a , that He was 
to work mjbraclSs 3 , that He was to abide for ever 4 ; that 
He was so to come from God, that no one should know 
whence He cometh 5 , that He was to be the Saviour of the 
world 6 , The contemporary paraphrase of Jonathan used 
the name Messiah in explaining 26 passages of the pro- 
phets of Him 7 ; 17 of them, signal prophecies 8 , such as. all 
Christians have been, wont so to interpret, and 9 less obvi- 
ous 9 , His paraphrase having been, in some measure, tra- 
ditionary, the learned Jews before him must have so in- 
.terpreted Daniel: for from him alone could they have 
had the name, Qnkelos, a little later, adds two more from 
the Pentateuch 10 . 

Of this Messiah the prophecy goes on to say, And after 
the sixty and two weeks Messiah shall be cut off', and there 
shall not be to Him. What this shall be, which shall be 
no more His, is to be supplied from the context, "what 
hitherto was His," viz. His people n , whose Prince: He 

2 Sam. xxiii. 1. In all, 28 times ; !yon jnsn four times, in Leviticus only, Lev. 

iv. 3, 5, 16. vi. 22. These are all, except in Daniel. l S. Matt. ii. 4-6. 

S. John vii. 41, 2. 2 S. John vii. 42. S. Matt. xxii. 42, &c. 

3 S.John vii. 31. 4 Ib. xii. 34. 5 Ib. vii. 27. 6 iv. 42. 

I They are in Buxtprf, Lex. Chald. col. 1270-2. 8 Is. iv. 2. ix. 6. 
xi. 1-6. xvi.5. xlii. 1. xliii. 10. Hi. 13. liii. 10. Jer.xxiii. 5. xxx.21. xxxiii. 15. 
Hos. iii. 5. Mic. iv. 8. v. 2. Zech. iii. 8. vi. 12. besides 2 Sam. xxiii. 3. 

9 Is. x. 27. xv. 2. xvi. 1. xxviii. 5. Jer. xxxiii. 13. Hos. xiv. 8. [7 Eng.] Mic. 
. v. 1. Zech. iv. 7. x. 4. besides 1 Sam. ii. 10. 10 Gen. xlix. 10. Num. xxiv. 17. 

II Vulg. "et non erit ejus populus, qui eum negaturus est." Aq. Symm. Syr. 
leave it unexplained. (" and there is not to Him," Syr. Aq. OVK virdpl-ei a.vr<f. 
Symm.) Theod. adds KpipaovK timv & a,vr<3, "matter for judgment is not in 

. Him." LXX. teal OVK eo-rat, "and shall not be." N always includes the substan- 
tive verb, ."there is not," "there was not," and is the opposite to E> and equiva- 
. lent to j tfo (Arab, laisa, Aram, laith) not to tA alone. This excludes the Eng. 
, Yers. and not for himself \ which must have been & i&j. Other renderings, ex- 
eluded by the meaning of j>$, are ; 1) he is .not, (which must have been 



"Cut off" always of death inflicted by God or man. 183 

heretofore was. The Jews, as a nation, cut themselves off, 
when they crucified Him. But, whatever be the precise 
explanation of that clause, there is no question as to the 
declaration, Messiah shall be cut off'. The word, shall be 
cut off', never means anything but excision; death direct- 
ly inflicted by God, or violent death at the hands of man. 
It is never used of mere death, nor to express sudden but 
natural death. In the Pentateuch, the word is used of 
God's covenant, he, they, shall be cut off from his, their 
people, from the congregation, of Israel u , which God 
explains by His words 15 , / will cut him off' from among 
his people. After the Pentateuch, it is more frequently 
used absolutely, as in Daniel, shall be cut off'; and, when 
used of national inflictions, it is employed of destruction 
of which man was the instrument 16 . Here it obviously 
expresses precisely the same which Isaiah had said by an 
equivalent word, 17 He. was cut off" out of the land of the 
living. Neologist interpreters do not hesitate to admit 

2) he hath nought, ();ijisnot "nought" but "is not,-"} 3) he hath none, (|:<is 
not" none."} But the object to be supplied must be gathered from the context. 
Hence it cannot be, 4) " He (Alexander) " shall not have a successor." Ber- 
tholdt. 5) "He (Seleucus Philopator) shall not have a son and heir." Rosch, 
Ewald. (Seleucus had moreover a son, Demetrius, who succeeded Antiochus Epi- 
phanes.) Nor 6) " an anointed (Sel. Ph.) shall be cut off, and he shall have no 
anointed tosucceed him ; " in which way " the anointed " is to he both the sub- 
ject of the original sentence and the person spoken of in relation to that first per- 
son. (Maurer.) Such interpretations would soon cease, if people would " inter r 
pret Scripture like any other book." (Ess. and Revrp. 77.) No one, in any 
other book, could explain the words, "a king shall be cut off, and to him there 
shall not be" " a king to succeed him." There remains,only, to supply, "and 
it (the people) shall have no Messiah more," (Steudel) which, though true, can- 
not be the meaning here ; for the people had nowhere been a subject or ob- 
ject of any previous sentence, and so many substantives had intervened between 
this verse and the mention of "thy people and thy holy city," v. 24. One 
would even correct j'N, owning thereby, that & j'H cannot have its meaning. 

12 Gen. xvii. 14. Ex. xxx. 33, 38. xxxi. 14. Lev. vii. 20, 21, 25,27. xvii. 4, 
9. xviii. 29. xix. 8. xx. 18. xxiii. 29. Num. ix. 13. xv. 30. 13 Num. xix. 20. 

14 Ex. xii. 19. "from Israel,'' Ex. xii. 15.. Nuin. xix. 13 ; "from My presence," 
Lev. xxii. 3. Lev. xvii. 10. xx. 3, 5, 6. 

10 Jn the Pentateuch three times (Lev. xvii. 14, xx. 17. Num. xv. 31.) else, 
Ps. xxxvii. 9, 22, 34. Prov. ii. 22. Is. xxix.2Q. Hos. viii. 4. Ob. 10. Mic. v. 8. 
[9. Eng.] Nah. ii. 1. [i. 15. Eng,] Zeph.i. 11, Zech. xiii, 8. by the flood, Gen. 
fc.ll, " * " wh.p,8 f . 



184 Twofold aspect of cessation of sacrifice. 

this l f if they can but find out any personage for their the- 
ory, who did die a violent death. 

The entire cessation of the bloody sacrifices of the law 
has a twofold aspect, of mercy and of judgment. To those 
who have believed in Jesus, He caused the sacrifice and. 
oblation of the law to cease, by re-placing the shadows, 
which pourtrayed His Atoning Sacrifice, by Himself the 
Substance, 2 offering Himself once for all, 8 to put away sin 
by the sacrifice of Himself . To the Jews who rejected 
Him, He caused sacrifice and oblation to cease, by the de- 
struction of the temple and city, and the dispersion of 
the people. 

On this, the Death of the Messiah, follows the sentence 
of that utter destruction of the city and temple. The 
meaning of the prophecy is not, in the least, affected by 
any variation in rendering or interpreting single words. 
It is far too broad and explicit. 

And the city and the sanctuary the people of a prince 
who shall come, shall destroy j and the end thereof shall be 
with thatjlood; and unto the end, war*, and desolatenesses 5 
decreed. And after the prophecy of the cessation of sa- 

1 So Bleek, Maurer, Lengerke, Ewald, who would have "the Anointed" to 
be Seleucus IV. Philopator, whose reign was marked by no one event ; Eich- 
horn, Wieseler, Hitzig, who would make it the aged deposed high-priest 
Onias III. whose murder had no other public effect than the punishment of the 
governor who murdered him. (2 Mace. iv. 34-36.) Even Rosenmuller, who 
would have the Anointed to be Alexander, rendered rightly " exscindetur." 
Only Bertholdt, with his wonted carelessness, says " Here, as in countless 
other places, (!) it stands only as a poetic word for no 'die,' and indicates a ra- 
pid and unexpected death." Gesenius followed him in rendering ambiguously 
"shall perish," contrary to the meaning which he assigns to the word in every 
other place. 2 Heb, vii. 27. 3 Ib. ix. 26, 28. 

4 It can hardly be, unto the end of the war, desolations are determined, as 
in the E. V. For the end of the war was the beginning, not the end, of the 
desolations. It would also he a tautology. fi3 also (Dan. xi. 27.) f>0 ny. (viii. 
17. 3d. 35. 40. xii. 4.) j*jj IjftD (viii. 19.) are terms used by Daniel to designate 
the close of a period appointed by God. roij^? has also no article, as ^3 has, 
referring to " the flood " of war just spoken of, and as it, too, probably would 
have had, had Daniel meant, the war. 

5 ntoois' is not an abstract, desolationes, but a passive, loca desolata, as just 
before, v. 18. and Is. xlix. 19. Ixi. 4. [all.] 



Scope of prophecy not varied by varied renderings. 185 

crifice ; and upon the pinnacle of abominations a desolated, 
and that, until decreed desolation be outpoured upon the de- 
solated. The rendering, "upon the pinnacle are the abo- 
minations which desolate 6 ," comes to the same meaning. 
In both ways, the temple is the place intended ; in both 
ways, the cause of the desolation is the same ; in both, the 
desolation is certain, either described as actually come, 
or as involved in the purpose of the Divine retribution, in 
that the abominations which should cause the desolation 
are there. "' 'Wheresoever the carcase is } thither will the ea- 

6 Gesenius allows (Thes. p. 698.) that the words " ought to be so rendered 
according to the masorethic points and the lawful syntax," but corrects, 135 hy\ 
and translates DDto D'jpp?>, as if it were BDteto "fleW (citing pc& D;D Is. xxx. 20.) 
and renders, " and on the pinnacle are the abominations of the desolater." He 
agrees then in the meaning of all the several words, and alters the construc- 
tion only. He adopts the construction of the LXX. and Theod. ical M rb 
hpbv j8Se\uy/to rrjs e/Mj/uiereas. The analogy of S. Matt. iv. 5. S. Luke iv. 9. 
r6 Trrfptiyiov TOV lepov, goes far to shew that f\g (orig. "wing") might have 
the same meaning as the Greek, i. e. pinnacle. The temple being, in part, the 
subject of the prophecy, the word "pinnacle" might the more readily mean 
" its pinnacle." Still, if DDiWS wppi? are united, they must stand in a sort of ap- 
position, "abominations (which are) a desolater," as po^o;*? are "waters "(which 
are, involve,) "affliction." They cannot stand in the relation of the thing caused 
and its cause, " abominations of (brought by) a desolater." In the phrase D;D 
fQ^ an abstract noun is added as a sort of adjective, " waters, affliction ;" the 
phrase DDteo n^isv? would, according to this analogy, signify as above, " abo- 
minations, a desolate-maker ; " i. e. which make desolate. As to the renderings, 
"wings:" i. e. army, "wing of the temple," V$g alone means "wings." The 
substitution of the meaning, "surface of the altar," (Rosch) only illustrates the 
abuse of so-called Hebrew criticism to rationalist prejudice. )3| might, with 
equal truth, be said to mean anything else under the sun. Lengerke adopts the 
construction given above, "and upon the pinnacle of abominations a desolater," 
but he would have it mean, " a desolater shall come upon a pinnacle, which shall 
not, when he conies, he a pinnacle of abominations, but which he shall make 
so," (contrary to all language.) In the words, "upon a pinnacle of abominations 
a desolater," the " pinnacle of abominations " must, according to all language, 
express the previous condition. The word, " abomination," must express the 
moral ground, why, in God's Providence, he came. We should so interpret 
the like words in any language, "Against the accursed race The Avenger 
came," " upon the degraded crew came a destroyer." It would simply not 
be true, that he " came upon a pinnacle of abominations," if it were not such 
when he came. The temple was, by God's appointment, " His holy house ; " 
men "made it a den of thieves." Only desecration from within could make it 
" a pinnacle of abominations." 7 S. Matt. xxiv. 28. 



186 Connection of destruction of city and temple 

gles be gathered together. If, again, the last words be 
rendered, as in the English margin, " even until decreed 
desolation shall he poured upon the desolater," (although 
I think it less probable 1 ,) it would but carry on the pro- 
phecy like those words of our Lord, 2 'Jerusalem shall be 
trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles 
shall be fulfilled. 

Apart from these lesser details of prophecy, the central 
unmistakeable prophecy lies in the connection of the de- 
struction of the temple and city with their great sin, the 
cutting off of the Christ. The connection is, not of time, 
but of cause and effect. Some forty years were allowed, 
in which individuals might save 5 themselves/rom that un- 
toward generation. But the doom of the whole was fixed. 
They had pronounced upon themselves their sentence 4 ; 
We have no king but Caesar. Our Lord, in that tender 
mourning over Jerusalem, pronounced that its day was 
past. 5 If thou hadst known, at least in this thy day, the 
things which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid 
from thine eyes. For the days come upon thee, that thine 
enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee 
round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee 
even with the ground and thy children within thee, and 
they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because 
thou knewest not the time of thy visitation. Our Lord en- 
larges what Daniel had said in sum. Both prophecies 
stand in the same relation. The death of the Messiah en- 
tails the destruction of city and temple. The people of a 
prince that shall come, is, by the force of the term, a foreign 
people with their prince. Before, it was said, unto Mes- 



, as being a different form from DBii'9, is probably used in a different sense. 
It had been used intransitively in the preceding verse, rtofc>, (v. 26.) as also, 
(equally in the fern.) v. 18. and in 11 other places (DCfa? Lam. iii. 11. j'CpW Lam. 
i. 4. D'BDiB> Ib. 16. iUjDW 2 Sam. xiii. 20. Is. liv. 1. Lam. i. 13. niDDis' Is. xlix. 8. 
19. lxi.4. (ii.) Ez. xxxvi. 4.) On the other hand, DOW is used twice in Da- 
niel actively, yet not absolutely, (as it stands here,) but as an adj.; and in both 
places its active meaning is determined by the context, DO'B' yysrc\ viii. 13. and 
DBtf pp? xii. 11. 2 S. Luke xxi. 24. 3 Acts ii. 40. 

4 S. John xix. 15. 5 S. Luke xix. 41-44. 



with the cutting off of the Christ. 187 

siah prince ; now he speaks not of the Messiah at all, but 
only of a prince ; not even the prince, as he would have 
said, had he been speaking of the same. The Coming. 
Daniel habitually used the word come 6 , of an invading 
power which comes into a land, to conquer it. It is re- 
markable that, contrary to the facts in the time of Antio- 
chus and conformably to the facts under Titus, the de- 
struction is attributed to the people of this prince, not to 
himself. Antiochus himself was the soul of his persecu- 
tion : Titus wished to save the temple ; his soldiery de- 
stroyed it r . Then too the destruction was to be final, at 
least for a long-appointed period. The end thereof shall 
be with the flood, and unto the end is war, desolations de- 
creed. The end thereof is plainly, " the end of the invad- 
ed," not " of the invader." For 1 ) it stands in the mid- 
dle of the description of the desolation. The account is 
progressive. First he says, the city and sanctuary, the 
people of a prince who shall come, shall waste : then he 
speaks of the violence, the irresistible, all-sweeping flood, 
with which the desolation shall be; the end thereof shall 
be with that flood. 2) That flood is evidently that over- 
flowing tide of war, just spoken of, the overspreading ar- 
mies, the people of the invading Prince. He had said that 
that prince should come ; now he speaks of his over-flow- 
ing power. Daniel never uses the word in any other 
sense 8 . It is used in Scripture of overflowing for evil, or, 
twice only, for good 9 . The Psalmist speaks of the flood 
of mighty waters 10 , as all languages speak of "a mightier 
wave," or " sea of troubles." But no where is the word 
used of the mere sudden death of an individual n . The 
end thereof must then be the end of that which has just 
preceded, the wasting of the city and temple: and this, 
to the end. 

6 xi. 13, 16, 21, 40, 41. 1 Jos. B. J. vi. 4, 5-7. 

8 " He so uses it xi. 10, 22, 26, 40. from Is. viii. 8." Hengst. In Nah. i. 8. 
the allusion is probably to the mode of the destruction. See ib. 

9 Is. x. 22. Ixvi. 12. 10 Ps. xxxii. 6. 

u The root is used of a large flow of water, Ps. Ixxviii. 20. overflowing, 2 Chr. 
,xxxii. 4. washing away, Job xiv. 19. of rains, Job xxxviii. 25. Ezek. xiii. 11, 13. 



188 Complicated fulness of the prophecy, 

Look then at this harmonising prophecy as a whole, the 
completeness of its symmetry, its complicated harmony. 
Look at the elements which are combined together. 
There is a whole of time, 490 years, distributed into pe- 
riods of 49, 434, and 3 \ years, twice repeated, and these 
four periods not to be taken any how, but following in 
this exact order. Then, in this series of years, as in every 
other part of prophecy, there is a nearer prophetic fore- 
ground of events, whose fulfilment was to guarantee the 
more distant, the restoration of the city and polity in a 
period of 49 years from a decree to be issued. 434 years, 
from the end of those 49, were to reach to the Coming of 
Messiah the Prince. At a time within the 490 years, but 
after the first 483, i. e. in the last 7, Messiah was to be 
cut off; in the midst of those 7, he was to make sacrifice 
to cease, but to confirm a covenant, not with all, but with 
the many ; transgression, sin, iniquity were to be effaced : 
everlasting righteousness was to be brought in ; but city 
and sanctuary were to be destroyed by the overwhelm- 
ing tide of the armies of a foreign prince ; coming down 
upon the pinnacle of abominations, and the desolation 
was to endure. 

Marvellous blending of mercy and judgment, harmo- 
nising with all God's other ways, and with the prophe- 
cies that a remnant a only would accept His mercies : yet 
inexplicable beforehand, and to be effected only by Di- 
vine power. The destruction and lasting desolation of 
city, temple, sacrifice, are closing traits of that vision 
which was to be the consolation of Daniel amid their pre- 
sent desolation, which was coming to an end. Sin is to 
be brought to an end and everlasting righteousness 
brought in ; and yet the desolation is to come, because 

xxxviii. 22. of a vessel flooded (i. e. throughly rinsed,) Lev. vi. 28. xv. 12. hands, 
Ib. 11. blood from the person, Ezek. xvi. 9. a chariot, 1 Kings xxii. 38. metaph. 
swept away, Ps. lxix.3, 16. [Heb.] cxxiv. 4. Is. xxviii. 18. Prov. xxvii. 4. 
sweeping by (rapid rushing) of horse to the battle, Jer. viii. 6. inundating with 
righteousness, Is. x. 22. of a stream sweeping away, Is; xxx. 28. xliii. 2. Jer. 
xlvii. 2. Cant. viii. 7. inpouring, Is. Ixvi. 12. J See on Joel ii. 32. p. 131. 



fulfilled exactly in the Gospel. 189 

sin is at its height, and in possession of the holy place 
itself. The Messiah is to be cut off, and the people no 
more to be His (as a whole ;) and yet He is to confirm 
the covenant with many; and this covenant must be 
plainly a new covenant, since the typical atonements for 
sin were to be abolished. 

All this meets in one in the Gospel. He, the so long 
looked-for, came ; He ivas owned as the Messiah ; He did 
cause the sacrifices of the law to cease ; He was cut off; 
yet He did make the covenant with the many ; a foreign 
army did desolate city and temple ; the temple for these 
1800 years has lain desolate; the typical sacrifices have 
ceased, not through disbelief in their efficacy on the part 
of those to whom they were once given. The city rose 
from its ashes, but not for them ; long, not for them even 
to look upon, and, even now, to be strangers in it, not 
having a house of their own in the Holy City 2 . 

Now what does the school of Porphyry give us in ex- 
change? The failure in accounting for the periods of 
time in the prophecy is the least portion of their failure. 
The heterogeneoiisness of the events which they bring 
together, the unmeaningness of the whole, the impossi- 
bility of bringing the parts into any one connection, or 
so as to bear at all on the situation of Daniel or the people, 
evince yet more, that the unmeaningnesses, which they 
have brought into the prophecy, cannot be its meaning. 

First, as to time. Since the close of the 490 years, if 
counted even from the edict of Cyrus, falls 118 years af- 
ter Antiochus, and within 42 years of our Lord's Birth, the 
1 18 years have to be removed. This is, for the most part, 
effected thus ; they assume that the ground of Daniel's 

2 This was stated to the Rev. G. Williams, author of "the Holy City," by 
Signor Pierotti, (Architect under France to the Holy Land and Architect Engi- 
neer to Surraya Pasha of Jerusalem) the author of the excellent chart of Jeru- 
.salem, who had been for some time employed by the Turkish Government as 
Chief Surveyor of the public works. I mention this as a fact only, an illustra- 
tion of its lasting desolation, a superabundance of fulfilment. That desolation 
of 1800 years would not be less signal, if, at any time, the Jews should anew 
acquire property in Jerusalem, preparing the way probably for Anti-Christ. 



190 Unnatural theory of nonfulfilment of Jeremiah's 

prayer was the nonfulfilment of Jeremiah's prophecy of 
the restoration of the people and of the city. They say> 
rtl the 69th year was now come, and yet there was no ap- 
pearance that the prophecy would be completed, for city 
and temple were still desolate. Gabriel is sent to an- 
nounce to him, that the 70 years of Jeremiah are not to 
be counted as common years, but as 70 weeks, of years/' 
Thus the commencement of the 490 years is to be thrown 
back to some period of the captivity, and the first 49 years 
are to be disposed of before the date of the prophecy and 
the time of Cyrus. Then, because the years would still 
be too long, the 62 sevens of years are to begin again at 
the same date. Cyrus is to be the Messiah of v. 25. The 
Messiah in v. 26. is to be a different person. Those cho- 
sen have been, Nebuchadnezzar, or Alexander, both of 
whom died by a natural death ; (Alexander B.C. 323.) or 
Seleucus Philopator, who was poisoned by his treasurer 
Heliodorus 2 , 175, B.C.; or Onias III. a deposed high priest, 
who was murdered by one Andronicus, a Syrian governor, 
at Daphne near Antioch, about 171, B.C., the murderer 
being put to death by Antioch us Epiphanes 3 . The prince 
who was to come is to be Antiochus, whose profanation 
of the temple was in December or January 16|-, B.C. 

The objectors, in this, strangely confuse the actual si- 
tuation of Daniel in that 69th year of the captivity, and 
that of their own Pseudo-Daniel 3 centuries and a half 
afterwards. To Daniel that 69th year was a year of 
longing expectation. The 70th year brought the fulfil- 
ment of the prophecy in Cyrus' decree. In the time of 
the supposed Pseudo-Daniel, every instructed Jew knew 
that prophecy to have been fulfilled. The assumed non- 
fulfilment of the 70 years is in direct contradiction to the 
admitted testimony of those times. Zechariah alludes 
to it 4 ; Ezra asserts that the proclamation of Cyrus in the 
first year of his reign was in order to its fulfilment. 5 In 
the first year of Cyrus, king of Persia, that the word of 

1 v. Lengerke, p. 407, 8. "* see ab. Lect. 3. 3 2 Mace. iv. 31-38. 
. 4 i. 12 sqq. . * Ezr. i. 1. 



prophecy, and its eking-out by Daniel's. 191 

the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the 
Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia, that 
he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, per- 
mitting the Jews to return, and aiding them to rebuild 
their temple. But, with this fact, the whole plea for dat- 
ing back the 490 years is gone. It was a strange theory, 
that, on account of the non-fulfilment of a prophecy, at a 
time before that assigned for its fulfilment, another was 
commissioned to declare, that the 70 years, which the for- 
mer prophet had predicted, were not to be 70 years, but 
7 times 70 years. It would have been a mockery, declar- 
ing what Jeremiah had said in God's Name to be false. 
For the words of Jeremiah admitted of no such extension. 
It was a definite prophecy, which, if not fulfilled, would 
have failed ; which admitted of no eking out, (for 70 years 
would in no way have meant 490 years,) but which was 
believed at the time to be fulfilled, and which was fulfil- 
led to the letter. The theory supposes the prophecy of 
the 70 weeks to have been written to explain the non-ful- 
filment of that, which they, to whom this amended pro- 
phecy is supposed to have been given, believed and knew 
to have been fulfilled. 

Then too, the words, from the commandment to restore 
and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah the prince, is 7 weeks 
and 62 weeks, cannot be disjoined. And this, on account 
both of the language and substance of the prophecy. 

In regard to its substance, the gifts which had just be- 
fore, in the summary of the prophecy, been promised at 
the end of the 70 weeks, are those which all other pro- 
phets prophesied as gifts through the Messiah. No cri- 
tic doubts of this, whether any one believes that those pro- 
mises were ever fulfilled or no. No rationalist interpreter 
questions that those promises were made, and were ex- 
pected to be fulfilled in that "golden age," the Coming of 
the Messiah. No one doubts of this, as to this prophecy. 
But then, since the times of the Messiah were, according 
to the admitted meaning of the words of the prophecy, to 
begin at the close of the 70 weeks, or 490 years, it could 



192 Construction, "72weefrs, the street shall be built "absurd. 

not be meant that the Messiah should come, when -^ only 
of the period had elapsed, at the end of the first 49. 

In regard to language ; if the words, and threescore and 
two weeks, were joined on to what follows, (as is required 
hy this theory 1 ,) and threescore and two weeks ,the street shall 
be built again, and that in troublous times, then the mean- 
ing would he, that the street, i. e. the city, should he in 
building through that whole period of 434 years l , which 
is absurd in itself, and contrary to the theory, in that the 
first portion of the period, during which it is to be in build- 
ing, would coincide with that in which it was to lie deso- 
late, in the past Captivity 3 . Further, a decree to restore 
and build Jerusalem is, according to these theories, not to 
be any decree or commandment of God, but a prophetic 
promise. This is contrary to the idiom, both in itself and 

1 Lengerke acknowledges that Hengstenberg has shewn this. Ewald had 
laid down as a general rule, " In assigning dates, the accusative is used, if the 
action belongs to the whole period. But if you would express, that the action 
falls at a definite moment within a larger period, a must be used, as the Abla- 
tive is in Latin." The only apparent exception is, where the larger space is 
itself very limited, and is used as a sort of adverb; as in German "you might 
say, diesen Tag, diese Stunde, diese Woche," and we could say colloquially, 
" this month, this year," for " within this month or this year ; " but, " these 
seventy years," " diese siebenzig Jahre," we or they could not say, except in 
the sense, " all through these seventy years." nj$j " this year," for, " ' in the 
course of this year,' (Jer. xxviii. 16.) is so completely an adverb, that you can- 
not say K'nn niB>n with the demonstr. Pron.,but must say N\nri ma's, as it is in 
Jer. xxviii. 1 7. So also D'u?n Is. xxvii. 6." On the same principle, it would be 
contrary to the idiom, to construe with Lengerke, as a nominative absolute, 
and sixty and two weeks the street shall be built again. Without the ad- 
dition of 05, " in them," the words would express what was either in doing 
throughout the time, or what was done at the end of it, whereas the rebuild- 
ing of Jerusalem began, on the rationalist hypotheses, after the first ten, or seven 
of the 62 weeks ; in our belief, during the course of the seven. See Hengst. 
Christol. iii. 72, 3. Ewald, consistently, rendered, " throughout 62 weeks." 
(D. Proph. ii. 568.) Maurer theorised that Seleucus might have contributed 
to the improvement of the city ; Rosch asserted that the city was then com- 
pleted. " He [Sel. Phil.] seems to have, amplified the city which, beyond 
question, had been long ago restored." Maur. "The completion of the 
building of the city under Seleucus IV." Rosch, Stud. u. Krit. 1834. p. 288. 

2 "They (Lengerke, &c.) maintain consistently, " that the building of the city 
Jerusalem was carried on during the captivity, or the tune when it lay 
waste." Wies. p. 103. 



To make y e 4th ofJehoiakimy^startingpoint, absurd. 193 

in the context also, in that, the identical words having just 
been used of a direct command of God, those same words 
are now to signify, not a command, but a single prophecy. 
The words are, "from the going forth of a word/' (or 
" command,") " to restore," &c. It is tvord, not, " the 
word." But " word," simply and indefinitely, is not used 
to designate the word of God, or prophecy, apart from any 
mention that it is "the word of God," any more than our 
" word" would be. But now, in the immediate context, 
the going forth of the word had been used of the issuing 
of a command from God to Gabriel, which command he 
obeyed. In no language would the same idiom be used in 
different senses in two places so closely adjacent. The 
prophecy of Jeremiah also, B.C. 606, was a prophecy of 
the desolation of Jerusalem and of the 70 years of the du- 
ration of that desolation. It was, as Daniel speaks of it in 
this chapter, the word of the Lord to accomplish 70 years in 
the desolations of Jerusalem. A prophecy, in God's Name, 
of a desolation of the city for a limited period, involves that 
such desolation should last only for that period j yet it 
would be unheard-of language to call the prophecy of that 
temporary desolation a word or promise to restore and 
rebuild it. Yet this is the only prophecy of Jeremiah 3 , 
to which Daniel refers. Hosea, Amos, Micah, Isaiah had 
prophesied the restoration of Judah from captivity ; Mi- 
cah and Isaiah had specifically promised a restoration 
, from Babylon. There' is then no more ground to select 
a prophecy of Jeremiah that God would, after the 70 years, 
cause them to return to that place, than one of Micah and 
Isaiah. No one would think of representing those other 
prophecies as decrees to restore and build Jerusalem. 
Why ? Because, when those prophecies were delivered, 
Jerusalem was not yet besieged, much less destroyed. 
There is no more reason to select a prophecy of Jeremiah, 
B.C. 606, than that of Micah, B.C. 758-26; i. e. there is no 
reason to take either. 
But, further^ let people (which they will not allow to 

s Jer. xxv. 9-11. 
O 



194 Problems as to the seventy weeks, 

believers) place the beginning of the period where they 
will, they "cannot make either the whole sum, or its seve- 
ral portions, agree with any event in history before Anti- 
ochus, if only they adhere to the obvious principle, that 
the parts are equal to the whole, and so, that 7+62+ 1 are 
the same as the 70 mentioned just before. This was, of 
course, in any honest way impossible. It was a postu- 
late of " pure intellect," that the prophecy should close in 
the life-time of the imagined author, accordingly not later 
than 16f, B.C., the date of the death of Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, which, since, on the hypothesis, the Man of God 
could not prophesy, he must be supposed to have outlived. 
But 16f +490 would carry us back to 65f, B.C. in the 
reign of Manasseh x , before the birth of Jeremiah, whose 
prophecy was thus to be explained. Yet the axiom, that 
there could be no definite prediction, was more self-evi- 
dent than what to our childhood seemed self-evident, that 
2 and 2 make 4. Any how, man willed that the axiom 
should remain unquestioned, and the science of numbers 
had to give way before it. Granted, for the time, that 
Jeremiah's prophecy of the desolation of Jerusalem could, 
by any human being, be seriously called, " the going forth 
of a word to restore and to build it ; " still, from 606, B.C. 
there was an overplus of 48 years on the whole. Or, 
granted that the actual destruction of Jerusalem by Ne- 
buchadnezzar, when there was no contemporary prophecy 
of its restoration 2 , was that " word to restore and rebuild 
it," this too, absurd as it was, left 30 years too much. 
But the difficulty as to the whole period was but the first 
item. Two other problems had to be worked out in har- 
mony with the solution adopted for this. It was believed 
by most of the school, with a certainty equal to that 
claimed for revelation, that Messiah the prince (v. 26.) was 

1 I see that Bohmer consistently adopted this, as the beginning. See below, 
p. 210. 2 There is nothing to place the prophecy, Jer. xxx. 18. in 

that year. Hitzig assumes this as to " its genuine portions," [i. e. what he, 
Hitzig, allows to be so,] on the ground that, as he thinks, Jer.xxxi. 15. relates 
to that event. 



lohich unbelief had to solve. 195 

Cyrus. Another Messias had to be found, who was to be 
cut off after the 62 weeks, or 434 years ; also some one 
(since he was not to be the Messiah) who should " make a 
covenant with the many " for the last 7 years, in the midst 
of which 7 years he was to make sacrifice and oblation 
to cease, and at the end of which he was himself, (so the 
school agreed,) to come to an end. 

These were the impossible problems for unbelief to 
solve ; it had to solve them for itself, which was, so far, 
easier ; for nothing is impossible for unbelief to believe, 
except what God reveals. 

The impossible numbers were to be reduced somehow; 
men tried their hands all ways. 

One 3 only was found to declare the three last verses 
at least a Rabbinical gloss ; one or two only (it is almost 
strange that no more were found to support the scheme) 
declared that all the weeks were literal weeks. An essay 
of an English deist 4 , who took this line, was almost un- 
noticed in England 5 ; was translated twice into German, 
" received with much applause," but, in 7 3 r ears, " it was 
almost forgotten 6 ." It was remoulded 7 ; but this, we are 
told, (i 8 found least reception of any." 

" Not until the light, which rose upon the theological 
world in the last century, had reached its full lustre," the 
Germans tell us 9 , "could Corrodi and Eichhorn succeed 
in winning their age to the right understanding of the 
passage." Only, Corrodi was still so far benighted, that 
he thought that, take the numbers how men would, they 
must be real numbers. He saw too that the whole pe- 

3 Lowenheim. 4 A Free Enquiry into Daniel's Vision and Prophecy of 
70 weeks. London, 1776. It was translated into German twice, in 1783 by 
Preiss, and in 1785. 5 No trace of the book can now be found. It is 

not in the British Museum, nor in the University Libraries of Oxford or Cam- 
bridge. There is no notice of it in any English Bibliographical book, nor can 
one of our ablest booksellers discover it. It is just alluded to by Wintle on Da- 
niel ix. 24. G Eichhorn, Allgem. Biblioth. iii. 781-790. The English writer 
" referred " the prophecy to " Cyrus and the fate of the Jews in his time." Ib. 

7 Eckermann, Theol. Beitr. i. 1. p. 133 sqq. 8 Wieseler, Die 70 Wo- 

chen, p. 69. 8 Bertholdt, Daniel, p. 601. 

o2 



196 Corrodi's theory and admissions. 

riod must end with the Messiah. Since then the num- 
bers, like water, did not admit of compression, and could 
not be condensed before the time of Epiphanes, and since 
there was no Messiah then, he detached the unreducible 
49 years from the beginning and added them on to the 
end, so that, in lieu of Daniel's divisions, 49, 434, 7> it 
was to be 434, 7, 49 l . The 434 years were to run from 
the prophecy of Jeremiah, B.C. 606, to Antiochus Epi- 
phanes' 1st invasion of Judaea, B.C. 170 ; the 7 years were 
to extend to B.C. 16f, the death of Antiochus; and the 
49 years, which, in Daniel, stand at the beginning, were 
to represent a period after the death of Antiochus, when 
the Messias is to have been expected to come, but did not. 
Corrodi's plan conceded too much of the natural mean- 
ing, and was itself too obviously unnatural. It was, so 
far, the testimony of an opponent, that the natural inter- 
pretation was, that the prophecy should close with the 
coming of the Messiah, and that the numbers of years 
were to be real bon& fide years. So Eichhorn tried 
another way 2 . He revived a theory, which in Harduin 3 
had been reverential, (for he acknowledged a fuller ful- 

1 Corrodi, Krit. Gesch. d. Chil. iii. 253. AVieseler, having first declared his 
solution " self-evidently arbitraiy and at variance with the text," afterwards 
adopted it. 2 AUg. Bibliothek, d. Bibl. Litt. B. 3. p. 793. Hebr. Proph . iii. 47. 

3 Chronologia Vet. Test. Opera Selecta, p. 592 sqq. defended in his Diss. de 
LXX hebdom. Daniel. Ib. p. 880 sqq. Collins (Scheme of Literal Prophecy, p. 
175 sqq.) in the main followed Harduin. The discrepancy of the first period, in 
this way, he gets over thus ; "All which, Chronology proves to have happened. 
For, from the 4th year of Jehoiakim, wherein the prophecy of the 70 years' cap- 
tivity, or of the deliverance from thence at the end of 70 years in the first of 
Cyrus, was made to Jeremiah, there are seven weeks or 49 years." i. e. 49 are 
the same as 70. The supernumerary years, even from this date, he gets rid of, 
by supposing that two persons are prophesied in the words, " unto Messias the 
Prince," in v. 25. so that the words should mean, " unto Messias the prince, Cy- 
rus, there shall be seven weeks, and unto another Messias prince there shall be 
62 weeks." Cyrus was the first ; and "No one can doubt," (he says, p. 182.) 
"that the name Messias belongs still better to Judas Maccabaeus, since he is call- 
ed 'the valiant man that delivered Israel,' (1 Mace. ix. 21.) and 'your captain and 
fighting the battles of the people. ' " (ii. 66.) The difficulty as to the 62 weeks 
and the one week he gets over summarily, hy counting them together, so that 
they should contain the time from the 4th of Jehoiakim to A. S. 148, when the 



Shifts of Marsham. 197 

filment in Christ,) in Marsham 4 was sceptical ; and which, 
having found no soil in England to root in, had been 
transplanted to Germany, where it met a want, the want 
to be rid of the prophecy of Daniel. The principle adop- 
ted from Marsham was, not to take the 70 weeks or 490 
years, as one entire sum, but to divide them into two, so 
that the first period of 7 weeks or 49 years should some- 
how run parallel with the first portion of the 63 weeks, 
and so should not be counted. The selfsame years of 
time were to serve, as portions both of the 49 and of the 
441 years ; so that, in fact, the sum total was to be, not 
490, but 441 ; a process like that of the steward, wise in 
his generation but unjust, who bade his Lord's debtors 
write "fifty" or "fourscore" instead of a "hundred 5 ." 
Yet, even thus, the numbers 49 and 441 would not fit in 
to the periods assigned to them. They could not be be- 
gun from any common date. 

There are 441 years from the 4th year of Jehoiakim, 
B. C. 606, to B. C. 165, the year when the temple was 
cleansed after the profanation by Antiochus ; but from 
B. C. 606, to Cyrus, B. C. 536, (if he was to be made the 
Messiah of v. 25.) there were not 49 years only, but 70. 
How then was the number 49 to be accounted for at all ? 
Harduin accounted for it in his way, by selecting, for the 
close of the 49 years, a date of his own, with which the 
Jews were not directly concerned; B. C. 557, which he as- 
signed as the date of Cyrus' conquest of Media 6 . Mar- 
sham, in ignorance of Hebrew, took Daniel's 3 weeks of 
fasting and prayer, in the third year of Cyrus, to be weeks 
of years, whereas they are expressly called weeks of days 1 ; 
and these 21 invented years were, in some not very in- 
telligible way, to be deducted from the 70 years of the 
Captivity. The 49 years then were to represent the re- 
maining years of the Captivity, and to be dated from the 

sanctuary was cleansed. The death of Antiochus, according 1 to him, lay beyond 
the 63 weeks. 4 Canon Chron. p. 610 sqq. He closed with the words, meant 
to hint what he did not care to avow ; "An ultra Epiphanem prospexerit Daniel, 
viderint alii." 5 S. Luke xvi. 6, 7. 6 p. 596. 7 Dan. x. 2. See E. Marg. 



198 Eichhorn's capricious amendment of 

expiration of the 21, which were somehow to be its first 
21 years; while the 441 years, or, (as Marsham, again in 
ignorance of Hebrew l , made them,) 444^ years, were to 
commence from the original date 606, B.C. The 63^ 
weeks, =444| years, were to last from 4107 of the Julian 
Period to 4551 (i.e. from B.C. 607. to B.C. 163;) the 62 
weeks were to reach to the beginning of the reign of Epi- 
phanes 2 ; the one week was to be the time in which he 
had not profaned the temple 3 ; the half week, the time 
from the capture of the city 3 ; the Messias to be cut off, 
were to be the high priests generally 4 . 

Marsham's hypothesis, however, of the 21 years, which 
were to explain the 49, was obviously absurd, and in fla- 
grant contradiction to the text. So Eichhorn tried to 
mend it in his way. He began, (as others after him,) 
at the end, as being the easiest. He paraphrased, rather 
than translated, but as no one else would; " 5 During a 
week of years, religion will shew its power with many 6 ;" 
from A.S. 143, to the re-consecration of the temple at the 
beginning of A.S. 148, he counted 6 years, [of course, since 
he did not claim to count both extremities inclusively, 
from 143 to 148 are 5 years not 6 ; the actual persecution 
up to that time had lasted 3 years only :] " 6 years might 
very well in poetry count for 7 ; the suspension of the 
daily sacrifice was to be 3^ [really 3] years." Then he 
left the early part of Epiphanes' reign a vacuum, and cal- 
culated that 62 weeks or 434 years would go back from 
the beginning of the reign of Epiphanes, when Onias was 
deposed, B.C. 175, to B. C. 609, 3 years only before Jere- 
miah's prophecy : but " 2 years " he said 7 , " cannot come 
into account in a reckoning by septennia, since a round 

1 Rendering " half of a week," instead of " the half, or midst of the week," 
i. e. of the one week just mentioned, as the use of the article requires, SJUB7I 'yrr. 

2 p, 615. 3 p. 617. 4 p. 616. 6 Allgem. Biblioth. f. Bibl. Lit. iii. p. 787. 
6 Literally, "the covenant will infuse might in to many." He recognised the 

right meaning of the word n'nji, God's covenant with man ; but 1) if the pro- 
phet had meant to change the subject, and make rn? the subject, he would have 
placed it before, the. verb. 2) rng, often as it occurs as the object of a verb, never 
occurs as an agent. . -1 p. 791. 



Marsham's theory., and dishonest criticisms. 199 

reckoning never troubles itself about a trifle." Then, as 
to the 7 weeks, he took so far the plain meaning, that the 
decree to restore Jerusalem must be some actual com- 
mand to rebuild it, and chose as his starting-point the 
first year of Cyrus. From 536, B.C. then, he said 8 , the 
years, if counted forward, would come to no year of mark- 
ed importance to the Jews : Messiah the prince must be 
an oppressor : and Xerxes, although very nearly one, was 
not. Counted backwards, 49 years would be, he says, 
only 2 years short of the destruction of Jerusalem by Ne- 
buchadnezzar, [really 3 ; he himself calls them 52 years.] 
All then, he says, was plain. It was to be a new inter- 
pretation of Jeremiah's prophecy. "Jeremiah, when 
speaking of the 70 years of misfortune, [Jeremiah spake 
not of misfortune but of captivity,'] did not mean 70 years 
in their most special sense, but 70 seven-years. To the 
end of the captivity, were not 70 years, only 7 weeks or 
49 years. But if you take 7 seven-years, and count in 
addition the 62 seven-years, which elapsed from the time 
when Jeremiah spoke, to Antiochus Epiphanes, and add 
the 7 years of his persecution, you have then the exact 
point of time when the new good- fortune of the Jews was 
to take its beginning." In other words, because 70 years 
elapsed from the prophecy of Jeremiah to the end of tbe 
Captivity, but only 49 of these after the destruction of 
Jerusalem, therefore, on the one hand, you were to count 
70 weeks of years, viz. 490 years, but, on the other, to de- 
duct from them 49 years. Why ? He says, "the word 'af- 
ter ' is used to mark succession of time ; since then it is 
not used here, it is implied that the time is coincident." 
In this way, by counting at one time backwards, at ano- 
. ther forwards, and by dishonest criticism 9 , Eichhorn, as 

8 p. 792. 

. 9 According to Eichhorn, the use of nqtf was to mark the succession of time, 
and for this he quoted v. 26, 7. thus, iro? jnrrf D'jnV ivis T3Jri D;$I DW D'jnay'Enqg 
paraphrasing, " after the 62 weeks of years, is a week of years to be sought, in 
which religion, &c," but he well knew that he had falsified the text, in which 
the order depends, not on the nns, but on the continuity of the narrative ; " Mes- 
sias shall be cut off, and he shall have nought, and city and sanctuary," &c. (T?M] 
not T?:n) " and he shall confirm," &c. So, contrariwise, he knew well that the 



200 Unnatural expedients of Eichhorn., 

far as he could, veiled the fact, that the simple words, 
" from the going forth of the command to restore and re- 
huild Jerusalem unto Messiah, (or, as he rendered, an 
Anointed Prince,) are 7 weeks and 62 weeks, street and 
wall shall be built/ 5 were, according to him, to mean, 
"from Cyrus' command to restore and build Jerusalem 
unto the anointed prince Nebuchadnezzar who destroyed 
it, are 7 weeks, and during threescore and two weeks shall 
street and wall be rebuilt." Threescore and two weeks 
frqm when ? Not from the command to rebuild it which 
he had selected ; not from the destruction which he had 
specified; but from Jeremiah's prophecy, before it was 
destroyed ; so that the point of time prefixed to the whole, 
" from the going forth of the command, &c." was, in re- 
gard to the first two words l , " seven years/' to mean the 
decree of Cyrus, and for the next three words 2 , " three- 
score and two weeks," to mean the prophecy of Jeremiah, 
70 years before it. Eichhorn owned the unnaturalness of 
all this, and called it " cabbalistic ; " but the fault was to 
be with the prophet, not with his own non-natural inter- 
pretation. Eichhorn in this way veiled also the fact, that, 
even from Jeremiah's prophecy, the 62 weeks or 434 years 
brought him to an unmarked period, the 5th year of Epi- 
phanes 3 ; and that so the last week, (really 8 years) had 
no marked beginning, and that the deposition of OniasIII. 
which, according to him, was to be the cutting- off of the 
Messias, at the beginning of the reign of Antiochus 4 , took 
place during, not, as the text says, after the 434 years 5 . 
Eichhorn, however, was an oracle in those times, and the 
result was what was wished for ; so it was ruled that all 
this was an adequate representation of the prophet's 
meaning. It was received by those 6 who were them- 



words njj niB>: ga$j <3tm should be rendered, "the half of the week," as he had 
rendered it, p. 786, not "a half week," as, contrary to the Hebrew, he rendered, 
p. 796. But then the words themselves, " half of the week," mark that the half- 
week belongs to the week preceding, not the absence of '^qt?- l niRV D'j3ij' 

2 0.$, QnyipF Qijpa^ s 606-434=172. Antiochus succeeded A. S. 137. 

(1 Mace. i. 11.) B. C. 176. " 2 Mace. iv. 7-10. * Dan. ix. 26. 

6 " It deserved the applause with which it was received by two of the most 



and of Paulus. 201 

selves received as Theologians. Only, for Nebuchadnez- 
zar, Paulus substituted, as the Messiah, the weak Zede- 
kiah, who imprisoned God's prophet, gave him over to 
death, when overborne by his princes 7 , did evil in the 
sight of God 8 , rebelled against God and man, trusting in 
man 9 , destroyed his country, and died a natural death 10 , 
as a perjured rebel u , in the prisons of Babylon. Paulus 
tried to cover Eichhorn's arbitrariness by other render- 
ings, as arbitrary. Having reached to Zedekiah from Cy- 
rus, he re-bounded from Zedekiah's captivity, B. C. 588, 
to the murder of Onias, according to Ussher, B. C. 171. so 
far, at least, in conformity with the text. This, however, 
being only 417 years, was 17 years before the close of the 
434 which he had to fit in. So, by aid of a meaning of 
his own, the words were to run, " and during the flow- 
ing-by of the times, and after the threescore and two 
weeks, shall Messias be cut off, and the people of the 
prince which shall come shall destroy the city and sanc- 
tuary;" i. e. Onias III. was to be murdered 17 years before 
the lapse of the 434 years, and Antiochus was to destroy 
city and sanctuary after them. Only, every one but him- 
self, and probably himself too, knew, that the words must 
mean, "in straitness of the times," not, "in the flowing- 
by of the times 12 ; " so the new explanation was only ano- 
ther confession of the difficulty, which it owned by trying 
so to solve it and failing. 

Yet it was patently unnatural. So then yet another, 
who was long the recognised interpreter 18 of Daniel, vir- 
tually avowed their incompetency to explain the num- 

celebrated and renowned Theologians of our times, (Ammon Bibl, Theol. ii. 
207 sqq. ed. 2. Paulus Comm. iib. d. N. T. iii. 415 sqq. ed. 2. note) and other 
unknown Scholars in literary journals." Bertholdt, Dan. p. 605, 6. 

' Jer. xxxviii. 5, 8 2 Kgs. xxiv. 19. Jer. xxxvii. 2. 9 Ezek. xvii. 15. 

10 Jer. Iii. 11. u Ezek. xvii. 13, 16, 18-20. 2 Chr. xxxvi. 13. 

12 pis twice, in kal, is i. q. ps;, " poured," Job xxix. 6. Is. xxvi. 16. onceintr. 
" was poured out," Job xxviii. 2. The noun pisj, " column," 1 Sam. ii. 8. 
xiv. 5. is connected with p'Sii i. q. ;ran " set up." To " flow by " is quite foreign 
from the root. 13 Bertholdt, Daniel. Rosenmuller abridged Bertholdt's 

statements, and (as was his wont) gave them out unacknowledged as his own ; 
"nostrasententia," i.e. by adoption, in Daniel, p. 322. 



202 Bertholdfs theory of " round numbers" 

bers ; only, of course, since the application to Antiochus 
was infallible, the fault was to rest with the prophet, not 
with his expositors. It was owned that the 70 years 
could not so be counted, it was alleged that they were not 
meant to be counted. They were to be an indefinite pro- 
phetical number. The word " weeks " was only to stand, 
because in sound it resembled " seventy * ; " a comment 
or rather " 3 a parody on the 70 years of Jeremiah." 

It being assumed, that the 70 years of Jeremiah were 
not to be taken precisely, so neither, it was assumed, were 
the 70 weeks of years ; and so, neither were the divisions 
of those years, selected prominently by the prophet, 7, 
62, 1 ; and the number to be compressed was apparently 
that which had least the character of a round number, 62. 
Had it but been 60, or 63 ! These would, at least, have 
been multiples of other numbers, 10 or 7 ; but 62 is so so- 
lid, angular, unreducible, matter of fact, sort of number, 
as unlike a "round number" as could be. No process of 
dividing, subtracting, combining, could make its elements, 
sacred numbers or " round numbers." There it stood, as 
if to set at nought the theory of " round numbers," and to 
require an unevasive matter-of-fact explanation. So then 
the knot, which could not be solved, was to be cut. The 
other parts, 7 and 1, were held to be accounted for; and 
whereas, the more precise these numbers were, the more 
one should expect the remaining solid number to be so, 
this was, contrariwise, to be the very reason why it should 
not. For the first 49 years a very definite period was to 
be found, that from the destruction of Jerusalem to Cyrus 
the last 7 years were to be made seemingly to correspond 
(which they did not) with the period of the persecution 
of Antiochus. And then, two periods having been ex- 
plained, the middle and largest was to be allowed to be 
false. It was said, that the writer, having once fixed up- 
on the number 70, had to fill it up ; and so was obliged 
to falsify the time from Cyrus to Antiochus Epiphanes, 

1 Bertholdt, p. (510, 11. 2 Ib. p. 612. 



and unnatural expositions. 203 

making it 62 weeks, or 434 years, instead of 361 years, 
because otherwise the number 70 could not be made out. 

One ground for introducing Epiphanes at all into the 
prophecy of the 70 weeks was, that he was prophesied of 
in the 8th and llth chapters. Bertholdt extended the 
argument, and, since Alexander was also prophesied of in 
those chapters, inferred that he must be spoken of here al- 
so 3 ; and, since there was no other place for him, he was to 
be the Messias to be cut off. Since, however, Alexander 
died a natural death, B.C. 323, and the alleged commence- 
ment of Antiochus' persecution was in December, 168, 
B.C., a century and a half later, therefore the words, "after 
the 62 weeks," were (contrary, of course, to all language,) 
to mean " 4 in their latter half," (in fact when f of the pe- 
riod had not expired;) nay, yet more, ("through 5 prolepsis 
and sullepsis,") it was to be used of events both before 
and after. According to the new enlightened criticism 
then, the words were to mean, "And towards the end of 
the threescore and two weeks shall an Anointed [Alexan- 
der] be cut off and have no [successor out of his own 
relations] ; and the city and sanctuary shall the army of a 
subsequent 6 prince destroy ; " although the death of Alex- 
ander was 150 years before the expiry of the 62 weeks, 
and the alleged destruction of the city and temple after 
their close, not to mention the fact, that neither city nor 
temple were destroyed by or under Antiochus. Such 
was the new historical and grammatical interpretation, of 
whose new light Bertholdt boasted 7 . 

So for 26 years Daniel had rest. The three main plans 
of getting rid of the superfluous years had been tried. 
Corrodi had disposed of .them beyond the time of Epi- 
phanes ; Eichhorn had made them run parallel, and so 
had thrown them out of the calculation ; Bertholdt had 
declared, that the largest was not to be taken precisely, 
i. e. no more of it than was convenient. " ye sons of 
men, how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leas- 

3 Bertholdt, p. 619-23. 4 " Towards the end," p. 619. 659-61. 

5 Ib. 616. 6 Njn. -i See above, p. 195. - 



204 Second stage of rationalist exposition. 

ing ?" One who should so keep accounts would meet the 
penalty of dishonesty ; one who should so make an astro- 
nomical calculation, would he counted a fool. But any- 
thing would do for " scientific theology." For, God says, 
"My people love to have it so." They who will to be 
deceived, are deceived. No one then had any interest in 
offering any new solution ; for no one doubted that some 
one of the three solutions would do ; and no one heeded, 
which. So that the reference to our Lord was buried, the 
rationalists, like the Jews, were hushed, for fear they should 
awake it. The less said about it, the better. Bleek dis- 
posed of the whole discussion in two pages l following 
the same division as Bertholdt, except that he made the 
62 weeks end with Seleucus Nicator, (he meant, he said 
afterwards 2 , Philopator ;) and he first, (though in cour- 
teous terms) assuming the infallibility of their theory, laid 
the blame of its incompatibility with facts upon the as- 
sumed ignorance of the writer. " The space really meant 
in the prophecies [of Jeremiah] was defined [in Daniel] 
to be 70 seven-years, as to which we must needs assume, 
that the Author, according to his calculation of the time 
elapsed since Jeremiah, believed, that such ivas about its 
length." Else he did not question Bertholdt. 

It was otherwise, after Hengstenberg revived from the 
dust the old belief, that Jesus and His Atoning Death were 
the end and object of the prophecy, and that we have here 
a real definite prediction. Thenceforth, all was, commo- 
tion to tread out the spark ere the fire should be kindled. 
Yet the ways already tried had exhausted all practicable 
methods of making away with the obnoxious years ; so 
the new schemes were only the old ones re-cast, mostly 
with some fresh monstrousness. 

One maintained that the 70 weeks, v. 24, after which 
those great blessings were to be given, were weeks of 
days 3 ; but the 7, 62, 1, (v. 25-27.) were to be weeks of 
years ; only that the writer did not mean the 7 years to 

1 Schleierm. ZS. iii. 291, 2. " Jahrbucher, f. Deutsch.Theol. 

1860. v. 87. 3 Wieseler, Die 70 Wochen, p. 91-4. 



Wieseler, unwilling -witness to the truth. 205 

be counted at all 4 . He then asks himself the naif ques- 
tion ; " 5 If the writer did not mean them to be counted, 
why did he name them at all ? " The answer is scarcely 
credible. " In part, in order to harmonise with an as- 
sumed omission of 7 years of the 70 of Jeremiah's pro- 
phecy of the Captivity ; in part, lest the 70 weeks of v. 24. 
should be counted as weeks of years, and so, since there 
was no room for these seven weeks before Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, any might be tempted to count them afterwards, 
as Corrodi did." In other words, the writer, having men- 
tioned 70 weeks, is subsequently to have counted 7, 62, 
1, weeks, which make up 70, in order to shew that the 
weeks in both are not to be taken in the same sense, as 
weeks of years. The framer of this scheme was amazed 
at the blindness of all critics, Messianic and anti-Messi- 
anic. All, he thought, were biassed, not to see what was 
so evident 6 , yet what he himself afterwards abandoned 7 , 
in order to take up that which he here condemned, as 
being " 8 self-evidently arbitrary and at variance with the 
text." The ground of both his theories, in part, was, that 
he felt how incongruous 9 were the two descriptions; that 
of the close of the 70 weeks as described in v. 24, and that 
of the 7+62+1 weeks, in v. 27., if the subject in these 
last was Antiochus Epiphanes. Then also he saw clearly 
that the Messiah spoken of must be one and the same 10 . 
So does error again bear witness to the truth. 

Yet another 11 (I take only persons who have been or are 
held in repute) placed the 7 weeks at the beginning, run- 
ning parallel with the 62, i.e. not counted at all, and then 
again at the end, equally not to be counted. This is a 
wantonness of contradiction to the text, which can only 
be explained by the necessity of saying something, when 
there was nothing to be said. "The author," he says 13 , 

* Ib. p. 101-5. 5 p. 105. 6 p. 106. 

7 Gott. gel. Am. 1846. p. 43 sqq. 8 p. 71. 9 p. 93. 10 p. 103. 

11 Von Lengerke, Daniel, p. 429. A good deal of his shew of learning was 
transferred tacitly to his pages from the writer whom he makes it an object 
to contradict, Havernick. '* p. 429. 



206 Lenger he's fantastic theory, 

"divides the period from the going forth of the word of 
Jeremiah to the end, seemingly into 7+62+1 weeks. It 
would, however, he an error, if one were to sum up the 
three numbers, as they follow upon each other. Rather, 
the number is to be a mystery, and the seeming natural- 
ness, with which it could be summed up, is precisely in- 
tended to intensify the mysterious obscurity. The wri- 
ter divides the period from the terminus a quo (i. e. 588, 
B. C.) into two, of 62 and 8 weeks. In the first, he marks 
out a lesser period of 7 weeks to Cyrus, and then again 
counts from the same terminus a quo [i. e. still 588, B. C.] 
So then the numbers 7 and 62 run parallel ; both start 
from the same point, but the 7 comes to its close within 
the 62. This lesser period he names for two reasons ; 
1) on account of the great importance of Cyrus to the 
Jews ; 2) in this way the sacred number of 3 becomes 
prominent ; and even apart from this, he had no other 
choice. For since, in order to mark off more precisely 
the time of Antiochus and so to point him out more dis- 
tinctly, 1 week (v. 27.) had to stand alone, and the number 
of 62 weeks was fixed, in that he was compelled, going 
upwards from the end, to distinguish an unnamed period 
of 8 weeks 1 , because the time of Antiochus the Great, 
since which the Jews again stood under Syrian rule, had 

1 Lengerke apparently derived his " 8 weeks " from Rosch, (Stud. u. Kritik. 
1834. p. 276 sqq.) whom he refutes p. 472, 3. Rosch.by a chronology of his own, 
placed the destruction of Jerusalem at B. C. 609 ; whence 49 years reached to 
560, B. C. when Cyrus was to have ascended the throne. (Harduin had taken 
557, B.C. as the first year of Cyrus in Media. See ab. p. 197.) From the same year 
609, 62 weeks, or 434 years, were to come down to the death of Seleucus Phi- 
lopator, B.C. 175 ; then 8 more weeks (56 years) would reach down to 120, 
B.C. [119.] " when John Hyrcanus had raised the condition of the Jews to 
their best estate." The time of Antiochus Epiphanes was to be marked by the 
week and the half week taken together. Lengerke answered, 1) that 609 was 
22 years before Jerusalem was destroyed ; 2) that there is no authority for such 
a date as to Cyrus ; 3) that the death of Philopator was on this theory both to 
end the 62 weeks, and, (on the hypothesis that he was the Messiah,) to follow 
after them ; 4) that, in the text of Daniel, the half -week was plainly a part of 
the week, as expressed by the article jpas'n r*n, "in the half," or "the midst of, 
the week ; " 6) that there was no occasion for this extension to Hyrcanus. 
The strange conception of the 8 weeks Lengerke adopted. 



in his own eyes, incontrovertible. 207 

to be specially marked, he had no other number but 7 
left. The 70 weeks had then a two-fold fulfilment. But 
the true way of counting is a veiled one. The numbers 
7+62 +1 divide the sacred number 70 outwardly only. 
The true division is partly a hidden one ; since only the 
period of 62 weeks is named, the other of 8 weeks is 
passed over in silence." 

In plain language, in order to mark out an event, (the 
transfer of Palestine to Antiochus the Great through the 
defeat of Ptolemy Epiphanes, B.C. 203,) to which event 
there is no allusion in this prophecy, which event took 
place neither at the interval of 62 weeks, (434 years) down- 
wards from the one term assumed, 588, (for this would go 
down to 154, 10 years after the death of Antiochus Epi- 
phanes) nor at the interval of 8 weeks (56 years) upwards 
from the other term assumed, the death of Epiphanes, 164, 
B.C. (for this would reach up to 220, B.C. which is no 
epoch at all, being 4 years after the accession of Antio- 
chus, and 18 years before the defeat of Ptolemy) in or- 
der, in short, to mark an event to which Lengerke owned 
that there was no allusion in Daniel, he assumed that 
the writer mentally divided the 70 weeks into 62 and 8, 
although neither of the numbers, 62 weeks which are 
named, or 8 which are not named, could be made to coin- 
cide with this unnamed event. And to arrive at this, the 
writer, dividing 7, 62, 1, is to have placed the 7 where it 
was not to be counted, and to have interposed the 62 be- 
tween it and the 1, with which he assumes that it was to 
be counted, and yet not even thus to be counted with the 
62 with which it stands connected. And this is given us, 
as " incontrovertible z " as the literal unprejudiced expo- 
sition of the sacred text. 

2 Lengerke says (p. 445.) "That the counting [of the 62 weeks] is to Antio- 
chus the Great, becomes incontrovertibly certain on this ground, that the Mes- 
siah who is to be cut off, can le no other than Seleucus Philopator who ac- 
tually succeeded him, and ' the prince ' who follows him is Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, who in xi. 21. also (comp. 20.) is named as the immediate successor 
of Seleucus Philopator," i, e. from an assumption transparently absurd, that the 
weak Seleucus Philopator, who attempted to plunder the temple, in order to 



208 Ewald' s two attempts to take numbers in natural order. 

So Ewald went back to one of the earlier ways of taking 
the numbers in their natural order, but making them in- 
accurate. First 1 , he took as his starting point, the 4th 
year of Jehoiakim, 607, B.C., made Cyrus the Messiah in 
v. 25., then stretched on to Seleucus Philopator and made 
him the Messiah of v. 26., and his death, B.C. 176, the 
end of the 62 weeks or 434 years, and the time of Antio- 
chus, (according to him. the prince, who should come,} the 
7 years. But the result was that, for 49 years he had 71 ; 
for 434, 360 ; for 7? 10 ; and, the excess in two items not 
counterbalancing the deficiency of the 3rd, for the whole 
490, he had 44 1 . This being unsatisfactory even to Ewald, 
he took 3 from Hitzig another date, that of the actual de- 
struction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, B.C. 588, from 
which there were 49 years to B.C. 539, when, they sup- 
posed, that "the Jews may first have heard of Cyrus." 
The last 7 years were to be from the death of Seleucus 
Philopator, B.C. 176, or 175, to 168, which was the date of 
the profanation of the temple by Antiochus. Every date 
assumed is alike arbitrary. At the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem by Nebuchadnezzar, no decree from God or man went 
forth to restore it. The approach of Cyrus was no mark- 
ed epoch either at the time or afterwards. Not at the 
time, upon the unbelieving hypothesis. It had no inter- 
est for the Jews then, except on the ground of their be- 
lief in Isaiah's prophecy, that God would restore them 
through Cyrus. Conquerors are not wont to give up a 
portion of their conquest, or to release the slaves of the 
vanquished, who, by right of conquest, have become their 
own. They do not trouble themselves about the details 
of the component parts of the dissolved empire, which 
they incorporate into their own. It passes, as a whole, 
into the empire which subdues and absorbs it. Nineveh 

pay his Roman tribute, but, in the 12 years of his reign, did nothing 1 to be re- 
corded, was spoken of as a Messiah cut off; it is to follow " incontrorertibly," 
that the 62 weeks, after which the Messiah was to be cut off, were to end early 
in the reign of his father, 45 years before his death. , 

1 Die Propheten, ii. p. 569, 70. 2 Jahrbiicher d. Bibl. Wiss. vi. p. 194. 



The dates, assumed by him, arbitrary. 209 

had been conquered by the Medo-Persians and Babylo- 
nians, but the 10 tribes remained where their conquerors 
had placed them. The change of masters does not alter 
the condition of slaves. Men were the strength of the 
country, the riches of their masters. The Jews were a 
peaceful, industrious, faithful population, inured, for the 
most part, (as the event shewed,) to their condition. No 
human policy suggested their restoration ; past memories 
and present interests forbad it. 

As they had no ground to expect release beforehand, 
except from Divine prophecy, so, when the release came, 
the release itself became the memorable date, not the 
first anticipation of it. Even to a contemporary, the first 
twilight of dawning hope disappears in the full brightness 
of the reality when risen and effulgent. This is true of all 
history. The birth, not the travail-pangs the first fore- 
runners of that birth, is the date of the new existence 
which is called into being. It is according to a law of 
our nature, that the date, when the Jews or Babylonians 
first heard of the approach of Cyrus, left no trace in his- 
tory. Immediately after their deliverance, the first year 
of Cyrus, the date of that deliverance, became the marked 
era in their history. It is even absurd to suppose, that a 
date, at which no marked event, no change of relations or 
of outward circumstances, took place, from which nothing 
dated, should, (as this theory requires,) have become a 
date nearly 3 centuries and a half afterwards. 

The death of Seleucus Philopator, the supposed com- 
mencement of the last period, had no interest whatever for 
the Jewish people. At the beginning of his reign, he too 1 
had sought to secure the good-will of the Jews by bearing 
the expense of their sacrifices out of his own resources. 
After his attempt to plunder the temple, no mention is 
made of him in Jewish history. Secular history speaks 
of him, as reigning inactively and weakly on account of 

1 " Insomuch that Seleucus too (l SeXeu/cov) the king of Asia," &c. i. e. he, 
as .well as his ancestors; or, "even he who afterward sought to plunder the 
temple." 2 Mace. iii. 3. 

P 



210 Arbitrary rationalist solutions. 

his father's misfortune a . His death absolutely changed 
nothing, since the first years of Epiphanes were peaceable. 

The selection of the date of Antiochus' desecration of 
the temple for the close of this last period is in direct 
contradiction to the prophecy to be explained. For the 
cessation of the sacrifice was to be in the midst of the 
week, i. e. after 3^ years, not at the close of the 7 years. 
Such is the accurate agreement at the beginning and the 
end of the period, which, Ewald thought, determined the 
Pseudo-Daniel to place the 62 weeks, or 434 years, in the 
middle, although the actual years were not 434, but 361, 
i. e. 73 less. Yet even thus conscience seems to require 
that some explanation, whether good coin or bad, should 
at least be tendered. So Ewald gave the solution, that 
seventy of the superfluous years may not have been count- 
ed, as being Sabbatical years, and the 3 other superfluous 
years might be employed to make up the period of Anti- 
ochus from 7 into 10. This is, of course, in the one case, 
much as if we were to say that there were only 3 13 days 
in our solar year because 52 days are Sundays ; or as if 
two inaccurate sums became accurate, because the excess 
of the one was the same as the deficiency of the other. 
These solutions are so many idiosyncrasies ; every one 
sees their arbitrariness except their parents. 

Rationalists have pleased themselves in exaggerating 
the variety of ways in which they say that Christians have 
counted the 70 weeks. Let them look at home. I have 
recounted twelve variations of the anti-Messianic school, 
and I will add one more as a rare specimen of " scientific 
exposition." 3 One following Hitzig, yet owning that the 
7 weeks must precede the 62, counts them back from 
B.C. 605, the date of Jeremiah's prophecy, to B.C. 654, 
which he assumes to have been the date of Manasseh's 
conversion. 3 

And so, the weary changes were rung, each refuting 

1 App. Syr. 66. Bohmer, (Deutsch. Zeitschr. f. Christl. Wissen- 

sehaft u. Phristl. Leben. Jan. 1857. p. 39-sqq.) quoted by Auberi. p. 169. 
3 2 Chr. xxxiii. J6. ' 



Men throw the blame of their own error on Daniel. 211 

his predecessor, the last awaiting his refutation from his 
successor, or ofttimes taking up that which he had before 
condemned. Lengerke refuted Rosch, and Wieseler re- 
futed Lengerke, and Hitzig, Wieseler ; or they mutually 
exchanged with each other. Wieseler took up with Cor- 
rodi ; and Hofmann exchanged his theory for Ewald's ; 
and Ewald gave up what Hofmann took, for Hitzig>s 4 ; 
and, at last, since the assumption, that the prophecy is no 
prophecy but a description of Antiochus, was to be in- 
fallible, and yet the periods given by Daniel were hope- 
lessly irreconcileable with that assumption, the fault is to 
be thrown, not on the infallible theory, but on what, (whe- 
ther men will it or no,) abides what it was, the word of 
God. Hitzig, in his arrogant way, says, " 5 If, in this way, 
the reckoning does not agree, then Daniel has erred, and 
the only question is to explain the error." " The 7 weeks 
form the irpmrov ^ei)So? in the calculation." " The He- 
brews had no Chronology and no connected history of the 
Persian period." Those who are more courteous to the 
aged Prophet say the same more courteously. " 6 The as- 
sumption of such an artificial and unnatural calculation is 
in reality contrary to the text. For it is said, ' throughout 
62 weeks shall Jerusalem be rebuilt/ The beginning of 
this period then cannot be the year of the prophecy; it can 
only be that of the return under Cyrus. Why should not 
the author have found and adopted a calculation for the 
time from Cyrus to Epiphanes, wrong by 70 years?" 
" Any how, one must assume here a blending of different 
calculations, if one will not content one's self with a mere 
erroneousness of the hereditary chronology. But the 
numbers are too important to allow of a mere accident, 

4 This Is noticed by Auberlen, Dan. p. 171. 

5 On Dan. p. 169, 70. See Bleek, (above and Jahrb. d. Deutsch. Theol. 7. 84.) 
"This space [from Cyrus to Epiph.] is really shorter, is some 9 weeks of years 
[56 years] less, but this cannot make us doubt an interpretation, supported by 
grounds so weighty, if we consider that there are in the Canon no chronolo- 
gical data for this period, so that at least a later -writer might easily follow an 
inaccurate calculation, especially if led by a special interest'' [i. e. ignorance 
guided by fraud.] 6 Bunsen, Gott in d. Geseh. i. 527, 29. 



212 Rationalists could not satisfy themselves ; 

and so one has, either, [with Hitzig] to assume that ar- 
bitrary double starting-point of the calculation down- 
wards, together with that strange twice-counting, or [with 
Ewald] to include the 70 years as their number, whereas, 
according to the literal meaning of the prophecy of Je- 
remiah, these might seem to be independent of any inter- 
pretation by weeks of years." 

Such then is the result of this " scientific " criticism. 
It fixes the interpretation beforehand, at its own will ; 
then it endeavours, in every way it can, to adjust with 
its theory the clear and definite statements of the text as 
to the seventy weeks of years, as divided into the periods 
of 7, 62, 1, and this one into its two halves. It adjusts the 
numbers, adapts the descriptions of those spoken of, as it 
wills ; no one for the time interferes with it ; it has free 
scope ; it adjusts, re-adjusts, turns, re-turns, in every way 
it wills. It gives its explanations authoritatively; no fail- 
ure damps its confidence ; it has but to please itself; and 
it cannot. After 80 years of twisting, untwisting, hew- 
ing at the knot, the knot is to them as fast and indissolu- 
ble as ever. "Except the Lord build the house, their la- 
bour is but lost that build it." They form a rope of sand, 
and wonder that it does not cohere ; that, twist it how 
they will, it is but sand. And so at last they throw up the 
problem ; and, like insolent scholars, accuse not their 
own ignorance, but their Master's. " It is not we who 
erred, but Daniel. The problem is insoluble in our way; 
therefore it cannot be solved at all." 

And yet, in this very charge of error on the writer 
of the book of Daniel, they forgot their own previous 
charges. This school objects to the book, that the wri- 
ter had too minute a knowledge of the history of Alex- 
ander's successors. "God does not," they say, "so mi- 
nutely reveal the future." Good. So far then it is con- 
ceded that the account is accurate. Again, it says, that 
the writer was ignorant of the Persian history ; that he 
believed that there were only 4 Persian kings in all, and 
that the Persian empire lasted but 54 years ; that the em- 



their charge of inaccurate Chronology recoils. 213 

pire of Alexander was divided immediately after Ms death 1 . 
Good, again. It concerns not us, whether God revealed 
to Daniel more of the future, than he has actually set 
down. But how this is to help the adaptation of the 70 
weeks to the period from Jehoiakim or Cyrus to Antio- 
chus Epiphanes, these theorists have to explain. Accord- 
ing to them, the writer knew accurately the period from 
the battle of Ipsus, B. C. 301, to B. C. 164. This gives 
137 years. Add the 54 years, during which these assume 
the writer to have believed the Persian Empire to have 
lasted, and the 10 of Alexander's Asiatic wars. This gives 
us 201 years, which the writer is supposed to have believed 
to have elapsed from Cyrus to the death of Antiochus 
Epiphanes. And yet they would have us to accept this 
as an explanation, why the writer of the book of Daniel 
should have supposed 63 weeks of years or 441 years to 
have elapsed from the 4th year of Jehoiakim or } if they 
would be but decently honest, from Cyrus, when a decree 
did go forth to restore and to build Jerusalem, to Epi- 
phanes. They assume that the writer of the book of 
Daniel supposed the period from Cyrus to Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, to have been little more than half of \ohat it ivas, 
viz. 201 years instead of 374 8 ; and then, retaining the 
general term, "inaccuracy of Chronology," they urge this 
as an argument why the writer may have fixed a pe- 
riod 3 , more than twice the length of the time which they 
themselves suppose him to have imagined the actual time 
to be. Their charge of " inaccuracy of chronology" tells 
against themselves. 

And yet what one, the more hold because the least be- 
lieving, speaks out, must have been in the consciences of 
many. " 4 After the death of Jesus, the Son of man, it 
was inevitable that they, to whom He was the Messiah, 
should refer to Him the words, 5 Messiah shall be cutoff" 
w6 One might easily be tempted to interpret Messiah, v. 26, 

1 Lengerke, p. 514. quoting also Bertholdt. 2 Date of prophecy, B.C. 

538 164=374. 3 Even if the 7 weeks,=49 years, are got rid of, there re- 
main 63 weeks =441 years, " Hitzig, Dan. p. 170. 5 ix. 26. 6 Ib. P. 160. 



214 Rationalist agreement only in pulling down ; 

who was to .die by a violent death, of Jesus and His Death; 
and if one thought of this Messlas, notwithstanding the 
absence of the Article, as, the Messias, (as Christ stands 
in Greek for the Christ,) they with whom the Name had 
weight, naturally understood Messias, v. 25, also to be 
Jesus Christ/' Yet with a strange inconsistency, any 
chronological difficulty was a solid ground not to believe 
that Jesus was foretold ; no chronological difficulty was 
any ground against believing any one else to be spoken of. 

The harmony of unbelieving criticism has been con- 
trasted with the disagreements among believers x . It were 
no harm, were these disagreements as great as they al- 
lege ; for the exposition of particular texts, closely or in- 
cidentally as it may at times bear upon the faith, is not, 
in itself, matter of faith. Not the meaning of texts in 
detail, but truths, on which they bear, are mostly 3 mat- 
ters of faith. But the alleged unanimity of this unbeliev- 
ing criticism has been in pulling down, not in building 
up. It has been agreed in rejecting Christ. It would, 
if it could, blot the mention of Him out of the Old Testa- 
ment. But when the question is, how to replace it, quot 
homines, tot sententiae. All agree in bearing witness 
against Him. But it is still, as of old 3 , their witness 
agreed not together. If they waited, until they found 
those whose witness would agree together, the old faith 
would not have been parted with till now. 

In regard to the 70 weeks, agreement on certain points 
was a necessity -of the case. It was essential to any ex- 
position which should exclude our Lord, that the Messiah 
of v. 25. should be Cyrus ; it was their axiom that the last 
week should be part of the reign of Epiphanes ; they had 
then next to no choice as to the Messias who was to be cut 
off. Without religious indifference they could not have 

1 "Among German commentators there is, for the first time in the history 
of the world, an approach to agreement and certainty." Prof. Jowett, Essays 
and Rev. p. 340. 2 I say, " mostly, " because our Lord's words, and so 

His expositions of the Old Testament also, are of course matters of faith. And 
so too whatever any inspired writer asserts, apart from translations of words, 
which, as not affecting the sense, he leaves unaltered. 3 S. Mark xiv. 56. 



disagreement in constructing. 



215 



lighted upon more than one. The following table will shew 
their unanimity as to the rest. 



70 WEEKS FIEST7 MESSIAH 62 62 MESSIAH LAST 

BEGIN END T.26. TOEiS "WEEKS Y.2. WEEK 

B.C. - BEGUN END BEGINS 

Harduin 606. 557.* Cyrus, 606. 172. Onias 171. 

typically. OyP 6 f Christ.) 

Marsham 607. 538. Cyrus. 607. 175. 175. 

Collins followed Harduin. Cyrus and, better, Judas Maccabeeus. 



Ecker- 


537. 


mann 




Corrodi 


588. 


Eieh- 1 




horn > 


536. 


AmmonJ 




Paulus 


536. 


Ber- } 




tholdt 1 
Rosen- j 


588. 


jnifflerj 
Bleek 


588. 



1AST 
WEEK 

ENDS 

165. 



168. 



165. 



537. Zerub- 536. 536. Jewish 174. 

babel. high priest suspended by Antiochus. 

none. The 588. 170. Onias 170. 164. 5 

Christ. death, 172. 

588. Nebu- 606. 175. Onias de- 170. 165. 

chadnezzar. posed, 175. hiatus 5 years. 

588. Zedekiah. 588. 154. Jewish high 175. 165. 6 

priesthood between Onias and Jonathan. 175-157. 



536. Cyrus. 536. 170. Alexander.? ;170. 164. 



536. Cyrus. 536. 



or Je- 



175. Seleucus 175. 164. 
Philopator (at first Nicator.) 



Mattrer 



remiah's time of prophesying generally. 

588. Cyrus. Cyrus. Cyrus. 176. Sel. Phil. 



Hitzig, 1st 588. 539. Cyrus. 588. 175. Sel. Phil. 



Hitzig, 2nd 606, 536. Cyrus, 
but the 7 at 588. 



606. 172. Onias. 



165. 

170. 164. 
hiatus 5 years. 
172. 165. 



Rosch 


609. 


560. 


Cyrus. 


609. 


175. 


Sel. Phil. 


175. 


164. 8 


Lengerke 


588. 


538. 


Cyrus. 


588. 


220. 


Sel. Phil. 


178. 


164. 


Wieseler, 


606. 


none. 


Onias iii. 


606. 


172. 


Onias. 


172. 


164, Feb. 


1st 


















Wieseler, 


606. 


none. 


The 


606. 


175. 


Onias. 


172. 


165,Dec. 


2nd 






Christ. 


hiatus 3 years. 


Ewald, 1st 


607. 


Cyrus. 


Cyrus. 


Cyrus. 


176. 


Sel. Phil. 


Philop. 


16J." 


Ewald,2nd 


588. 


539. 


Cyrus. 


539. 


176. " 


Bohmer 


654. 


605. 




605. 


171. 









Hilgenf eld as Harduin but dropping the types. 
Herzfeld 587. 538. Joshua. '538. 170. priesthood 170. 

after Jason. 

4 Really 559 ; see in Clinton, F. H. ii. 2. Conquest of Media. 6 But 7 weeks 
=49 years, i.e. undefined time, to be added. 6 "Whether &weeks,=56years, 
to be added at the end, the Pseudo-Daniel left to the future to explain." 

1 So also Gesenius, v. BTl? and Hupfeld on Ps. ii. T. up.. 1?. 8 8 more 

weeks from 175, B. C. to 120, B. C. John Hyrcanus. 9 7 more weeks, =49 

years (a definite for an indefinite time) when the Christ was to come lying beyond 
164, B.C. 10 The last 3? lying bejond.. " Sabbath years not counted. 



216 Rationalist failure to fa in the last week. 

But beyond this their utter inability to account for the 
whole period of four hundred years, in any way plausible 
enough to command the assent and Unity of their own school, 
they cannot make a theory, to satisfy one another even as to 
the last week. Here the harmony was to be so perfect, that 
we were to be ready, on the ground of such signal coinci- 
dence, to surrender at discretion, and accept the rest as an 
insoluble problem, with that same faith which Christians 
have, that all difficulties in God's word must needs be solu- 
ble, even though they know not the solution. Rationalists 
required of us implicit unreasoning faith as to the rest of 
their theory, on account of the self-evidence of this portion 
of it. But is it then so ? Do these seven years so exactly 
correspond to the persecution of Antiochus ? Here, on the 
rationalist hypothesis, we are in the writer's own time. He 
is to be speaking, not of what he saw, as we know, enlight- 
ened by God, but of what he is, by the hypothesis, to have 
seen with his bodily eyes and heard with his bodily ears. 

The facts are not disputed. There is no question of re- 
search or intricate chronology. In his first years, Antio- 
chus was otherwise engaged. A portion of the Jews were 
apostatising, rationalising probably. They were adopting 
Greek ways, and Greek unbelief 1 . They sought the king 2 , 
not the king them. The date of Antiochus' first attack on 
Jerusalem is given very precisely. " 3 After that Antiochus 
had smitten Egypt, he returned again in the hundred forty 
and third year [of the Seleucidse, B. C. 1-g-f-] and went up 
against Israel and Jerusalem with a great multitude." 

1 1 Mace. i. 11-15. 2 "They went unto the king, who gave them 

licence to do after the ordinances of the heathen, whereupon they built a gymnasium 
at Jerusalem according to the customs of the heathen, and made themselves uncir- 
cumcised, and forsook the holy covenant, and joined themselves to the heathen, and 
were sold to do mischief." Ib. 13-15. The gymnasium, adorned with emblems of 
Greek idolatry, and containing schools of Greek philosophy, was meant to Grecise 
the Jewish youth. The key to the unbelief was the " becoming uncircumcised," 
an effacing of the outward mark of the covenant with God, (see Lightfoot on 
1 Cor. vii. 18.) resorted to subsequently in time of persecution, now undertaken vo- 
luntarily, to assimilate themselves to the heathen. " Let us make a covenant with 
the heathen," was their resolve ; " to do after the ordinances of the heathen," was 
the permission of Antiochus, Jos. Ant, xji, 5, 3 1 Mace. i. 20. 



Dates in the reign of Epiphanes. 217 

Then he plundered the temple, (as had been done by other 
conquerors before him,) to supply his reckless expendi- 
ture 4 ; but it was a passing storm. It is said expressly 5 , 
" when he had taken all away, he went into his own land/' 
The real lasting persecution began two years later, when 
he returned in great anger at the discomfiture of his plan 
by the decisiveness of Popilius, at some time in the early 
autumn of B.C. 168. It is again said expressly, " 6 After 
two full years the king sent his chief collector of tribute 
unto the cities of Judah, who came unto Jerusalem with 
a great multitude/' Jerusalem and Judaea had been 
meantime unmolested from without. The collector of 
tribute came to the cities of Judah, when "two years 
were fully expired." Jerusalem lay secure within its 
strong walls, which held out so many sieges. It is again 
expressly recorded that " 7 he [Apollonius] spake peace- 
able words unto them, but it was all deceit; for when 
they had given him credence, he fell suddenly upon the 
city and smote it very sore, and set it on fire and pulled 
down the houses and walls thereof on every, side, and 
built the city of David [Mount Zion] with a great and 
strong wall, and with mighty towers, and made a strong 
hold for them and put a garrison of apostates in it." It 
is clear then from the whole account, that, up to this 
time, autumn 8 168, B.C., there had been no permanent 

4 " He committed sacrilege on very many temples." Polyb. xxxi. 4. 
5 1 Mace. i. 24. Ib. 29. 1 Ib. 30-34. 8 "Both Livy 

(xlv. 10.) and Polybius (xxix. 11. Legat. 92.) shew that Popilius did not pro- 
ceed to Egypt till after the battle of Pydna ; and as that battle was on the 23rd 
of June, his interview with Antiochus must be placed in July or August ; and 
Antiochus would reach Palestine in the Autumn." Clinton, Fasti Hell. iii. 323. 
The date of the battle of Pydna is fixed by an eclipse. " The eclipse, which pre- 
ceded the battle of Pydna, fell upon June 21, which would fix the battle to 
June 22, and the preceding notes of times agree with this date. Porphyry 
in Euseb. Chron. 1.38. p. 177. rightly places the battle within Olymp. 152. 4. 
i. e. before July, B. C. 168." Id. on B. C. 168. Tables, iii. p. 84. Popilius did not 
leave Delos, until the news of the the battle of Pydna reached him at Delos ; 
they sailed by Rhodes, where they spent 5 days. (Liv. xlv. 10.) There had been 
time for Alexandria to be "reduced to extremities." (Polyb. xxix. 11. Leg. 
92.) Polybius too thinks that " Antiochus would not have obeyed, unless the 
overthrow of Perseus had taken place and been credited." (n-jo-reuSe'i/ros) Ib. 



1218 Events at the close of the reign of Epiphanes. 

possession of Judaea by Aiitiochus. The persecution 
then commenced ;. on the 15th of Chisleu 1 (December, 
168, or January, 167, B. C.) the temple was desecrated by 
the idol-altar built upon the altar of God ; on the 25th, 
the first sacrifice was offered upon it. Three years af- 
terwards, on that same day in that month, the temple 
was cleansed. 

This was, of course, December, 165, or January, 164, 
B.C. Judas proceeded to fortify the sanctuary, as before, 
and Bethsur. Antiochus was at this time engaged in war 
with "the Satraps of the upper provinces," probably with 
Artaxias 2 . The tidings must have been dispatched soon 
after the defensive preparations of Judas^for no later tid- 
ings reached him. But the subsequent campaign of Ju- 
das Maccabams against the petty nations who harassed 
Israel had come to a close, while Epiphanes was still in 
Persia, attempting to plunder the temple in Elymais 3 . 
On his retreat after its failure, he heard how the Jews had 
defeated Lysias, undone his desecration of the temple, 
" 4 fortified. the sanctuary and his city Bethsur," and he 
died, while yet in Persia 5 , of a wasting disease 6 , 149, A.S. 7 
16f , B.C. The exact month it is impossible to determine 8 . 

Popilius then probably proceeded leisurely, in order to give full time for the 
news, on which the success of his embassy depended, to be fully accredited. 

1 1 Mace. i. 54. There is no reason to change the date against all authority, 
in order to identify it with v. 59. The sacrifices to God were renewed on the 
day, on which the first idol-sacrifices were offered. (1 Mace. iv. 52.) This is 
the point of contrast between i. 59. and iv. 52. The fact in i. 54. is additional. 

2 See ab. p. 150. 1. 3 1 Mace. vi. 1. Ib. 7. 5 Ib. 5. so. too Polyb. 
Fragm. xxxi. 11. Porph. in S. Jer. on Dan. xi. 44. 6 <f>0iva>v. App. Syr. 66. 
" He laid him down upon his bed, and fell sick for grief, and there he conti- 
nued many days, for his grief was ever more and more, and he made account 
that he should die." 1 Mace. vi. 8, 9. 1 Ib. 16. Jos. Ant. xii. 9. 2. 

8 Demetrius probably escaped from Rome so as to succeed at the very begin- 
ning 1 of A. S. 151,i.e.Oct. B.C. 162. For the death of Lysias and Eupator, and 
the two expeditions against Judaea took place before the close of the Adar ensu- 
ing. If then Eupator reigned 2 years, (as JosephusAnt. xii. 10. 1. and Eusebius, 
Can. p. 356. say,) the death of Epiphanes must have fallen at the beginning 
of 149, A. S. the autumn of 164, B. C. But Eusebius (in his Table, ii. 260.) and 
his Chronographer (i. 194.) assign 1 year 6 months to the reign of Eupator. 
And it may be, that Josephus took his period of 2 years from the more gene- 
ral statements of the first book of Maccabees, that Epiphanes died. A, S, 149. 



His death no relief to the Jews ; the " 2300 days." 219 

But his death was no relief; rather it was the signal for 
renewed hostilities. Antiochus being far away, Lysias 
had remained inactive in the interval, gathering a fresh 
army at Antioch 9 , perhaps awaiting the return of the 
messenger and further instructions. After the death of 
Epiphanes, Lysias, in the name of his youthful son 10 An- 
tiochus Eupator, renewed the war ; it was carried on by 
Demetrius, after he had murdered Lysias and Eupator ; 
and the first rest in the war was, when Nicanor, the se- 
cond general sent against the Jews by Demetrius, had 
been 'defeated and slain in Adar, 151, A. S. 11 i. e. early in 
161, B.C. It is then remarkedfor the first time/'Thus the 
land of Judah had rest for a little while." The first stage 
of the war then, and apparently that marked in Daniel 
himself in the prophecy specially relating to the perse- 
cution by Antiochus ia , was probably more than two years 
after the death of Epiphanes. How then do the events 

and that Demetrius escaped from Rome, A. S. 151. The uncertainty extends to 
6 months. 9 1 Mace. iv. 35. 10 Eusebins (p. 187.) says that he was 

12 years old ; Appian, that he was 9. (Syr. i. 46, 66.) u 1 Mace. vii. 1. 43-50. 
12 The term assigned in Daniel viii. 14. (which belongs to this Old Testa- 
ment Anti-Christ) is 2300 days, i. e. 6 years, 4 months, 2 days. This is any 
thing but a "round number." The time between the dates specified in the 
first book of Maccabees from Chisleu 15, A. S. 145, (the day when the idol-altar 
was erected) to Adar 13, A. S. 151, is only a month of 29 days short of the whole 
sum. The lunar year had 354 days ; in 6 years, there would be two interca- 
lary months of 30 days. The remainder of Chisleu adds 15 days ; the two months 
before Adar, 59 days ; of Adar there were 13 days. The sum then stands thus ; 

354 x 6=2124 

2 intercalary months 60 

2 intervening months 59 

parts of Chisleu and Adar 28 



2271 

leaving a deficit of a month of 29 days. But the desecration of the altar was 
not the beginning of the persecution. (1 Mace. i. 33-53.) A month then may 
well have elapsed before, in which all public worship of God was suspended. 
(Ib. 39.) This is the calculation of Hiivernick, and, in the main, that of Dere- 
ser and even Bertholdt ; only that Bertholdt tries to make room at the end for 
the month unaccounted for. 

Another period, however, equally harmonises in point of time, that from the 
first invasion, in 143, A. S. to the death of Antiochus, ^the death of Antiochus 
did not take place until the spring of A. S. 149, i. e. that of 163, B.C. For, since 



220 The " 2300 days " probably twice fulfilled. 

of the last week or their dates agree with this history ? 
Those events are, the cutting off of Messiah, the confirm- 
ing of a covenant with the many during the whole 7 years, 
the causing of all sacrifice to cease at the end of the first 
3| years. * Anti-Messianic interpreters place in it, and 
must place in it, the utter destruction of city and temple, 
and (as they will have it) the destruction of the destroyer. 
The prophecy says, that at the end of the 3 first years, 

the 2nd invasion, that of 145, A. S.,was "two full years" after the first, the 
first also must have heen in Autumn, the previous part of our year B. C. 170, 
i. e. the close of A. S. 142, having been spent in the Egyptian expedition; For 
this invasion was " after he had smitten Egypt." (1 Mace. i. 20.) If then we 
suppose this first invasion to have been near the middle of the 2nd month of 143, 
A. S. i. e. Nov. 15. B.C. 170, this would give the following result, the era of the 
Seleucidae beginning at Tisri 1, i. e. at the month in the lunar year answering 
to our October ; 

10 months of 143, A. S. and 13 days 308 days 

A. S. 144, 5, 6, 7, 8 ; 354 x 5. 1770 

A. S. 149, 5 months of 30 x 3 90 

29x2 58 

6th month, 14 days of 14 

two intercalary months 60 



2300 

There is then good space, (/"the reign of Eupator was only 1$ year ; and the 
events were marked in themselves, the first aggression of Antiochus against 
the people of God, and the issue of his persecution in his death. If this were 
so, the number was twice remarkably fulfilled. This way was adopted by a 
Lapide, although not entering into its proof. 

The Anti-Messianic interpreters, who could not satisfy themselves with the 
expedient of halving the days, have taken this plan ; only in order to make Dan. 
xii. 11, 12. relate to events in the life of Antiochus, they re-modelled, in differ- 
ent ways, the beginning of the era of the Seleucidse and history. The shift of 
halving the days is one of of those monsters, which have disgraced " scientific 
expositions " of Hebrew. The simple words nist? ts^ifi? D;B^X -ij5h DTJJ, " evening- 
morning two thousand and three hundred," (according to the analogy of 
wx^fifpof, 2 Cor. xi. 25. and the summary of each day in Gen. i. 5, &c. 
" And evening was, and morning was, the first, second, third, &c. day,") were 
to mean 1500 mornings on account of the morning sacrifice, and 1500 even- 
ings on account of the evening sacrifice, and yet an;/ of course means " even- 
ing," and ngh "morning." But could they, per impossible, mean "morningand 
evening sacrifices," the matter would not be mended. Standing as the words 
do before the numeral, the numeral must, according to the principles of all lan- 
guage, apply to the whole. Conceive any one rendering "noctes diesque 
triginta," " 15 nights and 15 days." 



Events of lastly ears agree with noj years of Epiphanes. 221 

all sacrifice was to cease ; it implies that it was to cease 
altogether ; the temple, where alone it could be offered, 
was to be utterly destroyed ; no word is said of its resto- 
ration. Ruin broods over its desolate places. Anti-Mes- 
sianic interpreters have diverted attention from the first 
3^ years, at the expiration of which all sacrifice was to 
cease, to the last 3| years, after which they supposed 
it to be restored. Of this, there is nothing in the text ; 
and the desecration of the temple lasted for three years 
precisely, not for 3 years. Again, counting back the 7 
years from the only date, which these interpreters can 
make out for themselves, the death of Antiochus, (if it was 
so) in the spring of 163, B. C., we arrive at the spring of 
1/0, B.C. in the middle of 142, A. S. This was 2 years and 
9 months before the desecration of the temple, but it was 
itself absolutely no era at all. It was eight months be- 
fore even that first passing storm, when Antiochus plun- 
dered the temple of Jerusalem, as he did so many besides. 
It was a happy eventless year for the Jews, when they 
were living every man under his vine, and under his Jig-tree^ 
with no signs even of that first hurricane; much less of 
their long desolation. Onias too, the exiled high-priest, 
having been deposed by Epiphanes on his accession l to- 
wards the close of A. S. 137 2 , in the middle of B. C. 175, 
had been murdered three years subsequently 3 , B. C. 172 ; 
consequently two years before this date. Lastly, the hea- 
thenising party of the Jews also applied to Antiochus at 
the very beginning of his reign 4 . Even then on the An- 
ti-Messianic theory, that " the confirming the covenant 
for one week" was meant of the encouragement given by 
Antiochus to the apostates who applied to him, this also 
was prior by 4 years to the week or 7 years of which it 
was to be a characteristic. 

Not a fact then, nor a date coincides. Granting these 
interpreters all which they ask for, allowing, which is ut- 
terly unnatural, that it should be said of one and the same 

i 2 Mace. iv. 7-10. 2 Clinton, F. H. iii. 323. 3 2 Mace. iv. 23. 32-4. 
4 2 Mace. iv. 7-10. 1 Mace, i, 10-15. 



222 Aggravations of the failure as to the last 7 years ; 

earthly king, that he should destroy the city and sanctu- 
ary, confirm a covenant with many for one week, and that, 
after half of the week, he should make sacrifice and obla- 
tion to cease ; and this, in the sense that he shewed fa- 
vour to apostates and deserters, and made war upon the 
city and people even supposing all this granted, they can 
give no account of those very dates in which all these 
things are supposed to have taken place, and which are 
to be the key to all the rest. Antiochus did not confirm 
any covenant for 7 years, nor did he make sacrifice to 
cease for half of those 7 years, nor was any Messias, or 
any one alleged to be. a Messias, cut off during those 7 
years ; nor was the temple destroyed ; nor were there any 
7 years, in the period selected, of one uniform marked 
character. Rather the 7 years selected were of a most 
chequered character ; first, nearly a year of entire peace ; 
then horrible and cruel treachery and bloodshed; then 
nearly two years more of peace ; then three years of in- 
tense persecution ; then a respite, at least from the gene- 
ral of Epiphanes for a year and 5 months, and victory 
over the petty heathen nations who assailed them. 

And yet the writer, living, according to their hypothe- 
sis, in Judaea, writing, as they say, to encourage their 
countrymen K1 in their great struggle against Antio- 
chus," could not be mistaken about what he is to have seen 
with his own eyes. 

The scheme then of connecting the prophecy of the 70 
weeks with Antiochus Epiphanes fails, evidently, palpa- 
bly, as to the very point upon which it is mainly brought 
to bear, the end and object of it. The impossibility of 
accounting for the whole period of 490 years or the two 
periods of 49 and 434 years is not in the least relieved, 
but is aggravated by the impossibility of explaining the 
last 7. The writer is supposed to have had no object, 
except to describe his own times and their issue, so far 
as it lay before him ; there was no call to mention time 
at all ; and, having a tabula rasa, on which, according to 

1 Ess. and Rev. p. 76. 



unmeaningness of the whole rationalist explanation. 223 

the hypothesis, he had to describe, as future, events be- 
fore his eyes, he is to have written them with marks, pa- 
tently at variance with those events which he saw and 
knew. In order, on the hypothesis, to explain Jeremiah's 
prediction, in the fulfilment of which all of his time be- 
lieved and of which they desired no explanation, he is to 
have written, as relating to his own times, a prophecy, 
which no one can adapt to them, explaining what was 
clear by what was inexplicable, irradiating light by 
darkness. 

Yet this failure, as to time, although a mark against 
these interpretations, is not so great a failure as the ob- 
jectless character of the whole. 

According to these dislocating interpretations, the 
whole promise of the blessings to come is to lie in that 
first verse of the prophecy ; and yet, since, according to 
them, to "anoint one all-holy" was to be the mere cleans- 
ing of the visible sanctuary, these too were to be quite im- 
personal. The promise does indeed contain what our spi- 
ritual nature most longs for, forgiveness of sins and the 
gift of righteousness, but, the personal Christ being blot- 
ted out, they were to be connected only with that outward 
purification of the profaned temple. All the rest of the 
prophecy is to relate, either to their restoration through 
Cyrus 370 years before, or to that chequered state in 
which they were, or to events in which they were no way . 
concerned, or actual visitations of God upon them, in 
which the picture is to close. What to them was the 
death of Alexander, or Seleucus Philopator, or even of the 
ejected high-priest Onias III, whom these have substi- 
tuted for the Christ ? Shocked they were doubtless at the 
murder of the blameless old man ; but it in no way af- 
fected them, since he was far removed from them at Anti- 
och, and his death was the result of mere private malice, 
avenged even by Antiochus on the perpetrator. But, ac- 
cording to these men, the central part of the prophecy 
are the desolations and prof anations of Antiochus, a long 
abiding desolation decreed by God. Whether they in- 



224 . Emptiness of the meanings 

terpret "to the end" or "to the end of the war," it was 
to an end, which they were not to see, a night of which 
their eyes were not to behold the first faint streak of the 
dawn. 

Contrast together the text and the interpretation. On 
the 24th verse, I will refer only to those who are consis- 
tent. For of all anomalies, one of the strangest is, to as- 
sume that v. 24, with all its fulness of spiritual promise, 
had its fulfilment in Jesus, and yet to maintain that the 
rest, which is a filling up of that outline, relates to per- 
sons with whom the spiritual history of the world is no 
way concerned. 

They then, who are consistent, paraphrase thus ; ("not 
seventy years but) seventy seven-years are determined on 
thy people and on thy holy city, until iniquity is perfected, 
and the mass of sins is full, and transgression is aton- 
ed by the suffering of punishment, and the prosperity of 
old times is brought back, and the prophet's (Jeremiah's) 
saying is fulfilled, and the all-holy (the temple) is conse- 
crated (by Judas Maccabeeus.") 

We are told in explanation, " l the Jews in the Hasmo- 
nrean age, according to the moral-deterministic princi- 
ples of their nation 2 , looked upon the time from the de- 
struction of the Jewish state until that when Judas Mac- 
cabeus, after driving out the Syrians, could undertake 
the consecration of the temple, as one, in which the peo- 
ple of Israel was to make the measure of its sins full ; and 
on the same principles they believed, that henceforth the 
anger of God would turn away from the people, and the 
long-heaped guilt be looked upon by God as atoned." As 
far as this has any truth, the point of departure is arbi- 
trarily selected. A greater than Daniel said 3 , Fill ye up 
the measure of your fathers. Unrepented sin does accu- 
mulate, whether upon the individual or the nation, until 

1 Bertholdt, Daniel, p. 616, 8. 2 " Dan. yiii. 23." This school con- 

tinually draws its statements as to " the Hasmonsean age " from Daniel alone, 
and is seemingly unconscious that it is " hegging the question." 
3 S.Matt.xxiii. 32. 



imported by Rationalists into the prophecy. 225 

it brings down God's chastisements 4 . Persevering dis- 
obedience to God's warnings by the former prophets 
brought on the first captivity 5 ; disobedience, ending in 
the heathenising under Antioehus Epiphanes, brought on 
his fierce persecution ; disobedience, culminating in the 
rejection and murder of Christ, ended in their last de- 
struction and dispersion. But on each occasion, they 
were put on a new trial. The sins, of which Antioehus 
became the scourge, were not those of their fathers before 
the Captivity, but their own. The ground assigned then 
for dating from the first destruction of Jerusalem is ar- 
bitrary and false. It is either too early or too late. In 
one way, a nation takes its character from all its previous 
history, since it became a nation j in this sense the date 
of the first destruction of Jerusalem is too late. In an- 
other, Israel was put on a new trial, after the restoration 
under Cyrus, and in this way the date from Jeremiah is 
too early. 

The exposition is also self-contradictory, in that it as- 
signs the same date for the filling up the measure of sin, 
and for its forgiveness. The filling up the measure of 
sin is the time, not of forgiveness but of punishment. If 
the punishment is, in its nature or in God's purpose, tem- 
porary, the restoration comes at its close. In that 69th 
year of the captivity, in regard to which this prophecy is 
supposed by all these expositors to have been given, that 
punishment was coming to an end. Israel had not been, 
for those 69 years, filling up iniquity, but had been bear- 
ing its punishment. 

Apart from this acknowledgement, that sin is, not in 
itself but in the mind of the Hebrews, a cause of afflic- 
tion, the rest is more heathen than heathenism ; it is not 
on a par with Virgil's description of the golden age to 
come, as borrowed from the Jewish Sibyl. 
To proceed with their exposition, I will take the most 

4 See Butler's Analogy, i. 2. 

6 Lev. xxvi. 14-39. (on the gradually accumulating punishment,) 2 Kings 
xvii. 7-23. Jer. xxv. 3-11. xxix. 18, 19. Ezek. xx. 



226 Contrast of the ivhole prophecy 

plausible, leaving out monsters, unless they have been 
followed by many ; 

From the going forth of the commandment to restore and 
to build Jerusalem, [i. e. from Jeremiah's prophecy of its 
70 years' desolation,] unto Messiah the Prince [i. e. to Cy- 
rus] shall be 7 weeks, [49 years, being a round number 
for the round number 70,] and threescore and two weeks, 
[i. e. during 434 years, yet not so, really, but during 360 
years,] street and ivall shall be built, and in strait of 
times ; [contrariwise, the greater part of the time, all that 
with which the Pseudo-Daniel is to have been most fa- 
miliar, the time after Alexander, was a prosperous time.] 
After the 62 weeks [i. e. really before their close] Messiah 
shall be cut off [i. e. a high priest shall be deposed, or, 
having been deposed, shall be assassinated out of private 
malice; or a foreign king shall die a natural death, or 
shall be poisoned,] and there shall not be to him [a suc- 
cessor or a legitimate successor, or one of his own kin ; 
although all had successors, and one might just as well 
supply anything else whatever, which they had not,] and 
the people of a prince that shall come shall destroy city and 
temple [i. e. shall fire V some houses in the city, yet leav- 
ing it, as a whole, unhurt and inhabited as before 3 , and 
displacing not one stone or ornament of the temple, nay 
nor touching it ; for the idol-altar was built on the brazen 
altar outside 3 ;] and his end shall be in that Jlood, [not in 
that, nor in any other flood of war ; but, rather more than 
3 years afterwards, after he had been victorious in his 
own wars, he wasted away of a disease which Jew 4 and 
Gentile 5 alike looked upon as a Divine infliction,] and 
unto the end is war, [not to his end, nor to anyone's end, 
but to the end of the war, i. e. there shall be war,, till there 
is peace,] and desolations determined [i. e. upon Jerusa- 
lem, which, after three years, and a year or 1^ year before 
the death of Antiochus, was again reoccupied and forti- 
fied by the Jews.] " 

1 1 Mace. i. 31. 2 Ib. 38, 55. 3 Ib. 54, 59. 4 Jos. xii. 9, 1. 

5 Potyb. xxxi. 11. T. iv, 513> Schw. 



with the rationalist expositions of it. 22/ 

And he shall confirm the covenant with the many for one 
iveek, [the prince had not been the subject of any former 
sentence; the covenant is, in Daniel, the covenant with 
God ; the many were not apostates ; but, apart from all 
this, Antiochus made no covenant with any ; to give li- 
cence to forsake God's law is no covenant ; there were no 
seven years in which Antiochus was in any relation with 
any Jews ; he gave that licence at the beginning of his 
reign ; in the period of the war, i. e. during the 7 years, in 
which it is supposed to have been made, it came to an end 
of itself;] in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacri- 
fice and oblation to cease, [there is no era from which those 
3| years can be dated,] and on the pinnacle of abomina- 
tions a desolater, [the temple was not then a place of abo- 
minations, (as the Jews in our Lord's time made it a den 
of thieves ; and afterwards, in their last war, more fear- 
fully desecrated it ;) yet it is so called from what it was 
before the desolation, not as what the desolation made it;] 
and until decreed desolation shall be poured on the deso- 
late; [even if this be rendered, on the desolater, the death 
of Antiochus, although an awful judgment of God, formed 
no era, made no change, was received as no relief by the 
Jews. For their war, all this time, had been with his 
generals, not with himself who was warring far away ; 
and with those same generals the war was renewed, when 
he was dead.] If any one can believe this to be the mean- 
ing of the prophecy, of a truth, unbelief imposes hard laws 
upon the intellect of man. 

Or look again at the prophecy, in the light of those 
times for which the Anti-Messianic interpreters will have 
it to be written after the event, and of those for which it 
was really given. 

The supposed object of this prophecy, according to the 
rationalist interpretation, is to account for the prophe- 
cies with regard to the Messiah not having been fulfilled 
at the time of the return from the Captivity, by promis- 
ing their fulfilmftnt at the time of Antiochus Epiphanes. 
Where is there a trace that the Jews ever looked for 

Q2 



228 The Messiah not expected, till He was to come ; 

their fulfilment then, or were disappointed at His not 
coming ? This is no negative argument. We have, in 
Ezra and Nehemiah, a graphic account of their condi- 
tion at different dates during 126 years after their return. 
We see them struggling with their present difficulties, but 
no more looking for our Lord's first Coming in which they 
helieved, as somewhat immediate or near, than Ave look 
for His second Coming, which we daily confess, as prox- 
imate. We have also Prophets, whose early date no one 
questions. Haggai promises that He should come in 
that temple, which was then in building 1 ; Zechariah 
speaks of His Coming, but of the events under Alexan- 
der before it 3 ; Malachi, a century, probably, after their 
return, foretells His coming suddenly to His temple 3 , and 
the messenger who should come before Him. This was, 
any how, two centuries and a half before Antiochus. 
. Then, as to the times in which the hypothetical writer of 
Daniel is to have lived and written, we have authentic, de- 
tailed histories of times, before, under, and after, Antio- 
chus Epiphanes ; we have books of edification written 
then, the two books of Wisdom and Baruch. In none of 
them is there any expectation of any deliverer. The 
books of Maccabees speak calmly of the great tribula- 
tion in Israel after Epiphanes, such as had not been since 
there had not been a prophet among them 4 ; the Jews 
laid aside the stones of the profaned altar, " 5 in the moun- 
tain of the temple in a convenient place, until there 
should come a prophet to shew what should be done 
with them/' They laid them by carefully as for many 
days. Twenty years afterwards, B.C. 141 6 , the Jews, 
" 7 the great congregation of the priests and people and 
rulers of the nation, and elders of the country /' made 
the priesthood hereditary in Simon's family "in perpe- 
tuity 8 , until a faithful prophet should arise." Israel is 
still a people of the future. In their prosperity as in their 

1 Hagg. ii. 6-9. 2 Zech. ix. 1-8. See further Lect. v. 

3 Mai. Hi. 1. iv. 5. 4 1 Mace. ix. 27. 6 Ib. iv. 46. 

6 " 18 EIuI, 172," Sel. 1 Mace. xiv. 27. ' Ib. 28. ds -rlv <u&va. Ib. 41. 



expected, when He was to come. 229 

adversity, they look on calmly to the future. The time 
came, and there was a general expectation. All men's 
minds were stirred ; the pious were waiting ; men were 
on the look-out ; there was no doubt among them, that 
He was coming ; they were like men in a city, when some 
great one of the earth is expected; as the time came 
nearer, they watched each token that it might he He : 
9 'Art thoit He that should come, or do we look for ano- 
ther ? w lf Thou be the Christ, tell us plainly." The poor 
Samaritan woman said, " u I know that Messias cometh, 
which is called Christ; when He is come, He shall tell 
us all things." Ambitious bad men availed themselves of 
the general stir, and said 12 , / am Christ, I3 and drew away 
much people after them. In all their afflictions, amid all 
that former pressure and noble struggle for their faith 
and country, there arose men zealous for the law of their 
God and for Israel, but no false Messias arose. False 
Christs could not somehow come, until about the time of 
the true. They were darkness cast, where t he true Light 1 * 
was obstructed ; fantastic, cold-engendered, fleeting, par- 
helia around 15 the Sun of Righteousness, which owed their 
existence to His Presence. 

Whence then, contrary to what those perverters of 
the truth of history as well as of Holy Scripture say, 
whence that long-enduring patience after the Captivity, 
in the troublous times in which the temple was rebuilt, 
the city and polity restored, amid the partial oppressions 
of some of Alexander's earlier successors or the concen- 
trated deadly enmity of Antiochus Epiphanes, and Eupa- 
tor, and Demetrius, amid all the hopes and fears of that 
nearly 60 years' strife of the Maccabees l8 , until about a 
century before our Lord ; whence all this tranquil look- 
ing to a distant future, through more than five checquer- 
ed centuries, when Christ did not come, and then, all 
at once, all that out-bursting of those long pent-up hopes, 

9 S.Matt. xi. 3. 10 S.John x. 24. " Ib. iv. 25. 12 S.Matt.xxiv.5. 
13 Acts v. 36, 7. u S, Johni. 9. 15 Mai. iv. 2. 1B 167, B.C. 

MuttathJas ; 109, B.C. the close of the w^rs of John Hyrcamis, 



230 The rest, and the expectation at last, 

all that Stirring expectation of Him^ as at their doors, as 
to come before that generation should be gathered to their 
fathers? 

The prophecies of Daniel explain hoth the previous 
tranquillity in that long winter which lay upon them, and 
that sudden burst and glow of spring-like hope, all na- 
ture ready to expand and welcome Him, when the Sun 
was indeed to come and put forth His power. Daniel 
had pointed out a long time, lasting, at the least, five cen- 
turies, during which the Messiah should not come. The 
peoplebelieved him, and, during all those centuries,looked 
not for Him then to come. The latest edict in behalf of 
Jerusalem having been given B. C. 445, there remained 
only 91 years, at certain periods in which the prophecy 
of Daniel could be fulfilled 1 . Of these, 42 only 2 had 
elapsed, when the then tributary king, and all Jerusalem 
with him, was troubled at the announcement, that stran- 
gers from the East were enquiring for the new-born king 
of the Jews, whom they were come to worship. Nearly 
30 years more, and one appeared, arresting the thoughts 
of all by the austere garb of Elijah, which preached that 
he was living not for this world, while his herald-voice 
proclaimed in Daniel's words, the kingdom of heaven is at 
hand. A few months more, and He came, who spake not 
as man spake, who did miracles which man could not do, 
who drew hearts, men knew not how. Expectation was 
created ; men's souls were prepared ; they who were His 
listened to the Voice which man had so long waited to 
hear. But the awful freedom of the human will was 
respected by its Maker. Messiah was cut off, as Daniel 
foretold, legal sacrifices end^ sin is forgiven, everlasting 
righteousness is brought in, the new covenant is con- 
firmed. 

Look steadily at the emptiness, irrelevancy, iriharmo- 
niousness, of those things, which men have fastened, 
not meanings but unmeaningnesses on" the book of Da- 

1 See ab. p. 166-9. 2 536, B, C. (490 + 42) = 4, B. C. the probable date 
of our Lord's Birth. 



explained by Daniel's prophecy. 231 

niel, and then look how that book lights up with its 
true meaning, reflecting beforehand Him who had not 
yet risen ; and you cannot hesitate to choose between the 
darkness and the light. 



LECTURE V. 



The minuteness of a portion of Daniel's prophecies is in 
harmony with the whole system of Old Testament Pro- 
phecy, in that God, throughout, gave a nearer foreground 
of prophecy, whose completion should, to each age, accre- 
dit the more distant and as yet unfulfilled prophecies* 

PORPHYRY'S objection to the book of Daniel, that it con- 
tained such definite prophecies of the reign of Antiochus 
Epiphanes, was consistent in him, if he had become al- 
together a heathen, and meant to deny all definite pre- 
diction. To maintain it, he must have denied the truth 
of most of the Old Testament, and contradicted the spi- 
rit and character of the whole. For the Old Testament 
is full of definite prophecies. Definite prediction, pre- 
diction as definite as those in the Book of Daniel, is an 
essential part of its system. Porphyry's German follow- 
ers accepted this issue. They rejected the definite pre- 
dictions of Daniel, but only in common with all other 
definite prediction of the Old and New Testament. It 
is the character of English minds to take things piece- 
meal. They admit an objection in detail, without ob- 
serving whither it tends, and become inconsistent alike 
in their belief and their unbelief. When it is proposed 
to you to disbelieve the book of Daniel, because there is 
" l not only minute description of Antioehus' reign, but 

1 Dr. Williams, Essays and Rev. p. 76. Again, "In the case of Daniel, he 
may doubt whether all parts of the book are of the same age," [which now 
not even a rationalist questions,] f 'or what is the stavtingpoint of the 70 weeks ; 



Breadth of the principle at issue. 233 

a stoppage of such description at the precise date 169, 
B. C.," or to deny the genuineness of the later chapters 
of Isaiah because Cyrus is there predicted by name 2 , you 
are in fact asked to admit a principle, which involves the, 
disbelief of all definite prediction. For the objection is 
one a priori; as to the character of all God's revelations 
of the future. The prediction of a person by name can 
be no proof, that it is a seeming prediction only, written by 
one contemporary with that person, except on the prin- 
ciple, that God did not, on any ground or under any 
circumstances, vouchsafe to His creatures such definite 
knowledge of the future ; that the Bible, so far, stands 
on the level of any human book. The argument against 
the book of Daniel involves broadly, that there are no 
true definite predictions in Holy Scripture, beyond the 
reach of human sagacity ; else it could be no objection to 
the book of Daniel, that, if his, it has definite and minute 
predictions. 

The Germans, from whom the objections were taken, 
saw this. They laid down broadly ; " 3 Most convincing 

but two results are clear beyond fan- doubt, that the period of weeks ended in 
the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes," [i. e. what account can be given of the 70 
weeks is to be a matter of doubt ; only, no doubt is to be admitted that it does 
not relate to our Lord,] "and that those portions of the book, supposed to be 
specially predictive, are a history of past events up' to that reign." Ib. p. 69. 

2 Prof. Jowett, Ib. p. 243. 

3 Lengerke, p, Ixxv. Ixxvii. " That the events of a distant future, and the 
fates of kingdoms, not then existing, yet only as far as Antiochus Epiphanes, are 
evidently predicted after they had occurred (post eventum) most definitely and 
accurately, even with data as to time." De "Wette, Einl. 225 6 . So also Ber- 
tholdt, Dan. Einl. 2. Eichhorn, Einl. 615, 6. Rosenm. Procem. n. iii. Herz- 
feld holds other alleged grounds unconvincing ; Bleek alone held that this would 
be unconvincing, but for those other alleged grounds. Herzfeld says, (Gesch. 
Isr. Exc. 2. 13.) " That the prophecies of this book, so detailed through- 
out, must have been committed to writing after the events, [there being, it 
is assumed, no prophecy,] is, as is well known, one of the very chiefest proofs, 
that it is to be placed in the times of the Syrian persecutions. This pr.oof is 
not to be confined to the Hebrew portion, but is to be extended to the Chal- 
dee also. For ch. vii. contains, in prophetic form, an equally detailed late his- 
tory (see vv. 7, 8, 21, 24, 25.) and even ch. ii. cannot have been written earlier, 
although it only mentions the intermarriages between the Macedonian [not 
so, see ab. p. 139.] kingdoms, and not the Syrian persecutions. This [omission] 



234 Statements of German rationalists, 

against the genuineness (of Daniel) is the character of 
the prophecy, and specially its definiteness. 1) The pro- 
phets speak mostly of the future in indefinite images and 
hints. Where they individualise, it is poetic language, 

can be satisfactorily explained, in that the author conceived of tlie succession 
and main relations of those empires, not the persecutions of the Jews, as of in- 
terest to Nebuchadnezzar, whose he feigned this dream to be ; whereas, in Da- 
niel's own visions, these persecutions must needs be of chief moment. The 
assumption (ii. 44.) that the kingdom of God would dawn in the days of the 
Greek kings [Roman empire] cannot have arisen before their persecutions. 
The intermediate chapters (iii-vi.) are closely connected with ch. ii. and each 
other. Of other proof s of so late date, which people will have it they have 
found in these chapters, / hold one only to be perfectly sound. The prayer 
three times a day (vi. 11.) points to atime when religious ideas out of India[!] 
penetrated into the neighbouring countries." [see below Lect. viii.] Bleek 
said contrariwise ; " if Daniel is author of the six last chapters, we can only 
look on them as containing actual visions, predictions of the future, which were 
unfolded to Daniel in visions. But it has been remarked with justice, that 
these are strikingly distinguished from the prophecies of other prophets by the 
definiteness and clearness of the predictions. Most striking is this difference 
in the accurate chronological fixing of future events, viii. 14. ix. 25-27. xii. 
11, 12.; Not less surprising is the definiteness of the prophecy in regard to 
the succession of the single events, especially ch. x-xii, where the several strug- 
gles of the Ptolemies and the Seleucidse are described so accurately, that one 
seems to read history rather than prophecy. This too, it will be confessed, is 
out of analogy with the other Hebrew prophets. At least, most of the pro- 
phecies, preserved to us, are of this other sort ; they are general threatenings 
or consolations and promises, rather than intended to impart knowledge of sin- 
gle events in the future, and- what, in them, appears as prediction of such events, 
is commonly only the poetical side of the prophecy, in that the prophet indivi- 
dualises, like a poet, depicting in single traits the general truth, which he 
wishes to express ; in which case we can neither shew, nor are we entitled to 
look for, an accurate literal fulfilment of the single traits of the prophecy in the 
events of subsequent times. This applies to the prophecies as to the Messiah 
also. Yet it is not to be denied that, among the prophecies of the Hebrew 
prophets, there are several, even though few in comparison, which relate to single 
incidents of the future, and predict them. None of these indeed can be com- 
pared to the predictions of the book of Daniel ; in none of them e. g. do we 
find described the single destinies of kingdoms, which, at the time of the an- 
nouncement, did not exist. Yet we ought not, in this respect, to pass any 
over-positive judgment, since we are not in a condition to draw defined and 
sharp lines, how far and to what degree of definiteness the spirit ofpro- 
phcey opens the future or not. I do not then believe that, if the book of Da- 
niel had all other marks of genuineness, the above-noticed character of the 
prophecies contained in it could be alleged as any certain proof of their later 
date." Schleierm. ZS. iii. 233-5. 



on what principles they reject Daniel's prophecies. 235 

and the predictions are really not such, or did not conle 
to pass in the way marked out. But if the prophets en- 
ter upon events, which lie centuries heyond and really 
happened, their prophecies are acknowledged to he spu- 
rious, or a right interpretation guards from false as- 
sumptions a ; or, lastly, the prophet stands actuallyin the 
time which he describes so accurately; it is his present." 
" 2) 2 The author further departs from the custom of other 
prophets in the accurate chronological statements, in 
which he enters even upon days." " 3) 3 In no prophecy 
of the Old Testament, except in Daniel, are detailed 
events of kingdoms described, which kingdoms did not 
exist in the time of the prophet." 

These two last statements, although untrue, involve 
seemingly, not the denial of all prediction as such, but 
only two sorts of prediction, which, if true, are unmis- 
takeable ; that of precise dates, and that relating to Em- 
pires unknown to the prophet except by revelation. If 
these statements were true, they would have no force of 
proof against the book of Daniel, so long as it is not al- 
together disproved, that God ever vouchsafed predic- 
tion. For if God has revealed the future in any defi- 
nite way, beyond the reach of the most piercing human 
intelligence, the whole principle is admitted, Mere va- 
riety as to details, in the character of that superhuman 
definiteness of prediction, is one of the properties of Old 

1 I regret to see this language adopted by Dr. Stanley, Jewish Church, p. 465. 
" The secular events are (with a few possible exceptions) within the horizon of 
the Prophet's age," and " They are either confessedly exceptional, or else admit, 
(on quite independent grounds) of another interpretation." (Ib. note) Yet be 
himself doubts not of the prophecy of Balaam ; although, how he could thin! 
that " the ships of Cyprus, of Greece and of Europe, were Wen [1450, B.C. half 
a millennium before Homer and some 700 years before the foundation of Rome] 
just seen in the horizon of human hopes and fears," (Ib. p. 192.) I cannot ima- 
gine. The real question at issue between Christians and those whose language 
Dr. Stanley partially adopts, is," whether prophecy is human sagacity or Divine 
knowledge ? " Dr. Stanley, who believes the prophecy of Balaam to include 
" Asshur and Babylon, Assyria, Chaldaea and Persia, no less than thewild hordes 
of the desert," (Ib. 193) must believe it to be a prescience given supernaturally 
by God. It is the more to be regretted, that he accepts the la? 'ojuage of un- 
believers. 2 Long. Ixxviii. 3 -b. Ixxix. 



236 Prophecy distinguished by these writers- 

Testament prophecy. It is the very summary of Old 
Testament prophecy, that l God in many portions and in 
divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the 
prophets. 

The point, which is really at issue and which under- 
lies all this denial of definite prophecies, is, whether pro- 
phecy is human or Divine. Disguise it how men will, 
what is really meant is, that God acted through the na- 
tural powers of man 8 . It is the old question of Pelagian- 
ism, which, speak how it would about the help of God, 
always meant, underneath, that succour which God sup- 
plied to or through the natural powers of the mind, in- 
tellect, reason, moral sense, as distinct from and exclud- 
ing any operation of Divine grace. So all prediction is at 
best to be some "inexplicable capacity of anticipating 3 ," 
founded on the knowledge of human nature and of God's 
Providence ; prophecy, which these men limit to the fore- 
announcing of our Lord's Coming,, is to be " * a striving 

1 Heb. i. 1. 

2 " What the prophet can, with perfect right, announce as the word of his 
God, is, in its contents, nothing but the application of some general Divine 
truth to a given moral condition, or a clear contemplation as to the confusions 
or unevennesses of moral life before him, springing out of the clear light of the 
spirit. What belongs to it falls within the province of the purer, i. e. the Di- 
vine spirit ; and if a prophet knows any thing more, and can give answer as 
to other questions, this is something accidental." Ewald, DieProph. i. 12. 

3 Schleiermacher distinguishes a "prediction, which is to be exclusively unit- 
ed to a heightened and pious stirring of the soul, and that which can arise out 
of an intelligent survey of human relations and a correct and deep sympathy," 
and adds, " that to no prediction, whatever its contents or however great its ac- 
curacy, or however wonderfully the images of a stimulated power of anticipa- 
tion may sometimes be confirmed, can a sacred character be attributed." (D. 
Christl. Glaube, 103. p. 134, 5. referred to by Tholuck, Die Propheten, 9. p. 
76.") He sums up, "All predictions, both those which arise out of historical tact, 
and those which spring from an inexplicable power of anticipating, are" to be 
" made over to the investigation of the nature of the soul." Ib. 

4 "When belief in the Redeemer already exists, we can dwell with much 
contentment on the expressions of a longing for redemption, awakened by ear- 
lier revelations, in themselves inadequate. And this is the proper import of 
the prophecies of the Messiah, (an import certainly both strengthening and con- 
firming,) wherever they occur and in however dark anticipation they may be 
shrouded, that they discover to us a striving of human nature towards Christi- 
anity, and, at the same time, as the confession of the best and most ensouled out 



from prediction ; both, in their sense, human. 237 

of human nature towards Christianity." Both purely 
human. But, although the correspondence of the Gos- 
pel with our spiritual needs is, in fact, one of the strong- 
est bands by which God holds fast our faith, yet our need, 
as sinners, to be reconciled with God, and to be made at 
one Math Him from Whom we feel, by nature, severed, 
could not and did not lead human nature to expect be- 
forehand that God would meet that need. Much less 
could heart of man imagine, that He would give His Only- 
Begotten Son (of Whose Being human nature could, of 
itself, know nothing.) to die for our sins, or that He would 
give His regenerating Spirit to those who believe in Jesus. 
Prophecy of the Supernatural must be itself supernatu- 

of the earlier pious communities, express, thatthey were only to be looked upon 
as preliminary and passing institutions." Sehleierm. 14. i. 105, 6. Schlei- 
ermacher led others into the land which he did not enter, being in antagonism 
with shallow rationalism, though short of Christian truth. Nitzsch, who re- 
tains the distinction of prophecy and prediction, owns both as supernatural, i. e. 
from God. Only he thinks, that " prediction must be rare, in order not to de- 
stroy the whole relation of man to history, the more so, because, in the cases 
to which it extends, it can only become altogether perfect through the most 
definite statements of the special marks of the fact." System d. Christl. Lehre, 
35. It is not clear to me, what Nitzsch, and those who have adopted his 
maxim, mean by it. God does not interfere with His creature's free-agency ; 
but the most definite prediction does not interfere with this. What bad men 
do not like, they disbelieve, and accomplish, while disbelieving it. Of a truth 
against Tliy holy Child Jesus, Whom Thou hast anointed, both Herod and 
Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel were gathered together, 
for to do whatsoever Thy hand and Thy counsel determined before to be done. 
Acts iv. 27, 28. Even when any one received a prediction as to himself, his 
way of acting upon that prediction rested with his free-agency. Hazael ful- 
filled his through murder; (2Kgs. viii. 13-15.) Jeroboam sought to establish 
his through sin ; (1 Kgs. xii. 26-33.) Jehu fulfilled his in the letter, not in the 
spirit. (2 Kgs. x. 31.) All abused their free-agency ; the prediction did not "de- 
stroy the relation of man to history." The whole history of Jeroboam's house, 
God says, and so of Israel, would have been different, had he been faithful to 
God. (1 Kgs. xi. 38.) Tholuck points out an oversight in this whole distinction 
between prediction and prophecy. The greatness of prophecy is proportioned 
to the greatness of its subject. Prophecies then as to the Christ were greater 
than any temporal prophecies. But, even as to our Lord Himself, prophecy 
foretold, at times, the greatest things, at others what formed a subordinate part, 
yet all were parts of one whole in the Mind of God. " Prophecy," says Tho- 
luck in reference to the distinction of Schleiermacher, "even if not without ex- 
ception, became the concrete view of the future ; prediction has every where 
prophecy as its background." Die Propheten, 9. end p. 78. 



238 No human knowledge of God's ways enables man 

ral. His temporal judgments, when they fall, find more 
response in the souls of us sinners. Yet, although God, in 
His judgments of the world throughout the history of the 
world \ acts, of course, in His varied dealings with His 
creatures, on one law of His All-wise Justice, man cannot 
tell beforehand, either whom He will punish, or how. 
Those predicted punishments mostly come upon one na- 
tion by another. "God punishes the guilty." True; 
but which ? Man could not know beforehand, on any 
ground of the Divine justice. The executioner was most- 
ly as guilty as the criminal. 

Good and evil are so variedly mingled in nations or in- 
dividuals, that, even when we know that persevering in- 
fringements of the Divine laws entail in the end, by God's 
appointment, certain punishments, yet we cannot usurp 
the prerogative of God, andj of our own minds, pronounce 
His judgments. The forms too of God's judgments are 
so manifold ; the time, when they burst, is so hastened or 
withheld upon grounds which we know not, that, although 
we know enough to see the justice of those judgments 
when they have come, we do not know enough to foresee 
those judgments before they come, still less their time or 
their ultimate issue 3 . 

But, in the time of Old Testament prophecy, mankind 
had yet to learn, both that there was a judgment of the 
world, and that there was One Judge, the One True God. 
Theorists, here as elsewhere, abuse ungratefully the know- 
ledge which, as matter of fact, they have gained from re- 
velation, to trick out human nature in its fallen state, and 
claim that, as their inherent endowment, which God gave 
them as a mitigation of their ills. 

All along the times before Christ came, prophecy was 
no mere prediction, no mere strengthening of faith by the 
fact of God's revealed foreknowledge. All along, its sub- 
jects were those of the Psalmist's song 3 , mercy andjudg- 

1 " The world's-history is the world's-judgment," conciser in the original, 
"Die Weltgeschiehte ist das Weltgericht." quoted by Tholuck, Die. Proph. p. 
79. 2 Ewald rests his idea of temporal prophecy simply on the antici- 

pation of Divine justice. 3 Ps. ci. 1. 



to.pr edict His national judgments; still less His mercies. 239 

ment. All along it withdrew the veil, not only from things 
invisible as yet by reason of distance, but from that which 
is to man more invisible still, because he would .fain not 
see it, God's minute, righteous Providence, to Whose se- 
rene Omniscience nothing is too small to see, to Whose 
Omnipresent Justice nothing is too mighty to control 
or to punish. Even more perplexing yet, than the sepa- 
rate announcement of mercy or judgment, is the blending 
of both. Man cannot, of himself anticipate mercy after 
judgment; without direct revelation, it is clean contrary 
to man's "anticipations." Presumption or despair are 
alike natural to the heart of man, as conscience is awak- 
ened or unawakened. To faith only it is revealed, that 
whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth. Those detailed mi- 
nute prophecies had their own especial office, to mark out, 
that God's Judgments were not mere chance, (as men, now 
also, often think,) nor again, (what lies nearer to the 
depths of man's heart, who feels himself in the power of 
the Invisible) a mere fated thing, but the discriminating 
sentence of the One Ruler of the Avorld. 

So far from those minute temporal prophecies, such as 
we have in Daniel, being alien from Old Testament pro- 
phecy, they are, in fact, a part of God's whole way of act- 
ing under the old dispensation. 

I would first point out the general indications of such 
a system of minute prophecy running along the whole 
course of the Old Testament history, presupposed by what 
is related in that history, but extending beyond the spe- 
cific instances which are recorded. 

1) Such prophecies are presupposed by the test, through 
which, at all times, the true prophet was to be distinguish- 
ed from the false. The fulfilment or non-fulfilment of de- 
finite prophecies is the God-given test of the truth or false- 
hood of the prophet. ^And ifthou shalt say in thine heart, 
How shall we know the wordiuhich the Lord hath not spo- 
ken f When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord 

4 Deut. xviii. 21,2. I am glad to see this recognised by Dr. Stanley, Jewish 
Church, p. 462. 



240 Struggle between false and true prophets 

if the thing follow not nor come to pass, that is the thing 
which the Lord hath not spoken ; the prophet hath spoken 
it presumptuously ; thou shalt not be afraid of them. God 
forewarned His people of the struggle which there should 
he between the true prophets and the false, and gave them 
a test of the true. But that test in itself implies a near 
fulfilment of definite prophecy ; else it would have been 
no test at all, by which true prophecy could be tried. 
Such definite prophecy is presupposed by all that long 
actual struggle between the false prophets and the true 2 , 
which closed only with the suspension of true prophecy, 
and which shall yet be revived before the end of the world. 
Sometimes it comes to a more solemn issue, as in that 
grand appeal of the one true prophet of God, when stand- 
ing against the 400 court-prophets of Ahab 3 . The re- 
peated challenge of Isaiah, that the gods of the nations 
had not uttered and could not utter predictions such as he 
had given in the Name of God 4 , and as had been fulfilled, 
was a challenge of the same sort to the heathen world, 
as Daniel's exposition of the dreams of Nebuchadnezzar 
or of the hand-writing on the wall, when the wise men 
of Babylon had failed, was in act. Accurate fulfilment, 
of which men were cognizant, is implied by the simple 
declaration, with which Amos winds up his series of like- 

1 See Introd. to Micah, p. 289. False prophecy reappeared after the captivity. 
Neh. vi. 12, 14. Zechariah prophesied its cessation under the Gospel, xiii. 4. 
Dr. Stanley instances " the prophetess Noadiah and the rest of the prophets," 
(Neh. vi.)" "as indications of the prophetic spirit," "among the Samaritans," 
( Ib. p. 423. ) as if there were any real connection between the false prophets 
and the true, between those who prophesied out of their own hearts, and ut- 
tered lies in the name of God, and those to whom the word of God came, and 
who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Bitter and sweet are both 
tastes, truth and falsehood are both in word, yet most opposite. It is no less 
confusion to blend those, who stood in directest antagonism, the instruments 
of God or the instruments of Satan, e. g. p. 429. " The prophets were to be 
found in considerable numbers, fifty, or even 400 at a time. The 50 (2 Kgs. 
ii. 16.) were prophets of God; the 400, false prophets of an idol, 1 Kgs. xxii. 6. 

2 Rev. xvi. 13. xix. 20. xx. 10. 3 1 Kgs. xxii. 6. Probably the 400 
Ashtaroth-prophets which did eat at Jezebel's table. Jb. xviii. 19. 

4 xli. 21-23. 26-28. xlii. 9. xliii. 9-12. xliv. 7, 8, 25-28. xlv. 11, 19, 21. xlvi. 9. 
xlviii. 3-7, 14-16. 



implies a series of definite predictions. 24.1 

nesses; B Surely the' Lord God will do nothing, but He 
revealeth His secret unto His servants the prophets. 

2) Still further, there are, in the earliest provisions of 
the law and in the history of Samuel, indications, that 
God condescended to shew His individual care and su- 
perintendence of human things by a more minute personal 
foretelling, than is recorded. It was a part of the office 
of 6 Eleazar the High Priest to ask counsel for Joshua, after 
the judgment of Urim and Thummim. We see, in a few 
instances in the history of David, how hahitually he con- 
sulted God thereby, and what minute answers as to the 
proximate future were given him, when his own human 
sagacity was utterly at fault 7 . The defence of the high 
priest, when accused by Doeg of having consulted God 
for him against Saul, implies that he had so done for him 
in times past. He consulted for him, as for one employed 
by the king, and knew nothing of these changes. "Did 
I now begin* to enquire of God for him? Thy servant 
knew nothing of all this, less or more." And indeed on 
that self-same occasion, we know the fact, that David 
then so consulted Ahimelech, only through Doeg's accu- 
sation and the High-Priest's admission 9 . Even Saul, in 
his short-lived better days, had so enquired of the Lord, 
though with his characteristic fitfulness 10 . Then, for a 
long time, he disused it. It would lie in his character, to 
have disused it from the day when God answered him 
not n . As is the wont of faith without love, he recurred, 
in the extremity of his fortunes, to all the means whereby 
God would be consulted, and, when God wouldnot answer, 
had resort to evil powers. When Saul enquired of the 

5 See onAm.iii. 7. 6 Num.xxvii. 21. 

7 1 Sam. xxiii. 2, 4, 6, 9-12. xxx. 7, 8. 2 Sara. ii. 1. v. 19, 23. xxi. 1. Proba- 
bly it was in reference to Zadok's office, as priest, that David said to him, Art 
iliou not a Seer 9 2 Sam. xv. 27. It is noticed that, in the 3 days' pestilence 
inflicted for the pride in numbering the people, David could not go before it 
(the tabernacle of the Lord, being at Gibeon) to enquire of God ; for he was 
afraid, because of the sword of the Angel of the Lord. 1 Chr. xxi. 30. 

8 'J^CBFI cvn 1 Sam. xxii. 15. 9 Ib. 9, 10. 10 Ib. xiv. 18, 19. 

11 Ib.37. I2 Ib.xxviii.6. 

R 



242 Minute habitual prophecies to 

Lord, the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams, nor 
by Urim, nor by prophets. * God is departed from me, 
and ansioereth me no more, neither by prophets nor by 
dreams. 

The use of the Urim lasted, probably, until the Capti- 
vity ; since after the Captivity it is spoken of as something 
which might perhaps still be restored 2 , if God so willed. 

3) But this was apparently reserved for persons in 
eminent station, whose acts concerned the well-being of 
the whole. The relation of Samuel to the people, at the 
close of that disorganised period of the Judges, belongs 
more to private life. It is expressly mentioned, at the 
beginning of God's revelation to him 3 , The word of God 
was rare in those days ; there was no vision spread abroad. 
This scarcity must stand in contrast with fulness, before, 
or after, or both ; for it is said, in those days. Samuel's 
foretellings were frequent, and had that characteristic of 
Divine truth, that they never failed. His prophetic office 
was so authenticated. Samuel grew 41 , it is said after 
that first revelation, and the Lord was ivith him and did 
let none of his words fall to the ground. And all Israel, 
from Dan even to Beersheba, kneiv that Samuel was esta- 
blished a prophet of the Lord. And the Lord appeared 
again in Shiloh : for the Lord revealed Himself to Samuel 
in Shiloh by the word of the Lord j not in vision only, but 
by inward inspiration. The name of Seer implies a ha- 
bitual " foreseeing " of things which others saw not. To 
ask God through him was a common every-day thing. 
5 Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, 
thus he spake, Come, and let us go to the Seer. Saul's 
servant was cognizant of the fact, that 6 all that he saith 
cometh surely to pass. His proposal to consult Samuel 
about the lost asses causes no surprise, beforehand, in 
the event, or when related to Saul's uncle 7 . It is ac- 

1 Ib.15. 2 "And the Tirshatha said, that they should not eat of the 

most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and with Thummim." 
EOT. ii. 63. Neh. vii. 65. 3 lSam.iii. 1. 4 Ib. 19-21. 5 Ib.ix. 9. 

6 Ib. 6. 1 Ib. 6-10. 20. x. 2. 16. 



individuals. "Seer," "Prophet." 243 

cepted as the natural solution of the visit to Samuel 
which had seemed remarkable. Yet this too had its pa- 
rallel in the Gospel. Saul's heart was prepared for the 
religious influence of the company of the prophets who, 
Samuel had predicted, would meet him, by the fulfilment 
of previous prophecy as to ordinary wayfarers 8 . The 
hearts of the disciples were prepared for the great mys- 
teries of the Passion 9 and of the Holy Eucharist 10 hy the 
minute prophecy as to the place where they should find the 
ass and the colt tied, and the answer of the owner, when 
they should loose them 9 ; and by that other of the man, 
bearing a pitcher of water, who should shew them a large 
upper room furnished and prepared. Those prophecies 
of the Old Testament are not more minute, nor do they re- 
late to circumstances more apparently incidental, than 
these two of our Lord Himself. 

4) It would seem, from the breadth of the expression 
used, on occasion of Samuel, that this habit of enquiring 
and obtaining answers from God did not begin in his time. 
Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God 
thus he spake, fyc. he, that is now called a prophet, (Nabi) 
was before called a Seer (Roeh.) This seems to go beyond 
the case of Samuel's contemporaries. As, habitually, in 
after times, people consulted the "prophet" (Nabi) in 
their emergencies, so now the " Seer" (Roeh.) The two 
offices were thenceforth united. In the early times, the 
title 'prophet' mostly described those who were recipients 
of Divine revelation or inspiration, but did not them- 
selves predict the future n . Abraham was entitled a pro- 

s Ib. x. 2-10. 9 S. Matt. xxi. 1-3. S. Luke xix. 29-34. 

10 S. Mark xiv. 13-16. S. Luke xxii. 10-13. 

u The title is given to Abraham ; (Gen. xx. 7. see Ps. cv. 15.) Aaron, as the 
speaker for Moses; (Ex. vii. 1.) Miriam ; (Ex. xv. 20.) the 70, on whom the 
Spirit of God came, by implication ; (the title Nebiim, would that all God's 
people were (Nebiim) prophets, corresponding to the word, they prophesied, 
i. e. praised God by inspiration of God. Num. xi. 2.1-9.) The prophet, sent by 
God, Judg. vi. 8, exercised the pastoral office of the prophet only. He was (like 
the man of God, sent to reprove Eli, 1 Sam. ii. 29.) sent on a specific message 
of rebuke, but was no bearer of prophecy. In Judg. ii. 20-22, it is not said, who 
was the organ of the prophecy. It is, in substance, the same as that at the be, 

R2 



244 Continued office of Seer. "Enquiring" 

phet, received great prophecies, but did not himself pro- 
phesy. Jacob prophesied, but is not called a prophet. 
Prophecies of Moses contained the whole future of Israel, 
yet he is called a prophet by implication only. 

5) The title also, Gad, l David's Seer, *Heman, the king's 
seer in the words of God, s jeduthun, the king's seer, implies 
apparently some special relation of those prophets to Da- 
vid, as " seeing" for him what he saw not. On one occa- 
sion, Gad gave him prophetic advice as to his safety, which 
he obeyed*. 

6) To enquire of the Lord was as received an idiom be- 
fore the return from the Captivity, as to "consult " a phy- 
sician or a lawyer is among us. The language occurs 
throughout the Old Testament. Not to repeat what has 
been cited, Rebekkah, before Esau and Jacob were born, 
went to 5 enquire of the Lord, and received a prophecy as 
to the future of the nations to be born of her unborn sons. 
Immediately G after the death of Joshua, the children of Is- 
rael asked of the Lord, who shall go tip for tis against the 
Canaanites first, to fight against them? And the Lord 
said, Judah shall go up. Behold, I have delivered the land 
into his hand. Again, they cried unto God, when oppres- 

ginning of ch. ii. 1-4, which was delivered through an angel. Deborah tJic pro- 
phetess (Judg. iv. 41.) uttered a signal prophecy, but there is no trace that she 
was a seer. The other cases, in which the word is used, are themselves pro- 
phecies ; (Num. xii. 6. Deut. xiii. 1, 3, 5. xviii. 15, 1 8, 20, 22.) they foretell what 
should be, they do not speak of what was then. Deut. xxxiv. 10. only says 
what was not, not what was. There arose not a prophet since in Israel, like 
unto Moses. The writer of the book of Samuel states, that in his time the 
nabi, prophet of God, was the organ of answering thosewho "enquiredofGod," 
as, in Samuel's time, "the seer." He does not say, that this was the only office of 
the prophet, nor that there had not been any prophets (Nebiini) before Samuel ; 
only that those who exercised that one office, had not that name in his time. 
Colenso's argument then against the Pentateuch drawn from it (n. 248.) is a 
mistake of his own. Even after this, prophets are mentioned collectively, 
whose only office apparently was that, corresponding to the use of the word 
in Num. xi. 29, the inspired praise of God. 1 Sam. x. 5. 10-12. xix. 19. In both 
cases,, they are designated by ancient words; the one, "company" (npqV) 
of prophets," occurring there only, (xix. 19 ;) the other, C?9n) " band of pro- 
phets," occurring probably in that sense in x. 5. 10. only. * 2 Sam, xxiv. 1 1 . 
1 Chron. xxi. 9. 2 Chron. xxix. 25. 2 1 Chron. xxv. 5. 

3 2 Chron. xxxv. 15. 4 1 Sam. xxii. 5. 5 Gen. xxv. 22. Judg. i. 1,2. 



of God, implying continual minute prediction. 245 

sed by Philistines and Ammonites, and received an an- 
swer 7 , rejecting them for awhile, it is not said through 
whom. After the defeat at Gibeah, in the time of the 
Judges, the collected tribes thrice "enquired of" God 8 
as to their punishment of Benjamin. Having previously 
enquired by lot, as to the king to be given them, when 
Saul ivas taken, they were told verbally, on enquiry, 
where he was to be found 9 . It is remarked, as something 
unwonted, w we enquired not at it (the ark) in the days 
of Saul, i. e. after his degeneracy. In David's days, it 
was a proverb of the acute practical sagacity of Ahito- 
phel, ll The counsel of Ahitophel, which he counselled in 
those days, ivas as if a man had enquired at the oracle of 
God. So ivas all the counsel of Ahitophel both with Da- 
vid and ivith Absalom. Jehoshaphat asks Ahab 13 , En- 
quire, I pray thee, at the tvord of the Lord to-day, and 
would not be put off with the 400 Ashtaroth prophets ; Is 
there not still here a prophet of the Lord, that we may 
enquire of him f When the king of Israel desponded 
in the war with Moab, Jehoshaphat's instant resource 
was, as before ]S , Is there not here a prophet of the Lord, 
that we may enquire of the Lord by him f He says at 
once of Elisha, The tvord of the Lord is with him. When 
the neglected book of the law had been found in the tem- 
ple, Josiah sent to Huldah the prophetess, to enquire as 
to the future of Judah, and was answered that God had 
heard his prayers and that the evil should not be in his 
days u . The godless Zedekiah still sent to enquire of the 
Lord by Jeremiah 15 . In the Captivity, people, estranged 
from God, enquired of Him by Ezekiel 16 , and were told that 
it would be to their hurt 17 . In the idolatrous kingdom 
of Israel too, Jeroboam sent to the prophet Ahijah, to en- 
quire as to the issue of his son's sickness 18 . God also, by 
Elijah, pronounced that Ahaziah should not recover, be- 

< Ib. x. 10-14. 8 Ib. xx. 18, 23, (with mention of the ark) 27, 8. 

1 Sam. x. 21. 10 1 Chr. xiii. 3. 2 Sam. xvi. 23. 12 1 Kgs. xxii. 5, 7. 
13 2 Kings Hi. 11,12. M Ib. xxii. 12-20. " Jer.xxi.2. xxxvii. 17. 

10 Ezek. xiv. 1-3. xx. 3. '' Ib. xiv. 4, 5, 7-10. 18 1 Kings xiv. 2-14. 



246 Three distances of Old Testament prophecy, 

cause he had enquired of the god of Ekron, not of God l . 
Even Benhadad sent to Elisha, to enquire whether he 
should recover of his disease 2 ; and a messenger from 
Bdom came to ask Isaiah as to the issue of the night of ca- 
lamity which threatened them : they were bidden, if they 
would indeed enquire, to enquire with earnestness, and 
so to return, come 3 . 

Prophecies, on one principle yet so varied, declaring, 
all along, what the natural heart of man is still so slow 
to believe, that all human things are minutely ordered by 
His Will, Who knows alike the number of the stars and 
of the hairs of our heads which He alike created, the 
fall of a sparrow or of a kingdom to the ground, are any 
thing but " * exceptional." Sometimes, through the im- 
portance of the occasion and of the answer, they became 
a part of those prophecies, which declared the nearer tem- 
poral future of Israel. 

The prophecies, which God has willed to preserve to 
us as the main system of Old Testament prophecy, had 
these three chief subjects ; 1) God's purpose of love in the 
promised Seed, the pure unlooked-for unanticipated efflu- 
ence of the love of the Creator. 2) Temporal judgments, 
the images, earnests, heralds, of the Judgment to come. 
3) Temporal mercies, in, amid, through, those temporal 
judgments. 

Of these three distinct distances of prophecy, prophecy 
as to Him, Whose Coming was the main object of the 
choice of the Jewish people, the Seed in Whom all the 
nations of the earth should be blessed 5 , Avas expanded or 
defined the most slowly. Forgiveness, through the Sacri- 
fice, was impressed by the rite of sacrifice. Else, the pro- 
mise stood, like a beacon-light at the end of a long vista, 
of which the whole was foreshortened, yet that first long 
future shewed that it was a great way off. Time and cir- 
cumstance as to His earthly Origin, Birth of a Virgin, 
Birthplace, Character, Offices, Life, Death, Divinity, 

1 2 Kings i. 3, 4-6, 16, 17. 2 Ib. yiii. 8, 14. 3 Is. xxi. 11, 12. 

4 StXhelin,p. 191. 5 tien.xxii. 18. 



temporal judgments and mercies, the Redeemer. 247 

Atonement, Sufferings, rejection by His own, acceptance 
by us Gentiles, Glory, everlasting Kingdom, were expand- 
ed gradually, and most towards the time, when the gra- 
dual setting-in and deepening of God's temporal judg- 
ments might shake faith as to His yet distant purpose of 
love. 

Of the two nearer distances of temporal prophecy, the 
furthest point was, to Abraham, the deliverance of his 
descendants from Egypt after the 400 years of affliction, 
and the judgment on the nation whom they should serve 
and who should afflict them 6 . The nearer events of pro- 
phecy to the Patriarchs, as time went on, were, the de- 
struction of Sodom and Gomorrha 7 ; the preternatural 
birth of Isaac 8 ; the increase of Ishmael and the character 
of his descendants 9 ; the beginning of the future of Esau 
and his descendants lo ; the temporal predictions to Ja- 
cob n ; the elevation of Joseph 13 , the seven years' plenty 
and seven years' famine of Egypt 13 . 

The prediction to Abraham, as to the deliverance from 
Egypt, was the first of a series of prophecies of judgment 
on the world, that first separation of the people of God 
from those who would be His enemies, and of God's op- 
posite dealings with each ; faint, yet, as a separation, ex- 
pressive shadow of the great separation at the End. 
u That nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge, and af- 
terward they shall come out with great substance. It was 
the first of the prophecies against the Heathen nations, 
not as Heathen, (for as Heathen, or simply as enemies of 
the Jews, no nation is threatened,) but as transgressors 
of God's unwritten law, graven, as it is until obliterated 
by man's will, on every human heart. And, if the people 
of God should become not God's people 15 , the like or se- 
verer judgments were foretold to them; nay, judgment 
was evermore prophesied as to 16 begin with the house of 

6 Ib. xv. 13, 14. 1 Ib. xviii. 17-21. xix. 13. 

8 Ib. xv. 4-6. xvii. 1-19. comp. Rom. iv. 3. 16-21. 9 Ib. xvi. 10-12. xvii. 
20. xxi. 18. 10 Ib. xxv. 23. xxvii. 39, 40. (comp. xxxvi. 6, 7.) " Ib. xxviii. 
15. xxxi. 3 sqq. xxxii. 9, 28. (comp. Hos. xii. 4.) 12 Ib. xxxvii. 6-9. 

is Ib.xli. > 4 Gen. xv. 14. 15 Hos.i.9. 1 Pet.iv.17. 



248 Temporal prophecies of judgment and mercy. 

God, and to fall on the heathen instruments of its exe- 
cution, only for exceeding or abusing their commission. 
Those judgments on Israel were to have several stages ; 
they were to increase, Moses foretold 1 , in severity: at 
last, on impenitence, they were to end in a temporary 
captivity ; and that, on repentance, was to issue in re- 
storation to their own land. Snch, at the distance of 
850 years, was the furthest horizon of their then future. 

But, within this period, there were marked lesser pe- 
riods, each with its own prophecies of weal or woe. Nor 
were these any chance unsystematic predictions. Varied, 
often minute, seldom repeated identically, they were one 
in their end and purpose, to fix in men's minds, that 
God held in His hands His creature's destiny, that good 
and evil came from Him, and were apportioned by Him 
who foretold them ere they came, good of His own free 
goodness, evil as drawn upon His creatures by their own 
evil. 

One such period, the prophesied 40 years 2 , during which 
they were to wander in the wilderness, until the former 
generation should have died there, had already elapsed. 

The next period, that of comparative obedience under 
Joshua, was chiefly one of fulfilment of prophecy. Yet 
here too prophecy accompanied even miracle, (as at the 
passage of the Jordan, or the fall of the walls of Jericho,) 
and the leading events of the conquest, as the capture of 
Ai, the defeat of the five kings, and the crowning victory 
by the waters of Merom. Over and above the fulfilment 
of the larger prophecy, that they should inherit the land 
promised to their fathers, the blessings of Jacob and 
Moses, so far as they related to temporal things, began 
their course of fulfilment. The lot, directed by God, ful- 
filled the specific promises to Asher, Zebulon, Issachar, 
and as to the territorial portions of Ephraim and Judah 3 . 

1 Lev. xxvi. 2 Num. xiv. 33. xxxii. 13. Dent. ii. 14. 

3 The portions of Judah, Ephraim, and Manasseh, were assigned to them by 
lot, only before the rest. (Josh. xv. 1. xvi. 1. xvii. 1, 2.) " By lot was their in- 
heritance, as the Lord commanded by the hand of J!oses,/br </ 
and the half tribe, Josh, xiv. 2. 



Continuous fulfilment of blessings of Jacob .and Moses. 249 

The tribes, in the nature of their temporal blessings, had 
a perpetual memory, not of the goodness only, but of the 
Providence of God, who brought about for each, what He 
had promised to each. The vines of Judah*; the exceed- 
ing fruitfulness of the portion of Ephraim and Manasseh 5 ; 
the olive-groves of Asher 6 , its iron and brass from its near 
Tyrian merchandise 7 ; the active commerce of Zebulon 8 , 
and the glass of its sands 9 ; the resting enrichment of Is- 

4 Gen. xlix. 11. Hebron, below which lay the valley of Eshcol, was given to 
Caleb on condition of expelling its giant inhabitants. (Josh. xiv. 12, 13.) The 
Vineyards of Engedi (Cant. i. 14.) also lay in Judah. Its vines and balsams 
were still famed in the time of Origen (in Cant. Opp. iii. 67.) " Uzziah had 
vine-dressers in the mountains and in Carmel," [of Judah.] 2 Chr. xxvi. 10. 
The terraces, on the sides of the now barren mountains of Judah, were noticed 
by Clarke (Travels, ii. 520.) and by General Straton as "vestiges of ancient 
luxuriance." (in Keith on Prophecy, p. 109.) 

5 Gen. xlix. 25. Deut. xxxiii. 13, 14. Jer.iii. 19. "All travellers bear testimony 
to the 'general growing richness' and beauty of the country in going north- 
wards from Jerusalem, the ' innumerable fountains' and streamlets, the villages 
more thickly scattered than any where in the south, the continuous cornfields 
and orchards, the moist vapoury atmosphere." (Martineau, 516; 521. V. d. 
Velde.,i.386, 8. Stanley, 234,5.) Grote, in Smith Bibl.Dict. v. Ephraim. Add 
A r on Schubert, iii. 127. Drew, Scripture Lands, p. 95. 

6 Deut. xxxiii. 24. It included Carmel, (on its richness see on Am. i. 2.) the 
Western end of the valley of Esdraelon, and a rich lowland on the shore from 
Carmel to Zidon. (Jos. Ant. v. i. 22.) 

7 It is foretold, that the metals should he in abundant use in a manufactured 
state, not, that they should be found in Asher. The language is different from 
that in Deut. viii. 9. where Moses speaks of Palestine generally as " a land whose 
stones are iron, and out of whose hills thoumayest dig brass." Iron was sup- 
plied in abundance by the basalt of Hauran, and is found in Lebanon. Volney, 
i. 233. Russegger, i. 693, 4. Palestine has not, however, been explored geologi- 
cally, so as to show whether there are worked-ont mines. 

8 Gen. xlix. 13. Deut. xxxiii. 19. All have remarked on the difficulty of 
tracing exactly the boundaries of each tribe, partly because many places are not 
yet identified, partly because, the distribution being (as Keith observed) that 
of towns with their districts, the line was probably very irregular, as in some 
of our English counties. Josephus says, " They of Zahulon received the coun- 
try, extending to the lake of Gennesareth, and around Carmel and the sea." 
Ant. v.l. 22. 

9 Deut. xxxiii. 19. " Two miles from Ptolemais a very little stream runs by, 
called Beleus, where by the tomb of Memnon is a wondrous place of 1 00 cubits. 
It is circular and hollow, and yields the sand for glass ; after it has been emptied, 
many shiploads having been taken, it is filled up again." Jos. B. J. ii. 10. 2. 
" A tiny shore, but unexhausted." Tac. Hist. v. 7. "A shore of not above 



250 Blessings of the tribes a continuous witness to them 

sachar, through which that commerce passed 1 ; the enrich- 
ing neighbourhood of the sea of Galilee to Naphtali 2 ; 
these were no mere natural gifts of God's Providence. 
Their several blessings were, in a manner, the heraldic 
mottoes of each tribe, and spoke of God's foreordaining 
love. Still more, those portions of the prophecy which 
pourtrayed the character of the tribes. They are the ban- 
ner of God hanging over th em, when faithful to Him. The 
lion-might of Judah, of Gad, and of Dan 3 , Ephraim's 
horns of power, the swift energy of Benjamin 4 , could be 
put forth, on each occasion, as strength which God had 
pledged to them. In that reeling strife which Jacob fore- 
half a mile, it has sufficed for yielding glass during so many centuries." Ptin. 
N. II. xxxvi. 26. Ps. Jon. on Deut. xxxiii. 19. has, " they produced mirrors 
and vessels of glass from the shore." 

1 Gen.xlix. 14, 15. Deut. xxxiii. 18. " Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out, 
and, Issachar, in thy tents." The rule of Hebrew parallelism, whereby each 
hemistich may be supplied out of the other, hardly applies here, where the 
main subject of each hemistich is a distinct tribe. For, if it were paraphrased, 
" Rejoice, Zebulun and Issachar, in thy going out and in thy tents," there 
would be nothing assigned as characteristic of either, contrary to the character 
of the other prophecies. The mention of the tents, in contrast to the " going 
out " of Issachar, corresponds with the image in Gen. xlix. Their joint enrich- 
ment is expressed in Deut. xxxiii. 19. The rich " great plain " of Esdraelon 
fell almost wholly to Issachar. 

2 Naphtali stretched far Northward from the N. W. end of the sea of Gali- 
lee to Anti-libanus, with which Mount Naphtali was connected. Josephus 
says, " The Naphtalites received the parts turned towards the East unto Da- 
mascus, and the upper parts of Galilee to Mount Lebanus and the sources of 
Jordan." (Ant. v. 1. 22.) It would thus become the channel of the trade from 
Damascus southwards. The description, " He giveth goodly words," (Gen. 
xlix. 21.) has no known explanation in those times. Yet the Eng. Vers. "Naph- 
tali is a hind let loose, he giveth goodly words," (which Dr. Stanley pronounces, 
"mistranslated," Pal. 363.) is right. The rendering, " is a spreading terebinth ; 
he giveth forth goodly boughs ; " Ib. (originally from Bochart, ii. 258. Leipz.) 
is founded on an altered text, rr)'g for n)jx, and npN, for 'TON, from TON, which oc- 
curs only in Is. xvii. 6, 9. has no known plural, and in its own nature would 
not have one, since it means, not " bough," generally, but, as we say, " a 
leader." " Leaders " would, of course, be a defect. Onk. Vulg. Syr. Saad. 
Sam.-Ar. agree so far against the LXX. 

3 The title " lion's whelp," etymologically would signify the cub, not yet 
separated from its mother, and (Ezek. xix. 2, 3, 5.) is used of the age before it 
has grown to be the "young lion," T0s, which catches pi'ey. Yet there is appa- 
rently no such emphasis here, since it is used of Judah. (Gen.xlix. 9.) 

4 Gen. xlix. 27. 



of God's foreknowledge and Providence. 251 

told of Gad, and which, at the Eastern outskirts of the 
land, he had ever to wage, now pressed in, but at the last 
overcoming*, he bore, a more than "charmed," a God- 
protected "life." So Dan, trampled upon in the dust by 
the horse-hoofs of the enemy, was still, out of the dust, to 
cast backward the horse and his rider, deadly as a ser- 
pent's bite 6 . And yet, although Dan was then little infe- 
rior in numbers to Judah 7 , and larger than either Ephra- 
im or Manasseh separately, the brunt of the conflict was to 
be borne by Judah and Ephraim. The blessing to Judah, 
8 Thou wilt bring him back to his people j Ms hands strive 
for him; and help from his enemies Thou wilt be, was the 
abiding hope of the wives and mothers of Judah, when its 
armies went forth to the field. 

Three tribes had, for the misdeeds of their first fathers, 
lost, successively, the primogeniture ; existence alone was 
promised them ; but Reuben was excluded from eminence; 
Simeon and Levi were to be dispersed in Israel. In the 
wilderness, Reuben, 7th in point of numbers, sought to 
recover the primogeniture 9 ; Simeon appears to have been 
prominent in the abominations of Baal Peor 10 ,and had lost 
nearly two thirds of its numbers, since the first numbering 
in the wilderness n ; Levi's fierceness had become a sanc- 
tified zeal. Simeon then disappeared from the blessing of 
Moses 1S ; Reuben's perilous pride was stayed by the pro- 
phecy of the fewness of his numbers 13 j the sentence on 

5 Ib. 19. 6 Ib. 17. 7 Dan, in the 2nd year, Ib. 62,700 ; (Num. i. 38, 39.) 
Judah, 74,600. (Ib. 26, 7.) Dan, in the 39th year, 64,400 ; (Ib. xxvi. 42, 3.) 
Judah 76,500. (Ib. 22.) Deut. xxxiii. 7. 

9 Such seems to have been the object of the rebellion ofDathanandAbiram, 
claiming 1 civil, as Korah and his company of Levites claimed ecclesiastical, dig- 
nity, Num. xvi. I0 Num. xxv. 14. u It had 59, 300, 
Num. i. 23. but 22, 200 only, Ib. xxvi. 14. 

12 The remarkableness of its omission gave rise to an incorrect correction in 
the Alex. MS. of the LXX. which got over two seeming difficulties at once by 
inserting it in the verse relating to Reuben ; "and let Simeon be many in num- 
ber." Apollinaris observes that "the accurate copies do not mention Simeon." 

1 3 " Let Reuben live and not die ; and let his men be few." TheE. V., fol- 
lowing Aben-Ezra,- has supplied the "not" from the preceding clause; but this, 
although not infrequent, when the negsitive is in the main clause, is not ad- 



252 " Until Shiloh come ; 

Levi, although unreversed, was turned into a blessing and 
an occasion of greater nearness to God. So was there 
stamped on the history of the people the great law of the 
justice and love of God, that irreversible chastisement 
deepens on persevering impenitence, but, on repentance, 
became, through the rich exuberance of His mercy, the 
channel of His choicest favours. In the subsequent his- 
tory, although Simeon and Reuben still lived, Reuben so 
dwindled away, that we find his cities completely in the 
possession of Moab and Ammon ; Simeon had a scanty 
settlement taken out of Judah l , yet, if the tradition be 
true, he too gained by the breaking of his fierce might, 
and while some of his sons, in search of pastoral wealth, 
broke out beyond the borders of the promised land 2 , and 
probably became an Arab tribe 3 , others became the teach- 
ers of the little children of Israel 4 . These prophecies had 
their continuous fulfilment, and so, when, after nearly 3| 
centuries, Judah, from being an eminent, became the 
royal tribe, the promise that it should not be dissolved 
until Shiloh should come 5 , gained the more impressive 

missible when (as here) it is in a subordinate clause. The Verss. then rightly 
omit the negative, although the Vulg. alone has the rendering, et sit parvus 
in numero." l Josh. xix. 9. 2 1 Chr. iv. 39-43. 

3 Tebrizi, in his Comm. on the Hammasa, mentions tliree Jewish Arab tribes 
as existing up to the times of Mohammed. 

4 "Another exposition, ' there shall not be to thee poor scribes and teachers 
of infants, save from Simeon.' " Rashi ad loc. The Jerus. Targ. has, '* I will 
divide the tribe of Simeon, able teachers of the law in the congregation of Ja- 
cob." That of Ps. Jon. "I will divide the possession of the sons of Simeon 
into two parts ; one part shall go forth to it out of the midst of the sons of 
Judah, and part among the rest of the tribes of Jacob." 

8 n*y$ (as it stands in the Hebrew text) would be an old form, which, be- 
coming a proper name thus early, never entered into the ordinary language. 
In this case EzekieFs paraphrase, which any how attests that he recognised 
the prophecy as relating to the Messias, would indicate also that the original 
meaning of the name was not familiar to his hearers. Remove the diadem and 
take off the crown I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no 
more,until He come Whose rigid it is; and I will give it. (xxi. 31,2. Heb.) 
Ezekiel's BS^'en \h -wx, N3-ij; may have been chosen to bring out the personal sense 
of the word nW, (if written and pointed rk/y for i^, as, in the next verse, rinso, 
'"iT#,) ivhich was not expressed by the form of the word itself. Ezeluel's para- 
phrase apparently determined Onkelos to render, "until Messias shall come, 



no temporal fulfilment can be made out. 253 

significance, was fixed by Ezekiel, and became the centre 
of the temporal hopes of Israel's continuance, when it was 
hemmed in to the two tribes whose permanence was pro- 
mised or hinted at, Judah and Benjamin. So, largest and 
least met in these two great prophecies, the obedience of 

Whose is the kingdom," ^retained in the Targ. Hieros.) and the Greek trans- 
lators, the Syriac, and Saadias,(T& airoKefyteva aura!, LXX. and Theod. in Eus. 
Dem. Ev. p. 370. $ ctn-oKeirat, Aq. Symm. " he whose it is," Syr. Saad.) There 
is nothing 1 to be said against this, since, (apart from Gen. vi. 3.)=Tfs cer- 
tainly occurs in the ancient song of Deborah, (Judg. v. 7.) and, being also Phoe- 
nician, is an early, not a late form of the relative. (See Introd. to Jonah, p. 250.) 

The reading rh'tcr, however, is attested by the paraphrase of Ps. Jon. "until 
the time that theking Messiah shall come, the. little one of his sons," (from W, 
i. q. V^f", "embryo," or the Avab.Saleel, "the new-born male child taken from 
its mother's womb." (So Abulw. & Kim.) The authority of the MSS is also 
for it ; 38 MSS only having the defective fbv, none the punctuation n^>. The 
exstant Samaritan text also omits the ', but the Samaritan version retains the 
word as a proper name ; an Arab. Sam. Comm. on Genesis comments on the ; 
one Sam. Arab, version substitutes Solomon, or peacemaker, while another ren- 
ders, "he who is worthy of it." De Rossi Varr. Lect. iv. App. p. 217, 219. 
There are traces of a Kri and Kethiv, rhv Keth. nW Kri in the Echa Rabbathi, 
f. 586. Ven. 1545 (but ifow Keth. in Mart. Pug. Fid. f. 531.) and of a Kri ta- 
in Mattan Cliehun. in Norzi ap. de R. p. 218. An etymology ff> '0, "to him 
are gifts," occurs in the Beresh. Ketsara in Mart. f. 251. and in the Talmud 
Horaioth in Yalkut Shimeoni, f. 49. 3 and in Jarchi in de Rossi, p. 219. In 
this case the form would be according to the analogy of ifiy from rhy and nSa 
from rh* &c, (see Hengst. Christ, i. 68. ed. 1.) This must any how be the ety- 
mology of the name of the place Sltiloh, " rest," a name given probably after 
Israel rested there. The etymology remains the same, if nW be regarded as 
an abridged form for p^, (Hengst. i. 68. ed. 2.) Nothing turns on the ety- 
mology ; the only question raised grammatically, is, whether the proper name 
(S/itYo/ibetheNom. or the Ace. ; until SMloh come, or until he come to Shiloh. 

The rendering," until he come to Shiloh," is obviously the reverse of the fact, 
since the eminence of Judah was, not bqforelui came to Shiloh, but afterwards. 
The words, " staff, sceptre," must relate either to the rule in Judah or of Ju- 
dah ; i. e. of the tribe within itself, or towards the other tribes. Of the tribe 
within itself, it would be unmeaning, if limited to the entrance into the pro- 
mised land ; since it was equally true of every other tribe. Of rule towards 
others, it would be untrue ; since, although the most numerous tribe and first 
in dignity, (the birthright, forfeited by the elder sons, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, 
having descended to it,) it had absolutely no authority. The sole authority, 
which was lodged any where, was that given directly by God to Moses of the tribe 
of Levi, and subsequently to Joshua of the tribe of Ephraim. Caleb was faith- 
ful as well as Joshua, but Joshua had entire authority given him ; Caleb, the 
chief prince of Judah, was as subordinate as any other. Rationalist interpre- 
ters have no choice but to call the prophecy, one " framed after the event," 



254 Prophecy of Shiloh had no temporal fulfilment. 

the heathen to Him our Peace, the calling of the Gen- 
tiles by those Northern tribes, where Jesus lived and 
whence Apostles came, and which were, above the rest, 
the high- way of Palestine. Then Zebulon indeed rejoiced 
in its going out, and, with Naphtali, a called the people to 
the mount, i. e. the Holy Mount of God. 

(e. g. Davidson, i. 198.) i. e. a falsehood. But then they are bound to shew that 
it agrees with the event. They cannot deny that, on the Jewish and Christian 
interpretation, it does. Judah did maintain its corporate existence until Jesus 
came, and then was dissolved. On the Anti-Christian, it had no fulfilment. 
The facts, that it was the most numerous tribe, that it marched first in the 
wilderness, that it drew its lot first for its inheritance, involve no authority. 
In numbers, it was little more than Joseph, (i. e. Ephraim and Manasseh collect- 
tively,) Ath only larger than Dan. In the wilderness, it marched at the head 
of two tribes, East of the Ark, as did Reuben on the South, Ephraim on the 
West, Dan on the North. This was dignity, not authority. The camp of 
Judah (Num. ii. 9.) had no other character than that of Reuben, (Ib. 10.) Eph- 
raim, (24.) Dan. (31.) In the whole conquest of Canaan under Joshua, it 
has not even any priority ; although, if it had, a regiment or tribe, ordered 
to march first, has dignity, not authority. It is under, not in command. 
But, in a marked way, throughout that history, (except when, after the con- 
quest, Caleb volunteered, and Ephraim asked for a larger lot,) the children 
of Israel are spoken of as one whole. It is throughout, Israel, all Israel, the 
children of Israel. The several tribes are merged in the whole. Twice in 
the book of Judges, Judah is related to have gone first to battle, by command 
of God. (Judg. i. 1,2. xx. 18.) On the first occasion, he fought only as a tribe, 
joining in mutual alliance with Simeon, whose lot was taken out of Ms. (Judg. 
i. 3.) But both cases shew that it had no such prerogative ; else, there had been 
no occasion to enquire of God. 

Still more unmeaning does the other clause become, "and to him [i. e. Ju- 
dah] shall he the obedience of the nations," i. e. (as these writers explain it) 
" Judah will be the leader of the other tribes till Canaan be subdued, and, after 
obtaining a quiet and sure abode in the country, shall stitt maintain its superi- 
ority." (Davids, i. 200.) But "superiority" is not receiving "obedience," still 
less, as the word meant doubtless, "loving obedience." comp. DK nnjy "reve- 
rent obedience to a mother," Prov. xxx. 17. and the connected ngj (prop, name) 
and the Arabic wakefia, "obeyed;" wakai, viii. "was reverent to God." croyn 
also are " the peoples, nations," not " the Jewish people." Obedience also is 
rendered to an individual, or a whole, not to a part. Obedience, when render- 
ed, was rendered to the kings, not to Judah. Judah was a large part and, 
after the two first reigns, almost the whole of the people who obeyed. They 
were the obeyers, not the obeyed. 

1 i Deut. xxxiii. 9. The prophecy, like that as to the " goodly words " of 
Naphtali, has no explanation at those times. The notion, that "a common 
sanctuary was intended for them in Mount Tabor," was one of Herder's crotch- 
ets, which I regret to see in Stanley's Jewish Church, p. 662. 



Series of individual prophecies. 255 

The prophecy, (in the sense, in which all understood 
it, until, in the last century, it was in the interest of unbe- 
lief not to understand it,) fixed, at the new era of the 
people, the promise to Abraham. The promise, " in thy 
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed," was 
expanded in both its parts. Judah was pointed out as 
the line, in which that Seed shoxxld come ; the blessing was, 
that he should be " Peace ; " that blessing was to reach 
the Gentiles through obedience to Him. The name Shi- 
loh was enlarged in the later prophecies of " the Prince 
Peace." 

The book of Judges almost opens with the prophecy, 
that the nations whom they had left should be as z thorns 
in their sides, and their gods a snare. Its history contains 
the fulfilment of this, and is the first stage of the comple- 
tion of Moses 3 prophecy. The deliverances on repentance 
are sometimes without, yet, in the cases of Barak 3 and 
Gideon 4 and Sampson 5 , with prophecy. 

The chain of individual personal prophecy was conti- 
nued on in the predicted judgments on Eli's sons 6 , and 
on his house 7 ; on Saul 8 ; even on David in the threefold 
punishment on his great sin 9 ; on Solomon 10 ; as to each 
there had been preceding promises 11 . Yet the prediction s 
are not scattered profusely. That upon Eli's house, as it 
was fulfilled in successive generations, remained, one con- 
tinued warning to the priesthood. One prophecy of woe 
overshadowed all the later years of David. The prophecy 
as to Jericho 12 brooded over its mighty ruins for some 
six centuries. Else, prophecy comes as the harbinger 
and forerunner of changes, not in tranquil times. Once 
only 13 , when preaching repentance to Israel, Samuel fore- 
told to them their deliverance from the Philistines. Twice 
God revealed himself to Solomon in dreams, at his first 
choice 14 , and after the dedication of the temple 13 : then, 

2 Judg. ii. 3. 3 Ib. iv. 6, 7, 9. 4 Ib. vi. 12-16. vii. 2-7. 5 Ib. xiii. 3-5. 

B 1 Sam. ii, 34. 7 Ib. 31-3. 36. s i b . tf& 14 . xv . 2 6, 28, 29. xxviii. 19. 

9 2 Sam. xu. 10-14. 1 Kgs. xi. 9-12. " To Saul, 1 Sam. x. 1-6 ; to 
David, Ib.xvi. 1-13. 2 Sam. vii. 11-16. xii. 25 ; to Solomon, 1 Kgs. iii. 5-14. ix. 
2-9. 13 Josh. vi. 26. 13 1 Sam. vii. 3. 1 Kgs. iii. 5-15. Ib.ix.2-20. 



256 Succession of prophecies to separated Israel. 

having gifted him with wisdom, He once more only x re- 
vealed Himself outwardly to him 3 , to pronounce the sen- 
tence, mitigated for David's sake. On and after the divi- 
sion of the ten tribes, prophecy and miracle were even 
more bestowed on the schismatic kingdom of Israel than 
upon Judah, which had the temple- worship and the teach- 
ing priesthood 5 , until the conflict of unbelief had set in in 
Judah too, and corruption was, although at the distance 
of two centuries, preparing its destruction. The temporal 
kingdom of Israel was inaugurated by the prophecy of 
Ahijah to Jeroboam 4 . On the morn of the consecration 

1 " The Lord God was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned 
from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared to Mm twice." Ib. xi. 9. 

2 Ib. 11-13. 

3 2 Chr. xv. 3. The prophet Ahaziah described the condition of Israel, in 
contrast with Judah, for a long season Israel Jiath been without tlie true God, 
andtvithont a teaching priesthood, and without law. Dr Stanley says of this 
period, " they, [the prophets,] maintained the true religion in the northern 
tribes, at times when in Judah it was crushed to the ground, and when in 
Israel it had to struggle against severe persecution or sluggish apathy." J. 
Ch. 421 . The prophets were God's instruments for maintaining what remain- 
ed of religion in Israel against the state-corruption, but Dr Stanley's account 
of Judah, and of the relative condition of Israel, is unhistorical. The bad reign 
of Rehoboam lasted but 17 years ; Abijah's (with an interval of good, 2 Chr. 
xiii.) 3 ; Asa's declension lasted 5 years ; (Ib. xvi.) Jelioram, under the influence 
of Ahab's daughter Athaliah, reigned 8 evil years ; Athaliah, 6 ; Joash after 
Jehoiada's death, seemingly 1 ; in all, thus far, 39 ; whereas the good part of 
Asa's reign was 36 years ; that of Jehoshaphat, 25 ; of Joash, seemingly 39 
years ; in all, about a century. Most of Amaziah's reign was also good, as also 
of Uzziah's. The increased corruption of Judah seems to have set in, some- 
what before the reign of Jotham. (2 Chr. xxvii. 3.) Yet Hosea bears witness 
to the relatively good state of Judah. (xi. 12. iv. 15.) In Israel, the idolatry, 
which all its kings encouraged, must (according to St. Paul's statement, Rom. 
i.) have been an intense source of immorality. All concurred in " making 
Israel to sin," besides the yet worse corruptions of the house of Omri. (See 
Introd. to Hosea, p. 2, 3.) 

4 1 Kgs. xi. 29-38. Dr Stanley says, " It was in the disorders at the close of 
Solomon's reign, that the Prophetic Order assumed an importance in the state, 
such as it had never acquired before. Samuel had transferred the crown from 
Saul to David; Nathan, from Adonijahto Solomon ; but Ahijah, in transfer- 
ring it from Rehoboam to Jeroboam, created not merely a new dynasty but a 
kingdom." (J. Ch. p. 420.) Scripture says, that Samuel anointed David at 
God's command against his own judgment, for he would have chosen Eliab ; 
(1 Sam. xvi. 6.) and against his own wishes, since he mourned for Saul. (Ib. 



Prophecy in the idolatrous kingdom of Israel. 257 

of the state- apostacy, its final desecration and the name of 
its overthrower were foretold 3^ centuries before 5 . The 
beginning of two of its four first dynasties 6 , the close of all 
the four 7 , was foretold. In the reign of Ahab, miracle and 
prophecy were put forth against the new corruption of 
Baal. The great famine and its close 8 ; Ahab's twofold 
victory over Benhadad 9 ; his death 10 , and the specific re- 
tribution of the innocent blood of Naboth upon himself 11 
and upon Jezebel 12 ; the extirpation of Ahab's house 13 , and 
its respite 14 , are minutely foretold. Yet again no mere 
foretelling. It is chastisement ; mercy ; then, at last, ex- 
cision. This striving, on God's part, to win Ahab who 
sold himself to work wickedness, is one of those marvellous 
touches of the long-suffering of Divine love, which meet 
us in the Old Testament. God even complains, that 
Ahaziah, the son of Ahab, did not enquire of Him, in- 
stead of the god of Ekron, as to the issue of his illness 15 . 
Even the last of the doomed house received promise of 
victory from Elisha, when united with Jehoshaphat 1G , de- 
liverance from peril through Elisha's supernatural know- 
ledge of the king of Syria's counsels 17 , and in the siege 
of Samaria 18 . Then followed the guardian-promise to 
the house of Jehu. Contrary to all experience as to the 

xv. 35.) David says also that God appointed, that Solomon should succeed him. 
(1 Chr. xxii. 9, 10. xxviii. 5, 6.) Nathan was very probably the organ of com- 
municating that will of God ; but, when Adonijah would have reversed God's 
appointment which David had confirmed by oath to Bathsheba, (1 Kgs. i. 13.) 
Nathan simply advised Bathsheba, how to save her own life and Solomon's by 
informing David. (Ib. ii. 13.) Ahijah the prophet declared himself the organ 
of God, Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel. 1 Kgs. xi. 13. It is mislead- 
ing, to speak only of the human agents and their acts, and to ignore that they 
acted at the express command of God. And this the more, since, although 
Dr Stanley speaks of their "endeavours on both sides to keep up a sentiment of 
humanity," (p. 421.) he says also, "at times, they increased the bitterness of 
the division," (p. 457) and " they were not without grievous shortcomings," 
(p. 450.) as if they had not acted and spoken under inspiration of the Spirit 
of God. 5 Ib. xiii. 2. 

6 Jeroboam's and Jehu's. 7 Jeroboam's by Ahijah, Ib. xiv. 6-16. 

Baasha's by Jehu son of Hanani, Ib. xvi. 1-4. 8 Ib. xvii. 1. xviii. 1. 

9 Ib. xx. 13,14,28. ><> Ib. 42. xxii. 17-23. 28. " xxi.19. 

J 2 2Kgs.ix:36,7. 13 1 Kgs. xxi. 21-24. " lb.29. 1S 2 Kgs. i. 2-4. 16. 
Ib.iii.17,18. V Ib. vi.8-23. B Ib.vii.l. 

S 



258 Minute temporal prophecies io Israel end in larger. 

former kings of Israel and the history of those who came 
after, the house of Jehu was to last till the 4th genera- 
tion 1 . The 3 promised victories of Jehoash 3 were Eli- 
sha's last bequest to his people ; Jonah, amid the weak- 
ness of the kingdom, predicted the great extension of 
the kingdom of Jeroboam II. 3 ; when this had been ful- 
filled, Amos, at the moment of the separated kingdom's 
greatest might, reversed the prediction and pronounced 
the affliction of Israel in the scene of its recent victories 4 . 
Hosea foretold the breaking of its might in the valley of 
Jezreel 5 . The Syrians, who had smitten them but by 
whose aid, after this, they sought to gain Jerusalem for 
themselves 6 , (perhaps as a support against Assyria,) 
should, Amos foretold, be carried captive to Kir 7 , a coun- 
try loosely connected with Assyria, and, at that time, in 
rebellion against it 8 . Contemporaneous are the two pro- 
phets' predictions of the final extinction of its kingdom 9 ; 
and, in regard to it and its kings, the close of all these 
particular prophecies, of all this care which they had 
wasted, follows in those vast comprehensive prophecies, 
which above 2600 years have not yet exhausted, that they 
should abidingly be wanderers among the nations 10 , de- 
spised among the nations u , sifted as in a sieve in the 
four corners in the earth, yet every real grain under the 
care of God m . 

The recorded prophecies in the early times of the king- 
dom of Judah were also given on emergencies. But these 
were the fewer, since God's promise to David secured the 
calm succession in the kingdom 18 , in strange contrast with 
the broken dynasties of Israel and the anarchy 1 in which 
they expired. The sacred historians were of the kingdom 
of Judah ; yet they have only preserved four temporal pro- 
phecies in its early history ; that of Shemaiah to Reho- 

^Kgs.x-SO. 2 Ib. xiii. 14-19. 3 Ib.xiv.25. 4 See on Am. 

vi. 14. p. 208, 9. 5 See on Hos. i. 5 . p. 9. x. 14. p. 69, 70. 6 Is. vii. 2-6. 

7 See on Am. i. 5. p. 160, 1. 8 Niebuhr, Gesch. Ass. p. 156. s See on Am. 
ix. 8. p. 222. 10 See on Hos. ix. 17. p. 61, 2. See on Hos. viii. 8. p. 52. 

See on Am. ix. 9. M 2 Sam. vii. 12-16. 1 Kgs. viii. 25. xi. 

13. 32. 36. 2 Chr. vi. 16. Ps. cxxxii. 11, 1*. 



Succession of prophets in Judah. 259 

bpam 1 *, during the invasion of Shishak ; that of Hanani 
the Seer to Asa 15 , on his alliance with Syria; that of Ja- 
haziel to Jehoshaphat 16 , when Moab, Ammon, and Edom, 
conspired to extirpate Judah ; and the personal prophecy 
of Elisha against Jehoram 17 . Yet a fifth is referred to, 
18 the vision of Iddo the Seer against Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat. But Judah had its prophets throughout. Na- 
than the prophet probably even survived Solomon, since 
18 the acts of Solomon, first and last, were written, in the 
words of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy ofAhi- 
jah the Shilonite, and in the vision of Iddo the seer against 
Jeroboam. But the prophecies of Ahijah and Iddo being 
apparently specific prophecies, it would follow that Na- 
than lived to write the latter acts of Solomon also. Iddo 
survived Rehoboam and Abijah, since he wrote their his- 
tories in two distinct works 19 . Azariah the prophet, son 
of Oded 20 , awakened Asa to a great reformation, which 
drew back many of Israel too to the worship of God, are- 
formation deeper apparently than those of Hezekiah or 
Josiah. Jehu, son of Hanani, who had prophesied against 
Baasha 21 , appears as a prophet in the kingdom of Judah 
under Jehoshaphat 22 , whose acts, first and last, he wrote, 
in his old age 2S . Both Jehu son of Hanani, and Eliezer 
son of Dodavah of Mareshah 24 , rebuked Jehoshaphat for 
his alliance with Ahab, which, by the intermarriage of 
his son Jehoram with Athaliah, so fatally corrupted Ju- 
dah. Few as are the prophecies which are preserved at 
this period, the title Seer, given to Iddo, Hanani, and 

14 2 Chr. xii. 7, 8. ' Ib. xvi. 7-9. 16 Ib. xx. 14-17. 

V Ib. xxi. 12-15. w Ib. ix. 29. 2 Chr. xii. 15. It is said that he 

wrote frjEpi^, lit. " to genealogise," paraphrased by the Vulg. " diligenter ex- 
posita." In xiii. 22. the title chin implies a diligent commentary, and it is 
said to contain " the matters of Abijah and his ways and his words." It is 
assumed that Ye'do or Ye'di, fty; or ^y;, (2 Chr. ix. 29.) is the same as Iddo, 
V=ij?. (xii. 15. xiii. 22.) 

50 Ib. xv. 8-15. All suppose Oded, v. 8. to be the same as Azariah the son 
of Oded, v. 1. 21 1 Kgs. xvi. 1-4, 12. 2 Chr. xix. 2. 

23 Ib. xx. 34. From the middle of the reign of Baasha to the end of Je- 
hoshaphat's, are about 50 years. There is then no reason to doubt the iden- 
tity of the prophet. 24 Ib. xx. 37. 

s 2 



260 Prophecies of the Christ connected with Jerusalem. 

Jehu son of Hanani, implies a habitual gift of prophecy ; 
nor was the title Nali, " prophet/' ever given in those 
times to any individual, who was not the organ of pro- 
phecy, as well as the interpreter of the Divine will. Na- 
than the prophet had conveyed to David the promise, 
that * his kingdom should be established for ever before 
God, his throne should be for ever ; a promise which, in it- 
self, enlarged while it limited the prophecy of Jacob. This 
prophecy had been expanded in the Psalms of David and 
Solomon. The great mystery which lay in the original 
promise of victory over the Evil one through the Suffer- 
ing of the Seed of the woman, had been unfolded to Da- 
vid in the Passion, Death, continued Life, session at 
God's right hand, 2 of Him to Whom alone God said, Thou 
art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee, to Whom the 
kingdoms of the world should be converted. Hence the 
special religious interest in the continuance of David's 
line, around which the prophecies of the Messiah in Ho- 
sea and Amos 3 among the ten tribes chiefly turned ; hence 
the great prophecy of Joel, the type of so many later pro- 
phecies, predicted that wide outpouring of the Spirit of 
God, beginning in Judah and Jerusalem. 

In the network of prophecy, the definite predictions of 
the earlier prophets became the all-but-present of the la- 
ter. Hosea and Amos had foretold the captivity of Syria 
and Israel ; Isaiah fixes the spoiling of both within one 
year 4 , the breaking up of Ephraim, as a people, in 65 
years 5 . As usual, the men of God do not point out the 
detail of the fulfilment of their prophecies ; yet, by a com- 
bination of scattered dates, out of which the number, 65, 
could not have been put together, even as a marginal gloss, 
we find that the 65 years Avere fufilled to the exact year 6 . 

1 2 Sam. vii. 12-16. 2 Ps. ii. xvi. xxii. ex. 

3 Hos. iii. Am. ix. 11, 12. 4 Is. vffi. 4. 5 Ib. vii. 8. 

6 Two contradictory modes of escaping the definiteness of this prophecy were 
adopted ; 1) that it was a gloss ; 2) that, since the captivity of Israel fell proba- 
bly some 20 years after this date, it had no fulfilment. They are contradicto- 
ry, because a gloss, as it would have been written after the event, would have 
been adapted to the event, and 65 years could not have been adapted, in refer- 
ence, to a period, manifestly not much exceeding 20. Isaiah however speaks. 



Prophecies against Sennacherib and Babylon. 261 

Isaiah and Nahum foretold the deliverance of Jerusalem 
from Sennacherib, when he counted it an easy prey, and 
his own death 7 . Both foretell the suddenness, easiness, 
utterness of the overthrow. *At eventide, behold terror : 
before morning, he is not. He shall shake his hand against 
the mount of the daughter of Zion. God would accept 
the challenge. The Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall lop the 
bough with terror. Micah 9 and Isaiah 10 foretell the cap- 
tivity at Babylon, when Assyria, not Babylon, was the 
object of Judah's dread, and the tributary king of Ba- 
bylon, under plea of congratulation on Hezekiah's reco- 
very 11 , was probably courting his alliance against Assyria. 
Isaiah foretells the conquest of Babylon by Medes and 
Persians 12 , in the " night of its festivity," and its utter de- 
solation 13 ; the recovery of Tyre, after 70 years as the years 

not of a captivity of Ephraim, but of its entire dissolution, as a separate people; 
" shall be broken from being a people." This plainly was, when Esarhaddon 
brought others in their stead, (Ezr. iv. 2, 10.) and since those by whom he re- 
placed them came in part from Babylon, (Ib. & 2 Kings xvii. 24.) it took place 
doubtless at a time when Esarhaddon had subdued some revolt at Babylon. 
But, since the reign of Esarhaddon at Babylon was from about, B.C. 680, to 
B.C. 667, 13 years, (see Rawl. Herod, i. p. 482.) Pekah's invasion of Judah, 
not before his 17th year, B.C. 742. when the reign of Ahaz began, yet, (on ac- 
count of the number of events in the remaining 3 years of Pekah's reign,) pro- 
bably in that year, the close of the 65 years would fall in the third year of Esar- 
haddon's reign at Babylon, B.C. 677. But Babylon did revolt in Esarhaddon's 
reign, (Niebuhr, Assyrien, quoted by Tholuck, Proph. p. 120.) and Esarhaddon 
was there when his generals brought Manasseh captive. (2Chr. xxxiii. 11.) 
This event, again, (according to the Seder Olam, p. 67.) took place in the 22nd 
year of Manasseh ; so that we have the fact of an Assyrian expedition to Ju- 
daea from the Assyrian king at Babylon in the 65th year from the first of Ahaz. 
(Ahaz 14 years, + Hezekiah 29, + Manasseh 22, = 65.) Manasseh is mentioned in 
an inscription of Esarhaddon, as a tributary. (Rawl. Her. i. p. 483.) This was 
the close of the existence of Ephraim, as a separate people, since the seat of 
the separated kingdom was given to heathen. But then neither have the 
words the character of a gloss. The Hebrew expression is too poetic. Even 
Ewald, being able to persuade himself that 65 was a " round number," being 
"somewhat less than a human life," and that it meant "before a human life" 
[just born] " shall have passed away," admits that " the words have a genu- 
ine old Hebrew tint," and thinks that they were "derived from an older oracle 
of some unknown prophet." d. Proph. i. 211. Thol. ib. 

7 Ib. xxxvii. 6, 7, 29, 33-5. x. 24-34. Nah. i. 11-15. <* Is. xvii. 14. 

x. 32, 34. add Nah. i. 12. iv. 10. Is. xxxix. 6, 7. u Ib. 1. 
12 See Lect. iii. p. 125, 6. xiii. 19-22. xiv. 22, 3. 



262 Prophecies of exact dates. 

of one king 1 , (i. e. as in Daniel, One kingdom,) when it was 
yet flourishing and in security. In the prophecy of the 
70 years, after which Tyre should resume her traffic, Isai- 
ah anticipates the prophecy of the 70 years of the capti- 
vity of Judah ; the Chaldaeans are foretold as the destroy- 
ers of Tyre 2 ; and the breaking of the Chaldee yoke was to 
set it free ; as, in fact, although under Persian rule, it 
was still allowed to refuse to Cambyses the aid of its fleet 
against its colonies and to baffle his plans 3 . Isaiah fore- 
told the destruction of Moah in three exact years, like the 
years of an hireling 4 , who counts his years to the very 
day. Isaiah's prophecy of the capture of Ashdod within 3 
years was in act also 5 . He fixes it in the minds and ima- 
ginations of his people, and stakes his truth, as a prophet, 
on the fact that the strong city, memorable afterwards for 
enduring the longest siege in human memory, 29 years 6 , 
against Psammetichus king of Egypt close by, should fall 
within 3, before the general of a distant empire. He fixes, 
within one precise year, the conquest of an Arabian tribe, 
which ordinarily so easily eludes assault. And yet Sen- 
nacherib had the title of king of Arabians 7 . To Heze- 
kiah himself Isaiah foretold the prolongation of his life 
for 15 years 8 . 

It is said that 9 we should remember that, when Nahum 
prophesied, "the Babylonian power threw its shadow 

1 xxiii. 15. 2 Ib. 13. 3 See below p. 288. 

4 xvi. 14. " In v. 13, 14. every syllable sounds like the majestic tone of Isai- 
ah." Ewald d. Proph. i. 236. Stiihelin follows him. Einl. p. 229. Even David- 
son admits the principle, " The silence of history is no good argument against 
the verification of the prophecy in some unknown Syrian expedition." iii. 13. 

5 Is. xx. 6 Herod, ii. 157. 1 Herod, ii. 141. Even Ewald 
observes, (Gesch. Isr. iii. 628.) " The fulfilment is self-evident from the pro- 
phecy ; for such prophecies would not have been preserved in writing, had 
they not been confirmed by the event." inTholuck, d. Proph. p. 119. 

8 xxxviii. 5. "The announcement of 15 years being added to the days of 
Hezekiah are contrary to the nature of prophetic foresight. Tfiey are too ex- 
act and precise to be predicted; and must therefore have been written after 
the things mentioned were known and past." Davids, iii. 31. i. e. it being set- 
tled a priori that there is ho such exact prediction, it must be assumed that the 
writer of these chapters put a prophecy into Isaiah's mouth falsely. 
9 Dr Williams, Ess. and Rev. p. 68. 



Varied minuteness as to the end of cities. 263 

across Asia." The internal notes mark Nahuin's pro r 
phecy to belong to the time of Hezekiah 10 . Even then, 
human wisdom could not foresee the issue of the strife 10 . 
But Nahum also foretells its destruction by means of 
the river which was its defence. 11 , and that fire should de- 
vour her 12 . 

Babylon was tributary to Assyria until the end of the 
Assyrian Empire. Not Babylonian power, but a revolted 
Babylonian general 13 , spoiled Nineveh of the armies which 
might have resisted in the field the Median invasion. 

Equally minute are the characters of the desolation 
foretold. Of Zion alone, of all the cities to be destroyed, 
it was predicted, that it should be ploughed as afield^*; 
strange blending of desolation and inhabiting, and it has 
been so. Tyre was to be for the spreading of nets 15 ; Ni- 
neveh 16 and Babylon 17 for the habitation of the wild ani- 
mals of the desert ; Rabbah of Ammon was to be 18 a stable 
for camels ; and the Ammonites a couching place for flocks ; 
Egypt, amidst its great and almost indomitable fertility, 
was to be a desolation 19 , and 20 a base kingdom. 

For forty one years, from the 13th of Josiah to the last 
of Zedekiah, Jeremiah declared one future for Israel, de- 
struction from the North, captivity in Babylon. After 
Josiah's death, his life was sought by those of his native 
place 21 , it continued to be plotted against 22 ; he was defam- 
ed 33 , reproached, derided, all day long 24 , cursed by the 
people man by man, as they curse those who grind them 
with usury 25 , accused falsely 26 , placed in the stocks 27 , put 
on trial for the truth 28 , imprisoned 29 , given over to death 30 : 
yet he had foretold from the first, that God would pre- 
serve him to the end, and that he should be treated kindly 
by the enemy at the latter end 31 . He went about among 

10 See Introd. to Nahum. u Nah. ii. 6. 12 Ib. iii. 13, 15. 

13 Abyden. in Eus. Chron. Arm. i. 54. Rawl. on Herod, i. p. 487. 

14 See on Mic. iii. 12. 15 Ezek. xxvi. 14. M Zeph. ii. 13, 14. w Is. xiii. 
19-22. 1S Ezek. xxv. 5. w See on Joel iii. 19. p. 152-4. , Ezek.xxix. 
14,15. 21 xi, 19-23. 22 xviii.18,20,22,3. a xx. 10. 24 Ib.7,8.add 
xxiii. 33-40. * xv. 10. xxxvii. 13-15. ' xx.2,3. K xxvi. 8-24. 

29 xxxii. E0 xxxviii. 4,5. xxxvii. 15-21. xxxviii. 6-20. 31 xv. 11. 



264 Jeremiah's unwavering prophecies as to Jerusalem ; 

them, persecuted by all, but invulnerable. For God was 
his invisible defence. I have made thee this day, were 
the words of his inauguration \ a defenced city and an 
iron pillar andbrasen walls against the whole land, against 
the kings of Judah and the princes thereof, and against the 
people of the land : and they shall fight against thee ; but 
they shall not prevail against thee ; for I am with thee to 
deliver thee. False prophets contradicted him ; the peo- 
ple loved this contradiction, and greedily swallowed every 
delusion ; the great men of the city werel>ent on defence; 
the petty kings around leagued to resist the king of Ba- 
bylon ; Egypt, at the first and the last, had warlike and 
able monarchs, Pharaoh Necho and Pharaoh Hophra. 
One voice alone peremptorily from the the first pronounc- 
ed the distinct issue. Before Nineveh fell, while Babylon 
was still dependent, while Judaea, amid the weakness of 
the last Assyrian king, was in perfect repose, that voice 
was first heard, which sounded on for those 41 years ; 
*Out of the north evil shall break forth upon all the inha- 
bitants of the land. For lo, Iivill call all the families of 
the kingdoms of the north, saith the Lord, and they shall 
come and set every one his throne at the entering of the gates 
of Jerusalem. That voice never wavered. During 18 
years of Nebuchadnezzar's reign, it announced uniformly, 
that he should be its destroyer 8 . What if, like Alexan- 
der or Cyrus, he had died prematurely ? What, if in the 
first 18 years of his reign ? Jeremiah knew that he would 
live, until God's word should be accomplished. And dur- 
ing this interval, nothing moved him. At one time Ne- 
buchadnezzar sent only bands of the Chaldaeans against 
Jerusalem 4 ; at another, the approach of Pharaoh's army 
compelled him to raise the .siege 5 . Jeremiah only pro- 
phesied its destruction with the more emphatic energy. 

1 i. 18, 19. add xv. 20, 1. xx. 1 1. 2 i. 14, 15. iv. 6. vi. 1. 22, 23. 

x. 22. xiii. 20. add v. 15. viii. 14-16, 19. xxxvi. 29. " king of Babylon." 

3 Jer.xxiv. (4th of Jehoiakim,) xxvii. 1-11. (beginning of the reign of Je- 
hoiakim,) xxii. 24, 25. (Jeconiah,) xxix. (beginning of ZedeHah's reign,) 
xxviii. (4th of Zedekiah,) xxxiv. (9th of Zedekiah.) 4 2 Kgs. xxiv. 2. xxxii. 
(10th of Zed.) s Jer.xxxvii.5. 



his predictions in the interval before the Captivity. 265 

When it was most straitly besieged, he bought, at God's 
command, a field in his native village, foretelling that, as 
he had done, so should others do thereafter 6 , for I will 
cause their captivity to return, saith the Lord of hosts. It 
was nothing less than " 7 despair before the Chaldaeans." 
It was knowledge from God. Isaiah knew from God that 
Sennacherib would not prevail ; Micah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, 
alike knew of the captivity at Babylon ; all alike knew of 
the deliverance from it. The captivity, contrary to the 
judgment of the nations around him and of his own peo- 
ple, was to be but the travail-pangs of the restoration 
which was to follow 8 . The prophets foretold both with 
equal confidence. The fulfilment of the prophecy of the 
captivity was to be the earnest of the fulfilment of the 
prophecy of the restoration. And during the long re- 
spite, which men abused to discredit the truth of the pro- 
phet, God manifoldly bore witness to His prophet's words. 
The people looked for the restoration of Jehoahaz, the 
prince of their own choice 9 , from Egypt ; Jeremiah fore- 
told his death in his exile 10 ; he shall see this land no more. 
And he died in Egypt. Jeremiah foretold that Jehoia- 
chin and his mother n should lose their crown ; they were 
carried captive 12 . To Jehoiakim he prophesied disgrace ; 
that after death, his corpse should be ls dragged along, 
like that of a malefactor, and cast forth beyond the gate 
of Jerusalem. The capture of Jerusalem, ending the 3 
months' 14 reign of his son, gave opportunity for this; and 
the contumely to the rebellious vassal would be in con- 
formity with what Jeremiah had prophesied more ge- 

6 Ib. xxxii. 44. 7 " Contrast Isaiah's confidence 

against Assyria with Jeremiah's despair before Chaldaea." (Stanley, J. Church, 
p. 457. in illustration of the " changing- of the Prophetical teaching with the 
events of their time.") 

8 Micah iv. 10. Is. xl. sqq. Jer. xii. 15. xvi. 15. xxiii. 1-8. xxiv. 5-7. xxvii. 22. 
xxix. 10-14. xxx. xxxi. xxxiii. 

9 2 Kgs. xxiii. 30. 2 Chr. xxxvi. 1. He is ranked the 4th of the sons of Josiah, 
being also named Shallum, 1 Chr. iii. 15. Jer. xxii. 11. He was younger than 
Jehoiakim, much older than Zedekiah. 2 Chr. xxxvi. 2, 5, 11. 10 xxii. 11, 12. 

"xiii.18. 13 2 Kgs. xxiv. 12. 

ain? Jer. xxii. 19. add xxxvi. 30. " 2 Kgs. xxiv. 8. 



266 Jeremiah and -Ezekiel foretell details of his capture ; 

nerally 1 . He alone of the four last wretched kings of 
Judah, rehel though he was, did not die in captivity. The 
political circumstances of Nebuchadnezzar, which detain- 
ed him elsewhere, so that he sent against Jehoiakim 
bands of the Chaldceans 3 , with auxiliaries of Ammonites, 
Tyrians, Moabites, were shaped so, as to leave room for 
the fulfilment of the words of Jeremiah. 

Then follow the signal prophecies, as to Zedekiah ; first, 
when the king enquired of God hy him, defeat, capture 
by Nebuchadnezzar 3 ; then, when the last siege set in, Je- 
remiah promised him, that it should be well with him if 
he should surrender ; else, he foretold the mockery of his 
harem 4 ; that he should speak to the king of Babylon 
mouth to mouth, see him eye to eye, be led to Babylon 5 . 
Minuter still was the prophecy of Ezekiel in the capti- 
vity, while the scoffers mocked him 6 . the days are pro- 
longed and every vision faileth. It is as if he saw in a vi- 
sion the flight of Zedekiah^ probably disguised, 7 Zy the way 
of the gate bettueen the two walls by the king's garden, flee- 
ing towards the plain, at the last, a solitary fugitive, his 
army scattered from him, pursued and overtaken by the 
Chaldees, brought before the king for judgment, his eyes 
put out, and himself carried to Babylon . Probably he did 
so see it. For when, by the symbolical act of digging 
through the ivall of his house, removing his goods through 
it on his shoulders at twilight with his face covered, as they 
that go forth into captivity, he thus explains his act; 8 the 

1 viii. 1,2. This seems to me more probable than that it was done by his 
own subjects, stained though he was with " innocent blood" and oppression 
to supply his luxuries. Jer. xxii. 13-17. 2 2 Kgs. xxiv. 1, 2. 

3 Jer. xxi. 4-7. add xxiv. 8. 4 xxxviii. 22. 5 xxxii. 4, 5. xxxiv. 3. 

6 Ezek. xii. 22. ' 2 Kgs. xxv. 4-7. 

8 Ezek. xii.-12-14. Ewald generalised the prophecy and accepted it. (Proph. 
ii. 255. 213.) Stahelin (p. 306) says, " in truth, the blinding of Zedekiah is 
not necessarily prophesied in xii. 13. but this passage can also be understood 
only of his imprisonment ; and as to xxiv. 1. the possibility of so clear an antici- 
pation ought not to be denied." So he half-retracts his explanation, that 
" Ezekiel recast his prophecies, and so e. g. xii. 13. xxiv. 1. prophesied what is 
so special ; involuntarily in the later recasting he introduced the fact into the 
'prophecy; " (p. 305.) in other words, said that he had prophesied what he had 



Event improbable to Jews ; prophecies on individuals. 267 

prince that is among you shall bear upon his shoulder in 
the twilight, and shall go forth ; they shall dig through the 
wall to carry out thereby : he shall cover his face, that he 
see not the ground with his eyes : My net also will I spread 
over him, and he shall he taken in My snare : and I will 
bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans; yet shall 
he not see it, though he shall die there ; and I will scatter 
toward every wind all that are about him to help him, and 
all his bands. 

And yet to the Jews nothing seemed less likely than 
all this. Hananiah ventured to predict the restoration 
of Jeconiahj (Jehoiachin,) and the vessels of God's house 
within two years 9 . Jeremiah predicted the false pro- 
phet's death within that year, and he died in that year in 
the seventh month 10 . The judgment predicted on the indi- 
vidual was itself not insulated. Such had heen aforetime 
that on the disobedient prophet 11 ; on Gehazi 13 ; on the 
false counsellor Shebna 13 ; the false prophet Amaziah 14 . 
Such were the predictions of Jeremiah himself to the 
false priest Pashur 15 ; to the false prophets Ahah and Ze- 
dekiah 16 , and Shemaiah 17 ; such in the N. T. were those 
of St. Peter to Sapphira 18 , and of St. Paul to Elymas the 

not. So then if the prophecy imply mere human knowledge, it is to stand ; 
if more, it is to be assumed to be recast. And this is to be criticism ! David- 
son follows Stiihelin's first solution of subsequent revision and introduction 
of " later knowledge." (iii. 150.) " Ezek. xii. 13. must have been written after 
the event," iii. 147. i. e. because it contains so distinct a prophecy. (In ii. 460. 
Davidson had apparently given it as an instance of admissible definite pro- 
phecy.) " In like manner ch. xxiv. could only have been written after the de- 
struction of Jerusalem," (iii. 147.) although Ezekiel distinctly says, that he was 
directed to note that it was delivered on the very day that the king of Babylon 
set himself against Jerusalem, (xxiv. 2.) On the like definite prophecy, (ch. xxi.) 
Ewald writes, as if he had been there, " One day it came vividly into the Pro- 
phet's mind, (who, although far removed from the scene of action, yet with his 
spirit ever followed the march with stretched expectation,) as if the army must 
b.e arrived before Jerusalem on that very day. His anticipation must very 
nearly or altogether have hit right, since the statement xxiv. 1. agrees quite 
historically with 2 Kgs. xxv. 1." 9 Jer. xxviii. 1-4. 10 Ib. 15-17. 

" lKgs.xiii.21,22. 12 2 Kgs. v. 27. 13 Is. xxii. 15-19. 

14 See Introd. to Amos, p. 153. on Am. vii. 16, 17. p. 214. 15 xx. 1-6. 

16 xxix. 21-23. W Ib. 24-32. Acts v. 9. 



268 Detailed prophecies of capture of Babylon, 

sorcerer 1 . Contrariwise, the prediction to the Recha- 
bites s has remained in force unto this day 3 . 

The prophecy of the capture of Babylon is so graphic, 
that it takes its place in history, accrediting the accounts 
of Herodotus and Xenophon. Its mighty men " forbear 
to fight ; they remain in their strong holds ; they become 
as women. Post shall run to meet post, and messenger 
to meet messenger, to tell the king of Babylon that his 
city is taken at the end* thereof, and that the passages are 
stopped, and the reeds they have burned with fire, and the 
men of war are affrighted." 

The title " vision" justifies us in conceiving, that vivid 
pictures, such as those of the capture of Babylon in Jere- 
miah and Isaiah, (and the like in other prophets,) were first 
spread before the prophets' minds, and then described by 
them in God-given words. The traits are characteristic 
of this siege, not of sieges in general. The idolatrous 
festival of Belshazzar ; its night of revelry ; its sudden in- 
terruption ; the fruitless cry " to arms " the drying up of 
the Euphrates as by fire ; the possession of the passages ; 
the vast city taken, ere it was aware ; the hurrying of the 
posts to tell the king ; we see it all vividly with our own 
eyes, as much as in the historical relations of the capture. 
Yet neither prophet supplies the whole history. Both see 
the besieging armies ; Jeremiah, the kings of the Medes 
and of the North ; Isaiah, the Persians also B ; both, the de- 
struction of Babylon, the breaking in pieces of her gods 6 . 
Isaiah alone sees the festive night, the sudden surprise 
amidst their revelry. ^The night of my pleasure He hath 
turned to terror to me. They prepare the table ; watch the 
watch; eat, drink; 'arise, ye princes; anoint the shield' 
In another vision he sees the slaughter of the king, his 

1 Actsxiii. 11. Jer.xxxv. 

3 The first notice of the Rechabites was given by Dr. Wolff in his Journal 
from 1827 to 1838,Lond. 1839.p.388,9. He gave a further account, Travels 
and Adventures, T. ii. p. 298-300. Lond. 1861. and p. 508. of an edit, in one Vol., 
also 1861. R. Schwarz of Jerusalem speaks of them, Das Heilige Land, p. 407- 
10. [Rev. G. Williams.] 4 Jer. li. 30-32. 5 See ab. p. 125, 6. 

6 Is.xxi.9. Jer. 1.2.11. 44. 1 xxi.4,5. 



in Isaiah and Jeremiah. 269 

burial not among the tombs of his fathers 8 . Jeremiah 
alone sees the mode of the capture, the completeness of 
the slumber of repose in which they were wrapped. Da- 
niel, Xenophon 9 , Herodotus lo , relate the festival-revelry ; 
Herodotus and Xenophon, state that Cyrus knew of it, 
and entered by the Euphrates. Daniel and Xenophon 11 
relate the death of the king ; Xenophon relates that the 
assault was in the night 12 , that the watch was surprised 
drinking 13 , the city captured through the death of the 
king, in that same night u , as Daniel relates that in the 
night the king was slain ; Herodotus adds, that the river- 
gates were left open, those same passages which Jeremiah 
beholds as siezed. The complete security of Babylon is 
related by both the Greek historians 15 j its deliberated un- 
warlikeness stands in strange contrast to its subsequent 
energy in rebelling 16 . Coarser rationalism assumed that 
both predictions were "framed after the events 17 ,"!, e. were 
lies ; more refined rationalism assumed that they were 
delivered during the siege, yet on no other ground than the 
assumption, that prophets did not predict events which 
"lay beyond their political horizon 18 ." The assumption 

s xiv. 15, 22. 9 Xen. Cyrop. vii. 5. 9. 10 i. 191. u Ib. 1 1. 

12 Ib. 9. B Ib. 10. " Ib. 11, 12. Her. i. 190. Xen.l. c. 7. 

16 See ab. p. 127. Berosus too mentions the single battle, c. Ap. i. 21. 

17 Eichhorn, Paulus, Rosenm., Koppe, as to Is. xxi. in ties, on Is. xxi. i. 649. 
At that date, 1822, " no one," he said, " had pronounced the oracle of Jere- 
miah (li.) to be spurious." (p. 650.) He maintains that both were written before 
the event, because they contained nothing which might not be foreseen. "In 
Jer. li. 32," he says, " the taking of the fords and shallow places of the Euphra- 
tes is spoken of: if one would combine this with the account of Xenophon, that 
the soldiers of Cyrus had to creep along shallow places in the bed of the Eu- 
phrates, it would follow that it was written later and was spurious," i. e. if it 
contained undeniable prophecy. 

18 This is Gesenius' primary argument, on Is. xiii. xiv. xxi. les. i. 448. Then 
follows, 2) the allegation of embittered enmity and love of revenge ; assuming 
again that the Prophet was not pronouncing God's judgments: 3)an argument, 
in like way, in a circle, from the similarity of the language with other parts of 
Isaiah, assumed on the like grounds to be spurious. 4) Of actual indications of 
a later style in the three chapters, Gesenius finds 3 only to allege, admitting 
at the same time that the language is " pure." His instances are, 1) njjj " be- 
gan to speak." Both cases, xiv. 10. xxi. 0., are implied answers. Besides, this 
meaning " began to speak," lies nearest to the original meaning of the root, 



270 Genuineness of Isaiah xiii. xiv. 

was repeated by turns as to each case in which the pro- 
phets do so predict the future, yet on each occasion, as if 
in entire unconsciousness, that the critics were repeating 
dogmatically the very point which they had to prove. 
When Jeremiah had been removed to Egypt, the pro- 

and occurs in Deuteronomy, Job, Canticles. 2) The " unemphatic use of the 
pronoun xiii. 3. xiv. 13. 19 ;" hut, in all 3 places, (as is to be expected in a pro- 
phecy so energetic,) it is very emphatic. 3) nyrtfl xiv. 4. The reading is itself 
doubtful ; any how, it is a word framed by the writer, and a poetic form. Kno- 
bel's instances (out of which Davidson selected his, iii. 9.) have not the slight- 
est force of proof. There is not one characteristic expression among them, 
ni xiv. 3. occurs in Job, 73-1 Joel ii. 1, &c.; iyx9Q, " look forth," in Cant.ii. 9. 
Ps. xxxiii. 14. only ; hyy Deut. xxviii. 30., twice only besides, Jer. iii. 2. Zech. 
xiv. 2. 5., in Zech. probably repeated from Isaiah ; roci, " the likeness of a great 
people," xiii. 4. see Ps. Iviii. 5. (David's.) " 1359 ' loose, set free,'xiv. 17. earlier, 
'open.' " Knob. nn is to " open a tiring," and 131-15 to "loose a person," Ps. 
cii.21. cv.20. ; "loosed" the camels from then- load, Gen. xxiv.32. The dif- 
ference is not of date, but of idiom, fffl xiii. 21. recurs in this sense once 
xxxiv. 14. ; n|n nsj an expression of Isaiah, xiv. 7. xliv. 23. xlix. 13. Iv. 12. 
It is the common Hebrew idiom, whereby a noun is added to a neuter verb, 
in cases where we use a preposition. In Is. Iii. 9. the two verbs fi ?ns$ are used, 
as in Ps. xcviii. 4. It is the usual argument in a circle, to assume the spurious- 
ness of Is. xl-lxvi. and then to argue that another prophecy of Isaiah is also 
spurious, because the prophet used the same expressions in both. 

With such proofs as these, it would be easy to prove any work in any lan- 
guage, not to have been written by its author. 

The positive evidence for the genuineness of cli. xiii. xiv. has been given well 
by Havernick, 208. Only the heads need be stated here. 1. The title, which 
ascribes it to Isaiah, is, like other titles in this portion of the book ch. xiii-xxiii,, 
closely united with the prophecy. It is the only indication of the object of 
the prophecy, unt'il v. 19, where Babylon is first named in the body of the pro- 
phecy. The titles in this portion are varied, historical, (xx. 1.) symbolical, 
(xxi. 1. 11. xxii. 1.) as an author only would vary them, sometimes omitted as 
xviii. xxii. 15., whereas a later hand would be uniform. 2) It stands connected 
with the prophecies, before and after. 3) xiv. 24-27., which is its close, refers 
to the prophecy against Asshur which preceded it, and is a summary of God's 
judgments on the world. The prophecies then against Asshur and Babylon 
must have formed one whole, as they stand in Isaiah now. Jeremiah, who 
adopted the language of Isaiah, (ch. 1. li.) united them in the same way. 4) Isai- 
ah, in these chapters, uses language of Joel alone, (see Introd. to Joel, p. 96.) 
his language here is used by later prophets, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Jeremiah. 
5) The language and thoughts recur in undisputed chapters of Isaiah. 

The prophecies of Jeremiah (ch. 1. li.) bear, even to an English reader, so 
evidently the impress of his style, that to attempt to convince one who did not 
see it, would be to try to give sight to the bund. Here, however, another 
antidogmatic prejudice came in. Jeremiah, in these chapters, as was especially 



and of Jeremiah L li. 271 

phecy of the conquest of Pharaoh Hophra in Egypt is as 
definite as that of Zedekiah l . 

The first prophecy which Ezekiel receives, after the vi- 
sions which contain his inauguration to his office 2 in the 
5th year of king Jehoiachin's captivity, is conveyed in the 
symbolical act which he was bid'den to do 3 , lying 390 days 
on the left side, according to the years of the iniquity of Is- 
rael, and. forty days on his right side for the iniquity of the 
house of Judah* The days are explained to represent 

his wont, embodies language of earlier prophets. But among these, he uses 
that of the latter chapters of Isaiah. The whole boasted theory then, as to the 
" Pseudo-Isaiah," was at stake, and, with it, the whole undeifying of prophecy. 
Gesenius satisfied himself, that Jeremiah did not employ those chapters, and 
that whafr he there foretold in ch. 1. li., he could have foreseen by human saga- 
city; so he had no doubts as to the genuineness of ch. 1. li. (les. Einl. ii. 26.) 
nor at that time De Wette. (Einl. led. 1822.) In 1839 De W. still said only, 
"ch. 52,50, 51. are from later hands, at least the false addition li. 59 sqq.." 
(p. 277.) Those who, on antidoctrinal grounds, deny the chapters to be Jere- 
miah's, are forced to concede the likeness of the style. This was shewn by Kii- 
pev, Jerem. libr. sacr. Int. p. 106-32. They have had recourse to the expe- 
dients; l)that the chapters are "a learned imitation of Jeremiah, in order 
to make them pass for his;" (Ewald, Proph. ii. 491. after Gramberg, Rel. Id. ii. 
400.) 2) that " they were written by Jeremiah but recast by the Pseudo-Isai- 
ah;" (Movers, de utr. recens. Jer.indole 1837. De Wette, Einl. 1852. 217.a.) 
3) that a prophecy of Jeremiah was really taken by Seraiah to Babylon, (Jer. 
li. 59.) and, when the fall of the Chaldee power was confidently expected, was 
published, interpolated out of other prophets and out of Jeremiah himself to 
gain it the more credit. (Stiihelin, Einl. p. 278.) 4) that the chapters were 
written by some unknown prophet about B.C. 556, (Maurer, ad loc.) 550, 
(Knobel, Proph. ii. 355.) perhaps Baruch, (Id. 353. Bunsen, Gott in d. Gesch. 
i. 437.) while a defender of their genuineness maintains conversely that they 
were imitated by the author of the latter chapters of Isaiah. (Graf. Jeremiah, 
p. 584.) So do they shew, in attack or defence, where the real pressure is. 
Yet the words of one of the extremest writers are virtually the confession of 
all, as to these chapters of Jeremiah ; " In truth, this section yields many 
proofs of its genuineness. Language, (1. 16. li. 1. 3. 7. 14. 45. 55.) imagery, 
(li. 7. 8. 34. 37.) style, (1. 2. 3. 7. 10.) especially in turns, (as li. 2.) the sub- 
scription, (li. 57.) the unannounced dialogues, (li. 51.) indicate Jeremiah un- 
mistakeably. And chronological data confirm this. Assyria is fallen, (1. 18.) 
&c." (Hitzig, Jeremiah, p. 391.) Of the rest it may suffice to add, thatNebu- 
chadnezzar is spoken of as the reigning king of Babylon, (" and last, this Ne- 
buchadnezzar," 1. 17.) and that, in contrast with an unnamed king of Babylon, 
upon whom the punishment should fall. (1. 18.) 

1 Jer. xliv. 30. xlvi. 26. 2 Ezek. i. 2. the next date is in ch. viii. 1. 

" in the 6th year, in the 6th month, on the 5th of the month." 3 iv. 4-6. 



272 EzekieVs prophecies of the duration of the 2 kingdoms, 

years ; I have appointed thee each day for a year ; the sym- 
bolical act itself follows upon another, representing the 
siege of Jerusalem *, its separation from God 2 , and is a 
prophecy against it 2 . It is agreed on all hands 3 , that 
the 390 years begin with the division of the two king- 
doms, B. C. 975 ; the 40 years, with the reformation of 
Josiah, either that in his twelfth year 4 , B.C. 630, or the 
more complete reformation in his eighteenth year 5 , B.C. 
624. But 390 years after B.C. 975, end in the year of the 
last deportation by Nebuzaradan in the 23rd year of Ne- 
buchadnezzar B.C. 585; and 40 years, from B.C. 624, end 
within a year of the same date. 

In relation to his people, the prophecies of Ezekiel co- 
incide with those in the later part, of Jeremiah's ministry : 
he foretells, in exile, the vanity of the resistance of the 
kings of Judah. In regard to Egypt he has a remarkable 
definite prophecy, that her land should be desolate forty 
years, that at the end of forty years, the Egyptians should 
be gathered, but that they shall be there, a base kingdom. 
It shall be the basest of kingdoms, neither shall it exalt 
itself any more above the nations ; for I will diminish them, 
that they shall rule no more over the nations 6 . 

It has been a superabundance of fulfilment, that this 
has been the history of Egypt, a prey successively to the 
Persians, Macedonians, Romans, Arabs, Georgians, Otto- 
man Turks. 

With this amplitude of fulfilment, it is even absurd to 
raise the question as to the fulfilment of the 40 years. 
The larger prophecy, which 2500 years have not exhaust- 
ed, that it shall be a base kingdom, neither shall it exalt 
itself any more among the nations, is as definite, as un- 
likely to be fulfilled. It was not, that the internal energy 
of its people was exhausted. Even of this there was no 
sign, when Ezekiel prophesied. Pharaoh Hophra had 
disputed energetically, and to human sight hopefully, 

1 Ezek. iv. 1, 2, 8. " Ib. 7. 3 as by Eichhorn, Rosenmuller, and 

" others," ap. Maurer. 4 2 Chr. xxxiv. 3. 5 Ib. 8. 2 Kgs. xxii. 3. 

<> Ezek. xxix. 14, 15. 



and as to Egypt. 2/3 

with- the hammer of the ivhole earth 1 . They continued 
their struggles with the Persian power 8 ; Alexander re- 
plenished their population with his Greeks, and founded 
Alexandria as the emporium of the world. The first Pto- 
lemies developed its resources, and its commerce hy land 
and sea, with Libya, India, Italy ; its new masters gained 
for themselves, for a time, territories wider than it had in 
its most prosperous days 9 , but Egyptians had no share 
in the greatness, except to supply taxation ; Ptolemy Eu- 
ergetes, who shewed favor to his native subjects, was 
the third and last of its great Ptolemies. Thenceforth 
was decay. When Egypt became Roman, Roman Em- 
perors dreaded its advantageous position for revolt, un- 
der the rule of an ambitious governor, and kept it in close 
dependence on themselves. Yet it never exalted itself any 
more. The means which its governors adopted to recruit 
it, or to strengthen themselves, turned to its permanent 
weakness. Its population, native, Greek, Jewish, Arab, 
was energetic, but divided 10 . But the first step in this 
division was long after the prophecy of Ezekiel. 

The difficulty of fixing the particular period of forty 
years arises from the fact, that the systematic accounts of 
Egypt at that time, those in Herodotus, are from Egyptian 
priests, who are known to have cast a veil over their dis- 
graces. They tell us of Necho's fleets n , his circumnavi- 
gation of Africa 12 , his victory over the Syrians at Megiddo 
and his capture of Cadytis, but nothing of the first victory 
of Nebuchadnezzar over Egypt in his father's life-tiuie 1S , 
or of the defeat at Carchemish u , after which apparently 
Necho u came not again any more out of his land, for the 
king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto 

7 Jer. 1. 23. See ab.p. 71. 136. 

9 Ptolemy Philad. held Egypt, with parts of Ethiopia, Arahia, Libya ; Cy- 
rene ; Pheenicia, Coele-Syria, Cyprus, and parts of Asia Minor : his son, Ptol. 
Euerg., had the coast of Asia Minor as far as the Hellespont, and even maritime 
towns of Thrace. 10 " Of every hundred mummies derived from 

the Necropolite receptacles of Memphis, 70 have lost their Coptic peculiarities." 
Smith, Geogr. Diet. v. jEgyptus, p. 46. from Sharpe, Hist, of Eg. p. 133. ed. 2. 
11 Her. ii. 159. 12 Ib. iv. 42. w see ah. p. 60. 

14 Jer. xlvi. 2. 15 -2 Kings xxiv. 7. 



2/4 Decay in Egypt before 

the river Euphrates all which pertained to the king of 
Egypt. On this, and all of the rest of Necho's " six- 
teen years/' Egyptian history is silent ; and in the six of 
his son Psammis it names only an "attack " on Ethiopia 
just before his death 1 . In the 25 years of Apries, they had 
nothing to relate, but a march against Sidon, and a na- 
val battle with the king of Tyre 2 , (in neither of which did 
they venture to say that he was victorious,) and the unsuc- 
cessful expedition against Gyrene to which they attri- 
buted his destruction. The Bible only adds the speedily 
quelled inarch to relieve Jerusalem when besieged by the 
Chaldeans 3 . The boast of pride related by Ezekiel, *My 
river is my own, and I have made it for myself, as well 
as the corresponding boast in Herodotus 5 , both imply 
strength in defence only, and that in Ezekiel a strength 
against attack, derived from the situation of Egypt. 
The employment of a foreign mercenary army, a sure sign 
of decay, commenced with Psammetichus I. the great 
grandfather ofHophra, it is said 6 , in civil strife. The 
ground of the desertion of the native troops stated by 
Diodorus 7 , that, the post of honor, the right wing, was 
assigned to the strangers, implies a very large enrolment 
of foreign troops and chief dependence upon them. The 
desertion of the native warrior-caste, which Herodotus 
states at 240,000 8 , is substantiated by monuments 9 . This, 
(whatever was its real extent,) must have been a great 

1 Her. ii. 161. 

2 Ib. Diodorus makes him victorious against the Cypriotes too, and take Si- 
don, so that the rest of Phrenicia surrendered out of fear. (i. 68.) Herodotus 
(ii. 182.) says that Cyprus was first subdued hy Amasis. Herodotus would hard- 
ly have omitted to speak of such successful results of the expeditions which he 
speaks of, had they been true. The Egyptian monuments add nothing of 
greatness. It does not appear from them that Necho II. was son of Psamme- 
tichus, whose daughter, (his half-sister, if he was son of Psammetichus,) he 
married. (Brugsch, 1'Egypte, p. 252.) " His fewmonumental memorials do not 
deserve much attention." (Id. p. 254.) The monuments confirm the fact of the 
one expedition of Psammis. (Ib. p. 255, 6.) " The monumental traces, recal- 
ling the name of Apries, are dispersed throughout Egypt." (Id. 257.) No one 
contains any historical statement. 3 Jer. xxii. 5-8. 2 Kgs. xxv. 1-4. 

4 xxix. 3, 9. 5 ii. 169. Her. ii. 152. 1 i. 67. 8 ii. 30. 

9 See Sir G. W. in Rawl. Her. T. ii. p. 44, 5. n. 3. add note 2. p. 43. 



temporary restoration under Amasis. 275 

source of weakness, breaking the military traditions of 
Egyp^ and throwing them more upon their foreign mer- 
cenaries, of whom Hophra is said to have had 30,000 10 . 
With these indications and occasions of weakness, before 
the time of Necho, it is not improbable, that Berosus, 
under the Satrap in those parts who had rebelled 11 , meant 
the king of Egypt ; that Egypt was already tributary, (as 
the successor of Hophra, Amasis, was probably in reality 
a Babylonian Vice-king,) and that the inaction of Necho, 
after his two great defeats, was owing to his weakness. 
There is, then, ample room for the 40 years of desolation 
before the death of Hophra. The intense hatred of the 
Egyptians towards Apries, expressed by the title "the 
hated ia " on the monuments, and which, according to He- 
rodotus too, was slaked only by his blood, when Amasis 
unwillingly gave him into their hands, being, as they com- 
plained, " 13 the bitterest of enemies to them and to him," 
implies any thing rather than a prosperous reign or a 
prosperous condition of Egypt under him. The internal 
prosperity in the reign of Amasis 14 stands in contrast 
with the former distress. This represents exactly what 
Ezeldel foretold, a restoration of internal prosperity, with- 
out any restoration of external power. Whether or no 
Egypt was engaged in the alliance with Croesus against 
Cyrus as a tributary to Babylon, and whether or no its 
troops, in conseqxience of that alliance, fought against 
Cyrus 15 , it fell, an easy conquest, at the first appearance 
of Cambyses. 

10 Her. ii. 163. n See ab. p. 62. and below Lect.vii. 12 In Roseffini, Mo- 
num. Storichi, i. 275. quoted Winer, Reallex. v. Hophra, seeThol. Proph.p.131. 

13 Her. ii. 169. " Ib. 177. and Sir G. W. in Rawl. Her. ii. p. 387. 

" The traces of monumental memorials are dispersed over the<itvhole country, 
from Alexandria to Syene. Although of little value for the political history 
of the times of Amasis, yet they serve notably to prove the assertion of He- 
rodotus as to the developement of architecture and sculpture under Amasis." 
Brugsch,p.262. 

15 Herodotus (i. 77. 79.) distinctly says, that Cyrus' rapid march on Sardis 
anticipated the reinforcements which Crresus hoped for from Babylon, Egypt, 
Sparta. Xenophon, on the other hand, circumstantially relates the Egyptian 
way of fighting there, their valour, and the colonization of the survivors, 
(Cyr. i. 2. 10. vii. i. 30-45.) 

T 2 



2/6 The 70 years of the Captivity, 

I have dwelt upon this prophecy the rather, because 
sceptics have made their boast of its assumed failure. 
Knowing, as we do know, the divinity of the Old Testa- 
ment as a whole, it cannot be essential to our faith, that 
the truth of details too should be matter of demonstra- 
tion. We believe as to the parts, because we believe the 
whole. It is a poor, unintelligent, human faith, ignorant 
of the real character or grounds of faith, which cannot 
say, unconcerned, about details, " I do not know." Those 
immediate prophecies were an evidence to those to whom 
they were given. Our faith indeed must be independent 
of minute points of obscure secular history. To us, (as 
far as temporal prophecy is an auxiliary to faith,) those 
long continuous prophecies are given. It is a wilfully 
false issue which scepticism puts it upon, when, ignoring 
that large tangible prophecy which it cannot deny, that 
Egypt should, on its restoration, no more exalt itself above 
the nations., and, unable to account for a patent fact of his- 
tory, which, in EzekiePs time, there was no human ground 
to anticipate, it diverts the attention from an unmistake- 
able prophecy, by alleging that another part of the pro- 
phecy was not true prophecy, simply because we, for 
whom that prophecy was not given as evidence, have not 
the data fully to substantiate it. 

The prophecies as to Egypt led far into the Captivity. 
Then, there was a term of 70 years, which, counted from 
that year, when captives were first taken to Babylon, 
the first of a long series of such removals, viz. the 3rd year 
of Jehoiakim, were fulfilled to the exact year 1 . It is, 

1 Sixty six years are furnished by the length of the reigns given in the Ca- 
non of Ptolemy ; 

Nabocolassaxus Nebuchadnezzar 43 
Ilvarodamus Evil Merodach 2 

Nericassolassarus Neriglissar 4 

Nabonadius Nabunahit 17 

66 

To these should be added probably a year or 18 months preceding that part 
of the fourth year of Jehoiakim, with which Nebuchadnezzar's accession to his 
father's throne coincides, (see below, Lect. vii.) and the two years during which 
Darius the Blede was Viceroy ; the permission to return not having been 



Zechariah's prediction of Alexander in Palestine. 277 

primd facie, absurd to suppose that the author of the first 
chapter of Ezra and^Zechariah were mistaken about the 
number of years in which they were so deeply interested 3 . 
After the Captivity, not to speak now of the prophecy 
of the 4 Empires in Zechariah, as bearing on that of Da- 
niel 3 , there is a distinct prediction of the conflict of the 
Jews with the Greeks and of their victories over them. 
And, before this war, there is a prophecy of a heavy ca- 
lamity, which falls in succession upon Damascus, Ha- 
math, Tyre, Zidon, and the maritime cities of Philistia, 
Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, Ashdod, in which calamity the 
temple of God was to be guarded, not by human power, 
but by His unseen Presence. *I tvill encamp about Mine 
house, because of the army, because of him that passeth by, 
and because of him that returneth. And this, while God 
should smite the power of Tyre in the sea. The selection 
of the places and of the whole line of country corresponds 
very exactly to the march of Alexander after the battle of 
Issus, when the capture of Damascus, which Darius had 

given until the 1st of Cyrus at Babylon B.C. 536. Sec Prideaux, Connection, 
A. 538. B. ii. T. i. p. 179. Davison on Prophecy, Lect. 6. Clinton, F. H. T. 2. c. 
18. p. 367 sqq. Tholuck adopts what he calls " an approximative number ; " 
(Die Proph. p. 103.) what in our ordinary idiom is called "a round number," not 
what the rationalists mean by it. A "roundnumber" idiomatically means " a 
number, in which fractions are disregarded." It must then be the nearest 
number above or below. We might say, for 2556, " in round numbers, 2600 ;" 
or for 68 J- years, " in round numbers, 70," and so on. But the very idiom im- 
plies that the number shall be the nearest number which is obtained, either 
by filling up or dropping the fractions above or below it. 70 might be " a 
round number" for 68 or 72. It could not be for 62 or 78. The principle 
then would introduce no vagueness into prophecy ; although I see no occasion 
for its introduction ; and that the less, since Daniel understood the numbers 
on consideration, as he says, ix. 2. Davidson's real objection lies, as usual, in 
the defmiteness of the prophecy. " We may go farther with Hitzig, and pro- 
nounce 11 b-14 a, suppositious, because the 70 years' captivity in Babylon is 
too specific to be pronounced in the fourth year of Jehoiakim." iii.-98. His 
plea, " Jeremiah would not have uttered what is not strictly correct, because 
the captivity did not last 70 years," (ii. 462.) stands in sad contrast with the 
respectful words of Niebuhr, "Since the number 70 is a typical number, this 
slight difference, [68 for 70 as he supposes,] should fill us with respect, instead 
of raising doubts as to the truth of the prophecy, or leading us to doubt the 
Babylonian chronology." Gesch. Assurs u. Babels, p. 90. in Tholuck, Die Proph. 
p. 112, 13. 2 See above, p. 190. 3 See below, Lect. vi- 4 Zech. ix. 8, 



2/8 Prediction of Alexander and of victory of Jews over 

chosen as the strong depository of his wealth, of Persian 
women of rank, confidential officers and envoys T , opened 
Ccele-Syria; Zidon surrendered; Tyre, specially marked 
out by Zechariah 2 , was taken with great eifort after a 7 
months' siege 3 ; Gaza too resisted for 5 months, was taken, 
and, it is said, plucked up * ; but Alexander passed by with 
his victorious army and returned, and Jerusalem remain- 
ed uninjured. History gives no other explanation of 
Zechariah's prophecy than this conquest by Alexander ; 
that conquest agrees minutely with the prophecy. No 
other event in history does. But, apart from this, the 
victory of the Jews over Greeks was, of all events of his- 
tory, then the most improbable. There was not the most 
distant likelihood of collision between them ; they had 
no point of contact. The name of Greece was known to 
the Jews, only as that of one of the many countries which 
traded with Tyre ; a distant nation, to whom Tyre and 
Zidon had, in their slave-trade, sold Jewish youths, that 
they might remove them far from their border ; but the 
guilt and the punishment belonged, to Tyre and Zidon, not 
to them. Joel had, for this sin, prophesied the punish- 
ment of Tyre, not of Greece. Eichhorn, whose form of 
unbelief exempted him from any necessity to explain pro- 
phecy of any other than its true object, avowed that this 
prophecy of Zechariah did relate to the march of Alexan- 
der and the victories of Jews over Greeks at the later cri- 
tical period of their history. He said plainly, " B The con- 
quests of Alexander are described so clearly, that they 

1 Grote, Greene, xii. 173, 4. 2 ix. 3, 4. 3 Died. Sic. xvii. 40-45. 

Arr. ii. 16-24. Curt. iv. 2. 4 /caTeoTraoyteVTj Strabo, xvi. 2. 30. 

5 Einl. T. iv. 605. He persuaded himself, as his way was, that it was a 
description of past events, and so invented a prophet, not earlier than Alexan- 
der. He supposed the name of the Greeks, in the subsequent prophecy, to stand 
for that " of the most powerful enemies of .the Jews." But Alexander had 
been their Mend. On any human aspect 'of prophecy, it were absurd to sup- 
pose that, in the time of Alexander, Jews should anticipate conquering 1 the con- 
querors of the world. The prophecy of Zech. xiii. 7-14, 21. he explained of 
Judas Maccabseus (p. 450.) and so put it in the time of the Maccabees. Cor- 
rodi, (according to Roster in Zech. p. 25,) followed him, (Bibelcanon, i. 107.) 
and found Antioclius Epiphanes in c. 14. (1 do not find the passage.) 



Greeks, improbable, but accurate, nationalist shifts. 279 

cannot be mistaken." " In what is said of Tyre, who can 
mistake Alexander's wonderful conquest?" "All the 
chief places, which Alexander, after the battle of Issus, 
either took possession of or conquered, are named one by 
one, the land of Hadrach, Damascus and Hamath, Tyre 
and Zidon, Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron and Ashdod." Unbe- 
lieving interpretation vacillated according to the require- 
ments of the theory of each. If any would own that the 
prophecy related to the march of Alexander and to real 
victories of Jews over Greeks, they placed it in those 
times 6 . If any felt constrained to place it earlier, they 
would not see, what to others, who believed prophecy as 
little, was so plain, and took up with any thing 7 which 

6 Rosenm. said generally, " Jahn refers the prophecy to the wars, which the 
Jews, after Alexander, waged with the Greeks who held Syria. Other inter- 
preters who, in like way, think that the victories, gained by the Maccahee 
leaders over Antiochus' Epiphanes, are meant here, infer that this was written 
after the Maccabee times." on Zech. be. 13. 

7 Paulus said, that the prophecy expressed what might be the hopes of the 
Jews after Hyrcanus had subdued Edom, and so placed it at that tune, about 
129, B.C. (lib. d. N. T. iii. 131-5.) Rosenmuller said, " the uncertain hopes 
of the future, expressed here by the prophet, are not to be referred to certain 
events." JBertholdt ruled that, if it related to Alexander's victories, " it must 
have been written by a prophet who flourished after Zechariah at the end of 
the Persian period." (Einl. T. iv. 430. p. 1714.) But he thought it was writ- 
ten in the time of Ahaz, before the Syro-Samaritan war ; (2 Kgs. xvi. 5, 6.) and 
so "that it was probable that the Assyrians gave the unknown prophet some oc- 
casion for his strong threatenings against Hamath, Tyre and Zidon ; but that 
it could not be proved, for want of historical data." In plain words, the ob- 
ject of the prophecy could not be Alexander, in whom it was exactly fulfilled, 
because then there would be prophecy. But no other account could be given 
of it, therefore we must imagine one. Gramberg would have it, that the 
Prophet, in the first prophecy as to Damascus, &c, used the language of the for- 
mer prophets without any special meaning, and in that of the victory over the 
Greeks meant only, " that so mighty and warlike a people could only be con- 
quered by Jehovah with His Israelites." (Rel. Id. i. 529, 30.) De Wette (ed. 
iv. when he acknowledged its genuineness) would have the prophecy to be a 
concealed denunciation against Persia, " against which Zech. did not wish to 
prophesy openly." (p. 311.) "ix. 13. [against Greece] x. 6sqq. are archaisms, 
resting at the same .time on the hoped-for restoration of the people;" (Ib.) or, 
later, " a prophetic antiquarian style whereby the Prophet cast a veil of mys- 
tery over his prophecies." (p. 337. ed. 7.) KnoM, supposing it to date before 
740, B.C., says, " It was expected, that the Egyptians, to try their strength 
against Egypt, would march through Syria, Phoenicia, and PhDistia, as they 



280 Definiteness of Zecharlah's prophecies. 

would fit in with any part of the prophecy or (if need 
were) with nothing. Greece was, until Alexander, a co- 
Jonising, not a conquering nation ; the Hebrews had no 
human knowledge of the site of Greece. .There was not 
a little cloud, like a man's hand, when Zechariah thus 
absolutely foretold the conflict and its issue. Yet here 
we have a definite prophecy, given later than Daniel, fit- 
ting in with his temporal prophecy, expanding a part of 
it, reaching beyond the time of Antiochus, and forean- 
nouncing the help of God- in two definite ways of protec- 
tion; 1) without war, against the army of Alexander; 2) in 

did once later, (Is. xx.) and that the kingdom of Israel too, (Zech. x. 9-12.) and 
in a lesser degree that of Judah, (ix. 8, 9.) would be affected by it. That plan 
of the Assyrians was probably not carried out then ; for the history of that 
time does not mention it." (Proph. ii. 169, 70.) Hitzig would have the first 
prophecy to be a mere imitation of the beginning of Amos, and that against the 
Greeks to he a prophecy, that the Jewish slaves, scattered among the Greeks, 
should rebel against them and conquer them. He admits, " peculiar is the ex- 
pectation, that his people should fight against the Greeks;" (174.) contrary 
to the whole character of prophecy, which bade the Jews in captivity to be still, 
seeking the good of those under whom they lived ; and absurd in itself, as if some 
scattered slaves could be called Judah and Ephraim ! Ewald (D. Proph. ii. 314, 
5.) would make it an encouragement to the Jews to make war on the Greeks 
for detaining then- banished," [those sold as slaves.] Her af eld (Gesch. Isr. Exc. 
2. 3. i. 283.) would make the first prophecy relate to the expedition of Shal- 
maneser, and, substituting jrs for jv, would make the latter relate to a civil war, 
to be encouraged by God. Stahelin, for the first part, followed De Wette ; but 
called ix. 13. a prophecy against Greece ; (p. 327.) how, he does not explain. 
Bleek, in his strange compromising way, in which he admitted right principles 
but excepted to their apph'cation, owned that there are such definite distant 
prophecies in Holy Scripture, but, on a priori grounds, preferred to suppose that 
the words related to something unknown, rather than own that they related to 
that in which he confessed that they were fulfilled. " Certainly one may find 
in these glorious battles of the Jews, in a certain sense, a fulfilment of what is 
here foretold by the Prophet. But if we are not to deny to this utterance all 
moral character, and to consider it purely as the production of a man tic predic- 
tiveness a gift which I do not deny to be possible and actual, but which, in the 
Bible prophets, appears, if at all, yet very seldom, then, I believe, we may con- 
sider ourselves justified in assuming, that the prophet here named the Greeks 
individually, instead of the enemies of the Covenant-people generally, not be- 
cause he saw in spirit before him the later battles of the Jews with the Seleu- 
cidse, but because he had, in the historical relations of the past or present, a spe- 
cial occasion to give them prominence in this respect." Theol. Stud. u. Krit. 
1852. H. 2. p. 266, 7. 



Daniel's prophecies suited to a transition state. 281 

the war of the Maccabees ; and those, two of the most cri- 
tical periods in their history after the captivity. Yet, 
being expansions of part of the prophecy of Daniel, the 
period to which they belong became clearer in the event 
by aid of the more comprehensive prophecies. They 
were two points in the larger prediction of the 3rd empire. 
The partial minuteness of Daniel's prophecies belongs 
to the transition-state of the period for which those pro- 
phecies were given. They are in one sense a link between 
the Old and NewTestament. God was preparing His peo- 
ple to depend more on His invisible presence. In the cap- 
tivity itself, the three great bodies of His people dispers- 
ed among the heathen, those in Assyria, in Egypt, and in 
Babylon, had still each their own great prophet, Ezekiel 
among the captives by the river of Chebar, Jeremiah in 
Egypt, Daniel in Babylon. After the captivity, there 
were but three prophets more. Of these, the prophecies 
of Haggai, preserved to us, fall in the space of four months 
in the 2nd year of Darius Hystaspes \ 16 years after their 
return ;Zechariah began two months 2 later than Haggai, 
and has no known date beyond the 4th year of Darius 3 . 
The prophecy of Malachi is probably contemporaneous 
with the second visit of Nehemiah, about 400, B.C. Then 
prophecy ceased in act. It was exceptional, while it 
lasted. For those five centuries, in the first instance, the 
book- of Daniel was written. God no longer willed to in- 
terfere visibly. Israel, a petty nation, hated, envied, on 
account of its magnificent claims, that its God was the God 
of the whole world, was placed in the high-way of the 
world, to be trampled upon by each in turn. Forerunner 
of the Christian Church, and itself shortly, the whole 
true Israel, to pass into it, it lay for the time, resting on 
the unseen Providence of God, and awaiting, with keener 
expectation, the Deliverer of itself and of the world. It 
was no longer to have single Prophets raised up, to ex- 
plain to it or to point out God's dealings with it, to preach 
submission, or to promise mitigation of suffering or de- 

1 Hag. ll.il 1-10.20. 3 Zecb.i. 1. 3 vii. 1. 



282 Daniel, a teacher for the times before our Lord. 

liverance upon its repentance. But God left Himself 
not without witness. Details of prophecy, such as afore- 
time had been given by different prophets, in succession, 
were spread out before them at once, culminating in that 
great trial of faith, the last before our Lord's first Com- 
ing, when Antiochus Epiphanes used all artifice and force 
to extirpate the worship of the One God. Daniel fore- 
shewed to them his power, his artifices, his partial suc- 
cess in abolishing the public worship of God, his sudden 
destruction without human hand. They should need no 
human might ; they had but to endure, and the victory 
was God's. 

These more detailed prophecies of Daniel, then, so far 
from being exceptional in God's dealings with His people, 
were in conformity with all His ways, as recorded for us, 
before the captivity ; so far from being retrogressive, in 
introducing a more limited character of, so to speak, 
civil prophecy, his prophecy was adapted to a state of 
progress, a condition more like our own, in which, instead 
of the living, revealing, prophet, they were cast upon the 
written book. But in that book God taught them that, 
however the world might rage, it was in His hands. He 
who beforehand told the course which ambitious, selfish, 
crafty, oppressive, sensual, monarchs would take, and how 
it would fare with them, shewed that He Himself ruled 
and overruled the affairs of men which He foreknew. -The 
book of Daniel said in fact, at each stage of its fulfilment, 
what God said in words by Isaiah, Behold, the former 
things are come to pass, and neiu things do I declare unto 
you ; before they spring forth, I tell you of them 1 . 

The same relations of a large future and a minute fore- 
ground of prophecy, which should be an assurance to men, 
until those large prophecies had time for their fulfilment, 
recurs in the Gospel. What is now to us a primary evi- 
dence, the conversion of the nations, was to the Apostles 
matter of faith. To us it is a marvellous evidence, which 
our own eyes see, that, as it was foretold, "the Holy 

1 Is.xlii.9. 



Large distant, and minute prophecy in Gospel too. 283 

Church throughout the world/' millions upon millions, 
yea, a hundred millions thrice-told, worship Him Who, 
when it was foretold, was worshipped only by a small 
handful of men in a space not so large as one of our En- 
glish counties ; that they worship Him, as it was foretold, 
Who came, was rejected, was crucified hy them as a ma- 
lefactor, and so atoned for them who crucified Him, and 
for the whole world. The shame of the Cross is the tri- 
umph of prophecy. Jesus suffered, as was written of 
Him ; He reigns and is worshipped, as was also written 
of Him. He endured, what mere man could not endure ; 
He reigns, as man could not reign. He has won the world 
to the Cross, as He foretold, and as man could not win it. 
The Church of all times and climes is large enough to be 
its own witness. It was foretold of, and, after eighteen 
centuries, endowed with the perpetuity of its Author and 
Founder, it IS. But while it was struggling into being, 
and man yet hoped to trample out its life, there was all 
that nearer minuter foreground around the Person of our 
Lord. His acts and history were the fulfilment of minute 
prophecy. Even those things which man could have ful- 
filled, had he willed, as that entrance into Jerusalem 2 , 
belonged to a character which none, save He Whose it 
was, could sustain, greatness in lowliness 3 . Such too 
were, the preaching of the Gospel to the meek * ; the bind- 
ing up the broken-hearted ; the liberty to the captives ; 
the glorious light to the despised land of Galilee 5 . Such 
and much more was all that sorrowful history of His Pas- 
sion, the 30 pieces of silver 6 , the shame, the spitting 7 , the 
smiting on the cheek, the gall and the vinegar 8 , the pierc- 
ing 9 , and that, of the hands and the feet 10 , the violent 
Death 11 by His people for whom He died. These would 
have been the end of all human pretensions. They were 
the beginning of His Divine kingdom, Who said by His 

2 Zech. ix. 9. 3 The Jews themselves saw that lowliness was the 

characteristic of the prophecy. See ab. p. 84. 4 Is. Ixi. 1. S. Lukeiv. 18. 

5 Is. ix. 1. 6 Zech. xi. 13. 1 Is. 1. 6. 

8 Ps. Ixix. 21. S. John xix. 29. Zech. xii. 10. S. John xix. 34, 37. 

10 Ps. xxii. 16. u Is. liii. 8. Dan. ix. 26. 



284 Minute prophecies of bur Lord. 

prophet, They shall look on Me Whom they have pierced; 
of Whom it was said \ Him Whom man despiseth, Him 
Whom, the nation abhorreth, a servant of rulers, kings 
shall see and arise, princes also shall worship. Human 
wisdom could not conceive,, human power could not ac- 
complish, that such a death should be the regeneration of 
the world. Salvation through the Crucified was the 
stamp of foolishness which the Gospel bore in the eyes 
of the followers of Socrates. 

That same characteristic of prophecy, the larger dis- 
tance and the nearer earnest, occurs too in our Lord's 
prophecies. We know His prophecies, that He shall come 
to be our Judge. He told it often and most distinctly. 
But, this being unseen, His judgment on the devoted city 
was the first earnest of that Judgment to come, with 
which accordingly He in His prophecy closely connected 
it, as closely and upon the same principle, as Daniel, un- 
der inspiration of the Holy Ghost, connected the Resur- 
rection with Anti-Christ, and Anti-Christ with his Jew- 
ish type, Antiochus Epiphanes. Our Lord also used the 
same minuteness of prophecy, in that He directed His 
disciples to flee from Jerusalem after it had been encom- 
passed by armies, a command which only became possible 
through the un-Roman retreat of Cestius Gallus. It is 
noticed also that, out of 17 sieges which Jerusalem sus- 
tained, once only, in consequence of its rocky site, was it 
encircled with a wall ; and that once was foretold by Je- 
sus 2 . Minuter yet were His predictions of the details of 
the contumelies heaped upon Him, the mode of His death, 
the threefold denial of S. Peter, the treason of Judas. 

In this long array of prophecy, which I have exhibited 
to you, it has been impossible to vindicate each against 
the cavils brought against it. This was not our problem. 
It was alleged, in prejudice against the book of Daniel, 
that its prophecies, if really such, were out of harmony 
with the other prophecies of the Old Testament, that 
other prophecy was not so minute or definite. I under- 

1 Is. xlix. 7. 2 Tholuck, Proph. p. 194. 



Concessions involved in rationalist answers. 285 

took to point out to you, that the truth was the exact 
contrary to this ; that the prophecies in Daniel, so far 
from being out of harmony with those in the rest of the 
Old Testament, were altogether in conformity with them. 
Impugners of the book of Daniel alleged anunlikeness on 
the surface ; I undertook to point out to you the real har- 
mony. If any one deny all Divine prophecy, a single lec- 
ture cannot suffice to assure him. But the argument, if 
honest, assumed the truth of prophecy generally. Peo- 
ple, who so argue, act the believers in prophecy. For the 
alleged difference between the prophecies of Daniel and 
other prophecy could have no weight in disproving that 
they are Divine prophecy, unless it could be shewn, that 
they were so different in character from Divine prophecy, 
that it would be a contradiction to think that both came 
from the same Author. 

But opponents have, for the most part, granted the 
agreement of other prophecy with the event. The as- 
sumption, that definite prophecies are "prophecies after 
the event," would, if true, make the Bible the most dis- 
honest book which ever was written, with one all-perva- 
ding dishonesty, coextensive with its actual Divinity. 
But it concedes the fact of the agreement. It cuts the 
knot, which it cannot untie. 

Of the vast range of definite prophecy, it is even strange 
that men should venture to attack any, when on their 
own shewing they can attack so little. Thus, the toost 
laborious impugner of Daniel, in denying all definite pro- 
phecy, attacked definitely but very few, and even in these 
he mostly falsified prophecies, in order to accuse them of 
failure. When Isaiah prophesied the invasion of Judah 
by Assyria which was fulfilled, Lengerke substituted "de- 
struction" which Isaiah did not prophesy ; when Isaiah 
prophesied the spoiling of Samaria and Damascus within 
the year, he substituted, "the destruction of both within 
the year." When Isaiah foretold the fruitless invasion of 
Sennacherib and his sudden overthrow, Lengerke ignored 
the fulfilment of this prediction, which he tacitly admit- 



286 Rationalist misstatements of prophecy. 

ted, in order to allege, that Isaiah in error predicted details 
of a siege which he did not predict. Hosea foretold that 
Israelites should return to Egypt, and eat unclean things 
in Assyria 1 . Lengerke said, "According to Hosea 3 , the 
ten tribes were to be carried back to Egypt, which was 
never fulfilled." But clearly, since Hosea prophesied in 
the same verse, that Israel should eat unclean things in 
Assyria, he could not mean that the " ten tribes " should 
return to Egypt. He could have meant it only of indivi- 
duals of them. Hosea, moreover, said distinctly, "he 
shall not return into the land of Egypt, and the Assyrian 
jjjall be his king s ; " marking the former statement to be 
partial or metaphorical. To Assyria also was to be car- 
ried the calf of Bethel 4 , the centre of their idolatry and of 
their national existence. Humanly too, it is a poor and 
petty criticism, which fixes itself on this subordinate ex- 
pression, limited, as it is, by the context, and ignores those 
vast prophecies, which describe the condition of Israel 
for 2600 years, as a nation, that they should be despised 
wanderers among the nations. 

A miscellaneous group has been exhibited to you, in 
proof of an alleged fault among us, that " 5 the failure of a 
prophecy is never admitted, in spite of Scripture and of 
history." Yet of the prophecies alleged to have failed, 
that of Amos, that the house of Jeroboam should fall by 
the sword, came true in the next generation j not the pro- 
phet's saying, but the false priest Amaziah's perversion of 
it, failed. The sentence, pronounced hy Jeremiah on Je- 
hoiakim, points to a dragging of his corpse in contumely, 
which history does not contradict, hut, in itself, leaves 
as probable 6 . 

In regard to the capture of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar, 
stress has been laid on the silence of the Tyrian historian 
Menander, and the statement in Ezekiel, that Nebuchad- 
nezzar and his army should find in Egypt the reward for 

1 ix. 3. 2 He quotes p. Ixxvi, vii." ix. 3. xi. 5." after Gesenius (les. ii. 

827.) xi. 5. should probably be viii. 13. since in xi. 5, Hosea says the contrary. 

3 xi. 5. 4 x. 6. 5 Prof. Jowett, Essays and Rev. p. 343. See ab. p. 265, 6. 



Capture of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar. 287 

Ms services against Tyre, which he had not found from 
Tyre. Both imply the capture of Tyre. Menander,who 
makes a boast of its resistance to Salmanassar 7 , would 
doubtless have related the issue of the siege of Nebuchad- 
nezzar, had it been honourable for Tyre 8 . He himself lets 
out the facts, that the reign of the king, who resisted Ne- 
buchadnezzar, ended with the close of the war 9 ; that after 
the next, probably tributary, king, Baal, (to whom he at- 
tributes no relation to the deceased king, as he does to 
others,) judges were appointed 10 ; that the line of kings was 
broken ; that, just before the close of the Babylonian mo- 
narchy, they had to send to Babylon for two brothers of 
their royal family in succession n . All this points to the 
ordinary treatment of conquered provinces, that, first, a 
native tributary king was appointed, then, if need were, se- 
verer measures were taken. Ezekiel speaks of Nebuchad- 
nezzar as an instrument of God against Tyre. 12 1 have 
given him the land of Egypt for the labour which he served 
against her, because they wrought for Me. The service, 
which he executed for God against Tyre, was the accom- 
plishment of God's purpose to bring down its pride. Eze- 
kiel says that he did that service 13 . Further, he only says 
that Nebuchadnezzar and his army had no adequate re- 
turn for a 13 years' laborious siege. S. Jerome, who had 
access to histories now lost, relates as a fact, that when 
Tyre was all but taken, "they put all their valuables, gold, 
silver, vestments, and other goods, on board their vessels, 
and transported them to the islands, so that, when he took 
the city, Nebuchadnezzar found nothing worthy of his 
toil." The expedient is so obvious w , that even a scepti- 

7 in Jos. Ant. ix. 14. 2. 8 Hengstenberg's argument, de rebb. Tyr. 

9 c. Ap. i. 21. He is giving the chronology, and says, "In the time of Itto- 
baal Nebuchadnezzar besieged Tyre 13 years." But whether or no Ittobaal 
began his reign before, he could not have reigned after the siege ; for Menan- 
der is counting the years from Ittobaal to Cyrus, and if the 13 years of Itto- 
baal had not been any how his last 13 years, they would have furnished no date. 

10 Karea-rderiffav. This does not express that it was their own act. 

11 See ab. p. 119. B Ezek. xxix. 18. w Hav. on Ezek. p. 428. 
/ 14 Diodorus relates that, in the siege of Alexander, the Tyrians purposed to 
remove, and in part removed, to Carthage their wives, children, and aged. 



288 Rationalist retreat as to prophecy against Tyre. 

cal critic finds in it nothing to question 1 . Isaiah foretold 
that it should be so. % Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye 
inhabitants of the isle. The state of Tyre also was changed 
by that capture. Although its fleet was still so powerful, 
that their refusal to take part in the expedition against 
Carthage frustrated the plan of Cambyses 3 , it had submit- 
ted of its own free-will to the Persians, and ranked after 
Sidon 4 . The assertion of Josephus 5 , that it was recorded 
in the Tyrian archives, that Nebuchadnezzar subdued the 
whole of Phoenicia, would, in itself, far out-weigh the si- 
lence of Menander. Rationalism retreated then in pre- 
sence of the facts, and admitted a capitulation of Tyre 6 , 
with which even Petavius 7 had been satisfied ; but, there- 
with, it resigned its sole argument, the silence of Menan- 
der, who says no more of a capitulation than of a surren- 
der. It has no support of its assertion but its own will. 
Baffled in the attempt to find direct failure of prophecy, 
rationalism assumed that prophecy always related to the 
immediate future, and so, when the prophet, beholding 
that future in a long perspective, spoke of the future of a 
city or nation without reference to time, it assumed that 

Diod. xvii. 41. Curt. iv. 1-5. Hav. p. 429. Herodotus (i. 164.) relates the same 
of the Phocseans, and attributes to Harpagus, the general of Cyrus, the know- 
ledge of their intentions. 

1 Ewald on Ezek. d. Proph. ii. 324. "Although we do not know the histo- 
rical source, out of which he [St. Jerome] drew, yet it agrees perfectly with 
the brief words which Ezekiel held to suffice. True, that the prophet does not 
say in so many words that Neb. entered island-Tyre ; but the converse, that 
the Tyrians at last vanquished him, lies still less in the words ; and, whether, 
or no, he entered upon the empty houses, is, in regard to the sequel, which is 
the only question in Ezekiel, indifferent. All which Ezekiel has to say here is, 
that Egypt will, through the ordering of Jahve [God,] be the more certainly 
abandoned to be plundered by the Chaldseans, the less he found his hard toil, 
employed at Tyre for higher ends, rewarded." 2 Is. xxiii. 6. 

3 Herod, iii. 19. 4 Ezr. iii. 7. Herod, vii. 98. viii. 67. " In the first seat 

sat the king of Sidon ; after him the king of Tyre." Hav. p. 433,4. 

5 " Nay, even in the archives of the Phrenicians are written things, agreeing 
with what is said by Berosus about the king of Babylon, that he subdued Sy- 
ria too and the whole of Phoenicia." c. Ap. i. 20. 

6 Movers, d. Pluen, ii. 1 . p. 428. 448 sqq. who however admits the complete 
subjugation of Phoenicia, including Tyre. " We allow that the Syrians capi- 
tulated." Davidson, ii. 467. 7 De Doctr. Temp. ix. c. 69. 



Prophecy apart from time, unless expressed. 289 

the prophecy failed, if it was not fulfilled at once. But it 
was a simple falsifying of the prophet's words, when men 
said, e. g. '' 8 the complete destruction of Babylon by the. 
Medo-Persians is prophesied by Isaiah ." " 9 Ezeldel pre- 
dicts its [Tyre's] utter destruction by Nebuchadnezzar, 
so that it should be like the top of a rock, and never re- 
built." 

It is strange that they who insist so much, that pro- 
phecy is not definite, who assert, even untruly, that dates 
are no matter of prophecy, will yet have it that these pro- 
phecies were not fulfilled, nay, that the prophets were de-. 
ceived, because the whole of each prophecy was not ful- 
filled at once. No one denies that Babylon has long been 
in the condition which Isaiah 10 and Jeremiah u foretold ; 
and that Idumaea is in that predicted by Obadiah 13 , Isai- 
ah 13 j Jeremiah u , Ezekiel 15 ; and that Tyre and Rabbah of 
Ammon are what Ezekiel foretold they should become 16 . 
All these prophets say, what punishments should come 
upon those nations ; no prophet says, as to the completed 
desolations, when they should be. They described appa- 
rently, in God-given words, the vision which God spread 
before their souls. We know that, as to our Lord's first 
Coming, they, for the most part, knew not the time. Only 
they knew, St, Peter tells us also, that it was not to be in 
their own ; and this, by revelation of God. They knew 
by revelation the things themselves; the Spirit of Christ in 
them testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the 
glory which should follow 1 ". Very different from the fana- 
tical expectations of later times, which have ever been 
outrunning prophecy, it was revealed to them, St. Peter 
continues 18 , that not unto themselves, but unto us, they did 
minister the things which are now reported unto you. Pur r 
ther, as to what was not revealed to them, they were left, 
St. Peter says, to their own pious search into the meaning 

8 Lengerke, Dan. Ixxvi. 9 Davidson, ii. 468. 

i Is. xiii. 19-22. xiv. 23. Jer. 1. 12, 13, 39, 40. li. 26, 37-43. 

12 Obad. 9, 18. see my Comm, p. 242, 3. 13 Is. xxxiv. 11-15. 
14 Jer. xlix. 17, 18. Ezek. xxxv. 7, 9. 16 Ib. xxvi. 14. 

V IS. Pet. i. 11. is Ib. 12. 

U 



290 Fulfilment of God's judgments slow, in His mercy. 

of what was revealed through them l . Of tvhich salva- 
tion the prophets enquired and searched diligently, who pro- 
phesied of the grace that should come unto you. Vision is 
independent of time. When then the prophets say no- 
thing of time, we have no right to assume, that they fixed 
any definite time for that future, which God spread out 
before them as what should be, irrespective of the time 
when it should be. At times the succession is marked in 
the prophecy itself ; as, when Obadiah, after foretelling 
the destruction of Edom by Nebuchadnezzar, foretells a 
second chastisement through the Jews, which came upon 
them through John Hyrcanus, accordingly four centuries 
after Nebuchadnezzar. The assumption, that the omis- 
sion of any mark of duration implies a disbelief that there 
would be any long interval, would be contrary to the au- 
thority of our Lord Himself, Who spake of the destruction 
of the world in connection with that of Jerusalem, with- 
out any note of time. Yet even apart from our know- 
ledge of His Divinity and Infallibility, we know that else- 
where .His words presuppose a long interval. The ques- 
tion is too, not how much the Prophets knew, but what 
God the Holy Ghost, Who spake by them, meant by the 
words which He gave them. 

It belongs to the character of prophecy, to 2 declare the 
end from, the beginning. It-belongs to God's mercy, that 
His judgments break in gradually, at intervals, leaving 
space for repentance. " 3 Therefore chastenestThou them 
by little and little that offend, and warnest them by put- 
ting them in remembrance wherein they have offended, 
that leaving their wickedness they may believe in Thee, O 
Lord." " Executing Thy judgments upon them by little 
and little, Thou gavest them place of repentance." What 
God's word declared has come. 

The attempts then to disjoin the prophecies of Daniel, 
as something unlike in kind from those of the rest of the 
Old Testament, fails in both ways of stating it. Rather, 
we have that characteristic of unity, which is stamped 

1 1 S. Pet. i. 10. Is. xlvi. 10. 3 Wisdom xii. 2. 10. 



Daniel has, in one, all the varieties of prophecy. 291 

upon all God's works of nature and of grace, likeness 
amid variety. Daniel, as being for that dreary time, when 
the living prophets ceased, a microcosm of prophecy, has 
in one all the character of prophecy. Largest and least, 
the remote future and the near, the conflict of the evil 
and the good, and its final issue, man's free-agency and 
God's overruling Providence, Judgment and Mercy, the 
Death of the Redeemer and His everlasting Kingdom, His 
Presence, as Man yet more than man, at the Right Hand 
of God, the passing away of the old Covenant and its 
sacrifices and the bringing in of the New, forgiveness of 
sins and the gift of righteousness, are all concentred in 
him. The form in part varies, the centre is the same. 
The minute is not severed from the vast, nor the near 
from the remote, nor predictions as to time from the eter- 
nal issues of this fleeting world, nor the glories of Christ 
from His humiliation and Death : but in Daniel, as in all 
the prophets, and in God's other prophets as in him, we 
see God, working through man's free-agency, knowing, 
in His ever-present Eternity, the events of His creatures' 
varying and conflicting wills, beholding things which 
are not as those which are, present with His creatures 
in all the intricacies of this eddying life, Himself, in all, 
the ever-present God, the pitying Father, the all-just 
Judge. Prophecy, like God's physical creation, bears 
witness to the Oneness of its Author, by that marvellous 
oneness which underlies its beautiful variety, reappear- 
ing without repetition j varying without deviation of prin- 
ciple ; one without identity : manifold, yet never departing 
from its one type. 



u2 



LECTURE VI. 



On the proof of the genuineness of the Book of Daniel, 
furnished by the date of the closing of the Canon of the 
Old Testament, and by the direct reference to it in the 
Canonical Scriptures, and in other hooks before or of the 
Maccabee period, 

THE account of the close of the Canon of the Old Tes- 
tament, as given by those to whom the books themselves 
were entrusted, is very definite, and proceeds on a defi- 
nite principle. Josephus, in a controversial work, in 
answer to an impugner of Judaism, states, in the name 
of his countrymen, when it was closed, and why no later 
writings were admitted into it. It was closed, he says, 
in the reign of Artaxerxes, son of Xerxes, and that, be- 
cause the succession of prophets closed then. "With 
us," he says 1 , in contrast to the contradictions of Greek 
history 2 , "there are, not myriads of books inharmonious 
and conflicting, but two and twenty books only, contain- 
ing the records of the whole time, and rightly believed 
to be Divine. Of these, five are those of Moses, which 
comprise as well the matters of law as, the account of 
the generations of man, to the time of his death. This 
period is little short of 3000 years. But from the death 
of Moses to the reign of Artaxerxes, the king of Persia 

1 c. Ap. i. 8. Bus. H, B. iii. 10. 2 Ib. 3. "I should be a busy body, 

if I would teach those who know better than I, how Hellanicus differed about 
genealogies from Acusilaus, or how Acusilaus corrects Hesiod, or how Ephorus 
points out that Hellanicus in most things lied, and Timseus as to Ephorus, and 
subsequent writers as to Timseus ; and as to Herodotus, all, &c." 



Josephus' statement of the closing of the Canon. 293 

after Xerxes, the prophets after Moses wrote what was 
done in their times, in 13 books. The 4 remaining books 
contain hymns to God, and suggestions to men as to their 
lives. From Artaxerxes down to our own times, events 
have been recorded, but they have not been accounted 
worthy of the same credit as those before them, because 
the exact succession of Prophets existed no longer. And 
it is evident in deed, how we stand affected to our own 
writings. For, so long a period having now elapsed, no 
one has dared either to add or to take away from them, 
or to change any thing; it being a thing implanted in all 
the Jews from their first birth, that they should account 
them as oracles of God, and abide by them, and, if need 
were, gladly die for them." 

The unchangeable adherence of the Jews to the Old 
Testament, that wonderful faith, which has for 1800 years 
since, in the main, characterised their nation, even while 
forced, if they would remain Jews, to explain away the 
prophecies which they believed and attested, is stated at 
the same time by one of the mystical school. Philo, of a 
character the most opposite to that of Josephus, says, 
3 They change not even a word of the things written by 
him, [Moses,] but would rather endure 10,000 deaths than 
be persuaded to what is contrary to his laws and cus- 
toms." 

Josephus somewhat varied the distribution of the 
books, within the three divisions in which the Jews class- 
ed the books of Holy Scripture. For the question at 
issue with Apion was the historical faithfulness of the 
Old Testament. "* Since I see many attending to the 
blasphemies uttered by some out of hostility, and disbe- 
lieving what I have written about our antiquities, and 
making it a token of the modernness of our race, that 
the celebrated Grecian historians have not accounted it 
worthy of mention, I thought it needful to write briefly 
of all these things, &c." On this ground Josephus classes 
in one all which we call the historical books with Job and 

3 in Euseb. Praep. Ev. viii. 6. p. 357. 4 c. Ap. i. init. 



294 Josephus' ground) why Canon closed about 400, B.C. 

the Prophets. His 13 books are, 1) Joshua; 2) Judges 
and Ruth ; 3) Samuel i. ii ; 4) Kings i. ii ; 5) Job ; 6) Isai- 
ah ; 7) Jeremiah and Lamentations ; "8) Ezekiel ; 9) The 
Twelve (minor prophets ;) 10) Daniel ; 1 1) Ezra i. ii ; (i. e. 
Ezra, Nehemiah;) 12) Chronicles i.ii; 13) Esther. His 
four books of hymns and ethics are owned to be, 1) 
Psalms ; 2) Proverbs ; 3) Ecclesiastes j 4) Canticles. No 
one now disputes that such were the 22 books intended 
by Josephus, so numbered by a sort of memoria technica, 
in conformity to the 22 Hebrew letters l . No one now 
ever questions that he meant to include all the books of 
the Hebrew Scriptures, and those only. It has only been 
alleged, in transparent contradiction to his own words, 
that it is "a private account" of his own. He speaks of 
it as " an implanted belief of all the Jews, for which they 
would gladly die." 

The date at which the Jews, in the time of Josephus^ 
believed the Canon of their Scriptures to have been clos- 
ed, was about four centuries before the birth of our Lord. 
Josephus probably fixed on the reign of Artaxerxes, as 
being the period of Nehemiah's great work of restora- 
tion 3 , although the actual closing of the Canon probably 
took place during the second visit to his country, the pro- 
bable date of the prophet Malachi, under the son and suc- 
cessor of Artaxerxes, Darius Nothus. The period which 
lay between was a long one ; the time of Antiochus Epi- 
phanes lay some 250 years nearer. Yet it was a period 
of the most active human intelligence. It reached back 
into no ages, really or hypothetically " dark." Socrates 
was a contemporary of Malachi ; the source of the two 
philosophies, which have influenced the world, was of the 
same date as the last of the Hebrew Prophets. Better 
might we suppose the Greeks ignorant as to the dates of 
their philosophers, than imagine the Jews, to whom the 
word of God was dearer than life, ignorant as to the date 

1 S. Jerome in Prolog, galeato. Opp. ix. 454. " The books of the Old law 
are in like way 22 ; Moses, 5 ; the Prophets, 8 ; the Hagiographa, 9." 

4 Neh. i. 1. xiii. 6. 



Intervening period one of mental activity. 295 

of their prophets. The term, moreover, was measured 
by something besides years. Josephus speaks of it as a 
period of mental activity in Judaea. "From that time 
down to our own, events were recorded ; but they have 
not been accounted worthy of the same credit as those 
before them." This describes a portion of the deutero- 
canonical books of the Old Testament ; books held in es- 
timation among the Jews as well as by Christians, but not 
received by the Jews into their Canon, because Israel had 
no more prophets, who had authority to receive them. 

The Canon of the New Testament closed with the Re- 
velation of St. John, and his death was, it is supposed, 
about A. D. 101. Now, conceive the parallel case, that 
a Christian Avriter, early in our 6th Century, e. g. Proco- 
pius, had stated in an Apology, that the history of Christ 
and His Apostles had been written in five books, and that 
there were 22 other books written by Apostles between 
the Resurrection of Christ and the reign of Trajan ; that, 
after the reign of Trajan, down to his own times, other 
books had been written ; yet that these were not esteem- 
ed worthy of the like credit, since there had been no Apos- 
tle later than the reign of Trajan ; and that so, since the 
time of Trajan, no one had taken from or added to the 
number of the sacred books ; what would be thought 
of a writer, who should assert that the Epistle to the 
Hebrews was not written until 25 years after the Council 
of Nice, and so, about A. D. 350 ? Apart from all other 
evidence, it would be thought inconceivable, that Proco- 
pius could assert, that the Christian Canon had been un- 
alterable since the death of the last Apostle, if a book 
had been added to the Canon two centuries and a half 
after his decease. 

One of the earliest of the books, written during that 
period of reflection and expectation, after the close of the 
Canon, the Wisdom of the son of Sirach, furnishes a 
probable date as to itself. The preface, written by the 
grandson of the author, who translated it into Greek, 
defines that date more closely. The author, after devot- 



296 Mention of Simon son of Onias and Euergetes 

ing six chapters to the praise of great men, whom God 
had raised up in Israel during the period of the sacred 
hooks, winds up with the praise of the earliest progenitors 
or renewers of the human race, Shem and Seth, and closes 
at the beginning, with Adam. Then follows abruptly the 
praise of Simon, the high priest, the son of Onias, whom 
he describes as one, still fresh in men's memory, men- 
tioning even his personal stature rising above that of 
the other priests, like a yoiing cedar among the palm- 
trees l , and his personal beauty. Now, although there 
were two high-priests, Simon son of Onias, and Simon II. 
son of Onias II., it is in itself the most probable, that the 
writer is describing the first Simon, both on the ground 
of his own greater eminence, and because the writer calls 
him simply, " Simon the high Priest, the son of Onias." 
The first is the Simon who, Josephus says 3 , "was sur- 
named 'the Just,' on account both of his piety to God 
and his benevolence towards his countrymen." He is 
the Simon singled out in an early tract of the Mishnah s , 
as one of the last remnants of the great Synagogue. 

The grandson relates that he himself " 4 came into 
Egypt, Euergetes being king." The date of the well- 
known Ptolemy Euergetes agrees with the date of Simon 
the Just. For, Simon having been contemporary with 
Ptolemjison of Lagus, the grandson of his contemporary, 
the son of Sirach, might well come into Egypt in the 
reign of Ptolemy Euergetes, the grandson: of Ptolemy I., 
himself also a great patron of letters. The title of ho- 
nour naturally belongs to the eminent person who bore 
it. A writer, wishing to designate his own date, would 
not use an ambiguous title. The name Euergejfces would 
recall to the Alexandrian, Jew or Heathen, the real "be- 
nefactor " to his country, not that later king, who, how- 
ever he usurped both name and kingdom, was, from his 
bloated person, called Physcon, "big-bellied," from his 
deeds, Kakergetes^ "malefactor;" retaining, says the 

1 Ecclus. 1. 12. 2 Ant. xii. 2, 5. 3 Pirke Abotli, c, 2. * Prologue. 



fix date of son of Sirach early in 3rd Cent. B.C. 297 

historian 5 , " through his daily excess/' neither the form 
nor the feelings of a man. A pious Jew would not have 
named Euergetes, one who, for incest, aggravated, cold- 
hlooded murder of his own offspring, promiscuous mas- 
sacre, hideous, inconceivable, diaholical, revenge, was a 
disgrace to human nature. Nor would Euergetes have 
been a correct title. Those, who called him at all by the 
name, entitled him " Euergetes the second/' or " Euer- 
getes Physcon," to distinguish him from the Ptolemy to 
whom the title belonged 6 . 

Simon the Just having been high-priest at the time of 
Ptolemy Lagi, the son of Sirach probably lived and wrote 
early in the 3rd century B. C. ; his grandson went into 
Egypt somewhere in the reign of Ptolemy Euergetes 247- 
221, aged 38, and translated the book after some little 
interval. 

The grandson's account is most distinct. He says, that 
his grandfather studied the Old Testament as a whole, 
and proceeded to write further, drawing his thoughts 
from it. " Whereas many and great things have been 
delivered to us l>y the law and the prophets and by the rest 
who followed their steps. whereof not only the readers 
must needs become skilful themselves, but also they that 
desire to learn be able to profit them which are without 
both by speaking and writing, my grandfather Jesus, 
when he had given himself to the study of the law and 
the prophets and the other books of our fathers, and had 
gotten therein good judgment, was drawn on himself also 
to write something pertaining to learning and wisdom, 
to the intent that those who are desirous to learn and 
are addicted to these things, might profit much more in 
living according to the law." The book, (according to 

5 quotidiana luxuria ita marcenti, ut sensu hominis nimia sagina careret. 
Just. 34, 2. sagina ventris non homini sed belluse similis. Id. 38, 8. 

6 " His (Ptol. Epiphanes') two sons succeeded him, the eldest snrnamed 
Philometor, the younger, Euergetes the second." Porphyry, (in Bus. Chron. 
Arm. i. 238.) "Ptolemy, the 2nd Euergetes." (Id. p. 241.) "Philometor his 
brother succeeded, the second Euergetes, whom they call Physcon." (Straho, 
17, 1, 11.) "Euergetes Physcon," (Ib. 12.) Justin gives him no surname. 



298 Canon closed before son of Sirach. 

the grandson's impression or knowledge,) was intended 
chiefly as a sort of epitome of practical teaching drawn 
and recast from Holy Scripture, to win those without to 
live according to the law. Three times, in this short 
preface, the grandson speaks of the Old Testament, as 
one completed whole ; 1) in his own person, as the hody 
of teaching which had been delivered to Israel; 2) as the 
source whence his grandfather derived his knowledge, 
3) in reference to his own work of translation. " The 
same things uttered in Hebrew, and translated into ano- 
ther tongue, have not the same force in them ; and not 
only these things [his grandfather's book which he had 
translated] but the law and the prophets and the rest of 
the books, have no small difference when they are spoken 
in their own language/' He coiild not more explicitly 
have contrasted this book, on which he had been engaged, 
with those of the three classes before it. They, then 
fore-existing; this, derived from them; they, of primary 
authority ; this, applying them ; they, such as might be 
expected to retain, to a greater degree, their native force 
in a translation ; this, as what might (obviously, from its 
less Divine power) lose more in translation. 

The grandson is a good witness as to the religious ha- 
bits of his thoughtful and pious grandfather. He could 
not fail to know them. The son of Sirach then had be- 
fore him, as the authoritative source of instruction, the 
Scriptures of the Old Testament, in that same threefold 
division in which they existed in our Lord's time. The 
last class, although more miscellaneous, was as complete 
and as authoritative as the others. He does not say, 
"others who followed him/' but "the others ;" not, "other 
books of our fathers," but, "the other books 2 ," " s the rest 
of the books." They were a complete whole, as authori- 
tative as the rest ; for the son of Sirach drew from all 
without distinction, as authorities to and above himself. 



Kdl rS>v irpofyrtT&v KO! r&v &\\wv riav KO.T' aSrovs ^ 
6i]KOTtav. Prfflf. 8 T^]V re TOV v6fiov Kal Ttav vpo^t]rSiv Kal T&V &K\u>v irarplaiv 



This decisive as to Daniel, whichever be the Simon. 299 

ft 

According to the date of the Wisdom of Sirach, as given 
by his grandson, the question of external evidence as to 
the book of Daniel is decided. For the question lies only 
between the real date at which the book of Daniel was 
closed, B. C. 534, and the date of the death of Antiochus 
Epiphanes, B.C. 164. The prophecies in the book exclude 
any other. All must be true or all imposture. The pro- 
phecies as to Antiochus Epiphanes himself are too minute 
to be human, if written before the event at all. No hu- 
man sagacity could have foreseen them. If we take "Si- 
mon the son of Onias" in the book itself to be the great 
"Simon the Just," and the "Euergetes" in the grandson's 
prologue to be the well-known Ptolemy Euergetes, then 
the grandson must have come into Egypt between B. C. 
247-221 2 . Supposing him to have come thither, as he 
says, at 38, at the close of the reign of Ptolemy Epiphanes, 
his father must have been born at the least some 60 years 
before, and the date of his grandfather must have fallen, 
any how, 280, B.C.; the Canon must have been then 
closed ; and the book of Daniel had its place there. But 
taking him who is spoken of as Simon, the great Simon, 
him who would be known by readers as " Simon son of 
Onias," not to be the high-priest who was celebrated by 
Jewish writers subsequently, but a later Simon, compa- 
ratively unknown ; taking also him who is called Euer- 
getes to be one whom all Egypt justly execrated as Ka- 
kergetes ; assuming also that people dated, (as there is 
no proof that any one but himself ever dated,) from the 
time of his first accession, before he was driven out for 
his repeated and wanton aggression on his forbearing 
brother; that " the 38th year in the time of Euergetes" 
meant what it does not naturally mean 3 , " the 38th year 

2 Ptolemy Euergetes came to the throne, B. C. 247, died B.C. 22|. Clinton, 
F. H. iii. 386. 

3 No one would doubt, in any ordinary Greek, that the sentence, eV yap ry 
oySdcp Kal TpiaKO(TT< erei, irl TOO 'Eve/vyeTOv fiatn\eus Trapa-yevridels fls "Atyvn-- 
TOV Kal crvYx#ovi<ra.s, meant, "for having, in the 38th year, in the time of king 
Euergetes, arrived in Egypt and continued some time with them." The con- 
text relates to his own work of translation, its difficulties, and the way in which 



300 Lowest date of son of Sirach, and the existence of , 



of Euergetes," just 2 years before Egypt rose up, unable 
to endure the monster any longer, and expelled him from 
them ; supposing this to be the date of the grandson's com- 
ing to Egypt, still the opponents of Daniel would gain 
nothing. The 38th year of Ptolemy Physcon, counted 
even thus, would fall 13^- B.C l . The grandfather's book 
was a well-known book : it was then in repute ; his grand- 
father himself must have been somewhile dead, and yet, 
during those long years of thought and study, which 
must have prepared for such a book as the Wisdom of Si- 
rach, the complete Canon of the Old Testament was (his 
grandson says,) the subject of that study. Let the date 
of the son of Sirach, when he so studied the Holy Scrip- 
ture and laboured, as he says, for all time to come, have 
been as low as 180, B.C. 2 , the case of the opponents of the 
book of Daniel is still as hopeless as ever, since the book 
of Daniel must have been earlier than this ; and, being- 
earlier, must have been prophetic. 

he qualified himself for it. "I found," he says, " a copy of no small learning, 
and held it most necessary, to apply some labour and study to translate this 
book." The date, "the 38th year," is, in the natural construction of the Greek, 
distinct from the date by the reign of Epiphanes. In Greek, no more than in 
English, would "in the 38th year in the time of Epiphanes " mean "in the 38th 
year of Epiphanes." It would rather signify a concurrent date, as, in the Mac- 
cabees, the phrase, " in the first year in the time of Simon the high priest," 
means, " in the first year of their freedom." (1 Mace. xiii. 42. add xiv. 27.) It is 
then most natural to understand "the 38th year" of his own life, and the be- 
ginning of his Hellenistic studies of which he is speaking. The language of 
this preface does not contain a single Hebrew idiom. And it is, moreover, no 
Hebrew idiom, that the single translator of Haggai and Zechariahhas render- 
ed, vhflj) D!5<? W?> & ry Sevrepq erei err! Aapelov. It is no natural translation, 
not the way in which a Hebrew would think in Greek, and so, not an Helle- 
nistic idiom, but a mere rendering of one man. It is no authority then for ren- 
dering the words of the preface, which we have in their original Greek, other- 
-wise than they would be rendered in any other Greek. 

1 Ptolemy Physcon dated back to the 12th year of his brother Plulometor, 
nrhen the Alexandrians made him king, his brother being for the time a pup- 
pet in the hands of Epiphanes. But his brother having succeeded his father, 
181, B. C., his 12th year and Physcon's 1st was 1^ B.C.; his 38th, 13f B. C. 

See Porphyry in Clinton, F. H. ii. 390, 1. and table of kings of Egypt, ii. 408. 

2 Even Fritzsche supposes the work to have been completed 40 or 60 years 
before B. C. 132, and so between B. C. 192-172. Welsh. Jesus Sirach's. Einl. 
j>. xvi. 



his book out of Canon, prove early date of Daniel. 301 

The existence of the Wisdom of Sirach, out of the He- 
brew Canon, in itself implies that the Canon was closed, 
when it was written. His grandson avers that it was writ- 
ten in Hebrew; weighty Jewish authorities 3 attest its 
existence in Hebrew for a long period. " 4 Its high re- 
putation appears from the way in which it is mentioned 
and its contents are applied. Very weighty authorities, 
chiefly of Palestine 5 , appeal to Sirach, and sometimes in 
a way, used only of passages of Scripture. Even in the 
beginning of the 4th century, the book is counted among 
the Kethubim 6 ." " 7 Sirach's proverbs passed into moral 
writings, were recommended by the wise, and spread 
abroad in public addresses. Including the anonymous 
citations, some 40 sentences, mostly in an abridged form, 
are given us in these writings, some of which are missing 
both in the Greek and Syriac text. All but three are in 
Hebrew, and, if the quotations are literal, they yield not 
unimportant contributions to the Hebrew of that time." 

No ground can be alleged, why a Hebrew work written 
in Palestine, of such character as the Wisdom of Sirach, 
so praised, so approved, so full of wisdom, should not have 

3 Zunz (a Jewish Sceptic) quotes the Tosefta, (Yadaim, c, 3. " the book 
Ben Siraand all the books written since,") the Jerusalem Talmud, (j.Bera- 
choth c. 7. j. Chagiga 2. 1. j. Nasir 5. 3. R. Akiba cites the books of Ben Sira 
j. Sanhedr. 10. 1.) Babylonian Talmud, (Chagiga 13. a. Yebamoth 63. b. [al- 
so R. Nissim relations f. 16. a.] Kethuboth 110. b. BabaBathra 98 b. 146 a. 
Sanhedrin 100. b. Nidda 16. b.) S. Jerome, [as representing his Jewish in- 
structors,] Beresliith Rabba, (c. 8. f. 10. a. f. 12. a. 73. f. 82. c. 91. f. 101 c. 
Vaiikra Rabba, (c.33. f.SOS.b.) Midrash Coheleth, (f. 102. c. 116. a.) Tan- 
chuma, (f. 13. a. 15. d. 69. a.) " and some later writers besides." "Rapoport 
has already proved that R. Nissim quotes out of Sirach, in his life, p. 8." Got- 
tesdienstl. Vortriige d. Juden, p. 101. 4 Id. p. 101, 2. 

5 "As Rab, (Erubin 65. a. [comp. Sanh. 44. b.] 54. a. Beza 32. b.) Jocha- 
nan, (Nidda f. 16. b.) JElasar, (j. Taanith 3, 6. j. Chagiga 2, 1. Beresliith 
Rabba f. 10. a. Tanchuma f. 15. d.) Rabba bar Mare, (Yebamoth 63. b. Baba 
Kama 92. b.) 

6 " TOWS', says Rab, (Erubin 65. a.) 3W1 R. Chanina (1,1.) and the Babylo- 
nian Talmud; (Berachoth f. 48. a.) Rabba Bar Mare uses the same expres- 
sion with the addition nmraa, and sets it over against the Law and the Pro- 
phets, (Baba Kama 1. 1.) Elialm Rabba has TDIN siron of the same passage, in 
Yalkut, Gen. f. 23. d, but in the editions, c. 12. f. 61. b., there stands for it, 
'The wise say."' Ib. p. 102. a. '' Zunz, p. 102-4. 



302 Son of Sirach, of high authority, yet speaks 

been received into the Canon, but either that inspired au- 
thority was then lacking to receive it, or that its author 
had not the same tokens of Divine authority as the wri- 
ters of the Old Testament ; or both. 

The writer himself speaks with authority ; he sums up 
his book, as a source of practical wisdom; " x Jesus, the 
son olSirach of Jerusalem, hath written in this book the 
instruction of understanding and knowledge; who out of 
his heart poured forth wisdom. Blessed is he that shall 
be exercised in these things ; and he that layeth them up 
in his heart shall become wise. For if he do them, he 
shall be strong to do all things ; for the light of the Lord 
shall lead him, Who giveth wisdom to the godly." Yet 
at the same time, he speaks of himself, as coming after 
the writers of Holy Scripture, a mere gleaner after them. 
" 2 I awaked up last of all, as one that gather -eth after the 
grape-gatherers ; by the blessing of the Lord I profited, 
and filled my winepress like a gatherer of grapes. Con- 
sider, that I laboured not for myself only, but for all them 
that seek learning. Hear me, O ye great men of the peo- 
ple, and hearken with your ears, ye rulers of the congre- 
gation." 

The son of Sirach himself, in praising great men of 
Holy Scripture, mentions generally, rulers, wise counsel- 
lors, "rich men furnished with ability/' and, with all 
ranks and conditions of life, two classes of writers, those 
who " 3 announced in prophecies," and those who " 4 nar- 
rated verses in writing," [setting them forth at length.] 
By these last he manifestly intends the Psalmists, (as of 
David especially he says, that " 5 he praised the Lord most 
High with words of glory ; with his whole heart he sang 
songs;") and hagiographical writers, (as of Solomon he 
says, " 6 The countries marvelled at thee for thy songs and 
proverbs and parables and interpretations,") and even 

1 1. 27-29. 2 xxxiii. 16-18. In xxir. 33. it is Wisdom, not the 

author, who says, " I will yet pour out doctrine as prophecy." 

3 &iniyyf\K6res iv IT po^r fiats, xliy, 3. 4 Siriyoii/jifyot ITTTJ & ypa.<pri,lb. 5. 
5 xlvii. 8. 6 Ib. 17. 



of Canon, as higher. Tradition as to Nehemiah. 303 

especially such lengthened works, forming one whole, as 
Job, or the Canticles 7 , or Ecclesiastes. So then 8 we 
have in the author himself, those two divisions of Holy 
Scripture, the " prophecies" and "the writings," as, in 
praising Moses, he adds "the law." "God gave him 
commandments, even the law of life and knowledge." 
Besides this, that long panegyric in itself hears witness 
to the greater part of Our existing Canon, and to nothing 
besides that Canon. 

This same division of the Old Testament into the same 
three classes occurs in a document, attributed to Nehe- 
miah in a letter which stands at the beginning of the 2nd 
book of Maccabees. The book itself closes with the death 
of Nicanor 9 , B. C. 161, and the subsequent peaceful pos- 
session of Jerusalem by the Jews ; " from that time forth 
the Hebrews had the city in their power." The work of 
Jason of Cyrene, which the author epitomised, did not 
extend beyond the reign of Antiochus Eupator 10 , who died 
in the autumn B.C. 162 11 . To one, probably the former 13 
of the two letters, there is added a date, 188 13 , i. e. 125, B.C. 
There is no indication of any later date. This letter 
quotes from some writings, called " commentaries of Ne- 
hemiah 14 ," that Nehemiah, " founding a library, gathered 
together the matters as to the kings and the prophets and 
the things of David, and the epistles of the kings con- 
curring the holy gifts." The "library" was doubtless 
connected with the temple, in the treasury or Archives 
of which we know other documents to have been depo- 
sited 15 . What document the writers of the Epistle had 
before them, we have no clue. 

Nor do the words 'contain anything as to the formation 
or closing of the Canon, or any act whatever in regard 

7 Fritzsche, ad loc. owns this. 8 This argument is from Hav. Einl. i. p. 32. 

9 .xv. 37. ! ii. 20-3. " Clinton, Past. Hell. iii. 325. In 2 Mace, 
xi. 21, 33, and 38, the date is at the end of the letter. 13 i. 10. It would 

then be divided, " in the month Chasleu, in the hundred fourscore and eighth 
year." Judas, whose name is prefixed to the 2nd letter, fell in battle, B. C. 
161. 14 fv TOIS {nro/jLvr)/j.a,Ttffti.ois rots KOTO; r'bv Nee/a/ap, lit. " the commen- 
taries according to Nehemiah," ii. 13. 15 1 Mace. xiv. 49. 



304 Nehemiah staled to have laid -up books of Canon, 

x- 

to it. But the passage proves thus much,, that a writing 
was in existence a century before our Lord, under the 
name of Nehemiah, presupposing the existence of the 
Canon in the time of Nehemiah, in that he gathered to- 
gether into a lihrary the books of which it was composed. 
Doubtless they were authentic copies which hewas believ- 
ed so to have collected, in like way as "the Epistles of 
kings concerning gifts " were, doubtless, the original let- 
ters of the kings of Persia, copies of which are preserved 
in the book of Ezra, to which originals, when need arose, 
appeal might be m ade. The law had been already spoken 
of 1 . "The matters of the kings" doubtless comprised 
what are now called " the former prophets ; " " the things 
of the Prophets/' "the later Prophets;" "the things of 
David," the hagiographa ; the third miscellaneous section 
being designated from the Psalms, the first book in it, 
precisely as our Lord speaks of z aU things, written in the 
law of Moses, and the prophets, and the Psalms, concerning 
Himself, in language familiar to those to whom he spake. 
The writers of the Epistle speak of the act of Nehemiah 
in gathering together those former books into the library, 
as a place of safe keeping, in just the same way as they 
speak of the act of Judas in "gathering together all those 
things which were lost by reason of the war we had, and 
they remain with us." " In like manner 3 ," they say. As 
then the writers, when they spoke of this act of Judas in 
"gathering together " those later documents, could not 
mean to speak of any gathering for the first time into a 
collection, (for they speak of them as having previously 
"fallen asunder 4 " and being " lost,") so neither could 
their meaning be, that Nehemiah, with whose act they 
compare that of Judas, for the first time collected those 
former books into the Canon. 

Let people place this letter at what date they will, be- 

1 ii. 2. 3. 2 S, Luke xxiv. 44. 3 &<ratW, ii. 14. 

4 8ia7rrTa>K<!Ta Stci, rbv Trfaffiov. Herzfeld would translate this, "what hap- 
pened in the war," i. e. that he gathered its events in a history, (i. p. 444, 5.) 
which is, of course, impossible. 



inconsistent with its late completion. 305 

fore our Lord., (and no one would now place it later,) it 
were absurd to suppose that a writing, attributed to Ne- 
hemiah, and speaking of the Canon as existing in his 
time, could have obtained belief, had the Canon been 
closed subsequently to the times of the Maccabees. But 
the validity and accuracy of the tradition has even been 
insisted upon by opponents of the book of Daniel. For, 
mistaking it for an account of a formation of the Canon, 
they thought that it could be used, as an argument, that 
the Hagiographa, in the time of Nehemiah, was as yet 
unfixed. And so they committed themselves to admit 
the correctness of a tradition which is evidence against 
them 5 . 

These traditions or indications of the close of the Ca- 
non of the Old Testament coincide with the data which 

5 "The second place is 2 Mace. ii. 13. where a notice has been preserved out 
of lost memoirs of Nehemiah. The correctness of this accqunt we have cer- 
tainly no ground to doubt. The only question is, what writing we are to sup- 
pose to be intended." Bleek.Schl. ZS.iii. 201. "Nehemiah directed his atten- 
tion to the commenced collection of a holy national library, as is expressly re- 
lated in 2 Mace. ii. 13. Probably he succeeded in gaining several books, not 
yet found ; and the passage quoted contains in fact very clear indications, that 
through him some [TCI trepl rS> trpo^rwv could not, of course, mean, some] 
prophetic books, as also the books of Samuel, here called 'the books of David,' 
(TO ToD AaulS,) because they treat chiefly of David; and 'the books of Kings' 
(TCI in pi T&V 0cn\eW) were added to the national library." Berth. Einl. 28. 
p. 75, 6. Movers would have the whole to relate to a commenced formation of 
the Hagiographa. "The matters as to the kings," were to be the Chronicles ; 
"David," "the first book of the Psalms;" " the Epistles," Ezra. Loci quid. 
Can. T. &c. p. 15. Stahelin leaves it open to mean, " either the books of the 
prophets according to then* two divisions, or at least the books of Samuel and 
Kings, perhaps the Chronicles also, the documents contained in Ezr. vi.2sqq. 
vii. 11. and the Psalms." Einl. 3. p. 9. Herzfeld is at pains to prove the gen- 
uineness of the two Epistles, (which he counts as one, Gesch. Isr. Exc. 18. i. 
443 sqq.) but will have it, that firt(rvviiya.ye, in ii. 14. means " compiled ; " but 
in ii. 13. with which the statement stands parallel, means " collected." He 
too maintains that the threefold division of the Old Testament was intend- 
ed by the writer of that letter ; the first division being what are now the ear- 
lier prophets (i. e. the historical books written by prophets, Joshua, Judges, 
Samuel, Kings ;) the 2nd, what the Jews count the later prophets, " Isaiah, al- 
though only to ch. 39 ; Jeremiah, with the Lamentations ; Ezekiel and the 12 
lesser prophets ; only it may be that Jonah was added later ; lastly, a collec- 
tion of Psalms viz. Ps. 2-41., all attributed to David, and Ps. 42-50. from the 
sons of Korah and Asaph." Gesch. Isr. u. 50. and Excurs. 22. p. 92 sqq. 

X 



306 The Pentateuch laid up from the first ; 

we have of its gradual formation before and in the cap- 
tivity. I cannot, of course, here condense the evidence 
for the genuineness and Divinity of the several books of 
the Old Testament. I can only point out traces of the 
gradual formation of the Canon, what books must have 
been received into it before the Captivity, and so, how 
little remained to be done after the return from it. The 
harmony of the account throughout involves an antece- 
dent probability, that the Canon was closed, as Josephus 
states it to have been, while there were yet persons living, 
who had a recognised Divine authority to receive books 
into it. 

The wildest criticism does not now doubt that the whole 
Pentateuch was before the Captivity. The objections 
which have lately been raised against it are but like the 
chaff of the summer-threshing-floors. They are but the 
arguments of persons, who wish to be deceived and so are 
deceived. But although, had their charges been true, the 
Old Testament would have been as Satanic as it is Di- 
vine, they concede all which is needed for this argument. 
I will then here state, i) The indications, in the Old Tes- 
tament itself, that a Canon was formed and enlarged ; ii) 
what books were manifestly of recognised authority be- 
fore the Captivity. 

i) The close of the Pentateuch contains a solemn ac- 
count, with what earnest protest Moses, when ready to 
depart, delivered the law to the priests, the Levites, and 
all the elders of the people, to be read publicly at the 
Feast of Tabernacles in the 7th year, the year of release *, 
when hearts would be gladliest. Besides this public gift 
and public use, Moses gave a copy of it to be laid up by 
the side of the ark. 2 Moses commanded the Levites who 
bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, saying, Take 
this Look of the law, and place it at the side of the ark of 
the covenant of the Lord your God, and it shall be a wit- 
ness against you. It was deposited there, not as a mere 
place of safety, but close by the place of the typical atone- 

i Deut. xxxi. 10, 11. * Ib.26,7. 



Gradual accessions implied in Scripture itself. 307 

ment for sin, the Ark of the covenant, as the protest against 
their national breach of that covenant by idolatry. There 
was yet further the provision, that the king, when he 
should come to the throne, should 8 write for himself the 
copy of this law in a book, from that which is before the 
priests, the Levites, and it shall be with him, and he shall 
read therein all the days of his life. This book, it is plain 
from the Pentateuch itself, was not a section only of it, 
since the word, the book, is used in the larger sense in 
the Pentateuch itself. In regard to Amalek, Moses is 
commanded; " 4 write this for a memorial in the book 
and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua." Moses " 5 took the 
book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the 
people." The curse is threatened to Israel, " 6 if thou wilt 
not observe to do all the words of this law that are writ- 
ten in this book." To this book Joshua added. Without 
entering into the details, how much he added, the fact of 
his so adding is stated clearly at the close of his book 7 , 
" Joshua wrote these .words in the book of the law of the 
Lord" The very form, in which Joshua and the other- 
historical books (except the Chronicles) begin, And it 
was, shews that the writers intended to join them on to 
previous books 8 . A Hebrew writer would not use the 
form, any more than we should, unless he intended by it 
to join on his book to a previous whole. In the book of 
Chronicles, which is a whole by itself, Ezra does not use 
it; nor does Daniel. 

Samuel again, when he had " 9 told the people the law 
of the kingdom, wrote it in the book and laid it up before 
the Lord ; " on the same ground on which Moses had so 
laid up the law, as a memorial against its infraction. 

So also as to the books of the prophets. Isaiah bids 
his people 10 , /Search ye out of the book of the Lord and read; 

3 Ib.xvii. 18. 4 Ex.xvii. 14. 5 Ex.xxiv. 7. 

6 Deut.xxviii.58.add61. "every plague not written in the book of this 

law," xxix. 21, " according to all the curses of the covenant that are written 

in this book of the law;" 27, "to bring upon it [the land] all the curses 

written in this book." 7 Josh. xxiv. 26. 8 See on Jonah i. 1. p. 265. 

9 1 Sam. x. 25. 10 Is. xxxiv. 16. ijp 

x2 



308 Pentateuch an authority before Jeroboam's schism. 

using the corresponding word to that which our Lord 
used, ^Search the Scriptures. Isaiah appeals here, as else- 
where 3 , to the evident fulfilment of prophecy. But he 
speaks of it as a whole, as one hook of the Lord, of which 
his own should form a part, in which they who should 
search should find, in Avhich God's word and the coming 
events which he foretold were accurately paired, one with 
the other. No one of these [predicted things] shall fail, 
none shall want her mate. Even an opponent has owned 
this, in his heathenish language 3 . 

The use of the law by the prophets, and of the earlier 
prophets by those who succeeded them, implies the 
same thing. It has been pointed out, how prophets of 
Israel, Hosea and Amos, appeal to or presuppose the law 
of Moses, as well known in the schismatic kingdom of Is- 
rael 4 , and so, how certain it is, that the law, as contained 
in the Pentateuch, was an existing authority, which Jero- 
boam could not shake off, but had to adapt his corruption 
of religion, as well as he could, to it. It has been pointed 
out too, how the citations of each earlier prophet by those 
who came after, presuppose that those former books were 
of recognised authority. Amos, when he opens and al- 
most closes his prophecy with words of Joel 5 , or applies 
more extensively those of Hosea 6 , intends manifestly to 
carry on a message, already recognised as Divine. So 
also Obadiah. when he uses words of the prophecies of 
Balaam, Joel, Amos, and a Psalm 7 . Micah alludes em- 
phatically to those parting words of his great predecesssor 
in the book of Kings 8 , to expressions of the Psalms and 
Proverbs 9 , to Joshua, to David's elegy over Saul and Jo- 
nathan, as well as to the Pentateuch ; Habakkuk, Zepha- 

1 S. John Y. 39. tpevvare ras ypa^ds. 2 xlii. 9. (coll. xli. 21-23.) xliii. 

9-12. xliv. 7, 8. xlv. 19,21. xlvi. 8-11. xlviii. 3-8. 14-16. 

3 " The poet seems to think of the insertion of his Oracle in a collection of 
Oracles and sacred writings, from which posterity could judge hereafter as to 
the correctness of his prophecy." Gesen. on Is. xxxiv. 16. i. p. 921. 

* Hengstenberg, Auth. d. Pent. i. 48-125. 

6 See on Joel, p. 94, 5. on Amos, p. 154. 6 See on Amos, p. 153. 

1 See on Obadiah, p. 230, 1. 8 See on Micah, p. 289. Hengstenb. 

Christol. i. 475. 9 See at length in Caspavi Micha : and on Micah, p. 294, &c. 



Each later prophet presupposes the earlier. 309 

niah, Ezekiel, employ words or thoughts of his. Jonah, 
by adopting the form And, joins on his prophetic history 
to the sacred histories before him, and blends his mission 
to the heathen with the history of the people of God. 

Nahum, in the opening of his prophecy against Nine- 
veh, manifestly refers to Jonah's appeal to God in regard 
to it. For Nahum had to exhibit the stricter side of 
God's dealings as to that same city. God had said in Jo- 
nah, how He forgave on repentance ; Nahum opens his 
book by saying in that self-same form of words, that He 
was indeed long-suffering, but would not finally spare the 
guilty. Nahum and Zephaniah use language of Isaiah 10 ; 
Zephaniah uses that of Habakkuk, as also of Joel, Amos, 
Micah; Habakkuk's hymn shews one well-acquainted 
Avith the Psalms. Whom does not Jeremiah employ ? 

The appeal in his day to the great prophecy of the de- 
struction of Jerusalem in Micah 11 , in its own words, shews 
that the book must have been in public use. 

Even before the captivity God by Ezekiel speaks of the 
prophets before him as one whole 13 . Thus saith the Lord 
God; Artthou [Gog] he of whom I have spoken in old time 
by My servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied 
in those days many years, that I would bring thee against 
them ? 

When then Daniel, studying Jeremiah's prophecy of 
the 70 years of the Captivity, says, I understood by the 
books ls , i. e. the biblia, scriptures, the number of the years, 
which the word of God was to Jeremiah the prophet, toful- 
Jil as to the desolations of Jerusalem, seventy years, this 
exactly expresses what we see from the writings of the 
prophets before the captivity to have been the fact, that 
the books of the prophets were collected together. 

The captivity set God's seal on the true prophets of God 
over against the false prophets, and gained a reverence 
for them among those also of the people who had de- 
rided and persecuted or slain them before. The for- 

10 On this and the following I hope to write in the Introduction to those Ero- 
phets. See on Micah, p.29Q. w Ezefe. xxxviu. 17. 13 ix. 2. 



310 Gradual accession of the historical books, 

mer prophets 1 is a standing expression for the prophets 
before the Captivity. 

The historical hooks were, at all times, an essential part 
of the teaching of Israel. They were a mirror in which 
God exhibited to them in act, in their own history, what 
in the law He had taught them in word, the fruits of obe- 
dience and disobedience to Himself. Much as the seve- 
ral series of histories vary in their character, this line runs 
through them and holds them in one, as, outwardly too, 
they are joined on together. Their difference of charac- 
ter marks their independence ; the unity of design marks 
one guiding principle. 

On ground of language the book of Joshua must have 
been very early; for its language has so much in common 
with the Pentateuch, although the Pentateuch has marks 
of greater antiquity, having archaisms, which the book 
of Joshua has not, and not having language which the 
book of Joshua has 3 . On historical grounds 3 the books of 

1 " Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former prophets have cried, say- 
ing, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Turn ye now from your evil ways Your 
fathers, where are they ? and the prophets do they Jive for ever ? But My 
words and My statutes which I commanded my servants the prophets, did 
they not take hold of your fathers ?" Zech. i. 4-6. " Should ye not hear the 
words which the Lord hath cried by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was 
inhabited and in prosperity ?" vii. 7. " lest they should hear the law, and the 
words which the Lord of Hosts hath sent by His Spirit by the former prophets." 
vii. 12. 

2 " The book of Joshua 1) has not the Archaisms which pervade all the five 
books of Moses equally, and, 2) notwithstanding great agreement of language 
with the Pentateuch, resulting from the common .subject, yet it had distinct 
expressions and forms, varying from and unknown to the Pentateuch." Keil, 
Einl. 42. p. 166. Of archaic forms of the Pentateuch, unknown to Joshua, 
Keil counts about 18 ; words and idioms, about 47; (Einl.- 15. 2. p. 40-2.) of 
new~ldioms or forms he also counts 18. (Einl. 42. 4. 16. 1. p. 46.) 

3 Keil (Einl. 44. p. 172.) has these arguments ; 1) The Jebusites were not 
then driven out of Jerusalem (xv. 63.) which David did in the 8th year of his 
reign. (2 Sam. v. 5-9.) 2) "The place which God should choose ;" He had not 
yet chosen, (Josh. ix. 27,) as it was chosen under David. (2 Sam. xxiv. 18 sqq. 
1 Chr. xxi. 18 sqq. xxii. 1.) 3) The Gibeonites were still "hewers of wood and 
drawers of water for the congregation and the altar ; " (Ib.) whereas Saul slew 
them as enemies of Israel and Judah (2 Sam. xxi. 2.) and (it follows) dispersed 
whom he did not slay. 4) "Great Zidon," (xi. 8. xix. 28.) not Tyre, was still 
the chief city of Phojnicia. 5) " The Sidonians " were still a people to. be ex- 



Joshua, Judges, Samuel, 311 

Joshua and Judges must have been written before the 
time of David, the Judges probably by Samuel 4 . 

The two books of Samuel were completed probably soon 
after the death of David 5 . They are far separated from 
the books of the Kings by the language, as well as by the 
style of the narrative. You must all have felt the differ- 
ence between the full, almost biographical, character of 
the books of Samuel, and the brief extracts in the Kings 
from the fuller histories of the kings of Israel and Judah. 
The books of Samuel too contain no quotation of any 
written book, except the book of Jashar, and that in com- 
mon with the book of Joshua 5 . The books of Kings, with 
a few very characteristic exceptions 6 , close the reigns of 

pelled ; (xiii. 4-6.) whereas in David's time they were friendly, (2 Sam. v. 11. 
1 Kgs. v. 15. IChr.xiv. 1.) and brothers. (See on Am. i. 9.) Later times than 
Solomon's are excluded hy the fact, that the Canaanites were dwelling at Geser, 
(xvi. 10.) whereas Pharaoh drove them out and gave the city, as a dowry for his 
daughter. (1 Kgs. ix. 16.) Keil added (Comm. Einl. p. xxxv.) 6) Psalm i. 
(which I also doubt not to have been a Psalm of David,) embodies God's com- 
mand to Joshua in His own words ; nS^i no'vb p'jrn Jos. i. 8. n$>$j n^i'v nan; in-jinn?. 
Ps. i. 2, Konig adds, 7) that it was probably written, before the shortlived con- 
questof Gaza, Ashkelon, Ekron. Judg. i. 18. comp. Josh. xiii. 3. Since the wri- 
ter speaks in the first person, ("until we were passed over," v. 1. "the Lord 
sware that he would not shew them the land, which the Lord sware unto their 
fathers that he would give us, v. 6.) it is most probable that the book was writ- 
ten by Joshua ; which. was the Jewish tradition. Baba bathra, f. 14. 2. 

4 The book of Judges also, which is so manifestly one whole, was written 
before David had driven the Jebusites from Jerusalem, (i. 21.) It speaks of a 
forty-years subjection to the Philistines from the days of Samson, and so must 
have been written, after the victory under Samuel had interrupted that subjec- 
tion. (1 Sam. vii. 3-13.) The repeated contrast of the state in those days with 
a more ordered state under a king, (xvii. 6. xviii. 1. xix. 1. xxi. 25.) makes it 
probable that it was written after the time of Saul. " Until the day of the cap- 
tivity of the land," xviii. 30. evidently marks the same period as, "all the time 
that the house of God was in Shiloh." ib. 31. But this ended in that battle 
in which the ark of God was brought from Shiloh, and taken. 1 Sam. iv. 3-11. 
It went back, not to Shiloh, but to Kirjath Jearim. (1 Sam. vii. 2.) There is 
no reason to question the Jewish tradition, that the book was written by Sa- 
muel. Baba Bathra, f. 14. 2. 15. 1. 5 2 Sam. i. 18. Josh. x. 13. Both are poetry. 

8 The exceptions are, Jehoram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah, 
slain by Jehu ; Athaliah, the usurping Queen, who was slain ; Hoshea, the 
last king of Israel ; Jehoahaz, removed after a 3 months' reign ; (2 Kgs. xxiii. 
31-34.) Jehoiachin, removed in like way ; (Ib. xxiv. 8, 12.) and Zedekiah, the 
last king of Judah. 



312 Probable date of books of Samuel and Ruth ; 

the kings, both of Israel and Judah, with the reference to 
the larger chronicles of the respective kingdoms. And 
this is the more remarkable, since the hooks of Samuel 
must he founded on the words of Samuel, Nathan and 
Gad a , in which the acts of David were written. In lan- 
guage also the hooks of Samuel are wholly free from 
Chaldaisms, and from later language generally. The 
statement, z Ziklag belongeth to the kings of Judah to this 
day, may refer to a time when there were kings of Israel 
also. It is not indeed necessary, since it seems to he stat- 
ed that it was a crown-property, and, whereas it origi- 
nally fell to Judah 3 , then was given to Simeon 4 , now it 
came hack to Judah in its kings. There are no other 
marks of time, and the absence of allusion to any later 
event fixes the books of Samuel probably, at latest, in the 
early part of the divided kingdoms 5 . 

The book of Ruth contains no marks of its date. It 
is most likely to have been written, when the memory 
was most fresh. The only custom which is related, that 
of giving the shoe in witness of a covenant 6 , belongs to 
a very simple time, and may well have fallen into de- 
suetude soon after David's time. The language has this 
remarkable characteristic, that the forms, which look 
like Chaldaisms, occur in conversation, and so represent 
the language of peasant life ; the narrative Hebrew he- 
ing good. The history itself took place a century he- 
fore David. The right of kindred in redeeming the land 7 
is a Levitical law 8 ; the custom, that such redemption 

i lChr.Xxix.29. 2 1 Sam. xxvii. 6. 3 Josh.xv.31. 4 Ib.xix.5. 

5 The explanation \ Sam. ix. 9., as to the office of the Roeh having passed to 
the Jfabi, requires no later date than the full establishment of the NeMim, 
"prophets," by Samuel. The dress of the king's daughters (2 Sam. xiii. 18.) 
might very possibly be changed in the days of Solomon. We could speak of the 
" long dresses " of 20 years ago. The cases, in which customs or things are 
said to have lasted unto this day, do not require any long period. They are, 
1 Sam. v. 5. Dagon's priests not treading on his threshold ; vi. 18. the great 
stone in the field of Joshua, the Bethshemite ; xxx. 25. David's rule about the 
equal division of spoils ; 2 Sam. iv. 3. the sojourning of the Beerothites at Git- 
; vi. 8. the name, 'Perest-Uzzali ; xviii. 18. the name, Absalom' s place. 
6 iv. 7. ? 5v.3,4. 8 Lev. xxv. 25, 



the books of Kings before the close of the Captivity. 313 

in the case of a childless widow involved marriage with 
her 9 , is something beyond, not against, the Levitical 
law; for the deceased had no brothers left. 

The books of Kings close with the life of Jehoiachin, 
whom Evilmerodach, in his first year, took out of prison 
in the 37th year of his captivity 10 . He was then in his 
55th year 11 . It seems probable that he died within the 2 
years of the reign of Evilmerodach, since it is said that 
the king, i. e. Evilmerodach, gave him a daily allowance 
all the days of his life. The kings of Judah had become a 
shortlived race 13 . In this case, the last event in the book 
falls about B.C. 559, the restoration of Jehoiachin being, 
as an act of kindness, a mitigation of their captivity, 22 
years before its close. Since the book does not allude to 
that close, there is no doubt that it was completed before. 
The manner and language of the books fall in with the 
Talmudic tradition, that the books of Kings were written 
by Jeremiah 1S . The Hebrew of the books of Kings is in- 
deed purer than that of Jeremiah, hardly any instance of 
what are alleged as Aramaisms occurring in the narra- 
tive u . But this, probably, results from the careful embo- 

9 Ruth iv. 5. 10 2 Kgs. xxv. 27. n He was 18 at his accession. 

(2 Kings xxiv. 8.) "Eight," in 2 Chron. xxxvi. 9., must he an error of a co- 
pyist. For he was old enough to do deeds of oppression, if not of blood. (Ezek. 
xix. 6, 7.) The long imprisonment too implies more of wilful rebellion against 
the king of Babylon, than an 8-year-old child is capable of. 

12 Manasseh alone reached 67. (2 Kings xxi. 1.) Jotham died at 41 ; (Ib. 
xv. 33.) Ahaz at 36 ; (Ib. xvi. 2.) Hezekiah's life was prolonged, hut only to 
54 ; (Ib. xviii. 2.) Jehoiakim died at 36. (Ib. xxiii. 36.) (Amon and Josiah do 
not come into account here, having been slain, Amon at 24, Ib. xxi. 19. Jo- 
siah at 39. Ib. xxii. 1.) Of the uncles of Jehoiachin, Jehoahaz was dead in 
Egypt, (Ib. xxiii. 34.) and Zedekiah, who was 3 years older than himself, 
(Ib. xxiv. 18.) was doubtless .already dead, since he is not mentioned. 

13 Bababathraf. 15. 1. 

14 ':&, 2 Kings iv. 2.'3'j3, WJ, Ib. 7. VIK, 1 Kgs. xiv.2. 2 Kgs.iv. 16. 23. viii. 1. 
are, of course, in conversation : but so also is nut for n with the affixes emu 
2 Kgs. vi. 16. inis Ib. Hi. 11. 12. viii. 8. and thence perhaps, (though an angel 
is speaking,) Ib. i. 15. So is winnpiif Ib. v. 18. and (if this were modern) a^>p 
2 Kgs. vi. 11. (but on w see on Jonah p. 250.) There remain only ^g. 2 Kgs. 
xiv. 10. and the two words ending in )', 1 Kgs. xi. 33. 2 Kgs. xi. 13. (the one 
a proper name, the other, the name of an office ; J^ijt, JY},) 3'3b (2 Kgs. viii. 21 .) 
is probably an error of MSS. 



314 Prophetic documents probably embodied in books of 

dying of the original documents, so regularly referred to, 
which accounts for some variations in the language also. 
The carefulness of that embodying is shewn in the reten- 
tion of the words "unto this day 1 /' a to things which, 
at the time of the completion of the whole, had ceased to 
he ; and in the dates, in that the age of the kings of Is- 
rael at their accession is not mentioned, nor that of the 
kings of Judah before Jehoshaphat, whereas it is not omit- 
ted as to any king of Judah after Jehoshaphat. Still there 
is a certain agreement of style between Jeremiah and the 
books of Kings, and even verbal agreement has been no- 
ticed where the writer of the books of Kings writes most 
reflectively 2 . The insertion of the history of the capti- 
vities of Judah at the end of Jeremiah 3 is unaccountable, 
except on the ground that it was Jeremiah's ; and yet the 
corresponding statement in the book of Kings 4 is not 
a mere abridgement of it, and so is, probably, from the 
prophet 5 . 

This, however, was but the completion of what, in sub- 
stance, existed long before. The basis of the present 
books was, from the time of Samuel, furnished by con- 
temporary prophets. The history of David was written 
by three, Samuel, Nathan, Gad 6 ; that of Solomon by 
Nathan, Ahijah, Ye'di 7 ; Rehoboam's by Shemaiah and 
Iddo 8 ; his son Abijah's by Iddo 9 ; Jehoshaphat's by Je- 
hu son of Hanani 10 ; Uzziah's and Hezekiah's by Isaiah 11 ; 

1 Of the position of the staves of the ark in the temple, 1 Kgs. viii. 8 ; Solo- 
mon's levying a tribute of bondservice of the Amorites Sic., Ib. ix. 21; the rebel- 
lion of Israel against the house of David, xii. 19 ; of Edom from under the hand 
of Judah, 2 Kgs. viii. 22 ; the disgrace of the house of Baal, 2 Kgs. x. 27. The 
name of Joktheel (2 Kgs. xiv. 7.) and the dwelling of the Syrians at Elath 
(xvi. 6.) which are mentioned with the same formula, are not necessarily so li- 
mited ; but still the formula is probably retained out of the old document. 

2 " comp. 2 Kgs. xYii. 14, and Jer. vii. 26 ; xvii. 15, and Jer. ii. 5 ; xvii. 20, 
and Jer. vii. 15." Hav. Einl. ii. 1. p. 171. Hav. also dwells on the corres- 
pondence of Jer. xxxix. with 2 Kgs. xxv.; and the way in which both allude, 
to God's promise to the house of David, His choice of Jerusalem, and the spe- 
cial employment of the language of the Pentateuch in both, p. 171, 2. 

3 ch. lu. 4 2 Kgs. xxiv. 18-20. xxv. 5 Hay. p. 172-4. 

6 1 Chr. xxix. 29. ? 2 Chr. ix. 29. Ib. xii. 15. Ib. xiii. 22. 
10 Ib. xx. 34. " Ib. xxvi. 22. xxxii. 32. 



Kings. First book of the Psalms, wholly David's. 315 

Manasseh's by Chosai 13 . These, it is clear, were incor- 
porated in the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Is- 
rael and Judah, so often referred to in the books of Kings. 

The books of Kings having been completed in their 
present form before the close of the Captivity, then, on 
this ground alone, it is clear that the previous books must 
have been written from the pre-existing prophetic mate- 
rials before that time. 

So as to the third division. The Psalms, being intended 
for devotional use in the Temple, must have been early 
collected. They were needed for that vast elaborate sys- 
tem of instrumental and vocal music which David insti- 
tuted, setting apart 4000 Levites 13 to praise the Lord with 
the instruments ivhich I made, said David, to praise there- 
with. The office of those set over them, was to u 'prophesy 
with harps, to give thanks and to praise the Lord. The two 
first collections or books of the Psalms, 1-41, 42-7%, con- 
tain only 7 anonymous Psalms. The first is entirely as- 
cribed to David, except four anonymous Psalms 15 , three 
of which are certainly, the fourth probably, his 16 ; the 2nd 

12 Ib. xxxiii. 19. lln "Seer of the Lord." The name is according to the ana- 
logy of many other Proper names ; there is then no reason to assume a rare and 
doubtful plural ending, with Kim. The Vulg. and Ch. keep it as an appellative. 

13 1 Chr. xxiii. 5. 14 Ib. xxv. 1, 2, 4. u Ps. i. ii. x. xxxiii. 

16 Ps. ii. is quoted by the collected Apostles (Acts iv. 25.) as David's, not as 
a name for the Psalter generally, but specifically, "Who by the mouth of Thy 
servant David hast said." It corresponds also with Ps. ex. which our Lord 
Himself quotes as David's in a conviction of the Jews, which turns upon the 
Psalm's being David's. But Ps. i. is distinctly written as a pair with Ps. ii, as 
well as an introduction to the whole Psalter. The Blessed, with which it be- 
gins, corresponds with the Blessed with which Ps. ii. closes ; the end of Ps. i. the 
way oftheungodly shall perisft, I2h n 1 j$n y-n, bears on, and ye perish as to the 
way, 373 nakn], the close of Ps. ii. They correspond too in subject. Each ex- 
hibits the 2 classes into which the world is divided, those who accept and those 
who reject God, in their way and in their end. Ps. i. describes them in rela- 
tion to the Law of God, the one studying and delighting in it, the other, in 
practice and in words, scorning and scoffing at it. (i. 1.) Ps. ii. exhibits them 
in relation to Christ, the one in concerted rebellion against Him, the other 
trusting in Him ; the one, His inheritance to the ends of the earth and bless- 
ed; the other, perishing. One cannot doubt the unity of the author in the 
unity of thought. 

Ps. x. is so closely connected with Ps. ix. which is ascribed to David, that 



316 Connection of Psalms ix, x. xxxii, xxxiii. 

the only question has been, whether it is altogether one Psalm with it. It is 
connected with it in outward form, in that both together form a partially al- 
phabetic Psalm. In Ps. ix. the alternate verses, 2,4, 6, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, be- 
gin, in the order of the alphabet, with eight of the first eleven letters of the 
alphabet, K, 3, 3, 1, 7, n, U, , to which the ninth is to be added, if p, v. 20., is used 
to replace 3 ; in which case two only, 1, n, would be omitted. Ps. x. has verses 
beginning with 5 out of the remaining eleven. Both Psalms also have verses 
where the alphabetic arrangement is broken. The xth, omitting 6 letters, be- 
tween the V with which it begins and the four last letters (p, i, iff, n, v. 12, 14, 
15, 17,) with which it closes, has 3 tetrastichs, (i. e. 2 verses divided in the 
middle,) 3, 4 ; 6, 7; 10, 11 ; and 3 tristichs (verses divided into 3) 5. 8. 9. cor- 
responding to the number of the omitted letters, D, 3, 0, y, s, n, and so in a de- 
gree marking the omission. The omission in Ps. ix, is also marked by four 
verses, successively beginning with 1, of which one only belongs to the alphabe- 
tic order. Their subject is the same, the overthrow of the ungodly, who forget 
(Ps. ix, 19.) and despise God, and oppress the humble and afflicted, (fj ix. 10. 
x. 18 ; else only Ps. Ixxiv. 21.) who trust in Him. There is a connection too 
in their language, as especially in the remarkable phrase, .Tiss nteij^>, which oc- 
curs only in these two Psalms, and which in Ps. x. manifestly refers to Ps. ix. 
In Ps. ix. 10. he says, "The Lord will be a refuge at needful times in the trou- 
ble." Ps. x. 1. asks, " Why hidest thou Thyself at needful times in the trou- 
ble? " Both end in the same way, the prayer against the prevailing of weak man 
against God, (ix. 20. x. 18.) and with the judgment of the heathen, ajgj>; 
. 20. n; 1 !! na$ x. 16. ?rt} riin; 0*1^ 18. Both have the appeal, mn ,ic)p ix. 20. 
x. 12. Both Psalms are complete in themselves, and yet are, in structure, es- 
sentially different. Ps. ix. is a Psalm of thanksgiving for God's judgments, as 
past, and has only two brief prayers, v. 13, 19, 20. Ps. x. describes the wicked 
in the period of his prosperity, when he thinks that all things are given into his 
hands, and briefly concludes with the judgment. In Ps. ix. the Psalmist thanks 
chiefly in his own name,"! will praise thee, &c." (ix. 1, 2, 3, 4, 13, 14.) In Ps. 
x. the prayer expressed or implied, and the thanksgiving, are for a class, " the 
poor," &c. in the 3rd person, (x. 2, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 17, 18.) In like way, Ps. 
ix. 13, 19. declares that God does not " forget (rnB>) the poor ; " Ps. x. 12. prays 
that He will not, in contrast with the boast of the ungodly that He " has for- 
gotten," x. 11. Ps. ix. speaks of it as an attribute of God, that He "maketh 
inquisition for blood," D'cn B>YJ ; the turning-point of Ps. x. is the boast of the 
ungodly, that God does not enquire ehf ^>3 x. 4. ehrtfl sA x. 13. 

Ps. xxxiii. begins where Ps. xxxii. ended. Ps. xxxii. closes with the ex- 
hortation, " rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, and jubilate, all ye upright in 
heart ; " Ps. xxxiii. takes up the key in words too used in Ps. xxxii, "Jubilate, 
ye righteous, in the Lord," and then follows the wonderful jubilee of praise for 
the marvels of His creation and of His Providence, how full the earth is of His 
tender mercy ; and the whole Psalm has only one brief prayer at the end, mak- 
ing, as it were, all this universal love their own. The Psalm appears then to 
have been written, as a sequel to Ps. xxxii. Its beginning connects it with 
a Psalm of David's ; there is a presumption that it is David's, from its being 
placed in this first book of Psalms ; there is nothing 1 against its being his. 
Even Hiipfeld (Ps. T. iv. p. 458.) thinks it probable that the iri^ was once 
there, and fell out subsequently. 



2nd and 3rd Books of Psalms. 317 

contains, in addition to his 1 , only a kindred Psalm of 
Asaph the seer* and Psalms of the choir which he insti- 
tuted, "the sons of Korah 3 ," one of Solomon's 4 , and three 
anonymous 5 . To this second book is subjoined the re- 
markable subscription, "The Psalms of David, the son of 
Jesse, are ended ;" and thereon follow two books, the 3rd 
and 4th, each of 17 Psalms, of which the 3rd, i. e. Ps. 
73-89, contains one Psalm ascribed to David ; the fourth, 
i. e. Ps. 90-106, two only. The subscription of the Psalms 
of the 2nd book seems to have a bearing on the two follow- 
ing books, separating off those books which had most of 
David's Psalms, in contrast with those which had fewest. 
The third book is, moreover, with the exception of the one 
Psalm of David 6 , composed of Psalms attributed to the 
sons of Korah 7 , and Asaph 8 , which it completes, one 
Psalm being apparently left uncertain, with a double tra- 
ditional title, those, who affixed those titles, being unable 
to decide between them and honestly admitting their ina- 
bility 9 . The 88th Psalm, which is ascribed in the second 
title to David's seer, Heman 10 , stands by itself also, as 
the Psalm expressive of the deepest woe in the whole 
Psalter, the only Psalm which ends in unmitigated woe. 
The 89th also, alone ascribed to its author, Ethan u , is 
again characteristic, in its lengthened, unwavering, con- 
fession to God of His faithfulness, and the unperplexed 
simple pleading of the apparent contrast of the actual 

1 li-lxv. Ixviii-lxx. 2 Ps. 1. 

3 Ps. xlii. (to which Ps.xliii. is manifestly a sequel) xliv-xlix. 4 Ps. Ixxii. 

5 Ps. Ixvi. Ixvii. Ixxi. Hiipfeld says, " Perhaps the title, Trfp has only drop- 
ped out. It is exstant in Ixvi. Ixvii. in some MSS." Ps. T. iv. p. 459. 

6 Ps. Ixxxvi. 7 Ps. Ixxxiv. Ixxxv. Ixxxvii. 8 Ps, Ixxiii-lxxxiii. 

9 In itself the mention of Heman the Ezrahite might, (however insulated 
the case,) fix the individual among the sons of Korah who composed the Psalm. 
But the completeness of each title, rrfp '$$ itoffi T?> and 'ijijxn yy$ ^9, makes 
me think it probable that they are two titles. 

10 1 Chr. xxv. 5, 6. add Ib. vi. 33. Eng. 18. Heb. 

11 I think (with A. C. H. in Smith, Bibl. Diet. i. 939) that Ethan is probably 
the same person as Jeduthun. (" comp. 1 Chr. xv. 17, 19. with xvi. 41, 42. 
xxv. 1, 3, 6. 2 Chr. xxxv. 15.") The name, " Jeduthun," " great praise," may 
have been formed by David. 



318 Gradual formation of the Psalter ; 

state of things with that promise. The 4th book, on the 
contrary, is made up wholly of anonymous Psalms, ex- 
cept that of Moses which stands at the head, and the two 
of David 1 . And then again, in the last large book, i. e. 
Ps. 107-150, we have what seem to be gleanings of 15 of 
David's Psalms 2 , whenoesoever they were gathered, 
among that larger mass of anonymous Psalms, no other 
human author being named, except Solomon 3 . 

The large proportion of Psalms left anonymous is a 
proof of the conscientiousness of the collector in not add- 
ing doubtful names. Nay, we know that some Psalms 
were David's, which do not bear his name, since Ezra, 
probably, relates that, when David brought the ark to 
Jerusalem, he* on that day first gave into the hands of 
Asaph and his brethren, to thank the Lord, a Psalm, 
whose two component parts in the Psalter 5 bear no name. 
On this ground too then, it is apparent that these Psalms 
were inserted in the third book of the Psalter, before the 
time of Ezra, and, if so, before the Captivity. For had 
Ezra inserted them, he would have entitled them Psalms 
of David, as he does in effect in the Chronicles. The 
Psalm ends also with a prayer and doxology, with which 
Psalm cvi. is now closed 6 ; a Psalm which stands in the 
Psalter as a pair with Ps. cv., rehearsing exclusively the 
mercies of God to Israel ; while Ps. cvi. sets forth the in- 
gratitude of Israel for those mercies. The prayer and 
the doxology form no integral part of Ps. cvi., the doxo- 
logy closing the Psalm, like our Gloria Patri, and, with it, 
that book of the Psalms. 

But the character also of the Psalms in the several 
books gives evidence of the gradual formation of the Psal- 
ter. In the first of the three books there is no one Psalm, 
of any later date than David. The second, in the main, 
ends with Solomon ; only that, among the Psalms of the 
sons of Korah, two are inserted, which seem to corres- 

1 Ps. ci. ciii. 2 Ps. cviii ex. cxxii. cxxiv. cxxxi. cxxxiii. 

cxxxviii cxlv. 3 Ps. cxlvii. 4 1 Chr. xvi. 7- 

8 Ps. cv. 1-15. xcvi. 1-13. Ps. cvi. 47, 48. 



Fifth book alone implies times after the Captivity. 319 

poiidbest to the time of Jehoshaphat or Hezekiah 7 . In 
the 3rd book, there is one Psalm relating to Jehosha- 
phat's time 8 , one to Sennacherib's overthrow 9 ; and two 
of Asaph 10 , referring to the destruction of Jerusalem, 
and the Captivity. But since this collection completed 
the Psalms of Asaph, it may be, that later Psalms of one 
of the choir of Asaph may have been inserted in the col- 
lection. In the great festival of Hezekiah, at the restora- 
tion of the worship which Ahaz had suspended n , he 13 and 
the princes commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the 
Lord in the words of David and of Asaph the Seer. It 
may be that he collected a book of Psalms, as his men 13 , 
we know, collected Proverbs. 

Yet the fourth book also, which opens with a Psalm of 
Moses 14 , contains only one Psalm 1S belonging to the Cap- 
tivity. In the 5th and last book there are, for the first 
time, thanksgivings for the restoration from the great 
captivity 16 . The reference to idolatry also, as foreign and 
heathen, probably belongs to times when their own na- 
tional idolatry had ceased 17 . Some of the gradual Psalms 
suit well to the habitual low estate of the returned exiles 18 , 
beset by the enemies who hindered the rebuilding of the 
temple ; one Psalm at least seems to belong to its dedi- 
cation 19 . The cxixth Psalm, every verse of which, save 
one, has one of the ten words, denoting the Iaw 20 ,and every 
verse of which, after the introduction, is directed to God, 
suits no one so well as the pious restorer of the law, Ezra. 
The five Halleluia Psalms, with which the book closes in 
one varied thanksgiving, all mourning done away and 

7 Ps. xlvi. xlviii, as describing a great gathering and raging of enemies and 
their instantaneous dispersion; xlvi. 6. xlviii. 45. 8 Fs. Ixxxiii. 

9 Ps. Ixxvi. 10 Ps. Ixxiv. Ixxix. 2 Chr. xxviii. 24. 

12 2 Chr. xxix. 30. 13 Prov. xxv. 1. 

14 Ps. xc. 15 Ps. cii. 16 Ps. cvii. cxxvi. perhaps Ps. cxxix. and cxxxvi. 

tf Ps. cxv. cxxxv. K Ps. cxx. (alluding probably to the calumnies men- 
tioned in Ezra,) cxxiii. cxxv. cxxvi. cxxix. cxxx. 19 Ps. cxviii. 

20 " In every verse," is the observation of the Masoraon v. 122, "except the 
122nd, occurs one of the 10 words, (pointing to the x fundamental command, 
ments of the Law of Sinai, ,YJDN, 153, nVisj, ?rji, B^p, Tip?, n$o, trita, ph, 
(another reading, pi?.") Delitzsch, Psalmen, ii. 187. note. 



320 No one Psalm contains any indication of the Maccabee 

even prayer for the time absorbed in praise 1 , suits no time 
so well as the completed restoration under Nehemiah, 
when 'the Lord built up Jerusalem and strengthened the 
bars of her gates. 

These facts, that the Psalms were gradually collected ; 
that their earlier portions were the oldest ; that the latest 
belong to the times shortly after the Captivity ; and that 
there are no Maccabee Psalms ; have impressed critics, 
whose interest it was to maintain their later date, in or- 
der to establish the late closing of the Canon. 

I will give the summary of one of this school ; " 3 All the 
later Psalms, which admit of or require an historical ex- 
planation, can be perfectly explained out of the history 
of Israel down to Nehemiah, and can only be explained 
out of it. A reference to later relations does not hold 
good, even as matter of interpretation." The Psalms 
most plausibly, as he thinks, alleged 8 , " are all Psalms of 
penitence or complaint to God; in all, the congregation, 
in its strait, calls on its God for help. Throughout, those 
who so pray speak of themselves, as the congregation, 
the whole of it. There is not the faintest hint of a divi- 
sion of the people into two portions, contending against 
each other with extremest embitterment, which division 
is acknowledged to have lasted during the whole of the 
Maccabee wars. No one hint is there of the foreign ene- 
my of the Maccabee combatants, Greek heathenism, and 
the Syrians 4 . The main points at issue then, the being 
or not-being of the true religion, abolition of the worship 
of God, prohibition of the keeping of the sabbaths and 
festivals, annihilation of the book of the law and of the 
other holy books, eating of unclean food, sacrificing to 
heathen gods, acceptance of the Greek religion, martyr- 
dom of so many of the godly, are no where even alluded 
to, (for even the words Ps. xliv. 23. Ixxiv. 9. are far too 

1 Hengst. Delitzsch. See Ewald, Poet. Btich. i. 188 sqq. 
51 Dilhnann, iib. L Bildung d. Sammlung d. hell. Schr. d. A. T. in Dorner, 
Jahrb. d. Deutsch. Theol. iii. 460-462. 

3 Ps. xliv. Ix. Ixxiv. Ixxix. Ixxx. bcxxiii. 
4 Dillmann adds, " which the book of Daniel describes clearly enough." 



period; those selected as such belong to the Captivity. 321 

weak for this.) The expressions, Thine enemies, O God ; 
the enemy blasphemeth the name of God; arise, O God, 
plead Thine own cause ; and the like, are far from esta- 
blishing that those wars were properly religious wars ; 
else many other passages of the Psalms and of the rest of 
the Old Testament must be referred to the Syrian reli- 
gious war. Then too we read nothing of appeals to vic- 
tories already won by them over these adversaries, which 
could not fail in hymns of Maccabee warriors : on the con- 
trary, Ps. xliv. 2-9. refers back to God's deliverances in 
old times, as the ground of the fresh entreaty. Contra- 
riwise, most of these Psalms 5 contain clear references 
to the Captivity, lament over the still-continuing aban- 
donment to the Heathen, or pray for fuller restoration 
out of banishment ; prayers and laments, removed far 
enough from the Maccabee times. Others allude to the 
mockery and malicious joy of the neighbouring people 6 
at the ill-treatment of Israel through the peoples and 
kingdoms, just as it happened at the time of the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem by the Cljaldeeans 7 . Almost all exhi- 
bit the condition bewailed, as one which had long lasted ; 
they entreat, that God would not be angry for ever, would 
now at the last help, would no longer behold with indif- 
ference the long-enduring misery 8 . What meaning could 
such expressions have in the period, to which the modern 
expositors would force these Psalms down ? " 

The LXX translation of the Psalms is in itself a clear 
evidence, that the Psalter, together with its titles, existed 
long before it, for it misunderstands many of the titles 9 ; 
yet, of course, the translators of the Psalms would be 
among the best of their day, since the use of the Psalms 

5 Ps. xliv. 12 sqq. 15. Ix. 3. Ixxix. 11. Ixxx. 6 Ps. xliv. 14. Ixxix. 4 sqq. 12. 
1 Ezek. xxv. Jer. xlix. 7. Obadiah. Is. xxxiv. Ixiii. Ps. cxxxvii. 

8 See the expressions Ps. xliv. 24. Ixxiv. 1, 3, 10, 19. Ixxix. 5. Ixxx. 5. 

9 Ewald uses this argument, Poet. Biich. i. 206., " The translator of the 
LXX. followed, in the Psalter, a MS., which only in less important things de- 
parts from the Masorethic text, yet, in the inscriptions, this latest part of the 
whole, [as Ewald thinks,] misunderstands much, or alters it on his own au- 
thority ; whence it follows that a considerable space must have elapsed between 
its date and that of the completion of the present book." 

Y 



322 Psalter translated by LXX before Maccabees. 

entered into the congregational as well as the personal 
religious life of the Hebrew, as of ours. The translation, 
however, of the LXX. was made long before the Greek 
of the first book of the Maccabees, since Ps. 79. is quoted 
in that book by memory from the Greek translation 1 , and 
so must have been already familiar to the Alexandrian 
Jews. Probably, the translation was completed before 
the Maccabee times. 

If completed before the Maccabee times, it is an evi- 
dence, of course, that the whole Psalter was then com- 
pleted ; if not, it would still be remarkable, that, ascribing 
four Psalms, in the Greek five, to Haggai and Zechariah 2 , 
they knew of no later author ; whereas, had any Psalm in 
the Canon been written in Maccabee times, it must have 
been written by a contemporary. 

The book of Proverbs also bears evidence of gradual 
collection. The statement prefixed to the third portion 
of it, that " 8 the men of Hezekiah transcribed them," is 
of course evidence, that the two former portions, which 
are identical in language, were formed into one whole be- 
fore that time. "The men of Hezekiah transferred " 
them from one written document to another, i. e. from a 
written collection, previously existing, to that in the Ca- 
non. The words, "These also 4 are proverbs of Solomon/' 
imply plainly that, in the belief of the persons so trans- 



1 1 Mace. vii. 17.2ti/!ttoj btrltav ffov KO\ alfiara avrav 
Kol OVK fy aiirots 6 6dirTa>. Ps.lxxviii. 2, 3. LXX. ras frdptcas TUV daliav ffov 
rots Oripiots TTJS yrjs. 'EJexeew rb af/ta aii-rtov us iiSap Ki5/cAy f Ie/>0i/<raA^/i, ical 



2 Ps. cxlv-viii. [cxlvi-Tiii. Heb. Eng-.] They add also the name of Haggai 
and Zechariah to that of David before Ps. cxlvii., iJ/aA/i&s ry AaulS 'Ayyatoii 
Kal Zaxapiov, in the same form as they do that of Jeremiah to Ps. cxxxvi. 
[cxxxvii. Heb. Eng.] r<p AaulS 'lepepiov. 

3 Prov. xxv. 1. ?P'P5)n, "removed," then "transferred" from one place to ano- 
ther. It means then, not simply " copied out," but " copied into," i. e. into 
the book already existing, nerrjpw Aq., transtulerunt LXX., /j,prfiveyKai> Gr. 
Ven., QeypdtyavTO LXX. Gesenius himself quotes from Buxtorf, p. 686. that 
the Talm. p'njffl is either " transcribed," or " translated," (Buxtorf gives p'p'nyo 
"translators.") It is then an arbitrary quid pro quo, when to the right expla- 
nation, "transcripsit ex uno libro in alium," Gesenius adds a whplly different 
meaning, "inde i. q. congessit." % 4 



Proverbs ch. xxx, xxxi. alone can be after Hezekiah. 323 

ferring, both collections, both that into which the pro- 
verbs were so transferred, and the proverbs themselves 
which were transferred, were Solomon's. There remain 
then only the two last chapters, inscribed severally, " the 
words of Agur " and " the words of king Lemuel/' (obvi- 
ously a symbolical name 6 ,) which can have been admitted 
into the book later than Hezekiah. Both are entitled by 
names, claiming for them Divine inspiration 6 , although 
we have no data as to the authors. 

It is mostly admitted now by the revolutionary school, 
that the book of Job is any how earlier than the Proverbs, 
in which Solomon uses some, although but little, of its 
language and idioms 7 . The adoption of its language by 



xxxi. 1. WID^? Ib. 4. " unto God," i. e. devoted to God, after the ana- 
logy of !?>$, Num. iii. 24. The idea, that Lemuel is said to be " king of Mas- 
sah," is, in Germany, probably now confined to Hitzig. The imaginary king- 
dom was founded on the mention of Massa among the sons of Ishmael, Gen. 
xxv. 14. 1 Chr. i. 30. The stress, laid upon the name Itliiel, "God is," "God 
is," would incline one to think that it too might be symbolical, in contradic- 
tion to some school of unbelief, against which the beginning of the chapter 
v. 2-6. is directed. With this the other name, Veal, "I am enabled," (^|N, 
other copies Vp$ for S:BX) would, though not obviously, agree. But even then, 
if iN too could (like rhtip Eccl. i. 1.) be a symbolical name for Solomon, (" col- 
lector," as St. Jerome's teacher and Judah ben Karish explained it,) it would 
still be a degree of symbolism beyond what one would expect, that the son 
of Yakeh, which looks like a real genealogy, should be symbolic too. 

6 NjpD xxxi. 31. K'^EB and Dfcii xxx. 1. 

"> Some few of the instances given by Keil (Hav. Einl. iii. p. 354.) seem to 
me satisfactory. Job xv. 7. $toi rfty^i ^ Prov. viii. 25. '^Vin.J.V. Jobxxi. 17. 

W Q WT3 !Tf 3 Prov.xm.9.?i5n:nWTT3ixxiv.20.^:DW'iT}. In Jobxxviii. 18. 
Prov. viii. 16. the onlyresemblanceis the setting the valueofwisdomaboveo''^ ; 
and this the Kethib in Prov. writes 0*39. In Job v. 17. DIXD& (?S *$ ip, Prov. 
iii. 11. DNDfl *?$ ^ m,T t&D, the resemblance is in very simple words. Of single 
words, in common to them only, n'faaijg " guidances," (of God, Job xxxvii. 12.) 
(written m^aijn) Prov. i. S.xi. 14. xx. IS.xxiv. 6. in a good sense, xii. 5. in a 
bad sense: T, "destruction," Job xxx. 24. xxxi. 29. Prov. xxiv. 22.(Arab.:) n^a 
"solid wisdom," Job v. 12. vi. 13. xi. 6. xii. 16. xxvi. 3. xxx. 22. Prov. ii. 7. 
iii. 21. viii. 14. xviii. 1. (else in Mic. vi. 9. Is. xxviii. 29. only :) jtajK "Abaddon," 
Kri. (rn3K Keth.) "place ofdestruction/'Jobxxvi. G.xxviii. 22. xxxi. 12. Prov. 
xv. 11. xxvii. 20, also Ps. xxxviii. 12, and still more the thought, Job xxvi. 6, 
Prov. xv. 11, are characteristic. Less so, are na3 tejiz "are crushed in the gate," 
Jobv.4. 1J!3 }jj %yp "?S " crush not the poor in the gate," Prov. xxii. 22. Of 
the rest, the use of the form chy, once in Proverbs, vii. 18. twice in Job, 
whereas the Proverbs have also l^once, and fiy twice, seems to me not cha- 

Y2 



324. Job quoted from early times. ' 

David 1 , Solomon, Amos 2 , Isaiah 3 , Jeremiah 4 , attests 
that it was received as a sacred book. Each case is slight 
in itself; together, they shew that the book was quoted 
from early times. 

The antiquity of the Canticles is conceded by those who, 
without ground, question that it is Solomon's. No one 
had any interest to question the age of the Lamentations 
of Jeremiah. Only one or two B raised an unheeded doubt, 

racteristic ; nor n$5 "foolish" "one easily misled," Job v. 2. but probably, "en- 
ticing," i. q. Piel, Prov. xx. 19 ; nor )3, Job xxxiii. 7.(LXXKim.i. q.iaas^VijN 
for i/Vij, oth. " weight," from tps, "bowed,") comp. fps, with hy, "impelled," 
Prov. xvi. 26 ; nor nyf" drink," i. e. " iniquitylikewater," Job xv. 16. " scorn- 
ing like water," Ib. xxxiy. 7.; in which two places the idea is of eagerness, 
whereas " drinking damage," Prov. xxvi. 6, is against one's will. Of those 
quoted by others, Prov. i. 7. r\tf} nwi " fifcrv, Job xxviii. 28. noaij K^ ^1$ nisi:, 
there is, in the words, not more than unavoidable resemblance. So' again in 
Job xxii. 29. and Prov. xvi. 18. xviil. 12. xxix. 23. In Job xiii. 5,the wisdom of 
silence is real, in Prov. xvii. 28, only apparent ; the thought that the perfection 
.of God is higher than heaven, deeper than hell, ^iwa njpos/, Job xi. 8, has no 
bearing on Prov. ix. 18, " her guests are in the depths of hell ; " Vim? 'JJOJJ3. Of 
like words for " calamity" Job vi. 2. xxx. 13. has a;o Keth. Prov. xix. 13, njrr. 

1 Ps. xxxix. 14. has different reminiscences of Job's language; 'leoyB'n, Job 
vii. 19. '$0 nyjfi} tih nsj ; ^X.DTB? TyV?Kl> Job x. 20, 1. 01,93 tsjja nj^atfj 'ason^; 
5]j?K. Ps. Ixix. 33. WD^; njs> isri resembles in thought, partly in word, Job 
xxii. 19. siDfc 1 :] O'pis wq;. Ps. ciii. 16. toipl? nty tfy?! K 4 ?] is identical with Job 
vii. 10. Ps. Iviii. 9. tfc# nij Vg nN !?$ reminds of Job iii. 16. a'atf 18"} K 4 ? 0^3-^15 ; 
and Ps. ciii. 1,5. has the special comparison of man's brief life with the py, in 
common with Job xiv. 2. } ja fiiU^ }"? Ps. Van ny; j"x? Job. 

2 Am. iv. 13, H$-'fl?.9 ^JZ.^Tii looks like a reminiscence of Job ix. 8, Va HIT 
D; ^y? which is the bolder expression, and Amos has in the same verse the word, 
ns'J!, which else occurs only in the form rip?^, Job x. 22. In y. 8. ^>'D3i no'3 Hay, 
Amos combines the same constellations as Job xxxviii. 31, and in the words 
of Job ix. 9, only omitting y, nn 1 ?} Vp? wy rib'y. Keil in Hav. iii. 353. 

3 Bh;i mnj 1 Is. xxx. 5. is verbatim from Job xiv. 11. p,N T^Vr] !?D^ hj Is. 
xxxviii; 4. seems to be from Job xv. 35. J1K T^;i ^Jjj trej, Keil Ib. 

4 The likeness in Jeremiah seems to me to lie chiefly in the woe on the day 
of Ms birth, Jer. xx. 14-18. from Job iii. Of other places quoted, in Jer. xx. 
7, 8. Job xii. 4. the specific likeness is only in the p\ri$ '(i';n Jer. n;iw ph'p Job. 
Jer. xlix. 19. and Job ix. 19. have 'iTj;i V?; Lam. ii. 16, and Job xvi. 9, 10, 
xxvii. 23, have no characteristic expression in common ; Lam. iii. 14, and Job 
xxx. 9, both say that the speaker is Dpr:3 ; Lam. iii. 7, 9, and Job xix. 7, 8, 
have only the word nia in common, '1^3 ria, n'3 ^ 733 Lam. 113 'i^x Job, and 
the unheard cry ; Lam. iii. 15. and- Job ix. 18. have an idiom almost identical, 
nn'TDi? ffi3lp! Job, Di'mw vyslpti Lam. . , . 

5 August!, (Einl.) Conz, (in Bengel's Archiv. B. iv.) Kalkar (Lam.p.57sqq.) 
and Thenius, (Comm. p. 120.) chiefly on the ground that it is improbable, that 



Arguments for lateness of Ecclesiastes invalid. 325 

to vindicate the sovereign power of criticism to call every 
thing sacred into question. 

The basis then of the third division of the Canon was 
beyond question laid before the Captivity, Job, the Pro- 
verbs, except, at most, the last two chapters, the larger 
portion of the Psalms ; the Canticles ; and probably the 
Lamentations. Ruth occupied originally its place as the 
sequel of the Judges, and was removed here, only on ac- 
count of its festival use, together with the four other Me- 
gilloth. Ecclesiastes alone is questioned. 

Ecclesiastes would probably never have been question- 
ed, but that, on the one hand, it contained so clearly the 
doctrine of a future judgment and retribution according 
to our works ; on the other hand, people gained a plea 
for the result which they wished, by ignoring the simple 
fact, that language must be adapted to its subject. Most 
of the words, selected to prove its late date, are simply 
abstract words, formed naturally from ordinary Hebrew 
roots 6 . No one word has been found to characterise an 
age later than Solomon's. 

"a poet should write five times on the same subject." Stahelin accounted 
"the question as of no great moment, since they any how belonged to the time 
of Jeremiah, and confessedly had his language." Einl. p. 285. 

6 Several of Gesenius' list of words, which were to prove the late date of Ec- 
clesiastes, were such abstract words, ending in fl, f r , m, Gesch. d. Hebr. Sprache, 
p. 36, a work written, if any ever was, in support of preconceived opinions, 
only, in his case, anti-doctrinal. 

The invalidity of such proof was, at last, observed by Herzfeld, who, in 1838; 
swept away most of the rubbish which had hitherto been relied upon. (Kohe- 
leth, p. 12-22.) He, however, had the same anti-doctrinal prejudice, that the Bi- 
ble was indebted to Magianism for the belief in the life to come. (Gesch. Isr. 
ii. 305.) And so, on that ground, it was to be written after the captivity. (Ib. 
ii. 66.) He admits that, " the Chaldaisms in it would not require that it should 
be brought lower than the time of the Chaldee invasions ; only (he adds) the 
stage at which the doctrine of immortality appears in it, and its 11 or 15 mo- 
dern Hebrew expressions speak for its having been composed, at least a cen- 
tury after the Captivity." (Ib. 67.) Five only of the words accumulated by his 
predecessors, as marks of modern Hebrew, passed muster with bun. 1) The in- 
terjection % "woe," iv. 10. x. 16. an onomapoeticum, which must have been 
very old in the language, since the word ays (of some shrill-voiced bird, in Lev. 
and Deut.) is formed from it. Both it and ^M lived on in Talmudic. 2) Granting 
that 0, for lyg, is Phoenician and old, the conjunction ty viii. 17. is to be mo- 



326: Invalid arguments from language or history, 

The Canon then was almost completed before the re- 
turn from the captivity. Of the books of the former pro- 

dern. But ty too is Phoenician. See Ges. Thes. p. 1346. and my Introd. to 
Jonah, p. 250. 3) )?:p is to be modern, "because it only occurs besides in Esth. 
iv. 16 ; " and 4) iVij, vi. 6, " because it only occurs besides in Esth. vii. 4, and 
the coalition of two conjunctions points to a late time. Ew. Kr. Gr. 632 n. 7." 
It is utterly unlikely that iVi* should be a compound of DN and 6 ; 1. because they 
are incompatible conjunctions ; 2. because &$ (for Vijt) is a simple conjunction in 
Ch. Syr. Sam. And very probably l^N in Hebrew is the same conjunction, only 
pointed wrong. Both iSs and )??. are rare conjunctions ; but there is no prin- 
ciple on which ]p:ji should be thought to be late, being formed in the same way 
as J?V, }3-V$!, p-'iqfc. It has a meaning, which there was not often occasion to 
express in the simple construction of Hebrew, "it being thus," In Esther both 
words occur in conversation. 5) "JHDj occurring x. 20. and else only in Daniel 
and Chronicles, instead of the old njri or nj^cp." But 5/39, Eccl. x. 20, is not 
" knowledge," but " the place of knowledge," " conscience." It is the word 
by which (as Gesenius remarks) the Peshito renders trvvfiSriffis, 2 Cor. v. 11. 
Neither njft, "knowledge," nor n^qo, "device, purpose," would have expres- 
sed the idea. 6) "lOV, as a particle of comparison, whereas, earlier, the com- 
parison had been expressed by the syntax only." It is clear from the cases in 
which -inv occurs, that it is no mere particle of comparison. "Wisdom is good 
with (i. e. as) an inheritance ; and better (lOV)) to them that see the sun." 
(vii. 11.) "And more than these," nang ioV], Eccl. xii. 12. n;r$ .itf " over and 
above that." 

The expressions which Herzfeld himself adds are of no more account ; 1) 
^> TDJ; " stand for," (ii. 19.) is a genuine Hebrew use of h. 2) Msfo KT;, (instead 
of '^D,) iii. 14. viii. 12, 13. recurs, he says, in 1 Sam.xviii. 12 ; which is an odd 
argument for its lateness. Probably Solomon used the word, thinking of the 
presence of God. 3) nfiQ, city, lit. "place of jurisdiction," and hence used alike 
of cities and provinces ; of which Solomon, ruling to the Euphrates, doubtless 
had many. (See further NoteB at the end.) 4) He allows that the root nab is 
not modern, since, in Ps. Ixviii. 7, thereis n'n^band in Prov. xxxi.l9.i l ns> < ?,and 
so, since abstracts are so much used in Eccl., ]tap:p (Eccl. ii. 21 . iv. 4. v. 1 0.) need 
not be modern ; but YBbrj (equally abstract,) "making to prosper," x. 10. is to 
be modern, because it is part of the verb. (Herzf. Koh. p. 18.) 5) and lastly, 
the use of the personal pronoun with the personal verb, 2K '5qn$. Of course, if 
it is emphatic, it is no mark at all of modernness. Solomon is giving his own 
personal experience, in a matter in which no other had experience so large, of 
the vanity of every thing human, out of God. If any one will examine the 
cases in which }K is added, and those in which it is not, in Ecclesiastes, he will 
see that it has been added, not pleonastically, but on a definite principle. The 
occurrences of eleven such words could not be the real ground of making Eccle- 
siastes one of the latest books in the Canon. 

In regard to the so-called Chaldee, or foreign, words ; 1) ]>8 "ditch," x. 10. 
2) on^ " doings," ix. 1. both air. My. and 3) 133 "formerly," 7 times in Eccl, 
and peculiar to it, occur in Syriac also, 135 in Nasor. too ; 4) oans viii. 11. is a 
foreign word, older than Pehlevi, naturalised in Syriac equally. 5) !3, Eccl. xii. 



to disprove that Solomon wrote Ecclesiastes. 327 

phets, or historical books, the Kings at most had yet to 
be formally added to it. Of the later prophets, there re- 

3. is a Semitic word common to every dialect, Arab. ^Eth. Melit. Syr. Ch. Zab. 
see Ges. 6) )B{ Kaip6s (Eccl. iii. 1.) is also common to Arab. JEth. Melik as 
well as Chald.; the D also remains in Sam., although in the present Syr. and Zab. 
it is pi ; ISID also would not (as Ges. says it would) represent it, for ijto is "ap- 
pointed time," |D|, Eccl. iii. 1, is "fitting time." There remain then only the 
punctuations of NXto vii. 26. KQh viii. 12. ix. 18.; and the interchange of the n 
for the K, in s|iz>; (viii. 1.) KSp (x. 4.) t?^ (x. 5.;) and this, "although, in un- 
questioned Hebrew books, verbs K 1 ? and r6 borrow each others' forms, yet, on 
the ground of the more frequent borrowing." Yet of the five words, in N19 
the R is not " borrowed" but original, as is attested by the Phren. and Arab, 
(see Ges.) It occurs also twice in the Proverbs, xiv. 30. xv. 4. The punc- 
tuation of Ktah and Njto, Herzfeld himself rightly calls " Syriac." (p. 120.) Syria 
was part of Solomon's dominions ; what marvel then in a few Syriac words ? 
Herzfeld himself would not make these Aramaic words (there is not one purely 
Chaldee among them) any test of such extreme lateness of the book, as would 
bear upon the history of the Canon. 

As to history, it is said that " Solomon, whose father had chosen Jerusalem 
for a residence, could not say, i. 16. ii. 7. above every one who was before me 
in Jerusalem." Solomon does not even say, " every king," but Jerusalem was 
an ancient city, and was a royal city at the time of the Exodus, probably in 
that of Abraham. (Gen. xiv. 18.) It strengthens his statement, that in those 
centuries, patriarchal, heathen, and lately Hebrew, none had made such trial 
as himself, and he too had failed. "Nor could he recommend (viii. 5,6.) to 
wait circumspectly the opportunity for rebellion against a tyrant." Solomon 
does not recommend it, but submission, (viii. 1-5.) " Judgment," (B^p,) 5. 6. 
is not man's but God's. " Nor could he give a description of princely glut- 
tons." (x. 16, 17.) He gives no such description ; why should not God move 
Mm, as much as Isaiah, to speak of the woe of princely petulance and intem- 
perance, and the blessedness of their nobility and temperance? Well had it 
been for Rehoboam, had he followed the warning against petulance. "Nor was 
the people in his time so unhappy as is presupposed in iv. 1. v. 7." Solomon is 
speaking of individual cases, and doubtless in such large rule, ill held together, 
there were cases of oppression. The next argument Herzfeld answers him- 
self. " The complaints against unjust judges, iii. 17, violence, iv. 1. v. 7. [8 
Eng. ,] unworthy filling of posts of honor, x. 5-7, have often been urged against 
a royal authorship ; contrariwise, it might be said, that all this does not ap- 
pear unsuited to a regent, who has taken the point of view of a jjppular teacher ; 
yet, taken together with the other arguments against Solomon's authorship, it 
has some weight." He wrote the book, not as a royal teacher, but as a royal 
penitent, and in him it would be unnatural not to refer to the past misgo- 
vernment. Lastly, comes the real ground ; " Further, the assumption of the 
return of the soul to God hereafter, which is questioned iii. 21, yet popular 
enough to be spoken of in writing for the people, and which is even victorious, 
xii. 7, cannot be ascribed to Solomon, since after him no trace of it re-appears 
until after the captivity." (!) On this subject see Lect. viii. 



328 Boo k of Esther written by a contemporary ; 

mained, perhaps, the formal reception of Ezekiel; the 
three last prophets only had not yet been sent 1 . Of the 
hagiographa, there remained the collection of some later 
Psalms ; some, in the last book of the Psalms, were not yet 
written; Daniel perhaps was then formally added; the 
historical books of Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, the Chroni- 
cles, alone were as yet unwritten. 

In no one of these books is there any thing, which re- 
quires a date, later than that which Josephus probably 
meant to fix, the date of Malachi and of the second visit 
of Nehemiah. 

The book of Esther marks itself to have been written 
by a contemporary. With this agrees the very accurate 
yet simple description of Persian customs, entering na- 
turally into minute details 2 ; its exact yet incidental agree- 
ment with the chronology of the reign of Ahasuerus, 
(in Greek, Xerxes 8 ;) the touching traits of her relation to 
her uncle Mordecai. The difficulties alleged are but illus- 
trations of its accuracy. Ending, as it does, with the ele- 

1 On Jonah see the Introduction to Jonah, p. 247 sqq ; on Obadiah, the In- 
troduction, p. 227 sqq. Those whorend off from Isaiah such chapters as they 
see good, still admit them to have been written and received before the return 
from the captivity. 

2 Heeren, looking upon it, (as the way then was in Germany,) as a fictitious 
narrative, yet allowed that it was "a faithful picture of the manners of the Per- 
sian Court." (i. 1. p. 132.) " The interior of the Harem is pictured to us most 
exactly in the history of Esther." (Ib. 466.) Baumgarten, de fide libri Esther, 
pointed out in detail the agreement with Persian customs ; then Hiivernick, 
Einl. 192, " on the historical character of the book Esther," p. 338-357 ; so 
that even Stahelin accepts the history, '51. 

3 Achashverosh (Esth. i. 1, &c) is formed from the Persian Kh.sh.w.e.r.sh.e. 
(see Grotefend in Ges. p. 75,) onlyby the addition of vowels, which should make 
it pronounceable in Hebrew. " That Ahasuerus is Xerxes remains the most 
probable opinion, and will be the more confirmed, when we compare with it 
the old Persian form." Lassen, D. Altpers. Keilschr. p. 33 sqq. Rodiger (App. 
p. 68.) gives it KH.SHa.Y.A.R.SH.A. from Lassen, p. 165. with which Sir 
H. Rawlinson agrees, (in Rawl. Her. iv. p. 264.) The feast given in the 3rd 
year (Esth. i. 3.) agrees with the special assembly of the noblest Persians," 
(Her. vii. 8.) which followed on the subdual of Egypt, which was in his second; 
(Ib. vii. 7.) but Esther did not become Queen till the close of his 7th year ; 
(Esth. ii. 16.) when the king returned to Susa, after the battle of Platjea. 
(Her. ix. 107, 8.) 



the Chronicles prior to book of Ezra 8f by its author. 329 

vation of Mordecai 4 , and appealing for further accounts 
to the Chronicles of Media and Persia 5 > it was very pro- 
bably written by Mordecai himself; and it would be an 
unmarked coincidence, that the historical books of the 
times in or after the captivity, the historical parts of Da- 
niel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, were written by those con- 
cerned in them. The book of Esther does not imply that 
it was written by Mordecai, but it does that it was writ- 
ten very shortly after the events 6 . 

The books of Chronicles are marked to have been writ- 
ten prior to the book of Ezra by their close. Ezra, by re- 
peating, at the beginning of his book, the two verses with 
which he had closed the books of Chronicles, identifies 
the two works. He breaks off the Chronicles in the mid- 
dle of the decree of Cyrus, yet so as to give a perfect 
sense ; and begins the book which bears his name, with 
those two verses, finishing the decree of Cyrus, so far as 
relates to his then object, the permission to return. A 
similarity of style and object has been observed between 
the books; so that believing and unbelieving critics 7 
have been agreed, that they were written by the same 
hand. The only question, of late, has been, whether Ezra 
is the author of both, or whether both have been com- 
piled by a later hand 8 . 

4 Esth.x.3. s Ib.2. 

6 Ib. ix. 30-32. "And he (Mordecai) sent the letters unto all the Jews in the 
127 Provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, worrf* of peace and truth, to con- 
firm these days of Purim in their tunes, as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the 
Queen confirmed them, and as they had confirmed them for themselves and 
for their seed, the matters of the fastings and of their cry, and the word of Es- 
ther confirmed these matters of Purim ; and it was written in the book." 
The expression, " and it was written in the book," implies that it was a conse- 
quence, which followed upon what preceded, as we should say, " so it was writ- 
ten, &c ; and the book can, I think, be no other than this our book of Esther. 

1 Zunz, (Gottesd. Vortr. p. 21-24) Ewald, (Gesch. Isr. i. 252-3.) and still 
more Stahelin, (Einl. 45.) are at pains to shew the identity of the authors 
of the books of Ezra and the Chronicles. Herzfeld (Gesch. Isr. Excurs 2. 
p. 302.) says, " 1 agree perfectly with the result of Zunz, even although not with 
all his proofs." 

8 " It is indeed commonly accepted, that at least Ezra vii. 27 ix. comes 
from Ezra himself; but the too close relationship of this section with the pre- 



330 One genealogy alleged to prove the Chronicles later 

The only plea, alleged for assigning a later date to the 
books of Chronicles, has been obtained by making the 
genealogy, at the close of the 3rd chapter of the first 
book \ consecutive, which any one can see, even from a 
translation, that it is not. In this way, six generations 
were obtained after Zerubbabel, and the date was carried 
down to the end of the Persian Empire in the time of 
Alexander. Yet there is a manifest break at the 2nd 
generation after Zerubbabel ; '' 2 And the sons of Hana- 
niah, Pelatiah and lesaiah." There his genealogy closes. 
What follows, "the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, 
the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shechaniah," obvious- 
ly stands in no relation to what went before, since no 
parent of any of those named, Rephaiah, Arnan, Obadiah, 
or Shechaniah, had been mentioned. The phrase, "the 
sons of Shechaniah," and the like, throughout this gene- 
alogy 1 , introduces the next link of the genealogy down- 
wards. These families stand in no connection with that 
of Zerubbabel. The want of relation to the preceding, 
and of any grammatical connection with it, gives to the 
section the appearance of an ancient gloss 3 . Yet even 

ceding 1 [part of 'Ezra] to my mind speaks against it, unless indeed one were to 
accept, that all, and so the Chronicles too, comes from Ezra, which, on account 
of the genealogy, 1 Chron. iii. 18 sqq. is not possible." Stiihelin, p. 161. Even 
Zunz, (p. 28.) Herzfeld, (p. 316.) Ewald, (i. 258.) grant that Ezr. vii. 27, ix. 
fin. is Ezra's, (except that Herzfeld deducts viii. 35, 6). Zunz adds iv. 1-6. x. 
18-44. Herzfeld says, " whether x. 18 44. was in Ezra's document, or was ap- 
pended from some other source, can naturally not be made out." (p. 306.) They 
all agree that the rest is by the writer of the Chronicles. 
1 1 Chr. iii. 21-24. 2 v. 21. 

3 This was the opinion not only of the older critical school, Vitringa, Hei- 
degger, Carpzov, but even of Le Clerc, I. D. Michaelis, (Bibl. Or. T. xx. p. 28.) 
and Eichhorn. (Einl. iii. 596. ed. 4. quoted by Keil, Apol. Vers. p. 45.) Herz- 
feld too says, "A further descent [than Pelatiah and leshaia] is evidently not 
given there ; the ' sons ' of Rephaia, of Arnan, Obadiah, and Shechaniah, are 
doubtless families descended from David, whose descent the writer of the Chro- 
nicles either could not or would not specify, and which he therefore only re- 
counts, parallel with one another." (Gesch. Isr. Excurs 8. p.378,9.) DeWette 
too who, (ed. 2.) in 1822, said positively, " the genealogy of Serubabel is 
(1 Chr. iii. 19-24.) carried down to the tune of- Alexander," ( 189.) modified the 
statement. " In the (it must be confessed) confused passage, 1 Chr. iii. 19-24. 
the genealogy of the house of David is earned down to the 2nd generation after 



than Ezra ; plain words of the text do not prove it. 331 

if it be part of the book, the six generations, required to 
bring- down the date of the books of Chronicles, are only 
obtained by introducing into the text what is not there, 
viz. that Shechaniah, whose sons are mentioned, was 
himself the son of Hananiah 4 < Ezra speaks of the "sons 
of Shechaniah 5 ," as a well-known family, at the time of 
the return from the captivity, without mentioning any 
genealogy of their's. Probably they were too well known 

Serubabel, and doubtless yet further;" he acknowledges, "the passage is 
commonly looked upon as a later addition," ed. 7. 1852. Ewald (Gesch. Isr. 
i. 229. ed. 2.) says, that the " order is difficult to be recognised," but gives it, 
without explanation, as positively as if there were no difficulty ; " the some- 
what-difficult-to-be-recognised consecutive order is, 1 Zerubabel, 2 Chananiah, 
3 Shechaniah, &c," overleaping the difficulty. Bleek says, equally without at- 
tempting any explanation, " The passage is not quite clear ; the text too is 
not certain, since the LXX differs from the Hebrew text. Yet probably the 
last is in the main the original. There too, according to the most probable in- 
terpretation, it is contained that, after Serubabel, 6 generations of his descend- 
ants are cited." (Einl. p. 395.) Stiihelm only appeals to 1 Chr. ii. 42. " The 
.sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were, Mesha, his first-born, which was 
the father of Ziph, and the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron." But this 
passage is itself obscure ; for Mareshah is not before mentioned among the sons 
of " Caleb, brother of Jerahmeel," ii. 18-24, where his sons by three, if not four, 
wives are mentioned and even a posthumous child, v. 24. In an early forefa- 
ther like Caleb, the grandfather of Caleb the spy, it is natural to class a whole 
family of descendants in one. A Scotchman might say of a distant forefather, 
that he was "the father of the Campbells, or the Stewarts," &c. but it would 
not be said, in any near interval, when families had not had time to ramify. 
Moreover in 1 Chr. ii. 43, the words stand connected, " The sons of Caleb the 
brother of Jerahmeel were Mesha his first born; and the sons of Mareshah." 
The very way of speaking implies a tradition, that " the sons of Mareshah " 
were known traditionally to be descended from this Caleb, but that the links 
were lost. In Hi. 21. "the sons of Rephaiah, &c." are not connected. They 
stand quite distinct. On the same ground then, that we believe " the sons of 
.Mareshah" to have been descendants of that Caleb, viz. that they stand con- 
nected with one who is stated to have been his descendant, we believe that the 
sons of Rephaiah, &c. were not descendants of Hananiah, because it is not ex- 
pressed that they are, in the way in which the author of the Chronicles, in 
the like case, expressed it. 

4 If 21-24 is part of the text, it must be pointed ; "And the sons of Hana- 
niah, Pelatiah and lesaiah. The sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons 
of Obadiah, the sons of Shechaniah. And the sons of Shechaniah, Shemaiah, 
&c." In this way, although the statement is rather abrupt, they would stand 
as Davidic families, of which the writer, in any case, gives the succession of the 
last only. 5 viii. 3. 



332 -The Chronicles refer to nothing later than Ezra. 

to need it. He mentions Hattush apparently as one " l of 
the sons of Shechaniah." If, (as seems probable,) he is 
the same person as Hattush in the Chronicles, he would 
be at least a grandson of Shechaniah 3 , but could not be 
the grandson's grandson of Zerubbabel, who returned 79 
years before. If he be the same Hattush, then the ge- 
nerations in the Chronicles go down to the great nephew 
of one who returned with Ezra 3 ; which, as nothing is 
said of the age of Hattush at his return, involves no later 
date than Ezra may have seen. This then, which is ad- 
mitted to be the only ground for attributing to the Chro- 
nicles a date, later than Ezra 4 , coincides with the ac- 
count given by Ezra. 

There being no ground, then, why the books of Chro- 
nicles should be later than Ezra, and the two books be- 
ing confessedly by the same hand, the only remaining 

1 In the text it is divided, "Of the sons of Phinehas, Gershom ; of the sons 
of Ithamar, Daniel : of the sons of David, Hattush, Of the sons of Shecha- 
niah, of the sons of Pharosh, Zechariah." But in Ezr. ii. 2. "the sons of Pha- 
rosh " are mentioned as a separate family, without being subordinated to "the 
sons of Shechaniah ; " and here too " the sons of Shechaniah" are mentioned 
apart after an interval. It seems then the simplest way, to join it thus ; "of the 
sons of David, Hattush, of the sons of Shechaniah : of the sons of Pharosh, 
Zechariah." 2 Hattush was one of the sons of Shemaiah, 

who was of the sons of Shechaniah, 1 Chr. iii. 21, 22. 

3 The genealogy is continued, not hi the line of Hattush but in that of his 
brother Neariah, of whose eldest son Elioenai, 7 sons are mentioned, 22-24. 

4 " On the age of the Chronicles the genealogy, 1 Chr. iii. 18. can alone give 
any result." Stahelin, 43. p. 356. Bleek only adds 1) The place which it oc- 
cupies in the Canon, (according to which, he must allow that Daniel was writ- 
ten before Ezra, which would be to give up the whole object of this bringing 
down of the Canon ;) and 2) the coin Darics, 1 Chr. xxix. 7. Darics are men- 
tioned by Ezra (viii. 27.) in the reign of Artaxerxes, grandson of Darius Hys- 
taspes. If then they were named from this Darius, they would furnish no ar- 
gument as to the date of the Chronicles ; hot to dwell on the Greek tradition 
that they were named from some earlier Darius, (see ab. p. 124.) or the con- 
jecture that they may have been named directly from dara, "king." Scott and 
Lidd. v. Sopeucds. This argument has been retorted, that, after the tunes of 
Alexander, Greek, not Persian, money would become the coin of Palestine, as 
being a Greek appanage. Davidson would have it, that " Shemaiah son of 
Shechaniah," Neh. iii. 29. is the same as the Shemaiah in the Chronicles ; 
Herzfeld answers the objection, that, being the keeper of the East gate, (Ib.) 
he was (he supposed) a Levite. Ib. .. 



The book of Ezra is one whole. ? 333 

question is, whether there be any ground to think, that 
the book of Ezra is later than the time of Ezra. The 
use of the first person in a portion of it has made all but 
the extremest scepticism allow that a portion is from his 
hand 5 . The likeness of all the Hebrew parts of it has 
also been admitted. But Ezra's thanksgiving at the be- 
ginning of this admitted portion, that 6 God hath put it 
into the the king's heart to beautify the house of the Lord 
which is in Jerusalem, and hath extended mercy unto me 
before the king, is connected with the decree before it 7 ; 
and the insertion of that decree involves such a preface 
as that prefixed to it 8 ; and that preface, beginning, " 9 And 
after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Per- 
sia," involves a previous history, and that, of events prior 
to the reign of Artaxerxes, which is just what the previ- 
ous chapters contain. But those chapters are evidently, 
as they stand, one whole ; i. e. the whole is one history of 
the rebuilding the temple, from the first permission of 
Cyrus to rebuild it until its dedication and the celebra- 
tion of the first passover afterwards. It is one progres- 
sive history. First, there is the permission of Cyrus to 
return 10 , and the preparation of the Jews n ; then his re- 
storation of the vessels of the temple 12 , their amount 13 , 
and the number of those who returned u ; the setting up 
the brazen altar, and restoration of sacrifice 15 ; the collec- 
tion of materials for the temple 16 ; the laying the founda- 
tion of the temple, with that natural and touching mixture 
of the joy of the young and the weeping of the old who re- 
membered its former glories 17 ; the cause of the opposition 
to its rebuilding 18 , and the means employed to hinder it 
under Cyrus 19 , Ahasuerus 20 , [i.e. Cambyses,] Artaxer- 
xes, [i.e.Pseudo-Smerdis 21 ;] the renewed efforts to rebuild 

5 See p. 329, 30. note 8. 6 vii. 27. 7 vii. 11-26. Even Herzfeld admits 
this to be genuine. 8 Ib. 1-10. 9 Ib. 1. 10 i. 1-4. u i.5,6. 

12 i. 7, 8. i 3 i.9-11. " ii. 13 in. 1-6. 1G Ib.7. V Ib.8-13. 
. is i v> 1.4. M iy.5. 20 i v . 6. 21 iy. j, 2 3. see ab. p. 166,7. 

.Keil illustrates this adoption of a 2nd more briliant name by the like act of Ochus, 
.who on his accession took the name of Darius (Nothus ;) of Arsaces, who took 
;that of Artaxerxes (Mnemon ;) of another Ochus, who took that of Artaxerxes 



334 Chaldee in Ezra written by a contemporary. 

it under the new dynasty of Darius x ; the fresh attempt to- 
hinder it and the baffling of the attempt 2 ; the favor of 
Darius 3 ; the completion of the temple 4 , its dedication 5 , 
and the first passover held in it 6 . 

It has been thought most probable that the Chaldee 
portion,which embodies the letters addressed to the kings 
of Persia and their rescripts previous to the return of 
Ezra, were written by a contemporary and inserted by 
Ezra as a whole. This thread of history does not,in all, ex- 
ceed 20 verses, the rest of these chapters being taken up 
with the original documents. It seems to me, too, proba- 
ble, that this was a distinct whole,part of a larger accoimt 7 
which Ezra embodied in his book, beginning his extract 
with a few verses just preceding the first document, and 
closing, a few verses after the last. For the first person is 
used in this section, not as to any important event, in 
which it might be thought that Ezra associated himself 
with them, but in a simple statement that those who were 
concerned in the building gave their names to the gover- 
nor and his companions who demanded them. It was a 
strictly personal act. 8 Then accordingly we said to them., 

(Diod. xv. 39;) and of the last Persian king, Codomannus, who took that of 
Darius ; (Justin,x.3.)asalso of Cyrus himself, whose name, before his accession, 
was Agradates. (Strabo, xv. 3. 6. p. 729. Cas.) Pott says, " The name Arta- 
xerxes was, we may safely say, a mere title, and when Bessus, ' taking the 
royal apparel, commanded that he should be called Artaxerxes,' (Curt. vi. 6.) he 
therewith declared himself the ' great king of kings,' which lies in the word." 
Etym. Forsch. i. p. Ixiii sqq. in Ha'r. Einl. ii. p. 294. 

1 iv.24-v.2. 2 v. 3-17. 3 vi. 1-13. Ib.14,15. 

5 Ib. 16-18. 6 Ib. 19-23. 1 By itself, the beginning of the 

Chaldee, (" Rehum the Chancellor, &c." iv. 8.)might have been a sort of docket 
on the letter. Even then one should not have expected it to stand, "wrote 
a letter." But there follows further (iv. 9.) "Then Rehum, &c," which implies 
that it is a sequel of a preceding history : it might have joined on to iv. 6, but 
not, I think, with iv. 7. 

8 v. 4. Gesen. (Thes. p. 652.) notices that NDJ? in vi. 13. manifestly refers to 
the past, [" according to that which Darius the king sent, accordingly, NOW, 
they did perfectly,"] and joins this instance with it. Our translators, follow- 
ing the usual meaning of NDJS, "so to speak," (for 1DNJ3, TD'M,) "after this man- 
ner," put that as a question into the mouth of the Jews, which was in fact a 
question to them, v. 10. " Then said we unto them after this manner, What 
are the names, &c ? " instead of, " Then said we unto them, what the names 



Ezra inserted the Chaldee document. 335 

what were the names of the men who build this building. 
But since this was 63 years before Ezra's return 9 , and 
since Ezra was engaged in the work of restoration with 
Nehemiah whose visit was 13 years later 10 , it is not likely, 
though possible, that dying, as he did, an old man 11 , he 
should have been present at that early time. The con- 
trary too is implied, in that he mentions himself for the 
first time in the 7th year of Artarxerxes. 

Ezra, however, it has been observed, had the Chaldee 
document before him, as appears from his adopting into 
his Hebrew three remarkable Persian words 12 , which are 
found exactly in this form, only in his Hebrew. 

It has been attempted to make out the Hebrew of Ez- 
ra to have been later than Ezra, partly by falsifying the 
history in the Chaldee, and then asserting truly that Ez- 
ra must have known such history to be false ; partly on 
the old childish grounds, that Ezra writes in the third 
person as well as the first, and praises himself, and also 
that he calls the King of Persia, King of Assyria. 

1) They assume that Artachshasht, mentioned before 

were, &c." Herzfeld admits that it may be taken as in the text, only saying 
" that v. 4. would thus contain an oblique construction which would be very 
unusual even in' later Hebrew." Geseh. Isr. Excurs 2. p. 304. He observes 
also, that it is not the answer to the preceding question. Ib. But it stands hi 
connection with what follows, that God gave them courage to persevere until 
the answer came from Darius. They gave their names, and made themselves 
responsible for their act. The answer to the former question is given in the 
letter to Darius, v. 11-16. Unless this verse contains the statement that the 
Jews did answer the question, which the governors state that they did put, 
(v. 1 0.) there would be no such statement at all. According to the present text, 
then, the verse does contain an additional fact, but bears witness that the 
Chaldee statement was written by a contemporary. Herzfeld, by altering the 
text WON into pDN, would get rid of the evidence, but introduce tautology. It 
is contrary of course to all criticism to have recourse to conjectural emenda- 
tion, when the text gives a good sense. 

9 2nd year of Darius, B.C. 520 ; 7th of Artarxerxes, B.C. 457. 

10 20thofArtaxerxes,Neh. ii. 1. u Jos. Ant. xi. 5. 5. A very late Jewish 
tradition supposed him to have lived to 120. (Benj. Tud. Itin. p. 85.) 

p T i$j, " Epistle," Ezr. iv. 7. vii. 1 1. Heb. iv. 18. 23. v. 5. Ch. (In Neh. and 
Esth.'n-p,) fjfis, " transcript " (of letter,) iv. 11. 23. v. 6. Ch. vii. 11. Heb. but 
Esth. iii. 14. iv. 8. (See Rod. App. to Ges.p. 108.) 15)?, "treasurer," i. 8. 
vii. 21. but p?33 Dan. iii. 2, 3. 



336 History in book of Ezra consistent. 

Darius under whom the temple was finished, was Longi- 
manus, that the building hindered by him was that of the 
walls not of the temple, and that the account, which re- 
lated to times after Darius, was placed by the writer, be- 
fore him 1 . 

Yet in Ezra, the names of the sovereigns of Persia 
stand in chronological order, three before Darius 2 ; and, 
both in Chaldee and Hebrew, an Artaxerxes after Dari- 
us 3 . Since then the hindrance of the building by the 
Magian impostor is in keeping with what we know of 
him from the monuments, whereas it was contrary to the 
first principles of Persian belief for its kings to repeal 
their own decrees 4 ; since moreover there is no reason 
whatever to think that Artaxerxes, in the first six years 
of his reign, passed any decree against the Jews, whom 
he favored ever afterwards ; it is mere gratuitous falsi- 
fying of the history to say that the king, called Artaxerxes 
but placed before Darius, is meant by the author to be 
the same whom he placed after him. The enemies of the 
Jews do not indeed speak of the rebuilding of the tem- 
ple, which was what they wished to hinder, but only of 
the wall. But the restoration of the temple involved ul- 
timately the restoration of the city. Angry and rival 
accusers do not confine themselves to facts, when appeal- 
ing to a distant authority. 

2) The praise of Ezra amounts to this, that he gives to 
himself his title in his own book. For it has been ob- 
served 5 , that, since the title, scribe of the law of the God of 
heaven, is twice 6 given to him in the decree of Artaxer- 

1 Herzfeld, Gesch. Isr. Excurs 2. 17. p. 303. The pK3, "then," iv. 24, 
marks that the history belongs, (according to the writer,) to the times before 
Darius. Davidson translates him, ii. 128. 

2 iv. 5-7. 23, 4. <> vi. 14. 15. vii. 1. 7. 

4 See ab. p. 166, 7. Herzfeld too observes (p. 306.) that throughout ch. iv. 
the orthography is KitfytTtnx (or sp) with t>, iv. 7. bis. 8. 11. 23. but through- 
out ch. vii. (of Artaxerxes Longimanus) witho, MjiWijl-rjSi! vii. 12. 21". as it is also 
in Neh. ii. 1. xiii. 6. The difference, though slight, is remarkable for its uni- 
. formity, except that, in the addition to the original, Ezr. vi. 14. .MFnppijjnfca, the 
form with is used of Artax. Longimanus. 

6 Hav.Einl.ii.l.p.281. . vii. 12. 21. . 



" Scribe of the law of God," his official title. 337 

xes, such was his official title. It is added only, that he 
was a ready, fluent, expositor of it. He mentions of him- 
self, what others have observed of him in the books of 
Chronicles, that the law of his God was the great study 
of his life, and that he made progress in it. Perhaps he 
meant, as one of the Psalmists, whose expression he used, 
said before him, that he was a "ready writer 7 " of what 
he was taught by God, ascribing to himself only that he 
was, what he was, the instrument of God. Now, if there 
be any truth in the tradition, that Ezra, in various ways, 
did so much for the preservation of the Canon, it may 
have been of especial moment for those generations, until 
our Lord should set His seal upon the whole 8 , that his 
fitness for the office should be authenticated in the Ca- 
non itself. It is not self-exaltation to speak the simple 
truth. It is not so accounted in St. John?. I suppose 
that, in this day, some of the critics of Ezra would not 
think it much to let it be known that they were good He- 
braists 10 , or understood the prophets by human skill, or 
knew ef them (whether they did or no) more than others 
did before them. All which we hear about "enlightened 
criticism," and the like, if it were true, would mean, in 
Scripture language, that they are "ready spribes" in the 
law of God. 

3) Cyrus, under whom the Jews first returned, had 
made Babylon the royal residence for seven months in the 

7 Ps. xlv. 2. My tongue is the pen o/vnnngto. 
- 8 S.Luke xxiv. 44. 9 See ab. p. 22, 23. 

10 Zunz thinks that he understands the title isb better than the writer of the 
book of Ezra. "The panegyrics of Ezra [yii.] 6, 10, 11. can not only not 
belong to this man, but not even to his time, since (v. 11.) they give an ex- 
planation of the expression ISO, which is over .an4 above incorrect." (p. 23.) 
Apart from inspiration, most of us will think that the writer of the book of Ez- 
ra knew best. Havernick observes that the title, whjjch is given to Ezra by 
Nehemiah also, (viii. 1, 2, 9, 13. xii. 26.) is also, [in Nehemiah's second visit,] 
given to another, Zadok. Neh. xiii. 13. Davidson paraphrases Zunz, " The 
way in which Ezra is spoken of in vv. .6, 10, 11. shews that he himself could 
not have so written, pe is termed 'a ready scribe in the law of Moses;' it 
is said that ,' he had prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord and to do 
it,' and an explanation of .155 is given in v. 11. which is unsuitable to Ezra, 
himself." p. J?9. 

Z 



338 Kings of Persia naturally called kings of Babylon. 

year 1 ; it had been the centre of the captivity; out of its 
temples were the sacred vessels given back to them by 
the command of Cyrus 2 ; it was, probably in the time of 
Ezra, still one province with Assyria 3 ; the kings of Persia 
liked to connect themselves with Perseus 4 , and held him 
to have been an Assyrian 5 . It is then nothing strange 
that the Jews, in appealing to the edict of Cyrus whereby 
he restored them, should have called him king of Baby- 
lon 6 ; or that Nehemiah should so have called Artaxerxes 7 ; 
or that Ezra, speaking of the king of Persia, apart from 
his name 8 , should have said that God 9 had turned the 
heart of the king of Assyria unto them. But for this 
petty controversial spirit, which grasps at any straw, 
people would have seen how these various titles bear up- 
on, and bear out, one another. The Persian rulers of As- 
syria undid towards the Jews what its former rulers had 
done. In the 2nd letter prefixed to the 2nd book of Mac- 
cabees, it is even said, " 10 our fathers were led unto Per- 
sia," and critics 11 have found nothing strange in the ex- 
pression 12 . ' 

1 Xen. Cyrop. viii. 7. 2 Ezr. i. 7. v. 14. 

3 Herod, iii. 92. In vii. 63. the "Chaldseans" are recounted as serving 
" among' the Assyrians," i. e. as subordinate to them. Babylonia and Assyria 
are counted separately in the lists of Darius, (in Rawl. Herod, ii. p. 485.) He- 
rodotus (i. 192.) uses "the Babylonian country," and " the Assyrian country," 
as identical, says, " thus the Assyrian country is in wealth, i of the rest of Asia," 
and speaks of this as far the wealthiest of the Persian Satrapies. Havernick 
(Einl. ii. p. 289.) refers farther to Lassen, D. Altpers. Keilinschr. v. Persepolis, 
p. 67 sqq. 72. in proof of its'eminence. .* Her. vi. 54. vii. 61. 150. Hiiv. 

6 Her. vi. 54. 6 Ezr. v. 13. ? Neh. xiii. 6. 8 Ezra uses "King of 
Persia " after the name ; "Cyrus King of P." i. 1, 2, 8. iii. 7. iv. 3, 5. "Darius 
K. of P." iv. 5, 24. "Artaxerxes K. of P." iv. 7. vi. 14. vii. 1. vi. 22. 

10 2 Mace. i. 19. u Grimm, ad loc. Exeg.Handb. z. d. Apocr. iv. p. 43. 

12 Zunz (p. 24.) adds the argument, " Ezra goes into the chamber of Joha- 
nan, son of Eliashib, (x. 6.) although this high-priest lived long after Nehe- 
miah." (Neh. xii. 22, 23.) Ezra does not say that either was high priest at that 
time. But Joiada the son of Eliakim was high-priest in Nehemiah's 2nd 
visit, (Neh. xiii. 28.) and Johanan, who succeeded him, may well have been 
old enough for Ezra to resort to. Davidson fills up Zunz wrongly, "of the 
high priest Eliashib who lived after Nehemiah." ii. 130. The natural con T 
struction of Neh. xiii. 28, one " of the sons of Joiada, son of Eliashib, the high 
priest," is that Joiada was high-priest then. Any how Eliashib did not "live 



'Nehemidh wrote his own book. 339 

In the book of Nehemiah, Nehemiah himself relates, in 
the first person, in one consecutive vivid narrative, the 
history of the rebuilding of the walls of Jerusalem, from 
the time that God first put the desire into his mind at the 
court of Persia until it was completed and he had made 
over the charge of the city 13 , and ends with his gathering 
the people together 14 . The next portion describes what 
they did, when so gathered 15 . The acts being religious, 
not civil, the prominent part belonged to Ezra. Nehemiah 
joins himself in, with the rest of the congregation, saying 
no longer, "I," but "we 16 ." The llth chapter gave no 
occasion for the first person, being an account of mea- 
sures taken by the people themselves for the re-peopling 
of Jerusalem. In the 12th and 13th Nehemiah had again 
occasion to speak of himself. The act, with which the his- 
tory closes, falls soon after B.C. 414. The whole then of 
the book which admits of it (ch. i-vii. x. 28-39. xii. 27-47. 
xiii.) is written in the 1st person. Where Nehemiah 
acted alone, (ch. i-vii.) he necessarily speaks of himself, 
" I ;" where the first part belonged to another, he classes 
himself with others, "we." (ch. i-vii.) Wherever then the 
first person could be used, it is used j and the parts in 
which it is not used stand closely connected with these; 
as, the sealing of the covenant 17 , (" we make a sure cove- 
nant," in the present,) with the confession of sin and hu- 
miliation before it 18 , and this with the previous festival in 
which, I9 day by day, from the first day unto the last day, 
Ezra read to them in the book of the law of God. So then 
all marks itself as contemporary, except the arrangement 
of the re-peopling of Jerusalem, and the enumeration of 
some towns and villages in which the rest dwelt 20 , and a 
list of priests and Levites 81 . And yet these too are really 

after Nehemiah," since (as Dr. Dav. too states) Nehemiah expelled his grand- 
son ; " a grandson of Eliashib the high priest had become son-in law to San- 
hallat the Horonite, and was expelled by Nehemiah." (Day. ii. 137.) Accord- 
ing to the natural meaning of the text, Nehemiah survived Eliashib. 

13 Neh. i-vii. 4. " Ib. vii. 5. 15 viii-x. 16 ix. 38. (x. 1. Heb.) 

x. 29-39. [30-40. Heb.] V 0^35-0^2 x. 1. Heb. (ix. 38. Eng.) 

18 "And because of all this." Ib. w viii. 18. w xi. 25-36. 21 xii 1-26 

z2 . 



340 Thoughtless criticism founded on the use 

connected. For the re-peopling of Jerusalem was a mea- 
sure which Nehemiah says he had at heart * ; and the 
enumeration of the priests and Levites seems to he men- 
tioned in connection with the dedication of the wall 2 . 
This is more evidence than can be alleged as to most 
hooks, out of Holy Scripture. 

The objections raised to the genuineness of a small 
portion of the hook amount to this, 1) that expressions of 
Nehemiah's personal feelings do not occur, where Ne- 
hemiah had no occasion to speak of himself; 2) that he 
speaks of Almighty God under different titles, The Lord, 
God of heaven, my God, (his own favorite, loving and beau- 
tiful, title,) our God, their God, their Lord, or simply, God, 
according to the varying circumstances, under which he 
spoke. " My God," " our God," in that it expresses the 
relation of the creature to the Creator, is as distinct a 
title of Almighty God, as His Name Jehovah, or Lord, 
or God. A Christian has no title of deeper love than my 
God. This way of counting the names of God, Adonai, 
YHVH, Elohim, El, without any reference to the shades 
of feeling expressed by them, or any modification of those 
names by the mention of our relation to God, is a mere 
disease of the criticism to which it belongs. But the 
statement is, over and above, inaccurate, and a seeming 
contrast only. As imported to us, it would he more ex- 
act, if reversed 3 . It is not, of course, enough to count on 
the fingers, that the one or other name occurs most often 
in this or that part of Nehemiah, unless it could be shewn 
that they had heen so used under exactly the same cir- 
cumstances. But, in fact, the main usage of the book 

1 vii. 4, 5. 2 xii. 27 sqq. 

3 De Wette said, from Kleinert p. 132 ; "The names Jehovah, Adonai, and 
Elohim, are used promiscuously viii. 1, 6, 8, 9 sqq. 14, 16,&c, whereas, except 
i. 5, 11. iv. 8, Elohim is prevalent in Nehemiah, (especially ' God of Heaven' 
i. 4. ii. 4. 20.)" Einl. 197 a p. 263. (Davidson adopts the words as his own, 
omitting the title "the.God of Heaven," ii. 141.) The names being "used pro- 
miscuously " is of. course no real contrast with the one name heing prominent. 
The title Adonai is not used in the chapters, in which it is stated that it is used, 
and is used where it is implied that it-is -not. " Lord," with the personal pro- 
noun, (" their, our JLosd,") is used an .hath. 



of the different Names of God. 341 

is one 4 . The result of a careful examination is, 1) that 
the proper Name of God (YHVH) is nowhere, through- 

4 The following are all the ways in which the name of God is used in Ne- 
hemiah ; 

1) The title, my God, occurs in the phrases, the goodhandofmy God upon 
me, \i. 8. I told them of the hand of my God, which was good upon me, Ib. 
18. (in reference to 8 ;) my God put in my heart, ii. 12. vii. 5 ; the house of 
my God, xiii. 14. Remember to me, my God, v. 19. xiii. 14, 22, 31. Re- 
member to Tobiah, &c. my God, vi. 14. Remember to them, O my God, 
xiii. 29. 

2) He prays, O our God, in what concerns others too, iv. 4. [iii. 36. Heb.] 
as the Levites too pray, " our God, the great and terrible God," ix. 32. Or 
he relates, "we made our prayer unto our God,"iv.9. [3. Heb.]; or speaks to 
others, "our Corf shall fight for us," iv.20. [14. Heb.]; " ought ye not to walk 
in the fear of our God? " v. 9. " did not our God bring all this evil upon us ?" 
xiii. 18. "shall we hearken unto you to transgress against our God ? " Ib. 27. 
Also, in the history of what they pledged themselves in common to do,hespeaks 
in common, " we made ordinances upon us, to charge ourselves for the service 
of the house of our God, for all the work of the house of our God; we cast 
lots to bring it into the house of our God," " that minister in the house of 
our God; " " to the chambers of the house of our God," "unto the house of 
our God; " "we will not forsake the house of our God;" x, 32-4. 36. bis. 37. 
38, 39. [33-34. 37, 38, 39, 40. Heb.] in all which there occurs once only, "the 
altar of the LORD, (YHVH) our God," x. 34. [35. Heb.] ; (the altar of the 
LOUD, [YHVH] being, with the exception of Ps. xliii. 4, the uniform idiom, 
see Ges.Thes. 579.) and once,"the house of the LOUD," (YHVH)x.35.(36.H.) 
which again is the common idiom. The expression, the house of our God, 
recurs xiii. 4. " Our God" he had just said, " turned the curse of Balaam 
into a blessing," xiii. 2. Contrariwise, the house of God occurs in the mes- 
sage of Shemaiah to Nehemiah, vi. 10, and in the contrasted chapters alike, 
viii. 16. xi. 11, 16, 22. xii. 40, 

3) His God, is used, with emphasis, of Solomon, " beloved of bis God ; " 
xiii. 26. and, 

4) Their God, xii. 45. " they kept the ward of titdr God." 

5) Their Lord (D$TTN) occurs iii. 5, " their nobles put not then- necks to the 
work of their Lord; " as does, our Lord, viii. 10, " this day is holy unto our 
Lord," (U'JTN^.) x. 30, [29. Eng.] " the commandments .of the LOKP, our 
Lord." 

6) Tfie God of heaven, is used in the two first chapters only, where the con- 
text relates to the power of God, in relation to those who were not Jews. i. 4, 
" 1 prayed before the God of heaven;" Ib. 5, " and said, I beseech Thee, 
LOKD, (YHVH) God of heaven, the great and terrible God. ii. 4, "I prayed 
to the God of heaven;" ii. 20, " The God of heaven He will prosper us," 
(against Sanballat and the others.) 

7) In a title taken from the Pentateuch, " the great and terrible God," he 
uses the word hm, i. 5. as do the Levites, ix. 32. 

8) Besides this he prays simply, LORD, (nw) i. 11. 



342 Use of the different titles of God 

out Nehemiah, the subject of any sentence; 2) that God is 
addressed by that Name throughout Nehemiah; 3) that 

9) The Lord, ^TK, is used once only, iv. 8. Heb. [14. Eng.] 

There are different phrases in which the name of God, or the Lord, are in 
Hebrew predominantly united ; and these uses of the word God, or Lord, 
should be considered in reference to the idioms. 

YHVH being 1 the Name by which God revealed Himself, "the command- 
ments of the LOUD," x. 30. [29. Eng.] is the received Hebrew phrase ; (see 
Ges. Thes. p. 579.) here it is added, "our Lord." Corresponding to this is 
the expression, "the law which the LOUD commanded Israel," (viii. 1.) "the 
law which the LOUD commanded by the hand of Moses," viii. 14. " The law 
of the LORD their God," occurs ix. 3, but, simply the law of God (wrfhgn) in 
viii. 8, 18. x. 29, 30. (28. 29. Eng.) The "law of the LOUD " occurs in Exod. 
xiii. 9. "thelaw of God," Josh. xxiv. 26. "Praise (^Wi) the LORD" (v. 13.) 
is again the common Hebrew idiom. So is, " worship (rnnrwn) the LORD," 
(viii. 6. In ix. 3. is added, " their God,") and, although less exclusively, "Mes- 
sed (TO) the LORD ;" (it is added, " the great God," viii. 6.) and " they 
cried unto the LORD," ("^K pjn) with, or without, the addition "their God." 
ix. 4. (see Ges. Thes. p. 426.) 

TJie man of God, xii. 24, 36. is the only idiom used. 

" Moses, the servant of God," x. 29. [30. Heb.] occurs besides only in 
1 Chron. vi. 34. [49. Eng.] 2 Chr. xxiv. 9. Dan. ix. 11; but Moses, the servant 
of the LORD, also occurs twice in the Chronicles, (2 Chr. i. 3. xxiv. 6.) as well 
as in the earlier books, Deut. xxxiv. 5. Joshua 13 times, 2 Kgs. xviii. 12. The 
title is used of Joshua in Judg. ii. 8. and of David in the titles of Ps. xviii. and 
xxxvi. 

The title "congregation of the LORD" was never largely used. It occurs 
twice only out of the Pentateuch, Mic. ii. 5. 1 Chr. xxviii. 8. and, in the Penta- 
teuch, chiefly in one set of laws, who were not to be received in " the congre- 
gation of the LORD." Deut.xxiii.2, 3. [bis] 4. [bis] 9. [1,2, 3,8. Eng.] Else 
only Num. xvi. 3. xx. 4. The congregation of God occurs only Neh. xiii. 1. 

To "make to sivear by God," Neh. xiiiT25. also occurs only 2 Chr. xxxvi. 
13. where it is used. of a heathen, Nebuchadnezzar, who did not know His 
Name. On the same ground Abimelech says to Abraham, and the Egyptian 
slave to David, Swear to me by -God, Gen. xxi. 23. 1 Sam. xxx. 15. Isaiah, 
prophesying of the Gospel, also has, shall swear ly the God of truth, |D^ ^K$. 
'The iphraseshall swear by theLoRD, occurs, in all, 11 times ; Josh. ii. 12. ix. 18. 
19. Judg. xxi. 7. 1 Sam. xxiv. 22. [21. Eng.] xxviii. 10. 2 Sam. xix. 8. (7. Eng.) 
1 Kgs. i. 17. iii 8, 23. and Hif. ib. 42. Abraham unites both to his servant, 
/ will make thee swear by theLoRD, the God of heaven, and the God of earth. 
Gen. xxiv. 3. ' 

"Thanksgiving unto God," QVj'V? rinVi xii. 46, occurs here only. ^> rftiVr 
occurs 1 Chr. xvi. 41. 2 Chr. v. 13. vii. 3, 6. Ezr. iii. 11. but in 2 Chr. v. 13. 
vii. 3. Ezr. iii. 11. with the full addition, "for He is good, for His mercy en- 
'durethfor ever;" in 1 Chr. xvi. 41. 2 Chr. vii. 6. with the last clause only. 
Absolutely ^ rinh^> stands only 1 Chr. xvi. 7, but there too premised to a Psalm 
which opens ""? yiin Ib. 8. 



in Nehemiah, 343 

throughout Nehemiah God is addressed and spoken of as, 
"our God; ? > 4) That in each part of his book, that in 
which Nehemiah speaks in the first person, and that in 
which he does not, God is spoken of as the "Lord of" 
His creatures, "their -Lord," "our Lord;" 5) That titles, 
such as, house of God, law of God, occur throughout; 6) 
That the expressions, the congregation of God, servant oj 
God, fear of God, thanksgiving unto God, cannot be made 
use of, to identify the parts of Nehemiah in which they 
occur with the books of Chronicles, since the other ex- 
pressions, the servant of the Lord, the fear of the Lord, 
occur in the book of Chronicles ; and those, the congrega- 
tion of God, thanksgiving imto God, do not occur there, 
but the expressions, "thanksgiving unto the Lord," 
" congregation of the Lord," only. 6) That the fuller and 
more solemn language is used upon the more solemn oc- 
casions 1 . In part too it occurs in spoken words 3 . It 
has been said truly, " 3 The variation is a guarantee to the 
accuracy of the relation, that the Levites (ch. 9.) pray dif- 
ferently from Nehemiah." It would probably be the office 
of Ezra, the priest, not that of Nehemiah, the civil go- 
vernor, to prepare that prayer. 

The historical ground alleged is, that the name of Jad- 
dua who, according to Josephus*, was high priest in the 
time of Alexander, occurs in the book of Nehemiah. We 
ought, of course, to be slow to assume any gloss in Holy 
Scripture, unless the context absolutely requires it. But 
there is, I think, evidence that the name of Jaddua did 
not stand in Nehemiah. Ch. xii. opens with two lists of 
priests and Levites, those which went up with Zerubbabel 
and Jeshua, and those in the days of Joiakim the son of 



The fear (nirj?) of God (Neh. y. 15.) recurs in the remarkable prophecy, 
2 Sam. xxiii. 3. In the Psalms (3 times) Proverbs (16 times) Isaiah (xi. 2, 
3. xxxiii. 6.) and 2 Chr. xix. 9, (charge of Jehoshaphat,) thefearoftheLord 
is used. Neither occurs in narrative. (Q'O^? IDS occurs Ps. xxxvi. 2. of "fear 
towards God," " i;j| being used of "terror inspired by God," 1 Sam. xi. 7. 2 Chr. 
xiv. 13. [14. Eng.j xvii. 10. Is. ii. 10, 19, 21. and n'ij^g io only in 2 Chr. xx. 
29. in the same sense.) l viii. 5, 9, 10. ix. 3, 4, 5. 2 viii. 9, 10. ix. 5. 
s Keil, Einl. p. 523, 4 Ant.xi.8. 



344 Proof that the name of Jaddua did not " 

Jeshua. They are the priests and Levites, then, in two 
generations. The Levites are, in both cases, distributed 
into two classes, 1) those over the t hanksgiving, 2) those 
who kept ward. These enumerations follow in an exact 
order ; first, the priests who went up with Jeshua 1 , then 
the Levites 2 ; then again, the priests in the days of Joia- 
kim 3 , the sons of those mentioned hefore, (except that no 
son of Hattush is named ;) and, after them, the chief of 
the Levites according to the former division 4 ; lastly, 
the summary, 5 These ivere in the days ofJoiakim the son 
of Jeshua, in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of 
Ezra the priest, the scribe. 

But in the midst of these connected accounts which 
give two generations of high-priests, priests, and Levites, 
that of Jeshua and the next, there occur two lists of 
high-priests, which gO dbwii to the 6th generation from 
Jeshua 6 , of the two last links of which no notice what- 
ever is taken in this context. Elsewhere also, in the 
history of Nehemiah, the last mentioned in the line of the 
high-priesthood is an unnamed sbn of the high-priest 
Joiada, the son of Eliashib, who Was himself the son of 
Joiakim 7 , the last mentioned in this context ; so that the 
history stops short of Jaddua; 

In the first of the two lists, even if it stands in part, 
it seems probable that some generations have any how 
been added. If it Stood, " And Jeshua begat Joiakim," 
the words would introduce the following statement of the 
priests in the 'days -of tfoikilcibn.. But, as there is no sort 
of addition more easily made, than that of some links of 
a genealogy, it is probable that at all events the latest 
links were added, which go beyond the history of Nehe- 
miah. 

The two verses, containing the 2nd list of names, are 
evidently altogether out of place. For they come be- 

1 xii. 1-7. 2 Ib.8, 9. 3 Ib. 12-21. Mb. 24, 25. Ib.26. 

6 xii. 10, II, "And Jeshua begat Joiakim, and Joiakim begat Eliashib, and 
Eliashib begat Joiada, and Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat Jad- 
dua." xii. 22, " The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, 
and Jaddua." 7 xiii.28. 



originally stand in NeJiemiah. 345 

tween the statement as to the Priests and the Levites, 
which before were closely joined 7 . Further, the name 
of Jaddua makes the two terms, which the verses assign, 
inconsistent. The first states, " 8 The Levites in the 
days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, were 
written, chief fathers ; and the priests in," or during 9 , 
" the reign of Darius the Persian." According to which, 
Jaddua is apparently the last high-priest. But the 
statement immediately following makes the list to end 
in the high-priesthood before Jaddua. " 10 The sons of 
Levi, the chief of the fathers, were written in the book 
of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan, the 
son of Eliashib." 

They would only be consistent between themselves, and 
with the history of Nehemiah, if the name of Jaddua 
were omitted. 

But these verses have so evidently the character of a 
marginal note 11 , which has by some inadvertence been 
brought into the text, that it needs not to discuss details 
in them. They are evidently supplemental to the account 
in Nehemiah. That gives the priests and Levites in the 
times of Jeshua and Joiakim ; thixs supplement makes a 
statement as to three or four generations, subsequent to 
that account, omitting those mentioned by Nehemiah. 
As a supplemental statement, written on th r e margin, they 
were transcribed into a wrong place. It is characteris- 
tic, that a school, which rejects with scorn the statement 
of Josephus, that a high-priest Jaddua shewed the pro- 

8 xii. 22. Johanair, in this list, occupies the same place as Jonathan in the 
former, xii. 11 . It may be, thut the . one was the son 'of Joiada, whom Nehe- 
miah expelled. 9 ri&fc ^. 10 Ib. 23. 

11 Even Herzfeld says p. 314, " v. 22, 23. are any how of later origin ; for 
they interrupt yet more stron'gly [than 10,11-.] the context, which requires 
that, as in v. 8, ' the heads of the Levites ' in Joiakim's days should follow up- 
on ' the heads of the priests.' I do not account them interpolated, but rather 
as erroneously come from the margin into the text. I assign also each verse 
to a separate author, &c." In p. 307. he speaks of them as " acknowledged 
by all to be interpolated." But they suit the theory of Zunz too well to part 
with, (p. 26, 27.) and from him have been accepted by those who impugn the 
rest, De Wette, Ewald, (G. Isr. i. 230.) Stahelin, Davidson, ii. 147, 8. 



346 No, even plausible, ground for denying 

phecy .of Daniel to Alexander, accepts the unhistorical 
confusion in the same context, whereby Josephus made 
" Sanballat the Horonite," the contemporary and adver- 
sary of Nehemiah, in the 20th year of Artaxerxes, B.C. 
445, to be a contemporary of Alexander, 113 years af- 
terwards a . 

No other, even plausible, ground has been alleged, for 
separating what is plainly one coherent whole. The rest 
which has been said are mostly mere insolent assump- 
tions against Holy Scripture, grounded on unbelief 2 . 

It has long ago been observed, that offences which 

1 Nehemiah says that a son of Joiada the high-priest, the son of Eliashib, 
married a daughter of Sanballat the Horonite, and that he himself expelled 
him from Jerusalem, (xiii. 28.) Josephus omits all mention of Sanballat at the 
time of Nehemiah, whom he places under Xerxes, and makes Sanballat " a sa- 
trap sent by the last king Darius to Samaria," who married his daughter, Ni- 
caso, to Manasseh, the brother of Jaddua, and son of John, the son of Judas, 
the son of Eliashib, (Ant. xL 7.) who are the Johanan, son of Joiada, son of 
Eliashib, in Neh. ii. 22. 

2 1) It was mere carelessness, when De Wette said, " The words trap, (sa- 
gans, rulers,) cnh (nobles,) characteristic of Nehemiah, ii. 16. iv. 8, 13. v. 7, 17. 
vi. 17.vii.5.xii.40. xiii. 11. do not occur in ch. viii. ix. x., and instead, JIUN wi 
occurs via. 13." (followed by Day. ii. 141.) "Sagans" is not so characteristic of 
Nehemiah, since it occurs of Jewish civil prefects in Ezra ; (ix. 2.) still less anil 
" nobles," since it occurs in Eccl. x. 17. 1 Kgs. xxi. 8, 11. Is. xxxiv. 12. Jer. 
xxvii. 20. xxxix. 6. But in all the places of Nehemiah except one, being ci- 
vil titles, they are vised in civil matters. In that one, xii. 40. Nehemiah says, 
how, on the day of the dedication of the city- wall, there were two processions 
round the wall, in which laity, priests, singers, were each divided into 
halves, and in consequence of that division half of the sagans were with him, 
half of the princes of Judah, (he used the words as equivalent s. xii. 31, 32, 
40.) headed the other company. It was a religious ceremonial on the com- 
pletion of the great civil work which God had prospered. On the other occa- 
sion, which was purely religious, a public exposition of Holy Scripture by Ezra, 
he classifies those present only as, "people, .levites, priests;" much as we 
might speak of clergy and people, without speaking of noblemen or State-Offi- 
cers. But, to express: that, those, who were present were " the heads of fami- 
lies," he used the well-known Pentateuch expression " heads of the fathers," 
which he himself used in a chapter, admitted to be his, vii. 70, 71. " Heads 
of the fathers to all the people" expressed what the terms "sagans and nobi- 
lity" would not express, unless "all the heads of families " in London meant 
its aristocracy. 

2) The title Tirshatha is a title which the Persian prefects of Judtea had. 
It is used absolutely of Zerubbabel, (Ezr. ii. 63. Neh. vii. 65.) added by Nehe- 
miah, in his signature to a document, (x. 2.) [1. Eng:] and on one public oc- 



the book of Nehemiah to be his. 347 

Malachi upbraids are so precisely the same as those 
which Nehemiah corrected on his return as governor, 

casion, when he was joined with Ezra, (viii. 9.) and tinder which, without his 
name, he records a gift of his to the treasury for the expenses apparently of re- 
peopling Jerusalem, (vii. 70.) It is used 5 tunes in all ; in -three cases, of Ne- 
hemiah. Pechah is of much more extensive use. It is used, after the capti- 
vity, of the Governor of Judaea, by Haggai of Zerubhabel, and by Malachi in 
the time of Nehemiah. Nehemiah speaks of the bread of the Pechah (i. e. the 
allowance made to him) V. 14, 18 ; of "all the time in which he was their Pe- 
chah" (o0)v.l4; "the [Persian] Pechahs beyond the river," ii. 7, 9 ; oP'the 
throne of the Pechah on this side the river," at Jerusalem, iii. 7. In the list 
of priests and Levites in ch. xii. alone, he is called " Nehemiah the Pechah," 
xii. 26. Why this case, which does not occur in the narrative, is to rule the 
other cases, or, since both names are given to Zerubbabel, both should not be 
given to Nehemiah, I know not. . 

3) No histories can well be more evidently distinct, than Ezra iii. andix. are 
from Neh. viii. Yet Zunz speaks of "a relation, partly dressing out what had 
been already related, partly repeating, as belonging to Ezra andNehemiah, what 
had already been related of Zerubabel." (p. 24. translated by Dav. ii. 142, 3.) 
" It is conformable to the character of the Chronicle- writer, that he forgets to 
make the people take notice of the day of atonement, which occurs five days only 
before the feast of Tabernacles, directly contradicts (v. 17.) his own account of 
the former festival, (Ezr.iii.4.) and even (v. 15.) quotes passages from the Pen- 
tateuch which are not there." (p. 25. also nearly translated, Dav. ii. 143.) Ne- 
hemiah quotes no passage at all. He says that'they found written in the law, 
that they should dwell in booths in the feast of the 7th month, and that they 
should proclaim that boughs should be brought to make booths, as was writ- 
ten. But it is contained in the law that the three great feasts were to be pro- 
claimed. (Lev. xxiii. 4.) The sort of trees also, of which the booths were to 
be made, are mentioned, fruit-bearing boughs of goodly trees, branches of 
palm-trees, and boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook. (Ib. 40.) It 
was directed also that 'they should dwell in booths. (Ib. 42, 3.) It is hardly 
credible that language so insolent should be used, either because, in Nehemiah's 
time, it was understood that the proclaiming of the festival involved the procla- 
mation to make preparations for it, or that they specified as trees, the olive and 
oleaster and myrtle, as explanations or applications of the directions in the 
Law. Most enlightened and large-hearted criticism ! The words, "since the 
days of Joshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the children of Israel done 
so," are, Zunz himself owns, like those sayings in the Chronicles, (2) xxxv.18. 
"there was no passover, like to that, kept hi Israel from the days of Samuel 
the prophet," &c. or of Hezekiah's passover, " since the time of Solomon 
there was not the like in Jerusalem." (Ib. xxx. 26.) And so in the book of 
Kings also. (2 Kgs. xxiii. 22.) But then what Nehemiah speaks of is the 
greatness of the festival, which, of course, does not in the least contradict the 
fact, that there had "been a festival kept in the depressed condition of the first 
band of returned exiles, amid the " fear upon them because .of .the. people of 
. those countries." Ezr. iii. 3, 4. The prospect of a 'Commentary on Ezra and 



348 Coincidence of Nehemiah and Malachi. 

that the two probably co-operated in their reformation; 
Malachi, as the prophet ; Nehemiah, as the civil Gover- 
nor. Yet two classes of the oifences stand in no evident 
connection. They were against God and man. Out of 
avarice, they offered imperfect and worthless sacrifices, 
and withheld the tithes ; they had put away their wives, to 
marry heathen women. To these is added, that priests 
were not correctors of the evil, but corruptors 1 . 

So then, from the examination of the later books them- 
selves, we come back to the statement of Josephus, that 
the canon closed with the last prophet, the last historical 
book ending with the reform of those same varied abuses, 
which the last prophet denounced in the name of God ; 
and the canon was closed about the beginning of the 
fourth century before our Lord, above two centuries be- 
fore Antiochus Epiphanes. 

With this agrees the tradition in the Talmud, that 
" 3 the men of the great Synagogue wrote Ezekiel, the 
twelve, [minor prophets] Daniel, and the book of Esther; 
Ezra wrote his book and the genealogy of the Chronicles 
down to lo. Rab says, Ezra did not go up from Babylon 
until he wrote his genealogy, and so he went up. And 
who finished it ? Nehemiah." 

It is clear, both from the context of the whole, and from 
the details, that by " wrote," they did not mean " com- 
posed," but "inscribed." 'For in no other sense could 
they be said to write the twelve minor prophets, of whom 
it is there said," 3 our fathers made a large volume of them, 
that they might not be lost for their littleness." As they 
inscribed in the Canon 4 the twelve, so they inscribed in 
it Ezekiel, Daniel, and the book of Esther, which could 
not have been inscribed in it before, being written in the 
Captivity. 

What historical grounds then are there to allege, why 

Nehemiah, by an able writer, in the series already begun, relieves me from fur- 
ther details. Neh. xiii. 4, 5, 7, 28. Mai. ii. 1-9. 2 Baba bathra, f. 15. 1. 
3 Ib. f. 14. 2. 4 So Kimchi says, " they wrote it [the Psalter] in the canon 
of the Kethubim, C'linan ^33 imana, not in that of the prophets." Proef. in Ps. 



Principle of Jewish arrangement of the Canon. 349 

Daniel had not his place in the Canon then, when every 
other book now in the Canon had ? 

Grounds alleged have been these; 1) that, had he writ- 
ten in the Captivity, he must have been quoted, or alluded 
to, by subsequent writers, especially by the sou of Sirach. 
2) The Jews disparaged him by placing his book, not 
among the prophets, but in the Hagiographa. 

Now, since the place where people have missed him in 
Ecclesiasticus is among the prophets, in that the author 
does mention Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, and perhaps, 
(though this is doubtful) the twelve, and does not men- 
tion Daniel, plainly his not mentioning him there implies 
no more than that the Jews in his time had the same ar- 
rangement as they have now. If they had any good 
ground for the arrangement, this plainly is no disparage- 
ment at all, any more than it is as to David. The ar- 
rangement of the Canon among the Jews, although dif- 
ferent from that of the Christian Church, proceeded on 
definite and legitimate principles. 1) The law, as the 
original fountain-head of revelation, stands at the head ; 
2) then all those books, believed to have been written by 
men exercising the prophetic office, whether those called 
the first prophets (the historical books from Joshua to 
the Kings,) or what we call the prophets, they the later 
prophets ; 3) then, a more miscellaneous class, " Scrip- 
tures," sacred writings, Hagiographa, written by persons 
who, whether endowed with the gift of prophecy or no, 
had not the pastoral office .of the prophet. This last class 
consisted even chiefly of persons in high secular office. 
There were kings, as D.avid who, in that wider sense, was 
eminently a Prophet ; Solomon, who wrote at least one 
glorious Psalm 6 , prophetic of Christ ; Ezra, who had 
charge to lead his people back from their captivity, the 
priest, the scribe 6 , yet who speaks of Haggai and Zecha- 
riah, as having an office of " prophets 7 " distinct from 
his own ; Ezra, the author of the Chronicles as well as 
of the book which bears his name ; Nehemiah ; probably 

5 Ps. Ixxii. 8 Ezr. vii. 6, 11, 12. Neh. viii. 4, 9, 13. xii. 26, 36. ' Ezr. v. 1. 



350 Hagiographd, sacred looks by men. in secular office. 

Mordecai also, the author of the hook of Esther. The 
distribution is allowable ; since plainly it is as permissi- 
ble to class books according to the offices borne by their 
authors, as according to the subjects of the books them- 
selves. But according to this distribution, the book of 
Daniel could occupy no other place than it does. Daniel 
had no immediate office of a practical teacher of his peo- 
ple. He was the statesman, the protector probably, not 
the direct teacher of his people. The historical portion of 
his book contains some great dispensations of God, set 
down in the order in which they took place, but with no 
account of the date of its composition. The propjietic 
portions of his book, in which he himself was the organ 
of prophecy, belong to the last years of a life beyond 
the common age of man. His first vision was probably 
not vouchsafed, until he had reached the fourscore years, 
after which man's ordinary lot is suffering and sorrow. 
Even at this period, those visions were but insulated 
events in his life, gifts vouchsafed to him in the midst of a 
secular life. Daniel, in the four visions which, in the last 
years of his life, were vouchsafed to him, was the recipi- 
ent and transmitter of great revelations. Still his office 
was different from that of those whom God sent, daily 
rising up early and sending them 1 , to speak in His Name 
the words which He gave them. Their 's was an abiding 
spirit of prophecy resting upon them ; to him, as far as 
we are told, insulated revelations only were disclosed. 

It does not affect us, whether the later Jews were right 
or wrong in distinguishing between those who wrote 
" 2 through the spirit of prophecy," and those who wrote 
"through the Holy Ghost." The distinction might be 
true, if they meant to express, by "the spirit of prophecy," 
the habitual gift of the Holy Ghost to those called to the 
office of prophet; and by "the Holy Ghost," the occa- 
sional or specific gifts of the Holy Ghost to write what 

1 Jer. vii. 13, 25. xi. 7. xxv. 3, 4. xxvi. 5. xxix. 19. xxxii. 33. xxxv. 14, 15. 
xliv. 4. 2 Chr. xxxvi. 15. 2 Maimon. More Neboch. ii. 45. p. 317 sqq. Kim. 
1. c. Prsef. ad Psalm. 



tFriting thro' y e spirit of prophecy fy thro' y 6 Holy Ghost. 351 

He willed to be written by them. The distinction belongs 
to the inspired persons, not to the substance of the things 
conveyed by them. For in both cases alike the language 
implies, that these men of God 3 spake, moved by the Holy 
Ghost, and that what they taught was infallible. The dis- 
tinction appears to be altogether a late one ; and probably 
was erroneous in the character which the modern Jews 
ascribed to "the spirit of prophecy," in that they imagined 
those under its influence to be deprived of the ministry 
of the outward senses. Still they did not mean by the 
distinction to disparage the greatness of DaniePs prophe- 
cies. 



Josephus says, that he was "* one of the greatest pro- 
phets." And whereas the Talmud mentions a saying, 
that " Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi, had this above him, 
that they were prophets, and he was not a prophet 5 ," yet 
they themselves explain this to mean " 6 that he was not 
sent to Israel for the office of prophecy ; " i. e. as said 
above, that he had not the prophetic office. It was part 
of that same saying, that, in another respect, " 7 he was 
greater than they, in that he saw the vision which they 
saw not." And the Talmud says, " 8 if all the wise of 
the nations were in one scale of the balance, and Daniel 
in the other, he would outweigh them all." "And Abar- 
banel says, that " 9 he stood in the secret of God and heard 
His words," and assents to the Rabbins who, in the Se- 
der Olam, count him among the prophets, and "this they 
said, not in the way of metaphor, or of mission, but in 
the way of precision and truth." 

In the one sense, then, as the organs of prophecy, Da- 
vid and Daniel were prophets and very great prophets. 

3 2 Pet. i. 21. 4 Ant. x. 11. 7. 

5 >MJ vh VfM Sanhedr. c. xi. Megill. c. I. quoted by Carpz. Intr. iii. 235, 6. 
and Voisin on Mart. Pug. Fid. P. ii. c. iii. iii. p. 295. 6 The tradition is a 

childish one, that those three prophets were'Daniel's companions who saw not 
the vision. Dan. x. 7. But it may be a vehicle of real meaning. Any how 
the tradition, that he was superior to the three in some way, is of the same va- 
lue as the other, in regard to the Jewish belief, which is the only point at issue. 

7 En Israel in Megilla f. 144. c. 3 ap. Carpz. ib. 236. 8 Yoma quoted in 
Carpz. ib. 9 Abarb. in Dan. p. 17, 3. 



852 Daniel fy David, prophets, not placed among prophets, 

If the term "prophet" be taken in the meaning of " exer- 
cising the prophetic office," then, to deny that they were, in 
this sense, "prophets," is only to own that God called Da- 
vid to be the shepherd of His; people, and, in His Provi- 
dence, raised the captive Daniel to high secular office in a 
heathen court. What no one imagines to be a disparage- 
ment to the Patriarch David, whose memory was so reve- 
renced, cannot have been meant as a discredit to Daniel. 
Nor, clearly, is it any argument against the existence 
of the book of Daniel, in the time of the son of Sirach, 
that, that writer did not speak of its author in a place which 
he did not occupy in the Canon. The panegyric is no c.a- 
talogue. Its leading principle seems to be to praise men, 
eminent for their place along the line of history from the 
creation, the Patriarchs, Adam, Seth, Enoch, before the 
flood ; Noah, Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, be- 
fore the Exodus ; Moses, Aaron, Phinehas, in the wilder- 
ness ; Joshua, Caleb, and the Judges generally, in the first 
period in the promised land ; Samuel ; then Nathan, Da- 
vid, Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah ; and, on occasion of He- 
zekiah, the prophecies of Isaiah ; then, Jeremiah, as pro- 
phesying tlie captivity ; Ezekiel ; and, in the present text, 
the Twelve 1 ; after the captivity, Zorobbabel, Joshua son 

1 AH important MSS. and Versions have the words, " And of the 12 prophets 
let the memorial be blessed, and their bones flourish again out of their place ; " 
yet, as they stand, what follows can hardly be construed, ttapfK&Xsffe Se Tbv 
'laK&P Kal k\vTp<i<ra.To avrobs If iricrTei f\irl$os, " but he [sing.] comforted 
Jacob, and redeemed [sing.] them in faith of hope." For the MSS. authori- 
ties are just as decided in retaining the singular, as in the insertion of the half- 
verse on the minor Prophets. So then there is the double anomaly, that the 
Imperatives are inserted in the midst of the narrative form, and the number is 
changed. It has been proposed to remedy this, by placing the clauses as to the 
Twelve prophets after the words, 7rapeKct\<re i\7r5os ; so that the clause, "he 
comforted Jacob," &c. should be a continuation of what he said of Ezekiel. 
Only, there is no more authority for transposing the words, than for omitting 
them. The words, " let their bones flourish again out of their place," had al- 
ready occurred, xlvi. 12. The only way, in which the words can be construed, 
is to understand them to be spoken of God. Yet this too is not according to 
the analogy of the other verses, in which that is attributed to the prophets, 
which God did by them, (xlviii. 2, 6, 23. xlix. 7, 9.) The construction and 
course of thought would certainly be easier, if the clause as to the Twelve 
were omitted. The writer had alluded to Malachi's closing prophecy, xlviii. 10. 



on oneprinciple; we miss Dan.inEccl only as prophet. 353 

of Josedech, who rebuilt the temple ; Nehemiah, who re- 
stored the walls. Daniel had not so marked an office for 
his people, as Ezra, who yet is equally omitted. It is not 
as a man, that we miss him in the enumeration, hut that 
he does, not occupy the place among the prophets, where 
we are accustomed to see him. 

The argument " from silence " is precarious at all times. 
Here it is the more nugatory, because it stands in conflict 
not only with the history of the canon generally, hut. with 
facts as to the book of Daniel itself. 

We have language of his prayer used in Nehemiah ; re- 
ference to his visions in Zechariah ; and, at the times in 
which the writer must have lived, had he not been the pro- 
phet, viz. the Maccabee times, we have quotations not of 
the book only, but of its Greek translation, in the 3rd (the 
Jewish) Sibylline book. It is quoted in the 1st book of 
Maccabees, and at some time, at the least not later, in the 
book of Baruch ; and, men allow too now, in the book of 
Enoch. I stated in a former lecture, how Ezekiel speaks 
of Daniel in two respects, his wisdom and his righteous- 
ness, just as he appears in his book. 

i. The correspondence between the prayer of Daniel 
and that in Nehemiah has been acknowledged and even 
exaggerated by the opponents of the book of Daniel. 
First they urged, that if the book had been written by 
Daniel, it would have been referred to in the later books 2 . 
When the reference was observed, they quietly assumed 
as self-evident, that the prayer in Daniel was copied from 
that of Nehemiah 3 . They alleged in proof of the lateness 

2 In regard to Zechariah, the argument is continued even in the posthumous 
" Introduction" by Bleek ; " Had the book been composed by Daniel, and so, 
extant from the time of Cyrus and known among the Jews, one should expect 
to find use made of it in the Prophets after the captivity, Haggai, Malachi, 
and especially Zechariah i-viii. But there is nothing of the sort. Jeremiah's 
prophecies of the Messiah have exercised an influence over Zechariah's concep- 
tion of the idea of the Messiah ; but the visions of Daniel, none." Einl. 1860. 
p. 589. Davidson, iii. 171, translates Bleek. 

3 " The passage ch. ix. contains verbal imitations of Nehemiah." Leng. p. Ix. 
" Through the expression D'TSon ix. 2. [see ah. p. 309.] we are directed to the 
time after Nehemiah, and also by the employment of the book of Nehemiah, 

A a 



354 Characteristics of the prayer in Nehemiah, 

of the book of Daniel, what had itself first to be proved, 
and which is not true. 

Nothing can be less like one another, than the two long 
prayers of Daniel and of the Levites in Nehemiah in the 
main. They are alike only, in so far as both are confes- 
sions of sin. But the prayer in Nehemiah 1 , like some of* 
the historical Psalms, turns wholly upon facts. It is a 
confession of God's mercies from the call of Abraham, of 
their own disobedience from the wilderness onwards, and 
of the justice of their punishment, ending with a profes- 
sion of amendment. It proceeds in one steady unbroken 
course of narrative, from first to last. It contains scarce- 
ly a petition. Just towards the end, there is that one, 
"let not all the trouble seem little to Thee, xuhich hath come 
upon us. But they expected no marked interposition 
then ; they confessed their sins, owned God's long-suffer- 
ing and their unrighteousness, renewed the covenant, and 
left the future to God. It is the prayer of one, whose me- 
mory is well and exactly stored with the precise words in 
which Moses had written. Throughout that part of the 
prayer, which relates to the history in the Pentateuch, 
idioms and sentences of the Pentateuch are worked in 3 ; 

v. 4; comp. i. 5. ix. 32; v. 15, Neh. ix. 10; v. 8, Neh. ix. 34." Id. p. 411. In 
p. Ixi. he speaks of "the great use of the book of Neh. in ch. ix." DeW. adopted 
the argument, ed. 7. "Daniel employs not only Ezekiel, who, in the case of 
the genuineness of the book, stood near him, but also (ch. ix.) Neh. ix." Einl. 
p. 347 ; then Stahelin, p. 349. and Dav. iii. 194. 

1 ix. 6-36. 2 Ib . 32. 

3 Neh. ix. 8. s|!irj> no^> HS n S n ^ n "l|5 ' 1S V "i" 1 ?! Gen - xv - ls - D 3?fc n * " "T? 
xri nx <nra sjsqi^ TDN|? ma.. The names of the nations follow in each. Neh. ix.9. 
pN $. nb' N-J.EII Ex. iii. 7. Dnxpn ITO <jj >jj). n$ VN-I. Neh. ix. 10. nhfc jspi 
^33! rtjnss. D-JIEM Deut. vi. 22. irra ^oai njrj53 0^901 nhiN |J? ! .i Neh. ix. 11. 
is o;n ijinri naffi D0'.4?^ Pi/pa o;m Ex. xiv. 16. tjina wa;i wyRai a;ri ^y, sjr nts JTOJI 
D,'n -add 22. Neh. Ib. Ex. xv. 4. |3>t to3 n^isp?. Neli. Ib. Is. xliii. 16. D'jJJ 0:03 
Neh. ix. 12. ar\h Txn) rh^ $ "ftoXp ooV ayttyj ]iy t ms!ffi Ex. xiii. 21. \iy IIDJ;? D?'V 
on^ TsnV E% i?sj;a n^;^i ifym oph}^ Neh. ix. 15. D:CB>D on^i. Ps. cv. 40, 
Neh. Ib. 0$ r\$ ^'; n$ ?NV} ^ HW n n ?^ "^ D 5^ " l ? N ' :i1 - Deut. i. 8. 
orA nn^-Da'DiKS " j/3^ TB-S nW Ex - vi - 8. TO^ 1 T n? '0'f j ^ piNri ^ 
D3^> nnfc 'ptcj a]p^ pq^ Drn T a>j^ Neh. ix. 16. 2 Kgs. xvii. 14. Jer. vii. 26. 
09")^ (from Pent.) Neh. ix. 17. ">gn 31] D:N :p v N rami ]o from Ex. xxxiv. 6 trans- 
]>osing jni Dim. Neh. ix. 18. nyijgo ?)^L| "f S 1'n'"jg -ij ?s*l n?BB "?JH 
the remarkable chang-e into the singular, from Ex. xxxii. 8. Tipso ^35? DH7 l 



and in Daniel. 355 

even the precise words are retained, in which Moses re- 
minds them that their clothes waxed not old, and their 
feet swelled not, although the last word occurs in those 
two places alone. This was done of set purpose ; for the 
writer used, where he willed, language of his own. In 
the same way in which he used the language of the 
Pentateuch and of other earlier Scripture, the writer of 
that long confession used also language of Daniel's 
prayer. 

Daniel's prayer, on the contrary, is rhetorical, so to 
say, not historical. Its suhject is, what must be a crea- 
ture's confession of sin, God's righteousness, man's un- 
righteoiisness. But it is one eloquent, fervid, tide of 
prayer. The prayer rises and falls alternately, in a pro- 
longed chequered cadence, as it sets forth or owns suc- 
cessively God's faithfulness, their unfaithfulness ; God's 
righteousness, their confusion through their unrighte- 
ousness ; God's property of mercy, their sins calling down 
His foreannounced justice ; then one hrief reference to 
the deliverance from Egypt, and an impassioned gush of 
prayer rolling on and on, until the last, Lord, tarry not, 
Lord, hearken and do, overcometh God, and his prayer 
is answered. Apart from evidence, no one could douht 
which had used the language of the other. 

It is not much which the two prayers have in common, 
except what is common to all prayer in distress, the con- 
fession of sins past and present which bring down God's 
cn? P V NO spfyjn na>' ^N-J^ spring n^x viash Neh. ix. 20. rnten sjnnj Ps. cxliii. 10. ^nn 
rnio Neh. ix. 21. vipij N 4 ? 13133 nn^>? n$ W1*! Deut.ii. 7. sprf^? " fisf D'j?fiN ni 
i;n o-jDij K 4 ? s|8jj Neh. Ib. ipsa N 4 ? on'hm 63 K 4 ? on'roVi? Uetit. viii. 4. npja K 4 ? yrhntlf 
*m *'*? l^li *p&P Neh. ix. 23. DS$J '33b;i ^ain D-TJ: Gen. xxii. 17. ^3 rw na-ix 
npB'n g^3j Neh. ix. 24. pjNrfa^'nNDrTjs^ J;J?FII Deut.ix.3. 5]'J2^> DK'J?; wni. Neh. 
ix. 25. W3if.i_ 6pn'i-Q'0'j] aw? D'3)sn rim 33 ^ n'^D D'ti?. Deut. vi. 11. n'i<bi? D'l-g? 
pjtfpi ^3w-n^')i Q'13 n5?sq niin psk> N 4 ? IEJN 35U ^3 Neh. ix. 27. ffl^Vi oygno nnb 155 
Jud. iii. 9. cavil hR-ty: sh yyf ogi. Neh. ix. 29. 07^ n'^E ib's en ?Naij ^'BD^pg? 
nrn n;ij] Lev. xviii. 5. 0159 'DJ D"3? Dps nVSi'. ~W : 'e??'? " Nrfl - ll) . Zech. vii. 11. 
rmiD p3 p;i. Neh. ix. 31. rbs 0^^ N 4 ?. Ezek. xx. 17. i? 1 ]^ .iV| DJIIN ^^ s 4 ?! 
Neh. ix. 32. Num. xx. 14. $jyo izs n^nn V| nx add Ex. xviii. 8. Neh. ix. 35, 6. 
D"i?s> Qi'n IJK njnjp^ n^-a-irj siaiogi-oni Deut. xxviii. 47, 8." n^ ^najj s 4 ? -^N nnp 

A a 2 



356 Nehemiah, and others, knew Daniel' 's prayer. 

chastisement upon the sinner, or the sinful nation, and 
thereon, what was peculiar to Israel, the pleading of the 
promise that God would, on their repentance, restore 
them. The prayer in Nehemiah had almost come to its 
close, before there is any point of contact with that of 
Daniel. The first words of Daniel's prayer, however, 
which are themselves a re-moulding of a doctrinal state- 
ment in the Pentateuch, so reappear in the two prayers in 
Nehemiah 1 , as to shew that those of his day were fami- 
liar with that great deep prayer of Daniel. 

1 Dan. ix. 4. Neh. jx. 32. i. 4. The basis of the passages is Dent. vii. 9. 
" know that ijto 'TO'^) i^ti^ ignn] rnsri lab' jnpi ^ D'-f^SO wn spg^ft ron*." ' 
The last clause is slightly modified from the decalogue, Ex. xx. 6, non raay] 
'fto *TOfc$! '3qs^ D'&f (Deut. v. 10.) This, as being a fundamental statement 
of God's relation to His people, was variously applied. Solomon, in memory 
of his father and of God's promises to him, addressed it in thankfulness, "Lord 
God of Israel, there is no God like Thee Wlio keepest covenant and mercy 
with Tlty servants, that walk before Tliee with a perfect heart." nngrr tM 
D3^> ^33 spa) D.^hn sjnjj^ norm] 1 Kgs. viii. 23. 2 Chr. vi. 14. Those times of faith- 
fulness were gone. Daniel took the words of Deuteronomy, but instead of 
" the faithful," he spake to God, as " the great, the aweful," "jNri yitj KJ$ 
rpixD "itivfy fys^f nponi n-ijii into' K-ji3n] Vnan ix. 4. The attribute of God is 
twice pleaded to Him in Nehemiah ; but, both times, so as to shew that he took 
it from Daniel, not from Deuteronomy, for in each case he takes words, which 
are in Daniel, and are not in Deuteronomy. In both he uses the characteris- 
tic words, the great, the aweful God; " in i. 5. he begins with the word of en- 
treaty, which Daniel had revived from the Pentateuch, N$N. (Gen. 1. 17. Ex. 
xxxii. 31. Dan. ix. 4. Neh. i. 5. else only in Ps. cxviii. 25. the i Psalm doubt- 
less of dedication of the second temple, and so, posterior to Daniel. The word 
is written rax 2 Kgs. xx. 3. Is. xxxviii. 3. Jon. i. 14. iv. 2. Ps. cxvi. 4, 16.) 
In both prayers in Nehemiah, something is added. In i. 5, he uses his own 
title, "God of heaven;" ix. 32, he adds the title, the mighty (TQiiT) and stops at 
" keepipg covenant and mercy." While both prayers of Nehemiah coiild be 
fpunded on that of Daniel, that of Daniel could riot be taken from either of 
Nehemiah.; not from Neh. ix. 32, because it is incomplete ; not from that in 
Neh. i. 5, because, although it is natural that. Nehemiah should have added the 
title which he uses elsewhere, " God of heayen," there wmild have been no 
reason why Daniel, had he used his words, should have omitted them. 

Of two other expressions, which Daniel and Nehemiah have in common, 
the one, ix. 15, and Thou modest for Thee a Name as at this day, *fy bj)wi 
njrr ni'3 ng> was, in Daniel, certainly a reminiscence of Jeremiah, (xxxii. 20.) 
since the context is so. The words, with which Daniel introduces it, " And 
now, O, Lord our God, Who broughtest Thy people forth from tlie land of 
Egypt," are nearly identical with those which follow it in Jeremiah, (xxxii. 
21.) .TRIO 1:3 on>'P p,$? 1?B n $ P N *in ^ ^'O^g T8 ^Sil Dan. " 



Two of Zechariah's visions allude to .Daniel. 357 

ii. Nehemiah could naturally allude only to language of 
Daniel; his history had no natural bearing on the history. 
or prophecies of Daniel. Two in the brief series of Ze- 
chariah's visions presuppose Daniel's prophecies of the 
four world-empires. They were given to those, who were 
already in possession of the full disclosures to Daniel, and 
cannot be understood without them. They are visions, 
describing in different pictures the gradual restoration of 
God's people until the Coming of Christ. Babylon had 
fallen; Israel had been partially, yet only very partially, re- 
stored. Zechariah's prayer, like that of Daniel, had been, 
" 3 Lord, how long ? " In answer to the prayer, there are 
exhibited tohim the four horns, as the obstacle to its com- 
plete restoration, and those who should fray them away 3 . 
The four horns were together symbols of all world-empire, 



npiq isji D'fistorrt nhfeji onp H$9 Jer - Onlv > Daniel used the vym for the rayysi of 
Jeremiah. That same form occurs in Nehemiah, and since the context in Ne- 
hemiah is a reminiscence of the Pentateuch not of Jeremiah, and the whole 
passage has several such reminiscences, there is a probability that these words 
too were taken from Daniel in whom they occur exactly, not from Jeremiah. 
The third place in Daniel is a reminiscence of Jeremiah. The accumulation, 
" our kings, our princes, our fathers," or the like, appears repeatedly in Jere- 
miah. Daniel owns, " we have not hearkened unto Thy servants the pro- 
phets, which spake in Thy Name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, 
and to all the people of the land." ix. 6. This is especially the complaint in 
Jeremiah, (see ab. p. 341.) Then he confesses that " righteousness is God's, 
confusion of face," theirs ; and enumerates again those on whom that shame 
had fallen, "to us, our kings, our princes, and our fathers," and "to the men 
of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem." This is also a favorite enumera- 
tion in Jeremiah, (xi. 2. xviii. 11. xxxv. 13. and the like, xvii. 20. xxv. 2, 
xxxv. 17.) Both enumerations occur in Jer. xxxii. 32. nen wyjn^ &y itfA 
n|?Ti; '5'f>5 .TUT B"!<3 Dnw:?3? DiTjqb ayy? nn'S^a Again in these same verses, the 
phrase, " the near and the far," a'pinim D'?hj?ri, Dan. ix. 7. is also Jeremiah's, 
xxv. 26. (originally in Deut. xiii. 8.) and that, "in all lands whither Thou hast 
driven them," oy Dflijnrt T$J nii-iNn-^3 Dan. ix. 7. Jer. xxiii. 3, 8. xxxii. 37. 

The passage in Nehemiah, ix. 32, is also probably a reminiscence of Jere- 
miah, since two classes are enumerated, "our priests and our prophets," which 
do not occur in Daniel, but do occur in Jeremiah, ii. 26, where the context is 
the same as in Nehemiah and, in part, in Daniel ; " so is the house of Israel 
ashamed, they, their kings, their princes, and then- priests, and their prophets." 
nn'8'3p Dyjob ngnjp orr^ra nen ^-ty; iva wpin j?. In this case then the likeness 
probably arises from both Daniel and the writer of the prayer in Nehemiah 
having their minds stored with the prophecies of Jeremiah. 
2 i. 12. s i. 18-21. 



SfJSZechariah's vision of four chariots, presupposes Daniel's 

yet were in themselves hardly significant, either as to their 
number or their power, apart from the symbol of the ani- 
mal which, in -Daniel's visions, wielded them. The same 
four-fold division of power recurs in the vision of the four 
chariots 1 which issue from between the two mountains 
of brass, with horses red, black, white, grizzled, strong, 
(for so only can the word 3 be rendered.) Those who have 
not explained this vision by aid of Daniel's four world- 
empires have been puzzled, 1 ) why the title strong should 
have been given to one set only of these symbols of power ; 
2) why, in the explanation of the Angel, the first symbol, 
the chariot with the red horses, disappears. Four symbols 
ofeai'thly power are exhibited to the prophet ; three only 
are explained. .Obviously, since the symbols represent 
the same as in Daniel, there was nothing to be said.about 
the first monarchy ; for it was gone. Of the black horses, 
the symbol of the second, it is said ?, they, have made My 
anger to rest on the North country, i.-e. on Babylon, of 
which the former prophets had ever spoken, as the North. 
The third, it is said 4 , go forth after them ; for the Greek 
empire occupied the same portion of the earth as the 
Persian. The fourth, the Roman, is designated by the 
grizzled and strong horses, corresponding to those cha- 
racteristics of strength and mingled character;, so pro- 
minent in the fourth empire in Daniel. These also are 
represented in two relations, 1) in their specific bearing 
on the Jewish people, they * go forth into the south coun- 

'-" ' " ' "-' - '1 vi.l-3. --- '. 

2 D*?IBK.. The root, which is so common in Hebrew, has no other meaning 
than that of " strength," as Aquila and Vulg. render, Kaprepol, fortes. The 
guess, that it was. a colour, seems to have arisen from its being joined with other 
colours ; hence LXX tyapol, " dapple-gray," Jon. pJD!?j? from "ashes." Both 
then took it to be equivalent to frVjSi, with which it is joined. The further guess, 
that J>DN might be i. q. pbri, Is. xliii. 1, (Boch". Hieroz. i. p. 111.) was founded 
on the idea, that the "red horses " must be meant in vi..7. But, over and above 
the presumption that fbtf must be 'taken in the uniform sense of the root, it is 
inconceivable, that an epithet, used to describe the horses of the 4th chariot in 
vi. 3. should be used to describe those of the first chariot in vi. 7. Gesenius 
(Thcs. p. 118.) arid even Maurer, Hitzig, gave up the conjectural meaning; 
Ewald would retain it. 3 vi. 8. 4 vi. 6. 



of the four Empires. Book of Baruch. 359 

try.., 2) in their wide-spread solid empire,, by permission 
of God, 5 they walk to and fro in the earth. Upon this 
their establishment there follows, as in Daniel, the pro- 
phecy of the Coming of Christ, 6 the Man Whose name is 
the Branch. 

This, which was in the main the old interpretation of 
Jews 7 and Christians, is free from those difficulties, from 
which those who forsook it have not been able to extricate 
themselves ; but it presupposes the existence of the book 
of Daniel. Daniel's visions could not have been expand- 
ed out of this vision of Zechariah. Zechariah's vision 
would not be suggestive of them. It is not a mere frag- 
ment or sketch, which could be expanded. It itself re- 
quires the explanation, which Daniel's visions, in them- 
selves so full and so one, on the very points upon which 
this is obscure, supply. 

iii. The book of Baruch consists apparently of two 
portions, the former 8 probably translated from the He- 
brew 9 , the latter bearing no marks of a translation. The 
former which is, with an historical introduction, a prayer 
for the Jews in Jerusalem to offer for their brethren, is 
chiefly in the language of the ancient Hebrew Scriptures, 
using largely the language of the law, of Jeremiah, of Da- 
niel. The great prayer of Daniel is made the basis of the 
early portion of the prayer in Baruch, and that, with 
one exception, in the order in which the passages lie in 
Daniel. The agreement then can be no chance coinci- 
dence, as if two persons under the same circumstances 

5 vi. 7. vi. 12. 

' See e.g. Kimchi oh Zech. Dr. Me. Caul's translation,- p. 55.: 6 i iii. 8. 

9 There is no historical statement, that there ever was a Hebrew original. 
In St. Jerome's time there was none. "Among the Hebrews, it is neither 
read, nor possessed." (Prsef. in expos. Jer.) Yet the direction, that it was to 
be used " in the house of the Lord," (i. 14.) implies a Hebrew or Chaldee ori- 
ginal of the prayer ; as does also some of the Greek, (I think, with Tritzsche, 
Exeg. , Hdb. z. d. Apokr. i. 171, 2. and others,) /twaa (for niJJD,) i. 10. o5 
lir' avr^, ii. 26. &si\ fi/j.epa OU'TTJ, (mrr Qi'3,) i. 15. OTTOO-TOA.-/], ii. 25. j8(fyij3i)cm, 
(for jtorj) ii. 29. wepaiKatpov, for ijito' '(?;, i. 14. fpydfcffOai with Dat. "serve," 
(for ity) ii. 22. jrpocre&;a<r0e eh, i. 11. (r^ Jjfeja Ezr. viii. 10.) evvoeiv els, 

>Vx'3i. 16. . , : . ' . 



360 The prayer in Baruch incorporates much from that 

' a had used formulae, then in general use." The agree- 
ment is not in formulae, but in whole verses, and that 
in the same order 3 . Nor can there be any doubt, that 
Daniel is the original, which is filled up and expanded 
in Baruch 3 . The prayer of Daniel is one whole, whose 
inspired thoughts, like those in the Psalms, have formed 
the devotions of 2300 years, ever gushing forth in re- 
newed fulness. It is the prayer of one, whose mind had 
been moulded by the writings of the gfeat prophet of 
the decline of Israel ; and the tones of Moses and Jere- 
miah sound anew in this fresh deep burst of trustful 
love. But the human instrument, which the Spirit of 
God struck, was not Jeremiah or Moses, but Daniel's 
soul. The prayer in Baruch, on the contrary, is a mo- 
saic, formed of jewels from Daniel, Nehemiah, and Jere- 
miah, blended together,yet not forming one distinct whole. 
The book of Baruch bears witness to Daniel on the 
historical side also. For, in that the author mistook ap- 
parently the relation of Nebuchadnezzar and Belshaz- 
zar, speaking of them as contemporaries 4 , he probably 
wrote at a time when the memory of the Chaidee mo- 
narchs had faded, and the book of Daniel was the only 
source of information. The mistake, as it seems to be, 
might arise naturally from Daniel's omission of the 

1 Jahn's solution, Einl. iv. p. 864. 

2 Dan. ix. 7, Bar. i. 15 ; Dan. ix. 8, Bar. i. 16 ; Dan. ix. 10, Bar. i. 21 ; 
Dan. ix. 11, Bar. i. 20 ; Dan. ix. 12, Bar. ii. 1, 2 ; Dan. ix. 13, Bar. ii. 8; Dan. 
ix. 14, Bar. ii. 9, 10. (10 expanded ;) Dan. ix. 15, Bar. ii. 11 ; Dan. ix. 19, end 
of Bar. ii. 15 ; Dan. ix. 18, end of Bar. ii. 16, 17; Dan. ix. 18 end, Bar. ii. 19. 

3 The unbelieving school are bound by their disbelief to disbelieve this, un- 
less they find some date for the book of Baruch, later than Antiochus Epipha- 
nes. So'Dillmann, (in Dorner, Jalirb. iii. p. 480) who thinks the book of Ba- 
ruch "a later off-shoot of the older prophetic literature, not to be so slightly 
estimated," speaks of "its employment in the book of Daniel." Herzfeld hint- 
ed the same, Gesch. Isr. Exc. 2. p. 318, 19. Davidson, assuming B. C. 300 to 
be the date of Baruch, lays down, " the author of Daniel made use of the He- 
brew Baruch in ix. 4-19 which is taken from Bar. i. 15-ii. 17." iii. p. 428. 
Fritzsche, on the other hand, who puts the book late on inadequate grounds, 
can aiford to see that the book of Daniel was used in it, and makes it the chief 
ground for the late date of Baruch. Einl. p. 173. So also De Wette, Einl. 
323. p. 427. Bertholdt, Einl. 427. p. 1750. " i. 11, 12. See Lect. vii. 



of Daniel ; probably written soon after close of Canon. 361 

wretched kings between Nebuchadnezzar and Belshaz- 
zar, who were of no interest to mankind. But then it 
implies, not only the existence of the hook of Daniel, as 
historical authority, hut that there were then no sources, 
from which people's Pseudo-Daniel could have compiled 
his history. 

But although there seem, to me, insuperable difficulties 
against supposing the book of Baruch to have been writ- 
ten at the date assigned in the book itself, the fifth year of 
the Captivity 5 , there is no ground to place it at any late 
date. For, although the latter portion of the book quotes 
a Psalm 6 , probably of the age of Nehemiah, that mostly 
original and beautiful section was probably written not 
so long after the close of the Canon. It is written amid 
hopes of a speedy restoration 7 ; but in a calm atmosphere 

5 "The fifth year" (i. 2.) is doubtless the same date as that in Ezekieli. 2, "the 
fifth year of Jehoiachin's captivity." For " the house of the Lord" is spoken 
of, as still standing, so that "the feasts and solemn days" could be kept, and 
prayer said, there. (Ib. 14.) Nor is there any difficulty in the statement, that 
Jerusalem was " burnt with fire," (i. 2.) since it may have been burnt, and 
the temple have escaped; nor in the account of "the silver vessels" having 
been " made by Zedekiah," (Ib. 8.) which is indeed in itself likely, although 
it does not appear, how they could have been carried off in the five first years of 
Zedekiah's reign ; at least, there is no account of his rebellion until his 9th 
year. It may however have been. It is not right to argue from silence. The 
expression, " that thou art waxen old in a strange land," (iii. 10.) probably 
means " decay," not length of time, lira\a60i]s having probably the meaning 
of nj>5 given to it. But in the prayer, ii. 26, "thehouse oftheLord" is "de- 
solate," and the captivity is spoken of, as complete, (" we are but a few left 
among the heathen, where Thou hast scattered us," ii. 13,) and Jeremiah's 
prophecy of the desolation of Jerusalem and the whole land, as fulfilled, ii. 
21-23. add ii. 29-31. In the fifth year of Jehoiachin's captivity, B. C. 594, 
also,'Belshazzar, who was associated in his father's throne about B.C. 541, was 
probably not born ; nor would he then have been connected with Nebuchad- 
nezzar, as the king, under whose shadow Israel should live, and serve many 
days ; for there were yet 32 years of Nebuchadnezzar's reign remaining, and 
probably 20 years of the intervening kings, including 14 years of Belshazzar's 
father, Labynetus ; nor was Belshazzar in the direct line to the throne. But 
even supposing Balthasar to have been a name of one of the intervening kings 
or of an elder brother of Evil-merodach who never reigned, (it can hardly be a 
name for Evil-merodach himself, since they are named from different patron- 
gods,) still there remains the difficulty that Daniel's prayer was not uttered 
until B. C. 538, and could not have been taken from Baruch's. 

8 Ps. cxlvii. 4. Baruch iii. 34. 1 iv. 22, 24, 25. 



362 Testimony to Daniel in LXX version of Pentateuch. 

of trust, in the consciousness of no troubles beyond those 
which were the results of the Captivity, and with no an- 
ticipation of the distresses of the Maccabee period. It 
was then doubtless written before Antiochus Epiphanes. 

iv. The LXX translation of the Pentateuch at least will 
not be placed by any later than Ptolemy Philadelphus. 
But it has been with good reason remarked that the LXX 
version, in rendering, " a when the Most High divided the 
nations, when He dispersed the sons of Adam, He esta- 
blished the bounds of the nations according to the num- 
ber of the angels of God" instead of " the number of the 
children of Israel," introduced into the Pentateuch the 
doctrine, that Angels are guardians over the several na- 
tions, a doctrine which is no where found out of Holy 
Scripture, and which, within Holy Scripture, is only found 
in Daniel. Of course, some answer must be made, and 
it is answered that the LXX may have drawn it from the 
general belief of the Jews. This only throws the ques- 
tion further back ; for, however the Jews may have ex- 
panded any doctrine, the source of their belief is Holy 
Scripture, rightly or, in later times, wrongly understood, 
and in this case, we have the fountain of the belief before 
us, the book of Daniel. It is found no where else 3 . 

v. The next evidence in point of time is quite apart from 
the religious writings of the Jews, a work of an Alexan- 
drian Jew, the writer of the Jewish Sibylline book. 

Since the investigations of Bleek 3 , Friedlieb 4 , Alexan- 
der 5 , it is certain that the work, which now is found as 
the 3rd Book of the Sibylline Oracles, is entirely distinct 
from the others, that it has (with the exception of very 
few manifest interpolations) no traces of Christianity, and 
that it was written by a Jew about 170 B.C. 6 

1 Deut.xxxii. 8. 2 See Lect. viii. 3 Schleierm. ZS. Heft i. p. 120 sqq. 

4 Orac. Sib. 1852. Einl. 10-17. p. xxii-xxxix. 5 Orac. Sibyll. Exc. 5. e. 1. 
T. ii. p. 314 sqq. 1856. 6 Bleek too saw that the date must be between 
1 70-168 B.C. (Heft ii. p. 222, 3.) The first and successful expedition of An- 
tiochus-against Ptolemy Philometor, was 171, B.C. the 2nd, after which he 
first attacked Jerusalem, 170, B.C.; that from which the finfil persecution 
began was 168, B.C. Ptolemy Philometor was a minor at the time of the 
first expedition. See above p. 152, and Clinton, Fasti Hell, ii.320, 1. 



The 3rd Sibylline book about If, B.C.. 363 

Friedlieb sums up .his analysis of the book thus, " 7 If you 
remove from the third book the later foreign accessions, 
viz. its present beginning, 1-45, and the last ten lines, as 
the latest addition to it ; also v. 47-96, which were written 
about 40-31, B..C,, and if you restore to it the Preface 
which originally belonged to it, such as it has for the most 
partjbeen preserved in Theophilus, you have, as an inde- 
pendent whole, the Sibyl, composed by a Jew about 160, 
B. C., in regard to which it may be unhesitatingly assumed 
that it is the old pr as-Christian Erythraean Sibyl, known 
to Alexander Polyhistor,Varro, Josephus, &c, which Theo- 
philus and Athenagoras u^ed, to which Lactantius as- 
x signed a very especial preeminence, estimating the num- 
ber of its verses at about 1000 8 . From this it appears, 
that little is wanting to our Sibyl ; foi', after deducting 
what is extraneous and adding the genuine fragments, it 
contains 905 verses, so that in all only 95 verses are miss- 
ing, of which some belonged to the Preface, the rest to 
the book itself. 

" This Erythraean was the old Hebrew Sibyl, as it is ex- 
pressly called by Clement, Pausanias, &c. It deserved 
this name the more, since it was composed by .a .Jew, and 
the Old Testament was the chief source of its Oracles. 

"All portions which, according to the accoitnts of the 
old authorities, stood in the Erythraean or Hebrew Si- 
byl, occur in .cur's; a proof that our inference is well- 
founded. We can go a step further. Virgil has in his 
fourth Eclogue the prophecy of the golden age, and as- 
cribes it to the Cumsean Sibyl. This prophecy, which is 
founded on Isaiah xi, also stands in our Sibyl, v. 784-794, 
so that we may attribute to this Sibyl the name of Cu- 
insean, though in this indeed there is a confusion, which 
however could easily arise, since, according to Varro, the 
Cumsean had also the names Amalthsea, Demophile, and 
Herophile." ' 

The writer three times fixes his date by annexing ,the 
prophecies of the conversion of the heathen to the date 

* p. xxxviii, ix. 8 Lact. Inst. Div. i. 6. ! 



364 Writer of 3rd Sibylline quoted book of Daniel, 

of the 7th king, who should rule over Egypt, of Grecian 
race 1 . In the early years of that king or of his reign 8 , 
it mentions the 1st expedition of Antiochus Epiphanes 
against Egypt, his overthrow of the kingdom, his return 
to Asia with great wealth 3 ; but the writer knows nothing 
later of Antiochus, nothing of Maccabsean wars, nor 
of any attempts of Antiochus against his people or the 
temple. Contrariwise he foretells, in language taken 
from ancient prophecy, from Joel and Zechariah, the 
fruitless seige, not by one but by many kings, against Je- 
rusalem and the temple, their utter overthrow by the 
direct interposition of God ; and the entire peace of the 
sons of God, in cities and in the country, God placing 
around them, as it were, a wall of fire. On this was to 
follow the conversion of the heathen 5 . 

The date then of the writer cannot be later than about 
B.C. 170, and before the commencement of the persecu- 
tion by Antiochus. 

Yet at this date he quotes the prophecy of the ten horns 
and the horn which should spring up at their side c ; 
'Etf Sexa Sr) /cepdrcov irapa Sr) tfrvrbv d\\o <J3VTevaei 

Kal rare Sr] irapa<f)v6/j,evov tcepa<; dp^et. 

On the other hand, it is even remarkable that, in re- 
gard to the Messiah, employing, as he does, prophecies 
of Isaiah and Zechariah, he scarcely alludes to those of 
Daniel. It may be, that in the words, " 7 Then from sun- 

1 ffi. 192, 3. 318. 608-10. ed. Frieill. 3 0a(ri\ebs vtos, 608. 3 611-15. 

* iii. 663-709. 6 Ib. 710-731. " Sib. iii. 397. 400. 

1 Ib. 652-5. Kol T<fr' a*' ije\ioio 0ebs Treptyei flcuri\TJa 
*Os iratrav yatai> iravfffi iroKfuoio KaKoto, 

Ovs ii.lv &pa KTtlvas, ols VdpKia, Triffra reheffffas. Lengerke, after Voss, under- 
stands air' i\s\loio to mean, that the Messiah was to come from the sun, i. e. 
from heaven, (p. 337, comp. p. 334.) This would have been expressed by air' 
ovpav&6ev. &v %e\toio, " from the sun-rising," is the converse of Homer's, 
irpbs 'Ha T' 'HeAiJv re, " towards the morning and the sun," i. e. the East. 
The author of the 2nd Sibylline 'book, (a Christian heretic) unites the language 
of Daniel with that of the N. T., hut does not use this expression : 
"But there shall come in a cloud to the Immortal, Immortal Himself, 
Christ in glory, with the excellent angels, 
And He shall sit on the right on a lofty throne, judging 
The life and ways of men, holy and unholy." ii. 242-5. 



found nothing in it to support his temporal hopes. 365 

rising God shall s"end a king, who shall stay all the earth 
from evil war, slaying some, to others fulfilling faithful 
oaths," he may allude to those words in ch. ix, He shall 
confirm the covenant with many in one week. But his 
omission, for the most part, of. the prophecies of Daniel 
as to the Messiah, is a striking answer to those who say 
that the prophecies of Daniel were forged for those times. 
The Sibylline writer was a fanatic ; a modern school would 
class Daniel with him ; and yet, on this suhject of the com- 
mon hopes of the Jews, the Coming of the Messiah, he 
found nothing in Daniel to use for his hopes. 

The first of the modern assailants of the book of Da- 
niel, pointed out the correspondence of the ten horns and 
the other collateral horn with the prophecy of Daniel, and 
also the early date of the Sibyl, and had no other so- 
lution than that both " 8 the Daniel of Palestine and the 
Egyptian author of the Sibylline book drew from an 
earlier and common source/' and that, " yet earlier, it 
was not uncommon to represent Alexander and the king- 
doms formed after his death under the image of an animal 
with ten horns/' whereas, in the timeof Antiochus, there 
had not been ten kings, and there never were ten king- 
doms. " Who could believe it ? " said a later opponent 9 , 

8 Bleek 1. c. 

9 Hilgenfeld, D. Judische Apocalyptik, p. 69. note. Hilgenfeld's expedient 
was to bring the Sibylline book down to 137, B.C. This was to be effected by 
interpreting of Antiochus Epiphanes, what must relate to Alexander, and then 
explaining the sequel, of times after Epiphanes. The words are, " But Mace- 
don shall bring forth heavy woe for Asia, And greatest grief of Europe shall 
shoot forth From bastards of the race of the Cronidse and the race of slaves. 
She [Macedon] shall o'ercome Babylon too, the strong city ; And, of the whole 
earth which the sun surveys Entitled lady, she shall perish by an evil fate, 
Having no law for the late, much-bewailed descendants. Once too shall there 
come unexpectedly to the happy soil of Asia, A man clad with purple robe on his 
shoulders, Fierce, unjust, fiery, lightning-born ; But all Asia shall bear the yoke, 
and the bedewed earth shall drink much slaughter. But thus too shall Ades 
take charge of every one in utter destruction. Whose race he willeth utterly 
to destroy, From their race shall his race utterly perish, Giving forth one sucker ; 
wliich too the destroyer shall cut off From ten horns ; but shall plant another 
plant close by. He shall cut off the warrior father of the purple race, And him- 
self by sons, to whom war becomes an auspicious, likeminded [friend] , Shall 
perish, and then shall the horn, planted hard by, rule." (iii. 381-400.) There 



366 Auxiliary evidence of the date of 3rd Sibylline. 

who thought that he had escaped the difficulty in another 
M r ay. ^ Credulity of the incredulous !" 

is no question, but the fierce conqueror of all Asia and Babylon is Alexander ; 
the term "bastard" "is probably an allusion to Zech. ix. 6, and to his claim to 
descent from Jupiter, (Sib. v. 6, 7.) as it is explained distinctly Sib. ix. [xi] 
195-8. The "one sucker " is perhaps Alexander's son, who was murdered. 
But, in secular history, it is in vain to look for minute meaning in such a wri- 
ter as the author of the 3rd Sibylline. He has one great contriist, Asia and 
Europe, of which Asia, in the empire of the Messiah,' was to requite to Europe 
the ills it had received. The description does not suit Epiphanes. He came, 
not as a conqueror, but redeemed from being a hostage at Rome by his bro- 
ther, whose throne he occupied peacefully, and, in the absence of his nephew 
Demetrius at Rome, lawfully; he sought to extirpate no race, neither the Pto- 
lemies nor that of Demetrius. But with the groundwork the whole theory is 
gone. The wars with the Parthians, in which Demetrius II. lost his liberty, 
and:his brother Antiqchus Sidetes^his life, were to be the explanation of "war 
becoming to the sons their favourer and friend."(Zundel, Daniel, p. 143.) Ziin- 
del (although he inadvertently accepted the explanation of Hilgenfeld) has 
pointed out the following additional evidence that the 3rd Sibylline was not 
later than B.C. 160. 1) The passage about the tower of Babel is cited as the 
Sibyl's by Alexander Polyhistor. .(Ens. Chron. Arm. i. 38.) But he had it from 
Eupolemus. (Eus. Prsep. Evang. iv. 17.)... But " the.work of Eupolemus .cannot 
be later than 160." (kuhhney, Diss. Inaug.) But connected with this, is a pro- 
phecy of empires, not world-empires like Daniel's, but successive powers, so as 
to be an imitation of his prophecy. "He raised up the kingdom ofEgypt.then 
that of the Persians, Medes, Egyptians,, and Babylon of Assyria ; then of the 
Macedonians, again of Egypt, then of Rome." iii. 159-161. 2) That kingdom 
was also in its beginning". " But thereon will be the rule of another kingdom, 
Hoary and many-headed, [the senate] and from the western sea, Which shall 
rule much land, and shake many, And cause fear to all kings afterward, And 
amass much gold and silver from many cities.. ..In those days, there shall: be 
great affliction among men, and shall confuse all, And cut all to pieces and fill ail 
with illj By disgraceful avarice, ill-gained wealth, In 'many countries, and Ma- 
cedonia most. Until the 7th reign, which a king of Egypt shall reign who shall 
be of the race of the Greeks." (iii. 175-193.) This suits the state of Macedonia, 
before its subdual; not after it had become a Roman Province, 168, B.C. 
3) Tribute from Asia was but recent. " Know, then, evil race of Egypt, that thou 
art near destruction, And then will the past year have been best for the Alex- 
andrians, When Rome received the'tribute-bearers of Asia." (348-50.) But then 
the -writer threatens requital -to Rome. The tribute from Asia began with 
the enormous sum, put upon Antiochus the Great, after the battle of Magnesia, 
.190, B.C.; but the threat could not have been after the battle of Pydna, 168, 
B.C. The utmost ambition even of Mithridates was to recover Asia. The 
most decisive proof of the age of the 3rd Sibylline book seems to me that gi- 
ven in the text p. 364. the rest harmonise with it. Philometor too, though 
probably about 10 at his accession, B.C. 181, could hardly have been accounted 
vtos, 21 years afterwards, B.C. 160. 



Extreme accuracy of 1 st Book of Maccabees. 367 

vi. The extreme accuracy of the first Book of Maccabees 
is acknowledged on all hands. It is the history of the Jews 
in that complicated period, wherein they were Drought 
into varied relations with contending powers. The wri- 
ter gives us an outline of the persecution of Epiphanes, 
as connected with his expeditions against Egypt 1 , and 
then, in order of years, the struggles of the Maccabees, 
from the first bold act of Mattathias to the death of the 
last of his sons, Simon. In this period of 34 years, he 
gives 20 dates 3 , names of various persons who claimed 
the throne of Syria, sometimes outlines of their end. 
His facts are in accordance with other history, wherever 
they come in contact ; he inserts written documents 3 , and 

1 1 Mace. i. 16, 20, 29, 54. with three important dates, that of his accession, 
A. S. 137 ; an expedition to Egypt, on the return from which he spoiled Jeru- 
salem, A.S. 143 ; the beginning of his persecution of the Jews, A.S. 145 ; 
CasleulS. 

2 ii.70,A.S. 146, death of Mattathias ; iii. 37, A.S. 147, Antioclms' expe- 
dition to the East ; iv. 28, expedition of Lysias, " the next year ;" iv. 52, A.S. 
148, cleansing of the temple by Judas ; vi. 16, A.S. 149. death of Epiphanes ; 
vi. 20, A.S. 150, Judas' ill success against Lysias, and relief by rivalry of Phi- 
lip, returning from Persia; vii. 1. A.S. 151, Demetrius' escape from Rome, 
murder of Lysias and Eupator by army ; Ib. 43, Adar 13, defeat and death of 
Nicanor ; ix. 3, A.S. 152, expedition of Bacchides, in which Judas was slain ; 
Ib. 57. rest for two years after the death of Alcunus ; x. 1, A.S. 160, war be- 
tween Alexander (Balas,) "son of Ant. Epiph.," and Demetrius; in the 7th 
month Alexander makes Jonathan high-priest ; x. 57, 8, A.S. 162, Ptolemy 
marries his daughter Cleopatra to Alexander ; Ib. 67, A.S. 165, " Demetrius 
son of Demetrius" [i. e. Nicator II.] comes from Crete ; xi. 19, A.S, 167, De- 
metrius is established on the throne by death of Ptolemy on 3rd day after he 
had received the head of Balas ; xiii. 41, 42, A.S. 17Q, yoke of the heathen ta- 
ken away by grant from Demetrius, 1st year of Simon; Ib. 51, A.S. 171, Simon 
recovers at last "the tower in Jerusalem ; " xiv. 1-3, A.S. 172, Demetrius ta- 
ken prisoner by Arsaces ; Ib. 27,35, A.S. 172, 3rd year of Simon, Simon cho- 
sen governor- tind high-priest by the people; xv. 10, A.S. 174, Antioclms (Si- 
detes) " returns from the isles of the sea," (" Rhodes," App. Syr. 68.) to "the 
land of his fathers;" xvi. 14-16, A.S. 177, Simon and two of his sons assassi- 
nated treacherously. 

3 In the answer .from the Roman senate, viii. 23-32, the Latin gleams 
through in three places, (see Grimm ad loc.) The Jiuthor gives a transcript 
(a-vviypafya) Ib. 22, as also of the letter to the Lacedjcmonians, (xii. 5.) and 
their answer, (Ib. 19.) and of a second letter, (xiv. 20.) and of the decree in 
favour of Simon, (xiv.27.) Also he inserts a brief letter of Alexander Balas, (x. 
18-20 ;) a letter of his rival Demetrius, (whose beginning is characteristic, ad- 



368 Internal evidence of the accuracy and 

there is. nothing to contravene their genuineness; his 
dates and names even remarkably stand the test of coins 4 . 
Sharing singularly Judas Maccabaeus' simple trustful es- 
timate of the Roman character 6 , relating the reports 
which reached Judaea just as they reached it 6 , the writer 
is the more remarkable for the knowledge of customs 
and facts, which come within the scope of his relation 7 . 

dressed " to the people of the Jews," and ignoring Jonathan, who had just re- 
ceived the high-priesthood at the hand of Alexander, Ib. 20, 21 .) Ib. 25-45 ; 
a letter of Demetrius in favour of the Jews, (xi. 32-36.) of which a copy was to 
he sent to Jonathan, (Ib. 37.) and another of Demetrius to Simon, xiii. 35-40 ; 
a letter of Antiochus Sidetes to Simon, xv. 1-9. 

4 e. g. in the remarkable title, x. 1, " Alexander, the son of Antioehus, Epi- 
phanes," in which the writer attributes the title Epiphanes to Alexander Balas, 
whereas every one imagined that it must belong to Antiochus Epiphanes, 
whose son Balas claimed to be. But a coin of Balas (in Eckhel, Doctr. num. 
I. III. 228,) bears the title Epiphanes, agreeing with the text. Grimm ad loc. 

3 viii. 1-20. Seeab. p. 160, 1. In speaking of "the terms of studied equa- 
lity " in the treaty granted by the Romans, I did not observe the claim of su- 
periority, unoffensively conveyed in the twice-repeated, " as it hath seemed good 
to Rome," noticed by Grimm ad loc. p. 129. 

6 e. g. as to the capture of Antiochus III. alive by the Romans, viii. 7 ; the 
cession of India and Media as well as Lydia, by Antiochus and the grant of 
themtoEumenes.Ib. 8. The writer expressly says, "Judas had heard," Ib. 1. 
" it was told him also." Ib. 2. He tells accurately an inaccurate report which 
altogether determined Judas. Grimm remarks on the mention of the Gauls, 
(Ib. 2.) that Livy says, " the victory over Antiochus was more glorious to the 
Romans ; that over the Gauls gladder to the allies" xxxvii. 37. The promi- 
nencegivento Spain, (viii. 3.) andthe policy and perseveringness of the Romans, 
(Ib. 4.) are striking, as is the allusion to the yEtolian threat, to carry the war 
into Italy, (Ib. 9) ; the amazement so natural in one, hitherto in contact only 
with Eastern ambition, that no one sought to be Sovereign, (Ib. 14) ; and that 
hitherto they had been free from internal discord. Ib. 16. 

1 These are naturally most observable in the series of persons, kings and 
others, who come in contact with the Jews. The incidental traits are in keep- 
ing ; e. g. the silence observed by Ptol. Philom., when Jonathan's enemies tried 
to irritate him against Jonathan, (xi. 5) ; the way in which Demetrius got 
rid of Lysias and Eupator, without ordering them to be murdered, (vii. 2-4) ; 
Epiphanes' extravagance in gifts and consequent needs, (iii. 30) ; that Lysias 
was of the blood royal, (Ib. 32) ; the mention of " tJie great pit " at Bezeth, 
(vii. 19); Nicanor's hatred, (vii. 26.) connected probably with his previous de- 
feat, (iii. 38) ; minute statement of taxation, very oppressive yet not unexam- 
pled, (see Grimm) mentioned not in complaint, but in treaty promising its 
abolition, (x. 29, 30) ; complex manoeuvring, beyond what appears on the sur- 
face, (Ib, 80, 1) ; the service rendered by the Jewish troops sent by Jonathan 



truthfulness of the 1st Book of Maccabees. 369 

He also tells simply the retreats, defeats, flight, diminu- 
tion, increase, of the Maccabee armies 5 ; how their chiefs, 

to Demetrius, (xi. 44-51) ; hindrance of relief of besieged in the tower at Je- 
rusalem by deep fall of snow, (xiii. 22 ; deep snow is mentioned else, once only 
in Holy Scripture; 2 Sam. xxiii. 20.) the decree of the Romans on receiving 
the shield from Simon, (xv. 20.) that all "pestilent fellows" should be given 
up to Simon, who had fled to other kings and countries, (Ib. 21.) Grimm 
quotes the remark of Josephus (B. J. i. 24. 2.) on a similar grant to Herod ; 
" To no other king did Csesar give such honor, that he should recover one who 
had fled from him even from a city not appertaining to him." Probably the 
grant was made the more readily to Jews, the offences being religious, which 
Eomans did not care about, not civil. The names of kings and countries, to 
which these letters were sent from Rome, are remarkable, in that no one, with- 
out accurate information, would have selected all the names of kings, (e. g. 
Arsaces ;) and that the names of countries are put down without reference to 
relative situation ; yet even Sampsames, which was an enigma in old times, 
(the Vulg. has Lampsacus,) is now recognised to be Samsum, a town, " held 
in considerable respect," in the gulf of S. (Ker Porter, Trav. ii. 690.) between 
Sinope and Trebizond, mentioned by Abulfeda, (I. D. Mich, ad loc.) The 
Epistle to the lung of Syria was addressed to Demetrius, (xv. 22.) who was 
king when it was despatched, but, when it arrived, was a prisoner in Parthia. 
Of customs, may be named; slave-merchants attending a conquering army, 
(iii. 41); intoxicating drink given to, and even set before, elephants to stimulate 
them, (vi. 34) ; then- " Indian," (Ib. 37) ; the " clasp of gold," as a token of 
royal favour, (x. 89. xi. 58); that there were different classes of "the friends 
of the king," (x. 65) ; the office of o-i-paTijyJs in Syrian rule, (Ib.); " leave to 
drink in gold," xi. 58. 

5 Judas, in the second battle at Bethoron, had "a small company," (iii. 16) ; 
then 3000, but ill-armed, (iv. 6) ; after the victory over Gorgias, he had 10,000, 
(iv. 29) ; after the retreat of Lysias, he and his brother had 11,000, besides a 
reserve, (v. 17-21.) which must have been considerable, since its commander, 
fighting against orders, lost in one battle 2000 men. (Ib. 60.) Against Lysias 
with his larger army he is unsuccessful ; probably by a bold charge, he de- 
stroys 600 men, (vi. 42) ; his- brother sacrifices himself in vain, (Ib. 43-6) ; his 
army retreats. (Ib. 47.) After the intrigues of Alcimus, he had only 3000 men, 
(vii. 40.) with which he defeated Nicanor, probably through his own personal 
prowess, since Nicanor's death determined the battle. (Ib. 43, 4.) He has again 
only 3000 against Bacchides, of whom all but 800 fled in the battle in which he 
fell. (ix. 5-6, 18.) After this Jonathan had but a company, whom his opponents 
thought to take in one night, (ix. 58.) who were besieged in a city " in the 
wilderness" (of Tekoa.) Ib. 62. He does not appear at the head of an army, un- 
til Demetrius, (over against Alexander Balas, x. 4, 5,) gave him authority to 
gather an host, and released the hostages. (Ib. 6-8.) After Alexander had 
made him Meridarch, (Ib. 65.) he could select 10,000 men from Jerusalem, be- 
sides those under Simon, (x. 74.) In a battle with an army of Demetrius, on 
a surprise, almost all his men flee, but return, (xi. 72, 3.) " Horsemen " ap- 
pear in the Jewish armies for the first time under Simon, yet then too were 

B b 



370 Internal evidence of exactness of Mattathias' speech. 

in their openhearted character, fell into snares * ; and how 
they were relieved by events in their assailants' history, 
rather than by their own power 2 . He writes in a sim- 
ple unimpassioned way, leaving the history to make its 
own impression. 

We have then good ground to think, that the few sim- 
ple words of the dying Mattathias, the parent of the 
Maccabee heroes, are likely to have been faithfully pre- 
served. They are a few energetic short discriminating 
sentences, such as such a man would speak, when trans- 
mitting to his sons the cause of the faith, around which 
he had rallied them. The direction, as to the part to be 
taken by his sons, is not what men have looked for, but 
is verified by thoughtful attention to the history 8 . Two 

very inferior in numbers, (xvi. 4, 7 ) He then " chooses out of the country 
20,000 men of war." (Ib. 4.) 

1 xii. 46-48. xvi. 11-16. In the same simplicity, the Asidteans trusted AI- 
cinms and Bacchides, because " he, a priest of the seed of Aaron, is come with 
this army and he will do us no wrong," (vii. 14.) and those in Jerusalem ad- 
mitted Lysias and Eupator into mount Zion, whereon they destroyed its walls^ 
vi. 61, 2. 

8 The peace with Antiochus Eupator was granted to them in their extre- 
mities, on advice of Lysias, on the ground of the return of Philip, the rival 
of Lysias, vi. 54-63. Bacchides left them in peace for 2 years, the king of Sy- 
ria having all the strong places in the country, ix. 50-7. Demetrius, in dread 
of his rival Alexander Balas, authorised Jonathan to raise an army, (x. 6.) 
whereon Jonathan re-fortified Jerusalem, (Ib. 10, 11 .) Grant of high-priesthood 
from Alexander, (Ib. 18-20) ; immunities offered to the Jews by Demetrius on 
the condition of their supplying him with 30,000 men, (Ib. 22-45) ; rejected, 
because Demetrius was not believed, whereas Alexander was, (Ib. 46, 7.) Fa- 
vor shewn to Jonathan by Alexander when successful. (Ib. 59-66.) Further 
favor, when he had defeated Apollonius, general of Demetrius II. (Ib. 88, 9.) 
After Alexander's death (xi. 17.) good terms given by Demetrius, (Ib. 23-37.) 
but troops asked for and sent. (Ib. 42-44.) After his breach of promise, (Ib. 53.) 
Jonathan accepts favours from Antiochus son of Balas and Tryphon, (Ib. 57- 
60.) renews the alliance with Rome, (xii. 3.) On Tryphon's treacherous mur- 
der of Jonathan, (Ib. 42-48. xiii. 23.) and of Antiochus, (xiii. 31.) Simon sought 
and obtained recognition by Demetrius, (Ib. 34-40.) renewed treaties with 
Rome, (xiv. 16-19.) with present. (Ib. 24.) Terms renewed by Antiochus Si- 
detes, when trying to regain his father's kingdom, (xv. 1-9.) broken, when 
successful. (Ib. 27.) Letters from Rome to different kings and countries in 
favor of the Jews, in acknowledgment of their present. (Ib. 15-24.) The 
book closes with the murder of Simon by his son-in-law shortly afterwards. 

3 Mattathias designates Simon as "a man of counsel," and bids them "give. 



Exact, but simple, reference to look of Daniel in it. 371 

points have been observed in that speech, as bearing on 
the book of Daniel. '!) His mention of DanieFs compa- 
nions and of Daniel in the same simple way, in which he 
had named other Scripture-examples before them, Abra- 
ham, Joseph, Phinehas, Joshua, Caleb, David, Elias 4 ; 
and that, in the order in .which their deliverances are re- 
lated in the book, Daniel's companions being named be- 
fore himself. Their histories too are touched on in a sin- 
gle word, as recorded in Daniel. " 6 Ananias, Asarias, 
and Misael, by believing were saved out of the flame. 
6 Daniel, for his innocency, was delivered from the mouth 
of lions." 2) His acknowledgement that a time of de- 
struction was come 7 , such as Daniel had foretold ; and 
his absolute certainty as to the issue, such as the know- 
ledge of the prophecies of Daniel would justify. 

"The words of dying men are not written down," 
they say. True ! but the glowing words of faith of such 
a father as Mattathias are written in the table of the 
heart, and live there in the breasts of sons, and, if need 
were, of sons' sons. 

ear to him, he shall be a father to you," whereas Judas he describes as " mighty 
and strong from his youth ; let him be your captain." (1 Mace. ii. 65, 6.) Grimm 
criticises this, as a mere mistake of the relater, since Simon too had the sole 
command, after the deaths of Judas and Jonathan, and Judas might hare 
" shewn counsel, had he lived." But the characteristic of Judas, which fitted 
him to be captain then with their handful of men, was the personal lion-heart- 
ed strength and courage, by which he made those sudden assaults which threw 
superior numbers into confusion, (1 Mace. iii. 11, 23. iv. 3, 4. v. 28, 33. ix. 14, 
15.) in one of which assaults, surrounded by superior numbers, he fell. (ix. 16, 
18.) Simon was associated in a subordinated command by Judas, (1 Mace. v. 
17-23.) and afterwards was joined with Jonathan, (Ib. ix. 33.) yet still as sub- 
ordinate, (Ib. 65. xi. 59, 64. xii. 33, 38.) the authority remaining with Jona- 
than. (Ib. x xii.) Not until all his brethren were dead, did he have the 
chief command. - 4 ii. 52-60. 

5 Ib. 59. comp: Dan. iii. 17, 18, 28. 6 Ib. 60. comp. Dan. vi. 22. 

1 On the one side, the strong word iortj/oix" 1 ) i s used ii. 49. (yvv icrriipt-xfiii 
virzprjtyavia Kal E\Ey,uos Kal Kaipbs KaraffTpo^ris Kal opyrj dv/j.ov ;) on the Other, 
Mattathias bids them confidently, not to fear " the words of a sinful man." 
(i/5pos aiiapT(a\ov.~) Ib. 62. This is independent of the question whether, in 
the Kaipbs Ka.TaffTpo<prjs, there be any reference to the Katpbs ffwrttelas in Dan. 
viii. 19. xi. 35. The word " sinner" is not applied to the heathen as such, (as 
Grimm says, on i. 34,) but to some special antagonism to God and His laws. 

Bb2 



372 ,1st book of Maccabees, before death of Hyrcanus , 

" But the date of the book itself, embodying this mention 
of the two miraculous deliverances in Daniel, as well as 
that of the " l abomination of desolation," in those same 
Greek words, by which the LXX had translated those of 
Daniel, was, probably, early in the life of John Hyrcanus. 
For the first book of Maccabees breaks off with the ac- 
count of the assassination of Simon, and the carrying- of 
the tidings to his son John. The rest of the history of 
Johnwas contained " il in the chronicles of his priesthood, 
from the time he was made high priest after his father." 
The writer's ground for breaking off was, he says, that 
what remained had been written already. But the fact of 
the history of Hyrcanus having been written would not 
have shewn this, had Hyrcanus been dead and had there 
been a period beyond him. This history of their former 
war had also a special history, before the war of freedom 
was over. The expression also, " 2 the rest of the acts, 
&c.they are written in the chronicles of," naturally signi- 
fies that they were written in chronicles kept contempo- 
raneously year by year. He refers, as do the older wri- 
ters whose language he adopts 3 , to chronicles officially 
kept, not to any book publicly circulated 4 . The writer 
only names the time when they began, to signify that they 
left no gap from the time when he left off. Nor do the 
facts, which he says were contained in those chronicles, 
necessarily go down far in the life of Hyrcanus. " 2 The 
rebuilding of the walls of Jerusalem " was naturally his 
first act on throwing off the Syrian yoke, when he heard 

1 f)5fK.vyiJLa. eprifntaffews, i. 54, from Dan. ix. 27. xi. 31. 2 1 Mace. end. 

3 1 Kgs. [3 Kgs. LXX.] xiv. 19, 29, &c. 4 Grimm rests his argu- 

ment solely on the supposed circulation. He says, " Our writer refers to these 
annals, as to a book in extensive circulation, accessible to his readers. But it 
cannot be well supposed, that it came into public use before it was completed 
at the death of John Hyrcanus." p. xxiv. But it is one thing that writings should 
be " accessible;" quite another, that they should be " in circulation." As it is 
quite certain that those other chronicles of the Kings of Judah and Israel were 
not in circulation, so, doubtless, this phrase, adopted from the old books, meant 
what it meant before, that they were state-documents, accessible but not in cir- 
culation. Those documents, if kept annually, were accessible, in any year of 
the reign of Hyrcanus, down to that period. 



probably about B.C. 125, certainly before B.C. 105. 373 

of the death of Antiochus Sidetes 5 , B.C. 1 27 6 . The wars 
were ended soon after, and a long peace was secured by 
the Syrian civil wars 7 . The main wars were over then, 
B.C. 125, and all which the writer of the 1st hook of 
Maccahees speaks of, as contained in the chronicles of 
Hyrcanus, falls in that period. Probably then it was 
written about B.C. 125. Soon after, Samaria was destroy- 
ed, and the last ashes of war extinguished, B.C. 109. Any 
how a very accurate and simple writer, who lived before the 
death of Hyrcanus, B.C. 105, writing of a period at most 
60, probably only some 40, years before, having access 
also to written documents 8 , relates that Mattathias, the 
father of those whose history he relates, on his deathbed 
encouraged his sons with histories taken from the book 
of Daniel together with other canonical Scriptures. And 
this, three years before the time, when, on the rationalist 
hypothesis, the book is to have been written. He him- 
self quotes the book of Daniel, as bearing on those times. 
But, beyond the direct citations, the whole history of 
the Maccabees, as recorded in that book, is inconsistent 
with men's invention of a Pseudo-Daniel in the time of 
the Maccabees ; while the absence of any expectation or 

5 The wars, in which he subdued Samaria and incorporated Edom, followedim- 
mediately after the death of Antiochus, and were probably not long protracted ; 
for " most of the cities were void of fighting-men." Medaba alone resisted for 
six months. The temple of Samaria was destroyed, some " 200 years after " it 
had been built by permission of Alexander, B.C. 332. (Jos. Ant. xiii. 9. 1.) Soon 
after, was the Roman edict which confirmed Hyrcanus. (Ib. 2.) After a long 
interval of peace, Samaria was destroyed, one of the generals of Antiochus Cy- 
zicenus perished, the other sold to Hyrcanus what remained in the hands of 
Syria. (Ib. xiii. 10. 1-3.) 

6 See Clinton, F. Hell. T. iii. p. 335. ' 7 First, between Antiochus Gry- 
pus and Alexander Zebina ; then, between Antiochus Grypus and Cyzicenus. 
Josephus says ; "After the death of Antiochus (Sidetes,) Hyrcanus revolted 
from the Macedonians, and neither as subject, nor as friend, did he yield them 
anything. But his affairs were advancing greatly, and were at their height, 
in the times of Alexander Zebina and especially of those two brothers. For 
then- war with each other gave Hyrcanus leisure, &c." 

8 The identity of the formula used at the death of Judas (ix. 22.) with that 
as to Hyrcanus (xvi. 23.) and those in the books of Kings, leaves me no doubt 
that the writer meant, that the other acts of Judas and his wars, &c. were " not 
written " in the document from which he took the rest. 



374 History in \st book of Maccabees contradicts 

looking for the Messiah then, falls in, as I said 1 , with the 
natural exposition of the prophecy of the 70 weeks. The 
Pseudo-Daniel, men say, wrote to " 2 encourage his coun- 
trymen in their great struggle against Antiochus." Then, 
we should have the phenomenon of a contemporary, wri- 
ting to inspire his countrymen with the helief that their 
struggles would he ended by the coming of the Great De- 
liverer, and a minute, natural, accurate, history of 34 
years of those struggles, written in all the simplicity of 
trustin God, that He, Who had delivered their forefathers, 
would, in His ordinary Providence, give them the victory, 
hut without the slightest thought of any unusual inter- 
vention 3 . There is not one hope of a future temporal 
deliverance, hut a calm waiting in religious matters for 
the time, when a " 4 Prophet should arise." '< We miss," 
says a writer 5 , candid on the whole but unbelieving, "we 
miss something essential in those speeches of the book. 
For although no tradition had been preserved to us, we 
must have pre-supposed, as necessarily involved in the re- 
ligious mind 6 [of the people,] that the hopes of the Mes- 
siah should scarcely ever have kindled up clearer and 
more glowing than in that extreme trouble under Antio- 
chus Epiphanes, and that those hopes would have been the 
mightiest impulse to animate to the most dauntless, bold- 
est, struggle, and the most joyous endurance." Yet the 
history is too vivid, too graphic, not to be true to the life. 
It is consistent with itself. The actors in it look to 
God's ordinary Providence, that He will give to the few 
the victory over the many, on the whole ; they are not 
dejected by defeat ; they look around and avail themselves 
ably of human help ; they act as religious men, with the 
belief that God willed to preserve His people, looking for 
no extraordinary interposition, but with what we should 
call good practical wisdom. They expect a prophet, but 

1 ]Lect. iv. p. 228-30. * Dr. Williams, Ess. and Rev. p. 76. 

* iii. 18-22. 43, 4. 52, 3, 59, 60. iv. 10, 11. 24, 5. 30-3. v. 32, 3. vii. 37, 8. 41, 
2. ix. 46. 4 See ab. p. 228. 5 Grimm, Kurzgef. Hdb. z. d. Apokr. T. iii. 
p. xix. 6 lit." a religious-psychological necessity." 



unbelieving theories as to book of Daniel. 375 

hereafter. The book of Daniel, according to the author- 
ship and object imputed by these men, would be at vari- 
ance with all this ; and all this, with the imputed pur- 
pose of the book of Daniel. The Pseudo-Daniel is to have 
written a series of prophecies, bearing upon the times of 
Antiochus ; he is to have ascribed them to an ancient pro- 
phet, and to have stated that they were to be kept con- 
cealed until his own time : those prophecies are to have 
been produced at the time of the Maccabees, in order to 
awaken the expectation of a supernatural deliverer, who 
should give them the victory, and establish a temporal 
"kingdom of the saints," i. e. of the Jews. The prophe- 
cies, framed, as is alleged, for this end, are to have been 
received largely and at once, and are to have been placed 
unhesitatingly at once among their sacred scriptures; 
they are to have been referred to thenceforth as prophe- 
tic truth, and yet there is not one trace of their having 
the slightest influence on the minds of the people, in in- 
spiring those hopes, which they are to have been forged 
to create. The history of the Maccabees, as the authen- 
tic history of those times, contradicts the unbelieving 
theories as to Daniel. 

The first book of Maccabees was, I think, probably 
written in Hebrew 7 . Had the Greek been the original, 

1 S. Jerome doubtless means to say that he had seen the original Hehrew of 
the first book of Maccabees. " Maccabaeorum primum librum hebraicum reperi; 
secundus grmcus est, quod ex ipsa quoque phrasi probari potest. " (Prol. gal.) 
For the fact, that the language itself of the 2nd book shewed that it was Greek, 
would have had no bearing on the former statement, unless he had meant that 
the first was originally Hebrew. Origen's statement that they had a Hebrew 
title implies the same. " External to these [the canonical books] are the Mac- 
cabees which are entitled Sarbeth Sarbane el." (in Bus. H. E. vi. 25.) For 
they would not have been known to the Greek-speaking Church by a Hebrew 
title, unless such had been the original title. Hebraisms, of course, in them- 
selves prove nothing; for one, who thinks in his own language and writes in 
another, is, in fact, translating, although mentally. One e. g. who had the 
word 'jaS in Us mind, might just as well use Ivwrlov for it, instead of tvdnriov, 
as one who had it before his eyes ; and so on. But mistakes in translating 
shew that the writer and translator were different. The "two and thirty 
strong men " upon each elephant seem likely to be for " two or three ;" (W 
for nwi mho. (vi.37.) The difficult words, "At Saramel," (xiv.28.) 



376 Evidence from the Greek additions to the book 

the quotation of the LXX 1 would have been by the origi- 
nal writer, about 125-109 ; and in that case, the book of 
Maccabees would have involved an earlier date of the 
book of Daniel, on the ground of the following argument 
also. If the original was Hebrew, it is only the Greek 
translator of the Maccabees, who has adopted the trans- 
lation of the LXX for the term in Daniel. 

vii. It is admitted that a considerable interval elapsed 
between the writing of the book of Daniel and its trans- 
lation; and that, on the ground both of the additions to 
Daniel, contained in the LXX and admitted to be con- 
temporary with it; (viz. the prayer and song of the three 
children, the history of Susanna, and that of the destruc- 
tion of Bel and the Dragon,) and also of the character of 
the translation itself. 1) The history of Susanna was 
confessedly written in Greek 2 . In regard to the other ad- 
ditions there are no data. But, since they were not in 
the Hebrew, and since the history of Bel and the Dragon 
is evidently founded in part on the history of Daniel in 
the Hebrew Canon, some interval must have elapsed be- 
tween the writing of the book of Daniel, and the gather- 
ing of these additions to it. 

But 2) the LXX translation of the book itself is, even 
in important places, so remarkable a modification of it,' 
that a long interval must have elapsed between the time 
when it was written and when it was so translated. 
The Greek itself is, in many parts, purer and more ele- 
gant than that of any other of the LXX translations. 

seem to be most easily explained by a mistake of 1 for 3, ^K oy inn, so that it 
should run, " Simon the high priest and prince of the people of God," (Werns- 
dorf's conjecture.) " Elam " is called a "city," (vi. 1.) perhaps as a faulty 
translation of n}ni?, "city" or "country;" but perhaps also in that the name 
of the country is given to the capital, as Arabic writers call Memphis or Cairo, 
"Misr," originally Egypt." (Grimm, p. 91.) Still most of the cases alleged, 
although possible, are not decisive. Thus the words, " be ye instead of me and 
my brother," (xvi. 3.) probably allude to the last brother with whom he was 
so long associated, (Jonathan ;) so that there is no reason to think that it is a 
mistake of fi$ for 'OS- Yet there. are other minute expressions, which seemed 
to me, on the whole, indicative of a translation. l See ab. p. 372. n. 1. 

. 2 No other explanation can be given of the verbal allusions, 54, 5. 58, 9. 



of Daniel, and from the character of the translation. 377 

The translator avoided Hebraisms, which Theodotion 
subsequently restored, and, in some places, substituted 
a classical Greek word. But in the same mind of re- 
commending it and his people to the readers, he mani- 
foldly glossed the text. In the historical portion, he in- 
serted statements, more or less full, which he thought 
would make the narrative easier, or would explain it, or 
would increase its effect, or meet some lesser difficulties. 
On the other hand, he omitted or changed statements, 
which he thought would be unacceptable to his reader, 
and modified some doctrines. He made both Nebu- 
chadnezzar and Darius more religious and more tho- 
roughly converted, than Daniel states them to have been. 
He explained, who, he believed, Darius was. The mira- 
culous accounts place us in quite a different atmosphere 
from that in which we live in Daniel. The translator 
made large additions, condensed, transposed, repeated, 
as he thought would be acceptable. In some cases, his 
thoughtsmusthave turned on the times in which he lived ; 
as, when he made the insanity of Nebuchadnezzar the pu- 
nishment for his sacrilege against the house of God, and 
placed the dream, which predicted it a year before, in his 
18th year, the year of the capture of Jerusalem, and of 
the destruction of the temple 3 . 

The translation of the later historical prophecy, (ch.xi.) 
is remarkable in another way. The prediction is to have 
been, (Porphyry and his school say,) history in the form 
of prophecy, because it is so exact. Of all this historical 
prophecy, the translator understood well one part, just 
that which a Jew, living at the time at Alexandria, would 
know, or what happened in Egypt itself. He para- 
phrases rightly the words, " 4 there shall come ships of 
chittim," by, "And the Romans shall come and shall ex- 
pel him, and shall rebuke him strongly," in allusion to 
the peremptory way in which Popilius cut short the sub- 
terfuges of Epiphanes. But in the whole previous pro- 

3 All this will be seen most vividly by an actual comparison of the LXX with 
the text, for which see Note E. 4 Dan. xi. 30. 



378 Evidence from historical mistakes of the translator, 

phecy, from the successors of Cyrus to Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, at every stage, in every step of every stage, he 
shews himself to be ignorant of the history. He trusts 
himself with it as little as he can. A literal translation 
would, of course, have guided him aright, wherever there 
was no uncertainty of construction; but, on whatever 
ground, down to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, he al- 
most always distorts the facts, because he would not trust 
himself with a literal translation. Porphyry and his 
school have maintained that it would have been an easy 
thing, in the time of Epiphanes, to write the prophecies 
of Daniel, on the ground that they could understand them 
by aid of the histories at their command 1 . The case was 
very different, when those histories were not written 2 . 
Tradition, or ordinary learning, did not suffice. The re- 
markable failure of a Jew at the time of Epiphanes, even 
with the prophecy of Daniel before him, well-read as he 
was in Greek, (as the character of his Greek, here and 
there, shews,) is an argument, which must strike any mind, 
which wills not to be blind. It is even strange that the 
translator of Daniel could have failed so uniformly. The 
exception as to Popilius, in which he even added, (as his 
way was,) what was not in Daniel, marks his own date. 
There was nothing to fix this one fact in the memory of 
a later generation, more than so many which he distorted 
for want of any traditional or historical knowledge of the 
past. In this case, he added real facts to those foretold 
by Daniel, as, in other cases, he perverted the facts which 
lay before his eyes in the prophet. Yet all this was not 

1 " To understand the latter part of Daniel, manifold Greek history is neees- 
ary; viz. Callinicus Sutorhte [3rd cent. A.D.] Diodorus, Hieronymus, [3rd 

cent. B.C.] Polybius, Posidonius, Claudius, (about 100, B.C. Smith, Biogr. 
Diet. v. Quadrigarius) Theon, and Andronicus Alipius, (about 112-51, B.C. 
Smith) whom Porphyry too says that he followed ; Josephus also and those 
whom Josephus puts down, and especially our Livy, and Pomponius Trogiis 
and Justin, who relate the whole history of the last vision, and after Alex- 
ander down to Caesar Augustus describe the wars of Syria and Egypt, i. e. of 
Seleucus, Antiochus, and the Ptolemies." S. Jerome, Prsef. to Daniel. 

2 Polybius did not apparently begin his historyuntilafter 145,B.C. See Smith, 
Diet. iii. 144. 



and his falsifying of the prophecy of the 70 iveeks. 3/9 

for want of knowledge of the original language, which he 
understood well, except perhaps, in places, some anti- 
quated words of the prophet's date. 

In the prophecy of the 70 weeks, the translator again 
repeatedly falsifies the time, in order to make it fit in 
with that of Epiphanes. For the dates of the original, 
he twice substitutes seven, and seventy, and sixty two, 
making 139. This, according to the era of the Seleu- 
cidse "which the Jews used, comprised the second year 
of the reign of Epiphanes, soon after whose accession 
Onias was deposed, to which act this writer probably 
alluded in his unfaithful paraphrase, "chrism shall be re- 
moved." Apparently, he meant the first date of "seventy 
weeks" to be literal weeks, since he renders, as if Daniel 
himself were to see them ; in his next numbers he sup- 
plied "years," capriciously effacing the word "weeks; " 
and then, at the end, under the " week," " weeks," means 
again literal "weeks of days." Thus he makes the later 
part of the prophecy a prophecy of the chequered but suc- 
cessful resistance to Antiochus, ending not in the de- 
struction of the city and of the sanctuary, but in a se- 
cond rebuilding of the city 3 . And this he does, altering 

3 This will be seen best by a translation of the whole. (In order to repre- 
sent the original more exactly, I have not supplied the article where it is omit- 
ted.) " Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon the city of 
Sion ; that the sin be accomplished and the iniquities become rare, and to wipe 
away the iniquities and the vision be thoroughly understood, and everlasting 
righteousness be given, and the visions and a prophet be consummated, and to 
gladden a holy of holies. And thou shalt be gladdened, and shalt find commands 
that answer be made, and shalt build Jerusalem, a city to the Lord. And after 
seven and seventy and sixty two, chrism shall be removed and shall not be ; 
and a. kingdom of gentiles shall corrupt the city and the holy place with the 
anointed ; and the consummation thereof shall come with anger, and unto time 
of consummation it shall be warred upon by war. And the covenant shall 
have might towards many, and it shall return and shall be built again in length 
and breadth, and at consummation of times ; and after seventy and seven times 
and in sixty two years, unto time of consummation of war, and the desolation 
shall be taken away, through the prevailing of the covenant for many weeks, 
and at the end of the week the sacrifice and the drink-offering shall be taken 
away, and on the temple shall be an abomination of the desolations unto end, 
and end shall be given upon the desolation." 

No theory of different readings will explain these variations. The transla- 
tor seems to have taken like words suggested by the text, ad libitum, yet with- 



380 LXX translator altered Daniel to make it Lear on 

and transposing the words of the text as suited his pur- 
pose, repeating of the later time what belonged to the ear- 
lier, so that it has even heen thought that we had a con- 
fusion of different translations 1 . He did, in effect, make 
his translation, what a modern school has accused the 
writer of making the hook, a direct hut fraudulent encou- 
ragement in the Maccabee struggle. But he effected it 
by falsifying the text of the Prophet; whence the Church 
rejected his translation 2 alone out of the LXX. People 

out any possibility of uniting them in a Hebrew construction. The first devi- 
ation no change could account for. He gives apparently a double translation 
of jtoiy DPti^i, reading the 2nd time, Dfln^ "and to bring to an end a vision;" 
"gladden," lie obtains by substituting oe'g^> for r&$}. It is mere guess-work, 
how he came to add " thou shalt be gladdened," (one conjecture is as good as 
another ; it may be a mere repetition.) Then, in nfoaVi 3'?^ 127 N$b-|D, there 
are materials for his words, "find," " command," " answer," " build," but not 
so that any Hebrew could put them together : for ij) he has ~iy, " city," and for 
" Messias prince " he substitutes " Lord." Then he springs to v. 26, substi- 
tutes for the D's^jj the njjaip ays? of v.25. and renders, as Kit were D'jn?!. Then 
having got through, as best he could, to the first words of v. 27. " and he 
shall confirm a covenant with many," he goes back to the end of v. 25. which 
he had omitted, substituting however "consummation of times," for "strait of 
tunes." Then he repeats again the date at the beginning of v. 26. but passes 
oyer to the end of it, which had before suggested the words, " and unto time 
of consummation it shall be warred upon by war," and translates, "and unto 
time of consummation of war ; " and out of nicety' ra"iJj, " decreed desolations," 
he gains his, "desolations shall be taken away;" (much as if we were to say 
that " decision " meant " cutting off," " ending : " ) then he inserts again the 
prevailing of the covenant, but, this time, " for many " (he adds) " weeks," 
supplying "weeks" from the y&y following : ^Q "half" seems, by its sound, 
to have suggested j>j5, " end," and then he gets tolerably to the end of the 
prophecy. 

1 Zundel, (p. 177-182.) who makes it an argument for the higher date of the 
original, in that there had been time for successive translations. To me it seems 
too continuous a whole, to be the result of chance combinations of different 
translations. 

2 " Except the LXX translators, who'passed over all this, I know not why, 
the three other interpreted, 'colleague.' Whence, by the judgment of the 
doctors of the Church, their edition tvas repudiated 'in this volume, andTheo- 
dotion's is commonly read, which agrees both with the Hebrew and with the 
other translators." S. Jerome on Dan. iv. 5. In his Preface to his version, 
he expresses doubt how the LXX translation of Daniel came to be bad, but 
asserts, in the same way, that it was deliberately rejected for its defects. 
" The Churches do not read Daniel according to the LXX translators, using 
the version of Theodotion. And why this happened, I know not. Whether, 



times of Epiphane.s. Interval between it and the book. 381 

do not gloss the book of a contemporary. It is not until 
a book has long had authority, and has had its place in 
the minds or souls of men. that men write glosses upon 
it. They do so, because their text has authority. Fur- 
ther, this proceeding of the LXX translator attests that 
the book, actually in existence and acknowledged, was 
not the encouragement which human policy wanted, to 
stimulate the people in their resistance. The book of 
Daniel, as written, was an encouragement to persevere 
under trial ; as falsified, it became a stimulus to religious, 
which ended in becoming a political, resistance. It is re- 
markable that, in the prophecy of the 70 weeks, it effaces 
the doctrine of the Messiah, teaching people, as far as its 
influence went, to look for nothing beyond the present. 

The opponents of the book of Daniel admit that along 
interval must have elapsed between the writing and the 
translation 3 . But the translation bears marks of being 
of the time of Epiphanes. There is then no room for 
such an interval, unless the book of Daniel was written, 
when, place it where men will, if they place it before Epi- 
phanes, it contained prophecy of events utterly undis- 
cernible by man. 

viii. I will only add briefly that there is one more evi- 
dence to Daniel in these times, the book of Enoch. A 
writer or writers of a portion of it had studied the book 

because the language is Chaldee and in some peculiarities differs from our idiom, 
the LXX were unwilling to retain in the translation the same lineaments of 
language, or whether the hook was published under their name by another, (I 
know not whom,) not adequately acquainted with Chaldee, or whether there 
was any other cause, I know not ; this one thing I can affirm, that it differs 
much from the truth, and was, by a sound judgment, repudiated." Praef. in 
vers. Dan. S. Justin and Tertullian used the LXX. " Origen asserts in the 
9th volume of his 'miscellanies,' (stromateis,) that from this place (iv. 5. Ch. 
8. Eng.) in the prophet Daniel he comments not according to the LXX, who 
vary much from the Hebrew truth, but according to the edition of Theodo- 
tiom" (S. Jer. on Dan. iv. 5.) 

3 Lengerke said, p. xxvi, " For its composition a space of from 50-60 years 
was fully sufficient." De Wette at one time " maintained that the LXX 
translation of Daniel must, from its character, have been made a considerable 
time after the publication of Daniel." Einl. p. 358. quoted by Hav. Einl. ii. 
p. 458. In De Wette's last edition, this statement was removed. - 



382 Book of Enoch speaks of the Messiah, chiefly as the 

of Daniel, so that both his language and thoughts re-ap- 
pear in it, combined with those of other propheticwritings. 
It does not, like the Sibylline book, simply quote one or 
two remarkable predictions. Its writers were diligent 
students of the prophetic Scriptures, and had combined 
their teaching into a whole, partly right partly wrong, 
in the way of uninspired reflection. But the use of the 
prophet Daniel is the more remarkable, because it is the 
result of reflection upon his writings as part of a whole, 
and that whole, Holy Scripture. I will name only two 
chief subjects, the doctrine of the Messiah and of Angels. 
1) The inculcation of a day of retribution is the chief 
object and moral of the book of Enoch. The chief doc- 
trine then, as to the Messiah, selected in it from Daniel, 
is that of "the Son of Man, sitting" in His glory. With 
this title of " the Son of Man" is combined that of " the 
Chosen," from Isaiah; and "the Chosen" is even the 
most frequent name, although the two names alternate. 
The then future worship of all nations is spoken of, in 
language of the Psalms, and the gifts of His Humanity in 
that of Isaiah, and the then present revelation of Him by 
the prophets ; still the central thought, which introduces 
the mention of Him, is judgment to come, as in Daniel 1 . 

1 xlv. 3-5. "On that day will the Chosen sit on the throne of glory, and 
will make choice among their deeds and abodes innumerable, and their spirit 
will be strong within them when they see My Chosen, and those who have 
prayed to My holy and glorious Name. And on that Day will I let My Chosen 
dwell among them, and will transform the heaven and make it everlasting 
blessing and light. And I will transform the earth and make it a blessing, 
and will make my chosen dwell in it, &c." So the sequel of the passage already 
quoted as to the Son of Man (p. 84.) is, " because the Lord of hosts has chosen 
Him, and His lot before the Lord of spirits has excelled all through righteous- 
ness for ever. And this Son of Man, Whom thou hast seen, will arouse the 
kings and the mighty from their beds and the violent from their thrones, and 
will loose the bands of the violent, and break in pieces the teeth (Ps. iii. 8, &c.) 
of sinners. And He will drive kings from their thrones and then- kingdoms, 
because they magnify Him not, nor praise Him, nor thankfully acknowledge 
Him by Whom their kingdom was given them. And He will repel the face 
of the violent, and shame shall fill them ; darkness will be their habitation, and 
worms their bed ; (Is. xiv. 11.) and they will have no hope to rise from their 
beds, because they magnify not the Name of the Lord of spirits, &c." xlvi. 3-6. 
"And in those days I saw the Ancient of days, as He sat upon the throne of 



Judge, from the book of Daniel. 383 

Reflection had taught the Jews of his day to believe in 

His glory, and the books of the living were opened before Him ; and His whole 
host, which is above in heaven and around Hun, stood before Hun." (xlvii. 3.) 
" And on that day I saw a well of righteousness inexhaustible ; round it were 
many wells of wisdom, and all thirsty drank out of them, and became full of 
wisdom, and had their dwellings with the Righteous and Holy and Chosen One. 
And at that hour was that Son of Man named before the Lord of spirits, and 
His Name before the Ancient of days. He will be a staff to the righteous and 
to the holy, that they may stay themselves thereon and not fall ; and He will 
be the light of the people, [Is. xlix. 4.] and the hope of those who are troubled 
in heart. All who dwell on the earth will fall down and worship before Him, 
(Ps. xxii. 27-29. Ixxii. 9-11.) and will exalt and praise and celebrate the Name 
of the Lord of spirits. And therefore was He chosen and hidden before Hun, 
ere the world was created, and to eternity will He be before Hun." [" In that 
he says," observes D. "that He (not His Name) was hidden before God, before 
the creation of the world, and that to eternity He .would be before God, it is 
clear even from the analogy of the second part of this declaration, that the hid- 
den Being cannot be understood to be merely ideal, but must be understood as 
real." comp.alsolxii. 7. " For before was the Son of Man hidden, and the High- 
est has reserved Him for His Might, and has revealediHim, the Chosen."] " And 
the wisdom of the Lord of spirits has revealed (i. e. by prophecy) Him, the 
Holy and Righteous ; for He maintains the lot of the righteous, because they 
have hated this world of unrighteousness and all its works and ways : for in 
His days the kings of the earth, and the violent who possess the fortresses, are 
of downcast look, for the work of their hands ; for in the days of then- fear 
and need they will not deliver their souls. And I will give them into the hands 
of My chosen, as straw in fire and as lead in water ; so will they burn in presence 
of the righteous and sink in presence of the holy, and no more trace of them 
will be to be found. And in the day of their distress there will be rest on the 
earth ; for they will fall before Hun, and will not rise again ; and there will be 
no one to take them in his hands and lift them up ; for they have denied the 
Lord of spirits and His Anointed. Praised be the Name of the Lord of spirits. 
For wisdom is poured out like water, and glory ceaseth not from eternity to 
eternity. For He is mighty in all mysteries of righteousness ; and unrighteous- 
ness will pass away like a shadow, and have no stay ; for the Chosen hath stood 
up before the Lord of spirits, and His glory is from eternity to eternity, and His 
might from generation to generation. In Him dwelleth the spirit of wisdom, 
and the spirit of Him Who giveth insight, and the spirit of teaching and of 
power, (Is. xi,) and the spirit of those who have fallen asleep in righteousness. 
And He will judge the secret things, (Eccl.xii. 14.) and no one will be able to 
bring an idle word before Him 5 for He was chosen before the Lord of spirits 
according to His good pleasure." ch. xlviii. xlix. " And in those days the earth 
will give back its deposit, and the kingdom of death will give back its deposit 
which it has received, and hell will give back what it owes. And He will 
choose the righteous and holy among them, for the day is come that they should 
be delivered. And the Chosen will sit on His throne in those days, and all 
mysteries of wisdom will stream from the thoughts of His mouth ; for the Lord 



384 Prceexistence of the Messiah in the book of Enoch. 
Him Who was to come, as the Son of God 1 , eternally 

of spirits has given it Him and glorified Him : and in those days the mountains 
will leap like rams, and the hills skip like lambs (Ps. cxiv. 4.) which are satis- 
fied with milk ; and they will all be like angels in heaven. Their countenance 
will beam for joy, because in those days the Chosen has stood up, and the 
earth will rejoice, and the righteous will dwell hi it and the chosen will go and 
walkinit." (ch. li.) "Andhe [theangel] saidtome, All these things, which thou 
hast seen, serve the rule of His Anointed, that He may be powerful and mighty 
on the earth. And those hills which thou hast seen of iron and of copper, and 
of silver and gold, all will melt before the Chosen, as wax before the fire, and 
as water which flows down (Mic. i. 4.) over those mountains, and will be weak 
before His feet. And in that day men will not be able to deliver themselves 
by gold or silver, nor to deliver themselves, nor flee away. All these things 
will disappear and be annihilated from the face of the earth, when the Chosen 
shall appear before the Lord of spirits." (lii. 4. 6. 7. 9.) " And after this, the 
Righteous and Chosen shall manifest the house of His congregation, which 
shall not be henceforth hindered, in the Name of the Lord of spirits." (liii. 6.) 
"The chosen will dwell with the Chosen One." (Ixi. 4. addlxxi. 17".) "The Lord 
of spirits sat on the throne of His glory, and the spirit of righteousness was 
poured out upon Him, [the Chosen, See D. p. 196, 7.] and the speech of His 
mouth slew all sinners [from Is. xi. 4.] and unrighteous, and before His Pre- 
sence they perish. (Ps. Ixviii. 2.) And pain will seize them, when they see that 
Son of the woman sitting on the throne of His glory." [Ixii, 2. 5.] " And the 
Lord of spirits will dwell above them, and with that Son of man will they 
dwell together and eat and lie down and rise up from eternity to eternity." 
(Ixii. 14.) " And He sat down on the throne of His glory, and the sum of judg- 
ment was given over to Him, the Son of man, and He will remove and destroy 
sinners from the face of the earth, and those who have seduced the world And 
thenceforth shall there be nothing transitory ; for He, the Son of the Man, hath 
appeared, and sitteth on the throne of His glory, and all evil shall disappear and 
pass away before Him ; but the word of that Son of the Man will avail before 
the Lord of spirits." (bdx. 27. 29.) "And after this, his [Enoch's] name [i. e. 
his person] was lifted up to that Son of man, to the Lord of spirits." (Ixx. i.) 
1 "And in those days,.saith the Lord, shall they Ciill all the sons of the earth 
together, and bear witness to the wisdom thereof [of the books of Enoch ;] shew 
them to them, for ye are their guides and rewards over the whole earth. For 
I and My Son will unite ourselves with them for ever, and ever, in the ways of 
righteousness during then- life." c. cv. Yet the Chosen is named as one who 
should praise the Lord of spirits. "And the whole army of heaven, and all holy 
ones above, and the army of God, the Cherubim and Seraphim and Ophannim, 
and all angels of power, and all angels of dominion, and the Chosen, and the 
other powers which are upon the firmament over the water, will call and will 
begin with one voice and praise and glorify and extol and magnify in the spi- 
rit of faith [or faithfulness,] and in the spirit of wisdom and patience, and in the 
spirit of compassion, and in the spirit of right and of peace, and in the spirit of 
goodness, and will all say with one voice, Praise to Him and praised be the Name 
of the Lord of spirits for ever and ever." Ixi. 10, 11. This is, of course, not 



Doctrine of Angels, in some few points, from Daniel. 385 

preexisting with God 2 , but also as the Son of Man Who 
shall come to be our Judge. His office for us on earth 
was, with this writer, subordinate. Having little thought 
of any but the deadliest sin, and thinking but poorly of 
repentance 8 , he looked to the Rewarder, not to the Re- 
deemer. Still, on this side, the book implies a long stu- 
dy of Daniel, in connection with other Scripture and as 
equally authoritative with it, utterly inconceivable, had 
the book of Daniel been written 164,, B.C. 

2) The doctrine of Angels varies in the book itself. Yet 
it implies, even in its errors, a meditative use of Holy 
Scripture. It has not much, which bears directly on Da- 
niel, only the names of Michael and Gabriel, the office 
of Michael towards the Jewish people, and the title, 
"Watchers," applied to the holy Angels. The common 
truths as to the holy Angels are, in part, largely expand- 
ed, and that by aid of other Scripture; in part they are 
modified, and that untruly. The book of Enoch has some 
names of chief angels, which occur rarely even in later 
Jewish writings, or which do not even occur in them 4 . 

Christian language ; for Jesus receives the worship of all the creation, and al- - 
though the Manhood of Jesus is a worshipper of the Trinity, yet Jesus, being 
God and Man, could not be so spoken of; much less, together with creatures. 

2 See ch. xlviii. Ixii. 7. Ixx. 1. in p. 384. note. 3 " In the day of trouble, 
evil will accumulate on sinners, and the righteous will prevail in the Name of 
the Lord of spirits : and He will let the rest see it, that they may repent and 
cease the works of their hands. They will have no honour before the Lord of 
spirits ; but in His Name they will be delivered, and the Lord of spirits' will 
have compassion upon them : for His compassion is great," 1. 2, 7. 

4 In ch. xl. there are " 4 forms on the four sides of the Lord of Hosts, differ- 
ent from " " the thousands of thousands and thousands of thousands," (taken 
from Dan. vii. 10. "there being in ,35th. no one term for 10,000," Dillm. p. 20.) 
" which stood by." " The first voice praised the Lord of spirits from eternity 
to eternity. The second I heard praising the Elect, and the elect who are 
weighed before the Lord of spirits. The third praying for the dwellers on the 
earth, and beseeching in the Name of the Lord of spirits. The fourth I heard, 
keeping off Satans and not allowing them to come before the Lord of spirits 
to accuse the dwellers on the earth." The angel, who comes with Enoch, tells 
him then' names. These are, " 1) the holy Michael, the pitying and long-suffer- 
ing ; 2) Rufael, set over all diseases and wounds of the sons of men ; 3) the holy 
Gabriel, set over all powers ; 4) Fanuel, set over the repentance and hopes of 
those who inherit eternal life. Theso, are the 4 angels of God most High." 

c c 



386 Special physical offices assigned to angels,inbookof 

It supposes that, there are angels, presiding over each of 
the ordinary changes in the physical world 1 ,, thunder, and 
lightning, hoar-frost;, hail, snow, mist, dew, rain; and of 

(mentioned- again liv. 6 V Ixxi. 8. 9.' 13. in the same connection with the " thou- 
sands 'of thousands.") In ch; ix. "departed souls" "cry to the holy ones of hea- 
ven" to obtain vengeance against the giants (before the flood;) and four Angels, 
" Michael, Gabriel, Surian, and Urian," (" Suriel, Uriel," Dillm. p. 97.) present 
their cry. " The name Suriel occurs in this place only and in Berachoth, f. 
51. 1." [the only place mentioned by Buxtorf, p. 1453.] Dillm. Ib. In the 
Greek, they are the four names received in the Church, Michael, Uriel, Ra- 
phael, and Gabriel ; but probably the translation is more exact than the ex- 
tract of G. Syncellus, who probably corrected it. In ch. x. for Urian is Arsyal- 
alyur [compounded of ^N'Din, " Sun of God," -nx'Wt, " my God is light." D.] 
and for Surian is Rufael. In ch. xx. there are six " holy angels who watch ; 
" Uriel, the angel of thunder and earthquake; Rufael, the angel of the spirits 
of men ; Raguel, (^Kljn, "Mend of God."] who exercises vengeance on the 
world and on the lights ; MicJiael, set over the best part of men, the people ; 
Sarachael, ["JNSID " president of God"] set over the spirits of the sons of men, 
whom the spirits seduce to sin ; Gabriel, set over the serpents and over Para- 
dise and over the Cherubim." An angel Zutel or Ziituel or Zuteel (^Wil D. 
p. 135.) is once mentioned, xxxii. 2. The OpJiannim ("wheels") from Ezek. 
i. and x. are mentioned with the Cherubim and Seraphim, (as in Rosh Hasha- 
na, f. 24, 2. Buxt. p. 187.) and angels of power (eou<rfcu Col. i. 16. add Eph.i.21.) 
and of dominions (KvpdrqTes ib.) Ixi. 10. The Seraphim, Cherubim, Ophan- 
nim are mentioned as round the house of God. " These are they who sleep 
not and who guard the throne of His glory." Ixxi. 7. 

The Archangel, who is supposed to accompany him, is called " the angel of 
peace;" (Ivi. 2. Ix. 24.) whence probably the byyeKos /o^ijs in S. Chrysostom's 
liturgy, of the guardian angel. 

Perhaps it is in contrast with " the sons of men," that there occur the 
phrases, " the children of the holy angels," (Ixix. 4, 5.) " the sons of the an- 
gels," (Ixxi. 1.) "the children of the angels of heaven." (cvi. 5.) Yet there 
occurs the strange and unexplained statement, "in those days [i.e. "when 
the congregation of the just shall appear," ch. xxxviii.] the elect and holy chil- 
dren shall come down from the high heavens : and their seed shall unite itself 
with the children of men." (xxxix. 1.) 

The "avenging angels" are, in one case certainly, (Ixvi. 1. those employed 
in the flood,) good angels. Yet Ivi. 1-3. they seem to be evil angels. In Ixii. 
11. Ixiii. 1. nothing is expressed ; nor in liii. 3. 

1 Ix. 14-21. The term applied to each is "spirit," "the spirit of the sea ;" 
but it is also said, "the spirit of the hoarfrost is its angel, and the spirit of the 
hail is a good angel ; " 17. "And he [the spirit of the mist] is its angel," 19. 
" When the spirit of the rain moves forth out of its containing vessel, the an- 
gels come and open the vessel, and lead him forth," &c ; and then follows the 
mention of "those angels," who are described, (in imitation of Zechariah,) as 
sent to measure in.the North country, but here to measure the righteous, ch, Ixi. 



Enoch;detailsastosiipposedfaUofangelsbeforethejlood3$J 

the sea also; "angels over the powers of the waters 3 ." 
In the Noah-portion of the hook/ there is an angel who 
stands in the fountain which, the writer says, " 3 produces 
lead and tin." It expands the title, "hosts of heaven," 
to mean, that angels "watch over the stars, that they 
should appear in their season," and names "leaders of 
the four seasons," "heads over thousands," with " other 
subordinate guides 4 ." The 15 names mentioned do not 
occur elsewhere. It speaks of " 5 the leaders of the heads 
of the thousands, set over the whole creation and over 
the stars." Of fallen angels, it is very full on that one 
point, for which it gained for a time extensive yet not 
complete reception in the Church, viz. the idea that the 
sons of God, who were the parents of the giants before 
the flood, were, not "the sons of Seth," but angels. Their 
number it asserts to have been 200 6 , gives the names of 
their 20 or 21 leaders, and states, what arts some of them 
are to have taught to men 7 . The giants born of them are 
said to have been 3000 ells high 8 . On the other hand, 
it mentions but little of Satan or of continued evil- 
agency 9 . 

It is a remarkable change from the book of Daniel, 
that the title "watcher," which, in the prophet apparently 

2 ch. Ixvi. 3 Ixv. 8. 4 Ixxxii. 11-20. 

5 Ixxv. 1. Enoch is said to have " seen the paths of the angels," xviii. 5. 
Of these it is said, (Ixxx. 6.) " many heads of the stars set over will go astray," 
(or " fail." D. who conjectures that he may mean the planets, p. 344.) 

6 ch. vi-xi. Ixix. Extracts in G. Syncell. Chron. p. 20-23. ed. Dind. The 20 
bear a relation to the two hundred ; they are supposed to he "leaders of tens." 
In Ixix, the chief, Semyaza, ('Ninca- Buxt. p. 2444. from Ps. Jon.) is counted 
apart. Dillmann corrects the corrupted names, p. 93, 4. 

7 In ch. viii, seven such are named : in Sync., 9 : in ch. Ixix. 4-12, attributed 
to Noah, 5 others are mentioned, inconsistent with those lists. 8 vii. 2. 
omitted by Sync. D. states, " one MS has, 300," evidently a correction. 

9 " Satans " are mentioned as accusers of mankind ; (from Job i. and Zech. 
iii.) xl. 7; (see p. 385. note 4;) "all mysteries of the angels and all violence 
of the Satans," Ixv., 6; "the avenging angels prepared all instruments [of 
punishment, liv. 3-5.] for Satan," liii. 3. "The hosts of Azazel" were to be 
"laid in the depths of all damnation," (D. p. 171.) "because they were sub- 
ject to Satan iind seduced those who dwell on the earth," (liv. 5, 6. but this 
too only relates to that one supposed set of acts before the flood.) 

cc2 



388Changes in B. of En. to the doctrine o/ angels in Daniel, 

is given to the angels to designate their sleepless being 1 , 
is, in Enoch, almost exclusively used of those whom this 
later writer reputed to have fallen before the flood 2 . 

In some of this account of angels we are in an entirely 
different atmosphere from the book of Daniel. It is not 
an expansion of the book of Daniel ; but the result of a 
meditation on various passages of Holy Scripture, to 
which, the book of Daniel gave no impulse, since it con- 
tained no example of it. Fables, not from Daniel, are 
mixed up with truths which are from Daniel. 

There is, besides, detached use of the language of Da- 
niel, as of other Scripture, in the book of Enoch. 

The book of Enoch is professedly made up of several 

1 Dan. iv. 10, 14, 20. [13, 17, 23. Eng.] See below Lect.viii. 

2 i. 5. " the watchers shall tremble ; " x. 7. " that all the children of men may 
not perish through the mystery of all that which the watchers have uttered and 
have taught their sons ; " Ib. 9. " go forth, and destroy the children of the watch- 
ers from among men ; " Ib. 15. " destroy the wanton souls and the children of 
the Wcitchers, because they have mishandled men ; " xiii. 10." I began to speak 
those words of righteousness and rebuke those watchers of heaven ;" xiv. 1. 
" what follows written here is the word of righteousness and of correction of 
the eternal watchers ; " Ib. 3. " He has created me and given to me to rebuke 
the watchers, the sons of heaven;" xv. 2." go and say to the watchers of hea- 
ven, who have sent thee to intercede for them." xvi. 1. 2. " So will they putrefy, 
until the day when the great Judgment shall be fulfilled upon the great world, 
\ipon the watchers and the ungodly ; and now, to the watchers who have sent 
thce to intercede for them, to them who aforetime were in heaven, &c." xci. 
15. " In the 10th week in the 7th portion will be the judgment for eternity, 
that is held upon the watchers." 

On the other hand, the adjuncts, " who watch," " who sleep not," are used to 
denote the unceasing praise and obedience in heaven, xxxix. 12, 13. " Thee 
they praise who sleep not ; they stand before Thy Majesty, and praise, bless, and 
exaltThee, saying, holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of spirits ; He fills the earth with 
spirits. And then my eyes saw those who sleep not, as they stand before Him 
and praise, &c." Ixi. 12. " Him shall all they praise, who sleep not above in hea- 
ven." Ixxi. 6, 7. " Around it were the Cherubim and Ophannim ; these are 
they who sleep not and who watch the throne of His glory." xiv. 23. "The 
holy ones, who were near Him, departed not day or night, and went not away 
from Him." See also xx. 1. in note 4. p. 386. 

The title " watchers " is only once given to good angels, xii. 2, 3, and then 
in antithesis to those who had fallen, " All his [Enoch's] life was with the holy 
ones and the watchers, and I, Enoch, was praising the great Lord and King of 
the world, when the watchers called me, me Enoch the scribe, and said to me, 
' Enoch, thou scribe of righteousness, go, carry tidings to the watchers of 
heaven who have left the high heaven, &c." 



Part of book quoted iny" N. T. distinct from the rest. 389 

books 3 . Its parts are very unequal. Its moral exhorta- 
tions are earnest ; then again there are those miserable 
false and childish physics, unrelieved in some places by 
any moral tone 4 , to which however one of the writers at- 
taches primary importance with a foolish vanity 5 . The 
introduction is so loosely connected with the other parts, 
that it may easily have been joined on afterwards, and 
the passage in it, which resembles that quoted by S. Jude 

3 The parts, of which the book of Enoch consists, are ; 1) the brief intro- 
duction, ch. i-v, declaring that God would come tojudgment, and how all na- 
ture obeyed Him, great and small, except man. In this, which is loosely con- 
nected with the book, occurs a passage very like to, but not absolutely identical 
with, that quoted by St. Jude. Then, unconnected with this, is the story found- 
ed on Gen. vi. 2, and Enoch's embassy from the fallen angels to God, ch. vi-xvi. 
Then follows a story, now detached, but connected byits beginning with some- 
thing which once preceded it ; " And they took me to a place." It is Enoch's 
travels in the unseen world, in which he mixes up some childish and impossi- 
ble physics, ch. xvii-xxxvi. Then follows what is called (ch. xxxvii.) a second 
vision, distributed in 3 "figured discourses," in which he describes what he saw 
in heaven, the abode of the blessed, ch.xxxviii-xiv. the Messiah, with the prophecy 
of His Coming, ch. xlv-lvii. The third, ch.lviii-lxix, is in utter confusion; a short 
prophecy of the lot of the righteous, ch. Iviii; a statement that the writer saw the 
mysteries of thunder and lightning, ch. lix; another as to fabulous creatures, Le- 
viathan, Behemoth, and angels of the elements, ch. Ix. (in the mouth of Noah,lx. 
8. ;) the world to come and judgment by the Chosen, ch.lxi-liv; a revelation of 
Enoch to Noah as to the flood and the punishment of fallen angels, with di- 
gressions about the formation 'of metals and hot springs, ch. Ixv-lxviii. It 
winds up with a declaration of the might of the oath by the Name of God, 
whereby the world was created, Ixix. 16-19, and preserved, 21-23, and praises 
God, 24, 5, whence it passes to the revelation of the Name of the Son of Man 
and of Judgment, 26-29. Then follows the assumption of Enoch, and his 
sight of heaven, ch. Ixx. Ixxi. Then " the book of the courses of the light of hea- 
ven," fabulous physics, ch. Ixxii-lxxviii; a revelation addressed to his son Methu- 
selah, ch. Ixxix ; a prophecy of preternatural changes of nature for men's wicked- 
ness, ch. Ixxx ; Enoch's return to earth and his charge to Methuselah to hand 
down this knowledge, chiefly as to the physics, ch. Ixxxi, ii. Then two visions, 
early in the life of Enoch, related by him to his son Methuselah, (the second 
being a sketch from Adam to his own time,) ch. Ixxxiii-xc, an address to Methu- 
selah and his brothers, chi xci. with a disjointed fragment, Ib. 12-17. The "doc- 
trine of wisdom, written by Enoch the scribe," an exhortation, mingled with 
prophecy, founded on judgment to come, ch. xcii-cv. Marvels at the birth of 
Noah, ch. cvi,vii. " Another writing which Enoch wrote for his son Methuselah 
and for those who shall come after him, and hold the law in his last days; " a 
brief exhortation, ch. cvii. 4 ch. Ixxii-lxxviii. 

5 xxxvii. lix. Ixxxii. 3, 4. xciii. 10, 11, &c. 



390 ,, Probable date of the chief part 

from the book of Enoch, may very probably have been 
fitted in by a later writer \ But the main substance of 
the book is doubtless old. The latest event spoken of in 
it relates to the time of the Maccabees 3 . It has been 
interpreted to relate to John Hyrcanus, professedly in 
order to leave room for the later date of the book of Da- 

1 The short preface contains the statement, that Enoch had observed that 
all trees were deciduous, except 14, which is a Greek statement, Geopon.xi. 1. 
SeeinDfflm. p. 91. 

2 The only indication of time in the whole book lies in the vision, in which, 
under an allegory, its writer gives chief points of sacred history from Adam 
to the Maccabees. It indicates the restoration of the temple, then adds, in lan- 
guage taken from Malachi, " they began again to put a table before the tower 
[temple,] but all the bread thereon was denied and impure." So the eyes of 
all these sheep were blinded as to everything, and then- " shepherds too,, and 
they were given over to their shepherds to destroy, very many ; and the Lord 
of the sheep abode still, until all the sheep were scattered on the .field, and 
mingled with them, and they delivered them not from the hands of the beasts," 
(Ixxxix. 73-5.) until a new generation arose, which tried to rouse the elders, but 
fruitlessly. That generation acquired horns, and their destroyers cast them 
down, until a great horn shot forth, which they assembled themselves to cast 
down, but could not. Ravenous birds preyed on them, until there remained 
only their skeletons, and these too sank to the ground and few sheep were 
left, (xc. 2-4.) Thus far, there are the grinding oppressions by foreign gover- 
nors, and their own heathenish) g, as described 1 Mace. i. 11-13. Then fol- 
low three stages of recovery ; 1) a new but defenceless generation, " lambs," 
whose eyes were opened, who cried to their deaf and blinded parents, the sheep ; 
the ravens flew at them and carried off one of the lambs. (Ib. 6-8.) 2) a time 
when the lambs gained horns, and the ravens cast down their horns. (Ib. 9. 
The interval is marked by the formula, taken from Daniel, "And I beheld until" 
(see ab. p. 78.) 3) a time when a great horn shotup, of one of the sheep, the 
young ran to him, the ravens and ravenous birds 'tried to destroy the horn ; and 
availed not, (Ib. 9-13) ; until, at last, they had exceeded the measure of de- 
struction allowed, (Zeeh. i. 15) ; the Lord of the sheep came and smote the 
earth with the rod of his anger; the earth opened and swallowed up the gathered 
foes, (14-18.) a sword was given to the sheep to destroy, and all the beasts 
and birds of the air fled before them. (19.) On this follows the Day of Judg- 
ment. (20.) A throne is setup in "the pleasant land," (Dan.) and the sealed 
books were opened. (Dan. vii. 10.) Now as this is confessedly not prophecy, 
but imitation of prophecy, it must have been written before the Maccabee 
struggles were closed. For it represents the straggles of the enemy to destroy 
the one great horn; and these struggles were to be ended supernaturally. But 
since there was no supernatural end, then this part of the book must any how 
have been written before the end, i. e. before the end of the wars of John Hyr- 
canus. But the whole description also suits better to the time before Hyr- 
canus. The first stage was unresisted persecution, when men's eyes were 



of the book of Enoch. . 391 

niel with which the writers were so deeply imbued 3 . 
It suits more naturally to Judas Maccabseus, or Simon. 

opened, but before they began to resist. This suits the first Maccabee suffer- 
ings. (1 Mace i-62-4. ii. 1-41. 2 Mace. v. 27-vii. 42.) The one lamb who was 
taken, may have been Eleazar, (2 Mace, vi.18-31.) or possibly Onias III. The 
second was the beginning of the Maccabee wars, when they were only a hand- 
ful of men. The third suits with the time of Judas, or Jonathan, or Simon, 
under whom " the yoke of the heathen was taken away from Israel." (1 Mace, 
xiii. 41.) In one'respect, it suits Judas Maccabseus best, because he was the 
first " great horn " who was raised up ; but it suits either of the three better 
than Hyrcanus ; for, after the first siege of Jerusalem in which he surrendered, 
he fought, not against, but under Antiochus, (Jos. Ant. xiii. 8. 4.) and when 
Antiochuswas dead, he had no resistance from Syria to meet, until a slight 
ineffectual effort at the end, not to subdue him, but to relieve Samaria. (Ib. 
10. 2.) 

The mention of the Farthians and Medes, as the nations whose kings should 
in the last days be stirred up by angels against Jerusalem, is of no account in 
fixing the date, as if the writer would not know of the Parthians until after 
Hyrcanus had fought in the army of Antiochus against them. The statement 
is a mere imitation of Zechariah. (ch. xiv.) Parthians and Medes stand only as 
representatives of Eastern nations, "in those days shall the angels gather them, 
selves, and direct their heads towards the East, towards the Parthians and 
Medes, to stir up a spirit of uprising among the lungs, &c." (M. 5.) The two 
names stand, as in 1 Mace. xiv. 2. Arsaces is called " the long of Persia and 
Media;" Philip "returned from P. and M."Ib. vi. 56. The Jews knew of Ar- 
saces, king of Parthia, in the time of Simon. 1 Mace. xiv. 2, 3. xv. 22. 

I do not take account of the numbers of the rulers indicated in this section ; 
for I do not think that they are any definite persons. Only it is clear that fo- 
reign rulers are meant. 

A writer, whom Dillmann accounts later than the chief writer of the book, 
places himself and his revelation at the end of the 7th week of the world. But 
the 6th week ended with the Captivity, (xciii. 8.) Of the 7th week he says ; 
" In the 7th week will a rebellious generation arise, and many will be its deeds, 
and all its words will be rebellion. And at the end thereof will the chosen and 
righteous be rewarded from the everlasting plant of righteousness, in that se- 
venfold instruction [his own] will be given them as to His whole creation." (Ib. 
9, 10.) But the 7th week was not yet closed, for the 8th was to begin with 
the times of the Messiah and with a power given to them over their enemies, 
(xci. 12.) And this was to follow a miraculous destruction of the ; enemy. (xc. 
19. comp. 18.) Since then the 7th age was not completed, the calculation of 
Dillmann, that each week was to contain six generations, would, (if true) ar- 
gue for the earlier composition of the book. For, according to him, the 14 
generations would reach to John Hyrcanus. (p. 390, 1.) Since then they were 
not completed, the book would, in this way too, fall before that time. 

3 "Of all our canonical books in the Old Testament, the author (as is admitted 
and universally owned) took for his pattern chiefly the book of Daniel, He 



392jjtuthprity of our Lord not countedtvithhumanevidence, 

But, at latest, the period of John Hyrcanus, B.C. 130-109, 
leaves no room for such a developement of doctrine after 
B.C. 163. Yet there is absolutely no choice, it has never 
been pretended that there is any choice, except between 
true prophecy in the time from Nebuchadnezzar to Cy- 
rus, and false prophecy in, or rather after, the death of 
Antiochus. 

I cannot, as some religious and eminent defenders of 
the book of Daniel have done, add to these human evi- 

rested on that book, or developed from it, many of his chief doctrines, (those of 
the Messiah, the kingdom of Heaven, the resurrection, the judgment by the 
Messiah, the times of the 70 shepherds ;) and he imitated it in many details of 
his descriptions and in expressions, (e. g. entitling the Israelites 'stars of hea- 
ven,' xlvi. 7. xliii. 3, 4 ; the conception of the shining of the righteous in the 
kingdom of the Messiah, civ. 2, or the descriptions of the throne of the Ma- 
jesty of God, and what encircles it, &c.;) and not merely the second part of the 
book, but the 4th also, and in single reminiscences the 5th also, betray this de- 
pendence on the book of Daniel. And this too of such sort, that it presupposes, 
not merely that the writer was acquainted with that hook, but that he com- 
pletely lived in its fundamental thoughts and firmly believed in them. Thisone 
circumstance would suffice to refute those, who would have it, that one portion 
of the book, (most of it except ch. xxxvii-lxxii,) was written at the beginning 
of the Maccabee wars, and suppose that the last important person in Jewish 
history, whom the writer had lived to see, (ch.xc. 9sqq.) was Judas MaceabiBus, 
not John Hyrcanus. Contrariwise, this circumstance compels us to assume, 
that a long time had elapsed since the writing of the book of Daniel, in which 
it had not only come into circulation and was much read, but had already at- 
tained a high, almost canonical, estimation in the congregation. Such an es- 
timation it could, however, have attained in the half century before the writ- 
ing ofthe book of Enoch." Dillmann, Das B. Henoch, Einl. p. xlv. His other 
grounds for placing the book in the time of Hyrcanus, are, that 1) a book so 
full, with such comprehensive objects and presupposing such learned studies, 
was not suited to such stormy tunes as those of the Maccabee wars, but "suits 
a time of rest after the struggle, in which people sought to maintain, settle, and 
defend, theoretically and scientifically, what had been practically fought for and 
won." p. xlvi. Certainly the Maccabee wars were not times for any writing, 
the book of Daniel as little as any other, unless by inspiration. But 1) it is not 
made out that the book of Enoch was written in Palestine. 2) In Palestine 
itself things were quiet, after the death of Antiochus Sidetes, B.C. 126. (Clin- 
ton, F. H. iii. 335.) 3) The book of Enoch is childish, except where borrowed from 
Holy Scripture. To assume then the later date, on account of this period of 
reflection on Holy Scripture, is the visual " begging the question," the lateness 
of the book of Daniel. Of the two other grounds, on 2) the mention of the 
Parthians, and 3) the weeks of the world, see note 1. p. 391. It is plain that 
the assumed date of the book of Daniel is the real ground, upon which the 
date of the book of Enoch is fixed. 



because it stands alone, Divine and Infallible. 393 

denccs the testimony of our Lord, or use Divine autho- 
rity as a makeweight to human proof. There, we are al- 
together on different grounds, in a different atmosphere. 
What I have proposed to myself in this course of lectures 
is to meet a boastful criticism upon its own grounds, 
and to shew its failure, where it claims to be most tri- 
umphant. The authority of our Lord stands alone. It 
is all in all, or, we should have nothing. It is the word 
of Him Who, being God, spake with a Divine know- 
ledge, Perfect, Infallible. If His knowledge could have 
failed in any one thing-, if He could (God forbid !) have 
set His seal on one thing which is not true, Divine au- 
thority would be gone. Hesitate how men will for the 
while, it was truly said by one of the most powerful in- 
tellects of this day \ " there is but one choice, Infallibi- 
lity or infidelity." 

1 Dr Newman. People rely, for this infallible teaching, personally on our 
Lord, or on the divinity of Holy Scripture, by virtue of His promise (S. John 
xvi. 13. xiv. 26) ; or on the witness of the universal and undivided Church (which 
sanctioned the Creeds, and the doctrines of Grace, and of the Sacraments) by vir- 
tue of our Lord's promise, (S. Matt, xxviii. 20. xvi. 18. "the gates of hell shall 
not prevail against it ; ") or on the manifold promises that God will bestow on 
us the gift of faith in what He has revealed ; so that we have not human, hut 
Divine, faith. In all these ways, people have an authority out of themselves 
and their own opinions. But we must have, subjectively, a supernatural faith, 
by gift of God the Holy Ghost, in that which has been supernaturally re- 
vealed, or we should have no faith at all. 



LECTURE VII. 



On the ''historical inaccuracies" falsely imputed to the 
book of Daniel, and the "improbabilities" alleged. 

THE charges of "historical inaccuracies 33 have been la- 
vished with a reckless hand. They are gathered into one 
in the following statement of Lengerke \ who exhibits in 
them the current charges of the German rationalists 3 . 
They have been recently transferred among us by a dis- 
senting writer 3 . 

"5") The lateness" of its date is clear also through the his- 
torical inaccuracies. Errors in chronology and antiqui- 

1 Daniel Einl. 13. p. Ixiii. 

2 De Wette, in his Einl. 255. a. Ed. 7. (as became his practice) epitomis- 
ed Lengerke. " That Daniel is not the author of this hook, is clear, 1) out 
of the fabulous contents of the historical portion, which is full of improbabili- 
ties, (ii. 3 sqq. 46 sqq. iii. 1, 5 sqq. 20, 22, 28 sqq. iv. 31 sqq. v. 11 sqq. 
18 sqq. 29. vi. 8 sqq. 26 sqq.) of monstrous miracles, (ii. 28. iii. 23 sqq. v. 5. 
vi. 23, 25.) and even of historical incorrectnesses, (such as no other prophetical 
book of the O. T. contains ;)" " incorrect representations of the wise men of 
Babylon, Daniel's inconceivable admission among them ; (ii. 2. iv. 7. v. 7, 11.) 
Darius the Mede instead of Cyaxares II ; (vi. 1. [v. 31. Eng.] ix. 1. xi. 1.) 
mention of the (Persian) institution of satraps under Nebuchadnezzar, (iii. 3.) 
and Darius the Mede, vi. 2. [l.Eng.] Ahasuerus, father of Darius the Mede, 
(Cyaxares II.) instead of Astyages ; (ix. 1.) Belshazzar, son of Nebuchadnezzar, 
last king of Babylon : (v. 11, 13, 18, 22, 30. contrary to Berosus in Jos. c. Ap. 
i. 20.) conception of the lion's den as a pit, (vi. 17.)" "Its relations moreover 
are formed so much upon the same type. (comp. ii. 2-11. with iv. 4-8. v. 8 ; iii. 
4-12. 24-30. with vi. 8-18. 21-24.) This love of miracles and the religious fa- 
naticism, as nourished by persecution, which it breathes, evince, that it is akin 
to the 2nd book of Maccabees, and a fruit of the times of Antiochus Epiphanes, 
and this uniformity betrays the fiction." 

3 Davidson, Introd. T. iii. p. 174, 5. 180-92. 



Summary of imputed " inaccuracies" 395 

ties, and embellishment of the history, remove the author 
far from the prophetic period. For, only in regard to the 
Maccabee times, does he give accurate and detailed ac- 
counts. As historical inaccuracies must be accounted ; 
1) the date of the first deportation ch. i. 1; 2) the historical 
contradiction between ch. i. 21. and ii. 1; 3) the false idea of 
the lion's den, ch. vi. and.4)of the Magi. (ch. ii.) It excites 
at least the gravest suspicion, that Daniel (ch. viii.) in the 
reign of the Mede Cyaxares II. [Belshazzar,] 5) sees him- 
self in vision at Susa, as a residence of the Persian kings; 
for although Susa was already built in the reign of Da- 
rius, it did not become a royal residence until the time of 
Cyrus. 6) He speaks of satraps and government by satraps, 
which cannot be imagined under the Babylonians, nor un- 
der Medes and Persians at the time of the capture of Ba- 
bylon. 7) He calls Nebuchadnezzar erroneously the father 
of the last king, gives that king a false name, makes him of 
royal blood, and follows a false legend as to the capture of 
Babylon and the fate of the last king. 8) He brings on 
the stage a Cyaxares II., Darius the Mede, who never liv- 
ed. 9) He makes the supremacy of the Medes still subsist 
at the time of the capture of Babylon ; and 10) is in igno- 
rance as to the order of succession of Persian kings." 

Of this list of errors, attributed to the writer of the book 
of Daniel, but, in truth, the inventions of the neologist 
school, I have already shown the baselessness of the im- 
putation as to the account of the Medes and Persians 4 . 
1) It is quite clear that Daniel does not speak of the Me- 
dian preeminence as still lasting at the time of the cap- 
ture of Babylon 5 . He twice expresses the contrary, that 
" Darius the Mede received the kingdom " i. e. from ano- 
ther, and "was made king" i.e. by another 6 . 2) It is 
probable 7 that there was a Cyaxares II; but the identifi- 
cation of Cyaxares II. with Darius the Mede is only a pro- 
bable historical conjecture, with which Daniel is in no 
way concerned. 

4 Obj. 9. 5 See Lect. iii. p. 122 sqq. Ib. p. 122, 3. 

l Obj. 8. See Ib. p. 124, 5. 



396 Ignorance as to Persian kings suits aprophet notaforger. 

It is directly false, on the surface of the book, to say l , 
that Daniel gives an accurate account of the times of the 
Maccabees alone. The accuracy of the prophecy of the 
victories of Alexander, of his sudden untimely end at his 
full strength, of the fourfold division of his empire, and 
of some chief events in the two houses of the Ptolemies 
and the Seleucidse for 7 or 8 generations previous to the 
time of Antiochus Epiphanes and the Maccabees, have 
been used by the Porphyry-school as arguments against 
their being prophecy. "They are too accurate and mi- 
nute/' these men say, "to be prophecies." Then they 
cannot be inaccurate also ; nor has there been an attempt 
to point out an inaccuracy. 

The hypocritical argument is plainly nihil ad rem. It 
is to be an argument against the genuineness of Daniel 
that he was ignorant of the Persian succession 3 . What ? 
In the minds of these writers, who disbelieve in prophecy, 
it is to be an argument that Daniel did not write the book, 
because he did not know events yet future in the time of 
Daniel ! So then each is alike to be an argument against 
the genuineness of Daniel, that, on the hypothesis, he 
did, and did not know the future ! Be it that he did not 
know more of the Persian succession than he sets down in 
his book, that God only revealed to him certain marked 
points of history and not the rest. We cannot tell. Per- 
haps it is the most probable. But this ignorance, if it 
were such, would have its obvious groundjif he knew what 
he knew, by revelation from God. In that case, he did 
not know it, because God did not reveal this unimportant 
series of kings, which even human historians have re- 
volted from dwelling on. The alleged ignorance is per- 
fectly consistent with the real character of Daniel, as a 
prophet . For God revealed to His prophets so much of the 
future, as He willed His people to be forewarned of. It is 
utterly inconsistent with the character of the assumed 
Pseudo-Daniel. For it is absurd to suppose a person to 
know by human knowledge the number of kings from Cy- 

1 Lcngerke's Introductory Statement. See ab. p. 395. 2 Obj. 10. 



Thedatesinch.i.ii.agreetvitfiBerosus,not contradicted. 397 

rus to Xerxes, and then again the chief events from Alex- 
ander onwards, and to have been absolutely ignorant of 
the whole intermediate history, or that there was any his- 
tory intervening. 

I will take the other charges in order. 

i. The date 3 in ch.i. accurately agrees with Berosus, and 
is not contradicted by any authority; the date in ch. ii. 
agrees exactly with that in ch. i. Daniel says, ch. i., that 
Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem in the third year of 
Jehoiakim ; that God gave Jehoiakim into his hands and 
a portion of the vessels of the house of the Lord ; and that 
certain of the seed-royal and of the nobles were carried to 
Babylon. He does not say, whether Jerusalem was taken 
or no. The mention that, not Jerusalem but, Jehoiakim 
fell into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, rather implies that 
it was not. Daniel states the expedition and its results. 
Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem, and took Jehoia- 
kim. Jehoiakim became tributary to Nebuchadnezzar, 
as we read in the book of Kings, *and became his servant 
three years. Perhaps the profane king, (such as we know 
Jehoiakim to have been 5 ,) redeemed himself with trea- 
sures out of the temple, a portion of the vessels, and hos- 
tages. The book of Chronicles relates the two leading- 
facts of the capture of Jehoiakim and the carrying away 
of some of the vessels of the Lord, equally without rela- 
ting any capture of Jerusalem. 6 Against him came up 
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and bound him in fet- 
ters, to carry him to Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar also car- 
ried of the vessels of t lie Lord to Babylon, and put them in 
his temple in Babylon. It is the more probable, that the 
writer of the book of Chronicles is speaking of the same 
event as Daniel, in that both speak of a portion 7 only 
of the vessels of the house of the Lord being taken ; but 
Daniel alone supplies the date. 

The first year of Nebuchadnezzar falling, according to 
Jeremiah 8 , in some part of the 4 th of Jehoiakim, this ex- 

3 Obj. 1 and 2. 4 2Kgs. xxiv. 1. 5 Jer. xxxvi. 23-25. 2 Chr.xxxvi. 
6, 7. 1 0'ij% n'3 <!?3 nyijo Dan. i, 2. nin' n'l '!? 2 Chr. xxxvi. 7. 8 Jer. xxv. 1 . 



3984greementofy e datesinDanielwithy e restofy e history. 

pedition, in the course of which he besieged Jerusalem, 
was before 'Ms accession to the throne. This coincides 
with the account in Berosus 1 of Nebuchadnezzar's success- 
ful expedition, when sent by his father Nabopolassar, from 
which he brought to Babylon Jewish captives, as well as 
Syrian, Phoenician, and Egyptian ; and " 3 from the spoils" 
of which war " he ornamented splendidly the temple of 
Bel," who was specially his god. In Daniel, whose king- 
Nebuchadnezzar had been from boyhood, it is nothing sur- 
prising, that he should speak of Nebuchadnezzar in no 
other way, than, "king Nebuchadnezzar," even when 
speaking of the time before his accession. Daniel does 
not ordinarily mention kings by their name only, Ne- 
buchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Cyrus, but adds the royal 
title also 3 . We should naturally say, " Queen Victoria 
was carefully educated by her mother," or "the Empe- 
ror Napoleon passedsome years of his life in England," al- 
though the education of our Queen was concluded be- 
fore her early accession to the throne, and the Emperor's 
residence here, was before his accession and while he was 
in exile. 

Daniel then having been earned captive in the third 
year of Jehoiakim, there is no discrepancy, but perfect 
agreement, between the dates in the first and second 
chapters. Daniel was to be educated for three years 4 
in the learning and tongue of the ChMcearis ; 'at : the end 
of the days -he -'-was examined before the king; and in 
the'course of the 2nd year of the reign of Nebuchadnez- 
zar, he was counted among the wise men, and was to 

1 See Lect. ii. p. 60. 2 Jos. c. Ap. i. 19. 

3 Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, (in contrast with Jerusalem,) i.l. the 
king Neb., ii. 46. iii. 1, 2,3,5, 7, 24. v.ll. Belshazzar the king, v. 1,9. Belshaz- 
zar-king. of Babylon, vii. 1. viii. 1. Darius 'the Tdng, v i. 6, 9, 25. Cyrus king 
of Persia, x. 1. In other places, in which the name .stands alone, some attri- 
bute of the royal title has been mentioned, or the title itself had occurred in 
the context, as Dan. i. 18. "in the reign of Neb.," ii. 1. iii. 9, 13, 14, 16, 19. "Bel- 
shazzar commanded," v. 2. (the title "king" had occurred in v. 1.) "Darius 
the Median received the kingdom," v. 31. " It pleased Darius," vi. 1. " In 
the first year of Darius, which was made king," ix. 1. . 4 i. 1, 18. 



Dates of Jehoia/cim's accession and subdual by Neb. 399 

share their lot. For this period of three years there is 
ample space. 

Jehoiakim himself, probably, came to the throne in 
the middle of B.C. 609. For since the expedition of Pha- 
raoh Necho against Asshur was probably in the spring, 
when campaigns commonly began, Josiah, who was slain 
when Necho reached Megiddo, probably died in that 
spring. Let us suppose it the end of April, for clear- 
ness. Then the three months' reign of Jehoahaz would 
have been broken off at the end of July, B.C. 609. The 
3rd year of Jehoiakim, whom Pharaoh placed on the 
throne in his stead, would begin at the end of July, B.C. 
607. In that, year Nebuchadnezzar, according to Da- 
niel, came against him. If Jehoiakim submitted in No- 
vember of that year, the three years of Daniel would 
close, late in 604 or early in 603. If, again, Nebuchad- 
nezzar returned to Babylon from that extensive expSdi- 
tion against Phoenicia, Coele-Syria, Egypt, and succeed- 
ed his father near the end of the 4th year of Jehoia- 
kim, B.C. 605, then the second year of Nebuchadnezzar 
would not be completed till B.C. 603, and the close of 
Daniel's three years would fall in the latter part of that 
his second year. 

But it is probable that the submission of Jerusalem did 
take place in November, B.C. 607. For although Jere- 
miah only mentions that the fast was proclaimed in the 
ninth month 5 , yet, as this must have been a civil fast, the 
analogy of the four fasts in four several months 6 , after the 
final capture of Jerusalem, makes it probable that this day 
was fixed in connection with some recent event which men 
mourned. And that the more, because November would 
otherwise hardly have been selected for a fast, which, at 
that season, must have been the more trying for those who 
had to come up to Jerusalem. There is no recent event 
at that time, except the siege of Jerusalem. 

At that time, the access to Jerusalem was open on all 
sides. For the words were to be read in the ears of all 
5 Jer. xxxvi. 9. Zech. viii. 19. 



400 Jehoiakim' s rebellion, expeditions against him. 

Judah, that are coming out of their cities, that are coming 
from the cities of Judah to Jerusalem 1 , 

In the following year Jehoiakim rebelled. In Ms days, 
it is related 2 , Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, 
and Jehoiakim became his servant three years ; then he 
turned and rebelled against him. Jehoiakim must have 
been already plotting that rebellion at the time of the 
fast, a year before he avowed it. And this explains his 
extreme anger at the predictions of Jeremiah, that he 
burnt the roll and directed that Jeremiah and Baruch 
should be seized 3 . For Jeremiah had foretold the fruit- 
lessness and destructiveness of that policy, upon which 
the reckless king was bent. At that time, the sixth year 
of Jehoiakim, Nebuchadnezzar was probably engaged 
elsewhere ; for he did not himself come up against him, 
as he had before and did afterwards. For it is said 4 ; 
TJte Lord sent against him bands of the Chaldees, and 
bands of the Syrians, and bands of the Moabites, and bands 
of the children of Ammon. The mention of bands of these 
several nations points to irregular incursions, made to 
harass him, not to any formal effort directed by any chief 
general. 

With this agrees the mention, made by the Rechabites, 
of the 5 army of the Chaldeans, and the army of the Syrians, 
which constrained them, so far, contrary to their father's 
injunctions, to dwell at Jerusalem. 

The expedition, led first by generals of Nebuchadnez- 
zar/and then by himself in person in Iiis7thyear 6 , when 
he carried captive three thousand Jews and three andtwenfy, 
was doubtless in the first instance directed against Je- 
hoiakim. The 7th year of Nebuchadnezzar coincided 
with the latter part of the reign of Jehoiakim, and the . 
three months of the reign of his son Jehoiakin. But 

1 D'K3n Jer. xxxvi. 6. and again vcr. 9. 

2 2 Kgs. xxiv. 1. He had probably been placed on the throne by Necho, as 

being in the interests of Egypt, as, contrariwise, he had been passed over after 

the death of his father, and his younger brother had been made king by the 

people, probably to continue the policy of Josiali. 3 Jer. xxxvi. 23-20. 

4 2 Kgs. xxiv. 2. 5 Jer. xxxv. 11. G Ib. lii. 28. 



Battle of Carchemish. 401 

those three months were not enough to furnish the occa- 
sion of the expedition to begin and to complete it. Jehoi- 
akim very possibly slept with his fathers, before the siege 
began, and people may have thought for those three 
months, that he had escaped the disgrace foretold by the 
Prophet. The dragging of his corpse was probably meant 
as a warning to bad successors, not to rebel. 

The first siege of Jerusalem falling in the third year of 
Jehoiakim, must have preceded the defeat of Pharaoh Ne- 
cho at Carchemish, which took place in the 4th year. 
But, as we know not one fact beyond these dates, except 
the relative position of the places ; not one circumstance 
as to the campaign, except its success ; since too the con- 
quering party does not even name Necho, unless the Assy- 
rians contemptuouslyregarded his authority as delegated, 
and himself as the rebellious Satrap, we have nothing, 
upon which to build a theory of the campaign. Senna- 
cherib aforetime, and Nebuchadnezzar afterwards in the 
time of Zedekiah, were engaged in the subdual of Judaea 
before they attacked Egypt, and were withdrawn from the 
siege by reports of an expedition from Egypt. Necho 
took Carchemish threeyears before, after defeating Josiah. 
Why Nebuchadnezzar should have placed his army be- 
tween Carchemish and Egypt, preferring first to recover 
the king of Jerusalem to his dependence on himself, of 
course we cannot know. The fact is implied by Berosus 
as well as by Daniel. But the measure has no such im- 
probability, as to throw a doubt on any statement even of 
ordinary history. Independent dates, such as these in 
Daniel, which are perfectly consistent with each other and 
with history, yet which could not have been suggested by 
other history, bear the characteristic mark of an original 
authority, viz. that it states what it knows, regardless 
whether it agree prima facie with other history or no. 

It is even strange how a difficulty could be raised about 
an account so simple and consistent. It ivas raised by 
remodellinghistory, contradicting Berosus' account of the 

campaign before Nebuchadnezzar came to the throne, 

n d 



402 Gratuitous contradiction of Scripture. 

asserting, that when : Jeremiah said, the fourth year of 
Jehoiakim was the first of Nebuchadnezzar, he did not 
really mean his first year, but the "first, in which the Jews 
heard of him 1 " contradicting the account in the book of 
Kings, that on Jehoiakim's rebellion, after being tributary 
for three years, God sent bands of Chaldees, Syrians^ Mo- 
abites, Ammpnites, against him, and so placing Nebuchad- 
nezzar's first invasion in the 6th year of Jehoiakim, and, 
(contrary to the explicit statement in Jeremiah,) deny- 
ing that, which was probably directed against Jehoiakim 
in his last year, although it fell upon his son. 

And yet for all this contradiction of Scripture, there 
is not even a plea, except a mistaken arrangement of 
the events in Josephus 2 , and a preconceived opinion that 
Nebuchadnezzar invaded Judsea once only, and an impa- 
tience at the inability to gather scattered notices into 
systematic history. 

ii. Rationalists must now retract the assertion that 
" 3 the last king of Babylon has a false name in Daniel ;" 
since it is now an admitted fact, that the name of Belshaz- 
zar occurs on Babylonian Cylinders, as that of the eldest 
son of Nabunahit, (the Nabonidus of Berosus, the Laby- 
netus of Herodotus,) the last king of Babylon, and being 
associated with his father in the empire, and slain at 
Babylon. The history was read at one and the same 
time in Lower Chaldsea by Oppert 4 , and by Sir H.Raw- 
linson 5 in England.. The three monograms, by which 
the name is expressed, are each well known, as being of 

1 Lengei'ke, p. 3. from Grieserigerj Neue Ansicht, &c. p. 39. 
2 Ant.x;6. 3 Obj.7." 

4 " Iii Abu Shahrein in Lower Chaldsea, cylinders of Nabonid have been dis- 
covered, wherein mention is made of his eldest son and co-regent Belsarussur. 
He was slain in Babylon, and is the Belshazzar of Scripture." Oppert, letter 
to Prof. Olshausen, Jan. 16. 1854, in Zeitschr. d. Deutsch. mbrg. Ges. viii. 598. 

5 " Mr. J. Taylor has lately discovered a number of clay cylinders at Um- 
Qeer, the modern Arab capital of Sook-ess-shoohd on the Euphrates. Two 
of these cylinders have already reached me. The most important fact which 
they disclose is that of the name Belsharezer, and that he was admitted by 
his father to a share in the government." Sir H. Rawl. in Athenaeum, 
March 1854. p. 341. 



Name of Belshazzar, as co-regent, on monuments. 403 

frequent occurrence 6 . The fact, that Belshazzar was 
slain, is illustrated " 7 by the inscription of Bisutun, in 
that the impostor, who caused the Babylonians to revolt 
against Darius Hystaspes, and who personated the heir 
to the throne, did not take the name of the eldest son 8 
of Nabonidus, Belsharezer, but of the second son Nabii- 
kudurusur." Beros.us, then, gives the history of the 
open campaign of. the father Nabonetus, ,who, having 
been defeated, shut himself. up in Borsippa, and was 
there taken after the capture of Babylon. Daniel relates 
the prediction of the fall of the Babylonian Empire in 
the capital, given to the son Belshazzar in the midst of 
his idolatrous insolence, and its fulfilment. The two 
accounts, which unbelievers have insolently contrasted, 
and which believers have been unable to harmonise, ap- 
pear as distinct portions of the same historyj the down- 
fall of Babylon. But men might well ask themselves, 
which is the most likely to have known the name of Bel- 

6 " The name is 'expressed by three monograms, the first signifying the 
god Bel; the second, shar, a fcjng-;and the third being the same sign which 
terminates the name of Nabopolassar, Nebuchadnezzar, Nergalshareser, &c." 
Ib. note. Nergalshareser is, by a like contraction, called Neriglissoqr by Be- 
rosus in Jos. c. Ap. i. 21; Neriglisar, by Megastbenes, Alex.'Polyh. in Eus*. 
Chron. ; Niglisar by Jos. Ant. x. 11. 2. Belshazzar is hot much abbreviated 
from Bel-shar-usur, and is abbreviated according to that common principle of 
languages, by giving it a more Aramaic form. The N is retained, although 
not pronounced ; the r alone is lost, and that is replaced by the double z. We 
have iXNtyVn for niK^a. Perhaps Daniel wrote it, as it was pronounced. We, 
English, strangely change the pronunciation of our proper names. '-. I; remem- 
ber, Saxby being Sauceby; Birmingham being. Brummegem; Cirenoester.is 
pronounced Ciceter; Leicester,. Lester ; Worcester, Worster; Malvern, Maw- 
vern ; Magdalene College was, in Oxford, Maudlen ; in London, the Magdalen 
Penitentiary was pronounced as it is spelt. 7 Sir II. RwJ. in Athc- 

nteum 1. c. ; Prof. Rawl. Herod. Ess. 8. i. 525. note 8, from Behistun Inscr. 
i. par. 17. iii. par. 13. re-edited, Ib. T. ii. p. 595, 6. 608. 

8 The fact, that Belshazzar was the eldest son, is stated in an inscription, 
thus decyphered by Dr. Hincks ; (Journal for Sacr. Lit. T. xiv. p. 412.) " Save 
thou me ; as to posterity, distant days to an extending extend thou ; also as 
to Belshazzar the son, the beginning of the issue of my heart, on the worship 
of thy great godhead his heart make to abide." Prof. .Rawlinson informs me, 
that no name is mentioned in the inscriptions, together with that of the 
reigning monarch, unless he were co-regent. Dr. Hincks speaks of Belshazzar, 
as being, according to "the inscriptions, " heir apparent." Ib. p. 409. ; . 

D(12 



404 Belshazzar' s relation to JVebuchadnezzar, 

shazzary which remained unknown to Babylonian, Per- 
sian, or Greek historians, the prophet who lived in Ba- 
bylon, or a Jew who is to have lived in Palestine nearly 
four centuries afterwards ? 

iii. In what way this Belsharusur was descended from 
Nebuchadnezzar, since his father was not of the royal fa- 
mily, may yet be discovered, or may, without detriment, 
remain unknown. Intermarriage with the family of a 
conquered monarch, or with a displaced line, is so obvi- 
ous a way of strengthening the newly acquired throne 1 , 
that it is a priori probable, that Nabunahit would so for- 
tify his claim. The fact, that two impostors took the 
title of "Nabocodrossor son of Nabonid," completely es- 
tablishes the fact, that Nabonidus wished to associate 
his family and dynasty with that of the great conqueror 
and the benefactor of Babylon. No one would hesitate to 
accept such an explanation in secular history. It is un- 
philosophical -to set historical statements at variance, 
when they admit of a ready solution. 

iv. Bat, it is said, the Queen-mother and Daniel speak 
of Nebuchadnezzar to Belshazzar, as his father, and to 
Belshazzar, as being his son, whereas the relation was, 
anyhow, that of grandfather and grandson, so that, al- 
though, by God's Providence, men have unexpected ex- 
ternal evidence that the name is right, still the relation 
is to be wrong. These men teach the old prophet, that 
he ought to have said, "Nebuchadnezzar, thy grandfa- 
ther," " and thou, his grandson." Most accurate advice ! 
Daniel would doubtless have followed it, had he been 
speaking English. But what if, in Chaldee, it was im- 
possible, without coining a new word ? Neither in He- 

1 Prof. Rawlinson (Bampton L. p. 443, 4.) gives as instances, " so Amasis 
married a daughter of Psammetik III. (Wilkinson in Rawl. Herod, ii. 387.) and 
Atossa was taken to wife both by the Pseudo-Smerdis and by Darius Hystas- 
pes. (Her. iii. 68, and 88.) On the Scime grounds Herod the Great married 
Marianne. (Jos. B. J. i. 12. 3.)" Even Mr. F. Newman acknowledges the prin- 
ciple in regard to the committing of Zedekiah's daughters to Gedaliah : (Jer. 
xli. 10.) quoted ib. The same principle was probably involved in Absalom's 
incest, (2 Sam. xvi. 22, 23.) and Adonijah's request, 1 Kgs. ii. 23. 



Neb. called his father, for no Chaldee word for grandf. 405 

brew,nor in Chaldee, is there any word for "grandfather," 
"grandson 2 ." "Forefathers" are called "fathers" or 
"fathers' fathers." But a single grandfather, or fore- 
father, is never called "father's father," but always "fa- 
ther " only. This is so, alike in early and late Hebrew, 
and the Chaldee follows the idiom. Jacob says, 3 The 
God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of 
Isaac. God says to Aaron, *the tribe of Levi, the tribe of 
thy father. The confession, to be made at the offering 
of the first fruits, began ; *A Syrian, ready to perish, was 
my father ; and in the same sense, probably, Moses says, 
& the God of my father. David said to Mephibosheth 7 , / 
will surely shew thee kindness, for Jonathan thy father's 
sake, and will restore to thee all the land of Saul thy father. 
And Asa is related to have * removed Maachah his mother 
from being queen, though it is said in the same chapter, 
that she was the mother of Abijam his father 9 . Maacha 
herself, who is called daughter of Absalom 9 , was really 
his granddaughter, he having left one only daughter, Ta- 
mar 10 , and her own father being Uriel u . Again, it is 
said, lz Asa did right in the eyes of the Lord, &idid David 
his father, and in like way of Hezekiah 13 . Contrariwise, 
it is said that u Ahaz did not right, like David his father ; 
that u Amaziah did right yet not like David his father ; he 
did according to all things as Joash his father did. Here, 
in one verse, the actual father and the remote grandfather 
are alike calleAhisfather; as, before, the father and grand- 
father of Mephibosheth 7 were called, in the same verse, 
his father. lG Josiah, it is said, ivalked in the ivays of Da- 
vid his father ; he began to seek the God of David his fa- 
ther. In IsFtiah there occur, Y ' 1 Jacob thy father ; ls thyjirst 
father, i. e. Adam ; and to Hezekiah he said, 19 Thus saith 

Even in Rabbinic, Buxtorf only mentions the terms, 'Jjj], 'tijfJi "my old man, 
my old woman," for " my grandfather," "my grandmother." col. 684. 

3 Gen. xxxi. 42. 4 Num. xviii. 2. 5 Peut. xxvi. 5. 6 Ex. xviii. 4. 

7 2 Sam. ix. 7. 8 1 Kgs. xv. 13. 9 Ib. 2. 2 Sam. xiv. 27. 

" 2 Chr. xiii. 2. 1 Kgs. xv. 11. > 3 2 Kgs. xviii. 3. 2 Clir. 

x'xix. 2. 14 2 Kgs. xvi. 2. 2 Chr. xxviii. 1. K 2 Kgs. xiv. 3. 

10 2 Chr. xxxiv. 2, 3. V Ts. Iviii. 14. w Ib- xiy;. 27. M ib. xxxviii. 5. 



406 In like ivay, men were called sons of their grandfathers. 

the Lord, the. God of David thy father. So, on the other 
hand, there is no one Hebrew or Chaldee word to express 
"grandson." In laws.; if the relation h as to be express- 
ed, the idiom is 1 thy son's daughter, 3 oi'' thy daughter's 
daughter ; or it is said, s thbu shalt tell it to thy son's son ; 
*rule tlwu over us, thou and thy son, and thy son's son. The 
relation can be expressed in this way in the abstract, but 
there is no way in HebreAV or Chaldee to mark, that one 
person was the grandson of another, except in the way 
of genealogy, " Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat, the son of 
Nimshi;" And so, the name son stands for the "grand- 
son," and a person is at times called the son of the more 
remarkable grandfather, the link of the father's name 
being omitted. Thus Jacob asked for *Laban the son of 
Nahor, omitting the immediate father, Bethuel 6 ; Jehu is 
called the son of Nimshi 1 , omitting his own father, Jeho- 
shaphat 8 . The prophet Zechariah is called the son of 
Iddo 9 , his own father being Berachiah 10 . Hence the 
Kechabites said, as a matter of course, ^Jonadab the 
son of Rechab our father commanded us ; we have obeyed 
in all things the^voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab our 
father; although Jonadab lived some 180 years before 13 . 
And reciprocally God says, l?> t he words of Jonadab the son 
of Rechab, that he commanded his sons, are performed; and, 
Because* ye have' obeyed the commandment of Jonadab 
your father, and kept all Ms precepts. 

In the Assyrian inscriptions, Sargon speaks of the 
al *kmgs my fathers," although himself probably connect- 
ed with the former line of kings, only through intermar- 
riage ; and Isaiah speaks of " 15 Merodach Baladan, son of 
Baladan," the immediate father of Merodach Baladan 
having been "Yagina 16 ." 

The requisition then, that Daniel or the Queen-mother 

1 Lev. xviii. 10. 2 Ib. and 17. 3 Ex.x.2. 

* Jud. viii. 22. 5 Gen. xxix. 5. 8 Ib. xxviii. 5. -"> 1 Kgs. xix. 16. 
2 Kgs. ix. 20. s 2 Kgs. ix. 2. 14. Ezr. v. 1. vi. 14. 10 Zech. i. 1. 

11 Jer. xxxr. 6, 8. 12 in Jehu's time B.C. 884. (2 Kgs. x. 15.) Jere- 

miah's prophecy was about B.C. 707. 13 Ib. 14. 16. " Athenseum I. c. 
Rawl. Herod. T. i. p 472. 16 xxxix. 1 . I(i Rawl. B. Lect. p. 443. note 4. 



Charges of error as to Susa,noto abandoned. 407 

should have expressed to Belshazzar the exact relation in 
which he stood to Nebuchadnezzar, is a thing simply im- 
practicable according to the genius of the language. But 
further;, it would have heen false to nature. The object 
of the Queen-mother was to influence Belshazzar; that 
of Daniel, to impress him by the contrast of his conduct 
and his grandfather's^ The words " son's son " are used, 
(where they are used,) to express distance. The idiom 
expresses the continuing-on of the line. It is, as I said, 
never used of an individual. Daniel used the only idiom, 
existing in the language, to express the relation ; and at 
the same time, instead of mentioning an inglorious father, 
he set before Belshazzar the history of his renowned fa- 
ther, the father of his greatness, the neglected example 
of God's judgment on the proud, and of His mercy on 
humbled pride. 

v. In regard to Susa 17 , rationalism, credulous, as usual, 
against the Bible, snatched at first at a statement of 
Pliny, " 18 Susiana, in which Susa, the ancient regal city 
of the Persians, was built by Darius the son of Hystas- 
pes." It also mistranslated Daniel, as though he said, 
that he was actually in Susa 19 , whereas he says, that in 
his vision he was there, (as Ezekiel speaks of his being 
iii his vision at Jerusalem 20 .) Then it tried to establish, 
that Elam was not conquered by Nebuchadnezzar 21 , so 
that Daniel was to have stated that he was in a place, 
not then built and not in the Babylonian empire. All 
these allegations were plainly contrary to the facts. 

Xenophon calls the city, Susa, in the time of Cyrus, say- 
ing that he " 22 passed the three spring months in Susa." 
Cambyses sent Prexaspes to Susa to put his brother to 
death 2S ; then; onhearing of the revolt of Pseudo-Smerdis, 
he set off himself to march to Susa 34 against him, but 
died; the two Magi reigned there 25 . Darius Hystaspes 

17 Obj. 5. 

is N. H. vi. 27. 31. w Bertholdt defended this at length, (p. 510, 4.) follow- 
ed hy Bachiene (Hell. Geogr. p. 615.) and others ; which every one now sees 
to be wrong. M Ezek. viii-xi. 21 Seeab. Lect.iii.p. 117, 8. ^ Cyrop.viii. 
G.ult. 23 Herod, iii. 30. ^ Ib. 64. %> Ib.65. 



408 Siisdj an ancient city, probably a residence of Cyrus, 

came thither from Persia Proper, of which his father was 
Satrap 1 . Herodotus too calls it " 2 the Susa of Mem- 
non," a name which carries its date back to the fabulous 
times of Greece. Straho says, that the Persian kings 
chose it as their residence, in part, " 3 on account of the 
dignity of the city ;" and so, as long prae-existing. Greek 
traditions placed " 4 Memnon son of Tithonus and his 
Susianians " in the time of the Trojan war. Pliny does 
not contradict all this, if we understand that he used the 
word "built," in regard to Susa, in the way in which it 
is so often said of one who rebuilds, beautifies, enlarges 
or fortifies. In that sense he must clearly have used it 
of Ecbatana, when he says, " s King Seleucus built Ec- 
batana, the capital of Media." So Nebuchadnezzar said, 
6 Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house 
of the kingdom ? and, in this sense, Solomon doubtless is 
said to have " 7 built Tadmor," and Rehoboam to have 
" 8 built" Bethlehem, Tekoah, and other towns, which 
existed long before. 

Rationalism then had to retreat from all those former 
charges, step by step. What remains resolves itself into a 
mere denial of prophecy. Daniel saw Susa, as a repre- 
sentative of Persian empire. Probably it was already 
the seat of that empire. For it is in itself unlikely, that 
Cyrus should have abandoned his Persians, and made the 
Median capital his only seat of empire. The one autho- 
rity, who states that he made Susa the Persian residence, 
does not hint that he made it so after the conquest of Ba- 
bylon. Contrariwise one of the grounds, which Strabo 
assigns for the choice 9 , its " bordering upon Babylon," 
suits the times before its capture better than those sub- 
sequent. Before the capture, Susa was a good point, 
whence to invade Babylon; a three months' residence 

1 " Darius, son of Hystaspes, arrived at Susa, having come from the Per- 
sians. For of these his father was governor," (forapxos, i. q. Satrap.) Ib. 70. 

2 vii. 151. In v. 54. he calls it "the Mcmnonian city;" v. 53, "the Mem- 
nonian palnoe." a xv. 3. 2. p. 728. 4 Diod. ii. 22. 

5 N. H. vi. 14. 17. 6 Dan. iv. 30. Eng. 27. Ch. ? 1 Kgs. ix. 18. 

8 2 Chr. xi. 6. I. c. 



before his capture of Babylon, 4C9 

there was of no special value in regard to Babylon, when 
Babylon was already their's. The account of the march 
of Cyrus against Babylon, given by Herodotus, also falls 
in with the probability, that Susa was already his capi- 
tal. Herodotus first 10 mentions the water of the Cho- 
aspes, which the Persian kings took with them on their 
expeditions ; then, the crossing of the Gyndes n ; but from 
Susa on the Choaspes to the Gyndes was the first part of 
the royal road 13 , which connected Susa with the extre- 
mity of the Persian empire on the Avest. 

In the 3rd year of Belshazzar, probably shortly before 
the close of the Babylonian empire, God foreshowed to 
Daniel the rise, the growth, the fall of the 2nd world-em- 
pire, which was about to destroy the first. This could not 
be more graphically shewn than by the symbolic animal, 
close by the capital of Persia whence its conqueror issued. 
Ecbatana would have symbolised chiefly the inferior, the 
Median, portion of the conquering empire. The name of 
Susa symbolises the superior element, the Persian. The 
slight touch is another indication, that Daniel knew the 
relation of the two races, of which these writers would 
fain make him out to be ignorant. 

vi. The mention of Satraps is to yield a twofold argu- 
ment against the book of Daniel ; 1) that they are men- 
tioned at all as 'Babylonian officers ; 2) that there were so 
many as 120 under Darius the Mede. True ! Bcrosus, 
the Babylonian historian, who is an infallible authority, 
if he can be made to seem to contradict Holy Scripture, 
mentions them too. He speaks, as we saw 13 , of the Satrap 
who rebelled against Nabopolassar. But this too is to be 
an anachronism u ; for there are to have been no Satraps 
in Egypt before the time of Cambyses 3 and those, of course, 
Persian. True again ; " 15 The government of the Asiatic 

10 i. 188. "i.189. 12 v.52.- 

13 See above Lect. ii. p. 60. 14 Lengerke on Dan. iii. 3. p. 117. 

is d-yye know from other places, that the government [of the Medes,] as in 
other Asiatic empires, was a government by Satraps ; in that the foreign popula- 
tions were under Median Satraps." Heeren, Ideen, 5. 1. 143. "The government 



410 Satraps, an essential part of the large Asiatic empires. 

states, Assyrians, Babylonians, Medians, and Persians, 
was a government by Generals, Princes l , who at the 
same time were Stadtholders, Governors general." Sub- 
dued, but warlike nations, uncemented into one with the 
conquering empire, and at a distance from its capital, 
must be held in allegiance by the strong hand and will 
of some delegated authority, to whom the distant go- 
vernment is confided. The Governors in our colonies or 
conquests, the Gape, Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, New 
Zealand, would, when government was less organised, 
have been Satraps. Governor, or Governor-General, is 
the title equivalent to Satrap. But further, the Assy- 
rian boast in Isaiah, ^Are' not my princes altogether 
kings f exactly expresses the character of the. Satrap, an 
officer who lived in almost royal state, almost indepen- 
dent of his distant suzerain, so that he provided the 
contingent of tribute, or, if need were, of soldiers, and 
was often in a condition, and tempted, to assert his com- 
plete independence. In the great wars or invasions of the 
king, the Satrap brought his contingent of troops, and be- 
came one of the great king's^ attendant princes. The title 
of Nebuchadnezzar himself, king of kings 3 , expresses the 
sanie relation. The title involves this, that he was -king 
of those who governed as kings, under him. Merodach- 
baladan, entitled king of Babylon by Isaiah 4 , was proba- 
bly one of the vice-kings or Satraps of the king of Assyria. 
For Babylon was, before and after this time, dependent 
on Nineveh. Sennacherib made Belib his viceroy there 5 ; 
his son Esarhaddon transplanted Babylonians to Sama- 
ria 6 , and carried Manasseh captive to Babylon 7 . As- 

by Satraps, which had in Xenophon's time attained its full organisation, was 
common to the Persian Empire with/all great despotic empires." Id. p. 489. " It 
belongs to the peculiar constitution of the Assyrian, Chaldean, and Persian 
Empires, that the provinces were governed by Satraps or Vice-kings, who 
were often relations, brothers, sons, or step-sons, of the Mng, at times extreme- 
ly powerful, rivalled the royal court in pomp, but often withdrew themselves 
from its supremacy, " and made themselves independent." * Is. x. 8. 

2 2 Kgs. xviii. 19. Is. xxxvi. 4. 3 E/ek. xxvi. 7. Dan. ii. 37. as of Ar- 

taxerxes, Ezr. vii. 12. 4 Is. xxxix. 1. 5 as Elibus, (Polybistor) or Belib. 
(Can. Ptol.) see Rawl. Herod, i. 504. G Ezraiv. 2. ? 2 Chr. xxxiii. 11. 



Cyrus is not said to have instituted the office. 411 

Syrian viceroys appear as Babylonian kings in the Ca- 
non of Ptolemy 5 .. The name, Satrap, being of Sanskrit 
origin, may have come in. at anytime. The relation, ex- 
pressed by the name, neither began nor ended with the 
Persians, being inseparable from the loose organisation of 
the vast Eastern Empires. Berosus speaks of a Satrap 
under Nabopolassar ; Diodorus uses the term of the go- 
vernor set by Ninus over Media 8 , and speaks of the"Sa r 
trapy of Babylonia," as having been promised to Bele- 
sys 9 . The name continued on. under the Grecian Alexan- 
der 10 , and after his death. There is not then a shadow of 
ground, because Xenophon says that Cyrus, " n when he 
was in Babylon, thought good at once to send Satraps to 
the. conquered nations/' to assume that he was ihejirst 
who sent Satraps to conquered provinces, or that he was 
instituting a new office. Xenophon says, " 12 having se- 
lected those of his . friends whom he thought the fittest, 
he sent Satraps to Arabia, Cappadocia, the Greater Phry- 
gia, Lycia and Ionia, Caria, Phrygia on the Hellespont, 
and ^Eolis. But over Cilicia and Cyprus and the Paph- 
lagonians he sent not Persian Satraps, because they seem- 
ed to join willingly the campaign against Babylon ;" and 
again, " 1S The Cilicians and Cyprians joined his army very 
readily. Wherefore he never sent any Persian Satrap 
over either Cilicians or Cyprians, but their native kings 
sufficed him." This is precisely the same policy which we 
find in Alexander and his immediate successors, who left 
certain kingdoms under their native kings, making them, 
as did Cyrus also, tributaries. The king was in these 
cases the Satrap, as elsewhere the Satraps became little 
kings. Herodotus himself says generally, that the Per- 
sians adopted the polity of the Medes u . Xenophon is 
obviously relating no new institution, but how Cyrus 
chose fitting Persians for the office, which itself was an 
integral part of all Asiatic rule. The point insisted on in 

Diod. ii. 2. Ib. 24. 10 See ab. p, 154-6. viii. 6. 1. Ib. 4. 
13 vi. 4. 1. 14 i. 134. see Bahr ad loc. following Heeren, i. 1. p. 142. 



412 Varying number and distribution 

each case is, that they were Persian l Satraps. The state- 
ment presupposes that the office existed before. It was 
manifestly also a mere partial, unsystematic, arrange- 
ment or account, since, of the six Persian Satraps, five 
were placed in Asia Minor 2 ; and, in all his other territo- 
ries, one only, and that, in Arabia. Cyrus appears rather 
to have modified the existing system of Satraps, by ^plac- 
ing the governors of the citadels and the captains of 
guards at the different posts in the country," as checks 
upon them. Herodotus also mentions a Persian Satrap 
of Sardis under Cyrus 4 , and of Egypt under Cambyses 5 . 
In regard to the number, it is evident that either Darius 
diminished the existing number, or that his Satraps mean 
something different from the office under Cyrus. For 
in Asia Minor alone the Satraps under Cyrus were twice 
as many as those mentioned in that division by Darius G . 
The number of twenty, under which Herodotus sums them 
up, is itself uncertain. In the Behistun inscription, Da- 
rius mentions incidentally a " 7 Satrap of Arachosia " not 
included in the list of Herodotus, whereas the province 
is mentioned in " 8 the three authentic lists of the Per- 
sian provinces, which are contained in the Inscriptions 
of Darius." 

The several lists of the provinces in those three inscrip- 
tions are moreover imperfect, not exactly agreeing with 
one another, yet each exceeding in number that given by 
Herodotus 9 . They shew, that variations took place even 

1 mentioned botli in viii. 6. 4. and vi. 4. 1. 2 viii. 6. 4. 3 Ib. 1. 4 iii. 120. 

5 iv. 1 66. 6 In addition to the five Persian Satraps there were, under Cyrus, 
the three native Satraps of Cilicia, and Paphlagonia, and the neighbouring 
Cyprus. Xenophon, in his own time, names the Persian "rulers" of two more 
divisions of Asia Minor, through which he passed, the Bithynians, and the Pha- 
sians (to the East of Pontus,) with the Hesperians. Anab. vii. 8. pen. Poly- 
semis (vii. 21. 7.) mentions, in regard to the times of Artaxerxes Memnon, a 
Satrap of Catonia, (one of the ten divisions of Cappadocia. Strabo xii. 1. 4. 
p. 534.) Under Darius, Herodotus mentions four Satrapies only in Asia Minor. 

7 Beh. Inscr. col. 3. par. 9. .2. 

8 The lists are given in Rawl. Her. T. ii. p. 485, n. 6. on Her. iii. 94. 

9 The list at Behistun (given by Rawl. ib. and in the inscription itself, p. 591,) 
mentions 23 provinces including Persia, (which it alone counts,) and the "Is- 
lands of the sea;" (col. 1. par. 6. in Raw!. Her. ii. 591.) but not containing 



of Satrapies. 413 

in the reign of Darius himself. Several, which occur as 
one Satrapy in the system given by Herodotus, are given 
in the lists as distinct provinces 10 . In all, those lists fur- 
nish the names of 33 provinces, instead of the 20 Satra- 
pies, or, (including n the Arabians, Ethiopians, Colchians, 
who brought presents instead of tribute, and the Per- 
sians, who were exempt from tribute,) the 24 divisions of 
Herodotus. Yet they omit the fifth Satrapy, " all Phceni- 
cia, Palestine-Syria, and Cyprus." Then also, since, in 
the third year of the reign of Xerxes, his dominions were 
divided into 127 provinces, it is in itself likely that the 
division into 20, which Herodotus himself speaks of as 
something peculiar 12 , did not exclude adivision into more 
numerous provinces. A trace of such subdivision occurs 
probably in the " 13 nome in Dascyleium." One of those 
larger Satrapies can hardly have been included under the 
title. JSolis continued to be a separate Satrapy in the 
time of Artaxerxes. It was held under Pharnabazus, and 
given by him to whom he willed u . Yet its Satrap, Ma- 
nia, was in a condition to hold her own and to make war 
with towns in the Troad 15 , and to incorporate them in her 
satrapy. She also joined Pharnabazus 16 in his invasions 
of the Mysians and^ Pisidians, gave him tribute and pre- 
sents, and received him in a more distinguished way, than 

Sagartia,which that at Persepolis lias, nor India,wliich is in the lists at Persepo- 
Jis and Nakhsh-i-Rustam. The list at Persepolis (Ib.) alone has not " the isles 
of the sea." That of Nakhsh-i-Rustam (Ib.) has not Mecia nor Sagartia, but 
has eight, which the others have not. The four Satrapies of Asia Minor (Her. 
iii. 90.) appear probably in the Nakhsh-i-R. list alone, as Cappadocia, Saparda, 
and Ionia repeated twice ; the two others have three only. 

10 Babylonia and Assyria are one Satrapy, but are two provinces in the lists; 
(as they were also in Xenophon's time, Anab. vii. 8. pen.;) the Sagartians, Sa- 
rangians, Mycians, part only of the fourteenth Satrapy, are three provinces ; 
the Parthians, Chorasmians, Sogdians, Arians, the sixteenth Satrapy, are four 
provinces in the lists ; the Sattagydians and Gandarians, part of the seventh 
Satrapy, are two provinces. ]1 Herod, iii. 97. 

12 Her. iii. 89. " It was only now, that the empire was divided only into 
20 Satrapies, and that it was denned, how much each was to pay." Fltigel, 
in Hall. Enc. Art. Perser. Gesch. p. 374. 

13 Her. iii. 120. In 126, Creates is called " the lieutenant-governor of Dasc." 
in vi. 33, "in Dasc." Thueydides also speaks of "the Satrapy of Dascyleium." 
i. 129. 14 Xcn. Hell. 3. 1.8. 15 Larissa, Hamaxitus and Colons. lc ib. 10. 



414 Satrap, a governor of large or lesser province. 

the other lieutenant-governors. Pharnabazus, thenj had 
many subordinate governors, who had, equally with him- 
self, the title of Satrap 1 . Palestine itself, after the cap- 
tivity and immediately after Daniel's time, is spoken of 
as " 2 a province." In the same book of Ezra it is related, 
that 3 the commissions of the king were given, to the satraps 
of the king and to the governors on this side the river,. and 
they furthered, the people, whereas, according to the later 
arrangement of Darius, there was in that district one Sa- 
trapy only. In the hook of Esther also, the Satraps are 
spoken of with reference to the one hundred and twenty 
seven provinces 4 , (Medinoth.) 

The result then is, that the government hy Satraps was, 
according to heathen historians too, Babylonian also, and 
was, under whatever name, an essential part of those large 
Eastern empires ; that Cyrus sent Persian Satraps, con- 
tinuing, but modifying, the old office ; sending Satraps, on 
whomhe couldrely,and limiting thepower of the Satraps ; 
and that the division by Darius Hystaspes, mentioned by 
Herodotus, which, as appears from the monuments of 
Darius himself, needs correction, did not interfere with 
the previous distribution into smaller provinces, of which 
we have notice before and after hiim Plato asserts 5 , on 
the other hand, that Darius made another distribution in- 
to seven only, the Governors of which must have borne 
the common title of Satraps. The title, signifying, (it 
is though t 6 ,) " lord or , protector of a kingdom or pro- 
vince," might relate equally to a larger or lesser pro- 
vince, although history, as is natural, has occasion mostly 
to speak of the greater Satraps. A Governor-general of 

. ! The word " Satrap " is usedin regard to Mania, n. 8-10 ; she is compared 
with " the other vvapx.oi." The word then must be used, as it is in Herodotus, 
(see Biihr on Her. iii. 70. note, v. 25. note.) as the Greek equivalent for Satrap. 

2 Ezra ii. I. Neh. vii. 6. xi. 3. 3 Ezra viii. 36.; 

4 viii. 9. In iii. 12, the number of the provinces is not mentioned, but the 
letters were written to the king's Satraps in each province,- (Medinah) of 
which it is said, i. 1. viii. 9, and ix. 30. that there were 127. 
"He divided [the empire] into seven parts." de Legg. iii. p/144. Bip. 
- See in Rodiger's App. to Gesen. Thes. p. 68. .'. 



Rationalist fictions as to the" den of lions." 415 

India would be likely to be mentioned in history; not so 
probably a governor of the Cape or of Bombay. ; 

vii. Unbelief counted, it did not weigh, arguments, when 
it would make an argument out of the description of the 
den of lions 7 . The den is to have been a cistern, (much 
like;that, I suppose, in which the white bears used to be 
kept in the Zoological gardens,) and the stone is to have 
been laid over the whole opening, excluding light and 
air, so that no animal could live in it. Such is the de- 
scription which Lengerke would insolently foist upon the 
book of Daniel 8 . 

It is, of course, foreign from Daniel, who represents 
the king as speaking, and himself, as hearing and answer- 
ing, ere the stone was removed. This is, of course, as 
essential a part of the description as the rest. The den 
was, for safety, below ground. Such a den must needs 
have some approach from above, in order to admit of its 
being cleaned by the keepers, and the bones of the ani- 
mals^ on which the animals were fed, being removed. 
There is nothing in the meaning of the word to determine 
further the shape of the den 10 . But the way, by which 

' 7 Obj.3. 

8 p. 272. 283. Davidson cidopts the insolence of Lengerke, "Howdid'the 
animals live in a cistern-like den? Did an angel give them air to breathe, 
whose vitalising property could not he exhausted ? It is difficult to see how 
life could have been long supported in the place. Lions would soon have died 
in it." iii. 175. Leng. had said, p. 272. "Hengstenberg (p. 134.) and Havernick 
.(p. 223.) decline considering the preservation of Daniel in the lion's den, as 
a natural event, hut forget that the lions too could not have held out in a hole, 
void of air, covered with a stone. Over these no angel watched, as over Da- 
niel (v. 21.) and yet it- were necessary to assume a 2nd miracle, to make then- 
preservation, and so the miracle of the deliverance of Daniel, possible." 

. - 9 vi. 19-21. 

10 K3. "In Syriac, goobo is used of 'a prison,' Barh. Chron. p. 178. 1. 10. 
of 'caves' Ib. p. 317. 1. 15, &c." Hav. Neue Unters. p. 65. Jaula, in Arab, 
is used of a cleft between two mountains, a ravine ; the opening between 
clouds ; space between houses or lands ; a pit or ditch, a small inn." -Freyt. 
Lex. Arab. i. 321. In Syriac, it seems to be a hollow. The Rev. Payne Smith 
has kindly furnished me with these instances from the collectanea of Bernstein 
and Quatremere with his own; "the hollow receptacle of a bolt," Gest. Al. 
88. 7; "vessel," Ecclus. xxi. 14. Judith vii. 20; "cistern," Ib. viii. 31. Jer. 
ii. 13; from which flocks drank, Rel. Jur. 123. 9; "well," (at Bethlehem) 
2 Sam. xxiii. 15, 16 ; 'H is used of " pits " in which people hid themselves and 



4l6flFord } rendered" den," usedof 'large under groundplaces. 

the keepers descended, might ohviously form a way of 
escape for one whom the lions spared, when first cast to 
them. The Jews, the keepers of the Emperor's lions in 
Fez, contrived, at times, to rescue their compatriots 
whom the Emperor had had cast in 1 . The word render- 
ed, mouth, is evidently the entrance. Of a well the whole 
was, and often still is, covered in the East by a stone, to 
reserve it for the time of use 3 , to keep it free from un- 
cleanly things, or from heing stopped by sand. The ob- 
ject of the princes, in laying a stone on the mouth of the 
den and sealing it Avith the seal of the king and of his 
lords, was simply to prevent the removal of Daniel. To 
this end, it was only necessary to close the entrance, where 
the stairs or ladder, by which the keepers went down into 
the den, abutted at the top. Such an entrance from above 
is described, in regard to a lions' den in Fez, where state- 
prisoners and Jews were often thrown. " x The lions' den 
was a large quadrangular hole in the ground, divided by 
a partition into two chambers. This wall has a door, 
which can be opened and shut from above. The keepers 

dwelt, 1 Sam. xlii. 6 ; the large "pit" of Beth-Eked, 2 Kgs. x .14 ; "pit of mud," 
deep enough for a prison, Barh. Chr. p. 118; "a dungeon," Jer. xxxvii. 16; 
"a prison," Wisd. x. 13. S. Ephr. ii. 416. Bar. Hebr. Clir. p. 178. 303. 338, 
(beitgoobo prison-house, Acta Mart. ii. 239.;) "den" of lions, Dan. vi. 7,, 12. 
Hist. Drac. 31. S. Eplir. in Ass. B. O. i. 78; a hollow in a wood, (perhaps i. q. 
Xaff/io, LXX) 2 Sam. xviii. 17. S. Eplir. ii. 48 ; "deep pit," for, "the pit of hell," 
Ecclus. xxi. 10 ; it is explained by xyy, " large cisterns," Ass. B. 0. iii. 1. p. 499. 
It is also used (as my son has noted) for lapp, "prison," Ps. cxlii. 7; lia, "pri- 
son," Gen. xli. 14; and in the phrases, "go down to the pit," Ps. xxviii. 1. 
Ixxxviii. 4 ; " in the lowest pit," Ps. Ixxxviii. 6 ; a pit, into which an ass or ox 
might fall and be killed, Ex. xxi. 33. In Jer. xli. 7, 9. it is used of the large 
pit, originally dug by Asa " for fear of Baasha," whether to bury things in, 
or, as Bochart thought, (T. ii. p. 65. Leipz.) as a subterranean hiding place, or 
as a large reservoir. In any case it must have been a large one. Ishmael 
cast 70 men into it. From the same meaning of " hollow," is perhaps derived 
that of " bridge." In Hebrew too 33 is an " arched building," Ezek. xvi. 24, 
31, 39. The arch was known in Babylon in Nebuchadnezzar's time; for the 
" hanging gardens " of Babylon were supported by arches, and were over the 
river, Strabo xvi. 1. 5. p. 738. Gas. In Samaritan also, it stands for "well," 
Gen. xxvi. 25 ;" cistern," Lev. xi. 36; "dungeon," Gen. xli. 14. Ex. xii. 29. 
Cast. Lex. col. 505. * Host, Nachr. v. Fez u. Marokko, p. 77. 290. 

3 Gen. xxix. -2, 3. As to the present practice see Robins. Pal. i. 490. and 
note 1. 2. 



Classes of the Magi. 417 

of the lions, (mostly Jews,) throw food into the one divi- 
sion,, and so entice the lions thither, then they shut the 
door from above and clean the other division. The whole 
is under the open sky, and is only encircled with a wall, 
over which" people can look down in. The Emperor 
sometimes has men cast in." 

Of course, we cannot tell whether such was the struc- 
ture of the den into which Daniel was thrown. Daniel 
wrote for believers, not for antiquarians. Enough, that 
a den of such sort would answer the description in Daniel, 
and that, the entrance being closed by the stone laid on 
it, the purpose' of the princes could be effected without 
the absurdity imputed. But to invent absurdities betrays 
the malus animus of the critic ; the prophet remains un- 
harmed, as he was in the lions' den. 

vi. The imputations of " ignorance about the Magi 3 " are 
to be made up of an alleged discrepancy of the statements 
of Daniel from those of Porphyry and S. Jerome. These, 
it is said, divide the Magi into three classes, whereas Da- 
niel, it is affirmed, enumerates five. As though, even if 
their accounts were at variance, such a change as to the 
number of classes into which an institute was divided, could 
not take place in nearly eight centuries ! But there is 
no discrepancy. The four 4 classes, enumerated by Daniel, 
magicians., astrologers, soothsayers, Chaldceans, are a divi- 
sion of kind, according to the character of their employ- 
ment. The distinction in Porphyry is one, not of 'kind, but 
of degree. They are three orders, like the different ranks 
of the initiated, or of the Free-masons to this day. The 
three orders of Magi, mentioned by Porphyry 5 , (from 
whom S. Jerome gives an extract 6 ,) were degrees in the 

3 Obj. 4. 4 Lengerke (p. 48.) overlooked, that the title D'sijbn occurs 

once only in the Hebrew, (Dan. ii. 2.) not in the ChaMee; and that in the Chal- 
dee enumerations there stands pn, (ii. 10. 27. iv. 4. v. 7. 11.) which is not in 
the Hebrew of Daniel. They are then doubtless equivalents. Compare espe- 
cially ii. 48. lie made Mm chief of the sagans of all the wise of Babylon with 
ii. 2. on the one hand in which four classes are mentioned, including the Heb. 
D'g8>aj, and on the other, v. 11. in which there are also four, but the Chald. 
i"iia stands for the Heb. D'fltf??. & De Abstin. iv. 16. 

c " Eubulus, who unfolded the history of Mithra in many volumes, relates 



418 Error in Porphyry's statement as to the Magi. 

highest, the priestly order. Porphyry distinctly calls 
them ministers of the Deity. '^Amongthe Persians, 
those who are wise as to the Deity, and are its ministers, 
are called Magi. For Magos means this in their native 
language. This race is accounted so great and venerable 
among the Persians, that even Darius son of Hystaspes 
inscribed on his monument, in addition to the rest, that 
he was a teacher of the things of the Magi. These were 
divided into three classes, as Symbulus [Eubulus 2 ] says, 
who wrote the history of Mithra in many books. The 
first and most learned class neither eat any living thing, 
nor slay it, but abide in the ancient abstinence from ani- 
mal food 3 . The second class use animal food, but do not 
kill any tame animal ; nor do the third touch all things, 
like ordinary people. For the transmigration of souls is 
a doctrine of all the first/* 

This last statement of Eubulus, which he assigned as 
the ground of the whole abstinence from: animal food, is 
a manifest error, since the metempsychosis was no part 
of the Magian system ; and the whole is directly contra- 
dicted by Herodotus 4 . 

There may, of course, still have been three classes of 
priests, although all besides is erroneous. So the evi- 
dence for the threefold division was to be eked out by an 
alleged threefold division of the ancient Egyptian and of 
the Parsee priesthood. This, if true, would manifestly 
be nothing to the purpose, unless it were shewn that the 
Magi were all priests, or that the modern ritual-priest- 
hood of the Parsee and the priesthood of the Egyptians 

that among the Persians there are three kinds of Magi, of whom the first, who 
are the most learned and eloquent, take no other food than meal and vegeta- 
bles." S, Jer. adr. Jovin. ii. 14. l I.e. 2 S. Jer.l, c. 3 Long, 
adds, of his own apparently, that "they abstained from wine and marriage." 
(p. 46.) The classes of Parsee priests are hereditary, and so involve marriage. 
- 4 /j ne ]vi a gj are much severed both from other men and from the priests 
: of Egypt. For these hold it matter of conscience not to kill any living thing, 
except what they sacrifice. But the Magi kill with their own hands all, save 
dog and man, and indeed shew great earnestness in it, killing alike ants and 
serpents, and the other reptiles and fowls." i. 140. 



. No old account of .threefold division of Magi. 419 

were identical with that of the Magi. In Christian times 
however, in which alone we have any account of the di- 
vision of the Egyptian priesthood 5 , the number, was not 
three. It consisted of four 8 or five more learned classes, 
besides others, to whom the general name of "priest ;" is 
also given. S. Clement of Alexandria recounts five 7 , as 
entering into the Egyptian processions of his day. All 
these were entrusted with hooks of Hermes, and four 
were engaged in secular learning also. 

The distribution of the Parsee priesthood into the Des- 
turs, Mobeds, Herbads, is also a division of degrees ; its 
antiquity is altogether uncertain. The names are not 
old, but modern Persian. They do not occur in the Zend- 
avesta. Any how, this is not a division of the Magi ge- 
nerally, and it relates to ritual only. Those who distin- 
guish the Destur and the Mobed most, say, " 8 that the 
office of the Mobed is to utter the prayers, to enact the 
ceremonies, and to this end he must know the whole Zend- 
avesta by heart, but without necessarily understanding 

5 Herodotus (ii. 36. 58.) whom Leng. quotes, has nothing on the subject. 
In ii, 37. he says contrariwise, " Each god has, not one priest, but t many, of 
whom one is chief priest; ifanydie, his son is appointed in his stead." InExod. 
vii. 11. it is not clear that three classes are mentioned. It is. literally, "And 
Pharaoh, too called the wise men and enchanters j and. they too, the writers of 
the sacred writing, did so with their enchantments." It is not clear, then, 
whether Moses speaks of two classes, or of three ; any how, he does not say, 
that there were only three. 

"The true philosophising exists in the prophetse and hierostolistce, and 
hierogrammateis, and the horologi. But the other multitude of the priests, 
and shrine-bearers, and temple-sweepers, and ministers of the gods, exercise 
cleanness in like way, but not with so much accuracy or continence." Porph. 
deabstin. iv. 8. p. 321. 

7 Strom, vi. 4. p. 757, 8. Pott. Porphyry n. 9, p. 324. mentions the hymn- 
singer, as " employed in the worship, of Sarapis by fire and water, making a li- 
bation with the water and strewing the fire, when, standing on the threshold, 
he, in the native language of the Egyptians, awakens the god." 

8 Haug, die GathSis Abth. 2. p. xiii. from the Destur at Poonah. Spiegel, 
(Avesta ii. p. xv. c. 1.) whom Haug criticises, quotes the Persian translation of 

.the Ardil-viraf-na'me, " the Desturs of the law, they are the Mobeds," and re- 
fers to Hyde Rel. Vett. Perss. p. 367. ed. 1. The nameMobed, for the chief 
priest of the Magi, occurs often in accounts of Syriac martyrdom. Lorsbach, 
Museum, p. 132. and Syriac collectanea of Quatremere. 

- EC 2 



420 Three of Daniel's classes, marked classes of Magi. 

it. The Destur has the superintendence of all the cere- 
monies and of the whole fire-worship, without being re- 
quired to perform it, this being done at his direction by 
the Mobeds. He is to understand and to be able to ex- 
pound the Zcndavesta, and in all matters of belief he 
alone is appealed to." The Herbads are acknowledged 
to be the lowest class of fire-priests. 

This too is a division wholly different in principle from 
that of Daniel. On the other hand the well-known ac- 
count of Strabo corresponds so far with this of Daniel, 
that he speaks of several kinds of Magi. " x Of the astro- 
nomical Chaldaeans there are many kinds 3 . For some 
are called Orchians, and others Borsippians, and many 
others, as, according to sects, speaking different things 
concerning the same dogmas." 

Three of the classes in Daniel are also marked classes. 

The Clialdceans were known to Greek writers also, as 
the priests ? among the Magi. These are the spokesmen 
of all the wise men, in that first trial by Nebuchadnezzar 4 . 
The title is not used (as some have said) as a name for 
all the Magi, but historically only on this one occasion. 
Elsewhere, and even by "the Chaldseans" themselves, they 
are mentioned as one class only among others 5 . The 
generic title, used in Daniel, is not Chaldseans, but, all the 
ivise men of Babylon 6 . This, as to Nebuchadnezzar's 
time 7 , included four classes ; in the single case, mentioned 
in Belshazzar's reign 8 , three only are named. 

1 xvi. 1.6. 2 76J/7). 

3 " The Chaldaeans, being priests of this god," [Bel.] Her. i. 181. "On the 
greater altar, the Chaldoeans burn 1000 talents of frankincense every year, when 
they celebrate the festival of this god." ib. 183. " The priests, whom the Baby- 

' lonians call Chaldseans." Diod. Sic. ii. 24. "The Chaldseans, being of the oldest 
Babylonians, in the distribution of the polity have the like rank with the priests 
of Egypt. For they are appointed to the service, and study wisdom during th<! 
whole period of their lives, having their greatest glory from astrology." Ib. 29. 
" Chaldreans, a kind (-yeW) of Magians." Hesych. (Hilv. Dan. p. 48, 9.) 

4 ii. 4, 5, 10. 5 with the D'^aj.Q'?^, Q'sijin,Dan. ii.2; with two classes only, 
by the Chaldeeans themselves, ii. 10. viz. '^31 *]BN] Dinn Va ; with the.sametwo 
classes and the pja iv. 4. and v. 11. referring to Nebuchadnezzar's time; and, 
of Belshazzar's, without the D-aairt, v. 7. 6 ii. 12, 13, 14, 18, 24, (bis) 48. iv. 3. 
Ch. [6. Eng.] v. 7, 1 1. 1 ii. 48. comp. ii. 2. and v. 11. 8 v. 7. 



Education by Magi not against conscience. 421 

A 2nd class, ashshafim, as has beeii already mentioned^ 
occurs only in Daniel and in West Aramaic 9 . 

A 3rd,, chartummim, (which probably signifies, etymo- 
logically, writers of sacred writing}) occurs besides only 
of-Egyptian magicians 10 . But the connection of Babylo- 
nian and Egyptian idolatry makes it, in itself, probable, 
that it was one and the same institution in both ; and we 
are directly told that Democritus, (who died B.C. 357,) 
wrote " n on the sacred writings in Babylon." 

The 4th class is, at least, characterised in this way, that 
a different name is given to it in the Chaldee and Hebrew ; 
which at least shews, (contrary to what has been stated 
so carelessly,) that discrimination was used in the naming 
of the several classes. 

But it is said, that it was improbable that Daniel should, 
with his strict principles, have been willing to be taught 
among the Magi ; or that they should have received him 
among them, being an hereditary caste; or that he should 
have been set over them, or should have accepted such a 
charge la . 

In regard to his willingness to be taught, Moses too, 
we know, I5 was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. 
As Moses acquired their secular knowledge without their 
debasing superstitions, so Daniel. As Moses was edu- 
cated by the priests, who were sole possessors of Egyp- 
tian learning, so Daniel by the Magi, the possessors of 
the Babylonian. In both nations the learning was ordi- 

9 See Lect. i. p. 40. 

10 Gen. xli. 24. Ex. vii. 11. In Exodus, it stands connected with the D'Djq 
and O'atfbn, whether including them, or no. The rendering of the LXl 
Itpoypamuvreis, (acquainted as they were with Egyptian customs,) makes it 
morally certain that the word is compounded of Bin " style " and Din " sacred." 

11 Trepl TUV iv fiafivXiavi lep&v ypa/j.fj.aTcav. Diog. Laert. vit. Democr. The 
Hierogrammateus, according to S. Clement AL, "had to know, what are call- 
ed Hieroglyphics^ and about cosmography, and geography, the order of the sun 
and of the moon and of the five planets ; the ground-plan of Egypt, and the 
diagram of the Nile ; the register of the ornaments of the temples, and of the 
spots consecrated to them ; about the measures, and the things of use in the 
temples." Strom, vi. 4. p. 268. Sylb. 

12 Lengerke, Dan. p. 50, 1. Bleek (Einl. p. 598,) only excepts to his under- 
taking the charge, followed by Dav. iii. 183. Acts vii. 22. 



Large ' unsiiperstitidus learning of Chaldees. 

narily transmitted from father to son : of the Persian 
Magi it is expressly said, " l The Persian Magi never edu- 
cated non-Persians, unless the king enjoin it." In such a 
monarchy as the Babylonian or Persian, the king's will 
was, of course, law. As the Egyptian priesthood had a 
large province of secular knowledge, so all tradition tells 
us of the varied learning of the Chaldseans, and their as- 
tronomy. Heathen knowledge was, of course, made sub- 
ject to vanity ; and astronomy was subjected to astrology. 
Still astrology, however intense the interest in it might be 
to those who believed in it, was only a subordinate stu- 
dy. " In Babylonia," Strabo says 3 , " an abode was set 
apart for the native philosophers, called Chaldees, who 
are chiefly engaged about astronomy ; but some claim to 
cast nativities, which others do not admit/' Their as- 
tronomical observations, were received in Greece as of 
acknowledged accuracy, and, from their extent, made a 
change in Greek astronomy 3 . Greeks 4 too have thought 
that the birthplace of philosophy was "among the Magi of 
Persia, the Chaldees of Babylonia or Assyria." , We have 
also received unexpected notices of a very large literature 
on "Apolitical and social legislation, philosophy, medicine, 
botany^ natural history, and the history of man." There 

'* Philostr. de vit. Soph. Protag. Opp. p. 498. Mor. 2 1. c. 

3 Simplicius notices Aristotle's acknowledgment of his uncertainty about 
the motions of the planets, and subjoins ; " We ought then, persuaded by 
Aristotle, to follow the later writers, because they best adhere to the pheno- 
mena, whereas the earlier neither perfectly adhere to them, nor knew so 
many, because the observations, sent by Callisthenes from Babylon, had not 
ye- : arrived in Greece, which Aristotle had besought him to send ; which ob- 
servations Porphyry relates to he for 1903 years, being preserved down to the 
times of Alexander of Macedon." (on Aristot. de cojlo L. ii. f. 123. ed. 1526. 
quoted by Prideaux^ Conn. A. 570.) Epigenes (in Plin. N. H. vii. 57.) adds 
the fact, that the observations were recorded on bricks, the well-known ma- 
terial of inscriptions. The uneven numbers in Porphyry are an internal 
evidence 'of truth, against the vague exaggerations of the 720,000 years of 
Epigenes, 490,000 of. Berosus and Critodemus, (in Plin. 1. c.) 473,000 of Dio- 
dorus Sic. (ii.,31.) 470,000 of Cicero, (de Div.i. 19.) 270,000 of Hipparchus, 
(in Procl. in Timceum p. 31.) which Diodorus and -Cicero too held to be in- 
credible. 4 Diog. Laert. Proojm. init. He mentions also the Gymnoso- 
phists among the Indians, and the Druids among the Celts and Galatians. 
5 See on Obadiah, p. 243 from Chwolson, &c. 



Scope for Daniel's office of supervision. 423 

was then a large field for Daniel to study or to regulate, 
without entering upon their superstitions or misbelief. 

His office, also, as described by himself, seems to point 
to a general supervision of the whole, rather than to di- 
rect connection with details. He is not called Rab-Mag, 
chief of the Magi ; but is simply said to have been head 
of the sagans (or governors) over all the wise men of Ba- 
bylon ; perhaps a sort of minister of public instruction. 

But even in that which was most connected with su- 
perstition, the astrological predictions of the wise men, 
there may have been very large scope for correcting 
abuses and superstitions. The wise men of Babylon cer- 
tainly had the reputation of a very great political saga- 
city. The characterof human prediction is "to see events 
while beginning 6 , and to anticipate." To discern their 
purport and tendencies from the first, is the province of 
human long-sightedness. To see events in their super- 
human causality in the mind of God, is His gift to the 
prophet. The Chaldee politicians had, apparently, ex- 
traordinary natural gifts of human sagacity, which, from 
youth onwards, were diligently cultivated 7 . "They say," 
says Diodorus 8 , "that predictions have been made to 
other kings not a few, and especially to Alexander the 
conqueror of Darius, and to Antigonus, and Seleucus Ni- 
cator, who reigned after him ; and in all the aforesaid they 
seem to have guessed well. They predict, also, to indivi- 

6 " Take accurate account, if you will, of those things for which an orator is 
responsible; I decline it not. What are these? To see, &c (as in text) and 
foretell them to others." Demosth. de corona, p. 308. Dind. quoted by Strachey 
On the Prophets of the O. T. p. 2. 29. (Tracts for priests and people.) 

? Diodorus (ii. 39.) contrasts the early, traditional, hereditary, persevering 
training of the Chaldees in philosophy and astrology, with the Greek want of 
training, late cultivation of philosophy, distracted pursuit of it, and the search 
after novelty and speculations, not for truth's sake, but to attract disciples 
and gain a livelihood. 

8 ii. 31. The two cases mentioned by Herodotus of the Magi are intrinsi- 
cally improbable, and inaccurate as related. As to the dream of Astyages, there 
was nothing to alarm him, that his descendant should flood all Asia ; (i. 167.) 
noi% if true, is it likely that he should have married his daughter into the roy- 
al family of Persia. In both cases too the Magi are related to have fallen into 
complete error, (i. 120. vii. 19.) 



424 Improbabilities alleged against the book 

duals what is about to happen, so successfully, that those 
who have made trial marvel at what happens, and deem 
that it is beyond what belongs to man." 

If this was so, the fraud lay in their claiming Divine 
authority for that which was human. And this, their 
fraud, was the occasion of two of their defeats. In the 
belief, which they encouraged, that the interpretation 
Avas Divine, it was nothing unreasonable in Nebuchad- 
nezzar, to ask of them to recall to him the half-forgot- 
ten dream 1 . God did reveal both to Daniel. The un- 
known character on the wall became the like test in the 
time of Belshazzar. 

II. The incorrectnesses then of Daniel being correct, 
they are to be eked out by " 3 a number of improbable and 
suspicious statements." Of these we may sever otf at 
once, what is called " 3 the rigorism of the Jews," i. e. the 
obedience of Daniel and his companions to the law of 
God; " 4 the detestable self-will andfanaticism of the Jewish 
Officers of state," i. e. the plain-spoken refusal of DaniePs 
companions to be guilty of idolatry ; " 5 the fanaticism 
of Daniel," i. e. his refusal to cease to pray to God, be- 
cause a king commanded; and contrariwise 6 the non-men- 
tion of Daniel, when he was not attacked ; and " 7 the 
senseless requisition of Nebuchadnezzar, that the wise 
men should tell him his dream;" which tacitly assumes 
the falsehood of the history, since it would only be "sense- 
less," if it was not calculated to be a test between truth 
and falsehood. 

1 Nothing is more common than an indistinct memory of a dream, of such 
sort, that a person can be sure what the dream was not, although he cannot 
recall what it was. Even Stahelin quotes from the Memoires de P Acad. d. 
Inscr. T. 48. p. 647, [extracts from Masudi, Sirat alresool, by De Sacy,] a like 
account of Rebia hen Nasr king of Yemen, who made the selfsame requisition 
on the same ground. " Prince," the diviners said, " tell us the vision and we 
will give you the interpretation." " No ! for then 1 could not be certain of the 
truth of your interpretation. He alone can know the meaning, who can know 
the vision before I relate it." De Sacy's transl. The story has no historical 
evidence ; since Almasudi died near the end of our 10th cent.; but it illustrates 
the principle. 2 Lengerke, xiii. 6. p. Ixiv, v. 3 Improb. 1. See ab. Lect. i. 
p. 17, 18. 4 Improb. 6. 5 Improb. 17. See p. 446. 6 Improb. 4. 

see ab. Lect. i. p. 14. and below, p. 460. 7 Improb. 2. See in text. 



of Daniel Nebuchadnezzar's Insanity. 425 

There remain, 8 the want of proportion in his. golden 
image; "the religious persecution of Nebuchadnezzar; 
10 Nebuchadnezzar's seven years' insanity ; n that he prays 
before he [wholly] recovers his reason ; 12 that he gives 
an account of his insanity in an edict to his subjects ; and 
that 13 yet, in that edict, he does not show his belief in the 
God of the Jews, as the only God ; that u Daniel did not 
come Avith the rest of the Magi, and was unknown to Bel- 
shazzar ; that 15 Belshazzar was courteous towards Da- 
niel, and 1G Daniel inconsistent in declining, and then ac- 
cepting, the king's gift ; 17 that the sacred vessels were so 
coarsely profaned ; 18 that Daniel was proclaimed the 
third ruler of the kingdom in the night of the capture of 
Babylon ; 10 the frantic law of Darius ; 20 traces that a Jew 
wrote the edict of Darius ; and (which is the same as the 
16th) 21 the incredible intolerance of the king. 

It seems as incredible to these writers, that human na- 
ture should be sinful and arrogant, as that man, through 
the grace of God, should obey God. Strange that any 
one, ever so little acquainted with the drunkenness of hu- 
man power and pride, should venture to represent Bel- 
shazzar's insolence, or the law into which the vanity or 
policy of Darius was entrapped, as any thing incredible 
for human nature to venture upon. When such things 
are swept together, we are at least sure, that no refuse 
has been left behind. I will take the miscellaneous list 
in the order of their interest. 

i. It is now conceded that the madness of Nebuchad- 
nezzar 10 agrees with the description of a rare sort of dis- 
ease, called Lycanthropy, from one form of it, of which 
our earliest notice is in a Greek medical writer of the 
4th century after our Lord, in which the sufferer retains 
his consciousness in other respects, but imagines himself 
to be changed into some animal, and acts, up to a certain 

8 Improb. 3.. 9 Improb. 5. 10 Improb. 7. "Improb. 9. 

12 Improb. 8. 13 Improb. 10. "Improb. 11. 15 Improb. 12. 

15 Improb. 13. ^ Improb. 14. Is Improb. 15. B Improb. 16. 

20 Improb. 18. 21 Improb. 19. 



426 Neb's, insanity probably a very rare form, 

point, in conformity with that persuasion. Those who 
imagined themselves changed into wolves howled like 
wolves, arid, (there is reason to believe, falsely,) accused 
themselves of bloodshed l . Others imitated the cries of 
dogs ; it is said that others thought themselves nightin- 
gales, lions, cats, or cocks, and these crowed like a cock. 
It was no dissimilar form of disease, that others imagined 
that their bodies were, wholly or in part, changed into 
some brittle substance, whence they avoided contact, lest 
they should be broken. Others had other similar delu- 
sions, varying incidentally from each other. 

The monotony of the descriptions of the disease seems 
to imply that it was very rare. Marcellus (4th Cent. 2 ) 
mentions two sorts. " They who are siezed by the ky- 
nanthropic or lycanthropic disease, in the month of 
February go forth, by night, imitating in all things wolves 
or dogs, and until day especially live near tombs." Aeti- 
us 3 , (end of the 5th Cent. 4 ) quotes the exact statement; 
giving his account also of the symptoms, and of remedies. 
Paulus of ./Egina [latter half of 7th Cent.] omits only the 
kynanthropy 3 . Further, Galen, I believe, only mentions 
one case, of one who acted like a cock. " G Another, hear- 
ing cocks crow, as they, before they crow, flap their 

1 Single instances of the disease are given in Calmei], La Polie consideree 
sous le point de rue pathologique, philosophique, historique, et judiciaire. Pa- 
ris. 1845. T. i. p. 276, 336. 416. (who also gives an account of an epidemic at- 
tack of it in the Juva, Ib. 310.) and in Dr Arnold's Observations on the na- 
ture, kinds, causes, and prevention of Insanity, (published 1782,) p. 122-5. To 
both these works Dr Browne kindly directed me. The references to other me- 
dical writers, quoted below, were supplied to me by Arnold's work. Welcker's 
work, Die Lycanthropie ein Aberglaube u. eine Krankheit, (Kl. Schriften, iii. 
157 sqq.) contains no facts, only a theory that such was the origin of the fable 
about Lycaon. . 2 Biogr. Univ. xxvi. 597. 

3 1,. vi. c. ii. p. 104. v. reprinted also in Galen. Opp. T. x. p. 502, 3. ed. Chart. 
4 These dates are taken from Dr. GreenhUTs articles in Smith's Biogr. Diet. 

5 iii. 16. He also says generally, " some think themselves some brute ani- 
mals, and imitate their noises. Some think themselves earthenware vessels,and 
fear that they shall be broken." iii. 14. 

6 de loc. affect, iii. 10. Opp. vii. 442. The context is of actual mental delu- 
sion. "Fear besets all the melancholic ; but not always the same sort of un- 
natural phantasy. For one thought he was earthenware, and so gave way to 
those whom lie met, lest he shoiild be broken." &c. as in text. 



humanly too, admitting of recovery . 42? 

wings, 'so he, flapping against his sides with his arms, 
imitated the noise of the animals." Trallian again (in the 
6th century 7 ) mentioned the same form of disease only ; 
" 8 Others think they are a cock, and imitate its crow- 
ing." The notices moreover in the middle ages are rare. 
Mostly, one only occurs in an author, writing on the sub- 
ject of melancholic alienation 9 ; and the repetition of the 
same stories in modern writers shews how little, in addi- 
tion, modern experience furnishes. The disease is one 
from which there have heen recoveries. Mercurialis 
says ; " 10 The disease is horrible, yet not destructive to 
life, even if it last for months ; nay, I have read that it 
have been thoroughly cured after years." The exact 
form of the disease, which would be Boanthropy, I have 
not found any notice of 11 ; perhaps, because the howling of 

1 Dr. Greenhill 1. c. (v. Alexander) i. 126. s De Art. Med. i. 17. p. 165. 

9 The authorities, quoted by Dr. Arnold, mostly mentioned single cases. 
Van Swieten (Comm. in Boerhaave, iii. p. 521. says that Forest (L. x. obs. 25. 
p. 441.) had "seen one countryman, seized with this species of mania, who in 
spring wandered about a cemetery, and had all the signs mentioned by the an- 
cient physicians," (which last remark implies that it was then unknown.) Wil- 
liam of Brabant mentioned one case, one at Padua, A.D. 1541, who said that 
he was a wolf, with the hair turned inside, (quoted by Wier, De Pnestig. Dae- 
mon, iv. 23. p. 335.) Zacut, a Portuguese writer,'also mentions a single case. 
(Praxis Med. Obs. 51. p. 12.) Riverius writes more generally, " Others think 
that they are dogs, cats, wolves, cuckoos, nightingales, cocks, and imitate the 
noises of these or other animals. Others think that they are dead, and that 
they must neither eat nor drink." (Praxis Med. i. 14. p. 34.) But, as this last 
was doubtless the celebrated case, in which the sufferer was led to think that 
other dead ate, and so was recovered, probably the other rarer sorts, if au- 
thentic, were but single cases. Besides these, Actuarius, (end of the 13th cent.) 
mentions the case, but not as knowing it ; " Of the same sort would that dis- 
ease be, called lycanthropy, as jf men had put on a wolf's nature." (De Math. 
Med. i. p. 48.) , 

10 Med. Pract. i. 13. He gives much the same account as Paul. JEg.; "by day 
they lie hid in the house. At night-fallj forthwith they go forth, and cours- 
ing hither and thither, they howl, avoid any who meet them, seek the tombs, 
are hollow-eyed, and of foul and black complexion." 

11 Arnold (on Insanity, i. 223.) suggests that such may have been meant by 
the story of the Preetides in Virg. Eel. vi. 48. Virgil describes a partial insa- 
nity of this sort, lowing, looking for their horns, fearing to be yoked, while he 
states it to have been in one respect partial. But this form of insanity is not 
mentioned by any other writer who mentions the insanity of the Preetides, Apol- 



428 Correspondence of Neb's, physical condition 

wolves, or dogs, or the crowing of cocks, are most heard 
by night, and are more piercing sounds, and so make most 
impression on a diseased brain. The remarkable expres- 
sions, l his heart ivas made like the beast's, 2 let a beast's 
heart be given him, fit most naturally with this form of 
disease. This would be its most literal, and exhaustive, 
explanation. The rest of the description would be in 
conformity with this, that Nebuchadnezzar, when affect- 
ed with this disease, ate grass as an ox, and allowed his 
hair and nails to grow, unshorn and unpared 3 , as if he 
was the animal. 

The growth of the nails described is exactly that which 
modern physiologists have stated to be their growth, 
when so neglected. His nails, Daniel says, ivere like 
bird's claivs. "The nails," says Kolliker 4 , "so long as 
they are cut, grow unremittingly ; when this is omitted, 
their growth is confined. In this case, as may be observ- 
ed in the sick when long bedridden, and in the people of 
Eastern Asia, the nails become \\ or 2 inches long, 
(among the Chinese, according to Hamilton, 2 inches,) 
and curve round the fingers and ends of the toes." The 
principles, which regulate the excessive growth of hair, 
are, Dr. Rolleston tells me, less ascertained 5 . Both be- 

lodorus, (ii. 2. 2.) or Pherecydes, (in Schol. on Horn. Od. xv. 225.) or Hero- 
dotus, (speaking of the Argive women generally, ix. 33.) or JEHan, (Var. 
H1st. iii. 42.) orDiod. Sic. (iv. 68.) or Pausanias, (viii. 18.) or Pliny, (xxv. 
21.) or the Scholiast on Pindar, (Pyth. iii. 96.) or even by Ovid. (Met. xv. 
325.) Perizonius, (on JSlian 1. c.) says that it is equally unknown to Callima- 
chus, Vitruvius, (viii. 3.) to the. author of the Epigram which he quotes, and 
to Stephanus Byz. l Dan. v. 21. 2 Dan. iv. 16, Eng. 13, Ch. 

3 iv. 33, Eng. 30, Ch. 4 Gewebelehre d. Menschen, 1859. 54. 

p. 126. furnished me by Dr Rolleston. 

5 "Whereon an excessive growth of the hair which occurs, and its diseased 
falling-off, together with a frequent reproduction in great masses, depen Is, 
cannot be stated with precision. Probably the increased or diminished exsu- 
dation from the vessels of the papillse and bulb of the hair, are the chief causes]; 
more distant causes are probably the condition of the skin and of the whole 
frame." Kolh'ker, Ib. p. 150. furnished me by Dr. Rolleston. Dr. R., in an- 
swer to my enquiries about the condition of those boys and girls who have ran 
wild, tells me, " Linnseus (Amcenitates Academ. T .vi. p. 65.) says that all the 
histories of them were to the effect, quod omnesfuerint Mrsutt ; and Ludwig 
(Grundriss d. Naturgeschiclite) speaks of some of these case% which he gives a 



with other cases of insanity. 429 

ing, I believe, called excremental, the excessive growth 
of both would probably be simultaneous. But both may 
have been the result of that personal neglect, which is so 
strangely humiliating, a part of a most distressing form 
of mental disease, and which I have seen as the result of 
disappointed pride. 

The expression, however, let a beast's heart be given 
unto him, may only signify the privation of the charac- 
teristic of man, reason, as the king wrote of himself, 6 my 
reason returned unto me. And there is a distinct form 
of insanity, in which the eating of grass is one of the cha- 
racteristic features. " In many classes of the insane/' 
the eminent Commissioner of the Board of Lunacy for 
Scotland, Dr. Browne, informs me 7 , " the eating garbage, 
excrement, even grass, is a symptom both of general de- 
basement and of perverted appetites. I was accustomed 
to distinguish a class of my patients asfcecophagi or eaters 
of ordure ; and there are met with in asylums sarcophagi, 
individuals who have desired to eat, or who conceive that 
they have eaten, or who have attempted to eat, human 
flesh ; and phytophagi, who devour grass, leaves, twigs, 
&c. I have had such cases ; as well as stone-swallowers, 
hair-eaters, &c." 

" If Nebuchadnezzar's punishment then be regarded as 
' alienation,' involving the greatest conceivable amount 
of degradation, the e eating grass as oxen,' the expulsion 
from the society of his fellow-men, and the exposure to 
the elements, may be viewed as most graphic features of 
his disease, and of the cruel treatment, to which, in those 
and in much more recent days, such an affliction subject- 
ed the sufferer." 

Whichever was the form of Nebuchadnezzar's disease, 
not even the extreme form of insanity interferes with the 

resume of in 1796, as being 'long-haired;' (p. 147.) but in summing up he 
says, ' Their skin was not more liauy, nor of a different complexion, nor thicker 
than usual.' I have failed to find any statement as to a correlation between 
the hair and mental alienation, hut I hear that such a correlation does exist ; 
The hair becoming bristly, &c. was looked upon as symptomatic." 

iv. 33, Ch. 36, Eng. 7 in one of the letters, which he kindly wrote 

to me, in answer to my. enquiries. 



430 Insanity does not hinder consciousness or memory. 

inner consciousness, or, consequently, with the power to 
pray 1 . Altomar gives an instance of lycanthropy 2 , which 
he had himself witnessed, in which neither conscious- 
ness nor memory were at all impaired. The person, who 
had thought himself a wolf, asked him afterwards, whe- 
ther he was not afraid of him. 

An eyewitness has related to me, how, when visiting 
an asylum, one accompanied him, who made such acute 
observations on the several forms of insanity of the other 
patients severally, that the visitor expressed his surprise, 
how he came to be confined there. " O, I am a cock," 
was the instant answer, and he began crowing, and flap- 
ping his arms ; just as the disease is described by Galen. 

The Pere Surin, who, in exorcising others, fell for 
many years into a strange malady, in which he believed 
himself to be possessed 8 , gives a most vivid account how, 
outwardly he was wholly poAverless, spoke what was put 
into his mouth, rolled on the ground, and was, mean- 
while, within, in the most perfect peace and communion 
with God. His description of himself is a most wonder- 
ful specimen of acute mental analysis 4 , while outwardly 
he was a maniac. The inner consciousness remains un- 

1 Improb. 9. " De Medend. Morbis. c. 9. in Schenk, Obss. Med. L. i. p. 229. 

8 I believe that no authorised opinion was ever given as to the exact nature 
of the P. Surin's disease. 

4 "For three months and a half I have never been without having a devil 
near me, and that actively. Tilings are come .to that pass, that God has per- 
mitted, I think, for my sins, what has perhaps never been seen in the Church, 
that, in the exercise of my ministry, that devil passes from the body of the per- 
son possessed, and, coming into mine, assaults and prostrates me, agitates and 
crosses me visibly, possessing me for several hours like an energumen. I could 
not express to you what takes place in me during this time, and how that spi- 
rit unites itself with mine, without taking from me either the knowledge or 
the liberty of my soul, acting nevertheless as a second self, and as if I had two 
souls, one of which is dispossessed of its body and of the use of its organs, and 
holds itself apart, looking on at .the other which introduced itself into its body, 
as it acts. The two spirits fight on the same field, the body ; and the soul is, 
as it were, divided. In one part of itself, it is subject to diabolical impressions ; 
in the other, it has the emotions proper to it, or those which God gives it. 

"At the same time I feel great peace under the good pleasure of God, with- 
out knowing how there comes to me an extreme rage and aversion to Him, 
which produces a sort of impetuous motions to separate myself from Hun, 



Jfonderful self-analysis of the Pere Surin. 431 

changed, while, up to a certain point, the sufferer thinks, 
speaks, acts, as if he were another. Dr. Browne, who has 

which amaze those who witness them ; and, at the same time, a great joy anil 
sweetness, which shews itself by lamentations and cries like those of demons. 
I feel the state, of damnation and apprehend it, and feel myself pierced, as it 
were, with the points of despair in that stranger soul which seems to me my 
own ; while the other soul, which feels itself in perfect confidence, mocks at sucli 
sentiments and, in all freedom, curses him who causes them nay, I feel that 
the same cries, which escape my mouth, come equally from these two souls, 
and I have difficulty to discern whether it is the joyousness which produces 
them, or the extreme fury which fills me. The extreme tremblings which 
seized me, when the holy Sacrament was brought near to me, proceed, it appears 
to me, equally from a horror at its presence which is unsupportable to me, and 
a cordial and sweet reverence, without my being able to ascribe it to the one 
rather than the other, and without having it in my power to restrain them. If, 
by a motion of one of these two souls, I wish to make a sign of the cross on 
my mouth, the other turns aside my hand with the greatest rapidity, and seizes 
my finger in my teeth to bite it out of rage. I never find orison more easy or 
more tranquil than amid these agitations. While my body rolls on the ground, 
and the ministers of the Church address me as a devil, and load me with ma- 
ledictions, I could not tell you the joy which I feel, having become devil, not 
by rebellion against God, but by the calamity which represents to me vividly 
the condition to which sin has reduced me ; and appropriating to myself, as 
being such, all the maledictions bestowed upon me, my soul has reason to sink 
in the abyss of its nothingness. 

" When the possessed see me in this state, it is a pleasure to see how they 
triumph, and how the devils make a mock of me, saying, ' Physician, heal thy- 
self, go now this moment mount the pulpit ; how glorious it will be to see him 
preach, after having rolled on the ground ! ' what ground of benediction to see 
one's self the sport of the devils, and that the justice of God takes account of 
my sins in this world. Such is my condition at this moment almost daily. 
There are great disputes about it, whether this be possession or no, whether 
minister^ of the Gospel' can fall into conditions so unsuited to their state. 
Some say that it is a chastisement of God upon me, in punishment of some 
illusion ; others say something else ; and for me r I am content. as I am, and 
" Would not change -my' lot 'with another, being firmly cotivuflfeff that' there is 
nothing .betti& tnthvfd be 'reduced to grdat extremities. My ''own extremity 
is sucli, that I have few pp^rati'ons free 5 if I wish to speak, my utterance is stop- 
ped ; at mass, I am stopped quite short. At table, I cannot cany the food to 
my mouth ; at confession, all at once I forget my sins, and I feel the devil en- 
tering me, as into his own house. 

"As soon as I awake, he is there at orison. He takes away all thought from 
me, when he pleases ; when the heart begins to expand in God, he fills it 
with rage; he casts me asleep when I wish to watch, and publicly by the mouth 
of the possessed [the Prioress] he boasts that he is my master, which I have 
nothing to gainsay: having the reproach of my conscience, and on my head 
the sentence pronounced against sinners, I ought to undergo it, and revere 



432 Dr Broivne on the praying of the insane. 

done more, lam told, than any other of our day for men- 
tal disease, tells me, as the result of the experience of 
ahove 30 years ; " My opinion is that of all mental powers 
or conditions, the idea of personal identity is but rarely 
enfeehled, and that it never is extinguished. The Ego 
and non-Ego may he confused. The Ego, however, conti- 
nues to preserve the personality. All the Angels, Devils, 
Dukes, Lords, Kings, 'gods many/ that I have had under 
my care, remained what they were, before they became 
Angels, Dukes, &c, in a sense and even nominally. I have 
seen a man, declaring himself the Saviour, or St. Paul, 
sign himself James Thomson, and attend worship as re- 
gularly, as if the notion of Divinity had never entered in- 
to his head." 

"I think it probable, because consistent with experi- 
ence in similar forms of mental affection, that Nebu- 
chadnezzar retained a perfect consciousness, that he ivas 
Nebuchadnezzar, during the whole course of his degrada- 
tion, and while he ate 'grass as oxen/ and that he may 
have prayed fervently that the cup might pass from him." 

"A very large proportion of the insane pray, and to the 
living God, and in the words supplied at their mother's 
knee or by Mother Church, and this whatever may be 
the form or extent of the alienation under which they la- 
boured, and whatever the transformation, in the light of 
their own delusions, they may have undergone. There 
is no doubt that the sincerity, and the devotional feeling, 
is as strong in these worshippers as in the sane. I do 
not say that all madmen pray, or can pray ; but, as you 
suppose, monomaniacs, and melancholies, chronic mani- 
acs, and ements, (in vast numbers) the hallucinated, &o. 

the order of Divine Providence, to which every creature ought to submit." 
Letter tothePered' Atticlu,Mny3. 1635. quoted by Calmeil, La Folic.ii. 59-64, 
from Hist, des Diables de Loudun, p. 217 sqq. This condition lasted first for 
two, then for 20 years, with few intervals, 1638-58. in which he composed a 
much- valued work on the spiritual life, Cateehisme Spirituel, 2 voll. In 1658 he 
was wholly restored ; hut was not allowed to go hack to the place, where his 
sufferings first came upon him. A hrief notice of him, from the Biographic 
Universelle, is prefixed to the translation of his " Foundations of the Spiritual 
Life," (London, 1847.)with such illustrationsfromlusletters, asl thencouldfmd. 



Force of evidence in true un-understood facts. 433 

Those of the Edinburgh school of Philosophy and educa- 
ted medical men would not, I conceive, take any excep- 
tion to the view which I have given, because the very con- 
ception of partial Insanity involves the possibility of the 
sentiment of devotion and the recognition of a Supreme 
Being remaining intact, while other powers are diseased." 

There is scarcely any stronger internal evidence of 
truth, than circumstances, on the surface unlikely, which, 
on careful examination, appear to be in harmony with 
the rest of the history. And this the more, when the 
scientific knowledge of that truth belongs to a later age. 
Thus, in secular history, Herodotus' account of the cir- 
cumnavigation of Africa is now undoubted, because of 
the fact of the position of the sun l , which one would not 
have known who had not crossed the line. So, in this 
account of Nebuchadnezzar, if the disease was some form 
of Lycanthropy, we should have an account of a rare dis- 
ease, mentioned by no aiithor before the Christian era, 
with physical facts, not obvious, but in harmony with it ; 
but in any case, and still more remarkably, we have the 
psychological fact, that one, perhaps with a beast's heart, 
imagining himself an ox, any how in a very degraded form 
of insanity, could still pray as a man. Although it be not 
certain, yet it is highly probable, that the "band of iron 
and brass, which, in the dream, was to be around the 
stump of the tree, the symbol of Nebxichadnezzar, relates 
to that mode of restraint, which, in Palestine, in the times 
of the Gospel 3 , and down to a late period, was thought 
necessary to secure the poor sufferer from self-injury, or 
from injuring others. Any how, this dwelling with the 
wild animals, and feeding like them, look like the state 
of one, whose return to reason was wholly despaired of. 
And yet, before he recovers, he prayed. This is related 
in Daniel with the simplicity of truth ; ignorant scepti- 
cism pronounces it impossible ; true physics and psycho- 
logy attest the reality of the description. 

ii. So from physics, men turn to historical evidence. 

1 Her. iv. 42. = Dan. iv. 15. Eng. 12. Ch. 3 S. Mark v. 3, 4. 

K f 



434 All believe facts on insulated testimony. 

"No one else relates it 1 ." What, if they did not ? Where 
are the full annals of 'Nebuchadnezzar's reign, that men 
should pronounce any event related in Holy Scripture, 
untrue, unless it were related in his secular history ? It 
is an hypocritical issue to put it on. They who do so, 
do not believe themselves. They do not limit their belief 
of Nebuchadnezzar's history to the few surviving* frag- 
ments of Berosus. What are those facts? Just that 
sketch of his campaign before he was king, his captives, 
his succession to his father, and his honoring Bel, his god; 
his adding a second city to Babylon, and its strong walls ; 
his palace ; his hanging gardens ; his falling sick ; and the 
length of his reign 3 . Until the decyphering of the mo- 
numents 3 , our knowledge of most of his great and useful 
works came from Abydenus 3 ; who also has the tradition, 
that he knew of the future desolation of his Empire by 
the Medes and Persians 4 . Even for his conquests, Jose- 
phus was obliged to supplement his account from Me- 
grfsthcnes, Diocles, and Philostratus. Berosus does not 
relate the battle of Carchemish ; Egyptian annals do not 
record it. These men eagerly believe it on the authority 
of Jeremiah, set it down as a certain fact, because they 
think they can employ it against Daniel. But why be- 
lieve one fact of Holy Scripture, not another ? The only 
principle of belief or unbelief of this historical criticism 
seems to be, whether a fact can seemingly be pressed or 
no into the support of its preconceived opinions. 

Enough, that there is neither external nor internal evi- 
dence against the history of Nebuchadnezzar's insanity. 
Almost all ancient or modern history is a mosaic, made up 
of the fragments of single authorities. If wewere tostrike 
out of it what is related by one author only, we should 

1 Lengerke gave up the old objections to the disease, and rested his objections 
on this. " Granted that the condition, into which N. sinks, is explicable, yet 
in no writer is there any allusion to an event, which must have occasioned such 
changes in the kingdom, that no one, who ever so briefly related the reign of 
that king, could have failed to touch on it." p. 145. Davidson re-writes the 
statement of Leng. iii. 185. in Jos. c. Ap. i. 19. See ab. p. 60. 

3 See ab. p. 119, 20. 4 See ab. p. 126. 



Abydenus' tradition probably relates to facts in Dan. 435 

often have but a threadbare history, a few hard outlines, 
unrelieved and unshaded by all those minuter touches, 
which supply the proportions and symmetry and beauty 
a'nd instructiveness of history. These critics would turn 
aside from the dry bones of secular history, which alone 
their system would leave. But that can be no canon for 
the writing of Daniel, which would not hold as to secular 
history ; which the wildest criticism has not consistently 
^applied to sacred history. Even unbelief writes it's his- 
tory of " the Hebrew Monarchy," disbelieving of it only 
what is Divine. 

The singular tradition, preserved by Abydenus 5 , con- 
tains an account of a supernatural state, which befel Ne- 
buchadnezzar on the roof of his palace, in which he is 
said to have prophesied the conquest of Babylon by the 
Medo-Persians, and which, being in his mouth, looks like 
a strange reminiscence of his illness. The statement can 
hardly be put together out of Daniel himself. For it is 
not likely, that Abydenus should have combined into one 
whole materials scattered in the book, standing in no re- 
lation to one another, and in part very subordinate, 
whereas the history, with which they are connected in 
Daniel, is so characteristic. As they stand in Daniel and 
Abydenus, they are too unlike, to have been directly bor- 
rowed. And yet, as we read Abydenus, they sound like 
reminiscences of the facts in Daniel blended together, as 
unauthentic tradition is wont to connect things heteroge- 
neously 6 . Eusebius was struck with the resemblance. 

5 " I found in the writing 1 of Abydenus about the Assyrians, what follows 
about Nebuchadnezzar. Megasthenes says &c " [see ab. p. 117.] Then, after 
the prediction of the conquest of Babylon by a Medo-Persian, which tradition 
put into the mouth of Nebuchadnezzar, (given above p. 126.) it made him con- 
tinue; "Would, before my people were given [to him,] some Charybdis or 
sea would receive him, and utterly extinguish him ; or, turned aside otherwhi- 
ther, he were borne through the desert, where are neither cities nor step of man, 
but beasts do feed and birds roam, wandering alone among rocks and ravines, 
and that I, before these things had come into my mind, had met with a happier 
end. Having foretold this, forthwith he disappeared." Preep. Ev. ix. 41. 

6 Even Lengerke (p. 151.) " agrees with Jahn (Arch. ii. 1. p. 214.) in think, 
ing the tradition of Abydenus a late patchwork, put together partly out of the 
prophecies, c. 2 and 4, partly out of the relation of the insanity c. 4. and lastly 

Ff 2 



436 Neb's, great works interrupted for a time. 

<tl In the history of Daniel, it is related of Nebuchadnez- 
zar, how and in what manner he became insane; but if 
the Greek, or Chaldee historians, conceal the disease, and 
state that it came from God, and call that madness, which 
seized him, some god or daemon, we need not marvel. 
For it is their custom to ascribe such things to God, and 
to call gods, dainiones." A sickness of his, which appa- 
rently was remarkable, because it is recorded, is men- 
tioned by Berosus 2 . An interval, in which he did none 
of his great works in Babylonia, is mentioned in his in- 
scriptions 3 ; and that, the more remarkable, because his 
works were so stupendous and so extensive. The fur- 
ther doubt which has been raised, how his empire could 
be preserved to him during those seven years of insanity, 
finds its solution in the incidental notice of Berosus. 
One chief Magus kept the government for him on his fa- 
ther's death, until he could return 4 . Much more would 
they for one, to whom the whole empire owed its great- 
out of the explanation of the unknown writing by Daniel c. 5." ._ He accord- 
ingly rejects " the assumption of Bertlioldt (p. 305 sq.) Bleek (p. 269.) Kirmss 
(p. 57. 62.)" who (in the way of that school) assumed that the tradition in 
Abydenus was the basis of the history in Daniel. It is not unlikely, that tradi- 
tion should have put into the king's mouth a curse taken from his own calami- 
ties ; but it is, in itself, absurd to suppose, that such a curse, which does not 
contain .any direct allusion to those calamities, should have suggested the his- 
tory. Again, the incidental mention of the roof of the palace is unmeaning 
there ; in Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar was surveying from \tgreatBalylon whicfi 
he had built for himself. Then also, it is the concentration of these reminis- 
cences in one place, which marks the borrower. And what would the Pales- 
tine Pseudo-Daniel have had to do with Chaldee traditions ? 

1 Chron. Arm. i. 61. 

2 " falling into a state of sickness," e^inrea-ibj/ tls appaprlai/. in Jos. c. Ap. i. 20. 
Berosus connects the illness with Nebuchadnezzar's decease. The accounts 
then ai-e different, although, probably, his insanity teas in the later part of his 
life, since it stands connected with his greatness and completion of his works 
at Babylon. It is also the last event of his life mentioned by Daniel. In the 
only other case, in which Berosus mentions the sickness of a sovereign, it stands 
connected with history, the sickness of Nabopolassar having 1 given occasion to 
Nebuchadnezzar's first military glory. (Hengst. Beitr. i. 106.) Bertholdt's 
statement that Berosus, by this expression, marked that a sovereign died a na- 
tural death, is directly false, since in our brief fragments he does not use it of 
Neriglissar or Nabonedus. Hengst. Ib. p. 105, 6. 3 See Rawlinson 

Bampton Lect. v. p. 166. and note 29. p. 440. 4 Sec ab. p. 60. 



His imperfect conversion. 437 

ness, nay, its being. Nor was his son, Evilmerpdach, one, 
whose character would furnish any temptation 5 to ante- 
date his reign by ingratitude to his great father. 

iii. Nor is it in any way contrary to human nature, but 
rather it is in accordance with it 6 , that Nebuchadnezzar, 
Avhile acknowledging the supreme power of the God of 
Daniel 7 , retained his Polytheism 8 . The belief in a su- 
preme God in no way interfered with the acknowledg- 
ment of inferior gods. Polytheism is in direct conflict 
with Monotheism, not with the owning of one Supreme 
God. The Persian kings owned Ahuramazda to be the 
supreme God, yet worshipped gods many. Cyrus, in his 
edict, owned the supremacy of the God of Israel 9 , Ar- 
taxerxes spoke of Him, as the God of heaven 10 , yet doubt- 
less without abandoning their hereditary Polytheism. 
Coustantine issued an edict, directing the auguries 11 , and 
had on his coins, " Soli invicto 12 ," after he had acknow- 
ledged the God of Christians to be the One True God, and 
had professed that he " 13 awaited the judgment of Christ," 
"the Saviour." 

A believer must wish that the great king had known 
God more thoroughly. The history in Daniel bears the 
more the character of truth, in that it must have been 
against the wish of a pious Jew, that the conversion was 
imperfect 14 . The character of Nebuchadnezzar is one of 
those, which have so much of nobility, that one longs for 
them to have been more perfect. He is exhibited, as men 
are, with their mixture of good and bad. As each of the 
three proofs of the wisdom or power of the God of Israel 

5 See ab. p. 120. Improb. 10. ? the high God. iii. 32. Ch. [iv. 2. Eng.j 
8 Daniel, whose name is Belteshazaar according to the name of my god, 

iv. 5. Ch. [8. Eng.] in tvhom is the spirit of the holy gods, ib. and 6. 15. [9. 

18. Eng.] 9 Ezr. i. 3. " Ib. vii. 21, 23. 

11 A.D. 321. Si quid de Palatio. cod. Theod. L. xvi. Tit. x. T. 6. p. 283. 

12 Banduri Num. Impp. Rom. ii. 254. 266. 283-8. 300. There are also coins 
with the inscription Jovi Conservator!, Ib. 253. 262. 273-5. and Marti Conser- 
vator!, Ib. 253, 263, 4, 276, and Herculi Conservator!, Ib. 262. 

13 Epist. ad Episc. Cath. Condi. A.D. 314. i. 1455. ed. Col. 

14 Hengst. points out how "Jewish and Christian interpreters have striven 
to make the conversion as complete as possible." p. 116. 



438 NeVs. edict true to our deepest nature. 

comes to him, there is the quick, honest, self-forgetful, 
acknowledgment of the truth. Two periods of power an d 
magnificence have been passed unnoticed, in which the 
strong convictions faded before his own dazzling great- 
ness. Years of conquest must have passed between that 
first acknowledgment of DaniePs God, after the explana- 
tion of his dream by Daniel, and the hour of pride in 
which he commanded the image to be worshipped; and 
then again another, in which he in a manner re-created 
the cities of his country, and in which he forgot that he, 
into whose hands God had given the known world, held 
only a delegated power. In Daniel, (as is always the way 
of truth,) the two sides of his character stand out unre- 
lieved. Nebuchadnezzar uses in his edict the language of 
Daniel, as to God, (for what other could he use, having 
learnt what he did learn of God from him?) and he uses his 
own heathen language. His relapses are related, not his 
temptations. He owns the truth, for the time, with his 
whole soul; what marvel, that, amid such greatness, he 
did not uniformly persevere, when the marvel would have 
been, (a crowning marvel of Divine grace and of heathen 
faithfulness to that grace,) if he had uniformly persevered? 
iv. The proclamation, which announced his past mala- 
dy l , would only have been strange, had there been nothing 
remarkable in his restoration. The supposed objection 
must be, either that it was too humble, or that it might 
have shaken the confidence of his subjects. But human 
nature feels, even heathen nature felt still, that it is an 
exceeding glory to be the special object of the care of 
God. The god of unbelief must be a more dumb idol than 
the Pagan gods, that unbelievers feel it not. Nebuchad- 
nezzar, after the event, felt that it was so, even when 
shewn in the correction of his pride. He who feels it 
not, shews .that he not only knows not God, but that he 
cannot even imagine the relation of the creature to the 
Creator, nor see, even dimly, something of the greatness 
and goodness of the infinitely Great and Good God. The 

1 Inaprob. 8. 



His golden image had apolitical end. 439 

fact, that Nebuchadnezzar felt that it was his own truest 
honor that God had so chastened and yet had so restored 
him, is a great truth as to the soul, which does not lie 
on the surface ; as these men confess, in that they do not 
see it. 

v. Why Nebuchadnezzar so solemnly inaugurated his 
golden image 2 , and whom or what he intended by it, we 
can have no certain knowledge 3 . It manifestly had a 
political end, since the officers Of all the provinces of the 
empire Avere assembled to inaugurate it 4 . The ground, 
why adoration was claimed for it, was the king's will, that 
they should 8 worship the golden image which Nebuchad- 
nezzar the king had set up. The charge against the three 
Jewish" governors was ingratitude, and, as was so often 
alleged against Christians, contumacy. Whether the 
image was formed in reminiscence of that emblem of 
human might, which Nebuchadnezzar had seen in his 

3 Impr. 5. 

3 Since Bleek, it has been repeated by one after another, that the history 
was a pure fiction, intended as an example of steadfastness to the Jews, under 
the persecution of Antiochus. The golden image was to denote a statue which 
Antiochus is to have set up in the Temple ; the refusal of the three youths to 
worship was to be an encouragement to the contemporaries of the Pseudo-Da- 
niel. Bleek says; "We cannot help thinking of Antiochus Epiphancs, who, 
after he had caused Jerusalem to he taken by surprise and plundered, desecra- 
ted the temple, had it dedicated to Jupiter Olynipius, and heathen sacrifices of- 
fered on the altar of burnt-offerings, after the jSSe'Auyfta epjj/tciirews, ' the abo- 
mination of desolation," doubtless the statue of Jupiter, had, on Chisleu 15, 
167 B.C. been erected there." (p. 259-60. Einl. p. 602, 3.) This statement, 
that Ant. Epiph. had any statue of Jupiter set up in the Temple, was itself a 
pure fiction ; as even Lengerke (p. 104, 5.) was constrained to own that Hengst- 
enberg had shewn. (Beitr. i. 86.) No one of the three accounts of the desecra- 
tion of the temple (1 Mace. i. 44-64. 2 Mace. vi. 1-11. Jos. Ant. xii. 5. 4. B. J. 
i. 1. 1, 2.) mentions anything of it. On the contrary, the history both of the 
desecration and purification shews, that what was done was the building of an 
idol-altar upon the Altar of God. " They built," (^KoB^Mjaw,) it is said, (1 Mace, 
i. 54.) "an abomination of desolation tipon the altar." A statue could not be 
said to be " built." The account goes on, " and in the cities of Judah round 
about they built (<pKo86/j.ri<rav') altars ; " (ib.) and, in relating that desecration of 
the temple, "and on the 25th day of the month, sacrificing upon the idol-altar 
(jBctfjubi/) which was upon the Altar," (0ixna<rTr)pfou.) ib.59. In the account 
of the purification it is said, " they bare out the defiled stones into an unclean 
place." [Ib. iv. 43.] Hengst. 4 Dan. iii. 2, 3. 6 Ib. 5-7. 12. 14. 18. 



440 Extent of worship of kings. 

dream, and of which the head was declared to represent 
himself, or whether it was himself whom he intended to 
he worshipped in it, it was plainly some test of allegi- 
ance, required of all peoples, nations, and languages, in 
his whole empire. In Persian times, we should have no 
doubt that it was the monarch himself, who made himself 
his people's idol. A form of idolatry, which the Ethio- 
pians a and Egyptians 3 are said to have shewn to their 
kings ; which ran through Persian history ; which Alex- 
ander adopted ; which successors of his, among the Seleu- 
cidse and Ptolemies, stamped on their coins 3 , or upon mo- 
numents * ; which reappeared among the Arsacidse when 
they extended their empire 5 ; which Caligula could not he 

1 The Ethiopians " said, that the accounting the king's to be gods is an Ethio- 
pian institution," (carried with them by the Egyptians.) Diod. iii. 3. "Whomso- 
ever the god, carried about in a festive procession, takes, the people forthwith 
choose as king', and forthwith worship and honor as a god." Ib. 5. 

2 " The Egyptians seem to worship and honor their kings, as if they were 
really gods." Diod. i. 90. "Darius was intimate with the priests in Egypt, and 
partook of their theology, whence he was so honored, that while living, he 
alone of (Persian) kings was addressed as a god, while living." Ib. 85. 

3 Antiochus Theus received the title, in flattery, from " the Milesians, for re- 
moving a despot." App. Syr. c. 65. It appears on the coins of Ant. Epiphanes, 
(Frolich p. 47. 51. 53. in Clint. P. H. iii. 325.) Demetrius Soter, (Vaillarit 
p. 129. in Clint, iii. 326.) Antiochus, son of Balas, (Dr. Smith in his Biogr. 
Diet. T. i. p. 198.) Demetrius Nicator, (Frolich, p. 71. 87, Vaillant. p. 176, in 
Clinton p. 336.) Demetrius Eucaerus, (Eckheliii. 245. in Cl. p. 342.) Antiochus 
son of Ant. Grypus. (Vaillant Hist. Ptol. p. 100. Frol. p. 113. in Cl. p. 342.) 
The title " goddess " appears on a coin of Cleopatra, the mother of Ant. Gry- 
pus and Cyzic. (Frol. p. 91. in Cl. p. 339.) Balas took the title of "Theopa- 
tor " on his coins. (Vaillant p. 138. 140, Frolich, p. 67, in Clinton p. 328.) Of 
the Ptolemies, the title " god " occurs on a coin of Philometor, (Vaillant p. 103. 
in Cl. iii. 393.) and " goddess " on two of Antony's Cleopatra, (6ea yeoiTcpo, 
Vaill. p. 189, 190. in Cl. iii. 406.) Of the Ptolemies before Philometor, a coin 
of Philopator alone had any title beyond that of king. 

4 In the inscription at Adule, " transcribed by Cosmas in the beginning of 
the reign of Justin," (he reigned A.D. 518-527,) Ptolemy Euergetes gives 
the title " Saviour gods," to his grandparents, Ptolemy Lagi and Berenice, and 
that of " gods " to his parents, Ptolemy Philadelphus and Arsinoe, claiming 
" descent on the father's side from Heracles son of Zeus, and on the mother's 
from Dionysus son of Zeus." in Montf. Coll. Nov. ii. 141, and thence in Clinton 
F. H. iii. 387. note o. 

5 Arsaces vii. took the title Theopator, (coin in Smith Biogr. Diet. i. 355.) 
Arsaces xii. had that of " god." Phlegon in Phot. Cod. 97. p. 84. Bek. ib. 



Proportion not to be looked for in his image. 441 

sated with ; which was the object of ambition to emperors 
and empresses of heathen Rome, must have a deep root in 
human nature. It is an offshoot of the primeval tempta- 
tion, ye shall be as God. We know not enough of Baby- 
lonian idolatry to say what Nebuchadnezzar intended. 
It would have been altogether in keeping, that he, who, 
like the Lycaonians 6 , was ready to shew Divine honors 
to that which was superhuman, the spirit of the holy gods 
which he believed to be in Daniel, should, in the intoxica- 
tion of irresistible power, have claimed them for himself. 
The Babylonians, in the time of Alexander, of their own 
accord, greeted the conqueror's entrance with " 7 the 
burning of frankincense and all kinds of odours on silver 
altars arranged on either side." 

vi. The colossal form of the image was, doubtless on 
purpose, not after the proportions of the human frame 8 . 
Majestic height was manifestly the idea of a statue 60 
cubits high. The apparent height was much increased 
by the diminished breadth, in that its height, as com- 
pared to its breadth, was as 10 to 1, instead of 6 to 1. 
Not proportion, but ideal effect, is the object of. at least, 
the sculptures of Nineveh. There is no need that it 
should have been "like the Amyclaean Apollo, the bust 
of man on a column, with human [hands and] feet 9 ." 
The sun-images bore no human proportion 10 . Who could 

6 Acts x. 25. ' Curt. v. 1. 20. Hav. on D. ii. 46. 8 Improb. 3. 

9 Munter Relig. d. Bab. p. 59. Hgst. p. 95. This obviously would not inter- 
fere with the figure's being an image (ni?f) ; since the human countenance, which 
specially gave it the character of an image, would remain the same. Pausani- 
as describes the Amycluean Apollo ; " It is not the work of Bathycles, but an- 
cient and made without art. For, except its face and the extremities of the 
feet and hands, the rest is like a brass column. It has a helmet on its head, 
and in its hands spear and bow." Lac. iii. 19. 2. K. O. Miiller speaks thus of 
the class of statues to which it belongs ; " Nothing is more common than to 
find unworked stones, stone-pillars, stakes of wood, set up as images for wor- 
ship. If, to the honor of the god, the sign was formed more costly and orna- 
mented, it is called an &ya\fitt. In order to bring the sign in nearer relation 
to the god, single significant parts were added, heads, arms which contain the 
attributes. In this way was formed the brazen pillar of the AmycliEan Apollo, 
with helmetedhead iind armed hands, &c" 

10 DTjr;. See Gcs. Thes. p. 491. and Max. Tyr. viii. p. 87. ib. 



442 Edict of Darius in harmony 

have looked for proportion in the Colossus of Rhodes 1 ? 
" Large colossi and very long men-sphinxes 2M entered 
into the (probably kindred) idolatry of Egypt. Adver- 
saries also admit, that images are called golden, which 
are only overlaid with golden plates 3 ; but therewith they 
own that objections have been wantonly multiplied. 

vii. " 4 The edict of Darius, that no one should for 30 
days ask any petition of God or man, save of himself," is 
said to have been " insane/ 3 Religiously, of course, it 
was extreme insanity. But that which was in truth in- 
sane, to pray of man as if he were God, to neglect God for 
man, is simple matter of fact. The Persians looked upon 
their king as the representative of Ormuzd, as indwelt by 
him, and, as such, gave him Divine honors. Persians, 

1 The colossus of Rhodes was 10 ells higher. Plin. H. N. xxxiv. 18. Pliny 
mentions (ibid.) " a colossal figure 110 feet long;, made in his own time by Ze- 
nodorus for Nero, which, after his crimes were condemned, was dedicated to 
the sun." " How little proportion was there in many of the little so-called 
Etruscan figures !" Munter 1. c. 2 Herod, ii. 175. 

3 " Some objections may be removed with little trouble. The statue must 
have a pedestal, which must be high, in order that the statue might be visible 
to the far-encircling multitude, and so one may assume, with Thube, that its 
height was included in the 60 cubits. The statue too with its pedestal may 
have been of wood within, [S. Chrys. Horn. iv. in S. Matt.] and only overlaid 
with gold. (7rep/xpu<ra Ka ^ irepicip7upa, Ep. Jerem. 8.) For the inside of idols 
(17 KapSia ainiav Ib. 20.) was generally of wood or clay (Bel 7.) and was then 
covered with gold by the goldsmith. (Is. xl. 19. xli. 7. xliv. 13. Jer. x. 3-5.) 
And this explanation is supported by the Hebrew idiom, that they were wont 
to call that ' gold,' or ' copper,' which was only covered with plates of gold 
or copper. (Ex. xxx. 1-3. xxxix. 38. xl. 5. 26. xxvii. 1,2.)" Bertholdt Dan. 
p. 256, 7. J. D. Michaelis, (as Ms way was,) had the amount of gold calculated, 
supposing it to have been solid gold. And thenceforth this figured among " ob- 
jections." Yet in truth Babylonians,' as well as Hebrews, called that golden, (as 
it was,) which was, not gilt, but overlaid with gold. "According to Herodotus, 
the great gold statue of Bel, the golden table before it, the golden steps, and 
the golden seat, together amounted only to 800 talents of gold, which would 
not in the least suffice, if these things had all been of massive gold. Accord- 
ing to Diodorus, 1000 talents of gold only were employed on a statue 40 feet 
high, which would be a nothing for a massive image of that height, and of 
breadth proportionate. Diodorus too (ii. 9.) expressly describes the statue as 
beaten with the hammer, and so, not massive." Hengst. p. 98. " Such is indeed 
the idiom of all languages, as in the aurea sella, Cic. Phil. ii. 34: Nep. Eumen. 
7." Hay. ad loc. The term "massive gold" implies other use of gold, not 
massive. < Improb. 16. 



with known Persian belief. 443 

Persian monuments, contemporary Greek writers, attest 
this. " With us/' said Artabanus 5 to Themistocles, " of 
many and good laws this is the best, to honor the king, 
and worship him as the image of god who preserveth all 
things," i. e. Ormuzd. Curtius says, " 6 the Persians wor- 
ship their kings among the gods ; " Isocrates, " 7 worship- 
ping indeed a mortal man, and addressing him as a Divine 
being, but dishonoring the gods more than men." Ar- 
rian relates 8 that, from the time of Cambyses to that of 
Alexander, the Magi had had the hereditary charge of 
the tomb of Cyrus at Pasargadae, and "received daily from 
the king a sheep, wheatflour, and wine, and monthly a 
horse to sacrifice to Cyrus. In Persian inscriptions they 
are called " 9 offspring of the gods/' and " gods." Repre- 
sentations at the royal graves at Persepolis, in whatever 
way they are to be explained, indicate some very close re- 
lation and identification of the king with Ormuzd 10 . The 
Persians, as they borrowed other things from the Medes, 
so probably this. Deioces is represented by Herodotus 
as retiring and keeping himself out of sight 11 . In this ac- 

6 Plutarch Themistocl. c. 27. from Charon of Lampsacus (B.C. 504.) The 
mention of the custom is not incidental, for the presentation of Themistocles 
to the king turned on his compliance with it. 

6 viii. 18. in Brisson de reg. Pers. p. 8. sqq. who adds iii. 31. v. 9. 29. viii. 17. 
and quotes also Herod, vii. 136. Val. Max. iv, 7. vii. 3. Justin vi. 2. Lamprid. 
in Alex.; Trebell. Pollio in Zenobia ; and, of the Parthians, Jos. xx. 3. Xeno- 
phon (Ages. i. 34. quoted ib.) is speaking of the Persians generally. 
7 Paneg. v. fin. p. 140, 1. ib. 8 vi. 29. 

9 " In the Greekinscriptions, corresponding to the cuneiform, atNaksh-i-Rus- 
tam, in De Sacy Memoires sur div. antiq. de la Perse, PI. 1. p. 27. 31. the Per- 
sian kings are called tKyovoi Qf&v, tic yevovs 6eav and Oeol," De Sacy translates 
an inscription, Mem. de 1' Instit. hist. anc. T.ii. p. 183,4. 188, "The figure is 
that of the worshipper of Ormuzd, of the excellent Sapor, king of the kings of 
Iran and Aniran, heavenly germ of the race of the gods, son of the worshipper 
of Ormuzd, the excellent Hormuz, king of the kings of Iran and Aniran, hea- 
venly germ of the race of the gods, grandson of the excellent Narses, king of 
kings." " Grotefend has found on cuneiform inscriptions the title, ' race of the 
ruler of the world.' comp. Munter 1. c. p. 29." Hengst. 

10 See Hengst. p. 129, 30. n Her. i. 199. Brisson notices this, quot- 
ing also from Aristotle (demundo,) " Himself, as is said, was fixed at Susa or 
Ecbatana, invisible to all;" and Justin, (i. 9.) "Among the Persians, the per- 
son of the king, under semblance of greater majesty, is hidden ; " and Xen. 



444 The decree of Darius probably political. 

count of Darius itself, the unalterableness of the law of 
the Medes and Persians is a part of the supposed relation 
of the king to Ormtizd. Man, claiming to act through 
a Divine presence, could not afford to appear mistaken 
or changeable 1 . There was a ready plea for the decree. 
It was pressed upon the king by the assembled governors 
of the provinces, whom the king had himself created. 
They were governors in a conquered realm. The object 
of the decree probably was to obtain from the Babylo- 
nians and other provinces that special recognition of the 
king, as the representative of the Supreme God, invested 
with his delegated power, which the Persians already re- 
cognised. The decree was for 30 days 2 ; for those who, 
for such a space, had so recognised that divinity of the 
king, would have admitted the principle of submission to 
him, as a Divine authority. It came to the king, pressed 
by the whole weight of his Councillors : once passed, it 
could not be retracted without forfeiting the claim which 
it was to establish. Hence the fruitless effort of the king 
to evade the decree, and the bold tone of the Councillors 
at the last. They represented a characteristic principle 
of Medo-Persian Monarchy, while they abused it. 

viii. But, it is altogether an assumption, that "intole- 
rance" was unknown to Babylonians 3 or Persians 4 . We 
are told from the inscriptions, that the Assyrian wars were 
" 5 religiouswars;" we also know that the Babylonians had 

Ages. ix. 1.2. "A reverence was thrown over him, in that he was rarely seen, 
and difficult of approach." 1 This was observed by Heeren i. 259. 

2 " How will any justify the circumstance, that a command, which was to se- 
cure the supremacy of the Magian religion, was given only for 30 days ? " Leng. 
p. 272. " Why for 30 days only ? " Dav. iii. 192. 3 Improb. 5. 4 Improb. 19. 

5 Prof. Rawlinson has pointed this out, Herod. Essay vii. T. i. p. 495. It 
does not depend upon the translation of particular words; whose meaning may 
not be as yet established, as " heretics," (in Fox Talbot repeatedly, but also in 
Sir II. Rawl. Journal As. Soc. xviii. 1. p. 1G4. 198.) It is expressed in too 
various ways, to depend upon particular .words. The following instances are 
from the single inscription of Tiglath-Pileser i, translated simultaneously by 
Sir H. Rawl. and F. Talbot, and, in part, by Hincks and Oppert. (Ib. 164-219.) 
Tiglathp. speaks of subduing "the enemies of Ashur ;" (R. p. 168. R. T. 206, 7. 
R. T. H. 202, 3. 214, 5.) " kings hostile to Ashur ; " (R. T. p. 168.) a king, who 



Assyrian religious wars, Persian oppression. 445 

taken captive the Assyrian gods 6 ; as Cambyses and the 
Persians afterwards took many of those of Egypt, the re- 
covery of which gained for the 3rd Ptolemy the title of 
Euergetes 7 . The sacred bull was slain both by Cambyses 
and Ochus ; and the ready submission to Alexander has 
been attributed to their resentment of the oppression of 
their religion by their Persian masters 8 . The Zoroas- 
trian system took its rise in intense hatred of the Vedic 
worshippers 9 ; it was established amidst civil wars 10 ; and 
subsequently wars arose on occasion of it. "Slay these 

" was not submissive to Ashur my Lord," (R. 192) " did not acknowledge A. my 
L." (R. 184.) "paid no worship to A. my L." (T. 193.) " worship not A. my 
L." (T. 184.) " were disobedient to A. my L." (H. 199. 1 ) " foreigners hostile to 
A." (R. II. 214, 5.) " heretics, my enemies and the enemies of A." (T. p. 214.) 
" who knew not the true religion," (T. p. 188.) "the kings of infidelity who are 
tributaries without faith [?] ;" (O. p. 189.) "who had not paid tribute and of- 
ferings to A. my L." (R. p. 178.) "withheld the tribute and offerings due to 
A. my L." (R. T. H. O. p. 170,1.) "the cities of Subarta attached to the 
worship of A. my L." (R. 178.) "which belong to A. my L." (T. ib.) "under- 
took (to do homage) before A. my L." (H. ib.) " the subjects of A. my L." 
(O. p. 185.) Tigl's. own conquests are "in the service of my Lord A." (R. 
T. p. 192, 3. 198.) "in the martial service of the great gods who rule in the 
Euphrates land;" (T. 188.) he " rules in the service of the great gods." (R. ib.) 
Ashur bids him war, (R. T. H. p. 180, 1. R. 0. p. 188, 9. R. H. p. 194, 5.) "for 
the enlargement of the frontiers of his [A's] territory." (R. p. 178.) He goes 
against those who do not acknowledge A. " in the might and power of A. 
myL." (R. p. 184.) "in the most high name of A. my L." (T. ib.) "in 
the execution of the will of A. my L." (O. ib.) He "attached" the conquered 
" to the worship of A. my L." (R. p. 184.) "with 60 kings victoriously 1 fought, 
and the laws and religion of my empire I imposed upon them," (T. p. 168.) 
" with attachment to the worship of A. my L. I entrusted them, i. e. I caused 
them to worship A." (R. p. 186.) " their territory I iinnexed to the special pos- 
sessions of A. my L." (T. ib.) " with prostrations before god Asur my L. I re- 
ceived their contributions." (0. p. 187.) " I imposed upon them religious ser- 
vice. "(R. p. 176. 194.) " I left him in life, to learn the worship of the great gods 
from my city of A." (R, p. 192.) He took captive their gods, (R. T. H. p. 174, 
5. 196, 7. R. T. p. 184, 5. bis.) "25 of their gods," (R. T. 0. 186,7.) dedicated 
them to his own, (R. T. 0. 186, 7.) to his guardian god, (R. T. p. 176.) "his 
guide." H. p. 177. His enemies " took their gods and fled." (R, H. p. 174, 5.) 

In the Bavian inscription, Sennacherib records his having "brought back 
from Babylon the images of the gods, which had been taken from Assyria 418 
years before, and had set them in their places." Layard, Babylon p. 212, 3. 
from Dr. Ilincks. ~> S. Jer. on Dan. xi. 7, 8. Inscription at Adule 1. c. 

8 Smith Geogr. Diet. i. 45. 9 See further Lect. viii. 10 GfUM Ahunav. 
5 [Yacna 32] n. 7. p. 15. 31. Haug. G. Uctav. 9. (Y. 44.) n. 15. p. 11. 25. 



446 Decree of Darius protective of Jews, not penal. 

liars with the sword */' is a maxim of Zarathustra as well 
as of Mohammed. But heathenism, as is now recognised, 
was tolerant only of those who did riot deny itself. 

ix. Daniel, however, did not thrust himself on danger. 
He went into Ms house ; there, he was in the upper cham- 
ber, in the uppermost story, where the Orientals retired, 
that they might be unobserved 2 , the usual pi ace of prayer. 
Unostentatious, yet not even in appearance denying his 
faith for the sake of the king's command, he did just as 
he did before. He was probably out of ordinary sight; 
for his accusers had to press tumultuously 3 in upon him, 
and found him," it is said. Rationalists have declared 
this fanatical 4 : then, in their mind, it must be fanatical, 
to be willing to die rather than deny God. 

x. The decree of Darius appears to me a decree of pro- 
tection for the Jews. It is not a command to worship 
the God of Daniel, but to stand in awe of Him. To me, 
it seems equivalent to the decree of Nebuchadnezzar, not 
to speak against Him ; only, the punishment, which Ne- 
buchadnezzar annexed to the breach of his decree, is omit- 
ted. The Satraps had combined to extinguish the wor- 
ship of God. Darius decrees that, throughout his domi- 
nions, men should stand in awe of Him, i. e. that they 
should not make attempts against His worship, as these 
had done. It is not usual for monarchs to write their 
own decrees ; and this decree had no relation to the perso- 
nal circumstances of the sovereign, as that of Nebuchad- 
nezzar upon his recovery necessarily had. There seems 
to me no reason why Daniel himself should not have been 
commissioned to write it, as first Minister of the Empire, 
or should not have suggested its language 5 . 

1 Gathii Almn. 4. [Y. 31.] 11. 18,p,30. Under the Sassanidae it is spoken of 
as a religious duty to force back any converted from Parsism. " If any depart 
from the path of the Yazatas, [gods,] he [the king] has him seized, and brought 
back to the right way." Minokhired in Spiegel tradit. Schr. d. Pars. p. 135. 

2 David retired to the upper chamber to weep over the death of Absalom. 
(2 Sam. xviii. 33.) Elijah prayed there for the boy's life. (1 Kgs. xvii. 19.) 

3 vi. 12. liMTi. 4 Lengerke says, " Daniel purposely seeks danger 
[which is directly untrue] and his conduct must be estimated from the same 
aspect as that of his three companions, c, 3." p. 279. 5 Improb. 18. 



Idle objections as to history of Belshazzar. 447 

The objection is again put dishonestly. One who ur- 
ges that the edict "bears traces of having been written 
by a Jew/' as a separate objection, concedes for the time 
the fact of the edict itself. But if the edict was written 
at all, by whom should it have been written, but by Da- 
niel ? Granted, that a certain proclamation was made by 
a sovereign, no one could urge it as an argument against 
its genuineness, that it bore tokens of the style of the 
Prime Minister. The objection is added, only to swell 
the number, and to make it seem as if the supposed forger 
had betrayed himself. 

xi. In the history of Belshazzar^ the objections are sim- 
ply childish. The insolence of Belshazzar, in desecrating 
the sacred vessels in a festival in honor of his gods, is no- 
thing strange 6 . Excited by wine 7 , he would triumph over 
God, as the Philistines did, when they placed the ark in 
the temple of Dagon. It is far less strange than the reck- 
lessness, with which, in the wantonness of party spirit, 
the sacred vessels of the altar have been used to adorn 
the side-boards of wealthy courtiers 8 , or, in a time of po- 
litical animosity against the Church, fonts have been turn- 
ed into horse-troughs 9 . Nor is it strange 10 , that the in- 
solent and sensual boy-king troubled not himself to know 
of Daniel ; but "following/' as St. Jerome says 11 , "the old 
and inworn error of his race, called the astrologers and 
Chaldceans and soothsayers, not the prophet of God;" 
or that Daniel, so neglected, did not appear, uncalled, 
with the wise men, when he would not be listened to if he 

6 Improb. 14. < jrypo oyoa. lit. " in the taste of the 

wine." The LXX. renders " elevated by wine." Vulg. "jam temulentus." 
S. Ephr. paraphrases, " exhilarated by the taste of the wine." Even Leng. 
says, "Ammonius rightly, ' The exceeding wantonness of Belshazzar and his 
wine-bibbing drew him to this great blasphemy.'" in Mai Scriptt. Vett. T. i. 

8 " Many private men's parlours were hung with Altar-cloths, then- tables 
and beds covered' with copes instead of carpets and coverlids ; and many made 
carousing cups of the sacred chalices, as once Belshazzar celebrated his drunk- 
en feast in the sanctified vessels of the temple." Heylyn Hist, of the reforma- 
tion p. 134. (Hist, of Edward vi.) 

9 This is an authenticated fact after the war of independence of the United 
States with England, the Episcopalians having been loyalists. 10 Improb. 11. 
Dav. Hi. 186, 7, extracts out of Leng. 238-40. - on Dan. iv. 7. 



448 History of the last night of Belshazzar. 

spoke contrary to them, but reserved himself until some 
opening should dispose the king to listen to him ; or that 
Belshazzar, when the Queen Mother had circumstantially 
reminded him of the supernatural wisdom which had been 
found in Daniel, in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, should 
have remembered so much of him, that his father had 
brought him from Judaea 1 . Daniel's Hebrew name, which 
Nebuchadnezzar (the Queen-Mother had reminded Bel- 
shazzar) had changed after the wont of conquerors, sug- 
gested his Jewish origin. All the rest Belshazzar pro- 
fessed to have been told 2 . The accurate distinction has 
the more the air of truth. Every one knows, how one 
little circumstance will awaken a whole train of forgotten 
histories of the past. Nor again, bound, as kings ever 
held themselves to be, to fulfil, at least, the letter of their 
public promises, is it at all strange 3 , that, in that night 
which Belshazzar knew not to be his last, he fulfilled his 
promise to him Avho should read the mysterious writing. 
When objectors charge inconsistency on a history, they, 
for the time, presuppose its reality. Their argument 
must be, " granted the rest of the circumstances, this is 
inconsistent with them." Let them place themselves then 
in the circumstances of that night. Let them imagine it 
(what, as unbelievers, they must,) mesmerism, or what- 
ever else they dare 4 , but let them imagine the ungodly 
revelry and triumph over God, broken at once by a sight 
seemingly supernatural, the man's hand writing charac- 
ters which no one could decypher ; we may suppose them 
the old Hebrew character, which would naturally be un- 
known to the wise men of Babylon. Let them picture 

1 v. 13. Lengerke says, " The author contradicts himself, for, according 1 to the 
discourse v. 11, Daniel is utterly unknown to the king ; [not so ; what the Queen- 
Mother reminds him of is the extraordinary -wisdom found in him ;] but then, 
v. 13, he forthwith remembers him, and knows his origin." (p. 238.) 
2 v. 14. 16. 3 Improb. 12. 

4 Bertholdt, who cidmitted all the facts of the festival on the night cf the cap- 
ture of Babylon, the profanation of the sacred vessels, and a writing upon the 
wall, supposed that the writing might have been contrived by some well-mean- 
ing friend of Belshazzar to awaken him, or by some intriguer with Cyrus to 
insult the king. Dan. p. 352, 3. 



The last night in Babylon. 449 

to themselves the confusion of the revellers, impressed, 
at the height of their idolatrous pride, with a sense of 
the supernatural which it baffled all the wisdom of the 
wise to explain ; the increasing terror at the failure 5 ; that 
sudden reverse, which changes presumptuous triumph in- 
to prostrate fear ; the calm, reassuring words of the 
Queen-mother 6 , speaking with dignity and authority 7 of 
the respect of the great departed king for Daniel, as en- 
dowed with a mysterious presence of the gods whom they 
believed ; and then let them view, amid that scene of bro- 
ken revelry, the silver-haired prophet, of above fourscore 
years, alone standing fearless, when all feared, the one 
surviving witness of the departed greatness of their em- 
pire, almost as a denizen of another world, since all of 
his generation had long been numbered with the dead, 
indifferent as to greatness, regardless of the king's dis- 

6 v. 9. 

The " Queen " v. 10. was obviously the Queen-mother, because the wives, 
sis well as the concubines, of Belshazzar were, according to the Babylonian cus- 
tom, already present at the feast. The title ^JB>, (the title of the " wives " in v. 
2. 3. 23.) as distinct from the concubines, is used of the wife of the king of Per- 
sia in Neh. ii. 6, and of the ideal queen, Ps. xlv. 10. " *n<y is always the Queen." 
Rosh hashshana f. 4. 1. quoted Buxtorf Lex. Chald. col. 2327. In like way 
.TV?}, the title for an Egyptian Queen, (1 Kgs. xi. 19.) is used of the dignity of 
Queen-mother, 1 Kgs. xv. 13. 2 Chr. xv. 16. Jer. xiii. 18. xxix. 2. (coll. xxii. 
26. 2 Kgs. xxiv. 12.) It seems to me also most probable, that " the children 
of the king, and the children of the queen," (2 Kgs. x. 13.) were different per- 
sons, viz. the children of Jehoram and those of the Queen-mother, Jezebel. 
This was also the statement of Josephus. " Josephus " [Ant. x. 11. 2] "writes 
that this was the grandmother of Belshazzar ; Origen, that it was liis mother ; 
whence also she was acquainted with things past, which the king knew not. 
Let Porphyry then shake off his sleep, who dreams that she was the wife of 
Belshazzar, and mocks at her knowing more than her husband." S. Jer. on 
Dan. v. 11. S. Ephrem and Theodoret also speak of her as the king's mother ; 
and even the rationalist school now admits it, Leng. Hitz. Ros. Winer, Real- 
Wort, i. 151. (against Bertholdt p. 355. 366.) 

7 The mother of the heir-apparent in Eastern monarchies had, in any case, 
considerable influence. Heeren p. 500. Herodotus has a remarkable tradition 
of the great wisdom of the mother of the last king of Babylon, whom he calls 
Nitocris, (i. 188. The wife of Nebuchadnezzar was Amuliea, Abyd. in Bus. Chr. 
Arm. i. 54,) attributing to her the same great brick-embankments on the Eu- 
phrates, which, Berosus says, were built in the time o/the last king, (&rl ro{nov 
in Jos. c. Ap. i. 20. and so Eus. Chron. Arm. i. 72,) and the bricks of which 
actually bear his name. AthebseumN. 1377. Rawl. Herod, i. p. 521. 

Gg 



450 (e Lavishing, of miracles," three miracles, 

pleasure, speaking words of forceful truth^ explaining un- 
hesitatingly, in the name of his God, the hitherto inexpli- 
cable words, and announcing a doom, founded on the 
just retribution of God, to which the heart of man in its 
secret depth responds, granted, for the time, the super- 
natural, all the rest is in most-perfect harmony with it. 
Nor is it, in the least, inconsistent 1 , that Daniel should 
have declined the king's honors, when offered to him as 
a bribe, and that, when his strict, because truthful, mes- 
sage had been listened to, he should have accepted the 
short-lived honor in the departing kingdom, which might 
the rather prepare the conqueror to listen to his words in 
the name of his God. 

I said, "granted, for the time, the supernatural;" for the 
question which has been raised does ? not relate to the ab- 
stract fact, that God reveals Himself and attests His re- 
velation by prophecy or by miracle. The truth of mira- 
cles in the abstract, as I said at the outset, does hot, on 
the one side or the other, belong to criticism. Criticism, 
in regard to a particular book, would, at most, have to do 
with the harmony or the evidence for the facts recorded 
in that book, not to the whole question of the intercourse 
which the Creator vouchsafes" to His creature, man. It 
is consistently, so far, that some have objected to "the ob- 
jectless prodigality of miracles, which:, as miracles, are 
improbable, and rest on incorrect statements." The 
" prodigality" of miracles of power, as distinct from the 
miracle ,of superhuman knowledge, consists in this, that 
in seventy years, three^ miracles are recorded; the' delive- 
rance of Daniel's three friends in the furnace, of Daniel 

1 Improb. 13. At last, the objection is to be, that, granted all the rest, 
the events are to be too many to be crowded into one night. Leng. p. 241. Dav. 
iii. 187. Yet the festival began by day and was prolonged into the night. The 
events which took place after dark, are only 1) the-handwritirig,-2) the sending 
for the Magi and their failure,'3) the Queen-mother's appearance and the send- 
. ing for Daniel, 4) the short conversation mentioned in Daniel, and 5) the con- 
sequent fulfilment of the king's promise, whicli, as ! the Court arid' the atten- 
dants were already assembled; could take place at once. 

8 Davidson adopts Leng's., " objectless lavishing of miracles." p. Ixii. '" The 
miracles recorded in the book are lavishly accumulated, without any apparent 



when heathen aimed to destroy faith or insulted God. 451 

himself in the lion's den, (which itself, although super- 
natural, could scarcely be called in the ordinary sense a 
suspension of a law of nature,) and the miraculous hand- 
writing in the midst of the idolatrous feast. "Objectless" 
they can only seem to those> to whom all revelation of 
God seems to be objectless. I would that they who 
make the objection could say,iwhat miracle they believed, 
as having an adequate object. Unless they believe that 
some miracles are not "objectless," it is mere hypperi-. 
sy to object to any particular miracles, as " objectless." 
For they allege, as a special ground against certain mi- 
racles, what they hold to be a ground against all miracles ; 
and act the believer in miracles in the abstract, in order 
to enforce the disbelief in specific miracles.. It was a 
grand theatre. On the one side, was the world-mO T 
narchy, irresistible, conquering, as the heathen thought, 
the God of the vanquished. On the other, a handful of 
the worshippers of the One only God, captives, scattered, 
with no visible centre or unity, without organisation or 
power to resist, save their indomitable faith, inwardly 
upheld by God, outwardly strengthened by the very ca- 
lamities which almost ended their national existence ; for 
they were the fulfilment of EUs word in Whom they believ- 
ed. Thrice, during the seventy years, human power put 
itself forth against the faith; twice in edicts which would, 
if obeyed, have extinguished the true faith on earth ; 
oiice,in directinsult to God. Faith,as we know,"querich- 
ed the violence of fire 3 ," "stopped the mouths of lions." 
In all three cases, the assault was signally rolled back; 
the faith was triumphant in theface of all the representa- 
tives of the power and intelligence of the empire; in all, the 
truth of the One God was proclaimed by those who had 
assailed it. Unbelief, while it remains such, must deny 
all true miracles and all superhuman prophecy. But, if 
honest, it dare not designate as "objectless," miracles 
which decided the cause of truth on such battlefields. 

object, and differ from those elsewhere related. Their prodigal expenditure 
is unworthy of the Deity. 1 ' iii, 174. 3 Heb. xi. 33, 34. -. 

Gg2 



452 False statements, to make the miracles objectless. 

In like way, as to the " improbable l " character of the 
miracles. Let men grant that any miracles are "proba- 
ble/' or that they have taken place, and then, from that 
standing-ground, point out wherein these are " improba- 
ble." Let one profess his belief that our Blessed Lord 
walked on the water, multiplied the loaves and fishes, 
healed by a word one lorn blind, raised one who had been 
for four days dead, rose Himself from the dead, passed 
through the sealed tomb and the closed doors, and then 
let him point out what intrinsic improbability there is, 
that God, in regard to the three youths who confessed His 
Name in that great theatre, suspended the power of fire to 
burn, or that He withheld for a night the wild fierceness of 
some creatures of His hands, that they should not destroy 
the prophet who would not, for fear of man, disown Him. 

[t is alleged that the miracles ' could not have been 
wrought to strengthen the faith of God's people, for, 1) "it 
would be a contradiction to the Divine dispensation, since, 
at the beginning of the captivity, God had departed from 
His people and had given it up to its enemies;" nor 2) 
could they have been to " prepare the restoration of Israel 
through the recognition of the Omnipotence of the Lord 
and the authority of Daniel ; " nor 3) that the heathen 
might be brought to recognise the one true God 3 . 

1 " Hitzig," says Lengerke p. 109, " appositely remarks, (Heidelb. Jalirb. 
1832 p. 26,) 'The main improbability, the wondrous deliverance itself, Hengst- 
enberg has passed over in entire silence.' Naturally ; for here he must quit 
the field, and retire to the province of a faith, ever ready to believe. In truth, 
a miracle, which changes the nature of its element, is a great one. It is the 
greatest in the Old Testament, but not therefore the most credible." This is 
not hypocrisy, if either of these writers believed any miracle of the Old Testa- 
ment. This question of the greater or less of miracles, if spoken of God, is 
gross anthropomorphism : in regard to its effects on man, such a miracle is, of 
course, no more amazing than the parting of the Red Sea, or of the Jordan, 
the ascent of Elijah, or any of the other miracles which could not, like the fall- 
ing of the walls of Jericho, or the destruction of Sennacherib's army, be, possi- 
bly, the operation of natural causes, minutely directed by the Providence of 
God, Whose wisdom predicted what He willed, in the order of His Providence, 
at that exact time to fulfil. 

4 Leng. Ixii, Ixiii. following Bertholdt against Hengst. Beitr. i. 35-40. The 
section is, under a different arrangement, closely followed by Davids, in. 174, 5. 



God had not cast away His people. 453 

The statements, as usual, "beg the question " of the 
falsehood of the history, hut, this time, of more history 
than DaniePs. 1) There is no intimation, any where, 
that God did cast off His people. On the contrary, in the 
prediction of that captivity in the law, He said, " s yet for 
all this, when they be in the land of their enemies, I will 
not cast them away but I will remember for them the cove- 
nant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the 
land of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I might be 
their God. And more specifically He had promised, in 
regard to the captivity at Babylon, that He would visit 
them there 4 , there 5 He would redeem them. There too, 
meanwhile, He had promised them peace, G in the peace of 
the city whither I have caused you to be carried captive. 
The captivity was, from the first, part of God's declared 
purpose towards them. It was the crowning act of God's 
discipline spoken of in the law, in which He promised that, 
if they should repent, He would remember His covenant 
with their fathers, and would remember the land 7 . God 
raised up Ezekiel, as the prophet of the captivity of the 
ten tribes ; He allowed Jeremiah to be carried down by 
the refugees in Egypt. It was in harmony with this, that 
He raised up Daniel in Babylon. 

2) Nor was DaniePs position any slight mitigation of 
the captivity, or any slight protection of his people. Let 
any one imagine a Christian, as devoted to God as Da- 
niel, and with that same love for his people which his 
great prayer indicates, First Minister at the Ottoman 
Court. The change which he would readily imagine in 
the condition of Christians, now made like the dust by 
threshing 8 , may enable him to picture to himself the bene- 
fits which DaniePs office yielded to his people. Each mi- 
racle resulted in a decree in favor of the Jews. The mi- 
raculous and the ordinary history are in harmony, which 
is what men mean to deny by their word " objectless." 

t 

3 Lev. xxvi. 44, 5. 4 Is. xlviii. 20. Jer. xxix. 10. 5 Mic. iv. 10. 

6 Jer. xxix. 7. ~< Lev. xxvi. 40-42. 3 The expression of a very intel- 
ligent Syrian to myself, from 2 Kgs. xiii. 7. 



454 JVb human motive., why Cyrus should release theJeius. 

But further, it is most probable that the release of the 
Jews was one consequence of these miracles. The mi- 
racles stand connected in a chain. The superhuman 
knowledge, shewn to Nebuchadnezzar, ' was the ground 
why Daniel was called in on that last night of Belshaz- 
zar ; his reading of the hand-writing, and the office which 
he occupied in consequence, were his first commendation 
to Darius. The restoration of his people was doubtless 
the fruit of his influence with Darius and Cyrus. It 
will have surprised most of us, that, according to the 
chronology in Daniel, the restoration of the Jews was 
not the immediate result of the conquest of Babylon. 
Looking upon it, as we did, as the promised result of 
that capture, and upon Cyrus as its foretold agent, we 
expected it to have taken place at once. And doubtless, 
had it been any human result, any political favour to a 
people who were oppressed by those whom he conquered, 
Cyrus would have given it at once, or not at all. Now men 
have the double problem to solve, why he restored them, 
and why he did not restore them at first. There was no 
motive of human policy, why he should restore them 1 . 

1 Gesenius (on Is. xli. 2.) says, "Perhaps Cyrus favored the view of the Jews, 
[of the similarity of their faith with his own religion, Magism,] because it 
must have been of moment to him, when about to conquer the lands, in which 
the Jews lived scattered, to win the confidence and attachment of the people, 
which cherished the liveliest national hatred to their oppressors." But, 1) with 
the fall of Babylon, the whole empire, in which the Jews were scattered, ex- 
cept Egypt, was already in his hands. 2) The Jews, (as appears from the few- 
ness of those who returned at first,) were, as a people, well contented with their 
condition. The religious portion only of them returned. 3) The state of the 
Jews was not like what people are probably thinking of, and what are now cal- 
led " the oppressed nationalities." A nation, conquered, imperfectly amalga- 
mated with the empire, longing for independence, is, of course, a formidable 
source of internal weakness to that empire ; a source of strength, if won, to 
an invader. But the Jews in the Babylonian empire were not a " nationality." 
They were but scattered captives without organization, without leaders, with- 
out military training. There is no ground to think that they could be of any 
use to the conqueror, as neither is there any hint in history that they were. 
We know the measures of the campaign against Babylon ; a pitched battle, 
in which Labynetus fled and shut himself in Borsippa, as Belshazzar did in Ba- 
bylon ; the provisioning of Babylon on the one hand, the stratagem whereby 
Cyrus took it unresisting. Magism- was also as much, perhaps more, op- 



Dan. probably made known to him Isaiah's prophecy. 455 

In the ordinary course of human events, he would not even 
have known of their existence. There is no indication, 
that he did know of it before the conquest. The pro- 
phecy of Isaiah must have been shewn him; for his de- 
cree in favour of the Jews evinces belief in it. But a 
prophecy, in the language of a scattered population un- 
known to him, would have had no convincing 1 power 8 . 
The living authoritative speaker gains admission for the 
unknown written word. As the history stands in Daniel, 
Cyrus had reason to trust Daniel; he had no reason to 
trust any ordinary Jew, who should shew him the, to him 
unknown, oracle. The accounts in Daniel and Ezra cor- 
respond with the facts, that the Jews were released, but 
not; at first., Their restorationy was, no part, .apparently, 
of 'the original plan of Cyrus; because: he, who. could have 
done.it with, a word, did it hot.' Itiwas- no deep 'plan 0f 
human policy; because, two years after he had granted 
the permission,he restrained his favour ungraciously, per- 
suaded by his councillors. His decree runs ; z The Lord 
God of heaven hath 'given me all the kingdoms of the earth; 
and hath charged me to build Him an house at Jerusalem. 
The facts of sacred history accord with this ; Daniel was 
accredited to Darius by the events at the close of the 
kingdom of Babylon ; he was accredited personally to Da- 
rius by his known innocency* and by his supernatural de- 
liverance ; Darius issued a decree, commanding that peo- 
ple should reverence the God of Daniel. Daniel himself 
'prospered in the reign of Darius and of Cyrus. One, 
then, in high favor at the Court, himself accredited by 
miracle, accredited the unknown prophecy, and Cyrus 
acted upon it.. ...... 

3) Nor, although the miracles did result in great bene- 
fits to the Jews, is there any reason to think that such 
was their sole end. In Babylon God shewed in act, what 
prophecy all along declared, that He was not a God of 

posed to truth, than Babylonian idolatry. The Sassanidse, who revived it, 
were deadly persecutors both of Jews and Christians. 

8 Hengstenberg's argument p. 39. from Kleinert Echtheit d. lesaia p. 134 
sqq. 3 Ezr. i. 2. 4 Dan. vi. 22. Ib. 28. 



456.ZVb proof, that y e miracles were wasted ony* Heathen; 

the Jews only. Nor were they wasted. It is said, "Ne- 
buchadnezzar had ever to be converted anew. Especi- 
ally, in c. 5, Belshazzar and his court, except the Queen- 
Mother, were wholly unacquainted with Daniel and his 
miracles, which he had as yet wrought 1 1 " Alas ! If man's 
waste or forgetfulness of God's goodness were to be a proof 
that God had never shewn it, then we must disbelieve that 
God has ever shewn any mercies of His Providence or 
His Grace to our own bad selves ; which yet we, each of 
us, know that He has. But, although Nebuchadnezzar's 
two first convictions of the greatness of the God of the 
Jews faded in time, we know of no relapse after the last. 
God triumphed at last, and won Nebuchadnezzar, as He 
does so many relapsing Christians. There is no reason to 
think that the aged Darius ever went back from his convic- 
tion. Therevelation to Belshazzarwasthe open temporal 
judgment on one who had despised God's known dealings. 
2 Thou, his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, 
though thou knewest all this, but ha>>t lifted up thyself 
against the Lord of heaven. Belshazzar had forgotten 
Daniel ; he had not forgotten God's ways with Nebuchad- 
nezzar; but, like too many so-called Christians, he de- 
spised known truth. We know, that G od's judgment was 
fulfilled. We do not know that it was wasted even on 
him. Yet they are not the great of this world, who are 
mostly converted to God. Many of those thousands of 
souls, who were assembled in that plain of Dura, may 
have been won to the belief of the One true God ; many, 
at Belshazzar's revelry, may have been awed towards 
God, before they slept their death-sleep ; many hearts may 
have been reached through Nebuchadnezzar's affecting 

1 Ijeng. p. Ixiii. Davidson follows the inconceivably careless statement, "Bel- 
shazzar and his nobles appear to have been unacquainted with Daniel and his 
miracles, as the 5th chapter shews. Nebuchadnezzar had always to be con- 
vinced anew. The array of marvels wrought through the instrumentality 
of Daniel m&Ae, little impression on the monarchs and their people." p. 174, 5. 
Again p. 171, "The cases of Ezraand Daniel are different. The former was a 
priest and a scribe : the latter a prophet and worker of miracles." 

Dan. v. 22, 23. 



instructive to all believers subsequently. 457 

account of his humiliation, or awed into forbearance to- 
wards His people by the edicts of Nebuchadnezzar and 
Darius. "Many hearts may have been reached," did I 
say ? They who, like the German critics, come to knoAv 
of the history of Daniel, simply as matter of criticism or 
of unbelief, may look on that great history, as a matter 
which could at most affect the then generation, and think 
that the doings of God failed, because Belshazzar had 
turned a deaf ear to God's warnings to Nebuchadnezzar. 
We, most of whose minds nrnst have been arrested in 
our childhood or boyhood by the impressive fascinating 
histories, we, to whom, as to the whole Church from the 
first and the Jewish Church before us, they have been, all 
our lives long, instructive, know that the works and 
words of God do "not pass away." Miracles of God did 
not cease their office of instruction and impressiveness, 
with the generation before whom they were wrought. 
Yet, even on that limited field, it is not true, according 
to the history itself, that God's dealings with Nebuchad- 
nezzar had no effect even on Belshazzar and his Court. 
Daniel remained in honor among the conquering Medo- 
Persians, as among the conquered Babylonians. If men 
cast aside God's word as a fable, it is alas ! their loss ; 
but at least, let them not falsify it, in order to prove it 
to have been useless. 

As regards the alleged " exaggeration " of the miracles, 
objectors must, in their consciences, know, that the only 
miracle, as to which this is alleged, could not have been 
lessened, if it was to be a miracle at all. It was more 
impressive to the great multitude, that Nebuchadnez- 
zar's passion, which made him command that the fur- 
nace should be heated seven times more than it had been 
thought good to heal it, turned upon those whom he em- 
ployed as his instruments. Little things affect us ; and 
the fact, that the smell of fire had not passed upon the three 
confessors of God, set before people's eyes the complete- 
ness of the miracle. But when a miracle admits of no 
degrees, it is mere idleness to speak of " exaggeration." 



458 Minute references to history, customs 6fc. 

The result of examining these untrue allegations against 
the book of Daniel is not simply negative, that nothing 
can be alleged against it, which does not relate to all re- 
velation, as such. Daniel wrote of certain events, which 
he was inspired to record, in detail 1 . He relates them, 
(which is a stamp of truth,) without any explanation, in 
all simplicity. He alludes, in his narrative, to kings un-^ 
known to Grecian historians, and to the relations of em- 
pires ; he mentions whole classes of officers, and the 
names of their offices, partly Semitic, partly of Aryan 
origin, and gradations of their rank ; wise men and their 
classes ; even musical instruments, of different nations, 
and names of articles of dress, which Hebrews did not 
use ; he assigns dates freely ; he describes what was pro- 
bably a marvellous and very rare disease of the great mo- 
narch, and the fact of his praying amid extreme mental 
alienation, a fact, which seems in the highest degree im- 
probable, but is accordant with known facts ; he alludes 
to customs, personages ; he gives a scene from the inte- 
rior of Babylon on the night of its capture, where, con- 
trary to ordinary Eastern custom, he mentions the pre- 
sence of the ladies of the harem 3 , and distinct from these, 

1 Hengstenberg has a section, " knowledge of the whole state of things at 
the time of Daniel ;" Beitr. i. 333-52, from which several of these instances have 
been taken. 

2 "Relaxation of manners shewed itself among tlie Babylonians,, especially 
as .to the other sex. There was not that retirement, which else prevails in the 
harems of the East. Hence the prophet, when he threatened the city with its 
fall, symbolises it as a luxurious and delicate female, who, from her soft couch, 
is cast into captivity. (Is. xiii.) [? xlvii. 1-5.] Even in drinking-bouts their 
women appeared; Curt. v. 1." [The passage of Curtius is too revolting to 
quote.] Heeren i. 2. p. 201 sqq. The presence of a concubine at a drinking- 
bout of the last king of BabyJon is stated by Xenophon. (Cyrop. v. 2, 28.) 
The dancing, united by Herodotus (i. 191.) with the " revelling " of that last 
night at Babylon, implies the presence of their women. Among the Persians, 
the drunken command of Ahasuerus, and the queen's refusal, (Esth. i. 10-12.) 
imply the contrary custom. " She, keeping to the Persian laws, which forbid 
women to be seen by strangers, did not go the king." Jos. Ant. xi. 6. 1. The 
statement of the Persian Embassadors to king Amyntas, that it was the Per- 
sian custom, that the wives and concubines should be present at their feasts, 
(Herod, v. 18.) if historical, was a shameless lie, to attain their end. Plutarch 
denies the presence of the wives at Persian feasts, affirms it of concubines. (Sym- 



which would be known only to a contemporary . 459 

and not present with them at the feast, the Queen-mother, 
speaking in a tone of authority ; he tells even of the plain 
stucco on the walls of the banquet-room, such as, notwith- 
standing the prevailing taste for ornament, is still found 
in the corresponding palaces of Nineveh 3 ; he alludes, in 
one word, even to the custom of Eastern kings, (such as we 
find it among Persians and Parthians,) to lie at table by 
themselves, over against 4 their guests, probably for safe- 
ty's sake ; he gives events of that night, which fill it up, 
adversaries have said, even to overflowing, but for which 
time is left, since the fact is supplied, that the capture 
was not until towards morning 5 ; he describes capital pu- 
nishments under the Babylonian 6 and Persian kings, 
varying, in one respect, in conformity with their religion ; 
the furnace he describes, as one only could have describ- 
ed it, who had seen such 7 . In his natural, truthful, and, 
so, fearless description, he again and again tells us what 
for us, who have only an antiquarian knowledge of these 

pos. i. 1.) So neither among the Parthians were the women present at feasts, 
(Justin xli. 3. Macrobius adapts the statement of Plutarch to the Parthians. 
vii. 1.) nor among the ante-Mohammedan Arabs. Hav. on Dan. p. 180. So 
strange did the presence of the women seem to the LXX translator, that he 
omitted the mention of them. Hengst. p. 338. 

3 " There were chambers in the palace of Sennacherib, as well as in those of 
Nimroud and Khorsabad, whose walls were simply coated with plaster, like the 
walls of Belshazzar's palace at Babylon." Layard Nin. and Bab. p. 651. 

4 "And over against the thousand (N?^ h^ drank he wine." S. Ephr. 
paraphrases, "Alone he lay over-against'all reclined." A Greek Scholiast has, 
" It was their custom, that each should have his own table." (in Mai.) Athe- 
nteus says, on the authority of Heraclides of Cuma, "When the Persian king 
makes a drinking-feast, (infa-oj/ [nniso] irottJTcci,) and he often makes one, those 
who drink with him are about twelve. And when they have supped, the king, 
by himself, and the guests, one of the eunuchs calls those who drink with him. 
And when they come in, they do not drink the same wine as he, and they, sit- 
ting on the ground, he lying on a couch with gold legs." Parask. ii. in Athen. 
iv. 26. "Among the Parthians, in their feasts, the king had the couch, where- 
on he lay alone, higher than the rest, and his table too apart, placed before 
himself alone, as a demigod, full of barbaric meats." Posidonius (about 100 
B.C.) de Parth. L. v. in Athen. iv. 38. 5 Xen. Cyrop. vii. 5. 27. 

Fire is mentioned, as a capital punishment, under Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 
xxix. 22. " whom N. roasted in the fire ; " and probably Ezek. xxiii. 25. " thy 
residue shall be devoured by the fire ; " which was, of course, disused by the 
Persians. ' Even Bertholdt owns this. p. 69* 



460 Force of evidence, from uniform correctness 

things, it requires thought to harmonise ; he explains no- 
thing, as writers do at a period somewhat later than the 
events which they describe, or when they write for a wi- 
der or different circle. His accounts are minute, graphic; 
he accumulates the names of the classes, which he men- 
tions, whether of officers, wise men, or musical instru- 
ments. Those, who have heen on the watch for his halt- 
ing, have thought again and again, that they have found 
some flaw, which should loosen the whole fabric. Look 
closer, and you see that the parts fit closely together ; 
that, the more closely you press the expressions, the 
more exactly they correspond. 

And this exactness occurs, even where the antagonistic 
critics have thought there was only a hap-hazard enume- 
ration. For example, at Nebuchadnezzar's inauguration, 
eight classes of officers of state are enumerated. Nebu- 
chadnezzar gathered them; Shadrach, Meshach, andAbed- 
nego, were comprised among them. Why was not Da- 
niel ? There is no allusion to any excepted class. Why 
should there ? Daniel is describing what ivas, the ga- 
thering of these officers, not, what was not. Yet, at the 
end of that eventful day, we find the king conferring with 
another class near himself, his councillors l , who had not 
been commanded to worship the image, and of whom Da- 
niel was, from his position, one. So in other cases. When 
you see a picture, representing the life of a people, and 
see, not a feature, a garb, a gesture, a building, a plant, 
other than you know to belong to the character of the 
people and scene which it represents, you doubt not that 
it is drawn from the life. No one could imagine a picture 
of Teniers to have been drawn by one who had not a per- 
sonal knowledge of what he depicts. One little flaw de- 
tects, that a poetical description is taken from careful 
research, not from sight. " Rhododendrons," it has been 
said 2 of a note on a description of the lake of Gerinesareth 

1 Dan. Hi. 27. 

2 Stanley Palestine p. 371 on Keble's Christian Year, 3rd Sunday in Advent. 
Again '"Tabor's lonely peak' is an inaccurate expression, and 'the mountains 



* in varied and minute details. 461 

which we all love, " is a mistake for oleanders/* When 
then there are no "rhododendrons," for "oleanders/' when 
all these varied touches, so boldly and so freely given, each 
and all, come true, what else can one judge, than that 
Daniel drew from the life ? The apparent improbability 
is, when verified, the surest witness to truth. The build- 
ing which, how ever many sides it may present to wind, 
storm, flood, cannot be shaken, is founded on the firm 
Rock. 

terraced high with mossy stone ' is an image belonging to the moist atmo- 
sphere of the West, not to the bare landscape of the East." Stanley Ib. 372. 



LECTURES VIII. AND IX. 



The points of doctrine and practice mentioned in the book 
of Daniel, which are alleged to indicate a date later than 
that of the prophet, are identical or in harmony with the 
other Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments ; nor 
was any doctrine or practice, mentioned in the book of 
Daniel, borrowed from Parsism. 

" Later ideas and practices " figure as an argument in 
all the attacks upon Daniel. Lengerke stated this most 
diffusively. a * The dogmatic ideas are wholly at vari- 
ance with those which prevailed in the Captivity and im- 
mediately after it, but agree accurately with the Macca- 
bee period; and consequently find numerous parallels 
in the Apocryphal books. 3 The doctrine of the Messiah 
appears already much more developed than in Ezekiel ; 
the Messiah appears as a superhuman being ; traces of 
the divine nature occur no where besides in the prophets, 

1 Einl. z. Dan. 13. n. 7. p. Ixv. Davidson nearly translates, (iii. p. 177, 8.) 
" The doctrinal and ethical ideas of the book often differ from the notions en- 
tertained at the time of the exile and immediately after, while they agree with 
the Maccabxan age, as is seen by parallels in the Apocryphal books." 

2 paraphrased by Davidson, ib. " Thus the Christology is much more de- 
veloped, than it is in the prophets of the Captivity, like Ezekiel. Here the 
Messiah appears a superhuman being, (vii. 13.) This doctrine is not found in 
any other passage of the Old Testament. The original of vii. 13. is evidently 
Ezek. i. 26-28 ; but there Jehovah himself is represented as having some re- 
semblance to a human form, whereas Messiah is the subject in Daniel. 
Though the later Jews transferred qualities and attributes from Jehovah to 
Messiah, the early ones, [i. e. the earlier inspired writers,] kept both apart, 
because they did not believe Messiah to be other than human." 



Doctrines and practices alleged to be " later" 463 

but first in the Sibylline books in the time of the Macca- 
bees. That passage [of Daniel] is imitated from Eze- 
kiel ; only, in Ezekiel, the human form signifies Jehovah, 
here, in Daniel, the Messias; as, altogether, the latest 
Jews transferred many attributes from Jehovah to the 
Messiah. Further, it is unmistakeable, that the definite 
succession of Judgment, Resurrection, the Appearing of 
the Messiah, is first most sharply marked in. our book, 
and the doctrine of the last things appears more developed 
than in the earlier books." ; 

" 3 The doctrine of Angels in the book also carries us 
into the latest time. The Angels appear already quite 
in the form in which they were introduced from the later 
Parsism into Judaism. Here first is found the distinc- 
tion of higher and lower Angels, and the doctrine of guar- 
dian angels 4 ." " 5 Peculiar to the book of Daniel are also 
the names of Gabriel and Michael, and, like the analogous 
Raphael in Tobit, borrowed from a later doctrine of Angels 
formed under Persian influence." 

" 6 The Asceticism also of the book approaches hard to 
Pharisaism. The exaggerated ideas of the later Jews as 
to the power of prayer 7 , which subsequently were yet 
more developed, appear to shew themselves already. 

3 ''The Angelology of the book points to a late origin". Thus the names of 
Gabriel and Michael first appear in it* Higher , and lower angels are distin- 
guished, for Gabriel is commanded by another, (yiii. 16.) One of the guar- 
dian angels contends with another for 21 days, and helps another. Here we 
see the influence of Parsism on Judaism." Dav. p. 178; 9. 4 x. 13.' 

5 from De Wette Allg. Enc. Art. Daniel p. 90. 6 Leng. ib. n. 8, 

. . 7 vi. .11. -ii. 18. ix. 3.x. 2. Davidson .thinks this. an argument, andgivesthe 
same instances, " Exaggerated and excessive notions of the value of prayer (!) 
betray a later Judaism ; not later, however, than what may have been 'de- 
veloped in Judaism, under the influence of Parsism, a generation or two after 
the return from Babylon ." [Herzfeld said this of the " Angelology." " The An- 
gelology in iv. 10. 14. is no sign of any considerable lateness of date. If it took 
its rise out of the earlier belief of Israel through Persian influence, it need only 
he a generation or two later than that influence." Geseh. Isr. Exc.,2. 13. 
p. 295.] " Thus Daniel prays and makes: supplication with windows open -to- 
wards Jerusalem, though (!) he knew that a royal decree was signed, con- 
demning any one that did so to be cast into the den of lions, (vi. 11.) He 
mourned and fasted three full weeks, (x. 2,3.) A secret was revealed to him 
in answer to prayer, ii. 18." p.. 179, 80. : - ' ; 



464 No a priori ground why God should not have. 

Then too, revelations are imparted to him, in consequence 
of frequent prayer. To this head belongs the abstinence 
from profane food 1 ; the three-weeks fasting; the prayer 
three times a day ; the searching and grubbing in the 
Scripture 3 , and the interpretation of a prophetical por- 
tion 8 ." 

Now, apart, for the time, from the facts, and the arro- 
gance and open profaneness of some of this, or the cen- 
sure on the New Testament and our Blessed Lord which 
some of it involves, the argument, as a whole, assumes 
the falsehood of revelation. The fact asserted is this ; 
" None of these doctrines or practices are contained ei- 
ther in the earlier books of Holy Scripture, or in Eze- 
kiel who lived in the Captivity, or in Haggai, Zachariah, 
or Malachi after it." Yet, as Daniel confessedly lived to- 
wards the close of that former revelation, there would be 
nothing strange, that doctrines, especially as to the Mes- 
siah, should be -revealed at its close, which had not been 
revealed before. Nor, considering the short compass of 
the prophets after the Captivity, would it be anything 
strange that any doctrine or practice should be contained 
in Daniel, which does not occur in the three. God fore- 
told by Haggai, that He would give peace 4 while the 2nd 
temple still stood, which does not occur in the others ; 
Malachi alone foretells the coming of Elias B . God re- 
vealed Himself in divers ways c to the Prophets," " 7 di- 
viding to each severally as He would/' Granted, that 
God did reveal Himself to the Jews, then the mention of 
any truth in Daniel alone could be no ground for assum- 
ing that it was not revealed to an earlier contemporary of 

1 i. 12. " He also abstained from the king's meat as profane, and lived on 
pulse, (i. 12.)" Dav. p. 180. 2 x. 2. 

3 De Wette summed up thus ; " The later expansion of the doctrine of An- 
gels (iv. 14. [17 Eng.] ix. 21. x. 13. 21.) and of the Christ, (vii. 13. sqq. 
xii. 1-3.) of doctrine, (xii. 2 sq.) morals, (iv. 24. [27 Eng.] comp. Tob. iv. 11. 
xii. 9.) and asceticism,'(i. 8-16. comp. Esth. LXX after iv. 17. 2 Mace. v. 27.) 
According to Havernick this only refers to abstinence from meat or drink of- 
fered to idols. [See ab. Lect. i. p. 17, 18.] vii. 11. [8 Eng.] comp. Acts ii. 15. 
iii. 1. x. 9. 12. [30.]" Einl. 255. c. ed. 7. 

4 Hagg. ii. 6-9. 5 Mai. iv. 5. 6 Heb. i. 1. M Cor. xii. 11. 



Divinity of our Lord in the Psalms. 485 

Haggai and Zechariah; It could be no a priori ground 
against the genuineness of the book of Daniel. The 
ground is not historical, but anti-dogmatic. These wri- 
ters again tacitly assume in the negative the whole mat- 
ter at issue, whether God revealed Himself to His crea- 
tures. They assume that all man's religious knowledge 
is the result of the workings of his own mind and is de- 
veloped in certain orders or cycles ; and so, that no por- 
tion of it could exist before that stage of the developement 
of the human mind to which they assume that it belongs ; 
and so, again, that the belief in any doctrine or practice, 
expressed in any writing, is an evidence of the age to 
which that writing belongs. Some such series of assump- 
tions is necessarily involved in the argument, that the 
book of Daniel must belong to the time of the Maccabees, 
if it be true, that such or such beliefs or practices are found 
in the book of Daniel, and are not found in the three pro- 
phets after the Captivity or in those before them. 

Another assumption is also involved, that the belief 
was not derived in the Maccabee times from the book of 
Daniel. 

To take these subjects in order : 

i. The first statement is untrue, both in what it affirms 
and what it denies. It affirms that traces of the Divine 
Nature of the Messiah are not found elsewhere in the 
Prophets, and are first found in the Sibylline books. In 
the Jewish Sibylline book, the only Sibylline in exis- 
tence before our Lord, there is no trace of a Divine Na- 
ture of the Messiah 9 . The language in the book of Enoch 
is, obviously and confessedly on all hands, taken from 
Daniel 10 . There is, as we know, in the Prophets, evidence 
of the belief in the Divinity of Him Who was to save us, 
before the time of Daniel. This, again, is a statement, 
aifecting not the book of Daniel only, but the Gospel. 

a. Our Lord Himself cited the 110th Psalm of Himself, 
the Christ, awakening up the thoughts of His adversa- 
ries, that He, Whom they gainsaid, was in truth an object 

8 See ab. Leek vi. p. 362, 3. 9 See the passage, alleged by Lengerke, 

ib. p. 304. 10 See ib. p. 382 sqq. 

H h 



466 Greatness of the object of Psalm ex, 

of awe to them; and that they were His enemies, to their 
own great peril. ^ While the Pharisees were gathered 
together, Jesus asked them, saying, What think ye of 
Christ? Whose son is He ? They say unto Him, The Son 
of David. He saith unto them, Hotv then doth David in 
spirit call Him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, 
Sit Thou on My Right Hand, until I make Thine enemies 
Thy footstool ? If David then call Him Lord, how is He 
his Son ? The adversaries of Jesus, at that day, had no 
answer to give. They could not deny that the Messiah 
was to be of the seed of David; or that David himself 
spoke- in spirit, i.e. by inspiration; or that he spake the 
words of that Psalm; or that he was speaking of the 
Christ and of His reign,, in despite of and over His ene^ 
mies. They could not deny any of this; nor could they 
concede the inference which our Lord drew, that, accord- 
ing to then- own prophets, the Christ was to be more than 
man, without taking away the ground of their own oppo- 
sition to Him, for which, soon after, they condemned Him 
to death. They had no answer, because there is none, 
save to confess that David in spirit foretold, that He, the 
Christ, Who was to be born of him according to the flesh, 
was, in another mode of being, his Lord. Jesus appealed 
to their own. convictions. The greatness of the Psalm 
doubtless forced it on them, and, in the face of the Truth, 
they dared : not directly lie* Twice in the brief Psalm, the 
prophetic asseveration of God is alleged, as pronounced 
to the Object of the Psalm. The word 2 , of the Lord to my 
Lord, Sit Thou on My Right Hand, until I make Thine 
enemies Thy footstool. The appeal of St. Paul is irresis- 
tible s ; To which of 'the angels said He at any time, Sit on 
My Right Hand, until I make Thine enemies .Thy foot- 
stool? Are they not all ministering spirits fyc< ::To.siton 
the right hand of an earthly king involved an association 
in the dignity of the Sovereign. Human nature, if it 
have any true belief in God, if it know anything as to 
God or -itself; could not tell the lie to itself, that this could 
be said to an earthly king. Unbelief, unless shameless, 

1 S. Matt. xxii. 41-5. 2 DNJ a Heb. i, 13, 14; 



its inapplicability to David. , 467 

could not say> that David sat on the Right Hand of God, 
because David had brought in the Ark into the city, where 
he dwelt. As if any one sat on the Right Hand of God, 
because his ! house was by a Church ! Nothing in David's 
life corresponds to the saying. David was a warrior-king; 
his enemies were subdued through human means and a 
human arm sustained by God. He himself fought, till his 
strength failed him 4 ; and he fled before Absalom; Ra- 
tionalism will scarcely say, that this is a fulfilment of that 
calm reign, which God affirmed, Sit- Thou on My Right 
Hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool^* And 
he, who was so to sit, was also to be a Priest, not after 
any priesthood which existed in David's time; Thou art 
a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. - A priest 
forever! David was no priest. He was soon to pass 
away], arid to be gathered to his fathers. The Psalm must 
have been written, after Zion had been taken- 6 . It were 
mockery, on any hypothesis, as addressed to David. The 
whole Psalm is personal. God binds Himself by an un- 
changeable oath. Thou art a priest for ever. To siim up, 
the king sits in calm majesty at the Right Hand of God, 
where no human king was ever imagined to sit. While 
Heis enthroned there, Godsends forth the rod of His power. 
He rules; not by subduing only, but amidst His unsub- 
dued enemies ; yet He is to reign until all His enemies be 
beneath His Feet. His people offer themselves willingly 
in the day of His power;, yet clad not in earthly armour, 
but in the beauties of holiness. He Himself is a priest^ 
and that for ever, yet by a priesthood, superseding the 
Levitical priesthood, unchangeable, in His own Person. 
Thou art a priest for ever. All corresponds to the truth 
in Christ. His Human Nature has ever been believed to 

4 2 Sam. xxi. 15-47. 

5 Ewald, I see, does say this. He interprets the whole Psalm of David, 
(Psalm, p. 23-5.) and " to sit on the Right Hand of God," is, that God would 
go with him, as it were, on "a chariot of victory " to fight against his enemies. 

6 Even : Ewald admits, that "the language of the short Psalm- does hot con- 
tradict its being of the time of David," and supposes it to have been "addres- 
sed to David, as he went forth to war against powerful enemies." ib. Day. 
u. 285, follows Ewald. . 

H h 2 



468 Fulfilment of Psalm ex. in our Lord. 

be in that special nearness to God, expressed by His Right 
Hand ; St. Stephen saw Him there ; Apostles averred it ; 
the whole Church ever confessed it. He is there, our 
Priest as well as our King, King with an unchangeable 
Priesthood. His people fight, not with weapons of this 
world, but in the armour of holiness. Godliness in them 
wins fresh subjects to Him. His kingdom is still upheld 
amid the hostility of the world. He rules in the midst of 
His enemies. The time, when all shall be subdued to Him, 
is, in the nature of things, yet to come. Such a waiting 
lies in the words of the prophecy and is a part of it ; sit 
Thou on My Right Hand till . The long expectation, 
which is the mockery of human hopes, is the fulfilment 
of the Divine promise. He rules, He gathers His willing- 
peoples in each generation, until time shall melt away in 
eternity. Each century, during which the consumma- 
tion of all things is delayed, is full of new victories over 
all the powers of darkness, the resistance of the world, 
the weakness of the flesh. Each century is a prolonged 
victory over the destroyer of all human things, time. 
What says rationalism ? " J The word 'until' is not to be 
pressed, but is to be understood ideally of an unending, un- 
closed, uninclusive term." But where was it for David ? 
And what are the objections to the interpretation given by 
Christ ? 1) " 2 The sitting on the Right Hand of the Fa- 

1 Hupfeld Ps. T. iv. p. 183. Ewald (Ps. p. 25.) refers to Bathsheba's lan- 
guage at David's death-bed, " Let my lord king David live for ever," (1 Kgs. 
i. 31.) and the Psalms prophetic of Christ xxi. 5. [4 Eng.] xlv. 3. 7. [2. 6. Eng.] 
and Psalm xli. 13. Bathsheba did not, like the Persian, greet the king, 
" Mayest thou reign for ever." (jElian V. H. i. 32.) I cannot think that, with 
the knowledge of the life to come which David had, the words "live for ever" 
were an unmeaning heartless formula, a mockery to a dying man. 

2 Hupfeld p. 175. "It is certain that a prophecy of the Messiah in the Christi- 
an sense, i. e. with the attributes ascribed to him in the New Testament on 
the ground of this Psalm, is, in the way in which it is here expressed, utterly 
inconceivable in a poet of the Old Testament, being irreconcileable with all his- 
torical and psychological conceptions and principles of interpretation, acknow- 
ledged elsewhere. For" &c (as in the text.) The remaining grounds are, 
3) "that the Object of the Psalm is addressed as present;" as if the Prophet could 
not in vision,'like Balaam, see Him but not now, behold Him, but not nigh; 
and 4) " that God would destroy his enemies ; " which is but what our Lord Him- 
self says, Those Mine enemies tvfio would not that I should reign over them, 



"Sit Thou"fyc. said to Jesus,as Man,because He is God. 469 

ther in the New Testament is a heavenly, ever united with 
the Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus, of which, earlier, 
no anticipation could come into the heart of man. 2) The 
high-priestly, or atoning office of Christ, (as it is taught 
in the Epistle to the Hebrews in contrast with the Mo- 
saic Priesthood and including the abolition of the Mosaic 
law,) equally goes too far beyond the position of the Old 
Testament, and, especially is too foreign to the idea of 
the Messiah of the Old Testament, that such a thought 
could have come into the mind of an Old Testament poet 
or prophet." In other words, because the thought could 
not come in any human way, and, it is assumed, was riot 
revealed by God, it could not have come at all. 

It was to our Lord as to His Human, not His Divine, 
Nature, that it was said, Sit Thou on My Right Hand. 
For, as God, He is ever one with the Father. But it was 
said to Him, because He was God. David's Son, a* Man, 
would not have been David's Lord. The later prophets, 
even if any of them were greater prophets, were not the 
lords of those who went before them. Among those born 
of women, there is not, our Lord said 3 , a greater prophet 
than John the Baptist. Nay, he was *more than a prophet. 
Yet he was the lord of no one. The angels themselves 
were the fellowservants of the Apostles and prophets, 
and of those who have the testimony of Jesus 5 . Jesus 
was David's Lord, because He was God; He was his 
Son, because He was God Incarnate. To sit on God's 
Right Hand, was a property of His Human Nature; but 
it belonged to that Nature, because, in that Nature, He 
was Lord and God. And so David gave to the Christ a 
title, which, as Man, did not belong to Him, and he pro- 
phesied of Him what did not belong to man. His words, 
like those of Daniel, ascribe to the Messiah a nearness to 

firing' them hither and slay them before Me. (S. Luke xix. 27.) Davidson 
adopts these last arguments, adding:, " Not to speak of the psychological im- 
possibility before-mentioned, that a writer shotdd, without the least intimation, 
identify himself with a person who was to live long after." (1. c.) This is mere 
carelessness. The Psalmist speaks of the subject of the Psalm, as " my Lord." 

3 S. Luke vii. 28. S. Matt. xi. 11. 4 S. Matt. xi. 9. 

* Rev. xix. 10. xxii. 9. 



470 "Thy throne, God, is for ever and ever "owned 

God which lias never been said 'of any created being. They 
foretell that fact, which our Lord predicted of Himself 1 , 
which has ever, been believed by all '.who ever believed in 
Jesus, which ever formed a part of the earliest Creeds, 
that Jesus is, as no other is or can be, in that special near- 
ness of glory, which is called the Right Hand of God. If 
men believe the fact, they will find it difficult not to believe 
that the Psalmist's words relate to the fact which they 
describe. The Psalmist and Daniel foretold the super- 
angelic glory of the Messiah in the same way. 

Z. A direct statement of the Divinity of the Messiah, in 
the PsalmSj'has'th'e authority of St. Paul, who alleges it 
in contrast with even superhuman beings. ^But unto the 
Son He saith, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. 
The attempts to eliminate the meaning betray their origin, 
and condemn one another. No one, but for a preconceiv- 
ed opinion, could interpret the word, Elohim, otherwise 
than as God, and as the title of the being addressed. 
No one, acting up to the boasted principle, that " Scrip- 
ture" is to be " 3 interpreted like any other book," could 
hesitate so to render it. No one, who could evade the 
meaning which he wished not to see, has hesitated about 
either. Grotesque as have been the renderings or ex- 
planations offered, no one, who thought he could so 
construct the sentence, that the word, Elohim, need 
not designate the being addressed, doubted that Elohim 
signified "God;" and no one who thought that he could 
make out for the word, Elohim, any other meaning 
than that of "God," doubted that it designated the being 
addressed. A right instinct prevented each class from 
doing more violence to grammar or to idiom, than lie 
needed, in order to escape the truth which he disliked. 
If people thought that they might paraphrase, "thy 
throne, 6 judge, or prince 4 ," or " image of GodJ," or 
" 6 -who art as a God to Pharaoh," they hesitated not for 

1 S. Matt. xxvi. 64. S. Mark xiv. 62. S; Luke xxii. 69. 2 Heb. i. 8. 

3 Prof. Jowett Essays and Rev. p. 377. * Raslii. -...', 

5 Obacl. Siporno. 6 Isaac Jabetz, Torath Chesed (as said to Moses.) 



piecemeal to be the meaning, by the opponents. 

a moment to render with us, "Thy throne is for ever and 
ever." If men think that they may assume such an idiom 
as, " thy throne of God," meaning " thy divine throne," 
or "thy throne is God," meaning "thy throne is the 
throne of God," they doubt not that Elohim means pure- 
ly and simply " God." " There are interpreters," says 
Gesenius 7 , " who say that Elohim is used, in the singular, 
of one king, and is the same as Ben-Elohim, ' Son of 
God/ appealing to those almost Divine honours which the 
Easterns pay to their kings, and the Divine attributes 
with which they adorn them, as ' Antiochus Deus Epi- 
phanes. 3 But the primary place which they allege, Ps. 
xlv. 7, does not at all prove this. They render, Thy throne, 
O God, (i. e. O divine king,) shall stand for ever but it 
can scarce be doubted that Elohim, the wonted name of 
God in the Psalms of the sons of Koran, is the same as in 
countless other places." 

Modern criticism, here or elsewhere, has been busy in 
blinding itself to what it wished not to see. No one, in 
the least conversant with Hebrew, and who had any idea 
of the idiom of language, could doubt how the four 
simple words are to be rendered. We could not doubt 
in Latin, how we must understand the words, " Solium 
tuum Deus in seternum." The Hebrew words are as sim- 
ple as any in any language. If people could but persuade 
themselves that the words were a parenthetic address 
to God, no one would hesitate to own their meaning 
to be, " Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever." They 
express naturally the eternal dominion of God. This 
is their obvious, their only natural grammatical meaning. 
In no other Psalm would any one have doubted it. One 
may appeal to men's own consiences, that they could not. 
When then they strive so hard, in non-natural ways, to 
force other meanings on the words 8 , it is clear that their 

7 Thes. p. 99. He used the same arguments on Is. ix. 5. p. 564, 5. note. 
But on Isaiah, he adopted the one evasion, " thy God's-throne is for ever and 
ever ;" in the Thesaurus, the other, " thy throne shall be [" is" ib. 699.] a throne 
of God (i. e. fortified and prospered by God.") 

8 These renderings have been, 1) " Thy throne i* God for ever and ever." 



472 Contradictory and ungrammatical renderings 
ground for this lies in their own conceptions, what the 

Even Hupfeld saw that this was " too bold." " God is our refuge," nay, " our 
dwelling-place," for in Him we live and move and have our being. He is be- 
tween us and our foes ; so He spoke of Himself, as the " shield" of His own. 
He doth that for them, in spirit and in body, which these outward things do 
for the body. But the throne is a symbol of dignity higher than its own, that' 
of the monarch. It would be unbefitting to speak of the Creator as the " throne " 
of the creature, because it would imply, not that the creature had a glory de- 
rived from the Creator, but that the Creator was subordinate to His creature. 
So Saadias dropped the rendering 1 , and supplied, " God shall establish thy 
throne for ever and ever ;" which, however, just requires the additional word, 
" shall establish," }'?;. Not in Hebrew, any more than in any other language, 
can, " Thy throne God for ever and ever," stand for, " God shall establish thy 
throne for ever and ever." 

2) " Thy throne, God," is to mean, " Thy throne of, or from, God." This 
is not so expressed in Hebrew. The throne of Israel was God's throne, be- 
cause it was a theocracy, its kings were His vicegerents. Once it is said, God 
chose Solomon to sit upon tJie throne of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel, 
1 Chr. xxviii. 5 ; and then, Solomon sat upon the throne of the Lord, as king 
over Israel. But this cannot make the words, "Thy throne, God," mean 
" Thy throne from God." 

3) They say, D'iiSg SIXD? is for q^g KM, the pronoun, thy, being, (as, it is 
alleged, in some few other instances,) interposed between the nominative and 
genitive. But ^3% KQ3, itself, must mean, "the throne of thy God ;" it could 
not mean, " Thy throne from," " or of God." No one could seriously main- 
tain that it did. And this might have shewn people, that that other rare idiom 
does not apply to this case. The few cases are strictly cases of apposition, ij/ 'pqo 
(Ps. Ixxi. 7.) or ^i 'fljflp (2 Sam. xxii. 33, for ^;/j 'n}8?Ci Ps. xviii. 33.) are not 
for '$ nprra or for ^>TI liyn which would rather mean, " the refuge of my 
strength," or would, at least, be ambiguous ; but are to be taken simply, "my 
refuge, strength," i. e. "and that a strong one." IQ& '3;fc (Ps. xxxv. 19.) is 
illustrated by 050 *$$&, with which it is united ; as D?n is an adverb, so 1%?. They 
are added absolutely, "my haters gratis," "mine enemies falsely." So ^an WCnjSJ, 
lit. "our help (which is) vanity." Lam. iv. 17, In like way, 13 "no (Lev. xvi. 13.) 
is, "his garment, linen ; " i.e. "consisting of linen ; " ne; 7|373 (Ezek. xvi. 27.) 
"thy way, lewdness," i. e. merelewdness. In all the cases, except Lev. xvi. 13, 
the words added express a quality ; viz. strength, might, lewdness,falseness, gra- 
tuitousness. Lev. xvi. 13, "his garment, linen," is but the well-known case of 
an explanation standing in apposition, as is seen in cases where the chief word 
has the article. 13 to, "his garment, linen," is the same construction, so far, 
as efe> fljhsfl, "the coat, fine linen," Ex. xxviii. 39. 3m D'nnso "the cherubs, gold." 
1 Chr. xxviii. 18. But God could stand in no such relation to the "throne" 
of man. Ewald himself gives an explanation of the idiom, similar in principle, 
(ausf. Lehrb. 291. 3. b.) "Poets can easily append the suffix to the first sub- 
stantive, to which it belongs, and then subordinate the second independently, 
as iy 'pqo, 'my refuge in strength,' i. e. my strong refuge ; "$v '$\v, "my lying 
enemies,' Ps. Ixxi. 7. [nj/?; T^fio, "Thy chariots, which are salvation,"] 



of words, grammatically most simple. 473 

words theologically can not mean, not in any persuasion 

Hab. iii. 8. Ezek. xvi. 27. xviii. 7. [taking i'ln irfesn (both &ir. Aey.) as if it 
were "his pledge for a debt," others, as E. V. "debtor."] 2 Sam. xxii. 33." 

4) They render, "Thy throne is (a throne of) God," which is, of course, sun- 
ply impossible. Ewald (Kr. Gramm. 343 note) said, "Very seldom is the 
status constructus wanting in the predicate, when it is the noun immediately 
preceding, as D'O^N ?R(ip? 'thy throne is God's (throne') for s ND? ; more easily 
with a noun designating the matter, Jer. xxiv. 2." But Jer. xxiv. 2. requires 
nothing to be supplied. We have, in English, many such idioms ; "The one 
basket, very good figs, like the figs first ripe ; and the other basket, very had 
figs, which could not be eaten for badness." The cases which others allege are 
obviously irrelevant, being cases in which the article has been put anomalously, 
yet on a different principle, before the nominative, as nn;jri jYixn, " the ark of 
the covenant ; " ^x n'3 *?xn, "the God of Bethel." For in these cases, there 
is only one nominative and one genitive ; there is nothing really to be supplied. 
The saying of Hebrew grammarians, that rn?ri pnn was for nnari pig ]Ywn, "the 
ark, the ark of the covenant," is, in itself, obviously a mere shift to explain the 
anomalous placing of the article ; for there is no such emphasis, as this repeti- 
tion would imply ; and, if this anomaly were to be thus accounted for, it would 
have no bearing on the passage in the Psalm ; since, in those cases, the words 
are in apposition ; in the Psalm they would be made to stand as subject and 
predicate. In his ausf. Lehrg. 296. b. ed. 7, Ewald quotes, as exactly cor- 
responding, only Cant. i. 15., rendering, (as the E. V.,) " thy eyes are doves' 
eyes." But from Cant. iv. 1, "thyeyes are doves behind thy veil," or "locks," 
and, still more, from v. 12, "His eyes are doves at the rivers of waters, bath- 
ing in milk, sitting in fulness," or, " at the fulness" (i. e. of the streams,) it 
is clear that the object of comparison, in i. 15, also, is the dove itself, not its 
eyes. For in iv. 1. v. 12. there follows on the comparison the mention of the 
situation of the dove. Ewald too rendered iv. 1, " thine eyes doves around 
thy locks ;" v. 1, "His eyes are doves over the water-brooks." Delitsch (ad loc.) 
says, "Hitzig, on Pr. vii. 27, rightly questions the correctness of the elliptical 
explanation in places such as Deut. viii. 15. 1 Kgs. iv. 13. Ezr. x. 13." Cer- 
tainly in such idioms as, "who led thee through the great and terrible wilder- 
ness, fiery serpents and scorpions and drought," (Deut.) "threescore great 
cities, walls and brasen bars," (1 Kgs. iv.) "the people is many, and the wea- 
ther is showers," (Ezr.) no one scarcely could think of filling it up "wilderness 
of serpents," "cities of walls," or "the weather is weather of showers." Such 
renderings ignore the idioms of language. Yet Hitzig now justifies his ren- 
dering, "thy throne is a God's throne," by such idioms, (ad loc.) According 
to these interpreters, in the 2nd half- verse, where there would be no ambigui- 
ty, "a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom," B3K> *#' tiiy 
spafe, the nominative is inserted in both clauses ; and in the first half-verse, 
where (as the Versions shew) the obvious rendering is, "Thy throne, O God," 
thenominative, which would prevent the ambiguity,isomitted. A writer, who 
writes fully, not "into only, but inute oat? i'D tuts- would, a fortiori, have writ- 
ten, DVI!?N NOD ixo3, if he had meant it, since there was the greater need of pre- 
cision, because its obvious meaning involves an important dogmatic statement. 
5) Gesenius (on Is. ix. 5.) adopted yet another construction. "The word 



474 "Thy throne, O God,"saidto God,but as king among men. 

what they grammatically do mean. The words are ad- 
dressed to God l ; the context shews that He Who is so 

KEQ has two genitives, in different relations, after it, just as Lev. xxvi. 42, '(H3 
3>y.: ' my Jacob's covenant,' i. e. my covenant with Jacob." In Lev. xxvi. 42, 
two constructions are united. In Hebrew, rn3 is joined in the genitive very 
commonly with the name of the person who makes the covenant, (as in the of- 
ten-repeated," JVi3, "the covenant of the Lord,") and more rarely with that of 
those, with whom the covenant is made, as Deut. iv. 31. sj'nhK nn3 " the cove- 
nant with thy fathers ; " Mai. ii. 10. " with our fathers ; " Ps. Ixxxix. 30, spny .3 
" the cov. with thy servant;" Mai. ii. 8 ; 'iWi nns, " the covenant with Levi ; " 
Is. xlii. 6. xlix. 8. Dj; nna, " a covenant with the people." In the emphatic 
saying, Lev. xxvi. 42, / will remember My covenant with Jacob, and also My 
covenant with Isaac, and also My covenant with Abraham I will remember, 
the two constructions are united, which has no difficulty, because, as Gesenius 
said, " they stand in different relations," well known in the idiom of the lan- 
guage. So in Jeremiah xxxiii. 20, >fln3 is united with oVjj and n^n " My co- 
venant with the day and My covenant with the night, parallel with, My cove- 
nant with David My servant. (r% nx Wig. v. 21.) The construction in n wia 
in itself suggests, that the construction, Divr wo, is idiomatic and elliptical. In 
v. 25, the adverb, DD'V, is substituted for ni ! n. The elliptical idiom was doubt- 
less the rather used, on account of the great frequency of the fuller idiom, "made 
a covenant with " &c. The covenant, of course, implies the two parties be- 
tween whom it is made. The two persons in (lit.) " the covenant of Me, Ja- 
cob," " the covenant of Me, Isaac," " the covenant of Me, Abraham," stand 
not only in relation with the word, "covenant," but with each other. wigi 
nsm Drrax ?n| nx *]N]pn: 'fl^f nx *]Sj sipjj; 'ring nx have no ambiguity. It is but 
the union of known relations. " My covenant," " the covenant of the Lord," 
is, every where, the covenant which God made ; " the covenant of your fa- 
thers," " of your servant," is " the covenant which He made with the fathers, 
&c ; " and the phrase, " My covenant with Jacob," does but blend them, in the 
same sense in which they were used apart. There is also no other possible 
meaning. The words " Thy throne," "the throne of God," equally have de- 
finite meanings, but exclusive of each other. They express, each of them, to 
whom the throne belonged. They are both the genitive of the subject. " The 
throne of God " never occurs in the sense of " the throne which God gave." 
We have, " Thy throne (0 Lord) is from generation to generation," Lam. 
v. 19 ; "the Lord's throne is in heaven," Ps. xi. 4 ; " God sitteth on His holy 
throne," Ps. xlvii. 8; "justice and judgment are the habitation of Thy throne," 
Ps. Ixxxix. 14 ; " the heaven is My throne," Is. Ixvi. 1 ; "the throne of the Lord," 
Jer. iii. 17; "the place of My throne," Ez. xliii. 7. And we have no other 
meaning. To render, then , " thy throne of God," in the meaning " thy throne 
entrusted to thee by God," (Ges. on Is. ix. 5.) is to join the words in a sense 
which they never have, rejecting that which the like phrase actually has. (Lam. 
v. 19.) Gesenius abandoned this (Thes. p. 98, 699.) for No 3 ; yet rendered 
(Ib. p. 1036.) " sollum iuum a Deo constitutum stabit in ceternum." 

1 " The Versions take Elohim as the Vocative ; but neither can this be an 
address to Jalive, (YHVH) as the Targum takes it ; nor can the Icing be so 
directly taken as Gorf."Hitzig. As for Hitzig's supplementary argument, (from 
Ewald,) it contains its own answer ; " moreover ijn D^iV (withoxtt- 1 ?, comp. Lam. 



Evidence of Divinity of the Christ from Psalm u. 475 

addressed as God, is a King among men, but One Whose 
kingdom is not of this world; His end truth, and meek 
righteousness ; Himself, beauteous above the sons of men ; 
His lips overflowing with Divine grace j and these things 
in Him, the Source of Divine Unction. Men would not 
believe that our Lord was God, or that God foretold this 
of Him 3 ; they dare not deny, that the simplest meaning 
of the words in themselves is, "Thy Throne, O God, is 
for ever and ever." 

c. A 3rd place, which the whole body of the Apostles 
quoted 2 , while addressing God, which St. Paul alleged 
to the Jews 3 at Antioch in Pisidia, quoted in the Epistle 
to the Hebrews 4 , and alluded to in the Epistle to the Ro- 
mans 5 , speaks of the Messiah, as, in a special way, "the 
Son of God." The second Psalm is a prophecy against the 
vain attempts of heathen nations to throw off the sove- 
reignty of God and of His Anointed. It exhibits, as Isaiah 
and Daniel do, the vain tumults of men, and, over-against 
them, the calm supremacy of God. Rebellion against 
the Lord and against His Anointed, i. e. His Messiah or 
Christ, is one and the same act. 6 The /rings of the earth 
set themselves in array, and the rulers take counsel together, 
against the Lord and against His Anointed. Obedience 
to God and reverence to the Son are also one and the 
same. 7 Serve the Lord with fear and rejoice ivith trem- 
bling. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry. Trust in Him is 
the source of manifold blessedness. Blessed are all they 
that put their trust in Him. His wrath is destruction. 
It is one and the same as the wrath of God, as instanta- 
neous in its effects and as fatal. Lest He be angry and 
ye perish from the way, when His wrath is kindled but a 

v. 19.) is uniformly only an incidental determination of the predicate, xlviii. 15. 
x, 16. lii. 10. not the predicate itself." It is mere straw-splitting, to admit 
that nil) Tn^> qwp? (Lam. v. 19.) signifies, " Thy throne is for ever and ever, 
and to deny that ijji t&ty !jxp? means the same. The construction, which is 
the point questioned by Hitzig, is precisely the sanfe. Ewald had doubtless for- 
gotten Lam. v. 19, when he made the assertion. ij)i oMy is as near an expres- 
sion for eternity, as human language admits ; it expresses clearly the same as 
W .iff. 2 Acts iv. 25, 6.' 3 Ib. xiii.33. * Heb.i.5. 

5 Rom. i. 4. 6 Pg. ii. 2. . 1 Ib. 11, 12, 



476 Close union of the Messiah with God in Psalm ii, 

little. His inheritance embraced all nations. ^Ask of 
Me and I will give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance. 
It is given by God, as our Lord says, *AU power is given 
unto Me in heaven and in earth ; but it is coextensive 
with the earth ; the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy 
possession; as our Lord, after mention of that power given 
to Him, said to His Apostles, and, in them, to His Church 
unto the end, 3 Go ye and disciple all nations. Of Him 
alone it is said, Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten 
Thee. Others have been and are adopted sons, He alone 
is a Son by nature ; of Him Alone is the word used, which 
expresses the special relation of nature. Of others whom 
God made His sons, He said ; *he shall be My son, and I 
his Father. To Him Alone, Who is the Son by Nature, 
He saith, This day I have begotten Thee. The kiss also 
(as it continues among us to this day,) to a superior was 
the well-known act of fealty, or of worship 5 . But, be- 
yond the word itself, was the association with God. The 

1 Ps. ii. 8. 2 S. Matt, xxviii. 18. 3 Ib. 19. 4 1 Chron. xxii. 9. 

5 See on Hos. xiii. 2. p. 82. p: occurs 34 times in the Bible. Three of 
these cases are in the idiom, n$j 'jjwj, " drawers of the bow," and are, in fact, 
from a different root. In all the other 31 cases, it has the one meaning, "kiss." 
In all cases but one, the object is expressed ; in 7 places besides this Psalm, it 
is in the accusative ; 21 times it stands with ^ ; in Gen. xli. 40. with !?J> ; in 
Ezeldel, iii. 13. of things inanimate, with W;. The one exception, where the 
object is omitted, is in Ps. Ixxxv. 11, *p?to tibtf] pix, "righteousness and peace 
have kissed ; " obviously, each other. 13 occurs once besides, in the undoubted 
sense, " son." Pr. xxxi. 2. It is not an Aramaic word only, as is commonly stat- 
ed; It is also a Phoenician word, and so it belongs to the earliest stock of the 
language. It occurs in Plautus, (Ges. Script, ling. Phrenic, p. 379,) and in pro- 
per names ; Vermlna, fttpfiivas = pDK 13 ; Liv. App. (Ib. p. 415,) Bar-melech, 13 
-D, "son of the king" i. e. Baal ; Inscr. Melit. 2, 4. (Ib. p. 348.) ffap^Kapos, 
Polyb. 7, 9. =ipj 13, " son of Hercules." (Ib. p. 403, coll. p. 353.) Gesenius also 
explains by it the names, Udpa\os (Diod. xvi. 9,) i. e. fpjn 13 " son of Baal ; " 
(Ib. p. 412.) Bogudes (App. Dio C.) i. e. TM 13 " son of a troop ; " (Ib. 404.) 
and Bomilcar (Liv. Pol. App.) ipte 13 " son of Milcar," i. e. Hercules, (ib.) 
Aramaic are poetic forms; But the form was also probably chosen here, to 
avoid the repetition of the same sound, ]3 ||, without any corresponding em- 
phasis. The word pi then, taken in its uniform meaning, and in a received 
construction, fits in with the mention of the object, " kiss the Son." The 
grammatical meaning suits the context. God said, "I have set. My king 
upon My holy hill of Zion." He declared of that king ; " Thou art My Son." 
The world was in rebellion against Him. God exhorts them to shew reve- 
rence to the Son, lest He be angry and they perish. 



owned by the Jews also. 477 

close of the Psalm corresponds with the beginning. It 
is an exhortation to those who were in rebellion, to re- 
turn to obedience to God and to His Son. " 6 The words, 

On the ground of this uniform meaning of peri, its meaning was retained even 
by those who did not understand, or who wished to evade, the meaning of 13. 
Hence Aquila translated strictly, Kara^iX^ffare, " kiss ; " Symmachus, in the 
derived meaning, " worship," irpoaKvvhaa-re ; as St. Jerome too, " adorate." 
But then it was inconsistent, not to take 13, as the object of the verb, in either 
of its known senses, " Son," or, (from the root in?,) " pure." For it is unidio- 
matic, to take as an adverb a word, which is only used as a noun, and that, when 
following an active verb, which requires a noun to complete its meaning. Aq. 
^KAeKToij, Symm. Kadap&s, S. Jer. pure. Yet even thus Aquila, at least, must 
have thought that " the king " was the object, since the word " kiss," which 
he adopts, could not be applied to God, save through the Incarnation. In re- 
gard to the rendering of the late Chaldee Targum, and of the LXX, " lay hold 
of instruction," yapi never signifies to "lay hold of," only to " stretch the bow ;" 
and & (if the vowel be changed) is only once used with the affix, n&, " my pu- 
rity," and that, when the idiom, o;i; IS, had just preceded, and the equivalent 
0:53 followed. Even thus, " purity " is not " instruction." Hupfeld, rejecting 
the real meaning, " son," as inapplicable, (he thought,) so felt that no other 
would hold, that he devised a correction of the text, \a for 13, although well 
knowing that this was a construction unknown to Hebrew. 

6 Aben Ezra. The reference to the Christ is acknowledged by the older Jews 
of all Schools. It is mentioned as a tradition in the Talmud, tract Succa, dist. 
Haclialll; "Our Rabbins handed down, ' Messiah ben David, (who is to be re- 
vealed, may he be revealed in our days !) God, blessed for ever, said to him, ' ask 
something of Me and I will give it Thee,' as is said, / will declare the decree, 
Tfie Lord said unto Me, T/iou art My Son &c. Ask of Me &c.' And when he 
shall hear, that Messiah son of Joseph is slain, he shall say, ' Lord of the world, 
I ask of Thee nothing but life ; ' God shall say to him, ' thou askest life of Me ; 
before thou saidst this, David thy father prophesied of thee, He asked life of 
Thee; &c'" Ps. xxi. 5. (Mart. Pug. Fid. f. 330.) The unworthiness of this re- 
presentation belongs to the Talmudists ; but they are witnesses to the tradi- 
tional meaning. In the mystical school, the Midi-ash Tillirn says, " kings shall 
rise up against him, [Messias ben David,] as it is said, the kings of the earth &c. 
Ps. ii. 2. Mart. f. 332. (See also ib. f. 604.) and again, "when his hour shall 
come, God shall say, ' I must create him by a new creation,' and so He saith, 
Tins day have I begotten thee." on Ps. ii. 2. Mart. f. 285; and on ii. 7, (f. 3, 4.) 
Ps. ex. 1. Ps. ii. 7. and Dan. vii. 13. lo with the clouds of heaven, are quoted 
together of the Messiah. (Schottg.Hor.Hebr.ii.p. 121.) And on Ps.21, "R. Jc- 
hanan says, 'Ask,' was said to three, Solomon, (1 Kings iii. 5,) Ahaz, (Is. vii. 11.) 
and kingMessiah, Ask of me &cPs.ii. 8."(Mart.f.516.) And in the Bereshith 
Rabba, " R. Huna in the name of R. Idi, [and R, Joshua B. Levi,] saith, " This 
(Jer. xxxi. 21.) is king Messiah, of whom it is said, ' Thou art My Son.'" (in 
Mart. f. 284.) In the Pirke R. Elieser c. 28, Mesharshia [4th cent.] is quoted, 
interpreting v. 2. of the last " gathering of all nations to fight against Messiah 
b. David." (Schiittgen adloc.p.227.) So also the Avodasaraf.3. 2, (ib. p. 228,) 
Tauchuma f. 55. 2, (Ib. p. 74,) Pesikta Sotarta, f. 58. 1, (Ib. p. 90,) the Zohar, 



478 Emphasis on the words "kiss the Son" 

serve the Lord, refer to the words, take counsel against the 
Lord; the words, kiss the 'Son, to the words, and against 
His dnointed." 

The omission of the article gives even an added empha- 
sis to the word Son 1 , in that the name therehy gains the 
character of a proper name, belonging to Him, and to no 
other as it does to Him 2 . 

(ib. p. 227,) Midrash Esther f. 107. 4, (Ib. p. 68, 9.) interpret the beginning 
of the Psalm of Gog and Magog. The Mechilta, quoting the words, against 
the Lord and against His Anointed, has the simile of " a robber, standing be- 
hind the royal palace, insulting it, and saying, ' If I find the king's son, I will 
seize and slay him and crucify him, that he may die a hard death,' but the 
Holy Spirit shall mock them ; He tfiat sitteth in the heavens shall mock them." 
(in Yallcut Shimeoni, ii. f. 90. 1. Sch. p. 227.) The Midrash Tillim has the 
likeness of " a king who was wroth with his subjects ; but they went to his son 
and besought him to appease the king. When they were reconciled, they sang 
a hymn to the king ; but he said, ' Why sing ye a hymn to me, go rather and 
present it to my son. For but for him, I should have destroyed the whole city.' " 
(f. 4. 2. Sch. p. 229.) It recognised the interpretation, even while misapply- 
ing it to the Jewish people. 

1 So ^p;" king," Ps. xxi. 1, and pn, "decree," in this Psalm, v. 7. Delitzsch 
remarks, how the omission of the Article is emphatic in Arabic also, quoting 
Fleischer on Zamakshari, Not. 2 p. 1 sq. and De Sacy Anthol. Gramm. p. 75. 
Hupfeld (p. 33.) says, that the word, 13, "son," would be " unmeaning without 
net 1 or the article." Yet he had himself, a few lines before, remarked the simi- 
lar use of i$n, Ps. xxi. 1: 'And this, in face of the acknowledged fact, that the 
article is habitually omitted in poetry, where it would stand in prose, as is said 
in all grammars, (e. g. Gesen. Lehrg. p. 652. Ewald ausf. Lehrb. 277 p.' 679. 
ed. 7.) fHN'g^n again occurs in this same Psalm, v. 2; 

2 Dr Williams said, " If he would follow our version in rendering the 2nd 
Psalm, kiss the Son, he knows that Hebrew idiom convinced even Jerome, the 
true meaning- was, worship purely? (Ess. and Rev. p. 68.) quoting liim, " ca- 
villatur-quod posuerim-^rfora^epzwe-ne violentus viderer interpres et Jud.fai- 
coe calumnise] locum darem." Hieron. c. Ruffin. [i.] 19. This is not an ac- 
curate account of S. Jerome's statement. Ruifinus blamed him for inconsisten- 
cy, that, ." having, in his brief commentary, said, adore the Son,' in his transla- 
tion he put ''adore purely.'" S. Jerome defends himself, that '" Bar ' had differ- 
ent meanings ; ' Son/ as in Barjona, Bartholonueus, BarthimsEus, Bariesus, and 
Barabbas ; also 'wheat' and ' a sheaf of corn ' [i. e. 'corn even standing,' Ps. 
Ixv. 14.] and 'elect' [from Cant. vi. 9.] and 'pure.'" "What then have I of- 
fended," he 'Siiys, " that I have rendered diversely an ambiguous word, and that 
while in the little commentary, where there was freedom of discussion, I had 
said,' adore the Son,' in the body of the work, [his translation,] lest I should 
seem to do violence to the text and give occasion to Jewish calumny, I said 
' adore purely,' or 'in a chosen way,' as Aquila and Symmaelras also translat- 
ed?" It beems to me that S. Jerome preferred the rendering, "the Son," 
since he adopted it where he could explain it, but gave way to prejudice in 



The King in Psalm Ixxii. has Divine attributes. 479 

d. The King, who is the subject of the 72nd Psalm, 
has attributes, which could not belong to any human 
being, immortality, omniscience, omnipotence. He is the 
source of an immortality of blessing, by acts strictly per- 
sonal, so long as this world shall endure 3 . Wherever the 
needy should cry in the whole world, there and then 
would He save. This is the special prerogative of God. 
Omniscience alone hears the cry of every. human heart 
which it framed: Omnipotence alone can deliver every 
one every where. Human benefactors can do this here 
and there 4 ; God alone every where. 5 When he cried 
unto Him, He heard. 6 Thou shalt cry, and He shall say, 
Behold Me ! is the prerogative of ah Almighty Helper. 
7 Call upon Me in the day of trouble ; I will deliver thee 
and thou shalt glorify Me, is God's invitation to all who 
will seek Him sincerely, and an anticipation of that 
loving invitation of our Lord, 8 Come unto Me, all ye that 
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Yet 
this is assigned- as the ground, 9 why all kings shall fall 
doivn before -Him; all nations shall serve Him. For He 
shall deliver &c. This is, in. truth, the attractive power 
which has drawn men unto Jesus, before they yet knew 
what it is to love Him, that He is an Almighty Deliverer. 

Yet the government of this King is wholly spiritual. 
Peace is to be the yield of the world, but in righteousness^; 
salvation 11 , righteousjudgment 12 , tender compassion 13 ,de- 

rendering "adore purely." But, although S. Jerome had very valuable tradi- 
tional knowledge, of Hebrew, which .he acquired with so much cost and pains 
from his Jewish instructors, no .one thinks now that he had an idiomatic know- 
ledge of Hebrew. It was not his line. Ye.t in rendering pj " adore," he pa- 
raphrased rightly on the right grounds. 

3 Ps. Ixxii. 5, 7. v. 5. is clearly addressed to the subject of the Psalm. In 
v. 17, it is said, "His Name shall endure for ever," and in Ps. Ixxxix. 29. 36. 
" his seed shall endure for ever," Ib. 4, " thy seed will I establish for ever ; " 
Ib. 37, '.'it shall be established for ever ; " here only,, it is said .of the Person. 

4 Job xxix> 12. Ps. xxii. 24* add Ps. xviii.7. xxxiv. 4, 5, 6. 15-17. 
iv. 3. iii. 4. Iv. 16. xcix. 6. i-xvi. 4-16. cxviii. 5. cxx. 1. cxlv. 18, 19. Jon. ii. 2< 

6 Is.lviii.9. ... ..... 7 Ps.l.l5.addxci.l5.Jer.xxxui.3,Is.lviii.9. 

?' S. Matt, xi. 28. 9 v. 11, 12. ' v. S.^Each hemistich fills up the 

other, " mountains and hills shall yield peace to the people in righteousness.'' 
11 v. 4, 13. 12 , y . 2, 4... 13 v. 13.. ^ oh; 



480 Empire of the King in Psalm Ixxii. in all time 8f clime, 

liverance l , redemption 2 , are His acts; the afflicted ones 3 
of God, of the people *, the sons of the needy 4 , and ge- 
nerally, the needy 5 , afflicted 6 , or those in low estate 7 , 
he who hath no helper 8 , are the objects of that love; and 
that, by His coming down from above, as rain upon the 
herb, when ready to dry up. Precious in His eyes should 
be the blood 9 of such as these 10 ; as it is said of Almighty 
God, n Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of His 
saints. All are strictly personal acts. The King Himself 
is to do all these things. His empire is to be coexten- 
sive with the world, coenduring with time. The confines 
of the promised land are by turns removed ; His domi- 
nion is to be/rom sea to sea., from the Mediterranean, their 
Western boundary, to the encircling sea beyond Asia's 
utmost verge ; and, from their Eastern boundary, the ri- 
ver, the Euphrates, unto the ends of the earth 13 . Some 
nations are mentioned as specimens ; the wild sons of the 
wilderness 13 , countries known to Solomon by commerce 
only, in the then distant Spain, or the empires on the 
shores of the Mediterranean u , the depths of Arabia or 
the far-removed and wealthy Nubia 15 . But these are in- 
stances only of the voluntary submission. The prophecy 
passes on to universal empire. All kings, all nations are 
to fall down before Him and serve Him. They are to 
offer their best, presents and gifts ; yet the most costly 
offering is to be the oblation of the poor. The kings of 
Sheba are to be there, but the gold of Sheba is specified 
as the offering of the poor. Precious shall their Hood be 
in His eyes. And live he, he will give of the gold of She- 
ba. His enemies are voluntarily to submit themselves. 

1 v. 12. 2 v.14. 3 v.2. 4 v.4. 

8 v. 12, 13. [u] c v. 12. ? v. 13. 8 v. 12. 

9 v. 6. " upon the mown grass," as in Am. vii. 2. E. V. rightly. Striking 
image of a world, in all appearance, hopelessly dead, but with a hidden capa- 
city for receiving life ! V. 7. The like image occurs in the prophecy of Christ, 
2 Sam. xxiii. 4. 10 v. 14. u Ps. cxvi. 15. 

12 H$ '9?* occurs 14 times, and always in this sense, as also jnxn rtej? (4 times) 
and y-jxn n$j? (20 times.) The plural in itself involves it, as in the Homeric 
ireipara yalt]s, and we say " the land's end," hut " the ends of the earth." 

13 D".x.v. 8. " D.ijv. 9. I5 N?P 



Himself out of sight. 481 

The abundance of peace in His days is to be as long as 
the moon endureth. He is to be the object of reverent fear, 
so long as sun and moon endure. And yet, by a wondrous 
coincidence with the fact, it is hinted that He Himself 
should be out of sight. For it is said, His Name shall 
be for ever ; His Name shall propagate, gaining, gene- 
ration after generation, a fresh accession of offspring, as 
long as the sun and moon endure ; and yet, again, He is 
to be the personal source of blessing; men shall be bles- 
sed in Him 17 . The prophecy of Solomon expands the pro- 

16 The E. V. has, (according to its rule,) followed the kri, ]'n;, " shall be pro- 
pagated." It is a mere substitution for the bold image of the text. Yet it 
must be an old correction, since it supplies one of the names of the Messiah. 
" Pirke R. Elieser c. 3. and Bereshith rabba s. 1. f. 3. 3. ' Six things' (seven 
are counted in Pesachim f. 54. 1. Nedarim f. 39. 2. Midi-ash TeMllim f. 35, 4. 
[see in Mart. Pug-, fid. f. 335.] and Midi-ash Mishle f. 53, 3.) ' were before the 
foundation of the world, and among them the name of the Messiah, Before the 
sun, Yinnon is Msname.' Ibid. c. 36, among those six, whose name was known 
before their birth, the ' name of the Messiah,' is mentioned, with an appeal to 
this place. [See in Mart. f. 334.] Echa Rabbathi f. 59. 3. and Sanhedrin 
f, 98, 2, ' They who are of the school of Jannai said, that ' the name of the 
Messiah is Yinnon,' from this place.. Midrash Mishle c. xix. 21. f. 57. 1, 'The 
name of the Messiah is Yinnon,' also quoting it." Schottgen de Messia ad loc. 

In the Bereshith R. 1. c. and Midr. Till. I. c. it is explained actively, yet the 
pass, form seems to have crept in, " Why is his name called pj' ? Because he 
shall give birth to (pi*) those who sleep in the dust of the earth ? " 

17 There is no pretext for the gloss of Le Clerc, (following Rashi,) that the 
words, "shall he blessed in Him," are to be limited by the idiom, Gen. xlviii. 
20. By thee Israel shall bless; which, by force of the conjugation, must have 
a different sense, and which is explained by the addition, saying, God make 
thee as Ephraim and ManasseJi. sjis, orig. " bent the knee," " prayed," is 
used of man's act as to man, in no other sense than, " prayed for a blessing," (as 
even benediction in God's name is still a prayer.) " Israel shall bless by thee," 
has then no other meaning than that which is expanded in the sequel, " use 
thy name in praying a blessing from God." Even apart from the meaning of 
the word, man cannot "make blessed" through man ; self-evidently he cannot 
Mess through forefathers, long since departed. Yet the very fact that the word 
is explained by the addition, "saying, God make thee fyc." shews that it is no 
ordinary idiom, as indeed it occurs in that one place only of Scripture. From 
God to His creature, man, to "bless" is to "make blessed." In itself, the 
Hithpahel or Nifal might be either reflective or passive, " he blessed himself," 
or, " he was blessed " by God. rn^ij is reflective Deut. xxix. 18. " shall bless 
himself in his heart," i. e. "pronounce himself blessed," as explained in the 
context. In Is. Ixv. 16. and Jer. iv. 2, (where it is united with 3) it signifies 
" shall bless himself in," i. e. " seek blessing in." In both cases, the object 

t i 



482 Isaiah's prophecy that the Child to be born 

mise to Abraham; as it is itself afterwards expanded in 
those of Micah, Isaiah, and Zeehariah V 

In Isaiah there occurs that wonderful prophecy of One, 
Who should be born a Child, yet of Whose personal rule 
there should be no end, Whose reign should not pass away, 
like that of mortal kings, who succeed others, to be suc- 
ceeded by others, but which should endure from thence- 
forth even for ever*. The line of David had lasted, from 
father to son, nearly 3 centuries, when Isaiah so prophe- 
sied. God had promised to Davidj z Thine house and thy 
kingdom shall be established for ever before thee. Three 
centuries had verified the promise. Isaiah opens ano- 
ther mode of its fulfilment. It was no longer to be from 

is God ; " He that blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God 
of truth'; " (Is.) " the nations shall bless themselves in Him, andin Him shall 
they glory." (Jer.) In both, it stands connected with an act of man, "shall 
swear by the God of truth ; " (Is.) " thou shalt swear, ' The Lord liveth,' in 
truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, and the nations shall bless themselves 
in Him." (Jer.) Even then, if to $; were to be rendered in the Psalm re- 
flectively, "shall bless themselves in Him," it would still mean, (according to 
the idiom in Isaiah and Jeremiah,) '*' shiill seek their blessedness from Him." 
In the first passage in Genesis xii. 2, God had already said to Abraham, 
" Thou shalt be a blessing," i. e. in its most natural sense, " a source of bless- 
ing," as in Ps. xxi. 7. The Nifal occurs only in these prophecies, Gen. xii. 3. 
xviii. 18. xxviii. 14. It is not known that it is any where used reflectively. The 
Hithpaelis used twice Gen. xxii. 18. xxvi. 4. After the typical sacrifice of 
Isaac, the term of the blessing is changed to Abraham, "in thy seed shall all na- 
tions be blessed," instead of " in thee." (Gen. xxii. 18. xxvi. 4.) To Jacob, 
(Gen. xxviii. 14.) both are united, " in thee and in thy seed." The emphasis, 
laid on the words in the five-times-repeated blessing, also precludes an inter- 
pretation, at once so empty and so exaggerated as, that this full promise should 
mean, that all nations of the world should use 'this as a formula of blessing, 
" God bless thee as He blessed Abraham, Jacob, and then- descendants." Am- 
mon, and Bertholdt, (de ortu theol. Hebr. p. 102.) got rid of the prophecy by 
saying that, " all nations of the earth " meant the Canaanitish nations ; and 
that the blessing on them, was that the remnant, which wiis not destroyed, 
was associated with the Jews! They admitted thus, that St. Peter (Acts iii. 
'25, 6.) and St. Paul (Gal. iii. 8. 16.) were right in arguing from the plain 
meaning of the words, "In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be 
blessed." 

1 The peace, characteristic of the ruler in this Psalm, reappears in the title, 
"Prince of peace," in Is. ix. 6.; in the peace foretold Is. xi.; in Micah v. 5. "this 
Man shall be our peace ; " in Zech. ix. 10., quoting this prophecy. 

3 Is. ix. 6: Heb. 7 Eng. 3 2 Sam. vii. 16. 



should be called "Mighty God? 483 

father to son, but was to abide in one individual, who 
should be born of his seed. Of Him he gives that won- 
drous prophecy of lowliness and Divinity, united in the 
Incarnation. *Unto .us a Child is born, unto 'us a Son is 
given, and the government shall be upon His Shoulder, and 
His Name shall be called, Wonderful Counsellor, Mighty 
God, 'Eternal Father, Prince of Peace. El, the name of 
God, is no where used absolutely of any but God. The 
word is once used relatively, in its first appellative sense, 
*'the mighty of the nations, in regard to Nebuchadnezzar. 
It occurs absolutely in Hebrew 225 times 6 ; arid in every 
place is used of God. It has been observed, 7 how, in He- 
brew too, it is specially used in union with some attribute 
of God ; " God most High," " God Almighty," u a jealous 
God," "the Living God," " God compassionate and gra- 
cious/' "God, the great and terrible," and the like, as,here, 
" Mighty God." This way of rendering the words in 
pairs agrees also with the immediate context, in which 
the title of the Saviour, Who was to be given, is, in the 
three other cases 8 , expressed in pairs of words. Deci- 
sive; however, is the occurrence of the same phrase in 
the next chapter. There, no one could render other- 
wise than, L4 'remnant shall return, a remnant shall re- 
turn, to the Mighty God. No one can doubt that such is 
the natural meaning of the words El Gibbor. Any one 
acquainted with Hebrew, if asked irrelatively of any con- 
text, "what is the meaning of the words 'El Gibbor?" 
would answer at once, Mighty God; just as one, acquaint- 
ed with Latin, would answer, that ! " Deus Omnipotehs " 
means,/ " God' Almighty/ 5 There is no more real' doubt 
atoimt" the one than about- the other. '' Had sby Hebrew 
writer wished to express might only, he could have been 

! 4 >Is.-ix.S. Heb. 6Eng.' -> -f- -:....= ..,-,.- , - ? ; .. r ,, 
5 Ezekjxxxi. 11. It occurs once also in the plural, Ib. xxxu.:2h-tryi33t<)]&j 
where 23 MSS have ^w. See Fiirst. Cone. p. 48, 9. : 

7 Gesen. Thes. p. 48. ji'^jj ^x, Gen. xiv. 18, 19, 20, 22. Ps. Ixxviu. 35. i ^ 
Genvxvii. 1. &c. NJJJ Vs, Ex.xx.5. jaoj-inm^ Ex. xxxiy. 6. Jriw'yna^Deut. 
vii. 21. "o ^ Jos. m. 10. Vna ^ Ps. xcr. 3. nsfiW? "?x Is. xlv. 15. j3is ^ Ib. 21. 
as here niaa !?x. And so tyinjpri "jxri Is. v. 16. ]Dpj ^>xrr Deut. vu. 9. &c. 
8 tiby , in ?*, ^V s^g. ... . s'x. 21.': 

ii 2 " ' 



484 Isaiah's prophecy that from David's line in low estate 

at no loss to do so, without taking words, belonging to 
God alone. It would then have been simply misleading, 
to have used those words at all, unless the prophet had 
used them in their simple meaning. And this, not in a 
matter of slight moment, but. in one touching the centre 
of the faith. The Jewish people was a witness to the 
Unity of God the Creator. The doctrine of the Trinity 
enlarges the doctrine of the Unity, by revealing fully 
that, of which indications only were given in the Old 
Testament, the mode of the existence of the One God. 
The doctrine of the Trinity being true, it is in accor- 
dance with all God's other ways of teaching the Jews, 
that He should have gradually prepared men's minds 
for the full revelation of the doctrine. No one, who 
believes the doctrine, doubts that these passages are to be 
understood in their plain grammatical sense. No one, 
who had not a repugnance to the doctrine contained in 
them, would hesitate for a moment about it. Those 
who, because they disbelieve that doctrine, resort to vio- 
lent expedients of explaining away the obvious sense of 
the words, have to suppose, that prophets of God taught 
in words which, in their only natural sense, contradicted, 
according to them, the central doctrine as to the Being 
of God. 

The passage does not stand alone in Isaiah. It is 
nearly connected with that announcement of the Virgin- 
Birth of Him, of Whom it is said, l she shall call His Name 
'Emmanuel, God with us. 

In the prophecy of the rule of Him Who should spring 
from the house of David when laid even with the ground, 
the sucker from its hewn stump 3 , Isaiah describes Him 

1 vii. 14. 

2 Jfl| (xi. 1.) is the " hewn stump," according to etymology, usage, and tra- 
dition, jru and ya, differing only by the omission of the sibilant in ?, survived 
in Hebrew ; jru only in the verb and in two or three proper names in Num- 
bers and the Judges, (oini, jijrw, '4Jna,) yii only in the noun. Both occur, as 
verbs, in Arabic, jru, " amputated," yu, specifically of the "hewing off wood 
from a tree." (Cast.) In Job xiv. 8, yn is the " hewn stump" which may yet 
revive and shoot forth. "There is hope to the tree, if it be cut down, and 
it shall yet put forth, and its sucker shall not fail. Though its root wax old 



should issue One, using Divine power. 485 

as exercising Divine power. On His will hangs the life 
and breath of His creatures. By His word they were 
created ; at His word the ungodly perish. s ffe shall smite 

in the earth, and its stump (tyja) die in the ground, through the scent of wa- 
ter it shall shoot, and hring forth boughs like a plant;" (yoj, a tree freshly 
planted.) In Is. xl. 24, the term, DJJIS, must necessarily be a part of the tree. 
For the mighty, (as so often in Scripture,) is compared, in the different like- 
nesses, to the tree itself. " They are not planted, (like a young tree,) yea, 
they are not sown, (like a seedling,) yea, their stump shall not shoot forth root 
in the earth." They themselves would be the stem, and this had just been 
mentioned. The tyBj " are planted," corresponds to the yaj, " like a plant," in 
Job : the Djjia, " their stump," to the tyu, " its stump." It is a frequent con- 
trast in Scripture, that the mighty shall neither prosper, (like the fresh plant,) 
nor recover their fall, (like the sucker from the stump.) In the context, 

the yn Is. xi. 1. corresponds with the 07$, which had just preceded, Is, x. 33. 
They are the two forms of the root, by which, in Hebrew, the action "hewing" 
and the " thing hewn," " the stump," are expressed. It is a continuation of 
the metaphor, and the common contrast in Scripture, that the mighty shall be 
brought low, the lowly exalted. " Lo, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, loppeth 
the bough with terror, and the high of stature are hewn down, (oyji) and the 
lofty shall fall and He shall cut down the thickets of the forest with the iron, 
and .Lebanon shall fall by a Mighty one ; and a rod shall shoot forth from the 
stump of Jesse, and a Branch shall shoot forth oxit of his root." The image 
of a chance shoot from the stem, while yet standing, is also unseemly. Such 
can but come to nothing, at best weakening and disfiguring the tree. From 
the hewn stump, which has vitality, a strong tree will shoot forth. As such 
a sucker, the Messiah is spoken of, both here (xi. 10.) and in Is. liii. 2. The 
mention of Jesse, " the stump of Jesse," belongs to the lowest estate of his line. 
The book of Ruth mentions its more prosperous condition in the time of Boaz. 
Eliab, Jesse's son, speaks of " those few sheep in the wilderness," (1 Sam. 
xvii. 28.) which yet were his father's whole flock, (Ib. xvi. 19. xvii. 15,) and 
David speaks of himself as " a poor man and lightly esteemed." (Ib. xviii. 23.) 
Amos had already foretold the coming of the Messiah, when the tabernacle of 
David should be fallen ; (see on Amos ix. 1 1. p. 223,4.) and Micah indicated 
the same, when he foretold His birth at Jesse's little village Bethlehem. (See 
on Micah v. 2.) Aq. Symm. Theod. render Kopfubs, and Kimchi says, " The tree 
which is cut down, and its root is left in the earth, is called yn." Is. xi. ] . is 
quoted in connection with the preceding x. 34, in the Talmud Jerus. Beva- 
choth f. 5. 1. (in Mart. Pug. fid. f. 279. Lightfoot Hor. Hebr. on S. Matt. ii. 1. 
Schottg. de Mess. p. 529.) in the Sanhedrin f. 93. 2. (in Schottg. ad loc.) in the 
Midrash Tillim on Ps. 72, 1. (Mart. f. 603.) the Bereshith Rabba on Gen. 
xxxviii. 18. xlix. 8. (in Schottg.) Tanchuma in Yalkut Shim. i. p. 247. (Ib.) 
as also in Rashi and Abarb. Subsequent verses of c. xi. are quoted of the Mes- 
siah in the Zohar also, and Sanhedrin ; xi. 4, is quoted in the Midrash Tillim 
on Ps. ii. 2, Midrash Ruth rabba, Pesikta rabb. f. 63, 1, (Sch. ad loc?) Tan- 
chuma, (Sch. p. 77.) Zohar chadash. (Ib. 137.) 3 Is. xi. 4. 



486 - Miccth's'and Zechariah's prophecies' 

the earth with the rod of His mouth, and with the breath 
of His lips shall He slay theivicked. St. Paul describes 
in words, slightly varied, from them, the destruction of 
Anti-Christ. ^Then shall that WicJted he revealed, whom 
the Lord shall consume ivith the , spirit of His mouth and 
shall destroy with the brightness of His Coming. 

Micah, the contemporary of Isaiah, prophesied the birth 
of the Ruler at Bethlehem, as Isaiah had foretold His birth 
in low estate. He too contrasts the going forth in time to 
be the Ruler of Israel with the going forth from of old, 
from the days of eternity* ; teaching not a prseexistenee 
only, but an existence before all time, in eternity 3 . 

Two out of the three prophets after the Captivity con- 
tain the same doctrine. It is God Almighty Who says, 
I will pour Upon the house of David and upon the inhabi- 
tants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace andsu2)pUcdtion,ai\d. 
Who adds, in words following at once, they shall look upon 
Me Whom they have pierced. But to pour out the Spirit, 
issuing in and producing grace and supplication, is plain- 
ly a Divine act, God alone having the sovereign power 
over the heart, alone the powjjr to give the Spirit and 
to work in the heart grace and supplication. When Ze- 
chariah prophesied, the Jews were familiar with that 
great prophecy in Joel 4 , in which God speaks of the future 
outpouring of the Spirit, I will pour out My Spirit upon 
all flesh, as the signal act of Divine power and grace. 
Here He foretells that same outpouring of the Spirit, and 
that, as a fruit of it, they should gaze earnestly on Him- 
self Whom they pierced. Then, Zechariah prophesied 
thatHe, Whom theyfirst pierced and then penitently gazed 
on, was God. Unbelief, of course, must have its ways of 
escape. It has altered the text; it has ascribed to the 
Hebrew word, dakaru, a sense which it nowhere has; it 
has adopted unnatural constructions. Here again, each 
party concedes all the truth which it can afford. They, 
wliose way of escape has been to alter the text, have ad- 
mitted the genuine meaning of the Hebrew word ; they 

1 2*Thess. ii. 8. 2 v. 1. Heb. 2. Eng. 3 See further on Mic. v. 2. 

4 See on Joel ii. 28. p. 127-9. 



'of the Divinity of the Messiah. . 487 

who have evaded the truth by means of a non-natural 
rendering of one Hebrew word, admitted, as a matter of 
course, the genuine meaning of the other, or the correct- 
ness of the text. A full consent of all the Versions and 
the oldest MSS attests the correctness of the text ; an uni- 
form use of the Hebrew words throughout Holy Scripture 
attests, that their meaning, here, is that in which St. John 
quotes them, declaring the actual piercing of the Christ 5 . 
As Zechariah then, in this place, spoke of Him Who was 
wounded, as God, so, in another, alleged by our Lord of 
Himself, God speaks of the Shepherd Who was slain, as 
equal with Himself. 6 Awake, O -sword, against My Shep- 
herd, and against the Man that is My Fellow, saith the Lord 
of Hosts. The word rendered, My Fellow, (it has been ob- 
served 7 ,) was revived by Zechariah from the language of 
the Pentateuch. It was used 11 times in Leviticus, and 
then was disused. There is no doubt, then, that the word, 
being revived out of Leviticxis, is to be understood as in 
Leviticus. But in Leviticus it is used strictly of a fellow- 
man, one who is as himself. The places are, 8 Ifa soul 
sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord and lie unto 
his neighbour in a deposit &c. or have oppressed his neigh- 
bour. PFith the wife of thy neighbour thou shalt not lie 
carnally. 10 Yeshall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie (lit.) 
a man against his neighbour. ll Ye shall do no unrighte- 
ousness in judgment : thou shalt not respect the person of 
the' poor, nor honour the person of the mighty ; but in right- 
eousness thou shalt judge thy neighbour. J ? Thou shalt not 
hate thy brother in thine heart ; thou shalt in any tvise re- 
buke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him. ls lf 
a man cause a blemish in his neighbour, as he hath done, so 
shall it be done to him, u lf ye shall sell ought to'thy 
neighbour or buy from the hand of thy neighbour, oppress 
not (lit:) a man his brother ; According to the number of 

5 To avoid needless repetition, I reserve the details of proof for my Com- 
mentary on Zechariah, if God wills. 6 Zech. xiii. 7. 7 Hengst. Christ, 
iii. 529, SO. ed. 2. s Lev. v. 21. Heb. vi. 2. Eng. , 8 Ib. xviii. 20. 

10 Ib. xix. 11. u Ib. 15. 12 Ib. 17. where \hy, refers to ^ssy.,. as being 
masc. in meaning-, though fem. .in form. 13 Ib. xxiv. 19. u Ib.. xxv. 14, 15. 



488 Zech's. and Malachi's prophecies of the Divinity ofXt. 

the years after the jubilee, thou shall buy of thy neighbour. 
1 Ye shall not oppress (lit.) a man his neighbour. 

In all the cases, the ground of the injunction is, that 
the duty commanded, or the offence prohibited or pu- 
nished, relates to a fellow man. They are applications 
of the great law, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy 
self. " What, as a man, thou wouldest not have done to 
thee, do thou not." It is the law of our common huma- 
nity. The name designates, not one joined by friend- 
ship or covenant, or by any voluntary act, but one, unit- 
ed indissolubly by common bands of nature, which a 
man may violate, but cannot annihilate; which, when 
they are violated, turn to his condemnation, and God is 
offended, the common Father of His creatures. " 2 When 
then this title is employed of the relation of an indivi- 
dual to God, it is clear that that individual can be no 
mere man, but must be one, united with God by an uni- 
ty of Being. The Fellow of the Lord is no other than 
He Who said in the Gospel, 3 / and My Father are one, 
and Who is designated as, 4 the Only Begotten Son, Who 
lay in the Bosom of the Father. The word, it seems, was 
especially chosen, as being used, in the Pentateuch, only 
in the laws against injuring a fellow man. The prophet 
thereby gives prominence to the seeming contradiction 
between the command of the Lord, Awake, O sword, 
against My Shepherd, and those of His own law, whereby 
no one is to injure his fellow. He thus points out the 
greatness of that end, for the sake of which the Lord re- 
gards not that relation, whose image among men He 
commanded to be kept holy. To speak after the manner 
of men, He draws attention to the greatness of the sa- 
crifice, whereby 5 Jfe spared not His own Son, but freely 
gave Him up for us all. The word Man forms a sort 
of contrast with My Fellow. He, Whom the sword is to 
reach, must unite the Human Nature with the Divine. 3 ' 

On yet a third place in Zechariah 6 I will only say 

1 Lev. xxv. 17. 2 Hengst. Christ, iii. 530. 3 S. John x. 30. 

4 Ib. i. 18, 5 Rom. viii. 32. 

6 Zech. xi. More fully, I hope, in.my Comm. See Hengst. Christol. iii. 410 



Daniel's prophecy of. Him, as Man yet more than man. 489 

here, that it is Almighty God Who says, I will feed the 
flock, Who with authority deposes the three shepherds 
who abused their office j it is He Who said, give Me 
My. price., and, when the thirty pieces were given, spoke 
of it as the price at which He Himself was valued. The 
Lord said unto me, Cast it unto the potter, the goodly price 
that I was priced at. 

Malachi, lastly, gives to the Christ the Name, the Lord, 
which belongs to God only. The ungodly Jews longed 
for an interference of God in their behalf. Where, they 
said, is the God of judgment ? Behold 1 , is the well-known 
answer, I ivill send My messenger, and he shall prepare 
the ivay before Me, and the Lord, Whom ye seek, shall sud- 
denly come to His temple, even the Messenger of the cove- 
nant, Whom ye delight in; where the coining of God to His 
own temple and that of the Messenger of the covenant, 
s the Mediator of the new covenant, is one and the same. 
Our Lord Himself marks the identity, when He says of 
St. John Baptist; 9 This is he of ivhom it is written, Behold 
I send My messenger before Thy face, which shall prepare 
Thy ivay before Thee. 

Daniel does, certainly, foretell of the Christ, that He 
should be Man and yet more than man. One like a son 
of man. He speaks of Him, not as before His Birth, nor 
in His days on earth, but, as He is now, since His Ascen- 
sion, at the Right Hand of God. He speaks of Him, not 
as " to come," but as already come 10 , His life on earth 
past ; (for on earth only could He have become a Son of 
man ;} His days of humility ended ; not coming from 
Heaven, but ascended to Heaven, and receiving all power 
in heaven and earth, which, He said on earth, was given 
to Him on His Resurrection. We see, in act, what was 
said in words in David's Psalm, which Jesus quoted as 
written of Himself, n The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou 
on My Right Hand until I make Thine enemies Thy foot- 

sqq. Dr Me Caul Obss. appended to his translation of Kimchi on Zech. p. 132. 
sqq. 1 Mai. iii. 1. " The Lord whom ye seek," " This is king Messiah, 

and He is also the Angel of the covenant." Kimchi. 8 Heb. ix. 15 

9 S. Matt. xi. 10. S. Luke vii. 27. 10 vii. 13. Ps. ex. See ab. p. 465-70. 



490 Daniel and the rest prophesied alike the same truth. 

stool. We see that everlasting dominion given to Him, 
which has now been acknowledged for above 1800 years ; 
we behold Him, receiving the beginnings of that homage, 
which has been rendered to Him ever since, and shall be 
rendered to Him for ever, that l all peoples, nations, and 
languages should serve Him. But this prophecy of Da- 
niel, although clear in itself, and understood both by the 
Jewish 3 and the Christian Church, is not, in the least, 
clearer than those other prophecies. It is arbitrary to 
select the one passage of Daniel, as clearly containing the 
doctrine of the superhuman Being of the Messiah ; then, 
on the a priori ground that Prophets and Psalmists could 
not have meant it, to reject that meaning in other places, 
where it is not a whit less clearly stated ; and, finally, to 
raise an argument upon the assumed omission of the doc- 
trine in the other Prophets and Psalmists and its men- 
tion by Daniel 3 , that the book of Daniel must be consi- 
derably later than they, because he believed what, in the 
literal meaning of their words, they believed also- The 
grammatical meaning of the words is as plain in the other 
Prophets and in the Psalms as in Daniel. The argument 
also tacitly assumes, not only the absence of any true re- 
velation under the Old Testament, but the mere humani- 
ty of our Lord. For, our Lord being God, then, accord- 
ing to their own witness, the author of the book of Daniel 

1 . 14. 

2 There is a remarkable agreement of different Jewish Schools, that the Son 
of Man, Dan. vii. 13. is the Messiah, much as they shrink from the prophecy 
of the 70 weeks. "This is king Messiah." Zohar (Parasha Toledoth col. 338. 
Sultzb. in Eisenm. Entd. Jud.ii.756.) Rashi. " This is Messiah our righteous- 
ness," Saadia, (comparing with it Ps. ex. 1.) "who shall come into the Pre- 
sence of God," Ibn Yech. adds. Eisenm. quotes even Aben Ezra, as saying 
tr&sn toa,though in the present copies he explains it of the Jewish people. Mar- 
,tini Pug. Fid. P. ii. i. 13. f. 352, quotes from him; " R, Yeshuah said that this, 
(Who was) 'like the Son of Man,' is the Messiah, and the saying is right." . (jun 
inn) Add theTseror Hammor (Mart. p. 214.) the Midrash Tillim, on Ps. ii. 2." 
comparing Ps. ex. (Mart. f. 423.) " R. Berachiah in the name of, R. Samuel," 
in Midrash Tillim on Ps. xxi. 7. (Mart. f. 504. 517.) See also Bereshith R. on 
Gen. xxviii. 10. (ab.p. 84.) Tanelroma (ib.) Sanhedrin, Chelek(ib.)Be,vesh. R. 
on Gen. xlix. 11. (Mart. f. 656.) Bammidbar R. sect. 13. f. 200, 1. (in- Schottg. 
de Mess. iv. p. 63.) - 3 " Here he is presented in a higher aspect than 
in any of the prophets ; a heavenly being or messenger." Day. iii. 177. 



He foretold the Second^Coniing of Xt. apart from /zme.491 

truly prophesied (to say the least) His superhuman Na- 
ture. They also assume, either the non-credihility of the 
Gospels, or (God forgive it) error in our Lord Himself, 
since He quoted that description of His Divinity and 
Power over all, as fulfilled in Himself. The wound is 
aimed at Daniel, through the Redeemer's Side. 

ii. The statement as to " 4 the definite succession of 
judgment, resurrection, appearing of the Messiah," is am- 
biguous. If it were meant, that the second Coming of 
Christ was to follow upon the judgment upon Anti-Christ, 
and that then would be the general resurrection, this 
would be the same as St. Paul also taught 5 , and would be 
true. But then it could be no argument against the ge- 
nuineness of the book of Daniel, except on the assumption 
of the falsehood of both. Lengerke, like the Jews, con- 
founded the second Coming with the first, himself disbe- 
lieving both. " 6 We must naturally think, in conformity 
with the parallel places 7 , that, at this time, the reign of 
the Messiah was to burst in. But the author conceives, 
as connected' with this, the Judgment as well as the Re- 
surrection, as in Isaiah 8 ." Now, first, if these events do 
stand so connected in Isaiah, and no critic dreams of 
placing the chapter of Isaiah later than the close of the 
Captivity, how is their being so connected in Daniel, to 
be a proof that the book is later than the times of Dani- 
el ? But, secondly, the statement is not true. The great 
"last things" are predicted in Daniel, independently of 
time. In c. xii. after the prediction of the last troubles 
of Anti-Christ^ the Resurrection is foretold ; but the Judg- 
ment and the Second Coming of our Lord are not spoken 
of there. In c. vii. the presence of our Lord in heaven, 
as the Son of Man, is predicted, but not His actual Coin- 
ing to judge, although the judgment on Anti-Christ is 
thrice spoken of 9 . The fact, if true, would be irrelevant, 
except on the assumption of the falsehood of the state- 
ments in St. Paul ; since what, being true, could be known 

Leng.p.lxix. . 5 2 Thess. ii. 2-8. 6 p, 564. the place referred 

to in proof of the assertion, p. Ixix. 7 "vii. 14. comp. 11. and ix. 24." 

8 " xxvi. 19. comp. i-4. 9." 9 vii. 11. 22. 26. ' '' ' 



492 The belief of man's immortality lay 

to St. Paul by revelation only, might equally have been 
made known to Daniel. 

iii. But, apart from the order of these events, we are 
told that " l in DaniePs time they did not yet think of the 
Resurrection ; " and, in order to account for the reception 
of the doctrine of the Resurrection from the Parsees, it 
is assumed that " 3 it was first received by the Jews who 
remained behind in the Captivity and who lived in an at- 
mosphere altogether filled with this doctrine, and at last 
passed from the Eastern Jews to the Jews, as Jewish/' 
The truth is nearly the reverse, that the doctrine of the 
Resurrection, i. e, of the body, as distinct from a continued 
existence of the soul after the death of the body, was not 
known to the Zoroastrians until after the Christian era, 
and was borrowed by them, together with much besides, 
from the Christians. 

Man's creation for immortality was, according to Holy 
Scripture, contained in the history of his creation. Adam 
knew it. His creation in the image of God, after His 
likeness 3 , in itself involved his immortality. All created 
good is some reflex of its archetype in the Infinity of its 
Maker's mind. Man alone, of all created things in this 
our world, was formed in the image and likeness of Him- 
self. He bore in himself that, for which, when it had been 
defaced by the fall, he has been reborn in Christ, * the 
image of the heavenly. But in that he was created in 
the image of God, he must needs have in himself created 
gifts, corresponding to the all-perfect attributes of God. 
Man had then, as endowments wherewith he was created, 
reason, intelligence, imagination, beauty of soul, justice, 
goodness, righteousness, love, immortality, as a sort of 

J Berth. Einl. iv- p. 1540. 

2 Herzf. Geseh. Isr. ii. 309. Earlier rationalism asserted that the Jews bor- 
rowed the doctrine of the resurrection from Parsism during the captivity, soe. g. 
Ges. on Is. xxvi. 19. p. 805. Davidson follows these ; on Ezekiel, iii. 150. How 
the Jews in Northern Assyria in the time of Ezekiel should have come in con- 
tact with Parsism, or the Jews in Babylonia until the very end of the cap- 
tivity, these writers do not explain. The argument against Daniel, of course, 
falls through, since, if the Jews knew the doctrine in the captivity, its men- 
tion in Daniel can be no argument, that he did not write during the captivity. 

3 Gen. i. 26, 27. 4 1 Cor. xv. 49. 



in the history both of his creation and his fall. 493 

created reflection of the infinite Wisdom, Beauty, Good- 
ness, Justice, Righteousness, Eternity of Eternal Love, 
which is God. Every thing else may in the end be lost; 
every gift of grace, even the capacity of grace, may in 
the end be obliterated ; every thing good, wherewith he 
was endowed, may be forfeited for ever, in the endless 
separation from God in hell. Immortality alone must 
remain ; and man is conscious of his immortality, be- 
cause immortality is of the essence of his being. Thence 
doubtless is that almost inextinguishable belief of his 
own immortality, however perverted the forms of that 
belief may have often become. 

And when he fell, and the image of God was defaced 
in him and His likeness was obscured, the sentence pro- 
nounced upon him at once implied, that death was not 
his original portion, and that God willed to restore him to 
life. In that sentence, 5 until thou return unto the 
ground, for out of it wast thou taken ; for dust thou art, 
and unto dust shalt thou return, it lay, that even his body 
was not originally formed to be dissolved. For the death 
of the body would not have been pronounced as the sen- 
tence on his sin, had it been God's purpose for him if 
he had not sinned. The truth of the Apostle's words, 6 by 
one man sin entered into the ivorld and death by sin ; and 
sodeathpassed upon all men, for that all have sinned, lay 
in the sentence of God upon Adam. And so, again, that 
first Gospel, the promise of the Seed of the woman 7 who 
should bruise the serpent's head, in itself implied man's 
immortality. For the victory over the serpent would not 
have been complete, unless man had been restored to what 
he was before. It would have been nothing to him, had 
he not been immortal. What of Adam was earthy re- 

6 Gen. Hi. 19. 

6 Rom. v. 12. St. Paul is speaking only of the death of man, as the fruit of 
sin, as is plain from the addition, " and so death passed upon all men &c." 
The objection then of some geologists, that death was antecedent to the exis- 
tence of man, is plainly, in any case, irrelevant. Not but that, since angels 
fell before the creation of man, death may have first existed, and that, even on 
this our earth, in consequence of sin. Only it is not contained in the Apostle's 
statement, which relates to man only. 7 Gen. iii. 15. 



494BeMefin immortality in history^ of the Patriarchs, and 

turned to the earth, and no redemption was wrought, no 
victory was won. Then, since God's word is true, its 
accomplishment lay beyond, arid Adam, for whom it was 
to be wrought, still lived, though unseen. 

This belief was expressed by the Patriarchs, as St. Paul 
developes their meaning *, when they said that they were 
strangers and pilgrims on the earth. The saying was 
applied in the law, that each generation had but a life- 
hold property in the promised land. 2 The land is Mine ; 
for.ye axe strangers and sojourners with Me. The much- 
containing phrase, "sojourners with God," itself lived 
on. David took up the word 3 . It still expresses our 
Christian hopes ; we use his words in parting for a while 
from those whom we love. For they, who are sojourners 
ivtth God here, undoubtedly abide with Him for ever* 
The term in itself expresses, that they who used it look- 
ed for a better country, their everlasting home with Him, 
with Whom they now were sojourners. So David, in 
the same Psalm, confessing man's frail condition at his 
best estate here, owned forthwith, where his own longing 
expectation lay. 4 And now, what look I for, O Lord? 
my longing. expectation is to Thee. 

The doctrine of life after death lay, for thoughtful minds, 
in the contimied relation of God to the Patriarchs, expres^ 
sed in: the title, 5 I am the God of thy father, the God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, by which 
God revealed Himself anew to Israel in Egypt. For our 
Lord would riot have blamed the Sadducees so severely, 
6 ye therefore do greatly err, unless, through their own 
fault, they had remained ignorant of what they might 
have known; God, our Saviour adds, in explanation of 
its meaning, ^'s not the God of the dead, but of the living. 
He said not, I have been, but " I am the God of Abra- 
ham 7 " &c. God, (it lay in the words,) took no transient 

1 Heb. xi. 13. from Gen. xxiii. 4. xlvii. 9. 

Lev. xxv. 23. 3 1 Chron. xxix. 15. Ps. xxxix. 12. 4 Ps. xxxix. 7- 
; Ex. iii. 6. 15. 16. ir. 5. 6 S. Mark xii. 27. 

: 1 St. Mark follows the original in omitting the am, but the present relation 
is expressed by- the force of the terms, 'I the God of Abraham." The sim- 



in God's declaring Himself their God, after their death. 495 

care of those who were His ; He, the Unchangeable, could 
not be named from His relation to something so fleeting 
as man's visible existence here ; He, the All-Good, did not 
enter into a relation to His creature, only, of His own ac- 
cord, Himself unforsaken, to end it; He, the self-commu- 
nicating, the Fountain of life, did not leave without some 
portion of His life, those with whom He deigned to stand 
in so close communion ; they, who lived to Him, lived in 
Him and by Him, and they who lived by Him, could not 
wholly die: so then Abraham, the real Abraham, could 
hot be simply that form of earth which was to return to 
the earth, although that also was a part of Abraham, and 
therefore in the fact of the life of Abraham was involved 
not only a continuance of life after death, but a resurrec- 
tion from the dead. God would not be called the God 
of the fishes of the sea or of the fowls of the air, or of any 
of His irrational creation, although they were all the work 
of His hands and He preserves them all, nor the God of 
the wicked, although He was yet merciful to them, since 
one day they would cease to have any portion of Him and 
had now withdrawn themselves from Him ; but only of 
His saints and of the Holy hosts of heaven. His interest 
in those whom He loves continued still after they were 
gathered to their fathers, and was continued on to their 
children ; yet He took not an interest in that which was 
not. All this, and far more, lay in those deep, simple, 
words, "I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the 
God of Jacob." 

The belief in reunion after death lies also in the va- 
ried expressions of the association of the soul by death 
with those who had gone before. It was said first, in the 
foz'm of a promise, 8 tfiou shalt go to thy fathers in peace. 
Of Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, it is said, he ^was 
gathered unto his people, words which do not intend a 
reunion of the bodies in a common burial-place; for Abra- 
ham was not buried with his fathers, nor was Ishmael 10 ; 

pie copula is not, and cannot be expressed in Hebrew ; but the past or future 
.would have been expressed. * Gen. xv. 15. 

? Ib. xxv. 8, 17. xxxv. 29. xlix. 33. ' Ib. xlk. 31. 



496 Belief in man's immortality in histories 

and Jacob speaks of it as something distinct from his 
burial, l l am gathered unto my people; bury me with my 
fathers. It means also more than a common lot of death. 
It speaks of the " I," and of a congregation, into which 
each " I" should be received, the assembly of those, who 
had been parted with out of sight for a time, but with 
whom, through death, he should be joined. David's com- 
fort of himself, as to his child, 2 / shall go to him, implies 
the same belief of personal reunion. The later language, 
he * slept with his fathers, contained the same truth. 

TJhe impression made by the history of Enoch, that God 
took him *, is marked by the repetition of the word as to 
the ascension of Elijah 5 . The same word expressed the 
faith of the Psalmists, the sons of Korah and Asaph, and 
the faith, so expressed, entered thenceforth into the public 
worship. From the time of David, Israel drank in that 
faith in their devotions. " 6 The rule of prayer was the 
rule of faith." They confessed it, as we do, in their prayers 
to God, and what we confess with our lips God works in- 
to our heart, by the gifts of faith and of certain knowledge. 

The subject of the 49th Psalm is the different lot of the 
brutish who live for this world, as if it were their ever- 
lasting dwelling-place, and that of those whose portion is 
God. As to both, the Psalmist sees beyond the grave ; 
the worldling living, in his thoughts, by a sort of posthu- 
mous immortality 7 , but in vain. s No brother can indeed 
redeem a man, or make agreement unto God for him. They 
are 9 laid together in the stall of the grave, Avith death for 
their shepherd. But what man could not do for himself, 

1 Gen. xlix. 29. So also as to Abraham xxv. 9. and Issac xxxv. 29. 

2 2 Sam. xii. 23. 3 1 Kgs. ii.10, &c. 4 Gen. v. 24. tofc r$. 
. 5 2 Kgs. ii. 3. 5. Oi& add 9. 10. 

c " ut legem credendi lex statuat supplicandi." S. Celestine Ep. ad Episc. 
Gall. viii. Cone. iii. 475. ed. Col. 7 Ps. xlix. 11. 

8 Ib. 7, 8. B>'!< .TIB; rh$ S' 1 ? ns. The nx is placed emphatically at the beginning. 
The idiom is wholly different from the common, vn$ '!<, " a man, his brother," 
i. e. one another. The construction here brings out the relation of the n$, "a 
brother," i. e. "one, who is merely a brother, cannot pay that great ransom," 
(the/orceof theemphatic ."n?: rns) " for a man, and give to GWhis redemption." 
When then it follows, " God shall redeem my soul," (the same word >TJ9;) it 
follows, that it is altogether a different kind of redemption. 9 Ib. 14. 



Enoch and Elijah. Psalm xlix. Ixxiii. ' 497 

God would. God will redeem my soul from the hand of 
the grave; for He will receive me 10 . The grave had a claim 
upon him ; God would "redeem" him. He seems to hint 
at mysteries which he does not speak. We know how 
God willed to redeem from the potver of the grave ; but the 
result he expresses ; "for He will receive me," i. e. to Him- 
self. So far the two classes are separated; the world- 
lings will be with. Death for their shepherd, the godly 
will be with God. But the Psalmist seems also to speak of 
a meeting of the righteous and the wicked after this first 
severance, a Morning yet to come after the night of death, 
the great Resurrection-morning, " the Morning" which 
has no evening ; when there shall be the great public 
reversal of men's judgments ; the righteous shall have 
dominion over them. Then, they, not the wicked, should 
have the preeminence. 

Yet more marked is the 73rd Psalm, because the pros- 
perity of the ungodly had taken more hold of the Psal- 
mist 11 , and because it was in the Sanctuary of God that 
he found his answer. The end of the ungodly is evil, sud- 
den destruction 13 ; and that end, like that of Korah, Da- 
than, and Abiram, coming upon an evil life, is the earnest 
of an evil hereafter. If this life were all, it were all one, 
how it ended. The Psalmist saw, beyond, the contempt 
to which they should awaken. l *As a dream when one 
awaketh, O Lord, in the Aioaltening^ thou shalt despise 
their image, their vain unsubstantial being, since it was 
void of God ; a vain show, " full of sound and fury, signi- 
fying nothing." What God despises must be full of con- 
tempt; and so Asaph forestalls DaniePs words, some shall 
rise to shame and everlasting contempt. On the other 



10 Again TO Ib. 16. (Heb. 15 Eng.) Ps. Ixxiii. 2-4. 

12 Ib. 17. ib. 18j !9. H Ibt 20i 

15 Tj$ for I'vn?, on the same principle as the ordinary future is formed VtJj?! 
for V'apo;, ,and in common nouns, f$? for n$3?- I n tne Inf. Hif. the contrac- 
tion is more frequent with !?, on account of its more frequent use and closer 
union with the verb, but it occurs with a also, iB>j/3. Neh. x. 39, in Nif. 'ity*? 
Pr. xxiv. 17. See Gesi Lehrg. 94. 3. p. 320. Ewald ausf. Lehrb. 244 b. 
p. 535. ed. 6. ^ D an- K & 2 . 

Kk 



4Q8dsaphknew that the godly wd\ dwell for ever with God. 

hand, he sums up the past, present, future of the godly. 
I am continually ivith thee ; Thou hast holden me by my 
right hand, Thou shalt guide me by Thy counsel, and, af- 
ter, receive me 1 into glory. The after, when God's gui- 
dance is past, can he no other than the great hereafter : 
the word, receive me, is the appropriated term for our, 
"take unto Himself/' But the ground of this assurance 
lies deeper than the assurance itself. And so it sheds 
its light over much of Holy Scripture besides. Its 
ground is that same ground which our Lord pointed out 
in the title, " God of Abraham." God was the Psalmist's 
own God, and eo He could not fail him. All which God 
had been to him, all which He was, He must be for ever. 
For He is unchangeable. It is an inner revelation, such 
as Heathenism could not know, because it could not know 
of union with God, that God could make Himself belong to 
the soul, as He had made the soul His own. Whom have I 
in heaven? None had he, save God. But then God, in 
all that wide heaven, was his. And with Thee, together 
with Thee, and so, having Thee, I have no delight on earth. 
In God he had all, and so he desired nought besides. But 
then He who was so his, must be his for ever. My flesh 
and my heart faileth, i. e. though flesh and heart be con- 
sumed, nay, he speaks of them as consumed already, God 
is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever. For 
ever! Not then for this little span of life only. Union 
with God is a pledge of immortality. But then every 
child of Israel, who had learnt the truth of that Psalm, 
2 O God, Thou art my God, had in him the assurance of a 
deathless unbroken unitedness with God. 

The like contrast of ithe future of those who choose this 
world, and that of those who choose God, for their por- 
tion, occurs in a Psalm of David, ,with Ahe.same reference 
to the Awakening, but in the calm self-possession of one 
who ^Icnows in Whom he has believed, a, Christian before 
Christ came. He grants that the worldly had their whole 
heart's desire. They were wren of (lit. from) the world* ; 

1 Again 'jrjivfi v. 24. 2 Ps. Ixiii. l. : 3 2Tim. i. 12. 

4 viol TOV aliavos TOVTOV, S. Luke xvi. 8. e'/c TOV ic6<rfiov rotrov. 8. John viii.23. 



. David knew .of the Beatific .Vision. 499 

they belonged 'to it, and it to them ; -their portion was in 
this life; God's choicest temporal treasures, His hidden 
store s , were theirs ; Hejllled their belly with them ; they 
tvere sated with children, and had a sort of posthumous 
existence in them,anda survival of their wealth, continued, 
at their will, to their descendants. In contrast to these, 
whose portion was in this life and in God's earthly gifts, 
David says, where his was. As for me, I shall behold Thy 
face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, in the Awakening, 
with Thy likeness. Satisfying is opposed to satisfying ; 
end to end, all to all. The portion of the worldly had been 
pursued to the utmost verge of this life, yea, and to all 
of this world} which they could in their imagination grasp, 
after their unwilling departure from it. And then there 
stands, in opposition to it, the short summary of David's 
whole portion; I shall behold Thy face ; I shall be satis- 
fadwith Thy likeness. David had, before, spoken of that 
beatific Vision, in contrast with the destruction of the 
wicked. The-uprigJvt shall behold His Face?. Here, 
alone, it is repeated, I shall behold Thy Face. This is ex- 
actly what God had said to Moses, that man could not 
see in the flesh and live^. God revealed Himself to Mo- 
ses more nearly than to others 9 . Yet God did not, for 
him, suspend the law of our mortality, that we cannot, 
in the flesh, behold God and live. David, in both places, 
says that it shall be hereafter, in the consummation of 
the righteous, as opposed to the consummation of the un- 
godly. Here, he says further, 'in the Aivakvning. It is 
the special term, used of the awakening from death, ei- 



6 Ps. xvii. 14. !)}<fls, as D'jis; Job xx. 26 ; D';tt> Deut. xxxlii. 19 ; and 
(God) ''stored up for," Ps. xxxi. 20, (19 Eng.) Prov. ii. 7; jy with ^ "stored 
by for," in God's Providence, Ib. xiii. 22 ; of evil, Job xxi. 19. 
" 6 D<:? lyaV' v. T4Vqp}P nJJ?'?'? -v.MS.' .' : 

7 Ps. xi. 7. The two places illustrate one another. On the other sideV " the 
face of the Lord " .is said to be " upon,'? i. e. turned in displeasure " upon evil- 
doers," (Ps.xxxiv. 16.) yet, not "the countenance" but "the eyes" are said 
to " behold." The renderings then, " His countenance doth behold the up- 
right," or "the thing which is right," are unidiomatic. 8 Ex. xxxiii. 20. 23. 

9 Num. xii. 8. 

Kk2 



500 "Awakening " is necessarily said of the body. 

ther for a time * or for ever ;?. And in that sight will be 
satisfying fulness. It is the beatific Vision. I shall le 
satisfied, in the Awakening, with Thy Likeness, or Form 3 . 
The worldly had their fulness in children ; he should have 
his, in the Form of God. 

The whole context, each expression, and the harmony 
with other Scripture, require it to be interpreted of the 
world to come. And then not of future life only, but of 
resurrection 4 , and, since of the resurrection, then of the 
body. 

Continued life and resurrection are incompatibles in the 
same subject. The soul lives on, sleeps not, continues 
its unbroken existence ; resurrection, awakening, belong 
to that which . was dead, asleep, the dust which had re- 
turned to dust. 

The 16th Psalm speaks yet more distinctly of the body, 
since it is a prophecy of the resurrection of the undecay- 
ed Body of Jesus. It expresses a certain future, which, 
every child of Adam knew, could not be directly fulfilled 
in himself; He, of whom he speaks, was to see the grave, 
but He was not to abide in it ; 

" Therefore My heart was glad, and My glory rejoiced, 

My flesh also shall rest securely ;" 
and the ground of this unanxious rest of the body is ; 

" For Thou wilt not leave My soul to Hell ; 

Neither wilt Thou suffer Thy Holy One to see corruption." 

The force of the words is strengthened by their bearing 
on each other. To " leave the soul to Hell," is, in He- 
brew as with us, to abandon it to its power 5 . The ground, 
why the flesh, as distinct from the soul, should "rest se- 
curely, " is this, "for it shall not be left to hell." It should 
rest securely ; for it was to be there but for a little while. 

1 2 Kings iv. 31. Jer. li. 39, 57. 2 Job xiv. 12. Is. xxvi. 19. Dan. xii. 12. 

3 ruiDiji corresponds to eTSos, S. John v. 37. or /top</>^, Phil. ii. 6. 

4 This is owned by R. Nehemiah in the Bereshith Rabba on Gen. iii. 23, 
(Mart. Pug. fid. f. 457) and by R. Rachmon in Rashi, and Rashi himself, (quot- 
ed ib. f. 682.) The quotation from Rachmon rests on Martini's MSS. 

5 as iii Job xxxix. 14 ; with W, Ib. 11 ; Nif. with *}, Is. xviii. 6; or, in the 
other sense of oiir "leave to," i. e. "bequeath to,'' Ps. xlix. 11 or ."leave for," 
Lev. six. 10. xxiii. 22. Mai. ii-. 19. [iv. 1. Eng.] In each case it is an "aban- 
donment to." 



Psalm 16. prophesies our Lord's Resurrection. 501 

And thereon follows eternal life, to which death is the en*, 
trance-hall; 

Thou shalt make me know the path of life ; 
In Thy Presence is satisfying fulness of joy, 
At Thy Right Hand are pleasures for evermore. 
Even apart from the distinct words, " Thou shalt not 
suffer Thy Holy One 6 to see corruption 7 ," the whole con- 

6 De Rossi counts 158MSS.ofKennicottandl83collatedbyhimself,inall271 
MSS., which read iron " Thy holy One ; " and 40 editions, some of the 15th, 
most of the 16th cent. All the old versions render so. He quoted also Tal- 
mud Bab., Midras Tehillim, Yalkut Simeoni, and, of later Jews, " Kimchi, Ara- 
ma, Aben Sohev, Aben Yachia, Joseph Chivcln, Alshech and others in their 
published Comm. and R. Imman-uel in his MS. Comm." The MSS., both Kenn. 
and De Rossi affirm to be the best, although De Rossi states, that there are 
"even ancient Spanish MSS., one of Toledo A. 1277 and one A. 1413 Hillel. 
and a Neap. Psalter A. 1490 which have -p'on," (Scholl. Critt. p. 99.) Even 
when the plur. sprpn was brought into the printed editions, it was with the 
punctuation of the singular and the note, nw, " Yod is superfluous ; " so that 
it should be read fvon, " Thy holy one." In the MS. of the Arab, version of 
Saadia (Poc. 281 see my A. E. to Nicoll's Cat. p. 559, 60.) the old Hebrew 
text has Tvon, the ' being squeezed in, in a different and later ink. Saadias 
renders inconsistently, " holy ones," (plur.) but "see" (sing.) -p>aDWiK^ 
IN^N am T |N In Hunt 416, (see ib.) where this and other missing Psalms 
have been supplied in a different hand, the sing, occurs, 7^1 " thy friend." The 
whole context is of the sing. The plural is owing to Jewish anti-Christian 
controversy. " Very few MSS.," De Rossi says, "have the points of the plural." 

7 Tint? (Siarpdopa. LXX. Acts) is most naturally rendered corruption in Job 
xvii. 14. (where it stands parallel with fieri, " the worm,") and in Ps. Iv. 24, 
my? i!o^, " to the pit of corruption" or " destruction." Also in Ps. xlix. 10. 
ciii. 4. Jon. ii.7.it is probably "destruction." Hengstenberg's attempt to main- 
tain that S. Paul too may have taken n&?> in the meaning " pit," will not stand 
comparison with the text. (Acts xiii. 35-7.) No one could have argued so 
briefly ; " He saith, Thou shalt not suffer Thy Holy One to see the pit For Da- 
vid fell on sleep and was laid unto his fathers, and sawthepit. But He Whom 
God raised again saw not the pit," whereas, if the pit meant the grave, Jesus, 
as well as David, did see the pit, and the Burial of Jesus as well as His Resur- 
rection, is part of our faith, " He was crucified, dead, and buried." Hengst. 
tries to save himself from contradicting the Apostles by supposing that they 
used the original word in the sense, " pit," and that St. Luke substituted the 
LXX word " corruption," although wrong. This would any how have in- 
volved an unfaithful rendering of St. Paul's own words, (v. 34. 36. 37.) But 
Hengst. says ; "In the sense, in which David did, Christ saw not the grave, saw 
it not in the sense of the Psalmist." Had this been St. Paul's meaning, the 
supposed meaning of " see " must have been drawn out ; whereas, not in any 
given sense, but al^ether, St. Paul denies that of Jesus, which he affirms of 
David. This is one of the unhappy compromises in the later theories of one, 
who has done so much good service to the truth, which has drawn down on him 



502 Passages in y Pss. } implying belief in y e life Jo come. 

nection would be destroyed, if the verse were understood 
of a mere temporary deliverance from death. Everlasting 
life does not follow upon the mere delay of death, hut the 
freedom from death and corruption, in which the Psalmist 
rejoices, is an entrance to the fulness of joy in the 
everlasting vision of God. 

What was fulfilled in Christ redounds to us, for, for 
our sake, it. was fulfilled in Him. The Psalm relates to 
the Psalmist and to us, reflected back from Christ. 
What was accomplished perfectly in Him the Head, over- 
flows to us the members ; His resurrection was the source 
and the pledge of ours. So we believe, that God will not 
abandon our souls to hell. But Davidknew and impressed 
the more the belief in the resurrection, in that he set 
Him before his people, over Whom death had no power, 
and joyed in His joy, which He has made ours. 

Besides these passages in the Psalms, which directly 
express in words the belief in the life to come or the re- 
surrection, there is also much language which implies it. 
Look at the doings or gifts of God which, the early 
Psalms say, will be "for ever." ^ Your heart shall, live 
for ever j 3 Thou settest me before Thy face for ever; 
3 Thou gavest him length of days, for ever and ever. 
* Thou hast set him a Messing for ever. Or reciprocally ; 
5 1 trust in the tender mercy of God for ever and ever ; I 
will praise Thee for ever ; 6 / will give thanks unto Thee 
for ever ; or again, 7 the fear of the Lord endureth for ever. 
An immortality of praise implies an immortality of be- 
ing; the endless abiding of the reverence of God involves, 
that they too who so revere Him shall abide alway. 
Again, 8 In Thee is the fountain of life ; and in Thy light 

the praise of Dr. Williams, " even the conservatism of Hengst. is free and ra- 
tional, compared to" &c. Essays p. 67. The belief of the later Jews, on the 
ground' of this Psalm, that David's body did not decay, (see e. g."R. Isaac in 
Midr.' Tehillim ap. Mart. P. F. f. 681 .) is a strong proof of their interpretation. 
Perhaps St. Peter alluded to it, and corrected it,.'-' Let me freely speak unto 
you of the Patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried," &c. Acts ii. 29. 

1 Ps. xxii. 26. 2 Ib. xli. 12. ' 3 Ib. xxi. 4. 4 1$ 6. Ib. Hi. 8. 9. 

G Ib.xxx.i2. 7 Ib.xix. 9. Add Ib. lxi.5. D'b^fy the "ages all along" 
of the Veni Creator. " Ib.'xxx^. 9, :-..-.. .' 



General judgment Sf.y e 2nd death, spoken of in Psalms. 503 

shall we see light. What can it mean, but that, when we 
shall be plunged into that Ocean of Light which God is, 
all darkness shall cease; then, admitted to Himself, the 
Fountain of life, we shall .see in Him, what on earth we 
never saw, the true eternal Light ? What is this, but the 
vision of God? Or when a son of Korah says, lo this 
God is our God for ever and ever, He Himself 9 ivill be our 
guide over death 10 , what is death, but a mere point in our 
everlasting relation to Him, Over which He Himself, like 
a tender Shepherd n , leads us ? Or when, in the sight of 
the fruitlessness of all worldly pursuits and aims, he asks 
God to teach him his end 12 , what comfort was there to 
know his end, unless he saw therein what was beyond that 
end, even Him, of Whom in that same Psalm he says, my 
longing is for Thee ls f David's words express our Chris- 
tian hopes. We, whose hopes they express^, cannot think 
that they meant less to David, whose hope they first fed. 

David knew also of a judgment of the world 14 . But 
since the inhabitants of this world are ever in one flux, 
some going, others replacing them, a judgment of the 
world implied a resurrection of the world, the great 
meeting of all before the judgment-seat of God. 

David knew too of the second death, of a" Sheol," into 
which the wicked and they who forget God should be 
ast 15 . When then, under the sense of guilt, he says, i6 In 
death there is no remembrance of Thee, he speaks not of 
death only, but of the sentence after an evil death. At 
times, thirsting to advance the glory of God in this life, 
he desires life for the sake of that, for which the Chris- 

9 . 1 Ps. xlviii. 14. 

11 This is the simple meaning of n ty WJqj;. Death cannot be the end of the 
guidance of a shepherd, (JfiJ Gen. xxxi. 18. Ex. iii. 1. Ps. Ixxx. 2. Is. xi. 6. 
Ixiii. 14.) nor would God he our God for ever and ever, if death were a break 
in that His relation to usi The most literal rendering is the truest. It is 
not up to (ny,) but over fill). So also in v. 11 j the praise of God is not spoken 
of as reaching to the ends of the earth, exclusively of them, but overpassing 
them. So the Syr. renders " over death," and, in the same sense, Lxx. and 
St. Jer. " for ever ;" as though it were an in-egular plural, ntoVy. 

13 Ib. xxxix. 4. 13 gee ab> p . 494^ w p s _ j t 5 - Ki g XQvi 13> 

? 5 Ib. be. 18. (Heb.),lxiii. 9, comp. Ps.xlix. 21. Ixxxyiii. 10-12. *, Ps, vi. 5. 



504Distinct prophecy of the Resurrection of the flesh in Job; 

tian too desires it, because here is the scene of promot- 
ing that glory in others : whence Hezekiah says in the 
same contrast, l The living, the living, shall praise Thee, 
as I do this day ; the fathers to the children shall make 
known Thy truth. 

The great passage in the book of Job is a confession 
intended for all times : 

2 that my words were written, O that they were graven in a book, 
were cut with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever ! 

Their most literal translation is ; 

And I, I know that my Redeemer liveth ; 

And that, the last, He shall arise upon the dust ; 

And, after my skin 3 , they have destroyed this lady, 

And from my flesh I shall behold God, 

Whom I, I shall behold for myself, 

And mine eyes shall behold, and not another [lit. a stranger ;] 

My reins are cqnsumed within me. 

No doubtful meaning of any words can efface from the 
passage the doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh. 
Whether the dust mean the surface of the earth 4 , or the 
dust, into which the human body returns; whether the con- 
suming of the m'wsbe, (as elsewhere in Job 5 ,) their actual 
consumption, or whether it be an idiom, (although not 
occurring elsewhere 6 ,) expressing that his inmost self 

1 Is. xxxviii. 19. So Ps. xxx. 9. cxv. 17. cxviii. 17. 2 xix. 23-27. 

3 The two constructions, in which ira is taken as a conjunction, (1. after 
they have destroyed my skin, this shall be ; 2. after my skin, which they have 
destroyed, this shall be ;) interrupt the description, and would be very heavy 
and prosaic. The rendering, And after they have destroyed this my skin, 
joins a masc. and fern. TINT my. 

- 4 TSJ; occurs, 1) of the habitable surface of the earth, Job xli. 25. It is used 
also not merely of the dust, but of the solid earth, Job viii. 19. xiv. 8. Is. ii. 19. 
Elsewhere, the meaning of dust, friable earth, remains. 2) It is used of 
man's returning' to the dust, Gen. iii. 19. Job x. 9. xxxiv. 15. Eccl. iii. 20. 
xx. 7. to their dust, Ps. civ. 29. resting in the dust, Job xvii. 16. lying down 
in, Job vii. 21. xx. 11. xxi. 26. goers down to, Ps. xxii. 30. infiabiters of, Is. 
xxvi. 19. place in the dust of death. Ps. xxii. 16. Man is spoken of as dust, 
Ps. xxx. 10. ciii. 14. Eccl. xii. 7 ; dust and ashes, ISM T$J;. Gen. xviii. 27. 
But Dip with by signifies to " arise against," not, " with power over." 

5 n^sisusedof actual" consuming away;" Jobiv. 9, vii. 6, a cloud whichva- 
nisheth away,lb. 9; his flesh consumeth away, xxxiii. 21 ; and so also r^3, 
God destroyeth, ix. 22. and simply, they pass away, xxxvi. 1. 

6 The common expression, his eyes shall consume, (viz. with vain longing,) 



of our Lord's in Hosea; ofour's'in Hosea and Isaiah.5Q5 

was consumed with a longing for that day, this remains, 
that Job looked forward to a manifestation of his Re- 
deemer at the end, with .power, whether on the earth, or 
over his own dust specially ; that he knew that he himself 
for hiinself should gaze upon his God ; and that, after the 
destruction of his body, he shoiild, with the eyes of his 
flesh 7 , behold Him. 

The saying of Hosea, * After tivo days He ivill quicken 
us ; in the third day He .will raise us up and we shall live 
in His sight, is a continuation of this connection of the 
Head and His members. " 9 The strictest application is 
the' truest. The tw o days and the third day have nothing 
in history to correspond to them, except that, in which 
they were fulfilled, when Christ, ' 10 rising on the third 
day from the grave, raised with Him the whole human 
race. 3 " 

Hosea and Isaiah carry on tlie triumph over death and 
the grave, in terms so large and so absolute, that St. 
Paul had no greater words wherewith to conclude his so- 

occurs in Job xi. 20, xvii. 5, as in Ps. Ixix. 4. cxix. 82. 123. Jer. xiv. 6. Lam. iv. 
17, and in Piel, 1 Sam. ii. 33. Else, fhsis joined, in the sanie sense, -with the 
" soul, " 1's. Ixxxiv. 3. cxix. 81, and the " spirit," Ps. cxliii. 7 ; but does not, at 
least, happen to be used with " the reins." 

7 The rendering of ^Vf"? " without my flesh," adopted by Davidson, ii. 227, 
from Ewald, &e. is unidiomatic and unnatural, jo, can no more, of itself, mean 
" without," than our " from." Where we might render " without," the 
meaning is gained from the context. Job xi. 15, " thou shalt lift up thy face 
CIQD, from spot," i. e. as we say, " above," or " removed from ; " Mic. iii. G, 
" there shall be a night to you Jitna, from vision," i. e. liiding all vision from 
you. Jer. xlviii. 45,isbest rendered as in E.V. "because of the force." (Gesenius 1 
instances, Thes. p. 805.) Gen. xxvii. 39. is best rendered as in E. V. "Thy 
dwelling shall be of the fulness of the earth." Edom was rich once, Its de- 
solation is prophesied. (See on Joel iii. 19. p. 144.) Obad. 9, also," (as in E.V.) 
" from slaughter," as the cause. (See Ib. p. 239.) Is. xxii. 3, (also as in E. V.) 
"bound by the bow," i. e. by the archers, as 3 verses before, xxi. 17. (These are 
allEwald's instances, Ausf. Lehrb. 217b p. 480. ed. 6. p. 551 ed. 7.) On the 
contrary, " I shall behold, *iV?9> from my flesh," implies that he will be in the 
fiesh,from which he shall leJiM, as he goes on to speak of the eyes of his flesh. 
Unless he had meant emphatically to assert, that he should/rom JiisflesJi behold 
God after his body had been dissolved, the addition of "vj/SD had been not merely 
superfluous, but misleading. For the obvious meaning is "from out of my flesh," 
as the Versions shew. 8 Hos. vi. 2. ' 9 my Comm.-Ib. p. 38. 10 S. Jer. 



z/*' prophecy of the resurrection of the good 8f bad, 

lemn hymn of victory wherein he reverses, one by one, the 
temporary triumphs of the grave over our poor bodies, 
than the jubilant exultation of the two Prophets, ^Death 
is swallowed up in victory, O death, where is thy sting ? 
grave where is thy victory ? Hosea's words of triumph 
followed upon the most absolute declaration on the part 
of God, 2 1 will ransom them from the hand of the grave ; I 
will redeem them from deaili* The words of Isaiah go 
even beyond the resurrection. Death, the destroyer, is 
destroyed for ever. .-'.-.- 

All judgment is an earnest of the judgment to come; 
all deliverance, of the deliverance ;. and so Isaiah having, 
in -previous chapters, pronounced God^s judgments upon 
single nations, does, in the great prophecy, c. xxiv-xxvii, 
go beyond all particular judgments. The mention of the 
end of all earthly things fits in with the largeness of the 
other language. Three times in the prophecy he speaks 
of the end of all, 1) of that swallowing up of death ; 2) of 
the resurrection of the body ; 3) of judgment. 

In the prophecy of the resurrection, his words too agree 
with those of Daniel. 

3 Thy dead men shall live ; with my dead body (or, my dead bodies) 
shall they arise. 

Awake and jubilate, ye inmates of the dust; 

For Thy dew is like dew on herbs, 
And 'earth shall cast out the dead 4 . 

Isaiah, like Daniel* foretold the resurrection of the good 
and bad 4 ; only, that the good alone should rise to joy. 

, i 1 Cor. xv. 54, 5. from Is. xxv. 8. Hos. xiii. 14. s Hos. xiii. 14. See my 
Comm.n.86,7. 3 Is.xxvi.l9. : 

4 pJJ91- " Refaim" is never used except of the evil dead. Primarily, it is the 
.name of a giant-race, one of the early races in Palestine, (Gen. xiv. 5. xv. 20. 
Deut.iii. 11, 13. Josh, xii.4. xiii. 12. xvii. 15.) .who gave their name to "the 
valleyof Refaim," South-West of Jerusalem, (Jos. xv. 8. xviii. 16. &c)and,then, 
(either from them or from the root, jian, " height," common in Arabic,) 
"giants," generally; (Deut.ii. 11.20.) as n?nn (2 Sam. xxi. 16,18,20,22.) 
S?in (1 Chr. xx. 4, 6, 8.) Thence, strength being so often abused to violence, it 
became the title of the ungodly dead ; (Job. xxvi. 5. Pr. ii. 18. ix. 18. Is. xiv. 9.) 
whence it is said of them, that they shall not rise, i. e. to life, (Ps. Ixxxyiii. 11. 
Js. xxvi. 14.) and here, that they shall be cast forth. 



-of the punishment of evil, spirits <an& Qfavikmen:, 507 

As the dew quickens the vegetation' which lies, so parch- 
ed and dead, so the life-giving power of God, which the 
Psalmist calls directly 5 His /Spirit, should quicken those 
so long dead G . 

But, in one respect, Isaiah has more than Daniel. 
For he foretells the judgment, not only of all on the 
earth, but of those higher beings, who ^kept not their first 

estate. 

" a The LOED shall punish the host of the height in the height, 

And the kings of the earth upon the earth j . . 

And they shall be gathered in a gathering, prisoners down to the pit, 

And. shall be shut up in prison ; 

And after many days shall they be visited, 

And the moon shall be ashamed and the sun confounded ; 

For the LORD of hosts reigneth on Mount Zion, 

And before His ancients gloriously." 

The " host of the height " is contrasted with " the kings 
of the earth/' as, in Daniel, " 9 the army of heaven" with 
" the inhabitants of the earth." Each is to be punished 
in the place of their sin 10 . Both are to be kept in prison, 
until a visitation u after a long period, as St. Peter says, 
13 God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them 
down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness 
to be reserved unto judgment. Then, in the brightness of 
the Eternal Presence before which sun and moon shall 
pale, follows the blissful nearness of the righteous in 
glory. Isaiah mentions specifically elders, anticipating 
St. John 13 . 

And so we cannot doubt that the same is contained in 
the visitation of the crooked serpent and the dragon 14 , 

5 Ps. civ. 30. 

6 Davidson says, (from Knobel les.p. 172,) "His, [the prophet's,] idiosyn- 
crasy is deeply imprinted. Peculiar conceptions are, the life-giving influence of 
dew on the dead, " &c. iii. 22. They obliterate the metaphor, in order to insult 
the prophet. ? S. Jude 6. 8 Is. xxiv. 21-24. 9 Dan. iv. 35. (32 Ch.) 

10 The E.V. supplies, "that arewpon the eartli,"yet contrary totheparallelism. 

11 *W " visited in punishment," as in Is. xxix. 6. Pr. xix. 23. comp. 1'ps; 
in the corresponding place Is. xxvii. 1. 12 2 Pet. ii. 4. 
add Jude 6. He hath reserved in everlasting chains under, darkness unto the 
judgment of the great Day. R ev . v . 4. 10. v . 6. 8. II. 14. vii. II. 

13. xi. 16. xiy. 3. xix. 4. ' i s . 



' Isaiah } foretellsy*seconddeath;Ezek., y\ '-flesh shallrise. 

which, in the corresponding place, follows on the resur- 
rection of the dead. 

The prophecy in Daniel 1 , some shall awake to shame 
and everlasting contempt, lies already in Isaiah, 2 They 
shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that 
have transgressed 'against Me: for their worm shall not 
die, neither shall their Jire he quenched ; and they shall be 
an abhorring unto all flesh. 

The great passage of Ezekiel 3 , with its vivid and thril- 
ling minuteness of description of the hones, exceeding 
many and exceeding dry, which, at God's word, came to- 
gether, hone to his bone, and were covered with sinews, 
flesh, skint and the breath came into them, and they lived 
and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army, 
implies the current belief of the resurrection of the flesh 
the more, because the application is figurative, and is 
made to strengthen a disheartened people. " Never," says 
St. Jerome *, " would the likeness of the resurrection be 
used, in order to signify the restoration of the people of 
Israel, unless the resurrection itself stood firm and was 
believed as to be ; for no one confirms things uncertain 
through things which are not." 

We may make the case our own. To a Christian no 
future of the Church, (except whatever is involved in our 
Lord's promise of His own continual Presence with it, and 
that, the gates of hell should not prevail against it,) is so 
certain as the Resurrection of the Flesh. To us, an assu- 
rance on God's part, that any future good condition of the 
Church would as sui'ely be, as the Resurrection of the 
flesh, would be most reassuring, on the ground of our 
certain knowledge of that doctrine. So then to the Jews 
also. . 

On the first vague acquaintance with the writings of 
the Parsees, it became an axiom among rationalists, that 
all the fuller belief in the resurrection came from the 

' i Dan. xii. 2. - , . . 2 Jxvi. 24. 3 xxxvii. 1-10. ' 

> 4 ad loc. '.'A figure could not be taken from the bones, unless the self-sajue 
reality were to come to pass as to the bones too." Tert. de res. earn. c. 30. . . 



False nations as to the Zend books. 509 

Zend writings. Those who disputed the antiquity of re- 
velation, received with both hands any statements of the 
antiquity of Zoroastrism. Its books passed muster, en 
masse, with those who were dissecting every chapter of 
the prophets; any interpretation was accepted unhesi- 
tatingly, so that it presented a doctrine which might ri- 
val or eclipse revelation. The doctrine of the Zend 
books was preferred to the Old Testament by renegade 
Christians 5 . ..-.-.... 

The statement, that the Zend books contained the doc- 
trine of the Resurrection, was first rested on mistransla- 
tions. Anquetil had translated "until the resurrection 6 ", 
a word which is now acknowledged to mean "for ever 7 ," 
and on the strength of this mistranslation or from writ- 
ings long after our era, it was received as infallible truth, 
that Isaiah and Daniel, or the writers who wrote . under 
their names, borrowed the doctrine of the Resurrection 

6 Rhode, with whom the Bundehesh, (a book of the 7th century A.D.) was 
an authority earlier than Moses, said, "The Mosaic tradition and the Mosaic 
law gain more consistency and hecome more intelligible, if we consider " them 
as offshoots of the older revealed doctrine, which is preserved fuller .in the 
Zend writings." (d. heil. Sage, p. 4G1.) "An impartial comparison of the rela- 
tion [of the fall] in Genesis with that in the Zend, forces on us the conviction, 
that the older Zend tradition of the rebellion of Ahrimanj.of his strife with 
Ormuzd, of the position of man between those two great Icings (!), and the 
consequent interest of Ahriman to draw man over to his side, is presupposed, 
and that one must of necessity refer to it, if the narrative of Moses is to be- 
come intelligible." (Ib. 393.) He maintained that the Pentateuch is dualistic, 
(p. 455,) and said, "One might in truth call the prayer of Jesus, [the Lord's 
prayer,] a brief extract from the prayers of the Zend writings." p. 416. Rhode's 
uncritical book, embodying- Anquetil's necessarily faulty and unreliable trans- 
lation of books of various dates, is still the source of the rationalist imputation 
of Parsism to Holy Scripture. ^ . .. . 

6 "Of the resurrection of the dead, or the awakening of the dead at the 
end of the world, mention is often made in the Zend writings, and the ex- _ 
pression which occurs so often, ' unto the resurrection .of the dead,' always de- 
notes the duration of the world which yet remains.'" Rhode heil. Sage p. 
465. "The expression occurs in this sense countless times, e. g. Vendidad 
Farg. viii. p. 342." Ib. note. . . , 

. " "In consequence of Burnoufs enquiries into the phrase yavaecha yavattt- 
taeclia, which had been translated by Anquetil, 'till resurrection,' but which 
means nothing but ' for ever,' the existence of such a doctrine in the Zend 
Avesta was lately doubted." Haug Essays on the Parsees p." 266. . 



blQResurrection unknown toy* older books ofy* Zend Av. 

from the Parsees 1 ; Whether the doctrine was true or 
false, the school did not trouble itself ; only it was to he 
borrowed. Probably it was supposed to be false, and 
its derivation from Zoroastrism was tacitly to prove 
its falsehood. 

Another passage from the Vendidad, which had been 
so translated as directly to affirm the resurrection of the 
dead, and which used to be alleged as, beyond all question, 
containing that doctrine, now, in a more accurate version, 
plainly contains no such doctrine. It even shews that, at 
the date of the Vendidad in which it is contained, the 
doctrine of the resurrection, as it exists in the later Pai ! - 
see books, was not known to them 3 . 

The statement, that the books of the earlier Parsism 
contained the doctrine of the Resurrection, being neces- 

1 e. g. Gesenius on Is.xxiv.21 p. 772,3. quoting Rhode. Herzfeld still de- 
rives the doctrine of the Resurrection in Ezek. Is. Dan. from Parsism, chiefly 
on the ground of the language of the very late Bundehesh. Gesch. Isr. ii, 307. 
friih. Gesch. 180,1. 

2 Anquetil translated Vend. Farg. xix. thus, " Zoroaster consulted Ormusd, 
' Ormusd, who knowest all, shall the pure man rise again, shall the pure wo- 
man rise again, the Darvands, the worshippers of the Dews who torment men, 
shall they rise again ? (shall one see) the running water, the corn which grows, 
go upon the earth given by Ormusd? Shall all these things go upon (the 
earth ?)' Ormusd answered, '(all) shall rise again, o pure Z.' ' How shall they 
be pure, how shall they walk pure, how shall they be pure, how shall they ap- 
proach purely ; the men of the existing world, to whom the soul shall have 
been restored ? ' Ormusd answered, ' When the man is dead, when he is in this 
state, the Dew, master of the evil, law, besieges the corpse behind and before 
uuringthreenights,'" &c. Zend. Av, ii.'p. 417, 8. Spiegel's translation is, " Shall 
I summon the holy man, shall I summon the holy woman, shall I summon the 
sinner among the evil, the Daeva-worshippers ? Shall they spread over the 
earth running-water, growing fruits, shall they spread other riches over it ? 
Ahuramazda answered, ' summon, o pure Zarathustra, ! ' ' Creator ! where are 
these judgments, where do these judgments take place, where are these judg- 
ments gathered, where do these judgments come together, which man dis- 
charges to the corporeal world for his soul?'" Spiegel observes ;" The follow- 
ing passage is of moment and, taken together with 26, is a proof, that the 
resurrection, at the time when the Vendidad was written, was not yet known 
to the Parsees. The pious here go at once on the 3rd day to paradise ; the bad 
to hell. Also the present passage exhibits the whole idea very simply, whereas 
the later Parsism in the Minokhired, Viraf-name, and a little fragment belong- 
ing to the older period (Anq. ZAr.i. 2. p. xiii. sqq.) variously deck it out." 
Av. i. p. 248, 9. ' - 



"Perpetuation of life" distinct from Sesurrection.511 

sarily abandoned, the germs of the doctrine, at least, were 
to be found in the Zend writings. One passage, whose 
meaningis confessedly extracted with great difficulty, has 
been found in what are claimed to be the older writings ; 
" 3 We," [i. e. Zoroaster and his friends,] " will be they, 
whol make this life lasting; and the living wise [a plural 
of Ahura mazda] are the supportings most moving and 
true; for the intelligent is wont to be, where prudence is 
at home." Granting the utmost which can be meant by 
this passage, of which all the important words have to 
be decyphered with difficulty, and from which any mean- 
ing certainly has not yet been decyphered, it contains, 
manifestly, no doctrine whatever of a resurrection. "A 
future life/' after the death of the body, is the .belief of 
mankind; a doctrine, which, like that of the Being of 
God, unless stifled, lives on, amid whatever debasements, 
in the human heart and Consciousness. Not the immor- 
tality of the undying soul, but the restoration of this in- 
dividual body, which is resolved into the dust whence it 
was taken, was, and is in part, the stumbling-block of 
intellect. The Zend phrase, " the perpetuation of life," 
is, by the force of the term, distinct from, and incompa- 
tible with, resurrection of the same substance. It ex- 
presses what Heathenism believed, the continued life of 
the soul ; it had no bearing upon what God revealed in the 
Old and New Testament, the restoration of the body. 

So this too has been eked out by a passage from one 
of those books, the Yashts 4 , which the author, who quotes 

8 Gfctha Ahunavaiti (Ya9na c. 30.) 4, 9. translated by Hang, d. Ga.thas d. Za- 
rathr. i. 9. and Comm. p. 109-113. I have preferred the translation in his La- 
tin and his Commentary, because his German translations are often a popular 
paraphrase, in which more or less is naturally added to the original. The un- 
certainty of the passage appears from the very different rendering of Spiegel, 
Avesta ii. 120 ; " May we belong to thee, we who seek to further this world. 
May^the wise lords bring help through A'sha. Whoso is here teachable, will 
there unite himself with wisdom." 

4 Haug. translates the passage thus, "This splendour attached itself to the 
hero who is to arise out of the number of the prophets, (called Soshyanto,) and 
to his companions, in order to make the life everlasting, undecaying, impe- 
rishable, imputrescible, incorruptible, for ever existing, for ever vigorous; full 



512 2%e Bundehesh, probably of the 7th cent, after Christ. 

it, confesses to be of late .date, calling it " 1 a literature/ 
which grew up at a time, when the Zoroastrian religion 
had already very much degenerated 2 ," itself largely "con- 
tributing towards that deterioration." 

The; modern Bundehesh has no claim to be considered 
a developement of Zoroastrism. It is written in a lan- 
guage, the basis of which is some form of Aramaic, (it is 
thought, Assyrian Aramaic 3 .) According to the close of 
the book, it is later than Mohammed 4 . But, whatever 

of power, at the time when the dead will rise again, and imperishableness of 
life will exist, making 1 the life lasting by itself. All the world will remain for 
. eternity in the state of purity ; the devil will disappear from all those places, 
whence he used to attack the religious men, in order to kill ; and all his brood 
and creatures will be doomed to destruction." Zamyad Yasht 19, 12. (90 West.) 
Spiegel, translates it ; " wliich attached itself to the victorious Caoshyan^ and 
his other friends, that he might make the world progressive, not aging, un- 
dying, not stinking, not putrid, ever-living, ever-benefitting, an empire accord- 
ing to wish, that the dead may arise, that deathlessness may come for the liv- 
ing, and the world advances itself according to wish. The worlds which teach 
purity will he undying-, the Drukhs will disappear at that time. So soon as 
it comes to the pure to kill him and his hundred-fold seed, then is it for dying 
and fleeing away (ripe)." Avesta iii. p. 183, 4. 174. 

1 Hang Essays p. 223. " This kind of literature, [the Yashts,] grew up at 
a time, when the Zoroastrian religion had already very much degenerated, and 
its original monotheism [dualism] partially given way to the old gods, who 
had been stigmatised and banished by Zarathustra Spitama, but were after- 
wards transformed into Angels." "This kind of literature has, no doubt, 
largely contributed towards the deterioration of the religion founded by Z. Sp., 
and partially re-established what the prophet had endeavoured to destroy." 

2 The" original purity of Zoroastrism is a theory of Hang's," contrary to 
the facts, in regard to Monotheism, since the Gfith&s are distinctly du.nlistic, 
and in regard to the inferior gods, since those borrowed from Vedism must al- 
ways have belonged to it. Human nature would be to be pitied, if it could be- 
lieve such trash as that Yasht to be the original of the doctrine of the Resur- 
rection. 3 Haug iib. d. Pelilewi Sprache u. d. Bundehesh, p. 28. 

. 4 " The grammatical and lexic.il peculiarities, which, to the philological en- 
quirer,' establish its late date, have been already mentioned in the .preceding 
paragraphs. . Lastly j the list of Emperors at the end of the book, often men- 
tioned alrea'dy, which brings us to the time after the destruction of the Empire 
of the Sassanidffi,' is an .undoubted mark of its late origin, and I can discover 
no mark which should justify criticism in considering these notices as appended 
later, as has often been maintained." Spiegel d. trad, literat. d. Parsen p; 94. 
Haug, who thinks the existing book to be probably a translation, supposes it 
to have "come into being in' the first centuries of our era ; the translation pro- 
bably towards the end of the rule of the Sassanidte ; or, if the close of the book 
is genuine which speaks of the. dominion of the Arabs, not until after the con- 
quest of the Persian Empire by the Arabs." ib. p. 30. 



borrowed from Christianity. 513 

its date, the writer has borrowed largely from Christian 
sources, as on other subjects, so here. The illustrations 5 , 
by which it defends the resurrection of the body against 
objections to its possibility, are such as were current in 
Christian apologists 6 , and were doubtless learned in the 
school of Edessa, where Persians also studied 7 . 

iii. The allegations, in regard to Daniel's teaching as 
to the Angels, also assume grave doctrinal error in the 
New Testament. For most of the points objected to are 
taught there also. Leaving this for the time, I will first 
remind you briefly, what is the doctrine as to Angels 
before Daniel; so we shall see the better, what acces- 
sions came through Daniel. The doctrine, as contained 
throughout theOld Testament previous to Daniel, is this; 
that there lives in the Presence of God a vast assembly 8 , 



5 They are, in sum, that God, Who created, could restore what He created. 
He brought light out of darkness ; " created the seed of corn, which, after de- 
caying in the earth, bursts forth anew, and multiplies countlessly." He created 
the sap in trees, the living fruit in the mother, &c. c. 31. p. Ill, 12. 

6 " Thou sayest, how can matter, which hath been dissolved, be made to ap- 
pear ? Consider thyself, O man, and thou wilt find how to believe this thing. 
Think what thou wast, before thou hadst a being ; simply nothing ; for hadst 
thou been anything, thou wouldest have remembered it. Thou therefore that 
wast nothing before thou didst exist, and that becomest also nothing, when 
thou ceasest to exist, why canst thou not begin to exist again from nothing 
by the will of that self-same Creator, Who hath willed that thou shoulde&t come 
into being, out of nothing ? Declare, if thou canst, the manner in which thou 
wast made, and then seek to know how thou shalt be made. And yet surely 
thou shalt be more easily made that which thou once hast been, seeing thou 
wast made, equally without difficulty, that which thou never hadst at any time 
been. There will be a doubt, I suppose, as to the power of God, Who hath 
framed out of that which was not before, not less than out of a death-like void 
and nothingness, this vast body of the universe, animated by that Spirit which 
animateth all souls, stamped too by Himself as an emblem of the resurrection 
of man, for a testimony unto you. The light, which is extinct every day, slu- 
neth forth again, and the darkness in like manner departeth and succeedeth 
in its turn ; the seasons, when they begin, end anew ; the fruits are consumed, 
and again return ; the seeds assuredly spring not up with new fruitfulness, ex- 
cept they be first corrupted and dissolved ; all things are by dying preserved ; 
all things are formed again after death." Tert. Apol. c. 48. p. 99, 100. Oxf . Tr. 
See other fathers, Greek and Latin, referred to ib. not. z. b. c. 

7 See ab. p. 146. n. 1. s Ps. Ixxxix. 5. 1 Kings xxii. 19. " all the 
host of heaven standing by Him on His right hand and His left." 

L 1 



514 Numbers and nature of Angels and their 

myriads upon myriads * of spiritual beings 2 , higher than 
we, but infinitely removed from God 8 , ^mighty in strength, 
doers of His word, ever set 6 to hear the voice of His word; 
who ceaselessly 6 bless and praise God; wise 7 also; to 
whom He gives charge to guard His own in all their ways 8 / 
ascending and descending^ to and from heaven and earth, 
and who variously minister to men, most often invisibly 10 . 
But all, (it was declared,) are interested in us and our well- 
being. For, when our earth was created, n all the sons of 
God burst forth into Jubilee, in prospect of our birth, who 
were to be their care here, their fellow-citizens hereafter 
in bliss. It was an anticipation of that which we know 
more fully, that the angels desire to look into lij the myste- 
ries of our salvation. At the giving of the law on Mount 
Sinai, they were present 1R in myriads. At that great ma- 
nifestation of the goodness and condescension of God, 
how should not they be present, who rejoiced at the crea- 
tion of our race ? Good beings must be interested in those 
capable of good, and in God's ways of forming them for 
Himself. When God vouchsafed His Presence at Mount 
Zion, and the holy place became a new Sinai u , twice ten 
thousand angels, yea, thousands many times repeated, 
were there. They are present with God, witnessing the 
trials of our race. On two occasions, when they present- 
ed themselves before God, they heard of Job's spotless- 
ness and of the great trial of his faith. Job already, 
like the Apostles afterwards, was I6 made a spectacle to 
Angels. This trial pf Job was the proving of one outside 

I Ps. Ixviii. 18, (17 Eng.) lit. " twice ten thousand, yea thousands of repeti- 
tion." It is Daniel's " thousand thousands and ten thousand ten thousands." 
vii. 10. 2 Ps. civ. 4, 3 Ps, Ixxxix. 6. Job iy. 18. i^jjp lit. "folly." Eng. 
V. from i hn. So Kim. AE. Saad. ap. Ges. Lex. p. 382. The Verss. render it as 
of a moral defect ; ffnoKi&v n, LXX ; pravitatem, S. Jer,; iniquity, Ch.; in which 
case it would relate to the fallen angels. 4 Ps. ciii. 20. 6 jjbtp^ 

5 Ps. Ixxxix. 5. ciii. 20. 1 2 Sam. xiv. 17. 20. 8 Ps. xci. U. 

9 Gen. xxviii. 12, 13. 10 as Gen. xxiv. 7. 40. Ex. xxiii. 20-23. xxxii. 34. 
xxxiii. 2. Num. xx. 16. Is, Ixjii. 9, and note 7. 

II Job xxxviii. 7. 12 1 Pet, i, 12, 13 Deut. xxxii. 2. Ps. Ixviii. 17. 
14 Ps. Ib. j ob i. 6 . a, i. K i Cor< iv . 9. 



interest in us, as revealed before Daniel. 515 

of Israel ; their joy at our creation related to the human 
race. They were again present 17 , and learnt how Ahab's 
false prophets would, by the intervention of a lying spirit, 
have power to deceive to his destruction Ahab who wish- 
ed to be deceived ; Ahab and his prophets accomplishing, 
each of his own freewill, what was against their will. 
Their love for man shews itself, in that, when God com- 
manded them to destroy the guilty in Jerusalem, the 
charge is given to them, I8 let not your eye sparO", neither 
have ye pity, as though they would have pity, only that 
they must needs be of the same mind with God. It is in 
conformity with this, and an anticipation of the New Tes- 
tament, that, in the prophecy of the Day of Judgment in 
Daniel, the myriads of the ministering spirits are exhi- 
bited as standing around the Throne. Their office there, 
it was reserved to our Lord, the Judge, to declare; Da- 
niel only declared their interest in it. The Day of the 
judgment of our whole race must needs unfold, even to 
those blessed spirits, more of the wisdom and love and 
justice of the Creator of us all. 

Some distinction among those heavenly hosts was re- 
vealed from the first. It would be out of harmony with 
the manifold beauty and gradations in the rest of God's 
creation, if those higher orders of intelligent beings -were 
of one kind only. At the closed gates of Paradise were 
the Cherubim 19 . 

But chiefly there was one, designated as " the Angel 
of the Lord/' in whom God accustomed His creatures 
to the thought of beholding Himself in human form. 
Whether it were God the Son, Who so manifested Him- 
self beforehand 20 , (His Godhead invisible, as in the days 

17 1 Kings XKii. 19. 18 Ez. ix. 5. comp. viii. 18. It is Herzfeld's observa- 
tion. Gesch. Isr. ii. 277. 1! > Gen. iii. 24. 

20 This was the common belief of the earliest fathers. S. Augustine pointed 
out the mistake of inferring this from S. John i. 18, " No man hath seen God 
at any tune," since the Divine Nature of the Son is as invisible as that of the 
Father. See references on Tertullian de Przescr. n. 12. p. 463. n. f. Oxf. 
Tr. ed. 2. S. Ath. de Cone. Arim. p. 120. n. q. O. T. S. Augustine's own sum- 
mary is, " the modest and cautious consideration of the Divine mysteries per- 

1,12 



516 The "Angel of the Lord" probably a created Angel 

of His flesh,) or no, yet there was one, known as the An- 
gel of the LORD, distinct from and ahove all the rest. He 
speaks with authority, as the Lord ; therefore the Lord, 
whether the Father or the Son or the Holy Ghost, was 
present with him, and spake by him j he is called, not as 
an epithet, hut as a description of his being, the Angel of 
the LORD; therefore it seems to me most probable, that he 
was a created Angel 1 . It seems most probable, that the 
word, Angel, describes his actual nature, not the higher 
Nature, which spoke or was adored in him. God spake 
by the Angel of the LORD to Hagar 8 , I will multiply thy 
seed exceedingly; and she called the Name of the LORD that 

suades us, I deem, not to pronounce rashly, which Person of the Trinity ap- 
peared to any one of the fathers or prophets in any body or likeness of a body, 
except where the context supplies any probable indications." de Trin. L. ii. 
fin. " It is plain that all those objects which were seen by the fathers, when 
God was represented to them according to His own manifestation, as befit- 
ted those times, were wrought through the creature. And if we cannot tell, 
how He did them through the ministry of angels, yet that they were done by 
angels, we say not of our own minds," but on " the authority of the Divine 
Scriptures." iii. 11. n. 22. "This Person [of God the Word] angelic nature 
could aforetime figure, in order to fore-announce ; it would not expropriate, 
so as to be Itself." Ib. iy. 20. fin. n. 30. " The Son Himself, Who is the Word 
of God, not only in these last times, when He vouchsafed to appear in the 
flesh, but aforetime too from the foundation of the world, announced as to the 
Father to whom He willed, whether by speaking, or by appearing, either 
by some angelic power or by any creature." c. Adimant. c. 9. S. Irenseus 
also speaks of " the shewing of God through the creature." iv. 20. 7. And 
S. Athanas. "But if, when an angel was seen, he who saw heard the voice 
of God, as took place at the bush, for the Angel of the Lord was seen in the 
flame of fire from the bush, and the Lord called Moses out of the bush, saying, 
' I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac 
and the God of Jacob,' and the Angel was not the God of Abraham, but it was 
God who was speaking in the Angel, and he who appeared was an Angel, but 
God spoke in him." Orat. 3. c. Arian. 14. p. 421. Oxf. Tr. So also Dionys. 
de csel. hierarch. c. 4. in Petav. de Trin. viii. 2. 

1 The fathers mostly applied the title of the Angel to God the Son on the 
ground of the gloss of the LXX in Is. ix. 6. fj.fyd\ris POV\TJS &yye\os, " magni 
consilii Angelus." But, although Malachi foretells our Lord's coming in the 
Flesh, under the titles " the Lord," " the Angel," or Messenger, " of the Cove- 
nant," (iii. 1.) there is no proof that He is any where spoken of absolutely 
as " the Angel," or that His Divine Nature is so entitled. 

2 Gen. xvi. 10. J3. add Ib. xxi. 17, 18. where tJieAngelof Godsays, Iwill 
make him a great nation. 



with special Presence of God; named in all the O. T. 517 

spake unto her, Thou, God, seest me. The Angel of the 
LORD arrested Abraham in doing that which God had bid- 
den him to do, to offer Isaac his son. God in him ac- 
cepted the obedience, as having been done to Himself. 
z Now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not 
withheld thy son, 'thine only son, from Me. Angels of 
God's host met Jacob 4 ; but it was one, to whom he made 
supplication, and who Messed him, and who, Hosea says, 
was the LORD of hosts, of whom Jacob said, / have seen 
God, face to face B . The Angel of the Lord withstood Ba- 
laam, because, God says by him 6 , thy way is perverse before 
Me ; the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt 
speak, the self-same words which God had said to him 
in vision before 7 ; those words, which were the turning- 
point of his next subsequent history 8 . Of this Angel God 
says, My Name is in him 9 ; in him were manifested the 
Divine attributes ; he was the minister of God's justice 
who would not pardon their transgressions ; to him God 
required obedience to be paid. His speaking was God's 
speaking in him ; for God says, lo lf thou shalt indeed obey 
his voice and do all that I command you. And since he 
was not present by any visible, presence, there was no 
way of obeying him, except in obeying what God com- 
manded to Moses. Since God was present in him, God 
uses as equivalent terms, the words, ll the Angel of His 
Presence, or My Presence. And when the time of fulfil- 
ment came, of which God had said, ls Mine Angel shall go 
before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, Sfc, and 
I will cut them off, it is still one Angel in human form, 
who says to Joshua, As Captain of the LORD'S host am I 
come, in whom Joshua worshipped God, and by whom 

3 Ib. xxii. 11, 12. Dr. Stanley, (Jewish Church, p. 48. 50.,) avoiding the 
coarse language of Dr. Williams as to " the fierce ritual of Syria," in substance 
agrees with him, and represents that as "a stern logical consequence of the 
ancient view of sacrifice," "infirmity, exaggeration, excess," which, God says, 
was obedience to His voice. Gen. xxii. 18. 4 Gen. xxxii. 1, 2. 

5 Ib. 24-30. Hos. xii. 2-5. See my Comm. p. 77. 6 Num. xxii. 32-35. 

1 Ib. 20. 8 Ib. xxiii. 12. 26. xxiv. 13. 9 Ex. xxiii. 21. 

10 Ib. 22. !1 Is. Ixiii. 9. 12 Ex. xxxiii. 14. " Ib. xxiii. 23. 



518 The Angel of the Lor din Judges and Psalms; 

God required the same tokens of reverence as He had 
from Moses *. 

By the Angel of the LORD God upbraided Israel in the 
time of the Judges ; 2 / made you to go up out of Egypt, 
and have brought you unto the land which t sware unto 
your fathers, and I said, I ivill never break My covenant 
with you. Wherefore also I said, twill not drive them out 
from before you. The Angel of the LORD pronounced the 
curse upon Meroz 8 for unfaithfulness ; and it disappears 
from history. In the mission of Gideon, the titles, the 
Angel of the LORD, and the LORD, interchanged 4 . Yet 
both are evidently one. God promised by him what God 
only can promise 5 , and accepted the sacrifice 6 . 

In the revelation to Manoah and his wife, the wife, ig- 
norant, at first, who he was, yet speaks of the Angel of 
the LORD, as a being, known to them 7 . 8 His counte- 
nance was like the countenance of the Angel of the LORD, 
very terrible. To offer sacrifice unto the LORD and to 
the Angel of the LORD, was one 9 . His name was won- 
derful 10 . No mention having been made of an Angel pre- 
viously, the Angel of the LORD is not, " the Angel/' i. e. 
he who had been spoken of, but he who was known as 
" the Angel of the LORD." 

Of this Angel, and of others with him, it seems to be 
said, ll The Angel of the LORD encampeth roundabout them 
that fear Him and deliver eth them. The word, encampeth, 
probably alludes to that appearance to Jacob on his re- 
turn from Mesopotamia, > when he saw God's host and from 

1 Josh. v. 13-1& and Ex. iii. 5. 2 Judg. ii. 1, 3. Dr. Stanley (J. Ch. 

p. 418.) following Ewald, makes him a human messenger, " an earlier Mala- 
chi," contrary to the uniform idiom, and the use of the 1st person, "I made 
you &c." 3 Ib. v. 23. * the Angel of the LORD, vi. 11. 12. 21 . 22. 

the angel of God, 20. the LORD, 14. 16. 23. 5 Ib. 16. 23. 21. 

? as in 2 Sam. xxiv. 16. 1 Chron. xxi. 15. xiii. 6. 

9 The clause, for Manoah knew not that he was the angel of the Lord, 
explains the angel's injunction, Tfiow must offer it unto the Lord. Manoah 
and his wife wished to bring the kid, as ordinary food. He refuses it as ordi- 
nary food, and bids him, if he would offer it in sacrifice, to offer it to the Lord 
in him. ' ^ 18 as sa Is. ix. 5. " Ps. xxxiy. 7. 

12 Hengst. on Ps. xxiv. 



probably the Angel- Interpreter of Job ; y e /Seraphim. 519 

it called the name of the place, Mahanaim 13 , " Two- 
camps," and, after that, saw the Angel of the LORD, who 
tried his strength and blessed him. The captain of a 
host is said to " encamp w ," hut he " encamps around" 
through the army of which he is the head. On account 
of this image, and the mention of "the chariots of God 15 ," 
as a title for the angels present at His manifestations of 
Himself, it seems not improbahle that the horses of fire 
and chariots of fire 16 round about Elisha, and those which 
carried up Elijah to heaven, were symbols of Angelic 
presence. 

This same Angel, I think, was meant by Elihu, the An- 
gel-interpreter 17 , one of a thousand, who sheweth unto man 
his righteousness, i. e. how he may be righteous in God's 
sight, and is gracious unto him, and saith, redeem him from 
going down to the pit, I have found a ransom. For it is 
the office of no mere created Angel, but is anticipative of 
His Who came, at once to redeem and to justify; as S.Gre- 
gory says 18 , " It is as though the Mediator of God and 
men said, ' since there hath been no man, who might ap- 
pear a righteous intercessor for man, I made Myself man 
to make propitiation for man.'" 

This then, in itself, involves a distinction among the 
heavenly beings, so far at least that, in the earliest books 
as well as in Daniel, we hear of one Angel, above those 
ordinarily spoken of. 

In the Seraphim, (probably,./?^ 19 spirits,) in Isaiah, 

13 Gen. xxxii. 1, 2. D:STD, from nji; " camped," the word used in the Psalm. 

14 2 Sam. xii. 28. Hengst. 15 Ps. Ixviii. 17. 16 2 Kings vi. 17. ii. 11. 
V Job xxxiii. 23. {"^o is unquestionably " interpreter," Gen. xlii. 23. " em- 

bassador," 2 Chr. xxxii. 13. In Is. xliii. 27, " thy interpreters have sinned 
against Me," it seems most natural to understand it of those who interpreted 
God's will to man. (comp. Mai. ii. 7.) " The Angel-interpreter," I think 
then, has more probably his name from an office from God to man, than from 
one for man with God, viz. intercessor. The office to man is explained, " to 
shew unto man his uprightness," i. e. how he should be upright with God. 

18 ad loc. L. xxiy. n. 6. 

19 So Kimchi and Abulwalid. The root pb, "burned," is so common in 
Hebrew, (whence also fjjp, like irpriffriip, itavtros, a poisonous serpent, whose 
bite was " inflaming,") that the Hebrew etymology is much safer than the Ara- 



520 Cherubim ; the Angel of the Lord, probably, Michael. 

and the Cherubim 1 , we have other orders of spirits in 
near relation to God. Of these, the Cherubim are not 
mentioned to have any office of ministry to man, but, hav- 
ing been placed, with symbols of terror, to forbid his re- 
turn to Paradise, were objects of awe. The Seraphim 
are spoken of, as engaged in ceaseless praise in great 
nearness to God, yet as concerned also about us below; for 
part Of their song was, 2 the earth is full of His glory. 
One of them also was sent to Isaiah with the symbolic 
burning coal, which was to cleanse his iniquity and fit 
him for the Seraphic mission of bringing good tidings 
to. man. 

In regard, then, to the greater dignity of some Angels 
above others, no addition is made in Daniel to what was 
known from the time of Abraham. It is even most pro- 
bable that Michael is no other than that Angel of the 
Lord, by whom God manifested Himself of old. For the 
Angel of the Lord seems to be the same who declared 
himself to be the prince of the host of the Lord 3 , a title gi- 
ven in Daniel to Michael, * your prince, *one of the chief 
princes : 6 the great prince which standeth up for the chil- 
dren of thy people. 

We have, then, alike in Joshua and Daniel, the belief 
as to one spiritual being, to whom the charge and pro- 
tection of the Jewish people was specially entrusted. In 
Daniel, there is the name only of Michael above what 
was known before, and the name and being of Gabriel 7 , 
both, in common with the New Testament 8 . 

bic spd, " eminent." Gesenius' only objection is, that f^ signifies " burning," 
not " shining." But " burning " suits best with what the Church has thought 
to be the special character of the Seraphim, " burning love." All languages 
speak of "the^re of love," and the Holy Ghost, at the day of Pentecost, fell 
on the disciples, with the symbol of "cloven tongues, like as of fire." Acts ii. 3. 

1 The Semitic etymologies of anp are severally possible, yet no one is satis- 
factory enough to be adopted with confidence. The Persian etymology, in 
itself quite unsatisfactory, is also excluded by the early mention of the Cheru- 
bim. 2 Is. vi. 3: 

3 Josh. v. 14. See ab. p. 517. 4 Dan. x. 21. Ib. 13. 6 Ib.xii. 1. 

1 Ib. viii. 16. ix. 21. Gabriel, S. Luke i. 19. 26 ; Michael, Jude 9. Rev. 
xii. 7. The statement in the Jerusalem Talmud, from R. Simeon ben La- 



Doctrine of Angels in Daniel the same as in all y e O.T.521 

Such gradation then of heavenly beings, as is implied 
in .Daniel, is in harmony with what had been revealed be- 
fore. He sees one in great majesty 9 , whom he describes 
in language of Ezekiel 10 , probably that same Angel of the 
Lord, who had appeared to those before him. This An- 
gel gives directions even to Gabriel 11 . It seems also that, 
among those exalted intelligences, some know more of 
the Divine purpose than others, and communicate that 
knowledge to others. Twice, in these visions, an Angel 
enquireth of that exalted Angel ia , (who yet himself is a 
creature, for he swears by the living God 18 ,) and receives 
an answer. 

Both these relations of that one great Angel, his spe- 
cial office for the people and his superiority to other An- 
gels, are mentioned in one of the prophets after the Cap- 
tivity, Zechariah. There, other Angels, whom God had 
sent to walk to and fro upon the earth, give account of 
their mission to the Angel of the Lord^, and he himself 
intercedes with the Lord 15 . He stands as judge, sur- 
rounded by Angels who fulfil his commands, hears the 
accusations of Satan, pronounces forgiveness to Joshua 
the high priest, and, in him, to the people whom he re- 
presents 16 . It is probably "the Angel of the Lord," cer- 
tainly it is a superior Angel, who, in another vision, di- 
rects another Angel to instruct Zechariah 17 . Again, God 
speaks of the Angel of the Lord, as having a glory like 
His own 18 . 

chish, (in our 3rd century,) " The names of angels went up by the hand of 
Israel out of Babylon," plainly means no more than that the names of Angels 
first occur in Scripture written in Babylon. For so it continues ; "For, before, 
it was said, Then flew one of the Seraphim unto me; before Him stood t7ie 
Seraphim, (Is. vi. 6. and 2.) but afterwards, the man Gabriel, (Dan. ix. 21.) 
and Michael your prince." (Ib. x. 21.) But, although first given in Babylon, 
the names are opposed to the errors of Babylon. Michael is one of the oldest 
Hebrew names, a sort of watchword and challenge to all idolatry, " Who is like 
God ? " The name Gabriel also, " man of God," declares that Angels too are 
but agents of God. 9 x. 5. xii. 6, 1. 10 i. 7, 14, 16, 22. 

11 viii. 16. 12 xii. 6. viii. 13. B xii. 7. 

14 Zech. i. 10, 11. is ib. 12. Ib. Hi, 1-5. 

'? Ib. ii. 7, 8, Heb. 3, 4, Eng. Ib. xii. 8. The house of David shall 

le'tts God, as the Angel of the Lord before Him. 



522 Other nations, besides the Jews., under care of Angels. 

The one fact as to Angels, which is peculiar to Daniel, 
is in harmony with his position in God's revelation. As 
he was employed to disclose God's care and providence 
over Heathen nations, so through him it was disclosed, 
that, as God set one chief Angel as the deputed guardian 
of His people, so He set others over other nations. It is 
in harmony with all which we know about those blessed 
spirits. As we know that 1 all of them are ministering 
spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of 
salvation ; as we know, from our Lord's words 3 and from 
the Apostolic belief 3 , that each Christian at least is, from 
childhood, assigned to the care of his own guardian An- 
gel ; so Daniel, declaring that the heathen also were the 
objects of God's care, taught, in the case of two great 
nations, Persia and Grsecia, that they were under the 
care of eminent Angels, princes 4 with God. For the An- 
gels of Persia and Graecia were, manifestly, good Angels, 
since they desired the welfare of their people, and they 
contended with Gabriel and Michael before God, each, in 
submission to the Divine Will, desiring what seemed for 
the good of his people, which, since their apparent inte- 
rests were diverse, seemed to be contrary. The interest 
of the heavenly beings in man had been revealed before. 
To Daniel it was made known as part of God's mercy 
over all His works, that "constituting the services of An- 
gels and men in a wonderful order," He assigned to each 
nation one of those ministering spirits, to succour and de- 
fend them, and plead their cause with Himself, the Fa- 
r ther of all. 

In the dream, in which Nebuchadnezzar was warned 
of the insanity, which God was about to inflict on him 
unless he repented, there occur the remarkable words, 
6 The matter is the decree of the watchers, the " ever wake- 
ful 6 " ministers of God, and the request is the word of the 

1 Heb. i. 14. 2 S. Matt, xviii. 10. 3 Acts xii. 15. 

* Dan. x. 20, 21. iy. 14, Ch. 17, Eng. 

6 ITS'- "Wi (probably the same word as eyflpw or Sanscr. gri,~) is used intrans. 
of" arousing one's self; " in Pi. Hif. of "arousing" others. It has not the mean, 
ing of -Off, " guard." In Job viii. 6, if it had had the sense of being " wakeful 



Daniel does not associate the creature with the Creator. 523 

holy ones 7 ; for which Daniel, in his interpretation, substi- 
tutes, 8 T/iis is the decree of the Most High. Daniel, using 
the self-same word 9 , states that the decree was solely 
from God. There is no association of the creature with 
the Creator. The same decree is hy Daniel called K the 
decree of the niost High," and, if Nebuchadnezzar's me- 
mory was accurate 10 , " the decree of the watchers," i. e. 

for," it would have had it, (as in Engi) by force of the by, " over," not of the 
word itself. But there too the E.V. is best. " He would awake for thee," (as 
God is so often said to " awake " for His people, when He notices that, which 
He had before left unremedied, their "trouble" &c.). fy then (to judge from 
the Hebrew, for Tjl occurs in Daniel only, and in Syriac as ultimately derived 
from it,) is watcher, (i.e. one ever-aroused, unsleeping 1 ,) not watchman, which 
in Hebrew is lo'vff, in Ch. TO}, in Syr. nhtoS. In Aramaic, only Pal. Af. Ithpeh. 
seem to have been used, in the sense, " aroused, was aroused." This is the 
rendering of the Vulg. " vigil ; " of Aq. Symm. typfyopos, and probably of the 
LXX, (whence the typfiyopoi of the book of Enoch. See above p. 387, 8.) 
Theod. and the Pesh. retain the word, Which, in Syriac, has the two senses 
which it has in the book of Enoch, and which doubtless are derived from it. 
There is absolutely no authority for the sense " custos." 

7 sAtj> is of course the Hebrew fffltf, which, in actual usage, signifies, "pe- 
tition;" in 1 Sam. ii. 20. also ; for Hannah did not lend Samuel to God, but gave 
him back for life to Him, from Whom she had asked and obtained him. 1 Sam. 
i. 27, 8. In like way, diKV, in the instances of its use given by Buxtorf (col. 
2300, 1,) from the Targums, signifies "petition." In itself, it might mean 
" interrogation," since ^wf, as well as ^, signifies, 1) ask, i. e. to enquire ; 
2) specifically, " ask " for a thing, request, beg. But this too comes no near- 
er to the sense which Gesenius would give it, " spec, qucestioforensis, (legal 
enquiry,) causa forensis judicata, inde decretum." No where in the Tar- 
gums, any more than in Hebrew, does ihv$ mean a decree; any more than our 
"suit" would mean " the judgment in a suit." Gesenius assigns this mean- 
ing, in order to make vhwf identical with .snap?. But oa^ itself signifies 
"word," not "decree," which is D$$, and from which it is distinguished in 
Ezr. vi. 1 1 . The " word " of a king is with authority ; and if one with autho- 
rity " sends word," (Noafl? n^ Ezr. iv. 17. v. 7,) that "word" is to be obeyed. 
But it does not follow that nans means " decree," any more than our " word" 
does, which we use in precisely the same idiom. It is also one of those com- 
mon abuses of Hebrew parallelism, to assume that each parallel word must 
mean the same thing. 8 i v . 21, Ch. 24, Eng. 

9 1TJ? n-]H3 14, Ch. K'U Kfai rnu? 21. 

10 Hengstenberg and others have held that the title of the " watchers " had 
reference to the fleol |8ouAa?o of the Babylonians, and this, consistently with 
revelation, on the supposition that the revelation of God was amalgamated in 
Nebuchadnezzar's mind with his own belief, (Beitr. p. 161.) in which way Da- 
niel's explanation would be a correction of it. But the fleol ftov\aiot of the 

t Babylonians, (if Diodorus has represented them rightly ; there is probably an 



524 " Gods of counsel" in Heathenism, astrological only. 

of the holy Angels; This it might be, either as the decree 
of God, entrusted to them to execute, or, since the holy 
Angels must needs be of the same mind as God, it may be 
said to be their decree, in that they embraced His. This 
decree had been first their request. It appears from 
Daniel's advice to the king, that the sin, for which that 
aweful seven- years' insanity was inflicted upon him, was 
that common sin of conquerors, unmercifulness and op- 
error as to the number,) are only stars, and have to do with astrology only. 
He says, " They say, that the most important calculation and motion is of 
the 5 stars called planets which they name 'interpreters,' and especially those of 
the star called by the Greeks Kronos [Saturn] but they call the clearest and 
the fore-signifier of the most and greatest things,. El ; but the other four 
they name as do our astrologers, Ares, Aphrodite, Hermes, Zeus, [Mars, Venus, 
Mercury, Jupiter,] wherefore they call them ' interpreters ; ' because, the other 
stars having their own fixed orbit, these alone, having an orbit of their own, 
shew what is about to happen, interpreting to men the good-will of the gods. 
For by then* rising and setting, and partly by their colour, they say that they 
foreshew to those who choose to attend accurately. For sometimes they shew 
the vehemence of winds, sometimes excessive rain or drought. Sometimes al- 
so, the rising of comets, sometimes eclipses of sun and moon, earthquakes too, 
and altogether all the circumstances, resulting from the atmosphere, good as 
well as bad for nations and places, for kings too or private individuals. Be- 
neath their orbit, they say that there are 30 [36] stars ordered, which they call 
' gods of counsel,' and that half of these look to the places above the earth, 
and half under the earth, looking at once at the things which fall out among 
men and in heaven. And that, every 10 days, of those above to those below 
a messenger of the stars is sent, and of those under the earth to those above, 
in like manner, one. This orbit they have defined, established by an eternal 
circuit. But of the gods they say, that 12 are lords, to each of which they 
assign a month and one of the 12 signs of the Zodiac. Through these they say 
that the sun and moon and 5 planets have their orbit. But after the Zodiac 
they separate off 24 stars, of which they say, half are set in the Northern parts, 
half in the Southern. Of these they assign those visible to the living, the 
invisible to the dead, which they call the judges of the universe. But the 
moon, they say, has its orbit below all these, &c." ii. 30. 1. 

I doubt not that Gesenius combined rightly the 12 lords, of the gods, to 
whom the signs of the Zodiac were assigned, and the 24 extra-Zodiacal stars, 
which together make up these inferior " gods of counsel." The whole context 
is of astrology. In astrology, while the position of the planets in the heavens 
was held to he of chief import, yet, suhordinately, so was the position which 
they occupied in the Zodiac at that time, two of the signs being the "houses" 
of each planet while the two remaining belonged to the sun and moon. (See 
in Ges. p. 354.) While then the 5 planets were the "interpreters," the fixed 
stars were so subordinately, and were called " gods of counsel." Among the 
Egyptians, the 12 signs, of the zodiac were called " gods of counsel," the pla-' 



Doctrine of Angels earlier than Magism. 525 

pression 1 . The word, " the request/' gives another 
glimpse into the interest of the holy Angels in our- 
selves. They too longed that the oppression should cease ; 
and, joining in the cry which is ever going up from the 
oppressed to the Throne of mercy and judgment, prayed 
for that chastisement which was to relieve the oppressed 
and convert the oppressor. But the statement, that it 
was a "request/* precludes the supposition, that the holy 
Angels had any portion in the "decree ;" for to " request " 
and to "decree" relate necessarily to different parties. 
One who can "decree" has no occasion to "request," nor 
does he. 

All this, from the iirst book of the Old Testament to 
the last, is in harmony. Throughout, it was revealed 
that there were different orders of the heavenly beings. 
This is as clear in Genesis, as in Daniel or Zechariah. 
Nor in all this is there any even seeming likeness to any 
thing Magian. Had there been any likeness, it must have 
existed in the Pentateuch as much as in Daniel, since the 
doctrine in both is one. An unbelieving Jewish writer, 
unable to escape the conviction of the oneness of the 
doctrine as to the holy Angels throughout the Old Tes- 
tament, was, at least, consistent in laying down that it is 
ante-Biblical 2 , and, (in regard to the evil angels,) in as- 

nets, the"rabdophori;" (Schol. Apoll. Rhod. iv. 262. quoted by Wess. on 
Diod. 1. c.) so that they occupied the same relative position. It is only in rela- 
tion then to the planets and in astrology, that certain stars were called " gods 
of counsel," either that by their astrological meaning they gave counsel, or that 
they were subordinate advisers to those which were reputed to he of primary 
significance. * Dan. iv. 27, Eng. 24, Ch. 

2 " Through this belief in angels of such various sort and of such varied sig- 
nificance, there was gained for the ancient Hebrews an imaginative addition 
to the belief in One God which was as yet too spiritual and too bare for them, 
and the gulph which they saw between God and man, so long as God did not 
appear to them as indwelling in man, was filled up satisfactorily. Yet evidently 
this belief was not created to satisfy that need, but was adopted from prae-Jah 
vist views, and only recast and developed in conformity with Jahvism, [God's 
revelation of Himself by Moses,] hi which way it unquestionably did it good 
service." Ib. p. 278, 9. It is true, of course, that the belief of other spiritual 
beings adds to our knowledge of the Creator of us all, yet not as "filling up 
ci gulph ;" for every creature is, of course, alike infinitely removed from the 



526 Imperfection of supreme god of the Aryans ; 

serting the influence of Magism upon the religion of the 
Bible from the beginning, while he admits that such in- 
fluence cannot be proved \ In one sense, the doctrine of 
the holy angels was ante-Biblical, since one portion is co- 
eval with the closing of the entrance to Paradise. But 
then, of course, its existence in Daniel or any other book 
cannot be any proof of the late date of such books. 

The harmony of the doctrine as to the Angels, from 
the first to the last, might have exempted us from any 
enquiry as to Magism. But since the imagination, that 
true religion, in both the Old and New Testament, is in 
someway indebted to Magism, is one of the " veteris ves- 
tigia fraudis," which still lingers on from times which 
knew little of Holy Scripture or of Magism, I would point 
out briefly, that, if any thing was borrowed, Magism 
must have been the borrower. And this, both from the 
character of the two religions and people, and also from 
the age of the books, in which the doctrines are contained. 

In regard to the religions, the god of the Aryans, Ahu- 
ra-mazda 3 , is not the living God, such as He has revealed 
Himself 3 , but a being, depending partly upon certain co- 
Creator. There are no steps from the finite to the Infinite. Contrariwise, 
the conception of beings immeasurably above ourselves, yet, together with 
ourselves, infinitely below the Creator, helps us, like a long vista in created 
tilings, to conceive the more of His ever-communicated, never-exhausted, in- 
finity of Goodness. 

1 " The inability to shew, in what way the Magian religion so early [as Ge- 
nesis] gained this influence upon Israelite views, does not entitle us to deny 
that influence." Herzfeld, G. Isr. ii. 281, 2. 

2 Max Mttller translates the name " wise spirit," Science of language, p. 208. 
Spiegel, " very wise Lord," Av. iii. p. 11; Haug, " living wise." 

3 Spiegel points out that Ahura-mazda is represented as corporeal, ("who 
has the best body," Ya<jna 1, 2. Farvardin Yast. 80, 81.) with a soul and/ra- 
vashi, (Farv. Y. 81. Ya<j. 26, 3. Vend. xix. 46, 7.) as human beings have their 
body, soul, an&fravashi. Mention is even made of " Cj>enta-armaiti and thy 
other wives," (Vispered iii. 21,) of " thy wives," (Yac,. 38, 2,) and of a daugh- 
ter of this Cj>. Armaiti and Ahura-mazda viz. Ashis-v'aguhi, (Ashi-Yast n. 16. 
Av. iii. p. 164.) although <^p. Arm. is elsewhere daughter of Ahura-mazda. (Ga- 
tha Ust. 44, 4. Vd. xix. 45.) Av. iii. Einl. p. v. In Ya$. Ixx, the praise of the 
body of Ahura-mazda intervenes between the praise of himself and that of the 
Amesha-^pentas ; "Ahura-mazda, the pure, lord of the pure, we praise. The 



time, light, space, co-existent with him. 527 

eternal existences 4 , light, space, and time, which were 
also objects of worship 6 , partly on the physical coopera- 
tion of what He is said to have created 6 . Time is not His 
creature, nor space His presence ; they are conditions of 
His being, independent of Himself. In like way, those 
other heings, which were the objects of Zoroastrian wor- 

whole body of Ahura-mazda we praise. All Amesha-cj). we praise." n. 10- 
12. AT. ii.p.203.Sp. 

4 Under the name Qadhata, " self-created," or " self-governed," (Spiegel, 
Av. ii. 218. note) occur 1) " light without beginning," as contrasted with 
" created lights ; " 2) thwSsha, (Spiegel thinks, "the boundless space of hea- 
ven" in contrast with A^man," the firmament ;") and3) "Zrvana akarana," 
"uncaused time." (Spiegel, Av. iii. xxxix. I have substituted "uncaused" for the 
common rendering " time without bounds," on the authority of Dr. Aufrecht.) 
Time, light, space, then, are coexistent with Ahuramazda. Plutarch speaks 
of the " light," as the original of Oromasdes, " Oromasdes sprang out of the 
purest light ;" (de Is. et Osir. c. 46.) and later Parsism conceived "uncaused 
tune" as his original, although this opinion was wrapped up in a myth. (Eznik 
of Armenia 5th. cent. A.D. " refutation of the false doctrine of the Persians," 
in Haug, Essays, p. 10, 11, and more concisely, but essentially the same, in the 
proclamation of a Persian general A.D. 450, in Elisaeus Hist, of Vartan, trans- 
lated by Neumann, p. 11, 12.) There is no such opinion in the Zendavesta. 
The words rendered by Anquetil, " the boundless time has given thee," are 
now owned to mean, " (Jpento-mainyus made, in the uncaused time." Herz- 
feld (translated by Davidson, iii. 177.) says, that " the ' time without bounds ' 
of the Magian religion is an attribute of Ormusd," on the authority of the Hall. 
LZ. 1845. n. 73. (friih.G.Isr. p. 460.) This is only the theory of a Par see gen- 
tleman, Doshabai, one of the new school, who wishes to dress up Parsism as 
a respectable Deism. His language is strange enough, below any belief of any 
of the old heathen who were not Atheists. " Zervan is the name of time, 
and is an attribute of Ormusd, applied to him, because no one knew the be- 
ginning or end of that Lord, the Creator, or, in other words, when that Lord 
[the supreme God] was created, or how long He will exist." 

5 " Praise the self-created firmament, the uncaused tune, the air which ope- 
rates on high." Vend, xix, n. 44. " I praise the self-created firmament, &c." ib. 
n. 55. " I praise the brightly shining sky ; I praise the unbegotten [ " unbe- 
ginning" Sp.] lights, self-created." Vend. xix.H8,19.Haug,Essays,p. 217. " I 
worship stars moon and sun, the unbeginning light, the set by itself, [" self- 
created" Sp.] and all the ["pure" Sp.] creatures of the holy spirit Ormusd." 
[" of (Jpentomainyus, male and female, the lords of the pure." Sp.] Yaijna, i. 
45. (Av. ii. p. 42, 3.) iii. 59. (Ib. p. 53.) " We praise the unbeginning lights, 
the unlimited." (Y<j. xvii. 41. Av. ii. p. 92.) "All unbeginning lights we 
praise." (Y^. Ixx. 45. Av. ii. p. 204.) Gah Uzlran, 6 (Av. iii. 24.) " The un- 
beginning lights, which follow their own laws." Kashira Yast,35. (Av. iii. 111.) 
Siroza, 30. (Av. iii. 202.) See also Schlottm. Hiob. p. 145, 6. 

6 See below, p. 531. 535. 



528 Zoroastrism only a modification of Fedism. 

ship, are only a more refined form of creature- worship. 
They are connected with those elements, on whose haiv 
mony God has made the well-being of this order of things 
to depend \ Zoroastrism betrays its original, the Aryan 
creature-worship, to which has been added its character- 
istic Dualism. 

The Zend religion is any thing but an original religion. 
It broke off, at some unknown time, from the religion of 
the Vedas in mutual and deadly hatred, which burst out 
into war, simultaneously with a change from the nomad 
to the agricultural life 2 . The adherents of the new reli- 
gion continued to be fire- worshippers like the Vedists; 
they retained, with certain changes, much of the ancient 
worship 3 , but they evinced their hatred of their antago- 
nists, by employing the Vedic name for their gods gene- 
rally, "Devas," as the title for evil spirits *, and making 
some of the gods themselves, Indra, Sarva 5 , into devils. 
"They retained as gods, only some of the lesser deities 6 ." 
There is no indication of any such changes on the part 
of the Brahmans 7 , But withal, the characteristic error 

1 See below, p. 530. ? Hang, Essays, p. 248, 9. 

3 Haug (Ib. p. 337-40.) points out " the identity of a good many terms re- 
lating to the priestly functions," "the Izeshne ceremony, as performed by the 
Parsee priests now," " the use of the juice of the Soma plant," " the Barsoni, 
or bundle of twigs, used in reciting Izeshne," &c. 

4 " Deva, in all the Vedas and in the whole Brahmanic literature, is the name 
of the gods, who are the objects of worship among the Hindoos to the present 
day. In the Zend Avesta, from its earliest to its latest parts, deva, (modern 
Pers. div,~) is the general name of an evil spirit. In the confession of faith, 
as recited to this day, the Zoroastrian religion is distinctly said to be vi dav6, 
i. e. 'against the devas,' and one of their most sacred books is called vi-daeV6- 
data (now corrupted into Vendidad,) i. e. 'what is given against, or for the re- 
moval of, the devas.' " Haug, Essays, p. 225, 6. 5 Ib. p. 230. 

6 "The Devas that are not degraded to demons in the Zendavesta are 
mostly minor deities and personifications of nature, the natural meaning of 
which was not forgotten. They were not gods, but only bright poetical beings 
in the minds of those who took them over. Thus the Buddhists carry about 
the statues of Brahma, Vishnu, Siva and other gods ; they tolerate them as 
ornaments, because they are not afraid of them." Prof. Max Muller, MS. letter 
to me. 

7 Prof. Max Muller kindly answered my enquiries, " I cannot agree with 
Haug in ascribing the later change of meaning in the Sanskrit Asura to a 



Dualism in the earliest Zoroastrian writings. 529 

of the Zend religion, its Dualism, was its blot from the 
first. It is a mistake to represent Zarathustra as teach- 
ing "monotheism." Dualism is enunciated, in the most 
distinct way, in what are held to he its oldest writings 8 . 

reacting influence of Zoroastrianism. In the most sacred hymns of the Brah- 
mans, asura constantly stands in the sense of ' god.' In the Brahmanas, a 
new name of god springs up, Sura, from suar, ' heaven,' which has nothing 
to do with asu-ra etymologically. But by a kind of irresistible etymological im- 
pulse, the Sanskrit language produced, in opposition to this Sura, a negative, 
A-sura, " not-god," quite distinct in reality from the 'old asu-ra, though iden- 
tical in sound. The Brahmanas are full of legends about Suras and Asuras, 
but there is no trace of any Zoroastrian influence, nor do we ever meet with one 
Asura, as in the hymns, but always with many." MS. letter. 

8 Two distinct passages occur in the G.tlu\s, which are not affected by any 
difference of translation. 

1) " These two first-spirits, twins, are known to act of themselves, 
In mind and word and act, these two, the good and the evil, 
(Choose) between these two ; be doers of good and not of evili'' 

Gatha ahunavaiti, (Yagna 30.) 3, 3. Haug, d. Gathas, i. p. 7. Spiegel renders ; 
" These two heavenly beings, the twins,first allowed from themselves to perceive 
Both, the good and the bad, in thoughts, words and works. 
Rightly decided as to them the wise ; not so the unwise." 

2) "So will I pronounce two first spirits of life ; Of which two the holier said 
to the wicked, ["the white said to the black," Essays, p. 153] 

'Do not thoughts, do not words, do not understandings, or doctrine ; do not 

sayings, or ceremonies, [' actions ' ib.] do not meditations, do not minds fol- 

low(me)?'" Gatha Ucjtavaiti, (Yac.na45.) 10.2. Haug.ii.p. 13. Spiegelren- 

ders ; 

"Now will I announce the two heavenly from the world's beginning ; 

Of the two the holy spake thus to the bad ; 

Not our spirits, not our doctrines, not our understandings, 

Not our wishes, not our speech, not our works, 

Not the laws, not the souls will unite." Av. ii. p. 150. 

The contrast of two primeval beings, one good, the other evil, remains in 
both translations. Spiegel observes, " The term, ' twins,' applied to the two 
heavenly beings, almost forces one to think of the myth as to the origin of the 
two heavenly spirits, which is found among the Armenian writers, e. g. Eznik, 
according to which Ahura-Mazda- and Agra-mainyus 'are both thought of as 
sons of time." (Avesta,ii. p. 119.) In Spiegel's translation, the Gatha Ahunav. 
goes on to describe the creation by the " twins ; " 

4) "As these two heavenly beings came together first to create 
Life and perishableness, and how at last the world was to be ; 
The Bad for the bad ; for the pure the best Spirit ; 

5) "Of these two heavenly, the Bad chose the bad, (so) acting ; 

The holiest Spirit (chose) the pure [neut.] , and created the most firm heaven 
And those who content Ahura with open acting, believing in Mazda." 

M m 



530 The six Amesha-qpentas below the Angels, 

A religion, starting, like this, in negatives, is not likely to 
have had truth unknown to other Heathenism. 

Nor, in fact, is there anything peculiar in those infe- 
rior deities of the Persians, more than in those of the 
Vedic nature-worship of the Aryans from which some 
of them were taken, or those of any other polytheistic 
people. A genius of light 1 , a genius who presides over 
marriage 2 , a genius of the earth 3 , a genius, identical 
with the morning wind 4 , are no more like angels, than 
Apollo, or Juno, or Ceres, or ^Eolus. Yet these and the 
like were part of the original Zoroastrism ; for, having 
been Vedic gods, they would not have been imported 
subsequently. In regard to those six beings, who, in the 
later books,are placed nearest to Ormusd,it is agreed that 
the common title, Amesha^pentas, "holy immortals," 
does not 6ccur in the oldest part of the Zendavesta 5 , and 
that the names, whereby they are severally distinguished, 
occur there also as names of qualities or substances 6 . 
The names of three of them occur so frequently, that it is, 

Haug renders these stanzas, 

4) "And thence these two spirits meet together ; they create the first, 
Existence and non-existence ; and that the last should be ; 

An evil life is to the liars, but to the.truthful the best mind, . ... 

5) "Of these two spirits choose (one,) who(i. e. one of whom) is liar, doing 
things most wicked ; (the other, doing) truth Spirit most holy. Whoso girdeth 
himself with very hard sling-stones (Haug, p. 103.) and they who venerate 
the Living-wise religiously by essential actions." Ib. p. 9. . ' 

1 " Mithra, the Sanscrit form being Mitra." Haug, Ess. p. 230. 

2 "Aryaman, the genius Airyaman of the Zend-Avesta." ib. p. 231. 

3 "Aramati, a female genius in the Vedas, meaning 1) devotion, piety, 
2) earth, is apparently identical with the archangel [!] Armaitii, : which : word 
has exactly the same two meanings in the Zend-Avesta." Ib. 231, 2. ! 

4 "The Vedic god Vayu( ( wind,' chiefly the morning wind) 'who first drinks 
the Soma at the morning sacrifice' is to be recognised in the genius Vayu of 
the Zend-Avesta, who is suppo'sed to be roaming every where, (see the RSm 
Yasht, p. 194.)" Haug, p. 232. See Spiegel, Av. iii. xxxiv. 151 sqq. 

5 The Gathas. Haug noticed this, Essays, p. 220. -.-.-. 

Spiegel (Av. iii. Einl. p. viii.) owns this. Haug would make the names 
always appellative in the Gathas, except that of Armaiti ; but he owns that it 
is most natural, in some places, to understand them to he the names of the 
genii. I cannot but think that he has been biassed by his wish to make out Zb- 
roastrism to be a pure monotheism, and to gain, an earlier elate for .the G&thls. 



too near to the supreme god of Parsism. 531 

I suppose, certain that they are mentioned as living be- 
ings, although details depend upon interpretations, of 
which they, who have studied those poems most, are not 
yet agreed upon the first principles 7 . Yet taking these 
beings as what they became, a group of six invisible be- 
ings, they help to shew that Zoroastrism is no true The- 
ism 8 , but they do not approach to the nature or office of 
the holy Angels. Their character is below that of the 
holy Angels, as that of Ahura-mazda is below that of the 
Living God. They are but little removed from Ahura- 
mazda, are associated with him 9 , and independent, in 

7 Spiegel rests chiefly on the traditional interpretation, (Av. T. iii. Vorr.;) 
Hang, on comparative philology. 

. 8 In the Behistun inscription, although Ahura-mazda is exclusively and re- 
peatedly named, as he hy whose help Darius conquered, it is twice added, "and 
the other gods which are." col. 4. par. 12. 4. par. 13. 2. revised in Bawl. He- 
rod, ii. p. 612. Both Mithra and Anaitis were worshipped before this time. 
"Auramazda is not only called [in the inscriptions] ' the great God ' (baga, as 
also in Ya<p. Ixx. 1 ; and, in Yaijn. x. 10, bagM is certainly to he referred to 
Ahura,) but also ' the greatest of all gods,' (Darius inscr. H. Benfey, p. 52.) as 
of Mithra it is said, ' he is the most intelligent of the gods." (Mihr Y. 141.) 
For together with Auramazda other gods are mentioned, both generally (tita 
aniytt bagdhaBis. iv. 61, 2.; lhadd bagaibis Xerxes A. 28, Ca 15, E. 18 ; liadil 
vithibis bagaibis, Darius, H. 14, 22, 24, which signifies the patron-gods of 
the Achiemenidte, the 0eol irarpfoi of Xenophori,) and, in the inscriptions of 
Artaxerxes Mnemon, by name, Mithra and Anahita ; whence, as has been 
shewn elsewhere, it cannot at all be inferred, that Artaxerxes introduced these 
worships,'but only that he was especially devoted to them." Windischm. Zo- 
roastr. Stud. p. 123. 

9 In the following list, I have omitted the passages which Spiegel owns to 
be difficult. In others, it will be recollected that almost every expression is dis- 
puted. Still any how the juxta-position remains. The references are to the 
sections of the Yacjia, in which the GathSs lie, in Spiegel's Avesta, T. ii. "Man- 
da, [i. e. Ahura-mazda, Ormusd,] Fbhumano, Asha who furthereth the world, 
Armaitl, Khsfiathra," are appealed to together, Ya^. 33, 11; Aliur. Voh.Asha, 
Arm. and perhaps Haurv. Ib. 50, 4; Ahur. Voli. Asha, Khsli. are praised toge 
ther, Ib. 49, 4. Else those chiefly named with Jlhura-mazda are, Volmmano, 
Asha,aaA, (although less frequently,) Armaiti. 

Volmmano is joined with Ahuram. 28, 1 . prayed to with him and Aslia, 34, 6. 
48, 7, praised with them, 28, 3. 34, 15. 49, 7 ; the sight of them is the object 
of desire ; 28, 5. his creatures are spoken of, his works, " for those who labour 
with the driven cow," 34, 14. 28, 10. his goods, 31, 10. 34, 2,45,2. nurtured 
by hun, 34, 3. his good dwelling, (joined with that ofAttur. andwfrJia,)30, 10. 
32, 15. Ahur. has like dwelling with him and Aslia, 43, 9. his kingdom, 33, 5. 
kingdoms, 45, 16, joined on to those of Aslia and Arm. ib. (and perhaps 34, 1 1 .) 

M m 2 



532 Amesha-qpentas, mere genii, 

great measure, of him ; on the other hand, they have, each 
his, or her, or its, own local office. 

The six were, l)Vohumano,(Bahman,) "the good mind/* 
(neuter) which had the care of cattle ; 2) Asha-vahista, 
(Ardi-bihist) "the best purity," (neuter) which had the 
charge of fire and what relates to it ; 3) Khshathra-vai- 
rya, (a neuter,) Shahrevar, which was in charge of metals 
below the earth ; 4) Qpenta-armaiti, a sort of female ge- 
nius of the earth l , and in charge of it ; 5) Haurvatat, who 
makes water to flow over the earth ; 6) Ameretat, who 
protected trees and fruits. Both "are identified with the 
things they protect 3 ." What have such beings as these, 
mere genii, with their physical occupations, in common 
with the Angels and Archangels of Holy Scripture ? So 
connected are they with the things of which they are the 
genii, that Spiegel says, " 3 it is a practice not unusual in 

As to his personal being, Khshathra is said to come with him and Asha, 30, 7. 
(see Haug, i. p. 105, 6.) and with him alone ; 30, 8 ; he is said to be " given as 
help " with Asha and Khsh. 29, 10. A diligent agriculturist is said to be in the 
service of Vohum. and Asha, 33, 3. 

Asha invoked with Mura-mazda, [in theplur.] 31, 4. with Almr. [sing.] 
34, 3, 4. 47, 9. 48, 6. 49, 5, with Almr. and Arm. 50, 2. Ahura-m. has the same 
will as Aslia, 28, 8. 45, 18 ; created sacred poem in union with Asha, for the 
cow, [earth] 29, 7. Zamthustra desired of us, Almr. and Asha, 29, 8. Almr. 
and Asha rule, 47, 9, are worshipped together, 28, 9. (comp. Haug) are thought 
of together, 45, 17. Asha is joint-creator of the earth, 29, 2, has the " drujas," 
(evil genii, mostly female, Spiegel, Av. iii. p. 1.) given into his hand, (30, 9.) 
will slay them, 47, 1. There is no protector savcAJmr. and Asha, 49, 1. re- 
ward is asked from Asha, 28, 7. 47, 8. long life, 28, 6 ; to " obtain the cow from 
Asha," 50, 4. (See also above with Fohumano.) 

Khshathra is scarcely mentioned by himself. See above with Fbhumano. 

Armuitis, female genius of the earth, is enthroned with Asha, where Fohu- 
mano reigns, and Almr. dwells, 45, 16. she belonged to Ahur. (" in thee was 
Armaitis, in thee was the former of the [cow] earth ; " Haug, i. p. 11. 136.) 
31, 9. "she gave strength to the body," (" created the body," Haug,)30, 7. she 
is invoked for "riches, blessing and the life of Volium." ("possession of a good 
mind" Haug,) 42, 1. she, "the good agent, is the daughter of Ala/tram." 44, 
11. (See also above with Fohumano and Asha.) 

Haurvatat and Ameretdt, who, elsewhere also, are almost always named to- 
gether, are just named, "that H. and A. may be rulers, " 43, 1 7. " what H. and 
A.\a\& promised me ;" 43, 18. " Asha's words " were created as help for A. as 
a reward for H." 33, 8. they come to the obedient. 44, 5. 

1 Burnouf sur le Yaona, p. 157. - Spiegel, Av. ii. p. 50. 3 Ib. iii. p. viii. 



of the same sort as other genii of Parsism. 533 

the Zend-Avesta, that the name of the Amesha-9penta is 
put for the thing entrusted to his care/' " 4 Khsathra- 
vairya is directly called metal/ 3 

But, on the other hand, from a radical defect in hea- 
then conception of God, they, like the gods of all heathen- 
ism, were too independent of Ahura-mazda, to have any 
bearing on our belief in Angels. Late books speak of 
them as his creatures *, or again of him, as their father 
and lord, yet placing them at the same time on a level 
with him 5 . . 

Any independence whatsoever of God is, of course, ra- 
dically at variance with any true conception of God. 
God is All, His creatures nothing, save what, by His Will, 
they hold from Him. This truth is guarded throughout 
the Old Testament. The very name, "Angel/ 3 expresses, 
that they are " messengers " of God, a higher order of 
spirits, ministering, according to His Will, to the lower, 
man. Or, like the Seraphim, they are seen in adoring- 
love, about His throne 6 . Whether or ' no all heavenly 
beings have, at times, any office for man, yet, no where 

4 Ib. p. x. " Khshathra we praise ; the metals we praise." Visp. n. 23. 1. Av. 
ii. 30. Hence the formula, " for Khsh., for the metal, for the compassion which 
nourishes the beggar." Siroza, n. 4. Av. iii. 198. Yast, d. 7 Amsh. 16. p. 34. and 
36. The name Kshathra vairya is even used for a " pointed metal-instrument," 
or " knife." Vend. ix. 21. Av. i. 164. and Spiegel's note 1. Vend. xvii. 17. Ib. 
164 and note 1. So of Cpenta Armaiti (female genius of the earth,) "we 
praise thee, (our) dwelling, Cpenta Armaiti," Ya<^. 17. 53. Av. ii. 9,2. So, Ya<j. 
iii. 2. " Haurvatat and Ameretat with the well-made cow," stand for the things 
offered to Ahuramazda and the Amesha-^pentas. (See Spiegel, Av. ii. 50. note.) 
Again Haurvatat and Ameretat are identified with the things which they have 
in charge, in these formulae ; " For Haurvatat the lord, for the yearly good 
dwelling, for the years the lords of the pure, for "Ameretat, the lord, 'for the 
fulness relating to the herds, for the corn for the horses ; " Yast, d. 7 Amsh. 3. 
Av.iii. 35. " Haurvatat the Amesha-^penta we praise ; the yearly good dwelling 
we praise;" and so on, ib.p.36. "Haurvatat and Ameretat conquer hunger and 
thirst." Zemyad Yast, n. 16. iii. 184. So as to Ardvi(jura, " I praise the water 
Ardvicjura, the pure, the full-flowing," &c. Ya<j. n. 64. Av. ii. 192. add Ormusd- 
Yast. n. 32. Av. iii. 32. 

5 Farv. Y. 83. " All which seven are of like mind, all seven of like speech, 
all seven like in acting. Like is their mind, like their word, like their action, 
like is their father and ruler, viz. the creator Ahuramazda." But Ahuram. 
is one of the " seven ;" so the words are self-contradictory as they now stand. 

6 Is. vi. . 



534 Theft to give Christian titles to Persian genii. 

in. Holy Scripture, does any, even the highest, so act, 
save as commissioned by God. They speak and act in 
His Name. 

It is then a mere misnomer, that some have called 
the Amesha-9pentas, "Archangels," meaning to liken 
the Zoroastrian notion to the Christian belief 1 ; They 
scarcely form a class hy themselves; hut, in any case, 
they are wanting in that one essential characteristic of 
every good creature^ however exalted, that they are sim- 
ply 2 ministers of God, to do His pleasure. 

Then too they are, practically, not distinguishable from 
the other genii, who rank after them 3 . 

The six Amesha-9pentas have the precedence in the 
dry, insipid invocations of Parsism. They are invited to 
the sacrifice, next after Ahura-mazda 4 . They are invited 
before " 5 the body and soul of the" fabulous primeval 
" Cow," or " 5 the fire of Ahura-mazda, who comes the rea- 
diest of the Amesha-9pentas," &c. But practically, seve- 
ral of the other objects of worship or. gods 6 , the Izads, 
seem to have been thought more powerful. Of Mithra, 

1 " Archangel " is a title belonging to the New Testament, not to the Old. 
Another g^rave misstatement of the like sort, is the substitution of " guardian 
angels " for " Fravashis." The Fravashis are nothing less. .They are a strange 
abstraction. For Ahura-mazda himself and the Amesha-^pentas also hare their 
Fravashi. In the Vendidad, Ahura-mazda is made to say, " Praise my Fra- 
vashi, mine, Ahura-mazda's, (19. 46.) the greatest, best, most beautiful, &c. 
(47) whose soul is the holy word." (48) So, according to this paraphrase, the 
supreme god of Magism, and its "Archangels" would have their " guardian 
angels." This is stealing from Christianity to trick out Magism, withtheview 
of reducing them to one level. 2 Ps. ciii. 21. 

3 , "Theword 'Yaeata' means properly, 'worthy of worship, worthy of sacri- 
fice,' and must also often in the Avesta be still taken in its original meaning. 
The expression Itaglia, god, is probably nearly identical with it. There seems 
to.be no very denned line of demarcation between the Amesha-cjpentas and Ya- 
zatas, as, in fact, Ahuramazda himself is in some places called Yazata." Spie- 
gel, Ay. iii. Einl. xii. " Yazatas (now Izads) corresponds to the Vedic Yqjata, 
i. e. 'a being who deserves worship'. The modern Persian Yazdffn, 'God,' is 
the plural of this word Yazata." Haug, Essays, p. 175. 

4 Yacna, i. 5. ii. iii. 3. vi. 2. vii. 1. In Ya^na, iy. 4. (^raqsha is interposed be- 
fore them, Av. iii. 54. In their Yast, after the two first there are interposed 
Airyama-ishya (the Vedic deity Aryaman, Haug, Essays, p. 221.) and Caoka. 

s Ya^na, i. 6. 6 see p. 533. n. 9. 



Supreme god of Parsism prays, to the. genii. 535 

the god of light, "7po.sse.ssor. of wide plains, who has 1000 
ears and 10, 000 eyes," Ahura-mazda is made to say, " 8 1 
created him, as worthy of worship and praise as myself;" 
of Tistrya, the dog-star, he is made to add, " 9 as worthy 
to be satisfied, as upright as myself." Ahura-mazda is 
said to have sacrificed to Mithra 10 , as also to Ardvi-9ura 
Anahita, too infamously celebrated as Anaitis n , the ge- 
nius of water, the fertiliser of the earth ; of whom also 
" 13 he prayed the favour, 'grant me, O good, most benefi- 
cial Ardvi-c,ura, spotless, that I may unite myself with the 
son of Pourashaspa, the pure Zarathustra, so that he 
thinks according to the law, speaks according to the law, 
acts according to the law/ Then Ardvi-9ura the spotless, 
granted to him [Ahuram.] this favour, to him who ever 
brings, gives, offers, sacrifices, who prayeth the givers 
[feniin.] for a favour." Indeed, as man, in his wants, looks 
most to those from whom he expects most, one should 
think that those whose great gifts to the heroes of old 
who prayed to them are recited, Anaitis 13 , Gosh u or the 
Cow, or Ashis-vaguhi 15 , or, again, those who were held 
to give the gifts men which most desire, would probably 
be more worshipped than he, who was, in the abstract, 

I his ordinary title. Av. iii. 79. &c. He is called " the first heavenly Yazata," 
MihrY.n.l3.iii.81. 

8 Mihr Yast, n. 1. Av. iii. 79. "to be of the same rank and dignity, (as far as 
worship is concerned) as I myself am." Hang, Ess. p. 183. 

9 Tistar-Yast, n. 50. Av. iii. 72. l MihrY. n. 123. Av. iii. 99. 

II Windischmann, ub. d. Pers. Anahita od. Anaitis. Muncheh, 1846'. 4. 

12 Aban Yast, n. 17. 18. Av. iii. 45, 6. Spiegel says, " Here, as often in the 
Yasts, Ahura-mazda is represented as standing in need of the help of individual 
genii, which, taken accurately, is absurd, for they are his creatures and have re- 
ceived their strength from him." Ib. note. The inconsistency could not hare 
been, where there was any true conception of God, a real Theism. 

13 Ib. n. 21-83. 90. 97-90. 104-18. Ahura-mazda, and the old heroes and maid- 
ens sacrificed also to Ramaqi^tra (Ram Yast 2-21. Av. iii. 151-6.) "To him 
sacrificed the Creator Ahura-mazda. He begged of him this favour, Give me,O 
air thou that workest aloft, that I may slay among the creatures of Agramain- 
yus, as one who to C_pentamainyus" (belongeth.) Ib. 2, 3. Spiegel says, " It 
almost seems as if the writer considered the air as a deity on a level with Ahu- 
ram. and so belonging to the Qadhatas. Otherwise, it were absurd that the 
creature grants his good-will to the Creator." p. 152. note. 

14 Gosh Yast, throughout, Av. iii. 74-9. 15 Ashi Yast, n.24-52. Av.iii. 165-8. 



536 - Extensive devotedness to Mithra 

owned to be the supreme god. Even Israel did so in the 
idolatries, into which it fell before the captivity ; in Ma- 
gism such idolatry was an essential part of the religion. 

Accordingly we find a wide-spread worship of Anahita 
and Mithra, rooted in the countries of Parsism, and more 
popular, apparently, than that of Ahura-mazda. In re- 
gard to Anaitis, Windischmann sums up, " l Anaitis had, 
in the midst of institutions plainly Zoroastrian and to- 
gether with beings of the same religious system, a far- 
spread worship in Persia, Bactria, Media, Elymais, Cap- 
padocia, Pontus, and Lydia ; her temples are at Baby- 
lon, Susa, Ecbatana, Konkabar, Sardis, Hierocsesarea, 
and Hypsepa, in Damascus, Zela, Ariselene, an Armenian 
province. Her worship was provided with priests and 
hieroduloi, and connected with mysteries, feasts, and 
unchaste ways. The Persian Saciacs were connected 
with her, holy cows were dedicated to her. Artaxerxes 
Mnemon first set up statues to her thereby introducing 
image- worship into Persia. The worship of an Aphrodite 
among the Persians, which Herodotus attests, allows us 
not to question its early date." It lived on in Armenia, 
with that of Vahagn or Virathragna, until Armenia was 
converted by S. Gregory 3 , and, while Ahuramazda was 
recognised as the creator, Anaitis was associated with 
him, as an equal source of the greatness of Armenia s . 

The worship of Mithra we hear of in Greek authors, 
from their first acquaintance with Persia. Xenophon 
introduces Cyrus, swearing "by Mithra*." Herodotus 
mentions a "Mitradates" ("given by Mitra 5 ") and that, 



1 Windischmann, ub. Anahita, p. 19, 20. 2 Wind. ib. 

3 "And those who are really ' makers,' thou insultest, and the great Artemis, 
[Anahita,] in whom the country of Armenia lives and hath life, and with her 
the most mighty Zeus, [Ahura-mazda,] the maker of heaven and earth, and, 
after him, the other gods thou hast called lifeless and speechless." Tiridates to 
S. Gregory, in Agathangelos Hist, of convers. of Armenia, c. 4. n. 28. Acta 
Sanctt. Sept. 30. T. viii. p. 335. quoted by Wind. Ib. p. 22. 

4 Cyrop. viii. 3. 53. CEcon. c. 4. n. 24. 

5 See Pott, Etym. Forsch. T. i. p. xlviisqq. Rosen, in Journal of Education 
ix. p. 334. quoted by Smith, Biogr. Diet. ii. 1093. 



probably coeval with Parsism. ' 537 

a peasant, the herdsman of Astyages 6 ; and a "Mitro- 
bates," (probably the same name corrupted,) a Satrap un- 
der Cyrus or Cambyses 7 ; a Mithridates was a trusted 
Eunuch under Xerxes 8 ; a Mithridates accompanied Cy- 
rus against Artaxerxes II. 9 ; a Mithridates was the Sa- 
trap of Lycaonia and Cappadocia under Artaxerxes II. 10 ; 
the ultimate founder of the kingdom of Pontus was a 
Mithridates, Satrap of Phrygia, under the same n . Then 
it became the name of the kings of Pontus ; it occurs as 
the proper name in the line of the Arsacidae, kings of 
Parthia 13 ; a king of Media Atropatene, a king of Cappa- 
docia, two kings of Commagene, bore the name 13 . But 
the corresponding title, Hormisdates, Hormisdas, "given 
by Ormusd," does not, I believe, occur until the revival 
of Magism under the Sassanidae, when it became the 
name of some of their kings. One of the greatest Per- 
sian festivals, MihragHn 14 , was in honor of Mithra; and 
while the Persian empire was still in being, " 15 the satrap 
of Armenia sent the king yearly 20,000 colts for the Mi- 
thriacs." Deceit against Mithra is a chief and most 
deadly sin. Morally, it relates to breach of promises or 
compacts, and is especially punished bylaw 16 . Yet Mi- 

6 Her. i. 110. Sir H. Rawl. thinks that ./Gradates in Nicol. Damasc. is the 
Median equivalent to it, " Atra" or " Adar " signifying the ' sun' or " fire." in 
Rawl. Her. i. p. 252. * Her. iii. 120. 126. 

8 Diod. xi. 69. 9 Xen. Anab. ii. 5. 9. 10 Ib. vii. 8. pen. 

11 Ariobarzanes II. Satrap of Phrygia (Curt. ii. 6.) got possession of his king- 
dom after his death in 362. Diod. xv. 90. He himself betrayed his father Ari- 
obarzanes. Xen. Cyrop. viii. 8. 4. See Clinton, F. II. ii. 431. ed. 2. 

13 See in Smith, Biogr. Diet. i. 354-6. 

13 See Smith, Ib. ii. 1094. MitJtrenes, and Mithrobarzanes (first mentioned 
under Artaxerxes II. Diod. xi. 91, three others are mentioned ;) RJieomithras, 
(under the same,)are other traces of the worship of Mithra. Pott also puts 
together, Ithamitres, (Her. viii. 130. ix. 102.) Ithamatrcs, (Ib. vii. 67.) Si- 
romitres, (vii. 68. 79.) Hannamithres, (vii. 88.) Mitraios, (Xen. Hell. ii.l. 6.) 
Mitragatlies (JSsch. Pers. 43.) Mitliraustes. (Arr. iii. 8.9.) 

14 Hyde, De Rel. Vett. Pers. p. 245. Duris, (B.C. 320-281.) Hist. vii. (in Ath. 
x. 45. p. 434. Cas.) mentions the greatness of the festival. Windischm. Mithra, 
p. 57. 15 Strabo, xi. 14. 9. p. 530. Cas. Wind. p. 58. 

16 The 4th Fargard of the Vendidad, which is on criminal law, assigns the 
punishments for " Mithra-deceit," at 300, 600, 700, 800, 900, 1000, stripes, 



538 Worship of the Haoma coeval with Parsism, 

thra himself was held to punish it, especially in making 
"Mithra-deceivers," '* Anti-mithras," powerless in war 1 ^ 
so that the title seems very mainly to include foreign ene- 
mies, or non r Par sees 3 . Mithra is associated as the equal 
of Ahura-mazda 3 . "Ahura and Mithra, the two imperish- 
able pure; and the stars, the creatures of Qpentomainyus." 
Not the name only of Mithra, hut his relation to other 
gods is Indian 4 , so that the mode of his worship, as well 
as his actual worship,must have heen coeval with Parsism. 
More remarkable still is the worship of Haoma, as 
identical with the Soma of the Vedas. " 5 Soma is, in the 
Vedas, not only the holy sacrificial drink. It is also it- 
self a god; So Haoma in the Zend-Avesta is not only a 
plant, hut is also a mighty genius; in both, the ideas of 
the heavenly genius and the holy juice of the plant work 
marvellously into each other 6 :" Both are the causes 
of the birth of heroes 7 ; their "gifts are immortality^ 
firmness, health of body, long life, protection against un^ 

(Sp. Av, i. p. 93. n. 24-35.) " whereas 200 stripes are elsewhere a very great 
punishment, which is very seldom exceeded." Spiegel, Av. i. p. 89. 

1 Milir, Yast n. 17. Av. iii. 83. Wind. n. 18 sqq. p. 3. 

2 Ib. 20, 21; 23. 24. 26-80. 

3 Ya^. i. 34. Av. ii. p. 40. Add Y^. ii. 44. iii. 48. " Come to our help, Mithra 
and Almra, the great ones." Qarset-ny&yis. 9. (Ay. iii. 2.) " M. and A. the two 
great, imperishable, pure, we praise." Mihr-nyayis 3 (Av. iii. 12.) " Wherefore 
may these come to our help, M. and A. the great ones, yea M. and A. the 
great ones." Mihr Y. n. 113. (Av. iii. 97.) 4 See Windischm. p. 54. 

5 Windischm. iiber d. Soma Cultus d. Aiier, from Abhandl. d. K. Ak. d. Wiss. 
T. iv. P. 2. p, 132. 

6 W. proceeds ; " The most important places on this personified Haoma are 
in the 9th and 10th Ha of the Ya^na, which are illustrated by striking analo- 
gies of the hymn of the Rig- Veda, hymn 31." " In early dawn came Haoma 
to Zarathustra, who was purifying his holy fire and repeating prayers. Z. ask- 
ed him, ' What man art thou, whom, in the whole existing world, I see the 
noblest, on account of his immortal life?' Haoma the pure, the disease-re- 
moving, answered me ; ' I am, O Z., Haoma, the pure, &c. Invoke me, holy 
one ; drop me out to be tasted, praise me with praise, as the pure have praised 
n\e before tJiee.' Thereon said Z.' Honor the Haoma.'" Ib. 

~> " Haoma was the cause of the birth of Jima and the blessings of his time ; 
so Rig-veda to Soma, ' through thy guidance have our noble fathers, O glori- 
ous, obtained treasures from the gods:'" W. p. 134. "On the gifts of sons see 
Sampveda,(W. p. 135) Rig-veda." Ib. p. 137, . 



Parsee genii, or gods, dependent in turn on man. 539 

foreseen accidents 8 . w " The worship is spoken of in the 
Avesta as prse-Zoroastrian 6 ." 

Yet these their gods, were in their turiij dependent on 
man. " It is known," says Spiegel 9 , "that the genii of 
of the Parsees are just as much in need of men, as men 
of the genii. If these deities do not receive from men 
the prescribed sacrifices, they become powerless and 
unable to accomplish their duties, unless Ahura-mazda 
sees himself occasioned to help them in a supernatural 
and unusual manner. This idea occurs often enough in 
the Yasts 10 ." And not only so, but, if the translation be 
correct, they needed it for themselves. Mithra's im- 
mortality depended on the sacrifices of man to him 11 . 

It is then a mere myth, to speak of the relative purity 
of early Magism, on the ground that, in five songs, con- 
sisting of not more than 404 lines of a longer and 494 of 
a shorter measure, which would occupy some 27 pages, 
there is no mention of the sacrificial rites, or of the gene- 
ric names of the Amesha-9pentas or the Yazatas, when it 
is certain that those gods must have been always wor- 
shipped, and those offerings always made. And yet in 
those same songs there is the distinctest enunciation of 
dualism. Yet the god of dualism is, ipso facto, not less 
removed from the conception of the One Living God than 
Bel or Zeus or Jupiter or any other heathen god, with 
the overruling fate. 

2) Then, also, in regard to the history of the two na- 
tions, however the Jewish people were seduced into the 
sensuality of idolatry, it is not even alleged that, in any 

8 " Its [the Haoma's] gifts are immortality, &c. all, traits which agree with 
those produced out of the Veda." W..p. 137. The parallel goes into even more 
detail, as of marvellous birds. II). p. 139. 9 On Aban Yast, n. 9. 

Av. iii.p.44. 10 " See Yast; 8. 13 sqq. 10, 34 sqq. &c." Ib. 

11 " I am the beneficent protector of all creatures ; I am the beneficent 
preserver of all creatures ; and yet men do not sacrifice to me -with named of- 
ferings, as they sacrifice to the other Yazatas with nariied offerings. For if 
men sacrificed to me with named offerings, as they do to the other Yazatas with 
named offerings, I should advance from the momentary, passing, limited, pe- 
riod, to the proper, lasting, undying, unlimited, life," Bfihir Yast, n. 54, 5, 
Wind, transl. p. 7. and n. 74. p. 9. 



540 Prophets warned against errors of Babylon &> Persia. 

case before the Captivity, the sacred writers admitted 
anything from profane sources. ContrariAvise, on the 
approach of the captivity, Isaiah warned beforehand 
against the fundamental error of Parsism. It is in the 
prophecy of Cyrus by name, after the mention of the vic- 
tory which God would give him, and of His call of 
him 1 , that God immediately inculcates anew the funda- 
mental truth, that there is no God but He Alone, and 
that He is the Creator of those which the Persians held 
to be primeval principles. 2 1 am the Lord, and there is 
none else ; I form the light, and create darkness ; I make 
peace, and create evil. As we had no ground, from the 
original of Parsism, to look for any characteristic truth 
in it, so even beforehand we see the truth, (as it must 
be,) in direct antagonism to its error. The portion of 
Isaiah which bears upon the captivity and the deliverance 
from it, is full of challenges to all the objects of worship 
in heathenism. Jeremiah gives the Jews a Chaldee for- 
mula 3 , wherewith to answer the heathen,who asked them 
why they did not worship their idols. Isaiah, Ezekiel, 
and Jeremiah denounced punishment for the worship 
of the heavenly influences 4 . DaniePs history is in har- 
mony with this, that pious Jews were willing to give 
their lives, rather than deny God by worshipping any 
but Him. 

I said "the sacred writers." -But as to the Jewish 
people also, idolatries, not abstractions, were its temp- 
tations. The besetting sin of the Jews before the Cap- 
tivity was idolatry. We have a long experience of their 
character in this, the experience of 900 years 5 . Nay we 
have the experience of every heathen nation. Whatever 
they took, they took wholly. Whether the Jews took 
the worship of Baal or Ashtoreth, or the Romans the Bac- 
chanalia, or subsequently the worship of Mithra, they 
took the gods as gods. The temptation was to worship 
something nearer and more like themselves, from whom 

i Is. xlv.l-6. 2 Ib. 6,7. 3 Jer. x. 11. 4 Is.lxv. 11, 12. 

Jer. xliv. 15-28. Ezek. viii. 15, 16. 5 From the Exodus to the captivity. 



Men borrow objects of idolatry, not abstractions. 541 

they hoped to gain the things of daily life, or to avoid 
evils, or for its sensuality. But the objects of Magian wor- 
ship, under whatever name, whether Amesha-9pentas or 
Izeds, Anaitis or Mithra, were just as much objects of 
idolatry, as ever Baal or Ashtoreth had been ; nay, they 
were the corresponding gods. The temptations to wor- 
ship them were just the same. But it is not in human 
nature, certainly it was not in Jewish nature, to abstract 
the being from the object of worship. It is in human 
nature to worship an angel, if any one thought that he 
could obtain what he wanted, more easily than he could 
from God ; it is not in human nature to form to himself, 
(if one so may speak,) an Angel out of a false god; to 
substitute a being to whom he should stand in no direct 
relation, from whom he had nothing to gain, for one 
from whom those, whom he is to have copied, thought 
that they gained the necessaries of life. But such, it is 
self-evident, is the characteristic of the Angels in the Old 
Testament as far as they have offices for us. Unless God 
made them in any case, the disclosers of His Will, or gave 
them an office to man, they were believed to be, in their 
offices/or man, unknown, invisible, "ministering, spirits," 
doing whatsoever offices for man God willed, but not do- 
ing any thing at the request of man. ' 

It is, again, in human nature, when it has come to see 
the falseness of its false worship, if it will not accept the 
truth, to trick out its fables anew, and form abstractions 
of its false gods. So did Alexandrian philosophy over-a- 
gainst the Gospel; so is neo-Parsism doing at this day. 
This it does in self-defence, over-against the truth, which 
it will not receive. It makes to itself as plausible a coun- 
terfeit as it can. It throws a veil over the grossness of its 
error, in presence of the light. But it is not in human 
nature, to adopt, in a refined form, the errors of others. 
Error has no intrinsic winningness for man, who was 
formed in the image of the Truth, Almighty God. To 
soften errors which he will not abandon, is a natural com- 
promise with truth. Man's self-respect demands it of 



542 Persians imitated, in matters of religion .too. 

him ; it is a tribute to the truth which he rejects, forced 
upon him by the yearnings of his nature which he stifles, 
and it is one of the subtlest snares of Satan. 

The original error belonged to the coarser side of hu- 
man nature, man's animal requirements or his passions. 
The refinement of Ms discovered error belongs to the sin of 
his intellectual nature, his pride. Both have their pleas. 
But there is no temptation to trick out or refine an error 
not its own. Least of all was this the character of the 
Jewish mind. 

On the other hand, it is admitted that the Persians 
were, of all nations, the most impressible and the most 
imitative 1 . In the time of Cyrus, they had adopted re- 
ligious symbols, originally Egyptian ; in that of Darius, 
they had borrowed others from the Assyrians 3 . Hero- 
dotus says, " 3 they have learned in addition, to sacrifice to 
Urania, (i. e. Mylitta,) from the Arabians and Assyrians." 
Ammianus Marcellinus ascribes the Semitic admixture, 
which has been observed *, to Zarathustra himself; " 5 he 
added many things from the secret lore of the Chaldaeans." 
Artaxerxes II. brought in image-worship 6 . It would then 
be a priori probable, both from their known character 
and from other facts, that they would borrow from the 
Hebrews any thing which commended itself to them. 

3) But the Zend books, which have any bearing on the 
revealed doctrines of the Old or New Testament, are ac- 
knowledged to be late. On the one hand, the tradition 
of the Parsees themselves is of a general destruction of 
their books under Alexander. This looks like an apology 
for the absence of ancient books, but is " 7 the unanimous 
belief of the Parsees up to this time." They give a list, 
moreover, of the literature, such as they allege it to have 
been collected in post-Christian times by the Sassanidae, 
containing additions to what they suppose it to have con- 

1 See ab. Lect. iii. p. 129. 2 See Sir H. Raw!, in Rawl. Herod, i. p. 270. n. 
3. Layard's Nineveh, ii. c. 7. 3 Herod, i. 131. ' 4 in ZS. D. M. G. 

v. 221 sqq. vi. 78 sqq. 6 Amm. M. xxiii. 6. 

6 S. Clem. Al. Exh. ad gentes, p. 43. Sylb. " Haug, Essays, p. 124. 



Par see traditions against antiquity of their books. 543 

tained in the time of Alexander 8 . Out of twenty-one 
books/ which they enumerate, two only have any hearing 
upon the books now extant 9 . They mention books on 
physics, law, medicine, panegyrics of men and angels, fa- 
bulous history 10 , duties of their religion and morals; but 
they make no mention of what is now accounted the old- 
est part of the Avesta 11 , nor again of the modern 12 , which 
has been mainly cited for approximations to the faith of 
Jews or Christians. 

The question, moreover, does not depend on the date of 
Zoroaster, which those, who have most studied the sub- 
ject, give up as a hopeless problem 13 ; nor even on the 
age of some of the songs, or of the basis of the rules of 
purifying, or whether a fragment, here and there, can 
be recovered of ancient date. It is admitted that the 
books have come down by an unwritten tradition, and 
it is of the nature of that unchecked tradition in any hu- 
man system to receive modifications, as it rolls onwards. 
"There are no facts," says MaxMiiller 14 , "to prove that 
the text of the Avesta, in the shape in which the Parsees 
of Bombay and Yezd now possess it, was committed to 
writing, previous to the Sassanian Dynasty," which began 
" 226, A.D." Spiegel says, " 15 Evidently very little in the 
writings of the Avesta, preserved to us, comes fromZara- 
thustra himself; most comes from different and mostly 
late authors." " 16 The grounds for ascribing the author- 
ship to Zarathustra are utterly untenable." Then, as to 

8 It is given by Hang, p. 125-7. It is taken from " two collections of decisions 
ofDestoors," of which the earliest was made early in our 17th century, " about 
250 years ago." Ib. 125. note. 

9 n. 20. the Vendidad, " on removal of uncleanness," and n. 1. their wor- 
ship of the Yazatas or gods. 10 "11. Vishtasp Nosk, 60 eh. (in Alexan- 
der's time only 10.) " On the reign of king Gustasp and his .conversion to the 
religion, and its propagation by him throughout the world. 13. Safand, miracles 
of Zoroaster, &c." u " The. Ya^na (Izeshne) is not mentioned at all, 
or the Visparad." Haug, p. 128. The Ya^na contains the Gathas and the Ya^na 
Heptanhaiti, written in the oldest dialect. Ib. p. 161. 12 The Bundehesh. 
See above p. 5 12, 13. J3 As Lassen, " It will never be possible to fix 
his date." In.d. Alt. i. 754. . On the Veda and Zend-Avesta,.p. 24, 

15 Avesta, p. i. 13. quoted by Hcngst. Christ. Ui. 2. p. 75. 16 Id. i. 54. ib. 



544 Present books, unauthentic traditions. 

its borrowing from others, Spiegel says; ^In this his- 
torical time, the Persians have certainly borrowed mani- 
foldly from their more cultivated Semitic neighbours." 
He lays it down as a rule; "If we find any view in the later 
books, contradicting the clear letter of the earlier, we 
may unhesitatingly assume it to be later; if it clearly 
sounds like any foreign doctrine, we may mostly assume 
that it was borrowed." Burnouf also thought that " 2 the 
Zend fragments, which have reached us under the name 
of Zendavesta, are subsequent to the mixture of the Ba- 
bylonian worship and of the ancient religion of the peo- 
ple of Aria, and that they were collected in a country 
where this mixture prevailed." 

The analogy fails in every way. 1) There is no evidence, 
that the books, upon the extent of which Hauglays stress, 
ever existed. If they ever existed, many of them are on 
secular subjects and have no relation to Magism. 2) A 
tradition, resting on no written document, as to the titles, 
subjects, number of chapters of books, said to have ex- 
isted some 2000 years before, more or less, would not be 
listened to, except to prop up a system. 3) The mere 
statement of the number of chapters, of which 21 books 
exist, does not necessarily involve the size of those books. 
The chapters, said by the Destoors to have existed before 
Alexander, amount to 626. The Hebrew Bible, as stated 
in the preface to our English Bibles (which counts the 
Psalms as so many chapters,) consists of 921 chapters; the 
New Testament, of 260 : the Apocrypha, of 1/2. 4) The 
tradition contradicts that of the destruction of the books 
by Alexander, since this states, of four of the books, that 
some seven-ninths were added to them, after Alexander. 

1 Id. i. 374. ib. 

2 Ya^na, p. 351, referred to ib. Haug 1 alone imagines them earlier, building 
on a fanciful analogy with " the sacred literature of the Jews," which, " to be 
dated from the earlier times of Moses (between 1300 and 1500, B. C.) down to 
the close of the Talmudic literature 960 A.D. [rather,about 500 A.D. See Wolf, 
Bibl Hebr. ii. p. 658 sqq.] comprises a space of about 2, 400 years." (Essays, 
p. 129.) Had Hang known the Talmud, he could scarcely have placed it and 
the Old Testament together. 



Amesha-qpentas like in nothing to Archangels. 545 

This relates to the facts. But in matter of principle, 
5.) There is neither developement nor corruption in the 
Avesta, for all alike is corrupt; dualism, (which is in- 
consistent with the idea of God,) and the worship of infe- 
rior gods, tainted it from the first. 6) It has no history. 
In the O. T. there is a continual history of the revela- 
tion for above 1000 years, during which revealed truth 
was enlarged. But the length of time was no necessary 
condition of the maturing of the revelation. When our 
Lord came, fuller truth was revealed in less than four 
years from the beginning of His Ministry to the Day of 
Pentecost. 

Amid this radical and essential difference between the 
error and the truth, it is almost inconceivable that people 
should have repeated so often and so long, that the Ame- 
sha~9pentas were the originals of the Archangels; and 
that, on such grounds as these ; 1) and chiefly, the number. 
If the supreme god of Parsism is counted in with his 
supposed creatures, the number seven is made out, (as it is 
in some of the Yashts 3 ,) but only so. People have then 
their choice, either to give up this point of the similarity 
of numbers, or to own that the Persians made their su- 
preme god, only first of a class, "primus inter pares." 
And, in the book of Tobit, it is mentioned that there are 
seven angels, (it is not said, "Archangels,") " 4 which pre- 
sent the prayers of the saints and which go in and out 
before the Holy One 4 ." To "present the prayers of the 
saints" is no office of the Amesha-9pentas ; nor will it be 
readily believed that the number " seven" will identify a 
system in which the creator is counted with his crea- 
tures, with one, in which the highest creatures appear as 
servants in presence of their Lord. 

2) In each there is to have been a "heavenly Council," 
in which God or Ahuramazda are to have deliberated 
with creatures. There is no trace of any such council in 
Parsism ; in the Old Testament, it is rejected as a thing 



3 Yasht 3, 26. Yasht 4, title. 4 xii. 15. 

N n 



546 Fasting of the Day of Atonement ; fasting of women 

abhorrent from faith. l Who hath known the mind of the 
Lord ? or who., being His counsellor, hath taught Him ? 

3) They are to have had the common offices of "watch- 
ing from the height over the soul 2 ." In regard to the 
Amesha-9pentas, this is one of the exploded mistransla- 
tions of Anquetil. They have no moral office for the 
soul of man. In revelation, the Archangels have not 
this office assigned unto them, nor have any angels, in 
this sense, the title of " 3 Watchers." 

Such heing the sum of what is alleged as to doctrine, 
we may turn to morals. 

v. The charges in regard to asceticism condemn prayer, 
fasting, the study of Holy Scripture, or any belief that 
alms, (given, of course, rightly,) are of any benefit to the 
soul of the giver. Of course, they condemn equally the 
Gospel and our Lord. It is however also contrary tofacts, 
that these acts of religion belonged to later times only. 

v.l. Fasting, in the Pentateuch, is expressed by the 
words, "to afflict the soul. 5 ' The great day of atone- 
ment was a sabbath of " affliction of the soul." Sin was 
not to be forgiven without sorrow for sin, as expressed 
by self-affliction. God commanded them to rest from 
work, and to afflict their souls by fasting. 4 And it 
shall be a statute for ever unto you : in the seventh month, 
on the tenth of the month, ye shall afflict your souls and do 
no work at all : -for in that day he [the high-priest] shall 
make an atonement for you, to cleanse you ; that ye may be 

1 Is. xi. 13. 

2 Lengerke, (p. 165, nearly translated by Day. iii. 178,) says, "Who, by the 
holy watchers, is hot reminded of the Amshaspands of the Zend-Avesta, whom, 
issuing from the seven planets, they honored as the first seven spirits or intelli- 
gences of heaven, to whom Ormuzd entrusted the oversight of the universe, 
[if they are seven, Ormuzd is one] who watch out of the height over the soul? " 
Kleuker's Zend-Avesta, ii.257." " Hence the original is Parsism," adds David- 
son. Anquetil's version, translated by Kleuker, is proverbially incorrect. It 
ran ; " O that they may watch out of the height over the soul, which strives 
after purity of heart, after .piirity of word, after purity of deed, which thinks 
of nothing but Garotman." " Yesht Farvardin, 23 Carde." In Spiegel's trans- 
lations it is ; " Of which [the frawashis or spirits of the six Amesha-ejpentas] 
the one sees the soul of the other, how it thinks on good thoughts," &c. 

3 See above p. 522. * Lev. xvi. 29-31. 



regiilated ; pitblic and private fasting. 547 

clean from all your sins before the Lord. It is a sabbath 
of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls, by a sta- 
tute for ever. The self-affliction or fast, and the absti- 
nence from work, were alike sanctioned hy that solemn 
penalty 5 ; he shall be cut off from among his people ; the 
same soul will I destroy from among his. people. 

This fast alone was prescribed in the law; but it stood 
connected with the most solemn service of the whole 
year. Yet voluntary vows of self-affliction were so far 
regulated, that women's vows of such self-affliction might 
be annulled by their fathers before, or by their husbands 
after, marriage 6 j when first they knew of the vow. Else, 
to prevent tampering with such vows, the penalty was 
annexed 7 , lie shall bear her iniquity. The vow of self- 
affliction;, made by a man or a widow or one divorced 8 , 
stood. We have accounts of such public and severe fast- 
ings before God from morning to evening, after the de- 
feats at Ai 9 and at Gibeah 10 , and in hope of deliverance 
from the Philistines, under Samuel at Mizpeh 11 ; and in 
the mourning 13 /or Saul and Jonathan and the people of 
the Lord, after the defeat at Gilboa. The men of Jabesh, 
when they buried the bones of Saul and his sons 15 , fasted 
seven days. David fasted 14 , in the hope that God might 
spare the child of his sin; Ahab fasted 13 , and God de- 
ferred the temporal evil, for this temporary humiliation. 
Joel, as a pattern for all days of public calamity, bade, 
16 sanctify ye a fast. l " Jehoshaphat proclaimed a fast 
throughout all Judah, on the conspiracy of the neigh- 
bouring nations against it. Private, and that, severe 
fasting, is mentioned in the Psalms, as part of religious 
humiliation. 18 / humbled my soul with fasting*; 19 / wept 
and chastened my soul with fasting ; 20 my knees are weak 
through fasting. The repeated forty-days fasting of 



5 Ib. xxiii. 29, 30. 6 Num. xxx. 3-8. 13. 7 ver. 15. 

8 xxx. 2, 9. 9 Josh. vii. 6., 10 Judg. xx. 26. u 1 Sam. vii.G. 

12 2 Sam. i. 12. 13 1 Sam. xxxi. 13. > 4 2 Sam. xii. 1622. 
15 1 Kings xxi. 27. 1C JoeH. 14.il. 15. V 2Chron.xx.3. 

13 Ps. xxxv. 13. w Ib. Ixix. 10. M Ib. cix. 24. 

N 11 2 



548 Abuses of fasting attest its recognised use. 

Moses 1 and that of Elijah 3 , (images of that of our Lord,) 
were supernatural. A public fast was proclaimed proba- 
bly in sorrowful memory of a conquest of Jerusalem by 
Nebuchadnezzar 3 , even in the reign of the godless Jehoi- 
akim. God accepted the fasting, humiliation, repentance 
of the Ninevites 4 . Ezra proclaimed a fast 5 , in order to 
obtain a safe return for the people with him. Nehemiah 
fasted and prayed before God 6 , when he desired to gain 
permission to restore Jerusalem. The ungodly had to 
pay this tribute to truth, masking their wickedness with 
a religious observance ; as when they proclaimed a fast) 
to colour the conspiracy against Naboth 7 , or fasted to 
smite ivith the fist of wickedness 8 . 

- The very fact, that the prophets had to rebuke hypocri- 
tical fasting as well as hypocritical worship, shews how 
deep hold it had upon the people. Pharisaism is faith 
without love, and so is the product of human nature, not 
of one time only. It deludes itself and others with that 
which is in high repute. The prophets undervalue not 
(how should they ?) even outward observances sanctioned 
by God. They condemn only the body without the soul of 
fasting: abstinence from food, in order to colour, either to 
the sinner himself or to others, indulgence in sin ; fasting, 
which is "an image of famine/ 5 

But what is this amount of fasting, which is to be a 
characteristic of a later date ? Literally this, that on 
two great public occasions, the first, the approaching 
close of the 70 years of captivity, the 2nd, the hin- 
drances to the rebuilding of the temple interposed by the 
councillors of Cyrus, Daniel fasted, or abstained from 
pleasant food. On these occasions he did what Joel 
bade to be done, in times of trouble, what so many had 
done before him : he added outward expressions of sor- 
row, partly the natural, partly the prescribed accompa- 
niments of grief. ^Iset my face unto the Lord God, to 
seek by prayer and supplications, ivith fasfing and sack- 

. ! Ex. xxxiv. 28. Deut. ix. 9, 18. 2 1 Kings xix. 8. 3 " Jer. xxxvi. 

9. see ab. p. 399. 4 Jon. iii, 5. 5 Ezr. viii. 21,23. G Neh. i. 4. 

, ~ 1 Kings xxi. 9, 12. 3 Is. Iviii. 4. 9 Dan. ix. 3. 



Daniel fasted, as God prescribed by Joel. 549 

cloth and as/ies. On the second occasion, he was in sor- 
row for three iveeks, lengthening out the period of the 
bread of affliction 11 of the Passover, which he could not 
celebrate, into three times its wonted length. For 
seventy years, he had longed for the promised restoration 
of his people from captivity. His life had been prolonged 
beyond man's ordinary term, that he might see it. And 
now, the rebuilding of the temple, the centre and condi- 
tion of their public worship, the bond of their unity 12 , 
was hindered 13 . Who, that had a heart, would not mourn? 
Daniel mourned in earnest. Like persons in deep grief, 
he did what would maintain life, but put away all plea- 
sant things. 14 1 ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh 
nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all. 
A person must be very fond of good food, or not know 
what sorrow is, who counts this Pharisaism. God saw 
otherwise. He did not at once remove the hindrance; 
but He comforted Daniel and his people by foreshewing 
to them His Providence over them in future times of 
trouble. 15 jFVom the first day that thou didst set thine heart 
to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy 
words were heard, and I am come for thy words. Daniel 
humbled himself before God ; and God, as He did so often 
in the times of old, accepted the humiliation. What is in 
common with all times before Daniel, can be no proof 
that the book is later than Daniel. 

v. 2. In like way as to prayer. Prayer being the voice 
of the creature to the Creator in its needs, something 
had to be found, characteristic o the prayer of Daniel. 
The prayers of Daniel are mentioned on four occasions 
1) when his life was in peril, and God, on his prayer, made 
known to him Nebuchadnezzar's dream 16 ; 2) that he per- 
severed in praying to God, as aforetime, when forbidden 
by Darius, on which occasion it is mentioned that his 
habit was to pray three times in the day ; and that 3, 4) 
he prayed earnestly, with fasting, on the two occasions 

10 Ib. x. 2. " Deut. xvi. 3. 12 Ps. cxxii. 3, 4. 

- "Ezr.iv.5. Dan.x.3. j 5 Ib. 12. 16 Dan.ii. 19. 



550 God suggests to pray for what He wills to grant. 

above mentioned. On three of these occasions, the real 
objection is to the supernatural, that, co upon his prayer 
revelations were made to him." But Daniel did not ask 
for them, except on one occasion, to save his life and 
the lives of his companions. Any how, this is nothing 
new, nothing late. The whole attitude of prophets was 
that of watchers, men standing on their watch, as Ha- 
bakkuk describes himself, 3 / will stand upon my watch, 
and set me upon the tower, and will ivatch to see what He 
shall say unto me. And the Lord answered me, and said, 
write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, Sfc. What 
occurs in Habakkuk cannot be a characteristic of a later 
date than that of Daniel. Granted the supernatural in 
the abstract, that God does make revelations to His 
creatures, it is in harmony with the whole relation of the 
creature to the Creator, that the creature should ask for 
what the Creator gives. God doubtless suggested to Da- 
niel the prayer which He willed to grant. Our Lord says 
of one sort of possession, 3 This kind goeth not out, but by 
prayer and fasting. On earnest self-afflictive prayer 
alone, Jesus said that His Apostles should be able to free 
these sufferers by miraculous cure. What is there incre- 
dible that God should reveal the future to Daniel on self- 
afflictive prayer, when He made self-afflictive prayer a con- 
dition of the exercise of miraculous powers ? It would 
of course, be presumption and fanaticism for man to ask 
for revelation or miraculous powers, without some secret 
inspiration of God. But it is "begging the" whole "ques- 
tion/' to assume that Daniel's prayer, that God would 
make known to him the dream which was to save his 
life, was not suggested by Him Who suggests all good 
thoughts, and Who, the history tells us, heard it. The 
objection is to the supernatural in itself; one objection 
must not be made into two. An objection to all reve- 
lation must not be made into a specific objection to the 
genuineness of the book of Daniel. Prayer, such as Da- 
niel's, belonged to the days of living faith, not to the life- 

Leng. p. Ixxii. 3 Hab. ii. 1, 2. 3 S. Matt. xvii. 21. 



All self-affliction forbidden by Parsism. 551 



less routine of the later Pharisaism, which, content with 
its outward soulless round of observances, needed, as it 
thought, nothing of God, but * thanked Him, that it was 
not as other men are. 

The next charge relating to DaniePs habit of prayer, 
which is to be of Parsee origin, I may just add that absti- 
nence, such as Daniel, on two occasions, associated with 
prayer, is among the Parsees accounted a sin, contrary 
to the first principles of their dualism 5 . 

v. 3. Prayer " 6 three times a day, " however, is to " point 
to a time at which religious ideas had penetrated out of In- 
dia into the neighbouring countries to the West/' Nay, a 
learned Jewish rationalist held that, apart from that which 
is the point at issue, whether the minute prophecies in the 
book were of God or were forgeries after the event, " 7 of 

4 S. Luke xviii. 11. 

5 " Almsgiving too, [i. e. to the good, not to sinners,] is a pious duty of the 
Parsees : contrariwise, all self-affliction and fasting is forbidden, in strict contrast 
to the usages of the surrounding populations, Indians,Mendffians, Harranians s &c. 
This antagonism to self-affliction is very intelligible from the whole Parsee view 
of nature, according to which it could he as little meritorious to afflict 'one 1 s- 
self, as any other being of the good creation." Spiegel, Av. ii. p. Iviii. " If you 
feed the hungry out of piety, you will gain great merit, if only they, who eat of 

. thy food, be of good name, not sinners." Sadder, p. xxi. quoted ib.. "Youmust 
beware of fasting ; for to eat nothing from morning to evening is not good in 
our religion. Our fast, each month and year, is; that we should not have even 
the least sin." Ib. p. xxy. ib. 6 Herzfeld, (friih.) Gesch. Isr. 1827. Exc. 

2. p. 295. translated by Dav. iii. 179. 

? I see that Herzfeld unsaid this in his later history. He had said 1. c. 
" Of other traces of a date so late, which people hold that they have found in 
these chapters,! regard one only as perfectly valid ; the prayer three times a day 
points to a tune, &c." (as in text.) In his later work, 1863, Gesch. Isr. ii. 191, 
he gives up this point altogether ; " I will not maintain, that Egyptian or In- 
dian influence occasioned the Jews to pray three times a day ; but I conjecture 
that, in many places in the East and so in Judeea too, the custom of pray- 
ing, by preference, at dawn, at midday, and at sunset, as being the most mark- 
ed times in the day, originated in the mere aspect of nature ; as also, later, 
Julian recommends (Opp. p. 302) to pray three times a day, or, at least, morn- 
ing and evening, according to which betook doubtless midday as the middle 
time'of prayer, and so, according to Robinson, [ii. 282.] now too the Samari- 
tans pray, morning, midday, and evening, on their sabbaths, festivals, and new- 
moons. Although then, even in the ante-Maccabee times, the morning and 
evening prayer had, more and more, in the soul of worshippers, grown into 
one with th,e morning and evening sacrifice, yet pious individuals still retained 
the custom to pray at midday also, and ' the men of the stations' (Maamad) 



548 Abuses of fasting attest its recognised use. 

Moses x and that of Elijah 3 , (images of that of our Lord,) 
were supernatural. A public fast was proclaimed proba- 
bly in sorrowful memory of a conquest of Jerusalem by 
Nebuchadnezzar 3 , even in the reign of the godless Jehoi- 
akim. God accepted the fasting, humiliation, repentance 
of the Ninevites 4 . Ezra proclaimed a fast 6 , in order to 
obtain a safe return for the people with him. Nehemiah 
fasted and prayed before God 6 , when he desired to gain 
permission to restore Jerusalem. The ungodly had to 
pay this tribute to truth, masking their wickedness with 
a religious observance ; as when they proclaimed a fast) 
to colour the conspiracy against Naboth 7 , or fasted to 
smite ivith the fist of wickedness 8 . 

The very fact, that the prophets had to rebuke hypocri- 
tical fasting as well as hypocritical worship, shews how 
deep hold it had upon the people. Pharisaism is faith 
without love, and so is the product of human nature, not 
of one time only. It deludes itself and others with that 
which is in high repute. The prophets undervalue not 
(how should they ?) even outward observances sanctioned 
by God. They condemn only the body without the soul of 
fasting: abstinence from food, in order to colour, either to 
the sinner himself or to others, indulgence in sin ; fasting, 
which is "an image of famine." 

But what is this amount of fasting, which is to be a 
characteristic of a later date ? Literally this, that on 
two great public occasions, the first, the approaching 
close of the 70 years of captivity, the 2nd, the hin- 
drances to the rebuilding of the temple interposed by the 
councillors of Cyrus, Daniel fasted, or abstained from 
pleasant food. On these occasions he did what Joel 
bade to be done, in times of trouble, what so many had 
done before him : he added outward expressions of sor- 
row, partly the natural, partly the prescribed accompa- 
niments of grief. 9 7 set my face unto the Lord God, to 
seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting and sack- 

, l Ex. xxxiv. 28. Deut. ix. 9, 18. 2 1 Kings xix. 8. * Jer. xxxvi. 

9. see ab. p. 399. 4 Jon. iii. 5. . 5 Ezr. viii. 21,23. 6 Neh. i. 4. 

. i 1 Kings xxi. 9, 12. 8 Is . ] viii< 4. 9 D an . ; x . 3. 



Daniel fasted, as God prescribed by Joel. 549 

cloth and ashes. On the second occasion, he was in sor- 
row for three tveeks 10 , lengthening out the period of the 
bread of affliction 11 of the Passover, which he could not 
celebrate, into three times its wonted length. For 
seventy years, he had longed for the promised restoration 
of his people from captivity. His life had been prolonged 
beyond man's ordinary term, that he might see it. And 
now, the rebuilding of the temple, the centre and condi- 
tion of their public worship, the bond of their unity 1S , 
was hindered 13 . Who, that had a heart, would not mourn ? 
Daniel mourned in earnest. Like persons in deep grief, 
he did what would maintain life, but put away all plea^ 
sant things. l *Iate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh 
nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all. 
A person must be very fond of good food, or not know 
what sorrow is, who counts this Pharisaism. God saw 
otherwise. He did not at once remove the hindrance; 
but He comforted Daniel and his people by foreshowing 
to them His Providence over them in future times of 
trouble, ^"from thejirst day that thou didst set thine heart 
to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy 
words were heard, and I am come for thy words. Daniel 
humbled himself before God ; and God, as He did so often 
in the times of old, accepted the humiliation. What is in 
common with all times before Daniel, can be no proof 
that the book is later than Daniel. 

v. 2. In like way as to prayer. Prayer being the voice 
of the creature to the Creator in its needs, something 
had to be found, characteristic o the prayer of Daniel. 
The prayers of Daniel are mentioned on four occasions 
1) when his life was in peril, and God, on his prayer, made 
known to him Nebuchadnezzar's dream 16 ; 2) that he per- 
severed in praying to God, as aforetime, when forbidden 
by Darius, on which occasion it is mentioned that his 
habit was to pray three times in the day ; and that 3, 4) 
he prayed earnestly, with fasting, on the two occasions 

10 Ib.x. 2. "Deut.xvi.3. 12 Ps. cxxii. 3, 4. 

. 13 Ezr.iv.5. 14 Dan.x.3. 15 Ib. 12. 16 Dan.ii. 19. 



550 God suggests to pray for what He wills to grant. 

above mentioned. On three of these occasions, the real 
objection is to the supernatural, that, " x upon his prayer 
revelations were made to him/ 3 But Daniel did not ask 
for them, except on one occasion, to save his life and 
the lives of his companions. Any how, this is nothing 1 
new, nothing late. The whole attitude of prophets was 
that of watchers, men standing on their watch, as Ha- 
bakkuk describes himself, 3 1 will stand Upon my watch, 
and set me upon the tower, and ivill watch to see what He 
shall say unto me. And the Lord anstoered me, and said, 
write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, 8fc. What 
occurs in Habakkuk cannot be a characteristic of a later 
date than that of Daniel. Granted the supernatural in 
the abstract, that God does make revelations to His 
creatures, it is in harmony with the whole relation of the 
creature to the Creator, that the creature should ask for 
what the Creator gives. God doubtless suggested to Da- 
niel the prayer which He willed to grant. Our Lord says 
of one sort of possession, 3 This kind gpeth not out, but by 
prayer and fasting. On earnest self -afflictive prayer 
alone, Jesus said that His Apostles should be able to free 
these sufferers by miraculous cure. What is there incre- 
dible that God should reveal the future to Daniel on self- 
afflictive prayer, when He made self-afflictive prayer a con- 
dition of the exercise of miraculous powers ? It would 
of course, be presumption and fanaticism for man to ask 
for revelation or miraculous powers, without some secret 
inspiration of God. But it is "begging the" whole "ques- 
tion," to assume that DaniePs prayer, that God would 
make known to him the dream which was to save his 
life, was not suggested by Him Who suggests all good 
thoughts, and Who, the history tells us, heard it. The 
objection is to the supernatural in itself; one objection 
must not be made into two. An objection to all reve- 
lation must not be made into a specific objection to the 
genuineness of the book of Daniel. Prayer, such as Da- 
niePs, belonged to the days of living faith, not to the life- 

licng. p. Ixxii. 2 Hab. ii. 1,2. 3 S. Matt. xvii. 21. 



All self-affliction forbidden by Parsism. 551 

* 

less routine of the later Pharisaism, which, content with 
its outward soulless round of observances, needed, as it 
thought, nothing of God, but 4 thanked Him, that it was 
not as other men are. 

. The next charge relating to Daniel's hahit of prayer, 
which is to be of Parsee origin, I may just add that absti- 
nence, such as Daniel, on two occasions, associated with 
prayer, is among the Parsees accounted a sin, contrary 
to the first principles of their dualism 5 . 

v. 3. Prayer " 6 three times a day, " however, is to " point 
to a time at which religious ideas had penetrated out of In- 
dia into the neighbouring countries to the West/' Nay, a 
learned Jewish rationalist held that, apart from that which 
is the point at issue, whether the minute prophecies in the 
book were of God or were forgeries after the event, " 7 of 

4 S. Luke xviii. 11. 

5 " Almsgiving too, [i. e. to the good, not to sinners,] is a pious duty of the 
Parsees : contrariwise, all self-affliction and fasting 1 is forbidden, in strict contrast 
to the usages of the surrounding populations, Indians, M endseans, Harranians,&c. 
This antagonism to self-affliction is very intelligible from the whole Parsee view 
of nature, according to which it could be as little meritorious to afflict 'onc's- 
self, as any other being of the good creation." Spiegel, Av. ii. p. lyiii. " If you 
feed the hungry out of piety, you will gain great merit, if only they, who eat of 
thy food, be of good name, not sinners." Sadder, p. xxi. quoted ib. "You must 
beware of fasting ; for to eat nothing from morning to evening is not good in 
our religion. Our fast, : each month and year, is, that we should not have even 
the least sin." Ib. p. xxv. ib. 6 Herzfeld, (friih.) Gesch. Isr. 1827. Exc. 
2. p. 295. translated by Dav. iii. 179. 

? I see that Herzfeld unsaid this in his later history. He had said 1. c. 
" Of other traces of a date so late, which people hold that they have found in 
these chapters,! regard one only as perfectly valid ; the prayer three times a day 
points to a time, &c." (as in text.) In his later work, 1863, Gesch. Isr. ii. 191, 
he gives up this point altogether ; " I will not maintain, that Egyptian or In- 
dian influence occasioned the Jews to pray three times a day ; but I conjecture 
that, in many places in the East and so in Judeea too, the custom of pray- 
ing, by preference, at dawn, at midday, and at sunset, as being the most mark- 
ed times in the day, originated in the mere aspect of nature ; as also, later, 
Julian recommends (Opp. p. 302) to pray three times a day, or, at least, morn- 
ing and evening, according to which he took doubtless midday as the middle 
time'of prayer, and so, according to Robinson, [ii. 282.] now too the Samari- 
tans pray, morning, midday, and evening, on their sabbaths, festivals, and new- 
moons. Although then, even in the ante-Maccabee times, the morning and 
evening prayer had, more and more, in the soul of worshippers, grown into 
one with th,e morning and evening sacrifice, yet pious individuals still retained 
the custom to pray at midday also, and ' the men of the stations' (Miiamad) 



55*2 Prqyer three times a day, natural filing-tip of prayer 

all the traces of such late date, which people will have 
it, that they have found in the chapters, this one alone 
altogether bears testing." Indeed? Prayer at morning 
and evening is the dictate of nature itself. To Israel these 
seasons were marked by the morning and evening sacrifice. 
Is it then necessary to have recourse to India, to suggest 
to the pious in Israel, the habit of praying to Him on 
Whom they knew that their being hung, Who had revealed 
Himself to them, as the Hearer of prayer 1 , at some set 
time, a resting-place in all those long hours between 
morning and evening ? Our proverbs tell us, " Avhat may 
be done at any time, is done at no time." A fixed time 
of prayer is, as every one who has tried it knows by ex- 
perience, a fresh centre from which other prayer ramifies? 
It would rather be a matter to be proved, that the pious 
in Israel did not use fixed prayers three times in the day, 
than that they did. They themselves say that they did. 
Rationalists, like other romancers, " ought to have good 
memories." Daniel's praying three times a day, is to 
be a proof that the writer had learned his duties to God 
from the Parsees. 

From whom then did David learn them? Psalm Iv. 
whose words typically prophesy of Judas in whom that 
treachery culminated, describes in the first instance 
the relation of Ahitophel to David. The Psalm is very 
individual. It was written in the midst of a secret con- 
spiracy in Jerusalem against the subject of the Psalm ; 
and in that conspiracy one was chief, his once smooth- 
tongued friend, with whom he had Halten sweet counsel and 
ivalked unto the house of God as friends. No situation in 

adopted it for the weekdays." In another place, again, he leaves it open ;" Pi- 
ous people especially prayed at that time a midday-prayer too. This custom 
comes either from without ; for both the Egyptian and the Indian religions 
prescribed the worship of the rising, culminating, setting s% or it had its 
birth on Jewish soil out of the like (!) desire to distinguish by a pious em- 
ployment, not only the sunrise and sunset, but also the next most marked 
time of the day." Ib. p. 136. So the custom, which was first to he clearly 
derived from India, and so of a date later than Daniel's, it is conceded, might 
be Egyptian, or, (which of course it was,) the worship of Jewish piety. In ii. 
185, he speaks of the custom, as, "certainly much earlier." Seep. 553. n. 9. 
i Ps. Ixv. 2, &c. . Ps. Iv. 14. 



at morning and evening ; David mentions it in Ps. Iv. 553 

the Old Testament agrees so well with this, as his, to 
whom the title ascribes the, Psalm, David. It is a kin- 
dred Psalm to the xlist, also ascribed to David, written 
in like way in a period of conspiracy, in which alone, 
besides, is that trait of the once s mine own familiar 
friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, who 
magnified himself against me. Both fall in with the con- 
spiracy of Absalom ; and Psalm xli, in that it speaks of 
David's sickness 4 , fills up his history in Samuel, and ex- 
plains how Absalom could charge his father with negli- 
gence, and so openly court the people who came to the 
king for judgment 5 . When he threw off the mask, he 
sent at once for Ahitophel 6 , implying thereby the previ- 
ous understanding between them. In that sickness the 
treacherous friend availed himself of his nearness and ac- 
cess, to spread evil reports as to David 7 . But since the 
Psalm, as we have reason to think, is David's, we have 
a trace of that expression of devotion, so natural to those 
who have devotion, prayer between morning and even- 
ing, and, according to the letter of the words, at that 
same time which became the fixed hour of prayer, half- 
way on the course from morning to evening, midday. 

By a happy forgetfulness, some Rationalists, at least, 
did not remember the bearing of this Psalm upon the 
argument as to the book of Daniel ; and so one 8 conjec- 
tured that Jeremiah wrote it; another 9 , that it, with 

3 Ps. xli. 9. Mb. 8. s 2 Sara. xv. 2-6. 6 Ib.12. 7 Ps.xli.7. 8 Hitzig. 

9 Ewald. Herzfeld's opinion as to the time "when the pious in Israel began 
to pray three times in the day," was changed apparently by this Psalm. In 
his last work, he says, " In Dan.vi. 11. prayer three times in each day is ascrib- 
ed to Daniel. In itself indeed, this statement only proves that, at the time 
when it was written down, viz. at the beginning of the Maccabee times, pious 
individuals were wont to pray three times a day. Yet, on account of Ps. Iv. 
18, this custom seems certainly to have been much earlier. In like way Aris- 
teas, about 80, B.C., relates, that the 70 translators went to then- work of 
translating, 'after having washed their hands and prayed after the custom of 
all Jews.' The incidental character of this notice implies a very extensive use 
of the daily morning prayer. But if it is improbable, that even a single man 
should for years pray day by day at a fixed hour, without such prayer be- 
coming, in consequence, fixed and formularised within a short time, it is 
simply impossible that prayers should be extemporised three times every day 
by many individuals and perhaps for centuries." Gesch. Isr. 1863. ii. 185, 



554 . . Parsee worship of tliefiv e portions of day, 

ten other Psalms, was written by some unknown author 
in the last ten years before the destruction of Jerusalem ; 
.another 1 referred it to an early period in David's life ; 
and so on 3 . 

But what again are the prayers, what is that habit of 
praying, from which the Jews are to have learned to pray 
a third time in the day? Rationalists could, I hope, not 
.make the charge, if they looked into the facts. The Par- 
see-worship was a worship, not at only, but of the Jive 
portions into which they divided night and day. It was 
part of that large worship of nature, which was the sin 
wherewith Israel was infected before the Captivity, for 
which it was punished, from which it was recovered. 
Time, in its grand course, containing within it all which 
receives being and passes away, the most spiritual of the 
unintelligent creatures of God, and, in its ceaseless flow, 
the nearest image of His own eternity, was, in all its 
parts, an object, of Parsee- worship. 
. " Uncaused time," (as they called it, asserting thereby 
an .existence independent of God;) was too abstract a 
thought to enter much into the worship of a worshipper 
of, nature. The idolater worships chiefly what is, he 
supposes, useful to him, those operations or creatures of 
God, which touch his being- most nearly. " Uncaused 
time," then, was invoked but rarely. More often, "time 
of the long periods," i.e. the time which envelopes the 
history of man and his future destiny in this world, the 
lifeless image of the all-embracing Providence of God, 
corresponding to the "fortune" or "fate" of more ab- 

1 Paullus, Colenso, Pent. ii. p. 285, 6. Davidson too does not count it post- 
Davidic, ii. 260. 

2 Hupfeld, (Ps. T. iii. p. 56, who seems to have no definite opinion as to its 
date,) will have it, that " evening, morning, and noonday, only describe the 
day in its most prominent turning-points," and so, that it means, " the whole 
day through," But then, it means more than morning and evening, and it 
evinces, at least, a hahit of praying more than twice in the day only. It 
were an odd argument, that "evening, morning, noonday," donotfmean the 
three periods of set prayer in the day, which the words describe, in the order 
of the Jewish day, beginning with the evening ; and that the less definite 
"three times in the day," does so precisely describe them, that people must 
have recourse to the Indian worship of the sun to explain it. 



unconnected with prayer to God thrice a day. 555 

stract systems, according as they retained more or .less 
of the expression of the belief in God, the Ruler of all. 
But nearer still to the agriculturist, to whom the cultiva- 
tion of the earth was a central religious duty 3 , were the 
seasons and portions of the day, with their continual in- 
fluences. The portions of the day, five or four according 
to the season of the year, each in union with its own set 
of gods, celestial or terrestrial, among whom the opera- 
tions in nature were mostly distributed, were daily objects 
of Parsee-worship V Strange and melancholy corpse of 

3 See e. g. in Haug, Essays, p. 141, 144, 146, 148, 154, 156, 7, espec. Vend. 
Farg. iii. 24-33. " on the holiness of agriculture." Ib. p. 206-7. 

4 " Especially used is the invocation of the several portions of the day, and 
of great importance in the daily worship. They are called Gabs. There are five 
of these, (in winter, four only.) 1) Ushaliina, morning, from midnight till the 
stars disappear ; 2) Hdwani, from sunrise to midday ; 3) Rapit/iwina, from 
midday to the beginning of evening twilight ; 4) Usayeirina, from the be- 
ginning of the twilight till the stars become visible ; 5) Mtviqrfltlirema, 
from the time when the stars become visible, to midnight. The invocation 
of the times of day are found especially in the first chapters of the Ya^na and 
in the pieces, called Gahs. In union with the times of day, commonly some 
other deities are also invoked, which are accounted then; helpers and protect- 
ors : viz. a heavenly genius, and then two others, who, it appears, have to 
work in the world, and are not further named. 1) In union with Uslialiina, 
Craosha appears, as heavenly watcher ; then Berejya and NmSnya, of whom 
the first, according to later authorities, has to watch over the growth of corn, 
while Nmanya, to judge from his name, must look to the growth of fami- 
lies." [<;. i. 20-2. ii. 26-8. iii. 34-6. iv. 25-7. vi. 18-20. vii. 26-28. Qarsetnyayis 
n. 3. Av. iii. 10. Rashnu and Arstat are, I suppose, to be added to the gods 
presiding over this part of the day, because their names occur in each place at 
this, which, in that order, is the last of the times of the day, and before the 
invocations of the monthly festivals, i. 23. iii. 29, 30. iii. 37. iv. 28. vi. 21, 2. vii. 
29.] "2) The superintendent of the tune Hdvani is Mithra ; with him is uni- 
ted ^avaghi, the protector of the herds and Vicja the protector of the clans, 
[$. i. 7-9. ii. 13-15. iii. 21-3. iv. 13-5. vi. 4-6, vii. 13-5. Ixv. 4-6.]. 3) With 
Rapithwina, Asha-vahista and the fire [son of Ahuramazda Y^. i. 12.] stand 
in connection ; of earthly deities, Fradat-fshu, the multiplier of cattle, arid 
Zantuma, the protector of societies. [9. i. 10-12. ii. 16-18. iii. 24-6. iv. 1 6-8. 
vi. 8-10. vii. 16-8.] 4) Uzayitirina has as his protector Apanmnapat, the na- 
vel of the waters: (according to glosses, the mountain Arburj,) [orAlburg :] 
co-operating in the world are Fradat-vira, the preserver of men, and Daqyuma, 
the protector of districts. [9. i. 13-15. ii. 19-22. iii. 27, iv. 19-2L vi. 12-4. vii. 
19-21.] 5) JHwigrtithrema is placed under the care of the Frawashis of the 
pure; with them cooperate Verethraghna, 'victory 1 ["the Indian VritahS," 
Haug, Ess. p. 244.] and Vanainti, 'smiting,' from above; and of terrestrial 
deities, Fradat-vi^panm-hujyaitis," ' the complete good condition,' and Zara- 



556 Traces of Parsee prayer to the sun three times a day, 

the living belief in the ever closely-present Omnipresence 
of God, Who, the Psalmist knew, l hast known my sitting 
down and my uprising, hast understood my thought afar off'. 
My path and my lying down hast Thou sifted, and all my 
ways Thou hast been acquainted with. ^In whose hand is 
the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind. 

A worship of the portions of the day has no connec- 
tion with a worship at given seasons of the day. No one 
would venture to connect the morning and evening sa- 
crifice, which, from the giving of the law, was part of the 
daily worship of Israel, with the worship of the sun, which 
that same law strictly forbade. 

Granted that the worship of the god of fire, three times 
in the day, was, of old, a part of the Parsee, as it certainly 
was of Vedic idolatry 3 . The first mention of any such 
worship 4 among the Parsees occurs indeed in a book 5 , 

'thrustrotema, the protector of priests." [Y^. i. 16-19. ii. 23-5. iii. 30-3. iv. 
22-4. vi. 15-7. vii.22-5.] Spiegel, Av. iii. p. xl, xli. 

1 Ps. cxxxix. 2, 3, &c. 2 Job xii. 10. 

3 "The following hymn (in Rig- veda Hi. 28. fytoAgni, (fire,) was pointed out 
to me by Prof. Max Miiller, as translated in his " history of ancient Sanskrit 
literature." (p. 492. ed. 1.) Agni was a god, created by Brahmah. (Ib. 452, 2.) 
I give the hymn in illustration of the character of the worship. "Agni, accept 
our offering, the cake, Jatavedas, at the morning libation, thou rich in 
prayer. The baked cake, O Agni, is prepared for thee alone indeed ; accept 
it, youngest of all the gods. Agni, eat the cake, offered to thee when 
the day is over, thou art the son of strength, stationed at the sacrifice. At 
the midday libation, O Jatavedas, accept here the cake, O sage! Agni, the 
wise do not diminish at the sacrifices the share of thee, who art great. 
Agni, as thou lovest at the third libation the cake, O son of strength, that is 
offered to thee, therefore, moved by our praise, take this precious oblation to 
the immortal gods to rouse them. Agni, thou who art growing, accept, O 
Jatavedas, the offering, the cake, at the close of day." 

4 Haug introduces mention of the prayers, said five, or three, times in the 
day, into two neighbouring places of the Gatha Utjtavaiti. The first stands in 
his Essays,^. 151. In his text, as translated by himself, there is no mention 
of either. " What soul, (what guardian angel) may tell me good things, to 
perform five times (a day) the duties which are enjoined by thyself, thou Wise ! 
and to recite those prayers, which are communicated for the welfare of all 
beings by the good mind ? What good intended for the increase of life is to 
be had, that may come to me." The basis of this, in his own Latin transla- 
tion which was meant exactly to represent the original, aud in his German 
placed in the order of the Latin, is, " to remind me, what is thy doctrine, 
(ratio,) O Wise, and what the advancement promised (dicta) by the good 



subsequent to our Lord ; to us, indifferent. 557 

written after the revival of Magisin by the Sassanidae 6 , 
and so, long after our Lord. Yet it is probable that this 

mind, and what true things of life exist to possess them, what mind shews 
(edicit) (good,) that it may approach." Die G&thas YIJ. 44. n. 8. T. ii. p. 9. 43. 
The place into which he introduces the prayer three times in the day, occurs 
three stanzas earlier in the same poem. His literal translation is, " Who 
(created) what morning, noon-day, and night, which are inventresses of 
things," [" remind of Ms duties" Germ, tr.] " to Mm who lias a divine reve- 
lation." [Lat. Germ, "the priests." Essays, p. 150.] Die Gathas Y(j. 44. n. 5. 
T. ii. p. 9. 43. In his notes, " inventresses of things to him who hath a divine 
revelation," is expanded into, "which ever remind the wise of his duties; 
i. e. which through their continued even changes define the different duties . 
and activities of the wise, i. e. of the priest, that he bring the offerings at the 
right time, and at the right time sing praises to the honor of God." Ib. p. 41. 
Granted, that " inventresses of things" could mean " reminding of duties," 
there is nothing to limit the expression to these any more than to other 
duties of the day. Spiegel renders the first, 

" This would I ask thee, tell me rightly, O Ahura. 

Who has, goodworking, made the light as the darkness ? 

Who, goodworking, sleep and watching, 

Who the dawns, the middays, the nights, 

(Who) him who thinks on the measures of the law ?" 

The second, " This would I ask, &c. 

Thy five fold doctrine, Ahura, 

The prayers, for which thou art asked by Vohumano, (man) 

The purity, which in the world is perfectly to be known, 

How can my soul enjoy these goods, (and) obtain them ?" 
He observes, " what the fivefold things are, spoken of here, cannot be said." 
Av. ii. 147. 

5 " The Min6khired prescribes to pray to the sun three times in the day, to the 
moon and the fire Behrem and Adar6 (Aderan ?) at daybreak and midday. The 
more modern practice is commonly to pray the Nyayish of the sun four times 
in the day, and that of the moon thrice only in the month, when the moon 
waxes, and in the middle of the month, and when it wanes." Spiegel, iii. Ii. 

6 " I account the Minfikhired one of the most important works from the 2nd 
period of Parsism." Spiegel, Tradit. Schr. d. Pars. p. 135. "On the ground 
of language one must be inclined to assign it a comparatively higher age, un- 
der the rule of the Sassanidte. The book contains no historical points ; yet 
from some expressions I think myself justified in inferring that the book be- 
longs to the rule of the Sassanicke. Kings are often mentioned, in the work. 
'It is most useful to kings to consult with intelligent persons.' ' A good 
lang takes care that the land is cultivated, the poor protected, right hereditary 
custom preserved. For the good mazdaya^n faith he gives his life, and if 
any departs from the path of the Yazatas, he has him seized and brought back 
to the right way.' Such a picture seems to me to belong only to a ruler at a 
time when the religion of Zarathustra was still supreme in Eran. He men- 
tions wheat as the chief corn, which a Parsee, living in India, certainly would 



55S Daniel' s>.'advice to Neb. about alms ascrib.es to them 

idolatry, having been part of the Vedic worship, was part 
of the original Zoroastrism, having, with the rest, been re- 
tained rather than subsequently adopted in it. The fact, 
however, that the Parsees, of old, did perform the liba- 
tions thrice a day is denied by one who identifies the Par- 
see Homa ceremony with the Soma libation, or Savana 
of the Indian worship 1 . To us it is indifferent. For what 
has such idolatrous ritual to do with the private prayers 
of Daniel? The Parsee worshipped the creature; the 
Hebrew, the Creator ; the old Vedic worship was a libation 
to the god of fire, in reference to the rising, meridian, 
and setting sun ; DaniePs prayer was without ritual, 
without the Temple, amid suspended sacrifice, in his secret 
chamber, to the One Omnipresent, Invisible, God. His 
worship was as far removed from that of the Parsee, as 
God is above His unintelligent creation. Of simple 
prayers three times in the day, apart from ritual, no men- 
tion, I am informed, occurs in the Institute of Manu; 
the first mention of these prayers in Indian books is in a 
book whose earliest date is two centuries after our 
Lord 2 , 
v. 4. Lastly, Daniel's advice to Nebuchadnezzar is to 

not have lighted on." Spiegel, Trad. Sell. p. 137. " Also the doctrine of the 
heavenly wisdom, so prominent in the hook, and its contact with the ideas of 
Western Asia in the first centuries after Christ/speak for an, early date of the 
book." Id. Ib. 

1 For the third, or evening oblation, there was no room in the Parsee ri- 
tual, because no sacrificial rites are allowed to be performed at evening or 
night time." Haug,Essays, p. 239. 

? Dr. Aufrecht, with his wonted kindness, wrote for me the following state- 
ment on the times of prayer among the Hindus, (as distinct from the libations 
or Savanahs above mentioned.) "The term for twilight in Sanskrit is sandhyd, 
In this meaning it oecvirs already in Vedical books, and, as natural, very often 
in the Dual. As it was enjoined on eveiy Hindu to say his private prayers 
before sunrise and sunset, sandhyd soon became the technical term for the 
time of private devotions, and. ' to sit down to the sandhya,' is as much as to 
perform one's daily devotions. Manu knows only of two such periods, and, 
repeatedly, either uses the Dual (2, 78. 222.), or particularises them by saying 
pilrva and paschimd, or ptirvd and apard sandhyd, ' the former and latter 
time of prayer.' (2, 101 . 4, 93.) Ydjnavalhya, who avowedly is later than Manu, 
is the first who speaks of a traikdlyasandhyu, 'devotions performed three 
times a day,' (3, 308,) including the devotions at noon. But this third time 
of prayer has at no time become so obligatory as the two first." Stenzler, 



no "magical" effect, but agrees with the N. T. 559 

have been wrong, and to ascribe a magical effect to alms, 
such as, it is assumed, could only belong to the decay of 
Judaism. " Magical" it certainly is not ; for Daniel does 
not even venture to assure Nebuchadnezzar that it would 
avail. This future had not been revealed to him ; so he 
ventures not to anticipate the judgment of God. He says 
only, if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity. But 
DaniePs advice is, to imitate those two great attributes of 
God, which are the theme of the whole Old Testament, 
justice and mercy. Oppression and injustice were, pro- 
bably, almost inseparable from Heathen despotism. Any 
how, DaniePs advice implies that Nebuchadnezzar had 
fallen into them. His advice then is to those same two 
acts, which the Saviour of the world accepted in Zac- 
chseus 3 , reparation, and deeds of love. 4 Redeem thy sins 
by righteousness and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to 
the poor, or afflicted. If the Gospel has any other terms 
of forgiveness, than the breaking off of sin by its contrary, 
righteousness ; if there is any other valid token of re- 
pentance than newness of life; or if mercy shall cease 
to have that prerogative with God, that '"the merciful 
shall obtain mercy, then we may think that this advice 
belonged to a decayed Judaism. But, if the copying of 
those two great attributes of God is essential to the 
Christian, and, in the Great Day, 6 mercy shall rejoice 
over judgment, then we shall admire the great Prophet, 
who fearlessly admonished of his sins the conqueror of 
the world in the centre of his self-created magnificence, 
and exhorted him to a greater work than the conquest 
of the world, the conquest of himself, and to a greater 
glory than his stupendous works, to imitate that most 
glorious prerogative of the King of kings, the merciful- 
ness of our God. 

And now, by the mercy of my God, my task is done. 
I have pointed out to you that, place the book of Da- 

who edited the work of YrfjnavaHiya, puts his earliest date in the 2nd cent, 
after our Lord. Vorr. p. xi. 3 g. Liike xix. 8. 

4 Dan. iv. 27. Bug. 24. Cli. * S. Matt. v. 7. S. James ii. 13. 



560 ,'"..'.'. Summary. 

niel where men will, it contains undeniable prophecy 1 ; 
that its prophecy is at once vast and minute, relating hoth 
to the natural events of God's Providence, and the super- 
natural order of His Grace 3 ; that its minute prophecy 
is in harmony with that of the rest of Holy Scripture 3 ; so 
that they who reject it, do, either nakedly or on the one 
or other plea, reject all definite prophecy, leaving, of 
Holy Scripture, only what they will; that, whereas the 
minute prophecies of the book of Daniel exclude any date 
between its real date, that of the close of the captivity, 
and that which must have been its date, had it been a 
human book, that of Antiochus Epiphanes, the later 
date is precluded, both by the history of the closing 
of the Canon 4 , and by the references to the book of Da- 
niel 4 , as well in books of the Canon, Nehemiah and Ze- 
chariah, as also in other books, before, in, or soon after 
the date of Epiphanes, and also by the character of its 
first Greek translation; that neither its language 5 , nor 
its historical references 6 , nor its doctrines 7 , imply any 
later date than that of Daniel himself; but that, contra- 
riwise, the character of its Hebrew exactly fits with the 
period of Daniel 5 , that of its Chaldee excludes any later 
period 6 ; that the minute fearless touches, involving de- 
tails of customs, state-institutions, history, belong to a 
contemporary ; and that what are, superficially, historical 
difficulties, disappearing upon fuller knowledge, are in- 
dications of the accurate, familiar knowledge of one per- 
sonally acquainted with customs or events 6 . I have 
shewn too how its doctrines are in harmony with those 
of other Scriptures, earlier and later 7 . > 

Of the objections, I believe, that no one would have 
been thought of, but for the necessity of getting rid of 
the miracles and prophecies of Daniel, unless people 
would believe them. Certainly, no one objection appears 
to me even plausible. I have answered the objections. 

1 Lect. ii. and iii. 2 Lect.iv. 3 Lect. v.. 

4 Lect. vi. 5 Lect. 1. and NoteB and D at the end. 

Lect. vii. " Lect. viii. and ix. 



To answer objections prepares for faith, God's gift. 561 

To convince, is the office not of man but of God. Gibbon 
enunciated a larger truth than he was aware of, when, 
unable to see any escape from the contemporary evidence 
for a fact, or from its miraculousness, if it were true, 
he said, " 3 They all [all the witnesses of the fact] lived 
within the compass of a century; they all appeal to 
their personal knowledge or the public notoriety for 
the truth of a miracle which was repeated in several 
instances, displayed on the greatest theatre of the 
world, and submitted, during a series of years, to the 
calm examination of the senses. But the stubborn mind 
of an infidel is guarded by a secret incurable suspicion" 
incurable save by God. 

St. Paul had said the same before, 4 the natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; only, it is 
man's own fault, if, encompassed with the Gospel, he 
remain in, or apostatise into, a state of nature. Yet to 
see, (as I believe,) a solid answer to those objections, 
although it cannot give faith to one who has lost faith, 
may aid in beating off unbelief or may predispose for 
faith. It may put a person in the position, in which he 
will either not admit unbelief, or will seek for faith from 
Him Who gives it to all who seek Him. It is not enquiry, 
but a non-enquiring acquiescence in doubt, which is the 
peril of this day. It costs much to disbelieve ; it requires 
submission to our God and His grace, to believe. The 
temptation of this age is to try to find a middle path be- 
tween faith and unbelief; to say that "there is much to 
be said on both sides " to think that all things must be 
uncertain in themselves, because many of the persons 
around us are at sea as to all things, as if one thought all 
things to be in a whirl, because they seemed so to our 
neighbours who had dizzied themselves ; to bebrowbeaten 
out of belief; to shrink from avowing a steadfast ad- 
herence to that which must be old because it is eternal, 
and which must be unchangeable because it is truth; 
to pick something out of revelation, which, it thinks, 

3 Decline and Fall, c. 38. A.D. 530. " Persecution in Africa." 

4 1 Cor.ii.14. 

O O 



562 Truth-destroying compromise or truth, 

will not be gainsaid, and to relegate all else to be matter 
qf opinion; an indolent, conceited, soft, weak, painsrha- 
ting, trifling with the truth of God. 

It is not, for the present, a day of naked blasphemy. 
The age is mostly too soft for it. Voltaire's " 6crasez 
Vinfame" shpcks it. Yet I know not whether the open 
blasphemy of the 18th century is more offensive than 
the cold-blooded patronising ways of the 19th. Rebellion 
against God is not so degrading, nor so deceiving, as a 
condescending acknowledgement of His Being, while it 
denies His rights over us,. Be not then imposed upon by 
smooth words. It is an age of counterfeits. Look not 
only at what is said, but look for what is suppressed and 
tacitly dropped out of the Creeds. The rationalism of 
this day will give you good words as far as they go, but 
will empty them of their meaning; it will give as plausible 
a counterfeit as it can, but the image and superscription l 
is its own. It will gild its idols for you, if yoii will accept 
them for the Living God. It will give yoii sentiment 
instead of truth, but as the price at which you are to 
surrender truth. It will praise Jesus as, (God forgive 
it !) in fact, an enlightened Jew, a benefactor to mankind ; 
and it will ask you in exchange to consent, not to say that 
He was God. It will extol His superiority to Judaism, 
and include under " Judaism" truths of God. Itwill praise 
His words as full of truth, and will call them, in a sense, 
divine truths, and will ask you in exchange, not to say 
that it is the infallible truth. It will say, in its sense, that 
<e the Bible contains the word of God," and will ask of you 
to give up your belief that "it is the word of God." It 
will say, in its sense, that the prophets spake by the Holy 
Ghost, (i. e. as all which is good and true is spoken by 
inspiration of the Spirit of God,) and will ask of you, in 
exchange, to drop the words, or at least the meaning, 
of the Creed, that God the Holy Ghost " spake by the 
prophets." It will say to you, that the prophets were 
<{ elevated by a divine impulsion," and grant you " an 
intensified, presentiment," but only in the sense common 

1 &, M^tt, 



The choice. 563 

to the higher conditions of humanity, even unaided by 
the Grace of God 3 . It will acknowledge a fallible inspi- 
ration, fallible even as to matters of every-day-morality 3 , 
and will ask of you to surrender the belief in the infalli- 
ble. It will descant on the love of God, if you will surren- 
der your belief in His aweful Holiness and Justice ; it 
will speak with you of Heaven, if you, with it, will sup- 
press the mention of Hell. It will retain the words of 
revelation, and substitute new meanings, if you will be 
content with the sound, and will part with the substance 
of the word of God 4 . 

The battle must be fought. It is half-won, when any 
one has firmly fixed in his mind the first principle, that 
God is All- Wise and All-Good, and that man's own wis- 
dom, although from God, is no measure for the Wisdom 
of God, and cannot sound its depth. The criticism of 
rationalism is but a flimsy transparent veil, which hides 
from no eyes except its own, (if indeed it does hide it 
altogether from its own,) the real ground of its rebellion, 
its repugnance to receive a revelation to which it must 
submit, in order that it may see. 

You must make your choice. Let it be a real one. But, 
before you choose, set before you that Day in which you 
shall see unveiled, all what you now see in part, and think 
what it will be to find, that they whom you adopted as 
teachers, critics and criticism which has in no case sur- 
vived its parents, taught you to ignore or deny or dis- 
believe, or accuse in the Name of God, what is indeed the 
very truth of God. Even in this life, those mists which 
hurry along so vehemently, so darkly, so impetuously, 
like hosts disarrayed, in yon tumultuous, thronging and 
seemingly endless flight, part to the eye- which watches 
well, and there opens to it the serene depth of heaven, 
in its own unchanging brightness, calm as ever beyond, 

2 " They shew that there is a preconscious region of the soul, with which 
the divine Spirit, evoking its latent phenomena, has sympathetic relation." 
Davidson, ii. 466. from Contributions to Mental Philosophy by I. M. Fichte, 
translated by Morell, c. 3, 4. 3 e. g. Dr. Stanley, Jewish Church, p. 329. 

4 Prof. Jowett, Epistles of St. Paul, ii. 589. Essay on the Atonement. 

o o 2 



564 Object of faith as certain to us as our being. 

tineffaced, undimmed, uninjured^ by the black earth-born 
clouds, which roll so far below. Those glimpses, which, 
by the gift of God, come even in this world to the soul 
which resigns itself wholly to God, in prayer, in contem- 
plation, in meditation, in devout study of His word, are 
earnests of the clearness of the Eternal Day. The Christ- 
ian is as certain of the truth of what rationalism im- 
pugns, as of his own existence. For God, Who gave him 
his being, gave him also his faith. God did not reveal 
Himself, that we should live in a twilight, seeing nothing 
of His truth distinctly, but only l men, as trees, ivalking. 
Twilight must brighten into full day, or darken into the 
heaviness of night. To choose not to believe, is to dis- 
believe. To halt between two divided ways 3 , is to reject 
God-given truth. If the Lord be the God, follow Him ; 
and- if Baal; go after him. 

1 S. Mark viii. 24. 2 B>9yt$ 2 Kings xviii..21. 



f&anfc*. fcfr to 



NOTES. 



Note A. on p. 38. 

EXPLANATION OF THE WORDS IN DANIEL WHICH ARE, OR 
WERE SUPPOSED TO BE ARYAN WORDS, BY PROFESSOR 

MAX MlLLLER. 

One who is only a Semitic scholar cannot, of course, estimate 
the different explanations of the Aryan names in Daniel, except in so 
far as some are self-evidently bad. I applied therefore to one, who 
to his great Sanskrit knowledge adds a marvellous genius in compa- 
rative philology, Max Muller. With his wonted kindness, he has 
written down for me the following explanations of the words, upon 
which I consulted him. Words, which, as ,13134 and pa-ip, are clearly 
Semitic, or, as n|, rti|, are of simple etymology and became indige- 
nous in other Semitic languages, needed no explanation, and on 
. these I did not consult him. 

"1) Pathbag is of Persian origin. Path corresponds to the Zend 
preposition paiti, and is the same as pith in pithgam, (Noi2.) This 
Zend preposition paiti corresponds to the Sanskrit preposition prati. 
(comp. Trport (Homer,) iropn (Cretan,) mm, (Homer), and Trpds.) This 
paiti in Zend expresses distribution, as paiti asne, day by day, (Sanskr. 
pratyaham.) It likewise conveys the notion of movement towards, 
whether in a friendly or hostile sense, (paityrara, contrarius.) The 
second part of pathbag is the Persian bdg, ' tribute,' the Sanskrit 
bhaga, 'a portion.' It happens that. the very compound pratibMga 
has been preserved in Sanskrit, where it is explained as ' A share of 
small articles, as fruit, flowers, &c. .paid daily to the Raja for house- 
hold expenditure.' This was pointed out by Gildemeister, Zeitschrift 
fur Kunde des Mqrgenlandes, w. p. 214. 

" Scaliger (Animadversiones ad Euseb. Chron. p. 112,) speaking 
of the change of g into z, has the following remark: 'hanc commuta- 
tionem G et Z nihil planius ostendere potest quam 7nmy3ats, quod 
dictum est pro mm'/Sayi? vel Trcm/Jayis. Nomen est Assyriacum,^aA- 
bag Danielis, i, 8. Act'j/wv eV rpiria Hepa-iK&v, citante Athenaeo,-m 
Se 7roTi)8ais apros Kpt$tvos Kai Trvpwos OTTTOS, /cat Kvirapio'vov ore^avoSj 
Kat otvos Ke/Cjoayoievos ev <o<3 j^py<r<3, ov avros ySacriXei's Trivet. Itaque 



566 Max Muller on Aryan words 

pathbag non solum cibum significat, ut interpretantur ludaei, sed 
et omnia quae recensentur a Dinone, in quibus corona, quod ad su- t 
perstitionera Chaldaicam pertinet. Ideo Daniel et socii maluerunt 
absfcinere quam iis uti. Nam si solus irvpivos apros aut Kpidwos fuis- 
set, non magis respuissent quam eorura legumina cocta.' 

"The coincidence between Dinon's explanation of Tron/Ja&s as ve- 
getables, wreaths, &c. to be taken by the King, and the independent 
interpretation of pratibhdga by Sanskrit lexicographers is curious. 

" 2) In pithgam, the first portion is again the preposition paiti, in 
the sense of ' towards ;' gam is to ' go' in Sanskrit, Zend, and the Cunei- 
form Inscriptions. Hence pratigama might well have had the mean- 
ing of ' messenger,' though thecompound does not occur in that sense in 
Sanskrit. There is, however, a similar compound in Sansk., prati- 
sasana, which means ' sending a servant on a message,' from prati, 
' towards,' and sdsana, ' commanding.' That the compound pratiga- 
ma, in the sense of ' messenger,' existed in Persian, is shown by the mo- 
dern Persian paiam, nuntius. There is the intermediate form paig- 
hdm, and the Haft qulzum mentions an archaic form paitdm. In 
Armenian too patgam exists, in the sense of 'message.' Paiti sinks 
down to pai in modern Persian, as for instance, paiker, ' picture,' 
corresponding to a Sanskrit compound, prati-kara, literally counter- - 
feit. Patikara occurs in the Cuneiform Inscriptions." 

[The i in paiti was probably elided in Aramaic, (both pathbag- and 
pithgam became indigenous in Syriac also,) on the principle of re- 
ducing the words to quadriliterals.] 

3) "Sagan is very likely connected with the Modern Persian shaft- 
neh, a ' prefect,' but the etymology of the word is not clear. The 
Sanskr. root KsM,to rule, appears in the Cuneiform Inscriptions as s/ii 
in shiydti, ' dominion ; ' once shdyatd. Kshayathiya, ' King,' in the 
Cuneif. Inscriptions, becomes shdh in Mod. Persian. 

"4) Pechah. Is this a foreign word, having a Semitic status con- 
structus, and the plural pachoth 9. It could not be derived from Sansk. 
paksha, Prakrit pakkha, which means, 'side,' ' wing ;' pratipaksha, 
' enemy,' sapaksha, ' friend.' 

[The Hebrew Pechah is remarkable from its early reception 
into Hebrew, having become a title of some " governors " in Solo- 
mon's outlying dominions. For in that they are mentioned, both in 
1 Kings x. 15. and 2 Chron. ix. 14, in union with " the kings of Ara- 
bia," as persons who supplied a yearly quantity of gold in addition 
to his regular revenue, and this, in connection with that derived from 
the merchants, it is in itself probable, that " the Pachoth of the land" 



in Daniel. 567 

were governors set over the outlying country beyond Judrea proper. 
And this is illustrated by the second place in which they are men- 
tioned, (1 Kings xx. 24.) where Benhadad, after his first defeat, is 
advised to depose the thirty-two subordinate kings who helped him, 
(Ib. 16.) and to put Pachoth in their place. He substituted Syrian 
" governors " for the 32 tributary " kings." Then, still in that neigh- 
bourhood, and in part doubtless in the same country, they are in mi- 
litary command in Sennacherib's army, leading doubtless their own 
contingent of troops, in his multitudinous host. (2 Kings xviii. 24.) 
Sennacherib compares Hezekiah to one of the " governors " of the 
subjugated provinces, which he held subdued. (Comp. Is. x. 8, 9. 
2 Kings xviii. 34.) Then, in each case joined with Sagans, Pechah is 
used of Babylonian, (Jer. li. 23, 57. Ez. xxiii. 6, 23.) and Median, 
(Jer. li. 28.) governors. Daniel, in recounting the Babylonian go- 
vernors, places the Pechahs the third, after the Satraps and Sagans. 
(iii. 2. 3. 27.) Under Darius, they are not immediately united with 
the Sagans, but still are enumerated with these only, the Satraps and 
the hadddberin, " privy councillors." vi. 8. Somewhat later, (Esth. 
viii. 9. ix. 3,) the Pechahs are mentioned without the Sagans, but 
with the Satraps and the " princes of the provinces." In the times 
after the captivity there were several such Pechahs, westward of 
the Euphrates, between it and Judaea, (Ezr. viii. 36. Neh. ii. 7. 9,) 
probably the same locality, in regard to which the name was first 
used under Solomon. Specifically, Tatnai is entitled as " Pechah 
beyond the river," Ezr, v. 3. vi. 6, who, (although apparently he dwelt 
at Jerusalem, Neh. iii. 7,) is yet, in the same rescript of Darius, dis- 
tinguished from "the Pechah of the Jews," (Ezr. vi. 7-) whom natu- 
rally there was most occasion to mention. (Hagg. i. I. 14. ii. 2. 21. 
Mai. i. 8. Neh. v. 14. 18. xii. 26.) 

It seems to me most probable, that Solomon adopted the title, as 
it already existed in the Syrian territories, for it is not said that he 
" placed Pechahs," but only that they paid him gold. Thus the 
name " Rajah " is continued in our Indian dominions. 

On my replying that Pechah had no possible Semitic etymology, 
and enquiring whether it could be connected with Pasha or with 
Beg, Max Miiller kindly gave me this further answer.] 

" If Pechah is connected with Pashdh, the history of the word would 
be very curious. 

" The modern Persian padshdh is a compound ; pad, the Sansk. pati, 
1 lord,' (iro'o-ts), Zend paiti. It does not occur in the Cuneiform In- 
scriptions. Shdh, ' King,' is what remains of the Khshdyathiya, the 



568 Max Miiller on Aryan words 

6 

name for ' King 1 ' is the Cuneiform Inscriptions ; Darius calling him- 
self Khshayathiya Khshdyathiydndm, just like the modern Shdhin- 
shdh. Hebrew does not tolerate, I believe, two such initial con- 
sonants as Kh -j- sh ; hence, in the name of Xerxes, the Cuneiform 
KhshaydrsUd, we get Achashverush ; instead of Satrap, the Cunei- 
form Khshatrapdvd, we get Achaslidarpenim, In Persian, the guttu- 
ral was afterwards dropt ; this gives Satrap instead of Khshatrap. 
In the same manner Kkshdyathiye in Persian sank down to shdyathi- 
ya, and finally to Shdh. Could the chdh in Chaldee be meant for this 
shdh ? The guttural was there originally as much as the sibilant, 
but I find no trace of the sibilant being dropt in Persian and the 
guttural retained. 

" As to Beg- I can find nothing except that it is treated as a bonft 
fide Turkish word, and would therefore be quite independent of Se- 
mitic or Aryan. 

5) "Gisbar, a compound of gis and Mr. Bar is clearly Persian, 
meaning at the end of compounds, ' Keeper.' Gis is most likely a 
contraction of gins, (comp. ginsin, 'treasures,') but it is doubtful whe- 
ther gins is of Semitic or Aryan origin. Dietrich thinks it can be 
explained as a Semitic formation and that it was borrowed by the 
Persians from their Semitic neighbours. If on the contrary gins is, 
like' Mr, of Persian origin, it will have to be identified with the 
Mod. Pers. genj, 'treasure,' and the compound gisMr with genjvdr, 
1 treasurer.' Genj in Persian has been derived from Sansk. ganja 
' treasure.' But though ganja occurs in Sanskrit in that sense, and 
likewise ganjavara, ' treasurer,' they both occur in late Sanskrit 
only, and were probably transferred from Persian into Sanskrit. 
Other words for treasure in Sansk. are kosa, which has been suggest- 
ed as an etymon of gis ; and kdnchana, gold. 

" The Old-Persian gaitJia has been guessed by Dr. Haug as the 
origin of genj and gins, but none of these etymologies convey real 
conviction. The Greek ya^a, 'royal treasure,' and yao<vA.a, 'trea- 
surer,' come from the same source as the Persian genj, but they 
throw no light on the original intention of the word." 

[The Semitic etymology ofiu, "treasure, "is, in itself, satisfactory; 
since, in Aramaic, it signifies, 1) " hidden," (as, in the unsettled state 
of the East, would be common as to " treasure, ") then, " laid up." In 
Syriac Ni'ij " the hidden," is a common title of God, the adv. n'tjt'j} 
" in a veiled way " occurs in S. Ephr. i. 414. of one " lurking con- 
cealed," Barh. p. 490. 1. 17- B. A trace of the same meaning occurs 
in Arabic too, 1) "covered," 2) "collected." (See Ges. Thes. p. 296.) 



in Daniel. 569 

And, since tu is used of a " chest" in which merchandise was " laid 
up" and conveyed, (Ez. xxxii. 24.) the name may have travelled with 
the thing ; and the word, which originally expressed the chest in which 
valuables were " stored up," may have been transferred to the stores 
themselves. The word having been naturalised in Persian, (see Max 
Muller above,) the difficulty of its etymology being half Semitic, half 
Persian, is removed. The naturalised Persian word was united with 
the old Persian, as we, in our familiar " stable-keeper," unite the La- 
tin and Saxon, unconscious that they are such. The compound it- 
self, gidsabro, "treasurer," occurs in the Peshito in Kings, Chron. Ezr. 
and also in Barh. Chr. p. 425. 1. 6. 152. 1. 7- and, (written xhajw,) in a 
Nestorian Epistle, A. D. 1504, in Ass. B.O. iii. 594 (quoted by Ges. 
1. c.) as also the abstract, gidsborutho, " treasury." B. B. and B. A. 
The gedabar of Daniel is recognised as a variation, perhaps dialectic, 
of the gidsbar of Ezra and modern Syriac, the sibilant being dropped.] 
" 6) Dethaldr is clearly a Persian compound ; the second part bdr 
is the same as in gisbdr ; the first deth stands for the Mod. Pers. 
dad. It occurs also as dath in Daniel. The two roots da, ' to give,' 
(Si'Soyu) and dhd, ' to place' (rfdq/u) assume in Persian one and the 
same form. Hence Add means a ' gift,' (from da,) and also 'law' and 
' religion,' i. e. what is settled and established, (from dhd.) The 
Partic. past of dd, in the Cuneiform Inscr., is data." 

" 7) Tiphta seems a Semitic word, though it occurs in Daniel only. 
The same Semitic root yields the Arabic Mufti." 

[In answer to a subsequent enquiry, "whether Benfey's explanation 
of Tifta tyAtipaiti was admissible?" Max Muller answered, "atipati 
is really no Sanskrit word at all; at least, it never could mean ' Ober- 
herr.' [Benfey's rendering.] That in Sanskrit would be adhipat. If it 
is objectionable to trace Tifta to the same root as Mufti, the word, 
Tifta, must be left for the present unexplained, without saying any- 
thing about such a mere guess as atipati." The Semitic etymology 
is perfectly satisfactory, Tifta, as well as Mufti, being the name of an 
office. I hesitated to adopt it, until Benfey's etymology should be dis- 
posed of, because, liAtipaiti had the meaning, which he assigned to it, 
it was a possible etymology, (although, as Furst also observes, very 
vague,) and also because of the bearings of the etymology on the 
date of the book of Daniel. For, derived from the same root vis, it 
involves this ; that the name of the office, in Daniel's time, was de- 
rived from a meaning of the root in Aramaic, which was subsequent- 
ly wholly lost, although it survived in the corresponding title in 
Arabic. Its use in the Arabic verb is rather obscure. In conj. iv. 



570 Max Mutter on Aryan words in Daniel. 

it signifies, " he taught another, by way of response, as to (he truth 
or law of a thing," (see in Freytag Lex.) whence the partic, 
Mufti, " one who so taught." Yet the words, fatvai, fotvai, the 
" response" itself, indicate the existence of the simple root. Proba- 
bly it was connected with the Heb. root, no?, " was open," which, in 
its stronger form, 059, signified, " laid open," which also in Arabic 
is used of God's " laying open" by revelation, and of man's" dijudi- 
cating^" See Freytag, sub v.] 

" 8) Sarbal, like the Arabic servdl, plur. serdvll, is of Persian ori- 
gin. Dozy (Dictionnaire des Noms des Vetements, p. 204) shows 
that Mohammed forbad pilgrims to wear serdvil on their pilgrimage 
to Mekka. The Persian word for braccae is shalvar, or more cor- 
rectly shulvdr. Shul in Persian is femur, the Sanskrit Kshura or 
Khura,hoof', Latin, cms, cruris. The Greeks changed Shulvar into 
0-apa.papa, (r07)s HeprnK-rj, Suidas), later, crapa/SaAAa. In Sarbal, the 
r and 1 changed places. 

" The -Zend, sdravdro, [quoted by Gesenius Thes. p. 971 J is a dif- 
ferent word, and means literally ' a cover of the head.' From this 
word sdra, 'head,' Sanskrit siras, the term 

" 9) Sarak may be regularly derived, being an adjective in ka, 
meaning 'head-man.' In Sanskrit, siras is not used with reference to 
persons, as little as the Greek Kopvs ; but ser, ' head,' is frequently ap- 
plied to persons in modern Persian, in the sense of Kopv^aios. 

" 10) Hamnik, derived from Sanskr. mani, a 'jewel,' with a secon- 
dary derivative, ka, manika. The Latin monile is a cognate word." 
" It is impossible to give any etymology of the proper names Mlshach, 
Shadrach, &c. Mlshach may have been mis, 'friend,' sA/t,'KSng,' but 
in Persian this compound could only mean, 'King of the friend.' Ml- 
shach maybe 'lambkin,' Sanskr. meshaka, as Dietrich supposes; but 
there can be nothing certain or even probable with regard to proper 
names of which we know nothing but their sound. 

"'KWapis cannot possibly be derived from the Persian sitdreh, a 
three-stringed (not six-stringed) instrument. Ktdapis occurs in 
Homer, and the numeral three, the Sanskr. tri, is still unchanged in 
Zend, where it appears as thri. Si is a much later corruption: of this. 

" Partemim is clearly the plural of a Persian Word. It is the 
Sanskr. prathama; Zend, frathema; Cuneiform Inscriptions, fra- 
tama ; Pehlevi, pardom ; irpwos. 

"Daryavesh is a more accurate transcript of the name of the Per- 
sian king than Aa/jeios. Darius calls himself in his Inscriptions 
Ddryavush, which means the 'holder' or 'supporter.'" 



Note B. on p. 36. 

ON THE HEBREW OF THE BOOK OF DANIEL, AND THE 
ARGUMENT ALLEGED FROM IT FOR THE " LATENESS " OF 
THAT BOOK. 

The evidence for the " lateness " of the hook of Daniel, to he de- 
rived from its six Hebrew chapters, was not a little eccentric. Of 
course, the book of Daniel was " late." According to its historical 
date, it was one of the " latest " books of the Canon. Eight books 
of the Canon only were later ; the three prophets after the captivity, 
the Chronicles, (in which however earlier documents were used,) Ezra, 
Nehemiah, Esther. The date, however, required for the book of Da- 
niel, if it was not to be his, was two centuries and a half later than 
the latest of these. In order then to prove that the style of the book 
of Daniel evinced that it was so much later than his date, it ought to 
have been shewn, that it was different in character from the books 
written soon after the captivity. On the contrary, the evidence chief- 
. ly alleged is, that it has certain words in common with them. 

Thus, i. " Daniel, as well as Ezekiel and the author of the books of 
Chronicles, revived idioms out of the Pentateuch." (Leng. p. bd.) 
This, at least, suits a date which lay between Ezekiel and the historian. 
Granted, that it shewed that Daniel wrote at a late date ; yet it is not a 
date, later than that of the prophet himself. 

ii. " There are agreements with Ezekiel, and the books of the latest 
period." (Leng. p. Ix.) Again, correspondence with Ezekiel, who was 
older than Daniel, as a proof that Daniel was above four centuries 
younger ! 

iii. " He imitates Jeremiah, who, in the case of the genuineness [of 
the book,] was almost his contemporary." (Leng. followed by Dav. 
iii. 194.) But it is now acknowledged that the prophets did pur- 
posely use the words of those almost their contemporaries, (see ah. 
p. 308, 9.) The date, also, at which Daniel wrote the prophecies de- 
livered through himself, Avas nearly 70 years after Jeremiah's prophe- 
cy of the captivity. 

iv. " The prayer c. ix. contains verbal imitations of Nehemiah." 
(Leng. and from Mm De Wette and Dav.) The truth is the converse, 
that Nehemiah adopted a few words of address to God from Daniel's 
prayer. (See ah. p. 353-6.) 



572 Alleged marks of ee lateness" in 

v. Daniel's expressions " are often careless, clumsy, or obscure." 
Three such expressions are alleged out of his Chaldee ; ii. 30. v. 4. 
vi. 21.; four out of his Hebrew, i. 21. ix. 8. 26. xi. 6. What, if there 
had been obscurity ? Is there none in Hosea, or in the hymn of Ha- 
bakkuk, or in Ezekiel, or even here and there in Isaiah ? This "ob- 
scurity, &c," however, is to be an indication, that he had not the full 
grasp of the language, but wrote as one who had learned it. (Leng. Ib.) 
Now, contrariwise, a writer, who has learned a language, avoids ob- 
scure expressions. Obscurity arises from the use of words or idioms, 
which, in course of time, become obsolete, or of allusions, which come 
to be forgotten ; or in a pregnancy or conciseness of diction, which 
a writer uses, in the full confidence that he shall be understood by 
those to whom the language which he uses is as familiar as to himself. 
Moreover, three out of the seven expressions are in his Aramaic, the 
language which Daniel spoke, which, in a later style, the Jews con- 
tinued to use. Daniel's style in writing Aramaic is to be a proof of 
his " clumsiness," &c. in writing Hebrew ! But after all, in three 
out of the four Hebrew passages, there is no obscurity. ) There 
could not be a simpler sentence than that, Dan. i. 21. n^ IK !?K.>ri 'ii;i 
^SB lihto^i nny lit. "And Daniel was, [i. e. continued,] unto the year 
one of Cyrus the king." He states, in other words, that he continued 
through the whole residue of the Babylonian empire. " Unto," it 
is well known, does not exclude the time beyond ; it only reaches 
quite up to the term. This is an idiom of all Hebrew. The ex- 
pression is " unsuited to an author of the Maccabee times." (Leng.) 
Granted. V) ix. 8. there is not even an alleged obscurity of style. 
It is flowing Hebrew : $ K&ri itfg 'Jibi &$ } u^oV D'JBrr nyz w^> ^it$ 
" O Lord, to us confusion of face, to our kings, to our princes, and 
to our fathers, us who have sinned against Thee." What is alleg- 
ed, is to be, not an obscurity, but an anachronism ; the mention of 
their "kings" is not to suit either the time of Daniel or of the Mac- 
cabees ; the writer is to have " used places like Ezra ix. 7, forgetting 
the contradiction that there were no kings in the exile." But 1) the 
shame of the Jewish kings must have been most keenly felt in Baby- 
lon, where Jehoiachin lived in his prison -garments for 37 years, dur- 
ing the whole reign of Nebuchadnezzar, and, when removed by 
Evilmerodach above the other kings of Babylon, was still part of his 
conqueror's show. (2 Kings xxv. 27-30.) There too, while he lived, 
was the eyeless Zedekiah in chains. (Jer. xxxix. 7- 2 Kings xxv. 7.) 
2) The mention of " our fathers," in the same sentence, shews that 
Daniel was not thinking of his own generation only. But his fathers 



the Hebrew in Daniel. 573 

were kings. (Dan. i. 3.) 3) Of course, whatever explanation suited 
Ezra, who lived after the captivity, would have suited Daniel too, since 
at neither time were there kings reigning, c) " Dan. ix. 26, \h J'N]," is 
only too clear. It will not mean, what these writers want it to mean, 
for their explanations. (See ab. p. 182. n. 11.) d) Dan. xi. 6, re- 
quires attention ; hut the ohscurity lies, not in the Hebrew words, 
but in the substance. It is prophesied of the alliance between Antio- 
chus Theos and Ptolemy Philadelphus, who married his daughter 
Berenice to Antiochus, to make terms of agreement, (the legitimate 
wife Laodice being dismissed,) that it should "not stand." She 
shall not retain the power of the arm, neither shall he stand nor 
his arm ; but she shall be given up, and they that brought her, and 
he that begat her, and he that strengthened her, in the times. Out 
of all this, the one word, ty">J> "his arm," is selected as obscure, neither 
he shall stand nor his arm, i. e. according to the common Hebrew idi- 
om, "neither he nor his helper," i. e. she who was to have strengthen- 
ed him by her alliance, Berenice, (as Leng. himself explains it, p. 517, 
in seeming unconsciousness of any difficulty.) I will add, in illus- 
tration of this criticism, that the Aramaic passages, against which 
Leng. excepts, are equally clear. 

v. "He is unacquainted with vau conversive." (Leng. Dav. iii. 194.) 
This is a marvellous statement, since Daniel uses it continually. It 
means, (as Leng. shews, p. 552,) that, in vivid prophetic description, 
Daniel used the abridged future with the simple "and" But this 
occurs in books of the middle age, and even in the Pentateuch. (See 
below p. 587.) 

vi. "He omits the article, where there can be no ambiguity." (Leng. 
translated by Dav.) Why should he not ? He does so only in the 
more elevated prophetic descriptions, as do writers of the middle age 
of Hebrew. (See below p. 585.) 

vii. " Other words only find their parallels in the Targums and the 
Rabbins. Such are, D'jni, [our "vegetables,"] onlyin Aramaic ; o^y :g 
'everlasting life;' and ini, in its original meaning ' shine,' only in 
the Targums (!) ; and a proverbial expression, (D. iv. 32.) which only 
occurs besides in the Targums and the Talmudists." (Leng. Dav.) 
This large language, (" the Targums and Talmudists,") really means, 
that Buxtorf noted one instance of the Aramaic expression, ?>v:j sno;, 
in a late Targum, (Eccl. viii. 3.) and one in Sanh. 93. 1. The ex- 
pression would be remarkable, only if it had the meaning given to it 
by Gesenius, on the strength of an analogous Arabic idiom, "Who 
shall strike His hand?" Buxtorf, however, did not think that such was 



574 Hebrew of Daniel suits his age. 

its meaning, but rather, "restrain." There is no trace of. the physi- 
cal meaning in the other idioms, given hy Buxtorf, in which sno, as 
in this, signifies "restrain "or "prohibit." In them, it cannot mean 
"strike." " It was in his power to hinder, and he hindered not," wa rvn 
nrra &1 nin^, Sanhedr. 103. 1 . (in Buxt. c. 11 86.) " For My glory ye 
did not avert it, (crrnD n^>) but for flesh and blood ye did:avert it, (onmo)." 
(Sanh. 10. 1. 103. 2. Ib.) "He hindered them not." (jraKn'o^i) Sanh. 
93. 1. (Ib.) " He who removes, takes away, his neighbour's wife." 
;mm Nnn'x^ .T!? 'HOT Sanh. f. 109, 2. (Ib.) vanp "ITO, "to remove its 
intestines." Pesach. f. 65. (Ib.) 'Vsa iron K^I ra WBD, "they remove 
with the hand and do not remove with an instrument." Shabb. f. 440. 
So then, probably, ira NHD simply means " withhold his hand," as no 
means "withhold him." It would have been a remarkable expres- 
sion, had Nebuchadnezzar used it of Almighty God. Yet, in that case, 
its occurring in Daniel's Aramaic could not indicate, even on the un- 
believing hypothesis, a late date of the book ; for the character of the 
Jewish mind (as seen in the Targums) was to efface or soften any 
expressions, which speak of God after the manner of men. But 
after all, the critics must have forgotten that the expression occurs 
in Daniel's Aramaic, not in his Hebrew. For what an argument is 
it, "We find a proverbial [Aramaic] expression, only found besides in 
the Targums and Talmudists ! " Where else should one find it, since 
there was no occasion for it in Ezra, and there is no other Bibli- 
cal Aramaic ? 

But, in the Hebrew of Daniel, Aramaic as well as Aryan words 
suit his real age. On the other words, see below. 

The result of the following arrangement of the marked words or 
idioms in Daniel is, I think, to shew that his Hebrew is just what one 
should expect at the age at which he lived. The number of words 
or idioms peculiar to himself suits the age of one who himself had 
full mastery of the language. The use of words, which have not 
lived in the Aramaic which the Jews cultivated, (that which remains 
in the Targums and the Gemara,) but which have lived on in the lan- 
guage of Western Syria, belongs to a date, when those dialects were 
more allied than they came to be, or perhaps before they had yet se- 
parated. The use of the Pentateuch, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, is in 
harmony with what we know of one who, when he had reached man's 
threescore years and ten, was himself made the channel of prophecy, 
but who, up to that time, had only had insight given to him as to the 
meaning of the visions vouchsafed to Nebuchadnezzar, and who, he 
himself tells us, had studied the previous Scriptures. (Dan. ix. 2.) 



Words or idioms peculiar to Daniel. 575 

The proportion of the idioms, which he has in common with the mid- 
dle age of Hebrew, to that of the books which are historically of a late 
period, shews that there is no marked preponderance of either, while 
there is not one word or idiom, which, in the slightest degree, beto- 
kens an age later than that of the prophet. 

I have marked with; a f the words or idioms, which Lengerke put 
together, De Wette copied, St'ahelin selected mostly, and Davidson 
translated, in order to give a shew of proof for the "lateness " of the 
book of Daniel. 

1) Words or idioms peculiar to Daniel. 

^SPI ^',3^ io5J Dan. i. 4 ; else, ^. 

Dan. i. 5, 8, 1 3, 1 5. xi. 26. see Note A.p. 565, 6. and C. p. 595, 6. 
| Dan. i. 5. 8. DH^WE* } i. 16. 

ty;, then, $> tiffi with name, but omitting nt^ Dan. i. 7. The 
construction in the Chaldee of Daniel is that which is usual in He- 
brew, nnytiy with the name. Dan. v. 12. Judg. viii. 31. 2 Kings xvii. 
34. Neh. ix. 7- 

yfa p tfjag, "sought from that," Dan. i. 8. comp. i JD Nj#ii. 16. 
23. Ch. 

D^'J? f, " like (those of) your age," i. 10. (In Samaritan also ^u, nVj; 
and ^-j, in the like idiom in Arabic, "with (thoseof) thine age." See Ges. 
p. 283.) from 'ya, as nh, "generation," from in. InTalm. it survived 
in the one idiom, i!?u p, " his contemporary." This then was to beTal- 
mudia. But didithen Arabs and Samaritan*get it from the Talmud ? 

ns^srj, i. 11. 16. The Hebrew article implies that a word, even if 
it becomes a proper name, retains its appellative meaning. Hebrew 
writers do not add the art. to foreign proper names, when the ety- 
mology is lost. (See Ew. Gr. p. 569.) The name Melzar must then 
have been an appellative or nearly so, in Daniel's time. In the time 
of the earliest translations, it must have been lost ; for all treat it as a 
- proper name and corrupt it. It has (Dr. Aufrecht tells me) a pos- 
sible Persian etymology, (that of Bohlen,) molsar, "head of wine," 
L e. "thechief cellarer," and this agrees with the context. Only there 
is. no proof that the compound existed in old Persian. Ithas^not 
survived. 

D'jni, f i. 12. "herbs," lit, "things sown." .Also D'jjn], f Dan. i. 1.6. 
(formed with Heb. ending, p ) Syr. Kby-$, niipii. Isaiah has D'j/nj, 
of "garden herbs," Ixi. 11. and Moses has the sing, yyij, Lev. xi. 37. 
The only other Hebrew words for herbs are, rftte, 2 Kgs. iv. 39. (poet. 
Is. xxvi. 19.) pv, our greens, Deut. xi. 10. 1 Kgs. xxi. 2. Pr. xv. 17. 

D'9#*, t i- 20. ii. 2. In Ch. r\ws sing. Dan. if. 10. plur. Dan. ii. 27. 



576 Word or idioms 

iv. 4. v. 7- 11. 15. In Syriac, "ashoofo" was used by Bar Hebrseus 
(Chron. p. 491,) so late as the end of the 13th cent., of a kind of en- 
chanter ; in the Targums or Talmud it does not apparently occur. 
(See Buxtorf.) 

vj> np;ru tajtf>, " his sleep was away," lit. " upon him," (so that its 
absence was heavy on him,) ii. 1. like Ch. 'itf^J ntu ae^ "his sleep was 
fled, (so as to be oppressive,) upon him." Dan. vi. 19. 
myfti, Ib. like 'fl'Sjj, viii. 27. 

0^3, " The Chaldaeans," i. e. the learned caste among them. Dan. 
U.-2.4.5. 10.iv.4.v.7. 11. 

^x f\ii) ,iN-]j, Dan. viii. 1. nx-p is often used of God's " appearing," 
" allowing Himself to be seen," as man can see Him. Here only of 
a vision, shewn by Him. 

^Kyi 'Ji '^8 nK-ij, viii. 1, (add 15,) an emphatic repetition of the 
pronoun, used throughout Hebrew, Gen. xxvii. 34. 1 Sam. xxv. 24. 
2 Sam. xvii. 5. Ezek. xxxiv. 11. 20. (probably not in Ps. ix. 7. Hag. 
i. 4.) but the use of the noun after the pronoun so repeated is rare. 
*H?52 'JN 'V occurs in 1 Kings i. 26, the exact idiom only in the Chald. 
of Ezra, Kflppijer^ NJN 'jo vii. 21. and of Daniel, ^nyj rug 'on vii. 15. 

^N or ^, "stream," Dan. viii. 2, 3, 6. The root occurs in V?; 
stream." [plur.] Is. (ii.) Vjr, Id. (Jer.) and even kan, " flood," and 
n$>|:, (of diseased sheep) Lev. xxii. 22. Aquil. Theod. Syr; retain the 
word Ubal; Ixx. render " gate ; " Symm. " marsh." 

tf.rsj, Dan. viii. 3. [ii.] 6; 7- 20, after the analogy of n;?^, Prov. xxviii. 
6. See Ew. Ausf. Lehrb. 186. g. p. 485. ed. 7. 

a3ii)'), viii.5, more vividly than yx j&j; lit. "there was none touch- 
ingtheearth." In prose, }<ij is used throughout Hebrew with the 
participle, as in Lev. xi. 4, Deut. xxi. 20, Judg. iii. 25, 1 Sam. xi. 7; 
and so with all the persons, ]oS'3j'N, Ex. v. 10, Deut. iv. 42; sij't}, Gen. 
xx. 7, xliii. 5, Ex. viii. 17; naj'fc, Deut. i. 32, iv. 12. See Fiirst, Cone, 
p. 45, col. 3, 4. v. WK &c. The use of ps with the noun and the 
partic. following, occurs even in the Pent., probably to express more 
emphatically the utter absence of the act ; as in Gen. xxxix. 23. px 
Vi;3 ncuND-^-n^i nxi ijjbij-fi'3 ~\is ', " the keeper of the prison did not in 
any way regard anything whatever under his hand," (as we say, 
" wholly disregarded,") and in Ex. v. 16. )$ ]*$ jap, " straw none is gi- 
ven ;" as. we might say, "there is no straw whatever given." In 
like way, rfy} qoa j'g, 2 Chron. ix. 20. add Ezr. iii. 13, Esth. iii. 4. 
The proper name occurs in the same construction in Esth. ii. 20. 
rnaa }%$$ \*x, and iii. 5. No other usage reaches the conciseness and 
energy of the idiom in Daniel. 



peculiar to Daniel. 577 

ni?, viii. 5, 8. of conspicuous beauty, as nyip, 2 Sam. xxiii. 31. 

inbnpqg, viii. -6. 

^H<, with verb of motion, viii. 7 5 17- ' 

>PT9(i! (Hithp.) Dan. viii. 7- xi. 11. comp. Arab, marmara, "was an- 
gry," Syr. ethmarmar, " was embittered." 

ii t 'D !?:*!$> H? nyj N 4 ?, viii. 7. *? instead of n$, perhaps with the idea of 
" extending help to." 

"And when it was strong, the great horn was broken," nuiif n$y$i 
Wisjj lit- " and there rose up, conspicuous beauty, four " (horns.) 
Dan. viii. 8. The idiom, wiij j-jg, "horn of conspicuous beauty," 
just before, (viii. 5.) which bears out the meaning, justified its exceed- 
ing boldness. 

o:9$7 rrtnn j/3^, the fuller form, Dan. viii. 8. xi. 4. comp. Dan.vii. 2. 
Ch. for riinn Wj^, Ezek. xlii. 20. 

'iTVVO " less than little," " very little," viii. 9 ; after the analogy of 
^>Nto " next to the ^xi, nearest of kin," or IIJND. See Ges. Thes. p. 801. 

'3x;j, lit. " the pleasantness," for, " the pleasant land," Dan. viii. 
0. as Judaea is called, \j&' pjK, " the land of pleasantness," Dan. xi. 
16, 41. comp. Tftar^n-^ <?, "the glory of all lands," Ezek. xx. 6. 
15. Y~$ '??> "the glory of the land," (Moab,) Ib. xxv. 9. nbko :jy. 
" the glory of kingdoms," (Babylonia,) Is. xiii. 19. ijsji px is not 
an idiom sufficiently frequent, nor was the term vw sufficiently ap- 
propriated to Judaea, that r;? should be a brief form for '3VD H. 
Rather it is a bold use of the abstract, like irnn below, ix. 23. 

With a like boldness, Ti?i?n,f " the continual," is used Dan. viii. 11, 
12, 13. xi. 31. xii. 11. instead of the phrase in the law, Tonnnty (ia 
Numbers xvi times, also in Neh. x. 34.) " the perpetual sacrifice." 
Daniel may the rather have chosen this form, in order to include the 
whole continual worship of God, in which the shewbread is also called 
Tajjiri or, Num. iv. 7- See Hengst. Clulstol. iii. p. 108, 9. 

Dng, with JQ of the person, viii. 11; of place, Is. Ivii. 14; abs. Ezek. 
xxi. 31. Ewald would read the Khethib, nnn, after the analogy of 
nij'in Zech. v. 11. and n'pn in Daniel's Chaldee, Dan. vii. 4. (Ausf.. 
Lehrb. p. 343. ed. 7-) ]9 5 of the ultimate cause, as in Ps. xxxvii. 2. 
Eccl. xih 13. 

arising.) "holy," i.e. angel, viii.13. asc!"!;; Dan.iv. 10. Ch. Tlie 
plur. c'riipfj, "the holy ones," occurs in Jobv. 1. (comp. iv. 18.) 1^5, 
" His holy ones," Ib. xv. 15. o'vhjj I ?^|7,o'?!^j3 nte, "the congi'egation of holy 
ones," " the assembly of the holy ones," Ps. Ixxxix. 6, 8. (the art. be- 
ing omitted, as is usual in the poetical books ;) in these two places of 
the Heb. and~Chald. of Daniel alone, it is used of a single " angel." 

pp 



578 Words or idioms 

'jfc&sn f yiii. 13. See ab. p. 40, 1. 

DW j/gteni TOW jinjn, lit. " the vision, the continual sacrifice and the 
transgression, which maketh desolate." Dan. viii. 13. The apposi- 
tion is exceedingly bold ; the subject of. the vision replacing the vi- 
sion itself. The ordinary cases, in which an explanatory word stands 
in apposition with the chief word in the sentence, are grammatically 
the same, (see ab. p. 472.) but have not the like emphasis. The most 
like perhaps is Jer. xxv. 15. " take nnnn |n Dis n^, the wine-cup, the 
wrath, from My hand." 

coy viii. 13. ix. 27. xii. 11,12. for DO^t? (Dan. ix. 27, xi.31,) as 
y?\y for ^ijjij, (which occurs Is. xii. 12 ;) 031?, Eccl. iv. 2, for tja^p. 

ssh'p py$ Dan. viii. 14. "the sanctuary shall be cleansed," lit. "jus- 
tified." 

ny$, abs. "understanding" of the vision, viii. 15. ix. 22. It is ex- 
pressed more fully n&ns3 i^> ni 1 ?, " he had understanding in the vision," 
x. 1. conip. the Imper. p? ix. 23.x. 1 ; prr, intrans. viii. 17- ix. 23. 
x. 11. trans, viii. 16. x. 14. pjjsj xii. 8. intrans. 

Y& ~>yid? 'I, Dan; viii. 19; D'9i no$ a, Ib. 26; "For till the ap- 
pointed end ; " " for till many days ; " " it is " being omitted, for 
energy. 

'T-bK, viii. 22. The form is not from the Chaldee, since the whole 
form is not Chaldee, and the is the Arabic prseforniant of the 3rd 
fem.fut. also, and njon. 1 . occurs in Gen. xxx. 38, and nr$] in 1 Sam. vi. 
2; the form also n:3rpFi is altogether rare, (Ges. Lehrg. p. 276.) p:ip, 
fb;, occurring for it. (Ew. Krit. Gr. p. 643.) The regular form 
wpsffi occurs in viii. 22. 

'no??, " when they have filled up " i. e. their sin. viii. 23. Comp. 
the intrans. |ty D^ Gen. xv. 16. and -n'w in^qs Is. xxxiii. 1. 

nYri?, prob. wiles, from " twisting, intertwining," viii. 23. orpo^ai. 
See Ges. Thes. v. ans and mn. 

i^3(f ^y, vui. 25, here only in a had sense, " cunning." 

,i$B>3, " in security," viii. 25 ; n^ga N? " came when they were in se- 
curity." xi. 21. 24. Comp. in Ch. Kiijip, "prosperity," "prosperous 
ease," Dan. iv. 24 ; n$g>, Ps.cxxii.7, Ez.xvi. 49. Plur. 7i:o'ife| " in thy 
prosperities," Jer. xxii. 21. " quietness," Prov. xvii. 1. 

m^ nif, of God, viii. 25, as in Ch. pa^n so.Dii.47- 6 /JacriXevs TWV jSao-i- 

XeUOVTtOV Kttl KVplOS TWV KVpteUOVTWV. 1 Tim. VI. 15. KV/310S KVptW KOU 

(Sao-tXeW. Rev. xvii. 14. 

j, abs. " has been said," i. e. to thee. Dan. viii. 26. In Gen. x. 
3. xxii. 14. c ' 1 it is said," in proverbs ; in Num. xxi. 14. "it is said," 
in a book. 



peculiar to Daniel. 5/9 

Dan. ix. 1. Seeab.p. I'22j3. 

the books " of Scripture, ix. 2. Comp. i$e nV?o Ps. xl. 8. 
fflp Is. xxxiy. 16. 159 Is. xxix. 18. Elsewhere, in the plur. "let- 
ters" or "letter." 

r. ix. 2. The word is taken from Jer. xxix. 10, 
ns^o comp. Jer. xxv. 12, nyy a^y m*b$3 
x, with !?*: p. (to God) and $> with infin. Ezekiel has *p$ D'V, 
with ^ of the persons to whom he was to prophesy, xiii. 17- xxi. 7. 
xxv. 2. xxxviii. 2. 

e>s? with cognate ace. abs., ix. 3. n-:nni n^9? B'iss/' ix. 5. translated 
by the LXX, evpetv irpocreu^v KO.I e\eos. 

ib] VJTB uj/ssnrn '$] ^. ix. 5. No instance of the use of the ab- 
solute inf. after finite verbs equals this in energy. After four words, 
in themselves containing a climax of their sin, we have sinned, &c. 
there follows in one word, " and turning aivay," itoj ; as we should 
say, " it was all turning away." This was the root of all. See the 
converse, the finite verb after the accumulated infinitives, Hos. iv. 2, 
and my Comm. p. 26. 

'fit? ]%$, ix. 17, "for the sake of my LORD." (The two -words stand 
with great pathos at the end of the sentence.) wyo 1 ? ix. 19; both sin- 
gle cases ; elsewhere, icip or sjp^ JUB^, ^on |yD$>. 

njjij;}', ni$ip, only in Dan. ix. 19. as nijR? ix. 18i according to the ana- 
logy of n^j Is. vii. 11, nx? 1 !, Ps. xli. 5. a very rare and emphatic form. 

nVfiDtj, lit. " longednesses." (ix. 23.) It is not for n'nmq wx, " vir 
desideriorum," x. 11.19, but an abstract, (" desiderium meum," Cat. 
or " mea desideria," Cic.) like nbni SIQJZ " tliy people are willingness- 
es," (i. e. all willing.) Ps. ex; 3. 

}5i?} t Dan. ix. 24. " is decreed." The Nifal is not found elsewhere. 
Hithp. occurs in a late Targ. Estb. iv. 5, "decided." The physical 
sense, cut, survived in the Talmud. Buxt. 

air}, " broad place, street of city," fein. Dan. ix. 25, according to 
the analogy of TJ; &c. The name, Rechoboth, Gen. x. 11, attests 
an early use of the fern. plur. Even this form T# n'urr; is joined with 
the masc. verb, in Zech, viii. 5. Else the gender of arr; is not 
marked. 

rnyvb " corruption." pass. Dan. x. 8, like 11070, " a thing marred," 
Is. lii. 14. n'rt^Q is used actively of " wastefulness" (whereby a person 
destroys his own substance) Prov. xviii. 9. and in a double sense 
nv$8ij i!j " the mount of corruption " and so of " destruction " also, 
2 Kgs.xxiii. 13. (of the scene of Solomon's idolatries, and thence Jer. 
li. 25 ;) and of " destructiveness " generally, 2 Chron. xx. 23. xxii. 4. 
Ezek. v. 16. ix. 6.xxi. 36. xxv. 15. 

p p 2 



580 fiords or idioms 



"set me trembling," Dan. x. 10. 

n; rites, "palms of my hands," (Dan. x. 10.) after analogy of D^ 
Josh. iii. 13. iv. 18. 1 Kings v. 17. Is. Ix. 14. Ez. xliii. 7. Mai. iii. 21 . 
of the statue of Dagon, 1 Sam. v. 4; of one dead, 2 Kings ix. 35; of 
hands amputated, 1 Sam. v. 4 ; handles. Cant. y. 5 ; "hollow vessels,". 
and so, " spoons," Ex. xxv. 29, &c. n$? " hands," including the 
palm. 

'rmj, Dan. x. 12, " I am come at," or " through, thy words." 
5?. Dan. viii. 5. x. 16, i. q. Syr. bpi^ Ch. !?3pi>. In a different 
sense, "stood opposed to," Dan. x. 13, as in Prov. xxi. 30. .y Eccl. 
iv. 12. 

nfy f " marked down as decreed." Dan. x. 21. In the Chaldee of 
Daniel, Dgn is used of the sentence "written against Belshazzar, v. 24, 
25; of the king's subscribing the decree, vi. 9, 10, 11, 13, 14. (See 
ab. p. 40.) In the Targg. it corresponds to D'pjp'inrT, " those who de- 
cree," Is. x. 1; piflfl, " set a mark on," Ez. ix. 4. In Syriac, it is 
used, theologically, of the " seal " of Baptism and of predestination. 
i ^>& TJ/; " stir up all (in strife) with ; " xi. 2, a single instance, as 
used of man. God is said Tjjn with ace. p. and Vy. 

tyni?) "dominion," Dan. xi.3, 5. "dominions" i.e. princes. 1 Chron. 
xxvi. 6. 

&"!' nis^ Dan.xi. 6. (as, in familiar English, to ' set things straight.') 
i'Ty jo? 23|fj i$9 pijri " And the king of the South shall he strong and 
of his princes," i. e. one of them Dan. xi. 5. The idiom, " and there 
went of the people," (i. e. some of them,) is common. (See instances 
in Ges. Thes. p. 800.) Here only, the subject to be supplied is one 
person. In Dan. xi. 7- " and there shall stand up from, the sucker 
of her roots," jz? most naturally expresses the extraction, i. e. from 
whom he should be born. In Mic. v. 1 . jo relates unquestionably to 
the birth-place. 

oia Dan. xi. 6, probably a trace of a fuller pronunciation. TheKri 
substitutes the common form, 53, which Daniel too has 7 times, be- 
sides to 4 times. This form of nouns, yy, occurs in middle as well 
as later Hebrew, sps Ps. Ixxii. 14. (in Ps. x. 7- Iv. 12, ijh) aVi Job 
xxxv. 9. (as well as Esth. x. 3.) D'W Prov. x. 9. liy, Ps. Ixxxiv. 6. Prov. 
xxiv. 5. xxxi. 17- 25, ttjij; Ps.lxxxi. 2. mo occurs only in Job v. 21. 
h\y in Deut.xxi. 3. as well as in Jer. v. 3. The forms are too insu- 
lated in their several roots to argue from. 

^ K3$, "shall come to," i. e. as a bride, onr. Dan. xi. 6. abs. " came,". 
of one actually married, Josh. xv. 18. Judg. i. 14. It corresponds with 
with J> p. " took a wife for " a son, Judg. xii. 9; here, W3 



peculiar to Daniel. 581 

tea iV " bestood his place," very boldly, Dan. xi. 7- i- q- ^5 ^S Ib. 
20. 21; -\oy, " standing up" having the idea of motion. 

'"!#;, abs. xi. 10. (ii.) " strive," lit. " stir themselves up." (comp. 
Syr. "they strove together," Barh. p. 219. in Ges. p. 301.) with 
added, Ib. 25. 

p oy tev Dan. xi. 1 1 , probably an emphatic repetition of the 
preposition, retained by Daniel from the Aramaic. It occurs in the 
Chaldee both of Daniel, (v. 12. WtHif .13) and Ezra, (iv. 11. i>y 'tfbll, 
Nff?'^")!}.) In Syriac, Rom. vi. 8. " 'ameh 'amMeshicho" "with Him, 
.even with Christ." (See Hoftnann, Gram. Syr. p. 319.) The empha- 
tic repetition of the preposition separates it from the cases of the so- 
called pleonastic pronoun. A similar emphasis, without a preposi- 
tion, occurs in the earliest Hebrew, Ex. ii. 6, n^n n$ wjyipij " and she 
saw it, the child." In Prov. v. 22, xiv. 13, our Version retains the 
emphasis ; in Jer. ix. 14, it is marked by the mri following, " Lo, I 
am about to make them, this people, (njfj cjft nsjs) eat wormwood." 

D'$, " years," determining n'sj/n 5^, "at the end of the times," Dan. 
xi. 13. as in x. 2. D'p; nji> nyty " three weeks (of) days." 

Ji"? "Pnyp 1 }, " confirm the vision," lit. " make it stand," Dan. xi. 14. 
TJ?^ is used with abstracts, in the sense of " constituting a law to," 
with ace. and ^> p. Ps. cv. 10 ; with ^>a p. " we constituted ordinances 
(as binding) on us." Neh. x. 33. 

rinyap YJ Dan. xi. 15. fern. O.TT. Jeremiah has q^yno '$ Jer. v. 17. 
Daniel has the form, D'-tfrip, " fortresses," xi. 24. 39. 

Wjnji with gen., "the arms of," i. e. "the might of," Dan. xi. 15, 22. 
o'jnj, abs. xi. 31, according to the analogy of m t DSS? nVn| a'np tb Ez. 
xvii. 9. and Ch. ^>:rn in,? Ezr. iv. 23 ; and the phrases, " I will break 
Pharaoh's arms ; " " I will strengthen the arms of the king of Baby- 
lon;" (Ezek. xxx. 22, 24, 25.) although in these cases the metaphor 
is prominent. 

HP? 1 ? ov, "his people of choice," Dan. xi. 15. The pi. D'nriy? oc- 
curs here only ; the order is that of 2 Kings iii. 19, ^n?p vy; usually 
inaa stands first, (xi times.) 

Dissa t?V, " not in anger." Dan. xi. 20. CPM, as " anger," occurs else 
only in the phrase DISK }$, and in the opposite, DISK nsj, Pr.xiv. 17- 

nip^D3, " with flatteries," Dan. xi. 21. 34. nip^qg, Dan. xi. 32, both 
once only ; but we have nip^n nsV, rfp^rr >%!&, Ps. xii. 3, 4. n'lpVjjbn, " slip- 
pery places," Ps. xxxv. 6. Jer. xxiii. 12. 

\sffi ty$ r\ my'i], xi. 22, lit. " the arms of the overflow shall be over- 
flowed ; " i. e. the tide of power which threatened to sweep away shall 
be swept back by a mightier tide, ntyhj is construed with the masc., 
probably, from the idea of strength. 



582 Words or idioms 

Ib. " a prince of a covenant,' after the analogy of n^a 



Obad. 7. 

113 xi. 24, only. Pi. only in Ps.lxviii.31. InCh. mi, Pa., Dan.lv. 1 1. 
Aram. Satnar. In Heb. its, x times; Ps. (v.) Prov. Joel, Jer. (ii.) Estli. 

U309 ^5k xi. 26, after the analogy of 'pi$ i??w, Ps. xii. 10; 

jn t V, "for evil doing," Dan. xi. 27. subst. like aco, Cant. i. 12. 

sia, with 2 p. "come upon him." Dan. xi. 30. Else, with ace. p. in 
poetry ; in prose, with "?J2 p. Yet there is ample analogy for this con- 
struction with a, in that of an, orfo, ?m, "?!?, nsjj, with a p. (Ew. 606.) 

D'> " ships " (Ih.) as D';N. In Num. xxiv. 24. Ez. xxx. 9. the plur. 
is n's. 

D'jnr, fig. " arms," Dan. xi. 31. mnsc. with idea of strength, Gen. 
xlix. 24; of God, Is. li. 5; rjfit pa " between his arms," 2 Kings ix. 
24. Else nijn? (xix times in all, in Dan., ii.) 

rna 'H'tshD Dan. xi. 32. (peculiar idiom) " who acted wickedly as to 
the covenant." 

>]'jq: f Ib., " corrupt," i. e. seduce to defile themselves. This is trans. 
of f\in Jer. xxiii. 11." priests and prophets became polluted." Else, 
of the land, Kal Ps. cvi. 38. Is.xxiv. 5. Mic. iv. 11. Jer. iii. 1, 9. Hif. 
Jer. iii. 2. Num. xxxv. 33. In the Peshito, it is used as equivalent 
to the e0i>iKos of the N. T.; and Afel, of " apostatising," S. Ephr. de 
fide iii. 6. If it had this meaning in Daniel, it would be another in- 
stance or his language surviving in Syriac, while lost in the Chaldee 
of the Targg. 

T7.3, " purify," Pi. only Dan. xi. 35. 

paVrt trans, only ib.; ja^n, " cleanse self," Ib. xii. 10. only. 

D^S ^') " God of gods," Dan. xi. 36. i. q. B'rhsy *%*?$ Deut. x. 17. 
Josh. xxii. 22. Ps. cxxxvi. 2. ]'n^ rhx, Dan. ii. 47. Ch. nn\p fy, of God, 
Dan. viii. 25. 

n'lN^sj nai; " will speak marvellous," i. e. proud things, Dan. xi. 36. 
i. q. |n-i3T y>oa, " speaking great things," Dan. vii. 8. 28. Gh.,and |te^> 
ni^a n-1310. Ps. xii. 4. 

naj^i; Hithp., only Dan. xi. 40; Piel, tj^ 5 Dan. viii. 4. In the phy- 
sical sense, "push with horns," Pi. Ex. xxi. [iii times ;] metaph. as 
here, Deut. (i.) Ps. (i.) 1 Kings (i.) Ez. (i.) Chr. (i.) 

ij$'f: Hithp. only Dan. xi. 40, "come as a whirlwind ;" comp. Job 
xxvii. 21, ibipipD in-i$n. ' .' 

;n Dan. xi. 42. 

, f" hidden treasures," Dan. xi. 43. The root, joa, must, in 
the time of Daniel, have had a meaning, " hide," which has survived 
in Arabic, but was lost both. in Eastern and Western Aramaic. In 
the Targg. (see Buxtorf,) and where it occurs in the Peshito, as also 



peculiar to Daniel. 583 

in all the places noted by Bernstein and Qiiatremere, it has only the 
derived sense, which occurs in the Arabic also, " lay in wait for," i. e. 
hid himself, in order to fall on another. 

viv?i?|) Ht. " at, in his steps," Dan. xi. 43; perhaps chosen, as more 
stately than i$fi?, the ordinary idiom in prose, Ex. xi. 8. Deut. xi. 6. 
Judg. iv. 10. viii. 5. 1 Sam. xxv. -27. 2 Sam. xv. 17-1 Kings xx. 10, 
2 Kings iii. 9. [viii times.] 

NDIJ, for non, " anger." Dan. xi. 44. 

Iris*, " his palace," xi. 45. See ab. p. 39, 40. 

nnsj with hy p. "stood over," to protect. Dan. xii. 1. comp. 1 Sam. 
xxv. 16,13'!$ vnnertn, "they were a wall,protecting us;" Ez.xiii. 5. "Ye 
have not made up the fence, n'3 ^>a, for [protecting] the house of Is- 
rael;" and DI& with ^ p. " fight for." Neh. iv. 8. 

nsDg am? " written in the book " (i. e. " the book of life " or " of 
God ") only in Dan. xii. 1. The idioms, " Thy book, My book," oc- 
cur in Ex. xxxii. 22, 3; " Thy book," (of God) Ps. Ivi. 8, cxxxvii. 16. 
" the book of life," Ps. Ixix. 29. " every one written to life," aw?n h$ 
arh occurs in Is.iv.3. 

'p; i?V IP]* '$] Dan. xii. 2. lit. " the sleepers of [in] the earth of 
dust shall awake ;" like Is. xxvi. 19. i?s? ^?i#-'pn lit. "awake, ye dwel- 
lers of [in] the dust." Comp. i?y Job vii. 21. xi. 11. Ps. xxii. 30. 
xxx. 10. and tt'p; Job xiv. 12. ppra Ps. xvii. 15. 

Q^itf ', lit. " life of eternity," Dan. xii. 2. on, of " life," in itself, 
life unceasing, was fixed in the language hy the title, D M .nn f K, " the tree 
of life," used metaphorically, without the art. Prov. iii. 18. xi. 30. 
xiii. 12. xv. 4. and n;n absolutely in Ps. xxxvi. 10. "with Thee is nip? 
Di3, the fountain of life ; " Prov. xi. 19, " as righteousness is no^, to 
life ; " so also in the idioms, Dn mk, b".n ^33, "way of life." For the 
rest of the idiom, comp. oViy nr?t?, " perpetual joy," Is. xxx v. 10; ^ 
D^JJ, "the way everlasting," i. e. which shall abide for ever, Ps. cxxxix. 
24 ; and, of God, oVij/fi <n, " He Who liveth for ever," Dan. xii. 7- and 
KD^ vj Id. Dan. iv. 31. Ch. 

nVij; j^-i^, Dan. xii. 2., drawn out from Is. Ixvi. 24. 

iTiji: ; lit. " give out brightness," " shine," only Dan. xii. 3. It is 
the original force of the word, which survived in Aramaic, and from 
which was derived the meaning, common to the earlier Hebrew, 
" teach," " warn." V!<n, which Gesenius gives as its earlier equivalent, 
(p. 408) is used actively of " giving light to," " illumining," others, 
chiefly of God. "Only in Ezek. xliii. 2, it is used of light reflected 
from God, " the earth shall shine from His glory," Via?o n-yxn. Daniel, 
doubtless, revived the word in its primitive sense, in allusion to: that, 



584 Words or idioms agreeing 

with which he joins it, jj'p-in ini, " brightness of the firmament," Ban. 
xii. 3. comp. int nxiDj Ezek. viii. 2. 

BQitf abs. Dan. xii. 4; with $> and inf. " go to and fro to seek," Am. 
viii. 12; with a. of the place, Jer. v. 1. Zeeh. iv. 10. 2 Chron. xvi. 1. 

*? ,139, ^ ,135, " on this side of on that side of," Dan. xii. 5. Else 
only njnj njn, " hither and thither." Josh. viii. 20. 1 Kings xx. 40. 
2 Kings ii. 8. 

plur. only Dan. xii. 6. 

vj Dan. xii. 6. see above xii. 3, commonly <n -|?N, D';n D'n%. 

ii. Agreement with middle period of Hebrew*. 

Vs^ri with a, Dan. i. 4. ix. 25. Ps. ci. 2, ^n, noun, with a. Dan. i. 7- 

nbj$ ona 03 -if's Dan. i. 4. viii. 7- [in xi. 15. ? with pers. is omitted] 
also 1 Sam. xxx. 4. Is. 1. 2. 2 Chron. xxv. 8. Ezr. x. 13; comp. Dent, 
viii. 18. f>;ri rt&$> ni s^ joto 

hss fcW-s Dan. i. 4, 17. Is. xsix. 11, 12. 

"PHI Dpyga* o^& |D|i Dan. i. 5. w$ )a Ps. Ixi. 8. 

a|? "?H crtty Dan. i. 8. Is. xlvii. 7. Ivii. 1, 11. Jer. xii. 11. with Vx, 
2 Sam. xix. 20. with 3, Job xxii. 22. 1 Sam. xxi. 13. 

'}$ Q'Pinl" " I ?0/ ) ^"U;! n t! Iffil Dan. i. 9. The same construction with 
ace. p., D'oqn^ ip^ and '.JB^ of p. occurs 1 Kings viii. 50. Ps. cvi. 46. 
Neh.i.11. 

nsV -I$K Dan. i. 10. i. q. nsW Cant. i. 7- like Syr. ND^. 

D??W Dan. i. 10. This intensive form occurs in nouns, iVs, Ex. 
xxx. 18; pa; Am. v. 26; \',i, judge, 1 Sam. xxiv. 16. Ps. Ixviii. 6; an, 
Jer. xvi. 16. Keth. Ezek. xlvii. 10. In the verb, it occurs in D.ii3 Ps. 
cxix. 28, 106. as well as in Ruthiv. 7- Ezek. xiii. 6. Esth. [vii time 
close together.] 

j)c$ with ^> p. and njn lyfa Dan. i. 14. 1 Sam. xxx. 24. 

nj'3 noyj Dan. i. 20. constr. as DDIJ ns^'Ps. xxv. 19. 
. nyys, "jurisdiction," (from n ;) then, of some small "jurisdic- 
tions " in the kingdom of Israel, (1 Kings xx. 14, 15, 17, 19.) or of 
Solomon, (Eccl. v. 7.) [8. Eng.J or of petty tributary kingdoms, (Eccl. 
ii. 8 ;) then, in the general sense of "countries," (Lam. i. 1. Ezek. 
xix. 8. sing. Dan. xi. 24.) transferred to the "provinces" of the Ba- 
bylonian and Persian Empires, hi the Hebrew and Chaldee of Daniel, 
the Chaldee of Ezra, and the Hebrew of Esther, (Dan. viii. 2. and 
Ch. of Dan. ii. 48, 49. iii. 1, 2, 3, 12, 30. and of Ezra iv. 15. vi. 2. 
vii. 16. Esth. xxxix times) and to Judsea, after the return from the 
Captivity, as a Persian "province." Ezr. ii. 1. v. 8. Ch. Neh. i. 3. 
vii. 6. xi. 3. This sense is purely Hebrew ; in Aramaic and Arabic 
of old the word signifies simply " city," whence the name Medina. 
In Jon. it is retained from the Heb. ; else it is " city." 



with middle period of Hebrew. 585 

in; V^pj (Syr. yathir) Dan. viii. 9. iNo'Vi:, Gen. xxvi. 13. Job ii. 13. 
But Dan. lias the common iton ntt viii. 8. xi. 25. and Isaiah has Tn; 
IKD, Ixvi. 12. and David in; to, Ps. xxxi. 24. 

K?y fern. Dan. viii. 12. Is. xl. 2. 

The use of i, i, " et, et," Dan. viii. 13. Ps. Ixxvi. 7 Prov. xxvi. 10. 
Is. xiii. 9. Jer. xiii. 12. xxi. 6. xxxii. 14. Neh. i. 6. xii. 28 ; yet also 
once in the Pentat. Nurn.ix. 14. and Job xxxiv. 28. (The other in- 
stances in Nold. n. 64. are wrong or doubtful.) 

f The omission of the article belongs to the elevated character of 
the prophetic style, as being essentially poetic. We could represent 
N??I $l n0 by " to give both sanctuary and host," so c'-jV ~te v. 25. 
See ab. p. 478. There is no characteristic omission of the article in 
Daniel, as Leng. would have it. 

Dona no, Dan. viii. 13. cp. DCTID toifc^, Is. x. 6. op-ja^ n;n Is. v. 5. 
xxviii. 18. Mic. vii. 10. Else in two places with gen. after oa-jn, Is. 
vii. 25. Ezek. xxxiv. 19. 

)'3, " between," used in regard to a Avhole. <^K ]<%, " between [the 
banks of] the Ulai," viii. 16. nton-in j'g " in the midst of the streets." 
Prov. xxvi. 13. 

i^n, without a subst., "this (man)," Dan. viii. 16. 1 Sam. xiv. 1. 
.(as Arab, allads for alladsi) ; not in the Pent.; nor is the nj^rt of Pent, 
(iii) in later books. 

j'55 with j> of pers. Dan. viii. 16. xi. 33. as in Job vi. 24. according 
to the analogy of other words, which signify " imparting instruction 
to" It is united with the personal affix, as an ace. Dan. x. 14. 

J'unn r& n $ '3> vi - *?, FB ^^ '3> v5ii - 19 > "'K^ ^ '3 f8 n i, xi. 
35, YB nj; iy xii. 4, ijite^ fR nij; '? xi. 27, .ii?i?k> fR ^ 5x - 26, refer back 
to the saying in Hab. ii. 3. {^ np;i ijriaV jiiij i\y <?, that, though God's 
promises tarried, they did not tarry out. comp. Ps. cii. 14. m}$ na '? 
nte K? 'a. 

In like way, Dj?jri n'iq.s'3, " at the end of the wrath," Dan. viii. 19, 
osi n^i iy Dan. xi. 36. from Isaiah x. 25. am n^a] xxvi. 20. DM itay* iy 
' of a fixed measure of God's chastening displeasure. 

rhsbsi adv. " marvellously," Dan. viii. 24, as in Job xxxvii. 5. The- 
plural expresses " manifold marvellous ways." 

Vi;3 ncna n^sri, viii. 25, the reverse of r&s; h;| f|>m Is. liii. 10. 

n; 0^3, viii. 25. i. q. i&3 with noun, Job vii. 6. Prov. xiv. 28. xxvi. 
20. Is. Iii. 4. T$ K 4 ? T>9>! wp;j Job xxxiv. 20. 

n'j? nxii, of God, with aff. and prepos. of object ; viz. to Dan. ix. 17. 
Ps. xxxi. 17. ^ Num. vi. 28. n$ Ps. Ixvii. 2. 3. Ps. cxix. 135. abs. Ps. 
Ixxx. 4, 8, 20. 



586 Words or idioms agreeing 



WO'g n{j -Dan. ix. 18. 

" nj39^ m,T -2 Kings xix. 16. 

Kli?j itf$ Dan. ix. 18 ; of God's house, n;a Jer. vii. 10, 11. 
14, 30. xxxii. 34. xxxiv. 15. ; of the city, ij? Ib. xxv. 29. 

"in*jp I>N, of God, Dan. ix. 19. only Ps. xl. 18. Ixx. 6. ifjtj; t&, of the 
vision, Hab. ii. 3. with tejts^, of God, "will not be slack to him that 
hateth Him." Deut. vii. 10. 

i nan? <JN -fty Dan, ix. 20. 21. ':N.I anaio nrj iiy Is. Ixv. 24. 

nyjnii ,-^a Dan. ix. 27- n^DJ ix. 26. njriDj Dan. xi. 36. Is. x. 23. 
xxviii. 22. 

na'j (abs.) " a word" revealed, (n^?, here) Dan. x. 1. Is. ix. 7- xiv. 
23. 1. 4. then Jer.xxxvii. 17- Ezek.iii. 17- xiii. 6. xxxiii. 7; of secret 
inspiration, Job iv. 12. 

n^fiD Dan. x. 6. Ruthiii. 4, 7,8, 14. 

jterr Vip Dan. x. 6. Is. xxxiii. 3. 

ny-iN *js v-ioj Dan. x. 15. i. q. nf-!X D'JS D?B- 1 Kings ii. 15.2 Kings xii. 8. 
Ez. vi. 2. : 

ty TX 9ijj Dan. x. 16. metaphoric use of the words of 1 Sam. 
iv. 19. 

PIG! p]0> Dan. x. 19, pjnpj] pin 2 Sam. x. 12, thence 1 Chr. xix. 13. 
nj3j0^ pin. Generally, piosvpiq Deut. xxxi. 7- 23. Josh. i. 6, 7, 9, 18. 
thence 1 Chron. xxii. 13. xxviii. 20. *i$ pN.:i Ps. xxvii. 14. 

th noy$ Dan. x, 17. comp. on % aa n;n n*> 1 Kings x. 5. 
X3D Dan. xi. 7 5 as vy-$a ixj, Is. xi. 1. isi only in these two 
places and Is. xiv. 19. Ix. 21, and wW of " sucker from root," only 
in Is. xi. lO.liii. 2. 

'p)a, for if'g v$a, Dan. xi. 8. comp. Is. x. 4. and DSBN na'ns ^a. Gen. 
xliii. 3. 

i5Vi tf$] Dan. xi. 10, 40. from Is. viii. 8. 

3 1 ] ]ton TDt>n, " set," in their place, " a great multitude," Dan. xi. 
11. 13. n^s3 TQyn " set the watch." Is. xxi. 6. Else, of persons or 
animate things, the place is expressed, as " 'is^i with ace. of place, 
Lev. xiv. 11. xvi. 7 j or jg^ alone, Num. v. 16, 18, 30, pass. Lev. 
xvi. 10 ; or \n3rj ^, Lev. xxvii. 8. 11. Num. iii. 6. viii. 13. xxvii. 19. 
22; or, of a king, nji-js \IB^> Gen. xlvii. 7 5 or with a of place, 1 Kings 
xii. 32. I Chron. xvii. 14. Neh. iv. 7- vii. 3 ; nta'an, Num. xi. 24 ; j3, 
Jud. xvi. 25 ; *]naa, 2 Chron. xxiii. 10 ; |v?'^>, Neh. xii. 31 ; ^v, of place, 
implying watch, 2 Chron. xxiii. 19. xxxv. 2. Neh. xiii. 9. The idiom 
in which TDjn, c. ace. p. signifies " set up, constituted," is different, 
and occurs in Exodus ix. 16. Neh. vi. 7- and with o^m, "in their 
place," Job xxxiv. 24. In Ps. cvii. 25, by a very bold image,.it is 
said, " God made thp wind to stand." 



with middle period of Hebrew. 587 

1?K '*"!$ '4?j " sons of the violent men of thy people," (seditious,) 
Dan. xi. 14. comp. jVa^i j?, " sons of poor," Ps. Ixxii. 4. mj} n^j, 
" children of strangers." Is. ii. 6. 

nV*>b i]57, " cast a mound," Dan. xi. 15. ->'j> V^, 2 Sam. xx. 15. ty 
vj?, 2 Kings xix. 32. Is. xxxvii. 33. Jer. vi. 6. Ezek. 5v. 2. xxvi. 8. abs. 
as here, Ezek. xvii. 17- xxi. 27. 

bsq Dan. xi. 16. ok?|, 17, a#l, 10, 18, 19. *% 25, 28 ^ 30. The 
condensation of this idiom, the use of the apocopated form, with the 
simple and, shews that there is great emphasis in it. Daniel used it 
besides in this chapter, v. 4. frio] and viii. 12. ij^oi. But, (as no- 
ticed by Ewald, Ausf. Lehrb. 343. c. p. 829, 30. ed. 7-) it occurs in 
Joel ii. 20, hm ; Mic. iii. 4. nep:j s and even in Lev. xxvii. 43. jnrij; and 
Lev. xv. 24. These cases in Daniel are the ground of Lengerke's 
strange assertion, that "he is not acquainted with the i conv.," (" does 
not use vau conversive," Dav. iii. 194.) which he uses continually. 

nyjD i 1 ? K^I nbj?rj w 4 ?, Dan. xi. 17- from Is. vii. 7- n#W K^>] tPP K 1 ?, comp. 
Is. xiv. 24. 

p'inn, " laid hold of," with ace. instead of 9, Dan. xi. 21.2 Sam. xv. 
5. " terror seized hold of," c. ace. p. Mic. iv. 9. Jer. vi. 24. viii. 21. 
"trouble seized, &c." Jer. 1. 43. 

\xfa Wa vj?j xi. 25. like taoq ^ TJJ; K^? Ps. Ixxviii. 38. nxjp YJI; 
Is. xlii. 13. 

Q'?T n'^ri ^BJ, Dan. xi. 26. Judg. ix. 40. 1 Chron. v. 22. 
51 5, lit. " as and as," for ? ? Dan. xi. 29. as, Josh. xiv. 11.1 Sam. 
xxx! 24. Ezek. xviii. 4. - 

despond." Dan. xi. 30. 35!? nN?i Ps. cix. 16. 
5; riai, " multitudes [fern.] shall stumble," [masc.] xi. 41. rhyisf 
irbrpi "rumours [fern.] shall terrify [masc.] him." xi. 44. These may 
be the use of the 3rd pers. masc. plur. as a common gender, includ- 
ing the fern., as in Job iii. 24. Cant. vi. 9. Prov. xvi. 3. Hos. xiv. 1, 
7- and 2nd. person plur., Cant. ii. 7- viii. 4. Joel ii. 22. (Ew. Gr. p. 
643.) Esth. i. 20.; or they might be a very bold change of gender, in 
conformity with the image ; since, as to the first, those who " stumble " 
must be persons ; as to the second, the "terror" implies might ; and Je- 
remiah has (xlix. 16.) ijnN n'^ri 1p$sti, " thy terribleness [fern.] hath 
deceived (masc.) thee; " as JiNBrj is construed as masc: from the image 
of a wild beast, " sin [fern.] coucheth [masc.] at the door." Gen. iv. 7- 
na^jr with art. lit. " the [only] knowledge." Dan. xii. 4. Hos. iv. 6. 
iii. Words and idioms common to Daniel with later books. 
'a ma^y efhy n$s, " in the year three of the reign of," i. 1. ii. 1. 
viii. 1. 1 Chr. xxvi. 31. 2 Chr. iii. 2. xv. 10, 19. xyi. 1, 12. xxxv. 19. 



584 Words or idioms agreeing 



with which he joins it, ipp-jn irjj, " brightness of the firmament," Dan. 
xii. 3. comp. nni nx-p? Ezek. viii. 2. 

coil!' abs. Dan. xii. 4; with ^ and inf. " go to and fro to seek," Am. 
viii. 12; with 3 of the place, Jer. v. 1. Zech. iv. 10. 2 Chron. xvi. 1. 

i njBj } .130, " on this side of on that side of," Dan. xii. 5. Else 
only njrn njn, " hither and thither." Josh. viii. 20. 1 Kings xx. 40. 
2 Kings ii. 8. 

rrtN^s plur. only Dan. xii. 6. 

oVijiri 'n Dan. xii. 0. see above xii. 3, commonly >$ "?N, D".n D'nV 

ii. Agreement with middle period of Hebrew* 

Ivj^n with 3, Dan. i. 4. ix. 25. Ps. ci. 2, ^ri, noun, with 3 Dan. i. 7- 

10$ ana ob i^s Dan. i. 4. viii. 7- [in xi. 15. ? with pers. is omitted] 
also 1 Sam. xxx. 4. Is. 1. 2. 2 Chron. xxv. 8. Ezr. x. 13: comp. Dent. 
viii. 18. h-.n nfe 1 ^ nb ^ |n5n 

h3B feWers Dan. i. 4, 17. Is. xxix. 11, 12. 

"M: Dfltjjt?! cfriifp jnp. Dan. i. 5. ?,TI; jo Ps. Ixi. 8. 

a!? ^2 oik Dan. i. 8. Is. xlvii. 7- Ivii. 1, 11. Jer. xii. 11. with ^s, 
2 Sain. xix. 20. with 3, Job xxii. 22. 1 Sam. xxi. 13. 

\!?V n'Dtn^ iog^ ^N.y;! ns [B;I Dan. i. 9. The same construction with 
ace. p., D'orn^i ^n^> and v?V of P- occurs 1 Kings viii. 50. Ps. cvi. 46. 
Neb, i. II. 

nsb -\&K Dan. i. 10. i. q. nW> Cant. i. 7- like Syr. xb^. 

053:13 ' Dan., i. 10. This intensive form occurs in nouns, ni-s, Ex. 
xxx. 18; )?'?i Am. v. 26; ]l?,jtidge, 1 Sam. xxiv. 16. Ps. Ixviii. 6; 3;n 
Jer. xvi. 16. Keth. Ezek. xlvii. 10. In the verb, it occurs in o.'j3 Ps. 
cxix. 28, 106. as well as in Ruthiv. 7- Ezek. xiii.6. Esth. [vii time 
close together.] 

yaty with } p. and mn 1?^ Dan. i. 14. 1 Sam. xxx. 24. 

-nyanDsg Dan. i. 20. constr. as ajri nK'j'^Ps. xxv. 19. 
. ajnij, "jurisdiction," (from JT ;) then, of some small "jurisdic- 
tions" in the kingdom of Israel, (1 Kings xx. 14, 15, 17, 19.) or of 
Solomon, (Eccl. v. 7<) [8. Eng.] or of petty tributary kingdoms, (Eccl. 
ii. 8 ;) then, in the general sense of "countries," (Lam. i. 1. Ezek. 
xix. 8. sing. Dan. xi. 24.) transferred to the "provinces" of the Ba- 
bylonian and Persian Empires, in the Hebrew and Chaldee of Daniel, 
the Chaldee of Ezra, and the Hebrew of Esther, (Dan. viii. 2. and 
Ch. of Dan. ii. 48, 49. iii. 1, 2, 3, 12, 30. and of Ezra iv. 15. vi. 2. 
vii. 16. Esth. xxxix times) and to Judaea, after the return from the 
Captivity, as a Persian "province." Ezr. ii. 1. v. 8. Ch. Neh. i. 3. 
vii. 6. xi. 3. This sense is purely Hebrew ; in Aramaic and Arabic 
of old the word signifies simply " city," whence the name Medina. 
In Jon. it is retained from the Heb.; else it is " city." 



with middle period of Hebrew. 585 

in; V^ei (Syr. yathir) Dan. viii. 9. ito'^n:, Gen. xxvi. 13. Job ii. 13. 
liut Dan. has the common iton in viii. 8. xi. 25. and Isaiah has ip; 
IND, lxviM2. and David in; "?S!, Ps. xxxi. 24. 

jqy fern. Dan. viii. 12. Is. xl. 2. 

The use of i, i, " et, et," Dan. viii. 13. Ps. Ixxvi. 7- Prov. xxvi. 10. 
Is. xiii. 9. Jer. xiii. 12. xxi. 6. xxxii. 14. Neh. i. 6. xii. 28 ; yet also 
once in the Pentat. Num. ix. 14. and Job xxxiv. 28. (The other in- 
stances in Nold. n. 64. are wrong- or doubtful.) 

f The omission of the article belongs to the elevated character of 
the prophetic style, as being essentially poetic. We could represent 
j^yi en)?] ng by " to give both sanctuary and host," so wiy -tip v. 25. 
See ab. p. 478. There is no characteristic omission of the article in 
Daniel, as Leng. would have it. 

DBin no, Dan. viii. 13. cp. DD-ID "toifc^, Is. x. 6. opno)) n;fr Is. v. 5. 
xx viii. 18. Mic. vii. 10. Else in two places with gen. after DDTO, Is. 
vii. 25. Ezek. xxxiv. 19. 

}'3, " between," used in regard to a whole. ^N j'3, "between [the 
banks of] the Ulai," viii. 16. nbrnri j<a " in the midst of the streets." 
Prov. xxvi. 13. 

ifo, without a subst., "this (man)," Dan. viii. 16. 1 Sam. xiv. 1. 
(as Arab, allads for alludsi) ; not in the Pent.; nor is the nj/yj of Pent, 
(iii) in later books. 

pj?5 with }> of pers. Dan. viii. 16. xi. 33. as in Job vi. 24. according 
to the analogy of other words, which signify " imparting instruction 
to." It is united with the personal affix, as an ace. Dan. x. 14. 

[w? fS "$ '?> viii. 17, fi3 iKto5> '?, viii. 19, ^teV -ny >a po ny. iff, xi, 
35, fjj n -iy. xii. 4, -iy\sb ?$ i\y '? xi. 27, ncn^p J-R nj; ix. 26, refer back 
to the saying in Hab. ii. 3. fjsV n9j] ny>^ )iiri niy '?, that, though God's 
promises tarried, they did not tarry out. comp. Ps. cii. 14. wjn^ nj; '? 
nato K; -3. 

In like way, D^n nnnjj?, " at the end of the wrath," Dan. viii. 19, 
W?J ^3 tsi Dan. xi. 36. from Isaiah x. 25. DJW n^o; xxvi. 20. oyi nbj is 
of a fixed measure of God's chastening displeasure. 

rfis^B) adv. " mai'vellously," Dan. viii. 24, as in Job xxxvii. 5. The- 
plural expresses " manifold marvellous ways." 

.h;3 no-] D'^rtj viii. 25, the reverse of n^s! Vi$ fsri] Is. liii. 10. 

n; Da^3, viii. 25. i. q. sS? with noun, Job vii. 6. Prov. xiv. 28. xxvi. 
20. Is. Iii. 4. i,'3 Kh v?tf n'p;; Job xxxiv. 20. 

0'J9 n><ri, of God, with aff. and prepos. of object ; viz. hy. Dan. ix. 17. 
Ps. xxxi. 17- ^ Num. vi. 28. n^ Ps. Ixvii. 2. 3. Ps. cxix. 135. abs/Ps. 
Ixxx. 4, 8, 20. 



586 Words or idioms agreeing 



nijgs . s $*i ijis 'H7S nan Dan. ix. 18. 

" npj^ m,r -2 Kings xix. 16. 

Kl,?j IB>K Dan. ix. 18 ; of God's house, n;s Jer. vii. 10, 11. 
14, 30. xxxii. 34. xxxiv. 15. ; of the city, TV Ib. xxv. 29. 

nrmfi $>K, of God, Dan. ix. 19. only Ps. xl. 18. Ixx. 6. nnx; sA, of the 
vision, Hab. ii. 3. with IKJ^, of God, "will not be slack to him that 
hateth Him." Deut. vii. 10. . 

HJ i\y Dan. ix. 20. 21. 'jgi D'lfiD DO -hy Is. Ixv. 24. 

Dan. ix. 27- nsiDJ ix. 26. nywj Dan. xi. 36. Is. x. 23. 
xxviii. 22. 

iy3 (abs.) " a word" revealed, (rfa?, here) Dan. x. 1 . Is. ix. 7- xiv. 
23. 1. 4. then Jer.xxxvii. 17- Ezek. iii. 17- xiii. 6. xxxiii. 7; of secret 
inspiration, Job iv. 12. 

Dan. x. 6. Ruth iii. 4, 7,8,14. 
*?ip Dan. x. 6. Is. xxxiii. 3. 

' 'J? 'WJ Dan. x. 15. i. q. mfit} D'JS D^ 1 Kings ii. 15. 2 Kings xii. 8. 
Ez. vi. 2. 

ty "3'x ?;?} Dan. x. 16. metaphoric use of the words of 1 Sam. 
iv. 19. 

P1D! P!D, Dan. x. 19, poj] pin 2 Sam. x. 12, thence 1 Chr. xix. 13. 
njpjnpj] pin. Generally, ppjjj'pMj Deut. xxxi. 7- 23. Josh. i. 6, 7 9, 18. 
thence 1 Chron. xxii. 13. xxviii. 20. qa^ fCK] Ps. xxvii. 14. 

'a .YiNi}!} A no^i? Dan. x. 17. comp. mn n'ljj n^ n;n tb 1 Kings x. 5. 

5Tl i i^P Dan. xi. 7j as ivjyis nw, Is. xi. 1. nsj only in these two 
places and Is. xiv. 19. Ix. 21, and trff of "sucker from root," only 
in Is. xi. 10. liii: 2. 

p^a, for IK '^a, Dan. xi. 8. comp. Is. x. 4. and Da^N oams ^a. Gen. 
xliii. 3. 

i3i >JB^] Dan. xi. 10, 40. from Is. viii. 8. 

ai jten TBjjn, " set" in their place, " a great multitude," .Dan. xi. 
11. 13. nss^n nDjKO " set the watch." Is. xxi. 6. Else, of persons or 
animate things, the place is expressed, as *&*? with ace. of place, 
Lev. xiv. 11. xvi. 7; or ':Q^> alone, Num. v. 16, 18, 30, pass. Lev. 
xvi. 10 ; or ]nsn "^, Lev. xxvii. 8. 11. Num. iii. 6. viii. 13. xxvii. 19. 
22; or, of a king, ny-is \js^> Gen. xlvii. 7 5 or with a of place, 1 Kings 
xii. 32. I Chron. xvii. 14. Neh. iv. 7- vii. 3 ; rfa'30, Num. xi. 24 ; j'3, 
Jud. xvi. 25 ; r\nsa, 2 Chron. xxiii. 10 ; pp^, Neh. xii. 31 ; ^a, of place, 
implying watch, 2 Chron. xxiii. 19. xxxv. 2. Neh. xiii. 9. The idiom 
in which foyn, c. ace. p. signifies " set up, constituted," is different, 
and occurs in Exodus ix. 16. Neh. vi. 7- and with Dflrtn, "in their 
place," Job xxxiv. 24. In Ps. cvii. 25, by a very bold image,. it is 
said, " God made tbp wind to stand." 



with middle period .of .Hebrew. 587 

'J3, "sons of the violent men of thy people," (seditious,) 
Dan. xi. 14. comp. jVax \n, " sons of poor," Ps. Ixxii. 4. o'naj '^:, 
"children of strangers." Is. ii. 6. 

n^fa i]5>, "cast a mound," Dan. xi. 15. iy !?K, 2 Sam. xx. 15. fy 
vy, 2 Kings xix. 32. Is. xxxvii. 33. Jer. vi. 6. Ezek. 5v. 2. xxvi. 8. abs. 
as here, Ezek. xvii. 17- xxi. 27. 

fe-lK] Dan. xi. 16. DI?;I, 17, asty, 10, 18, 19. ^} 25, 28 p r ) 30. The 
condensation of this idiom, the use of the apocopated form, with the 
simple and, shews that there is great emphasis in it. Daniel used it 
besides in this chapter, v. 4. fijo] and viii. 12. ^oj. But, (as no- 
ticed by Ewald, Ausf. Lehrb. 343. c. p. 829, 30. ed. 7.) it occurs in 
Joel ii. 20, "?jmi ; Mic. iii. 4. iep:i, and even in Lev. xxvii. 43. prii; and 
Lev. xv. 24. These cases in Daniel are the ground of Lengerke's 
strange assertion, that "he is not acquainted with the i conv.," (" does 
not use vau conversive," Dav. iii. 194.) which he uses continually. 

n;nij "i 1 ? N 4 ?! nbjyi tA, Dan. xi. 17- from Is. vii. 7- n;nij Si mpp i&, comp. 
Is. xiv. 24. 

p'!Dii, " laid hold of," with ace. instead of 3, Dan. xi. 21.2 Sam. xv. 
5. "terror seized hold of," e. ace. p. Mic. iv. 9. Jer. vi. 24. viii. 21. 
"trouble seized, &c." Jer. 1. 43. 

to?^ \ri\3 YJJ; xi. 25. like taaq "?$ vy; & Ps. Ixxviii. 38. nsjp vy; 
Is. xlii. 13. 

D'?T o'^n '^}, Dan. xi. 26. Judg. ix. 40. 1 Chron. v. 22. 

^3,lit. " as and as," for ? ? Dan. xi. 29. as, Josh. xiv. 11. 1 Sam. 
xxx. 24. Ezek. xviii. 4. 

n^j, " despond." Dan. xi. 30. a?S riKai Ps. cix. 16. 

^t#3; rfan, "multitudes [fern.] shall stumble," [masc.] xi. 41. t\\ycsy 
in^nj; " rumours [fern.] shall terrify [masc.] him." xi. 44. These may 
be the use of the 3rd pers. masc. plur. as a common gender, includ- 
ing the fem., as in Job iii. 24. Cant. vi. 9. Prov. xvi. 3. Hos. xiv. 1, 
7. and 2nd. person plur., Cant. ii. 7- viii. 4. Joel ii. 22. (Ew. Gr. p. 
643.) Esth. i. 20; or they might be a very bold change of gender, in 
conformity with the image ; since, as to the first, those who " stumble " 
must be persons ; as to the second, the "terror" implies might ; and Je- 
remiah lias (xlix. 16.) TCIK K'^CI IPI^??, " thy terribleness [fern.] hath 
deceived (masc.) thee ; " as JIKBIJ is construed as masc. from the image 
of a wild beast, " sin [fem.] coucheth [masc.] at the door." Gen. iv. 7. 

nsnn with art. lit. " the [only] knowledge." Dan. xii. 4. Hos. iv. 6. 

iii. Words and idioms common to Daniel with later books. 

'B n^y irtty nj?3, " in the year three of the reign of," i. I. ii. 1. 
viii. 1. 1 Chr. xxvi. 31. 2 Chr. iii. 2. xv. 10, 19. xyi. 1,12. xxx v. 19. 



588 Words and idioms common 

Esth. ii. 16. Moses has the fuller idiom ni nV njv' nine w n$? Gen. 
vii. 11. (followed in 1 Kings xvi. 8, 15, 23. [with the shorter form 
ver. 10.] 2 Kings viii. 25. xiii. 1, 1.0.) but also ^ D'j^-jsp rue*? without 
f\yo Num. xxxiii. 38. nnfo, however, only occurs in the Pentateuch 
in the mouth of Balaam (from Aram,) Num.xxiv. 7- 5 the form most 
used in the earlier hooks being fi?5?QO. 

Daniel lias also (i. 21. vii. 1. ix. 1. x. 1. xi. 1.) the shorter form, 
which is frequent in the Kings, with J> simply prefixed to the name of 
the king, and ia^ nnx n$a ix. 2, which occurs in Kings [ii.] Jere- 
miah [iii.] Chron. [v.] Esther [i.] 

nyga [form njo Ps. xvi. 5, &c.] "some," of things, Dan. i. 2. of per- 
sons, Neh. vii. 70. nXjjn, Gen. xlvii. 2. (thence in Ezek. xxxiii. 2.) of 
time, Dan. i. 5, 15, 18. nXjpp Gen. viii. 3, &c. 

trrhgn rvn ^5, Dan. i. 2. 2 Chron. xxviii. 24. (bis) xxxvi. 18. Neh. 
xiii. 9. "n'3, Jer. xxvii. 16. xxviii. 3,6. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 10. Ezr. i. 7; 
but Khpn 'ba, 1 Kings viii. 4. as Num. iii. 31. also 1 Chron. ix. 21. 
2 Chron. v. 5. The name nw occurs only in Daniel's own prayer, Dan. 
ix. 10. 13. 14. [ii.] and its immediate context ix. 2. 4. 20. 

crnnn J?a Dan. xi. 8. comp. n?an '!?? "73 2 Chron. xxxii. 27. n^r? ( i?a 
n'3 2 Chron. xxxvi. 10. rnoqo 'a Ib. 19. but also Hos. xii. 10. 
, vn^K iste iva Dan. i. 2. (" the treasure-house of his gods," for the 
simple )#,) nyinn n3, Mai. iii. 10. Neh. x. 39. in Jos. " IS'IK, vi. 19. 
n'a iste, Ib. 24. and so 1 Chron. xxix. 8. n<a nin^K 1 Kings vii. 51. 
-xv. 18. 2 Kings xii. 19. o'nSxn .a ., 2 Chron. v. 1. 

nDx with ^> and inf. " commanded to," Dan. i. 3. 4. 18. ii. 2. (in 
Chald. of Dan. ii. 12. 46. iii. 13, 19, 20. iv. 23. vi. 24.) 1 Chron. 
xxi. 17- Esth. i. 17- iv. 13. ix. 14. In 2 Sam. xxii. 16, (quoted by 
Ew. Lehrb. p. 818.) as in Ex. ii. 14, it signifies, " thought to." See 
Ges. Thes. p. 120. 

qu jn? Dan. i. 3. 2 Kings xxv. 25. Jer. xii. 1. Ez. xvii. 13. 

"Nobles," Jewish, Dan. i. 3. Persian, Esth. i. 3. vi. 9. 
Aryan word. See Note A. p. 570. The Hebrew title is p^rr -'hx Ez. 
xvii. 13. 2 Kings xxiv. 15. comp. Ezek. xv. 15. or onin, see above p. 
346, or generally D'Vvfy D>T. 

jnn, f knowledge, Dan. i. 4. 17- 2 Chron. i. 10, 11, 12. (j/?: Cli. 
Dan. ii. 21. iv. 31. 33. v. 12. Sam. njnD) connected with contraction in 
the oldest Hebrew, j)"Q for jjvi; no. 

tyw, "was defiled," Dan. i. 8. Ezr. ii. 62. Mai. i. 7, 12. Neh. vii. 64. 
but ?lso before Captivity, Is. lix. 3. Ixiii. 3. Zeph. iii. 1 . or at its begin- 
:ning, Lam. iv. 14. 

jiiij ^| pgn, Dan. i. 17- D'i^ga rfn-ia j'sep, % .Chron. xxvi. 5. and ge- 



to Daniel, and the later "books. 589 

nerally pn with ? is. 23. (ii.) x. 11. 2 Chron. xxxiv. 12. Neh. viii. 8. 
xiii. 7 

" castle," " tower," Dan. viii. 2. Chron. (ii.) Neh. (iii.) Esth. 



(x.) 

bis-]? nptf Dan. viii. 4. xL 3, 16. with plur. aff. Nell. ix. 24. Esth. 
xi. 5. 

D<$n Tpy (i. q. n'$ ~\y'y of Pent.] Dan. viii. 5, 8. 2 Chron. xxix. 21. 
Ezr. vi. 17- Ch. VSVD alone, Dan. viii. 5. Ezr. viii. 35 ; with fyfr}, Dan. 
viii. 21. (T?^ Ch. Sam. ns^ Syr.) 

nVs^j Dan. viii. 22. like nvjn Jer. xxxvii. 16. 
ix. 6. accumulation like Jer. xliv. 17. 
-icy c. ^y p. viii. 25. xi. 14. 1 Chron. xxi. 1. 2 Chron. xx. 23. 
-\dy, only with affix, " where I, he, stood," nearly =ripn, Dan. 
iii. 17, 18. x. 11. xi. 1. 2 Chron. (iii.) Neh. (iii.) 

nVJ$J> Dan. viii. 27- only occurs in Ez. xx. 14 ; but bssj also, occurs 
only five times ; n'^u also occurs 1 Kings xvi. 25. 2 Kings iii. 2. 
xiii. 11. Ezek. xviii. 12. 

DV> Dflcnn IB> nis-jNn V?3 .Dan.ix. 7- from Jer. xxiii. 3. 8. xxxii. 37. 
n^$ nB>3, for nwa only, Dan. ix. 7, 8. 2 Chron. xxxii. 21. with aff. 'j? .3 
Ps. xliv. 16. onug .3 Jer. vii. 19. 

c^n; 'a^i niinj w'^ Dan. ix. 7- Jer. xxxv. 13. with the prep. ^ 
and ^, Jer. xi. 2. xviii. 11. 

o^n? 'g^'j nnifi; B!-! ^ 2 Chron. xxxiv. 30. 
"" ^)] niw; ^>3 Jer.xvii. 20. xxv. 2. 
' '' "?? Sxi ,n; ^ Jer. xxxv. 17. 
" " "?? ^i ',T D5! ha "?a Jer. xxv. 2. ... 

" "i ,r "?? 2 Chron. xx. 15, 18. xxxii. 33. 
'' "rrriinj 2 Chron. xx. 20. xxi. 13. xxxiii. 9. 
D'pinim D^i-ijpn Dan. ix. 7- Jer. xxv. 26. Esth. ix. 20. from Deut. 
xiii. 8. 5jsa D'prrjri i ?i'VK D^hj-iri, 

^ya, verb and noun, revived from the Pentateuch in the later books; 
very little used in intervening books. 

The verb occurs in the Pent, (vii times) Josh, (iv.) Prov. (i.) Dan. 
ix. 7- Ezek. (vii.) Ezr. (ii.) Chron. (xii.) Neh. (ii.); the noun, in Pent. 
(vii.) Josh, (v.) Job (i.) Ezek. (v.) Dan. ix. 7- Ezr. (iii.) Chron. (v.) 
*>S8 ^?, with "3, or pronoun relating to God, Lev. v. 21. xxvi. 40. 
Num.v. 6. Josh. xxii. 31. Ezek. xvii. 20. xx. 27- xxxix. 26. Dan. ix.7- 
1 Chron. x. 13. 2 Chron. xxviii. 19. 

Q'iprnrt Dan. ix. 9. Jer. xvi. 5. " the mercies, compassions," si'orp 
Dan. ix. 18. " Thy mercies, the great," i. e. Thy great, well- 



590. Words and idioms common to Daniel. 

known mercies. Neheiniah has hn 'ma, 'nn 'ma, lit. " in, according 
to Thy mercies, the great." Else, only 0*31 Tprp, Ps. cxix. 156. "Thy 
mercies are great." D'?T vnrn, 2 Sam. xxiv. ] 4. 1 Chron. xxi. 13. 213 
according to the multitude of," &c. Ps. li. 3. Ixix. 17. 

nin^g Dan. ix. 9. .ng^eg Ps. cxxx. 4. nin^o \fb : Neh.ix. 17. 

vjnin? ngV? u'fl^s Vip? uyatp *>] Dan. ix. 10. from Jer. xliv. 23. V 
ppnai 11171:11 '.T Vip3 cnyoip 

30} "poured out," of God's anger, Dan.ix. 11, 27- Nah. i. 6. Jer. 
vii. 20. xlii. 18. xliv. 6. 2 Chron. xii. 7- xxxiv. 17-21. 25. 

nNi before Nominative, Dan. ix. 13. Jer.xxxvi. 22. Neh. ix. 19. 

npj' with ^ of thg. Dan. ix. 14. Jer. i. 14. with *?% p. Jer. xxxi. 28. 
xxxiv. 27. , 

v > 'Vilp~ < ?$~ l >Sl " P"!S '? Dan. ix. 14. ty NJH ^5 ^ p'^s n^S] Neh. ix 33. 

njjj Di'9 D 5)^-^51 Dan. ix. 15. verhatim from Jer. xxxii. 20. (only 
Jeremiah has the unabridged form, n^8i.).n}g oi's, like "hodie" for 
" adhuc" in good latin. 

^?a Dan.ix. 18. 'i?V 'ijjijfi ^?a Dan.ix. 20. Va?^ 
Jer. xlii. 9. of God. ^eg us^ 'o?^ 'J ^'29 Ib. xxxviii. 26. 
Dan. x. 5. Jer. x. 9. . , 

!?; "nevertheless," "however," Dan.x. 7,21. Ezr.x. 13. 2 Chr. 
i. 4. xix. 3. xxxiii. 17- " nay but," Gen. xvii: 19. xlii. 21. 2 Sam. 
xiv. 5. 1 Kings i. 43. 2 Kings iv. 14. 

na isj; Dan. x. 8, 16. xi. 6. 2 Chron. xiii. 20: with \ 1 Chron. xxix. 
14. 2 Chron. xxii. 9. 

TJHD, f " trembh'ng," of the human being, Dan. x. 11. Ezr. x. 9, 
after the analogy of pnjm Is. viii.,12. xxix. 24, and other words, ex- 
pressive of emotion. We say," do not frighten yourselves." The 
simple root, ijn, is used of the lifeless earth, Ps. civ. 33. -\yi, " trem- 
bling," occurs Ex. xy. 15. Ps. Iv. 6.. 

iab nx i/jj with ) and inf. Dan. x. 12. EccL L 13, 17. viii. 16. 1 Chr. 
xxii. 19. 2 Chron. xi. 16 ; with ^ of thing Eccl. vii. 21. viii. 9. 



Dan* x. 12. Ezr. viii. 21. 

Vjjf- (for irx) Dan.x. 17. 1 Ghron; xiii. 12; Sam. -\rt, even in Sam. 
Pent. Gen. xxxiv. 21 ; Syr. TKJ Targ. has both K?%, NO'S, " how ? " but 
T& T5> are not interrogative, and the abstracts in late writers are 
formed, not from %-Q but from Tpx ; ma's, " quality ; " y.x$n " endowed 
with qualities." . . 

3$o " writing," Dan. x. 21. 2 Ghron. xxxv. 4. else " written cha- 
racters," Ezr. Esth., " letter," 2 Chron. ii. 10; "writ," Esth. iii, 



with the later hooks; with the Pentateuch. 591 

14. vii. 8, 13. iv. 8 ; God's " book " of the people, Ezek. xiii. 9, "re- 
gister," Ezr. ii. 62. Neh. vii. 64 ; " book," Arab. Aram. Samarit. In 
Chald. "writing," Dan. v. 8, 15, 16, 24, 25. 

vpy pjofla Dan. x. 21. 1 Chron. xi. 10. 2 Cliron. xvi. 9. 

isopij Dan. x i' 6. with ny p. 2 Chron. xx. 35, 37- W?0?n t Dan. 
xi. 23, verbal noun like nijp$j, Ez. xxiv. 26. 

n'^, with | p. " do against," Dan. xi. 7 j of God, Jer. xviii. 20. 

D^Bjten, "forces," Dan.xi.10; n^;n, chiefly of D'^q&'iV "the princes 
of the forces ; (of Benhadad's 1 Kings xv. 20.) 2 Kings xxv. 23, 26. 
2 Chron. xvi, 4. Jer. [ix times.] also n^>;q n_ba 1 Chron. vii. 5, 7 , 1 1 > 40. 

an; Dan. xi. 12. Ez. xxxi. 10. 

rj, " 10,000 s ," Dan. xi. 12. pointed in Ezr. ii. 69, roka-j. On the 
sing, ia-i see on Jonah p. 250. 

ttb^ vj? n<i?; Dan. xi. 17- Jer. xlii. 15, l7-,xliv. 12. ni^ 'a 'b 2 Kings 
xii. 18. 

rym, Dan.xi. 17. Esth. ix. 29. x. 2 ; Ch. Dan. ii. 37. iv. 27. 

tola fiyp Dan. xi. 20, contrary prophecy of Israel, i\y D-T^J; nbia A 
li, Zech. ix. 8. 

m? f xi. 24, 33. fern, form of the ordinary, 13, (in Syr. fern. xhjf, 
Sain, ma.) " booty," Ezek. xxix. 19. Ezr. ix. 7- 2 Chron. (iii.) Neh. (i.) 
Esth. (iii. one phrase, ix. 10, 15, 16.) 

^2 nb^qn ngiij Dan. xi. 24. Jer. xi. 19. xviii. 18. sing. Jer. xviii. 
11. xlix. 30. Esth. viii. 3. plur. with (?$? Jer. xlix. 20. 1. 45. 

iv. Words and idioms revived from the Pentateuch, in part in com- 
mon with other of the later books of the O.T. 

"W$ t P.$ Dan. i. 2, from Gen. x. 10 ; also adopted in Zech. v. 1 1 . 
The name was still exstant in the fcime of Joshua, whether as derived 
from Genesis or as travelling with the article of merchandise, ityv n-jjiij 
" a garment of Shinar," i. e. of its tapestried mamifacture. Josh. vii. 21 ; 
Isaiah used nj$?>, alone, xi. 11. The name, ijj}^ Sen'ar, was still the 
Syriac title for Babylon, in the time of Barhebraeus, as distinct from 
Persia, Syria, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Chron. p. 9,93, 169,256,274, 
314, 529, 565, 578, in Tuch de Nino urbe, p. 9. 

n-)i9 aio Dan. i. 4. Gen. xxiv. 16. xxvi. 7- 2 Sam. xi. 2. also in 
Esth.' i. 11. ii. 2, 3, 7. 

toi^i n'v ly.j Ex. (iii.) Lev. Num. Deut. Kings (ii.) Chron. (iii.) Ezr. 
(i.) Neh. (ii.) Jer. (i.) 

D'sjy;} of the countenance, only Dan. i. 10. Gen.xl. 6. 

13^ ^9, with gen. of abstract word, Dan. i. 20. from Ex. xxii. 8 ; 'al- 
so in 1 Chron. xxvii. 1. 



592 Words are taken from the Pentateuch 

"V?; %%, i. 20. from Gen. xliii. 34. nVi; it>9g ; comp. Gen. xlvii. 24. 
ni,'D M18 5 this last in Neh. xi. 1. 

D'^B-IIJ, lepoypa/ii/Mmts, Dan. i. 20. ii. 2 ; in his Chaldee, ii. 10, 27. 
iv.4,6. Y. 11.; a common name for a common office in Babylon and 
Egypt; Gen. xli. 8. 24. Ex. vii. 11. 22. viii. 3. 4. 15. ix. II. 

Dj$ttfl tan Dan.ii. 1, >pn Q^?fll Ib. 3. from Gen. xli. 8. tan Djj|pi. DJHS 
does not occur in Chald. except in the sense of the Heb.'" times," nor 
in Syr. at all ; in Arabic it only signifies " was full." 

n^ipg, "in the beginning " Dan. viii. 1. ix. 21. Gen. (iv) Jud. [iii] 

nan] nx-iNi -?% Ktyx\ Dan. viii. 3, mcij sqf<} 'j'j; n$ K^I Ib. x. 5 ; from 
Gen. xxxi. 10. ajijj ci^na K-J^I j<jj N^KI. 

njjj) njisvi "?; f Dan. viii. 4. from Gen. xxviii. 14. njyj n^byj nenRi ns; 
The 4 points of the compass are given n$;j ncnjjj ,15511 njby Gen. xiii. 14. 
and in 1 Chron. ix. 24. It is not a mere imitation, since the East is 
omitted purposely. See ab. p. 86. 

iji 3Tj{ f Dan. viii. 14. with art. ij53,3] STJ;??, referring to this, Ib. 
26 ; from Gen. i. 5, sqq. . 

nja nsi? Dan. viii. 15. " as the appearance of a man," (add x. 6, 18.) 
from Num. ix. 15, v$ hi<iD| ; thence Ezelc. i. 13, 14, 26. (ii.) 27. (ii.) 28. 
viii. 2. (ii.) x. 1. xl. 3. xlii. 1 1. xliii. 3. 

n$rp, "vision," viii. 1 6, from Ex. iii. 3, of the "burning bush ; " then 
Ez. viii. 4. xi. 24. xliii. 3. 

fix-ID Id. Dan. x. 7. (ii.) 8. 16. Num. xii. 6. plur. Gen.xlvi. 2. Ezetc. 
i. 1. viii. 3. xl. 2. sing. 1 Sam. iii. 15. 

D'j? ia Dan. viii. 23. from Deut. xxviii. 50. iu ip Is. xix. 4. 

rrjuiij, " confess," Lev. v. 5. xvi. 21. xxvi. 40. Num. v. 7- then Dan. 
ix. 4. 20, and Ezr. (i.) Chron. (i.) Neh. (iii.) 

ix. 4. vriwD natf 1 ?! vansV ^D^^l n'lin ~iav vnatn hi-un ^nn, verbatim from 
Deut. vii. 9, except that Dan. has substituted s-mn, the aweful, for 
ja^jn, the faithful. Daniel has retained even the 3rd persons, vniso, 
r^ftx. Nehemiah uses the verse, i. 5. and some of it in ix. 32. Solo- 
mon employed Moses' words 'ni 'IT 'KM in his prayer, 1 Kings viii. 23. 
2 Chron. vi. 14. See ab. p. 356. 

TID, with 5, " rebelled against " God, Dan. ix. 9. Num. xiv. 9. Josh, 
xxii. 16, 18, 19, 29. Ezek. ii. 23. Neh. ix. 26. 

toga rnina n^n? ^ nsjntj'm n^xri Dan. ix. 11. Deut. xxix. 19. ^> ta nja-j 
nn n?53 nyinyy rhttn 

DjD-^n- 1 ?? ODD Dan. ix. 12. Gen. vii. 19. Deut. ii. 25. iv. 19. Job 
xxviii. 24. xxxvii. 3. xli. 3. [11. Eng.] 

n;u of living body Dan. x. 6. Gen. xlvii. 18. thence Ez. i. 11,23. 
Neh.' ix. 27. 



and from EzekieL 593 

x. 4. title given to the Euphrates (tr% i&}) Gen. xy. 18. 
Deut. i. 7. then Jos. i. 4 ; here transferred to Tigris h$$ wrt. 
nViJ iTi-jn Dan. x. 7- Gen. xxvii. 33. 
'Daii. x. 13. as Gen. xxxii. 25. 

Dan. ix. 12. (ii.) Num. xv. 24. Deut. xiii. 14.. xvii. 4. 2 Sam. 
(i.) Neli. (i.) Mai., (i.) np^jy Dan. xi. 36. in pause. 
n 1i?' "^ n $ 1" Dan. x. 14. 



In this place only, mi?: is pointed like Nnjj; for which it is substitut- 
ed ; and here only has ^> p. not the ace. 

13)10 Dan. xi. 4. Pent, (xxiv.) Jos. xvii. 49. 1 Kings x. 33. Ezr. (i.) 
Neli. (i.) Chron. (iii.) 

nty? for iijjo Dan. xi. 10, from old form in Pent. Gen. xlix. 11. [ii.] 
(changed hy Kri once) Ex. xxii. 4. 26. xxxii. 17- Lev. xxiii. 13. thence 
2 Kings xix. 23. xx. 13. Ezek. xlviii. 18. all corrected in Kri (Killer 
Arc. Keth. p. 74. Ges. Lehrg. p. 212.) 

m ; Dan. xi. 13. from Gen. xiii. 6. xxxvi.7- thence 2 Chron. xxxii. 
29. my} occurs in the Pent, xiii times ; in Dan. iii ; in Ezr. iv ; in 
Chron. viii times. 

HS IN Dan. xi. 20-21. 38, prob. from Gen. xl. 13. xli. 13. 

D'-IIJN D>D; Dan. xi. 20, from Gen. xxvii. 44. xxix. 20. 

HW '39$? " tne r i cu (Ht./) places of the land" D,an. xi. 24., from 
Gen. xxvii. 28. 39. 

nbm r^ut? Ib. like Ex. x. 6. si'nb?! ntoio I'njs. 

p'N-i| Dan. xi. 29. n^nn? else only Deuk ix. 18. 

ni^j c. ^j? p. " cleave (so as to lean) upon," Dan. xi. 34. from Num. 
xviii. 2. 4. but also Is. xiv. 1. and Esth.ix. 27. as to God; Is. Ivi. 6. 

iN;n ns^ Dan. xii. 5; from Gen. xli. 3, ih;?j''9'B, Dan. xii. 6, from 
Ex. vii. 24. 

v. Words or idioms taken from EzekieL 

DO? " shut up," of things obscure, Dan. viii. 26. xii. 4, 9. Ezek. 
xxviii. 3. "lo, thou art wiser than Daniel," PDBS> N!? fflnp *?$. It im- 
plies, not that the thing was not known, but that it was not under- 
stood ; |'3P j's viii. 27. comp. Ps. Ii. 8. pnfi, " in the hidden part." 

D^CI, comp. ain, debt, Ezek. xviii. 7- 

D!!J )| " son of man," vocative, Dan. viii. 17- as Ezek. passim, comp. 
v% 13 Dan. vii. 13. 

Dan. x. 5, from Ezek. ix. 2 ; and (referring to this) mJj 
Dan. xii. 6. Ezek. ix. 11. 

Dan. x. 6. the word, not the idiom, from Ez. i. 16. x, 9. 



594 Aryan, or other rare ivords in Daniel 

P"3? nsii??, tfij.'y?!?? Dan.x. 6. p-ja NSV v$n jni Q'T?Vtj nsp s D} Ez. i. 13. 

^>j3 nEnj pa?. Ib. Ezek. i. 7- 

nv? )i)ij iiy '? "the vision is yet for those (fijoed) days." Dan.x. 14. 
Before, he said, undefined, nan n^ '? viii. 26. Ezekiel says, l x?r$\ ira 
a'an n'p;?> nih sin nw jVijn D^ON xii. 27. If there be an allusion, it is a 
remarkable adoption, as truth, of what was said scornfully. 



Note C. on p. 38. 

Of the Aryan or other rare words in Daniel relating to offices, dress, 
musical instruments, most were lost in Aramaic, together with the 
things themselves, several had become obsolete, when the book of 
Daniel was translated. 

The more common names of offices, Achashdarpenin, sagan, pe- 
chah, were understood and translated by the Peshito but had disap- 
peared from the language. The translation of these, and the reten- 
tion of the names of the four next in order, in Dan. iii. 2, &c. makes 
it probable that the meaning too of the four latter names of offices 
was obliterated. The original words can still be tracedj being dis- 
guised only by the interchange of similar letters. Adargazeraiia 
lies hid under agardoie ; gedaberaiia under gerabdoie, (the d and r, 
as differing only by the position of the dot, being transposed ;) de- 
thaberaiia under therdbdoie, (the d being again changed into r and 
r into d, andr, so changed, being further transposed with th ;) Ti/taiia 
under Thibetlwie (the /being changed into b which it much resem- 
bles.) The entire expiry of two of these words is the more remark- 
able, because they are pure Aramaic. They perished with the offices 
themselves. A third was a variation of a word which lived on in 
Syriac, which yet the translator did not recognise under the slight 
disguise of gedabar for gidsbar. The name satrap Avas revived, but 
probably from the Greek, Nb'itjp (e. g. Barh. 159. 1 .) whence was form- 
ed, with the Syriac ending, Khttnijo or xfflsnijp, " satrapy," (e. g. Barh. 
162, 6.) Hammelsar was also retained, although without the Article. 
It has now become MesMzar i. ll,Menisarm i. 16. Haddaberaiia 
(again an Aramaic word) is translated in Dan. iii. 24. iv. 33, as is also 
Sarechin, Dan. vi. 3, Sec. Partemim, " nobles," was doubtless re- 
tained in what is now an unmeaning word, partevoye. No trace of 
any of these three words remains in Syriac. 



lost subsequently. 595 

Of tlie names of musical instruments, the Syriac name mashrooki- 
tho was naturally retained; as being Syriac, and remaining', although 
in a modified form, iri the language. (See below Note D.) Kithoro 
also survived, being used in the Peshito, Gen. iv. 21, 1 Cor. xiv.7 
and Plur. Ps. Ixxvi. 3; as was the Syrised Kithooroodootho, "mu- 
sic," Barh. p. 149. pen. p. 162. 1. 6 ; mekaithoro, "minstrel ; " Nov. 
149; kithoroodo, " minstrel ;"F. methkithar,roKiOapi.^6fji.evov 1 Cor. 
xiv. 7- (Bernst.) It seems probable that, at the date of the Peshito, 
the Syrians had the instrument symfoneyali or sifoneyah, because the 
Peshito does not simply retain the word, but slightly inflects it, ze- 
fooneyo, (N>}X); yet there are no subsequent traces of it, and the 
learned lexicographers differ as to the nature of the instrument, (see 
Ges. de B. All, p. 26, 7-) -It is even remarkable that there is no trace 
of the instrument pesanterin in Syriac, since it had become an As- ' 
Syrian instrument in the time of Sennacherib, and continues in use to 
this day in Egypt, the trunk of its name, santer,santur, &c. still sur- 
viving. See ab. p. 32, 3. 

Of the names of dress, the Peshito pronounces sm-bal, sharbolo. 
This is designated as "a flowing garment" by Barhebrasus, tfVjn vfojg 
p. 223. 1. 16. and a verb is formed from it; "'their dress was me- 
sharbelin," lit. " trousered." Barh. p. 80. 1. 8. (The reading is un- 
doubted, occurring in cod. Hunt. 1. also.) The defeat of the Per- 
sians is ascribed to this peculiarity of their dress, and their bows being 
relaxed by the humidity of the air. 

Tlie word carbal, the Peshito alone understood rightly. It is the 
more remarkable, that there is no trace of the word in Syriac, except 
as, "the crest of a cock." In Hebrew there occurs the derived verb 
"?-na? 1 Chr. xv. 27. " 

Petsho was retained, is explained by the Syriac lexicographers, but 
no instance has been found of its use. 

Hammica not only lived oh in the form of the Kri, hamnica, as 
equivalent to dsiro, a " jewelled collar," but gave rise to a verb, ham- 
nec, "girt," and a corrupted noun, hamnisono, " a girdle." See in 
Ges. de Bar Ali et B. B. ii. 10. 

Patlibag had become a naturalised term in the Hebrew of Daniel, 
being used, not only of the royal food allotted to the three youths, (i. 
5, 8, 13, 15, 16.) but also in the prophetic description of the treachery 
to Ptolemy Philometor, (xi. 26, not mentioned in exstant historians,) 
where " they who eat of his patlibag " replaces the " they who did 
eat of my bread " of the Psalmist. In the exstant Syriac, pathbag, 

Qq2 



596 Aryan or other rare words in Daniel 



occurs both in the more limited and in the wider sense. 
S. Ephrem uses it of the " royal dainties," which Barzillai declined, 
(i. 423,) hut also of " the dainties of Egypt," which Israel pined af- 
ter, (i. 260,) and of the food with which Abigail supplied David and 
his men. (Ib. 382.) Barhebrseus uses it of something given by the 
Atabeg, which would keep for a year, unspoiled, in a cloth in the 
slave's bosom. Chron. p. 331. The Syriac Lexica say, that pet boge 
are " dates without rind ; " patboge, pathbogotho, " various sorts of 
strong soup ; " pathbogo, " a royal cook." Ges. on B. Ali. ii. 25. 

Of the Hebrew of Daniel, we have, as is known, no Targum. The 
Jewish tradition states that " Jonathan B. Uzziel was forbidden to 
write a Targum on the Hagiographa," "because in it," ("i. e. in Da- 
niel," adds Rashi,) " is contained the term of the coming of the Mes- 
siah." (Megillah, f. 3. 1. in Schottg. de Mess. p. 264.) 

Of the titles of officers, which occur in the Hebrew or Chaldee of 
Daniel, the Targum of Esther substitutes a corrupt form of the Greek 
orparqXanjs for n^jmamK in Esth. iii. 12. viii. 9. ix. 3. (Buxtorf's re- 
ference to 'Esther x. 3. (Lex. p. 64.) must be an accidental erratum, 
since, there, o'js-ne'nx occurs in the Hebrew, not in the Chaldee.) Sa- 
gan was perpetuated in the Chaldee of the Targums and Gemara 
from the Hebrew ; yet so as to shew that the name was retained only 
in the generic sense of " prefect." (see Buxt. p. 1435.) Pechah, al- 
though so common in Biblical Hebrew, was lost. ddargadserin, a\- 
though lost, was understood rightly by Saadiah. Aben Ezra professes, 
not to understand it or the names which follow it. Rashi thought it 
to be the name of a nation. Gedabar Saadiah explains rightly by 
the gidsbar of Ezra ; but dethabar he explains wrongly by aid of the 
Hebrew bar; and tiphtaie, as though it were formed from patach. 
Haddaberin was lost, although Buxtorf gives a single instance of me- 
dabbera (T|io) in the Targ. (Prov.xi.4.) and ofmedabberana, (NJT^IIJ) 
in the Talmud, (Ketubh. f. 170, 1.) in the general sense, "ruler." 
Partemim is retained in one of the two places of Esther, in which it 
occurs besides Daniel, (i. 3,) as ^rqs ; in Esth. vi. 9, it is replaced by 
j'rEHBDN i. e. crrpcmjyoi. 

Of dress, carbela is used once (Berach. f. 20, 1.) of dress of a cer- 
tain " gentile woman," and is explained in the gloss by reference to 
Dan. iii. 21. (Buxt. p. 1084.) Sarbal, like the Syriac sharbal, gave rise 
to a pass. part. ^09 or ^lop. Buxt. 1544, 5. 

Hamnuca survived in the form which the Kri substituted, Hamnica, 
(Prov.i. 9. Esth.ii. 9, Buxt, c. 1226,) or the more Greek form, me- 



lost subsequently. 597 

nica CGen. xli. 42. Onk. xlix. 22. Targ. Jer. Esth. ii. 17. vii. 7. Bust.) 
or moniak, /iavia/c^s. (Buxt. c. 1228.) Pattish was lost. Of the mu- 
sical instruments, the Mashrokitha, Sabca, Pesanterin were lost ; 
the soomphonia occurs in the Talmud twice, (Kelim c. 11 and 16) 
and is explained wrongly "lyre." (Buxt. c. 1504.) Katliros occurs 
wrongly in Jonathan Is. v. 12. for >]h, i. e. timbrel and in Targ. Eccl. 
ii. 8. (Buxt. c. 2164.) Pathbag,so common in Syriac, was lost. 

Of the Greek-speaking Jews, the LXX translated in a general 
way the names- of Offices, shewing that they attached no definite mean- 
ing to them. Acliaslidarpcnin (Satraps) they rendered 8101/07701, 
Esth. viii. 35 ; OIKOVO/AOS, Esth. viii. 9 ; o-arpaTnys, in Dan. iii. 2. vi. 1 . 4. 
[2. 5.] where they were guided hy the numbers ; crTparrjyol in Esth. 
iii. 1 ; rupavvoi in Esth. ix. 3, (where they render rfonzpn '# l>$ " the 
rulers of the Satraps," perhaps, " satrapies"); worot, Dan. iii. 3, 27- 
(94.) 

Sagan, they render by ap^wv (as they do many other words,) 4 
times in Nehemiah and in Is. xli. 15; by arpom^oi, 12 times, inclu- 
ding Dan. iii. 27, (94); by ^you//,i/os, Dan. ii. 48, by rtyirdp^ai, Ib. 
iii. 27. (94.) 

Pechah also they render in Nehemiah, twice by ap^wv, as also twice 
by (tia, /3iai } and twice by tirapypt. 5 in Ezra, by a^T/jyov/j-evo^ in vi. 7; 
by errapxot, 5 times ; by 6t]cra.vpo^>vko.^, v. 14. They render it by i/ye/jon/ 
Jer. Ii. 23 ; by ^yov//,evos, Jer. Ii. 28, and Ezek. xxiii. 6 ; by a-a.Tpa.irai, 
twice in Kings, once in Chron.; by TOTrap^s, in 2 Kings xviii. 24, Is. 
xxxvi. 9, Dan. iii. 2, 3 ; by ap^araTpiutTai, iii. 27 (94); by IK <iA?js, 
4 times in Haggai. 

Of adargadseriia, gedaberiia, detliaberiia, tiphtaiia, the LXX ren- 
dering must be uncertain, since it has only six names for seven offi- 
ces ; and waroi, which occupies the first place in iii. 1 , is now the 
the fourth in iii. 2 ; but there is no one characteristic rendering. In 
Ezra the LXX retain gisbar in the form yo/3apivos, i. 8. In the 
plural they render " treasures," instead of "treasurers," ydtfu. viii. 20. 

Haddabere malca is rendered, "the king's friends," in Dan. iii. 27. 
(94.) haddaberohi, " his friends," Ib. 24. The clause, in which it oc- 
curs, is omitted in iv. 33, and in vi. 8. Theodotion renders it by 
/xeytoTwes aurov, iii. 24, Swaorai TOT) /JacriXe'cus, iii. 27 5 ol vupawoL pov, 
iv. 33, and by TJiraros in vi. 8. 

SarecMn the LXX translated, vaguely, YXov/xei/ovs ainfav, Dan. vi. 2, 
omitted it in 4. 5. 6. 7- 8 ; Theodotion rendered rct/crnco! in vi. 3. 4. 5. 
6. 7- oTpcmjyot in vi. 8. 



598 Words of -Daniel retained or lost in LXX. 

The LXX were still acquainted with the musical instruments, and 
rendered mashrokitha rightly aijpvy. . Of the articles of dress, in 
Dan. iii. 21, they rendered sarbalin wrongly " sandals," and patti- 
shin, "tiaras ; " carbelath they omitted ; but in iii. 27, (94.) they re- 
tained sarbalin in the form in which it had already been Grecised, 
(Antiphanes in Poll.x.40.) <rapd[3apa, yet they understood apparently 
neither the Chaldee nor the Greek word, since they mistranslated the 
Chaldee iii. 21'; hamnic they recognised by aid of the Greek (w.vid.Kt]s. 
Pathbag they rendered by a general word "table," i, 5, or "feast," 
i. 8, 13, 15, where the context clearly guided them, but in xi. 26, 
they wholly missed the meaning, as did, subsequently, Theodotion. So 
also they .were ignorant of the meaning of Hammehar, of gazerin, 
a Babylonian class of soothsayers, which they retained with the Greek 
termination Gazarenoi, Dan. ii. 27, v. 7, repeating it v. 8, but omit- 
ting it altogether in iv. 4. v. 11. So also they omitted Appadno, in 
Dan. xi; 47, a well-known term in Babylonia, whose meaning was 
lost in their time in the West. They translated the proper name 
Dura, not knowing it to be such. In Daniel, as throughout the O.T., 
they rendered rab-hattabbachim or sar-hattabbachim, ctpxi/Aayetpos, 
except in Gen. xl. 4, where, determined by the context, they rendered, 
dpxiSecr/Mimys, " captain of the prisoners." Nor did they understand 
P'3D3, to which the later Chaldee did not guide them; nor ^K and 
other words of the date of Daniel. In a word, they knew the mean- 
ing of musical instruments still in use, but they were ignorant of the 
names of Babylonian officers, Babylonian dress, Babylonian sooth- 
sayers, a Babylonian castle. Naturally. For their fathers had quit- 
ted Babylon some centuries before. And yet, on the rationalist hy- 
pothesis, the writer of the book of Daniel is to have lived in Pales- 
tine, some 363 years after his people quitted Babylon, and yet to 
have been familiar with* and to have used rightly, all those non-He- 
brew words, whichj shortly after, his countrymen did not understand. 



Note D on p. 49. 

The chief characteristics, which sever the Chaldee of the Bible 
from that of the Targums, lie in those grammatical forms which 
run through the whole diction, a summary of which has already 
been given from the careful examination of the Rev. J. Me Gill, 
p. 44-61. 



Aramaic words of Daniel lost subsequently. 599 

It is only as very subsidiary to that decisive proof, that I have set 
down a certain number of words, which occur in the six chapters 
which Daniel wrote in Chaldee, and which do not apparently occur 
in the Targums or the Gemara, or either of them. I say, " do not 
apparently occur," on the ground of the 30 years' labour of Bux- 
torf. 

Even such a labour would leave many gleanings for those, who 
should make the subject either of the Targums or of the Gemara a 
special study, as he did. They, who are not called to this, may rely 
with a certain degree of confidence on such a prolonged labour by 
one so accurate as Buxtorf ; as, in fact, I have not observed in the 
Thesaurus of Gesenius a statement .on the Chaldee of the Targums 
which is not taken from Buxtorf. Meantime, while individual state- 
ments may have to be modified, the main fact of the difference be- 
tween the Biblical Aramaic and that of the Targums, will only be 
established the more clearly. Daniel was, of course, in early times 
a subject of study both to the Targumists and the writers in the 
Gemara. Men do not infer that the Pentateuch is of the age of 
Daniel, on the ground that Daniel adopted some idioms from it. So 
neither should they, that Daniel was of the age of or near the Tar- 
gums, because the paraphrasts adopted idioms from Daniel. Many 
words, doubtless, were retained in the later Chaldee, as the result of 
the study of Daniel. On the other hand, Ziindel has hinted .at the 
converse of this argument, viz. the idioms of the Targums, which 
might naturally have occurred in Daniel, but for which Daniel uses 
his own equivalent expression. (Daniel, p. 246, 7-) I have marked 
with a * those words only which Buxtorf did not know to exist in 
the Targums or the Gemara. 

n^o in Dan. xxii times ; in Targg. less frequent, mostly JODNB, or 



probably from im i. q. ^m, (as Theod. Vulg.) Dan. ii. 5. 8. (d 
forl, as in nn^>p from Arab, nip; SaKpvov, lacryma,; aSdfJias, Arab, al- 
mas &c. In the Talm. it occurs only in the one phrase ITDJJB^ '3i!?a NIIK, 
" A. went after his own opinion." Ges. Thes. p. 58, from Saad. 

jvi^jsruji jwn,* Dan. ii. 5. lit. "ye shall be made limbs," i. e. cut to 
pieces. Syriac, hadom hadom, "limb for limb." It is the only ver- 
sion which translates right. 

'V}J>* for n^i}, Dan. ii. 5. iii. 29. as >h}f' for wVii Ezr. vi. ll.Targ. 
has "?i "foulness," Talm. h]io " defiled," of the srj.i is;, the " fomes pec- 
cati." Buxt. p. 1317- The word was understood by the Syr. only, 

'rtjS &c. Hafel, in Dan. ii. 6, 7, 9, 10, 16, 27. v. 1 5. Pael is frequent 



600 Aramaic ivords in Daniel, 

in the Targg. Of Afel Buxt. gives 2 instances from the Talin., none 
from the Targg. But the infinitive noun, n;iqs Dan. v. 12, occurs 
also in the Targg., so that Gesenius' inference from Buxt., "In Targg. 
hsec conjug. non usitata est," must be so far limited. 

napj, Dan. ii. 6. v. 17. " large gifts," from iaja with j prefixed, 
Buxt. c. 281. "then, naiaj for mana, as Golgotha for Gulgoltha," &c. 
Ges. p. 842. In the Targ. Jer. xl. 5. (quoted Buxt. 1. c.) the whole 
phrase, pnn pno, was prohably adopted from Daniel, as it is not the 
literal translation of Jeremiah. Else Buxt. quotes only the late Ps. 
Jon. Deut. xxxiii. 24. 

]rb* " therefore," Dan. ii. 6, 9. iv. 24 ; in Heh. Ruth i. 13. 

N^'P,* NJif.* '& for D. See ab. p. 51. n. 9. 

a'?:-]?.*, like our, "of a certainty," Dan. ii. 8. as ^!}-]o, Dan. ii. 47, 
our, " of a truth." comp. e avay/ajg, eic Trepicrcrov, e ia-orrjTOs, e 
fp.(j}avovg, e ttrov, ex sequo, ex integro." 

pjat NMJ/,* " gaining [lit. buying] time." Dan. ii. 8. 

(am "sentence, [lit. "law"] for you." ii. 9. jtt is always used from 
a superior to an inferior, law, religion, n? occurs viii times in the Ch, 
of Dan., vii times in that of Ezra ; not quoted from Targg. in Buxt. 

jajn * " settle." Ib. So Samar. often. Ges. In Targ., Af. only 
signifies "prepare," "invite," with ^ p. Buxt. c. 677- 

t\n * Dan.ii. 10, 27. iv. 4. v. 7, 11, 15. i. q. Heb. and Syr. See ab. 
p. 40. 

flrrnn, ii. 1 1 . TIB only here ; else -no iv. 22. 29. iViij v. 2 1 . as in Targg. 

R, s n3Q ai,* " chief of the executioners," (the " body-guard " hav- 
ing this office.) Dan. ii. 14. as D'nsa an in Heb. In Targg. nsa, 
"butcher," or "cook." 

^M, " went up," Dan. ii. 16. *?y is used ix times, in different conjuga- 
tions, of " entrance " to the king, (in regard either to the dignity or the 
elevation of the palace,) once to Arioch, probably in the king's pa- 
lace, ii. 24. No additional instance is given by Buxt. 

KT'ty* " light?" as i n Sy r - ^ an - " 22. The Kri changes it into 
the form used in the Targg., jj^jlnj. Dan. has again, in the spiritual 
sense, iv?u "illumination/' (v. 11, 14.) abridged from the fuller Syriac 
form Nhnw. 

nn;,* Judsea, Dan. ii. 25. v. 13. vi. 14. Ezr. vi. 8. vii. 14. In Syri- 
ac also. 

^>n| * (part.) Dan. ii. 26, iv. 15. j^rj? * (part, plur.) Dan. v. 8. 15. i. q. 
Heb. !?3'. It is probably i. q. ^3=^a< ; the a, (as also in jth.,) stand- 
ing (as in some other cases) for the softer i. 

pja,* probably, "they who define the course of man's life," Dan. 



lost subsequently. 601 

ii. 27- iv. 4. v. 7j 11. The root was in frequent use; this meaning 
only in Daniel. 

! nirn ^>S2>* " in order that," Dan. ii. 30 ; i niTi 1% Dan. iv. 14. (al. 
hy) adopted from Heb. if niai h]i Eccl. vii. 14, and, without y, Eccl. iii. 
18. viii.2. 

fy* Dan. i5. 31. iv. 7, 10. vii. 8. his. njj,* Dan. vii. 2, 5, 6, 7, 13 ; in 
all cases with the i prefixed ; and lo ! This may possibly be a mere 
exclamation, like one, sunk into vulgar use in English. Or the ori- 
ginal may be, foq, " see," and the i may be softened into "?. The 
Targg. have nq. 

in D!?S, "a certain image," Dan. ii. 31. rnq J3X, "a certain stone," 
vi. 1 8. as in Ezr. iv. 8, Kin NI^N, " a certain letter." This is rare in 
Hebrew, inx E><J<, " a certain man," 1 Sam. i. 1 ; nriK orn, " a certain 
broom," 1 Kings xix. 4 ; IIJN in " a certain hole," Ez. viii. 7 ; ii? DU 
" a certain people." Esth. iii. 8. This use of in is common in Sy- 
riac ; it is not mentioned apparently by Buxt. c. 708. 

inti, "breasts," Dan. ii. 32. The Hebrew form, njn, used of animals, 
is the original, lit. " what may be seen," " the front, like D'J?. In 
Dan. ii. 32, in Syriac, and in cod. Shabb. beg. (in Buxt. c. 710.) it is 
used of the human being. 

iiV,* " chaff," ii. 35. In Syr. also. Perhaps it is from isjy ; Ges. 
derives it from iiy, " blinded ; " which does not seem to me probable. 

^>8>n * i. q. Syr. " beat out with hammer," Dan. ii. 40. In Talm. it 
occurs only in the derived sense " devised ; " as we say, " beat out ; " 
and perhaps in N^n " barley freed from its husk," " threshed." 

Kn?v;j, "firmness." Dan. ii. 41. In Targg. it is only used for 
" planting." 

NO* (for N?) Dan. ii.43, perhaps retained from Gen.xlvi. 23. Ez. 
xvi. 43. In Syr. sh. 

]*yn*i * (lit. " acquiescences," " acceptablenesses,") is used in Dan. 
ii. 46, Ezr. vi. 10. absolutely, of "incense," not as in Heb. mri nn 
" smell of acceptableness." In Heb. too, the plur. is only used Ezek. 
xx. 28. 

NJfl with ]a pers. ii. 49. like K^a with JD p. Dan. i. 8. 

s<;i!27 *, " noble judges," Dan. iii. 2. 3. from ii^s, " magnificence," 
(comp. "his Excellency" &c. "bis Eminence" &c) andija, "decide." 
There is no other trace of the word. Of the two halves of the word, 
UK must have been old Aramaic, since it appears in the name of the 
idol of the Sepharvites of Mesopotamia, (2 Kings xvii. 31.,) ^STIN, 
and, from it, of Sennacherib's parricide son, Is. xxxvii. 38. 2 Kings 



602 Aramaic words in Daniel 

xix. 37. (See Ges. Thes. p. 29.) Yet this whole meaning of the root 
is entirely lost in Syriac. It occurs only, as a compound, in Persian 
names, mentioned in Syriac authors. (See Bernstein, Lex. p. 42sqq.) 

K'fts^i * II). doubtless from the same root as the Arab. " Mufti ; " but 
there is no trace of the word elsewhere, the name having perished 
with the office. " The root HUB occurs in Syriac only in the sense 
' latus fuit.' The Afel is very common in the sense of ' ampMca- 
vit.' " P. Smith from his own and Bernst. and Quatr's. collections. 
See above Note A. p. 569, 70. 

K,'$fy N;S^' N;OO occur in this order, Dan. iii. 4, 7, 29. v. 19. vii. 14 ; 
nax, Dan. iii. 29 ; N;BN ixy, Ear. iv. 10. In the Targg. KSIN occurs appa- 
rently, only to represent the word in the Hebrew text ; D's.^ in Ps. 
cxvii. l,or nisx, Gen. xxv. 16, Num. xxv. 25, and by Ps. Jon., Jerus. 
Targ. in Gen. xxv. 3. in a wrong explanation of D'SN^. 

On the words of Aryan origin in this v. see Note A. 

Nmpwo,* " pipe," Dan. iii. 5, 7, 10, 15. piv in Heb. Ch. Syr. Na- 
sor. signifies " hiss." In Heb. it is used of the sharp sound used 
in calling bees, and, seemingly, of the calls of shepherds to their 
flocks, rfp'Tf' Jud. v. 16. In Syr. alone and the Ch. of Daniel it is 
used of a musical instrument. " Mashrukitho, except in the Syr. 
translation of Daniel, only occurs of ' hissing ' [as in the Carm. de 
Alex. Knos Chr. p. 97.] or for crupty/tot, Judd. v. 16. Hexap. but 
masliruko is used of ' the pipe ; ' Bar-Ceph. Hem. 1 98. Bar-Salib. com. 
174." P. Sm. The exact gloss which Ges. quotes from Bar All of 
the Afel, " ashrek, shabbaba bilzaffara," does not occur in the Oxford 
MSS, but there is abundant proof of the use of the Afel. Bar Ali 
says that maslirek is chiefly used of the hissing of the serpent; 
(Hunt. 25. f. 184) but that it is used also of the mashrukitho, " play- 
ed on the Zqffdrat " (pipe) Ib. 12. v. and that mashrukitho is the 
zaflurah, and that mashrekono is used of " the player on the zqff'd- 
rah." (f. 184.) B. B. also says that mashrekin are " those who 
blow in the ssur." (a musical instrument.) It is also used of those 
who suffer from singing in the ear. (B. B. Hunt. 157. f. 560.) The 
mashrukitho is explained also as the instrument, shebabah (see Freyt. 
ii. 387.) and ssur, (Hunt. 1 70. f. 210.;) and those who play on it, 
mashrekin, are described by the verbs formed from those instruments, 
ssqffara,shaW)aba. (in Hunt. 170. 1. c.) According to Bar Ali, An- 
ton (i. e. Antonius Rhetor a learned Monophysite early in the 9th 
cent. Ass. B. O. ii. 345.) wrote the Afel, ashreg. Hunt. 25. f. 12. v. 
* Dan. iii. 5. (written K#V, Ib. 7- 10. 15,) a sort of harp, whence 



lost subsequently. 603 

o-aju,/3wo/j which the Greeks call a Syriac instrument. (See ab. p. 25, 6.) 
There is no other mention of the instrument. On the other instru- 
ments, see ah. p. 24-30. 

xtytf na, " in that hour," Dan. iii. 6. exactly as in Syr. 
p?a * plur. as from ^, Dan. iii. 8. It occurs in Dan. xv times ; 
in Ezra, iii times. Else only Nasor. sHau. 

one oVj " made a decree," Dan. iii. 10. Ezr. iv. 21. v. 3, 9. 13. vi. 1. 
3, 12. vii. 21. DJHP n^ 'JD, " a decree is made by me," Dan. iii. 29. iv. 
3. Ezr.iv. 19. vi. 8, 11. vii. 13, and, in the same idiom, DJ D^ cnis |Q 
Ezr. v. 17-' also Dyo a*i? 'cn^, )D Dan. vi. 27- 

ojm o^ with "?u p. " take account of," (probahly " set the mind on,") 
Dan. iii. ] 2. vi. 14. 

jq?,* " of deliberate purpose," Dan. iii. 14. as in Heb. n,nv Num. 
xxxv. 20. 22. nn* Ex.xxi. 13. 1 Sam.xxiv. 12. and in Syr. In Targg. 
it only signifies " desolate," "mock;" Ethp. "intermingle." Buxt. 

nan. * " need," (act.) Dan. iii. 16 ; is " needful," Ezr. vi. 9. ninipn, 
" need," Ezr. vii. 20. In Syr. " is useful, needful," a common word. 

n, "|,"iii. 19. 
" it seemed good," " visum est." Dan. iii. 19. vrj Targg. 

"tunic," Dan. iii. 21. In the Targg. and Gem. the word 
survived in the meaning which it has in Heb. and Arab, but not in 
Syriac, " hammer." Of an article of dress it is retained in the Sy- 
riac out of Daniel, (see Note C. p. 595.) not in tho Targg. or Gem. 
The case in which in one MS. fctoe occurs for w\<y$, " shoe," is evident- 
ly wrong, and owing probably to a wrong explanation of Daniel. See 
Buxt. c. 1865. 

N^a-]3, "cloak," Dan. iii. 21. (In Heb. ^anai, i.q. iwij, "girded," 
1 Chr.xv. 27.) In Berach. f. 20, 1. (Buxt. c. 1084.) probably taken 
from Daniel. 

x^a ^ H?'^,^ "flame of fire," Dan. iii. 22. i i pa^ Dan. vii. 9. In 
Syr. also. In Talm. uns? <3, explained in a gloss, "between the suns," 
" twilight," (Shabb. f. 109. 2. in Buxt. c. 2303) from Syr. K^s "?3<? 
" dawn." 

p?^,* " councillors," Dan. iii. 24, 27. iv. 33. vi. 8. doubtless (as 
Ges.) jnn'j, " leaders," with the art. It cannot be a compound with 
the Pers. " choda," because " choda," in compounds, retains its mean- 
ing " God," and is never used of a human " lord." Nor is the inter- 
change of the strong Persian guttural with the weak n probable. The 
name was lost with the office. 

pfria * Af. Dan. iii. 25. iv. 34. Pa. iv. 26. In Targg. Pa. and Eth- 
pa, only, in Buxt. 



604 Aramaic words 'of Daniel 

K^S>, as Syr. N^, Dan. iii. 26, and ix other places in Daniel, " the 
most High." In Kri and Targg. always n$y. 

c'3," body," Dan. iii. 27, 28. iv.30. v.21.vii. 11. In Targg. w$w. 

n^, " error," " any thing amiss," E.V. Dan. iii. 29. ity Kri, Dan. 
vi. 5. Ezr. iv. 22. as in Targg. 

r>5&fci " shall be made," Dari. iii. 29. Pa. is common in this sense; 
Ethpa. not in Targg. in Buxt. 

)J5n> "flourishing," Dan. iv. 1. In Job xv. 32, Buxtorfs only in- 
stance from the Targg., it is retained from the Hebrew. 

jnrnri * iv. 2. " imaginations." Syr. In Targ. " evil conceptions, 
evil thoughts of God, concupiscences." 

jnps * iy, " at last," iv. 5. 

OIK with t> pers., " is oppressive to," i. e. too difficult for. -Dan. iv. 6. 
In Targg. it is used of actual " oppression," and corresponds to Heh. 
' pn, ^>u, paty, Buxt. 

"vy,* "a watcher," iv. 10. p'S? 5 * "watchers," iv. 14. see ah. p. 522, 3. 

Tia, " cut," Dan. iv. 11, 20, as in Arab.,jadda. Only in Ber. Rab. 
c. 71- Buxt. In Targg. m, Buxt. 

'ninris, iv. 11. vii. 27- In Targg. sijiin^ Deut. xxviii. 13. else rrirw, 
and, with affixes, 'rfirfirw 8cc see Buxt. col. 2586. 

pfe* " portion." Dan. iv. 12. K|^>rr Syr. pV?n Targg. 

N#K,* Dan. iv. 13, 14. like Samarit. M^UK. Kri conforms it to 
Targg. N^N. 

-ifiv-$ i/3V, Dan. iv. 12, 20, 23. The Targg. use the one word ),?#, 
and, besides that they have not this idiom, they only retain the word 
ehtf itself, in a few places out of the Hebrew text. 

j'Xjj/ * njp?>> " seven, times," i. e. " years," iv. 13. 

njqo, " my Lord," Dan. iv. 16, 21. Kri alters it to na as if it were 
from 19, whence p,D, " our Lord." NID, also, Dan. ii. 47. v. 23, is rare 
in Targg. even without affix. Buxt. only mentions SID Prov. xxiii. 2, 
! frequently. 

on) i5a> "made bread," i.e. a feast, Dan. v. 1, as Heb. D^ riyy 
Eccl. x. 19. (a Chaldee idiom peculiar to Daniel.) 

no? NTI?D N?S^ ^315,^ "over against the thousand, wine he was drink- 
ing." v. 1. On the force of this idiom and its correspondence with East- 
ern customs see ah. p. 459. 

finf:} n;fi;n^i?N, Ib. transition from infinit. to finite verb as in i. 5. 

N-IDH Dj!iji3,lit. "in the taste of the wine," v. 2. idiomatic for " exhi- 
laration through the wine." 

rv$ with 3, of vessel, (as in Gen. xliv. 5. Am.vi. 6.) Dan. v. 2, 3, 23. 
> * " his singing women " v, 2, 3, 23, according to the Baby- 



lost subsequently. 605 

Ionian and Persian customs. Such was the original meaning of the 
Arab. |nV. [NI^N " songs," Toclif. Ichw. in Freyt.-Lex.; [Ninn^K nywx 
" the art of music ; " thence it is used of the wrong pronunciation of 
vowels, making long short, short long, in singing. "Modulation" 
is a secondary, not, as Ges. says, the primary meaning. In Targg. 
only " concubines." 

"?fl?, wall, Dan.v. 5. Sam. s^na i. q. hna Cant. ii. 9. The form of 
the Targg. is V 13 J with which Nj^ia, Ezr. v. 8, with Heb. and Targg 1 , 
agrees. 

rrtno nop lit. " the bands of his loin," i. e. the vertebrae. Dan. v. 6. 
The idiom stands alone, p'op, in a figurative sense, for " lineaments," 
occurs in Yelamm. and Vaiikra rabba in Buxt. c. 2024. In Syriac, 
it is used of the " bands of the hand," i. e. wrist. 

t^if': v?^B * lit. " he shall rule, third in the kingdom." Dan. v. 7- 
B^IJI N^g * Ib. 16. K$>B * a^w, " third ruler," Ib. 29. i. e. next to the 
Vizier, and third, including the king as the first. 

for n Syriac Dan.v. 11. 

, with K prosth. Dan.v. 12. In Targg., as in Syr., Nljnnix. 
?, (Sam. PID-D,) "throne," Dan. v. 20. In Targg. 'D-iis. and so 
Syr. 

W, probably to be read '$, Peal, only in Dan. v. 21. 
N;>a with JD Dan. vi. 3. Targ. sb'y. 
oya 3?;, " give account." Dan. vi. 3. 

pi}, " suffer injury," only Dan. vi. 3. In Targg. Peal is trans.; 
Buxt. quotes Ps. xci. 7- Pael is quoted once, Jer. xii. 14, else Afel is 
transitive, as is Haf. Ezr. iv. 13. 15. 22. 

ntfjija,* with hii p., " was preferred above." Dan. vi. 4. In Targg. 
and Syr. only of " victory." 

tfvsi, * " was minded," Dan. vi. 4. In Targg. only Ethp. 

nso lit. " on tlie side of the kingdom," i. e. in temporals. Dan. vi. 5. 

" [blasphemies] n$$> against," so as to be "side by side" with God, 

contesting on equal terms, Dan. vii. 25. Buxt. quotes only one instance 

of TSV, " thou shalt not approach TX^ of a woman," for ^ Ex. xix. 15. 

1^3 with ">$; p. vi. 15 ; as axa with ^>a p., vi. 24. and, in Hebrew in, 

with hy Eccl.ii. 17- 

IDK, " an interdict," Dan. vi. 8. 9. 10. 13. 14. 1C. In Targg. Buxt. 
only gives the case in which the Heb. word i$g, " obligation," (viz. to 
abstain from a thing,) has been retained in Num. xxx. 3. 4. 6. &c. 

T!?* "knelf'i.e.to God, Dan.vi. 11; as in Heb. Ps.xcv. 6, 2Chron. 
vi. 1 3 ; more widely in Syr. 



606 Wilful variations of the LXX translator of Daniel 

$>a*DV withes p. "set his heart upon," Dan. vi. 15; like !?ij aV tty, 
1 Sam. ix. 20. !?a * for ai?, is common Syriac, $&a, ^>N3 Arab., but not 
Ch. or Talm. 

iinw?,* " laboured," Dan. vi. 15. Vie?:, Targg. In the Targg. II^^N 
signifies, " was sent," as in Syr. 

ngiy, Dan. vi. 18. " DIE* is rare in Targg. which generally have 'fly." 
Buxt. c. 2349. 

nil?, "hungered," Dan. vi. 19. (comp. the usage of the Arab. MB in 
Ges. ;) once in Talm. Berach. f. 55. 2. Buxt. 

]}iH* Dan. vi. 19. Uncertain, whether " musical instruments," 
" singing-women," or " concubines." 

tfiflj "substance," much as we say "heads." Dan. vii. 1. (as in Heb. 
Ps. cxix. 160. and Lev. v. 24.) No instance of this use of tfn in Buxt. 
from Targg. 

IBS, "said," (in writing) = wrote. Dan. vii. 1. 

)rwD " bursting forth," of winds. Dan. vii. 2. So in Heb. and Syr.; 
but in Targg. only of "going forth to war," whence commonly joined 
with a^i?, Buxt. c. 402. In Job xxxviii. 8, 13", and in Jud. xx. 33, Q'JJS, 
the word is retained in the Targ. from the Heb. text. 

'ji-ipx,* " strong," vii. 7- The word, formed perhaps by Daniel, is 
from a root, exstant in Arabic only and in a derived word in Heb. 
D;jpD, not in any other Aramaic besides Daniel's, in any allied sense. 
See ab. p. 76. n. 2. 

|p; 'niD-iij, vii. 10. i. q. 'JE^ vinyi, i. 5. 

a i o; p, "judgment " (i. e. judges) " was set." Dan. vii. 26. 



Note E. on p. 377- 

The character of such a translation as that of the LXX is, with 
difficulty, exhibited by mere references or extracts, here and there. I 
have therefore translated, throughout, what seemed to me characte- 
ristic renderings, and many which contain in them little which is 
characteristic. The variation of the degrees of free translation or 
almost re-writing in different chapters is in itself remarkable. Where 
there was little temptation to embellish or gloss, as in ch. viii, the 
prayer in ch. ix, and ch. x., there is very little variation. But the ad- 
herence to the text in some parts makes it the more evident, that it 
was of set purpose, that the translator departed from his text, in 
other parts. One who could so translate must have been removed 



imply a date long subsequent to the Prophet. 607 

by centuries from the prophet. The whole tone of mind is different, 
and not accounted for by the mere absence of inspiration in the 
translator. 

i. 2. " The Lord delivered it (Jerusalem) into his hands and Joia- 
kim," (stating the capture of Jerusalem.) Ib. "he carried them to 
Babylon" explaining the land ofSMnar of the Hebrew. Ib. " in his 
idol temple," for, " in the treasure-house of his god." 3. " of the sons 
of the nobles of Israel," added. 7- "And to Daniel he gave under- 
standing in every word and wisdom and dreams and in all wisdom" 
\. 10. (lest he should see) " your faces distressed and iveak above 
the youths of the aliens who are nourished with you ; " (as though 
Daniel and his companions were the only Jews, and so no Jews had 
eaten forbidden food.) 11. " Daniel spake to Abiesdri who was ap- 
pointed chief of the eunuchs," for, " to Hammelzar whom the chief 
&c. had appointed ; " probably not understanding Hammelzar (see 
ab. p. 575.) 20. "And the king glorified them, and made them rulers 
and declared them wise above all his, in affairs in all his land and 
in all his kingdom," added. 20. " the sophists and philosophers," 
for, " magicians and astrologers." 

ii. 1. "visions and dreams." 2. " and sorcerers q/"the Chaldees," 
for " and," not understanding the Chaldees to be a distinct class. 
3. "my spirit was troubled; I wish therefore (added) to know my 
dream." ii. 5. " Unless ye shew me the vision in truth" added. 
3. instead of, " ye shall be cut in pieces and your houses shall be 
made a dunghill," " ye shall be made an example and your property 
shall be taken into the royal." ii. 9. " ye shall die," for, " there is 
one decree for you." 8. " as I have commanded, so it shall be," 
added. 9. " and shew its interpretation," added ; " the word which 
1 have seen by night," added, Ib. 11. " is rare and glorious," added. 
Ib. " except some angel," for, " except the gods," " wherefore 
it cannot be, as thou thinkest," added. 13. " Daniel and all who 
were with him, that they might perish with" (the wise men) as if they 
were a distinct class (TOV o-wa7roXr0cu)." 16. " Daniel went quickly 
to the king;" "he would shew all things," for, "the interpretation." 
18. for " that they would desire mercies from the God of Heaven," 
"and he enjoined fasting and supplication and self-affliction (lit. " re- 
venge," Ti/MopiW, added) "to seek from the Lord the Most High, &c." 
" with the sophists of Bab.," for " with the rest of the wise men of 
B." separating Daniel from them. 19. "in a vision, in that same 
night," for, " in a night-vision." 23. " Thou hast made known unto 



608 Daniel, in part rewritten . 

me what / desired, that I should make known to the long accordingly," 
for, " what we desired of Thee, for Thou hast made known unto <s." 
25. " I have found a wise man." 26. " Daniel, who was surnamed in 
Chaldce Belteshazzar." 34. " a stone was cut out of a mountain" 
added. 37. " gave them glory in the whole world" added. 38. " the 
fowls of heaven," he adds, " and the fishes of the sea" 41. for " the 
kingdom shall be divided," " there shall he another kingdom of two 
parts in it" (Siju,ep)s), adapting the prophecy to the Seleucidse and 
Ptolemies. 43. " They shall be commingled for the generation of 
men ; but they shall not be of one mind nor well-minded to one 
another." 44. " set up another kingdom," " and this kingdom shall 
not suffer another nation," for, " shall not be left to." 

iii. 1. "In the 18th year," King N. "governing cities and coun- 
tries and all dwellers on the earth from India to Ethiopia," added, 
this last probably from Esther i. 1 . " 2. in the plain of the circuit," 
not knowing Dura, as a proper name. " N. the king of kings and 
ruling the whole world sent to collect all nations and tribes and 
tongues and satraps, &c. and all throughout the world." 12. " serve 
not thy idol," for "thy gods," " and% golden," &c. for "the, &c. 
17- " For God is in heaven, our One Lord, whom we fear," for, " Our 
God, whom we serve ; " 18. "And then it will be clear to thee," 
for, " And if not, be it known, &c. ; " " thy idol," for, " thy gods." 
22. " And the men, who were appointed, having bound them and 
bringing them to the furnace cast them, into into it ; " added. 23. 
"The men then who bound Azariah and his companions, the flame, 
coming forth out of the furnace burnt and killed, and these were 
preserved" added. 

The Greek has only " the height thereof [of the statue] six cu- 
bits," avoiding the statement of the want of proportion, bxit the Sy- 
riac Hexaplar agrees with the Heb. 

After the prayer of Azarias, there follows an addition, 46. " And 
they who cast them in, ministers of the king, ceased not heating the 
furnace, and when they cast the three together into the furnace, and 
the furnace was red-hot, sevenfold, according to its heat, and when 
they cast them in, they who cast them were above them, but others 
from below kindled under them naphtha, and tow, and pitch, and 
faggots. And the fire was poured forth above the furnace, 49 
cubits. And it went, forth, and kindled those whom it found of the 
Chaldffians around the furnace. But the angel of the Lord descended 
with Azariah and his companions into the furnace and struck out 



'by the Septitagint translator. 609 

the flame of fire from the furnace, and he made the midst of the furnace 
like a whistling wind of dew, and the fire touched them not at all, 
nor distressed them, nor trouhled them." After the " hymn of the 
three children," 91. "And it came to pass when the king heard them 
hymning, and stood and saw them living," added (introductory to the 
mention of his surprise.) 92. (25. Ch.) " the form of the fourth is the 
likeness of an angel of God," for " the Son of God." 95. (28.) "yielded 
their bodies to the 'burning" added. 96. (29.) " shall be cut in pieces 
and his house shall be confiscated," for, " made a dunghill." 

iv. 1. (4. Eng.) added, "In the ISth year of the reign. 3-6. (6-9,) 
omitted. 7. (10.) added, "and there was no other like to it, its branches 
ivere in length as it were SOfnrlongs, its fruit was much and good" 
"all the beasts of the field, &c." 8. (11.) added,"and the trunk of 
it to the clouds, filling the space under heaven, the sun and the moon 
were in it ; they dwelt and enlightened the whole earth." 10. (13.) 
" an Angel," for, " a watcher and a holy one." 11." cut it down, 
and spoil it ; for it is commanded by the Highest to uproot and make 
it useless." 12, 13. (14, 15.) "leave one root of it in the ground, 
that with the beasts of the earth on the mountains he may be fed 
with grass like an ox, and by the dew of heaven his body may be 
.changed, and for 7 years he may be fed with them ; " omitting the 
greater part of v. 14. 14. (17-) " until he know," for, " that the liv- 
ing may know ; " " that the King of heaven hath power over all things 
in heaven and in earth, and what He wills to do He doth in them," 
omitting the characteristic language, "This matter is by decree, 
&c. holy ones." 15. (18.) added, " In my presence it was cut^down 
in one day, and its destruction was in one hour of the day, and its 
branches were given to every wind, and it was torn away and cast 
down, and he ate the grass of the field, and was given in charge, and 
was hound by them in fetters and handcuffs of brass. I wondered at 
these things exceedingly, and my sleep departed from my eyes, and, ris- 
ing early from my bed, I called Daniel, chief of the sophists, and prefect 
of those who interpret dreams, and I related to him the dream, and he 
shewed me all its interpretation." 16. (19.) " and, affrighted, trem- 
bling seizing him, and, his aspect being changed, he, shaking his head, 
for one hour, much marvelled, having answered me with a mild 
voice," for, " The king said, let not the dream or the interpretation 
thereof trouble thee. Daniel answered." 17. (20.) abridged, " The 
tree which was planted in the earth, whose aspect was great, thou, 
king, art it." 18. (21 .) explained with omissions, " And all the birds 
of the heaven which nestled in it," " the might of the earth and of 

R r 



610 Additions or alterations made 



the nations and of all tongues to the ends of the earth, and all coun- 
tries shall serve thee." 19. (22.) The description of the tree is re- 
peated from v. 8 ; " But that tlie tree was exalted, and reached to 
the heaven, and its trunk touched the clouds ;" then the comment is 
added, |* thou hast been lifted up above all men who are on the face 
of all the earth ; thy heart has been lifted up with pride and might 
over the things towards the Holy One and His angels ; thy works 
have been seen, according as thou hast utterly desolated the house 
of the living God, for the sins of the sanctified people." 21. (24, 25.) 
"This vision that thou hast seen, that an angel was sent in might from 
the Lord, and that he said, ' Take away the tree and cut it down,' the 
judgment of the great God cometh upon thee ; and the Highest and 
His angels shall assail thee ; they shall lead thee away to prison, and 
shall send thee to a desert place ;" 23. (26.) " And the root of the tree, 
which was left that it was not uprooted, the place of thy throne shall 
be kept for thee for a time and an hour. Behold they are prepared 
against thee, and shall scourge thee and bring all that is adjudged 
against thee." 24. (27.) " Beseech Him for thy sins," for, " Where- 
fore let my counsel be acceptable to thee : " " that gentle dealing 
may be given thee, and thou mayest be for many days on the throne 
of thy kingdom and He may not destroy thee," for, " thine iniquities 
tranquillity ;" 25. " Cherish these sayings ; for my word is accurate, 
and thy time full. And at the end of the words, Neb. when he 
heard the interpretation of the vision, kept the sayings in his heart," 
instead of 28. Eng. 26. (29.) " the king was walking on the wall of 
the city with all his glory and was going through upon its towers," 
for, "on the palace of the kingdom of Babylon." 28. (31.) added, 
" at the end of his speech he heard a voice," and, " the kingdom of 
Babylon is taken from thee, and is given to another the most abject 
man in thy house, (suggested by iv. 1 7- [20] ) It then adds, " Lo I set 
him over thy kingdom, and lie shall receive thy power and thy glory 
and thy luxury, that thou mayest know, &c." (from 32.) Then, "to the 
sunrising another king shall rejoice in thy house, and shall possess 
thy glory and thy might and thy power." 29. (32.) "And the Angels 
shall drive thee for seven years, and thou shall not he seen nor 
shalt speak with any man ; they shall feed thee with grass as an ox, 
and of the tender grass of the field shall thy pasture be ; (from iv. 
23.) then, " Lo ! for thy glory they shall bind thee, and the house 
of thy luxury and of thy kingdom shall another have." 30. (33.) 
_!" Till the morning^ all these things shall be fulfilled upon thee, Ne- 
buchadnezzar king of Babylon, and nothing of all these things shall be 



by the Septua'gint translator of Daniel. 611 

wanting. I Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon was bound with, chains 
for seven years. They fed me with grass as an ox, and I ate of the herb 
of the earth." 31. (34.) "And after seven years I gave my soul unto pray- 
er, and I entreated for my sins before the Lord God of heaven, and for 
my ignorances I besought the great God of gods." from 30,(33.) related 
by, not of, Nebuchadnezzar. " And my hairs became as eagle's wings, 
my nails as a lion's, my flesh and my heart was deranged. I walked 
naked with the beasts of the. field." Then follows seemingly a hint 
that some of this passed in a dream, (which was perhaps hinted also 
by the " Till the morning" ous irptit 36,) 32, " I saw a dream, and 
conjectures seized me and, during a time, nrach sleep seized me, and 
deep slumber fell upon me. And at the end of 7 years, the time of 
my redemption Came, and my sins and my ignorances were filled up 
before the God of heaven, and I besought the great God of gods for 
my ignorances. And lo, an angel called me fromi heaven, saying, N., 
serve the Holy God of heaven, and give glory to the most Highest ; 
the kingdom of thy nation is given back to thee." 34. (37) "The 
king of heaven," is explained " who created the heaven and the earth 
and the seas and the rivers and all things in them ;" then, instead of, 
" all Whose works are truth and His ways judgment," follows the 
addition, " because He is God of gods, and Lord of lords and King 
of kings; for He doth signs and wonders, and changes times and 
seasons, taking away the kingdom of kings, and setting others in 
their stead. Henceforth I will serve Him; and from fear of Him 
trembling hath seized me, and I praise all His saints. For the gods 
of the heathen have not power in themselves to remove the kingdom 
of a king to another king, and to slay and make alive, and to do 
signs and wonders, great and terrible, and to change things exceed- 
ing great, as the God of heaven did in me, and changed great things 
upon me. I, all the days that I am king, will offer sacrifices to the 
Most High for my soul, a sweet savour unto the Lord, and will do 
what is pleasing in His sight, I and my people, my nation, and my 
countries which are in my power. And as many as have spoken 
against the God of heaven,' or shall be found speaking anything, these 
will I condemn to death. King Nebuchadnezzar wrote ah encyclical 
epistle to all the nations and countries, and all tongues which dwell 
in all the countries to generations and generations. Praise ye the 
Lord, the God of heaven, and offer to Him sacrifice and oblation 
gloriously. I, king of kings, confess to Him gloriously, because He 
dealt thus with me. In that same day He seated me on my throne, 

R r 2 



612 Additions or alterations made 

and my might and my kingdom ; I prevailed in my people, and my 
greatness was restored to me.' Nebuchadnezzar the king to all na- 
tions and to all countries and to all who dwell in them. ' Peace be 
multiplied to you at all times. And now I will shew you the deeds, 
which the great God has done with me. But it seemed good to me 
to shew you and your sophists, that there is a God and that His won- 
ders are great ; His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, His power 
from generation to generation.' And he sent letters concerning all 
things which befel him in his kingdom, to all the nations which were 
under his rule." 

ch. v. Of ch. v. 1 j 4, 5, there is a double translation, but neither quite 
complete. In the one, the translator counts the thousand guests, twice 
mentioned, as 2000 ; says that the feast was " on the day of the dedi- 
cation of his kingdoms," joins the beginning of v. 2. to v. 4, " Bel- 
shazzar elevated by the Avine, and boasting, praised all the gods of 
the heathen, molten and graven, in his place," and adds from v. 23, 
" and to God most High he did not give praise." In v. 5. the words 
written on the wall are added, from v. 25, and an interpretation, 
"Mane, it is numbered, Phares, it is taken away, Tliekel, it is weigh- 
ed." The 2nd translation is closer. But it omits the number of the 
guests in both places in v. 1 . and the mention of " the wives and con- 
cubines," v. 3. 3, 4, are abridged ; " And they (the vessels) were 
brought, and they drank out of them and praised their idols made 
with hands," and added to, "And the God of the world, who had 
power over their breath, they praised not." 5. " over against king 
Belshazzar," for, " the wall of the king's palace." 6. " the king then 
hastened and arose and saw that writing, and his companions around 
him boasted ; " instead of " the joints against another." 7 5 8. " to 
tell the interpretation of the writing ; and they (the wise men) en- 
tered to behold, to see the writing," added ; " and they could not ex- 
plain to the king the interpretation of the writing, 1 " " and no one could 
explain the interpretation of the writing," is repeated. " There shall 
be given him power of the third part of the kingdom," for, " shall be 
third ruler in, &c. So also in v. 16. and 29. 9. " Then the king 
called the queen concerning this sign and shewed her that it was 
great, and that no man can shew the king the interpretation of the 
writing." 10. " Then the queen mentioned to him concerning Da- 
niel who was of the captivity of Judaea." (instead of v. 10.) 11, 
12. " There is a man of knowledge and wisdom, and surpassing all 
the wise of Babylon, and a holy spirit is in him, and, in the days of the 
king thy father, he shewed exceeding great interpretations to Nebu- 



by the Septuagint translator of Daniel. 613 

chadhezzar ' thy father." 13-16. "art thou that Daniel canst dis- 
solve doubts," omitted. The speech begins v. 16, "O Daniel, canst 
thou shew me the interpretation, &c. 1J. " Then Daniel stood over 
against the writing, and read, and thus answered the king, ' this is the 
writing, it is numbered, it is completed, it is taken away,' and the 
hand which wrote, stayed ; and this is its interpretation." Then he 
omits " Let thy gifts to another," v. 17 5 and the account of God's 
dealings with Nebuchadnezzar, v. 18-22, and he substitutes for 22-28, 
the account, as he had given it before, " O king, thou niadest a feast 
to thy friends, and drankest wine, and the vessels of the house of the 
living God were brought to thee, and ye drank wine, thou and thy 
nobles," [the " wives and concubines," again omitted] " and ye 
praised," [for " thou didst praise,"] all the idols of men made with 
hands, [for " the gods of silver nor know ;"] and the Living God 
and He gave thee thy kingdom," (for, " whose are all thy ways,") 
thou didst not bless nor praise." 25-28. " This is the interpretation 
of the writing. Is numbered, the time of thy kingdom ; thy king- 
dom ceaseth, is cut short, and accomplished; thy kingdom is given 
to the Medcs and Persians." For 30, 31 , "And this interpretation 
came upon king B. and the kingdom was taken from the Chaldees, 
and was given to the Medes and Persians. And Artaxerxes of the 
Medes received the kingdom, and Darius full of days and glorious in 
old age." 

vi. 1. " an hundred and twenty and seven Satraps," from Esther, 
(repeated v. 4.) 2-9. "And Daniel was one of the three men, having 
power above all in the kingdom ; and Daniel was clad in purple, and 
was great and glorious before Darius the king, because he was glo- 
rious and of knowledge and understanding, and a holy spirit was in 
him, and he was prosperous in the affairs of the king which he did. 
Then the king purposed to set over his whole kingdom Daniel, and the 
two men whom he set with him, and 127 Satraps. But when the king- 
purposed to set Daniel over his whole kingdom, then the two youths 
counselled together saying, (because they found no sin or ignorance 
against Daniel for which to accuse him to the king,) and said, come 
let us make a decree against ourselves, that no man shall make a re- 
quest, or pray a prayer of any god for 30 days, except of Darius the 
king ; else, he shall die ; that they might defeat Daniel before the 
king and he be cast into the den of lions. For they knew that Da- 
niel prayed and besought the Lord his God thrice a day. Then these 
men came and said before the king ; ' we have made a decree and a 
statute that any man, who shall pray a prayer or ask a request of any 



614 Additions in the historical., alterations in prophetic, 

god for 30 days, save of Darius the king, shall be cast into the den 
of lions." ["And they persuaded the king to constitute this law, and 
hot change it, because they knew that Daniel prayed thrice a day, 
that he might be made guilty before the king, and be cast into the 
den of lions." added in Syriac Tetrapl. p. 64, 5.] 10, 1 1 . " But when 
Daniel knew the decree, which he made against him, he .opened the 
windows in his hyperoon toward Jerusalem, and fell on his face thrice 
in the day, as he did before, and prayed. And they observed Daniel 
and found him praying three times a day every day." 13, 14. "And 
they said to him, [the king,] we adjure thee by the decrees of the 
Medes and Persians, that thou change not the command, nor accept 
persons, nor lessen ought thou hast said, but rather punish the man 
'who abode not by this decree. And he said, I will do as ye say, and 
this stands with me. And they said, Behold we found Daniel thy 
friend praying and beseeching the face of his God thrice a day. And 
the king, grieved, said that Daniel should be cast into the lion's den 
according to the decree which he made against him. Then the king 
was greatly grieved for Daniel and succoured to deliver him, until sun- 
''setjjfi'om the hand of the Satraps, and he could not deliver him from 
them. Darius the king cried out and said to Daniel, thy God whom 
thou servest continually thrice a day, He will deliver thee from the 
hand of the lions.; until morning, be of good courage." 17- " Then 
Daniel was cast into the den of lions, and a stone, &c., that Daniel 
might not be taken away of them, nor the king take him up out of 
the den," for, "that the purpose might not be changed concerning 
Daniel." 18. 17- "And he was grieved for Daniel," for "neither were 
instruments, &c. sleep went from him." " Then the God of Daniel, 
having thought of him, shut the mouths of the lions and they troubled 
not Daniel," added. 19. Darius "took with him the Satraps," added. 

20. "O Daniel, art thou then alive, and hath thy God [not, "is He 
able ? "] saved thee from the lions and they have not disabled thee ? " 

21. "Then Daniel shouted with a loud voice and said, 22. king, 
I am alive and God hath saved me from the lions" (" sent His angel" 
omitted)^ " but thou hast listened to men who mislead kings, and 
hast cast me into the den of lions for destruction," added. 23. " Then 
all the authorities were collected and saw Daniel, that the lions had 
not troubled him." 24. " Then those two men, who witnessed against 
Daniel," &c. omitting " or ever they came to the bottom of the den." 
26. omits, " and his kingdom unto the end." 27. " I Darius will be a 
worshipper of Him, and serve Him all my days ; for the idols made 
with hands cannot save, as the God of Daniel has redeemed Daniel. 



parts of Daniel, made by Septuagint translator. 61b 

28. And king Darius was added to his race, and Daniel was set over 
the kingdom of Darius, and Cyrus the Persian received his kingdom." 
vii. 7- " It had ten horns and many cotmsels in its horns." 8. "And 
three of the first horns were dried up by it." "And it made war with 
the saints," added. 12. " And those around it He removed from their 
power." 13. "And as the Ancient of days was present, and they who 
stood by were present with Him." 17- "four kingdoms, which shall 
perish from the earth," for, " which shall arise." 24. " and he in evils 
shall be diverse above the first." 26. " and they shall destroy " [not 
" his "] " power, and they shall will to defile and destroy." 

viii. 2. " at the gate JElam," for, " at the river Ulai" (" gate" for 
" river" in 6 also). 3. " and the higher ascended, hut after this," for, 
" Avent up last ; " missing the relation of the Persian to the Median 
empire. 9. " one strong- horn" (for, "a little horn,") "and prevailed 
and smote ; " then, " and to the North" for " the pleasant land." 11. 
" Until the chief captain shall deliver the captivity, and for him the 
everlasting mountains were broken, and their place was taken away, 
and sacrifice ; and he set it down to the ground, upon the earth, and 
they prospered, and it was, and the holy place shall he desolated. And 
the sins were in the sacrifice; and righteousness was cast to the ground." 
"16. It adds, "And the man crying aloud said, the vision is as to that 
commandment." 19. "at the end of the indignation to the sons of thy 
people," added ; "for it shall still abide unto the time, &c." 23. "And at 
the end of their kingdom, when their sins are fulfilled." 25. " And 
his purpose shall be against the saints," for "And his policy ; " " for 
the destruction of men and shall make a gathering of hand and shall 
repay," for, " against the Prince of princes, and he shall be broken 
without hand." 

ix. 1. " Darius the son of Xerxes, of the Median race who reigned," 
[plural] &c. 10. " to obey Thy law, which Thou gavest before Moses 
and us through Thy servants the prophets," for, " to Avalk in His laws 
which He set before us by, &c." 12. " whatever Thou hast judged to 
bring," for, "that judged us." 17- " upon Thy holy mountain" for 
" Thy sanctuary." 19. " upon thy city Sion and thy people Israel" 
2 1 . . " in my sleep" for " in the vision ; " " approached me," for " touch- 
ed me." On the grave alterations in the prophecy of the 70 weeks, 
see above p. 3/9, 80. 

x. 1 . " In the/rs* year of Cyrus," for, " the third." 5. " and from 
the midst of him was light," for, " fine gold of Uphaz." 9. " And I 
heard not the voice of his speech." 13. " The General of the king of 
Persians," for, " the prince of the kingdom of Persia." " And I left 



616 .. Intentional alterations, of the text of Daniel 

him there with the General of the king of Persians," for, "And I 
remained there with the kings of Persia." 16. " like the similitude of 
the hand of man," for, " of the sons of men." 20. " to fight with the 
General of the king of the Persians, and I went forth, and lo the 
General of the Greeks came in." 21. " except Michael the Angel," 
for, " your prince." 

xi. 1. " And in the first year of Cyrus the king, he said to me, he 
strong, and be of good courage, and now I have come to shew you, 
&c." for, " And I, in the first year of Darius the Mede, I stood to 
confirm and strengthen him, and now I will show you, &c." 2. " 3 kings 
.have resisted," for, " are standing up ;" " he shall rise up against 
every king of Greece," for, " stir up all against the kingdom of 
Greece." 4. " not according to his strength," for, " not to his pos- 
terity ; " " and he shall teach to others these things," for, " and to 
others .besides these." isVo for i^t) 5. &c. " kingdom of Egypt" for, 
" King of the South," " and he shall strengthen the kingdom of Egypt," 
for, " and the King of the South shall he strong." 0. " He shall bring 
them, and the King of Egypt shall enter the kingdom of the North 
to make treaties," for, " they shall associate themselves and the 
daughter of the King of the South shall come to the King of the 
North to make (i. e. produce) agreements ; " " and his arm shall be 
paralysed and of those who go with him, and shall not prevail, for 
his arm shall not establish strength and shall abide for a time," for, 
"and she shall not retain the power of the arm, and he shall not stand, 
nor. his arm, and she shall be given up and those who brought her 
and he that begat her and he that strengthened! her, in the times." 
7. " And the King of the North shall come to his power (army) in 
his might and shall make a tumult" for, " and he shall come to his 
army and shall enter the fortress of the King of the North and shall 
do against them." 8. "And their gods shall he overthrow; with their 
molten images, and their crowds with their desirable vessels the sil- 
ver and the gold, shall he lead into captivity to Egypt," for, " and 
their gods also with their molten images, with their desirable, &c. 
(missing the fact in which it was fulfilled ; see ab. p. 445.) " and there 
shall be a year to the King of North," for, " and he shall stand years 
more than the King of North." 9. " And the King of Egypt shall 
enter a kingdom days," for, " And he shall enter the kingdom of the 
King of the South and shall return to his land." 10. "And his son, 
[i. e. the son of the King of the South, in both cases giving the victory 
to Egypt,] and shall be irritated and shall gather a gathering of a great 
multitude and shall enter with it sweeping, (So Syr, Karao-vpwv for the 



made by the Septuagint translator. 617 

Kara Svpwv of the Edd.) pass through and return and shall he exas- 
perated greatly," for, " and his sons shall arouse themselves, and 
shall gather a multitude of many forces, and one coming shall come, 
and shall flood and pass through and return, &c. and they shall strive 
together even to his fortress." 12. " and shall trouble many nnd shall 
not fear," for, " and shall cast down ten thousands and shall not be 
strong." 13. "and shall gather a gathering of a city," added: "in 
the completion of the time of a year," for, " at the end of the times, 
years." 14. " Thoughts shall arise against the King of Egypt and he 
shall rebuild tvhat is fallen of thy nation, and he shall arise to raise 
up the prophecy, and they shall stumble ; " for, " and in those times 
many shall stand against the King of the South, and the sons of the 
robbers of thy people shall lift themselves up to establish a vision, and 
shall stumble." 15. " and shall turn his spears," for, " and shall cast 
up a mount," " and take the [for " a "] strong city ; and the arms of 
the King of Egypt shall stand, with his princes, and he shall have no 
power to resist him," for, " and the arms of the South shall not stand, 
nor his chosen people, and there shall be no power to stand." 16. "And 
he shall stand in the land," omitting " of desire," which marks it to 
be Juda;a ; " and all things which are in his hand shall be accom- 
plished," for, "it shall be consumed by his hand." 17. "and shall 
not persuade and shall not be," for, " and she shall not stand and 
shall not be for him." 18. "and he shall turn his face to the sea 
and shall take many persons," for, " to the islands and shall take 
many ;" " and shall turn the anger of their reproach in an oath ac- 
cording to his reproach," for, " and a ruler shall make to cease his 
reproach to him, besides that he shall turn back his reproach to 
him." 20. "And there shall arise from his root, a plant of a king- 
dom for rising up, a man striking the glory of a king, and in the 
last days," for, " in some days " (D'inN for onrrc, as though it had been 
D';n Jinn*?.) 21. " a king shall be strong in his lot," for, "obtain the 
kingdom by flatteries." 22. "And the arms, u'hich are broken, he 
shall break before him," for, "And with the arms of a flood." 23. 
"And with the covenant and the people banded with him he shall 
do falsehood, and against a strong nation with a very small nation ;" 
for, " And also a prince of covenant; and from the binding unto him 
he shall do treachery and shall go up and be strong with a small peo- 
ple." 24. " Suddenly he shall desolate a city," for, " in security and 
on the rich places of a province shall he enter ;" " and against the 
strong city shall he devise, and his thoughts shall be in vain," for, 
" and against fortresses shall he devise his devices, and even to the 



618 Intentional changes of LXX translator. 

time." 26. "And his cares shall consume him, and they shall turn 
him away, and shall pass by and he shall hiss at, and many shall fall 
wounded," for, "And they who eat of his royal meat [pathbag] shall 
break him, and his army shall overflow and many, &c." 30. " And 
Romans shall come and shall expel him, and shall rebuke him an- 
grily," [Popilius] for, "And ships of Chittim shall come against 
him, and he shall be grieved and return and shall be wroth ; " "and 
shall devise against them, because they have forsaken the covenant of 
the Holy One," for, "and shall observe those who forsake, &c." 31. 
"the holy place of fear" for, "the sanctuary, the fortress." 32. 
"And in sins of the covenant, they shall defile in a hard nation and 
the people who knoweth these things," (n"?N for vnSx) &c. for, " And 
they who do wickedly against the covenant he shall corrupt with 
flatteries, and the people who knoweth their God, &c." 33. " and 
shall be worn away in it," for " and by the flame," (dividing nanfcn 
into na nVai but neglecting the plur.) " and in foray of days they shall 
be defiled." 34. " and shall be gathered to them many in a city, 
and many as if appointed by lot," for, " and there shall cleave many 
to them in flatteries." 35. " And of those who understand, there 
shall think with view to purify themselves and to be elected," &c. 
for, "And of those who understand, there s\i&llstumble,to purify among 
them and to cleanse, &c." 36. " for the end is towards him," for, " for 
that which is determined shall be done." 37- omits " nor regard any 
god." 38. " and mighty nations shall be subjected to him, to his place 
he shall move," for, " and the god of forces on his place he shall ho- 
nour." 39. " And in the objects of desire of cities he shall do, and 
to a strong fortress he shall come with a strange god, whom when 
he shall recognise, he shall multiply glory and shall lord it over him 
much, and shall partition country as a gift," for, (38.) " and with 
things desired; (39,) and he shall do to the fortresses of strong [places] 
with a strange god whom he shall acknowledge, shall enlarge it with 
glory, and he shall make them rule over many, and shall divide land 
for a price." 40. " and shall come into the land of Egypt," for, " into 
the lands, and shall overflow and pass over." 41. " And he shall in- 
vade My land," for " the pleasant land." 43. " the place of gold and 
the place of silver," for, " the hidden treasures of gold and silver," 
rendering D'JDUD as if oipn. 45. " he shall place his tent there, (as if it 
were iVnN and omitting max,) between the seas arid the mountain of 
the will (ms for 'as) of the Holy One and the hour (ny for iy) of his 
end shall come." 

xii. 1. "Michael, the great angel," for, "prince ; " " ali.the peo- 



Dr. Stanley's jiarallels of human prophecy. 619 

pie shall be exalted \f\\o shall be found, &c." for, " shall be delivered." 
2. " in the breadth," [for, "the dust,"] "of the earth shall arise, some 
to everlasting life, and some to reproach and some to dispersion and 
everlasting shame." 3. " they who confirm my words," for, " who 
turn many to righteousness." 4. "until the many rave out their 
madness, a.Tro/j.avuxnv" (" are mad " Syr.) " and the earth be filled 
witli iniquity," for, " many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall 
be increased." 6. " when shall be the end of the wonders, which thou 
hast spoken to me, and the purifying of these ? " added. 7- " I heard 
the man." 8. " I understood not at that time" added. " and whose 
are these parables," added. 10. " and rise to thy glory," for, " stand 
in thy lot." 



Note F. 

On the secular predictions which Dr. Stanley parallels in regard 
to exactness of fulfilment with those of the Old Testament. 

Dr. Stanley produces a certain number of alleged predictions in 
secular history, as counterparts of "the predictions of the political 
events of their own and the surrounding nations" in the Hebrew pro- 
phets, i. e. (in religious language) "of God's judgments upon both 
for their sins against Himself and their felloAV-men." He says, " every 
one knows instances, botli in ancient and modern times, of predictions 
which have been uttered and fulfilled in regard to events of this kind. 
Sometimes such predictions have been the result of political foresight. 
Many instances will occur to students of history. Even within our 
own memory the great catastrophe of the disruption of the United 
States of America was foretold, even with the exact date, several 
years beforehand. Sometimes there has been an anticipation of 
some future epoch in the pregnant sayings of eminent philosophers 
or poets ; as, for example, the intimation of the discovery of- America 
by Seneca ; or of Shakspere by Plato, or the Reformation by Dante. 
Sometimes the same result has been produced by the power of 
divination, granted, in some inexplicable manner, to ordinary men. 
Of such a kind were many of the ancient oracles, the fulfilment of 
which, according to Cicero, could not be denied without a perversion 
of all history. Such was the foreshadowing of the twelve centuries 
of Roman dominion by the legend of the apparition of the twelve 
vultures to Romulus, which was so understood 400 years before its 
actual accomplishment. Such, but with less certainty, was the tra- 



620 Dr. Stanley's parallels of supposed 'human prophecy ; 

ditional prediction of the conquest of Constantinople by the Mussul- 
mans ; the alleged predictions by ABp. Malachi, whether composed 
in the 1 1th or the 16th century, of the series of Popes down to the 
present time ; not to speak of the well-known instances which are 
recorded both in French and English history. But there are several 
points, which at once place the Prophetic predictions on a different 
level from any of these. It is not, that they ark more exact in par- 
ticulars of time and place ; none can be more so than that of the 
twelve centuries of the Roman Empire ; and our Lord Himself has 
excluded the precise knowledge of times and seasons from the widest 
and highest range of the prophetic vision." (Jewish Church, p. 
463, 4. The Bible, its Form and Substance, p. 80-82.) 

It might safely be admitted, that the outward prediction of time 
and place are of the body rather than of the soul of propliecy ; yet, 
as indications that He revealed Himself, Who alone could know 
long before what He willed to bring to pass in His Providence, the 
predictions by the Hebrew prophets are not to be paralleled by any 
human history. 

Definite predictions of the Hebrew prophets have been instanced 
above. Dr. Stanley's instances of secular fulfilment are unhappy. 

1) Sterling, as quoted by Mr Spence, so far from predicting "the 
great catastrophe of the disruption of the United States" at the end 
of the four years, says, that no wise man would predict any thing even 
within those four years. "It appears to me, that amid so many ele- 
ments of uncertainty as to the future, both from the excited state of 
men's minds in the States themselves, and the complication of sur- 
rounding circumstances, no wise man would venture to foretell the 
probable issue of American affairs during the next four years." (On 
the American Union, p. 14.) And this was written amid all the heav- 
ings, which preceded the bursting of the volcano. It followed, after 
statesmen had, one after another, seen the element of that disruption. 
The probability of the severance of the North and South has been a 
speculation to which the older of us have been long familiar. And now 
who would venture to predict the time of the close of that sad war ? 

2) The so-called prophecies of S. Malachi have long been recog- 
nised to be a forgery, unmeaning except for the immediate purpose, 
for which they were " forged by the partizans of the Card. Simoncelli, 
one of the candidates for the tiara, who was designated by the words ' de 
antiquitate orbis,' because he was of Orvietto, in Latin, ' urbs vetus.'" 
(Biogr. univ. v. Wion.) " Menestrier published ' a refutation of the 
pretended prophecies of S. Malachi,' Paris, 1689, written with much 



American war, ABp. Malachi, Constantinople. 621 

solidity. Don Feijoo also refuted those pretended prophecies in his 
Teatro critico." (Ib. v. Malachie.) The Nouveau Dictionnaire 
Historique by MM. Chaudon and Delandine speaks of "the errors 
and anachronisms with which this impertinent list swarms." " The 
forgetfulness of common sense makes itself felt in a few pages. 
Those who have set themselves to explain those too-noted insipidi- 
ties, always find some allusion, forced or probable, in the country, 
name, arms, birth, talents of the Popes, the Cardinalate or dignities 
which they had borne ; &c. e. g. the prophecy which related to Urban 
viii. was Lilium et Rosce. ' It was fulfilled to the letter, (say these 
absurd interpreters,) for that Pope had, in his coat of arms, bees, 
which suck lilies and roses ?'" (art. Malachie and Wion.) 

3) " In the Mosque of Sultan Mahommed II." says v. Hammer, 
" which was finished A.D. 874. (1469.) there stands, to the right of 
the main door, on a marble slab on azure field in gold raised charac- 
ters the tradition of the prophet relating to Constantinople ; 'they 
will conquer Constantinople ; and blessed the prince, blessed the 
army, which shall fulfil this ;'" (Constant, u. d. Bosporos, i. 393,) or 
(as he renders more exactly in Gesch. d. Osm. Reich, p. 523.), "the 
best prince is he who conquers it, and the best army, his army." 
This tradition being above 8 centuries after Mohammed, has, of 
course, no value. It reappears in a different form in Ockley, the 
conquest being presupposed rather than prophesied; " Mahomet ha- 
ving said," says Ockley, ' The sins of the first army that takes the 
city of Caesar are forgiven.' " (Hist, of Sarac. ii. 128.) Ockley refer- 
ring only vaguely to Bokhari, who, early in the 3rd. cent, after Mo- 
hammed, selected 7000 traditions which he held to be genuine, 
only of some 267,000, I applied to my friend M. Reinaud, Prof, of 
Arabic at Paris, and Member of the Institute, &c., not doubting that 
with his large knowledge, he would be able to point out to me the 
passage in the Saltih. This, with Ms well-known kindness, which 
I have before experienced, he has done, amid his many labours. It 
puts an end to all question about prophecy. The passage is this ; 
" Omm-Heram has related to us that she heard the prophet say, 
' the first army of my people which shall war by sea, will acquire 
merits (with God.') Omm-Heram said, 'I said, o apostle of God, I 
will be among them.' He said, ' thou shalt be among them.' Then 
the prophet said, ' The first army of my people which shall attack 
the city of Csesar, their sins are forgiven them.' Then I said, ' I 
will be with them, o Apostle of God.' He said, ' no ! '" Mr Rei- 
naud adds, " There is no question but that Mahomet conceived the 



622 Anticipations ascribed to Mohammed, no 'prophecies ; 

idea of an invasion of the Roman empire and of the kingdom of Per- 
sia by his disciples. He himself, shortly before his death, tried his 
strength against the Roman forces in Syria. But the passage does 
not say what Ockley makes him say. It does not say that Constan- 
tinople would be taken. 1 will only add that in the Sahih what 
relates to the Jews and Turks, consists of some puerilities, and that 
nothing there resembles a prophecy. ThepassagescitedhyM.de 
Hammer in his history of the Ottoman empire are somewhat singu- 
lar. I regret that I have been unable to read them in the works 
themselves, from which M. de Hammer has derived them. I explain 
them thus. The Seljucidfc, and subsequently the Ottoman Turks, 
subdued successively the whole of Asia Minor, and presented them- 
selves before Constantinople. Afterwards the Ottomans invaded 
Thrace, and gradually the Greek empire found itself reduced to the 
Capital. It then became evident that, considering the political con- 
dition of Christian Europe, Constantinople would fall, like all the 
rest. Prophecies might be made without fear of failure. 

" Ibn Khaldoun has given a paragraph of his prolegomena to the 
prophetic character of Mahomet. As he flourished before the end 
of the 14th cent, and so, more than 60 years before the capture of 
Constantinople, his testimony would have had some value ; but he 
says not a word of it. (See his text in the Notices et Extraits, T.xvi. 
p. 160. and the French translation, Ib. xix. p. 205.)" 

The two prophecies given by v. Hammer in his Gesch. d. Osmann. 
Reiches, L. xii. T. i. p. 522, 3, are, the one that already cited, and 
which seems to be a false colouring of the tradition given in the Sahih ; 
the other is indeed remarkable, in that it is stated to rest on un- 
doubted authority, but is a fanatic prophecy, misapplied to the Otto- 
man capture. 

" 'Have you heard of a city, of which one side is land, the two 
others sea ? ' They said, ' Yea, o Apostle of God,' He said, ' The 
last hour will not come, without its being conquered by 70,000 sons 
of Isaac. When they come to it, they will not fight against it with 
weapons and engines of war, but with the word, There is no God 
but God, and God is great. Then will one side of the sea-walls fall; 
and at the second time, the second ; and at the third time, the wall 
on the land side ; and they will enter in Avith gladness.' " The fra- 
mer of this prophecy expected the walls of Constantinople to fall, 
like those of Jericho, which he must have had in his mind. He ex- 
pected it to fall before Arabs, " sons of Isaac," not before Turks. 
Von Hammer says of it, " Ali and Edris guarantee the genuine- 



prophecies ascribed to him, contrary to the facts. 623 

ness of this tradition through the first accreditors of the Hadith. 
The false application of it to the Ottomans has misled some his- 
torians, as the old Neshri, to derive the Turks from Esau, the son 
of Isaac, which however Ali (f. 7-) contradicts as a shameful error." 
(Ib. p. 668.) Yet, contrary to the expectation and the prophecy, it 
did fall hefore Turks, having- been besieged seven times by the Arabs 
between A.D. 654, (Hejra 34.) and 798 (Hej. 182.);and,betweenA.D. 
1396, (Hej. 797.) and A.D. 1422, (H. 826.) four times by the Turks, 
by whom it was taken A.D. 1453. (H. 857.) v. Hammer, Ib. p. 669. 
The Arabs are, in part, sons of Isaac through Esau. The framers of 
the prediction anticipated that the representatives of the followers of 
the prophet would be Arabs to some indefinite period, " near the last 
hour ; " he expected a miraculous destruction of Constantinople ; it was 
besieged 7 times by those, before whose war-cry he expected it mi- 
raculously to fall. It did not fall before those before whom he said 
that it would fall ; it fell in an ordinary way, not in that predicted ; it 
was besieged in the way in which he said that it would not be be- 
sieged ; lastly it fell, but its walls fell not. Every detail of the pre- 
diction is directly contrary to the fact. As for the mere capture, 
it befalls all great cities in turn ; so that a prediction of the capture 
of any city " before the end of the world" would be the safest of all 
prophecies. But the prediction did not anticipate, what is now cer- 
tain, that, as soon as Christian jealousies permit, " before the end of 
the world," it will be wrested from its captors. 

4) The " legend of the apparition of the 12 vultures to Romulus," 
is quoted by Censorinus (de Die Natali, c. !? fin.) A.D. 238, from 
Varro who died 28, B.C. Varro stated (Antiq. L. xviii.) that " he 
had heard Vettius, no common augur, of great genius, in disputing a 
match with any the most learned, say, " If it was so, as the historians 
related, as to the auguries of the founding of the city of Romulus 
and the 12 vultures, since the Roman people had passed 120 years 
safe, it ivould're&ch 1200." A conjectural inference from a hypo- 
thetical fact ! " If it was so as they relate." 1) The 12 vultures, if there 
were such, (and the vulture apparently was not then a bird of Italy) 
were to signify that the people should be safe during a period of years, 
which was to be a decuple of their own number, and this, since the 
event had shewn it to be more than 10, was to be 100. But 2) 
there is nothing as to Roman dominion. Varro speaks not of do- 
minion, but of " safety." The v\\lt\\re too is not a ravening, but a 
gentle bird, which preys only on carcases. 3) Then, as to time, 
while it was held as certain that Rome was founded 753, B.C., the ex- 



624 Duration of Roman empire not foretold, 

tinction of the Western empire, A.D. 476, or 479, furnished a term, 
not much in excess of 1200 years from its supposed foundation. But 
now, when, by common consent, it is agreed, that the early traditions 
as to Rome are uncertain ; that it was doubtless never " founded " at 
all, but gradually " grew ; " that, consequently, the era "ab Urbe con- 
dita,""from the foundation of Rome," is a convenient measure of time, 
but is itself a fiction ; that, within this period, the 240 years, assigned 
to its 7 supposed kings, are an artificial calculation, based on the sup- 
position that 3 generations went to a century, whence 7 kings would 
yield 233^ years, which were probably rounded into 240, as the dou- 
ble of the 120 years, assigned to the consuls down to the burning of 
the city by the Gauls (Mommsen d. Rom. Chronol. p. 133); it would 
be monstrous to speak of the 1200 years duration of "Roman empire," 
as the fulfilment of prophecy, since there is no certain date, within a 
century, from which to begin. Whatever may have been the antici- 
pations of a decaying people, amid a false chronology, as seen in Si- 
clonius or Clattdian, (who expected the destruction of Rome even be- 
before the 12 centuries had expired,) the conjectural interpretation 
was in no sense fulfilled ; 1 200 years was not meant as any term of 
its duration. Since it had survived for 120 years, it was to survive 
1200 ; but, on that same principle, if it survived the 1200, it might 
be inferred that it would survive 12000. There is no hint that it 
should perish then. Had it perished before, Vettius' interpretation 
would have failed. But Vettius did not anticipate any change at the 
end of the 1200 years. Nor was there any real change as to Rome 
itself. The change of dynasty did not worsen, it improved the con- 
dition of the people : Rome is still " the eternal city." Even as to 
empire, its throne still remained set up in " New Rome " for nearly 
twice the 1200 years; and now too the empire of Rome is diffused 
over many millions more than its temporal sway ever held controlled. 
5) The one expression in Seneca's words, which has suggested the 
thought that they were a prophetic anticipation of the discovery of 
America is the mention of " annis seris." People forgetting, or not 
knowing, that the words are in the mouth of supposed contemporaries 
of Medea (the Chorus,) and are ascribed to the fabulous times of 
Greece, have projected on those "late years" from the date of Seneca. 
In this way, the " late ages," which really fitted in with the times of 
Seneca himself, were thought marvellously to correspond with the 14 
centuries between Seneca and Columbus. Else, there is nothing re- 
markable in the words. They do but express "Seneca's belief of the 



nor the discovery of America. 625 

old traditions about the land beyond the seas. ' Whatever be the source 
of the story which Plato ascribes to the Egyptian priests, and which 
he himself asserted to be "strange but altogether true," (Tim. p. 20. 
D.) the description does correspond to the situation of America, alarge 
continent with intervening islands. The words are ; " the writings 
state, how great a might, coming aggressively against all Europe and 
Asia, invading from without from the Atlantic, your city checked. 
For at that time the sea there was navigable. For it had, before the 
mouth which ye call the pillars of Hercules, an island, larger than 
Africa and Asia together, from which there was access to the other 
islands, and from the islands to the whole opposite continent, which 
encircled that real ocean. For all this, which is within that mouth 
of which we speak, [the Mediterranean,] seems a harbour with a nar- 
row entrance ; but that may indeed be called ocean, and the land 
which encircleth it may, correctly and in truth, be called a continent. 
And in this island Atlantis there was a great and wondrous power of 
kings which held the whole island and many other islands and parts 
of the continent ; and moreover they ruled these interior parts of 
Africa, as far as Egypt, and Europe as far as Tyrrhenia." (Ib. 24- 
E 25. B.) He further states that the island Atlantis, (not, the yet 
further encircling continent,) "was submerged, so that the ocean there 
was difficult to explore, on account of the shallowness and the mud 
left when the island settled down." Strabo says, that the account of 
the submersion of Atlantis " admitted of not being a fiction," and that 
it was thought probable by Posidonius (a Stoic as well as Seneca), ii. 
p. 102.B.C. Proclus also adduced from Marcellus, inhis^Ethiopica, 
traditions of the existence of a " most exceeding large island Atlan- 
tis which was indeed there," among the inhabitants of an island, 125 
miles in size, in the Atlantic, (on the Tim. p. 54. F.) Ammianus 
Marcellinus (xvii. 6. 13.) speaks of it, as not doubting of its truth ; 
Diodorus alludes to it. (iii. 54.) Aristotle distinctly held it to be 
probable, that there was such a continent and such islands. " The 
common account divides the world into continents and islands, not 
knowing that the whole is one island, encircled by the Atlantic. And 
it is probable that afar there are many others, in the parts opposite 
to these, some larger, some less ; but all, save this, invisible to us. 
For as our islands are to these seas, so is this our continent to the 
Atlantic; and many other continents to the whole sea; for these too 
are in a way large islands, washed on all sides hy some great seas." 
(de Mundo c. 3.) . Plutarch relates that Sertorius met some sailors, 
who had recently come by sea from the Atlantic, the Fortunate 

ss 



626 Heathen Oracles. 

islands, 10,000 stadia,[1250 miles] from Libya.(vit. Sertorii, c. 8.) In 
the immediate context in Seneca the Chorus is speaking of bold na- 
vigations. " Every bound removed, and cities placed their walls in 
new lands. The Indian drinks the cold Araxes ; the Persians the 
Elbe and the Rhine." What marvel then, that he should imagine that 
Plato's conception or tradition should be realised, and that the mud- 
dy sea, which must in his time have ceased to be believed, since Bri- 
tain was laid open, yielding no hindrance, Plato's vast encircling con- 
tinent, his own " ingens tellus," should be at length discovered ? When 
the spherical form of the earth was known, as it was in the days of Se- 
neca, theexistence of another Continent, corresponding to our's,became 
even more probable, than that all should be one expanse of sea. It 
has been pointed out to me, that the Stoic philosophy, in other ways, 
carried men's minds beyond the Roman " world." Horsley pointed 
out, in answer to Collins' taunt in regard to these words of Seneca, 
that there is nothing definite in his description. Seneca says not, across 
what sea the discovery would be made. The anticipation is realised 
in Australasia, as much as in America ; and the only definite state- 
ment, that "Thule should not be the utmost land," if pressed, would 
be incorrect, " as it points precisely to that quarter of the globe where 
discovery has ever been at a stand, where the ocean, to this hour, 
opposes his eternal barrier of impervious unnavigable ice." (Serm. 
17 on 2 Pet. i. 20, 21.) The argument, however, is superfluous, for 
Seneca's words relate only to an existing belief, that there was sucli 
a continent, and that this belief would prove true. It is not, like 
prophecies of Holy Scripture, a foreannouncement of events, whose 
causes lay hid in the mind of God. 

6) With regard to the heathen oracles, Cicero states the two sides 
in the two books on Divination; in the first book, in their favour, in the 
name of his brother Quintus ; in the second in his o\vn, as one uncer- 
tain, (de Div. ii. 3.) There he gives his opinion that the oracles of 
Apollo were " partly false ; partly true by accident, as happens very 
often in all language ; partly involved and obscure, partly ambiguous," 
as those stated by Herodotus and Ennius to have been given to Cro3- 
sus and Pyrrhus. (Ib. 56.) For myself, I see no evidence of any 
well-authenticated oracle, involving supernatural knowledge of the fu- 
ture. If Herodotus' story be true, that the Pythian answered right, 
as to what Crresus was at that moment doing, this related to the pre- 
sent not to \ksifuture, and is no more than mesmerists of this day 
claim. On the other hand, even according to the story, it alone of all 



Supernatural prophecy in the early Church. 627 

the oracles was right thus far, so that Crresus pronounced it to be 
" the only oracle ; " (Herod, i. 48.) and it, with another oracle which 
he thought somehow to have spoken the truth, are related to have 
given him the well-known ambiguous answer about " destroying a 
mighty empire," encouraging his wishes, but providing an escape 
from the charge of falsehood in case of his failure. (Ib. 53.) And 
this in a prophecy as to the immediate future, and the issue of a war 
which they encouraged. 

7, 8) Those best read in Dante and Plato are at a loss to find any 
trace, of a prediction either of the Reformation or of Shakspere. 
Dante, with his firm faith in all Roman doctrine, could not have ima- 
gined or anticipated such a disruption as Luther's. I can find no- 
thing which bears a semblance to it. 

In denying that there is any proof as to these prophecies or the 
genuineness of that set attributed to ABp. Malachi, I do not, of course, 
deny Christian prophecy after the Apostolic age, such as I have my- 
self pointed out, as having been vouchsafed to St. Cyprian, along the 
whole course of his Episcopate. (Pref. to S. Cyprian's Epist. p. xxi. 
See also references to other prophecies, S. Cypr. Ep. ix. p. 27, 8. n. k.) 
Prophecy, in the Christian Church, is but a fulfilment of the pro- 
phecy of Joel, vouchsafed or intermitted, as well as the gift of mira- 
cles, as God sees best. In both cases, the whole question is one of 
evidence. 



ADDENDA et CORRIGENDA. 

Addition to p. 481. 

Among the characteristics of the King, who is the Object of Ps, Ixxii, I should 
have mentioned His perpetual Intercession. The words, "And He shall pray 
for him continually," (Ps. Ixxii. 15.) anticipate the revelation by St. Paid, "He 
ever liveth to make intercession for them." (Heb. vii. 26. add Rom. viii. 34.) 
The words, h^3 ^ssy., cannot be rendered, as in the P. B. version, "prayer 
shall be made ever unto Him ; " on the other hand, the idiom is used exclusive- 
ly of the intercession of one nearer to God for one less near. It is used of Abra- 
ham, who as " a prophet" was to intercede for Abimelech, that he might live, 
Gen. xx. 7; of Moses, interceding for Aaron after the sin of the calf, Deut. 
ix. 20 ; of Samuel interceding for the people, on their putting away their idols, 
1 Sam. vii. 5 ; of his intercession after the offence in asking for a king, asked 
for by them and owned by him as his perpetual office, Ib. xii. 19-23 ; of the pro- 
phet interceding for Jeroboam at his request, that the use of his hand might 
be restored to him, 1 Kgs. xiii. 6 ; of Zedekiah's request to Jeremiah, " inter- 
cede with the Lord our God for us," Jer. xxxvii. 3 ; of the like request of the 



628 



ADDENDA. 



people to Jeremiah, Jer. xlii. 2. 20, and as .forbidden by God, on the ground 
that He would not remit the punishment, Jer. vii. 16. xi. 14. xiv- II; of the 
duty of the Jews in the captivity to intercede for the heathen, Ib. xxix. 7 ; of 
Job, interceding for his friends that they might be forgiven, Job. xlii. 10. These 
are all the cases in which the Concordances, at least, give the idiom. ^TSipfl 
is also used with ^ of the person for whom intercession is made, Job xlii. 8, 
and with ^ 1 Sam. ii. 25. 

Mr Filipowski, (known as the learned Editor of the Yuchasin of Zacut, of 
the Lexicon of Menachem B. Merzuk, with the Teshuboth of Donash b. Librat 
&c) who cast the Hebrew type for this work, has, by a thoughtful arrangement 
of the "cases," which only a Hebrew probably could have lighted upon, made it 
possible to use Hebrew type, in which the Towel-points are on the same "body" 
as the letter. Those who have known the difficulty of combining pointed He- 
brew with English type will appreciate the value of the discovery ; for such it 
is, Mr P. has kindly corrected for me the " proofs " of the Hebrew of the last 
sheets and has pointed out to me errata which, with ageing eyes, I had failed 
to see in the proof. I have not noticed those which (like the omission of the 
mute ,) could not perplex any one. Some pages I cancelled. 



p. 24 pen. read 
28 note 1, 
53ult. 
54 n. 8. 
58 note 
68 pen. 
75 
179 
185 four times 
199 three times 
313 
323 Not. 7. 1.3 
324 n. 3. 1. 2. 

n A \ Illf 


K3|!D for 


W 


1 !gW? 


'"' 








N 

TO 






Mihr 


Abbe 






























3434frombel. 
345 note 9 
358 note 2 
478 n. 1 ult. 
483 n. 7. 1.3. 
496 n. 8. 1. 1. 

tjflfil A. fff\m\\o\ 




* 










* L 1 ' 


**-..-. 






P !* 




i 


n 



520 note 3. 1. 4. from bel. n n 

Also in p. 250, n. 2. 1. 11. the words should run, "and, in lieu of 'ID!*, 
for "TDK &c ; " i. e. Bochart, not seeing any explanation of the prophecy, coin- 
ed a Hebrew plural, n.'cjt, overlooking the ground why the Hebrews would not 
use it. 



THE END. 



