: SAS : bs SSO 


A 


and 


| 


I 


o 
£ 
a 
° 
2 
a 
o— 
<£ 
s 
2 
c 
S 
a 


a 
D 
oO 
(=) 
bd 
< 
N 
N 


tt 


3 0513 I 9368 7 


| 


> 
cc 
< 
oc 
2 
4d 
> 
c 
=< 
e 
= 
uu 
” 
= 
Ww 
< 
= 
uu 
a 


Dennett, Edw 


REG 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2026 


https://archive.org/details/owb_W7-DJF-874 


Aleit ae 
0399 


DANIEL THE PROPHET: 


‘ AND 


THE TIMES OF THE GENTILES. 


BY 


EDWARD DENNETT, 


AUTHOR OF 
‘9B VISIONS OF JOHN in PATMOS"”; “ ZECHARIAH THE PROPHL? * 
“EyPICAL TEACHINGS OF BXODUS'’; BTC. 


G. MORRISH, 
20, PATERNOSTER SQUARE, LONDON, E.C, 


1919. 


PREFACE, 


T is in the hope of promoting the knowledge of dis- 
pensational truth that this volume is offered to 

the Christian reader. It does not claim to be more 
than a concise and simple introduction to the study of 
the contents of the book of Daniel; and yet enough of 
detail has been given to enable the reader, if guided 
and taught of the Holy Spirit, to comprehend the 
character of ‘‘the times of the Gentiles,” of which 
this portion of the inspired volume especially treats. 
Symptoms of the period spoken of by our blessed 
Lord are already to be discerned—‘‘ Men’s hearts failing 
them for fear, and for looking after those things which 
are coming on the earth ” (Luke xxi. 26). It is there- 
fore of the utmost importance to understand the 
nature of the last days and the course of events on to 
the appearing of Christ, as revealed in the infallible 
word of God. It tends, moreover, to enhance the 
appreciation of the heavenly calling and of the character 
of Christianity to be instructed in the purposes which 
God has formed for the blessing of His earthly people. 


4 PREFACE 


When the heart is at leisure from itself, through being 
satisfied with Christ, the Holy Ghost is free to lead 
it out into all the circle of God’s interests, whether 
as regards the church, His ancient people, or the 
world. May He Himself teach both the reader and 
the writer how to hold all the truths He has revealed 
in their proper relationships, and in livmg power in 
the soul. 


CROYDON, 
February, 1893. 


DANIEL THE PROPHET. 


INTRODUCTION. 


EFORE entering upon a consideration of the 
contents of this book, it is needful to call atten- 


tion, however briefly, to its special and peculiar 


character. At the very commencement, mention is 
made of the fact that Nebuchadnezzar had already 
besieged Jerusalem, and that the Lord had given 
Jehoiakim king of Judah into Nebuchadnezzar’s hand, 
with part of the vessels of the house of God, ‘etc. ; 
and thereon we read that some of the children of 
Israel, and of the king’s seed, and of the princes, were 
captives in Babylon. These facts when rightly under- 
stood open out to us the significance of the whole 
book. Until now God’s throne had been at Jeru- 
salem; He dwelt between the cherubim; and Israel 
(we speak of the nation according to the purpose of 
God) was consequently the centre of God’s ways in 


, the government of the whole earth (see Deut. XXX. 
_ 9-9). Israel, as this same scripture tells us, occupied 


a special position of favour and blessing, “‘for the 
Lord’s portion is His people ; Jacob is the lot of His 
inheritance.” Because of their position of blessing 
and privilege the nation had special responsibilities. 


ht, 


6 INTRODUCTION 


_This principle is announced by the prophet: ‘“ You 


only have I known of all the families of the earth: 
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities ” 
(Amos iii. 2). Their responsibility was according to 
their light, and because they were Jehovah’s people ; 
for as such they were His witnesses (Isaiah xliii. 8-13), 
and Jerusalem was His candlestick in the midst of 
the nations. 

When, therefore, Israel became worse than even the 
surrounding nations, and the king of Judah made the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse than 


'. the heathen (2 Chron. xxxiii. 9), the Lord, after many 


warnings and much long-suffering (2 Chron. xxxvi. 
14-20), executed the judgment which He had threat- 
ened, by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, who “ burnt 
the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jeru- 
salem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and 
destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof. And them 
that had escaped from the sword carried he away to 
Babylon ” (2 Chron. xxxvi. 19-20). The dominion of 
the earth was henceforward committed to the king of 
Babylon (see Daniel ii. 37, 38), and it is in the midst 
of this new order of things, as a true remnant and 
seed preserved of God, that Daniel and his companions 
are found in the first chapter of our prophet. 

This position of the remnant in Babylon, subject to 
the Gentile power and dominion, affords the key for 
the interpretation of the book. For the visions, 
vouchsafed to the kings, concern the Gentile powers 
themselves, in their successive order, development, 
and, what may be termed, their moral phases, going 
on to complete apostasy; and those granted to the 
prophet deal with the same subject, but, as going 
down to the end, in the accomplishment of God’s 


Pe ed 


INTRODUCTION See ef 
oo) : 


purposes concerning His beloved people, more in 
their bearing upon this issue. The “ pleasant land” 
finally becomes the centre round which all the Gentile 
activities and designs gather; and the curtain is 
lifted to reveal the future of the chosen nation, in its 


‘pathway, because of its sins and iniquities, and most 


of all because of its crowning sin in the rejection of 
Messiah, through unequalled and unheard of sorrow 
and trouble (chap. xii. r) on to the enjoyment of its 
purposed blessing according to the thoughts of God. 
All this will be more distinctly seen as we pursue our 
studies ; but it may now be pointed out that the book 
is divided into two equal parts—chaps. i. to vi. form- 
ing the first, and chaps. vii. to xii. the second part. 
The first part is wholly made up of the visions and 
actings of the Gentile monarchs and their subordinate 
authorities. Daniel and his companions appear on 
the scene as having the mind of God, and as faithful 
to Him amid all the seduction and oppesition by 
which they were surrounded. Daniel, like Joseph in 
Egypt, is first brought to the notice of the king as an 
interpreter of dreams; and also, like Joseph, he is, 
as a consequence, taken into favour, and exalted to 
the seat of government. Having obtained from the 
king the association of Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego, with himself in his exaltation, they become 
the objects of the envy and enmity of the princes. 
The details will be found in their place; but the two 
things are interwoven, the character of the Gentile 
powers, and the suffering condition of the remnant 
and their final deliverance from under the Gentile 
persecuting dominion. The second part of the book, 
commencing with chapter vii., contains the prophetic 
visions, with their interpretations, received by Daniel ; 


8 INTRODUCTION. 


and they embrace the course, character, and destiny 
of the Gentile empires, which followed the destruction 
of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. . Their various 
actings are described, especially those of the third and 
fourth, in relation to the Holy Land and the Jewish 
people ; and we have, moreover, the special revelation 
made to Daniel of the seventy weeks, as indicative of 
the period in which God’s purposes for His earthly 
people will be accomplished. 

Finally, in the long vista of the future opened up 
to the prophet, the Gentile governments are displaced 
by the Son of man to whom there is given “ dominion, 
and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, 
and languages, should serve Him: His dominion is 
an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, 
and His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed ” 
(chap. vii. 14). It is in connection with His coming 
to establish His kingdom that Daniel is told: “‘ At 
that time thy people shall be delivered, every one 
that shall be found written in the book ” (chap. xii. 1). 
At His first coming He was cut off (ix. 26), and had 
nothing; but though He was rejected and crucified 
by “His own” people, He yet, according to the 
counsels of God, died for that nation ; and it is on the 
foundation of that efficacious sacrifice that God, after 
He has, in His righteous government, punished them 
for their sins, will act in the future for the restoration 
of His beloved, but guilty, people. Isaiah can thus 
cry, ‘Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your 
God. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry 
unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her 
iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of the 
Lord’s hand double for all her sins ” (chap. xl. 1, 2). 
The book of Daniel reaches in prophetic vision to this 


INTRODUCTION . 9 


point ; but it does not go beyond. For the establish- 
ment and the glory of the kingdom other prophets 
must be consulted. What we have in Daniel is, as we 
have already indicated, the course and character of 
Gentile powers, from the destruction of Jerusalem 
on to the appearing of Christ, together with the 
position of the remnant, and the sufferings of the 
Jewish people, while the Gentiles possess the dominion, 
until at last God, in His faithfulness in pursuance of 
His purposes, interposes, and, for His own glory, 
works for the rescue and blessing of His elect earthly 
people. This blessed consummation is yet future, 
_and though our calling and portion are heavenly, and 
our hope is the coming of the Lord to receive us unto 
Himself, and to introduce us into the Father’s house, 
it is yet of the utmost importance that we should 
understand the nature of “‘ the times of the Gentiles,” 
and embrace in our thoughts the whole circle of God’s 
revealed interests. It is to aid in this object that we 
desire to commend to our readers the earnest study of 
this part of the inspired volume. 


10 - THE PROPHET DANIEL 


CHAPTER If. 


VNR hs 2 the state of things on the earth God 

never leaves Himself without a witness. He 
may punish His people on account of their unfaith- 
fulness and their sins, and He may permit them to be 
carried into captivity, and to be enslaved under the 
power of their enemies, and yet, in the midst of the 
darkness by which they are surrounded, He will 
rekindle the torch of His truth, in testimony to Him- 
self and to His faithfulness, and as encouragement to 
those who cleave or turn to Him in their sorrows. He 
will, moreover, cause those whom He has used to 
chastise His people to know that they are still the 
objects of His care and love ; and that their oppressors, 
however seemingly exalted and mighty, are subject 
and accountable to Him. 

The first three verses of our chapter are the intro- 
duction to the book, and they explain how it had 
come to pass that Daniel and his companions are 
found in connection with the court of the king of 
Babylon. The reference, as may be easily seen by 
turning to the historical accounts in 2 Kings and 
2 Chronicles, is to the first siege of Jerusalem by 
Nebuchadnezzar. In Chronicles, after the mention of 
the accession of Jehoiakim to the throne, through the 
instrumentality of Necho, king of Egypt, it says, 
“Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to 
Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels 


CHAPTER I. II 


of the huuse of the Lord to Babylon, and put them in 
his temple at Babylon” (2 Chron. xxxvi. 6, 7). But 
neither here, nor in Kings, is it mentioned that there 
were other captives at this time, and it is quite possible 
that the short introductory statement of our chapter 
includes, in its purport, the subsequent proceedings of 
the king of Babylon until Jerusalem was destroyed, 
and the princes, and the mighty men of valour, to- 
gether with the mass of the people, had been deported 
to Babylon (see 2 Kings xxiv. 12-16, xxv. 1-21). It 
is therefore the general position which is here defined. 
_ The Lord had given Jehoiakim into Nebuchadnezzar’s 
hand, and so completely had He abandoned His house 
in Jerusalem, that He had permitted the sacred 
vessels of the temple, profaned as they were by the 
sins of the kings of Judah, to be carried into the land ° 
of Shinar,* to the house of Nebuchadnezzar’s god, 
God’s candlestick at Jerusalem was thus for the time 
removed; and it was judicially removed, because 
it had ceased to give forth divine light for guidance 
and blessing amid the moral darkness of this world. 
In the next paragraph (vv. 3-7) the remnant, or its 
representation, is introduced. After that Hezekiah 
had received the embassy from the king of Babylon, 
and, gratified by the attention thus shown to him, 
had exhibited to them all the treasures of his kingdom, 
Isaiah was sent to him with this message: ‘ Hear 
the word of the Lord of hosts: Behold, the days 
come, that all that is in thine house, and that which 
thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall 
be carried to Babylon. ... And of thy sons that 
shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall 


* For the significance of this statement the reader should 
consult Zechariah v. 


12 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the 
‘palace of the king of Babylon” (Isaiah xxxix. 5-7). 
The opening verses of our chapter reveal the fulfilment 
of Isaiah’s prediction; but what we desire to call 
attention to is, that, in fulfilling His own word in 
judgment, God remembered mercy, for it is out of 
these very descendants of Hezekiah that He raised up 
witnesses for Himself in the midst of Babylon’s 
idolatrous corruptions. 

In permitting Nebuchadnezzar to carry them away 
as captives, God was accomplishing His own purpose ; 
but Nebuchadnezzar, having obtained power over 
them, sought to make them serve his will. The 
consequence was, that a conflict immediately arose 
between the thoughts of God and the thoughts of the 
king of Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar desired to adorn 
his palace with those of his captives “in whom was 
no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in all 
wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding 
science, and such as had ability in them to stand in 
the king’s palace, and whom they might teach the 
learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans” (v. 4). 
The world is every ready to make the people of God 
its servants, and to derive light from their knowledge ; 
but it cannot tolerate them, if they maintain fidelity 
to their God in obedience to His word, and in a holy 
separation from evil. The king, therefore, would have 
these captives to be fed with his own meat, and to 
drink of his own wine, that, nourished from his 
resources for three years, they might at the end 
thereof stand in his presence (v. 5). He would have 
' them, in one word, to cease being Jews, and to become 
_Chaldeans; and to mingle with their new religion 
the light they had received from the oracles of God. 


CHAPTER I. : 13 


Such is the origin of philosophy even in Christian 
times—that philosophy against which Paul earnestly 
warns us as being “after the rudiments of the world, 
and not after Christ ” (Col. ii. 8). 

It is in connection with this command of Nebuchad- 
nezzar that Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah 
are brought into prominence (v. 6). Their very 
names, when understood, proclaimed to whom they 
belonged,* and the character of their God: and the 
prince of the eunuchs, instinctively feeling that such 
names. would not suit his master’s court, gave them 
others, all of which were more or less connected with 
_ Babylon’s idols (v. 7). 

The question now raised for Daniel and his compani- 
ons was, whether for the sake of the world’s favour 
and advancement, they would yield to the king’s 
command. The answer had already been given: 
“‘ Daniel purposed in his heart that-he would not defile 
himself with the portion of the king’s meat, nor with 
the wine which he drank: therefore he requested of 
the prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile 
himself ”’ (v. 8). As a Jew, obedient to the word of 
God, it was impossible for Daniel to eat the food of 
the Gentiles. Both the fat and the blood of those 
animals which were permitted to .be eaten, were 
forbidden ; and it was only of the clean beasts and 
birds that a Jew was allowed to partake (see Leviticus 
vii. 22-27, chaps. xi., xxii). Unless, therefore, Daniel 
and his companions were prepared to surrender their 
faith, and to renounce the word of their God, they 
could not accept the royal provision. And there is 

* Daniel means “* God’s piss ’; Hananiah, pose sehen 


ciously gave ” ; Mishae who (is) as God ” 
TG how Jehovah aids.” 


14 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


another instruction—if an application may be made 
to ourselves. The food of the world, that in which 
man as man, alienated from God as he is, finds his 
strength and sustenance, is ever destructive to the 
spiritual life of the Christian; and if he would be a 
true Nazarite, and walk in the path of holy separation 
unto God, he must ever turn aside from the wine, the 
joys of earth. The apostle thus writes, “Be not 
drunk with wine, wherein is excess ; but be filled with 
the Spirit ” (Ephes. v. 18). In the attitude of Daniel 
we have then an example for all believers; and the 
closer it is followed, the more will they enjoy the 
conscious favour and blessing of God ; and, as morally 
dead to things here, they will the more fully realize 
their true portion in Christ, in the place where He is. 

We now read, as explanatory of what follows, that 
“God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love 
with the prince of the eunuchs ” (v. 9). Again we are 
reminded of the similar case of Joseph. Sold inte 
Egypt, and becoming an inmate of Potiphar’s house, 
“he found grace” in his master’s sight. But, like 
Daniel, refusing the world’s food and wine, he, unlike 
Daniel, was cast into prison, where the Lord also 
** gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the 
prison.” ‘‘ When a man’s ways please the Lord, He 
maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him ” ; 
and hence it was that the prince of the eunuchs, 
notwithstanding his fear of his lord the king, and the 
possible danger to his own life, granted through Melzar 
the request of Daniel, that he and his companions 
might be tested for ten days with pulse to eat and 
water to drink, instead of the king’s food and wine. 
God was with Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, 
and hence it was that, at the end of the ten days, 


CHAPTER I. 15 


‘their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in 
flesh than all the children which did eat the portion 
of the king’s meat ” (v. 15). God had sustained and 
prospered His servants in their path of fidelity to 
His will, in keeping themselves undefiled amid the 
Babylonish seductions and corruptions by which they 
were surrounded. Even Melzar could not gainsay that 
they had flourished on their simple regimen, and 
henceforward he gave them pulse. 

The reflection may be permitted, that there are 
many of the people of God who can walk in the narrow 
path of devoted discipleship as long as they are in the 
enjoyment of the fellowship of saints, and in the 
midst of happy spiritual influences. But it is some- 
times seen that such, when transported into a worldly 
circle, are apt to fall in with the practices and habits 
of their new society, and thus to lose their distinctness 
of walk, even if their testimony be not altogether 
extinguished. It is therefore full of refreshment and 
encouragement to ponder the spectacle presented by 
these four children of Judah. Deprived of all the 
privileges of the temple, the temple itself destroyed, 
themselves captives at the mercy of a heathen monarch, 
plied, too, with every sort of alluring temptation, 
they maintained the Nazarite’s place of true separation 
through obedience to the word of God. Doubtless it 
was the faith and energy of Daniel that acted on his coms 
panions, and led them to follow him in the path of God’s 
will ; but if so, the others were willing to follow, and all 
four present a striking proof of the all-sufficiency of 
God’s grace to sustain His servants in the most unfavour- 
able circumstances that could possibly be imagined. 

The significant statement follows: “As for these 
four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in 


16 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


all learning and wisdom : and Daniel had understana- 
ing in all visions and dreams” (v. 17). “* The secret 
of the Lord is with them that fear Him ; and He will 
show them His covenant.” This principle ever 
abides ; and it is seen in all dispensations. It is first 
laid down by God Himself in the familiar words, 
‘“‘ Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do ? 
... For I know him, that. he will command his 
children and his household after him, and they shall 
keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment ; 
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which 
He hath spoken of him” (Genesis xviii. 17-19). It 
appears also in the prayer of the apostle Paul for the 
Colossians, “‘That ye might be filled with the know- 
ledge of His will in all wisdom and spiritual under- 
standing”? (Col. i. 9). It is abundantly plain, in 
other words, that God gave these four “children ”’ 
knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom because 
of their separation in heart and life from the defiling 
evils around. It is indeed ever true, that the nearer 
we are practically to the Lord, the more fully He 
communicates to us of His mind; and remark, that 
it is not only what is generally understood as “ His 
mind,” but it is in all learning and wisdom. The 
students of modern days, even Christian students, are 
too often betrayed into the thought, that for the 
acquisition of human “learning and wisdom” they 
are dependent upon their own industry and power. 
The consequence is, that the years of their student-life 
are often marked by spiritual declension, if not by 
open backsliding. The example of the four “‘ children ” 
might well teach another lesson.* 

* The well-known saying of Luther, although he referred to the 


Scriptures, might be profitably recalled in this connection, ‘‘ To 
have prayed well is to study well.” 


CHAPTER I. 17 


At the close of the verse Daniel is singled out from 
his fellows; for we are told, undoubtedly in view of 
his special work and mission, that he had understand- 
ing in all visions and dreams. Thereby, too, we are 
taught, that in all the circumstances and experiences 
through which God leads His people, He is forming 
them as vessels for His service. On the human side 
it was a calamity that had befallen Daniel; on God’s 
side, as is plainly revealed, this seeming calamity 
was but the instrumentality which He had chosen to 
form Daniel for his mission to carry His testimony 
into the court of the mighty Gentile monarch—His 
testimony concerning the powers which He had 
allowed to supercede His own direct government of 
the earth through Israel, and through Jerusalem as 
His dwelling-place and throne. But it is faith alone 
that can rise up beyond all secondary causes, connect 
everything with the hand of God, and at the same 
time peacefully rest in Him assured of His infinite 
wisdom and love, and that the issue of all events will 
be according to His own perfect will. 

The next three verses (18-20) give the result before 
the king of the training to which the four children, as 
well as the others selected, had been subjected. All 
alike were brought into the royal presence, and 
Nebuchadnezzar himself examined the students of his 
college: he “communed with them; and among 
them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, 
Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they before 
the king. And in all matters of wisdom and under- 
standing, that the king enquired of them, he found 
them ten times better than all the magicians and 
astrologers that were in all his realm” (vv. 19, 20). 
They might each have thus adopted the language of 


2 


¥ 


18 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


the Psalmist : ‘Thou through Thy commandments 
hast made me wiser than mine enemies: for they are 
ever with me. I have more understanding than all 
my teachers: for Thy testimonies are my meditation. 
I understand more than the ancients, because I keep 
Thy precepts ” (Psalm cxix. 98-100). Would that the 
lesson might be laid to heart by all the young Christians 
of the present day! 

The chapter closes with the remark, that ‘‘ Daniel 
continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus.” He | 
lived, therefore, to see the fall of the colossal empire of 
which Nebuchadnezzar was the monarch; he served 
under Darius the Mede, and witnessed the advent of 
Cyrus, of whom Isaiah had prophesied more than one 
hundred and fifty years before (see Isaiah xliv. 28; 
xlv. I-3, etc.) as the one who should be instrumental 
in the restoration of Jerusalem and the temple. It 
should, however, be observed that this last verse is 
only a general statement that Daniel lived to see the 
accession of Cyrus; for in chapter x. 1 we find that he 
received special revelations from God “in the third 
year of Cyrus king of Persia.” How far he may have 
survived that date is not mentioned; but the one 
given makes it certain that he lived to a good old age, 
exceeding, at any rate, the limits of threescore years 
and ten. 


gg ae CHAPTER II. is) 


‘CHAPTER II. 


ig is evident that the real subject of the first part of 
this book commences with this chapter. Chapter 
i. is prefatory and introductory, giving, so to speak, 
the situation, and displaying a view of the various 
actors in the following events, together with their 
relative positions, while behind all God is clearly 
revealed as working all things after the counsel of 
His own will. However supreme man may seem to 
be, as, for instance, Nebueshadnezzar in his dominion, 
-it is always to be remembered that God never sur- 
renders the reins of government. He may control 
directly or indirectly, but He does control the smallest 
as well as the greatest events that happen on the earth. 
It was thus by no chance that Nebuchadnezzar 
“‘dreamed dreams” in the second year of his reign, 
“wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleep 
brake from him”’ (v. 1). The like thing had happened, 
‘it will be recalled, to Pharaoh, and it was used to 
bring Joseph to the notice and succour of the king, 
and to be the means, in God’s hand, of constituting 
him ruler over all the land of Egypt; and he thus 
became no mean type of the rejection and exaltation 
of Christ in His earthly glory. In a similar way the 
dreams of Nebuchadnezzar were the occasion for the 
introduction of Daniel to the king, and of his exalta- 
tion as ruler over the whole province of Babylon. 
But man must ever come to the end of his own 
resources before he is made willing to turn to God for 


* 


20 THE PROPHET DANIEL ‘ 


= 


aid and direction. The king had ascertained for 
himself that in all matters of wisdom and under- 
standing the “‘ four children’ were ten times better © 
than all the magicians and astrologers that were in 
all his realm; and yet he did not in his perplexity 
turn to them for help and counsel. For we read, 
‘“Then the king commanded to call the magicians, 
and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the 
Chaldeans, for to show the king his dreams. So they 
came and stood before the king.” All the wise men 
of his realm, men of knowledge and experience, all 
the philosophers and scientists of the day, were thus 
assembled to listen to the commands of Nebuchad- 
nezzar. The king’s request was simple: he had 
forgotten his dream, and he desired them to tell him 
what it was that he had dreamed, and then to give 
its interpretation. Pity might be felt for these men 
of wisdom, in being subjected to such an ordeal, did 
we not remember that the professors of the occult 
sciences of that day claimed to be able to reveal 
secrets, and to penetrate into regions hidden from 
mortal eyes; and, secondly, that the whole thing was 
designed of God to bring to nought, in the eyes of 
this absolute monarch, the wisdom of the wise, to 
take them in their own craftiness, and thus to pour 
contempt upon all the pride of man. Their reply was, 


“Tell thy servants the dream, and we will show the 


interpretation.” 

An interpretation might easily be given, one which, 
if it concerned future events, might pass unchallenged, 
for until the time came for it to be realised no one 
could say whether it was true or false. The purpose 
of God, therefore, to expose the vanity of their pre- 
tended skill and knowledge, would not then have 


CHAPTER Il. 21 


been accomplished. The king would not be pacified 
by their answer; and, on being further urged by 
alternate promises of reward and threatenings, they 
were driven to confess, ‘‘ There is not a man upon the 
earth that can shew the king’s matter: therefore 
there is no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things 
at any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean. And it 
is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is 
none other that can shew it before the king, except 
the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh ”’ (vv. 10, 11). 
_ The issue raised was thus decided, and the wise men 
themselves were compelled, in no dubious language, 
to own their incompetency to reveal the king’s secret, 
and to declare at the same time that the know- 
ledge required of them lay outside the domain of man 
altogether, that the “‘ gods” alone possessed it. On 
the side of man the answer was not so unreasonable ; 
but Nebuchadnezzar, absolute and imperious monarch 
as he was, would not suffer the contradiction of his 
wishes ; and, enraged, he commanded to destroy all 
the wise men of Babylon. ‘‘ And the decree went 
forth that the wise.men should be slain; and they 
sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain” (v. 13). 
Man’s extremity is God’s opportunity. Daniel had 
not been summoned with the astrologers before the 
king; but, being included in the public reckoning 
among the “wise men,” he was amenable to the 
king’s decree. This brought him into notice, and 
into contact with the officer charged with its execu- 
tion. It was God’s purpose to bring His witness, in 
the person of Daniel, before Nebuchadnezzar; and 
the king’s forgetfulness of his dream, and his anger at 
the failure of his wise men to tell him what it was, 
were only the instrumentalities for its accomplishment. 


Ss 


22 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


On learning from Arioch the cause of the king’s 
anger, and of the decree that had gone forth, “ Daniel 
went in, and desired of the king that he would give 
him time, and that he would shew the king the inter- 
pretation’ (v. 16). What, it may be enquired, led 
Daniel to suppose that this secret would be communi- | 
cated to him? The answer is, Confidence in God, 
and the assurance that as His glory was concerned 
in the matter, as well as the safety of those who had, 
through His grace, maintained .their faith and hope 
in Him amid all the seductions of the Babylonian 
court, He would not fail to interpose for their rescue 
in this hour of peril. It was, in truth, a supreme 
moment—a moment when all the wisdom of the 
world had confessed its failure. If, therefore, Daniel 
could reveal the king’s secret, God would be publicly 
magnified before the whole realm. 

* Daniel’s next step was to go to his house, and make 
“the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, 
his companions: that they would desire mercies of 
the God of heaven concerning this secret; that 
Daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest 
of the wise men of Babylon” (vv. 17, 18). Counting 
upon God, Daniel associated his companions with 
himself in his supplications. It is the first instance 
of united prayer recorded in Scripture; and the fact 
that these children of the captivity resorted to it, 
discovers to us the secret of their holy and separate 
waik. “Dependence on God in secret is the means of 
all power in life and testimony, and, it may be added, 
of courage in the presence of man and of Satan’s 
power. These four, on their knees at such a moment 
before the God of heaven, present a wondrous spec 
tacle. They were but aliens in a strange land, 


CHAPTER II, 23 


_expatriated for the sins of their nation; and now 
they were doomed to a speedy death, unless the 
forgotten dream could be recalled and interpreted. 
But they knew with whom they had to do, the One 
who had said in their own Scriptures, “‘ Call upon Me 
in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou 
shalt glorify Me” (Psalm 1. 15); and hence they 
waited and pleaded before Him “concerning this 
secret.” Nor was their confidence in vain: God 
heard their cry, and the secret was revealed unto 
Daniel in a night vision (v. 19). 

& It will be remarked that they pray to the God of 
heaven. In Israel He was known as the Lord of all 
the earth (Exodus vill. 22; Joshua iii. 11; 2 Kings 
v. 15); for indeed He dwelt, and had His throne, in 
the midst of His people. But now it was otherwise ; 
for He had removed His throne from Jerusalem, and 
committed the sovereignty of the earth to Nebuchad- 
nezzar (vv. 37, 38); and hence it was with a true 
understanding of their own position in relation to 
God, that the “four children’’ addressed Him as 
the God of heaven. The time will come when He will 
once more resume the title of the God of the earth, 
and it is His claims as such that will form the subject 
of testimony on the part of the two witnesses in the 
book of Revelation.* 

The heart of Daniel was filled with thanksgiving at 
the revelation to him of the king’s secret; and the 
character of his piety, the state of his soul, is seen in 
that he turned immediately to God with thanksgiving 
and praise. When blessings are communicated there 
is often a tendency to fall at once to their enjoyment 
instead of tracing them back, as Daniel “¢ to the 


* The true reading in Rev. xi. 4 is “ the Lord of the earth.” 


24 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


x 


heart of God. Verse 19 gives the general fact of his 
having blessed God ; and then we have, in vv. 20-23, 
the exact words in which his thanksgiving was 
rendered. First, he ascribes blessing to the name of 
God for ever and ever. The praise he offers he desires 
to be eternal, “‘ from eternity to eternity,” as the due 
of Him who had been pleased to reveal Himself to 
His people. He then assigns a reason—‘* Wisdom 
and might are His.” A simple utterance, but how 
profound! For if wisdom and might are God’s 
(compare Rev. v. 12), they are nowhere else to be 
found, and it is in vain to turn for them to any but 
God. Next, he ascribes to God universal sovereignty. 
‘““He changeth the times and the seasons: He 
removeth kings, and setteth up kings.” The poten- 
tates of the earth may claim to exercise absolute 
power; and men by the force of arms, or even by 
political movements, may depose monarchs and 
establish governments; but neither the power nor 
the wisdom is theirs—they are but the blind instru- 
ments of the divine will. Once recognize with Daniel 
the sovereignty of God, and, whatever the character 
of the times in which we live, or the menacing aspect 
of public affairs, we may rest in perfect peace, knowing, 
as Nebuchadnezzar had to confess, that God “‘ doeth 
according to His will in the army of heaven, and 
among the inhabitants of the earth” (chap. iv. 35). 
Moreover, Daniel says, “He giveth wisdom unto the 
wise, and knowledge to them that know under- 
standing.” This principle is everywhere affirmed, 
that there must be a state of soul to receive from God. 
The apostle thus prayed, that the Colossians might 
be filled with the knowledge of God’s will in all wisdom 
andgspiritual understanding. In like manner we 


CHAPTER I. 25 


learn from these words of Daniel, that to be divinely 
wise, wise after God’s thoughts (and the fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom), is the condition of 
receiving wisdom. To him that hath shall be given, 
and this is what Daniel confesses, whether in respect 
of wisdom or understanding. He therefore proceeds, 
“He revealeth the deep and secret things: He 
knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth 
with Him”; for He is a God of omniscience, and all 
things are naked and opened unto the eyes of Him 
with whom we have to do (see Ps. cxxxix). After this 
celebration of what God is, in His wisdom, power, and 
sovereignty, Daniel offers his thanksgivings for the 
special mercy he had received. And in doing so 
he passes from the address, “‘ God of heaven,” to the 
more intimate title, ‘‘God of my fathers”; for the 
God his fathers had known and who had succoured 
them out of their distresses, is the One who had 
appeared on his own behalf, and he thanks and praises 
Him accordingly, and as the One who had now given ~ 
him “ wisdom and might.” It is beautiful to notice, 
lastly, how he associates his companions with himself. 
“Thou,” he says, “hast made known unto me now 
what we desired of Thee: for Thou hast now made 
known unto us the king’s matter.” Together they 
had sought the help of their God; and Daniel in full 
identification with his brethren acknowledges that 
the answer they had received was God’s response to 
their united cry. tm 
; At once ‘“ Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the 
king had ordained to destroy the wise men of Babylon : 
he went and said thus unto him, Destroy not the wise 
men of Babylon: bring me in before the king, and I 
will shew unto the king the interpretation” (v. 24). 


26 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


Arioch complied “‘in haste’ with Daniel’s request; — 
and ‘“‘the king answered and said to Daniel, whose 
name was Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known 
unto me the dream which I have seen, and the inter- 
pretation thereof?’ The answer of Daniel is given 
in three parts ; first, his explanation of the source and 
the object of the revelation of the secret; secondly, 
the dream itself; and-~ lastly its interpretation. 
Daniel commences, in evident communion with the 
mind of God, by declaring the impotence of human 
wisdom, in accordance with the words of another 
prophet, “*I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and 
will bring to nothing the understanding of the 
prudent.” Writing thus, as led of the Holy Spirit, 
the sentence of death upon the wisdom of the world, 
Daniel proceeds to declare the source of the vision. 
** There is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets,” and 
this was Daniel’s God, and he delighted to exalt Him 
in the presence of this absolute and idolatrous king. 
He then announces the object of the dream in respect 
of Nebuchadnezzar; it was to make known to him 
what should be in the latter days (vv. 28, 29). Finally, 
he disclaims any merit for himself; he was nothing 
but the vessel of the forgotten dream. God had His 
people in view, the faithful remnant to which Daniel 
belonged, in revealing the dream; and He also pur- 
posed that the king should know the thoughts of his 
heart. Daniel thus kept himself in the background— 
a sure sign of his moral preparedness to bear testimony 
for God. The nearer we are to God, the more we lose 
sight of ourselves, and the better we are able to 
apprehend and to communicate His mind. 

After Daniel had explained to the king the source 
and object of the revelation of his secret, he proceeded 


CHAPTER IL. ee 27 


to recall the dream and to give the interpretation. 
The language he employed in describing the dream 
was as simple as it was grand. ‘‘ Thou, O king, sawest, 
and behold a great image. This great image, whose 
brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the 
form thereof was terrible’ (v. 31). The details will 
come before us in considering the interpretation ; but 
it may be remarked at once that while the image 
represents the times of the Gentiles, from Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s day until the establishment of the kingdom 
of Christ, it is yet one image, and that the image of a 
man. It is thus, as has been strikingly observed by 
another, a representation of ‘“‘the man of the earth” 
(see Psalm x. 18), and the man of the earth, it may be 
added, as expressed in government—in all the various 
phases, as will afterwards be seen, of his corrupt heart 
and unbridled will. Man is never, indeed, fully 
revealed until all restraints are removed and he has 
the liberty as well as the inclination to gratify his own 
lusts (see 2 Thess. ii. 6-12). The image, while a 
complete image, is yet divided, as to its composition, 
into four parts: the head of fine gold; his breast and 
arms of silver ; his belly and his thighs of brass; and 
his legs of iron ; his feet part of iron and part of clay. 
There is, therefore, deterioration from the head to the 
feet, as seen in the figurative employment of the 
different metals. Finally, the image was smitten by 
a stone “cut out without hands,” and all its several 
parts were “broken to pieces together, and became 
like the chaff of the summer threshing-floors; and 
the wind carried them away, that no place was found 
for them: and the stone that smote the image became 
a great mountain, and filled the whole earth” (vv. 


34 35). 


28 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


Such was the dream; and the prophet’s authentic 
interpretation follows. The head of gold was Nebu- 
chadnezzar (v. 38). Of all the kingdoms that are to 
span the interval between the destruction of Jerusalem 
and the period of the establishment of the everlasting 
dominion of the Son of man, that of Babylon is pre- 
eminent. The reason is here given. Nebuchadnezzar’s 
kingdom was a direct gift from God. As Daniel said, 
‘Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of 
heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and 
strength, and glory.” This could not be said of any 
of the three successive kingdoms. They come upon 
the scene in a providential manner, as permitted of 
God, for the government of the earth, and according 
to His ordering; but their respective heads were in 
no sense the direct depositaries of power, as was 
Nebuchadnezzar. He was nearest God in this external 
sense, and his responsibility was consequently all the 
greater. 

The character of his kingdom, as described, by 
Daniel, was remarkable. Nebuchadnezzar was a king 
of kings—the supreme monarch, by God’s appoint- 
ment, over all the kings of the earth, for God had 
given him “a kingdom, power, and strength, and 
glory ”—all of which were wonderful words as setting 
forth the majesty and excellency of his position and 
dominion. Nor was his authority confined to men; 
for ‘‘ wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts 
of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath He given 
into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over them 
all ’’ (v. 38). A comparison has sometimes been drawn 
between the place occupied by Adam as head of this 
creation, and that here given to the king of Babylon ; 
and it has been well said: “ Although more limited, 


CHAPTER II. z 29 


it is a dominion characterized by the same features 
as that of Adam. It differs in that men are placed 
under his power ; it is more limited, for the sea is not 
included in his sovereignty, but it reaches te every 
place where the beasts of the field and the fowls of the 
heaven exist.”* Taking these various features into 
consideration, it is easily comprehended that Nebu- 
chadnezzar should be set forth as the head of gold.t 

The next two kingdoms, as denoted by the silver and 
the brass, are passed over with the slightest mention 
in the interpretation; but in another part of the 
book they are plainly stated to be the Medo-Persian 
and Grecian kingdoms (chapter viii. 20, 21). The 
fourth kingdom is described more at large; and 
happily there is no difficulty in its identification, as 
all prophetic expositors agree that it is that of Rome— 
the four kingdoms being Babylon, Persia, Greece, and 
Rome; and these, as will be seen, are to occupy the 
whole period of the times of the Gentiles. 

The features of the fourth kingdom, as delineated by 
Daniel, must be briefly considered. Before this is 
done, however, its duration must be indicated. It 
continues plainly until the kingdom of Christ is 
established (v. 44); and hence, to understand this, 
other scriptures have to be consulted. Historically, 
the Roman empire succeeded that of Greece, and, 
*“‘ strong as iron,” it broke in pieces and subdued all 
things. Its might for the time seemed to be irre- 
sistible, and it established its dominion throughout 
the greater part of the then known world. All this 


* Synopsis of the Books of the Bible, by J. N. Darby, vol. ii., p. 415. 
New edition. 

+ It must be observed that it is not only Nebuchadnezzar person- 
ally that is figured by the head of gold, for the successors of his 
own line until Belshazzar are included. 


30 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


is matter of history; but the question arises, If this 
Roman empire is to be found in existence on the eve 
of the appearing of Christ, where is it now, and whence 
is it again to emerge into view? It is in the book of 
Revelation that the answer to this question is found. 
That the outward form of this kingdom has dis- 
appeared is only too apparent; to human eyes it is, 
in fact, non-existent. In God’s eyes it is but hidden 
for the moment, and waiting to spring forth and to 
astonish the world by its reappearance. The angel 
thus said to John, in interpreting the “ mystery of the 
woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, which hath 
the seven heads and ten horns. . . . The seven heads 
are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth. 
And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is, 
and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, 
he must continue a short space. And the beast that 
was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the 
seven, and goeth into perdition” (Rev. xvii. 7-11). 
And more precisely still. “The beast that thou 
sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the 
bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that 
dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names were 
not written in the book of life from the foundation of 
the world, when they behold the beast that was, and 
is not, and yet is” (v. 8). Two things are taught in 
these scriptures—firstly, that the “‘ beast ” is regarded 
as the continuation of that which formerly existed ; 
and, secondly, that ‘“ while of the seven,” he reappears 
after an interval of apparent non-existence. Now this 
“beast” represents the head of the revived Roman 
empire in the last days; and his origin and charac- 
teristics, as well as the source of his throne and 
authority, are depicted in Rev. xiii. 1-8; and if verse 


CHAPTER II. - gt 


2 in ‘this scripture be compared with Daniel vii. a. 
it will also be seen that this beast is the successor of 
the three previous kingdoms, and that as such he 
combines all their moral features, as portrayed under 
the symbols of the leopard, the lion, and the bear. 

The fourth kingdom therefore, the kingdom in 
power when our blessed Lord was here on the earth, 
and by whose authority, in the person of Pilate, He 
was adjudged to be crucified, is that which will once 
more be established, and which will continue until 
smitten by the stone “‘ cut out without hands.” 

In verses 41-43 Daniel calls attention to a source of 
weakness in what was otherwise as “ strong as iron ”’: 
*““ And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of 
potters’ clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be 
divided ; but there shall be in it of the strength of 
the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed 
with miry clay. And as the toes of the feet were part 
of iron and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly 
strong, and partly broken. And whereas thou sawest 
iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle them- 
selves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave 
one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.” 
We see no reason to doubt a very common inter- 
pretation of the clay, that it represents the mingling 
of popular, democratic forms with absolute govern- 
ment, the combination of absolutism with the popular 
will, which, as they are incongruous elements, can 
never be thoroughly welded together, and must, in 
the very attempt at union, become a source of 
weakness. 

A further idea is given in verse 43, and is thus 
explained by another: ‘‘‘ The seed of men’ is, I 
think, something outside of that which characterises 


34 fHE PROPHET DANIEL 


the proper strength of the kingdom. . . . It appears 
to me that the Barbaric or Teutonic element is 
probably here pointed out as added to that which 
originally constituted the Roman empire.”* 

That the ten toes are also symbolical may be 
~ gathered from chapter vii., and also from Revelation 
Xvii.; but as they are not explained here the subject 
may be left until chapter vii. is reached, merely 
remarking that they set forth the ten kingdoms which, 
federated together under one imperial head, represent 
the final form of the Roman empire. 

It will now be understood that, under this image, 
the various forms of the world-power are sketched 
from the days of Nebuchadnezzar down to the time 
when the Lord will come, take His sovereignty over 
the whole earth, and reign for ever and ever. The 
chart of this world’s history, onward to the close, 
thus lies open before the eye of God. Men may 
agitate, devise, form and overturn governments, as 
they think, in their own power, and according to 
their own will; but prophecy teaches that they can 
only act within the limits of the divine wil] for the 
accomplishment of what has been purposed. We 
see, moreover, that human governments, whatever the 
efforts of sincere, though misguided men, must deteri- 
orate until at length, as we are distinctly told in the 
Apocalypse, Satan will be the source and sustainer of 
the last form of earthly rule. It is well for us, there- 
fore, when, as taught of the Spirit of God, we survey 
the future, to seek grace to maintain the place of 
separation outside of all the alarms and confusions 


* Those who desire to pursue the historical imvestigation of this 
statement will find ample accounts of the effect of the irruption of 
the Goths into Italy, and of the capture of the imperial city, in 
GipBon’s Roman Empire, and other works. 


= CHAPTER I. ae 33 


of the world, while waiting for the Lord’s return. 

Passing now to verse 44, we learn that “‘ in the days 
of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a king- 
dom, which shall never be destroyed : and the kingdom 
shall not be left to other people, but it shall break 
in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall 
stand for ever”’; and this is given, as Daniel expressly 
says, as the explanation of the stone, cut out of the 
mountain without hands, smiting the image upon his 
feet, and breaking them to pieces. The expression, 
“in the days of these kings,” is to be noted, especially 
as following on verse 43, as giving the éast, elsewhere 
formally stated, that the last kingdom of the four will 
be subdivided into ten kingdoms ; and this also marks 
the time when the God of heaven will set up a kingdom 
which will displace, first destroy and then displace, 
the last form of the Roman empire. This kingdom 
set up from heaven is the kingdom of Christ (see 
Daniel vii. 1-14); and its first act will be to break 
the “image” in pieces, and then, when formally 
established in power by Christ Himself, it will enlarge 
itself, until it fills the whole earth; and it will have 
no successor, for it will stand for ever. 

In concluding his interpretation, Daniel added two 
things—first, he repeated that the great God had made 
known to the king what should come to pass hereafter ; 
and, secondly, he assures the king of the certainty 
both of the dream and of its interpretation. As 
befitted a divine messenger, he was confident of the 
truth of his message. It is precisely in this particular 
that a revelation from God differs from what is of 
man. All that is outside of the Bible, all that presumes 
to cone into competition with it, and challenges the 
ears of men, is but a sea, an unformed mass, of 

3 


34 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


opinions and reasonings. How welcome therefore to 
the soul, wearied in its quest after some stable founda- 
tion on which to rest in view of death and eternity, 
is the immutable basis laid for faith in the infallible 
- Scriptures. Daniel’s message concerned time alone 
(although it reached onward to the close of all God’s 
ways in government on the earth); but knowing the 
source whence it came, he could authoritatively 
announce that what he had spoken would be surely 
fulfilled. 

And Nebuchadnezzar, idolator though he was, 
acknowledged, was constrained to acknowledge, the 
power of the word. He “fell upon his face, and 
worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they shou!d 
offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him. The 
king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, 
that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, 
and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal 
this secret”’ (vv. 46, 47). There was no escape for 
the king from this conclusion. He only had the 
dream, and having had it, he only could test Daniel’s 
claim for God to reveal secrets ; and hence, when his 
secret was revealed, the conclusion was irresistible that 
Daniel’s God was above all gods. The confession 
indeed was remarkable, admitting as it did the 
supremacy of God in heaven and on earth, and also 
what amounted to His omniscience. Far, however, 
as it went, neither Nebuchadnezzar’s conscience nor 
heart appears to have been reached. It was but the 
bowing of his mind to the evidence offered, just as 
those in the days of our Lord who believed in His 
name when they saw the miracles which He did (John 
i, 23). His action, in yielding homage to Daniel and 
in commanding an oblation to be offered to him, as 


CHAPTER Il. _ 35 


well as his subsequent conduct, is the proof of this ; 
even though for the moment he proclaimed in the 
presence of his court the sovereignty of Daniel’s God 
in heaven and on earth. , 

Lastly, Nebuchadnezzar “‘ made Daniel a great man, 
and gave him many great gifts, and made him ruler 
over the whole province of Babylon, and chief of the 
governors over all the wise men of Babylon ” (v. 48). 
Like Pharaoh, the king felt that ““a man in whom 
the Spirit of God ” was (Genesis xli. 38), would be a 
valuable assistant in government; and he conse- 
quently promoted him to great honour. Daniel had 
neither sought nor asked anything for himself; but 
now that he was exalted, he “ requested of the king, 
and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego over 
the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel 
sat in the gate of the king.” 

In such a way, when the sentence of death had gone 
forth against them, did God rescue His servants, and, 
working out His own purposes in testimony and 
blessing, bring them forth in the full light of the day. 
They were of the captivity of Judah; but now they 
are made to occupy the most prominent places in 
Babylon, for the king exalted them above all his 
courtiers and nobles in the direction of public affairs, 
while Daniel himself was in a still higher position, for 
he “sat in the gate of the king.” 


36 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


CHAPTER ill. 


ES chapter ii. the image which Nebuchadnezzar had 
seen in his night-dreams shadowed out, according 
to Daniel’s authoritative interpretation, the whole 
course of the times of the Gentiles. It is therefore 
a general picture, but a picture so distinct in its outline, 
that no one who gives himself earnestly to study the 
subject can possibiy mistake its import. He that 
runs may read the character of the kingdoms that 
bridge the space between the destruction of Jerusalem 
by Nebuchadnezzar and the appearing of Christ in 
glory. After this general outline, our attention is 
called, by the Spirit of God, to what may be termed 
the moral characteristics of the Gentile powers, 
chiefly as displayed in Babylon ; but, though displayed 
there, the several features are typical or representative 
of what will be seen throughout the whole duration of 
the Gentile sovereignty. In other words, we are now 
permitted to see the use which the Gentiles will make 
of the power entrusted to them in responsibility. 
This is abruptly brought before us in +t vpening 
verse of this chapter: “Nebuchadnezzar tne kin? 
made an image of gold, whose height was three-score 
cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it 
up in the plain of Du:a, in the province of Babylon ” 
(v. I). 
Such is man. Nebuchadnezzar had learnt from 
Daniel, if he had not known before, that the God of 
heaven had given him his universal kingdom, and he 


ee CHAPTER II. 37 


had confessed that Daniel’s God was “a God of 
gods and a Lord of kings,” and yet he will use his 
absolute power to have a god of his own, to assert his 
own will over the consciences of his subjects through- 
out his vast dominions, and thus to usurp for himself 
the place and authority that belonged alone to the 
God of heaven. That is, he used the power that God 
gave him to deny God and to put himself in the place 
of God, although this feature is subsequently expressed 
in a still more distinct form. 

Such conduct would be wholly inexplicable were we 
not acquainted with the subtle motives that animate 
and govern the human heart, and did we not remember 
that we ourselves have often used the blessings vouch- 
safed of God for our own profit and exaltation. In 
truth, Nebuchadnezzar might have had strong induce- 
ments to the course delineated in this chapter. His 
empire must have been an immense conglomerate, 
composed of numberless tongues (see vv. 4-8) and 
religions, all of which would tend, politically speaking, 
to disturb the peace of his realm.* If, therefore, his 
heterogenous dominions could be welded together by 
a common religion, his empire would be consolidated 
and the welfare of his subjects promoted. Whatever 
his thoughts, such was the course he adopted, and he 
made the magnificent image which he determined 
should serve as the deity for “all the people, the 
nations, and the languages ” that were subject to his 
authority.t 

* The difficulties in the government of India, springing up from 
the difference of religion, will afford an illustration of this. 


+ It has often been suggested that the image of his dreams formed 
the pattern for his idol. It is certainly remarkable that the one 
followed so closely upon the other, and that, as the head of the one 
that symbolised his own kingdom was of gold. he should make his 


38 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


The image erected, all the governing authorities 
and officials of his realm were summoned to Babylon, 
to be present at ‘‘ the dedication of the image which 
Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up’’; and they 
were all obedient to the royal command. Assembled 
“before the image,” the decree was proclaimed by 
an herald—‘‘To you it is commanded, O people, 
nations, and languages, that at what time ye hear the 
sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, 
dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and 
worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the 
king hath set up: and whoso falleth not down and 
worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into the 
midst of a burning fiery furnace ”’ (vv. 4-6). 

The decree would be easily understood: it was 
simple and brief, and the penalty was plain. Nor 
was there much, according to human thoughts, 
required. An act of prostration before the king’s 
idol at the appointed moment, and the whole thing 
was over. But the decree needs a little examination. 
It was, as before observed, the intrusion of man’s will 
into God’s domain. Obedience to the powers that be, 
as may be hereafter more fully explained, is a sacred 
duty ; but obedience to the powers that be can only 
be rendered within the circle of their own lawful 
authority. If they step out of this circle, as the 
rulers in Jerusalem did when they commanded the 
apostles not to teach or to preach in the name of 
Jesus, they must be told, as Peter and John answered, 


idol of gold. There might have been a connection in his mind 
between the two, but the wonder is, as already seen, that the 
impressions made upon his mind by the revelation of his secret, 
and by the interpretation Daniel gave him, could have been so soon 
e‘iaced. We all know, however, how transient the deepest feelings 
are where there is no positive work of the Holy Ghost in the soul. 


CHAPTER III. 39 


“We must obey God rather than men.” Absolute 
monarch, therefore, as Nebuchadnezzar was, he 
stepped outside of his own domain, and claimed for 
himself what was due to God alone, when he issued 
his decree. 

Another thing may be remarked. The signal for 
the worship of the image was the outburst of all kinds 
of music from the finest band in all the king’s dominions. 
If religious feelings did not exist, they must be pro- 
duced by the sweet and sensuous sounds of harmony. 
How subtle the wiles of Satan! for we have really 
here the history of all religious music. It appeals te 
nature, and begets natural emotions ; but in these the 
Spirit of God has no part, for they that worship God 
*“must worship Him in spirit and in truth.”’ All these 
expedients do but deceive souls by their enjoyment of 
what is natural, and at the same time they both shut 
out God and conceal the spiritual condition of the 
professed worshippers. 

There was practically entire unanimity in obedience 
to the king’s command. Three only, as far as is 
recorded, refused to comply with his decree. These 
were brought to the notice of the king by certain 
Chaldeans, who ‘‘ came near, and accused the Jews ” 
(v. 8). After reciting the king’s decree, with the 
accompanying penalty for disobedience, they pro- 
ceeded: ‘‘ There are certain Jews whom thou hast 
set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego; these men, O king, 
have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, nor 
worship the golden image which thou hast set up” 
(v. 12). If the accusation was subtle, and couched in 
the form most likely to arouse the anger of the king, 
its raotrve ig very apparert Jealousy its written 


40 THE PROPHET DANIEL | 


_ plainly upon it. “ There are certain Jews ”—men of 
an alien race, belonging to a hostile nation, of those 
who were brought here as captives, and those whom 
thou hast promoted over the heads of thine own loyal 
subjects—it is these who have set themselves up in 
opposition to thy royal command. Hatred is scarcely 
less concealed, for, before charging them with refusing 
to worship the king’s image, they say, “ They serve 
not thy gods.” The king knew this well from Daniel, © 
and had, notwithstanding, appointed them to their 
posts of honour; but the Chaldeans could not brook 
the servants of the true God being thus exalted, and 

_the opportunity had at length arrived for them to 
express the enmity of their hearts in the accusation 
they now made. Happy was it for Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego that no charge could be 
brought against them excepting, as afterwards in the 
case of Daniel, concerning the law of their God. 

If, however, the manner of the accusation was 
dictated by jealousy and hatred, it was well calculated 
to appeal to the conscience of Nebuchadnezzar. The 
mention of his promotion of the three Jews would, it 
might be supposed, surely recall to the king’s mind 
that eventful day when Daniel had unfolded his 
secret and its meaning, together with the confession 
which Daniel’s words had extorted from his lips. 
But if so, all was forgotten in his “rage and fury ” at 
the men who had dared to disregard his absolute and 
imperious will. The knowledge which God had com- 
municated to Daniel had. in a certain sense, ministered 
to the king’s desire, whereas now, faithfulness to God 
crossed his will, and taught him that there were some 
who believed, and who acted on their belief, that God 
was, to use the king’s owe words. “a God of gods, and 


CHAPTER III. 4I 


a Lord of kings.” This was insufferable to the insen- 
sate and irritated monarch, and he commanded that 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego should be brought. 
“Then they brought these men before the king” 
(v. 13). : 

Morally speaking, it was a most impressive scene. 
On the one hand there was Nebuchadnezzar, the 
mightiest monarch the world had ever seen, sur- 
rounded with all the pomp and magnificence of his 
court and realm; and on the other, three men of a 
despised race, whatever the position they occupied at 
that moment in the government. And the question 
about to be raised was this: Who is the master of 
men’s consciences, God or man? Nebuchadnezzar 
himself raised it. First, he asked them if the accusa- 
tion were true; and it will be observed that he travels 
outside his own decree in accepting the additional 
charge—that they did not serve the king’s gods— 
which the Chaldeans had brought. Next, he gives 
them a further opportunity of proving their loyalty 
when the band of music should once more break out 
in exciting strains. If then “ ye fall down and worship 
the image which I have made ; well: but if ye worship 
not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of 
a burning fiery furnace” (v. 15). Lastly, carried 
beyond all bounds by his rage, he dared to challenge 
the interposition of anyone superior to himself, and 
thereby to assert his own omnipotence ; for he added, 
“Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my 
hands?” This was in truth a gage of battle, and the 
conflict now commenced was between Nebuchadnezzar 
and God. 

The answer of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, 
quiet and subdued in tone, is sublime in the confidence 


4% THE PROPHET DANIEL 


in God and in His power which it breathes, and in the 
calm courage it expresses in their determination to 
dare all and to endure all rather than be unfaithful to 
their God. They say, ‘““O Nebuchadnezzar, we are 
not careful to answer thee in this matter.* If it be 
so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from 
the burning fiery furnace, and He will deliver us out 
of thine hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto 
unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, 
nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up’ 
(vv. 16-18). As wisdom, divine wisdom, was found to 
be with the remnant in the previous chapter, so now 
faithfulness, indomitable faithfulness, to God is ex- 
hibited. Grace gave to them both the one and the 
other, for it was God who had taken up His servants 
to display, through them, His own wisdom and power. 
But this answer of the three children of Judah to 
Nebuchadnezzar must be examined to understand its 
fullimport. First, then, they declared that they were 
not careful, or that it was not necessary, to reply to 
the king in “this matter,’ meaning, undoubtedly, 
that as the king had defied God, it was He alone who 
could deal with him, and that they fully counted on 
His interposition to rebuke his arrogant and profane 
presumption, and to vindicate His own name and 
supremacy. They then proceeded calmly to confess 
their faith in the power of their God to deliver them 
should Nebuchadnezzar carry out his threat of casting 
them into the furnace, and their confidence that He 
would deliver them out of his hand. They added, 
moreover, that should He not deliver them, their 
determination was fixed not to yield to the king’s 


* Some translate, ‘‘It is not necessary to answer thee on this 
subject.” 


CHAPTER III. 43. 


command. They knew whom they had believed, and 
that He was able to preserve them from the king’s 
fury ; but if it were His will, they were ready to die 
as martyrs for His name’s sake. As another has 
observed, their faith and obedience were as abso,ute 
as the will of the king. 

This attitude of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego 
defines with exactitude, as already remarked, the true 
position of the believer in relation to the powers that 
be. Everywhere in the New Testament submission to 
these is enjoined, and such is to be the path of the 
Christian in the midst of political agitations and 
confusions. He is neither to raise questions, nor to 
examine the lawfulness of constituted authorities. 
It is enough for him that they are in power, and he 
pursues his way in peace as he renders the required 
obedience. But if these authorities, whether they be 
emperors, kings, or magistrates, travel outside of 
their own province, as Nebuchadnezzar did, and seek 
to substitute their will for the word of God, and to 
impose that will on the consciences of their subjects— 
putting themselves, in fact, in the place of God— 
then, in very faithfulness to God, like these three 
children of the captivity, and at whatever cost, the 
believer is bound to disobey. The limit of his obedi- 
ence to kings is obedience to God in obeying them. 
The moment he is called upon to disobey God by 
yielding to a monarch’s demands, he must, if he 
would retain a good conscience towards God, refuse 
the demanded subjection, even at the cost of life. 
Such was the ground taken in this conflict between 
Nebuchadnezzar and these three subjects of his realm. 

aThis was a new thing to this master of the world. 
Absolute in authority over all the kingdoms of the 


44 = THE PROPHET DANIEL” 


earth, was he to be flatly and publicly disobeyed by 
three Jews—members of a nation which he had con- 
quered ? Such a thing could not for one moment be’ 
tolerated ; and hence he was “full of fury, and the 
form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego”’; and “he spake, and 
commanded that they should heat the furnace one 
seven times more than it was wont to be heated. 
And he commanded the most mighty men that were 
in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego, and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace.” 

A public example must be made of these rebels to 
the king’s commands, and a salutary impression 
_ produced on all the representatives of the govern- 
ment. In some measure, one can understand the 
wrath of this arbitrary monarch. He had devised an 
expedient for securing the unity of the various races 
of his dominions, and it seemed likely to be successful. 
Not a hand nor a foot was moved against the project, 
when suddenly three Jews, and these the special 
objects of the king’s favour, were brought before him 
and charged with resisting his commands.* His 
entire scheme was thus imperilled, and hence the 
ungovernable passion with which he ordered the 
rebels to his authority to the cruellest doom that could 
possibly be devised. 

His commands were instantly obeyed, and ‘‘ because 
the king’s commandment was urgent, and the furnace 
exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those men 
that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego.” 
What was human life to this wilful, raging king ? 

* Many speculations have been offered upon the fact of Daniel’s 
absence from this scene. That he did not surrender his faith, that 


he was as faithful as his companions, is attested by his subsequent 
history. Why he does not appear in this chapter is not revealed. 


CHAPTER Ill. - 45 


_ But God will teach him by the very contrast, that 
_ what is death to His enemies cannot injure those who 

are under His protection. (Compare Exodus xiv.;_ 
Mark xvi. 18.) ‘‘Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, 
fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery 
furnace ”—and, their confidence in God vindicated, 
they were not destroyed. The men who had cast 
them into the furnace were overpowered and killed by 
the scorching flames ; but they themselves though in 
the midst of the furnace were unharmed. Their God 
was able to deliver them. There was another thing 
to fill the mind of the king with astonishment. He 
“rose up in haste, and spake, and said unto his coun- 
sellors, Did not we cast three men bound into the 
midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the 
king, True, O king. He answered and said, Lo, I see 
four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and 
they have no hurt ; and the form of the fourth is like 
the Son of God” (vv. 24, 25). Two miracles thus 
amazed the king: the fact of his intended victims 
being loose and unhurt, and the presence with them 
of a supernatural Companion, whom he designates as 
“like the Son of God.”* Not that he understood his 
own speech ; but we may conclude that the Spirit of 
God, as often in the Scriptures, controlled him, and 
made him proclaim the truth. Isaiah had said, 
speaking in the name of Jehovah to Israel, ‘‘ When 
thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee ; 
. . . When thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt 
not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon 
thee’? (chap. xliii. 2); and this promise was now 


* Whether the translation be accepted as it stands, or taken as 
** Son of the gods,” the significance remains. He owns that some 
one, more than mortal, is with them in the furnace, 


46 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


fulfilled to this believing remnant, as it will be to the 
remnant of a future day, of which these three children 
‘are a type. Jehovah was with His faithful servants 
in the furnace to sustain, to comfort, and to secure 
them from harm. Before the very eyes of the king, 
who had impotently and impiously dared Him to 
deliver out of his hand, He appears, and shielding 
His servants from the power of the flames, vindicates 
their confidence in Him, and their fidelity to His 
name. Has He not also said to us, “I will never — 
leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly 
say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what 
man shall do unto me” ? (Hebrews xiii. 5, 6). 

Nebuchadnezzar had provoked the conflict in 
challenging the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego. God came in, and silently exhibited His 
power before the furious king; and he is conquered ! 
Forgetful of everything else now but the spectacle 
before his eyes, insensible even to his own public 
humiliation, he, confessing his defeat, with his whole 
mien and aspect changed, advanced “to the mouth of 
the burning fiery furnace, and spake, and said, Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye servants of the 
most high God, come forth, and come hither. Then 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- ehego came forth of the 
midst of the fire” (v. 26). 

It is to be remarked that it is not said that anyone 
besides Nebuchadnezzar saw the divine Companion 
of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. His eyes 
were for the moment opened to see what was naturally 
invisible, that he might learn his own folly in entering 
upon a conflict with the God of heaven. What 
patience and longsuffering on the part of God, in the 
presence of the weak profanity of one of His own 


CHAPTER III. cA? 


creatures! Happy is it for man, for us all, that He 
never allows His purposes to be frustrated by our 
daring presumption and rebellion. 

The king’s command was now obeyed, and these 
“servants of the most high God” came forth; and 
‘the truth of their preservation—the miracle wrought— 
was verified by “the princes, governors, and captains, 
and the king’s counsellors,” who were “ gathered to- 
gether,” it would seem, to examine the reality of this 
miraculous preservation ; and they ‘“‘saw these men, 
upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an 
hair of their head singed, neither were their coats 
changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them” 
(v. 27). The deliverance was total and complete, for 
the fire had only been allowed to burn the bonds 
wherewith they had been bound: at least they were 
seen, notwithstanding they had been bound, walking 
in liberty in the company of their Deliverer and 
Preserver. Overwhelmed by the undeniable character 
of the evidence offered, and owning his own impotence 
and defeat before such a God, Nebuchadnezzar said, 
‘Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, who hath sent His angel, and delivered 
His servants that trusted in Him, and have changed 
the king’s word, and yielded their bodies, that they 
might not serve nor worship any god, except their 
own God ”’ (v. 28). He thus paid honour to God, who 
had rescued His servants from the king’s wrath, and 
he justified t those who, in fidelity to ‘‘ their own God,” 
had refused to worship the image which he himself 
had set up. He made a decree, moreover, “ That 
every people, nation, and language, which speak any 
thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, 
and Abed-nego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses 


48 THE PROPHET DANIEL. 


shall be made a dunghill: because there is no other 
God that can deliver after this sort ” (v. 29). 

All the king’s thoughts and projects were thus 
utterly set at nought. The image he had made had 
been publicly refused, and as publicly declared to be 
a false god. Nebuchadnezzar himself was constrained 
to confess the impotence of himself and of his god, 
and to proclaim throughout his empire that there was 
no god like the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego. His magnificent assembly had been in vain as 
far as his own purposes were concerned. Obsequious 
subjects came from all parts of his dominions to 
accept and to worship the king’s idol: and lo! even 


before they dispersed, a trumpet-tongued testimony 


was raised to the supremacy of the most High God. 
God vindicated His own name, and the faith of His 
servants, before all the notabilities of the realm. 

One thing more is recorded: ‘‘ Then the king pro- 
moted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, in the 
province of Babylon” (v. 30). The victory vouch- 
safed was complete; for not only did God frustrate 
the designs of the king, but also those of the jealous 
and malignant enemies of His servants. They had 
thought to compass the destruction of these faithful 
men; but the issue was their further promotion and 
exaltation. 

So far the record is historical; but is it only his- 
torical ? To suppose so would be to miss the main 
object of the narrative. The actual facts took place, 
but these actual facts were chosen to set forth what 
will take place in the last days. As the first Gentile 
empire became idolatrous so will also the last, as we 
may learn from Rey. xiii., and as God’s faithful rem- 
nant was the object of enmity and persecution under 


A 
Optra Re oee 


Yee. se ee 


: - 
CHAPTER III. 49 


the king of Babylon, so will it be again under the last 
head of the Roman empire (see Rev. xii. 13-17; 
xiii. 6-8, 15, etc). But, as we read in this same book, 
Daniel’s people, however hot the furnace into which 
they shall at that time be cast, “shall be delivered, 
every one that shall be found written in the book.” 
Satan may be allowed to rage, and to sift the people 
of God, but not a hair of their heads can fall without 
God’s permission. The history therefore of Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego is full of encouragement— 
especially for the Jewish remnant in the last days, but 
also for the saints of God in every age when surrounded 
by the fires of persecution, when Satan, as a roaring 
lion, is seeking whom he may devour. And the lesson 
is written large: ‘‘ God is faithful, who will not suffer 
you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will 
with the temptation also make a way to escape, that 
ye may be able to bear it” (1 Cor. x. 13). 


50 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


CHAPTER IV. 


A SPECIAL character attaches to this chapter from 
the fact that it contains a communication or 
letter, written by Nebuchadnezzar himself, and 
addressed to “‘all people, nations, and languages, that 
dwell in all the earth.” He had been favoured with 
many signs from God through Daniel’s interpretation 
of his dream in chapter ii., and in connection with 
.the deliverance of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego 
from the power of the flames in chapter iii., and, 
under the momentary impressions produced, he had 
confessed Daniel’s God to be a God of gods, and a 
Lord of kings, and a Revealer of secrets, and that 
there was no god that could deliver as the God of 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. His heart, how-. 
ever, was unchanged ; but in the narrative before us, 
which again is both historical and prophetical, we 
are permitted to see the way in which this idolatrous 
king is brought at last to “ praise and extol and honour 
the King of Heaven ”’ (v. 37). Read in its connection, 
there cannot be a doubt that Nebuchadnezzar really 
bowed in conscience and heart to the testimony which 
reached him through the prophet Daniel, and that 
he thus became a servant of the “‘ Most High.” 
The proof of this lies in the royal communication 
to all his subjects. He desires that every person in 
his dominions should be made acquainted with his 
“conversion.” The address of the letter has already 
been noticed: and this is followed by a salutation— 


CHAPTER IV. 51 


“Peace Le multiplied unto you ”—which in its form 
is almost apostolic. (Compare 1 Peter i. 2.) In 
verses 2, 3 he concisely states the object he has in 
addressing his subjects: ‘“‘I thought it good to show 
the signs and wonders that the high God hath wrought 
toward me”’; and then his heart overflows in admira- 
tion as he recalls what God had wrought, exclaiming, 
“* How great are His signs! and how mighty are His 
wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, 
and His dominion is from generation to generation.” 
It is a good thing when the: soul is constrained to 
confess what God has wrought by His grace; for, 
as the apostle teaches, if the heart believes unto 
righteousness, it is with the mouth confession is made 
unto salvation. It is due to God that confession 
should be made, and when made it turns to a testi- 
mony for His glory. 

Following upon this, he gives his own personal 
circumstances at the time when this new message 
from God reached him. ‘I Nebuchadnezzar was at 
rest in mine house, and flourishing in my palace” 
(v. 4). He had attained the summit of all human 
ambition. Monarch of all the kingdoms of the earth, 
his authority undisputed, prosperous in all his under- 
takings, with nothing to disturb his tranquillity, 
whether as touching his public or his private affairs ; 
he was in peace* in his house, and flourishing in his 
palace. Everything, in a word, went well with this 
mighty monarch, so that he might have been, if human 
prosperity could have given it, in the enjoyment of 
perfect happiness. And he was, it would seem, 


*Such is the translation given by some; and this removes 
perhaps the ambiguity of the words “at rest,’’ as in connection 
with his dream and visions they might be thought to mean that he 
was resting tn sleep. 


52 : THE PROPHET DANIEL 


happy, but without God. It was from this clear sky, 
with no premonition of coming trouble, that God’s 
warnings suddenly came to arouse the king and to 
fill him with apprehensions. ‘‘I saw a dream,” he 
says, ‘‘ which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon 
my bed and the visions of my head troubled me” 
(v. 5). : 

The dream did not, as on a former occasion, pass 
away from his mind; nor did he understand what he 
had seen, although he was troubled—troubled as he 
felt that it contained something of momentous import 
for him and for his kingdom. He therefore at once 
issued a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon, 
that they might make known to him the interpretation 
of the dream (v. 6). Having proved their incompe- 
tency in chapter ii., and having, at the same time, 
learned that Daniel alone could unravel his mystery, 
it may seem strange that Daniel was not immediately 
summoned into the king’s presence. There is no 
affinity between the natural and the spiritual man. 
Saul was glad to avail himself of David’s services both 
with his harp and with his sword, and yet he hated 
him. In like manner, Nebuchadnezzar had profited 
by Daniel’s interpretation; but he could not love 
the one who was the representative before him of 
the God of heaven. If, therefore, he could do without 
Daniel, he would; and consequently he first tried 
his own wise men. Again their impotence was mani- 
fested. The wisdom of man is confined to earth; 
but Nebuchadnezzar’s dream came from heaven. 
The subject was one outside of all the thoughts of 
men, even though it related to the earth. To under- 
stand God’s things a man must be instructed of God ; 
and this the wise men of Babylon were not. Foiled 


CHAPTER IV. 53 


in his purpose, the king tells us, “ At the last Daniel 
came in before me, whose name was Belteshazzar, 
according to the name of my god,” etc. (v. 8). The 
next verse plainly shows that Nebuchadnezzar had 
not forgotten Daniel’s ability as an expounder of 
secrets, although he could not have known the source 
of his inspiration, nor that he was God’s vessel of 
the spirit of prophecy. He only sent for him, there- 
fore, from necessity, inasmuch as in all his dominions 
there was no other who could interpret his dream. 

Every particular of the dream was fast rooted in the 
king’s memory, and he proceeded to repeat it to 
Daniel. It falls into three parts; first, its subject- 
matter, the tree (vv. 10-12); secondly, the judgment 
upon the tree (vv. 13-16); and lastly, the object 
of the judgment executed (v. 17). As all these 
particulars are taken up by Daniel, we may pass to 
his interpretation, after noticing, first, the effect on 
Daniel of the king’s recital. 

When Nebuchadnezzar had explained to him what 
he had seen in the visions of his head in his bed (v. r0), 
** Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was astonied 
for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him.” The 
meaning of the dream was unfolded to his soul as he 
heard it, and as he comprehended its import in its 
application to the king, filled with amazement, and 
troubled, he was reluctant, it would appear, to 
communicate to him the significance of the dream. 
This was perceived by Nebuchadnezzar, and he said, 
** Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation 
thereof, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and 
said, My lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, 
and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies” 
(v. 19). It may be questioned whether Daniel, in 


54 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


speaking thus, having received from God the interpre- — 
tation of the dream, maintained the level of his 
prophetic office as a messenger from God ; and it will 
be observed that in the record of this sentence the 
name Daniel is dropped. It is for the first and only 
time Belteshazzar—‘‘ not Daniel, whose name was 
Belteshazzar,”’ but simply Belteshazzar—who answered 
the king. 

However this may be, Daniel commenced to give 
to the king the interpretation of his dream: ‘“‘ The 
tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, 
whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight 
thereof to all the earth ; whose leaves were fair, and 
the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all; 
under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon 
whose branches the fowls of the heaven had their 
habitation: it is thou, O king, that art grown and 
become strong: for thy greatness is grown, and 
reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end 
of the earth” (vv. 20-22). The figure of a tree to 
denote men in their earthly greatness is often used in 
the prophets. Ezekiel thus says: “Behold, the 
Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, 
and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature ; 
and his top was among the thick boughs... . Ail 
the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, 
and under his branches did all the beasts of the field 
bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt 
all great nations,” etc. (chap. xxxi. 3-9). This striking 
correspondence helps much to understand the sym- 
bology of Nebuchadnezzar’s dreams, and enables us 
to perceive how apt an illustration it is of exalta- 
tion in the government of the earth, in the far- 
reaching, wide-spreading, and sheltering protection it 


CHAPTER IV. 55 


affords to all ranks and conditions of men. The 
beasts of the field and the fowls of heaven are 
introduced because both alike had been given into 
his hand (see chap. ii. 38); and hence they, as well 
as the children of men, are looked upon as subject to, 
sustained and protected by, his authority. Well 
therefore might Daniel say to the king, “ Thy great- 
ness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy 
dominion to the end of the earth.” 

A difference between the head of gold in chapter ii., 
and the tree here, in their respective applications, is 
to be remarked. Both concern Nebuchadnezzar, as 
plainly said; but the former includes his dynasty, 
inasmuch as it is not until his dynasty ends that the 
second of the four prophetic kingdoms appears. The 
latter is a symbol of Nebuchadnezzar himself, as is 
seen by the judgment executed; only, it has to be 
added, that his degradation is in reality, as may be 
afterwards explained, typical of the character of-the 
Gentile power in government on to its supersession at 
the appearing of Christ to establish “lis kingdom. 

Having given the application of the symbol, Daniel 
continued his interpretation: ‘‘ And whereas the 
king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down from 
heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy 
it ; yet leave the stump of the roots thereof in the 
earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender 
grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of 
heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the 
field, till seven times pass over him ; this is the inter- 
pretation, O king, and this is the decree of the most 
High, which is come upon my lord the king: that 
they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall 
be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make 


56 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with 
the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over 
thee, till thou know that the most High ruleth in the 
kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever He 
will. And whereas they commanded to leave the 
stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure 
unto thee, after that thou shalt have known that the 
heavens do rule ”’ (vv. 23-26). 

Nothing could be more precise than this inter- 
pretation, and it is given at length that the reader 
may perceive how exact in every detail was the fulfil- 
ment.. It could not be otherwise, inasmuch as it 
was, through Daniel, a divine exposition of Nebu- 
chadnezzar’s vision. It may now be understood why 
Daniel was tempted, as the judgment impending over 
the king rose up before him, to say, “‘The dream be 
to them that hate thee.” It was only the courage 
which the sense of his mission from God imparted 
that enabled him thus fearlessly to unroll the scroll 
of the king’s future; and it needed courage for the 
Jewish captive-prophet to stand before the monarch 
of the world, and to depict such an overwhelming 
disaster. Daniel himself would appear to have been 
moved; for he appealed to the king in words of 
earnest entreaty, “‘ Wherefore, O king, let my counsel 
be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by 
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy 
to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tran- 
quillity.”’== Like Paul with Felix, Daniel reasoned with 
Nebuchadnezzar of righteousness, temperance, and 
judgment to come; but we do not read that the king 
trembled. The message however had been delivered, 
and the appeal made ; and the momentous interview 
between the prophet and the monarch was ended. 


CHAPTER IV. 57 


In the next place the history of the fulfilment of 
Daniel’s interpretation is given. ‘“‘ All this,” he says, 
““came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar ” (v. 28); and 
then we have the circumstances under which the 
threatened judgment was executed. Twelve months 
had passed, and there is no record that the king had 
even been troubled by the warning he had received. 
The sky was still clear, with not a cloud on the distant 
horizon. This might be a matter of unspeakable 
surprise if we did not remember that the spectacle of 
sinners unmoved on the eve of eternal woe greets our 
eyes every day. Death must come, and judgment 
will follow, and yet men are careless and heedless. 
So with Nebuchadnezzar ; and hence it is that we read 
that “‘at the end of twelve months he walked in the 
palace of the kingdom of Babylon.” And what was 
the subject of his meditations? His own greatness, 
power, and majesty. “The king spake, and said, Is 
not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house 
of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the 
honour of my majesty?” (v. 30). All this was the 
glorification of himself, the full-blown pride of the 
human heart, begotten of his exaltation and prosperity 
—the pride that goe th before destruction. The source 
of his power had been communicated to him (chap. ii.) ; 
but this he had entirely forgotten in attributing all 
the glory of his kingdom to himself. Surveying the 
magnificence of his palace and metropolis, with a 
heart swelling with pride and exultation, he ascribed 
all to the might of his own power, and declared that 
it was all for the honour of his own majesty. God 
was not in all his thoughts, nor even his own false 
gods; his vision was bounded by himself—himself as 
the source of all his glory, and himself as the object 


8 THE PROPHET DANIEL - 


of all his works. What an insight into the heart of 
man! We are thus allowed to behold the moral 
condition of this gigantic tree before it is hewn down 
according to the divine decree. 

The similarity between this and the parable of the 
rich man, whose ground brought forth plentifully, will 
at once be recalled. As he congratulated himself upon 
his prosperity, purposed to enlarge his barns, and 


contemplated years of selfish enjoyment, the judgment | 


went forth, ‘“‘ Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be 
required of thee’ (Luke xii. 16-20). In like manner, 
as Nebuchadnezzar vented the pride of his heart in his 
foolish boasting, even “while the word was in the 
king’s mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, 
O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken, The 
kingdom is departed from thee”; and then the 
judgment pronounced by Daniel is repeated by the 
voice, and immediately executed. For “the same 
hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar : 
and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, 
and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his 
hairs were grown like eagles’ feathers, and his nails 
like birds’ claws.”” When God speaks it is done, and 
what He commands ever stands fast. < 

It is now necessary to enquire into the meaning of 
this judgment ; and on examination it will be found 
that it has a threefold significance—personal, moral, 
and prophetical. First, then, the personal meaning 
has to be considered. This lies in the fact that what 
was inflicted upor Nebuchadnezzar was a direct 
judgment from Goa for his personal pride, for what 
might be termed his self-deification. The pride of 
man is one of the especial objects of God’s hatred; - 
and because of its expression in an extreme form in 


CHAPTER IV. 59 


the king of Babylon, he fell under God’s jwdicial hand. 
There are those who endeavour to account for his 
condition in a natural way by terming it a special 
form of madness. Even so, the question returns, 
Whence came it? The Biblical narrative supplies 
the answer—an answer recorded by the king himself— 
that it came from the hand of God as a just judgment 
upon Nebuchadnezzar’s overweening pride and vain- 
glory. Threatened a year before it was inflicted, and 
space thus having been given for repentance, he has 
the very words of Daniel recalled to his mind by a 
voice from heaven, at the very moment when the 
punitive stroke was about to descend. Entrusted 
with the government of the earth, God held him 
accountable, and punished him accordingly, and yet 
in grace, as well as in righteousness, since the object 
was to teach him “that the most High ruleth in the 
kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever He 
will” (v. 32). 

The moral significance of what befell Nebuchadnezzar 
is even, if possible, of more importance. He was 
driven from men, became as a beast of the earth, for 
he ate grass as oxen, and in his bodily condition was 
even worse than the beasts of the field. All this is 
but expressive of his moral state, and of the character 
of the power he wielded as dissociated from God. In 
the language of another: ‘“‘ Power is reduced to the 
condition of the beasts that know not God, and are 
devoid of man’s understanding. The only true privi- 
lege of man, that which ennobles him, is that he can 
look up to God and acknowledge Him Without this 
be looks downward, he cannot suffice to himself, he is 
degraded. . . . Pride and independence separate 
man from God; he becomes a beast, devoid of real 


60 THE PROPHET DANIEL - 


intelligence.” The physical state of this monarch is 
therefore a moral picture, and one that should often 
be pondered, inasmuch as it reveals man’s condition 
according to the estimate of God, when he vaunts his 
own power, seeks his own glory, and asserts his own ~ 
independence. But it goes further than the king 
himself ; it embraces also the character of his rule, 
and of his kingdom. If then the first kingdom in 
man’s hand becomes in chapter iii. idolatrous, in 
chapter iv. it becomes bestial, bestial in the sense of 
being devoid of all intelligence as dissevered from God, 
and as looking downward, and feeding only upon the 
motives and objects of earth. For when man in his 
exaltation shuts out God from his thoughts, and 
makes himself his centre and object, he is morally no 
better than a beast. As the Psalmist says, ‘‘ Man 
that is in honour, and understandeth not, is like the 
beasts that perish ” (Psalm xlix. 20). 

There is lastly the prophetical aspect. ‘‘ Seven 
times ” were to pass over the king in his degradation 
before he should be restored. It does not say “ years,” 
though possibly the “times ”” might be “ years,” but 
“times.” The expression is vague, while the term 
“seven” gives it a very precise meaning; that is, a 
perfect period, a period comprising the whole duration 
of the times of the Gentiles. We gather, therefore, 
that all the four kingdoms—and these, it will be 
remembered, embrace the whole period of Gentile 
rule—will have the same moral character before God ; 
that the power exercised in them will be apart from 
God, and will be wielded for self, for man, and for 
earthly objects, without regard to God’s thoughts, or to 
responsibility to Him from whom the power has been 
derived. This is a very solemn consideration, and on 


CHAPTER Iv. 61 


many accounts. It shows that no improvement in 
the governments of the earth is to be expected, and 
therefore that it is worse than useless, to say nothing 
of inconsistency with his heavenly calling, for the 
Christian to embark upon the sea of political agitations, 
in the hope of securing some amelioration in the state 
of things around. It is not for one moment denied 
that man’s condition in this world may be improved 
by just and beneficent laws ; but the question remains, 
Will any political changes or legislative enactments 
alter the moral character either of human governments 
or of their subjects? Our chapter, with a host of 
other scriptures, proclaims that the character of the 
first kingdom will be repeated in its successors; and 
it will, as we know from the book of Revelation, be 
seen without any disguise in the final form of the last 
of the four prophetical kingdoms. If any one should 
doubt this statement, let him trace the course of 
human governments from the days of the kingdom of 
Babylon up to the present time. Let him wade 
through the histories of conquests, wars, and dynasties, 
and then let him ask himself if he could name any 
period when the power of the throne was held from 
God, and wielded for God. He will undoubtedly dis- 
cover that some individual monarchs have been pious 
men; but he will also have to confess that, whatever 
their piety, they could not change the course or the 
character of their governments. The powers that be 
are ordained of God, and therefore the Christian is to 
render them all due honour and subjection ; but this 
in no wise militates against the fact that Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s condition in its moral aspect, as given in our 
chapter, depicts the character of the kingdoms which 
fill up the times of the Gentiles. 


62 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


Having traced the meanings of Nebuchadnezzar’s 
degradation, we may now consider its effect on himself. 
The ‘‘ seven times ” may also refer to this effect. The 
period was divinely appointed, and, as in analogous 
cases in the typical books, had without doubt regard 
to the change to be wrought in his soul. His degrada- 
tion, in other words, was to continue for a perfect 
period, as indicated by the number seven, until the 
divinely-intended work in his soul should be accom- 
plished. Hence he says, “‘ And at the end of the days 
I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, 
and mine understanding returned unto me, and I 
blessed the most High, and I praised and honoured 
Him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an ever- 
lasting dominion, and His kingdom is from generation 
to generation : and all the inhabitants of the earth are 
reputed as nothing: and He doeth according to His 
will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants 
of the earth: and none can stay His hand, or say 
unto Him, What doest Thou?” (vv. 34, 35). The 
object of God’s dealings with him was attained; for 
the king had now learnt the lesson appointed him, 
that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and 
giveth it to whomsoever He will (see vv. 25, 32). 

Let us, however, examine his confession more 
particularly. In the judgment with which he had 
been visited he was as a beast of the earth; and, as 
we have pointed out, the characteristic of a beast is 
that it looks downward, and does not possess the 
intelligence of man. It is, therefore, most interesting 
to notice that the moment Nebuchadnezzar lifted up 
his eyes to heaven his understanding returned. So 
with the prodigal who had wandered into the far 
country; his “coming to himself” and his turning 


CHAPTER IV. 63 


to his father’s house are connected. The fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and this statement 
is illustrated in the experience of the king of Babylon. 
Turning upward to the hand that had smitten him, he 
began to understand, for he learnt for the first time 
his accountability to God. 

And remark that the first use he makes of his newly- 
found understanding is to bless the most High, to 
praise and honour Him as the eternal God, and as the 
Sovereign Ruler both in heaven and on earth. This 
is exceedingly beautiful; and is the sure evidence of 
what we know as a work of grace in the soul. The 
character under which he blesses God, ‘“‘ the most 
High,” is also significant. This title is first found in 
connection with Melchizedek, who is termed the priest 
of the most High God; and who, blessing Abram on 
his return from the slaughter of the kings, said, 
““ Blessed be Abram of the most High God, possessor 
of heaven and earth” (Genesis xiv. 18, 19). This 
plainly teaches, as also may be gathered from other 
scriptures, that this is the title which God will assume 
in the age to come, when He will, in very deed, possess 
the earth as well as heaven. In addition, therefore, 
to the significance of the use of the title by Nebuchad- 
nezzar, who owned thereby that God, though He had 
committed the sovereignty of the earth to him, yet 
did according to His will on earth as in heaven, there 
is also a prophetic meaning. We have already called 
attention to the fact that Nebuchadnezzar’s degrada- 
tion shadowed forth the character of Gentile rule on 
to the end; and now we learn that it will be through 
judgment that the nations will be brought to acknow- 
ledge God. We thus read in the prophet Zephaniah, 
‘‘My determination is to,gather the nations, that I 


64 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine 
indignation, even all my fierce anger for all the earth 
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. For 
then will I turn to the people a pure language, that 
they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve 
Him with one consent ”’ (chapter iil. 8,9). 

Daniel had told the king that the kingdom should 
be sure unto him; after that he had learnt that the 
heavens do rule. This prediction was also verified ; 
for he further adds: “‘ At the same time my reason 
returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, 
mine honour and brightness returned unto me; and 
my counsellors and my lords sought unto me; and I 
was established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty 
was added unto me” (v. 36). God thus fulfilled His 
own word by the mouth of His servant; not one jot 
or tittle was allowed to fall to the ground ; and Nebu- 
chadnezzar joyfully confesses and records the divine 
faithfulness. And it is no small encouragement in the 
presence of the pride of power everywhere displayed, 
and amid all the confusions of earth, to see that God 
is working through all for the accomplishment of His 
own purposes, and that in the issue all the Gentiles, 
as well as His ancient people, will be brought into 
willing subjection to Christ when He establishes His 
kingdom, and extends His sway throughout the whole 
earth. 

The chapter closes with another note of praise : 
‘““ Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour 
the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and 
His ways judgment : and those that walk in pride He 
is able to abase”’ (v. 37). Comparing the Nebuchad- 
nezzar who renders this praise to God with the Nebu- 
chadnezzar who said, as he surveyed the magnificence 


Jo = == 7, CHAPTER IV. : 65 


of his Sy, 5 Is not this great Pabgion. that I have 
_ built ?” etc., we can only exclaim, “ What hath God 
wrought!” He had indeed shewn His power to 
abase the one who was walking in pride; and, more 
than this, in abasing him He so effectually changed 
the heart of the monarch that he turned submissively 
to the hand that had smitten him, and confessed that 
all God’s works are truth, and His ways judgment. 
He thus justified God, a sure and unmistakable sign of 
conversion, and as he justified Him his lips were filled 
with praise and adoration. It is a lovely picture of 
the ways of God both in judgment and in grace. 

A word should be added upon the character in 
which he here confesses God. He now speaks of Him 
as the King of heaven; and this is also evidence of 
his having been divinely taught. When Jehovah had 
His throne in Jerusalem, He was God of the earth as 
well as of heaven; but when He had abandoned His 
throne there, and had committed the sovereignty of 
the world to the Gentile monarch, He would be known 
as the God of heaven, and it is to Him as such that 
Daniel bore testimony before the king (chap. ii. 37-44). 
But while God had now assumed this title, He in no 
wise surrendcred either His claims to the earth, or the 
present actings of His power in government ; for His 
object in the judicial stroke that fell upon Nebuchad- 
nezzar was, as we have seen, to teach him, “ that the 
most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth 
it to whomsoever He will.” Nebuchadnezzar had 
confessed this truth; but ere he concludes the account 
of God’s dealings with himself he proceeds a step 
further, and owns Him as the King of heaven. 

It is exceedingly interesting to trace the various 
stages in Nebuchadnezzar’s history which led up to 


5 


66 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


this conclusion. In chapter ii. he confessed to Daniel, 
“Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and 
a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou 
couldest reveal this secret’? ; in chapter iii. he decreed — 
that no one, under the extreme penalties of the law, 
should speak against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, 
and Abed-nego, owning that there was no other god 
that could “deliver after this sort’; and, lastly, in 
our chapter he acknowledges God as the most High, 
and as the King of heaven. God thus in His mercy 
subdued the proud heart of this mighty potentate, 
and humbling him before Him, made him confess His 
name before all the inhabitants of his vast empire. If 
a record of judgment, it is yet a story of unbounded 
grace. peo 


CHAPTER hs 67 


S. CHAPTER V. 


T is of all importance to remind ourselves again and 
again, in reading the chapters that form the first 
part of this book, that while they are strictiy historical 
they are also prophetical; that while they describe 
characteristics of the thrones of the Gentiles, to which 
God entrusted the sovereignty of the earth after the 
destruction of Jerusalem, these characteristics will 
reappear in the last days. There are three things, 
' indeed, which especially have this prophetic character : 
the acts of these various monarchs; the judgments 
that followed as in the last, and in the present, 
chapter ; and the deliverance of God’s people as seen * 
in chapter iii., and again in the person of Daniel, in 
chapter vi. To these may be added the acknowledg- 
ment of the true God by the Gentiles after their 
having been judged, as portrayed in the case of 
Nebuchadnezzar, and also in that of Darius (chap. vi.), 
albeit his confession is elicited rather by the display of 
God’s power in succouring His people, as represented 
by Daniel, when in the very jaws of destruction. 
Coming now to our chapter, a still worse moral 
feature of Gentile sovereignty is exhibited. Idolatry 
and pride of power—vainglory—had marked Nebu- 
chadnezzar; but Belshazzar is distinguished by the 
public insolence of daring impiety, venting itself in 
open wickedness and profanity. The occasion for 
this outburst of iniquity is described in the first verse : 
‘* Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand 


68 ~ THE PROPHET DANIEL 


of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand.” 
It was a night of feasting, revelry, and unbridled 
licence, when all the evil passions of man’s corrupt 
heart were inflamed and enticed to their gratification. 
For, mark, it was while Belshazzar ‘“‘ tasted the wine,”’ 
that he gave the commandment “to bring the golden 
and silver vessels which his fathr Nebuchadnezzar | 
had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem ; 
that the king, and his priecss. his wives, and his 
concubines, might drink therein ” (v. 2). 

Was he intoxicated? With the pride of wicked 
presumption certainly ; and this was inflamed by the 
wine which he drank. Indulgence in wine, in the joy 
which earth affords, necessarily panders to the heart’s 
worst desires ; and the company that surrounded the 
king reveals that this instance was no exception to 
the general rule. Had this been, however, but an 
ordinary revel or debauch, whatever its accompanying — 
licentiousness, no inspired pen would have recorded 
it; but the crowning sin of it was the direct insult 
which Belshazzar offered to the God of Israel, the 
God of heaven. The holy vessels were holy still in 
God’s eyes, however polluted they had been by the 
sins of His kings and priests, for they had been used 
in the house where He had put His name for ever, 
and where His eyes and His heart should be perpetu- 
ally (1 Kings ix. 3). True He had in judgment 

*The chronology of Nebuchadnezzar’s successors anes be 
accurately determined, but it seems beyond question that Belshazzar 
could not have been hisson. It is possible that he might have been 
his grandson, though this is not certain. The term “ father,” 
therefore, as is often the case in Scripture, is used in the sense of 
progenitor, or forefather, Whatever the exact relationship he 
bore to Nebuchadnezzar, he could not have been very far removed 


from that monarch, seeing that he was well acquainted with the 
judgment that had fallen upon him (v. 22). 


| CHAPTER V. Z 69 
_ suffered them to share in the captivity of His people ; 
_ but He could not allow them, consistently with all 
_ that He was, and with all that He purposed, to be 
defiled by the Gentile monarch and his profligate 
associates. Nor was it only that the king, and his 
princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them ; 
but “they drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, 
and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.” 
Gods of all degrees were extolled and their superiority 
over the God of Israel insultingly vaunted; and in so 
doing they challenged God publicly and insolently. With 
such insensate folly and impiety did this foolhardy king 
dare the interposition of the living and true God. 
The answer—for it could not be delayed—was at 
hand; almost before the sounds of their idolatrous 
chants had died-away—“ in the same hour came forth 
fingers of a man’s hand, and wrote over against the 
candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king’s 
palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that 
wrote” (v. 5). Silently came these mysterious fingers 
in answer to the king’s challenge, silently they wrote 
their words of doom amid the noise of revelry and of 
song, and yet, for an unseen power directed his eyes, 
the king saw the part of the hand that wrote. And 
what was the effect of the apparition? Surely 
fortified by wine, and strong in confidence in the 
omnipotence of his gods, the king will not be afraid ? 
But even he—wicked as he was—had a conscience, 
and he knew of the power that had driven even 
Nebuchadnezzar from his throne, and made him, for 
a season, like the beasts of the earth ; and conscience 
now, in spite of the king’s surroundings, asserted its 
office, and “‘ the king’s countenance was changed, and 
his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his 


79 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against 
another (v. 6). What achange! In the midst of his 
banquet he had dared to insult the God of heaven, 
and aow, at the sight of this mysterious hand, fear 
and dread possessed his soul, and he trembled from 
head to foot. He had girded himself to challenge the 
omnipotent God; and the moment the challenge was 
accepted, before the blow had been struck, his heart 
failed him under the awful apprehension of coming 
judgment. Who can help him at such a moment ? 
Instead of humbling himself before the One against 
whom he had so grievously sinned, he called to his 
succour the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the sooth- 
sayers, and by the proffer of munificent rewards 
hoped they might be able to solve the written words, 
and thus, as he vainly thought, give him relief. But 
the wisdom of this world could not unravel God’s 
secrets nor interpret His writing; and these men of 
pretended knowledge were as impotent as they had 
been proved to bein the days of Nebuchadnezzar. “‘The 
things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.” 

Belshazzar was still more troubled, panic-stricken 
as he had been, and even his courtiers were astonished. 
But God meant that the king should have the writing 
explained, only it must be done by His own chosen 
vessel. The instrument was at hand to bring Daniel 
to Belshazzar’s notice. “The queen* by reason of 
the words of the king and his lords came into the 
banquet house” (v. 10). She had not taken part in 
the wild orgies of this eventful night ; but the rumour 
of the apparition that had startled the king and his 


* This could scarcely have been Belshazzar’s wife (see v. 3) ; most 
probably therefore it was the queen-mother, or, as expressed in 
modern language, the queen-dowager, 


Se CHAPTER V. Ze 71 
» 
guests had gone out theoueh the palace and reached 
her ears. She was fully acquainted with what had 
taken place in the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, as also 
with the service Daniel had rendered, and with the 
place to which he had been consequently appointed, 
and she hastened therefore to the king’s help. ‘“O 
king,”’ she said, “live for ever: let not thy thoughts 
trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed : 
there is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit 
of the holy gods”; and then, after describing what 
he had proved himself to be in the days of Nebuchad- 
nezzar, she added, “‘ Let Daniel be called, and he will 
show the interpretation ” (vv. 10-32). 
Daniel was at once “ brought in before the king. 
‘And the king spake and said unto Daniel, Art thou 
that Daniel, which art of the children of the captivity 
of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of 
Jewry ?”’ He had known, as before remarked, of the 
services of Daniel, but he had not cared to know him 
personally. The impious king had no desire for 
acquaintance with the servant of God; and had only 
now sent for him in his extremity for help in the hour 
of his need. He then told Daniel, what he had heard 
of him, and continued: ‘“‘ Now if thou canst read the 
writing, and make known to me the interpretation 
thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and have 
a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third 
ruler in the kingdom ”’ (vv. 14-16). 

Daniel was standing before the sovereign of all the 
kingdoms of the earth, before an absolute monarch, 
and before one who held the power of life and death 
over all his subjects (see v. 19); but Daniel was the 
servant of the God, who was the source of Belshazzar’s 
brief power; and he, therefore, conscious of | his 


92 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


mission, neither feared the king nor was tempted by 


his offered rewards. In the calm confidence which, 
through grace, he possessed in Him whose servant he — 
was, he ‘‘ answered and said before the king, Let thy 
gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another ; 
yet I will read the writing unto the king, and make 
known to him the interpretation” (v. 17). It was 
a noble preface, befitting the messenger of God to the 
wicked king; and the reader will not fail to remark 
the different spirit in which Daniel addressed 
Belshazzar from that in which he spoke to Nebuchad- 
nezzar. The latter was idolatrous, imperious, and had 
sought to compel his subjects to worship the idol 
which he had made; but he had not gone the length 
of Belshazzar in his profanity. Daniel therefore made 
a distinction, taught as he undoubtedly was by the 
Spirit of God, and knowing that the cup of Belshazzar’s 
iniquity was now filled up to the brim. But he will 
deliver his message, though, first of all, Belshazzar 
must be made to hear how God had dealt with Nebu- 
chadnezzar in the past, and how that, absolute 
monarch as he was, and universal as was his dominion, 
“when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened 
in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and 
they took his glory from him.” Daniel recounted, 
moreover, the nature of the judgment that was inflicted 
upon him, and reminded Belshazzar that all this was 
“till he knew that the most high God ruled in the 
kingdom of men, and that He appointeth over it 
whomsoever He will.” Thereon he proceeded to 
deal with the trembling monarch before him—in 
severe, but faithful words: “And thou his son, O 
Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though 
thou knewest all this; but hast lifted up thyself 


Pour 2g 


- against the Lord of heaven ; and they have brought 


_ the vessels of His house before thee, and thou, and 
thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk 
wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of 
silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which 

see not, nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose 
hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast 
thou not pgliorified ” (vv. 22, 23). 

If God was about to smite, He will have the 
grounds of His action explained. It is indeed a 
stt.king feature in His ways, especially as recorded in 
the Old Testament, that before He acts in judgment, 
He is careful to state the reasons of it, that He may 
-be clear when- He speaks, and justified when He 
judges (see, for example, 2 Chron. xxxvi. 11-21). So 

here Daniel presented the indictment against the 
king, showed him that he had slighted all the warnings 

of the past, had sinned against light and knowledge, 
and that he had finally lifted up himself against 
the Lord of heaven, and had polluted the holy vessels 
of His house. This shows plainly the meaning of the 
king’s action in commanding these vessels to be brought ; 
that it was no mere wild freak, while under the heat of 
wine, but a deliberate and studied insult against God. 

Hence it was that Daniel would have the king to under- 

stand, that “‘the part of the hand” was sent from God 

to write on the wall in connection with this very act 

(v. 24). In such a solemn moment there must be no 

mistake, and thus hé arraigned the king before the 

tribunal of God before he expounded the writing.* 

* As the writing was in the Chaldaic language, it was not that 
the king’s wise men did not understand the words. It was the 
connection, application, and interpretation that they could not 


unfold. So many separate words would appear to them, being 
without the clue, as disjointed and meaningless. 


74 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


The words were four: MENE, MENE, TEKEL, 
UPHARSIN, and we have next Daniel’s authoritative 
interpretation. 

Before entering upon it, attention may be drawn to 


the fact that Daniel does not merely translate the 


words which had been written, but he gives out the 
mind of God intended to be conveyed. This could 
not have been done unless he hims=<!i had received a 
direct communication from God. ‘The words them- 
selves, if rendered according to their meaning, are 
““numbered,” ‘“‘ weighed,” and “divided”; but 
no human ingenuity could have discovered their 
divine significance, and it is this which Daniel ex- 
plains. The first word was repeated. The reason for 
this may be doubtless found in Joseph’s words to 
Pharaoh: “‘And for that the dream was doubled 
unto Pharaoh twice; it is because the thing is 
established by God, and God will shortly bring it 
to pass’ (Genesis xli. 32). 

“This,” says Daniel, “‘is the interpretation of the 
thing: Mene ; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and 
finished it ” (v. 26). In expounding Nebuchadnezzar’s 
vision of the great image, Daniel had said to him, 
“Thou art this head of gold,” and, inasmuch as 
Babylon was to be succeeded by the Medo-Persian 
kingdom, it is evident, as previously remarked, that 
Nebuchadnezzar’s dynasty was included in this term, 
Belshazzar being its last member. God Himself had 
committed the sovereignty of the earth to Nebuchad- 
nezzar in responsibility, and He alone determined the 
duration of his kingdom. When therefore Daniel said 
to Belshazzar, ““God hath numbered thy kingdom, 
and finished it,” he meant that, according to the 
divine appointment, the termination of Babylon’s 


CHAPTER V. 5 


‘sovereignty had arrived ; that its days were numbered, 
and were now ended. — 

_ The ground of this annunciation is found in the next 
verse: “‘TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, 
and art found wanting” (v. 27). If God had com- 
mitted the government of the earth to Nebuchadnezzar 
and his successors, for the accomplishment of His 
purposes in His ways with His people, He held them . 
responsible for the way in which they fulfilled their 
trust. The verdict is now pronounced upon 
Belshazzar. Nebuchadnezzar had also failed, if not 
to the same extent; but, under chastisement from 
God, he had humbled himself, owned Him as the 
source of his authority, as the omnipotent Ruler in 
heaven and on earth, and had extolled and honoured 
Him as the King of heaven. Belshazzar, blind to all 
the teachings of the past, had more grievously sinned 
by magnifying his idols above the God in whose hand 
his breath was, and had thus lifted up himself against 
the Lord of heaven. His probation was now ended, 
and Daniel declared to him the result that, as shown 
by the mysterious word ‘“ Tekel,” weighed in God’s 
unerring balances, he was found wanting. 

Judgment is contained in the next word, PEREs,* 
the public judgment consequent upon Belshazzar’s 
failure in the use of the power entrusted to him in the 
government of the earth: “ Thy kingdom is divided, 
and given to the Medes and Persians.” The long 
suffering of God towards the “head of gold” was 
ended ; and hence there is no exhortation to repent- 
ance, nothing but the announcement of the result 


* Peves is another form of the word Uphaysin. The former is tne 
participle passive, and the latter the participle active of the verR 
P’ras, to divide. 


0 ‘THE PROPHET DANIEL 


of God’s verdict, together with the ‘decompantyily = 


judgment. Altogether “this narrative,” as has been = 
well said, “gives us the last character of the iniquity _ 
of the sovereign power of the Gentiles, in opposition 


to the God of Israel, and the judgment which falls in | 
consequence upon the monarchy of which Babylon 
was the head, and to which Babylon had given its own 
character.” 

Nothing is said as to the effect of this awful inter- 
pretation. With the judgment pronounced God had, 
save the execution of the sentence, done with the man 
who had arrogantly defied His power. One thing, 
however, is added, and that is Belshazzar’s last act 
of royalty. He could not, whatever the attitude of 
Daniel, allow his public promise of reward to the 
interpreter to fall to the ground. Men who are false 
to God are often true to one another in their very 
selfishness. Belshazzar therefore commanded, “and 
they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and put a chain of 
gold about his neck, and made a_ proclamation 
concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in 
the kingdom ”’ (v. 29). If he believed the interpreta- 
tion, it is evident that he had no conception of the 
rapidly approaching execution of the sentence he had 
heard ; but “in that night was Belshazzar the king of 
the Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took the 
kingdom, being about three score and two years old ” 
(vv. 30, 31). 

God thus judged the first of the kingdoms of the 
Gentiles, and this was the monarchy of Babylon. The 
event was of the highest importance historically, and 
of no less moment prophetically; for >the moral 
features which marked Belshazzar’s sovereignty will 
appear in the future Babylon spoken of in Revelation. 


See ETERS 77 
There it is seen under two aspects—that of a woman, — 
and that of a city.* The moral character of the 
former is given in these words: Mystery, Babylon the 
great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the 
earth ; and we read of the ruler whose throne was 
derived from Satan, that “‘he opened his mouth in 
blasphemy against God, to blaspheme His name, and 
His tabernacle; and them that dwell in -heaven” 
(see Rev. xvii. 5; xiii. 6). Moreover, as to the 
judgment of Babylon it is said, “‘ Her plagues shall 
come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine ”’ ; 
and so it will happen, for those who bewail her 
destruction are represented as saying, “ Alas, alas, 
that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for 
in one hour is thy judgment come” (chap. xviii. 
10). This will suffice to show the exactness of the 
correspondence, and the prophetical nature of these 
historical narratives. (‘Compare also Jeremiah 1. 35-46 ; 
li. 24-64.} o 

A few words should perhaps be said upon the 
question of tke histerical event alluded to when 
Belshazzar was thus surprised and slain in his 
capital. Isaiah is thought to refer to the capture 
of Babylon by Cyrus in chapter xlv. 1, 2; and 
in chapter xlvii he speaks expressly of — her 
sudden destruction ‘vv. tI-15; see also ¥xi. 1-0). 
_ Jeremiah also prophesies with more detail of the 
surprise and taking of Babylon, and that in con- 
nection with the Medes (li. 28-32); and this of the 
two prophecies wouid rather point to the event 
recorded in our chapter. There are those who, in 
the hopeless confusion of the pretended histories 


* For an explanation of these two aspects see The Visions of John 
4 Patmos, published by A. S. Rouse, 15 & 16, Paternoster Square, 


78 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


of the past,* seek to establish the identity of Darius — 
with Cyrus; but the Scripture narrative is clear 
that Darius took the kingdom, and that Cyrus is 
subsequently found in its possession. And let it not 
be forgotten that the importance of the narrative 
lies in its moral and prophetic instruction ; and happy 
are they who, with unquestioning confidence in the 
word of God, have their hearts prepared and opened 
to receive its teaching. 

* In proof of this it may be said, that in Smith’s Bible Dictionary 
the articles on Babylon, Cyrus, and Dayius are made up mainly of 


conjecture and of attempts to reconcile the contradictory state- 
ments of the ancient records. 


CHAPTER VL ce 79 


CHAPTER VL 


N this series of historical pictures there are 
presented, it will be remembered, the moral 
features which will distinguish, in the last days, the 
last form of Gentile sovereignty. If Belshazzar, there- 
fore, typified the impiety that dared to lift itself up 
against the Lord of heaven,#Darius sets forth thes 
_ exaltation of man, and indeed, the substitution of man > 
for God, as an object of worship. This is by no means . 
altered by the fact that he was betrayed into taking 
this position, or that.he himself was.a man of an 
amiabie character; fpr it is still true that he signed 
twe decree, that whosoever should ask a petition of 
any god or man for thirty days: save of himself, should 
be. cast into the den of lions (v. 7). It is not what he 
was in himself, but what he did, that contains the 
prophetical instruction ; and it is quite possible that 
he, who in a future day will oppose and exalt himself 
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, 
and who will sit in the temple of God, and show him- 
self that he is God (2 Thess. ii. 4), will possess many 
features which will extort the admiration and homage 
of men. When the Lord was upon the earth there 
was no beauty in Him that men should desire Him ; 
there was nothing in Him to commend Him to the 
natural man; but, on the other hand, when Antichrist 
appears on the scene he will be marked by the features 
which will attract the hearts of men as men.” Of the 
wotld, the world will love its own; whereas Christ, 


80 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


who was not of the world, was hated by it. It is 
just because Darius was naturally a man of an admir- 
able character that he was fitted to shadow out in this 
respect this future ruler in his self exaltation and 
deification. 

The first three verses of this chapter furnish the 
groundwork of what follows, the occasion of the 
actings that issued in the casting of Daniel into the 
lions’ den. On taking possession of the throne of 
Babylon, Darius reorganized the affairs of the 
kingdom ; and he “set over the kingdom an hundred 
and twenty princes...and over these, three 
presidents, of whom Daniel was first. . . . Then this 
Daniel was preferred above the presidents and princes, 
because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king 
thought to set him over the whole realm” (vv. 1-3). 
Belshazzar had, on the eve of the capture of his-city, 
proclaimed Daniel as the third ruler in the kingdom ; 
Darius promoted him to the first place under himself, 
being God’s instrument in doing so for the accomplish- 
ment of His purposes. Daniel was no unknown man 3 
and he was hated both as a Jew and as a true 
worshipper of the God of heaven. His exaltation in 
the government still further provoked the envy and 
jealousy of the nobles, the princes, and the presidents 
over whom he had been placed. A man of incorrup- 
tible fidelity, and seeking only to commend himself 
to God, could not be loved by men of corrupt and 
covetous hearts. They therefore determined in some 
way or other to compass his deposition or destruction ; 
and first of all they sought to find occasion against 
him concerning the kingdom—concerning his adminis- 
tration of the government. There are none so eagle- 
eyed as malicious men, so that nothing—whether in 


“< CHAPTER VL 8r 


matters of finance or other branches of the affairs of 
this vast empire—would escape their notice; ‘but 
they could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch 
as he was faithful, neither was there any error or fault 
' found in him” (v. 4). What a testimony to the 
probity and uprightness of this servant of God; and 
it is all the greater because, as we read in the next 
verse, it was a testimony borne by his enemies. They. 
knew not that Daniel laboured under the eye of Him 
who beholds the secrets of the heart, and that it was 
the joy of his life to walk in the favour and blessing 
of his God. 

Foiled in this direction, with the inventiveness 
which ever characterizes the evil heart, they chose 
another ground of attack. They said—‘‘ these men ”’ 
(a term seemingly chosen to express their iniquity) 
said, ‘‘We shall not find any occasion against this 
Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the 
law of his God ” (v. 5). Idolaters as they all were, and 
having a sovereign who was also an idolater, it was. 
easy, they thought, to entangle Daniel in their net on 
such a ground. But Darius could scarcely have been 
ignorant of what had transpired between Daniel and 
Belshazzar, or of the fact that he was a godly Jew; 
and this will account for the method adopted by these 
princes and presidents. They did not proceed to 
charge Daniel with worshipping his God; in greater 
subtlety they determined, first, to flatter the king by 
offering to him the place of absolute supremacy— 
supremacy over heaven as well as earth—and then to 
bring Daniel into conflict with, as well as disobedience 
to, the king. 

As inspired of Satan, their project was cleverly 
devised, and they sought immediately to put it into 

6 


| eee THE PROPHET DANIEL — 


execution. Accordingly they “‘assembled together 

to the king, and said thus unto him, King Darius, live 
for ever”; and they then informed his majesty that, 
after due consultation, they had agreed “to establish 
a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that who- 
soever shall ask a petition of any god or man for | 
thirty days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into 
the den of lions” (v. 7). The only thing wanting to 
ensure the validity of the decree was the king’s 
signature, and then it could not be changed, ‘ accord- 
ing to the law of the Medes and Persians, which 
altereth not” (v. 8). The king, flattered probably by~ 
the homage and subjection of his nobles in his new ~ 
dominions, fell at once into the snare they had woven 
about his feet, and not pausing to consider the awful 
place which he was accepting, a place belonging to 
God alone, “ signed the writing and the decree ”’ (v. g). 
Nebuchadnezzar had made an image, and had com- 
manded his nobles to be present at its dedication, and 
to unite in rendering it homage; but Darius himself 
now took the place of God, and forbade any of his 
subjects for the space of a whole month, whether in 
private or in public, to fall down before any “‘ god” 
but himself. It was the deification of man, which 
will, as we have pointed out, have its counterpart in 
the last days, and towards which men are even now 
proceeding with such rapid steps. The displacement 
of God by man is seen even in Christendom; what 
wonder then if, after the church is gone, when the 
energy of Satan will be unlimited and unhindered, 
man publicly and avowedly assumes the place of God, 
even with approbation. Such a consummation is 
only gradually reached. The steps toward it are 
silently and unwittingly trodden; for the minds of 


CHAPTER VI. 83 


_men are so prepared through teachings which in their 
fruit must bring in this conclusion, that they will 
scarcely be astonished when a man who has won 
their homage by his earthly wisdom and power, 
declares that he is God. 

But what of Daniel in the presence of such a decree ? 
Will he yield obedience to it ? or will he, like his three 
companions of the captivity, disregard the~king’s 
commandment ? Who could doubt what his course 
would be—seeing how faithfully he had spoken both 
to,Nebuchadnezzar and to Belshazzar? The fact, 
moreover, that, within the circle of his responsibility 
and allegiance to his monarch, he had served so well 
that even his enemies could not find matter of accusa- 
tion, affords a guarantee that he, a servant of the God 
of heaven, will be no less conscientious in that other 
sphere where God is supreme. Darius—however he 
had been entrapped—had stepped outside of the circle 
of his authority, and had, in signing this decree, in- 
truded into God’s circle, where man has neither right 
nor place. If Daniel, therefore, would maintain a good 
conscience towards God, he had no alternative but to 
refuse subjection to the decree that had been issued. 
When therefore he “knew that the writing was signed, 
he went into his house ; and his windows being open in 
his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his 
knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks 
before his God, as he did aforetime ” (v. 10). 

What a spectacle! A man of another race, an 
object of the envy of the Chaldeans, and enjoying his 
exaltation simply by the king’s favour, dares, at all 
cost, the power of the whole realm, because he would 
not be unfaithful to his God! And observe that there 
was no ostentation in the course he pursued. He 


84 THE PKOPHET DANIEL ~ 


continued in his usual course; it was ‘‘as he did 
aforetime.” He might have closed his windows and 
escaped observation, but to have done this, under the 
circumstances, would have been all one as if he were 
respecting the king’s decree. His windows had ever 
been open towards Jerusalem, and they must still be 
kept so. Daniel, thus morning, noon, and evening, 
cried to the Lord “‘as he did aforetime,” regardless, 
by the grace of God, of the consequences of his act. 
There was a reason for his windows being opened 
towards Jerusalem. At the dedication of the temple 
Solomon had prayed thus concerning the people, 
should they be carried away into captivity in the 
enemy’s land, far or near: “If they shall bethink 
themselves in the land whither they were carried 
captives . . . and pray unto Thee toward their land 
which Thou gavest unto their fathers, the city. which 
Thou hast chosen, and the house which I have buili for 
Thy name: then hear Thou their prayer and their 
supplication in heaven Thy dwelling-place, and main- 
tain their cause” (1 Kings viii. 46-49). Daniel was 
consequently resting on the sure word of God in thus 
praying, for the Lord had said to Solomon, ‘‘I have 
heard thy prayer and thy supplication, that thou hast 
made before me” (1 Kings ix. 3). 
- Daniel was no “secret disciple”; his habits of 
prayer were known, and accordingly his enemies 
understood how to discover whether he was, or was 
not, cbedient to the decree. ‘‘ These men assembled, 
and found Daniel praying and making supplication 
before his God” (v. 11). The term “‘ these men,” as 
in verse 5, is again employed (see also vv. 15, 24), 
doubtless to express the divine estimate of their 
wicked conduct. But they had gained their point ; 


3 


CHAPTER VI. 85 


their wicked device had so far prospered ; and, 
exulting over their success, “they came near, and 
spake before the king concerning the king’s decree ”’ 
(v. 12). Had not his majesty, they enquired, signed 
the decree? The king replied, “The thing is true, 
according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which 
altereth not.” Alas! the king was in the hands of 
these unscrupulous men. He had accepted their 
flattery, and now he had become their helpless slave. 
He himself had unsuspectedly riveted his own chains. 
Having thus secured the monarch in their toils, they 
proceeded to unveil the purpose of their malicious 
. hearts; and the very words they used did but betray 
the depth of their iniquity. They said before the king, 
“That Daniel, which is of the children of the captivity 
of Judah, regardeth not thee, O king, nor the decree 
that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition three 
times a day ”’ (v. 13). 

Their personal enmity to Daniel and to his race, 
together with their envy because of his position, are 
plainly revealed, as well as the fact that they had but 
used the king, in their professed desire for his absolute 
supremacy, as their tool for the accomplishment of 
Daniel’s destruction. The king was in this way 
brought face to face with the fruit of his own doings, 
and could no longer conceal from himself the real 
object of the writing he had signed. How often it is 
that we are blinded to the nature of our actions until 
we encounter their irrevocable consequences! So 
was it with Darius ; and when he heard the accusation 
against Daniel, he “was sore displeased with himself, 
and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him: and he 
laboured till the going down of the sun to deliver him ” 
(v.14). His efforts were a testimony to his appreciation 


86 THE PROPHET DANIEL — 


of Duniel, and aiso to the kindness of his own heart ; 
but he was no longer his own master. He himself had 
declared the immutable character of the laws of the 
Medes and Persians; and Daniel’s enemies were not 
slow to take advantage of this admission; for they 
again “‘assembled unto the king, and said unto the 
king, Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and 
Persians is, That no decree nor statute which the king 
establisheth may be changed ” (v. 15). They asserted 
their power; and their language, “‘ Know, O king,” 
betrayed their purpose to maintain it at all costs; 
so that Darius did not dare to trifle any longer with 
the most influential nobles of his realm, for they, 
through his own folly, had the law on their side. He 
therefore “‘ commanded, and they brought Daniel, and 
cast him into the den of lions ” (v. 16). - 

The deed was consummated, and “these men” 
triumphed over both Daniel and Darius. But there 
was Another on Daniel’s side on whom his enemies 
had not counted ; and, as will be seen in the following 
narrative, their short-lived victory was but the prelude 
to their own defeat and destruction. If God is for 
His people none can be successfully against them, 
whatever the appearances for the moment. Even 
Darius had, in some way or other, the conviction that 
Daniel would not be allowed to perish. ‘“‘ Thy God,” 
he said, ““whom thou servest continually, He will 
deliver thee’ (v. 16). And yet he was still in the 
power of his servants, and was compelled to carry out 
his decree to its bitter end; for after the stone had 
been “brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; 
. . . the king sealed it with his own signet, and with 
the signet of his lords ; that the purpose might not be 
changed concerning Daniel” (v. 17). 


CHAPTER VI. ee Se 


aBélore passing on, a remark may be permitted upon 


© the similarity between the action of Darius and his 


lords and that of the chief priests and Pharisees, as 
recorded in Matthew’s gospel. These had been 
allowed of God to compass the crucifixion of the 
Lord Jesus, and after His death He was buried in the 
sepulchre. Not content with the attainment of their 
object, they obtained leave of Pilate to make ‘the 
sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch.” 
In both cases man thought to secure his end by making 
_ intervention and rescue impossible. But God was 
not in all his thoughts; and what can man do when 
he ventures to fight against God ? > 

That the heart of Darius was not in what was done 
has been plainly seen; and now that the deed had 
been accomplished, notwithstanding his expressed 
assurance that God would deliver Daniel, he was filled 
with remorse. He passed the succeeding night fasting, 
dispensed with his usual music, his sleep went from 
him, and, rising early in the morning, he went in 
haste unto the den of lions. All his thoughts were 
for the time centred on Daniel. ‘‘ And when he came 
to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice... 
O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom 
thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from 
the lions?” God had not forgotten His servant ; 
and though Daniel had been exposed to the full dis- 
play of Satan’s power,* he was not, and could not be, 
injured, for he was under the omnipotent protection 
of the living God. He was therefore able to reply to 
the king’s question, after the customary loyal address, 


* It was, of course, an actual den of lions into which Daniel had 
been thrown; but we see no reason for departing from the usual 
typical significance of the lion in Scripture. 


88 THE PROPHET DANIEL ~ 


“My God hath sent His angel, and hath shut the 
lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch 


as before Him innocency was found in me; and also _ 


before thee, O king, have I done no hurt ” (v. 22). 

It was thus still true that the angel of the Low 
encampeth round about them that fear Him, and 
delivereth them. It should be noticed, however, 
Daniel claimed that “‘innocency ” was found in him 
before God. The lesson is, that we could not be 
consciously under God’s protection, nor could we 
claim, or rather expect, His succour, if we had not a 
good conscience in His sight. Before the king Daniel 
was as clear as before God; like the apostle, he had 
a conscience void of offence both towards God and 
towards men; and God, later on, stepped in and, 
vindicating His servant, delivered him, like Paul 
(2 Tim. iv, 17), from the mouth of the lion. 

The decree having been executed, for the penalty of 
its infraction was that the offender should be cast into 
the lions’ den, not that he should be killed by the 
lions, the king was freed from the meshes of his lords. 
The law had been vindicated, and Daniel had suffered 
its punishment. Darius could therefore, no one for- 
bidding on the ground of the unchangeable laws of the 
Medes and Persians, exercise his prerogative, and 
command that Daniel should be taken up out of the 
den; and being taken up, “‘no manner of hurt was 
found upon him, because he believed in his God ” 
(v. 23). The whole secret of his protection and de- 
liverance is here revealed. Faith, divinely produced 
in his soul, brought in God, who shielded His servant 
from the malice of his enemies by subduing and 
restraining the natural and ravenous instincts of the 
lions. The apostle, with Daniel in mind, speaking of 


CHAPTER VI. 89 


the prophets, says, “‘ Who through faith . . . stopped 
_ the mouths of lions” (Hebrews xi. 33). It was one 

of the victories of faith that should encourage the 
people of God to trust in, and to count upon, Him 
at all times, remembering that while all things are 
possible with God, all things are also possible to him 
that believeth; and it is of this wondrous truth that 
Daniel is here the exemplification. 

The king’s work was not completed with the de- 
liverance of Daniel. Made fully aware, by what had 
taken place, of the enormity of the iniquity of his 
presidents and princes, he, in righteous indignation, 
“commanded, and they brought those men which 
had accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den 
of lions, them, their children, and their wives; and 
the lions had the mastery of them, and brake all their 
bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of 
the den” (v. 24). ‘“‘ These men” thus fell into the 
pit which their own hands had digged, and in the 
snare which they had laid for Daniel were their own 
feet taken. In this way God testified to His servant, 
and executed judgment upon His enemies. 

A profound impression was made upon Darius by 
the events he had witnessed ; and he sent a proclama- 
tion throughout the whole of his realm, to the different 
nations “‘ that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multi- 
plied unto you. I make a decree, That in every 
dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before 
the God of Daniel: for He is the living God, and 
steadfast for ever, and His kingdom that which shall 
not be destroyed, and His dominion shall be even 
unto the end ” (vv. 25, 26). How far he entered into 
the truth of the words he caused to be written is not 
revealed. However this might have been, it was no 


go THE PROPHET DANIEL 


mean testimony he rendered to God and to His — 


sovereignty. He went much farther than Nebu- 
chadnezzar in chapter iii. This monarch contented 
himself with forbidding his subjects, under extreme 
penalties, to speak anything against the God of Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Darius commanded 
that in all his dominions men should tremble and fear 
before the God of Daniel, because He was the living 
God, and His kingdom was everlasting. In such a 
marvellous way did God make the wrath of man to 
praise Him, and the attempt to quench for ever the 
light of His testimony in Babylon was made the means 
of kindling it throughout the whole earth. 

At the commencement of this chapter we saw that 
Darius, in accepting the place which his counsellors 
offered him, was a type of the future head of the last 
form of Gentile sovereignty who will accept divine 
honours, and have his deification enforced upon his 
subjects (Rev. xiii. 8-12). The deliverance of Daniel 
is also typical. He prefigures the remnant, God’s 
faithful remnant, who will be found in Jerusalem and 
in the land during the days of Antichrist’s fearful 
sway. Through the machinations of their enemies 
they will be cast, as it were, into the lions’ den, sur- 
rounded on all sides by the various displays of Satan’s 
power, and their destruction will appear to human 
eyes to be imminent and certain. But God will Him- 
self protect them, and interposing for their release by 
the appearing of Christ, will bring upon their enemies 
the very judgment which they had designed for His 
people. This situation of the remnant, previous to 
the appearing of Christ in glory, is often depicted both 
in, the prophets and in the Psalms. A citation, from 
the latter will make this clear: ‘‘ My soul,” says the 


. CHAPTER VI. OL 
Beakenict, speaking as the mouthpiece of the Spirit of 
_ Christ in this remnant, ‘‘ My soul is among lions : and 

IT lie even among them that are set on fire, even the 
sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and 
their tongue a sharp sword.” Then turning upward, 
he cries, ‘‘ Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens ; 
let Thy glory be above all the earth,” knowing that 
when the glory of God is thus displayed at the appear- 
ing of Christ, the time of the remnant’s deliverance 
will have arrived. As indeed he says in a previous 
verse, “ He shall send from heaven, and save me from 
the reproach of him that would swallow me up. God 
shall send forth His mercy and His truth.” Yet 
again, in correspondence with the prophetic character 
of Daniel’s deliverance, he says, ““ They have prepared 
a net for my steps; my soul is bowed down: they 
have digged a pit before me, into the midst whereof they 
are fallen themselves” (Psalm Ivii). This psalm was 
written at least five hundred years before the time of 
Daniel; and yet its resemblance to his experience is 
so striking as to arrest the attention of any devout 
reader of the Scriptures. The explanation is, that the 
circumstances of David, which furnished the occasion 
for the psalm, as well as those of Daniel, were both 
alike prophetic of those of the remnant in the last 
days. 

And it may be remarked again for the help of the 
younger students of Scripture, that very few of the 
narratives of the Bible are simply historical. As 
histories they are full of interest, and afford moral 
lessons of great value; but they are also often typical 
and prophetic. For example, David is a historical 
perstmage, and much instruction can be gleaned from 
his*life and conduct, instruction which yields both 


92 | THE PROPHET DANIEL 


encouragement and warning. But we have also, in 
all his rejection and persecution before ascending the 
throne, to view him as a type of Christ when He came_ 
to His own and His own received Him not. So after- 
wards in the kingdom he presents to us Christ as the 
King of righteousness, while Solomon, his son, shadows 
forth the Messiah as King of peace. David, moreover, 
as we know on the authority of the apostle Peter 
(Acts ii. 30), was a prophet, and hence it is, as in the 
Psalm above referred to, that many of his writings are 
descriptive of the future, whether of the position and 
state of the remnant or of the blessings and glory of 
Messiah’s reign and kingdom. It greatly enhances 
our interest in the Scriptures to remember this, and 
it enables us at the same time to understand their 
profound character and God’s purpose in the special 
events recorded. 

It only remains to point out that Darius’s con- 
fession of Daniel’s God as the living God is also typical, 
inasmuch as it prefigures the conversion of the Gentiles, 
consequent upon the interposition of Jehovah for the 
rescue of His people, and for judgment upon their 
enemies. In Psalm xviii. we thus read, after a descrip- 
tion of Messiah’s victory over His foes, ‘‘ Thou hast 
delivered me from the strivings of the people; and 
thou hast made me the head of the heathen [nations]: 
a people whom I have not known shall serve me. As 
soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the 
strangers shall submit themselves unto me.”* And 
again, ““ He delivereth me from mine enemies: yea, 
Thou liftest me up above those that rise up against 

* The marginal rendering is more accurate—“ shall yield to me 
feigned obedience.’’ Afraid before the display of Messiah’s power, 


and apprehensive of the consequences of rebellion, they will, while 
still hating Him in their hearts, proffer their allegiance. 


CHAPTER VI. . 93 


me: Thou hast delivered me from the violent man. 
Therefore will I give thanks unto Thee, O Lord, 
among the heathen [the nations], and sing praises 
unto Thy name” (vv. 43, 44, 48, 49). We learn, 
therefore, as from all the prophetic writings, that the 
Lord will deliver His people through unsparing judg- 
ments, and that, after He has visited His wrath upon 
their oppressors, He will establish His throne, and 
that then all kings will fall down before Him, and all 
nations will serve Him. 


94 . THE PROPHET DANIEL 


CHAPTER VII. 


Wes this chapter we enter upon the second part — 
of the book. The first part contains the visions — 
seen by the monarchs, together with their actings and 
the actings of others in relation to Daniel and his 
companions ; and Daniel is brought upon the scene 
as the messenger from God, possessing His mind, to 
expound authoritatively the dreams and visions which 
Nebuchadnezzar had received. All this we have 
considered, and now, in this second part, we have the 
visions, with their interpretations, which were vouch- 
safed to Daniel himself, communications ‘“ which 
contain not merely general principles, but details 
relative to God’s people and the Gentiles who oppressed 
them—historical details, though given beforehand 
prophetically.” A difference between these and the 
ordinary prophetic communications will at once be 
noted. It is not with Daniel, as with the prophets 
generally, that the word of the Lord came unto him, 
or that he spake as moved by the Holy Ghost; but 
he “‘had a dream and visions of his head upon his 
bed,” or, as in chapter vili., ‘‘a vision appeared unto ” 
him. In fact, he was not a messenger to God’s people, 
as, for example, Isaiah and Jeremiah were; but, like 
John in Patmos, he received revelations of the future 
for the guidance of God’s people in all ages. The 
visions of Daniel are thus, like those of John, apoca- 
lyptic in their nature. 
The first of these is recorded in this chapter, and it 


CHAPTER VII. . 95 


took face ES in the first year of Belshazzar fie of 
Babylon ” (v. 1). We say the first vision, though, as 
a matter of fact, three visions are here given, com- 
mencing with vv. 2, 7, and 13; and besides these the 
interpretation, in answer to his inquiry, is found in 
vv. 17-27. The object of the chapter would seem to 
be the fourth Gentile empire, and its judgment and 
suy-ersession by the kingdom of the Son of man. The 
three first empires are introduced, though briefly, and 
the chapter thus covers, from another point of view, 
the same ground as the vision of Nebuchadnezzar in 
chapter ii. The three visions are all connected and 
supplementary ; and it will, therefore, conduce to a 
better understanding of them if they are considered 
in the order in which they are placed, reserving the 
interpretation until they have been apprehended in 
their characteristic outlines. 

‘The subject, then, of the first vision was four great 
beasts: ‘‘ Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision 
by night, and, behold, the four winds of the heaven 
strove upon the great sea. And four great beasts 
came up from the sea, diverse one from another ” 
(vv. 2, 3). The sea, a mass of waters, will mean, as 
often in Scripture (see Rev. xvii. 1-15) peoples and 
nations ; and, in the case before us, there is a state of 
anarchy and confusion, inasmuch as “the four winds 
of the heaven strove upon the great sea.”” The winds 
are various disturbing influences, ordered of God in a 
providential way, and in judgment, for the accom- 
plishment of His purposes in the government of the 
earth. Thus, in Rev. vii. we have angels holding 
back the four winds of the earth from their judicial 
mission until the servants of God should have been 
sealed in their foreheads. It is the winds of earth 


\ 


96 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


there, because the earth was the object of their visita- 


tion ; whereas in Daniel they are the winds of heaven, 
as indicating the source whence they were directed 
to issue. : 

It was then out of the sea, out of the masses of the 
peoples in a state of agitation, if not of chaotic con- 
fusion, that the four beasts were seen to arise. It is 
not, however, to be supposed that their rise was 
simultaneous, for if it be that they represent, as 
scarcely any one doubts, the same four empires as 
Nebuchadnezzar’s image typifies, they appear succes- 
sively on the scene ; and, indeed, this is indicated by 
Daniel in verse 6 (when he says, “‘ After this I beheld, 
and lo another,” etc.), and also in verse 7. It is but 
a general statement in verse 3, but one showing that 
all these empires came up into view, and obtained their 
dominions in the same way; that they sprang into 
existence as universal empires at a time of revolutionary 
agitation, and were built up upon the ruins of other 
kingdoms. All alike are portrayed as beasts, differing 
in this from the symbolism of Nebuchadnezzar’s 
image. In the image the idea was embodied of the 
gradual deterioration of the governmental power in 
the hands of the Gentiles, from Nebuchadnezzar (to 
whom it was directly committed by God Himself), as 
the head of gold, down to the iron and clay in the 
legs and feet. Here all alike, while differing in their 
character, and perhaps in degrees of excellency, are 
seen as beasts to show their moral features, for God 
being shut out, self, selfish appetites, earthly aims and 
earthly motives and objects, cruelty and rapacity, 
characterize all these Gentile kingdoms. What a 
revelation, that all the governments of the earth, 
from the destruction of Jerusalem until the kingdom 


CHAPTER VII. : 97 


_ of Christ, should be morally figured as “beasts! > | 
The first, that is, Babylon, ‘‘ was like a lion, and 
had eagle’s wings: I beheld till the wings thereof 
were plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth, and 
made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man’s heart 
was given to it” (v. 4). Both these symbols—the lion 
and the eagle—had been before used of Babylon 
(Jeremiah iv. 7, xlix. 19-22, compared with verse 30), 
and they speak of majesty and rapidity—rapidity of 
march and conquest, both of which especially marked 
the kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar. But the prophet \ 
beheld a remarkable change. The wings of the beast e 
were plucked ; it lost the swiftness of execution which 
had distinguished it, thus revealing what the empire 
‘became in the hands of Nebuchadnezzar’s effeminate 
successors. Moreover, the beast lost its characteristic 
attitude, was made to stand up like a man, and re- 
ceived the heart of a man—figures of the state of 
weakness to which Babylon was ultimately reduced. 
For if a lion is made to stand up, and its whole 
nature is changed, it has lost both its power and | 
its grandeur. a 
The second beast was “ like to a bear, and it raised 
up itself on one side, and it had three ribs in the mouth 
of it between the teeth of it : and they said thus unto 
it, Arise, devour much flesh” (v. 5). As plainly, if 
Babylon is designated by the first beast, Persia, or 
rather the Medo-Persian kingdom, is set forth by the 
second; for we are expressly told in chapter v. that 
this kingdom succeeded that of Babylon, and, in 
chapter viii., that it preceded that of Greece (vv. 20, 21). 
The fact, moreover, is well known from history. The 
symbol of a bear will indicate its ferocious character, 
and raising itself up on one side calls attention to the 


7 


s 


¢ 


98 THE PROPHET r DANIEL 


fact that, composed at the outset of the two kingdoms = 
of the Medes and Persians, one of these—the latter 


under Cyrus—obtained the superiority, even if it did 
not absorb the other. The remaining feature, having — 


three ribs in its mouth between its teeth, and the 


exhortation, “‘ Arise, devour much flesh,” evidently 


_ points to the distinguishing feature of this empire, viz., 


its rapacity—swallowing up; devouring, as it were, 
kingdom after kingdom. 

Greece follows—the Grecian kingdom as formed by. 
the conquests of Alexander. And yet not only as 
held by him, for “the beast had also four heads ” ; 
and hence, just as the single head of gold symbolized 
Nebuchadnezzar and his dynasty, so the successors of 
Alexander are seen in these four heads, the dominion 
of Alexander being finally divided after his death into 
four kingdoms, ruled over by four of his generals.* 
The two prominent features, as portrayed by the 
leopard with the four wings of a fowl on its back, are 
agility and speed in execution—features which, in a 
remarkable manner, distinguished Alexander in his 
wars and conquests. For rapidity and impetuosity he 
has probably never been surpassed, and it should be 
borne in mind that these traits of the Grecian king 
were depicted about two hundred years before he was 
born. Like Cyrus, therefore, he was girded for his 
work, though he knew not the One who had called 
him into existence. 

It is In a separate vision that the fourth beast is 
seen, and the reason is, as has been stated, that it is 
the fourth kingdom which the Spirit of God has 


* Two only of these remained in the issue. The Seleucid had 


' Syria, and the Ptolemies Egypt. The other two kingdoms, Greece 


and Thrace, were soon conquered by the Romans. The two former, 


Syria and Eg gypt, continued till about 50 B.¢c, 


fae 


CHAPTER VII. . 99 
5 aly) in view in this chapter ; ; and on this account 
_ the first three beasts are only slightly sketched as 

introductory, and as, with the fourth, covering the 
whole period of the times of the Gentiles. 

Daniel was, for the same reason, specially arrested — 
by the fourth beast, as may be seen from the striking 
language he was led to employ. He says: ‘“ After 
this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth 
beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly ; 
and it had great iron teeth: it devoured and brake 
in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it : 
and it was diverse from all the beasts that were before 
it; and it had ten horns. I considered the horns, 
and, behold, there came up among them another little 
‘horn, before whom there were three of the first horns 
plucked up by the roots: and, behold, in this horn 
were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking 
great things”’ (vv. 7, 8). That the Roman Empire is 
here depicted all expositors agree, whatever their 
differences of opinion as to the period of the application 
_ of parts of the description. No other interpretation, 
indeed, is possible, as it is easily ascertained that the 
final successor to Alexander’s dominion was Rome. 
We need not now, however, do more than consider a 
feature or two of Daniel’s vision of this empire, seeing 
that we have an “uthoritative interpretation at the 
end of the chapter. 

The prominent characteristic then is strength, 
resistless might, striking terror into the hearts of those 
who beheld its relentless and pitiless cruelties. As 
another has written, “‘ Strength and rapacity, which 
spare and respect nothing, appropriating everything, 
or trampling it under foot without regard to con- 
science ; such are morally the characteristics of the 


100 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


fourth beast.”* Remark, too, that it was diverse 
from all the beasts that were before it; and the ex- 
planation of this may perhaps be found in the book of © 
Revelation, where we read of this same beast that it 
“‘ was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet 
of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and 
the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and 
great authority ’ (chap. xili. 2). That is to say, this 
beast concentrated in itself all the bestial forms which 
had distinguished its three predecessors, and moreover 
received its kingdom, in its final form, directly from 
the hands of Satan. Nebuchadnezzar had received 
his dominion from God; the revived Roman empire 
at the close will accept its power from, and be ener- 
gised by, Satan. It is the complete apostasy of human 
government ; for not only will it, beast-like, derive its 
motives from, and seek its objects on, the earth, and, 
in lust of aggrandizement and the gratification of its 
own desires and passions, exclude God from all its 
designs ; but, turning completely round, as completely 
as the children of Israel did when they worshipped 
the golden calf, it will also become the willing depen- 
dant and bond-slave of Satan. Such will be the issue 
of all the boasted progress and enlightenment and of 
all the political science of the closing years of the 
present age. It will be seen, as far as the ruling 
powers are concerned, in the dethronement of God 
and in the exaltation of Satan to His seat! 

It is also important to observe that in this vision of 
the fourth empire Daniel sees it as a whole—that is, 
from its rise until its termination. Leaving further 
remark upon this till the close of the chapter, it may 


* Synopsis of the Books of the Bible, by J. N. Darby, vol. ii., p. 430. 
New edition, revised. v4 ve sik 


CHAPTER VII. Se ERT 


be simply added that the proof of it lies in the mention 
_ of the ten horns and in the appearance of another 
_ little horn with remarkable power and characteristics 
of intelligence and speech, and from the fact that the 
destruction of this fourth beast is followed by the 
introduction of the kingdom of the Son of man. 
Daniel thus continues the account of what he saw 
in his night visions: “I beheld till the thrones were 
cast down,* and the Ancient of days did sit, whose 
garment was white as snow, and the hair of His head 
like the pure wool: His throne was like the fiery 
flame, and His wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream 
issued and came forth from before Him: thousand 
_thousands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand 
times ten thousand stood before Him: the judgment 
was set, and the books were opened” (vv. 9, Io). 
That the Ancient of days is the Eternal God is un- 
doubted ; and it is as evident both from verse 22 and 
from Rev. i. that the Son of man is the Ancient of 
days, the Eternal God. All judgment has been com- 
mitted to Him because He is the Son of man; and 
this is plainly declared in the scene before us to be a 
session of judgment—not the session of judgment of 
the Great White Throne in Rev. xx., but a session 
for the judgment of the living (for He will judge the 
quick, the living, as well as the dead) preparatory to 
the establishment of His kingdom (v. 14). The throne 
was like the fiery flame, its wheels as burning fire, and 
a fiery stream came forth from before Him; for fire 
is ever a symbol in Scripture of the holiness of God 


} 


as oe in judgment. The myriads of angels alsc, 


af Seevay BE doubts that these words should be ret ndered 
‘set ” on * placed ” instead of “ cast down.” ‘The Revised Version 
Pom * placed.” 


102 THE PROPHET DANIEL — 


who serve and wait before Him, point to the same 
conclusion, even as we read in Matthew, in connection — 
with the judgment of the nations, “‘ When the Son of 
man shall come in His glory, and all the holy angels 

-with Him, then shall He sit upon the throne of His 

glory,” etc. (chap. xxv. 31). The thrones—not the 

throne at the end of verse 9, which is that of the 

Ancient of days, but the thrones at the beginning of 
the verse—are those found in Rev. xx.: “ And I saw 

thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was 

given unto them” (v. 4). These are the thrones 

occupied by the saints, the armies in heaven that will 

follow Christ when He comes forth for the judgment 

of our chapter (Rev. xix. 11-21). The apostle could 

thus write to the Corinthians, “ )o ye not know that 

the saints shall judge the world?’ They will be thus 

associated with Christ in the judgment of the living, 

and on this account Daniel beheld thrones in addition 

to the one like the fiery flame on which the Judge 

Himself sat.* 

The occasion of the judgment, as revealed to the 
prophet, is given in the next verse: “I beheld then 
because of the voice of the great words which the horn 
spake : I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his 
body destroyed and given to the burning flame” 
(v. 11). The occasion then was ‘the great words 
which the horn spake.” In Revelation xiii. it is said 
of the beast, “There was given unto him a mouth 
speaking great things and blasphemies. . . . and he 
opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to 
blaspheme His name, and His tabernacle, and them 


* It should be remarked that Daniel saw only the thrones them- 
selves, whereas John saw them occupied by those that followed 
Christ out of heaven. 


gi CHAPTER VII. _ 103 
_ that dwell in heaven”, and it was on account of 
these blasphemies that the Ancient of days came and 
sat for judgment on His fiery throne. By these 
daring acts of defiance against God the cup of his 
iniquity was filled to overflowing, and judgment swift 
and sure came upon him; for the beast was slain, 
and his body consigned to the everlasting flame 
(compare Rev. xix. 19-21). 

Then follows the general statement: ‘ As concern- 
ing the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion 
taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for a 
season and time” (v. 12)... It must not be supposed 
that this was in direct sequence to that which pre- 
cedes. All four beasts had been exhibited to Daniel, 
and now, after having given the judgment of the last, 
the vision goes back to tell us what had been done, © 
not at this session of judgment, but previously in God’s 
judicial dealings in His providential government with 
the first three beasts. The dominion and life of the 
last beast were “taken away” at the same time. 
Not so with Babylon, Persia, and Greece. Babylon 
continued to exist long after its subjugation by the 
Medes and Persians ; Persia, shorn of her former glory, 
remains until the present day; and Greece has been 
once more, in these last years, constituted a kingdom. 
The lives of these empires have thus been prolonged 
for a season and a time; but when the Roman empire, 
after its resuscitation to the astonishment of all 
beholders, is finally judged, both it and its head will 
disappear for ever. 

Consequent upon the judgment of the fourth beast, 
fs the vision of the kingdom which will never pass 
away: “I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one 
like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, 


I04 THE PROPHET DANIEL — 


and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought | “a 


Him near before Him. And there was given Him 
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, — 
nations, and languages, should serve Him: His 
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not 
pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not be 
destroyed” (vv. 13, 14). The Ancient of days, as 
already seen, is the Son of man; but in this vision 
they are distinguished. It is often so in the Psalms. 
The Messiah is Jehovah ; and yet in Psalm cx. Jehovah 
speaks to Adonai: “Sit Thou at my right hand until 
I make Thine enemies Thy footstool.” It is the 
mystery of the divine persons. They are distinguished 
in Daniel’s vision because, as Son of man, our Lord 
receives everything from God. Hence, after He is 
brought to the Ancient of days, it says, ‘‘ There was 
given Him a dominion,” etc. This shows plainly, both 
from the title, Son of man, and from the fact that He 
receives His dominion, that what we have here is His 
universal kingdom, extending throughout the whole 
earth, which He will establish after His appearing in 
glory. It is, in one word, the fulfilment of Psalm viii., 
all things being put under His feet. This vision 
therefore is immediately connected with verse Ir, 
and the order of events will be, first, the coming of 
Christ in glory with His saints; then, His judgment 
of the beast; after that, though not specifically 
mentioned here, the establishment of His throne in 
Zion; and, lastly, the rod of Jehovah’s strength, will 
go out from that centre (see Psalm cx.), and subdue 
all people, nations, and languages, that they may 
serve Him, who is both the Christ and the Son of man. 
The man of the earth will thus no more oppress for 
ever ; for he will, in the person of the fourth beast, 


CHAPTER VII. 505 


have been dispossessed and judged; but Christ 
Himself will rule over all the nations of the earth,-and 
_ the cry will be, “Say among the heathen that the 
Lord reigneth: the world also shall be established 
that it shall not be moved : He shall judge the peoples* 
righteously ” (Psalm xcvi. 10). 

Some of the features of this glorious kingdom will 
be seen in the interpretation of the vision ; but before 
entering upon these, the effect on Daniel of what he 
had seen must be noticed. He says, ‘“‘I Daniel was 
grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body, and 
the visions of my head troubled me” (v. 15). It is 
remarkable that while he had been enabled, through 
having been divinely taught, to explain Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s dreams and visions, he could not understand 
his own. No man knoweth the things of God but the 
Spirit of God (x Cor. ii.); and therefore unless He is 
pleased to communicate the meaning of any divine 
revelation, it could never be ascertained. Daniel 
consequently was as dependent on God for the inter- 
pretation of his own vision as he had been for 
Nebuchadnezzar’s. It should be said, however, that 
God never sends a message of any sort, apocalyptic or 
otherwise, without providing means for its under- 
standing. Both for Nebuchadnezzar and for Bel- 
shazzar explanations were at hand, as also for Daniel 
in this chapter. 

But why was the prophet “grieved” and 
“troubled”? ? As a godly Jew he would look for the 
coming Messiah, with His reign of peace, prosperity, 
and blessing ; but now the Spirit of God had opened 
out before his soul the vista of the future; and, 
mysterious to him as much of it would necessarily be, 


* So it should be rendered—not “ people,’”’ but ‘ peoples.” 


106 THE PROPHET DANIEL | 


he could not but perceive that there was a long path- — 
way of sorrow to be trodden by his people before their — 
longed-for consummation would be reached. He was 
therefore cast down, and desired of “‘ one of them that 
stood by ” “ the truth of all this.” Who these standing 
by were, is not revealed : according to the character 
of the book they were probably angels. The one 
addressed responded at once to Daniel’s request, and 
“he told me, and made me know the interpretation 
of the things” (v. 16). 

It will be remarked that there are really two inter- 
pretations (a general one in verses 17, 18, and then a 
more specific one in verses 23-27) in reply to Daniel’s 
interrogation concerning the fourth beast. Both of 
these must be considered. 

In the general interpretation the angel says, “‘ These 
great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which 
shall arise out of the earth. But the saints of the 
most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the 
kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.” This 
explanation has been largely anticipated, but there 
are two or three points which demand further notice. 
The four kings are viewed as representing their several 
kingdoms, viz., Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome; 
and they will therefore, as has been before said, 
include their dynasties or successors on to the termina- 
tion of their respective empires. In verse 3 these 
kings, the beasts, are said to come up from the sea, 
whereas here they are described as arising out of the 
earth. In the former passage they are viewed on 
the occasion of their appearance, and of their acquisi- 
tion of governmental power, ascending their thrones 
out of the surging waves of the people; in this verse 
they are seen rather in their origin, ‘‘ out of the earth,” 


= 


CHAPTER VII.  : 107 


2 in peek with Him who will come ort of heaven to 

take His kingly power. These four then span the 
_ whole interval from the prophet’s day, for Babylon 
was still in existence, until the coming of Christ in 
glory. On this account it is added, ‘‘ But the saints 
of the most High shall take the kingdom,” etc., after 
which there is no other, for they will possess it for 
ever and ever. 

Who then, are these “saints of the most High” ? 
The term “most High” is used in verses 22, 25, 27, 
besides verse 18; but it should be noticed that, 
excepting in verse 25, where the term is used of God 
Himself as the title He will be known by in the future, 

it is in the plural; and that consequently the exact 
rendering is the saints of the “ high places.” And it is 
scarcely questioned that the term ‘‘ heavenly places ”’ 
in Ephesians is derived from this expression in Daniel. 
It need hardly be said, that a far larger meaning as 
flowing from the truth of that epistle, which unfolds 
the eternal counsels of God for the glory of His beloved 
Son, and for the blessing of the saints in Him, is to be 
attached to these words in Ephesians than in Daniel ; 
but their import in both places is the same in this 
respect—that they speak of a heavenly sphere, a 
sphere outside of this world, to which certain saints 
belong. Who, then, the question may be repeated, 
are the saints so described? In the larger and more 
general sense they comprise, as may easily be gathered 
from the epistle to the Ephesians, all believers from 
Pentecost to the coming of Christ, all who are united 
to Christ by the Holy Ghost, and therefore compose 
His body. But such an anticipation and revelation 
of the;‘‘ mystery” (Ephesians iii. 3) could scarcely 
be expected in the prophet Daniel. While, however, 


- 108 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


they might be 7i: the mind of the Spirit ; for they that — 
suffer with Christ will reign with Him, and hence they 
must not be excluded by the Christian reader, another 
class must be sought for, to whom the description 
will apply. If now we turn for a moment to Revela- 
tion xx., we shall see that there are two classes who 
are added to the first resurrection, those who were 
beheaded for the witness of Jesus and for the word 
of God, and those (for so it should be read) who had 
not worshipped the beast (the fourth beast of our 
chapter), neither his image, neither had received his 
mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and 
they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years 
(v. 4). During the terrible times of the “ little horn’s ”’ 
domination these saints had refused to acknowledge 
his power, for they owned and worshipped the God 
of heaven, confessing that His was the kingdom both _ 
in heaven and on earth, and that the heavens did 
rule, and hence they in view of what awaited them 
and of the special honour to be accorded to them, are 
also termed “saints of the high places.”” Though on 
earth they belonged to heaven, for instead of being 
preserved for earthly blessings under the reign of their 
glorious Messiah, the brighter portion awaited them of 
reigning with Him in the kingdom. And it is to these 
that special reference is made in our verse, although 
the general statement may include all the heavenly 
saints, when it says, that the saints of the high places 
shall take the kingdom, etc. 

Daniel then proceeded to inquire more particularly 
concerning the fourth beast ; and it will be observed 
that, while he repeats what he had seen, as given in 
verses 7, 8, he adds two things not before mentioned. 
In verses 21, 22 he says, ‘“‘I beheld, and the same 


CHAPTER VII. 109 


_ horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against 
them ; until the Ancient of days came, and judgment 
was given to the saints of the most High; and the 
time came that the saints possessed the kingdom.” 
The explanation of these additions will come in when 
considering the authoritative interpretation given to 
Daniel; but attention is now called to them as an 
illustration of the fact that there are no mere repetitions. 
in Scripture. The connection, or the object, is differ- 
ent, or, as here, the interest is enhanced by a further 
revelation so that no scripture, which seems the same 
as another, should ever be lightly passed over. The 
fact of a seeming repetition should invite all the closer 
study to receive the fresh light communicated. 

We pass now to the angelic exposition of the vision 
of the fourth beast. Having already pointed out in 
verses 7, 8 that the Roman empire is symbolized by the 
fourth beast, it is only necessary to dwell upon the 
special characteristics here explained. First, it is said 
that this kingdom “shall be diverse from all king- 
doms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall 
tread it down, and break it in pieces ” (v. 23). Those 
who are acquainted with history will confess that a 
more accurate description of the Roman empire, in 
its character, progress, and dominion, could not have 
been conveyed. It was different from all its predeces- 
sors in the nature of its government, combining, as it 
did, the utmost absolutism with democratic forms, 
mingling thus the iron and the clay of Nebuchadnezzar’s 
image. By its irresistible arms it acquired almost 
universal dominion, devoured the whole earth, and 
subdued and broke to pieces nations on every hand. 
These statements apply to its rise and zenith - 
especially to the period of the Consuls and the Cesars. 


TIO ‘THE PROPHET DANIEL 


Next, we are told, that “the ten horns out of this 
kingdom are ten kings that shall arise” (v. 24). This 


is really the crucial point in the interpretation, for _ 


the question arises, inasmuch as verse 23 refers 
undoubtedly to the past, whether these ten kings are 


past or future. There are those who contend entirely 


for what is termed the historical interpretation, and 
maintain that the prophecy has thus been fulfilled.* 
The fatal objection to this theory lies in the fact that 
this fourth kingdom having been judged, is immediately 
succeeded and displaced by the kingdom of the Son 
of man (vv. 13, 14, 26, 27; compare also chap. i. 
43, 44). For what event in the past, it may well be 
enquired, could answer, even in the smallest degree, 
to that spoken of in the above scriptures? It is only 
indeed by spiritualizing the kingdom of the Son of 
man, and interpreting it as Christianity, that any 
show of evidence in support of such a theory can be 
obtained. But even so, what is there in the public 
course of Christianity that corresponds with the 
predicted universal dominion of the Son of man, 
before whom all kings will fall down, and whom all 
nations will serve ? If such an explanation could be 
accepted, any possible view might be read into the 
words of Scripture. But this is not the way of the 
Spirit of God. He speaks clearly and definitely, and 
when He uses the term the “Son of man,” and 


* To cite a representative interpreter of this school, Mr. Elliott 
says that the ten kings are found in the “ Anglo-Saxons, Franks, 
Allemans, Burgandians, Visigoths, Suevi, Vandals, Heruli, Bavari- 
ans, Ostrogoths, ten in all”; and he labours thereon to prove 
“the connection of those ten early barbaric kingdoms with the 
bishops of Rome as their ecclesiastical and spiritual head ; agreeably 
with the Apocalyptic symbol of the ten horns, sprouting from the 
Beast’s eighth head.” (Hove Apocalypiica, vol. iii., pp. 124-134, 
fourth edition). 


‘CHAPTER Wi oF I 


re the extent and glory of His kingdonn and 
_ this as following upon the governments of the earth, it 
_may be easily ascertained by the unbiassed student 
of Scripture that He refers neither to the church nor 
to Christianity, but to the kingdom which Christ will 
establish in this world in a future day, when He will 
return with His saints in glory. 

Accepting this view all is plain, and we thus under- 
stand that in this divine communication received by 
Daniel, the Roman empire is seen as a whole, from 
the time of its establishment on to its resuscitation, 
as explained in Rev. xvii. 10-13,* and its destruction 
at the appearing of the Lord. There is, on this 
account, a large interval of time between verses 23, 
24, only it should be remembered that if verse 23 
portrays the Roman empire in its pristine energy and 
strength, the same features will reappear in its final 
form ; and hence that the portraiture, as is oiten the 
case in Scripture, is both historical and prophetic. 

These ten kings are then future, and they point to 
the peculiar form of the last phase of the fourth 
kingdom, that there will be ten kingdoms in Western 
Europe confederated under one imperial head. This 
fact is shadowed out in the ten toes of the image 
Nebuchadnezzar saw, and is plainly stated in the 
Apocalypse (chap. xvii. 12, 13). Insisting on this as 
the mind of the scripture before us, it can well be 
conceived that in the past there have been adumbra- 
tions of this final fulfilment; but the mistake is, to 
claim these foreshadowings as the fulfilment itself 
instead of regarding them as finger-posts by the way 
to indicate the consummation intended. 


* See The Visions of John in Patmos, p. 224, for a further 
elucidation of this subject. 


+ 
7 


:5 Veer THE PROPHET DANIEL ~ 


Not only will there be these ten kings, but “another 
shall rise after them; and he shall be diverse from 
the first, and he shall subdue three kings. And he 
shall speak great words against the most High, and 
shall wear out the saints of the most High,* and think 
to change times and laws: and they shall be given 
into his hand until a time and times and the dividing 
of time ”’ (vv. 24, 25). This is the little horn of verses 
8, and 20, 21; but is entirely distinct, as will after- 
wards be explained, from the little horn in chapter 
viii. 9. ‘The horn of our chapter is in connection with 
the Roman empire in the west of Europe, where the 
ten kings will exercise their sovereignty within the 
boundaries, speaking generally, of the ancient Roman 
empire in Europe ; — whereas the horn of chapter viii. 
will have his seat in Syria, and is often mentioned in 
Seripture as the king of the north. ; 

Several particulars of the little horn of our chapter 
should be noted in order to his identification. First of 
all he arises after the ten kings, and he is different 
from these,} though in what respect he is distinguished 
from them is not stated. Secondly it is said that 
“he shall subdue three kings,” that is, three out of 
the ten who are on the scene when he arises. In the 
next place it is evident that he acquires the power of 
the whole empire, for it is “his dominion” that is 
taken away when the judgment sits. Lastly, the very 


* Here again the word is in plural, and it should be rendered as 
in verse 18, “ high places.” 

} The reader can easily trace these boundaries in any Scripture 
atlas, or in most Bibles that contain maps, and he will then perceive 
the meaning of the term ‘“‘ Western Europe.’ Germany, Scandi- 
navia, and European Russia were never within the territory of the 
empire. 

-} The words “ the first ” (wv. 24) are plural, and hence refer to the 
ten kings. 


Fr 3 


CHAPTER VIL. 113 


_ same things are ascribed to him in verse 25 as are 
imputed to the first beast of Rev. xiii. in verses 5~7. 
The conclusion therefore is irresistible that the little 
horn is no less a personage than the head of the revived 
Roman empire in Western Europe in the last days; 
and this conclusion is still further strengthened by 
the statement in Rev. xvii., that the ten kings “‘ have 
one mind, and shall give their power and strength 
unto the beast’ (v. 13). The little horn thus arises 
after the formation of the ten kingdoms, and having 
subdued three of these, whether by military prowess 
or other means, the other seven are led in conjunction 
with the three subdued kingdoms to unite in one vast 
confederation, of which the little horn becomes the 
imperial head. If Rev. xiii. 1-8, and chapter xvii. 
are read in this connection, the whole position of the 
little horn will be more clearly apprehended.* 

His moral character is presented next to us in the 
words, “‘ And he shall speak great words against the 
most High ” (v. 25). Not only is his carnal mind, as 
is the case with every unregenerate man, enmity 
against God, but in his mad impiety he also dares to 
take the ground of open defiance. (Compare Rev. 
xiii. 5, 6.) As a consequence—for he that hates God 
must also hate His people—he will “wear out the 
saints of the high places” (he “made war with the 
saints, and prevailed against them,” verse 21) in his 

* If the little horn of this chapter foreshadows the head of the 
revived Roman empire in the last days, it should be remembered 
that the Antichrist will be existent at the same time, that he will 
be associated with the Roman head, will exercise “ all the power 
of the first beast before him,” and will cause ‘‘ the earth and them 
which dwell therein to worship the beast whose deadly wound was 
healed,” as well as induce them to make an image “‘ to” him to be 
worshipped (Rev. xiii.). ~ He will be thus in every way morally 


identified with the western beast, and hence it is that, as his prophet, 
he will share in the same doom (Rev. xix. 20). 


8 


II4 THE PROPHET DANIEL 

presumptuous effort to destroy the name of God from 
off the face of the earth. (See Rev. xiii. 7, xiv. 12, 13.) 
God will thus allow the patience of His earthly people 
to be tested; for as yet they will not know that 
Jesus of Nazareth is their promised Messiah. They 
will cry to the God of their fathers, and turn to Him 
for succour, as we find in the psalms that treat of this 
period; but it is not until the Lord appears from 
heaven that they will look upon Him whom they had 
pierced, and have their eyes open to discern. like 
Thomas, that the once crucified Jesus is their Lord 
and their God. This enables us to understand why 
He allows them to fall at this time, for their chastise- 
ment and purification, into the hands of their enemy. 
But though their enemy, as the instrument of Satan, 
may sift them, not one single grain of wheat shall 
fall to the ground. This were impossible, for, to cite 
another illustration, the hairs of their head will all be 
numbered. 

The next clause of verse 25 reveals plainly who 
these saints are. This little horn will “think to 
change times and laws: and they shall be given into 
his hand.” At this period the Jewish temple will 
have been rebuilt, though in unbelief; and in connec- 
tion with it the ordinances of the law and the various 
feasts will have been established. These are the 
“times and laws ’’ which this king will think to change, 
that is, to abrogate, because their very existence, 
whatever the state of the people who observe them, 
will constitute a testimony to the existence of God, 
and this will be insupportable to one who desires to 
occvpy for himself the place of God. And he will 
succeed in their abolition; for they (ot the saints, 
but the times and laws) will be given into his hand. 


CHAPTER VIL. Se ELS 


_ Antiochus Epiphanes, as he is known in history, and 
_ of whom we shall find traces in chapter xi., did the 
same thing, and profaned the temple ; and his exploits 
_ will be repeated in a still more terrible way, by this 
little horn at the time of the end. But He who will 
allow His people to be cast into the burning fiery 
- furnace of persecution, will determine the limit of the 
power of the enemy: it will only be for a time and 
times, and the dividing of time, the 1260 days, the 
forty-two months, the three years and a half of the 
book of Revelation. Our Lord speaks of the com- 
mencement of this period when, citing from Daniel, 
He says, ‘‘ When ye therefore shall see the abomination 
of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand 
in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand :) 
then let them which be in Judea flee into the 
mountains,” etc. (Matt. xxiv. 15; Daniel xii. Ir; 
compare chap. ix. 27). 

At the termination of this allotted period “the 
judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his 
dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the 
end ” (v. 26). As this session of judgment had been 
fully revealed to the prophet, the interpretation only 
gives this passing reference to it. It is a judgment 
conducted by the Ancient of days from His fiery 
throne, with all His attendant majesty, accompanied 
by His myriads of angels (vv. 9, 10); and we learn 
moreover, and this also proves that the Ancient of 
days is the Son of man, that the saints who come with 
Christ, the heavenly saints, will be associated with 
Him in the judgment (v. 22; compare Psalm cxlix. 
6-9) of that day, when God will take public and formal 
cognizance of the acts and words of this daring enemy. 
It is for this purpose that the books will be opened 


116 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


(v. 10), the books that will contain the infallible 
records of this impious sinner’s deeds, and the sentence ~ 
will be passed according to the requirements of the 
glory of Him who will sit on His holy throne. 

The execution of the sentence is thus recorded : 
‘* And they shall take away his dominion, to consume 
and to destroy it unto the end” (v. 26). Adding to 
this description what we find in verse II, it will be 
seen what the judgment was on his person, though, 
strictly speaking, only the ‘“‘ body” of the beast is 
there spoken of. The “ great works which the horn 
spake ”’ are, however, mentioned as the occasion of the 
judgment. Turning for a moment to Revelation xix., 
we find some supplementary information. In con- 
nection with the same judgment, we read that both 
the beast and the false prophet were cast alive into a 
lake of fire burning with brimstone (v. 20). Deprived 
of his dominion, having, like Belshazzar, been weighed 
in the balances and found wanting, he suffers with the 
false prophet the vengeance of eternal fire, and will be 
cast alive into it. The prayer of David is thus fulfilled : 
“Let God arise, let His enemies be scattered: let 
them also that hate Him flee before Him. As smoke 
is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth 
before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence 
of God”; or, as he says in another place, “‘ Let death 
seize upon them, and let them go down quick [living] 
into hell: for wickedness is in their dwellings, and 
among them ” (Psalms lxviii. 1, 2; Iv. 15). 
4 Judgment having been passed upon the little horn, 
and his dominion having been taken away, consumed 
and destroyed unto the end, “the kingdom and 
dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the 
whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints 


CHAPTER VII. . 117 


_ of the most High [“‘ high places ’], whose kingdom is 
an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve 
and obey Him” (v. 27). This is the kingdom of the 
Son of man which, consequent upon the judgment and 
removal of the last of the four world empires, is estab- 
lished upon earth. In verses 13, 14 we have His 
investiture. As Son of man, He receives the kingdom 
from the Ancient of days. Already we see Jesus, who 
was made a little lower than the angels for the suffer- 
ing of death, crowned with glory and honour. In the 
scene before us all things are given into His hands, to 
be put in subjection under Him; for He must reign 
until all enemies are put under His feet. In verse 27, 
however, it is “the people of the saints of the high 
places’ who are brought into prominence, and who 
are said to have the kingdom given to them. Yet it 
is not apart from Christ, as at the end of the verse it 
says, “‘Whose”’ (i.e. Christ’s) ‘kingdom is an ever- 
lasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and 
obey Him.” It is His kingdom, only He is pleased in 
His grace to associate with Himself ‘‘ the people of the 
saints of the high places.”” Who then are these? As 
already pointed out in verse 18, “the saints of the 
high places” are said to take the kingdom; and in 
verse 22 ‘‘ the saints ”’ possess it, while here it is “‘ the 
people of the saints of the high places.” There is a 
reason for this term. It means the Jews; and they 
are thus denominated as being, during the millennial 
kingdom, connected with, if not dependent upon, the 
saints of the high places. The latter reign with Christ ; 
through the former Christ will subdue the nations, and 
exercise His sovereignty over the earth; for “the 
Lord shall send the rod of Thy strength out of Zion ; 
rule Thou in the midst of Thine enemies ”’ (Psalm cx. 2. 


~ “The saints of the high places, 


118 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


See also Jeremiah li. 19-21 ; Isaiah Ix. ro-r6). 

There are then three classes specified in this chapter. — 
” in verse 22, would 
seem to be the heavenly saints; in verse 18 the same 
term, while not excluding the heavenly saints, refers 
especially to the saints on earth during the domination 
of the little horn, who look up to God, and acknowledge 
Him as the God of heaven, and as the only source of 
authority, whether in heaven or upon earth. They 
are regarded on this account as belonging to heaven, 
and, as we learn from Rev. xx., will ultimately partici- 
pate in the first resurrection, and reign with Christ a 
thousand years. Lastly, the people of the saints of 
the high places are earthly saints, God’s ancient people, 
who in the mercy and faithfulness of their God, brought 
through all their trials and sorrows, will at length 
possess the kingdom and dominion on earth under the 
reign of their exalted and glorified Messiah. 

The conclusion of these visions and their interpreta- 
tion is now reached ; but the prophet adds, ‘‘ As for 
me, Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and 
my countenance changed in me: but I kept the matter 
in my heart” (v. 28). If it is an unspeakable honour 
to be made the depositary of divine thoughts, the 
vesse] must suffer, and the more so because the time 
for their communication had not yet arrived. At this 
period Daniel was in the midst of all the splendour 
and magnificence of the empire of Babylon, whose 
authority extended to the ends of the earth, and 
whose stability was unquestioned. But the scroll of 
the future had been unrolled before his astonished 
gaze, and he saw in the long vista that stretched far 
away into the coming centuries, a succession of wars, 
conflicts, tyrannies, and oppressions before He who 


CHAPTER VII. T19 
had retired from His throne at Jerusalem would inter- 
pose, bestow the sovereignty of the earth upon the 
Subject of all Jewish hopes, and re-establish. His — 
beloved people in blessing under Messiah’s peaceful © 
and glorious reign. Daniel had indeed seen the visions 
of God, but they had brought death into his own soul, 
and thereby he was divinely qualified to be the channel 
of these divine revelations (compare 2 Cor. iv. 7-18, 
etc.). 


£40 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


CHAPTER VIII. 


@ 8 changes mark the commencement of this 

chapter. From chapter ii. 4 to the end of 
chapter vii. the language employed is Chaldee; from 
verse 1 of this chapter to the end of the book it is 
Hebrew. While the Spirit of God was unfolding things 
connected with the Gentile monarchs and their actings, 
present and future, together with the character and 
course of their several kingdoms, He used the tongue 
of the country in which Daniel dwelt ; but the moment 
He begins to treat of their actings in relation to the 
land and to the sanctuary, He returns to the sacred 
language.* Secondly, the scene is changed. Until 
now Daniel had been in Babylon ; here, “in the third 
year of the reign of king Belshazzar,’’ when the vision 
of this chapter appeared unto him, he was “‘ at Shushan 
in the palace, which is in the province of Elam,” a 
country adjacent to Persian territory, and which 
seems afterwards to have become a Persian province. 
It was here “ by the river of Ulai” that Daniel “‘ saw 
in a vision.” “Then,” he says, “I lifted up mine eyes, 
and saw, and, behold, there stood before the river a 
ram which had two horns: and the two horns were 
high; but one was higher than the other, and the 
higher came up last. I saw the ram pushing westward, 
and northward, and southward; so that no beasts 
might stand before him, neither was there any that 
could deliver out of his hand; but he did according 


* We say “ returns,” because chapters i.-ii. 1-3 is in Hebrew. 


ae CHAPTER VIU. = rar 


se his will, and became great.” (vv. 2-4). This is a 
_ symbolic description of “the kings of Media and 
_ Persia *’* (v. 20); and it represents the dual character 
of that empire, composed as it was of Media and 
Persia (see chapter v. 28, vi. 8); and the fact, in that 
the horn that came up last was higher than the other, 
that the Persian part of the kingdom ultimately gained 
the ascendancy. Darius the Mede was thus succeeded 
by Cyrus the Persian ; and the ram pushing westward, 
northward, and southward, invincible in its conquests, 
_ and doing “according to his will,” exhibits this king- 
dom in the zenith of its power and aggrandizement, 
and probably during the reign of Cyrus. The rapacity 
of this empire in its career of victorious conflict was 
“pointed out when considering chapter vii. 5. This 
was the second of the four Gentile kingdoms, and con- 
sequently the successor of Babylon. 

Daniel next relates what he further saw in these 
words : “‘ And as I was considering, behold, an he-goat 
came from the west on the face of the whole earth, and 
touched not the ground: and the goat had a notable 
horn between his eyes” (v. 5). The goat sets forth 
“the king of Grecia,” the king being here, as often, 
the expression of the sovereignty or kingdom; and, 
consequently, the “notable horn” stands for the 
Alexander whose martial genius, courage, and victories, 
have been so largely celebrated in history. The 
rapidity of his movements, which was a conspicuous 
feature in his campaigns, is strikingly described in the 
vision: ‘‘ An he-goat came from the west on the face 
of the whole earth, and touched not the ground.” In 
about ten years he conquered almost all the kingdoms 


* It is said that a ram was used as an emblem of their kingdom 
by the Persians themselves, and a goat by the Macedonians, 


122 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


of the then known world. In verses 6, 7, we have the 
attack of Alexander upon Persia figuratively described ; 
and yet, though the language is symbolic, a more 
accurate description of his conquest could not have 
been conveyed. The goat “came to the ram that had 
two horns . . . and ran unto him in the fury of his 
power.” Again: “And I-saw him come close unto 
the ram, and he w.'s moved with choler against him, 
and smote the ram, and brake his two horns ” (vv. 6, 7). 
The very words used express a specially hostile feeling 
on the part of Persia’s assailant; and this was the 
case, for Greece had never forgotten the invasion of 
their country by the Persian hordes, and they burned 
to revenge themselves upon their enemy. No less 
graphically is the utter powerlessness of Persia in the 
presence of her foe portrayed: “‘ There was no power 
in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down 
to the ground, and stamped upon him : and there was 
none that could deliver the ram out of his hand ” (v. 7). 
_ In fact the duration of the Persian empire had, by 
God’s appointment, reached its termination ; and the 
kingdom which He had destined to succeed it was now 
to obtain the supremacy. The battles of Issus and 
Arbela are among the decisive battles of the world, and 
they were decisive because God was using Alexander 
“the Great ” to accomplish His purposes in respect of 
the government of the earth. = 

The object of the mention of Persia and Greece, and 
of these two only, in this place is well stated in the 
following words: ‘‘ The two empires of Persia and 
Greece, or of the East, which succeeded that of Babylon 
under which the prophecy was given, are only intro- 
duced to point out the countries in which these events 
are to take place, and to bring them before us in their 


\, 
% 


CHAPTER VIII. = 123 


historical order. The Persian empire is overthrown by 
the king of Greece, whose empire is afterwards divided 
into four kingdoms, from one of which a power arises 
that forms the main subject of the prophecy.”* This 
last sentence will be explained by the two following 
verses: ‘‘ Therefore the he-goat waxed very great: 
and when he was strong, the great horn was broken ; 
and for it came up four notable ones toward the four 
winds of heaven. And out of one of them came forth 
a little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the 
south, and toward the east, and toward the pleasant 
land” (vv. 8, 9). A long stretch of history is com- 
pressed into this compendious statement, which con- 
tains, however, all the points affecting the prophetic 
subject of the chapter. First, the fact of the estab- 
lishment of the Grecian kingdom is given; then the 
death of Alexander in the midst of his triumphs— 
‘* when he was strong ”’ ;—the subsequent partition of 
his empire between four of his generals; and finally 
the rise out of one of these of “‘a little horn, which 
waxed exceeding great.” 

Leaving the reader, if he so desire, to pursue the 
examination of the history, it will suffice to here state, 
that the four kingdoms, as pointed out in chapter vi., 
into which Alexander’s empire was ultimately divided, 
were Syria, Egypt, Greece, and Thrace. The two 
latter soon succumbed to the advancing Roman power ; 
but the two former continued till about 50 B.c. The * 
one out of which the little horn arose was Syria, and 
for reasons which will appear in the course of the 
prophecy, this little horn was the king known as 
Antiochus Epiphanes. , It will therefore be seen, if 


* Synopsis of the Books of the Bible, by J. N. Darby, vol. il., p. 438, 
(New edition, revised). 


124 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


what was said of the little horn of chapter vii. be = 


remembered, that the two little horns are entirely 
distinct ; that the one of chapter vii., which subdues 
three kings, and finally wields the whole power of the 
empire, belongs to the west. It is the dominion of the 
revived Roman empire which he possesses. The little 
horn of chapter viii. has his seat and throne in Syria, 
and it is on this account that he becomes such a remark- 
able foreshadowing of the personage so often mentioned 
in the prophetic scriptures as the Assyrian, and as the 
king of the north.* 

This little horn extended his kingdom, “ waxed 
exceeding great toward the south,” that is, toward 
Egypt, which is always so denominated as being south 
of Palestine; ‘‘ toward the east,” that is, toward 
Parthia and Armenia, etc. ; and “‘ toward the pleasant 
land,” that is, Palestine. All these again are well- 
known facts of history, and the various campaigns of 
this notorious king in these several countries are given 
in historical records.t 

It is in the next three verses that his doings in 
respect of the “‘ pleasant land” are found, the doings, 
indeed, to which our attention is specially directed as 
of great prophetic importance: ‘‘ And it waxed great, 
even to the host of heaven; and it cast down some of 
the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped 
upon them” (v. 10). The first thing necessary for the 
understanding of this description is to ascertain the 
import of the “ host of heaven.”? That the sun, moon, 

* See, for example, Isaiah x. 24; xiv. 25; xxxi. 8; Micah v. 5; 
Daniel xi. 6, 8, etc. 


{+ His actings in respect of the pleasant land are narrated in 
2 Maccabees, which, though no part of Sacred Scripture, is judged to 
beaccurateinthe main. Thisremark will not apply to the other books 
of the Maccabees, except perhaps in measure to the second book. 


CHAPTER VIII. : 125 
Wy 

and stars are indicated by this term is seen ix cis of 
the Psalms: ‘“ By the word of the Lord were the 
heavens made ; and all the host of them by the breath 
of His mouth” (Psalm xxxiii. 6); and it is as plain 
from the Scriptures that the sun, moon, and stars 
represent, symbolically, ruling authorities—the sun 
supreme, the moon derivative, and the stars subordinate 
authorities. This symbolic significance is drawn from 
the actual functions assigned to the heavenly luminaries. 
In Genesis we read, “‘ And God made two great lights ; 
the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light 
to rule the night: [He made] the stars also ”’ (chap. 
i. 16); and in Psalm cxxxvi. it says, “To Him that 
made great lights . . . the sun to rule by day... 
the moon and stars to rule by night” (vv. 7-9). 
In accordance with the emblematical meaning thus 
drawn, we have the sun, moon, and stars introduced 
in Rev. xii. 1, and the stars in v. 4.* 

The conclusion, therefore, may be safely drawn, that 
the ‘‘ host of heaven ” in our Scripture is figurative of 
some ruling authorities. Who then are they? The 
references in the following verse, point, without doubt, 
to Jerusalem as the place where they existed at the 
time indicated ; that is, a period after Persia had been 
conquered by Greece. It is indispensable to bear this 
in mind, because, as we learn from Ezra and Nehemiah, 
the temple and the holy city had been rebuilt during 
the sovereignty of Persia. The temple services were 
organised at the period spoken of, whatever the state 
of the people and the corruption into which they had 
fallen ; and provision had been made in measure for 
their government according to Jewish customs and 


* For an exposition of these Scriptures see The Visions of John in 
Patmos. A. S. Rouse, London, 


126 THE PROPHET DANIEL— 


forms. The “host of heaven ” will thus signify those 
who held the place of authority in the Jewish polity, . 
those who occupied, by whatever means, positions of __ 
responsibility in the government of the Jewish people. 
Stars are employed, it will be remembered, in Rev. i.—iii., 
as embdems of those who have the place of rule in the 
church, the assembly ; and in like manner, the host 
of heaven designates those to whom rule was entrusted 
at this epoch in the midst of the Jews. @ 

What we learn then from our scripture is that this 
little horn, Antiochus Epiphanes (and that he did so 
is a matter of history), assailed the ruling powers 
among the Jews, cast down some of different grades, 
“stamped ” upon them, and subjected them to every 
species of ill-treatment and degradation, even te 
destruction. 

The next verse carries us further, and gives us more 
details ; but it should be carefully observed that from 
the beginning of v. rr to the word “ transgression ” in 
v. 12 is an explanatory parenthesis, so that the clause 
after this word is connected with the end of v. Io. 
This may be readily perceived if it be noticed that in 
the parenthesis “ he ” is employed, whereas after it the 
neuter pronoun “it” is again used (agreeing with 
“horn”’) as found in vv.'9, 10. Taking now the 
parenthesis, we read, “‘ Yea, he magnified himself even 
to the prince of the host [¢.e., the prince, of the host of 
heaven], and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, 
and the place of his sanctuary was cast down. And 
an host was given him against the daily sacrifice by 
reason of iransgression”’ (vv. II, 12). The change 
from “it” to “he,” which has been pointed out, 
would seem, it has been suggested, to show that it was 
the king in person who so acted—the king figured by 


CHAPTER VIII. ze 127 


the little horn—and this suggestion commends itself 
from the fact that the little horn might be expressive, 
though in a general way, of the power of the kingdom. 
We gather then that such was the daring of this king 
that he ventured openly and avowedly to set himself 
in opposition to Him who was no less than Jehovah. 
In profession, at least, the Jewish rulers were God’s 
servants ; and their Prince, the One they waited for, 
whatever their carnal expectations, was Israel’s God, 
the One who afterwards appeared in this world as 
Jehovah-Jesus to save His people from their sins. 
The next clause is obscure, but most agree that it 
should be rendered, “and from him [not by him] the 
daily sacrifice was taken away.” This means that it 
was taken away from Jehovah, that it was, in fact, 


suppressed—it does not say by whom, though the . 


context points very plainly to the little horn, the king 
himself. The beginning of the next verse reveals also 
that, whatever the wickedness of the agent, he was but 
an instrument in the hands of God for the chastise- 
ment of those who were in the place of His people, for 
this wicked king was allowed to succeed in his designs 
against the daily sacrifice “‘ by reason of transgression.” 
Moreover, “‘ the place of His sanctuary was cast down.” 
For the time all Jewish rites and sacrifices were 
abolished, and Zion, the holy mountain, was defiled by 
the Gentile oppressor.* In addition to this the little 
horn (for now the connection with v. 10 is resumed) 
‘“‘ cast down the truth to the ground ; and it practised, 
and prospered.” Together with the abolition of the 
daily sacrifices, and the profanation and destruction 
of the sanctuary, the truth, as Isaiah speaks, was 
fallen in the streets, “‘ cast down ” by the violence of 


* See for the history of these particulars 1 Maccabees i. 


Ld 


128 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


the enemy; and this wicked power practised— — 
practised by. subtleties, plans, and-schemes—and 
prospered.* ; oe 
At this point of the vision Daniel “heard one saint 
_. speaking, and another saint said unto that certain 
saint which spake, How long shall be the vision con- 
cerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of 
desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to 
be trodden under foot ? And he said unto me, Unto 
two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the 
sanctuary be cleansed” (vv. 13, 14). Passing by the 
question for the present (as it must come before us in 
examining the interpretation), whether this period of 
time named in the answer of the angel has any pro- 
phetic significance, it will be enough now to perceive 
~ that it must have had an historical application. The 
sacrifice was taken away, the place of the sanctuary 
was defiled, “cast down,” by the personage 
denominated as the little horn; the temple was 
cleansed again after a certain time by the Maccabees, 
and the sacrifices were restored, so that there is n¢ 
necessary connection between this period and those 
named of a different duration in chapter xii. 

_.. The prophet was not content with the vision itself, 
but he “sought for the meaning.” The desire of his 
heart was approved of God, for He delights in com- 
municating His mind to the seeking soul; and hence 
no sooner did the prophet wish to know the meaning 
of the vision than the interpreter was at hand. He 
says, “Behold, there stood before me as the appear- 
ance of a man. And I heard a man’s voice between 
the banks of Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, 


* Psalm lxxix. may be read as a commentary upon the state of 
things at this time in Jerusalem, 


CHAPTER VIII. | 129 


— 


make this man to understand the vision ” (ov. 15, 16). 
Gabriel, obedient to the command he had received, 
came near where Daniel stood. Afraid in the presence 
of his angelic visitant, the prophet fell upon his face ; 
but Gabriel “said unto me, Understand, O son of 
man: for at the time of the end shall be the vision.” 
Daniel, overcome, was in a deep sleep on his face 
toward the ground ; “‘ but he touched me, and set me 
upright ” (vv. 17, 18). Gabriel thus imparted under- 
standing and strength to enable him to receive the 
- interpretation of the vision. The title “ Son of man ”’ 
is also given him, the significance of which may be 
gathered from the following remarks upon the same 
title as bestowed on Ezekiel. It is “‘a title that 
suited the testimony of a God who spoke outside His 
people, as being no longer in their midst ; but, on the 
contrary, was judging them from the throne of His 
sovereignty. It is Christ’s own title, looked at as 
rejected and outside of Israel, although He never 
ceases to think of the blessing of the people in grace. 
This puts the prophet in connection with the position 
of Christ Himself.’’* 

Before proceeding with the explanation of the 
vision, it will be for profit to again state distinctly the 
relation of a divine interpretation to the thing imter- 
preted. The interpretation never confines itself to 
the matter to be explained, but adds whatever may 
be necessary to bring out the mind of God in the thing 
communicated. A simple illustration from John xiv. 
will unfold the principle. When the Lord had spoken 
of manifesting Himself to the one who had His com- 
mandments and kept them, Judas enquired as to how 
He could manifest Himself to His own, and not to the 

* Synopsis of the Books of the Bible, vol. ii., pp. 370-1. 


tg 


130 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


world. In the answer to this question our Lord goes 
much beyond (at east in explaining its import) what 
He had before said. Instead of manifesting Himself, 
we have ‘we (the Father and the Son) will come 
unto him, and make our abode with him.” All this 
unquestionably lay in His first statement, but it 
would not have been apprehended unless He had 
explained it. And in the interpretation of a prophetic 
vision additions and applications are made in order 
to bring out its divine meaning—a meaning which 
otherwise would have been hidden. 

So is it here. What Daniel saw was fulfilled, histori- 
cally, in Antiochus Epiphanes during the time of the 
Maccabees ; but we now learn from Gabriel’s interpre- 
tation that this historical fulfilment was also pro- 
phetical of another fulfilment, and hence that the full 
realization of what is described will be after the rapture 
of the Church, when the Jews will be once more in 
their own land.* Thus in the very first words of the 
angel he says, “At the time of the end shall be the 
vision”? ; and again, “ Behold, I will make thee know 
what shall be in the last end of the indignation: for 
at the time appointed the end shall be ” (vv. 17, 19). 
There is a remarkable proof in the prophet Isaiah, 
that the period here spoken of refers to the last days— 
a passage in which he speaks of the Assyrian, or the 
king of the north, of whom “the little horn,” Antio- 
chus Epiphanes, is such a striking figure: ‘‘ Therefore 
thus saith the Lord God of hosts, O my people that 
dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he 
shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff 


* Dr. Arnold, of Rugby, in a volume of published discourses, 
called special attention to this prophetical principle, that « 
ees became, in God’s hand, the shadow of a deeper ful- 

ment. 


CHAPTER VII. 131 


against thee, after the manner of Egypt. For yet a 
very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and 
mine anger in their destruction ” (chap. x. 24, 25). 
_ That this scripture applies to the future may be 
seen from the fact that the apostle Paul so uses the 
immediate context (Rom. ix. 28); and this was the 
important point for Daniel to understand that the 
vision had to do with the accomplishment, through 
sorrows and tribulation, of God’s purposes of blessing 
for His beloved people. It is true that Antiochus had 
not yet arisen; but with this authentic unfolding of 
the vision, it would be impossible for any one 
acquainted with it to suppose, however closely Antio- 
chus might resemble him, that he was the personage 
here delineated, unless the issue of his advent had been 
the restoration and blessing of the chosen nation. 
Seeing then that the fulfilment of this vision is yet 
future, the details of the angelic interpretation may 
now be considered. Since, however, in dealing with 
the vision itself, many of these have been necessarily 
anticipated, it will suffice to show their bearing and 
connection. In verses 20-23 we have it authoritatively 
stated that the two kingdoms figured by the ram and 
the goat (vv. 3-7) are Persia and Greece, and it will 
be recalled that the introduction of these two king- 
doms in this chapter is merely to show the quarter 
whence the little horn is to arise. Greece succeeds 
Persia in the world-empire; the notable horn of 
Greece, Alexander the Great, is broken, and “ four 
kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not in 
his power.” These kingdoms have already been 
specified; but the angel adds one particular, that 
they will not be in the power of their predecessor. 
Then, leaping over the interval from the existence of 


\ : 
132 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


these four kingdoms to “‘ the time of the end ” (v. 17), 
for at that period the Assyrian, the king of the north, 
will have appeared, and will exercise his sovereignty 
in the same regions as the little horn of verses 9, 10, 
Gabriel proceeds: ‘‘ And in the latter time of their 
kingdom, when the transgressors are come to the full, 
a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark 
sentences, shall stand up ’’ (v. 23). This is the personal 
description of the antagonist of Israel in the last days, 
the one of whom Isaiah so often speaks as the Assyrian.* 
Pride and cruelty seem to mark his appearance; and 
a kind of supernatural wisdom (understanding dark 
sentences), enabling him to penetrate into the meaning 
of mysterious forms of speech, will give him ascendancy 
over the minds of men, and especially over the Jewish 
mind in alienation from God. In himself he is not to 
be a powerful king, for if mighty, it will not be “ by 
his own power ’”’; that is, he will be sustained im his 
realm by a mightier potentate than himself. 

Next, the actions of this fierce king are described : 
“* He shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and 
practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the holy 
people.” The location of this king, it must not be 
forgotten, like that of his prototype, will be in Syria, 

* It may be interesting to recall, in proof that the Assyrian is a 
future enemy, what has been often noticed, that Assyria historically 
succumbed to Babylon, whereas prophetically the Assyrian is, after 


the restoration of Israel to their own land, their last external 
adversary. 


+ Iwo things are often put together in connection with this 
statement, viz., that the seat of the sovereignty of this king will be 
in Asiatic Turkey; and, secondly, that Russia, as plainly shown 
in Ezekiel xxxvili. and xxxix., will be the final enemy of Israel, 
after their establishment in the land in blessing under their Messiah. 
The deduction is then made that the power behind this king of 
the north will be Russia. It may be so, but where Scripture does 
not speak positively, a conjecture can only be accepted as a 
possibility. 


CHAPTER VIII. (133 


im the north of Palestine, and hence his designation in 
this book (chap. xi.) as the king of the north; and 
thus, being on the borders of, he will wax exceeding 
great towards the pleasant land, as we learn from 
verse g. This explains the statement of our verse 
concerning his deadly hostility to the Jews. As 
another has written, “‘ He will make great havoc, will 
prosper and practise, destroying the mighty, or a 
great multitude of persons, and especially ‘ the people 
of the holy ones’; that is, the Jews (chap. vii. 27). 


_ He is subtle, and his craftiness is successful. He will 


magnify himself in his heart, and will destroy many 
by means of a false and religious security.” Alto- 
gether it is a fearful portraiture of one who will be an 
apt tool of Satan, and yet withal an instrument in the 
hand of God for the chastisement of the ungodly Jews. 
He will be a man 2f resolute will, refined cruelty, one 
practised in designing craftiness, a master of occult 
knowledge, and one of such determined purpose that 
he will allow nothing to stand in the way of the execu- 
tion of his own selfish designs ; for all his object will 
be his own aggrandizement and exaltation. Such 
will be one of the powerful enemies of the Jews, after 
they have been restored to their own land, and have 
rebuilt the temple, while still in unbelief, before the 
appearing of their Messiah in glory. 

But his career of prosperity will be his ruin. De- 
ceived by his own successes and lifted up in heart, he 
will venture also to ‘“‘stand up against the Prince of 
princes; but he shall be broken without hand.” 
The fact only is stated that this earthly monarch will 
dare to be the open antagonist to Him who will soon 
assert His title as King of kings and Lord of lords, 
and that in some way, “ without hand,” he will meet 


134 ‘THE PROPHET DANIEL 


with instant destruction. The same event is probapty 
alluded to in chapter xi., where it says that “he shall 
come to his end, and none shall help him” (v. 45) ; 
and as the occasion of his being in the “ pleasant 
land,” when condign punishment thus overtakes him, 
is there given with some detail, it will be more suitable 
to defer further remarks till this passage is reached. 

Gabriel finally affirms the truth of the vision which 
Daniel had received, and commands him to shut it up, 
** for it shall be for many days.” Under the burden of 
these divine communications Daniel fainted, and was 
sick certain days (v. 27). The vessel was strained by 
the contents, portending so much of sorrow and 
tribulation, which had been poured into it, and for a 
time was disabled. ‘“‘ Afterward,” he says, “1 rose 
up, and did the king’s business ” (ever faithful to his 
earthly master) ; ‘‘ and I was astonished at the vision, 
but none understood it.” Who were the “none” is 
not explained, although we may be sure that they 
were of Daniel’s companions in captivity. Even the 
people of God do not listen willingly to the prophet of 
coming sorrows, while the prophet of smooth things 
ever finds a ready ear. Hence it is that a soul who is 
(in the secret of the divine mind must be content to be 
_unappreciatéd and to walk alone. 


CHAPTER IX. Be Aas 


CHAPTER IX. 


[TANIEL appears in a new character in this chapter. 
Hitherto we have seen him as the recipient in 
different ways of divine and prophetic communica- 
tions ; we now behold him discovering the mind of 
God from studying the Scriptures, and as an inter- 
cessor for God’s chosen people. How long an interval 
had elapsed between this and the preceding chapters 
cannot be ascertained, since we know not the duration 
of Belshazzar’s reign. Belshazzar, on account of his 
impiety, had forfeited his life under the just judgment 
of God, and “ Darius, the son of Ahasuerus, of the 
seed of the Medes . . . was made king over the realm 
of the Chaldeans ’’; and the events of this chapter 
took place “in the first year of his reign” (vv. I, 2). 
Two things evidently distinguished Daniel: an 
intense love for the place where God’s honour had 
dwelt ; and an undying affection for God’s people. 
He might truly have been the mouthpiece of his 
fellow-captives in the well-known psalm, the author- 
ship of which is not revealed, “If I forget thee, O 
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If 
I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the 
roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above 
my chief joy" (Psalm cxxxvii. 5, 6). It was doubt- 
less this love for Jerusalem that led him to the writings 
of Jeremiah, to ascertain how long it was to remain 
in desolation; and he says, giving the result of his 
study, “ I Daniel understood by books the number of 


136 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to 
Jeremiah the prophet, that He would accomplish 
seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem ”’ (v. 2 ; 
Jeremiah xxv. II, xxix. I0). 

The effect of this discovery on Daniel was, in his 
unquenchable love for his people, to lead him to 
identify himself with their state, to confess their sins, 
and to intercede for their forgiveness and restoration ; 
for he well knew that there must first be a work 
wrought in their souls to qualify them for returning 
to their own land and to their city. It is only where 
divine affections for the people of God exist in the 
heart, as so markedly exemplified both in Moses and 
in Paul, as well as in Daniel and in Ezra, that there 
can be power in intercession on their behalf. And 
may it not be suggested as present instruction that 
the urgent need of to-day is that of intercessors ? of 
holy men and women, who, divinely taught and filled 
with the Spirit, shall be enabled, like Epaphras, to 
labour fervently for the saints in prayer? And if we 
ourselves, through lack of zeal for God’s glory, and of 
love for His people, cannot be intercessors, we may at 
least pray that such may be raised up throughout the 
whole church of God in every part of the world. 

Before considering Daniel’s prayer it may be helpful 
to observe what has been elsewhere pointed out,* 
that the intercession of the prophet is one of three 
links in God’s ways for the accomplishment of His 
purposes in respect of Jerusalem. Jeremiah was 
commissioned to prophecy of her desolation for seventy 
years on account of her transgressions; Daniel was 
stirred up by the Spirit of God to pray for her restora- 
tion ; and finally Cyrus was raised up “ that the word 

*In Esva; or, Restoration from Babylow. 


pe CHAPTER IX. 137 


of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah ment be ful- 

filled,” to issue a proclamation concerning the rebuild- 
ing of the Temple (Ezra i.). God Himself must have 
the glory of all His work, and He will not permit any 
of His servants to claim the credit of that which His 
own power has executed. 

It will not be necessary to make more than a few 
brief remarks upon the prayer, as its intention, 
character, and purport are easily apprehended. It 
should be noted, however, first of all, that Daniel’s 
own state of soul was in correspondence with his 
confessions and prayers. He says, “I set my face 
unto the Lord God to seek by prayer and supplications, 
with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes ” (wv. 3). It is 
only as we ourselves are truly humbled before God 
that we can humble ourselves for His people. Through 
grace, and the power of the Holy Spirit, we must put 
ourselves morally into the circumstances of those 
whose case we desire to present to God. The state of 
the people required prayer and supplications, with 

‘fasting, sackcloth, and ashes, and the prophet as one 
of them, understanding their condition, took this 
ground in the presence of God. The Lord Himself 
was the perfect example of this, as when seen in the 
Psalms confessing His people’s sins.”* Nothing 
indeed more plainly exhibits the Spirit of Christ than 
this complete identification with the sorrowful con- 
dition of God’s people through their sins. It ts thus 
that saints may bear one another’s burdens, and 
fulfil the law of Him who was the great burden-bearer. 

The two prominent features of Daniel’s suppli- 
cations are confession and the justification of God in 
what He had done in His dealings with His people. 


* See as am example of this Psalm Ixix. 5. 


138 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


In the address to God in verse 4, he lays the basis for 
justifying God. He says, ““O Lord,* the great and 
dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy to 
them that love Him, and to them that keep His com- . 
mandments.’”’ God could not fail in keeping His 
covenant with His people, and hence the conduct of 
the people themselves must have been the cause of 
all the chastisement by which they had been over- 
taken. And it is this sinful conduct which Daniel 
now proceeded to specify. ‘‘ We,” he says, “have 
sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done 
wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from 
Thy precepts and from Thy judgments” (v. 5). He 
offers no palliation of, nor does he seek to extenuate, 
the enormity of the guilt of his people; but in every 
variety of expression makes the fullest confession of 
their manifold transgressions. They had aggravated 
their sin, moreover, by refusing to listen to the prophets 
whom God, in His longsuffering and tender mercy, 
had sent to their kings, their princes, their fathers, 
and to all the people of the land (v. 6). The guilt lay 
alike upon every class. As a consequence, and this 
Daniel owns, righteousness in His ways with His 
people, belonged to the Lord, but confusion of face 
“to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and unto all Israel that are near, and that 
are far off, through all the countries whither Thou 
hast driven them, because of their trespass that they 
have trespassed against Thee ”’ (v. 7). 

This particularity of confession, taking nothing for 
granted as already known in the presence of God, 
may be well commended to us for imitation. It is an 


* The reader may observe the change from “ Jehovah, my God ”” 
in the first line of the verse to ‘‘ Adonai ’’ in hne three. 


oe CHAPTER IX. 130 


infallible sign of the “true heart,” of uprightness of 
soul before God, and hence of a real work of the Holy 
Spirit in the heart and conscience. But if confusion 
_ of face, as Daniel again confesses (v. 8), belonged to 
every class of the people because of their sins, ‘to 
the Lord our God,” he proceeds to say, “ belong 
mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled 
against Him,” though they had not obeyed His voice 
through the prophets, and though all Irsael had 
transgressed the law of the Lord their God, and had 
therefore fallen under the curse and penalty of their 
sins, as had been written in the law of Moses the 
servant of God (vv. g-rr). Daniel in that one sen- 
tence, ‘To the Lord our God belong mercies and 
forgivenesses,”” had reached the only foundation on 
which he could rest m his intercession. Had he 
known only the law, he could not have hoped to be 
heard; but he knew the Lord his God also in the 
measure of grace in which He had been revealed both 
to Moses (Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7), to David, and to 
Solomon in connection with the building of the temple 
en Mount Zion, which was henceforward to be known 
as the expression of royal grace (see 1 Chron. xxi. ; 
2 Chron. vi. 36-39). It was therefore on God as 
known in grace that the prophet depended ; and it ts 
only as grace is known that the heart is enabled to 
unburden its sins and sorrows in the presence of God. 

Daniel will hide nothing, and hence he further says 
that, while God had only confirmed His words in 
bringing upon His people so great an evil (and there 
was never a greater under the whole heaven than that 
which had been done upon Jerusalem); and while 
the evil came upon them exactly as written in the law 
of Moses, “ yet,’’ he says, “made we not our prayer 


140 THE PROPHET DANIEL 
before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our 
iniquities, and understand Thy truth” (vv. 12, 13). 
The result of all this evil conduct is now stated: 
“Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the evil, and 
brought it upon us: for the Lord our God is righteous 
in all His works which He doeth: for we obeyed not 
His voice” (v. 14). Yet again he mentions another 
aggravation of their guilt—it was against Him who 
had redeemed them with a mighty hand out of the 
land of Egypt, and had gotten Himself renown, that 
they had sinned and done wickedly (v. 15). Daniel 
went thus to the very bottom, and viewed all the sins 
of his people in the light of God’s holiness, justifying 
God, and owning that the judgment which had over- 
taken Jerusalem, Judah, Israel, kings, princes, and 
people, was but their righteous due. It is therefore a 
pattern confession for all time, whether for saints or 
for sinners, only remembering that grace is now still 
further known (see 1 John ii. 1, 2; chap. i. 9); but if 
further known this is an additional incentive for 
thoroughness and openheartedness in confession. 
Having confessed the sins and iniquities of his 
people, Daniel, in the next place, turns to intercession. 
The form of it is much to be observed. Daniel had 
fully owned the righteousness of God in the chastise- 
ment of His people, and now he appeals to the Lord 
according to all His righteousness, to turn away His 
anger and His fury from His city Jerusalem, His holy 
mountain ; and he further pleads that Jerusalem and 
Jehovah's people, because of their sins and iniquities, 
were now “a reproach to all that are about us.” The 
prophet was entitled to plead the Lord’s righteousness, 
for Jehovah had put His NAme in the sanctuary built 
by Solomon ; He had moreover accepted Salomon’s 


CHAPTER IX. 141 


prayer at its dedication, and He had thus bound 
Himself to hear the prayers of His people, when 
humbled before Him by reason of their sins.* Daniel, 
therefore, in this plea counted on all that Jehovah was 
as revealed to Israel, and upon His fidelity to His own 
word. Nothing gives the soul so much courage as the 
apprehension of God’s righteousness, or so completely - 
sets it at liberty in God’s presence. It is very touching 
also to see the way in which Daniel uses the term, 
“Thy people.” In fact God had written Lo-ammi 
(“not my people’’) on Israel, but faith would re- 
establish the link, and hence it refuses the term of 
reproach. 

The sanctuary in all its desolation is next presented ; 
and the ground of his prayer and supplications that 
God would cause His face to shine upon His sanctuary, 
is, ‘‘for the Lord’s sake,” a ground of appeal which 
could not be refused. In the following verse (18) the 
subject of his petition is “‘ our desolations, and the city 
which is called by Thy name,” and for this he urges 
yet another plea: “ We do not present our supplica- 
tions before Thee for our righteousnesses, but for Thy 
great mercies.” 

These then are the three pleas Daniel urges before 
the Lord—His righteousness, His own sake, and His 
mercies ; and having laid these out in His presence, 
he gathers up all his desires and pours them forth in 
one last earnest entreaty: ‘‘O Lord, hear; O Lord, 
forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, for 
Thine own sake, O my God; for Thy city and Thy 
people are called by Thy name.” Here was the 
secret of his strength; he was concerned most of all 
for the name of his God, and for His interests in His 


* See also Deuteronomy xxx. 


142 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


sanctuary, His city, and His people. He has not sne 
single thing to ask for himself, or even for his com- 
panions in captivity ; but his whole heart goes out in 
supplication for the honour of the name of his God, 
and for the interests of God upon the earth. It is a 
prayer, therefore, which might well be often studied 
by those who desire, in any measure, to be im fellowship 
with God’s heart concerning the sorrowful condition 
of His church m the world. 

Before Daniel had ended his supplications the 
answer to his cries was received—in so far as concerned 
the revelation of the mind of God touching the subjects 
of his prayer. Hesays: ‘‘ And whiles I was speaking, 
and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my 
people Israel, and presenting my supplication before 
the Lord my God for the holy mountain of my God ; 
yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man 
Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, 
being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time 
of the evening oblation”’ (vv. 20 21). Two remarks 
may be made before proceeding: first, to remind 
ourselves anew that God’s ear is ever open to the 
prayers of His people. As John wrote, “If we ask 
anything according to His will, He heareth us,” and 
it was so in this case. Daniel was in the secret of 
God’s mind, and God delighted in His servant’s sup- 
plications, every word of which ascended up before 
Him as sweet incense; for, in truth, they were His 
own desires which had been begotten in His servant’s 
heart. Secondly, it was at the time of the evening 
oblation that Gabriel arrived and “‘ touched ” Daniel. 
The evening oblation was the perpetual burnt offering— 
appointed to be presented morning and evening con- 
tinually. The temple having been destroyed, it could 


CHAPTER IX, 143 


no longer be offered; but Daniel was before God in 
the virtue of it ; that is, he identified himself in spirit 
with all its sweet fragrance, as constituting his own 
acceptance, and the efficacy of his prayers (compare 
I Samuel vii. 9, 10; 2 Kings iii. 20). So is it with our 
prayers now when, through faith and in the power of 
the Holy Ghost, we rest wholly and entirely upon what 
-_ Christ is, and upon all the virtue of His sacrifice, before 
God. . 

Gabriel came, first of all, to give Daniel ‘‘ skill and 
understanding ” (v. 22); and, moreover, told him “ at 
the beginning of thy supplications the commandment 
came forth, and I am come to shew thee; for thou art 
greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter, 
and consider the vision”? (v. 23). The revelation 
about to be made would need divine intelligence to 
comprehend it, and this it was that God first imparted, 
through Gabriel, to His servant. He would have 
Daniel also know that He had read the desires of his 
heart, and had, at the beginning of his supplications, 
given commandment for Gabriel’s mission; and in 
His precious grace, to encourage Daniel’s heart, He 
would also have him informed that he was greatly 
beloved—beloved, like the disciple whom Jesus loved, 
as being in the intimacy of the Lord’s mind and 
affections, and thus enabled to receive the impartation 
of divine secrets. For it is ever true that the nearer 
we are to the Lord the more fully He can open out His 
mind to us. Hence Gabriel adds, “‘ Therefore under- 
stand the matter, and consider the vision.” The 
qualifications were possessed ; divine intelligence and 
a heart in communion with God; and Daniel, thus 
endowed thro igh grace, was in a position to compre- 
hend the revelation he was about to receive. 


144 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


This brings us to the most difficult part of the book, 
or at least to one made difficult through speculation 
and controversy, viz., the subject of the | 


SEVENTY WEEKS. 


Some preliminary observations will pave the way for 
its consideration. It is then of the utmost moment to 
note that the revelation of God’s purpose goes a long 
way beyond the prophet’s prayer. Jeremiah had 
said, “* Thus saith the Lord, That after seventy years 
be accomplished at Babylon I will visit you, and 
perform My good word toward you, in causing you to 
return to this place” (chapter xxix. 10; see also 
chapter xxv. 11-14). It was these scriptures which 
Daniel had discovered, and on which he had based his 
intercession, becoming, as possessing the mind of God, 
a mediator. Hence it is that, as often observed, he 
does not go back to God’s unconditional covenant 
with the patriarchs, on the ground of which, m virtue 
of the death of Christ, He will finally re-establish His 
people in the land in blessing under the reign of Christ 
(see Leviticus xxvi. 40-45), but only to the revelation 
God had made of Himself, and to the promises He 
gave to Moses in Exodus xxxiv.* What Daniel sought 
in his supplications was the fulfilment of the promise 
made through Jeremiah, and, as led of the Spirit of 
God, he took the appropriate ground for this in the 
presence of God. But in the communication made 
through Gabriel, it is revealed to him that God had still 
larger thoughts of blessing for His people, which would 
be surely fulfilled at the end of the seventy weeks. 

*In Reodus xxxii. Moses did go back to the promise made to 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, when it was a question of God’s utterly 


consumisg His people and making of Moses a nation to take their 
place. 


CHAPTER IX, 145. 


“1s 


It must afso be borne in mind that this revelation 
entirely concerns the Jewish people and Jerusalem. 
It is strange indeed that this should need to be insisted 
upon, considering the language employed; but the 
tendency is so persistent in some quarters to explain 
away, by spiritualizing, the scriptures which have in 
view the future restoration of the chosen nation, that 
it becomes necessary to affirm and to hold fast their 
manifest application. Gabriel thus says to Daniel, 
“Thy people,” and “thy holy city.” Even a child, 
if he know but the elements of the New Testament, 
understands that Christians have no holy city upon 
earth. And should it be contended that it is the 
heavenly city, new Jerusalem, which is here indicated, 
it might well be enquired, When were its walls thrown 
down, so as to need rebuilding ? No, the city prayed 
for is the city of which Gabriel speaks, as is evident 
from verse 25; and consequently Daniel’s people are 
the Jews, and his city is the earthly Jerusalem. Re- 
mark also that, though Daniel had said to the Lord, 
““Thy people”? and “Thy city” Jerusalem, Gabriel 
says to him, “thy people ” and “thy city ” (compare 
the intercession of Moses in Exodus xxxii.—xxxiv). 
The link with Jehovah had been broken by Israel’s 
sin, and Lo-ammi (ot my people), as before explained, 
had been pronounced over them; and from that 
time, until the appearing of Christ and the restor- 
ation of His people, the term “ my people” is never 
used.* 

Another thing to determine is the meaning of 
the expression “weeks ’—seventy weeks. From 


* Hence it is mever found in Ezra and Nehemiah; but when the 
Lord once more returns to Zion, He again takes it up (See Zechariah 
viii. 7, 8; xii. 9; Hosea il. 23). 

i@ 


146 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


familiarity with the term “ weeks,” and its common 
use, it might be supposed that a period of seven days 
was meant; and there have been expositors who have 
insisted on this theory. The answer is simple and 
irrefragable. The date of the commencement of the 
seventy weeks is laid down with the utmost precision 
(v. 25); and starting from this date, was there, it 
may well be inquired, if seventy weeks of days are 
signified, any fulfilment of this prediction within the 
period named? Nay; has there even yet been the 
accomplishment of Gabriel’s revelation ? If not, it is 
proved beyond all question, for those who believe in 
the plenary inspiration of the Scriptures, that “‘ weeks ” 
in this passage are not weeks of days. The following 
quotations from one whose intimate acquaintance 
with the Hebrew language none would question, will 
be helpful in the understanding of the term. He 
says: “‘ The word itself is strictly, something divided 
into, or consisting of, seven parts—a hepiad, a hebdomad.” 
Again, ‘“‘Daniel had made inquiry about seventy 
years of the captivity in Babylon. The answer speaks 
also of seventy periods, which in our English translation 
are called weeks. The word, however, does not 
necessarily mean seven days, but a period of seven 
parts; of course, it is much more often used in 
speaking of a week than anything else, because 
nothing is so often mentioned as a week which is 
similarly divided. The Hebrews, however, used a 
septenary scale as to time, just as habitually as we 
should reckon by tens; the sabbatical years, the 
jubilees, all tended to give this thought a permanent 
place in their minds. The denomination is here to 
be taken from the subject of Daniel’s prayer. He 
prayed about years, he is answered about periods of 


CHAPTER IX. , 147 


‘Seven years ; i.e., the recurrence of sabbatical years.”’* 
_ Having shown that weeks in this scripture signify 

periods of seven years, our next inquiry must be 
concerning the date of their commencement. It is 
stated by Gabriel to be “from the going forth of the 
commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem” 
(v. 25). In the book of Ezra we have a decree by 
Cyrus, and another by Artaxerxes in the seventh year 
of his reign; but both of these are concerning the 
house of God in Jerusalem, and hence neither satisfies 
the terms mentioned by Gabriel. Passing on however 
to Nehemiah, we find that, ‘‘in the twentieth year of 
“Artaxerxes,” he issued letters, in response to Nehemiah’s 
request, commissioning him to go unto Judah, unto 
the city of his fathers’ sepulchres, that he might build 
it (chapter ii.). Here then is the date referred to by 
Gabriel, and, as there is no other such “‘ command- 
ment ”’ as to the restoration and building of Jerusalem 
in any part of scripture, the point of time is fixed and 
certain. 

Another question arises as to whether the year in 
the world’s history of this “commandment” can be 
ascertained. Without going into the details of the 
investigation, which can easily be pursued if desired, 
it may be stated that the twentieth year of Artaxerxes 
is believed to coincide, as nearly as possible, with 454 


*§. P. Tregelles, LL.D. 

} The following fact, borrowed from Dr. Tregelles, may be inter- 
esting to some readers. Archbishop Ussher’s chronology is that 
adopted in our own English Bibles, and it seems that he paid very 
special attention to the date of Artaxerxes’ reign. “ About a 
hundred and fifty years ago” (nearer two hundred now), Dr. 
Tregelles says, “‘ Bishop Lloyd undertook to affix Archbishop 
Ussher’s dates to our English Bibles; but, im this instance, he 
made a considerable alteration, and substituted another date of 
his own, 80 as to adapt the reign of Artaxerxes to his own theory ’’ ! 


148 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


or 455 B.C. The application of this date will be seen 
in considering the several parts of Gabriel’s com- 
munication. 

Taking then verse 24, we have the statement that 
‘seventy weeks (490 years) are determined upon thy 
people and upon thy holy city, to finish the trans- 
gression, and to make an end of sins, and to make 
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting 
righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, 
and to anoint the most Holy ” (or, the holy of holies). 
All these expressions look plainly onward to the full 
re-establishment of Daniel’s people and city in blessing. 
The transgression will be ended, the transgression for 
which they have been scattered, Jerusalem having 
now ‘received of the Lord’s hand double for all her 
sins,” their iniquity will be pardoned (Isaiah xl. 2), 
everlasting righteousness, God’s righteousness, will be 
brought in (Isaiah li. 4-8), visions and prophecies will 
be closed up for ever (see Zechariah xiii.), and the holy 
of holies will once more be set apart, sanctified accord- 
ing to the requirements of the glory of Him who will 
again dwell there (see Exodus xl. 9). O 

In the next verse (25th) the period of seventy weeks 
is divided: ‘‘ Know therefore and understand, that 
from the going forth of the commandment to restore 
and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince 
shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks : 
the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in 
troublous times.”’ The seventy weeks are thus divided 
into three portions—seven weeks, threescore and two 
weeks, and one week. The first portion undoubtedly 
comprises the period occupied in rebuilding Jerusalem 
and the wall, for the end of the verse expressly speaks 
of the “ troublous,” or “strait of,” times during which 


=~ 


CHAPTER IX, 149 


this was performed. In the book of Nehemiah some 
account is given of the obstacles and opposition which 
Nehemiah and his builders had to encounter. 

Next we have sixty-two weeks, which reach “ unto ” 
the Messiah, the Prince. That is, adding the forty- 
nine years occupied in the restoration of the city, 
there would be four hundred and eighty-three years 
until Christ. It must be carefully observed that the 
expression is general, that neither the birth of Christ, 
His anointing for His mission, nor His death is speci- 
fied. It simply says, “unto” Messiah, the Prince. 
Some. taking the date of the commandment to restore 
and build Jerusalem as 454 or 455 B.c., calculate that 
the 483 years, included in 'the sixty-nine weeks, ter- 
minated with the death of Christ.* Had the Messiah 
been received, the Jewish nation would, as we know, 
have been at once established in the kingdom; and 
even had He been received by the nation after the 
crucifixion, the times of refreshing, as Peter distinctly 
declares, would have come from the presence of the 
Lord; and He would have sent Jesus Christ to His 

a 


* This calculation takes, what indeed is now commonly accepted, 
the year 4 B.c. for the birth of Christ and consequently 29 a.p. 
for His crucifixion. But nothing whatever is gained by this attempt 
at numerical accuracy ; and we cannot but believe that the expres- 
sion ‘“‘ unto Messiah the Prince ”’ is indefinite, for the reason that the 
Messiah, as here foretold, would be rejected by those to whom He, 
came. It may be mentioned that some, holding that the sixty-nine 
weeks end with the birth of Christ, regard the first half of the 
seventieth week as fulfilled in the ministry of the Baptist, and its 
second half in the ministry of our Lord, but that, owing to the 
vejection of Christ this week is cancelled, and therefore remains to be 
gone over again. We see no Scriptural ground whatever for this 
opinion, for in no possible way can the ministry of John be extended 
to three years and a half. Another view, for which there is much 
more to be said, is that the Lord’s ministry embraces the first half 
of the seventieth week, and hence that only the remaining half is 
yet to be fulfilled. This view will be more properly discussed in 
connection with verses 26. 27 


I50 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


people (Acts iii. 19-21). But God foreknew all, and 

hence, after naming the sixty-two weeks, says, “ And 
after* three score and two weeks shall Messiah be cut 
off, and [marginal rendering] shall have nothing ”’ 
(v. 26). It should be noticed that it does not say 
immediately after, only “after,” leaving room, we 
cannot doubt, for the half week of the Lord’s ministry. 

Be that however as it may, the facts mentioned are 
divinely given, and are therefore indisputable, viz., 
that sixty-two weeks, dating from the restoration of 
Jerusalem, ran on till Christ; and that “after” the 
termination of this period, He, being rejected, was 
cut off, and had nothing; for the kingdom and its 
glory were as a consequence postponed, and, together 
with it, the fulfilment of the last portion of the seventy 
weeks. This will be more clearly seen as we follow 
the scripture. 

In connection then with Messiah’s being cut off, it 
is said: ‘‘ And the people of the prince that shall 
come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and 
the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end 
of the war desolations are determined.’’f (v. 26). The 
most careful attention must be given to the exact 
words used in this scripture if we are to understand 
their import, and it may help to their elucidation if 
we recall one or two facts to our minds. We have scen 
then, in the earlier chapters, that the fourth kingdom, 
the successor -to that of Greece, which is to complete 
the times of the Gentiles, is Rome; and we have also 
seen that this has no earthly successor, that it will, in 
fact, be displaced by the kingdom of the Son of man ; 


* The article should here be inserted, viz., after the sixty-two weeks. 


¢ Another translation of the last clause ts, ‘‘ And until the end _ 
[there is} war [even] that which is determined for desolations.” 


CHAPTER IX, I5I_ 


and consequently that, though to outward eyes the 

Western Roman empire may appear to have passed 
away for ever, it will, according to the teaching of 
Scripture, be revived (see Rev. xiii. and xvii.), and will 
assume the form of ten kingdoms, confederated under 
one imperial head—the little horn of Daniel vii., or 
the first beast of Rev. xiii. Moreover, it was in the 
time of the fourth empire, as a well-known fact in 
history, and testified to in the Scriptures, that the 
Lord Jesus came into this world, and that it was at 
Rome’s tribunal, with Pilate as judge, that He was 
sentenced to the death of the cross. These facts have 
a most important bearing upon the statements of our 
scripture. 

Remark then, first, that it does not say that a prince 
shall come and destroy the city and the sanctuary, 
but that the people of the prince that shall come shall 
do so. In other words “the prince that shall come ” 
applies to the future, and is indeed, as will be seen in 
the next verse, the imperial head of the revived Roman 
empire in the last days. The “ people ” are identified 
with him because they are Romans of the same 
kingdom that is yet to reappear, and of which this 
prince will be the leader and the chief. What we have 
then, in this passage, is the destruction of Jerusalem 
by the Romans after the death of Christ as God’s 
judgment upon the Jews for their rejection and cruci- 
fixion of their Messiah. Our Lord Himself often spoke of 
this sorrowful event, and always connected it with His 
own rejection (see Matt. xxii. 7, Luke xix. 41-44, &c.). 

The fearful character of this judgment is pointed 
out in the closing words of the verse—“‘ The end thereof 
shall be with a flood, and,” adopting the alternative 
translation given, “‘ until the end,” there will be wars 


152 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


for the accomplishment of God’s will in the desolations 
of the holy city ; for, as the Lord Himself said, “‘ They 


[the Jews] shall fall by the edge of the sword, and © | 


shall be led away captive into all nations: and 
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until 
the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled ” (Luke xxi. 24 ; 
see also Rev. xi. 2). 

It is now apparent why the last of the seventy weeks 
is separated from the previous sixty-two. Within 
one week (seven years) when Christ came, the seventy 
weeks spoken of by Gabriel had run their course ; and 
~ had the Jews but received Jesus of Nazareth as their 
promised Messiah, He would have at once established 
His kingdom, and brought in all the blessings spoken 
of in verse 24; but they knew not the time of their 
visitation. As a consequence the course of the seventy 
weeks has been interrupted, and God does not count 
time while His ancient people on earth are out of 
their inheritance, and scattered over the globe. There 
is therefore a blank, so to speak, in Jewish history, an 
interval during which the nation, though still watched 
over, has no recognized relationship with God.* But, 
blessed be His name, “‘ through their fall salvation is 
come unto the Gentiles, for to provoke them to 
jealousy’ (Rom. xi. 11). For it has pleased God, in 
the depth of the riches both of His wisdom and of His 
knowledge, to use this very interval for the unfolding 
and accomplishment of His eternal counsels in Christ 
concerning the saints who are to be joint heirs with 
Christ, and to form His body and His bride. It is 
precisely this interval, wherein time is not reckoned, 


* The bond between God and Israel is maintained during this 
period through the faith of the remnant, as exemplified in the first 
part of this book in Daniel and his companions. 


: CHAPTER IX. 153 


which forms the church-period ; and when this—the 
_ acceptable year of the Lord—is ended, God will again 
put forth His pewer for the blessing of the chosen 
earthly people; and then they will sing with over- 
flowing hearts, “‘O give thanks unto the Lord, for He 
is good: for His mercy endureth for ever. Let the 
redeemed of the Lord say so, whom He hath redeemed 
from the hand of the enemy ; and gathered them out of 
the lands, from the east, and from the west, from the 
north, and from the south ” (Psalm cvii. 1-3). 

It will be perceived that an immense interval is to 
be interposed between verses 26 and 27; that verse 26 
refers to the death of Christ and God’s judgment upon 
Jerusalem some thirty years after, while verse 27 
passes on to a time after the church-period is. closed, 
when the Jews, though in unbelief, will be again in 
their own land. Should anyone regard this interpre- 
tation as forced, he may be reminded that such in- 
stances are common in the prophetic scriptures. 
Peter, for example, in citing from Psalm xxxiv., says, 
** The face of the Lord is against them that do evil,” 
but he does not add, what is found in the Psalm, “‘ to 
cut off the remembrance of them from the earth,” 
for the reason that since God is now acting in grace, 
while it is ever true that His face is against them that 
do evil, He will not cut such off from the earth until 
the kingdom of Christ is established. In other words, 
the whole of the present period, the day of grace, has to 
be inserted between the two clauses of the same verse.* 


* For another remarkable illustration of the same thing the reader 
may compare Luke iv. 18, 19, with the place in Isaiah whence the 
words are taken. He will discover that the Lord did not cite 
** And the day of vengeance of our God,” because in fact that day 
would not come until after the “ acceptable year’’—that is, the 
whole period of grace—had run its course. 


I54 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


We may now proceed to consider the opening state- 
ment of verse 27, ‘‘ And he shall confirm the [rather a] 
covenant with many [really the many] for one week.” 
The first thing to be decided in this statement is as to 
who is the person who makes a covenant with the . 
many. Adopting the English translation, “the 
covenant,” some have hastily concluded that it is 
Christ Himself, omitting to notice that the covenant 
mentioned is only made for seven years. It is now, 
however, admitted on all hands that the words should 
be rendered @ covenant, and this at once shows that it 
could not be the Messiah. Indeed the proper ante- 
cedent of the pronoun “he” is the prince that shall 
come ; and it is to this personage that the reference is 
made. What is asserted therefore is, that the future 
head of the revived Roman empire will make a covenant | 
with “the many,” that is, with the mass or majority 
of the Jews, who at that time wiil be again in their own 
land; for the mention of the sacrifice and the oblation 
puts it beyond doubt that Jerusalem is in question, and 
that the temple has been rebuilt. This prince will then 
enter into an alliance with the Jews, with all of them 
save the godly remnant, professedly as befriending 
their cause, and as protecting them from their adver- 
saries. And it should be well observed that the term_ 
of this covenant is one week—that is, for the seven- 
tieth week, as we judge, in respect of the unbelieving 
Jews. Faith may accept the Lord’s ministry, when 
on earth, as the first half of this last week, and go on 
to the time when the prince breaks his covenant with 
the Jews for the commencement of the last half; but 
for unbelief the seventieth week is the week for which 
this covenant is made. Other scriptures allude to 
this covenant. We thus read in Isaiah | xxviii., 


CHAPTER IX. 155 


“Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful 
_ men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem. 
Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with 
death, and with hell are we at agreement ; when the 
_ overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not 
come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and 
under falsehood have we hid ourselves,” etc. (vv. 14, 15). 
It would appear therefore that it will be the fear of 
another adversary, “‘the overflowing scourge’ (who 
is no less a personage than the Assyrian, or the king of 
the north), which will drive these ‘scornful men ”’ 
into the arms of the imperial head of the Roman 
empire. It must also be remembered, as will be 
seen when chapter xi. is reached, that the Anti- 
christ will at this time have his seat and sway in 
Jerusalem, and that he will act as the “ prophet,” — 
the false prophet to the prince of the empire (Rev. 
xiii.). It will thus be, as led by him, that in fear 
of their terrible adversary, the Assyrian, they will 
accept the treaty of alliance proposed by the head 
of the Roman Empire. 

At the outset, as we have seen in Isaiah, all will 
promise well, and the Jews will delude themselves with 
the thought that they have secured themselves from 
all possible danger. Shutting God out, they will lean 
upon the arm of the most powerful monarch of the 
world. Of whom therefore should they be afraid ? 
But the very one in whom they trust becomes their 
enemy ; for, false to his own covenant, “in the midst 
of the week ”’ (that is, at the end of three years and a 
half) ‘“‘he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to 
cease,” and more than this, for (we now give what 
most competent students of Scripture accept as the 
true sense or rendering of what follows) “on account 


156 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


of the protection*® of idols there is a desolator, and until 
the consummation that is determined there shall be 
poured [judgment] upon the desolate.” Without at- 
tempting to unravel the intricacies of this admittedly 
difficult passage, it may be affirmed that its general 
sense is quite plain, inasmuch as there is ight from 
other scriptures to guide us as to it. 

Not only will this Roman prince cause the daily 
sacrifices to be removed, but in addition to his own 
image erected by Antichrist which will be endowed 
with seemingly miraculous powers (Rev. xiii.), the 
Antichrist himself, as we learn from 2 Thess. ii., will as 
God sit in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is 
God (v. 11). The Lord Himself refers to this awful 
fact in Matthew xxiv., where He speaks of the abomina- 
tion of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, 
as to be set up in the holy place, referring to chapter 
xii. II. 

The situation then will be thus: The Jews at this 
time will have returned to their own land, and, though 
m unbelief as to the mass, they will have rebuilt the 
temple and restored the temple services. Antichrist, 
according to the Lord’s prediction, having come in his 
own name, will be received as their king ; and, under 
his leadership, when threatened by the power of the 
Assyrian, they will enter into a covenant, and make a 
treaty, with the head of the western empire. This 
prince breaks his covenant, as we have seen, and “in 
the midst of the week ’’ abolishes the temple services ; 
and, with daring profanity, the Antichrist, as his 
prophet, causes an image of himself to be erected in 


* The word translated ‘‘ protection ’’ is literally “wing”; but 
every reader of the Bible knows that “wing” is continually a 
symbol of protection. 


CHAPTER IX. . 137 


the holy of holies, and demands that divine honours 
should be rendered to himself instead of to Jehovah. 

We have repeated these facts because that, from 
thes potnt, the setting up of the abomination of desola- 
tion in the holy place, commences the last half of the 
seventieth prophetic week. This is the beginning of the 
“time and times and the dividing of time ” of chapter 
vii. 25, and of the forty-two months, or the 1260 days 
of the book of Revelation, that is of the three years 
and a half—the last half of the seventieth week. it 
is of this period our blessed Lord speaks in Matthew 
XXiv. as a time of unequalled sorrow, saying, “‘ Thea 
shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the 
beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shali 
be. And except those days should be shortened, 
there should no flesh be saved ”’ (vv. 21, 22); for it is 
during these days that the trumpet judgments, and 
“the vials of the wrath of God,” of which we read in 
Revelation, are poured out on the earth. It is to 
these judgments, as affecting Jerusalem and the Jews, 
that allusion is made in the verse in Daniel which we 
are considering. 

First, then, it says, according to the amended 
translation given: ‘‘On account of the protection of 
idols there is a desolator.” The desolator here is 
undoubtedly the ‘overflowing scourge” of Isaiah 
Xxviii.; for, as before seen, the Jews are led by anti- 
christ to form a treaty with the head of the Roman 
empire to protect themselves from their northern 
adversary; and the “scornful men, that rule this 
people which is in Jerusalem,” boast of their security. 
But, says the prophet, “your covenant with death 
shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell 
shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall 


158 THE PROPHET DANIEL = 


pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it” 
(Isaiah xxviii. 18; see also vv. 19-22). In fact, God 
uses the Assyrian as a rod to break the guilty people to 
pieces, twice guilty—in rejecting Christ and in again 
accepting idolatry after the house had been swept and 
garnished. = 
There is yet more, for ‘until the consummation 
that is determined, there shall be poured [judgment] 
on the desolate.”** Commencing then with the over- 
flowing scourge the Jews will be the objects of un- 
ceasing judgment, and Jerusalem will be given up to 
the fury of her oppressors. As another has said, “‘ the 
consummation that is determined ”’ is an expression 
constantly used for the last judgments that shali fall 
upon the Jews (see Isaiah x. 22; xxviii. 22). As 
these will come before us towards the close of the book, 
further consideration of them now may be deferred, 
only remarking that at the close of this night of tribu- 
lation their Messiah. will appear, and “ will destroy in 
this mountain (Zion) the face of the covering cast over 
all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations. 
He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord 
God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the 
rebuke of His people shall He take away from off all 
the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it ’ (Isaiah xxv. 


7, 8). 


* There has been much discussion as to whether this word 
“ desolate ’’ should not be translated “‘ desolator.”” It is admitted 
that it will bear both meanings, although the former is the more 
common rendering. Whichever is adopted the sense remains much 
the same, excepting that, if ‘‘ desolate ’’ be retained, Jerusalem is 
signified, whereas if “‘ desolator’’ be preferred her adversary is 
indicated. The meaning in either case is that from the time 
mentioned increasing judgment will be poured out until ‘ the 
consummation that is determined.” 


_ CHAPTER X. : 159 


CHAPTER X. 


[7 is apparent to the most casual reader that the last 
three chapters of this book form, so to speak, but 
one prophecy. It deals, however, with different eras 
and personages, traverses many spheres of action, but 
it does not proceed consecutively ; for after reaching 
down to a certain point, with a historical description 
of machinations and conflicts between the king of the 
north and the king of the south, it suddenly passes on 
- to the time of the end, and brings before us the “‘ wilful 
king,”’ the Antichrist, together with his wicked doings 
{xi. 36, etc.), and his conflicts with his adversaries. The 
last chapter is entirely taken up with the Jews, having 
especially in view the faithful remnant, the “time of 
trouble ” through which they will pass during the last 
days of Gentile rule, and their glorious deliverance. 
The chapter now before us is occupied mainly with 
the circumstances under which Daniel received these 
last communications ; and with respect to these it has 
been well observed ‘‘ that in both cases (chap. ix. and 
chaps. x.-xii.) the revelation given to Daniel, as to his 
people, is in reply to his exercises of heart in inter- 
cession or fasting ; [whereas] the revelations in chapters 
vii., viii, as to the western or eastern destroying 
powers, are not. They are given when God pleases. 
These were in the time of Belshazzar; the two former 
after Babylon was taken.” * The date of the vision is 


* Synopsis of the Books of the Bible, by J. N. Darby, vol. ii., p. 451. 
New edition. Revised. 


160 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


given in verse 1. It was in the third year of Cyrus, 
king of Persia, the king who succeeded, it will be 
remembered, Darius the Mede, during whose reign 
Daniel was cast into the den of lions. As expressly 
said, the thing revealed was “true, but the time 
appointed” (appointed for the fulfilment of all the 
events, or of the last of them, which had been unfolded 
in the prophetic vision) “‘ was long ; and he understood 
the thing, and had understanding of the vision.” If 
God thus used the prophet as a vessel for the revelation 
of the future, He also gave him to understand what 
was revealed. 

The circumstances under which the vision was 
vouchsafed are next given: “In those days I Daniel 
was mourning three full weeks. I ate no pleasant 
bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, 
neither did I anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks 
were fulfilled’ (vv. 2, 3). The subject of his sorrow 
and fasting is not stated; but as we know from the 
previous chapter that the condition of his people and 
of the holy city lay heavily upon his heart, we may well 
conclude that his mourning here was on account of the 
same thing, and the more certainly in that it led to a 
revelation of the future deliverance of his people. For 
our own instruction two observations may be made: 
First, that he who most completely identifies himself 
with the sorrows of God’s people is most in fellowship 
with the heart of God for them (compare Isaiah liii. 
4, 5); and, secondly, that if we would have the mind 
of God communicated to us, we must be in a state of 
soul to receive it. What greater mistake can be made 
than to suppose that we can enter into God’s secrets 
without a moral preparedness of heart, or to think that 
it 3s possible to understand divine things merely 


CHAPTER X,. 161 


through hearing or reading, or because we have ranged 

_ ourselves round certain leaders of God’s people, and 
enthusiastically upheld their teachings ? Humiliation 
and fasting were Daniel’s means of receiving these 
revelations ; and so now, it is only when we are morally 
outside of things here—outside of the gratification of 
the senses and of the joys of earth, having thoroughly 
chastened ourselves, through the application of the 
cross, in the presence of God—that the Spirit of God 
enlightens the eyes of our hearts to comprehend God’s 
mind and will. These two verses, therefore, may be 
regarded as most important, containing as they do the 
means by which Daniel was prepared to hear and to 
understand the divine voice. 

Other particulars concerning time and place are 
added: “And in the four and twentieth day of the 
first month, as I was by the side of the great river, 
which is Hiddekel ; * then I lifted up mine eyes, and 
looked,” etc. (vv. 4, 5). At this date, then, and at 
this place, the vision of ‘‘ a certain man ” is granted to 
him, and the various features of his dress and appear- 
ance are described. He was clothed in fine linen ; his 
loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz; his body 
also was like the beryl; his face as the appearance of 
lightning ; his eyes as lamps of fire ; his arms and his 
feet like in colour to polished brass ; and the voice of 
his words like the voice of a multitude (vv. 5, 6). 

Who, then, was this heavenly visitant ? That there 
are many resemblances to the appearance of the one 
* like the Son of man,”’ whom John saw in Patmos, is at 


* This river is only mentioned by name in one other place (Gen. 
fi. 14). It is generally identified, both from geographical and 
etymological considerations, with the Tigris. If this be correct, 
Daniel would have to cross it on his journeys to Shushan (chap. 
‘iii, 2) from Babylon. 

It 


162 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


once perceived ; but there are also differences, and there 
is‘the absence of some of the most striking character- 
istics that John records. It is by no means certain, 
therefore, that this is a divine personage. Indeed, if it 
is the same speaker throughout this chapter, it could not 
be, since he speaks of being hindered in his mission by 
‘the prince of Persia’ for one and twenty days.* 
The effect upon Daniel and his companions, the men 
that were with him, of whom we read here for the first 
time, combines in some particulars the effects pro- 
duced on Paul’s attendants when on his way to 
Damascus, as the light from heaven, beyond the bright- 
ness of the midday sun, shone round about him; and 
those produced on John when he saw, while at Patmos, 
the vision of the Son of man. Daniel’s companions, 
like those of Paul, were afraid, and so great was the 
“‘ quaking ” that fell upon them that they fled to hide 
themselves ; and Daniel himself, like John, fell down 
as dead before the celestial messenger. He says, 
“‘ There remained no strength in me: for my comeli- 
ness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained 
no strength. Yet heard I the voice of his words: and 
when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a 
deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the ground ” 
(v. 8, 9). It would seem impossible, from many 
instances in Scripture, for man in nature to hold con- 
verse with heavenly beings when surrounded with the 
majesty and excellency that pertain to theiy existence; and 
* Some have supposed that it is a divine person in verses 5-9, and 
an angel from verse 10. This seems a little forced, although there 
are traits in verses 5-9 that might suggest that it was more than an 


angel. Nothing, however, depends upon the interpretation, and 
the question may therefore be left undecided. 


+ This would seem to point to the conclusion that Daniel was at 
this time on a journey, and that the men were his personal 
attendants, 


CHAPTER X, 163 


hence it is necessary to be like Paul, whether in the 
body or out of the body he knew not, or like John 
“in the Spirit,” rapt outside of his ordinary mode of 
being, in order to become the recipient of heavenly 
secrets. Three things were bestowed upon Daniel 
before the angel proceeded with his communication : 
First, ‘an hand touched me, which set me upon my 
knees and upon the palms of my hands.” Divine 
strength was imparted to him. Secondly, he receives 
the assurance that he was “‘a man greatly beloved,” 
an object of the divine affections ; and, together with 
this, and indeed in the power of it, he is commanded 
to understand the words spoken to him, and to stand 
upright ; for, said the angel, ‘‘ Unto thee am I now 
sent ” (v. 11). Then, lastly, he is set at liberty. In 
response to the command to stand upright, he “‘ stood 
trembling. Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel.” 
He was thus calmed in the presence of the heavenly 
messenger, his fears having been dissipated, and so 
qualified to become the depositary of the angel’s 
message. The angel then revealed to him that he had 
come in answer to his prayer: ‘‘ From the first day 
that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to 
chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, 
and I am come for thy words ” (v. 12). What gracious 
encouragement is thus ministered to the intercessors in 
‘all ages for the people of God! They may be alone in 
the midst of the prevailing confusion and corruption ; 
they may even have their names cast out as evil by 
professing Christians, and by real believers ; but their 
cries are heard by God, and He will sustain them by 
the assurances of His love, comfort them by the con- 
solations which He alone can minister, and in due 
time answer their prayers. 


- 


r 


164 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


But, as the angel goes on to inform the prophet, there 
may be, nay, there will be, antagonistic forces at work 
to hinder the divine response to the supplications of 
His servants ; and hereby is revealed to us one of the 
the profoundest mysteries of the spiritual world. “The 
prince of the kingdom of Persia,” the angel informs 
Daniel, ‘‘ withstood me one and twenty days ” (v. 13) ; 
that is, during the whole time of Daniel’s fasting and 
prayer. The words of the prophet were heard “from 
the first day’”?; and the angel was sent, but this 
*‘ prince of the kingdom of Persia’? In some way or 
other interposed an obstacle for the period of three 
weeks, While careful not‘to go beyond what is written, 
nor to penetrate into what is not revealed, a few words 
will be required for the elucidation of this mysterious 
revelation. 

In the first place, it must be observed that “‘the 
prince of the kingdom of Persia” is an angel; for 
Michael, termed in the same verse “‘ one of the chief 
princes,” and in chapter xii. “the great prince” in 
connection with Israel, is known, on the authority of 
Jude, to be the archangel. If so, inasmuch as this 
“prince”? of Persia is seen here acting in opposition 
to the mind of God, he is a bad angel, in fact, one of 
Satan’s princes. This will help us to understand what 
we find often mentioned in the New Testament, viz., 
that there are good principalities and powers (Ephes. 
i, 213 Col. L216, di. 103+ 1 Peter iti: 22), and=bad 
principalities and powers (Rom. viii. 38 ; Ephes. vi. 12, 
etc.). It would seem, therefore, that Satan has 
imitated the kingdom of God,* and formed his grada- 
tions of rank and power according to the divine model. 


* We use the term “ kingdom of God ”’ in this place as expressive 
of the whole sphere of God’s authority and rule. 


CHAPTER X. 165 


_ Having therefore seen that God had appointed the 
archangel Michael to watch over the interests of Israel 
in His providential government, Satan sent one of his 
angels to care for his interests in Persia, which at this 
time held the sovereignty of the earth, and consequently 
to frustrate, wherever possible, the activities of God 
upon the earth. In how far this mode of operation 
may continue during the day of grace we are not 
distinctly informed. We do find, however, that the 
Lord, during His sojourn on the earth, referred to the 
angels of little children, that Peter was delivered from 
prison through the instrumentality of an angel, that 
angels are “sent forth to minister for them who shall 
be heirs of salvation’; and it is plain from chapter 
chapter xii. that Michael’s office continues to the end. 
And in regard to evil spirits or angels, we learn from 
Ephesians that their activities and energy are ceaseless 

-(see chaps. li. 2; vi. 12) against the children of God. 
Moreover Paul, in writing to the Thessalonians says 
expressly, “‘ Wherefore we would have come unto you, 
even I Paul, once and again ; but Satan hindered us ” 
(x Thess. ii. 18). We have, therefore, to count, when 
walking in God’s ways and doing His will, upon the 
incessant and malevolent opposition of the Evil One 
through his emissaries ; and it is to our loss when we 
forget this character of the enemy of God and of our 
souls, for we forget with it our need of being clothed 
with the panoply of God, and of constant vigilance 
against Satan’s devices. 

It is an encouragement, however, to learn from this 
scripture that we are not left to ourselves; for if 
Satan’s prince was seeking to hinder the answer to 
Daniel’s supplications, Michael, one of God’s chief 
princes, came to help His messenger; and he 


166 THE PROPHET DANIEL = 


‘remained there with the kings of Persia,” victorious, 
through Michael’s succour, over the wicked agent who 
had daringly thrust himself between the command of 
God and its execution. 

The next verse (14th) affords the key to the com- 
munication about to be made. The angel says, “‘ Now 
I am come to make thee understand what shall befall 
thy people in the latter days: for yet the vision is for 
many days.” Much of what he is about to impart 
relates, as we shall see, to what took place during the 
time of the third kingdom, the time of Alexander’s 
successors; but even this is given such prominence 
because of its typical foreshadowings. The object of 
the angel’s communication was to make the prophet 
know what should befall his people tn the latier days ; 
and unless this is borne in mind it is impossible to 
read aright these prophetic intimations. It is from 
want of attention to such words as these, which open 
out to us the import of the prophecy, that so many 
mistakes have been made. 

Daniel once again is overcome by the revelations 
made to him concerning the conflicts in the spiritual 
world in connection with his people. He set his face 
toward the ground, and he became dumb (v.15). But 
if the human vessel was too weak in itself to utter the 
thoughts that arose in his heart, divine help was at 
hand. “One like the similitude of the sons of men 
touched my lips: then I opened my mouth, and spake, 
and said unto him that stood before me, O my lord, by 
the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have 
retained no strength.” Both his strength and his 
breath, as he proceeds to say, had departed. The 
vessel, as said before, could scarcely bear the strain of 
the contents of the vision; and in this way the Lord 


CHAPTER X. 167 


: would teach His servant his utter weakness, that he 
might learn that His strength is made perfect in weak- 


- mess. Hence, as soon as Daniel owned that no more 


strength remained in him, “there came again and 
touched me one like the appearance of a man, and he 
strengthened me, and said, O man greatly beloved, 
fear not : peace be unto thee, be strong, yea, be strong ” 
(vv. 18, 19). This is exceedingly beautiful, showing us 
that the Lord expects nothing from us, except looking 
to Him, and even for that He will give the power. 
Strength, the sense of His love, calm, peace, yea, and 
double strength, are all bestowed on Daniel to qualify 
him for the service to which he was called. Who, 
indeed, ever goeth to warfare at his own charges? No; 
He who calls, equips, and sustains; and the servant 
has only to learn how to avail himself of what is 
provided. The effect on Daniel was immediate; he 
“was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak ; for 
thou hast strengthened me ” (v. 10). 

The last two verses need attentive examination to 
understand their force and bearing. After the angel 
had asked, “‘ Knowest thou wherefore I come unto 
thee ? ” he continued, “‘ and now will I return to fight 
with the prince of Persia: and when I am gone forth, 
lo, the prince of Grecia shall come. But I will show 
thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth” 
(vv. 20, 21). If we understand rightly, the last clause 
means that before the angel goes forth against the 
prince of Persia, he will communicate to Daniel his 
message, the contents, that is, of chapters i ML 
This makes all plain. Then, if the prince of Persia 
signifies a Satanic angel, as already explained, so will 
also the prince of Grecia, although we are not told for 
what purpose he will appear on the scene, excepting 


168 _ THE PROPHET DANIEL 


that we know it must be in hostility to God’s people. — 
The reason of the special antagonism of “the prince 
of Persia’? may be easily discerned. Persia was the 
kingdom in power at this moment, and consequently 
held the people of God in captivity. As influenced by 
Satan’s prince, apart from natural reasons, Persia 
would be the enemy of Daniel and his people, whatever 
the toleration of its rule. It would be interested in 
retaining them in subjection; and remembering this, 
one can the better understand the necessity of the 
conflict of which the angel speaks. Before, however, 
he departed, he would communicate, by divine direc- 
tion, the history of the future with its issue in the full 
accomplishment of God’s purposes for His earthly 
people. And then he adds, “There is none that 
holdeth with me in these things* but Michael your 
prince’ (v. 21). Satan was thus even then though it 
had not yet been demonstrated, the god of the world ; 
and his angels had supreme influence with the various 
governments that swayed the nations, so that on earth 
there was not one to stand by and assist this angel in 
his conflict with Satan’s agents, excepting the archangel 
that cared for, in the way of providential government, 
the imterests of the elect nation. 


* Some translate “ against them,” that is, against the ‘‘ prince ” 
of Persia, and the “ prince’ of Grecia. If the rendering “ in these 
things ’’ he retained, the meaning will be the objects for which 
the augel was contending. 


CHAPTER XI. 169 


CHAPTER XI. 


A® before observed, chapters x.—xii. form one con- 
tinuous revelation or prophecy; and it will be 
seen that the whole of chapter x., together with the 
first verse of chapter xi., is introductory, containing 
the account of the circumstances under which the 
revelation was made, and the exercises of the prophet 
which God used to produce his moral fitness to receive 
these divine unfoldings of the future. Down to the 
end of verse 35, it may be repeated, we have a narrative 
of events which were to take place in connection with 
the kingdoms into which “ Grecia’ was divided after 
the death of Alexander the Great; and these are 
chosen because they bring before us two monarchs, 
the king of the North, and the king of the South (so 
denominated because of the geographical position of 
their respective territories in relation to the “ glorious 
land”), who are themselves foreshadowings of the 
adversaries of the Jews in the last days. Their actings, 
as here described, have now long since passed away ; 
but their prophetic significance remains, or they would 
have no possible interest for the reader, except in so 
far as they reveal the divine prescience, as also God’s 
care over His people, even while, as a people, they are 
unfaithful to Him and to His word. 
gin the first verse a remarkable revelation is made. 
Every one must be struck, in reading chapter vi., with 
the earnestness of Darius in espousing Daniel’s cause, 
and in seeking his deliverance from the devices of 


170 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


his enemies. The secret of this is now discovered, 
illustrating the fact that God holds the hearts of all 
men in His hands, and turns them whithersoever He 
will in pursuance of His purposes. ‘Also I,” said the 
angel to Daniel, “in the first year of Darius the Mede, 
even I, stood to confirm and to strengthen him.” 
Darius knew it not; but the fact is now made known 
that there was a divine influence secretly working to 
confirm him in a certain course, and to strengthen him 
against those who were plotting against God’s witness 
in the king’s court. Well may we learn from this to 
look away from all secondary causes, and to rest in the 
assurance that God is silently working towards His 
proposed end through all the apparent confusion of 
human designs, and in the face of all the demonstrated 
power of the enemy. 

The next three verses (vv. 2-4) give a brief outline 
of those near events which would form the foundation 
of the subsequent developments which the Spirit of 
God was about to trace. First, four kings of Persia 
were yet to arise; “‘ the fourth shall be far richer than 
they all.” Three of these (the first three) are mentioned 
in Ezra iv., Ahasuerus, Artaxerxes, and Darius.* The 
fourth was the famous Xerxes, who, “‘ by his strength 
through his riches,” stirred up “all against the realm 
of Grecia.”” The overwhelming defeat of his motley 
host, and the subsequent invasion and conquest of his 
kingdom by Alexander—facts well known to every 
reader of history, and alluded to in chapter viii. 7— 
are here passed over, and Alexander, as a “ mighty 
king,” is at once introduced—one “that shall rule 

* This is not, it should be remarked, Darius the Mede of verse 1, 
but Darius Hystaspes, as he is known in history. Ahasuerus and 


Artaxerxes are supposed to be the monarchs designated by profane 
writers as Cambyses and Smerdis. 


- CHAPTER XI. I7r 


with great dominion, and do according to his 
will” (v. 3). 

We are next told, that “ when he shall stand up, his 
kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward 
the four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, 
nor according to his dominion which he ruled : for his 
kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside 
those” (v. 4). The devout believer in the inspired 
word of God will not need to be told that this is an 
accurate description in every particular of what took 
place on the death of Alexander—so accurate, indeed, 
that the unbeliever can only account for it by maintain- 
ing that it was written subsequently to the event! The 
ingenuity of infidelity to escape the evidence that God 
‘has spoken to man in His word, and that the future all 
lies before his gaze, is simply astounding. The 
suppositions of unbelief are readily received and 
circulated as facts; but the verities of the divine 
record are rejected with contempt. And who is the 
loser ? Surely the man who, in the pride of his fancied © 
self-sufficiency, shuts his eyes against the light. The 
light shineth in darkness, and the darkness compre- 
hendeth it not. 

To return, it is well known (the facts have been 
before stated) that on the death of this “‘ mighty king,” 
after various contentions and conflicts, his kingdom 
was “‘ divided toward the four winds of heaven; and 
not to his posterity,”’ but by four of his generals. Two 
of these kingdoms soon disappeared ; and two remained 
till about 50 B.c. ; * and these are the two under the 
_ appellations of the “ king of the south ” and the “ king 


* To speak more accurately, the Syrian Kingdom only con- 
tinued till 65 B.c., but that of Egypt was not extinguished until 
51 B.C. 


172. THE PROPHET DANIEL 


of the north ” that are found in this narrative.* One 
thing must be borne in mind in following the narrative, 
and that is that the king of the north and the king of 
the south do not always designate the same persons. 
They are titles (like Pharaoh, for example), and thus 
apply to all the monarchs of the same line. If there- 
fore one king of the north have died, his successor will 
bear the same designation. This will be readily 
understood. 

The first of these monarchs, to which our attention 
is directed, is the king of the south—that is Egypt, as 
seen from verse 8. He is characterised by strength ; 
but there is another ‘“‘strong above him,”f and “his 
dominion shall be a great dominion ”’ (v. 5). 

The monarchs are now in their places, south and 
north of Palestine ; and next we have a record of their 
relationships and conflicts. It will not be necessary, 
however, to consider these in all their details: it will 
suffice to indicate the outline of the occurrences here 
presented.{ 

We read in verse 6 that ‘‘in the end of years they 
shall join themselves together ; for the king’s daughter 
of the south shall come to the king of the north to 
make an agreement,” etc. This was strictly fulfilled ; 


* These represent the two famous dynasties of the Ptolemies 
(Egypt), and the Seleucide (Syria). For a chronological table of 
the respective monarchs of these dynasties see Elliott’s Hore 
Apocalyptica, vol, iv. p. 57. Fourth edition. 


ft It is not necessary to discuss the translation ; it will suffice to 
state that in the opinion of most, this sentence applies to the king 
of the north; and that we have here the founders of their respective 
dynasties, viz., Ptolemy and Seleucus, two of the four who succeeded 
to Alexander’s kingdom, 


tIf the reader desire to study the details he can consult the 
histories of the period, especially 1 Maccabees, the articles in Smith’s 
Bible Dictionary under the headings of Syria, Alexander, Seleucus, 
Antiochus, Ptolemy, etc.; Josephus, etc. 


CHAPTER XI. _ 193 


for on a quarrel having ensued between the immediate 
successors of the first Greek kings of Syria and Egypt, 
amity was sought to be restored by the king of Egypt 
giving his daughter (Berenice) in marriage to the king 
of the north. But, as it is here said, ‘‘she shall not 
retain the power of the arm; neither shall he stand, 
nor his arm: but she shall be given up, and they that 
brought her, and he that begat her, and he that 
‘strengthened her in these times,” so it happened ; for 
this queen (Berenice), together with her husband (the 
king of the north), her son, and her attendants, were 
_ murdered ; and in this way the devised means of amity 
became the ground of future dissensions and conflicts.* 
The next three verses (7-9) give the description of the 
avenging of the murder of Berenice by one out of a 
branch of her “ roots,” another king of the south, who 
invaded Syria, entered “into the fortress of the king 
of the north,” and prevailed (v. 7). In fact his victory 
was complete, and he extended his conquests as far as 
Antioch, and eastwards to Babylon, and returned to 
Egypt in triumph with great spoil of gods and treasures, 
as recounted in verse 8. “So the king of the south 
shall come into his kingdom, and shall return into his 
own land ”’ (v. 9).T 
It is plain from the context that the term “ his sons,” 
in verse 10, applies to the successors of the king of the 
north who had been overcome by Ptolemy III.; and 
in fact the two next kings of the north{ did attack 
* For the authority fof these statements see Elliott’s Hore 
Apocalyptica, vol. iv. pp. 59 et seq. (4th edition), and Smith’s Bible 
Dictionary, under the title Piolemy. 
{ The name of this king of the south was Ptolemy IJI., known 
also by the title Ewergetes (Benefactor), which he either assumed 
or received. 


+ These were, first, Seleucus Ceraunus, who only reigned a year 
or two; and, secondly, his brother and successor, Antiochus the Great. 


174 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


+ 


Egypt with large forces, but were unsuccessful; and 
the latter of the two suffered a most disastrous defeat, 
according to the prediction in verse 11, “ the multitude 
[the army of the king of the north] shall be given into 
his hand ” (into the hand of the king of the south— 
Egypt). But, as we read in verse 12, the king of Egypt 
did not profit by his victory,* for his heart was lifted 
up, and although he cast down many ten thousands, 
he was not strengthened by it. The reason is given in 
verse 13, which tells us that “the king of the north 
shall return, and shall set forth a multitude greater 
than the former, and shall certainly come after certain 
years with a great army and with much riches ” (v. 13). 
Many others also shall ‘stand up against the king of 
the south’; and in addition to these another class is 
named, ‘‘ the robbers of thy people ”’ (that is, of Daniel’s 
people), who are said to ‘‘ exalt themselves to establish 
the vision,” to verify the divine word, “‘ but they shall 
fall’ (v. 14). 

All this, it is almost needless to remark, exactly 
happened ; for Antiochus the Great, and Philip IIT. of 
Macedonia, formed a league, with others, against 
Egypt, and many of the Jewish insurrectionists and 
professed patriots, “‘ the robbers of thy people,” threw 
off, at the same time, their allegiance to Egypt. The 
issue of this combination against the king of the south 
is stated in the next verse (15). Antiochus and his 
allies conquered “the most fenced cities,” took 
possession of the whole of Judea, and decisively 
defeated the Egyptian army. He did therefore accord- 
ing to his own will, and none was able to stand before 
him (v. 16); and thereon it is said, ‘‘ He shall stand 


* The battle by which this victory was won is known by the name 
of Raphia, and the king who won it was Ptolemy Philopator. 


CHAPTER XI. | 175 


in the glorious land, which by his hand shall be con- 
sumed.” The glorious land is Palestine, and the 
allusion is to some action of the king of the north in 
respect of the Holy Land. It is maintained by some 
that the word “‘ consumed” should be ‘“‘ perfected” ; 
and it seems established that the king of the north on 
this occasion did act as a friend to the Jews, and 
assisted in the completion or beautifying of the temple. 

This however is of little moment, but the circum- 
stance serves to call attention to the special object of 
the narration of the conflicts of these rival sovereigns. 
They ave given in such detail because of their bearing 
upon the Jews and the glorious land. This will be 
understood when the geographical position of Palestine 

in relation to Syria and Egypt is recalled. It lay 
between them, and consequently formed the highway 
of approach from either country. The armies of the 
two hostile countries were therefore, in their mutual 
invasions, continually marching through the land; 
and, moreover, Judza was possessed by the monarch 
who for the moment was victorious. Palestine was 
thus largely the battle-field, as constituting the outpost 
of the territory of both kingdoms. God could not be 
indifferent to this as affecting the welfare of His poor 
people who had returned from Babylon ; and hence it 
is that the Spirit of God has caused the account of all 
these wars to be recorded. It shows us the intensity of 
God’s love for His people, whatever their state; and 
teaches us likewise that He regards the movement of 
nations as affecting their interests. 

The next section (vv. 17-19) contains the subse- 
quent doings of this king of the north, and the account 
of his death. First of all he meditated another attack 
on Egypt; but, changing his mind, he formed an 


176 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


alliance with the king of the south, giving him his 
daughter to wife, in order to secure his own influence 
in the Egyptian court. What is meant by “ corrupt- 
ing her” is, that he desired her to act in his own 
interests rather than in those of her husband; but 
she, in this respect a true woman, clave to her husband. 
Having, as he supposed, made all secure in Egypt by 
the marriage, he proceeded, according to a design that 
he had formed, to attack ‘the isles ”*—the isles of - 
Greece—and took many; and here his career of 
victory ended. ‘“‘A prince” appeared on the scene, 
a Roman commander, for the Roman Republic was 
in alliance with Greece, and attacked and defeated 
him in two decisive battles, and compelled him to cede 
to his victors the western half of his empire, besides 
imposing upon him the payment of an immense 
tribute.* In order to obtain the means of paying 
this tribute the king of the north made an expedition 
against a rich temple, and was killed while attempting 
to plunder it ; according to the prediction “‘ He shall 
stumble and fall, and not be found ”’ (v. 19). 

His successor, “‘a raiser of taxes” (v. 20), seeking 
to raise the Roman tribute, plundered the temple at 
Jerusalem, and, “‘ within few days,” he was destroyed, 
“neither in anger, nor in battle,” the very man he 
had employed to despoil the temple being the instru- 
ment of his assassination. 

We arrive now at the advent of a monarch, yet “a 
vile person ” (v. 21), who has been specially chosen as 
the type of the Assyrian, or the king of the north, of 
the last days. It is for this reason that his career is 
given with such detail, occupying the whole paragraph 
contained in verses 21-25. This “‘vile person” is 


* See Smith’s Bible Dictionary, vol. 1., p. 74. 


CHAPTER XI. 77 


known in history as Antiochus Epiphanes, and he 
commenced his reign about 175 B.c. He was not 
given “the honour of the kingdom,” for he was not 
the rightful heir ; but “he shall come in peaceably, 
and obtain the kingdom by flatteries,” and he fulfilled 
this description to the letter. Having established 
himself in the kingdom, his various actings are narrated, 
his successes, deceit, and increasing strength, the 
enlargement of his territory, and his reckless pro- 
digality (vv. 22-24). Then, like his predecessors, he 
proceeded on an expedition against the king of the 
south, and, aided by treachery in his enemy’s court and 
camp, he utterly defeated him.* A treaty would seem 
to be formed according to verse 27, both sovereigns, 
under the mask of friendship, concealing treachery 
. in their hearts—“ they shall speak lies at one table ; 
but it shall not prosper: for yet the end shall be at 
the time appointed.” Having settled his affairs for 
the moment with the king of Egypt, he returned to his 
kingdom “ with great riches”; and now his enmity 
against the “holy covenant,” that is against the 
Jewish religion, the covenant of God with His people, 
was in some way manifested; “and” it is added, 
“‘he shall do [exploits], and return to his own land” 
(v. 28). It is said that on his homeward march he 
attacked Jerusalem, massacred thousands of its in- 
habitants, and profaned the temple, because of the 
insurrection of the Jews on a false report of his death.f 

In the following verse (29) we read that “at the 


* It is said that he made four expeditions against Egypt, in the 
years B.C. 171, 170, 169, 168, but two only are mentioned in the 
sacred narrative, unless indeed three are found in verse 29, and 
these are evidently chosen because of the consequences in regard 
to the Jews. 

¢ See 1 Maccabees i, 21-24. 

tz 


178 THE PROPHET DANIEL = 


time appointed he shall return, and come toward the 
south.” By “the time appointed,” as we understand, 
is meant, as stated in verse 27, the time fixed by God 
for the termination of the deceitful alliance which this 
monarch had made with the king of the south. It 
was not to prosper, and accordingly Antiochus, in 
defiance of his treaty obligations, returned in hostility 
towards his ally; “but,” as Daniel was told, “it 
shall not be as the former or as the latter.” On these 
previous occasions he had prospered in his designs ; 
but now another power steps forward (the power that 
was soon, as the fourth prophetic kingdom, to succeed 
to that of “‘ Grecia’ in the government of the world) 
and checks his victorious career. ‘‘ For the ships of 
Chittim shall come against him ” (v. 30), the ships of 
Italy, which is the country designated in Scripture as 
Chittim, a fleet, in fact, of the Roman republic. For- 
bidden by the Roman consul to pursue his objects in 
Egypt, and impotent in the presence of such an 
enemy, he was compelled to return. His state of 
mind consequent upon having his prey snatched from 
his grasp is thus described: ‘‘ Therefore he shall be - 
grieved, and return, and have indignation against 
the holy covenant ”’ (v. 30). 

We have now reached the main object of the fore- 
going recital of what are now historical facts, related 
by the angel long before they occurred, demonstrating, 
it may once more be affirmed, both the presence of 
God and the character of inspiration. It is the habit 
of the present day to seek among ancient ruins and 
antique inscriptions and tablets for confirmation of - 
the Bible records. It seems to be forgotten that God 
is not dependent on man for the authentication of the 
revelation He has made, and that if the word of God — 


CHAPTER XI. 179. 


is not its own witness (see John iii. 33) no amount of 
human evidence will establish it as such in the soul. 
Besides, the facts adduced, and the translations made 
_ from ancient cylinders and monuments assume a very 
different aspect and importance according to the 
_ views of the various interpreters. But accepting the 
Bible as the veritable word of God, and maintaining 
therefore its absolute “inerrancy ” (to borrow a new 
theological term) where there is no dispute as to 
readings or translation, we have an infallible guide, a 
trustworthy standard of appeal, and thus the certainty 
that the events predicted must have a real and actual 
fulfilment, and that the historical facts recorded are 
given with the most truthful accuracy. It is of all 
moment, if we would understand the divine records, 
that we should begin with an undoubting faith in the 
- infallibility of Scripture. 

From the middle of verse 30 to the end of verse 35 
we have the account of the actings of Antiochus in 
Jerusalem and the glorious land—actings so diabolical, 
when estimated according to God, that, as has been 
observed more than once, he is selected as a type of 
the powerful enemy of Israel in the last days; and 
perhaps even more than their last enemy the Assyrian, 
for he seems to concentre in himself almost every 
element of hostility and profanity that will be found 
in the two beasts of Revelation xiii. as well as in the 
king of the north. 

We are told in the first place that he shall “have 
indignation against the holy covenant: so shall he 
do”; that is, we apprehend, that he acted according 
to his indignation against the Jews and the holy 
covenant. Moreover, he had an _ understanding 
(‘‘ intelligence ”’) with the apostate Jews. ‘The account 


186 {HE PROPHET DANIEL 


of his doungs may be gleaned from 1, 2 Maccabees, 
whence it is to be gathered that he resolutely 
set himself to work to heathenize the Jews, and 
indeed, like Nebuchadnezzar in chapter iii, to 
unify his dominions by compelling all his subjects 
to worship the same false gods. That he largely 
succeeded among the Jews is seen from this pro- 
phetic narrative. Apostates are specified in verses 
30 and 32. 

In pursuance of his objects the temple would of 
necessity be in his way, and call forth his deadliest 
hostility; and verse 31 describes his conduct in 
regard to it. It says, ‘“‘And arms shall stand on his 
part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, 
and shall take away the daily [sacrifice], and they 
shall place the abomination that maketh desolate ” 
(v. 31). This is referred to in x Maccabees in the 
following words: “The king had sent letters by 
messengers unto Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, 
that they should follow the strange laws of the land, 
and forbid burnt offerings and sacrifices and drink 
offerings in the temple ; and that they should profane 
the sabbaths and festival days: and pollute the 
sanctuary and holy people: set up altars, and groves, 
and chapels of idols, and sacrifice swine’s flesh, and 
unclean beasts . . . to the end they might forget the 
law, and change all the ordinances.”’ And further we 
read that on “the fifteenth day of the month Casleu, 
in the hundred forty and fifth year, they set up the 
abomination of desolation upon the altar’; and 
that on “the five and twentieth day of the month 
they did sacrifice upon the idol altar, which was upon 
the altar of God” (chapter i. 44-59), From other 
sources we learn that the worship Antiochus enjoined 


CHAPTER xT. 181 


in the place of that of the God of heaven, Jehovah, 
was that of Jupiter Olympius. 

These facts will enable the reader to understand 
verse 30, and the fearful character of the doings, the 
profanity and wickedness, of this king of the north; 
and also the sufferings entailed by his conduct upon 
those of the Jews who remained faithful to their God 
and to His word. Some, “‘such as do wickedly 
against the covenant,” he corrupted by flatteries ; 
but God preserved a faithful remnant, and these 
knowing their God, were strong, and did exploits, 
(v. 32). In the next verse a smaller class are intro- 
duced to our notice—‘‘ they that understand among 
the people.” Thus there were, we apprehend, three 
classes of Jews; first, the mass who were corrupted 
by flatteries; secondly, the faithful remnant, who 
refused to renounce their observance of the law of 
their God ; and lastly, some among the remnant who, 
as taught of God, were able to instruct them in the 
word, and to encourage them in the path of fidelity, 
whatever the persecution to which they might be 
subjected. This class is again mentioned in chapter 
xii. 3, and those who compose it are termed “ the 
Maschilim.” It was against this class, those who 
were publicly identified with God’s testimony on the 
earth, that Satan’s enmity was specially directed ; 
and, as a consequence, the angel says, “ Yet they 
shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and 
by spoil, many days ” (v. 33). The reader of Revela- 
tion will recall the similar experiences there recorded 
(see chapters xi., xil. 17; Xill., xiv., 12, 13, etc.). 

But, they are not left wholly in the hands of the 
enemy, for ‘“‘ when they shall fall, they shall be holpen 
with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with 


y 


182 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


flatteries.”’ (v. 34). It could scarcely be otherwise 
than this, in this prophetic narration, there should be 
a very distinct allusion to the uprising, and valiant 
resistance of the Maccabees against the cruelties and 
profanity of their oppressor. For there was, at least 
at the commencement of their rebellion, undoubted 
zeal for God, for His temple and for His law; and 
the success vouchsafed to them was great. For 
years they stemmed the tide of the whole power of 
the king of the north, and maintained, through victory 
after victory, their just and holy cause. All this is 
now a matter of history, and it is only recalled here 
as explanatory of the last clause of verse 34—“ Many 
shall cleave to them with flatteries*°—for subse- 
quently to the reign of Antiochus, when Syria was 
torn asunder by faction and intestine discords, the 
Maccabean leaders were as often courted as threatened. 

But the reader may be reminded that while this 
is history, it is not only history. Antiochus himself, 
as again and again pointed out, is a typical personage, 
and many of the events connected with his reign, and 
especially his actings in Jerusalem, are typical, so that 
many of these things will be reproduced at the close. 
Two illustrations of this may be offered. Antiochus 
caused “the abomination that maketh desolate” to 
be set up in the temple; in chapter xii. 11 we learn 
that this act will be repeated in a future day. Conse- 
quently our Lord quotes from chapter xii. in Matthew 
xxiv. because He is there speaking of what had not 
yet taken place. If this distinction had been more 
accurately observed, fewer mistakes would have been 
made in the interpretation of these prophetic scrip- 
tures. Then again take verse 35, where we read that 


God will allow “some of them of understanding ” to - 


Some 


CHAPTER XI. 183 


fall to try the faith and “to purge ” the remnant, and 
“to make them white, even to the time of the end,” 
&c.; the very language used shows that what took 
place then is given as a sample of a similar thing in 
the last days. Thus in Revelation xiv., after the 
annunciation of judgment upon those who shall 
worship the beast and his image, &c., the remnant 
are described; and it is then the command comes 
from heaven, “ Write, Blessed are the dead which die 
in the Lord,” &c. (vv. g-13 ; compare chap. xiii. 5-15). 
If, therefore, anyone has been tempted to enquire, 
while reading this chapter, What advantage is there 
in these historical details ? the answer is, that God 
has allowed things to be rehearsed, as it were, in 
- preparation for what will be seen in the time of the 
end. There are very few purely historical events in 
Scripture for the reason we have given, that the 
histories recorded are in themselves typical and pro- 
phetical. It is an immense thing, an immense help, to 
the study of the Scriptures, when this principle is 
understood.* 

We pass now to another section of the chapter, for 
there is a break between verses 35, 36. Up to verse 
35 we have, in prophetic form, a relation of what, 
though future in Daniel’s day, has now long since 
been accomplished ; from verse 36 we have the account 
of what is entirely future. The proof of this, it may 
be at once said, lies in two sentences. In verse 36 
we read that the king “‘shall prosper till the indig- 
nation be accomplished”; and in verse 40 we are 
told that the event there given is “at the time of 

* It should also be borne in mind that these revelations were for 
the guidance and comfort of the Jews during the time of these wars 


between Syria and Egypt, as well as for the instruction of the 
godly remnant in the last days. 


184 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


the end.” It has already been observed, as to the 
former expression, that it is used in Isaiah of God’s 
last indignation, by means of the Assyrian, against 
His people in the land before the appearing of Christ. 
If the reader attentively considers Isaiah x. 20-25, 
XXviil. 16-22, he cannot fail to be convinced of the 
truth of this interpretation. The latter expression, 
“the time of the end,” may be thought to be more 
general, because it is also found in verse 35; but 
even with regard to the use of it there, the typical 
significance of what is related must be borne in mind. 
Another thing will appear as we proceed, viz., the~ 
correspondence of the king here described with the 
“man of sin,’ or the Antichrist of the New Testament. 
On these grounds we cannot doubt that an immense 
interval lies between verses 35, 36, and this conclusion 
will be further strengthened by many of the events 
found in this closing section of the chapter. 

The characteristics and doings of “the king” are 
given with some particularity. First of all it is said 
“The king shall do according to his will; and he 
shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every 
god, and shall speak marvellous things against the 
God of gods” etc. (v. 36). The appellation of the: 
“wilful king’ is derived from this scripture, expres- 
sive of the fact here stated, that his own will is his 
only law. He will be the incarnation and manifesta- 
tion of all that is evil in man. Adam in the garden 
of Eden fell through disobedience, doing his own will 
instead of God’s, and through the desire, at the tempta- 
tion of Satan, to exalt himself; and these two things 
will reach their further expression in this wilful king, 
who will claim, in the height of his presumptuous 
folly, to suffice for himself, to be both independent of 


CHAPTER XI. 125 


God and absolute in power. He will be consequently 
the perfect contrast, morally, to Christ, who, being in 
the form of God, did not think it robbery to be equal 
with God, but emptied Himself, and having taken 
upon Him the form of a servant, humbled Himself, 
and became obedient unto death, even the death of 
the cross. This man will assert his superiority over 
every god, and will moreover speak marvellous things 
against the God of gods. This last feature savours of 
what in chapter vii. and in Revelation xiii. is ascribed 
to the imperial head of the revived Roman empire ; 
but it must be borne in mind that this king—king to 
the Jews, who will receive him as their Messiah— 
coming as he will in his own name, acts as the prophet, 
- the false prophet, to this monarch, and exercises ali 
this monarch’s power in his presence (Rev. xiii. 12), 
and that it is he who will do great wonders, so that he 
will make fire come down from heaven on the earth 
in the sight of men in support of his claims. So great 
will be the unhindered display of Satanic power in 
this fearful era that men, being under a strong 
delusion, will believe a lie: that they all might be 
damned (judged) who believed not the truth, but 
had pleasure in unrighteousness. 

If we turn for a moment to 2 Thessalonians ii. we 
shall see that the advent of this ‘‘ man of sin,” this 
“son of perdition,” will not be until after the church 
has been caught away from the earth at the coming 
of the Lord. It says plainly, ‘‘And now ye know 
what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his 
time. For the mystery of iniquity doth already work 
only he who now letteth (the Holy Ghost in the church, 
as we understand the passage) [will let], until he be 
taken out of the way. An then shall that Wicked 


86 THE PROPHET DANIEL S 
be revealed,” etc. (vv. 6, 7). Earlier in the chapter 
(v. 4) the description of this “‘ man of sin ” corresponds 
most strikingly with what is given in verse 36. It 
says, ‘‘Who opposeth and exalteth himself above 
all that is called God, or that is worshipped ; so that 
he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing him- - 
self that he is God.” It is impossible to read the two 
scriptures without coming to the conclusion that they 

refer to one and the same person, and that both alike 
treat of him in his relation to the Jews. The apostle 
John presents him to us in his relation to Christianity, 
when he writes, ‘‘ He is the* Antichrist, that denieth 
the Father and the Son” (z John ii. 22). 

We also learn that he will prosper till the indignation 
be accomplished, etc. God will allow him to have 
hisown way for the moment ;. but when the indigna- 
tion is accomplished in His chastisement of the guilty 
nation for the rejection of Christ, at the end of the 
three years and a half so often spoken of in the 
Apocalypse, the Lord will appear from heaven and 
consume this wicked one .with the spirit of His 
mouth, and destroy him with the brightness of His 
coming (2 Thess. ii. 8; Rev. xix. 20). 

Following the prophetic narrative, we learn, in the 
next place, that Antichrist will be an apostate Jew; 
he will not “regard the God of his fathers,” nor, 
moreover, “ the desire of women, nor regard any god,” 
for the reason already given, that “‘he shall magnify 
himself above all.” This, we judge, refers to his own 
state of mind; but as men, speaking generally, must 
have some kind of religion, he will introduce a god for 
their acceptance—“ the god of forces: and a god 


* The article is in the text, though not given in the Authorized 
Version. 


CHAPTER XI. 187 


-_ whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold, 
_ and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant 
things. Thus shall he do in the most strong holds 
with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and 
increase with glory” (vv. 38, 39). Entirely infidel 
and atheistic himself, he will, in order to satisfy the 
cravings of the people, promote tbe worship of an 
idol—the image, it is to be concluded, that he himself 
will cause to be made to the beast which had the 
wound by a sword and did live—the head, that is, of 
the western Roman Empire in its last revived form. 
Concerning this we read in Revelation that ‘the 
king ” of this chapter in Daniel, the beast in Revela- 
tion who “had two horns like a lamb, and spake as a 
_ dragon” (for they are one and the same person), 
“had power to give life (breath) unto the image of the 
beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, 
and cause that as many as would not worship the 
image of the beast should be killed” (chapter xiii. 15).* 
Endowed as this “wilful king” will be with such 
Satanic art and power, it is easily understood how 
readily he will obtain ascendancy over the minds of 
men, and succeed in subduing them to his will for the 
execution of his diabolical designs. It is of this period 
the apostle speaks when he says that God will send 
upon men, because they received not the love of the 
truth that they might be saved, a strong delusion 
that they should believe a lie (2 Thess. ii. 10, 11). 

The last clause of verse 39 is not soclear. It reads: 
“And he shall cause them to rule over many, and 
shall divide the land for gain.” Its purport has been 


* To prevent confusion, it must again be recalled that, in addition 
to the image which Antichrist will make and cause to be worshipped 
throughout the Roman Empire, he will himself sit as a god in the 
temple at Jerusalem. 


188 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


generally taken to signify that he will promote his 
own. followers to places of honour and rule, and appor- 
tion the land either for his own personal profit or as 
rewards for faithful service, devotedness to his interests. 
The term “‘ the land ”’ settles beyond doubt the sphere 
of this king’s influence and activity ; for it always, as 
far as we know, describes the land of promise. This 
in Scripture language is emphatically the land; and 
consequently it bears out the conclusion arrived at 
before, that Jerusalem and Palestine is the seat of the 
wilful king’s power, and thus that he is the Antichrist. 

Now that the Antichrist has been portrayed in his 
moral characteristics, the Spirit of God, through the 
angel, passes on to describe the actings—mainly of 
the king of the north, though the king of the south is 
also mentioned. Two or three introductory obser- 
vations will aid the reader in the study of this part of 
our scripture. He will now see, from the fact men- 
tioned in verse 40, the reason of the detailed accounts 
of the conflicts between the kings of the north and 
south in the earlier part of the chapter. It is simply 
because of the relationship of these two sovereigns to 
the Jews and to “the land,” and because of their 
typical and prophetical character in reference to the 
end. To understand what took place in these con- 
flicts in the past is the qualification for the under- 
standing of what will take place in the future. With 
this is connected a very important thing, which is 
revealed in the prophetic scriptures. The kings of the 
south and north appear in verse 40, and it is “‘ at the 
time of the end”; Edom, Moab, and Ammon are 
named in verse 41 as existing at the same period; and 
it may be gathered from many other scriptures that 
when thé Jews are once more in their own land, the 


CHAPTER Xl - 8s 


nations that forrnerly surrounded them, and were in 
proximate relationship with them, will re-appear in 
_ their old places. ‘‘ When the Most High divided to 
the nations their inheritance, when He separated the 
sons of Adam, He set the bounds of the people 
[peoples] according to the number of the children of 
Israel”? (Deut. xxxii. 8). When therefore Israel 
again occupies its place, the bounds of the peoples will 
be restored according to their divine and original 
determination. To perceive this, as revealed in the 
Scripture, is to possess the key of a large portion of 
prophecy.* . 

To return to our subject, we are told that the 
“ wilful king,” will, at the time of the end, be attacked 
by the king of the south; and that this will bring his 
adversary, the king of the north, into the field, who 
will “‘come against him like a whirlwind, with 
chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships” 
(v. 40). At this period the king of the north, strong, 
“but not by his own power” (chapter vili. 24), will 
combine both military and naval forces in his expedi- 
tion, and will apparently be successful in all his pro- 
jects. It is not precisely stated what will be the issue 
of his campaign in Palestine; but we gather from 
chapter viii. that he will “destroy the mighty and 
the holy people” (v. 24), and here we learn that he 
“shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow 

x IP nay be interesting to some to state that there are four words 
used in the Old Testament for people and peoples—one always in the 
singular, either ‘“‘ the people ” or “ my people ” for Israel; another 
in the plural to indicate the heathen or nations who are in contrast 
with Israel as the people of God—lIsrael is once so designated to 
mark its guilt in Psalm xliii. 1 ; another for the peoples and nations 
in general on the earth, the various races of mankind; and lastly 
one for “ the nations, viewed, I think, in connection with Israel 


restored, and taken into relationship with Jehovah.” (See The 
Synopsis, by J. N. Darby, vol. ii. pp. 84, 85), 


Igo THE PROPHET DANIEL 


and pass over. He shall enter also into the glorious 
land, and many countries shall be overthrown ” 
(vv. 40, 41). Doubtless this is the overflowing scourge, 
of which Isaiah speaks, as passing through the land, 
and treading down the “scornful men ” that rule this 
people which is in Jerusalem ” (xxvili. 14-22). 

Then, as a wonderful confirmation of the truth and 
unity of all Scripture, we are told, “ But these shall 
escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and 
the chief of the children of Ammon” (v. 41). If we 
turn to Isaiah xi. we find the explanation. It says, 
speaking of the time after both Judah and Israel have 
been restored, “‘ They shall lay their hand upon Edom 
and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey 
them” (v. 14). God’s judgment upon these three 
nations is to be executed by Israel; and on this 
account the Assyrian, the king of the north, will not 
be permitted to touch them; but they will escape 
out of his hand. 

If however these nations elude his vengeance, he 
will carry his successes into other countries, and 
especially into Egypt. “The land of Egypt shall 
not escape. But he shall have power over the trea- 
sures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious 
things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians 
shall be at his steps.”” But it would not be according 
to the divine purpose that he should go further, or 
even consolidate his conquests in these southern 
regions. As the blind instrument of God’s will, he 
may overcome all the forces brought against him, 
and enrich himself with the treasures of Egypt, and 
thus be the executor of God’s judgment upon that 
country. But, his work done, he must return, and 
“tidings out of the east and out of the north shall — 


CHAPTER XI. 1gI 


trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great 
fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many ” 
(v. 44). Evidently news of approaching enemies from 
the east, the east of Syria, and it may be of domestic 
foes, as the north points to his own country, will 
reach him; and he, flushed at the moment with his 
successes, will start, confident in his own power, and 
_ “with great fury,” to deal with his foes. 

It is as he is marching homewards that he will, as 
the next verse informs us, “ plant the tabernacles of 
his palace between the seas* in the glorious holy 
mountain’ (v. 45). Like his type, Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, he makes Jerusalem and the land the first 
object of his hostility on his return from Egypt; and 
then it is added, ‘‘ Yet he shall come to his end, and 
none shall help him.” Of the circumstances of the 
termination of his career we are not told; the simple 
fact is recorded that, in connection with his hostility 
against the glorious holy mountain, his end is reached, 
and he dies under the judgment of God. In chapter 
viii. we read that the little horn, who undoubtedly is 
the king of the north, will “stand up against the 
Prince of princes; but he shall be broken without 
hand” (#. 25). If this refer to the same event, as 
appears probable, we have in both Scriptures the 
destruction of the prophetic Assyrian by the Lord 
Himself, and hence he is broken ‘‘ without hand,” 
that is, without human instrumentality, and more- 
over, ‘‘none shall help him.” For, as we learn from 
Isaiah, “the Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall lop the 
bough with terror: and the high ones of stature shall 


* If this rendering be accepted it will mean the Mediterranean, or 
Great Sea, and the Dead Sea; but there are those who understand 
the expression to mean, “ between Jerusalem and the Sea,’’ 


192 THE PROPHET DANIEL. 


be hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled ” 
(chapter x. 38). Whether this event must be placed 
before or after the destruction of the beast and of the 
false prophet can only be determined by a careful 
study of the prophetic Scriptures. If Zechariah xiv. 
give the final assault of Jerusalem it must be placed 
unquestionably after the Lord has cast the beast and 
Antichrist alive into the lake of fire (see also Micah v. 
4, 5). | ; 

It may be well to add that the end of the “ wilful 
king,” the Antichrist, is not here given—that is found 
in Rev. xix. where he is described as the false prophet. 
Here it is the end of the king of the north, one of 
the most formidable enemies of the Jews in the last 
days—during the time of their unequalled sorrows. 
They will be beset on every hand; for in addition to 
the Assyrian (the king of the north), there will be the 
first beast of Rev. xiii. (the imperial head of the 
western empire) and his ally the Antichrist, as well as 
the king of the south mentioned in verse 4o of our 
chapter. This will enable us to understand the 
language of the Spirit of Christ in Psalm cxviii. “All 
nations compassed me about : but in the name of the 
Lord will I destroy them. They compassed me 
about ; yea, they compassed me about: but in the 
name of the Lord I will destroy them. They com- 
passed me about like bees; they are quenched as the 
fire of thorns: for in the name of the Lord I will 
destroy them ” (vv. 10-12). 


CHAPTER XII. 193 


CHAPTER XII. 


i 62s reference to the question discussed at the close 

of the previous chapter as to whether or not the 
end of the king of the north in verse 45 is the final 
judgment upon the Assyrian, light is thrown upon it 
by the first verse of this chapter. The words, “‘ And 
at that time-shall Michael stand up,” will refer to the 
period of the events described in chapter xi. 36-45, 
because they are followed by the statement that 
“there shall be a time of trouble ”—the period of 
unspeakable sorrow for the Jews in the land before 
the appearing of Christ. Then it is said, “At that 
time thy people shall be delivered,” that is, as we 
know from other scriptures, at the close of the tribu- 
lation, and therefore after the destruction of both 
Antichrist and the Assyrian. There are three impor- 
tant things contained in this opening verse. The first 
is the action of Michael. We learned from chapter x. 21 
that this exalted intelligence had a special connection 
with the Jews in the ordering of God’s providential 
government, and that he was consequently termed by 
the angel, when speaking to Daniel, “ Michael your 
prince.” Now we gather, whatever his special func- 
tions up to this period, that, at the moment indicated 
by the first words of verse 1, he begins to act in a 
more energetic way, interposing with power on behalf 
of the nation entrusted to his care. Have we any 
means of discovering what the particular action was, 
as signified by the words, “‘ At that time shall Michael 
stand up”? Turning to Rev. xii. we read, “ And 

13 


194 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels 
fought against the dragon ; and the dragon fought and 
his angels, and prevailed not ; neither was their place 
found any more in heaven. And the great dragon... 
was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast 
out with him.” And thereon there was a loud out- 
burst of joy in heaven because “the accuser of our 
brethren is cast down, which accused them before our 
God night and day ” (vv. 7-10). This we cannot doubt 
is the commencement of the activity of the archangel, 
when he shall stand up for Daniel’s people. 

This conclusion is sustained by the fact that the un- 
paralleled time of trouble follows, and this harmonizes 
with what we find in Revelation: ‘‘ Woe to the 
inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil 
is come down unto you, having great wrath, because _ 

-he knoweth that he hath but a short time.” And in 
the very next verse we read: ‘“‘ And when the dragon 
saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted 
the woman [Israel] which brought forth the man 
child [Christ].” (Rev. xii. 12, 13.) Remark, more- 
over, as having a distinct bearing on the subject, that 
the woman is endowed with power to escape from 
his enmity, and is “nourished for a time, and times, 
and half a time, from the face of the serpent”; and 
also that, when the dragon was foiled in his attempt 
to destroy the woman he was wroth with her, “‘ and 
went to make war with the remnant of her seed 
which keep the commandments of God, and have the 
testimony of Jesus Christ ” (Rev. xii. 14-17). wet 

If this interpretation be correct, the next clause of 
the verse is at once understood. It says: ‘‘ And 
there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was 
since there was a nation even to that same time.” 


CHAPTER XII. 195 


There are two other remarkable allusions to this same 
period of sorrow and tribulation. In Jeremiah we 
read, “‘ For thus saith the Lord; We have heard a 
voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace. Ask ye 
. how, and see whether a man doth travail with child ? - 
wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his 
loins, as @ woman in travail, and all faces are turned 
inte paleness ? Alas! for that day is great, so that 
none is like it : it is even the time of Jacob’s trouble ; 
but he shall be saved out of it” (chap. xxx. 5-7). 
And the next verse describes his deliverance by the 
Lord Himself, just as in Daniel the time of trouble is 
followed by deliverance. Our Lord has also spoken 
of this period as follows: ‘“‘ For then shall be great 
‘tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the 
world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. And except 
those days should be shortened, there should no flesh 
be saved: but for the elect’s sake those days shall be 
shortened’ (Matt. xxiv. 21, 22). To prevent all 
possibility of mistake as to the period of this tribula- 
tion, the Lord expressly connects it with the setting 
up of the “abomination of desolation, spoken of by 
Daniel the prophet . . . in the holy place.” It will 
be remembered, from what was said of the seventieth 
week, when considering chapter ix., that this occur- 
rence takes place in the middle of that week. 

This time of trouble therefore is its last half—the 
time and times and the dividing of time of chapter 
vii. 25; the time, times, and an half of verse 7 of this 
chapter; and the 1,260 days, or forty-two months of 
Revelation. Satan is the instigator of the trouble ; 
but his agents, as we learn elsewhere, will be the two 
great enemies of the faithful remnant among the Jews, 
the two beasts of Rev. xiii, and their enemy from 


196 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


without, the Assyrian. But while Satan is the prime 
mover of all the sorrow through which Daniel’s people 
will have to pass, it must be borne in mind that God 
uses it as His judicial rod to punish His people for 
their crowning sin in the rejection of their Messiah. 
Restored to their land, after the captivity in Babylon, 
Christ came in the fulness of time, and was born in 
Bethlehem, according to the prediction of their pro- 
phets, and His forerunner, John the Baptist, pro- 
claimed His advent ; but when He came to His own, 
His own received Him not; they refused and rejected 
Him, even going so far as to say, “‘ We have no king 
but Cesar,” and to accept the guilt of His death, cry- 
ing, “‘ His blood be on us, and on our children.” God 
could not but chastise the guilty nation, and this “time 
of trouble” is the period during which His rod, whatever 
the instruments, will fall in successive and ever heavier 
strokes until “the indignation be accomplished.” 

But in the midst of wrath He will remember mercy, 
for unless those days should be shortened, as we have 
seen, there should no flesh be saved, but for the elect’s 
sake those days shall be shortened; and hence it is 
that we read at the close of verse 1: ‘* And at that 
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that 
shall be found written in the book.” The period 
indicated is, of course, at the close of the “time of 
trouble.” As indeed we gather from other prophets, 
it will be at the moment when all hope will seem to 
have departed, just when the jaws of the roaring lion 
are about to close upon his prey, that the Lord will 
suddenly appear for the succour and rescue of His 
poor and aiflicted people (see Zechariah xii.—xiv. ; 
Isaiah xxv., xxvi., etc.). 

It is interesting to note the distinction here made — 


CHAPTER XII. 197 


between the mass of the nation and the elect remnant. 
It is not all who are delivered, but “every one that 
shall be found written in the book.” It is very clear 
therefore that God has His elect amongst His earthly 
people, as well as that His heavenly people are the 
objects of His eternal choice in Christ. They are — 
mentioned, too, in Revelation, where, after the account 
of the blasphemous conduct of the first beast of 
chapter xiii, we read, ‘‘ And all that dwell upon the 
earth shall worship him, whose names are not written 
in the book of life of the Lamb slain* from the founda- 
tion of the world.” God therefore from the foundation 
of the world, not before it as in the case of the heavenly 
saints (Ephes. i. 4), had chosen this remnant, who 
should prove their election by refusing to worship the 
image of the beast (compare 1 Thess. i. 4, 5); and it is 
of these the angel says that they shall be delivered. 
Some indeed may seal their fidelity with martyrdom, 
but, if so, they will obtain a better deliverance, for 
they will be reserved for heavenly blessing, participating 
in the first resurrection ; but whether thus, or whether, 
like the 144,000 on Mount Zion, they are brought 
through the time of trouble, all alike will be redeemed 
from the hand of their enemies through the faithfulness 
and power of their God. 

The next verse (2) is more comprehensive. ‘And 
many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall 
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and 
everlasting contempt.’’ It should be borne in mind 
that during the “time of trouble” only two tribes, 
Judah and Benjamin, are in the land; the remaining 
ten will be lost, as they are now, among the nations ; 


* This is better rendered “‘ Whose names had not been written from 
the foundation of the world in the book of life of the slain Lamb,” 


198 THE PROPHE? DANIEL 


and it is to these that this veise refers. After the 
Lord has appeared and succoured the faithful remnant 
in Judah and Jerusalem (Zechariah xii.), He will 
establish His throne in Mount Zion, and thereafter 
He will recover His lost people, as we read in the 
prophet Ezekiel: “ And I will bring you out from the 
people [peoples], and will gather you out of the coun- | 
tries wherein ye are scattered. . . . And I will bring 
you into the wilderness of the people, and there will I 
‘plead with you face to face... .. And I will purge 
out from among you the rebels and them that trans- 
gress against me. . . . And ye shall know that I am 
the Lord, when I shall bring you into the land of 
Israel, into the country for the which I lifted up mine 
hand to give it to your fathers” (chapter xx. 33-42). 

Now this passage treats entirely of Israel—that is, 
the ten tribes as distinguished from the Jews (the two 
tribes); and it will be seen, if it be attentively con- 
sidered, that it speaks of two classes—one who will be 
brought back to the land for blessing, and the other 
who will be judged in the wilderness. It is of these 
same two classes that verse 2 speaks. Both alike 
are regarded as sleeping in the dust of the earth while 
lost and scattered among the nations; but when the 
Lord “‘shall send His angels with a great sound of a 
trumpet”? to gather “‘ His elect from the four winds, 
from one end of heaven to the other ” (Matt. xxiv. 31), 
all alike will be awakened ; some, as we here read, to 
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting 
contempt. The same contrast is found in the judg- 
ment of the living nations, of whom some shall go 
away into everlasting punishment, and some into life 
eternal (Matt. xxv. 31). This last scripture is 
important as showing that the saints during the 


CHAPTER XII. 199 


millennium will enjoy eternal life, if not of the same 
character as that which Christians possess, yet accord- 
ing to the revelation God will make of Himself to His 
people of that dispensation. It will be the “life for 
evermore ” of which David speaks in Psalm cxxxiii. as 
characterising millennial blessedness. ~ 
Some however may enquire whether this verse (v. 2) 
does not rather speak of resurrection. Two con- 
siderations will, we judge, show that it does not ; and 
that the interpretation given is according to the 
teaching of scripture. In the first place, the figure of 
“awaking ” is constantly employed in a moral sense 
in the Old Testament (see Isaiah li. 19, lii. 1, etc.) ; 
and even in the New it is used in a most striking way. 
_ The apostle, for example, writing to the Ephesians, 
says, “‘ Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the 
dead, and Christ shall give thee light ” (Ephes. v. 14); 
and no one could doubt the figurative sense in this 
passage. Secondly the prophet Ezekiel uses the 
figure of resurrection plainly in the sense of a national 
revival. We say “plainly,” because the application 
the prophet himself makes shows, beyond question, 
what was intended (see Ezekiel xxxvil. I-14). ™ 
What we gather therefore is, that God, im some 
special and extraordinary way, will arouse His scat- 
tered people from the lethargy into which they have 
fallen, and will kindle once more within their hearts the 
expectation of the fulfilment of the prophetic promises 
concerning their restoration and blessing under their 
Messiah. But, together with the re-awakening of their 
national hopes, God will purge out the rebels from 
among them, preparatory to their restoration, so that it 
will be literally true that some will awake to everlast- 
ing life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. 


200 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


The third verse speaks of the class, we apprehend, 
mentioned in the previous chapter (v. 33); only here 
it may be that they are divided into two classes—those 
who are wise, and those who turn many to righteous- 
ness, or, as some prefer to render it, those who instruct 
the many in righteousness. Adopting this rendering, 
it will point back to the energetic testimony God 
raised up in the midst of the Jews during the last half 
week, when Satan’s power was demonstrated without 
let or hindrance. Even then there will be those, 
chosen and sustained by God, who, undaunted by the 
terrors of the times, will courageously maintain the 
authority of God’s word, and unweariedly seek to 
bring “the many” under its influence and power. 
In the establishment of the kingdom, whatever their 
sufferings, or even martyrdom, on account of their 
testimony, their past service will be recognised, and 
they will occupy a special place. Those that be wise 
having possessed God’s mind, and having been endowed 
with divine wisdom, shall shine as the brightness of the 
firmament; they will be conspicuously displayed as in 
the enjoyment of the special favour of God ; and they 
that instruct the many in righteousness [shall shine] as 
the stars for ever and ever; they shall be assigned a 
place of authority and light-giving throughout the 
* duration of the kingdom. (Compare Luke xix. 15-19.) 

The revelation through Daniel’s celestial visitant is 
now completed, and he receives the command: “ But 
thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, 
even to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, 
and knowledge shall be increased” (v. 4). It has 
often been noticed, in contrast with this instruction to 
Daniel, that John, at the close of the book of Revela- 
tion, is directed not to seal “‘ the sayings of the prophecy 


CHAPTER XII. 3 201 


of this book,” and the reason given is that “ the time 
is at hand” (Rev. xxii. 10). This explains the 
difference between the positions occupied by Daniel 
and John, The time was not at hand for Daniel, and 
thus his book was to be sealed to the time of the end. 
If it be asked how it is that we possess the means for 
the understanding of that which was to be sealed “ to 
the time of the end,” the answer is that this period has 
arrived for Christians. Paul speaks of the “last 
days,” and John of the “‘ last time ” (2 Timothy iii. 1 ; 
x John ii. 18). The death of Christ indeed, which 
took place “in the consummation of the ages,” 
inaugurated the time of the end; and hence for those 
who are Christians, possessing the Holy Ghost, there 
is nothing concealed (John xvi. 13; x John ii. 20). 
Through the Spirit of God therefore, ‘‘ the time of the 
end ”’ having arrived, Daniel’s book is unsealed ; and 
if we fail to apprehend what was communicated to 
him, it is either because we are not in the state of soul 
which gives the opened ear and entire subjection to 
the divine word (see Isaiah 1. 4, 5), or because we have 
not given serious attention to what has been revealed. 

The statement that many shall run to and fro, and 
knowledge shall be increased, would seem to give the 
characteristics of the period from the days of Daniel 
until ‘‘ the time of the end.” How true it is of the 
present moment; and until the Lord comes it will be 
ever more fully exemplified. hes 

From verse 5 we have the conclusion of Daniel’s 
prophetic visions. He is still by the river Hiddekel ; 
and he tells us, ‘“‘ Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, 
there stood other two, the one on this side of the bank 
of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of 
the river.“ And one said to the man clothed in linen, 


202 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


which was upon the waters of the river, How long shall 
it be to the end of these wonders ? ” (vv. 5, 6). The 
answer explains the question. The man clothed in 
fine linen “‘ held up his right hand and his left hand 
unto heaven, and sware by Him that liveth for ever 
that it shall be for a time, times, and an half; and 
when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power 
of the holy people, all these things shall be finished ” 
(v. 7). From the introduction of the familiar period, 
“time, times, and an half,” that is, the last half week 
we understand that the question referred to the 
duration of the “time of trouble’? mentioned in 
verse 1; and the answer states that it is limited to 
three years and a half, or 1,260 days. The latter part 
of the answer states also, that when God has collected 
His scattered people, having accomplished His pur- 
poses in their dispersion,* all these things shall be 
finished. Two things are thus revealed: that the 
period of tribulation shall not extend beyond the 
half-week ; and that at the close of it having suc- 
coured His people already in the land, God will 
assemble His outcast people from all the quarters 
where they have been dispersed. These two things 
are confirmed by a divine oath—one of the two 
immutable things in which it is impossible for God to 
he, for a comparison of this scripture with Rev. x. 
5-7 will surely lead to the conclusion that He who 
utters this oath is more than man. 

Daniel heard, and understood not; and then said, 
““O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things ? ” 
He is reminded that “the words are closed up and 
sealed till the time of the end”; and then a further 


* This, as we understand it, is the force of this somewhat difficult 
sentence. 


CHAPTER XII. eZ 203 


c:.imunication is made: “ Many shall be purified, 
aici made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do 
wickeci 7: and none of the wicked shall understand ; 
“at the wise shall understand ” (v. 10). It is evident 
that the reference is still to the “‘ time of trouble ” in 
“he last half week; and what we learn is, that the 
Lord will take up the sorrows and trials of that time 
and use them as needful discipline for those that 
wait on Him—His faithful remnant amid the wicked- 
mess and apostasy by which they will be surrounded. 
Whatever their sufferings, therefore, ‘many shall 
be purified and made white. and tried.” It is on 
this principle God ever acts, even as the apostle 
teaches that God chastens us “ for our profit, that we 
might be partakers of His holiness’ (Heb. xii. 10). 
But tf God thus purges His people from their dross, 
the wicked—the wicked, we apprehend, among the 
Jews—“‘shall do wickedly.” They will, under the 
leadership of Antichrist, sin with a high hand, throw off 
all restraint, and fall into open and avowed apostasy. 
The last part of the verse alludes to verse 8, where 
Daniel says he understood not; and in it we have a 
principle of abiding importance. It gives us the 
indispensable condition of understanding divine things 
as revealed in God’s word. It says, “‘ None of the 
wicked shall understand; but the wise shall under- 
stand.” There may be the plainest of testimonies, 
but if the heart, alienated from God, be bent upon 
wickedness, it will not comprehend it. What is 
purest light to God’s people will be densest darkness 
to the sinners amongst the nation. The wise only 
will understand; and let it be for ever remembered 
that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, 
that Christ in this present time is the only wisdom of 


204 THE PROPHET DANIEL 


His people. It had been well if this had been remers- 
bered, especially now, when the Scriptures of truth are 
being assailed with persistency, not to say virulence, 
by men of learning and intellectual power. “ The 
things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.” 
And again, ‘‘ The natural man receiveth not the things 
of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto 
him: neither can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned ” (1 Cor. ii. 11-14). None there- 
fore but the wise, the spiritually wise, can in any dis- 
pensation enter into the mind of God, however plainly 
it may be revealed in His word. 

It is on the basis of this principle, in answer to 
Daniel’s question, ‘‘“O my Lord, what shall be the 
_ end of these things ?”’ (v. 8) that the “‘ man clothed 
in linen” makes further revelations to the prophet. 
He now tells him in most express language that ‘‘ from 
the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, 
and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, 
there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety 
days’ (v. 11). It is this Scripture our Lord cites in 
Matt. xxiv. so far as the setting up of the abomination 
of desolation is concerned ; and from chapter ix. 27 
we have gathered that these things will take place in 
the middle of the seventieth week; and if so, there 
will remain only 1,260 days for these prophetic weeks 
to run their course. But here we have an addition of 
thirty days. Is is possible to explain the reason of 
this ? Nothing certain can be said; only it is clear, 
from many references both in this book and in Revela- 
tion, that the 1,260 days fix the duration of the “‘ time 
of trouble,” which will be ended by the appearing of 
Christ. At His coming in glory the beast and the 
false prophet are taken and cast alive into the lake of 


CHAPTER XII. 205 


fire (Rev. xix.), and He will go forth and fight against 
the nations that will at that time be besieging Jeru- 
salem. There are several great events therefore to 
follow the termination of the last half week preparatory 
to the establishment of Messiah’s throne in Zion ; and 
it is possible that this is the reason for the additional 
thirty days. There is, however, in verse 12, a further 
forty-five days: ‘Blessed is he that waiteth, and 
cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and 
thirty days.” From the very form in which this 
extra period is introduced, it evidently points to the 
full establishment of blessing in the ordering of the 
kingdom. We may cite on this point the words of a 
well-known student of the Scriptures: “I have 
thought it possible that this computation may arise 
from this. An intercalary month to the 1,260 days, 
or three years and a half, and then 45 days, if the 
years were ecclesiastical years, would bring up to the 
feast of tabernacles; but I offer no judgment on it. 
At any rate, the statement is clear that then the 
sanctuary of God is cleansed in Jerusalem.”* If the 
reader will turn to Leviticus xxiii. he will understand, 
the purport of the remark as to the feast of tabernacles 
as he will perceive that it is the last of the cycle of 
feasts—a feast which was intended to celebrate Israel’s 
rest, and possession of the land, after their wanderings 
in the wilderness; a feast, therefore, which as yet, 
according to the teaching of Heb. iii. and iv., has had 
no complete fulfilment. It awaits its realisation, 
according to the thoughts of God, until the true 
Solomon, after He has, as the true David, executed 
* It js clear, from chap. ix, 24, that the period includes the anoint- 
ing of the most Holy. If therefore the three years and a half, 1260 


days, determine the duration of the time of trouble, there might be 
a further period for the introduction of the full blessing thus indicated. 


206 _ THE PROPHET DANIEL 


judgment upon His enemies, shall give rest to His 
people, when with joy they will draw water out of the 
wells of salvation (Isaiah xii. 3 ; compare John vii. 37). 

But Daniel does not enter upon this scene of millen- 
nialjoy. He is occupied with the times of the Gentiles 
up to the deliverance of his people. It was reserved 
for other prophets to speak of the establishment of 
the kingdom and of the blessings of Messiah’s reign.* 

And now with one last word to the prophet the 
book is ended. Vessel of the divine mind as to the 
times of the Gentiles, and the deliverance of his people, 
his work is done, and he is now bidden to retire from - 
the scene: ‘“‘Go thou thy way till the end be: for 
thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the 
days ” (#. 13). Rest was to follow on the completion 
of his labours, and he would have his own special 
place in the Kingdom at the end of the days. Our 
Lord Himself said, ‘‘ Many shall come from the east 
and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and 
Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven” (Matt. 
viii. 11); and Daniel will share in the glories of that 
day. Now one of the spirits of just men made perfect, 
he will then participate in the first resurrection ; and, 
returning with all the risen saints with Christ in glory, 
he will stand in his lot, occupy the special place 
assigned him, in the kingdom of Him, whom he had 
seen in the night visions as the Son of man coming in 
the clouds of heaven. 


* It is remarkable how few are the scriptures that treat of the 
actual blessings of the reign of Christ. Among the Psalms, for 
example, it is only Psalms Ixxii. and cxlv. that do so, There are 
many more that deal with His coming, and with the joy of His 
people in His reception, but they stop short of the millennial reign 
itself. Neither does Isaiah, who the most frequently alludes 
prophedcaly to the coming glories of Immanuel’s rule, go mueh 
urther. 


LONDON ; G. MORRISH, 114 CAMBERWBLL ROAD, 
LONDON, 8.&.5. 


Dennett, Edward, 
Daniel, the prophet. 
- and the times of 


SUED —= 


3 poate UA Se 
jeu Dosw 


Dennett, Edward, 
Daniel, the prophet 
: and the times of 


Bethel Seminary Library 
3949 Bethel Drive 
St. Paul, Minn. 55112 


DEMCO 


aw 
<7 W7-DJF-874 


