Se aa wee ey, 


—- 


AeAeeooree 


am ir 


wi hesgerraninn tener ece 


Iwntn cnn bree manera 


DANIEL 


+ 


IN THE 
CRITICS’ 
DEN. 

eo 


“ 


Sm ROBERT 


ANDERSON, 
K.C.B., LL.D. 


We should not exceed 
the bounds of accuracy 
were we to say that this 
logical, philosophical, 
and always reverent 
treatise pulverises the 
latest attack on the 
Book of Daniel. 
—Evangelical Churchman. 


About this Book: 


“A most valuable book.’’—Dr. Griffith 
Thomas, Wycliffe Hall, Toronto. 

“Tt is excellent.’’—L. W. G. Alexander, 
Edinburgh. 

“The volume by Sir Robert Anderson, ‘Daniel 
in the Critics’ Den,’ is good. We heartily com- 
mend it.’’—A.C. Gaebelein, Editor of Our Hope, 


New York. 
“A trenchant exposure of the assumptions of 
Higher Criticism. . . We trust this volume will 


‘be read by thousands.’’—C. H. Spurgeon, in 
Sword and Trowel. 

[His] “apparently cogent elucidation of the 
vexed question of the ‘seventy weeks.’ ’’—The 
Times. 

“To the unbiased mind which has studied both 
sides of the question this work would appear to 
be unanswerable.’’—-Sunday Magazine. 

“We welcome Sir Robert Anderson’s extremely 
able defence of the truth of the record of Daniel. 
In its cautious, but firm, weighing of evidence, 
the refutation (of the critics) is crushing .’’—The 
Record. 

“Tf Sir Robert Anderson has—as we believe 
he has—successfully refuted the charge as con- 
cerns the Book of Daniel, he has inferentially 
done so as concerns the whole Canon of the Scrip- 
tures.’’—The Rock. 

“We certainly think that this work will make 
Bible students reopen the study of the Book of 
Daniel, with regard to authorship, philology, 
and history .’’—Church Bells. 

“We should not exceed the bounds of accuracy 
were we to say of this logical, philosophical, and 
always reverent treatise, that it pulverises the 
latest attack on the Book of Daniel.’’—English 
Churchman. 

“We sincerely trust it will have the extensive 
circulation it so well deserves. Few books expose 
with equal truth and vigour the fallacies of de- 
structive criticism .’’—Church Family Newspaper. 


naa is Caan 


FORTHEASTERN 8/5 E LIBRARY 


DANIEL IN TH 
CRITICS’ DEN 


An Investigation as to the 
Accuracy of the Book of Daniel 


A REPLY to PROFESSOR DRIVER or OXFORD 
AND THE LATE DEAN FARRAR 


BY 


Sm ROBERT ANDERSON, xcs, LL. 


Author of ‘‘The Gospel and Its Ministry,*’ ‘‘The Silence of God,’’ 
‘*The Bible and Modern Criticism,’’ ‘‘The Lord from Heaven,’’ 
*‘Human Destiny,’’ etc. 


ey Kourta EpIrion 
{0 Zoe TE WASTER'S COLLEGE 

go POWELL LIBRARY 
} SANTA CLARITA, CA 9132) 


4\ 


PICKERING & INGLIS 
229 Bothwell Street, Glasgow ; 75 Princes Street, Edinburg 
ALFRED HOLNESS, 14 Paternoster Row, London, E.C.4 


Agents as next page, and through aed Looksellers 


OFFICES AND AGENTS. 

Giascow: Pickerinc & InGuis, 229 Bothwell Street. 

ee Joun Menzizs & Co., their Branches and Bookstalls. 
EDINBURGH: PicKERING & INGLIS, 75 Princes Street. 
Lonpon: ALFRED Hoiness, 14 Paternoster Row, E.C. 

‘i ALL THE WHOLESALE HousEs. 
MANCHESTER: JoHN HEywoop, Deansgate. 
LiveRPOooL: WM. T. JAYE,18 Slater Street. 
NEWCASTLE: NorRTHERN Counties Depot, 63a Blackett Street. 
BirMInGHAM: P. H. HuLBert, 315 Broad Street (Corner). 
PiymoutTH : J. E Burt, Morley Villa, Fernleigh Road. 
Batu: H. W. & H. R. Grirritus, 35 Milton Avenue. 
ILFRACOMBE: E. OSBORNE, 4 Portland Street. 
BrisToL: W. B. W. SARSFIELD, 78 Park Street. 
BirKENHEAD: J. E. Bevan, 15 Laburnum Road, Oxton. 
WESTON-SUPER-MARE: WESTERN BIBLE Deport, 12 Waterloo Street. 
CarpiFF: H. J. Lear, 17 Royal Arcade. 
DuBiin: R. STEwarT, 10 D’Olier Street, and 2 Nassau Street. 
BetFastT: RR» M‘Cray, 44 Ann Street. 

50) H.G. Gisson, 168 Upper North Street. 

“i W. M‘Nettty, Y.M.C.A. Buildings, Albert Bridge Road. 
DunpDEE : R. H. Lunpiz, 35 Reform Street. 
New York: GosPEL PUBLISHING House, 318 West 39th Street. 
Cuicaco: Wa. Morton, Bible Institute Assoc., 826 North La Salle St. 
BurFraLo, N.Y.: SworD AND SHIELD Tract Society, 1247 Niagara St. 
SWENGEL, Pa.: I. C. HirENDEN, Bible Truth Depot. 
Les ANGELES, CAL.: Gro. Ray, 8508 So. Vermont Avenue. 
Boston: HAmiLton Bros., 70 Kelley Street, Room 13. 
PHILADELPHIA: GLAD TipIncGs PUBLISHING Co., 5863 Christian St. 
Daas, Texas: J. T. Dean, 2613 Pennsylvania Avenue. : 
Winpsor, Ont.: C. J. Stowe, 23 Martin Street. 
Toronto: Upper CanapvA Tract Society, 2 Richmond Street, E. 
Orii1a, OnTARIO: S. W. BENNER, Bible and Tract Depot. 
Winnirec: N.-W. Bisie Depot, 580 Main Street. 
Buenos Arres: W.C. K. Torre, Casilla 5. 
MELBOURNE: E. W. Coxz, Book Arcade. 
SYDNEY: BIBLE, Book AND Tract Depot, 373 Elizabeth Street. 
BrisBane: W. R. Smitu & Co., Bible Repository, Albert Street. 
AvucKLAND, N.Z.: H. L. Toatcner, 135 Symonds Street. 
Dunevin: H. J. Batzs, Otago Bible House, 38 George Street. 
PALMERSTON NortH: JAMES G. Harvey, Main Street. 
CHRISTCHURCH: G. W. Priimsoii, 84 Manchester Street. 
Bricaum, Invi: W. C. Irvine, Christian Literature Depot. 
BANGALORE: A. M‘D, Repwoopn, Frasertown Book Depot. 
Catcurta: “CHRISTIAN WITNESS’’ OFFICE. 
Carro: Tue NILE Press, Bulag. 
HonG-Kone: A. Youn, Bible Depot, 2 Wyndham Street. 


And through most Booksellers, Colporteurs, and Tract Depois. 


PREFACE 


ALTHOUGH this volume appears under an old 
title, it is practically a new work. The title 
remains, lest any who possess my “ Reply to 
Dean Farrar’s Book of Daniel” should feel 
aggrieved on finding part of that treatise 
reproduced under a new designation.* But 
the latter half of this book is new; and the 
whole has been recast, in view of its main 
purpose and aim as a reply to Professor 
Driver's Commentary in ‘‘ The Cambridge 
Bible” series, : 

The appearance of Professor Driver's Book 
of Daniel marks an epoch in the Daniel 
controversy. Hitherto there has been no 
work in existence which English exponents 
of the sceptical hypothesis would accept as 


1 It appeared first as an article in Blackwood’s Magazine, 
and afterwards separately in book form. 
v 


V1 PREFACE 


a fair and adequate expression of their views. 
But now the oracle has spoken. The most 
trusted champion of the Higher Criticism 
in England has formulated the case against 
the Book of Daniel; and if that case can 
be refuted—if it can be shown that its ap- 
parent force depends on a skilful presentation 
of doubtful evidence upon the one side, to 
the exclusion of overwhelmingly cogent evi- 
dence upon the other—the result ought to 
be an “end of controversy” on the whole 
question. . 

It rests with others to decide whether 
this result is established in the following 
pages. I am willing to stake it upon the 
issues specified in Chapter VII. And even 
if the reader skould see fit to make that 
chapter the starting-point of his perusal of 
my book, I am still prepared to claim his 
verdict in favour of Daniel. 

And here I should’ premise, what will be 
found more than once repeated in the 
sequel, that the inquiry involved in the 


PREFACE Vil 


Daniel controversy is essentially judicial. 
An experienced Judge with an intelligent 
jury—any tribunal, indeed, accustomed to 
sift and weigh conflicting testimony—would 
be better fitted to deal with it than a com- 
pany of all the philologists of Christendom. 
The philologist’s proper place is in the 
witness-chair. He can. supply ‘but a] part, 
and that by no means the most important 
part, of the necessary evidence. And if a 
single well-ascertained fact be inconsistent 
with his theories, the fact must prevail. 
But this the specialist is proverbially slow 
to recognise. He is always apt to exag- 
gerate the importance of his own testimony, 
and to betray impatience when evidence of 
another kind is allowed legitimate weight. 
And nowhere is this tendency more marked 
than among the critics. 

In the preface to his Contenuzty of Scrip- 
Zure, Lord Hatherley speaks of “the sup- 
posed evidence on which are based some 
very confident assertions of a self-styled 


Vili PREFACE 


‘higher criticism.’ And he adds, “ Assum- 
ing the learning to be profound and accurate 
which has collected the material for much 
critical performance, the logic by which con- 
clusions are deduced from those materials 
is frequently grievously at fault, and open 
to the judgment of all who may have been 
accustomed to sift and weigh evidence.” 
My. apology for this book is that I can 
claim a humble place in the category de- 
scribed in these concluding words. Long 
accustomed to deal with evidence in diffi- 
cult and intricate inquiries, I have set 
myself to investigate the genuineness of 
the Book of Daniel, and the results of my 
inquiry are here recorded. 

Lord Hatherley was not the only Lord 
Chancellor of our time to whom earnest 
thought and study brought a settled con- 
viction of the Divine authority and absolute 
integrity of Holy Scripture. The two very 
great men who in turn succeeded him in 
that high office, though versed in the litera- 


PREFACE 1X 


ture of the critics, held unflinchingly to the 
same conclusion. And while some, perhaps, 
would dismiss the judgment of men like 
Lord Cairns and Lord Selborne as being 
that of ‘mere laymen,” sensible people the 
whole world over would accept their de- 
cision upon an intricate judicial question of 
this kind against that of all the pundits of 
Christendom. 

As regards my attitude towards criticism, 
I deprecate being misunderstood. Every 
book I have written gives proof of fear- 
lessness in applying critical methods to the 
study of the Bible. But the Higher Criticism 
is a mere travesty of all true criticism. Secu- 
lar writers are presumed to be trustworthy 
unless reason is found to discredit their 
testimony. But the Higher Criticism starts 
with the assumption that everything in 
Scripture needs to be confirmed by ex- 
ternal evidence. It reeks of its evil origin 
in German infidelity. My indictment of it, 
therefore, is not that it is criticism, but that 


x PREFACE 


it is criticism of a low and spurious type, 
akin to that for which the baser sort of 
“Old Bailey” practitioner is famed. True 
criticism seeks to elucidate the truth: the 
Higher Criticism aims at establishing pre- 
judged results. And in exposing such a 
system the present volume has an import- 
ance far beyond the special subject of which 
it treats. 

A single instance will suffice. The “ An- 
nalistic tablet”” of Cyrus, which records his 
conquest of Babylon, is received by the 
critics as Gospel truth, albeit the deception 
which underlies it would be clear even to 
a clever schoolboy. But even as read by 
the critics it affords confirmation of Daniel 
which is startling in its definiteness in regard 
to Belshazzar and Darius the Mede. It 
tells us that the capture of the inner city 
was marked by the death of Belshazzar, or 
(as the inscription calls him throughout) 
“the son of the king.” ~And further, we 
learn from it that Cyrus’s triumph was 


PREFACE ales 


shared by a Median of such note that his 
name was united with his own in the pro- 
clamation of an amnesty. And yet so fixed 
is the determination of the critics to discredit 
the Book of Daniel, that all this is ignored. 

The inadequacy of the reasons put for- 
ward for rejecting Daniel clearly indicate 
that there is some potent reason of another 
kind in the background. It was the miracu- 
lous element in the book that set the whole 
pack of foreign sceptics in full cry. In this 
age of a silent heaven such men will not 
tolerate the idea that God ever intervened 
directly in the affairs of men. But this is 
too large a subject for incidental treatment. 
I have dealt with it in Zhe Silence of God, 
and I would refer specially to Chapter III. 
of that work. 

Other incidental questions involved in the 
controversy I have treated of here; but as 
they are incidental, I have relegated them 
to the Appendix. And if any one claims a 
fuller discussion of them, I must ask leave 


xii PREFATORY NOTE 


to refer to the work alluded to by Professor 
Driver in his Book of Danzel—namely, The 
Coming Prince, or The Seventy Weeks of 


Daniel. 
R. A, 


PREFATORY NOTE TO THE 
THIRD EDITION 


Most of the “historical errors” in Daniel, 
which Professor Driver has copied from Ber- 
tholdt’s work of a century ago, have been 
disposed of by the erudition and research 
of our own day. But the identity of Darius 
the Mede has been referred to in former 
editions of the present work as an unsolved 
historical difficulty in the Daniel controversy. 
That question, however, seems to be settled 
by a verse in Ezra, which has hitherto been 
used only by Voltaire and others to discredit 
the Prophet's narrative. se 

Ezra records that in the reign of Darius 


Hystaspis the Jews presented a petition to 


PREFATORY NOTE XH 


the King, in which they recited Cyrus’ decree 
authorising the rebuilding of their Temple. 
The wording of the petition clearly indicates 
that, to the knowledge of the Jewish leaders, 
the decree in question had been filed in 
the house of the archives in Babylon. But 
the search there made for it proved fruit- 
less, and it was ultimately found at Ecbatana ~ 
(or Achmetha: Ezra vi. 2). How, then, 
could a State paper of this kind have been 
transferred to the Median capital ? 

The only reasonable explanation of this 
extraordinary fact completes the proof that 
the vassal king whom Daniel calls Darius was 
the Median general, Gobryas (or Gubaru), 
who led the army of Cyrus to Babylon. As 
noticed in these pages (163, 165, fost), the - 
testimony of the inscriptions points to that 
conclusion. After the taking of the city, 
his name was coupled with that of Cyrus in 
proclaiming an amnesty. And he it was who 
appointed the governors or prefects ; which 
“appointments Daniel states were made by 


XIV PREFATORY NOTE 


Darius. The fact that he was a_ prince 
of the royal house of Media, and presum- 
ably well known to Cyrus, who had resided 
at the Median Court, would account for his 
being held in such high honour. He had 
governed Media as Viceroy when that country 
was reduced to the status of a province; and 
to any one accustomed to deal with evidence, 
the inference will seem natural that, for some 
reason or other, he was sent back to his 
provincial throne, and that, in returning to 
Ecbatana, he carried with him the archives 
~ of his brief reign in Babylon. 

I will only add that the confusion and 
error which the “ Higher Critics” attribute 
to the sacred writers are mainly due to their 
own failure to distinguish between the several 
judgments of the era of the exile—the “ Ser- 
vitude,” the “ Captivity,” and the “ Desola- 


tions” (Jer. xxix. 10; 2 Chron. xxxvi. at. 
See pp. 112, 117-119, fost). 


RAs 


CHAP. 


IV, 


vil. 


VIL. 


IX, 


CONTENTS 


THE “HIGHER CRITICISM,” AND DEAN 
FARRAR’S ESTIMATE OF THE BIBLE. ¢ 


THE HISTORICAL ERRORS OF DANIEL ., > 


HISTORICAL ERRORS CONTINUED: BELSHAZ- 
ZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE . . . 
“ PHILOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES”: THE LAN- 


GUAGE OF DANIEL . . = 


. THE POSITIVE EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF 


DANIEL . ‘ 2 : ; : : 
“VIOLENT ERRORS” . ; - : : 
PROFESSOR DRIVER’S ‘‘ BOOK OF DANIEL ”— 

THE EVIDENCE OF THE CANON SAK 
THE VISION OF THE “SEVENTY WEEKS ”— 

THE PROPHETIC YEAR . : : : 
THE FULFILMENT OF THE VISION OF THE 


‘WEEKS ” P : . ‘ A 3 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION ° ° . 


xV 


PAGE 


12 


23 


42 


56 
79 


92 


It2 


Xvi 


CONTENTS 


APPENDICES 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S FIRST INVASION OF 

JUDEA . F 5 A ; 3 - 
THE DEATH OF BELSHAZZAR F ‘i A 
THE PUNCTUATION OF DANIEL IX. 25 ws 
THE JEWISH CALENDAR . i ; ‘ 


THE TWENTIETH YEAR OF ARTAXERXES ° 


. THE DATE OF THE CRUCIFIXION oe 


. PROFESSOR DRIVER’S INDICTMENT OF DANIEL 


INDEX . ° e : ‘ 0 


E53 


Daniel in the Critics’ Den 


CHAPTER I 


THE ‘‘HIGHER CRITICISM,’ AND DEAN FARRAR’S 
ESTIMATE OF THE BIBLE 


By “all people of discernment” the “Higher 
Criticism” is now held in the greatest repute. 
And discernment is a quality for which the 
dullest of men are keen to claim credit. It ~ 
may safely be assumed that not one person 
in a score of those who eagerly disclaim 
belief in the visions of Daniel has ever 
seriously considered the question. The liter- 
ature upon the subject is but dull reading 
at best, and the inquiry demands a combina- 
tion of qualities which is comparatively rare. 
A newspaper review of some ponderous trea- 
tise, or a frothy discourse by some popular 
preacher, will satisfy most men. The Ger- 
man literature upon the controversy they 
A 


2 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


know nothing of, and the erudite writings 
of scholars are by no means to their taste, 
and probably beyond their capacity. Dean 
Farrar’s Book of Daniel therefore meets 
a much-felt want. Ignored -by scholars it 
certainly will be, and the majority of serious 
theologians will deplore it; but it supplies 
“the man in the street” with a reason for 
the unfaith that is in him. 

The narrowness with which it emphasises 
everything that either erudition or ignorance 
can urge upon one side of a great contro- 
versy, to the exclusion of the rest, will 
relieve him from the irksome task of think- 
ing out the problem for himself; and its 
pedantry is veiled by rhetoric of a type 
which will admirably suit him. He can- 
not fail to be deeply impressed by ‘‘the 
acervation of endless conjectures,” and ‘the 
unconsciously disingenuous resourcefulness 
of traditional harmonics.” His acquaintance 
with the unseen world will be enlarged by 
discovering that Gabriel, who appeared to 
the prophet, is “the archangel” ;* and by 


° 


LP 27 ye 


THE ‘‘ HIGHER CRITICISM” 3 


learning that ‘it is only after the Exile that 
we find angels and demons playing a more 
prominent part than before, divided into 
classes, and even marked out by special 
names.”* It is not easy to decide whether 
this statement is the more astonishing when 
examined as a specimen of English, or when 
regarded as a dictum to guide us in the 
study of Scripture. But all this relates only 
to the form of the book. When we come to 
consider its substance, the spirit which per- 
vades it, and the results to which it leads, a 
sense of distress and shame will commingle 
with our amazement. 

What the dissecting-room is to the phy- 
sician criticism is to the theologian. In its 
proper sphere it is most valuable; and it 
has made large additions to our knowledge 
of the Bible. But it demands not only skill 
and care, but reverence; and if these be 
wanting, it cannot fail to be mischievous. 
A man of the baser sort may become so 
degraded by the use of the surgeon’s knife 
that he loses all respect for the body of 

é LPS AOI. 


4 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


his patient, and the sick-room is to him but 
the antechamber to the mortuary. And can 
we with impunity forget the reverence that 
is due to “the living and eternally abiding 
word of God” ?? 

It behoves us to distinguish between true 
criticism as a means to clear away from that 
word corruptions and excrescences, and to 
gain a more intelligent appreciation of its 
mysteries, and the Higher Criticism as a 
rationalistic and anti-christian crusade. The 
end and aim of this movement is to eliminate 
God from the Bible. It was the impure 
growth of the scepticism which well-nigh 
swamped ‘the religious life of — in 
the eighteenth century. 

Eichhorn set himself to account for the 
miracles of Scripture. The poetic warmth 
of oriental thought and language sufficed, in 
his judgment, to explain them. The writers 
wrote as they were accustomed to think, 
leaving out of view all second causes, and 
attributing results immediately to God. This 
theory had its day. It obtained enthusiastic 

aot Pet. i 23; 


THE “‘ HIGHER CRITICISM” 5 


acceptance for atime. But rival hypotheses 
were put forward to dispute its sway, and at. 
last it was discarded in favour of the system 
with which the name of De Wette is promi- 
nently associated. The sacred writers were 
honest and true, but their teaching was 
based, not upon personal knowledge, still 
less upon divine ffispiration, but upon 
ancient authorities by which they were 
misled. Their errors were due to the ex- 
cessive literalness with which they accepted 
as facts the legends of earlier days. De 
Wette, like Eichhorn, desired to rescue 
the Bible from -the reproach which had 
fallen upon it. Upon them at least the 
halo of departed truth still rested. But 
others were restrained by no such influence. 
With the ignorance of Pagans and the 
animus of apostates they perverted the 
Scriptures and tore them to pieces. 

One of the old Psalms,* in lamenting with 
exquisite sadness the ruin brought by the 
heathen upon the holy city and land, declares 
that fame was apportioned according to zeal 


1 Ps, Ixxiy. | 


\ 


| 


| 
| 
\ 


\ 
} 
\ 


| 
t 


6 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS DEN 


and success in the work of destruction. A 
like spirit has animated the host of the _ 
_ critics. Seite is a “distressing and baneful | 


ordeal to find oneself in the company of | 


those who have no belief in the virtue of 
women. The mind thus poisoned learns to 
regard with suspicion the purest inmates of 
a pure home. And a too close familiarity 


bah the vile literature of the sceptics leads | 
-toa kindred distrust of all that is true and ; 


yholy i in our most true and holy faiths” Every 
“chapter of this book gives proof to what 
an extent its author has suffered this moral 
and spiritual deterioration; and no oné can 
accept its teaching without sinking, imper- 
ceptibly it may be, but surely and inevitably, 
to the same level. Kuenen, one of the 
worst of the foreign sceptics, is Dean Far- 
rars master and guide in the interpretation 
of Daniel. And the result is that he revels 
in puerilities and extravagances of exegesis 
and criticism which the best of our British 
contemporary scholars are careful to re- 
pudiate. 

The Book of Daniel is not “the eck of 


a 


THE ‘‘ HIGHER CRITICISM” 7 


a prophet in the Exile” (if indeed such a 
personage as Daniel ever really existed), 
“but of some faithful Chaszd in the days 
of the Seleucid tyrant.”* Its pretended 
miracles are but moral fables. Its history 
is but idle legend, abounding in “violent 
errors” of the grossest kind.’ Its so-called 
predictions alone are accurate, because they 
were but the record of recent or contem- 
porary events. But Dr. Farrar will not tol- 
erate a word of blame upon ‘‘the holy and 
gifted Jew”® who wrote it. No thought 
of deceiving any one ever crossed his mind.* 
The reproach which has been heaped upon 
him has been wholly owing to Jewish arro- 
gance and Christian stupidity in misreading 
his charming and elevating romance. For 
it is not only fiction, but ‘‘ avowed fiction,” ° 
and was never meant to be regarded in any 
other light. In a word, the book is nothing 
more than a religious novel, differing from 
other kindred works only in its venerable 
antiquity and the multiplicity of its blunders. 


Leas aitat 2 P. 45. 
oP oki Os * Pp. 43,85; Pat 


} 


es) DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


Accepting these results, then, what action 
shall we take upon them? In proportion 
surely to our appreciation of the precious- 
ness of Holy Scripture, shall be our resolute- 
ness in tearing the Book of Daniel from 
its place in the sacred canon, and relegating 
it to the same shelf with Bel and the Dragon 
and The Story of Susanna. By no means. 
Dr. Farrar will stay our hand by the 
assurance that— 


“Those results . .. are in no way derogatory 
to the preciousness of this Old Testament Apoca- 
lypse.” ‘No words of mine,” he declares, “can 
exaggerate the value which I attach to this part of 
our Canonical Scriptures. . . . Its right to a place 
in the Canon is undisputed and indisputable, and 
there is scarcely a single book of the Old Testa- 
ment which can be made more richly ‘ profitable 
for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for instruc- 
tion in righteousness: that the man of God may 
be complete, completely furnished unto every good 
work.’’’! 


1p. 4. Again and again throughout this volume the 
author uses like words in praise of the Book of Daniel. 
Here are a few of them: “It is indeed a noble book, full 
of glorious lessons” (p. 36). “Its high worth and canonical 
authority” (p. 37). “So far from undervaluing its teach- 
ing, | have always been strongly drawn to this book of 


THE ‘‘ HIGHER CRITICISM” 9 


Christian writers who find reason to reject 
one portion of the sacred canon or another 
are usually eager to-insist that in doing so 
they increase the authority.and enhance the 
value of the rest. It has remained for the 
Dean of Canterbury, in impugning the Book 
of Daniel, to insult and degrade the Bible 
as a whole. An expert examines for me 
the contents of my purse. I spread out 
.nine-and-thirty sovereigns upon the table, 
and after close inspection he marks out one 
as a counterfeit. As I console myself 
for the loss by the deepened confidence I 
feel that all the rest are sterling coin, he 
checks me by the assurance that there is 
scarcely a single one of them which is any 
better. The Book of Daniel is nothing 
more than a religious novel, and it teems 
with errors on every page, and yet we are 
gravely told that of all the thirty-nine books 


Scripture” (p. 37). “We acknowledge the canonicity of 
the book, its high value when rightly apprehended, and 
its rightful acceptance as a sacred book” (p. 90). And 
most wonderful of all, at p. 118 the author declares that, 
in exposing it as a work of fiction, “We add to its real 
value” | 


~ 


| 
Io DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 
- XN 


= 


of the Old Testament there is scarcely a 
single book which is of any higher worth! 
The expert’s estimate of the value of my 
coins is clear. No less obvious is Dr. 
Farrar’s estimate of the value of the books 
of the Bible. 

It is precisely this element which renders 
this volume so pernicious. The apostle de- 
clares that ‘“‘ Every Scripture zxspzved of God 
is also profitable for teaching, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction in righteousness: 
that the man of God may be complete, fur- 
nished completely unto every good work ;”? 


12 Tim. iii. 16. I quote the R.V. because it gives more 
unequivocal testimony to the inspiration of Scripture than 
does the A.V. According to the A.V. the apostle asserts 
that all Scripture is inspired of God: according to the 
R.V. he assumes this as a truth which does not need even 
to be asserted. For “every Scripture” here means every 
part of the Holy Scriptures mentioned in the preceding 
sentence. Indeed, ypagyn has as definite a meaning in 
N.T. Greek as “Scripture” has in English, and is never 
used save of Holy Scripture. But I am bound in honesty 
to add that I believe the R.V. is wrong, albeit it has the 
authority of some of our earlier versions. The same con- 
struction occurs in eight other passages, Viz., Rom. vii. 12 ; 
1 Cor, x1. 3032 (Cor. <x. 10 j= Dims Woke a es. a ae 
Heb. iv. 13. Why did the Revisers not read, ¢.g., “the holy 
commandment is also just and good” (Rom. vii. 12); and 
“many weak ones are also sickly” (1 Cor. xi. 30)? © 


THE ‘“‘HIGHER CRITICISM” II 


and in profanely applying these words to a 
romance of doubtful repute, Dr. Farrar denies 
inspiration altogether. 

But ‘What is inspiration?” some one 
may demand. In another connection the 
inquiry might be apt; here it is the merest 
quibble. Plain men brush aside all the in- 
tricacies of the controversy which the answer 
involves, and seize upon the fact that the 
Bible is a divine revelation. But no one 
can yield to the spirit which pervades this 
book without coming to raise the question, 
‘Have we-a revelation at all?’ ~ The 
Higher Criticism, as a rationalistic crusade, 
has set itself to account for the Bible on 
natural principles; and this is the spirit 
which animates the Dean of Canterbury’s 
treatise. 


CHAPTER JI 
THE HISTORICAL ERRORS OF DANIEL 


‘“TueE historical errors” of the Book of 
Daniel are the first ground of the critic's 
attack. Of these he enumerates the follow- 
ing :— 

(1.) ‘There was no deportation in the 
third year of Jehoiakim.” 

(2.) ‘There was no King Belshazzar.” 

(3.) ‘“‘ There was no Darius the Mede.” 

(4.) “It is not true that there were only 
two Babylonian kings—there were five.” 

(5.) ‘‘Nor were there only four Persian 
kings—there were twelve.” 

(6.) Xerxes seems to be confounded with 
the last king of Persia. 

(7.) And “All correct accounts z the 
reign of Antiochus Epiphanes seem to end 
about B.c. 164.” 

Such is the indictment under this head. 


HISTORICAL ERRORS OF DANIEL 13 
Two other points are included, but these 
have nothing to do with fzstory ; first, that 
the decrees of Nebuchadnezzar are extra- 
ordinary—which may at once be conceded ; 
and secondly, that ‘the notion that a 
faithful Jew could become president of the 
Chaldean magi is impossible” —a statement 
which only exemplifies the thoughtless dog- 
matism: of the writer, for, according to his 
own scheme, it was a ‘holy and gifted 
Jew,’ brought up under the severe ritual 
of post-exilic days, who assigned this posi-— 
tion to Daniel. A like remark applies to 
his criticism upon Dan. ii. 46—with this 
addition, that that criticism betokens either 
carelessness or malice on the part of the 
critics, for the passage in no way justifies 
the assertion that the prophet accepted 
either the worship or the sacrifice offered 
him. 
So far as the other points are concerned, 
we may at once dismiss (4), (5), and (6), for 
the errors here ascribed to Daniel will be 
sought for in vain. They are “read into” 
the book by the perverseness or ignorance 


14 “DANIEL IN THE CRITICS DEN 


of the rationalists.. And as for (7), where 
was the account of the reign of Antiochus 
to end, if not in the year of his death! 
The statement is one of numerous _in- 
stances of slipshod carelessness in this 
extraordinary addition to our theological 
literature. 

The Bible states that there was a depor- 
tation in the reign of Jehoiakim: the critic 
asserts there was none; and the Christian 
must decide between them. Nothing can 


1 As regards (5) and (6), the way “kisses and kicks” alter- 
nate in Dr. Farrar’s treatment of his mythical “ Chasid” is 
amusing. At one moment he is praised for his genius and 
erudition ; the next he is denounced as an ignoramus or a_ 
fool! Considering how inseparably the history of Judah 
had been connected with the history of Persia, the sugges- 
tion that a cultured Jew of Maccabean days could have 
made the gross blunder here attributed to him is quite 
unworthy of notice. 

And may I explain for the enlightenment of the critics 
that Dan. xi. 2 is a prophecy relating to the prophecy which 
precedes it? It is a consecutive prediction of events w7thin 
the period of the seventy weeks. There were to be “yet” 
(Ze, after the rebuilding of Jerusalem) “three kings in 
Persia.” These were Darius Nothus, Artaxerxes Mnemon, 
and Ochus ; the brief and merely nominal reigns of Xerxes 
II., Sogdianus, and Arogus being ignored—two of them, 
indeed, being omitted from the canon of Ptolemy. “The 
fourth” (and last) king was Darius Codomanus, whose 
fabulous wealth attracted the cupidity of the Greeks. 


HISTORICAL ERRORS OF DANIEL 15 


be clearer than the language of Chronicles ;’ 
and, even regarding the book as a purely 
' secular record, it is simply preposterous 
to reject without a shadow of reason the 
chronicler’s statement on a matter of 'such 
immense interest and importance in the 
national history. But, it is objected, Kings 
and Jeremiah are silent upon the subject. 
If this were true, which it is not, it 
would be an additional reason for -turning 
to Chronicles to supply the omission. But 
Kings gives clear corroboration of Chron- 
- icles. Speaking of Jehoiakim, it says: “In 
his days Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, 
came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant 
three years; then he turned and rebelled 
against him.”? Daniel’ tells us this was 
in his ¢kzvd year, and that Jerusalem was 
besieged upon the occasion. This difficulty 
again springs from the habit of “ reading 
into” Scripture more than it says. There 
is not a word about a taking by storm. 
The king was a mere puppet, and presum- 


1 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6. 
2 2 Kings xxiv. 1. SChi Ante 


16 DANIEL-IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


ably he made his submission as soon as the 
city was invested. Nebuchadnezzar took him 
prisoner, but afterwards relented, and left him 
in Jerusalem as his vassal, a position he had 
till then held under the King of Egypt. 

But Dr. Farrar’s statements here are 
worthy of fuller notice, so thoroughly typi- 
cal are they of his style and methods. For 
three years Jehoiakim was Nebuchadnezzar’s 
vassal. This is admitted, and Scripture 
accounts for it by recording a Babylonian 
invasion in his third year. But, says the 
critic :— 

“Tt was not till the following year, when Nebu- 
chadrezzar, acting as his father’s general, had 
defeated Egypt at the battle of Carchemish, that 
any siege of Jerusalem would have been pos- 
sible. Nor did Nebuchadrezzar advance against . 
the Holy City even after the battle of Carchemish, 
but dashed home across the desert to secure the 
crown of Babylon on hearing the news of his father’s 
death.” 

The idea of dashing across the desert 
from Carchemish to Babylon is worthy. of 
a board-school essay! The critic is here 
adopting the record of the Babylonian 


HISTORICAL ERRORS OF DANIEL 17 


historian Berosus, in complete unconscious- 
ness of the significance of his testimony. 
We learn from Berosus that it was as Prince- 
royal of Babylon, at the head of his father's 
army, that Nebuchadnezzar invaded Palestine. 
And, after recording how in the course of 
that expedition Nebuchadnezzar heard of. 
his father’s death, the historian goes on to 
relate that he “committed ¢he captives he 
had taken from the Jews” to the charge 
of others, ‘‘ while he went in haste over the 
desert to Babylon.”* Could corroboration of 
Scripture be more complete and emphatic? 
The fact that he had Jewish captives is 
evidence that he had invaded Judea. Proof 
of it is afforded by the further fact that 
the desert lay between him and Babylon. 
Carchemish was in the far north by the 
Euphrates, and the road thence to the 
Chaldean capital lay clear of the desert 
altogether. Moreover, the battle of Car- 
chemish was fought in Jehoiakim’s fourth 
year, and therefore after Nebuchadnezzar’s 
- accession, whereas the invasion of Judea was 


1 Josephus, Contra Apion, i. 19. 
. B 


18 DANIEL. IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


during Nabopolassar’s-lifetime, and therefore 
in Jehoiakim’s ¢hzrd year, precee as the 
Book of Daniel avers.’ 

It only remains to add that Scripture no- 
where speaks of a general “deportation” in 
the third year of Jehoiakim. Here, as else- 
where, the critic attributes his own errors 
to the Bible, and then proceeds to refute 
them. The narrative is explicit, that on 
this occasion Nebuchadnezzar returned with 
no captives save a few cadets of the royal 
house and of the noble families. But Dr. 
Farrar writes: ‘‘ Among the captives were 
certain of the king’s seed and of the princes.” 
Nor is this all: he goes on to say, ‘ They 
are called ‘children,’ and the word, together 
with the context, seems to imply that they 
were boys of the age of from twelve to four- 
teen.” What Daniel says is that these, ¢he 
only captives, were “skilful in all wisdom, and 


1 The question of course arises how this battle should 
have been fought a/er the successful campaign of the pre- 
ceding year. There'are reasonable explanations of this, but 
I offer none. Scripture has suffered grievously from the - 
eagerness of its defenders to put forward hypotheses to 
explain seeming difficulties. 


HISTORICAL ERRORS OF DANIEL 19 


cunning in knowledge, and understanding 
science.” What prodigies those Jewish 
boys must have been! The word trans- 
lated “children” in the A.V. is more cor- 
rectly rendered “youths” in the R.V. Its 
scope may be inferred from the-use of it in 
1 Kings xii. 8, which tells us that Reho- 
boam ‘forsook the counsel of the old men, 
and took counsel with the young men that 
were grown up with him.” This last point 
is material mainly as showing the animus 
of the critic.’ 

But the Scripture speaks of Kzug Nebu- 
chadnezzar in the third year of Jehoiakim, 
whereas it was not till his fourth year that 
Nabopolassar died. No doubt. And a 
writer of Maccabean days, with the history 
of Berosus before him, would probably have 


1 The only reason for representing Daniel as a mere boy 
of twelve or fourteen is that thereby discredit is cast upon 
the statement that three years later he was placed at the . 
head of “the wise men” of Babylon. It is with a real sense 
of distress and pain that-I find myself compelled to use such 
language. But it would need a volume to expose the errors, 
misstatements, and perversions of which the above are typi- 
cal instances. They occur in every chapter of Dr. Farrar’s 
book. 


20-- DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


noticed the point. But the so-called in- 
accuracy is precisely one of the incidental 
proofs that the Book of Daniel was the work ~ 
of a contemporary of Nebuchadnezzar. The 
historian of the future will never-assert that 
Queen Victoria lived at one time in Ken- 
sington Palace, though the statement will 
be found in the newspapers which recorded 
the unveiling of her statue in Kensington 
Gardens. 
The references to Jereuien raise the ques- 
tion whether the book records the utterances 
of an inspired prophet, or whether, as Dr. 
Farrar’s criticisms assume, the author of the 
book wrote merely as a religious teacher. 
This question, however, is too large to treat 
of here ; and the discussion of it is wholly un- 
necessary, for the careful student will find in 
Jeremiah the clearest proof that Scripture is 
right and the critics wrong. The objection 


1 The careful reader of Dr. Farrar’s book will not fail to 
see that his references to the Scriptures generally imply 
that the prophecies came by the will of the prophets ; 
whereas Holy Scripture declares that “No prophecy ever 
came by the will of man; but men spake from (God, being 
moved by the Holy Ghost » (2 Pet. i. 20, 21). 


HISTORICAL ERRORS OF DANIEL 21h 


depends on confounding the seventy years 
of the “Servitude to Babylon” with the 
seventy years of “the Desolations of Jeru- 
salem ”"—another.of the numerous blunders 
which discredit the work under review.) 
“The Captivity,” which is confounded with 
both, was not an era of seventy years at all. 

The prophecy of the twenty-fifth chapter 
of Jeremiah was a warning addressed to the 
‘people who remained in the land after the 
servitude had begun, that if they continued 
impenitent and rebellious, God would bring 
upon them a further judgment—the terrible 
scourge of “the Desolations.” The pro- 
phecy of the twenty-ninth chapter was a 
message of hope to the Jews of the Captivity. 
And what was that message? That “after 
seventy years be accomplished for Babylon, 
I will visit you, and perform my good word 
toward you, in causing you to return to this 
place.”* And that promise was faithfully 

1 P. 289. 

2 Jer. xxix. 10, R.V. The word is for (not af) Babylon. 
These “seventy years” dated, not from their deportation to 


Babylonia as captives, but from their subjection to the 
suzerainty of Babylon. 


” 


22 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


fulfilled. The Servitude began in the third 
year of Jehoiakim, 3.c. 606.1 It ended in 
B.C. 536, when Cyrus issued his decree for 
the return of the exiles. By the test of 
‘chronology, therefore—the severest test 
which can be applied to historical state- 
ments — the absolute accuracy of these 
Scriptures is established.” 


1 That is, the year beginning with Nisan, B.C. os and 
ending with Adar, B.C. 605. 

2 Owing to the importance of this Jehoiakim “error” I 
have added an excursus upon the subject. See Appendix I. 


Pp. 153, post. 


CHAPTER III 


HISTORICAL ERRORS CONTINUED: BEL- 
SHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 


PRoFEssor Driver acknowledges “the. pos- 
sibility that Nabunahid may have sought 
to strengthen his position by marrying a- 
daughter of Nebuchadnezzar, in which case 
the latter might be spoken of as Belshazzar’s 
father (=grandfather, by Hebrew usage).”* 
And the author of the Anczent Monarchies, 
our best historical authority here, tells us 
that Nabonidus (Nabunahid) “had associated 
with him in the government his son Belshazzar | 
or Bel-shar-uzur, the grandson of the great 
Nebuchadnezzar,” and “in his father’s ab- 
sence Belshazzar took the direction of affairs 
within the city.”* The only question, there- 
fore, is whether Belshazzar, being thus left 
as regent at Babylon when his father was 
1 Book of Daniel, p. li. 


2’ Rawlinson’s Ancient Monarchies, vol. iil. p. 70. 
23 


24 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


absent at Borsippa in command of the army, 
- would be addressed as Azmg. But Dr. 
Farrar settles the matter by asserting that 
“there was no King Belshazzar,” and that 
Belshazzar was ‘conquered in Borsippa.”? 
This last statement is a mere blunder. 

The accuracy of Daniel in this matter is 
~ confirmed in a manner which is all the more 
striking because itis wholly incidental. Why 
did Belshazzar purpose to make Daniel the 
third ruler in the kingdom? The natural 
explanation is, that he himself was but — 
second. : 

“Unhappily for their very precarious hypo- 
thesis,” Dr. Farrar remarks, “the translation 
‘third ruler’ appears to be enterely untenable. 
It means ‘one of a board of three.’”*? As 
.a test of the author's erudition and candour 
this deserves particular notice. Every scholar, 
of course, is aware that there is not a word 
about a ‘board of three” in the text. This 
is exegesis, not translation. But is it correct 
exegesis ? ; 

Under the Persian rule there was a cabinet 


I) ity SS eh 


BELSHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 25 


of three, as the sixth chapter tells us; but 
there is no authority whatever for supposing 
such a body existed under the empire which 
it supplanted. As regards chapter -v., it will 
satisfy most people to know that the render- 
ing which Dr. Farrar declares to be “entirely 
untenable” has been adopted by the Old Tes- 
tament company of Revisers. And I have 
been at the pains to ascertain that the pas- 
sage was carefully considered, that they had 
no difficulty in deciding in favour of the read- 
ing of the A.V., and that it was not until 
their final revision that the alternative ren- 
dering ‘‘one of three” was admitted into the 
margin. In the distinguished Professor 
Kautzsch’s recent work on the Old Testa- 
ment,’ representing the latest and best Ger- 
man scholarship, he adheres to the rendering 
“third ruler in the kingdom,” and his note is, 
“either as one of three over the whole king- 
dom, or as third by the side of the king and 
the king’s mother.” Behrmann, too, in his 
recent commentary, adopts the same read- 
ing —‘‘as third he was to have authority 
1 Die Heilige Schrift des Alten Testaments. 


JHE MASTER'S COLLEGE 


26 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


b 


in the kingdom,” and adds a note referring 
to the king and his mother as first and 
second. 

This surely will suffice to silence the 
critic's objection, and to cast suspicion 
upon his fairness as a controversialist.’ 

But, we are told, the archeological dis- 
coveries of the last few years dispose of the 
whole question, and compel us entirely to 


‘In reply to an inquiry I addressed to him, the Chief 
Rabbi wrote to me as follows : “I have carefully considered 
the question you laid before me at our pleasant meeting on 
Sunday relative to the correct interpretation of the passages 
in Daniel, chapter v., verses 7 and 16. I cannot absolutely — 
find fault with Archdeacon Farrar for translating the words 
‘the third part of the kingdom,’ as he follows herein two of 
our Hebrew commentators of great repute, Rashi and Ibn 
Ezra. On the other hand, others of our commentators, such 
as Saadia, Jachja, &c., translate this passage as ‘he shall be 
the third ruler in the kingdom.’ This rendering seems to 
be more strictly in accord with the literal meaning of the 
words as shown by Dr. Winer in his Grammatik des Chal- 
daismus. It also receives confirmation from Sir Henry 
Rawlinson’s remarkable discovery, according to which Bel- 
shazzar was the eldest son of King Nabonidus, and asso- 
ciated with him in the government, so that the person next 
in honour would be the third.” 

* This applies equally to Prof. Drivers note, which says 
“The rendering of A.V. is certainly untenable.” And his 
reference to the LXX. is unfair, seeing that his view isrefuted - 
by the version of Theodotion, which is of higher authority 
than that to which he appeals. 


BELSHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 27 


reconstruct the traditional history of the 
Persian conquest of Babylon. ‘‘We now 
possess the actual records of Nabonidos and 
Cyrus,” Professor Sayce tells us, and he 
adds, ‘They are records the truth of which 
cannot be doubted.”* What “simple child- 
like faith” these good men have in ancient 
records, Holy Scripture only excepted! The 
principal record here in question is ‘the 
Annalistic tablet of Cyrus,” an inscription of 
which the transparent design is to represent 
his conquest of Babylon as the fulfilment of 
a divine mission, and the realisation of the 
wishes of the conquered. And any docu- 
ment of the kind, whether dated in the sixth 
century B.c. or the nineteenth century 4.D., 
is open to grave suspicion, and should be 
received with caution. Even kings may 
pervert the truth, and State-papers may 
falsify facts! But even .assuming its ac- 
_ curacy, it in no way supports the conclusions 
which are based upon it. No advance will 
be made towards a solution of these ques- 


1 The Higher Criticism and the Verdict of the Monus 
ments, p. 498. 


28 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ “DEN 


tions until our Christian scholars shake 
themselves free from the baneful influence 
of the sceptics, whose blind hostility to Holy 
Scripture unfits them for dealing with any 
controversy of the kind. The following is 
a typical instance of the effect of the influ- 
ence I deprecate :— 


“But Belshazzar never became king in his 
father’s place. No mention is made of him at 
the end of the Annalistic tablet, and it would 
therefore appear that he was no longer in com- 
mand of the Babylonian army when the invasion 
of Cyrus took place. Owing to the unfortunate 
lacuna in the middle of the tablet we have no 


account of what became of him, but since we are ~ 


told not only of the fate of Nabonidos, but also 
of the death of his wife, it seems probable that 
Belshazzar was dead. At any rate, when Cyrus 
entered Babylonia he had already disappeared 
from history. Here, then, the account given by 
the Book of Daniel is at variance with the testi- 
mony of the inscriptions. But the contradictions 
.do not end here. The Biblical story implies that - 
Babylon was taken by storm; at all events it ex- 
pressly states that ‘the king of the Chaldeans was 
slain,’ Nabonidos, the Babylonian king, however, 
was not slain, and Cyrus éntered Babylon ‘in 
peace.’ Nor was Belshazzar the son of Nebuchad- 


BELSHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 29 


rezzar, aS we are repeatedly told in the fifth 
chapter of Daniel.’’! 


May I criticise the critic? Daniel no- 
where avers that Belshazzar became king in 
his father’s place. On the contrary, it clearly 
implies that he reigned as his father’s vice- 
roy. Daniel nowhere suggests that he was 
in command of the Babylonian army. The 
Annalistic tablet, on the other hand, tells us 
that Mabonzdus was at the head of the army, 
and that he was at Sippara when the Persian 
invasion took place, and fled when that town 


1 The Higher Criticism and the Verdict of the Monu- 
ments, pp. 525, 526. This last point is typical of the 
inaccuracy and pertinacity of the critics. We are nowhere 
told in Daniel that Belshazzar was the son of Nebuchad- 
nezzar. Weare told that fe was so addressed at the Court 
_of Babylon, which is a wholly different matter. He was 
probably a descendant of the great king, but it is certain 
that if, rightly or wrongly, he claimed relationship with him, 
no one at his-court would dispute the claim. In a table 
of Babylonian kings I find mention of -a daughter of 
Nebuchadnezzar who married the father of Nabonidus — 
(Trans. Vict. Inst., vol. xviii. p. 99). This of course would 
dispose of the whole difficulty. She, perhaps, was “the 
king’s mother,” whose déath eight years before was followed 
by national mourning (Azmnal. Tablet). To trade on the 
word “son” is a mere quibble ad captandum vulgus, which 
has been exposed again and again. (See Pusey’s Danze/, 
p. 405, and Rawlinson’s Leypt and Babylon, p. 155.) 


30 DANIEL IN -THE CRITICS’ DEN 


opened its gates to the invaders. To the 
fact that more than half of the inscription is 
lost Professor Sayce attributes-the absence 
of all mention of Belshazzar. And yet he 
goes on to assume, without a shadow of evi- 
dence, that he had: died before the date of 
the -expedition; and upon this utterly base- 
less conjecture he founds the equally baseless 
assertion that “Daniel is at variance. with 
the testimony of the inscriptions”! Asa 
matter of fact, however, the tablet is not 
silent about Belshazzar. On the contrary, it 
expressly refers to him, and records his death. 
But toresume. Daniel nowhere avers that 
‘Babylon was taken by storm.” Neither is 
it said, “the king of the Chaldeans was 
slain”; the words are explicit that ‘ Be- 
shazzar, the Chaldean king, was. slain.” 
How his death was brought. about we are 
not told. He may have fallen in repelling 
an assault upon the palace, or his death 
may have been caused in furtherance of the 
priestly conspiracy in favour of Cyrus, or 
. the ‘‘wise men” may have compassed ‘it in 
revenge for the preferment of Daniel. 


BELSHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 31 


All this is mere conjecture. Scripture 
merely tells us that he was slain, and that 
Darius the Mede, aged about sixty-two, 
‘““vecetved the kingdom.’ ‘The same word 
occurs again in ii. 6 (‘‘ Ye shall vecezve of me 
gifts,” &c.), and in-vii. 18 (‘The saints of 
the Most High shall receive the kingdom S 
No word could more fitly describe the en- 
thronement of a vassal king or viceroy. No 
language could be more apt to record a 
peaceful change of dynasty, such as, accord- 
ing to some of the students of the inscrip- 
tions, took place when Nabonidus lost the 
throne. : = 

But this is not all; and the sequel may 
well excite the reader’s astonishment. First, 
we are asked to draw inferences from the. 
silence of this document, though we possess 
‘but mutilated fragments of it, and, for ought 
we know, the lost portions may have con- 
tained matter to refute these very inferences. 
And secondly, accepting the contents of the 
fragments which remain, the allegation that 
they contradict the Book of Daniel has no 
better foundation than Professor Sayce’s 


32 ‘DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


heretical reading of them; and if we appeal 
to a more trustworthy guide, we shall find 
that, so far from being inconsistent with the 
sacred narrative, they afford the most striking 
confirmation of its truth. 

‘According to this tablet, ‘“Sippara was 
taken without fighting, and Nabonidus fled.” 
This was on the 14th day of Tammuz ;’ 
and on the 16th, ‘‘Gobryas and the soldiers 
of Cyrus entered Babylon without fighting.” 
- On the 3rd day of Marchesvan, that is, four 
months later,’ Cyrus himself arrived, Fol- 
lowing this comes the significant statement : 
‘“The 11th day of Marchesvan, during the 
night, Gobryas was on the bank of the river. 
The son of the king dted” ; or, as Professor 
Driver reads it, ‘‘Gubaru made an assault, 
and slew the king’s son.’* Then follows the 
mention of the national mourning and of 
the State burial conducted by Cambyses, 
the son of Cyrus, in person. But instead of 
“the son of the king,” Professor Sayce here 
reads ‘‘the w2fe of the king,” and upon this 


1 June—July. \ 2 October—November. 
® See p. 36, dost. 


BELSHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 33 


error rests the entire superstructure of his 
attack upon the accuracy of Daniel.’ 

Nor is this all. The main statements in 
the tablet may reasonably be accepted. We 
may assume that the Persian troops entered 
Sippara on the 14th Tammuz, and reached 
Babylon on the 16th. But the assertion that 
in both cases the entry was peaceful will, of 
course, be received with reserve. Professor 
Sayce, however, would have us believe it all 
implicitly, and he goes on to assert that 
Cyrus was King of Babylon from the 14th 
Tammuz, and therefore that Daniel’s men- 
tion of the death of Belshazzar and the 
accession of Darius the Mede is purely . 
mythical. He dismisses to a footnote the 
awkward fact that we- have commercial 
tablets dated in the reign of .Nabonidus 
throughout the year, and even after the 
arrival of Cyrus himself; and his gloss upon 
this fact is that it gives further proof that 
the change of dynasty was a peaceful one! 
It gives proof clear and conclusive that 
during this period Nabonidus was still recog- 


1 See Appendix II., p. 160, post. 
i C 


34 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


nised as king, and therefore that Cyrus was 
not yet master of the city. As a matter of 
fact we have not a single “Cyrus” tablet in 
this year dated from Babylon. All, with one | 
exception, the source of which is not known, 
were made in Sippara.* 

But who was this personage whose death 
was the occasion of a great national mourn- 
ing and a State funeral? As the context 
shows clearly that ‘the king” referred to 
was not Cyrus, he can have been no other 
than Nabonidus; and as “the king's son,” 
so frequently mentioned in the earlier frag-_ 
ments of the-inscription and in the contract 
tablets, is admittedly Belshazzar,’ there is 
no reason whatever to doubt that it was 
he whose death and obsequies are here 
recorded. 

What then does all this ea us to? The 
careful and impartial historian, repudiating 
the iconoclastic zeal of the controversialist, 
will set himself to consider how these facts 
can be harmonised with other records sacred 


1 See p. 164, fost. 
* Sayce, p. 525. 


BELSHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 35 


and profane; and the task will not prove a 
difficult one. Accepting the fact that at the 
time of the Persian invasion Nabonidus was 
absent from Babylon, he will be prepared to 
find that ‘the king’s son” held command in 
the capital as viceroy. Accepting the fact 
that the Persian army entered Babylon in 
the month Tammuz, and that Cyrus arrived 
four months later, but yet that Nabonidus 
was still recognised as king, he will explain 
the seeming paradox by inferring that the 
invaders were in possession only of a part 
of the vast city of Nebuchadnezzar, and that 
Belshazzar, surrounded by his court and the 
wealthy classes of the community, still re- 
fused to yield. Accepting the fact that 
Cyrus desired to represent his conquest 
as a bloodless one, he will be prepared to 
assume that force was resorted to only after 
a long delay and when diplomacy was ex- © 
hausted. And he will not be surprised to 
find that when at last, either in an attack 
upon the palace, or by some act of treachery 
in furtherance of the cause of the invaders, 
‘Belshazzar the Chaldean king was slain,” 


36 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


the fact was veiled by the euphemistic an- 
nouncement that ‘the king’s son died.” * 
But while the record is thus shown to be 
entirely consistent with Daniel, so far as the 
mention of Belshazzar is concerned, what 
room does it leave for Darius the Mede? 
The answer is that the inscription fails us at 
this precise point. ‘The rest of the text is 
destroyed, but the fragments of it which re- 
main indicate that it described the various 
attempts made by Cyrus and his son Kam- 
byses, after the overthrow of Nabonidus, 
to settle the affairs of Babylonia and con- 
ciliate the priesthood.” Such is Professor 
Sayce’s own testimony.? In a word, it is 


1 When the fall of the Empire scattered the Secret Ser- 
vice staff of the French Prefecture of Police, many strange 
things came to my knowledge. I then learned that Count 
D’Orsay’s death was caused by a pistol-bullet aimed at the 
Emperor, with whom he was walking arm-in-arm. But it 
was publicly announced, and universally believed, that he 
died of a carbuncle in the back. If, even in these days of 
newspapers, facts can be thus disguised for reasons of State, 
who will pretend that the circumstances of Belshazzar’s 
death may not have been thus concealed in Chaldea twenty- 
five centuries ago? Moreover, Professor Driver's reading 
of the tablet (see p. 32, am/e) renders even this suggestion 
unnecessary. 

AEP EICO Spas 


BELSHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 37 


doubtful whether the tablet mentions Darius 
or not, but it is certain that any such men- 
tion would be purely incidental, and wholly 
outside the purpose with which the inscrip- 
tion was framed. While its mention of him, 
therefore, would be conclusive, its silence 
-respecting him would prove nothing. 

Nor will the omission of his name from 
the commercial tablets decide the matter 
either way. If, as Daniel indicates, Darius 
was but a viceroy or vassal king, his 
suzerain’s name would, in the ordinary 
course, be used for this purpose, just as 
the name of Nabonidus was used during 
the regency ot Belshazzar. 

But who was this Darius? Various 
hypotheses are maintained by scholars of 
eminence. By some he is identified with 
Gobryas, and this suggestion commends 
itself on many grounds.’ Others, again, fol- 


1 See Appendix II., gost. The language of the Cyrus 
inscription is very striking, as indicating that Gobryas 
was no mere subordinate; ¢.g., “Peace to the city did 
Cyrus establish. Peace to all the princes of Babylon did 
Gobryas his governor proclaim. Governors in Babylon he 
(Gobryas) appointed.” 4 


- 


38 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


low the view adopted by Josephus, accord- 
ing to which Darius was ‘the son and 
successor of Astyages”—namely, Cyaxares 
I]. Xenophon is the only authority for the 
existence of such a king, but his testimony 
has been rejected too lightly on the plea 
that his Cyropedia is but a romance. The 
writers of historical romances, however, do 
not invent kings. Yet another suggestion 
remains, that Darius was the personal name 
of “‘ Astyages,” the last king of the Medes. 
“This,” says Bishop Westcott, “appears to 
satisfy all the conditions of the problem.”? 
Although I myself adopt the first of these 
rival hypotheses, my task is merely to show 
that the question is still open, and that 
the grounds on which it is now sought to 
prove it closed are such as would satisfy 
no one who is competent to form an opinion 
upon the evidence. Though Professor Driver 
here remarks that “there seems to be no 
room for such a ruler,” he is careful to add 


1 Smith’s Bzble Dictionary, 1st ed., article “ Darius.” 
Dr. Westcott adds: “ The name Astyages was national and 
not personal, and Ahasuerus represents the name Cyaxares 
borne by the father of Astyages.” : 


BELSHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 39 


that the circumstances are not inconsistent 
with either his existence or his office, ‘‘and a 
cautious criticism will not build too much on 
the silence of the inscriptions, where many 
certainly remain yet to be brought to light.” } 

The identity of Darius the Mede is one of 
the most interesting problems in the Daniel 
controversy, and it is a problem which cannot 
be ignored. The critics do not dispose of 
it by declaring the Book of. Daniel to be 
a “pseud-epigraph” of Maccabean days. 
Accepting that hypothesis for the sake of 
argument, the mention of Darius remains to 
be accounted for. Some writers reject it as 
“pure fiction”; others denounce it as a 
“sheer blunder.” Though these are wholly 
inconsistent hypotheses, Dr. Farrar, more suo, 
adopts both. Both, however, are alike un- 
tenable; and the “avowed fiction” theory 
may be dismissed as unworthy of notice. 
The writer would have had no possible 

motive for inventing’ a “ Darius,” for the 


1 The Introduction, &c., p. 469. In the Addenda note 
to 3rd ed., Professor Driver seeks to qualify this, misled 
by Professor Sayce’s argument. But see pp. 33, 34, ande. 


40 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


events of Daniel vi. might just as well have 
been assigned to some other reign, and a 
figment of the kind would have marred his 
book. The suggestion is preposterous. 

And ex hypothest, the author must have 
been a man of extraordinary genius and of 
great erudition. He would have had before 
him historical records now lost, such as the 
history of Berosus. He would have had 
access to ‘the authorities upon which the 
book of the Axézguzties is based; for the 
student of Josephus cannot fail to see that 
his history is partly derived from sources 
other than the Book of Daniel. And be- 
sides all this, he would have had the Book 
of Ezra, which records how Darius the 
_ Persian issued an edict to give effect to the 
decree of Cyrus for the rebuilding of the 
Temple, and also the prophecies of Haggai 
and Zechariah, which bring this fact into 
still greater prominence. It may safely be 
averred, therefore, that no intelligent school- 
boy, no devout peasant, in all Judah could 
have been guilty of a blunder so gross and 
stupid as that which is attributed to this 


! 


BELSHAZZAR AND DARIUS THE MEDE 4I 


“holy and gifted Jew,” the author of the 
most famous and successful literary fraud the 
world has ever seen! The ‘sheer blunder” 
theory may be rejected as sheer nonsense. 
Accepting, then, for the sake of argument, 
the pseud-epigraph theory of Daniel, the 
book gives proof of a definite and well- 
established historical tradition that when 
Cyrus conquered Babylon, ‘Darius the 
Mede received the kingdom.” How, then, 
is that tradition to be accounted for? The — 
question demands an answer, but the critics 
have none to offer. 


% 


CHAPTER IV 


‘“PHILOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES” : THE 
LANGUAGE OF DANIEL 


“ Tue philological peculiarities of the book” 
constitute the next ground of the critic's 
attack on Daniel. ‘‘The Hebrew” (he de- 
clares) “‘is pronounced by the majority of 
experts to be of a later character than the 
time assumed for it.” The Aramaic also is 
marked by idioms of a later period, familiar 
to the Palestinian Jews.’ And not only are 
Persian words employed in the book, but it 
contains. certain Greek words, which, it is 
said, could not have been in use in Babylon 
during the exile. 

1 The opening passage of Daniel, from ch. i, 1 to ch. ii. 3, is 
written in the sacred Hebrew, and this is resumed at ch. viii. 
1 and continued to the end. The intervening portion, from 
ch. ii. 4 to the end of ch. vii., is written in Chaldee or Aramaic. 
Professor Cheyne accepts a suggestion of Lenormant’s that 


the whole book was written in Hebrew, but that the original 
of ii, 14 to vil. was lost (Smith’s Bzd/e Dict., art. “Daniel ”), 
42 


THE LANGUAGE OF DANIEL 43 


Here is Professor Driver’s summary of the 
argumient under this. head :— 

“The verdict of the language of Daniel is thus 
clear. The Persian words presuppose a period 
after the Persian Empire had been well established : 
the Greek words demand, the Hebrew supports, and 
the Aramaic fermits, a date after the conquest of 
Palestine by Alexander the Great (B.C. 332). With 
our present knowledge, this is as much as the 
language authorises us definitely to affirm.” } 


Now, the strength of this case depends on 
one point. Any number of argumentative 
presumptions may be rebutted by opposing 
evidence; but here, it is alleged, we have 
proof which admits of no answer: the Greek 
words in Daniel demand a date which de- 
stroys the genuineness of the book. Will 
the reader believe it that the only foundation 
for this is the presence of ¢wo words which 
are alleged to be Greek! Dr. Farrar in- 
sists on three, but one of these (4z¢haros) is 
practically given up.’ 

1 The Introduction, p. 476, and The Book of Daniel, 


. xiii. 

2 In Bertholdt’s day the critics counted fem Greek words 
in Daniel: they have now come down to ¢wo. Dr. Pusey 
denies that there are any. 


44 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


The story was lately told that at a church 
bazaar in Lincoln, held under episcopal 
patronage, the alarm was given that a thief 
was at work, and two of the visitors had lost 
their purses. In the excitement which fol- 
lowed, the stolen purses, emptied of course 
of their contents, were found in the bishop’s 
pocket. The Higher Criticism would have - 
handed him over to the police! Do the 
critics understand the very rudiments of the 
science of weighing evidence? The presence 
of the stolen purses did not “demand” the 
conviction of the bishop. Neither should 
the presence of the Greek words decide the 
fate of Daniel. There was no doubt, more- 
over, as to the identity of the purses, while 
Dr. Pusey and others dispute the derivation 
of the words. But in the one’ case as in the 
other the question would remain, How did 
they come to be where they were found ? 

The Talmud declares that, in common 
with some other parts of the canon, Daniel 
was edited by the men of the Great Syna- 
gogue—a college which is supposed to have 
been founded by Nehemiah, and which con- 


THE LANGUAGE OF DANIEL 45 


tinued until it gave place to the Great San- 
hedrim. May not this be the explanation of 
all these philological difficulties? This is not 
to have recourse to a baseless conjecture in 
order to evade well-founded objections : it is 
merely to give due weight to an authori- 
tative tradition, the very existence of which 
is prima face proof of its truth.’ 

It may be added that in view of recent 
discoveries no competent scholar would 


1 The attempt to explain in this way difficulties of another 
kind is to force the hypothesis unduly. But assuming, what 
there is no reason whatever to doubt, that such a revision 
took place, we should expect to find that familiar idioms 
would be substituted for others that were deemed archaic, ~ 
that familiar words would be substituted for.terms which 
then seemed strange or uncouth to the Jews of Palestine, 
and that names like Nebuchadrezzar would be altered’ to 
suit the then received orthography. And the “immense ana- 
chronism,” if such it were, of using the word “ Chaldeans” 
as synonymous with the caste of wise men is thus simply 
and fully explained. 

As regards the name Nebuchadnezzar, it is hard to re- 
press a feeling of indignation against the dishonesty of the 
critics. They plainly imply that this spelling is peculiar to 
Daniel. The fact is that the name occurs in nine of the 
books of the Old Testament, and in all of them, with the 
single exception of Ezekiel, it appears in this form. In 
Jeremiah it is spelt in both ways, proving clearly that the 
now received orthography was in use when the Book of 
Daniel was written, or else that the spelling of the name 
throughout the sacred books is entirely a matter of editing. 


46 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


now reproduce without reserve the argu- 
ment based on the presence of foreign 
words in the book. The fact is, the evolu- 
tion theory has thrown its shadow across 
this controversy. The extraordinary conceit 
which marks our much-vaunted -age has 
hitherto led us to assume that, in what has _ 
been regarded as a prehistoric period, men 
were slowly emerging from barbarism, that 
written records were wanting, and that there 
was no interchange among nations in the 
sphere either of scholarship or of trade. It 
is now known, however, that at even a far 
earlier period the nations bordering upon the 
Mediterranean possessed a literature and en- 
joyed a civilisation of no mean excellence. 
Merchants and philosophers travelled freely” 
from land to land,’ carrying with them their 


1 May not all that is truest and best in Buddhism be thus 
traced to the great prophet-prince of the exile? Gautama 
was a contemporary of Daniel. And when he set out upon 
his long pilgrimage in search of truth and light, may he not 
have found his way to Babylon, then the most famous centre 
both of civilisation and of religion. And visiting the broad- 
walled city, he could not fail to come under the influence of 
Daniel. Daniel was born about B.c. 624; and, according 


to Sir E. Arnold (Light of Asta, Preface), Gautama was born 
about B.C. 620. 


THE LANGUAGE OF DANIEL 47 


wares and their learning; and to appeal to 
the Greek words in Daniel as proof that the 
book was written after the date of Alex- 
ander’s conquests, no longer savours of 
scholarship. According to Professor Sayce, 
“there were Greek colonies on the coast of 
Palestine in the time of Hezekiah ”—a cen- 
tury before Daniel was born; ‘and they 
already enjoyed so much power there that a 
Greek usurper was made King of Ashdod. 
The Tel el-Amarna tablets have enabled 
us to carry back a contract between Greece 
and Canaan to a still earlier period.”! In- 
deed he goes on to indicate the possibility 
“that there was intercourse and contact be- 
tween the Canaanites or Hebrews in Pales- 
tine and the Greeks of the A‘gean as far 
back as the age of Moses.” 

But this is not all. Will the reader 
believe it, I ask again with increasing 
emphasis and indignation, that the Greek 
words, the presence of which is held to 
“demand” the rejection of the Book of 
Daniel, are merely the names of musical 

1 The Higher Criticism and the Monuments, pp. 494, 495. 


48 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


instruments? If the instruments themselves 
came from Greece it might be assumed that 
they would carry with them to Babylon the 
names by which they were known in the 
land of their origin. In no other sphere 
would men listen to what passes for proof 
when Scripture is assailed. In no other 
sphere would such trifling be tolerated. 
What would be thought of a tribunal which 
convicted a notorious thief of petty larceny 
on such evidence as this ? 

The Persian words are of still less account. 
That the Persian language was unknown 
among the cultured classes in Babylon is 
incredible. That it was widely known is 
suggested by the ease with which the Per- 
sian rule was accepted. The position which 
Daniel attained under that rule renders it 
probable in the extreme that he himself 
was a Persian scholar. And the date of 
his closing vision makes it certain that his 
book was ‘compiled after that rule was 
established. 

But, it will be answered, the philological 
argument does not rest upon points like 


THE LANGUAGE OF DANIEL 49 . 


these ; its strength lies in the general char- 
acter of the language in which the book 
is written. The question here raised, as 
Dr. Farrar justly says, ‘“‘involves delicate 
problems on which an independent and 
a valuable opinion can only be offered” by 
scholars of a certain class and very few in 
number.? 

But the student will find that their deci- 
sion is by no means unanimous or clear. 
And of course their azc¢a must be considered 
in connection with evidence of other kinds 
which it is beyond their province to deal 
with. Dr. Pusey’s magnificent work, in which 
the whole subject is handled with the great- 
est erudition and care, is not. dismissed by 
others with the contempt which Dr. Farrar 
evinces for a man who is fired by the enthu- 
siasm of faith in the Bible. In his judgment 
the Hebrew of Daniel is ‘just what one 
should expect at the age at which he lived.”’” 

1 Dr. Farrar’s words are, “by the merest handful of living 
scholars” (p. 17). How many scholars make a “ handful” 
he does not tell us, and of the two he proceeds to appeal to, 
one is not living but dead ! 


2 Pusey, p. 578. 
D 


50 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


And one of the highest living authorities, who 
has been quoted in this controversy as favour- 
ing a late date for the Book of Daniel, writes 
in reply to an inquiry I have addressed to 
him : “I am now of opinion that it is a very 
difficult task to settle the age of any portion 
of that book from its language.” This is 
also the opinion of Professor Cheyne, a 
thoroughly hostile-witness. His words are: 
‘‘From the Hebrew of the Book of Daniel 
no important inference as to its date can be 
safely drawn.” ? 

And, lastly, appeal may be made to Dr. 
Farrar himself, who remarks with signal 
fairness, but withstrange inconsistency, that 
‘Perhaps nothing certain can be inferred 
from the philological examination either of 
the Hebrew or of the Chaldee portions of 
the book.” ? And again, still more definitely, 
he declares : “ The character of the language 
proves nothing.”* This testimony, carrying 
as it does the exceptional weight which 
attaches to the admissions of a prejudiced 


1 Ency. Brit., art. “Daniel,” p. 804. 
TP. 37: 3 P. 89. 


THE LANGUAGE OF DANIEL 51 


and hostile witness, might be accepted as 
decisive of the whole question. And the 
fact being what is here stated, the stress 
laid on grounds thus admitted to be faulty 
and inconclusive is proof only of a deter- 
mination by fair means or foul to discredit 
the Book of Daniel. 

In his Hestory of the Criminal Law, Sir 
James Fitzjames Stephen declares. that, as 
no kind of evidence. more demands the 
test of cross-examination than that of ex- 
perts, their proper place is the witness 
chair and not the judgment seat. There- 
fore when Professor Driver announces “the 
verdut of the language of Daniel,’ he 
goes entirely outside his proper province. 
The opinions of the philologist are entitled 
to the highest respect, but the “ verdict” 
rests with those who have practical ac- 
- quaintance with the science of evidence. 

Before turning away from this part of 
the subject, it may be well to appeal to 
yet another witness, and he shall be one 
whose competency Dr. Farrar acknowledges, 
and none will question. His words, more- 


52 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


over, have an interest and value far beyond 
the present controversy, and deserve most 
careful consideration by all who have been 
stumbled or misled by the arrogant dog- 
matism of the so-called Higher Critics. The _ 
following quotation is from An Essay on the 
Place of Ecclesiasticus in Semitic Literature 
by Professor Margoliouth :— 


“My lamented colleague, Dr. Edersheim, and I, 
misled by the very late date assigned by eminent 
scholars to the books of the Bible, had worked 
under the tacit assumption that the language of 
Ben-Sira was the language of the Prophets; 
whereas in reality he wrote the language of the 
Rabbis ” (p. 6). 


It should be explained that the Proverbs 
of Jesus the son of Sirach have come down 
to us in a Greek translation, but the 
character of that translation is such that the 
reconstruction of the original Hebrew text 
is a task within the capacity of competent 
scholarship, and a preface to that translation 
fixes the date of the book as not later than 
about B.c, 200. But to resume :— 


1 Clarendon Press, 1890, 


THE LANGUAGE OF DANIEL 53 


“If by 200 sc. the whole Rabbinic farrago, 
with its terms and phrases and idioms and par- 
ticles, was developed, . . . then between Ben-Sira 
and the Books of the Old Testament there must lie 
centuries—nay, there must lie, in most cases, the 
deep waters of the Captivity, the grave of the old- 
Hebrew and the old Israel, and the womb of the 
new-Hebrew and the new Israel. If Hebrew, like 
any other language, has a history, then Isaiah (first 
or second) must be separated -from Ecclesiastes by 
a gulf; but a yet greater gulf must yawn between 
Ecclesiastes and Ecclesiaticus, for in the interval 
a whole dictionary has been invented of philoso- 
phical terms such as we traced above, of logical 


phrases, . . . legal expressions, . . . nor have the 
structure and grammar of the language experi- 
enced. less serious alteration. . ..It may be, if 
ever Ben-Sira is properly restored, . . . that while 


some students are engaged in bringing down the 
date of every chapter in the Bible so late as to 
leave no room for prophecy and revelation, others 
will endeavour to find out how early the professedly 
post-exilian books can be put back, so as to ac- 
count for the divergence between their awkward 
middle-Hebrew and the rich and eloquent new- 
Hebrew of Ben-Sira. However this may be, hypo- 
theses which place any portion of the classical or 
old-Hebrew Scriptures between the middle-Hebrew 
of Nehemiah and the new-Hebrew of Ben-Sira will 
surely require some reconsideration, or at least 


a 


54 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


have to be harmonised in some way with the history 
of the language, before they can be unconditionally 
accepted.” 


These weighty words have received strik- 
ing confirmation by the recent discovery of 
the ‘‘ Cairene Ecclesiasticus,” a Hebrew MS. 
the genuineness of which is maintained by 
most of the critics, though others regard it as 
merely an attempt to reconstruct the original 
of Ben-Sira. According to Dr. Schechter, 
who has edited the document for the 
University of Cambridge, an examination 
of the language establishes “the conclusion 
that at the period in which B.-S. composed 
his ‘Wisdom’ classical Hebrew was already 
a thing of the past, the real language. of the 
period being that Hebrew idiom which we. 
know from the Mishnah and cognate Rab- 
binic literature.” And again, after freely 
quoting from Ben-Sira: ‘“‘These specimens 
are enough to show that in the times of B.-S. 
the new-Hebrew dialect had long advanced 
beyond the transitory stage known to us 
from the later Biblical books, and had already 
reached, both in respect of grammar and of 


a 


THE LANGUAGE OF DANIEL 55 


phraseology, that degree of development to 
which the Mishnah bears testimony.” * 


1 The Wisdom of Ben-Sira, &c., by S. Schechter, M.A., 
Litt.D., &c., and C. Taylor, D.D., Master of St. John’s Col- 
lege, Cambridge (Cambridge University Press, 1899). As 
Professor Driver and his school have unreservedly accepted 
this MS., it is not open to them to plead that its genuineness 
is doubtful. And if Professor Margoliouth’s judgment 
should ultimately prevail that it is a forgery of late date— 
the tenth or eleventh century— it would be still, as an 
attempt to reconstruct the Hebrew original, a notable con- 
firmation of the views and opinions above cited. 


CHAPTER V 


.THE POSITIVE EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR 
OF DANIEL 


THE critics claim a competency to judge 
whether this portion or that of the canon_ 
of Scripture be divinely inspired, and in the 
exercise of this faculty they have decided 
that certain -passages of Daniel give proof 
that the book could. not have a divine 
sanction. Their acta on this subject will 
have weight with us just in proportion to our 
ignorance of Scripture. The opening chap- 
ters of the book which follows Daniel in the 
canon present far greater difficulties in this 
respect, and yet the prophetic character of 
Hosea is unquestionable. Other Scriptures 
also might be cited to point the same moral ; 
but as these pretensions of the critics are 
not accepted by Christians generally, the 
matter need not be further discussed. 

Still more summarily we may dismiss 

3 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 57 


Dean Farrar’s argument from the absence 
of references to Daniel in the apocryphal 
literature of the Jews. ~ Indeed; he himself 
supplies the answer to it, for when he ap- 
proaches the subject from another standpoint 
he emphasises the influence which the book 
exercised upon that very literature.” And 
as for the silence of Jesus the son of Sirach, 
the argument only serves to indicate the 
dearth of weightier proofs. The reader can 
* turn to the passage referred to” and decide 
the matter for himself. If an omission from 
this panegyric of “famous men” proves any- 
thing, Ezra and the book which bears his 
name must also be rejected. 

The next point claims fuller notice. Daniel 
was admittedly received into the canon ; but, 
we are told, ‘‘it is relegated to the Kethuvim, 


1The book is in all respects unique, a writing saz 
generis; for the many imitations to which it led are but 
imitations” (p. 37). This is but one of numerous instances 
in which Dr. Farrar affords on one page a refutation of 
objections stated upon another. 

2 Ecclestasticus, x\viii. 20-xlix. 10. On this point see 
Professor Margoliouth’s Lines of Defence of the Biblical 
Revelation, pp. 177, 178, 305. It is there established that 
the Book of Daniel was known to Ben-Sira, and the whole 
pseud-epigraph theory is thus exploded. 


- 


58 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


-side by side with such a book as Esther.” 
The answer to this is complete. In the 
Jewish canon the Old Testament Scriptures 
were reckoned as twenty-four books. These 
were classified as the Zorakh, the eveezm, 
and the Kethuvim—the Law, the Prophets, 
and the Other Writings. Now, the objection 
implies that the Meveetm embraced all that 
was regarded as prophecy, and nothing else ; 
and that the contents of the Kethuvim were 
deemed inferior to the rest of the canon. 
Both these implications are false. .In the 
former class are placed the books of Joshua, 
Judges, Samuel, and Kings. And the latter 
included two books at least, than which no 
part of the Scriptures was more highly 
esteemed,—the Psalms, associated so in- 
separably with the name of King David; 
and Esther, which, face the sneer of the 
critic, was held in exceptional honour. Dr. 
Driver avers that it came to be ‘ranked by 
the Jews as superior both to the writings of 
the prophets and to all other parts of the 
-Hagiographa.”’ The Psalms headed cs 

| 1 Introduction, p. 452. . 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 59 


list. Then came Proverbs, connected with 
the name of Solomon. Then Job, one of 
the oldest of the books. ~Then followed 
the five Megilloth (Song of Songs, Ruth, 
Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther). 
And finally Daniel, Ezra and Nehemiah, 
and Chronicles. To have placed Daniel 
before the Megzlloth would have separated 
it from the books with which it was so im- 
mediately associated. In a word, its place 
in the list is normal and natural.’ 

_ The Book of Psalms, as already men- 
tioned, stood first in the Kethuvim, and in 
later times gave it its name; for when our 
Lord spoke of ‘‘the Law of Moses, the 
Prophets, and the Psalms,” he thereby 
meant ‘“‘all the Scriptures.”* Many of the 
Psalms were rightly deemed prophetic ; but 
though David was a prophet in the highest 
sense, it was not as prophet but as king that 
his name was enshrined in the memory of 
the people, and the book thus naturally 
found its place in the third division of the 


M 1 But see p. 60, fost. 


2 Luke xxiv. 27, 44. 


60 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


canon, For the books were grouped rather 
by authorship than by the character of their 
contents. Precisely the same reason existed 
for placing Daniel .where it stood; for it 
was not till the end of a long life spent in 
statecraft that the visions were accorded to 
the Exile. 

But this isnot all. As Dr. Farrar urges, 
though he is obviously blind to its signi- 
ficance, Daniel had no claim to the prophet’s 
mantle. The prophets ‘‘spake as they were _ 
moved by the Holy Ghost:” fe merely 
recorded the words addressed to him by 
the angel, and described the visions he 
witnessed. And the question here, be it 
remembered, is not what weight would be 
given to this distinction by our modern 
critics, but how it would influence the minds- 
of the men who settled the canon. I am 
here assuming that the: place which the 
Book of Daniel now holds in the Hebrew 
Bible is that which was originally assigned 
to it. But this is by no means certain. 
There are definite reasons to suspect that 
it was the Talmudists who removed it from 


. * 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 61 


the position it occupies in the LX X. version 
and in our English Bible, and relegated it to 
the third division of the canon.’ 

And now it is high time to raise a ques- 
tion which the critic systematically ignores, 
a question which possibly he is incompetent 
to deal with. For the Higher Criticism 
claims an entirely false position in this con- 
troversy. The critic is a specialist; and 
specialists, though often necessary witnesses, 
are proverbially bad judges. To some men, 
moreover, every year that passes brings 
more experience in the art of weighing evi- 
dence than the theologian or the pundit 
would be likely to acquire in a lifetime. 
And such men are familiar with cases where 
amass of seemingly invincible proof seems 
to point one way, and yet fuller inquiry 
establishes that the truth lies in a wholly 
opposite direction. But the caution which 
such experience begets is not to be looked 
for in the critic. And as for Dr. Farrar, his 
book reminds us of a private prosecution 


1 On this subject see Kitto’s LEwcyclopedia, article 
“Canon,” by the learned editor of that work 


62 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


conducted by that type of lawyer whose 
remuneration is proportionate to the vehe- 
mence with which he presses ‘every point 
against the defendant. It never seems to 
have crossed his mind that there may pos- 
sibly be two sides to the question. Here, 
then, we have everything which can possibly 
be urged agaznst the Book of Daniel: the 
inquiry remains, What further can be said 
in its defence? Let us call a few of the 
witnesses, 

First comes the mention of Daniel, three 
times repeated, in the prophecies of Ezekiel 
(xiv. 14, 20, and xxvili. 3). The critics 
urge that a man so famous as the Daniel 
of the Exile is represented to have been in 
the book which bears his name, would have 
filled a large place in the literature of the 
nation, and they appeal to the silence of that 
literature in proof that no such personage 
in fact existed. And yet when the testimony 
of Ezekiel is cited, they declare that there 
must have been another Daniel of equal if 
not greater fame, who flourished at some 
earlier epoch of their history, albeit not even 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 63 


the vaguest tradition of his existence has 
survived! Such casuistry is hard to deal 
with. . : 

But here Dr. Farrar is rash enough to 
leave the path so well worn by the feet of 
those he follows, and to venture upon,a piece 
of independent criticism. He fixes B.c. 606 
as the date of Daniel’s captivity, and twelve 
years as his age when carried to Babylon; 
and he adds :— 


“Tf Ezekiel’s prophecy was uttered: B.C. 584, 
Daniel at that time could only have been twenty- 
two: if it was uttered as late as B.C. 572, Daniel 
would still have been only thirty-four, and there- 
fore little more than a youth in Jewish eyes. It is 
undoubtedly surprising that among Orientals, who 
regard age as the chief passport to wisdom, a 
living youth should be thus canonised between 
the Patriarch of the Deluge and the Prince of 
ize 


The author’s words have been given ver- 
batim, lest some one ‘should charitably sup- 
pose they have been misrepresented. For 
the reader will perceive that this pretentious 
argument has no better foundation than a 


Pe 10, 


64 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


transparent blunder in simple arithmetic.’ 
According to his own showing, Daniel was 
upwards of thirty-four,? and he may have 
been forty-six, when Ezekiel’s prophecy was 
uttered. And setting aside the absurd fig- 
ment that Daniel was but a child of twelve 
when deported to Babylon,® his age at the 
date of the prophecy must, as a matter of 
fact, have been forty at the least, or “if it. 
was uttered as late as B.c. 572,” he must 
have already reached middle age. In either 
case he had already attained the prime of 
his powers and the zenith of his fame. 

What, then, are the facts? We have 
Daniel in a position of dazzling splendour 
and influence at the Court of Nebuchad- 
nezzar, second only to that of the great 
king himself. His power and fame, great 


1 Any schoolboy can see that from B.C. 606 to B.C. 584 was 
twenty-two years, and if Daniel was twelve in B.C. 606, his 
age in B.C. 584 was not twenty-two, but thirty-four. Or if 
B.C. 572 was the date of the prophecy, his age when it was 
uttered was. forty-six. 

* At 34 years of age Napoleon became Emperor, and the 
foremost figure in Europe. At 33, Alexander died, having 
already conquered the world. 

3 Pp. 18, 19, ante. If his age at the time was eighteen, 
he died at eighty-eight. 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 65 


though they were, cannot fail to have 
loomed greater still in the estimate of the 
humbler exiles by the river Chebar, among 
whom Ezekiel lived and__ prophesied. 
Neither “the Patriarch of the Deluge” 
nor “the Prince of Uz” would have held 
as large a place in the heart or in the 
imagination of the people. The name of 
their great patron must have been on every 
lip. His power was their security against 
oppression. His influence doubtless fired 
their hopes of a return to the land of their 
fathers. : - 

Nor was this all. The college of the 
Chaldean Magi was famous the wide world 
‘over; and for more than twenty years 
Daniel had been “chief of the wise men,” 
and thus, in wisdom as well as in statecraft, 
the foremost figure of the Court of Babylon. 
Among Orientals, and especially among his 
own people, the record of the event which 
gained him that position, and of his triumphs 
.of administration as Grand Vizier, would 
have lost nothing in the telling. And 


though his piety was intense and wholly 
E 


66 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


phenomenal, his reputation in this respect 
also could not fail to be exaggerated. — 

Such, then, was the time and such the 
circumstances of Ezekiel’s prophecy—words 
of scorn addressed to one of the great ene- 
mies of their race: ‘Behold thou art wiser 
than Daniel, there is no secret that they can 
hide from thee;” or words of denunciation 
of the wickedness which brought such judg- 
ments upon Jerusalem: ‘‘ Though these three 
men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, 
they should deliver but their own souls by 
their righteousness.” 

The refusal therefore to accept the testi- 
mony of Ezekiel as evidence to accredit the 
Book of Daniel is proof that neither honesty 
nor fairness may be looked for from the 
sceptics. In the judgment of all reasonable 
men, this single testimony will go far to 
decide the issue.’ AF 

The First Book of Maccabees is a work 
of the highest excellence. It has an author- 
ity and value which no other part of the 
Apocrypha possesses, and even Luther de- 

1 On this see also p. 98, post. 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 67 


clared it not unworthy to be reckoned among 
the sacred books of Scripture. The author 
was indeed ‘‘a holy and gifted Jew,” and 
though the suggestion that he was no other 
than John Hyrcanus is now discredited, it 
gives proof of his eminence both for piety 
and learning. And one of the most striking 
and solemn passages of this book, the record 
.of the dying words of the venerable -Mat- 
tathias, refers to the Daniel of the Exile 
and the book which bears his name.! 
Notwithstanding the extraordinary eru- 
dition which has been brought to bear 
upon this controversy, so far as I am 
aware the full significance of this fact has 
hitherto escaped notice. There is internal 
evidence that 1 Maccabees was written be- 
fore the death of John Hyrcanus (B.c. 106). 
Allowing, then, for. the sake of argument, 
the utterly improbable hypothesis that the 


1 ; Mace. ii. 59, 60. The whole passage is important, but 
the special reference is to the words : “Ananias, Azarias, and 
Misael by believing were saved out of the flame. Daniel for 
his innocency was delivered from the mouth of the lions.” 
Nor is this all. The words BdeAvypa epypacews in 1 Mace. i. 
54 are quoted from Dan. xii. Ir. 


68 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


canon was not closed till after the time of 
Antiochus, the book affords conclusive proof 
that among the learned of that day Daniel _ 
was. regarded as the work of the great 
prophet-prince of the Captivity. It was as 
such, therefore, that it must have been ad- 


mitted to the canon. The theory is thus ~ 


exploded that it was as a “ pseud-epigraph ” 
that the Sanhedrim received it; and the 
fact of its reception becomes evidence of 
its genuineness which would outweigh the 
whole mass of the objections and difficulties 
which have been heaped together upon the 
other side. 

If space were of no account, numerous 
points might thus be turned against the 
argument in support of which the critic 
adduces them. But these may be safely 
ignored in presence of other proofs of 
principal importance. 

It was Sir Isaac Newton’s opinion that 
“to reject Daniel’s prophecies would be to 
undermine the Christian religion.” Bishop 
Westcott declares that no other book of 
the Old Testament had so great a share 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 69 


in the development of Christianity." To 
cite a hostile witness, Professor Bevan ad- 
mits that “the influence of the book is 
apparent almost everywhere.” In this con- 
nection he adds: ‘The more we realise 
how vast and how profound was the in- 
fluence of Daniel in post-Maccabean times, 
the more difficult it is to believe that the 
book existed previously for well-nigh four 
centuries without exercising any perceptible 
influence whatsoever.”* On this it may be 
remarked, first, that it is far more difficult 
to believe that a ‘‘pseud-epigraph” could 
possibly have had an influence so vast and 
so profound on the development of Chris- 
tianity. The suggestion indeed, if accepted, 
might well discredit Christianity altogether. 
And secondly, it is extraordinary how any 
person can fail to see that the influence of 
the Book of Daniel in post-Maccabean times 
was due to the fulfilment of its predictions 
relating to those times. 

\Dr. Farrar quotes, though with special 


1 Smith’s Bible Dict., art. “ Daniel.” 
2 Short Com., p. 15. 


70 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


reprobation, the dictum of Hengstenberg, 
that “there are few books whose divine 
authority is so fully established by the 
testimony of the New Testament, and in 
particular by the Lord Himself.” And yet 
the truth of all this no thoughtful Chris- 
tian can question. St. Paul’s predictions of 
the Antichrist point back to the visions of 
Daniel. And with those visions the visions 
of St. John—the Daniel of the New Testa- 
ment—are so inseparably interwoven, that 
if the former be attributed to imagination, 
the latter must be attributed to lunacy. 
The Book of Daniel and the Apocalypse 
stand or fall together. 

But the matter becomes far more serious 
and solemn when we realise how definitely 
the visions of Daniel have been adopted 
in the teaching of Christ. Dr. Farrar ima- 
gines that he has disposed of the matter 
by the figment that in the twenty-fourth 
chapter of Matthew the reference to 
“Daniel the prophet” was added by the 
evangelist as an explanatory note. But 
even if such a wild suggestion could be 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 71 


allowed, every intelligent reader of the 
passage can see that any such interpolation 
must have been based upon the obvious 
and unmistakable connection between the 
words of our Lord and the visions of the 
prophet of the Exile. 

Here is a dilemma from which escape is 
impossible. If the Gospels be authentic and 
true, our Lord has adopted, and identified 
Himself with, the visions of this now dis- 
credited book. If the Gospels be unreliable 
and fictitious, the foundations of our faith are 
destroyed, and belief in Christianity is sheer 
superstition. “To the last degree danger- 
ous, irreverent, and unwise” this may seem 
in the Dean of Canterbury’s judgment, but 
its truth is none the less obvious and 
clear. — 

It cannot be asserted too plainly that 
Christianity is a Divine revelation. Nor 
need the admission be withheld that, apart ~ 
from revelation in the strictest sense, the 
Christian’s faith would be without adequate 
foundation.. It is easy, indeed, to formulate 
a religious system based on the teaching of a 


72 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


traditional “Jesus Christ.” But this is no 
more than a Christianised Buddhism; it is 
certainly not Chvzstzanity. The main fact on 
which Christianity as a system rests is the 
incarnation; and the man who, apart from 
revelation, believes in the incarnation is a 
credulous weak creature who would believe 
anything. 

“The Nazarene was admittedly the son 
of Mary. The Jews declared that he was | 
the son of Joseph ; the Christian worships 
Him as the Son of God. The founder of 
Rome was said to be the divinely begotten 
child of a vestal virgin. And in the old 
Babylonian mysteries a similar parentage 
was ascribed to the martyred son of Semi- 
ramis gazetted Queen of Heaven. What 
grounds have we, then, for distinguishing 
the miraculous birth at Bethlehem from 
these and other kindred legends of the 
ancient world? To point to the resurrec- 
tion is a transparent begging of the question. 
To appeal to human testimony is utter folly. 
At this point we are face to face with that 
to which no consensus of mere human testi- 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 73 


mony could lend even an a griort proba- 
bility.” * 

The editor of Lux Mundi and his allies 
would here seek to save their reputation for 
intelligence by setting up the authority of 
“the Church” as an adequate ground for 
faith. This theory, however, is a plant of 
foreign growth, which, happily, has not taken 
root in England. But while on this point 
the Dean of Canterbury would probably re- 
pudiate the teaching with which, in its de- 
generate days, Pusey House identified itself, 
he would doubtless endorse the words which 
follow. Here is the passage :— . 


“The Christian creed asserts the reality of certain 
historical facts. To these facts, in the Church’s 
name, we claim assent; but we do so on grounds 
which, so far, are quite independent of the zzsfira- 
tion of the evangelical records. All that we claim 
to show at this stage is that they are historical : not 
historical so as to be absolutely without error, but 
historical in the general sense, so as to be trust- 
worthy. All that is necessary for faith in Christ is 
to be found in the moral dispositions which predis- 
pose to belief, and make intelligible and credible the 


14 Doubters Doubts about Science and Religion, p. 76. 


74 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


thing to be believed: coupled with such acceptance 
of the generally historical character of the Gospels, 
and of the trustworthiness of the other Apostolic 
documents, as justifies belief that our Lord was 
actually born of the Virgin Mary,” &c.! 


This language is plain enough. The 
gospels are not even divinely accredited as 
true. They are “historical zx the general 
sense’ indeed, and therefore as trustworthy 
as history in general. They afford, there- 
fore, ample ground for belief in the public 
facts of the life and death of Christ. But 
who denies or doubts these facts? They 
have their place in the Koran and the 
writings of the Rabbis, as well as in our 
Christian literature. But on what ground 
can we justify our faith in the transcendental 
facts to which these public facts owe all their 
spiritual significance? ‘To these facts, in 
the Church’s name, we claim assent,” is the 
only reply vouchsafed to us. Let a man 
but yield up his judgment and bow before 
his priest, and he will soon acquire ‘the 
moral dispositions which predispose to belief, 


1 Lux Mundi, p. 340. 


EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 75 


and make intelligible and credible the thing 
to be believed.” And whether the object of 
his worship be Buddha or Mahomet or Christ, 
the result will be the same!? 


“ But,’ Dr. Farrar here exclaims, 
’ 


“Our belief in the Incarnation, and in the miracles 
» of Christ, rests on evidence which, after repeated 
examination, is to us overwhelming. Apart from 
all questions of personal verification, or the Inward 
Witness of the Spirit, we can show that this evidence 
is supported, not only by the existing records, but by 
_myriads of external and independent testimonies.” ? 


Contempt is poured upon our belief that 
an angel messenger appeared to Daniel, and 
we are not even permitted to believe that 
an angel ministered to our Divine Lord in 
the Garden of Gethsemane.® But if, as the 


1] have dealt with this more fully in Zhe Buddha of 
Christendom, ch. vii. 

252; 40. 

3 This, according to Dr. Farrar, has no foundation save 
in the superstitious imagination of the three’disciples when 
half dazed with sleep !—7he Life of Christ, ch. lvii. What 
authority have we, then, for the words alleged to have been 
uttered by the Lord in His agony? What confidence can 
we feel in the narrative at all? The Cospels become (to use 
the critic’s words about the Book of Daniel) a charming and 
elevating romance! For the full development of this pro- 


“s 


76 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


natural outcome of this teaching, we should 
be led’ to doubt the reality of the angelic 
apparition at Bethlehem, the indignation of 
the teacher will find vent in a scream of 
hysterical and unmeaning rhetoric. 

For the question at issue here is the truth 
of the opening statement of the Gospel nar- 
rative. I allude to Matthew i. 18-25, the 
last verse especially. To the facts there 
recorded only two persons in the world 
could testify, and the witness of Mary and 
Joseph reaches us only in the very records 
which, we are told, are unreliable and marred 
by error. But Dean Farrar will assure us 
that, while words attributed to our Lord 
Himself are not to be accepted as authentic 
and true, the evidence here is “ overwhelm- 
ing.” Of the reality of Joseph’s visions, 
and of the fact of Mary’s faithfulness and 
purity, we are supposed to have satisfied 
ourselves, first by ‘personal verification,” 


fane system, see Professor Cheyne’s Encyc. Bzb., article 
‘“Gospels.” A man who accepts that article and yet pro- 
fesses to believe in Christianity is either baa aoe 
or hopelessly credulous and superstitious. 


_EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF DANIEL 77 


secondly by ‘‘the inward witness of the 
Spirit,” thirdly by study of the “existing 
records —the ‘very records which he dis- 
parages—and lastly by “tens of thousands 
of external testimonies”! To discuss this 
is impossible, for here the writer passes out 
of the region in which reason holds sway, 
and parts company even with common-sense. 

The position of the Christian is an in- 
telligible one. Though he believes in the 
unseen and the unprovable, his faith is 
strictly rational; for, assuming a Divine 
revelation, belief is the highest act of reason. 
I cannot here discuss the grounds on which 
he claims to possess such a revelation.’ | 
merely note the fact that the Christian main- 
tains such a‘claim, and that, if it be assented 
to, his position is unassailable. But if once 
the validity of that claim be destroyed, every 
fearless thinker must fall back upon scep- 
ticism as ‘‘the rational attitude of a thinking 
mind towards the supernatural.”*? The story 


1 This, of course, would raise the whole question- of In- 
spiration, the discussion of which would be impossible here. 
But see p. 11, ante. 

2 Mills Essays on Religion, p. 242. 


78 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


of the Incarnation sinks at once to the level 
of a Galilean legend, and our faith in Chris- 
tianity is the merest superstition. 

Not that the removal of spurious portions 
of the canon need necessarily lessen faith in 
what remains. But, as already urged, if the 
Book of Daniel be expunged the Revelation 
of John must share its fate, and in view 
of their exclusion numerous passages in the 
Gospels and Epistles must be fearlessly re- 
edited. Some may imagine that the process, 
if intrusted to reverent hands, would not 
undermine the fabric of the Bible as a whole ; 
but all will admit that it could not fail to 
weaken it. Nor is this plea put forward as 
an excuse for clinging to what is doubtful.’ 
It is designed only as a protest and a warn- 
ing against the recklessness and levity of 
the critics, 


(HAPTER VI 
“VIOLENT ERRORS” 


“THE existence of violent errors as to mat- 
‘ters with which a contemporary must have 
been familiar, at once refutes all pretence of 
historic authenticity in a book professing to 
have been written by an author in the days 
and country which he describes.” “By no 
possibility could the book have been written 
in the days of the Babylonian exile.” Thus. 
it is that Dean Farrar disposes of the Book 
~ of Daniel. Such dogmatism, while it will 
surprise and distress the thoughtful and well- 
informed, will no doubt overwhelm the simple 
“folk whom this volume of the Eaposttor’s - 
ible is presumably intended to enlighten. 
Indeed, the writer betrays throughout 
his belief that, from Bacon to Pusey, all 
who have accepted the Book of Daniel as 
authentic have been wanting either in hon- 

; 79 


80 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


esty or intelligence. And it suggests that 
he himself is one of a line of scholars who, as 
the result of independent inquiry, are agreed 
in rejecting it. The discovery of the hidden 
records of the court of Babylon cannot be 
much longer deferred, and when these shall 
have been brought to light we shall learn, 
perchance, on which side the folly lies—that 
of the believers or of the critics. And while 
an ignorant public is easily imposed upon by 
a parade of seeming scholarship, no one who 
is versed in the Daniel controversy can fail 
to recognise that fair and independent inquiry 
is absolutely wanting. : 

Porphyry the Pagan it was who set the 
ball rolling long ago. After resting for 
centuries it was again put in motion by 
the rationalists. And now that the fashion 
has set towards scepticism, and “ Higher 
Criticism” is supposed to denote higher 
culture, critic follows critic, like sheep 
through a gap. Here in this last contribution 
to the controversy the writer falls into line, 
wholly unconscious that the “ violent errors” 
he pillories have an existence only in the 


“ VIOLENT ERRORS” 8I 


ignorance of those who denounce them. 
And we seek in vain for a single page that 
gives proof of fair and unbiassed inquiry. 

But the critic will tell us that the time for 
inquiry is past, for the question is no longer 
open. ‘ There is no shadow of doubt on 
the subject left in the minds of such scholars 
as Driver, Cheyne, Sanday, Bevan, and 
Robertson Smith.”* This list of names is in- 
tended as a climax to the pretentious periods 
which precede it, but this grouping together 
of the living and the dead makes it savour 
rather of anti-climax. Do these writers 
monopolise the scholarship of England? or 
does the list represent the authorities hostile 
to the Book of Daniel? 

It may seem ungracious to add that not 
one of these distinguished men has ever 
given proof of fitness for an inquiry so diffi- 
cult and complex. And as for the treatise 
here under review, every part of it gives 
proof of absolute unfitness for the task. It 
is easy to convict’ an accused person if all 
his witnesses are put out of court and re- 


-l Pp, 118, 
F 


82 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


fused a hearing, and his own words and 
acts are misrepresented and distorted. Yet 
such is the treatment here accorded to the 
Book of Daniel. Not one of the champions 
of faith is allowed a hearing, and the exegesis 
offered of the prophetic portions of the book 
would be denounced as a mere travesty by 
every intelligent student of prophecy. In 
nota few instances, indeed, the transparent 
error and folly of the critic’s scheme will be 
clear even to the ordinary reader. 

Take the Seventy Weeks as an example. 
In adopting what he terms “the Antiochian 
hypothesis” of the sceptics, the critic is con- 
fronted by the fact that ‘it does not accu- 
rately correspond with ascertainable dates.” 
“Tt is true,” he says, ‘that from B.c. 588 to 
B.C. 164 only gives us 424 years, instead of 
490 years.” But this difficulty he disposes 
of by declaring that “precise computation 
is nowhere prevalent in the sacred books.” 
And he adds, “to such purely mundane-~ 
and secondary matters as close reckoning 
of dates the Jewish writers show themselves 
manifestly indifferent.” No statement could 


‘“ VIOLENT ERRORS” 83 


well be more unwarrantable. A ‘close 
reckoning of dates” is almost a speciality 
of ‘Jewish writers.” No other writings can 
compare with theirs in this respect. But let 
us hear what the critic has to urge. : 
“That there were differences of compu- 
tation,” he remarks, ‘as regards Jeremiah’s 
seventy years, even in the age of the exile, 
is sufficiently shown by the different views as 
to their termination taken by the Chronicler 
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 22), who fixes it B.c. 536, 
and by Zechariah (Zech. i. 12), who fixes it 
about B.c. 519.” This is his only appeal to 
Scripture, and, as I have already shown,’ 
it is but an ignorant blunder, arising from 
confounding the different eras of the Servi- 
tude, the Captivity, and the Desolations. 
Dr. Farrar next appeals to ‘‘exactly similar 
mistakes of reckoning” in Josephus, and he 
enumerates the following :— | 


“1, In his /ewzsh Wars (VI. iv. 8) he says that 
there were, 639 years between the second year of 
Cyrus and the destruction of the Temple by Titus 
(A.D. 70). Here is an error of more than 30 years. 


1 Pp, 21-22, ante. 


84 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


“2, In his Antiquities (XX. x.) he says that 
there were 434 years between the return from the 
Captivity (B.C. 536) and the reign of Antiochus 
-Eupator (B.C. 164-162). Here is an error of more 
than 60 years. 

“3, In his Amtiguatees, XIII. xi. 1, he reckons 
481 years between the return from the Captivity 
and the time of Aristobulus (B.C. 105-104). Here 
is an error of some 50 years. é 


These “mistakes” will repay a careful 
scrutiny. Inthe passage first cited, Josephus 
reckons the period between the foundation 
of the first temple by Solomon and its de- 
struction by Titus as 1130 years 7 months 
and 15 days. ‘And from the second build- 
ing of it, whrch was done by Haggat, in the 
second year of Cyrus the king,” the interval 
was 639 years and 45 days. This, be it 
remarked, is given as proof that “precise 
computation” is nowhere to be looked for 
in Jewish writers! The enumeration of the 
very days, however, renders it certain that 
Josephus had before him chronological tables 
of absolute precision. But in computing the 
second era above mentioned, he refers to the 
prophet Haggai, who, with Zechariah, pro- 


‘VIOLENT ERRORS” 85 


moted the building of the second temple in 
the second year of Darius Hystaspis. As 
this historian speaks elsewhere of Artaxerxes 
as Cyrus,’ so here he calls Darius by that 
title. The period, therefore, was (according 
to our chronology) from B.c. 520 to A.D. 70— 
that is, 589 years—that is, about fifty years — 
less than Josephus reckons. In Dr. Farrar’s 
third example, this same excess of about fifty 
years again appears; and if in his second 
example we substitute 424 years for the 

doubtful reading of 434 years, we reach a 
- precisely similar result. 

What are we to conclude from these facts? 
Not that the ancient Jews were careless or 
indifferent in regard to chronology, which 
would be flagrantly untrue; but that their 
chronological tables, though framed with 
absolute precision, were marked by errors 
which amounted to an excess of some fifty 
years 7z the very period to which the era of 
the seventy weeks must be assigned. A 

Here, then, we have a solution which is 


1 Ant., XI. vi. 1. Cyrus, like Cesar and the modern 
Kaiser, seems to have been used as a title. 


86 *® DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


definite and adequate of the only serious 
objection which the critic can urge against 
the application of this prophecy to Messiah. 
Of that application Dr. Farrar writes :— 

“Tt is finally discredited by the fact that neither 
our Lord, nor His apostles, nor any of the earliest 
Christian writers, once appealed to the evidence of 
this prophecy, which, on the principles of Hengsten- 
berg and Dr. Pusey, would have been so decisive! 
If such a proof lay ready to their hand—a proof 
definite and*chronological—why should they have 
deliberately passed it over?”? 

The answer is full and clear, that any such 
appeal would have been discredited, and any 
such proof refuted, by reference to what (as 
Josephus shows us) was the received chron- 
ology of the age they lived in. But what 
possible excuse can be made for those who, 
. with the full light that history now throws 
upon the sacred page, not only reject its 
teaching, but use their utmost ingenuity to 
darken and distort it? ‘‘ From the decree 
to restore Jerusalem unto the Anointed One 
(or ‘the Messiah’), the Prince”—this, to | 
quote Dr. Farrar’s own words,” describes 
1 P. 287. SP 275. 


‘“VIOLENT ERRORS ” 87 


the era here in view. There is no question 
that the Holy City was restored. There is 
no question that its restoration was in pur- 
suance of a decree of Artaxerxes I. The 
date of that decree is known. From that 
date unto “the Messiah, the Prince,” was 
exactly the period specified in the prophecy.’ 

But Dr. Farrar will tell us that the real 
epoch was not the decree to restore Jeru- 
salem, but the catastrophe by which Jeru- 
salem was laid in ruins. “It is obvious,” 
he says, after enumerating “the views of the 
Rabbis and Fathers,” “that not one of them 
-accords with the allusions of -the narrative 
and prayer, except that which makes the 
destruction of the Temple the ¢erminus a 
guo.”® This sort of talk is bad enough with 
those who seek to adapt divine prophecy to 
what they suppose to be the facts it refers to. 
But the suggestion here is that a holy and 
gifted Caszd, writing in B.c. 164, with the 
open page of history before him, described 
the destruction of Jerusalem as ‘‘a decree to 


1 See Ch, IX., post. 
2 Pp. 288, 289. 


88 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


restore Jerusalem,” and then described a 
period of 424 years as 490 years! And at 
the close of the nineteenth century of the 
Christian era, these puerilities of the scep- 
tics are solemnly reproduced by the Dean 
of Canterbury for the enlightenment of Chris- 
tian England! To escape from.a difficulty 
by taking refuge in an absurdity is like 
committing suicide in order to escape from 
danger. 

Other writers tell us that the era of the 
seventy weeks dated from the divine promise 
recorded in Jeremiah xxix. 10.1 But though 
this view is free from the charge of absurdity 
it will not bear scrutiny. That was not a 
“commandment” to build Jerusalem, but 
merely a promise of future restoration. All 
these theories, moreover, savour of perverse- 
ness and casuistry in presence of the fact . 
that Scripture records so definitely the ‘‘ com- 


1 Mr. Bevan says (Com., p. 155) “the ‘word’ [command- 
ment] is of course” this prophecy. The force of this “of 
course” is solely that this destroys the Messianic applica- 
tion of the angel’s message! The term used is one which 
occurs more than a thousand times in Scripture with many 
shades of meaning, and in the Bookof Esther it is repeatedly 
used, as here, of the decree of a Persian king. 


“VIOLENT ERRORS ” 89 


mandment” in pursuance of which it was in 
fact rebuilt. . 
Neither was it without significance that 
the prophetic period dated from the restora- 
tion under Nehemiah. The era of «the 
Servitude had ended with the accession of 
_ Cyrus, and the seventy years of the Desola- 
tions had already expired in the second year 
of Darius. But the Jews were still without 
a constitution or a polity. In a word, their 
condition was then much what it is to-day. 


- It was the decree of the twentieth year 


of Artaxerxes which restored the national 
_ autonomy of Judah. 

And a precedent which is startling in its 
definiteness may be found to justify the 
belief that such an era would not begin 
while the existence of Judah as a nation was 
‘in abeyance. I allude to the 480 years of 
1 Kings vi. 1, computed from the Exodus 
to the Temple. If a little of the.time and 
energy which the critics have expended in » 
denouncing that passage as a forgery or a 
blunder had been devoted to searching for 
its hidden meaning, their labours might 


90  ° DANIEL IN THE CRITICS DEN 


perchance have been rewarded. That the 
chronology of the period was correctly 
known is plain from the thirteenth chapter 
of. the Acts, which enables us to reckon the 
very same era as 573 years. How then 
can this seeming error of 93 years be ac- 
counted for? Jt 2s precesely the sum of the 
several eras of the Servitudes.. The infer- 


1 Acts xiii. 18-21 gives 4o years in the wilderness, 450 
years under the Judges, and 40 years for the reign of Saul. 
To which must be added the 40 years of David’s reign, and 
the first three years of Solomon, for it was in his fourth year 
that he began to build the Temple. The servitudes were to 
Mesopotamia for 8 years, to Moab for 18 years, to Cahaan 
for 20 years, to Midian for 7 years, and to the Philistines for 
4o years. See Judges iii. 8, 14; iv. 2, 33 vi. I3 xiii. 1. 
But 8+18+20+7+40 years are precisely equal to 93 years. 
To believe that this is a mere coincidence would involve 
an undue strain upon our faiths. 

Acts xiii. 20 is one of the very many passages where the 
New Testament Revisers have corrupted the text through 
neglect of the well-known principles by which experts are 
guided in dealing with conflicting evidence. It is certain 
that neither the apostle said, nor the evangelist wrote, that 
Israel’s enjoyment of the land was limited to 450 years, or 
that 450 years elapsed defore the era of the Judges. The text 
adopted by R.V. is- therefore clearly wrong. Dean Alford 
regards it “as an attempt at correcting the difficult chron- 
ology of the verse ;” and he adds, “taking the words as 
they stand, no other sense can be given to them than that 
the time of the Judges lasted 450 years.” That is, as he 
explains, not that the Judges ruled for 450 years—in which 
case the accusative would be used, as in verse 18—but, as 


“VIOLENT ERRORS” gI 


ence therefore is clear that “the 480th year” 
means the 48oth year of national life and 
national responsibilities. And if this prin- 
ciple applied to an era apparently historical, 
we may a fortzort be prepared to find that 
it governs an era which is mystic and 
prophetic. 


the use of the dative implies, that the period until Saul, 
characterised by the rule of the Judges, lasted 450 years. 

The objection that I omit the servitude of Judges x. 7, 8 
is met by a reference to the R.V. The punctuation of the 
passage in Bagster’s Bible perverts the sense. That servi- 
tude affected only the tribes beyond Jordan. 


CHAPTER VII 


PROFESSOR DRIVER'S ‘‘ BOOK OF DANIEL — 
THE EVIDENCE OF THE CANON 


To have answered Dean Farrar’s Book of 
Daniel may appear to some but a cheap 
and barren victory. For they will urge that 
if the attack on Daniel were entrusted to 
abler hands, the issue would be different. 
But the suggestion is untenable. While the 
passing years are bringing to light from 
time to time fresh evidence to confirm 
the authenticity of the book, the treasury 
of the critics is exhausted. They have 
‘no abler, no more trusted, champion than 
Professor Driver of Oxford; yet in his 
Introduction there is not a single count in 
the elaborate indictment of Daniel that 
will not be found in his apparatus criticus. 
And now, in his Book of Daniel, after an’ 


1 The Cdmbridge Bible for Schools and Colleges: The 
Book of Daniel, by the Rev. S. R. Driver, D,D., Regius 


ce) 
) 


DR. DRIVER’S- ‘‘BOOK OF DANIEL.” 93 


interval of ten years, he has reproduced 
these same stock difficulties and objections, 
and for the most part in the same words. 
That volume is fitted to excite feel- 
ings of surprise and disappointment. An 
‘Introduction to the Literature of the Old 
Testament” may fitly cite what German: 
sceptics have written on the Book of Daniel. 
But it is deplorable that a commentary- for 
the use of “schools and colleges,” coming 
from the pen of an English clergyman, a 
scholar of high repute, and the occupant 
of a chair in the University of Oxford, 
~ should be merely a modified reproduction 
of what German rationalism has to urge 
on one side of a pending controversy. 
Surely we might have expected some in- 
dication of independent inquiry and free 
thought; but we look for it in vain. The 
very same criticisms which Dr. Farrar has 
strung together are once again paraded. 


Professor of Hebrew in the University of Oxford. As 
compared with the “Daniel” section of the Jxtroduc- 
tion, the only new element is the evidence of a further 
lapse towards the unreasoning scepticism of the “Higher 
Critics.” 


94 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS DEN 


The language, of course, is very different, 
but the matter is for the most part identical. 
Of these criticisms there is only one 
which is of vital importance. If, as the 
critics assert, there was no invasion of 
Judea and no deportation of Jewish cap- 
_tives in the third year of Jehoiakim, the 
historical basis upon which the Book of 
Daniel rests is destroyed, and the book as 
a whole is discredited. To that criticism, 
therefore, I invite. the reader’s close and 
earnest attention. If he finds it to be 
sustained, let him regard the controversy 
as closed. But if he finds it disproved by 
Scripture, and demonstrated to be erroneous 
by the strict test of chronology, let him 
look upon it as discrediting the critics.’ 
As for the rest of these criticisms, what 
Professor Driver says of some is true of 
them all: they will influence the mind 
‘according as the critic, upon zxdependent 
1 Pages 14~18, ande, seemed a sufficient reply to Dr. Farrar 
on this point.. But as Dr. Driver blindly follows the same 
false lead, not even avoiding the blunder of the journey 


from Carchemish to Babylon across the desert, 1 add an 
excursus on the subject. See Appendix I., p. 153, gost 


DR. DRIVER'S ‘BOOK OF DANIEL.” 95 


grounds, has satisfied himself that the book 
is the work of a later author or written by 
Daniel himself.” If, therefore, any one of 
the visions of Daniel can be shown to be 
a Divine prophecy, the authority of the 
book is established. And of this, full and 
incontestable proof is afforded by the fulfil- 
ment of the vision of the Seventy Weeks. 
The course of study which led me to these 
results was begun a quarter of a century 
ago under pressure of doubts whether the 
Bible could withstand the attacks of the 
sceptical movement known as the ‘“ Higher 
Criticism.” In accordance with my usual 
habit, I set myself to test the matter by 
examining the critics’ strongest position. 
For their indictment of the Book of Daniel 
is supposed to be unanswerable, and I con- 
fess that at first it seemed to me most 
formidable. But no one who has much 
experience of judicial inquiries is ever sur- 
prised to find that a case which seems con- 
vincing when presented ex parte, breaks 
down under cross-examination, or is shat- - 
tered by opposing evidence. And this is 


_> 


96 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


emphatically true of the sceptical attack on 
Daniel. 

And let it not be forgotten that the present 
inquiry is altogether judicial. The question 
involved is precisely similar in character 
to issues such as are daily decided in our 
Courts of Justice. And one of H.M. Judges 
with a good “ special jury” would be a fitter 
tribunal to deal with it than any company of 
philologists, however eminent. Due weight 
would of course be given to the evidence 
of such men as experts. But the azctum, 
so familiar to the lawyer, would not be 
forgotten, that the testimony which least de- 
serves credit is that of s&z//ed witnesses, for 
the judgment of such men becomes warped — 
by their habit of regarding a subject from 
one point of view only.! 

The critics maintain that the definiteness 
of the predictions of Daniel is due to the 
fact that the book was written after the 
events referred to; and further, that its 
“visions” cease with the reign of Antiochus 
Epiphanes. The main issues of fact, there- 

1 Taylor’s Ruithee, Part III. Chap. V. § 1877. 


DR. DRIVER'S “BOOK OF DANIEL” 97 


fore, to be decided at such a trial would be 
these :— 

(1) Was the Book of Daniel in existence 
in pre-Maccabean days? and 

(2) Was any one of its visions fulfilled in - 
later times? ies 

And if either of these issues should be 
found against the critics their whole case 
would be shattered. 

The discovery of Neptune was due to the 
fact that astronomers found reason to assume 
the existence of such a planet. And if the 
Book of Daniel had been lost, true criticism 
would assume the presence of a Daniel.at the 
Court of Babylon. For otherwise the story 
of the exile and return of the Jews would 
be intelligible only on the assumption of 
miracles: such as those which marked the 
Exodus. And further; if the advocates of 
the pseud-epigraph theory of Daniel were 
versed in the science of evidence, they would 
recognise that, on their own hypothesis, 


_~ the presence of the book in the canon is evi- 


dence of the existence of the man. For 


the Sanhedrim would never have accepted it 
G 


. 


98 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


unless they had had knowledge of the his- 
torical facts on which it is based. 

But while the existence of Daniel was 
indisputable when Dr. Driver wrote his 
Introduction, it was only “probable” when 
he came to write his Book of Dantel—a 
deplorable lapse from true criticism to 
“Higher Criticism,” and from rational belief 
to unreasoning scepticism. On this point I 
have already cited the testimony. of Ezekiel; 
and that testimony is coriclusive unless the 
critics can find some adequate answer to it. 
The only answer they offer is not even 
reasonable.’ And as regards the existence 
of the Book of Daniel, the same remark 
applies, though in a modified degree, to 
the testimony of 1 Maccabees.’ 

Even if the testimony of these witnesses 
stood alone, it would prevail with any im- 

1 See pp. 62-66, ante. In his Lines of Defence (p. 182) 
Professor Margoliouth claims to have established that a 
pre-Maccabean writer, Ben-Sira, “identified the Daniel 
mentioned by Ezekiel with the Daniel of the book that bears 
his name,” and that he ‘‘ bases a theological argument on 
the /as¢ verse of Daniel, and borrows phrases from the caHlicr 


part of the book.” 
2 See pp. 66-68, ante. 


DR. DRIVER'S ‘“‘BOOK OF DANIEL” 99 


partial tribunal. But when we come to 
consider the general question of the canon, 
the weight of proof becomes overwhelming. 
Apart from the disturbing influence of these 
controversies, no reasonable person would 
reject the clear and definite tradition that 
the completion of the Old Testament canon 
was the work of the mén of the Great 
Synagogue. In an age when scepticism of 
a singularly shallow type has been allowed 
to run riot, it is the fashion to reject that 
tradition because of the myths and legends 
which have attached themselves to it. But 
a soberer scholarship would recognise, first, 
that this very element is a proof of its 
antiquity, and of the hold it gained upon the 
Jewish mind in early times; and secondly, 
that if historical facts are to be ignored on 
this ground the whole volume of ancient 
history must shrink to very small proportions. 

But all that concerns me here is to estab- 
lish that the canon was complete before the 
Maccabean epoch. And upon this point 


1 Upon the general question ‘of the canon of the Old 
Testament the reader will find in Dr. Ryle’s book a fair 


100 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


I might almost rest the case upon the evi- 
dence of a single witness. 

As mentioned in an earlier chapter,’ Zc- 
clestasticus was written not later than about 
B.c. 200. The object of the book is thus 
explained by the: grandson of the writer, 
who translated it into Greek not later than 
B.C, 132": “My grandfather Jesus, seeing 
he had much given himself to the read- 
ing of the law, of the prophets and the 
other books of the Fathers, and had gotten 
therein sufficient proficiency, was drawn him- 
self to write something pertaining to learning 
and wisdom.” Now it is acknowledged 


statement of the arguments in favour of a late date. And 
any one who is used to frequent our courts of justice will 
recognise the kinship of those arguments with the case 
which is always made against any claim to prescriptive or 
ancient rights. For treatisés of a different kind see by all 
means Dr. Alexander’s article on the “Canon,” and Dr. 
Ginsburg’s on the “Great Synagogue,” in K7¢to’s Cyclo- 
fedia; and also Lecture VI. in Pusey’s Daniel the Prophet. 

IPs 52, .ante. 

2 The evidence clearly points to an earlier date for both 
the book and the translation of it. But as I wish to avoid 
all “collateral issues.” I adopt for the sake of argument the 
dates accepted by the critics. See, however, Dr. Ginsburg’s 
article in K7¢to’s Cyclopedia, also Edersheim’s . Life and 
Times of the Messiah, vol. i. pp. 26 ff. 


DR. DRIVER’S ‘BOOK OF DANIEL” IOI 


even by hostile critics that the words ‘the 
law and the prophets and the other books,” 
or as he calls them again, “the rest of the 
books,” refer to the sacred writings, and 
that they imply the existence at that time of 
a recognised canon. 

“T think it quite incredible,” says Dr. 
Ryle, “that the thrice repeated formula 
should have been an invention of the Greek 
translator, and not rather the description 
of the Hebrew Scriptures commonly used 
among the Jews.”* Zhe Law, the Prophets, 
and the Writings—these same words stand 
upon the title-page of the Jewish Bible of 
to-day, and no fair and competent tribunal 
would hesitate to find that that title has 
covered the same books for more than 
twenty-three centuries. 

Ben-Sira was ‘“‘a poetical paraphraser” 
‘of the Old Testament, and his book abounds 
in passages which are imitations of the can- 
onical writers. And, “as clear examples of 
such imitation can be found-of a// the can- 
onical books, with the doubtful exception of 

1 Canon of the Old Testament (2nd ed.), p. 313. 


102 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


the Book of Daniel, these books must, as a 
whole, have ‘been familiar to Ben-Sira, and 
must therefore be much anterior to him in 
date.” These words are from Dr. Schechter’s 
Introduction, already quoted,’ and they are 
substantiated —by a list of the passages re- 
ferred to. That list includes three quota- 
tions from Daniel; these however are, of 
course, rejected by the critics.” 

Now I confidently maintain that upon the 
evidence any impartial tribunal would find 
that the canon was complete before Ben- 
Sira -wrote. But assuming, for the sake 
of argument, that the inclusion of Daniel 
is doubtful, the matter stands thus :—It is 
admitted, (1) that the canon was complete 
in the second century B.c.; and (2) that no 
book was included which was not believed 
to have been in existence in the days of 
Nehemiah.’ For the test by which a book 
was admitted to the canon was its claim to 

1 P, 54, amde (the quotation is from p. 35). 

2 Hence Dr. Schechter’s expression, “the doubtful excep- 
tion of Daniel.” He himself doubts, not the quotations from 


Daniel, but the “‘ exception” maintained by the critics. 
* Dr. Ryle. Canon of the Old Testament, pp. 175 and 188. 


DR. DRIVER’S ‘BOOK OF DANIEL” 103 


be inspired; and the Sanhedrim held that 
inspiration ceased with the prophets, and 
that no “ prophet”—that is, no divinely in- 
spired teacher—had arisen in Israel after 
the Nehemiah erat When, _ therefore, 
Josephus declares that the Scriptures were 
‘justly believed to be Divine,” and that the 
Jews were prepared “willingly to die for 
them,”? he is not recording merely the 
opinion of his contemporaries, but the 
settled traditional belief of his nation. 

How, then, can the critics reconcile their 
hypothesis as to the origin of the Book 
of Daniel with its inclusion in the canon? 

As regards point (1) above indicated, the 
Bishop of Exeter’s testimony carries with 
it the special authority which attaches to 
the statements of a hostile witness. ‘‘If,” he 
says, ‘‘all the books of ‘the Kethubim’ were 
known and received in the first century A.D., 
and if, as we believe, the circumstances of 
the Jewish people rendered it all but impos- 


1 The question of the justice of such beliefs and claims in 
no way affects the force of my argument. 
2 Against Apion, i, 8. 


104 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


_sible for the canon to receive change or 
augmentation in the first century B.c., we 
conclude that ‘ the disputed books’ received a 
recognition in the last two or three decades of 
the second century B.c., when John Hyrcanus 
ruled and the Jews still enjoyed prosperity.” 

This ought to decide the whole question. 
For mark what it means. The critics would 
have us believe that after the death of Anti- 
ochus some Jewish Chaszd incorporated a his- 
tory of his reign in a historical romance, 
casting it into the form of a prophecy sup- 
posed to have been delivered hundreds of 
years before; and that, at a time when this 
was still a matter within living memory, 
the work was accepted as divinely inspired 
Scripture, and bracketed with the Psalms 
of David among the sacred books of the 
Hebrew nation! ; ; 

We are dealing here, remember, with the 
acts, not of savages in a barbarous age, but 
of the religious leaders of the: Jews in his- 
toric times. And the matter in question re- 
lated to the most solemn and important of 
all their duties. Moreover, the Sanhedrim 


DR. DRIVER'S ‘‘BOOK OF DANIEL” 105 


of the second century B.c. was composed of 
men of the type of John Hyrcanus; men 
famed for their piety and learning ; men who 
were heirs of all the proud traditions of the 
Jewish faith, and themselves the sons or suc- 
cessors of the heroes of the noble Maccabean 
revolt. And yet we are asked to believe 
that these men, with their extremely strict 
views of inspiration and their intense reve- 
rence for their sacred writings—that these 
men, the most scrupulous and conservative 
Church body that the world has ever known 
—used their authority to smuggle into the 
sacred canon a book which, ex hkyfothesz, was 
a forgery, a literary fraud, a religious novel 
of recent date. 

Such a figment is worthy of its pagan 
author, but it is wholly unworthy of Chris- 
tian men in the position of English ecclesi- 
astics and University Professors. And were 
it not for the glamour of their names it would 
be deemed undeserving of notice. But our 
respect for Church dignitaries of our own 
times must not make us forget what is due 
to the memory of Church dignitaries of 


106 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


another age, men whose fidelity to their 
trust as the divinely appointed custodians of 
‘the oracles of God” has earned for them 
the gratitude and admiration of the Church 
foralltime. Their fitness, moreover, to judge 
of the genuineness and authenticity of the 
Book of Daniel was incomparably greater 
than could be claimed for any of those who 
join in this base and silly slander upon their 
intelligence or their honesty. For if the 
critics are right, these men who were, I re- 
peat, the divinely appointed custodians of 
the Hebrew Scriptures,* and from whom the 
Christian Church has received them, were 
no better than knaves or fools. Let no one 
start at this language, for it is not a whit too 
strong. They were utter fools if they were 
deceived by a literary forgery of their own 
time ; they were shameless knaves if they 
shared in a plot to secure the acceptance of 
the fraud. 

For let it be kept steadily in view that no 
book would have been thus honoured unless 
it was believed to be ancient. The ‘‘avowed 


1 Rom, ili. 2. 


DR. DRIVERS ‘BOOK OF DANIEL’ 107 


p) 


fiction” theory of Daniel is puerile in its 
absurdity.’ If the book was not genuine it 
was a forgery palmed off upon the Sanhe- 
drim.. And like all forgeries of that kind the 
MS. must have been “discovered” by its 
author. But the “finding” of such a book 
at such a period of the national history would 
have been an event of unparalleled interest 
and importance. Where then is the record 
of it? When it suits them, the critics make 
great use of the argument from the sz/ence 
of witnesses; but in a case like this where 
that argument has overwhelming force they 
ignore it altogether. 

Moreover, the suggestion of the critics 
that the Sanhedrim admitted a book to the 
canon in the way a library committee adds 
a volume to their catalogue is grotesque in 
the extreme., -‘“‘ They never determined (a 
book to be canonical, in the sense of intro- 


1 Imagine a meeting of the upper House of Convocation 
to discuss a proposal to add Dr. Farrar’s Lzfe of Christ to 
the canon of the New Testament! Quite as grotesquely 
ridiculous is the suggestion that.the Jewish Sanhedrim in 
the second century B.C. would have entertained the question 
of adding “an elevating romance” of their own age to the 
canon of the Old Testament. 


108 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS DEN 


‘ducing it into the canon. In every instance 
in which a writing is said to have been 
admitted to the canon, the writing had 
already been in existence for generations, 
and had for generations been claimed as 
canonical before the discussions arose in 
regard to it. In every instance the decision 
is not that the book shall now be received 
into the collection of sacred writings, but that 
the evidence shows it to have been regarded 
from the first as a part of that collection.” ? 
One point more. While books of great 
repute, such as Ecclesiasticus and 1 Mac- 
cabees, were absolutely excluded from the 
canon, and even canonical books, such as 
the Book of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes; and 
even Ezekiel were challenged, “the right 
of the Book of Daniel to canontcity was never 
called tn question in the Ancient Synagogue.”* - 
In disparagement of Daniel the critics - 
point to the extraordinary additions which 
mark the Septuagint version. But owing to 


1 Encyc. Americana, article “ Bible.” 
2 Edersheim’s Life and Times of the Messiah, vol. ii, 
App. V. _ 


DR. DRIVER'S ‘‘BOOK OF DANIEL” 109 


their want of experience in dealing with 
evidence, they fail to see what signal proof 
this affords of the antiquity of the book. 
The critics themselves allow that the Greek 
version of Daniel was in existence before 
1 Maccabees was written.’ According to 
their own case, therefore, the interval between 
the appearance of the book and its translation 
into Greek must have been within the memory 
of the older members of the Sanhedrim. 
And yet they ask us to believe that though 
during that interval it was under considera- 
tion for admission to the canon, it was 
guarded so carelessly that these additions 
and corruptions were allowed.2. The Septua- 
gint version is evidence that Daniel was a 
pre-Maccabean work: the corruptions of the 
text which mark that version are evidence 
that it was in existence long before the 
Maccabean era. 


1 The presumption is strong that the LXX. version was 
in existence at the date to which the critics assign the book 
itself. But here, as on every other point, I am arguing the 
question on bases accepted by the critics themselves. 

2 And Professor Cheyne adopts the suggestion that the 
Hebrew original of ii. 14 to vii. was allowed to be lost! 
(Smith’s Bzble Dicd., art. “ Daniel”), 


1 fe) DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


In view of all this it is not surprising that 
even a writer so cautious and so fair as 
Canon Girdlestone should assert that ‘there 
is not an atom of ground for the supposition 
that any of the books or parts of books 
which constitute our Old Testament were 
the work of men of that age.” “Of one 
thing,” he adds, “we may be quite certain: 
nothing would be introduced into the ‘Sacred 
Library’ which was not believed to be ‘ pro- 
phetic,’ and therefore in some sense Divine, 
and though there were occasionally men after 
Nehemiah’s time who had semi-prophetic 
gifts, the Jews do not acknowledge them as 
prophets... . We look in vain down the 
remains and traditions of Hebrew history 
between the age of Nehemiah and the Chris- 
tian era for the appearance of any men who 
would venture to add to or take from the 
sacred library or canon which existed in 
Nehemiah’s days.” ® 

Upon the first of the issues above specified 


1 In proof of this he refers to 1 Maccabees iv. 46; ix. 27 
(which puts the prophets in the far past) ; and xiv. 41. 
? The Foundations of the Bible, ch. ii., pp. 8 and 10. 


x 
DR. DRIVER'S ‘BOOK OF DANIEL” TIT 


I therefore claim a decision in favour of the 
Book of Daniel. I now proceed to state the 
grounds upon which, with equal confidence, 
I claim a verdict also on the second. 


CHAPTER VIIt- 


THE VISION OF THE ‘‘SEVENTY WEEKS ”— 
THE PROPHETIC YEAR 


As the solution of the problem of the Seventy 
Weeks is my personal contribution to the 
Daniel controversy, I may be pardoned for 
dealing with the subject here in greater 
detail, albeit this involves some repetition. 
It is all the more necessary, moreover, be- 
cause in his recent work Professor Driver 
has adopted the laboured efforts of the 
foreign sceptics to evade the Messianic refer- 
ence of the vision. Indeed, his exposition — 
of the passage reminds us of that sort of 
dream in which words never “have their 
natural meaning and events always happen 
in some unexpected way. 

In the ninth chapter of Daniel the scene 
is laid in Babylon, and the occasion is the 
approaching end of the “ Desolations,” an 


II2 


THE ‘SEVENTY WEEKS” 113 


era which the critics without exception con- 
found with either the “Servitude” or the 
“Captivity.” “I Daniel,” the writer tells 
us, ‘understood by the books the number 
of the years whereof the word of the Lord 
came to Jeremiah the prophet for the accom- 
plishing of the desolations of Jerusalem, even 
seventy years.”” Then follows the record 
of his passionately earnest prayer on behalf 
of his city and his people,* which prayer 
brings in answer the angel’s message. Here 
is the text of Dan. ix. 24-27 (R.V.)*:— 


“Seventy weeks are decreed upon thy people 
and upon thy holy city, to finish transgression and 
to make an end of sins and to make reconciliation 
for iniquity and to bring in everlasting righteous- 
ness and to seal up vision and prophecy and to 
anoint the most holy. Know therefore and discern 
that from the going forth of the commandment to 
restore and to build Jerusalem unto the anointed 
one (or Messiah) the prince shall be seven weeks 
and threescore and two weeks: it shall be built 
again with street and moat, even in troublous times. 


1 See pp. 21, 22,.an7e. 

2 Ver. 2. 8 Ver. 19. 

* As to the punctuation of this passage, see Appendix 
IIL, p. 167, post. 


2 


H 


114 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS DEN 


And after the threescore and two weeks shall the 
anointed one (or Messiah) be cut off and shall 
have nothing: and the people of the prince that 
shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary ; 
and his end shall be with a flood, and even unto 
the end shall be war; desolations are determined. 
And he shall make a firm covenant with many for 
one week: and for the half of the week he shall 
cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease.” 


Well- may Professor Driver and Dean- 
Farrar comment upon the hopeless diverg- 
ence which marks “ the bewildering mass of 
explanations ” offered by the numberless ex- 
positors of this passage. But there is no 
reason why the intelligent reader should 
follow these eminent critics who, in their 
“bewilderment,” have adopted the most pre- 
posterous interpretation of it ever proposed. 
For such indeed is the suggestion that any 
devout Jew—whether the prophet of the 
Exile or a Maccabean zealot, it matters not 
which—could thus anticipate “ the complete 
redemption of Israel’ apart from the-advent 
of Messiah. It is absolutely certain that 
the vision points to the coming of Christ, 


1 The words are Professor Drivers (Daniel, p. 135). 


> 


THE ‘SEVENTY WEEKS” rts 


and any other view of it is indeed ‘‘a resort 
of desperation.” 

May I now invite my reader to follow me 
in the path which I myself have traversed in 
seeking the explanation of the vision? Re- | 
jecting all mystical or strained interpreta- 
tions, let him insist on taking the words in 
their simple and obvious meaning ; and with 
the help of a key which, though long over- 
looked, is ready at hand, he will find the 
solution, full and clear, of what may have 
seemed a hopeless enigma. 

Here was a man trained by his Scriptures 
to look for a Messiah whose advent would 
bring fulness of blessing to his people and 
city.’ But his people were in captivity and his 
city wasin ruins. And having himself already 
passed the allotted span of life, he could not 
hope to outlive the period of the Divine 
judgment of the Desolations, of which 
some seventeen years were still unexpired. 
So he set himself to plead for light ; and the 
answer came that the realisation of the pro- 


1 With those who regard the Book of Daniel as a pseud- 
epigraph my argument here should have special force. 


116 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN. 


mised Messianic blessings was deferred until 
the close of an era of seven times the seventy 
years of the Desolations—not seventy years, 
but “seventy weeks” of years.’ 

These seventy weeks, moreover, were 
divided thus—7+62+1. The period “unto 
Messiah the prince” was to be ‘seven 
weeks and threescore and two weeks;” 
and at the close-of the middle era—“ after 
the threescore and two weeks’—Messiah 
“was to be “cut off.” In other words, the 
presentation and rejection of Messiah were 
to be 69 weeks, or 483 years, fom the epoch 
of the era. 

The first question, then, which claims — 
attention is the character of the year of 
which this prophetic era is composed. Here 
expositor after expositor and critic after critic 
has held in his hand the key to the whole 
problem, but has-thrown it away unused. 


1 With the Jew the effect of his laws was “to render the 
word week capable of meaning a seven of years almost as 
naturally as aseven of days. Indeed the generality of the 
word would have this effect at any rate. Hence its use to 
denote the latter in prophecy is not mere arbitrary sym- 
bolism, but the employment of a not unfamiliar and easily 
understood language.”—Smith’s B26. Dict., art. “ Week.” 


THE “SEVENTY WEEKS” IL? 


) 


All are agreed that the “seventy weeks’ 
of verse 24 are seven times the seventy 
years of verse 2; if, then, the duration of 
the seventy years of the Desolations can be 
ascertained, the problem is solved. 

Seventy years was the appointed dura- 
tion of the Servitude to Babylon.’ But the 
stubborn refusal of the people to submit to 
that judgment,’ or to profit by the further 
chastisement of the Captivity, which followed 
eight or nine years afterwards, brought on 
them the terrible scourge of the Desolations.® 
The essential element in this last judgment 
was not merely ruined cities, but a land laid 
desolate by a hostile invasion, the effects 
of which were perpetuated by famine and 
pestilence, the continuing proofs of the 
Divine displeasure.“ The Desolations, there- 
fore, were reckoned from the day the capital 

1 Jer. xxix. 10, and note the R.V. “or (not a¢) Babylon.” 
The figment of a seventy years’ captivity, though so gene- 
rally held, isa blunder. The Captivity lasted only sixty-two 
years. 

2 Jer. xxvil. 6, 17; xxviii. 14. 

8 This was foretold in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, after 


the Servitude had began (Jer. xxv. I-11). 
4 Jer. xxvii. 13; Hag. ii. 17. 


A 
118 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


was invested, the roth day of the 10th month 
in the ninth year of Zedekiah.’ This was the 
epoch of the judgment as revealed to the 
prophet Ezekiel in his exile ;? and for four- 
and-twenty centuries it has been observed 
as a fast by the Jews in every land. 

As an interval of seventeen years elapsed 
between the epoch of the Servitude and that 
of the Desolations, so by seventeen years 
the second period overlapped the first. And 
this explains the seemingly inexplicable fact. 
that a few refractory Samaritans were allowed 
to thwart the execution of the work expressly 
ordered by the edict of Cyrus. Until the 
era of the Desolations had run its course 
the Divine judgment which rested upon the 
land vetoed the rebuilding of the sacred 
Temple. 

As the epoch of that era is recorded with 
absolute definiteness, so also is its close. It 
ended upon the 24th day of the 9th month 
in the second year of Darius. Hystaspis of 


1 2 Kings xxv. 1 ; Jer. lii. 4. The event, of CourKe, put an 
end to all agricultural pursuits. 
2 Ezek. xxiv. 1, 2. 


THE ‘‘SEVENTY WEEKS” 119 


Persia. The reader will do well here to 
peruse the prophecy of Haggai and the first 
chapter of Zechariah. I will quote but a 
single sentence of each: ‘Then the angel 
of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of 
hosts, how long, wilt Thou not have mercy 
on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, 
against which Thou hast had indignation 
these threescore and ten years?”? ‘Con- 
sider now from this day and upward, from 
the four-and-twentieth day of the ninth 
month, even from the day that the founda- 
tion of the Lord’s temple was laid, consider 
it... . Prom this day will I bless you.”* 
Now the Julian date of the 10th day 
of the 1oth month in the ninth year of 
Zedekiah was the 15th December, B.c. 
589; and that of the 24th day of the 
oth month, in the second year of Darius 
Hystaspis was the 17th December, B.c. 
520. The intervening period, therefore, 
was exactly sixty-nine years. But sixty- 
nine years contain 25,200 days, the precise 


1 Zech. i. 12. 
2 Hag. ii. 18,19; compare Ezra iv. 24;'v. 1, 2. 


120 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS DEN 


- equivalent of seventy years of 360 days.’ 
It is clear, therefore, that; as the era of 
the Desolations was a Divine judgment 
upon Judah, the period was measured with 
all the accuracy of a judicial sentence. 
Even if this stood alone it would be 
conclusive. But, further, we are expressly 
told that the era of the Desolations was 
fixed at seventy years, because of the 
neglect of the Sabbatic years.” Therefore 
we might expect to find that a period of 
70 X 7 years, measured back from the — 
end of the Desolations, would bring us to, 
the time when Israel entered into their 
full national privileges, and thus incurred 
1 3652 x 69=25,200, and 360xX70=25,200. I may here 
explain that in giving historical dates I follow secular 
historians and chronologists, and not writers on prophecy, 
who are too prone to “cook” the chronology to suit their 
schemes of interpretation. In the above instance I follow 
Clinton, but with this difference—that he wrote in ignorance 
of the Mzshna rule that a king’s reign was always reckoned 
from Nisan (see App. IV., gost). The thirty-seventh year 
of the Captivity, reckoned from the eighth year of Nebu- 
chadnezzar, was the first year of Evil-Merodach (2 Kings 
XXV. 27), @é. 561, and that date fixes the whole chronology, 
as Clinton shows (fas¢i Hel., vol. i. p. 319). Zedekiah’s 


reign, therefore, dates from Nisan, B.C. 597, and not 598. 
22 Chron. xxxvi. 21; cf Lev. xxvi. 34, 35. 


THE ‘‘SEVENTY WEEKS” 121 


their full responsibilities. And such, in 
fact, will be found to be the case. From 
the year after the dedication of Solomon’s 
temple to the year before the foundation 
of the second temple was.a period of 490 
years of 360 days.* 

But even this is not all. No one doubts 
that the visions of the Revelation refer to 
the visions of Daniel, and for this purpose 
they may be read together. And _ there 
we find a part of the prophetic era sub- 
divided into the days of which it is com- 
posed. Half of one week of the vision 
is twice described as forty-two months ;? 
and twice as 1260 days.® But 1260 days 
are exactly equal to forty-two months of 
thirty days, or three and a half years of 
360 days. = 
- To English ears the suggestion may seem 
fanciful that a chronological era should be 


1The temple was dedicated in the eleventh year of 
Solomon (8.6. 1005). The Desolations ended, as above 
stated, in the second year of Darius Hystaspis (8.C. 520). 
The intervening period, reckoned excluszvely, was 483 years, 
or 70 x 7 luni-solar years of 360 days. 

2 Rev. xi..2 3 xiii.-5. 

3 Rev. xi. 3; xii. 6, 


é 


122 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


reckoned thus in luni-solar years. But it 
was not so with those for whom the prophecy 
was given, Such, it is reasonably certain, 
was the form of year then in use both at 
Babylon and at Jerusalem. Such was in 
fact the year of the Noachian age.’ | Tradi- 
tion testifies-that it was the year which 
Abraham knew in his Chaldean home, and 
which was afterwards preserved in his family. 
And Sir Isaac Newton avers that 


“All nations, before the just length of the solar 
year was known, reckoned months by the course 
of the moon, and years by the return of winter 
and summer, spring and autumn; and in making 
calendars for their festivals, they reckoned thirty 
days to a lunar month, and twelve lunar months 
to a year, taking the nearest round numbers, 
whence came the division of the ecliptic into 360 
degrees.” 


And in quoting this statement, Sir G. C. 
Lewis declares that 


“All credible testimony and all antecedent proba- 
bility lead to the result that a solar year containing 
1 150 days being specified as the interval between the 


17th day of the 2nd month and the 17th day of the 7th 
month (Gen. vil. 11 3 vill. 3, 4). 


THE ‘‘ SEVENTY WEEKS” 123 


twelve lunar months, determined within certain 
limits of error, has been generally recognised by 
the nations adjoining the Mediterranean from a 
remote antiquity.” ? 


In view of all this mass of cumulative 
proof, the conclusion may be regarded as 
raised above the sphere of controversy or 
doubt, that the prophetic year is not the 
Julian year of 365% days, but the ancient 
year of 360 days. 


1 Astronomy of the Ancients, ch. i. § 7. 


CHAPTER IX 


THE FULFILMENT OF THE VISION OF THE 
“ WEEKS ” 


In view of the proofs adduced: in-the preced- 
ing chapter, it may now be accepted as a 
demonstrated fact that the unit of the pro- 
phetic era of the seventy weeks is the luni- 
solar year of the ancient world. Our next 
inquiry must be directed to ascertaining the 
epoch of that era. 

The language of the vision is simple and 
clear: “From the going forth of the com- 
mandment to restore and to build Jerusalem 
unto Messiah the Prince, shall be seven 
weeks and threescore and two weeks.” Here 
at least we might suppose that no question 
could arise. But with Professor Driver, fol- 
lowing the lead of the wildest and worst of 
the foreign sceptical expositors, ‘the com- 
mandment to rebuild Jerusalem” becomes 
the prophecy that Jerusalem would be rebuilt ; 


124 


FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY 125 


‘Messiah, the Prince” becomes Cyrus, King 
of Persia ;' and by a false punctuation which 
divides the sentence in the middle,’ the 
sixty-two weeks become the period for which 
the city was to be restored. I appeal to the 
reader to reject this nightmare system of 
interpretation, and to follow the early fathers 
and the best of the modern expositors in 
accepting the words in their plain and natural 
meaning. 

What then was the “commandment,” or 
edict, or firman to build Jerusalem? The 
Book of Ezra records three several decrees 
of Persian kings, relating to the Jews. The 
opening verses record the edict of Cyrus, 
which authorised the return of the exiles. 
But this decree mentioned only the temple 
and not the city; and moreover it referred 
to the era of the Servitude, and not ' of the 
Desolations, which later era it was that, 
Daniel had in view.* The sixth chapter 

1 Albeit the vision was given in 538 B.C., and the restora- 
tion under Cyrus was in 536! 

2 See Appendix III., p. 167. 

3 Canon Rawlinson assumes that the temple was fifteen 
years in building (Five Great Men, iv. 398). But this is 
vetoed by Scripture. Ezra iii. 8-11 records that the founda- 


126 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


records a decree issued by Darius Hys- 
taspis to confirm the decree of Cyrus, 
but this in no way extended the scope 
of the earlier edict. The seventh chapter 
records a third decree, issued by Artax- 
erxes Longimanus in his seventh year, 
but this again related merely to the temple 
and its worship.’ The Book of Ezra there- 
fore will be searched in vain for what we 
seek, but the book which follows it gives it 
fully and explicitly. 

The Book of Nehemiah opens by relating 
that while at Susa, where he was in attend- 
ance as cupbearer to the king, ‘‘an honour 
of no small account in Persia,” he learned 
from certain of his bréthren who had just 
arrived from Judea that the Jews there were 
“in great affliction and reproach ;” “the wall 
_ of Jerusalem also was broken down, and the 
gates thereof were burned with fire.”® The 
next chapter relates that while discharging 


tion was then laid, but though the a/far was set up and 
sacrifices renewed (iii. 3, 6), the foundation was again laid 
fifteen years later, for not a stone of the house had yet been 
‘placed (Hag. ii. 10, 15, 18). 
1 Ezra vii. 19, 27. * Herodotus, iii. 34. 
SsNehra<2,)3: 


- 


FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY L27 


the duties of his high office, Artaxerxes 
noticed his distress, and called for an expla- 
nation of it. ‘Let the king live for ever,” 
Nehemiah answered, ‘why should not my 
countenance be sad, when the city, the place 
of my fathers’ sepulchres, lieth waste, and the 
gates thereof are burned with fire?” ‘For 
what dost thou make request?” the king de- 
manded. To which Nehemiah answered, 
“That thou wouldest send me unto Judah, 
unto the city of my fathers’ sepulchres, THAT 
I may BuiLp IT.”* Artaxerxes forthwith 
granted the petition, and issued an edict to 
_give effect to it. This occurred in the be- 
ginning of the Jewish year; and before the 
Feast of Tabernacles, in the seventh month, 
Jerusalem was once more a city, enclosed by 
gates and ramparts. 

Of course there must have been many 
streets of inhabited houses in Jerusalem ever 
since the first return of the exiles. But, 
as Dr. Tregelles justly says,? ‘the very 
‘existence of the place as a@ city depended 
upon such a decree” as that of the twentieth 

1 Neh, ii. 5. 2 Daniel, p. 98. 


128 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


year of Artaxerxes. Once, at an earlier 
period, work which the Jews were executing 
under the decree of Cyrus had been stopped 
on the false charge that its design was to 
restore the city. ‘A rebellious city” it had 
ever proved, the local officials declared in 
reporting to the king; and they added, “// 
this city be butlded, and the walls thereof set 
up again, by this means thou shalt have no 
portion on this side the river.”* The edict 
of Cyrus was in keeping with the general 
policy of toleration, to which the inscriptions 
bear testimony: it was a wholly different 
matter to‘allow the conquered race to set up 
again the famous fortifications of Jerusalem, 
and to restore under Nehemiah the old polity 
of the Judges. This was a revival of the 
political existence of Judah; and therefore 
no doubt it was that the event was divinely 
chosen as the beginning of the prophetic 
era of the seventy weeks.’ 

1 7.e. Euphrates. Ezra iv. 16-22. 

2 For the same reason, ¢g., the “Servitudes” were 
ignored in reckoning the time of Israel’s national respon- 


sibilities (see p. 90, ante). 
This sudden change in the policy of the Persian court was 


FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY 129 


It is certain, moreover, that this edict of 
Artaxerxes is the only “commandment to 
restore and build Jerusalem” recorded in- 
history, and that under this ‘“ command- 
ment” Jerusalem was in fact rebuilt. Un- 
less, therefore, the nightmare system of 
interpretation must prevail, we may accept 
it, not as a plausible theory or a happy 
guess, but as a definite fact, that the seventy 
weeks are to be computed from the date of 
the issuing of this decree. 

The date of it is expressly recorded 
by Nehemiah. It was made in the begin- 
ning of the Jewish year in the twentieth 
year of the king’s reign. And the Julian 
date of the first Nisan in the twentieth 
year of Artaxerxes is the 14th March Bc. 
445.! Here let me quote the words of the 
vision once again. ‘From the going forth 
of the commandment to restore and build 


not due merely to the influence of a popular minister. In 
his A/¢story of the Jews, Dean Milman accounts for it by 
“the foreign history of the times.” The terms imposed on 
Persia by the victorious Athenians seem to have rendered 
it important to make Jerusalem a fortified city. 

1 See App. V., p. 179, Bost. . 


s 


130 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


Jerusalem unto Messiah the Prince shall be 
seven weeks and threescore and two weeks. 

. And after the threescore and two weeks © 
shall the Messiah be cut off.” * 

If, therefore, the vision be-a Divine pro- 
phecy, an era of “ sixty-nine weeks,” that is, 
of 483 prophetic years, reckoned from the 
14th March B.c. 445, should close with the 
public presentation and death of ‘‘ Messiah 
the Prince.” 

No student of the Gospels can fail to see 
that the Lord’s last visit to Jerusalem was not 
only in fact but in intention the crisis of His 
ministry. From the time that the accredited 
leaders of the nation had rejected His Mes- 
sianic claims, He had avoided all public 
recognition of those claims. But now His 
testimony had been fully given, and the 
purpose of His entry into the capital was to 
openly proclaim His Messiahship and to re- 
ceive His doom. Even His apostles them- 
selves had again and again been charged that 


1 Not “after sixty-two weeks”—which might mean sixty- 
two weeks reckoned fromm the beginning of the era—but - 
“after the sixty-two weeks” which follow the seven: ze. at 
the close of the sixty-ninth week of the era. : 


‘FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY 131 


they should not make Him known ; but now 
He accepted the acclamations of ‘“ the whole 
multitude of the disciples.” And when the 
Pharisees protested, He silenced them with 
the indignant rebuke, “I tell you that if 
these should hold their peace the stones 
would immediately cry out.” These words 
can only mean that the divinely appointed 
time had arrived for the public announce-- 
ment of His Messiahship, and that the Divine 
purpose could not be thwarted. 

The full significance of the words which 
~ follow is lost in our Authorised Version: As 
the cry was raised by His disciples, “ Ho- 
sanna to the Son of David, blessed is the 
King of Israel that cometh in the name of 
the Lord,” He looked off towards the Holy 
City and exclaimed, ‘If ¢hou also hadst 
known, even ON THIS DAY, the things that 
belong to thy peace—but now they are hid 
from thine eyes!” ” The nation had already 

1 Luke xix. 39, 40. 

2 R.V. reads, “If thou hadst es in this day”; A.V. 
reads, “this ¢hy day.” Alford’s note is, “ thou also, as well 


as these My disciples.” And so also the Speaker's Com- 
mentary. 


132 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


rejected Him, but this was the fateful day 
when their decision must be irrevocable. 
And we are expressly told that it was the ful- 
filment of the prophecy, ‘Shout, O daughter 
of Jerusalem; behold thy King cometh unto 
thee.” It was the only occasion on which 
His kingly claims were publicly announced. 
And no other day in all His ministry will _ 
satisfy the words of Daniel’s vision.? 

And the date of that first “‘ Palm Sunday” 
can be ascertained with certainty. No year 
in the whole field of ancient history is more 
definitely indicated’ than that of the begin- 
ning of our Lord’s public ministry. Accord- 
ing to the Evangelist it was ‘the fifteenth 
year of Tiberius Casar.”* Now “the reign 
of Tiberius, as. beginning from 19th August, 
A.D. 14, was as well known a date in the time 
of Luke as the reign of Queen Victoria is in 


1 Zech. ix..9 ; Matt. xxi. 4) 5. 

2 The only other possible day would be Boe the day of 
His birth or the first day of His public ministry. But neither 
date is recorded. As regards the nativity, the only thing 
reasonably certain is, that it occurred neither in the year 
nor on the day to which it is popularly assigned. 

8 Luke iii, 1. 


FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY 133 


our own day.”* The Evangelist, moreover, 
with a prophetic anticipation of the perverse- 
ness of expositors and “reconcilers,” goes 
on to name six prominent public men as 
holding specified positions in the fifteenth 
year of Tiberius, and each one of these is 
known to have actually held the position 
thus assigned to him in the year in question. 

As, therefore, the first Passover of the 
Lord’s ministry was that of Nisan, a.p. 29, 
the date of the Passion is thus fixed by 
Scripture itself. For it is no longer neces- 
sary to offer proof that the crucifixion took 
place at the fourth Passover of the ministry. 
According to the Jewish custom, our Lord 
went up to Jerusalem on the 8th Nisan,’ 
which, as we know, fell that year upon a 
Friday. And having spent the Sabbath 
at Bethany, He entered the Holy City 
the following day, as recorded in the 
Gospels. 

The Julian date of that roth Nisan was 


1 Lewin, Fasti Sacri, p. lili. He adds, “And no single 
case can be produced in which the years of Tiberius were 
reckoned in any other manner.” 

2 John xi, 55, xii. 1; Josephus, Wars, vi. 5, 3. 


134 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


Sunday the 6th April, a.p, 32.1. What then 
was the length of the period intervening be- 
tween the issuing of the decree to rebuild 
Jerusalem and this public advent of ‘‘ Messiah 
the Prince”—between the 14th March, B.c. 
445, and the 6th April, a.p. 32? THE INTER- 
VAL WAS EXACTLY AND TO THE VERY DAY 
173,880 DAYS, OR SEVEN TIMES SIXTY-NINE 
PROPHETIC YEARS OF 360 DAYS.” 


1 See Appendices IV., p. 171 and VI., p. 176, Zosé. 

2 From B.C. 445 to A.D. 32 is 476 years = 173,740 days 
(476 365)+116 days for leap years. And from 14th March 
to 6th April (reckoned inclusively according to Jewish prac- 
tice) is 24 days. But 173,740+116+24=173,880. And 69 
" X7X 360= 173,880. 

It must be borne in mind here that in reckoning years 
from B.C. to A.D. oe year must always be omitted ; for, of 
~ course, the interval between B.C. I and A.D. I is not fwo 
years but one year. In fact B.C. 1 ought to be called B.c. 0; 
and it is so described by astronomers, with whom B.C. 445 is 
— 444 (see App. V., p. 174, Jost). And again, as the Julian year 
is II m. 10.46 s., or about the 129th part of a day, longer than 
the mean solar year, the Julian calendar has three leap years 
too many in every four centuries. This error is corrected by 
the Gregorian reform, which reckons three secular years out 
of four as common years. For instance, 1700, 1800, and 1900 
were common years, and 2000 will be a leap year. 


_ 


CHAPTER X 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 


Ir will be obvious to the intelligent and 
thoughtful that unless the conclusions re- 
_corded in the preceding chapter can in some 
way be disproved or got rid of, there is 
an end of the Daniel controversy. The 
reader, therefore, will be interested to know 
what reply Professor Driver has to give 
to them. : 

After noticing the solution of the Seventy 
Weeks proposed by Julius Africanus, the 
father of Christian chronologers,’ he pro- 
ceeds :— 

“This view has been revived recently, in a 
slightly modified form, by Dr. Robert Anderson, 
according to whom the ‘year’ of Daniel was the 
ancient luni-solar year of 360 days; reckoning, 


then, 483 years (=69 ‘weeks’), of 360 days each, 
from 1 Nisan, B.C. 445, the date of the edict of 


1 About A.D. 200, 
135 


136 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


Artaxerxes, Dr. Anderson arrives at the roth of 
Nisan in the 18th year of Tiberius Ceesar, the day on 
which our Lord made His public entry into Jeru- 
salem (Luke xix. 37 ff.). Upon this theory, how- 
ever, even supposing the objections against B.C. 445 
as the zerminus a quo to be waived, the seventieth 
week remains unexplained.” 


There is one objection, I admit, to the B.C. 
445 date; it violates the canon of interpreta- 
tion, that Scripture never means what it says! 
But waiving that point, the only criticism 
which the highest scholarship has to offer 
upon my scheme is that it leaves the seven- 
tieth week “unexplained.” 

This objection would be irrelevant even if 
it were well founded. But as a matter of 
fact the book to which Dr. Driver refers 
his readers deals fully and in much detail 
with the seventieth week... One of the 
blunders of this controversy is that of sup- 


1 His referenceis to Zhe Coming Prince, or the Seventy 
Weeks of Daniel, 5th ed. The first edition of the book 
appeared in 1881: the ninth is now current. The scheme 
has thus been before the public for many years; and during 


that time every detail of it has been subjected to the most . - 


searching criticism, both here and in America; but neither _ 
error nor flaw has been detected in it. 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 137 


posing that the era of the seventy weeks 
was to end either with the advent or the 
death of Christ. Here the language of 
Daniel is explicit: the period ‘unto Messiah 
the Prince” was to be, not Seventy weeks, 
but sixty-nine weeks. The crucifixion is 
the event which marks the end of the sixty- 
“ninth week; the seventieth week ends with 
the restoration of the Jews to prosperity and 
blessing. Those who regard that week as 
cancelled hold an intelligible position. ‘And 
the same may be said of those who maintain 
that it still awaits fulfilment. But the fig- 
ment that a prophecy of temporal and spiri- 
tual good for the Jews was fulfilled by their 
rejection and ruin is one of the very wildest 
vagaries of interpretation.’ 

Upon this point three different opinions 
prevail. By some the restoration of the 
Jews is dismissed as a dream of Hebrew 
poetry. Others consider that the Jewish 

1 Another amazing vagary of the same type is that Dan. 
ix. 27 means tHat our Lord made some sort of seven years’ 
covenant with the Jews at the beginning of His ministry, 


and that it was broken by His death. See Zhe Coming 
Prince, ch. xiy., and especially pp. 182, 183. 


138 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


promises were finally forfeited by the rejec- 
tion of Christ, and now belong to the Gen- 
tile Church. And others again are bold 
enough to believe that God will make good 
every promise and every prophecy the Bible 
contains, but that the realisation of the dis- 
tinctive blessings of the favoured nation is 
postponed until the close of this Gentile dis- 
pensation. I am not ashamed to rank my- 
self in this-third category ; and following the 
teaching of the Ante-Nicene Fathers—for 
this is precisely the sort of question as to 
which apostolic tradition is least likely to 
have been corrupted—to hold that the seven- _ 
tieth week, and the events pertaining to it, 
belong to the future. 

But what bearing has all this upon the 
point at issue? The question here is whether 
the vision of the seventy weeks was a mere 
human prediction or a Divine prophecy. 
The popular view of the matter appears to 
be that, as the advent of Christ was expected 
about the time when He actually- appeared, 
there was nothing extraordinary in a chrono- 
logical forecast of the event. But this be- - 


« 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 139 


trays a strange misconception and confusion 
of thought. = 

True it is that the advent of their Messiah 
was a hope universally cherished by the Jews 
. —a fact which, as I have urged, proves the 
error and folly of denying the Messianic 
interpretation of the 9th of Daniel. But if 
His coming was expected nineteen centuries 
ago, the hope was based on these very 
visions. For, apart from Daniel, Scripture 
contains no hint of a time limit within which 
the advent was to take place. Apart from 
Daniel, indeed, the theory was plausible 
that it would herald the dawn of the seventh 
millennium of the world’s history—an epoch 
which, by the Jewish calendar, is even now 
in the distant future. But here is a book 
which specifies the precise date of the 
presentation and death of Christ, and the 
prediction has been fulfilled. Had it been 
fulfilled within the year, the result might well 
stagger unbelief. And if the apparent margin 
of error had been a month, the explana- 
tion would be obvious and adequate, that 
Nehemiah does not record the day of the 


140 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS DEN 


month on which the edict was signed.’ But, 
as a matter of fact, it was fulfilled with 
absolute accuracy, and to the very day. 

Let us fora moment ignore the controversy 
about the date of Daniel—whether in the 
second century B.c., or in the sixth, and 
confine our attention to this simple issue: 
Could the prediction have been a mere guess 
by some learned and pious Jew? If we refer 
this question to a mathematician he will ask 
what data there were to work upon; and on 
hearing that there were none, he will tell us 
that in such circumstances the chance of 
accuracy would be so small, and the pro- 
bability of error so great, that neither the 
one nor the other could be expressed 
arithmetically in figures. The calculation, 
in fact, would become lost in infinity. And 


11 would not be understood as urging this. I presume 
the banquet at which the edict was issued took place on 
New Years day. Nehemiah began to build the walls on 
the third day of the fifth month (Neh. vi. 15).  Ezra’s 
journey from Babylon to Jerusalem occupied precisely four 
months (Ezra vii. 9), and in “the unchanging east” 
Nehemiah’s journey from Susa would have occupied as 
long. I conclude, therefore, that he set out in the deginning 
of Nisan. 


1 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION I4! 


this being so, any attempt to dismiss the facts 
and figures set forth in the preceding chapter 
as being accidental coincidences is not intel- 
ligent scepticism, but a crass misbelief which 
is sheer credulity. 

And this brings us back again to the 
question, What is the character, and what 
the credentials, of the book which contains 
this most marvellous vision? The critics 
themselves admit that the authority of the 
Book of Daniel was unchallenged by Jews 
and Christians alike for at least two thousand 
years. It was not that the question of its 
claims was never raised; for Porphyry the 
Neo-Platonist devoted to the subject one of 
his discourses against the Christians. But 
Porphyry’s attack evoked no response in 
the Christian camp until modern German in- 
fidelity began its crusade against the Bible. 
The visions of Daniel afforded an un- 
answerable testimony to the reality of in. 
spiration, and their voice had to be silenced. 
No matter to what date the 53rd chapter 
of Isaiah be assigned, the sceptics would 
reject the Messianic interpretation of it. 


142. _ DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


But if it can be proved that the visions of 
Daniel were written in the sixth century 
B.C., scepticism becomes an impossible atti- 
tude of mind. Therefore, a propagandism 
designed to degrade the Bible to the level of 
a human book found it essential to prove 
that Daniel was written after the events it 
professed to predict. 

‘SEO attain this end all the great erudition 
and patient subtlety for which German 
scholarship is justly famed, were prostituted 
without reserve; and the attack of the 
apostates was an immense advance upon 
the attack of the Pagan. ‘‘Apostates,” I 
say advisedly, for in its origin and purpose . 
the movement was essentially anti-Christian. 
In course of time, however, men who had no 
sympathy with the aims of the rationalists 
were led to adopt their conclusions; and in 
our own day the sinister origin of the move- 
ment is in danger of being forgotten. Its 
obtaining recruits among English scholars of 
repute is a matter within living memory. 

First, then, we have the fact that the — 
Book of Daniel, regarded as a classic, is a 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION _ 143 


work of the very highest character, and that 
the attack upon it originated in the exigencies 
of modern rationalism. But secondly, the | 
critics admit, for the fact is indisputable, that 
the Book of Daniel has entered more closely 
into the warp and woof of the New Testa- 
ment than any other portion of the Hebrew 
Seriptures.* And if they do not admit as 
unreservedly that it comes to us expressly 
accredited by our Lord Himself, it is because 
the “ Higher Criticism” is purely destructive, 
and therefore violates at times the principles 
on which all true criticism rests.” But 
whether they admit it or not, it is none the 
less certain. Andas Keil justly says: ‘“ This 
testimony of our Lord fixes the seal of Divine 
confirmation on the external and internal 
evidences which prove the genuineness of 
the book.” 

And in view of these overwhelming proofs 
of its genuineness, if Hebrew scholars were 

1 See p. 68 ff., ande. 

2 In Matt. xxiv. 15, ¢.g., there is no question of conflicting 
MSS. ; the words are admittedly quoted from Daniel, and 


the passage as a whole unmistakably refers to Daniel (see 
p- 70, azze). 


; € 
144 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


agreed that its language was not that of the 
sixth century B.c., but of a later time, true 
criticism would seek for an explanation of 
that fact. But even those Hebraists who 
reject the book contradict one another on 
this very point; and so Professor Driver falls 
back on the alleged presence of two Greek 
words in the text as settling the whole 
question. But in the circumstances this is 
but a travesty of true criticism, and proves 
nothing save the critic’s want of practical 
experience in the art of sifting and weighing 
evidence.’ 

The case of the philologist having thus 
collapsed, the critic still further shakes our 
confidence in him by turning aside to borrow 
from the German rationalists a farrago of _ 
objections upon minor points. Some of 
these prove on inquiry to be either sheer 
blunders? or mere quibbles,? and most of 
them are so petty that no competent tribunal 

1 See pp. 51, 81, ante. 

2 F.g., that Dan. i. 1 is unhistorical (see App. I., p. 153, 
post). 


3 E.g., the spelling of “ Nebuchadnezzar” (p. 45 7. anie), 
and that Belshazzar is called his son (p. 23, azze). 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION _ 145 


would listen to them, save in the absence of 
evidence worthy of the name. 

If any should think that in my reply to 
Professor Driver I have treated these minor 
points of criticism too lightly, I would plead 
the advice once given by a great advocate, 
always to ignore the petty details of an 
opponent’s evidence if his case can be shat- 
tered on some vital issue. There is not 
one of these difficulties and objections to 
which I have not given full and fair con-_ 
sideration, and a reply to them will. be found 
in these pages.* But, I repeat, I am pre- 
pared to stake the whole case for Daniel on 
the two issues I have specified, namely, the 
inclusion of the book in the canon, and the 
fulfilment of its great central vision in Mes- 
sianic times. 

Behind these is the fact—which in itself 
ought to satisfy the Christian—that the 
book bears the express zmprimatur of our 
Divine Lord. And we have the further 


1 To guard myself against any charge on this score, I 
give a summary of them in the Appendix. See Appendix 
VIL., p. 179, Dost. 3 

K 


146 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS DEN 


fact that its visions are inseparably inter- 
woven with the Christian revelation and 
with the whole scheme of unfulfilled pro- 
phecy. But this last topic I do not now 
discuss. These pages are not addressed 
to students of prophecy, for no student of 
prophecy doubts the genuineness of Daniel. 
But prophecy fulfilled has a voice for every 
man; and as Professor Driver's treatise is 
addressed to men of the world from their 
own standpoint, I have here, waiving the 
vantage ground of spiritual truth, appealed 
to the judgment of all fair and reasonable 
men. 

Ptolemy the astronomer was a “ Higher 
Critic.” The belief had long prevailed that 

1 1 do not say this by way of complaint. Regarding the 
Book of Daniel as no more than a classic, he treats it, of 
course, on that footing. I recognise the difference between 
what he has written on this subject and such productions, 
e.g. as the article in Hastings’ Dictionary of the Bible, of 
which he is one of the editors ; or the article in Professor 
Cheyne’s rationalistic Emcyclopedia Biblica. Were Por- 
phyry the Pagan to come to life again he might without 
reserve put his name to those articles, and to many another 
article in both these works. If this is the sort of food sup- 
plied to divinity students nowadays it is no wonder that so 


many of them either lapse to rationalism or Le refuge in 
the superstitions of mere religion. 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 147 


the sun was the centre of our system; but 
he had no difficulty in proving that this tra- 
ditional belief was untenable. Once he got 
men to consider the matter from their own 
standpoint all could see the absurdity of 
supposing that the earth on which they lived 
and moved was flying helter-skelter round 
the sun. And nothing more was needed but 
to keep the mind occupied with the many 
apparent difficulties of the hypothesis he 
opposed, to the exclusion of all thought of 
the few but insurmountable difficulties of the 
theory he advocated. The professors and 
experts were convinced, the multitude fol- 
lowed suit, and for more than a thousand 
years the puerilities of the Ptolemaic System 
held sway, with the sanction of infallible 
science and the blessing of an infallible 
Church. 

The allegory is a simple one. There is a 
“Ptolemaic System” of studying the Bible, 
which is now struggling for supremacy. 
Let us, following the rationalists, insist on 
shutting out God, and dealing with the 
Bible from the purely human standpoint, 


148 DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN 


and then we need but to weary our minds 
by the consideration of seeming difficulties 
of one kind, while we ignore overwhelming 

difficulties of another kind, and the victory ; 
of that false system will be assured. For 
the capacity of fairly considering both sides 
of a controversy is not common, and the 
habit of doing so is rare. Therefore it is 
_ that the best judge is not the legal expert, 
but the patient, broad-minded arbitrator, 
who will calmly hear both sides of a case, and 
then: adjudicate upon it without prejudice 
or passion. 

This brings me to my closing appeal ; 
and I address it specially to those who are 
accustomed to take part in any capacity 
in the proceedings of our courts of justice. 
Once again, I ask them to remember that 
the question here at issue is essentially 
one for a judicial inquiry, and that if they 
possess experience of such inquiries their 
fitness for the task is greater than usually 
belongs to the professional scholar, how- 
ever eminent. Philologists of high repute 
will tell them that the Book of Daniel is 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 149 


aforgery. Other philologists of equal fame 
will assure them that it is genuine. Let 
them set the opinion of the one set of 
experts against that of the other; and 
then, turning to consider the question on 
broader grounds, let them fearlessly decide it 
for themselves, uninfluenced by the glamour 
of great names. 

The religious revolt of the sixteenth 
century rescued the Bible from the Priest: 
God grant that the twentieth century may 
bring a revolt which shall rescue it from 
the Professor and the pundit. 


APPENDICES 


APPENDIX I 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S FIRST INVASION OF JUDEA 


THE opening statement of the Book of Daniel is 
here selected for special notice for two reasons. 
First, because the attack upon it would be serious, 
if sustained. And secondly and chiefly, because it 
is a typical specimen of the methods of the critics ; 
and the inquiry may convince the reader of their 
unfitness to deal with any question of evidence. I 
am not here laying down the law, but seeking to 
afford materials to enable the reader to form his 
own opinion. Lx uno disce omnes. 

Dan. i. 1 reads: ‘‘In the third year of the reign 
of Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon unto Jerusalem and besieged it.” 
The German rationalists denounce this statement 
asa blunder. Their humble disciples, the English 
sceptics, accept their conclusion and. blindly repro- 
duce their arguments. Dr. Driver (more suo) takes a 
middle course and brands it as “ doubtful” (Danzel, 
pp. xlviii and 2). I propose to show that the state- 
ment is historically accurate,-and that its accuracy 
is established by the strict test of chronology.! 

1 For a complete and exhaustive analysis of the chrono- 


logy I would refer to the “‘ Chronological Treatise” in The 


Coming Prince. 
153 


154 APPENDIX I 


A reference to Rawlinson’s Five Great Monarchies 
(vol. iii. 488-494), and to Clinton’s Fast2 Hellenict, 
will show how thoroughly consistent the sacred 
history of this period appears to the mind of an 
historian or a chronologer, and how completely it 
harmonises with the history of Berosus. Jerusalem 
was first taken by the Chaldeans in the third year 
of Jehoiakim. His fourth year was current with 
the first year of Nebuchadnezzar (Jer. xxv. 1). 
This accords with the statement of Berosus that 
Nebuchadnezzar’s first expedition took place before 
his actual accession (Josephus, Apzon, i. 19). Then 
follows the statement quoted at p. 17, ante. But 
here we must distinguish between the narrative of 
Josephus, which is full of errors, and his quotation 
from Berosus, which is consistent and definite. 
Dr. Driver tells us that on this expedition, whén 
Nebuchadnezzar reached Carchemish, he was con- 
fronted by the Egyptian army, and defeated it ; and 
that then, on hearing of his father’s death, he 
hastened home across the desert. That German 
_ rationalists should have fallen into such a gro- 
tesque blunder as this, is proof of the blind 
malignity of their iconoclastic zeal: that English 
scholars should adopt it is proof that they have 
not brought an independent judgment to bear 
on this controversy.. What Berosus says is 
that when Nebuchadnezzar heard of his father’s 
“death, “he set the affairs of Egypt and the other 
countries in order, and committed the captives he 
had taken from the Jews, and the Phoenicians, and 


FIRST INVASION OF JUDEA 155 


Syrians, and of the nations belonging to Egypt, 
to some of his friends . . . while he went in haste 
over the desert to Babylon.” Will the critics tell us 
how he could have had Jewish captives if he had not 
invaded Judea; how he could have reached Egypt 
without marching through Palestine ; how he could 
have returned to Babylon over the desert if he had 
set out from Carchemish on the Euphrates ! 

One error leads to another, and so Dr. Driver 
has to impugn also the accuracy of Jer. xlvi. 2 
(which states that the battle of Carchemish was in 
Jehoiakim’s fourth year), and further, to cook the 
chronology of Jehoiakim’s reign by making his 
regnal years date from Tishri (p. xlix.)—a blunder 
that the Wishna exposes. (Treatise, Rosh Hasha- 
nah.) ‘The regnal years of Jewish kings are always 
reckoned from Nisan. 

According to the Canon of Ptolemy, the reign of 
Nebuchadnezzar dates from B.C. 604: ze. his acces- 
sion was in the year beginning the Ist Thoth (which 
fell in January), B.c. 604. But the Captivity began 
in Nebuchadnezzar’s eighth year (g~ Ezek. i. 2, 
and 2 Kings xxiv. 12); and in the thirty-seventh 
year of the Captivity Nebuchadnezzar’s successor 
was on the throne (2 Kings xxv. 27). This, how- 
ever, gives Nebuchadnezzar a reign of at least 
forty-four years, whereas according to the canon 
(and Berosus confirms it) he reigned only forty- 
three years. It follows, therefore, that Scripture 
antedates his reign and computes it from B.C. 605. 
(Clinton, /, /., vol. i. p. 367.) This might be ex- 


156 APPENDIX I 


plained by the fact that the Jews acknowledged him 
as suzerain from that date. But it has been over- 
looked thatit is accounted for by the J/zskua rule of 
computing regnal years from Nisan to Nisan. In 
B.C. 604, the first Nisan fell on the 1st April, and 
according to the Mzshua rule the king’s second 
year would begin on that day, no matter how 
recently he had ascended the throne. Therefore 
the fourth year of Jehoiakim and the first year of 
Nebuchadnezzar (Jer. xxv. 1) was the year begin- 
ning Nisan B.C. 605 ; and the third year of Jehoiakim, 
in which Jerusalem was taken and the Servitude 
began, was.the year beginning Nisan B.C. 606. 

This result is confirmed by Clinton, who fixes the 
summer of B.C. 606 as the date of Nebuchadnezzar’s 
first expedition. And it is strikingly confirmed also — 
by a statement in Daniel which is the basis of one 
of the quibbles of the critics: Daniel was kept ¢hree 
years in training before he was admitted to the 
king’s presence, and yet he-interpreted the king’s 
dream in his second year (Dan. i. 5, 18; ii. 1). 
The explanation is simple. While the Jews in 
Palestine computed Nebuchadnezzar’s reign in their 
own way, Daniel, a citizen of Babylon and a courtier, 
of course accepted the reckoning in use around him. 
But as the prophet was exiled in B.C. 606, his three 
years’ probation ended in B.C. 603, whereas the 
second year of Nebuchadnezzar, reckoned from his 
actual accession, extended to the early months of 
B.C, 602. : 

Agait s the accession of Evil-Merodach was in 


FIRST INVASION OF JUDEA £57 


B.C. 561, and the thirty-seventh year of the Capti- 
vity was then current (2 Kings xxv. 27). There- 
fore the Captivity dated from the year Nisan 598 
to Nisan 597. But this was (according to Jewish 
reckoning) the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar (2 
Kings xxiv. 12). His reign, therefore, dated from 
the year Nisan 605 to Nisan 604. And the first 
siege of Jerusalem and the beginning of the Servi- 
tude was in the preceding year, 606-605. 

But seventy years was the appointed duration 
of the Servitude (zot the Captivity, see p. 21, 
ante). And the Servitude ended in the first year of 
Cyrus, B.C. 536. J/¢ must therefore have begun in 
B.C. 606 (the third year of Jehoiakim), as the Book 
of Daniel records. 

That date, therefore, is the pivot on which the - 
whole chronology turns. On what ground then 
does Dr. Driver impugn it? Will it be believed 
that the only ground suggested is that 2 Kings 
xxiv. I, which so definitely confirms Daniel, does 
not specify the particular year intended, and that 
Jeremiah xxv. and xxxvi. are silent with regard to 
the invasion of that year. 

Let me examine this. I open Jer. xxv. to 
find these words: ‘The word that came to 
Jeremiah ... in the fourth year of Jehoiakim ... 
that was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar, king of 
Babylon.’ Now Jeremiah had been a prophet for 
more than twenty years, yet till the fourth year of 
Jehoiakim he never mentions Nebuchadnezzar ; but 
in that year he fixes a date by reference to his reign. 


x 


Te Sie APPENDIX I 


How is this to be explained ? The explanation is 
obvious, namely that by the capture of Jerusalem, 
the year before, as recorded in Dan. 1. 1, and 2 
Chron. xxxvi. 6, 7, Nebuchadnezzar had become 
suzerain. And yet Professor Driver tells us that 
“the invasion of Judea by Nebuchadnezzar, and the 
three years’ submission of Jehoiakim, are certainly 
to be placed after Jehoiakim’s fourth year—most 
probably indeed, towards the close of his reign” 
(Daniel, p. 2). 

I now turn to Jer. xxxvi. This chapter records 
prophecies of the fourth and fifth year of Jehoiakim 
(vers. I and 9), and it is true that they do not mention 
an invasion before these years. But the critic has 
overlooked chapter xxxv. This chapter belongs to 
the same group as the chapter which follows it, and 
should of course be assigned to a date mot later 
than the fourth year of the king. And in this 
chapter (verse 11) the presence of the Rechabites in 
Jerusalem is accounted for by the fact that Nebu- 
chadnezzar’s invasion had driven them from their 
homes. This chapter also thus affords signal con- 
firmation of Daniel. The critics therefore hold, of 
course, that it belongs to the close of Jehoiakim’s 
reign, And if we ask, Why should the history be 
turned upside down in this way ? they answer, 
Because the prophecies of the earlier years of 
his reign are silent as to this invasion! This 
is a typical illustration of their logic and their 
methods. 

I will only add that the silence of a witness is a 


FIRST INVASION OF JUDEA 159 


familiar problem with the man of affairs, who will 
sometimes account for it in a manner that may seem 
strange to the student at his desk. It may be 
due, not to ignorance of the event in question, 
but to the fact that that event was prominently 
present to the minds of all concerned. 


APPENDIX II 
THE DEATH OF BELSHAZZAR 


THE following is Professor Sayce’s rendering of 
the concluding (decipherable) portion of the An- 
nalistic tablet of Cyrus :— 


“On the fourteenth day of the month Sippara 
was taken without fighting; Nabonidos fled. On 
the sixteenth day Gobryas (Ugbaru), the Gover- 
nor of the country of Kurdistan (Gutium), and the 
soldiers of Cyrus, entered Babylon without fighting. 
Afterwards Nabonidos was captured, after being 
bound in Babylon. At the end of the month 
Tammuz, the javelin-throwers of the country of 
Kurdistan guarded the gates of E-Saggil; no ces- 
sation of services took place in E-Saggil and the 
other temples, but no special festival was observed. 
The third day of the month Marchesvan (October) 
Cyrus entered Babylon. Dissensions were allayed 
before him. Peace to the city did Cyrus establish, 
peace toall the province of Babylon did Gobryas 
his governor proclaim. Governors in Babylon he 


appointed. From the month Chisleu to the month © 


Adar (November to February) the gods of the 
country of Accad, whom Nabonidos had trans- 
ferred to Babylon, returned to their own cities. 
~ The eleventh day of the month Marchesvan, during 


the night, Gobryas was on the bank of the river. 
z 160 


\ 


THE DEATH OF BELSHAZZAR 161 


. .. The wife of the king died. From the twenty- 
seventh day of Adar to the third day of Nisan 
there was lamentation in the country of Accad; 
all the people smote their heads. On the fourth 
day Kambyses the son of Cyrus conducted the 
burial at the temple of the Sceptre of the world. 
The priest of the temple of the Sceptre of Nebo, 
who upbears the sceptre [of Nebo in the temple 
of the god], in an Elamite robe took the hands 
of Nebo, ... the son of the king (Kambyses) 
[offered] free-will offerings in full to ten times 
[the usual amount]. He confined to E-Saggil 
the [image] of Nebo. Victims before Bel to ten 
times [the usual amount he sacrificed].” 


The reader’s surprise willsnaturally be excited on 
learning that the tablet is so mutilated and defective 
that the text has here and there to be reconstructed, 
and that the above, while purporting to be merely 
a translation is, in fact, also a reconstruction. I 
will here confine myself, however, to one point 
of principal importance. Mr. Theo. G. Pinches, 
by whom this very tablet was first brought 
to light, is perfectly clear that the reading “the 
wife of the king died” cannot be sustained. He 
writes as follows! (I omit the cuneiform charac- 
ters) :— 


“Professor Sayce has adopted a suggestion of 
Professor Schrader. The characters cannot be... 


1 ] wish to acknowledge my obligation to the Rev. John 
Urquhart, the author of Zhe Jnspiration and Accuracy of 
the Holy Scriptures, for placing this letter at my disposal. 

a L 


162 APPENDIX II 


‘and the wife of,’ but must be either . . . ‘and’ (as 
I read it at first) or . .. ‘and the son of. This 
last improved reading I suggested about four years 
ago, and the Rev. C. J. Ball and Dr. Hagen, who 
examined the text with me, adopted this view. Dr. 
Hagen wrote upon the subject in Delitzsch’s Bez¢- 
rage, vol. i. Of course, whether we read ‘and the 
king died,’ or ‘and the son of the king died,’ it 
comes to the same thing, as either expression could 
refer to Belshazzar, who, after his father’s flight, 
would naturally be at the head of affairs.” 


The following extract is from Mr. Pinches’s article 
“Belshazzar” in the new edition of Smith’s Bzd/e 
Dictionary :— 


“ As is well known, Belshazzar was, according to 
Daniel v., killed in the night, and Xenophon (Cyrop., 
vii. 5, 3) tells us that Babylon was taken by Cyrus 
during the night, whilst the inhabitants were en- 
gaged in feasting and revelry, and that the king was 
killed: Soin the Babylonian Chronicle, lines 22-24, 
we have the statement that ‘On the night of the 
11th of Marchesvan, Ugbaru (Gobryas) [descended ?] 
against [Babylon ?] and the king died. From the 
27th of Adar until the 3rd of Nisan there was weep- 
ing in~Akkad. All the people bowed their head.’ 
The most doubtful character in the above extract is 
that which stands for the word ‘and,’ the character 
in question having been regarded as the darge group 
which stands for that word. A close examination of 
the original, however, shows that it is possible that 
there are two characters instead of one—namely, the 
small character for ‘and,’ and the character tur, which 
in this connection would stand for w mdr, ‘and the 
son of,’ in which case the line would read, ‘and zhe 


THE DEATH OF BELSHAZZAR 163 


son of the king died.’” Weeping in Akkad for Bel- 
shazzar is just what would be expected, when we 
take into consideration that he was for many years 
with the army there, and that he must have made 
himself a favourite by his liberality to the Akkadian 
temples. Even supposing, however, that the old 
reading is the right one, it is nevertheless possible 
that the passage refers to Belshazzar; for Berosus 
relates that Nabonidos, on surrendering to Cyrus, 
had his life spared, and that a principality or estate 
was given to him in Carmania, where he died. It 
is therefore at least probable that Belshazzar was 
regarded even by the Babylonians as king, especi- 
ally after his father’s surrender. With this improved 
reading of the Babylonian text, it is impossible to do 
otherwise than identify Gobryas with Darius the Mede 
(if we suppose that the last verse of the 5th chapter 
of Daniel really belongs to that chapter, and does 
not form part, as in the Hebrew text, of chap. vi.), 
he being mentioned, in the Babylonian Chronicle, in 
direct connection with the death of the king’s son 
(or the king, as the case may be). This identifica- 
tion, though not without its difficulties, receives a 
certain amount of support from Daniel vi. 1, where 
it is stated that ‘it pleased Darius to set over the 
kingdom an hundred and twenty princes,’ &c.—an 
act which finds parallel in the Babylonian Chronicle, 
which states that, after Cyrus promised peace to 
Babylon, Gobryas, his governor, appointed gover- 
nors in Babylon.’” 


On this same subject I am indebted to Mr. St. 
Chad Boscawen for the following note :-— 


“Owing to the mutilated state of the latter part 
of the tablet, it is extremely difficult to arrange the 


) 


164 APPENDIX II 


events, and also in some cases to clearly understand 
the exact meanings of the sentences. As far as 1. 
can see, the course of events seems to have been as 
follows. Sippara was taken on the 14th of Tam- 
muz, and two days later Babylon. Nabonidos had 
fled, but he was still recognised as king by the 
majority of the people, especially by rich trading 
communities such as the Egibi firm, who continued 
to date their contracts in his regnal years. At 
Sippara the people seem to have recognised Cyrus 
as king earlier than at Babylon, as the tablets of 
his accession year are a//, with one exception, the 
source of which is not known, from Sippara. On 
the 3rd of Marchesvan Cyrus entered Babylon and 
appointed Gobryas (the prefect of Gutium) ‘ prefect 
of the prefects’ (pzkhat-pikhate) of Babylon; and 
he (Gobryas) appointed the other prefects. That 
reading of the sentence is perfectly legitimate. 
Cyrus seems only to have occupied himself with 
the restoration of religious order, and on restoring 
“the gods to their temples who had been transported 
to Babylon. We have then a remarkable passage. 
Sayce reads ‘ the wife of the king died’; but Hagen 
reads the son of the king, and I have examined this 
tablet, and find that although the ‘tablet is here 
broken, the most probable reading is ... the son, 
not the wzfe... 

“In Dan. v. we read, and ‘ Darius the Median 
took the kingdom, being about threescore and two 
years.’ Ina second passage, however, this is modi- ~ 
fied. We read, ‘In the first year of Darius, the 
son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, which 
was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans, 
(ix. 1); and again, ‘It pleased Darius to set over 
the kingdom a hundred and twenty princes’ (vi. 1). 
Here we have an exact parallel to the case of Gob- 


~ 


THE DEATH OF BELSHAZZAR 165 


ryas. Gobryas was a Manda—among whom were 
embraced the Medes, for Astyages, an undoubted 
Median king, ruler of the Median capital of Ecbatana, 
is called . . . a soldier of the Manda, or barbarians. 
He is appointed on the 3rd Marchesvan B.C. 538— 
after taking the kingdom on 16th Tammuz—‘ prefect 
of the prefects’ ; and he appoints other prefects over 
the kingdom. His reign did not last more than one 
year, terminating in either Adar 538 or early in B.C. 
537. The end is rendered obscure by the fractures 
in the tablét..:... 

“Tf, then, Gubaru or Gobryas was prefect of 
Gutium before his conquest of Babylon in B.c. 538, 
there is nothing whatever against his being a Mede; 
and as Astyages was deposed by a revolt, when ‘he 
was taken by the hands of the rebels and given to 
Cyrus’ (Chronicle Inscr.), it is very probable that 
Gobryas was the leader of the conspiracy. Indeed 
he seems to me to fulfil in every way the required 
conditions to be Dariusthe Mede. . . . The appoint- 
ment of the satraps does not seem exorbitantly large, 
nor are these to be confounded with the satrapies of 
the Persian empire.” 


And finally, in his Book of Daniel (p. xxx) Pro- 
fessor Driver, in citing the foregoing extract from 
the tablet, reads the crucial sentence thus :—“ On 
the 11th day of Marchesvan, during the night, 
Gubaru made an assault and slew the king’s son.” 
And at pp. 60, 61 he writes: ‘After Gubaru and 
Cyrus had entered Babylon . . . he (Belshazzar) is 
said (according to the most probable reading) to 
have been slain by Gubaru ‘during the night,’ ze. 
(apparently) in some assault made by night upon 
_the fortress or palace to which he had withdrawn.” 


* 


166 APPENDIX It 


I will only add that, in view of the testimony of 
these witnesses, so thoroughly competent and im- 
partial, it is not easy to restrain a feeling of indigna- 
tion at the effrontery (not to use a stronger word) 
of Professor Sayce’s langudge in pp. 525, 526 of his 
book, 


APPENDIX Ill 
THE PUNCTUATION OF DANIEL IX. 25 


THE Massoretic punctuation of Daniel ix. 25 has 
been adopted by Dean Farrar and Professor Driver, 
who fail to see that it is fatal to their pseud-epigraph 
theory of Daniel. The passage when thus read 
limits to 62 ‘weeks” the period during which 
_ Jerusalem was to remain as an inhabited city; and 
it is quite certain that no Jew writing “in the days 
of the Seleucid tyrant, anxious to inspire the courage 
and console the sufferings of his countrymen,” 
would have used words which could only mean 
that the destruction of their holy city was imminent. 
Assuming the genuineness of the Book of Daniel, 
the R.V. punctuation renders the meaning of the 
passage more obscure, but it cannot alter it ; for 
as 7+62+1 make up 70, it is obvious: that the 
lesser periods mentioned are subdivisions of the 
70 weeks of the prophecy. It is clear, therefore, 
that the 62 weeks follow the 7 weeks, and that the 
death of Messiah (according to verse 26) was to be 
at the close of the 69th week. 

“The sacred writings—Torah, Rape and 


Hagiographa—were written in archaic style, the 
167 


168 “APPENDIX III 


letters were unaccompanied by vowel or punctua- 
tion signs, . . . The accents and the vowel system 
‘are an integral part of the Massorah.”? And 
further, “The Received, or, as it is commonly 
called, the Massoretic text of the Old Testament 
Scriptures, has come down to us in manuscripts 
which are of no very great antiquity, and which 
all belong to the same family or recension” (Pre- 
face, R.V.). As the words “of no very great 
antiquity” may be explained to mean not more 
than about one thousand years old, the reader 
can appreciate Professor Margoliouth’s statement 
“that we possess the Old Testament in a partially 
anti-Christian recension.”? And asa false punctua- 
tion of Dan. ix. 25 would suffice to obscure, though 
it could not destroy, the Messianic reference of the 
passage, the Jewish editors may have possibly 
sought in this way to lessen the weight of 
proof which Daniel affords of the truth of Chris- 
tianity. 

But we may clear’the Jewish editors from this 
charge, though at the expense of the Old Testament 
Company of Revisers. Punctuation marks (as we 
understand the term) there are none in Hebrew. 
But the Hebrew accents serve to a certain extent the 
same purpose. The following extract from the 
Gesenius-Kautzsch Hebrew Grammar? (than which 


1 The Hebrew Accents, by Arthur Davis. (Myers & Co. 
1900.) 

3 Lines of Defence, p. 242. 

3 Clarendon Press, 1898 (p. 56). 


THE PUNCTUATION OF DANIEL 169 


there is no higher authority) will enable the reader 
to judge of this matter for himself :— 


“The design of the accents is primarily to regu- 
late the musical enunciation (chanting) of the sacred 
Text; and thus they are first of all a kind of musi- 
cal notes... . On the other hand, according to 
their original design they have also a twofold use 
which is still of the greatest importance for the 
grammar—viz., their value (a) as marking the tone ; 
(b) as marks of punctuation.” And to this a foot- 
note is added to explain “that the value of the 
accent as a mark of punctuation is always relative. 
Thus, ¢.g., ’Athnah, as regards the logical struc- 
ture of the sentence, may at one time indicate a very 
strong ceesure (thus Gen. i. 4); at another, one 
which is almost imperceptible (thus Gen. i. 1).” | 


Now it is the presence of the Athnah accent 
which has led the Revisers to divide Dan. ix. 25 
by a colon,. On the same principle and for the 
same reason they ought to have rendered Gen. i. 1, 
“In the beginning God created: the heaven and 
the earth.” In the Hebrew the order of the words 
is, ‘In the beginning created God;” and the force 
of the Athnah is to make the reader pause at the 
sacred name in order that the hearers may grasp 
the solemn meaning of the words. In every case, 
therefore, the context must decide whether the 
accent should be ‘‘translated” by the insertion of a 
colon in the English version. The Revisers, how- _ 
ever, by a majority vote, and-in spite of the protest 
of the American Company, have thus corrupted 
Dan. ix. 25. It is one of the blemishes of the 


170 APPENDIX III 


R.V. of the Old Testament, which is generally free 
from these “ schoolboy translations,”’ that so often 
mark the R.V. of the New Testament. I will con- 
clude by repeating that if their punctuation here is 
right, it is proof that Daniel was not written in the 
Maccabean era. 

Since writing the foregoing my attention has 
been called to the presence of the Athnah in verse 
2 of this very chapter. If the critics are right they 
ought to render it, “I, Daniel, understood by the 
books: the number of the years, &c.” But their 
position is in fact utterly untenable. 


1 Eccles. xii. 5 is a notable instance of this. The beauti- 
fully veiled reference implied in the caper-berry is rendered 
with exquisite propriety in our A.V., “and desire shall fail.” 
The R.V. reading, “and the caper-berry shall fail,” is a 
mere schoolboy translation, and absolutely meaningless to 
the English reader. 


Poe PEND Xx TV 
THE JEWISH CALENDAR 


ACCORDING to the Wishna (treatise Rosh Hashanah), 
“On the Ist of Nisan is a new year for the com- 
putation of the reign of kings and for festivals.” 
To which the Jewish editors of the English trans- 
lation of the M/zshna add this note: “ The reign of 
Jewish kings, whatever the period of accession might 
be, was always reckoned from the preceding Nisan ; 
so that if, for instance, a Jewish king began to reign 
in Adar, the following month (Nisan) would-be 
considered as the commencement of the second 
year of his reign. This rule was observed in all 
legal contracts, in which the reign of kings was 
always mentioned.” This rule, I may add, will 
explain what Christian expositors and critics are 
pleased to call the ‘‘errors” in the chronological 
statements of Scripture as to Jewish regnal years. 
Full information on the subject of the present 
Jewish year will be found in Lindo’s /ewésh 
Calendar, and in the Encyc. Brit., oth ed., article 
“Hebrew Calendar.” But while their calendar is 
now settled with astronomical accuracy, it was not 
so in early times. And nothing is certainly known 


171 


172 APPENDIX IV, 


of the embolismal system then in use, to adjust the 
lunar to the solar year. But the testimony of the 
Mishna is definite that the great characteristic of 
the sacred year, as ordained in the Mosaic age, 
remained unchanged in Messianic times; namely, 
it began with the first appearance of the Paschal 
moon. The Misha states that the Sanhedrim re- 
quired the evidence of two competent witnesses 
that they had seen the new moon. The rules for 
the journey and examination of the witnesses con- 
template the case of their coming from a distance, 
and being ‘‘a night and a day on the road.” The 
proclamation by the Sanhedrim may therefore have 
been delayed for a day or two after the phasis, and 
the phasis may sometimes have been delayed: till 
the moon was Id. 17h. old. So that the rst Nisan 
may sometimes have fallen several days later than 
‘the true new moon. (See Clinton, Fas? Rom., 
vol. ii. p. 240.) 

All writers therefore who, ¢.g., fix the date of the 
’ Crucifixion by assigning it to a year in which the 
Paschal full moon was on a Friday, are clearly 
wrong. The elements of doubt are: (1) The time 
of the phasis; (2) the appearance of the necessary 
witnesses ; (3) the rules to prevent the festivals 
falling on unsuitable days; and (4) the embolismal 
system in force, of which we know nothing certainly. 
The use of the Metonic cycle in settling the Jewish 
calendar dates only from the fourth century A.D.; 
and as the old eight years’ cycle was in use 
among the early Christians for settling Easter, 


THE JEWISH CALENDAR 173 


the presumption is that it was borrowed from 
the Jews. 

Let me illustrate this by A.D. 32, the year which 
Scripture itself marks out as the year of the Cruci- 
fixion. The true new moon was late on the night 
(10h. 57m.) of the 29th March. The proclamation 
of the Sanhedrim therefore would naturally have 
occurred on the 31st. But, as above explained, it 
may have been delayed till rst April; and in that 
case the 15th Nisan should have fallen on Tuesday 
the 15th April. But according to the scheme of the 
eight years’ cycle, the embolismal month was inserted 
in the 3rd, 6th, and 8th years; and an examination 
of the calendars from A.D. 22 to 45 will show that 
A.D. 32 was the 3rd year of such acycle. And as 
the difference between the solar year and the lunar 
is 11¢ days, it would amount in three years to 333 
days, and the addition of a 13th month (Ve-Adar) 
of 30 days would leave an epoch still remaining of 
3? days. And the “ecclesiastical moon” being 
that much before the real moon, the Passover 
festival would have fallen on Friday (11th April). I 
have dealt with this question at greater length in 
The Coming Prince, pp. 99-105. 


APPENDIX V 
4 
THE TWENTIETH YEAR OF ARTAXERXES 


THE month Nisan in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes 
is the epoch of the prophetic era of the seventy weeks, 
In dealing with this subject, therefore, it is of vital 
importance to fix that date, and I have dealt with 
the matter exhaustively in an Excursus (App. IL, 
Note A) added ‘to The Coming Prince, to which I 
beg leave to refer the reader. I will here give but - 
one extract :— : 


“According to Clinton (/. Z., vol. ii. p. 380), the 
death of Xerxes was in July, B.C. 465, and the 
accession of Artaxerxes was in February, B.C. 464. 
Artaxerxes, of course, ignored the usurper’s reign, 
which intervened, and reckoned his own reign from 
the day of his father’s death. Again, of course, - 
Nehemiah, being an officer of the court, followed the 
same reckoning. Had he computed his master’s 
reign from February 464, Chislen and Nisan could 
not have fallen in the same regnal year (Neh. i. 1; 
ii, 1). No more could they, had he, according to 
Jewish practice, computed it from Nisan.” 


Not content, however, with my own investigations, 
I appealed to the author of The Five Great Mon- 


archies, and Canon Rawlinson. favoured me with — 
174 


TWENTIETH YEAR OF ARTAXERXES £75 


the following reply: “You may safely say that 
chronologers are now agreed that Xerxes died in 
the year B.c. 465. The Canon of Ptolemy, Thuci- 
dides, Diodorus, and Manetho are agreed, the only 
counter authority being Ctesias, who is quite un- 
trustworthy.” 

Then as regards the Julian date of the 1st Nisan, 
B.C. 445 (Neh. ii.), when my book was in the press, 
I began to fear lest my own lunar calculations. to 
fix the Jewish New Year (see Appendix IV., ante), 
might prove untrustworthy, and accordingly I wrote 
to the then Astronomer-Royal, Sir George Airy, 
who replied as follows: “I have had the moon’s 
place calculated from Largeteau’s Tables in additions 
to the Connaisance des Temps, 1846, by one of my 
assistants, and have no doubt of its correctness. 
The place being calculated for —444, March 12 d. 
20 h., French reckoning, or March 12 d. 8h. P.M., 
it appears that the said time was short of New 
Moon by about 8h. 47 m., and therefore the New 
Moon occurred at 4 h. 47 m. A.M., March 13th, 
Paris time.” . 

The New Moon, therefore, occurred at Jerusalem 
on the 13th March, B.c. 445 (—444 Astronomical) 
at 7h.9m. A.M. And the next day, the 14th, was 
the 1st Nisan. 


APPENDIX. Vi 
THE DATE OF THE CRUCIFIXION 


AS regards the date of the Ministry and of the 
Passion, Luke iii. 1 is an end of controversy with 
all who reject the nightmare system of interpreting 
Scripture. -The 15th year of the Emperor Tiberius 
is as certain a date as the 15th year of Queen 
Victoria. He began to reign on the roth August 
A.D. 14. “And no single case has ever been, or 
can be, produced in which the years of Tiberius 
were reckoned in any other manner.” 

But Gibbon tells us that ‘‘The Roman Emperors 

. . invested their designed successor with so large 
a share of present power as should enable him, after 
their decease, to assume the remainder without suf- 
fering the empire to perceive the change of masters. 
Thus Augustus ... obtained for his adopted son 
[Tiberius] the censorial and tribunitian power, 
and dictated a law by which the future prince 
was invested with an authority equal to his own | 
over the provinces and the armies. Thus Ves- 
pasian ,. . associated Titus to the full powers of 
the Imperial dignity ” (Decline and Fail,1. ch. 3). 

And this is made an excuse for “cooking” the 


chronology by those who, in spite of the clear 
176 


THE DATE OF THE CRUCIFIXION Wy 


testimony of Scripture, insist on assigning the 
Crucifixion to A.D. 29 or 30. They treat the reign 
of Tiberius as beginning some years before the 
death of Augustus, and take his 15th year to mean 
his 12th year. Sanclementi, indeed, finding “that 
nowhere in his time, or on monuments or coins, is 
a vestige to be found of any such mode of reckoning 
the years of this emperor,” disposes of the difficulty 
by taking the date in Luke iii, 1 to refer to the 
Passion! Browne adopts this in a modified form. 
He says ‘it is improbable to the last degree” 
that Luke, who wrote specially for a Roman officer, 
and generally for Gentiles, would have so expressed 
himself as to be certainly misunderstood by them. 


Therefore, though the statement of the Evangelist, 


clashes with his date for the Passion, he owns his 
obligation to accept it. _ Gee Ordo Sec, §§ 71 
and 75.) 

The Evangelist’s chronology refutes the tradi- 
tional date embodied in the spurious Acta Pilat 
formerly quoted in this controversy, and in the 
writings of certain of the Fathers— “by some 
because they confounded the date of the baptism 
with the date of the Passion; by others, because 
they supposed both to have happened in one year; 
by others, because they transcribed from their 
predecessors without examination” (Fynes Clinton, 
Fasti Rom., A.D. 29). 

The adactnice of this false chronology rely, first, 
on a wrong inference from the Evangelist’s state- 
ment that the Lord “when He Pegan (to teach) 

M 


=~ 


178. APPENDIX VI 


was about thirty years of age” (Luke iii. 23). But, 
as Alford says, this ‘admits of considerable lati- 
tude, but only in one direction, viz. over thirty years.” 
And, secondly, on the figment that the Passion must 
have occurred in a year when the Paschal moon 
was full upon a Friday. -But this is a blunder. 
John xviii. 3 makes it clear that the Passover of the 
Crucifixion was zo¢ at the full moon. For in that 
case there would have been ‘no “lanterns and 
torches,” especially having regard to Luke xxii. 2. 
See Appendix IV. (p. 1727 ante); and also Clinton’s 
Fasti Rom., vol. ii. p. 240, as to the impossibility 
of determining in what year the Passover fell on a 
Friday. The whole question is dealt with fully in 
The Coming Prince, ch. viii. 


APPENDIX VII 
PROFESSOR DRIVER’S INDICTMENT OF DANIEL 


THE following is a brief summary of Professor 
Driver’s indictment of the Book of Daniel. 

He enumerates under nine heads “facts of a 
historical nature” which point to an author later 
than Daniel (pp. xlvii-Ivi). These are :— 

1. The position of the Book in the Jewish Canon. 
(As to this see pp. 57-61, and 103-108, anze.) 

2. The omission of his name from Ecclesiasticus. 
(See pp. 57, 98 2., ante.) 

3. That the Book of Kings is silent as to the 
siege mentioned in Dan. i. 1. (See p.15 and App. L., 
ante.) 

4. The use of the term ‘“‘ Chaldean.” (See p. 45 z., 
ante.) 

5. That Belshazzar is spoken of as king, and as 
son of Nebuchadnezzar. (See p. 23 #7, ante.) 

6. The mention of Darius the Mede as King of 
Babylon. (See p. 31 f/. and 165, ante.) 

7. The mention of “the books” in Dan, ix: 2. 
The word sepher means simply a scroll, It often 
denotes a dook ; often a letter (as, ¢.g., Jer. xxix. I, 
or Isa, xxxvii. 14.) Then again Jer. xxxvi. 1, 2 


records that Jeremiah’s prophecies up to that time 
179 ’ 


180 __APPENDIX VII 


were recorded in a “book.” And ten years later 
a further ‘‘book” of them was sent to Babylon 
(Jer. li 60, 61). Or if any one insists that “the 
books” must here mean a recognised canon, where 
is the difficulty? The statement that no such 
“collection” existed in B.C. 536 is one of those 
wanton assertions that abound in this controversy. 
It may.“ safely be affirmed” with certainty that the 
scrolls of the Law were kept together. And there 
was no man on earth more likely to possess them 
than the great prophet-prince of the Captivity. 

8. ‘The incorrect explanation of the name Belte- 
shazzar in iv. 8.” (As Dr. Driver goes on to de- 
scribe this as “ doubtful’’ (p. liv.), I have not deemed 
it necessary to notice it.) 

g. The ‘‘improbability” that strict Jews would 
have accepted a position among the “ wise men” 
(see p. 13, auze), and other like “improbabilities.” 
(As Dr. Driver goes on to admit that these do not 
possess weight, and “should be used with reserve,” 
I have not dwelt upon them.) 

His second ground of attack is the language of- 
the book (Ivi.—Ixiii.). This has been fully discussed 
in these pages (ch. iv.). 

And the third ground is “the theology of the 
book.” After deprecating the “exaggerations of 
the~rationalists” under this head, he proceeds :— 
“Tt is undeniable that the conception of the future 
Kingdom of God, and the doctrines of angels, of the 
resurrection, and of a judgment on the world, appear 
in Daniel in a more developed form than elsewhere 


PROFESSOR DRIVER'S INDICTMENT 181 


in the Old Testament.” Far be it from me to deny 
it! It is largely on this very account that the 
Christian values the book, remembering as he does, 
what Professor Driver ignores, that its teaching in_ 
all these respects is definitely adopted and developed 
in the New Testament. And if he finds that the 
later Jewish apocalyptical literature resembles the 
book in some respects, he has no difficulty in 
accounting for the resemblance. (See p. 57, ante.) 

I make the critic a present of the entire argument 
under this head of “ the theology of the book,” save 
on three points. And they are points which would 
never have been urged by an English Christian 
writer save under the influence of German infidelity. 

. It is not true that the interest of the book cwu/- 

ates in the history of Antiochus. As all Christian 
expositors with united voice maintain, it culminates 
in the prophecy of Messiah’s advent and death. 
And as all students of prophecy recognise, it reaches 
on to the time of the great Antichrist of whom 
Antiochus was but a type. 

2. Daniel’s passionately earnest prayer recorded 
in ch. ix. is a complete answer to the statement that 
he took “‘little interest in the welfare and prospects 
of his contemporaries.” ° 

3. Weare told that ‘the minuteness of the predic- 
tions embracing even special events in the distant 
future, is also out of harmony with the analogy of 
prophecy.” Ifthis were sustained it would not affect 
the book as a whole, but serve merely to accredit the 
suggestion urged by some writers that part of chap. xi. 


182 APPENDIX Viti 


isan interpolation. But in view of the facts this alle- 
gation is as strange as that under (2) supra, and as 
many others in Professor Driver's book. What 
about the minute predictions scattered through the 
Old Testament respecting the Nativity and the 
Passion? And the last eight chapters of Ezekiel 
contain a mass of predictions which still await 
fulfilment, as minute as anything in Daniel. 

This is all that the Higher Criticism has to urge 
against the Book of Daniel. 


INDEX 


ACCENTS, the Hebrew, 169 

Adler, Dr., Chief Rabbi, 26 7. 

Airy, Sir George, 175 

 Annalistic Tablet,” the, 27, 
29, 32, 37 %.) 160-166 

Antiochus Epiphanes, 12, 14, 
96 

Apocryphal literature of the 


Jews, 57 See 
Aramaic of Daniel, the, 42, 


43 
Artaxerxes I., 85, 87, 89, 126, 
127, 174 


BEHRMANN, 25 

Belshazzar, King, 12, 23, 24, 
29, 30, 179 

—— death of, 32, 33, 34 
35, 160-166 

Ben-Sira, 52-55, 57, 98 #., 
100-102 

Berosus, 17, 19, 40, 154, 163 

Bevan, Professor, 69, 88 7. 

“ Books ” the (Dan, ix. 2), 179 

Borsippa, 24 

Boscawen, Mr. St. Chad, 163 

Buddhism, 46 7. 


183 


CALENDAR, the Jewish, 171- 
173 

Cambyses, 32 

Canon, testimony 
Daniel, 99-111, 179 

“* Caper-berry,” the, 170 7. 

Captivity, the, 21, 113, 157 

Carchemish, 16, 17, 94 7., 
154, 155 

“ Chaldeans” = wise men, 
45 #., 179 

Cheyne, Professor, 42 7., 50, 
76 nt. 

Chronological 
82-91, 120 7%. 

Clinton, Fynes, 120 #., 154, 
155, 156, 172, 174, 177, 
178 

Crucifixion, the, 
sion.” 

‘“« Cyrus,” a title, 85 

Cyrus, King, 22, 27, 30, 32, 
33) 35 89, 126, 160-165 


of, to 


difficulties, 


See “Pas- 


DANIEL, personality of, 7, 
97, 98 


184 


Daniel, his age when exiled, 
19, 63, 64 

fame of, 64-66 

—— testimony of the Canon 
to, 60, 99-111 


Darius Hystaspes, 89, 118, 
119, 121 7%. 

Darius the Mede, 12, 31, 33, 
36-41, 179 


David, King, 59 

“ Desolations,” era of the, 21, 
89, 112, 115-120 

De Wette, 5 

D’Orsay, death of pes 
36 2. 

Driver, Professor, 23, 38, 43, 
51, 55 M58 

—his Book of Daniel, 
92 fF. 

——his © indictment — of 
Daniel, 179-182 

——his answer to 
present scheme, 135 


the 


ECCLESIASTICUS, Book of, 
52-55, 57, 98 #., 100-102, 
179 

—— the “Cairene,” 54 

Edersheim, Dr., 52, 100 7., 
108 

Eichhorn, 4, 5 

Esther, Book of, 58, 59, 88 

Ezekiel, mention of Daniel 
in, 62-66, 98 

Ezra, Book of, 40, 57, 125 


FARRAR, Dean, his Book of 
Daniel, 2 ff. 


INDEX 


Farrar, Dean, his estimate ot 
the Bible, 9, 10, 20 

—— his blunders, 2, 13, 14, 
16-17, 18, 21, 24, 25, 63- 
64, 82, 83, 84, 88 

“ Father,” meaning of, 23 


GIBBON’S Decline and Fall, 
176 

Girdlestone, Canon, 110 

Gobryas (Gubaru), 32, 37, 
160-166 ~ : 

Great Synagogue, the, 44, 
99, 100 #. 

Greek words in Daniel, 42, 
43) 44, 47, 144 


HAGGAI, prophecy of, 119 

Hebrew of Daniel, the, 42, 
43, 49, 50, 53 

Higher Criticism, the, 1 #7, 
II, 61, 80, 95, 142, 143, 
146, 182 

Historical errors of Daniel, 
12-41 

Hosea, Book of, 55 

Hyrcanus, John, 67, 104, 105 


INCARNATION, the, 72-78 
Inspiration, 11, 20, 56, 77 72. 


JEHOIAKIM, King, 12, 15, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 22, 94, 153 

Jeremiah, 20, 21, 157 

Jesus. See * Ben-Sira.” 

Josephus, 38, 83, 84, 86, 103 

Julius Africanus, 135- 


INDEX 


KAUTZSCH, Professor, 25, 
168 

Keil, 143 

_ Kethuvim, the, 58, 59, 103 

Kitto’s Encyclopedia, 61 n., 
100 #. 

Kuenen, 6 


LANGUAGE of Daniel, the, 
42 77. 

Lewis, Sir G. C., 122 

Luke, Gospel of, 131 

Lux Mundt, 73- 


MACCABEES, Book of, 66-68, 
98, 109, IIO 7. 

Margoliouth, Professor, 52, 
55 7%. 57 7., 98 #., 168 

Megilloth, the, 59 

Milman, Dean, 129 #. 

Mishna, the, 120 ., 155, 156, 
171,172 


NABONIDUS (Nabunahid), 
King, 23, 27, 29, 33, 35; 
163, 164 


Nebuchadnezzar, King, 13 
16, 17, 18, 19,20, 23, 153-158 

—— spelling of the name, 
45 #., 144 2. 

Nehemiah, 126-129, 140 7. 

Neveeim, the, 58 

Newton, Sir Isaac, 68, 122 


“PaLM SUNDAY,” the first, 
132 

Passion, date of the, 133, 
176-178 


185 

Persia, Kings of, 14 7. 

Persian words in Daniel, 43, 
48 

Pinches, Mr. Theo. G., 161 
162 

Porphyry, 80, 141, 146 

Psalms, the Book of, 59 

“Ptolemaic System” of 
Bible study, 147 

Punctuation of Daniel ix., 
125, 167-170 

Pusey, Dr., 44, 49, 100 #. 


RAWLINSON, - Canon, 23, 
125 #., 154, 174 

Revelation, Book of the, 78, 
121 

Ryle, Dr. (Bishop of Exeter), 
99 #., 101, 102 #., 103 


SANHEDRIM, the, 97, 103, 
104-109, 172, 173 

Sayce, Professor, 27, 28, 30- 
36, 47, 160, 161, 166 

Schechter, Dr., 54, 
102 

Septuagint version, the, 108 

Servitude to Babylon, — the, 
21, 22, 89, 113, 157 

Servitudes of Israel, the, 90, 
128 2. 

“Seventy Weeks,” the, 82, 
112-134 

Sippara, 29, 32, 34 

Specialists, 61 

Stephen, Sir James F., 51 


55 %., 


186 

TABLET. See “ Annalistic 
Tablet” 

Tablets, the commercial, 33, 
34 

Tebet, Jewish fast of, 118 

Tel el-Amarna tablets, the, 
47 

Tiberius Cesar, 
176, 177 

Torah, the, 58 


I 325 I 335 


WESTCOTT, Bishop, 38, 68 


INDEX 


XENOPHON, 38 


YEAR, the prophetic, 116- 
123 

the ancient, 122 

— the Julian, 134 #. 

—— the Jewish, 171 


ZECHARIAH, prophecy - of, 
119, 132 


THE END 


~ 


WORKS BY. 
Sir ROBERT ANDERSON, K.C.B. 


THE BIBLE AND MODERN CRITICISM. With a 
Preface by the Bishop of Durham, Seventh Edition. 
Cloth, as. 6d., post free. 

“A vigorous criticism of the methods of the ‘ Higher Critics.’”— 


The, Times. 
“A noble contribution to current literature.”"—The Record. 


THE COMING PRINCE; or, The Seventy Weeks of 
Daniel. Ninth Edition. Cloth, 
3s., post free. 

Tt deserves to be well and carefully studied.”—The Record. 


“There are few books on prophecy written in so fair and impartiai 
a spirit.’—The Christian. 


THE BIBLE OR THE CHURCH? 
Cloth, 5s., post free, 
“We trust it will find multitudes of readers, There is not a dry 
page, in the book.—The Life of Faith. 
“He has put those who would be faithful to the Gospel under a 
heavy debt.”—The Christian. 
(Tue Buppa oF CHRISTENDOM is now out of print, as the bulk of it 
is incorporated in ‘‘ The Bible or the Church?”’) 


IN DEFENCE: A Plea for the Faith. 
Second Edition. Cloth, 5s., post free. 


THE LORD FROM HEAVEN: Chapters on the Deity 
ot Christ. With a preface by the Bishop of Durham. 
Second Edition. Cloth, 3s. 6d., post free, 

‘A model of concise statement, careful ratiocination, and reverent 
but illuminative handling of the Word of God.’’—The Life of Fatth. 
“ Among the many valuable literary productions of the author, this 
volume is one of the most valuable.” Evangelical Christendom. 
“Sound, strong, and to any open mind convincing.""—The Sword 
and Trowel. 


DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN: A Reply to Pro- 
fessor Driver and the late Dean Farrar. Third Edition. 


Cloth, 2s. 4d., post free. 


“The refutation (of the critics) is crushing.'"—The Record. 

“It -pulverises the latest attack on the Book of Daniel.”—The 
English Churchinan. 

“One of the freshest books on the “foundation truths of the old, old 
story that we have ever read.’’—British Evangelist. 


THE WAY: Chapters on the Christian Life. Second 


Edition, Cloth, 3s. 6d., post free. 


‘The author deals with the problems of life in his own masterly 
manner. "—Life of Faith. 
‘It is a real literary treasure.'’—Christian Commonwealth 


WORKS BY 
Sir ROBERT ANDERSON, K.C.B. 


PSEUDO-CRITICISM; or, The Higher Criticism and its. 
Counterfeit. Cloth, 3s. 6d., post free. 


“It is a masterpiece of apologetics.'’ The English Churchman. | 

““T read the book through with the keenest interest, and I laid it 
down with the earnest hope that God would use it very widely among 
precisely the men for whom it was written with such masterly force.” — 
BisHor oF DurwAM. 


THE HEBREWS EPISTLE in the Light of the Types. 
3s. 6d. net (3s. 9d., post free). 


“A new volume which will be welcomed by a wide circle.”— 
The Wttness, 


HUMAN DESTINY: A Handbook ot the Eschatological 
Controversy. Sixth Edition. 
Cloth, 2s. 4d., post free. 


“The most valuable contribution on the subject I have ever seen.” 
—C, H. SPURGEON. 

“It is seldom that we take up a book of which we wish that it had 
been longer, but this is such a book.’’—T/ie Record. 


THE GOSPEL AND ITS MINISTRY: A Handbcok of 
Evangelical Truth. Thirteenth Edition. Revised and 
Enlarged. Cloth, 2s. 6d. net (post free, 2s. 9d.); Special 
Edition, 1s. net (post free, 1s. 3d.). 

“The chapters on ‘Grace’ and.‘ The Cross’ are worth their weight 
in gold.”— The Christian. 
“In every way an uncommon work.’’—Pathway of Power. 

THE HONOUR OF HIS NAME: with a List of the 
Names and Titles of the Lord of Glory. 
2s. 6d., post free, 


REDEMPTION TRUTHS: ‘FOR US MEN.”’’ 
2s. 6d. net (2s. 9d., post free). 


“Intended to help those who are seeking peace with God, or who 
desire to lead others into the way of life.'—Preface. 


THE SILENCE OF GOD. Tenth Edition. Cloth, 2s. 
net. (2s.4d,, post free). 


“ This most striking endeavour to move a terrible stumbling-block 
out gine way of many.’’—The Record. 


book which has astounded religious Europe."—New York 
Herald. 


Post free at prices named to any part of the world. 
Pickering & Inglis, 229 Bothwell Street, Glasgow. 
Alfred Holness, 14 Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


By G. H. PEMBER, M.A., 


Author of ‘‘The Great Prophecies of the Centuries,’’ etc. 


EARTH’S EARLIEST AGES and their connection 
with Modern Spiritualism and Theosophy. 494 
pages. Formerly 7/6, now 8/ net (5/6, post free). 

‘A singular book, wonderfully instructive. We would not willingly 
have missed the reading of such a book.’’—Sword and Trowel. 

“‘The 220 pages of the book on Spiritualism and the modern movement 
of an occult Theosophy are very remarkable and startling.’'—Christian. 

**The whole of the book is stimulating to serious thought and inquiry.’’ 
—Clergyman’s Magazine. 

“Tt sets forth clearly and concisely the characteristics of Theosophy, 
its errors from the Christian standpoint and its relationship to Budd- 
hism.’'—Methodist Recorder. 

‘*An able, seasonable, and sagacious book. His knowledge of the 
Hebrew Scriptures is exact and scholarly, and his interpretation trust- 
worthy and brilliant, while his acquaintance with the phenomena of 
Spiritualism and Theosophy is wide and accurate.’’—Edinburgh Review. 


By J. S. ANDERSON, Florence. 


HEROES OF THE FAITH IN MODERN ITALY; 
or, The Italian Acts of the Apostles. Pen Sketches 
from Real Life taken from Original Sources. 1/6 


net (1/10, post free). 
‘Reads like a continuation of the soul-stirring incidents that we find 
in the Acts.’’—Evangelistic News. : 
‘‘A happy thought so to enshrine the memory of these Italian © 
Christians for English readers.’’—Sword and Trowel. 
‘‘Makes an inspiring record of devotion and courage. Gives an ad- 
mirable picture of lives strengthened and sustained by the Divine 


power.’’—Life of Faith. 


By W. E. VINE, M.A., Bath, 


Author of ‘‘B.C. and A.D.; or, How the World was 
prepared for the Gospel,’ etc. 


THE ROMAN EMPIRE In the Light of Prophecy. 
A Sketch of the Past—a Survey of the Present—a 
Suggestion for the Future. A Remarkable Book for 
To-day. 112 pages, with 5 specially drawn maps. 
2/ net (2/4, post free). 

This volume will be specially helpful to anyone who desires to sea 
how God’s Prophetic Plan has been steadily developed in the History 
of Man, and of nations. Commencing with the conquest which in- 
augurated the Times of the Gentiles, it shows the Four Kingdoms and 
the development of the fourth, or Roman Empire, with the widest 
domains illustrated. Then follow the Tenfold Division, the Western 
Empire under Germanic Tribes, the invasion by the Huns under Attila, 
the rise, power, and coming overthrow of the Turkish Empire, the 
Present Outlook, the Future Roman Empire, and the relation of Britain 
and her Colonies, United States, Germany, Greece, etc., also the 
‘‘Superman,’’ Democracy, Spiritism, the Papacy, etc.; closing with 
the Future of the Jews and the King ruling in the Everlasting Kingdom. 


By DAVID ANDERSON-BERRY, 
M.D., LL.D., F.R.S. 


PICTURES IN THE ACTS; or, The Unfinisheé 


Work of Jesus. 2/ net (2/4, post free). 

‘‘Vividly portrays the scenes through which the first heralds of the 
cross passed, and their labour, testimony, and suffering in connection 
therewith.’’—Novth Africa. 

‘‘Thoughtful and instructive papers on such subjects as ‘His Resur- 
rection,’ ‘His Ascension,’ ‘His Coming Again.’ Also lessons from the 
lives of Paul, Stephen, and Luke.’’—The Christian. 

“The commentary on the Acts will be read with much pleasure by 
peers and they are not a few, who delight in eloquence .’’—Expository 

wmes. 

‘‘The work of a careful student, who loves his subject, and makes 
most refreshing reading. Here are things familiar and things we did not . 
know previously, all worth pondering.’’—Home Mission Worker. 


THE SEVEN SAYINGS OF CHRIST ON THE 
CROSS. 2 net (2/4, post free). 


‘‘We commend this little volume.’’—Sword and Trowel. 

“‘Worth reading , even by those who have studied the subject oatudstios 
Many beautiful thoughts worthy of the theme.’’—British Messenger. 

_ ‘‘A very thoughtful and suggestive volume.’’—Rest and Reaping. 

‘‘Spiritually minded people will find both pleasure and profit in the 
quiet reading of this book.’’—The Christian. 

‘*All the meditations are instructive, interesting, and inspiring. He 
goes to the very heart of his theme, and lays that bare in the most skilful 
and helpful manner.’’—West Kent "Advertiser. ° 


By WALTER SCOTT, Nottingham. 


Collaborator with Dr. C. I. Scofield in the ‘‘Scofield Bible,’’ in 
the introduction to which Dr. Scofield speaks of Mr. Scott 
as ‘‘the eminent Bible teacher.’’ 


THE STORY OF OUR ENGLISH BIBLE: Its 
various Translations, Separate Books, Inspired Writers, 
etc., etc. 1/6 net(1/10,post, free). 


SELECTIONS FROM FIFTY YEARS’ WRITTEN 
MINISTRY. A spiritual treasure for all who_love 
devotional reading. 245 large type pages, 200 Subjects of 
varied and edifying matter, 3/10, post free. 

THE LATEST EXPOSITION OF THE REVELA- 
TION and Prophetic Outlines. With Separate 
Articles on the Six Chief Actors in the Coming Crisis; 
The Celebrated Prophecy of the 70 Weeks, etc. Demy 
8vo. 444 pages. With exhaustive Index. SY net 

(5/6. post free), 

me and more will the Revelation occupy the attention of all 
Biblical scholars, and if one started to read this work in almost total 
ignorance of the subject, he could scarcely end without having gained 
an intelligent conception of the whole.’’—The Faith and the Flock. 

‘‘A complete exposition of this great book. It is better than Lincoln, 
more readable than Kelly’s work, and Seiss on Revelation, with its 
numerous errors, cannot be compared with this work.’’—Our Hope. 

“Tt is a marvel of cheapness, and, as it is a standard work, may it 
have the ready and large sale which it deserves.’’—The Morning Star. 

‘Written clearly and convincingly, and can be read’ over and over 
again.’’—North London Guardian, 

i i i 


Select Series of Copyright Books for All Christians, 
of which 480,000 copies have been issued. 


_-— The Believer’s Library. 


Handy Pocket Size, Cloth Binding, 1/ net (1/3, post free). 

SEVEN SAYINGS OF CHRIST ON ‘THE CROSS. By 
D. Anderson-Berry, M.D., F.R.S. (Edin.). 

FOUNDATIONS OF ‘THE FAITH Ounce forall Delivered to 
the Saints. ByJ. R. Caldwell. Cardinal truths for all. 

FROM THE CROSS TO THE KINGDOM. Christ Crucified, 
Risen, Glorified, Coming, Reigning. By J. R. Caldwell. 

THE TABERNACLE IN THE WILDERNESS and its 
Lessons. By J. Ritchie. Original Edition. Illustrated. 

GOD’S CHOSEN PEOPLE; or, Israel Past, Preseut, and 
Future. By J. R. Caldwell. Spiritual lessons for all. 

FROM GT,ORY TO GLORY: Select Addresses on theCalling, 
Hope, and Manifestation ofthe Elect of God. Dr. Neatby. 

“BECAUSE YE BELONG TO CHRIST;” or, The Mutual 
Responsibilities of Believers to Kach Other. J.R.Caldwell. 

LAYS OF LIFE AND HOPE. Poems on the Atonement, 
Advocacy, and Appearing of our Lord, By W. B. 

CHOICE HYMNS AND MEDITATIONS. Musings on Por- 
tions, Meditations on Song of Songs. By R.C. Chapman. 

CHRIST IN THE LEVITICAL OFFERINGS; or the Five 
Offerings, typifying the great Offering. ByJ. R. Caldwell. 

THE KARTHLY RELATIONSHIPS OF THE HEAVENLY 
FAMILY. By John R. Caldwell. 

THINGS TO COME: Some Great Events of Prophecy. By 
John R, Caldwell. 

SEVENTY YEARS OF PILGRIMAGE. The Life, Writings, 
and Select Sayings of Wm. Hake. By R. C. Chapman. 

THE FEASTS OF THE LORD: Illustrating in a complete 
way God’s Dealings with Man. ByA. J. Holiday. 

GOD SPAKE ALI, THESE WORDS: A Defence of the 
Inspiration of God’s Word. By Dr. James H. Brookes. 

SIN AND SINLESSNESS: Inquiry into Modern Holiness 
Theories. By A. M. A. Graham. : 

MORE THAN CONQUERORS. Twelve Helpful Meditations 

- on Romans 8. By W. H. Bennet. Preface by Dr. Maclean. 

THH COURSE OF TIME. An Outline of Rible History and 
Hvents, with Explanatory Chart. By Walter Scott. 

CHRIST IN HEBREWS; or, Personal Glories of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. By J. R. Caldwell. 

GEMS FROM GENESIS TO REVELATION. Original 
Notes from the margins of the Bible of a diligent 
student. 

THE WORLD AND ITS GOD; a thought-revolutionising 
work. By Philip Mauro, Attorney-at-Law. 70,000 issued. 

CLEAR TYPE CONCORDANCE to the Texts and Subjects 
ofthe New Testament. With Appendices. . 352 pages. 
12 Volumes, all different, post free for 13 Shillings. 


GLascow: PICKERING & INGLIS, Printersand Publishers. 
Lorpon: ALFRED HOLNESS, 14 Paternoster Row, E.C. 4. 


The STANDARD BIBLICAL MONTHLY. 


Issued regularly on the 1st of each month for close on 50 
Years without a break, and read month by month by almost 
20 000 Readers in all parts of the English-speaking world. 


20 ENLARGED PaGES, MonTHLY, TWOPENCE. 


An Unfettered Journal of Biblical Literature, Practical 
Papers, Expositions, Answers, Intelligence, etc. 


Editor: Hy, PickEeRING. 


Truth in Love; or, All the Word of God for all the People 
of God has been the motto of the paper since its commencement 
by Donacp Ross in 1870, whilst edited by J. R. CALDWELL from 
ae to 1914, and is steadfastly continued by the present 
editor. 


Month by Month there is given Edifying Expositions of 
various portions of the Word of God; Practical Papers on 
many phases of Christian Work; Devotional Thoughts from 
the writings of well-known men of God; Voices from the Vine- 
yard pee and abroad; Suggestive Topics for Preachers and 

eachers; Correspondence on themes of doctrinal and practical 
interest, and helpful all-round ministry. 


Current Events dealing with some of the great problems 
facing the believer and the Church, Burning Questions for 
Students, and ‘‘Questions and Answers” on subjects of general 
interest to all saints are dealt with in each issue. 


Witnessing in many Lands}; Stirring events in Heathen 
Lands; Records of Revival in English-speaking Lands; Notices 
of the Home-call of well-known Christians; Contributions to 
and Intelligence of work on Faith lines in very many parts 
of the World. 


How to obtain. The Witness will be sent post free to any 
address in the whole world at the following rates for one year: 
1 Copy, 2/6; 2 Copies, 5/; 3, 7/6; 4, 9/6; 6 or more at 2/3 
each, post free. In American Currency: 1 Copy, 76 cents; 
2 Copies, $1.25; 3, $1.87; 4, $2.87; 6 or more, 56 cents 
each, p.f. Dollar Bills, or British, Australian, New Zealand, 
American, Canadian Postage Stamps received in payment. 


[Ww] Put a square like this, with name and address on post card, 
send to Pickrrine & Inciis, G.ascow, and you will receive 
free specimen copies per return of post, so as to judge of its value. 


PICKERING & INGLIS, ie: 
229 BoTtHwELL St., GLascow; 75 PRINCES St., EDINBURGH. 


Lonpon: ALFRED HOLNESS, 14 Paternoster Row, E.C.4. 
And may be ordered through most Booksellers. 


% 


Vag AEN a | 79)0 b. 
An24qd Anderson, Sir Robert ei fo 
Be cel _ | Danielin the critics! den 


JA 3973] DATE DUE | 
A ines) a ae 


THE MASTER'S COLLEGE 
POWELL LIBRARY 
SANTA CLARITA, CA 91321 


RG STON INST 


ii 


3540 00020 7853 


