<M 

h^ 
ID 
no 

(M 


LIBRARY 

lit  03 

TORONTO 

Shelf  No..  BS  6BO- .Bt& 

Register  No. 


19 


\ 


DAVID 

SHEPHERD,    PSALMIST,    KING 


DAVID 


SHEPHERD,    PSALMIST,    KING 


F.    B.    MEYER,    B.A. 

A uthor  of 

ABRAHAM:  or,  the  Obedience  of  Faith 
ISRAEL:  a  Prince  with  God 
JOSEPH;    MOSES;   ELIJAH 

JRREMIAH;  JOSHUA; 
etc.,  etc. 


MORGAN    AND    SCOTT    LTD. 
(Office  of  f&lje   Cljristian) 
12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS 
LONDON  MCMX 


T"^ 

L*- 


SCRIPTURE    BIOGRAPHIES 
BY  REV.  F.  B.  MEYER.  B  A. 


DAVID 

SHEPHERD,  PSALMIST,  KING. 

ELIJAH 

AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POWER. 

ISRAEL 

A  PRINCE  WITH  GOD. 

JOSEPH 

BELOVED  —  HATED  —  EXALTED. 

MOSES 

THE  SERVANT  OF  GOD. 

PAUL 

A  SERVANT  OF  JESUS  CHRIST. 

CLOTH,    1s.    NET    EACH. 


MORGAN     AND     SCOTT     LTD. 
LONDON. 


HE  character  and  life  of  DAVID  are 
supremely  fascinating,  not  only  to  holy 
souls,  whose  deepest  thoughts  have  been 
expressed  in  his  unrivalled  Psalms,  but 
to  all  men :  because  of  their  humanness ;  their 
variety ;  their  sharply  contrasted  experiences ;  their 
exhibition  of  traits  of  generosity  and  courage  which 
always  elicit  admiration. 

Whilst  sketching  every  period  of  DAVID'S  life,  I 
have  concentrated  myself  on  those  passages  which 
trace  the  steps  by  which  the  shepherd  became  the 
king.  It  was  in  these  that  his  character  was  formed 
his  sweetest  psalms  composed,  and  those  manifold 
experiences  encountered  which  enabled  him  to 
interpret  and  utter  the  universal  heart  of  man. 


v 


Sweet  Singer  of  the  World  ;  Ancestor  of  Christ  ; 
Founder  of  a  Dynasty  of  Kings  ;  a  Prophet, 
inspired  and  taught,  as  the  Apostle  Peter  tells  us, 
by  the  Holy  Ghost;  the  type  and  precursor  of 
Him,  who,  though  his  Son,  was  also  his  Lord  ; 
the  man  after  God's  own  heart,  who  "  did  that  which 
was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  turned  not 
aside  from  any  thing  that  He  commanded  him 
all  the  days  of  his  life,  save  only  in  the  matter 
of  Uriah  the  Hittite."  So  long  as  time  lasts, 
DAVID  must  always  enlist  affection  and  command 
respect. 

73. 


FAGS 

I.  TAKEN  FROM  THE  SHEEP-COTES     9 

II.  "  FROM  THAT  DAY  FORWARD  "      16 

ill.  SUMMONED  TO  THE  PALACE 22 

IV.  A  DARK  BACKGROUND          28 

V.  THE  FAITH  OF  GOD'S  ELECT          34 

VI.  "!N  THE  NAME  OF  THE  LORD  OF  HOSTS"       4* 

VII.  JONATHAN          48 

VIII.  OUTSIDE  THE  HOUSE,  AND  IN       55 

IX.  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  ARROWS     62 

X.  ALMOST  GONE 70 

XI.  THE  CAVE  OF  ADULLAM      77 

XII.  THE  WHITE  STONE     85 

XIII.  SONGS  BORN  OF  SORROW       92 

XIV.  DAVID'S  SELF-RESTRAINT      99 

XV.  CUSH  :  A  BENJAMITE «  106 

XVI.  A  COOL  HAND  ON  A  HOT  HEAD 112 

XVII.  A  FIT  OF  MISTRUST 119 

XVIII.  THE  MERCY  OF  GOD  THAT  LED  TO  REPENTANCE       ...  126 

XIX.  THRICE  CROWNED       134 

XX.  OH  FOR  THE  WATER  OF  THE  WELL  OF  BETHLEHEM  !  142 

XXI.  JERUSALEM,  THE  HOLY  CITY          149 

XXII.  THE  CONVEYANCE  OF  THE  ARK  TO  MOUNT  ZION       ...  154 

XXIII.  "THOU   DIDST  WELL  THAT   IT  WAS   IN  THINE   HEART"  160 

XXIV.  "YET  HAVE  I  SET  MY  KING"        166 

XXV.  THE  SIN  OF  HIS  LIFE 171 

XXVI.  THE  STRIPES  OF  THE  CHILDREN  OF  MEN          177 

XXVII.  SUNSET  AND  EVENING  STAR          183 


DAVID  : 

SHEPHERD,    PSALMIST,    KING. 


I. 

fr0m  tb* 

(i  SAMUEL  xvi.  i.) 

"  We  stride  the  river  daily  at  its  spring, 

Nor  in  our  childish  thoughtlessness  foresee 
What  myriad  vassal  streams  shall  tribute  bring, 

How  like  an  equal  it  shall  greet  the  sea. 
"  O  small  beginnings  !   Ye  are  great  and  strong, 

Based  on  a  faithful  heart  and  weariless  brain  ; 
Ye  build  the  future  fair,  ye  conquer  wrong, 
Ye  earn  the  crown,  and  wear  it  not  in  vain." 

J.  R.  LOWELL. 

HE  story  of  David  opens  with  a  dramatic  contrast 
between  the  fresh  hope  of  his  young  life  and 
the  rejection  of  the  self-willed  king  Saul,  whose 
course  was  rapidly  descending  towards  the  fatal 
field  of  Gilboa. 

Few  have  had  a  fairer  chance  than  Saul. 
Choice  in  gifts,  goodly  in  appearance,  favoured  by  nature 
and  opportunity,  he  might  have  made  one  of  the  greatest 
names  in  history.  His  first  exploit,  the  relief  of  Jabesh- 
gilead,  justified  the  wildest  anticipations  of  his  friends. 
But  the  fair  dawn  was  soon  overcast.  The  hot  impatience 
that  persisted  in  offering  the  sacrifice  before  Samuel  came  ; 
his  needless  oath  and  ruthless  proposal  to  take  Jonathan's 
life ;  his  flagrant  disobedience  to  the  distinct  charge 
respecting  Amalek— all  proved  that  he  was  not  fit  to  act 
as  God's  vicegerent,  and  that  he  must  be  set  aside. 


io  ®ak*tt  front  tb 

The  final  announcement  of  his  deposition  was  made  at 
Gilgal.  At  that  spot,  on  entering  Canaan,  Israel,  at 
Joshua's  bidding,  had  rolled  away  the  reproach  of  uncir- 
cumcision.  The  place  suggested  the  only  condition  on 
which  God  can  use  human  instruments  ;  but  in  Saul's  case 
there  had  been  no  humbling  of  pride,  no  submission  of 
self-will,  no  putting  away  of  the  wild  energy  of  the  flesh. 
He  was  called  whilst  seeking  his  father's  straying  asses,  as 
David  was  whilst  watching  his  father's  sheep  ;  and  there 
was  a  good  deal  of  the  wild-ass  nature  about  Saul,  as  about 
Ishmael,  which  neither  of  them  sought  to  subdue.  Saul,  it 
is  said,  rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord ;  and  the  Lord  rejected 
him  from  being  king. 

From  Gilgal  Saul  went  up  to  his  house  at  Gibeah,  in  the 
heights  of  Benjamin  :  while  Samuel  went  to  Ramah,  a  little 
to  the  south — there  was  his  house ;  there  he  had  judged 
Israel  for  twenty  years ;  and  there  he  dwelt  as  father  and 
priest  among  the  people,  known  far  and  near  as  the  man 
of  God  (vii.  17  ;  ix.  6,  io,  12).  There,  too,  he  mourned  for 
Saul.  No  bad  man  drifts  down  the  rapids  unwarned, 
unwept ;  but  the  Divine  purpose  cannot  stay  till  such 
pitying  tears  are  dried.  Nor  must  we  cling  to  the  grave  of 
the  dead  past,  whence  the  Spirit  of  God  has  fled ;  but  arise 
to  follow,  as  He  transfers  the  focus  of  his  operation  from 
the  rocky  heights  of  Benjamin  to  the  breezy  uplands  of 
Bethlehem,  and  conducts  us  to  the  house  of  Jesse. 

In  the  selection  of  every  man  for  high  office  in  the 
service  of  God  and  man,  there  are  two  sides — the  Divine 
and  the  human  :  the  election  of  God,  and  its  elaboration  in 
history ;  the  heavenly  summons,  and  the  earthly  answer 
to  its  ringing  notes.  We  must  consider,  therefore,  I.  The 
Root  of  David  in  God  ;  II.  The  Stem  of  Jesse— that  is,  the 
local  circumstances  that  might  account  for  what  the  boy 
was  •  and  III.  The  White  Bud  of  a  Noble  Life. 

I.  THE   ROOT  OF   DAVID. — Once   in   the   prophecy  by 


floot  of      atri&."  n 


Isaiah,  and  twice  in  the  Book  of  Revelation,  our  Lord  is 
called  the  "  Root  of  David."  "  The  Lion  of  the  Tribe 
of  Judah,  the  Root  of  David,  hath  prevailed  to  open  the 
Book  and  to  loose  the  seven  seals  thereof."  And  still 
more  emphatically,  among  the  last  words  spoken  by  the 
Saviour,  before  the  curtain  of  the  Ages  fell,  "  I,  Jesus,  am 
the  Root  and  the  Offspring  of  David  ;  the  Bright,  the 
Morning  Star." 

The  idea  suggested  is  of  an  old  root,  deep  hidden  in  the 
earth,  which  sends  up  its  green  scions  and  sturdy  stems. 
David's  character  may  be  considered  as  an  emanation  from 
the  life  of  the  Son  of  God  before  He  took  on  Himself  the 
nature  of  man,  and  an  anticipation  of  what  He  was  to  be 
and  do  in  the  fulness  of  time.  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  David, 
yet  in  another  sense  He  was  his  progenitor.  Thus  we 
return  to  the  ancient  puzzle,  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  at 
once  David's  Lord  and  Son  (Mark  xii.  35-37). 

There  are  four  great  words  about  the  choice  of  David, 
the  last  of  which  strikes  deeply  into  the  heart  of  that  great 
mystery. 

The  Lord  hath  sought  Him  a  man  (i  Sam.  xiii.  14).  —  No 
one  can  know  the  day  or  hour  when  God  passes  by,  seeking 
for  chosen  vessels  and  goodly  pearls.  When  least  ex 
pecting  it,  we  are  being  scrutinized,  watched,  tested,  in 
daily  commonplaces,  to  see  if  we  shall  be  faithful  in  more 
momentous  issues.  Let  us  be  always  on  the  alert,  our  loins 
girt,  our  lamps  burning,  our  nets  mended  and  cleansed. 

I  have  found  David  my  servant  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  20).  —  There 
is  ecstasy  in  the  voice,  like  the  thrice  repeated  found  of 
Luke  xv.  David  was  found  long  before  Samuel  sent  for 
him.  Which  was  the  moment  of  that  blessed  discovery? 
Was  it  one  dawn,  when  in  the  first  flicker  of  daylight  the 
young  shepherd  led  his  flock  from  fold  to  pasture  ;  or  one 
morning,  when,  in  an  outburst  of  heroic  faith,  he  rescued  a 
trembling  lamb  from  lion  or  bear  ;  or  one  afternoon,  when, 
as  he  sat  and  watched  his  charge,  the  first  conception  of 


12  ffraken  torn  tire  ^Ij^j-  Cotes. 


the  Shepherd  Psalm  stirred  in  his  heart;  or  one  night,  when 
he  heard  the  silent  speech  of  the  heavens  declaring  the 
glory  of  God?  And  was  there  not  some  secret  glad 
response  to  the  Master's  call,  like  that  which  the  disciples 
gave,  when  Jesus  found  them  at  their  nets,  and  said, 
"Follow  Me"? 

He  chose  David  to  be  his  servant  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  70).  —  The 
people  chose  Saul  ;  but  God  chose  David.  This  made  him 
strong.  He  was  conscious  that  the  purpose  of  God  lay 
behind  and  beneath  him  ;  and  when  in  after  years  Saul  lay 
in  its  power,  or  Michal  taunted  him  with  his  extravagant 
gestures,  the  thought  that  he  was  Divinely  commissioned  was 
his  stand-by  (2  Sam.  vii.  21).  We  are  immovable  when 
we  touch  the  bed-rock  of  God's  choice,  and  hear  Him  say, 
"He  is  a  chosen  vessel  unto  Me,  to  bear  my  name." 

The  Lord  hath  appointed  him  to  be  Prince  (i  Sam. 
xiii.  14).  —  Appointments  are  not  solely  due  to  human 
patronage,  nor  won  by  human  industry  ;  they  are  of  God. 
He  bringeth  low  and  lifteth  up.  Saul  might  chafe  and 
fret  ;  but  from  amid  the  ruins  of  his  waning  power  the 
authority  of  David  emerged  as  a  sun  from  a  wrack  of 
clouds,  because  God  willed  it.  Fit  yourself  for  God's 
service  ;  be  faithful  :  He  will  presently  appoint  thee  ;  pro 
motion  comes  neither  from  the  east  nor  west,  but  from 
above. 

/  have  provided  Me  a  King  (i  Sam.  xvi.  i).  —  That 
answers  everything.  The  Divine  provision  meets  every 
need,  silences  every  anxiety.  Let  us  not  yield  to  anxious 
forebodings  for  the  future  of  the  Church,  or  of  our  land. 
God  has  provided  against  all  contingencies.  In  some 
unlikely  quarter,  in  a  shepherd's  hut,  or  in  an  artizan's 
cottage,  God  has  his  prepared  and  appointed  instrument. 
As  yet  the  shaft  is  hidden  in  his  quiver,  in  the  shadow  of 
his  hand  ;  but  at  the  precise  moment  at  which  it  will  tell 
with  the  greatest  effect,  it  will  be  produced  and  launched 
on  the  air. 


"I^e  &tem  of  lease."  13 

II.  THE  STEM  OF  JESSE. — We  turn  for  a  moment  to  con 
sider  the  formative  influences  of  David's  young  life.  The 
family  dwelt  on  the  ancestral  property  to  which  Boaz,  that 
mighty  man  of  wealth,  had  brought  the  Rose  of  Moab.  Per 
haps  it  was  somewhat  decayed,  through  the  exactions  of  the 
Philistine  garrison,  which  seems  to  have  been  posted  in  the 
little  town.  We  read  of  the  few  sheep  in  the  wilderness 
that  composed  the  flock,  and  the  present  sent  by  Jesse  to 
his  soldier  sons  was  meagre  in  the  extreme.  The  conditions 
under  which  he  brought  up  his  large  family  of  eight  sons 
and  two  daughters  were  probably  hard  enough  to  severely 
tax  the  endurance  and  industry  of  them  all. 

David  says  nothing  of  his  father,  but  twice  speaks  of  his 
mother  as  "  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord."  From  her  he 
derived  his  poetic  gift,  his  sensitive  nature,  his  deeply 
religious  character.  To  the  father  he  was  the  lad  that  kept 
the  sheep,  whom  it  was  not  worth  while  to  summon  to  the 
religious  feast;  to  his  mother  he  was  David  the  beloved,  and 
probably  she  first  heard  the  psalms  which  have  charmed  and 
soothed  the  world.  He  honoured  them  both  with  dutiful 
care ;  and  when  it  seemed  possible  that  they  might  suffer 
serious  hurt,  on  account  of  their  relationship  to  himself, 
amid  the  pelting  storm  of  Saul's  persecution,  he  removed 
them  to  the  safe  keeping  of  the  king  of  Moab,  the  land  of 
his  ancestress. 

The  lad  may  have  owed  something  to  the  schools  of  the 
prophets,  established  by  Samuel's  wise  prescience  to  main 
tain  the  knowledge  of  the  law  in  Israel.  They  appear  to 
have  been  richly  endued  with  the  gracious  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  to  have  been  to  Israel  what  lona  was  to 
the  wild  tribes  of  the  North  in  later  times.  The  sons  of 
these  institutions  would  doubtless  visit  Bethlehem,  and  find 
an  eager  response  in  the  guileless  nature  of  the  young  shep 
herd.  From  them  he  would  learn  to  reduce  his  melodies 
to  metrical  order,  and  accompany  them  with  the  harp ;  from 
them,  too,  he  learnt  to  know  and  prize  the  Divine  Word. 


14  Caken  from  tlje  %ljtt$- Cotes. 

But  Nature  was  his  nurse,  his  companion,  his  teacher. 
Bethlehem  is  situated  six  miles  to  the  south  of  Jerusalem, 
by  the  main  road  leading  to  Hebron.  Its  site  is  two 
thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean,  on 
the  north-east  slope  of  a  long  grey  ridge,  with  a  deep  valley 
on  either  side;  these  unite  at  some  little  distance  to  the 
east,  and  run  down  toward  the  Dead  Sea.  On  the  gentle 
slopes  of  the  hills  the  fig,  olive,  and  vine  grow  luxuriantly ; 
and  in  the  valleys  are  the  rich  cornfields,  where  Ruth  once 
gleaned,  and  which  gave  the  place  its  name,  the  House  of 
Bread.  The  moorlands  around  Bethlehem,  forming  the 
greater  part  of  the  Judaean  plateau,  do  not,  however,  present 
features  of  soft  beauty ;  but  are  wild,  gaunt,  strong — 
character-breeding.  There  shepherds  have  always  led  and 
watched  their  flocks;  and  there  David  first  imbibed  that 
knowledge  of  natural  scenery  and  of  pastoral  pursuits 
which  coloured  all  his  after  life  and  poetry,  as  the  contents 
of  the  vat  the  dyer's  hand. 

Such  were  the  schools  and  schoolmasters  of  his  youth. 
But  pre-eminently  his  spirit  lay  open  to  the  Spirit  of  God, 
which  brooded  over  his  young  life,  teaching,  quickening, 
and  ennobling  him,  opening  to  him  the  books  of  nature 
and  revelation,  and  pervading  his  heart  with  such  ingenuous 
trust  as  the  dumb  animals  of  his  charge  reposed  in  him. 
In  the  spiritual  as  in  the  physical  realm  he  had  every  reason 
to  say  long  after, 

"  My  substance  was  not  hid  from  Thee 
When  I  was  made  in  secret, 

And  curiously  wrought  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth. 
Day  by  day  were  all  my  members  fashioned." 

III.  THE  WHITE  BUD  OF  A  NOBLE  LIFE. — He  had  not 
the  splendid  physique  of  his  brother  Eliab,  who  so  im 
pressed  the  aged  prophet.  But  he  was  strong  and  athletic. 
His  feet  were  nimble  as  a  gazelle's  ;  he  could  leap  a  wall 
or  outstrip  a  troop ;  a  bow  of  steel  could  be  easily  broken 


15 

by  his  young  arms ;  and  a  stone  sent  from  his  sling  would 
hit  the  mark  with  unerring  precision.  Too  slight  to  wear  a 
man's  armour,  and  yet  able  to  rend  a  lion  or  bear.  His 
face  glowing  with  health.  The  blue  of  his  eyes  and  beauty 
of  his  fair  complexion  in  strong  contrast  to  the  darker 
visages  of  his  companions.  The  sensitiveness  of  the  poet's 
soul,  combined  with  daring,  resource,  and  power  to  com 
mand.  His  dress,  a  coarse  and  simple  tunic  ;  his  accoutre 
ments,  the  wallet  sling,  the  rod  and  staff. 

His  soul  is  reflected  in  the  Psalms  that  must  be  attri 
buted  to  this  period  of  his  life,  because  so  free  from  the 
pressure  of  sorrow  and  anxiety,  and  the  strife  of  tongues. 
Amongst  them  are  the  eighth,  nineteenth,  twenty-third,  and 
twenty-ninth.  So  full  of  wonder  that  Jehovah  should  care 
for  man,  and  yet  so  sure  that  He  was  his  shepherd  ;  so 
deeply  stirred  by  the  aspect  of  the  heavens,  and  yet  con 
vinced  that  the  words  of  God  were  equally  Divine  ;  so 
afraid  of  secret  faults  and  presumptuous  sins  ;  so  anxious 
to  join  in  the  universal  chorus  of  praise,  ascending  from 
the  orchestra  of  nature,  but  yet  so  certain  that  there  were 
yearnings  and  faculties  within  his  soul,  in  which  it  could 
not  participate,  and  which  made  him  its  high-priest  and 
chorister.  To  these  we  will  come  again — they  are  too 
radiant  with  a  light  that  never  shone  on  sea  or  shore,  for 
us  to  pass  them  so  lightly  by. 

Ah,  guileless,  blessed  boy  !  thou  little  knowest  that  thou 
shalt  die  amid  the  blare  of  trumpets  announcing  the  acces 
sion  to  the  throne  of  thy  son,  the  splendid  Solomon ;  still 
less  thou  dreamest  that  thy  unsullied  nature  shall  one  day 
be  befouled  by  so  sad  a  stain  !  Yet  thy  God  loves  thee,  and 
thou  shalt  teach  us  many  a  lesson  as  we  turn  again  the 
pages  of  thy  wonderful  career — poet,  minstrel,  soldier,  exile, 
king — and  read  them  in  the  light  that  streams  from  the  face 
of  thy  greatest  Son,  who  was  born  of  the  seed  of  David 
according  to  the  flesh,  but  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of 
God  by  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  ! 


II. 
"  Ifrom  tljat  Bay  3f0rtoar&." 

(i  SAMUEL  xvi.  13.) 

Once  for  the  least  of  children  of  Manasses 

God  had  a  message  and  a  deed  to  do, 
Wherefore  the  welcome  that  all  speech  surpasses 

Called  him  and  hailed  him  greater  than  he  knew. " 

F.  W.  H.  MYERS. 

ROM  whatever  side  we  view  the  life  of  David,  it 
is  remarkable.  It  may  be  that  Abraham  ex 
celled  him  in  faith  ;  and  Moses  in  the  power  of 
concentrated  fellowship  with  God;  and  Elijah 
in  the  fiery  force  of  his  enthusiasm.  But  none 
of  these  was  so  many-sided  as  the  richly-gifted 
son  of  Jesse. 

Few  have  had  so  varied  a  career  as  he :  shepherd  and 
monarch ;  poet  and  soldier ;  champion  of  his  people,  and 
outlaw  in  the  caves  of  Judaea;  beloved  of  Jonathan,  and 
persecuted  by  Saul;  vanquishing  the  Philistines  one  day, 
and  accompanying  them  into  battle  on  another.  But  in  all 
he  seemed  possessed  of  a  special  power  with  God  and  man, 
which  could  not  be  accounted  for  by  the  fascination  of  his 
manner,  the  beauty  of  his  features,  the  rare  gifts  with  which 
his  nature  was  dowered,  or  the  spiritual  power  which  was  so 
remarkable  an  attribute  of  his  heart.  We  touch  these  many 
chords,  but  the  secret  still  eludes  us,  until  we  read  the 
momentous  words  that  sum  up  the  result  of  a  memorable 
day  that  lay  as  a  jewel  in  the  obscure  years  of  opening 
youth.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  on  David 
from  that  day  forward." 


17 

I.  IT  BEGAN  LIKE  ANY  ORDINARY  DAY. — No  angel- 
trumpet  heralded  it ;  no  faces  looked  out  of  heaven ;  the 
sun  arose  that  morning  according  to  his  wont  over  the 
purple  walls  of  the  hills  of  Moab,  making  the  cloud-curtains 
saffron  and  gold.  With  the  first  glimmer  of  light  the  boy 
was  on  his  way  to  lead  his  flock  to  pasture-lands  heavy 
with  dew.  As  the  morning  hours  sped  onwards,  many 
duties  would  engross  his  watchful  soul — strengthening  the 
weak,  healing  that  which  was  sick,  binding  up  that  which 
was  broken,  and  seeking  that  which  was  lost ;  or  the  music 
of  his  song  may  have  thrilled  the  listening  air.  "  A  cunning 
player  on  the  harp  was  he." 

A  breathless  messenger  suddenly  broke  upon  this  pastoral 
scene,  with  the  tidings  of  Samuel's  arrival  at  the  little  town, 
and  that  the  prophet  had  refused  to  eat  of  the  hastily-pre 
pared  banquet  until  the  shepherd-boy  had  joined  the  bidden 
guests.  His  father  had  therefore  sent  to  summon  him  with 
all  speed.  How  the  young  eyes  must  have  flashed  with 
pleasure !  Never  before  had  he  been  wanted  and  sent  for 
thus.  Till  now  he  had  been  only  "  the  lad  that  kept  the 
sheep."  The  family  life  had  been  complete  without  him. 
His  father  and  brothers  had  followed  their  pursuits  and 
pleasures  in  almost  total  disregard  of  the  young  son  and 
brother  who  was  destined  to  make  their  names  immortal. 
He  had  borne  it  all  in  patience.  His  heart  was  not  haughty, 
neither  his  eyes  lofty;  neither  did  he  exercise  himself  in 
great  matters,  or  in  things  too  high  for  him;  but  quieted 
himself  as  a  child  that  is  weaned  from  its  mother.  Still,  it 
was  a  genuine  pleasure  to  feel  that  the  family  circle  in  great 
Samuel's  eyes  was  not  complete  till  he  had  come.  He 
therefore  left  his  sheep  with  the  messenger,  and  started  at 
full  speed  for  home. 

Samuel  on  his  coming  had  sanctified  Jesse  and  his  sons, 

passing  them  through  a  series  of  ceremonial  ablutions  to 

fit   them  for   the  festival   in  which  the  social  and  sacred 

elements   combined.     But  David   needed   none   of  these. 

B 


i8  "3Fr0m  tfrat  gag  JForfoarfc." 

His  pure  and  guiltless  soul  was  right  with  God,  and  clad 
in  the  spotless  robe  of  purity.  No  soil  needed  punctilious 
removal.  Let  us  so  live  as  to  be  prepared  for  whatever  the 
next  hour  may  bring  forth.  The  spirit  in  fellowship  with 
God,  the  robe  stainlessly  pure,  the  loins  girt,  the  lamp 
trimmed.  The  faithful  fulfilment  of  the  commonplaces  of 
daily  life  is  the  best  preparation  for  any  great  demand  that 
may  suddenly  break  in  upon  our  lives. 

II.  IT  WAS  THE  CONSUMMATION  OF  PREVIOUS  TRAIN 
ING. — We  must  not  suppose  that  now,  for  the  first  time,  the 
Spirit  of  God  wrought  in  David's  heart.  To  think  this 
would  indicate  complete  misconception  of  the  special 
teaching  of  this  incident ;  for  Scripture  always  distinguishes 
between  the  regenerating  and  the  anointing  grace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  From  his  earliest  days,  David  had  probably 
been  the  subject  of  his  quickening  and  renewing  work  ;  but 
he  had  probably  never  experienced,  before  the  day  of  which 
we  treat,  that  special  unction  of  the  Holy  One  symbolized 
in  the  anointing  oil,  and  indispensable  for  all  successful 
spiritual  work. 

Our  Lord  was  born  of  the  Spirit ;  but  his  anointing  for 
service  did  not  take  place  till  at  the  age  of  thirty,  when  on 
the  threshold  of  his  public  work,  He  emerged  from  the 
waters  of  baptism.  It  was  to  this  He  referred  in  the  open 
ing  words  of  his  earliest  sermon,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
is  upon  Me,  and  He  hath  anointed  Me."  The  Apostles 
were  certainly  regenerate  before  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  but 
they  had  to  wait  within  closed  doors  until  they  were  endued 
with  power  for  the  conversion  of  men.  Full  often  have  we 
met  with  those  who  were  unmistakeably  the  children  of 
God,  but  who  had  no  special  power  in  witness-bearing,  nor 
freedom  in  speech,  nor  ability  to  grapple  with  the  hearts 
and  consciences  of  men.  They  needed  what  would  be 
to  them  as  electricity  to  the  wire,  or  the  spark  to  gun 
powder.  In  other  words,  the  Spirit  of  God  has  been  in 
but  not  on  them.  We  have  seen  such  awake  and  claim 


|p reparation  for  gitrhte  JVttoitttiiuj.  19 

the  Divine  anointing;  and  suddenly  they  have  begun  to 
speak  with  new  tongues,  and  men  have  not  been  able  to 
resist  their  reasonings  of  sin,  righteousness,  and  judgment 
to  come. 

This  blessed  anointing  for  service  cannot  be  ours,  except 
there  has  been  a  previous  gracious  work  on  the  heart. 
There  must  be  the  new  life— the  life  of  God.  There  must 
be  docility,  humility,  fidelity  to  duty,  cleansing  from  known 
sin,  and  a  close  walk  with  God.  The  descending  flame 
must  fall  upon  the  whole  burnt-ofCering  of  a  consecrated 
life.  And  it  was  because  all  these  had  been  wrought  in 
David  by  the  previous  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  he 
was  prepared  for  this  special  unction.  It  may  be,  reader, 
that  in  the  obscurity  of  your  life,  shut  away  from  the 
presence  of  great  interests,  you  are  being  prepared  for  a 
similar  experience.  Be  careful  to  obey  God's  least  prompt 
ing,  whether  to  do  or  suffer ;  that  you  be  prepared  for  the 
golden  moment  when  your  meek  head  shall  be  suddenly 
bathed  in  the  descending  chrism. 

III.  IT  WAS  MINISTERED  THROUGH  SAMUEL. — The  old 
prophet  had  conferred  many  benefits  on  his  native  land  ; 
but  none  could  compare  in  importance  with  his  eager  care 
for  its  youth.  The  creation  of  the  schools  of  the  prophets 
was  due  to  him.  Saul,  in  the  earlier  years  of  his  manhood, 
felt  the  charm  and  spell  of  the  old  man's  character.  The 
stalwart  sons  of  Jesse's  house  were,  therefore,  probably  well 
known  to  him  when  he  received  the  Divine  command  to 
anoint  one  of  them  as  Saul's  successor. 

Driving  a  heifer  before  him,  he  entered  the  one  long 
street  of  Bethlehem,  and  summoned  the  elders  to  a  feast, 
so  as  not  to  arouse  the  suspicions  of  the  jealous,  moody 
king,  who  would  not  have  scrupled  to  take  his  life  if  he  had 
suspected  the  real  object  of  his  visit. 

When  David  reached  the  village,  a  strange  scene  met  his 
eye.  There  was  his  father  Jesse,  and  his  seven  brothers, 
probably  waiting  for  him  in  the  ancestral  home,  preparatory 


20  "  JFrnm  tfrat  Jag  JFxrrhrarft." 

to  their  all  going  together  to  the  public  banquet  to  which 
the  leading  men  of  the  village  had  been  invited.  An 
unusual  restraint  lay  upon  the  rough  tongues  and  harsh 
behaviour  with  which  Eliab  and  the  rest  were  wont  to  treat 
him.  At  other  times  they  would  not  have  hesitated  to 
express  their  impatience  and  contempt ;  but  now  the  very 
air  seemed  heavy  with  a  sacred  spell  that  held  them.  No 
sooner  had  he  entered,  flushed  with  exertion,  health  glowing 
on  his  face,  genius  flashing  from  his  eye,  royalty  in  his  mien, 
than  the  Lord  said  to  Samuel,  "Arise,  anoint  him  :  for  this 
is  he  ! "  Then  Samuel  took  the  horn  of  oil  which  he  had 
brought  with  him  from  Nob,  and  poured  its  contents  on  the 
head  of  the  astonished  lad. 

It  is  likely  that  the  bystanders  did  not  realize  the 
significance  of  that  act ;  or  on  the  eve  of  the  fight  with 
Goliath  Jesse  would  hardly  have  treated  him  so  un 
ceremoniously,  and  Eliab  would  have  addressed  him  with 
more  courtesy.  But  David  probably  understood.  Josephus 
indeed  tells  us  that  the  prophet  whispered  in  his  ear  the 
meaning  of  the  sacred  symbol.  Did  the  aged  lips  approach 
the  young  head,  and  as  the  trembling  hand  pushed  back 
the  clustering  locks,  did  they  whisper  in  the  lad's  ear  the 
thrilling  words,  "Thou  shalt  be  king"?  If  so,  in  after 
days  how  they  would  return  to  him  ;  and  how  vast  an 
inspiration  they  would  be  ! — a  formative  influence,  a  pre 
paration  for  the  great  destiny  that  awaited  him. 

The  descent  of  the  oil  was  symbolical ;  in  other  words,  it 
had  no  spiritual  efficacy,  but  was  the  outward  and  visible 
sign  that  the  Spirit  of  God  had  come  mightily  on  the 
shepherd-lad.  For  Jesus  there  was  no  oil ;  but  instead, 
the  appearance  of  a  dove  flitting  gently  to  its  nest.  For 
the  disciples,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  there  was  no  oil ; 
but  a  flame  of  lambent  fire  alighting  on  each  bowed  head. 
In  the  process  of  the  age  these  outward  symbols  have 
become  mechanical  and  have  passed  from  general  use. 
We  must  believe  that  we  have  received  when  we  have 


We  gmott  of  tije  IM?  Spirit.  21 

fulfilled   the   conditions    of    humility   and    the   faith   that 
claims  (Gal.  iii.  14). 

From  that  memorable  day  David  returned  to  his  sheep ; 
and  as  the  months  went  slowly  by,  he  must  sometimes  have 
greatly  wondered  when  the  hour  of  achievement  would 
arrive.  When  would  he  have  an  opportunity  of  displaying 
and  using  his  new-found  force  ?  He  had  to  learn  that  we 
are  sometimes  strengthened  with  all  might  to  patience  and 
long-suffering  as  the  prelude  to  heroic  deeds ;  we  have  to 
wrestle  with  the  lion  and  the  bear  on  the  hills  of  Bethlehem, 
that  we  may  be  prepared  to  meet  Goliath  in  the  valley 
of  Elah. 

IV.  IT  WAS  A  DAY  OF  REJECTION. — Seven  of  Jesse's 
sons  were  passed  over.  Not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh, 
not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  were  called ;  but  God 
chose  then,  as  ever — the  weak,  the  base,  the  things  that 
were  despised.  Seven  is  the  perfect  number  :  the  seven 
sons  of  Jesse  stand  for  the  perfection  of  the  flesh.  This 
must  be  cut  down  to  the  ground,  lest  it  should  glory  in 
God's  presence.  The  lesson  is  hard  to  learn ;  but  its 
acquisition  is  imperative.  You  cannot  bear  it  ?  Well,  be 
it  so ;  then,  like  Eliab,  you  may  become  one  of  the 
princes  of  Judah,  but  you  shall  never  be  God's  beloved 
(i  Chron.  xxvii.  18). 

In  this  secret  anointing  of  David,  the  first  of  three,  we 
have  a  type  of  the  setting  apart  of  our  Lord  in  the  Divine 
counsels.  Rejected  of  men,  despised  of  his  brethren, 
without  form  or  comeliness,  He  has  been  set  apart  as  the 
King  of  the  Ages.  As  yet  many  a  barrier  lies  between  Him 
and  the  acknowledgment  which  the  Father  has  promised  ; 
but  to  Him  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  shall 
confess  that  He  is  Lord.  In  the  meanwhile  He  waits — 
waits  till  the  hour  of  universal  triumph  strikes  ;  waits  till 
the  many  crowns  of  the  destined  empire  meet  on  the  head 
which  was  once  encircled  by  the  crown  of  thorns. 


Ill 


(i  SAMUEL  xvi.  18,  19.) 

"  He  bowed  himself 

With  all  obedience  to  the  king,  and  wrought 
AH  kind  of  service  with  a  noble  ease, 
That  graced  the  lowliest  act  in  doing  of  it." 

TENNYSON. 

k,W^.  has  been  supposed  that  the  incident  we  are  now 
JiBK  to  consider  belongs  to  a  subsequent  page  in 
David's  history,  following  the  narrative  of  the 
slaying  of  Goliath,  so  as  to  make  that  the  oc 
casion  of  the  young  shepherd's  first  introduction 
to  Saul.  This  transposition  seems  to  be  called 
for  by  Saul's  slowness  to  recognise  his  former  minstrel  in 
the  young  warrior  that  stood  before  him  with  the  head  of 
the  Philistines'  champion  in  his  hand. 

But,  after  all,  this  may  be  accounted  for  by  David's 
manly  growth  between  the  period  of  his  minstrelsy  and  his 
first  great  exploit  in  the  battlefield.  How  long  that  interval 
lasted  we  cannot  tell  ;  but  during  its  course  David  had 
grown  from  youth  to  manhood,  his  figure  becoming  stal 
wart  and  robust,  his  face  moulded  by  the  growing  soul 
within.  If  we  reject  this  explanation,  and  do  not  allow  the 
incident  to  remain  where  we  find  it,  we  have  to  face  the 
further  difficulty  of  how  Saul's  courtiers  could  dare  to 
introduce  to  their  master  one  whose  successes  had  already 
stirred  his  jealousy  (xviii.  9)  ;  or  why  it  was  necessary  to 
employ  so  much  circumlocution  to  describe  the  personality 
of  the  young  singer  (xvi.  18).  Surely  it  would  have  been 
sufficient  to  recall  what  David  had  done  in  the  vale  of 
EJah  to  identify  him  at  once.  We  hold,  therefore,  that  this 


4t  feinting  in  fplaghtg."  23 

story  should  stand  in  the  place  it  has  held  ever  since  this 
narrative  was  penned. 

After  his  anointing,  David  returned  to  his  sheep.  When 
Saul,  advised  by  his  courtiers,  sent  for  him  to  charm  away 
his  melancholy,  this  was  the  specific  indication  he  gave  to 
Jesse,  his  father,  "  Send  me  David,  thy  son,  which  is  with 
the  sheep."  It  says  much  for  the  simplicity  and  ingenuous 
ness  of  the  boy's  character  that  he  should  have  returned  to 
the  fold,  to  lead  and  guard  his  helpless  charge,  faithfully 
fulfilling  the  routine  of  daily  duty,  and  waiting  for  God  to 
do  what  Samuel  had  spoken  to  him  of.  So  Jesus  left  the 
temple,  where  to  his  boyish  eyes  a  radiant  glimpse  had 
been  afforded  of  doing  his  Father's  business,  to  be  subject 
to  his  parents,  and  engage  in  the  humble  toils  of  the 
carpenter's  shop. 

A  contemporary  hand  has  given  a  brief  portraiture  of  his 
character  as  it  presented  itself  at  this  period  to  casual 
observers.  One  of  Saul's  young  men  said,  "  Behold,  I 
have  seen  a  son  of  Jesse  the  Bethlehemite,  that  is  cunning 
in  playing,  and  a  mighty  man  of  valour,  and  a  man  of  war, 
and  prudent  in  speech,  and  a  comely  person,  and  the  Lord 
is  with  him."  These  five  characteristics  enable  us  to  form 
a  graphic  conception  of  the  young  hero  who  was  making 
the  country  side  ring  with  his  renown. 

I.  THE  MINSTREL. — He  had  the  poetic  temperament, 
sensitive  to  nature,  open  to  every  impression  from  mountain 
and  vale,  from  dawn  and  eve ;  and  he  had  beside  the 
power  of  translating  his  impressions  into  speech  and  song. 
His  psalms  commemorate  to  the  present  day,  and  will  as 
long  as  man  shall  live,  the  story  of  the  green  strips  of 
meadow-land  where  his  flocks  grazed  at  noon ;  the  little 
stream  somewhere  near  Bethlehem  of  whose  limpid  waters 
they  drank ;  the  smooth  paths  which  he  selected  for  their 
feet ;  the  rocky  defiles  where  they  were  in  danger  of  lion 
and  bear. 


24  j^tnttmnnefc  ta  tire  palace. 

A  great  modern  poet  imagines  him  reciting,  as  he  sang 
to  his  harp,  his  call  to  his  sheep,  the  song  of  the  autumn 
vintage,  the  joyous  marriage  lay,  the  solemn  funeral  dirge, 
the  chant  of  the  Levites,  as  they  performed  their  sacred 
duties,  the  marching  music  of  the  men  of  Bethlehem  when 
they  repelled  some  border  foray.  And  we  might  add  to 
these  his  marvellous  power  in  depicting  the  sacred  hush 
of  dawn,  where  there  is  neither  speech  nor  language,  just 
before  the  sun  leaps  up  as  a  bridegroom  to  run  his  race, 
and  the  solemn  pomp  of  night,  where  worlds  beyond 
worlds  open  to  the  wondering  gaze.  And  to  these  we 
might  add  the  marvellous  description  of  the  thunderstorms 
that  broke  over  Palestine,  rolling  peal  after  peal,  from  the 
great  waters  of  the  Mediterranean,  over  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon  to  the  far-distant  wilderness  of  Kadesh,  until  the 
sevenfold  thunders  are  followed  by  torrents  of  rain,  and 
these  by  the  clear  shining  in  which  Jehovah  blesses  his 
people  with  peace  (Psa.  xxiii.,  xix.,  viii.,  xxix.). 

The  psalm  began  with  David.  Its  lyric  beauty  and 
tender  grace  ;  its  rhythmic  measure  j  its  exuberant  halle 
lujahs  and  plaintive  lamentations  ;  its  inimitable  expression 
of  the  changeful  play  of  light  and  shade  over  the  soul ;  its 
blending  of  nature  and  godliness ;  its  references  to  the  life 
of  men  and  the  world,  as  regarded  from  the  standpoint  of 
God — these  elements  in  the  Psalter  which  have  endeared 
it  to  holy  souls  in  every  age  owe  their  origin  to  the  poetic, 
heaven-touched  soul  of  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel.  What 
wonder  that  Saul's  young  man  said  that  he  was  cunning  in 
playing  !  The  psalms  which  he  composed  in  those  early 
days — and  which  are  so  delightfully  free  from  the  darker 
elements  which  persecution,  and  unkindness,  and  conscious 
ness  of  sin  introduced  into  the  later  creation  of  his  genius — 
were  destined  to  go  singing  through  the  world,  working  on 
men  effects  like  those  wrought  on  the  king,  of  whom  it  is 
said  that  when  David  took  the  harp  and  played  with  his 
hand,  Saul  was  refreshed. 


n  of  3Jal0ur."  25 

II.  THE  YOUNG  WARRIOR. — There  was  abundant  oppor 
tunity  for  the  education  of  his  prowess.  The  Philistines' 
frontier  was  not  far  away  from  his  native  town  ;  and  pro 
bably  there  were  many  repetitions  of  the  incident  of  after 
years,  when  the  sons  of  the  alien  held  it,  and  placed  a 
guard  demanding  toll  of  the  water  of  the  well  of  Bethlehem 
that  was  by  the  gate.  Many  a  skirmish  had  the  men  of 
Bethlehem  with  the  border  warriors,  who  would  sweep 
down  upon  the  produce  of  their  vineyards  and  comnel'ds 
when  the  harvest  was  ripe.  In  these  David  acquired  the 
character  of  being  a  man  of  valour  and  a  mighty  man  of 
war.  It  may  be  that  sometimes  he  had  to  stand  alone 
against  a  handful  of  sheep-stealers  intent  on  plundering 
the  fold. 

He  tells  us  how  he  needed  to  be  on  the  alert  against  the 
wild  beasts  that  prowled  amongst  the  hills  of  Judah — the 
lion  with  his  hungry  teeth,  the  bear  with  his  deadly  hug. 
For  these  he  had  no  fear.  He  smote  them,  and  delivered 
the  trembling  lambs  from  their  mouth.  He  caught  them 
by  their  beard  and  slew  them.  He  could  break  a  bow  of 
steel  with  those  strong  young  arms,  and  wield  Goliath's 
sword  with  ease ;  or  club  a  wild  beast  with  his  staff,  and 
hurl  a  stone  with  unerring  aim.  A  proud  young  Samson, 
laughing  in  the  fulness  of  his  manly  strength. 

But  he  would  have  been  the  last  to  attribute  his  exploits 
to  his  sinewy  strength.  By  faith  he  had  learnt  to  avail 
himself  of  the  might  of  God.  Was  he  not  His  servant, 
designated  for  a  great  mission,  summoned  to  wage  uncom 
promising  war  with  the  uncircumcised  ?  He  might  be  a 
babe ;  yet  out  of  his  mouth  God  had  established  strength,  in 
order  to  still  the  enemy  and  the  avenger !  He  might  be  a 
suckling ;  yet  he  was  made  to  have  dominion  over  the  works 
of  God's  hands  !  Listen  to  his  buoyant  challenge  :— 

"  For  by  Thee  have  I  run  through  a  troop, 
And  by  my  God  have  I  leaped  over  a  wall.     .     .     . 
It  is  God  that  girdeth  me  with  strength. 


s6  j^ummonefc  to  tljz 

He  maketh  my  feet  like  hind's  feet.     .     .     . 

He  teacheth  my  hands  to  war.     .     . 

Thou  hast  subdued  under  me  those  that  rose  up  against  me." 

Through  faith  he  subdued  kingdoms,  stopped  the  mouths 
of  lions,  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  waxed  mighty  in 
war,  turned  to  flight  armies  of  aliens. 

III.  PRUDENT  IN  SPEECH. — The  sagacity  of  David  will 
appear  as  our  story  proceeds.     He  was  as  prudent  to  advise 
and  scheme  as  he  was  swift  to  execute.     He  had  under 
standing  of  the  times,  of  human  hearts,  of  wise  policy ;  and 
he  knew  just  how  and  when  to  act.     Frank  to  his  friends, 
generous  to  his  foes,  constant  in  his  attachments,  calm  in 
danger,  patient  in  trouble,  chivalrous  and  knightly,  he  had 
-every  element  of  a  born  leader  of  men,  and  was  equally  at 
home  in  the  counsels  of  the  state  and  the  decisions  of  the 
battle-field.      Whatever  emergency  threatened,  he  seemed 
to  know  just  how  to  meet  it.     And  this  was  no  doubt  due 
to  the  repose  of  his  spirit  in  God.     The  sad  mistakes  he 
made  may  be  traced  to  his  yielding  to  the  sway  of  impulse 
and  passion,  to  his  forgetfulness  of  his  habit  of  drawing  near 
unto  God,  and  inquiring  of  Him  before  taking  any  important 
step.     The  attitude  of  his  soul  is  sweetly  mirrored  in  one  of 
his  earliest  psalms  : 

"  O  my  Strength,  I  will  wait  upon  Thee.     .     .     . 
Unto  Thee,  O  my  Strength,  will  I  sing  praises." 

When  men  live  like  that,  they  cannot  fail  to  be  prudent 
in  speech,  sagacious  in  counsel. 

IV.  THE  CHARM  OF  HIS  PRESENCE. — He  was  David  the 
beloved.     Wherever  he  moved,  he  cast  the  spell  of  his  per 
sonal  magnetism.      Saul  yielded   to   it,   and  thawed;   the 
servants  of  the  royal  household  loved  him ;  Michal,  Saul's 
daughter,  loved  him ;  the  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  with 
his  soul ;  the  women  of  Israel  forgot  their  loyalty  to  Saul, 
as  they  sounded  the  praises  of  the  young  hero  who  was  so 


"fte  Sorb  is  toitlr  lim."  27 

goodly  to  look  upon ;  the  wild,  rough  soldiers  were  willing 
to  risk  their  lives,  in  order  to  gratify  his  wish  for  a  draught 
from  Bethlehem's  well.  So  he  passed  through  life,  swaying 
the  sceptre  of  irresistible  potency  over  men  and  women. 
The  beautiful  Abigail  is  glad  to  wash  the  feet  of  his  ser 
vants  ;  Achish  says  that  he  is  as  an  angel  of  the  Lord ;  Ittai 
the  Gittite  clings  to  him  in  his  exile ;  the  people  slink  into 
the  city  because  he  is  weeping  over  Absalom ;  when  he 
speaks,  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Judah,  conscious  of 
treachery,  and  backward  to  welcome  him,  are  moved  even 
as  the  heart  of  one  man.  Beloved  of  God  and  man,  with  a 
heart  tremulous  to  the  touch  of  love,  the  soil  of  his  soul  was 
capable  of  bearing  crops  to  enrich  the  world;  but  it  was  also 
capable  of  the  keenest  suffering  possible  to  man. 

V.  GOD  WAS  WITH  HIM. — He  had  no  hesitation  in 
describing  himself  as  "thy  servant,"  liable  to  hidden  and 
presumptuous  faults,  from  which  he  desired  above  all  things 
to  be  delivered.  He  thought  of  God  as  his  Rock,  Re 
deemer,  Shepherd,  and  Host  in  the  house  of  life,  his  Com 
forter  in  every  darksome  glen.  In  weariness  he  found  green 
pastures ;  in  thirst,  still  waters ;  in  perplexity,  righteous 
guidance ;  in  danger,  sure  defence — in  what  the  Lord  was 
to  his  soul.  God's  Word,  though  he  knew  but  a  part  of  it, 
was  perfect,  right,  and  pure;  and  as  he  recited  it  to  himself, 
under  great  Nature's  tent,  it  restored  his  soul,  rejoiced  his 
heart,  enlightened  his  eyes,  and  seemed  better  than  the 
honey  that  dripped  from  the  rock.  He  set  the  Lord  always 
before  him;  because  He  was  at  his  right  hand,  he  could 
not  be  moved  ;  and  therefore  his  heart  was  glad. 


IV. 


3V  Bark  Uarkgrotmtr. 

(i  SAMUEL  xvii.  n.) 

' '  I  flung  away 

Those  keys  that  might  have  open  set 
The  golden  sluices  of  the  day  ; 

But  clutch  the  keys  of  darkness  yet. 
I  hear  the  reapers  singing  go 

Into  God's  harvest ;  I  that  might 
With  them  have  chosen,  here  below 

Grope  shuddering  at  the  gates  of  night." 

J.  R.  LOWELL. 

GREAT  contrast,  as  we  have  said,  is  evidently 
intended  by  the  historian  between  Saul  and 
David.  The  portrait  of  Saul  is  drawn  in 
Rembrandt  colours,  to  set  forth  the  excelling 
beauty  of  God's  designated  king. 

The  king  of  Israel  took  his  first  step  away 
from  God  when  he  permitted  himself  to  be  betrayed  into 
undue  haste  and  precipitation,  and  offered  the  burnt- 
offering  at  Michmash  before  Samuel  came.  He  took 
further  steps  in  the  same  direction  in  the  outburst  of  indig 
nation  against  Jonathan  for  violating  his  regulation  about 
abstinence  from  food.  But  the  final  break  took  place  when 
he  disobeyed  the  distinct  command  of  Jehovah  through  his 
prophet,  and  spared  Agag  and  the  choice  of  the  spoil. 
Then  he  rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  God  gave  him 
up  to  his  own  evil  heart.  From  that  moment  his  course 
was  always  downward  toward  the  gathering  gloom  of 
Gilboa.  From  the  disobedient  heart  God  withdraws  his 
keeping  power ;  and  as  it  is  no  longer  tenanted  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  Most  High,  it  becomes  at  once  the  prey 
and  habitation  of  unclean  spirits,  reminding  us  of  the 


j  (Sair.  29 

awful  words  with  which  Isaiah  describes  the  desolation  of 
Edom  (Isa.  xxxiv.  14,  15,  R.V.). 

Such  was  the  state  of  Saul's  heart.  Since  he  was  not 
willing  to  retain  God  in  his  knowledge,  God  gave  him  up  to 
a  reprobate  mind,  to  do  those  things  which  are  not  fitting. 

We  will  notice  some  points  in  Saul's  dark  eclipse  which 
will  serve  to  illustrate  salient  features  in  the  young  shep 
herd's  character. 

I.  FORSAKEN  BY  THE  SPIRIT  OF  GOD. — Browning  con 
ceives  of  him  amid  the  black  mid-tent's  silence,  from 
which  for  days  together  not  a  sound  came  to  the  anxious 
watchers;  the  blackness  of  darkness  reigning;  within,  the 
figure  of  Saul  resting  against  the  tent-prop  without  move 
ment,  speech,  or  appetite  for  food ;  shuddering  for  a 
moment  under  the  first  spell  of  music,  and  then  resuming 
his  insensibility  to  all. 

The  departure  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  probably  refers 
to  that  special  equipment  for  the  regal  office  which  had 
once  come  mightily  upon  him.  In  his  case,  it  had  rather 
to  do  with  office  than  with  any  change  of  disposition  and 
heart  (i  Sam.  x.  10;  xi.  6).  By  his  wilfulness  and  dis 
obedience,  Saul  forfeited  this  royal  prerogative.  The  light 
faded  off  his  soul,  and  he  became  as  other  men. 

Nothing  in  this  world,  or  the  next,  can  be  compared  for 
horror  to  the  withdrawal  of  God  from  us.  It  involves  the 
perdition  of  body  and  soul ;  because  it  is  the  one  force  by 
which  evil  is  restrained,  and  good  fostered.  Take  the  sun 
from  the  centre  of  the  solar  system,  and  each  planet,  break 
ing  from  its  leash,  would  pursue  a  headlong  course, 
colliding  with  the  rest,  and  dashing  into  the  abyss.  So 
when  God's  presence  is  lost,  every  power  in  the  soul  rises 
in  revolt.  Ah !  bitter  wail,  when  a  man  realizes  the  true 
measure  of  the  calamity  which  has  befallen  him,  and  cries 
with  Saul,  "  I  am  sore  distrest ;  for  God  is  departed  from 
me,  and  answereth  me  no  more  ! " 


3° 

It  is  a  very  serious  thing  to  ask  if  we  are  not  tampering 
with  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  To  do  so  will  turn  the  most 
radiant  dawn  into  the  chill  twilight  of  a  wintry  day  when 
the  blizzard  fills  the  air  with  snow  and  ice.  Beware  lest 
you  fret  against  the  Divine  delays,  or  disobey  the  Divine 
command.  Know  in  this  thy  day  the  things  that  belong  to 
thy  peace,  lest  they  be  for  ever  hid  from  thy  view ;  and, 
as  the  sun's  last  rim  sinks  beneath  the  waves,  the  storm- 
clouds  of  jealousy,  superstition,  frenzy,  bear  down  in  thick 
battalions. 

How  different  with  David  !  The  Lord  was  with  him. 
To  the  clear,  bright  eye  of  his  faith  the  living  God  was 
more  real  than  the  giant  that  stalked  each  morning  before 
the  hosts  of  Israel.  Had  He  not  delivered  him  from  the 
paw  of  the  lion  and  from  the  paw  of  the  bear  ?  And 
was  He  not  as  real  amid  the  dignity  of  the  Court 
or  the  clash  of  the  battle-field  ?  The  dew  of  the 
Divine  blessing  rested  upon  that  fair  young  head,  and 
the  light  of  the  Shekinah  shone  from  the  inner  shrine 
through  those  clear  blue  eyes.  With  him  the  Spirit  of  God 
was  not  simply  an  equipment  of  gift  for  service,  but  the 
resident  presence  of  the  Divine  in  soul  and  heart. 

II.  TROUBLED  BY  AN  EVIL  SPIRIT  FROM  THE  LORD. — 
Evidently  the  conception  is  of  Jehovah  surrounded  by 
spirits,  some  good,  and  some  evil.  He  has  only  to  speak, 
and  one  powerful  to  exercise  a  malign  and  deadly  influence 
hastens  to  do  his  bidding.  Micaiah  spoke  after  the  same 
manner  in  the  dark  hour  of  Ahab's  infatuation  (i  Kings  xxii. 
19-23).  This  method  of  speech  is  unfamiliar.  We  prefer 
to  say  that  God  permits  evil  spirits  to  fasten  on  souls  which 
have  refused  Him,  as  vultures  on  the  carcase  from  which 
life  has  fled.  We  go  farther,  and  say  that  God  always 
means  to  do  the  best  by  every  creature  that  He  has  made  : 
but  that  we  have  the  power  of  extracting  evil  from  his 
good ;  of  transforming  his  sunshine  and  rain  into  hemlock 


0  itritlj  <5otr.  31 

and  deadly  nightshade  and  rank  poison ;  of  transmuting 
the  roses  which  fall  from  his  hand  into  the  red-hot  cinders 
that  scorch  and  burn  into  the  flesh. 

Never  doubt  that  God  is  good ;  that  He  sends  good  and 
gentle  spirits  to  stay  man  from  his  purpose,  and  conduct 
him  into  the  light  of  life  :  but  when  we  turn  against  God, 
it  seems  as  though  He  has  commenced  to  be  our  enemy,, 
and  to  fight  against  us  ;  the  reality  being  that,  whereas  we 
once  went  with  the  stream  of  the  Divine  blessing,  we  are 
now  wading  against  it  with  difficulty  and  peril.  With  the 
fro  ward  God  shows  Himself  fro  ward  ;  and  with  the  perverse, 
his  angels,  conscience,  gratitude,  the  memory  of  the  past, 
convictions  of  duty,  intended  to  elevate  and  save,  oppose 
their  progress  as  mortal  foes.  They  wrestle  with  us — or 
rather,  we  wrestle  with  them — in  the  dark  night,  in  which 
we  cannot  distinguish  friend  from  foe.  So  when  Judas  had 
finally  chosen  to  betray  our  Lord,  the  very  pleadings  of 
Jesus  hardened  his  heart,  and  sealed  his  doom. 

With  David,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Spirit  of  God  was 
constantly  co-operating.  He  lived  and  walked  in  fellowship 
with  the  unseen.  All  the  genial  influences  of  heaven,  as 
they  fell  upon  his  young  spirit,  elicited  responses  of  love 
and  faith ;  like  the  strains  of  music  which  each  passing 
breeze  summons  from  the  Eolian  lyre. 

III.  SAUL'S  DISCORD. — The  fact  that  music  was  the  cor 
rective  of  the  king's  malady  seems  to  indicate  that,  being, 
wrong  with  God,  he  was  out  of  harmony  with  the  universe, 
which  is  the  circumference  of  which  God  is  centre.  It  is 
impossible  to  define  music.  In  its  grander  and  more  lovely 
strains  it  has  escaped  the  defiling  touch  of  sin,  and  is,  so  to 
speak,  the  echo  of  eternity ;  spray  from  the  wraves  of  light 
and  glory  that  break  upon  our  shores  ;  the  expression  of  the 
infinite  order  and  rhythm  of  the  spheres.  Music,  therefore, 
is  the  natural  expression  of  the  perfect  life  and  peace  of 
heaven.  There  the  harpers  harp  upon  their  harps;  there 


32 

redeemed  and  glorified  spirits  raise  new  songs ;  there  holy 
beings  express  their  perfect  accord  with  the  nature  of  God  and 
the  order  of  the  universe  in  outbursts  of  harmonious  sound. 
Perfected  sense,  which  can  only  be  had  on  the  condition  of 
unbroken  union  with  God's  will,  purpose,  and  life,  would  de 
tect  all  things  uttering,  "  Hallelujah  ! "  and  be  compelled  by 
the  contagiousness  of  a  holy  sympathy  to  swell  the  anthem. 

To  all  this  Saul  was  a  stranger.  He  was  out  with  God, 
and  there  was  consequently  discord  in  his  heart  and  life. 
Music  falling  on  his  ear  recalled  memories  of  his  former 
better  self,  and  laid  a  brief  spell  upon  the  discordant  ele 
ments  of  his  soul;  reducing  them  to  a  momentary  order, 
destined,  however,  to  be  marred  and  spoilt  so  soon  as  the 
sweet  sounds  were  withdrawn.  Yes,  it  is  ever  thus.  If  you 
have  not  received  the  At-one-ment,  if  you  are  not  at  peace 
with  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  you  are  at  enmity,  by  wicked 
works  and  inward  temper ;  and  there  can  be,  therefore,  no 
sympathy  between  you  and  the  universe  around.  Art, 
music,  the  engagements  of  daily  business,  the  whirl  of 
society,  the  exercises  of  religion  may  do  what  David's  harp 
did  for  Saul,  in  producing  a  momentary  stillness  and  sense 
of  harmony  with  your  environment ;  but  it  is  only  for  a 
moment :  when  the  spell  is  withdrawn,  the  olden  spirit  of 
disorder  asserts  itself. 

With  David,  on  the  other  hand,  the  harp  was  the  symbol 
of  a  soul  at  rest  in  God.  All  things  were,  therefore,  his; 
all  spoke  to  his  soul  of  the  harmonies  subsisting  in  the 
unseen  and  eternal  world.  And  it  was  because  his  own 
spirit  was  so  perfectly  harmonious  with  the  nature  of  God 
and  with  the  universe,  that  he  could  cast  the  spell  of 
calming  and  quieting  influence  over  another.  This  may 
explain  the  influence  of  music  in  all  ages  of  the  world  over 
the  maladies  of  the  soul.  Elisha  called  for  a  minstrel  to 
calm  his  disquieted  spirit.  Pythagoras,  as  Seneca  tells  us, 
was  in  the  habit  of  quieting  the  troubles  of  his  mind  with  a 
harp.  Philip  V.  of  Spain  was  recalled  from  the  profoundest 


Htttoltef.  33 

melancholy  by  the  famous  singer  Farinelli.  The  servants 
of  Saul  were  therefore  justified  in  urging  him,  in  one  of  his 
lucid  moments,  to  permit  them  to  seek  out  a  man  who  was 
a  cunning  player  on  the  harp.  And  the  power  that  David 
exercised  over  him  is  an  illustration  of  a  similar  charm 
which  we  may  individually  exert  upon  the  restless,  storm- 
tossed  spirits  around  us.  Let  us  accept  God's  basis  of  the 
reconciliation.  Let  us  stand  beneath  the  Cross,  which  is  the 
centre  of  reconciliation  from  the  discords  of  sin,  till  we  are 
in  perfect  accord  with  it ;  and  let  us  go  forth  to  induce  men 
to  come  to  that  centre  also,  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  to 
learn  the  mystery  of  that  peace  of  which  Jesus  spoke  on  the 
eve  of  his  death  and  the  day  of  his  resurrection. 

IV.  SAUL'S  UNBELIEF. — If  a  man  is  wrong  with  God, 
faith  is  impossible;  for  it  is  the  health-bloom  of  the  soul. 
When,  therefore,  Goliath  stalked  through  the  valley  of  Elah, 
and  defied  the  armies  of  Israel,  Saul  was  greatly  afraid. 
Where  was  now  the  prowess  that  engaged  the  early  love 
and  admiration  of  the  people,  that  delivered  Jabesh  Gilead, 
and  that  vexed  the  foes  of  Israel  whithersoever  he  turned 
himself  ?  It  had  vanished ;  as  the  beauty  passes  from  the 
surface  of  the  fruit  which  is  rotten  at  the  core,  and  as  the 
forms  of  the  hills  disappear  from  ruffled  water.  Under 
happier  conditions  he  would  have  become  the  champion  of 
his  people ;  now  he  cowered  in  his  tent. 

To  David,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  no  such  fear. 
His  soul  was  full  of  God.  He  was  his  light  and  salvation, 
whom  should  he  fear?  the  strength  of  his  life,  of  whom 
should  he  be  afraid  ?  He  was  hidden  in  the  secret  of  God's 
pavilion,  and  abode  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty. 
There  was  no  unsteadiness  in  the  hand  that  slung  the  stone, 
no  tremor  in  the  heart.  He  was  strong  in  faith ;  because 
his  young  heart  was  pure,  and  good,  and  right,  and  in  living 
fellowship  with  Jehovah. 


V. 
Jfaiilj  of  (gofc's 

( i  SAMUEL  xvii. ) 

"  Who  the  line 

Shall  draw,  the  limits  of  the  power  define 
That  even  imperfect  faith  to  man  affords  ?" 

WORDSWORTH. 

N  the  valley  of  Elah  to-day  the  traveller  finds  the 
remains  of  an  immense  terebinth.  Perhaps  this 
gave  it  its  name,  "  the  valley  of  the  terebinth." 
Starting  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ancient 
city  of  Hebron,  the  valley  runs  in  a  north-westerly 
direction  towards  the  sea ;  it  is  about  a  mile 
across,  and  in  the  middle  there  is  a  deep  ravine,  some 
twenty  feet  across,  with  a  depth  of  ten  or  twelve  feet. 
Winter  torrents  have  made  this  their  track. 

Having  recovered  from  the  chastisement  inflicted  on 
them  by  Saul  and  Jonathan  at  Michmash,  the  Philistines 
had  marched  up  the  valley  of  Elah,  encamping  on  its 
western  slope  between  Shochoh  and  Ephes-dammim ;  a 
name  with  an  ominous  meaning — "  the  boundary  of 
blood  " — probably  because  on  more  than  one  occasion  it 
had  been  the  scene  of  border  forays.  Saul  pitched  his 
camp  on  the  other  side  of  the  valley;  behind  them  the 
Judean  hills,  ridge  on  ridge,  to  the  blue  distance,  where 
Jerusalem  lay,  as  yet  in  the  lands  of  the  Jebusite. 
That  valley  was  to  witness  an  encounter  which  brought 
into  fullest  contrast  the  principles  on  which  God's  warriors 
are  to  contend — not  only  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  against 
the  principalities  and  powers  of  darkness.  Three  figures 
stand  out  sharply  defined  on  that  memorable  day. 


"fcfrou  art  but  a  foutij."  35 

First,  the  Philistine  Champion.  He  was  tall — nine  feet 
six  inches  in  height ;  he  was  heavily  armed,  for  his  armour 
fell  a  spoil  to  Israel,  was  eagerly  examined,  and  minutely 
described ;  they  even  weighed  it,  and  found  it  five  thousand 
shekels  of  brass,  equivalent  to  two  hundredweight ;  he  was 
protected  by  an  immense  shield,  borne  by  another  in  front 
of  him,  so  as  to  leave  his  arms  and  hands  free  ;  he  wielded 
a  ponderous  spear,  whilst  sword  and  javelin  were  girt  to  his 
side ;  he  was  apt  at  braggadocio,  talked  of  the  banquet  he 
proposed  to  give  to  the  fowls  and  beasts,  and  defied  the 
armies  of  the  living  God. 

Second,  Saul.  A  choice  young  man  and  a  goodly. 
There  was  not  among  the  children  of  Israel  a  goodlier 
person  than  he  ;  from  his  shoulders  and  upward  he  was 
higher  than  any  of  the  people.  He  had  also  a  good  suit 
of  armour,  a  helmet  of  brass,  and  a  coat  of  mail.  In 
earlier  days,  when  he  had  blown  the  trumpet,  its  notes  had 
rung  throughout  the  land,  stirring  all  hearts  with  antici 
pations  of  certain  victory.  Even  now  the  formula  of  his 
former  faith  and  fervour  came  easily  to  his  lips,  as  he 
assured  the  young  shepherd  that  the  Lord  would  certainly 
be  with  him ;  but  he  dared  not  adventure  himself  in 
conflict  with  what  he  reckoned  were  utterly  overwhelming 
odds.  He  was  near  daunting  David  with  his  materialism 
and  unbelief :  "  Thou  art  not  able  to  go  against  this 
Philistine  to  fight  with  him  ;  for  thou  art  but  a  youth,  and 
he  a  man  of  war  from  his  youth." 

Third,  David.  He  was  but  a  youth,  and  ruddy,  and 
withal  of  a  fair  countenance.  No  sword  was  in  his  hand  ; 
he  carried  a  staff,  probably  his  shepherd's  crook  ;  no 
armour  had  he  on,  save  the  breastplate  of  righteousness 
and  the  helmet  of  salvation  ;  no  weapon,  but  a  sling  in  his 
hand  and  five  smooth  stones  which  he  had  chosen  out 
of  the  torrent  bed,  and  put  in  the  shepherd's  bag  which  he 
had,  even  in  his  scrip.  But  he  was  in  possession  of  a 
mystic  spiritual  power,  which  the  mere  spectator  might  have 


36  &be  3faitlr  of  (Soft's  (Blert 

guessed,  but  which  he  might  have  found  it  difficult  to 
define.  The  living  God  was  a  reality  to  him.  His  coun 
trymen  were  not  simply,  as  Goliath  insinuated,  servants  to 
Saul ;  they  were  the  army  of  the  living  God.  When  he 
spake  of  armies,  using  the  plural  as  of  more  than  one,  he 
may  have  been  thinking  of  Jacob's  vision  of  the  host  of 
angels  at  Mahanaim  ;  or  of  Joshua's,  when  the  Angel  of 
the  Covenant  revealed  himself  as  Captain  of  the  Lord's 
host  that  waited  unseen  under  arms,  prepared  to  co-operate 
with  that  which  Israel's  chieftain  was  about  to  lead  across 
the  Jordan.  As  likely  as  not,  to  the  lad's  imagination  the 
air  was  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire ;  of  those  angel 
hosts,  which  in  after  days  he  addressed  as  strong  in  might, 
hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  God,  and  hastening  to  do  his 
pleasure  in  all  places  of  his  dominion.  At  least,  he  had  no 
doubt  that  the  Lord  would  vindicate  his  glorious  name,  and 
deliver  into  his  hands  this  uncircumcised  Philistine. 

Let  us  study  the  origin  and  temper  of  this  heroic  faith. 

IT    HAD    BEEN    BORN     IN     SECRET,    AND     NURSED     IN     SOLI- 

TUDE. — As  day  after  day  he  considered  the  heavens  and 
earth,  they  appeared  as  one  vast  tent,  in  which  God 
dwelt.  Nature  was  the  material  dwelling-place  of  the 
eternal  Spirit,  who  was  as  real  to  his  young  heart  as  the 
works  of  His  hands  to  His  poet's  eyes.  God  was  as  real  to 
him  as  Jesse,  or  his  brothers,  or  Saul,  or  Goliath.  His 
soul  had  so  rooted  itself  in  this  conception  of  God's 
presence,  that  he  bore  it  with  him,  undisturbed  by  the 
shout  of  the  soldiers-  as  they  went  forth  to  the  battle,  and 
the  searching  questions  addressed  to  him  by  Saul. 

This  is  the  unfailing  secret.  There  is  no  short  cut  to  the 
life  of  faith,  which  is  the  all-vital  condition  of  a  holy  and 
victorious  life.  We  must  have  periods  of  lonely  meditation 
and  fellowship  with  God.  That  our  souls  should  have  their 
mountains  of  fellowship,  their  valleys  of  quiet  rest  beneath 
the  shadow  of  a  great  rock,  their  nights  beneath  the  stars, 


art  near,  <     (oft "  37 

when  darkness  has  veiled  the  material  and  silenced  the  stir 
of  human  life,  and  has  opened  the  view  of  the  infinite  and 
eternal,  is  as  indispensable  as  that  our  bodies  should  have 
food.  Thus  alone  can  the  sense  of  God's  presence  become 
the  fixed  possession  of  the  soul,  enabling  it  to  say  repeatedly 
with  the  psalmist,  "  Thou  art  near,  O  God." 

IT      HAD     BEEN      EXERCISED      IN     LONELY      CONFLICT. — 

With  a  beautiful  modesty  David  would  probably  have  kept 
to  himself  the  story  of  the  lion  and  the  bear,  unless  it  had 
been  extracted  from  him  by  a  desire  to  magnify  Jehovah. 
Possibly  there  had  been  many  conflicts  of  a  similar  kind ; 
so  that  his  faith  had  become  strengthened  by  use,  as  the 
sinews  of  his  wiry  young  body  by  exertion.  In  these  ways 
he  was  being  prepared  for  this  supreme  conflict. 

What  we  are  in  solitude,  we  shall  be  in  public.  Do  not 
for  a  moment  suppose,  O  self-indulgent  disciple,  that  the 
stimulus  of  a  great  occasion  will  dower  thee  with  a  heroism 
of  which  thou  betrayest  no  trace  in  secret  hours.  The 
crisis  will  only  reveal  the  true  quality  and  temper  of  the 
soul.  The  flight  at  the  Master's  arrest  will  make  it  almost 
needless  for  the  historian  to  explain  that  the  hour  which 
should  have  been  spent  in  watching  was  squandered  in 
sleep.  It  is  the  universal  testimony  of  holy  men  that  lonely 
hours  are  fullest  of  temptation.  It  is  in  these  we  must 
conquer  if  we  would  be  victorious  when  the  eyes  of  some 
great  assembly  are  fastened  upon  us. 

IT  STOOD  THE  TEST  OF  DAILY  LIFE. — There  are  some 
who  appear  to  think  that  the  loftiest  attainments  of  the 
spiritual  life  are  incompatible  with  the  grind  of  daily  toil 
and  the  friction  of  the  home.  "  Emancipate  us  from  these," 
they  cry,  "give  us  nothing  to  do,  except  to  nurse  our 
souls  to  noble  deeds;  deliver  us  from  the  obligations  of 
family  ties,  and  we  will  fight  for  those  poor  souls  who  are 
engrossed  with  the  cares  and  ties  of  the  ordinary  and 
commonplace." 


38  ®t>£  faitlj  of  (Bob's  (Blert. 

It  was  not  thus  with  David.  When  Jesse,  eager  to  know 
how  it  fared  with  his  three  elder  sons,  who  had  followed 
Saul  to  the  battle,  bade  David  take  them  rations,  and  a 
present  to  the  captain  of  their  division,  there  was  an 
immediate  and  ready  acquiescence  in  his  father's  proposal ; 
"he  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  took,  and  went,  as 
Jesse  had  commanded  him."  And  before  he  left  his  flock 
he  was  careful  to  entrust  it  with  a  keeper.  We  must 
always  watch  not  to  neglect  one  duty  for  another ;  if 
we  are  summoned  to  the  camp,  we  must  first  see  to  the 
tendance  of  the  flock.  He  that  is  faithful  in  the  greater 
must  first  have  been  faithful  in  the  least.  It  is  in  the  home, 
at  the  desk,  and  in  the  Sunday-school,  that  we  are  being 
trained  for  service  at  home  and  abroad.  We  must  not 
forsake  the  training-ground  till  we  have  learnt  all  the 
lessons  God  has  designed  it  to  teach,  and  have  heard  his 
summons. 

IT    BORE    MEEKLY    MISCONSTRUCTION     AND     REBUKE.— 

Reaching  the  camp,  he  found  the  troops  forming  in  battle 
array,  and  ran  to  the  front.  He  had  already  discovered  his 
brothers,  and  saluted  them,  when  he  was  arrested  by  the 
braggart  voice  of  Goliath  from  across  the  valley,  and  saw, 
to  his  chagrin,  the  men  of  Israel  turn  to  flee,  stricken  with 
sore  affright.  When  he  expressed  surprise,  he  learnt  from 
bystanders  that  even  Saul  shared  the  general  panic,  and 
had  issued  rewards  for  a  champion.  So  he  passed  from 
one  group  to  another  of  the  soldiery,  questioning,  gathering 
further  confirmation  of  his  first  impressions,  and  evincing 
everywhere  the  open-eyed  wonder  of  his  soul  that  "any 
man's  heart  should  fail  because  of  him." 

Eliab  had  no  patience  with  the  words  and  bearing  of  his 
young  brother.  How  dare  he  suggest  that  the  behaviour 
of  the  men  of  Israel  was  unworthy  of  themselves  and  their 
religion  !  What  did  he  mean  by  inquiring  so  minutely  after 
ihe  particulars  of  the  royal  reward?  Was  he  thinking  of 


anfc  £lijjljt.  39 

winning  it  ?  It  was  absurd  to  talk  like  that !  Of  course  it 
could  only  be  talk ;  but  it  was  amazing  to  hear  it  suggested 
that  he,  too,  was  a  soldier  and  qualified  to  fight.  Evidently 
something  should  be  said  to  thrust  him  back  into  his  right 
place,  and  minimize  the  effect  of  his  words,  and  let  the 
bystanders  know  who  and  what  he  was.  "Why  art  thou 
come  down?  With  whom,"  he  said,  with  a  sneer,  "hast 
thou  left  those  few  sheep  in  the  wilderness  ? "  Ah,  what 
venom,  as  of  an  asp,  lay  in  those  few  words  !  David,  how 
ever,  ruled  his  spirit,  and  answered  softly.  "  Surely,"  said 
he,  "my  father's  wish  to  learn  of  your  welfare  was  cause 
enough  to  bring  me  here."  It  was  there  that  the  victory 
over  Goliath  was  really  won.  To  have  lost  his  temper  in 
this  unprovoked  assault  would  have  broken  the  alliance 
of  his  soul  with  God,  and  drawn  a  vail  over  his  sense  of 
His  presence.  But  to  meet  evil  with  g-ood,  and  maintain 
an  unbroken  composure,  not  only  showed  the  burnished 
beauty  of  his  spirit's  armour,  but  cemented  his  alliance  with 
the  Lamb  of  God. 

To  bear  with  unfailing  meekness  the  spiteful  attacks  of 
malice  and  envy;  not  to  be  overcome  by  evil,  but  to 
overcome  evil  with  good ;  to  suffer  wrong  ;  to  possess  one's 
soul  in  patience ;  to  keep  the  mouth  with  a  bridle  when  the 
wicked  is  before  us;  to  pass  unruffled  and  composed 
through  a  very  cyclone  of  unkindliness  and  misrepresenta 
tion — this  is  only  possible  to  those  in  whose  breasts  the 
dove-like  Spirit  has  found  an  abiding  place,  and  whose 
hearts  are  sentinelled  by  the  peace  of  God ;  and  these  are 
they  who  bear  themselves  as  heroes  in  the  fight.  A 
marvellous  exhibition  was  given  that  day  in  the  valley  of 
Elah  that  those  who  are  gentlest  under  provocation  are 
strongest  in  the  fight,  and  that  meekness  is  really  an 
attribute  of  might. 

IT    WITHSTOOD    THE    REASONINGS    OF    THE    FhESH. — Saul 

was  very  eager  for  David  to  adopt  his  armour,  though  he 


40  ®Jje  yaitrj  0f  dbfc's  (BIcrt. 

dared  not  don  it  himself.  He  was  taken  with  the  boy's 
ingenuous  earnestness,  but  advised  him  to  adopt  the  means. 
"  Don't  be  rash ;  don't  expect  a  miracle  to  be  wrought. 
By  all  means  trust  God,  and  go  ;  but  be  wise.  We  ought 
to  adopt  ordinary  precautions." 

It  was  a  critical  hour.  Had  David  turned  aside  to  act 
on  these  suggestions,  he  would  certainly  have  forfeited  the 
Divine  alliance,  which  was  conditioned  by  his  guileless 
faith.  There  is  no  sin  in  using  means  :  but  they  must  come 
second,  not  first ;  they  must  be  such  as  God  suggests.  It 
is  a  sore  temptation  to  adopt  them  as  indicated  by  the  flesh, 
and  hope  that  God  will  bless  them,  instead  of  waiting  before 
Him,  to  know  what  He  would  have  done,  and  how.  Many 
a  time  has  the  advice  of  worldly  prudence  damped  the 
eager  aspiration  of  the  spirit,  and  hindered  the  doing  of 
a  great  deed. 

But  an  unseen  hand  withdrew  David  from  the  meshes  of 
temptation.  He  had  already  yielded  so  far  to  Saul's  advice 
as  to  have  donned  his  armour  and  girded  on  the  sword. 
Then  he  turned  to  Saul  and  said,  "  I  cannot  go  with 
these  "  j  and  he  put  them  off  him.  It  was  not  now  Saul's 
armour  and  the  Lord,  but  the  Lord  alone  ;  and  he  was 
able,  without  hesitation,  to  accost  the  giant  with  the  words, 
"  The  Lord  saveth  not  with  sword  and  spear." 

His  faith  had  been  put  to  the  severest  tests  and  was 
approved.  Being  more  precious  than  silver  or  gold,  it  had 
been  exposed  to  the  most  searching  ordeal ;  but  the  furnace 
of  trial  had  shown  it  to  be  of  heavenly  temper.  Now  let 
Goliath  do  his  worst ;  he  shall  know  that  there  is  a  God 
in  Israel. 


VI. 


In  tb*  Jianw  of  ifr*  tortr  of 

(i  SAMUEL  xvii.  45.) 

"  Oh,  I  have  seen  the  day, 

When  with  a  single  word, 
God  helping  me  to  say, 

'  My  trust  is  in  the  Lord ' ! 
My  soul  hath  quenched  a  thousand  foes, 
Fearless  of  all  that  could  oppose. " 

COW  PER. 

'HILST  the  two  armies,  on  either  side  of  the 
ravine,  waited  expectant,  every  eye  was 
suddenly  attracted  by  the  slight  young  figure, 
which,  staff  in  hand,  emerged  from  the 
ranks  of  Israel,  and  descended  the  slope, 
For  a  little  while  David  was  hid  from  view, 
as  he  bent  intent  on  the  pebbles  that  lined  the  bottom, 
of  which  five  smooth  stones  were  presently  selected  and 
placed  in  his  shepherd's  bag.  Then,  to  the  amazement 
of  the  Philistines,  and  especially  of  their  huge  champion,, 
he  sprang  up  on  the  further  bank,  and  rapidly  moved 
towards  him.  .  . 

Goliath  had  apparently  been  sitting ;  and  when  he 
realised  that  the  youth  was  daring  to  accept  his  challenge, 
he  arose,  and  came,  and  drew  near  to  meet  David,  cursing 
him  as  he  did  so,  and  threatening  him  that  his  blood 
should  encrimson  the  mountain  sward,  whilst  his  unburied 
body  feasted  the  wild  things  of  earth  and  air.  "Then 
said  David  to  the  Philistine,  Thou  comest  to  me  with  a 
sword,  and  with  a  spear,  and  with  a  javelin  ;  but  I  come 
to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  the  God  of 
the  armies  of  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  defied." 


42         "  In  ifre  llame  of  tfrc  JForfc  of 

I.  THE  TALISMAN  OF  VICTORY.— "  The  name  of  the 
Lord  of  Hosts."  Throughout  the  Scriptures,  a  name  is 
not  simply,  as  with  us,  a  label ;  it  is  a  revelation  of 
character.  It  catches  up  and  enshrines  some  moral  or 
physical  peculiarity  in  which  its  owner  differs  from  other 
men,  or  which  constitutes  his  special  gift  and  force.  The 
names  which  Adam  gave  the  animals  that  were  brought  to 
him  were  founded  on  characteristics  which  struck  his 
notice.  And  the  names  which  the  Second  Adam  gave  to 
the  apostles  either  expressed  qualities  which  lay  deep 
within  them,  and  which  He  intended  to  evolve,  or  un 
folded  some  great  purpose  for  which  they  were  being 
fitted. 

Thus  the  Name  of  God,  as  used  so  frequently  by  the 
heroes  and  saints  of  sacred  history,  stands  for  those  Divine 
attributes  and  qualities  which  combine  to  make  Him  what 
He  is.  In  the  history  of  the  early  Church  the  Name  was  a 
kind  of  summary  of  all  that  Jesus  had  revealed  of  the 
nature  and  the  heart  of  God.  "  For  the  sake  of  the  Name 
they  went  forth,  taking  nothing  of  the  Gentiles."  There 
was  no  need  to  specify  whose  Name  it  was — there  was  none 
other  Name  by  which  men  could  be  saved,  none  other 
Name  that  could  be  compared  with  that,  or  mentioned 
on  the  same  page.  Stars  die  out  and  become  invisible 
when  the  sun  appears.  That  Name  is  above  every  name, 
and  in  it  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  confess  ; 
because  it  embodies  under  one  all-sufficient  designation 
everything  that  any  single  soul,  or  the  whole  race,  can 
require,  or  imagine,  or  attain  in  the  conceiving  of  God. 

The  special  quality  that  David  extracted  from  the  bundle 
of  qualities  represented  by  the  Divine  Name  of  God  is 
indicated  in  the  words,  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  That  does 
not  mean  only  that  God  was  Captain  of  the  embattled 
hosts  of  Israel ;  that  idea  was  expressed  in  the  words 
that  followed,  "The  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel."  But 
there  was  probably  something  of  this  sort  in  David's 


44  ®IjE  |lame  0f  lestts."  43 

thought.  He  conceived  of  angels  and  worlds,  of  the 
armies  of  heaven  and  the  elements  of  matter,  of  winds  and 
waves,  of  life  and  death,  as  a  vast  ordered  army,  obedient 
to  the  commands  of  their  Captain,  Jehovah  of  Hosts.  In 
fact,  his  idea  was  identical  with  that  of  the  heathen 
centurion  of  the  Gospels,  who  said  he  was  a  man  under 
authority,  having  servants  to  whom  he  said,  Come,  or  Go, 
or  Do  this  or  that. 

To  come  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  did  not 
simply  mean  that  David  understood  Jehovah  to  be  all  this  ^ 
but  implied  his  own  identification  by  faith  with  all  that 
was  comprehended  in  this  sacred  Name.  An  Englishman 
in  a  foreign  land  occupies  a  very  different  position,  and 
speaks  in  a  very  different  tone,  according  to  whether  he 
assumes  a  private  capacity  as  an  ordinary  traveller,  or 
acts  as  representative  and  ambassador  of  his  country.  In 
the  former  case  he  speaks  in  his  own  name,  and  receives 
what  respect  and  obedience  it  can  obtain  ;  in  the  latter 
he  is  conscious  of  being  identified  with  all  that  is 
associated  with  the  term  Great  Britain.  For  a  man  to 
speak  in  the  name  of  England  means  that  England  speaks 
through  his  lips ;  that  the  might  of  England  is  ready  to 
enforce  his  demands ;  and  that  every  sort  of  power  which 
England  wields  is  pledged  to  avenge  any  affront  or  indignity 
to  which  he  may  be  exposed. 

Thus,  when  Jesus  bids  us  ask  what  we  will  in  his  Name, 
He  means  not  that  we  should  simply  use  that  name  as  an 
incantation  or  formula,  but  that  we  should  be  so  one  with 
Him  in  his  interests,  purposes,  and  aims,  that  it  should  be 
as  though  He  were  Himself  approaching  the  Father  with 
the  petitions  we  bear. 

There  is  much  for  us  to  learn  concerning  this  close 
identification  with  God  before  we  shall  be  able  to  say  with 
David,  "  I  come  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts." 
It  is  only  possible  to  those  who  carefully  fulfil  certain 
conditions  which  were  familiar  enough  to  this  God-taught 


44         "  $n  tlje  Hame  of  tlje  f  orfr  of  Hosts." 

youth.  But  it  were  well  worth  our  while  to  withdraw 
ourselves  from  the  activities  of  our  life,  to  lay  aside  every 
thing  that  might  hinder  the  closeness  of  our  union  with  the 
Divine  nature  and  interests,  and  to  become  so  absolutely 
identified  with  God,  that  his  Name  might  be  our  strong 
tower,  our  refuge,  our  battle-cry,  our  secret  of  victory.  Oh 
to  be  able  to  approach  each  high-handed  wrong-doer,  each 
confederacy  of  evil,  each  assault  of  the  powers  of  darkness, 
each  tribe  of  savages,  each  drink-sodden  district,  each  con 
gregation  of  the  unsaved  and  impenitent,  with  the  words, 
"  I  come  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  !  " 

II.  THE  CONDITIONS  ON  WHICH  WE  ARE  WARRANTED 
IN  USING  THE  NAME. — (i)  When  we  are  pure  in  our 
motives.  There  was  no  doubt  as  to  the  motive  which 
prompted  David  to  this  conflict.  It  is  true  that  he  had 
spoken  to  the  men  of  Israel,  saying,  "  What  shall  be  done 
to  the  man  that  killeth  the  Philistine  ? "  but  no  one 
supposed  that  he  acted  as  he  did  because  of  the  royal 
reward.  His  one  ambition  was  to  take  away  the  reproach 
from  Israel,  and  to  let  all  the  earth  know  that  there  was  a 
God  in  Israel. 

We  must  be  wary  here.  It  is  so  easy  to  confuse  issues 
which  are  wide  asunder  as  the  poles,  and  to  suppose  that 
we  are  contending  for  the  glory  of  God,  when  we  are  really 
combating  for  our  church,  our  cause,  our  prejudices  or 
opinions.  It  has  always  been  a  temptation  to  earnest  men 
to  veil  from  their  own  eyes  the  selfishness  of  their  motives 
and  aims  by  insisting,  with  vehement  asseveration,  that  they 
are  actuated  by  pure  zeal  for  the  cause  of  God. 

To  fall  into  this  sin,  though  unconsciously,  is  to  forfeit 
the  right  to  use  his  sacred  Name.  We  may  still  conjure 
with  it  and  invoke  it,  but  in  vain.  The  very  demons  we 
seek  to  bind  as  with  a  spell  will  deride  us,  and  leap  out  on 
us,  and  chase  us  before  them.  How  constantly  we  need  to 
expose  our  hearts  to  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that 


jlattlE  is  tbe  f orfc's."  45 

He  may  wholly  cleanse  them,  and  fill  them  with  an  all- 
consuming  devotion  to  the  glory  of  God ;  so  that  the  words 
may  be  true  of  us,  as  of  our  Lord,  "  The  zeal  of  thy  house 
hath  eaten  me  up." 

(2)  When  we  are  willing  to  allow  God  to  occupy  his  right 
place.     David   said   repeatedly  that  the  whole   matter  was 
God's.     He  might  gather  up  the  spoils  of  the  battle ;  but 
the  overthrow  of  Goliath  and  the  Philistine  host  was  not  in 
his  province  at  all.     "The  battle  is  the  Lord's.   .   .  This 
day  will  the  Lord  deliver  thee  into  mine  hand.    .    .    The 
Lord  saveth,  and  He  will  give  you  into  our  hand." 

And  David's  attitude  has  been  that  of  every  man  who 
has  wrought  great  exploits  in  the  behalf  of  righteousness. 
Moses  said,  "The  Lord  hath  appeared  unto  me,  and  He 
will  bring  you  up  out  of  the  affliction  of  Egypt."  Samuel 
said,  "  Prepare  your  hearts  unto  the  Lord,  and  He  will 
deliver  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistine."  Paul  said, 
"  I  will  not  dare  to  speak  of  any  things  save  those  which 
Christ  wrought  through  me."  We  must  recognise  Jesus 
Christ  as  the  essential  warrior,  worker,  organizer,  and 
administrator  of  his  Church,  through  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Whatever  is  rightly  done,  He  must  do.  We  are  not  called 
to  work  for  Him,  but  to  let  Him  work  through  us.  Of 
Him  and  through  Him  and  to  Him  are  all  things.  The 
battle  is  not  ours,  but  his.  His  skill  must  direct  us ;  his 
might  empower  us  •  his  uplifted  hands  bring  us  victory. 

(3)  When   we  take  no  counsel  with  the  flesh.     It  must 
have  been  a  hard  thing  for  a  youth  to  oppose  his  opinion 
to  Saul's,  especially  when  the  king  was  so  solicitous  for  his 
welfare.     "  Spare  thyself,  my  son,"  he  seemed  to  say ;  "  be 
wise,  take  ordinary  precautions,  do  not  throw  thy  young  life 
away."     It   was   a   dangerous    moment.     To   meet   scorn, 
hatred,    wrong-doing,    with   uncompromising  defiance    and 
resistance  is  so  much  easier  than  to  refuse  assistance  or 
advice  which   are   kindly   meant.      It   was   well   for   him, 
indeed,  that  David  withstood  the  syren  song,  and  remained 


46         "Utt  tire  Jiame  0f  tire  frrrfc  of 

unaffected  by  the  blandishments  of  royal  favour.  He  could 
not  have  served  two  masters  so  utterly  antagonistic.  To 
have  yielded  to  Saul  would  have  put  him  beyond  the 
fire-ring  of  the  Divine  environment. 

How  perpetually  does  Satan  breathe  into  our  ears  the  soft 
words  that  Peter  whispered  to  his  Master,  when  He  began 
to  speak  about  the  cross.  "  Spare  Thyself :  that  shall  not 
come  unto  Thee."  There  is  so  much  talk  about  the 
legitimacy  of  means,  that  no  room  is  left  on  which  the 
Almighty  can  act.  Means  are  right  enough  in  their  right 
place ;  but  that  place  is  far  from  first.  Both  their  nature 
and  time  have  to  be  fixed  by  Him  who  refuses  helmets  of 
brass  and  coats  of  mail,  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  His 
presence,  but  who  uses  the  rustic  sling,  the  smooth  stone 
from  the  brook,  and  the  sword  of  Goliath. 

III.  THE  BEARING  OF  THOSE  WHO  USE  THE  NAME. — 
(i)  They  are  willing  to  stand  alone.  The  lad  asked  no 
comradeship  in  the  fight.  There  was  no  running  to  and 
fro  to  secure  a  second.  He  was  perfectly  prepared  to 
bear  the  whole  brunt  of  the  fray  without  sympathy  or 
succour ;  so  sure  was  he  that  the  Lord  of  Hosts  was  with 
him,  and  that  the  God  of  Jacob  was  his  refuge. 

(2)  They  are  deliberate.     He  was  free  from  the  nervous 
trepidation  which  so  often  unfits  us  to  play  our  part  in  some 
great  scene.     Our  heart  will  throb  so  quickly,  our  move 
ments  become  so  fitful  and  unsteady.     Calmly  and  quietly 
he  went  down  the  slope,  and  selected  the  pebbles  which 
best  suited  his  purpose.     In  this  quietness  and  confidence 
he  found  his  strength.     His  mind  was  kept  in  perfect  peace, 
because  it  was  stayed  on  God.     He  did  not  go  by  haste  or 
flight,  because  the  Lord  went  before  him,  and  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel  was  his  rereward. 

(3)  They  are  fearless.     When  the  moment  came  for  the 
conflict,  David  did  not  hesitate,  but  ran  toward  the  Philistine 
army  to  meet  their  champion.     There  was  no  fear  of  the 


ijjatt  Conquerors. "  47 

result  in  that  young  heart ;  no  tremor  in  the  voice  that 
answered  the  rough  taunt ;  no  falter  in  the  arm  that  wielded 
the  sling;  no  lack  of  precision  in  the  aim  that  drove  the 
stone  to  the  one  part  of  the  Philistine's  body  that  was  un 
protected  and  vulnerable. 

(4)  They  are  more  than  conquerors.  The  stone  sank  into 
the  giant's  forehead ;  in  another  moment  he  fell  stunned  to 
the  earth.  There  was  no  time  to  lose  ;  before  he  could 
recover  himself,  or  his  startled  comrades  overcome  their 
stupefied  amazement,  his  head  had  been  hewn  from  his  body 
by  one  thrust  of  his  own  sword.  And  when  the  Philistines 
saw  that  their  champion  was  dead,  they  fled.  The  spoils 
of  victory  lay  with  the  victor.  David  took  the  head  of  the 
Philistine  as  a  trophy,  and  put  his  armour  in  his  tent. 

Let  us  live  alone  with  God.  The  weakest  man  who 
knows  God  is  strong  to  do  exploits.  All  the  might  of  God 
awaits  the  disposal  of  our  faith.  As  a  child  by  touching  a  L 
button  may  set  in  motion  a  mighty  steamship,  making  it 
glide  like  a  swan  into  her  native  element,  so  a  stripling  who 
has  learnt  to  reckon  on  God  may  bring  the  whole  forces  of 
Deity  to  bear  on  men  and  things  on  the  world's  battlefield. 
This  is  the  victory  that  overcomes  the  world,  the  flesh,  and 
the  devil — even  our  faith. 


VII. 

Jnnatljan. 

(i  SAMUEL  xviii.  i.) 

"  Souls  that  carry  on  a  blest  exchange 
Of  joys  they  meet  with  in  their  heavenly  range, 
And,  with  a  fearless  confidence,  make  known 
The  sorrows  sympathy  esteems  its  own — 
Daily  derive  increasing  light  and  force 
From  such  communion  in  their  pleasant  course  ; 
Feel  less  the  journey's  roughness  and  its  length, 
Meet  their  opposers  with  united  strength  ; 
And  one  in  heart,  in  interest,  and  design, 
Gird  up  each  other  to  the  race  divine." 

COWPER. 

•N  heaven's  vault  there  are  what  are  known  as 
binary  stars,  each  probably  a  sun,  with  its 
attendant  train  of  worlds,  revolving  around  a 
common  centre,  but  blending  their  rays  so  that 
they  reach  the  watcher's  eye  as  one  clear  beam 
of  light.  So  do  twin-souls  find  the  centre  of 
their  orbit  in  each  other ;  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  annals 
of  human  affection  nobler  than  the  bond  of  such  a  love 
between  two  pure,  high-minded  and  noble  men,  whose  love 
passes  that  of  women.  Such  love  was  celebrated  in  ancient 
classic  story,  and  has  made  the  names  of  Damon  and 
Pythias  proverbial.  It  has  also  enriched  the  literature  of 
modern  days  in  the  love  of  a  Hallam  and  a  Tennyson. 
But  nowhere  is  it  more  fragrant  than  on  the  pages  that  con 
tain  the  memorials  of  the  love  of  Jonathan  and  David. 

David  was  in  all  probability  profoundly  influenced  by  the 
character  of  Jonathan,  who  must  have  been  considerably 
older  than  himself.  It  seems  to  have  been  love  at  first  sight. 


ttta&e  a  Cobcttattt."  49 

"When  David  had  made  an  end  of  speaking  unto  Saul,  the 
soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  with  the  soul  of  David,  and 
Jonathan  loved  him  as  his  own  soul."  He  did  not,  how 
ever,  avow  it  on  the  spot ;  but  that  night,  as  the  young 
shepherd  was  sitting  amid  a  group  of  soldiers,  recounting 
with  them  the  events  of  the  memorable  day,  a  royal 
messenger  may  have  summoned  him  to  Jonathan's  pavilion, 
on  entering  which  he  was  amazed  to  be  greeted  with  the 
warm  embrace  of  a  brotherly  affection,  which  was  never  to 
wane.  He  had  lost  Eliab  in  the  morning ;  but  at  nightfall 
he  had  won  a  friend  that  would  stick  closer  than  a  brother. 
The  boy-soldier  must  have  shrunk  back  as  unworthy ;  he 
must  have  ruefully  looked  down  at  his  poor  apparel  as 
unbefitting  a  royal  alliance.  But  all  such  considerations 
were  swept  away  before  the  impetuous  rush  of  Jonathan's 
affection,  as  he  stripped  himself  of  robe  and  apparel,  of 
sword  and  bow  and  girdle,  and  gave  them  all  to  David. 
"  Then  Jonathan  and  David  made  a  covenant,  because  he 
loved  him  as  his  own  soul." 

I.  CONSIDER  THE  QUALITIES  OF  THIS  FRIEND  whom 
Jehovah  chose  for  the  moulding  of  the  character  of  his 
beloved ;  and  then  be  prepared  to  surrender  to  his  care 
the  choice  of  your  most  intimate  associates.  He  knows 
what  your  temperament  needs,  and  where  to  find  the  com 
panion  who  shall  strengthen  you  when  weak,  and  develop 
latent  unknown  qualities. 

He  was  every  inch  a  man.  In  true  friendship  there  must 
be  a  similarity  of  tastes  and  interests.  The  prime  condition 
of  two  men  walking  together  is  that  they  should  be  agreed. 
And  the  bond  of  a  common  manliness  knit  these  twin 
souls  from  the  first.  Jonathan  was  every  inch  a  man  ;  as 
dexterous  with  the  bow,  as  his  friend  with  his  sling.  Able 
to  flash  with  indignation,  strong  to  bear  without  quailing 
the  brunt  of  his  father's  wrath,  fearless  to  espouse  the 
cause  of  his  friends  at  whatever  cost — he  was  capable  of 
D 


50  fottatljatt. 

inspiring  a  single  armour-bearer  with  his  own  ardent  spirit 
of  attacking  an  army  ;  of  turning  the  tide  of  invasion  ;  and 
of  securing  the  admiration  and  affection  of  the  entire 
people  who,  standing  between  him  and  his  father,  refused 
to  let  him  die.  When  Jonathan  fell  on  Gilboa,  it  was  no 
fulsome  flattery  that  led  his  friend,  in  his  pathetic  elegy,  to 
exclaim  : 

"Thy  glory,  O  Israel,  is  slain  upon  thy  high  places  ! 
How  are  the  mighty  fallen  ! " 

He  was  withal  very  sensitive  and  tender.  It  is  the  fashion 
in  some  quarters  to  emphasize  the  qualities  supposed  to  be 
specially  characteristic  of  men — those  of  strength,  courage, 
endurance — to  the  undervaluing  of  the  tenderer  graces  more 
often  associated  with  woman.  But  in  every  true  man  there 
must  be  a  touch  of  woman,  as  there  was  in  the  ideal  Man, 
the  Lord  Jesus.  In  Him  there  is  neither  male  nor  female, 
because  there  is  the  symmetrical  blending  of  both :  and  in 
us,  too,  there  should  be  strength  and  sweetness,  courage 
and  sympathy;  the  oak  and  the  vine,  the  rock  and  the  moss 
that  covers  it  with  its  soft  green  mantle. 

Jonathan  had  a  marvellous  power  of  affection.  He  loved 
David  as  himself;  he  was  prepared  to  surrender  without  a 
pang  his  succession  to  his  father's  throne,  if  only  he  might 
be  next  to  his  friend ;  his  was  the  love  that  expresses  itself 
in  tender  embraces  and  tears,  that  must  have  response  from 
the  object  of  its  choice. 

"  I  am  distressed  for  thee,  my  brother  Jonathan  ! 
Very  pleasant  hast  thou  been  unto  me  ; 
Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful, 
Passing  the  love  of  women." 

We  judge  a  man  by  his  friends,  and  the  admiration  he 
excites  in  them.  Any  man  whom  David  loved  must  have 
been  possessed  of  many  of  those  traits  so  conspicuous  in 
David  himself.  Much  is  said  of  the  union  of  opposites, 
and  it  is  well  when  one  is  rich  where  the  other  is  poor ;  but 
the  deepest  love  must  be  between  those  whose  natures  are 


be  bethreett  as."  51 

close  akin.  As  we,  therefore,  review  the  love  that  united 
these  two,  now  for  ever  joined  in  the  indissoluble  bonds  of 
eternity,  we  must  attribute  to  Jonathan  the  poetic  sensitive 
ness,  the  tender  emotion,  the  heroism  of  that  courage,  the 
capacity  for  those  uprisings  of  the  soul  to  all  that  was  pure, 
and  lovely,  and  noble,  which  were  so  conspicuous  in  David. 

He  was  distinctly  religious.  When  first  introduced  to  us, 
as,  accompanied  by  his  armour-bearer,  he  climbs  single- 
handed  to  attack  the. Philistine  garrison,  strongly  entrenched 
behind  rocky  crags,  he  speaks  as  one  familiar  with  the  ways 
of  God,  to  whom  there  is  no  restraint  "  to  save  by  many  or 
by  few";  and  when  the  appointed  sign  is  given,  it  is  accepted 
as  a  presage  of  the  victory  which  the  Lord  is  about  to  give 
(i  Sam.  xiv.). 

As  he  stands  beside  his  father  On  the  hillside,  and  sees 
the  stripling  descend  to  slay  Goliath,  and  win  a  great  victory 
for  Israel,  he  discerns  the  hand  of  the  Lord  working  a  great 
victory  for  Israel,  and  his  soul  lifts  itself  in  holy  thought 
and  thanksgiving  (i  Sam.  xix.  5). 

When  the  two  friends  are  about  to  be  torn  from  each 
other,  with  little  hope  of  renewing  their  blessed  intercourse, 
Jonathan  finds  solace  in  the  fact  of  the  Divine  appointment, 
and  the  Lord  being  between  them.  Between  them,  not  in 
the  sense  of  division,  but  of  connection  ;  as  the  ocean  unites 
us  with  distant  lands,  whose  shores  she  laves,  whose  freights 
she  bears  to  our  wharves.  However  far  we  are  parted  from 
those  we  love,  we  are  intimately  near  in  God,  whose  presence 
infills  and  enwraps  us — thus  streams  mingle  in  the  ocean  to 
which  they  pour  tributary  tides. 

And  when,  in  the  last  interview  the  friends  ever  had, 
they  met  by  some  secret  arrangement  in  a  wood,  "Jonathan 
came  to  David  there,  and  strengthened  his  hand  in  God." 
All  that  those  words  imply  it  is  not  easy  to  write :  our 
hearts  interpret  the  words,  and  imagine  the  stream  of  holy 
encouragement  that  poured  from  that  noble  spirit  into  the 
heart  of  his  friend.  He  must  be  strong  who  would 


5  2  Jf  onatljan. 

strengthen  another;  he  must  have  God,  and  be  in  God, 
who  would  give  the  consolations  of  God  to  his  brother; 
and  we  can  easily  understand  how  the  anguish  of  Jonathan's 
soul,  torn  between  filial  devotion  to  his  father  and  his  love 
to  his  friend,  must  have  driven  him  back  on  those  resources 
of  the  Divine  nature,  which  are  the  only  solace  of  men 
whose  lives  have  been  cast  in  the  same  fiery  crucible. 

II.  CONSIDER  THE  CONFLICT  OF  JONATHAN'S  LIFE. — He 
was  devoted  to  his  father.  He  was  always  found  associated 
with  that  strange  dark  character,  melancholy  to  madness, 
the  prey  of  evil  spirits,  and  yet  so  keenly  susceptible  to 
music,  and  so  quick  to  respond  to  the  appeal  of  chivalry, 
patriotism,  and  generous  feeling;  resembling  some  moun 
tain  lake,  alternately  mirroring  mountains  and  skies,  and 
swept  by  dark  storms.  Father  and  son  were  together  in 
life,  as  they  were  "undivided  in  death." 

When  his  father  first  ascended  the  throne  of  Israel,  the 
Lord  was  with  him,  and  Jonathan  knew  it  (i  Sam.  xx.  13). 
It  must  have  been  an  exceeding  delight  to  him  to  feel  that 
the  claims  of  the  father  were  identical  with  the  claims  of 
God,  and  the  heart  of  the  young  man  must  have  leapt  up  in 
a  blended  loyalty  to  both.  But  the  fair  prospect  was  soon 
overcast.  The  Lord  departed  from  Saul ;  and  immediately 
his  power  to  hold  the  kingdom  waned,  the  Philistines 
invaded  his  land,  his  weapons  of  defence  failed  him,  his 
people  followed  him  trembling,  and  Samuel  told  him  that 
his  kingdom  could  not  continue.  Then  followed  that  dark 
day  when  Saul  intruded  on  the  priestly  office  in  offering 
sacrifice.  The  ominous  sentence  was  spoken,  "The  Lord 
hath  sought  Him  a  man  after  his  own  heart,  and  the  Lord 
hath  appointed  him  prince  unto  his  own  people." 

From  that  moment  Saul's  course  was  always  downward ; 
but  Jonathan  clung  to  him  as  if  he  hoped  that  by  his  own 
allegiance  to  God  he  might  reverse  the  effects  of  his  father's 
failure,  and  still  hold  the  kingdom  for  their  race. 


31  Ihin  gtffiniltjr.  53 


At  first  this  was  not  so  difficult.  There  was  no  one  to 
divide  his  heart  with  his  father;  it  was  not,  therefore,  a 
hardship  for  him  to  imperil  his  life  in  unequal  conflict  with 
the  Philistines;  and  his  heart  must  have  been  fired  with  the 
gladdest  anticipations  as,  through  the  woods  where  honey 
dropped,  he  pursued  the  Philistines,  with  all  Israel  at  his 
heel,  smiting  them  from  Michmash  to  Aijalon.  His  hopes, 
however,  were  destined  to  disappointment;  for  instead  of 
the  revival  which  he  had  pictured  to  himself,  he  saw  his 
father  drifting  further  down  the  strong  tide  that  bore  him 
out  from  God.  Saul's  failure  in  the  matter  of  the  destruc 
tion  cf  the  Amalekites,  the  dark  spirit  which  possessed  and 
terrified  him,  the  alienation  of  Samuel  —  these  things  acted 
as  a  moral  paralysis  on  that  brave  and  eager  heart.  What 
could  he  do  to  reverse  the  decisions  of  that  fated  soul;  how 
stem  the  torrent;  how  turn  the  enemy  from  the  gate? 
Surely  it  was  this  hopelessness  of  being  able  to  alter  any  of 
these  things  that  made  him  unable  to  meet  Goliath.  Many 
a  time  as  he  heard  the  terrible  roar  of  the  giant's  challenge, 
he  must  have  felt  the  uprisings  of  a  noble  impulse  to  meet 
him,  slay  him,  or  die.  But  there  came  over  his  soul  the 
blight  of  despair.  What  could  he  do,  when  the  destiny  of 
the  land  he  loved  seemed  already  settled  ? 

When  he  woke  up  to  find  how  truly  he  loved  David,  a 
new  difficulty  entered  his  life.  Not  outwardly,  because, 
though  Saul  eyed  David  with  jealousy,  there  was  no  open 
rupture.  David  went  in  and  out  of  the  palace,  was  in  a 
position  of  trust,  and  was  constantly  at  hand  for  the  inter 
course  for  which  each  yearned.  But  when  the  flames  of 
hostility,  long  smouldering  in  Saul's  heart,  broke  forth,  the 
true  anguish  of  his  life  began.  On  the  one  hand,  his  duty 
as  son  and  subject  held  him  to  his  father,  though  he  knew 
his  father  was  doomed,  and  that  union  with  him  meant 
disaster  to  himself;  on  the  other  hand,  all  his  heart  cried 
out  for  David. 

His    love    for    David     made    him    eager    to    promote 


54 

reconciliation  between  his  father  and  his  friend.  It  was 
only  when  repeated  failure  had  proved  the  fruitlessness  of 
his  dream  that  he  abandoned  it ;  and  then  the  thought  must 
have  suggested  itself  to  him :  Why  not  extricate  yourself 
from  this  sinking  ship  whilst  there  is  time  ?  Why  not  join 
your  fortunes  with  his  whom  God  hath  chosen  ?  The  new 
fair  kingdom  of  the  future  is  growing  up  around  him — 
identify  yourself  with  it,  though  it  be  against  your  father. 

The  temptation  was  specious  and  masterful,  but  it  fell 
blunt  and  ineffectual  at  his  feet.  Stronger  than  the  ties  of 
human  love  were  those  of  duty,  sonship,  loyalty  to  God's 
anointed  king;  and  in  some  supreme  moment  he  turned 
his  back  on  the  appeal  of  his  heart,  and  elected  to  stand 
beside  his  father.  From  that  choice  he  never  flinched. 
WThen  David  departed  whither  he  would,  Jonathan  went 
back  to  the  city.  His  father  might  sneer  at  his  league  with 
the  son  of  Jesse,  but  he  held  his  peace ;  and  when  finally 
Saul  started  for  his  last  battle  with  the  Philistines,  Jonathan 
fought  beside  him,  though  he  knew  that  David  was  some 
how  involved  in  alliance  with  them. 

It  was  one  of  the  grandest  exhibitions  of  the  triumph  of 
principle  over  passion,  of  duty  over  inclination,  that  the 
annals  of  history  record.  Jonathan  died  as  a  hero ;  not 
only  because  of  his  prowess  in  battle  with  his  country's  foes, 
but  because  of  his  victory  over  the  strongest  passion  of  the 
human  heart,  the  love  of  a  strong  man,  in  which  were 
blended  the  strands  of  a  common  religion,  a  common 
enthusiasm  for  all  that  was  good  and  right. 

Conflicts  like  these  await  us  all — when  the  appointment 
of  God  says  one  thing,  and  the  choice  of  the  heart  says 
another ;  when  the  wind  sets  in  from  one  quarter,  and  the 
tide  from  the  opposite  one.  Whenever  this  befalls  thee, 
may  God's  grace  enable  thee  to  follow  as  straight  a  course, 
as  true  to  the  loftiest  dictates  of  conscience,  as  Jonathan, 
the  son  of  Saul ! 


VIII. 

(Jlhtisifo  t\)t  H0us*,  anb 


(  PSALM  lix.  9,  17.) 

1  Unholy  phantoms  from  the  deep  arise, 
And  gather  through  the  gloom  before  mine  eyes  ; 
But  all  shall  vanish  at  the  dawning  ray  — 
When  the  day  breaks  the  shadows  flee  away. 

He  maketh  all  things  good  unto  his  own, 
For  them  in  every  darkness  light  is  strewn  ; 
He  will  make  good  the  gloom  of  this  my  day  — 
Till  that  day  break  and  shadows  flee  away.  " 

S.  J.  STONE. 

the  Hebrew  the  difference  between  the  words 
"  wait  "  and  "  sing,"  as  appearing  in  this  passage, 
is  very  slight.  They  are  spelt,  indeed,  alike, 
with  the  exception  of  a  single  letter.  The 
parallelism,  therefore,  between  these  two  verses 
is  very  marked. 

9.   Upon  Thee,  O  my  strength,  I  will  wait, 

For  God  is  my  high  tower. 
17.   Unto  Thee,  O  my  strength,  I  will  sing, 
For  God  is  my  high  tower. 

The  inscription  indicates  the  occasion  on  which  this  Psalm, 
one  of  the  oldest,  was  written.  "  A  Psalm  of  David  :  when 
Saul  sent,  and  they  watched  the  house  to  kill  him."  The 
allusions  of  the  Psalm  substantiate  this  title,  especially  that 
of  the  sixth  and  fourteenth  verses,  in  which  the  Psalmist 
compares  the  troop  of  soldiers,  bitten  with  their  master's 
spleen,  who  encamped  around  his  house,  belching  out  their 
curses  and  threats,  to  the  vicious  curs  of  an  Eastern  city, 
that  prowl  the  streets  by  day  and  night,  clearing  them  of  their 
offal  and  refuse,  and  filling  the  night  with  their  uproar. 


56  (Hhttstto  ilje  ?famse,  anb  Utt. 


"  They  return  at  evening  ;  they  make  a  noise  like  a  dog, 
And  go  round  about  the  city  : 
Behold,  they  belch  out  with  their  mouth." 

But  meanwhile  David  is  in  his  house,  waiting  upon  God, 
and  singing  aloud  of  his  mercy  in  the  morning. 

I.  THE  EVENTS  WHICH  LED  UP  TO  THIS  ASSAULT  ON 
DAVID'S  HOUSE.  —  As  the  victorious  army  returned  home 
from  the  valley  of  Elah,  the  whole  land  went  forth  in 
greeting.  The  reapers  stayed  their  labours  in  the  field  ; 
and  the  vineyards  were  depleted  of  the  women  that  plucked 
the  grapes,  and  the  men  that  trod  them  in  the  presses. 
From  village  to  town  the  contagious  enthusiasm  spread  ; 
and  the  women  came  forth  out  of  all  the  cities  of  Israel, 
with  song  and  dance,  with  timbrels  and  tabrets,  to  meet 
King  Saul.  To  the  song  of  victoiy  there  came  this  refrain, 
which  was  strikingly  discordant  to  the  soul  of  the  king  :  — 

"  Saul  hath  slain  his  thousands, 
And  David  his  ten  thousands." 

In  that  hour  the  first  jealous  thought  awoke  in  Saul's 
heart  ;  the  pitted  speck  became  visible  in  the  goodly  fruit 
of  his  character,  which  was  destined  to  rot  and  ruin  all. 
Happy  had  he  been  if  he  had  trodden  the  hell-spark 
beneath  his  feet,  or  extinguished  it  in  seas  of  prayer.  But 
he  nursed  it  till,  to  change  the  simile,  the  trickling  stream 
undermined  the  sea-wall,  and  became  a  raging  turbid  flood. 
"  Saul  was  very  wroth,  and  the  saying  displeased  him  ;  and 
he  eyed  David  from  that  day  and  forward." 

But  Saul  was  more  than  jealous.  He  deliberately  set 
himself  to  thwart  God's  purpose.  Samuel  had  distinctly 
told  him  that  the  Lord  had  rent  the  kingdom  of  Israel  from 
him,  and  had  given  it  to  a  neighbour  of  his  that  was  better 
than  himself.  And,  without  doubt,  as  he  saw  the  stripling 
return  with  Goliath's  head  in  his  hand,  and  as  he  heard  the 
song  of  the  Israelite  women,  the  dread  certainty  suggested 
itself  to  him  that  this  was  the  Divinely  designated  king. 


intent  on  ^turtrcr.  57 

"What  though  he  be,"  said  Saul  to  himself,  as  Herod  in 
after  days,  "I  am  king,  and  will  see  to  it  that  this  prediction 
at  least  shall  not  come  true.  A  dead  man  cannot  reign ; 
and  there  are  many  ways  short  of  direct  murder  by  which 
a  man's  life  can  be  taken.  But  this  is  what  it  must 
come  to."  He  supposed  that  if  only  he  could  take  David's 
life,  God's  purpose  would  miscarry,  and  Samuel's  predictions 
be  falsified.  He  is  not  the  last  man  that  has  descended  into 
the  arena  to  match  himself  with  God,  and  been  crushed 
in  the  attempt.  No  student  of  history  is  likely  to  forget 
the  cry  of  Julian  the  Apostate,  which  mirrors  the  experience 
of  thousands  more,  "  Thou  hast  conquered,  O  Galilean  ! " 

Saul's  murderous  passion  sought  to  fulfil  itself  in  many 
ways.  On  the  following  day,  as  David  essayed  to  soothe 
him  with  his  harp,  he  twice  hurled  his  javelin  at  the 
minstrel,  in  the  hope  that  if  it  pinned  him  to  the  wall 
the  act  might  be  imputed  to  insanity ;  but  on  each  occasion 
the  weapon  sped  harmlessly  past,  to  quiver  in  the  wall 
behind,  instead  of  in  that  young  heart. 

Next,  Saul  gave  him  an  important  military  commission, 
and  made  him  his  captain  over  a  thousand,  in  the  vain  hope 
that  this  sudden  elevation  into  the  slippery  place  of  worldly 
prominence  and  power  might  turn  his  head  dizzy,  and  lead 
him  to  some  traitorous  deed,  for  which  death  would  be  the 
obvious  penalty.  But  David  behaved  himself  wisely  in 
all  his  ways,  avoiding  every  pitfall,  eluding  every  snare; 
so  that  the  king,  who  watched  closely  for  his  falling,  became 
more  than  ever  convinced  that  he  was  God's  ward,  and 
stood  in  awe  of  him. 

Then  he  offered  the  young  soldier  the  hand  of  his  eldest 
daughter  in  marriage,  and  treacherously  withdrew  the  offer 
as  the  time  of  the  nuptials  approached — the  intention  being 
to  arouse  his  ardent  spirit  to  retaliate,  and  so  to  become 
liable  to  the  charge  of  treason  ;  but  all  his  efforts  failed 
to  arouse  even  a  transient  impulse  for  revenge. 

Again,  by  the  lure  of  his  second  daughter,  Michal,  as 


58  ©tttsito  tire  IfrttsCt  attfc  3n. 


prize  to  be  won  by  the  evidence  of  one  hundred  Philistines 
having  been  slain,  he  sought  to  involve  his  rival  in  frays  out 
of  which  only  a  miracle  could  bring  him  unhurt.  But 
David  returned  unscathed  with  double  the  number  required; 
and  the  love  of  the  people  gfew. 

Thwarted  thus  far,  the  God-forsaken  monarch,  driven  by 
the  awful  fury  of  his  jealousy,  spake  to  Jonathan  and  to  all 
his  servants  that  they  should  rid  him  of  David's  tormenting 
presence  :  but  of  course  this  plot  failed  ;  for  Jonathan 
delighted  much  in  David,  whilst  all  Israel  and  Judah  loved 
him,  for  he  went  out  and  came  in  before  them.  Jonathan 
indeed  stood  in  the  breach  to  turn  away  his  father's  anger, 
and  elicited  from  him  the  promise  that  his  friend  should  not 
be  put  to  death.  But  his  pleadings  and  reasonings  had  only 
a  temporary  effect  ;  for  shortly  after,  as  the  young  minstrel 
endeavoured  to  charm  away  the  spirit  of  melancholy,  the 
javelin  again  quivered  past  him  from  the  royal  hand,  and 
would  have  transfixed  him  to  the  wall,  but  for  his  lithe 
agility.  It  was  the  evening,  and  David  fled  to  his  young 
wife  and  home.  And  Saul,  intent  on  murder,  "  sent 
messengers  unto  David's  house,  to  watch  him,  and  to 
slay  him  in  the  morning."  These  were  the  men  whom 
he  characterised  so  vividly,  as  we  have  seen. 

Michal's  quick  wit  saved  her  husband's  life.  She  let  him 
down  through  the  window,  and  he  went  and  escaped  ; 
whilst  an  image,  covered  with  a  quilt  and  placed  in  the 
bed,  led  Saul's  emissaries  to  suppose  that  he  was  sick. 
There  was  no  real  occasion,  however,  for  her  to  resort  to 
either  teraphim  or  deceit,  to  secure  his  safety  from  her 
father's  murderous  rage  ;  for  when,  shortly  after,  the  king 
proposed  to  snatch  his  prey  from  the  midst  of  the  sacred 
college,  and  from  the  very  presence  of  Samuel,  three  sets  of 
messengers  were  rendered  powerless  by  the  Divine  afflatus, 
and  an  arrest  was  put  on  Saul  himself,  who  was  prostrated 
before  the  mighty  impression  of  God's  Spirit,  and  lay  help 
less  on  the  earth  (i  Sam.  xix.  24). 


ifc  JJxbnuj  in  (Soft.  59 

That  must  have  been  a  marvellous  experience  for  David. 
To  the  eye  of  sense  there  was  absolutely  nothing  to  prevent 
the  king's  messengers,  or  the  king  himself,  from  taking  him. 
But  by  faith  he  knew  that  he  was  being  kept  within  the 
curtains  of  an  impalpable  pavilion,  and  that  he  was  hidden 
beneath  an  invisible  wing.  As  the  air,  itself  invisible,  fills 
the  diving  bell  and  saves  the  inmates  from  the  inrushing 
water ;  as  a  stream  of  electricity  poured  over  a  heap  of 
jewels  protects  them  from  the  hand  of  the  plunderer;  as 
the  raying  forth  of  Christ's  majesty  flung  his  captors  to  the 
ground— so  did  the  Presence  of  God  environ  and  protect 
both  Samuel  and  David.  And  thus  our  God  will  still  do 
for  each  of  his  persecuted  ones. 

"  In  the  secret  of  his  tabernacle  shall  He  hide  them, 
He  shall  set  them  up  upon  a  rock." 

II.  DAVID'S  COMPOSURE  AMID  THE  ASSAULTS  OF  HIS 
FOES. — This  hunted  man  is  a  lesson  for  men  and  angels. 
Saul  is  his  inveterate  foe ;  traps  and  snares  are  laid  for  him 
on  all  sides.  Sometimes  the  sun  shines  on  his  golden 
locks,  but  more  often  the  skies  are  thick  with  cloud  and 
storm.  Now  the  women  of  Israel  welcome  him ;  and 
again  he  is  torn  from  his  wife,  and  driven  forth  from  his 
home  to  go  whither  he  may.  Yet  all  the  while  his  heart  is 
tranquil  and  reposeful — yea,  it  actually  breaks  forth  into 
praise,  as  the  closing  verses  of  this  psalm  prove.  What  was 
the  secret  of  his  serenity  ? 

It  lay,  first,  in  the  conviction  of  what  God  was.  God 
was  his  strength — that  was  God  within  him;  God  was 
his  high  tower — that  was  God  without  and  around  him. 
He  was  God-possessed  and  God-encompassed.  God  dwelt 
in  him,  and  he  in  God ;  there  was  no  demand  for  which  He 
was  not  sufficient,  no  peril  which  He  could  not  keep  at 
bay.  What  a  blessed  conception  is  here !  You  are  too 
weak  for  some  great  task  which  has  been  entrusted  to 
your  care.  In  your  judgment  it  would  task  the  energies  of 


60  ©utsite  tljc  Hotise,  anfc  fit. 


the  best  and  wisest  you  know  ;  but  lo  !  it  has  been  placed 
in  your  hands.  "O  Lord,"  you  cry,  "wherewith  shall  I 
save  Israel  ?  Behold,  my  family  is  the  poorest  in  Manasseh  ; 
and  I  am  the  least  in  my  father's  house."  Then  the 
Spirit  of  God  reveals  God  as  strength,  that  He  may  be 
so  received  into  the  heart  as  to  become  the  principle  of  a 
new  and  heaven-born  energy,  which  shall  rise  superior 
to  every  difficulty,  and  breast  the  mightiest  waves  that 
would  beat  the  swimmer  back.  Listen  to  the  laughter  of 
the  apostle's  soul,  as  he  surveys  herculean  tasks  on  the  one 
hand,  and  enormous  opposing  obstacles  on  the  other,  and 
says  with  unhesitating  assurance,  "  I  can  do  all  things 
through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  me."  O  weakest  of  the 
weak,  remember  Jesus  Christ,  and  take  Him  to  be  the 
strength  of  thy  life  ;  be  strong,  yea  be  strong,  in  the  grace 
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Or  turn  to  the  other  conception.  See  those  fugitive 
soldiers,  hotly  pursued  by  their  enemies  as  clouds  before 
the  Biscay  gale  ;  on  yonder  cliff  is  perched  a  fortress,  whose 
mighty  walls  and  towers,  if  only  they  can  be  reached, 
will  ensure  protection.  Breathlessly  they  scale  the  ascent, 
rush  across  the  drawbridge,  let  down  the  portcullis,  and 
fling  themselves  on  the  sward,  and  know  that  they  are  safe. 
God  is  all  that  to  the  soul  which  has  learnt  to  put  Him 
between  itself  and  everything.  We  have  not  even  to  flee 
to  God,  for  that  implies  that  we  have  been  allured  out  of 
Him;  but  we  are  to  abide  in  Him,  to  stand  fast  in  the 
liberty  wherewith  He  has  made  us  free  ;  to  reckon 
that,  whatever  Satan  may  say  and  however  he  may 
rage,  we  are  absolutely  secure  so  long  as  we  abide 
in  God. 

When  we  realize  these  things,  and  add  the  further  con 
ception  with  which  the  Psalm  closes,  that  God  is  the  fount 
of  mercy  :  when  we  dare  to  believe  that  there  is  mercy  in 
Saul's  hate,  mercy  in  the  difficulties  of  our  lot,  mercy  in  the 
clouds  that  veil  our  sky  and  the  flints  that  line  our  path, 


0n  <&ob.  61 

mercy  in  the  sharpest,  bitterest  experiences — then  we  can 
sing,  we  can  say  with  David  : 

4 '  I  will  sing  of  Thy  strength  ; 

Yea,  I  will  sing  aloud  of  Thy  mercy  in  the  morning, 
For  Thou  hast  been  my  high  tower,  and  a  refuge  in  the  day  of  my 
distress. " 

It  lay,  next,  in  his  attitude  towards  God.  "  O  my 
strength,  I  will  wait  on  Thee."  The  word  so  translated  is 
used  in  the  Hebrew  of  the  shepherd  watching  his  flock,  of 
the  watchman  on  the  tower,  of  the  sentry  passing  to  and  fro 
upon  his  beat.  Is  this  our  habitual  attitude?  Too  many 
direct  their  prayer,  but  do  not  look  up  the  ladder  for  the 
descending  angels,  laden  with  the  heavenly  answer.  Many 
a  ship  passes  in  the  night,  touching  at  our  wharf  with  the 
precious  freight  which  we  have  been  praying  for;  but  we 
are  not  there  to  receive  it.  Many  a  relieving  force  comes 
up  the  pass  with  glittering  spears  and  flashing  helmets ;  but 
our  gates  are  closed.  Many  a  dove  comes  to  our  window 
from  the  weltering  waste  of  waters ;  but  we  are  too 
immersed  in  other  things  to  notice  its  light  tap.  We  pray, 
but  we  do  not  wait;  we  ask,  but  we  do  not  expect  to 
receive ;  we  knock,  but  we  are  gone  before  the  door  is 
opened. 

This  lesson  is  for  us  to  learn — to  reckon  on  God ;  to 
tarry  for  the  vision  ;  to  wait  till  Samuel  comes  ;  to  believe 
that  He  who  taught  us  to  trust  cannot  deceive  our  trust; 
to  be  sure  that  none  of  them  that  wait  on  Him  can  be 
ashamed  ;  to  appropriate  by  faith ;  and  to  know  that  we  have 
the  petitions  we  desired,  nay,  to  do  more,  to  take  them 
and  count  them  ours,  though  we  have  no  responsive 
emotion,  no  sense  of  possession — this  is  waiting  upon  God : 
this  will  keep  us  calm  and  still,  though  dreaded  evils  frown 
around  our  homestead ;  this  will  change  our  waiting  into 
song. 


IX. 
0f 

( i  SAMUEL  xx.  21-37. ) 

Toils  and  foes  assailing,  friends  quailing,  hearts  failing 

Shall  threat  in  vain  : 
If  He  be  providing,  presiding,  and  guiding 

To  Him  again." 

T.  M.  NEALE. 

TW/ONATHAN  had  considerable  influence  with  his 
father.  Saul  did  nothing,  either  great  or  small, 
which  he  did  not  "  uncover  to  his  ear."  For  his 
love's  sake,  as  well  as  for  his  father's,  he  was  ex 
tremely  eager  to  effect  a  reconciliation  between 
him  to  whom  he  owed  the  allegiance  of  son  and 
subject,  and  this  fair  shepherd-minstrel-warrior,  who  had  so 
recently  cast  a  sunny  gleam  upon  his  life.  In  all  probability 
Jonathan  was  much  David's  senior;  but  in  his  pure  and 
noble  breast  the  fountain  of  love  rose  unquenched  by  years. 
On  more  than  one  occasion  he  had  communed  with  his 
father  concerning  his  friend,  so  far  impressing  Saul  as  to 
make  him  swear  that  David  should  not  be  put  to  death; 
thus  when  David  returned  in  hot  haste  from  Naioth,  leaving 
Saul  under  the  spell  of  prophecy,  and  asked  him  what  he 
had  done  to  arouse  such  inveterate  hate,  asserting  that  there 
was  but  a  step  between  him  and  death,  Jonathan  did  not 
hesitate  to  assure  him  of  his  willingness  to  do  whatever  his 
soul  desired. 

It  was  the  eve  of  the  feast  of  the  new  moon,  when  Saul 
invited  the  chief  men  of  his  kingdom  to  a  banquet ;  and  the 
friends  agreed  that  this  was  an  opportune  moment  for  test 
ing  the  real  sentiments  of  Saul.  David  suggested  that  he 
should  absent  himself  from  the  royal  banquet ;  visiting  his 


f&Ije  Claims  of  JFnen&sljtp.  63 

father's  home  at  Bethlehem  instead.  It  would  be  quite 
easy  for  him  to  do  this,  and  yet  be  back  by  the  third  day. 
In  the  meantime,  Jonathan  was  to  watch  narrowly  his 
father's  behaviour,  and  mark  his  tone,  noting  whether  it 
was  rough  or  kind. 

The  general  outline  of  this  scheme  was  arranged  within 
the  palace ;  but  there  were  confidences  to  be  exchanged  so 
intimate;  words  to  be  said  so  tender;  a  covenant  to  be 
entered  into  so  pathetic ;  a  means  of  communication  to  be 
arranged  so  secret— that  it  seemed  wiser  to  continue  the 
conversation  in  some  secluded  spot,  where  only  the  living 
things  of  the  woods,  that  can  tell  no  tales,  could  behold  the 
flowing  tears,  and  hear  the  outbreak  of  those  manly  sobs 
that  could  not  be  choked  down.  There  was  indeed  one 
other  witness ;  for  Jonathan  was  a  deeply-religious  man.  It 
was  his  habit  to  live  in  the  presence  of  the  God  of  Israel ; 
and  to  Him  he  made  his  appeal  as  he  bared  his  heart  to  his 
friend,  entreating  him  to  deal  truly  with  him ;  and  pleading 
that  in  that  certain  future,  when  God  had  cut  off  David's 
enemies  from  the  earth,  he  would  not  forget  the  claims  of 
friendship,  and  cut  off  his  kindness  from  his  house. 

Surely  the  fateful  field  of  Gilboa  was  already  casting  a 
premonitory  shadow  over  Jonathan's  heart ;  and  he  felt  the 
time  would  come  when  David  would  exercise  supreme 
power,  and  might  be  tempted  to  stamp  out  the  possibility 
of  rivalry  on  the  part  of  Jonathan's  heirs  by  exterminating 
the  royal  house.  In  his  anxiety  he  made  him  swear  again, 
and  afterwards  proposed  the  ingenious  and  significant  plan 
in  which  his  art  and  directions  to  the  little  lad  would 
express  by  a  swift  telegraphy  the  secret  which  would  either 
lift  David  to  peace  and  safety,  or  thrust  him  into  the  depths 
of  despair. 

It  is  impossible  to  read  the  story  without  thinking  of  the 
boys  that  carry  the  buff-coloured  envelopes,  so  little  con 
scious  of  what  the  messages  may  mean  to  those  in  whose 
hands  they  place  them,  here  filling  them  with  ecstasy,  and 


64  We  $tessa0e  rrf  tfre  Jlrrofos. 

there  with  bitter  anguish.  The  arrows  are  flying  still ;  the 
little  lads  are  fulfilling  their  unconscious  ministries  with 
respect  to  them;  often  they  fall  short  of  the  mark,  then 
again  they  fly  beyond  it.  How  often  they  are  beyond  !  O 
strong  arm,  why  shoot  them  with  so  much  energy  ?  O  wind, 
why  carry  them  so  lightly?  Hearts  are  breaking  as  the 
bow-string  twangs.  Lives  take  their  colour  of  light  or 
shadow  ever  after,  just  because  of  a  few  yards  less  or 
more ! 

I.  THE  ARROWS  TAUGHT  THAT  A  STRONG  AND  NOBLE 
FRIEND  WAS  STANDING  IN  THE  BREACH. — Jonathan  was  a 
jewel  of  the  first  water ;  unequalled  in  his  use  of  arms, 
daring  to  recklessness  on  the  field  of  battle,  swifter  than 
the  eagle,  stronger  than  the  lion  :  yet  tender  as  a  woman  ; 
true  to  his  friend ;  so  capable  of  inspiring  attachment,  that 
his  armour-bearer  would  face  an  army  at  his  side ;  so 
tenacious  of  his  principles,  that  he  clung  to  his  father's 
fallen  fortunes,  even  though  he  had  suffered  from  that 
father  all  that  jealousy  could  suggest  of  bitter  insult  and 
murderous  hate. 

It  was  no  child's  play  that  he  undertook  in  the  sacred 
name  of  friendship ;  and  probably  he  was  quite  prepared 
for  the  outburst  that  followed  his  manly  protest  for  his 
absent  friend.  On  the  first  feast  day,  Saul  noticed  David's 
absence,  but  said  nothing ;  on  the  second,  however,  when 
his  seat  was  still  vacant,  he  turned  sharply  on  his  son 
Jonathan  and  asked  the  reason,  "  Why  cometh  not  the 
son  of  Jesse  to  meat,  neither  yesterday,  nor  to-day  ? " 
Jonathan  instantly  made  the  preconcerted  answer  about 
David's  desire  to  see  his  family,  and  made  out  that  he  had 
himself  given  permission  for  his  absence.  This  identifica 
tion  of  himself  with  David  brought  on  Jonathan  an  out 
burst  of  ungovernable  rage.  Saul's  fury  knew  no  bounds  : 
with  stinging  allusion  to  Jonathan's  mother,  his  own  wife, 
as  the  source  of  his  son's  perversity ;  with  taunts  that  were 


fnr  iljc  Worst.  65 

intended  to  instil  into  Jonathan's  heart  the  poison  which 
was  working  in  his  own  ;  with  demands  that  David  should 
be  instantly  fetched  and  put  to  death — the  monarch  clearly 
showed  his  inveterate  hatred  and  determination  that  the 
son  of  Jesse  should  no  longer  tarry  above  ground.  Jonathan 
made  one  vain  attempt  to  reason  with  the  furious  monarch  ; 
he  might  as  well  have  tried  to  arrest  the  swelling  of  Jordan 
in  the  time  of  flood.  In  a  paroxysm  of  ungovernable 
passion,  the  king  cast  his  spear  at  him  to  smite  him. 
Then  Jonathan  knew  that  they  must  prepare  for  the 
worst;  and  left  the  table  in  fierce  anger,  being  grieved 
for  his  friend,  because  his  father  had  done  him  shame. 

Never  be  ashamed  to  own  a  friend.  Do  not  count  him 
your  friend  whose  name  you  are  ashamed  to  mention,  and 
with  whose  lot  you  blush  to  be  identified ;  but  when  you 
have  entered  into  an  alliance  with  another  soul,  whom  you 
love  as  Jonathan  loved  David,  dare  to  stand  up  for  him  at 
all  cost  to  your  comfort  and  relations  with  those  who  do 
not  know  your  friend  as  you  know  him.  "  To  be  obscure, 
and  poor,  and  out  of  court-favour  ?  " — that  is  the  greater 
reason  why  you  should  take  his  part.  It  is  a  noble  thing 
when  a  man  or  woman  in  some  gay  and  frivolous  circle, 
where  fashion  and  pride  rule,  dares  to  take  the  part  of  some 
unpopular  righteous  cause,  of  some  maligned  but  holy 
servant  of  God,  of  some  unpolished  but  sterling  associate. 
This  stamps  the  confessor  with  the  guinea-die  of  native 
worth.  It  is  easier  to  storm  a  fort  than  to  withstand  the 
covert  sneer,  the  contemptuous  look. 

But  there  is  something  still  nobler,  when  one  dares  in 
any  company  to  avow  his  loyalty  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  Like 
David,  He  is  now  in  obscurity  and  disrepute;  his  name  is 
not  popular ;  his  gospel  is  misrepresented ;  his  followers 
are  subjected  to  rebuke  and  scorn.  These  are  days  when 
to  stand  up  for  anything  more  than  mere  conventional 
religion  must  cost  something ;  and  for  this  very  reason,  let 
us  never  flinch,  but  as  we  trust  that  He  will  confess  our 
E 


66  ^(je  ^Ucasage  of  tljz  JVrrotos. 

name  before  his  Father  and  the  angels,  let  us  not  be 
ashamed  of  his.  Jonathan's  arrows  showed  that  he  did 
not  hesitate  to  stand  alone  for  David ;  let  our  words  assure 
Him,  who  is  just  now  hidden,  that  we  will  bear  scorn, 
obloquy,  and  death,  for  his  dear  name. 

Never  be  ashamed  /<?  speak  up  for  the  cause  of  Truth. 
How  often  the  spirit  of  expediency  whispers  in  our  ear, 
"  Let  it  pass ;  wait  till  the  dinner  is  done ;  do  not  make  a 
gazing-stock  of  yourself;  take  an  opportunity  of  private 
remonstrance;  sit  still,  be  pleasant,  we  will  see  what  can 
be  done  presently."  Jonathan  took  the  nobler  course. 
The  dainties  were  on  his  plate,  but  he  would  not  touch 
them ;  the  cup  was  in  his  hand,  but  he  would  not  place  it 
to  his  lips ;  his  father  was  before  him,  with  his  claims  on 
his  reverence  and  respect,  the  king,  with  the  power  of  life 
and  death  in  his  mouth ;  but  he  dared  not  hold  his  peace. 
Had  it  been  simply  a  question  of  his  own  position  or 
respect,  of  mere  politeness,  civility,  courtesy  due  to  age — 
he  would  have  been  the  first  to  put  his  hand  upon  his 
mouth,  and  be  silent.  But  it  was  a  question  of  Truth, 
Righteousness,  Justice  ;  and  if  he  were  to  be  still, 
the  very  stones  in  the  wall  would  cry  out  against  him, 
and  he  would  forfeit  the  respect  of  his  own  con 
science, 

But  it  may  be  asked,  Is  it  not  unseemly  to  obtrude 
opinions  amongst  those  who  are  older  and  more  learned 
than  ourselves  ?  Yes ;  but  there  is  all  the  difference  in  the 
world  between  opinions  spun  like  cobwebs  from  the  brain, 
or  caught  up  at  second-hand,  and  those  great  basic  prin 
ciples  of  Truth,  Morality,  and  Right,  which  are  witnessed 
to  by  conscience.  And  when  you  stand  up  for  these,  you 
do  not  seek  to  exalt  your  own  goodness,  or  win  an  advan 
tage  ;  but  simply  to  lift  the  standard  from  being  trampled 
in  the  mud.  Let  the  arrows  witness  to  the  simplicity  and 
fervour  of  your  allegiance  to  whatever  is  lovely  and  of  good 
report. 


gtiritt*  purpose.  67 

II.  THE  ARROWS  SPOKE  OF  IMMINENT  DANGER. — 
"  Jonathan  knew  that  it  was  determined  of  his  father  to  put 
David  to  death."  As  the  lad  ran,  Jonathan  shot  an  arrow 
beyond  him  :  "  And  as  soon  as  the  lad  was  gone,  David 
arose  out  of  a  place  towards  the  south,  and  fell  on  his  face 
to  the  ground,  and  bowed  himself  three  times,  and  they 
kissed  one  another,  and  wept  one  with  another,  until  David 
exceeded."  There  was  no  need  for  Jonathan  to  enter  into 
explanations,  David  knew  that  "the  Lord  had  sent  him 
away"  (22). 

"The  arrows  are  beyond  thee."  You  have  hoped  against 
hope ;  you  have  tried  to  keep  your  position ;  you  have  done 
your  duty,  pleaded  your  cause,  sought  the  intercession  of 
your  friends,  prayed,  wept,  agonized :  but  it  is  all  in  vain ; 
the  arrow's  flight  proves  that  you  must  go  whither  you  may. 
Behind  you  is  the  sunny  morning,  before  you  a  louring  sky; 
behind  you  the  blessed  enjoyment  of  friendship,  wife, 
home,  royal  favour  and  popular  adulation,  before  you  an 
outcast's  life.  The  heart  clings  to  the  familiar  and  beloved. 
But  the  message  of  those  arrows  cannot  be  resisted.  There 
is  no  alternative  but  to  tear  yourself  away,  take  your  life  in 
your  hand,  and  go  forth,  though  you  know  not  whither. 
But  take  these  thoughts  for  your  comfort. 

(1)  There  are  things  we  never  leave  behind.     David  had 
an  inalienable  possession  in  the  love  of  his  friend,  in  the 
devotion  of  the  people,  in  the  memory  of  God's  goodness, 
in  his  experience  of  his  delivering  care,  in  the  sense  of  the 
Divine  presence  which  was  ever  beside  Him,  in  the  Psalms 
which  he  had  already  made  for  himself,  as  well  as  for  the 
world.     There  are  threads  woven  into  the  fabric  of  our  life 
which  can  never  be  extracted  or  obliterated. 

(2)  There   is  a  Divine  purpose  determining  our  course. 
To  the  lad  there  was  but  royal  caprice  in  the  flight  of  the 
arrow.     " What  are  you  doing,  my  little  fellow ?  "     "I  am 
picking  up  the  prince's  arrows ;  we  generally  go  for  game, 
but  he  is  playing  at  it  to-day."     That  was  all  he  knew ;  how 


68  He  $fossajge  of  tljc 

little  did  he  divine  the  purpose  of  his  master,  and  still  less 
realize  that  each  flitting  arrow  was,  so  to  speak,  taken  from 
God's  quiver  and  directed  by  his  hand.  There  is  no 
chance  in  a  good  man's  life.  Let  us  recognise  the  provi 
dence  of  the  trifle.  Let  us  believe  that  behind  the  arrow's 
flight  there  is  the  loving  purpose  of  our  Heavenly  Father. 
He  is  sending  us  away. 

(3)  The  going  forth  is  necessary  to  secure  greater  happiness 
than  we  leave.  Had  David  lingered  in  the  palace,  his  life 
would  have  been  forfeited,  and  he  would  have  missed  all 
the  glory  and  bliss  with  which  his  cup  ran  over  in  after 
years.  This  was  the  way  to  the  throne.  Only  thus  could 
the  sentence  whispered  in  his  ear  by  Samuel  years  before 
be  realized.  This  mountain  pass,  with  its  jagged  flints,  was 
the  path  to  the  happy  valley.  The  nest  was  stirred  up  that 
he  might  acquire  powers  of  flight ;  the  precious  wine  of  his 
life  was  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel  to  lose  its  strong 
flavour  of  must;  the  trellis-work  was  taken  down  that  the 
plant  might  stand  alone. 

Follow  the  arrow's  flight  then — beyond  the  warm  circle 
in  which  you  have  so  long  been  sheltered ;  beyond  the 
south-land  to  the  icy  north ;  beyond  the  known  to  the  un 
known.  Like  another  Abraham,  go  into  the  land  which 
God  will  show  thee ;  like  another  Columbus,  turn  thy  prow 
in  the  wake  of  the  setting  sun.  Let  David's  assurance  be 
yours  : 

"  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  Hades, 
Neither  wilt  Thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption  : 
Thou  wilt  show  me  the  path  of  life." 

III.  THE  ARROWS  TAUGHT  THAT  HUMAN  LOVE  MUST 
SUFFER  SEPARATION. — This  was  the  last  meeting  of  these 
two  noble  hearts  for  a  long  time.  Indeed,  the  friends  only 
met  once  more,  shortly  before  Jonathan's  death.  They  had 
realized  that  this  must  be  so.  The  soul  of  Jonathan, 
especially,  seems  to  have  been  overcast  with  the  impression 


©emaciation.  69 

that  their  happy  intercourse  would  never  again  be  renewed  ; 
therefore  he  pledged  David  with  that  pathetic  vow,  to  be 
faithful  to  his  seed,  and  to  remember  their  love  when  all 
his  enemies  had  been  cut  off.  "  Go  in  peace,"  Jonathan 
said,  finally,  as  though  he  could  no  longer  bear  the  awful 
anguish  of  that  parting.  Forasmuch  as  we  have  sworn 
both  of  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  saying,  "  The  Lord 
shall  be  between  me  and  thee,  and  between  my  seed  and 
thy  seed,  for  ever."  Then  David  arose  and  departed  to 
become  a  fugitive  and  an  outlaw,  liable  at  any  moment  to 
capture  and  violent  death ;  whilst  Jonathan  returned 
thoughtfully  and  sadly  to  the  palace,  where  he  must  spend 
the  rest  of  his  life  in  contact  with  one  who  had  no  sym 
pathy  for  his  noble  sentiments,  who  had  outraged  his 
tenderest  sensibilities. 

These  are  the  hours  that  leave  scars  on  hearts,  and 
whiten  the  hair.  The  world  in  its  rush  is  so  unconscious 
of  all  the  tragedies  which  are  taking  place  around.  Young 
hearts  suffer  till  they  can  suffer  no  more ;  aged  ones  cannot 
forget ;  and  years  after  some  scene  like  this,  eyes  will  film 
with  tears  as  it  is  recalled.  But  Christ  comes  to  us  in 
these  dark  moments,  as  of  old  to  the  disciples,  on  whom 
had  broken  the  full  import  of  their  Master's  approaching 
departure.  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  .  .  .  trust 
in  Me."  There  is  no  comfort  like  this.  To  believe  that 
He  is  ordering  each  detail ;  to  know  that  love  is  prompting 
each  action  of  his  hand,  each  thought  of  his  mind ;  to 
lie  back  on  his  bosom  and  utterly  trust  Him  —  there  is 
nothing  like  this  to  bridge  the  yawning  gulf  of  separation, 
with  its  turbid,  rushing  stream  beneath. 


X. 


(i  SAMUEL  xxi. ;    PSALM  Ivi. ) 

"  But  oh,  whatever  of  worst  ill  betide, 
Choose  not  this  manner  to  evade  your  woe  : 
Be  true  to  God  ;  on  Him  in  faith  abide, 
And  sure  deliverance  you  at  length  shall  know. 
It  may  be  that  some  path  his  hand  will  show 
To  your  dear  earthly  homes  ;  or  He  will  shape 
For  you  at  length  a  way  of  glad  escape. " 

TRENCH. 

is  not  easy  to  walk  with  God.  The  air  that  beats 
around  the  Himalaya  heights  of  Divine  fellowship 
is  rare,  and  hard  to  breathe  ;  human  feet  tire  after 
a  little  :  and  faith,  hard  put  to  it,  is  inclined  to  give 
up  the  effort  of  keeping  step  with  the  Divine  pace. 
So  David  found  it ;  and  there  came  in  his  ex 
perience  a  terrible  lapse,  the  steps  and  consequences  of 
which,  together  with  his  recovery,  must  engage  us  for  a 
space. 

I.  THE  STEPS  OF  DAVID'S  DECLENSION. — The  first 
sign  of  what  was  impending  was  his  remark  to  Jonathan, 
that  there  was  but  a  step  between  himself  and  death 
(i  Sam.  xx.  3).  Evidently  his  faith  was  beginning  to  falter; 
for  nothing  could  have  been  more  definite  than  the  Divine 
assurances  that  he  was  to  be  king.  He  looked  at  God 
through  the  mist  of  circumstances,  which  certainly  to  the 
eye  of  sense  were  sufficiently  threatening,  instead  of  looking 
at  circumstances  through  the  golden  haze  of  God's  very 
present  help.  The  winds  and  waves  were  more  daunting 
than  the  promise  of  God  was  inspiring.  The  javelin  of 


"<50Jr  is  gisW."  71 

Saul  intercepted  the  remembrance  of  the  hour,  now  rapidly 
receding  into  the  distance,  when  he  had  received  the 
anointing  oil  at  the  hand  of  Samuel.  The  apostle  John 
says,  that  it  is  not  enough  to  receive  the  anointing  once,  it 
must  abide  on  us  :  and  this  was  characteristic  of  our  Lord, 
that  the  baptism  saw  the  Spirit  descending,  and  abiding 
upon  Him.  But  perchance  David  relied  too  absolutely  on 
what  he  had  received,  and  neglected  the  daily  renewal  of 
the  heavenly  unction  (John  i.  33,  34 ;  i  John  iii.  24). 

Next,  he  adopted  a  subterfuge,  which  was  not  worthy  of 
him,  nor  of  his  great  and  mighty  Friend.  This  was  a  further 
descent  from  the  high  place  of  heavenly  fellowship  and 
testimony.  God  is  light,  and  light  is  truth  ;  and  those 
who  walk  with  Him  must  put  off  the  works  of  darkness, 
and  put  on  the  armour  of  light,  walking  as  children 
of  the  day. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  day  preceding  the  weekly 
Sabbath,  the  king's  son-in-law  arrived,  with  a  mere  handful 
of  followers  at  the  little  town  of  Nob,  situated  among  the 
hills  about  five  miles  to  the  south  of  Gibeah.  It  was  a 
peaceful  secluded  spot,  apart  from  the  highways  of  com 
merce  and  war,  as  became  the  character  and  calling  of  its 
inhabitants,  who  were  engaged  in  the  service  of  the 
sanctuary.  Four  score  and  six  persons  that  wore  the  linen 
ephod  dwelt  there  with  their  wives,  their  children  and 
sucklings,  their  oxen,  asses,  and  sheep.  Into  the  tranquil 
course  of  existence  in  that  holy  and  retired  spot  hardly  a 
ripple  came  from  the  storms  that  swept  the  outer  world. 
There  was  at  least  no  provision  made  to  repel  invading 
footsteps ;  for  no  weapon  was  found  there  but  the  sword  of 
Goliath,  deposited  years  before  as  a  trophy  by  the  youthful 
champion.  Probably  the  great  annual  convocations  had 
fallen  into  disuse,  and  the  path  to  the  simple  sanctuary  was 
only  trodden  by  occasional  visitors,  such  as  Doeg,  who 
came  to  pay  their  vows,  or  be  cleansed  from  ceremonial 
pollution.  There  was,  evidently,  no  attempt  made  to 


72  3Uttt0st 

prepare  for  large  numbers ;  the  hard  fare  of  the  priests  only 
just  sufficed  for  them,  and  the  presence  of  two  or  three 
additional  strangers  completely  overbalanced  the  slender 
supply ;  there  were  not  five  loaves  of  common  bread  to 
spare. 

It  was  necessary  to  answer  the  questions,  and  allay  the 
suspicions  of  the  priest;  and  David  did  this  by  pleading 
the  urgency  of  the  mission  on  which  his  royal  master  had 
sent  him.  He  led  Ahimelech  to  suppose  that  his  young 
attendants  and  himself  had  been  at  least  three  days  on  this 
expedition ;  that  the  king  had  specially  insisted  on  privacy 
and  secrecy;  and  that  a  large  escort  awaited  him  at  a 
distance.  But  a  chill  struck  to  his  heart  whilst  making 
these  excuses  to  the  simple-minded  priest,  and  enlisting  his 
willing  co-operation  in  the  matter  of  provisions  and  arms, 
as  he  saw  the  dark  visage  of  Doeg,  the  Edomite,  "the 
chiefest  of  the  herdmen  that  belonged  to  Saul."  He  knew 
that  the  whole  story  would  be  mercilessly  retailed  to  the 
vindictive  and  vengeful  monarch.  Uneasiness  for  his 
unsuspecting  host  and  fear  for  himself  filled  his  heart ;  and 
as  soon  as  the  Sabbath  was  over,  he  left  the  spot,  and  with 
all  haste  struck  across  the  hills  in  a  south-westerly  direction 
until  he  cut  the  deep  depression  of  the  valley  of  Elah, 
where  he  had  achieved  the  great  victory  of  his  life.  Its 
aspect  was  strangely  altered,  its  only  tenants  then  being  the 
wild  things  of  earth  and  sky.  Ten  miles  beyond,  lay  the 
proud  Philistine  city  of  Gath,  which  at  that  time  had  sent 
its  champion  forth  in  all  the  pride  of  his  stature  and 
strength.  Behind,  David  had  left  an  implacable  foe. 
What  worse  fate  could  await  him  at  Gath,  than  that  which 
threatened  him  each  hour  he  lingered  within  the  limits  of 
Judah !  He  therefore  resolved  to  make  the  plunge, 
probably  hoping  that  the  shepherd  lad  of  years  ago  would 
not  be  recognised  in  the  mature  warrior,  or  that  the 
Philistines  would  be  glad  to  have  his  aid  in  their  wars 
against  his  countrymen. 


His  geijaimmr  before  ^.rljtalj.  73 

Not  a  little  to  his  dismay,  and  perhaps  on  account  of 
Goliath's  sword  hanging  at  his  belt,  he  was  instantly 
recognised;  and  the  servants  of  Achish  recalled  the  refrain, 
which  had  already  awoke  the  jealousy  of  Saul.  He  was 
instantly  regarded  with  hatred,  as  having  slain  his  ten 
thousands.  His  hands  had  been  embrued  in  Philistine 
blood ;  his  fortunes  reared  from  the  dust,  at  the  expense 
of  bereaved  hearts  and  homes  throughout  the  Philistine 
territory.  Here,  however,  was  an  easy  opportunity  of 
avenging  all.  By  some  means  David  became  aware  of 
the  evil  impression  at  court,  and  saw  the  immense  peril 
in  which  he  stood  of  imprisonment  or  execution.  He 
saved  himself  by  descending  to  the  unworthy  subterfuge 
of  counterfeiting  the  behaviour  of  a  madman,  drumming  on 
the  leaves  of  the  city  gate,  and  allowing  his  spittle  to  fall 
down  upon  his  beard.  His  device  succeeded  ;  and  Achish 
dismissed  him  with  the  humorous  remark  to  his  servants 
that  he  had  already  madmen  enough  around  him,  and 
had  no  need  of  another.  This  certainly  was  one  of  the 
least  dignified  episodes  in  David's  varied  life,  very  unworthy 
of  God's  anointed  ;  and  the  shame  was  that  there  would 
have  been  no  need  for  it,  if  he  had  not  departed  through 
unbelief  from  the  living  God. 

II.  THE  PSALM  OF  THE  SILENT  DOVE. — At  first  sight 
we  are  startled  with  the  apparently  irreconcilable  dis 
crepancy  between  the  scenes  we  have  just  described  and 
the  56th  Psalm,  the  inscription  of  which  associates  it  with 
them.  But  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  accuracy  of 
that  ancient  note,  which  is  probably  due  to  David's  hand, 
and  is  at  least  as  old  as  the  first  arrangement  of  the  Psalter, 
in  the  days  of  Solomon. 

Closer  inspection  will  reveal  many  resemblances  between 
the  singer's  circumstances  and  his  touching  words  :  and  we 
are  reminded  that  beneath  much  which  is  unworthy  and 
contemptible  there  may  burn  a  true  devotion,  an  eager 


74 

yearning  after  God,  a  soul  of  good  amid  things  evil.  The 
cursory  spectator  would  not  have  supposed  that  this  dis 
sembling  madman  was  meditating  thoughts  which  were 
to  express  for  all  generations  the  most  implicit  faith,  the 
sincerest  trust.  But  so  it  was. 

The  major  part  of  this  exquisite  psalm  consists  of  two 
stanzas,  which  culminate  in  the  same  refrain ;  the  remainder 
is  full  of  hope  and  praise,  and  expression  of  the  joy  with 
which  the  Psalmist  anticipates  walking  before  God  in  the 
light  of  life. 

First  Stanza  (1-4). — He  turns  to  God  from  man  ;  to  the 
Divine  mercy  from  the  serried  ranks  of  his  foes,  who, 
•surging  around  him,  threaten  to  engulf  and  swallow  him 
up  ;  he  counts  himself  as  a  lonely  dove  far  from  its  native 
woods ;  his  heart  trembles  and  misgives,  amid  the  many 
that  fight  proudly  against  him ;  yet  he  contrasts  fear  with 
faith,  arguing  with  himself  as  to  the  baselessness  of  his 
dread,  and  contrasting  man's  fleshy  might  with  God's 
supreme  power.  Thus  he  climbs  up  out  of  the  weltering 
waves,  his  feet  on  a  rock,  a  new  song  in  his  mouth,  the 
burden  of  which  is,  "I  will  not  be  afraid."  Oh,  happy  soul, 
who  hast  learnt  to  take  thy  stand  on  God  as  thy  Rock  and 
Fortress ! 

Second  Stanza  (5-9). — Again,  he  is  in  the  depths.  The 
returning  wave  has  sucked  him  back.  His  boast  changed 
to  a  moan,  his  challenge  to  complaint.  Never  a  moment  of 
intermission  from  the  wrestling  of  his  words ;  not  a  glint  of 
respite  from  the  hostility  of  their  thoughts;  not  a  step 
which  is  not  watched  by  the  scrutiny  of  those  who  lie  in 
wait  for  his  soul.  He  wanders  fitfully  from  shelter  to 
shelter ;  his  tears  fall  thick  and  fast ;  his  enemies  are 
numerous  as  the  hairs  of  his  head.  Ah,  soul !  is  this  thy 
voice  which  but  a  moment  ago  was  resonant  with  praise? 
Alas  for  thee  !  Yet  as  we  condole,  we  hear  the  voice  of 
faith  again  ringing  out  the  positive  assurance,  "  I  know  that 
God  is  for  me,"  and  again  the  old  refrain  comes  back : 


0f  ^in.  75 

"  In  God  will  I  praise  his  word, 
In  the  Lord  will  I  praise  his  word  ; 
In  God  have  I  put  my  trust, 
I  will  not  be  afraid, 
What  can  man  do  unto  me  !  " 

Third  Stanza  (10-13). — There  is  no  further  relapse. 
His  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  the  Lord ;  the  vows  of  God 
are  upon  his  head.  He  looks  back  upon  the  dark  abyss 
into  which  his  soul  had  well-nigh  gone,  and  knows  that 
he  is  delivered  from  it  for  ever.  As  the  morning  breaks  he 
sees  the  mark  of  his  footprints  to  the  edge  of  the  precipice, 
and  recognises  the  Divine  power  and  grace  which  has 
delivered  his  feet  from  falling.  And  now,  as  once  again  he 
regains  the  sunny  uplands,  which  he  had  so  shamefully 
renounced  in  his  flight  from  Gibeah  to  Nob,  from  Nob  to 
Gath,  from  Gath  to  feigned  insanity,  he  is  sure  that  hence 
forth  he  will  walk  before  God  in  the  light  of  life.  Truth, 
purity,  joy,  shall  be  the  vesture  of  his  soul. 

In  the  extreme  anguish  of  those  hours  at  Gath,  when  he 
thought  that  the  torch  of  his  life  would  go  out  in  the  dark 
waters  of  Philistine  hatred,  the  backslider  had  returned  to 
God,  had  caught  the  rope  by  which  to  spring  from  the 
abyss  into  the  light,  and  once  again  sat,  as  a  child  at  home, 
anointed  with  oil,  with  a  table  spread  before  him  in  the 
presence  of  his  enemies. 

III.  THE  CONSEQUENCES  TO  AHIMELECH. — A  child  of 
God  may  be  forgiven  and  restored,  yet  the  consequences  of 
his  sin  may  involve  sufferings  to  many  innocent  lives.  So 
it  was  in  this  instance.  It  happened  shortly  after,  when 
Saul  was  sitting  under  the  tamarisk  tree  in  Ramah  with  his 
spear  in  his  hand,  and  his  servants  around  him.  He  was 
endeavouring  to  excite  their  sympathy  by  enumerating  the 
supposed  wrongs  he  had  suffered  at  the  hand  of  David, 
and  Doeg  took  the  opportunity  of  ingratiating  himself  in 
the  royal  favour,  by  narrating  what  he  had  seen  at  Nob. 


76  Almost  ©one. 

He  carefully  withheld  the  unsuspecting  innocence  and 
ignorance  of  the  priest,  and  so  told  the  tale  as  to  make  it 
appear  that  he  and  his  house  were  accomplices  with  David's 
action,  and  perhaps  bent  on  helping  David  to  gain  supreme 
power.  It  was  in  vain  that  Ahimelech  protested  his  inno 
cence,  enumerated  David's  services,  referred  to  the  many 
occasions  on  which  David  had  sought  his  help,  persisted  in 
the  avowal  of  his  unconsciousness  of  the  quarrel  between 
Saul  and  his  son-in-law — before  night  fell  the  white  vesture 
of  the  priests  was  soaked  with  their  blood,  and  every  living 
thing  in  the  little  mountain  town  was  smitten  with  the  edge 
of  the  sword.  By  one  ruthless  act,  the  entire  priestly 
community  was  exterminated. 

There  was  but  one  survivor,  for  Abiathar  escaped, 
carrying  the  ephod  in  his  hands ;  and  one  day,  to  his 
horror,  David  beheld  the  dishevelled,  blood-besmeared 
form  of  the  priest,  as  he  sped  breathless  and  panic-stricken 
up  the  valley  of  Elah,  to  find  shelter  with  the  outlaw  band 
in  the  Cave  of  Adullam.  We  shall  hear  of  him  again. 

Meanwhile,  let  children  of  God  beware  !  Sin  is  bitter  to 
the  conscience  of  the  sinner,  and  in  its  consequences  upon 
others.  Let  us  walk  circumspectly,  watchfully,  prayerfully, 
exercising  our  consciences  repeatedly  to  see  if  there  be  any 
swerving  from  the  path  of  strict  integrity;  lest  seeds  be 
scattered  beyond  recovery,  to  bear  bitter  harvests  in  the 
lives  of  those  who,  through  their  mysterious  union  with 
ourselves,  are  inextricably  involved  in  the  consequences 
of  our  deeds. 


XI. 

0f 

( i  SAM.  xxii. ;  PSALM  xxxiv. ) 

For  good  ye  are  and  bad,  and  like  to  coins — 
Some  true,  some  light ;  but  every  one  of  you 
Stamp'd  with  the  image  of  the  king." 

TENNYSON. 

'EAVING  Gath,  with  a  very  thankful  heart  for 
God's  delivering  mercy,  David  hastily  recrossed 
the  frontier,  and  found  himself  again  in  the 
kingdom  of  Saul.  His  life,  however,  was  in 
^reat  Je°Par(ty>  an(*  ne  did  not  dare  to  expose 
himself  to  the  royal  jealousy.  To  return  to 
court  was  impossible  ;  and  he  did  not  care  to  incur  the 
risk  of  involving  his  relatives  in  his  troubles  by  seeking 
shelter  at  Bethlehem.  There  was  apparently  no  alternative 
but  to  adopt  the  life  of  a  fugitive  and  wanderer  amid  the 
hills  of  Judah,  with  which  his  shepherd  life  had  made  him 
so  familiar. 

Two  miles  up  the  valley  of  Elah  from  Gath  there  is  a 
labyrinth  of  hills  and  valleys,  deeply  honey-combed  with 
caves  ;  one  of  these,  near  the  ancient  Canaanitish  city  of 
Adullam,  and  called  after  it,  afforded  David  for  a  consider 
able  period  the  shelter  of  which  he  was  in  search.  It  is 
described  as  a  dark  vault,  the  entrance  of  which  is  a  low 
window  in  the  perpendicular  face  of  the  cliff ;  and  its  posi 
tion  made  it  possible  for  him  to  cross  from  one  country  to 
another,  as  occasion  required.  Thither  fled  his  whole 
family,  dreading,  no  doubt,  the  violence  of  Saul's  hatred ; 
and  thither  also  came  every  one  that  was  in  distress,  and 
every  one  that  was  in  debt,  and  every  one  that  was  dis 
contented,  and  he  became  captain  over  them. 


78  ffc  Cain:  af 

We  need  not  now  enlarge  on  David's  filial  love,  which 
traversed  the  entire  distance  from  Adullam  to  Moab  to 
secure  an  asylum  for  his  father  and  mother,  who  were  pro 
bably  too  aged  to  stand  the  hardships  and  dangers  of  his 
fugitive  life.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  his  petition  was  readily 
granted  by  the  king  of  Moab,  perhaps  on  account  of  some 
pride  in  the  Moabite  blood  that  flowed  in  the  veins  of  the 
young  Hebrew  warrior.  But  that  double  journey,  first  to 
secure  the  shelter,  and  then  to  escort  the  aged  couple 
thither,  evinces  a  pleasing  trait  in  David's  character.  There 
was  no  lack  of  obedience  to  the  first  commandment  with 
promise.  It  is,  however,  with  the  cave  and  the  more  motley 
group  of  his  adherents  that  we  have  now  to  do. 

I.  THE  CAVE  AND  ITS  LESSONS. — There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  minute  narration  of  these 
experiences  in  David's  life,  desires  us  to  trace  an  analogy 
between  his  history  and  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  his 
present  rejection  and  banishment  from  the  throne  of  the 
world.  The  parallel  is  as  minute  as  it  is  instructive. 

A  rejected  king  was  on  the  throne.  Though  anointed  by 
Samuel,  Saul  by  disobedience  had  forfeited  his  right  to 
reign  ;  and  had,  so  to  speak,  nullified  the  effect  of  the 
sacred  unction — as  we  may  do  also.  The  sentence  of  de 
position  had  been  pronounced,  and  was  awaiting  execution 
at  the  appropriate  moment.  Similarly,  the  dark  fallen 
spirit,  Satan,  was  once  an  anointed  cherub,  set  on  the  holy 
mountain  of  God,  and  perfect  in  his  ways  from  the  day 
that  he  was  created,  till  unrighteousness  was  found  in  him. 
Not  improbably  he  derives  the  title  which  our  Lord  gave 
him  of  "  prince  of  this  world  "  from  his  original  appoint 
ment  as  God's  vicegerent  and  representative ;  but  in  his 
fall  he  forfeited  his  glorious  position,  and  man  was  created 
as  his  substitute  to  take  his  place.  "  What  is  man  ?  .  .  . 
Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion  over  the  works  of  thy 
hands."  That  power  is  not  yet  exercised  by  man  ;  "  we 


ihuj&cm.  79 

see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him  ":  but  it  will  be  in  the 
person  of  the  Son  of  Man,  who  is  already  "  crowned  with 
glory  and  honour." 

In  the  meanwhile,  Satan  still  holds  the  throne  of  the 
world.  He  has  many  a  time  cast  his  javelin  at  the  King 
after  God's  own  heart.  In  the  Temptation  and  in  Geth- 
semane  he  would  fain  have  pinned  Him  to  the  wall.  All 
through  the  present  age  he  has  been  doing  his  worst  to 
exterminate  the  incipient  hidden  Kingdom  of  Jesus,  though 
he  knows  that  God  has  destined  it  to  take  the  place  of  his 
own.  But  all  his  attempts  must  fail.  As  Saul  fell  on  the 
field  of  Gilboa,  so  the  prince  of  darkness  shall  be  finally 
cast  into  the  bottomless  pit. 

David's  kingdom  was  hidden.  It  was  a  true  kingdom, 
though  in  mystery,  veiled  in  the  darkness  of  Adullam's 
Cave,  and  concealed  in  the  labyrinth  of  valleys  and  hills. 
He  had  fallen  into  the  ground  to  die,  that  he  might  not 
abide  alone,  but  bring  forth  much  fruit.  It  is  a  mysterious 
process  through  which  the  little  seed-corn  passes  in  the 
winter,  vvhen  it  surrenders  itself  to  the  destructive  forces 
that  lie  in  wait  in  the  red  mould,  and  seize  on  its  tender 
fabric.  "  Exposed  to  wintry  winds,  trodden  under  the  feet 
of  those  who  drive  the  rake  and  harrow  over  it ;  buried  out 
of  sight  and  left  alone,  as  if  cast  out  by  God  and  man  to 
endure  the  slow  process  of  a  daily  dissolution ;  then  melted 
by  rains  and  heats  until  its  form  is  marred,  and  it  seems 
useless  to  either  God  or  man."  Such  was  the  experience  of 
David :  and  it  was  also  the  experience  of  that  Divine  King, 
\vho  fell  into  the  mystery  of  forsakenness  on  the  Cross,  and 
the  mystery  of  rejection  in  the  grave ;  and  whose  person 
and  kingdom  are  now  altogether  hidden  from  the  world  of 
men. 

The  day  is  not  far  distant  when  the  Lord,  who  is  hidden 
until  the  time  of  the  restitution  of  all  things,  shall  be  mani 
fested  with  his  saints,  and  take  to  Himself  his  great  power 
and  reign.  The  pearl  which  He  won  from  the  ocean-caves 


So  ^t  Cafre  of 

shall  be  worn  on  his  brow;  the  treasure  for  which  He 
bought  the  field  of  the  world  shall  be  spread  forth  for  the 
admiration  of  the  universe;  the  army  which  He  has  con 
stituted  from  such  unpromising  materials  shall  follow  Him 
on  white  horses  in  radiant  array.  In  the  meanwhile,  his 
kingdom  is  "  in  mystery." 

David  and  his  followers  were  in  separation.  Driven 
without  the  camp  of  Israel,  they  had  no  alternative.  With 
the  feasts  and  pageants,  the  counsels  and  decisions,  the 
home-politics  and  foreign  wars  of  Saul,  they  had  no  imme 
diate  connection;  though  the  Cave  of  Adullam  could  not 
but  exert  an  important  indirect  influence  on  the  whole 
realm.  The  lot  of  an  exile,  the  path  of  the  wanderer  and 
stranger,  were  meted  out  to  David  and  those  who  were  will 
ing  to  share  his  lot.  His  way  to  the  throne  lay  through 
multiplied  difficulties  and  sorrows;  and  although  he  must 
have  prized  the  freer  air,  the  sense  of  liberty,  the  deliverance 
from  the  heartless  and  godless  etiquette  of  the  palace,  there 
must  have  been  a  perpetual  sadness  and  loneliness  in  his 
soul. 

The  true  King  of  men  is  still  outside  human  politics  and 
society.  We  cannot  have  Him  and  them.  Those  who  de 
sire  to  be  his  subjects,  and  to  share  the  rewards  and  glories 
of  those  coming  days,  when  He  shall  have  dominion  from 
sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  must 
go  out  to  Him  without  the  camp,  willing  to  forsake  all  that 
they  have,  and  be  counted  the  off-scouring  of  all  things. 

David  was  content  to  await  God's  time.  Whatever 
provocation  Saul  gave,  he  never  retaliated.  However  easy 
the  opportunity  of  gaining  an  advantage  over  his  vindictive 
pursuer,  he  never  availed  himself  of  it.  He  was  prepared 
to  wait  God's  time,  and  to  receive  supreme  power  in  God's 
way.  He  quieted  himself  as  a  weaned  child.  His  per 
petual  refrain  is  recorded  in  his  own  words:  "My  soul,  wait 
thou  only  upon  God;  for  my  expectation  is  from  Him."  It 
was  as  though  he  sat  down  in  patience  and  submission  till 


Matting  (Soft's  fitme.  81 

God  made  his  foes  the  footstool  of  his  feet,  and  set  him  as 
his  king  on  his  holy  hill  of  Zion.  It  is  thus,  through  these 
passing  centuries,  that  our  Saviour  is  waiting.  Now  is  the 
time  of  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ ;  here  is 
the  patience  of  the  saints ;  whilst  the  eager  expectation  and 
yearning  of  the  whole  creation  is  waiting  for  the  manifesta 
tion  of  the  sons  of  God.  Ourselves  also,  which  have  the 
first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves  groan  within 
ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption 
of  our  body.  For  by  hope  were  we  saved ;  but  hope  that 
is  seen  is  not  hope :  for  who  hopeth  for  that  which  he 
seeth  ?  But  if  we  hope  for  that  which  we  see  not,  then  do 
we  with  patience  wait  for  it. 

II.  THE  CAVE  AND  ITS  INMATES. — The  tidings  of  David's 
return  to  Judah,  and  of  his  retreat  in  the  shelter  of  the  cave, 
spread  swiftly  and  mysteriously  throughout  the  whole  land ; 
and  those  who  were  sorely  pressed  by  misery,  poverty,  and 
bitterness  of  soul  began  to  flock  around  him.  The  young 
leader  soon  found  himself  at  the  head  of  four  hundred 
men,  a  very  motley  crew  !  For  the  few  who  were  loyal  to 
him,  there  were  preponderating  multitudes  who  were  full  of 
their  own  grievances,  and  eager  only  for  their  redress. 
The  sacred  historian  says  that  their  faces  were  like  the 
faces  of  lions,  and  that  they  were  as  swift  as  roes  upon  the 
mountains ;  but  their  tempers  were  probably  turbulent  and 
fierce,  requiring  all  the  grace  and  tact  and  statesmanship  of 
which  the  young  ruler  was  capable,  to  reduce  them  to 
discipline  and  order.  It  was  surely  no  small  feat  so  to 
organize  such  materials,  that  they  became  the  nucleus  of 
the  greatest  army  of  their  time,  and  carried  the  standard 
of  Israel  to  the  fullest  limits  it  ever  reached. 

We  must  not  think  of  David  at  this  time  of  his  career  as 
a  bandit  or  freebooter  chief;  but  rather  as  improvising  a 
frontier  guard  to  defend  the  land  against  the  Amalekites 
and  Philistines,  who  were  perpetually  raiding  it  at  the  time 

F 


82  f;ije  Cahe  of 

of  harvest,  sweeping  away  the  results  of  the  farmers'  toils. 
Thus  he  became  the  benefactor  and  defender  of  his  people, 
though  exiled  from  them.  In  the  common  talk  of  the  time 
his  men  and  he  were  described  as  a  wall  to  the  great  sheep 
masters  and  agriculturists  of  southern  Judah,  "  both  by 
night  and  day"  (i  Sam.  xxv.  16). 

It  is  impossible  not  to  turn  from  David  to  Him,  who, 
though  cast  out  from  the  scheme  of  this  world  and  its 
prince,  is  ever  gathering  around  his  standard  the  poor  and 
outcast,  the  leper  and  sinner,  the  blind  and  bruised  and 
broken-hearted,  those  who  are  in  distress,  in  debt,  and  dis 
contented,  and  making  them  into  soldiers,  that  shall  win 
the  world  for  Himself. 

Did  these  wild,  rough  soldiers  find  a  new  centre  for  their 
life  in  David  ?  We  have  found  a  new  object  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  for  whom  to  live  is  life  indeed,  and  for  whom  to  die 
is  gain. 

Did  this  new  centre  draw  them  away  from  attachment 
and  association  with  the  decadent  kingdom  of  Saul  ?  Our 
oneness  with  the  living  Saviour  has  made  us  unworldly  by 
making  us  <?//^r-worldly.  We  have  cast  in  our  lot  with 
Him,  and  become  citizens  of  the  new  Jerusalem,  and  are 
glad  to  confess  ourselves  strangers  and  pilgrims. 

Did  they  put  off  the  manners  and  customs  of  their  old 
life,  and  allow  the  shuttle  of  love  and  devotion  to  weave 
the  fabric  of  a  new  character?  We  have  put  off  the  old 
man  with  his  doings,  and  have  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
is  being  renewed  unto  knowledge  after  the  image  of  Him 
that  created  him. 

Did  they  love  David  for  removing  their  discontent, 
alleviating  their  distress,  and  relieving  them  from  the  dis 
order  and  anxiety  of  their  existence  ?  Much  more  should 
we  love  Him,  who  has  done  more  for  us  than  even  David 
did  for  his  poor  followers.  He  has  paid  our  debts 
with  his  precious  blood  ;  relieved  us  from  our  creditors 
by  meeting  them  Himself ;  clothed  us  in  his  perfect 


in  tlje  Cafo.  83 

beauty  ;    allayed    our    sorrows  ;    calmed    and    stilled   our 
souls. 

Did  the  attachment  between  David  and  his  followers 
grow  with  the  years,  cementing  them  in  a  fellowship  which 
was  the  result  of  sharing  common  dangers — the  bivouac 
fire  by  night,  the  toilsome  march  by  day,  the  brush  with 
the  foe  ?  What  an  incentive  to  us  to  seek  a  fellowship  with 
our  blessed  Lord,  that  shall  grow  closer  for  ever}'  day  of 
trial  we  share  with  Him  ! 

III.  THE  CAVE  AND  ITS  SONG. — Many  allusions  connect 
the  thirty-fourth  Psalm  with  the  Cave  of  Adullam.  It  was 
there  that  the  little  host  needed  the  encamping  angel ; 
there  that  the  young  lions  roared,  as  they  ranged  the  wilds 
in  search  of  food ;  there  also  that  God's  care  was  per 
petually  laid  under  requisition  to  keep  the  bones  of  the 
fugitives  lest  they  should  be  broken  by  falling  down  the 
crags  (vv.  7,  10,  20). 

We  can  imagine  the  leader  one  evening  when  the 
anxieties  and  fatigues  of  the  day  were  over,  gathering  his 
troop  around  him  with  the  words,  "  Come,  ye  children, 
hearken  unto  me,  and  I  will  teach  you  the  fear  of  the 
Lord."  Then,  in  quick  succession,  the  three  exhortations, 
"Oh,  magnify  the  Lord  with  me.  .  .  .  Oh,  taste  and 
see  that  the  Lord  is  good.  .  .  .  Oh,  fear  the  Lord,  ye 
his  saints."  Then,  perhaps,  from  all  their  voices  came  the 
full  chorus,  "  The  Lord  redeemeth  the  soul  of  his  servants  ; 
and  none  of  them  that  trust  in  Him  shall  be  desolate." 

The  soul  which  is  living  a  separated  life,  with  sin  judged, 
forsaken,  and  forgiven,  behind  it,  may  count  on  these  four: 

Deliverance — even  in  the  midst  of  difficulties  and  per 
plexities  which  have  been  caused  by  its  own  misdeeds 
(4,  7,  17,  19). 

Enlightenment — for  what  the  dawn  is  to  the  weary  watcher, 
that  God  will  be  to  the  soul  that  has  long  groped  in  the 
dark,  if  only  the  face  is  turned  towards  his  (5). 


$4  K*  Cake  rtf 

Perfect  Provision — so  that  it  shall  lack  nothing  which  it 
really  needs  (10). 

The  Sense  of  Go&s  nighness — nearer  than  the  nearest, 
more  real  than  the  presence  or  absence  of  any  (18). 

If,  in  that  cave,  with  so  many  things  to  distract  him, 
compelled  to  spend  every  hour  in  the  presence  of  his  men, 
David  was  able  to  realize  the  presence  of  God,  how  much 
more  possible  it  must  be  for  us  !  And  when  once  that  is 
realized,  all  the  conditions  of  the  best  life  are  fulfilled. 

What  makes  the  difference  between  the  dull  and  grey  of 
winter  and  the  beauty  of  the  spring?  Is  it  not  that  the  sun 
is  nigh,  and  nature  knows  it,  and  assimilates  his  glorious 
colour  ? 

So  backslider  !  broken  heart !  contrite  spirit !  do  not  look 
back  on  past  failure  and  shortcoming,  nor  stand  in  dread  of 
recurring  sin ;  but  look  up  and  away  to  the  face  of  Jesus. 
Do  not,  I  pray  you,  live  on  the  dying,  but  on  the  living 
side.  Dwell  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High.  Abide 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  your  life.  Enter 
with  boldness  the  Holiest,  to  remain  there.  Ask  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  enable  you  to  realize  the  constant  presence  of 
God.  Say  to  yourself  many  a  time  each  day,  even  when 
you  do  not  feel  it,  "  Thou  art  nigh ;  Thou  art  here."  Make 
your  home  in  the  sense  of  God's  nearness.  Oh,  taste  and 
see  the  sweetness  of  such  a  life. 

It  was  thus  that  Jesus  thought  of  his  Father ;  and  it  is 
thus  that  you  will  realize  the  happiest,  strongest  experiences 
possible  to  the  saints.  "  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  them  that 
are  of  a  broken  heart,  and  saveth  such  as  be  of  a  contrite 
spirit." 


XII. 


(i  SAMUEL  xxiii.  6;    PSALM  xxvii.  ) 

"  Will  not  God  impart  his  light 
To  them  that  ask  it  ?—  Freely—  'tis  his  joy, 
His  glory,  and  his  nature,  to  impart  ; 
But  to  the  proud,  uncandid,  insincere, 
Or  negligent  inquirer,  not  a  spark." 

COWPER. 

is  not  perfectly  clear  where  David  was  when  he 
was  joined  by  Abiathar.  If  we  consider  the  time, 
we  are  disposed  to  fix  the  massacre  of  the  priests 
shortly  after  his  flight  to  Gath  ;  and,  in  that  case, 
Abiathar  must  have  come  to  him  whilst  David 
was  in  his  first  prolonged  hiding-place  in  the  cave 
of  Adullam.  It  is  on  this  supposition  that  we  have  already 
sketched  the  fugitive  coming  thither,  breathless  and  dis 
hevelled. 

If,  however,  we  judge  by  the  position  given  to  the 
incident  on  the  page  of  Scripture,  we  should  be  disposed 
to  locate  it  in  the  forest  of  Hareth,  a  tract  of  country  a 
little  to  the  south  of  Adullam,  and  not  far  from  Hebron. 
The  prophet  Gad,  who  had  recently  joined  the  young 
refugee,  and  was  destined  to  share  the  fortunes  of  his  long 
career,  living  to  chronicle  his  entire  history,  seems  to  have 
advised  this  exchange.  The  open  country,  in  the  case  of 
pursuit,  would  be  safer  than  a  cave,  which  might  be  closed 
at  the  entrance  and  become  a  death-trap  (i  Sam.  xxii.  5  ; 
i  Chron.  xxi.  9  ;  xxix.  29). 

On  the  other  hand,  the  verse  quoted  above  suggests  that 
Abiathar  came  to  David  at  Keilah.  But  good  authorities 
question  the  authenticity  of  the  words  "to  Keilah," 


£6  ®ije  White 

especially  as  the  Septuagint  reads  : — "  It  came  to  pass  when 
Abiathar,  son  of  Ahimelech,  fled  to  David,  then  he  went 
down  with  David  to  Keilah,  having  the  ephod  in  his  hand." 
If  this  were  so,  the  enquiries  mentioned  in  the  previous 
verses  (1-5)  would  have  been  made,  as  was  the  custom  in 
those  days,  through  the  Urim  and  Thummim. 

There  is  no  need  to  delay  further  in  the  attempt  to  fix 
what  is  of  no  material  importance.  Our  present  purpose  is 
rather  to  bring  into  prominence  David's  lifelong  habit  of 
waiting  upon  God  for  direction  and  guidance.  It  is 
instructive  and  stimulating  to  notice  that  the  successive 
steps  of  his  chequered  career  were  taken  after  very  definite 
waiting  upon  God.  It  was  as  though  the  advice  he  gives  to 
us  all,  in  the  Psalm  which  dates  from  this  period,  was  the 
outcome  of  his  own  deepest  experience  and  practice  : — 

' '  Wait  on  the  Lord  : 

Be  strong,  and  let  thine  heart  take  courage  ; 
Yea,  wait  thou  on  the  Lord." 

The  expression  of  the  Psalmist's  soul  in  Psalm  xxvii. ; 
his  practice,  as  delineated  by  the  historian ;  and  the  lessons 
which  we  may  well  incorporate  into  our  daily  walk — such  is 
the  trend  of  our  thought. 

I.  THE  PSALMIST'S  ATTITUDE  A^D  DESIRE.— There  are 
several  items  of  internal  evidence  which  connect  Psalm 
xxvii.  with  this  period  of  David's  life.  His  fortunes  were 
as  dark  as  the  interior  of  Adullam's  cave,  therefore  he 
spoke  of  God  as  his  light ;  he  was  in  daily  peril,  therefore  it 
was  his  comfort  that  God  would  be  his  salvation.  Jehovah 
was  more  really  his  stronghold  than  even  that  fortress  of 
rock  (R.V.,  margin).  Evil-doers  might  come  on  him  to  eat 
up  his  flesh,  but  they  would  stumble  and  fall,  as  Goliath 
had  done  in  that  very  ravine ;  hosts  might  encamp  against 
him,  but  his  heart  would  not  fear;  war  might  rise  against 
him,  but  in  this  would  he  be  confident.  He  would  be  hid 
in  the  covert  of  God's  tent  from  all  pursuit,  or  be  set  upon 


in  (Soft.  37 

a  rock  at  an  elevation  inaccessible  to  his  foes.  True,  he 
had  no  longer  the  asylum  of  the  old  home  in  Bethlehem ; 
in  that  sense  his  father  and  mother  had  forsaken  him  (10). 
But  God  would  gather  him,  and  be  father  and  mother 
both. 

The  further  references  to  his  extreme  need  and  anguish, 
to  the  necessity  of  being  led  in  a  plain  path,  to  the  false 
witnesses  who  had  arisen  against  him,  and  who  breathed 
out  cruelty — an  allusion  that  may  be  very  well  accounted 
for  by  Abiathar's  account  of  Doeg's  treachery — combine  to 
associate  this  lovely  and  pathetic  psalm  with  David's  resi 
dence  in  the  cave.  It  is  just  such  a  cry  as  must  frequently 
have  broken  from  his  heart  in  those  sad  and  dark  days. 
Often  must  the,  splintered  rocks  around  have  heard  his 
strong  cryings  and  tears ;  and  witnessed  the  awful  swoon  of 
his  soul,  nigh  unto  death,  as  he  looked  down  on  the  abyss 
from  which  he  was  hardly  delivered.  He  could  not  forget 
that,  by  his  recent  lapse  at  Gath,  he  had  given  cause  to 
God  to  hide  his  face  from  him,  to  leave  him,  and  put  him 
away  in  anger  :  but  he  pleads  that,  through  all  those  bitter 
passages  of  his  life,  he  "  believed  to  see  the  goodness  of  the 
Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living  " ;  and  he  comforts  himself 
by  the  reflection  that  He  who  sustained  his  soul  with  the 
blessed  hope,  could  not  fail  to  realize  the  vision  with  which 
He  had  allured  the  wanderer  back  to  Himself. 

The  main  objection  that  obtains  against  the  supposition 
that  the  Psalm  dates  from  this  period  of  David's  life  arises 
from  his  mention  of  the  Lord's  house,  tabernacle,  and 
temple.  Still,  this  is  not  conclusive.  We  met  with  the 
germ  of  the  same  thought  in  the  23rd  Psalm,  where  the 
shepherd-minstrel  desired  to  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
for  ever.  It  is  not  likely  that,  in  his  young  life,  he  could 
have  desired  seclusion  for  the  rest  of  his  days  in  the  narrow 
limits  of  Levitical  service.  This  had  been  a  morbid  craving, 
entirely  out  of  keeping  with  his  heroic  soul.  Surely,  then, 
the  desire  for  an  abiding-place  in  the  house  of  the  Lord, 


88  ffte  Mb-tte 

which  was  the  wish  of  his  shepherd  days,  of  his  cave 
experiences,  and  of  his  exile  when  fleeing  from  Absalom, 
can  only  be  interpreted  as  referring  to  an  intimacy  of 
Divine  fellowship,  a  constant  flow  of  blessed  communication 
which  should  supply  guidance  and  direction  in  all  the  dark 
and  tortuous  pathways  of  his  history. 

What  fresh  and  vivid  meaning  invests  his  words  when 
read  under  this  light !  He  desired  to  abide  in  communion 
with  God,  and  to  have  face  to  face  converse  with  Him.  as 
the  priests  within  the  precincts  of  the  shrine  at  Nob.  He 
wished  to  be  able  at  any  moment  to  inquire  of  the  holy 
oracle.  It  was  his  choice  to  live  so  near  to  God,  that  when 
ever  the  Divine  summons  was  heard,  though  in  whispers 
too  faint  for  ordinary  ears — 

"  Seek  ye  My  face  :  " 
he  might  be  near  enough  to  hear  it,  and  reply — 

"Thy  face,  Lord,  will  I  seek." 

II.  His  HABITUAL  PRACTICE. — When  the  trembling 
priest  had  told  his  story,  David  addressed  to  him  words 
which  have  a  sweet  application  when  placed  in  the  lips  of 
Christ.  It  is  thus  that  our  outcast  King,  driven  beyond 
the  camp,  receives  each  fugitive  soul  that  has  recourse  to 
Him  :  "Abide  thou  with  Me,"  He  says  ;  "fear  not !  for  he 
that  seeketh  my  life  seeketh  thy  life :  with  Me  thou  shalt 
be  in  safeguard." 

The  special  reason  that  made  David  glad  to  welcome 
Abiathar  was  that  he  brought  with  him,  rescued  from  the 
sack  of  the  little  town,  the  sacred  ephod,  within  which 
were  the  sacred  Urim  and  Thummim.  The  words  signify 
"  Light  and  Perfection  "  ;  it  is  by  no  means  certain  what 
they  refer  to.  The  most  probable  explanation,  however, 
is  the  following  : — 

The  High-Priest's  inner  garment  was  a  white  linen  tunic ; 
over  this  he  wore  a  blue  robe,  and  above  this  the  ephod, 


fRe  "  Erim  anfc  I^umtmm."  89 

made  of  white  twined  linen,  inwrought  with  blue,  and 
purple,  and  scarlet,  and  gold.  To  this  was  affixed  the 
breastplate,  in  which  were  twelve  precious  stones,  corre 
sponding  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  In  this  breastplate, 
perhaps  part  of  it,  or  attached  to  it,  were  probably  either 
one  or  two  very  beautiful  and  resplendent  diamonds,, 
through  which  God  manifested  his  will.  If  to  any  question 
reverently  put  to  Him  by  the  Priest,  the  answer  was 
No,  the  light  in  these  precious  stones  dimmed ;  if  on  the 
contrary,  it  was  Yes,  they  flashed  with  splendour. 

It  was  obviously  a  great  gain  to  David  to  have  at  hand 
this  priceless  method  of  communication  between  Jehovah 
and  himself.  Already  Gad  was  with  him,  as  the  repre 
sentative  of  the  prophetic  office ;  now  Abiathar  and  the 
ephod  represented  the  most  precious  prerogative  of  the 
priesthood.  By  one  or  other  of  these,  and  probably  in 
these  earlier  days  especially  by  the  latter,  he  was  able 
at  any  moment  to  know  the  will  of  God. 

Do  tidings  come  that  the  Philistines  are  plundering 
Keilah — he  dares  not  pursue  till  he  has  asked  the  Lord. 
Do  the  cowardly  townspeople  propose  to  betray  their 
deliverer — he  dares  not  leave  the  little  city  till  he  has 
received  Divine  directions  to  go.  In  one  of  the  most  awful 
experiences  of  his  life,  when  his  men  spoke  of  stoning  him, 
instead  of  taking  up  his  cause,  he  said  to  Abiathar,  the 
priest,  "  I  pray  thee,  bring  hither  the  ephod."  Then 
Abiathar  brought  the  ephod  to  him,  and  David  enquired 
of  the  Lord.  Long  after  he  had  become  the  acknowledged 
king  of  the  land,  in  his  conflicts  with  the  Philistines  he  was 
careful  to  enquire  of  the  Lord  as  to  the  very  method  of 
attack  (i  Sam.  xxx.  7  ;  2  Sam.  v.  17-25). 

Evidently  this  was  the  holy  practice  of  his  life  :  to  wait  on 
God,  quelling  the  fever  of  his  soul,  and  compelling  the 
crowd  of  impetuous  thoughts  to  be  in  abeyance  until  time 
had  been  given  for  the  clear  disclosure  of  the  Divine 
purpose  and  plan.  Like  a  child  that  dares  not  take  one 


90  Clrc  Wiljitz  Jlione. 

step  alone,  like  a  traveller  in  a  strange  country,  who 
is  utterly  dependent  on  his  guide,  so  David  lifted  up  his 
soul  for  the  supreme  direction,  which  God  only  can  give ;  to 
whom  the  future  is  as  clearly  defined  as  the  past,  and  from 
whom  no  secrets  can  be  hid. 

III.  THE  LESSON  FOR  OURSELVES. — When  Israel  came 
up  out  of  Egypt,  they  were  led  across  the  desert  by  the 
pillar  of  cloud  and  fire.  After  they  were  settled  in  their 
own  land,  the  Urim  and  Thummim  took  its  place.  After 
awhile,  this  method  of  ascertaining  God's  will  fell  into 
disuse,  and  the  prophets  spake  as  they  were  moved  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  These,  even  in  the  early  Church,  played 
a  very  important  part  in  the  ordering  of  God's  people  in 
his  way. 

But  the  voices  of  the  prophets  were  silenced  as  the 
apostolic  age  came  to  a  close.  What  is  our  oracle  of 
appeal  ?  Are  pious  souls  without  the  means  of  enquiring 
of  the  Lord,  and  receiving  his  clear  direction  on  the 
difficult  questions  perpetually  demanding  solution  ?  Not 
so ;  for  in  one  of  the  last  messages  given  by  the  ascended 
Lord  to  his  Church,  through  the  apostle  John,  it  was  fore 
told  that  he  who  overcame  should  receive  a  white  stone,  and 
the  word  white  means  resplendent,  or  lustrous.  It  may, 
therefore,  denote  a  diamond,  and  probably  refers  to  those 
ancient  stones  in  the  High  Priest's  breastplate,  that  dimmed 
or  flashed  with  the  Divine  oracles.  On  them  the  Holy 
Name,  Jehovah,  was  inscribed  in  mystic  characters  ; 
and  similarly  it  is  said  that  on  the  white  stone,  which 
each  believer  should  receive  who  had  overcome  in  the 
spiritual  conflict  against  sin  and  the  world,  a  new  name 
should  be  written,  unknown  save  to  him  that  received 
it  (Rev.  ii.  17). 

In  other  words,  each  child  of  God  has  his  own  Urim 
and  Thummim  stone,  which  is  a  conscience  void  of 
offence,  a  heart  cleansed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  a 


JFellotosjjtp  faritfr  <8o&.  91 

spiritual  nature  which  is  pervaded  and  filled  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God. 

When  we  are  in  doubt  or  difficulty,  when  many  voices 
urge  this  course  or  the  other,  when  prudence  utters  one 
advice  and  faith  another,  then  let  us  be  still,  hushing  each 
intruder,  calming  ourselves  in  the  sacred  hush  of  God's 
presence ;  let  us  study  his  Word  in  the  attitude  of  devout 
attention ;  let  us  lift  up  our  nature  into  the  pure  light  of  his 
face,  eager  only  to  know  what  God  the  Lord  shall 
determine — and  ere  long  a  very  distinct  impression  will  be 
made,  the  unmistakeable  forth-telling  of  his  secret  counsel. 
It  is  not  wise,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  Christian  life,  to 
depend  on  this  alone ;  but  to  wait  for  the  corroboration  of 
circumstances.  But  those  who  have  had  many  dealings 
with  God  know  well  the  value  of  secret  fellowship  with 
Him,  to  ascertain  his  will.  The  journals  of  George  Fox  are 
full  of  references  to  this  secret  of  the  Lord,  which  is  with 
them  that  fear  Him,  to  whom  He  shows  his  covenant. 

Are  you  in  difficulty  about  your  way  ?  Go  to  God  with 
your  question ;  get  direction  from  the  light  of  his  smile 
or  the  cloud  of  his  refusal.  If  only  you  will  get  alone, 
where  the  lights  and  shadows  of  earth  cannot  interfere, 
where  the  disturbance  of  self-will  does  not  intrude,  where 
human  opinions  fail  to  reach — and  if  you  will  dare  to  wait 
there  silent  and  expectant,  though  all  around  you  insist  on 
immediate  decision  or  action — the  will  of  God  will  be  made 
clear  ;  and  you  will  have  a  new  name  in  addition,  a  new 
conception  of  God,  a  deeper  insight  into  his  nature  and 
heart  of  love,  which  shall  be  for  yourself  alone — a  rapturous 
experience,  to  abide  your  precious  perquisite  for  ever,  the 
rich  guerdon  of  those  long  waiting  hours. 


XIII. 

of  ^ 


(i  SAMUEL  xxiii.) 

"  A  song  of  the  heart  that  is  broken, 

A  song  of  the  sighs  and  the  tears, 
The  sickness,  the  want,  and  the  sadness 
Of  the  days  of  our  pilgrimage  years. 

"  Sweet  sings  the  great  choir  of  sorrow, 

The  song  of  the  gladness  untold, 
To  Him  on  the  throne  of  his  glory, 
Who  wept  in  the  days  of  old." 

H.  SEARS. 

'HE  Church  owes  many  of  her  sweetest  hymns  to 
the  profound  anguish  which  wrung  the  hearts  of 
her   noblest  children.      The  rough  feet  of  trial 
f       and    pain   have    stamped,   as    in    the    oil-press, 
hearts  whose  life-blood  is  preserved  in  matchless 
lyrics.     There  is  no  such  raw  material  for  songs 
that  live  from  heart  to  heart  as  that  furnished  by  sorrow. 

It  has  been  said  by  a  modern  writer  that,  to  his  thought, 
the  mysterious  beauty  of  music  is  more  wonderful  than  the 
prodigality  of  form  and  colour  which  overspreads  the  whole 
of  nature  ;  and  he  goes  on  to  show  that  man  only  develops 
and  liberates  the  music  which  is  latent  in  almost  all  sub 
stances,  waiting  for  his  coming  to  give  it  expression. 
"  Man  only  develops  what  was  within  them,  just  as  the  coal 
which  is  extracted  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  when  set 
on  fire,  merely  liberates  the  heat  and  light,  which  in  the 
forest  it  received  from  the  sun."  Is  not  this  speechless 
music  —  locked  within  nature,  pleading  to  be  let  out  in  song 
or  sound  through  the  agency  of  man  —  part  of  the  earnest 
expectation  of  the  creature,  which  waits  for  the  manifesta 
tion  of  the  sons  of  God  ? 


93 

It  is  remarkable  how  many  of  David's  psalms  date  from 
those  dark  and  sad  days  when  he  was  hunted  as  a  partridge 
upon  the  mountains.  His  path  may  be  tracked  through 
the  Psalter,  as  well  as  in  the  sacred  narrative  of  his  wander 
ings.  Keilah,  Ziph,  Maon,  Engedi,  yielded  themes  for 
strains  which  will  live  for  ever.  To  this  gifted  singer  the 
power  was  entrusted  of  eliciting  the  music  that  lay  con 
cealed  in  the  least  congenial  haunts.  Is  it  not  strange  that 
these  wild  desolations  are  now  immortal,  and  that  each  has 
contributed  chords  to  the  complete  music  of  the  soul  ?  We 
will  for  a  little  trace  the  parallel  lines  of  David's  history  and 
song. 

I.  A  CLUSTER  OF  PSALMS. — KEILAH. — While  sheltering 
in  the  forest  of  Hareth,  tidings  came  of  a  foray  of  the 
Philistines  on  one  of  the  hapless  border-towns.  "Behold, 
the  Philistines  are  fighting  against  Keilah,  and  they  rob  the 
threshing-floors."  The  year's  harvest  was  at  that  time 
spread  out  for  threshing  ;  it  was  an  opportune  moment 
therefore  for  the  plunderer.  The  labours  of  the  year  were 
being  carried  off,  and  the  cattle  "lifted  by  Israel's  bitter 
and  relentless  foe."  Wrapped  in  these  tidings  there  was 
probably  a  covert  appeal  for  help  from  one  who  had  often 
proved  himself  a  wall  of  defence  on  the  southern  frontier. 
Saul  was  too  far  away,  and  perhaps  too  intent  on  his  fan 
cied  personal  wrongs,  to  be  available  for  the  rapid  action 
that  was  required.  David  was  alert,  energetic,  near  at 
hand.  The  appeal  to  him  was  not  in  vain  ;  especially  as 
it  wras  ratified  by  the  Divine  voice.  He  arose  and  went 
down  from  the  hill-country  of  Judah  into  the  plains,  met 
the  marauders  on  their  return  journey,  heavily  laden  with 
booty  and  impeded  with  cattle,  smote  them  with  great 
slaughter,  and  brought  back  all  the  spoil  to  the  rejoicing 
townsfolk,  who,  in  return  for  his  services,  gladly  lodged  and 
entertained  him  and  his  men. 

It  was  a  brief  spell  of  sunshine  in  a  dark  and  cloudy  day, 


94  j^ongs  J50m  of  j^orrofo. 

and  must  have  been  very  welcome  to  the  weary  little  band. 
To  be  again  in  a  town  that  had  "  gates  and  bars "  was  as 
welcome  an  exchange  to  life  in  the  dens  and  caves  of  the 
earth  as  the  comforts  of  civilization  are  after  the  privations 
of  the  Tartar  steppes.  And  this  gleam  of  comfort  probably 
elicited  from  the""minstrel-chieftain  Psalm  xxxi.,  "Blessed 
be  the  Lord,  for  He  hath  showed  me  his  marvellous  loving- 
kindness  in  a  strong  city." 

ZIPH. — His  stay  in  Keilah  was  brought  to  a  summary 
close  by  the  tidings,  given  perhaps  by  Jonathan,  that  Saul 
was  preparing  an  expedition  to  take  him,  like  a  trapped 
bird,  even  though  the  city  that  sheltered  his  rival  were  de 
stroyed  in  the  attempt.  These  tidings  were  confirmed 
through  the  ephod,  by  which  David  appealed  to  the  God  of 
Israel ;  and  the  further  information  was  communicated  that 
the  cowardly  and  ungrateful  townsfolk,  when  forced  to  choose 
between  the  king  and  himself,  would  not  scruple  to  save 
themselves  by  surrendering  their  deliverer.  Then  David 
and  his  men,  in  number  about  six  hundred,  arose  and 
departed  out  of  Keilah,  and  went  whithersoever  they  could 
go.  Perhaps  they  broke  up  into  small  parties,  whilst  the 
leader,  with  the  more  intrepid  and  devoted  of  his  followers, 
made  his  way  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Ziph,  about  three 
miles  south  of  Hebron. 

This  was  about  the  lowest  ebb  in  David's  fortunes.  The 
king  was  searching  for  him  every  day  with  a  malignity 
which  made  it  evident  that  he  had  come  out  to  seek  his 
life.  Beneath  the  expressions  and  formulas  of  devout  re 
ligion  which  he  carefully  maintained  (xxiii.  7,  21),  Saul 
secretly  cherished  the  resolve  of  thwarting  the  Divine  pur 
pose.  He  knew,  so  Jonathan  told  his  friend  in  a  hurried 
interview  the  two  noble  youths  arranged  in  the  wood  of 
Ziph,  that  David  would  be  king  over  Israel.  But  this  did 
not  abate  his  determination  to  take  his  life  if  he  could. 
What  a  desperate  condition  his  soul  had  reached,  as  the 


95 

result  of  turning  itself  to  its  own  wild  and  evil  way !  And 
manifestly  David  had  every  reason  to  fear  the  outbursts  of 
the  hatred  which,  in  proud  defiance,  had  even  set  itself 
against  the  will  of  God. 

In  addition  to  this  relentless  hate,  there  was  the  medi 
tated  treachery  of  the  Ziphites,  who  sought  to  curry  favour 
with  the  king  by  betraying  David's  lurking  place.  Tidings 
of  their  intended  falseness  came  to  David,  and  he  moved 
further  south  to  the  wilderness  of  Maon,  where  a  conical 
hill  gives  a  far  extended  view  of  the  surrounding  country. 
But  to  the  spot  the  men  of  Ziph  conducted  the  king  with 
such  deadly  accuracy,  that,  before  they  could  escape,  the  little 
beleaguered  band  found  the  hill  on  which  they  gathered 
surrounded  by  the  royal  troops,  and  their  escape  rendered 
impossible.  Well  for  them  that  a  breathless  messenger 
at  this  juncture  burst  in  on  Saul  with  the  words,  "  Haste 
thee,  and  come ;  for  the  Philistines  have  made  a  raid 
on  the  land." 

Then  David  drew  a  long  sigh  of  relief,  and  sang  Psalm 
liv. :  "  Save  me,  O  God,  by  thy  name,  and  judge  me  by 
thy  might." 

ENGEDI. — From  Maon,  when  the  heat  of  the  pursuit  was 
over,  David  removed  his  quarters  eastward  to  the  strong 
holds  of  the  wild  goat  on  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea. 
On  the  western  shore,  midway  between  north  and  south, 
there  is  a  little  piece  of  level  ground,  covered  with  the 
rich  luxuriance  of  tropical  vegetation.  It  is  jealously  fenced 
in  by  giant  cliffs,  jutting  out  into  the  dark  waters  of  the 
lake  ;  but  its  beauty  is  maintained  by  a  tepid  stream  which 
issues  from  the  limestone  rock,  four  hundred  feet  above 
the  glen.  It  is  said  that  grey  weather-beaten  stones  mark 
the  site  of  an  ancient  city,  and  traces  of  palms  have  been 
discovered  encrusted  in  the  limestone.  But  the  tangle  of 
a  tropical  jungle  now  reigns  supreme.  This  was  David's 
next  resort — Engedi,  the  haunt  of  the  wild  goat — where 


96  j^otujs  jS0m  of  j^urrohr. 

deep  caverns  in  the  steep  cliffs,  and  the  abundance  of 
water-supply,  furnished  two  of  the  most  important  items 
in  his  sparse  and  frugal  programme.  Here,  again,  the 
Psalmist  sets  his  experiences  to  music  in  two  priceless 
songs.  Psalm  Ivii.,  "  Be  merciful  unto  me,  O  God,  for  my 
soul  taketh  refuge  in  Thee";  and  Psalm  cxlii.,  "  I  cry  with 
my  voice  unto  the  Lord,  with  my  voice  unto  the  Lord,  do 
I  make  supplication." 

Wilderness  Experiences  also  gave  rise  to  other  psalms, 
nil  of  them  marked  by  a  recurrence  of  the  same  metaphors 
borrowed  from  the  wilderness  and  rocky  scenery ;  of  the 
same  protestations  of  innocence ;  of  the  same  appeals  for 
the  overshadowing  wing  of  the  Most  High ;  of  the  same 
delicately-worded  references  to  Saul.  Amongst  these  are 
Psalms  xi.,  xiii.,  xvii.,  xxii.,  xxv.,  Ixiv. 

II.  SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THESE  PSALMS.  —  We 
cannot  deal  with  them  in  detail ;  but  one  or  two  features 
arrest  the  most  superficial  glance. 

Their  Imagery. — Men  are  as  lions.  "  My  soul  is 
among  lions,  I  lie  among  them  that  are  set  on  fire."  His 
soul  takes  refuge  in  God,  hiding  in  the  shadow  of  his 
wings ;  as  he  had  often  seen  the  eaglets  do  beneath  the 
broad  pinion  of  the  parent-bird.  God  is  his  Rock,  he 
hides  in  Him  ;  as  his  fugitive  band  in  the  strong  deep  sides 
of  the  cave.  His  Divine  helper  will  not  let  his  enemies 
triumph  over  him  ;  it  shall  happen  to  them,  as  so  often 
happened  to  hunters  in  those  very  wilds,  when  they  fell 
down  the  crumbling  sides  of  pits  dug  to  trap  the  creatures 
of  the  forest.  At  night  he  shelters  in  God;  with  his 
psaltery  he  awakes  the  dawn.  All  these  psalms  are  bathed 
in  imagery  and  metaphors  like  these. 

Their  Delicate  References  to  Saul. — He  does  not  spare 
his  epithets  for  those  who  goad  the  king  to  murderous 
hate.  The  men  that  watched  for  his  stumbling,  that  cried 
"  report  it !  report  it !  "  that  misrepresented  and  maligned 


44  3V  Conarienre  &0t&  of  (Menre."  97 

him,  are  dealt  with  in  no  hesitating  or  mincing  tones.  But 
of  Saul  he  says  nothing,  unless  there  is  a  veiled  allusion  to 
him  in  the  plural,  with  which  he  describes  the  violent  men 
that  sought  after  his  life.  There  is  a  plaintive  allusion  to 
happy  days,  past  for  ever,  when  he  manifested  his  profound 
sympathy  for  the  king's  terrible  malady,  wearing  sackcloth 
on  his  flesh,  and  humbling  his  soul  with  fasting  (xxxv.  13); 
but  there  are  no  words  of  reproach,  no  upbraidings,  no 
repayment  of  hate  with  hate.  In  this  there  is  an  anticipa 
tion  of  the  teaching  and  temper  of  Jesus. 

There  is  a  Conscious  Rectitude. — His  conscience  was  void 
of  offence  towards  God  and  man.  If  challenged  as  to 
his  absolute  sinlessness,  he  would  have  been  the  first  to 
deprecate  anything  of  the  sort ;  instantly  he  would  have 
acknowledged  that  in  his  rough  soldier-life  he  was  constantly 
in  need  of  the  propitiating  sacrifices,  which  should  plead 
for  him  with  God.  But,  in  respect  to  Saul,  or  to  any 
treachery  against  him  or  his  house,  or  to  any  crime  de 
serving  such  treatment  as  that  with  which  he  was  threatened, 
he  protested  his  absolute  innocence ;  and  turned  confidently 
to  God,  with  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart,  as  one  who 
had  not  lifted  up  his  soul  unto  vanity,  or  sworn  deceitfully 
(Psa.  vii.  3,  4,  5  ;  xxiv.)« 

There  is  great  Evidence  of  Suffering. — Of  all  sources  of 
pain,  there  is  none  so  hard  to  bear,  that  stings  so  sharply, 
and  strikes  its  poison  fangs  so  deeply,  as  the  malevolence 
of  our  fellows.  This  is  what  David  suffered  from  most  of 
all.  To  his  highly  sensitive  spirit  it  was  the  most  acute 
form  of  torture  :  that  though  he  was  absolutely  innocent, 
though  he  was  willing  to  give  himself  to  prayer  and 
ministry  on  their  behalf,  yet  his  calumniators  pursued  him 
with  such  unrelenting  malice — "  Their  teeth  are  spears  and 
arrows,  and  their  tongue  a  sharp  sword." 

But  his  appeal  was  to  God — 

"  Save  me  by  thy  name  ; 

Judge  me  by  thy  might  ! " 
G 


50rn  of 

"  Behold,  God  is  my  helper." 

"  I  will  cry  unto  God  most  High  ; 

Unto  God  that  performeth  all  things  for  me. 

He  shall  send  from  heaven,  and  save  me. 

God  shall  send  forth  his  mercy  and  truth." 
' '  Refuge  hath  failed  me  ;  no  man  careth  for  my  soul. 

I  cried  unto  Thee,  O  Lord. 

I  said,  Thou  art  my  refuge." 

What  depths  of  pathos  lie  in  these  stanzas  of  petition ! 
He  does  not  seek  to  retaliate  or  avenge  his  wrong;  but 
commits  himself  to  Him  who  judgeth  righteously,  assured 
that  the  Righteous  One  will  shelter  him  during  the  time  of 
trial,  and  ultimately  bring  out  his  righteousness  as  the  light, 
and  his  judgment  as  the  noonday. 

If  any  should  read  these  lines  who  are  unjustly  maligned 
and  persecuted,  let  them  rest  in  the  Lord  and  wait  patiently 
for  Him.  Some  little  time  may  elapse  before  the  hour  of 
deliverance  may  strike,  during  which  they  must  wear  white 
robes  of  stainless  innocence  and  purity  (Rev.  vi.  n);  but 
presently  God  will  arise,  and  lift  the  poor  out  of  the  dust, 
the  needy  from  the  dunghill,  "to  make  them  sit  with 
princes  and  inherit  the  throne  of  glory."  For  the  needy 
shall  not  always  be  forgotten,  nor  the  expectation  of  the 
poor  perish  for  ever. 


XIV. 


(  i  SAMUEL  xxiv.  and  xxvi.  ;   and  PSALM  xlii.  i.} 

"  Wait  !  for  the  day  is  breaking, 

Though  the  dull  night  be  long  ; 
Wait  !     God  is  not  forsaking 
1  hy  heart.     Be  strong  —  be  strong  ! 

"  Wait  !  'tis  the  key  to  pleasure 

And  to  the  peace  of  God  ; 
Oh,  tarry  thou  his  leisure  — 
Thy  soul  shall  bear  no  load." 

C.  TOWNSEND. 

S  David  reviewed  his  life,  and  recorded  his  experi- 
ences,  he  was  well  aware  of  the  innumerable  evils 
that  had  encompassed  him,  of  the  horrible  pit 
and  miry  clay  out  of  which  he  had  been  brought 
up,  and  of  the  many  who  had  sought  in  vain  to 
destroy  his  soul  ;  but  from  all  he  had  been 
delivered.  He  dared  not  attribute  his  deliverance  to  the 
quickness  of  his  ingenuity,  or  the  agility  of  his  movements  ; 
but  to  God,  and  God  only.  Mark  his  record  of  God's 
dealings  with  him,  as  he  stands  on  the  eminence  of  the 
years  and  looks  down  and  back  — 
'•''He  inclined  unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry  ; 

He  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay  ; 
He  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  established  my  goings  ; 
He  hath  put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth,  even  praise  unto  our  God." 

And  if  we  further  inquire  what  his  attitude  was,  during  all 
these  long  and  sad  experiences,  he  answers  :  — 

"  I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord." 

In  a  recent  chapter  we  saw  how  David  waited  on  the 
Lord;  but  there  is  a  clear  distinction  between  this  and 
waiting  for  the  Lord,  though  in  practice  they  are  generally 


ioo 

conjoined.  We  wait  on  the  Lord  by  prayer  and  supplica 
tion,  looking  for  the  indication  of  his  will ;  we  wait  for  the 
Lord  by  patience  and  submission,  looking  for  the  inter 
position  of  his  hand.  It  is  very  needful  to  learn  this  lesson 
of  silence,  patience,  resignation ;  and  it  is  interesting  to 
remark  in  the  two  incidents  before  us  how  perfectly  David 
had  acquired  it,  and  had  learnt  to  wait  for  the  Lord. 

THE  BASIS  OF  WAITING  FOR  GOD. — There  must  be  a 
promise  to  justify  us,  or  some  definite  committal  of  God, 
on  which  we  can  rest  as  the  unmistakeable  revelation  of  his 
purpose.  In  their  last  interview,  in  the  wood  of  Ziph, 
Jonathan  had  given  this  to  his  friend.  He  had  spoken 
like  a  messenger  from  God.  How  those  words  rang  in  the 
weary  heart  that  had  drunk  them  in  as  the  parched  land 
drinks  water !  "  Fear  not,"  he  had  said,  "  for  the  hand  of 
Saul  my  father  shall  not  find  thee ;  and  thou  shalt  be  king 
over  Israel,  and  I  shall  be  next  unto  thee."  He  had  even 
said  that  this,  too,  was  Saul's  conviction  :  "  That  also  Saul 
my  father  knoweth." 

Besides  this,  he  was  conscious  of  faculty  and  God-given 
power ;  of  ability  to  grasp  the  helm  of  the  distracted  king 
dom,  and  guide  the  sorely-tossed  bark  into  calmer  waters. 
As  all  these  corroborations  of  the  original  promise  came 
into  his  heart,  he  became  convinced  that  God  had  a  great 
purpose  in  his  life ;  and  settled  it  in  his  own  mind  that 
he  would  wait  patiently  for  the  Lord  to  do  as  He  had  said, 
and  that  he  would  not  lift  his  finger  to  secure  the  kingdom 
for  himself.  Jehovah  had  promised,  then  He  would  perform. 
Whenever  the  moment  came  for  him  to  sit  on  the  throne  as 
the  acknowledged  king  of  his  people,  it  should  be  from  first 
to  last  the  Divine  gift,  and  the  Divine  performance.  There 
should  be  nothing  to  hinder  God  from  saying : — 
"  I  have  set  my  king 

Upon  my  holy  hill  of  Sion." 

Two    NOTABLE    INCIDENTS. — Engedi. —  One    afternoon, 


We  lung's  |l ml.  101 

when  Saul,  with  three  thousand  men,  was  in  hot  pursuit 
of  David,  amid  the  wild  and  tangled  rocks  of  Engedi,  a 
strange  incident  put  him  completely  in  David's  power.  It 
was  a  time  of  breathless  heat ;  the  sunbeams  were  striking 
like  swords  into  the  deep  wadys  and  ravines,  and  every 
living  thing,  except  perhaps  the  little  lizards,  had  crept  away 
into  shelter.  For  the  same  reason,  or  because  they  desired 
to  elude  pursuit,  David  and  his  men  were  in  the  inmost 
recesses  of  an  immense  cavern.  Into  that  very  cave  Saul 
came.  His  men  had  gone  forward  ;  the  intense  solitude  and 
silence  within  and  without  threw  him  off  his  guard ;  he 
lingered  a  little  in  the  entrance. 

These  caves,  says  Dr.  Thomson,  are  dark  as  midnight, 
and  the  keenest  eyes  cannot  see  five  paces  inward  ;  but  one 
who  has  been  long  within,  and  is  looking  towards  the  en 
trance,  can  observe  with  perfect  distinctness  all  that  takes 
place  in  that  direction.  The  blinding  glare  of  the  sunshine 
on  the  limestone  cliffs  made  Saul  more  than  ever  unable  to 
detect  the  forms  that  lined  the  cave,  whilst  they  could  per 
fectly  well  watch  his  every  movement.  How  little  did  the 
king  realize  the  intense  interest  with  which  he  was  being 
watched  by  six  hundred  pairs  of  eyes,  and  the  peril  to 
which  he  was  exposed  !  The  whole  band  was  thrilled  with 
excitement. 

Now  was  the  opportunity  for  David  to  end  their  wander 
ings  and  hardships  by  one  thrust  of  the  spear.  They 
whispered  "  Seize  your  opportunity  !  Could  it  have  fallen 
out  more  fortunately  ?  Here  is  the  man  who  has  repeatedly 
tried  to  take  your  life,  and  is  here  with  that  avowed  intent. 
Surely  the  law  of  God  itself  exonerates  us  in  taking  the 
life  of  those  who  would  take  ours  !  God  Himself  has 
undoubtedly  brought  him  here  that  you  should  avenge  your 
wrongs,  and  save  further  ones." 

With  great  difficulty — and  to  have  been  able  to  do  such 
a  thing  showed  the  immense  power  he  exerted  over  these 
wild  strong  men — David  restrained  them,  and  curbed  his 


102  gabtfr's  &elf-flesirahtt. 

own  passion,  that  tore  like  fire  through  every  vein,  and 
contented  himself  with  creeping  near,  and  cutting  off  the 
skirt  of  the  king's  robe,  to  prove  to  him  afterwards  how 
completely  he  had  been  in  his  power.  But  even  then,  after 
Saul  had  gone  forth,  and  David's  men  crowded  round,  full 
of  sullen  remonstrance  at  his  weakness,  he  was  struck  with 
remorse,  and  he  said  to  them,  "The  Lord  forbid  that  I 
should  do  this  thing  unto  my  lord,  the  Lord's  anointed,  to 
put  forth  mine  hand  against  him,  seeing  he  is  the  Lord's 
anointed." 

Hachilah. — Previously  at  this  spot  David  had  been 
nearly  trapped.  This  time  the  tables  were  turned.  Once 
more  Saul,  probably  instigated  by  a  malign  influence,  that 
we  shall  consider  in  our  next  chapter,  was  in  pursuit  of  his 
rival,  "  having  three  thousand  chosen  men  of  Israel  with 
him."  Having  ascertained  by  means  of  scouts  the  exact 
situation  of  the  royal  camp,  David  went  to  inspect  it  in  per 
son  from  an  overhanging  cliff.  On  the  outskirts,  the  wagons 
made  a  rude  barricade,  within  these  were  the  soldiers' 
quarters,  and  in  the  innermost  circle  Saul  and  Abner  were 
posted ;  but  the  watches  were  badly  kept,  and  no  pre 
caution  was  taken  against  a  sudden  attack. 

A  sudden  inspiration  seized  David,  and  he  proposed  to 
Abishai  and  Ahimelech  the  Hittite,  that  they  should  visit 
the  camp  by  night.  Abishai  gladly  volunteered  to  accom 
pany  him,  and  guided  by  the  clear  moonlight  they  crept 
down  the  hill,  crossed  the  ravine,  picked  their  way  through 
the  wagons  and  the  sleeping  ranks  of  the  soldiers,  stood  for 
a  moment  whispering  over  the  prostrate  form  of  the  king, 
bore  off  his  spear  and  water-bottle  from  Saul's  head,  and 
then  "  gat  them  away,  and  no  man  saw  it,  nor  knew  it ; 
neither  did  any  awake,  because  a  deep  sleep  from  the  Lord 
was  fallen  upon  them." 

Thus,  again,  Saul  had  been  in  his  power ;  but  he  had 
restrained  himself.  Abishai  could  not  read  him  nor  under 
stand  his  secret.  To  him  it  seemed  a  most  natural  and 


gatrifc's  Jttagttatumitii.  103 

lawful  act  for  David  to  take  the  life  of  the  man  who  was  so 
infatuated  for  his  destruction.  Nay,  if  David  were  at  all 
squeamish  about  killing  him  with  his  own  hand,  surely  he 
could  have  no  objection  against  Abishai  doing  it,  since  he 
was  not  personally  concerned  in  the  feud.  In  that  whis 
pered  colloquy  over  the  sleeping  monarch,  Abishai  had 
suggested  that  God  had  delivered  his  enemy  into  his 
chieftain's  hand,  and  had  offered  to  smite  him  with  his 
own  spear  with  a  stroke  so  deadly,  so  instant  in  its  effect, 
that  there  would  be  neither  sigh  nor  groan  to  awake  Abner 
or  his  body-guard.  But  David  would  not  have  it. 

"  No,"  he  said,"  I  will  be  no  party  to  this  deed.  None 
can  smite  the  Lord's  anointed  and  be  guiltless.  When  his 
appointed  death-hour  comes,  God  will  take  him,  either  by 
some  natural  process  in  the  palace,  or  amid  the  going  down 
of  the  battle.  But  my  hand  shall  not  curtail  his  days :  I 
will  wait  God's  time." 

On  each  of  these  occasions  David  acted  with  the  mag 
nanimity  that  became  a  hero  and  a  saint.  He  would  take 
no  mean  advantage  of  his  adversary.  He  would  not 
retaliate  or  avenge  his  wrong.  He  refused  to  admit  the 
specious  argument  that  opportunity  meant  permission,  and 
that  licence  meant  liberty.  He  quieted  the  impetuous 
fever  of  his  soul,  resisted  the  subtle  temptation  of  the 
adversary,  and  elected  to  await  the  slow  unfolding  of  the 
Divine  purpose. 

THE  BEHAVIOUR  THAT  WAITING  FOR  GOD  INDUCES  — 
It  Restrains  from  Crime. — Bitter  indeed  had  David's  re 
morse  been,  if  he  had  listened  to  his  comrades  and  put 
forth  his  hand  against  Saul's  life.  It  would  have  robbed 
his  harp  of  all  its  music.  There  would  then  have  been 
some  justification  for  Shimei's  cursing  words  on  that  dark 
after-day  in  his  life ;  but  as  it  was,  though  they  cut  him  to 
the  quick,  they  met  with  no  answering  response  from  his 
conscience.  As  he  searched  his  heart  in  the  sight  of  God, 


104  gnirifc's  Jttlf-ftasfathti. 

he  knew  that  Absalom's  rebellion  and  seizure  of  his  throne 
could  not  be,  as  Shimei  suggested,  a  requital  in  kind  for  his 
dealings  with  Saul.  True,  months  were  still  to  pass,  full  of 
anxiety  and  suspense,  before  the  coronation  shouts  rang 
through  the  streets  of  Hebron ;  but  they  were  forgotten  as 
snow  dissolves -in  the  river;  and  then  there  was  nothing  to 
regret,  no  gnawing  conscience,  no  death's  head  at  the  bottom 
of  his  cup  of  joy.  Be  still,  O  heart !  wait  for  God ;  this 
will  keep  thee  from  acts  and  words,  which,  if  allowed, 
would  shadow  thy  whole  after  life. 

//  Inspires  Courage. — What  an  intrepid  spirit  this  was 
that  dared  to  cry  after  the  king  and  hold  up  the  skirt  of  his 
robe;  that  challenged  the  two  bravest  men  of  his  little 
army  to  a  feat,  from  which  one  of  them  shrank !  Ah !  the 
man  who  is  living  in  the  Divine  purpose  has  the  secret 
of  quenchless  courage.  He  knows  that  no  weapon  formed 
against  him  shall  prosper,  and  that  every  tongue  that  shall 
rise  against  him  in  judgment  shall  be  condemned.  He 
fears  nothing,  except  to  do  wrong,  and  to  grieve  God.  If 
in  following  the  prepared  path  he  suddenly  comes  on  the 
brink  of  a  precipice,  down  which  he  must  cast  himself,  he 
does  not  hesitate  to  do  so ;  knowing  that  the  angels  will 
swoop  beneath,  and  bear  him  up,  so  that  he  shall  not  dash 
his  foot  against  a  stone, 

It  gives  great  Rest. — Surely  it  was  out  of  such  experi 
ences  as  these  that  David  wrote  the  37th  Psalm,  which, 
though  it  belongs  to  a  later  period,  for  ever  embalms  the 
conclusions  of  this.  The  mellow  wisdom  of  old  age  gathers 
up  the  maxims  that  were  wrought  out  in  the  fires  of  early 
manhood. 

"  Fret  not  thyself  because  of  evildoers  ; 

Neither  be  thou  envious  against  them  that  work  unrighteousness : 
For  they  shall  soon  be  cut  down  like  the  grass, 
And  wither  as  the  green  herb." 

The  exhortations  of  this  exquisite  psalm,  to  trust  in  the 
Lord,  to  delight  in  the  Lord,  to  roll  the  way  of  life  on 


in  (Soft.  105 

the  Lord,  to  rest  in  the  Lord  and  wait  patiently  for 
Him,  and  especially  the  repeated  injunction  not  to  fret, 
are  all  bathed  in  new  meaning  when  read  in  the  light  of 
these  memorable  incidents  in  David's  life. 

Live  on  the  Divine  purpose.  Be  not  eager  for  thyself, 
but  only  that  God's  work  should  be  done.  •  It  is  certain 
that  He  will  take  care  of  thy  interests,  if  thou  carest  for 
his.  Calm  thyself  as  a  weaned  child ;  rest  thee ;  sit  thee 
still  and  trust — God  is  working  out  the  plan  of  thy  life  ; 
thou  canst  not  hurry  Him  ;  it  will  only  expend  the  energy 
of  thy  soul  to  no  purpose,  if  thou  allowest  its  fever  to 
consume  thee ;  in  his  own  time,  the  best  time,  He  shall 
give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart. 

//  induces  Penitence  in  others. — When  David  gave  such 
unmistakeable  evidences  of  his  self-restraint,  continued 
loyalty,  and  surviving  affection,  in  spite  of  all  that  had 
been  done  to  quench  it ;  when  he  so  clearly  established 
his  innocence,  and  showed  the  baselessness  of  the  charges 
made  against  him  ;  when  he  appealed,  with  such  reverence 
and  sincerity  from  the  calumnies  and  misrepresentations 
of  earth  to  the  decisions  of  the  Divine  Judge — the  miserable 
monarch  lifted  up  his  voice  and  wept,  and  confessed  that  he 
had  "  played  the  fool,  and  erred  exceedingly."  Saul 
recognised  David's  nobility ;  the  .old  chivalrous  nature 
which  had  so  captivated  the  nation  in  earlier  days  flashed 
out  with  an  expiring  flicker  ;  and  he  went  so  far  as  to  admit 
that  he  would  be  king.  Nothing  but  such  forbearance  on 
David's  part  could  have  brought  him  so  near  repentance. 

It  is  thus  that  we  may  win  men  still.  We  win  most 
when  we  appear  to  have  yielded  most ;  and  gain  advantages 
by  refusing  to  take  them  wrongfully.  The  man  who  can 
wait  for  God,  is  a  man  of  power,  and  others  will  acknow 
ledge  it  and  bend  beneath  his  sceptre.  To  be  under 
authority  to  God's  lofty  principle  is  to  have  soldiers  under 
us,  who  go  and  come  at  our  will,  and  do  our  bidding. 


XV. 
Cttslj:   a 

(i  SAM.  xxvi.  i  ;   PSALM  vii.) 

"  Who  to  that  bliss  aspire 
Must  win  their  way  through  blood  and  fire  ! — 
The  writhings  of  a  wounded  heart 
Are  fiercer  than  a  foeman's  dart. 
Oft  in  life's  stillest  shade  reclining, 
In  desolation  unrepining, 
Without  a  hope  on  earth  to  find 
A  mirror  in  an  answering  mind, 
Meek  souls  these  are  who  little  deem 
Their  daily  strife  an  angel's  theme  !  " 

KEBLE. 

is  somewhat  surprising  to  find  Saul  in  search  of 
David,  after  the  first  of  the  incidents  described  in 
the  previous  chapter.  At  Engedi  there  seemed  so 
absolute  and  entire  a  reconciliation  between  them. 
Saul  confessed  that  David  was  more  righteous 
than  himself;  acknowledged  that  he  had  dealt 
well  with  him  ;  asked  that  God  would  reward  him ;  and 
assured  him  that  he  would  undoubtedly  be  king.  He  even 
went  so  far  as  to  make  him  swear  that,  when  he  had  come 
to  the  throne,  he  would  not  destroy  his  name  out  of  his 
father's  house  (xxiv.  21).  And  yet,  after  so  short  a  space, 
he  is  again  on  the  war-path. 

These  capricious  changes  may,  of  course,  have  been  due 
to  the  malady  from  which  he  was  suffering ;  but  another 
and  more  satisfactory  explanation  has  been  suggested,  and 
one  which  casts  fresh  light  on  the  seventh  Psalm. 
Dr.  Maclaren,  whose  work  on  the  Psalter  has  brought  the 
whole  Church  into  his  debt,  is  specially  emphatic  in 
connecting  the  psalm  with  this  part  of  David's  history,  and 


bras  Jje  ?  107 

indicates  its  value  in  helping  us  to  understand  the  rapid 
vacillations  in  Saul's  behaviour. 

It  is  headed  Shiggaion  of  David^  which  he  sang  unto  the 
Lord.  That  is,  it  is  an  irregular  ode ;  like  a  stream  broken 
over  a  bed  of  rocks  and  stones,  expressing  by  its  uneven 
measure  and  sudden  changes  the  emotion  of  its  author. 
We  have  often  to  sing  these  Shiggaion  metres ;  our  songs 
are  frequently  broken  with  sighs  and  groans ;  but  we  do 
well  still  to  sing  with  such  tunefulness  as  we  may.  Happy 
are  they  who  can  find  themes  for  singing  to  the  Lord  in 
every  sad  and  bitter  experience  ! 

The  title  proceeds,  concerning  the  words  of  Gush,  a 
Benjamite.  Who  was  this  Cush  ?  The  word  means  black. 
It  may  possibly  refer  to  the  colour  of  the  skin  and  hair,  and 
been  given  as  a  familiar  designation  to  some  swarthy 
Benjamite.  Some  have  supposed  that  it  was  David's  title 
for  Saul ;  but  the  terms  of  respect  in  which  he  ever  spoke 
of  the  Lord's  anointed  make  that  supposition  unlikely. 
Others  have  referred  it  to  Shimei,  the  Benjamite,  whose 
furious  abuse  of  the  king,  in  the  hour  of  his  calamity, 
elicited  such  plaintive  resignation  from  him,  such  passionate 
resentment  from  Abishai.  But  the  style  and  phraseology 
belong  so  evidently  to  this  period  of  David's  life,  that  this 
supposition  also  seems  untenable. 

If  the  psalm  be  carefully  examined,  it  will  be  found  to 
bear  a  close  resemblance  to  the  words  spoken  by  David, 
when  Saul  and  he  held  the  brief  colloquy  outside  the  cave 
at  Engedi,  and  afterwards  at  the  hill  Hachilah. 

Indeed,  the  correspondences  are  so  many  and  minute  that 
they  establish,  almost  beyond  question,  the  date  of  the 
psalm  as  synchronous  with  the  incidents  described  in  the 
last  chapter ;  and  if  so,  we  can  infer  the  cause  of  Saul's 
renewed  passion.  On  comparison  of  psalm  and  narrative 
it  seems  more  than  likely  that  Cush  was  one  of  Saul's 
intimate  friends  and  constant  companions,  and  that  he  was 
incessantly  at  work  poisoning  the  king's  mind  with 


io8  Cuslj:  a  jknfamite. 

malignant  and  deliberate  falsehoods  about  David.  When 
Saul  was  away  from  this  man,  and  under  the  spell  of 
David's  noble  and  generous  nature,  he  laid  aside  his 
vindictiveness,  and  responded  to  the  appeals  of  olden 
friendship  and  chivalry ;  but  when  he  returned  to  his  palace, 
and  Cush  had  fresh  opportunities  of  influencing  him,  he 
yielded  to  the  worse  side  of  his  character,  and  resumed  his 
desperate  attempt  to  thwart  the  Divine  purpose.  Thus  like 
a  shuttlecock  he  was  tossed  to  and  fro  between  the  two 
men.  Now  inclined  to  mercy  by  David,  and  then  to 
vengeance  by  Cush. 

It  is  quite  likely  that  many  of  those  who  shall  read  these 
lines  will  be  able  to  understand,  by  bitter  experiences, 
the  anguish  of  David's  soul  from  this  cause.  You,  too, 
have  a  Cush  in  the  circle  of  your  life,  who  is  constantly 
circulating  baseless  and  calumnious  statements  concerning 
you  ;  poisoning  the  minds  of  those  who  otherwise  would 
be  well  disposed,  and  suggesting  questions,  suspicious 
misunderstandings  of  your  purest  and  most  untainted 
actions.  Such  slanderers  are  to  be  found  in  the  salons 
of  modern  society,  as  in  the  palace  of  the  first  king  of 
Israel ;  and  cause  as  much  exquisite  torture  to  sensitive  and 
tender  natures  to-day,  as  to  David  in  the  wilds  of  Engedi. 
Let  us  learn  how  to  deal  with  such. 

I.  SEARCH  YOUR  HEART  TO  SEE  IF  THESE  SLANDERS 
HAVE  FOUNDATION  IN  FACT.— It  may  be  that  there  is 
more  truth  in  these  hurtful  words  than  you  are  inclined, 
at  first  sight,  to  admit.  Would  it  not  be  wise  to  ask  if 
it  be  so,  before  dismissing  them,  or  treating  them  with 
disdain  ?  Perhaps  those  quick,  envious  eyes  have  dis 
cerned  weaknesses  in  your  character,  of  which  your  closest 
friends  are  aware,  but  they  have  shrunk  from  telling  you  j 
for  love  is  quick  to  notice  the  weak  points  in  the  beloved, 
though  it  is  not  always  true  to  indicate  and  rebuke.  The 
supreme  love  alone  girds  itself  to  the  task  of  washing  the 


109 

feet  of  its  friends.  It  is  a  good  rule  before  you  destroy 
the  anonymous  letter,  or  dismiss  the  unkind  statement, 
which  has  been  going  the  round  of  your  society,  to  sit 
down  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  and  in  its  white 
light  ask  yourself  whether  you  can  say  with  David  : 

4<  My  shield  is  with  God, 
Who  saveth  the  upright  in  heart." 

II.  IF   THERE    is    NO    BASIS    FOR    THEM,   REJOICE  ! — 
Always   remember,   when   men   revile   you,  and  persecute 
you,  and  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely — first, 
that  you  are  in  the  succession  of  the  prophets  and  saints 
of  every  age,   and  may  be   assured  that  you  are  on  the 
right  track ;  and,  secondly,  that  out  of  this,  according  to  the 
express  words  of  Christ,  you  may  extract  that  blessedness 
which  is  richer  and  deeper  than  the  world's  joy,  that  passes 
like  a  summer  brook. 

How  thankful  we  should  be  that  God  has  kept  us  from 
being  actually  guilty  of  the  things  whereof  we  are  accused  ! 
We  might  have  done  them,  and  worse.  It  was  only  by  his 
grace  that  we  have  been  withheld.  That  we  have  the  wit 
ness  of  good  conscience,  and  of  his  Spirit  in  our  hearts, 
should  be  a  perennial  source  of  gladness. 

III.  TAKE  SHELTER  IN  THE  RIGHTEOUS  JUDGMENT  OF 
GOD. — We  are  his  servants,  and  if  He  is  satisfied  with  us, 
why   should  we  break  our   hearts   over  what    our   fellow- 
servants  say  ?     He  put  us  into  the  positions  we  occupy, 
and  if  He  please  to  keep  us  there,  all  that  men  may  say 
or  do  will  be  unavailing  to  dislodge  us.     It  is,  after  all, 
but  a  small  matter  with  us  to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment ; 
yea,  we  judge  not  our  own  selves,  but  He  that  judgeth  us 
is  the  Lord.     He  only  can  properly  determine  the  quality 
of    our    lives,    because    to    Him    alone    are    the   hidden 
things   knowrn   which   give   the   real   clue   to  Tightness  or 
wrongness. 


no  Cuslj:  a  gcnfamite. 

IV.  ABJURE  MORE  COMPLETELY  THE  CARNAL  LIFE. — 
Why   do   we   smart   under   these   unkind   and   slanderous 
words,  which  are  as   baseless  as  uncharitable?     Is  it   not 
because  we  set  too  high  a  value  upon  the  favour  and  ap 
plause  of  men  ?  Is  there  not  a  deadly  fear  of  being  despised 
and  condemned  ?     Does  not  the  world  still  live  within  us, 
revealing  the  tenacity  of  its  hold,  in  this  mortification  and 
shame?     Is   this   being   crucified   to   the   world,  and   the 
world  crucified  to  us  ? 

If  we  were  really  nothing,  and  God  were  all  in  all ;  if  the 
Spirit  and  the  Lamb  of  God  were  dominant  in  our  inner 
life ;  if  we  were  dead  to  the  flesh,  with  its  affections  and 
lusts,  and  alive  only  to  God — surely  it  would  be  a  matter  of 
indifference  what  became  of  our  good  name  in  the  lips  of 
foolish  and  sinful  men.  Here  then  there  is  a  revelation 
of  a  deeper  death  to  be  realized ;  let  us  not  flinch  from  it, 
but  be  willing  to  fall  into  the  ground,  and  die  to  our  reputa 
tion,  as  Jesus  did,  who  endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners 
against  Himself,  and  of  whom  they  spoke  as  in  league  with 
Beelzebub,  the  prince  of  demons. 

We  must  choose  death  in  all  those  forms  in  which  our 
Master  knew  it;  that  having  been  planted  in  the  like 
ness  of  his  death,  we  may  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  his 
resurrection. 

V.  LEAVE  GOD  TO  VINDICATE  YOUR  GOOD  NAME. — Any 
unjust  imputation  or  stigma  that  rests  on  us  is  part  of  the 
evil  of  the  world,  and  a  manifestation  of  its  inveterate  bad 
ness  ;  it  is  a  grief  and  care  to  God ;  it  is  part  of  the  burden 
which  He  is  carrying  ever ;  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  cope 
with  or  remove  it;   it  is  useless  to  retaliate  or  revenge. 
Like   Jesus,   we    may   meekly   ask    the    false    accuser   to 
establish  his  untrue  charges,  or  we   may  meet  them  with 
our  steadfast  denial ;  but  when  we  have  done  this,  and  we 
shall  find  it  of  little  avail,  there  is  no  more  to  do  but  wait 
patiently  till  God  arise  to  avenge  our  wrong  and  vindicate 
our  characters. 


Uttssst 

It  was  so  that  David  acted,  even  in  those  twilight  days. 
He  appealed  to  the  righteous  God  who  trieth  the  hearts 
and  reins;  believed  that  He  would  gird  on  his  armour, 
whetting  his  sword  and  bending  his  bow  against  those  who 
repented  not  of  their  hatred  against  his  saints.  The 
Psalmist  had  a  clear  apprehension  of  the  immutable  law 
that  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  would  come  to  an  end  ; 
that  his  mischief  would  return  on  his  own  head ;  that  the 
trapper  of  the  saints  would  fall  into  his  own  snare ;  whilst 
they  would  be  established,  and  their  character  cleared.  It 
was  so  that  Jesus  bore  Himself.  "  When  He  was  reviled, 
He  reviled  not  again;  when  He  suffered,  He  threatened  not, 
but  committed  Himself  to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously." 

Such  is  the  true  and  wisest  policy.  Be  still ;  give  place 
unto  wrath ;  concern  thyself  rather  with  the  misery  of  that 
soul  from  which  these  wild  words  proceed ;  think  more  of 
this  than  of  thy  wrongs ;  let  thy  heart  be  exercised  with  a 
great  tenderness  toward  him ;  if  he  hunger  feed  him,  if  he 
thirst  give  him  drink ;  try  to  overcome  the  evil  of  his  heart 
by  thy  generous  good;  and  leave  vindication  and  vengeance 
alike  to  God,  whose  prerogative  is  to  plead  the  cause  of  the 
innocent  and  defenceless,  whilst  He  will  repay  the  wrong 
doer  in  due  time. 


XVI. 
31  Cool  tanir  on  a  lot  t*ao. 

(i  SAMUEL  xxv.) 

"  Calm  me,  my  God,  and  keep  me  calm  ; 

Let  thine  outstretched  wing 
Be  like  the  shade  of  Elim's  palm, 
Beside  her  desert  spring. 

' '  Calm  in  the  sufferance  of  wrong, 

Like  Him  who  bore  my  shame  ; 
Calm,  'mid  the  threatening,  taunting  throng, 
Who  hate  thy  holy  name." 

H.  BONAR. 

HE  tidings  passed  throughout  the  land,  like  fire  in 
prairie-grass,  that  Samuel  was  dead ;  and  Israel, 
recognising  its  unity  in  the  common  loss, 
gathered  to  lament  the  prophet  and  saint,  and 
perform  the  last  honouring  rites.  To  his  worth 
and  service  was  accorded  the  unusual  tribute 
of  interment  within  the  precincts  of  his  own  house  at 
Ramah,  on  the  heights  of  Benjamin.  In  all  likelihood  an 
amnesty  was  proclaimed,  and  David  came  to  take  part  in 
the  obsequies  of  his  master  and  friend.  He  did  not, 
however,  dare  to  trust  himself  in  such  near  proximity  to 
Saul  a  moment  longer  than  was  absolutely  essential ;  and  as 
soon  as  all  was  over,  he  started  again  for  the  sparsely-popu 
lated  region  of  Paran,  at  the  extreme  south  of  Judah.  To 
those  borderlands,  so  long  desolated  by  border  warfare 
through  the  incursions  of  the  Philistines  and  Amalekites, 
his  advent  brought  tranquillity  and  safety.  The  sheep- 
masters  had  every  reason  to  be  grateful  for  his  protection ; 
and,  as  one  well  put  it,  "  The  men  were  very  good  unto  us, 
and  we  were  not  hurt,  neither  missed  we  anything,  as  long 
as  we  were  conversant  with  them ;  they  were  a  wall  unto  us 


llalral,  tr;e  CImrl.  113 

both  by  night  and  by  day,  all  the  while  we  were  with  them 
keeping  the  sheep." 

Where  such  services  were  accepted  and  counted  upon, 
it  was  obviously  fair,  and  indeed  according  to  the  custom 
of  the  time,  that  some  recompense  in  kind  should  be 
made.  It  was  a  tacit  understanding,  an  unwritten  law ; 
and  David  was  perfectly  justified  in  sending  ten  young  men 
to  greet  the  opulent  sheep-master,  Nabal,  in  the  day  of 
prosperity,  to  which  the  exertions  of  himself  and  his  men 
had  so  largely  contributed,  to  remind  him  of  his  obligations, 
and  ask  whatsoever  might  come  readily  to  his  hand  to  give. 
Nabal's  churlish  treatment  of  this  request  touched  David 
to  the  quick,  and  led  up  to  an  incident  which,  as  recorded 
by  the  sacred  historian,  is  one  of  the  most  charming  idylls 
of  Scripture,  fragrant  as  the  flowers  of  Alpine  pastures, 
and  fresh  as  a  summer  morn. 

The  story  centres  in  Nabal,  David,  and  Abigail. 

I.  NABAL,  THE  CHURL. — His  character  is  drawn,  after 
the  manner  of  Scripture,  in  three  or  four  bold  outline 
strokes,  and  need  not  detain  us.  In  every  society  men  of 
this  type  are  to  be  encountered,  overbearing  to  their  in 
feriors,  intolerable  in  prosperity,  drunken  in  carouse,  abject 
in  misfortune ;  who  fly  out  with  flout  and  sneer  when  they 
think  themselves  secure,  but  whose  heart  cringes  before 
reverse.  What  an  apt  thumb-nail  sketch  is  given  of  the 
whole  race  of  Nabals  in  the  confidential  remark  passed 
between  his  servant  a-nd  his  wife,  "  He  is  such  a  son  of 
Belial  that  one  cannot  speak  to  him  "  ! 

He  was  very  great,  the  historian  says.  But  it  was  the 
meanest  kind  of  greatness,  consisting  not  in  what  he  was 
in  character,  or  had  achieved  in  valiant  deed,  but  in  the 
number  of  sheep  and  goats  that  bore  his  brand  over  the 
pasture  lands  of  the  south.  There  are  four  kinds  of  great 
ness  ;  young  men,  choose  the  best  for  your  life  aim  !  It  is 
little  to  be  great  in  possessing  ;  better  to  be  great  in  doing ; 

H 


H4  00       an    rm  a 

better  still  to  conceive  and  promulgate  great  thoughts  ;  but 
best  to  be  great  in  character.  Aim  at  the  greatness  of 
which  Heaven  takes  account.  It  was  where  Self-mastery, 
Holy  Ghost  Fulness,  and  Service  to  mankind  met,  that  the 
angel  said,  "  He  shall  be  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord." 

He  was  a  fool,  his  wife  said.  "  As  his  name  is,  so  is  he ; 
Nabal  is  his  name,  and  folly  is  with  him."  Poor  woman ! 
She  had  had  every  reason  for  speaking  thus  bitterly  of  him ; 
and  she  was  a  sweet  woman  too,  not  likely  to  speak  in 
these  terms  of  her  husband  unless  his  rude,  cruel  hands 
had  wantonly  broken  down  the  last  remnant  of  wifely 
respect  and  love.  He  surely  must  have  sat  for  the  full- 
length  portrait  of  the  fool  in  our  Lord's  parable,  who 
thought  his  soul  could  take  its  ease  and  be  merry  because 
a  few  big  barns  were  full.  There  are  appetites  and  longings 
in  the  soul  which  good  dinners  cannot  satisfy ;  there  are 
cravings  which  will  not  be  appeased  merely  because  we  can 
see  our  way  to  three  meals  a  day  as  long  as  we  live. 

He  was  a  man  of  Belial,  his  servant  said ;  and  indeed  his 
treatment  of  David's  modest  request  well  bore  out  the 
character.  It  was  rude,  uncourteous,  uncivil.  He  could 
not  have  been  ignorant  of  the  causes  which  had  forced 
David  into  his  wandering,  arduous  life ;  but  he  ignored 
them,  and  chose  to  put  forward  the  most  cruel  and  harsh 
construction.  He  as  good  as  said  that  David  was  raising  a 
revolt  against  his  master  Saul ;  virtuously  covered  his  refusal 
beneath  a  show  of  loyal  devotion  to  law  and  government, 
which  was  intended  to  suggest  an  extremely  unpleasant 
alternative  for  David  ;  and  finally  asserted  his  preference 
to  give  his  bread  and  flesh  to  those  who,  like  his  shearers, 
had  worked  for  them,  rather  than  to  a  lot  of  vain  fellows, 
who  were  hanging  idly  about  to  live  on  the  ripe  fruit 
that  might  fall  into  their  mouths. 

He  seems  to  have  had  no  compunction  for  his  churlish 
speeches  :  no  idea  of  the  consequences  they  might  involve. 
As  soon  as  the  words  were  spoken,  they  were  forgotten ;  and 


115 

in  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which  they  were  spoken  we 
find  him  in  his  house,  holding  a  feast,  like  the  feast  of  a  king, 
his  heart  merry  with  wine,  and  altogether  so  stupid  that  hus 
wife  told  him  nothing  less  or  more  till  the  morning  light. 

II.  DAVID,  PRECIPITATE  AND  PASSIONATE. — One  of  the 
most  characteristic  features  in  David's  temper  and  be 
haviour  through  all  these  weary  years  was  his  self-control. 
He  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord.  Year  after  year  he 
stayed  himself  on  God's  promise,  and  left  Him  to  fulfil  the 
word  on  which  He  had  caused  him  to  hope.  When  sum 
moned  to  relieve  Ziklag,  or  warned  to  leave  it,  as  well  as  on 
other  occasions,  he  showed  the  utmost  deliberation,  calling 
for  prophet  or  priest,  and  seeking  to  ascertain  the  Divine 
will  before  stirring  a  step.  On  two  occasions  he  had  con 
trolled  himself,  when  Saul  lay  in  his  power,  and  refused  to 
take  his  life.  But  the  rampart  of  self-restraint  built  by  long 
habit  went  down,  like  al  neglected  sea  wall,  before  the 
sudden  paroxysm  of  passion  which  Nabal's  insulting  words 
aroused.  In  hot  fury  he  said  to  his  men,  "Gird  ye  on 
every  man  his  sword."  And  they  girded  on  every  man  his 
sword,  and  David  also  girded  on  his  sword,  and  there  went 
up  after  David  about  four  hundred  men.  He  doubtless 
argued  with  himself  as  they  marched  rapidly  through  the 
silent  wolds,  "  I  am  justified  in  this  act ;  there  is  no  reason 
why  this  man  should  treat  me  thus ;  he  has  returned  evil 
(or  good,  and  added  reviling  and  reproach  ;  it  is  intolerable ; 
I  must  assert  my  self-respect,  and  let  this  neighbourhood 
see  that  I  am  not  going  to  be  trifled  with.  I  will  bear  from 
the  king  what  I  will  suffer  from  no  living  man  else." 

At  this  hour  David  was  on  the  brink  of  committing  a 
crime,  which  would  have  cast  a  dark  shadow  on  all  his 
after  years.  In  calmer,  quieter,  holier  hours  it  would  have 
been  a  grief  to  him,  and  an  offence  of  heart,  to  have  shed 
blood  causelessly,  and  avenged  himself,  instead  of  leaving 
it  to  the  Lord  to  sling  out  the  souls  of  his  enemies,  as  from 


\ 


n6  3V  ^oai  Uanfc  on  a 

the  hollow  of  a  sling.  From  this  shame,  sorrow,  and 
disgrace  he  was  saved  by  that  sweet  and  noble  woman, 
Abigail. 

III.  ABIGAIL,  THE  BEAUTIFUL  INTERCESSOR. — She  was 
a  woman  of  good  understanding  and  of  a  beautiful 
countenance — a  fit  combination.  Her  character  had 
written  its  legend  on  her  face.  The  two  things  do  not 
always  go  together.  There  are  many  beautiful  women 
wholly  destitute  of  good  understanding ;  just  as  birds  of 
rarest  plumage  are  commonly  deficient  in  the  power  of 
song.  But  a  good  understanding,  which  is  moral  rather 
than  intellectual,  casts  a  glow  of  beauty  over  the  plainest 
features. 

It  is  remarkable  how  many  Abigails  get  married  to 
Nabals.  God-fearing  women,  tender  and  gentle  in  their 
sensibilities,  high-minded  and  noble  in  their  ideals,  become 
tied  in  an  indissoluble  union  with  men  for  whom  they  can 
have  no  true  affinity,  even  if  they  have  not  an  unconquer 
able  repugnance.  In  Abigail's  case,  this  relationship  was 
in  all  probability  not  of  her  choosing ;  but  the  product  of 
the  Oriental  custom,  which  compelled  a  girl  to  take  her 
father's  choice  in  the  matter  of  marriage.  As  a  mere  child 
.she  may  have  come  into  Nabal's  home,  and  become  bound 
to  him  by  an  apparently  inevitable  fate.  In  other  ways, 
which  involve  equally  little  personal  choice,  compelled  by 
the  pressure  of  inexorable  circumstances,  misled  by  the 
deceitful  tongue  of  flattery,  her  instinctive  hesitancy  over 
come  by  the  urgency  of  friends,  a  woman  may  still  find 
herself  in  Abigail's  pitiful  plight.  To  such  an  one  there  is 
but  one  advice— You  must  stay  where  you  are.  The  dis 
similarity  in  taste  and  temperament  does  not  constitute  a 
sufficient  reason  for  leaving  your  husband  to  drift.  You 
must  believe  that  God  has  permitted  you  to  enter  on  this 
awful  heritage,  partly  because  this  fiery  ordeal  was  required 
by  your  character,  and  partly  that  you  might  act  as  a 


counteractive  influence.  You  must  stay  as  you  are.  It 
may  be  that  some  day  your  opportunity  will  come,  as  it 
came  to  Abigail.  In  the  meantime  do  not  allow  your  purer 
nature  to  be  bespotted  or  besmeared.  You  can  always  keep 
the  soul  clean  and  pure.  Bide  your  time ;  and  amid  the 
weltering  waste  of  inky  water,  be  like  a  pure  fountain,  rising 
from  the  ocean  depths. 

But  if  any  young  girl  of  good  sense  and  earnest  aspira 
tions  who  reads  these  lines,  secretly  knows  that,  if  she  had 
the  chance,  she  would  wed  a  carriage  and  pair,  a  good 
position,  or  broad  acres,  irrespective  of  character,  let  her 
remember  that  to  enter  the  marriage  bond  with  a  man, 
deliberately  and  advisedly,  for  such  a  purpose,  is  a  pro 
fanation  of  the  Divine  ideal,  and  can  end  only  in  one  way. 
She  will  not  raise  him  to  her  level,  but  sink  to  his;  her 
marble  will  not  change  his  clay,  but  coarsen  to  it. 

Nabal's  servants  knew  the  quality  of  their  mistress,  and 
could  trust  her  to  act  wisely  in  the  emergency  which  was 
upon  them  ;  so  they  told  her  all.  She  immediately  grasped 
the  situation,  despatched  a  small  procession  of  provision- 
bearers  along  the  way  that  David  must  come,  and  followed 
them  immediately  on  her  ass.  She  met  the  avenging 
warriors  by  the  covert  of  the  mountain,  and  the  interview 
was  as  creditable  to  her  woman's  wit  as  to  her  grace  of 
heart.  The  lowly  obeisance  of  the  beautiful  woman  at  the 
young  soldier's  feet ;  the  frank  confession  of  the  wrong  that 
had  been  done ;  the  expression  of  thankfulness  that  so  far 
he  had  been  kept  from  blood-guiltiness  and  from  avenging 
his  own  wrongs ;  the  depreciation  of  the  generous  present 
she  brought  as  only  fit  for  his  servants  ;  the  chivalrous 
appreciation  of  his  desire  to  fight  only  the  battles  of  the 
Lord  and  to  keep  an  unblemished  name ;  the  sure  anticipa 
tion  of  the  time  when  his  fortunes  would  be  secured  and 
his  enemies  silenced ;  the  suggestion  that  in  those  coming 
days  he  would  be  glad  to  have  no  shadow  on  the  sunlit 
hills  of  his  life,  no  haunting  memory — all  this  was  as 


n8  ^  C001  Sattfc  on  a 

beautiful,  and  wise,  and  womanly  as  it  could  be,  and 
brought  David  back  to  his  better  self.  Frank  and  noble  as 
he  always  was,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  acknowledge  his  deep 
indebtedness  to  this  lovely  woman,  and  to  see  in  her 
intercession  the  gracious  arrest  of  God.  "  And  David  said 
to  Abigail,  Blessed  be  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,  which 
sent  thee  this  day  to  meet  me ;  and  blessed  be  thy  wisdom, 
and  blessed  be  thou,  which  hast  kept  me  this  day  from 
blood-guiltiness,  and  from  avenging  myself  with  my  own 
hand." 

What  a  revelation  this  is  of  the  ministries  with  which 
God  seeks  to  avert  us  from  our  evil  ways !  They  are  some 
times  very  subtle  and  slender,  very  small  and  still.  Some 
times  a  gentle  woman's  hand  laid  on  our  wrist,  the  mother 
reminding  us  of  her  maternity,  the  wife  of  early  vows,  the 
child  with  its  pitiful  beseeching  look ;  sometimes  a  thought, 
holy,  pleading,  remonstrating.  Ah  !  many  a  time,  we  had 
been  saved  actions  which  have  caused  lasting  regret,  had  we 
only  heeded.  And  above  all  these  voices  and  influences, 
there  has  been  the  gracious  arresting  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  striving  with  passion  and  selfishness,  calling  us  to  a 
nobler  better  life.  Blessed  Spirit,  come  down  more  often 
by  the  covert  of  the  hill,  and  stay  us  in  our  mad  career  ;  and 
let  us  not  press  past  Thee  to  take  our  own  wild  way,  and 
we  shall  have  reason  for  ceaseless  gratitude. 

The  idyll  ended  happily.  Nabal  died  in  an  apoplectic 
iit,  caused  by  his  debauch,  or  his  anger  at  his  wife's  treat 
ment  of  David  and  his  men ;  and  David  made  proposals  of 
marriage  to  the  woman,  to  wThom  he  owed  so  much,  which 
she  gracefully  and  humbly  accepted,  not  thinking  herself 
meet  for  such  high  honour.  "  Behold,"  she  said,  "  thy 
handmaid  is  a  servant  to  wash  the  feet  of  the  servants  of 
my  lord."  I  suppose,  that  in  this  life,  or  the  next,  all  God's 
idylls  end  happily.  That,  at  least,  is  one  cherished  article 
of  my  creed. 


XVII. 
Jt  fit  of  £tistritst 

(i  SAMUEL  xxvii.) 

"  Ever  thus  the  spirit  must, 

Guilty  in  the  sight  of  heaven, 
With  a  keener  woe  be  riven, 
For  its  weak  and  sinful  trust 
In  the  strength  of  human  dust ; 
And  its  anguish  thrill  afresh 
For  each  vain  reliance  given 
To  the  failing  arm  of  flesh." 

WHITTJER. 

HE  Psalms,  which,  with  more  or  less  probability; 
may  be  assigned  to  this  period  of  David's  life, 
are  marked  with  growing  sadness  and  depression. 
Amongst  them  may  be  reckoned  the  x.,  xiii.,  xvii., 
xxii.,  xxv.,  Ixiv.,  and  perhaps  xl.  and  Ixix.  Those 
of  the  first  group  have  many  features  in  com 
mon.  The  scenery  of  the  wilderness,  the  psalmist  like  a 
hunted  wild  thing,  the  perpetual  insistence  on  his  innocence 
and  invocation  of  Jehovah's  interference,  the  bitter  descrip 
tion  of  his  sorrows — such  are  the  characteristic  features  of 
these  Psalms.  But,  besides,  there  is  a  tone  of  despair  : 
' '  Why  standest  Thou  afar  off,  O  Lord  ? 

Why  hidest  Thou  Thyself  in  times  of  trouble?"  (x.  i). 
"  How  long,  O  Lord  ?     Wilt  Thou  forget  me  for  ever  ? 

How  long  wilt  Thou  hide  thy  face  from  me?"  (xiii.  i). 
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  me  ? 

Why  art  Thou  so  far  from  helping  me,  and  from  the  words  of  my 

roaring?"  (xxii.  i). 
"  Save  me,  O  God  : 

For  the  waters  are  come  in  unto  my  soul. 
I  sink  in  deep  mire,  where  there  is  no  standing. 
I  am  come  into  deep  waters,  where  the  floods  overflow  me  " 

(Ixix.  I) 


120  ^  JFit  of  IHtstrust. 

These  notes  are  sad,  plaintive,  and  despairful ;  it  is  as 
though  the  sufferer  were  near  the  limits  of  his  endurance. 
It  seemed  hopeless  to  effect  any  permanent  alteration  in 
Saul's  feelings  towards  him,  so  long  as  Cush,  and  Doeg, 
and  Abner,  and  others  who  had  proved  themselves  his 
inveterate  foes,  were  able  so  readily  to  instil  their  poison 
into  the  royal  ear.  It  had  become  so  increasingly  difficult 
to  elude  the  hot  pursuit  of  the  royal  troops,  whom  long 
practice  had  familiarized  with  his  hiding-places  and  haunts. 
And  it  became  more  and  more  perplexing  to  find  susten 
ance  for  the  large  body  of  followers  now  attached  to  him. 
Every  day  he  had  to  provide  for  six  hundred  men,  besides 
women  and  children ;  and  the  presence  of  these  more  tender 
souls  made  it  perilously  difficult  to  maintain  a  perpetual 
condition  of  migration  or  flight.  He  had  now  two  wives  ; 
and  from  what  is  said  of  the  sack  of  Ziklag,  shortly  after 
wards,  we  should  judge  that  the  larger  proportion  of  the 
outlawed  band  consisted  of  those  who  had  wives,  and  sons, 
and  daughters,  and  property  (xxx.  3,  6,  19,  22). 

In  other  days  of  healthier  faith,  these  considerations 
would  not  have  availed  to  shake  the  constancy  of  his  much- 
tried  soul.  He  would  have  stayed  himself  upon  his  God, 
and  been  strengthened  with  all  power,  unto  all  patience 
and  long  suffering  with  joy.  But  of  late  his  faith  had 
become  impaired  and  the  loins  of  his  godly  courage 
slackened,  so  that  he  said  in  his  heart,  "  I  shall  now  perish 
one  day  by  the  hand  of  Saul ;  there  is  nothing  better  for 
me  than  that  I  should  escape  into  the  land  of  the  Philis 
tines  ;  and  Saul  shall  despair  of  me,  to  seek  me  any  more 
in  all  the  borders  of  Israel ;  so  shall  I  escape  out  of  his 
hand." 

I.  LET  us  EXAMINE  THIS  SUDDEN  RESOLUTION. — //  was 
the  suggestion  of  worldly  policy. — "David  said  in  his  heart." 
On  other  occasions,  as  we  have  observed  more  than  once, 
it  had  been  his  wont  to  summon  the  priest  with  the  sacred 


UtorlMii  $0itrtr.  121 

ephod,  or  to  inquire  of  God  through  Gad ;  but  in  this 
resolution  he  had  recourse  to  neither  the  one  nor  the  other, 
In  the  matter  of  Nabal  he  had  acted  under  the  sudden 
impulse  of  passion ;  here  under  that  of  panic.  He  looked 
at  circumstances,  perhaps  listened  to  the  counsels  of  men 
who  were  attracted  to  him  by  the  qualities  of  daring, 
bravery,  and  frank  generosity,  which  made  him  the  popular 
hero  of  his  time,  but  had  no  sympathy  with  the  deeper 
springs  of  his  life  in  God,  and  faith,  and  prayer.  Never  act 
in  a  panic ;  nor  allow  man  to  dictate  to  thee ;  calm  thyself 
and  be  still ;  force  thyself  into  the  quiet  of  thy  closet  until 
the  pulse  beats  normally  and  the  scare  has  ceased  to 
perturb.  When  thou  art  most  eager  to  act  is  the  time 
when  thou  wilt  make  the  most  pitiable  mistakes.  Do  not 
say  in  thine  heart  what  thou  wilt  or  wilt  not  do ;  but  wait 
upon  God  until  He  makes  known  his  way.  So  long  as  that 
way  is  hidden,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no  need  of  action, 
and  that  He  accounts  Himself  responsible  for  all  the 
results  of  keeping  thee  where  thou  art. 

It  was  very  dishonouring  to  God.  Had  He  not  sworn  to 
make  him  king,  to  cast  forth  his  enemies  as  out  of  a  sling, 
and  to  give  him  a  sure  house?  Had  not  these  promises 
been  confirmed  by  Samuel,  Jonathan,  Abigail,  and  Saul 
himself?  Had  not  the  golden  oil  designated  him  as  God's 
anointed  ?  How  impossible  it  was  that  God  should  lie  or 
forget  his  covenant !  By  immutable  pledges  his  Almighty 
Friend  had  bound  Himself,  seeking  to  give  his  much-tried 
child  strong  consolation,  if  only  He  would  remain  within 
the  sheltering  walls  of  the  refuge-harbour  which  these  assur-  >- 
ances  constituted ;  and  it  was  easier  for  heaven  and  earth 
to  pass  away  than  for  one  jot  or  tittle  of  the  Divine  engage 
ments  to  become  invalid. 

Surely,  then,  it  was  unworthy  of  David  to  say,  in  effect : 
"I  am  beginning  to  fear  that  God  has  undertaken  more 
than  He  can  carry  through.  True,  He  has  kept  me 
hitherto ;  but  I  question  if  He  can  make  me  surmount  the 


122  £  JFit  of  £tistrust. 

.growing  difficulties  of  my  situation.  Saul  will,  sooner  or 
later,  accomplish  his  designs  against  me ;  it  is  a  mistake  to 
attempt  the  impossible.  I  have  waited  till  I  am  tired  ;  it  is 
time  to  use  my  own  wits,  and  extricate  myself  while  I  can 
from  the  nets  that  are  being  drawn  over  my  path." 

The  resolution  must  have  given  great  rejoicing  to  many 
of  his  followers  ;  but  all  devout  souls  must  have  felt  that 
the  leader's  despairing  confession  was  in  sad  contrast  to  his 
exhortation,  so  repeatedly  insisted  upon,  to  wait  on  God. 
"  None  that  wait  on  Thee  shall  be  ashamed  ; 

They  shall  be  ashamed  that  transgress  without  cause." 

How  much  easier  it  is  to  indicate  a  true  course  to  others 
in  hours  of  comparative  security,  than  to  stand  to  it  under 
a  squall  of  wind !  Dr.  Tauler,  the  great  preacher  of  Stras- 
burg,  before  his  second  and  deeper  conversion,  could  be 
excelled  by  none  in  his  delineation  of  the  virtues  of  humility 
and  self-denial  ;  yet,  when  the  humble  traveller  from  the 
Oberland  remonstrated  with  him  for  loving  one  creature, 
himself,  more  than  God,  he  was  offended,  and  his  proud 
heart  arose  within  him.  It  is  an  experience  through  which 
most  of  us  have  to  pass,  the  contrast  between  speech  and 
possession  ;  between  thinking  we  have,  and  having ;  between 
our  directions  to  others,  and  our  own  behaviour  when  the 
dark  waters  are  sweeping  over  our  soul. 

It  was  highly  injurious. — Philistia  was  full  of  idol  temples 
and  idolatrous  priests  (2  Sam.  v.  21).  It  lay  outside  the 
inheritance  of  the  Lord,  the  sacred  land  of  Palestine, 
deemed  by  the  pious  Israelites  of  those  days  to  be  the 
special  location  and  abiding-place  of  the  Most  High,  and 
to  be  banished  from  whose  sacred  borders  seemed  like 
going  into  a  wild  and  desolate  land  of  estrangement  and 
God-abandonment.  What  fellowship  could  David  look  for 
with  the  Divine  Spirit  who  had  chosen  Israel  for  his  people 
and  Jacob  for  the  lot  of  his  inheritance  ?  How  could  he 
sing  the  Lord's  songs  in  a  strange  land  ?  What  share  could 
he  claim  in  the  sacrifices  which  sent  up  the  thin  spiral  of 


at  £ihla0.  123 

smoke  on  the  sites  of  Nob  or  Kirjath-Jearim  ?  Besides, 
their  perpetual  familiarity  with  the  rites  and  iniquities  of 
idolatry  could  not  but  exert  an  unwholesome  and  altogether 
disastrous  effect  on  the  minds  of  the  unstable  in  his  band. 
Poison  must  have  been  injected  into  many  hearts,  that 
wrought  disastrously  in  after  years.  What  was  harmless 
enough  in  the  case  of  David,  who  knew  that  an  idol  was 
nothing  in  the  world,  was  perilous  in  the  extreme  to  the 
weak  consciences  in  his  train  which  were  denied  by  what 
they  saw  and  heard. 

//  was  the  entrance  on  a  course  that  demanded  the  per 
petual  practice  of  deceit.  He  was  received  at  Gath  with 
open  arms.  Before,  when  he  had  sought  the  shelter  of 
the  court  of  Achish,  he  had  but  a  handful  of  companions ; 
now  he  was  the  leader  of  a  formidable  band  of  warriors, 
who  might  easily  turn  the  scale  of  strength  in  the  long 
struggle  between  Israel  and  Philistia.  "  And  David  dwelt 
with  Achish,  he  and  his  men,  every  man  with  his  house 
hold." 

This  proximity  to  the  royal  palace  and  the  court  became, 
however,  extremely  irksome  to  the  Hebrews.  Their  move 
ments  were  always  under  inspection,  and  it  was  difficult  to 
preserve  their  autonomy  and  independence.  Finally,  there 
fore,  David  asked  that  one  of  the  smaller  towns  might  be 
assigned  to  him  ;  and  to  his  great  comfort  received  per 
mission  to  settle  at  Ziklag,  a  town  in  the  south  country, 
originally  allotted  to  Judah,  then  transferred  to  Simeon,  and 
latterly  captured  by  the  Philistines,  but  not  occupied  by 
them  (Josh.  xv.  31  ;  xix.  5  ;  i  Chron.  iv.  30). 

The  sense  of  security  and  relief  to  these  hunted  men 
must  have  been  very  great,  as  they  found  themselves  within 
the  slender  fortifications  of  the  little  town.  For  long  they 
had  known  no  settled  home,  their  life  full  of  alarm  and 
flight,  the  weapon  always  at  their  side  or  in  their  hand,  the 
senses  alert  to  the  rustle  of  a  leaf,  or  the  slightest  move 
ment  in  the  covert ;  from  all  these  there  was  now  a  grateful 


124  31  JFit  0f  JHtstrust. 

pause.  For  sixteen  months  they  had  a  measure  of  repose 
and  safety.  The  old  men  and  women  sat  in  the  streets,  and 
the  shouts  of  merry  children  in  their  play  were  no  longer 
instantly  and  jealously  hushed  lest  they  should  attract  the 
scouts  of  the  royal  army.  "  It  was  told  Saul  that  David  was 
fled  to  Gath,  and  he  sought  no  more  again  for  him." 

David's  mind  was,  however,  kept  on  the  stretch,  con 
stantly  at  work,  weaving  a  tissue  of  duplicity  and  cruelty. 
He  had  really  no  love  for  Achish,  no  zeal  for  the  mainten 
ance  of  his  rule ;  he  had  not  deserted  the  chosen  people, 
though  he  had  fled  before  Saul ;  in  his  deepest  soul  he  was 
still  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews.  Maintenance  for  himself 
and  his  followers  must,  of  course,  be  provided;  and  in  those 
days  of  wild  border-war,  nothing  was  more  obvious,  to  the 
Philistines  at  least,  than  to  raid  the  land  on  which  he  had 
turned  his  back.  This,  of  course,  he  would  not  do ;  and  so 
he  turned  his  sword  on  the  petty  tribes  of  the  south  country, 
who  were  in  alliance  with  Philistines,  but  the  hereditary 
foes  of  his  own  people.  Amongst  these  were  the  Geshurites, 
and  Girzites,  and  the  Amalekites,  all  nomad  tribes,  living 
by  plunder.  To  obviate  any  report  of  his  proceedings 
reaching  the  ears  of  Achish,  David  was  compelled  to  adopt 
the  cruel  and  sanguinary  policy  of  saving  neither  man  nor 
woman  alive :  and  when  Achish,  by  virtue  of  his  feudal 
lordship,  required  of  him  an  account  of  his  expedition,  he 
said  evasively  that  he  had  been  raiding  against  the  south  of 
Judah,  and  instanced  tribes,  which  were  known  to  be  under 
the  direct  protection  of  Israel.  The  fact  of  his  having 
brought  back  no  captives,  the  most  valuable  part  of  booty, 
was  reckoned  by  the  Philistines  a  proof  of  the  passionate 
hate  with  which  he  regarded  his  countrymen,  making  him 
forego  the  pecuniary  advantage  accruing  from  the  sale  of 
slaves,  rather  than  the  satisfaction  of  beholding  their  dying 
anguish.  "And  Achish  believed  David,  saying,  He  hath 
made  his  people  Israel  utterly  to  abhor  him ;  therefore  he 
shall  be  my  servant  for  ever." 


125 

The  whole  behaviour  of  David  at  this  time  was  utterly 
unworthy  of  his  high  character  as  God's  anointed  servant. 
//  was  also  a  barren  time  in  his  religious  experience.  No 
psalms  are  credited  to  this  period.  The  sweet  singer  was 
mute.  He  probably  acquired  a  few  new  strains  of  music, 
or  even  mastered  some  fresh  instruments,  whilst  sojourning 
at  Gath,  the  memory  of  which  is  perpetuated  in  the  term 
Gittith,  a  term  which  frequently  occurs  in  the  inscriptions 
of  the  Psalms  composed  afterwards.  But  who  would 
barter  a  song  for  a  melody,  a  psalm  for  a  guitar  ?  It  was 
a  poor  exchange.  There  was  something  in  the  air  of  those 
lowland  plains  that  closed  the  utterances  of  the  sweet  voice 
that  had  sung  to  God  amid  the  hills  of  Judah  and  the  caves 
of  Ain-jedi. 

How  precisely  do  these  symptoms  of  old-time  declension 
and  relapse  correspond  with  those  which  we  have  observed 
in  ourselves  and  others  !  The  way  of  faith  may  be  irk 
some  to  the  flesh,  but  it  is  free  and  glad  to  the  spirit. 
It  may  have  to  trace  its  steps  with  difficulty  among  the 
hills,  but  a  new  song  is  in  its  mouth,  of  praise  and  thanks 
giving.  But  when  we  descend  to  the  lowlands  of  ex 
pediency  and  worldly  policy,  a  blight  comes  on  the 
landscape  of  the  soul,  a  silence  on  the  song  of  the  heart. 

From  that  moment  we  are  left  to  maintain  our  position 
by  our  own  scheming  and  planning ;  we  ask  God  to  help 
us,  but  dare  not  count  on  Him  absolutely  to  provide  for 
us ;  we  are  driven  into  tight  corners,  from  which  we  escape 
by  subterfuge  and  duplicity,  such  as  we  in  our  souls  despise; 
we  realize  that  we  have  purchased  our  deliverance  from  the 
pressure  of  adverse  circumstances  at  too  great  a  cost,  and 
have  bartered  the  smile  of  God  for  that  of  Achish,  so  soon 
to  be  turned  from  us ;  the  munitions  of  Divine  protection 
for  the  walls  of  Ziklag,  over  the  ruins  of  which  we  shall 
soon  be  weeping  scalding  tears. 


XVIII. 
0f  <S0tr  tljat  1*5  tn 

(i  SAMUEL  xxix.,  xxx.  ) 

Prostrate  your  soul  in  penitential  prayer  ! 
Humble  your  heart  beneath  the  mighty  hand 
Of  God,  Whose  gracious  guidance  oft  shall  lead 
Through  sin  and  crime  the  changed  and  melted  heart, 
To  sweet  repentance  and  the  sense  of  Him." 


(HROUGHOUT  that  season  of  declension  and 
relapse  which  we  have  been  considering,  the 
loving  mercy  of  God  hovered  tenderly  over 
David's  life.  When  we  believe  not,  He  remains 
faithful  —  He  cannot  deny  Himself;  and  when 
his  servants  are  wandering  far  afield,  sowing  for 
themselves  thistledown,  and  piercing  themselves  through 
with  bitter  sorrows,  He  is  encompassing  their  path  and 
their  lying  down,  solicitous  of  heart  and  compassionate, 
exhibiting  the  tenderest  traits  of  his  mercy  and  pity,  as 
though  to  win  them  back  to  Himself. 

This  is  particularly  illustrated  by  the  present  stage  of 
David's  history.  There  was  a  special  focussing  of  Divine 
gentleness  and  goodness  to  withdraw  him  from  his  purpose, 
to  keep  back  his  soul  from  the  pit  and  his  life  from 
perishing  with  the  sword.  We  will  now  trace  the  succes 
sive  stages  in  this  loving  process  of  Divine  restoration  ;  and 
as  we  do  so,  we  will  believe  that  all  these  things  doth  God 
work  still,  to  bring  back  our  souls  from  the  pit,  that  we 
may  be  enlightened  with  the  light  of  life.  In  us  also. 
David's  words  shall  be  verified,  spoken  as  he  reviewed  this 
part  of  his  career  from  the  eminence  of  prosperity  and  glory 
to  which  God's  goodness  afterwards  raised  him,  "Thy 


£U0iittr  JHetu  127 

gentleness  hath  made  me  great."     God's  restoring   mercy 
was  evident — 


I.  IN  INCLINING  STRONG  AND  NOBLE  MEN  TO  IDEN 
TIFY  THEMSELVES  WITH  DAVID'S  CAUSE. — "  Now  these 
are  they,"  says  the  chronicler,  "that  came  to  David  to 
Ziklag,  while  he  yet  kept  himself  close,  because  of  Saul,  the 
son  of  Kish ;  and  they  were  among  the  mighty  men,  helpers 
in  war"  (i  Chron.  xii.  i).  And  he  proceeds  to  enumerate 
them.  Some  came  from  Saul's  own  tribe,  experienced 
marksmen,  who  could  use,  with  equal  dexterity,  the  right 
hand  and  the  left,  in  slinging  stones  and  in  shooting 
arrows  from  the  bow.  Some  came  from  the  eastern  bank 
of  the  Jordan,  swimming  it  at  the  flood,  mighty  men  of 
valour,  men  trained  for  war,  whose  faces  were  like  the  faces 
of  lions,  and  they  were  as  swift  as  roes  among  the  mountains 
Some  came  from  Benjamin  and  Judah,  assuring  David  that 
there  was  no  ground  for  his  suspicions  of  their  loyalty. 
What  a  manly,  generous  ring  there  was  in  those  reassuring 
words  as  uttered  by  their  leader,  Amasai,  and  which  were 
probably  the  expression  of  the  feelings  of  all  the  contingents 
of  heroes  which  at  this  time  rallied  around  David's 
standard  •,  "  Thine  are  we,  David ;  and  on  thy  side,  thou 
son  of  Jesse  :  peace,  peace  be  unto  thee,  and  peace  to 
thine  helpers  ;  for  thy  God  helpeth  thee." 

Evidently  the  spirit  of  discontent  was  abroad  in  the  land. 
The  people,  weary  of  SauFs  oppression  and  misgovernment, 
were  beginning  to  realize  that  the  true  hope  of  Israel  lay  in 
the  son  of  Jesse.  They  therefore  went  out  to  h*im  without 
the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach,  content  to  forfeit  every 
thing  they  possessed  in  the  assurance  that  they  would 
receive  it  all  again,  and  a  hundredfold  beside,  when  he 
came  by  his  own.  Thus  from  day  to  day  "  there  came  to 
David  to  help  him,  until  it  was  a  great  host,  like  the  host 
of  God." 

Thus,  in  silence  and  secrecy,  loyal  and  true  hearts  are: 


128     ®bz  $tmg  of  (gofc  tljat  f  i»&  to  ftepcntatwe. 

gathering  around  our  blessed  Lord,  the  centre  of  whose 
kingdom  is  not  earthly  but  heavenly ;  who  has  gone  away 
to  receive  a  kingdom,  but  who  shall  certainly  return ;  and 
when  He  is  manifested  in  his  kingly  glory,  then  shall  they 
also  be  manifested  with  Him.  Who  then  are  willing  to 
leave  the  tottering  realm  of  the  prince  of  this  world,  soon 
to  be  shattered  on  the  last  great  battlefield  of  time,  and 
identify  themselves  with  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  David, 
which  is  destined  to  endure  as  long  as  the  sun  ? 

II.  IN  EXTRICATING  HIS  SERVANT  FROM  THE  FALSE 
POSITION  INTO  WHICH  HE  HAD  DRIFTED. — The  Philistines 
suddenly  resolved  on  a  forward  policy.  They  were  aware  of 
the  disintegration  which  was  slowly  dividing  Saul's  king 
dom  ;  and  had  noticed  with  secret  satisfaction  the  growing 
numbers  of  mighty  men  who  were  leaving  it  to  seek  identi 
fication  with  David,  and  therefore,  presumably,  with  them 
selves.  Not  content,  therefore,  with  the  border  hostilities 
that  had  engaged  them  so  long,  they  resolved  to  follow  the 
course  of  the  maritime  plain — the  long  stretch  of  low-lying 
land  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  ;  and  to  strike  a 
blow  in  the  very  heart  of  the  land,  the  fertile  plain  of 
Esdraelon,  destined  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  battle-fields 
of  the  world,  drenched  with  the  blood  of  great  leaders,  as 
Sisera,  Saul,  and  Joash,  and  of  vast  hosts,  Philistine  and 
Hebrew,  Egyptian  and  Assyrian,  Roman  and  Maccabaean, 
Saracen  and  Anglo-Saxon.  "  The  Philistines  gathered  their 
"hosts  together  for  warfare,  to  Aphek ;  and  the  Israelites 
pitched  by  the  fountain  which  is  in  Jezreel." 

When  this  campaign  was  being  meditated,  the  guileless 
king  assured  David  that  he  should  accompany  him.  This 
was  perhaps  said  as  a  mark  of  special  confidence.  It  would 
have  been  foolhardy  on  the  part  of  Achish  to  associate 
David  with  himself  on  such  an  expedition,  had  he  not  con 
ceived  the  most  absolute  confidence  in  his  integrity.  He 
had  seen  no  fault  in  his  protege  from  the  first  hour  of  his 


31  Critical  Jfuttrture.  129 

coming  into  his  court,  but  had  looked  on  him  as  an  angel 
of  God ;  he  had  no  hesitation,  therefore,  in  summoning  him 
to  march  beside  him,  and  even  to  be  captain  of  his  body 
guard.  "  Therefore  will  I  make  thee  keeper  of  mine  head 
for  ever."  It  was  a  relief  to  the  gentle  nature  of  the  king 
to  turn  from  his  imperious  lords  to  this  generous,  open- 
hearted  soul,  and  entrust  himself  to  his  strong  care. 

It  was,  however,  a  very  critical  juncture  with  David. 
He  had  no  alternative  but  to  follow  his  liege  lord  into  the 
battle;  but  it  must  have  been  with  a  sinking  heart.  It 
looked  as  though  he  would  be  forced  to  fight  Saul,  from 
whom  for  so  many  years  he  had  fled ;  and  Jonathan,  his 
beloved  friend ;  and  the  chosen  people,  over  whom  he 
hoped  one  day  to  rule.  He  could  not  but  reply  evasively, 
and  with  forced  composure  and  gaiety  :  "  Thou  shalt  know 
what  thy  servant  will  do ; "  but  every  mile  of  those  fifty 
or  sixty  which  had  to  be  traversed  must  have  been 
trodden  with  lowering  face  and  troubled  heart.  There 
was  no  hope  for  him  in  man.  It  may  be  that  already 
his  heart  was  turning  in  eager  prayer  to  God,  that  He  would 
extricate  him  from  the  net  which  his  sins  had  woven  for 
his  feet ;  and  in  the  evasiveness  of  the  reply  he  gave  to 
Achish,  there  is  a  trace  of  glimmering  hope  that  God 
would  yet  show  a  way  of  escape  from  his  fearful  dilemma. 

If  by  your  mistakes  and  sins,  you  have  reduced  yourself 
to  a  false  position  like  this,  do  not  despair  ;  hope  still  in 
God.  Confess  and  put  away  your  sin,  and  humble  yourself 
before  Him,  and  He  will  arise  to  deliver  you.  You  may 
have  destroyed  yourself;  but  in  Him  will  be  your  help. 
"  If  any  of  thine  outcasts — outcasts  because  of  their 
disobedience  and  apostasy — be  in  the  uttermost  parts  of 
heaven,  from  thence  will  the  Lord  thy  God  gather  thee; 
and  from  thence  will  He  fetch  thee ;  and  the  Lord  thy 
God  will  bring  thee  into  the  land  which  thy  fathers 
possessed,  and  thou  shalt  possess  it :  and  He  will  do 
thee  good,  and  multiply  thee  above  thy  fathers." 
I 


of  (g0&  tljat  f  &  to 

An  unexpected  door  of  hope  was  suddenly  opened  in  this 
valley  of  Achor.  When  Achish  reviewed  his  troops  in 
Aphek,  after  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  had  passed  on  by 
hundreds  and  by  thousands,  David  and  his  men  passed  on 
in  the  rearward  with  the  king.  This  aroused  the  jealousy 
and  suspicion  of  the  imperious  Philistine  princes,  and  they 
came  to  Achish  with  fierce  words  and  threats.  "  What  do 
these  Hebrews  here  ?  Make  the  man  return,  that  he  may 
go  back  to  the  place  where  thou  hast  appointed  him,  and 
let  him  not  go  down  with  us  to  the  battle."  In  vain  Achish 
pleaded  on  the  behalf  of  his  favourite  ;  the  Philistines  would 
have  none  of  it.  They  pointed  out  how  virulent  a  foe  he 
had  been,  and  how  tempting  the  opportunity  for  him  to 
purchase  reconciliation  with  Saul  by  turning  traitor  in  the 
fight.  In  the  end,  therefore,  the  king  had  to  yield.  It  cost 
him  much  to  inform  David  of  the  inevitable  decision  to 
which  he  was  driven  ;  but  he  little  realized  with  what  a 
burst  of  relief  his  announcement  was  received.  We 
can  imagine  David  saying  to  himself  as  he  left  the  royal 
pavilion  : 

"  My  soul  is  escaped  as  a  bird  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler. 
The  snare  is  broken,  and  I  am  escaped." 

He  made  a  show  of  injured  innocence  :  "  What  have  I 
done,  and  what  hast  thou  found  in  thy  servant  so  long 
as  I  have  been  before  thee  unto  this  day,  that  I  may 
not  go  and  fight  against  the  enemies  of  my  lord  the 
king  ? "  But  his  heart  was  not  with  his  words  ;  and  it 
was  with  unfeigned  satisfaction  that  he  received  the 
stringent  command  to  depart  from  the  camp  with  the 
morning  light.  As  in  the  grey  dawn  he  stealthily  mus 
tered  his  men  to  start,  did  he  not  fling  one  glance  as 
far  as  the  mists  permitted  to  the  camp  of  Israel,  where 
the  lion-heart  of  the  beloved  Jonathan  was  doubtless  pre 
paring  itself  for  the  fight  ?  Oh  to  have  been  permitted  to 
be  beside  him  in  repelling  one  of  the  most  formidable 
invasions  of  their  lives  ! 


WE  ^arh  of  £iklajj.  131 

III.  BY  THE  DIVINE  DEALINGS  WITH  HIM  IN  RES 
PECT  TO  THE  BURNING  OF  ZIKLAG.— It  was  by  God's 
great  mercy  that  the  Philistine  lords  were  so  set  against  the 
continuance  of  David  in  their  camp.  They  thought  that 
they  were  executing  a  piece  of  ordinary  policy,  dictated  by 
prudence  and  foresight ;  little  realizing  that  they  were  the 
shears  by  which  God  was  cutting  the  meshes  of  David's  net. 
Their  protest  was  lodged  at  exactly  the  right  moment ;  had 
it  been  postponed  but  for  a  few  hours,  David  had  been 
involved  in  the  battle,  or  had  not  been  back  in  time  to 
overtake  the  Amalekites,  red-handed  in  the  sack  of  Ziklag. 

As  David  was  leaving  the  battlefield,  a  number  of  the 
men  of  Manasseh,  who  appear  to  have  deserted  to  Achish, 
were  assigned  to  him  by  the  Philistines,  lest  they  also 
should  turn  traitors  on  the  field.  Thus  he  left  the  camp 
with  a  greatly  increased  following.  Here,  too,  was  a  proof 
of  God's  tender  thoughtfulness,  because  at  no  time  of  his 
life  was  he  in  greater  need  of  reinforcements  than  now. 
God  anticipates  coming  trial,  and  reinforces  us  against  its 
certain  imminence  and  pressure.  We  are  taken  into  the 
House  Beautiful  to  be  armed,  before  we  descend  into  the 
valley  of  conflict  with  Apollyon. 

It  was  altogether  according  to  God's  merciful  provi 
dence  that,  contrary  to  his  wont,  David  had  left  no  men 
to  defend  Ziklag  during  his  absence.  It  is  difficult  to 
understand  the  laxity  of  his  arrangements  for  its  safeguard 
in  those  wild  and  perilous  times  ;  but  apparently  not  one 
single  soldier  was  left  to  protect  the  women  and  children. 
Yet  it  was  well ;  for  when  a  band  of  Amalekites  fell  sud 
denly  on  the  little  town,  there  was  none  to  irritate  them  by 
offering  resistance,  none  to  obstruct  their  will,  nothing  to 
excite  their  fear  of  pursuit  or  revenge.  Evidently  neither 
David  nor  his  soldiers  would  be  back  from  the  war  for 
weeks  or  months ;  there  was  therefore  no  need  to  exercise 
the  usual  precautions — they  could  spread  themselves  abroad 
over  all  the  ground,  eating  and  drinking,  and  feasting. 


i32     We  fftwtq  of  (Soft  tfrat  l^ir  t0  tlcpcntanrc. 

In  the  first  outburst  of  grief  and  horror,  nothing  but  the 
gracious  interposition  of  God  could  have  saved  David's  life. 
On  reaching  the  spot  which  they  accounted  home,  after 
three  days'  exhausting  march,  the  soldiers  found  it  a  heap 
of  smouldering  ruins ;  and  instead  of  the  welcome  of  wives 
and  children,  silence  and  desolation  reigned  supreme. 
"  Then  David  and  the  people  that  were  with  him  lifted  up 
their  voice,  and  wept  until  they  had  no  more  power  to 
weep  " ;  but  in  David's  case  there  was  an  added  element  of 
distress.  Those  who  had  a  little  before  cried,  "Peace, 
peace  to  thee,  thou  son  of  Jesse,  thy  God  helpeth  thee," 
now  spoke  of  stoning  him.  The  loyalty  and  devotion 
which  he  had  never  failed  to  receive  from  his  followers  were 
suddenly  changed  to  vinegar  and  gall.  The  milk  of  human 
kindness  had  turned  sour  in  this  awful  thunderstorm. 

But  this  was  the  moment  of  his  return  to  God.  In  that 
dread  hour,  with  the  charred  embers  smoking  at  his  feet; 
with  the  cold  hand  of  anxiety  for  the  fate  of  his  wives 
feeling  at  his  heart ;  with  the  sense  of  duplicity  and  deceit 
which  he  had  been  practising,  and  which  had  alienated  him 
from  God,  on  his  conscience ;  with  this  threat  of  stoning  in 
his  ears  ;  his  heart  suddenly  sprang  back  into  its  old  resting- 
place  in  the  bosom  of  God.  "  David  was  greatly  distressed, 
for  the  people  spake  of  stoning  him ;  because  the  soul  of  all 
the  people  was  grieved,  every  man  for  his  sons  and  for  his 
daughters  :  but  David  strengthened  himself  in  the  Lord  his 
God." 

From  this  moment  David  is  himself  again,  his  old 
strong,  glad,  noble  self.  For  the  first  time,  after  months  of 
disuse,  he  bids  Abiathar  bring  him  the  ephod,  and  he 
enquires  of  the  Lord.  With  marvellous  vigour  he  arises  to 
pursue  the  marauding  troop,  and  he  overtakes  it.  He 
withholds  the  impetuosity  of  his  men  till  daylight  wanes, 
loosing  them  from  the  leash  in  the  twilight,  and  leading 
them  to  the  work  of  rescue  and  vengeance  with  such 
irresistible  impetuosity  that  not  a  man  of  them  escaped, 


of  tlje  $ttriJ  (Mag."  133 

save  four  hundred  young  men  who  rode  upon  camels  and 
fled.  And  when  the  greed  of  his  followers  proposed  to 
withhold  from  those  whose  faintness  had  stayed  them  by 
the  brook  Besor  all  share  in  the  rich  plunder,  he  dared  to 
stand  alone  against  the  whole  of  them,  and  insisted  that  it 
should  not  be  so,  but  that  as  his  share  was  that  went  down 
to  the  battle,  so  his  should  be  that  tarried  by  the  stuff. 
Thus  he  who  had  power  with  God  had  power  also  with 
man. 

And  when,  shortly  after,  the  breathless  messenger  burst 
into  his  presence  with  the  tidings  of  Gilboa's  fatal  rout, 
though  they  meant  the  fulfilment  of  long-delayed  hopes,  he 
was  able  to  bear  himself  humbly  and  with  unaffected 
sorrow,  to  express  his  lament  in  the  most  exquisite  funeral 
ode  in  existence,  and  to  award  the  Amalekite  his  deserts. 

He  was  sweet  as  well  as  strong,  as  courteous  as  brave. 
For  when  he  returned  to  Ziklag,  his  first  act  was  to  send 
of  the  spoil  taken  from  the  Amalekites  to  the  elders  of  all 
the  towns  on  the  southern  frontier  where  he  and  his  men 
were  wont  to  haunt,  acknowledging  his  indebtedness  to 
them,  and  so  far  as  possible  requiting  it. 

Thus  the  sunshine  of  God's  favour  rested  afresh  upon 
his  soul.  He  had  broken  from  Doubting  Castle  and  Giant 
Despair,  and  had  reached  again  the  path  of  obedience  and 
safety.  God  had  brought  him  up  from  the  horrible  pit  and 
the  miry  clay ;  had  set  his  feet  on  a  rock,  and  established 
his  going ;  and  had  put  a  new  song  of  praise  in  his  mouth. 
Let  all  backsliders  give  heed  and  take  comfort.  These 
things  were  written  aforetime  for  our  instruction,  that  we, 
through  the  comfort  and  instruction  of  the  Scriptures, 
might  have  hope. 


XIX. 


(2  SAMUEL  i.-iv.) 

"For  life,  with  all  it  yields  of  joy  and  woe, 
Is  just  our  chance  o'  the  prize  of  learning  love  ; 
And  that  we  hold  henceforth  to  the  uttermost 
Such  prize,  despite  the  envy  of  the  world." 

R.  BROWNING. 


whole  days  had  passed  since  that  triumphant 
march  back  from  the  slaughter  of  Amalek  to  the 
charred  and  blackened  ruins  of  Ziklag,  and  it 
appeared  as  though  David  were  awaiting  some 
sign  to  determine  his  future  course.  What 
should  he  do  next?  Should  he  begin  to  build 
again  the  ruined  city  ?  Or  was  there  something  else  in  the 
Divine  programme  of  his  life?  His  heart  was  on  the 
watch.  He  could  not  forget  that  when,  but  a  few  days 
back,  he  had  left  the  camp  of  Achish,  a  battle  was 
imminent  between  the  Philistines  and  his  countrymen. 
Had  that  battle  been  fought  ?  and,  if  so,  what  had  been  the 
issue?  How  had  sped  the  fortunes  of  that  momentous 
day?  What  tidings  were  there  of  Saul,  of  the  beloved 
Jonathan,  and  of  his  comrades  ?  Surely  it  could  not  be 
long  ere  rumours,  breathed  as  on  the  wind,  would  answer 
the  questions  which  were  surging  through  his  mind. 

On  the  third  day  a  young  man  rushed  breathless  into  the 
camp,  his  clothes  rent  and  earth  upon  his  head.  He  made 
straight  for  David,  and  fell  to  the  ground  at  his  feet.  In  a 
moment  more  his  tidings  were  told,  each  word  stabbing 
David  to  the  quick.  Israel  had  fled  before  the  foe ;  large 
numbers  were  fallen  on  the  battlefield ;  Saul  and  Jonathan 
were  dead  also.  That  moment  David  knew  that  the 
thundercloud  which  had  been  so  long  louring  over  his 


0f  haul's  gcatr;.  135 

head  had  broken,  and  that  the  expectations  of  years  were  on 
the  point  of  being  realized ;  but  he  had  no  thought  for 
himself  or  for  the  marvellous  change  in  his  fortunes.  His 
generous  soul,  oblivious  to  itself,  poured  out  a  flood  of  the 
noblest  tears  man  ever  shed,  for  Saul  and  for  Jonathan  his 
son,  and  for  the  people  of  the  Lord,  and  for  the  house  of 
Israel,  because  they  were  fallen  by  the  sword. 

I.  DAVID'S  TREATMENT  OF  SAUL'S  MEMORY. — There 
could  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  dead.  His  crown,  the 
symbol  of  kingly  power,  and  the  bracelet  worn  upon  his 
arm,  were  already  in  David's  possession.  The  Amalekite 
indeed,  to  lay  David  more  absolutely  under  obligation,  had 
made  it  appear  that  the  king's  life  had  been  taken,  at  his 
own  request,  by  himself.  "  He  said  to  me,"  so  the  man's 
tale  ran,  "  *  Stand,  I  pray  thee,  beside  me,  and  slay  me ;  for 
anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  me  because  my  life  is  yet  whole 
in  me.'  So  I  stood  beside  him,  and  slew  him,  because  I  was 
sure  that  he  could  not  live  after  that  he  was  fallen."  David 
seems  to  have  been  as  one  stunned  till  the  evening,  and 
then  he  aroused  himself  to  show  respect  to  Saul's  memory. 

He  gave  short  shrift  to  the  Amalekite.  The  bearer  of  the 
sad  news  had  been  held  under  arrest,  because  on  his  own 
showing,  he  had  slain  the  Lord's  anointed ;  and,  as  the 
evening  fell,  the  wretched  man  was  again  brought  into  the 
chieftain's  presence.  David  seems  to  have  had  some  doubt 
as  to  his  tale,  and  it  afterwards  appeared  that  the  story  was 
false ;  still  it  was  necessary  that  the  regicide  should  pay  the 
extreme  penalty  for  the  deed  to  which  he  had  confessed. 

With  that  reverence  for  the  Lord's  anointing  which  had 
smitten  him  to  the  heart  when  he  cut  off  the  piece  of  his 
robe,  David  asked,  an  expression  of  horror  in  his  tone, 
"  How  wast  thou  not  afraid  to  put  forth  thine  hand  to 
destroy  the  Lord's  anointed ! "  Then  calling  one  of  the 
young  men,  he  bade  him  go  near,  and  fall  upon  him. 
And  he  smote  him  that  he  died. 


136  ®&me  (Krofametr. 

He  next  poured  out  his  grief  in  The  Song  of  the  Bow, 
which  at  first  was  taught  to  and  sung  by  the  children  of 
Judah,  and  has  since  passed  into  the  literature  of  the  world, 
as  an  unrivalled  model  of  a  funeral  dirge.  The  Dead 
March  in  Saul  is  a  familiar  strain  in  every  national  mourning. 
It  was  originally  called  the  Song  of  the  Bow  (ver.  18,  R.v.), 
because  of  the  reference  to  that  weapon  in  the  poem. 

The  greatness  of  Israel's  loss  is  brought  out  in  the  fan 
cied  exultation  with  which  the  daughters  of  Philistia  would 
welcome  their  returning  warriors ;  in  the  lasting  curse 
invoked  on  the  mountains  where  the  shield  of  the  mighty 
was  polluted  with  gore  and  dust ;  and  in  the  exploits  which 
the  heroes  wrought  with  bow  and  sword  before  they  fell. 
And  then  the  psalmist  bursts  into  pathetic  reminiscences 
of  the  ancient  friendship  which  had  bound  him  to  the 
departed.  He  forgets  all  he  had  suffered  at  the  hands  of 
Saul ;  he  thinks  only  of  the  ideal  of  his  early  manhood. 
His  chivalrous  love  refuses  to  consider  anything  but  what 
had  been  brave  and  fair  and  noble  in  his  liege  lord,  before 
self-will  had  dragged  down  his  soul  into  the  murky  abyss, 
where  for  the  last  few  years  it  had  been  entombed  as  in 
a  living  grave.  "  Lovely  and  pleasant,"  such  is  the  epitaph 
he  inscribes  on  the  memorial  cenotaph. 

But  for  Jonathan  there  must  be  a  special  stanza.  Might 
had  been  his,  as  Saul's.  Had  he  not,  single-handed,  at 
tacked  an  army,  and  wrought  a  great  deliverance  ?  But 
with  all  his  strength,  he  had  been  sweet.  A  brother-soul ; 
every  memory  of  whom  was  very  pleasant,  like  a  sweet 
strain  of  music,  or  the  scent  of  the  spring  breeze.  Tender, 
gentle,  loving  as  a  woman.  A  knightly  nature  ;  dreaded  by 
foe,  dearly  loved  by  friend ;  terrible  as  a  whirlwind  in 
battle,  but  capable  of  exerting  all  the  witchery  of  a  woman's 
love,  and  more. 

"  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful, 
Passing  the  love  of  women." 

Moreover^  he  sent  a  message  of  thanks  and  congratulation. 


JlUn  of  latesij-SUeafc.  137 

to  the  men  of  Jabesh-Gilead.  The  indignity  with  which  the 
Philistines  had  treated  the  royal  bodies  had  been  amply- 
expiated  by  the  devotion  of  the  men  of  Jabesh-Gilead. 
They  had  not  forgotten  that  Saul's  first  act  as  king  had 
been  to  deliver  them  from  a  horrible  fate ;  and  had  or 
ganized  an  expedition  which  had  taken  the  bodies  of  Saul 
and  his  three  sons  from  the  walls  of  Bethshan,  to  which, 
after  being  beheaded,  they  were  affixed  ;  and  had  carried 
them  through  the  night  to  their  own  city,  where  they  had 
burned  them  to  save  them  from  further  dishonour — the 
ashes  being  reverently  buried  under  the  tamarisk  tree  in 
Gilead. 

As  soon  as  David  heard  of  this  act,  he  sent  messengers 
to  the  men  of  Jabesh-Gilead,  thanking  them  for  their 
chivalrous  devotion  to  the  memory  of  the  fallen  king,  and 
promising  to  requite  the  kindness  as  one  done  to  the  entire 
nation,  and  to  himself. 

In  all  this  David  evinced  great  magnanimity.  There 
was  no  thought  of  himself  or  his  own  interests.  He  had 
learnt  the  secret  of  escaping  from  himself  in  his  devotion 
and  care  for  another.  It  is  the  secret  of  all  self-oblivion. 
Live  in  another  s  life,  especially  in  the  interests  of  your 
Master,  Christ,  and  you  will  be  freed  from  the  constant 
obtrusion  and  tyranny  of  self. 

II.  DAVID'S  ATTITUDE  WITH  RESPECT  TO  THE  KING 
DOM. — There  is  something  very  beautiful  in  his  movements 
at  this  juncture,  evidencing  how  completely  his  soul  had 
come  back  to  its  equipoise  in  God.  He  had  resumed  his 
old  attitude  of  waiting  only  upon  God,  and  directing  all  his 
expectation  to  Him.  It  was  for  God  to  give  him  the 
kingdom,  and  therefore  he  refused  to  take  one  step  towards 
the  throne  apart  from  the  direct  Divine  impulse. 

This  was  the  most  remarkable,  when  so  many  reasons 
might  have  been  alleged  for  immediate  action.  The  king 
dom  was  overrun  by  Philistines ;  indeed  it  is  probable  that 


Crofamefc. 

for  the  next  five  years  there  was  no  settled  government 
among  the  northern  tribes.  It  must  have  been  difficult 
for  his  patriot  heart  to  restrain  itself  from  gathering  the 
scattered  forces  of  Israel  and  flinging  himself  on  the  foe. 
He  knew,  too,  that  he  was  God's  designated  king,  and  it 
would  have  been  only  natural  for  him  immediately  to  step 
up  to  the  empty  throne,  assuming  the  sceptre  as  his  right. 
Possibly  none  would  have  disputed  a  vigorous  decisive 
policy  of  this  sort.  Abner  might  have  been  out-manoeuvred, 
and  have  shrunk  from  setting  up  Ishbosheth  at  Mahanaim. 
So  mere  human  judgment  might  have  reasoned.  But 
David  was  better  advised.  Refusing  to  judge  according 
to  the  judgment  of  his  eyes,  he  inquired  of  the  Lord, 
saying,  Shall  I  go  up  into  any  of  the  cities  of  Judah  ?  And 
when  the  Divine  oracle  directed  him  to  proceed  to  Hebron, 
he  does  not  appear  to  have  gone  there  in  any  sense  as  king 
or  leader,  but  settled  quietly  with  his  followers  among  the 
towns  and  villages  in  its  vicinity,  waiting  till  the  men  of 
Judah  came,  and  by  a  consentaneous  movement  owned 
him  king.  Then  for  a  second  time  he  was  anointed. 

Anointed  first  by  Samuel  in  the  secrecy  of  his  father's 
house,  he  was  now  anointed  king  over  his  own  people ;  just 
as  the  Lord  Jesus,  of  whom  he  was  the  great  exemplar  and 
type,  was  anointed  first  by  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  and 
again  as  the  representative  of  his  people,  when  He  ascended 
for  them  into  the  presence  of  the  Father,  and  was  set  as 
King  on  the  holy  hill  of  Zion. 

We  cannot  turn  from  this  second  anointing  without  em 
phasizing  the  obvious  lesson  that  at  each  great  crisis  of  our 
life,  and  especially  when  standing  on  the  threshold  of  some 
new  and  enlarged  sphere  of  service,  we  should  seek  and 
receive  a  fresh  anointing  to  fit  us  to  fulfil  its  fresh  demands. 
There  should  be  successive  and  repeated  anointings  in  our 
life-history  as  our  opportunities  widen  out  in  ever-increasing 
•circles.  It  is  a  mistake  to  be  always  counting  back  to  an 
anointing  which  we  have  received;  we  must  be  anointed 


in  ^ebron.  139 

with  fresh  oil.  When  leaving  the  school  for  the  college, 
and  again  when  stepping  forth  from  the  college  to  the  first 
cure  of  souls ;  when  standing  at  the  altar  to  become  a  wife, 
and  again  when  bending  over  the  cradle  of  the  first  babe ; 
when  summoned  to  public  office  in  Church  or  State — each 
new  step  should  be  characterized  by  a  definite  waiting  on 
God,  that  there  may  be  a  fresh  enduement  of  power,  a  re 
charging  of  the  spirit  with  his  might. 

III.  THE  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  DAVID'S  REIGN  IN  HEB 
RON. — For  seven  years  and  six  months  David  was  king  in 
Hebron  over  the  house  of  Judah.  He  was  in  the  prime  of 
life,  thirty  years  of  age,  and  seems  to  have  given  himself  to 
the  full  enjoyment  of  the  quiet  sanctities  of  home.  Sand 
wiched  between  two  references  to  the  long  war  that  lasted 
between  his  house  and  that  of  Saul,  is  the  record  of  his 
wives  and  the  names  of  his  children  (iii.  2-5). 

Throughout  those  years  he  preserved  that  same  spirit  of 
waiting  expectancy,  which  was  the  habit  and  temper  of  his 
soul,  and  which  was  so  rarely  broken  in  upon.  In  this  he 
reminds  us  of  our  Lord,  who  sits  at  his  Father's  side,  till  his 
foes  are  made  the  footstool  of  his  feet.  Similarly,  David 
sat  on  the  throne  of  Judah,  in  the  city  of  Hebron — which 
means  fellowship — waiting  until  God  had  levelled  all  diffi 
culties,  removed  all  obstacles,  and  smoothed  the  pathway 
to  the  supreme  dignity  which  He  had  promised.  The  only 
exception  to  this  policy  was  his  request  that  Michal  should 
be  restored  to  him ;  it  would  perhaps  have  been  wiser  for 
them  both  if  she  had  been  left  to  the  husband  who  seemed 
really  to  love  her.  But  David  may  have  felt  it  right  to 
insist  on  his  legal  status  as  the  son-in-law  of  the  late  king, 
and  as  identified  by  marriage  with  the  royal  house. 

With  this  exception,  he  maintained  an  almost  passive 
policy  ;  what  fighting  was  necessary,  was  left  to  Joab.  The 
overtures  for  the  transference  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel 
were  finally  made  by  Abner  himself,  who  for  years  had 


140  £{jrkc  (Krofonctr. 

known  that  he  was  fighting  against  God  ;  and  who  at  last 
told  the  puppet  king  whom  he  had  set  up  and  supported, 
that  what  God  had  sworn  to  David,  he  was  resolved  to 
effect — namely,  to  translate  the  kingdom  from  Dan  even  to 
Beersheba,  from  the  house  of  Saul  to  that  of  David.  The 
negotiations  with  Israel  and  Benjamin  were  carried  out  by 
Abner  in  entire  independence  of  David ;  it  was  he  who 
had  communications  with  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  spake 
in  the  ears  of  Benjamin,  and  went  finally  to  speak  in  the 
ears  of  David  in  Hebron  all  that  seemed  good  to  Israel 
and  to  the  whole  house  of  Benjamin.  It  was  Abner  who 
proposed  to  David  to  go  and  gather  all  Israel  unto  him, 
addressing  him  as  lord  and  king,  and  bidding  him  prepare 
to  rule  over  all  that  his  soul  desired  (iii.  17-21). 

Throughout  these  transactions,  David  quietly  receives 
what  is  offered ;  and  only  asserts  himself  with  intensity  and 
passion  on  two  occasions,  when  it  was  necessary  to  clear 
himself  of  complicity  in  dastardly  crimes,  and  to  show  his 
detestation  and  abhorrence  of  those  who  had  perpetrated 
them. 

It  was  a  noble  spectacle  when  the  king  followed  the 
bier  of  Abner,  and  wept  at  his  grave.  He  forgot  that  this 
man  had  been  his  persistent  foe,  and  remembered  him  only 
as  a  prince  and  a  great  man  ;  and  he  wove  a  chaplet  of 
elegiacs  to  lay  on  his  grave,  as  he  had  done  for  Saul  s.  It 
is  not  wonderful  that  all  the  people  took  notice  of  it,  and 
that  it  pleased  them,  as  whatever  the  king  did  pleased  the 
people. 

Then  followed  the  dastardly  assassination  of  the  puppet 
king,  Ishbosheth.  His  had  been  a  feeble  reign  throughout. 
Located  at  Mahanaim,  on  the  eastern  side  of  Jordan,  he 
had  never  exercised  more  than  a  nominal  sovereignty,  all 
his  power  was  due  to  Abner,  and  when  he  was  taken  away 
the  entire  house  of  cards  crumbled  to  pieces,  and  the 
hapless  monarch  fell  under  the  daggers  of  traitors.  As 
soon  as  they  bore  the  tidings  to  David,  bringing  his  head 


ober  tljz  entire  |jeople.  141 

as  ghastly  evidence,  David  turned  to  the  Lord,  who  had 
redeemed  him  from  all  adversity,  and  solemnly  swore  that 
he  would  require  at  their  hands  the  blood  of  the  murdered 
man.  The  reward  for  the  tidings  borne  by  the  Amalekite, 
who  asserted  he  had  taken  Saul's  life  was  death  ;  and  surely 
nothing  less  could  be  the  sentence  on  wicked  men  who  had 
slain  a  righteous  man  in  his  own  house  upon  his  bed. 

Then  came  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  that  "  long  stone 
town  on  the  western  slope  of  the  bare  terraced  hill,"  and 
offered  him  the  crown  of  the  entire  kingdom.  They  re 
membered  his  kinship  with  them  as  their  bone  and  flesh ; 
recalled  his  former  services,  when,  even  in  Saul's  days,  he 
led  out  and  brought  in  their  armies  ;  and  reminded  him  of 
the  Divine  promise  that  he  should  be  shepherd  and  prince. 
Then  David  made  a  covenant  with  them,  and  became  their 
constitutional  king  and  was  solemnly  anointed,  for  the  third 
time ;  king  over  the  entire  people — as  the  Son  of  Man  shall 
be  one  day  acknowledged  king  over  the  world  of  men,  and 
shall  reign  without  a  rival. 

It  is  to  this  period  that  we  must  attribute  Psalm  xviii., 
which  undoubtedly  touches  the  high-water  mark  of  rap 
turous  thankfulness  and  adoration.  Every  precious  name 
for  God  is  laid  under  contribution  ;  the  figure  of  his  coming 
to  rescue  his  servant  in  a  thunderstorm  is  unparalleled  in 
sublimity.  We  can  hear  the  rattle  of  the  hailstones,  see 
the  forked  lightning  flash,  and  the  gleam  of  the  coals  of  fire  ; 
but  there  is  throughout  an  appreciation  of  the  tenderness 
and  love  of  God's  dealings  with  his  children,  which  might 
have  been  written  by  the  apostle  whom  Jesus  loved  :— 

"  Thou  hast  given  me  the  shield  of  thy  salvation  ; 
Thy  right  hand  hath  holden  me  up  ; 
And  thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great." 


XX. 

for  tlje  Mato  of  tfc  tBell  of 

(2  SAMUEL  v.  17-25  ;  xxi.  15  ;  xxiii.  8.) 

"  Let  us  be  patient,  God  has  taken  from  us 

The  earthly  treasures  upon  which  we  leaned, 
That  from  the  fleeting  things  that  lie  around  us 
Our  clinging  hearts  should  be  for  ever  weaned." 

ANNA  L.  WARING. 

T  must  have  been  a  rare  and  imposing  assembly 
that  came  to  crown  David  king  of  all  Israel. 
The  Chronicles  record  the  names  and  numbers 
of  the  principal  contingents  that  were  present  on 
that  memorable  occasion  (i  Chron.  xii.  23,  etc.). 
Mighty  men  of  valour  from  Judah  and  Simeon ; 
Levites,  led  by  Jehoiada  and  Zadok ;  famous  men  from 
Ephraim ;  men  of  Issachar  that  had  understanding  of  the 
times  ;  of  Zebulun,  such  as  were  not  of  double  heart,  and 
could  order  the  battle  array.  These  and  many  more  came 
with  a  perfect  heart  to  Hebron  to  make  David  king  over  all 
Israel.  For  three  days  they  remained  with  him,  keeping 
high  festival,  the  provisions  being  contributed  by  such 
distant  tribes  as  Zebulun  and  Naphtali,  as  well  as  by 
those  near  at  hand,  so  that  all  Israel  participated  in  the 
joy  of  the  occasion. 

The  Philistines,  however,  were  watching  the  scene  with 
profound  dissatisfaction.  So  long  as  David  was  content 
to  rule  as  a  petty  king  in  Hebron,  leaving  them  free  to 
raid  the  northern  tribes  at  their  will,  they  were  not  disposed 
to  interfere  ;  but  when  they  heard  that  they  had  anointed 
David  king  over  all  Israel,  all  the  Philistines  went  down 
to  seek  David.  They  probably  waited  until  the  august 
ceremonial  was  over,  and  the  thousands  of  Israel  had 
dispersed  to  their  homes,  and  then  poured  over  into  Judah 


31  J&tfctott  ftetesal.  143 

in  such  vast  numbers — spreading  themselves  in  the  Valley 
of  Ephraim,  and  cutting  off  David's  connection  with  the 
northern  tribes — that  he  was  forced  to  retire  with  his 
mighty  men  and  faithful  six  hundred  to  the  hold,  which, 
by  comparison  of  passages,  must  have  been  the  celebrated 
fortress-cave  of  Adullam  (2  Sam.  v.  17  and  xxiii.  13,  14). 

I.  A  SUDDEN  REVERSAL  OF  FORTUNE. — It  was  but  as 
yesterday  that  David  was  the  centre  of  the  greatest  assembly 
of  warriors  that  his  land  had  seen  for  many  generations. 
With  national  acclaim  he  had  been  carried  to  the  throne 
of  a  united  people.  He  realized  that  he  was  fondly 
enshrined  in  the  hearts  of  his  countrymen  ;  but  to-day  he 
is  driven  from  Hebron,  where  for  more  than  seven  years  he 
had  dwelt  in  undisturbed  security,  back  to  that  desolate 
mountain  fastness,  in  which  years  before  he  had  taken 
refuge  from  the  hatred  of  Saul.  It  was  a  startling  reversal 
of  fortune,  a  sudden  overcasting  of  a  radiant  noon,  a  bolt 
out  of  a  clear  sky.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  he  took 
refuge  in  God.  These  were  days  when  he  walked  very 
closely  with  his  Almighty  Friend,  and  he  did  not  for  a 
moment  waver  in  his  confidence  that  God  would  perfect 
what  concerned  him,  and  establish  him  firmly  in  his 
kingdom. 

Such  sudden  reversals  come  to  us  all — to  wean  us  from 
confidence  in  men  and  things ;  to  stay  us  from  building  our 
nest  on  any  earth-grown  tree ;  to  force  us  to  root  ourselves 
in  God  alone.  It  was  salutary  that  David  should  be  re 
minded  at  this  crisis  of  his  history  that  he  was  as  dependent 
on  God  as  ever,  and  that  He  who  had  given  could  as  easily 
take  back  his  gifts.  Child  of  mortality,  such  lessons  will 
inevitably  be  set  before  thee  to  learn.  In  the  hour  of  most 
radiant  triumphs,  thou  must  remember  Him  who  has 
accounted  thee  fit  to  be  his  steward  ;  thou  must  under 
stand  that  thy  place  and  power  are  thine  only  as  his  gift,  and 
as  a  trusteeship  for  his  glory.  Be  not  surprised  then  if  He 


144    ©b  for  tijc  Ulatcr  of  tr/c  ®dl  of 

makes  thy  throne  tremble  now  and  again,  that  thou  mayest 
remember  that  it  rests,  not  on  some  inherent  necessity,  but 
only  on  the  determination  of  his  will,  the  forth-putting  of 
his  might. 

This  contrast  between  the  anointing  of  Hebron  and  the 
conflict  of  Adullam  presents  a  striking  analogy  to  the  ex 
periences  of  our  Lord,  who,  after  his  anointing  at  the  banks 
of  the  Jordan,  was  driven  by  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness 
of  Judaea  to  be  forty  days  tempted  of  the  devil.  It  is  the 
law  of  the  spiritual  life.  The  bright  light  of  popularity  is 
too  strong  and  searching  for  the  perfect  development  of  the 
Divine  life.  Loneliness,  solitude,  temptation,  conflict — 
these  are  the  flames  that  burn  the  Divine  colours  into  our 
characters ;  such  the  processes  through  which  the  blessings 
of  our  anointing  are  made  available  for  the  poor,  the 
broken-hearted,  the  prisoners,  the  captives,  and  the  blind. 

II.  GLEAMS  OF  LIGHT. — The  misty  gloom  of  these  dark 
hours  was  lit  by  some  notable  incidents.  The  mighty  men 
excelled  themselves  in  single  combats  with  the  Philistine 
champions.  Then  Abishai,  the  son  of  Zeruiah,  smote  the 
giant,  who  with  his  new  sword  thought  to  have  slain  David ; 
and  Elhanan  slew  the  brother  of  Goliath  of  Gath ;  and 
Jonathan,  David's  nephew,  slew  a  huge  monstrosity  who 
had  defied  Israel ;  and  Eleazar  stood  in  the  breach,  when 
the  rest  had  fled,  and  smote  the  Philistines  till  his  hand  was 
weary,  and  the  discomfited  soldiers  returned  only  to  spoil. 
Such  prodigies  of  valour  were  performed  around  the  person 
of  their  Prince,  whom  his  followers  delighted  to  call  the 
Light  of  Israel,  albeit  for  the  hour  obscured  by  clinging 
mists  (xxi.  17). 

What  marvels  may  be  wrought  by  the  inspiration  of  a 
single  life !  We  cannot  but  revert  in  thought  to  that  hour 
when,  hard  by  that  very  spot,  an  unknown  youth  stepped 
forth  from  the  affrighted  hosts  of  Israel  to  face  the  dreaded 
Goliath.  Alone,  so  far  as  human  succour  went,  he  had 


irjljt  0f  Israd." 

encountered  and  defeated  that  terrible  antagonist ;  but  now, 
after  some  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  had  run  their  course,  he 
no  longer  stood  by  himself,  there  were  scores  of  men, 
animated  by  his  spirit,  inspired  by  his  faith,  who  pushed 
him  gently  back,  and  told  him  that  they  must  be  permitted 
to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  conflict,  since  his  life,  which  was 
the  fountain-source  of  all  their  energy,  must  be  carefully 
withheld  from  needless  peril. 

Thus  the  lives  of  great  men  light  up  and  inspire  other 
lives.  They  mould  their  contemporaries.  The  inspiration 
of  a  Wesley's  career  raises  a  great  army  of  preachers.  The 
enthusiasm  of  a  Carey,  a  Livingstone,  a  Paton  stirs  multi 
tudes  of  hearts  with  missionary  zeal.  Those  who  had  been 
the  disciples  of  Jesus  became  his  apostles  and  martyrs. 
His  own  life  of  self-sacrifice  for  men  has  become  the 
beacon-fire  that  has  summoned  myriads  from  the  lowland 
valley  of  selfishness  to  the  surrender,  the  self-denial,  the 
anguish  of  the  Cross,  if  only  they  might  be  permitted 
to  follow  in  his  steps. 

III.  A  TOUCHING  INCIDENT. — Adullam  was  not  far  from 
Bethlehem.  Often,  in  his  earliest  years,  David  had  led  his 
father's  flocks  to  pasture  amid  the  valleys  where  he  was 
now  sheltering ;  and  the  familiar  scenes  recalled,  as  a  scent 
or  strain  are  wont  to  do,  memories  which  came  trooping 
back  from  the  past,  and  spoke  to  him  of  Jesse,  his 
mother,  and  his  boyhood's  home. 

One  sultry  afternoon,  as  it  would  seem,  these  recollections 
were  unusually  fresh  and  vivid.  He  was  a  semi-prisoner  in 
the  hold.  Over  yonder,  almost  within  sight,  a  garrison  of 
Philistines  held  Bethlehem.  Suddenly  an  irresistible  long 
ing  swept  across  him  to  taste  the  water  of  the  well  of  Beth 
lehem,  which  was  by  the  gate.  Almost  involuntarily  he  gave 
expression  to  the  wish.  He  did  not  suspect  that  any  of  his 
stalwarts  were  within  earshot,  or  if  there  were,  that  they 
would  be  foolhardy  enough  to  attempt  to  gn?>'Tv  his  whim. 


146    ®Ir  for  tire  Water  of  tbe  Widi  of 

If  he  had  thought  this,  however,  he  miscalculated.  He  had 
not  gauged  the  warmth  of  the  affection  with  which  those 
strong  men  loved  him. 

Three  of  his  mightiest  warriors  overheard  their  chieftain's 
wish,  stole  secretly  out  of  the  cave  and  down  the  valley, 
burst  through  the  host  of  the  Philistines,  drew  water  from 
the  well,  and,  before  they  had  been  missed,  placed  the 
brimming  vessel  in  David's  hands.  It  was  the  priceless 
expression  of  a  love  that  was  stronger  than  death.  He 
could  not  drink  it.  To  him  the  vessel  seemed  gleaming 
crimson  with  the  blood  it  might  have  cost.  With  that 
instinctive  chivalry  of  soul  which  made  him  in  all  the 
changes  of  his  fortune  so  absolutely  kingly  as  to  compel  the 
enthusiastic  devotion  of  his  adherents,  he  arose  and  poured 
it  out  as  a  libation  to  God,  as  though  the  gift  were  fit  only 
to  be  made  to  Him ;  saying,  as  he  did  so,  "  My  God,  forbid 
it  me  that  I  should  do  this,  shall  I  drink  the  blood  of  these 
men  that  have  put  their  lives  in  jeopardy  ?  " 

We  have  another  example  in  this  graphic  episode  of 
David's  marvellous  self-control.  Up  to  this  time  of  his  life, 
he  seems  always  to  have  lived  with  the  tightly -girded  loin — 
no  desire  was  allowed  to  have  unchallenged  sway.  The 
wayward  impulse  of  passion,  the  assertion  of  caprice,  were 
repressed  by  the  iron  determination  of  the  purpose  in  all 
things  to  live  according  to  the  loftiest  ideals  of  manhood 
and  kingliness.  The  question  of  selfish  gratification  was 
always  secondary  to  the  considerations  of  high  and  noble 
principle. 

It  were  well  if  all  young  men  and  women,  aye,  and  others 
also,  who  read  these  words  would  ask  themselves  whether 
certain  gratifications  in  which  they,  with  others  of  their 
class,  have  been  accustomed  to  indulge,  are  not  purchased 
at  too  dear  a  cost.  Could  they  quaff  the  cup  of  pleasure  in 
the  theatre  and  opera-house,  if  they  realized  that  it  vras 
presented  to  their  lips  at  the  cost  of  scores  of  souls,  whose 
modesty  and  virtue  were  being  sacrificed  behind  the  scenes? 


31  toar  Cap.  147 

Could  they  drink  of  the  intoxicating  cup,  as  a  beverage,  if 
they  realized  that  the  drinking  customs  of  society  were 
annually  costing  the  happiness,  the  life,  and  the  eternal 
welfare  of  myriads  ? 

How  often  we  sigh  for  the  waters  of  the  well  of  Beth 
lehem  !  We  go  back  on  our  past,  and  dwell  longingly  on 
never-to-be-forgotten  memories.  Oh  to  see  again  that  face ; 
to  feel  the  touch  of  that  gentle  hand ;  to  hear  that  voice  I 
Oh  to  be  again  as  in  those  guileless  happy  years,  when  the 
forbidden  fruit  had  never  been  tasted,  and  the  flaming 
sword  had  never  been  passed  !  Oh  for  that  fresh  vision  of 
life,  that  devotion  to  the  Saviour's  service,  that  new  glad 
outburst  of  love  !  Oh  that  one  would  give  us  to  drink  of 
the  water  of  the  well  of  Bethlehem,  which  is  beside  the 
gate  !  They  are  vain  regrets ;  there  are  no  mighties  strong 
enough  to  break  through  the  serried  ranks  of  the  years,  and 
fetch  back  the  past.  But  the  quest  of  the  soul  may  yet 
be  satisfied  by  what  awaits  it  in  Him  who  said,  "  He  that 
drinketh  of  this  water  shall  thirst  again  ;  but  he  that  drinketh 
of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him,  shall  never  thirst :  but  it 
shall  be  in  him  a  spring  of  water,  rising  up  to  everlasting 
life."  Not  in  Bethlehem's  well,  but  In  Him  who  was  born 
there,  shall  the  soul's  thirst  be  quenched  for  ever. 

IV.  THE  OVERTHROW  OF  THE  PHILISTINES. — Prosperity 
had  not  altered  the  attitude  of  David's  soul,  in  its  persistent 
waiting  on  God.  As  he  was  when  first  he  came  to  Hebronr 
so  he  was  still ;  and  in  this  hour  of  perplexity,  he  inquired 
of  the  Lord,  saying,  "  Shall  I  go  up  against  the  Philistines  ? 
Wilt  Thou  deliver  them  into  mine  hand  ? "  In  reply,  he 
received  the  Divine  assurance  of  certain  victory ;  and  when 
the  battle  commenced,  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  the  Lord 
Himself  were  sweeping  them  before  Him,  like  a  winter 
flood,  which,  rushing  down  the  mountain-side,  carries  all 
before  it  in  its  impetuous  rush.  "The  Lord,"  said  her 
"  hath  broken  forth  upon  mine  enemies."  The  routed  foe 


148    ©Ij  for  tfre  Mater  nf  tlje  Mcll  of 

had  no  time  even  to  gather  up  their  gods,  which  fell  into 
the  conqueror's  hands. 

Again  the  Philistines  came  up  to  assert  their  olden 
supremacy,  and  again  David  waited  on  the  Lord  for  direc 
tion.  It  was  well  that  he  did  so  ;  because  the  plan  of 
campaign  was  not  as  before.  Those  that  rely  on  God's 
co-operation  must  be  careful  to  be  in  constant  touch  with 
Him.  The  aid  which  was  given  yesterday  in  one  form,  will 
be  given  to-morrow  in  another.  In  the  first  battle  the  posi 
tion  of  the  Philistines  was  carried  by  assault ;  in  the  second 
it  was  turned  by  ambush.  To  have  reversed  the  order,  or 
to  have  acted  on  the  two  occasions  identically,  would  have 
missed  the  method  and  movement  of  those  Divine  legions 
who  acted  as  David's  invincible  allies. 

This  movement  in  the  mulberry  trees,  which  indicated 
that  the  ambush  must  bestir  itself,  and  advance  on  the  foe, 
suggests  the  footfalls  of  invisible  angelic  squadrons  passing 
onward  to  the  battle.  "  The  Lord  is  gone  out  before  thee 
to  smite  the  host  of  the  Philistines."  Then  David  broke 
on  their  ranks  and  pursued  them  from  Gibeon  down  into 
the  heart  of  the  maritime  plain. 

Sometimes  we  have  to  march,  sometimes  to  halt ;  now 
we  are  called  to  action,  again  to  suffering  :  in  this  battle  to 
rush  forward  like  a  torrent ;  in  the  next  to  glide  stealthily 
to  ambush  and  wait.  We  must  admit  nothing  stereotyped 
in  our  methods.  What  did  very  well  in  the  house  of 
Dorcas  will  not  suit  in  the  stately  palace  of  Cornelius. 
Let  there  be  living  faith  in  God;  the  calm  waiting  on 
the  housetop  in  prayer  \  the  perception  of  the  new  departure 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  is  intending  and  foreshadowing ; 
and  the  willingness  to  follow,  though  it  be  at  the  sacrifice  of 
all  the  older  prejudices.  Then  shall  we  know  what  God  can 
do  as  a  mighty  co-operating  force  in  our  lives,  making  a 
breach  in  our  foes,  and  marching  his  swift- stepping  legions 
to  our  succour. 


XXI. 

fmtsaknt,  tljt  U01ij  Citg. 

(2  SAMUEL  v. ) 

"  Fair  Jerusalem, 
The  Holy  City,  lifted  high  her  towers." 

MILTON,  Paradise  Regained. 

NE  of  the  first  acts  of  the  new  king  was  to  secure 
a  suitable  capital  for  his  kingdom.  And  his 
choice  of  Jerusalem  was  a  masterpiece  of  policy 
and  statesmanship.  Surely  it  was  more ;  it  was 
the  result  of  the  direct  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  This  was  the  time  of  which  Jehovah 
speaks  in  that  passage  of  Ezekiel :  "  I  passed  by  thee, 
and  looked  upon  thee,  behold  thy  time  was  the  time  of 
love ;  and  I  swore  unto  thee,  and  entered  into  a  covenant 
with  thee,  and  thou  becamest  mine  "  (xvi.  8). 

It  was  highly  desirable  that  the  capital  should  be  acces 
sible  to  the  whole  country,  and  should  possess  the  necessary 
features  that  rendered  it  fit  to  become  the  heart  and  brain 
of  the  national  life.  It  must  be  capable  of  being  strongly 
fortified,  so  as  to  preserve  the  sacred  treasures  of  the 
kingdom  inviolate.  It  must  combine  features  of  strength 
and  beauty,  so  as  to  arouse  the  national  pride  and  devotion. 
It  must  be  hallowed  by  sacred  associations,  so  as  to 
become  the  religious  centre  of  the  people's  holiest  life.  All 
these  features  blended  in  Jerusalem,  and  commended  it  to- 
David's  Divinely-guided  judgment.  In  this  he  greatly"^ 
differed  from  Saul,  who  had  made  his  own  city,  Gibeah,  his  ! 
capital — an  altogether  insignificant  place,  and  the  scene 
of  an  atrocious  crime,  the  infamy  of  which  could  not  be 
obliterated.  To  have  made  Hebron  the  capital  would  have 


150  fentsahm,  tire 

excited  the  jealousy  of  the  rest  of  Israel ;  and  Bethlehem, 
his  birthplace,  would  have  struck  too  low  a  keynote.  None 
were  to  be  compared  with  the  site  of  Jerusalem,  on  the 
frontier  between  Judah  and  Benjamin,  surrounded  on  three 
sides  by  valleys,  and  on  the  other  side,  the  north,  strongly 
fortified. 

I.  ITS  PREVIOUS  HISTORY. — To  the  Jew  there  was  no 
city  like  Jerusalem.  It  was  the  city  of  his  God,  situate  in 
his  holy  mountain  :  "  Beautiful  in  elevation,  the  joy  of  the 
whole  earth."  The  high  hills  of  Bashan  were  represented 
as  jealous  of  the  lowlier  hill  of  Zion,  because  God  had 
chosen  it  for  his  abode.  The  mountains  that  stood  around 
her  seemed  to  symbolize  the  environing  presence  of 
Jehovah.  The  exile  in  his  banishment  opened  his  windows 
towards  Jerusalem  as  he  knelt  in  prayer,  and  wished  that 
his  right  hand  might  forget  its  cunning  sooner  than  his 
heart  fail  to  prefer  Jerusalem  above  its  chief  joy.  The 
charm  of  the  yearly  pilgrimage  to  the  sacred  feasts  was  that 
the  feet  of  the  pilgrim  should  stand  within  her  gates ;  and 
when  at  a  distance  from  her  walls  and  palaces,  pious  hearts 
were  wont  to  pray  that  peace  and  prosperity  might  be 
within  them  for  the  sake  of  those  brethren  and  companions 
who  were  favoured  to  live  within  her  precincts.  The 
noblest  bosom  that  ever  throbbed  with  true  human  emotion 
heaved  with  convulsive  sobs  at  the  thought  of  the  desolation 
impending  over  her.  Jesus  wept  when  He  beheld  the  city 
and  said :  "  O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  how  often  would  I 
have  gathered  thee,  as  a  hen  gathers  her  chickens  beneath 
her  wings  :  and  ye  would  not  ! " 

But  it  had  not  always  been  so.  Her  birth  and  nativity 
were  of  the  land  of  the  Canaanite.  An  Amorite  was  her 
father,  and  her  mother  a  Hittite.  In  the  day  that  she  was 
born  she  was  cast  out  ac  a  deserted  child  on  the  open  field, 
weltering  in  her  blood.  For  a  brief  spell  the  priest-king 
Melchizedek  reigned  over  her,  and  during  his  life  her  future 


151 

glory  must  have  been  presaged  :  the  thin  spiral  columns  of 
smoke  that  arose  from  his  altars,  anticipating  the  stately 
worship  of  the  Temple  ;  his  priesthood  foreshadowing  a 
long  succession  of  priests.  Thereafter  a  long  spell  of 
darkness  befell  her;  and  for  years  after  the  rest  of  the 
country  was  in  occupation  of  Israel,  Jerusalem  was  still  held 
by  the  Jebusites.  Joshua,  indeed,  nominally  subdued  the 
city  in  his  first  occupation  of  the  land,  and  slew  its  king  ; 
but  his  tenure  of  it  was  very  brief  and  slight,  and  the  city 
speedily  relapsed  under  the  sway  of  its  ancient  occupants. 

II.  THE  CAPTURE.— Making  a  levy  of  all  Israel,  David 
went  up  to  Jerusalem.  For  the  first  time  after  seven  years, 
he  took  the  lead  of  his  army  in  person.  Passive,  when  he 
was  called  to  wait  for  the  gift  of  God,  he  was  intensely 
active  and  energetic  when  he  discerned  the  Divine 
summons.  The  Jebusites  ridiculed  the  attempt  to  dislodge 
them.  They  had  held  the  fortress  for  so  long,  and  were  so 
confident  of  its  impregnable  walls,  that  in  derision  they 
placed  along  the  walls  a  number  of  cripples,  and  boasted 
that  these  would  be  strong  enough  to  keep  David  and  his 
whole  army  at  bay.  But  it  appears  from  the  narrative  given 
by  Josephus,  that  Joab,  incited  by  David's  proclamation  of 
making  the  captor  of  the  city  his  commander-in-chief,  broke 
in  by  a  subterranean  passage,  excavated  in  the  soft  lime 
stone  rock,  made  his  way  into  the  very  heart  of  the  citadel, 
and  opened  the  gates  to  the  entire  army. 

Whether  this  story  be  true  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  through 
Joab's  prowess  the  city  speedily  fell  into  David's  hands ;  and 
he  dwelt  in  the  stronghold,  afterwards  known  as  Zion,  or  the 
City  of  David.  This  was  only  part  of  what  was  afterwards 
known  as  Jerusalem.  Moriah,  where  afterwards  the  Temple 
was  erected,  was  probably  an  unoccupied  site.  Araunah, 
the  Jebusite,  had  a  threshing-floor  there. 

David's  first  act  was  to  extend  the  fortifications  ;  "  He 
built  round  about  from  Millo  and  inward ; "  whilst  Joab 


152  Jerusalem,  tfje  Uolg  (Kttjr. 

seems  to  have  repaired  and  beautified  the  buildings  in  the 
city  itself.  This  first  success  laid  the  foundation  of  David's 
greatness.  "  He  waxed  greater  and  greater ;  for  the  Lord, 
the  God  of  hosts,  was  with  him."  Indeed,  neighbouring 
nations  appear  to  have  become  impressed  with  the  growing 
strength  of  his  kingdom,  and  hastened  to  seek  his  alliance 
(i  Chron.  xi.  7-9;  2  Sam.  v.  u). 

III.  A  FAIR  DAWN. — It  has  been  suggested  that  we 
owe  Psalm  ci.  to  this  hour  in  David's  life.  He  finds  him 
self  suddenly  called  to  conduct  the  internal  administration 
of  a  great  nation,  that  had,  so  to  speak,  been  born  in  a  day, 
and  was  beginning  to  throb  with  the  intensity  of  a  long- 
suspended  animation.  The  new  needs  were  demanding 
new  expression.  Departments  of  law  and  justice,  of 
finance,  and  of  military  organization,  were  rapidly  being 
called  into  existence,  and  becoming  localized  at  the  capital. 
Functionaries  and  officials  of  every  description  were  being 
created.  The  palace  and  court  were  every  day  thronged 
with  those  who  sought  promotion  to  offices  of  trust.  It  was 
highly  desirable  that  no  mistake  should  be  made  in  these 
early  selections,  and  that  the  country  should  be  reassured  as 
to  the  character  of  the  men  whom  the  king  was  prepared  to 
entrust  with  its  concerns.  For  these  purposes  this  psalm 
may  have  been  prepared.  In  any  case,  it  exactly  suits 
such  an  occasion  and  purpose. 

The  royal  psalmist  declares  that  he  will  behave  himself 
wisely  in  a  perfect  way,  and  will  walk  within  his  house  with 
a  perfect  heart.  He  will  set  no  base  thing  before  his  eyes, 
and  hate  the  work  of  those  that  turn  aside.  Then  he 
describes  those  who  shall  be  his  chosen  counsellors  and 
ministers.  He  will  listen  to  no  privy  slanders,  subtly 
suggested  to  his  ear,  as  from  another  Doeg  or  Cush.  He 
will  not  suffer  Hamans  with  their  high  looks  and  proud 
hearts,  to  rule  his  privy-council,  and  oppress  the  poor 
Mordecais  at  the  gate.  If  he  discovers  deceit  or  falsehood 


31  Jair  Ideal.  153 

in  any  of  his  attendants,  any  species  of  deception  or  mis 
representation,  he  pledges  himself  to  dismiss  him  instantly. 
His  earliest  and  best  energies  should  be  devoted  to  cutting 
off  all  workers  of  iniquity  from  the  city  of  the  Lord,  and  to 
the  destruction  of  all  the  wicked  of  the  land  ;  whilst  his 
eyes  should  be  upon  all  the  faithful  of  the  land,  they  should 
dwell  with  him,  and  he  would  choose  as  his  most  favoured 
attendants  those  who  walked  in  a  perfect  way. 

It  was  a  fair  ideal.  These  early  days  of  the  new  kingdom 
were  fitly  described  by  him,  as  he  reviewed  them  from  the 
threshold  of  eternity,  as  a  morning  without  clouds,  or  as 
when  the  tender  grass  springeth  out  of  the  earth  through 
clear  shining  after  rain.  The  conception  of  the  righteous 
ruler,  ruling  men  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  thrusting  away  the 
ungodly  as  thorns  and  briars,  stood  out  sharply  defined, 
and  clear-cut  before  him.  It  beckoned  to  him  to  follow, 
and  if  only  he  had  obeyed  and  followed,  without  swerving 
to  the  right  or  left,  what  tears  of  blood,  what  years  of 
anguish  would  have  been  saved  !  As  a  dying  man,  that 
ideal  of  more  than  thirty  years  before  came  back  on  him, 
and  compared  sadly  with  what  had  actually  befallen  him. 
It  was  bitter  to  contrast  what  had  been,  with  what  might 
have  been ;  the  muddy  swamp  in  which  the  river  of  his  life 
had  nearly  lost  itself,  with  the  clear  crystal  of  its  first 
inception  (2  Samuel  xxiii.  1-5). 


XXII. 


0f 


(2  SAMUEL  vi.  ) 


ta 


"  Hark  !  what  a  sound,  and  too  Divine  for  hearing, 
.     Stirs  on  the  earth,  and  trembles  in  the  air  ! 
Is  it  the  thunder  of  the  Lord's  appearing  ? 

Is  it  the  music  of  his  people's  prayer  ? 
Surely  He  cometh  !  and  a  thousand  voices 

Shout  to  the  saints,  and  to  the  deaf  are  dumb  ! 
Surely  He  cometh  !  and  the  earth  rejoices, 
Glad  in  his  coming,  who  hath  sworn,  '  I  come.'  " 

F.  MYERS. 

soon  as  David  had  acquired  a  capital,  he  was 
eager  to  make  it  the  religious,  as  well  as  the 
political,  centre  of  the  national  life.  With  this 
object  in  view,  he  resolved  to  place  in  a  tem 
porary  structure  hard  by  his  palace,  the  almost 
forgotten  Ark  ;  which,  since  its  return  from  the 
land  of  the  Philistines,  had  found  a  temporary  resting- 
place  in  the  "  city  of  the  woods,"  some  eleven  miles  south 
west  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  house,  and  under  the  care  of 
Abinadab. 

In  all  probability,  David  felt  unable  to  remove  the 
Tabernacle  —  which,  after  Saul's  slaughter  of  the  priests,  had 
been  set  up  in  the  high  place  that  was  at  Gibeon  —  because 
Zadok,  the  priest,  and  his  brethren  the  priests,  ministered  to 
it,  and  maintained  the  burnt-offering  continually  upon  the 
altar.  An  old  root  of  jealousy  lay  between  the  families  of 
Zadok  and  Abiathar  ;  and  it  was  wiser  in  every  way  not  to 
bring  them  together,  or  to  interfere  with  the  religious  rites 
which  had  been  maintained  through  the  broken  years  of 
recent  history  (i  Chron.  xvi.  39,  etc.).  But  David's  purpose 


31  Jatal  £tistah£.  155 

would  be  sufficiently  served  by  securing  the  presence  of  the 
Ark  in  the  heart  of  the  new  city.  He  would  not,  however, 
take  any  step  upon  his  own  initiative ;  but  consulted  with 
the  captains  of  thousands  and  of  hundreds,  even  with  every 
leader.  With  their  acquiescence  he  sent  abroad  everywhere 
throughout  all  the  land  of  Israel  to  gather  priests,  Levites, 
and  people,  to  bring  again  the  sacred  emblem. 

I.  THE  MISTAKE  OF  THE  CART. — It  was  a  great 
procession  that  wended  its  way  that  day  to  the  little  town. 
In  addition  to  a  vast  host  of  priests  and  Levites,  arid  a  great 
concourse  of  people,  there  were  thirty  thousand  chosen 
soldiers,  whose  presence  would  be  sufficient  to  protect  the 
assembly  from  any  hostile  incursion  or  surprise. 

Probably  we  owe  psalm  cxxxii.  to  this  occasion ;  in  which 
the  royal  singer  records  the  determination  which  he  had 
formed  in  the  days  of  his  affliction,  that  whenever  he  should 
be  delivered  from  them,  and  established  in  his  kingdom, 
one  of  his  earliest  acts  would  be  to  find  out  a  place  for  the 
Lord,  a  tabernacle  for  the  mighty  one  of  Jacob.  Then  fol 
low  the  magnificent  stanzas  which  refer  directly  to  this  event : 
"  Lo,  we  heard  of  it  in  Ephratah  : 

We  found  it  in  Kirjath-jearim. 

We  will  go  into  his  tabernacles  ; 

We  will  worship  at  his  footstool. 

Arise,  O  Lord,  into  thy  resting-place, 

Thou  and  the  ark  of  thy  strength." 

But  one  fatal  mistake  marred  the  events  of  the  day,  and 
postponed  the  fulfilment  of  the  nation's  high  hope  and 
resolve.  It  was  strictly  ordained  in  the  law  of  Moses,  that 
Levites  alone,  specially  consecrated  to  the  task,  should  bear 
the  Ark  upon  their  shoulders,  not  touching  it  with  their 
hands,  lest  they  should  die  (Numbers  iv.  15  ;  vii.  9). 
Nothing  could  be  clearer  than  this  specific  injunction,  or 
more  obvious  than  the  reason  for  it,  in  enforcing  the 
sanctity  of  all  that  pertained  to  the  service  of  the  Most 
High.  This  command  had,  however,  fallen  into  disuse 


i56     ®!l£  CcmfoirattrB  of  tljz  3Vrk  to  fftount  Zian. 


with  much  else  ;  and  it  was  arranged  that  the  Ark  should  be 
carried  on  a  new  cart  driven  by  the  two  sons  of  Abinadab. 
This  mistake  could  not  be  passed  over.  That  the  Philistines 
had  used  such  a  cart  with  impunity  had  been  permitted  be 
cause  they  did  it  ignorantly  ;  but  for  Israel  to  set  aside  the 
repeated  injunction  of  the  Levitical  law,  and  follow  their  own 
caprice,  could  not  be  condoned,  lest  the  entire  Levitical  code 
should  be  treated  as  a  dead  letter,  and  sink  into  disuetude. 

The  oxen  started  amid  a  blast  of  song  and  trumpet,  and 
for  the  first  two  miles  all  went  well,  until  they  came  upon  a 
piece  of  rough  road,  on  which  the  oxen  stumbled,  and  the 
ark  shook  so  violently  as  to  be  in  danger  of  being 
precipitated  to  the  ground.  Then  Uzzah,  the  younger  son 
of  Abinadab,  who  perhaps  had  become  too  familiar  with 
the  sacred  emblem,  put  out  his  hand  to  steady  it,  and 
instantly  fell  dead.  The  effect  on  the  procession  was 
terrific.  Horror  silenced  the  song,  and  panic  spread 
through  the  awed  crowd,  as  the  tidings  of  the  catastrophe 
spread  backward  through  its  ranks.  David  was  greatly 
dismayed.  He  was  afraid  of  God  that  day,  and  said,  How 
shall  I  bring  the  Ark  of  God  home  to  me  ?  So  he  directed 
that  the  Ark  should  be  deposited  in  the  house  of  Obed- 
edom,  a  Levite,  who  lived  in  the  vicinity,  and  there  it 
remained  for  three  months.  The  terrified  crowds  returned 
to  Jerusalem,  in  consternation  and  dismay. 

It  has  been  suggested  in  some  quarters  that  the  breach  of 
Uzzah  was  a  needlessly  severe  act  of  God  —  a  too  stern  treat 
ment  of  a  sin  of  ignorance.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind  how  important  it  was  at  this  juncture  to  insist 
on  literal  obedience  to  the  ancient  code.  If  it  had  been  per 
mitted  to  man's  caprice  to  set  its  injunctions  at  defiance,  it 
is  easy  to  see  that  the  entire  system  might  have  fallen  into 
disuse,  and  its  important  functions  been  left  unrealized. 

II.  THE  SHOULDERS  OF  LIVING  MEN.  —  "  The  Lord 
blessed  the  home  of  Obed-edom."  Josephus  states  that 


&J)£  g  Urine  gimticns.  *57 

from  the  moment  the  Ark  rested  beneath  his  roof,  a  tide  of 
golden  prosperity  set  in,  so  that  he  passed  from  poverty  to 
wealth;  an  evident  sign  that  Jehovah  had  no  controversy 
with  those  who  obeyed  the  regulations  and  conditions  laid 
down  in  the  ancient  law.  In  the  meanwhile,  David  searched 
into  the  Divine  directions  for  the  conveyance  of  the  sacred 
emblem  ;  for  he  said  :  "  None  ought  to  carry  the  Ark  of  the 
Lord  but  Levites  ;  for  them  hath  the  Lord  chosen  to  carry 
the  Ark  of  God,  and  to  minister  unto  Him  for  ever.'' 

Again  a  vast  concourse  was  gathered.  This  time,  how 
ever,  the  prescribed  ritual  was  minutely  observed ;  and  the 
children  of  the  Levites  bare  the  Ark  of  God  upon  their 
shoulders,  with  the  staves  thereon,  as  Moses  commanded, 
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Then  the  deep  bass 
of  the  white-robed  choirs,  the  clash  of  the  cymbals  of  brass, 
the  sweet  strains  of  the  bands  of  psalteries  and  harps,  the 
measured  march  of  the  captains  over  thousands,  the  stately 
procession  of  the  elders,  the  shoutings  of  the  teeming 
crowds  of  all  Israel — together  made  up  such  a  welcome  as 
was  worthy  of  the  occasion,  and  thrilled  the  soul  of  David, 
responsive  as  a  musical  instrument  to  a  master-hand.  Clad 
in  a  linen  ephod,  he  leapt  and  danced  before  the  Lord. 

So  they  brought  in  the  Ark  of  the  Lord,  and  set  it  in  its 
place,  in  the  midst  of  the  tent  that  David  had  pitched  for 
it;  and  David  offered  burnt-offerings  and  peace-offerings 
before  the  Lord.  Then  he  turned  to  bless  the  people  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts ;  and  distributed  to  them  bread, 
and  wine,  and  raisins.  The  one  cloud  that  marred  the 
gladness  of  the  day  was  the  biting  speech  of  Michal,  who 
had  no  sympathy  with  her  husband's  religion.  Poor  woman  ! 
perhaps  she  was  still  smarting  over  the  loss  of  Phaltiel ;  pos 
sibly  she  was  jealous  at  David's  independence  of  her  and  her 
father's  house — hence  the  venom  in  her  speech  to  the  man 
whom  she  had  loved,  and  whose  life  she  had  once  saved. 

III.   THREE    MAJESTIC    PSALMS. — Upon   this   occasion 


Ccnbcganre  of  ilje  3^rh  to  ^Eoutit  Zivn. 

three  of  the  greatest  psalms  were  composed  :  xv.,  Ixviii.,  and 
xxiv.  Psalm  xv.  was  evidently  composed  with  direct  reference 
to  the  death  of  Uzzah,  and  in  answer  to  the  question  : 

"  Lord  who  shall  sojourn  in  thy  tabernacle — 
Who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill  ?  " 

Psalm  Ixviii.,  which  was  chanted  as  a  processional  hymn.  It 
begins  with  the  ancient  formula,  uttered  in  the  desert  march 
each  time  the  camp  was  struck : 

"  Let  God  arise,  let  his  enemies  be  scattered  ; 
Let  them  also  that  hate  him,  flee  before  him." 

As  the  Ark  was  borne  forward,  in  its  majestic  progress, 
the  symphony  was  softly  played  which  told  of  the  ancient 
days  in  which  He  went  before  his  people  and  marched 
through  the  wilderness,  whilst  the  earth  trembled,  and 
the  heavens  dropped  at  his  presence. 

As  the  Levite-bearers  drew  near  the  ascent  of  the  road 
up  to  the  citadel  of  Zion,  the  high  mountains  of  Bashan 
were  depicted  as  regarding  its  lowlier  height  with  envy; 
and  then,  as  the  august  procession  swept  up  the  steep, 
the  choristers  broke  into  a  strophe  of  unrivalled  grandeur, 
the  full  meaning  of  which  could  only  be  fulfilled  in  the 
Ascension  of  the  Christ  Himself,  far  above  all  principality 
and  power  into  the  presence  of  his  Father  : 

"  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  Thou  hast  led  captivity  captive  : 
Thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men, 
Even  for  the  rebellious,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them." 

An  enumeration  of  the  constituent  parts  of  that  mighty 
host  follows.  The  singers  who  went  before,  and  the 
minstrels  that  followed  after;  the  damsels  that  played 
with  timbrels,  and  the  great  host  of  women  publishing 
the  tidings;  little  Benjamin  and  the  princes  of  Judah; 
the  princes  of  Zebulun  and  of  Naphtali.  Finally,  the 
psalmist  anticipates  the  gathering  of  distant  nations  to 
that  sacred  spot  : 

"  Princes  shall  come  out  of  Egypt, 
Ethiopia  shall  haste  to  stretch  out  her  hands  unto  God." 


Ithtrj  of  ©teg."  159 

But  Psalm  xxiv.  is  perhaps  the  master-ode  of  the  three. 
It  begins  with  a  marvellous  conception,  when  we  consider 
the  narrowness  of  ordinary  Jewish  exclusiveness : 

"  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof; 
The  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein." 

The  first  half  of  the  psalm  answers  the  question  as  to  the 
kind  of  men  who  may  stand  before  with  God  (3-6).  They 
must  be  clean  in  hands,  and  pure  in  heart,  not  lifting  their 
soul  to  vanity  nor  swearing  deceitfully.  No  mere  ablutions 
or  external  ceremonial  will  meet  the  case.  The  require 
ment  of  this  holy  God  is  the  righteousness  which  He  alone 
can  give  to  those  who  seek  his  face. 

The  second  half  declares  God's  willingness  to  abide  with 
man  upon  the  earth.  The  low-browed  gates,  beneath  which 
Melchizedek  may  have  come  forth  to  greet  Abraham, 
seemed  all  too  low  to  admit  the  Ark  borne  aloft  on  the 
Levites'  shoulders  ;  and  they  were  bidden  to  lift  up  them 
selves,  and  open  to  the  entering  king.  In  thunders  of 
voice  and  instrument,  the  white-robed  choirs,  halting  before 
the  closed  portals,  cried  : 

"  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates  ; 
And  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors, 
And  the  King  of  Glory  shall  come  in." 

Then  from  within,  a  single  voice,  as  though  of  some 
startled  and  suspicious  warder,  demands  : 

"Who  is  this  King  of  Glory  ?  " 

A  question,  which  met  with  the  immediate,  emphatic, 
and  mighty  response  : 

"  The  Lord  strong  and  mighty, 
The  Lord  mighty  in  battle." 

Again  the  challenge  to  open.  Again  the  enquiry. 
Again  the  magnificent  reply,  that  the  King  of  Glory — for 
whom  admittance  was  demanded  to  this  ancient  city,  held 
once  by  demons,  the  nest  of  every  unclean  bird — is  the 
Lord  of  Hosts,  to  whom  all  angels,  all  demons,  all  the 
living  things  in  heaven,  and  on  earth,  and  under  the  earth, 
are  subject.  So  the  Ark  at  last  reached  its  resting-place. 


XXIII. 

Mtrst  Widl  tbat  it  toaa  in  iljitu  !*art" 

(2  SAMUEL  vii.  ;  2  CHRONICLES  vi.  8.) 

'  '  There  lives 

A  Judge,  who,  as  man  claims  by  merit,  gives  ; 
To  whose  all-pondering  mind  a  noble  aim, 
Faithfully  kept,  is  as  a  noble  deed  ; 
In  whose  pure  sight  all  virtue  doth  succeed." 

WORDSWORTH. 


the  assistance  of  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre, 
a  palace  of  cedar  had  been  erected  for  David 
on  Mount  Zion.  It  was  a  remarkable  con 
trast  to  the  shelter  of  Adullam's  cave,  or 
even  to  any  house  he  might  have  occupied 
during  his  stay  at  Hebron.  It  was  a  great 
contrast  also  to  the  temporary  structure  which  served  as  a 
house  for  the  Ark.  One  day  the  impulse  suddenly  came  to 
David  to  realize  a  purpose,  the  germ-thought  of  which  had 
probably  been  long  in  his  heart.  Calling  Nathan  the 
prophet,  now  mentioned  for  the  first  time,  he  announced  to 
him  his  intention  of  building  a  house  for  God.  For  the 
moment,  the  prophet  cordially  assented  to  the  proposal  ;  but 
in  the  quiet  of  the  night,  when  he  was  more  able  to 
ascertain  the  thought  of  God,  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to 
him,  and  bade  him  stay  the  king  from  taking  further  steps 
in  that  direction. 

The  next  day  he  broke  the  news  to  David  with  the 
utmost  delicacy  and  gentleness.  Indeed,  in  the  account  of 
his  interview  with  the  king,  it  is  difficult  to  detect 
the  sentence  which  contained  the  direct  negative.  The 
impression  of  the  whole  is  that  the  offer  was  refused  ;  but 
the  refusal  was  wrapped  up  in  so  many  assurances  of  bless 
ing,  in  so  much  promise  and  benediction,  that  the  king  was 
hardly  sensible  of  disappointment  amid  the  rush  of  intense 
and  overwhelming  gladness  which  Nathan's  words  aroused. 


purpose.  161 

"  Wilt  thou  build  a  house  for  God  ?— He  will  build  thee  an 
house." 

I.  A  CONCEPTION  OF  A  NOBLE  PURPOSE. — It  was  a  great 
thought  that  came  to  David.  It  was  in  part  suggested  by 
the  exigencies  of  the  situation.  After  the  Ark  had  come  to 
its  new  home,  Asaph  and  others  had  been  appointed  to 
celebrate,  and  thank,  and  praise  the  Lord,  and  minister 
before  Him  (i  Chron.  xvi.  4-37);  and  it  is  supposed  that, 
at  this  period,  the  twenty-four  courses  of  priests  were 
appointed,  an  arrangement  which  lasted  to  the  time  of  our 
Lord.  It  is  also  supposed  that  the  Levites  were  now 
organized — twenty-four  thousand  to  help  the  priests,  four 
thousand  as  musicians  and  singers,  four  thousand  as 
guards  and  watchmen ;  whilst  the  remainder  were  scattered 
throughout  the  land  to  teach  the  law,  execute  justice,  and 
perform  other  public  offices.  An  immense  body  of  men 
was  thus  gathering  around  the  Ark  and  palace,  for  whom  it 
was  necessary  to  find  suitable  head-quarters ;  and  this  no 
doubt  partly  urged  David  towards  the  fulfilment  of  his 
purpose.  But  surely  there  was  a  deeper  reason ;  to  show 
his  love  for  God,  to  establish  some  monument  of  his 
reverence,  devotion,  and  lasting  gratitude. 

It  is  thus,  especially  in  young  life,  that  great  conceptions 
visit  the  soul  ;  ideals  of  surpassing  beauty  cast  a  light 
forward  upon  the  future ;  resolves  of  service  for  God 
and  man  brace  the  soul  as  the  air  from  the  glaciers  does 
the  dwellers  in  the  plains  ;  and  all  life  assumes  a  nobler 
aspect,  and  is  set  to  a  higher  key.  Secretly  that  lad 
resolves  to  be  a  preacher,  missionary,  or  philanthropist ; 
and  that  girl,  to  be  queen  in  an  ideal  home,  or  to  go 
far  hence  to  the  zenanas  of  India.  "I  will  do  this  great 
thing  for  God,"  the  young  heart  says  to  itself,  altogether 
heedless  of  sacrifice,  tears,  blood.  The  bugle-notes  of  lofty 
purpose  ring  out  gladly,  summoning  ^e  soul  to  noble 
exploit ;  and  it  is  saved  from  the  low  levels  which  satisfy 
L 


162   "  fljou  Mfcst  Weil  tljat  it  teas  in  thine  l*art." 

others  by  the  immortal  hope  that  has  already  gone  forward 
to  occupy  the  future. 

Young  people,  never  surrender  your  ideal,  nor  act  un 
worthily  of  it,  nor  disobey  the  heavenly  vision.  Above 
all,  when  you  come  to  the  house  of  cedar,  and  God  has 
given  you  rest,  be  more  than  ever  careful  to  gird  yourselves, 
and  arise  to  realize  the  purpose  that  visited  you  when  you 
kept  your  father's  sheep. 

II.  THE   IDEAL  is   NOT  ALWAYS   REALIZED. — There  is 
no  definite  "  No  "  spoken  by  God's  gentle  lips.     He  presses 
his  promises  and  blessings  upon  us,  and  leads  us  forward 
in   a  golden  haze   of  love,  which   conceals  his   negative. 
Like   David,  we  cannot  point  out  the  word   or  moment 
of  refusal,  we  are  lovingly  carried  forward  from  sentence 
to  sentence  in  life's  long  speech  of  Divine  care  and  bounty; 
and  it  is  only  in  moments  of  review  that  we  find  that  our 
purpose   is   not   destined   to   work   itself   out   just  as   we 
thought. 

The  plant  is  conscious  of  a  great  possibility  throbbing 
within  it ;  but  somehow  the  days  pass,  and  it  does  not 
come  to  a  flower.  The  picture  which  is  to  gain  immortality 
is  always  to  be  painted ;  the  book  which  is  to  elucidate 
the  problem  of  the  ages  is  always  to  be  written  ;  the 
immortal  song  is  always  to  be  sung.  The  young  man 
is  kept  at  his  desk  in  the  counting-house  instead  of  going  to 
the  pulpit ;  the  girl  becomes  a  withered  woman,  cherishing 
a  faded  flower ;  the  king  hands  on  to  his  son  the  building  of 
the  house. 

III.  GOD    EXPLAINS    HIS    REASONS    AFTERWARDS.— 
What  we  know  not  now,  we  shall  know  hereafter.     Years 
after  David  said  to  Solomon  his  son,  not  born  at  this  time, 
"The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  Thou  hast 
shed   blood  abundantly,  and   hast  made   great  wars,  thou 
shalt  not  build  a  house  unto  my  Name"  (i  Chron.  xxii.  8). 


Clre  gitrine  "  &a  I  "  163 

The  blood-stained  hand  might  not  raise  the  temple  of 
peace.  It  would  have  wounded  David  needlessly  to  have 
been  told  this  at  the  time.  It  was  enough  to  wrap  up  the 
Divine  "  No  "  in  a  promise  of  infinite  blessing ;  but,  as  the 
years  passed,  the  reason  for  God's  refusal  grew  clear  and 
distinct  before  him.  Meanwhile,  David  possessed  his  soul 
in  patience,  and  said  to  himself:  God  has  a  reason,  I 
cannot  understand  it ;  but  it  is  well. 

Some  day  we  shall  understand  that  God  has  a  reason .  in 
every  "  No  "  which  He  speaks  through  the  slow  movement 
of  life.  He  would  reveal  it  to  us  if  we  could  bear  it ;  but  it 
is  better  not  to  pry  into  the  mystery  of  his  providence.  He 
fences  our  questions,  saying,  "  If  I  will  that  he  tarry,  what 
is  that  to  thee  ! "  But  the  time  will  come,  probably  in  this 
life — certainly  in  the  next — when  the  word  of  the  Lord  will 
come  to  us ;  and  from  the  eminence  of  the  years  we  shall 
descry  why  He  led  us  as  He  did. 

IV.  AN  UNREALIZED  CONCEPTION  MAY  YET  BE  FRAUGHT 
WITH  IMMENSE  BLESSING. — Solomon  completes  the  story : 
"  The  Lord  said  unto  David  my  father,  Whereas  it  was  in 
thine  heart  to  build  an  house  for  my  Name,  thou  didst  well 
that  it  was  in  thine  heart."  David  was  a  better  man  be 
cause  he  had  given  expression  to  the  noble  purpose.  Its 
gleam  left  a  permanent  glow  on  his  life.  The  rejected 
candidate  to  the  missionary  society  stands  upon  a  higher 
moral  platform  than  those  who  were  never  touched  by  the 
glow  of  missionary  enthusiasm.  For  a  woman  to  have  loved 
passionately,  even  though  the  dark  waters  may  have  en 
gulfed  her  love  before  it  was  consummated,  leaves  her  ever 
after  richer,  deeper,  than  if  she  had  never  loved,  nor  been 
loved  in  return.  That  a  plant  should  have  dreamt  in  some 
dark  night  of  the  possibility  of  flowering  into  matchless 
beauty,  stamps  it  as  belonging  to  a  higher  family  than  the 
moss  that  clings  around  the  stump.  "  Thou  didst  well  that 
it  was  in  thine  heart." 


164  "  tljou  fci&st  Wizli  tirat  it  toas  in  tljme  ifcart." 

The  martyrs  in  the  apocalyptic  vision  behold  a  day  when 
their  wrongs  will  be  avenged ;  but  they  are  told  to  wait,  since 
God's  time  had  not  come :  in  the  meanwhile,  white  robes 
are  given  them.  Their  ideal  was  not  yet,  but  it  purified 
them,  and  bound  them  closer  to  the  Christ. 

God  will  credit  us  with  what  we  would  have  been  if  we 
might.  He  that  has  the  missionary's  heart,  though  he  be 
tied  to  an  office-stool,  is  reckoned  as  one  of  that  noble 
band ;  the  woman  at  Zarephath,  who  did  nothing  more 
than  share  her  last  meal  with  the  prophet,  shall  have  a 
prophet's  reward;  the  soul  that  thrills  with  the  loftiest 
impulses,  which  the  cares  of  the  widowed  mother,  or  de 
pendent  relatives,  stay  in  fulfilment,  will  be  surprised  one 
day  to  find  itself  credited  with  the  harvest  which  would 
have  been  reaped,  had  those  seed-germs  been  cast  on  more 
propitious  soil.  In  the  glory  David  will  find  himself 
credited  with  the  building  of  the  temple  on  Mount  Zion. 

V.  Do  THE  NEXT  THING. — The  energy  which  David 
would  have  expended  in  building  the  temple  wrought  itself 
out  in  gathering  the  materials  for  its  construction.  "  I 
have  prepared  with  all  my  might  for  the  house  of  my 
God  .  .  .  "  (i  Chron.  xxix.  2,  etc.).  If  you  cannot 
have  what  you  hoped,  do  not  sit  down  in  despair  and  allow 
the  energies  of  your  life  to  run  to  waste ;  but  arise,  and  gird 
yourself  to  help  others  to  achieve.  If  you  may  not  build, 
you  may  gather  materials  for  him  that  shall.  If  you  may 
not  go  down  the  mine,  you  can  hold  the  ropes. 

There  is  a  fact  in  nature  known  as  the  law  of  the  con 
servation  of  force.  The  force  of  the  accumulating  velocity 
of  the  falling  stone  passes  into  heat,  of  which  some  is 
retained  by  the  stone,  the  rest  passes  into  the  atmosphere. 
No  true  ideals  are  fruitless  ;  somehow  they  help  the  world 
of  men.  No  tears  are  wept,  no  prayers  uttered,  no  con 
ceptions  honestly  entertained  in  vain. 

Somehow    God    makes    up   to   us.      He   stooped   over 


promise  to  gairifc.  165 

David's  life  in  blessing.  The  promise  made  through 
Nathan  was  threefold  :  (i)  That  David's  house  should 
reign  for  ever ;  (2)  that  David's  seed  should  build  the 
temple  ;  (3)  that  the  kingdom  of  Israel  should  be  made 
sure.  As  we  read  the  glowing  words,  we  feel  that  they 
could  only  be  realized  in  Him  whom  Peter  declares  David 
foresaw.  There  is  only  One  of  the  sons  of  men  whose 
reign  can  be  permanent,  and  his  Kingdom  without  end, 
who  can  bring  rest  to  the  weary  sons  of  men,  and  build 
the  true  temple  of  God  (Acts  ii.  30).  But  how  great  the 
honour  that  He  should  be  David's  Son  ! 

Then  David  the  king  went  in  and  sat  before  the  Lord, 
and  he  said,  "  Who  am  I,  O  Lord  God  .  .  ."  (2  Sam. 
vii.  1 8).  We  have  no  words  to  characterize  the  exuberant 
outflow  of  his  soul  in  that  transcendent  hour.  There  was 
no  complaint  that  the  purpose  of  his  heart  was  thwarted, 
amid  the  successive  billows  of  glory  that  swept  over  his 
soul.  Does  God  withhold  the  less,  and  not  give  the 
greater  ?  Does  He  refuse  the  offer  we  make,  and  not 
bestow  some  heavenly  gift  that  enriches  for  evermore? 
Dare  to  trust  Him  :  sit  before  Him  ;  and  let  his  assurances 
comfort  thee.  Claim  that  He  should  do  as  He  has  said, 
and  know  that  not  one  good  thing  shall  fail :  "  For  brass 
He  will  bring  gold  ;  for  iron,  silver ;  for  wood,  brass  ;  and 
for  stones,  iron.  The  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by 
day,  neither  for  brightness  shall  the  moon  give  light  unto 
thee ;  but  the  Lord  shall  be  unto  thee  an  everlasting  light, 
and  thy  God  thy  glory." 


XXIV. 

"  |«t  IjaiK  J  set  ${5  mittj." 

(2  SAMUEL  viii. ;    i  CHRONICLES  xviii.,  xix.,  xx.) 

' '  Crown  Him  the  Lord  of  Heaven  ! 

Enthroned  in  worlds  above  ; 
Crown  Him  the  King  to  whom  is  given 

The  wondrous  name  of  Love. 
Crown  Him  with  many  crowns, 

As  thrones  before  Him  fall ; 
Crown  Him,  ye  kings,  with  many  crowns, 
For  He  is  King  of  all!" 

GODFREY  THRING. 

time  of  rest  which  succeeded  the  removal  of 
the  ark  was  broken  in  upon  by  a  succession  of 
fierce  wars.     One  after  another  the  surrounding 
nations  gathered   together,    either   singly  or   in 
confederacies,    against   David.      "The   nations 
raged  ;  the  kingdoms  were  moved." 
The  Philistines. — For  the  last  time  they  arose  ;  but  David 
smote  and  subdued  them,  and,  to  use  the  significant  phrase 
of  the  R.V.,  took  the  bridle  of  the  mother-city  out  of  their 
hand. 

The  Moabites. — The  hereditary  alliance,  dating  from  the 
time  of  Ruth,  between  the  Hebrew  monarch  and  his  restless 
neighbours  was  insufficient  to  restrain  them  ;  and  Benaiah 
was  commissioned  to  lead  an  expedition  against  them,  which 
was  so  successful  that  their  entire  army  fell  into  his  hands, 
and  was  dealt  with  according  to  the  terrible  custom  of  the 
time,  one-third  only  being  spared. 

The  Syrians. — The  king  of  Zobah  and  the  Syrians  of 
Damascus  were  utterly  defeated  ;  vast  spoils  of  gold  and 
brass  fell  into  David's  hand,  and  the  border  of  Israel  was 
carried  to  the  line  of  the  Euphrates,  so  that  the  ancient 


Rations  flajjEfc."  167 


promise  made  by  God  to  Abraham  was  fulfilled  :  "  Unto 
thy  seed  have  I  given  this  land,  from  the  river  of  Egypt 
unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates." 

Edom.  —  Whilst  David  was  engaged  in  the  north,  the 
Edomites  invaded  Judah,  and  Abishai  was  despatched 
against  them.  On  the  west  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea  he 
encountered  them,  and  slew  eighteen  thousand  in  the  valley 
of  Salt.  The  whole  land,  even  to  Petra,  its  rock-bound 
capital,  was  slowly  reduced  to  submission  ;  and,  with  the 
exception  of  Hadad,  who  made  his  way  to  Egypt,  the  royal 
family  was  exterminated. 

Ammon.  —  A  friendly  overture  on  the  part  of  David  was 
met  with  gross  insult  ;  and  Hanun,  apprehending  the  in 
fliction  of  condign  revenge,  formed  a  vast  coalition.  The 
combined  forces  amounted  to  thirty-two  thousand,  with  a 
strong  contingent  of  cavalry  and  chariots,  against  which 
David  could  only  oppose  the  Hebrew  infantry,  the  use  of 
horses  being  forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  legislation.  It  was 
a  supreme  moment  in  David's  career,  and  taxed  the  utmost 
resources  of  Joab's  generalship.  By  God's  good  hand, 
however,  victory  was  secured  ;  the  tide  of  Israelite  invasion 
swept  over  the  hostile  country  ;  Kabbah,  the  capital  city,  fell 
into  David's  hand  ;  the  people  were  put  to  work  with  saws, 
arrows,  and  axes,  probably  preparing  the  materials  for  the 
erection  of  public  works,  and  perhaps  of  the  temple  itself. 

These  years  of  war  gave  birth  to  some  of  the  grandest 
of  the  psalms,  amongst  which  may  be  numbered,  ii.,  xx., 
xxi.,  lx.,  ex. 

I.  THE  FOE.  —  The  nations  rage;  the  peoples  imagine  a 
vain  thing  ;  the  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the 
rulers  take  counsel  together  against  the  Lord,  and  against 
his  anointed.  We  hear  their  plottings  in  their  council 
chambers  : 

"  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder, 
And  cast  away  their  cords  from  us." 


168  M  |et  r/afre  U  set  fftv  ling/' 

They  trust  in  chariots  and  in  horses;  their  kings  think 
that  they  will  be  saved  by  the  multitude  of  their  hosts. 
They  inspire  fear  through  the  hearts  of  Israel,  so  that  the 
land  trembles  as  though  God  had  rent  it,  and  the  people 
drink  the  wine  of  staggering  and  dismay.  So  tremendous  is 
their  assault,  so  overwhelming  their  numbers,  that  all  help 
of  man  seems  vain. 

It  is  thus  in  every  era  of  the  history  of  God's  people,  that 
Satan  has  stirred  up  their  foes.  Right  behind  the  coali 
tions  of  men  lies  the  malignity  of  the  fallen  spirit,  who  ever 
seeks  to  bruise  the  heel  of  the  woman's  seed.  "  In  the 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."  "Behold,  the  devil  shall  cast 
some  of  you  into  prison  that  ye  may  be  tried ;  and  ye  shall 
have  tribulation  ten  days."  "When  the  dragon  saw  that  he 
was  cast  down  to  the  earth,  he  persecuted  the  woman." 

II.  THE  ATTITUDE  OF  FAITH. — Whilst  the  serried  ranks 
of  the  foe  are  in  sight,  the  hero-king  is  permitted  a  vision 
into  the  unseen  and  eternal.  There  is  no  fear  upon  the 
face  of  God,  no  change  in  his  determination  to  set  his  king 
upon  his  holy  hill.  In  fact,  it  seems  that  the  day  of  his 
foe's  attack  is  that  in  which  he  receives  a  new  assurance  of 
sonship,  and  is  bidden  to  claim  the  nations  for  his  inherit 
ance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  posses 
sion.  As  he  anticipates  the  battle,  he  hears  the  chime  of 
the  Divine  promise  above  the  tumult  of  his  fear  : — 

"  Thou  shall  break  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  ; 

Thou  shalt  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel." 

_.On  his  leaving  the  capital,  his  people  pray  that  the  Lord 
may  answer  him  in  the  day  of  trouble,  remember  his  offer 
ings,  and  send  him  help  from  the  sanctuary ;  and  he 
replies, 

"  I  know  that  the  Lord  saveth  his  anointed ; 
He  will  answer  him  from  his  holy  heaven 
With  the  saving  strength  of  his  right  hand." 

He  knows  that  through  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Most 


"  |p mat  atttr  |int0."  l69 

High  he  shall  not  be  moved,  but  that  his  right  hand  will 
destroy  his  enemies. 

In  the  ecstasy  of  his  faith  he  asserts,  as  he  looks  east 
ward,  across  the  Jordan,  that  Gilead  will  as  certainly  own 
his  sway  as  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  did.  Strong  in  the 
allegiance  of  Judah,  and  her  sister  tribes,  he  counts  victory 
already  secured.  Moab  is  his  washing-basin ;  Edom  like 
a  slave  shall  carry  his  shoes ;  Philistia  shall  tremble  before 
his  war-shout,  and  even  the  strong  city  of  Petra  shall 
receive  his  troops. 

In  perfect  peace  he  anticipates  the  result,  the  Lord  will 
send  forth  the  rod  of  his  strength  out  of  Zion,  and  strike 
through  kings  in  the  day  of  his  wrath,  and  make  his 
enemies  his  footstool,  so  that  in  all  after-days  he  may 
combine  the  office  of  priest  and  king,  as  Melchizedek  did 
on  that  same  site  centuries  before. 

III.  THE  WARRIORS  OF  THE  PRIEST-KING. — Catching 
the  contagion  of  his  faith,  they  triumph  in  God's  salvation, 
and  in  his  name  set  up  their  banners.  They  believe  that 
God,  as  a  Man  of  War,  is  going  forth  with  their  hosts,  and 
will  tread  down  their  adversaries.  They  are  characterized 
by  the  willingness  of  their  service.  No  mercenaries  are 
pressed  into  their  ranks ;  they  gladly  gather  around  the 
standard,  as  the  warriors  of  whom  Deborah  sang,  who 
willingly  offered  themselves.  They  are  dad  not  in  mail, 
but  in  the  fine  linen  of  the  priests ;  "  the  beauties  of  holi 
ness,"  a  phrase  which  suggests  that  the  warfare  was  conducted 
by  religious  men,  as  an  act  of  worship  to  God.  They  are 
numerous  as  the  dewdrops  that  bespangle  the  morning 
grass,  when  every  blade  has  its  own  coronet  of  jewels,  and 
the  light  is  reflected  from  a  million  diamonds  (Psa.  ex.). 

What  an  exquisite  conception  of  David's  ideal  for  his 
soldiers,  and  of  the  knightly  chivalry,  of  the  purity,  truth, 
and  righteousness,  in  which  all  the  soldiers  of  the  Messiah 
should  be  arrayed ! 


170  "  f  et  bate  f  set  $tg  SMn0." 

IV.  THE  COMPLETENESS  OF  THE  VICTORY. — The  armies 
of  the  alien  cannot  stand  the  onset  of  those  heaven-accoutred 
soldiers.  Kings  of  armies  flee  apace.  They  are  bowed 
down  and  fallen  in  bitter,  hopeless  defeat.  They  are  made 
as  a  fiery  furnace  in  the  time  of  God's  anger,  and  swallowed 
up  in  his  wrath.  Their  dead  bodies  strew  the  battle-field, 
and  the  valleys  are  choked  with  slain. 

As  the  triumphant  army  returns,  leaving  desolation  where 
their  foes  had  swarmed,  they  express  in  song  their  gratitude 
to  their  Almighty  Deliverer.  Singers  and  minstrels,  Ben 
jamin  and  Judah,  Zebulun  and  Naphtali,  join  in  the  mighty 
anthem : 

"  God  is  unto  us  a  God  of  deliverances  ; 
And  unto  Jehovah  the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from  death  : 
O  God,  Thou  art  terrible  out  of  thy  holy  places  ; 
The  God  of  Israel,  He  giveth  strength  and  power  unto  his  people." 

All  this  has  a  further  reference.  In  David  we  have  a  type" 
of  the  Messiah.  For,  of  a  truth,  against  the  Holy  Servant 
Jesus,  whom  God  has  anointed,  both  the  Gentiles  and  the 
peoples  of  Israel  have  gathered  together.  Men  have  refused 
his  sway,  and  do  refuse  it  •  but  God  hath  sworn,  and  will  not 
repent,  that  to  Him  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue 
confess  :  and  it  is  more  sure  than  that  to-morrow's  sun  will 
rise  that,  ere  long,  great  voices  shall  be  heard  in  heaven, 
saying,  "  The  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  become  the  king 
doms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ :  and  He  shall  reign  for 
ever  and  ever"  (Rev.  xi.  15-18). 


XXV. 
gin  of  lia  life. 

(2  SAMUEL  xi.-xix.) 

O  Father,  I  have  sinned  !  I  have  done 

The  thing  I  thought  I  never  more  should  do  ! 
My  days  were  set  before  me,  light  all  through  ; 
But  I  have  made  dark — alas,  too  true  ! — 

And  drawn  dense  clouds  between  me  and  my  Sun." 

SEPTIMUS  SUTTON. 

7,  HE  chronicler  omits  all  reference  to  this  terrible 
blot  on  David's  life.  The  older  record  sets  down 
each  item  without  extenuation  or  excuse.  The 
gain  for  all  penitents  would  so  much  outweigh 
the  loss  to  the  credit  of  the  man  after  God's 
own  heart.  These  chapters  have  been  trodden 
by  myriads  who,  having  well-nigh  lost  themselves  in  the 
same  dark  labyrinth  of  sin,  have  discovered  the  glimmer  of 
light  by  which  the  soul  may  pass  back  into  the  day.  "  Thy 
sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven  thee ;  go  in  peace." 

I.  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  THAT  LED  TO  DAVID'S  SIN. — 
The  warm  poetic  temperament  of  the  king  specially  exposed 
him  to  a  temptation  of  this  sort ;  but  the  self-restrained  habit 
of  his  life  would  have  prevailed,  had  there  not  been  some 
slackening  of  the  loin,  some  failure  to  trim  the  lamp. 

For  seventeen  years  he  had  enjoyed  an  unbroken  spell  of 
prosperity ;  in  every  war  successful,  on  every  great  occasion 
increasing  the  adulation  of  his  subjects.  This  was  fraught 
with  peril.  The  rigours  of  the  Alps  are  less  to  be  dreaded 
than  the  heat  of  the  enervating  plains  of  the  Campagna. 

In  direct  violation  of  the  law  of  Moses — which  forbade 
the  multiplication  of  wives  on  the  part  of  Hebrew  kings, 


£in  of  lis  fife. 

"  lest  their  hearts  should  turn  away  " — we  are  distinctly  told 
that,  when  established  at  Jerusalem,  David  took  unto  him 
more  concubines  and  wives ;  sowing  to  himself  the  inevit 
able  harvest  of  heart-burning,  jealousy,  quarrelling,  and 
crime,  of  which  the  harem  must  always  be  the  prolific 
source,  besides  fostering  in  David  himself  a  habit  of  sensual 
indulgence,  which  predisposed  him  to  the  evil  solicitation 
of  that  evening  hour. 

He  had  also  yielded  to  a  fit  of  indolence,  unlike  the 
martial  spirit  of  the  Lion  of  Judah ;  allowing  Joab  and  his 
brave  soldiers  to  do  the  fighting  around  the  walls  of  Kabbah, 
while  he  tarried  still  at  Jerusalem.  It  was  a  mood  to  which 
Uriah  administered  a  stinging  rebuke  when  he  refused  to 
go  to  his  own  house  whilst  his  comrades  and  the  Ark  were 
encamped  on  the  open  field. 

One  sultry  afternoon  the  king  had  risen  from  his  after 
noon  siesta,  and  was  lounging  on  his  palace-roof.  In  that 
hour  of  enervated  ease,  to  adopt  Nathan's  phrase,  a  traveller 
came  to  him,  a  truant  thought,  to  satisfy  whose  hunger  he 
descended  into  the  home  of  a  poor  man  and  took  his  one 
ewe  lamb,  although  his  own  folds  were  filled  with  flocks. 
We  will  not  extenuate  his  sin  by  dwelling  on  Bath-sheba's 
willing  complicity,  or  on  her  punctilious  ceremonial  purifi 
cation  ;  while  she  despised  her  plighted  married  troth  to  her 
absent  husband.  The  Scripture  record  lays  the  burden  of 
the  sin  on  the  king  alone,  before  whose  absolute  power 
Bath-sheba  may  have  felt  herself  obliged  to  yield. 

One  brief  spell  of  passionate  indulgence,  and  then  !— 
his  character  blasted  irretrievably ;  his  peace  vanished ;  the 
foundations  of  his  kingdom  imperilled  ;  the  Lord  displeased  ; 
and  great  occasion  given  to  his  enemies  to  blaspheme  ! 
Let  us  beware  of  our  light,  unguarded  hours.  Moments  of 
leisure  are  more  to  be  dreaded  than  those  of  strenuous  toil. 
Middle  life — for  David  was  above  fifty  years  of  age — has 
no  immunity  from  temptations  and  perils  which  beset  the 
young.  One  false  step  taken  in  the  declension  of  spiritual 


fttrtalj's  gcatfr-Marrattt.  i?3 

vigour  may  ruin  a  reputation  built  up  by  years  of  religious 
exercise. 

A  message  came  one  day  to  David  from  his  companion 
in  sin  that  the  results  could  not  be  hidden.  It  made  his 
blood  run  with  hot  fever.  The  law  of  Moses  punished 
adultery  with  the  death  of  each  of  the  guilty  pair.  Instant 
steps  must  be  taken  to  veil  the  sin !  Uriah  must  come 
home  !  He  came,  but  his  coming  did  not  help  the  matter. 
He  refused  to  go  to  his  home,  though  on  the  first  night 
the  king  sent  him  thither  a  mess  of  meat  straight  from  his 
table,  and  on  the  second  made  him  drunk.  The  chivalrous 
soul  of  the  soldier  shrank  even  from  the  greeting  of  his  wife 
whilst  the  great  war  was  still  in  process. 

There  was  no  alternative  but  that  he  should  die ;  for 
dead  men  tell  no  tales.  If  a  child  was  to  be  born,  Uriah's 
lips,  at  least,  should  not  be  able  to  disown  it.  He  bore  to 
Joab,  all  unwitting,  the  letter  which  was  his  own  death- 
warrant.  Joab  must  have  laughed  to  himself  when  he  got 
it.  "  This  master  of  mine  can  sing  psalms  with  the  best ; 
but  when  he  wants  a  piece  of  dirty  work  done,  he  must 
come  to  me.  He  wants  to  rid  himself  of  Uriah — I  wonder 
why?  Well,  I'll  help  him  to  it.  At  any  rate,  he  will  not 
be  able  to  say  another  word  to  me  about  Abner.  I  shall 
be  able  to  do  almost  as  I  will.  He  will  be  in  my  power 
henceforth."  Uriah  was  set  in  the  forefront  of  the  hottest 
battle,  and  left  to  die;  the  significant  item  of  his  death 
being  inserted  in  the  bulletin  sent  to  the  king  from  the 
camp.  It  was  supposed  by  David  that  only  he  and  Joab 
knew  of  this  thing ;  probably  Bath-sheba  did  not  guess  the 
costly  method  by  which  her  character  was  being  protected. 
She  lamented  for  her  dead  husband,  as  was  the  wont  of  a 
Hebrew  matron,  congratulating  herself  meanwhile  on  the 
fortunate  coincidence;  and  within  seven  days  was  taken 
into  David's  house.  A  great  relief  this  !  The  child  would 
be  born  under  the  cover  of  lawful  wedlock !  There  was 
one  fatal  flaw,  however,  in  the  whole  arrangement,  "The 


174  W*  ^iit  of  His  |£if£. 

thing  that  David  had  done  displeased  the  Lord."  David 
and  the  world  were  to  hear  more  of  it.  But  oh,  the  bitter 
sorrow,  that  he  who  had  spoken  of  walking  in  his  house 
with  a  perfect  heart,  with  all  his  faculty  for  Divine  fellow 
ship,  with  all  the  splendid  record  of  his  life  behind  him, 
should  have  fallen  thus  !  The  psalmist,  the  king,  the  man, 
the  lover  of  God,  all  trampled  in  the  mire  by  one  dark, 
wild,  passionate  outburst.  Ah  me  !  My  God,  grant  that  I 
may  finish  my  course  without  such  a  rent,  such  a  blot !  Oh 
to  wear  the  white  flower  of  a  blameless  life  to  the  end  ! 

II.  DELAYED  REPENTANCE. — The  better  the  man,  the 
dearer  the  price  he  pays  for  a  short  season  of  sinful  pleasure. 
For  twelve  whole  months  the  royal  sinner  wrapt  his  sin  in 
his  bosom,  pursed  his  lips,  and  refused  to  confess.  But  in 
Psalm  xxxii.  he  tells  us  how  he  felt.  His  oones  waxed  old 
through  his  roaring  all  the  day  long.  He  was  parched  with 
fever  heat,  as  when  in  Israel  for  three  years  there  was 
neither  dew  nor  rain  in  answer  to  Elijah's  prayer,  and  every 
green  thing  withered  in  the  awful  drought  of  summer. 
Day  and  night  God's  hand  lay  heavily  upon  him. 

When  he  took  Rabbah,  he  treated  the  people  with 
ferocious  cruelty,  as  if  weary  of  his  own  remorse,  and 
expending  on  others  the  hardness  which  he  ought  to  have 
dealt  out  to  himself.  We  often  excuse  ourselves  from  aveng 
ing  our  own  sin,  by  our  harsh  behaviour  and  uncharitable 
judgments  towards  others.  The  same  spirit,  which  always 
characterizes  the  sullen,  uneasy  conscience,  flamed  out  in 
his  sentence  on  the  rich  man  who  had  taken  the  poor  man's 
lamb.  The  Levitical  law  in  such  a  case  only  adjudged 
four-fold  restoration  (Exod.  xxii.  i).  The  king  pronounced 
sentence  of  death. 

Nathan's  advent  on  the  scene  must  have  been  a  positive 
relief.  One  day  whilst  statesmen  and  soldiers  were  crowd 
ing  the  outer  corridor  of  the  cedar  palace,  the  prophet,  by 
right  of  old  acquaintance,  made  his  way  through  them,  and 


"  fijott  art  tire  $tatt!"  175 

sought  a  private  audience.  He  told  what  seemed  to  be  a 
real  and  pathetic  story  of  high-handed  wrong ;  and  David's 
anger  was  greatly  kindled  against  the  man  who  had  per 
petrated  it.  Then,  as  a  flash  of  lightning  on  a  dark  night 
suddenly  reveals  to  the  traveller  the  precipice,  on  the  void 
of  which  he  is  about  to  place  his  foot,  the  brief  awful 
stunning  sentence,  "  Thou  art  the  man  !"  revealed  David  to 
himself  in  the  mirror  of  his  own  judgment,  and  brought 
him  to  his  knees.  Nathan  reminded  him  of  the  past,  and 
dwelt  specially  on  the  unstinted  goodness  of  God.  It  was 
a  sunny  background,  the  sombre  hues  of  which  made  recent 
events  look  the  darker.  "  Thou  hast  despised  his  word ; 
thou  hast  slain  Uriah ;  thou  hast  taken  his  wife.  The 
child  shall  die ;  thy  wives  shall  be  treated  as  thou  hast 
dealt  with  his ;  out  of  thine  own  house  evil  shall  rise 
against  thee."  "  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord,"  was 
David's  only  answer — a  confession  followed  by  a  flood  of 
hot  tears — and  instantly  his  scorched  heart  found  relief. 
Oh,  blessed  showers  that  visit  parched  souls  and  parched 
lands ! 

When  Nathan  had  gone,  he  beat  out  that  brief  confession 
into  Psalm  li.,  dedicated  to  the  chief  musician,  that  all  the 
world  might  use  it,  setting  it  to  music  if  they  would.  The 
one  sin  and  the  many  transgressions ;  the  evil  done  against 
God,  as  though  even  Uriah  might  not  be  named  in  the 
same  breath ;  the  confession  of  inbred  evil ;  the  ache  of 
the  broken  bones  ;  the  consciousness  of  the  unclean  heart  > 
the  loss  of  joy ;  the  fear  of  forfeiting  the  Holy  Spirit ;  the 
broken  and  contrite  heart — thus  the  surcharged  waters  of 
the  inner  lake  broke  forth  turbid  and  dark.  Ah,  those 
cries  for  the  multitude  of  God's  tender  mercies !  nothing 
less  could  erase  the  dark  legend  from  the  book  of  remem 
brance,  or  rub  out  the  stains  from  his  robe,  or  make  the 
leprous  flesh  sweet  and  whole.  To  be  clean,  because 
purged  with  hyssop ;  to  be  whiter  than  snow,  because 
washed ;  to  sing  aloud  once  more,  because  delivered  from 


1 76  fire  £ht  of  Sis  fife. 

blood-guiltiness  ;  to  be  infilled  with  a  steadfast,  a  willing, 
and  a  holy  spirit ;  to  be  able  to  point  transgressors  to  the 
Father's  heart — these  were  the  petitions  which  that  weak, 
sin-weary  heart  laid  upon  the  altar  of  God,  sweeter  than 
burnt-offering  or  fragrant  incense. 

But  long  before  this  pathetic  -  prayer  was  uttered,  im 
mediately  on  his  acknowledgment  of  sin,  without  the 
interposition  of  a  moment's  interval  between  his  confession 
and  the  assurance,  Nathan  had  said,  "  The  Lord  hath  put 
away  thy  sin." 

"  I  acknowledge  my  sin  unto  Thee,  and  mine  iniquity  have  I  not  hid. 
I  said,  I  will  confess  my  transgressions  unto  the  Lord, 
And  Thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin." 

Penitent  soul !  Dare  to  believe  in  the  instantaneous 
forgiveness  of  sins.  Thou  hast  only  to  utter  the  confes 
sion,  to  find  it  interrupted  with  the  outbreak  of  the 
Father's  love.  As  soon  as  the  words  of  penitence  leave 
thy  lips,  they  are  met  by  the  hurrying  assurances  of  a  love 
which,  whilst  it  hates  sin,  has  never  ceased  to  yearn  over 
the  prodigal. 

Sin  is  dark,  dangerous,  damnable :  but  it  cannot  staunch 
the  love  of  God ;  it  cannot  change  the  love  that  is  not  of 
yesterday,  but  dates  from  eternity  itself.  The  only  thing 
that  can  really  hurt  the  soul  is  to  keep  its  confession  pent 
within  itself.  If  only  with  stuttering,  broken  utterance  it 
dares  to  cry,  "  Be  merciful  to  me,  the  sinner,  for  the  sake 
of  the  Blood  that  was  shed,"  it  instantly  becomes  white  as 
snow  on  Alpine  peaks  ;  pure  as  the  waters  of  mid-ocean, 
which  the  stain  of  the  great  city  cannot  soil ;  transparent 
as  the  blue  ether  which  is  the  curtain  of  the  tabernacle  of 
the  Most  High. 


XXVI. 

tlje  (KbiUrrm  0f 


(2  SAMUEL  xii.-xix.> 

No  action,  whether  foul  or  fair, 

Is  ever  done,  but  it  leaves  somewhere 

A  record  written  by  fingers  ghostly, 

As  a  blessing  or  a  curse,  and  mostly 

In  the  greater  weakness  or  greater  strength 

Of  the  acts  which  follow  it." 

LONGFELLOW. 


IN  may  be  forgiven,  as  David's  was,  and  yet  a  long 
train  of  sad  consequences  ensue.  The  law  of 
cause  and  effect  will  follow  on,  with  its  linked 
chain  of  disaster  :  though  God's  mercy  to  his 
erring  and  repentant  children  will  be  shown,  in 
converting  the  results  of  their  sin  into  the  fires 
of  their  purification  ;  in  setting  alleviation  of  the  tenderest 
sort  against  their  afflictions  ;  and  in  finally  staying  the  further 
outworking  of  evil.  All  these  facts  stand  out  upon  the 
pages  which  tell  the  story  of  God's  Chastisement,  Alle 
viations,  and  Deliverances. 

O  soul  of  man,  this  is  solemn  reading  for  us  ;  it  is  the 
inner  story  of  God's  dealing  with  his  own.  As  He  dealt 
with  David,  He  will  deal  with  us.  He  will  forgive,  but  He 
may  have  to  use  the  rod  ;  He  may  restore  to  his  favour, 
and  yet  permit  us  to  drink  the  bitter  waters  which  our  sin 
has  tapped.  Be  meek,  patient,  and  submissive  ;  thou  wilt 
come  forth  out  of  the  ordeal  a  white  soul,  and  men  shall 
learn  through  thy  experiences  the  goodness  and  severity  of 
God.  Forgiven  men  may  have  to  reap  as  they  have  sown. 

I.  GOD'S  CHASTISEMENTS.  —  Bath-sheba's  little  child  was 
very  sick;    it  was  the  child   of  sin   and  shame,  but  the 
M 


178         Cljc  Stripes  of  the  Cljtl&mt  0f  fkltn. 

parents  hung  over  it ;  for  seven  days  the  mother  watched  it, 
and  the  father  fasted  and  lay  on  the  earth.  He  suffered 
more  in  seeing  the  anguish  of  the  babe  than  if  ten  times 
its  pain  had  been  inflicted  on  himself.  It  cuts  to  the 
quick  when  the  innocent  suffer  for  our  crimes.  On  the 
seventh  day  the  child  died. 

Two  years  after,  one  of  his  sons  treated  his  sister  as 
David  had  treated  Uriah's  wife.  They  say  a  man  never 
hears  his  own  voice  till  it  comes  back  to  him  from  the 
phonograph.  Certainly  a  man  never  sees  the  worst  of 
himself  until  it  re-appears  in  his  child.  In  Amnon's  sin 
David  beheld  the  features  of  his  own  unbridled  passions  ; 
and  in  his  murder  by  Absalom  two  years  after,  David 
encountered  again  his  own  blood-guiltiness.  Absalom's 
fratricide  would  never  have  taken  place  if  David  had 
taken  instant  measures  to  punish  Amnon.  But  how  could 
he  allot  that  penalty  to  his  son's  impurity  which  he  had 
evaded  for  himself?  (Lev.  xviii.  9-29).  Nor  could  he 
punish  Absalom  for  murder,  when  he  remembered  that 
he,  a  murderer,  had  eluded  the  murderer's  fate. 

When  presently  Absalom's  rebellion  broke  out,  it  received 
the  immediate  sanction  and  adherence  of  David's  most 
trusty  counsellor,  whose  advice  was  like  the  oracle  of  God. 
What  swept  Ahithophel  into  the  ranks  of  that  great  con 
spiracy  ?  The  reason  is  given  in  the  genealogical  tables, 
\vhich  show  that  he  was  the  grandfather  of  Bath-sheba, 
and  that  his  son  Eliam  was  the  comrade  and  friend  of 
Uriah. 

It  is  thought  by  some  that  at  this  time  David  was 
smitten  with  some  severe  form  of  disease.  Psalms  xli.  and  Iv. 
are  supposed  to  record  his  sufferings  during  these  dreary 
years.  They  tell  the  tale  of  his  depression,  depict  the 
visitors  that  surrounded  his  bed,  and  recount  the  comments 
they  passed  on  the  sick  man. 

The  most  disastrous  and  terrible  blow  of  all  was  the 
rebellion  of  Absalom.  His  beautiful  figure;  ready  wit; 


jltortttjj  gans.  179 


apparent  sympathy  with  the  anxieties  and  disappointments 
of  the  people,  fretting  under  the  slow  administration  of  the 
law  ;  his  sumptuous  expenditure  and  splendour  —  all  these 
had  for  four  years  been  undermining  David's  throne,  and 
stealing  away  the  hearts  of  the  people  :  so  that,  when  he 
erected  his  standard  at  Hebron,  and  was  proclaimed  king 
throughout  the  land,  it  was  evident  that  the  people  had  lost 
their  former  reverence  and  love  for  David  —  perhaps  the 
story  of  his  sin  had  disappointed  and  alienated  them,  and 
they  hurried  to  pay  their  homage  at  the  shrine  of  the  new 
prince. 

We  need  not  recount  the  successive  steps  of  those 
stormy  days.  The  panic-stricken  flight  of  the  king,  "  Arise 
and  let  us  flee,  make  speed  to  depart  "  ;  the  bare-foot 
ascent  of  Olivet  ;  the  anguish  that  wept  with  loud  voice  ; 
the  shameful  cursing  of  Shimei  ;  the  apparent  treachery  of 
Mephibosheth  ;  the  humiliation  of  David's  wives  in  the 
sight  of  that  sun  which  had  witnessed  his  own  sin  ;  the 
gathering  of  all  Israel  together  unto  Absalom  in  apparent 
oblivion  of  the  ties  which  for  so  many  years  had  bound 
them  to  himself. 

Such  were  the  strokes  of  the  Father's  rod  that  fell  thick 
and  fast  upon  his  child.  They  appeared  to  emanate  from 
the  malignity  and  hate  of  man  ;  but  David  looked  into  their 
very  heart,  and  knew  that  the  cup  which  they  held  to  his 
lips  had  been  mixed  by  heaven,  and  were  not  the  punish 
ment  of  a  Judge,  but  the  chastisement  of  a  Father. 

Outside  the  story  of  Christ,  there  is  nothing  in  the  Bible 
more  beautiful  than  his  behaviour  as  he  passed  through  this 
tangled  growth  of  thorns.  "  Carry  back  the  Ark  of  God," 
he  said  to  Zadok  ;  "  He  may  bring  me  again  to  see  both  it 
and  his  habitation  ;  but  if  not,  behold,  here  am  I,  let  Him 
do  to  me  as  seemeth  good  unto  Him."  And  when  Shimei, 
perhaps  referring  to  the  recent  execution  of  the  sons  of 
Rizpah,  and  perhaps  suggesting  that  he  had  been  guilty  of 
the  death  of  Ishbosheth,  called  him  a  man  of  blood  because 


i8o         ^z  Stripes  0f  tbz  Cljiltett  0f  JHen. 

of  his  dealings  with  Saul's  house,  David  said  to  Abishai, 
"  The  Lord  hath  permitted  him  to  curse,  and  who  shall  say, 
Wherefore  hast  thou  done  so?"  Thus,  when  Judas  brough/ 
the  bitter  cup  to  the  lips  of  Christ,  the  Master  said,  "  It  is 
the  cup  my  Father  hath  given  Me  to  drink."  Let  us  never 
forget  the  lesson.  Pain  and  sorrow  may  be  devised  against 
us  by  the  malignity  of  an  Ahithophel,  a  Shimei,  or  a  Judas : 
but  if  God  permits  such  things  to  reach  us,  by  the  time  that 
they  have  passed  through  the  thin  wire  of  his  sieve  they  have 
become  his  will  for  us  ;  and  we  may  look  up  into  his  face  and 
know  that  we  are  not  the  sport  of  chance,  or  wild  misfortune, 
or  human  caprice,  but  are  being  trained  as  sons.  Without 
such  chastisement  we  might  fear  that  we  were  bastards. 

II.  GOD'S  ALLEVIATIONS. — They  came  in  many  ways. 
The  bitter  hour  of  trial  revealed  a  love  on  the  part  of  his 
adherents  of  which  the  old  king  may  have  become  a  little 
oblivious. 

Ahithophel's  defection  cut  him  to  the  quick.  He  tells  the 
story  in  the  psalms  we  have  mentioned.  His  sensitive 
nature  winced  to  think  that  the  man  of  his  friendship,  in 
whom  he  trusted,  and  who  did  eat  of  his  bread,  had  lifted 
up  his  heel  against  him ;  but  then  Hushai  the  Archite  came 
to  meet  him  with  every  sign  of  grief,  and  was  willing,  as  his 
friend,  to  plead  in  the  council-chamber  of  Absalom. 

Shimei  might  curse  him  ;  but  Ittai  the  stranger,  a  man  of 
Gath,  with  all  his  men,  sware  allegiance  for  life  or  death. 

Zadok  and  Abiathar  are  there  with  the  Ark,  their  ancient 
animosity  forgotten  in  their  common  sorrow  for  their 
master ;  Ziba  meets  him  with  summer  fruits,  clusters  of 
raisins,  and  loaves  of  bread ;  Shobi,  and  Machir,  and 
Barzillai  make  abundant  provision  for  his  hungry,  weary, 
and  thirsty  followers ;  his  people  tell  him  that  he  must  not 
enter  the  battle,  because  his  life  is  priceless,  and  worth  ten 
thousand  of  theirs. 

It  was  as  though  God  stooped  over  that  stricken  soul, 
and  as  the  blows  of  the  rod  cut  long  furrows  in  the  sufferer's 


's  geliberanre.  181 

back,  the  balm  of  Gilead  was  poured  into  the  gaping  wounds. 
Voices  spoke  more  gently ;  hands  touched  his  more  softly ; 
pitiful  compassion  rained  tender  assurances  about  his  path ; 
and,  better  than  all,  the  bright-harnessed  angels  of  God's 
protection  encamped  about  his  path  and  his  lying-down. 

Thus  he  came  to  sing  some  of  his  sweetest  songs,  and 
amongst  them  Psalms  iii.,  iv.,  Ixi.,  Ixii.,  Ixiii.,  cxliii. 

The  two  former  are  his  morning  and  evening  hymns-, 
when  his  cedar  palace  was  exchanged  for  the  blue  canopy 
of  the  sky.  He  knows  that  he  has  many  adversaries,  who 
say,  "  There  is  no  help  for  him  in  God " ;  but  he  reckons 
that  he  is  well  guarded. 

"  Thou,  O  Lord,  art  a  shield  about  me, 
My  glory,  and  the  lifter-up  of  mine  head." 

He  is  not  afraid  of  ten  thousands  of  the  people ;  he  lies 
down  in  peace  to  sleep,  and  awakes  in  safety,  because  the 
Lord  sustains  him.  He  knows  that  the  Lord  hath  set  him 
apart  for  Himself,  and  feels  that  the  light  of  his  face  will  put 
more  gladness  into  his  heart  than  the  treasures  of  the  king 
dom  which  he  seemed  to  have  forfeited  for  ever. 

Then,  from  the  drought-smitten  land,  which  they  were 
obliged  to  traverse,  his  soul  thirsts  to  see  the  power  and 
glory  of  God,  as  he  had  seen  them  in  the  sanctuary ;  and 
already  he  realizes  perfect  satisfaction.  To  long  for  God  is 
to  find  Him ;  to  thirst  after  Him  is  to  feel  the  ice-cold 
water  flowing  over  the  parched  lips.  With  these  came  a 
clear  prevision  of  the  issue  of  the  terrible  strife  : 

"  The  king  shall  rejoice  in  God  : 
Every  one  that  sweareth  by  Him  shall  glory  : 
But  the  mouth  of  them  that  speak  lies  shall  be  stopped." 

III.  GOD'S  DELIVERANCE.— The  raw  troops  that  Absa 
lom  had  so  hastily  mustered  were  unable  to  stand  the 
shock  of  David's  veterans,  and  fled.  Absalom  himself  was 
despatched  by  the  ruthless  Joab,  as  he  swayed  from  the 
arms  of  the  huge  terebinth.  The  pendulum  of  the  people's. 


1 82         ®|JE  ^tripes  of  tlje  Cfrilfcmt  of 

loyalty  swang  back  to  its  old  allegiance,  and  they  eagerly 
contended  for  the  honour  of  bringing  the  king  back.  Even 
the  men  of  Judah,  conscious  of  having  forfeited  his  con 
fidence  by  so  readily  following  Absalom,  repented,  and  urged 
him  to  return.  Shimei  cringed  at  his  feet.  Mephibosheth 
established  his  unfaltering  loyalty.  Barzillai  was  bound  to 
the  royal  house  for  ever  by  his  profuse  acknowledgments  and 
the  royal  offers  to  Chimham.  All  seemed  ending  well. 

One  unfortunate  occurrence  delayed  the  peaceful  con 
clusion  of  the  whole  matter.  The  ten  tribes  were  greatly 
irritated  that  Judah  had  made  and  carried  through  all  the 
arrangements  for  the  king's  return,  and  gave  vent  to  hot, 
exasperating  words.  These  the  men  of  Judah  answered 
with  equal  heat.  At  an  inopportune  moment,  Sheba 
sounded  the  trumpet  of  sedition,  and  raised  the  cry  that 
was  destined  in  the  days  of  Rehoboam  again  to  rend  the 
Ian4  "  Every  man  to  his  tents,  O  Israel."  The  ten  tribes 
immediately  seceded,  and  another  formidable  revolt  yawned 
at  David's  feet;  and  it  was  only  put  down  by  incredible 
exertions  on  the  part  of  Joab.  The  death  of  Sheba  was  the 
last  episode  in  this  rebellion  which  was  quelled  in  blood, 
.and  always  left  a  scar  and  seam  in  the  national  life. 

Many  were  the  afflictions  of  God's  servant,  but  out  of 
them  all  he  was  delivered.  When  he  had  learnt  the  lesson, 
the  rod  was  stayed.  He  had  been  chastened  with  the  rod 
of  men,  and  with  the  stripes  of  the  children  of  men  ;  but 
God  did  not  take  away  his  mercy  from  him  as  from  Saul : 
his  house,  his  throne,  and  kingdom,  in  spite  of  many  con 
flicting  forces,  being  made  sure.  Thus  always — the  rod, 
the  stripes,  the  chastisements ;  but  amid  all  the  love  of  God, 
•carrying  out  His  redemptive  purpose,  never  hasting,  never 
resting,  never  forgetting,  but  making  all  things  work  to 
gether  till  the  evil  is  eliminated,  and  the  soul  purged. 
Then  the  after-glow  of  blessing,  the  calm  ending  of  the  life 
-in  a  serene  sundown. 


XXVII. 

anb  Atoning 

( i  CHRONICLES  xx.-xxix.) 

"  Sunset  and  evening  star, 

And  one  clear  call  for  me  ; 
And  may  there  be  no  moaning  of  the  bar 
When  I  put  out  to  sea  !  " 

TENNYSON. 

PERIOD  of  ten  years  of  comparative  repose  was 
granted  David,  between  the  final  quelling  of  the 
revolts  of  Absalom  and  Sheba  and  his  death. 
The  recorded  incidents  of  those  years  are  fe\v. 
It  is  probable  that  David  walked  softly  and 
humbly  with  God,  not  minding  high  things,  and 
concentrating  his  attention  on  the  erection  of  the  Temple, 
which  had  been  the  dream  of  his  life.  If  he  might  not 
build  it  himself,  he  would  strive  with  all  his  might  to  help 
him  who  would,. 

I.  ITS  SITE. — This  was  indicated  in  the  following 
manner.  He  conceived  the  design  of  numbering  Israel 
and  Judah.  The  chronicler  says  that  Satan  moved  him  to 
it,  whilst  the  older  record  attributes  the  suggestion  to  the 
anger  of  the  Lord.  It  is  not  impossible  to  reconcile  these 
two  statements,  since  the  Old  Testament  writers  so  fre 
quently  attribute  to  God's  agency  what  we  would  refer  to 
his  permissive  Providence. 

The  sin  of  numbering  the  people  probably  lay  in  its 
motive.  David  was  animated  by  a  spirit  of  pride  and  vain 
glory.  He  was  eager  to  make  a  fine  show  among  the  sur 
rounding  nations,  and  impress  them  with  such  a  conception 
of  Israel's  greatness,  that  they  might  not  dare  to  attack  any 
point  on  the  long  frontier  line.  There  was  a  tendency  to 


184  j^mtsct  attfc  (£bEttitt0  Jltar. 

exchange  his  chosen  position  of  waiting  only  on  God,  and 
to  trust  in  the  arm  of  human  prowess  and  organization. 

In  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  Joab  and  others,  the 
king  persisted ;  and  the  officers  went  to  and  fro  throughout 
the  land,  taking  the  the  sum  of  the  people.  Truly  the 
nation  had  grown  vastly,  since  it  was  a  scattered,  demoral 
ized  remnant  after  the  defeat  of  Gilboa.  Excluding  the 
tribes  of  Levi  and  Benjamin,  and  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  the 
fighting  men  of  Israel  numbered  about  a  million,  and  those 
of  Judah  five  hundred  thousand. 

When  the  enumeration  was  nearly  complete,  and  the 
officers  had  reached  Jerusalem,  David's  heart  smote  him, 
and  he  said  unto  the  Lord  :  "  I  have  sinned  greatly  in  that 
I  have  done."  He  saw  how  far  he  had  swerved  from  the 
idea  of  the  theocracy,  in  which  God's  sovereignty  alone 
determined  the  nation's  policy.  He  had  substituted  his 
own  whim  for  the  Divine  edict,  and  had  involved  himself 
and  his  people  in  the  charge  of  emulating  the  kings  and 
nations  around.  A  night  of  anguish  could  not,  however, 
wipe  out  the  wrong  and  folly  of  nine  months.  He  might 
be  forgiven,  but  must  submit  to  one  of  three  modes  of 
chastisement.  It  was  wise  on  his  part  to  choose  to  fall  into 
the  hands  of  God  ;  but  the  plague  which  devastated  his 
people  with  unparalleled  severity  cut  him  to  the  quick. 

Sweeping  through  the  country,  it  came  at  last  like  a 
destroying  army  to  the  holy  city,  and  it  seemed  as  if  the 
Angel  of  the  Lord  were  hovering  over  it,  sword  in  hand, 
to  begin  his  terrible  commission.  Then  it  was  that  David 
cried  unto  the  Lord,  pleading  that  his  judgments  might  be 
stayed  :  "  Better  let  thy  sword  be  plunged  into  my  heart, 
than  that  one  more  of  my  people  should  perish.  I  have 
done  perversely ;  but  these  sheep,  what  have  they  done  ?  " 
And  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  stayed  by  the  threshing-floor 
of  Araunah,  or  Oman,  a  Jebusite,  who  is  thought  by  some 
to  have  been  the  deposed  king  of  the  old  Jebusite  city. 
There,  on  Mount  Moriah,  where  centuries  before  the  angel 


185 

had  stayed  the  uplifted  knife  of  Abraham,  God  said,  "  It 
is  enough  ;  stay  thine  hand."  That  spot  became  the  site 
of  the  Temple.  At  the  direction  of  the  prophet  Gad,  David 
purchased  the  threshing-floor,  the  threshing  instruments,  and 
the  oxen  that  trod  out  the  grain.  He  insisted  on  paying 
the  full  price,  that  he  might  not  give  God  that  which  cost 
him  nothing  ;  and  thenceforward  Mount  Moriah  became 
the  centre  of  national  worship,  the  site  of  successive  temples, 
and  the  scene  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  Man. 

II.  ITS  BUILDER. — The  last  year  of  David's  life,  and 
the  fortieth  of  his  reign,  was  embittered  by  a  final  revolt 
of  the  discordant  elements  which  had  so  often  given 
him  trouble.  Joab  at  last  turned  traitor  to  his  old  master ; 
and  Abiathar,  instigated  probably  by  jealousy  of  Zadok, 
joined  him  in  espousing  the  cause  of  Adonijah,  the  eldest 
surviving  son.  They  must  have  known  God's  distinct  as 
surance  that  Solomon  was  his  chosen  king ;  but  they  realized 
that  there  was  little  hope  of  being  entrusted  with  his  confi 
dence,  and  therefore  resolved  on  making  one  last  effort  to  set 
him  aside,  and  foist  on  the  nation  a  nominee  of  their  own. 

When  the  account  of  the  revolt  was  brought  to  David, 
it  stirred  the  old  lion-heart,  and  though  he  had  reached 
the  extreme  point  of  physical  exhaustion,  he  aroused 
himself  with  a  flash  of  his  former  energy  to  take  measures 
for  the  execution  of  the  Divine  will  communicated  to 
him  years  before.  "And  the  king  sware,  and  said,  As 
the  Lord  liveth,  who  hath  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all 
adversity,  as  I  sware  unto  thee,  so  will  I  do."  Not  many 
hours  passed  before  tidings  broke  in  on  Adonijah's  feast  at 
Enrogel,  to  say  that  Solomon  had  been  anointed  king  in 
Gihon,  by  the  hand  of  Zadok  the  priest,  and  Nathan  the 
prophet,  and  had  ridden  through  the  city  on  the  royal  mule, 
escorted  by  Benaiah  and  his  men-at-arms.  Within  an  hour 
the  whole  of  Adonijah's  supporters  had  melted  away,  and 
he  was  clinging,  as  a  fugitive,  to  the  horns  of  the  altar. 


1 86  Sunset  antr  (Bbenimj  jjtar. 

It  was  probably  about  this  time  that  David  gave  Solomon 
the  charge  to  build  the  house  for  God.  He  recapitulated 
the  steps  by  which  he  had  been  led ;  from  his  desire  to  build 
the  house,  and  the  Divine  refusal  on  account  of  his  having 
shed  so  much  blood,  to  the  Divine  assurance  that  a  son 
should  be  born  who  should  be  a  man  of  rest,  and  should 
build  the  Temple  of  Peace.  He  then  enumerated  the  trea 
sures  he  had  accumulated,  and  the  preparatory  works  which 
had  been  set  on  foot.  It  is  almost  impossible  for  us  to 
realize  the  immense  weight  of  precious  metal,  the  unlimited 
provision  of  brass,  iron,  and  timber,  or  the  armies  of  work 
men.  The  surrounding  countries  had  been  drained  of  their 
wealth  and  stores  to  make  that  house  exceedingly  magnifical. 

At  the  close  of  this  solemn  charge,  he  added  instructions 
to  direct  Solomon  in  his  behaviour  towards  Joab  and 
Shimei.  These  have  the  appearance  of  vindictiveness ;  but 
we  must  give  the  dying  monarch  credit  for  being  animated 
with  a  single  purpose  for  the  peace  of  the  realm.  Had  ven 
geance  been  in  his  heart,  he  might  have  taken  it  forthwith. 

III.  ITS  PATTERN. — The  Jewish  polity  required  that  the 
king  should  not  only  be  anointed  by  the  priest  but  recog 
nised  by  the  entire  people.  It  was  therefore  necessary  that 
David's  choice  should  be  ratified  in  a  popular  assembly, 
which  gathered  at  the  royal  command  (i  Chron.  xxviii.  i). 
What  an  august  spectacle  must  that  have  been  when  for  the 
last  time  the  aged  king  stood  face  to  face  with  the  men  who 
had  helped  to  make  Israel  great,  many  of  whom  had  followed 
him  from  comparative  obscurity  !  It  resembled  the  farewell 
of  Moses  to  the  people  whom  he  had  led  to  the  threshold  of 
Canaan  ;  or  Samuel's  parting  address.  For  the  last  time 
monarch  and  people  stood  together  before  God.  Again  he 
recited  the  circumstances  of  his  choice,  of  his  desire  to  build 
the  Temple,  and  the  substitution  of  Solomon  for  himself. 
Then  turning  to  the  stripling  that  stood  beside  him,  he  bade 
him  be  strong  and  carry  out  the  Divine  purpose. 


31  (ireat  Ofoniroratton.  187 

Next  followed  the  gift  of  the  pattern  of  all  the  house 
which  had  been  communicated  to  David  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  an  inventory  of  the  treasures  from  which  each 
article  was  to  be  constructed.  As  Moses  saw  the  Land 
of  Promise  gleam  before  his  dying  gaze,  so  to  David's 
imagination  the  splendid  Temple  stood  forth  in  every  part 
complete.  The  contribution  from  his  private  fortune  had 
been  most  munificent ;  and  with  this  as  his  plea  he  turned 
to  the  vast  concourse,  asking  princes  and  people  to  fill 
their  hands  with  gifts.  The  response  was  splendid.  It  is 
probable  that  never  before  or  since  has  such  a  contribution 
been  made  at  one  time  for  religious  purposes  ;  but,  better 
than  all,  the  gifts  were  made  willingly  and  gladly. 

With  a  full  heart  David  blessed  the  Lord  before  all  the 
congregation.  His  lips  were  touched  with  the  olden  fire; 
his  thoughts  expanded  beneath  the  warmth  of  his  imagina 
tion,  and  rose  to  heaven  ;  he  ascribed  to  Jehovah  the 
universal  kingdom,  and  recognised  that  all  which  had  been 
contributed  that  day  had  been  first  received.  Standing 
upon  the  threshold  of  the  other  world,  his  days  seemed  as 
a  shadow  in  which  there  was  no  abiding  ;  and  then  the 
king  and  father  pleaded  for  Solomon,  that  he  might  keep 
the  Divine  statutes  and  build  the  house.  Lastly,  he  turned 
to  the  people,  and  bade  them  join  in  ascriptions  of  praise, 
and  there  went  forth  such  a  shout  of  jubilation,  of  blessing 
and  praise,  that  the  welkin  rang  again ;  whilst  a  great 
religious  festival  crowned  the  proceedings. 

It  was  a  worthy  conclusion  to  a  great  life  !  How  long 
after  David  lingered,  we  cannot  tell.  The  sacred  historians 
do  not  expend  their  words  in  describing  dying  scenes.  One 
record  says  simply  that  "  David  slept  with  his  fathers,  and 
was  buried  in  the  city  of  David  " ;  another,  that  "  he  died  in  a 
good  old  age,  full  of  days,  riches,  and  honour."  But  perhaps 
the  noblest  is  that  uttered  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  the  lips 
of  Paul,  "  David,  after  he  had  served  his  own  generation  ac 
cording  to  the  will  of  God,  fell  on  sleep,  and  saw  corruption." 


1 88  Sunset  attfc  <E  fretting  Jltar. 

It  is  beautiful  to  find  that  word  "  sleep  "  used  of  David's 
death.  His  life  had  been  full  of  tumult,  storm,  and  passion, 
of  war  and  blood ;  many  a  revolt  had  cast  its  foam  in  his 
face ;  but  rest  came  at  last,  as  it  will  come  to  all.  Like  a 
tired  infant's,  those  aged  eyes  closed  in  the  last  sleep,  and 
the  spirit  joined  the  mighty  dead.  His  sepulchre  remained 
to  the  day  of  Pentecost,  for  Peter  refers  to  it ;  but  the  man 
whom  God  had  raised  up  was  drinking  of  the  river  of  his 
pleasures,  and  became  satisfied  as  he  awoke  in  his  likeness. 
The  fairest  dreams  of  his  Lord  that  had  ever  visited  his 
soul  fell  short  of  the  reality ;  and  upon  his  aged  face  must 
have  rested  in  death  a  look  of  glad  surprise,  as  though  the 
half  had  not  been  told. 

The  parallel  between  him  and  our  Lord  may  be  carried 
into  minute  particulars.  In  their  anointing ;  their  inimitable 
words ;  their  sufferings ;  their  zeal  for  the  House  of  God ; 
their  love  for  their  friends ;  their  betrayal  by  those  they  had 
trusted;  their  wars;  their  love  for  Jerusalem — how  much  in 
common  !  But  there  the  parallel  stays.  In  his  atoning 
death,  in  his  incorruptible  nature,  in  his  glorious  Ascension 
the  Son  of  David  stands  alone.  David  himself,  in  the 
Spirit,  called  Him  Lord,  and  knew  that  He  alone  could 
fulfil  that  ideal  of  kingship  which  had  passed  before  his 
inspired  thought,  given  to  Him  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  but 
which  no  mere  mortal  would  ever  be  able  to  realize. 

"  For  He  shall  come  down  like  rain  upon  the  mown  grass, 
As  showers  that  water  the  earth  : 
He  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to  sea, 
And  from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  : 
He  shall  deliver  the  needy  when  he  crieth, 
And  the  poor  that  hath  no  helper. 
His  name  shall  be  continued  as  long  as  the  sun, 
And  men  shall  be  blessed  in  Him." 


MORGAN  AND  SCOTT  LTD.,  12,  Paternoster  Biddings,  London,  E.C. 


By  Rev*  F.  B.  MEYER,  BA. 


Ube  "Expositors"  Series. 

CHRIST  IN  ISAIAH.    A  SERIES  OF  EXPOSITIONS. 
THE  PROPHET  OF  HOPE.    STUDIES  IN  ZECHARIAH. 

THE    DIRECTORY  OF    THE    DEVOUT    LIFE.     (As  contained 
in  MATT.  V.,  VI.,  VII.) 

THE   LIFE   AND    LIGHT    OF    MEN.     EXPOSITIONS   OF   THE 
GOSPEL  OF  JOHN,  Chaps,  i.-xii. 

LOVE    TO    THE   UTTERMOST.     EXPOSITIONS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 
OF  JOHN,  Chaps,  xiii.-xxi. 

THE    WAY    INTO    THE    HOLIEST.      EXPOSITIONS  OF   THE 
EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

TRIED    BY    FIRE.      EXPOSITIONS   OF  THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  OF 
PETER. 

Each  Volume  Cloth  Boards,  2s.  6d. 


OUR    DAILY    HOMILY.      GEMS   OF   THOUGHT   FROM    EVERY 
CHAPTER  IN  THE  BIBLE. 

Vol.  i,  Genesis— Ruth.  Vol.  2,  i  Samuel— Job. 

Vol.  3,  Psalms — Song  of  Solomon.     Vol.  4,  Isaiah — Malachi. 

Vol.  5,  Matthew— Revelation. 

Each  Volume  Cloth  Boards,  Is.  6d.  ;  Cloth,  Bevelled  Boards,  Gilt 
Edges,  2s.  The  Five  Volumes  in  Cloth  Case,  6s.,  6s.  6d.,  and 
10s.  6d.  net. 


REVERIES   AND    REALITIES :  LIFE  AND  WORK  IN  LONDON. 
With  Life-like  Portrait  of  the  Author.     Cloth,  2s.  6d. 

MORGAN     AND    SCOTT    LTD,     LONDON. 


WORKS  BY  DR.  G.  CAMPBELL  MORGAN. 

GOD'S    PERFECT    WILL.      CLOTH  BOARDS,  1,.  ad. 

"  There  is  no  phrase  more  often  in  use  in  Christian  thought  and  speech  thaa 
'  The  Will  of  God.'  .  .  .  The  familiarity  has  in  some  measure  robbed  us  of  a  keen 
sense  of  its  vital  importance.  Its  meaning  is  all  too  little  realized.  The  fact  that 
it  is  the  supreme  subject  of  revelation,  and  the  one  and  only  abiding  law  of  life,  is 
forgotten. " — Extract  from  PROLOGUE. 

DlSCIPLESHIP.  CLOTH    BOARDS,    1s.  6d. 

"  The  work  of  this  volume  is  not  measured  by  its  bulk.  Each  of  the  chapters  may 
be  read  in  a  few  minutes  ;  but  the  thought  is  so  compressed  that  the  book  yields  more 
real  substance  than  many  larger  works.  .  .  .  We  commend  the  little  book  as  one  that 
will  be  of  immense  help  to  learners  in  the  school  of  Christ." — The  Christian. 

STUDIES  IN  MALACHI; 

CLOTH  BOARDS,  is.  6d.        0r»  tSftfrmitt  Ijabe  toe  H0Mr£&  (Soft  ? 

"  These  brief  studies  are  remarkable  for  the  freshness  and  directness  of  the  style  in 
which  the  author  sets  Divine  truth  before  his  readers." — English  Churchman. 

LIFE  PROBLEMS. 

CLOTH  BOARDS,  Is.  ;   PRESENTATION  EDITION,  1s.  6d. 

"  We  consider  this  the  best  book  that  has  come  from  the  pen  of  this  gifted 
minister.  .  .  .  The  strength  of  thought  and  forcibleness  of  expression  we  greatly 
admire,  and  give  this  volume  hearty  recommendation."—  Methodist  l^itnes. 

"  Mr.  Morgan  writes  with  clearness  and  force." — Literary  World. 

AN    IMPORTANT   WORK   ON    PROPHECY. 

GOD'S  METHODS  with  MAN: 

Hn  ®itne— |3nst,  present,  anir  future. 

With  Coloured  Chart  of  Events. 
CLOTH  BOARDS,  2s.  6d.  ;   PRESENTATION  EDITION,  3s.  6d. 

"  To  indicate  the  different  epochs  in  this  world's  history,  and  the  unfolding  of  the 
Divine  plan  therein,  is  the  object  of  this  book.  It  is  based  upon  what  is  known  as  the 
pre-millennial  theory." — British  Messenger. 


OF    ALL     BOOKSELLERS. 


MORGAN  AND    SCOTT  Ltd.,  12,  Paternoster  Buildings,  London. 


THE   BIOGRAPHY  OF  A   FRIEND  OF  MISSIONS 
"A  Veteran  in  Revival." 

R.   C.    MORGAN :    His  Life  and  Times. 

By  his  Son,  GEORGE  E.  MORGAN,  VT.A.  With 
an  Introduction  by  the  Rt.  Hon.  LORD  KINNAIRD. 
With  4  Photogravures  and  8  Half-tone  Plates. 
Cloth  boards,  53. 

"  No  kind  of  literature  is  more  interesting  or  instructive  than 
well-written  biography." — Christian  Advocate. 

"One  of  the  best  biographies  that  has  been  written." — Western 
Daily  Mercury. 

"A  model  biography." — Principal  E.  Griffith-Jones  in  The 
Christian. 

OTHER  OPINIONS. 

"This  book  will  be  welcome  to  all  interested  in  Protestant 
Evangelical  work." — Times. 

"It  is  written  with  grace  and  perspicuity." — Guardian, 

"  We  wish  we  had  space  to  quote  from  the  book." — Bookseller. 

"  Quite  apart  from  its  biographical  interest,  the  book  afford* 
valuable  information." — Daily  Graphic. 

"It  is  an  admirable  biography." — English  Churchman  ind  Si, 
James's  Chronicle. 

"We  cannot  speak  too  highly  of  its  lucidity  and  accuracy." — 
Life  and  Work. 

"We  do  not  know  of  any  other  book  which  gives  in  such  clear 
outline  a  history  of  the  religious  life  of  modern  England  from  ail 
points  of  view." —  Young  Alan. 

"  It  will  prove  a  stimulus  to  Christian  activity." — Life  o/  f•a^tk. 
"This  admirable  lite."— Sunday  School  Chronicle. 

"  We  heartily  commend  this  book  to  all.  our  readers." — 
Overcomer. 

"It  is  an  inspiring  record." — Dundee  Advertiser. 

"It  is  an  important,  even  an  essential,  contribution  to  the 
history  of  the  later  Victorian  era." — Local  Preachers'  Magazine. 

Of  all  Booksellers. 
MORGAN  &  SCOTT  LTD.,  12  Paternoster  Buildings,  LONDON,  E.(X 


WITH   WHICH   18   INCORPORATED    "THE    REVIVAL." 

"FIRST  THINGS  FIRST." 

to   ilbangritral   Qortrtnr, 

tB/Ij£  (Kljrtstran  is  a  weekly  record  of  Evangelistic  Effort  and  Missionary 
Enterprise,  a  regular  feature  in  its  contents  being  Sketches  (with  Portraits) 
of  eminent  Christian  workers.  There  are  also  Articles  of  an  Expository 
and  Devotional  character,  in  addition  to 

DAILY    BIBLE    READINGS, 

and  a  Young  People's  Page  with  Bible-Searching  Competitions. 


EVERY  THURSDAY.   ONE  PENNY, 

©!)*  Christian  may  be  ordered  in  advance  from  the  Publishers,  at  1/8 

for  three  months,  3/3  for  six  months,  or  at  6/6  per  annum,  at  home  or 

abroad,  post  free. 


MORGAN   AND   SCOTT   LTD.,   LONDON. 


'fM' 
II 


ill 


!i!!!! 


sssm 


m 


I 


!! 


w 


••  ;  ]•• 

mlm 


