OATH and 
AFTERWARDS 


—for the CHRISTIAN 
—for the CHRISTLESS 
—SPIRIT, SOUL, and BODY 


by H. A. IRONSIDE, Litt.D. 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS 
Neptune, New Jersey 


AFTER DEATH: WHAT? 
For the CHRISTIAN 


which there seems to be much perplexity in the 

minds of many sincere believers, it is hardly 
necessary to go outside of the fifth chapter of the 
second epistle to the Corinthians, though one would 
include with this the last three verses of chapter 4, 
which properly belong to the chapter that follows. 
We will read from the 16th verse of chap. 4 to 
the 10th verse of chap. 5. 


“For which cause we faint not; but though our out- 
ward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by 
day. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, 
but at the things which are not seen; for the things which 
are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen 
are eternal. 

For we know that if our earthly house of this taber- 
nacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house 
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For in this 
we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our 
house which is from heaven; if so be that being clothed we 
shall not be found naked. For we that are in this taber- 
nacle do groan, being burdened; not for that we would be 
unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swal- 
lowed up of life. Now He that hath wrought us for the 


LT: attempting to answer this question concerning 


2 After Death: What? 


selfsame thing is God, who also hath given unto us the 
earnest of the Spirit. 

Therefore we are always confident, knowing that, whilst 
we are at home in the body we are absent from the Lord 
(for we walk by faith, not by sight). We are confident, 
I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body and 
to be present with the Lord. Wherefore we labor, that, 
whether present or absent, we may be accepted of Him. 
For we must all appear before the judgment-seat of — 
Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his 
body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good 
or bad.” 


You will notice that this passage abounds in striking 
contrasts. I want to point out a full dozen, or more, 
of them; and doubtless a careful analysis would 
show several others, and some that I will mention 
could be subdivided, and thus add to the number. 

First, we have the “outward man” contrasted with 
the “inward man.” Notice this carefully. The 
outward man is the physical man; the inward man 
is the spiritual man. Materialists of all types deny 
the personality of the spiritual man, but verse 10 
distinctly affirms it. 

In the second place, “‘perish” is contrasted with 
“renewed.” The physical man wastes away. As 
soon as we begin to live we begin to die; but the 
inward man is renewed from day to day. 

Then in verse 17 we have three more decided con- 
irasts: “light” is contrasted with “weight,” “afflic- 
tion” with “glory,” and that“‘which is for a moment” 


For the Christian 3 


with that which is “eternal.” Affliction often seems to 
the tried and distressed saint to be heavy indeed and 
long-continued, but the Spirit of God calls it “our 
light affliction which is but for a moment,” and we 
realize this in all its blessedness when we see it in 
full contrast with the “‘far more exceeding and eter- 
nal weight of glory,” which is to be our portion 
throughout the ages to come. 

The sixth contrast is in the 18th verse, where “the 
things which are seen” is put in apposition with “the 
things which are not seen.” The former are declared 
to be temporal and the latter eternal. This sixth con- 
trast is of great importance in connection with the 
present discussion. It is often said, by the advocates 
of conditional immortality and other materialistic 
systems, that the word generally rendered “‘eternal”’ 
in the New Testament does not necessarily bear that 
meaning. But here we have this very word put in 
direct contrast with the word “temporal.” Tem- 
poral clearly means that which has an end. Eternal, 
therefore, must mean that which has no end. If we 
think of several other instances in which the same 
word is used we will perhaps realize more than ever 
the truthfulness and solemnity of this statement. We 
read of the eternal God, the eternal Spirit, eternal 
redemption, eternal inheritance; and on the other 
hand, of eternal punishment and eternal judgment. 
Who, with any regard for the authority of Scripture, 
would dare affirm that eternal means one thing when 


4 After Death: What? 


referred to what is good, and to Deity itself, but 
quite another when it has to do with the punish- 
ment of the wicked? 

The seventh and eighth contrasts are found in the 
first verse of chap. 5. There we have “our earthly 
house of this tabernacle,”’ and side by side with it, “a 
building of God, a house not made with hands, eter- 
nal in the heavens.” The one may be “dissolved,” the 
other is “‘eternal.”” Observe that this is the third time 
we have the word “eternal” used in this remarkable 
series: once more it is in direct contrast with that 
which passes away, or comes to an end; that which 
is temporal may be dissolved, but that which is eter- 
nal will never know dissolution. 

We next have the contrast between being “‘un- 
clothed,” which refers to death, and “‘clothed upon,” 
which is clearly resurrection. Mortality will then be 
swallowed up of life. 

The last three pairs of contrasts to which I now 
desire to direct your attention are found in verses 6 
to 9, where we have, “at home in the body” in con- 
trast with “‘absent from the body;” “by faith” con- 
trasted with “by sight; and, lastly, “absent from 
the Lord” contrasted with “present with the Lord.” 

I am persuaded that any thoughtful person, de- 
siring to be taught of God, who will weigh care- 
fully this full series of contrasts, will have no diffi- 
culty with regard to the future state of those who 
know the Lord Jesus Christ as their Saviour; but we 


For the Christian 5 


will now proceed to look somewhat carefully at the 
passage as a whole. 


In the first place I call your attention again to the 
fact that we are not to confound the “outward” man 
with the “inward” man. I am not my body. Man is 
distinctly said to be spirit, and soul, and body. The 
body is the outward man. The spirit and the soul 
together constitute the inward man. The spirit is the 
seat of the intellectual being, a distinct entity, as we 
shall see when we come to consider this special topic 
in a separate lecture. The soul is the seat of the 
man’s emotional nature. These two, spirit and soul, 
are never separated. Scripture alone distinguishes 
between them; that is, it shows us that they are dis- 
tinct but it does not separate. Now all men, as crea- 
ted by God, consist of spirit, soul, and body; but 
the believer in the Lord Jesus Christ has that which 
the natural man does not possess. Being bom again, 
he has received a new nature, and this new nature is 
also called “‘spirit;”’ it is the characteristic feature of 
the inward man. “That which is born of the flesh 
is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. 
Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born 
again.” 

Unless it should be our happy lot to be among 
those who are still living in the body when the Lord 
Jesus Himself descends from heaven with that assem- 
bling shout spoken of in | Thess., chap. 4, we who 


6 After Death; What? 


believe in Him must go the way of all flesh. Our 
earthly house of this tabernacle must be dissolved— 
that is, the body will die. What then will be the 
state of the believer? When my body sleeps in 
death, do I, the inward man, go to sleep in the body ? 
Or will I leave the body and ascend to another 
sphere? 

Scripture gives no uncertain testimony in regard 
to this. The body is but the tabernacle in which the 
inward man dwells. The tabernacle may be broken 
down, and the man himself moves out. This is 
clearly what the apostle here teaches and it is con- 
firmed by the words of his brother-apostle, Peter, in 
his second epistle, chap. 1, vers. 13 to 15. He there 
says, ‘Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this 
tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remem- 
brance; knowing that shortly I must put off this my 
tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath 
showed me. Moreover I will endeavor that ye may 
be able after my decease to have these things always 
in remembrance.” 

Observe: while left on the earth he was in the 
tabernacle of his body; at death he put off his taber- 
nacle. He speaks of this as his decease; this word 
here translated “decease” is the word “‘exodus”—the 
same as the title of the 2d book of the Bible. That 
book is called “Exodus” because it relates the going 
out of the people of Israel from the land of Egypt. 
Peter’s exodus took place when the inward man 


ti i 


For the Christian 7 


moved out of the earthly tabernacle. And so with 


Paul; for in another very striking scripture (Phil. 
1: 21-25) he tells us, 


“For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. But if I 
live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor; yet what 
I shall choose I wot not. For I am in a strait betwixt 
two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, 
which is far better; nevertheless to abide in the flesh is 
more needful for you. And having this confidence, I know 
that I shall abide and continue with you all for your 
furtherance and joy of faith.” 


Observe that here we have the same truth put in 
a slightly different way. Life here on earth is life in 
the flesh, that is, in the body; death is to “depart,” 
that is, to go out, and to be with Christ which is far 
better. But for the then present time the apostle was 
convinced that he would still abide in the body. The 
great point is, the man himself is not confounded 
with his body. He is “far more than a living, 
breathing mass of clay,” as one has well said; a 
veritable living spirit indwells this clay tenement for 
a brief period, moves out at death, but returns at the 
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, when the body, 
raised in glory, and suited to heaven, becomes our 
soul’s and spirit’s eternal dwelling. 

May I here use a very homely illustration? A 
number of years ago I was returning to my home- 
city from a gospel tour. My wife met me at the 
station, and as we came up through town on the 


& After Death: What? 


way to our house I noticed that an entire block of 
stores had been vacated, as the whole building was 
being made over. Apparently an arrangement had 
been made with the tenants of all the stores to move 
out temporarily and return when the renovation was 
complete. In every window we noticed signs reading 
somewhat as follows: ““Such and such a firm tempor- 
arily located at such a place, moved out until this 
building is renovated and repaired.” I said to my 
wife, “What a striking picture of death for the be- 
liever! If I should be called home to be with the 
Lord before you, and you wished to put a slab of 
some kind where my body lies, you might have it 
read something like this: “Henry A. Ironside, saved 
by the grace of God, moved out until renovated and 
repaired.” That would tell the whole story.” 
Months went by, and again I had been absent on 
a trip telling out the glad tidings of the grace of 
God, when upon my return I passed once more this 
same block of buildings. One would hardly have 
recognized it so great was the change, and yet it was 
the same original foundation, the same walls and 
floors, but marvelously altered both within and with- 
out, and all the firms were back doing business at 
their old stands. I thought when I looked at it, 
What a picture of the resurrection, when that which 
has been sown in weakness shall be raised in power, 
that which has been sown in dishonor shall be raised 
in glory. and the inward man shall dwell in the re- 


= 


For the Christian 9 


newed body—identical with, yet different as to con- 
dition from the body that once wasted away. 

I know the thought of some is that the building of 
God is a spirit-body of some kind which clothes the 
inward man between death and resurrection, but the 
verses which follow clearly negative this thought. In 
this present tabernacle we groan, earnestly desiring, 
not to die, but to be clothed upon with our house 
which is from heaven when we are caught up to 
meet the Lord in the air. Like Paul, we are set for 
the first resurrection, and if when raised or changed 
we are in Christ we shall not be found naked. 

It is well to remember that resurrection does not 
necessarily involve salvation. There is to be “a 
resurrection both of the just and of the unjust’”—a 
resurrection of life and a resurrection of damnation 
(John 5: 29). There are those who in their resur- 
rection body will be clothed in Christ’s likeness, and 
those who in that day will be as they are now— 
poor and wretched, blind, miserable and naked. 


But the fact that people are saved does not pre- 
clude them from groaning. We once groaned in 
anguish under the weight of our sins. From that 
groaning, thank God, the believer has been de- 
livered; but we still groan and yearn for deliverance 
from the vicissitudes of this present life and from the 
conditions which so often hinder spiritual growth. 
We look for the redemption of the body—this body 
which so often hinders our spiritual aspirations. How 


10 After Death: What? 


many times we are made to realize that the spirit 
indeed is willing but the flesh is weak, and so we 
groan, desiring not that we be unclothed, but clothed 
with a body like that of our Lord. No right-minded 
Christian is yearning to die, for he should say with 
Paul, ‘For me to live is Christ ;”” but we do yearn for 
the glad hour when we shall be clothed upon; when 
mortality shall be swallowed up of life, when our 
bodies shall be conformed to His body of glory. 
Now we have eternal life in dying bodies; but in that 
blessed moment of our Lord’s return, His quickening 
word will impart eternal life to our very bodies. 

It is for this very thing that He has been working 
in us up to the present moment, and has given us His 
Spirit to dwell within us as eamest of the blessedness 
which shall be ours in that resurrection day. Mean- 
time, though encompassed with infirmities, we have 
full confidence, knowing that while we are at home 
in the body we are absent from the Lord; whereas, 
if called to leave the body, we shall not go out to 
wander in space, nor sleep in unconsciousness, but 
shall at once be at home with the Lord. Walking, 
not by sight, but by faith grounded in the written 
Word, we have a confidence in view of death which 
enables us to say with Paul, “To depart and be with 
Christ is far better.” “Therefore, we are willing to 
be absent from the body and to be present with the 
Lord.” 


Let no one rob you, dear believer, of the precious 


For the Christian 11 


ness of those four words, “‘present with the Lord.” 
A better rendering would be, “At home with the 
Lord.”” Now we are at home in the body and absent 
from the Lord, then we shall be absent from the body 
and at home with the Lord. When you think of the 
dear departed ones in Christ, comfort yourself with 
these heartening thoughts. They are at home. Oh, the 
sweetness of that word “home!” They were strang- 
ers and pilgrims here on earth; for His blessed name’s 
sake they voluntarily relinquished the earthly claims. 
Now the wilderness journey, with all its trials for 
them, is in the past, and they rest at home. How 
could they enjoy this if in an unconscious condition 
between death and resurrection? If this cold thought 
were true, how could the apostle speak of being with 
Christ as “far better?’’ Surely he had not in view 
a sleep of unconsciousness. 

It is true that in many places he does speak of 
death as a sleep; but mark, that which sleeps is that 
which is to be awakened. The body of the believer 
is put to sleep, and it will be awakened at the Lord’s 
return. Notice the 14th verse of 2 Cor., chap. 4: 
“Knowing that He which raised up the Lord Jesus 
shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us 
with you.” This clearly is the body which is to be 
raised up by Jesus, even as God the Father raised the 
body of Jesus from death. 

Again in | Thess. 4: 13, 14 we read, 


“But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, 
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, 


12 After Death: What? 


even as others which have no hope. For if we believe that 
Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep 
in Jesus will God bring with Him.” 

The expression used in the 14th verse, “them also 
which sleep in Jesus” might be better translated 
“them also who have been put to sleep by Jesus’ — 
just as a mother takes her tired, fretful, and suffering 
child, quietly soothing it to sleep, so the Lord Jesus 
puts His beloved people to sleep. By and by, when 
He returns from heaven, He will raise them up again. 


Then | Thess. 4:15-18 will be fulfilled. 


“For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that 
we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord 
shall not prevent (or, precede) them which are asleep. For 
the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, 
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of 
God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we 
which are alive and remain shall be caught up together 
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and 
so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one 
another with these words.” 


Some may ask, Do those who are absent from the 
body and at home with the Lord know anything of 
what goes on in this world? The best answer to that 
may be another question: What does Scripture say 
about it? And to this the answer would probably 
be, Nothing. Then, certainly, it is not wise for us to 
speculate. But is there nothing in Scripture which 
intimates that the redeemed in heaven have between 
death and resurrection at least some knowledge of 
things taking place on earth? 


— 


For the Christian 13 
There is a passage in the beautiful 15th of Luke 


which is most precious in this connection. There we 
read, in verse 7: “I say unto you, that even so there 
shall be joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, 
more than over ninety and nine just persons, who 
need no repentance.” I quote from the Revised 
Version, and would lay special stress on the expres- 
sion “even so.”” The friends of the man who found 
the lost sheep were called upon by him to share his 
joy over its recovery. ““E:ven so” are the friends of the 
Good Shepherd called upon to joy in His gladness 
over the salvation of a soul. In Luke16 we see Abra- 
ham and the rich man in the full possession of their 
faculties, the one in paradise, the other in hades. 
They are competent to enter into communications, 
the one with the other, though separated spiritually 
by a great gulf that can never be crossed. How 
much more will the redeemed in heaven hold com- 
- munion with each other and with their Lord, and 
thus enter into His rejoicing when a sinner repents. 
It is not only angels who exult, but all in heaven. 
At the close of a meeting some years ago a young 
man who had led a wild reckless life yielded to 
Christ. For over an hour several of us were seeking 
to help him from the Word of God. He was in 
great anguish of soul as he mourned over his past 
wickedness, and it was some time before he could 
see the simplicity of salvation through faith alone in 
Christ; but when at last he caught a view of thar 


14 After Death; What? 


finished work, his soul entered into peace. With 
mingled tears of joy and grief running down his face 
he said to me, “Oh, if my dear mother were only liv- 
ing that I might send her a telegram to-night to let 
her know that I had yielded to Christ. She prayed 
for me for many years: my ungodliness broke her 
heart; she died praying that I might be saved. How 
glad I would be if I could only get word to her that 
at last her prayers are answered.”” I said, “My dear 
young man, you need not grieve over that. I am 
certain she knew the moment you trusted Christ. Up 
there in heaven every redeemed one is rejoicing over 
another sinner that repenteth.” 

And so we gather from these scriptures that there 
is no such thing as unconsciousness for the believer 
between death and resurrection; the moment that he 
leaves the body he is in the presence of the Lord, 
and waits there expectantly until the first resurrection 
at the Lord’s return. 


“When the weary ones we love enter on their rest above, 
When their words of love and cheer fallnolonger on our ear, 
Hush, be every murmur dumb! It is only ‘till He come.’ ” 


In that glad day the bodies of the sleeping saints 
will be awakened and the living will be changed in a 
moment. ‘Then, throughout eternity, in bodies glori- 
fied, and wholly like the blessed Lord Himself, they 
will dwell in His presence, and be with Him in hap- 


piness unmarred and joy unclouded, in the home of 
the saints, the New Jerusalem. 


AFTER DEATH: WHAT? 
For the CHRISTLESS 


AST evening I spoke to you on “After Death: 
What?—for the Christian.” To-night my 
theme is a much more solemn and serious 

one: “After Death: What?—for the Chrisiless.” 
When we think of the realities of the life to come, 
it is as to the impenitent and the wicked that we are 
most exercised. We are not worried as to what the 
other world has in store for the men and women who 
have walked with God here. We feel certain, even 
apart from revelation, that wherever John, the be- 
loved, will be for eternity, it must be well with him. 
We are sure that Paul, the devoted follower of his 
crucified and risen Master, cannot lose out in the 
coming ages as a result of his faithfulness here; nor 
-are we concemed about repentant David, sinner 
though he owns himself to have been, or the dying 
robber, whose last words condemn himself and mag- 
nify his Saviour. With all these we are certain it 
must be well forever. 

But we have deep exercise of heart when we 
think of Cain, who turned away from salvation pur- 
chased by atoning blood; of Esau, who sold his 
birthright for a mess of pottage; of Judas, the traitor, 
who bartered away his hope of everlasting bliss for 
thirty pieces of silver. When we think of these men 


16 After Death: What? 


and myriads like them, we ask with bated breath, 
What does the great eternal future hold in store for 
them? 

In Job, chap. 14: 10, we read, “Man dieth and 
wasteth away; yea, man giveth up the ghost, and 
where is he?” The old Anglo-Saxon word “ghost,” 
similar to the German “geist,” simply means “‘spirit.” 
At death man gives up the spirit, and the question 
is, Where is he? The body may be buried or dis- 
posed of in some other way, but where is the spiritua! 
entity, the man who at one time occupied that tene- 
ment? Notice another question in the 14th verse of 
the same chapter: “If a man die, shall he live again? 
All the days of my appointed time will I wait, tll 
my change come.” 

There are then two questions; “Man dieth and 
wasteth away; man giveth up the spirit, and where 
is he?” Then, “If a man die, shall he live again?” 
The first question has to do with the state of the 
man between death and a possible resurrection; the 
last one inquires whether there will ever be a resur- 
rection. Now in attempting to answer these ques- 
tions from Scripture, remember we are confining our- 
selves to the Christless man. ‘Where is he when the 
body dies, and will that body ever be raised from 
the tomb? 

There is no authoritative answer to these ques- 
tions apart from divine revelation. The speculations 
of men cannot give it, be they ever so reasonable 


it te i te ae ie 


For the Christless 17 


and erudite. Those who reject the testimony of 
Holy Scripture are not further advanced in regard 
to the great question of life beyond the grave than 
that little coterie of Greek philosphers, who, in the 
days of Socrates, centuries before Christ, used to 
reason about life and death and immortality. Plato 
is still read and taught in our colleges. People still 
go back to those old Greeks for arguments regarding 
immortality ; it is interesting, much that is advanced 
is fairly convincing and even probable, but there is 
no authoritative assurance; and the soul is left in 
uncertainty. 

The Bible alone gives us positive knowledge. But 
to what part of our Bible shall we turn for light on 
these great questions? Not to the Old Testament. 
Please keep that distinctly in mind. There are those 
of a materialistic tendency, bearing a Christian name, 
but misguided people, as Adventists of various 
schools, Christadelphians, Russellites, and other 
minor sects, who insist that Scripture teaches the 
unconsciousness of the dead between death and res- 
urrection, and in some instances the annihilation of 
the wicked after the day of judgment. Rarely in- 
deed do these people quote from the New Testament 
in attempting to maintain their theories; they refer 
us almost invariably to Old Testament scriptures, 
and the bulk of these are found in three books, Job, 
the Psalms, and Ecclesiastes—particularly the latter. 

Now we do well to remember that the Old Testa- 


18 Afier Death: What? 


ment was not given to unfold the eternal future, but 
chiefly to show God’s dealings with man, in this life, 
individually and nationally: and the three books 
mentioned are, of all others, the experimental books 
of the Old Testament, giving us human experience 
in striking detail. 

It was our Lord Jesus Christ who brought life and 
immortality to light through the gospel.* Clearly 
then we need not expect to find these great truths 
fully developed in the Old Testament. There we 
have the twilight; in the later revelation we are in 
the full blaze of gospel light. I do not mean to say 
that saints of Old Testament times did not have the 
hope of immortality. They certamly did. 

Job is perhaps the oldest book in the Bible, and 
unquestionably Job himself believed in a resurrection 
from the dead. He exclaims, “I know that my Re- 
deemer liveth, and though after my skin worms des- 
troy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.” 
Moses speaks of the patriarchs as dying and going 
to be with their fathers, and Abraham could count 


*TIt is notable that the words “immortal,” ‘“immor- 
tality,” and “eternal life” are not found in the Old Testa- 
ment. They were as true then as now, of course, and 
intuitively believed in by the godly, but it awaited the 
coming of the Son of God for their open and full declara- 
tion. Atonement needed to be made before salvation 
could be openly preached in Christ’s name, and the eternal 
issues revealed.—| Ed. 


For the Christless 19 


on God to give him back Isaac from the dead if 
called upon to actually slay him on Mount Moriah. 
This, surely, he could not have done, had he not 
had the faith of immortality. David prayed and 
wept while his darling child was ill, but when he 
learned of his death he dried his eyes and comforted 
himself with the reflection, “He shall not come back 
to me, but I shall go to him,” and elsewhere he 
exclaims, “I shall be satisfied when I awake in Thy 
likeness.” 

I will not dwell upon the striking incident of 
Samuel’s appearance to the witch of Endor, and his 
message to Saul, ‘To-morrow shalt thou and thy 
sons be with me;” nor need I quote many passages 
in the Prophets which evince a knowledge of life 
after death. But, granting all these, it is certainly 
evident that it was not the specific purpose of any 
Old Testament writer to reveal this great truth, and 

in the experience-books referred to, we need not be 

surprised if some passages even seem to indicate the 
contrary. These need to be carefully examined to- 
gether with the context, that they be not entirely 
misapplied. 

Here let me make a statement, seriously and 
soberly, which may startle some of you, and which 
you may even question at first. It is this: All the 
Bible is inspired, but there are many statements in 
it that are not true! Just think of it for a few mo- 
ments—I want it to sink in. People often think 


20 After Death: What? 


that a text from any part of the Bible settles some 
controverted question, but a text out of its connection 
may be used to bolster up the worst kind of error; 
it may in fact be the declaration of an absolute false- 
hood. 

We are told that some years ago a noted Southern 
attorney was pleading a certain case before a Ken- 
tucky jury where his client was on trial for his life. 
The prosecuting attorney, addressing the jury, said, 
“Gentlemen, we have it on the very highest author- 
ity that, ‘All that a man hath will he give for his 
life.’ ’’ This made quite an impression on the jury, 
for they understood that he was quoting from the 
Bible—which he was. When he had concluded his 
address, the other attorney arose and said, “My op- 
ponent has told you that on the very highest author- 
ity we may know that all that a man hath will he 
give for his life.” “Then, opening a Bible, he read 
from the 2d chapter of the book of Job how the 
devil said, “Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath 
will he give for his life.” ‘“‘Now,” he exclaimed 
dramatically, “‘Gentlemen of the jury, you know for 
yourselves who the attorney for the prosecution con- 


siders to be the very highest authority—even the 
devil himself!” 


True, that statement is in the Bible; Satan made 
it, and it is only too true with many. But it is not 
invariably true that “All that a man hath will he 
give for his life.” Myriads of our Lord’s devoted 


ee 


For the Christless 21 


followers have imitated their Master in laying down 
their lives rather than surrender one jot or tittle of 
the truth of God. 

The above mentioned incident will show you what 
I mean when I say there are things related in the 
Bible which are not true. Not only are there state- 
ments in the Bible which are said to be from the 
devil himself, but there are some things spoken by 
good men, such as the friends of Job, for instance, 
who were not inspired of the Holy Spirit to speak as 
they did. There are statements uttered by very bad 
men recorded in the volume of inspiration, which do 
not thereby become divine truth. Thoughts and 
reasonings of the natural man’s mind are sometimes 
given, as in the book of Ecclesiastes. It is very im- 
portant to bear this in mind when reading the ex- 
perience-books of the Old Testament. 

In the book of Ecclesiastes, Solomon tells us that 
they who have died will never any more have a 
reward. If we take that at its face value it would 
directly contradict New Testament revelation, as 
well as Solomon’s own declaration by divine in- 
spiration at the end of the book where he says, 

“Tet us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear 
God, and keep his commandments, for this is the whole 
duty of man. For God shall bring every work into judg- 
ment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or 
whether it be evil.” 


Is it an evidence of the non-inspiration of the book 


jaye After Death: What? 


of Ecclesiastes? Surely not. What then? Why in 
this book Solomon tells us he is giving us a record of 
what he said in his heart as he pondered things under 
the sun. He saw people die, they were buried, he 
never saw them come back from the tomb. We read 
elsewhere, ““The dead know not anything.” Does 
this mean they are absolutely unconscious after leav- 
ing the body? Not at all. Scripture elsewhere con- 
tradicts such a thought; but a lifeless corpse knows 
nothing of the affairs that occupied that busy brain 
but yesterday. 

Shallow thinkers take such a passage as this, ““The 
dead know not anything,” and in the face of all the 
New Testament teachings to the contrary, deduce 
from it the doctrine of the “sleep of the soul.”” But 
the expression means nothing of the kind. The same 
words are used in that incident told in the first book 
of Samuel, of the compact between David and Jona- 
than. David was hiding in the field; Jonathan had 
gone in to sound his father and find out whether 
David’s life was really in danger. It had been 
agreed that Jonathan accompanied by a lad would 
go out into the field and shoot an arrow; if he said 
to the lad, ‘““The arrow is beyond you,” David 
would understand Saul was seeking his life; but if 
he said, “The arrow is behind you,” he knew he was 
safe. The program was carried out, and Jonathan 
called to the lad, “The arrow is beyond you,” and 
David understood; but we read that “the lad knew 


——— eS 


For the Christless 23 


not anything.” Was the boy in a state of uncon- 
sciousness? Not at all, but he knew nothing of the 
compact made between David and Jonathan. Time 
forbids calling your attention to a number of similar 
instances where exactly the same expression is used. 
You can look them up for yourself at your leisure. 

In the last chapter of the book of Malachi there 
is a passage which many seem to think settles the 
question as to the fate of the wicked dead. I read 
verses | to 3: 


“For, behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an 
oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, 
shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them 
up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither 
root nor branch. But unto you that fear my name shall 
the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings; 
and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall. 
And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be 
ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall 
do this, saith the Lord of hosts.” 


Now observe what the prophet is here telling Is- 
rael. Is he speaking of judgment to come on the 
wicked after death? Not at all. The passage is 
prophetic of what shall befall the wicked on the 
earth at the Lord’s second coming. In other words, 
this judgment is pre-millennial, not post-millennial. 
There is nothing here about the resurrection and 
people brought before the Great White Throne. 
‘The day that ‘“‘shall burn as an oven” is the day of 


24 After Death; What? 


the Lord, when wicked men, taken red-handed in 
their sins, will be burned up root and branch; that 
is, root and fruits. Then the righteous shall tread 
down the wicked. They shall be ashes under their 
feet in the day that God shall do this. 

Does this prove the annihilation of those who die 
in their sins? No, it is similar in character to the 
judgment that fell on Sodom and Gomorrah. The 
day that Lot and his company left the city the fire 
of God’s wrath burned up the people of the cities 
of the plains, root and branch. Had Lot himself 
and Abraham, his uncle, gone down to see conditions 
a few days after the judgment, the wicked would 
have been ashes under the soles of their feet; but 
does that imply annihilation? No. In the book of 
Jude, written centuries after, we read of “Sodom 
and Gomorrah, and the cities about them, set forth 
as an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal 
fire.” And our Lord Jesus Christ declares that “‘it 
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah 
in the day of judgment” than for those who rejected 
His word while He spake on earth. So, although 
burned up root and branch, although as ashes under 
the feet of the righteous, the people of Sodom and 
Gomorrah have not lost their identity; they are con- 
sciously suffering now, and will rise in the day of 
judgment. 

Time forbids dwelling longer on the Old Testa- 


ment, and I turn at once to the words of our Lord 


—_——- a a ws 


For the Christless 25 


Jesus Christ Himself, rather than to those of His 
apostles. Not that I place the teaching of the Lord 
Jesus on a higher plane that that of His inspired 
apostles, but because many say, “I am not prepared 
to accept Paul, Peter, or John, but give me what 
Jesus says.” So I shall do this. Men who reject the 
solemn warnings given elsewhere in the Bible as to 
he eternal judgment of the wicked, foolishly say 
that the teaching of Jesus is all they want—the 
Sermon on the Mount is enough for them. 

Well, my friends, do you know that eternal punish- 
ment is taught in the Sermon on the Mount? And 
if you tell me that you will accept the teachings of 
Jesus Christ, don’t forget that He has told us more 
of the actual state of the Christless dead than any 
one else. No one ever uttered more serious and 
solemn things as to the doom awaiting sinners than 
God’s blessed Son, the tenderest, yet most faithful 
Man that ever walked this earth. It was not Peter 
who first spoke of “‘the fire that never shall be 
quenched;”” it was not Paul who spoke of being 
“salted with fire;” it was not John who said, “It is 
better to enter into life maimed than having two 
hands to be cast into hell fire;” it was the Lord Jesus 
Christ Himself ; and whatever further instruction you 
get in the New Testament in regard to the punish- 
ment of the wicked is all based on the teaching of 
the Son of God. 


We have this teaching in its simplest and clear- 


26 After Death; What? 


est form in the 16th chapter of Luke’s Gospel. I 
know that some object, “‘Oh, that is only a parable.” 
Who told you so? It is not called a parable. A 
parable is an illustration, or story, told to picture 
some truth. This incident of the rich man and Laza- 
rus is not called a parable. The parables are gener- 
ally announced by some such expression as this, “He 
spake a parable unto them,” but we have no such 
expression here. But in the second place, if this is 
a parable it certainly is meant to illustrate the fear- 
ful danger of dying unreconciled to God; and the 
impression made on the minds of His hearers, and on 
those of millions of people from that day to this, is 
that Jesus was here teaching that it is a fearful thing 
to die in one’s sins. 

But notice the naturalness with which the story is 
introduced. Our Lord is addressing the people; and 
in the course of His instruction He says in the most 
natural way, ““There was a certain rich man who 
was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared 
sumptuously every day.” ““There was a certain rich 
man;”’ was there, or was there not? Jesus says there 
was. He does not say, “Let us suppose there might 
have been such a person,” but He definitely declares 
there was such a man; how he was clothed; how he 
fed sumptuously. Suppose in the course of my ad- 
dress I should say there was a certain Indian out in 
Arizona who was recently converted. When I get 
through you come up to me and say, “I was inter- 


For the Christless 27 


ested in what you told us about that Indian. How 
long ago was he converted?” “Oh,” I say, “I hope 
you did not take me seriously, that was just a para- 
ble. I was only illustrating; I don’t know of any 
such Indian.” You would be justified in saying to 
me, “That, sir, was dishonest of you; you gave us 
all the distinct impression that you knew just such a 
person.” . 

Now this is exactly what Jesus did. He gave 
every hearer that day to believe that He was relating 
a story of fact. When He comes to speak of the 
other man in the story, He says, “There was a cer- 
tain beggar, named Lazarus.” When you are just 
supposing an incident to illustrate a point you don’t 
usually name the suppositious character. Why did 
He name this beggar? Because He knew him: “He 
calleth his own sheep by name.”” We shall never 
know the rich man’s name until the day of jude- 
ment, but we do know the beggar’s name, because 
though poor in purse he was rich in faith, and was 
one of the sheep of Christ. Our Lord relates the 
story with remarkable detail, even to the dogs who 
came and licked the poor man’s sores. If this is but 
a parable, what are these parabolic dogs who licked 
the parabolic sores of the parabolic beggar as he lay 
on the parabolic steps of the parabolic rich man’s 
parabolic house, watching him eat his parabolic 
food? Often had the hearers of Jesus seen just such 
an incident as he was describing. He goes on to say 


28 After Death: What? 


that the beggar died and was carried by the angels 
into Abraham's bosom. This, of course, was before 
the death and resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Abraham was the father of the faithful, and in para- 
dise. Ass a son of Abraham, this redeemed beggar 
was welcomed to his bosom. Believers now are said 
at death to be “absent from the body and present 
with the Lord.” To be in Abraham’s bosom was 
the portion of Old Testament saints. 

And what about the mch man? He also died and 
was buried, and we follow his disembodied spint 
into the other world. Jesus said, “In hell he lifted 
up his eyes, being in torment.” Now, my friends, 
there have been times when I would have taken that 
out of the Bible if I could, and even to-night I can 
well understand the feelings of Richard Baxter as 
he prayed, “Oh, for a full heaven and an empty 
hell!” I have searched this book, and read scores 
of volumes penned by theologians of all shades of 
opinion, to try and find one ray of hope for men who 
died in their sins, but I have never been able to 
find it. 

Men try to take the edge off a passage like this 
by setting aside the old Anglo-Saxon word “‘hell” 
and using the Greek word “Hades.” We are told 
that this word has no reference whatever to a place 
of punishment; Hades is simply “the unseen.” Very 
well, let us use the Greek word: “In Hades he lifted 
up his eyes, being in torment.” Changing the name 


For the Christless 29 


of the place, you see, does not do away with the 
torment. 

But others say, “You are mistaken when you 
think of Hades as a condition in which men are 
found after death. Hades is simply the grave.” I 
do not believe this for one moment. Scripture, I am 
certain, teaches the very opposite. But suppose, for 
- argument’s sake, we substitute the word “grave” for 
“hell.” Let us read it that way: “In the grave he 
lifted up his eyes, being in torment.” Again the 
change of the word fails to do away with the tor- 
ment. You may call it the tomb; you may desig- 
nate it simply the “‘unseen;” you may make it read 
the “spirit-world;” you may use any term you like, 
but the solemn fact remains that wherever that rich 
man was, and whatever that word means, he was 
in torment! 

Need we follow the story further? Need we 
~ dwell upon its horrors? You know them well. You 
know how this wretched man, lost beyond redemp- 
tion, becomes a suppliant in the pit of woe. He makes 
two agonized petitions, but they are denied him. He 
began to pray on the wrong side of death. He 
prays first for one drop of water on the tip of the 
beggar’s finger to cool his parched tongue. Living 
water he had refused while grace was free, now he 
is where living water never flows through all eter- 
nity. His other request is for his five brothers. Peo- 
ple say, “If I am lost I shall be with the crowd any- 


30 After Death: What? 


way. I shall have lots of company in hell.” But, 
my friends, look at this—six brothers, but what a 
family! One is in hell and five are on the way; and 
the man in hell prays, “If you can do anything to 
keep my brothers from joining me here, do it; I 
don’t want their company; send Lazarus that he may 
warn them and tell them not to come to this place 
of torment.” Abraham replies, “They have Moses 
and the prophets; let them hear them.” That is, 
they have the Bible—just what you have, and which 
you are responsible to heed. The man in torment 
cries, “No, father Abraham, but if one went unto 
them from the dead they would repent.””. Abraham 
answers, “If they hear not Moses and the prophets, 
neither will they be persuaded though one rose from 
the dead.” Accept the testimony of this Book, re- 
ceive the Saviour it reveals, or go into the outer dark- 
ness forever! There is no other alternative. It must 
be Christ or hell, and to reject the one is to choose 
the other. 

But we must not ignore the attempt to make this 
incident a parable. If it is a parable, what is it sup- 
posed to teach? One, whose propaganda has mis- 
led thousands in recent years undertakes te explain 
it. He says the rich man is the Jew, the poor man 
is the Gentile. For centuries the Jew had all the 
good things; the favor of God, riches spiritual and 
material; he fared sumptuously every day; the Gen- 
tile lay outside his door, afflicted, destitute, desiring 


For the Christless 31 


to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the Jew’s 
table. Eventually things changed; both Jew and 
Gentile died to their former condition. Now the 
Gentile has been brought into Abraham’s bosom, the 
blessings that once belonged to the Jew are his, and 
the Jew is being tormented in Russia, in Poland, and 
in many parts of the world, where he is in agony. 
And the distressed Jew, from his place of torment, 
pleads for mercy. He says, Send the friends with 
some little message from the Word of God; relieve 
my agony, or deliver my brethren. But Abraham 
replies, “Between us and you there is a great gulf 
fixed, you cannot come to where the Gentile is, and 
the Gentile cannot come to you.” Does this explain 
the so-called parable? Why, my friends, it does 
not fit! The gulf is not fixed between Jew and Gen- 
tile. Any Jew who will may enter into the fulness 
of Christian privilege, and any Gentile, who is fool- 
ish enough to do so, may apostatize and go over to 
Jewish ground. 

But, you say, according to your understanding of 
the passage the man there is in torment before the 
day of judgment. If this be so, what need of a day 
of judgment? 

Let me use a very simple illustration. A man is 
arrested, charged with a heinous crime. He is placed 
under restraint in the county jail; there he remains 
for long, weary months, and, if actually guilty, is 
tormented with a hidden knowledge of his guilt, how- 


32 After Death: What? 


ever vehemently he may deny it, until at last he is 
brought to trial, and if the case goes against him he 
is sent to the penitentiary. Hades is God’s jail; Ge- 
henna is God’s penitentiary. 


In the 20th chapter of Revelation we read of a 
time when death and Hades will give up the dead 
which are inthem. Death gives up the body, Hades 
gives up the spirit and soul. This is the resurrection 
of judgment, and it takes place a thousand years 
later than the resurrection of life. John writes, 


“And I saw a great white throne, and Him that sat on 
it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; 
and there was found no place for them. And I saw the 
dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books 
were opened; and another book was opened, which is the 
book of life; and the dead were judged out of those things 
which were written in the books, according to their works. 
And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death 
and hell delivered up the dead which were in them; and 
they were judged every man according to their works. 
And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This 
is the second death. And whosoever was not found writ- 
ten in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.” 


This is the last great assize. Then men will be 
judged, every man according to his works, and pun- 
ishment will be meted out in intrinsic righteousness. 
Who can tell all that is involved in the horror ex- 
pressed by the symbol, “‘the lake of fire!” Oh, my 
friend, I pray you, run not the risk of finding out for 


For the Chrisiless 33 


yourself, but flee at once to Christ for refuge, and 


be able to say with Paul Gerhardt, 


“There is no condemnation, there is no hell for me, 
The torment and the fire mine eyes shall never see.” 


Actual details of the sinner’s final doom are not 
given, but striking and awful figures are used, such 
as “wandering stars to whom is reserved the black- 
ness of darkness forever; “‘beaten with stripes,” 
“cast into a furnace of fire,”” and many others. These 
all are meant to impress men with the fearfulness of 
an eternity away from God—an etemity out of 
Christ! Risk not, I pray you, so dire a doom, but 
flee now for refuge to Him who waits in grace to 
save. 


SPIRIT AND SOUL AND BODY 


“I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be 
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus” 
(Ie. DOSS. 22 6d). 


ECAUSE God has existed from all eternity 
B as one ineffable Being in three glorious Per- 

sons, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit 
—all co-equal in majesty, power, and all attributes 
—we speak of Him as “the Trinity.” The word 
itself is not found in the pages of Holy Scripture, 
but the fact is again and again declared, and per- 
haps nowhere more strikingly than in the formula of 
Christian baptism: ““Baptizing them unto the Name 
of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit.” 
Observe, not the names, as though they were three 
Beings, but the Name—the three are one. 

Because man was created as one person in three 
parts we speak of him as tri-partite. He is spirit and 
soul and body. The body alone is not man; the soul 
alone is not man; the spirit alone is not man; but 
spirit and soul and body together constitute man. 
It is my purpose on this occasion to inquire what 
Scripture teaches as to the meaning of these terms. 

It is hardly necessary to say much about the body; 
that is the material part of man, and is his link with 


Spirit and Soul and Body 35 


the material creation as a whole. The body is the 
house in which the inward man dwells. In its present 
condition it is subject to decay and death; but there 
will be a resurrection of both the just and the un- 
just, when the bodies of the saved and the lost will 
be raised from the dead. In their resurrected mater- 
ial bodies the saints will stand at the judgment seat 
of Christ to be rewarded according to the deeds done 
in the body; and the wicked, raised a thousand years 
later, will stand at the Great White Throne to be 
judged according to their deeds. 

It may be well to turn back to the first page of our 
Bibles and notice how in the beginning we have a 
three-fold creation: that is, three times in this wonder- 
ful first chapter of Genesis God is said to have 
“created.” In verse one we read, “God created 
the heaven and the earth.” Here you have the origin 
of matter. We never read of a second creation of 
anything material. All the matter in the universe is 
formed out of that which was then created. 

In verse 21 we have a second creative act: “God 
created great whales and every living creature that 
moveth;” or as better rendered, “Every being that 
hath a living soul.” Here is the origin of life. Scrip- 
ture knows nothing of life spontaneously generated 
from dead matter. It differentiates absolutely be- 
tween the non-living and the living. By no possible 
process of evolution could the non-living ever be- 
come the living. Therefore, if dependent life is te 


36 Death and Afterwards 


come into the universe, God must act anew as 
Creator. 

Soul, as we shall see, is that which is common 
both to the lower animals and to man. It is the 
natural life with all its capabilities of passions, emo- 
tions and instincts. The soul of the animal dies when 
the body dies; with the soul of man it is otherwise, 
being linked with his spirit. 

I remember some years ago I was ia the town of 
Los Gatos in California, having a series of meetings. 
A Seventh-day Adventist was lecturing there at the 
same time, in a large tent. As I passed the tent 
one day I noticed a very imposing sign on one side. 
In large letters I read: 


TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS REWARD 


“T will give $10,000.00 United States Gold Coin, 
to any one who will produce a text from the Bible 
that speaks of an immortal soul.” 


I went inside to find the lecturer. He was there 
dusting the seats. I said, “I have come to see you, 
sir, about the sign outside.” “‘Oh,”’ he replied, agree- 
ably enough, “you have come to collect the $10,000; 
have you?” “No,” I answered, “I am afraid I can- 
not claim it on your terms.” “You admit then,” 
he replied, “that the Bible nowhere speaks of an 
immortal soul.” I acknowledged this without hesi- 
tation. Then I asked, “Because the Bible nowhere 


Spirit and Soul and Body a7 


speaks of an immortal soul, do you therefore believe 
that the soul of man is mortal?” ‘“‘Certainly,” he 
answered; “‘undoubtedly if the Bible never speaks 
of an immortal soul, the soul must be mortal.” 

I drew his attention to the fact that just as the 
Bible does not mention an immortal soul, neither 
does it ever speak of a mortal soul. I pointed out 
that, arguing from his standpoint, it was just as 
reasonable to say that the soul of man is not mortal, 
since the Bible never mentions a mortal soul. But 
I went on, “If I can produce a scripture that declares 
the soul is not killed when the body is killed, will 
you give me the $10,000? For, I suppose, by an 
immortal soul you mean a soul that lives when the 
body dies.” 

He at once began to hedge, and said, “It might 
be a question of interpretation,” and I saw that my 
chances of earning the $10,000 were exceedingly 
slim. However, I produced the passage. You will 
find it in Matthew 10: 28. There our Lord says, 
“Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able 
to kill the soul.” Manifestly, a soul that cannot be 
killed when the body is killed must be what we mean 
when we speak of ‘‘an immortal soul.” The Adven- 
tist was taken aback for the moment, but though sil- 
enced, refused to part with the $10,000. The fact 
is that in Scripture the actual words, “mortal” and 
“immortal,” are only used in reference to the body. 
The mortal body becomes immortal if the believer 


38 Death and Afterwards 


lives on earth until the return of the Lord from 
heaven. 

Turning again to Genesis, chap. 1, we have a 
third act of creation. In verse 27 we read: “So 
God created man in his own image; in the image of 
God created He them.” Why the need of this dis- 
tinctive creative act if man is simply an evolution 
from the animals beneath him? The fact is that by 
no possibility could creatures possessing only body 
and soul have become possessed of a thinking, reason- 
ing spirit, unless it were communicated by God Him- 
self. It is this that lifts man above all else in God’s 
creation. If you tum to Zechariah 12: 1, you will 
read, “The burden of the word of the Lord for 
Israel, saith the Lord, which stretcheth forth the 
heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth, and 
formeth the spirit of man within him.” Observe that 
the formation of the human spirit is there viewed as 
though it were as great a work as the stretching 
forth of the heavens and the creation of the earth. 
Does not this give us some idea of its importance in 
the mind of God? 

Now just what is the spirit in man? Perhaps the 
clearest passage in the Bible is found in | Cor. 2: 
11: “For what man knoweth the things of a man, 
save the spirit of the man which is in him? Even so 
the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit 
of God.” Here the spirit of man is shown to be the 
seat of intelligence. It is by the spirit. man knows; 


Spirit and Soul and Body 39 


it is the spirit that reasons. It is the spirit that re- 
ceives instruction from God. Several other scriptures 
will help to make this clear. Romans 8: 16: “The 
Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we 
are the children of God.” Rom. 1:9: “God is my 
witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of 
his Son.” Job 32: 8: “There is a spirit in man; and 
the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them under- 
standing.” Notice that understanding is received by 
the spirit through divine inspiration. Proverbs 18: 
14: “The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, 
but a wounded spirit who can bear?” Prov. 20: 27: 
“The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, search- 
ing all the inward parts of the belly;” that is, illu- 
minating the man’s inward being. God illuminates 
the man by communicating His truth to the spirit. 
We might quote many other scriptures, but these will 
suffice as they clearly emphasize the case in point. It 
is the spirit that thinks; it is the spirit that weighs evi- 
dence; the spirit is that part of the man to which 
God, who is Himself a Spirit, communicates His 
mind, 

At death the spirit leaves the body. This, in fact, 
is what death is—the separation of body and spirit. 
In James 2: 26 we are told, “As the body without 
the spirit is dead, so faith, if it hath not works, is 
dead, being alone.” 

We have already seen that when the body of the 
beast dies, the soul, which is linked with its body, 


40 Death and Afterwards 


dies too; that is the end of its existence. But when 
the body of the mar dies, his spirit leaves the body, 
whether the person is saved or unsaved. “Then shall 
the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit 
return to God who gave it” (Eccles. 12: 7). Leav- 
ing the earthly tenement. behind, the spirit goes into 
the unseen world and has to do with the God who 
created it. This is alike true of the saved and the 
lost. Both have to give account to God. 
Materialists insist that the spirit is but the breath; 
they point to the fact that in both the Hebrew and 
the Greek languages the words for “breath,” “wind,” 
and “‘spirit’” are the same, and they insist that there- 
fore in each instance the word may be translated 
“breath” with impunity. However, it is well for us 
to remember that even in English the word “‘spirit” 
has a number of meanings, according to the connec- 
tion in which it is used, and these meanings cannot be 
confounded without doing violence to the language. 
We speak of a man of spirit, and we mean of de- 
cision of purpose and of energy. We speak of a 
spirit, and we mean a wraith or a ghost. The 
context determines the meaning of the word. The 
best way to find out whether the spirit of man is 
simply the breath of the man is to try translating 
for ourselves. Substitute the word “breath” in the 
various passages we have already quoted, and see if 
it fits. “I pray God that your breath may be pre- 
served blameless” (1 Thess. 5: 23)—will that do? 


Spirit and Soul and Body 4] 


We all agree that a blameless breath is desirable, but 
can any one think the apostle speaks of such a thing 
here? Again, “What man knoweth the things of a 
man save the breath of a man that is in him?” Who- 
ever heard of an intelligent breath? Nor is it the 
“breath” of the man that is the candle of the Lord; 
neither does the Spirit of God bear witness with our 
“breath” that we are children of God, and Paul’s 
service in the gospel was far more than service with 
his “breath.” I do not want to amuse nor try to be 
humorous, but it is necessary sometimes to show how 
ridiculous such fantastic theories are, to show that 
they refute themselves. 

What then shall we say of the soul in man? That 
it is not to be confounded with the spirit, our open- 
ing text makes plain. The use of the copulative 
“‘and” between spirit and soul emphasizes this. In 


Hebrews 4: 12 we read: 


“The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper 
than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing 
asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, 
and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the 
heart.” 


Here we learn that God’s Word distinguishes be- 
tween soul and spirit. It does not separate them, 
for the two are never separated, either in life or in 
death. The spirit is the higher part of the unseen 
man; that part, as we have already seen, to which 


42 Death and Afterwards 


the Spirit of God speaks. The soul is the lower part 
of the unseen man, and is the link between the body 
and the spirit. It is not merely the natural life, 
though it is that, but it is a great deal more. _It is 
the seat of man’s emotional nature. 

Again let me give a number of quotations from 
Scripture. First, one that speaks of God having a 
soul. ‘‘Now the just shall live by faith; but if any 
man draw back my soul shall have no pleasure in 
him” (Heb. 10: 38). And in the next verse we 
read, ‘‘But we are not of them that draw back unto 
perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of 
the soul.” God’s soul longs for the salvation of our 
souls; that is, God, who is infinite love, would have 
our emotional natures in fullest harmony with His 
own. Hindrances to this are found in our bodily 
lusts. | Pet. 2:11: “‘Abstain from fleshly lusts which 
war against the soul.” The soul in harmony with 
God finds its joys in Him, and in this the spirit fully 
shares. Luke 1: 46: “And Mary said, My soul 
doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced 
in God my Saviour.” 

The soul suffers. Luke 2:35: “A sword shall 
pierce through thine own soul also.” Psalm 107: 
26: “ Their soul is melted because of trouble.” 
Joseph’s brethren “‘saw the anguish of his soul,” but 
took no heed. Jesus said, “Now is my soul trou- 
bled,” and in His agony on the cross, “His soul was 
made an offering for sin;” yea, there, “He poured 


ee 


Spirit and Soul and Body 43 


out his soul unto death,” when “He was numbered 
with the transgressors.” See Isaiah 53: 12. 

The soul loves. “Saw you him whom my soul 
loveth>?”’ exclaims the bride in the Canticles. In 
1 Sam. 18: 1, “The soul of Jonathan was knit with 
the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his 
own soul.” 

The soul hates. 2 Sam. 5: 8: “The lame and the 
blind that are hated of David's soul.” 

The soul mourns. Job 14: 22: “His soul within 
him shall mourn.” 

The soul desires. Job 23: 13: “What his soul 
desireth, even that he doeth.” 

The soul longs. Psa. 119: 20: “My soul break- 
eth for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments 
at all times.” Ps. 42: 1,2: “As the hart panteth 
after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after 
Thee, O God. My soul thirsteth for God.” Psa. 
63: 1: “My soul thirsteth for Thee.” 

These are but a very few out of many similar 
scriptures that we might quote did time permit, but 
they surely establish the fact that the soul is the seat 
of the emotional nature just as the spirit is the seat 
of the intellectual nature; and because man in the 
present body is so largely a creature of emotions, the 
soul is made to designate the man as a whole. Man 
is distinctly called a soul over and over again. ‘Man 


became a living soul” (Gen. 2: 7). And in Luke 


44 Death and Afterwards 
12: 20 the Lord says to the rich fool,““This night thy 


soul shall be required of thee.” Whereas, in Reve- 
lation, chap. 6, John sees in vision the souls under 
the altar of those who have been slain. It is alto- 
gether correct, therefore, to speak of man as having 
a soul to be saved or a soul to be lost. 

Someone has likened man as originally created 
by God to a three-story house; the lower story or 
basement is the body; the second story, or workshop, 
is the soul; the third story, as the observatory and 
the place of communion and study, is the spirit. In 
his sinless condition, man’s spirit held converse with 
God and enjoyed communion with the Infinite Spirit. 
The fall of man, as a moral earthquake, so shook the 
house that the third story fell down into the base- 
ment. The natural man is therefore the soulish man. 
The word rendered “natural” and “‘sensual’”’ in the 
New Testament, is really “‘soulish.” It is an adjec- 
tive derived from the word for soul. 

Man, however, is not bereft of the spirit even 
though fallen, but he has “the understanding dark- 
ened, being alienated from the life of God, through 
the ignorance which is in him.” No act on man’s 
part can ever restore the spirit to its proper place, for 
all his faculties have been perverted by the fall. His 
spirit has become insubject to God, and made filthy 
by sin. We read, you remember, of the “‘filthiness 
of the flesh and spirit.” His soul has become utterly 
debased and corrupt; he now loves what God hates, 


Spirit and Soul and Body 45 


and hates what God loves. His body is weakened 
by disease and infirmity, the direct result of the en- 
trance of sin into the world. He is gone out of the 
way, and is become altogether unprofitable. In 
other words, man is a hopelessly ruined creature, 
apart from the regenerating grace of God. 

But it is the mind of God to save this fallen, de- 
based man; and not only to restore him to his 
Adamic condition, but to lift him to a higher plane 
than unfallen man ever knew. In order that this 
might be so, God, Himself, in the person of the Son, 
came into this scene as man. He not only took a 
human body, but was possessed of a true human 
spirit and human soul. Many do not see this, and 
think of the divine Logos, the Eternal Word, bear- 
ing the same relation to His body as our spirit and 
soul do to our body—which is a mistake. Christ not 
only took a body as a tabernacle for Deity, but He 

‘took a complete humanity into union with Deity, 
thus becoming manifested on earth as the Son of 
God—a Being with two natures, human and 
divine. 

That He had a human soul is clear from the pas- 
sages already quoted, In another place He says, 
“My soul is exceedingly sorrowful,even unto death.” 
It is written also that, ‘““He was troubled in his 
spirit;” “He rejoiced in spirit,” and as He was 
about to lay down His life, He exclaimed, “Father, 
into thy hands I commit my spirit.” He offered 


a eben Soe SS OSS a 


46 Death and Afterwards 


Himself a sacrifice in full—body, soul, and spirit on 
behalf of our ruined humanity. 

The atoning blood that purchases redemption was 
a man’s blood untainted by sin. The body given on 
the cross was a human body holy and undefiled. The 
anguish of His soul was the anguish of a human soul, 
which we can but faintly enter into as He suffered 
there in the deepest recesses of His being; all His 
tenderest affections were lacerated as He took our 
place in judgment upon the cross. The darkness 
that overwhelmed His spirit we can but faintly ap- 
prehend as we listen to His fearful cry, ““My God, 
my God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?” His 
was a complete sacrifice of Himself on our be- 
half. 

When a soul trusts Him as Saviour, a new life 
is communicated to the man once wrecked and 
ruined, and this life is felt—shall I say >—in every 
part. The awakened spirit now receives the word 
of God, and the man is renewed in the spirit of his 
mind; the building is being renewed so that once 
more he is able to look up to God and enter into 
communion with Him through the spirit—is able to 
take in and understand the mind of God, and to dis- 
cern what is according to the Word. His soul also 
is saved; its affections are purified; its longings and 
yearnings are now turned from things evil and things 
mundane to things holy and heavenly. 

The body alone remains for the present un- 


Spirit and Soul and Body 47 


changed, save as the new life enables the man to 
resist physical appetites that once threatened to ruin 
this tabernacle, now recognized as the temple of the 
living God; but eventually, at the coming of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, He will change this body of our 
humiliation and make it like unto the body of His 
glory. Then we shall be completely saved—spirit, 
soul, and body. We shall then have put off the 
natural body and have put on a spiritual body. 

Some, however, when reading | Cor.15: 44, men- 
tally contrast, I think, a material body with an im- 
material one. But this is not the thought of the 
apostle nor the mind of the Spirit. A natural body 
is a body suited to the soul; the word rendered “‘na- 
tural” is simply, as already mentioned, an adjective 
derived from the word for “‘soul.”” We might say a 
soulish body. It is raised a spiritual body—not a 
body of spirit, but a real body suited to the spirit. 
Now the spirit often is willing, but the flesh is weak; 
then body and spint will be in perfect harmony. 
This will be our complete salvation, when spirit, soul, 
and body will be conformed to the image of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Firstbom among many 
brethren. 


“When left this scene of fault and strife 
Then flesh and sense deceive no more. 

We then shall see the Prince of life 
And all His ways of grace explore.” 


48 Death and Afterwards 3 
We shall be wholly like Him, and His suited 


companions, in glorified bodies like His own, for- 
ever. “Faithful is He that calleth you, who also will 
do it.” For it is written, “He who hath began a — 


good work in you will perform it until the day of 
Jesus Christ.” In that day our salvation will be 
complete, when our entire spirit and soul and body 
will be blameless before God, as we stand in His 
presence in all the perfection of Christ’s finished 
work, 


Books by H. A. IRONSIDE 


on Bible Exposition 


JOSHUA, Addresses on 


the Book of 


oa oe py 
EZRA, NEHEMIAH & ESTHER, in 1 volume .......... 3.00 
PSALMS 20.2.2. eeeiy a +> a alle sale che eteeet een 2.75 
PROVERBS, Notes on the Book of .................. 3.75 
SONG OF SOLOMON, Addresses on ............-- 2.00 
ISAIAH oe cs acs eae sw ape go Seen 3.25 
JEREMIAH, “The Weeping Prophet’ .............. 3.50 
EZEKIEL, The Prophet ....:... .<s ces gine ee 3.50 
DANIEL, The Prophet, Lectures on. With Chart ....... 2.75 
MINOR PROPHETS, The’. ......+.02. 2. eee 3.75 
MATTHEW, Addresses on. .:. 2... 2 ss sie ee 3.50 
MARK, Addressesion .. .0os.0'c 0s ans 6 = 2.75 
LUKE, Addresses on. Complete in 1 volume .......... 5.00 
JOHN, Addresses:on ....... .. 5 2. sce ose ce 5.50 
ACTS, Lectures on the Book of ..............see0-s 4.50 
ROMANS, Lectureson ....... cise vs 08s ee 2.25 
CORINTHIANS, First Epistle to .................-2- 4.00 
CORINTHIANS, Second Epistle to ...............-- 2.50 
GALATIANS, Messages on ...........02+seseeeees — 2.50 
IN THE HEAVENLIES, Notes on Ephesians ........... 3.00 
PHILIPPIANS, Notes on .....55.... oceeiee seen 225 
COLOSSIANS, Lectures on ....... capes eee 2,25 
THESSALONIANS, Addresses on Ist and 2nd ........ 2.25 
TIMOTHY, TITUS & PHILEMON, in 1 volume ......... 275 a 
HEBREWS, Studies in, with Lectures on TITUS ........ 2.50 ie 
JAMES & PETER, Notes on ............00eceeeeeee 2.25 = 
JOHN & JUDE, Epistles of; in 1 volume ...........-. 3.00 — 
REVELATION, Lectures on the. With Chart ........... 3.50 === 
_——— 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS 


Neptune, 


New Jersey 


Forty cents 


Printed in U.S.A. 


ATI AAU 


