Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


s^ 


o 


DIALOGUES 


ON    THE 


ESSAYS    AND    REYIEWS. 


BY 


ONE  WHO  VALUES  CHEISTIANITY  FOE  ITS  OWN  SAKE, 
AND  BELIEVES  IN  IT  AS  A  REVELATION 

FROM  GOD. 


f  <  :  jcff     .       at  :•: 


» 


CONTENTS : 


Page 
Chrihtiamitt  and  tux  Education  op 

THE  World S 

What  has  thbBibijc  Taught?   and 

What  hab  Qxoloot  Frotkd!  ...  115 


Page 


Modern  Philompht  and  Modkrn 
Thkoloot,  both  comfahbd  with 
BomxpTUHR   15S 

Inspiration  and  Intzrphxtation 287 


SECOND    EDITION,    REVISED. 


LONDON  : 

W.    H.    BEOOM,    47,    ST.     PAUL'S     CHUBCHTAED 
HAMILTON,  ADAMB,  k  CO.,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

UDOOGLZnL 


C  (b^»»*  ^"^ 


HArfVAKJ  vOLlttit  ;  i»AAiY 


10 


%J^;U^    ^iX-t 


jLcAAittxrt^^  » 


^- 


^ 

^ 
♦? 


CHRISTIANITY  AND  THE  EDUCATION 
OF   THE   WORLD; 


Well,  H.,  have  you  read  the  Essdifs  and  Heviews  > 

II.  I  have ;  I  am  somewhat  late  in  doing  so ;  I 
thought  I  might  have  seen  them  abroad,  hut  the  book 
was  not  sent  mo  as  I  expected.  But  my  sojourn  there 
has  enabled  me  to  judge  somewhat  more  distinctly  of 
the  character  of  this  effort.  As  might  be  supposed,  it 
ia  not  an  isolated  one  in  the  remarkable  working  of 
principles,  both  good  and  evil,  which  we  see  in  the 
present  day. 

W.  You  do  not  mean  that  rationaUsm  is  on  the 
increase  in  Germany, — I  think  you  were  last  in  that 
country  ? 

H.  By  no  means.  It  had  found  the  extreme  of  its 
limits,  both  religiously  and  philosophically,  and  the 
reaction  has  necessarily  set  in :  for  truth  there  is,  and 
good  there  is,  at  least  in  God,  in  spite  of  man ;  and 
when  men  have  displayed  the  extremes  to  which  the 
evil  of  human  nature,  and  humau  will,  and  its  revolt 
against  God  can  go,  there  is,  under  Divine  Ught,  at 
least  till  man,  as  wc  read,  be  given  up  to  beheve  a 
lie,  a  reaction  of  natural  conscience,  and  the  instinct 
which  knows  and  feels  that  a  God  there  is,  and  that 
"iU8t  be  good.  Under  this  influence  man 
what  shocks  a  conscience  informed  by 


Christianity,  and  in  a  general  wf^y,  desires  to  have  to 
say  to  God,  because  he  has  learned  that  He  is  good, 
and  feels  that  a  bad  God,  a  God  with  whom  we 
have  nothing  to  do,  and  a  revelation  that  is  only  de- 
ceit and  falsehood,  can  give  no  comfort.  I  have  no 
thought  that  a  man  can  go  right  without  grace,  but 
there  ia  a  natural  conscience  which  sees  through  dis- 
honesty, and  wants  truth  and  grace ;  sees,  at  least, 
that  the  contrary  is  not  a  true  representation  of  God, 
It  wants  something  more  sure  in  a  revelation,  than  a 
product  of  man's  mind,  a  history  of  the  Hebrew  mon- 
archy, or  an  inspiration  somewhat,  perhaps,  superior 
to  Shakspeare,  which  learned  men  can  criticise.  This 
may  do  for  Essayists  and  Eeviewers,  but  it  won't  do 
for  the  wants  of  the  soul  in  daily  life.  It  won't  do 
for  the  poor.  Such  views  may  make  pretentious  infi- 
dels of  them,  retailing  what  they  have  read,  and 
thinking  themselves  wise,  because  they  have  a  certain 
nimiber  of  objections  against  what  is  good  and  blessed; 
but  they  can  give  no  help  or  food  to  any.  I  have  al- 
ways remarked  of  infidels,  or  infidel  writers,  (for  it  is 
better  to  call  things  by  their  names,)  that  they  can 
make  you  doubt  (no  wonder)  of  many  things,  but  they 
can  give  you  nothing.  They  never  give  you  one  cer- 
tain truth.  The  word  of  God  gives  you  many  certain 
truths.  It  makes  ydu  doubt  of  nothing.  It  has  no 
need ;  for  it  possesses  the  truth,  and  gives  what  is 
positive.  This  is  an  immense  difference  ;  it  stamps 
both  morally.  When  infidel  minds  speak  of  a  love  of 
truth,  they  never,  that  I  can  see,  go  further  than  Pilate : 
What  is  truth  ?  It  is  never  a  holding  fast  truth  they 
have  got,  but  a  casting  doubt  on  what  others  believe, 
and  professing  to  search  for  it,  always  to  be  ready  to 
receive  it,  I  suppose,  because  they  have  never  got  it. 

W.  But  when  you  speak  of  the  wants  of  the  soul,  do 
you  believe  that  in  the  mass  of  men  these  spiritual 
wants  exist  ? 

H.  I  believe  there  are  hidden  wants  everywhere.  I 
do  not  say  a  new  nature,  a  changed  will,  but  cravings  of 


s 


a  soul  tliat  has  capacities  beyond  the  sphere  in  which 
it  is  imprisoned ;  rarely  shewing  themselves  in  the 
toil  and  follies  of  life,  but  which  press  into  notice  on 
partictilar  occasions  through  the  disordered  throng  of 
thoughts  which  crowd  the  avenues,  and  people  the 
busy  interior,  of  a  dissipated  and  care-hurdened  exis- 
tence. Bat  it  is  not  of  this  I  speak  now.  I  think 
that  the  mass  of  the  poor  have  more  reality  of  thought 
than  reasoners, — see  more  justly  the  true  character  of 
things.  Their  oecnpation  with  lahour  gives  this ;  they 
toil  to  exist.  That  is  now  God's  ordinance.  What 
they  get  outside  this,  must  be  reah  Speculatiou  has 
no  place  here.  They  may  know  nothing  of  a  revela- 
tion, but  if  they  have  the  thought  that  there  is  one, 
they  want  one  that  is  a  revelation  from  God, — ; 
something  He  has  told  them,  not  an  improved  Shak- 
gpeare.  If  they  have  Diana  and  Jupiter,  they  take 
Diana  and  Jupiter  as  realities.  If  they  are  under  the 
law  of  Moses,  they  will  not  spintualise  everything 
with  Philo,  or  his  modern  imitators.  They  will  take 
it  as  Moses  gave  it,  or  not  at  all.  If  they  are  idolaters, 
they  will  be  idolaters  bom  fide.,  not  readers  of  Lucian. 
If  they  are  sceptical, — if  this  pervades  the  population, 
not  merely  rehgion,  but  the  state,  is  near  its  end.  I 
mean  by  that,  society.  When  man  speciUates  on  the 
sanctions  of  social  life, — when  the  divine,  ever-hving 
power  of  faith  is  gone,  what  holds  man  subject  to 
something  superior  to  himself ; — when  what  links 
man  to  man  is  gone,  self  is  dominant,  conscious  that 
it  is  self.  A  few  minds  may  speculate  on  how  much 
may  be  true,  and  seek  refined  notions  out  of  the 
condemned  mass  of  materials ;  the  mass  of  men  will 
be  indifferent  to  all.  Despotism  or  anarchy  ensues. 
How  long  did  the  Roman  empire  survive  Lucian,  who 
was  but  a  sign  of  the  times  ?  or  the  French  monarchy 
the  Encyclopedists  ?  On  the  fall  of  Rome,  Christianity 
came  in  as  a  bond  ;  now  I  see  not  what  will,  save  the 
faithfulness  of  God  and  the  Lord  himself  from  heaven. 
^hflt  anythmg  is  true,  I  admit;  but 


6 

it  proves  that  there  is  moral  power  in  faith,  and  that 
the  absence  of  faith  is  the  destruction  of  society. 
And  upon  the  face  of  it,  the  faith  of  the  masses  is 
not  discriniinative  speculation. 

W.  But  are  you  one  of  those  who  take  religion  to 
be  a  means  subservient  to  society? 

H.  God  forbid.  The  revelation  of  God  is,  for  me, 
the  putting  an  immortal  soul,  through  grace,  in  com- 
munication with  the  eternal  fountain  of  blessedness, 
of  Ught,  of  love — ^with  God  himself.  Doubtless,  most 
important  revelations  accompany  it,  necessary  for 
the  existence  or  full  development  of  this.  I  have 
God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  I  have  the  blessed  re- 
lationships of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  without 
which  it  is  impossible  for  man  to  be  thus  connected 
with  God.  I  have  besides,  the  Church  united  to 
Christ ;  subjects  into  which  I  cannot  enter  now,  but 
which,  while,  when  revealed,  they  give  to  us  conscious 
links  of  union  with  what  is  divine,  and  develop  di^dno 
affections  in  the  relationships  they  place  us  in,  must 
be  the  subject  of  revelation.  Man's  mind  cannot  go 
beyond  its  own  sphere.  It  is  not  God,  and  if  it  is  to 
be  really  elevated,  must  be  elevated  by  something  that 
is  outside  and  above  itself.  That  is,  there  must  be  a 
positive  revelation  of  something  not  within  the  sphere 
of  its  own  proper  apprehensions.  It  may  develop  its 
own  powers,  it  may  create  poetically  what  is  within 
the  sphere  of  those  powers ;  but  in  the  nature  of  things 
it  cannot  by  itself  get  beyond  itself.  You  may  have 
Shakspeare  to  give  all  the  scope  of  the  human  mind, 
all  its  workings,  in  a  course  of  pictures,  from  its  high- 
est to  its  lowest  forms,  with  a  graphic  truth  which 
may  interest  in  the  most  absorbing  way  inferior  minds 
to  his — ^minds  which  cannot  do  this  for  themselves ; 
but  it  is  always  and  must  be  the  human  mind,  and 
within  the  sphere  of  its  own  limits,  or  it  would  not 
be  the  human  mind.  The  consequence  is,  that 
though  it  may  elevate  these  inferior  minds  above  their 
level,   it  contents  them  with  man,  and  in  result. 


by  excluding  God,  degrades  them  from  what  they 
might  be.  Poetry  is  the  effort  of  the  hmnan  mind  to 
create,  by  imagination,  a  sphere  beyond  materiahsm 
which  faith  gives  in  realities.  But  then  it  cannot  rise 
above  the  level  of  its  source,  whatever  displays  of  force 
there  may  be  by  its  being  conducted  in  a  secret 
channel,  aud  not  exposed  to  be  wasted  in  the  open 
intercourse  of  the  world.  In  result,  it  sinks  down  to 
the  level  towards  which  all  human  nature  runs,  and 
then  settles,  not  to  rise  again.  There  may  be  a  certain 
subjective  development  of  mind  in  its  use,  hut  no  more. 

W.  But  men  speak  of  the  inspiration  of  Shakspeare 
and  others ;  even  of  ordinary  men  under  happy  or 
religious  influences. 

If.  There  is  a  confusion  of  language  and  thonglit 
between  revelation  and  inspiration.  Wo  may  use 
the  latter  term  figuratively  of  the  animated  efforts  of 
the  human  mind,  compared  with  the  platitudes  of 
ordinary  life,  or  as  is  habitually  done  of  the  instru- 
mental power  by  which  unknown  truths  are  com- 
municated by  God  to  the  human  mind;  but  revelation 
IS  quite  another  thing,  of  which  inspiration  in  the 
highest  sense  is  but  the  form  or  instrument  (for  it  is 
both) ;  that  is,  the  actual  presentation  to  us  of  an 
object,  or  truth,  or  a  fact  not  otherwise  known.  Here 
I  get  an  adtUtional  object,  not  otherwise  obtained 
for  the  hiunan  mind.  As  to  will,  moral  or  spiritual 
qualities,  the  mind  may  or  may  not  be  capable  of 
discerning  or  appreciating  it.  That  is  a  theological 
question,  a  most  important  one,  but  not  exactly  our 
topic  now.  But  revelation  is  the  declaration,  the 
actual  promulgation  of  otherwise  unknown  truths ; 
often  those  which  could  not  otherwise  he  known. 
Sometimes  of  those  which  in  the  actual  condition  of 
the  individuals  could  not  be  known. 

There  is  another  enormous  moral  mistake,  that 
internal  power  is  that  by  which  man  advances  in  the 
moral  scale  of  being.  Power  in  man  is  limited  to 
what  man  is.    That  is  no  advance  beyond  what  ho  is. 


8 

An  acorn  may  become  an  oak,  but  in  its  nature  it  is 
never  but  an  oak.  Even  so  power  is  not  the  real 
thing  that  elevates  man  (though  in  man  tliere  is  an- 
other question,  an  oak  is  not  a  corrupt  fallen  thing). 
'^  I  can  do  all  that  may  become  a  man ;  who  can  do 
more  is  none."  There  is  man's  power  at  its  limit. 
If  I  may  quote  one  who  amongst  men  had  hardly  his 
like,  I  find  more.  I  only  say  now,  he  pretends  to 
more.  Let  history  and  facts  judge  of  his  claim.  I 
can  do  all  things  through  him  that  strengthens  me. 
Here  I  find  another  and  divine  source  of  strength 
carrying  him  morally  beyond  man.  But  to  state  to 
you  distinctly  the  principle  I  refer  to ;  a  dependent 
being  (and  a  creature  is  a  dependent  being,  or  a 
revolted  one,  perhaps  a  revolted  dependent  one),  but 
a  dependent  being  is  elevated  by  its  wants,  not  by  its 
powers.  Its  powers  may  develop  it,  but  cannot 
elevate  it.  But  if  I  have  a  want,  which  is  not  power, 
and  there  is  that  which  meets  my  want  outside  my- 
self, I  become  acquainted  with  it.  I  appreciate  it,  not 
by  power,  but  by  dependence  on  the  quality  by  which 
my  want  is  suppUed.  Hunger  is  not  power,  but  it 
enjoys  and  appropriates  food  which  gives  power. 
Weakness  is  not  power,  but  if  my  languid  body  leans 
on  kindly  and  supporting  strength,  my  felt  weakness 
makes  me  know  what  strength  is.  But  I  learn  more 
by  it.  I  learn  the  kindness,  patience,  goodness, 
readinesa,  help,  and  perseverance  in  helping  which 
sustain  me.  I  have  the  experience  of  independent 
strength,  adapted,  suited,  to  my  weakness.  I  know  its 
capacity  to  sustain  what  is  beyond  itself,  which  is  not 
my  power  elevating  itself  in  internal  development,  self- 
filling  power.  There  is  love.  Now  this  relationship 
of  wants  to  that  which  suppUes  them  in  another,  is 
the  link  between  my  nature  and  aU  the  qualities  of 
the  nature  I  lean  on,  and  which  suppUes  these  wants. 
I  know  its  quaUties  by  the  way  it  meets  my  not 
having  them,  my  want  of  power.  It  is  a  moral  link, 
too.     I  know  love  by  it,  and  all  the  unfolding  of 


goodness ;  self-power  never  does.  The  exaltation  of 
what  is  human  in  itself  is  the  positive  loss  of  what  is 
Di-vine,  that  is  infinite,  positive  loss.  There  is  im- 
mense moral  depth  in  the  apostle's  word :  When  I  am 
weak,  then  am  I  strong.  And  the  more  I  have  of 
God,  and  the  more  absolutely  it  is  so,  the  more  I  gain. 
All  is  appropriated,  but  self  is  destroyed.  It  is  not 
that  I  cease  to  exist,  or  to  enjoy.  It  is  not  a  Budd- 
hist or  stoical  pantheistic  absorption  into  God,  I  am 
always  the  conscious  I,  for  ever  ;  hut  an  I  which  does 
not  think  of  I,  but  of  God,  in  whom  its  delight  is. 
It  is  a  wonderfiil  perfection — an  absolute  deUght  in 
what  is  perfect,  but  in  what  is  perfect  out  of  ourselves, 
80  that  self  is  morally  annihilated,  though  it  always  is 
there  personally  to  enjoy.  This  is  partly  now  in  the 
foiTU  of  thirst,  though  there  he  enjoyment.  Hereafter, 
for  those  who  have  it,  perfect  enjoyment  face  to  face. 
God  alone  is  sufficient  for  himself,  is  arj-rxpx-n^,  and 
hence  not  self-seeking,  for  that  comes  from  not  being 
satisfied,  not  sufficient  for  self.  Out  of  Him  the 
a-j-rxpxsix  is  pride,  is  satisfaction  with  miseiy  and  itself 
a  sin — dependence  the  right,  holy,  lo^dng,  excellent 
place.  To  he  independent,  if  we  are  not  God,  is  folly, 
stupidity,  and  a  he,  Uving  in  a  lie.  If  we  are  God,  we 
must  be  the  only  one,  or  we  are  it  not  at  all.  Yet  in 
Christianity  we  ai"e  made  partakers  of  the  Divine 
nature,  in  order  to  our  having  the  fullest  capacity  of 
enjojanent ;  but  for  that  very  reason  have,  He  being 
perfectly  revealed,  such  a  knowledge  of  him  as  makes 
us  undividedly  delight  in  his  infinite  excellence,  and 
makes  our  dependence  to  be  our  deriving  in  love  from 
infinite  excellence,  and  in  our  normal  state  im- 
mingled  delight  in  it.  The  connection  of  the  deriva- 
tive and  perfect  objective  character  of  Divine  life  and 
love,  is  what  is  so  brought  out  in  John,  particularly  in 
his  epistle ;  it  makes  its  essential  depth  and  beauty, 
and  when  not  seized,  because  not  possessed,  its  difB- 
cnlty  and  apparently  mystic  character.  It  is  this 
which  makes  the  Trinity  have  so  sure  and  perfect  a 


10 

place  to  the  soul.  I  do  not  use  this  as  a  proof,  save 
as  the  real  present  enjoyment  of  anything  proves  to 
the  heart  it  is  true.  In  the  Father  I  have  absolute 
Godhead  in  its  own  intrinsic  permanent  perfection. 
In  the  Son,  I  find  what  is  Divine  (if  not  in  the  same 
perfection,  I  have  not  God  revealed)  brought  out  in 
man,  fully  wrought  into  all  that  is  sinlessly  human ; 
so  that  it  is  not  only  suited  to  man,  but  to  be  appre- 
hended (if  morally  capable  of  it)  by  man.  All  the 
fulness  of  the  Godlieaa  dwells  in  him  bodily,  at  the 
same  time  in  the  personal  relationship  of  Son ;  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  besides  my  having  a  life  from  God, 
and  so  being  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,  is  the 
power  in  me,  (morally  as  well  as  in  power  of  appre- 
hension,) by  which  I  apprehend  and  enter  into  com- 
munion with  God,  with  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
While  this  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  secures  in  my 
feebleness  the  truth  and  purity  of  this  communion, 
because  any  inconsistency  grieves  him,  and  He  works 
in  the  conscience  by  the  revelation  of  God,  though 
not  then  in  communion. 

Now  you  must  see  that  there  is  much  that  must  be 
directly  revealed  in  such  subjects  as  these.  Even  of 
what  is  bodily  brought  before  us,  as  in  the  life  of 
Jesus  on  earth,  though  in  itself  a  revelation,  an 
account  of  it  is  needed,  not  only  to  perpetuate  it — 
which  is  quite  true — but  also  to  give  a  Divine  view  of 
the  thing  revealed,  which  it  is  evident  man  by  sight 
would  have  hardly  seized  in  its  full  extent  or  bear- 
ings ;  or  could  not  in  its  links  with  other  unseen  or 
unknown  thmgs.  But  besides  this,  we  want  a  Divine 
account  of  what  is  short  of  the  revelation  of  God 
himself  to  man ;  namely,  a  revelation  of  the  terms  on 
which  man  stood  with  him,  and  of  his  ways  with 
man.  This  will  involve  man's  imperfection,  and  if 
historically  given,  the  expression  of  that  imperfection, 
but  will  be  God's  account  of  it. 

W.  Yes ;  but  it  is  just  when  we  get  on  this  ground 
that  there  are  difficulties  and  objections  which  per- 


n 


plex  the  mind.  Difficulties,  I  mean,  both  as  to  the 
record  of  truth,  and  as  to  the  moral  proprieties  of 
evangelical  truths. 

H.  I  do  not  deny  it,  not  that  I  judge  they  are  very 
weighty ;  but  aa  to  the  first  point,  it  does  not  sur- 
prise me,  that  in  a  record  which  reaches  over  some 
fifteen  bunilred  years  or  more,  committed  to  the  care 
of  man,  for  that  it  professes  to  be,  I  should  find  the 
traces  of  the  infirmity  of  man,  wliile  its  state  in  those 
circumstances,  and  its  whole  history,  is  the  most 
striking  possible  proof  of  the  providence  of  God.  Xt 
is  of  the  essence  of  a  revelation  made  in  grace,  to 
be  adapted  to  man,  comiected  with  man,  to  pass 
through  the  medium  of  man's  moral  nature,  and  he 
put,  so  to  speak,  into  his  hands.  It  could  not  draw 
the  sympathies  of  his  nature  in  the  same  way  if  it 
did  not.  It  would  not  associate  man  with  God — not 
connect  God  and  man  in  interests,  affections,  moral 
nature — give  a  common  ground  of  moral  association, 
if  it  did  not.  Hence  the  New  Testament  does  it 
much  more  than  the  Old — is  more  familiar,  more 
human,  takes  its  place  more  in  every  element  of 
human  circumstances.  In  the  Old,  after  the  reve- 
lation of  the  creation  as  a  stai-ting-point,  and  sphere 
of  God's  manifcstatiou  by  and  in  man,  I  find  history 
as  to  which  I  am  left  to  judge  morally ;  most  in- 
structive history,  if  I  know  how  to  use  it  ;  but  a 
public  government  of  this  world,  or  occasional  rela- 
tionships between  God  and  man,  in  which  I  have  to 
form  a  spiritual  judgment  how  far  men  are  up  to  the 
height  of  a  true  association  with  God.  For  the  true 
link  was  not  yet  formed  by  the  full  revelation  of  God 
in  grace,  only  a  partial  revelation  of  it  anticipatively, 
and  particular  communications  j  and  God  dwelt  in 
the  thick  darkness  ;  then  oracular  dicta,  a  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord."  God  shewing  grace,  speaking  to 
man,  but  speaking  himself  alone.  No  doubt  by  the 
mouth  of  man,  His  word  using  them  so  as  to  ap- 
n  sovereign  goodness  where  man  had 


12 

felled.  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  such  a  one, 
it  is  said.  But  it  was  as  an  instrument,  a  chan- 
nel of  communication,  so  that  they  searched  out  the 
meaning  of  their  own  prophecies.  In  the  New,  I 
find  a  history  of  perfection ;  for  God  is  manifest  in 
i&e  flesh.  It  is  not  communications  from  a  God  not 
revealed,  but  the  revelation  of  God.  Hence  it  is 
perfect,  on  His  part,  in  that  association  of  which  I 
spoke.  It  is  the  Word  made  flesh.  God  in  man 
moving  in  the  circumstances  of  men  amongst  men, 
and  is  not  what  I  have  to  judge  of  spiritually  in 
man,  but  the  perfection  which  judges  all  else ;  the 
truth,  an  object,  which,  if  I  have  a  heart  capable 
of  seeing  it  and  loving  it,  engages  it  absolutely, 
because  it  is  God,  because  it  is  man,  because  it  is 
God  in  man,  and  I  am  a  man ;  the  perfect  object 
linking  itself  with  every  moral  delight  of  my  new 
nature,  meeting  at  the  same  time  every  want  if  my 
moral  being,  in  perfect  grace ;  finding  i£  those  wants, 
jea,  even  in  my  sins,  the  occasion  of  manifesting 
^ace  to  it,  of  making  me  know  God  by  them,  at 
least  by  the  perception  of  the  way  He  meets  them  in 
love.  It  forms  and  fills  the  capacities  of  my  nature 
in  what  is  Divine,  as  beauty  does  a  capacity  to  per- 
ceive it.  Yet  it  meets  all  my  wants  with  good,  which 
puts  man  in  his  right  place  of  dependence,  in  grace, 
on  God ;  but  gives  entire  confidence,  because  He  is 
come  as  myself,  as  far  as  being  a  man,  in  every  thing 
but  what  is  a  defect  in  man ;  that  is,  sin.  He  is 
that  by  which  I  judge  everything,  not  which  I  have 
to  judge  as  a  history  of  man,  though  it  be  of  man  in 
various  relationships  with  God.  Besides,  I  have  in 
the  New  Testament  another  immensely  important  ele- 
ment of  our  relationship  with  God.  This  blessed  One 
was  rejected.  Such  is  the  history  we  have.  It  is 
:the  full  discovery  of  this  solemn  truth,  that  the  carnal 
mind  is  enmity  against  God.  And  the  other  part  of 
the  New  Testament,  is  the  unfolding  of  the  way  in 
which,  through  God's  being  sovereign  in  love  ovo 


man's  evil,  Ho  has,  in  the  perfect  display  of  right- 
eousness, been  able,  glorifying  himself  perfectly  in 
the  work  of  Christ  in  the  putting  away  of  evil,  to 
associate  man  in  hie  new  nature  with  himself,  out  of 
the  reach  of  the  evil,  and  according  to  his  own  per- 
fection ;  where  the  feebleness  and  the  misery  will 
and  can  exist  no  longer.  Thus  a  perfect  heavenly 
relationship  is  formed,  ourselves  holy  and  without 
blame  before  him  in  love,  and  his  own  children  in 
his  house,  associated  with,  and  like  him  who  became 
a  man  for  us  in  grace.  To  this  is  added,  the  various 
exercises  accorapauying  the  knowledge  and  faith  of 
this  in  weakness,  and  the  fitting  display  of  the  fruits 
of  it,  in  those  partakers  of  this  Hfe,  in  connection  with 
heaven,  but  in  the  weakness  of  an  earthly  vessel. 
This  display  of  the  Divine  in  man,  and  the  bringing 
man  up  to  God  in  his  own  blessedness,  form  the 
contents  of  the  New  Testament.  We  may  add,  the 
setting  the  world  right  ultimately,  iu  peace,  by  the 
Divine  government  in  man.  What  I  have  just  re- 
marked, if  you  examine  it  a  little  closely,  you  will 
find  to  be  the  difference  between  the  wi'itings  of 
Paul  and  John,  and  the  reason  of  the  special  attrac- 
tiveness of  the  writings  of  the  latter.  John  brings 
God  dowTt  in  man  to  earth.  It  is  the  Divine  down 
here,  and  it  is  the  perfection  of  loveliness  and  truth. 
Paul  brings  man  out  of  the  earth  and  up  to  heaven. 
You  will  see  that,  save  iu  casual  allusions  necessarily 
made,  or  complementary  to  the  main  subject,  John 
never  takes  even  Christ  np  to  heaven.  He  brings 
the  Divine  person  do\vn  here  in  human  kindness, 
diffusing  what  is  perfectly  divine  into  the  hearts  of 
men  that  can  receive  him,  through  his  own  person, 
and  at  any  rate  manifesting  it  among  them.  And 
hence  too  it  is,  that  it  was  Jolm's  part  to  go  on  to 
tbe  Apocalypse,  because  though  in  certain  respects 
on  much  lower  ground,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  govern- 
iiient  of  the  world,  it  is  still  the  display  of  God's 
^aracter  on  the  earth. 


14 

W.  This  to  mc,  though  thus  briefly  sketched,  is 

Erofoundly  interesting.  But  what  place  do  the  Psahns 
old  in  this  view  of  the  character  of  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments  ? 

H.  I  was  going  to  say  a  word  on  them ;  they  have 
their  own  and  a  very  pecuUar  place.  We  have  no 
devotional  pieces  prepared  for  the  Church  in  the 
New  Testament,  which  gives  this  point  more  impor- 
tance, and  I  think  additionally  shews  the  grace  of 
God,  and  the  perfect  and  Divine  harmony  of  that 
book  we  call  the  Bible.  I  say,  that  book ;  for  though 
there  be  many  authors  instrumentally,  it  is  one  book 
— our  Bibliotheca  Sancta,  as  Jerome  says. 

In  the  New  Testament,  the  saints  having  the  know- 
ledge of  perfect  Divine  favour,  the  love  of  God  shed 
abroad  in  their  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  given  to 
them,  and  that  blessed  Spirit  dwelling  in  them,  are 
supposed  to  be  capable  of  praising  God  freely.  It 
is  expressed  in  a  very  wonderful  manner  in  the 
twenty-second  Psalm.  After  giving  prophetic  utter- 
ance to  the  sorrows  of  Christ,  and  his  being  for- 
saken of  God,  He  is  heard  from  the  horns  of  the 
unicorns.  As  soon  as  He  enters  into  the  full  light  of 
his  Father's  countenance,  according  to  the  power  of 
redemption  and  the  work  that  He  had  wrought,  He 
declares  his  Father's  name,  as  He  thus  knows  it,  to 
his  brethren,  puts  them  as  He  is  in  relationship  with 
the  Father.     As  He  historically  did:  *'  Go  tell  my 

brethren, I  go  to  my  Father  and  your  Father,  to 

my  God  and  your  God."  This  was  a  position  entirely 
new,  consequent  upon  his  resurrection,  in  which  He 
had  not  only  taken  a  new  place  as  man,  but  acquired 
it  for  them.  Then  in  the  Psalm,  He  says,  **  In  the 
midst  of  the  Church  I  will  sing  praise  unto  thee.*' 
Our  praises  then  are  the  free  and  joyful  following  of 
Christ  in  the  praises  which  He  can  raise,  as  man,  in 
entering  into  the  full  Ught  of  his  Father's  counte- 
nance, according  to  the  work  He  has  wrought.  But 
this  could  not  be  till  perfect  and  intimate  love  was 


revealed  to  man,  and  men  were  bronglit,  according  to 
a  righteons  escreise  of  it,  into  the  enjoyment  of  the 
light  of  Clod's  countenance,  according  to  the  value  of 
that  work  which  had  given  them  the  title  to  be  there. 
Hence,  if  I  should  tind  the  same  perfection  pourtrayed 
in  the  Old  Testament  as  in  the  New,  I  should  know  it 
was  not  true.  Before  the  revelation  of  God  himself,  and 
our  being  brought  on  a  new  footing  into  bis  presence, 
that  is,  in  the  Old  Testament,  the  dealings  of  God 
with  man,  on  the  moral  condition  in  which  he  was  as 
a  child  of  Adam,  are  mifolded.  God  never  leaving 
himself  without  witness,  for  He  is  good,  but  for  a 
time  without  an  express  revelation  ;  afterwards  with 
one  of  promise  or  of  law,  and  the  moral  nature  of 
man  wrought  in  by  hopes,  fears,  promises,  warn- 
ings, judgments,  and  mercies.  In  a  word,  God  was 
dealing  with  man  on  the  ground  of  man's  reaponsi- 
bihty,  and  trying  the  effect  of  motives.  Could  man, 
in  flesh  walking  on  the  earth,  be  in  relationship  with 
God  ?  It  was  not  God  himself  revealed,  and  man 
reconciled  to  him  according  to  his  unclouded  heavenly 
character,  but  God  governing  the  earth  in  mercy 
and  righteousness,  and  man's  moral  condition  tested 
thereby.  On  the  one  hand  wickedness  and  self-will 
breaking  forth,  and  where  there  was  realty  grace, 
failure  no  doubt,  but,  faith  in  God,  confidence,  hope, 
integrity,  acknowledgment  of  sin,  dependence  on, 
and  delighting  in  him,  in  spite  of  aU.  But  man, 
not  being  reconciled  to  God,  knows  God  only  by 
his  ways,  and  a  word  adapted  to  man  in  this  outsido 
position.  How,  ^ith  failure  and  conscious  sin, 
could  that  confidence  be  maintained,  without  which 
no  heart-link  could  exist  ?  If  reconciled,  where 
the  Spirit  of  adoiition  is,  where  by  one  offering 
we  are  perfected  for  ever,  praise  is  easy  and  spon- 
taneous, though  acknowledgment  of  failure  be  called 
for.  If  repeated  sacrifices  give  momentary  ease, 
"m  these  were  the  witness  that  sin  still 
The  way  into  the  boHest  was  not  yet 


I 
I 


ft  'OH  th 


> 


16 

made  manifest ;  nor  was  God  revealed  outside  it.  He 
was  a  God  of  hope,  not  of  communion.  Here  the 
Psahns,  in  the  most  gracious  and  lovely  way,  find 
their  place,  not  the  peaceful  breathings  of  a  recon- 
ciled soul,  but  Gx)d  farnishing  the  true  but  tried  soul 
with  divinely  given,  and  therefore  surely  accepted  ex- 
pressions, of  every  feeling  which  a  soul  in  such  a  state 
could  need  to  express,  and  the  witness  of  the  entire 
sympathy  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  all  their  sorrows 
and  exercises  of  heart.  To  be  perfect,  man  must  be 
within — children  in  a  new  accepted  state.  But  for 
the  heart  divinely  quickened,  and  exercised  without, 
wishing,  hoping,  fearing,  confiding,  yet  tried,  guilty, 
sometimes  almost  despairing,  yet  still  clinging,  the 
Spirit  of  Jehovah  puts  his  word  in  the  tongue  of  the 
Psalmist,  to  give  a  Divine  utterance  to  otherwise  a 
perhaps  distrusted  feeling,  or  to  draw  the  heart  from 
a  feeling  of  distrust:  and  the  Psalms  become  the 
comfort  of  every  tried  and  godly  soul.  Hence  it  is 
that,  as  the  expression  of  a  soul  tried  in  the  present 
dark  government  of  this  world,  the  judgment  and 
destruction  of  enemies  in  this  world  is  looked  for  :  a 
judgment  which  must  take  place  for  the  power  of  evil 
to  be  removed  by  government  out  of  it.  The  Chris- 
tian has  nothing  to  do  with  that,  because  he  is  en- 
tirely associated  with  heaven,  enters  within  the  veil  by 
a  new  and  Uving  way,  and  will  leave  the  evil,  to  go  to 
heaven,  and  is  above  it  morally  all  his  life  long.  Hence 
the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  spiritual  minds  in  the  Old 
Testament  must  be  imperfect.  They  are  the  fruit  of 
grace,  giving  confidence  to  the  soul  when  yet  far  from 
God,  and  the  expression  of  its  feelings  at  that  distance, 
and  according  to  the  state  it  finds  itself  in,  looking  to 
God  in  and  out  of  that.  And  all  this  I  must  have  to 
know  what  the  true  condition  of  the  human  heart  is, 
looked  at  in  its  exercised  responsible  position  out  of 
paradise,  man  with  a  knowledge  of  good  and  evil : 
the  goodness  and  righteousness  of  God  as  i 
that  state  revealed  to  him,  and  all  the  vari< 


17 


iugs  of  bis  nature  under  this,  with  the  promise  of  a 
better  deliverance  to  come.  Christianity  is  another 
thing  altogether ;  exercises  there  are,  no  douht,  but 
they  are  the  exercises  of  a  reconciled  soul,  which  has 
its  place  and  dwelling  with  God,  kno^Ti  himself  in 
love. 

IF.  Bat  you  do  not  feign  that  Old  Testament  saints 
looked  ouly  for  temporal  promises  ? 

//.  I  do  not.  I  do  not  doubt  that,  according  to  the 
measure  of  their  faitli,  though  they  did  look  for  the 
exercise  of  God's  government  for  deUverance  here, 
yet  in  the  delay  of  this,  they  looked  out  of  it  all  to 
a  better  place,  though  obscurely  enough.  But  this 
changes  nothing.  They  looked  to  it  as  a  resource 
out  of  a  scene  they  belonged  to.  The  Christian  dwells 
in  it  if  in  his  right  place,  and  has  to  cultivate  the 
affections  which  belong  to  his  Father's  house  as  his 
own  home.  You  will  remark  that  I  do  not  merely 
mean  that  in  result  Old  Testament  feelings  are  im- 
perfect, for  that  may  well  be  said  of  ours ;  but  that 
the  basis  of  them,  the  moral  sphere  in  which  they 
moved,  necessarily  made  them  imperfect ;  they  were 
not  in  place,  if  they  were  not.  God  might  inspire 
feelings  right  for  those  without, — hope,  desire,  confi- 
dence ;  but  He  could  not  truly  inspire  to  those  without 
the  feehngs  which  expressed  being  within,  for  those 
feelings  would  not  have  been  true.  My  feelings,  if 
right,  are  the  feelings  of  one  «ithin  in  my  Father's 
house  as  a  known  home,  reconciled  to  God.  Theirs, 
if  right,  were  those  of  persons  without,  looking  for 
the  present  government  of  this  world,  and  confiding 
in  God  in  spite  of  subsisting  evil  in  a  world  to  which 
they  belonged.  He  that  is  of  the  earth  is  earthy, 
Bftjs  the  greatest  bom  of  woman,  and  speaketh  of  the 
ew^h :  He  that  cometh  from  heaven  is  aljove  all ;  and 
what  He  has  seen  and  heard  that  He  lestitieth. 

jr.  1  thiuk  I  understand  vou ;  but  it  was  very  great 
God's  entering  into  the  very  sorrows  and  cod- 


18 

Word,  famishing  them  with  assurances  of  his  faith- 
ftdness,  and  expressions  for  a  heart  which  could  not 
speak  as  at  peace,  reconciled,  and  within,  and  yet 
needed  the  sense  and  sustaining  of  favour!  Yet,  of 
course,  it  is  better  to  have  affections  which  belong  to 
the  house  developed  within  as  children  of  the  house. 
It  gives  a  wonderfully  interesting  and  enlarged  scope 
of  thought  in  reading  Scripture,  and  makes  Gk)d 
more  familiar  with  the  soul  as  truly  estimating  and 
dealing  with  its  thoughts.  But  these  saints  will  be 
in  heaven  ? 

H.  Doubtless,  they  will.  They  received  that  Divine 
nature  which  has  its  place  there,  but  not  in  the  con- 
scious heavenly  relationship  formed  on  known  re- 
demption. God  had  reserved  some  better  thing  for 
us,  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect, 
They  will  be  made  perfect  in  resurrection ;  but  what 
a  lesson  shall  we  have  learnt, — aye,  will  the  angels 
have  learnt,  of  the  ways  and  dealings  and  goodness  of 
God,  and,  instead  of  that  miserable  oturapxeea  which 
was  the  heathen's  boast,  what  a  moulding  of  a  thou- 
sand excellent  feelings  through  dependence  on  Qodf 
in  the  midst  of  evil  and  in  the  sense  of  imperfection, 
which  He  met  by  his  word  as  a  resource  for  faith. 
How  tender  and  familiar,  while  exalting  his  Majesty 
by  goodness,  God  thus  becomes.  Yet  it  was  right 
we  should  understand  that  by  a  perfect  sacrifice  we 
could  in  a  new  nature  enjoy  God  as  He  is  in  himself, 
and  that  is  our  Christian  place.  This  is  what  the 
apostle  unfolds  in  its  elements  in  Bom.  v.  Justified, 
for  it  must  be  a  divinely  righteous  thing,  or  it  is  not 
really  introduction  to  God's  nature,  we  have  peace 
with  God ;  as  regards  all  eml  the  question  is  settled ; 
grace  or  favour  wherein  we  stand ;  our  hope  that  of 
the  glory  of  God  himself.  These,  you  would  say,  are 
all.  Yes,  as  regards  my  place,  but  not  my  exercises 
of  heart.  "  Not  only  so,  but  we  gloni  in  tribulations," 
not  looking  out  of  them  merely  in  hope,  but  glory  in 
them  as  a  refining  work,  because  the  love  of  God  is 


19 

shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  given  to 
us,  and  I  have  the  key  to  all  my  Borrows.  God's  love 
is  the  joy  of  my  heart.  Hence,  again,  not  only  so, 
bnt  1  joy  in  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by 
whom  we  have  now  received  the  reconciUation. 

W.  It  makes  rationalism  and  infidehty  appear  very 
Buperfieial. 

H.  There  is  nothing  more  characteristic  of  it  than 
superficiahty.  It  never  gets  beyond  the  bark  and 
shell  of  the  Divine  fruit  of  the  Word.  In  the  midst 
of  the  most  admirable  development  of  Divine  ways, 
it  will  stop  to  complaiu  that  the  nomberinga  of  Israel 
and  Judah  are  not  the  same  in  Samuel  and  Chroni- 
cles. How,  they  ask  me,  do  you  account  for  that  ? 
Suppose  I  answer,  I  cannot  account  for  it  at  all.  I 
should  not  be  a  hit  the  worse  off.  I  have  a  positive 
proof  of  perfect  Divine  wisdom  in  the  book  and  in 
all  its  details,  for  these  details  give  to  the  whole  the 
character  it  has.  Man's  estimate  of  things,  partly 
influenced  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  his  thoughts,  his 
feelings,  the  evil,  the  rebellions,  the  faults,  the  un- 
belief, tUe  way  God  met  it,— all  go  to  make  up  the 
picture  of  what  man  was  before  God,  and  the  scene 
of  God's  dealings  in  mercy  and  truth  with  men,  till, 
as  it  is  expressed,  mercy  and  truth  meet  together, 
and  righteousness  and  peace  kiss  each  other.  Every 
detail  lost,  would  bo  a  loss  of  the  completeness. 
Some  trait  would  fail  of  these  wonderfiil  imfoldings 
of  what  man  is  in  relationship  with  God.  Suppose 
my  intelligence  of  some  of  the  details  fails  me,  that 
I  cannot  account  for  some  phenomenon,  I  lose  some- 
thing, of  course.  The  proofs  of  the  completeness, 
the  dealings  of  God,  however,  have  not  disappeared. 
I  cannot  (I  suppose  the  case)  explain  some  particular 
point,  nor  solve  an  apparent  discrepancy  in  a  number. 
I  pity  the  person  whose  perception  of  the  perfection 
of  all  is  hindered  by  a  difficulty  he  cannot  explain. 
To  my  mind,  the  greatest  part  of  these  difficulties 
are  the  fruit  of  the  ignorance  and  traditional  ■views  of 
b2 


20 

the  objectors.  This  Yolume  proves  it.  I  may  not  be 
able  to  solve,  God  may  try  our  faith  by  some  such 
things,  through  the  human  weakness  of  those  to 
whom  these  Divine  oracles  were  entrusted,  but  He 
will  always  answer  and  bless  our  faitli. 

W.  Have  you  any  case  on  your  mind  ? 

H.  I  judge  that  superficiality  is  universally  charac- 
teristic of  rationalist  views,  but  I  will  allude  to  one 
prominent  subject  with  them.  Before  I  heard  of 
rationaUsts  I  had,  as  others  no  doubt,  clearly  seen 
the  Petrine,  and  Pauline,  and  Johannean  characters 
into  which  parts  of  the  Divine  revelation  were  thrown. 
The  beauty  and  moral  harmony,  the  goodness  of 
God  in  this,  the  enormous  gain  and  advantage  to  us, 
which  fill  the  believer's  mind,  they  have  not  the 
smallest  perception  of.  They  can  only  spell  out 
possible  historical  inconsistencies,  and  think  of  the 
books  as  the  fniit  of  some  ecclesiastical  intrigues 
to  reconcile  Christian  factions,  or  give  the  authority 
of  apostolic  names  to  cover  resistance  to  heresies 
come  in  long  after.  That  God  in  perfect  love  to 
man  should  give,  in  one,  instniction  how  far  the 
Christian,  redeemed  from  the  world,  should,  as  a 
pilgrim  in  it,  be  connected  with  its  government  by 
God  as  more  directly  displayed  in  the  Old  Testament, 
as  Peter  does  ;  that  the  blessed  revelation  of  God 
himself,  as  it  is  expressed.  No  man  hath  seen  God 
at  any  time,  the  only  begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him,  and  of 
eternal  life  in  Him  in  all  its  nature  and  qualities 
should  be  given  in  John ;  and  man  presented  to  Otod 
in  righteousness  and  resurrection,  and  conferred  pri- 
vileges in  heaven,  be  developed  in  Paul :  all  this  is 
lost  on  them.  They  are  trying  to  prove  it  imposture, 
or  reconcile  dates,  or  discuss  the  possible  author, 
provided  no  one  pretend  it  to  be  genuine.  There  is 
an  incapacity  to  perceive  the  Di\dne  which  is  difficult 
to  conceive.  Yet  I  believe  it  is  useful.  Happily  the 
most  advanced  of  these  wise  men  are  so  entirely 


21 

imhiBtorical,  that  they  have  uo  credit  with  soter 
miuds,  even  those  who  are  not  much  affected  by  the 
Diviue. 

English  theologians  are  so  shut  np  in  traditional 
love,  that  they  think  rationalists  have  npset  all  in- 
sph-atiou,  if  they  overthrow  then-  own  traditions. 
Just  as  a  poor  Iloman  Catholic  turns  iuhdel  often,  if 
he  comes  to  think  a  bit  of  bread  is  not  the  body, 
blood,  soul,  and  divinity  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Thus 
our  essayists  tell  us  as  a  great  tliscovei-y,  that  uo  man 
can  now  suppose  that  the  tower  of  Eahel  was  built  to 
be  high  enough  to  e8caj)e  the  flood ;  a  puerile  conceit 
of  which  there  is  not  a  trace  in  the  scriptural  ac- 
count, but  an  immense  moral  historical  fact.  Their 
declared  object  was  to  make  themselves  a  name,  have 
a  centre,  which  should  hinder  tlieh-  being  scattered 
abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  It  was  cen- 
tralization, not  with  God  for  a  centre ;  but  to  com- 
bine the  whole  race  in  one  system  of  united  power. 
This  God  eonfoimded,  and  made  them  into  nations, 
which  they  bad  never  been  before  at  all.  This  im- 
mense fact  in  the  histoi-y  of  the  world  they  see 
nothing  of,  and  think  they  have  made  a  great  dis- 
covery which  upsets  the  Scripture  account,  in  shewing 
that  it  could  not  be  to  escape  the  flood.  "  No  doubt 
they  are  the  men,  and  wisdom  shall  die  with  them." 
We  get  in  this  part  of  Scripture  the  two  great  elements 
on  which  all  the  world  has  proceeded  since, — nation- 
alities, and  individual  ambitions  seizing  imperial 
power.  But  you  must  never  trust  the  statements  of 
this  class  of  persons  as  to  anjihing.  There  is  the 
greatest  pretension  to  new  light,  and  some  very 
questiouable  hypothesis  of  a  moment  is  stated  as  a 
settled  ascertained  fact,  with  a  coolness  which  is  a 
mark  of  want  of  the  honesty  of  a  conscience  fearing 
God.  In  these  EsKai/x  aiui  ileti'ncs  there  are  state- 
ments which  are  a  disgrace  to  any  upright  or  honest 
man, — Jesmtical  to  a  degree  which  is  suIEcient  to 
r  all  moral  confidence  in  one  who  could  have 


22 

such  sentiments;  the  publication  of  which  proves 
that  those  who  publish  them  are  arrived  at  a  point 
of  moral  insensibiUty  at  which  they  have  lost  the 
sense  of  shame  in  making  their  shame  known.  They 
are  not  aware  how  bad  it  is. 

W.  But  this  is  rather  strong  language. 

if.  To  be  sure  it  is;  there  are  acts  and  traits 
which,  if  they  do  not  excite  indignation,  one  is  a  par- 
taker in  morally.    What  do  you  say  to  this : — 

*'  It  is  stated  to  be  the  affirming,  that  any  of  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles  are  in  any  part  'superstitious  or  erroneous.*  xet  an 
article  may  be  yery  mexpedient,  or  become  so;  may  be  unin- 
telligible, or  not  easily  intelligible  to  ordinary  people ;  it  may  be 
con&oyersial,  and  such  as  to  proyoke  controyersy  and  keep  it  aliye 
when  otherwise  it  would  subside ;  it  may  reyiye  unnecessarily  the 
remembrance  of  dead  controyersies — all  or  any  of  these,  without 
being  '  erroneous ;'  and  though  not '  superstitious,'  some  expres- 
sions may  appear  so;  such  as  those  wnich  seem  to  impute  an 
occult  operation  to  the  sacraments/' 

.  '*  The  other  canon  which  concerns  subscription  is  the  thirty- 
sixth,  which  contains  two  clauses  explanatory,  to  some  extent,  of 
the  meaning  of  ministerial  subscription,  'That  he  alhweth  the 
Book  of  Articles,'  &c.,  and  '  that  he  achnowledgeth  the  same  to  be 
agreeable  to  the  Word  of  Gk>d.'  We  *  aUow '  many  things  which 
we  do  not  think  wise  or  practically  useful ;  as  the  less  of  two 
eyils,  or  an  eyil  which  cannot  be  remedied,  or  of  which  the  remedy 
is  not  attainable,  or  is  uncertain  in  its  operation,  or  is  not  in  our* 
power,  or  concerning  which  there  is  much  difference  of  opinion, 
or  where  the  initiation  of  any  change  does  not  belong  to  ourselyes, 
either  of  the  things  as  they  are,  or  of  searching  ror  something 
better.  Many  acquiesce  in,  submit  to, '  allow,'  a  law  as  it  operates 
upon  themselyes  which  they  would  be  horror-struck  to  haye 
enacted ;  yet  they  would  gladly  and  in  conscience,  *  allow '  and 
submit  to  it,  as  part  of  a  constitution  imder  which  they  liye, 
against  which  they  would  neyer  think  of  rebelling,  which  they 
would  on  no  account  undermine,  for  the  many  blessings  of  whicn 
they  are  fully  grateful — they  would  be  silent  and  patient  rather 
than  join,  eyen  in  appearance,  the  disturbers  and  breakers  of  its 
laws.  Secondly,  he  *  acknowledgeth '  to  be  agreeable  to  the  Word 
of  Gk>d.  Some  distinctions  may  be  founded  upon  4;he  word  '  ac- 
knowledge.' He  does  not  maintun,  nor  regard  it  as  self-eyident, 
nor  originate  it  as  his  own  feeling,  spontaneous  opinion,  or  con- 
yiction ;  but  when  it  is  suggested  to  nim,  put  in  a  certain  shape, 
"when  the  intention  of  the  firamers  is  borne  in  mind,  their  probable 
purpose  and  design  explained,  together  with  the  difficulties  which 


23 


eurrouDiicd  tlietn,  he  is  not  prepu^d  to  contradict,  and  he 
aclniowledgcB.  There  is  a  great  deal  to  be  said,  which  had  not  at 
first  occurred  to  him ;  many  other  better  and  wiser  men  Jhan 
himself  have  acknowledged  the  same  thing — why  should  he  be 
obstinate  P  Besides,  he  is  young,  and  hoe  plenty  of  time  to  re- 
consider it ;  or  be  is  old,  and  continues  to  submit  out  of  habit, 
and  it  would  be  too  absurd,  at  hie  time  of  life,  to  be  setting  up 

aa  a  church  reformer." 

"We  have  spoken  hitherto  of  the  Biguification  of  aubsOTiption 
which  may  be  gathered  irom  the  canons  ;  there  is,  also,  a  statute, 
a  law  of  tile  land,  which  forbids,  under  penalties,  the  advisedly 
aud  directly  contradicting  any  of  them  by  ecclosiaatics,  and 
requires  subHcription  with  declaration  of  "  assent "  from  beneficed 
persons.  This  statute  (13  Eliz.  c.  12),  three  hundred  years  old, 
like  many  other  old  enactments,  is  not  found  to  be  very  applicable 
to  modem  cases  ;  although  it  is  only  about  fiAy  years  that  it  waa 
said  by  Sir  William  Scott  to  be  in  viridi  observantia.  Nevertheless, 
its  provisions  would  not  easily  be  brought  to  bear  on  questioaa 
likely  to  be  raised  in  our  own  days.  The  meshes  are  too  open  for 
modem  refinements.  For  not  to  repeat  concerning  the  word 
"assent  "  what  has  been  said  concerning  "  allow  "  and"  acknow- 
ledge," let  the  Articles  be  taken  according  to  an  obvious  classifica- 
tion. Forms  of  expression,  partly  derived  from  modem  modes  of 
thod^ht  on  metaphvsicol  aubiects,  nartiy  suggested  by  a  better 
ac^naintance  than  heretofore  with  the  unsettled  state  ol  C'hnstian 
opmion  in  the  immediately  post-apostolic  age,  may  be  adopted 
with  respect  to  the  doctrines  enunciated  in  the  five  first  Articles 
without  directly  contradicting,  impugning,  or  refusing  assent  to 
tbem,  but  passing  by  the  side  of  them— as  with  respect  to  the 
humauifying  of  ihe  Divine  Word  and  to  the  Divine  Personali- 
tiea."— J&rays  miil  Heviewt.  pp.  182 — 186. 

And  remark  here,  this  does  not  refer  to  minute 
■diBcrepancies  of  view  which  are  often  connected  with 
the  very  structure  of  individual  mind  where  there  is 
no  real  difference  in  substance.  It  is  dii'ectly  referred 
to  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  incarnation  and 
the  persons  in  the  Trinity ;  as  to  this  they  justify 
signing  your  assent,  meaning  that  you  do  not  agree, 
but  pass  by  the  side  of  them.  Now  I  say,  that  a 
person  who  could  unblushingly  avow  such  opinions 
does  not  deserve  to  be  heard  on  atnj  moral  question 
whatever. 

yv.  But  you  cannot  charge  tbem  all  with  the  views 
of  one. 


\ 


24 

H.  Not  of  course  as  to  details,  but  when  they  agree 
to  appear  together,  and  bind  up  their  articles  in 
a  common  volume  to  act  together  on  the  public 
mind,  by  a  common  testimony,  they  are  practicaUy 
associated.  I  admit,  not  in  details  of  opinions,  but 
in  the  general  purport  and  moral  aim  and  character 
of  the  book.  And  I  do  say,  that  such  pages  as  182 
— 186  put  them  out  of  court  as  to  their  title  to  be 
heard  on  Divine  things. 

W.  They  are  very  bad,  in  truth. 

H.  We  will  leave  that,  though  to  my  mind  it  is  not 
an  evil  that  the  minds  of  all  who  believe  in  the  revela- 
tion God  has  given  should  know  where  the  system 
of  rationalism  leads  morally, — at  any  rate,  when  it  is 
attempted  to  be  connected  with  estabUshed  Chris- 
tianity. 

W.  What  were  you  saying  as  to  the  tendency  you 
had  observed  on  the  Continent  ? 

H.  We  have  indeed  had  a  long  preface,  but  the 
perfect  beauty  of  Scripture  leads  me  on. 

W.  It  is  no  loss  to  have  had  this  much.  I  believe 
that  the  positive  perception*  of  the  excellency  and 
beauty  of  what  is  true  and  good  is  the  best  security 
against  cavil  and  difficulties.  These  difficulties  take 
their  right  proportion  and  their  right  place.  The 
truth  is  divinely  certain.  And  there  are  difficulties^ 
not  objections. 

H.  Surely,  and  the  diflference  is  of  all-importance. 
A  person  who  makes  an  objection  out  of  a  difficulty 
proves  the  spirit  he  is  animated  with,  especially  when 
the  thing  he  objects  against  is  supremely,  lovely.  He 
shews  himself  incapable  of  judging.  Either  he  does 
not  perceive  the  loveliness,  or  he  dislikes  it.  But 
what  you  refer  to  was  this,  an  effort  to  popularize,  in 
Prance  as  well  as  England,  the  infidel  conclusions 
drawn  from  German  research.  I  bought  a  translation 
of  Job  by  a  first-rate  oriental  scholar  in  France, 
not  heeding  his  opinions,  but  hoping  to  find  some 
profound  examination  of  the  text.    I  found  in  his 


introduction  merely  the  assumption,  that  all  the  Ger- 
man infidelity  was  a  conceded  matter,  and  putting  it 
into  plain  French.  This  is  just  what  the  Essays  and 
RecU-icx  are  attempting.  Now  where  there  is  Divine 
faith,  this  does  not  do  much  ;  hut  the  mass  may  have 
educational  faith  in  the  Scriptiu-es,  so  that  they  are 
respected  as  true,  and  have  a  hold  on  the  conscience. 
They  cannot  liave  by  this,  the  proof  that  the  believer 
has,  that  the  word  has  divinely  reached  his  own  con- 
science. But  when  the  eonfiaence  of  those  who  are 
believers  in  the  Word  as  such,  by  habit  and  education 
merely,  is  gone,  you  have  to  begin  further  back  in  the 
matter ;  the  population  are  tending  to  apostacy,  not 
mere  heart  unbelief;  and  that  is  what  Satan  is  seeking 
to  do  now.  It  is  not  the  open,  honest  denial  of  the  old 
Deist,  against  which  the  claims  of  a  denied  Christi- 
anity, raised  with  most,  a  rampart  in  the  conscience 
too  strong  to  be  overcome  ;  but  the  keeping  up  the 
name  and  garb  of  Christianity,  and  blunting  its  edge, 
and  undermining  its  foundations,  so  that  what  is  of 
God  in  it  may  be  wholly  given  up,  and  the  authority 
of  God's  word  over  the  conscience  gone  ;  for  if  it  be 
God's  word,  it  has  absolute  authority.  A  man  that 
would  speak  of  Shakspeare  having  authority  over  my 
conscience  would  be  a  fool.  They  may  parade  hmnan 
inspiration,  and  compare  degrees  of  it.  God's  autho- 
rity is  wholly  gone,  and  man  is  free  in  the  perversion 
of  his  will.  Shakspeare  never  made  a  saint.  Modem 
infideUty  will  allow  Christianity  as  much  as  you 
please,  provided  Christ  be,  as  another,  a  minister  to 
elevate  humanity  as  it  is,  comes  in  in  his  own  place 
SB  one  eminent  instrument,  and  man,  I,  be  all.  I 
maintain  the  authority  of  God's  word  because  it  is 
God's,  that  man  is  lost  in  himself,  and  that  God  has 
appeared.  Owned,  we  possess  him  in  blessing ;  re- 
jected, we  are  his  self-condemned  enemies.  I  main- 
tain redemption,  which  brings  man  out  of  the  con- 
dition he  was  in,  into  another  new  and  blessed  one 
before  God,  according  to  his  own  righteousness  and 


26 

holiness.  I  do  not  want  humanity  educated,  but 
God  known. 

W.  I  see  you  haVe  finished  your  preface,  at  any 
rate,  and  that  your  zeal  has  Is^ded  you  at  Rugby. 
Let  us  hear  what  you  have  to  say  of  Dr.  Temple. 

If .  I  am  sure  you  will  excuse  my  zeal.  I  have  not 
an  unkindly  feeling,  that  I  am  conscious  of,  towards  a 
living  being ;  but  when  I  see  what  is  divinely  perfect, 
and  good,  and  reverenced,  flippantly  assailed,  I  have 
no  wish  to  exhibit  indifference:  and  when  men 
jeopard  the  faith  of  millions,  as  far  as  their  acts  are 
concerned,  when  they  treat  with  a  Ught  hand  the 
Lord  of  glory,  and  the  authority  of  his  words,  they 
merit  scornful  rebuke  for  what  they  do,  if  even  its 
execution  be  pretentious  and  superficial. 

Such,  whatever  my  feebleness  in  showing  it  may 
be,  is  the  judgment  I  have  formed  of  these  Essays 
and  Reviews.  They  are  mischievous,  not  by  their  depth 
and  seriousness,  for  they  are  neither  deep  nor  serious : 
but  as  a  spark  that  falls  among  shavings  in  a  ware- 
house filled  with  oil.  I  agree  with  two  Irish  Arch- 
bishops, that  they  are  dishonest,  and  with  an  EngUsh 
one,  that  they  are  very  feeble.  But  let  us  examine 
Dr.  Temple  on  the  education  of  the  world. 

The  fiirst  thing  that  strikes  me  is,  that  there  is  no 
glimpse  or  appearance  of  a  thought  of  anything  in 
man,  but  of  the  lower  part  of  man — of  man  arriving 
as  a  race,  at  a  certain  result  down  here  in  this  world. 
God  and  a  soul  in  connexion  with  him  are  altogether 
shut  out.  Supposing,  what  I  do  not  beKeve,  a  suc- 
cession of  races,  beginning  and  running  through  the 
same  career  in  a  succession  of  cycles,  this  would 
render.  Dr.  Temple  tells  us,  the  existence  of  each  one 
of  them  unnecessary:  the  annihilation  of  a  whole 
human  race  is  absolutely  nothing.  Now,  as  to  pro- 
gress in  this  world,  or  a  development  of  man,  as 
man  merely,  that  is  quite  true.  But  what  about  the 
relationship  of  the  souls  which  compose  the  race  with 
God  ? — ^Is  that  nothing  ?    Or  is  that  xmder  the  iron 


rale  of  a  cycle  which  leads  to  no  result  ?  The  snp- 
position  leaves  out  altogether  every  relationship 
between  God  and  the  soul.  Redemption  being  an 
infinite  thing  in  its  nature,  I  do  not  believe  there 
can  be  a  repetition  of  such  cycles,  because  I  beheve 
the  second  man  is  the  last  Adam.  Of  course,  this 
Christian  Doctor  and  instructor  of  youth  does  not 
trouble  himself  about  redemption  in  his  education  of 
the  world,  nor  will  I  here  insist  upon  it ;  but  if  there 
were  uniform  cycles,  and  the  result  of  each  the  same 
as  to  the  public  result,  as  to  humanity  in  this  world ; 
the  difference  might  be  infinite  as  to  everything  of 
the  highest  nature  in  man,  uidess  man  is  morally 
an  absolute  slave  to  the  circtuustances  through  which 
he  passes.  To  say  nothing  of  redemption,  that  is, 
God's  actings  about  men,  which  makes  the  whole 
theory  of  the  education  of  the  world  nonsense.  The 
whole  reasoning  of  Dr.  T.  excludes  the  idea  of  God 
and  a  soul. 

W.  Excuse  me ;  he  speaks  of  the  effect  on  the 
souls  of  men  in  the  second  paragraph  of  his  paper. 

if.  To  be  sure  he  does,  and  this  is  the  clearest 
proof  of  what  I  say,  and  that  it  ia  true  in  the  most 
offensive  way.  He  says,  that  on  the  supposition  of 
his  uniform  cycles,  the  Uves  and  souls  of  men  become 
80  indifferent,  that  the  annihilation  of  a  whole  human 
race,  or  of  many  such  races,  is  absolutely  nothing. 
Now  this  makes  the  soul  of  man  absolutely  nothing, 
but  for  a  result  of  progress  in  this  world.  It  goes  so 
fer  that  the  soul's  non-existence  after  death  is  abso- 
lutely indifferent ;  for  their  annihilation  ia  nothing,  if 
progressive  result  as  a  race  is  not  induced.  And 
supposing  the  soul  were  not  immortal,  and  were  an- 
nihilated after  death,  the  progress  of  the  race  could 
CO  on  just  as  well ;  the  succeeding  generation  would 
mherit  the  progress  of  the  preceding,  and  go  on  to- 
wards the  ultimate  result.  Those  that  were  dead 
need  not  exist  at  all  for  that. 

ir.  Yes,  my  friend,  but  there  is  an  aspect  of  this 


28 

yon  have  not  considered ;  it  may  be  alleged  that  the 
doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  is  necessary 
for  this  progress. 

H.  Excuse  me,  my  dear  W.  I  have  considered  it. 
Either  the  doctrine  of  the  immortaUty  of  the  soul  is 
true,  or  it  is  not.  (And  the  doctrine  itseK  proves  the 
doctrine  true).  If  it  be  not  true,  I  have,  on  the  suppo- 
sition you  make  of  its  being  used,  an  imposture  which 
involves  considerations  leaving  this  poor  world  and 
its  progress  in  the  shade  of  nothingness,  used  for  the 
sole  purpose  of  leading  the  race  to  progress,  as  its 
result,  a  use  which  makes  the  immortality  absolutely 
nothing — ^which  is  really  as  absurd  as  it  is  false  and 
dishonest ;  or  immortaUty  and  the  all-important  con- 
siderations which  accompany  it  are  true ;  and  they 
make  the  progress  of  the  race  a  mere  accident,  com- 
paratively, and  all  Dr.  Temple's  views  miserably  false, 
to  the  shame  of  one  who  could  have  held  them.  No, 
he  has  a  world  without  souls,  and  souls  without  God. 

W.  I  see  you  have  considered  it,  and  what  you  say 
is  true.  It  is  evident  that  this  system  ignores,  or 
worse,  God,  and  all  the  higher  parts  and  relationships 
of  man. 

H.  But  it  is  as  intrinsically  feeble  as  it  is  morally 
low.  His  statement  is,  "  Now,  that  the  individual  man 
is  capable  of  perpetual  or  almost  perpetual  develop- 
ment, from  the  day  of  his  birth  to  the  day  of  his 
death,  is  obvious,  of  course."  If  he  had  said 
development,  and  decay,  and  extinction,  (that  is,  as 
far  as  this  world  goes,)  he  would  have  been  right,  but 
that  would  not  have  served  his  purpose — a  cycle  of 
education  of  the  race  which  ended  in  decay  and  ex- 
tinction is  a  poor  kind  of  progress.  Yet  this  enters 
essentially  into  the  condition  of  man.  The  sense 
that  he  is  mortal  is  a  necessary  part  of  his  moral 
existence.  A  Christian  knows  it  has  come  in  by 
8in ;  that  it  is  a  silent,  yet  loud-speaking  witness  of 
it,  and  of  God's  judgment  against  it.  But  is  the 
education  of  the  world  to  end  in  its  progressive 


death,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  its  development  ?  If 
not,  the  analogy  is  wholly  false,  for  this  is  as  real 
and  trne  a  part  of  the  course  of  the  individual  as 
his  growth  fi-om  childhood. 

ff .  It  is  tnie.  I  suppose,  however,  Dr.  T.  does 
not  consider  the  world  as  arrived  at  its  dotage. 

H.  No  ;  of  course,  all  the  world  were  infants  or 
boys  till  now.  Now  tho  human  race  is  left  to  itself, 
to  be  guided  by  tho  teaching  of  the  Sjilrit  within. 

W.    The  human  race  !     Is  he  a  quaker,  then  ? 

H.  Oh,  you  must  not  look  for  anything  like  exac- 
titude of  thought  in  drawing-room  nitionalists.  That 
the  mass  of  men  are  heathens  is  all  nothing,  or  that 
the  Bible,  of  which  they  profess  to  be  teachers,  declares 
as  one  of  its  most  solemn  truths,  that  the  Spirit  is 
given  to  those  that  belong  to  Christ.  To  speculation, 
heathenism,  or  Christianity  is  all  ahke.  It  is  an 
clement  of  progress  of  the  human  race.  You  must 
not  be  so  particular  as  that.  You  must  believe  that 
tho  human  race  is  left  to  itself,  to  he  guided  by  the 
teaching  of  the  Sph'it  within. 

W.  Well,  but  there  is  a  revelation.  Surely  Chris- 
tianity is  something.  Do  they  believe  that  the  Son 
of  God  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  what  is  lost  ? 

fj.  Oh  !  that  is  part  of  the  progress — one  of  tho 
things  von  can  sign  your  assent  to  as  agreeable  to 
the  Scriptures,  and  pass  by  the  side  of.  It  is  "  hu- 
manifying  the  Divine  Word." 

ir.   Now  don't  be  bitter.    That  is  not  Dr.  Temple. 

H.  It  is  not ;  but  it  is  one  with  whom  Dr.  Temple, 
tho  head-master  of  Rugby,  has  associated  himself, 
and  given  his  weight  to,  in  the  hope  that  it  will  be 
received  as  an  attempt  to  illustrate  the  advantage 
derivable  to  the  cause  of  religion  and  moral  truth, 
'  from  a  free  handling,  in  a  becoming  spirit,  of  subjects 
peculiarly  liable  to  suffer  by  the  repetition  of  conven- 
tional language,  and  from  traditional  methods  of 
treatment.'  You  see,  however  independent  of  each 
other,  it  is  a  Band  of  Hope  Review.     They  approve 


I 


80 

of  each  other,  they  consider  the  articles  as  handled 
in  a  becoming  spirit,  though  evidently  some  were  a 
little  squeamish  m  doing  it.  But  we  will  go  on  with 
Dr.  Temple. 

Man,  he  tells  us,  cannot  be  considered  as  an  indi- 
vidual. 

This  is  a  most  startling  but  instructive  statement, 
which  I  must  take  up,  though  I  have  touched  upon  it. 
Note,  his  soul  is  individual,  his  responsibiUty  is  indi- 
vidual, his  moral  state  is  individual,  his  feelings  are 
individual,  his  conscience  is  individual.  All  that  is 
elevated,  excellent,  and  that  raises  him  above  the 
common  stream  of  passions,  is  individual.  All  that 
constitutes  him  a  moral  being,  all  the  inward  man, 
all  in  which  he  is  personalljr  related  to  God,  every- 
thing that  does  not  perish  with  his  death  :  and  all  is 
ignored,  cannot  be  considered,  by  Dr.  Temple.  He 
is  part  of  a  great  machine  formed  by  the  infltiences 
around  him,  that  is  all.  Neither  is  he  morally  indi- 
vidual in  himseK,  according  to  Dr.  Temple  ;  nor 
raised  to  be  so  by  a  known  relationship  to  God. 
And  this  leaks  out  farther  on.  In  speaking  of  the 
elements  of  progress,  he  says,  **The  conviction  of 
the  unity  and  spirituality  of  God  was  peculiar  to  the 
Jews,  among  the  pioneers  of  civilization."  Think 
of  the  unity  and  spirituality  of  God,  or  at  any  rate 
the  conviction  of  it,  making  men  simply  the  pioneers 
of  future  civilization. 

Dr.  T.  argues  that  a  child,  brought  up  from  its 
birth  apart  from  its  kind,  becomes  rather  a  beast  in 
human  shape,  than  a  man  in  the  fall  sense  at  all. 

If  he  used  this  merely  to  shew  that  God  had  so 
constituted  man,  that  he  should  learn  intelligently 
from  others,  and  not  grow  up  as  animals  with  a  mere 
instinct,  I  suppose  he  needed  not  have  feared  much 
opposition ;  but  when  he  uses  it  to  shew  that  man 
cannot  be  individually  considered,  it  is  utterly  illo- 
pcal.  That  man  learns  ^from  others  does  not  prove 
m  the  least  that  he  is  not  a  responsible  individual 


81 


when  he  does  learn.  Dr.  Temple's  Btatement  destroys 
totally  the  whole  moral  responsibility  of  man. 

That  there  la  progress  in  knowledge,  in  civilization, 
np  to  a  certain  point  in  man's  development  as  a  race, 
is  partially  true.  That  a  part  of  the  race  has  been 
placed  under  progressive  reUgious  light  is  also  true. 
Bat  that  that  is  the  obliteration  of  individuality,  or 
individual  responsibility  in  and  according  to  that 
state,  is  utterly  and  degradingly  felse. 

If  the  education  at  Bugby  were  necessary  to  enable 
a  man  to  go  up  to  Oxford,  does  that  prove  he  cannot 
be  considered  an  indi-iidual  when  he  is  gone  up  ? 
Bat  all  is  so  carefully  generalized  as  to  be  false  the 
moment  we  apply  it  to  facts.  Thus  Dr.  T.  says, 
**  We  may  expect  to  iind  in  the  history  of  man, 
each  successive  age  incorporating  into  itself  the 
substance  of  the  preceding."  Now  I  suppose  no  in- 
teUigeut  person  would  deny,  that  where  European 
civilization  has  prevailed,  the  acquirements  of  one 
age  become,  in  many  points,  that  is  when  discoveries 
are  concerned,  the  elements  of  the  next.  Every 
child  who  learns  astronomy  learns  the  Newtonian, 
or  if  you  please,  the  Copemican  system,  not  the 
l*tolemaic.  But  when  you  say  the  history  of  man,  it 
is  entirely  false.  The  vastly  greater  part  of  the  human 
race  remain  in  statu  quo.  The  Chinese  are  not  more 
advanced  than  they  were  centuries  ago.  Nor  indeed, 
may  we  say,  any  of  the  Asiatic  nations,  that  is,  the 
greatest  part  by  far  of  the  population  of  the  globe. 
Indeed,  they  have  in  many  respects  retrograded. 
None  of  the  Africans  have  advanced  j  on  the  con- 
trary, there  also  they  have  fearfully  retrograded.  In 
America,  Europeans  have  supplanted  the  native  popu- 
lation, but  there  has  been  no  advance  save  in  the 
conquerors.  It  is  a  question  if  Mexico  and  Peru  be 
as  civihzed  as  when  Aatecs  and  Tezcucans  possessed 
the  country  of  Anahuac,  and  Incas  exercised  their 
mild  despotism  as  the  le^timate  descendants  of  the 
son.    There  has  been  a  history  of  man  in  these  races 


I 


32 

that  have  come  in  connection  with  the  despised 
people  of  God,  but  no  where  else.  Somehow  or  other, 
the  people  whose  records  rationalism  delights  to  call 
in  question,  are  the  necessary  centre,  and,  I  may  say, 
foundation  of  all  known  history.  The  mind  of  man 
may  speculate  with  interest  on  other  histories,  the 
ruins  of  Nineveh,  and  the  hundred-gated  Thebes,  and 
Babylon  may  furnish  evidence  for  antiquaries  to  build 
dynasties  and  histories  on ;  but  a  documented  history 
of  those  early  days,  belongs  to  Israel  only.  It  may 
of  course  be  attacked,  and  conjectures  hazarded  to 
disprove  it,  as  they  may  be  hazarded  to  make  kings 
out  of  tombs,  and  centuries  out  of  priestly  traditions ; 
but  in  Israel  alone  are  the  documents  there  to  be 
disproved.  In  this  history  only  do  we  find  the  prin- 
ciples which  Dr.  T.  speaks  of  as  the  true  education 
of  man.  We  will  speak  afterwards  of  the  influence 
of  Greeks  and  Romans  on  the  present  age  and  edu- 
cation of  man,  but  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  his 
analogy  of  educational  epochs,  which  are  the  law, 
Christ,  and  the  Spirit:  for  of  course  we  must  de- 
cently Christianize  everything,  that  is,  reduce  Chris- 
tianity to  the  level  of  man  and  his  progress.  And 
this  introduces  another  immensely  important  point, 
carefully  suppressed  by  Dr.  T.  in  his  account  of  this 
progress  of  man.  I  mean,  the  fact  of  revelation.  He 
speaks  of  the  progress  of  man  ;  but  the  facts  in  which 
the  progress  is  estimated  are,  really,  exclusively,  re- 
velations and  interventions  of  God.  He  says,  '*  First, 
the  law,  then  the  Son  of  Man,  then  the  gift  of  the 
Spirit."  Is  this  progress  essential  to  a  spiritual 
being  ?  Is  this  each  generation  receiving  the  benefits 
of  the  cultivation  of  that  which  preceded  it  ? 

But  let  us  consider  the  facts.  However  he  may 
borrow  the  principles  of  his  education  of  the  human 
race  from  Scripture,  except  to  array  himself  in  these 
borrowed  plumes,  revelation  is  totally  ignored  and  all 
it  contains.  If  there  has  been  a  faU,  the  progress  of 
the  hum  r  aspects^  comes  to 


nothing  at  once.  We  are  fallen  beings ;  there  is  a 
guilty  soul  before  God ;  the  whole  scene  is  one 
depajted  from  and  out  of  the  condition  He  set  it  in. 
It  IS  in  progress  in  what,  then  ?  It  wants,  and  wants 
individually,  and  in  every  way,  restoration, — progress 
in  its  highest  relationship.  Christianity,  and  aU  the 
revelation  from  which  the  head  master  of  Rugby 
quotes  his  principles  of  progress,  treats  man  as  in 
this  state  of  alienation  from  God.  It  is  false,  or  the 
theory  is  false.  The  law  was  given,  but  broken.  The 
Son  of  Man  in  the  world,  but  rejected  out  of  it  by 
man,  and  a  work  of  redemption  revealed  for  a  being 
not  in  progress,  but  lost.  X  reserve  the  consideration 
of  what  thought  that  man  must  have  of  God,  who, 
looking  at  this  world's  universal  state,  does  not  believe 
in  the  fall  of  man. 

But  farther,  as  to  the  world's  history.  The  flood 
has  taken  place,  so  the  Old  Testament  teaches,  so 
the  Lord  declares,  as  Peter  warns  that  it  is  by  wilful 
ignorance  it  is  forgotten.  But  if  the  flood  has  taken 
place,  the  whole  race  liasbeenjudged  once,  and  judged 
for  the  progress  it  had  made.  That  judgment  will,  it 
is  true,  not  be  repeated,  but  the  now  world  is  reserved 
for  fire.  At  what  point  of  progress  will  that  come  ? 
Has  Dr.  T.  ever  heard  of  days  in  which  mockers  will 
be,  who  say.  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  for 
all  things  continue  as  they  were ;  of  perilous  times 
that  will  come,  in  which  the  Scripture  will  be  the 
resource  of  the  faithful  who  continue  in  the  things 
they  have  learned  ?  But  I  am  wrong  to  reason  on 
Scripture  with  them,  as  if  they  beheved  it.  Let  us 
take  their  own  system  as  they  take  it  up  professedly 
from  Scripture.  That  I  am  not  unjust  in  charging 
them  with  ignoring  this  mighty  dealing  of  God  with 
the  world,  which,  while  keeping  the  place  they  do, 
they  have  not  the  honest  boldness  to  deny,  while  in- 
twdnciug  what  sets  it  aside,  you  may  easily  see.  Dr. 
T.'s  words  are  these  :  "  The  education  of  this  early 
xace  may  strictly  be  said  to  begin  when  it  was  formed 


I 


LI 


84 

into  the  varions  masses  out  of  which  the  nations  of 
the  earth  have  sprung.  The  world,  as  it  were,  went 
to  school,  and  was  broken  up  into  classes."  Now  that 
refers  to  the  confusion  of  tongues  at  Babel.  You 
would  suppose,  that,  before  this  Rugby  education  of 
the  race  when  a  wise  master  began  to  deal  with  and 
educate  it,  in  order  that  there  might  be  some  hope 
of  the  race's  turning  out  well,  it  had  been,  as  yet, 
nurtured  in  the  graceful  afifections  and  first  confi^g 
impressions  of  the  home  of  its  childhood.  Alas ! 
no.  It  was  a  world  outcast  from  God,  so  bad  that 
He  had  to  destroy  it.  The  childhood  of  man  before 
it  went  to  school,  according  to  Dr.  T.,  was  violence, 
and  that  followed  by  sensuality,  fallen  or  not.  But 
the  flood — ^no  trace  of  it  is  found.  We  are  told,  that 
the  earliest  commands  almost  entirely  refer  to  bodily 
appetites  and  sensual  passions.  This  may  suit  the 
theory,  because  they  have  to  be  corrected  as  children, 
but  is  otherwise  a  dream.  There  is  no  command 
before  the  flood,  and  after  it  the  one  declaration  is, 
"  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood 
be  shed. ' '  It  appears  that  wilfulness  of  temper,  germs 
of  wanton  cruelty,  characterize  childhood,  and  are 
easily  corrected  by  a  mother  ;  but  here  there  was  no 
education,  no  wise  educator.  The  Governor  of  the 
world  left  the  childhood  of  man  to  itself,  to  run  into 
wanton  violence  unrestrained,  to  perfect  its  evil  edu- 
cation without  any  restraint  at  all.  This  was  a  singular 
system  of  the  education  of  the  human  race.  "  Each 
generation  receiving  the  benefit  of  the  cultivation  of 
that  which  precedes  it . "  "  The  easily  corrected  cruelty 
was  here,"  we  are  told,  "  developed  into  a  prevailing 
plague  of  wickedness."  Now  let  the  reader  remember 
that  this  was,  to  take  Hebrew  dates,  as  long  a  period 
nearly  as  since  Christ,  some  1656  years  ;  but  this  is 
not  all ;  from  thence  to  the  giving  of  the  law  there 
were  some  800  years.  That  is,  during  some  2500 
years  the  race  did  not  get  any  education  at  all ;  and  if 
that  history  is  to  be  believed  which  Dr.  Temple  uses  as 


p 


35 


his  proof  of  the  value  of  the  education,  the  whole  race, 
save  eight  persons,  had  been  destroyed  because  of  the 
result  of  the  education  they  had  given  themselvea. 
But  this  is  not  only  a  discrepancy  in  the  analogy,  but 
it  upsets  the  whole  system.  There  was  no  such  edu- 
cation going  on.  The  world  went  on,  on  another 
principle ;  leaving  man,  not  without  witness  indeed 
from  God,  but  otherwise  to  himself  and  with  no 
education.  And  if  Scripture  is  to  be  believed  as 
to  one  of  the  most  solemnly  attested  facts  iu  it,  the 
whole  world  was  judged  once,  before  its  alleged  edu- 
cation hfgan.  But  here  we  stumble  on  anotlier  strange 
instance  of  the  falseness  of  all  this.  I  quote  still  Dr. 
Temple.  "  The  world  was  once  a  child  under  tutors 
and  governors,  until  the  time  appointed  by  the  Father. 
__.  .  .  The  education  of  the  world,  like  that  of  the 
child,  begins  with  the  law."  Now  note,  not  only  was 
there  '2500  years  of  the  race  without  aoiy  education 
at  all,  if  we  pass  over  the  flood,  and  the  whole  world 
judged  if  there  was,  and  the  theory  an  absurdity ; 
but,  even  supposing  this  left  aside,  the  facts  are  mis- 
stated. '*  The  education,"  Dr.  T.  tells  us,  "  of  this 
early  race,  may  strictly  be  said  to  begin  when  it  was 
formed  into  the  various  masses  out  of  which  the  na- 
tions of  the  earth  have  sprung."  That  was  at  Babe], 
or  iu  Peleg's  time ;  but  there  were  some  700  years 
between  Peleg  and  the  law,  so  tliat  the  education  of 
the  human  race  began  700  years  before  it  began. 
And  I  pray  you  to  remark,  that  this  is  not  a  question 
of  confounding  chronology  with  a  great  principle. 
The  tlieory  of  Dr.  Temple  is,  that  the  dividing  mto 
nations  strictly  begins  the  education ;  it  was  the  form- 
ing them  into  classes.  But  the  very  vital  principle  of 
his  system  of  analogy  with  individual  education  is, 
that  it  began  with  law,  but  there  were  more  than 
seven  centuries  between  the  two.  I  suppose  the 
classes  at  Rugby  are  iu  before  Dr.  Temple.  That  we 
may  admit.  At  least  they  used  to  be,  as  the  rule,  at 
Westminster,  when  I  was  there ;  but  if  Dr.  Temple 
r  2 


I 


86 

were  to  leave  some  period  analoaical  to  seyen  centimes 
before  he  came,  I  am  afraid  the  sanction  of  the  law, 
not  the  law,  would  be  wanting.  What  riot  in  the 
schoolroom  I  It  is  true,  the  present  generation  may 
have  profited  by  the  cnltiyation  of  the  last,  but  at 
any  rate,  in  my  time,  we  should  have  had  notable 
confusion.  But  we  will  be  serious.  Dr.  Temple  will 
forgive  my  recollections  of  these  early  days ;  he  tells 
us  they  are  often  vividly  remembered.  But  I  turn 
to  our  Scripture  history,  and  you  will  see  the  whole 
principle  of  the  theory  proved  false. 

Scripture  treats  man  as  a  sinner,  to  be  restored  to 
Gk)d  or  judged :  rationalists  as  a  race  to  be  educated, 
and  the  previous  parts  sacrificed  to  the  condition  of 
a  little  fragment  at  the  end.  It  is  a  base  idea,  but  it 
is  its  jusfaaess  we  have  now  to  think  of.  Now,  in 
Scripture  we  are  carefully  told,  that  in  the  sense  in 
which  there  was  an  education  and  progress  in  it,  law 
was  not  the  beginning.  The  promise  came  430  years 
before  it.  Now,  this  is  an  all-important  principle.  It 
brings  in  Gk)d,  whom  Dr.  Temple  leaves  out.  Grace, 
only  in  germ  it  is  true,  precedes  law,  and  law  comes 
in  by  the  bye,  as  a  needed  convincer  of  the  conscience. 
That  is  the  Divine,  the  blessed  form  of  education 
revealed  in  the  word,  because  it  reveals  God,  and 
must  reveal,  therefore,  love  and  grace.  Law  may  be 
needed.  It  was  needed.  The  question  of  righteous- 
ness must  be  raised.  But  God  had  to  say  to  it,  and 
grace,  and  goodness,  and  love,  must  be  the  point  of 
departure  with  him,  because  He  is  it,  and  is  it  with 
man.  Dr.  Temple's  is  an  education  of  man  without 
God;  and  therefore,  as  he  cannot  deny  *Hhe  prevailing 
plague  of  wickedness,"  he  begins  with  man's  only 
remedy,  conmiandments,  to  an  uninteUigent  nature. 
But  think  of  such  a  scheme  which  lets  the  person  to 
be  educated  get  to  a  prevailing  plague  of  wickedness 
before  he  begins  to  educate  him.  It  is  well  Dr.  T. 
leaves  God  out.  But  this  confusion  of  Peleg's  time 
and  the  law,  this  lapse  of  some  seven  centuries, 


L 


37 


omits  facts  which  shew,  in  another  respect,  the  false- 
ness of  the  whole  system.  After  Babel,  or  Peleg's 
time,  when  nationalities  and  races  had  been  formed, 
a  kind  of  departiu-e  from  God  came  in  of  which  we 
find  no  trace  before.  Not  violence  and  evil ;  that  is 
the  recorded  state  of  man  before  the  flood.  Now, 
man  had  been  forced  to  recognize  Divine  judgments. 
But  far  from  the  true  God,  yea,  not  liking  to  retain 
the  true  God  in  hie  knowledge,  he  changed  the  truth 
of  God  into  a  he,  and  worshipped  and  ser\'ed  the 
creature  more  than  the  Creator ;  changed  the  glory 
of  the  incorruptible  God  into  an  image  made  like  to 
corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and  four-footed  beasts, 
and  creeping  things.  Yoiu-  fathers,  says  Joshua, 
worshipped  other  gods  beyond  the  flood;  Terab,  the 
father  of  Abraham,  and  the  father  of  Nahor.  Now 
the  God  of  gloiy  appears  to  Abraham,  and  calls  him 
to  leave  entirely  the  system  into  which,  as  Dr.  Temple 
justly  remarks,  God  had  formed  the  world — coun- 
tries, and  kindreds,  and  father's  house.  The  world 
was  broken  up  into  classes,  but  when  God  began  to 
educate,  He  called  out  of  all  the  classes  one  to  be  for 
himself;  not  indeed  by  law,  but  then  He  gave  the 
promises.  The  principle  of  a  called  people,  or  saint, 
was  brought  out,  and  Abraham  became,  as  an  im- 
mense principle,  the  father  of  the  faithful,  who  were 
known  as  called  out  of  the  world.  That  the  world 
was  educated  by  it  is  absolutely  false.  The  world,  or 
the  nations,  had  rejected  God  altogether,  and  taken 
devils  to  be  their  gods ;  and  God,  patient  in  mercy, 
begins  a  race  of  his  own,  calls  Abraham  and  his  seed, 
be  they  in  the  flesh  or  in  the  Spirit.  I  have  partially 
noticed  some  particular  proofs  of  the  progress  of  the 
world  according  to  Dr.  Temple  and  his  companions ; 
but,  as  they  belong  to  this  epoch,  I  will  refer  to  one 
or  two  of  their  discoveries  here.  Lamech  makes  no 
comparison  of  himself  with  God  whatever.  It  is  all 
a  dream.  Unless  taking  vengeance  is  comparing 
oneself  with  God,  hecaose  yengeance  belongs  to  him. 


<, 


88 

If  so,  many  are  guilty  of  it  still,  I  fear.  At  any  rate, 
he  compares  himself  with  Cain,  and  he  is  not  God, 
I  suppose.  As  to  the  gross  ignorance  as  to  building 
a  tower  high  enough  to  escape  God's  wrath ;  it  is, 
without  any  contempt  of  Dr.  Temple,  his  ignorance, 
not  that  of  the  sons  of  Noe.  They  acted  very  wisely 
according  to  man.  They  made,  what  Nebuchadnezzar 
tried  afterwards,  and  a  man  who  founds  empires  ever 
does,  a  great  pubhc  centre  which  could  be  a  name — 
which  God  alone  ought  to  have  or  give — ^that  they 
might  not  be  scattered,  but  have  united  force.  It 
was  to  be  a  Rome  in  the  world.  It  was  not  ignor- 
ance, but  profound  political  skill,  met  the  power  of 
one  who  had  other  purposes ;  and  under  his  hand  it 
brought  on  the  very  thing  they  wished  to  avoid. 
They  built  a  city  and  a  tower,  a  central  capital  to 
nnite  them  all  as  one  great  company,  and  a  tower 
which  should  distinguish  itself,  and  to  whidi  aJl 
should  be  bound  as  belonging  to  it.  Dr.  Temple's 
notion  is  ignorance  of  the  19th  century  after,  not  of 
the  22nd  before  Christ. 

But  to  return  to  our  history.  God  separates  a 
people  carefully  from  the  world,  and  gives  them  a 
law  when  He  has  separated  them.  The  world  was 
never  under  tutors  and  governors  at  all.  When  God 
dealt  with  the  world,  He  returned,  and  returned  ne- 
cessarily, to  the  principle  of  grace,  on  which  alone, 
even  if  law  existed.  He  could  really  deal  with  a  sinner. 
The  education  of  the  world  never  began  with  law. 
The  world  never  had  any  law.  God  <£d  give  a  law 
to  a  carefully  isolated  people,  and  carefully  isolated 
them  by  it ;  made,  as  it  is  expressed,  a  middle  wall  of 
partition,  so  that  if  a  Jew  associated  himself  with  the 
world,  he  was  a  defiled  and  guilty  Jew.  No  doubt  in 
this  law  great  principles  of  moral  government  lay,  I 
may  almost  say,  concealed ;  but  this  only  proves  still 
more  the  great  truth.  God  must  separate  a  people 
out  of  the  world  to  deposit,  in  a  system  carefuUy  ex- 
cluding others,  the  perfect  rule  of  creature  estate ; 


and  to  preserve  the  knowledge  of  one  true  God  in  a 
world  given  to  idols  in  their  will,  and  given  up  by  him 
to  a  reprobate  mind  to  work  all  uncleanness  with 
greediness,  as  every  one  who  has  studied  the  working 
of  heathen  idolatry  knows  they  were,  and  indeed  are ; 
and  the  whole  system  to  be  a  consecration  of  \'ice 
in  its  filthiest  and  most  abhorrent  shapes.  Yet  these 
efforts  of  God  with  Israel  were  fniitless,  and  the  law 
given  in  vain.  Israel  first  went  after  idols ;  and  when 
that  unclean  spirit  was  gone  out,  their  house  was 
empty,  swept,  and  garnished ;  they  neglected  the 
pearl  which  the  blessed  Lord  drew  out  of  the  setting 
of  the  law,  turned  its  outward  ceremonies,  which 
nnregenerate  flesh  could  perform,  into  their  righteous- 
ness, and  hardened  themselves  against  grace  and 
him  that  brought  it.  So  true  is  it  that  the  law  was 
not  given  to  the  world  to  educate  it,  and  the  educa- 
tion of  the  world  is  not  in  God's  thought,  that  Israel, 
in  order  to  be  taken  as  a  people,  is  redeemed  out  of 
it.  Till  that  redemption,  there  is  no  dwelling  of  God 
with  man.  Not  in  Paradise,  not  with  Abraliam. 
■Wlien  redemption  is  even  figuratively  presented,  it  is 
said  (Ex.  xxix.),  I  have  brought  them  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt  that  I  may  dwoU  among  them.  Hence,  as 
God's  dwelling  with  man  is  never  seen,  so  holiness  is 
never  spoken  of  till  then.  Because  redemption  is 
necessary  to  man's  being  near  God,  and  that  is 
(morally  understood)  holiness.  The  moment  (Ex.  xv.) 
Israel  is  out  of  Egypt,  holiness  is  spoken  of.  No 
doubt,  all  this  was  in  an  outward,  carnal  way  then  ; 
but  the  principle  taught  is  all-important.  Doubtless 
there  were  holy  persons  before ;  but  here  great  prin- 
ciples are  revealed. 

W.  Well,  I  must  say,  that  this  effect  is  produced 
on  my  mind,  by  the  facts  you  have  gone  through.  If 
we  are  to  take  the  Scripture  account  of  facts  (and 
what  you  have  remarked  is  true,  that  save  ignoring 
the  flood,  Dr.  Temple's  statements  are  based  on 
Scripture  statements),  but  if  we  are  to  take  them, 


I 
I 


40 

not  only  is  he  mistaken  as  to  the  alleged  fieu^ts,  but 
what  is  far  more  important,  if  the  Scripture  view  be 
true,  his  is  totally  false.  It  is  not  a  question  of 
details  of  ancient  history  which  a  rationalist  might 
contest,  but  the  whole  principle  on  which  Gk)d  had 
dealt  with  man  is  the  opposite  of  that  on  which  Dr. 
Temple  estimates  what  has  taken  place.  It  seems 
to  me  very  shallow  indeed.  It  shelters  itself  under 
references  to  Scripture,  which  might  seem  to  give 
credit  to  the  statements  with  those  who  have  not  yet 
thrown  oflf  all  respect  for  those  wonderful  records ; 
but  when  examined,  it  has  not  a  shadow  of  founda- 
tion. The  Bible  is  false  in  its  whole  teaching,  or 
Dr.  Temple's  views  are  as  unfounded  as  they  are 
trifling  and  superficial.  I  am  glad  of  this  conversa- 
tion ;  for,  though  I  reject  the  principles  of  the  book 
as  really  infidel,  and  morally  unsatisfactory,  I  had 
not  an  idea  of  the  hoUowness  of  its  views,  at  least 
thus  far.  The  utter  want  of  honesty  of  the  part 
which  speaks  of  consenting  and  allowing  had  offended 
me,  as  contrary  to  all  uprightness.  I  confess  that 
turned  me  at  once  away  from  all  confidence.  I  can- 
not conceive  how  a  man  could  openly  avow  such 
principles.  But  I  had  not  examined  the  reasonings. 
H.  Mark  another  thing,  dear  W.  It  is  a  point  to 
me  most  striking  in  the  character  of  this  system. 
You  may  have  the  law  for  a  schoolmaster ;  Christ  and 
the  primitive  church  for  an  example ;  the  Spirit  to  set 
you  free,  and  leave  you  to  yourself  to  be  guided  by 
the  Spirit  within ;  you  may  have  Greece  to  teach  you 
taste,  cultivation  and  logic;  Home  seK-restramt, 
obedience,  and  patriotism ;  mediaeval  popery,  to  keep 
Clovis  in  order ;  but  God  revealing  himself,  revealing 
himself  in  love  so  as  to  draw  out  the  heart,  to  teach 
it  goodness  by  its  enjojdng  it,  so  as  to  link  the  heart 
with  himself,  and  raise  it  above  the  carnal  and  worldly 
and  selfish  interest  of  this  low  and  sin-ridden  world; 
God  producing  the  reflection  of  his  own  nature  in 
the  thankful  and  enlightened  heart ;  God  revealing 


himself  to  man,  so  that  he  should  taste  and  enjoy 
what  He  is, — no,  that  must  not  be  ;  the  thought  of 
being  thus  iiuitatora  of  God  as  dear  children — you 
most  not  seek  it  here.  Everything  but  God,  every- 
thing for  man  to  think  well  of  himself  by,  to  be  what 
Paul  calls  gam  to  him,  that  is,  the  nm-ture  of  self; 
but  God,  no  :  no  revelation  of  Him  must  enter  into 
the  education  of  man- 

IV.  Ifstrae.  This  is  hnmensely  important.  How 
often  one  reads  books  vdtliout  seeing  what  is  under- 
neath the  surface.  But  this  is  indeed  grave ;  the 
whole  moral  education  of  man,  without  his  being 
brought  into  heart-association  with  God  by  the  ele- 
vating revelation  of  Him.  I  see  it  is  anti-Christian 
in  principle,  anti-Divine.  It  lowers  the  whole  of 
what  is  carrying  on  in  man  to  what  he  is  in  flesh, 
and  thus  separates  from  God,  instead  of  bringing 
to  Him  in  living  capacity  to  enjoy  Him,  and  making 
man  morally  liie  Him.  I  have  difliculty,  do  you 
know,  in  expressing  what  the  effect  is  on  my  mind  : 
for  leaving  God  out  makes  all  so  false,  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  express  anything  then  fully.  A  being 
who  can  exist  truly  only  in  relation  to  another,  can 
have  no  truth  of  his  existence  without  introducing 
the  other. 

H.  To  be  sure ;  and  then  if  he  be  a  sinner,  intro- 
ducing that  other  must  be  accompanied  by  that  which 
recoucilea  the  sinner  to  that  nature  according  to  ita 
own  holy  and  blessed  quahtJes.  This  brings  in  re- 
demption, and  the  education  of  the  world  is  trifling, 
immoral  nonsense.  You  must  give  up  that  which 
alone  elevates  man,  his  association  with  God,  or  as- 
sociate bim  with  Him  according  to  what  He  is.  The 
nature  and  character  of  God  must  be  maintained,  or 
it  is  not  with  Him  I  am  associated.  And  I  must 
have  morally  the  quahtics  which  judge  of  good  and 
evil,  as  He  does,  to  be  really  associated  with  Him. 
But  I  do  judge  the  evil,  and  see  the  guilt.  Now 
Christianity  meets  this,  and  gives  me  a  full  blessing, 


I 

I 


I 

1 


42 

because  it  gives  me  life.  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath 
Ufe.  He  is  a  life-giving  Spirit.  But  then,  besides 
that,  it  takes  away  all  guilt  from  me.  I  can  judge  evil 
fully  in  my  heart  and  conscience,  because  I  mow  I 
shall  never  be  judged  for  it ;  that  Christ  has  by  him^ 
self  purged  my  sins,  and  sat  down  on  the  right  hand 
of  the  Majesty  on  high.  I  affirm  that,  without  these 
two  principles,  a  new  life  and  the  perfect  purging  of 
sins  according  to  God's  nature  by  redemption,  no 
real  moral  elevation  of  man  can  take  place,  because 
he  cannot  be  spiritually  associated  with  God  accord- 
ing to  the  perfection  of  God's  nature.  The  com- 
munication of  the  Divine  nature,  though  absolutely 
necessary,  does  not  suffice,  because  the  communica- 
tion of  that  nature  makes  one  judge  evil  as  God  does, 
at  any  rate  in  principle.  I  see  the  selfishness  and  im- 
purity that  is  in  man's  mind — ^that  is,  now,  in  mine. 
And  for  that  very  reason^  I  see  guilt  and  wretchedness 
in  myself.  I  have  the  conscience  of  evil  or  guilt 
(not  necessarily  by  crimes  or  vices,  but  by  comparing 
my  whole  inward  life  with  the  loveliness  of  the 
Divine  nature,)  on  my  soul ;  my  conscience  must  be 
purged  for  God,  as  a  consciously  responsible  creature 
before  Him,  that  my  heart  may  be  free  before  Him, 
that  His  holy  nature,  which  must  repel  evil,  and 
which  is  the  very  source  of  my  dehght,  may  be 
maintained  even  for  my  soul  to  enjoy. 

W.  I  see  this  very  plainly,  what  God  is,  must  be 
morally  maintained  for  my  soul,  if  I  am  to  enjoy 
Him.  If  it  is,  I  must  judge  sin  as  He  does,  that  is, 
if  I  am  honest  myself.  It  is  a  gain,  in  a  certain 
sense,  to  have  a  bad  conscience  in  this  way. 

H.  Yes  ;  but  a  terrible  burden,  because  sin  sepa- 
rates from  God,  though  we  see  He  is  love — ^but  the 
purging  the  conscience  by  a  work  done  without  us, 
and  which  is  perfect  in  glorifying  God,  gives  me  an 
unhindered  dehght  in  Him,  and,  I  may  add,  in  the 
love  which  has  done  it.  God  has  put  this  in  the 
simplest  way,  blessed  be  His  name,  for  simple  souls. 


but  it  is  of  the  deepest  moral  necessary  truth.  Yon 
may  have  amiable  men,  but  no  God,  if  yoa  have  not 
this.  Wheu  readin^j  a  work  of  Maurice's,  a  person 
of  -whom  I  know  nothing,  and  speak,  of  course,  only 
of  his  works, — 

W.  You  mean  him  wlio  wrote  a  work  on  sacrifice, 
and  essays.  I  should  like  to  know  what  you  think 
of  him. 

H.  I  speak  only  of  his  books,  I  repeat,  for  I  know 
nothing  of  him.  I  should  say,  he  was  an  amiable 
man,  with  many  elements  of  a  fine  nature,  though 
with  amazing  confidence  in  himself — a  trait  which 
sometimes  accompanies  a  fine  benevolent  nature, 
wheu  it  is  not  humbled  in  a  Christian  way  by  the 
knowledge  of  itself,  and  the  supreme  excellence  of 
God  and  what  we  are, — our  wretched,  selfish,  appro- 
bation-loving hearts.  I  should  think,  too,  his  books 
shew  wants,  perhaps  divinely  given  wants,  in  the  soul; 
but  X  should  think  the  influences  his  soul  had  been 
under  were  half  Socinian  and  half  Quaker.  But  he 
has  no  knowledge  at  all  of  the  efl'ect  of  ha^-ing  a  con- 
science before  God.  I  said  all  along  as  I  read,  I  for- 
get which  of  his  hooks,  this  man  does  not  believe  in 
guilt ;  and  when  I  had  got  on  a  very  considerable  way 
m  the  book,  200  or  300  pages,  I  should  think,  I 
found  "guilt,  that  is,  guile."'  Now,  there  you  can  get 
the  key  to  his  whole  story.  He  may  have  judged 
some  evil,  but  he  has  never  had  bis  conscience  before 
God  at  all.  Hence,  he  can  turn  what  that  gives  into 
a  play  ou  words,  or  a  question  of  etymology ;  but 
what  a  tale  that  tells.  Ah  !  what  a  ditference  it 
makes  when  a  soul  has  to  say  to  God. 

W,  I  see  plainly  now,  both  what  was  attractive  in 
his  views,  and  the  mischievous  tendency  they  had,  the 
mischievouH  influence  they  exercised  on  my  soul.   In 


*  I  appreliend  tliis  !b  a  mere  blunder.  Quile  ie  the  same  aa  wile 

•  lilt        ■  '    ~  ...  - 


and  giiilt,  a  Saioa  ^ortl,  Soe  or  pmiifllmient ;  oa  now,  in  Qei 


I 
I 

I  wue;  ^ 

1 


u 

&ct,  it  strikes  at  the  responsibility  of  man,  oar  rela^ 
tionship  to  God. 

H.  To  be  sore  it  does.  Holiness  is  the  quality 
of  a  nature  which  repels  evil  in  its  nature,  and 
delights  in  what  is  good.  Bighteousness  is  founded 
reaUy  on  the  same  principle,  but  brings  in  the 
authority  of  God,  which  judges  of  this  and  the  re- 
sponsibility of  the  creature.  Now,  man  will  admit 
holiness,  because  that  exalts  man,  makes  him  like 
God,  excellent  in  himself;  he  has  **no  guile."  Righ- 
teousness he  does  not,  because  this  asserts  God's 
authority,  the  creature's  responsibility.  It  is  making 
good  God's  authority  against  evil  by  judgment,  our 
real  relationship  to  God.  This  man  will  not  submit 
to.  He  is  willing  to  be  free  from  guile ;  it  exalts  him 
in  his  own  sight.  But  to  be  under  guilt,  no ;  that 
humbles  him. 

W.  How  subtle  evil  is. 

H.  Yes  ;  but  a  personal  conscience  makes  all 
simple.  I  do  not  discuss  with  a  bad  conscience  ;  I 
can  principles  with  my  reason.  With  a  bad  conscience 
I  want  cleansing,  and,  because  I  have  offended  a 
loving  Father  and  God,  forgiveness  too  ;  and,  thank 
God,  I  have  it  in  Christ.  There  is  no  personal 
having  to  do  with  God  without  this.  I  may  theorize 
and  honestly  enjoy  my  ideas ;  but  theorizing  is  not 
the  knowledge  of  God.  A  truly  upright  soul,  a 
divinely  taught  soul  has  a  moral  need  that  the  love 
of  God,  the  favour  which  is  its  light  and  its  joy, 
should  be  a  righteous  favour.  As  Scripture  speaks, 
grace  reigns  through  righteousness,  hence,  that  God 
should  righteously  not  see  sin  upon  it ;  has  need, 
therefore,  that  the  conscience  should  be  purged. 
And  this  it  has  through  the  truth,  that  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  his  Son,  cleanses  from  all  sin.  Without 
it,  God's  love  would  be  an  unholy  love,  would  not  be 
God,  or  love  at  all.  We  walk  in  the  light,  as  God  is 
in  the  light ;  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  his 
Son,  cleanses  us  from  all  sin.    Hence,  comes  that 


bright  and  blessed  testimony,  tbongh  there  in  onfr> 
ward  figures,  He  hath  not  seen  iniquity  in  Jacoby 
nor  beheld  perverseness  in  Israel. 

W.  I  confesB  I  see  no  moral  perfection  maintain- 
able without  this,  for  sin  there  is  in  the  world.  No 
true  assurance  of  heart  with  God,  no  true  upright- 
ness in  man.  And  association  with  God,  fellowship, 
is  the  one  true  and  excellent  blessing  that  belongs  to 
us  in  this  world,  and  the  next. 

if.  Surely.  But  we  will  pui-aue  our  essay,  though 
I  have  not,  I  beUeve,  much  more  to  say. 

The  principle  of  the  essay  is  each  successive  age 
incorporating  into  itself  the  substance  of  the  pre- 
ceding. The  analogy  is  :  the  law,  Christ,  and  the 
Spirit.  But  this  wholly  contratUcts  the  principle. 
These  are  no  incorporations  of  past  growth  or  acquire- 
ments, but  specific  revelations  of  a  full  and  absolute 
character  in  themselves.  Indeed,  as  to  the  two  last, 
the  actual  coining  of  Divine  persons.  Not  only  so, 
bat  the  law  was  given  when  men  had  plunged  into 
every  loathsome  wickedness,  and  had  learnt  to  worship 
devils  instead  of  God  ;  so  that  God  had  given  them 
up  to  a  reprobate  mind,  even  as  to  what  became  them 
as  men.  And  it  was  given,  therefore,  to  a  people 
carefully  separated  out  from  the  rest  of  the  world. 
It  was  no  progress,  it  was  a  revelation  to  a  pecuhar 
people.  When  Christ  came,  it  was  after  this  had  been 
broken,  and  the  people  become  a  whited  sepulchre ; 
and  He  likewise,  though  introducing  universal  prin- 
ciples, separates  a  people  to  himself,  and  is  entirely 
rejected  by  men.  When  the  Holy  Ghost  comes,  we 
know  on  the  Lord's  own  authority,  that  the  world 
cannot  receive  Him,  because  it  seeth  Him  not,  neither 
knoweth  Him.  In  a  word,  it  was  no  progressive  in- 
corporation by  one  age  of  the  acquirements  of  the 
last ;  but  revelations  given  to  a  people  separated  to 
receive  them.  The  first,  because  men  had  departed 
utterly  from  God ;  the  second,  because  the  depositaries 
of  the  first  had  broken  and  falsifiied  it,  as  they 


I 
I 


46 

cified  TTini  who  came.  As  to  the  third,  it  was  mani- 
fested in  power  at  the  first ;  and  instead  of  progress 
or  development,  there  has  been  a  corruption  by_  the 
denial  of  the  presence  of  the  Spirit,  and  setting  aside 
the  word,  which  has  made  the  annals  of  the  church 
the  most  painful  history  the  world  can  shew,  as  has 
been  insultingly  said,  the  annals  of  hell :  and  if  the 
degradation  of  heathenism  was  more  open,  it  was  not 
so  morally  abominable,  nor  clothed  with  the  forms  of 
Christian  grace.  Sin  among  heathens  was  horrible 
to  the  last  degree,  and  consecrated  to  deities  who 
were  only  devils  to  help  men's  lusts  ;  but  there  were 
no  Christian  indulgences  to  allow  or  forgive  it,  no  tax 
for  what  it  was  to  be  compounded  at ;  no  selling  of 
grace  and  license  for  what  was  condemned.  This 
was  reserved  for  what  is  called  the  church,  and  in 
the  outward  sense  justly.    And  remark  here  another 

Soint  of  vast  importance  in  the  present  day,  when 
evelopment  is  so  much  spoken  of.  What  Gk)d 
reveals  is  revealed  perfect  in  its  place  and  for  its 
purpose  at  first ;  and  man  declines  from  it.  There  is 
progress  in  the  character  of  Gk)d's  revelations,  com- 
pared with  one  another ;  but  in  themselves,  none. 
There  cannot  be  progress  in  a  revelation.  It  is  itseK. 
There  may  be  in  revelations.  A  revelation  is  given 
perfect.  Man  declines  from  it  or  corrupts  it.  That 
man  should  make  progress  in  a  revelation  denies  its 
nature.  Now  the  things  Dr.  Temple  speaks  of  were 
revelations ;  dififerent  in  nature ;  but  still  revelations. 
And  when  I  come  to  Christ,  I  find  another  immensely 
important  truth — ^to  talk  of  progress  here  is  blasphe- 
my. He  is  Gk)d  manifest  in  flesh.  He  is  perfection. 
Hence  the  apostle  John  tells  us  to  abide  in  that 
which  we  have  heard  from  the  beginning.  And  I 
find  here  too  a  principle  of  Scripture,  the  ignorance 
and  denial  of  which  is  the  root  of  all  these  errors  and 
modem  reasonings.  The  Scripture  (I  am  not  now  to 
enquire  whether  its  whole  system  be  false)  presents 
Christ  as  a  second  man,  a  new  starting-point  of  the 


47 


rhmnan  race,  the  last  Adam.  There  is  no  progress  of 
man  in  flesh  spoken  of.  He  is  to  put  off  the  old  man, 
or  has  done  so,  and  put  on  the  new,  which  after  God 
is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  He 
is  to  reckon  himself  dead,  he  is  crucified  with  Christ 
— he  speaks  of  when  we  were  in  the  flesh.  That  is, 
the  hlessed  and  admirable  doctrine  of  Scripture  is  the 
absolute  moral  judgment  of  man  as  man,  a  child  of 
Adam  in  flesh,  because  sin  is  there  ;  and,  in  the 
delight  the  new  man  has  in  God,  he  cannot  bear  this. 
He  has  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  atfections  and 
lusts,  and  lives  as  alive  to  God  in  the  last  man.  I  am 
crucified  with  Christ ;  nevertheless,  I  live :  yet  not 
I,  but  Christ  hveth  in  me.  And  the  great  ordinances 
of  Christianity  declare  this  as  its  nature.  We  are 
buried  in  baptism  unto  death,  risen  again,  and  we 
celebrate  a  Christ  hi  the  Lord's  supper,  not  who  has 
instructed  us,  (though  blessedly  He  has  done  so  those 
who  are  quickened,  and  warned  the  dead,)  but  died  for 
ns.  Thus  Christianity  is  founded  on  the  total  con- 
demnation of  the  old  man,  (only  that  Christ  has 
died  for  it  in  grace,  and  thus  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin 
condemned  sin  iu  the  flesh,)  and  the  mtroduction  of 
a  new,  but  a  new  connected  in  the  power  of  Christ's 
resnrrectiou  with  that  which  is  heavenly,  where 
Christ  now  sits.  The  object  of  this  new  life  is  not 
here,  though  its  display  is.  It  is  the  tnie  character 
of  power  in  a  creature  to  hve  in  the  circinaistanceB  it 
is  in,  from  motives  and  a  power  which  are  not  found 
in  them,  or  else  he  is  governed  by  them,  that  is,  is 
weak.  So  with  the  Chnstian,  vfith  peace  in  his  con- 
Bcience  through  a  dying  Christ,  he  has  a  heavenly 
Christ  before  him,  and  his  motives  being  wholly  out 
of  this  world,  he  has,  through  grace,  power  to  Uve  in 
it  according  to  the  character  of  the  motives  which 
govern  him. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  unfold  all  the  exquisite 
internal  beauty  of  this  principle,  wrought  out  for  its 
perfecting  in  depeudauce  on  grace,  in  the  midst  of 


1 


1 


48 

the  conflicts  in  which  we  are  in  a  world  of  evil,  with 
a  lower  nature  in  itself  prone  to  it ;  and  the  continual 
association  with  Christ,  our  glorified  head,  the  Man 
at  God's  right  hand,  in  which  it  is  made  good,  so  as 
to  grow  up  to  Him  who  is  the  head  in  all  things. 
This  would  be  to  unfold  the  contents  of  all  the  Epistles 
as  the  development  of  it  in  teaching,  and  the  Gk)spels 
as  the  exhibition  of  the  perfection  of  it  in  Chnst: 
but  I  have  said  enough  to  show  that  the  system  of 
the  New  Testament  is  the  setting  aside  of  the  old 
man,  the  flesh,  the  first  Adam,  because  there  is  sin, 
(and  sin  is  become  unbearable  when  the  true  li^ht, 
Christ,  is  in  the  heart  as  life,)  and  the  possession, 
the  substitution  for  that,  of  the  new  man,  Christ  our 
life,  unfolded  in  a  life  which  we  live  by  the  faith  of 
the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  us,  and  gave  himseK  for 
us.  Was  He  a  point  of  progress  in  the  development 
of  human  nature,  or  Adam  fallen  life,  or  the  perfect 
exhibition  of  a  new  thing,  that  eternal  life  which  was 
with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested  to  us,  and  be- 
came the  source  of  it  to  others,  while  He  has  died 
for  the  guilt  and  sin  which  characterized  the  old  ? 

W.  I  see  this  is  indeed  an  immensely  important 
principle.  It  strikes  at  the  root  of  all  this  system. 
This  builds  up  what  Scripture  calls  the  old  man,  and 
develops  it.  You  say,  its  principle  in  fallen  man  is 
sin  and  self,  and  that  God  has  in  Christ  introduced 
a  new  life  in  Christ,  and  to  others  through  Him,  and 
as  He  has  cleansed  from  sin,  so  He  has  given  a  hea- 
venly object  out  of  this  world.  But  then  do  you 
mean  that  no  one  had  this  life  till  Christ  came  down 
to  earth  ? 

H.  No,  of  course  not.  Life  and  incorruptibiUty 
were  brought  to  Ught  by  the  Gk)spel :  but  this  life  did 
not  begin  to  exist  then.  Christ,  who  is  the  Lord  from 
heaven,  is  a  life-giving  Spirit ;  has  not  merely  a  living 
soul,  though  that  He  had  of  course ;  and  He  com- 
municated this  life  to  others  from  Abel,  I  may  well 
say,  and  doubt  it  not,  from  Adam  downwards.    But 


49 


then,  for  that  very  reason,  though  the  great  contntBt, 
the  enmity  of  man,  of  the  carnal  mmd,  against  God 
was  not  brought  out  till  the  Cross,  when  the  perfec- 
tion of  God  revealed  m  flesh,  was  fully  presented, 
those  who  partook  of  this  life  through  grace  were 
hated  and  rejected  of  the  world,  whose  hoasted  pro- 
gress is  depicted  to  us  by  the  new  philosophy.  He 
that  was  bom  after  the  flesh  persecuted  him  that  was 
bom  after  the  spirit.  They  were  moral  contradic- 
tions,— one  loved  God,  judged  self,  and  owned  God's 
authority ;  the  other  sought  self,  and  would  none  of 
God  for  that  reason.  Conscience  there  was  and  is 
in  all, — conscience  judges  good  and  evil :  but  a  new 
life  is  good  in  a  Divine  way.  Hence  you  will  find,  that 
with  all  this  modem  school  of  rationaUsm,  even  in  its 
most  infidel  forms,  Christ  will  be  recognized,  provided 
He  be  a  restorer  of  what  the  Scriptm-e  denoimces  as 
flesh.  They  wih  use  what  appears  Christian  language 
to  many  a  simple  mind,  but  the  just  condemnation  of 
a  sinner,  the  absolute  condemnation  of  flesh,  and  a 
new  life  in  Christ,  and  atonement  for  the  sin  of  the 
old  ;  all  this  will  not  be  heard  of;  and  into  this  anti- 
Christian  system  even  Christians  fall.  It  exalts  man  ; 
and  all  the  blessed  hght  of  God,  the  heavenly  place 
into  which  Christ  is  entered,  is  lost. 

iV.  But  what  do  you  say  to  the  other  elements  of 
human  progress,  Egypt,  Greece,  Rome,  and  the  hte  ? 

/i.  If  you  mean  civilization,  arts,  and  mental  de- 
velopment, and  cultivation,  and  more  particularly 
science,  I  do  not,  of  course,  deny  it ;  though  I  think 
there  is  a  good  deal  of  mistake  as  to  it.  Discoveries 
by  which  the  knowledge  of  nature  or  the  power  of 
man  over  it  is  advanced,  are  imdoubtedly  multiplied. 
We  know  more  physical  facts  than  our  ancestors. 
Astronomy,  Geology,  on  the  one  hand,  and  Railroads, 
Telegraphs,  Chemistry,  on  the  other  baud,  have  en- 
larged, not  the  domain,  but  the  appropriation  of  the 
domain  allotted  to  man.  And  with  every  increase  of 
knowledge  there  is  a  reaction.    There  is  more  realif 


] 


50 

and  less  hypothesis  on  all  these  subjects ;  but  I  doubt 
the  development  of  much  more  than  materialism  by 
this.  That  that  is  a  progress  I  more  than  doubt.  As 
regards  taste  and  cultivation,  or  intellectual  powers, 
I  should  think  also  progi'css  more  than  doubtful.  All 
now  is  at  best  imitation.  Take  Grecian  architecture 
or  Gothic  styles,  whoso  ideal  conceptions  are  the  op- 
posite of  one  another  ;  or  even  Italian,  all  attempted 
is  imitative.  In  intellectual  power,  I  suppose  Grecian 
and  Roman  was  as  developed  in  itself  as  any  now. 
Plato,  Aristotle,  or  what  was  more  profound  than 
either,  theBritish  triads  or  Bardic  philosophy  ,*  present 
the  expression  of  as  powerful  thought.  And  as  to  lan- 
guage it  is  admitted,  that  as  an  instrument  of  thought, 
the  Greek  stands,  of  all  commonly  known  languages, 
unrivalled.  The  powers  of  Sanscrit  I  am  unacquainted 
with,  and  but  little  with  the  capacities  of  the  daughter 
which  most  resembles  it,  they  say,  the  Irish.  In  phi- 
losophy there  is  more  truth  in  modem  times,  so  far, 
not,  as  there  has  been  progress,  but  as  revelation  has 
exercised  an  influence  on  it,  and  no  further.  So  that 
I  do  not  see  great  progress  even  in  these  earthly  things. 
As  to  philosophy,  all  is  necessarily  false  at  flJl  times, 
because  it  reasons. upon  the  present  state  of  man  as 
a  normal  one,  or  else  it  becomes  theology,  and,  there- 
upon as  its  necessary  point  of  departure,  upon  his 
relationship  to  God,  and  what  God  is.  Hence  it  is 
all  necessarily  false,  both  as  to  God  and  as  to  man. 
It  is  in  vain  to  say  that  you  must  not  bring  religion 
into  philosophy,  because  unless  religion  be  fable  it  is 
the  truth,  so  that  it  is  only  saying  that  you  must  not 
bring  in  truth.  There,  I  believe,  they  have  told  the 
truth.  That  man  is  not  fallen  is  a  calumny  against 
God.  A  God  who  made  this  world  directly  as  it  is 
would  be  a  weak  or  a  cruel  God.  But  if  man  be  fallen 
and  in  rebellion,  and  have  to  say  to  God  in  that  state  ; 
if  his  whole  moral  condition  be  the  acquired  know- 

*  But  licro  the  influence  of  Christianity  is  evident  as  in  Neo- 
plaloniBui. 


L 


ledge  of  good  and  evil,  far  from  the  Bource  of  good, 
tlien  reasoning  npon  his  relationships  to  God  to  prove 
what  thej"  are  nonually,  is  to  reason  always  against 
the  truth.  And  tliat  goes  far  deeper  into  the  whole 
system  than  men  are  generally  aware  of.  It  affects 
ever}'  possible  relationship  of  life.  It  is  the  reason 
there  are  magistrates,  the  origin  of  property,  of  lahonr, 
death,  inheritances.  I  take  the  commonest,  everj- 
day.  outward  things  on  purpose.  Philosophy,  since 
it  ceased  to  be  cosmogony,  is  reasoning  on  moraUty, 
ignorant  of  the  groundwork  of  the  highest  obligations, 
and  of  the  whole  state  of  things  on  which  moral  rela- 
tionships are  foimded.  Nothing  can  be  right,  or  set 
right,  ii'  the  world  has  departed  from  God, — because 
all  its  state  is  wrong ;  the  central  obhgation  is  lost 
which  was  the  groundwork  of  all  others,  though  those 
others  be  true, — unless  we  bring  in  the  restoring 
power  of  rcrralal  goodness  applied  to  that  state,  and 
that  is  Christianity.  Hence  it  is  a  necessary  conse- 
quence, that  all  philosophy  is,  and  must  be,  false. 
There  is  eridence  enough  that  evil  exists,  that  sin 
exists  ;  the  man  who  will  say  tliat  things  are  morally 
as  they  ought  to  be,  is  a  devil,  and  not  a  man,  take 
heathens  or  Christendom.  If  they  are  not,  there  is 
no  sense  in  not  beginning  with  the  truth  of  this 
state  and  its  remedy,  if  there  be  one.  But  that  is 
religious  truth. 

W.    But  you  have  made  a  sweeping  clearance  of 
philosophy. 

H.  Tnith  always  does.  The  mind  may  he  interested 
in  it  as  an  exercise  ;  my  own  has  been,  though  I 
never  pursued  it  far.  Trath,  as  to  its  title  at  least, ' 
had  too  early  possession  of  my  mind.  But  you  can- 
not deny  that  speculations,  whose  starting-point  is 
felse,  can  but  plunge  the  mind  farther  in  error  the 
farther  it  goes.  There  is  no  ttou  aw.  It  is  far  worse 
than  the  play  of  Hamlet  with  the  part  of  Hamlet  left 
out.  That  to  which  all  refers  is  wanting.  If  I  leave 
oat  God,  ail  is  esscntiidly  false,  and  if  I  bring  Him 


52 

in  and  omit  the  groundwork  of  all  present  relation- 
ship with  man  as  he  really  is,  that  is  a  state  of  sin, 
all  must  be  equally  false.  Sin  is  the  groundwork  of 
all  God's  dealings  now. 

W.  Dear !  How  do  you  mean  that  ?  That  is  a 
strange  statement,  is  it  not  ? 

U.    Is  not  judgment  in  respect  of  sin  ? 

W.    Well,  of  course  it  is. 

H.  So  much  so  that  there  could  be  none  without 
it ;  hence  in  itself  can  only  be  condemnation.  If 
God  judges  his  own  workmanship  as  it  came  out  of 
His  hands.  He  is  judging  himself,  not  the  work,  or 
if  you  please,  in  the  work.  But  if  it  has  departed 
wilfully  into  rebeUion,  judgment  as  such  must  be 
condemnation. 

W.  But  if  man  had  never  fallen,  would  there  not 
have  been  a  judgment  ? 

H.    A  judgment  of  what  ? 

W.    Well,  I  do  not  know. 

H.  Nor  can  you  know.  There  was  nothing  to 
judge,  speaking  of  human  nature ;  all  was  then  as 
God  made  it.  If  man  has  abandoned  God  and  gone 
into  sin,  I  repeat,  judgment  must  be  condemnation  ; 
and  that  is  the  ground  Christianity  goes  upon.  Christ 
comes  to  seek  and  to  save  the  lost.  And  so  every 
divinely  taught  soul :  "Enter  not  into  judgment  with 
thy  servant,  0  Lord ;  for  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man 
living  be  justified.*'  But  I  pursue  my  theme  a  little. 
Is  not  the  exercise  of  mercy  in  respect  of  sin  ? 

IV.    Of  course. 

H.    And  law  ? 

W.    Why  yes,  it  forbids  it. 

H.    And  grace  ? 

W.    Of  course. 

H.  And  salvation,  and  judgments,  and  patience, 
or  vengeance — all  is  in  respect  of  sin.  Hence,  the 
immensely  deep  moral  development  in  the  soul,  in 
its  relationship  with  God.  No  angel  would  know 
God,  or  be  in  the  kind  of  relationship  in  which  a 


53 

sinner  brought  to  God  is.  All  the  highest  attributes 
and  qnaUties  in  Godhead  are  brought  out.  Mercy, 
patience,  goodness,  condescension,  love  in  its  perfect 
exercise  in  the  shape  of  grace,  on  one  side,  and 
restoring  in  righteousness  on  the  other  to  perfect 
delight  in  itself,  in  a  word,  redemption.  The  inti- 
macy which  the  working  of  grace,  whether  in  the 
incarnation  or  in  the  soul  of  one  in  whom  grace  is, 
the  estimate  of  good  and  evil,  by  the  proximity  of 
what  is  Divine  to  enl  as  it  is  in  us  ;  yea,  the  com- 
munication of  what  is  Divine  to  one  who,  on  the 
other  side,  is  weakness,  and  yet  wilfulness  and  self, 
the  dependance  of  a  creature  who  has  both  on  con- 
tinual grace,  and  yet  the  capacity  of  the  enjo^'ment 
of  the  highest  good,— all  this,  which  is  not  Christian- 
ity exactly,  but  its  working  in  us,  gives  a  display  of 
Divine  wisdom,  and  is  itself  a  purifying  and  elevating 
process,  leading  to  a  knowledge  of  God  in  His  highest 
nature,  most  intimate,  and  yet  most  adoring,  which 
makes  philosophy  puny  and  dry  beyond  all  belief ; 
empty,  utterly  empty.  Christianity  is  light  and  love 
come  into  darkness  and  selfishness,  and  in  the  human 
heart  reaching  all  its  springs,  and  destroying  self  by 
shewing  it  and  replacing  it  by  God ;  and  this,  not  by 
the  flimsy  spinnings  of  the  human  brain,  but  by  a 
Divine  person ;  who,  if  Divine  desires  are  wrought  in 
me,  takes  me  out  of  myself  by  Divine  affections  in- 
stead of  exalting  self,  by  producing  in  it  qualities  to 
be  admired,  which  being  by  self  makes  them  bad  and 
false.  The  Christian,  qtid  Christian,  has  Divine 
qualities;  but  sees,  and  because  he  sees  only  God. 

W.  Why  you  are  growing  quite  eloquent !  but  it  ■ 
is  true. 

/-/.  There  is  nothing  so  eloquent  as  Christianity 
itself.  Did  you  never  remark,  that  Christianity  makes 
the  poorest  mind  eloquent.  What  is  eloquence  ?  Is 
is  not  elevated  thoughts  clothed  in  what  is  perfectly 
adapted  to  the  meanest  capacity,  and  enjoyed  because 
it  lifts  the  poor  heart,  wearied  with  commou-plaee  life 


54 

and  toil,  out  of  itself  ?  Now,  that  is  what  Christianity 
does,  because  it  reveals  a  Divine  person,  God  himself, 
who  has  adapted  himself  to  the  lowest,  yea,  the  vilest ; 
who  is  holy  enotigh,  for  He  is  perfect  in  it,  to  bring 
love  into  all  the  recesses  of  the  human  heart,  because 
never  defiled  himself,  and  awake,  even  by  its  sorrows 
and  its  miseries,  the  want  of,  and  to  the  enjoyment 
of,  the  love  that  has  visited  it.  It  has  set  too,  by  a 
glorious  redemption  and  atonement,  the  poor  soul, 
that  by  love  has  learnt  to  delight  in  light,  at  liberty 
to  enjoy  it,  because  it  is  spotless  in  it,  and  the 
adoring  object  of  the  love  that  has  brought  it  there.. 
I  look  around.  What  can  I  see  ?  Heathenism, 
men  worshipping  stocks  and  stones;  Christendom, 
what  would  often  disgrace  a  heathen  ;  yet  goodness 
and  wisdom  evidenced  in  the  midst  of  it  all.  What 
can  I  think  ?  All  is  confusion.  The  goodness  and 
wisdom  I  see  lead  me  in  spite  of  me  to  God,  and  the 
thoughts  of  God  confound  me  when  I  see  all  the 
evil ;  philosophy,  poor  philosophy,  would  justify  the 
evil  to  justify  God.  But  when  I  see  Christ,  the  riddle 
is  gone.  I  see  perfect  good  in  the  midst  of  the  evil, 
occupied  with  it  and  then  suiBfering  under  it.  My 
heart  rests.  I  find  one  object  that  satisfies  all  its 
wants — rises  above  all  its  cravings.  I  have  what  is 
good  in  goodness  itself.  I  see  what  is  above  evil 
which  was  pressing  on  me.  My  heart  has  got  rest  in 
good,  and  a  good  which  is  such  in  the  midst  of  and 
above  evil,  and  that  is  what  I  want ;  and  I  have  got 
relief,  because  I  have  found  in  that  one  what  is  power 
over  it.  But  I  go  a  Uttle  further  and  I  get  a  great 
deal  more.  I  follow  this  blessed  One  jfrom  whom  all 
have  received  good,  and  who  has  wrought  it  with 
unwearied  patience,  and  I  hear  the  shouts  of  a  giddy 
multitude,  and  I  trace  the  dark  plans  of  jealous  ene- 
mies, man  who  cannot  bear  good ;  I  see  high  judges 
who  cannot  occupy  themselves  with  what  is  despised 
in  the  world,  and  would  quiet  malice  by  letting  it 
have  its  way,  and  goodness  the  victim  of  it.     But  a 


55 


little  thonglit  leads  me  to  see  in  a  nearer  view,  what 
man  is  :  hatred  agaiust  God  and  good.  Ohi  what  a 
display  !  The  truest  frieud  denies,  the  nearest  betrays, 
the  weaker  ones  who  are  honest  flee.  Priests,  set  to 
have  compassion  on  ignorant  failure,  plead  furiously 
against  innocence.  The  jndge  washing  his  hands  of 
condemned  innocence.  Goodness  ahsolutely  aloue, 
and  the  world,  all  men,  enmity,  universal  enmity, 
against  it.  Perfect  hght  has  brought  out  the  dark- 
ness ;  perfect  love,  jealous  hatred.  Self  would  have 
its  way  and  not  have  God,  and  the  cross  closes  the 
scene,  as  far  as  man  is  concerned.  The  carnal  mind 
is  enmity  against  God.  But  oh  !  here  is  what  I  want. 
Oh  1  where  can  I  turn  from  myself  ?  Can  I  set  up 
to  be  better  than  my  neighbours  ?  No,  it  is  myself. 
The  sight  of  a  rejected  Christ  has  discovered  myself 
to  myself,  the  deepest  recesses  of  my  heart  are  laid 
bare,  and  self,  hon-ible  self,  is  there.  But  not  on  the 
cross.  There  is  none.  And  the  infinite  love  of  God 
rises  and  shines  in  its  own  perfection  above  it  all. 
1  can  adore  God  in  love,  if  I  abhor  myself.  Man  is 
met,  risen  above,  set  aside  in  his  evil,  ahsoluti;  as  it 
IB  in  itself  when  searched  out.  The  revelation  of  God 
in  Christ  has  proved  it  in  all  its  extent  on  the  cross. 
That  was  hatred  against  love  in  God  ;  but  it  was  per- 
fect love  to  those  that  were  hating  it,  and  love  when 
and  where  they  were  sucli.  It  was  tlie  perfect  hatred 
of  man,  and  the  perfect  love  of  God  doing  for  him 
that  hated  Imu,  what  put  away  the  hatred  and  blotted 
oat  the  sin  that  expressed  it.  There  is  nothing  Uke 
the  cross.  It  is  the  meeting  of  the  perfect  sin  of 
man  i,vith  the  perfect  love  of  God.  Sin  risen  up  to 
its  highest  point  of  evil  and  gone,  put  away,  and  lost 
in  its  own  worst  act.  God  is  above  man  even  in  the 
height  of  his  sin ;  not  in  allowing  it,  but  in  putting 
it  away  by  Christ  dying  for  it  in  love.  The  soldier's 
iuBiiltiug  spear,  the  witness,  if  not  the  instrument  of 
death,  was  answered  by  the  blood  and  water  which 
expiated  and  puritied  from  the  blow  which  brought  it 


56 

out.  Sin  was  known,  and  to  have  a  trae  heart  it 
must  be  known,  and  God  was  known,  known  in  light, 
and  the  upright  heart  wants  that,  but  known  in  per- 
fect love,  before  which  we  had  no  need  to  hide  or 
screen  the  sin.  No  sin  allowed,  but  no  sin  leffc  on  the 
conscience.  All  our  intercourse  with  God  founded  on 
this — ^grace  reigning  through  righteousness.  Shall 
we  turn  to  learn  of  Greeks  and  Romans  after  this  ? 

W.  God  forbid.  It  is  a  wonderful  scene.  .  There 
is,  in  truth,  nothing  Uke  it. 

H.  Nothing  in  heaven  or  earth,  save  He  who  was 
there  for  us.  The  glory  .we  shall  share  with  Him; 
but  on  the  cross  He  was  alone.  He  remains  alone  in 
its  glory.  Associated  with  Him  there,  nothing  can 
be,  save  as  it  is  the  expression  of  the  nature  which 
was  revealed  and  glorified  in  it.  That  we  find  ever  in 
God  who  is  thus  known.  Eternal  life  is  become  thus 
association  with  God.  But,  though  reluctantly,  I  must 
turn  again  to  our  essay,  to  the  effort  to  supplant  the 
cross,  for  such  it  is,  by  the  progress  of  corrupt  human 
nature, — ^the  cross,  which  writes  death  on  corrupt 
man,  and  brings  in  a  new  and  Divine  man  risen  up 
out  of  that  death,  and  a  walk  in  newness  of  life. 
The  system,  however,  we  have  discussed,  as  far  as  a 
brief  conversation  will  allow ;  but  there  are  two  or 
three  passages  which  it  may  be  useful  to  notice,  some 
of  them  shewing  the  animus  of  this  and  of  all  these 
Essays,  and  of  the  whole  school,  and  the  miserable 
ground  on  which  they  stand. 

As  to  mere  intellectual  progress  in  the  sphere  of 
knowledge,  no  one,  of  course,  questions  it.  I  may 
pass  over  Egypt,  though  boasted  Greece  was,  as  the 
Egyptian  priests  told  Herodotus,  a  shallow  copy  turned 
into  poetry  of  far  deeper  moral  intuitions  found  in 
Egyptian  mythology,  deeper  because  nearer  the  source 
of  ancient  truths.  But  as  to  Greece  and  Rome,  no 
one  denies  that,  as  regards  the  upper  orders,  they  ex- 
ercise an  influence  over  the  minds  of  the  present  age 
in  virtue  of  their  education.    Whether  it  be  in  all 


respects  an  advantage  may  be  doubted.     They  are  I 
Dot  what  is  highest  in  motive  or  thought,  I  judge,  but 
BO  it  is.    That  there  is  progress,  I  cannot  exactly  see 
in  it,  because  we  go  btu'k  for  models  and  influence.    If 
Bome   bad   been   forgotten,  and   we   were   a  fuller 
and  riper   development    of  what   was   gone  by,   Ij 
shonld   understand   progress.      But  this  is  not  so,  T 
We  try  and  get  back  to  what  they  displayed.     How  J 
that  is  progress,  I  do  not  understand.    In  progress,  I  [ 
leave  behind  what  preceded  me.    Copying  Raphael,  if  1 
I  can,  is  not  progi'ess  in  painting  beyond  Raphael, 
though   that   copying   exercise    an    miluence   over  1 
me.     Then  as  to  patriotism.     It  is  hmnan  nature.  ( 


Kome  was  heard  of 


wO^t 


Trip  I 


was  before  i 


If  we  desire  to  learn  bow  con- 
summate selfishness,  which  broke  through  every 
honourable  and  generous  feeling,  and  trampled  on 
all  the  world,  disguised  itself  under  the  name  of 
patriotism,  we  may  surely  learn  it  in  Rome  ;  or  how 
democracy  or  human  will  closed  in  servility,  and 
tried  to  hide  its  pain  when  oppressed  in  letting  loose 
the  same  will  in  ^ice,  we  may  go  to  Rome.  If  Greece 
have  given  reason  and  taste,  I  can  only  repeat,  this  is 
not  progress  in  ns.  If  heartlessness  and  poetry  for 
conscience,  if  vanity  and  talent  are  a  model,  Greece 
may  shine  pre-eminent.  Cultivation,  I  admit,  as  far 
as  it  can  go  on  without  morality.  But  immoral 
beauty,  and  such  was  the  mind  of  Greece,  which 
excludes  the  truly  divine,  (for  even  Plato  declared 
the  impoaeibility  of  any  direct  connection  between 
the  sui)reme  God  and  a  creature,  whence  probably 
Justin  Martyr  did  too,)  which  has  the  creatures  of 
imagination  not  of  spiritual  need  for  gods,  which 
does  not  look  at  another  world, — such  beauty  as  j 
tliis,  admittmg  in  the  fullest  way  its  very  high  I 
development  there,  is  a  very  doubtful  subject  of  ' 
atlmiration,  however  it  may  call  out  certain  faculties, 
which  no  one  denies.  A  Hvely  imagination  con- 
nected with  excessive  vanitv,  and  identified  with  im- 


68 

morality,  is  not  a  picture  which  attracts  me.  **  What 
sort  of  morality  the  Gentiles  would  have  handed  down 
to  us,"  .  .  .  Dr.  Temple  tells  us,  *'  is  clear."  I 
do  not  know  (though  the  destruction  of  mental  purity 
is  a  great  evil,)  whether,  with  the  present  attempt  to 
exalt  human  nature,  it  might  not  be  well  that  maturer 
minds,  at  any  rate,  should  know  the  excessive,  atroci- 
ous, disgusting,  immorality  of  all  classical,  and  indeed 
all  heathen  antiquity,  the  universal  depravity,  besides 
what  is  discovered  by  mythological  and  historical  re- 
search. It  might  be  painful  to  such  minds,  and  they 
abhorrent  from  it ;  but  it  would  act  as  a  warning  and 
preventive  against  such  views  as  those  of  the  Essays 
and  Reviews.  It  has  been  said,  and  said  truly,  that 
no  decent  person  would  allow  on  their  tables  in 
English,  what  is  learnt  by  all  classically  educated 
youths  at  school.  I  may  be  told,  they  do  not  rest 
on  it — be  it  so ;  but  they  become  famihar  with  it  in 
what  they  are  taught  to  admire.  Any  one  may  see 
the  picture  of  vaunted  antiquity  in  the  first  chapter 
of  the  epistle  to  the  Romans.  That  Dr.  Temple  tells 
us,  is  what  is  to  teach  the  world ;  aye,  the  Christian 
world  too.  There  is  beauty,  there  is  patriotism.  What 
do  I  learn  from  this  ?  That  these  passions  of  human 
nature  and  elements  of  his  being,  are  perfectly  compa- 
tible with  the  most  degraded  possible  state  in  which 
human  nature  can  be  found.  Nothing  could  possibly 
exceed  the  degradation,  by  vices  which  eat  out  every- 
thing naturally  noble  even  in  nature,  in  which  these 
Greeks  and  Romans  lived.  The  beauty  and  the  patriot- 
ism amused  or  absorbed  them  so  that  they  should  not 
find  it  out.    Stifled  conscience  needed  foUy  or  pride. 

W.  But  it  is  difficult  to  know  what  to  do.  Are  we 
to  leave  young  men  uncultivated  ? 

H.  Difficulties  there  must  be  in  a  world  in  which 
sin  has  made  deadly  confusion.  But  there  comes  in 
the  noble  active  principle  of  Christianity :  "  To  him 
that  overcometh :"  **  Be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  overcome 
the  world."   Christianity  gives  motives,  objects,  ener- 


giea  which  deliver  man,  when  under  their  influence^ 
from  slavery  to  the  scene  through  which  he  is  passiug. 
He  has  a  riybt  to  he  a  stranger  and  a  pilgrim  in  it. 
His  ear  has  liear  J  the  solemn  wai'niug  which  elevates, 
yet  sinks,  with  a  sanctifying  sorrow  as  to  all  around, 
in  the  depths  of  the  heart :  "  Arise  and  depart ;  this 
is  not  your  rest;  it  is  polluted."  And  he  takes  up  his 
cross,  and  sets  out  solemnized,  broken  in  spirit  per- 
haps, it  is  good  in  such  a  world,  but  cheerfully,  because 
he  sees  that  Christ  has  gone  hefore,  and  that  the 
victory  that  overcomes  the  world  is  liis  faith.  P'or 
"  who  is  he  that  overcomes  the  world,  but  he  that 
believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Sou  of  God  ?"  He  can  be  i 
himself,  Christ  being  his  life,  in  a  world  of  evil  and  , 
confusion,  not  conformed  or  belonging  to  it.  Not 
formed  by  it  iu  motive  or  principle  of  life,  (though 
naturally  as  to  mere  outward  circumstances  not  unin- 
fluenced by  it,)  but  acting  in  it  according  to  his  own. 
Ha])py  to  have  companions  in  tlie  excellent  of  the 
earth,  but  a  leader  and  a  Lord  in  Christ.  By  tliis 
he  judges  of  everything.  He  has  seen  perfet'tion  in 
Christ,  and  he  is  led  by  it.  Greece  and  Rome  wore  all 
judged  by  that.  The  assimilating  power  is  one  only — 
Christ — God  manifested  in  flesh:  folly  to  the  world,  of 
course,  but  he  knows  whom  he  has  believed ;  he  bas 
no  doubt  as  to  the  excellency  of  the  object  and  model, 
nor  of  its  absoluteness  and  completeness.  The 
Christian  beheves  that  Christ  gave  himself  for  our 
sins  to  redeem  from  this  present  world.  Let  not  man 
tell  me  that  meant  the  heathen  world.  What  world 
was  Greece  and  Rome  ? 

But  I  must  lead  you  to  notice  some  particulars  ' 
which  shew  further  the  shallowness  and  superficiality 
of  this  school.  "  The  conviction  of  the  unity  and 
Bpirituahty  of  God,  was  pecuhar,"  we  are  told,  "to 
the  Jews  among  the  pioneers  of  civihzation."  You 
see  how  they  never  get  beyond  this  pomt :  man, 
not  the  God-mau,  improving,  exalting  self:  it  is 
dcplom'jle.      But  it  ia  another    point  I  must    refer 


k 


60 

to  now.  **  To  every  Jew,  without  exception,  Mono- 
theism was  equally  natural/'  This  with  purity  **  are 
the  cardinal  points  of  education.  The  idea  of  Mono- 
theism out-tops  all  other  ideas  in  dignity  and  worth. 
The  spirituality  of  God  involves  in  it  the  supremacy 
of  conscience,  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  the  final 
judgment  of  the  human  race." 

W.  You  surely  do  not  object  to  that. 

H.  Patience,  good  friend.  In  the  main,  though 
Monotheism  be  a  poor  word,  I  do  not.  But  you  know 
these  good  people  have  other  elements  of  instruction. 
You  know,  too,  that  Babylon  was  a  cup  of  prostitu- 
tion, as  idolatry  is  justly  called  in  Scripture,  for  all 
nations;  that  Babylon  and  Jerusalem  stand  as  the 
two  seats  of  the  two  systems  of  idolatry  and  Mono- 
theism. No  doubt,  however  faithless  the  Jews  were,  it 
was  faithlessness  to  a  known  truth,  which  truth  was 
Monotheism,  involving,  as  Dr.  Temple  assumes,  the 
immortality  of  the  soul. 

W.  Well,  that  is  quite  just ;  but  what  conclusions 
do  you  draw  from  that  ? 

H.  How  was  I  surprised — ^No,  I  was  not;  from 
some  acquaintance  with  these  rationalist  doctors,  par- 
ticularly superficial  borrowers,  as  English  rationalists 
are :  I  correct  myself,  I  was  not  surprised  to  find : 
**  She  (Asia)  had  been  the  instrument  selected  (!)  to 
teach  the  Hebrews  the  immortality  of  the  soul ;  for 
whatever  may  be  said  of  the  early  nations  on  this  sub- 
ject, it  is  unquestionable*'  (what  rationalists  say  is 
always,  you  must  understand,  unquestionable),  '*  that 
in  Babylon  the  Jews  first  attained  the  clearness  and 
certainty  in  regard  to  it,  which  we  find  in  the  teaching 
of  the  Pharisees."  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  Mono- 
theism involves  the  knowledge  of  the  immortality  of 
the  soul ;  for  it  was  taught  to  those  who  held  Mono- 
theism by  the  most  idolatrous  Polytheists  in  the 
world.  Is  this  philosophical  or  historical?  It  is 
unquestionable,  of  course. 

W.  Now,  do  not  be  bitter. 


I  lie  i 

■  his ' 


61 


//.  Contempt  is  not  bitterness ;  yet,  I  admit,  no 
human  being  Bhoultl  be  despised.  It  is  the  glory  of 
Christianity  to  make  it  impossible ;  but  reasonings 
and  pretensions  to  light  and  superiority  of  mind  of 
this  kind  I  may  despise,  and  do. 

See  again  the  superficiality  of  such  a  statement 
OS  this:  "The  New  Testament  is  almost  entirely 
occupied  with  histories — the  life  of  our  Lord,  and 
the  life  of  the  early  Church  ;"  and  he  refers  to  the 
Epistles.  Now,  that  the  New  Testament  does  give 
us  truth  in  li\Tng  evidence  of  it,  and  works  truth  out 
in  the  actual  living  relationships  of  the  soul  with 
God,  and  is  not  dry  systematic  theology,  I  admit  with 
all  my  heart ;  but  it  is  exactly  the  use  of  this  blessed 
character  of  Scripture  to  deny  the  truth  on  which 
these  relationships  are  founded,  which  shows  the 
excessive  superficialness  of  this  remark.  That  all  the 
Epistles  were  "the  fruit  of  the  current  history"  I 
admit  fully.  Very  often  mistakes  and  faults  were  their 
occasion ;  but  what  then  ?  The  doctrine  is  grace 
meeting  need,  not  treatises  for  the  competency  of  the 
human  mind.  But  does  that  say  that  the  revelation 
of  grace  to  this  need  was  not  doctrine,  and  doctrine 
of  the  deepest  and  most  wonderful  character?  Nothing 
but  the  incapacity  of  apprehension  which  cold-hearted 
rationalism  produces,  could  ever  have  sueli  an  idea 
for  a  moment.  "  That  early  church,"  we  are  told, 
"does  not  give  us  precepts,  but  an  example."  Fine 
words ;  but  as  stupid  as  they  are  false.  They  wilt 
have  only  man.  The  Church  gives,  God  must  not 
be  brought  in — must  not  even  give.  What  a  heart- 
less system  it  is  !  Did  God,  by  whatever  instru- 
ments, give  nothing  to  "that  church  ?■'  Wore  the 
Epistles  not  given  to  it — not  by  it  ?  Nothing,  more- 
over, can  be  more  false  than  the  statement  itself. 
There  is  not  what  Dr.  Temple  states,  save  in  the 
smallest  degree ;  and  there  is  almost  exclusively  what 
lie  states  there  is  not.  No  doubt  in  St.  Paul,  fi"om 
his  very  nature,  his  letters  disclose  the  man ;  but  the 


I 


62 

Epistles  are  entirely  composed  of  doctrines  and  pre- 
cepts ;  whoever  doubts  about  it  has  only  to  read 
them.  All  this  is  theory,  perfectly  regardless  of  facts. 
They  are  all  **  letters  for  the  time/'  and  all  '*  treatises 
for  the  future."  When  Dr.  Temple  says,  *'  To  these 
pages,  accordingly,  the  church  of  our  day  turns  for 
renewal  of  inspiration,'*  though  somewhat  acquainted 
with  the  pretensions  of  rationalism,  I  confess  I  can 
hardly  understand  it,  unless  it  be  a  very  conmion- 
place  fact  put  in  a  bombastic  way,  to  exalt  men  now 
to  a  level  with  apostles,  make  the  Epistles  a  mere 
aroused  energy  of  man,  reference  to  which  may  arouse 
energy  in  us.  They  turn  for  a  renewal  of  inspiration. 
I  ask  you,  what  does  that  mean  ? 

W.  Well,  I  really  do  not  know.  I  remember 
Balaam  went  to  seek  enchantments ;  perhaps  it  is 
that  in  a  good  sense. 

H.  I  know  of  no  such  going  to  God  for  inspiration 
in  Scripture.  There  is  enquiring  of  the  Lord.  That, 
in  the  modesty  of  Scripture, — and  how  lovely  it  is 
in  everything, — I  can  imderstand ;  and  that  a  man 
taught  of  God,  reading  Scripture,  may  be  animated, 
his  soul  refreshed,  and  filled  with  the  truth  and 
Spirit  of  God ;  but  '^  turning  for  a  renewal  of  in- 
spiration,"  I  must  leave  to  the  high-flown  pretensions 
of  modem  despisers  of  revelation.  I  remember 
once  speaking  to  the  very  chief  of  this  system  in 
a  foreign  country,  one  who  has  largely  spread  it 
among  evangelical  men.  He  denied  inspiration  as 
held  in  the  common  beUef  of  the  church  of  God. 
I  said  to  him,  '*  You  speak  of  avoiding  the  question 
of  the  inspiration  of  the  Old  Testament.  That  is 
a  very  easy  way  of  avoiding  the  difficulties  of  your 
subject,  you  who  deny  inspiration  in  the  vulgar  use 
of  the  word;  because  the  Lord  and  the  Apostles 
plainly  declare  the  Old  Testament  to  be  inspired." 
**  0  yes,"  he  said,  declining  to  answer  as  to  the  Lord,  as 
he  had  already  given  too  much  scandal  by  it.  **  No" 
upright  honest  man  can  deny  that  the  Apostles  treat 


the  Old  Testament  as  inspirecl,  and  quote  it  as  such, 
but  they  deceived  themselves."  He  said  this  with  an 
aplomb  that  was  inconceivable.  I  only  said,  "  Then 
it  is  A  question  as  to  your  or  the  Apostles'  competency 
and  authority  as  to  Christianity.  That  ia  soon  set- 
tled." And  30  I  must  say  to  Dr.  Temple,  if  he  turns 
to  biographical  Scripture  for  a  renewal  of  inspiration 
in  himself.  He  must  forgive  me.  if  I  still  trust  some- 
what more  to  the  old  mspiration  than  to  the  renewal 
of  it ;  more  to  the  divinely -given  teaching  of  those 
who  were  sent  by  the  Lord  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  fitted  for  this  work,  and  separated  to  it,  and  who 
could  say,  "He  that  is  of  God  hears  us;"  "and  if 
any  man  be  spiritual  let  him  acknowledge  that  the 
things  that  I  write  unto  you  are  the  commandments 
of  the  Lord ;  and  if  any  be  ignorant,  let  him  be  igno- 
rant." He  who  can  go  there  for  a  renewal  of  inspira- 
tion, and  find  only  two  lives  there,  must  have  a 
singular  process  of  blinding  himself. 

He-mark  too  the  assiduous  confounding  what  is 
dirine  and  human.  "  The  age  of  reflection  begins." 
.  .  .  .  "The  spirit  or  conscience  comes  to  fiill 
strength ;  and  assumes  the  throne  intended  for  it  in 
the  soul."  Be  it  so,  though  the  confusion  of  the 
spirit  and  the  conscience  is  a  mischievous  one,  as 
we  may  see.  But  mark  what  soon  follows :  "  Now 
the  education  by  no  means  ceases  when  the  8pu*it 
thus  begins  to  lead  the  soul."  "The  office  of  the 
spirit  is,  in  fact,  to  guide  us  uito  truth,  not  to  give 
trutJi."  Note  here  the  use  of  Scriptural  terms,  so  as 
to  hamnnize  and  destroy  their  force:  the  spirit  is  Erst 
conscience ;  it  is  gi-owu  up  at  the  age  of  reflection, 
and  takes  its  seat  on  the  tlirane ;  then  it  guides  into 
tnith.  That  in  the  Scripture  is  said  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  Comforter,  who  was  to  he  sent  down  from  heaven, 
who  was  to  shew  them  the  things  of  Christ.  Here  the 
spirit,  whicii  was  just  now  couseience,  guides  into 
troth,  but  gives  no  truth.  That  is,  the  Holy  Ghost 
r«veals  nothing,  shews  nothing;  the  Comforter  is  ft 


64 

the  conscience  of  man.  Further  note,  there  are  no 
precepts  to  be  found.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  thus 
dropped  into  mere  conscience,  and  no  truth  is  given. 
But  let  us  proceed  in  the  description  of  this  state  of 
fiill  age.  **  He  is  free,  but  freedom  is  not  the  oppo- 
site of  obedience,  but  of  restraint."  **  The  law,  in 
fact,  which  God  makes  the  standard  of  our  conduct, 
may  have  one  of  two  forms.  It  may  be  an  external 
law — a  law  which  is  in  the  hands  of  others,  in  the 
making,  in  the  applying,  in  the  enforcing  of  which 
we  have  no  share ;  a  law  which  governs  from  the  out- 
side, compelling  our  will  to  bow,  even  though  our 
imderstanding  be  enlightened  or  not  .  .  .  Or, 
again,  the  law  may  be  an  internal  law;  a  voice  which 
speaks  within  the  conscience,  and  carries  the  con- 
science along  with  it ;  a  law  which  treats  us  not  as 
slaves,  but  as  friends,  allowing  us  to  know  what  our 
Lord  doeth ;  a  law  which  bids  us  yield  not  to  blind 
fear  or  awe,  but  to  the  majesty  of  truth  and  justice ; 
a  law  which  is  not  imposed  on  us  by  another  power, 
but  by  our  own  enlightened  will.'*  Remark  here  how 
all  subjection  to  God,  or  authority  of  God,  is  wholly 
denied.  But  this  all  gets  a  distinct  character,  unit- 
ing the  first  and  last  quoted  passages  by  words  in  a 
previous  page  describing  this  time  of  full  age.  *'  Thus 
the  human  race  was  left  to  itself,  to  be  guided  by  the 
teaching  of  the  spirit  within."  Now  I  hold,  as  you 
know,  that  a  Christian  is  not  under  law  at  all ;  he  is 
dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ.  But  it  is  one 
of  the  characteristics  of  modem  rationalism,  to  take 
certain  advances  in  truth,  which  the  Church  at  large 
does  not  see,  and  pervert  them  to  evil.  Here  the 
conscience  and  spirit  are  identified;  and  the  spirit 
gives  no  truth,  but  guides  into  it ;  that  is,  it  is  man's 
growing  up  into  it;  but  there  is  no  revealed  truth. 
There  is  a  life,  an  example,  we  are  allowed  to  know 
what  our  Lord  doeth.  The  human  race  is  left  to  it- 
self, to  be  guided  by  the  teaching  of  the  spirit  within, 
which  is  only  conscience.     But  it  is  left  to  itself;  no 


65 

truth  given,  no  precepts  ever  found  in  the  word,  and 
in  addition  to  all  this  the  authority  of  God  wholly  set 
aside,  the  law  we  have  is  this  conscience  or  spirit 
within,  is  not  a  law  imposed  on  us  by  another  power, 
bnt  by  our  own  enlightened  will,  we  bow  to  the 
majesty  of  truth  and  justice,  to  God  never.  He  may 
neither  give  truth  nor  impose  a  command.  God's 
word.  His  precepts,  the  Spirit  giving  any  truth, 
the  authority  of  God,  obedience — is  whoUy  denied. 
Now  the  scheme  of  Christianity  is  the  opposite  of 
this.  It  teaches  of  a  Comforter,  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  is  sent  hy  Christ  from  the  Father,  whom  the 
Father  sends  in  Christ's  name,  who  comes  and  con- 
vinces the  world.  He  testifies  of  Christ,  and  the 
disciples  also  bear  witness.  He  does  not  speak  of 
Himself,  but  what  He  hears  He  speaks.  He  was  to 
teach  the  disciples  all  things,  to  shew  them  things  to 
come,  to  bring  what  Christ  bad  said  to  their  remem- 
brance ;  and  he  who  loved  Him  would  keep  His  com- 
mandments. Now  this  Christianity  of  the  Apostle 
John,  these  words  of  Christ,  every  honest  man  must 
see  are  contrarj'  to  and  contradictory  of  Dr.  Temple's 
statements.  Ho  may  think  that  he  knows  Chris- 
tianity and  Christ's  teaching  better  than  John.  His 
opinion  of  himself  in  that  respect  I  cannot  doubt ;  but 
that  his  is  the  opposite  of  apostolic  teaching  is  most 
evident.  I  prefer  apostolic  accounts  of  Christianity. 
Dr.  Temple  may  think  his  conscience,  and  his,  of 
course,  enhghteued  will,  superior  to  the  Holy  Ghost 
which  Christ  promised.  I  confess  I  prefer  Johannean 
Christianity,  if  we  are  so  to  call  it,  the  command- 
ment of  Christ — the  truth  taugiit  and  given  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  to  the  first  essay  which  is  to  illustrate 
moral  and  reUgious  truth.  It  may  be  prejudice — it 
may  be  stupidity ;  but  the  shining  of  these  modem 
stars  does  not,  to  my  spirit  and  conscience,  eclipse 
the  teaching,  aye,  the  giving  of  truth  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  sent  domi  fiom  heaven,  for  so  the  Word  of 


1 


I 


66 

teaches,  we  are  not  under  law  as  risen  with  Christ : 
**  to  them  that  are  without  law,  as  without  law.  Yet 
not  without  law  to  God,  but  rightly  subject  to  Christ" 
(evvo/uioc).  How  carefully  he  shews  that  there  is  sub- 
jection to  God.  So  John :  '*  This  is  love,  that  we  keep 
his  commandments.''  So  Christ  Himself,  I  have  kept 
my  Father's  commandments,  and  abide  in  His  love ; 
and  in  the  highest  of  His  free  acts  of  grace,  His 
offering  Himself,  He  says :  But  that  the  world  may 
know  that  I  love  the  Father,  and  as  the  Father  has 
given  me  commandment,  so  I  do.  It  is  with  us  as  it 
was  with  Christ,  the  law  of  liberty ;  because  the  new 
man  finds  its  delight  both  in  tvhat  is  commanded  and 
in  ohedience  itself^  as  Christ  did :  **  I  delight  to  do  it ; 
yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  heart."  But  we  are  sanc- 
tified unto  obedience,  the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ. 
It  is  not  a  law  stopping,  or  attempting,  for  it  did  not 
do  it  in  fact,  to  stop  an  evil  nature,  but  the  will  of 
God,  the  motive  of  the  new  man  as  of  Christ.  It  is 
not  yielding  to  the  majesty  of  truth  and  justice,  but 
to  God.  The  doctrine  of  the  essay  is  the  casting  off 
^^  holly  God's  authority,  the  principle  of  revolt  and 
apostacy ;  denying  the'  Master  (deairoTa,  not  xuptoc)  that 
bought  us,  the  only  Lord  (dcd^iroTa)  God.  The  heathen 
were  partially  a  law  to  themselves  when  they  were(a6eot) 
atheists  in  the  world.  This,  with  increased  light,  is 
what  is  recommended.  It  is  a  denial  of  redemption, 
of  obedience  of  God's  authority,  a  denial  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  giving  any  truth,  it  is  merged  in  an  enlight- 
ened will,  our  spirit  or  conscience.  ''That  early 
church  (i.e.  the  epistles)  does  not  give  us  precepts  " 
even. 

W.  But  he  speaks  of  obedience. 

H.  He  does,  but  it  is  "obedience  to  the  rules  of  his 
own  mind,"  not  the  child  once  obedient  to  a  parent, 
now  in  direct  subjection  to  God  in  love  as  Christ  wasy 
but  the  niles  of  his  own  mind,  all  he  knows.  Christ's 
deUght  was  to  keep  His  Father's  commandments. 
The  saint's  delight  is  the  same.    The  rationalist's  to 


be  left  to  himself,  and  have  nothing  to  say  to  God. 
It  is  the  dignitied  Hberty  of  a  grown  man,  competent 
to  guide  himself,  instead  of  being  a  child. 

*'  The  church,  in  the  fullest  sense  is  left  to  herself, 
to  work  out,  by  her  natural  faculties,  the  principles  of 
her  owa  action."  Can  anything  more  completely 
deny  the  presence  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  authority  of 
the  Word,  that  is,  of  God  in  every  way.  What  makes 
her  the  church  in  this  case,  I  am  sure  I  do  not 
Imow.  It  is  an  epoch  when  men  have  learned  beauty 
from  Greece,  patriotism  from  Rome,  the  immortality 
of  the  soul  from  Babylon  through  the  Jews  when 
departed  from  God,  seen  an  example  in  Christ  and 
that  early  church,  whatever  it  was,  aud  then  left  to 
themselves  to  follow  their  own  enlightened  will ;  that 
is  all  the  church  means.  How  the  apostles  blundered 
about  the  whole  matter,  to  think  that  they  were  sent 
by  the  Lord,  and  laid  down  their  hves  for— I  am 
sure  I  do  not  know  what:  and  were  so  bigoted,  that 
they  say  ;  He  that  is  of  God  hearctli  us,  and  he  that  is 
not  of  God  heareth  not  us  ;  hereby  know  we  the  Spirit 
of  truth,  and  the  Spirit  of  error.  Why  the  Spirit 
does  not  give  truth  at  all.  Wliat  a  pity  Dr.  Temple 
was  not  there  to  instruct  them  !  I  suppose  men  were 
not  ripe  for  it  in  the  apostles'  days.  And  they  were 
obliged  to  be  thus  bigoted,  or  did  not  know  any 
better,  and  that  now  in  this  advanced  age  we  can 
profit  by  and  appreciate  the  teaching  of  these  men 
grown  to  full  ago.  I  wonder  whether  they  think  that 
they  that  are  of  God  hear  them.  Though  I  do  not 
know  why  they  do  not  leave  men  to  the  rules  within 
instead  of  writing  essays. 

IV.  I  do  not  exactly  see,  to  say  the  truth,  how 
these  men  call  themselves  Christians,  and  clergy- 
men, too. 

//.  Oh,  you  see  they  can  consent  to  many  things  they 

think  very  inexpedient.     Aiu\  though  tliey  have  said 

that  the  Articles  are  not  superstitious  or  erroneous, 

yet  some  expressions  mav  appear  so.     If  they  have 

e2 


I 
I 
1 


68 

acknowledged  the  same  to  be  agreeable  to  the  word 
of  God,  some  distinctions  may  be  founded  on  the 
word  acknowledge.  They  have  allowed  them,  but 
*'  we  allow  many  things  we  do  not  think  wise  or  use- 
ful." He  does  not  maintain  it  or  regard  it  as  self- 
evident,  nor  originate  it ;  many  better  and  wiser  men 
than  himself  have  acknowledged  the  same  thing ;  why 
should  he  be  obstinate  ?  Besides,  he  is  young  and 
has  plenty  of  time  to  consider  it,"  when  he  has 
signed  it,  of  course,  '*  or  he  is  old,  and  continues  to 
submit  out  of  habit,  and  it  would  be  too  absurd,  at 
his  time  of  life,  to  be  setting  up  as  a  church  reformer." 

W.  But  Dr.  Temple  does  not  say  all  this,  it  is  not 
in  his  essay. 

H.  No ;  he  only  joins  in  publishing  the  volume, 
in  the  hope  that  it  will  be  received  as  an  attempt  to 
illustrate  the  cause  of  religious  and  moral  truth  firom 
a  free  handling,  in  a  becoming  spirit,  of  subjects 
peculiarly  liable  to  suffer,  &c. 

But  I  have  nothing  to  say  to  Dr.  Temple.  I  know 
nothing  of  him  but  that  he  is  Master  of  Rugby^.  I 
have  a  book  before  me  with  these  principles  in  it. 

But  there  is  a  short  episode  in  the  progress  of 
the  world's  education,  which  is  somewhat  curious. 
The  progress  of  the  patriotic  Roman  empire  was 
such,  that  its  utter  decay  gave  occasion  for  the  well- 
known  swarms  from  the  officina  gentium  to  break  in 
upon  it.  Now  as  they  had  neither  Grecian  cultivation, 
nor  Christian  enlightened  will,  and  their  patriotism 
was  rather  rough-handed,  what  was  to  be  done  ? 
Why  the  church  instinctively,  not  intentionally,  gave 
up — for  herself  of  course,  it  was  very  gracious — gave 
up  her  full-age  Christianity  in  which  she  had  been 
fully  left  to  herself  and  her  own  faculties,  and  took 
up  law — ^the  only  means  of  taming  these  myriads 
that  had  esc  iped  the  general  education  of  the  race ; 
gave  up  Christianity,  and  subjected  herself,  that  is, 
the  whole  church  under  its  name,  to  the  old  principle 
of  childhood — ^the  law,  to  tame  these  barbarians.     It 


was  more  than  apostolic.  Paul  kept  his  liberty,  but 
condescended  to  the  weak ;  but  the  church,  not  "that 
early  one,"  but  the  mediaeval  one  gave  up  Christianity 
for  herself,  (of  course,  any  duty  to  God  or  the  trutli 
was  out  of  the  question  ;  she  foUowed  her  instinct,  the 
rule  of  her  own  enlightened  will,)  and  "  had  recourse 
to  the  only  means  that  would  suit  the  case — a  revival 
of  Judaism."*  I  admit  the  fact ;  only  that  there  was 
a  deliberate  mixture  of  heathenism  with  it.  How  it 
was  a  progress,  kind  and  instinctive  as  it  was,  it  would 
be  hard  to  tell.  Paul  had  struggled  hard  against 
this  kind  of  progress ;  he  thought  it  a  falling  from 
grace.  Christ  became  of  no  avail  if  people  did  it,  he 
thought.  However,  there  is  nothing  an  enlightened 
will  and  the  Spirit  guiding  into  truth,  without  giving 
any,  will  not  do.  It  was,  in  fact,  neither  more  nor 
less  than  the  old  schoolmaster  come  hack  to  bring 
some  new  scholars  to  Christ.  "  Of  course,  this  was 
not  the  conscious  intention  of  the  then  rulers  of  the 
church ;  they  believed  in  their  own  ceremonies  as 
much  as  any  of  the  people  at  large."  But  this  is 
somewhat  obscure.  Did  they  believe  the  legal  system 
before  they  imposed  it  ?  if  so,  they  had  set  up  the 
sclioolmaater  before  he  was  needed  for  Cloris  and  Iiis 
Franks ;  and  it  was  no  instinct  at  all,  but  they  had 
sunk  back  by  their  own  evil  instinct  to  law.  If  they 
wore  in  the  full  hght  of  the  age  of  reflection  and  en- 
lightened will,  they  must  have  known  what  they  were 
about.  This  does  not  quite  hang  together.  Did  they 
get  into  it  themselves  by  their  instinct,  or  knowing  it 
was  retrograding  themselves,  impose  it  on  others  as 
necessary,  and  themselves  adopt  the  revival  of  Juda- 
ism ?  Here  I  am  at  a  loss.  However,  "nothing 
short  of  a  real  system  of  discipline,  accepted  as 
Divine  by  all  alike,  could  have  tamed  the  German 
and  Celtish  nature  iuto  the  self-control  needed  for  a 


•  B«m&rk  how  infidelity  alwaj-a  eicuaea  Popory,  and  eidea  with 
it  in  these  days. 


Ji 


70 

truly  spiritual  religion."  But  then,  if  they  accepted 
the  schoolmaster,  they  were  not  under  it  before,  and 
must  have  known  the  difference.  How  they  accepted 
it  as  Divine,  is  very  difficult  to  understand,  smce 
they  had  recourse  to  it  as  the  only  thing  that  would 
suit  the  case.  It  was  a  singular  procedure.  They 
beUeved  it  as  much  as  the  untamed  Germans,  ac- 
cepted it  as  Divine,  and  yet  had  recourse  to  it,  be- 
cause it  suited  the  case  of  the  latter.  Their  beUeving 
it  Divine,  and  giving  up  an  enlightened  will,  was 
a  self-sacrifice  of  an  unexampled  kmd,  rewarded  with 
darkness  that  made  them  think  it  Divine.  When 
are  they  thus  to  get  the  truly  spiritual  religion  ?  I 
suppose  that  it  is  not  modern  Popery  and  the  im- 
maculate conception  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  We  have 
had  some  thousand  years  already  to  tame  the  Ger- 
man and  Geltish  nature  into  the  self-control  needed 
for  a  truly  spiritual  religion.  The  Celts  are  under 
it  still,  perhaps.  Dr.  Temple  thinks  the  Germans 
have  got  the  start  of  them.  But  then  this  instinc- 
tive act  of  the  church  assumes  in  the  same  page 
quite  a  new  character.  The  question  arises,  why 
the  less-disciplined  race — Germans  or  Celts,  (though 
these  last  had  been  a  good  while  under  Boman  dis- 
cipline— of  full  age  too,  for  they  were  in  the  empire 
that  was  attacked) ;  why,  I  say,  they  could  not  have 
learned  spirituality  from  the  more  disciplined.  You 
see  they  had  the  spirituaUty,  and  it  was  by  this 
leap  into  the  schoolmaster's  hand  out  of  instinct 
that  they  accepted  the  unspiritual,  the  Judaism, 
as  Divine,  as  much  as  the  Germans.  But  why 
was  the  reverse  not  the  case  ?  **  This  may  hap- 
pen when  the  more  disciplined  is  much  the  more 
vigorous  of  the  two,  but  the  exhausted  state  of  the 
Boman  empire  had  not  such  strength  of  life  left 
within  it.  There  was  no  alternative,  but  that  all 
alike  should  be  put  under  the  law  to  learn  the  lesson 
of  obedience." 

The  more  disciplined,  the  Church  had  then  the 


spirituality  to  teach,  but  had  recourse  to  a  revival  of 
Judaism  as  the  only  means  which  coiild  suit  the  ease. 
Still  it  was  not  the  conscious  intention  of  the  church. 
They  beheved  in  the  divine  character  of  what  they  bad 
recoorse  to,  and  do  you  see  the  reason  of  this  aston- 
ishing mystification  of  having  a  recourse  to  a  thing 
as  the  only  means  suited  to  this  case,  yet  without  any 
conscious  intention,  yet  possessing  the  spirituality 
which  would  show  what  it  was— it  was  the  state  of 
exhaustion  of  the  Koman  empire,  and  that  is  pro- 
gress. How  charming  is  divine  phUosophy  I  They 
retrograde  out  of  spirituality  to  Judaism,  recident  pour 
mietu;  sauler,  I  suppose,  to  begin  the  progress  over 
again ;  but  alas !  there  is  no  good  in  meddling  with 
low  principles.  They  beheved  they  were  divine ;  they 
who  were  of  the  full  reflective  age,  had  to  be  put 
themselves  under  the  law  to  learn  the  lesson  of  obe- 
dience. Who  put  them,  God  knows;  but  why  had 
they,  the  spiritual  ones,  to  be  put  under  law,  when 
they  had  already  learned  obedience  of  a  far  higher 
kind,  and  were  disciplined  and  had  spirituahty  to 
teach,  only  that  the  others  needed  the  law  ?  Ah,  the 
truth  will  leak  out  in  spite  of  theories ;  the  professing 
church,  like  man  in  all  states,  progresses  backwards. 
What  is  perfect  in  its  place  is  given  of  God  first,  and 
man  corrupts  it ;  so  did  Adam  innocent,  so  did  Noaii, 
80  did  Israel  under  law,  so  did  the  priesthood,  so  did 
the  royalty,  so  did  the  church  imder  grace.  The 
whole  of  this  statement  is  a  wilful  perversion  of  history, 
the  progress  of  darkness,  and  superstition,  and  the 
legal  spirit,  and  of  hierarcliieal  and  then  monarchical 
power  is  as  notorious  and  well  known  as  possible. 
The  inroad  of  barbarians  gave  politic  Kome  the  means 
of  reducing  it  into  a  governmental  system,  complete 
under  Hildebrand.  But  the  corruption  itself  had 
been  growing  from  the  time  the  mystery  of  iniquity 
began  to  work,  and  was  ripened  by  degrees  into  the 
Papacy,  which  partially  supplanted  the  empire  by  au 
iufioeuce  of  a  new  kind.     But  that  the  church  had 


72 

to  be  put  under  law  to  learn  the  lesson  of  obedience, 
though  thus  laboriously  obscured  by  inconsistent 
statement,  is  the  admission  that  it  had  utterly  fallen 
from  its  first  estate.  That  going  back  to  law  was  an 
advance  towards  spirituaUty,  no  true  Christian  will 
think  a  moment,  m  presence  of  Paul's  statements. 
The  return  to  law  was  the  corruption  of  Christianity, 
mingled,  and  avowedly  mingled,  with  heathenism  as 
it  was.  The  rulers  of  the  church  used  this  with  a 
perfectly  conscious  intention,  as  the  mission  of  Au- 
gustme  to  England  proves,  to  bring  them  under  their 
own  hierarchical  power.  History  shews,  too,  that  as 
to  the  first  great  inroad  of  barbarians,  its  whole  history 
was  different ;  the  Goths  were  Arians,  and  the  theory, 
confused  as  it  is,  has  no  historical  ground  at  all. 

W.  Are  you  sure  that  you  do  not  take  a  one-sided 
view  as  to  a  previous  point?  Is  not  Dr.  Temple 
merely  insisting  upon  the  use  of  revelation  as  light 
rather  than  as  a  law,  and  while  insisting  on  one  point 
as  that  which  he  feels  important,  not  denying  the  use 
of  revelation ;  only  urging  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  to  be 
used  ?  A  somewhat  exclusive  one-sided  view  is  natural, 
when  we  are  absorbed  by  one  view  of  a  subject  im- 
portant at  the  moment. 

H.  Your  question  is  a  very  fair  one.  We  all  are 
liable  to  such  excess  in  reasoning,  if  not  very  watch- 
ful. But  my  answer  is  very  simple.  And  it  shews 
that  all  this  train  of  reasoning  is  a  dead  set  at  re- 
velation ;  that  is,  an  effort  with  unconscious  intention, 
perhaps  instinctive,  as  the  only  means  which  would 
suit  the  case.  Dr.  Temple  says,  ''  If  they  could  ap- 
peal to  a  revelation  from  heaven,  they  would  still  be 
under  law ;  for  a  revelation  speaking  from  without, 
and  not  from  within,  is  an  external  law  and  not  a 
spirit."  Is  not  this  as  plain  as  plain  can  be,  that 
progress  means  emancipation  from  revelation.  You 
see,  too,  what  a  spirit  is.  God,  any  expressed  au- 
thority of  God,  or  given  truth,  must  be  absolutely 
excluded ;  it  is  the  childhood  of  law. 


W.  It  is  fatally  plain.  I  had  no  idea  it  came  to 
this.     It  is  not  even  Deism. 

H.  It  is  remarkable,  that  a  friend  of  mine  once 
heard  Mr.  Powell,  now  no  more,  I  believe,  preach ; 
and  he  said, — "  It  is  in  vaiu  they  seek  to  escape 
mysteries.  They  mnst  become  Atheists,  for  the 
greatest  mystery  is  the  existence  of  God."  What  1( 
there  is,  I  need  not  say.  The  Lord  says,  tliat  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  Comforter,  which  shonld  come, 
should  take  the  things  that  were  His,  and  shew  them 
to  them ;  and  all  that  the  Father  has  is  His,  all  the 
infinitude  of  the  unseen  heavenly,  and,  I  may  say, 
di^Tne  world,  was  to  be  revealed,  and  that  in  the  inti- 
macy of  the  relationship  of  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
so  that  we  shonld  have  fellowship  witli  them.  And 
no  man  had  gone  up  there,  but  He  who  descended 
thence.  He  could  speak  what  He  knew,  and  testify 
what  He  had  seen ;  declare  the  Father  as  in  His 
bosom.  He  and  He  only  had  seen  the  Father — but 
this  is  truth  given  by  the  Spirit  (all  of  it,  even  what 
Christ  said).  All  is  lost;  instead,  we  are  to  have  the 
spirit  or  conscience  assume  the  throne  intended  for 
Tfitn  in  the  soul,  and  draw  from  the  storehouse  of 
yonthful  experience,  and  legislate  upon  the  ftiture 
without  appeal,  except  to  himself ;  a  law  which  is  not 
imposed  upon  us  -by  another  power,  but  om-  own 
enlightened  will.  All  that  God  can  give  of  the  hea- 
venly blessedness  of  the  Son,  now  a  glorified  man, 
is  lost,  for  ever  lost ;  and  man  is  only  to  seek  the 
development  of  what  is  within  man. 

IV.  It  is,  indeed,  a  loss — a  strange  progress.  It  is 
inconceivable  to  me  how  any  who  respect  Chris- 
tianity, can  put  thefr  sons  under  the  mfiuonee  of 
such  principles. 

LH.  Alas !  my  friend,  the  greater  part  of  the  world, 
and  particularly  the  upper  classes,  go  with  the  stream ; 
and  if  God,  in  chastisement,  sees  fit  to  let  loose 
Satan's  influence,  they  float  with  circumstances. 
The  air — I  use  it  only  metaphoricallj' — is  darkened 


74 

with  the  smoke  of  the  pit.  And  this  rejection  of 
objective  religion  is  as  unphilosophical  as  it  is  un- 
christian; for  all  creatures  must  be  formed  by  objects, 
God  alone  is  self-sufficient.  He  can  create  objects  in 
the  display  of  His  love ;  but  He  needs  none  outside 
himself,  a  creature  does.  Man  has  no  intrinsic  re- 
sources within  himself;  whether  fallen  or  unfallen. 
Nor  even  angels.  Take  away  God,  what  are  they  ? 
nothing  or  devils. 

So  man ;  if  money  is  his  object,  he  is  avaricious 
or  covetous,  at  any  rate;  if  power,  ambitious;  if  plea- 
sure, a  man  of  pleasure ;  and  all  other  objects  are 
judgedof  by  the  ruling  one.  In  every  caseof  a  creature, 
what  is  objective  is  the  source  of  the  subjective  state. 
In  Christianity  this  is  connected  with  a  new  nature, 
because  the  old  will  not  have  the  divine  object  which 
characterizes,  and  is  the  foundation  of  faith ;  but  the 
principle  remains  unchanged.  "  We  all,  with  open 
(unveUed)  face,  beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are 
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  as 
by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  See  what  a  magnificent 
picture  we  have  in  Stephen  of  this.  In  a  remarkable 
way,  no  doubt ;  but  still  exhibitory  of  it  morally,  as 
well  as  by  a  vision.  The  whole  question  between 
Christianity  and  Dr.  Temple's  system  is  brought  to 
an  issue.  The  progress  of  human  nature,  with  the 
very  elements  he  speaks  of,  and  the  contrasted  result, 
is  stated.  **  Ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost :  as 
your  fathers  did,  so  do  ye."  There  is  the  relationship 
between  man  and  the  Spirit.  Next,  **  Which  of  the 
prophets  have  not  your  fathers  persecuted  ?  and  they 
have  slain  them  which  have  shewed  before  of  the 
coming  of  the  Just  One,  of  whom  ye  have  been  now 
the  betrayers  and  murderers. ' '  These  were  their  ways 
with  those  who  unfolded  the  law  in  a  more  spiritual 
manner,  and  with  the  great  hving  witness  of  perfec- 
tion himself.  Such  was  man — ^flesh  in  contrast  with 
the  law.  Such  was  his  state :  he  always  resisted  the 
Holy  Ghost.     Now  note  the  contrast  of  the  objec- 


75 

tive  spiritual  man.  "  Stephen,  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  looked  steadfastly  up  into  heaven  and  saw 
the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesua  standing  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  and  said,  I  see  the  heaven  opened, 
and  the  Son  of  Man  standing  at  the  right  hand  of 
God."  And  what  was  the  efleet,  the  subjective 
effect,  in  one  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  hitf  objective 
perception  of  heavenly  objects  ?  In  the  midst  of  rage 
and  violence,  and  while  being  actually  stoned,  in  all 
calmness'  be  not  merely  bears,  but  kneels  down,  and 
says,  "Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  So 
Jesua:  "Father,  forgive  them j  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do."  Then  he  said.  "  Lord  Jeaus,  receive 
my  spirit,"  as  Jesus  had  said,  "Father,  into  thy  hands 
I  commend  my  spirit."  He  beheld,  with  unveiled 
face,  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  was  changed  into  the 
same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord.  But  how  fiill  and  complete  a  picture — 
man  always  a  resister  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  under  law, 
not  keeping  it ;  with  prophets,  persecuting ;  with 
the  Just  One,  a  murderer ;  with  the  witness  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  gnashing  his  teeth  and  slaying  in  rage. 
Christianity,  in  contrast,  a  man  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  seeing  Jesus,  the  Son  of  Man,  in  heaven, 
changed  into  his  image,  and  killed  by  man,  falls 
asleej),  Jesus  receiving  his  spirit. 

Dr.  Temple  goes  over  this  ground ;  rejects  Chris- 
tianity as  an  external  revelation,  that  must  be  a  law ; 
takes  up  exactly  the  same  elements  as  Stephen,  and 
declares  that  man  is  progressively  educated  by  them 
to  do  without  that  which  Stephen  enjoyed.  Which 
un  I  to  hdieve  ?  Yet  I  have  but  coldly  sketched  the 
elements  of  thought ;  I  must  leave  you  to  meditate 
over  it,  and  appreciate  the  beauty  and  spiiilual  im- 

•  The  Bame  calm 


a  marlis  his  whole  diBcoiiree.    Ue  rccilee  the 
:hcy  CI 

~,  .  ^ --.   -...-. -.,-.-ilko» 

Joaepn  their  suatuiiier  and  help,  and  the  temple  they  had  tl 
in,  God  bad  rejected  by  tlio  mouth  of  their  prophets. 


Jewfl'  history,  their  own  hoant,  bo  that  they  could  have  no  word  to 
Ukj  ;  yet  it  said  all. — They  had  rejecled  Mobcs  the  true  deliverer, 


76 

portance  of  it.  It  is  a  most  enchanting  pictare,  and 
the  deepest  moral  principles  are  contained  in  it ;  bnt 
Scripture  is  a  wonderful  book. 

W.  But,  then,  this  was  a  vision. 

H.  No  doubt ;  but  what  he  saw  is  revealed,  and 
written  for  my  faith  to  act  on. 

W.  True ;  I  see  plainly  that  Christianity  judges 
wholly  that  nature  which  Dr.  Temple  educates  for 
itself ;  I  cannot  say  for  God. 

This  rejection  of  Christ  in  the  world  made  evi- 
dently a  turning-point  in  the  world's  history,  as  to 
the  proof  of  what  it  really  was  ;  and  this  history  of 
Stephen  shews  man  resisting  the  testimony  to  Christ's 
heavenly  glory,  as  they  had  killed  Him  when  He  was 
the  witness  of  perfection  and  of  God  on  earth. 

H.  Just  so.  There  is  a  silent  witness  to  the 
divinity  of  Jesus,  and  while  truly  and  really  a  man, 
a  contrast  between  Him  and  all  other  men,  which  has 
profoundly  interested  me.  When  man  is  blessed, 
morally  blessed,  elevated,  he  must  have  an  elevated, 
and,  indeed,  to  be  taken  out  of  self,  a  divine  object 
before  him.  Jesus  was  the  object  even  of  heaven, 
instead  of  having  one.  When  Stephen  is  before  us, 
heaven  is  opened  to  him  as  it  was  to  Jesus ;  but  he 
sees  the  Son  of  Man  in  the  heaven,  and  that  fixes  his 
view,  and  lights  up  his  regard  with  the  glory  he  saw. 
Heaven  is  opened  upon  Jesus,  and  the  angels  are  His 
servants ;  He  sees  it  opened,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
descends,  witness  that  He  is  Son  of  God ;  but  He  is 
changed  into  no  other  image  by  it ;  he  has  no  object 
to  which  to  look  up,  but  heaven  looks  down  on  Him, 
and  the  Father's  voice  declares,  "  This  is  my  beloved 
Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 

W.  That  is  deeply  interesting,  and  supremely  beau- 
tiful. What  a  word,  indeed.  Scripture  is.  I  find 
often  these  traits,  which,  to  the  renewed  soul,  stamp 
the  person  of  Jesus  as  divine,  more  powerful  as  wit- 
nessing who  He  was,  than  even  positive  texts. 

H.  They  are ;  but  that  does  not  diminish  the  im- 


77 

portanoe  of  the  positive  texts.    We  enjoy  these  reve- 
lations of  His  person,  but  the  declaration  that  the 
Word  was  God,  and  many  such  like,  is  a  declaration 
which  has  authority  o\er  my  soul.     I  make  God  a 
liar,  as  John  speaks,  if  I  do  not  believe  it,  and  so  I 
can  use  it  ^-ith  others.   God  has  declared  it : — He  that 
beheves  not  has  made  God  a  liar,  because  he  has  not 
believed  the  record  which  God  has  given  concerning 
His  Son.   He  that  beheves  has  the  witness  in  himself, 
and  all  these  traits  which  clothe,  or  rather  reveal  the 
beloved  person  of  Him  who  was  humbled  for  us,  are 
ineffably  sweet,  but  the  positive  declaration  is  of  all 
importance,  too.   Note  in  a  passage  I  have  alluded  to, 
two  other  ways  in  which  Jesus  is  presented,  besides 
the  actual  declaration  that  He  was  God,  and  the 
Word  made  flesh.     He  gathers  round  Himself.    If 
He  were  not  God,  this  would  be  frightful,  a  subver- 
sion of  all  truth,  a  destructive  impossibility.      He 
would  turn  more  away  from  God.      He  accepts  this 
place.      All  that  is  attracted  by  what  is  good  flows 
around  Him,  and  finds  there  its  perfect  and  all-satisfy- 
ing centre.    That  is  God.    No  one  else  could  or  ever 
did  do  this,  except  in  sin  or  violence.   The  Church  can 
say,  Come  aud  drink,  I  have  the  living  water ;  so  she 
has,  but  not,  Come  to  me.     That  marks  the  spirit  of 
apostacy.     The  stream,  blessed  be  God,  flows  there, 
but  she  is  no  fountain  to  which  to  go.     That  must 
be  divine,  or  it  is  false.     But  mark,  this  is  a  new 
I         gathering  by  a  divuie  revealed  centre,  not  the  educa- 
1        uonal  progress  of  the  race.   It  is  the  opposite,  though 
I        blessed  instruction  for  the  whole  race.     The  other 
t       way  Jesus  is  revealed,  is  in  the  words,  ''Follow me." 
The  same  perfection,  but  now  as  man,  there  is  a  path 
through  this  world  of  evil.     It  is  one,  only  one,  fol- 
lowing  Christ.      There   can  be  no  way  but  a  new 
1        divine  one,  yet  necessarily  a  human  one ;  there  is  no 
I       way  for  man,  as  man,  in  the  world  at  all.      When 
I       Adam  was  in  paradise,  he  did  not  want  a  way,  he  had 
I       only  in  blessed  aud  unfeigned  thankfulness,  iguor*™*  ■ 


78 

of  evil,  to  enjoy  good  and  worship.  When  man  has 
been  cast  out,  and  the  world  is  grown  up  away  from 
God,  away  in  nature  and  will,  there  can  be  no  way 
in  a  rebellious  world,  in  a  sinful  corrupt  system,  how 
to  walk  aright,  as  in  and  of  the  world,  when  its 
whole  state  is  wrong.  But  if  what  is  divine  comes 
into  it  as  man,  what  has  motives  not  of  it,  nor  of 
human  nature,  though  trul^  man ;  if  it  gives  a  path 
in  which  the  divine  nature  is  displayed  in  grace  and 
holiness  in  these  circumstances,  yet  always  itself 
manifesting  what  it  is  in  them,  now,  I  have  a  way. 
I  foUow  hii ;  truly,  in  eyerything,  a  man,  but  a  mi 
displaying  divine  qualities  in  the  ordinary  circum- 
stances of  human  life.  He  says,  **  Follow  me,"  but 
when  He  has  said,  "  Ye  are  not  of  the  world,  as  I  am 
not  of  the  world,"  and  goes  into  glory,  sanctifies  him- 
self even  externally,  in  His  ascension,  from  the  human 
race,  that  we  may  be  sanctified  by  the  truth.  How 
thoroughly  opposite,  to  be  sure,  Christ's  system  in 
every  detail  is,  from  Dr.  Temple's. 

W.  It  is.  But  what  you  refer  to  gives  a  scope  to 
Christianity,  and  a  character  which  elevates  indeed, 
attracts  to  an  object,  a  divine  object ;  yeff,  we  may  be 
allowed  to  say,  attaches  to  it — but  it  shows  that  our 
ordinary  Christianity  is  poor  work,  indeed.  I  mean, 
poor  in  principle.  I  am  not  comparing  persons. 
Take  myself,  the  first. 

H.  It  is.  Yet  there  is  more  of  it,  practically, 
where  it  could  not  be  unfolded  in  terms,  among  the 
poor  of  the  flock  than  we  may  be  aware  of,  Still,  I 
am  sure,  alas  !  you  are  right.  But  it  is  the  beauty  of 
Christianity,  that  being  objective,  being  truth,  **  the 
truth  shall  set  you  free  " — and  a  person,  "  th^  Son 
shall  set  you  free,"  it  works  effectually  in  those  who 
receive  Christ,  and  requires  no  intellectual  develop- 
ment to  receive  its  power.  Christ  is  received  into 
the  heart,  and  dwelling  there  by  faith,  produces 
the  effect  in  us.  Yet  it  takes  us  out  of  ourselves, 
bacause  it  is  objective,  and  we,  filled  with  delight  in 


79 


I      an  object,  in  what  is  perfect,  are  like  Him,  but  so 
'       forget  ourselves ;  and  Med  by  doing  so,  as  Ho  did  in 
grace. 

i\\  How  skiliU  God  ia. 

H.  Yes ;  it  is  divine  wisdom.  Man  would  pro- 
duce virtue  by  the  love  of  virtue  in  himself;  but  then^ 
he  thinks  of  himself,  and  all  his  virtue  is  rottenness. 
God  gives  us  a  human  but  divine  object,  and  our 
affections  are  divine,  because  we  love  what  is  so,  and 
we  are  morally  what  we  love ;  but  we  love  it  in 
another,  and  are  delivered  from  self.  I  would  just  add, 
that  I  b6heve  that  this  adaptation  of  the  character 
of  walk  to  our  entirely  new  position  in  Christ,  is  what 
is  meant  by  created  again  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good 
works,  which  God  has  afore  prepared  that  we  should 
walk  in  them.     Hence,  we  are  the  epistle  of  Christ, 

t  engraved  in  the  ileshy  tables  of  the  heart  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  living  God. 
W.  This  contrast  with  the  Christianity  of  the 
Scriptures  is,  I  think,  what  strikes  one  most,  because 
we  are  occupied  not  merely  with  particular  errors  or 
(UfBcnlties.  but  evidently  with  the  whole  system  of 
relationship  with  God,  of  moral  influences,  and  the 
formation  of  the  soul  in  God's  image ;  and,  I  must 
add,  though  I  do  not  see  any  reference  to  such  a 
thing  in  Dr.  T.'s  system,  for  communion  with  God, 
the  whole  system  is  the  opposite  of  the  Christian  one. 
I  must  reject  one,  if  I  receive  the  other.  They  are 
more  than  contrary — they  are  eontradictoiy. 

H.  Undoubtedly  they  are.  The  very  starting-point 
is  opposite.  Christianity  treats  man  as  a  fallen  being, 
not  merely  as  imperfect,  but  as  departed  from  God, 
and  needing  a  new  nature  and  redemption.  Christ 
meets  Nicodemus  at  once  on  this  ground. 

The  rationalist  or  infidel  system  takes  in  Clms- 
tianity,  by  the  bye,  as  it  does  Greece  and  Kome;  but 
man,  as  he  is,  is  to  be  educated. 

There  are  a  few  points  it  may  yet  be  well  to  taka  ^ 
notice  of.    Can  auj-thing  prove  more  completely  hj 


80 

moral  intelligence  is  lost,  or  does  not  exist,  in  the 
minds  of  these  teachers,  than  the  following  state- 
ment :  **  The  Pharisees  had  succeeded  in  converting 
the  Mosaic  system  into  so  mischievous  an  idolatry  of 
forms,  that  St.  Paul  does  not  hesitate  to  call  the  law 
^the  strength  of  sin."  Nothing  could  shew  more 
^ignorance  of  the  human  heart,  or  Paul's  reasonings. 
His  principle  is  that  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against 
God,  and  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither 
indeed  can  be.  When  the  commandment  came,  sin 
revived,  and  I  died,  and  the  commandment  ordained 
to  life  became  to  me  death.  If  a  law  had  been  given 
which  could  have  given  life,  verily  righteousness 
should  have  been  by  the  law.  He  sees  an  external 
exvjence  of  righteousness,  which  imputes  sin  and  gives 
no  life.  He  goes  to  the  very  depths  of  our  moral 
being ;  shews  the  law  to  be  spiritual,  and  our  flesh 
carnal,  and  takes  man  out  of  the  flesh,  makes  him 
dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ,  that  he  may 
live  to  God.  All  this  which  ploughs  up  the  whole 
moral  nature  by  its  word,  *  thou  shalt  not  lust,*  sinks 
in  these  eminently  superficial  men  into  the  efilect  of 
a  mere  converting  the  Mosaic  system  into  a  mis- 
chievous idolatry  of  form.  The  Lord  Jesus  did  judge 
the  neglect  of  substance  for  form,  but,  once  the  flesh 
had  fully  proved  itself  by  rejecting  Him — for  lawless 
sin  and  law-breaking  were  complete  when  He  came, 
then  its  nature  is  judged,  instead  of  the  law  educat- 
ing it.  It  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither 
indeed  can  be.  And  now  even  our  hearts  feel  that 
Paul  is  truer,  knew  more  about  it,  than  the  ration- 
alists, if  one  morsel  of  spirituality  be  in  us.  But 
turn  on  whatever  hand  you  will,  you  are  met  by  the 
superficiality  of  these  pretenders  to  progress.  Do 
you  think,  my  dear  W.j  that  grace  overcomes  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh  ? 

W.  So  we  have  learnt,  through  mercy. 
H.  Not  at  all ;  *  *  the  moral  toughness  of  the  Jew- 
ish nature  which  enabled  them  to  outlive  Egyptians, 


81 

Romans,  Massulmans,  was  well  matched  against  the 
baffling  evil."  And  so  it  has  been  communicated, 
I  Eupposc,  to  our  natures,  which  are  not  tongh  at  all. 
Is  it  not  deplorable  ?  There  is  only  one  more  prin- 
ciple produced  in  this  essay,  but  an  important  one  of 
the  rationalistic  school,  on  which  I  would  mate  a 
remark — their  view  of  the  Bible ;  for  they  boast  of  the 
Bible  and  of  Christ  in  their  own  way.  "  The  Bible, 
from  its  very  form,  is  exactly  adapted  to  our  present 
want.  It  is  a  history;  even  the  doctrinal  parts  of  it 
are  cast  in  an  historical  form,  and  are  best  studied  by 
considering  them  as  records  of  the  time  at  which 
they  were  written,  and  as  conveying  to  ue  the  high- 
est and  greatest  religious  life  at  that  time."  It  has 
its  value  "  by  virtue  of  the  principle  of  private  judg- 
ment, which  puts  conscience  between  us  and  the 
Bible,  making  conscience  the  supreme  interpreter." 
Now  that  every  man  has  a  conscience  is  a  truth  of 
the  last  importance.  God  has  taken  care  that  man, 
falling  into  sin,  should,  in  and  with  the  sin,  acquire 
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil — a  profound  and 
admirable  ordering  of  di\"ine  wisdom,  as  it  was  im- 
possible he  could  have  that  knowledge  before.  The 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  in  one  necessarily  above 
all  evil  in  nature,  is  the  sphere  of,  and  inseparable 
from  holiness.  In  man  this  is  impossible.  He  is 
in  innocence,  or,  with  a  conscience,  in  sin.  But 
then  if  conscience  come  with  sin,  while  in  itself  it  is 
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  i.e.  of  the  difference 
of  right  and  wrong,  it  may  bo  deadened,  perverted, 
gives  no  motives  more  than  approval  and  disapproval, 
no  power,  no  \ivhig  object,  save  as  fear  of  judgment 
may  come  in. 

To  man  in  this  state,  a  revelation  of  God  is  made 
from  the  beginning,  a  promise  -of  deliverance  in 
another  than  himself;  the  all-important  principle  we 
have  seen  of  the  mind  being  taken  out  of  self — affec- 
tions, thankfulness,  adoration  of  heart  introduced  in 
contrast  with  judgment,  while  the  truth  of  judgment  ( 


82 

is  owned,  law  confirmed,  but  deliverance  given  from 
it.  But  God  gives  a  fall  revelation  as  to  the  whole  of 
his  relationships  with  man,  in  responsibihty,  and  in 
grace.  That  is,  He  either  puts  Himself  in  relationship, 
or  shews  a  relationship  which  exists,  with  the  being 
who  has  the  conscience.  We  must  consider  it  in  both 
these  lights.  The  latter  is  law,  the  former  grace. 
Both  were  already  seen  in  Paradise.  In  and  out  of 
Christianity,  men  have  sought  to  reconcile  them.  Out 
of  Christ  they  never  can.  But  there  they  were,  re- 
sponsibility and  life — a  command  (not  knowledge  of 
right  and  wrong),  but  a  command — and  free  commu- 
nication of  life ;  responsibility  and  giving  of  life.  Man 
took  of  the  first  tree,  and  never  ate  of  the  second.  He 
goes  out  a  sinner,  with  death  on  him  and  judgment  be- 
fore him — the  promise  of  a  deliverer,  but  in  another ; 
no  promise  to  him,  for  he  was  in  sin,  but /or  him ;  the 
seed  of  the  woman,  which  Adam  specifically  was  not. 
The  first  creature,  man,  flesh,  was  no  longer  in  com- 
munion, or  heir — he  was  lost.  Then  came  God's 
witness  to  men,  and  temporal  judgment  of  the  world 
on  that  footing,  i.e.  the  flood.  Then  promise  un- 
conditional, again  confirmed  to  the  seed,  to  that  one 
only,  as  Paul  says,  and  as  is  strictly  and  profoundly 
true.  (Gen.  xxii.)  No  question  of  responsibility  raised; 
God  would  bless  all  nations  in  the  promised  seed. 
But  could  the  question  of  righteousness  be  left  as 
indifferent  ?  Impossible.  It  is  raised  by  law,  obe- 
dience and  blessing,  disobedience  and  the  curse.  This 
is  broken,  before  it  is  fonnally  given,  in  its  first  and 
chiefest  link — ^that  which  bound  man  immediately  to 
God.  They  made  other  gods ;  turned  their  glory  into 
the  similitude  of  a  calf  eating  hay.  Then,  after  various 
dealings  in  mercy,  the  work  of  God  comes,  not  deal- 
ing tvith  the  responsibility  of  men,  but  recognizing 
it,  grace,  which  brings  salvation,  sealing  the  truth 
of  all  the  previous  responsibility,  for  otherwise  sal- 
vation were  not  needed,  but  going  on  another  ground 
and  meeting  the  case.     Christ  takes  the  effect  of  the 


83 

broken  responsibility  on  bimself,  dies  for  sin,  and  is 
the  source  of  life,  and  that  according  to  righteousne88. 
The  whole  question  of  the  two  trees  of  Paradise,  life- 
giiiing  and  good  and  evil,  and  man's  ruin  in  this,  is 
settled  for  those  who  receive  Christ  for  ever,  with  the 
largest,  yea,  a  perfect  revelation  of  God  as  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  in  all  His  riches  and  ways. 
Two  points  come  before  us  here  ;  how  we  are  to  view 
the  Bible,  even  the  doctrinal  parts  of  it ;  and  con- 
science being  between  us  and  the  Bible  as  supreme 
interpreter. 

The  whole  question  is",  Is  there  a  revelation  ? 
Is  anj-thing  heavenly  to  come  within  the  scope  of 
man's  thoughts  ?  Has  God  to  be  known — or  merely 
right  and  wrong  discerned  ?  And  if  He  has  to  be 
known,  must  He  not  reveal  himself? 

Now  I  say,  if  we  are  to  be  blessed,  God  must 
be  known.  If  I  am  away  from  God  in  sin,  and  so 
the  Scripture  treats  man,  and  conscience  cannot  deny 
it,  doing  right  and  wrong  cannot  be  settled  but  by 
returning  to  God.  If  a  child  has  wickedly  abandoned 
his  father's  house,  he  may  leave  off  particular  faults, 
but  he  can  never  he  right  till  he  returns  and  submits 
to  his  father.  But  the  tme  knowledge  of  God  is 
lost,  and  the  more  man  reasons  in  sin,  the  more  it  is 
lost.  God  mnst  be  good  ;  I  can  say  that  when  once 
He  has  been  revealed,  for  heathens  did  not  know 
this  as  truth,  though  instinct  looked  for  it — wants 
looked  for  it.  They  did  not  in  their  notion  of  God 
rise  above  the  passions  of  men.  When  they  did  rise 
above  them,  they  held  that  God  could  have  nothing  to 
say  to  men.  But  now  God  has  been  revealed.  Even  the 
poorest  man  knows  God  must  be  good.  But  if  I 
begin  to  reason,  what  do  I  see  ?  an  innocent  child 
perishing  in  agony,  the  mass  of  the  world  degraded 
to  the  lowest  degree  by  heathenism — How  is  He  then 
good  ?  An  infinitesimal  part  of  the  race,  for  centu- 
ries alone  knowing  the  miity  of  the  Godhead,  and 
they  almost  worse  than  their  neighbours,  sin  having 
f2 


84 

power  over  myself,  brutality  in  £Eiinilies,  wars,  tuniTilts, 
and  miseries — How  is  He  good  ?  If  I  say,  Ah !  but 
that  is  fallen  man,  departed  from  God.  Then  I  ask, 
how  then  can  he  be  received  back  again  ?  I  cannot 
with  any  sense  deny  that  he  is  a  sinner,  and  if  God 
did  not  make  him  bad,  he  is  fallen.  The  cravings  of 
nature  prove  he  is.  How  can  he  be  back  with  God, 
whom  I  must  then  think  to  be  holy  and  pure  ? 

A  revelation  from  God  and  of  God,  is  the  first 
necessity  of  my  nature  as  a  moral  being.  I  get  both 
in  Christ.  He  whom  God  hath  sent  speaketh  the 
words  of  God.  I  set  to  my  seal,  on  believing  Him, 
that  God  is  true  ;  but  then  it  is  not  only  the  word 
received  from  above  ;  that  a  prophet,  that  John  had, 
and  spoke  of  earthly  things,  moved  in  the  sphere  in 
which  God  dealt  with  man  as  a  creature  on  earth 
responsible  to  God ;  but  He  came  Himself  from  above. 
God  spoke  in  the  Son ;  His  words  were  in  a  personal 
and  complete  way,  though  a  man,  the  words  of  God. 
They  were  spoken  by  the  Lord.  Now,  he  that  receives 
his  testimony,  sets  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true.  And 
note  how  this  is  stated.  No  one  is  ascended  into 
heaven,  but  He  who  is  come  down  from  heaven,  even 
the  Son  of  Man  who  is  in  heaven,  and  what  He  hath 
seen  and  heard  that  He  testifieth.  Oh  t  what  a  bless- 
ing is  here,  which  none  else  can  give,  for  none  else 
has  gone  up  to  heaven  to  tell  us  what  is  there.  In 
this  poor  distracted  sin-beset  world,  I  have  the  sweet 
and  holy  ways  and  divine  objects  of  heaven  brought 
down  to  my  heart,  by  one  who  is  the  centre  of  its 
glory  and  delights,  and  come  to  bring  them  to  me  in 
love,  yet  without  leaving  it. 

W.  But  is  there  not  a  conscience  which  must  and 
does  judge  what  is  before  it  ?  For  instance,  if  a  God 
was  revealed  who  was  not  good,  or  who  was  not  holy, 
how  could  I  possibly  receive  such  a  being  as  God  ? 

H.  How  long  has  that  been  the  case  with  man  ? 
Was  there  ever  a  case  where  conscience  made  a  diffi- 
culty when  a  revelation  had  not  been  given  ?  Was  there 


I        ever  each  a 

~  of   hollTIPSR 


85 


ever  snch  a  thing  as  a  holy  God  thought  of,  or  the  need 
of  holiness  in  God  dreamt  of,  in  any  religion  hut  a 
revealed  one  ?  We  may  find  partial  traces  of  good- 
ness as  to  human  need  and  deliverance  from  tyranny 
in  India,  in  the  avatera  of  Vishnoo  in  that  otherwise 
monstrous  idolatry;  but  all  idolatry  everywhere  proves 
that  the  notion  that  goodness  and  holiness  were  re- 
quired in  a  divine  being  by  the  conscience  of  man,  is 
atterly  false.  The  gods  were  the  reproduction  of 
men's  passions  with  a  superior  degree  of  power. 
Wlun  revelation  was  given,  and  redemption  was  made 
known  by  God,  then  hoHuess  and  goodness  were 
made  knowu  aud  estimated,  but  nowhere  else.  That 
is,  instead  of  the  conscience  being  between  us  and 
the  Bible,  or  a  positive  revelation,  there  must  be  a 
revelation  between  God  and  us,  and  our  conscience, 
or  if  you  please,  between  God  and  us,  in  order  that 
the  conscience  may  feel  that  God  must  be  good  and 
holy  to  be  God  at  all.  When  the  revelation  has  been 
given,  the  conscience  recognises  it,  hut  never  before. 
Now  this  is  essential  and  conclusive  on  the  question 
before  db,  and  shows  us  that  conscience  within  is 
wholly  incapable  of  judging.  But  there  is  a  con- 
science, and  when  a  divine  revelation  or  light  comes 
to  it  from  God,  it  is  susceptible  of  impressions  from 
it,  so  as  to  have  a  right  judgment,  but  never  without, 
as  to  what  is  di\'ine.  Modern  infidels  are  reasoning 
from  the  effect  of  divine  light,  to  deny  its  necessity. 
As  when  hght  comes  in,  the  eye  can  see  ;  with  none 
it  cannot,  and  would  never  know  it  could.  Scripture 
is  true  ;  when  men  had  the  knowledge  of  God,  they 
did  not  discern  to  ri'tain  God  in  their  knowledge. 

W.  I  had  not  weighed  these  facts,  or  rather,  I  had 
not  thought  of  them,  but  they  are  true,  and  they 
certainly  put  the  pretensions  of  infidelity  aud  of  man's 
mind  in  a  very  pecuUar  hght.  They  are  really  vaunt- 
ing themselves  as  competent  to  judge  Christianity ; 
whereas  the  only  Hght  they  have  to  judge  it  by,  they 
have  got  from  it,  or  from  Judaism.   Without  it  mon'B 


i 


86 

mind  sunk  into  the  grossest  idolatry  and  moral  degra- 
dation. A  revelation  alone  enabled  them,  by  revealing 
what  God  really  is,  and  so  forming  their  mider stand- 
ings to  judge  of  what  He  ought  to  be.  There  is 
another  point  strikes  me  in  our  conversation.  How 
little  their  themes  bear  the  test  of  history  and  facts. 
They  make  boast  of  philosophy,  but  it  is  well  known 
that  up  to  Socrates,  it  was  little  but  Cosmogony,  and 
Plato's  moraUty  was  communism,  and  his  theology 
dsemonism,  perhaps  metempsychosis.  This  argument 
from  conscience  was  what  I  felt  least  able  to  meet, 
for  I  was  conscious  that  an  unholy  God,  or  one  that 
was  not  good,  I  could  not  have  borne  for  a  moment. 
H.  You  could  not,  I  am  sure,  because  you  have  a 
revelation.  It  is  their  great  theme  abroad.  But  it  is 
always  useful  to  meet  infidels  on  their  own  ground.  I 
mean  on  its  untenableness.  I  already  referred  to  this. 
If  God  is  simply  good,  and  the  fall  and  redemption 
are  not  God's  truth,  explain  to  me  the  state  of  this 
world,  three-quarters  heathen,  and  of  the  other,  a  great 
part  Mussulman  or  Papist,  and  every  kind  of  misery 
and  degradation  dominant,  and  selfishness  the 
dominant  spring  of  all  its  activities,  where  lusts  and 
passions  are  not  so.  If  man  be  not  fallen,  where  is 
God's  goodness  ?  And  if  God  be  not  good,  what  is  ? 
Christianity  tells  me  man  is  fallen,  and  reveals  to  me 
God  in  goodness  in  the  midst  of  the  misery,  and 
redemption  has  an  issue  out  of  it :  and  the  history 
of  man,  not  succeeding  generations  sacrificed  to 
rationalists'  theories  of  progress  of  the  fifty-ninth  cen- 
tury ;  but  revelations  of  this  goodness  and  deliver- 
ance for  faith  to  lay  hold  of  from  the  day  of  man's 
fall,  though  the  time  was  not  come  to  accomplish  the 
thing  promised.  And  allow  me  to  ask  you,  if  man 
be  so  competent,  how  comes  it  there  is  so  much 
difficulty,  and  conflict,  and  uncertainty  ?  Why  is 
there  so  much  difficulty  in  finding  out  God  ?  ^Vhy 
any  question  of  discovering  Him,  if  men  have  not 
lost  Efim?    Why  men  beheve  in  Jupiter,  or  Siva,  &c., 


87 


or  Odin  King  of  men,  or  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman, 
or  Khem,  or  a  host  of  others,  which  it  is  useless  for 
me  to  follow  ? 

Why  have  they  such  difficulty,  when  it  is  owned 
God  must  be  good  and  holy,  in  coming  to  Him  and 
walking  with  Him  ?  No ;  it  is  evident  man  has  got 
away  from  God,  many  horridly,  degradingly;  and  the 
fairest  of  Eve's  daughters  caring  more  for  a  pretty 
ribbon,  and  of  her  sous  for  gold  or  a  title,  than  all 
which  God  presents  to  them,  to  win  their  hearts  in 
the  Son  of  God's  sufferings,  and  offering  up  Hhuself  in 
grace  for  them.  No ;  man  is  fallen,  has  lost  the  sense 
of  what  God  is,  and  of  His  love — has  not  his  heart's 
deUght  in  that  which  God  is,  or  wliat  is  supremely 
good.  Nothing  proves  it  more  than  his  not  finding  it 
out.  God  has  given  a  conscience,  but  it  does  not 
judge  the  Word  ;  tlie  Word  of  God  judges  it.  In  one 
sense,  every  man  must  judge ;  but  his  judgment  re- 
veals him  in  presence  of  the  Word.  A  man's  judg- 
ment of  other  things  always  reveals  his  own  state. 
He  is  certainly  lost,  condemned,  if  he  does  not  receive 
the  Word.  God  speaks,  and  gives  adequate  witness 
of  who  He  is.  He  that  beUeveth  not  is  condemned 
aheady.  Light  is  come  into  the  world.  If  men 
prefer  darkness,  it  is  not  their  conscience.  Their 
will  must  be  at  work.  Dr.  Temple  professes  to  be- 
lieve, I  suppose,  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come.  I 
ask,  is  man  bound  to  receive  Him  or  not  ?  There 
He  is  to  test  every  man's  soul  by  Hia  reception, 
or  the  contrary.  It  does  test  the  soul.  He  has  a 
right  to  judge,  you  tell  me.  If  he  does  not  receive 
Him,  he  proves  himself  bad,  bad  in  will.  He  has  to 
judge;  but  if  he  rejects  what  is  perfect  in  goo(hiess, 
his  own  state  is  she^vn.  He  is  judged  by  his  approval 
or  disapproval  of  what  is  there,  because  perfection, 
because  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  is  there.  Because 
God  is  speaking  woe  to  him  wiio  does  not  hearken. 
Yes,  he  has  to  judge.  It  is  not  his  right.  He  is  a 
lost  creature ;  but  he  is  tested  by  it — it  is  his  respou- 


A 


88 

sibility.  How  he  can  meet  it,  I  do  not  enquire  here. 
I  believe  the  grace  of  Gk)d  is  needed ;  but  there  is 
God  speaking — speaking  in  grace.  Is  He  received  or 
not  ?  The  two  things  John  speaks  of  here  are  the 
words  of  God,  and  one  come  from  above  who  is  above 
all.  Am  I  not  bomid  to  listen  ?  am  I  not  bound  to 
receive  ?  You  tell  me,  must  I  not  judge  whether 
they  are  His  words,  and  whether  He  came  from 
above  ?  I  answer,  yes ;  but  you  are  judged  by  the 
result  you  come  to,  because  God  knows  He  has  given 
a  perfectly-adapted  and  gracious  witness ;  yea,  that 
He  is  it.  If  you  have  rejected  this,  you  have  rejected 
Him,  and  remain  in  your  sins  and  under  wrath.  To 
them  that  believe  He  is  of  price,  as  of  God ;  to  them 
that  are  disobedient,  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock 
of  offence.  It  is  a  savour  of  life  to  life,  and  a  savour 
of  death  to  death ;  and  the  presentation  of  the  truth 
and  words  of  God,  and  of  the  Son  of  God,  must  be 
so,  because  their  present  rejection  is  the  rejection  of 
himself. 

Talking  of  conscience  between  us  and  the  Bible  is 
all  foolishness,  and  nothing  else.  The  Bible  is  God's 
word  in  direct  contact  with  us,  telling  to  our  con- 
science all  that  ever  we  did ;  that  GoA  is  holy,  but, 
blessed  be  His  name,  that  He  is  gi-ace  and  a  Saviour. 
What  is  conscience  as  distinct  from  us  ?  It  is  that 
on  which  the  Word  of  God  acts.  If  light  comes,  and 
God  is  light,  and  Christ  was  the  light  of  the  world,  it 
makes  all  manifest,  and  acts  on  the  eye.  If  the  eye 
is  in  an  ill  state,  it  avoids  the  light ;  it  does  not  judge 
the  Ught ;  its  state  is  proved  by  it ;  it  judges  colours, 
forms,  and  so  on,  by  the  light.  But  a  conscience 
that  is  not  '^ us,"  or  a  conscience  between  us  and  God, 
is  an  utter  delusion.  Conscience  is  the  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil  in  us.  That  it  is  without  any  further 
revelation  of  God.  It  has  the  sense  of  responsibility, 
and,  though  obscurely,  of  judgment  and  the  con* 
sequences  of  sin ;  at  any  rate,  as  far  as  vague  fear 
goes.    But  if  Christianity  be  true  at  all,  the  Son  of 


89 


God  has  come,  and  speaks  God's  words.  The  mo- 
ment He  is  received,  that  is,  that  there  is  faith  in 
him,  the  first  judgment  of  conscience  aud  heart  is  to 
bow  to  him ;  the  first  right  tiling,  for  right  is  the 
just  niiiintenauce  of  the  duties  of  relationship,  is  to 
listen,  and  obey  that  word ;  the  most  essentially  wrong 
thing,  is  not  to  bow  and  receive  his  word.  To  judge 
God,  when  I  know  it  is  him,  is  the  height  of  sin.  If 
Dr.  Temple  or  these  rationalists  do  not  believe  that  He 
has  caiiie  am!  t^poken,  I  will  seek  to  prove  to  their  con- 
sciences that  He  has.  There  is  God's  way  of  doing 
it.  They  must  judge  whether  He  he.  To  he  sure ; 
but  this  I  tell  them  with  certainty,  from  his  own  lips, 
that  He  ia  come,  and  il'  they  do  not  believe  in  Him, 
they  are  condemned;  if  they  do,  they  have  eternal 
life.  But  if  He  be  there,  if  they  do  beheve  He  has 
spoken,  their  part  ia  to  listen  to,  not  to  judge  him. 
With  tlie  blinding  of  conscience  by  passions,  igno- 
rance, education,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to 
have  a  sure  witness  of  God's  mind,  not  dependent  on 
the  varj'ing  views  of  man.  If  I  lose  the  Bible,  I  lose 
communications  from  God ;  I  am  infinitely  irreparably 
sunk.  Dr.  Temple,  it  seems,  does  not  Uke  God's 
word ;  does  not  Uke  He  should  reveal  himself.  If  he 
has  a  professed  revelation,  he  '*  likes  to  consider  it  as 
records  of  the  time  at  which  tliey  were  written,  and 
as  conveying  to  us  the  highest  and  greatest  religions 
life  at  that  time."  That  man  should  be  developed, 
that  may  be  allowed;  reUgious  life,  that  too;  but 
communications  firom  God — no.  Now  there  have 
been  such.^God's  word  spoken  in  this  world,  or 
Christianity  is  all  a  falsehood  from  beginning  to  end, 
a  holy  imposture,  which  there  is  nothing  Uke  in  the 
world.  But  if  there  have  been  such,  have  we  lost 
them  for  ever  ?  Are  we  returned  to  darkness  ?  for 
since  the  true  light  shone,  shone  in  one  speaking 
the  words  of  God,  am  I  to  have  them  no  more,  no 
more  this  revelation  fi'om  God,  no  more  any  commu- 
nication from  himself  as  such.   I  have  lost  all  that  was 


90 

precious  and  elevating  in  the  world.  I  have  lost 
communication  with  God.  I  may  speculate  about 
him,  may  know  something  of  right  and  wrong,  but 
I  have  lost  all  communications  from  him — ^wretched 
man  that  I  am.  What  was  man  when  he  had  not  it  ? 
What  is  man  when  he  has  not  it  ?  To  reduce  Divine 
communications  to  apostolic  life  is  to  shew  a  will  not 
to  hear  God  directly,  not  to  have  to  say  to  him,  a 
dislike  to  have  to  do  with  the  words  of  his  mouth. 
It  is  not,  **  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them, 
and  they  were  to  me  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  my 
heart/'  If  God  have  spoken,  and  if  we  deny  it,  we  are 
infidels ;  to  exalt  the  conscience  of  man  above  ity  as  a 
judge,  is  to  set  corrupt  sinful  man  above  the  authority 
of  God.  I  read  that  the  word  discerns  the  thoughts  and 
intents  of  the  heart,  it  makes  its  truth  and  the  autho- 
rity of  God  known  by  its  action  in  the  conscience,  it 
tells  a  man  all  that  ever  he  did,  but  it  reveals  a  God 
of  grace — not  that  the  conscience  judges  the  word. 
Christ  did  speak  the  words  of  God.  Are  they  lost  to 
us  ?  If  I  have  them,  is  my  conscience  to  be  between 
me  and  them  ?  What  profound  nonsense  such  a 
sentence  is.  If  you  do  not  know  them,  I  will  not 
call  you  an  infidel,  but  you  are  an  unbeliever.  You 
have  not  yet  set  to  your  seal  that  God  is  true.  Do 
not,  at  any  rate,  pretend  to  teach  others,  when  you 
admit  that  God  has  spoken,  and  you  cannot  yet  tell 
what  is  his  word,  and  what  is  not. 

W.  I  am  glad  you  spoke  of  this  question,  for  it  is 
one  of  the  practical  difficulties  to  my  mind  in  their 
way  of  speaking ;  because  I  feel  I  have  a  conscience, 
and  yet  I  recognize  the  supreme  authority  of  the  word. 

fir.  But  do  you  not  see,  my  good  friend,  that  the 
whole  object  is  to  get  rid  of  revelation,  and  its  autho- 
rity over  us  ?  If  God  has  spoken,  if  there  be  a  reve- 
lation, would  not  the  first  act  of  conscience  be  to 
turn  and  bow  to  it — of  the  heart  to  delight  in  what 
God  has  revealed,  for  He  has  surely  revealed  him- 
self ? 


91 


W.  Of  course,  it  would  be  the  proof  that  there  was 
conscience  in  activity,  and  not  will,  a  heart  to  taste 
the  blessedness  One  alone  can  tell  of. 

li.  That  is  the  verj*  point,  at  least  a  very  principal 
one,  and  it  is  connected  with  the  fall,  which  is  always 
ignored  in  this  system.  There  are  two  parts  of  con- 
science ;  one,  the  knowledge  of  right  and  wrong,  the 
other,  sense  of  responsibility,  and  that  to  God.  The 
'  first,  sin  has  practically  greatly  darkened,  the  last,  will 
resists,  though  it  cannot  deny.  The  word  of  God 
comes  in,  gives  perfect  light  to  the  conscience,  and 
much  more,  and  presents  the  authority  of  God  to  the 
will.  Men  plead  conscience  as  a  competency  against 
God  and  His  word,  saying,  they  must  have  conscience 
supreme.  God  will  settle  that  question,  whether  His 
light  and  word  is  perfect  for  conscience.  His  authority 
in  it  sufficient  to  claim  obedience  and  submission. 
A  child  has  departed  wickedly  from  its  father's  house, 
and  thrown  off  his  authority.  He  professes  to  desire 
to  go  right,  his  father  sends  a  message,  yea,  comes 
and  speaks  to  him,  communicating  to  him  his  mind, 
and  will,  and  grace.  He  rephes.  "  Oh  !  all  that  is  a 
thing  external  to  me  ;  the  real  thing  is  the  inward 
disposition  in  me."  My  answer  to  him  is,  "  All  very 
fair,  my  good  lad  ;  but  the  trial  of,  and  test  of  your 
disposition,  is  your  submitting  to  your  father's  word, 
and  receiving  and  bowing  with  a  thankful  heart  to 
his  testilied  kindness." 

rr.  But  suppose  he  were  to  say, — But  I  must 
know  if  it  be  my  father's  word. 

//.  AU  quite  right.  But  I  reply,  if  your  heart  was 
right,  you  would  be  only  too  glad  to  know  it  is.  And 
when  yon  say  that,  even  if  it  be,  it  is  only  an  external 
thing,  and  my  conscience  after  all  must  judge,  I  see 
you  take  yoiu  own  judgment  still,  and  do  not  want 
your  father's  word,  I  know  your  disposition,  your 
will  likes  to  be  master  yet.  Besides,  let  me  tell  yon, 
had  yon  been  staying  in  the  house,  you  would  be 
famihar  enough  with  your  father's  voice  and  words  to 


92 

know  them  at  once.  You  are  proving  yonr  own  inca- 
pacity and  evil.  If  you  do  not  receive  and  under- 
stand his  words,  you  will  remain  withouti  and  prove 
that  incapacity, — ^that  is  all.  If  your  disposition 
was  right,  rebel  as  you  have  been,  a  word  from  your 
father  would  be  heaven  to  you,  and  the  heart  would 
deUght  in  bowing  to  his  authority;  and  this  very 
readiness  is  the  disposition  which,  directed  towards 
his  own  words,  is  that  which,  morally  speaking,  gives 
capacity  to  receive  them ;  for  the  heart  is  right,  and 
the  will  broken.  If  any  man  will  (desire,  be  willing) 
to  do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  whether 
it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of  myself.  If  you 
talk  of  your  conscience  being  supreme,  when  your 
father  has  spoken,  it  is  quite  clear  that  you  wish  to 
be  independent  of  your  father ;  the  first  proof  of  the 
true  return  of  heart  and  conscience  is  the  self-sub- 
jection to  your  father's  declared  mind  and  will.  You 
are  not  returned  to  him  yet.  Your  whole  place  is 
wrong,  conscience  and  all. 

There  is  the  knowledge  of  right  and  wrong 
as  a  faculty  without  God ;  but  where  God  speaks, 
conscience  is  proved  by  bowing  to  it.  See  Saul. 
I  **  thought  I  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to 
the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  which  thing 
also  I  did."  There  was  conscience.  Once  he 
has  to  do  with  the  Lord,  that  he  is  right ;  it  is, 
**  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?"  "  Speak, 
Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth.'*  All  short  of  this  is 
aUenation  from  God.  A  conscience  that  wants  to  be 
away  from  God,  to  judge  for  itself,  is  not  an  upright 
conscience.  It  is  will  and  sin.  Conscience  is  not 
only  judgment,  it  recognizes  the  authority  of  God, 
(we  are  sanctified  to  obedience)  and  loves  it,  because 
it  is  true  conscience,  and  the  will  of  independent 
self  is  given  up,  the  soul  restored  to  God.  For  the 
word  has  authority  as  well  as  light.  It  tests  the  truth 
of  conscience  by  giving  light,  but  it  speaks  with  the 
authority  of  God.    Hence  the  Lord  says,  *'  The  word 


that  I  gpeak  unto  yon,  the  Bame  shall  judge  yon  in 
the  last  day."  Judge  it  now,  if  you  dare.  I  do  not 
beheve  in  the  eouscientiousnesa  of  a  man  who  pleads 
his  conscience  against  the  word  of  God.  See  how 
the  apostles  speak :  If  we  beheve  the  witness  of  men, 
the  witness  of  God  is  greater  ;  he  that  beUevea  not 
hath  made  God  a  Har.  He  that  heareth  my  word 
hath  everlasting  life,  says  Christ.  Why  do  ye  not  un- 
derstand my  speech,  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  word  ; 
because  I  tell  you  the  trutli,  ye  believe  not.  He  that 
Bent  me  is  true,  and  I  speak  to  the  world  these  things 
I  have  heard  of  Him.  As  my  Father  hath  taught  me, 
I  speak  these  things.  Because  man  has  abandoned 
God  on  his  original  created  ground,  God  has  sent  the 
testimony  of  heavenly  things,  to  bring  him  to  a  higher 
relationship  with  Himself.  And  he  tells  me,  the 
wretched  sinner,  he  must  Hsteu  to  conscience,  because 
this  revelation  is  an  external  thing.  To  be  sure, 
heavenly  things,  and  the  record  of  them,  are  very  ex- 
ternal to  bun.  He  has  told  the  truth.  He  is  out  of 
Paradise ;  this  world  is  the  scene  which  has  grown  up 
in  man's  exclusion  from  God.  He  comes  with  the 
revelation  of  what  is  Divine  and  heavenly  to  bring 
him  out  of  that,  and  into  what  is  heavenly,  and  he 
puts  it  off,  and  says  it  is  external  to  him.  He  is  right. 
Only  if  he  does  not  receive  it,  ho  will  be  external  to  it.  ^ 
He  will  have  a  conscience  too ;  lie  is  all  right  in  that, 
and  it  will  tell  him  what  he  has  done,  when  the  time  of 
gracious  reception  is  past.  His  sheep  hear  his  voice. 
But  ye,  says  the  Lord,  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not 
of  my  sheep.  The  word  and  confirming  works  are 
given,  adequate  testimony  is  given.  Woe  to  him  who 
does  not  receive  it.  He  will  die  in  his  sins,  and  the 
same  jcfird  will  judge  him  in  that  day.  If  God  has 
come  and  spoken,  and  revealed  Himself  from  heaven, 
and  we  do  not  receive  it.  He  and  all  that  is  heavenly 
is  external  to  us,  and  there  is  nothing  but  self  within. 
But  even  hi  this  notion,  they  only  shew  their  igno- 
for  ho  that  believeth  on  the  Son,  hath 


I 
I 

I 

gno-     J 

J 


94 

witness  in  himself.  The  measure  of  the  conscience 
becomes  Divine,  which  natural  conscience  never  can 
be,  even  when  it  is  right.  It  must  and  ought  to  be 
human ;  whereas,  when  bom  of  God  through  the 
word,  on  receiving  the  word,  I  receive  Christ,  the 
revelation  of  God,  and  of  what  is  heavenly.  He  is 
my  hfe ;  He  is  within,  and  I  am  called  on  to  be  an 
imitator  of  God,  as  a  dear  child,  and  walk  in  love  as 
Christ  has  loved  us,  so  that  I  am,  if  needed,  to  lay  down 
my  life  for  the  brethren ;  for  Christ  has  thus  proved 
His  love  to  us.  My  measure  of  conscience  is  Divine, 
acting  because  I  have  both  seen  and  received  what  is 
Divine,  in  receiving  Christ  by  His  word.  So  that, 
speaking  of  its  fulness,  the  apostle  is  not  afraid  to 
say,  filled  with  (up  to)  all  the  fulness  of  God.  Hence, 
John  says,  **  which  thing  is  true  in  him  and  in  you ; 
because  the  darkness  is  passed,  and  the  true  light 
now  shineth.'*  And  all  this  heavenly  revelation  of  and 
by  Him,  who  came  down  from  heaven,  I  am  to  give 
up,  to  have  patriotism  from  the  selfish  and  treacherous 
Komans,  whose  patriotism  was  the  deceitful  oppression 
of  the  world  ;  and  to  learn  that  courage,  which  I  may 
find  in  a  cock  or  a  bull-dog,  has  been  ignorantly  for- 
gotten by  Paul.  It  is  hard  to  have  patience  with 
such  contemptible  stuff. 

IF.  But  we  ought.     The  master  you  speak  of  had. 

IL  You  are  right ;  He  was  perfect  in  everjiihing, 
and  fleshly  and  unchristian  feeUng  is  apt  ever  to 
mingle  itself  with  our  state  in  such  cases.  Still 
though  we  are  imperfect  in  it,  indignation  in  itself  is 
not  wrong  in  such  cases. 

W.  But  there  is  still  a  question  which  I  should 
like  to  put  to  you  here. 

H.  Well,  do  so. 

W.  I  enter  into  your  feelings  as  to  Christ.  He 
whom  God  hath  sent  spoke  the  words  of  God,  and  he 
who  received  his  testimony  set  to  his  seal  that  God 
is  true.  An  immense  principle  e^ddently  every  way. 
I  see  plainly,  that  in  receiving  the  Word,  the  very 


I        name  given  to  Christ  in  this  respect,  I  receive  tmth, 
I  submit  to  (livine  authority,  am  restored  to  God,  enter 

r  in  a  heavenly  way  into  a  new  relationship  with  Him, 
according  to  that  which  is  revealed,  and  know  grace, 
and,  indeed,  glory.  But  then  the  apostle's  words. 
How  can  I  regard  them  ?  Because  the  personal 
speaker  is,  so  to  speak,  lost, 
i  H.  As  regards  Christ  himself,  the  ineffable  love- 

liness of  all  He  said  and  did,  of  course,  necessarily 
bears  the  stamp  of  heaven,  of  one  who  came  thence, 
and  yet  could  say,  who  ix  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father; 
who  spoke  what  he  knew,  and  testified  what  he  had 
seen.  This  is  necessarily  wanting  in  the  subsequent 
communications;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  gain. 
"  It  is  expedient  foryou  tliati  go  away;  for  if  I  go  not 
away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come  ;  but  if  I  go,  I 
will  send  him  imto  you."  Besides  the  perfect  ex- 
pression of  divine  good  in  Christ  on  earth,  the  ques- 
tion of  good  and  evil  was  settled  for  ever.  Christ 
being  made  sin,  and  God  perfectly  glorified  by  His 
offering  of  Himself  and  His  being  the  sin-bearer,  the 
question  of  good  and  evil  was  morally  settled,  and  there- 
upon man  takes  a  place  in  heaven.  This  was  a  new 
tiling.  Thus  you  will  find  that  characteristically,  for, 
of  course,  the  same  truths  are  found  in  both,  John 
gives  ns  the  divine  thing,  the  heavenly  thing — God 
Himself  manifested  upon  earth,  Paul  on  the  ground 
of  sovereign  grace,  man  brought  righteously  into 
heaven.  Now  Christ  must  have  suffered,  risen  from 
the  dead,  and  gone  to  heaven,  to  have  this  before  as, 
and  the  message  or  testunony  of  it  given.  Yet  it 
must  be  divine  testimony  to  have  any  value,  and  that 
I  have  through  the  Holy  Ghost  scut  down. 

TI'.  You  mean,  that  the  New  Testament  gives  us  a 
witness  and  a  record,  with,  of  course,  many  accessory 
truths,  of  the  divine, — of  God  himself  ©Eo-nic,  as  well  as 
Qto-m^,  manifested  in  man ;  and  man  brought  in  a 
and  heavenly  way  completely  to  God. 

//.  I  do.     The  former,  as  to  its  fruit  in  us,  take 


Mas      ^H 

new    ^^M 

akes    ^^M 


96 

the  character  of  life ;  the  latter,  of  righteonsness ; 
but  divine  life,  that  eternal  life  which  was  with  the 
Father,  and  was  manifested  to  us,  and  by  which, 
Christ  being  our  life,  we  now  live  ;  and  divine  righ- 
teousness. It  is  thus  wholly  a  new  thing — a  life  that 
was  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was,  manifested 
in  Jesus,  communicated  to  us, — ^not  in  Adam  innocent 
more  than  in  Adam  a  sinner. 

W,  But,  then,  this  becomes  a  kind  of  independent 
life — at  any  rate,  once  it  is  received. 

H.  In  no  way.  The  character  of  this  life,  even  in 
Jesus  as  a  man,  was  the  perfection  of  the  condition  in 
which  He  was.  It  was  obedience  and  dependence, 
and  a  constant  heavenly  regard.  He  was  the  apxriyoq 
and  T€hioTn<;  of  faith,  a  man  with  his  eye  always  out  of 
himself  on  God.  So  with  us.  When  I  say,  Christ 
lives  in  me,  I  must  add  always,  the  life  which  I  live 
in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God, 
who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me.  Divine  Ufe 
in  a  creature  nature  is  always  objective,  that  is,  its 
essential  excellence,  as  indeed  we  have  already  seen. 

W.  Let  me  ask  you  what  place  you  give  Peter,  then  ? 

H.  What  there  is  of  connection  in  this  life  with  the 
previous  ways  of  God  he  pursues.  It  is  government ; 
and  this  in  the  strongest  way  confirms  to  me  the 
authenticity  of  the  second  Epistle.  The  first,  is 
government  in  favour  of  the  just ;  the  second,  as 
regards  the  predominant  and  hcentious  wicked. 
Hence  he  goes  to  the  consuming  of  all  things  in  the 
stability  of  which  they  rest.  The  saint  for  him  is-  a 
pilgrim.  The  great  fact  of  redemption,  of  course,  is 
fully  stated  for  this.  But  we  are  not  risen  with 
Christ,  but  He  is  risen,  and  we  have  a  living  hope 
through  His  resurrection ;  meanwhile  the  government 
of  God  is  displayed  in  favour  of  His  people  upon 
earth.  This  evidently  connected  it  with  the  Old 
Testament,  though  on  new  ground.  Hence  the  quo- 
tation of  the  thirty-fourth  Psalm,  "He  that  will  love 
hfe,"  &c. 


97 

W.  Have  you  ever  thought  of  the  likeness  of  Jude 
and  2nd  Peter  ?    There  is  something  strange  in  it. 

H.  How  it  came  about  may  be  a  difficulty — per- 
haps a  difficulty  never  to  be  solved,  as  many  such 
external  questions,  after  1800  years,^ — interesting  in 
their  place,  but  immaterial.  But  the  difference  as  to 
divine  teaching  in  them  is  clear  and  important.  Peter 
speaks  of  mckednesa,  and  God's  dealings  with  it  as 
such,  God's  govenunent,  as  I  said.  Jude  of  apostacy, 
or  leaving  the  first  estate,  going  briefly  thi-ough  all  the 
characters  of  this,  angelic,  the  natural  man,  ecclesias- 
tical, and  final  reheihon  against  Christ,  on  which 
actual  judgment  wiU  come  ;  especially,  of  course,  tra- 
cing it  as  regards  the  church  from  false  brethren  first 
creeping  in,  till  Christ  comes  to  judge  imgodly  men. 
Thus  Peter  speaks  of  angels  that  sinned,  Jude- of 
angels  that  kei)t  not  their  first  estate,  hut  left  their 
oviii  habitation.  Thus  Scripture  fiUs  all  parts  of 
moral  truth  up.  Like  a  dissected  map,  it  proves  its 
own  perfectness. 

In  the  gospels  which  these  ignorant  wise  men  are 
talking  about,  as  to  be  harmonized  and  compared,  and 
synoptical  and  supplementary,  we  get  in  Matthew 
Christ  presented  to  the  Jews,  Immannel,  Messiah, — 
and  the  result  of  His  rejection,  but  still  referring  to 
the  Jews,  hence  no  ascension  ;  in  Mark,  Christ  the 
servant  prophet :  in  Luke,  Christ  the  Son  of  man  in 
grac^,  leading  them,  on  going  to  heaven,  under  the 
blessing  of  His  thence  outstretched  baud ;  that  is,  the 
various  revelation  of  Christ  on  earth  as  man  :  and  in 
John,  out  of  all  dispensational  relationship,  Christ, 
God  manifest  in  flesh,  the  Word  and  Son,  and  divine 
hfe  displayed,  and  the  giver  of  the  Comforter ;  but 
even  here  no  ascension,  because  it  is  not  man  in 
heaven,  but  God  on  enrth.  Were  we  to  enter  into 
details,  wo  should  only  find  this  admirably,  and  of 
course,  perfectly  brought  out.  I  confess,  when  I  read 
iBtionaUstic  views  of  tlie  hooks  {I  do  not  mean,  of 

■se,  criticism  of  the  text,  though  even  this  bo  in- 


I 
I 


^^iBtionali! 
^^^biTSe,  c 


98 

fiuenccd  by  their  state),  I  am  astonnded  at  their 
absolute  moral  incapacity.  External  it  is  to  them, 
sure  enough ;  at  least,  all  that  is  in  it,  all  that  is 
divine.  They  have  hit  here  on  the  right  word,  con- 
demned out  of  their  own  mouth. 

W.  But  as  we  are  speaking  of  this,  what  do  you 
make  of  James  ? 

H.  It  is  equally  admirable  in  its  place;  not  a 
high  revelation  of  what  is  divine,  but  the  fruit  of 
the  patient  and  perfect  grace  of  God  towards  us. 
When  Paul  had  been  in  the  third  heaven,  after  all  he 
was  a  poor  mortal ;  and  as,  speaking  reverentlj,  God 
had  put  him  in  the  danger,  though  by  blessmg,  he 
sent  him  a  corrective.  It  was  PauFs  evil,  no  doubt, 
that  needed  it ;  but  it  was  God's  own  goodness,  which 
thinks  of  all  our  evil  in  grace,  that  sent  it.  And 
Paul,  as  you  may  see,  got  profit  and  advantage  through 
it ;  that  is,  as  an  occasion.  Now  I  do  not  say  that 
James'  epistle  is  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  but  it  is  an  ex- 
cellent corrective  of  it ;  it  is  a  girdle  about  the  loins. 
Our  loins  are  girt  about  with  truth  by  it ;  the  exceed- 
ingly high  and  heavenly  truth  into  which  we  are 
brought ;  the  elevation  to  which  faith  brings  us  ;  its 
being  faith,  that  is,  a  principle  which  takes  us  out 
of  ourselves  to  rest  on  what  is  in  God  and  His  reve- 
lation, might  lead  us,  not  by  its  own  nature,  but  by 
our  utter  perverseness,  like  Paul,  not  to  be  out  of  the 
flesh  as  it  ought,  but  to  be  puffed  up  in  it ;  to  use 
liberty  for  a  cloak  of  licentiousness.  It  is  dreadful  it 
should  be  so,  but  such  we  are,  poor  wretched  creatures 
that  we  are.  James,  that  is  reaUy  God,  comes  in  and 
meets  us,  and  with  an  appropriate  moral  energy  which 
is  mighty  in  the  conscience,  shews  that  the  real  power 
of  faith  connects  it  with  life.  Its  reaUty  is  sliewn — ^that 
is  the  testing  word — by  its  fruits.  And  no  one  speaks 
of  this  as  more  of  sovereign  grace  than  he,  in  all  its 
Pauline  excellency,  so  as  to  shew  the  connection. 
**  Of  His  own  will  begat  He  us,  that  we  might  be  a 
kind  of  firstfruits  of  His  creatures."  He  too  connects  it 


99 

with  the  law  of  liberty — ^that  is,  when  the  nature,  the 
new  man,  and  the  prescribed  will,  go  together.  If  I 
command  my  child  to  go  where  he  longs  to  go,  and 
tell  him  the  way,  it  is  obedience  ;  but  it  is  the  law  of 
liberty.  He  speaks  of  three  laws,  or  law  in  three 
ways :  1st.  The  law  as  such — ^here,  if  guilty  in  one 
point,  guilty  of  all.  The  authority  of  the  law  given 
has  been  despised  in  the  point  in  which  lust  was 
active.  We  are  wholly  guilty.  2nd.  The  royal  law  of 
subjective  perfection :  '*  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh- 
bour as  thyself."  That  is  doing  well.  3rd.  The  perfect 
law  of  liberty  into  which  I  look ;  that  is,  the  revela- 
tion of  the  path  of  the  divine  nature,  of  which  I  am 
made  partaker.  Revelation  shews  me  the  perfection 
of  it,  the  divine  nature  gives  me  the  deUght  in  it.  I 
am  as  a  present  thing  blessed  in  the  doing  it.  That 
James  speaks  purely  of  fruits  of  faith  in  justifying  by 
works,  is  evident  from  the  fact,  that  the  examples 
he  takes  were  no  examples  of  the  fruit  of  natural 
conscience  at  all.  One  was  a  father  slaying  his  son, 
the  other  a  harlot  betraying  her  country.  I  do  not 
know  what  the  Romans  or  Dr.  Temple  would  have  said 
to  her.  But  one  was  giving  up  every  thing,  even  the 
promises  according  to  flesh,  to  God,  in  absolute  obe- 
dience, counting  on  Him  even  to  have  Isaac  again, 
according  to  His  word ;  the  other  identifying  herself 
with  the  Lord's  people  when  they  had  not  yet  gained 
one  victory  in  Canaan  over  their  mighty  enemies. 
No  one  pierces  more  deeply,  by  the  word,  into  the 
principles  and  workings  of  the  human  heart,  or  takes 
grace  and  faith  as  all,  than  James  ;  but  he  will  have 
it  real  and  practical,  not  speculative  knowledge.  And 
we  need  this,  and  delight  in  it,  if  true  of  heart. 
Nothing  shewed  more  the  really  weak  side  of  Luther 
than  his  calling  this  an  epistle  of  straw.  And  I  have 
no  doubt  at  all,  that  it  greatly  hindered  his  entering 
into  the  blessed  excellencies  of  Paul  himself.  But 
you  have  led  me  away  from  our  subject. 

W.  I  do  not  know  that  I  have.     The  natural  flow 

G  2 


100 

of  our  delights  in  divine  things  is  itself  a  testimony, 
and  a  powerful  one.  Besides,  I  apprehend  the  posi- 
tive production  of  what  is  good  is  an  argument  for  it 
(it  makes  its  veiy  beauty),  as  well  as,  at  least  as  strong 
as,  mere  reasonings  against  objections. 

//.  Well,  I  believe  so ;  besides  it  keeps  charity 
alive  as  regards  those  who  do  not  taste  them,  which 
there  is  danger  that  reasonings  which  occupy  them- 
selves with  evil  mav  not  do.  You  cannot  be  filled 
with  the  blessedness  that  is  in  Christ  and  the  Word, 
without  both  loving  the  persons  of  those  that  are 
simply  wTong,  and  desiring  they  might  partake  of 
them.  There  are  adversaries.  This  is  somewhat 
different.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  righteousness  as 
regards  wilful  evil,  and  it  is  charity  ;  but  we  have  to 
watch  ourselves  close  as  regards  this.  If  you  saw  a 
deliberate  smner  seeking  to  corrupt  a  young  prac- 
tically guileless  mind,  would  you  not  be  indignant, 
and  charitablv  indignant  ? 

W.  I  should. 

H.  It  is  not  reflective,  but  it  is  right,  and  a  high 
kind  of  right.  It  shews  a  soul  living  in  what  is  right, 
and  caring  for  it.  Seeing  the  connection  between 
souls  and  God,  which  the  other  is  disturbing  or  hin- 
dering, a  millstone  about  such  a  one's  neck  and 
casting  into  the  sea,  would  be  better  for  a  man  than 
his  so  doing ;  and  that  is  felt.  How  far  these  ration- 
alists are  thus  guilty,  I  leave  to  God.  But  to  turn  to 
our  subject — the  word  of  the  apostles  as  compared 
with  Christ.  The  fifth  of  second  of  Corinthians 
states  the  change  from  one  to  the  other.  God  was 
in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,  not  im- 
puting their  trespasses  unto  them.  There  was  the 
direct  witness  of  God  Himself  in  the  person  of  His 
Son  in  grace ;  and  when  asked  who  He  was  by  the 
Jews,  He  refers  to  His  words  :  apx^v,  in  principle 
utterly  and  entirely  what  I  have  said  to  you ;  or,  as  in 
the  English,  from  the  beginning.  His  words  expressed 
himself.     Then  we  have  a  third  point,  committing 


nnto  as  the  ministry  of  reconciliation.  "  Now  thea 
we  are  ambassadors  for  Clirist,  as  though  God  did 
beseeeh  by  us,  we  beseech  iii  CbriBt's  stead — be  re- 
conciled to  Grod ;  for  He  hath  made  Him  to  be  siu 
for  us  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Him."  God  had  Himself, 
in  Christ,  testified  perfect  grace  in  His  words  and 
ways  with  man  ;  revealed  what  was  heavenly  as  one 
who  had  come  down  from  heaven,  and  was  tlie  Son 
of  Man  wlio  was  in  Heaven*.  It  was  the  blessed,  gra- 
cious revelation  of  what  was  heavenly  to  men,  meet- 
ing all  their  wants  and  sorrows  withal.  But  man 
would  noue  of  it.  No  man  receiveth  his  testimony. 
He  then  accomplishes  the  work  which  was  to  bring 
His  redeemed  into  heaven.  "  Father,  I  will,  that  they 
whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  I  am  ;  " 
and  He  goes  to  prepare  a  place  for  them.  But  thus 
His  ministry  by  the  Word  was  closed,  and  He,  having 
secured  everlasting  righteousness  aud  the  glory  of 
God  in  their  admission,  sends  down  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  be  to  earth  a  witness  of  it  in  chosen  vessels,  and, 
practically,  in  all  who  should  receive  their  testimony. 
He  tells  them,  that  it  should  not  be  they  that  spake, 
but  the  Spirit  of  their  Father  who  spoke  ui  them ; 
and  so  far  from  inferior  was  that  testimony,  that  He 
encourages  His  disciples  by  saying,  that  a  blasphemy 
against  Him  who  spoke  in  it  would  be  unpardonable, 
while  a  word  against  Himself  as  humbled  might  be 
forgiven.  (Luke  xii,  10-12.)  Hence  John  says,  ■'  He 
that  is  of  God  heareth  us ;  he  that  is  not  of  God  heareth 
not  us  ;  hereby  know  we  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  the 
Bpirit  of  error."  And  the  apostle  Paul :  "  If  any  one 
ho  spiritual,  let  him  acknowledge  that  the  things  that 
I  write  unto  you  are  the  commandments  of  the  Lord." 
Again :  "  Now  we  have  received  not  the  spirit  of  the 
world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God,  that  we  might 
know  the  things  which  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God ; 
which  things,  also,  we  speak,  not  iu  the  words  which 
miin's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost 


I 


102 

teachethy  compariug,  or,  as  I  have  no  doubt,  is  the 
sense,  using  a  spiritual  medium  for  communicating 
spiritual  things.  That  these  things  animated  their 
life  too  is  true ;  but  where  did  they  get  them  ?  The 
Holy  Ghost  was  come  down  from  heaven,  as  the  Son 
had  come  down.  He  was  to  shew  them  the  things  of 
Christ ;  to  guide  them  into  all  truth ;  shew  them 
things  to  come.  I  suppose  if  they  Uved  in  the  things, 
they  must  have  learned  them  somehow.  What 
wretched  pleading  it  is  to  say,  it  is  the  expression  of 
the  highest  and  greatest  rehgious  life  of  the  time. 
To  be  sure  it  was.  But  where  did  they  get  the  things 
to  communicate  on  which  they  Uved  ?  What  was  the 
power  in  which  they  communicated  them  ?  Can  Dr. 
Temple,  who  fancies  he  sees  this  life  clearer  than  his 
neighbours,  can  he  tell  us  anything  he  has  not  got 
from  their  revelations  ?  He,  we  may  hope,  is  Uving 
on  what  they  communicated;  but  who  communicated 
them  for  him  to  live  on  ?  All  this  is  shuffling  about 
the  matter  to  deny  revelation.  No  one  could  testify 
of  what  was  in  heaven  directly,  but  one  who  came 
thence.  Christ  did,  and  says  so ;  ,the  Holy  Ghost 
did,  and  communicated,  through  suited  vessels,  the 
glory  of  Christ,  and  the  Father's  love  in  Him.  Thus 
it  was.  After  the  law,  the  rule  of  God's  government 
on  earth,  the  prophets  showed  the  coming  Messiah, 
His  sufferings  and  glories ;  but  it  was  as  seeing  it 
afar  off,  and  recallrag  to  the  law,  not  announcing  the 
kingdom  as  then  coming ; — the  law  and  the  prophets 
were  until  John.  By  him  the  kingdom  is  preached. 
He  goes  before  the  face  of  Jehovah  to  prepare  His 
way.  He  receives  from  above  his  testimony  and 
place ;  but  his  testimony  was  of  the  earth,  repent- 
ance, judgment,  the  kingdom — Messiah  coming 
amongst  them.  Then  Christ  comes,  but  does  not 
receive  from  heaven,  but  comes  from  heaven,  and  can 
tell  directly  what  He  has  seien,  and  knows,  and  has 
heard.  He  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  and  can 
declare  God;  and  He  does  so.    No  man  receiveth 


103 

His  testimony.  Mau  wills  not  what  is  heavenly. 
But  what  an  infinite  blessing  is  this  of  which  these 
rationalists  would  deprive  us — the  positive  revelation 
of  what  is  heavenly,  the  blessed  communication  of 
what  is  there  above.  To  talk  of  life  and  religious 
life  is  all  simple  nonsense.  Can  religious  life  reveal 
what  it  has  never  seen,  the  blessedness  in  which  it 
has  never  yet  been  ?  True  religious  Christian  Mfe  is 
formed  by  this  revelation ;  and  tbiuk  of  reducing 
men  to  mere  conscience  and  rejecting  the  revelation 
even  of  what  is  lieavenly,  to  conscience.  What  a 
lowering  thing  it  is.  No  ;  the  Son  speaks  what  He 
knows,  and  testifies  what  He  has  seen.  It  is  the 
very  essence  of  Christianity,  and  sole  source  of  bless- 
ing. But  mau,  being  so  evil  as  to  reject  it,  God  is 
not  frustrated  in  His  love ;  the  need  of  it  as  above 
all  is  made  manifest ;  redemption  is  aceompHshed, 
and  thereon,  mau  takes  his  seat  on  high  on  the  Throne 
of  God,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  is  sent  down  the  witness 
and  proof  of  it,  and  testifies  of  the  glory  he  (man)  is 
in,  his  relationship  with  God  his  Father,  all  the  wis- 
dom and  glory  of  the  counsels  and  work  by  which  he 
is  brought  there  ;  the  church's  place  with  Clirist, 
founding  a  perfected  and  purged  conscience  on  the 
work  of  Christ,  so  that  hohness  ia  righteously  con- 
nected with  the  entrance  of  a  sinner  into  the  glory 
he  had  come  utterly  short  of.  This  links  the  heart 
to  what  is  heavenly ;  while  the  testimony  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  sure  foimdation  on  which  the  soul  can 
rest,  for  the  certainty  of  it  as  truthful,  and  thus  a 
living  enjoyment.  God's  will  and  counsel;  Christ's 
accomplished  work  ;  the  Holy  Ghost's  testimony 
(Heb.  X.) :  that  is  what  gives  liberty  and  boldness  to 
enter  into  the  i)resence  of  God.  The  Scriptures  are 
the  recorded  testimony  for  all  times.  Ministry  does 
not  cease,  but  revelation  does,  when  all  is  revealed. 
The  Word  of  God  is  completed. 

ir.  I  see  the  Divine  system  in  what  you  say,  and 
its  wisdom  and  completeness  while  we  have  to  Uve  by 


1 


104 

faith.  But  there  is  a  question  I  should  like  to  ask 
you  in  connection  with  this — ^What  place  do  you  give 
to  criticism  in  this  ? 

H.  I  use  it  with  all  my  heart.  If  my  father  had 
left  a  will  of  his,  copied  for  the  various  members  of 
the  family,  which,  we  felt,  bound  us  all,  in  which  all 
had  an  interest,  and  were  all  subject  to,  of  course,  in 
copying,  some  errors  might  have  crept  in.  So  in  the 
Scriptures,  the  oracles  of  God  were  committed  to 
men, — (mark  the  expressions — the  oracles  of  God,  it 
is  formal ;  that  is  not  mere  life  expressed,)  while  Pro- 
vidence watched  over  them.  But  there  was  as  to  this 
the  responsibihty  of  man  ;  as  in  all  God's  ways  with 
us,  there  is  this  connection  of  responsibility,  and  yet 
security  by  grace.  Well,  errors  have  crept  in  to  this 
will ;  but  we  are  all  desirous  of  knowing  accurately 
our  Father's  mind,  assured  that  it  is  in  the  will.  We 
compare  copies,  to  have  it  as  accurately  given  as 
possible.  I  do  so,  because  it  has  authority,  ab- 
solute authority,  over  me  the  child.  Had  it  not,  I 
should  not  do  so.  The  multiplication  of  the  copies 
which  has  so  far  multiplied  occasional  mistakes, 
qiias  aut  incuria  fudit  aut  humana  parum  cavit  naturae  has 
also  multiplied  the  certainty,  that  the  whole  will  is 
right,  and  has  enabled  me  to  correct  isolated  errors 
in  each  one  copy  by  comparing  it  with  the  others.  If 
a  word  or  two  remain  illegible,  or  not  to  be  ascer- 
tained, I  must  leave  that  word,  lose  its  force,  if  the 
same  disposition  be  not  elsewhere.  But  it  is  evident 
I  should,  if  I  attached  value  to  my  Father's  will  as 
such,  carefully  compare  all,  to  have  it  exact.  This 
has  been  done  by  men  skilled  in  it,  proving  how  little 
was  uncertain,  and  that  little  affecting  doctrine  no- 
where. 

W.  This  I  see  very  distinctly.  The  proofs  of  the 
Di\ine  record  lie  elsewhere.  This  is  mere  care  for 
its  correctness,  because  it  is  so  estimated,  in  which 
providential  care  and  Divine  faithfulness  is  to  be 
trusted,  as  in  everjiihing  we  are  blessed  in. 


105 


U.  Just  so.  There  ia  no  Divine  blessing  but  by 
faith,  nor  can  be,  when  it  passes  beyond  mere  tem- 
poral enjoyments,  and  they  are  never  divinely  enjoyed 
but  by  faith.  This  is  the  necessary  linlt  between  the 
soul  of  man  and  au  unseen  God.  In  truth,  it  was 
needed  when  He  was  manifested ;  for  no  man  can  see 
God,  morally  speaking.  Therefore  it  was  said  then, 
He  that  seeth  the  Son,  and  beheveth  on  Him,  hath 
everlasting  life.  Were  it  possible  to  see  His  glory 
and  live,  it  would  be  uo  moral  link  of  the  soul  with 
Him.  If  a  man  were  even  kept  from  sin  by  it,  which 
mitwardb/  he  might,  it  would  be  no  real  enjoyment  of 
Him,  nor  living  spiritual  fellowship. 

I  think  we  have  pretty  well  exhausted  the  subject 
of  this  essay,  and  enjoyed  some  excursions  by  the 
way,  to  scenes  it  opened  out  to  "view  as  we  passed. 
Many  details  might  be  taken  up,  but  I  do  not  know 
that  we  should  gain  any  thing  material  by  referring 
to  tliem  ;  such  as  the  habits  of  false  moral  estimation 
introduced  by  the  heathen  apprehension  of  things 
often  current.  His  three  witnesses  quarrelled,  but 
that  proves  nothing,  if  they  had  different  partial  ele- 
ments of  truth.  It  is  seen  every  day  hi  poor  human 
nature,  so  that  I  do  not  insist  on  this ;  but  some  I 
will  refer  to.  Two  of  these  witnesses— Rome  and  the 
early  church,  (hslikcd  each  other.  Yet  that  dislike, 
we  are  told,  makes  Httle  impression  onus  now.  What 
an  advance  through  indiflerentism  to  an  Anti-Christian 
state.  For  so  absolute  is  truth,  is  Christ's  claim,  that 
he  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me.  This  dislike 
that  Dr.  Temple  and  his  school  remain  unaffected  by, 
is  the  deadly  persecuting  hatred  of  Christians,  of  the 
saints,  (certainly,  whatever  faults  there  may  have 
been,  the  excellent  of  the  earth,)  by  the  heathens. 
The  hatred  of  Christ  and  His  people  by  the  worship- 
pers of  idols  and  devils.  The  enmity  of  man  and 
Satan  (for  we  are  not  going  to  give  up  our  belief  that 
Jesus  was  the  Christ  of  God  for  these  gentlemen) 
against  the  Son  of  God  and  all  that  owned  Him. 


I 
I 


106 

This  makes  little  impression  on  them,  no  doubt.  In 
the  fourth  essay  we  read,  **  It  was  natural  for  a  Chris- 
tian in  the  earliest  period,  to  look  upon  the  heathen 
state  in  which  he  found  himself,  as  if  it  belonged  to 
the  kingdom  of  Satan,  and  not  to  that  of  God ;  and 
consecrated  as  it  was  in  all  its  offices  to  the  heathen 
divinities,  to  consider  it  a  society  having  its  origin 
from  the  powers  of  darkness,  not  from  the  Lord  of 
light  and  life."  And  what  do  these  clergymen  and 
professed  teachers  of  Christianity  believe?  What 
were  the  heathen  gods  and  goddesses  ?  I  read  in  the 
first  essay,  *'  The  natural  religious  shadows  projected 
by  the  spiritual  Ught  within,  shining  on  the  dark 
problems  without,  were  all  in  reality  systems  of  law 
given  also  by  God,  though  not  given  by  revelation." 
No  doubt,  they  say,  they  distorted  and  corrupted,  &c. 
But  can  you  for  a  moment  believe  that  the  worship 
of  Jupiter,  and  Venus,  and  Bacchus,  and  horrors 
which  are  simple  facts,  as  they  may  be  read  in 
Romans  i.  (which  after  all,  though  in  just  language, 
passes  over  the  surface  of  turpitude,  not  to  defile  itself, 
by  sinking  into  details  to  which  I  cannot  here  refer 
either),  were  systems  of  law  given  by  God.  The  wor- 
ship of  passions  and  devils,  gloating  in  the  unutterable 
degradation  of  God's  most  wonderful  creature,  a  sys- 
tem of  law  given  of  God !  And  it  is  false  as  to  its 
history.  Heathenism  was  even  in  this  aspect,  the 
departure  under  devilish  influence  from  the  knowledge 
of  God.  Noah  had  this,  and  they  (fid  not  Uke  to  retain 
God  in  their  knowledge,"  and  God  gave  them  up  to 
dishonour  themselves.  They  degraded  Qrod  to  a  brute, 
and  themselves  to  worse  after.  It  never  was  a  train- 
ing parallel  to,  and  contemporaneous  with  that  of  the 
Hebrews — a  system  of  law  given  of  God,  and  then 
corrupted.  There  was  the  knowledge  of  the  true 
God,  and  men  gave  it  up.  As  far  as  the  history  of 
these  dark  ages  can  be  traced,  a  system  deliberately 
taken  up  in  Babel,  to  leave  God,  and  separated  into 
two  hostile  branches.     The  Sabseans,  who  did  not  go 


107 


further  tbau  takiug  fire  as  a  representative  of  God, 
as  the  moileru  Parseea;  and  lonism.  a  system  of  hor- 
rible wickedness  and  idolatry  pervading  India,  Egypt, 
Phcenice,  and  tlience  Greece,  which  made,  possibly, 
through  Orpheus  and  the  Oabiri,  certainly  in  Hesiod 
and  Homer,  pretty  poetry  of  it,  and  so  passing  on  to 
Eome,  and  I  have  Uttle  doubt,  far  and  wide,  else- 
where, modified  according  to  the  spirit  and  character 
of  nations,  at  any  rate,  in  historically  known  nations, 
a  common  universal  system.  It  is  a  perfect  iniquity 
to  say  as  to  the  principle  of  it,  and  false  as  to  the 
lustory  of  it,  that  these  were  systems  of  law  given 
of  God,  though  not  by  revelation.  There  was  a 
knowledge  of  God  departed  from.  That  was  cor- 
rupted, and  man  with  it.  Devils  and  deified  passions 
took  the  place  of  God  in  the  heart.  To  say, 
■'  Ultimately  the  gospel  was  to  have  sway  in  doing 
more  perfectly  that  which  heathen  religions  were 
doing  imperfectly,"  has  only  to  be  stated,  to  revolt 
every  divinely  taught  mind.  What  did  heathenism 
do  ?  Hold  the  State  together.  Be  it  so ;  but  they 
admit  this  only  decorated  the  surface  of  it.  But 
morally  in  relationship  to  God,  what  did  it  do  ?  That 
these  educators  of  the  world  do  not,  I  suppose,  care 
about.  Christianity,  they  say,  was  not  only  to  quicken 
the  spirit  of  the  individual,  (What  is  that  ?)  but  to 
sanctify  civil  institutions — heathenism  decorated  the 
surface.  But  even  as  to  the  church,^Heatbemsm, 
they  tell  us,  had  its  national  churches. 

This  defence  of  heathenism  seems  to  me,  dear 
friend,  as  immoral  in  its  character  as  it  is  false 
historically.  In  heathenism  there  was,  as  there  must 
be  in  man,  an  instinct  as  to  God,  but  laid  hold  of  by 
Satan  to  pander  to  the  passions  of  men.  God,  with 
some  instinctive  remains  of  a  supreme  God  (ks- 
tiitionium  anitmi;  naturaliter  chriMiamv)  turned  into 
calves,  cats,  and  monkeys,  and  beasts.  There  were  four 
principles  as  it  seems  to  me  at  work  in  heathenism. 
The  instinct  of  a  supreme  being,  or  a  superior  one,  at 


108 

any  rate,  above  man,  impossible  to  be  got  rid  of; 
heroism  or  the  deification  of  ancestors  traceable 
everywhere,  and  connectiag  itself,  in  its  earlier  and 
oriental  phases,  with  Noah  and  his  family  and  the 
ark ;  the  idea  is  carried  to  excess  by  Bryant,  but  it 
seems  to  me  incontrovertible  ;  thirdly,  the  stars,  as 
something  wonderftd,  instinct  with  movement,  and 
acting  on  the  earth ;  and,  lastly,  what  led  to  such 
horrible  corruption  ;  the  sense  of  a  generative  power 
of  nature,  partly  abstract,  partly  running  through 
every  sphere  of  thought,  and  connected  with  the 
ruin  of  nature,  and  a  certain  resurrection  in  power, 
which  linked  it  with  day  and  night,  and  summer  and 
winter.  This,  helped  by  various  traditions,  formed 
various  systems  ;  but  all  of  man  without  God,  to  be 
found  if  at  all,  as  the  (ryvaxroc  Oeoi; :  in  India,  in  certain 
respects,  the  most  elevated,  but  the  most  monstrous ; 
more  of  God's  interest  in  man  and  His  coming  down, 
though  there  was  Apotheosis :  in  Egypt,  one  more  wise 
and  applied  to  human  morality  and  organisation,  yet 
the  same  system  thoroughly,  with  more  of  the  sentiment 
of  a  definite  judgment  of  God,  and  conflict  of  good 
and  evil  in  the  history  of  Osiris,  Amenti,  and  Typhon, 
dead  men  not  execrated  were  called  justified :  in 
Greece,  the  lowest  and  poorest  of  all,  which  made  man 
and  poetry  everything :  gods  became  men,  or  swans,  or 
bulls  to  indulge  their  passions.  It  was  the  deification 
of  man,  and  morally  more  contemptible  than  all.  No 
gods  but  gods  of  human  passions,  money,  war,  cor- 
rupt lusts — gods  in  which  there  was  no  single 
association  with  conscience,  except  a  dreary  Tartarus 
for  those  who  might  despise  them,  and  an  Elysium  so 
poor  that  Achilles  complained  bitterly  of  being  there. 
It  is  the  system  of  deification  of  human  passions, 
and  another  world  only  used  to  make  gods  of  them, 
and  these  gods,  that  is  devils,  important,  and  this 
world  the  only  excellent  place.  This  was  a  system  of 
law,  we  are  told,  given  of  God.  I  am  silent.  I  fear 
I  should  be  rebuked  by  you  for  something  contemp- 


tuous  and  bitter,  and  say  nothing  of  what  I  : 

As  to  Kome  there  was  nothing  new,  they  were  i 
poetical,  bnt  political ;  and  their  rehgion  too.  The 
god  Terminus  was  immoveahle.  Can  these  clergymen 
ahew  me  one  single  proof  of  any  heathenism  being  a 
system  of  law  given  of  God  ?  The  instinct  that  there 
is  something  above  him  is  in  man,  cannot  be  eradi- 
cated, a  conscience  accompanies  him,  in  spite  of  the 
devil.  la  there  anj-thing  to  be  found  in  heathenism 
besides  this  fact  perverted  to  men's  offering  the  things 
which  they  offered  to  de\'il8,  and  not  to  God ;  and 
the  consecrating  the  worst  passions,  and  their  most 
intolerable  effects  to  these  devils  or  dung-gods,  as 
Scripture  calls  them,  so  as  to  destroy  that  conscience, 
if  it  had  been  possible  ?  Do  our  Essayists  think  their 
judgment  of  heathenism,  or  that  of  Scripture  in  the 
Old  and  New  Testament,  the  most  correct  ?  Their 
admirable  Trajan  they  must  view  as  a  heathen  to 
admire.  They  turn  round  the  other  side,  and  see  tliat 
the  subdaer  of  Dacia,  the  mighty  emperor,  is  with 
heartless  indifference  of  character  the  cool  perse- 
cutor of  those  who  owned  the  Son  of  God,  and  the 
restorer  of  sacrifices  to  devils.  "  They  are  so  eager 
for  liglit,  that  they  will  rub  their  eyes  in  the  dark, 
and  take  the  resulting  optical  delusions  for  real 
flasheB,"  Excuse  mc  if  I  quote  this  not  very  elegant 
image  of  Dr.  Temple's  as  a  singular  but  not  inapt 
description  of  a  state  of  mind  in  which,  of  course, 
he  has  not  described  himself.  In  fine,  the  foundation 
of  the  whole  system  is  false.  There  was  progress  in 
the  revelation  of  God's  mind,  because  of  the  aliena- 
tion of  man  from  God,  and  the  ignorance  that  was  in 
him,  bnt  it  never  was  the  education  of  the  world  at 
all.  It  began  not  by  law,  but,  as  became  the  God  of 
all  grace,  by  promise,  but  not  by  promise  to  the 
world,  though  in  favour  of  it,  and  for  all  that  sliould 
beheve  it  at  all  times  ;  then  law.  but  not  given  to  the 
world,  but  to  a  people  separated  out  of  it,  because  of 
the  horrible  state  the  world  was  in,  and  a  careful 


I 


.--^ 


S(  ])arati()n  made  Ix'twoon  tlu^m,  to  koop,  at  any  rate, 
ill  Olio  little  corner  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God, 
that  all  might  not  be  wholly  debased.  Then  the  Son 
of  God  coming  into  it,  but  the  world  knew  Him  not, 
His  own  received  Him  not ;  and  they  joined  in  cru- 
cifying Him.  He  was  the  Shepherd  of  a  little  flock. 
Then  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  whom  the  world  cannot 
receive,  because  it  seeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth 
Him  ;  but  given  to  those  who  beheve ;  but  with  the 
fullest  witness  of  grace  to  all  who  do  beheve  the 
record  God  has  given  concerning  His  Son.  Does 
Dr.  Temple  believe  these  facts,  or  deny  them  ?  Is 
he,  that  is,  a  Christian  or  an  infidel  ? 

Heathenism  was  not  different  contemporary  sys- 
tems of  law  given  of  God,  but  the  givmg  up  the 
know^ledge  of  the  true  God,  and  plunging  into  deviUsh 
idolatry  and  bestial  corruption,  though  God  did  not 
allow,  let  Satan  do  what  he  could,  that  they  should 
destroy  the  instincts  that  there  was  a  God,  nor  flee 
from  the  torment  of  a  violated  conscience.  The 
whole  system  is  historically  and  actually  false.  I 
beUeve,  dear  friend,  in  Christianity,  not  in  the 
reveries  of  one  who,  to  use  their  own  somewhat 
vulgar  simile  already  quoted,  which  I  only  do  use  as 
theirs,  **  are  so  eager  for  light  (not  having  God's, 
and  reflecting  it,  Christ  come  as  light  into  the  world 
in  darkness,)  that  they  will  rub  their  eyes  in  the 
dark,  and  take  the  resulting  optical  delusions  for 
real  flashes.''  It  suggests  to  me  the  word  addressed 
to  poor  Israel  on  lower  ground  than  ours,  for  the 
true  light  now  shines  :  '*  Who  is  among  you  that 
feareth  Jehovah,  that  obeyeth  the  voice  of  His  ser- 
vant, that  walketh  in  darkness,  and  hath  no  hght ; 
let  him  trust  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  stay  upon 
his  God.  Behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a  fire,  that 
compass  yourselves  about  with  sparks,  walk  in  the 
light  of  your  fire,  and  in  the  sparks  that  ye  have 
kindled.  This  shall  ye  have  at  my  hand.  Ye  shall 
he  down  in  sorrow." 


You  know  well,  your  heart  knows,  dear  frieud,  how 
utterly  far  my  spirit  is  from  an  ungracious  feeling 
towards  the  authors  of  these  essays,  of  whom  I  have 
no  knowledge  whatever,  and  desire  unfeignedly  from 
the  bottom  of  my  heart,  their  good  and  blessing. 
But  such  is  theii-  path.  I  speak  of  the  system,  a 
system  so  hard  and  unfeeling,  tliat  it  has  no  idea  but 
of  beginning  with  law,  that  even  a  mother's  tender 
care  of  the  fruit  of  tlie  womb  is  known  only  as  cor- 
recting wiLfulness  of  temper,  and  germs  of  wanton 
cruelty,  that  it  sees  no  promise,  no  grace,  but  God 
beginning  ttitli  a  law  to  repress  already  ripened 
wickedness ;  a  system  which  ignores  the  fall,  yet 
Bees  only  wanton  cruelty,  and  wilfulness  of  temper  in 
an  infant ;  and  begins  God's  history  after  some 
2,500  years  resulting  in  a  plague  of  wickedness,  to 
ignore  the  flood. 

I  believe  in  a  revelation  which  contains  an  exter- 
nal law,  brouglit  in  by  the  bye  to  test  man,  and 
shew  him  what  he  was,  but,  is  a  revelation  of  grace, 
hfe,  redemption,  the  revelation  of  the  Son  of  God, 
of  God  himself,  bringing  down  heavenly  things 
which  the  human  heart  camiot  spell  out  or  divine  if 
unrevealed ;  which  brings  a  revealed  God  and  light 
to  man  ;  and  man,  made  tit  for  it  by  love,  into  the  per- 
fect light  by  redemption,  and  gives  him  a  new  nature 
capable  of  enjoying  it,  and  soon,  how  soon  One  only 
knows,  glorj-  out  of  this  world ;  a  revelation  through 
which  (to  close  what  I  have  to  say  in  the  blessed 
words  of  Scripture,  how  does  it  meet  everything ;) 
those  who  have  received  it  instead  of  leamiug  from 
heathens — own,  in  moral  uprightness,  the  ruin  of  the 
old  man,  and  have  put  it  off,  and  have  put  on  the 
new  man,  which  is  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the 
image  of  Hun  that  created  him ;  where  there  is 
neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor  nncircum- 
cision,  barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  nor  free ;  but 
Christ  is    all,  and  in  all. 

If.  I  am  uncommonly  glad  I  met  you.    The  sys- 


I 


L 


112 

tern  is  a  judged  one  for  me.  It  is  not  of  Gk)d. 
It  is  evidently  exalting  man  and  heathenism  at  the 
expense  of  Christ.  I  am  not  master  of  all  the  points 
to  which  you  have  referred,  but  I  see  enough  to  have 
the  distinct  conviction  of  the  hollowness  of  the  sys- 
tem, even  as  to  facts.  But  how  happy  it  is  that  the 
Scripture  itself  gives  so  fully  all  that  is  needed,  not 
only  to  save,  but  to  make  a  man  wise  unto  salvation, 
through  faith  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  then  tho- 
roughly furnished  unto  all  good  works. 

It  must  be  distracting  and  defiling  to  wade  through 
these  mythological  systems,  with  all  their  aberrations 
and  pollutions,  but  with  the  holy  judgment  of  God, 
the  Word  of  God  in  a  few  short  verses,  tells  us  all 
its  history.  How  admirable  this  is ;  how  evidently 
one  sees  the  hand  and  Spirit  of  God  in  it.  There 
certainly  is  a  stamp  in  the  Word  of  God  of  what  is 
Divine,  which  is  immistakeable,  even  where  it  is 
most  human. 

H.  In  truth  there  is ;  a  simplicity,  a  dignity, — ^no 
one  ever  produced  anything  like  it.  You  have  only 
to  read  Apocryphal  books.  There  is  eflfort  in  them. 
There  is  none  in  Scripture.  Not  once  do  you  find 
an  epithet  attached  to  Jesus,  (that  were  a  human 
feeling,  perhaps  a  right  one,)  but  what  He  is  to  tell 
its  own  tale  of  what  He  is.  What  human  writer  in 
recording  His  history,  would  have  kept  uniformly  to 
this.  Yet  how  it  becomes  a  divine  person.  Every 
epithet  would  lower.  They  may  be  put  as  the  ex- 
pression of  my  sentiment,  but  not  as  the  cause  of 
them.  And  how  it  has  forced  man  to  deal  with  it. 
Infidels  or  not,  they  must  deal  with  it  where  it  is.  It 
is  God  telling  us  in  grace,  but  telling  us  of  Himself, 
telling  of  heavenly  things,  and  for  man.  What  can 
man  do  ?  It  concerns  him.  He  may  be  angry  with 
the  grace,  angry  to  be  forced  to  say  he  does  not  like 
what  is  heavenly,  may  exalt  heathenism  which  has 
been  tired  of  itself ;  but  there  it  is,  he  has  to  say  to 
it.     Blessed  they  who  have  tasted  that  God  is  in  it, 


L 


113 

speaks  in  it,  and  that  have  found  Him  to  be  Holy,  as 
He  must  be,  but  love  in  revealing  Himself  to  them, 
and  in  bringing  them  by  redemption  and  Diviiie 
righteousness  to  Himself  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever.  But 
we  must  part,  dear  friend,  in  the  common  enjoyment, 
I  trust,  of  this  hope. 

If.  Shall  we  not  meet  again,  and  take  these  ques- 
tions up?  There  are  more  of  these  Essays,  and  we 
may  find  means,  through  God's  grace,  to  get  profit  in 
weighing  them  in  the  light,  particularly  as  these 
questions  are  current. 

U.  Perhaps  God  may  permit  it  to  bo  so.  We  have 
gone  over,  I  believe,  the  fundamental  questions  as  to 
it.  I  am,  as  you  know,  constantly  occupied  with  more 
direct  work.  Yet  I  fully  recognise  the  importance 
of  these  subjects.  These  Essays,  which  seem  to  me 
very  superficial,  are  but  the  sign  of  a  state  of  feeling 
of  a  large  class,  or  they  would  uot  be  worth  notice. 
It  is  an  effort  of  Satan  to  pervert  and  really  hea- 
thenize the  country,  and  swamp  revealed  religion. 
It  is  going  on  everywhere  in  Christendom.  The 
attempted  counteraction  of  ordinances,  whether  Stahl 
and  Hengstenberg,  in  Germany,  or  what  is  called 
Puseyism  in.  England,  cannot  meet  the  wants  of  a 
soul,  even  though  there  may  he  personal  piety,  which 
is  anything  but  required  for  that  system.  In  France 
it  is  the  ultramontane  system,  which  is  the  counter 
balance.  In  the  feeble  Protestantism  whicb  is  there, 
there  is  none.  It  is  infidelity,  or  the  new  evangelical 
party  infected  with  rationalism,  with  many  individual 
pious  persons.  But  I  sball  see  you,  and  if  leisure 
peiTuits  me,  will  take  up  any  further  questions  that 
may  occur. 

I  would  refer  you  in  parting,  you  who  do  believe 
in  the  Word  of  God,  to  1  John  v.,  where  the  exactly 
opposite  view  to  Dr.  Temple  on  every  point  is  given. 
For  this  is  the  wUl  of  God,  that  we  keep  His 
commandmeute.  There  is  obedience  to  a  command- 
ment, the  proof  of  love  ;  and  His  commandments  are 


I 


114 

not  grievous.  For  whatsoever  is  bom  of  God  over- 
cometh  the  world.  There  is  a  new  nature,  and  the 
world  not  educated,  but  overcome.  Who  is  he  that 
overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus 
is  the  Son  of  God  ?  There  is  faith  on  a  perfect  ex- 
ternal revealed  object,  the  only  means  of  obtaining  the 
victory.  At  the  end  of  the  third  chapter  you  will 
find,  as  in  Bom.  viii.,  the  Spirit,  the  Holy  Ghost 
given,  carefully  distinguished  from  the  spirit  or  con- 
science within.  Christianity  is  a  deliverance  sent  by 
God  to  form  the  spirit  according  to  a  new  life  on  an 
object  supremely  blessed  without,  so  as  to  take  out  of 
self,  and  fix  the  heart  on  that  supreme  object  of  bless- 
edness. Dr.  Temple  and  the  rationalist  system,  a 
rejection  of  that  for  the  spirit  or  fallen  nature  of  man 
to  form  itself  by  heathenism  and  Christianity  as  pretty 
nearly  on  a  par,  the  latter  being  reduced  by  him  to 
within  a  shade  of  the  level  of  the  former. 

K  you  would  have  blessing  or  holy  and  divine 
affections,  hold  fast  the  revelation  of  a  divine  object, 
and  the  divine  revelation  of  that  object. 


It 

m 

•  the 


W.  I  am  glad  to  meet  you  again.  Though  the 
subject  was  a  painful  one  in  some  respects,  I  enjoyed 
tlie  conversation  we  had  when  we  last  met.  It  em- 
braced a  large  field  of  view ;  and  though  we  could 

ly  step  from  mountain  top  to  mountain  top,  and 

jik  down  into  the  rich  valleys  below,  still  it  showed 

me  there  were  such,  and  I  see  we  possess  a  goodly 
country  where  I  saw  little  before,  but  rock  or  misty 
mountain.  Scripture  has  something  of  another  as- 
pect to  me,  as  a  whole.  Could  we  not  continue  our 
researches  in  examining  some  of  the  other  Essays  ?  i 
I  have  been  interested  in  this  new  science  of  geology,  J 
■And  you  are  aware  how  the  cosmogony  of  Scripture  I 

18  been  attacked,  the  genesis  of  the  world.  I 

_  H.  I  shall  most  gladly  accept  jrour  proposal :   I  j 
cannot  pretend  to  be  a  very  scientific  geologist,  but  ( 
the  very  objections  of  infidels  you  have  referred  to  I 
have  made  me  examine  it  in  the  results  professed  to  f 
be  arrived  at,  if  I  have  not  the  science  of  details. 
These  would  require  one  to  consecrate,  to  say  the  ' 
least,  a  largo  portion  of  a  life  to  it,  and  the  Inndred  j 
sciences  of  comparative  anatomy,  and  natural  liistory, 
and  of  scientific  botany,  and  this  I  neither  can  nor 
would  I  do ;  but  our  main  object  will  be  Scripture, 


^^^jpd  to  tell  you  the  honest  truth,  while  these  Essay-  ^^ 


116 

ists  are  very  ignorant  of  Scripture^  I  have  not  learnt 
to  trust  the  depth  of  their  science  on  any  point.  Bat 
our  object  will  be:  Is  the  Scripture,  viewed  as  a 
Divine  revelation,  inconsistent  with  the  facts  dis- 
covered in  the  earth's  structure  ?  I  do  not  say,  with 
the  conclusions  of  geologists,  for  it  will  be  found 
that  these  are  not  very  soUd.  The  discoveries  are  full 
of  interest,  the  results  extremely  uncertain.  But 
some  collateral  subjects  will  meet  us,  which  will 
diversify  our  conversation.  You  must  always  remem- 
ber, that  it  is  the  habit  of  rationalist  mfidels  to 
assume,  that  what  their  doctors,  or  rather  doubters, 
have  laid  down  as  hypotheses,  are  admitted  truths. 
Things  as  unfounded  as  possible.  It  is  one  of  the  com- 
monest deceits  of  the  system  to  allude  to  in  passing,  as  to 
an  admitted  truth,  what,  if  they  had  to  prove  it,  they 
would  find  themselves  at  an  utter  loss  to  do  so.  It 
is  settled,  universally  recognized,  an  admitted  truth, 
merely  means  that  German  rationalists  have  satisfied 
themselves,  or  pretend  to  have  done  so,  even  if  that 
be  the  case.  We  first  find  in  the  Essay  you  refer  to, 
the  ignorant  and  stupid  theory  of  Elohistic  and  Jeho- 
vistic  documents.  Now  I  should  have  no  difficulty  in 
supposing  2,  20,  or  20,000  documents,  provided  I 
have  God's  relation  of  the  matter  out  of  them. 
Human  instrumentality  I  can  admit  to  any  extent, 
provided  I  have  Divine  certainty,  and  Divine  inten- 
tion. These  are  necessary  to  my  accepting  anything 
as  a  revelation,  because  a  revelation  must  flow  from 
the  intention  of  God  to  make  known,  and  what  He 
makes  known,  is  made  known  with  certainty,  and  as 
He  meant  it  to  be  presented  to  my  mind.  It  is  not 
that  all  contained  in  a  revelation  is  right.  I  may 
have  the  devil's  words,  wicked  men's  words,  imperfect 
men's  words ;  but  I  must  have  all  these  things  pre- 
sented to  me  exactly  as  God  meant  them  to  be  presented 
to  nio,  and  His  own  words  besides.  The  account 
given  must  have  His  authority.  The  use  of  the  word 
revelation  in  this  paper  on  the  Mosaic  cosmogony  is. 


I  cannot  say,  merely  as  loose,  but  as  nonsensical 
anything  I  ever  read.  If  such  a  use  of  terms  be 
allowed,  we  may  use  any  word  about  anything,  and 
find  wc  have  one  of  Ossian's  grey  skirts  of  the  mist, 
instead  of  our  lost  friend.  What  do  you  think 
revelation,  a  Divine  revelation,  is  ? 

fV.    Well,   I   suppose    something  that    God    hi 
revealed. 

H.  Ignorant  man  that  you  are,  why,  you  are 
plain  Enghshman.  You  do  not  know  German  depthi 
BtiU  less  German  depths  brought  to  the  surface 
English  vessels. 

A  revelation  does  not  mean  a  revelation  at  all.  It 
means,  '  God  made  use  of  imperfectly  informed  men 
(for  the  plan  of  providence  for  the  education  of  man 
iIb  a  progressive  one)  to  lay  the  foundations  of  that 
higher  knowledge,  for  which  the  human  race  is 
destined.'  '  Is  it  wonderful,  therefore,  that  they  have 
committed  themselves  to  assertions  not  in  accordance 
with  facts  ?'  '  As  imperfect  men  have  been  used  (in 
this  progressive  scheme)  as  the  agents  for  teaching 
mankind,  is  it  not  to  be  expected  that  their  teachings 

[Bhonld  be  partial,  and  to  some  extent  erroneous  ?' 
iV.  Well,  but  then  men  could  give  no  more  than 
they  knew  themselves,  and  that  is  not  a  revelation, 
or  else  God  gave  it,  revealed  it,  and  then  it  was  from 
Him,  and  had  His  authority  stamped  on  it  as  His 
truth. 
H.  You  are  all  out  again.  '  It  has  been  popularly 
assumed  that  the  Bible,  bearing  the  stamp  of  Di\ine 
authority,  must  be  complete,  perfect,  and  unimpeach- 
able in  all  its  parts.' 
W.  Well,  but  how  could  it  bear  the  stamp  of  Divine 
authority,  if  God  did  not  give  it  ?  You  cannot  make 
the  notions  of  a  particular  time  at  ^hich  men  had 
arrived,  and  erroneous  ones,  a  revelation.  It  is  simply 
absurd  to  talk  of  the  stamp  of  God's  authority,  when 
they  are  merely  the  fancies  of  men.  Why  then  the 
Ptolemaic  system  ia  a  revelation. 


i 


It  18  Bimpiy 
lority,  when 
'hy  then  theJ 


118 

E.  No,  no ;  yon  are  all  wrong  again.  ^  The  humble 
scholar  is  willing  to  accept  snch  teaching  as  it  hath 
pleased  Divine  providence  to  afford.  To  do  other- 
wise is  presuming  to  point  out  how  God  onght  to 
have  instructed  man.  But  if  we  regard  the  Mosaic 
narrative  as  the  speculation  of  some  Hebrew  Des- 
cartes or  Newton,  promulgated  in  all  good  faith  as 
the  best  and  most  probable  account  that  conld  be 
then  given  of  God's  universe,  it  resumes  the  dignity 
and  value  of  which  the  Theological  Geologists  have 
done  their  utmost  to  deprive  it.' 

W.  But  what  dignity  or  value  is  there  in  the  errors 
of  men  ignorant  of  all  true  science,  or  how  can  that 
bear  the  stamp  of  Divine  authority  ? 

H.  Ah  !  you  are  not  initiated. 

W.  Well,  but  Qt)d,  according  to  this  theory,  made 
use  of  men  to  teach  error.  Why  should  He  stamp 
that  with  His  authority  ?  Let  them  write  for  them- 
selves, or  at  least,  God  not  give  His  authority  to 
it. 

H.  Why,  you  see,  the  education  of  man  was  to  be 
progressive,  so  He  must  begin,  I  suppose,  in  their 
infancy,  by  teaching  them  error.  It  is  not  for  you  to 
guess  of  His  methods  of  providence,  and  then  in 
that  age  '  the  early  speculator  was  harassed  by  no 
scruples  as  to  asserting  as  facts  what  he  knew  only 
as  probabilities.  He  asserts,  indeed,  solemnly  and 
unhesitatingly,  that  for  which  he  must  have  known 
he  had  no  authority.  But  the  difficulty  as  to  this 
arises  only  from  our  modem  habits  of  thought. 
Modesty  of  assertion  is  taught  only  by  the  true  spirit 
of  science ';  but  then  these  things  are  better  done 
now,  of  course. 

W.  But  then  modem  science  is  not  a  revelation, 
but  founded  on  discovery,  and  the  Mosaic  narrative 
is  merely  an  obsolete,  an  erroneous  supposition,  when 
the  truth  was  not  discovered. 

//.  To  be  sure,  and  that  for  our  Essayist,  is  a  re- 
velation. 


119 


I  revelation  ?        ■ 
ord.     This  way  of" 


I 


■         and 


IV.  But  is  it  honest  to  call  that  a  r 

H.  Honest !  what  a  strange  word.  This  way  of^ 
using  language  so  as  to  save  appearances,  though  it 
be  not  what  the  word  means,  arises  from  our  modem 
habits  of  thought.  It  is  the  true  spirit  of  Gcience. 
"  It  is  the  free  handling,  in  a  becoming  spirit,  of  sub- 
jects pecnharly  liable  to  suffer  by  the  repetition  of 
conventional  language,  and  from  traditional  methods  _ 
of  treatment." 

W.  Well,  but  speaking  of  revelation  is  the  repet! 
lion  of  conventional  language. 

H.  Yes,  no  doubt  of  it ;  but  the  use  of  it  is  th 
becoming  spirit,  and  the  rest  the  free  handling. 

W.  But  this  seems  to  me  profoundly  immoral, 
the  highest  and  deepest  sense,  to  talk  of  revelatioii 
and  deal  thus.  1 

H.  Oh  !  '  our  respect  for  the  narrative,  which  ha^ 
played  so  important  a  part  in  the  culture  of  our  race, 
need  in  no  wise  be  dimmished.'  '  For  ages  this  simple 
Tiew  of  creation  satisfied  the  wants  of  man,  and  both 
its  consistency  and  grandeur  may  be  preserved,  if  we 
recognize  in  it,  not  an  authentic  utterance  of  Divine 
knowledge,  but  a  human  utterance,  which  it  hath 
pleased  providence  to  use,  in  a  special  way,  for  thi 
education  of  mankind.' 

iV.  But  this  is  a  deliberate  denial  of  revclatioB 
Providence  uses  what  man  has  uttered. 

H.  Yes ;  and  see  what  a  convenient  word  Provi^^ 
dence  is,  because  there  is  no  sign  how  it  came  to  I 
nsed.  As  to  the  education  of  mankind,  it  is  a  bubble 
we  have  already  seen  burst ;  for  none  but  those  who 
received  it  as  an  absolute  revelation  of  God  (God 
providentially  leading  them,  we  are  to  suppose,  to  be- 
lieve this  he)  ever  were  educated  at  all.  The  heathen 
had  their  own  cosmogonies,  which  it  may  be  worth 
comparing  ;  and  we  have  got  geologists  to  settle  ours, 
or  at  least  unsettle  what  was  supposed  true.  Rabbin 
and  fathers  may  have  believed,  in  their  superstition, 
Mosaic  account.     The  whole  thing  was  b 


perstition,   j 
,s  a  happ^ri 


120 

mistake,  into  which  Providence  led  them,  nobody 
knows  how ;  a  singular  operation  of  Providence  to 
make  man  beUeve  a  he,  and  that  a  false  account  was 
its  own  utterance. 

W.  Do  you  know  anything  of  Cosmogonies  ? 

H.  Weil,  popularly ;  but  we  may  say  in  general, 
that  the  immense  fact  of  creation  was  unknown  to 
the  heathen.  ''By  faith,  we  understand,"  says  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  *'  that  the  things  which  are 
seen  were  not  made  of  the  things  which  do  appear." 
What  we  now  feel  must  have  been,  was  repelled  by 
all  the  proud  reasoners.  A  poor  obscure,  ignorant 
Hebrew  alone  knew  it.  For  all  others,  ex  nihilo  nil 
fit^  was  the  practical  maxim.  That  is  a  striking  fact. 
What  are  the  cosmogonies  of  other  nations  ?  Never, 
as  I  said,  a  creation.  Matter  was  eternal.  In  India, 
it  was  Pantheism.  God  was  the  soul  of  the  world  : 
or  human  passions  were  perfected  into  powerful  and 
mysterious  beings,  moved  in  chaos,  or  m  darkness ; 
and  systems  impossible  for  our  cold  western  reason  to 
grasp,  were  concocted.  But  a  personal  God,  and  a 
creation  did  not  enter  into  their  minds.  Brahm  was 
at  ease,  asleep  in  the  unconscious  enjoyment  of  this 
state.  He  woke  up,  and  the  mundane  egg  spUt,  the 
upper  part  became  heaven  and  the  lower  earth. 
Their  more  serious  philosophical  views  were,  *'  The 
universe  is  Brahm,  it  comes  from  Brahm,  it  subsists 
in  Brahm,  and  returns  into  Brahm."  All  the  rest  is 
a  kind  of  Maya  or  illusion.  It  is  only  Brahm  reveal- 
ing himself  in  various  ways,  first  disengaging  a  female 
from  himself,  and  then  by  emanations  of  gods  who 
have  each  their  goddesses,  and  thence  into  all  nature ; 
— ^Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva,  and  so  on,  identified  with 
created  existence  while  Brahm  is  awake,  and  which 
perishes  by  a  great  catastrophe  when  he  is  tired. 
The  Kalpa,  then,  is  over,  and  he  goes  to  sleep,  and  the 
same  story  (for  they  had  not  learned  Dr.  Temple's  phi- 
losophy), exactly,  is 'reproduced  over  again.  In  this 
way,  what  our  Essayist  calls  Providence,  provided  for 


121 

the  edncation  of  an  immensely  greater  number  of  the 
human  race  than  it  did  by  the  Hebrew  Descartes. 
It  was  Pantheism  connected  with  the  powers  of 
nature,  and  the  idea  of  decay  and  reproduction.  So 
that  the  destroyer,  Siva,  was  the  god  of  life.  The 
female  deities  were  the  productive  power  of  the  gods 
they  were  connected  with,  while  the  history  of  Adam 
and  Eve,  whose  very  names  were  used,  and  Noah  and 
his  sons,  ran  through  it  aU  ;  and  even  the  names  of 
Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet,  in  Sama,  Cama,  and  Praja- 
pati.  The  "a"  at  the  end  not  being  sounded,  and 
"  Pra,"  meaning  Lord. 

In  the  laws  or  institutes  of  Menu,  we  have  it  di- 
rectly stated,  that  the  sole  setf-existing  power  having 
wiUed  to  prodace  various  beings  from  his  own  divine 
substance,  he  divided  his  own  substance,  and  the 
mighty  power  became  male  and  female.  This  gives, 
perhaps,  the  most  complete  original  system  of  idolatry 
which  exists,  its  most  stupid  and  earthly  form  being 
Grecian  mythology,  but  the  same  was  really  current 
everjTvhere.  You  can  see  these  things,  if  you  are 
anxious,  in  Guignlaufs  Kreuzer  or  Faber,  and  the 
Asiatic  Researches,  and  in  many  curious  facta  in 
Bryant.  Wilkinson  for  Egypt,  and  Cory's  Frag- 
ments, for  Orphic  and  Phenician. 

In  more  modem  less  metaphysical  theories,  matter 
was  eternal.  I  will  give  you  the  Phenician  one  by 
Sanchoniatho  preserved  by  Eusebius.  I  give  the 
quotations  of  it  from  Cory's  volume.  He  supposes 
that  the  beginning  of  all  things  was  a  dark  and  con- 
densed windy  air,  or  a  breeze  of  thick  air,  and  a 
chaos  turbid  and  black  as  Erebus,  and  that  these 
were  unbounded,  and  for  a  long  series  of  ages  desti- 
tute of  form ;  but  when  this  wind  became  enamoured 
of  its  own  first  principles,  and  an  intimate  union 
took  place,  that  connexion  was  called  pathos  (cupid 
or  desu'e),  and  this  was  the  beginning  or  origin  of 
the  creation  of  all  things ;  but  it  knew  not  its  own 
creation,  but  from  its  connexion  with  the  wind  (or 


I 


122 

spirit),  was  produced  Mot.  This,  some  call  litis 
(mud),  but  some  the  putrefaction  of  a  watery  mix- 
ture, and  from  this  was  produced  all  the  rest  of 
creation,  and  the  generation  of  all  things.  He  then 
proceeds  to  details. 

The  Egyptian  was  more  strictly  mythology,  not 
cosmogony,  though  in  ancient  systems  these  are,  in- 
deed, the  same.  The  unity  of  Deity,  or  subsistence, 
does  not  appear  ;  but  their  Vedas,  the  books  of 
Hermes  Trismegistus  are  lost.  But  it  was  essen- 
tially the  same  as  the  Hindoo,  save  that  the  system 
'common  to  both,  had  adapted  itself  to  the  circum- 
stances of  the  country.  It  was  a  more  terrestrial  and 
less  imaginative  system.  Human  nature  took  a  tinge 
less  kindly,  but  more  righteous.  The  Unity  of  the 
Deity  was  less  in  relief.  Decay  and  return  to  life 
more  prominent,  and  generation  more  than  emana- 
tion, though  these  were  all  found  in  both.  The  ori- 
ginal Deity,  Nef,  or  the  Spirit,  came  down  more  into 
the  ordinary  rank  of  gods  than  Brahm ;  and  while  the 
eight  great  gods  and  goddesses  were  found  in  both, 
yet  a  triad  of  another  kind  was  prominent — ^male, 
female,  and  child,  as  Nef,  Sate,  and  Khonso — Osiris, 
Isis,  and  Horus.  The  former  the  more  active  prin- 
ciple, the  second  the  passive  or  earth  (the  great 
mother  as  everywhere),  and  the  order  produced  out  of 
these.  The  latter  triad,  the  Niley  or  sun,  for  Osiris  was 
both  in  certain  respects,  i.e.j  not  the  sun  as  sun,  but 
its  action  on  the  Nile  and  Egypt  for  blessing.  Isis 
Egypt,  and  Horus  the  return  to  blessing  after  Typhon, 
or  the  burning  sun  had  dried  all  up.  There  are  traces 
of  one  divine  origin,  out  of  which  all  proceeded,  but 
having  no  book  like  the  institutes  of  Menu,  it  is  com- 
paratively speaking  lost.  Ptha,  though  a  great  god, 
and  the  formative  power,  was  in  a  certain  sense  a 
secondary  one.  He  formed  more  than  was  an  origin 
of  all  things.  The  Phenician  system  was  more  his- 
torical and  mythic.  In  all,  the  worship  of  Yoni 
Lingams  attached  to  Siva,  the  same  with  Ehem,  and 


the  history  of  Osiris,  and  Phallic  processions  of  Bac- 
ehns  were  from  Hinclostan  to  Rome,  the  origin  of  a 
degradation  of  ideas  and  manners,  which  need  not  be 
recalled;  but  it  is  imiversally  recognized,  that  creation 
was  unknown  in  these  systems.  There  was  pan- 
theistic emanation,  or  eternal  matter.  The  Gnostic 
systems  evidently  linked  themselves  up  ■nith  all  this. 
An  effort  of  Satan  to  bring  the  old  mythology  spirit- 
ualized into  Christianity.  This  I  shall  beg  leave  to 
call  the  de%'il's  education  of  the  world.  The  point  of 
departure  being  an  idea  of  one  God,  which  man  can 
hardly  get  rid  of,  he  turned  it  by  false  human  wisdom 
into  idolatrj',  by  deifying  attributes,  powers  of  nature, 
stars,  and  ancestors.  All  this  was  afloat  in  the  world 
before  Moses'  account  of  things.  There  were  traces 
of  prinueval  history  both  of  Adam,  Noah,  Babel,  the 
giants,  and  the  judgment  of  Babel,  but  all  turned 
into  idolatrj'.  When  this  ripened,  God  gave  a  divine 
account,  perfectly  suited  to  the  age,  not  science,  which 
would  have  been  unsuited  to  divine  action,  but  res- 
cuing the  great  facts  in  such  a  way,  that  the  divine 
actings  necessary  for  man  to  know  morally,  and  as 
far,  therefore,  as  they  concerned  man  on  the  earth, — 
with  which  he  had  to  do,  should  be  distinctly  set  out, 
and  with  the  simplicity,  dignity,  and  beneficence  to- 
wards man,  which  bore  the  stamp  of  God.  The 
whole  world  is  witness  that  no  man,  neither  the  sim- 

Slcst  uor  the  wisest,  ever  could  have  known,  or  ever 
id  discover,  such  a  thought  as  to  creation  as  is  given 
iu  Genesis.  It  stands  not  pre-eminent,  but  isolated 
and  alone ;  short,  simple,  unscientific,  no  mental 
elalxiration,  no  recognition  of  natme's  powers  (such 
as  Jews  fell  into,  not  only  in  the  gross  way  of  idolatry, 
but  in  the  refined  Alexandrian  system  of  Philo),  no 
emanation  or  pantheism,  no  eternal  matter,  no  deifi- 
cation of  mythic  ideas.  No  visible  world  covmted  for 
the  Logos,  as  again  Philo  ;  every  human  thouglit  is 
denied,  but  the  fiat  of  God  himself  brings  the  world 
into  existence,  and  every  thing  into  order ;  and  the 


J 


124 

relationships  of  God,  the  world,  and  man,  are  per- 
fectly established.  Had  there  been  no  cosmogonies, 
the  yalne  of  this  statement  wonld  not  have  been  felt. 
The  simplest  mind  would  have  known  the  truth,  but 
the  truth  meets  every  error  of  every  mind. 

Let  us  just  look  after  the  poor  conceptions  and 
wild  imaginations  of  heathen  cosmogonies,  at  the 
simple  statement  of  the  word  of  God.  We  shall  see 
at  once,  in  the  former,  the  laborious  efforts  of  the 
human  mind  in  what  it  cannot  reach,  heaping  up 
powers  and  conceptions  to  fill  the  imagination,  and 
account  for  effects,  because  it  does  not  know  God,  and 
is  oppressed  with  the  effect  of  His  power,  and  on  the 
other,  God  speaking  with  the  simplicity  of  one  who 
had  made  it  all,  and  knew  it  all.  The  word  that  had 
made  could  tell  what  it  had  done,  and  creation  takes 
its  place  of  a  mere  creature,  and  Elohim  maintains 
His  own. 

W.  Before  you  go  further,  I  should  like  to  hear 
what  you  say  to  the  two  alleged  accounts  of  creation, 
Elohistic  and  Jehovistic. 

H.  From  Genesis  to  Revelation,  there  are  two  ways 
of  speaking  of  God,  either  as  the  one  divine  being 
in  contrast  with  men,  God  known  as  God  (only 
that  it  is  applied  to  the  representatives  of  His  power 
as  such,  whether  angels  or  judges  hold  that  place) ; 
or  in  Imown  revealed  relationships  with  men.  Of 
these  relationships  there  are  three,  Almighty,  Jeho- 
vah, and  Father  ;  the  last  never  revealed  tiU  Christ 
the  Son  came.  Elohim  was  revealed  to  Abram  as 
Almighty.  He  was  to  trust  in  Him  in  that  character. 
It  was  to  be  the  effect  of  faith.  To  Israel,  He  was 
revealed  as  Jehovah,  and  He  was  to  be  known  and 
trusted  as  such.  To  us,  as  Father,  and  especially  as 
Holy  Father,  in  which  name  He  keeps  us,  and  we 
who  have  believed  in  the  Son,  know  and  trust  Him. 
Thus,  in  Exodus  vi.,  Elohim  specially  teUs  Moses  that 
He  had  revealed  himself  to  the  fathers  by  His  name 
El  Shaddai,  God  Almighty,  but  not  by  that  of  Jeho- 


vah,  which  He  now  took  with  Israel ;  and  Christ  par- 
ticularly notices  that  He  had  manifested  the  Father's 
name  to  the  disciples,  had  declared  and  would  declare 
it,  the  Holy  Ghost  becoming  a  spirit  of  adoption  in 
us.  Hence  the  apostle  beautifully  connecting  all 
these  revelations  of  God,  says  (2  Cor.  vi.  18,)  I  will 
he  a  Father  to  you,  and  ye  shall  bo  my  sons  and 
daughters,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty.  That  is.  He  who 
had  been  the  God  of  Abraham  as  Almighty,  and  the 
God  of  Israel  as  Jehovah,  now  took  his  name  and 
place  of  Father,  Surely,  He  was  ever  Father  in 
respect  of  the  Son,  ever  Almighty,  and  ever  Jehovah  ; 
but  He  had  not  taken  it  as  a  name  of  known  relation- 
ship. Now  there  is  never,  in  any  case,  confusion  in 
this  respect.  In  the  Psalms,  the  difference  is  of  the 
deepest  interest,  and  when  understood,  greatly  facih- 
tates  reading  them  mth  intelligence.  It  is  equally  true 
now.  God  I  may  seek  as  God,  thirst  after  as  God, 
bow  to  as  such.  With  a  Father,  I  am  in  sweet 
and  blessed  relationship,  according  to  the  terms  of 
that  name.  It  was  not  in  vain  that  Christ  said,  I 
go  to  my  Father  and  yoiu:  Father,  my  God  and  your 
God.  During  this  life.  He  ever  said,  Father.  On 
the  cross,  My  God,  my  God :  perfect  in  faith,  yet 
not  enjoying  the  relationship.  After  His  resurrec- 
tion He  uses  both  acconUng  to  the  full  perfectness 
in  which  He  now  stands  in  them  according  to  redemp- 
tion, and  introduces  His  disciples  in  virtue  of  that 
into  the  same.  Hence,  too,  when  all  was  finished, 
even  in  the  act  of  dying,  He  says,  Father,  into  thy 
hands  I  commend  my  spirit.  Now  if  yon  examine 
the  second  chapter  of  Genesis,  from  verse  -1,  you  will 
see  that  nothing  but  the  utmost  prepossession  could 
speak  of  it  as  a  secoud  accomit  of  the  creation. 
Have  you  ever  looked  at  it  in  this  point  of  view  ? 

ir.  I  have  not.  I  have,  of  course,  often  read  it  ; 
but  for  positive  instruction,  not  to  meet  any  parti- 
cular doctrine. 

H.  Far  the  best  way,  too.  But  ifyou  do  come  across 


I 

I 
I 


i 


126 

rationalistic  assertions,  never  accept  them  without 
reading  the  passage  in  question,  because  thus  the 
Divine  intention  of  the  passage  is,  with  God's  help, 
present  to  the  mind,  and  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten 
that  suffices  to  make  all  their  assertions  utterly  null. 
It  is  the  case  here.  In  the  first  chapter,  and  three 
verses  of  the  second,  we  have  the  simple  but  magni- 
ficent account,  and  magnificent  because  simple,  of 
the  creation  of  all  things,  and  the  orderings  of  the 
earth,  the  world,  as  subjected  to  man  and  in  reference 
to  him.  This  was  God  creating.  In  the  rest  of  the 
second  chapter,  we  have  the  sacred  historian  entering 
into  all  the  special  circumstances  in  which  man  was 
placed  in  this  world.  He  alludes  to  the  fact  of  the 
rest  of  the  creation  subsisting  without  man,  then 
speaks  of  the  Garden  being  planted  in  Eden,  of  the 
tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  how  man  was 
made  and  became  a  living  soul,  by  which  his  special 
relationship  to  God  existed,  of  the  forming  of  Eve 
out  of  his  rib,  of  his  dominion  over  all  animals. 
These  and  other  circumstances  being  taken  as  sym- 
boUcal  expressions  of  higher  things  all  through 
Scripture.  In  a  word,  we  have  passed  out  of  creation 
into  the  whole  scene  of  moral,  mysterious,  and  sym- 
bolical relationships  between  God  and  man.  It  is, 
first,  responsibilities  in  an  historical  way,  and  then 
the  figures  of  all  the  blessings  and  rights  to  come  in 
and  be  conferred  on  man  in  the  second  Adam.  I  am 
not  now  arguing  whether  the  application  be  just  or 
not  which  subsequent  Scriptures  make  of  this  history ; 
but  to  say  it  is  a  second  account  of  the  creation  is 
simple  nonsense.  Not  one  subject  in  chapter  two, 
except  the  fact  that  a  man  was  created  and  a  woman, 
is  spoken  of  in  chapter  one.  The  fact  that  there 
were  plants  without  a  man  is  mentioned  in  chapter 
one,  and  these  are  spoken  of  in  chapter  two  in  a 
wholly  different  aspect,  and  carrying  the  subject  on  to 
a  further  point.  Now,  it  was  of  the  last  importance 
that  he  wno  wrote  for  Israel  should  shew,  that  Jeho- 


vah,  the  God  revealed  to  them,  was  the  one  Bapreme 
and  only  Elohim,  the  Creator,  though  He  was  their 
national  God  ;  and  this  the  account  most  fully  does. 
The  first  chapter  shews,  that  it  was  simple  Elohim, 
God,  the  only  one ;  the  second,  that  when  special 
conditions  of  man  came  out,  that  one  Elohim  was 
Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel.  Had  he  put  Jehovah  in 
the  first,  it  might  have  been  only  the  particular 
national  God  known  by  that  name.  But  it  was  Elo- 
him, God.  There  was  none  hut  He.  Had  he  omitted 
it  in  the  second,  it  might  not  have  been  the  God  of 
the  Jews  at  all.  Had  he  laboriously  affirmed  it,  it 
might  have  heen  a  national  assumption :  the  simple 
statement  left  it  in  its  own  eternal  truth.  So,  when 
the  great  truth  was  restored  under  Elijah,  the  con- 
vinced people  shoot,  Jehovah,  He  is  Elohim  !  Jeho- 
vah, He  is  Elohim  I  The  question  being,  whether 
Baal  was  Elohim,  or  Jehovah.  It  would  be  well  we 
should  read  the  chapters ;  it  will  bring  thorn,  in  the 
way  I  said,  before  our  minds,  and  the  contrast  with 
the  deplorable  cosmogonies  of  the  heathen  by  which 
in  fact  the  world  was  educated  (and  cosmogony  and 
theology  were  identical) ;  and  the  bearing  and  rela- 
tionship of  the  two  chapters  wiU  become  evident. 

In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth.  And 
the  earth  was  without  form,  and  void;  and  darkneaa  u-iu  upon  the 
fn«»  of  the  deep.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of 
the  waters.  Aiid  God  aaid,  Let  there  be  light :  and  there  was 
light.  And  God  saw  the  light,  that  it  woi  good:  and  God  divided 
the  light  from  the  darkneea.  And  God  called  the  light  Day,  and 
the  darkness  ho  called  Night.  Aad  the  evening  and  the  morning 
were  the  first  day. 

And  God  said,  Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the  midst  of  the 
watoTB,  and  let  it  divide  the  waters  from  the  waters.  And  God 
made  the  firmament,  and  divided  the  waters  which  u-ere  under  the 
firmament  from  the  waters  which  leere  above  tlie  firmament :  and 
it  was  so.  And  God  called  the  firmament  Heaven.  And  the 
fiveuing  and  the  morning  were  the  second  day. 

And  God  said,  Let  the  waters  under  the  heaven  be  gathered 
t(^ther  unto  one  place,  and  let  the  dry  '<""'  appear  :  and  it  was 
BO.      And  God  called  the  dry  land  Earth;   and  the  gathering 


128 


together  of  the  waters  called  he  Seas ;  and  Ood  flaw  that  it  mhu 
good.  And  God  said,  Let  the  earth  brin^  forth  Krass,  the  herb 
jidding  seed,  and  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit  after  his  kind,  whoee 
Beed  is  in  itself,  upon  the  earth :  and  it  was  so.  And  the  earth 
brought  forth  grass,  and  herb  yielding  seed  after  his  kind,  and  the 
tree  yielding  fruit,  whose  seed  was  in  itself,  after  his  kind ;  and 
God  saw  that  it  was  good.  And  the  evening  and  the  morning 
were  the  third  day. 

And  G-od  said.  Let  there  be  lights  in  the  firmament  of  the  hea- 
ven to  divide  the  day  from  the  night ;  ar^d  let  them  be  for  signs 
and  for  seasons,  and  for  days,^and  years:  and  let  them  be  for 
lights  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven  to  give  light  upon  the  earth: 
and  it  was  so.  And  God  made  two  great  lights;  the  greater  light 
to  rule  the  day,  and  the  lesser  li^ht  to  rule  the  night:  he  made  the 
stars  also,  ^d  God  set  them  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven  to 
give  light  upon  the  earth,  and  to  rule  over  the  day  and  over  the 
night,  and  to  divide  the  light  from  the  darkness :  and  Gt)d  saw 
that  it  was  good.  And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the 
fourth  day.  And  God  said.  Let  the  waters  bring  forth  abundantly 
the  moving  creature  that  hath  life,  and  fowl  that  may  fly  above  the 
earth  in  the  open  firmament  of  heaven.  And  God  created  great 
whales,  and  every  living  creature  that  moveth,  which  the  waters 
brought  forth  abundantly,  after  their  kind,  and  every  winged  fowl 
after  his  kind  :  and  God  saw  that  it  was  good.  And  Gt>d  blessed 
them,  saving,  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  fill  the  waters  in  the 
seas,  and  let  fowl  multiply  in  the  eaith.  And  the  evening  and 
the  morning  were  the  fifth  day. 

And  God  said.  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  creature 
after  his  kind,  cattle,  and  creeping  thing,  and  beast  of  the  earth 
after  his  kind :  and  it  was  so.  And  God  made  the  beast  of  the 
earth  after  his  kind,  and  cattle  after  their  kind,  and  every  thing 
that  creepeth  upon  the  earth  after  his  kind :  and  God  saw  that 
it  was  good. 

And  God  said.  Let  us  make  man  in  our  own  imaj?e,  after  our 
likeness:  and  let  them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  oi  the  sea,  and 
over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  the  cattle,  and  over  all  the 
earth,  and  over  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth. 
So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the  image  of  God 
created  he  him ;  male  and  female  created  he  them.  And  God 
blessed  them,  and  God  said  unto  them.  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply, 
and  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it :  and  have  dominion  over 
the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every 
living  thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth. 

And  Qx>a  said,  Behold,  I  have  given  you  every  herb  bearing 
seed,  which  is  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth,  and  every  tree,  in  the 
which  is  the  fruit  of  a  tree  yielding  seed ;  to  you  it  shall  be  for 
meat.  And  to  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and  to  every  fowl  of  the 
air,  and  to  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth,  wherein 


there  u  life,  /  have  given  every  preen  herb  for  meat :  and  it  wm 
■o.  And  God  saw  every  thing  that  be  had  made,  and,  behold,  it 
Koa  very  good.  And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  eiitb 
day. 

ThuB  the  heavens  aud  the  earth  were  finished,  and  all  the  host 
of  tiiem.  And  on  the  seventh  day  God  ended  his  work  which  he 
had  made ;  and  he  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  hia  work 
which  he  had  made.  And  God  blesaed  the  seventh  day,  and 
•anctified  it :  because  that  in  it  he  hud  rested  &om  all  his  work 
which  God  created  and  made. 

These  or«  the  generadonsof  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth  when 
they  were  created,  in  the  day  that  the  Losd  God  made  the  earth 
ftnd  the  heavens,  and  every  plant  of  the  field  before  it  was  in  the 
earth,  and  every  herb  of  the  field  before  it  grew :  for  the  Lord 
Ood  had  not  caused  it  to  rain  upon  the  earlh,  and  there  wa»  not  a 
man  to  till  the  ground.  But  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth, 
and  watered  the  whole  fiice  of  the  ground.  And  the  Loud  God 
formed  man  of  the  duet  of  the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his 
nostrile  the  breath  of  life ;  aud  man  became  a  living  soul. 

And  the  Lord  God  planted  a  garden  eastward  in  Eden  ;  and 
there  he  put  the  man  whom  he  had  formed.  Aud  out  of  the  ground 
made  the  LoBn  God  to  grow  every  tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the 
sight,  and  good  for  food  ;  the  tree  of  litb  also  in  the  midst  of  the 
garden,  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  And  a  river 
went  out  of  Eden  to  water  the  garden  ;    and  from  thence  it  was 

farted,  and  became  into  four  heads.  The  name  of  the  first  u 
'ison :  that  w  it  which  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Havilnh, 
where  thrre  it  gold ;  and  the  gold  of  that  land  m  good :  there 
M  bdellium  and  the  onyx  stone.  Aud  the  name  of  the  second 
river  m  Gihon  :  the  same  it  it  that  compasseth  the  whole  laud  of 
Ethiopui.  Aud  the  name  of  the  third  river  it  Hiddekel :  that  m  it 
which  goeth  toward  the  east  of  Assyria.  And  the  fourth  river  i* 
Euphrates.  And  the  Lobd  God  took  the  man,  and  put  him  into 
the  garden  of  Eden  to  dress  it,  and  to  keep  it.  And  the  Lokd 
God  commanded  the  mau,  saying,  Of  every  tree  of  the  garden 
thou  mayest  freely  eat :  but  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil,  thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it :  for  in  the  day  that  thou  eateet 
thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die. 

And  the  Lord  God  said,  It  is  not  good  that  the  man  nhould  be 
alone;  I  will  make  him  an  help  meet  for  him.  And  out  of  the 
ground  the  Loan  God  formed  every  beast  of  the  field,  and  every 
fowl  of  the  air;  and  brought  them  unto  Adam  to  see  what  he 
would  call  them  :  aud  whatsoever  Adam  called  every  living  crea- 
ture, that  teas  the  name  thereof  And  Adam  gave  names  to  all 
cattle,  and  to  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every  beast  of  the  field ; 
but  for  Adam  there  was  not  found  an  help  meet  for  him.  And 
the  Lord  God  caused  a  deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  Adam,  and  he 
*lept ;  and  he  look  one  of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up  the  flesh  instead 


I 

1 


180 

thereof;  and  the  rib,  which  the  Lord  Qoi  had  taken  from  man, 
made  ho  a  woman,  and  brought  her  onto  the  man.  And  Adam 
Baid,  This  U  now  bone  of  mj  bones,  and  flesh  of  iot  flesh :  she 
shall  be  called  Woman,  because  she  was  taken  out  of  Man.  There- 
fore shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  shall  cleave 
unto  his  wife :  and  they  shall  be  one  fleeh.  And  tbej  were  both 
naked,  the  man  and  his  wife,  and  were  not  ashamed. 

How  refreshing  is  the  Word  after  all  the  caYillings 
of  men ! 

W.  It  is  most  truly  so  ;  but  I  seize  your  remarks 
on  the  different  relationships  in  which  Qod  reveals 
Himself  with  men.  It  opens  a  wide  field  of  interest 
in  the  study  of  Scripture,  and  I  see  that  it  rests  on 
the  plain  testimony  of  Scripture  itself.  I  confess  I 
begin  to  think  these  essayists  and  rationalists  exces- 
sively superficial ;  they  seem  always  to  rest  in  the 
mere  outside  of  Scripture,  and  in  no  case  to  get  hold 
of  the  mind  of  Grod  m  it. 

H.  Naturally  enough,  they  set  out  by  not  believing 
there  is  one ;  and  the  truth  is,  as  Scripture  states  it, 
the  god  of  this  world  has  blinded  the  eyes  of  them 
that  beUeve  not.  Thev  think  themselves  wiser  than 
apostles,  exclude  God  from  the  whole  matter,  and,  of 
course,  sink  to  their  own  level. 

W.  The  passage  from  2  Corinthians  has  singular 
beauty  in  respect  of  these  relationships. 

H.  It  is  indeed  of  exquisite  beauty ;  and  these 
connections  of  Scripture,  which  unfold  a  whole  scene 
of  moral  truths  and  elements,  diverse  in  themselves, 
yet  revealing  the  full  force  each  of  the  other ;  and 
thus  related  in  the  deepest  way  one  to  another,  bring- 
ing out  what  God  is,  and  evolving  in  the  revelation 
of  it,  every  exercise  of  the  human  heart  towards 
God,  shew  a  Divine  unity  of  mind  in  Scripture,  which 
all  the  petty  cavils  of  essayists  cannot  shake.  That 
one  verse  embraces  all  the  Divine  relations  of  God, 
and  the  dispensational  connections  of  man  with  Him, 
and  takes  them  all  up  to  introduce  them,  though  as 
isolated  relationships  quite  different  from  one  another 
in  their  abstract  power,  into  that  one  new  perfect  one 


Iilfhich  has  beeu  revealed  as  the  perfection  of  grace 
r  through  Christ.  But  He  hides  these  things  from  the 
wise  and  prudent,  and  reveals  them  unto  babea.  The 
moral  need  of  the  soul,  the  wants  of  a  new  nature, 
it  is  by  which  we  get  to  understand  Scripture,  not 
our  intellectual  powers.      But  let  us  turn   to 


\V.  Well,  how  do  you  reconcile  the  Mosaic  accoi 
of  the  creation  with  geological  discoveries  ? 

H.  To  tell  you  the  honeat  truth,  I  think  the  MosaiQ 
acconnt  of  the  creation  much  more  certain  than  any 
geological  system.  First,  the  direct  proofs  of  Scrip- 
ture are,  to  me,  infinitely  more  soUd  and  sure  than 
any  geological  conclusions  j  and  the  geological  con- 
clusions I  have  seen  arrived  at,  seem  to  me  to  rei 
in  fact  on  very  doubtful  evidence. 

11'.  But  surely  there  are  a  number  of  well-ascei 
tained  facts  and  principles  ? 

H.  There  are  a  number  of  facts  which  to  me 
least  are  of  the  highest  possible  interest.  But  (per- 
haps my  mind  is  slow  and  apt  to  see  difficulties,  an^ 
not  to  come  to  a  conclusion  before  they  are  cleareij 
up)  the  results  put  together  into  a  system  are  to  mi 
mind  surrounded  with  difficulty.  I  have  no  disposi' 
tion  to  controvert  extraordinary  facts.  If  it  is  proved 
to  me  that  the  tomb  of  Mahomet  in  the  Caaba  is  sus- 
pended in  the  air,  I  say  very  well,  I  may  be  able  to 
explain  it,  or  I  may  not,  and  if  so  I  wait  till  I  can. 
If  a  man  can  cause  a  table  to  be  suspended  in  the  air, 
it  is  to  me  a  mere  question  of  physical  fact — is  there 
such  a  power  ?  Lifting  my  band  is  just  as  wonderful 
in  itself.  I  believe  that  in  a  certain  sense  the  physical 
world  is  subject  to  man,  and,  if  God  allow  him,  I  know 
no  limit  to  lus  employing  the  powers  of  nature.  Miracle 
is  divine  power  over  nature,  the  will  of  God  in  exer- 
cise not  ordinarily  but  extraordinarily,  whoever  may 
be  the  person  who  brings  that  will  into  play.  Th«j 
powers  used  are,  to  my  mind,  inmiaterial ;  they  mayj 
r  be  natural  or  supernatural ;  but  when  natural  powi 
I  2 


unfcn 

miQfl 
anyl 


182 

are  in  exercise  according  to  the  prescribed  course  of 
things,  there  is  no  miracle.  The  power  exercised 
may  be  as  great,  or  greater,  but  it  is  the  ordinary 
course  of  nature.  But  when  not  in  that  course,  even 
though  it  be  the  same  power,  but  by  an  extraordinary 
occasional  action  of  the  Divine  will,  any  event  is  pro- 
duced, that  is  a  miracle.  If  I  remember  right  I  am 
repeating  the  idea  of  John  Wessal,  Luther's  fore- 
runner ;  but  I  must  not  make  him  responsible  for  it ; 
but  I  think  I  owe  it  to  him.  Of  course,  if  the  power 
itself  is  absolutely  supernatural  as  raising  the  dead, 
that  itself  proves  a  miracle. 

W.  I  think,  at  any  rate,  the  idea  of  miracle  is  just ; 
it  is  one  which  has  been  a  good  deal  discussed.  It  is 
referred  to  in  these  Essays. 

H.  It  is.  Take  an  example.  A  mighty  East  wind 
was  a  natural  power  at  the  Bed  Sea ;  yet  it  was  a 
miracle,  because  it  was  an  extraordinary  exercise  of 
the  Divine  will,  just  as  much  as  at  Jordan,  though 
there  the  river  was  arrested  in  its  course  super- 
naturally ;  Le.j  by  no  known  natural  cause.  However, 
I  am  ready  to  admit  any  extent  of  power  over  natural 
objects  subjected  to  him  by  God  being  exercised  by 
man.  If  he  has  found  a  means  of  making  a  table 
rap  on  the  ground,  the  only  question  with  me  is,  is 
it  a  power  given  to  man  ?  If  he  pretends  to  bring 
souls  up,  I  do  not  believe  it ;  because  I  do  not  believe 
God  has  put  the  souls  of  the  deceased  in  his  power. 
He  may  have  devils  deluding  him,  pretending  to  be 
the  souls  of  the  dead ;  but  souls  are  in  God's  keep- 
ing, and  cannot  come  unless  He  bring  them. 

IV.  And  what  do  you  make  of  the  witch  of  Endor  ? 

H.  God  brought  up  Samuel  I  do  not  doubt  a 
moment ;  the  woman  was  as  frightened  as  Saul  at  his 
coming.  Now  the  discovery  of  geological  remains, 
and  the  theories  of  successive  formations,  are  fuU  of 
interest,  and  there  are  strong  grounds  to  beUeve  there 
have  been  such  ;  nor  can  I  see  that  the  Deluge  ac- 
counts for  all,  because  if — but  it  is  if— the  upheaval 


theory  be  correct,  which  I  have  nothing  to  oppose  to, 
then  the  mountains  which  existed  at  the  time  of  the 
Deluge  have  broken  up  strata  which  baiJ  various 
fossils  aheady  buried  in  them  ;  that  is.  the  Flood 
does  not  appear  to  have  brought  them,  while  uncon- 
formable strata  prove  deposits  after  the  upheaval. 
Thus  tbere  is  a  proof  of  strata  of  different  ages. 
But  I  am  not  satisfied  entirely  as  to  all  the  data.  If 
the  present  surface  of  land  were  submerged,  and 
there  were  fossil  English  and  fossil  Australian  re- 
mains, the  Mareupia  and  duck-billed  Platybuses  of 
AustraUa  would  be  treated  as  proofs  of  a  necessarily 
anterior  formation,  because  the  Marsupia  are  an  in- 
ferior class  of  MammaUa,  a  transition  order.  The 
proofs  might  exist,  I  admit;  but  as  far  as  this  goes, 
why  do  Marsupian  fossils  prove  in  themselves  an 
anterior  formation  ?  superposition  may,  but  remains 
do  not.  Again,  in  the  Wealden  formation,  fresh. water 
remaius  are  found  and  salt  too,  and  I  think  alternat- 
ing, and  turtles.  Well,  this  is  a  great  difficulty.  It 
is  concluded  that  it  must  have  been  an  estuary  in  a 
large  bay; — all  very  ingenious.  It  is  alleged,  how- 
ever, after  disputes  between  the  cbalk  and  Jurassic  or 
oolites,  to  belong  to  the  Jura  sea.  But  then,  if  it 
belong  to  eitber,  according  to  the  ablest  geologists, 
as  Vogt,  who  adopts  the  idea  of  the  estuary  and  the 
Jura  sea,  there  could  have  been  no  great  river  there 
at  that  time,  nor  a  bay  into  which  it  ran,  according  to 
the  limits  which  geological  data  give  of  dry  land  and 
the  Jura  sea.  But  there  are  more  serious  objections. 
It  is  alleged  that  for  certain  sandstones  some  twenty 
thousand  years  must  have  passed  to  have  a  bed  of 
such  thickness  deposited  ;  but  at  Craigleith,  near 
Edinburgh,  a  tree  some  sixty  feet  long,  lies  slanting 
at  an  angle  of  40°  across  the  strata  in  its  whole 
length.  Now  that  a  tree  remained  20,000  years 
slantmg  thus,  while  the  sea  deposited  this  strata,  is 
not  to  be  believed.  Again,  they  tell  us  that  the  for- 
mation of  certain  beds  of  coal  would  require  2,000 


184 

years  to  make  a  bed  of  coal  a  foot  thick,  and  some 
120,000  for  the  coal  measures  of  England,  Now 
one  used  to  bogs  may  well  doubt  this.  You  may  find 
some  10  or  12  feet  of  bog  formed  in  a  comparatively 
short  time,  as  in  Ireland ;  in  cut-down  forests,  in  a 
quarter  of  the  tnne.  A  particular  kind  of  grass 
has  always  turf  at  the  roots,  if  only  a  single  plant ; 
and  I  have  seen  trees  retaining  their  form,  but  grown 
through  by  the  roots  of  grass,  forming  the  whole  into 
a  compact  mass  little  diflferent  from  coal.  Where 
water  is  found  the  progress  is  very  rapid.  In  Lin- 
colnshire  I  have  imdierstood  that  the  number  of  the 
legion  who  cut  down  the  forest  has  been  found  in  the 
bog.  Nor  is  this  all ;  at  South  Joggins'  clifif,  in  Nova 
Scotia,  and  somewhere  near  Manchester,  sigillaria 
grow  through  the  coal,  the  roots  bein^  in  and  below 
it,  and  the  stems  rising  up  in  their  original  position 
through  the  superincumbent  sandstone  and  shale. 
So  in  the  Isle  of  Purbeck,  dicotyledonous  wood  in 
limestone.  Even  Phillips  says,  *  the  nearly  vertical 
position  of  certain  fossil  plants,  a  phenomenon  by 
no  means  rare  among  sandstone  rocks,  affords  good 
ground  for  caution  in  assigning  very  great  extension 
of  years  to  geological  periods,  the  accumulation  of 
transported  sediment  must  have  been  so  rapid  as  to 
prevent  the  decomposition  of  the  vertical  portions  of 
the  plants.  No  one  doubts  that  the  bed  of  stone 
three  feet  thick  which  encloses  equisetum  columnare 
at  High  Wliitby,  was  laid  by  a  single  inundation ;  and 
again  the  sigillaria  in  the  coal  sandstones  of  York- 
shire pass  through  more  than  one,  sometimes  four  or 
five  beds  of  stone.'  Such  facts  as  these  subvert,  as 
far  as  I  can  judge,  the  whole  system  of  geologists  as 
to  deposits.  Again  it  was  a  settled  point,  that  human 
remains,  according  to  the  known  geological  progress 
of  orders  of  fossil  Fauna,  could  not  be  found  in  any 
deposits  before  our  present  world.  The  human  petri- 
faction from  Guadaloupe,  in  the  British  Museum, 
was  held  to  be  recent,  as  were  some  since  discovered ; 


but  the  question  after  all  remains  if  that  is  just.  At 
any  rate,  the  whole  theory  seems  upset  now.  It  is 
alleged  that  in  Brazil  and  in  North  America,  (in  the 
last  case  in  so  old  a  deposit  as  old  red  sandstone), 
unequivocal  human  remains  have  been  discovered 
in  strata  too  old  for  them,  according  to  geological 
systems.  In  the  caves  of  Gaylenreuth,  they  are 
mixed  up  with  fossil  remains  of  species,  belonging  to 
anterior  formations ;  and  at  Mialet,  in  a  cavern  in 
which  the  hunted  pastors  of  the  efiHsei  dti  desert  found 
constant  refuge,  and  a  place  of  common  meeting  and 
resort,  human  bones,  and  those  of  the  cave  bear  and 
others,  have  been  found.  But  here,  both  rudeRoman 
and  still  ruder  Celtic  implements  have  been  found. 
Dr.  Philhps  says  as  to  this,  "  he  will  not  hazard  a 
definite  conclusion."  "  In  the  meantime  we  may 
remark  that  the  principal  arguments  for  the  eo-eval 
existence  of  man,  and  extinct  pachy-dermata  and 
camivora  in  the  south  of  France,  aro  the  intimate 
mixture  and  equal  conseiTation  of  the  bones.  And 
these  arguments  should  not  be  slighted,  for  they 
would  probably  not  have  been  resisted  in  any  case  of 
the  mixture  of  quadrupedal  remains."  Since  all  this, 
however,  rude  instruments,  constructed  by  human 
skill,  have  been  discovered  in  drift  of  an  epoch,  ac- 
cording to  geologists,  very  lojiii  nnl<'rior  to  that  in 
which  man  ought  to  be  foimd.  I  think  in  the  Eocene 
formation.  But  the  facts  and  data  as  to  this  are  any- 
thing but  clearly  ascertained.  One  celebrated  natural- 
ist has,  on  his  own  data,  according  to  the  President 
of  the  Geological  Society,  made  the  period  required 
forty  thousand  times  too  long.  A  man  who  makes 
mistakes  of  this  kind  on  very  simple  questions  dis- 
credits all  his  reasoning.  But  all  his  data  are  denied 
by  Sir  R,  Murchison.  Further,  as  to  the  remains  in 
the  drift,  or  dilavium,  the  great  proof  of  antiquity  are 
the  remainsof  extinct  mammalia  at  anyrate  of  Pliocene  ■ 
date,  as  Hippopotamus  major  and  Elephas  antiquus, 
1  some  others.     But  those  who  maintain  the  anti- 


I 

I 

I 


186 

quity  of  man  are  obliged  to  admit  that  the  question 
remains.  Are  not  these  animals  of  more  recent  date  ? 
As  Mr.  Lubbock  admits  ''we  may  do  this  by  bringing 
these  animals  down  to  a  later  period,  as  well  as  by 
carrying  man  back  to  an  earlier  one."  Now  in  point 
of  fact  some  animals  which  have  been  insisted  on  as 
proofs  of  Pliocene  age  have  been  found  in  far  more 
recent,  such  as  post  glacial  deposits.  Bos  longifrons 
and  Elephas  primigenius  clearly  much  later  still. 
I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  all  the  data 
require  far  fuller  examination,  and  that  nothing  is  yet 
proved.  As  it  has  been  said,  ''  He  knows  most  who 
believes  least."  The  haste  with  which  conclusions 
are  drawn  is  unscientific.  The  alleged  colonies  of 
Mr.  Barrande  in  Bohemia,  also  inconsistent  with  the 
due  succession  of  Fauna,  and  alleged  to  be  carried 
there  by  currents  require  evidently  more  explanation. 

W.  And  what  conclusions  do  you  draw  from  these 
facts  ? 

H.  None ;  save  that  geologists,  as  Lyell  has  ad- 
mitted, are  but  on  the  threshold  of  the  science. 
That  the  conclusions  of  the  earth's  antiquity,  and  of 
the  formation  of  strata  cannot  be  sustained,  and  that 
we  must  wait  for  further  light  and  additional  facts, 
before  any  conclusion  can  be  drawn. 

W.  That  is  a  most  lame  and  impotent  conclusion. 

H.  Better  to  wait  till  I  have  adequate  grounds  to 
judge,  than  bewilder  myself  by  premature  assertions. 
There  is  another  point,  whether  LyelPs  system  of  the 
progressive  effect  of  subsisting  causes,  acting  with  the 
power  which  they  yet  do,  or  that  of  other  geologists  of 
great  catastrophes  is  the  right  one.  Our  Essayists 
embrace  Lyell's,  and  of  course  treat  it  as  a  settled 
point,  as  they  ever  do  when  it  suits  them.  I  judge 
with  many,  I  believe  most  English  geologists,  that, 
admitting  the  possibility  of  catastrophes,  in  general 
similar  powers  have  been  in  operation,  but  in  a  far 
higher  degree.  It  is  absurd  to  compare  the  elevation 
of  a  mountain,  such  as  Jorullo  in  Mexico,  of  1600 


feet  high,  formed  in  1759,  with  the  Alps,  Pyrenees, 
Himalayas,  or  its  own  kindred  Cordilleras.  Sir  B. 
Mnrchison  justly  warns  his  readers  more  than  once 
against  comparing  them.  He  calls  them  infinitely 
more  intense. 

ir.  But  why  should  they  find  that  suit  them  ? 

H.  Because  then  miracles,  by  a  faint  analogy,  are 
merged  in  the  operation  of  ordinary  causes. 

W.  Dear,  what  a  poor  and  unsolid  foundation  to 
build  on. 

H.  Yes,  but  it  shuts  out  a  living  tnter^'ention  of 
God  in  men's  matters,  and  that  is  their  great  object. 
God  may  give  an  impulsion,  but  the  iutervention  or 
intercourse  with  a  living  God  does  not  suit  the  dig- 
nity or  independence  of  man. 

W,  In  result,  where  do  you  think,  supposing  there 
are  Hypozoic,  and  Palteozoie,  and  Mesozoic,  and 
Kainozoic  periods,  they  come  in  in  the  first  of 
Genesis  ? 

H.  I  have  no  kind  of  a  priori  opinion  or  moral  objec- 
tion to  the  system  of  the  days  being  lengthened  periods, 
but  it  seems  to  me  somewhat  forced ;  McCaua- 
land's,  a  barrister  of  Dublin,  is  the  cleverest  book 
on  the  subject.  And  I  have  heard  another  thought  ex- 
pressed by  a  Christian  friend,  that  the  day  is  an  actual 
day,  the  state  produced  byitheingof  unqualified  dura- 
tion ;  but  I  was  not  persuaded  by  it.  The  structure 
of  the  chapter  itself,  and  the  connection  of  the 
parts  lead  me  to  take  it,  after  the  first  verse,  as  a 
statement  of  the  formation  of  our  present  world,  or 
xofffioc.  Once  we  have  seen  the  laborious  efforts  at 
cosmogony  which  occupied  the  heathen  world,  and 
that  not  one  ever  arrived  at  the  simple  fact  of  a  crea- 
tion, the  force  of  Heb^xi.  3,  becomes  obvious;  one 
sentence  of  revelation  from  God  settled  what  all  the 
profound  elaborations  of  man  never  could  arrive  at; 
and  what  is  not  very  much  to  the  honour  of  man's 
intellect,  once  the  fact  is  stated  there  is  the  conscious- 
sss  that  it  could  not  be  otherwise.     Yet,  instead 


188 

the  best  and  most  probable  account,  as  the  essay  calls 
it,  that  could  be  given,  it  is  in  absolute  opposition  to 
the  uniform  and  universal  view  of  the  matter  in  every 
known  record.  Ex  nihilo  nil  jit  was  the  admitted 
maxim,  Nothing  can  come  of  nothing,  whereas  the 
Divine  maxim  is.  Ex  nihilo  omnefit.  Emanation,  or 
when  the  Grecian  mind  would  not  bear  these  oriental 
systems,  the  eternity  of  matter,  taken  for  granted, 
was  the  only  idea  men  had  of  the  origin  of  the  world. 
Hence  we  have,  In  the  beginning  Elohim  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth, — ^not  the  expanse  simply,  but 
in  general  and  absolutely  those  objects  we  have  before 
us.  Eth  hashamaim  ve  eth  haarets.  This  great  truth 
once  laid  down — ^whose  importance  redemption  only 
surpasses,  as  indeed  it  does  infinitely, — ^what  con- 
cerned man,  the  earth  as  we  have  it,  was  all  man  had 
to  be  taught  by  God.  It  would  have  been  utterly  un- 
suited  to  give  a  revelation  to  teach  science,  or  to  allude 
to  it.  The  phenomena  are  explained,  so  far  as  it  is 
needed  to  put  what  man  saw  before  his  soul  as  the 
work  and  ordering  of  God.  What  came  between  the 
first  verse  and  the  second,  does  not  enter  into  the 
object  of  the  revelation.  Creation,  and  the  forming 
of  the  present  earth  did.  As  regards  the  words  used, 
Maimonides  has  discussed  them.  He  refers  to  Bara, 
Hasa,  Chasa,  and  Yatsar.  The  last  he  afi&rms  is 
never  used  of  creating  out  of  nothing,  the  three  for- 
mer may.  I  do  not  deny  that  Bara  may  be  used  of 
what  is  not  formed  out  of  nothing,  but  it  is  not  used 
for  forming  or  moulding  out  of  something.  Bara 
speaks  of  the  thing  made  as  the  absolute  act  of  the 
Maker.  The  one  who  has  simply  caused  it  to  be  such. 
Haza  refers  to  the  form  into  which  it  is  put,  he  made 
it  a  man ;  but  Bara,  he  created  a  man,  or  a  whale. 
Yatsar  refers  directly  to  the  material  cause,  he  moulded 
something  into  a  form ;  hence,  Yatsar,  a  potter ;  Bara 
refers  to  the  efficient  cause,  Haza  to  the  formal,  Yat- 
sar to  the  material.  Create  and  make  quite  suffici- 
ently represent  Bara  and  Haza.    I  could  not  say  a 


carpenter  created  a  table,  he  made  it.  I  could  almost 
say  Stephenson  created  railways,  figuratively  of 
course.  As  to  birds  being  formed  out  of  the  water, 
the  margin  would  have  removed  the  difficulty.  The 
objection  is  either  clap-trap  or  ignorance  ;  Zung  and 
De  Wette  have  both  of  them  getstjd  fiiege,  let  fowl  fly, 
BO  the  excellent  Dutch,  and  Diodati's  Italian  version ; 
the  English  has  followed  the  Sept.  and  Latin ;  the 
Hebrew  ve  yoph  ijopheph  in  the  second  member  of  the 
verse  seems  plain  enough.  Perhaps  remains  of 
ancient  prejudices  may  have  led  our  Essayists  to 
follow  the  learned  Patrick,  who  says,  that  it  ia  clear 
fishes  and  birds  have  the  same  origin,  for  they  both 
lay  eggs,  and  both  guide  themselves  with  their  tails. 

ir.  Well,  it  is  naif  enough,  at  any  rate.  What 
strange  creatures  we  are.  But  you  think,  then,  that 
the  whole  geological  period,  if  such  there  be,  eoraea 
between  verse  1  and  2. 

H.  Would  come ;  for  the  object  of  the  chapter  is 
to  treat,  as  I  have  said,  the  fact  of  creation,  that 
everything  is  made  out  of  nothing,  and  then  our 
present  eax-th,  and  nothing  else.  Hence,  in  the 
second  verse.  He  confines  himself  to  the  earth.  The 
earth  was  tohu  vohu.  There  is  no  idea  of  the  hea- 
vens being  in  this  state,  and  I  confess  I  should  not 
suppose  chaos  to  have  been  a  first  creation  of  God. 
It  looks  like  the  result  of  some  catastrophe.  Here 
all  the  Orphic,  Grecian,  and  Phenician  cosmogonies 
begin,  and  the  Boman,  as  in  the  Unes  well  known  to 
boys,  "Ante  mare  et  terras  et  quod  tegit  omnia  codum 
Unus  frat  loto  naUiras  vultus  in  orhe,  Quern  dixere  chaos." 
Only  they  personify,  in  general,  chaos,  and  erebus, 
or  darkness ;  the  mimdane  egg,  coming  out  of  the 
former.  We  get  the  historical  fact  here  (primeval 
creation  properly  speaking  being  distinct),  chaos;  they 
personify  in  general  chaos,  darkness,  the  waters,  and 
the  Vishnu  narayana  of  the  Hindoos.  (1  refer  to 
these  only  to  shew  where  the  traditions  fall  into  the 
ranks).  The  Spirit  of  Goct  moves  upon  the  face  of  the 


I 
I 


140 

water.  Now  comes  the  fiat  of  God  upon  this  scene 
of  darkness.  Darkness,  mark,  was  only  on  the  fBuce 
of  the  deep.  And  God  said,  Let  there  be  light,  and 
there  was  light.  He  spake,  and  it  was  done.  This 
was  the  great  fact.  But  God  distinguished  darkness 
and  light,  and  there  was  night  and  day.  The  how 
is  not  said.  We  can  well  believe,  by  the  turning 
of  the  earth  round,  which  would  suppose  a  fixed 
light ;  but  God  is  not  teaching  science,  nor  is  it  mere 
observation,  for  observation  would  have  led  to  speak 
of  the  sun,  which,  every  one  knows,  lights  the  earth. 
It  is  not  the  most  probable  accoimt.  The  difficulty 
is  one  mmecessarily'created  by  the  writer  in  appareS 
divergence  from  what  every  one  sees  and  knows.  The 
difficulty  overthrows  the  theory  of  infidels ;  the  writer 
departs  from  the  evident  and  apparent  phenomena, 
not  to  raise  mystic  fables,  but  to  state  a  singular  fsLci 
gratuitously,  if  it  were  not  a  revelation.  Then  the 
expanse  is  formed,  or  for  a  Jew  the  first  heaven, 
as  we  see  it.  God  set  it  over  the  earth.  It  is 
spoken  of  as  we  speak  of  it.  Bakiang  is  an  expanse, 
but  there  is  no  definition  of  it.  Firmament  is  merely 
a  word  taken  from  the  Septuagint  and  Latin.  God 
produced  what  we  see  daily,  this  blue  sky  over  our 
heads,  and  call  sky,  and  call  heaven.  It  is  not  mere 
empty  space,  as  our  Essayist  says ;  all  but  what  the 
sun  shone  on  would  be  pitch  dark  if  it  were,  and  the 
bottom  viewed  in  a  telescope  is  black.  It  is  the  air 
which  is  blue,  yet  we  all  say  blue  sky,  and  so  on.  It 
sufficed  to  say,  that  what  was  thus  before  us  God 
had  so  ordered.  I  am  not  aware  that  the  waters 
above  the  heavens  are  more  than  the  supplies  of  rain 
in  the  clouds.  It  has  been  alleged,  that  there  was  no 
rain  till  the  deluge,  and  that  these  waters  came  down 
then.  It  may  be  so.  I  see  no  proof  of  it.  Earth 
now  comes  out  of  the  waste  to  be  fruit-bearing.  The 
notion  that  there  were  no  heavens  till  the  present  sky 
was  formed,  the  atmospheric  heavens,  is  an  utter 
mistake.    We  left  the  heavens  as  distinct  from  the 


Ll.^ 


earth  behind  ns  in  the  first  veree,  to  speak  only  of 
the  earth  and  what  referred  to  it.  The  notion  that 
there  were  none  till  the  atmosphere  was  formed  was 
the  heathen  idea,  as  may  be  seen  hi  Ovid.  The 
Mosaic  account  is  much  more  just  and  true,  when 
none  else  was.  It  distinguishes  the  empyrean  heavens 
fi^jm  the  atmospheric  heavens.  In  heathenism,  man 
spoke ;  in  Scripture,  God.  The  word  used  for  what 
was  now  formed,  ia  not  what  is  spoken  of  in  the  great 
act  of  creation  ;  it  is  expanse.  But  this  has  the  name 
of  heaven,  and  that  only  is  said,  and  this  is  true  now. 
The  rakiang  is  called  heaven,  and  it  is  quite  right  it 
should  be.  Do  I  not  rightly  say,  I  shall  go  up  to 
heaven  ?  I  do  not  excommunicate  a  man  for  believ- 
ing there  are  antipodes ;  but  I  should  think  a  man 
who  should  tell  me,  I  must  not  say  go  up  to  heaven, 
because  my  friend  in  New  Zealand  or  Australia  would 
then  go  down,  a  very  unprofitable  and  foohsh  person. 
Moral  ideas  are  associated  with  physically  unscientific 
ones  ;  and  I  am  afraid  we  shall  speak  and  sing  of  the 
sun's  rising  and  setting,  and  moon's  waxing  and 
waning,  though  the  advanced  science  of  rationalists 
in  the  happy  age  that  is  coming  may  have  convinced 
incipient  philosophers  at  National  Schools  that  it  is 
all  a  mistake,  that  suns  do  not  set  or  rise,  nor  moons 
wax  nor  wane.  We  are  set  in  a  system  where  these 
phenomena  are  meant  to  act  on  us,  a  wondrous  world 
of  images  which  are  more  true  than  science,  because 
mind  is  more  real  than  matter.  And  in  moral  things, 
and  the  Scripture  is  throughout  a  moral  book,  God 
speaks  to  us  according  to  this,  not  according  to  the, 
after  all,  petty  discoveries  of  science.  I  call  it  petty, 
because  it  is  only  occupied  with  material  things.  AU 
knowledge  is  tlie  proof  of  ignorance ;  for  what  a  man 
has  learnt  he  did  not  know  before.  Yet,  if  he  has 
rightly  learnt  it,  it  was  before,  and  he  did  not  know  it. 

iV.  Is  that  all  you  make  of  man  and  his  powers  ? 

H.  That  is  all.  As  Pascal  has  said.  All  matter 
never  produced  a  thought,  and  all  intellect  never 


I 
I 


vers  r  ^ 
latter  ^k 
rpro-     ■ 


142 

dnced  charity.    As  to  the  da^  that  is  now  before  ns, 
it  is  a  mistake  of  the  Essayists  that  frait-trees  and 
seed-bearing  plants  are  first  noticed.     Grass,  the 
green  herb,  is  first  noticed,  which  was  not  given  for 
man's  use.    Of  course  the  Divine  account  does  not 
set  about  botanising,  to  study  what  are  the  best  kinds 
for  man  or  beast.     God  created  all.    All  are  respec- 
tively given,  and  what  is  best  is  used.    It  is  the  fact 
of  Elohim's  making  the  beautiful  clothing  of  this 
earth,  and  trees,  and  herbs,  to  reproduce  themselves, 
which  is  noticed  as  the  great  general  fact.    We  now 
arrive  at  what  is  the  great  difficulty  presented  to  us, 
but  which  I  have  partly  anticipated,  God's  middng 
lights  for  day  and  night.    I  repeat  what  I  said.     If 
this  be  not  a  revelation,  it  is  a  difficulty  gratuitously 
created  for  himself  by  the  writer.    If  it  be  a  revelation, 
he  must  give  it  as  he  received  it ;  and  that  explains 
why  it  is  thus  set  forth.     If  it  be  not  a  revelation,  it 
is  perfectly  inexplicable  why  He  should  have  made 
light,  and  lights  for  day  and  night  distinct  things ; 
for  every  one  knows  day  and  night  come  from  the 
rising  and  setting  of  the  sun.    That  it  ever  was  other- 
wise must  be  a  matter  of  revelation.    But  as  a  phase 
of  truth  the  difference  is  great ;  light  in  itself  is  not 
a  light,  a  governing  central  power,  that  has  light  in 
it ;  and  it  is  in  this  way  it  is  brought  before  us  here. 
Some  doubts  have  arisen  as  to  the  sun's  atmosphere, 
in  the  mind  of  the  distinguished  French  astronomer, 
who  observed  the  last  total,  or  at  any  rate,  annular, 
eclipse  in  Spain ;  but  we  may  take  it  as  an  admitted 
fact,  that  the  sun,  as  a  body,  forming  a  centre  of  gra- 
vity for  the  planetary  system,  is  not  in  itself  neces- 
sarily a  light.    The  reproduction  of  light,  before,  was 
only  to  dissipate  the  darkness  that  brooded  on  chaos. 
Now  we  have  a  beautiful  centre  of  order  identified 
with  light,  just  as  Christ  could  speak  of  truth,  and 
say,  I  am  the  truth.     Nor  while  taking  the  historical 
parts  of  Scripture  as  plain  facts  are  their  analogies 
of  no  import.    Imagination  may  play  us  false,  but 


143 


that  there  is  a  world  of  images  of  truth,  the  stupideefc" 
can  hardly  deny.  Scripture  is  fuU  of  it.  Langnage 
is  formed  on  it.  The  mind  of  man  is  bred  and  fash- 
ioned in  it.  You  must  make  him  a  materialist  and  a 
bnite  with  physical  wants,  that  is,  destroy  his  higher 
nature,  if  you  set  aside  this.  You  cannot  utter  a  sen- 
tence without  it,  unless  on  mere  material  subjects. 
Grod  has  taken  this  up  in  the  highest  way.  He  is 
Ught.  The  right  hand  of  His  power  makes  all  equal. 
His  eyes  run  to  and  fro  through  the  earth.  No  one 
is  deceived  by  it,  no  more  than  they  are  by  going  up 
into  heaven.  They  are  taught  by  it,  what  is  strictly 
materially  inexact  gives  more  truth  than  the  contrary. 
Destroy  it,  and  God  cannot  communicate  with  man, 
for  he  has  not  the  same  natm-e :  nor  man  with  man, 
as  a  moral  man.  Language,  the  wonderful,  though 
imperfect  expression  of  thought  and  feeling,  ceases 
to  serve  man  as  a  moral  being. 

W.  But  you  take  this  Mosaic  account  of  creation 
as  literally  true  ? 

H.  Undoubtedly ;  but  I  do  not  doubt  it  is  so 
framed,  as  the  world  is  of  which  it  speaks,  as  to 
furnish  images  for  higher  relations.  If  the  facts 
were  not  there,  the  images  would  not  be.  If  there  were 
no  cleanness,  I  could  not  speak  of  the  heart  being 
clean,  but  the  last  is  a  figure.  Remember  this,  that 
science  however  useful  is  material.  Phenomena,  on 
the  contrary',  are  connected  with  the  higher  and 
divine  part  of  man  ;  and  these  are  for  all  the  world. 
I  do  not  beheve,  while  no  doubt  demonstrating  the 
wonderful  works  of  ttod,  that  Lord  Eoss's  telescope 
has  awakened  a  higher  feeling  than  breathed  in  the 
heart  of  the  Shepherd  of  Bethlehem,  when  in  the 
fields  keeping  his  flock  by  night,  he  viewed  the 
heavens,  the  work  of  God's  hands,  the  moon  and  the 
stars  which  He  had  ordained,  and  God  gave  him  to 
image  out  that  second  and  perfect  man,  as  the  answer 
to  hia  wants  and  aspirations,  who  should  be  crowned 
with  glory  and  honour,  and  have  all  tilings  pnt  under 


I 
I 


i 


144 

his  feet.  Perhaps  the  first  man  may  exalt  himself 
by  the  discoveries  which  prove  how  little  he  is,  but 
what  has  he  gained  by  it  ? 

I  believe  folly  God  set  at  this  time  the  son  and 
the  moon  to  be  for  signs,  and  seasons,  and  years,  and 
make  day  and  night,  but  they  are  viewed  here  solely 
in  this  aspect  towards  the  earth,  and  only  as  lights. 
God  made  the  two  great  lights,  eth  shenee  hameorothf 
and  God  gave  them  as  such.  There  is  no  creation 
of  the  bodies.  There  is  the  establishment  of  the  phe- 
nomena, and  their  purpose.  Hence,  when  he  speaks 
of  the  stars,  he  only  takes  care  to  remind,  that  God 
had  made  them  too.  Instead  of  men's  worshipping 
them,  God  had  distributed  them  to  all  men  under 
heaven ;  but  as  not  having  any  other  place  with  this 
earth,  it  is  simply  left  in  that  way.  We  have  no 
revelation  of  the  creation  of  angels.  Man,  Israel,  is 
to  be  instructed  as  to  what  they  were  in  danger  of 
abusing,  and  told  how  it  came  from  God.  It  is  not 
as  Hugh  Miller  thought,  a  vision,  or  the  impression 
of  it  related,  but  phenomena  put  in  their  right  place 
in  man's  mind,  or  God  as  to  the  phenomena.  And 
that  is  what  we  want. 

W.  It  makes  it  very  simple  and  infinitely  more 
important  when  we  see  it  in  this  light.  I  quite  feel  it 
would  be  utterly  out  of  place  to  make  of  a  revelation 
a  course  of  science.  Yet  the  distinction  of  creation 
and  the  arranging  the  present  order,  the  xo<t/xoc,  of 
which  Moses  could  have  had  no  natural  knowledge, 
leaves  all  discoveries  of  science  their  own  place.  It 
supposes  a  knowledge  of  them  which  God  only  could 
have,  and  yet  does  not  take  the  mind  from  what  was 
before  it  in  all  ages,  and  important  for  the  develop- 
ment of  truth  in  all  ages,  and  the  true  condition  of 
the  masses  in  reference  to  God  and  the  creation,  at 
all  times.  In  this,  I  see  what  is  wholly  divine  in 
this  account.  There  must  be  love  and  purpose  in 
God's  revelations ;  and  in  revelations  to  man,  that 
love  and  that  purpose  must  refer  to  man  while  it 


I        reveals  God 
f         mirably.     I 


146 


reveals  God,  and  this  the  first  of  Geneeis  does  ad- 
mirably. It  seems  to  me,  as  indeed  I  do  not  doubt 
it  is,  perfect  in  this  respect. 

if.  Surely  it  is.  And  the  question  between  us 
and  the  rationalists  is,  not  whether  the  Scripture 
gives  scientific  knowledge — most  surely  it  does  not ; 
but  whether  its  contents  are  God's  thoughts  or  man's 
thoughts  of  the  subject  it  treats  of.  It  does  give  us 
man's  thoughts  when  man  stands  responsible  (and 
that  of  course  it  must  do  to  have  a  full  moral  pic- 
ture), but  God's  view  and  thoughts  of  all  tliis  scene, 
with  the  perfection  of  man  in  Christ,  but  a  second 
man.  In  the  case  before  us,  in  this  most  simple 
account,  we  have  aU  the  needed  phenomena  on  which 
man  speculated  ascribed  to  the  right  source,  and  put 
in  their  place,  and  all  man's  thoughts  met.  Else- 
where we  have  man's  thoughts,  schemes  of  ema- 
nations, personifications,  and  theories.  One  little 
chapter  answers  them  aU  divinely. 

(F.  I  feel  thoroughly  satisfied  as  to  the  divine  and 
perfect  character  of  tliis  account  as  given  by  revela- 
tion. It  seems  to  me  that  it  bears  the  stamp  of  a 
revelation  on  itself.  The  review  of  human  systems 
shews  evidently  that  it  was  not  the  product  of  man's 
mind. 

//.  I  would  notice  only  now  a  few  statements  of 
the  Essay  to  shew  its  fallacy.  Many  such  have  been 
noticed  in  our  general  review  of  the  subject.  It  is 
stated,  that  theologians  should  have  accepted  frankly 
the  principle,  that  those  things  for  the  discovery  of 
which  man  has  faculties  specially  provided,  are  not 
fit  objects  for  a  divine  revelation.  All  quite  right ; 
I  quite  agree  with  this.  But  it  does  not  touch  the 
qnestion.  I  have  not  even  to  discover  the  sun,  nor 
the  stars,  nor  the  moon;  but  what  man  never  did 
discover,  but  lost  when  he  bad  it,  was,  that  God  had 
made  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  stars.  Instead  of  which, 
man  took  them  for  gods,  and  worshipped  them, 
That  God  in  mercy  should  give  a  revelation  to 


I 
I 


'hich,  ^ 
:hem.  fl 
0  de-       H 


146 

liver  man  from  this,  even  though  he  was  without 
excuse,  is  very  worthy  of  God.  But  now  mark  the 
consequence  these  reasoners  draw :  "  Had  this  been 
unhesitatingly  done,  either  the  definition  and  idea  of 
divine  revelation  must  have  been  modified,  and  the 
possibility  of  an  admixture  of  error  been  allowed; 
or  such  parts  of  the  Hebrew  writings  as  were  found 
to  be  repugnant  to  fact,  must  have  been  pronounced 
to  form  no  part  of  revelation."  Now  this  conclusion 
is  totally  false.  If  objects  of  scientific  discovery  are 
not  proper  objects  of  revelation,  the  conclusion  is  not 
by  any  means  that  there  is  error  in  Scripture,  but 
that  what  is  a  revelation  does  not  set  about  to  reveal 
them,  and  therefore  has  no  occasion  to  be  in  error 
about  them.  The  writer's  statement  amoimts  to  this. 
There  is  a  revelation  which  God  has  given,  and  as 
scientific  facts  are  not  a  proper  subject  of  revelation, 
therefore  there  is  error  in  the  revelation  God  has 
given.  I  should  have  thought,  as  God  was  the  re- 
vealer,  and  there  could  be  no  other,  that  if  they 
were  not  objects  of  revelation.  He  would  not  have 
revealed  anything  about  them,  not  that  He  must  have 
been  in  error.  If  He  revealed  any  thing  and  there 
be  error.  He  must  have  known  the  truth  of  it,  and 
have  wilfully  deceived.  If  He  has  not  revealed  any 
object  of  scientific  discover}^  the  position  falls  to  the 
ground.  I  have  found  no  revelation  of  Cephalopodes, 
or  Tribolites,  or  Megalotheria,  Megalosaurias,  and 
Ichthyosaurias  or  huge  Pterodachtyls.  Man  has  dis- 
covered them.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  revelation  on 
an  object  of  science.  I  find  the  word  of  God  as  to 
natural  things  resting  on  the  ground  of  phenomena, 
and  God  correcting  the  horrible  wanderings  of  men's 
minds,  by  revealing  Himself,  whom  man  never  dis- 
covered as  the  creator  of  all.  Let  man  resolve  ne- 
bula with  his  telescopes,  and  find  they  are  composed 
of  stars.  Scripture  tells  us  that  He  made  the  stars 
also.  Let  him  discover  if  he  can,  that  the  whole 
world  is  made  up  of  infusoria,  if  revelation  be  not 


true,  he  dies  and  becomes  part  of  it  in  his 
We  must  distinguish  between  the  facts  of  geology 
and  the  conclusions  of  geologists.  I  admit  the  former ; 
the  latter  are  extremely  uncertain,  in  some  respects 
impossible  to  be  true.  There  is  nothing  to  conciliate, 
as  I  have  said.  The  facts  of  geology  are  there. 
Scripture,  which  does  not  reveal  scientific  facts,  is 
totally  silent  as  to  them,  but  leaves  a  gap  which 
may  have  been  filled  by  milhons  of  years  when  we  were 
not :  but  it  does  tell  us  the  origin  of  the  world,  which 
no  man  could  find  out,  so  horribly  stupid  was  man 
withoiit  a  revelation,  namely,  that  God  made  it.  If 
He  did  not,  who  did  ?  Our  \\Titer  would  have  us 
leam  from  the  history  of  man  what  God's  protedure 
has  been.  History,  where  ?  In  India,  or  Egj'pt,  or 
from  the  Edda,  or  Ahriman  and  Ormuzd  ?  Where 
am  I  to  find  the  history  ?  The  vast,  vast  majority 
of  the  world  were  in  the  most  horrible  state  possible. 
Is  it  from  that  I  am  to  learn  God's  procedure  towards 
man  ?  Did  God  give  him  Kali,  and  Jugganath,  or 
the  Grand  Lama,  or  Khan,  and  Yoni-Lingams,  and 
Brahms  ?  Where  is  this  procedure  ?  What  history 
is  it  found  in  ?  History !  Go  to  it,  and  see  what 
man  is.  I  do  not  say  books  of  philosophy,  though 
they  are  bad  enough,  and  how  truly  judged  in  Rom. 
ii. ;  but  history,  aye,  rationalists !  history  !  What  a 
God  you  most  have,  if  that  be  His  procedure  with 
man.  And,  alas  !  our  cosmogonists  are  only  return- 
ing to  what  the  first  of  Genesis  brought  the  believer 
in  it  out  of;  for,  "  here,  geology  steps  in  and  success- 
fully carries  back  the  history  of  the  world's  cmst," 
thuik  of  that,  "  to  a  verj'  remote  period,  until  it 
arrives,"  where  do  you  think?  "  at  a  region  of  uncer- 
tainty, where  philosophy  is  reduced  to  mere  guesses 
and  probabilities,  and  pronounces  nothing  definite." 
What  a  satisfactory  result,  successfully  arriving  at 
uncertainty.  How  these  men  tell  the  truth  about 
themsflves.  Divine  philosophy,  occupied  with 
the  earth's  crust  till  it  successfully  arrives  at  un- 


148 

certainty ;  but,  if  reduced  to  guesses,  it  will  guess : 
and,  **  to  this  region,  belong  the  speculations  which 
have  been  ventured  upon,  as  to  the  original  concretion 
of  the  earth  and  planets  out  of  nebular  matter," 
is  there  such  a  thing?  **  of  which  the  sun  may  have 
been  the  nucleus."  It  must  have  been  a  prodigious 
comet,  to  have  been  concentrated  into  the  sun,  for 
they  have  no  sensible  power  of  gravity  at  all ;  but 
let  that  pass.  Who  made  the  nebula  ?  The  Hindoo 
could  set  the  world  on  an  elephant,  and  the  elephant 
on  a  tortoise,  his  back  was  tolerably  suited  for  it ; 
but  the  tortoise  on — a  guess  perhaps.  Mr.  Gbdwin 
would  be  greatly  benefited  by  one  text  of  Scripture, 
in  which  there  is  no  scientific  fact.  In  the  beginning 
God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth. 

As  regards  carnivorous  animals,  and  one  man  and 
one  woman,  the  fact  is  a  question  of  God's  power. 
It  is  distinctly  stated,  that  herbs  were  given  for  food 
to  the  beasts  of  the  field,  not  clearly  from  ignorance, 
for  lions  were  eating  men  in  Moses'  time :  but,  with 
the  deliberate  intention  of  alleging  a  revelation, 
Moses  contradicts  the  whole  existing  order  of  facts  as 
to  animals.  He  had  no  need  to  be  a  comparative 
anatomist,  to  know  that  there  were  wild  beasts.  He 
declares  that  at  first  they  were  given  the  green  herb 
for  food.  Scripture  gives  to  understand  they  eat  that 
in  the  ark,  and  speaks  of  it  as  representing  the  reign 
of  peace.  Whether  God,  who  foreknew  the  fall, 
maae  them  as  they  are,  or  whether  they  were  changed 
in  disposition  and  internal  organization,  I  do  not 
pretend  to  say ;  but  I  believe  man  fell  the  first  day  ; 
but  the  passage  is  not  ignorance  of  science,  for  no 
science  was  needed.  It  is  a  direct  contradiction  of 
universal  experience,  and  professes  to  be  a  revelation. 
To  say  that  it  cannot  be  true  is  absurd.  It  is  morally 
appropriate.  All  men  had  a  tradition  of  a  golden 
age  of  blessing.  Plato  said,  the  beasts  used  to  con- 
verse then : 


"He  did  not  aak  Jean  Jacques  HousHeau 
K  beasta  confabulate  or  uo." 

As  regards  the  single  pair,  Christ  and  His  apostles, 
particularly  Paul,  speak  of  the  first  man  and  woman  j 
as  alone;  and  all  Paul's  doctrine  is  based  on  it.  ' 
I  am  aware  that  our  essayists,  and  all  their  party, 
think  themselves  far  wiser  than  the  apostles  ;  but,  as 
the  same  Paul  says,  not  he  that  commeudeth  himself 
is  approved.  I  suppose  they  would  have  a  little 
modesty  as  yet  as  to  treating  the  Lord  as  a  person  of 
inferior  wisdom ;  but  the  whole  account  in  both 
chapters  speak,  as  the  Lord  says,  of  one  man  and 
one  woman.  He  planted  a  garden,  and  there  He  put 
the  man  whom  He  had  fonued.  He  was  alone.  All 
the  beasts  subjected  to  him,  but  no  companion  ;  and 
then  Eve,  taken  out  of  his  side :  when  fallen  and 
driven  out,  he  begat  a  sou  in  his  own  image.  It  is 
not  merely  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  but  the  historical 
statement  is  as  clear  as  possible.  The  fall  and 
redemption  are  all  set  aside  in  the  part  of  the  essay  , 
I  allude  to.  I  have  already  commented  on  the 
pretension  that  it  is  a  second  narrative.  The  whole 
subsequent  history  goes  on  the  supposition  that  there 
was  no  other  man.  The  whole  moral  meaning  of 
the  history  is  a  briitiim  fulmm,  if  there  were  others. 
LThe  historj'  is  written  to  shew  an  innocent  man 
l&llen  and  driven  out,  as  the  head  of  a  race,  from 
God.  If  this  is  not  so.  what  does  the  history  mean  ? 
Genesis  is  a  book  in  which  ail  the  elements  of  the 
Divine  history  are  brought  out,  and  auticipatively 
passed  in  review.  In  the  first  chapter,  the  man  is 
carefully  spoken  of  in  the  singular,  and  then  plural 
when  the  woman  is  added.  It  is  quite  evident  that 
ftU  kinds  of  traditions  were  afloat  in  the  world  as  to 
creation,  or  formation  rather,  and  when  God  called 
out  a  people,  He  informed  them  as  to  the  origin  of 
the  world  around  them ,  put  them  into  a  right  relation- 
ship to  Himself  as  to  it,  and  only  spoke  of  it  as  far 


150 

as  that  was  needed  ;  but  did  that  knowing  everything 
and  speaking  according  to  that  knowledge.  We  may 
rest  in  peace  in  that.  Discoveries  may  interest  us 
deeply,  like  the  discovery  of  antiquities  of  Celts  or 
Saxons  in  an  old  castle  we  live  in — our  own  relation- 
ship with  God  flows  from  the  revelation  He  has  made 
of  Himself  in  Christ.  At  the  same  time,  according 
to  the  ablest  enquirers,  as  Pritchard,  Cuvier,  and 
others,  all  races  of  men  are  derived  from  one  stock. 
The  American  efforts  to  show  the  contrary  are  exces- 
sively poor  ;  contradictory  as  to  Africa,  and  false  as  to 
America.  Their  object  is  to  make  of  negroes  another 
race.  Livingstone's  facts  go  to  show  their  physical 
peculiarities  to  be  a  natural  result  of  heat  and  damp. 
But  I  am  content  to  be  ignorant  of  its  cause. 

W.  I  am  perfectly  satisfied.  I  see  as  clearly  as 
poosible  that  the  light  we  have  in  the  first  of  Genesis 
is  of  God,  that  man  was  incapable  of  it  in  every  way. 
That  its  silence  and  its  eloquence  are  alike  of  Him. 
Its  wisdom,  and  the  absence  of  all  that  is  not  simi)le 
or  what  might  be  called  science.  That  it  is  silent  as 
to  the  contrast,  and  yet  distinguishes  creation  and 
formation  in  a  way  no  man  ever  in  fact  was  capable 
of,  shewing  an  account  coming  from  Divine  know- 
ledge, and  yet  fitted  to  human  ignorance  in  its  most 
childhood  days,  yet  giving  all  morally  important  and 
elevating  for  any  of  us,  testing  our  faith  in  some 
things,  and  proving  itself  divine  for  the  faith  that  is 
to  be  tried.  I  am  satisfied  none  but  God  could  have 
given  such  an  account,  though  I  could  not  have  so 
judged  if  I  had  not  had  it,  and  the  essajasts  could 
not  have  commented  on  it  as  they  have  done  if  they 
had  not  had  it.  What  conclusions  would  have  beeji 
drawn  from  the  discoveries  of  geology,  if  Christianity 
had  not  come.  What  a  comfort  it  is  to  know  one 
has  God's  own  word,  the  communication  of  His 
thoughts  and  mind  in  the  interest  He  takes  in  us. 

H.  In  truth  it  is — I  am  glad  you  are  satisfied. 

IV.  Satisfied,  yet  ignorant  of  many  things;  but 


151 


the  tone  and  spirit  of  these  essayists  are  sufficient,  it 
seems  to  me,  to  prove  that  they  have  no  sense  of  the 
divine,  and  even  the  historical  comparison  we  have 
made,  brief  as  it  has  been,  of  human  thoughts  and 
divine  revelation,  is  sufficient  to  stamp  its  true  cha- 
racter on  the  latter. 

H.  Well,  I  suppose  we  must  part  for  the  present. 
If  spared,  we  may  perhaps  take  up  some  other  point 
of  the  essays,  though  some  from  their  occasional 
nature  hardly  merit  any  notice. 


London :  W.  H.  Bkoom,  47,  St  Paul's  ChordiTard. 


DIALOGUES 


OS  THB 


ESSAYS  AND  EEVIEWS. 


BT 


ONE  WHO  VALUES  CHRISTIANITY  FOR  ITS  OWN  SAKE 
AND  BELIEVES  IN  IT  AS  A  REVELATION 

FROM  GOD. 


PART    II. 


MODERN  PHILOSOPHY  AND  MODERN  THEOLOGY 


BOTH 


COMPARED  WITH  SCRIPTURE. 


LONDON : 
W.  H.  BEOOM,  48,  PATEENOSTEE  EOW. 

KDOCdXIt. 


I 


H.  Stall  we  take  up  the  review  of  "  Bunsen's  Biblical 
Researches  "  to-day  ?  It  has  specially  as  its  object  the 
sjireadiog  the  Genuau  system  of  discrediting  the  Scrip- 
tures, as  we  possess  them.  It  is  evident  that  the  mass 
of  readers  camiot  enter  into  arguments  founded  on  lin- 

fuistic  or  even  historic  criticism.  And  if  the  Scriptures 
ave  not  authority  as  the  Word  of  God.  substautially  as 
they  are.  that  authority  is  gone,  and  with  it  every  direct 
communication  from  God.  If  Scripture  be  not  this, 
certainly  nothing  else  is;  and  mankind  are  deprived  of 
all  direct  communication  from  Him.  The  immense 
bearing  of  this  is  self-evident.  The  great  question  is, 
not  whether  there  are  defects  through  lajise  of  ages  and 
man's  want  of  care  in  the  record  of  Divine  communica- 
tions— defects  which  every  possible  research  may  be  iLsed 
to  remedy,^but,  first,  whether  there  are  such  comrau- 
uicatious,  and,  next,  whether  there  be  a  divinely-given 
record  of  them.  It  is  freely  admitted  that  it  is  through 
man.  and  in  a  large  portion  of  it  the  history  of  man  just 
as  he  was.  with  a  measure  of  Divine  light,  or  without  it, 
in  s[»efial  if  imperfect  relationships,  or  with  the  Divine 
light  come  down  traditionally  fi-om  those  in  more  direct 
ooDunoiucatioD :  in  a  word,  that  Scripture  gives  us  the 
l2 


154 

whole  working  of  Divine  light  in  all  its  phases  and  its 
effects,  and  the  workings  of  man's  mind  under  it.  It  is 
admitted  that  the  very  object  of  a  large  part  of  it  is  to  show 
the  results  in  man  put  thus  to  the  test  in  various  ways, 
that  man  may  know  himself;  and  that  this  is  accom- 
panied by  the  patience  of  a  condescending  God  working  in 
the  midst  of  this.  All  this  is  admitted — ^yea,  insisted  on. 
The  question  is  not  there.  The  question  is.  Are  the 
Scriptures  a  Divine  record  of  Divine  communications,  in 
which  God  has  unfolded  all  this  before  us,  and  given  us, 
besides,  His  own  mind  and  thoughts  as  to  it,  and  the 
ground  of  our  relationship  with  Him  ?  If  this  be  the 
case,  then  the  Scriptures  are  wholly  and  absolutely  in 
contrast  with  every  other  book.  Other  books  are  not  a 
divinely-given  record  of  God's  thoughts ;  the  Scriptures 
are.  They  have  taken  up  humanity  in  all  its  forms,  and 
held  it  up  such  as  it  is  in  the  light,  and  under  the  eye  of 
God,  and  given  us  that  light,  so  that  the  darkness  is 
past  and  the  true  light  now  shineth.  We  may  have 
aspirations  after  God,  the  working  of  conscience,  thoughts 
of  need,  giving  much  more  real  sense  of  what  God  must 
be  to  help  us  than  the  pride  of  intellectual  reasoning. 
But  the  revelation  of  God  is  the  full  answer  to  all  this ; 
and  that  no  man  can  give.  God  has  in  Scripture  given 
us  the  helpful  description  of  these  workings,  so  that  the 
answer  may  be  better  understood.  He  has  brought  out 
in  historical  realities  and  moral  searchings  of  heart,  vidth- 
out  law,  and  under  law,  these  wants  and  cravings,  and 
the  display  of  man  s  incompetency  to  meet  God.  We 
have  the  struggles  of  a  Job,  and  the  heart  exercises  of 
the  Psalms,  the  experience  of  all  under  the  sun  in  the 
Preacher — man  left  to  himself  before  the  flood,  man  on 
the  ground  of  obedience  to  law,  man  in  obedient  royalty 
in  Israel,  and  man  in  imfettered  supremacy  in  Babylon. 
The  results  of  all  this  are  given,  and  in  Christ,  the  last 
Adam,  God  is  fully  revealed,  and  is  (dying  withal  that  it 
may  be  righteous)  the  way  to  God.  This  is  not  a  specu- 
lation of  what  God  may  be.  It  is  a  revdatixm  of  what 
He  is  and  the  way  to  Him.     If  Christianity  be  true,  it 


155 


is  tliis :  Wten,  in  the  wisdom  of  Gwl,  the  world  by 
wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God,  by  the  foolish- 
ness of  preaching,  to  save  them  that  believe.  It  is  not 
the  speculations  of  man's  mind,  hut  Christ  crucified  ;  to 
the  Jews  a  stumbling-block,  to  the  Greeks  tbolishness; 
but  to  us  that  are  saved  Christ,  the  power  of  God,  and 
the  wisdom  of  God.  God  has  made  foolish  the  wisdom 
of  this  world.  He  has  chosen  the  foolish  things  to  con- 
found the  wise,  and  weak  things  and  things  that  are 
not  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are.  Such  was  the 
Divine  sj-stem,  and  such  it  is.  If  Christianity  be  true 
at  all,  it  is  the  express  opposite  of  all  the  system  advo- 
cated by  these  Essays. 

W.  Of  that  I  am  fully  convinced.  I  see  plainly  that 
the  very  essence  of  Christianity  as  a  revelation  is  the 
bringing  Divine  light  into  the  course  of  this  world  and 
of  the  human  heart ; — is  to  show,  not  indeed  that  there 
are  no  amiable  natural  qualities,  for  there  are,  but  that, 
with  them  nr  withont  them,  man  is  alienated  from  God, 
that  in  his  flesh  dwells  no  good  thing.  I  see  plainly, 
too,  that  man's  moral  estimate  of  good  must  be  lowered, 
if  he  does  not  so  judge.  But  with  this  he  has  a  perfect 
revelation  of  love,  and  of  a  righteous  way  for  man  through 
the  cross  into  the  perfect  enjoyment  of  it.  But  the  dif- 
ficulties are  to  l)o  met.  I  feel  I  am  in  the  evening 
darkness  when  T  take  up  this  book,  with  all  its  preten- 
sions ;  but  it  Ls  difficult  to  catch  a  flitting  bat  who  is  in 
his  element  when  he  is  there. 

If.  The  main  thing.  I  apprehend,  in  these  cases  is  to 
bring  in  the  light.  Bats  are  gone  when  it  comes,  and 
crouch  into  more  natural  darkness.  What  they  have  of 
Christianity  has  given  them  this  twilight — a  perplexing 
kind  of  light;  their  home  is  darkness.  I  speak,  of  course, 
of  the  principles,  not  of  the  men.  There  may  be  first 
last  and  last  first. 

Scripture  calls  God  light,  and  it  calls  Him  love,  which 
are  the  titles  yon  have  used  in  speaking  of  Him.  He  is 
that.  He  is  not  holiness,  for  that  is  relative ;  He  is  not 
righteousness,  though  Hebe  holy  and  righteous.     To  bo 


156 

holy,  there  must  be  knowledge  of  good  and  evil ;  and  so 
of  righteousness;  but  that,  i.e.,  evil,  cannot  be  within  God; 
but  perfect  purity,  and  that  which  manifests  all,  He  is ; 
and  the  perfect  activity  of  goodness,  that  is,  love ;  and 
so  Scripture  speaks.  And  Uiis  makes  the  cross  so  glo- 
rious, of  which  you  speak  as  the  way.  God  meets  sin 
there.  Oh,  what  a  wondrous  meeting !  yet  in  perfect 
love,  but  in  perfect  righteousness  and  holiness;  yea, 
exalting  them  by  it.  Hence  he  says.  Now  is  the  Son 
of  Man  glorified — for  it  was  glorious  for  a  man  to  do  it — 
and  God  is  glorified  in  him.  If  God  be  glorified  in  him, 
God  shall  also  glorify  him  in  Himself,  and  shall  straight- 
way glorify  him — shall  not  wait  for  the  outward  display 
in  the  coming  kingdom,  but  shaU  glorify  him  in  Himself, 
who  was  glorified  in  Him.  This  is  man's  place  in  hope 
and  in  spiritual  nature  and  affections  now ;  hence  not  of 
the  world,  as  Christ,  who  came  from  heaven  and  as 
a  Divine  person  was  in  heaven,  was  not  of  the  world. 
This  nature  may  display  itself  in  a  thousand  exercises 
and  relationships  here,  as  it  did  in  Christ,  and  in  us — 
mixed  with  failures,  alas !  for  which  there  is  provision 
in  Him ;  but  the  proper  association  of  our  nature  and 
standing  as  Christians  is  with  Him  in  heaven.  Hence 
he  says,  Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given  all 
things  into  His  hand,  and  that  He  came  from  God  and 
went  to  God,  in  presence  of  all  He  was  and  was  going  to, 
and  in  presence  of  treachery  and  failure,  takes  tibe  place 
of  a  servant  to  wash  His  disciples'  feet,  that  they  might 
have  a  part  with  him.  He  could  not  stay  with  them  in 
this  polluted  earth.  Hence,  too,  when  Peter  would  have 
other  than  his  feet  washed — his  need  through  defilement 
from  daily  walk,  the  Lord  says :  He  that  is  washed,  really 
partakes  of  this  Divine  nature  (for  they  were,  save  Judas, 
clean  through  the  word  spoken),  needeth  not  save  to  wash 
his  feet,  but  is  clean  every  whit.  What  a  picture  of 
grace !  what  a  witness  of  our  portion  or  part  with  Him ! 
and  while  giving  the  assurance  that  the  truth  of  the 
Divine  natuj^  is  there  (for  here  He  speaks  of  water,  not  of 
blood),  to  give  us  morally  elevating  confidence  in  inter- 


157 


«t  doil;^   ^H 


course  with  God,  and  yet  allow  of  not  the  smallest 
stain,  yet  leam  grace  in  it. 

W.  It  is  a  picture  at  once  most  lovely  and  elevated 
of  the  Lord's  grace. 

M.  If  you  examine  it  closely,  you  will  see  that  it 
comes  after  His  earthly  claims  are  witnessed  and  closed. 
As  Son  of  God.  lie  raises  Lazarus ;  as  Son  of  David, 
He  rides  into  Jerusalem.  When  the  Greeks  come  up, 
he  says :  The  hour  is  come  tliat  the  Son  of  Man  should 
beglorified;  buttheu  adds,  He  mustfall  into  the  ground 
as  a  corn  of  wheat  and  die.  In  the  13th  chapter,  He 
shows  how  we  have  part  with  Him  when  lie  could 
not  with  us.  But  note  this  well.  If  we  are  to  be 
really  elevated,  it  is  taking  us  in  spirit  out  of  this 
■world.  He  gave  Himself  for  our  sins,  to  deliver  us 
from  this  present  world.  However,  we  will  turn  from 
Scripture  to  Dr.  Williams  and  Baron  Bunsen,  if  you 
are  so  disposed. 

W.  If  you  [tlease.  I  should  gladly  pursue  our  inquiry 
into  the  whole  of  .lohn's  Gospel ;  but  I  suppose,  for  the 
moment,  we  must  pursue  our  subject. 

//.  Note,  then,  the  principles  Dr.  Wilhams  lays  down. 
"  There  is  hardly  any  greater  question  than  whether  his- 
tory shows  Almighty  God  to  have  trained  mankind  by  a 
tiiih  which  has  reason  and  conscience  for  its  kindred,  or 
by  one  to  whose  miraculous  tests  their  pride  must  bow." 
I  deny  the  alternative  altogether.  But  what  shall  we 
say  to  his  account  of  English  scholars  at  the  Univer- 
sities ?  "They  stand  balancing  terror  against  mutual 
shame.  Even  with  those  in  our  Universities  who  no 
longer  repeat  fully  the  required  Shibboleths,  the  expUcit- 
ness  of  truth  Is  rare.  He  who  assents  most,  committing 
himself  least  to  baseness,  is  reckoned  wisest."  What  a 
picture! 

W.  It  is  no  great  compliment.  Their  faith  has  not 
reason  and  conscience  for  its  kindred,  at  any  rate, 
mdiatever  kind  of  tests  they  may  have  to  bow  to. 

H.  It  is  just  the  effect  of  narrowness  such  as 
theology  without  Scripture  gives,  tied  up  by  system,  and 


158 

turning  in  its  will  to  unlawful  fields  of  delight ;  sober 
research  is  i)ot  followed  out,  and  as  liberty  cannot  be 
had,  pretensions  to  it,  which  are  really  infidelity,  must 
be  had  resort  to  to  seem  free.  But  though  such  a 
position  be  sufficiently  despicable,  and  we  have  not 
assigned  it  to  them,  nor  do  I  see  any  good  in  discredit- 
ing thus  morally  the  educational  and  religious  heads  of 
the  country  (I  should  at  any  rate  leave  it  to  themselves 
to  do  so) ;  yet  the  evil  is  deeper.  It  is  reducing  Chris- 
tianity to  man,  not  raising  man  by  Christianity.  "  Devo- 
tion raises  time  present  into  the  sacredness  of  the  past ;" 
that  is,  what  we  have  now  of  spiritual  power  is  pretty 
much  equivalent  to  the  apostolic  energy ;  "  and  criticism 
reduces  the  strangeness  of  the  past  into  harmony  with 
the  present ;"  that  is,  the  times  of  Christ  and  His  works 
were  no  more  than  what  we  have  now.  Heathenism 
must  itself  be  on  the  same  level.  We  are  not  to 
"acknowledge  a  Providence  in  Jewry  without  owning 
that  it  may  have  comprehended  sanctities  elsewhere." 
Not  a  very  lucid  statement,  but  which  means  that,  if  the 
Jewish  religion  were  something  more,  yet  heathenism 
was  as  much  owned  of  God :  "  Its  religions  appealed  to 
the  better  side  of  our  nature,  and  their  essential  strength 
lay  in  the  good  they  contained."  So  Bunsen  "  traces 
frankly  the  Spirit  of  God  elsewhere,  but  honouring 
chiefly  the  traditions  of  His  Hebrew  sanctuary."  Nor  will 
they  hear  of  anything  superior  to  man.  "  Our  author 
then  believes  St.  Paid,  because  he  imderstands  him  rea- 
sonably." Now,  it  is  difficult  to  follow  the  statements 
of  the  paper  of  Baron  Bunsen,  because,  with  an  immense 
store  of  reading,  Bunsen,  evidently  personally  a  most 
amiable  and  attractive  person,  skimmed  everything  more 
than  he  thoroughly  searched  anything ;  sought  to  reduce 
all  events  to  their  most  abstract  ideality,  which  was  its 
only  truth  for  him  (and  it  is  in  this  last  point  its  fallacy 
and  infidel  character  consisted),  and  indulged  an  imagi- 
nation amiable  by  its  very  wantonness.  You  see  a  man 
who  can  believe  anything,  if  he  thought  it,  and  mean  no 
harm ;   but  put  that  as  truth,  while  research  after  oer- 


159 


tion  and  ^^| 


taintj  was  too  prosaic  for  bira.  Endless  supposition 
ideality;  truth  not  necessary  to  the  stioicture  of  his 
mind,  lie  has  read  and  studied  a  vast  deal,  thought  a 
great  deal,  written  a  great  deal,  to  show  what  might  be 
or  must  have  been;  the  prose  of  what  was  does  not 
seem  to  have  occurred  to  him  as  a  subject  of  inquiry. 
He  felt,  like  our  essayists,  the  narrowness  of  conventional 
Oxford-like  education  and  system,  and  sought  in  eman- 
cipating himself  and  being  suggestive,  as  our  essayists 
say,  hljerty,  not  truth.  A  balloon  is  free,  l>ut  as  yet  no 
one  has  known  how  to  guide  it.  In  his  history,  "  giant 
shaj>es  of  ancient  empires  flit  like  dim  shadows,  evoked 
by  a  master's  hand,"  The  only  misfortune  is,  they  are 
only  shadows — they  never  existed.  Then  some  20.000 
years  are  needed  for  them.  There  must  have  been  to 
fbnn  the  empires,  and  the  language  too  ;  but  the  empires 
were  only  shadows,  and  the  20,000  years  flit  away 
necessarily  like  the  empires.  None  of  the  allegations 
bear  serious  examination.  Next,  the  whole  system  is 
founded  on  belie\'ing  in  the  goodness  of  man.  He  Ije- 
lieves,  as  the  reviewer  says,  in  Chiist,  because  he  believes 
in  God  aufl  in  mankind.  There  you  have  the  real  truth. 
What  is  believing  in  mankind '{  That  they  are  sinners, 
lost  ?  .So  Christianity  undoubtedly  teaches.  So  the 
reviewer  s[>eaks  of  (.Jod's  giving  us,  through  His  Son.  a 
deeper  revelation  of  His  own  presence.  Present  He 
always  was  in  man,  only  this  was  somewhat  fuller,  and 
•'  the  incarnation  becomes  as  purely  spiritual  as  it  was 
with  Paul."  All  truth  disappears  under  Baron  Bunsen's 
musings.  Ideas  remain.  Nought  else.  Christ  is  an 
idea.  This  levelling  of  all  facts  to  exalt  man  by  ideas  is 
followed  out  by  the  reviewer,  "  First,  as  regards  the 
subject-matter,  both  spiritual  affection  and  metaphysical 
reasoning  forbid  us  to  confine  revelations  like  those  of 
Christ  to  the  first  half  century  of  our  era,  but  show  at 
least  affinities  of  our  faith  existing  in  men's  minds  ante- 
rior to  Christianity,  and  renewed  with  dee]j  echo  from 
living  hearts  in  many  a  generation." .  . . .  "  We  find  the 
evidences  of  our  canonical  books,  and  of  the  patristic 


I 


160 

authors  nearest  to  them,  are  sufficient  to  form  illustration 
in  outward  act  of  principles  perpetually  true ;   but  not 
adequate  to  guarantee  narratives  inherently  incredible, 
or  precepts  evidently  wrong."     We  will  speak  of  this 
hereafter.     But  the  first  thing,  in  this  chaos  of  words 
and  abstract  principles,  which  it  is  important  for  our 
minds  to  dwell  oa  is,  what  Christianity  professes  to  be. 
I  say,  professes  to  be.     My  business  now  is  not  to  prove 
it  true,  but  to  show  that  the  idea  to  which  it  is  reduced 
here  is  false,  and  impossible  if  it  be  true.     The  reader 
must  remember  that  the  reviewers  profess  to  be  Christ- 
ians— to  be  Christian  teachers — and  to  be  teachers  of 
those  intended  to  be  teachers.    They  cannot  say  we 
deny   Christianity.     They  are  only  wiser   Christians; 
they  would  suit  Christianity  to  human  nature — to  men, 
to  man's  progress.     They  would  not  have  the  narrow- 
ness of  ancient  orthodoxy,  and  they  abhor  evangelical 
truth ;  but  they  must  be  Christians,  or  leave  the  posi- 
tion they  hold.     The  explicitness  of  truth,  they  tell  us, 
is  rare.     Now  Christianity  is  very  explicit.     It  does  not 
speak  of  revelations  of  Christ — that  is,  thoughts  com- 
municated by  Him  —but  foimd  in  living  hearts  in  many 
a  generation.     It  declares  that  the  Father  sent  His  Son 
to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.     It  is  a  religion  of  facts, 
and  so  suited  to  the  poor.     Half  the  population   of 
England  would  not  xmderstand   the  sentence  I  have 
quoted  above.     The  Gosi)el  may,  alas !  be  rejected,  but 
it  consists  in  facts  suited  to  every  man's  heart  and  con- 
science.    Christianity  states  deep  things,  which,  if  re- 
ceived, reveal  God  in  a  way  that  makes  Him  possess 
the  heart ;   but  it  states  them  simply,  because  what  is 
perfectly  known  can  be  simply  statcnl,  and  God  knows 
perfectly  what  He  reveals  in  grace. 

But  to  return  to  the  point  I  insist  on.  Christianity  is 
a  religion  of  immense  facts;  facts  which  contain  un- 
speakably important  principles,  but  facts  which  connect 
those  principles  \^ith  God,  are  a  revelation  of  Him,  and 
not  with  mans  thinkings  or  aspirations.  Thus  "the 
Word  was  made  fiesh  and  dwelt  among  us»  (and  we  be- 


161 


held  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the 
Father,)  full  of  grace  and  truth.  For  the  law  was  given 
by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ." 
*'  I,"  says  Jesus,  "  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and 
came  into  the  world;  and  again,  1  leave  the  world,  and 
go  to  the  Father."  Now  principles  are  here  :  law  con- 
trasted with  grace  and  truth ;  but  the  former  in  the  facts 
which  happened  at  Sinai ;  the  latter  in  thefact  that  the  Son 
of  God  is  come  from  heaven  into  this  world.  And  the 
essence  and  substance  of  Christianity  was  to  believe  that 
this  Person  was  the  Christ,  was  the  Son  of  Go<l— was 
to  believe  these  facts  which  lie  asserted  of  Himself,  or 
Uis  Apostles  after  Him  declared  to  be  so,  alleging  that 
they  worked  miracles  to  aid  men  to  believe.  Christ 
declares  that  if  men  did  not  believe  Him  they  would 
die  in  their  sins;  that  he  that  believed  on  the  Son  had 
everlasting  life;  that  he  that  believed  not  was  condemned 
already.  He  declares  that  nobwiy  had  ascended  up 
to  heaven  so  as  to  tell  of  heavenly  things,  but  He 
that  came  down  from  heaven ;  but  that  He  spoke  that 
He  knew,  and  testified  that  He  had  seen.  Paul,  too, 
for  whom  incarnation  was  so  spiritual,  sees  that  just 
One  returned  into  glory,  and  hears  the  voice  of  His 
mouth,  that  he  qiight  be,  as  he  insists  he  was,  an  eye- 
witness that  in  very  deed  He,  who  thought  it  no 
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  had  made  Himself  of  no 
reputation,  and  taken  on  Him  the  form  of  a  servant, 
and  was  found  in  fashion  as  a  man;  and  though  his 
ministry  was  mainly  to  show  man  righteously  exalted  to 
heaven,  John's,  God  come  down  in  grace  to  the  earth; 
still,  the  same  great  facts  are  distinctly  declared  by 
him  as  by  all.  Stephen  declares  the  wondrous  fact, 
nhich,  in  the  order  of  revelation,  led  the  way  on  to 
Paul's  ministry,  that  ho  saw  the  Son  of  Man  standing  at 
the  right  hand  of  God. 

If  we  take  other  facts  constituting  the  bases  of 
Christianity — the  Incarnation;  it  lies  at  the  outset  and 
foundation  of  its  history  that  Christ  was  not  bom  as  men 
are  bora,  but  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     That  a 


162 

holy  thing  was  bom  of  Mary,  through  this  miraculous 
interposition.  This  fact  gives  us  a  sinless  man  born  of 
God—a  son  of  man,  indeed,  but  a  second  man,  a  last 
Adam.  An  immense  fact,  involving  an  immense  prin- 
ciple, completely  brought  into  light  by  the  rejection  and 
death  of  this  blessed  one  (for  man,  with  all  his  analogous 
revelations  out  of  living  hearts,  would  none  of  a  living 
Saviour ;  He  was  by  wicked  hands  crucified  and  slain) : 
the  principle  that  man  was  a  hopeless  sinner,  and  a  new 
man  to  be  set  up.  But  then  comes  another  fact.  He 
rises ;  the  power  of  death  is  destroyed.  I  do  not  know 
what  affinity,  or  deep  echo,  there  is  of  resurrection  in 
men's  minds.  I  have  not  heard  it.  It  has  not  reached 
the  world  of  history.  In  what  dell  has  Dr.  Williams 
been  where  its  echo  has  sounded  concealed  from  all  ? 
The  sound  of  resurrection  once  reached  the  ears  of 
instructed  men,  but  what  echo  did  it  bring  back? 
When  they  heard  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  some 
mocked;  some,  happily  startled  at  the  strange  sound 
which  spoke  relief  to  dying  man,  said,  "  We  will  hear 
thee  again  of  this  matter."  Death,  ah!  its  echo  has 
sounded  far  and  wide.  Yea,  it  needs  none.  It  speaks 
in  its  own  voice  on  the  right  hand  and  the  left.  It  says, 
Who  can  escape  me  ?  who  can  tell  w^iat  has  brought 
me  ?  who  shall  return  out  of  my  hand  again  ?  Is  Paul 
wrong  who  tells  that  sin  brought  my  terror-striking 
power  on  man  ?  Who  can  tell  where  I  bring  those  on 
whom  I  lay  my  hand  ?  Is  it  to  judgment  ?  Where  is 
it  ?  Who  has  returned  to  tell  the  tale  ?  What  afiinities 
shall  help  me  here  ?  What  living  hearts  tell  me  more 
than  I  know?  They  fear  or  hope  like  me.  Death 
makes  them  as  serious  as  it  makes  me.  If  Christ  be 
my  God,  it  is  a  gain,  the  brightest  moment  of  life ;  it 
is  to  depart  and  be  with  Him.  But  if  not,  who  of 
these  fancied  revealers  has  ever  revealed  what  is  be- 
yond ?  Hope.  Yes,  since  Christianity,  infidels  can.  But 
resurrection  goes  farther;  it  destroys  death's  power 
wholly.  What  came  in  by  the  first  Adam  is  destroyed 
by  the  second,  and  brings  into  glory.     The  resurrection 


is  an  immense  fact ;  glorious  truths  and  principles  in  it. 
The  power  of  Divine  life  paramount  to  death.  Accept- 
ance of  man  in  a  wholly  new  state,  reasoned  on  largely 
by  the  Apostles,  especially  Paul.  Still  a  simple  but 
immense  fact.  That  God  should  become  a  man ;  that  the 
Son  shouhl  be  personally  revealed  as  man  on  earth ; 
that  lie  should  die  as  man  on  the  cross ;  that  lie  should 
triumph  over  death,  and  rise  again,  and  ascend  as  man 
io  a  spiritual  and  glorified  body  into  heaven,  assuring  to 
those  who  believed  on  Him  that  they  would  be  with  and 
like  Him ;  these  are  facts — if  Christianity  be  true  at 
all — which  make  it  simple  nonsense  to  talk  of  "  affinities 
of  our  faith  existing  in  men's  minds  anterior  to  Christi- 
anity, and  renewed  with  deep  echo  from  living  hearts  in 
many  a  generation."  No  doubt  aspirations  there  were 
before  in  men's  hearts,  through  the  moral  desolation  of 
the  world.  Prophecies  too,  before  Christ,  which,  in  a 
chosen  and  called  people,  kept  alive  the  hope  of  some- 
thing better ;  and  every  Christian  of  course  believes  that 
these  facts,  and  the  principles  of  grace  and  truth  they 
involve,  are  received  in  many  li>'ing  hearts  since,  with 
more  or  less  depth  of  feeling  and  find  an  echo  there. 
But  the  prophecies  were  not  the  thing  prophesied  of, 
the  aspirations  were  not  the  Divine  answer  that  met  aud 
more  than  met  them.  Nor  is  the  blessed  echo  in  the  be- 
liever's, heart,  he  well  knows,  the  fact  that  has  awakened 
it — that  heavenly  sound  which  it  echoes  with  Joy  in  its 
praises.  There  is  realization  of  it  all,  living  realization, 
affinity,  because  the  believer  is  partaker  of  the  Divine 
nature.  If  God  be  love,  the  believer  loves.  If  God  be 
holy,  the  believer  is  made  jiartaker  of  His  holiness.  Is 
Christ  glorifie<H  the  behever  will  be  like  Him,  and 
seeks  to  be  spiritually  like  Him  now.  But  the  [>erson 
of  Christ.  His  ileath,  His  resurrection,  remain  great  and 
unchangeable  facts.  He  does  not  speak  of  revelations 
"f  Christ  (i.e.,  by  Hini),  and  affinities  in  other  men's 
minds,  but  he  knows  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come ;  he 
knows  that  the  Father  sent  the  Son ;  that  Christ  is  a 
person  come  down  from  heaven,  so  that  He  could  reveal 


164 

what  is  there  (not  merely  aspire  after  it) ;  that  He  loved 
us  and  gave  Himself  for  us,  appears  in  the  presence  of 
God  for  us ;  that  we  have  forgiveness  of  sins  through 
Him,  salvation  in  no  other ;  and  that  if  He  was  God 
upon  earth,  the  Word  made  flesh.  He  is  Man  in  heaven. 
There  can  be  no  afl^ties  to  facts  in  men's  minds; 
there  may  be  effects  produced  by  them,  which  bring  the 
mind  into  suited  feelings ;  there  may  be  dark  aspirations 
after  what  is  better.  But  a  revelation,  and  the  Son  of 
Grod  coming  into  the  world  to  create  the  one  and  to 
meet  the  other  are  another  thing.  The  statement  of 
Dr.  Williams  is  a  covert  denial  of  Christianity.  It 
reduces  it  to  thoughts  and  feelings  in  men's  minds  not 
confined  to  the  revelations  of  Chnst,  and  here  Dr.  Wil- 
liams is  even  further  from  Christianity  than  Bimsen. 
Now  Christ  did  reveal  most  blessed  ^ce  and  truth. 
But  Christianity  rests  on  what  He  was,  what  He  suffered, 
and  on  His  resurrection.  If  that  be  not  true,  our  faith 
is  vain,  we  are  yet  in  our  sins,  and,  as  the  Apostle  con- 
fesses, if  it  be  not,  they  were  false  witnesses  of  God. 
He  had  seen  the  Lord  after  His  resurrection,  and  he 
could  appeal,  not  only  to  the  Apostles,  but  to  hundreds, 
as  eye-witnesses  of  the  fact.  The  Apostles  were  to  be 
witnesses  of  His  resurrection,  of  this  immense  fact. 
What  affinity  is  there  to  that  ?  No ;  however  covertly 
it  maylbe  done — however  Christ's  revelations  may  be 
spoken  of,  and  moral  beauty  be  sought  elsewhere  as 
well — the  putting  Christianity  on  this  ground  is  the 
denial  of  it ;  for  if  Christianity  consist  in  the  great  facts 
I  have  referred  to,  there  is,  and  can  be,  no  affinity  to  it 
as  such.  Affinity  to  resurrection  is  nonsense,  if  resur- 
rection be  related  as  a  fact  on  which  moral  truth  is 
based.  How  wise  is  Grod.  My  thoughts  are  not  Gx)d 
personally  incarnate.  My  being  dead  to  sin  and  alive 
to  God  is  not  the  Son  of  God  passing  through  death 
actually  and  rising  again  that  I  may  be  so.  Let  any 
one  admit  the  facts,  that  is,  that  Christianity  is  true, 
and  the  views  here  given  by  Dr.  Williams  are  at  once 
seen  to  be  the  denial  of  it,  because  what  passes  in  men's 


minds  are  not  such  facts.  If  Christianity  be  only  what 
the  afBnities  of  men's  minds  are,  Christianity,  as  a  reve- 
lation, is  not  true.  If  there  be  affinities  to  Christianity, 
then  the  Christianity  of  the  Bible  and  of  the  universal 
Church  is  false,  for  one  states,  and  the  other  has  believed 
it  as  a  religion  of  Divine  facts,  however  much  they  have 
disputed  about  doctrines.  And  no  honest  man  can 
read  the  Scriptures  without  seeing  that  tlie  men  who 
relate  and  reason  on  Christianity,  the  original  promul- 
gators of  it  to  the  world,  rest  all  on  these  facts,  declare 
themselves  often  eye-witnesses  of  many  of  them,  and 
rest  Christianity  on  their  truth.  It  is  impossible  to  read 
the  New  Testament,  the  references  to  the  origin  of  Christ- 
ianity in  futhers,  heretics,  enemies,  or  pagans,  and  not 
see  that  it  rested  on  a  series  of  facts  alleged  to  be  super- 
natural and  Divine,  which  Christians  believed,  and  dieir 
adversaries,  save  as  to  the  fact  of  the  cross,  denied. 
The  miracles  they  did  not  deny,  but  accounted  for. 
With  these  facts  the  affinities  of  men's  minds  have 
nothing  to  do,  lie  who  makes  Christianity  to  consist 
in  them  denies  Christianity  altogether  as  a  religion  of 
God.  If  it  be  not,  is  there  any  such?  If  none,  where 
are  we  ?  where  are  we  going  ?  If  we  take  the  character 
of  the  revelation  of  these  facts,  the  contrast  is  equally 
great.  He  that  hath  received  His  testimony  hath  set 
to  his  seal  that  God  is  true.  Not  that  what  is  said  is 
truth  merely :  he  has  owned  God  to  be  true,  as  lie  has 
spoken.  For  he  whom  God  hath  sent  speaketh  the 
words  of  God.  John,  who  spoke  as  a  prophet,  yet  says, 
'*  He  that  is  of  the  earth  is  earthy,  but  He  that  cometh 
from  above  is  above  all,  and  what  He  hath  seen  and 
heard  that  He  teatifieth,  and  no  man  receiveth  His 
testimony."  So  Christ  himself  (John  viii.  47),  "  He 
that  is  of  God  heareth  God's  words."  Read  the  whole 
chapter,  and  see  where  are  the  affinities  of  living  hearts. 
Again,  "  He  was  that  eternal  life  which  was  with  the 
Father  and  manifested  to  us."  The  whole  of  the  New 
Testfljnent  presents  the  testimony  of  Christ  as  a  directly 
Divine  testimony ;  not  the  thoughts  or  aspirations  of  the 


I 
I 


166 

human  heart,  but  God's  words,  the  words  of  one  who 
could  tell  what  was  in  heaven,  if  man  was  darkly  aspiring 
after  it,  because  He  came  down  from  heaven,  and  spoke 
what  He  had  seen,  heard,  and  known  there.  In  a 
different  way  the  Holy  Ghost  has  done  the  same  in  the 
Apostles.  It  was  not  what  passed  in  man's  mind,  but  a 
clear  revelation  from  God,  because  man's  mind  could 
not  find  out  the  truth  and  God,  as  history  plainly  proves. 
The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  and  it  pleased  God, 
by  the  foolishness  of  preaching,  to  save  them  that  believe. 
It  presents  itself  in  this  form  in  contrast  with,  and  as 
exactly  the  contrary  of,  what  Dr.  Williams  says.  If  it 
be  not  such,  it  is  fsdse,  and  a  horrible  imposture,  and  yet 
a  holy  imposture,  which  there  is  nothing  like  in  the 
world,  to  reveal  all  that  is  in  man  and  all  that  is  in 
God.  Let  any  one  produce  anything  at  all  like  it. 
Take  away  this,  and  what  have  you  as  a  revelation? 
What  have  heathens  given  us  at  best? — a  despairing 
recognition  that  if  man  was  to  have  any  moral  deliverance 
it  must  be  thus.  The  highest  heathen  philosophy  held 
it  impossible  that  the  Supreme  God  could  have  directly 
to  say  to  a  creature  or  to  the  creation.  The  fact  of 
Christianity  is  that  He  Himself  became  a  man.  God 
is  not  afraid  to  compromise  His  name.  He  is  God 
everywhere — nowhere  more  so  than  when  He  is  a  man, 
for  He  is  perfect  love. 

W,  It  is  quite  evident  that  Christianity  and  the 
whole  system  are  in  essential  and  total  opposition.  If 
the  ideas  of  Dr.  Williams  are  true,  Christianity  is  false ; 
and  yet  there  is  nought  that  approaches  to  it  in  excel- 
lence, nU  simile  avt  secundum.  If  Dr.  Williams's  views 
are  false,  they  are  high  treason  against  the  goodness  of 
God.     That  is  plain  enough. 

jBT.  Remark  another  thing — ^their  moral  incapacity 
to  seize  the  bearing  of  their  own  or  their  adversaries' 
views.  There  is  a  conscience,  a  sense  of  good  and  evil, 
without  a  revelation.  More  of  that  anon.  But  Christ- 
ianity, as  a  revelation  of  God,  gives  us  entire  confidence 
in  goodness,  but  an  object  out  of  self,  delight  in  goodness 


out  of  ourselves,  faith  in  that  which  is  revealed  in 
auother.  The  infidel  party  bring  us  back  to  seif,  to 
confidenoj  in  self,  value  for  self.  Man  is  as  good 
in  other  ways  as  what  has  been  had  in  Christ ;  at  any 
rate,  it  is  a  question  of  degree.  All  is  man ;  that  is, 
Christianity  takes  out  of  self,  by  a  divinely  perfect  object, 
infidelity  exalts  self,  lives  in  what  is  really  degradation. 
What  is  exalted  in  this  system  ?  What  is  exalted  in 
Christianity  ?  I  spoke  once  to  an  inteUigent  artizan 
nurtured  in  this  doctrine,  of  the  beauty  and  perfectness 
of  Christ,  "Oh,"  he  repUed,  "you  will  never  see  me 
do  anything  unworthy  of  a  man."  ^Tiat  man^  Him- 
self to  I)e  sure.  At  the  cost  of  his  own  humiliation  the 
Christian  admits  the  Divine  excellency  which  condemns 
him.  These  unhappy  men,  as  we  can  again  find  here, 
in  order  to  reiluce  all  to  a  dead  level,  lower,  or  rather 
see  nothing  Divine  in  Christianity;  and  then,  what 
really  is  disgraceful  morally,  as  we  have  seen  in  Dr. 
Temple,  and  see  again  here,  i»ut  heathenism  on  a  level 
with  it,  or  as  nearly  as  they  dare.  I  confess  this  seems 
to  me  a  vdlifying  themselves  beyond  all  belief.  But  so 
they  do.  It  is  the  direct  point  of  the  jiaper  we  are  con- 
sidering. "Devotion,"  it  is  said,  "raises  time  present 
{i.e.,  ourselves)  into  the  sacredness  of  the  past;  while 
criticism  reduces  the  strangeness  of  the  past  into  har- 
mony with  the  present."  \VTiat  past  ?  Why  revelation. 
Tiiat  is  what  is  criticised.  That  is,  the  object  is  to 
reduce  what  is  Diriiie,  or  presents  itself  definitely  and 
alisoliitely  as  such,  as  the  ■'  words  of  God,"  and  "  works 
of  the  Father,"  to  the  level  of  what  men  say  and  do  now, 
and  give  sacredness  and  importance  to  ourselves  hy  say- 
ing we  are  as  Divine  as  what  is  revealed  to  us.  Remove 
God  Uiraself,  whom  C'hristianity  has  revealed,  far  away — 
lower  what  is  Di\'ine.  and  exalt  self — that  is  the  avowed 
object  of  Dr.  Williams. 

W.  Well,  it  really  cannot  be  denied.  It  is  but 
tpargere  voces  in  viilffitm  ambiffuae  at  present,  but  the 
interpretation  you  give  does  but  put  it  in  plain  language, 
and  it  condemns  itself. 


I 


168 

H.  Plain  language  they  cannot  boast  of.  I  read, 
"  we  cannot  acknowledge  a  Providence  in  Jewry  with- 
out owning  that  it  may  have  comprehended  sanctities 
elsewhere."  Now  that  God's  providence  acted  sove- 
reignly everywhere,  that  the  confinement  of  specific 
relationship  to  Israel  was  only  because  historically  men 
had  everywhere  departed  from  God,  every  Christian 
owns,  and  the  Book  of  Job  is  the  special  witness  of  it. 
It  is  asserted  in  a  thousand  places  by  prophets,  and  in 
Psalms.  Jonas  is  the  public  witness  of  its  subsistence 
when  Israel  was  fully  formed  as  a  people.  But  what  is 
the  meaning  of  this  precious  phrase,  *'  Providence  com- 
prehending sanctities  elsewhere"?  If  we  are  to  be 
permitted  to  take  a  meaning  out  of  it,  as  our  Irish 
fellow-countrymen  say,  it  is  simply  that  the  heathen 
were  as  holy  as  God*s  people,  and  as  really  in  direct 
relationship  with  Him.  If  so,  of  course  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, and  Christ's  statements,  and  the  Apostles,  and  the 
whole  scheme  of  Scripture,  is  totally  false.  These  do 
teach  us  that  Christianity  has  broken  down  the  middle 
wall  of  partition,  but  that  before  God  had  not  had  His 
name  called  on  any  other  people,  but  had  chosen  Israel 
for  Himself  out  of  all  nations.  The  whole  scheme 
of  Scripture  is  on  this  showing  false ;  salvation  was  not 
of  the  Jews,  as  the  Lord  asserts.  The  passage  which 
follows,  however,  justifies  the  interpretation  I  have  given 
to  Dr.  Williams's  oracle.  He  adds,  "  But  the  moment 
we  examine  fairly  the  religions  of  India  and  Arabia,  or 
even  of  primaeval  Hellas  and  Latium,  we  find  they 
appealed  to  the  better  side  of  our  nature,  and  their 
essential  strength  lay  in  the  elements  of  good  .which 
they  contained,  rather  than  in  any  Satanic  corruption." 
So  thought  not  Paul :  but  let  that  pass.  Dr.  Williams 
has,  of  course,  keener  spiritual  perception  than  he. 
He  was  in  conflict  with  the  evil,  saw  it  aroimd  him, 
would  feel  its  evil  and  corruption,  and  could  not  take  so 
philosophic  and  cool  a  view  of  it  as  Dr.  Williams  now. 
Indeed,  it  would  have  sadly  cooled  his  zeal ;  his  idea  of 
revelation  would  have  widened  and  deepened.     Jupiter, 


169 


whose  ways  appealed  to  the  better  side  of  our  nature, 
would  have  had  a  part  in  his  sympathies.  You  may 
have  remarked  what  is  said  in  the  essay  on  national 
churches,  I  will  recall  to  you  a  specimen  of  this  moral 
levelling : — 

"  It  was  natural  fur  a.  Christian,  in  the  earliest  period,  to  look  upon 
the  heathen  state  iu  which  he  found  himself  us  if  it  beloaged  to  the 
ktDgdum  of  Satun,  and  not  to  that  of  God  ;  and  consecrated  as  it  was, 
in  all  its  offices,  to  the  heathen  divinities,  to  consider  it  a  society 
having  its  onipa  from  the  powers  of  darkness,  not  from  the  Lord  of 
light  and  life,"  ....  "But  the  primitive  Christians  could 
scarcely  be  exjiecled  to  see  that  ultimately  the  Gospel  was  to  hare 
sway  in  dobg  more  perfectly  that  which  the  heathen  retigions  were 
doing  imperfectly;  tliot  ii3  office  should  he,  not  only  to  quicken  the 
spirit  of  the  individual  and  to  confirm  his  future  hopes,  but  to  Eanclify 
all  social  relations  and  civil  inslitutioite,  and  to  enter  into  the  marrow 
of  the  national  life ;  whereas  heathenism  had  only  decorated  the  surface 
of  it.  Heathendom  had  it^  national  churches;  indeed  the  existence  of 
•  national  church  is  nut  only  a  permissible  thing,  but  is  necessary  to 
the  completion  of  a  national  life,  and  has  shown  itself  in  all  nations 
when  they  have  made  any  advance  in  civilization."    (p.  166.) 

Paul  could  bend  himself,  however,  to  human  con- 
dition and  human  infirmity  in  a  wonderfiil  way,  to 
seek  a  point  where  he  could  meet  those  he  dealt 
with,  and  at  Athens  meet  a  weary  and  wandering  con- 
science with  au  unknown  God ;  and  bring  the  true  one 
to  ignorant  and  more  savage  Lystrians,  as  not  having 
left  Himself  without  witness  in  that  He  did  good,  and 
gave  rain  and  fruitful  seasons,  and  filled  men's  hearts 
wth  food  and  gladness.  He  could  lead  jieople  to  the 
true  God  by  this,  but  he  could  not  justify  corruption  and 
devils  like  Dr.  Williams,  nor  call  evil  good,  and  good 
evil,  and  put  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness, 
'ITie  true  picture  of  it  he  gives  Rom.  i.  There  is 
rea.M»n,  as  Di-.  Williams  alleges,  and  conscience,  and  I 
see  Paul  meeting  with  the  utmost  earnestness  of  love, 
and  the  delicacy  of  tact  which  love  gives,  the  point  in 
man's  state  accessible  to  it.  in  order  to  draw  him  to  the 
goodnes.s  and  holy  grace  of  the  true  Go<l.  out  of  the  evil 
he  was  in ;  but  never  seeking,  as  Dr.  Williams,  to  widen 
the  idea  of  revelation,  and  lower  it  to  the  level  of  the 
M   2 


tture,        ^H 


170 

heathenism  it  was  to  draw  men  out  of,  and  thus  make 
them  content  with  their  degradation.  When  Christianity 
sunk  morally,  Porphyrys  and  lamblichus,  sought  to  do 
this  by  refining  on  heathenism,  and  making  myths  of  it» 
as  Julian  sought  in  vain  to  moralize  it  to  make  a  stand 
against  Christianity,  which,  by  its  fruits,  told  on  the 
conscience ;  but  never  did  an  Apostle,  or  any  one  who 
had  a  sense  of  the  excellency  of  Christ.  Paul  can 
quote  their  own  poets,  can  use  all  means  to  win  all,  but 
never  to  sanctify  evil,  and  so  degrade  the  moral  judgment 
of  man.  This  was  reserved  for  the  pretenders  to  higher 
moral  discernment  of  the  nineteenth  century.  But  a 
word  more  on  this.  We  have  already  spoken  on  this 
sanction  of  heathenism.  It  is  characteristic  of  the 
system:  this  moral  levelling  all  excellency  to  make 
an  unwholesome  swamp  of  man's  mind,  where  all  stag- 
nates and  never  rises  above  its  own  level.  But  some 
particular  features  of  it  occur  in  this  paper.  It  is  called 
widening  revelation  and  deepening  it.  Widening  means 
giving  it  so  large  a  meaning  that  that  should  be  con- 
sidered a  revelation  which  is  no  revelation  at  all.  Man's 
mind  works ;  thoughts  are  produced.  How  that  is  deep- 
ening revelation  I  confess  I  do  not  know.  I  suppose 
they  think  men  s  thoughts  are  deeper  than  God's.  Less 
simple  they  are.  All  is  seen  in  obscurity,  and  thought 
to  be  profound.  But  where  are  they — these  revelations  ? 
Is  Jupiter  a  revelation,  or  Brahm  and  Siva  ?  I  deny  all 
revelation  save  what  revelation  means,  God's  communi- 
cations to  man.  Let  it  be  produced.  I  do  not  deny 
shreds  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  but  I  deny  revelation. 
There  is  conscience  in  all,  and  conscience  of  God ;  and 
there  is  reason ;  and  there  was  a  knowledge  of  God  from 
His  original  revelations  of  Himself,  which  men  had  not 
discernment  to  retain,  and  there  was  the  evidence  of 
Nature.  This  conscience  could  not  be  got  rid  of,  nor 
reason,  however  fearfully  perverted,  nor  the  conscious- 
ness of  superior  power.  But  this  was  corrupted.  This 
side  of  human  nature  is  found  in  heathenism,  as  the 
Apostle  largely  declares ;  but  heathenism  itself  is  a  vast 


sptem  of  diabolical  corruption  and  sanctifying  of  lusts, 
which  was  obliged  to  let  this  in,  for  Satan  can  only  act 
in  and  by  what  was  in  man ;  and  conscience  and  the 
sense  of  sujierior  power  was  in  man.  Hat  the  heathenism 
was  the  exclusion  of  God  in  unity  as  far  as  possible,  and 
the  deifying  of  lusts  and  powers  of  Nature.  It  was  only 
the  connecting  of  man,  such  as  man  was  in  sin,  with 
devils;  a  departure  from  God  without  being  able  to 
destroy  the  idea  of  one,  or  the  conscience  which  God 
had  taken  care  should  accompany  sin ;  but  it  in  no  way 
sought  to  maintaia  the  one  or  to  meet  the  other,  but  to 
exclude  the  one  and  deaden  and  pervert  the  other.  It 
took  the  character  of  each  distinct  nation.  In  Greece 
it  was  gay.  poetic,  and  corrupt ;  in  India,  a  wonderful 
apjirehension  of  the  powers  of  Nature,  with  a  tinge 
of  kindness  intersjffirsed ;  in  Kgypt,  wisdom,  and  sobriety 
of  judgment  as  to  man ;  in  Canaan,  the  filth  of  inveterate 
corruption:  but  in  all,  without  exception,  sanctified  cor- 
ruption. In  the  north,  perhaps,  the  wilder  and  more 
warlike  pa.ssions,  but  in  all  passion.  It  was  the  devil's 
revelation  of  a  lie,  if  it  was  a  revelation,  unless  Siva,  and 
Jupiter,  and  Khem  be  truths.  It  seized  existing  facts, 
but  only  made  a  lie  of  them.  There  is  no  '  repressive 
idea  of  revelation ',  as  regards  conscience  or  reason. 
There  is  an  authoritative  revelation  of  facts,  and  teach- 
ing of  truths  I>y  God,  which  act  on  conscience  and  give 
reason  its  best  light.  Reason  judges /^ofeafi?'/,  but  never 
more,  of  the  truth  and  falsehood  of  anything  as  a  conse- 
quence. A  revelation  gives  certain  truth,  or  it  is  not 
one.  If  it  be  truth,  conscience,  liable  to  be  misled,  is 
rightly  led  by  it.  Reason,  as  to  the  direct  reception  of 
a  revelation,  is  out  of  court,  because  reason  draws  con- 
clu.sions,  and  a  revelation  is  received  as  a  testimony. 
To  say  that  reason  and  conscience  are  absolute  judges, 
or  comi)etent  to  be  so.  is  palpably  and  historically  false. 
Reason  and  conscience  received  Brahraanisra  and  Budd- 
hism, and  lonism,  and  the  Eg)-i»tian  system,  and  Odin 
King  of  Men.  and  Uruidism — all  false  and  different  in 
fonn. — Did  they  judge  rightly  in  this  ?    If  not,  are  they 


I 


J 


172 

not  at  least  incompetent  to  hold  the  balance,  and  rule 
above  the  will  and  corrupt  influences  ?  Why  am  I  to 
trust  them  in  judging  of  what  is  infinite  in  excellence  ? 
They  could  not  secure  man's  judgment  in  the  grossest 
cases  imaginable  of  superstition  and  moral  vileness.  I 
admit  conscience,  when  acted  on,  recognizes  holy  truth 
and  Divine  authority.  But  when  it  begins  to  judge,  not 
good  and  evil  in  itself,  but  to  determine  the  will  as 
competent  to  judge  for  itself,  as  reasoning,  it  has  ceased 
to  be  conscience,  or  rather  conscience  has  ceased  to  act, 
and  influences  and  motives  are  in  play.  Conscience 
knows  murder,  fruit  of  hatred,  is  wrong ;  that  stealing  is 
wrong,  disobedience  to  pai-ents  wrong.  Did  a  religion 
come  saying  "  that  is  good,"  as  such,  conscience  could  say, 
*'  that  cannot  be  from  God,  for  it  is  not  good :  that  is  a 
lie,  not  the  truth."  But  if,  not  conscience,  but  pride, 
begin  to  say,  ''God  ought  not  to  have  done  this; 
miracles  do  not  suit  man's  better  knowledge,"  I  reply, 
"Ah!  my  poor  conscience,  you  are  putting  on  these 
peacocks'  feathers,  are  you  ?  You  are  too  late.  Why 
did  not  you  judge  all  the  juggling  of  oracles,  false  gods, 
and  priestcraft  Qiese  four  or  five  thousand  years  ?  This 
is  all  very  fine.  Christianity  has  saved  you  from  all  this 
long-lasting  shame,  from  which  you  never  could  save 
yourself,  and  never  did,  with  all  your  fine  pretensions 
now ;  and  you  now  turn  to  set  up  to  be  competent  to 
judge  about  what  it  ought  to  have  been,  and  reject  the 
very  pretensions  the  power  of  which  alone  gave  you  any 
sense  to  judge  at  all.  No,  no;  keep  in  your  place, 
according  to  the  light  which  you  have  got  blEick  to.  In 
your  own  measure  call  good  good  and  evil  evil.  That  you 
have  only  learnt  really  to  do  through  Christianity.  Let 
us  see  how  lively  you  will  be  as  to  this  under  its  influence, 
and  we  will  applaud  you.  And  do  not  speak  to  us,  at 
least  by  the  mouth  of  those  who  tell  us  *they  stand 
balancing  terror  against  mutual  shame.'  The  eye, 
though  capable  of  seeing,  wants  light ;  but  do  not  fancy 
because  you  are  the  mind's  moral  eye,  that  you  are 
therefore  God,  to  know  how  in  His  workings  and  ways 


He  ought  to  behave.  Why  did  you  not  judge  ' 
man  had  to  do  when  he  was  under  your  care  ?  What 
did  you  make  of  him?  Let  history  tell.  If  God  has 
graciously  used  miracles,  not  against  conscience,  but  to 
arouse  it,  and  help  man  against  inHuences  tending  to 
incredulity,  and  to  show  that  there  was  a  power  in  God 
above  the  evil  to  which  you,  conscience,  had  succumbed, 
do  not  you  complain  or  set  up  to  judge  God  for  a 
deliverance  which,  without  this,  you  never  did  effect. 
Do  not  say  it  could  !«  done  without  it.  You  can  tell 
that  you  say,  AVhy  did  you  not  then  do  it  in  the  four 
thousand  years — twenty  thousand  if  you  please- — which 
ha<l  ela])se<l  ?  Your  pretended  competency  to  judge  of 
means,  and  reliance  on  your  own  power  in  behalf  of 
man,  is  an  historically  proved  falsehood.  You  let  man 
sink  into  the  grossest  superstition  and  corruptions.  The 
Cliristianity  you  are  calling  in  question  delivered  him 
somehow  or  another ;  that  is  a  fact  (deep  as,  conscience 
and  reason  and  all,  he  is  fallen  again  in  corrupt  Christi- 
anity and  rationalism),  you  never  could."  I  do  not  talk 
of  '  kindred  reason  and  conscience '.  I  admit  both,  and 
revelation  s]>eaks  to  btith ;  but  1  say  that  it  is  an 
historical  fact  that  with  them  man  fell  from  the  light  he 
had  into  the  pit  of  degradation.-  Christianity  delivered 
him.  and  set  rea-son  and  conscience  in  the  light,  and  on 
their  right  ground,  and  nothing  else  did.  I  am  talking 
of  history.  I  trust  my  reason,  for  things  of  reason,  as 
far  as  it  is  reasonable ;  that  is,  as  to  what  is  subjected 
to  it.  I  have  to  act  according  to  my  conscience  when 
this  is  in  the  light ;  indeed  it  is  honester  to  do  so  when 
imperfectly  enlightened ;  but  trust  to  man's  pretended 
competency  to  judge  of  revelation  by  them  and  of  what 
a  rehgion  ought  to  be,  I  cannot,  because  with  them  man 
has  received  everything  as  true  that  is  false,  base,  and 
wicked  to  be  God,  and  that  is  corrupt  and  abominable 
to  be  a  duty,  until  God  came  in  in  power  to  deliver, 
anil  has  rejected  what  was  excellent  and  holy.  I  have 
got  my  senses,  now  I  am  in  the  light,  to  see  that  with 
my  senses  I  fell  into  the  ditch  when  I  had  not  the  light, 


174 

and  that  all  the  eyes  in  the  world  could  not  make  a  ray 
of  light,  though  now  I  have  the  light  I  know  it  is  light. 
And  I  have  no  inclination  now  I  have  it  to  put  it  out» 
or  to  say  that  eyes  without  it  were  competent  to  see, 
kindred  to  light;  and  widen  the  sense  of  light,  to 
make  it  comprehend  men  walking,  and  walking  in  dark- 
ness, and  their  feeling  their  way  an  almost  equivalent 
to  having  the  light — a  deepening  of  the  idea  of  what 
light  is. 

W.  I  feel  that  your  estimate  is  just.  I  must  get  rid  of 
history  and  facts^  as  well  as  every  moral  sentiment  of  my 
nature,  to  receive  the  theories  of  these  men.  Yet  they 
use  the  name  of  Christ,  while  setting  conscience  above 
revelation. 

JBT.  Of  their  speaking  of  Christ  anon,  but  conscience 
being  above  revelation  is  nonsense  upon  the  face  of  it. 
A  man  may  deny  revelation ;  that  I  understand.  1  reject 
his  thought  as  a  horror,  a  moral  impossibility,  that  man 
should  be  so  left ;  but  it  is  not  nonsense.  But  if  there 
be  a  revelation  really,  that  is  God.  Conscience  is  man ; 
and  a  conscience  above  revelation  is  man  above  Grod. 

W.  But  must  not  I  judge  of  a  revelation  ? 

JEf.  It  is  not  the  common  way  of  receiving  it,  because 
it  acts  with  Divine  light  on  the  conscience.  I  cannot 
say  the  eye  judges  light— light  makes  the  eye  see.  A 
revelation  being  holy,  convicts  of  sin,  and  so  proves 
itself.  But  when  we  have  to  judge  of  a  revelation,  if 
it  be  one,  I  am  judged  by  my  judgment.  If  I  judge  a 
beautiful  picture  to  be  a  bad  one,  and  that  the  painters 
ought  to  have  distributed  the  lights  so  and  so,  what  is 
judged  when  one  knows  what  really  is  beautiful  ?  Why 
I  am.  Our  judgment  proves  what  we  are.  There  is  no 
escaping  that,  unless  finally  man  is  to  judge  God,  not  God 
man.  Oh,  what  a  judgment  it  would  be !  Yet  that  is 
really  the  question,  and  in  truth  we  have  seen  it  brought 
to  a  trial  and  issue  in  Christ.  Golgotha  can  tell  that 
tale.  Our  reception  or  non-reception  of  the  truth  is  our 
judgment,  and  so  the  New  Testament  declares.  Both 
^alogy  and  history  give  us  to  understand  this  important 


jirinciple.  wholly  overlooked  by  these  unbelievmg  rea- 
soners,  that  for  the  use  of  a  faculty,  power  outside  itself 
may  be  needed,  so  that  when  the  power  is  not  there  the 
faculty  is  useless,  WTien  it  is  there,  it  acts  rightly  and 
freely ;  but  its  action  is  wholly  dependent  on  a  power 
independent  of  it.  It  exists  without  the  power,  but 
cannot  act  without  it.  Conscience  is  a  faculty  of  the 
soul,  as  the  power  of  seeing  is  of  the  eye ;  but  conscience 
without  revelation,  without  light  from  God,  has  never 
judged  rightly.'  Man  with  this  faculty  has  received  all 
the  de\Tlish  horrors  and  corruption  it  is  possible  to  ima- 
gine; he  walks  in  darkness,  and  knows  not  at  what  he 
stumbles.  But  light  is  inde])endent  of  the  eye,  and  the 
eye  judges  not  light,  but  everything  by  the  light.  Con- 
science judges  not  revelation  but  by  revelation,  or  per- 
fect Divine  light,  that  is,  Christ  Himself.  God  is  light, 
and  Christ  is  that  light  in  the  world.  If  men  have  had 
it  elsewhere,  let  tliem  say  where. 

W.  It  is  clear.  After  all,  it  is  only  sajHng  there  is  a 
God,  and  that  as  such  He  must  be  above  man's  judg- 
ment and  the  power  of  it.  It  is  all  confusion  to  speak 
of  revelation  being  contrary  to  conscience,  or  having 
reason  and  conscience  for  its  kindred.  God,  and  God 
reveahng  Himself,  has  His  place;  and  if  God  does  not 
reveal  Himself,  we  are  godless  creatures—  not  without  a 
sense  that  there  is  a  God,  but  ignorant  of  what  He  is; 
in  the  deplorable  condition  of  knowing  there  is  a  God, 
and  not  knowing  Him;  with  conscience  enough  to  know 
we  are  in  evil,  but  ignorant  how  to  get  out  of  it.  His- 
tory, the  complaints  of  a  Socrates,  the  puny  efforts  of 
others,  show  and  tell  —the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not 
God. 

JH.  Surely,  surely ;  and  the  sense  of  excellency  gives 
the  sense  of  wTetchedness ;  of  excellency — blessed  be  His 
nama— in  God;  of  wretchedness  in  man ;  but  then  of 
infinite  love  towards  us.  If  the  world  by  wisdom  knew 
God.  it  did  not  know  love;  if  it  did.  where  is  the  know- 
ledge to  be  found  ?  I  defy  Dr.  Williams,  conscience, 
and  reason,  and  all,  to  tell  me.     If  God  does  reveal 


I 
I 


176 

Himself,  He  reveals  Himself  as  God.  Man  is  not  a 
judge  of  the  way.  He  has  received  every  kind  of  lie  as 
Grod,  then  laughed  at  it  in  the  end,  in  the  mockery  of 
despair,  without  finding  out  it  was  his  wretched  self  he 
was  laughing  at.  But  this  revelation  does  not  exclude 
but  awake  conscience,  makes  it  for  the  first  time  see 
goody  which  it  in  this  light  can  recognize.  For  God  who 
is  ligdt,  is  goodness  or  love  manifested  in  the  midst  of 
men.  Conscience  is  not  the  instrumentality  of  revela- 
tion, as  they  say.  Such  a  statement  is  nonsense.  A 
revelation  is  God's  making  something  known  which  was 
not  otherwise  apprehended,  perhaps  could  not  have  been. 
Conscience  is  no  instrumentality  in  revealing.  It  is  a 
positive  essential  faculty  in  man,  knowing  or  discerning 
good  and  evil :  but  that  is  not  an  instrument  of  revela- 
tion. It  is  a  proper  independent  faculty,  which  the 
believer  knows  to  have  been  acquired  in  tfie  fall.  But 
it  must  have  its  object  before  it,  to  say  it  is  good  or  evil ; 
that  is,  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  revealing.  Its  object 
must  be  there  and  then ;  when  not  perverted,  it  says,  if 
good  be  before  it,  that  is  good ;  if  evil,  that  is  evil ; 
Reason  discerns  cause  and  effect,  and  as  reasoning  draws 
consequences ;  in  moral  things  runs  closely  into  con- 
science. But  it  is  never  an  instrument  of  revelation, 
unless  in  the  sense  that  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  a  man  as 
an  instrument  in  revealing ;  but  in  itself  nev6r  is.  It 
must  have  its  object  to  reason  about.  Revelation  gives 
objects  otherwise  unknown,  or  fresh  truth  about  known  • 
objects,  or  it  is  not  a  revelation.  This  neither  conscience 
nor  reason  do  in  their  very  nature.  I  may  figuratively 
say :  It  really  was  a  revelation^that  is,  the  perception 
of  reason  was  so  quick,  that  it  was,  in  comparison  with 
other  minds,  like  one.  But  this  only  proves  the  difference 
I  have  stated.  In  a  word,  conscience  and  reason  must 
have  objects  to  judge  of.  A  revelation  communicates 
objects  which  men  have  not.  There  is  no  contrast  with 
revelation;  they  are  no  parts  of  its  instrumentality. 
Reason  and  conscience  have  their  own  proper  power  in 
their  place,  needing,  in  order  to  act  in  Divine  things,  a 


177 

light  wliolly  independent  of  them,  that  is,  a  revelation. 
In  their  place  they  are  like  every  other  faculty,  and,  as 
the  most  important  ones,  blessed.  As  1  have  said,  when 
conscience  has  got  light,  it  can  say,  Jupiter  and  Saturn 
cannot  be  gods ;  and  reason  can  say,  wlu-n  it  has  got 
the  idea  of  Ood,  there  cannot  be  two.  Keasnn  can  never 
say  is,  or  is  not,  but  must  and  cannot.  Ideas,  and  not 
facts,  are  its  sphere.  Revelation  saj-s  is  — another  most 
important  flifference.  I  believe  the  idea  of  God  is,  in 
spite  of  Locke,  at  the  bottom  of  every  heart :  corrupted 
and  dimmed,  but  in  every  heart ;  and  so,  of  course,  are 
conscience  and  rea-son,  though  blind  and  corrupted,  till 
light  comes,  and  through  passions,  interests,  and  Sataidc 
power,  losing  the  light  and  being  blinded  when  men 
have  had  it.  They  did  not  discern  to  retain  God  in 
their  knowledge.  1  have  been,  I  am  conscious,  long  in 
my  lucubrations  on  this  subject,  but  hope  I  have  not 
lost  your  attention.  Those  who  have  followed  the 
phases  of  the  new  school,  and  particularly  abroad  in  its 
French  forms  (for  it  uses,  but  is  not  the  old  rationalism), 
know  that  their  battle-horse  is  this  point  of  conscience. 
All  their  statements  are,however,  error  and  confusion,  and, 
like  everything  they  say,  as  sujierficial  as  it  is  pretentious. 
W.  I  have  listened  diligently  to  what  you  have  been 
saying.  It  has  not,  of  course,  the  interest  which  unfold- 
ing the  range  of  Scripture,  or  touching  on  its  main 
beauties,  has ;  but  I  see  plainly  the  need  of  getting  clear 
hold  of  the  true  place  of  conscience  and  reason,  insisted 
on  as  they  are  by  them;  and  it  has  deep  interest  as 
general  truth.  Happily,  history  is  there  to  refute  man's 
pretensions,  and  the  proof  it  gives  of  the  need  of  light — 
that  is,  of  revelation — to  give  conscience  its  power  is  all- 
important.  Whatever  the  cause— I  do  not  doubt  the  fall, 
and  Satan's  power,  man's  utter  alienation  from  God,  is 
— but  whatever  the  cause  is,  the  fact  is  so.  By  the  Chris- 
tian revelation,  partially  by  the  Jewish  one,  man  had  light 
to  judge  the  absurdities  and  corruptions  of  paganism; 
without  that,  in  pomt  of  fact,  he  never  did.  Conscience, 
one  may  see,  existed,  but  was  religiously  incompetent — 


I 


178 

incompetent  to  judge  of  a  revelation,  that  is,  of  its 
truth  or  falsehood.  I  might  question  whether  Dr.  Wil- 
liams's conscience  and  reason  be  much  better  or  sounder 
in  his  judgment  of  the  matter.  I  doubt  it  very  much ; 
but  that  we  may  leave.  I  refer  to  his  attempted  justifi- 
cation of  heathenism  in  presence  of  Christianity,  and 
while  favouring  those  horrible  corruptions,  questioning 
the  Divine  character  of  both  Christianity  and  its  testi- 
mony. It  seems  to  me  as  perverted  as  the  heathenism 
it  defends. 

H.  In  a  certain  aspect,  I  judge  more  so,  as  it  comes 
after  the  light.  But  we  will  turn  to  another  part  of  the 
subject — some  of  the  scientific  researches  by  which  they 
call  in  question  Scripture  accounts.  It  is  easy  to  speak 
of  chronology,  of  which  Dr.  Williams  remarks,  "  Dr. 
Bunsen  says,  with  quaint  strength,  '  there  is  no  chrono- 
logical element  in  revelation.' "  I  see  neither  quaintness 
nor  strength  in  the  remark.  I  do  see  sophism  and 
ignorance  of  the  scope  and  nature  of  Scripture ;  because 
it  is  impossible  to  separate  chronology  and  history,  and 
the  inquiry  into  chronology  is  here  with  a  view  to  lustory. 
Now  the  moral  history  of  mankind  is  a  large  feature  in 
revelation — one  of  deep  import;  and  the  researches 
or  rather  suppositions  of  Dr.  Bunsen,  in  which  Dr.  Wil- 
liams revels,  are  calling  in  question  the  chronology  in 
order  to  set  aside  the  history.  Whether  Adam  lived 
130  years,  as  the  Hebrew  Bible  says,  and  begat  a  son,  or 
230  years,  as  the  Septuagint,  is  in  itself  of  little  moment. 
It  shoves  on  dates  100  years,  but  that  is  all.  Quite  right 
to  find  the  truth,  if  we  can ;  but  if  it  be  sought  to  dis- 
turb the  history — if  (this  Dr.  Bunsen  has  too  much  sense 
to  believe)  Adam  be  not  the  head  of  the  race — if  even 
Noah  be  not,  and  other  races  escaped  the  flood,  we  lose 
the  judgment  of  the  world ;  the  Scripture  history,  in  its 
deepest  moral  elements,  is  trenched  on ;  the  perishing 
of  a  world  is  only  a  national  fable  belonging  to  a  race, 
drawn  from  some  local  phenomenon.  And  a  flippant 
remark  that  chronology  is  not  an  element  of  revelation, 
is  impertinent  or  dishonest.    But  I  confess  I  fear  some- 


179 


what  to  enter  on  scientific  questions,  having  really  no 
pretension  to  be  a  learned  man.  My  only  encourage- 
ment is  that  experience  has  so  taught  me  the  superficial 
and  flijipant  character  of  neology,  and  particularly  of 
English  neologists,  that  I  have  been  emboldened,  using 
books  current  on  the  subjects  referred  t^>,  and  the  little 
knowledge  I  have,  to  examine  the  statements  that  are 
made,  and  see  how  far  they  are  to  be  relied  on.  The 
result  for  me  has  been  that  there  is  a  mass  of  charlatan- 
ism. A  little  knowledge  is  a  dangerous  thing.  I  have 
only  a  little;  but  in  their  waters  I  venture  to  wade.  I 
would  first  di-aw  your  attenliou  to  the  kind  of  state- 
ments and  reasonings  :  "  He  could  not  have  vindicated 
the  unity  of  mankind  if  he  had  not  asked  for  a  vast 
e.\tensiou  of  time,  whether  his  petition  of  {sic)  20,000 
years  be  granted  or  n()t."  Is  this  serious  ?  "  Do  we 
see  the  historical  area  of  nations  and  languages  extend- 
ing itself  over  nearly  10,000  years,  and  can  we  imagine 
less  than  another  10,000  during  which  the  possibilities 
of  these  things  took  body  and  form?"  Chronology 
imagined  at  this  rate  ceases  to  be  a  dry  study,  no  doubt ; 
bat  a  serious  one  it  can  hardly  be  called.  "  Qnestions  of 
this  kind  require  from  most  of  us  a  special  training 
for  each ;  but  Baron  Bunsen  revels  in  them,  and  his 
theories  are  at  least  suggestive."  WUl  the  reader 
believe  that  such  cruditias  are  brought  to  make  out  his- 
tnrj%  and  the  revelling  of  Baron  Bunsen  in  suggestive 
theories  is  to  settle  chronology  and  overthrow  Scripture  ? 
Why  l  Because  it  is  Scripture.  As  an  ancient  docu- 
ment there  is  nothing  to  be  comparecl  with  it.  Again : 
"The  Semitic  languages,  which  had  as  distinct  an  indi- 
viduality 4,000  years  ago  as  they  have  now,  retiuire  a 
cradle  of  larger  dimensions  than  Archbishop  Usher's 
chronology.  What  further  effort  is  not  forced  upon  our 
imagination  if  we  woidd  guess  the  measure  of  the  dim 
background  in  which  the  Mongolian  and  Eg\-ptian 
languages,  older  probably  than  the  Hebrew,  became 
fixed,  growing  early  into  the  type  which  they  retained." 
•Efforts  forced  on  the  imagination  (hanlly  forced  when  a 


180 

maQ  revels  in  it)  to  gaess  the  measure  of  the  dim  back- 
gromid  of  languages,  probably  older  than  the  Hebrew'! 
You  have  in  this,  my  dear  W.,  a  very  fair  picture  of  Baron 
Bunsen  and  his  suggestive  theories.  In  point  of  fact, 
the  only  probable  evidence  we  have  is  that  these  languages 
were  contemporaneous  ;  but  the  evidence  is  late ;  as  to 
writing,  the  most  ancient  known  in  the  East  received  it 
certainly  from  Semitic  language.  Bumouf  has  proved  this 
in  his  inquiry  into  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  of  Hamadan. 
But  the  date  of  Mongol  is  dim  enough,  no  doubt  But  let 
us  leave  this.  His  excessive  carelessness  you  may  judge 
from  other  instances  I  lit  on  in  Stuart  Poole,  in  Smith's 
Dictionary,  the  other  day.  Bunsen  ridicules  Baum- 
garten  for  making  fifty-six  pail's  out  of  seventy  souls. 
He  had  never  looked  at  the  chapter,  where  it  is  evident 
that  sixty-seven  of  the  seventy  were  men.  It  would 
seem  that  he  has  taken  Shaul  the  Levite  for  Saul  the 
king  in  1  Chron.  vi.  22.  IF.  But  this  is  so  gross,  he  may 
in  copying  Lepsius,  whom  he  greatly  follows,  have  not 
seen  that  it  was  only  a  synchronism.  I  have  not 
Lepsius  here.  At  any  rate  it  is  the  greatest  careless- 
ness. Bunsen  set  aside,  to  start  with,  the  divinely-given 
history.  Chronology  was  not  an  element  of  revelation. 
At  any  rate,  that  was  the  glory  of  liberal  Christian 
views.  And  then  he  revels  in  suggestive  theories.  Man 
has  it  all  to  himself.  I  will  examine  some;  but  I 
thought  it  well  to  notice  Dr.  Williams's  own  account  of 
Baron  Bunsen's  procedure.  Dr.  Williams  asks :  How 
many  years  are  needed  to  develop  modem  French  out  of 
Latin? — say  900,  that  is,  from  600  to  Francis  I.  Well, 
what  then  ?  How  many  the  divergence  of  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Indo-European  family?  Probably,  very 
various ;  some  very  early,  some  much  later.  TTie  dis- 
persion of  the  Aryan  race  is  beyond  history,  and  they 
seem  to  have  had  already  dialects.  The  only  supposed 
date  is  within  Septuagint  chronology.  The  Vedas  do 
not  go  more  than  to  about  1,400  years  before  Christ, 
leaving  1,000  years  within  even  Hebrew  chronology 
to  the  flood.     Circumstances  influence  the  growth  of 


181 


dialects  immensely.  A  tribe  moves  from  a  mountain 
to  a  plain,  or  to  another  climate ;  the  names  caused 
by  local  ciri-umstances  disappear — plants,  cattle,  terms 
omnected  with  culture  and  the  like,  all  change.  When 
long  remaining  in  one  place  a  language  changes;  but 
it  is  easily  seen  it  is  in  its  forms  by  civilization. 
When  tribes  are  entirely  separate,  with  little  inter- 
course, they  become  distinct  languages  very  rapidly, 
though  grammutical  forms  are  analogous,  or  the  style, 
as  in  North  America.  When  a  language  is  widely 
diffused,  and  there  is  much  communication,  it  remains 
one,  and  is  only  developed  according  to  a  pretty  constant 
rule,  generally  of  abbreviation  of  forms.  But  if  900  or 
1,000  years  sufHced  to  change  and  form  a  new  language, 
that  time  can  well  lie  allowed  to  the  history  of  the 
SaJiscritian  or  Zend,  not  more  than  there  is  room  for  in 
Scriptural  chronology.  Take  notice,  too,  that  all  this 
reasoning  sets  out  with  treating  the  history  of  the  tofl'er 
of  Babel  as  a  fable.  It  is  not  a  nicety  of  interpretation, 
tut  a  total  rejection  of  the  whole  theory.  But  I  should 
think,  while  confessing  that  I  am  no  comparative  philo- 
logist, that  Dr.  Williams  can  know  little  or  nothing 
abont  the  matter,  lie  says  (and  all  the  world  is  always 
to  understand  that  the  new  theology  brings  from  its 
stores  well-authenticated  results,  mentioned  as  if  every 
tolerably  well-read  man  should  be  aware  of  it) :  "  When 
again  we  have  traced  our  Gaelic  and  our  Sanskrit  to 
their  inferential  pre-Hellenic  stem."  &c.  Now  I  appre- 
Iiend  this  sentence  betrays  total  ignorance  of  the  whole 
Subject.  Hellenism,  or  Greek,  as  well  as  Latin,  is  a  compa- 
ratively modem  daughter  of  Sanskrit  itself;  Zend,  as  its 
twin  sister,  has  its  mixed  or  corrujited  mediseval  derivation 
in  Pehlvi.  and  its  direct  one  in  modem  Persian  and  the 
Teutonic  languages.  Sanskrit  is  not  traced  to  a  pre-Hel- 
lenic  stem,  It  is  the  root  or  stem  of  Hellenistic  and  Ijatin 
languages.  Zend  and  Sanskrit  are  very  closely  allied  dia- 
lects of  what  is  often  now  called  Aryan — Zend  north  of  the 
Himmalayas,  Sanskrit  south.  The  classical  Sanskrit  of 
the  Vedas  is  still  more  closely  allied  to  Z^id  than  the  com- 


182 

mon  Sanskrit.  Zend  is  hard  in  pronunciation,  Sanskrit 
soft.  Gaelic  or  Irish  is  held  by  some  able  philologists  to 
be  the  closest  existing  representative  of  Sanskrit  in  the 
West,  with  the  richest  vocabulary  of  words.  Others  cite 
the  Lithuanian  as  having  the  closest  resemblance.  This 
is  from  the  use  of  soft  instead  of  hard  sounds  in  both, 
which  characterises  Sanskrit,  as  contrasted  with  Zend. 
But  Irish  is  pronounced  hard,  and  gutturally.  Lithuanian 
German  is  very  soft ;  but,  as  is  well  known,  southern  Ger- 
man differs  from  .northern  in  the  hardness  of  its  guttural 
pronunciation.  The  aspirates  and  ellipses  in  Erse  arise 
from  the  utterance  stopping  half-way  between  the  preced- 
ing and  following  sound.  If  you  examine  bata  (battha), 
mo  wata,  ar  mbata,  you  will  find  the  change — that  w  is  half- 
way between  o  and  b,  and  m  between  r  and  b.  It  is  an 
imperfect,  undefined  utterance.  To  return  to  our  dates. 
The  most  careful  research  into  monuments  compared 
with  Berosus,  whose,  chronology  the  monuments  con- 
stantly confirm,  and  other  chronological  elements  and  dates, 
gives  about  2,234  years  before  Christ  for  the  foundation  of 
the  first  Chaldean  kingdom.  The  common  biblical  chro- 
nology gives  for  the  flood  2,348.  It  is  alleged  by  German 
critics  following  Berosus  (I  say  German,  as  freed  from 
Scripture  authority),  that  there  was  a  Median  dynasty  of 
eight  kings,  and  this  is  conjecturally  carried  to  2458  B.C., 
110  years  before  the  ordinary  Hebrew  date  of  the  flood. 
According  to  the  Septuagint  chronology,  the  flood  was 
B.C.  3155,  leaving  697  years  between  the  flood  and  the 
first  kingdom  known  to  Berosus  in  Chaldea.  This  Median 
kingdom  I  should  not  be  disposed  to  reject,  though  its 
duration  and  character  be  conjectural  and  imcertain. 
Because  the  Chaldean  or  Babylonish,  as  we  know,  was 
the  seat  and  centre  of  idolatry,  invented  and  established 
as  a  system.  Previous  to  and  concurrent  with  this  was 
another  and  less  outwardly  gross  idolatry — ^the  worship 
of  fire,  and  so  far  the  sun  and  stars.  Sabaeism  con- 
trasted with  lonism.  This  did  not  reject  star,  or  at  any 
rate  planet  worship,  but  connected  it  with  making  gods 
of  men,  of  their  ancestors—  and  first  of  Noah  and  his  sons. 


183 


Now  this  Median  kingdom  would  be  the  prevalence  of 
Sabseism  —the  first  Chaldean,  simply  the  kings  of  Babel 
from  Nimrod,  setting  up  systematic  idolatry.  All  tradi- 
tion points  to  such  a  change  in  these  days.  Epipha- 
nius  —no  great  authority,  it  is  true,  but  a  witness  of 
tradition  in  this  respect  ^says  it  took  place  in  the  days 
of  .Serug,  Abraham's  great-grandfather.  That  idolatry 
had  then  come  in,  we  learn  from  Joshua  xxiv.  It  was 
the  occasion  of  calling  out  Abraham  to  be  the  stock  of  a 
separate  people,  that  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God 
might  uot  be  wholly  lost ;  so  that  probably  it  was  then 
(juite  established  and  prevalent,  yet  not  very  long  esta- 
blished. The  uniformity  of  its  fundamental  elements  in 
India.  Egypt,  Gi'eece,  and  Rome,  show  a  regularly  in- 
rented  system  connected  with  the  deluge  and  Noah,  and 
the  prevalent  principle  in  all  countries  comiected  with  it 
of  the  -setting  up  their  fii-st  ancestors  as  the  gods  of  their 
country  gives  its  fixed  principle.  This,  with  their  identi- 
tication  with  some  planet.  Thus  we  have  2234  b.c.  for 
the  first  Chaldean  monarchy;  2348  B.C.  according  to  the 
Hebrew  chronology,  the  date  of  the  flood;  3155  B.C. 
according  to  the  Septuagint,  when  our  review  says  2234 
for  the  first  Median  conquest  of  Babylon.  It  is  very 
certainly  an  error  of  Bunsen's,  or  a  blunder  of  Dr.  Wil- 
liams's. It  is  the  date  of  the  first  Chaldean  kingdom, 
which  overthrew  the  Median— Berosiis  calls  it  Chaldean, 
at  any  rate ;  and  the  monuments,  if  not  using  the  word 
Chaldean  (which  does  not  occur  till  the  Assyrian  inscrip- 
tions in  the  ninth  century  before  Christ),  confirm  the 
fact  of  a  series  of  kings  reigning  in  the  countries  whence 
Abraham  came — called  by  Berosus  Chaldean,  or  by 
Scripttu-e  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  Now  learned  men  may 
discuss  these  dates.  We  have  no  objection,  but  we  have 
data,  not  suggestive  theories.  Research  into  Egyptian 
chronology  and  historj-  leads  to  the  conclnsion  that  the 
suggestive  theories  of  Baron  Bunsen  fall  before  the 
facts.  The  attempt  of  I^psius  to  set  up  the  long  period 
which  Manetho's  lists  would  make  out,  and  on  which 
Baron  Bunsen  greatly  builds,  has  no  foundation  to  rest 


184 

upon.  The  whole  is  utterly  superficial.  Not  only  does 
Manetho  speak  of  contemporary  princes,  but  the  stelsa 
and  tablet  monuments  give  imequivocal  proofs  of  the 
coexistence  of  kings  of  different  dynasties,  sometimes 
subordinate  one  to  another.  I  need  not  enter  now  into 
the  details  with  you.  But  the  names  are  brought  toge- 
ther of  two,  and  even  of  several  dynasties  on  tiie  same 
monument,  so  that  the  chronology  founded  on  their 
being  in  succession  one  to  another  is  a  delusion  from 
beginning  to  end.  But,  leaving  all  reference  to  Scrip- 
tural chronology  out,  the  commencement  of  Egyptian 
history  has  been  estimated  at  some  2,650  years  before 
Christ.  Now  no  one,  I  suppose,  pretends  to  give  these 
dates  accurately ;  but  the  coincidence  of  the  Asiatic  and 
African  empires  gives  a  general  probability ;  while 
Baron  Bunsen*s  is  founded  on  want  of  research,  on 
speculations  from  the  boastful  and  legendary  lists  of 
Manetho,  and  the  desire  to  make  the  time  long, 
and  chronology  no  element  of  revelation.  He  has 
neglected  the  evidently  important  evidence  furnished  by 
the  monuments  (some,  perhaps,  ascertained  indeed  since 
his  time),  of  the  co-existence  of  dynasties,  and  of  very 
many  too— perhaps  eight  at  a  time.  Moreover,  his  whole 
theory  as  to  old  and  middle  and  new  empires  falls 
to  the  ground  wholly,  save  so  far  as  the  fact  of  the 
presence  of  Hyksos  kings  goes,  and  with  these  other 
dynasties  subsisted  nearly  all  the  time.  His  whole 
Egyptian  system  is,  as  Dr.  Williams  has  described  it, 
revelling  in  guggestive  theories.  The  speculative  results  of 
elaborate  inquiry  into  the  great  Aryan  or  lapetic  emigra- 
tion supposes  it  was  3,000  years  before  Christ,  and  this  is 
avowedly  mere  theory.  This  you  will  find  in  Pictet's 
book.  I  have  thus  taken  up  the  historical  part,  and, 
I  think,  shown  that  all  is  theory.  But  I  would  still 
draw  your  attention  for  a  moment  to  the  kind  of  rea- 
soning. Even  Dr.  Williams,  however  gluttoning  in  the 
helps  to  incredulity,  is  obliged  to  demur,  and  finds  puz- 
zling circumstances  in  the  strained  etymologies  which 
are  made  its  foundation;   but  adds  a  justification  of 


Bunsen,  which  reaches  far  beyond  all  my  conceptions  of 
tlie  posisibilities  of  logic :  "  That  our  author  would  not 
shrink  from  noticing  this,  is  shown,"  that  is,  noticing 
how  he  strained  etymologies  to  make  the  two  antedilu- 
vian genealogies  legendary, ''  by  the  firmness  with  which 
be  relegates  the  long  lives  of  tbe  first  patriarchs  to  the 
domain  of  legend."  Is  not  that  a  proof?  It  is  this. 
His  arbitrary  boldness  in  making  a  legend  of  Scriptnrfl 
statement  shows  that  he  wilt  judge  his  own  arbitrariness 
in  making  legends  of  genciilogies  by  strained  etymo- 
logies; at  any  rate.  Dr.  Williams  aduiires  hira — revels 
in  the  Baron's  firmness. 

H'.  But  it  is  difficult  to  consider  all  this  to  be  serious. 
I  am  glad  you  spoke  of  the  Assyrian  and  Egyjitian  his- 
tory, but  the  stj'le  of  Bunsen's  and  Dr.  Williams's 
reasoning  seems  to  me  triULug  almost,  hardly  worth 
notice. 

II.  It  would  not  be  if  it  were  not  an  attack  against 
Scripture ;  but,  though  it  be  wearisome,  it  is  well  to 
show  the  stuff'  these  neological  reasonings  are  made  of. 
Bear  with  me  yet  a  little,  while  I  quote  a  passage  or 
two.  '  The  idea  of  bringing  Abraham  into  Egypt  as 
early  as  2876  is  one  of  our  author's  most  doubtful 
points,  and  may  seem  hardly  tenable.'  (According  to 
monuments,  it  was  fxjfore  Mencs,  when  the  gods  or 
heroes  were  reigning.)  But  why  is  this  date  ?  Some 
proof,  perhaps,  is  given.  Here  it  is : — "  He  wanted 
time  for  the  growth  of  Jacob's  family  into  a  people  of 
two  millions" — (a  question  discussed  on  the  shortest  sup- 
posed period  by  Clinton  Fynes,  and  others).  However, 
Baron  Bunsen  wanted  time  for  it,  and  he  felt  bound  to 
place  Joseph  under  a  native  Pharaoh — therefore  before 
the  sheplierd  kings.  He  also  contends  that  Abraham's 
horizon  is  antecedent  to  the  first  Median  conquest  of 
Babylon,  in  2234  ii.c.  (We  have  spoken  of  this  point ; 
as  far  as  I  can  gather,  there  is  no  proof  or  sign  of  such 
an  event.)  So  the  stay  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt  is  ex- 
tended to  fourteen  centuries  (it  is  well  he  let  them  go  there 
at  all) ;  the  215  years  is  the  time  of  o)ipression.  Baron 
m2 


186 

Bunsen  s  history  puts  me  in  mind  of  Vertot's  account 
of  a  siege — I  forget  of  what  town.  He  had  written  to 
have  an  accurate  accoimt  of  it  from  one  present,  but 
when  it  came,  he  said  he  was  very  sorry,  but  he  had 
written  his  siege.  Then  Bunsen  takes  Manetho's  vrild 
account  of  the  lepers  and  Avaris,  quoted  in  Josephus, 
as  confirming  the  exodus  imder  Menephthah — (the 
date  is  very  possible,  Wilkinson,  after  the  Duke  of 
Northumberland,  is  disposed  to  accept  it — I  think 
Osborne  too) ;  but  then  says,  you  must  accept  the  whole 
history,  if  you  do  the  confirmation.  That  is  very  critical. 
In  this  case,  no  sober  person  does.  And  hence  it  was  an 
invasion  by  the  Jews ;  and  the  high  hand  with  which 
Jehovah  led  His  people,  the  spoiling  of  the  Egyptians, 
and  the  lingering  in  the  peninsula  (!),  are  to  be  taken 
as  signs,  even  in  the  Bible,  of  a  struggle  conducted  by 
human  means.  Can  absurdity  go  further  ?  What  do 
you  think  the  avenger  who  slew  die  first-bom  was  ? 

W.  Well,  what  ? 

JET.  "  It  may  have  been  the  Bedouin  host,  akin  nearly 
to  Jethro,  and,  more  remotely,  to  Israel." 

W.  But,  my  dear  H.,  enough  of  these  excessive  puerili- 
ties. Surely  we  need  not  go  further,  or  waste  our  time 
with  the  foolish  and  imbridled  licence  of  an  imagination 
which  leads  to  no  result.  It  is  refreshing  to  turn  to  the 
gravity  and  simplicity  of  Scripture  accoimts.  The 
moral  truths  so  richly  encased  in  its  simple  tale  are 
enough  for  a  mind  rightly  tuned  to  see  its  divine  cha- 
racter. It  is  well,  perhaps,  to  see  the  contrast,  and 
how  God  allows  a  most  amiable,  learned,  and  attractive 
mind  to  run  into  absurdity  and  senseless  suppositions, 
when  it  lends  itself  to  speculations  which  baser  minds 
seek  to  profit  by,  against  all  truth. 

JET.  I  have  done.  But  it  was  well  that  the  true  cha- 
racter of  these  speculations  should  appear.  We  will 
turn  to  other  points. 

W.  But  I  should  like  to  ask  you  a  question.  How 
comes  it  that  Dr.  Williams  recognises  the  untenableness, 
as  in  this  last  case,of  the  statements  and  the  straining  of 


etymology  for  proofs,  and  yet  delights  in  bringing  for- 
ward the  conclusions,  and  presses  with  satisfaction  the 
results? 

U.  Allow  me  to  reply  by  asking  a  question  too.  Do 
you  believe  that  on  any  subject  but  one  he  would  admit 
the  premisses  to  be  false,  and  delight  in  the  conclu- 
sions ? 

W.  Well.  I  suppose  not.  No  one  would.  Where 
the  will  is  not  engaged,  no  man  pleads  that  premisses  are 
false,  and  conclusions  excellent. 

H.  You  have  answered  yourself.  See  what  is  said : 
"  It  is  easier  to  throw  doubt  on  some  of  the  arguments 
than  to  show  that  the  conclusion  ....  is  im- 
probable." He  is  s^waking  of  Bunsen's  requiring 
twenty  thousand  years. 

The  ti-uth  is,  the  idea  of  human  excellency  and 
their  own  superior  powers  of  criticism  has  led  them  to 
reject  Scripture  a  priori,  becaase  it  sets  down  man  as 
wicked  and  lost ;  and  then  to  loosen  by  speculative  sup- 
positions the  bands  of  all  proof  whatever.  Bunsen, 
building  on  an  excessively  uncritical,  unphilosopliical 
estimate  of  Egyp)tian  j>eriods — speculations  which  have 
neglected  all  careful  research  into  the  facts — has  con- 
cluded that  the  emigration  into  Egypt  was  ante- 
Noahic,  the  flood  only  partial,  and  Scripture  not 
worth  a  straw,  save  as  bright  and  eminent  individuals 
gave  an  impulse  suited  to  their  day.  His  writings  are 
a  kind  of  skating  over  the  surface  of  facts.  I  will  give 
yon  here  a  specimen  of  Scriptural  interpretation,  to  show 
how  far  solidity  of  judgment  can  be  looked  for  in  Bun- 
sen's  writings: — "In  the  event  of  Pentecost,  not  only 
the  first  legislation  of  mankind  founded  on  the  per- 
manent law  of  the  conscience,  became  a  reality,  but  the 
whole  distinguishing  character  of  the  eighteen  centuries 
which  separate  us  from  that  event,  was  typiiied  and 
foreshadowetl,"  All  well,  save  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
Ls  not  alluded  to.  only  permanent  conscience.  I  will 
refer  to  tliis  further  on.  But  now ;  "  In  what  did  that 
miracle  consist?     One  hundred  and  twenty  persons — 


188 

not  only  Galileans,  as  they  were  naturally  supposed  to 
be,  but  belierers  from  various  parts — assembled  together 
on  that  festive  day,  expecting  the  end  of  the  world. 
Suddenly,  during  a  violent  storm  of  wind,  accompanied 
by  lightning,  the  persons  so  assembled  felt  moved 
apparently  to  praise  God,  not  in  the  formularies  of  their 
sacred  language,  but  in  the  profane  sounds  of  their 
heathenish  mother  tongues,  of  which  the  Greek  was 
foremost,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance."  **  What 
more  portentous  or  deeply  significant  sign  could  there 
be  that  religion  was  henceforth  to  cease  to  be  an  ex- 
ternal or  sacerdotal  and  ceremonial  worship  ?  At  this 
moment,  and  with  that  soimd,  the  true  temple  of  God  was 
opened.  This  was  in  reality  the  temple  which  Christ 
had  said  He  could  raise  on  the  ruins  of  the  old."  •*  The 
speakers  themselves  were  overpowered  by  the  sudden 
wind  and  scintillating  flashes  of  the  electric  fluid  (v.  3)," 
— the  verse  is,  "  And  there  appeared  unto  them  cloven 
tongues,  like  as  of  fire,  and  it  sat  upon  each  of  them  " — 
"  while  those  who  gathered  round  and  listened  to  them 
were  no  less  awe-struck  by  hearing  the  praises  of  God 
and  wonderful  things  uttered  in  their  own  tongues, 
which  they  little  expected  to  hear  from  Galileans 
(v.  4-8).  The  speakers  at  first  made  convulsive  sounds, 
but  soon  recovered  their  equilibrium  (I  feel  it  hard  to 
preserve  one's  own) ;  not  like  those  who,  in  the  time  of 
St.  Paul,  after  having  lost,  in  the  midst  of  the  Divine 
service,  the  power  of  articulation  (that  is,  speaking  with 
a  tongue,  note),  were  imable  to  express  their  emotion 
otherwise  than  by  sounds  of  the  brute  creation,  extorted 
by  their  overpowering  sensations.  Nor,  according  to 
St.  Luke's  account,  were  the  pious  hearers  overcome  to 
such  an  extent  as  some  later  learned  interpreters  appear 
to  have  been.  They  did  not  regard  the  screams  which 
had  been  uttered  at  the  first  moment,  but  listened  to 
what  they  heard  spoken  in  their  own  tongue.  If  this 
be  a  rationalistic  explanation,  it  is  that  of  St.  Peter.  (!) 
Where  does  that  Apostle  state  that  he  and  his  friends 
received  the  power  of  speaking  languages  not  their  own. 


189 

or  tLat  the  utterance  of  convulsive  sounds  was  a  proof 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  being  the  Christ,  and  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  having  come  down  upon  the  believers  in  the 
Galilean"  ? 

W.  It  is  inconceivable ;  one's  only  comfort  is  that  its 
follj'  proves  honesty, 

£1.  I  agi-ee  with  you.  I  believe  there  was  a  love  of 
good,  and  that  from  God,  in  this  amiable  man.  Are 
you  aware  that  he  declared,  on  his  death-bed.  that 
Christ  was  all,  an<i  that  only  was  life — all  else  nothing. 

If.  It  is  a  sweet  and  joyfiil  thought  to  know  it. 
How  wonderful,  and  wonderfully  above  man,  is  the  grace 
of  God ! 

U.  It  is.  and  sweet  to  turn  to  and  dwell  on. 

W.  But  how  is  it  possible  that  one  can  be  blinded  to 
such  a  point  ? 

£{.  It  is  hard  to  tell.  That  man  should  say,  "I  do 
not  beheve  the  account,"  is  intelligible  enough.  But  to 
take  it  and  make  this  out  of  it  is  hard  to  understand.  I 
account  for  it  by  the  Divine  instinct  which  cannot  bear 
to  give  up  the  words  of  eternal  life,  and  the  vanity 
which  would  go  on  with  the  supposed  progress  of 
science.  All  is  the  contradiction  of  the  Scripture 
statement.  There  was  no  wind,  but  a  sound  hke  one. 
The  scintillating  electricity  of  the  storm  resting  on  their 
heads  would  be  rather  awkward.  There  are  no  con- 
vulsive sounds,  no  screams;  they  are  all  Galileans,  con- 
trasted with  devout  men  from  everj'  nation  under  heaven. 
Peter  had  no  need  to  say  they  spake  with  tongues, 
because  it  was  heard  by  all,  and  is  stated  by  the  historian. 
He  does,  both  here  and  in  his  defence  as  to  going  to 
Cornelius,  rel'er  to  it  as  the  proof  of  C'hrist's  glory  and 
the  seal  of  faith ;  aud  tells  them  if  they  repented  and 
were  baptized  they  would  receive  it  too.  Each  particular 
is  exactly  contrary  to  the  history,  and  the  wind  and 
electricity  contemptible.  Think  of  Paul  saying  they 
were  not  to  speak  with  a  tongue  except  there  was  an 
interpreter,  when  they  were  the  souucls  of  the  brute 
creation  — he  spake  with  tongues  more  than  they  ail — I 


190 

suppose  of  difTerent  brutes.  But  the  explanation  of 
Baron  Bunsen  is  important  here  as  regards  the  system  of 
the  school.  "With  true  prophetic  spirit  St.  Peter 
applied  to  this  event  what  had  been  foretold  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  which  was  to  come  in  the  last  days,  and 
to  be  recognized  by  the  outpouring  of  intelligence  and 
wisdom  over  the  unlearned  men  and  women  even  of  the 
lowest  classes."  Now  this  is  not  true.  He  speaks  of 
visions  and  dreams,  not  of  wisdom  and  inteUigenoe. 
But  further :  "  No,  he  tells  them  a  story  as  simple  as  it 
is  true ;  the  great  event  of  his  days,  and  of  all  days—  the 
glorification  of  God  through  Christ,  not  as  an  external 
fact,  but  as  a  Divine  principle  of  life  in  mankind." 
Now  how  striking  it  is  that  an  upright  mind,  for  such  I 
doubt  not  was  Baron  Bunsen's,  xmder  the  influence  of 
this  deceit  of  Satan,  can  misrepresent  a  statement,  or 
rather,  just  as  the  Baron  does  in  Egyptian  history,  give 
what  he  thinks  ought  to  be  here  instead  of  what  is. 
There  is  not  one  word  of  the  glorification  of  God  through 
Christ,  but  of  God's  glorifying  Christ,  whereupon  tie 
Holy  Ghost  was  shed  forth.  He  speaks  of  the  power 
of  God  raising  up  from  the  dead  and  setting  Chnst,  as 
man,  at  His  right  hand,  and  that  He,  having  received 
the  Holy  Ghost  from  the  Father,  had  sent,  not  a  storm 
and  electricity  to  rest  on  the  disciples'  heads,  but  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Nor  does  he  even  say  one  word  of  a 
principle  of  Divine  life  in  mankind.  Christianity  is 
that ;  but  here  there  is  not  a  word  of  it.  The  Baron 
adds :  "  On  that  day,  accordingly,  not  only  the  Christian 
Church  was  bom,  but  also  the  Christian  state."  I  only 
add  this  to  show  how  all  is  the  theory  of  his  mind  with- 
out reference  to  fact.  Where  is  '  the  Christian  state ' 
on  Pentecost? 

I  need  not  say  I  do  not  quote  this  to  refiite  it — it 
would  not  deserve  it ;  but  to  show  the  character  and 
spirit,  and  materials  of  which  the  new  school  is  made 
up.  God's  exalting  Christ—  overstepping  the  narrow 
bounds  of  Judaism,  to  visit  all  nations  in  grace — the 
blessed  truth  of  another  Comforter,  which  Christ  had 


jiromised.  is  Dot  seen  for  a  moment.  An  invented 
storm,  an  electricity  which  would  have  left  very  few 
Galileans  there :  what  folly  replaces  it  ? 

W.  Refuting  it  would  indeed  be  absurd ;  but  it  is 
a  singular  phenomenon,  such  an  entire  aberration  of 
mind. 

H.  It  is  a  state,  and  the  proof  of  the  folly,  of  man's 
mind,  when,  as  such,  it  pretends  to  judge  of  God's  acts. 
But  I  have  a  quotation  from  another  part  of  Baron 
Bunsen's  works  which  distinctly  shows  his  notion — the 
school's  notion -of  revelation,  and  with  this  view  I  quote 
it : — '•  Such  a  direct  communication  of  the  Divine  mind 
as  is  called  revelation,  has  necessarily  two  factors,  which 
arc  co-operating  in  producing  it.  The  one  is  the  infinite 
factor,  or  the  direct  manifestation  of  eternal  truth  to  the 
mind,  by  the  power  which  that  mind  has  of  perceiving 
it ;  for  human  perception  is  the  correlative  of  Divine 
manifestation."  "This  infinite  factor  is,  of  course,  not 
historical ;  it  is  inherent  in  every  individual  soul,  but 
with  an  immense  diflerence  of  degree." 

'•  The  second  factor  of  revelation  is  the  finite,  or  ex- 
ternal. This  mode  of  Divine  manifestation  is,  in  the 
first  place,  a  universal  one — the  universe  is  Nature. 
In  a  more  s|)ecial  sense,  it  is  an  historical  manifestation 
of  Divine  truth  through  the  life  and  teaching  of  higher 
minds  among  men.  The.-e  men  of  Gocl  are  eminent 
iiidi\nduals,  who  communicate  something  of  eternal 
truth  to  their  brethren,"  "The  difference  between 
Jesus  and  the  other  men  of  God  is  analogous  to  that 
between  the  tnauifestation  of  a  part  and  the  totality  and 
substance  of  the  Divine  mind."  I  cannot  follow  the 
wild  idealism  of  Bunsen  in  all  its  details.  I  may  give 
as  an  example  of  it  his  interpretation  of  "Marvel  not 
at  this :  for  the  hour  is  coming  in  the  which  all  that  are 
in  their  graves  shall  hear  His  voice,  and  shall  come 
forth,  those  that  have  done  good  to  the  resurrection  of 
life,  and  they  that  have  done  evil  to  the  resurrection 
of  danmation."  He  translates,  he  says,  from  Semitic , 
into  Jaj>etic  language ;  so  he  speaks  thus :  "  The  history 


192 

of  mankind  will  prove  to  be  the  judgment  of  God. 
Nations  will  perish  by  this  judgment,  and  new  nations 
will  arise,  and  the  truth  and  justice  of  God  will  become 
manifest  as  well  by  tibe  destruction  of  empires  as  by  the 
awakening  of  new  national  life."  This  is  not  exceptional. 
The  Son  having  life  in  Himself,  as  the  Father  in  Him- 
self, and  authority  to  execute  judgment,  means — "  This 
new  period  of  mankind  is  now  beginning ;  individuals  of 
all  nations  will  be  awakened  by  Divine  consciousness 
(nota  bene),  and  in  process  of  time  this  Divine  principle 
in  man  will  become  the  principle  of  all  social  relations, 
governments,  and  states."  Now  how  entirely  opposite 
this  is  to  Christianity  I  need  not  say,  which  speaks  of 
man  as  lost,  of  redemption,  of  a  new  Divine  life  given. 
But  I  only  introduce  it  now  as  showing  the  excess  of 
spiritual  idealism  which  makes  all  Baron  Bunsen's 
views  and  statements  a  will-o'-the-wisp.  The  only 
thing  I  know  like  it,  and  from  which  much  (at  any  rate 
in  the  form  and  habit  of  mind)  seems  to  be  drawn,  is 
Philo.  Of  course  to  Bunsen  it  came  philosophically 
through  Hegel — perhaps  Schelling;  but  Philo  is  so 
extraordinarily  like,  because  he  connected  Judaism 
and  a  like  system,  as  Bunsen  does  Christianity  with 
Hegelianism.  I  shall  recur  to  this.  My  present  point 
is  the  revelation  of  Christ.  I  believe  Christian  instinct 
gave  Bunsen  a  sense  of  what  Christ  was,  which  pierces 
through,  so  great  is  God's  grace.  But  I  will  give 
his  ideas  of  Christ  to  complete  the  picture,  and  dien 
turn  to  his  ideas  of  revelation.  I  say  idea,  for  Bunsen 
is  an  honest  man,  and  gives  it ;  but  we  must  never  trust 
words  in  these  men's  mouths,  because  tibey  all  use 
common  Christian  terms,  but  they  mean  with  them 
totally  different  things. 

W.  That  I  see  plain  enough.  I  am  getting  gradu- 
ally hold  of  the  system.  We  must  have  the  key  to  the 
cyj)her.  When  once,  however,  one  sees  this,  it  produces 
just  distrust  as  to  all  they  say.  They  cover  themselves 
with  the  mantle  of  Christianity  to  pierce  it  under  the 
fifth  rib.    They  are  very  Joabs  in  their  character.   They 


fejieak  peaceably  to  Aliaer  in  the  king's  gate,  but  on 
has  to  learn  to  be  aware  that  they  have  a  hidden  sword. 
However,  the  iraud  is  tolerably  apparent.  God  ever 
takes  care  of  His  people. 

//.  In  a  very  angry  correspondence  in  France,  which 
1  have  seen  puljlished  as  a  pamphlet  since  our  first 
conversation,  it  is  seriously  proposed  that  they  should 
openly  say  what  they  mean  and  think  on  the  great 
truths  of  Christianity,  that  the  mass  of  professing  Chris-  j 
tiana  may  know  what  they  really  hold.  They  speak  of 
Christ,  His  gracious  life  and  the  like,  and  unsuspecting 
persons  assume  commonly-received  truths  as  at  the 
basis ;  but  the  select  few  are  initiated,  and  propagate 
loubts  and  unbelief;  and  the  work  is  actively  carried 
Such  at  least  is  the  distinct  statement  in  these 
("papers ;  and  one  sees  the  shrinking  from  open  dealing, 
or  meeting  it  clearly,  in  the  replies.  At  any  rate,  the 
first  part  is  true,  for  that  I  have  met  with — the  speak- 
ing of  Christ  as  if  all  was  right,  while  not  one  word 
of  commonly  held  Christian  truth  was  believed,  yet  the 
same  terms  largely  employed.  This  is  the  case  with 
Bunsen,  only  he  honestly  states  what  he  thinks.  Thus 
I  speaks  of  judgment.  But  what  does  this  mean? 
[•The  conscience  of  man.  now  represented  by  Jesus  of 
Bf&zareth,  will  be  the  judge  of  man—  first,  as  to  individual 
Wnduct,  and  in  i)rocess  of  time,  through  faith  in  his 
^irit,  as  to  national  affairs'.  What  f)ecomes  of  the 
hidgment  of  quick  and  dead  now  ?  Christianity  is  gone 
W  a  reverie. 

Again,  he  speaks  of  Christ's  unity  with  the  Father. 

9e  is  identified  and  one  with  God.     That  sounds  well 

HDOUgh.     But  what  is  it  ?     "  The  willing  self-sacrifice 

r  Jesus  is  the   cause  of  his  unity  with  the  Father," 

(lit  is  a  mere  moral  idea.     The  truth  is  gone,  and  see 

Bw  it  works.      He  adds    (Christ  speaks),    "What  I 

■y  of  myself,  that  I  am  one  with  God,  is  true  of  all 

len." 

Having  shown  the  genius  and  character  of  all  this 

iching,  I  vrill  now,  before  applying  it  to  revelation. 


194 

quote  to  you  his  interpretation  of  the  Apostle's  (John's) 
teaching  concerning  Christ: — 

"  Before  the  visible  universe  existed,  there  was  in  God 
the  conscious  thought  of  Himself,  as  active  reason. 
This  thought  was  identical  with  God,  the  substance  of 
the  universe;  it  was  God  thinking  Himself,  making 
Himself  objective  to  Himself"  (As  the  Neoplatonists 
say,  the  intelligent  no  longer  as  existence,  but  in  activity 
becoming  the  intelligible.  For  this  is  mere  Neoplatonism, 
and,  indeed,  so  does  Bunsen  explain  it.)  "This,  then, 
is  the  Divine  existence  of  the  Word,  as  active  reason ; " 
according  to  Philo  and  the  Alexandrian  fathers,  ev^iw 
eiTot.  "  The  creation  of  the  universe  is  the  manifestation 
in  space  and  time  of  the  same  thought  of  God  of  Him- 
self. There  was  nothing  created  which  has  not  the 
principle  of  existence  in  that  thought  of  God  of  Him- 
self." These  are  the  ideas  of  Plato,  the  yorjrov  of  Philo. 
"  The  universe,  thus  created,  continues  to  have  the  prin- 
ciple of  life  in  this  Divine  self-consciousness;  this 
principle  of  substantial  existence  is  also  the  intellectual 
principle  in  man." 

"  God's  eternal  thought  of  Himself  became  personal 
in  finite  existence  in  a  man  conscious  of  his  Divine 
nature.  In  this  man,  that  Divine  Word  lived  amongst 
us,  and  we  behold  in  Jesus  Divine  glory  and  truth. 
He  alone,  therefore,  could  declare  to  mankind  the 
nature  of  God,  for  that  primitive  consciousness  lived  in 
Him  constantly  and  perfectly." 

I  rejoice  to  think  that  true  divinely-given  faith  in 
Christ  pierces  through  Bunsen's  idealism;  I  rejoice 
heartily  in  it.  It  is  swamped  in  idealism,  but  there  is 
not  the  cold,  calculating  infidelity  of  the  Essays  and 
Reviews.  Dr.  Williams's  language  is,  "  The  son  of 
David  by  birth  is  the  Son  of  God  by  the  spirit  of  holi- 
ness" (a  false  citation).  '^What  is  flesh  is  bom  of 
flesh,  what  is  spirit  is  bom  of  spirit."  This  he  calls  the 
incarnation  becoming  purely  spiritual.  Having  gladly 
owned  this  as  to  Baron  Bunsen,  which  is  my  real  feeling, 
we  may  pursue  the  research  into  the  system.    Save  the 


195 

last  phrase  I  have  quoted,  it  is  merely  a  reproduction 
of  Philonian,  that  is  Alexandrian,  Platonism,  adapted 
by  idealism  to  Scripture  statements. 

The  Logos  was  first  evhaderoQ — immanent  reason  in 
God;  then  wpcxpopiKog ;  and  thus  the  universe  (not  in 
matter,  but  existing  in  the  thought  of  God  in  idea)  was 
the  Xoyof.  Then  the  Xoyoc  became  the  band  and  support 
of  it  when  it  took  a  form.  So  here  with  Baron  Bunsen 
in  the  wild  notion  that  the  universe^  thus  created,  con- 
tinues to  have  the  principle  of  life  in  this  Divine  self- 
consciousness.  It  is  a  living  being.  All  this  is  pure 
Philonism.  So  is  the  notion  that  the  eminent  man — 
"the  wise  man,"  says  Philo — has  this  partially  in  him, 
partakes  intrinsically  of  the  Divine  Xoyog  in  his  reason. 
As  in  Bunsen,  repeated  in  a  passage  I  have  not  quoted : 
"  In  the  progress  of  history,  this  principle  (life  in  Divine 
self -consciousness)  manifested  itself  as  intelligence" — 
the  (TfxpoQ  and  eTrKTrrjfJtrj  of  Philo.  The  only  point  where 
Bunsen  leaves  Philo,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  is  when  he 
speaks  of  Christ  as  having  the  fulness  of  this  in  a  finite 
person ;  but  even  here,  with  a  very  slight  modification, 
Philo  applies  this  to  Moses.  He  could  not  see  God 
Himself,  but  entered  into  the  darkness  and  saw  the 
original  pattern  of  heavenly  things.  He  is  called  God. 
"  But  what,  did  He  not  enjoy  also  a  greater  fellowship 
with  the  Father  and  Maker  of  all  things ;  having  been 
counted  worthy  of  the  same  title :  for  He  was  called 
the  God  and  King  of  the  whole  nation,  and  is  said  to 
have  entered  into  the  thick  darkness  where  God  was, 
that  is,  into  the  formless  and  invisible  and  incorporeal 
pattern  essence  of  beings :  mentally  contemplating  what 
cannot  be  seen  by  mortal  nature."  {De  Vita  Mosis^ 
Mangey,  108  for  106.) 

The  j)rophets  only  inquire,  and  get  answers.  So  the 
law  of  Moses  is  the  perfect  expression  of  the  Divine 
mind,  and  serves  as  such,  and  will  be  for  all  ages.  It 
corresponds  to  the  harmony  of  the  universe,  and  is  in 
unison  with  the  reason  (Xoyw)  of  the  eternal  nature. 
{De  Vita  Mom,  Mangey,  ii.  142.) 


196 
Bunsen's  notion  of  the  prophetic  spirit  in  all  eminent 

men  is  aJsO  x  bllO  S,  iravri  aydpuTia  aortuo  o  lepog  Xoyoc  wfXHpriTtiaP 

fxaprvpei.  But  the  word  of  prophecy  has  Moses  for  its 
name  (Man.  i.  652).  Moses  has  power  over  all  the 
elements  of  nature;  each  one  of  them  obeys  him  (Man.  ii. 
105.  SoMangey,ii.l07— forl05.)  He  took  the  Divine 
excellencies  as  preferable  to  worldly  goods,  so  that  God 
rewarded  him  with  great  and  perfect  riches.  The  read- 
ing is  then  said  to  be  faulty  in  the  text,  umrrir  (equality). 
It  may  be  so,  but  I  am  not  quite  clear.  Mangey  reads, 
those  (riches)  of  all  the  universe.  But  it  then  goes  on : 
For  having  been  thought  worthy  of  being  declared  par- 
taker of  His  own  lot  [God]  granted  him  the  whole 
world.  The  elements  own  him  Lord.  "  Nor  is,"  he  adds, 
"  that  wonderful ;  for  if,  as  the  proverb  says,  all  things 
belonging  to  friends  are  common — and  the  prophet  is 
called  t^e  friend  of  God,  as  a  consequence  as  to 
usufruct — he  will  be  partaker  and  companion  of  all 
his  possession."  What  is  this  but  Bunsen  s  Jesus  of 
Nazareth's  self-sacrifice — the  cause  of  his  unity  with 
the  Father? 

It  is,  I  think,  a  mistake,  unless  I  have  overlooked 
some  passage,  to  say  that  Moses  is  called  ©  upoQ  Xoyor» 
the  sacred  Word,  as  has  been  alleged  by  Gfrorer.  This 
applies  to  the  Scripture,  but  he  is  set  in  the  same  place 
really  in  the  de  migratione  Abrahami.  He  is  the  ^taioia, 
the  mind  and  thought  of  God,  and  Aaron  his  prophet  to 
declare  it.  This  under  another  name  is  the  same  thing, 
but  it  is  not  immanent  as  the  Xoyo^  but  more  a  gift. 
But  then,  on  the  other  hand,  the  irvevfia  ayutr  abode  always 
with  him.  In  most  it  visits  and  goes — is  an  afflatus,  but 

in  JMoseS   abides,  tovtw  fity  ow  to  Oeioy  aei  iroptorarai.    yjL/6 

Giffantibus,  Man.  i.  269,  270). 

I  will  not  go  further.  He  largely  insists  in  more 
than  one  place  on  his  entering  into  the  thick  darkness — 
so  as  prophet  he  knew  all  that  as  king,  lawgiver,  and 
priest  he  could  not ;  and  all  completed  his  knowledge, 
he  is  (M.  ii.  145)  inspired,  has  breathed  into  him 
heavenly  love ;  what  he  says  is  an  oracle  Xtylor  ex  wpuaunfou 


ii'  tpfiiivtiay  iminixed.  not  as   others  trom    iaquiry    and  J 
answer  (Man.  ii.  163.)  I 

W.  It  would  be  curious  if  Bunsen's  wanderings  were  J 
only  a  reproduction  of  Philo.  But  where  are  you  lead-  I 
ing  my  thoughts  with  all  this  ?  I 

I£.  Not  au  unnatural  question.     First  we   are  ex- 1 
amimng  a  professed  review  of  Bunsen,  and  inquiry  into  i 
his    real  views   is  the  best  answer ;  and  it  shows  the  ' 
true  character  of  the  teaching  sought  to  be  introduced. 
PLiJo  indeed  was,  while  for  ever    allegorising,  so    far  , 
soberer,  that  ho  recognises  the  literal  history,  though,  | 
like  Augustine,  saying  when  it  is  dishonouring  to  God'»  1 
tlioughts,  it  must  bo  taken  mystically.     Still  he  respects  I 
the  written  Word  far  more  than  Jiunsen  and  our  Essay- 
ists,    But  I  had  also  a  more  precise  object.     1  have 
only,  could  only,  in  our  brief  intercourse  bring  forward 
points  of  contact,  but  the  more  Philo's  views  are  before 
the  mind  as  a  whole,  the  more  the  similarity;  the  identity, 
I  may  say,  is  apparent.     Another  character  of  the  \oyoc 
which    Philo  gives  will    lead  nie  to  the  point.      The 
Xa^c  or  Di^-ine  reason,  is  faith  in  us ;  that  is,  the  Xoyoo 
or  Divine  immanent  reason,  becoming  in  its  acting  in 
man    intelligence,   the  opdot  Xoyoc,    or    right   reason   in 
the    abstract,   which  is  Divine,  is,  as  far   as   it  acts, 
right  reason  in  man,  i.e.,  in  the  wise ;  and  the  arche- 
typal idea  is  in  the  mind  of  man  faith ;  he  has  seized  it  as 
li8TiDg,  as  the  wise  man,  this  right  reason  in  himself,  it 
being  in  himself  so  far  as  he  is  wise.     That  which  is 
seized  is  the  idea  in  God,  but  it  is  the  idea  in  the  man's 
mind,  the  \oyoc  being  his  intelligence.     It  is  a  copy  of 
the  original  copy,  or  production  of  the  inherent  mind  of 
God.     As  inherent,  it  is  unknown.     As  become  intel- 
ligible in  the  Xoyoc  an  idea,  it  is  roirros,  capable  of  being 
a  subject  of  thought;  and  the  human  mind,  which  is  the 
actinu  of  the  Xnyo^  in  us.  thinks  it,  has  the  idea,  believes  i 
it  as  truth.     Thus  it  is  faith.     This  seems  subtle,  but  it  I 
is  not  difficult  to  understand.     The  thinking  potver  isa 
not  thinking.    When  1  think  I  have  a  thought.     Thus  I 
I'what  was  simply  intelligent,  capable  of  thinking,  is  in-.  I 


198 

telligible,  becomes  in  tlie  produced  thought  a  possible 
subject  of  another  s  apprehension.  If  the  same  intelli- 
gence is  in  another  as  his  mind,  it  is  the  spring  of  the 
same  thought  in  him.  The  Xoyoc  as  immanent  reason  in 
God  is  unknown,  but  as  a  whole  of  thoughts,  when 
thinking  has  taken  place,  when  the  Divine  mind  has 
had  or  produced  thoughts,  is  not  all  known,  but  vonroc, 
knowable;  and  then  archetypal  ideas  become  by  the 
Xoyoc  being  also  our  reason,  our  ideas.  Hence  the  \oyoc 
is  the  archetjrpal  idea,  and  faith,  according  to  Fhilo. 
Forgive  me  this  dose  of  Alexandrian  philosophy.  You 
ynll  see  its  application  to  revelation  in  a  moment. 

W.  I  begin  to  catch  it  already.  But  it  denies  posi- 
tive revelation.  It  is  a  kind  of  deifying  the  intelligence 
of  man,  making  him,  in  some  strange  way,  the  proper 
source  of  the  same  thoughts,  called  faith,  and  so,  eventu- 
ally, a  part  of  God. 

a.  Yes.  This  comes  from  the  connexion  of  con- 
science and  reason  on  moral  subjects,  the  judging 
process  of  the  mind  and  perception  of  good  and  evil. 
Thus,  where  the  will,  or  that  in  which  we  take  pleasure, 
coincides  with  the  conscience — the  judgment  of  good 
and  evil — there  is  moral  perfection.  God  is  realised ; 
or,  as  Bunsen  says,  man  is  God. 

TF.  But  then,  if  I  understand  this,  it  is  a  direct 
denial  of  all  revelation.  It  is  a  partial  possession  of  the 
Divine  nature,  which  may  be  morally  complete,  in  virtue 
of  which  man  has  in  himself  the  thoughts  of  God,  and 
that  naturally,  which  equally  denies  what  is  revealed 
— the  sinful  alienation  of  man  from  God.  Scripture 
says,  "  All  the  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart 
were  only  evil,  and  that  continually ;"  and  the  deep  prac- 
tical experience  of  one  who  understood  the  spirituality 
of  God's  law  could  say,  "  I  know  that  in  me  "—that  is, 
in  my  flesh — "  dwelleth  no  good  thing ;"  and  that  even 
when  to  will  was  present  with  him,  how  to  perform  that 
which  was  good  he  found  not. 

H.  Precisely.  It  is  a  denial  of  revelation,  and  a 
denial  of  the  truth  as  to  man;  and,  in  revelation,  a 


199 

dropping--  1  will  not  say  denial  —  of  every  Divine 
object, 

\f.  But  I  have  a  difficulty  here,  because  Philo  surely 
recognized  a  Divine  revelation. 

2/.  Your  remark  is  quite  in  place ;  but  it  leads  to 
the  confirmation  and  clearing  up  of  the  real  truth  on 
this  question  —  "  What  is  revelation  V  From  his  educa- 
tion and  habits  as  a  Jew.  he  distinctly  recognized  the 
inspiration  of  the  Old  Testament— particularly  of  Moses' 
writings,  but  of  all ;  and  inspiration  in  the  fullest  sense — 
the  oi>eration  of  the  Holy  or  |)rophetic  Spirit ;  so  that 
man  was  wholly  shut  out.  lie  was  far  more  a  believer 
in  his  theory  on  this  subject  -  very  far— than  Bunsen  or 
the  rationalists,  even  the  most  moderate  of  them.  But 
two  things  are  to  be  observed :  first,  he  philosophized 
independently  of  the  Scriptures,  though  he  sought  to  bring 
them  in  as  confirmatory,  and  allegorized  them  even 
where  he  owned  them  to  be  historical.  Abraham 
meant  one  idea,  Israel  another,  Jacob  another.  He 
often  admitted  only  ideas  —no  literal  history  at  all.  He 
was  the  most  outrageous  spiritualizer,  but  reducing  ali 
to  man  as  he  is  looked  at  as  virtuous.  Hence  evident 
inconsistencias.  Hut  what  is  more  material,  there  was 
no  Divine  object  in  revelation  for  him.  Cod  remained 
necessarily  unknown  in  Himself.  The  revelation  he  had 
was  of  ideas;  the  Xnyoe- the  imiversal  idea  of  all — the 
universe ;  the  bringing  this  idea  into  finite  man's  mind 
a  little  world  of  answering  ideas,  formed  a  micro- 
cosm as  the  philosophers  called  it.  Man  was,  when 
virtuous,  when  partaker  of  Bnuy  api-uv  (Divine  virtues), 
an  a»T(ioi  m-iip  (Bunsen's  eminent  men),  a  possessor,  as 
we  have  seen,  of  the  opSoe  \<iyiic,  which,  in  its  infinitude, 
was  a  kind  of  middle  being  Ijetween  God  and  creatures 
(the  evident  origin  of  iVrianism,  and  the  early  philo- 
sophical Christianity  of  Alexandria).  The  law  for  him 
was  tlie  expression  of  this  perfect  or  right  reason,  and 
was  to  be  perpetual  and  universal.  But  there  were  thus 
only  great  principles  and  ideas  to  be  made  good — there 
■was  no  Divine  object  at   all.      God  was  inaccessible. 


I 
I 

J 


200 

The  Xoyoc  comes  out  as  a  universal  archetypal  idea, 
realized  finitely  in  creation,  but  not  as  a  personal  object 
of  faith,  though  sometimes  treated  almost  as  a  person, 
because  acting  in  power ;  and  this  \oyov  was  man's  in- 
telligence. MessisJi  is  only  referred  to  as  a  conqueror 
to  come,  subduing  the  Gentiles,  and  making  good  Jewish 
hopes ;  beasts  to  be  tamed  ~  men  too ;  sickness  to  de- 
part ;  the  Jews  to  be  a  kind  of  world  priests.  There  is 
no  proper  revealed  Divine  object  of  faith.     The  soul  is 

an   avoaraafia^    a   shrcd,    an  arauyatr/xa,  a  shiuiug    forth,    a 

ray,  an  ex^aytioy  efi(f>€pec,  a  corresjTonding  impress  of  God. 
It  existed  before,  came  into  a  body,  and  so  was  lowered 
and  dualized ;  (and  this  circumscription  of  our  spirits  in 
the  limits  of  flesh  and  time,  practical  selfishness,  Bunsen 
reckons  the  fall;)  and  when  it  dies,  goes  back  to 
heaven,  restored  to  unity.  There  is  a  reproduction  of 
the  Word  in  the  soul,  but  no  revealed  object  l>efore  it. 
This  part  of  man  is  reason  and  conscience.  Now  you 
will  find  that  this  makes  the  ground  taken  by  the  new 
school  most  distinct.  Thev  claim  the  title  of  reason  and 
conscience  to  judge  of  all,  that  is,  of  the  finite  Xoyoc,  so 
to  speak,  in  man — the  moral  perceptive  jx)wer  in  man 
to  judge  of  everything.  By  what  ?  By  itself.  Man, 
as  he  is,  is  the  measure  of  right  and  wrong,  and  good 
and  evil.  Now,  if  the  Word  has  been  made  flesh,  God 
revealed  in  man,  this  cannot  be.  He  is  the  true  and 
perfect  measure,  and  His  words,  expressing  what  He  is, 
will  judge  men ;  not  now,  unless  inwardly ;  Imt  when  the 
time  of  gracious  revelation  is  over,  the  same  will  judge 
him  in  the  last  day.  Now  this  is  Christianity  in  its 
great  elementary  truths.  It  declares  man  has  failed, 
and  is  evil,  tJiough  he  had  a  conscience.  God  had  taken 
care  that  when  he  left  God  and  sinned,  and  sought  in- 
dependence (i.e?.,  sin  as  to  will, -as  corruption  is  it  as  to 
lust),  he  should  carry  a  conscience,  a  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil,  with  him.  He  has  sinned  without  a  law% 
and  wallowed  in  corrui)tion ;  he  has  sinned  under  law, 
which  forbade  the  corruption,  and  denied  the  independ- 
ence, claiming  obedience,   and   therein   righteousness. 


201 

Kay,  he  has  sinned  in  rejecting  goodness  itself 
came  into  the  world,  after  all  this.  Now,  wrath  is 
revealed  from  heaven  against  both  ungodliness  and 
ujirighteousness  of  men  who  hold  the  truth  in  uuright- 
eoiisness.  But  uithal  God's  righteousness  is  revealed, 
not  on  a  principle  of  works — niaii  was  judged  and  con- 
demned on  that  principle — but  as  God's  righteousness 
by  faith,  and  so  to  every  one,  without  law  or  under 
law,  who  believed.  But  how  ?  In  a  Divine  object  pre- 
sfflited — God  iliruself  manifested  in  grace,  as  man  dying 
to  put  away  sin,  that  blessing  might  be  in  righte- 
ousness, and  no  allowance  of  evil,  and  a  new  Divine  life 
communicated,  iu  a  word,  God  is  i-evealeil  in  Christ, 
to  be  the  coudcnmrLtion  of  Besh  and  man,  but  to  be  a 
new  eternal  life  ctirae  down  from  heaven,  making  men 
thus  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature ;  and  while  putting 
away  sm.  and  glorifying  God  in  this  respect,  giving  a  per- 
fect object  of  this  life — the  Father  revealed  in  the  Son. 
A  Divine  object  is  before  us.  The  Word  made  fle^h, 
"we  beheld  Ilis  glorj',  the  glory  as  of  an  only  begotten 
from  the  Father."  lie  "  dwelt  among  us,  full  of  grace  and 
truth."  I  have  here,  very  imperfectly,  but  sufficiently  at 
tkis  moment,  sketched  the  revelation— a  revealed  object 
My  puTfmse  heie,  of  course,  is  not  to  unfold  doctrine, 
but  give  the  character  of  the  revelation.  Now  the  new 
school  comes  in  and  says,  "  But  I  must  judge  this  by 
what  is  in  man.'"  Nay.  1  say,  it  judges  what  is  in  man 
— in  grace  and  for  his  good— rbut  it  is  the  truth.  Christ 
is  the  truth,  and  judges  man.  It  is  a  revelation  after 
man  has  had  full  scoj*  with  conscience,  reason,  and  a 
perfect  rule  for  it,  the  law ;  and  all  in  vain.  It  is  a 
revelation  coming  because  that  was  insufficient,  because 
mail  was  incomjietent.  and  proves  it ;  and  brings  in  sal- 
Tation  iu  a  new  revealed  object,  which  is  not  what  was 
in  man,  but  in  God  —  a  second  man,  but  the  Lord 
from  heaven. 

Let  us  now  see  how  Btuisen's  statement  as  to  revela- 
tion embodies  the  evil  principle  I  have  referred  to.    He 
lays : — "  Such  a  direct  communication  of  the  Divine 
0  2 


I 

I 


202 

mind  as  is  called  revelation  has  necessarily  two  factors 
which  are  co-operating  in  producing  it.     The  one  is  the 
infinite  factor,  or  the  direct   manifestation  of  eternal 
truth  to  the  mind,  ly  the  power  which  that  mind  has  of 
perceiving  it ;  for  human  perception  is  the  correlative  of 
Divine  manifestation."     Now,  absurd  as  this  is,  it  is 
plain  enough.    It  is  Philo's  op6o-  Xoyot,  right  reason,  and 
faith,  or  the  reason  and  conscience  of  the  new  infidel 
school.     A  manifestation  to  by  the  power  of  perceiving 
is  absurd— absurd  in  every  case.    It  supposes  an  object, 
but  an  object  by  a  power  of  perceiving.     Now  God  can 
will  an  object,  but  needs  then  no  revelation,  of  course. 
If  man  perceives,  he  must  have  something  to  perceive ; 
it  is  not  manifested  by  his  power  to  perceive ;  or  he 
creates,  or  has  the  Divine  nature,  with  its  thoughts,  as 
a  given  mind.     This  is  just  Philo,  and  is  false,  meta- 
physically and  morally,  because  he  is  not  infinite,  and 
he  is  evil.     Scripture  makes  the  contrast,  and  refers  the 
knowledge  of  the  Divine  mind  to  the  believer  only,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  who  shows  things  to  us.     "  What  man 
knows  the  things  of  a  man  save  the  spirit  of  the  man 
which  is  in  him  ?  so  no  man  knows  the  things  of  God 
but  the  Spirit  of  God.     Now  we  have  received,  not  the 
spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God,  that 
we  might  know  the  things  which  are  freely  given  to  us 
of  God."     A  man  knows  the  things  of  a  man  by  the 
spirit  of  man ;  the  things  of  God  (these  are  new,  freely 
given  things,  objects  not  inherent  in  the  mind),  the 
Spirit  of  God  only.     He  is  given  to  them  that  believe, 
takes  the  things  of  Christ  and  shows  them  to  us.     I  am 
not  arguing  now  whether  Scripture  be  true ;  but  show- 
'  ing  that  the  Christian  system  is  directly  in  every  part 

in  antagonism  with  the  system  we  are  examining. 

W.  Most  clearly,  and,  I  may  say,  rationally  and 
morally  so ;  but  perfectly  opposed  in  every  particular. 

H.  What  I  think  striking  is,  that  it  goes  over  the 
same  ground,  the  mind,  its  thoughts,  conscience,  rela- 
tionship of  God  to  man,  our  being  His  ofl&pring ;  but  in 
every  point,  instead  of  building  up  the  competency  of 


203 


man  in  his  oM  pitsitiou,  treats  liitn  as  incompetent  and  ' 
fallen,  and  brings  in  a  new  tiling,  a  second  man,  the 
revelation  ni  God,  and  of  the  father,  and  of  the  Son. 


i,the 


It  shows  liberty  fi'om  rites  and  legal  ceremonies, 
bondage  of  the  law,  the  higher  prophetic  light,  even  be- 
fore Christ ;  but  instead  of  reducing  it  into  the  limits  of 
the  Adam  nature  to  exalt  man,  that  is,  self,  it  uses  it  to 
show  him  condemned  in  his  Adam  condition,  incapable 
of  thus  knowing  God.  and  gives  new  life,  new  objects,  a 
new  state,  and  a  perfect  revelation  of  all  that  was  needed 
to  introduce  it,  and  to  be  that  on  and  in  which  it 
liTod. 

W.  But  Baron  Bunsen  gives  a  second  factor. 

£C  He  does,  but  we  do  not  gain  much  there ;  It 
"is  tlie  finite,  or  external.  This  mode  of  Divine  mani- 
festation is,  in  the  first  place,  a  universal  one ;  the  uni- 
verse, or  nature.  In  a  more  special  sense,  it  is  an 
historical  manifestation  of  Divine  truth  through  the  life 
and  teaching  of  higher  minds  among  men.  These  men 
of  God  are  eminent  individuals,  who  communicate  some- 
thing of  eternal  truth  to  their  brethren,  as  far  as  they 
themselves  are  true.  They  have  in  them  the  conviction, 
that  what  they  say  and  teach  of  things  Divine  is  an 
objective  truth."  "will last"  therefore.  But  mark,  only 
a  truth  :  "  The  difference  between  Jesus  and  the  other 
men  of  God  is  analogous  to  that  between  the  manifesta- 
tion of  a  part,  and  of  tiie  totality  and  substance  of  the 
Divine  mind."  Thus  Christ  is  a  perfect  revealer  at  best, 
not  a  personal  object  of  faith  to  whom  we  are  subject 
8S  the  Son.  That  is,  my  mind  perceives  truth  partially. 
His  completely,  and  so  teaches.  Thus  it  is  expressed, 
"God's  eternal  thought  of  Himself,  became  [lersonal 
in  finite  existence  in  a  man.  conscious  of  his  Divine 
nature."  Remark,  He  heroines  personal,  and  is  then 
finite.  He  is  Son.  and  God  is  Father  only  in  a  finite  way. 
Otherwise,  "He  is  God's  thought  of  Himself  in  spat 
and  time."  "  It  has  the  principle  of  lite  in  this  Divine 
self-oonsciousness"  "  That  primitive  consciousness 
lived  in  Him  constantly  and  perfectly," — in  Jesus.   The 


I 


204 

former  part  is  pure  Philonism ;  the  latter,  the  incarnation 
of  God's  eternal  thought  of  Himself  in  a  man,  who 
thus  lived  in  the  consciousness  of  his  Divine  nature,  is, 
of  course,  not  Philo's. 

But  we  know  now  what  revelation  means,  and  why 
the  reviewer  speaks  of  the  revelation  of  Christ,  and  of 
not  confining  it  to  Him. 

I  proceed  with  Bunsen.  "God  reveals,  that  is  to 
say,  manifests  Himself  directly  to  mankind  by  the  mind. 
This  manifestation  addresses  itself  to  man's  rational 
conscience,  or  to  the  consciousness  of  truth  and  good- 
ness. This  direct  manifestation  is  that  of  the  Eternal 
Word  or  Reason,  and  is  the  key  to  the  indirect  mani- 
festation of  God  to  man  through  the  creation  and  through 
history."  Hence,  "  there  must  be  faith  in  the  Divine 
element  of  the  soul."  "  The  contemplation  of  God  in 
the  history  of  mankind,  is  the  most  natural  and  most 
universal  means  of  strengthening  the  innate  faith  of  the 
soul  in  its  own  destiny." 

"  The  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament 
exhibit  such  a  record  of  humanity ; "  "bearing  eminently 
the  character  of  humanity,  they  are  eminently  pro- 
phetic." 

"  Christ  is  the  centre  of  the  universal  development^ 
typically  exhibited  in  the  Jewish  records." 

He  adds,  "  Moses  had  coined  out  of  the  law  of  con- 
science which  Abraham  had  made  the  distinctive  law 
of  his  family,  the  ritualized  law  of  that  nation  which 
he  formed  out  of  Abraham's  descendants."  (In  another 
place,  he  says,  "  the  wickedness  and  stubbornness  of  the 
people  obliged  him  (Moses)  to  surround  this  spiritual 
law  (contrary  to  his  original  intentions)  with  ritual  and 
ceremonial  regulations.") 

"Jesus  proclaimed  it  the  law  of  mankind  by  attach- 
ing it  directly,  without  any  national  medium,  to  the 
consciousness  of  God  Himself  dwelling  in  man  and  in 
mankind.  He  divinized  man  because  He  realized  God." 
"  He  based  upon  fdith  in  her  (the  soul's)  origin  and 
destiny the  whole  social  life  of  mankind." 


Ileiice  ho  holrls  that,  by  revtilutionarj-  destruction 
hierarchy  and  empires,  there  will  I>e  hy  the  prevalence  of 
conscience  a  kind  of  moral  millennium. 

Now  here  God  dwelling;  in  man,  the  direct  revelation 
to  man's  rational  conscience,  is  the  Infinite  Factor,  the 
judge  of  ail.  llie  finite,  and  even  (Jhrist  conies  in  hero 
(though  [(orsonsiliy  Bunsen  ascrilics  to  Ilim  a  i>erfcct 
couscinusness  of  the  whole  of  Go<rs  thought  of  Himself), 
is  a  secondary  and  external  one.  Mankind's  history 
streng;then3  the  internal,  but  no  more.  Jewish  records 
give  man'x  ex[)ression  of  this.  Christ  is  the  centre  ot 
this  finite  e^itcrnal  one.  Eminent  men  have  {riven  it 
oat.  as  far  as  they  thought  theij  hail  the  perception  of. 
truth.  Christ  is  not  a  part  but  tlie  whole  reason  of  GoT 
in  a  man,  to  whom  God  gave  eternal  life,  for  so  H< 
says. 

But  revelation  is,  as  a  direct  thing,  merely  and  only 
the  percejition  of  truth  by  man's  mind  as  man,  through 
the  eternal  reason  of  God  dwelling  in  him  as  man.  Anti 
lie  must  have  faith  in  this  divine  element  in  himself. 
Kniinent  men  may  give  out  their  consciousness  of  it, 
and.  if  true,  give  it  out  with  a  conviction  that  it  is  last- 
ing tnith.  liut  this  is  all  secondary  and  indirect.  Direct 
Wvelation  is  only  the  inward  perceptions  of  man's 
natural  mind.  And  the  Bible  is  prephetic  in  general, 
not  because  of  its  divinity,  bnt  because  of  its  humanity, 
xuid  that  it  is  tlie  expression  of  what  passes  in  the  human 
Tnind.  The  eternal  reason  of  God  dwells  in  man,  and 
man  by  it  perceives,  and  that  is  revelation  in  all.  What 
"Timkes  some  to  l^e  eminent,  we  are  left  to  conjecture. 
I*hilo  was  dreadfully  embarrasseil  here,  too.  However, 
Is  this  a  denial  of  a  revelation  or  not?  Is  it  a  denial 
of  Christian  doctrine  or  not?  That  is  the  jwsitive 
announcement  of  the  word  of  God  claiming  absolute 
authority  over  the  conscience,  partial  and  preliminary 
l»y  the  prophets,  fidly  and  openly  by  Christ  and  His 
Apostles.  Men  were  to  reeei\'e  it  as  the  woni  of  Gftd, 
which  was  eliectunl  in  those  that  believed.  It  w 
he  obedience  of  faith  among  all  nations — man  bei 


206 

darkness,  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  tlirough  the 
ignorance  that  was  in  him. 

W.  It  is  most  clearly  a  positive  denial  of  revelation 
altogether.  For  the  secondary  or  finite  one  is  only 
reproducing  the  first,  and  is  good  only  as  far  as  the  con- 
viction of  the  speaker  goes,  L  e.,  not  God's  word.  It  is  a 
positive  denial,  too,  of  the  whole  doctrine  of  Christianity, 
as  to  the  fall  of  man,  and  a  redemption,  and  a  new  life. 

S.  You  can  now,  too,  clearly  see  why  in  this  system 
rational  conscience  is  to  judge  of  all  else,  be  it  what  it 
may,  and  this  is  the  essence  of  their  system.  Man  is  to 
have  faith  in  the  Divine  element  in  his  own  soul. 
Hence  "  the  evidences  of  our  canonical  books  and  of  the 
patristic  authors  nearest  to  them  are  sufficient  to  prove 
illustration  in  outward  act  of  principles  perpetually  true 
(is  that  revelation?),  but  not  adequate  to  guarantee 
narratives  inherently  incredible  or  precepts  evidently 
wrong ;"  i.  ^.,  we  are  finally  judges  of  right  and  wrong. 
Now,  the  Gospels  are,  in  another  sense,  an  "  illustration 
in  outward  act  of  principles  perpetually  true."  For  God 
Himself  is  love  and  man  hatred  against  Him.  But  it 
is  a  mere  record,  according  to  Dr. Williams,  of  the  truth 
and  falsehood,  the  right  and  wrong,  of  which  we  are 
judges,  as  of  any  other  book.  It  is  not  a  bit  more  the 
word  of  God  or  a  revelation  from  God  than  any  other 
book.  It  may  be  better  if  those  of  whom  it  relates 
correctly  the  facts  and  sayings  were  better.  But  it  is 
no  revelation.  We  are  judges  of  its  contents,  and  select 
as  we  please.  That  is,  God  has  given  no  revelation  at 
all;  for  if  He  has  given  a  positive  revelation  of  His 
mind,  it  is  quite  clear  it  must  both  guide  and  judge 
us,  not  we  it.  The  whole  system  is  infidelity  without 
the  honesty  to  own  it,  and  nothing  dse.  And  what,  conse- 
quently, is  man  according  to  Baron  Bunsen  ?  "  The  finite 
realization  of  the  Spirit  of  God  as  good  in  individual 
consciousness  developed  in  time."  We  see  that  all  this 
is  historically  false,  and  that  man  has  received  every- 
thing that  is  vile,  and  crucified  Him  that  by  their  ovra 
confession  was  goodness  and  truth.    No  man  received 


207 


His  testimony;  those  who  <lid  receive  Him  were  bora 
not  of  man  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  but  of  God.  It 
was  a  work,  a  new  work,  wrought  in  them.  They,  and 
they  only,  set  to  their  seals  that  God  was  true.  St.  Paul 
further  declares,  that  what  he  had  was  communicated 
to  him  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  He  imparted  it  in  words 
taught  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  it  could  only  be 
received  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  contrast  with  the  natural 
man.  I  conclude  that  the  system  is  historically  false, 
theoretically  false:  i.e.,  its  pretension  that  it  is  rationally 
Christian  is  false.  It  is  diametrically  opposite  to  the 
theory  of  Christianity  and  all  the  prinei|»les  of  Scripture. 
And  in  doctrine  not  merely  infidel  but  anti-Christian. 
Take  away  Christianity,  and  what  have  you '!  Let 
history  tell.  I  must  add,  that  I  think  it  dishonest  to 
use  Christian  language  for  the  purpase  of  denying  all 
that  the  words  mean.  To  say  that  the  perceptions  of  a 
mail's  mind  are  a  i-evelatlou  from  God,  is  deceiving  by 
an  abuse  of  words.  But  it  is  well  to  get  at  the  fact, 
ttat  the  ([uestion  is :  Is  there  a  revelation  or  not — 
a  revelation  addressed  to  man.  claiming  authority  over 
man  l)ecause  it  is  the  word  of  God  ?  If  they  say  there  is 
not,  we  know  what  we  are  about,  which  they  are  doing 
their  best  to  conceal.  In  my  Judgment  their  views  are 
from  Satan  himself — the  direct  work  of  the  enemy — 
devilish  in  their  nature.  I  do  not  use  tlie  word  as  vulgar 
and  abusive,  but  in  its  strict  and  proper  sense. 

IF.  Well,  I  suppose  we  must  admit  them  to  be  such 
if  they  are  not  of  God ;  for  they  are  not  simply  human 
mistakes  and  reasonings  (though  that  may  be  the  case 
as  to  individuals),  but  a  systematic  antagonism  to  a 
Divine  revelation  of  the  truth,  and  of  the  truth  revealed. 

ff.  We  have  one  or  two  points  which  we  should' do 
well  to  consider.  The  value  of  moral  and  miraculous 
evidences.  It  is  a  subject  treated  in  these  Essays,  and 
has  its  importance. 

W.  It  has  considerable  importance.  Intidelity  is 
evidently  natural  to  the  mind  of  man,  i.  e.,  when  God  is 
revealed,  and  the  truth.    And  this  question  of  evidences 


208 

meets  with  this  propensity  in  the  heart  as  much  as  the 
truth  itself. 

//.  First  of  all  you  must  remark,  that  evidences  sup- 
pose either  reluctance  to  receive  or  difficulties  inherent 
in  man  as  to  the  reception  of  truth.  If  man  s  mind  met 
the  truth  as  such  at  once,  there  would  be  no  need  of 
any  evidences,  no  need  of  our  new  school  investigating 
so  much ;  but  men  do  reason  to  prove  the  truth,  i.e.j  it 
is  not  intuitively  known  or  necessarily  received.  The 
new  school  declare  the  human  mind  productive  of  truth 
as  being  an  intelligence  which  is  the  Divine  Word  in 
finite  action  in  man.  Christianity  declares  the  tinith  to 
be  revealed  in  and  by  Christ,  and  those  sent  by  Him ; 
and  as  to  ordinary  men,  lie  has  declared,  "  Because  I  tell 
you  the  truth  ye  believe  me  not."  And  again,  "  He  was 
in  the  world,  and  the  world  knew  Him  not.  He  came 
to  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not."  "The  light 
shineth  in  darkness,  and  the  darkness  comprehended  it 
not."  That  truth  was  found  by  man  is  false  ;  it  was  not. 
He  arrived  at,  "  What  is  truth  ?"  Christ  came  to  bear 
wtness  to  it.  Now,  assuming  that  there  is  such  a  thing 
as  truth  (and  there  must  be,  or  there  is  nothing ;  for  if 
there  is  something,  a  true  statement  or  knowledge  of 
what  it  is,  is  the  truth),  either  man  is  omniscient,  or 
he  wants  the  truth  to  be  made  known  to  him.  If  he 
does,  he  needs  evidences,  unless  he  be  so  absolutely 
proper  for  its  reception,  that  to  state  it  is  sufficient  for 
its  reception  ;  i.  e.,  unless  the  truth  be  self-evident.  If 
he  be  not  so  receptive  of  truth,  and  we  are  sure  he  is 
not,  he  needs  evidences  of  it,  because  he  has  reluctance  or 
difficulties.  But  I  go  further :  truth  cannot  really  be  self- 
evident  to  a  creature,  l)ecause  let  men  be  as  proud  as  they 
will,  in  a  creature  the  moral  condition  depends  on  the 
object  he  is  occupied  with.  Is  it  gold  ?  he  is  covetous. 
Power  ?  he  is  ambitious ;  and  so  on.  Hence  the  moral 
condition  is  the  fruit  of  the  object.  There  may  be  lusts 
and  tendencies  dominant;  but  actual  character  is  deter- 
mined by  an  object.  Now,  to  know  goodness  as  a  crea- 
ture without  a  revelation  of  it,  I  must  be  perfectly  good. 


209 

But  I  am  not — far  from  it.  Wlien  therefore  it  comes,  it 
finds  me  not  perfectly  good — i.e.,  so  far  averse  to  what 
is  good.  1  do  not  know  whether  any  one  pretends  to 
being  perfect  goodness ;  if  not  he  is  strmL-thmg  as  a 
morally  active  being;  he  is  selfish.  Is  it  not  true? 
W.  Alas !  yes. 

//.  'I'liat  is.  a  reTelfttion  of  perfect  goodness  meets 
sclfisbness,  which  is  incapable  of  receiving  it.  Besides, 
in  fact,  there  is  corruption,  prejudice,  superstition,  into 
which  selfishness  has  formed  itself.  And  God,  wlio 
is  light  as  well  as  love,  makes  havoc  with  this.  "  No 
man  having  drunk  old  wine,  straightway  desireth  new, 
fur  he  saith,  the  old  is  better."  If  your  infidel  Bays,  man 
is  innocent,  and  education  has  given  him  prejudices, 
and  connected  his  inll  with  his  lusts,  so  as  to  make 
passions;  I  say,  I«  it  so.  I  do  not  believe  it;  but  be 
it  so.  But  man  is  educated ;  he  is  a  Jew,  a  Romanist, 
a  heathen,  a  Prolestant.  Pure  truth  comes ;  it  meets 
his  prejudices,  and  evidences  arc  needed.  If  these  are 
sent  it  is  the  activity  of  grace.  Tliey  are  not  simply  to 
prove  the  truth  (to  a  mind  who  sees  truth  as  truth,  it 
needs  no  proof),  i)ut  to  prove  it  to  man,  because  man  is 
prejudiced,  and  deeply  prejudiced.  But  man  lias  a 
conscience,  and  the  truth  does  reach  it  even  when  will 
is  opposed ;  has  a  heart,  yea  selfishness,  and  is  miser- 
able ;  and  can  feel  goodness,  though  opposed  to  the  > 
claim  of  God  over  his  will  as  light  and  love  (for  if 
God  reveals  Himself  Re  must  claim  subjoctiou,  anil 
must  to  bless  make  man  give  up  his  will,  that  own  will, 
which  is  alienation  from  God,  and  mixes  in  his  lusts) : 
attraction  is  felt,  the  claim  felt  in  conscience,  the  claim 
of  goodness,  the  iteauty  of  what  is  holy  felt  in  con- 
science, what  God  is  is  felt ;  but  there  are  deep  obscu- 
rities through  prejudice  and  lusts,  and  reluctance 
through  feeling  how  much  it  will  cost.  Ignorance  of 
what  God  ought  to  be,  prejudice  against  what  Ho  is. 
"  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?"     AVhat  is    ' 

I  to  be  done  i     Man  ought  to  receive  grace  and  truth. 

I  light  and  love.    Yet  he  would  not  want  it  revealed  If  lie 


210 

were  not  morally  in  contradiction  of  will  with  it.  God 
gives  adequate  evidences  to  overtop  the  prejudices,  to 
force  on  the  mind  that  what  is  presented  to  it  must  be 
a  revelation  of  God.  Men  have  inquii'ed  as  to  receiving 
truth  because  of  miracles,  or  miracles  because  of  truth. 
Both  and  neither.  Men  ought  to  receive  truth  because 
it  is  truth.  Abstractedly  ought :  for  unfallen  he  would 
not  need  a  revelation ;  fallen,  puts  the  case  that  he  is 
indisposed :  but,  abstractedly,  a  nature  suited  to  truth 
would  receive  the  truth.  "  If  I  tell  you  the  truth,  why 
do  ye  not  believe  me  ? "  But  this  is  not  so.  Man  does 
not  like  to  come  to  the  light,  because  his  deeds  are  evil. 
God  therefore  in  grace  gives  evidences,  miracles  if  you 
please,  when  the  revelation  of  the  truth  is  there.  Not 
when  it  has  been  admitted  as  truth,  to  speak  histori- 
cally. But  this  is  great  grace.  "Believe  me,"  says 
Christ,  "  that  I  am  in  my  Father,  and  my  Father  in 
me,  or  else  believe  me  for  the  very  work's  sake."  There 
is  the  place  of  truth  and  of  miracles,  "which  at  first 
began  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord,  and  was  confirmed 
unto  us  by  them  that  heard  it,  God  bearing  witness  by 
signs  and  miracles,"  &c.,  so  "  confirmingthe  word  by  signs 
following."  Where  faith  was  founded  only  on  miracles, 
the  Lord  did  not  own  it ;  there  was  nothing  moral  in  it. 
But  lie  did  give  miracles  to  help  men  to  believe  the 
holy  truth  of  love.  But  men  say,  all  is  to  be  reduced  to 
general  laws;  and  if  anything  cannot,  it  cannot  be  believed. 
God  would  not  disturb  general  laws.  The  most  general 
law  is  that  God  is  love,  and  miracles,  used  as  I  have 
said,  show  that  more  than  a  physical  law.  I  afiirm 
that,  compared  with  miracles,  general  laws  are  nothing 
as  a  revelation  of  God.  There  are  general  laws,  I 
admit.  An  increasing  number  of  phenomena  may  be 
reduced  to  them.  Perhaps,  had  we  all  the  secrets  of 
nature,  all  of  them.  I  will  suppose  that,  however  irre- 
gular phenomena  may  ai)pear,  all  can  be  reduced  to 
general  laws.  But  I  do  not  know  hereby  a  personal 
God ;  I  do  not  know  Ilim  morally.  All  goes  on  admi- 
rably.    I  am  so  constituted — for  that  is  me  real  &ct — ^ 


that,  seeing  a  creature,  1  suppose  a  Creator.  As  has 
often  been  said,  a  design  ]>roves  to  the  human  mind 
(rather  it  is  inherent  in  the  idea,  that  is,  in  the  constitu- 
tion of  man)  a  designer,  A\Tieu  I  say  design,  I  think 
of  a  person,  a  cause  for  what  exists.  Constituted  as  I 
am,  I  c«nnot  help  doing  so.  Now,  this  proves  1  cannot 
know  God ;  for  I  cannot  think  of  a  thing's  existing 
without  a  cause.  But  He  exists  without  a  cause,  as  we 
have  said  -  that  is  Uis  ver)'  natm-e  of  God.  And  what 
makes  me  know  there  is  one,  proves  I  cannot,  in  the 
nature  of  things,  know  II  im.  But  that  is  not  my 
object  now.  The  knowknlge  that  there  is  a  God  is  no 
pei-sonal  revelation  of  God—  no  reniation  at  all.  I 
conclude  there  must  be.  I  am  right.  I  conclude  to 
immense  |)ower,  and  [iretty  surely  to  Ilis  unity.  The 
Apostle  says  llis  eternal  power  and  Godhead — a  solemn 
truth,  from  which  many  an  inquiry  may  arise.  Where 
is  Ue  ?  Who  is  lie  ?  Is  lie  good  ?  Does  He  think 
now  at  [iresent  of  men  ?  Does  lie  govern  all  things  ? 
I  have  only  a  conclusion  of  my  owii  mind  that  there 
must  be  a  God  of  grower  who  made  the  universe ;  not 
that  there  is.  No  conclusion  gives  ihat,  because  my 
conclusion  is  only  the  sequence  of  an  idea.  But  'am  I 
in  any  relationship  with  Him  I  am  I  part  of  a  system 
governed  by  general  laws,  and  no  more? — for  the  abso- 
luteness of  these  is  insisted  upon.  If  I  am  not  a  part 
of  these  general  laws,  what  relationship  have  I  with 
God '.  My  new-5ch(tol  man  tells  me  I  have  a  con- 
science and  reason,  am  free,  and  so  forth ;  that  is,  I  am 
not  governed  like  a  planet  by  general  laws.  Ah  ah! 
Then,  in  all  that  is  really  important,  that  is,  what  is 
moral,  I  am  not  a  mere  machine,  under  a  general  law. 
And  you  would  persuade  me  God  is,  and  cannot  help 
Himself,  nor  act  freely  in  respect  of  my  freedom.  I  am 
free,  and  He  is  not.  Then  certainly  I  am  God,  not 
He.  Now,  general  laws  give  me  no  revelation  of  God 
personally;  and  when  1  enter  into  detail,  I  am  lost  even 
as  to  my  conclusions.  My  conscience  tells  me  He  must 
Iw  good.     But  I  look  aroimd   and    see    misery,  evil ; 


f 


212 

men  worshipping  Jupiter,  Venus,  Pluto ;   men  in  eveiy 
degradation  that  human  nature  is  capable  of ;  babes  in 
torture,  grown  man  in  sin,  oppression,  and  a  groaning 
creation.     Is  that  a  general  law  ?     Where  is  the  good- 
ness ?     There  is  another  world,  you  tell  me.    Perhaps. 
I  hope  so.     Will  the  oppressor,  the  seducer,  the  cor- 
rupter, the  tyrant  be  there?     What  proof  have  you? 
Your  instinct  tells  you  so.     Is  that  all  you  have  to 
comfort  me  ?      Has  the  instinct  of  men  given  them  any 
clear  idea  of  it  ?    Ilad  the  heathen  such  ?    Are  life  and 
incorruptibility  brought  to  light  anywhere  ?     In  theory 
a  God  of  mere  general  laws  is  a  dead  God  for  me  as  to 
present  moral  relationship ;  and,  when  I  turn  to  facts,  I 
see  it  is  false,  or  evil  must  be  a  general  law  too.     Now, 
where  there  is  One  who  reveals  the  truth,  and  works 
miracles,   I  am  brought  into  relationship  with  a  God 
who  acts  personally,  so  that  I  know  Him.     I  see  what 
He  is,  what  He  is  about.     He  is  righteous.  He  is  love. 
He  thought  it  w^orth  while  to  come  dowTi  into  a  world 
full  of  misery,  which  man's  free  will  had  brought  in,  to 
show  Himself  good  in  it,  more  mighty  than  the  evil, 
to   reveal   Himself  as   a   resource,   to   make   Himself 
known,  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  make  the  moral  reve- 
lation of  Himself  in  the  truth  valid  to  the  heaits  of  men 
paramount  to  all  prejudices,  on  the  other.    If  it  be  love, 
it  cannot  be  a  general  law.     Not  that  love  is  not  the 
general  law  of  God's  nature,  as  I  said;   but  love  in 
exercise  must  have  its  occasion — suited   occasion — be 
free,  or  it  is  not  love.     But  if  God  acts  in  this  world  to 
make    Himself  known,   He   thereby   works   miracles; 
for  God's  acting  thus  is  a  miracle.     He  does  not  con- 
tradict, does  not  suspend  the  general  law,  as  a  law.  Men 
die  as  they  died  before,  nay,  they  died  again  if  He  raised 
them ;  but  He  acted  by  a  power  which  was  not  subject 
to  the  general  law,  because  He  is  God,  takes  an  individual 
out  of  it  by  His  own  power,  without  touching  the  law. 
The  queen  does  not  abrogate  a  law  when  she  pardons. 
That  power  is  })art  of  a  more  general  law.     The  most 
general  law  of  all  is,  that  God  is  always  God,  caimat 


213 

act  contrary  to  Himself;  but  .can  always  act  as  God 
when  He  pleases.  Thus  I  know  Him  ;  His  own  mind, 
sj)irit,  disposition,  interest  in  man,  goodness,  love.  I 
know  what  sin  is  thereby;  for  it  is  departure  of  will 
from  Him.  But,  unless  this  new  school  deny  all  the 
truth  of  Christianity,  their  theory  of  general  laws  is 
wholly  false.  Is  the  resurrection  by  God's  power  or 
not  ?  Does  man  rise  of  himself  by  some  common  law 
of  his  nature,  or  is  the  resurrection  the  fruit  of  the 
intervention  of  God  in  power?  If  so,  the  system  of 
general  hiws  adduced  against  miraculous  Christianity  is 
all  nonsense.  God  does  interfere  by  i)ower,  freely,  to 
bring  the  great  result  of  moral  dealings  to  an  issue. 
Besides,  the  theory  of  judging  by  general  laws  is  false 
in  principle.  It  takes  man's  experience  of  the  physical 
course  of  things  (for  that  this  world  is  an  adequate 
witness  of  God's  moral  government,  though  there  is 
one,  is  a  horrible  lie)  as  the  sole  and  absolute  measure 
of  what  God  is  and  can  do.  What  proof  is  there  of 
this?  I  am  told  it  is  complete.  It  is  not;  morally,  it 
is  no  such  thing :  and  your  experience  of  what  God  is 
in  the  laws  of  the  universe  is  no  adequate  measure  of 
what  God  is.  lint,  I  repeat,  miracles  are  a  far  more 
real  revelation  of  God  Himself  than  general  laws,  moral 
revelation.  I  am  not  ])ersonally  in  relationship  with 
God  by  general  laws.  I  am  by  free  miracles,  not  done 
necessarily  on  me  or  for  me,  but  in  which  God's  free 
action  shows  what  God  personally  is  in  His  actings.  I 
ask  if  Christ's  miracles  did  not  do  this?— did  not  show 
the  intervention  of  God  in  goodness  in  a  world  of 
misery  ?  There  are  instances  of  judgment  when  it  w^as 
to  deliver  others,  and  that  is  part  of  the  character  of 
God;  permitted  displays  of  Satan's  ])ow^er,  that  we  might 
know  it.  Why  are  any  of  them  inherently  incredible  ? 
Who  is  the  judge  ?  man's  experience  ?  Nonsense !  He 
cannot  have  an  experience  of  miracles.  It  is  merely 
saying  there  can't  be  because  tliere  can't  be :  because  I 
do  not  think  (iod  ought  to  do  them.  You  do  not. 
What  is  incredible  ?  was  God  not  powerful  enough  to 


214 

do  them?  You  cannot  say  that.  Was  He  not  good 
enough  ?  Ah !  that  is  perhaps  what  is  incredible  to  you. 
I  thank  God  it  is  not  for  me.  But,  if  in  a  world  of 
misery,  God  was  winning  the  confidence  of  men's  hearts 
to  II  is  goodness,  what  more  credible  than  miracles  ?  i.  e., 
extraordinary  displays  of  power,  sufficient  to  show  God's 
intervention,  so  that  men  might  know  not  only  that  evil 
was  not  of  Him,  but  that  He  had  come  to  man's  help 
as  good.  That  may  be  incredible  for  the  new  school : 
they  may  study  the  movements  of  Jupiter,  and  speculate 
on  the  fall  of  empires,  as  based  on  general  laws ;  but  a 
personal  God  of  goodness  they  do  not  like  to  know.  It 
has  inherent  incredibility  for  them.  But  there  is  no 
personal  relationship  with  G«d  without  it.  I  delight  in 
the  thought  of  seeing  God  manifested  here  below, 
spending  Himself  to  win  the  confidence  of  hearts  who 
as  offenders  were  afraid,  and  using  the  very  wretched- 
ness they  were  in  by  sin  to  draw  their  hearts  to  God  out 
of  it.  True,  it  was  inherently  incredible  to  Pharisees 
and  Sadducees  then.  He  could  not  be  of  God ;  He  did 
not  keep  the  Sabbath.  They  were  grieved  that  the 
Apostles  taught  the  resurrection.  But  Jesus  cared  for 
the  poor  of  the  flock,  and  in  spite  of  Pharisees,  would 
win  by  speaking  "  as  never  man  spake,"  and  doing  so 
that  "it  was  never  seen  on  that  fashion."  If  power 
acting  in  goodness  to  win  the  hearts  of  the  poor  to  God 
is  inherently  incredible,  I  know  where  the  heart  is  to 
whom  it  is  so.  Such,  then,  is  the  place  of  miracles. 
The  abiding  thing  is,  the  truth  of  the  being  of  that 
personal  objective  God  who  is  revealed  by  their  means. 
Miracles  are  a  means  of  knowledge  as  evidence.  The 
truth,  and  the  Son,  who  is  the  truth,  revealing  the 
Father,  revealing  God,  is  that  which  is  evidenced. 

W.  Do  you  admit  what  Hippolytus  says,  that  mira- 
cles are  useless  when  unbelief  ceases  ? 

H.  I  do  not  in  an  absolute  way.  They  are  useless 
as  evidence ;  but  as  being  the  fruit  and  exhibition  of 
the  power  and  love  of  God,  they  remain  always  the 
object  of  increased  delight :  and  in  Christ's  miracles  it 


215 

is  impossible  to  separate  His  ways,  and  feelings,  and 
thoughts  from  them,  when  we  have  any  detail.  Have 
you  not  felt  this  ? 

W.  Surely  I  have.  I  admit  fully  the  justice  of  your 
remark,  and  it  helps  to  judge  of  the  nature  of  these 
signs. 

II.  Miracles,  then,  have  a  double  character.  They 
are  confirmatory  signs  graciously  given,  and,  especially 
Christian  miracles,  a  present  witness  of  the  intervention 
of  power  in  grace.  Where  Christianity  is  believed  and 
professed,  so  far  as  they  are  proofs,  they  lose  their  im- 
portance, are  out  of  place.  So  far  as  they  have  the 
second  character,  the  record  of  them,  which  is  here 
supposed  to  be  received,  is  a  witness  to  the  heart  that 
God  is  come  in  to  help,  and  how  He  is  come  in.  The 
Word  alone  reveals  this  directly  as  revelation.  At  any 
time  faith  fouiided  on  miracles  was  nothing  worth, 
because  miracles  do  not  quicken.  We  are  begotten  by  the 
word  of  truth,  and  so  children  by  faith.  When  believed 
only  by  reason  of  miracles,  the  Lord  did  not  trust  Him- 
self to  them ;  He  knew  what  was  in  man.  As  removing 
opposing  hindrances  in  the  mind,  and  strengthening 
man  against  unbelief,  they  are  precious  to  our  com- 
pound nature.  There  is  much  that  removes  unbelief, 
acts  on  our  old  nature,  even  solid  reasoning  does,  that 
does  not  give  faith  nor  a  new  nature ;  but  removes  the 
opposition  of  nature,  and  silences  it,  and  attracts  the 
heart.  This  if  alone  is  nothing ;  there  must  be  some- 
thing positively  new  which  a  man  cannot  give  himself, 
and  which  no  proof  produces. 

W.  You  believe,  then,  in  a  really  new  nature  and 
life  which  man  receives  ? 

S.  Undoubtedly.  It  is  a  first  principle,  and  one  of 
the  main  vital  questions  of  the  day.  That  which  is 
bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that  which  is  bom  of  the 
Spirit  is  spirit.  Except  we  are  so,  we  cannot  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God.  Of  His  own  will  begat  He  us  by 
the  word  of  truth,  that  we  might  be  a  kind  of  first- 
fruits  of  His  creatures.     Infidelity  seeks  to  set  up  man 


r 


216 


&s  he  is,  wilt  accept  Clirist  if  he  serves  fnr  that.     The 
doctrine  of  Scripture  is  that  there  is  a.  second  man, 
last  Adam  ;  and  as  is  the  earthy,  such  are  they  also  thai^ 
are  earthy,  aud  as  is  the  heavenly,  such  are  they  aJsai' 
that  are  heavenly. 

(K.  But  miracles  now  have  to  be  proved,  instead 
being  proofs. 

H.  There  is  truth  in  that.  "VVe  have  not  now  to  d»- 
with  heathenism  and  Judaism  (I  mean  in  our  present 
inquiries,  for  we  know  with  delight  there  are  mission- 
aries to  tell  Christ's  blessed  grace  to  them).  When  we 
meet  with  infidelity  now,  it  has  the  character  of  apos- 
tacy  and  antagonism.  It  may  be  ojien,  as  in  the  last 
century,  or  covert,  as  in  this,  but  it  has  essentially  this 
character.  Early  opposition  was  not  apostacy ;  nor  did  it, 
indeed,  deny  the  miracles;  they  were  too  recent.  ITiey 
ascribed  them,  as  Celsus,  to  magic,  or  cited  A)>ollomua 
Tyanneus  as  having  wrought  such  too;  or  the  Jews  to 
magic  learnt  in  Egypt,  aud  the  theft  of  the  Shem  hammi 
phoresh  out  of  the  temple.  Still  that  was  aiitagonism»; 
and  had  to  be  so  treated.  Now  it  is  more.  It  is  apes 
tacy  in  princi]>ie,  and  has  to  be  treated  as  such ;  covei 
I  admi^  usiug  Christ's  name,  but  only  so  much  tb 
worse.  Christianity  has  been  publicly  admitted  as  the 
religion  of  God,  its  record  accepted  as  the  record  of  God, 
miracles  aud  all ;  and  then  men  begin  to  cavil,  and  oppose, 
and  undermine,  not  being  honest  enough  to  throw  it  0% 
or  sometimes  happily  kept  back  by  spiritual  instinct ;  butil 
as  a  system,  it  is  apostacy  in  principle.  Hence  there  ii' 
less  hope,  and  the  record  has  to  be  proved,  objections 
answered,  miracles  to  be  proved,  not  a  proof.  In  this 
case  we  must  show  their  folly  as  reasoners,  and  trust  to 
the  Word,  if  God  peradventure  will  give  them  repentance 
t.)  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth.  For  them  I  should 
look  much  more  to  the  power  of  the  Word  in  grace.  If 
the  record  have  power  in  them,  they  will  see  the  miracles 
with  it,  and  the  perfect  Ixsauty  and  suitableness  of  them, 
hi  such  a  revelation  of  God.  Proofs  may  show  the 
absurdity  of  doubtji,  and  so  far  are  useful.  They  may  put 


1 

n- 

ist 
lis 
it, 
ey 
iniua 

lisnif^^H 

>veTt^^H 

tbe^H 


217 

to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men,  but  cannot  give 
faith.  Of  this  we  have  sufficiently  spoken,  and  I  sup- 
pose of  geueral  principles  so  delighted  in  by  Dr.  Williams. 
(Jne  soon  sees  there  is  not  the  soberness  of  inquiry,  but 
delight  in  one  like  Bunsen,  who,  he  thinks,  may  aid  in 
overthrowing  Scripture  as  a  divine  record.  You  will 
soon  see  how  httle  they  are  to  be  trusted.  I  may  not 
be  able  to  answer  every  objection,  but  if  1  find  a  man 
make  a  hundred,  and  ninety-nine  are  shallow  and  founda- 
tionless,  and  his  nill  pierces  in  it  all,  I  am  not  much 
troubled  with  the  weight  of  the  hundredth.  Facts  and 
principles  will  both  come  before  us. 

W.  Proceed. 

If.  We  have  spoken  of  Abraham  and  Eeyptian  dates 
as  one  great  battle-horse  of  Bunsen  and  his  uncritical 
admirers.  Asia  was  only  alluded  to,  I  would  now  touch 
on  it.  It  is  known  from  Layard  that  Assyrian  monu- 
ments have  largely  confirmed  Scripture  history.  It  is 
interesting,  though  of  course  no  ground  of  faith.  But 
then  we  are  in  historic  periods,  and  it  is  pretty  plain 
sailing,  wth  difficulties  in  arranging  names  and  dates 
incidental  Ui  ancient  times  and  human  accounts  of  them. 
I  speak  here  of  profane  history,  and  the  connection  of 
Babylonish  and  Assyrian  history.  This  is  not  touched 
on  in  the  Review.  But  more  ancient  days  are  of  course 
obscure,  and  here  our  Bunsens  revel,  and  evoke  the 
spirits  of  erajiires.  But  we  will  follow  them  there.  Not 
to  prove  all  with  certainty, — that  no  man  can  do  as  to 
these  empires  with  the  remains  we  possess  and  the  im- 
perfect knowledge  of  them, — but  to  prove  that  Biinsen's 
admired  assertions  are  foundationless,  wholly  so,  and 
against  the  documenLs  we  have,  "  He  also  contends," 
says  Dr.  Williams,  '•  that  Abraham's  horizon  in  Asia  is 
antecedent  to  the  first  Median  conquest  of  Babylon  in 
2234,"  Let  us  examine  this.  He  puts,  we  have  seen. 
Abraham's  descent  into  Egypt  in  2876:  his  departure 
from  Ur,  of  course,  many  years  earlier. 

The  <iuestion  is  this :  the  observations  of  the  Chal- 
deans, according  to  Berosus.  give  2234  for  their  com- 
p  2 


218 

mencement;  1903*  from  Alexander  the  Great.  The 
length  of  the  second  dyi;iasty  is  lost  from  the  MS.  The 
rest  are  there,  or  in  modern  history.  From  these  we 
have  224  (lost),  458  (2nd  Chaldean),  245,  526 
Assyrian,  and  from  other  sources  209.  Then  Babylon 
was  taken  by  Cyrus ;  that  is,  after 

34,080  Mythic  Chaldean. 

We  have      22^  Median. 
—    Chaldean. 
458  Chaldean. 
245  Arab. 
526  Assyrian. 
209  Do.  and  Babylonian. 

All  the  dynasties  to  Cyrus       1,662  +  lost  dynasty. 

208  Persians. 


All  the  dynasties  to  Alexander  1,870  +  lost  dynasty. 

The  Chaldean  observations  reached  to  2234  before 
Christ,  1903  years  before  Alexander.  The  date  of  Callis- 
thenes'  visit  being  331  before  Christ,  the  third  (second 
historical)  dynasty  must  be  added  to  complete  the  term. 
Cyrus  was  538  about  before  Christ— 1662  +  538  = 
2200.  If  we  add  258  for  the  dynasty  missing  from 
the  MS.,  the  first  Chaldean,  we  have  2458  for  the 
whole ;  but  the  first  was  Median,  not  Babylonish,  if  at 
Babylon  :  hence  substracting  224,  2458  —  224,  we  have 
2234,  exactly  the  alleged  period  of  Babylonish  astro- 
nomical observations;  these  Chaldeans  being  known 
observers  of  planetary  movements  in  connection  with 
their  idolatry,  which  the  Medians  were  not,  so  that  it 
is  unlikely  the  2234  years  of  observations  extend  to 
their  time.  That  is,  the  known  date  of  Alexander,  added 
to  the  alleged  duration  of  stellar  observations,  agrees 
vrith  the  length  of  dynasties  exactly,  if  we  leave  out  the 
first,  which  was  not  Chaldean,  and  give  258  to  the  lost 

•  If  we  include  the  Median,  or  first  historic  dynasty,  in  the  1,903 
years  of  observations  alleged  by  Berosus,  then  the  duration  of  the 
first  historical  Chaldean  is  only  34  years.  But  I  certainly  judge  the 
other  scheme  preferable. 


219 


one.  Some  would  count  back  from  Cyrus,  because 
the  empire  was  then  transferred  from  Babylon  to  Susa. 
Bunsen  finds  the  name  of  Zoroaster,  and  connects  2234 
with  the  first  Median  dynasty ;  but  this  is  far  less  likely, 
as  it  was  not  rehgiously  or  historically  probable.  Not 
religiously,  for  the  planet  gazers  were  the  Chaldeans ; 
not  historically,  as,  though  Babylon  had  fallen  as  the 
iin]»erial  race  in  Cyrus'  time,  the  priests'  observations 
were  given  to  Callisthenes  at  Babylon.  Such  is  the 
judgment  of  the  ablest  German  critics.  It  does  not 
affect  much  our  inquiry.  I  know  Bunsen  attempts  to 
deny  a  Euphratean  Cush;  but  his  notion  is  contrary  to 
all  testimony  of  history,  names,  and  accounts  of  races 
and  their  movements.  I  shall  therefore  take  this 
system.  It  is  Niehbuln-'s  and  other  Germans  he  quotes, 
as  well  as  Rawlinson's,  and  a  German  whom  he  quotes ; 
quite  admitting  that,  though  the  proofs  are  remarkably 
strong,  in  these  ancient  dates  and  readings  there  is 
uncertainty.  That  is,  the  Median,  not  idolatrous  as  the 
Chaldees,  was  the  first  historic  kingdom.  Then  a 
Chaldean.  Of  tliis  the  earliest  known  monarch,  Urukh, 
has  left  his  name  on  the  foundation  of  the  earliest  cities 
of  Lower  Babylonia,  Ur  (or  Mogheir),  Warka  (pro- 
bably Erech),  Senkereh  (Larsa),  and  Nifler.  Here  first 
idolatry  is  found — the  worship  of  sun.  moon,  and 
planets.  He  calls  himself  king  of  Ur,  and  Kinzi  Akkad  ; 
a  supposed  ethnical  or  national  designation.  Erech 
and  Akkad  are  mentioned  in  Genesis.  We  have  a 
known  date  of  a  king  Ismidagon  from  an  inscription  of 
Tiglath  Pileser,  which  places  him  in  1861.  This  is,  say 
340  years  after  Urukh. 

When  Babylon  was  founded  does  not  appear  from 
the  monuments  that  I  am  aware  of.  The  astronomical 
observations  date  from  2234.  This,  which  is  the  date 
of  Berosus,  is  not  only  from  him,  but  from  Callisthenes, 
a  Greek,  but  probably  from  the  same  sources.  Others 
seem  to  confirm  it.  And,  1861,  or  Ismidagon,  being 
ascertained  with  some  precision,  we  have  bricks  with 
the  names  of  kings  not  doubted  to  be  anterior  to  Ismi- 


220 

dagon.  Babylon  does  not  appear  on  these.  About 
1750  Naramsin  reigned  there.  Merodach  Namana  is 
the  first  who  has  been  found  named  king  of  Babylon 
somewhat  later.  But  we  have  seen  the  records  at 
Babylon  go  to  the  begimiing  of  the  kingdom  exactly 
according  to  the  chronology  adopted  by  the  ablest 
inquirers,  as  preserved  there  B.C.  331. 

It  is  evident  the  kings  changed  their  capitals.  Werka 
was  probably,  it  is  thought,  Erech.  Akkad  we  find 
Urukh  king  of.  Senkereh  is  Larsa  in  the  monuments ; 
supposed  to  be  Ellasar.  I  need  not  enter  into  further 
details  here.  This  will  give  an  idea  of  dates.  Lan- 
guage is  a  difficult  medium  of  proof,  because  probably 
Turanic  or  Turano-Aryan  (for  there  are  Aryan  words), 
Hamite  and  Semitic  terms  are  mixed  in  the  vocabulary ; 
and  the  cuneiform  signs  represent,  it  appears,  all. 
Afterwards  Semitic  prevailed  in  Assyria ;  but  the  older 
forms  being  preserved  apparently  as  sacred,  what  seems 
older  is  sometimes  more  recent.  1  now  turn  to  Abra- 
ham. A  king  is  found  on  the  bricks  of  not  exactly 
ascertained  date ;  but  very  early  indeed  in  the  above 
dates,  part  of  whose  name  is  the  same  as  Chedor- 
iaomer's — ^perhaps  the  whole — and  who  is  called  the 
Ravager  of  the  West :  ravager  being  questionable,  west 
certain.  There  are  probabilities  from  names  that  he 
was  connected  with  Susa  or  Elam,  but  of  a  Cushite 
race.  The  great  Chaldean  empire  of  Berosus  begins 
1976  before  Christ.  The  first  lasted  from  2234  to 
1976.  Chedorlaomer,  if  the  name  be  right,  comes 
somewhat  later;  not  the  first  king  of  it.  Scripture 
Hebrew  chronology  puts  the  arrival  of  Abraham  in 
Canaan  about  the  year  1922  before  Christ ;  54  years 
after  the  beginning  of  the  first  idolatrous  kingdom :  but 
he  had  been  some  years  in  Canaan,  and  l)een  down  to 
Egypt,  when  Chedorlaomer  arrived,  so  that  that  was 
perhaps  ten  years  later — perhaps  1915  before  Christ — 
that  is,  Chedorlaomer  was  61  years  after  Berosus'  date 
of  the  setting  up  of  the  second  Chaldean  empire.  Now 
Abraham  comes  from  Ur,  because  idolatry  was  there ; 


221 

and  the  dates  agree  with  the  common  date  gi 
Abraham ;  the  cause  of  his  being  called  of  God  exist- 
ing at  that  time,  as  is  demonstrated :  that  is,  idolatry 
was  established.  Indeed,  it  is  at  this  epoch,  it  appears, 
that  the  Semitic  races  spread  and  left  Chaldea,  though 
not  all  escaped  the  idolatry,  as  we  see  in  Assyria.  But 
the  date  of  2876  for  Abraham  given  by  Bunsen,  with  an 
Asiatic  horizon,  is  in  any  case  long  before  any  historical 
data  whatever.  It  is  in  the  fabulous  addition  of  34,080 
years  (or  33,091  invented  probably,  as  Bunsen  himself 
supposes,  to  make  up  36,000 — the  first  lunar,  the  second 
reduced  by  Eusebius  to  solar  years).  Nor  could  it  be 
exactly  said  the  Medians  worshipped  other  gods.  They 
worshipped  one  under  the  symbol  of  fire.  The  date 
Bunsen  gives  for  Abraham,  to  indulge  his  fancy  as  to 
what  ought  to  be  as  to  Israel,  and  his  mistaken  chrono- 
logy from  Manetho  unverified  by  monuments,  is  about 
a  thousand  years  too  soon,  according  to  all  that  can 
probably  l>e  ascertained  from  monuments ;  and  these 
monuments  show  Scripture  to  be  right.  No  one  can 
pretend  to  precision,  but  all  the  data  we  have  prove  that 
Bunsen  indulged  his  imagination,  I  proceed  to  other 
points,  concluding  with  Dr.  Williams  that  Bunsen's 
details  on  some  {and  nearly  all)  these  points  are  suffi- 
ciently doubtftd  to  afford  ground  of  attack  ;  and  with 
all  due  deference,  that  we  are  most  logically  and 
rationally  free  to  more  than  distrust  his  conclusions, 
instead  of  holding  them  for  certain  when  his  premisses 
are  false,  and  the  fruit  of  his  imagination. 

W.  The  character  of  his  views  seems  to  me  pretty 
clear.  It  is  simi»le  idealism,  and  running  a  principle  of 
his  own  to  excess,  and  not  sober  research ;  merely  using 
a  mass  of  reading  to  controvert  Scripture,  not  to  ascer- 
tain the  truth. 

H.  Simply  that.  I  proceed.  Take  another  in- 
stance of  careful  research,  cited  by  Dr.  Williams,  used 
to  proTe,  what  I  have  noticed,  that  the  slaj-ing  of  the 
first-bora  was  by  Bedouin  Arabs,  most  choice  in  the 
eflect  of  their  successful  inroad ;  only  it  is  a  wonder  they 


J 


222 

did  not  carry  off,  in  their  razzia,  the  first-bom  of  cattle. 
Perhaps  they  ate  them :  but  the  proof  is,  that  it  is,  as 
the  pestilence  of  the  Book  of  Kings  becomes  in  Chro- 
nicles, the  more  visible  angel.  Now,  this  is  a  mere 
dream.  I  suppose  he  means  Samuel,  called  Kings  in 
Lxx.  But  it  is  alike  called  a  pestilence  and  an  angel, 
both  in  Samuel  and  Chronicles  (1  Chron.  xxi.  14,  15 ; 
2  Sam.  xxiv.  15 — 17).  In  the  case  of  Sennacherib,  it 
is  called  an  angel  simply  in  Kings  and  Chronicles. 

W.  But  this  shows  great  carelessness.     It  is  trifling. 

U.  Yes ;  trifling  with  truth.  Never  trust  the  alleged 
facts  of  this  school.  Make  that  a  rule ;  I  have  learnt 
it  by  experience.  Mark  the  excessive  looseness  of  Dr. 
Williams  in  what  follows :  "  It  is  no  serious  objection  that 
Egyptian  authorities  continue  the  reign  of  Menephthah 
later."  All  these  reigns  in  Egyptian  authorities  are 
confusion  itself  as  to  their  length ;  but  let  that  pass. 
Its  objection  means  here  no  objection  to  Exodus  xv. : 
"  A  greater  difliculty  is,  that  we  find  but  three  centuries 
left  us  from  the  exodus  to  Solomon's  temple."  Here 
the  difficulty  is  in  Bunsen's  scheme.  Nothing  can 
exceed  the  carelessness  of  the  article  ;  but  this  very 
carelessness  is  employed  to  cast  a  slur  on  the  chronology 
of  the  judges  :  "  The  uncertainty  and  popular  character 
of  which  makes  the  difficulty  (in  Bunsen's  scheme)  of 
no  moment."  We  are  told  the  numbers  in  the  Book 
of  Judges  proceed  by  the  Eastern  round  number  of  40. 
Now,  it  is  possible  that  in  the  East  they  say — though 
I  am  not  aware  of  it — (it  is  a  sacred  number,  what- 
ever its  import,)  "this  forty  years,"  as  we  say,  "this 
hundred  years,"  which  may  be  given  in  round  numbers, 
though  1  see  no  reason  to  think  so.  In  the  case  of 
the  wilderness  and  David's  race,  determinative  details 
making  forty  years,  are  given.  In  one  oppression  also. 
But  we  have  thirteen  other  oppressions  or  judges  of 
precise  dates.  One  thing  that  has  misled  most  com- 
puters of  the  dates  of  Judges  is,  that  they  have  not  seen 
that  Sampson  and  Eli  are  expressly  during  the  oppres- 
sion of  the  Philistines,  and  that  Samuel  and  Saul  are 


223 


for  a  long  time  together.  But  these  are  details  lor 
inquiry,  as  every  one  recognizes.  When  it  is  said, 
'■Baron  Bunsen  feels  himself  compelled  to  see  growth 
in  the  Pentateuch,  aud  he  makes  it  Mosaic,  as  embody- 
ing the  mind  of  Moses  rather  than  written  by  his  hand," 
one  can  only  say  it  is  very  little  matter  what  he  makes 
of  it.  A  great  part  of  it  professes  to  give  dii-ect  com- 
munioations  from  God,  Tbey  are  true  or  false.  The 
style  is  confessedly  the  earliest  Hebrew,  as  shown  by  the 
use  of  hit  for  hi,  nakar  for  nahara.  That  it  was  edited 
by  Ezra  aud  others,  may  be  very  likely.  That,  and  its 
being  done  by  the  great  Sanhedrim  in  his  day.  is  an  old 
Jewish  tradition,  and  may  have  so  far  general  truth  in  it, 
as  some  such  work  of  editing  may  have  been  called  for 
after  the  return  from  the  captivity.  Josephus  distinctly 
rests  all  on  the  authentication  by  the  prophets,  and 
hence  owns  none  after  Artaxerxes  as  Scripture.  This 
scconls  with  what  we  read  in  the  historical  parts.  What 
Dr.  Williams  means  by  "  the  whole  literature  grew  like 
a  tree  rooted  in  the  various  thoughts  of  successive  gene- 
rations," I  do  not  know.  If  he  means  that  they  modi- 
fied the  older  books  continually  as  their  habits  changed, 
it  is  the  most  improbable,  absurd  idea  for  any  nation, 
and  particularly  for  the  Jews,  and  es]>ecially  with  books 
which  they  disobeyed,  and  which  reprove  and  re- 
proach them,  as  tiese  do,  which  yet  they  held  as 
sacred,  coming  from  God  Himself;  p)ersecuting  the 
prophets,  too,  because  they  spoke  so  plain.  There 
cannot  be  conceived  anything  more  improbable  or  more 
purely  an  imagination,  contradicting  all  the  facts,  than 
this  gratuitous  theory.  That  Moses  and  Joshua,  for 
certain  historical  events,  used  popular  documents— as 
Paul  Grecian  poets — is  stated  in  Scripture.  That 
IMoses  may,  under  God's  guidance,  have  used  others 
which  are  not  stated,  is  very  possible.  Tlie  question  for 
us  is,  was  he  guided  of  God,  so  that  what  we  have  it 
Scripture.  For  that  we  have  the  authority  of  Christ 
and  the  apostles — wliich  I  suppose  has  little  weight 
with  Dr.  W'illiams — and,  I  may  add,  the  divinely  given 


224 

conviction  of  every  child  of  God,  and  of  every  sai 
under  the  Old  TestJiraent  too.  All  the  theories  of  Je! 
Yistie  and  IiLlohistic  dociiraents  are  the  merest  claptraps 
we  have  only  to  examine  the  passages  to  sec  the " 
fallacy.  We  have  spoken  of  Gen.  i.  ii.,  and  need  not 
return  to  it.  The  history  of  Noah  equally  proves  the 
perfect  absurdity  of  it.  1  repeat,  all  through  .Scripture 
Jehovah  is  the  name  of  relationshiji,  as  Almighty  and 
Father  are.  and  stated  so  to  be.  God,  the  simple  name 
of  the  Divine  being. 

Again.  1  read  here,  somewhat  to  my  astonishment, 
"When  the  fierce  ritual  of  Syria.  Rith  the  awe  of  a 
divine  voice,  bade  Abraham  slay  his  son.  he  did  not 
reflect  that  he  had  no  perfect  theory  of  the  absolute 
to  justify  him  in  departing  from  traditional  revelation, 
but  trusted  that  the  Father,  whose  voice  from  heaven 
he  heard  at  heart,  was  better  pleased  with  mercy 
with  sacrifice;  and  his  trust  'was  his  righteousness. 

W.  What! 

//.  Yon  may  well  say  what.  Only,  it  is  well  to  let 
these  people  talk,  to  show  what  their  talking  is  worth. 
How  does  the  good  man  know  there  was  such  an 
event  ?  Why.  from  the  liistory^ — and  yet  to  please  his 
fancied  wisdom,  he  upsets  every  fact  and  principle  of 
the  history  Abraham  had  been  called  out  from  his 
country  and  traditions  in  the  most  absolute  way  by  the 
"  God  of  Glory."  He  was  not  a  Syrian  idolater ;  and 
never  worshipjied  with  them ;  but  had  his  tent  and  his 
altar  apart — that  is  the  gist  of  his  whole  hist<try,  itSi 
essence.  It  has  no  meaning  else.  It  Mas  not  a^j 
traditional  revelation  for  him;  he  had  a  theory  of  the. 
absolute  to  justify  him— both  at  first  in  departing  from 
all  idolatry,  and  now  in  not  returning  to  the  ritual  of 
Syria.  God  had  revealed  Himself  to  him.  The  Syrian 
ritual  had  no  divine  voice  for  him ;  and  instead  of  find- 
ing righteousness  in  not  saciilicing  his  son,  when  the 
awe  of  a  divine  voice  from  fierce  devils  bade  him,  tha 
whole  point  of  the  story  is  that  he  was  blessed,  bi 
he  did  not  vrithhold  him.    So  the  story  states.    It  h 


aven  ^^ 
th^^H 


other  meaning ;  and  so  James  reasons  in  his  epistle,  and 
the  Hebrews  quote  it  as  his  glory.  They  had  better 
make  popular  stories  for  their  views,  a  new  Mormon 
Bible  of  their  own.  than  edit  such  senseless  stuff  as  this. 
It  is  a  good  specimen  of  rational  literature.  His  com- 
ment on  it  is  this  :  ■'  So  in  each  case  we  trace  principles 
of  reason  and  right,  to  which  our  heart  peq^etually 
responds,  and  our  response  to  which  is  a  truer  sign  of 
faith  than  such  a  deference  to  a  supposed  wrtemal 
authority  as  would  quench  these  principles  themselves." 
I  quote  this  that  you  may  remark  the  object  which  we 
detect  throughout :  the  substitution  of  man's  judgment, 
and  what  philosophers  have  called  moral  sense,  for 
obedience  to  Gnd  ;  the  putting  them  in  contrast,  so  as 
to  make  a  revelation  needless,  or  an  evil,  because  it  is 
esteraai.  The  Xoyoc  <"■  wonl,  may  be  allowed  to  work 
in  man,  in  man's  mind ;  hence  man,  as  he  is,  Is  suffi- 
cient, but  no  word  from  God  allowed.  It  quenches  the 
natural  conscience.  Now,  there  is  a  conscience :  but 
all  history  declares,  and  every-day  life  confirms,  that  it 
is  not  L'limiietent  Ui  guide  man,  and  that  man  is  wicked, 
and  naturally  hates  the  light  because  he  is,  and  is  in 
darkness  if  there  is  no  revelation.  AU  history  proves  it. 
Now,  Christianity  owns  this  conscience,  but  brings  God, 
in  grace,  and  jierfcct  light,  into  contact  with  it.  And 
that  is  what  they  object  to, — in  a  Incoming  spirit  they 
tell  us.  But,  in  fact,  in  the  passage  I  quote  from  Dr. 
AVilliams,  their  avowed  aim  is  to  resist  a  revelation  of 
God  external  to  man's  mind,  and  claiming  obedience. 
Now,  it  is  an  unhappy — I  had  better  say  happy — instance 
in  which  to  make  such  a  remark.  No  honest  man  can 
controvert  that  the  whole  and  sole  meaning  of  this 
history  of  Abraham  is,  that  absolute  deference  to  ex- 
ternal authority  was  claimed,  at  the  sacrifice  of  all 
natural  altectious  in  the  case  of  an  only  son,  and,  what 
was  more,  in  giving  up  all  the  promises  lodged  in  his 
person.  And  this  showed  absolute  faith  in  God's  faithful 
goodne-ss.  Abraham,  as  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
tells  us,  was  sure  God  must  give  him  Isaac  back,  if 


I 

1 


226 

even  he  raised  him ;  for  God  would  fulfil  his  promises, 
and  fulfil  them  in  him.  When  the  sacrifice  of  self  was 
made — for  it  is  alwajrs  self — God  did  not  allow  the 
sacrifice. 

W.  The  contrast  of  principles  between  Scripture  and 
this  school,  is  as  clear  as  day,  and  their  desire  to  get  rid 
of  God  revealing  Himself — the  one  great  blessing  of  our 
souls — in  order  to  exalt  man  and  his  moral  competency. 
It  is  war  against  revelation,  and  against  obedience ;  for 
simply  knowing  or  doing  right,  is  not  obedience.  And 
they  resist  the  claim  of  God  to  obedience,  as  well  as  the 
revelation  of  God  in  grace.  This  exclusion  of  God  is 
dreadful,  and  clearly  proves  what  they  will.  It  is  moral 
wickedness  in  character,  and  here  shows  itself  in  direct 
opposition  to  the  mind  of  Scripture.  The  effort  to  give 
the  character  they  wish  to  Scripture  is  contemptible  — 
happy,  I  agree  with  you — because  it  shows  what  their 
state  of  mind,  and  what  their  reasonings  are  worth. 

H.  We  will  proceed  to  some  other  remarks ;  for,  as 
Dr.  Williams  speaks  of  Scripture,  we  must  meet  him  in 
detail. 

"  The  famous  Shiloh  is  taken  in  its  local  sense  as  the 
Sanctuary  where  the  young  Samuel  was  trained ;  which, 
if  doctrinal  perversions  did  not  interfere,  hardly  any  one 
would  doubt  to  be  the  true  sense." 

The  sentence  is  this :  "  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart 
from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  till 
Shiloh  come." 

What  the  training  of  the  young  Samuel  has  to  do 
with  it  I  cannot  tell.  If  it  refer  to  this,  it  is  still  a  pro- 
phecy; but,  I  should  judge,  a  prophecy  very  badly 
interpreted.  It  seems  to  me  it  is  very  irrational  to 
suppose  that  it  is  a  divinely  inspired  prophecy  about  the 
name  of  the  place  where  the  young  Samuel  was  trained, 
because  the  tabernacle  was  there.  What  is  "  till  Shiloh 
come  "?--and  yet  more  "to  him  shall  the  gathering  of 
the  peoples  be  "  ?  What  has  that  to  do  with  the  place 
the  young  Samuel  was  trained  in  ?  It  is  not  people — 
fancy  might  have  spoken  of  the  tabernacle  so — ^but 


'•  people."  But  the  truth  is,  this  use  of  Sliiloh  for  the 
name  of  the  place  is  a  modem  Jewish  opposition  to  the 
faith  of  Jesus  being  the  Messiah.  All  the  old  Jewish  inter- 
jireters  referred  this  to  Messiah  with  one  consent,  though 
the  root  of  the  word  be  disputed.  R.  Lipmauu  first 
j)roposed  to  read  it,  till  they  come  to  Shiloh.  As  in 
1  Sam.  iv.  12,  where  the  words  are  so  translated,  and 
this  a  certain  Teller  in  the  last  century  defended ;  apply- 
ing it  to  the  fact  in  Joshua,  that  at  the  close  of  the  wars 
they  pitched  the  tabernacle  in  Shiloh.  and  then  Judah 
ceasetl  to  have  the  lead  which  had  been  given  him  in 
Numbers  in  the  wilderness,  Reuben  andGad  Ieft,&c.  This 
interpretation  has  been  arlopted  by  the  rationalists,  as 
Eichom,  Amnion,  Block, Tuch,  &c.,  denying  any  applica- 
tion to  the  Messiah.  Thesoberestand  best  Hebrew  scholars, 
even  rationalists,  take  it  as  referring  to  peace,  and  see 
Me.ssiah  in  it  as  Prince  of  Peace,  as  the  sceptre  signifies 
dominion.  They  do  so  on  Hebrew  grounds,  without 
troubling  themselves  about  prophecy  and  its  fulfilment- 
It  is  also  translated,  till  he,  J  udah,  come  to  rest ;  seeing 
in  it  the  full  accomplishment  of  the  promises  to  Israel 
when  the  nations  of  the  earth  will  be  subject ;  some 
adding  the  coming  to  Shiloh,  when  the  land  was  dis- 
tributed as  a  tii'st  instalment  and  turning  point ;  because 
Israel  got  its  rest  of  promise  in  first  i)rovisional  fulfil- 
ment there.  Now,  these  questions  of  inter|)retation  I 
cannot  enter  into  here.  The  objections  of  some,  as 
Kurz.  to  a  personal  Messiah  being  as  yet  the  subject  of 
prophecy,  are  null,  It  is  said  this  was  not  within  view 
of  the  faith  of  the  patriarchs.  That  is  a  mistake ;  the 
T.-ord  Himself  says  :  "  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to 
see  my  day.  and  he  saw  it  and  wa-s  glad."  In  principle, 
I  see  nothing  to  object  to  iu  seeing  a  germinant  accom- 
plishment in  responsible  Israel,  to  be  fully  accomplished 
in  their  final  glory  with  Messiah.  That  the  chapter  is  a 
pretended  prophecy  after  the  event,  has  been  sliown  to 
be  absurd  upon  the  face  of  it,  for  the  stat«ineuts  are,  in 
almost  every  particular,  such  as  no  one  speaking  from  the 
events   could    have  made.     You  must  always  bear  in 


I 


228 

mind  that  these  rationalists  never  search  even  whether 
a  passage  may  be  a  prophecy.  They  start  with  the 
assertion,  there  can  be  none,  and  then  seek  to  show  how 
the  passage  may  have  otherwise  arisen.  In  this  case 
the  absurdity  of  their  notions  lies  on  the  surface.  Jacob 
declares  that  he  speaks  of  the  end  of  days,  that  this 
goes  on  to  the  full  final  blessing  of  Israel ;  and  the 
gathering  of  the  nations  is  therefore  the  natural  inter- 
pretation for  those  who*  brieve  in  prophecy  and  the 
Divine  inspiration  of  Scripture.  That  there,  was  a  pro- 
visional bringing  in  of  blessing,  and  the  first  proposal  of  it 
on  Israel's  responsibility  in  the  first  coming  of  Christ,  is 
the  belief  of  all  Christians,  and  the  express  teaching  of 
Peter  in  Acts  iii. ;  now  put  off,  till  Israel  rei)ent,  while 
the  Church  is  being  gathered,  and  yet  to  be  fiilfilled,  and 
then  to  be  accomplished  by  a  glorious  intervention  in 
the  last  days,  I  have  no  doubt.  And  Judah  is  preserved 
as  a  tribe  (I  do  not  see  more  necessarily  in  ''  Shebet") 
for  that  day.  It  certainly  never  will  be  ftilfiUed  till  then. 
It  has  had  in  the  progressive  development  of  Israel's 
history  preparatory  events.  To  make  it  Samuel's  training 
place  is  simple  nonsense. 

It  is  a  question  whether  the  name  be  not  itself  given 
from  the  fact  of  Joshua's  sitting  down  there  to  distribute 
the  conquered  land.  The  point  difticult  to  receive  from 
the  words  is,  Israel's  coming  to  Shiloh— either  it  is, 
"until  rest  come,"  or  "until  Judah  come  to  Shiloh;"  if  not, 
the  sentence  is  broken  off,  and  there  is  no  antecedent  to 
"  come."  It  is  people,  they,  as  the  French  "on,"  with  no 
one  mentioned  before.  If  the  ancient  interpretations, 
Targums,  &c.,  which  all  take  it  as  Messiah,  be  not  re- 
ceived, it  is, "  till  rest  come,"  or  "  till  Judah  come  to  rest." 
The  words,  "to  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  peoples  be," 
is  the  difficulty  then.  If  it  be  not  translated  till  Shiloh 
come,  the  gathering  will  be  to  Judah,  looked  at  as  repre- 
senting the  people,  as  Judah  did,  and  specially  the  stock 
of  the  house  of  David,  and  Christ,  in  contrast  with  the  ten 
tribes.  That  the  people  first  should  be  the  vessel  of 
God's  testimony,  and  Messiah  take  their  place  on  their 


229 


ilure,  and  gather  the  peoples,  is  the  distinct  declara- 
tion of  prophecy.  It  is  fully  develoiied  iu  Isaiah  xlix., 
where  Messiah  declares  he  has  laboured  in  vain,  if  it  he 
Israel ;  and  then  his  gathering  the  renmaut  of  Israel 
and  the  nations  is  fully  set  fortli,  going  on  to  the  rest  and 
glory  of  Israel.  It  is  the  great  subject  of  prophecy — 
Messiah  taking  up  the  promise  as  faithful  servant  when 
Israel  had  failed.  Hence  He  is  the  True  Vine  as  Israel 
WHS  the  old  vine,  but  was  fruitless,  or  bore  wild  grapes. 
Bunsen's  and  Dr.  WiUiams's  view  is  too  puerile  to  pay 
attention  to. 

The  alleged  "  Bible  before  our  Bible  is  indicated 
.  .  .  rather  than  proved,  as  it  might  be."  'ITiis 
merely  means  the  olil  story  of  Jehovistic  and  Elohistic 
elements.  Book  of  .lasher.  Book  of  the  wai-s  of  the  Lord, 
of  which  we  have  spoken.  It  may  be  seen  expanded 
elaborately,  as  to  the  former,  in  De  Wette,  after  many 
others,  and  is,  I  hesitate  not  to  say,  contrary  to  fact,  and 
pure  ignorance.  Take  the  Gth  of  Genesis,  indeed  the 
whole  account  of  the  Flood,  and  see  if  any  man  with  his 
senses,  mthout  a  theory  to  support,  could  make  two 
<Iocuments — one  with  God,  the  other  with  the  Lord. 
Joshua  also  has  referred  to  documents,  ta  prove  the 
truth  of  what  he  said  to  unbelieviug  enemies  of  Israel ; 
so  Jephthah  used  it  against  Annuon.  The  Kings  and 
Clironicles  constantly  refer  to  the  public  records.  That 
«nly  says  that  the  prophetic  Spirit  used  but  did  not  copy 
them.  The  statement  of  a  Bible  before  the  Bible  has 
Ho  kind  of  ground  whatever.  We  are  told,  "he  rightly 
j^iects  the  perversions  which  luake  the  Psalms  evan- 
^lically  inspired."  Who  ever  thought  they  were? 
Why  is  evangelically  thrust  in  ?  Who  ever  supposed 
the  Psalms  wei-e  the  Gospel  1  The  Psalms  refer  to  the 
^venunent  of  God,  not  to  His  intervention  in  grace, 
«ave  as  delivering  Israel.  For  this  their  enemies  must 
l>e  destroyed,  and  this  they  look  for.  But  it  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  Christian  now.  He  has  "  to  do  well, 
enfler  for  it,  and  take  it  patiently."  The  Jews  in  the 
lattei'  day  will  look  for  their  oppressing  enemies  to  be 


230 

destroyed  when  God  comes  in ;  and  He  will  answer 
their  cry.  Jerome  and  Augustine  I  leave  to  answer  for 
themselves ;  only  their  imagination  was  moderate  com- 
pared with  the  system  we  are  inquiring  into.  1  admit 
fully  the  absurdity  of  much  patristic  interpretation  ;  but 
calling  Chaldeans  demons,  whose  instruments  they  were, 
is  not  more  absurd  than  saying :  "  the  Father "  (Semitic)  : 
Japetic  interpretation:  the  eternal  will  of  the  realiza- 
tion of  good  in  man  (eternal  decree  of  election).  The 
Son :  Man,  mankind  (Jesus  and  children  of  God)  strug- 
gling with  self  for  the  realization  of  good  in  time. 
2.  In  an  eminent  degree  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  the  con- 
scious realization  of  God's  goodness.  "  Man,,  the  Son  of 
Man : "  The  finite  realization  of  the  Spirit  of  God  as  good 
in  individual  consciousness  developed  in  time.  '*  Resur- 
rection:" The  awakening  of  the  consciousness  of  this 
divine  life  in  the  soul.  "  Eternal  life :  '*  The  divine  element 
in  man  s  ethical  life  as  union  with  God's  will  in  time. 

TF.  But  whose  interpretations  are  these  strange  be- 
wilderments of  mind  ? 

H,  Baron  Bunsen's  last  improved. 

W.  Is  it  possible  ?  It  is  well  te  know  what  kind  of 
mind  we  are  dealing  with.  I  am  not  surprised  at  his 
idealizing  history  teo,  having  his  siege  wTitten  before 
the  histery  of  it  comes. 

H.  It  was  the  Alexandrian  manner  of  interpreting, 
and  came  into  the  Church.  It  is  very  absurd,  save  in 
so  far  as  facts  carry  moral  ideas  in  them.  As  to  Mes- 
sianic prophecies  in  the  Old  Testament:  It  is  insisted 
that  they  refer  partly  to  a  present  historical  sense. 
This  is  not  true  of  all.  It  is  introduced  here,  as  a  great 
admission  of  the  orthodox  Bishops,  and  I  know  not  who, 
as  a  discovery  now  forced  on  people  which  is  to  under- 
mine these  prophecies.  As  to  the  greater  part  of  them, 
I  do  not  doubt  the  principle  at  all.  All  Christians,  since 
Scrii)ture  has  been  studied,  with  a  very  few  exceptions, 
have  so  imderstood  them ;  applying  the  principle  with 
more  or  less  intelligence.  God  in  goodness,  who  had 
announced  from  the  outset  a  deliverance  and  a  deliverer, 


231 


when  dealing  with  details  encouraged  faith- 
faith,  by  prophecies  which  had  application  then;  but 
the  mind  of  God,  which  saw  to  the  end  of  the  vista, 
ckithed  it  in  language  which  went  back  to  the  original 
promise,  and  surrounded  it  with  clearer  light.  God 
wrought  in  present  deliverance,  and  encouragetl  hope. 
The  prophets  acted  as  revealers  of  Uis  mind  in  this,  but 
kept  alive  with  growing  light  the  hope  of  the  full  de- 
liverance yet  to  come ;  so  that  the  prophets  searched 
into  the  meaning  of  their  own  prophecies,  and  saw  it 
was  not  for  them  but  for  us.  But  all  this  is  so  little 
new,  that  it  is  a  principle  laid  down  by  Lord  Bacon, 
who  calls  them  germinant  prophecies.  Deliverance  is 
promised  as  to  Sennacherib,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  takes 
occasion  to  point  to  a  final  deliverance  from  the  Assyrian 
in  the  latter  days.  Both  were  important,  and  both 
given.  If  Paley  could  only  find  one  Messianic  pro- 
phecy, he  was  very  ignorant  of  Scripture.  I  do  not  say 
that  none  have  an  interior  application  to  circumstances, 
or  that  the  prophet  does  not  rise  from  circumstances  to 
Iks  "  rapt  into  future  times  ; "  but  if  it  be  meant  that 
there  is  but  one  prophecy  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
meant  to  point  out  C'hrist,  it  is  utterly  false.  Baron 
Bunsen  admits  no  prophecy,  but  a  kind  of  second  sight 
— a  spirit  of  prognostication  in  man,  in  which  he  is 
fallible,  but  conceives  futui-e  things.  The  rationalist 
school  deny  all  prophecy.  But  take  the  Psalms : — the 
2iid  psalm  is  prophetic  of  Christ;  the  16th  is;  the 
22nd  is;  the  69th;  the  72nd;  the  102nd;  the  110th. 
I  do  not  say  that  some  |iart  of  some  of  these  may  not 
have  had  a  partial  application  to  other  sufferers  or 
triumphs.  But  they  have  Messiah  directly  in  view. 
Many  others  rise  up  to  His  case  while  dealing  in  divine 
sympathy,  more  generally  with  the  suffering  remnant, 
whose  place  and  part  He  took.  But  these  speak 
directly  of  Him ;  some  of  Him  only.  For  this  we  have 
the  authority  of  Christ  and  the  Apostles.  I  am  aware 
that  is  nothing  with  this  school ;  but  it  is  with  Chris- 
tians something.     They  think  Paul,  and  Peter,  and  t 


\ 


232 

records  divinely  given  us  of  Christ,  on  which  Christianity 
is  authentically  founded,  are  of  more  authority  than  Dr. 
Williams ;  for,  soberly,  that  is  the  question.  Can  any 
one  but  a  Neologist  doubt  that  Isaiah  viii.  13,  to  ix.  7, 
connects,  and  is  meant  to  connect,  the  present  circum- 
stances of  Israel  with  a  great  future  deliverance  by  a 
glorious  personage,  who,  meanwhile,  is  a  stone  of 
stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence?  that  is,  encourages 
Israel  in  those  days  in  their  distress,  but  goes  on  to  an 
allege<l  glorious  deliverance  hereafter,  when  the  distress 
should  be  yet  greater,  but  a  deliverer  there.  I  say 
alleged.  I  am  not  inquiring  here  whether  it  be  false 
or  true,  whether  it  was  a  fanatic  prophet,  holding  out 
hopes  of  false  deliverance,  or  the  Holy  Ghost  predicting 
sure  events ;  but  I  say,  the  prophet  or  impostor  meant — 
though  connecting  it  with  i)resent  events  -  to  encourage 
the  people  with  the  hopes  of  a  glorious  deliverer  in  future 
times,  but  who  would  be  a  stone  of  stumbling  meanwhile, 
and  who  would  have  disciples.  The  character  and  terms 
of  the  prophecy  prove  it  could  not  be  an  impostor; 
they  are  too  detailed,  and  si>eak  too  much  of  the  evil  of 
Israel,  But,  be  the  prophet  what  he  may,  I  say,  a  man 
wants  either  sense  or  honesty  who  will  attempt  to  deny 
that  the  alleged  prophet  intended  to  i>oint  out  a  mighty 
future  deliverer,  who  is  said  to  be  Jehovah,  long  hiding 
His  face  from  the  house  of  Israel,  a  sanctuary  or  refuge, 
but  a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  then  a  public  deliverer  in 
battles  of  fire.  An  unbeliever  may  deny  Christianity, 
and  any  accomplishment.  If  we  begin  by  taking  for 
granted  it  cannot  be,  we  may  spare  ourselves  the  trouble 
of  proving  it  is  not.  As  a  Christian,  I  believe  a  part  is 
accomplished — ^the  last  part  clearly  not  till  Christ  comes 
again.  All  I  say  now  is,  that  here  is  a  passage  which, 
referring  to  Israel's  fears  then,  and  connecting  the  testi- 
mony with  present  facts,  goes  on  through  a  series  of 
alleged  events  to  the  time  of  a  great  deliverer,  of  the 
increase  of  whose  government  there  will  be  no  end,  on 
the  throne  of  David.  Let  it  be  a  false  prophecy  or  a 
true  one,  it  is  a  prophecy,  and  a  prophecy  of  Jehovah's 


233 

being  a  sanctuary,  a  stone  of  stumbling,  having  dis- 
ciples, the  breaking  of  Israel  on  the  stone  of  stumbling, 
to  which  the  Lord  and  Peter  apply  this,  and  then  a 
triumphant  deliverer. 

I  will  now  take  another  character  of  prophecy  referred 
to — the  servant ;  showing  that  Israel  is  taken  up  as  the 
servant,  and  replaced  by  Christ,  who  will  deliver  the 
remnant  as  again  servants  of  Jehovah,  who  had  long,  as 
we  have  seen,  hidden  His  face.  1  take  this  the  rather  as 
Dr.  Williams  has  referred  to  it.  Isa.  xlii.  says,  *'  My 
servant  whom  I  uphold ;  mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul 
delighteth ;  I  have  put  my  sj)irit  upon  Him ;  He  shall 
bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Gentiles.  A  bruised  reed 
shall  He  not  break/'  &c.  This  we  know  is  formally 
applied  to  Christ  in  the  Gospels.  In  verse  19,  and 
more  <listinctly  and  definitely  in  xliii.  1 — 10,  the  servant 
is  Israel.  In  xlix.  this  is  again  declared  in  express 
terms,  "  Thou  art  my  servant,  0  Israel,  in  whom  I  will 
be  glorified."  llien  says  one,  If  that  be  so  I  have 
laboured  in  vain,  and  si)ent  my  strength  for  nought,  and 
in  vain.  And  then  goes  on,  "  And  now  saith  the  Lord 
that  formed  me  from  the  womb  to  be  His  servant, 
thmxgh  Israel  he  not  gathered,  yet  I  shall  be  glorious  in 
the  eyes  of  Jehovah,  and  my  God  shall  be  my  strength." 
His  judgment  was  with  Jehovah,  and  his  work  ivith  his 
God.  Then  comes  the  answer,  "  It  is  a  light  thing  that 
thou  shouldest  be  my  servant,  to  raise  up  the  tribes  of 
Jacob,  and  restore  the  preserved  of  Israel.  I  will  also 
give  thee  for  a  light  to  the  Gentiles,  and  to  be  my 
salvation  to  the  ends  of  the  earth."  Yet  afterwards 
Israel  is  brought  Ijack,  and  Zion  is  rememl)ered  and 
glorified,  and  kings  her  nursing  fathers.  Now  here  I 
have  Israel  a  ser\^ant,  apparently  a  total  failure,  because 
they  are  not  gathered  by  a  person  who  appears  on  the 
scene  to  do  it,  yet  declares  his  work  owned.  Then  the 
Gentiles  brought  in ;  a  passage  which  Paul  uses  for  his 
ministry;  and  then,  after  all,  Israel  restored  and 
blessed.  Now  I  am  not  saying  again  whether  this  is  a 
fidse  prophecy,  or  a  true  one ;  but  it  is  there,  was  there, 

q2 


234 

as  a  prophecy  before  the  time,  is  not  yet  all  accom- 
plished certainly,  but  speaks  of  Israel  as  a  servant  sup- 
planted by  another  who  fails  in  gathering  Israel,  and 
turns  to  the  Gentiles,  and  looks  on  to  the  end  then  even 
for  Israel.  It  is,  true  or  false,  Messianic,  predicts  one 
who  seems  to  fail,  outwardly  does  as  to  Israel,  and  then 
turns  to  the  Gentiles.  It  is  used  by  Paul  in  Luke's  account 
in  the  Acts,  and  by  himself  in  Romans ;  the  former  to 
authorize  his  turning  to  the  Gentiles,  the  latter  to  the 
Gospel  time,  v.  6  and  v.  9.  Every  one  can  judge 
whether  Christianity,  or  the  ribaldry  of  the  Neologists, 
and  the  idealism  of  Baron  Bunsen  most  justly  meet  the 
statements  in  it.  At  any  rate  they  are  there.  A  man 
may  reject  prophecy,  or  say  it  is  not  fulfilled ;  but  to 
say  there  is  not  avowed  prophecy,  and  prophecy  of 
Israel's  future  glory,  and  glory  through  a  glorious 
Deliverer,  commonly  called  Messiah,  is  not  an  honest 
man,  or  is  in  wilful  blindness.  I  will  take  up  Isa.  liii. 
by  itself  as  so  important;  but  see  lix.  16 — 21,  and  all 
Ix.  Now  I  am  not  arguing  for  their  truth  now,  much 
as  I  believe  it ;  I  only  say  they  exist. 

W.  I  understand  you.  It  is  a  vital  point ;  because 
if  they  exist,  which  Dr.  Williams  attempts,  bu,t  hardly 
dares  to  deny,  we  should  soon  be  brought  to  the  convic- 
tion, not  that  all  interpreters  of  course  are  right  (for, 
for  my  own  part,  I  apprehend  that  when  Zion  and 
Jerusalem  are  turned  into  the  church,  you  must  make 
confusion,  though  there  may  be  some  analogies) ;  but 
that  God  has  accomplished  in  fact  in  part  what  He  has 
proi)hesied  of  beforehand. 

-ff.  And  remark,  I  insist  on  the  truth  of  what  they 
make  an  objection  of,  namely,  that  there  is  the  connection 
with  present  circumstances  in  Israel;  that  God  had 
foretold  a  deliverance  by  the  seed  of  the  woman :  and 
then,  when  the  world  had  fallen  into  idolatry,  which  no 
one  can  deny,  chose  out  a  people  to  preserve  the  know- 
ledge of  the  one  true  God,  Jehovah,  and  made  them 
the  centre  of  His  earthly  government:  as  it  is  said, 
"When  the    Most    High    (His    universal    name    of 


235 

dominion  over  the  earth  and  all  powers)  divided  to  the 
nations  their  inheritance ;  when  He  separated  the  sons 
of  Adam,  He  set  the  bounds  of  the  people  according  to 
the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel.  For  the  Lord's 
portion  is  His  people,  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  His  inherit- 
ance." This  did  not  set  aside  the  promise  made  before, 
though  for  a  time  He  suffered  all  nations  to  walk  in 
their  own  ways.  But  the  promises  as  to  the  earth 
centred  in  Israel  as  a  people.  When  the  fulness  of 
time  was  come  the  promised  deliverer  came  and  pre- 
sented Himself  to  Israel  as  a  minister  of  the  circum- 
cision for  the  truth  of  God.  Israel  is  not  gathered ;  he 
is  a  stone  of  stumbling.  Then  the  promises  centre,  as 
we  have  seen,  in  Christ.  Israel  has  voluntarily  forfeited 
them,  and  ceases  for  a  time,  save  by  the  hiding  of 
God's  face  from  them,  to  be  the  centre  of  Ilis  earthly 
government,  and  remain,  as  we  know,  without  their 
own  religion,  and  without  a  false  one.  Meanwhile, 
believers  are  called  to  follow  a  rejected  Lord,  take  up 
their  cross,  and  have  their  treasure  in  heaven.  Though 
not  a  sparrow  falls  without  our  Father,  and  all  is  under 
God's  hand,  yet  it  is  not  the  time  of  God's  direct 
government  in  respect  of  an  earthly  people.  In  due 
time  God  declares  He  will  take  up  the  Jews  and  Israel 
again ;  and  while  the  saints  who  have  suffered  will  have 
a  heavenly  portion,  the  earth  will  be  governed  in  peace. 
But  this  will  be  introduced  by  a  time  of  evil,  tribulation, 
and  judgment.  Now  the  prophecies  all  declare  this, 
and  we  must  not  confound  the  government  of  the  earth, 
and  the  promises  made  to  the  Jews  and  connected  with 
it,  with  our  heavenly  hopes,  God  does  not  prophecy  of 
heaven,  but  of  events  in  the  earth.  These  prophecies, 
while  the  Jews  were  connected  with  the  present  govern- 
ment of  God,  were  addressed  to  them  to  warn  and 
encourage  them  then;  but  God,  knowing  what  they 
were,  went  on  to  the  end,  to  the  infallible  accomplish- 
ment of  His  purpose,  knowing  that  what  rested  on  man  s 
responsibility  must  fail.  Hence  prophecies  do  apply 
largely  at  the  time,  only  they  go  often  on  to  the  end ; 


236 

and  are  all  a  part  of  this  large  general  scheme—  are  not 
of  private  interpretation.  And  not  only  as  to  Messiah, 
but  as  to  Jews  and  Gentiles,  all  whose  history  and 
circumstances  at  the  close  of  the  world's  history  are 
mitch  more  fully  gone  into  than  the  circumstances  of  the 
day.  Christ's  humiliation  is  spoken  of,  His  rejection,  as 
we  have  seen ;  but  then  prophecy,  as  it  speaks  of  the 
government  of  the  world,  once  lie  is  gone  on  high, 
passes  over  to  His  future  re-appearing  in  the  w^orld's 
government:  for  this  was  the  subject  of  prophecy. 
Hence  Christ  and  the  Apostles  leave  out  often  the  last 
part  of  a  prophecy — it  belongs  to  the  end  of  the  present 
order  of  the  w^orld—  and  stop  at  its  first  coming  or  its 
effects.  Thus  Christ  says,  *'  To  proclaim  the  acceptable 
year  of  the  Lord ;''  but  does  not  add,  *'  the  day  of  ven- 
geance of  our  God :"  that  is  to  come.  So  Paul,  quoting 
the  68th  Psalm,  says,  "  He  has  received  gifts  for  men ;" 
but  does  not  add,  "Yea,  even  for  the  rebellious,  that 
the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them."  ITiat  will  be 
true  when  Israel  is  restored  in  the  latter  day. 

Take  another  prophecy  cavilled  at — Micah's  pro- 
phecy; one,  perhaps,  as  I  have  found,  that  strikes  a 
Jew  the  most.  Dr.  Williams  represents  Baron  Bunsen 
so  as  that,  if  he  would  (juote  Micah  as  designating 
Bethlehem  for  the  birth-place  of  Messiah,  he  cannot 
shut  his  eyes  to  the  fact  that  the  deliverer  that  was  to 
come  from  thence  w-as  to  be  a  contemporary  shield 
against  the  Assyn'an.  Why  is  contemporary  added? 
Contemporary  with  what  ?  AVhere  is  there  a  word  in 
the  passage  about  contemporary?  This  is  dishonest. 
The  fourth  chapter,  which  precedes  it,  and  is  the  same 
prophecy,  after  denouncing  Jerusalem,  and  declaring 
that  she  shall  bo  ploughed  as  a  field,  declares  that  in 
the  last  days  all  shall  be  changed,  and  the  mountain  of 
the  Lord's  house  esta^blished  on  the  tops  of  the  moun- 
tains, and  exalted  above  the  hills ;  and  the  peoples  (not 
people — a  frequent  unhappy  mistake  in  the  English 
version)  flow  unto  it.  And  many  nations  shall  come, 
and  full  blessings  are  promised  to  Zion  in  the  last  days 


I 


237 

after  juilgment.  All  the  natioos  shall  be  gathered 
against  her  (as  Zeehariah  prophesies  also,  and  Isa. 
xvij.,  and  other  passages),  but  she  arises  and  threshes 
them  as  sheaves  on  the  corn  floor.  In  the  midst  of 
this  it  is  announced,  not  as  het'ore,  chap,  iii.,  that 
wickedness  led  to  desolation,  as  Isaiah  had,  xlii.  and 
xlviii.,  bnt  that  there  was  -another  great  event  in  the 
interim.  The  Judge  of  Israel  should  be  iasulted  and 
rejected,  and  that  therefore  God  would  give  them  up. 
This  judge  of  Israel  was  to  be  bom  in  Bethlehem ; 
but  his  goings  forth  have  been  from  the  days  of  eternity. 
Therefore  will  lie  give  them  vp  until  she  which  hath 
travailed  hath  brought  forth ;  then  the  remnant  of  his 
brethren  will  return  to  the  children  of  Israel.  Israel 
will  be  taken  up  again,  and  this  man,  this  judge  of 
Israel,  will  be  the  peace,  when  the  Assyrian  comes. 
Now  the  AssjTian  is  numberless  times  designated  as  the 
great  enemy,  1  do  not  say  oppressor,  of  the  Jews,  in  the 
latter  day ;  and  the  prophecy  speaks  explicitly  of  the 
latter  day  after  Israel  had  been  given  uii,  because  they 
had  smitten  the  judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod  upon  the 
cheek.  Now  "contemporary"  is  a  dishonest  wnrd  bora 
of  neology  hero.  The  prophecy  I  leave  to  any  one  to 
read  through,  and  I  would  press  the  necessity  of  taking 
the  context  of  passages  as  well  as  a  single  verse.  I  do 
not  fear  the  result  "f  reading  the  prophecy  of  Micah  by 
any  unprejudiced  |»erson;  and  the  more  he  knows  the 
scheme  of  prophecy  in  all  the  prophets,  the  clearer  he 
will  be.  and  the  more  he  will  be  convinced  that  one 
Spirit  wrote  them.  Holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they 
were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  the  Jews  of  whom 
the  prophets  speak  are  excluded  from  the  interpretation 
by  Christians,  to  a|>ply  it  in  themselves,  they  must 
distort  them.  If  .Jeremiah  says,  God  had  plucked  them 
down,  and  He  would  build  them  up;  and  the  plucking 
down  is  ajtplied  to  .Tews,  and  the  building  up  to 
Christians,  nonsense  ia  made  of  it  at  once,  because 
passages  are  found  immediately  which  it  is  impossible 
so  to  accommodate.     But  if  we  take  them  a.";  they  are 


I 
I 


238 

delivered,  they  are  comparatively  speaking  perfectly 
simple.  Yet  it  is  into  this  very  error  this  new  school 
falls.  "  The  typical  ideas  (of  i)atience  or  of  glory)  find 
their  culminating  fulfilment  in  the  new,"  says  Dr. 
Williams. 

W.  But  let  me  interrupt  you  with  a  question  here. 
This  ideal  element  recals  it  to  me.  You  quoted  the 
Baron  on  resurrection ;  does  he  not  believe  in  one  ? 

IL  No ;  as  far  as  I  can  find  out.  ''  He  shares,"  Dr. 
Williams  tells  us,  "  in  the  aspiration  of  the  noblest  philo- 
sophers elsewhere,  and  of  the  firmer  believers  among 
ourselves  to  (sic)  a  revival  of  conscious  and  individual 
life,  in  such  a  form  of  immortality  as  may  consist  with 
union  with  the  Spirit  of  our  Eternal  Life-giver."  It  is 
Buddhism,  and  that  pretty  much  avowedly,  for  he  de- 
fends Buddhism  from  the  charge  of  seeking  annihilation. 
It  is  Philo  who  taught  that  the  soul  was  in  dualism  in 
the  body,  came  down  from  God,  was  a  portion  of  Him- 
self, and  returned  to  be  rejoined  to  Him.  Save  in 
Philo's  respect  for  the  Scriptures,  which  is  only  in  vague 
language  held  by  Bunsen,  and  denied  in  fact,  all  the 
main  points  of  his  view  arc,  as  I  said,  Philo's.  With 
all  its  pretensions  to  philoso])hy  and  science,  it  is  only  a 
return  to  the  doctrine  of  that  vam  but  active-minded 
platonic  Jew.  Only  that  Bunsen  necessarily  brings  in 
Christ  but  to  reduce  Him  to  l>eing  a  mere  completing 
the  ideal  system  of  which  He  is  a  more  perfect  expres- 
sion. It  is  remarkable  that  Philo  speaks  little  of  Mes- 
siah, and  only  as  an  earthly  king ;  does  not  connect  with 
Him  the  \oyoc,  of  whom  he  speaks  largely  philosophi- 
cally. I  ai)prehend  myself  the  m  hole  ideal  system  came, 
as  to  parentage,  from  the  Feroohers  of  Zoroaster,  from 
whom  Plato  borrowed  them,  and  Philo  from  Plato.  You 
may  find  the  account  of  Zoroaster's  system  in  Heeren. 

TF.  But  it  is  the  utter  subversion  of  Christianity  in 
all  its  truths. 

H.  What  do  you  think  Bunsen  makes  of  the  fall  ? 

W.  I  know  not ;  though  I  think  you  referred  to  it. 
All  their  system  denies  it  altogether. 


239 


H.  It  is  "  ideally  the  circumscription  of  our  spints 
in  limits  of  flesh  and  time — then  practically  the  selfish 
nature  with  which  we  fall  from  the  likeness  of  God," 

W.  But  then  tlie  fall  ami  creation  are  the  same  thing ; 
for,  surely,  our  spirits  were  then  circumscribed  in  flesh 
uid  time ;  and  the  selfish  nature  is  only  ^iewetl  as  a 
practical  state  into  which  we  may  now  come  when  free. 

H.  What  you  say  is  perfectly  just— the  fall  is  simply 
creation ;  but  this  is  again  Philo.  The  spirits  were 
pnre  spirits,  part  of  God,  and  were  lowered  and  brought 
into  an  inferior  state  by  coming  into  the  body.  So, 
indeed,  Origen;  only,  inconsistently,  he  made  it  partly 
the  effect  of  previous  conduct.  This  is  the  secret  of  the 
teaching  of  Origen,  and  Clemens  of  Alexandria,  aud  of 
Bunsen's  liking  them,  as  having  the  spirit  of  freedom 
in  the  Church,  which  was  lost  afterwards.  But  I  will 
take  up  some  more  of  the  cavils  against  Scripture, 
because  that  is  important.  Forgive  me  if  I  am 
tedious, 

W.  Continue.  All  this  examination  of  Scripture  is 
full  of  interest. 

H.  Dr.  Williams  says,  "  He  cannot  quote  Nahum, 
denouncing  ruin  against  Nineveh,  or  Jeremiah  against 
Tyre,  without  remembering  that  already  the  Babylonish 
power  threw  its  shadow  across  Asia,  and  Nebuchad- 
nezzar was  mustering  his  armies."  Now,  all  this  vague 
language  is  very  convenient  to  make  mere  human  fore- 
sight out  of  divine  propliccy.  But  there  is  no  manly 
grappling  with  the  subject.  According  to  the  Ijest 
research,  theological  and  other,  Nahum  lived  in  Heze- 
kiah's  reign.  This  is  drawn  from  reference  to  historical 
facts  alluded  to  in  the  prophecy  in  connection  with 
Assyria.  Egypt,  and  Philistia,  and  Isaiah  xx.  Now, 
Jeremiah  was  more  than  a  hundred  years  afiterwards. 
In  Nahum's  time  Babylon  did  not  cast  its  shadow  over 
the  East,  and  Nebuchadnezzar  was  not  bom.  Mero- 
dach  Baladan  reigned  in  Babylon,  and  cherished,  }iro- 
bably.  ambitious  views  against  Assyria,  Babylon  having 
been  long  a  cai)ital  before  Nineveh.     But,  though  he 


240 

revolted,  in  the  confusion  of  Sargon  s  usurpation,  as  it 
api)ears,  he  was  attacked  and  driven  from  Bal)ylon  into 
the  marshes ;  and,  though  a  party  held  to  him  and  his 
family  of  his  own  race,  so  far  was  Babylon  from  rising 
then,  that  Esarhaddon  ruled  without  any  subject  king  at 
all  in  Babylon  ;  and  Assyria  was  under  Seimachorib 
and  Esarhaddon  at  a  pitch  of  splendour  it  had  never 
reached  before.  After  that  it  began  to  decline  ;  but  it 
was  not  Nebuchadnezzar  who  attacked  it.  The  last 
king — as  to  whose  name  there  is  some  difficulty — sent 
Nabopolassar  against  (Jlyaxares,  king  of  Media ;  but  he 
joined  him,  married  his  daughter,  and  they  attacked 
Nineveh  together.  Then,  a  hundred  years  after  the 
pro])hecy,  as  Nahum  had  said,  the  gates  of  the  rivers 
were  opened.  The  Tigris  washed  away  the  brick 
defences,  and  the  king  burnt  the  palace  over  his  head. 
Modern  research  has  proved  in  detail  that  the  fire  de- 
voured her  palaces.  The  statement,  therefore,  as  regards 
Nahum,  is  entirely  groundless.  As  to  Nebuchadnezzar 
mustering  his  armies,  and  Jeremiah  knowing  it;  the 
great  body  of  his  [)ropheeies  refer,  not  to  mustering 
armies,  but  to  the  war  being  carried  on  before  his  eyes. 
AVTiat  was  important  was  not  that,  it  required  no  pro- 
phet, but  one  to  put  a  distinct  limit  to  the  captivity  of 
seventy  years,  and  predict  the  final  glory  of  Israel,  as 
the  |)rophets  universally  announce  it,  but  with  even 
more  j)recision.  That  prophecy  of  the  seventy  years 
was  distinctly  fulfilled ;  and  if  Jeremiah  prophesied  at 
the  mustering  of  the  armies,  and  saw  Jerusalem  taken 
and  burnt,  his  prophecy  of  her  restoration  is  fulfilled 
prophecy.  But  as  to  dates.  Dr.  Williams  is  wrong. 
Jeremiah  j)rophesies  in  the  14th  of  Josiah;  that  was 
the  first  year  of  Nabopolassar.  It  was  not  till  after 
this  that  Nebuchadnezzar  comes  upon  the  scene. 
Marcus  Niebuhr  makes  the  14th  of  Josiah  some 
twenty  years  before  Nebuchadnezzar's  Syrian  cam- 
paigns. We  have  still  Isaiah,  though  briefly  touched  on, 
to  notice.  Psalms  ii.  and  xxii.,  and  Daniel.  The  fact 
is,  the  only  real  ground  alleged  against  the  authenticity 


241 

of  the  prophets  is  the  foregoae  conclusion  that  there 
can  be  no  such  thing.  Dr.  Williams  and  Bunsen  only 
repeat  what  the  Gesenius',  and  De  Wottes,  and  Rosen- 
miillers— Kop])e  being  the  first — have  said  before  them. 
Isaiah  xiii.,  xiv..  and  xxiv.  to  xxvii.,  xxsv.  to  xxxril., 
and  xl.  to  the  end.  cannot  be  Isaiah's,  because  the  cap- 
tivity of  Babylon  is  spoken  of  as  a  present  thing,  and 
the  Jews'  deliverance  proclaimed.  Consequently  it 
must  have  been  written  at  that  time ;  that  is,  there  can 
be  no  prophecy,  therefore  this  is  not  one.  But  that  is 
begging  the  question.  "  It  is  clear  to  demonstration 
Uiat  the  later  chaptei-s  are  upon  the  stooping  of  Nebo 
and  the  bowing  down  of  Babylon,  when  the  Lord  took 
out  of  the  hand  of  Jerusalem  the  cup  of  tremljling,  for 
the  glad  tidings  of  the  decree  of  retiu-n  were  heasd  upon 
the  mountains."  Clear  to  demonstration— demonstration 
of  what  ?  There  is  no  need  of  demonstration  at  all.  One 
has  only  to  read  the  chapters  to  see  they  are  upon  the 
stooping  of  Nebo.  &c.  But  that  the  decree  was  heard 
upon  the  mountains,  intimates,  it  is  alleged,  that  it  was 
gone  forth,  and  the  people  went  forth  not  mth  haste. 
Now,  all  this  is  Dr.  Williams's  loose  manner.  If  it  was 
on  the  mountains,  it  was  not  in  Babylon,  for  there  are 
Done  there;  and  Judah  was  not  on  their  mountains  to 
hear  it  or  have  it  proclaimed.  I'urther,  the  going  out  is  a 
promise,  not  a  fact.  But  the  whole  point  of  the  ]>assage 
is,  that,  as  it  s^ieaks  of  Nebo's  stooping,  Ncbi;i  must 
have  already  stooped,  because  no  one  could  foretell  a 
thing.  So  De  Wette :  The  events  "  are  supposed  to 
have  actually  taken  place,  which  shows  the  author 
wrote  in  the  time  of  the  Babylonish  captivity."  So  of 
the  earlier  chapters  :  "  The  passage  which  treats  of  the 
destruction  of  Babel  and  the  Babylonian  empire,  &c., 
must  be  spurious  ....  because  the  writer  takes 
his  stand  point  in  the  exile."  So  Gesenius:  "The 
oracle  supposes  a  (n-ophetic  poet  being  iu  Babylon ;  and 
the  point  of  time  of  the  composition  can  hardly  l)e  any 
(rther  ....  than  when  the  hostility  of  the  Medes 
against  Babel,  and  their  brilliant  progress  under  Cyrus, 


242 

gave  to  the  Jews  the  sure  hope  that  the  seat  of  their 
l)ersecutors  would  fall  through  them."  "  This  situation 
is  portrayed  as  present,  not  future,  and  in  such  a  way 
that  the  ruin  (of  Babylon)  should  immediately  follow. 
That  this  does  not  suit  in  the  least  the  time  of  Isaiah 
needs  no  further  proof."  This  applies  specially  to  the 
last  part  after  the  history  of  Ilezekiah,  and  the  previous 
parts,  which  speak  of  Babylon,  and  xxiv. — ^xxxv.  It  is 
needless  to  quote  more  of  the  same  kind  from  other 
rationalists.  Now,  it  is  evident  that  this  pretends  to  no 
proof  that  it  is  not  a  prophecy.  It  assumes  it,  and  uses 
the  assumption  to  prove  Isaiah  could  not  be  the  author. 
Tliere  is  no  thought  of  proving  that  it  is  not  a  prophecy. 
As  there  can  be  none,  the  reference  to  Babylon  is  a 
proof  of  the  time  it  is  composed  in.  The  allegation 
that  it  is  spoken  of  as  present,  not  future,  is  utterly 
without  force.  It  speaks  of  things  as  present,  which, 
by  the  supposition,  w^ere  future,  the  destruction  of  Nebo 
and  Babylon,  which  were  only  a  sure  hope.  It  pretends, 
that  is,  to  be  a  prophecy,  and  of  the  glorious  restoration 
of  Jerusalem,  when  they  were  in  exile.  If,  then,  it 
be  not  a  prophecy,  it  is  an  imposture.  Indeed,  the 
notion  of  a  person  making  a  prophetic  book  of  events 
to  encourage  the  peo})le  when  they  were  present  is  an 
absurdity  on  the  face  of  it.  They  do  not  want  it.  That 
an  imjjostor  may  arouse  hopes  from  his  use  of  coming 
events,  which  throw  their  shadows  before,  is  very  pos- 
sible; but  that  does  not  suit  the  argument  that  they 
relate  events  when  they  are  present.  But  more  of  this 
when  we  come  to  Daniel,  who  enters  into  details.  Only 
here  I  remark,  that  the  theory  is  an  absurdity.  A 
prophet  may  use  present  interventions  of  God  as  a 
ground  of  confidence  for  future  ones  of  wliich  he  pro- 
phesies ;  but  a  prophet  of  ]>resent  events  is  nonsense. 
But  this  is  the  rationalist  theory.  And  see  how  little 
reality  there  is  in  all  this  reasoning.  They  say  Isaiah's 
saying  that  Jerusalem  lay  desolate,  is  a  proof  that  the 
Jews  were  already  exiles  and  Jerusalem  destroyed. 
Yet  of  Nineveh  it  is  said,  she  is  empty,  and  void,  and 


243 


waste !  But  here  they  do  not  think  of  saying  it  was  past. 
It  19  evident  enough  it  is  the  prophetic  spirit  rendering 
it  present  in  vision  in  both. 

W.  But  why  should  they  insist  on  it  in  Isaiah,  and 
not  in  Nahuin '{ 

H.  In  Nahutn  there  is  no  direct  Messianic  prophecy, 
and  therefore  they  have  no  particular  object  -  they  are 
content  to  leave  it  in  the  shade.  Isaiah  is  too  plain. 
If  it  be  a  prophecy,  it  is  a  prophecy  of  Christ.  We  have 
seen,  indeed,  that  their  whole  statement  sis  to  Tsalium  is 
false  in  fact.  It  is  equally  so  here ;  for  the  greater  part, 
indeed  all  the  prophecy,  speaks  of  future  events  as  the 
NeologisU  admit.  Nebo  had  not  bowed  down,  and  Baby- 
Ion  bad  not  yet  fallen.  The  Jews  were  in  exile  then, 
and  a  very  large  part  indeed  has  nothing  to  do  with 
Babylon,  but  speaks  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  judge 
all  flesh,  the  future  glory  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  like. 
My  part  here  is  not  to  show  Isaiah  true,  but  the  Neolo- 
gists  false.  There  is  no  ground,  in  fact,  at  all  tor  their 
statements.  Prophets  may  tiike  an  immediately  immi- 
nent fact  and  speak  of  it.  Thus  when  the  peojile  were 
besieged  and  liojied  to  escape,  Jeremiah  declares  they 
should  go  to  Babylon,  and  so  they  did.  So  Ezekiel : 
only  he  declares  Zedekiah  should  come  to-  Babylon,  and 
die  there,  but  not  see  it ;  as  it  happened,  for  they  put  his 
eyes  out.  But  this  is  not  the  case  in  Isaiah.  liesides, 
the  stopping  at  xiv.  23  is  perfectly  arbitrary.  The  pro- 
phecy is  the  same  at  any  rate  to  the  end  of  xxvii.  But 
the  reason  is  obvious  :  we  get  then  the  Assyrian  de- 
stroyed after  Babylon,  and  that  does  not  suit  jjresent 
things  in  Babylon.  It  is  avowedly  future  in  the  text. 
And  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  in  the  future,  when 
Israel  was  in  Babylon,  will  not  do  if  it  is  a  projthecy. 
What  has  the  founding  of  Zion  to  do  with  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Philistines  if  we  go  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  I 
No :  Isaiah  prophesies  Babylon  will  be  destroyed  :  an  im- 
mense event,  because  it  was  the  great  seat  of  idolatry, 
the  empire  God  had  first  formally  given  to  the  Gentiles 
(the  four  monarchies) — that  which  stands  as  the  type  of 


244 

mans  idolatrous  power  in  the  earth  oppressing  God's 
people.  Hence  its  judgment  was  in  moral  import  all 
important;  and  the  prophet  looks  out  from  it  to  the 
great  closing  deliverance  of  the  earth ;  and  adds  the 
destruction  of  the  Assyrian,  the  great  external  enemy 
that  attacked  God's  people,  not  where  they  were  captive, 
and  never  substituted  for  Jerusalem,  as  Babylon  was : 
and  then  the  inward  enemies  in  their  own  territory,  the 
Philistines,  and  Zion  would  be  really  founded  of  God. 
Hence  as  to  Babylon,  though  he  does  i)rophesy  its 
present  judgment,  as  he  had  the  captivity  there  to  Heze- 
kiah,  when  he  was  in  prosperity,  yet  he  goes  on  far 
beyond,  to  the  day  of  the  Lord. 

The  principle  then  is  an  assumption  of  the  question 
which  we  have  to  prove,  in  order  to  conclude  as  to  who 
the  author  of  the  book  is,  and  has  no  pretension  to  be 
an  argument  as  to  anything  else.  And  the  alleged  facts 
on  which  it  is  founded  are  no  facts  at  all.  Its  being 
Isaiah  or  not  is  all  one  to  those  who  believe  it  is 
inspired ;  although  I  doubt  not  the  least  it  was  Isaiah. 
Why  should  any  one  have  shoved  in  parcels  of  prophecy 
into  his  ?  It  is  not  merely  the  last  twenty-five  chapters, 
but  parcels  in  the  midst  of  the  prophecies  which  are 
absolutely  needed  to  make  a  whole  of  it ;  for  they  are, 
if  we  leave  out  Babylon  and  the  then  history  of  the 
nations  which  Isaiah  prophetically  gives,  altogether 
incomplete.  The  main  element,  without  which  the  rest 
have  not  their  sense,  is  wanting.  It  is  the  main  part 
of  a  whole,  as  any  one  reading  it  may  see.  And  the 
oidy  reason  for  taking  it  out  is  tjuit  it  must  be  a  prophecy 
if  it  is  left  in;  and  this  avow^edly.  But  the  rest  is 
prophecy,  too,  of  Moab,  Egypt,  &c.,  so  that  nothing  is 
gained. 

I  am  aware  that  the  style  is  alleged.  But  this  is 
merely  a  help;  and  it  is  not  denied  that  there  are 
pecidiarities  which  prove  its  similarity,  while  the 
general  flow  of  the  last  half  is  naturally  different  from 
short  burdens.  I  say,  it  is  not  denied.  The  explana- 
tion of  these  is,  "  But  these  peculiarities  prove  nothing." 


245 


"Their  agreement  in  this  respect  cannot  have  been 
accidental,  and  must  be  esplaine<l  as  an  imitation  of  the 
genuine,  or  in  some  other  way."  One  who  can  reason 
thus.  De  Wette,  has  not  much  title  to  claim  attention. 

W.  Clearly  not.  It  is  well  in  these  days  to  know 
what  these  Neologists  have  to  say.  That  I  find  diffi- 
cult^ in  ."scripture  does  not  surprise  me.  I  wait,  and 
profit  by  the  overflowmg  mass  of  evidently  divine 
instruction.  But  when  learned  men,  or  men  who  give 
themselves  out  for  such,  and  have  credit  for  gi'eat 
research,  present  it  as  a  settled  thing  in  Hebrew  and 
Chaldee,  and  1  know  not  what,  where  most  ]>eople 
cannot  follow  them,  that  the  Scriptural  books  are  not 
inspired,  and  cannot  be.  it  is  a  relief  to  know  what 
ground  they  go  on.  Thus,  when  I  find  that  it  is  simply 
asstnniug  there  cannot  be  a  prophecy,  and  no  more ; 
and  that  half  Isaiah  is  cut  off  solely  because  the  chapters 
speak  of  fviture  events,  and  therefore  must  have  l>een  then 
written,  tlieir  whole  statement  crumbles  to  nothing.  It 
is  simply  making!;  impostors  or  fanatics  of  all  the  insjiired 
■writers,  because  inspiration  is  impossible.  That  is 
simply  direct  unlielief  without  any  motive  but  the  will 
of  unbelief.  And  I  through  grace  can  judge  for  myself. 
I  have  tasted  and  am  assui-ed  that  they  are  inspired. 
Besides  what  you  say  is  true,  that  the  pretension  tliat 
they  were  prophecies  written  at  the  time  of  the  events, 
or  after,  is  false  as  to  the  fact  in  the  prophecies,,  and 
absurd  upou  the  face  of  it. 

ff.  As  regards  the  alleged  later  words,  the  statement 
Bs  to  foffan  is  an  absurdity.  It  is  used  in  Isaiah  when 
he  is  speaking  of  the  Conqueror  (Cjtus)  treading  down 
the  Babylonish  power ;  and  speaks  of  the  half  governors, 
half  kings,  or  deputies,  satraps  or  pachas,  who  had  that 
title  in  the  East:  and  Isaiah  gives  them  their  title.  It 
is  used  by  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  as  well  as  by  Daniel. 
It  would  l>e  just  as  much  sense  to  say  that  I  was  not 
tai  Englishman  because  I  spoke  of  the  French 
Chambers,  because  in  England  they  were  called  houses. 
As  regards  the  alleged  words  of  later  Hebraism  and 


246 

Chaldaism,  I  have  no  pretensions  to  be  learned  in 
Hebrew  certainly,  but  I  have  examined  them,  at  least 
many  of  them ;  some,  as  the  use  of  zaba  alleged  by  De 
Wette,  is,  I  am  quite  sure,  a  blunder.  Of  another, 
which  is  an  Aramaism,  Gesenius  says,  an  aramaic  form 
for  the  Ilebrew  one  in  a  word  much  more  common  in 
aramoean  is  less  surprising.  Others,  as  the  use  of  then 
for  if,  I  judge  to  be  simply  false  interpretation.  It  has, 
I  am  satisfied,  its  usual  Hebrew  sense  as  the  English 
gives  it.  Another,  in  which  he  follows  Gesenius, 
alleging  a  Chaldaism,  is  entirely  rejecteil  by  Rosen- 
miiller,  who  gives  the  word  as  in  the  English  as  good 
Hebrew ;  and  the  LXX  and  Jerome  so  translate  it :  so 
Jarchi,  one  of  the  learned  Rabbin.  Hence  I  conclude, 
with  Stuart  of  Andover,  that  the  discrepancy  has  no 
solid  basis  of  proof.  The  objections  are  wholly  ground- 
less. The  best  Hebraists,  nay,  the  objector,  admit  that 
the  style  is  not  that  of  the  later  Hebrew.  De  Wette 
will  have  it  an  imitation  ;  Rosenmiiller  admits  that  the 
writer,  who  lived  near  the  close  of  the  Babylonish 
exile,  personated  some  ancient  prophet.  He  admits, 
too,  that  all  the  latter  part  points  to  some  glorious 
future  restoration  which  the  then  restoration  of  Jeru- 
salem in  no  way  fulfilled.  Only  when  Cyrus's  decree 
came  out  he  encouraged  his  com])atriots  by  it.  How 
little  all  this  enters  into  the  spirit  of  the  prophet  I  need 
not  say.  I  yn\\  enter  now  into  some  examination  of  the 
last  part,  and  show  their  estimate  of  it  to  be  as  super- 
ficial as  all  the  rest.  I  may  mention  that  Gesenius 
treats  it  as  an  epistle  to  the  Jews  in  exile.  How  then 
written  in  Babylon  ?  They  allege  that  the  last  chapters 
are  a  whole,  and  that  the  servant  must  be  one  through- 
out; and  the  53rd  chapter  speaks  of  him.  Bunsen 
alleges  it  is  Jeremiah ;  Gesenius  a  personification  of  all 
the  prophets. 

W.  But  this  is  a  deliberate  denial  of  the  authority 
of  the  apostles  and  New  Testament,  who  quote  the 
passage  and  apply  it  to  Christ. 

H.    Do  you  fancy  they  trouble  themselves   about 


that  ?  Not  only  the  apostles,  but  the  Lord,  according 
to  the  evangelist,  (quotes  their  pseudo  Isaiah  as  a  prophet 
(John  ^1. 45),  Paul,  Peter,  John,  all  quote  Isaiah  liii.,  and 
that,  too,  as  referring  to  Christ,  But  what  are  a[>ostles 
to  neologists  ?  They  spoke  according  to  their  natural 
prejudices — yoa  would  not  suppose  the  new  school  to 
have  any. 

XV.  But  why  do  they  call  themselves  Christians  ? 
S^.  It  is,  I  judge,  in  some  res])ect  a  mercy.  Habit, 
convenience,  and,  I  trust,  in  many  an  instance,  the 
restraint  of  conscience,  where  only  the  mind  is  led 
astray ;  but  the  Jewish  journalist  has,  while  exulting 
in  their  denial  of  (^Christianity,  reproached  them  with 
their  waut  of  honesty.  But  to  proceed  with  Isaiah.  I 
shall  show  you  that  the  scrv-.tnt  is  not  the  same ;  that  the 
portion  is  not  one.  though  the  parts  compose  a  whole ; 
and,  though  Christ  be  seeu  throughout,  yet  that,  as  I 
said  before,  Israel  is  first  presented  in  one  part;  then, 
in  the  next,  Christ  takes  Israel's  place,  and  then  He 
is  the  Word  of  God  to  those  that  have  ears  to  hear ; 
and  then  the  remnant,  in  the  last  days,  take  this  place 
of  servant.  The  first  part  ends  in  xlviii.,  with,  "  There 
is  no  peace,  saith  .Jehovah,  t«  the  wicked."  In  this, 
though  Christ  be  named,  Israel  is  distinctly  brought 
forward  as  the  servant,  and  the  qnestiou  of  idolatry 
raised,  which  Babylon  rejiresents,  and  Israel  is  held 
guilty  ill  res})ect  of  graven  images,  and  not  heeding 
God's  word ;  but  in  the  end  full  deliverance  and  bless- 
ing is  promised  after  full  chastisement,  only  distinguish- 
ing the  wicked  and  the  remnant.  In  xlix.  the  second 
part  I>egins;  it  ends  in  Ivii.,  and  again  with,  "  There  is 
no  i«ace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  Now,  in 
x\.,  xlviii.,  though  in  the  fii-st  comforts  and  promises 
Christ  be  named  as  the  servant  of  Jehovah  after  the 
glory  of  Jehovah  has  been  insisted  on,  yet,  when  the 
prophet  speaks  of  restoring  Israel,  and  turns  to  their  moral 
condition  before  it,  they  are  looked  at  as  the  respoasible 
servant  of  Jehovah;  and  His  witnesses  as  the  one  only 
Ixue  God.     "Ye  are  my  witnesses,  saith  Jehoviih,  and 


my  servants  whom  1  have  chosen."  But  Israel  had 
weary  of  Him,  yet  He  wuuld  restore  and  bless  thei 
and  idolatry  and  Bal))lon  would  be  judged.  Tl 
Israel  stands  forth  in  xlix.  as  the  chosen  witness  ; 
servant  before  the  Gentiles.  I'hen,  in  verse  4,  comes 
charge,  not  of  disobedience  and  idolatry,  but  of  the  rejec- 
tion of  Christ,  lie  is  the  true  servant,  but  has  laboured 
in  vain,  the  true  vine,  the  true  Son,  but  is  rejected, 
and  Israel  guilty  of  that.  But  God  would  infallibly 
make  good  His  promises;  yet  Israel  would  be  divorced: 
*'  Wherefore  when  1  came  was  there  no  man ;  when  I 
called  was  there  none  to  answer  ? "  Then  we  have 
Christ's  humiliation.  And  now  Israel  itself  is  called 
upon  to  hear  the  voice  of  Jehovah's  servant,  and  the 
lot  of  each  depends  on  this  (1,  11).  Here  they  who 
were  expressly  the  witnesses  and  servant,  are  called 
upon  to  hear  the  seri'ant.  Such  and  such  only  might 
count  on  blessing ;  and  then  restoration  is  gone  throuj ' 
in  a  beautiful  jirogress  from  the  distress  of 
humbled  remnant  to  the  full  latter-day  glory  of  Jeni- 
saleui.  Then  the  servant  is  exalted  and  extolled,  and 
very  high,  sprinkles  many  nations,  kings  shall  shut  their 
mouths  at  Him  ;  for  that  which  they  had  not  been  told 
shall  they  see,  and  that  which  they  had  not  heard  they  shi  " 
consider.     Then  comes  the  confession  of  the  way  th(_^ 

^jhad  received  Him  when  He  was  there,  and  the  declanir»" 
1  that  when  they  esteemed  Him  stricken  and  smitten 
f  God  and  afflicteil,  it  was  really  an  expiation  work. 

'  and  with  His  stripes  they  were  healed.  The  result  is 
blessing,  but  through  judgment,  because  of  not  only 
this,  but  subse(|uent  iniquity ;  but  in  the  end  healiug — 
only  no  peace  to  the  wicked.  With  this  the  second 
part  closes.  He  then,  in  the  third  part,  enters  on  a  full 
controversy  with  Israel  for  their  sins,  and  the  extreme 
departure  from  God  in  the  latter  days,  owned  by  the 
faithful  in  spirit,  and  then  God  interferes  in  judgment 
for  His  own  name's  sake,  and  the  Redeemer  comes  to 
Zion— a  passage  quoted  by  Paul  as  yet  to  bo  fulfilled. 
This,  in  a  certain  sense,  closes  the  part.     The  rest 


gut 

sd 
eir 
old 


iiar>^H 


249 

folds  various  subjects  connected  with  the  latter  days. 
The  glory  and  holiness  of  Jerusalem  is  depicted  then  in 
that  day.  Christ  is  introduced  in  a  passage  quoted  by 
Himself,  and,  passing  from  His  first  coming  in  humilia- 
tion to  His  second  in  judgment.  We  have  the  confession 
and  intercession  of  the  prophet  in  Israel's  name  in  the 
last  days;  the  answer  of  God,  how  He  had  had 
patience  with  Israel,  and  used  their  rejection  to  call 
the  Gentiles,  and  He  will  judge  the  sins  of  Israel ; 
but — and  here  we  find  the  servants  again — He  will 
make  a  difference  between  His  elect  servants  and  the 
wicked  nation.  This  is  enlarged  upon ;  the  rejection  of 
mere  outward  service  in  that  day  is  shown,  and  Jehovah 
coming  in  judgment,  and  vengeance  to  all  flesh,  is 
announced,  but  for  the  glory  and  blessing  of  these 
servants,  the  remnant  of  Israel.  ITius  we  have  Israel 
servant,  faithless ;  and  Christ  servant,  He  is  to  be  heard 
by  the  previous  witnesses.  Now  He  is  rejected,  and 
then,  at  the  close,  those  who  hear  His  voice  are  in 
the  place  of  servants,  and  inherit  the  promises  to  Israel, 
when  Jehovah  comes  to  judge  all  flesh.  They  tell  us 
this  must  be  one  single  servant;  and,  if  we  are  to 
believe  Baron  Bunsen,  and  what  Dr.  Williams  recom- 
mends as  a  masterly  analysis,  all  this  vast  scope  of 
prophecy,  from  a  suffering  Christ  to  a  judged  world, 
concerns  Jeremiah. 

W.  It  is  difficult  indeed  to  conceive  anything  so,  I 
was  going  to  say,  imbecile.  I  really  know  not  what 
word  to  use.     That  would  not  be  a  seemly  one  I  own. 

U.  Think  of  his  sprinkling  many  nations,  kings 
shutting  their  mouths  at  him  confounded,  that  is,  at  his 
being  so  extolled  and  so  high ;  the  poor  man  that  was 
dragged  down  to  Egjrpt,  and  died  there.  For  here  it  is 
the  same  servant ;  the  chapters,  as  they  insist  to  their 
own  confusion,  cannot  be  separated ;  the  13th  verse  of 
Ui.  begins  the  strophe,  so  to  speak.  Gesenius  is  not 
quite  so  absurd,  he  takes  the  whole  body  of  prophets 
personified,  rejected  as  they  were  by  the  people ;  and 
adds  against  De  Wette  and  others,  that  whether  we 

b2 


250 

look  at  the  language,  or  reflect  on  the  universal  expia- 
tory sacrifices,  and  the  habits  of  thought  of  Israel,  and 
indeed  all  nations,  we  must  see  here  reference  to  an 
expiatory  work.  But  Christ  and  grace  cannot  be 
accepted,  so  perverse  is  the  poor  heart  of  man;  the 
suflerings  of  the  prophets  are  looked  at  by  him  as 
expiatory,  and  the  means  of  Israel's  deliverance.  Any- 
thing, provided  it  be  not  Christ.  He  adds,  that  no  man 
can  doubt  that  the  New  Testament  doctrine  was 
founded  on  this.  The  poor  unhappy  Apostles  who  did 
not  know  their  own  religion!  and  all  this  time  has 
elapsed,  deceived  by  the  means  of  their  teaching,  and  in 
the  19th  century  light  has  come  in.  Well  might 
not  Tertullian  alone,  but  John  say,  "  That  w^hich  w^as 
from  the  beginning ;"  and  "  Let  that  therefore  abide  in 
you  which  ye  heard  from  the  beginning  :  if  that  which 
ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning  abide  in  you,  ye  also 
shall  abide  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father."  And  Paul,  that 
we  should  continue  in  what  we  have  learned,  knowing 
of  whom  we  have  learned  it,  and  that  the  Scriptures 
can  make  us  wise  unto  salvation.  And  again,  John — 
"  He  that  is  ^f  God  heareth  us  ;  and  he  that  is  not  of 
God  heareth  not  us :  hereby  know  we  the  Spirit  of 
truth  and  the  sj)irit  of  error."  I  have  heard  the 
Apostles,  I  have  heard  them  quoting  this  passage  of 
Christ,  and  I  know  the  spirit  of  error  in  Dr. 
Williams.  There  is  another  point  I  would  notice  here. 
The  sufferings  of  Christ  are  no  doubt  spoken  of  in 
Isaiah  liii.  The  prophets  were  animated  by  the  Spirit 
of  Clirist,  Himself  the  great  and  perfect  Prophet ;  and 
for  the  testimony  of  the  word  they,  as  He,  were  rejected 
and  suffered :  their  report  was  not  more  received  than 
His  as  the  Great  Prophet.  So  far  there  is  a  very 
imj)ortant  and  interesting  analogy.  But  that  is  not  the 
chief  point  here.  The  fact  is  recognized,  as  in  Ps.  xxii. 
and  Isaiah  1. ;  but  it  is  only  the  occasion  here  of  the 
people's  recognition  of  something  else.  "  We  hid  our 
faces  from  Him."  But  what  w^as  the  secret  of  this? 
"Surely  He  hath  borne   our  griefe   and  carried  our 


sorrovs,"  as  faitbfiil  in  the  midst  of  tbeh-  tm&ithfhloess. 
In  a  measure  a  prophet  could  sar  that,  Tea.  or  s 
Christian  could  say  it  too,  in  a  fnller  way.  *•  Therefore 
I  endure  all  things."  says  the  Apo&tle  "ftw  the  elect's 
sake."  But  now  we  come  to  another  point.  ■•  Yet  we 
did  esteem  lUm  stricken,  smitten  of  God.  sod  afflicted. 
But  He  was  wounded  for  our  tiansgressHifia,  He  was 
bruised  for  our  iniquities :  the  chastisement  of  oar 
j>eace  was  upon  Him.  and  with  His  stripes  we  are 
healed.  All  we  like  sheep  have  gooe  astray,  we  bare 
turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ;  and  JefaoTah  hath 
laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all  .  .  .  for  the  trans- 
gression of  my  people  was  He  stricken  ...  it  pleased 
the  Lord  to  bmise  Him.  He  hath  put  Him  to  grief: 
when  thou  shalt  make  His  soul  an  olTering  for  sin.  He 
shall  see  His  seed  .  .  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall 
prosper  in  His  hand.  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His 
soul  and  shall  l>e  satisfied;  by  His  knowledge  shall  mr 
righteous  servant  instruct  many  in  righteoasEiess  (so  I 
tnmslatc  the  hiphil  here),  aiul  He  shall  bear  their 
im(]uities  .  .  .  Ijecanse  He  poored  out  HLs  soul  onto 
death,  and  was  numbere<t  with  the  transgrejEsors,  atMl 
He  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made  interecssicm  for  the 
transgressors."  Now  none  can  read  the  chapter  with- 
out seeing  that,  as  Gesenias  admits,  expiatory  soflering 
is  the  |ioint  insisted  on,  a  principle  of  inteqirctatioa 
evident,  from  the  terms  of  the  |iassage.  a-s  being  the 
point.  They  thought  Him  rejected  of  God  as  well  as 
man  ;  but  Ho  was  really  l>earing  their  inicjuities.  That 
is  the  special  force  of  the  chapter,  confirmed  by  the 
general  conviction  of  the  Jews  on  the  subject  of  ex[>ia- 
fion,  and  of  every  nation  under  heaven.  Now  what  I 
note  this  now  for  is  that  this  point  is  (as  a  Christian 
can  easily  conceive)  wholly  omitted  in  the  "masterly 
analysis."  Not  one  wonl  of  it  has  Dr.  Williams  to 
produce  from  Bunsen.  naturally  enough.  ITie  pious 
and  devoted  prophet,  though  really  representing  Christ 
as  a  prophet,  was  far  enough  from  pretending  to  be  a 
sacrifice.     But  the  foUy  of  this  interpretation  is  ^«)c 


more  evident,  because  if  our  Isaiah  prophesied 
end  of  the  exile,  Jeremiah  was  dead  and  gone ;  and  that 
which  is  clearly  future  at  the  end,  can  have  no  applica- 
tion to  him.  To  apply  it  to  a  series  of  prophets  is 
absurd;  with  any  application  to  Israel  as  a  people,  the 
common  modern  Jewish  idea,  it  is  in  contradiction. 
They  are  confessing  their  having  misconceived  the 
position  of  the  suS'erer,  and  that  he  suiiered  for  their 
sins.  No,  nothing  can  he  clearer  than  the  prophecy. 
The  servant  who  was  to  be  exalted,  and  extolled,  and 
very  high,  so  that  kings  should  shut  their  mouths,  and 
he  8|jrinkle  many  nations,  was  to  be  rejected  by  the 
Jews  and  of  meu ;  but  make  his  soul  an  oftering  for 
sin,  and  then  be  highly  exalted.  The  terms  of  the 
passage,  its  place  in  the  prophecy,  all  give  it  its  true 
and  evident  character,  aud  enable  us  to  understand  why 
the  Apostles,  that  is,  the  same  Spirit  that  dictated  it,  use 
it  (I  do  not  exactly  say  found  their  doctrine  on  it,  for 
both  it  and  their  doctrine  are  founded  on  the  fact)  to 
confirm  and  illustrate  the  doctrme  of  the  sufferings 
the  blessed  Sa>"iour  (compare  Ps.  xxi,). 

W.  It  is  as  clear  as  can  possibly  be.  I  bless  G( 
for  it.  And  indeed  the  attacks  of  enemies,  and  able 
enemies,  such  as  Gesenius  and  De  Wette,  and  surely 
of  Dr.  Bunsen  and  Dr.  Williams,  only  prove  their  impo- 
teucy  in  attemjtting  to  assail  this  foundation  doctrine  rf 
Christianity  and  basis  of  all  holy  peace,  that  Christ  is  ft<i 
propitiation  for  our  sins. 

II.  And  see  the  sad  perversions  to  which  it  leads. 
"  Israel,"  Dr.  Williams  tells  us,  "  would  bo  acknow- 
ledged, as  in  some  sense,  still  a  Messiah  (for  in  spite  of 
Baron  Bunsen  he  prefers  really  the  perversion  of  Jewiflfc, 
unbelief  to  Christianity)  having  borne  centuries  of 
proach  through  the  sins  nf  the  nations," 
the  Saviour  ....  would  be  recognized  as  having 
eminentiy  the  imction  of  a  prophet  whose  words  die  not, 
of  a  priest  in  a  temple  not  made  mtb  hands,  and  of  a 
King  in  the  realm  of  thought  delivering  his  people  from 
a  bondage  of  moral  evil,  worse  than  Egypt  or  Babyicm." 


1 


253 

Israel,  then,  is  the  Messiah  who  suffered  for,  I  do  not 
know  what,  through  the  wickedness  of  the  Gentiles; 
and  Christ  a  King  in  the  realm  of  thought  to  deliver  U3 
from  moral  evil,  it  might  be  rather  said,  if  we  are  to 
take  the  new  school,  a  Saviour  from  the  bondage  of 
Apostolic  Christianity,  for  that  seems  the  greatest  evil 
they  see.  "  The  vast  majority  of  prophecies  require 
some  such  rendering  in  order  to  Christianize  them," 
and  "our  Isaiah"  too.  "The  liii.  chapter,  wblch  had 
been  thought  exceptional,  is  shown  to  harmonize  with  a 
general  principle."  What  is  meant  by  Christianizing  the 
prophecies  I  do  not  know,  as  the  prophets,  they  say.  wem 
only  persons  warning  or  arousing  Jews  by  pretended  jtro- 
phecies  (denouncing  their  compeers),  compiled  when 
the  circumstances  were  preseut ;  but  I  take  note  that  it 
is  recognized  that  the  vast  majority  of  prophecies  retjuire 
Bome  such  rendering  to  reduce  them  to  the  measure  of 
the  new  school.  I  believe  it.  The  liii.  is  a  specimen 
of  this  rendering.  ITie  Jews  are  Messiah  in  a  sense, 
and  Christ  has  not  suffered  for  sins  the  just  for  the 
unjust.  He  is  a  Pro])het,  a  Priest  without  a  sacrifice, 
and  a  deliverer  from  moral  e^il  as  King.  The  Apostolic 
view  nf  Christianity,  the  Christianity  of  the  founders  of 
the  religion,  has  all  to  be  corrected.  It  requires  it. 
There  is  no  propitiation,  no  sacrifice.  All  its  great  traits, 
as  we  learn  it  from  the  New  Testament,  are  a  mistake. 
How  happy  that  there  arc  some  who  understand  a  reli- 
gion better  than  those  who  founded  it. 

I  turn  to  the  ii.  Psalm.  "  If  he  would  follow  our 
version  in  rendering  the  ii.  Psalm,  '  kiss  the  Son,'  he 
knows  that  Hebrew  idiom  convinced  even  Jerome  the 
true  meaning  was  '  worship  jiurely.'  "  This  statement  is 
false.  lie  admits  nescu  (I  i|unUj)  means  'kiss,'  and 
says,  as  kissing  the  hand  had  the  sense,  as  in  Job,  of 
worshipping,  he  has  given  the  sense,  not  the  letter.  As 
to '  Har.'  he  acknowledges  he  had  in  his  ' Commentariolis,' 
which  are  now  lost,  translated  it  '  kiss  the  Son,'  con- 
trary to  the  old  Italic,  which  had  translated  it  '  leam 
discipline.'      Probahly  an  interpretation,  and  ^U\e\\,  ia 


254 


^ed  the  ol^^H 


r 

[  now  found  in  the  Vulgate,  which  has  preserved 

f  Italic  psalms  after  the  LXX.,  as  the  English  Prayer  Book 

the  old  versiun.  RuHinus  attacked  him  for  now  giving 
this  up,  and  saying.  Adore  purely.  He  replies:  "Bar  sig- 
nifies different  things, — Sou.  as  Bnrjesus.  iic,  wheat,  a 
handful  of  ears  of  corn,  elect,  and  purely ;  what  then 
have  I  sinned  if  I  have  translated  a  doubtful  word 
with  differing  interpretations,  and.  having  said  in  my 
notes,  where  there  was  the  liberty  of  explanation,  'adore 
the  Son.'  in  the  Imdy  itself,  lest  1  might  seem  a  violent 
I"  interpreter,    and   give   occasion    to   .lewish  calumnies, 

should  have  said  adore  pui-oly,  oi-  in  an  elect  way  (electe), 
as  A<|uila  and  Symniaclms  have  translated.  IIow  does 
it  hurt  their  ecclesiastical  faith  if  the  reader  should  be 
taught  in  how  many  ways  amongst  the  Jews  one  little 
verse  can  be  explamed."  The  reader  will  judge  how  far 
Hebrew  idiom  convinced  even  Jerome,  He  would  m  ~ 
force  it  all  one  way  to  avoid  Jewish  calumnies,  and 
I  has  given  it  several.     In  his  own  notes,  when  he  ^ 

^^^  free,  kiss  the  Son ;  in  tlie  text,  adore  purely.  Jerome 
^^^L  alone  gives, '  kiss  the  Son,'  in  Latin,  as  also  adore  purely. 
^^^^  The  \'"ulgate  *  learn  discijiline,"  following  the  LXX., 
^^^  (as  did  the  Italic  or  old  Latin),  was  used  in  the  Christian 
world,  save  in  the  Syriac  translation,  which  as  a  kindred 
language,  followed  the  Hebrew  closely,  and  reads,  kiss 
the  Son.  The  Hebrew  is  no  doubt  obscure.  But  that 
the  Hebrew  idiom  obliges  to  read,  adore  purely,  is 
anything  but  just.  DeWette,  a  first-rate  Hebraist  and 
extreme  rationalist  (though  it  seems,  thank  God,  draw- 
ing yearly  closer  to  Chi-ist  as  be  grew  older,  yet  the 
freest  of  the  free  as  to  doctrine),  in  his  otherwise  very 
beautiful,  though  somewhat  affected,  translation  gives, 
kiss  the  Son.  Rosenmiiller  declares  that  nashak  is 
never  used  by  itself  for  adore  or  venerate.  Hengsten- 
berg.  a  Coryphoeus  against  rationalists,  translates  it,  kiss 
the  Son,  and  quotes  Gesenius,  Winer,  and  Hitzig  for 
the  same,  ^'"enema  the  same,  referring  to  the  sense  of 
elect  in  Bar.  and  gives  elect  son.  In  the 
Rosenmiiller  approves,  quoting  many  others.    He 


^sm 


255 


lates  give  the  kiss  of  TeneradoQ  to  so  gtest  a  Kin^. 
Svmmacclius  gives,  porelv.  1  am  not  swaie  of  othen. 
(Aquiia,  I  suppose,  elecle.)  Tbe  Septnagint  tmulatioa, 
which  is  also  the  Chaldee.  is  a  kind  of  interftfctadoo  like 
Rosemniiller's,  and  gives  the  fense.  Jews  avoided  the 
term  son,  and  so  Neologi^ts.  Bar  is  more  Aranumi. 
hut  Geseoius  admits  Hebrew  tends  to  Amnaao  to 
poufcry.  Vaihinger  gives,  kiss  the  S*m.  Hopfeltl  has 
it  like  Jerome,  admittiog  that  Geseniiis,  I>e  WeCte, 
HengstQnberg,  that  is,  the  ablest  modem  Bcbrusfii,  and 
most  modems,  admit  this— the  Son — to  be  right.  So 
much  for  the  insinoation  of  Hebnrw  idiom  ooovindng 
Jerome;  and,  if  Hebrew  idiom,  it  sboul<L  of  ociune,ot]ie»; 
whereas  all  the  ablest  Hebraists  tran.<ilate  it,  kiw  the 
Soti.      I  re[»eat.  never  tro^t  the  facts  of  Neologiaas, 

I  now  turn  to  Psalm  xxii.  17.  Hi*  Bofb.  in  the  mMt 
ancient  Hebrew  reading.  "  like  a  lion."  >'</«-  that  tfaeie 
are  dilficultics  of  interyiretotinD  or  temdaaft  m  Hebrew 
no  one  doubts.  (-^hri>tiaDitT  is  in  do  war  obacemed  m 
tills  phrase.  It  is  not  quoted  m  the  New  TesfauMat. 
llie  reason  for  reading  it  as  it  is  in  the  Eagliih  Panda 
tion  is  that  the  ancient  Jews  iosia  it  »  so  in  die  «4d 
Hebrew.  It  is  no  question  oT  ratiooalinn.  The  moat 
High  Church  orthodox  writ^rrs  take  H  aa  neaittlig  "» 
lion."  The  form  is  peculiar.  Then  b  ike  aane  ia 
Isaiah,  where  it  is  trattslateil  "  as  a  God;"  hut  Ae 
ancient  Jewish  writet«  imii^t  that  it  is  not  to  be  read  w 
here.  The  LXX.,  a  centurr  and  a  half,  taj,  \Miiire  oar 
Lord,  translates  it,  '*  tber  pier<-ed  mj  hjsid*  and  rajr 
feet " — so  the  Vulgate,  so  the  .^jriar  in  Walton ;  M'lfi- 
tant^s,  De  Weite.  Ilengstenherg.  and  maor.  "**  »  Vttm." 
Of  the  ancients,  the  ChaJdee  Targum  only  baa,  "  a«  a 
lion;"  and.  according  to  De  Rosn.  the  beM  antfaorilv,  Ja 
of  small  authoritv,  and  fouoded  on  bod  msodsmpto. 
He  insists  on  the  maiinscripte  tA  the  vMy  U-nrvf^  fritle 
of  tlic  Jews,  Ben  Chaiim.  and  the-  yiamaa.  that  "ihtfy 
pierced  "  is  right ;  KownimulkT  pffftn  "  they  U»ii(wl, 
It  is  a  question  of  reading.  Cahari  is,  "  as  ft  \uni ;" 
most  probably,  though  not  certainly,  eahani  is,  "  ih^t<^ 


pierced ;  and  the  difference  in  Hebrew  is  very 
1W— Tvcj.  Cam  is,  "they  bound."  Now,  as  i 
ancient  translations  give  "they  pierced,"  the  Afasora 
confirms,  and  one  of  the  most  critical  Jewish  doctors 
approves,  pleading  his  own  good  Jewish  manuscripts; 
and  the  use  of  the  text  by  the  fathers  may  have  induced 
the  Jews  to  tamper  with  the  text  by  a  change  hardly 
perceptible ;  and  as  the  poJntiug  is  uncertain,  there  is 
nothing  so  sure  in  the  matter.  I  avow  I  am  disposed 
to  think  "  pierced "  right.  What  is  the  meaning  of 
"  the  assembly  of  the  wicked  surrounded  me,  as  a  lion 
my  hands  and  my  feet?"  I  do  nnt  see  much  sense  in  it. 
What  is  most  against  *  pierced,'  though  it  proves  nothing, 
is  that  it  is  never  referred  to  in  the  New  Testament, 
whereas  other  parts  of  the  Psalms  are.  However,  my 
own  conviction  is  that  "  they  pierced "  is  right.  The 
difficulties  and  labour  of  those  who  take  "  as  a  lion  "  as 
the  true  reading  to  make  any  sense  of  it,  show  that  it  is 
no  natural  reading.  Its  place  in  the  Psalm  makes  it 
inappropriate.  It  is  not  "  the  strength  of  bulls  and 
lions  "  that  is  here  spoken  of — that  is  an  earlier  stage 
of  the  speaker's  sorrow  —  but  tlie  "  shamelessness  of 
dogs,"  It  is  an  interpretation  of  what  is  ascribed  to  the 
dogs.  They  " compass "  him — so  the  wicked:  then  to 
jump  to  a  lion,  who  does  not  comjiass  jieople  at  all,  is 
out  of  place.  Next,  how  "  compass  his  kitmis  artd/eet?" 
what  does  that  mean  ?  We  have  had  the  lion,  but  thcQ 
it  was  only  "  gaping  with  the  mouth,"  and  in  place ; 
here  he  is  going  on  with  personal  details.  All  tends,  I 
think,  to  show  the  ancient  interpreters  were  right,  had 
Ihey  cahari  for  caharce,  or  caharu,  Venema  reads  "  as 
a  lion,"  but  connects  "  my  hands  and  my  feet  *'  with  "  \m 
can  count"— an  additional  proof  of  the  difficulties  i 
those  who  reject  the  ancient  versions.  That  it  is  thri 
most  ancient  Hebrew  reading  is  anything  but  provedfl 
that  it  is  the  common  modem  one  is  true.  The  versiofll 
have  so  far  more  authority  in  the  Old  Testament,  thi 
no  Hebrew  manuscript  is  so  old  by  many  centuries  t 
the  oldest  of  the   New.     In   any  case,  though 


AposUes  hare  qooted  itena^  *>  ■  f 

Dr.  WilUuns  is  soft  tfef  ae  i 

monsters  are  inleoded  bv  wkiH 

and  torn."    Only  read  de  Pah  « 

ing  God's  name  to  Iib  bf«lfci^L~  m 

tbe  Cbnrdi  viQ   I  fnix  User 

John  XX.,  and  yoa  w31  ne  how  n 

it  to  Israel     But  tke  g 

thought,   ^   monwt 

centre,  these  men  seam 

little  sketch  of  the  I 

lead  us  to  see  bow  flpedy|) 

the  whole  book  of  PaalHsif 

doubt,  tboogb  we  caoaot  t 

righteous  Jew.  tbe  tewmaa 

the  ii..  Chriat  as  Kmg  ia  Zjob,  i 

of  God,  and  owned  Sao ;  tfce  i 

against  Him.  bat  vsmed;  At 

meo,  tbe  rigbteuas  are  in  tiii 

msDt   of  God   feaaiag  Arir   ,  ^ 

Psalm  i.     Bat  in  the  «m,  Qsitf  im  a  wiier  ^Mactar 

than  hi  tbe  ii.     He  is  Sea  of  Maa.  mC  Sm  «r  IlMaC 

and  (f//  things  are  pot  voder  Him.  mat  Jcftamlft  ai^v 

is  excellent  in  all  tbe  earth.     Thai  Ae  «s^  if  Gai 

with  earth  are  sbowo.     ii.  and  x.  enter  mtm  tfce4ekA 

of  Israel's  cooditioa  in  tbe  bod  ia  Ae  bit  4q^  ami 

their  deliverance.     iL — xr.  go  Anmf^  lim,  Mi  ife 

feelings  it  protiuces,  in  Tarioas  Vina:  Maee  dn'WMaB 

a  oonifort  in  anr  triaL     rvi. :  Cbritt  ink  t^ca,  ia  ^b 

most  exquisite  and  deeplj  instmethe  vsf.  Hit  flM* 

nniong  the  excellent  of  the  earth ;  ilioaitlu.  ftA  «f  V~ 

through   death;    and   as   His  traat   wm  m  M    ^ 

Jehovah's  presence  was  His  jaj  as  man. 

tbe  subject  not  of  cooBdenoe,  but  of  rigbt< 

here  we  get  glorr,  and  what  I  may  ^I  i 

than  joy.     xriii.,  I  have  no  dnvbt.  luoks  at  tbe  i 

of  Christ  as  the  centre  of  all  God's  w»ts  from  I 

Messiah's  kingdom.     I  now  come  *o  the  ] 

immediately  in  mind.     In  xix.  we  have  two  t 


258 

of  God — the  creation  (the  heavens),  and  the  law.     In 
XX.  the  true,  faithful  witness  is  prophetically  viewed  as 
rejected  by  men,  and  in  sorrows.     In  xxi.,  which  di- 
rectly answers  to  it,  having  cried  for  life,  He  is  exalted, 
as  man,  to  everlasting  glory,  and  Ilis  hand  finds  out 
His  enemies.     This  was  outward  government  and  deal- 
ing.    He  had  suffered   from   man   imagining   devices 
against  Him ;    and  when  they  took  the  character  of 
enemies  they  were  judged.   But  (Ps.  xxii.)  Christ  did  not 
suffer  from  man  only ;  bulls  did  close  Ilim  in  ;  heartless, 
shameless  dogs  then  surrounded  Him,  and  He  looked,  not 
only  to  man  to  have  compassion  on  Him,  and  there  was 
none,  not  one  that  could  watch  one  hour,  He  looked  to 
God,  and  was  forsaken  there.     But  suffering  from  God 
was  avenging  not  to  be  avenged ;  hence,  when  this  is 
passed,  all  is  grace,  widening  out  in  blessing.     He  de- 
clares His  name  to  His  brethren,  as  He  did  in  John  xx., 
there  first  distinctly  calling  them  brethren,  and  leads  the 
praises  of  the  Church  He  has  gathered ;  then  brings  in 
all  Israel;  then  all  the  ends  of  the  world  remember 
themselves,   and  turn  to  Jehovah;  and  then  the  seed 
born  in  this  time  of  blessing  learn  the  great  truth,  to 
chant  it  with  others,  that   lie  hath  done  this.     It  is 
evident  to  me  there  is  j)rogrcss  in  the  bulls  and  the 
dogs ;  the  first  refers  to  mere  violence,  leading  Him  to 
the  cross ;  the  other  to  men's   conduct  when  He  was 
there.     But  the  witness  of  creation,  law,  and  Messiah, 
rejected  of  men,  and  He  glorified  and  judging;  and 
then  His  being  forsaken  of  (iod,  the  result  of  which  was 
not  judgment  (for  it  was  bearing  it),  but  grace,  un- 
mingled  grace,  makes  the  true  import  of  the  Psalm  most 
clear.     Could  we  dwell  upon  it,  and  study  the  grace  of 
Christ  in  it,  the  place  He  gives  us  in  it — what  the  de- 
claring the  Father  s  name  was  (see  John  xx.),  and  the 
full  import  of  this  consequent  on  redemption,  and  the 
place  He  then  takes  in  our  midst,  when  redemption  is 
accomplished,  to  lead  our  praises  as  being  in,  and  having 
placed  us  in,  the  same  perfect  joy, — it  would  show  the 
extraordinary  beauty  of  this  Psalm  as  applied  to  Christ. 


We  may  take  the  words  of  His  lips  upon  the  cross  to 
show  us  he  was  not  a  stranger  to  it.  Now.  I  cao  (miIj 
use  the  series  as  marking  the  place  Christ  has  in  it. 
when  God.  after  ail.  <liJ  not  despis*  nor  abhor  the  afflic- 
tion of  the  afflicted,  and  nhen  atonemeDl  was  made 
for  sin. 

I  do  not  believe  that  "  I  hare  called  my  son  out  of 
Egj'pt"  is  a  mere  aceoniniodatioa.  It  is  an  example  of 
the  universal  princi^ile  of  the  substitutioD  of  Christ  tbe 
true  vine,  the  servant,  for  tbe  old  vine,  the  servant.  He 
began  all  anew  as  the  stock  for  Israel,  as  he  did  for  maiL 
That  the  'Jth  of  Isaiah  may  be  translated  •■  the  father 
of  the  age  to  come,"  may  be  alleged.  No  Christian  thinks 
of  making  Christ  in  the  proper  sense  the  Father.  EJ  Gib- 
ber, it  may  be  dispule<l,  is  "the  strcwig  and  mighty  one." 
Let  us  even  suppose  it  is  so,  although  it  be  unduabtedljr 
contrary  to  the  soundest  criticism ;  one  thing  'i»  certain, 
it  is  Christ  then  ownetl  by  the  Jews  after  J^wvah  lias 
hid  his  face  from  them ;  and  tbe  law  has  been  sealed 
among  his  disciples  only,  and  Israd  has  gone  througli 
depths  of  misery,  and.  tinally.  the  judgmeoi  by  6re. 
Then  Israel  will  own  the  child  Ixim  as  all  this  t*»  theni. 
It  is  a  divinely  given  projthecy  *rf  Messiah,  As  to 
Isoiali  vii.  Il3.  Dr.  Williams  may  "not  listen,"  but  his 
judgment  will  not  now  have  much  weight  with  a  ^"rioiiB 
and  critical  mind.  I  fully  believe  it  to  be  a  prophecy  of 
Christ,  as  Matthew  has  declared  il.  The  imi]th0cy  goes 
on  to  the  passage  already  referred  to  (is,  7);  and  on- 
equivocally  gives  al!  Israel's  lustory  till  the  time  of  rest 
and  glorj',  including  Christ's  "  first  and  nectmi  corning." 
The  occasion  of  this  gemiioant  prophecv'  was  tlic  atta<;k 
of  Ttezin  and  Pekah,  But  the  childn^n  are  >yml>olical 
children  from  their  names:  "the  remnant  (•hall  return." 
and,  "  making  speed  to  the  spoil,  he  liahleneth  the  prey." 
So  the  then  circumstances,  in  which  confederairy  was 
sought  with  the  Assyrian,  is  used  as  a  jtcg  to  hang  the 
exhortation  to  look  to  Jehovah,  and  so  introduce  (.'lirist's 
first  coming,  and  Its  effects  on  his  rejection,  an'l  thereby 
Israel's.     Jehovah  would  be  a  stone  of  stumblitig,  and 


I 

I 


260 


have  disciples  and  chiUlren,  and  wait  in  this  chi 
of  the  faithful  one  in  Israel  on  Jehovah.     The  safe 
wa£  in  Immanuct. 

Now  the  wickedness  of  the  house  of  David  was 
ruin  of  the  last  prop  of  Israel  responsible  to  God, 
thereon,  as  a  stay  to  the  faith  of  the  remnant  and  all 
the  promises,  the  virgin's  seed  is  promised.  ITiis  is  said 
to  be  Hezekiah ;  now  the  application  of  the  whole  to 
Hezekiah  only  shows  the  utmost  narrowness  of  spirit. 
It  is  absurd  to  think  that  all  God's  counsels  end  in  a 
Jewish  king  who,  after  all,  though  blessed,  wrought  no 
great  deliverance :  the  end  of  the  prophecy  cannot  apply 
to  him,  he  had  no  disciples,  he  was  not  the  father  of  an 
age.  But  farther,  a  little  critical  inquiry  shows  it  could 
not  be  Hezekiah  at  all.  Hezekiah  was  twenty -five  years 
old  when  he  began  to  reign.  Ahaz  reigned  sixteen 
years ;  consequently  Hezekiah  was  bom  some  eight  or 
nine  years  before  Ahaz  began  to  reign ;  consequently 
there  could  not  be  a  promise  of  his  bh-th  after  Aha^  was 
reigning.  So  that  the  sign  so  solemnly  given  when  the 
last  hope  of  Israel  failed  in  the  apostacy  of  the  house  of 
David,  for  such  it  was  in  Ahaz, — the  sign  the  Lord  Him- 
self interferes  to  give,  calling  him  "God  with  us,"  means 
that  one,  no  one  knows  who,  who  till  then  had  been  a 
virgin,  should  bear  a  son.  It  certainly  is  not  Hezekiah. 
Is  it  not  evident  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  looking  out  to 
some  greater  deliverer,  who  should  indeed  be  Iramanuel  ? 
Even  ihe  learned  Jewish  Rabbin,  Jarchi,  &c.,  have 
given  up  the  foolish  attempt  to  ap|ily  it  to  Hezekiah. 
Since  that  they  and  other  opposers  of  Christianity  have 
been  at  their  wits'  end  seeking  how  to  make  out  a  sign 
out  of  some  younger  wife  of  Ahaz's  having  a  son  at  the 
epoch  of  the  prophec)-.  Now  if  you  examine  the  pro- 
phecy, or  pretended  prophecy,  for  we  are  to  assume 
nothing,  you  will  find  in  symbolical  and  mysterious  lan- 
guage the  whole  .scene  of  Jewish  history  in  connection 
with  Messiah,  and  the  state  of  the  nation  to  the  end 
when  glory  and  deliverance  comes  to  it.  The  main 
features  are  depicted  in  these  children,  one  being  all 


Ureadj^H 


261 

bom,  all  bearing,  as  is  usual  in  prophecy,  and  indeed  in 
history,  names  indicative  of  the  events  they  represent. 
bhear-Jashub,  Immanuel,  Maher-shalal-hash-baz.  The 
remnant  of  Israel  and  its  restoration,  God  with  the 
people,  represented  by  this  child ;  and  the  inroad  of  the 
Assyrian,  the  universal  expression  of  the  enemy  of  the 
latter  day.  The  history  of  the  people,  as  we  have  seen, 
is  cqntinued  from  Ahaz  to  the  glorious  time  of  Messiah. 
The  occasion  was  this : — The  people  despised  the  pro- 
mises to  the  house  of  David— despised  the  waters  of 
Shiloah,  and  trusting  in  human  strength,  cried  out  for  a 
confederacy.  The  house  of  David  itself,  despising  the 
promises,  sought  help  by  confederacy  with  the  Assyrian, 
and  removed  the  altar  of  Jehovah,  putting  a  heathen 
altar  in  its  place  in  the  temple.  In  these  circumstances, 
the  Prophet,  or  Isaiah,  giving  himself  for  a  prophet, 
unfolds  the  history  of  Israel.  Already  he  owns  a  rem- 
nant only,  which  shall  be  restored,  for  he  sees  all  ruined. 
He  goes  with  Shear-Jashub  to  the  king.  The  king  re- 
fuses the  encouragement  of  an  ofiiered  sign  from  Jehovah. 
He  was  too  wise  a  politician  and  lover  of  arts,  to  have 
faith  in  Jehovah.  Then  Immanuel  is  promised  to  Israel, 
born  of  the  virgin ;  but  the  land  was  to  be  desolate. 
Next,  the  latter-day  circumstances  are  entered  on.  The 
Assyrian  comes  up  (prefigured  by  near-approaching 
circumstances,  which  are  almost  always,  perhaps  always, 
the  occasion  of  latter-day  predictions),  but  the  land  is 
Immanuel's.  The  Assyrian  overflows  all  up  to  the 
head,  but  cannot,  so  to  say,  drown  altogether ;  for  Im- 
manuel, God  is  with  them.  Next,  the  detail  of  the 
history  is  brought  out,  the  people's  history ;  the  prophet 
is  warned  not  to  trust  in  confederacies,  but  in  Jehovah 
the  refuge  of  the  remnant ;  that  Jehovah,  the  sanctuary 
of  those  that  trust  in  Him,  would  be  a  stumbling-stone 
to  the  mass  of  the  people,  but  the  law  and  testimony 
would  be  sealed  and  made  good  among  the  remnant, 
who  are  styled  his  disciples  and  his  children,  and  are 
tokens  to  both  houses  of  Israel  that  Jehovah  would 
hide  his  face  from  the  house  of  Israel,  (all  this  we 


know  has  taken  place),  that  the  remnant  taught  by 
Christ  would  wait  for  Him.  The  result  would  be  for  the 
nation,  and  this  is  a  second  part  of  the  inward  history, 
a  time  of  unparalleled  disti-ess  and  darkness,  partially 
fulfilled,  but  not  complete;  a  time  of  darkness  and 
oppression,  leading  them  to  rage  and  blasphemy.  But 
another  element  was  in  the  midst  of  this.  Light  would 
be  there  when  all  was  the  shadow  of  death.  This  would 
be  in  Galilee,  not  in  Jerusalem  ;  the  result  of  this  would 
be  multiplying  the  nation,  increasing  its  joy,  breaking 
men's  yoke  from  its  neck  by  judgment  of  fire  (compare 
Isaiah  Ixvi. ) ;  for  the  mighty  one,  the  child  bom  to  tfaem, 
the  Immanuel— the  estabhsher  of  peace,  was  now  owned 
and  known  by  them  in  a  kingdom  never  to  be  subverted, 
on  the  throne  of  Da^^d,  a  kingdom  of  jieace  and  blessing. 

Hence,  Matthew,  citing  tiiis  prophecy,  brings  Jesus 
into  Galilee,  and  at  the  close,  with  the  true  remnant, 
His  disciples,  meets  them  there  after  His  resurrection, 
no  reference  being  made  to  the  ascension,  linking  His 
life  and  resurrection  on  to  future  Jewish  hopes  and 
despised  Galilean  remembrances.  The  ascension  took 
place  from  Bethany,  the  secret  home  of  Christ,  when 
the  nation  rejected  Him. 

W.  And  what  do  the  Neologists  reply  to  this  re- 
markable scheme  or  outline  of  Divine  history,  more 
deeply  and  fully  known  by  its  mysterious  and  symbolic 
character?  That  it  gives  itself  for  a  prophecy  up  to 
the  last  days  is  clear ;  and  the  two  sons  of  the  prophet 
being  prophetical,  the  third  would  be  naturally  thought 
so  too. 

JT.  Surely  ;  only  the  prophet  is  in  the  circumstances, 
and  with  the  people,  and  they  are  connected  with 
him ;  but  the  virgin's  Son  is  the  intervention  of  God, 
God  with  us,  and  therefore  not  the  prophets.  Yet 
when  He  is  seen  on  earth  as  a  prophet — for  so  He  was 
— He  takes  the  prophetic  place,  and  says,  personified 
by  the  prophet,  "  I  and  the  children  which  God  hath 
given  me."  "Vou  remember  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
quotes  this  as  a  proof  of  Christ's  takuig  human  natxire, 


L 


263 

most  rigbtlr.  as  we  see  Iiere.  IW  icms  « 
as  a  child  bom  to  iImib  id  tfe  < 
vithal.  The  13th  TCise— tfe  s^m  ^  a 
also  ijuoted  br  Peter  aod  bv  Pw^  ^ti  i 
to,  as  apptjing  to  Hnaaelf.  bf  tfas  Lnri.  m  «icv  tf  A* 
then  state  of  the  Jen  as  a  Batiim,  ^ri  wmeiks^m  m 
more  awful  cooseqnoicses  mhim  He  ^a^i  Mi  i^^ 
theni ;  for  the  reje^ed  stoie  was  te  W  tie  fa^  «f  ^e 
comer.  The  nUaoaEstt  aeist,  ia  Mplf,  at  ^  faks* 
quotiog  it  as  a  proof  of  tfe  |mihAHb  J  iJi^iMij  af 
Mary,  and  arge  tba^  kad  it  faem  sa^  tfce  Hdvrv  waril 
be  Behula,  not  Abm,  wUA  daes  aoc  aa^  ■«»■■% 
that  state. 

W,   But   afe  too  serims!     Sadlf  doe  ■>«  fee 
something  more. 

//i  ThCTe  is,  rf  i 
argument — there  aamat  be  m  f 

SV,  Yes;  but  that  h  i 
ing  wliat  is  to  be  pntved,  a 
once.     If  God  can  speak.  He  e 

JJ.  AV'ell,  I  canncC  hdp  its  btmg  waaeBK;  it  ii  al 
tfaej  have  to  sar-  ChiK  700  ■otf  i^BaA  Wv  A^ 
labour  in  rain  bj  seeku^  to  Amr  witt  it  tarn  W. 
Gesenius  holds  it  for  the  piu|ALli 
and  Aben  £zra.  But 
of  calling  her  Ha  Alma. 
jashub.  So  it  is  aXK^tber 
answers.  But  the  land  is  lannanaeTs  had.  Biuw  cnrfi 
Isaiah  call  the  kingdom  his  feeood  wife's  li*^*  iMldf 
and,  1  may  add,  h^  second  wife's  tiabf — "Cot  wiA 
ns."  So  he  says  it  most  be  a  oew  wife  of  Akax.  BoC 
then  we  stumble  upon  Hezekiah  again,  hrrrmr  H  wm 
his  land  in  this  sense.  lie  wa»  a  kind  of  trute  of 
Christ,  as  son  of  David,  before  whom  the  Ampian 
fell.  But  then  he  could  not  be  the  perfjo  tBoded  to 
bere;  he  was  bom  some  eigbt  or  nine  yeani  befers 
Ahaz  was  king,  and  was  now  some  twetre  or  tfatiteea 
years  old.  Evidently  tfae  same  child  is  the  gJorioas  ooe 
of  chap.  ix.    But,  further,  RosemniUIer  has  shown  tliat 


264 

the  argument  as  to  alma  is  unfounded,  and  that  the 
Scripture  use  of  it  is  a  virgin,  and  nothing  else.  And 
would  it  not  be  singular,  as  he  adds,  to  call  Ahaz's  wife 
thus,  and  Ha  Alma,  the  virgin  ?  Remark,  too,  that  not 
only  Christians,  i.  6.,  the  New  Testament,  distinctly 
apply  this  passage  to  Christ,  but  the  effect  was  uni- 
versal. The  Jews  expected  a  Messiah  in  the  house  of 
David,  who  would  so  deliver  them,  and  have  universal 
rule.  The  Gentiles,  too,  as  Tacitus  witnesses  of  the 
expectation  of  thq  whole  of  the  East,  and  as  Virgil  has 
simg,  wherever  he  found  the  materials  of  his  extraordi- 
nary ode  to  Pollio  : — 

'*  Ultima  Cumcei  yenit  jam  carminis  setas 
Magnus  ab  integro  sceclorum  nascitur  ordo, 
Jam  redit  et  virgo  redeunt  Saturnia  regna. 
Jam  nova  progenies  coelo  dimittitiir  alto 
Tu  modo  nascent!  puero  quo  ferrea  primum 
Desinit  ac  toto  surgit  gens  aurea  mundo 
Casta  fave  Lucina." 

Of  coiu^e,  in  the  last  phrase  wo  find  the  heathen,  as  in 
the  whole  eclogue,  the  courtly  poet. 

It  is  fair  to  add  that  Rosenmiiller,  though  a 
rationalist,  admits  fully  the  usual  sense  of  the  passage ; 
adding,  like  a  rationalist,  but  which  is  confirmatory  of 
the  Hebrew  truth  of  the  passage  in  Isaiah :  "  The  fact> 
that  the  expectations  held  out  by  the  prophet  of  speedy 
deliverance  were  not  fulfilled  should  not  make  us  deny 
that  the  prophet  thought  about  that.  He  refers  to  the 
then  universal  expectations  of  a  Messianic  deliverer 
(referred  to  as  a  hope  in  every  deep  distress),  confirmed 
by  the  language  of  Micah,  a  contemporary  prophet." 
He  admits,  strange  to  say,  that  it  predicted  an  incarna- 
tion (only  as  just  coming)  because  one  who  was  to  be 
God  with  them  was  to  be  bom  of  a  virgin.  He  says  it 
is  evident  from  Matt,  i*  22,  23,  that  the  Jews  at  the 
time  of  Christ  so  interpreted  it.  Not  believing  in 
inspiration,  they  are  forced  to  admit  the  facts.  The 
statement  that  the  word  alma  was  not  a  virgin,  but 
simply  a  young  woman,  comes  from  the  Jews,  after 


265 

Christ,  atteniptmg  to  reject  tlie  facts  of  Christiamty,  u 
may  be  seen  in  Justin's  dialogue  with  Trvpho.  I  say 
after  Christ,  because  the  LXX.  give  "the  virgin"  tiwapOmt 
Xjiittrai,  and  Aquila  and  Symmachus'  translations  made 
after  Christianiti\  the  first  to  meet  the  feeling  of  the 
Jews,  and  the  effect  of  the  argument  drawn  from  the 
LXX,,  give  navii,  a  young  woman. 

\f.  1  think  what  you  have  stated  [iroves  the  flip- 
pancy of  their  objections.  If  Dr.  Williams  will  not  hear, 
what  I  have  beard  both  shows  to  me  the  wide  bearing 
of  prophetic  testimony,  and  how  it  hangs  together  as  a 
whole;  how  it  comiects  itself  with  present  circum- 
stauces  was  to  be  an  encouragement  to  faith  then,  and 
a  revelation  to  future  ages^  sometimes  symbolical  and 
mysterious,  so  as  to  comprise  immense  facts  in  a  few 
words,  and  yet  so  place  them  in  the  whole  scheme  as  to 
give  them  a  plan  of  which  Christiamty  is  the  sure,  I 
may  say  necessary,  inteqireter.  Thus  Roseoraiiller  is 
so  far  right,  that  there  was  present  encouragement; 
and  laith  met  even  its  present  reward  in  the  ruin  of 
Sennacherib :  but,  had  he  examined,  he  n'ould  have 
fbtmd  at  the  same  time  in  the  hortatory  language  and 
internal  history  of  the  nation,  from  12  to  the  end.  to 
which  you  have  referred,  the  evident  ruin  and  rejection 
of  Israel,  in  the  rejection  of  Christ  aiipearing  as 
prophet,  and  having  discijdes,  but  not  the  nation,  from 
which  Jehovah  hides  His  face. 

If.  It  is  quite  just,  and  you  will  find  in  this  part  of 
the  proiphet  an  unfolding  of  all  the  gi-eat  principles  of 
God's  dealings.  After  four  chapters  of  preface,  in  v.  the 
prophet  (for  now  I  shall  call  him  so)  shows  tie  judg- 
ment of  Israel  for  its  failure  in  respect  of  its  first  given 
blessings.  In  vi.  it  is  judged  in  respect  of  the  coming 
glory  of  Messiah  —  Jehovah,  but  a  remnant  is  pre- 
served ;  a  passage  quoted  in  the  Gospels  and  by  PauJ,  as 
fulfilled  in  the  blinding  of  the  people  as  a  people,  which 
we  know  to  be  true  (though  these  infidels  would  only 
make  it  the  Gentiles'  sin.  and  they  have  sinned,  not  the 
Jews),  but  with  an  answer  of  peace,  after  judgment,  to 

82 


I 
I 


266 

the  inquiry  of  faith  counting  on  Jehovah's  faithfulness  to 
promise,  and  saying,  "How  long?"  Then  the  special 
prophecy  as  to  the  house  of  David  and  Christ,  and  the 
remnant,  and  the  inroad  of  the  latter  days,  and  the 
delivering  judgment  and  glory,  which  we  have  just 
considered.  Then  he  takes  up  their  history  from  Rezin 
and  Pekah  to  the  end,  or  Assyrian  final  invasion.  But 
this  is  linked  to  the  judgment  of  v.  by  the  words,  "  For 
all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his  hand  is 
stretched  out  still ;''  repeated  ix.  12,  21 ;  x.  4.  And  as 
the  Assyrian  was  the  last  enemy  from  without  (from 
Babylon  on  they  were  captives,  and  the  temple  burnt, 
or  under  the  Gentile  monarchies),  it  is  said,  on  the 
occasion  of  his  destruction :  "  For  yet  a  very  little 
while  the  indignation  shall  cease,  and  His  anger  in 
their  destruction  "  (x.  25) ;  for  he  was  the  rod  of  God's 
anger,  and  the  staff  in  his  hand  was  God's  indignation. 
Then  (xi.  and  xii.)  we  have  Messiah,  and  the  results  of 
His  coming,  the  rod  of  the  stem  of  Jesse.  The  word 
**  indignation  "  becomes  technical  in  after- prophecy  for 
the  later  sorrows  of  the  Jews,  as  in  Daniel ;  and  the 
expression  in  the  22nd  verse,  "the  consumption 
decreed,"  very  definitely  so,  for  the  special  dealings  of 
God  in  the  last  days. 

And  remark ;  this  history  of  Israel,  and  the  outward 
connection  of  Christ  with  the  people,  is  never  quoted  in 
the  New  Testament ;  while  the  special  dealings  of  God 
in  connection  w  ith  the  revelation  of  Jehovah  in  vi.,  vii., 
viii.,  are  largely  and  repeatedly  quoted:  a  fresh  con- 
firmation how  one  Divine  mind  runs  through  all 
Scripture. 

W.  I  enjoy  your  unfolding  of  Scripture  more  than 
your  controversy,  still  I  do  not  deny  that  it  is  useful  and 
called  for.  Can  you  refer  me  to  the  texts  where  the 
expressions  you  call  technical  are  used  ? 

a,  I  am  sure  I  enjoy  them,  at  any  rate,  much  more. 
I  have  hesitated  as  to  whether  any  controversy  was  to 
be  desired.  But  your  owti  state  of  mind,  though  fully 
believing  the  truth  of  the  Divine  record,  and  of  many 


others,  where  unbelief  lies  floating,  so  to  speak,  has 
made  me  think  it  might  be  useful.  I  will  refer  to  some 
of  the  texts ;  but  if  they  did  not  refer  to  the  same  epoch, 
they  would  not  have  the  same  force  they  have,  which  j'ou 
must  note.  As  to  indignation,  Daniel  viii.  19;  xi.  36; 
and  as  to  consumption  decreed.  Isaiah  xxvlii.  22,  and 
Daniel  ix.  27.  I  little  doubt  the  Lord  refers  to  this 
when  Ue  speaks  of  the  shnrteniag  of  these  days  in 
Matt.  xxiv. 

if,  1  thank  you;  I  shall  examine  them.  They  not 
only  connect  the  two  prophets,  but,  if  1  understand  their 
bearing,  throw  light  on  the  whole  nature  of  this  last 
period,  so  often  referred  to  in  Scripture.  1  think,  by-the- 
bye,  this  constant  reference  to  the  last  days,  to  a  special 
time,  at  the  close  of  trial,  judgments,  and  deliverance  at 
the  end,  makes  the  rationalist  system  of  application  to 
present  events,  or  mere  Biinsenian  second-sight,  utterly 
untenable.  It  was  in  all  tlie  prophecies,  from  the  Pen- 
tateuch on,  a  distinct  object  held  out— asystem  of  Di^-ine 
government  before  all  their  minds^a  system  which,  be 
it  false  prophecy,  which  would  be,  I  think,  incredible  in 
itself,  or  true,  at  any  rate  proves  the  falseness  of  the 
rationalist  view.  But  we  have  been  led,  I  think,  to 
Daniel. 

JI.  I  entirely  agree  with  you.  It  is  evidently  a 
whole  ;  the  prophetic  scheme  connecting  itself,  of  course, 
with  present  warning  and  circumstances,  but  in  most 
various  parts  and  divers  manners,  all  bearing  on  one 
great  delivering  intervention,  preceded  by  trials.  We 
have  the  sorrows  and  joys  of  it  in  the  Psalms,  and  the 
encouragement  and  warnings  of  it  in  prophet-*,  Christ's 
connection  with  the  remnant  in  rejection  or  in  deliver- 
ance in  both  Psalms  and  prophets,  but  evidently  one 
great  moral  scheme.  And  this  is  a  proof  of  its  truth, 
because  it  shows  that  it  is  not  the  fruit  of  individual 
mind,  but  of  one  Dirine  mind  ;  for  it  is  not  cojiyirig  or 
carrying  on  a  scheme  one  from  another  {tlioro  in 
only  one  such  case  of  Micah  and  Isaiah),  nor  iliitt<!riiig 
the  [)eople.    They  fit  into  a  wliole,  but  do  not  ci\>\»h  ^^ 


268 


Germaa^^l 


one  another.  But  we  will  turn  to  Daniel.  The 
critics  in  general  have  given  him  up,  but  we  must  inquire 
why  ?  It  is  become  an  axiom,  wo  are  told.  But  German 
and  rationalist  axioms  have  not  much  hold  on  my 
mind.  We  mil  get  rid  of  evidently  false  grounds  rf 
judgment  to  begin  with.  "  The  absence  of  any  mention 
of  it  by  the  son  of  Sirach  strikingly  confirms  their  view 
of  its  origin" — that  of  a  patriot  bard  using  Daniel's 
name  in  the  time  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  Now,  accord- 
ing to  thejustest  criticism,  allthe  twelve  minor  prophets 
are  omitted  too,  though  even  the  fact  of  Daniel's  being 
in  the  Ilagiographa  would  account  for  its  not  being 
named  there  as  only  natural.  But  the  connection  of 
the  phrase  in  Greek,  as  to  the  sen.'ic,  proves,  I  think,  tJie 
introduction  of  the  twelve  minor  prophets  to  be  an  inter- 
polation, and  an  unskilftd  one.  Daniel's  being  by  the 
Tigris,  if  it  proves  anything,  proves  the  genuineness  of 
the  book,  as  a  Jew  would  certainly  have  thought  of  the 
Euphrates,  the  great  river,  not  of  one  all  but  unknown 
and  unmentioned.  But  it  really  proves  nothing,  because 
it  was  in  the  third  year  of  Cyrus,  when  Daniel  had  left- 
Babylon,  and  was  at  Shushan  and  other  places.  The 
remark  of  Dr.  Williams.  "  If  the  scene  had  been  Babyltai 
un<!er  Darius,  the  river  must  have  been  Euphrates," 
has  no  meaning.  There  is  (juestion  neither  of  Darius 
nor  of  Babylon.  He  cannot  have  simply  looked  at  the 
chapter.  These  and  similar  remarks  we  may  leave  as 
worthless.  The  real  objection  to  Daniel  is,  that  prophe- 
cies and  visions  are  impossible.  Thus  De  Wette.  Jt 
appears  that  Daniel  is  not  the  author  of  this  book,  "  fro! 
its  legendary  contents  It  is  full  of  improbabilities. 
"  The  events  of  a  distant  future  ....  are  related  with 
great  distinctness  and  accuracy,  even  with  the  addition 
of  the  dates.  This  was  evidently  done  after  the  events," 
Now  "it  is  peri(jctly  evident  that  this  is  no  argument. 
It  is  simply  saying,  as  we  have  seen  before,  there  can 
be  no  prophet,  no  revelation ;  therefore,  Daniel  is  not 
one,  and  this  is  not  a  revelation,  but  composed 
lie  event.    This  can  have  no  force ;  it  is  a  mere 


'Cd  afier^H 


269 


principii,  begging  the  questioo.  But  a  statement  Ls 
made  connected  with  it,  and  rej>eated  by  all  the  rational- 
ists, that  the  alleged  prophet  stops  at  Antiochus  Epi- 
phanes.  This  is  siniply  false.  He  continues,  after  amost 
important  reference  to  the  state  of  the  Jews,  and  a  most 
accurate  one  from  the  time  of  the  Maccabees,  a  very 
detailed  account  of  the  state  of  Palestine  in  connection 
with  th?  kings  of  north  and  south  on  to  the  end,  where 
Daniel  was  to  stand  in  his  lot  at  the  end  of  days.  You 
have  only  to  read  Daniel  xi.  from  30  on.  and  xii.  to 
convince  you  of  it.  if  their  theory  be  true,  Daniel 
must  write  the  book  when  he  stands  in  his  lot ;  and  the 
details  are  quite  as  full  at  the  end,  if  not  more  so,  than 
in  the  previous  jmrt.  This  is  all  entirely  unfounded. 
Along  with  this,  there  is  an  effort  to  make  the  account 
of  the  emjiires  suit  the  fact  of  Daniel  living  in  Antiochus 
Epiphanes'  time.  If  so,  he  could  not  speak  of  the 
Itomans,  and  his  four  monarchies  must  end  with  the 
Grecian.  Thus  vrith  Bunsen,  the  lion  is  Assyrian,  the 
bear  Babylonian,  the  leopard  Persian,  the  fourth  beast 
Alexander.  Now  this  is  too  bad.  Not  a  trace  of  Nineveh 
existed  even  when  the  true  Daniel  was  in  Babylon,  and 
it  was  wholly  incon.'>istent,  if  a  patriot  forgerj-.  to  place 
him  there.  Nineveh  had  not  taken  Judah  cai)tive;  the 
thought  is  contrary  to  all  proljability ;  but  he  did  see  the 
wings  of  Babylon  plucked,  and  a  tame  heart  given  it. 
The  attempt  to  make  the  last  beast  Alexander^that  is, 
the  beast  with  seven  heads  and  ten  horns — is  arbitrary, 
and  without  the  smallest  apparent  ground.  It  is  simply 
impossible  that  Daniel  coiild  so  describe  the  Grecian 
empire,  if  he  lived  in  the  time  of  Antiochus.  Alexander's 
empire  had  never  seven  heads  and  ten  horns.  It  had 
four,  as  the  leopard  is  spoken  of  here ;  and  more 
precisely,  as  in  the  following,  is  expressly  said  of  the 
Grecian  kingdom,  four  notable  horns,  and  out  of  one  of 
them  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  it  is  declared,  was  to  come. 
The  previous  one  to  this  is  declared  to  be  Media  and 
Persia.  All  these  statements  are  unworthy,  I  must  say, 
of  honest  men.    The  previous  attempt  was  to  make 


270 

Media  one  empire  and  Persia  another,  and  so  end  with 
Alexander.  This  broke  down  because  the  prophet  de- 
clares he  reckons  them  one.  "  The  ram  with  two  horns 
are  the  kings  of  Media  and  Persia/^  What  was  to  be 
done  ?  Baron  Bunsen's  imagination  sets  at  work,  and 
the  Assyrian  empire  is  dragged  in  before.  But  this  is 
going  farther  and  faring  worse.  Because,  besides  the 
utter  improbability  already  noticed,  here  are  clearly 
only  four  great  empires  contemplated,  and  we  have 
another  figure  of  them — the  statue,  where  the  head  of 
gold  is  Nebuchadnezzar;  and  we  find  the  ten  kings  in 
another  form  in  the  ten  toes.  They  are  really  to  be 
pitied  in  their  reasonings ;  their  object  cannot  here  be 
alleged  to  be  truth,  but  at  all  cost  to  prote  Daniel  is 
no  prophet — that  there  can  be  no  revelation. 

W.  Well,  it  is  pitiable  and  pitiful,  because  there  is 
no  honest  nobleness  of  truth  in  it.  No  one  can  read 
Daniel,  be  he  true  or  false,  and  not  see  that  the  Baby- 
lonish empire  is  the  starting-point  in  his  mind.  The 
rest  follows  necessarily.     Have  they  no  other  grounds  ? 

H,  The  first  chapter  clearly  shows  where  the  starting- 
point  of  all  his  prophecies  is,  the  basis  of  the  scheme 
which  the  book  carries  out  to  the  final  deliverance  of 
the  Jews.  But  then,  if  this  be  so,  he  is  a  prophet,  and 
all  their  system  is  false.  Their  anxiety  betrays  them. 
Besides  chapter  ix.,  '  Messiah  is  to  be  cut  off  and  to 
have  nothing,'  for  that  is  the  force  of  it,  is  clearly  a 
prophecy.  How  they  make  this  apply  to  the  time  of 
Antiochus  Epiphanes  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand.  It 
was  poor  patriotic  encouragement  to  tell  them  that  their 
Messiah,  their  Prince,  would  be  there  in  a  year  and 
three  months,  be  cut  off,  and  get  nothing,  and  then  war 
and  desolations.  And  the  date  is  the  decree  to  restore 
and  rebuild  Jerusalem.  De  Wette  says  Daniel  extends 
Jeremiah's  seventy  years  to  seventy  weeks  of  years,  so  as 
to  include  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  But  he  admits  the 
golden  head  and  first  beast  are  the  Babylonian  empire. 
Now,  "  include  Antiochus  Epiphanes  "  is  i-ather  vague. 
If  we  take  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  which  is  very  unlikely,  it 


271 

runs  on  to  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  beyond  Anti- 
ochua  Epiphanes,  and,  remark,  beyond  the  existence  of 
the  Syrian  monarchy.  Cjtus  took  Babylon  in  538. 
(Clinton  Fynes.)  The  SeleucidjE  ceased  to  reign  in  65; 
but  the  490  years  end  48  years  before  Christ,  so  that 
they  reach  on  to  17  years  after  the  close  of  the  Syrian 
monarchy.  This  is  the  most  favourable  case  to  De 
Wette.  Yet  it  runs  into  the  Roman  power.  If  we 
take  other  decrees  to  be  referred  to,  as  surely  they  are, 
the  prophecy  runs  on  to  the  full-blown  Eoraan  empire. 
Why,  then,  "to  include Autiochus  Epiphanes'?  but  you 
will  never  find  details  fairly  examined  and  compared. 
De  Wette  settles  it  in  a  much  more  suggestive  way,  it 
was  a  patriot  bard ;  like  many  of  our  own,  says  Dr.  Wil- 
liams, who  borrowed  Daniel's  name  for  himself,  and  then 
being  naturally  afraid  to  speak  of  Antiochus  Epiphaties, 
openly  borrowed  the  names  of  Nebuchadnezztir  and 
Belshazzar  to  depict  him;  and,  as  Antiochus  Epiphanes. 
from  his  conduct,  was  called  Antiochus  Epimattes,  or 
madman,  Ijethought  himself  of  putting  Nebuchatlnezzar 
to  eat  grass  for  seven  years ! 

}V.  Dear !  on  what  principle  do  they  apply  the  king- 
doms?    Must  not  the  image  harmonize  ? 

J£.  That  is  not  it  at  all.  Daniel  *ii.  cannot  go  lower 
than  Antiochus  Epiphanes ;  for  you  know  the  bard  lived 
then,  and  hence  you  must  make  the  othem  harmonize 
with  that. 

W.  But  do  they  really  settle  it  in  that  iwjrt  of  way  ? 

JI.  That  is  the  exact  conclusion  of  De  Wette.  iJe- 
cause,  till  the  new  idea  of  Nineveh  of  Baron  Bunson, 
all  begin  with  Babylon,  as  Daniel  does ;  but  then,  to 
make  four  empires  down  to  .Antiochua  Epiplmncn  is  a 
torture. 

W.  But  the  other  prooft  of  the  epoch  of  Dftutd'i 
prophesying  ? 

H,  There  are  Greek  words  a^  for  iruitrutocnt*  of 
music.  As  to  this,  De  Wette  hiiiiwlf  lulmitn  that  It  in 
possible  that  Greek  instnimenls  with  theftc  nnrnen  miiy 
have  been  known  to  the  Babylontani!  at  this  time,    But 


272 

a  fuller  inquiry  into,  and  deeper  knowledge  of  languages, 
of  which  recent  study  has  made  almost  a  new  science, 
has  shown  that,  not  only  does  this  attempt  to  impeach 
the  genuineness  of  Daniel,  from  the  use  of  Greek  words, 
wholly  fail,  but  the  facts  go  to  prove  the  genuineness. 
At  the  utmost,  too,  names  of  instruments,  which,  if  they 
came  from  Greece,  would  naturally  keep  their  names, 
can  be  traced  to  Greek  words.  The  others  belong  to 
that  class  of  languages  from  which  Greek  proceeds — 
thQ  Aryan,  or  Indo-European,  known  now  thi-ough 
Sanscrit  and  Zend.  These  words  belonged  to  the  East, 
and,  save  one,  are  not  found  where  Greek  and  Aramean 
were  thrown  together  in  the  time  of  Antiochus  Epi- 
phanes.  The  foreign  words  are,  many  of  them,  inex- 
plicable from  Greek,  but  are  explicable  from  the  sacred 
language  of  the  Aryans,  who  were  the  priestly  caste  in 
Babylon,  and  under  Cyrus.  As  I  have  said,  when 
Aramean  was  Hellenized,  these  words  disappeared.  The 
force  of  this  is  evident.  It  is  alleged,  too,  that  the 
Chaldee  and  Hebrew  are  corrupt — so  says  De  Wette 
and  Dr.  Williams.  I  consult  other  authorities,  and 
find  the  character  of  the  Hebrew  bears  the  closest 
affinity  to  that  of  Ezekiel  and  Habakkuk,  who  lived 
near  his  time ;  but  it  is  less  marked  by  peculiar  corrup- 
tions than  that  of  Ezra.  The  Aramean  also,  like  that 
of  Ezra,  is  also  of  an  earlier  form  than  exists  in  any 
other  Chaldaic  document.  Michaelis  declares  that  the 
language  proves  it  was  no  late  compilation.  Other 
words  betray  a  source  which  render  it  inexplicable  how 
it  could  have  been  composed  in  Palestine.  And  the 
peculiarities  urged  as  proofs  of  the  late  composition  of 
Daniel  are,  by  Havemich,  on  very  strong  grounds, 
shown  to  be  Babylonish  peculiarities.  Thus,  like  the 
alleged  Greek,  they  too  prove  the  genuineness  of 
Daniel,  which  they  were  produced  to  impeach.  But 
this  is  not  all.  It  was  clearly  received  into  the  canon 
when  the  LXX.  translation  was  made ;  so  that  it  was 
then  a  known  book.  Now,  the  whole  of  this  was  known 
as  complete,  at   the  latest  supposition,  in  130  b^ore 


tine,  bat  in  ^Cf^ 

it  bad  been 

Egypt-    E^^*" 

onlt  aputrrphil 

tbe  rogn  of 
supposed  to* 

Christ,  100; 

poUic  trin'lhfinn  af  Dtanri 

Now,  h  b  Dot,  ifcr  al,  ^ 

yeais  b 

onlvof  whenAet 

well  kmnm.    Then  h  I 

Testamoit  1 

Antiochns  I 

latcd  probdbly  loo^  bdwe  Ae  tae  few  ■ 

certainly  at  latest  U  tfe  taae  Aej  ^  fe  I 

part  of  Scriptnre. 

of  prophets. 

W.  TbeohjectioosareeratadyJtiMiirfdIi 

and  the  LSX  *eman  makei  it  n  Ac  krt  d 
probable  that  it  can  he  briwght  donni  to  j 
even  up>:)n  ratiooaKst  gioaad.  Bat  vfet  4*  t 
of  the  I^nnl's  qooting  it  t 

H,  Thev  make  notloDg  of  it;  Agf  d»  aoC  i 
their  beails  about  it.     It  ts  enrioos,  if  i 

the  spirit  of  these  meiL     It  is  UBpoaabie  tfcat  God  l 

reveal  anything ;  and  when  it  is  tnqnired  if  it  be  Dmne; 
that  is  out  of  tbe  question.  Bat  ^  it  sDgfests,  in  tfe 
godless  invader,  do  slight  forecast  of  Caligula  again  in- 
vading the  temple  with  like  abomination,  as  weO  as 
wh&tever  exalts  itself  agaiost  faith  and  conaeieoce  to 
the  end  of  the  world."  Thus  an  impostor,  pre- 
iding  to  be  a  prophet  of  oldea  time,  can  breast 
a  future  tjrant,  make   a   germinant  propheev,  Violt  x 


tiTie  one  there  cannot  be. 
leology. 
W.  it  is  as  low  as  it  is  trifling, 
H.  A  short  sketch  of  Daniel  will  facilitate  our  Ji 
ment  of  their  partial  interpretations.  We  have,  first, 
the  captive  remnant,  faithful  an<l  trusting  Jehovah,  but 
giving  Jlini  the  name  which  suits  llim  when  Jerusalem 
was  laid  low.  He  is  the  God  of  heaven.  For  the  moment, 
his  earthly  place  of  habitalion  was  la,i<l  low,  but  faith 
looked  beyond.  He  was  above  all.  Hence,  in  the 
returning  intervention  of  God's  power,  the  witnesses  in 
the  A])ocalypse  stand  before  the  God  of  the  earth. 
Next  we  have  the  Gentile  powers,  under  whiuh  Judah 
was  captive,  presentetl  as  a  whole  {the  man  of  the  earth), 
beginning  with  Nebuchadnezzar.  Gud  entrusted  su- 
preme power  into  the  hands  of  man  ;  next  we  find  that 
man,  thus  entrusted  with  power,  sets  up  an  idolatroua 
centre,  and  persecutes  the  faithful  remnant.  Next  it  ■' 
shown  that  the  Gentile  power  loses  its  true  sense,  its  d( 
pendent  relationship  to  God  (it  is  not  exactly  here 
idolatr)',  but  great  Babylon  which  I  have  built),  and, 
during  the  whole  time  of  the  Gentiles,  Viecomes  a  beast 
unintelligent.  Next  there  is  the  contempt  of  Jehovah, 
the  God  of  Israel;  lastly,  the  setting  up  to  be  God. 
Thus  we  get  a  full  picture  of  the  Gentile  world— not, 
alas!  the  finite  realization  of  the  spirit  of  goodness. 
This  closes  the  outward  history ;  what  remains  is  made 
up  of  the  visions  of  Daniel,  in  which  the  condition  of  the 
remnant,  and  the  events  of  the  last  days,  are  more 
clearly  brought  out.  It  is  the  inside,  more  than 
outside,  as  was  natm-al — more  relationships  and  c( 
duct. 

First  we  have  the  four  great  empires,  but  cspecii 
the  last  or  western  one,  and  its  connection  with 
saints  ;  and  when  the  explanation  comes,  the  final 
secuting  power,  and  the  triumph  of  saints  by  the  jut 
ment  and  coming  of  the  Lord,  is  clearly  brought  oii.* 
Ihen  we  get  the  eastern  part  of  these  empires  of  thft' 
beasts,  and  that  carried  down  to  the  end,  passing  ovffl^] 


275 

from  the  relationship  of  the  Syro-Grecian  monarchy 
with  the  faithful  Jews  to  the  last  days,  thus  omitting 
the  previously  given  western  monarchy,  but  expressly, 
and  with  detail,  recounting  what  was  to  happen  in  the 
last  end  of  the  indignation.  The  ix.  chapter  gives  the 
promise  of  the  -lews'  return  from  Babylon,  and  of 
Messiah,  in  answer  to  Daniel's  sujiplication  ;  but  reveals 
that  Messiah  will  be  cut  off,  and  not  take  the  kingdom, 
and  then  desolations  be  determined  on  the  jjeople. 
X— xii.  gives  the  history  of  the  eastern  part  of  the  king- 
dom of  the  beasts  in  detail,  from  Cyrus  and  Xerxes  to 
Antiochus  Epiphanes ;  the  coming  of  the  Romans,  de- 
scribing the  desolation  of  ihe  Jews  for  many  days,  but 
then  intrfHlucing  the  kings  of  north  and  south;  but, 
besides  them,  the  wilful  and  apostate  king,  and  thereon 
the  destruction  of  the  king  of  the  north,  and  the  deliver- 
ance and  gathering,  but  judgment  and  cleansing  of 
Israel,  for  final  blessing.  \Ve  can  see  how  complete  a 
picture  of  the  whole  history  of  the  world,  in  connection 
witli  the  Jews,  the  book  gives ;  there  is  nothing  which 
has  any  pretence  to  be  like  it  in  what  is  uninspired. 
You  may  find  pretentious  details,  and  passions  flattered, 
and  solemn  warning  as  to  some  cherished  religions  being 
neglected,  but  anything  like  the  connected  scope  of 
Daniel  does  not  exist. 

W.  It  certainly  is  above  all  the  puny  and  futile  criti- 
cisms which  the  dislike  of  revelatiou  has  made  men 
heap  upon  it. 

If.  In  truth  it  is  ;  and  my  only  reply  to  Dr.  Williams, 
when  he  says,  "  It  is  time  for  divines  to  recognize  these 
things,"  is  this :  It  is  time  for  these  servile  followers 
of  German  rationalism  to  learn  that  a  little  attention  is 
sufficient,  for  those  even  who  are  not  learned,  to  detect 
their  superficial  fli|>|)ancy.  and  despise  — not  them,  God 
forbid! — but  their  dishonest  dealing  with  serious  sub-, 
jects  and  with  truth.  Those  M-ho  have  the  name  of 
orthodox  in  Germany  are  too  much  atraid  of  them  ;  the 
Tholucks  and  Neanders,  and  such  like,  men  to  be 
valued  and  respected  in  many  points  of  view,  have  too 


276 


much  yielded  to  the  current  of  popular  professional  pi 
tensions  to  superiority,  and  have  not  held  fast  the  grouni 
work  of  revelation.  All  earnest  criticism  to  ascertain 
what  God  has  said,  to  interpret  it  aright  with  every  aid 
learning  can  bring,  though  a  far  less  important  thing 
than  piety  and  the  aid  of  God's  Spirit,  yet,  as  to  the  out- 
ward text,  uo  one  can  object  to ;  but  no  tampering  with 
what  God  has  said,  if  we  recognize  that  Pie  has  said  it. 
It  is  of  the  last  importance,  morally,  for  man  that  he 
have  something  to  which  he  bows  as  God's  Word ;  the 
whole  condition  of  my  soul  is  different  then,  and  when  I 
judge  I  am  before  God,  and  not  a  boy's  professor.  For 
the  speaking  of  the  inspiration  of  Shakespeare  or  Milton 
I  have  the  most  sovereign  contempt !  Can  I  feel  my 
soul  before  God  when  1  read  them  ?  Did  Dr.  Williams 
ever  do  that  when  he  read  the  Word  ? 

TV.  It  is  an  immense  thing  to  have  a  revelation, 
communications  from  God  in  this  dark  world.  And,  as 
you  say,  the  whole  moral  condition  of  the  soul  is 
different  when  I  place  myself  before  the  Word  as  a  direct 
communication  from  God.  Besides,  if  competent  to 
receive  and  enter  into  it,  it  is  the  highest  privilege  and 
enjoyment,  communion  with  God  ;  not  merely  similarity 
of  thought,  but  direct  intercourse  with  Himself. 

M.  Surely  it  is.  For  one  taught  of  God,  the  moral 
side  of  the  question  leaves  no  trace  of  doubt  that  these 
rationalists  are  without  God  in  the  matter.  The  Scrip- 
tures are  like  the  cloud  at  the  Red  Sea,  a  cloud  ani| 
darkness  to  them  ;  to  the  simple-hearted  believer  it  is  a 
light  all  the  night.  I  do  not  know  that  we  have  much 
more  to  search  into  in  this  Essay  before  we  close  our 
long  interview.  I  feel  how  little  one  can  bring  out  the 
deep  and  rich  stores  of  Scripture  in  such  a  conversation. 
It  is  more  to  show  the  worthlessness  of  the  pretensions 
of  these  men.  The  great  principles  of  what  remains  w» 
have  already  reviewed.  The  rest  is  merely  common- 
place infidelity,  under  the  cover  of  indiscriminate  and^ 
fulsome  praise  of  Baron  Bunsen.  It  is  excessively  bi 
written,   turgid    abstractions,    without    a   clear    idea] 


I 


1 


277 

"  windows  that  exclude  the  tight,  and  passages  that  tead 
to  nothing."  Dr.  Williams  tells  as  that  the  great  re- 
sult of  making  allow-auce  for  the  distinction  betneen 
jiuetry  and  prose,  and  not  OTCrlookiug  the  possibilitr  of 
imagination's  altjing  itself  with  afieotiou;  of  holding 
that  the  Bible  is  an  expression  of  devout  reason,  and 
therefore  to  be  read  with  reason  in  freedom ;  the  hold- 
ing that  those  who  pretend  to  be  inspired  prophets  are 
patriot  bards  using  their  name ;  and  that  these  books 
contain  no  predictions,  except  by  analogy  and  typo,  can 
hardly  be  gainsaid;  that  the  Almighty  God  has  been 
pleased  to  educate  men  and  nations  by  employing  imagi- 
nation, no  less  than  conscience,  and  suHering  His  lessons 
to  play  freely  within  the  limits  of  humanity  and  its 
short-comings;  — "The  great  result  is  to  vindicate  the 
work  of  the  Eternal  Spirit;  that  abiding  influence 
which,  as  our  Church  teaches  us  in  our  ordination  ser- 
vice, underlies  all  others,  and  in  which  converge  all 
images  of  old  time,  and  means  of  grnce  now,  temple, 
Scripture,  finger  ami  hand  of  God ;  and.  again,  preach- 
ing, sacraments,  waters  which  comfort,  and  tlanie  which 
bunis."     What  dt)es  that  mean? 

fV.  Well,  I  really  do  not  know.  Images  converging 
in  an  iufluence  may  be  very  fine,  as  well  as  flame  which 
bums,  but  it  is  a  strange  medley  of  a  sentence. 

H.  Yet  the  object  is  plain  enough.  All  that  God 
has  given  of  old,  all  revelation,  all  the  expressions  of 
Divine  power,  are  no  more  than  the  ordinary  influence 
which  ihe  spirit  of  a  man,  a.s  a  part  of  the  Deity,  pos- 
sesses. It  issues  in  this  as  the  true  result,  be  it  great 
or  small.  "The  Bible  is,  before  all  things,  the  written 
vmce  of  the  coagregation  "—  not  of  God  to  it.  Let  any 
one  take  and  read  it.  and  see  if  that  be  true.  It  is 
wmply  saying,  that  when  Isaiah  &ays,  "Thus  saith  the 
Lord,"  he  had  not  the  Spirit  more  than  some  other  man. 
It  was  man's,  the  congregation's  voice,  not  God's. 
That  when  the  ma^  said,  *•  Thia  is  the  finger  of  God," 
they  made  a  Umuler.  and  need  not  liavc  been  so 
amazed;  it  was  oiJ/  (be  underlying  influence.     That 


I 


r 


278 


L 


when  Christ  said,  "  If  I,  by  the  finger  of  God,  cast  oi 
devils,  no  doubt  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  amt 
you,"  it  is  still  only  what  Dr.  Williams  or  you  may  pi 
tend  to.  This,  he  tells  us,  was  the  earliest  creed  of  i 
Church,  The  sacred  writers  acknowledge  themsel 
men  of  like  passions  with  ourselves,  and  we  are  pro- 
mised illumination  from  the  Spirit  which  dwelt  in  them. 
Dr.  Williams,  if  he  set  about  it,  according  to  this  pro- 
mise, could  write  a  bible  as  well  as  they.  Now  Uie 
illumination  of  the  Spirit  is  promised  and  needed ;  but 
to  confound  the  reception  of  Divine  truth,  by  the  illumi- 
nation of  the  Spirit,  with  the  revelation  of  it,  is  as  un-i 
intelligent  as  it  is  preposterous.  Paul  distinguishefti 
them  carefully,  so  that  there  is  no  excuse  tor  so  serious 
B  mistake.  "  We  should  define  inspiration  consistently 
with  the  facts  of  Scripture  and  of  human  nature ;  these 
would  neither  exclude  the  idea  of  falhbility  among 
Israelites  of  old,  nor  teach  us  to  quench  the  Spirit  in 
true  hearts  for  ever.  But  if  any  one  prefer  tliinking 
the  sacred  wi-iters  passionless  machines,  and  calling 
Luther  and  Miltou  uninspired,  let  him  co-operate  in  re- 
searches by  which  his  theory,  if  true,  will  be  triumph- 
antly confirmed."  Then  he  tells  us  what  it  is  he  wishes, 
which,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
matter,  save  of  diligent  criticism  to  have  a  pure  text 
and  translation. 

I  should  like  to  see  Dr.  Williams  write  a  bible;  it 
would  bring  these  lofty  pretensions  to  a  test.  We  should 
see  what  kind  of  bible  one  of  these  true  hearts  would 
give  us.  He  gives  us  fully  to  understand  that  ho  is  one 
of  them.  They  would  avoid,  of  course,  the  awkward 
expressions  of  "Thus  saith  the  Lord."  lie  would  use 
the  theories  of  Lyell  or  Murchison,  instead  of  giving  an 
account  of  creation  as  from  God.  He  would  avoid  the 
dangerous  possibility  of  imagination  allying  itself  with 
affection  in  giving  accounts  of  the  blessed  Lord.  He 
would  profit  by  "  the  pathway  streamuig  with  light  from 
Eichom  to  Ewald,"  aided  "by  the  poetical  penetration 
of  Herden,  and    the  philological  researches  of  Gese- 


279 


1 


nios."  We  will  allow  him  to  avoid  the  directly  pre- 
dictive, and  eTeo  the  fwecsst  of  coodog  trraimies.  It 
is  daogeroDs  gronod  to  tread  on  if  tod  do  not  reallj 
know  what  is  coming.  Dr.  Williams,  it  seems,  has  even 
the  pretensioD  to  be  a  bard,  as  well  as,  of  coarse,  a  patriot, 
but  he  ma;  write  in  [Hxee.  Let  as  see  what  kind  of 
bible  he  will  produce.  He  maj  be  freelj  allowed  all 
the  collaborators  he  wishes.  I  think  it  might  be  fair 
the;  should  be  shut  ap  in  c^Is  like  Ptolemy's  trans- 
lators, but  we  need  not  insist  on  this.  TheT  maj  ^vrite, 
not  like  these  £ssaTS  in  entire  indep^idence  of  each 
other,  but  with  concert  and  comparison,  or  without,  as 
they  like.  Let  us  have  their  bible  free  from  all  tradi- 
tioQal  methods,  and  see  what  it  wilt  be.  Do  they 
shrink  from  this  i  Why  so  '.  The  influence  is  abiding, 
they  should  not  i^uench  it,  so  their  church  teaches  them. 
Their  God  cannot  be,  they  assure  us,  as  of  the  priests  of 
Baal,  talking,  or  puisning  a  journey,  or  peradventure 
asleep  and  must  be  awaked.  They  assure  us  they  have 
the  fire  from  heaven.  Let  us  see  its  fr-uits — ^let  ua  have 
their  inspired  communications.  If  not,  in  spite  of  all 
the  water  they  may  cast  on  it,  we  will  own  the  true  I 
and  blessed  revelation  from  heaven,  the  true  given  fire ;  * 
through  a  man.  we  glory  in  it,  hut  not  of  man ;  the  true 
heavenly  fire,  the  proof  that  our  God  cares  for  us,  and 
that  lie  is  the  true  and  only  God.  as  He  has  revealed 
Himself.  We  can  be  as  calm  as  Elijah  because  we  are 
sure,  and  only  desire  that  all  the  people  that  may  be 
misled  may  have  their  hearts  turned  back  again ;  and 
may  we  fall  on  our  faces  because  God  has  given  us 
from  Uiinsdf  the  true  and  perfect  revelation  of  His  I 
love.  I 

Only  a  few  isolated  passages  remain  which  I  notice, 
because  they  refer  to  Scripture.  "  The  verse,  '  And  no 
man  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,  save  he  that  came 
down,'  is  intelligible  as  a  free  comment  near  the  end  of 
the  first  century,  but  has  no  meaning  in  our  Lord's 
mouth  at  a  time  when  the  ascension  had  not  been  heard 
of."    Now  he  has  quoted  only  half  the  verse,  it  goes  on — 


280 

"  from  heaven,  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in  heaven ;  and  as 
Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness."  That 
is,  it  is  clearly  presented  as  applicable  before  his  death, 
not  after  his  ascension.  What  precedes  makes  it  still 
more  evident.  "  We  speak  that  we  do  know  and  testify 
that  we  have  seen,  and  ye  receive  not  our  witness.  If  1 
have  told  you  of  earthly  things  and  ye  believe  not,  how 
shall  ye  believe  if  I  tell  you  of  heavenly  things  ?"  That 
He  could  do  because  He  had  come  down  from  heaven 
and  was  divinely  in  it,  though  no  man  else  had  come  down 
to  bring  word.  Christ  was  then  speaking  to  Nico- 
demus,  and  .so  speaks  in  the  passage ;  it  is  no  comment, 
free  or  unfree.  The  Evangelist  might  have  added,  and 
no  one  has  gone  up  to  do  it  like  him  save  He  who  came 
down,  the  Son  of  man  who  is  now  there,  being  gone 
back.  This  would  have  been  very  intelligible  as  his 
remark,  without  being  free  at  all.  But  it  is  not  so. 
They  are  the  Lord's  words  at  the  time,  only  half  of 
which  are  given  by  the  reviewer ;  and  their  meaning  is 
very  simple  and  very  evident.  How  shall  ye  believe  if 
I  tell  you  of  heavenly  things,  when  you  cannot  believe 
the  earthly  things  of  your  own  prophecies,  w^hich  as  a 
Master  in  Israel  you  ought  to  have  understood  ?  And 
if  you  do  not  believe  them  you  must  remain  entirely 
ignorant  of  heavenly  things,  for  nobody  has  gone  up 
there  to  bring  word  back,  but  I  can  tell  them ;  I  c^me 
from  heaven,  and  not  only  so,  but  I  can,  even  in  all  their 
Divine  freshness,  for  I  am  in  my  Divine  nature  always 
there,  and  it  flows  in  my  human  nature  to  tell  it  accord- 
ing to  my  perfect  knowledge  of  it. 

As  to  faith  being  differently  used  in  the  Hebrews,  it 
is  a  common  stalking-horse  of  rationalists.  It  is  not 
they  say  Paul's  Epistle,  faith  is  used  differently.  No 
Christian  is  held  to  believe  it  St.  Paul's  as  it  is  not  said 
so  in  the  Epistle.  I  believe  it  is,  but  I  am  no  way 
anxious  or  inclined  to  be  dogmatic  about  it.  I  should 
be  content  to  say  with  Origen,  "  Whose  it  is  God  knows," 
only  assured  that  it  is  Divine.  Every  one  knows  that 
very  early,  not  two  hundred  years  after  Christ,  it  was 


281 

doubtetl  if  it  was  St.  Paul's  when  fully  received  as 
.Scripture,  because  of  the  dittbrence  of  style,  and  avowedly 
for  this  reason.  But  as  to  faith.  It  is  differently  ap- 
plied, but  does  not  mean  a  ditferent  thing.  It  is  here 
looked  at  as  an  active  principle  of  endurance  and  con- 
duct, not  as  the  ground  on  which  we  are  justified.  Both 
are  true,  that  is  all.  A  ditferent  subject  is  treated,  and 
faith  is  shown  to  be  the  principle  of  blessing  in  both ; 
but  in  both  it  is  the  reliance  through  grace  on  God's 
word,  and  so  on  God,  which  is  the  ground  of  blessing. 
One  for  peace,  the  other  for  practice. 

.\s  to  second  Peter,  the  Epistle  most  contested  and 
latest  known  in  the  Church,  1  am  thoroughly  satisfied 
it  is  genuine.  External  e%idence  is  not  "  against,"  but 
there  is  not  so  early  evidence  of  cjuotation  for  it.  That 
intemat  is.  I  formally  deny.  That  mere  critics  who  look 
at  the  surface  have  thought  so  I  know.  ITie  similarity 
to  Jude  is  dwelt  on.  There  is  an  exactly  suited  difference. 
Jude  speaks  of  apostacy ;  Peter  of  wickedness,  because 
Peter  speaks  in  both  epistles  of  God's  government,  and 
gives  the  link  between  the  glorious  grace  of  the  heaven- 
revealing  gospel,  and  that  government  on  earth  as  re- 
vealed already  in  the  Old  Testament.  In  the  first 
epistle,  viewed  as  exercised  in  favour  of  the  just.  In 
the  second,  against  the  wicked.  Hence,  he  goes  on  to 
the  end  of  all  things.  It  professes  to  be  the  .second 
epistle,  and  written  by  Simon  Peter,  saying,  that  he  had 
been  with  Jesus  in  the  transfiguration  ;  and  if  thus  an 
imposture,  is  an  audacious  one;  yet  one  which  is  most 
solemn  in  its  denunciation  of  evil,  and  h<ily  in  its  character. 
It  properly  and  exactly  completes  the  first.  The  ques- 
tion of  the  canon  I  need  not  go  into  with  you,  nor  general 
councils.  They  do  not  in  themselves  command  much 
respect  when  we  read  their  history.  There  was  what 
the  rationalists,  however,  ought  to  delight  in,  ubiindanco 
of  the  human  element.  But  I  do  not  feel  much  more 
respect  for  the  "  first  freedom  of  the  goai)el."  Wlmt  wo 
have  of  the  fathers  here  alluded  to  was  mere  Alexandrian 
speculation — after  the  school  whose  views  are  presented 
■.2 


I 
i 


282 


n  bless  Go^^H 
id  intri^ue^^H 


to  us  by  Philo, — Neoplatonisni !  But  we  can  b 
that  in  spite  of  shameful  human  violence  and  i 
and  the  emperor's  authority  to  keep  the  peace  amongst 
the  bishops  of  the  holy  councils — for  that  is  the  real  truth 
of  the  case, — God,  who  promised  that  the  gates  of  hell 
should  not  jirevail  agaiast  the  church,  has  maintained 
substantial  foundation  truth  for  saints  to  live  by,  through 
the  means  of,  or  in  spite  of  human  aberrations.  The 
early  contentions  of  the  Church,  and  the  deplorable 
scenes  of  the  first  councils  are  full  of  instruction  in  this 
respect.  As  regards  the  explanation  of  Christian  doc- 
trines by  Baron  Bunsen,  we  have  seen  enough  to  judge 
of  them.  Dr.  Williams  sums  them  up  in  saying.  "  He 
may  Ije  charged  with  using  evangelical  language  in  a 
philosophical  sense."  I  only  note  one  point  as  substan- 
tially important :  "  Salvation  would  be  our  deliverance, 
not  from  the  life-giving  God.  but  from  evil  and  dark- 
ness, which  are  His  finite  opposites."  Now  this  mis- 
represents atonement,  and  misrepresents  the  truth ;  it 
bewrays  the  writer.  Who  ever  heard  of  salvation  deliver- 
ing from  a  life-giving  God  ?  But  there  is  a  true  ch»« 
racter  of  God  as  a  moral  Governor,  if  we  are  to  uflcd 
philosophical  or  "  Japetic"  language,  which,  if  it  wwe 
shaken,  would  shake  the  universe;  which  God  main- 
tains, of  which  judgment  is  the  witness ;  and  God  hates 
sin  in  His  people,  as  everywhere  else,  and  if  He  conies 
in  judgment,  knows  no  man.  He  judges  right.  "Wheu 
the  judgment  of  God  went  through  Egypt,  Israel  was 
guilty,  and  righteousness  could  not  have  spared.  Hence 
the  blood  was  put  upon  the  lintel  and  the  two  door- 
posts, and  there  was  righteous  deliverance  (in  a  figure) 
from  a  God  executing  righteousness.  Can  Dr.  Williams 
imderstand  this?  God  in  judgment,  where  sin  is,  is  a 
condemning  God.  not  a  life-giving  God.  Does  Dr. 
Wilhams  believe  that  ?  If  he  does  not,  let  him  not  mis- 
represent what  Scripture  does  state.  Now,  at  the  Red 
Sea,  God  said,  "  Stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of 
God ;"  and  Israel  was  delivered  from  all  his  enemies 
and  from  bondage.     But  in  virtue  of  what  had  ' 


haA  be^H 


wrought  (here  all  is  figure,  but  a  6gure  applied  by  Christ 
to  Himself,  and  b_v  Paul  to  Him)  it  was  a  rightoims 
deliverance.  The  fathers  did  discuss  what  redemption 
was,  and  made  utter  conhision  of  it;  but  the  Scrip- 
ture is  clear  enough.  Love  gives  the  victim.  Tho 
Lamb  is  God's  Lamb;  but  it  is  a  victim  God  gives 
because  sin  must  be  put  away.  And  thus  we  are  de- 
livered from  all  we  were  bouud  by,  and  which  kept  us 
from  God,  and  brought  to  Him  iu  the  light,  according 
to  his  holiness. 

Here  is  his  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  which  I  notice 
only  to  remark  that  its  main  points  are  wholly  borrowed 
from  Philo;  for  all  this  philosophy  is  only  bringing  us 
down  to  the  reveries  of  an  unbelieving  Jew,  who  mixed 
the  law  with  Neoplatonism.  "  The  profoundesC  analjvu 
of  our  world  leaves  the  law  of  thought  as  its  ultimate 
basis  and  bond  of  coherence."  This  is  pure  PhilooUin. 
"  This  thought  is  consubstantial  with  the  being  fX  tbe 
eternal  I  AM.  Being,  becoming,  and  anintatii^  -  or 
substance,  thinking,  and  conscious  life,  are  tfae  expre*- 
sions  of  a  triad  which  may  be  represented  aa  viU,  wi*- 
dom.  and  love ;  light,  radiance,  and  warmtb,  hzT  Dr. 
Williams  is  very  confused  in  what  (uDmn.  or  rather 
lower  in  doctrine  than  Bunsen;  he  makea  inHlflM  tW 
word,  consciousness  the  spirit;  but  then,  ia  order  to 
have  Gu-ist,  he  says.  "  ConadoiMDev  or  vMmi  ha^ 
coming  personal  in  tl»  Son  oi  Man;"  it » the  Sfkit  or 
tbe  Word,  and  becomes  penooaL  He  i  " 
*'  If  all  this  has  a  SabeUian,  or  afaMit 
sound,  its  impngners  are  bo^id.  m 
grounds,  to  show  bow  it  diflba  fi«n  Ae  Jtttimt  «f 
Justin  Martyr,  TertuDian.  fTlfpiilff^  Origm,  Md  A* 
historian  Eusebius."  Xfjw-  J«cia  Mar^  «w  ^Mfff 
tinged  with  Platoaism,  atkd  ahnm  *«•  lit  ptfcaa 
'  pher's  cloak ;  Origeo  wa»  |ilaBgni  itto  away  wfUmm 
Platonism  and  an  extrmfpat  immmaa6mt  miMftmitft 
I  a  person  in.     Eojxiikua  wa»  ao  .\n>n.  £»<  a  8aMbA^^^^^ 

I         whereas    Has   dortrinfc    i-  4r,  >^^^^^^^| 

I         writer  justly  sa;&.  alawat  iir~  fit  Bllj^^^^^^| 


284 

which  Philo  tended  to.     And  this  is  what  we  are  to  get 
by  leaving  Scripture. 

The  love  of  heathenism,  formed  into  popery,  of  any- 
thingism  except  a  revelation,  is  curiously  shown  in  a 
passage  in  this  part  of  the  review :  — "  The  elasticity 
with  which  Christianity  gathers  into  itself  the  elements 
of  natural  piety,  and  assimilates  the  relics  of  Gentile 
form  and  usage,  can  only  be  a  ground  of  objection  (ob- 
jection to  what  ?)  with  those  who  have  reflected  little 
on  the  nature  of  revelation."  The  fact  is  true.  Me- 
diaevalism  is — historical  proof  of  it  is  abundant — the 
assimilation  of  the  relics  of  heathenism.  Whether  it  is 
to  be  objected  to  is  another  question.  I  should,  I  con- 
fess, prefer  Christianity  as  Christ  and  the  Apostles  gave 
it.'  But  the  tendency  of  rationalism  to  accept  popery, 
be  assured,  will  daily  be  more  evident.  Pretending  to 
be  above  it,  it  will  leave  it  free  to  do  all  the  mischief  it 
likes.  It  is  one  of  the  ominous ''  forecasts  "  of  the  times 
that  I  have  no  kind  of  moral  doubt  of. 

That  I  am  not  wrong  in  treating  these  rationalists  as 
deniers  of  revelation — open  deniers,  I  cannot  say,  but 
absolutely  so,  I  can — while  using  Christian  terms  (a 
procedure  I  do  not  envy  them  their  use  of),  some  closing 
passages  of  the  review  will  show. 

"So,  when  he  (Bunsen)  asks,  How  long  shall  we 

bear  this  fiction  of  an  external  revelation  ? or 

when  he  says,  All  this  is  delusion  for  those  who  believe 
it ;  but  what  is  it  in  the  mouths  of  those  who  teach  it  ? 

there  will  be  some  who  think  his  language  too 

vehement  for  good  taste ;  others  will  think  of  burning 
words  needed  by  the  disease  of  our  time."  What  are 
we  to  think  of  one  who  quotes  this  ?  "  What  is  it  in  the 
mouths  of  those  who  teach  it  ? "  It  is  a  matter  of  taste, 
and  there  is  no  disputing  about  that. 

I  have  done.  I  fear  I  have  tired  you.  I  feel  lassi- 
tude creeping  over  me  in  long  reasonings  over  men's 
ways ;  in  Scripture  never.  It  is  one  thing  that  stamps 
its  character.  It  renews,  and  feeds,  and  strengthens 
in  every  true  exercise  of  mind  upon  it,  because,  ^ougli 


oo 


there  be  that  exercise  where  the  aneutiua  is  nxt>i  *  q  iu 
we  receive  instead  of  judge. 

W.  But  I  am  glad  we  have  pyzie  ihrimzh  it.  This 
review  is  the  distinctivelv  rationalist  oDe  of  iLe  ToI:iiDe ; 
our  sitting  has  been  long,  but,  I  hoiie. ii«j:  wiibo:;:  jT^rir. 
What  I  am  glarl  of  is,  that  it  leaves  the  B-Me  wLat  ft 
was  in  my  mind,  and  in  the  simple  reeeprion  *a  that  is 
our  blessing.  What  I  dread  in  these  inqiiires  is,  the 
loss  of  simplicity,  the  hindrance —  even  thoa  ^rh  I  do  be- 
lieve it  to  be  the  revelation  of  God — to  ^olnj:  :o  it  as 
such,  without  any  questions,  even  though  aiLSwered.  re- 
maining in  my  mind. 

H.  The  Lord  grant  that  questions  and  answers  m^y 
both  disappear  when  you  use  the  Scriptures.  AVe  are 
in  another  element,  in  the  use  of  another  faculty,  when 
faith  receives  the  AVord.  AMiat  ?  .  .  .  .  another  na- 
ture? An  objection  is  presented  to  the  mind:  the 
answer  is  presented  to  it  and  convinces,  lie  Word 
stands  higher  than  ever  in  its  authorial-,  to  my  iri:i:d.  It  is 
well.  But  when  I  use  the  word  itself,  my  quickoTiod  soul 
receives  it  divinely,  by  grace ;  I  li-ien  to  Go^l.  My  uiuA 
is  not  at  w^ork  about  it ;  I  appn^ach  it.  and  listen  to 
God.  Of  course  one's  intelligence  is  in  play,  but  not 
TYiy  mind  actively  judging.  Now  our  jj^xjfs  and  n.-avjn- 
ings  only  go  to  leave  the  soul  free  in  its  true  eujoyme^t 
of  these  blessed  dinne  communications,  when  we  are 
taught  of  God.     May  yours  l>e  free. 

W.  I  confess  it  has  had  another  happy  effe^rt,  though 
it  may  be  a  sorrowful  thought,  t^Xi — complete  moral 
distrust  of  this  whole  class  of  reasoners  ;  that  is  de^^ply 
engraved  as  the  result  in  my  mind.  Ilave  you  vxti 
the  article  in  the  "  Kdinburgh  "  ? 

H.  I  have.  It  is  a  most  deplorable  article ;  but  I 
think  we  must  close  now.  We  have  gone  through  Mio?;t 
of  the  subjects  of  any  imjiortaiice,  however  rapidly. 
Perhaps  Jowett's  article  may  deserve  our  Irx^kiug  at  it — 
it  is  on  other  ground,  and  somewhat  more  res|>e<:table 
than  this; — if  we  do,  we  can  speak  of  the  article  in  the 
"Edinburgh."      Oh^  how  I  bless  God,  in  c^inclusion, 


286 


that  we  have  a  revelation  from  God.  A  revelation 
from  Himself,  and  of  Himself,  where  love  has  made  all 
easy  when  we  are  humble;  where  Divine  depths  are 
found,  but  clear,  because  they  are  divine. 

W.  How  true  it  is.  I  am  sure  I  join  with  you  in 
thankfulness  for  the  Word  of  God,  however  poor  all 
our  thankfulness  is. 


END   OF    DIALOGUE    III. 


INSPIRATION  AND    INTERPRETATION: 
%  gialcguij  on  the  ^ast  o^  the  (Bssajis  and  §cci(icfi. 


Well,  H.,  what  do  you  say  to  Jowett?  It  has  a  dif- 
ferent character  from  the  other  Essays.  I  cannot  get  so 
last  hold  of  it.  The  others  rest  on  alleged  facta  or  dis- 
coveries, which  may  alarm  you,  if  they  can  be  main- 
tained, and  the  deductions  are  just ;  but  here  there  is 
nothing  to  lay  hold  of,  and  yet  it  leaves  a  painful 
impression  on  tlie  raind  that,  if  this  be  so,  one  has  lost 
the  Word  of  God.  It  makes  me  not  doubt  of  this  or 
that,  but  doubtful  of  everything.  I  think  it  does  me 
more  harm  than  the  others,  if  I  am  to  have  faith  in 
God's  Word.  I  may  say  to  myself,  in  reading  the 
others.  Well,  this  is  all  very  well,  but  it  rests  on  science 
or  chronology,  and  people  differ  about  that,  and  perhaps 
their  statements  will  not  stand  examination ;  and  there 
one  leaves  it.  But  here  there  are  some  sensible  rules 
for  interpretation;  and  yet,  in  interpreting,  I  have  at 
the  end  lost  the  thing  to  be  interpreted. 

ff.  I  quite  agree  with  you  ;  there  is  greater  sobriety 
of  manner,  a  more  moderate  tone ;  C'hrist  seems  at  least 
to  be  treated  with  more  reverence.  There  are  many 
principles  which  I  should  not  deny,  provided  other 
principles,  which  are  not  here,  were  associated  with 
them.     He  circles  round  the  outside  of  the  word,  may 


288 

make  some  just,  and  more  plausible  remarks,  to  remove 
traditional   apprehensions.     These  approve  themselves 
to  the  mind ;  but  when  he  touches  the  core,  the  sub- 
stance of  the  word,  it  is  simply  that  God  is  not  there    ' 
for  him.     It   is  infidelity  as  to  any  possessed  revela- 
tion of  God,  and  the  same  taking  for  granted  that  all 
rationalist  objections  are  gospel,  if  the  evangelists  were 
not,  and  the  same  entire  ignorance,  really,  of  the  heart 
and  substance  of  Scripture.     You  must  always  remem- 
ber that  with  this  class  of  persons  the  love  of  truth  does 
not  mean  that  there  is  any  truth  they  love,  or  any  to  be 
loved,  but  simple  pyrrhonism — the  keeping  the  mind 
.  always  open  to  receive  anything,  and  therefore  always 
sure  of  nothing.     Now,  this  is  not  the  love  of  truth. 
It  is  the  love  of  making  people  doubt,  and  think  there 
is   no  truth.     Can  you  tell   me  one  truth  they  have 
brought  forward  in  their  writings  ?    Isaiah  is  not  Isaiah, 
David  is  not  David,  the  inspired  word  is  not  inspired. 
What  is  it  ?     Mere  expressions  of  men's  feelings  and 
minds.     Why,  if  that  is  all,  I  may  get  Dr.  Temple's 
renewal  of  inspiration,  and  have  or  give  just  as  good 
now ;  perhaps,  as  the  world  is  got  so  much  wser  now, 
better  still.   But  we  shall  see  that,  as  regards  the  Word 
of  God,  Mr.  Jowett  is  just  as  distinctly  infidel  as  the 
rest.     The  others  are  as  a  stone  rolled  upon  the  moun- 
tain path  I  have  to  walk  on,  which  bars  my  way.     I 
look  under,  see  it  has  no  foundation  at  all,  give  it  a  tilt, 
and  it  is  down  in  the  valley,  and  the  path  clear.     Dr. 
Jowett  is  like  a  green  morass  all  across.    It  does  not 
look  such  a  hindrance,   but   there  is   no  safe  footing 
anywhere.     If  you  had  been  in  the  bogs  of  Ireland,  you 
would  know  that  a  green  grassy  spot  is  sure  to  be  un- 
safe.    It  has  no  bottom,  and  if  you  tread  on  it  you  are 
plunged  in  black  mud.     There  are  springs.     There  are 
springs  of  infidelity  in  Dr.  Jowett.     We  must  lay  them 
bare,  and  the  danger  is  over ;  they  run  in  their  own  chan- 
nel as  infidelity,  but  the  ground  is  dry.    I  have  looked  at 
Dr.  Jowett's  commentaries  too.    I  confess  I  was  surprised 
at  their  emptiness,  and,  I  must  say,  their  perverseness. 


u 


Notes,  to  take  away  tlie  Apostle's  meaning,  as  received 
by  faith  in  the  Word— not  merely  false  interjiretfttions. 
or  wrong  construction  of  Greek,  or  traditional  notions — 
but  all  Dinne  points  and  truth  gone,  and  that  is  all. 
They  suggest  to  you  probable  or  )>ossible  human  cir- 
cumstances which  may  have  occasional  what  is  said, 
but  deny,  or,  more  truly,  ignore  all  springs  of  eternal 
Divine  truth  as  the  true  source  of  the  writings.  It  is  — 
though  the  comparison  be  weak — as  if  one  should  point 
out  circumstances  in  the  hfe  of  a  man  of  imcommon 
nobleness,  and  energy,  and  truth,  and  generosity  of 
character  — circumstances  in  which  his  character  had 
been  developed,  some  of  them,  possibly,  haWng  as  occa- 
Bion,s  done  so,  and  attribute  all  to  these  circumstances,  as 
if  the  character  were  caused  by  them.  In  such  a  case 
I  should  say  of  oue  who  did  so,  That  man  does  not 
know  what  the  springs  of  truth,  and  nobleness,  and 
generosity  are.  Circumstances  may  develope,  he  may 
think  he  is  wise,  hut  the  spring  is  wanting  in  him 
which  would  enable  him  to  uruLrsta^id  the  other,  oven 
supposing  he  was  owned  to  be  superior.  The  similarity 
of  moral  sentiment  is  wanting.  So,  when  Scripture  is 
interjireted  by  these  men,  some  of  then-  remarks  as  to 
occasions,  or  the  effect  of  circumstances,  may  l>e  just ; 
but.  in  thinking  they  have  explained  the  matter,  they 
show  they  have  nothing  of  the  contents  at  all.  As  if  a 
man  should  cat  the  hard  skin  of  a  pomegranate,  and 
think  he  had  tasted  one,  telling  me  that  it  was  through 
that  the  pomegranate  was  rijjened.  "Well,  so  it  was  in 
a  sense ;  but  he  has  not  tasted  the  jiomcgranatc  for  all 
that ;  nor  does  he  know  what  the  sun  is  either. 

Such  is  the  effect  produced  in  me  by  Dr.  Jowett's 
writings,  though  in  some  respects  far  less  ollensive  than 
others  of  the  Essays,  and  containing  expressions  as  to 
Christ  which  would  give  hope  that  the  love  of  His 
excellency  was  not  wholly  wanting.  But  there  is.  in  all 
who  follow  this  method,  in  point  of  fact,  a  profound 
ignorance  of  Scripture,  of  the  text,  and  of  its  hearing 
and  connection,  and  of  the  mind  of  God  as  stated  ' 


I 


•ring  ^B 

il 


290 


r 


You  will  ever  find  that  what  is  evidently  Divine  and 
perimental,  is  difiicult  or  unintelligble  for  them,  Th<  _ 
will  satiate  you  with  external  motives  and  circumstances, 
but  never  study  Divine  truth.  They  turn  Semitism  into 
Japetism,  with  Baron  Bunseii ;  that  is,  not  believing 
the  Scripture  to  have  a  Divine  source,  they  do  not  study 
it  to  know  what  God  says  and  thinks,  but  merge  it  into 
the  vague  notions  of  their  own  mind,  and  get  nothing 
beyond  what  they  have  without  it.  They  reduce  Scrip*] 
ture  to  their  minds,  decently  calling  it  their  conscience^i 
and,  of  course,  have  nothing  beyond  their  minds  save  by 
the  irresistible  and  unescapable  power  of  the  Word. 
And  the  plainest  statements  of  Scripture  are  neglected 
by  them,  so  that  they  cannot  be  trusted  as  to  its  views 
in  a  single  statement  they  make  In  virtue  of  theilfi 
system,  the  knowledge  of  the  mind  of  God— I  do  noB 
say  as  a  whole,  for  no  man  knows  that  {"  we  know  in 
part")— but  in  the  connection  of  its  parts,  is  wholly 
and  necessarily  absent ;  for  they  do  not  believe  there  is 
one.  To  one  knowing  simply  the  statements  of  Scrip- 
ture there  is  an  ignorance  of  them,  and  consequent 
misstatements  as  to  particular  passages,  which  is  almost 
inconceivable.  And  further,  with  much  even  seemli- 
ness  of  manner,  Dr.  Jowett  has  the  same  pretensions. 
All  have  been  ignorant  till  now  the  wise  age  of  the 
world  is  come.  The  rationalists  possess  the  wisdom  of 
it.  Now  there  is  a  freedom  from  many  of  these  preju- 
dices which  cause  glosses  on  Scripture;  and  hence — 
and  it  is  the  case  with  Dr.  Jowett  himself — the  circum- 
stances of  Scripture  become  more  real  to  them.  They 
are  looked  in  the  face.  And  many  who  would  think 
they  must  defend  Christianity,  carry  the  glosses  with 
them  to  defend.  These  glosses  are  but  prejudices.  Over 
such  defenders  of  truth,  as  far  as  reasoning  goes,  the  ra- 
tionalists have  an  easy  victory.  This,  however,  for  myself, 
and  I  suppose  for  you,  has  lost  its  power.  Traditions 
and  glosses  have  never  had  much  influence  over  me 
since  I  thought  of  Scripture,  because  It  came  to  me  as 
the  Word  of  God,     All  the  rest  was  man — might  profit 


J 


I. 

d 

1 


me  surely— but  was  man  as  to  authority.  I  saw  that 
tradition,  iii  all  its  shapes,  was  man.  1  can  give  it  all 
up,  and  think  it  gain  to  have  done  so,  have,  in  purpose 
and  principle,  these  thirty  years  and  more,  and  am  de- 
hghted  when  any  remaining  influence  of  it  is  shown  to 
me,  that  I  may  get  rid  of  it.  But  I  gave  up  tradi- 
tions and  glosses  by  and  because  of  the  power  of  the 
Word  of  God,  and  that  only,  and  have  a  profound  and 
ever-deepening  conviction  that  it  is  the  Word  of  God. 
I  have  given  up  glosses  for  that,  trusting  to  learn 
humbly /rom  that.  They  have  given  up  the  Word  be- 
cause they  have  found  the  glosses  are  glosses ;  or  rather, 
having  only  the  glosses,  and  having  detected  them  to  be 
such,  have  nothing  but  some  old  books.  But  the  Word 
of  God  is  quick  and  powerful,  and  as  they  have  confi- 
dence in  themselves,  and  talk  a  great  deal  about  it,  they 
come  athwart  that  power ;  and  their  ignorance  of  it, 
the  folly  of  their  views,  becomes  evident  for  every 
intelligent  believer,  yea,  for  every  intelligent  mind 
where  there  is  not  a  will  to  disbelieve.  The  one  diffi- 
culty is,  that  the  full  unclouded  truth  and  glorj'  of  the 
Word,  as  revealing  God's  mind,  is  known  to  so  few 
(because   they  do    live   on  glosses    and   prejudices   of 

,      education),  that  it  is  difficult  to  make  it  apparent -to 
say  nothing  of  one's  own  weakness, 

I  must  recall  to  your  mind,  my  dear  W.,  another 
thing,  not  to  be  misled  by  words.  These  men  use  tra- 
ditional words  when  they  deny  the  things  meant  by 
them.  I  cannot  say  I  think  it  an  honourable  system ; 
but  it  is  sufficient  here  to  say  we  must  keq>  it  in 
mind.  An  upright  mind  suspects  no  guile,  trusts  the 
green  grass,  being  used  to  see  the  green  grass  on  solid 
ground,  and  finds  itself,  by  its  confidence,  in  the  black 
mud.  To  give  an  instance  of  what  I  mean,  we  have  a 
treatise  on  the  interpretation  of  Scripture;  it  begins, 
"  All  Christians  receive  the  Old  and  New  Testament  as 
sacred  writings,"     Of  course  the  unsuspecting  reader 

I     supposes  Mr.  Jowett  to  present  himself  as  a  Christian 


292 

New  Testament  as  sacred  writings.  We  all  suppose 
sacred  writings  to  be  such  because  they  are  inspired, — 
the  teaching  of  prophets,  of  Christ,  and  inspired  apostles, 
or  prophets,  with  no  defined  view  of  inspiration  perhaps, 
but  so  as  to  receive  them  as  having  the  authority  of  God, 
as  God's  Word. 

IV.  Of  course.  Mr.  Jowett's  paper  is  on  interpreta- 
tion; and  I  do  not  know  what  sacred  writings  mean  for 
a  Christian,  except  inspired  ones. 

H.  My  poor  friend,  as  I  told  you  once  already,  you 
are  in  the  childhood  of  the  world.  Here  is  Mr.  Jowett's 
dictum :  "Nor  for  any  of  the  higher  or  supernatural 
views  of  inspiration  is  there  any  foundation  in  the  gos- 
pels or  epistles." 

W.  But  surely  that  is  not  true,  though  each  book 
may  not  come  and  say,  I  am  inspired.  I  see  that  infi- 
delity is  their  common  object. 

H,  We  will  come  to  the  question  itself.  Of  course 
I  only  notice  it  now,  that  you  may  never^  with  these 
rationalists,  take  common  words  to  mean  what  is  com- 
monly meant  by  them.  They  deny  nothing  hardly. 
They  show  that  men  have  had  all  sorts  of  opinions, 
that  the  commonest  subjects  on  which  Christians 
are  agreed,  have  been  spoken  of  under  the  influence 
of  views  prevalent  at  the  time  they  lived,  that  men 
were  under  the  influence  of  their  times  (all  except 
themselves,  of  course)  ;  and  hence,  all  is  uncertain, 
everything  that  has  been  said,  doubtful.  The  Fathers 
were  under  the  impressions  of  their  age,  the  Re- 
formers of  theirs,  Romanists  of  their  system.  Hence 
the  truth  itself  is  uncertain,  because  men  are.  Hence, 
doubting  of  every  form  of  truth,  truth  itself  is  lost, 
because,  everything  being  difterent,  each  is  an  opinion, 
a  view  of  man.  Now,  men  do  feel  the  influence  of  their 
age ;  they  are  poor  weak  creatures.  But  the  argument 
from  this  to  the  uncertainty  of  truth,  is  only  a  proof 
that  they  who  use  it  have  opinions,  but  no  truth ;  the 
argument  supposes  God  has  never  revealed  any  truth, 
otherwise  we  should  say,  there  is  a  fund  of  absolute  and 


f 


sure  truth.  Men  have  varied — even  those  who  have 
it  fimclamentally ;  but,  thank  God,  the  truth  remains  the 
same.  There  would  be  an  appeal  from  man's  uncer- 
tainty to  God's  certainty ;  but  they  having  only  opinions, 
only  man's  mind,  nothing  from  God,  the  eH'ect  is,  that 
apostles  and  prophets,  all  the  inspii-ed  ^Titers,  fall  into 
the  same  class  as  these  various  interpreters  :  they 
underwent  the  influence  of  their  day,  and  there  is  no 
truth  at  all.  'I"he  only  ditVereuce  is,  that  they  were  at 
the  childhood,  Mr,  Jowett  and  his  friends  are  at  tlie 
mature  age  of  the  world  and  human  race,  and  the  repre- 
sentatives of  it,  so  that  they,  in  the  freedom  it  gives, 
judge  it  all.  The  whole  matter  is  this,  they  see  only 
the  circumstances  and  opinions,  never  the  truth.  They 
have  no  revelation  from  God  at  all,  for  if  we  have  a  reve- 
lation from  God,  it  must  be  truth,  the  truth ;  and  when 
the  revelation  is  fully  made,  must  express  His  mind, 
though  that  may  he  partially  revealed  or  fully,  a  light 
shiniug  in  a  dark  place,  or  the  dawn  of  eternal  day. 

W.  I  see  plainly  the  working  of  their  reasomngs. 
If  there  is  nothing  supernatural  in  inspiration,  of  course 
I  have  no  truth.  I  may  come  to  conclusions,  but  never 
get  truth,  get  nothing  that  is  a  revelation  of  it  from 
God,  nothing  that  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the  human 
mind.  Hence,  if  various  opinions  are  shoivn  to  exist, 
all  are  doubted ;  all  are  the  fruits  of  influence  of  one 
kmd  or  another.  I  judge  them  all  coldly,  but  have  no 
opinion  except  the  denial  of  inspired  truth. 

II.  The  whole  system  is  simjily  that.  There  is  the 
coolness  which  can  judge  what  has  exercised  influence 
on  others,  so  as  to  cast  all  they  have  said  into  doubt, 
all  the  shapes  in  which  even  real  truth  has  been  received 
into  doubt,  but  no  truth  held  at  all.  It  is  quite  true 
that  in  a  human  mind  truth  is  modified  by  circumstanceft 
in  its  form,  for  we  are  feeble,  and  hold  the  truth  par- 
tially and  mixed  with  error.  The  Christian  says,  yes ; 
and  what  a  comfort,  therefore,  to  have  the  truth  itself 
which,  though  taking  a  human  form  that  it  may  apply 
to  the  human  heart,  and  have  a  witness  of  originatuuc 


I 


I 


294 

where  it  professes  to  have  originated,  by  leaving  tlie 
stamp  of  the  time  and  circumstances  as  to  its  form,  is 
yet  the  truth  of  God  Himself;  and  the  channels  of 
communication  so  guarded,  that  I  should  have  it  pi 
and  exactly  as  God  meant  me  to  have  it.  WTiat  a  rest 
for  my  soul  to  have  truth  from  God,  I  can  rely  upon  it. 
It  is  pure  light  in  the  confusion  of  this  world.  It  is 
love  too  which  has  given  it  to  our  souls  wandering  in 
the  wilderness.  Then  comes  in  Mr.  Jowett,  and,  seeing 
nothing  of  this  in  it  at  all.  proves  that  fathers  and 
reformers,  and  theologians,  with  systematic  and  con- 
ventional doctrine,  are  all  under  the  influence  of  their 
age  and  its  manner  of  judging,  but  declares  that  he  and 
his  friends  are  exempt  from  it ;  at  any  rate,  so  far  exempt, 
that  they  can  show  in  each  case  the  influences  which 
acted  on  the  doctors  of  the  various  ages,  and  gave  a  form 
to  their  views  ;  you  may  be  allowed  to  doubt  whether  they 
have  got  the  truth  themselves,  provided  you  doubt  of  all 
the  rest ;  and  when  I  ask,  well,  but  about  the  aposdes 
and  writers  of  Scripture  to  whom  these  different  preju- 
diced persons  refer  their  doctrine  ?  Oh !  says  Mr.  Jowett, 
you  must  throw  them  all  in  in  the  lump.  They  are  like 
all  the  rest  formed  by  their  age,  and  you  must  judge 
them  like  any  other  book.  That  is  Mr.  Jowett's  Essay. 
He  will  tell  you  how  fathers  erred  by  prejudice,  how 
reformers  took  the  colour  of  their  time,  how  modern 
interpreters  are  yet  inferior.  How  the  New  Testament 
was  formed  from  the  influences  of  its  day.  Natural 
conscience  will  judge  of  all  this  ;  but  of  truth,  Divine 
^^  truth,  inside  of  all  this,  revealed  truth  which  is  thus 
^B  clothed  or  departed  from,  not  an  atom,  save  what  nature 
^V  has.     He,  Mr.  Jowett,  and  his  friends,  have  made  all 

■^  this  clear.     But,  I  ask,  where  then  is  the  truth  ?     You 

■  are,  he  tells  me,  to  walk  in  the  love  of  it.     I  ask,  where 

I  is  it  to  love  ?     Oh,  that  is  not  what  I  mean,  says  Mr. 

I  Jowett.     Love  of  truth  is  not  truth  being  loved.     It  is 

not  love  of  the  truth      'ITie  truth  has  disappeared  in  the 
I  process.     Love  of  truth  merely  means  a  readiuess  to 

ft  reject  what  is  not  honestly  what  it  pretends  to  be.    Really 


,   IS 

luretl^l 
restV 


295 


a  pretension  to  be  able  to  judge  by  my  own  competency 
of  everjthiug,  submits  everything  to  this  test,  and  never 
to  be  convinced,  but  always  ready  to  doubt,  conscfjuently 
never  know  that  ivnrtliing  is  truth  :  so  that  I  cannot  love 
it  becaiLse  it  is  truth.  The  moment  I  am  assured  any- 
thing is  the  truth,  I  can  receive  nothing  contrary  to  it; 
it"  I  do,  1  do  u(tt  love  the  truth.  But  with  them  the 
love  of  truth  means  never  to  do  this,  but  readiness  to 
(luubt,  IjecaiLse  we  never  have  the  truth.  This  doubting, 
God  hftil  taken  away  by  His  word,  "  Ye  shall  know 
the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  tree,"  says  Christ, 
"  if  ye  continue  in  my  word."  "  He  that  is  of  God 
heareth  us,"  says  John.  To  the  total  al>senoe  of  this 
truth  we  are  brought  back  again  by  the  rationalists, 
That  was  all  the  childhood  of  the  world  ;  we  are  now  in 
the  manhood  of  the  world — at  least  sufficiently  to  cast 
off  all  this,  and  trust  ourselves. 

W.  And  l»elieve  what  ? 

H.  Well,  I  do  not  know — ourselves,  and,  if  we  please, 
Mr.  Jowett. 

W.  But  do  you  seriously  mean  that  Mr.  Jowett's 
essay  throws  Scripture  thus  into  the  lump,  as  you  say, 
with  other  prejudiced  writers,  so  that  we  have  no  Divine 
revelation,  and  so  no  standard  of  truth ;  and  that  they 
have  the  singular  pretension  that  they  only  are  enlight- 
ened to  judge  of  it  ? 

JI.  You  shall  judge  of  this  yourself;  we  will  go 
through  his  essay.  The  only  modification  is,  that  i>er- 
haps  they  are  only  enlightened  enough  to  learn  that  all 
before  themselves  have  been  wrong. 

}V,  But  what  motive  can  they  have  ? 

H.  I  am  satisfied  it  is  a  direct  work  of  Satan,  as  I 
said  ;  but  it  works  thus  : — They  are  enlightened,  intelli- 
gent [arsons — at  least,  think  themselves  so  ;  they  believe 
nothing,  and  have  given  up  all  that  is  Divine  and  super- 
natural in  Christianity,  but,  as  yet.  like  to  retain  the 
credit  of  lieing  Christiaas  :  they  think  that  every  other 
intelligent  iwi-son  must  give  up  the  faith  as  they  have, 
and  they  seek  to  lower  Christianity  to  a  point  in  which 


296 

nothing  properly  Divine  remains,  so  that  their  intelligent 
firiends  may  thus  accept  it.  Men's  eyes  dont  like  the 
light,  and  they  want  to  dim  or  destroy  its  character,  that 
men  may  look  at  and  receive  it ;  only,  unfortunately,  it 
is  not  the  light  they  have  received,  and  they  remain 
content  with  the  state  that  hinders  their  receiving  it. 
When  any  truth  is  in  question  which  requires  Divine 
faith,  dont  be  so  foolish  as  to  peril  religion  on  that,  says 
Mr.  Jowett;  intelligent  people  soon  wont  receive  it. 
Another  truth  comes  up  :  Do  not  lead  people  to  reject 
Christianity  by  defending  that,  he  tells  us. 

W.  But  that  is  the  love  of  intelligent  people  more 
than  of  the  truth — the  love  of  respectability.  How  dares 
he  to  speak  of  love  of  truth,  and  use  such  an  argu- 
ment? 

JBT.  It  is  a  threat  to  induce  people  to  degrade  Chris- 
tianity to  his  level  of  it ;  the  poorest,  simplest  saint, 
fears  no  such  threats ;  one  word  of  Christ's  is  more  to 
him  than  a  bookful  of  such  reasoning.  It  proves  that 
the  writer  has  not,  or  does  not  love,  the  truth — does  not 
know  its  value  ;  has  not  the  moral  courage  that  belongs, 
through  grace,  to  a  Divine  acquaintance  with  it.  The 
humblest  believers  pity  such  intelligent  people,  and  with 
true  charity.  But  what  is  Divine  is  just  what  is  pre- 
cious to  such  souls.  They  know  God  hides  these  things 
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  reveals  them  unto  babes ; 
they  can  therefore  well  imderstand  that  those  who  call 
themselves  intelligent,  and  think  highly  of  themselves, 
will  stumble ;  those  who  say.  We  see ;  "  we  are  rich, 
and  increased  in  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing." 
Some  intelligent  ones  (not  many),  the  Apostle  tells  us, 
may,  by  grace,  be  poor  enough  in  spirit  to  receive  the  king- 
dom of  God  as  little  children.  They  have  been  warned 
by  their  Master  of  such  pretensions  to  wisdom ;  but 
God's  words  have  been  found  by  them,  and  they  have 
eaten  them,  and  they  have  been  to  them  the  joy  and  re- 
joicing of  their  hearts.  They  know  they  are  Divine ; 
they  have  received  them  as  they  are  in  truth — ^the  Word 
of  God,  which  works  effectually  in  them  that  believe ; 


297 


[  fright-    H 

lings  of    ^1 


they  have  not  the  most  distant  thought  of  being 
ened  out  of  their  known  treasure  by  the  questionings 
those  who  use  human  intellect  to  judge  of  Divine  things. 
They  do  not  think  this  very  intelUgeut,  because  they 
kunw  God.  No,  uiy  dear  W. ;  threats  of  the  intelli- 
geut  not  ret-eiving  Divine  truth  may  make  us  mourn, 
but  not  doubt.  It  was  always  so.  They  must  become 
fools,  that  they  may  be  wise.  It  was  Celsus'  reproach 
in  his  day ;  it  is  jiractically  Mr.  Juwett's  in  this.  But 
we  will  verily'  what  we  have  spoken  of.  That  men  have 
sought  to  liull  Scripture  their  own  way,  as  Mr.  Jowett 
alleges,  is  most  true ;  that  we  need  not  discuss.  After 
describing  how  this  is  su[)posed  or  expected — i.  e.,  by  the 
cool  observer — which  is  also  true,  we  soon  find  who  this 
observer  is.  "  Philu^ophical  differences  are  in  the  back- 
ground, into  which  the  difficulties  about  Scripture  re- 
solve themselves.  They  seem  to  nm  up,  at  last,  into  a 
dilfererice  of  opinion  resjiecting  revelation  itself — whether 
given  l)eside  the  human  facidties  or  through  them ; 
whether  an  interruption  of  the  laws  of  natiu-e,  or  their 
perfection  and  fulfilment." 

Now  this  is  rather  early  in  the  essay  (the  first  para^ 
graph)  for  infidelity  to  ooze  out ;  but  *'  out  of  the  abund- 
ance of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  The  essay  is  on 
the  interpretation  of  Scripture,  but  it  turns  at  last  (at 
first,  he  should  say)  into  a  difference  as  to  revelation — 
I.  e.,  whether  there  is  any.  The  question  here  is,  though 
garbled  in  "  philosophical  diflerences  in  the  background." 
"  Is  there  inspiration,  and  are  there  miracles  ? "  He 
could  not  keep  it  in,  ITierc  is  no  truth  in  the  statement 
whatever.  With  the  "  Ultramontane  and  Anglican,  the 
Protestant  and  Roman  Catholic,  the  Bible-alone-men  of 
the  Reformation  school,  or  the  Bible  and  Prayer-book 
advocates,"  there  is  no  question  as  to  the  Scriptures  bemg 
truly  inspired,  or  miracles  being  true.  They  disagree  on 
many  jKiints — on  important  i>oints  ;  but  the  points  they 
do  not  disagree  on  are  the  inspiration  and  authority  of 
the  Word,  and  the  truth  of  miracles.  On  this  they  all 
agree ;  their  differences  do  not  ever  run  up  into  thenwj 
u  2 


298 

The  only  meaning  of  the  sentence  is,  that  Mr.  Jowett's 
paper  is  not  an  interpretation,  but  infidelity  as  to  the 
thing  to  be  interpreted ;  and,  as  I  said,  he  makes  the 
doubts  and  differences  as  to  interpretation  fall  on  the 
truth  of  Scripture  itself.  It  is  poorly  and  dishonestly 
done.  Others  differ — ^he  does,  too,  from  them.  It  is  all 
one  thing.  Now  this  is  false.  All  the  others,  unless 
"  The  Germans,"  own  God's  Word  and  its  Divine  cha- 
racter ;  Mr.  Jowett  does  not.  Their  differences  do  not 
run  up  at  last  into  this ;  it  is  not  in  "  the  background  " 
nor  in  the  foreground  for  them.  They  own  the  autho- 
rity of  Scripture,  whatever  use  they  make  of  it.  It  is 
the  whole  ground  for  Mr.  Jowett ;  his  heart  was  too  fiill 
of  it  to  keep  it  in.  An  honest  man,  unless  blinded  by 
prejudice,  could  not  say  that  differences  as  to  doctrine 
to  be  drawn  from  Scripture,  because  all  held  it  to  be 
Divine,  run  up  into  the  denial  of  its  authority,  its  in- 
spiration, and  miracles.  If  all  is  opinion,  and  there  is 
no  faith,  then  Mr.  Jowett's  opinion  is  as  good,  it  may  be, 
as  another.  But  the  fact  is  exactly  the  contrary  of  what 
he  says.  They  contended  fiercely,  because  they  declared 
they  had  Divine  authority  for  what  they  professed  to  be 
from  Scripture,  and  therefore  insisted  that  that  was  from 
God.  Had  it  run  up  into  doubting  the  Word,  their  con- 
flicts woidd  instantly  have  ceased.  Mr.  Jowett  doubts 
of  all,  and  hence  of  Scripture. 

W.  It  is  clear  he  nmst  have  been  in  a  great  hurry  to 
get  out  his  infidelity  ;  l)ut  what  he  says  is  evidently 
without  the  smallest  ground  of  truth  in  it ;  it  is,  as  you 
said,  doubting  of  all  forms  of  truth,  to  make  it  doubtful 
whether  there  is  anything  but  form.  But  his  doubt  is 
not  a  consequence  of,  it  is  exactly  the  opposite  in  prin- 
ciple from  the  discussions  of  the  others.  They  did  not 
doubt  at  all.  All  is  avowedly  a  "  difference  of  opinion," 
even  to  whether  there  is  a  revelation.  Truth,  and  the 
certainty  of  it,  are  gone— do  not  appear  as  a  possi- 
bility. 

IB..  The  third  })aragraph  contains  the  pretension  to  be 
the  sole  possessors  of  wisdom — at  least,  wisdom  enough 


299 


to  doubt.  "  It  lias  not  been  readily,  or  at  once,  that 
mankind  have  learned  to  realize  the  character  of  sacred 

writings It  is  the  old  age  of  the  world  only  that 

has  at  length  understood  its  childhood  (or  rather,  per- 
haps, is  beginning  to  understand  it,  and  make  allowance 
for  its  own  deficiency  of  knowledge). "  I  told  you  he 
would  let  you  doubt  even  of  his  world's  old-age  wisdom, 
provided  you  doubt  of  all  the  rest. 

W.  Well,  it  is  tolerable  self-sufficiency ;  and  how 
opposite  to  the  assertions  of  Scripture !  I  do  not  see, 
after  all,  that  there  is  less  open  infidelity  here  than  in 
the  other  papers  we  have  examined.  He  seems  in  a 
hurry  to  get  at  it.  Scripture  speaks  of  perilous  days 
at  the  end ;  it  pretends  everj-where  to  miracles,  and  gives 
itself  everywhere  for  inspired.  I  cannot  see  the  con- 
sistency of  pretenduig  to  be  anxious  to  interpret  rightly 
a  IxHik  which,  if  their  way  of  setting  about  it  be  true,  is 
an  universal  He. 

H.  Tlie  truth  of  that  is,  that  the  Word,  and  Christi- 
anity which  is  revealed  in  it,  have  a  power  men  must 
undergo  while  they  seek  to  deuy  it ;  it  has  changc<l  the 
world — has  made  the  proudest  hearts  bow  to  its  truth ; 
their  pride  may  comment  on  it,  but  they  are  forced  to 
own  its  power, 

W.  However,  I  see  plainly,  that  under  cover  of 
speaking  of  principles  of  interpretation,  Jowett,  by  look- 
ing at  fdl  interpretation  of  Scripture  as  opinions  formed 
by  the  day,  brings  in  his  own  denial  of  Christianity, 
viewed  as  a  miraculous  revelation  of  God,  as  one  of  the 
opinions.  It  is  not,  in  my  opinion,  brilliant  in  its 
honesty;  but,  jierhaps,  having  only  opinions,  and  no 
truth,  he  does  not  see  any  further.  But  then  that  shows 
that  the  idea  of  truth  is  lost ;  all  is  "  opinionum  com- 
menta"  which  "  ddet  dies." 

H.  I  apprehend  that  is  what  is  likely. 

W.  But  there  is  excessive  pretension  in  it.  Tt  re- 
minds me  of  the  bitter  sarcasm  you  (juoted  from  Job  in  a 
former  conversation  :  "  no  doubt,  but  ye  are  the  people, 
and  wisdom  shall  die  with  you." 


300 

jBT.  Many  principles  of  interpretation — such  as  not 
taking  scholastic  divinity  or  the  definitions  of  creeds  to 
interpret  Scripture  by — I  entirely  agree  with.  God  may 
providentially  have  preserved  the  truth,  more  or  less,  in 
the  visible  Church  by  them,  when  spirituality  was  gone. 
But  Scripture  does  not  make  creeds,  but  livingly  reveals 
the  truth  of  God ;  all  this  you  and  I  have  long  recog- 
nized; though,  where  error  and  Alexandrianisra,  or 
Neoplatonism,  and  its  kindred  Gnosticism,  invaded  the 
Church,  creeds  may  have  had  their  use.  All  conventional 
interpretations  we  can  let  go  without  a  regret;  we 
will  take  up  the  principles  of  interpretation  which  touch 
on  the  "philosophical  differences  in  the  backgroimd," 
the  difference  of  opinion  we  come  to  at  last — i.  e.. 
Whether  there  is  divinely  given  truth?  A  great  deal 
that  is  said  on  confounding  application  and  interpreta- 
tion, and  using  vScripture  to  make  out  sermons,  is  very 
just,  and,  no  doubt,  with  the  preachers  Mr.  Jowett  has  to 
say  to,  necessary ;  but  it  is  common-place,  and  needs  no 
remark.  Thei'e  is  an  abuse  of  Scripture,  in  this  respect, 
among  ministers,  in  and  out  of  the  Establishment,  which 
is  a  proof  of  a  low  state  of  mind  as  to  Scripture  and 
apprehension  of  Divine  truth,  which  God,  in  His  good- 
ness, bears  with,  but  is  both  painful  to  a  mind  which  has 
studied  Scripture  and  injurious  to  all.  But,  at  least, 
the  authority  of  Scripture — that  is,  God's  Word — ^is 
owned ;  it  is  better  than  Mr.  Jowett's  "  interpretation." 
Imagination  works  too.  Let  all  these  remarks  have 
their  effect  in  the  proper  quarters ;  no  sensible  person 
will  regret  it.  Let  those  who  have  these  habits  see  the 
effect  in  Mr,  Jowett's  treatise — that  is,  the  charging  the 
New  Testament  writers  with  doing  the  same,  still  being 
good  men  and  Apostles ;  so  that  all  the  authority  of 
Scripture  is  gone — mvtato  nomine  de  te  fabvla  narratur. 
"  What  preachers  do,"  urges  Mr.  Jowett,  "  the  Apostles 
and  inspired  writers  did — accommodated  Scripture  to 
their  own  ideas."  But  we  may  come  to  principles  of 
interpretation  which  affect  Scripture  itself  directly,  as 
denying  inspiration,  or  as  evidently  leading  to  the  same 


301 


coQcIusioQ.  It  is  better  to  take  up  the  statements  in 
the  essay  than  follow  any  order  of  our  own  on  the 
subject.  I  will  only,  to  break  fairly  into  the  subject, 
tlraw  your  attention  to  Mr.  Jowett's  statement,  which  I 
have  already  quoted,  that  we  may  know  what  we  are 
about.  Mr.  Jowett  says  :  "  Nor  for  any  of  the  higher 
or  supernatural  views  of  inspiration  is  there  any  founda- 
tion in  the  Gospels  or  Epistles ;"  that  is  the  "  back- 
ground." His  other  principle  to  which  I  have  alluded 
I  may  quote  only  to  set  it  aside.  It  is  a  base  one.  If 
inspiration  be  true,  it  is  true ;  if  not,  let  us  give  it  up. 
If  it  be,  let  Christianity  and  philosophy  take  care  of 
themselves  ;  the  day  of  judgment  will  settle  who  is  right 
in  principle.  I  do  not  expect — it  would  prove  a  book 
not  inspired — a  treatise  on  chemistry  or  geology,  or  an 
inspired  instructor  to  speak  any  but  the  common  lan- 
guage of  men  on  this  subject ;  an  ins|)ired  man  would  say 
the  sun  rises,  like  another.  It  is  the  grossest  and  flattest 
stupidity  to  object  to  it;  to  think  that  the  llolv  Ghost, 
speaking  to  immortal  souls,  would  stop  to  explain  astro- 
nomy, or  not  use  current  expressioas  ;  the  whole  eflect  of 
what  He  said  would  l)e  destroyed.  It  is,  morally  speak- 
ing, impossible.  He  would  not  sanction  popular  errors, 
though  He  might  apjieal  to  men's  belief  of  them  as  an 
argument  of  the  unreasonableness  of  their  unbelief,  be- 
cause then  He  only  accepts  the  state  of  their  minds, 
which  is  the  truth  as  to  their  state ;  but  He  would  not 
use  the  phoenix,  as  Clement  does,  as  a  proof  of  the 
resurrection.  That  men  should  insist  on  the  language 
of  .Scripture  as  scientific  is  absurd,  and  that  is  what  the 
clergy  did  with  Galileo,  with  his  eppure  n  muove.  But 
Mr,  Jowett's  principle  is  a  hollow  and  base  one  ;  speak- 
ing of  chemistry  and  physiologj',  he  says  ;  "  It  is  a  false 
policy  to  set  up  inspiration  or  revelation  in  opposition  to 
them — a  principle  which  can  have  no  influence  on  them, 
and  should  be  rather  kept  out  of  their  way."  I  say.  if 
God  has  spoken,  let  Gocl  Ije  true,  and  every  man  a  liar. 
I  make  no  objection  to  chemical  and  physiological  in- 
quiry ;  hut  I  do  not  trust  man's  certainty,  and  I  do 


302 

God's.  And  see  how  far  Mr.  Jowett's  principles  go : 
"  The  sciences  of  geology  and  comparative  philology  are 
steadily  gaining  ground ;  many  of  the  guesses  of 
twenty  years  ago  have  become  certainties,  and  the 
guesses  of  to-day  may  hereafter  become  so.  Shall  we 
peril  religion  on  the  possiljility  of  their  imtruth  ?  On 
such  a  cast  to  stake  the  life  of  man,  implies  not  only  a 
recklessness  of  facts,  but  a  misunderstanding  of  the 
nature  of  the  Gospel.  If  it  is  fortimate  for  science,  it  is 
perhaps  more  fortunate  for  Christian  truth,  that  the 
admission  of  Galileo's  discoverv  has  for  ever  settled  the 
principle  of  the  relations  between  them."  Now  the  cool, 
yet  stupid  audacity  of  this  is  somewhat  singular.  It 
amounts  simply  to  this:  the  bigoted  persecution  of 
popish  priests,  and  the  judgment  of  the  Inquisition,  have 
exactly  the  same  authority  as  the  Word  of  God  ;  and  if 
the  movements  of  Jupiter  s  satellites  have  proved  the 
folly  of  popish  persecution  and  applpng  their  dogmas  to 
science,  the  Bil)le  must  retire  and  hide  itself  before  the 
guesses  of  geology,  and  get  out  of  its  way,  as  they 
may  prove  true.  What  think  you  of  such  a  principle — 
of  such  love  of  truth  ?  Is  there  a  trace  of  the  noble 
bearing  of  truth  in  it  ? 

W.  Not  one. 

U,  There  is  not.  I  mav  l)e  mistaken,  of  course ;  I 
may  misinterpret  Scri]iture ;  humility  as  to  one's  oivn 
thoughts  is  always  right.  But  I  have,  what  I  believe  to 
be  the  truth.  I  shall  hold  and  o\\x\  it  as  such,  till  I  am 
convinced  of  the  contrary ;  if  1  find  it  is  not  the  truth  I 
shall  give  it  up.  If  what  ])rofessed  to  te  insi)ired,  or 
men  supposed  such  (for  I  do  not  think  a  true  revelation 
would  occupy  itself  with  such  a  subject),  said  Jupiter's 
planets  do  not  move,  and  it  was  proved  they  did,  I  might 
see  if  I  had  not  misinterpreted,  if  it  was  not  a 
traditional  ^lew  supposed  to  be  l)ascd  on  this  writing ;  if 
definitively  it  said  as  a  revelation,  they  do  not,  and  I 
found  they  did,  or  had  when  the  writing  spoke  of  them, 
I  would  say,  I  have  been  deceived.  This,  at  any  rate, 
is  not  inspired.     It  is  not  from  God.     Yet,  even  in  this 


L 


case,  if  the  direct  proofs  of  inspiration  were  absolute  f 
other  parts,  it  would  only  prove  this  spurious.  If  all 
the  writing;  wa,s  identified  with  it  on  the  same  ground,  I 
would  say.  1  j^jive  up  holding  that  I  have  au  inspired 
bwik ;  a  Iwok  with  good  things  in  it,  I  may  have,  perhaps, 
from  spiritual  |)eople,  hut  no  hook  from  God  with  a  re- 
velation of  His,  I  would  not  call  them  saorcd  writings. 
No  man  that  talks  of  false  policy  in  this  way  has  a  right 
to  speak  of  love  of  truth  again.  I  rejreat,  I  liKik  for  no 
science  in  Scripture ;  I  should  at  once  Ire  dis[)<)st'd  to 
reject  it  as  Scripture  if  I  found  it;  but  this  I  avow 
boldly,  I  have  no  need  to  use  ]>olicy  alxiut  it.  I  may 
avoid  bringing  those  weak  in  the  faith  to  the  deciding  of 
doubtful  ipiestions.  But  I  am  not  atraiil  of  the  ques- 
tion of  inspiration,  not  afraid  of  science.  I  do  not  ajiply 
Scripture  to  the  latter,  but  I  am  not  going  to  deny  inspi- 
ration—that is.  the  direct  communications  of  my  God  in 
grace — for  the  uutrutliful  and  dishonest  warnings  of 
l>olicy  from  tliose  who  want  to  keep  their  religious  jiosi- 
tions  and  give  u|)  their  religion.  Ilowever.  so  frightened 
is  Mr.  Jowett,  that  his  i-eeonmiendation  is  to  give  up 
the  inspiration  of  Scripture  Itefore  a  guess  even  of 
science.  This  guess  may  Iw  true.  That  Scripture  is, 
or  may  1m*.  no  mortal  knows,  certainly  not  Mr.  Jowett, 
or  he.  from  "  love  of  truth,"  would  keep  fast  hold,  and 
stand  up  for  it.  But  Scripture,  yea,  even  "  Christian 
truth  "  itself,  is  all  the  same  as  the  tenets  of  the  Intjui- 
sition.  Such  is  the  man.  such  the  doctrine,  which  is 
pretending  to  intcrptfet  Scripture.  But  as  an  argument, 
the  rea.<;oning  has  no  ground  whatever,  l)ecauso  it 
assumes  these  .Jesuitical  tenets  to  l«j  the  alisoluto 
equivalent  of  what  Mr.  Jowett  himself  calls  ('hristian 
truth. 

We  may  set  aside  all  that  part  of  the  reasoning  which 
refers  Ut  the  fears  of  mwldling  with  the  text.  Tho 
thought  iasteil  for  perhaps  a  century,  at  tho  utmost, 
after  the  so-calle<!  texfiis  rec^m.  Since  Mills'  or  eveu  i 
Bengel's  time,  the  question  has  really  ceased  t^)  exist. 
Save  a  rare  timid  spirit,  even-  one  neeics  a  text  crlticatl^ 


304 

exact.  All  this  is  throwing  dust  in  people's  eyes. 
Persons  who  have  the  profoundest  conviction  of  the 
Divine  original  of  Scripture,  seek,  for  that  very  reason,  to 
have  it  as  pure  as  possible.  The  showing  that  people 
have  had  to  give  way  in  prejudices  as  to  the  effect  of 
changes,  has  nothing  to  do  with  a  denial  of  inspiration. 
In  the  supernatural  sense,  Mr.  Jowett  denies  inspira- 
tion. It  is  not  the  way  of  secimng  our  having  the 
thing,  but  whether  there  is  anything  to  be  had  which  is 
now  in  question.  He  uses  fallen  prejudices  to  produce 
universal  uncertainty.  Having  got  rid  of  all  these 
artifices,  for  such  they  are,  I  meet  Mr.  Jowett's  state- 
ments in  face  on  the  point  really  in  question,  the  inspi- 
ration of  Scripture. 

No  one  denies  that  the  structure  of  sentences  is  to  be 
sought,  though  it  be  riot  classical  Greek,  in  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  language,  modified  by  its  then  state  of 
decay,  and  the  changes  which  entirely  new  ideas  and 
subjects  introduce  necessarily  into  every  language.  But, 
I  affirm,  that  the  principle  of  Mr.  Jowett,  that  it  must 
be  interpreted  when  we  come  to  the  matter  contained  in 
it,  by  the  plain  use  of  words  as  other*  books,  is  a  false 
and  absurd  notion.  I  interpret  men's  words  so,  because 
men's  ideas  have  formed  them,  and  therefore  they  can 
express  those  ideas  which  gave  them  birth.  But  if 
there  be  a  revelation,  however  much  God  may  conde- 
scend to  men  and  speak  through  men  amongst  them, 
and  even  in  His  Son  as  a  man,  the  ideas  of  men  not 
having  given  rise  to  the  words  and  thoughts,  but  God,  it 
is  impossible  that  language  formed  by  man's  ideas  can 
be  an  adequate  expression  of  God's,  if  we  take  that 
language  as  Mr.  Jowett  would  in  its  simple  use 
according  to  men's  ideas.  Upon  the  showing  of  the 
case,  by  the  strictest  scientific  principles,  the  whole 
statement  is  wrong. 

W.  I  see  it  plainly.  Every  one  who  has  the  least 
inquired  into  the  subject,  or  even  thought  of  it,  knows 
that  language  is  formed  by,  and  expresses  the  thoughts, 
habits,  and  mental  objects  of  a  people.     "  It  is  thdr 


305 


picture.  It  forms  ikelf  on  their  habits."  But  if  this  Iw 
so,  a  revelation  from  God  caimot  find  its  nde<|uat«  ex- 
pression in  the  language  taken  according  to  its  human 
force,  because,  according  to  its  human  force,  it  expresses 
human  ideas,  not  Divine.  But  then  this  ditiiculty  arises, 
we  must  have  an  inadequate  revelation. 

H.  Inadequate,  if  we  seek  what  Is  infinite  in  its  com- 
pleteness all  at  once.  "  We  know  in  part  and  prophesy 
in  part,"  says  the  Apostle.  Intuitive  knowledge  of  all 
at  once  is  not  come.  But  there  are  analogies  of  rela- 
tionship, and  the  Lord  Himself  lays  down  expressly  that 
the  thought  (the  Xoyoc)  must  be  known  before  the  speech 
(the  pijjm)  is.  This  is  not  the  way  with  man's  language. 
I  explain  the  terms,  and  use  tlicm  then  to  learn  all  re- 
lating to  them,  and  unfold  the  relationships  in  which  the 
things  stand  to  one  another.  In  Divine  things  we  must 
know  tlie  thing  to  understand  the  word.  To  take  a 
familiar  example,  "  We  must  he  Iwrn  again."  If  I  take 
that  in  the  "  simple  universal  meaning "  of  Ixjing  bom. 
I  shall  stumhlc  with  Nicodemus  on  nonsense.  Take 
the  word  Son  applied  to  Godhead.  Has  it  the  simple 
muTersal  sense  it  has  elsewhere  ?  "  The  Word  was  with 
God,  and  was  God,"  WTiat  does  Word,  or  Aoyoc  mean  ? 
I  affirm  that  in  everything  imjtortant  referring  to  God, 
or  even  spiritual  subjects,  the  words  must  have  a  meaning 
only  to  be  known  by  those  who  have  the  Divine  key  to  it, 
whatever  that  is ;  l)ecause  as  human  words  they  only 
express  human  ideas,  and  they  are  now  used  to  expres-s 
what  is  not  the  fruit  of  human  thought  but  of  Divine. 
If  I  say,  "  Reckon  yourselves  to  be  dead  unto  sin ;"  •'  ye 
are  dead,  and  your  lite  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God ;"  can  I 
take  the  simple  meaning  of  the  words  as  they  apply  to 
the  human  order  of  thought  by  which  they  have  beon 
formed  ?  It  is  absurd,  and  contradicts  itgielf. 
W.  This  seems  to  me  perfectly  clear. 

//.  It  is  not  that  the  language  is  not  ordinary  human 
language.  It  is  because  it  is  ordinary  human  language 
(though  modified,  as  is  ever  the  case  with  now  idoB»), 
and  to  be  con-itnied  so,  that  interpreting  it  when  u-sed  for 


306 

Divine  things,  as  if  the  ordinary  human  meaning  was 
the  limit  of  the  thought,  and  that  is  what  Mr.  Jowett 
wants,  is  unintelligent,  yea,  the  grossest  absurdity.  And 
indeed  Mr.  Jowett  cannot  and  does  not  deny  it.  He 
says,  "  There  are  difficulties  of  another  kind  in  many 
parts  of  Scripture,  the  depth  and  inwardness  of  which 
require  a  measure  of  the  same  qualities  in  the  inter- 
preter himself."  That  is,  everything  that  is  of  chief 
value  does.  And  consequently  he  contradicts  himself 
within  a  })age  or  two  expressly.  "  First,"  he  says,  "  it 
may  l)e  laid  down  that  Scripture  has  one  meaning — ^the 
meaning  which  it  had  to  the  mind  of  the  prophet  or 
evangelist  who  first  uttered  or  wrote,  to  the  hearers  or 
readers  who  first  received  it"  (p.  378).  Exactly  two 
pages  further  on  he  says,  *'  All  that  the  prophet  meant 
may  not  have  been  consciously  present  to  his  mind : 
there  were  depths  which  to  himself  also  were  but  half 
revealed  "  (p.  380).  Yet  I  am  told  (p.  378),  Scripture 
has  one  meaning,  the  meaning  which  it  had  to  the  mind 
of  the  prophet. 

W.  It  is  impossible,  where  a  man  is  not  a  hardened 
infidel,  who  will  not  see  any  force  in  the  Word  of  God, 
to  escape  the  conviction  of  special  depth  and  power  in  it. 

//.  Another  passage  in  which  Mr.  Jowett  most  hap- 
pily contradicts  liimself  in  this  respect,  shows  the  truth 
of  what  you  sav.  "  There  are  fferms  of  truth  which 
after  thousands  of  years  have  never  vet  taken  root  in 
the  world.''  That  is,  really,  that  the  ideas  being  not 
from  a  human  source,  but  from  a  Divine  one,  human 
language  cannot  express  it  as  a  human  idea,  to  be  re- 
ceived according  to  a  human  measure.  "  There  are 
lessons  in  the  prophets  which,  however  simple,  mankind 
have  not  yet  learned  eveii  in  theory,  and  which  the  com- 
plexion  of  society  rather  tends  to  hide ;  aspects  of  human 
life  in  Job  and  Ecclesiastes,  which  have  a  truth  of  deso- 
lation al)out  them  which  we  faintly  realize  in  ordinary 
circumstances."  All  this  is  saying  (and  makes  one  think 
Mr.  Jo\vett  above  the  heartless  system  he  is  propa- 
gating) that  the  forms  into  which  the  human  mind  is 


[ 


307 

moulded,  the  state  in  which  it  naturally  is,  cannot  seize 
tlie  bearing  and  truth  of  aspect  of  the  Divine  nuDd.  how- 
ever simply  it  is  expressed.  And  what  follows  expresses 
it  yet  more  distinctly :  "  It  is  perhaps  the  greatest  diffi- 
culty of  all  to  enter  into  the  meaning  of  the  words  of 
Christ,  so  gentle,  so  human,  so  Divine,  neither  adding  to 
them  nor  marring  their  simplicity."  Now  I  rejoice  in 
such  phrases.  1  repeat,  it  gives  one  a  bright  hojie  that 
Mr.  Jowett  is  above  his  system,  that  in  emancipating 
himself  from  traditional  nullities,  he  has  stumbletl  into 
the  mud  of  the  system  next  him,  and  that  he  will  get 
out  confessing  and  knowing  by  experience  that  it  is  dirty 
mud.  and  nothing  else,  anti  that  the  depth  of  the  Divine 
mind  and  grace  will  be  his  abiding  portion, 

W.  One  would  trust  so  indeed  from  these  words, 
and  they  are  tjuite  the  truth ;  but  it  does  most  entirely 
contradict  his  statement  that  the  Scripture  "  has  one 

meaning,  the  meaning  which  it  had to  the 

hearers  or  readers  who  first  received  it." 

JJ.  Yes ;  but  we  will  rejoice  in  so  hajipy  an  incon- 
sistency— rejoice  because  the  good  side  seems  to  be 
more  truly  Mr.  Jowett  himself.  We  must,  however, 
having  gladly  admitted  this,  follow  the  system  to  which 
his  name  is  attached  in  this  pa[jcr.  Piow.  with  this 
depth  in  the  mind  of  Christ,  or  even  the  jirophets,  what 
may  be  called,  though  unjustly,  many  meanings,  becomes 
perfectly  intelligible,  and  the  necessary  result.  I  do  not 
take  up  Cocceius'  notion,  though  I  imderstaiid  it.  I  think, 
that  the  Scripture  had  all  the  meanings  it  could  have. 
It  was  merely  awkwardly  expressing  in  human  fwling 
this,  that  the  Divine  mind  was  so  large  that  human 
expressions  of  it  partially  had  no  end.  I  f  I  dniw  water 
from  the  well,  I  do  not  say  at  each  bucket,  that  is 
difl'erent  water.  I  say.  no,  there  is  a  continually  spring- 
ing well.  It  is  all  water  of  the  well,  but  my  bucket  can 
only  bring  a  small  part  of  it  at  a  time.  It  is,  as  Mr.  Jowott 
says,  hard  in  doing  this.  "  ntrt  to  mid  or  mar  the  sim- 
plicity. The  interpreter  needs  nothing  nhort  of  fashion- 
ing in  himself  the  image  of  the  mind  of  Christ:  he 


308 

has  to  be  bom  again  into  a  new  spiritual  or  intellectual 
world,  from  which  the  thoughts  of  this  world  are  shut 
out."    Now,  that  is  excellent ;  but  the  proof,  not  that  the 
words  of  Scripture  are  not  simple,  but  that,  from  the 
natural  mind  being  formed  in  another  train  of  thought,  it 
cannot  enter  into  what  is  Divine.    It  says  what  Scripture 
says :    *'  The  natural  man  recciveth  not  the  things  of  the 
Spirit."     But  it  denies  at  once  the  theory  that  Scripture 
can  be  interpreted  as  having  the  meaning  it  had  to  the 
hearers   or   readers   who   first   received   it.     Scripture, 
Divine  truth,  never  is  really  received  but  in  the  measure 
in  which  the  mind  is  formed  into  the  spiHtual   state 
capable  of  apprehending  it.     Not  that  the  words  are  not 
simple,  or  that  the  statements  are  not.     They  are ;  but 
that  the  mind  is  not  morally  open  to  them;  they  are 
foolishness  to  it.     So  of  the  use  of  a  passage  of  Scrip- 
ture.     As  my  water  from  the  well,  I  may  use  it  to 
drink  and  quench  my  thirst,  to  wash,  to  quench  the  fire, 
to  make  the   plants    of  my  garden  grow.      It   is  not 
changing  amthing  in  the  water ;  God  so  formed  it  as 
to  be  proi)erly  applicable  to  all  these  things.  And  so  His 
Divine  Word.      Man's   limited    nature   makes   limited 
things  (we  spoil  the  instrument  in  appljing  it  to  some- 
thing else)  and  limited  words.     God's  infinite  and  crea- 
tive nature  has,  in  Ilis  revelation,  given  what  is  accord- 
ing to  His  nature,  though  suited  to  man's.     The  source 
is  infinite;  the  apj)lication  to  what  is  finite.     Hence, 
what   it   is   simply  in  itself,  is   various   in   application. 
Hence,  even   in  the  language  which   expresses  it,  we 
have  a  finite   instrument   used   to   express   an  infinite 
mind.     This  must  be  different  from  a  finite  instrument, 
used  to  express  a  finite  mind.     Even  in  the  last  case  it 
is  imperfect,  as  the  comparison  of  the  different  languages 
shows ;    but,  in  respect  of  God's  thoughts,  though  He 
who  uses  it  is  God,  and  hence  it  is  perfectly  used  for 
thoughts  not  learned  but  only  to  be  expressed,  that  which 
is  used  must  have  a  fulness,  and  elasticity,  and  power, 
which  it  had  not  with  man.     He  who  would  reduce  the 
force  of  language  used  for  inspired  communications — as 


309 


tiie  rationalists,  and,  alas  I  inconsistent  Mr.  Jowett — to 
the  measure  of  the  mind  of  the  speaker  or  hearer,  denies 
the  inspired  communication  altogether.  Hence,  too,  the 
language  of  Scripture  is  eminently  figurative.  It  uses 
physical  facts  and  terms  to  express  moral  ideas ;  but  the 
consequence  is.  we  nmst  have  the  moral  ideas  them- 
selves to  understand  the  words,  as  Jowett  admits.  But 
then  the  force  of  the  words  is  measured  by  the  ideas 
I  have,  not  by  the  simple  theory  expressed  by  the  words 
at  all.  All  language  is  figurative  when  any  moral 
subject  is  spoken  of.  I  talk  of  a  lovely  picture  of 
virtue,  and  so  on.  Our  lile  is  spent  in  such  figures  the 
moment  I  leave  materialism.  But  man  cannot  speak  of 
Divine  things  truly,  because  he  does  not  know  them ;  his 
language  cannot  in  itself  be  formed  directly  on  them, 
save  in  falsehood.  When  God  speaks  of  them,  and  that 
is  revelation.  He  does  for  our  sakes  condescend  to  use 
human  language,  but  fills  it  with  that  which  is  Divine. 
And  the  intelligence  of  the  language  is  in  the  measure 
of  the  intelligence  of  the  truth  convoyed.  He  who 
would  reduce  the  meaning  to  the  human  meaning  of  the 
words,  denies  the  thing  altogether,  makes  nonsense  of  it 
besides,  by  making  Divine  things  human  in  their  con- 
ception. He  is  simply  an  infidel,  in  fact,  that  denies 
the  communication  of  the  Divine  mind.  That  God 
should  connnunicatc  Hts  thoughts  to  man,  to  sinful. 
corrupt,  narrow-minded  man.  and  all  be  understood 
accordiog  to  the  human  limit  of  human  expressions,  is 
an  absurdity  upon  the  face  of  it.  It  denies  what  it  pro- 
fesses to  admit,  and  this  is  Mr.  Jowett, 

W.  But  does  not  this  leave  room  for  very  wild  imagi- 
nations? 

H.  To  be  sure  it  does.  But  this  is  a  moral  ques- 
tion under  God's  hand  and  government,  like  all  others. 
Man's  mind  runs  wild  without  Scrijiture,  and  it  runs 
wild  with  Scripture  if  it  tr^'Xts  itself.  And  the  mightier 
the  instrument  the  more  the  wildness  appears.  If  I 
run  about  with  a  perambulator,  I  may  perpetrate  some 
mischievous  folly;  but  if  with  a  steam-engine,  I  p 


310 

jeopard  a  multitude  of  lives.     But  that  is  the  fault  of 
the  person  who  does  so.     That  this  danger  should  not 
exist,  we  must  give  up  materially  and  morally  all  that 
has  power.     And  it  is  God's  will  that  man  should  l)e 
thus  tested.     The  humble  mind  learns  according  to  the 
power   of  God's   truth.      The   self- conceited   wields  a 
weapon  to  his  own,  perhaps  to  others'  hurt ;  but  he  has 
not  morally  speaking  Scripture  as  God's  Word,  but  as 
so  many  thoughts,  and,  when  wielded  by  man's  mind, 
always  false,  Ixjcause  man  cannot  wield  God.     He  is 
subject  to  Ilim,  and  the  power  lie  gives  is  subject  to  the 
moral  guidance  of  the  Si)irit  working  in  man.     This  is 
what  the  Apostle  means  by  the  spirits  of  the  prophets 
are  subject  to  the  prophets.     God  may  use  man  as  an 
instrument,  but  he  must  first  be  emptied  of  self.    Hence 
the  humble  soul  prospers,  has  God's  own  Word,  feeds  in 
these  green  pastures,  and,  as  the  exprOvSsion  of  what  is 
become  himself,  may  become  a  blessing  to  others.     The 
self-confident  mind  has  never  approached  God  in  His 
AVord  at  all,  for  had  he,  he  would  have  ceased  to  be  self- 
confident.     Whenever  I  see  a  man  confident  in  himself 
(and  we  are  all  of  course  liable  to  it,  at  any  rate  in 
detail),  I  have  no  confidence  in  him.     The  truth  is,  all 
Divine  things  are  a  riddle,  because  man  having  departed 
from  God,  the  introduction  of  God  again  is  necessarily 
the  destruction,  the  setting  aside  of  man,  viewed  in  his 
present  state,  but  thereupon  it  is  the  filling  the  man  who 
receives  it  with  grace,  and  so  with  Divine  confidence, 
and  a  delight  in  holiness  that  he  would  never  have  had 
otherwise.     And  he  is  strong  in  virtue  of  being  nothing, 
and   in   the  measure  in  which  he  is.     As  Paid  savs, 
"  WTien  I  am  w^eak  then  am  I  strong."     But  this  is  in 
principle,  the  total  putting  down  of  man  as  he  is,  and 
this  man  will  not  bear,  and  will  meddle  to  his  hurt  with 
what   is   given  to  the  new  man;    and  God  will  deal 
morally ;  He  will  not  give  His  power  (unless  as  some 
particular  exceptional  exhibition  to  show  it  is  Himself) 
otherwise  than  morallv,  certaiidv  not  at  all  the  know- 
ledge  of  Himself,  and  it  is  of  that  we  are  speaking  now. 


311 

And  it  is  right  it  should  be  so :  "  Blessed  are  the  pure 
ID  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  If  any  man  will 
do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it 
be  of  God  or  whether  I  speak  of  myself.  And  is  it 
not  right  that  God  should  thus  deal  morally  with  man  { 
Is  He  to  give  intelligence  of  His  mind  tij  mere  human 
will  and  self-sufficiency  ?  He  presents  it  in  the  Word 
as  adapted  to  man,  to  every  one.  But  the  understand- 
ing of  its  contents  does  depend  on  moral  condition  of 
sold,  and  ought ;  though  it  may  work  by  grace  to  pro- 
duce that  condition.  But  that  the  rationalist  denies  as 
well  as  the  other.  I  affirm,  then,  that  as  Mr.  Jowett  is 
perfectly  right,  his  system  is  intelJectually  a  contra- 
diction and  an  absurdity ;  because  it  supposes  a  reve- 
lation of  Divine  thoughts  of  which  language  confessedly 
formed  on  other  thoughts  is  the  expression,  and  says  it 
is  to  be  understood  according  to  the  simple  apprehension 
of  the  hearei-s,  It  is  immoral,  because  it  supposes  the 
moral  condition  of  men  to  exercise  no  influence  in 
the  intelligence  of  Diviue  things. 

W.  But  yet  the  Lord  surely  made  things  plain,  or, 
rather,  presented  things  plaiidy  to  men. 

If.  Undoubtedly.  If  He  had  not,  it  would  not  have 
tested  man ;  being  plain,  it  condemns  him.  by  showing 
that  his  will  and  moral  condition  are  in  question — are 
the  real  hindrance.  Light  was  surely  in  the  world. 
Nothing  so  simple  as  light.  But  men  loved  darkness 
rather  than  light.  The  Lord  therefore  came  not  to 
judge,  but  in  judgment;  not  only  is  light,  but  gives  eyes 
to  one  born  Idijid ;  that  they  which  see  not  might  see, 
and  they  which  see  might  l>e  made  blind.  And  so  it  is 
now.  How  can  ye  lielieve  who  receive  honour  one  of 
another  ?  He  sowed  the  seed  in  the  heart.  Often  it 
was  by  the  wayside,  hard  as  the  nether  millstone — the 
highway  of  this  world's  folly  and  self-will ;  —  part  was 
choked  by  cares,  riches,  and  lusts ;  part  lost  by  self- 
deception.  Hence,  too,  we  have  what  stupid,  most 
stupid  rationalists  would  call  contradiction.  He  spoke 
to  them  in  parables  as  they  were  able  to  bear  it.     Yet 


312 


r 


hey  migli^^H 


He  spoke  to  them  in  parables,  that,  hearing,  they 
hear  and  not  [lerceive.  It  was  perfectly  suited 
in  grace ;  but.  to  a  nation  that  would  uot  the  truth,  so 
communicated,  that,  where  the  prejudice  (tf  ivill  was,  all 
should  be  dark.  Those  ^vho  had  judged  themselves, 
who  had  repented,  believed  and  glorilied  Ilim.  The 
Pharisees  rejected  the  coun.sel  of  God  ogaiast  them- 
selves, being  uot  baptized  of  John.  I  will  now  cite  the 
positive  testimony  of  the  Lord  to  this  jmnciple  of  having 
the  Divine  thought  in  order  t«  understand  the  Divine 
words.  "  Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  speech  ?  Even 
because  ye  cannot  hear  my  word."  So  in  Proverbs; 
It  is  all  simple  to  them  that  understand,  and  plain  to 
them  that  keep  knowledge.  How  the  Lord  shows  in 
John  iv.  that  conscience  is  the  inlet  to  intelligence  in 
Divine  things ;  and  thus  ■  the  heart  becomes  engaged. 
Rejected  and  di-iven  out  from  Judaea,  lie  sat  weary  on 
the  well  of  Sychar.  A  woman,  lonely  (it  was  not  the 
hoiu*  when  women  go  forth  to  draw  water)  and  weary 
with  sui,  evidently  a  strong  and  anient  nature  that  had 
sought  happiness  with  eager  jtursuit.  and  sank  through 
it  into  sin,  and  not  found  rest  to  her  spirit  (how  many 
such  are  there  in  the  world),  dragged  on  a  lite  of  toil, 
and,  in  the  midst  of  it,  thought  sometimes  on  Gerizim 
and  Jerusalem,  and  knew  there  was  a  Messiah  to  cume. 
There  might  be  hapiiiness  and  rest  somewhere ;  she  had 
none.  Toil  and  weariness  she  had,  and  the  last  evi- 
dently in  spirit  as  well  as  liody,  Jesus  had  toil  and 
weariness  too,  but  through  love,  not  through  sin,  save 
the  sin  of  others,  and  that  could  not  weary  love,  and  He 
knew  where  rest  was.  lie  was  it.  The  Son  of  God, 
the  Judge  of  all.  had.  humanly  speaking,  put  Himself  in 
a  position  where  He  was  debtor  to  this  woman  for  a 
drink  of  cold  water.  But  He  soon  draws  her  out ;  He 
speaks  of  the  gift  of  God,  of  a  well  of  water  springing 
up  into  everlasting  life.  All  was  dark  in  the  Sama- 
ritan woman's  mind.  She  moved  in  the  circle  of  her 
own  weariness:  that  she  felt,  the  fruit  of  her  sin  and 
toil  after  happiness.     And  with  all  the  morings  within^ 


that  i)redominate<l  and  tilled  her  mind,  for.  in  fact, 
had  she  else  ?  What  does  the  Lord  do  ?  "  Go  call  thy 
husband,  and  come  hither."  '■  I  have  no  hasband." 
"Thon  hast  well  said,"  replied  the  Lord,  "I  have  no 
husband :  thou  hast  had  five  husbands ;  and  he  whom 
thou  now  hast  is  not  tby  husband :  in  that  speakest  thou 
truly."  Now  a  ray  of  light  breaks  in.  "  Sir,  I  perceive 
thou  art  a  prophet."  The  word  of  God  by  the  Lord  has 
Divine  authority  in  her  heart,  because  it  has  reached 
her  conscience.  She  has  found  a  man  who  has  inld  her 
all  that  ever  she  did.  Whn  knew  that  ?  The  prophet's 
word  has  Divine  authority.  Yet  she  does  not  yet  get 
to  wells  of  water.  The  Divine  communications  made  to 
her  were  quite  unintelligible ;  but  much  was  done.  He 
who  knew  all  her  life,  all  her  sin,  had  been  sitting  in 
grace  by  her,  willing  to  l)e  helped  by  her,  Grace  was 
there  as  well  as  truth.  She  had  found  the  Christ;  and 
leaves  her  water-jwt  and  her  care  with  it,  and  I)ecomes 
a  messenger  of  that  which  is  good  news  for  all,  Gerizim 
and  Jerusalem  are  all  alike,  and  alike  nothing.  Tlie 
FuOurr  is  se.king  worshippers  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 
Now  liere  we  find  a  picture  of  the  opening  of  a  soul  to 
understanding,  and  die  reception  of  the  Divine  things. 
The  presenting  of  Divine  things  of  the  highest  character 
in  grace  does  not  do  it.  The  natural  heart  remains 
closed.  Even  when  there  are  moral  wants  and  cravings. 
Divine  things  are  not  understood  at  all.  God  makes 
His  way  through  the  conscience.  Then  the  word  is 
received.  At  the  moment,  the  heart  does  not  get  farther 
than  its  present  capacitj'.  Still  what  has  been  spoken  of 
has  been  spoken  of  for  it ;  and  grace  makes  all  its  own. 
Jesus  in  grace  has  been  with  it.  Oh,  what  a  difference — 
man's  specidations,  and  God  seeing  the  fields  white  for 
harvest!  The  Lord  refreshing  His  spirit  when  rejected 
by  the  pride  of  man,  not  with  the  water  of  the  well,  but 
with  love  finding  its  bliss  in  hearts  filled  with  wretchedness 
drinking  of  the  one  refreshing  well-spring  that  has  visited 
this  world.  He  had  meat  to  eat  His  disciples  knew 
not  of.  What  a  place  for  this  poor  Samaritan,  what  a 
X  2 


314 

place  for  us ;  to  refresh,  stupid  creatures  that  we  are — 
the  heart  of  Jesus,  because  lie  is  love.  Nothing  brighter, 
nothing  more  genuine,  than  the  effect  of  her  new-found 
joy,  which  makes  this  poor  woman  the  messenger  of 
God's  visiting  this  world  to  the  self-satisfied  inhabitants 
of  Sychar.     8he  was  just  the  one  that  suited  the  Lord. 

JV.  It  is  a  lovely  picture,  and  I  think  the  moral  ele- 
ments you  have  touched  justly  given ;  but  on  that  men  may 
differ.  We  see  thereby,  evidently,  how  the  estimate  of  the 
force  of  passages  depends  on  the  individual  spiritual  state. 

jET.  Of  course,  and  there  is  nothing  like  the  picture 
itself  here.  What  Mr.  Jowett  savs  is  true !  AH  ex- 
planations  mar.  They  are  only  the  expression  of  our 
feelings  and  moral  j)erc«ptions  of  that  which,  in  itself,  is 
complete  and  perfect.  But  remark  another  thing  here, 
showing  how  absurd  it  is  to  speak  of  just  the  simple 
meaning  to  the  hearer — that  is,. man  s  measure,  according 
to  the  words  used.  We  have  here  the  full  power  of 
eternal  life  as  in  one  who  drinks  of  the  water  Christ 
gives ;  the  whole  of  His  person  in  humiliation ;  who  it  is 
that  saith  to  thee  ''Give  me  to  drink;**  His  relationship 
to  sinners  ;  how  the  Divine  word  reaches  the  conscience ; 
the  passing  of  grace  out  of  ceremonial  Judaism,  where 
it  was  according  to  promise,  to  bring  mercy  to  the  vilest ; 
the  place  Jesus  takes  thus  as  rejected ;  His  human  estate 
as  weary  with  us,  not  having  where  to  lay  His  head,  yet 
giving  as  God;  the  substitution  of  worship  in  spirit 
and  truth  for  Jerusalem  or  Gerizira,  yet  salvation  of  the 
Jews;  the  revelation  of  the  Father  acting  in  grace, 
seeking  to  have  such  worshippers ;  the  total  change  in 
the  soul,  when  once  it  is  taken  possession  of  by  Christ, 
however  ignorant.  These,  which  I  only  recall  from  me- 
mory, are  all  directly  before  the  soul  in  this  short  but 
touching  interview.  How  much  more  who  can  say  ? 
The  mere  literal  facts,  read  as  any  other  history,  cannot 
bring  the  mind  at  all  into  the  apprehension  of  what  is 
here  spoken  of.  If  I  take  the  commonest  words,  as  Son 
— the  Son  of  God,  the  Son  of  the  Father,  a  mere  literal 
apprehension  affords  me  nothing,  or  error ;  or  the  Word 


.315 


made  flesli.     I  shall  be  told,  these  are  mysteries ;  but 
the  language  is  simiile,  and  what  1  am  showing  is  that, 
with  the  sin]|>lest  liiiiguage,  there  must  be  Divine  ap- 
prehensions ill  the  soul  to  understand  Scripture;  and 
that  understanding  it  as  Thucjilides  or  Sophocles  is  just 
simple  nonsense.     They  have  human  ideas,  and  are  i 
derstood  humanly.     If  there  are  Divine  ideas,  they  must 
be  iinderst<K«l  divinely.     Yet  1  have  only  human  lan- 
guage, and  hence  my  way  of  understanding  it  must  be 
dirterent ;  and,  1  nnist  add,  the  way  of  writing  it,  because 
the  way  of  thinking  it  miuit  be  different.     Whether  it   l 
be  by  inspiration  is  the  (juestion  we  have  to  come  to ; 
only  I  say  here,  that  to  give  Divine  ideas  with  certainty,    ' 
or  to  be  the  truth,  they  nmst  have  a  Divine  source,  a 
Divine  author.     Man's  ideas  about  God    were  utterly 
false  and  degraded  without  it.     Ilis  power  of  thought,  as 
such,  camiot  be  adequate  to  form  the  idea,  or  clothe  it  iu 
language,  so   as  to  lie  a  communication  of  truth,  aa 
authentic  revelation  of  God's  mind.     I  conclude  that  as 
to  the  general  principle  of  interpretation  proposed  by 
Mr.  Jowett,  he  c<mtradicts  himself  in  the  first  place,  and 
happily  so ;  next,  the  system  is  intellectually  an  absur- 
dity ;  thinily,  that  it  Is  contradictory  to  the  facts  of  the 
case :  and,  fourthly,  the  Lord  Himself,  as  do  His  Apostles, 
assure  us  that  it  is  not  true.     The  ideas  and  subjects  of    ^^ 
Scripture  being  Divine,  and  language  hirnian,  formed  by  ^^| 
human  ideas,  to  understand  it  simply  as  it  is  expressed  ^^M 
by  a  human  interpretation  of  the  words,  is  a  manifest    ^^ 
contradiction  and  absurdity.     Let  us  get  the  best  text  to 
have  what  is  to  be  interpreted,  and  be  relieved  from  tradi- 
tional glosses ;  let  us  have  the  most  accurate  knowledge 
of  Hebrew  and  Greek  at  our  command :  all  this  is  every 
way  to  be  desired.    But,  when  you  have  all,  in  the  nature 
of  things  the  text  cannot  be  interjireted  as  the  words    ^_ 
wouM  strike  the  hearer  who  sttK>d  as  a  natural    maa  ^^M 
with  human  thoughts.  I   may  Ixildly  say,  in  any  case  ^^M 
whatever.      For  what  is  WTong  in  principle   is    wrong    ^^ 
always.     When   God  is  in  the  world.  His  ways   and      "^ 
actions  have,  and  must  have,  a  meaning  whick  *  \fis 


316 

man's  cannot  have,  because  He  is  God.  If  a  Jew  had 
ridden  into  Jerusalem  on  an  ass,  what  would  it  have  been? 
Nothing.  If  the  Lord  did  ?  In  one  sense,  the  history 
of  the  world  turned  on  it  as  a  last  public  testimony.  It 
was  a  moment  which  made  the  Lord  weep,  and  God 
perfect  praise  out  of  the  mouths  of  bates  and  sucklings, 
to  still  the  enemy  and  the  avenger.  Had  these  held 
their  peace,  the  stones  would  have  immediately  cried 
out.  I  cannot  conceive  anything  more  absurd  than  the 
thought  that  the  works  or  the  words  of  the  Lord  in  the 
earth  are  to  be  taken  just  as  another's  words,  and  so 
understood.  They  cannot,  for  He  says  things  none  else 
could  say,  and  does  what  none  else  could  do ;  but  were 
they  the  same,  the  bearing  would  be  quite  different. 
Does  Mr.  Jowett  believe  that  the  Lord  was  in  the  world, 
or  that  the  Word  of  God  is  a  revelation  at  all  ?  or,  if  he 
does,  have  they  no  more  weight  or  bearing  than  another's, 
supposing  he  has  the  text  and  grammar  all  clear  ?  He 
has  told  us  he  does,  and  told  us  he  does  not.  If  his  heart 
is  cleft  in  twain,  may  he  throw  away  the  worser  part  of  it. 
IV.  I  do  feel  what  a  solemn  question  it  all  is.  Your 
reference  to  John  iv.,  though  so  brief,  again  led  the  heart 
back  to  these  fresh  springs  which  make  one  taste  that 
one  is  in  a  region  that  nothing  else  is  like.  It  is  a  folly, 
a  horror,  a  senselessness  no  term  can  reach,  to  compare 
the  movings  and  speakings  of  a  God  walking  in  love  in 
this  world,  wth  the  waitings  and  actings  of  other  men. 
If  they  were  such,  He  was  not  that  at  all;  and  I 
thoroughly  agree  Avith  you,  that  no  human  language, 
taken  in  its  ordinary  terms  as  expressing  ordinary  things, 
can  express  that.  The  statement  contradicts  itself.  It 
is  still  a  question.  Is  there  a  revelation  ?  JTas  God  re- 
vealed Himself  or  not?  Let  the  language  be  made 
grammatically  clear,  of  course.  It  is  the  vehicle  God 
has  been  pleased  to  use,  and  as  a  vehicle  I  employ  it. 
But  when  you  come  to  the  meaning,  the  interpretaticm, 
we  enter  on  a  Divine  order  of  thought,  and  must  be  in 
it  oiu'selves .  to  understand.  Here  we  are  dependent  on 
God,  as  in  everything  else. 


317 

H.  Surely  ;  and  hence  it  is  that,  though  they  may  be 
bad  commentators,  of  course,  as  to  the  text,  the  poor  and 
unlearned,  who  ai'e  really  exercised  in  conscience  and  in 
Dinne  tnith,  understand  the  truth  better,  as  to  the  sub- 
stance of  it.  than  the  learned  man,  "  who  leans  to  his 
own  understanding ;"  because  they  have  personally  learnt 
where  the  connection  between  an  exercised  soul  and  God 
is  formed — they  have  learnt  it  by  their  spiritiuil  wants ; 
and  f'hrist  is  that  connection,  and  the  mind  of  Christ  is 
in  the  Scripture,  and  thus  they  have  the  key  to  it.  If 
they  pretend  Uy  interpret  texts,  they  may  very  likely  go 
astray  ;  but  as  to  the  doctrine  of  Scripture,  their  faith  ia 
clear  and  sure.  No  exercise  of  human  understanding 
can  give  that ;  no  chemist,  even  if  his  analysis  be  right, 
knows  what  water  is  like  a  man  who  is  ready  to  die  of 
thirst. 

I  conclude,  therefore,  as  to  the  general  principle  of 
Mr.  Jowett.  and  especially  as  to  the  first  part,  that  he  is 
fundamentally  WTong.  "  The  true  glory  and  note  of 
divinity  in  these  latter,"  he  says — {Jewish  and  Christian 
Scriptures) — **  l:)eing,  not  that  they  have  hidden,  myste- 
rious, or  double  meanings,  but  a  simple  and  imiversal 
fine."  Now  I  took  for  neither  mysticism  nor  logic;  I 
reject  them,  as  such.  both.  When  Mr.  Jowett  speaks 
of  double  meanings,  if  he  means  that  two  distinct  mean- 
ings of  the  words  are  to  be  taken — "  good  meanings,"  as 
thefjlogians  used  to  say — it  is  at  once  to  be  rejected ; 
but  if  he  confines  the  meaning  of  the  Scriptures  to  the 
narrowness  of  human  worduig  and  thought,  bis  principle 
is  false.  In  the  communication  of  Di\'ine  thoughts  in 
human  language,  the  l>eariug  of  the  sentences,  from  the 
richness  of  the  truths  in  them,  is  various.  If  I  say 
"  God  is  a  Spirit ;  an<l  they  that  worship  Him  must  wor- 
ship Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  for  the  Father  seeketh 
such  to  worship  Him  ;"  I  may  justly  t,ike  up  the  contrast 
with  Jerusalem  and  Gerizim.  and  the  whole  question  of 
God's  dispensations ;  or  I  may  justly  take  up  God's 
being  a  Spirit,  which  in  the  nature  of  tJiii 
spiritual  worship.     It  must  l>e  su- 


318 

the  diflference  between  God  in  his  nature  requiring  such, 
and  the  Father,  as  a  name  of  grace  and  relationship, 
seeking  such ;  and  how  now,  in  this  double  name.  He 
gave  His  character  to  all  approach  to  Him;  as  the 
Lord  said,  "  I  go  to  my  Father  and  your  Father,  and 
my  God  and  your  God;"  and,  in  the  Ephesiaas,  "The 
God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  blessed 
us  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in 
Christ." 

I  add,  as  Mr.  Jowett  complains  of  connecting  passages 
by  some  hidden  connection,  that  when  I  find,  "  Come 
out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch 
not  the  unclean  thing,  and  I  will  receive  you,  and  ye 
shall    be    my    sons    and    daughters,    saith   the   Lord 
Almighty,"  I  may  insist  on  the  need  of  separation  from 
an  imgodly  world  and  evil,  in  order  to  be  in  relationship 
with  God ;  or  I  may  note  that  there  are  three  Scriptural 
relationships  with  God :  two  expressly  noted  and  distin- 
guished in  the  Old  Testament — Almighty,  and  Lord  or 
Jehovah ;  the  first  to  Abraham,  the  second  to  Israel  and 
Moses ;  and  that  He  who  bore  them  both  takes  here  that 
of  the  Father.    Now  all  these  are  not  double  senses,  but 
Divine  truths,  coming  from  an  everlasting  source ;  and 
being  the  expression  of  it,  and  of  Him  who,  in  hifinite 
richness  of  being  and  character,  must  he  in  relationship 
with  all  things — above  all,  through  all,  and  in  all  be- 
lievers ;  and  the  statement  of  these  tniths  must  carry 
all  that  God  is  as  spoken  of  in  the  statement,  or  dis- 
played in  the  acts  contained  in  the  passage.     Of  course, 
all  passages  are  not  alike  full.     It  is  not  logical  conclu- 
sions, which  are  not  in  the  passage,  which  I  find  or  seek  ; 
nor  mystic  inventions,  which  are  not  there  either ;  but 
the  mind  of  God,  found  in  it,  that  I  look  for.     To  say 
that  that  is  not  mysterious,  is,  as  to  many  passages, 
begging  Mr.  Jowett's  pardon,  absurd.    A  religion  which 
depends  on  the  Word  being  made  flesh,  and  the  Son  of 
Man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  sending  dovm 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  make  our  bodies  temples ;  which  tells 
us  that  we  are  members  of  Christ's  body,  of  His  flesh 


319 


and  ^H 


and  of  His  Ixines;  which  shows  Gofl  bectmie  a  man, 
obedient  as  such,  and  dying  as  such,  and  other  truths  I 
need  not  enlarge  upon,  must  l)e  mysterious  in  the  true 
sense  of  the  word,  and,  indeed,  in  ever)'  sense.  I  do  not 
know  if  Mr.  Jowett  denies  all  these  things.  "Uliat 
angels  desire  to  look  into  can  well  lie  supjjosed  to  lie  so. 
Christ  made  sin;  our  dwelling  in  God,  and  God  in  us; 
our  Ijeing,  in  this  world,  as  Christ  is,  so  as  to  have  bold- 
ness iu  the  day  of  judgment;  the  miraculous  birth  of 
Christ;  all  speak  with  one  voice.  He  who  excludes 
mysteries  from  the  Wfird,  excludes  sense  from  it,  instead 
of  making  it  intelligible.  I  do  not  mean  by  mysterious 
that  it  cannot  l>e  understood.  The  Scripture  meaning 
of  mystery  is.  that  known  only  by  revelation,  not  by 
human  knowledge.  The  initiated  know  mysteries,  the 
uninitiated  not — that  is  the  meaning  of  the  word ;  but 
the  tnie  initiated  are  those  taught  of  God.  If  God  re- 
veals, there  must  be  mysteries ;  and,  from  the  nature  of 
what  He  reveals,  true  initiation  nnist  exist  to  understand 
it.  Its  expression  cannot  be  at  the  level  of  human 
ideas.  All  the  deepest  expressions  of  good  and  evil  are 
brought  together.  God  and  sin  meet  in  the  cross. 
Christ  is  God,  and  is  forsaken  of  God.  Christ  is  the 
power  and  Prince  of  Tife.  ami  He  dies ;  bnt  through 
this  destroys  the  power  of  death.  You  cannot  have^ 
such  things  brought  together  in  the  same  act  ^vithouti 
mysterious  truth.  When  all  that  is  [lerfectly  good  ia 
God  and  evil  in  man  meet,  and  are  centred  indeed  in 
one  person,  or  the  condition  he  takes,  the  hiiman  mind 
must  be  taught  of  God  to  know  it;  and  God  alone, 
who  knows  all  things  perfectly,  can  reveal  it  simply, 
because  He  does  know  perfectly  ;  but  He  reveals  all  in 
man,  all  in  Himself,  and  all  iu  Christ  in  it.  I  know,  as 
one  may  see  in  Mr.  Jowett's  Commentary,  a  periiott 
may  rest  on  the  surface,  and  seek  to  destroy  all  dc]>th  in 
them,  and  bend  them  to  the  standard  of  the  human 
mind  and  scope  of  human  thought.  But  I  do  not  see 
any  great  sense  iu  this;  that  such  a  fact  a&  God 
becoming  a  man  should  not  supiiose  immense  de^tbC'- 


\ 


320 

thought,  purpose,  and  moral  truth,  and  reveal  them.  If 
Mr.  Jowett  denies  all  this,  then  I  get  simple  infidelity. 
I  know  what  I  have  to  deal  with.  If  not,  1  have  a 
Christianity  in  which  the  depth  of  my  moral  nature,  old 
and  new,  and  in  the  exercises  and  conflicts  of  both, 
meet  God  where  He  and  sin  have  met,  and  Christ  in 
the  consummation  of  ages  is  come  to  put  it  away.  And 
perfect  love  and  Divine  righteousness  find  their  mani- 
festations and  ground.  The  simplest  expressions  of 
Scripture  awake  profound  depths  in  our  moral  nature. 
What  does  putting  away  sin  mean  ?  What  Christ  the 
Son  of  God  appearing  to  do  it  ?  What  does  the  Lamb 
of  God  mean  ?  It  is  easy  for  philosophers  to  avoid  all 
these  expressions,  and  make  a  Christianity  of  their  own. 
Only  it  is  in  no  part  the  Christianity  that  is  revealed  or 
known  in  the  world.  But  interpreting  the  Christianity 
that  was  revealed  in  Scripture,  and  has  possessed  men's 
minds  for  ages,  by  saying  that  the  true  Divine  in  it  is 
not  having  mysteries,  is  false  in  fact,  and  absurd  in  idea. 
Mr.  Jowett  gives  pages  on  conversion  and  change  of 
character  to  excuse  and  suppose  it  possible,  at  least  in 
uneducated  persons!  And — what  I  trust  shows  that 
he  may  have  tasted  it,  but  shows  how  ashamed  he  is  of 
owning  it  before  educated  persons — excuses  it  thus :  '*  It 
was  the  quiet  fancy  of  a  sentimentalist  to  ask  whether 
any  one  who  remembers  the  first  sight  of  a  beloved 
person  could  doubt  the  existence  of  magic.  We  may 
ask  another  question :  Can  any  one  who  has  ever  known 
the  love  of  Christ  doubt  the  existence  of  a  spiritual 
power?"  I  hope  from  this  it  is  true  in  the  writer's 
case ;  but  it  is  very  low  ground  to  take  in  speaking  of 
the  dying  and  living  love  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  may 
suit  an  Oxford  theologian  seeking  to  emancipate  himself 
from  the  trammels  of  conventional  doctrines  and  creeds. 
A  serious  Christian  hopes  for  the  writer,  and  passes 
over  an  expression  of  the  truth  so  unworthy  of  one  who 
has  felt  it. 

I  would  add  a  few  words  on  the  contrast  between 
double  meanings  of  prophecy  in  general,  and  the  appli- 


L  ap 

L  dc 

L 


321 

catioD  of  the  simple  meaning  of  the  words  as  a  hearer 
would  understand  them  with  one  meaning,  'llie  idea  is 
entirely  false.  Mr.  Jowett  admits,  "They  must  speak 
as  fi'om  one  with  whom  a  thtmsand  years  is  as  one  day, 
and  one  day  as  a  thousand  years ;  but."  he  says,  "  not  so 
as  to  connect  distinct  aud  distant  objects."  Now  I  thyik 
this  also  unphilosophical.  contradicted  by  the  facts  and 
statements  of  Scriptm-e,  and  untrue.  If  the  prophecies 
are  to  be  interpreted  as  the  words  of  one  with  whom  "  a 
thousand  years  are  as  one  day,"  as  Mr.  Jowett  says,  it  is 
impossible  uot  to  see  that  the  bearing  of  these  words 
mu.st  be  something  of  larger,  wider  import  than  the  cir- 
cumstance.s  of  the  moment,  and  must  reach  on  to  epochs 
wliere  the  thoughts  and  words  of  such  an  one  will  be  ful- 
filled. In  this  day  of  a  thousand  years,  all  in  man's 
hand  changes,  shifts,  is  subverted ;  new  things  are  set  up, 
new  interests  created.  If  the  Word  of  one  Divine  day 
can  reach  over  to  the  end  of  it,  it  nmst  be  occupied  with 
a  plan  that  runs  through  it  all,  through  all  these  human 
changes,  which  are  but  the  risings  and  fallings  of  a 
tumultuous  sea.  where  the  equal  tide  below  the  surface 
pursues  its  constant  course.  There  is  a  Di^-ine  plan  above 
and  l)eyond  all  the  local  circumstances.  As  Peter  says. 
'  no  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  of  any  private  interpretation," 
does  not  solve  itself  in  the  individual  drcumstauces 
which  occasion  it,  but  enters  int<i  the  great  plan  of  God. 
Yet.  in  the  love  of  Ciod,  we  may  say  they  must  coimect 
themselves  with  those  to  whom  they  are  addressed.  I 
doubt  not.  therefore,  that  the  prophecies  were  often  occa- 
sioned by  present  circmnstances,  and  ecnntbrt  given  to 
saints  at  the  time  by  them;  but  to  say  they  did  not  look 
out  to  a  future  of  blessing  to  Israel,  of  the  final  setting 
aside  of  the  power  of  oril.  of  the  coming  in  of  a  great 
promised  deliverer,  is  to  fail  in  recognizing  the  most 
pb^-ious  fact  in  all  prophecy.  Jews,  and  rationalist  infi- 
dels who  tliink  that  the  prophets  were  national  poets, 
apply  it,  no  doubt,  to  Israel ;  and  if  we  are  to  listen  to  the 
dull  rhapsodies  of  Drs.  Bunsen  and  Williams,  Jeremiah 
the  sufferer:  but  Mr.  Jowett  is  not  yet  there.     lie 


1 


322 

o\^Tis  God  has  something  to  do  with  Scripture,  and  we 
will  not  return  to  these  foolish  and  stupid  imaginations. 
Take  Joel.  There  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  a  famine 
through  locusts  and  insect  ravages  is  the  occasion  referred 
to.  But  do  you  or  I  believe,  or  any  reasonable  person, 
to  say  no  more,  that  lie  whose  words  are  to  be  inter- 
preted as  the  words  of  one  with  whom  a  thousand  years 
are  as  one  day,  has  written  a  book  for  all  ages  to  deter- 
mine the  result  at  that  time  of  an  inroad  of  caterpillars, 
the  effect  of  whose  ravages,  however  trying,  would  dis- 
appear in  a  few  years  ?  Could  any  one  read  the  book 
and  not  see  that  God*s  present  judgments  and  mercies 
are  made  the  occasion  of  drawing  the  attention  of  Israel 
to  their  state,  and  lead  the  awakened  conscience  to  God's 
judgment  of  evil,  and  full  deliverance  for  those  who 
repented  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  when 
the  people  should  never  be  ashamed,  the  Spirit  poured 
out  on  all  flesh,  and  Judah  dwell  for  ever,  and  every 
temporal  blessing  be  theirs ;  and,  finally,  the  harvest  and 
vintage  of  the  whole  earth  be  reaped  and  trodden — God 
dwelling  there  in  Zion  ?  The  famine  connected  the  pre- 
sent circumstances  with  this  promise  of  plenty  and  bless- 
ing, but  no  one  can  but  see  that  the  prophet  is  rapt 
into  future  times.  Now,  if  this  is  meant  by  a  double 
meaning,  it  is  true.  That  is,  that  the  Lord  does  give 
what  is  a  present  comfort,  yet  clothes  it  in  language 
which  leads  on  to  Ilis  ultimate  plans,  so  as  to  keep  the 
godly  hope  of  Ilis  people  up,  and  often  passes  entirely 
into  that  with  which  the  j)resent  is  not  linked  at  all. 
The  point  of  transition  may  l)e  sometimes  obscure.  But 
the  general  principle  is  undeniable,  and  such  a  character 
of  prophecy  worthy  of  God,  and  indeed  alone  worthy  of 
Him.  In  Jeremiah  and  in  Isaiah  it  is  in  vain  to  deny 
that,  with  encouragement  suited  to  the  occasion,  the 
prophet  refers  to  the  coming  of  Messiah,  and  a  time  of 
unparalleled  and  continued  blessing.  It  is  incredible  to 
suppose  that  God  had  not  Ilis  own  plans  in  view,  and 
the  great  result  of  His  government  of  the  world  when 
man  had  been  fully  tried  on  tlie  ground  of  responsibility. 


I  nrid 


W.  I  must  say  I  think  jninciple  and  fiict  coueur  to 
prove  this.  I  mean  that  God  held  out  the  hope  of  a 
great  coming  dejiverance  and  blessiug,  whatever  mo- 
mentarj  encouragement  Re  might  give;  and  that  this 
time  in  which  Uis  plans  would  be  accomplished  must 
be  mainly  in  ricw^iJiongfa  present  circumstances  would 
draw  the  prophet's  attrition,  and  give  rise  to  exhoi-ta- 
tion  and  warning.  And  we  must  not  forget  that  in 
fact  Israel  was  waiting  for  this  time,  and  that  in  all  the 
East,  as  Tacitus  tells  us.  the  es]>ectation  prevailed. 

H.  Nor  is  this  all.  Almost  the  earliest  pmphety 
{lialaani's,  which  reaches  to  the  Star  of  Jacob,  was 
earlier)  declares  that  the  order  of  the  world  was  all 
arranged  io  respect  of  Israel  (Deut.  xxxii.  S).  And 
further,  that  Israel  would  be  given  up  into  the  hands  of 
their  enemies,  aud  afterwards  restored,  and  the  Gentiles 
associated  with  them,  through  overwhelming  judgments, 
when  '•  God  shall  arise  to  judgment,  and  to  help  all  the 
meek  of  the  earth." 

Isaiah  (vi.)  shows  us  Israel  given  up  too.  and  for  a 
long  [teriod,  and  yet  preser^-ed  in  a  remnant ;  and  the 
rejection  of  Ilim  (1.)  who  found  none  to  answer  when 
lie  came  and  called,  as  the  cause  of  their  being  laid 
aside.  Yet  this  followed  by  the  fullest  jiromise  of 
restoration  and  glory.  So  Ilosca  declares  they  t-hall 
reinaiu  many  days  desolate,  without  true  God  or  false, 
but  seek  Jehovah  their  God,  and  IJavid  their  king,  at 
the  end.  So  Micah  declares  they  will  insult  and  reject 
the  Judge  of  Israel  born  at  Bethlehem,  and  therefore 
be  given  up ;  but  that  this  same  man  will  lie  their 
pea<?e.  And  again,  the  largest  and  ftillast  blessing  is 
promised  to  a  remnant  through  Ilim.  while  judgment 
will  be  executed  on  tlie  nations,  who  yet  will  be  blessed 
as  by  the  dew  from  heaven  which  tarries  not  fcr  men. 
Now.  mv  object  is  not  to  explain,  of  course,  here  all 
pi-ophecy.  but  to  note  that  there  was  a  reference  tn  a 
great  scheme  or  plan,  such  as  must  I)e  in  God's  mind, 
though  He  may  encourage  and  comfort  at  the  time; 
and  nut  only  so,  itut  that  there  was  something  more 


324 

specific —<a  giving  up  Israel,  the  beloved  people,  for  a 
time  (during  which  God  would  be  found  of  them  that 
sought  Him  not) ;  that  that,  whatever  other  sins  they 
had,  was  caused  by  their  rejection  of  Jehovah  coming 
as  a  man  in  mercy ;  that  this  caused  their  divorce  from 
Him ;  and  that  then  a  long  imdefined  interval  would 
elapse,  and  blessing  afterward  arrive,  but  introduced  by 
judgments — the  Lord  pleading  with   all   flesh.      This 
gives  a  uniform  plan,   declared  in  statements  verified 
before  our  eyes  in  the  state  of  the  Jews  consequent  on 
Christ's  coming.     This  necessarily  threw  on  the  appli- 
cation of  Scripture  projihecy  to  the  end,  when  alone  the 
plans  of  God  Avould  have  their  decided  and  full  result, 
evil  be  set  aside,  and  the  earth  blessed  under  Messiah. 
This   principle  the   New   Testament   confirms    (Matt. 
xxiii.  39 ;  Rom.  xi.  25,  26)  ;  and  other  passages.     We 
find  the  Old  testif\ang  in  one  entire  passage,  of  one 
coming  in  grace  and  gentleness,  and  then  judgment. 
The  New  cjuotes  what  relates  to  the  grace,  and  stops 
short   of  the  judgment.      Thus,    Luke   iv.    19,   from 
Isaiah  Ixi.  1 .     So  JNIatt.  xxi.  5,  from  Zech.  ix.  9.     The 
New  Testament  leads  us  itself  to  the  same  point.  Thus, 
Matt.  X. :  "  Ye  shall  not  have  gone  over  the  cities  of 
Israel  till  the  Son  of  Man  be  come."     Now,  He  was 
there;  but  there  was  a  presenting  of  Him  to  human 
responsibility,  and  l)ringing  II im  in  in  power.     So  the 
Lord  personally  tells  them  they  should  not  see  Him  till 
they  said,  Blessed  1)0  lie  that  cometh.     Till  then  their 
house  should  bo  desolate.     I  refer  to  these  to  show  that 
Scripture  constantly  refers  to  a  Divine  accomplishment 
of  a  plan  to  be  fulfilled,  which  seemed  at  first  to  fail — 
a  failure  which  was  the  occasion  of  bringing  in  the 
Church  on  quite  different  principles,  the  mystery  hidden 
from  ages  and  generations,  Israel  being  set  aside.   Even 
the  Epistles  follow  the  same  order.     The  quotation  of 
Ps.  Ixviii.  in  Eph.  iv.  goes  only  so  far  as  it  does  not 
apply  distinctly  to  Israel.     Finally,  I  take  up  Daniel, 
and  I  find  a  declaration  of  a  period  appointed  to  Jeru- 
salem for  God  to  bring  in  righteousness  and  blessing — 


the  famous  period  of  seventy  weeks ;  but  when  this 
is  entered  on  in  detail,  we  have  seven  weeks  of  trial  to 
build  the  city,  then  sixty-two  weeks  to  Messiah  the 
Prince,  who  is  cut  ort',  and  takes  nothing  (for  that  is 
the  true  sense  of  the  words ;  not,  "  and  not  for  Him- 
self'). Then  comes  a  long  undated  period  of  war  and 
desolation.  And  when  is  the  promise  of  the  preceding 
verses  supposed  by  the  prophecy  to  Imj  fulfilled  ?  It 
must  come  after  the  end  of  the  war ;  till  then  there  are 
desolations — the  city  and  sanctuary  l>eing  destroyed 
already.  It  is  put  oft'  for  an  unknown  length  of  time, 
and  the  unfinished  period  of  seventy  weeks  gets  its  con- 
clusion at  the  end.  That  is  the  unequivocal  structure 
of  the  prophecy.  (Daniel  never  goes  on  to  the  blessing 
beyond  the  times  of  the  Gentles.)  That  is,  the  prophets 
suppose  a  rejection  of  Israel  for  a  long  jjeriod,  the 
cutting  oft'  of  Messiah,  and  afterwanls  tlie  bringing  iu 
of  full  blessing  through  Him.  I  am  not  now  saving 
tlicy  are  real  ])rophecies  to  be  fulfilled ;  nor,  as  to  this 
poin^  does  it  alter  the  case,  absurd  as  the  theory  is, 
if  Daniel  wrote  in  the  days  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes. 
My  assertion  is,  that  the  pro|>hets  have  a  scheme  of  this 
kind, — an  api>earing  of  grace,  as  Christianity  expresses 
it,  teaching  us  to  wait  for  the  apjiearing  of  the  glory — 
a  putting  off'  to  a  remote  period  of  earthly  blessing,  intro- 
duced by  Messiah  and  judgments,  the  accomplishment 
of  these  prophecies,  and  of  the  Itlessiug  of  Tsrael ; 
Messiah  being  rejected  meanwhile  by  Israel,  and  Israel 
therefore  given  up.  But,  whatever  particular  warnings 
and  consolations  there  may  have  lieen,  this  shows  that, 
while  addressed  to  these  generations,  and  often  occa- 
sioned by  their  circumstances,  prophecy  always  looked 
out  farther  in  its  true  scojic.  I  am  speaking  of  its 
plan,  not  of  its  accomplishment.  He  who  would 
interpret  it  with  that  kind  of  simplicity  which  would 
leave  this  out,  leaves  all  the  clearly  demonstrable  inten- 
tion of  its  Author  out,  and  that  is  a  bad  way  of  inter- 
preting. 

W.  I  seize  clearly  the  purport  of  what  you  say.  and 


326 

it  binds  the  whole  together,  from  the  Pentateuch  to 
Revelation,  and  brings  in  the  New  Testament  into 
its  place  in  the  organization  of  the  whole.  I  feel  that 
if  God  gives  a  revelation,  and  that,  as  entering  into  the 
wants  of  His  people  as  Scripture  professes  to  do,  He 
must  enter  into  local  circumstances,  and  present  events 
so  as  to  meet  these  wants;  and  vet  God  must  have 
a  plan  and  a  purpose.  And  Scripture  clearly  points 
out  that  He  has.  But  the  Church  seems  to  stand  on 
peculiar  ground. 

IL  Doubtless  it  does.  The  testimony  of  Paul  takes 
up  man  as  wholly  ruined  in  nature,  and  reveals  a  hea- 
venly man  and  a  new  creation;  and  associates  those 
called  during  the  rejection  of  the  true  heavenly  man 
with  Him  in  heaven;  so  that  they  are  heavenly.  He 
was  the  Lord  from  heaven.  They,  as  new  created,  have 
a  part  with  II  im,  and,  having  the  Spirit,  are  united  to 
Him,  and  become  His  bride  and  His  body,  are  joint- 
heirs  with  Him  the  first-born  among  many  brethren. 
But  the  current  of  promise  runs  on  too  in  connection 
with  the  original  promise  to  Abraham.  The  Jewish 
branches  were  broken  ott*;  and  we  grafted  in ;  but  the 
chain  of  promise  was  unbroken,  though  there  are  bless- 
ings above  promise  in  the  mystery  of  union  with  Christ. 
Thus  the  Church  is  associated  with  Him  for  ever. 

W,  And  when  the  l^lessing  comes  in  ? 

H,  She  will  joy  and  minister  in  it  as  thus  imited  to 
Him  and  joint-heir  with  Him,  and  blessedly  so,  though 
her  highest  joy  l)e  Himself. 

W,  Where  is  this  at  all  drawn  out  of  Scripture  ? 

H,  The  bringing  as  children  into  the  inheritance, 
and  the  tree  of  promise,  in  Rom.  viii.  and  xi. ;  the  rela- 
tionship with  our  God  and  Father,  and  all  His  counsels 
in  Christ,  in  Ephesians,  specially  chap.  i.  Our  having 
personally  all  wth  Christ  is  still  more  brought  out  in 
the  last  chapters  of  John  s  Gospel.  It  is  this  testimony 
of  a  second  Adam,  a  last  man,  which  alone  gives  its  true 
Divinely  moral  character  to  the  New  Testament,  and 
gives  the  just  sense  of  the  real  bearing  of  Christianity 


327 


for  us,  animating   nith    a  heavenly  energy,  and 
l>rinting  a  heavenly  character  on  our  whole  position. 

W.  The  Gospel  then  comes  in,  in  its  full  character,  in 
a  suspension  of  the  regular  course  of  pro|>hetic  promise 

T{.  Exactly,  And  the  Jews  are  ol>liged  to  come  in, 
in  more  mercy,  as  a  Gentile.  Yet  all  promise  will  Iw 
t'LiltiUed  to  them.  This  it  is  that  makes  the  Apostle 
a<lore  the  depths  of  the  riches  of  God's  wisdom.  The 
promises  meanwhile  run  on ;  yet  a  heavenly  people  is 
ibi-med.  All  in  heaven  and  earth  is  to  be  gathered  up 
into  one  head  in  Christ.  Jiesides  individual  salvation 
and  blessing,  there  are  two  great  topics  in  .Scriptui-e — 
God's  government  of  the  world,  and  the  Church.  In 
Christ  both  find  their  Head,  He  will  rule  over  all, 
Israel  being  the  earthly  centre,  while  the  Church  is 
united  to  Uim.  Meanwhile,  as  lie  has  perfectly  re- 
vealed God  and  the  Father,  we  are  lirought  into  full 
personal  relationship  with  what  God  is  in  Himself,  and 
as  children,  or  sons  with  a  Fathei',  a  relationship  of 
which  lie  Himself  is  the  pattern  as  man,  His  redemp- 
tion work  being  the  basis  of  all,  in  the  power  of  which 
He  fills  all  things. 

W.  It  does  give  a  Divine  completeness  to  the  reve- 
lation of  the  mind  of  God,  which  is  full  of  Interest 
though  M'e  see  but  corners  of  it ;  yet  corners  of  a  whole 
worthy  of  God.  The  time  will  come  when  we  shall 
know  as  we  are  known,  and,  better  still,  enjoy  God 
Himself  fully. 

-ff.  That  is  indeed  our  one  chief  joy,  thoagh  we  shall 
admire  Him  in  all  His  jilans  and  ways.  'lue  place  of 
Christ  is  lovely,  too,  in  this.  The  glory  of  God 
enlightens  the  heavenly  city.  But  such  a  bright  blaze 
of  glory,  though  needed  to  know  Him,  has  nothmg 
personal  in  it.  It  dazzles  more  than  it  concentrates  the 
affections ;  but  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof  Here 
the  heart  finds  its  home  and  centre.  Gne  known,  one 
who  has  loved  us.  one  who  is  divinely  at  home  there, 
and  the  very  light  of  that  glory ;  but  has  never  lost  the 
character  in  which  He  has  served  us  in  the  depths  of 


I 


328 

love.  For  where  love  is  active  it  serves.  But  I  turn 
to  another  point  of  the  prophetic  revelation  of  God 
before  we  leave  this  part  of  our  inquiry.  We  have 
accepted  interpreting  prophecy  as  the  words  of  One  w  ith 
whom  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day.  But,  if  this  be 
so,  then  there  is  one  author  really  of  the  whole,  though 
divers  instruments ;  and,  though  surely  adapting  His 
words  in  grace  by  those  instruments  to  various  circum- 
stances that  arise,  as  grace  would  do,  yet,  I  must  find 
one  mind  as  to  the  substance  and  purpose  of  the  whole. 
And,  though  interpreting  each  part  simply,  and  just  as  I 
find  it,  as  to  the  dii-ect  meaning  of  the  passages  (which 
I  think  very  important  myself ),  taking  what  a  prophecy 
says  as  it  says  it,  yet  the  one  mind  from  which  all 
flows  and  which  runs  through  all,  I  shall  surely  find, 
and  do  find;  and  consequently  (not  a  similarity  or  a 
copying)  but  a  fitting  of  each  part  into  the  whole,  and 
into  its  own  place  in  the  whole,  each  part  being  suited 
for  that  very  reason,  to  its  own  object  and  part  in  that 
whole;  and  thus,  secondly,  a  connection,  not  imme- 
diate, but,  through  the  whole,  of  each  with  every  other 
part.  As  the  members  of  the  body  different  entirely  in 
service,  yet  serve  the  whole,  and  serve  each  other.  I 
get  Jews,  Gentiles,  Israel,  Messiah,  their  history  deve- 
loped in  multifarious  ways ;  but  all  treated  by  one  mind 
to  whom  all  belong,  history  bringing  out  the  thoughts 
of  that  one  mind  by  each  one,  in  the  sphere  they  belong 
to,  and  by  a  revealed  bearing  one  upon  another.  Law, 
the  opening  up  of  wider  thoughts  by  prophets,  obedient 
royalty,  punishment  of  evil,  absolute  Gentile  dominion, 
Messiah,  sacrifice,  endless  principles  brought  out  in 
germ,  death,  resurrection,  promises,  and  all  running  into 
one  another  in  one  great  scheme.  For  it  is  a  remark- 
able fact  that  Judaism  has  given  rise,  whatever  people 
think  of  it,  to  a  more  enlarged  unfolding  of  every  ques- 
tion as  to  good  and  evil,  and  man's  relationship  with 
God,  has  more  touched  all  the  springs  of  human  natui'e 
than  anything  that  ever  claimed  the  attention  of  the 
heart  of  man.     A  being  separate  from  good,  that  is, 


L 


from  God,  yet  capable  (by  grace)  of  it.  One  who  had 
a  will  of  his  own,  but  was  responsible;  who  had 
acquired  the  knowledge  of  gtjod  and  evil,  conscience — 
yet  was  under  the  power  of  e^-il :  who  had  been  made  in 
the  likeness  of  God,  Imt  had  set  up  to  be  independent 
and  do  without  Him.  Such  a  being  must  be  exercised 
in  this  way,  to  know  himself  and  be  restored  to  God, 

W.  When  you  say  Judaism,  do  you  not  think 
Christianity  does  so  ? 

H.  Every  restored  soul  must  in  principle  be  so  exer- 
cised ;  but  I  look  at  Christianity  itself  rather  as  the 
answer — the  divine  and  blessed  answer  to  all  the  ques- 
tions that  have  l>een  raised.  Thus  far  then.  W.,  of  the 
general  [trinciiiles  raised  by  Mr.  Jowett,  as  far  as  a 
conversation  of  the  kind  can  meet  them.  I  conclude  with 
him  that  we  must  intei-pret  prophecy,  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  the  words  of  One  with  whom  a  thousand  years  are 
as  one  day.  But  I  do  uot  think  he  has  wisely  weighed 
what  the  import  of  such  a  statement  is.  We  may  next 
follow  him  into  details  as  iJar  as  they  affect  the  principle. 

TF.  But,  before  you  go  on  to  these,  I  should  like  to 
ask  yon  a  question, 

H,  Well? 

W.  You  do  not,  I  am  sure,  receive  all  the  spiritu- 
alization.  as  it  is  called,  and  endless  applications  of 
Scripture  made  by  men's  minds.  I  thought  you  took 
prophetic  Scriptures  in  their  direct  and  plain  meaning. 

JT.  Surely,  I  do.  I  reject  entirely  this  mystiiying  of 
the  Old  Testament,  There  are  great  spiritual  principles 
and  truths  which  are  found,  and  must  be  found,  in  all 
that  divinely  unfolds  God's  relationships  with  men, 
God's  faithfulness.  His  mercy,  His  patient  goodness; 
man's  trust  and  integrity  of  heart,  his  humbleness,  the 
fear  of  God.  But  when  I  seek  the  meaning  of  a  pass- 
age. I  seek  simply  what  God  meant,  where  it  is  His 
testimony;  or  in  what  light  He  seeks  to  put  man's  con- 
duct, if  it  is  a  history  of  that,  or  what  ia  His  piu-pose, 
as  a  whole,  in  the  narration.  I  have  already  spoken  of 
the  difterenee  of  encouragement  or  warning  affiirded  at 
Y  2 


I 


r 


330 


ct  its  pla<i|^| 
ilished  in  t^^^ 


the  time,  and  its  passing  on  to  give  the  subject  its  _ 
in  the  genera]  purpose  of  God  to  be  accomplished  i 
fiiture  day.  What  I  object  to,  is  the  unintelligent,  and, 
if  you  please,  uuphilosophical,  irrational  way  nf  looking 
for  the  plain  meaning.  "  The  office  of  the  interpreter 
is  not  to  add  another  (interpretation),  but  t^;)  recover  the 
oiiginal  one."  Now  here  we  are  entirely  agreed,  but 
then,  it  is  added,  "  The  meaning,  that  is,  of  the  words 
as  they  struck  on  the  ears,  or  flashed  before  the  eyes  of 
those  who  first  heard  and  read  them."  I  affirm  this  to 
be  in  every  case  false,  if  the  fine  language  means  any- 
thing. I  have  already  refeiTed  to  the  soberer  expr« 
sion,  "  the  meaning  which  it  had  to  the  mind  of  t 
prophets  ...  or  to  the  hearer  or  reader."  Now,  if  ] 
am  reading  or  hearing  a  statement,  I  do  not  in  any  i 
look  to  the  effect  on  the  hearers.  That  may  be  a  casui 
help,  but  no  more.  If  I  seek  the  meaning,  I  mm 
seek  not  the  effect  on  others,  but  the  intention  of  the 
speaker  or  writer.  That  as  simply  a.s  you  please,  and 
nothing  else,  T  have  nothing  to  ilo  with  the  irapi-essions 
produced  on  hearers.  There  may  have  been  none,  <»r  a 
false  one,  according  to  previous  piejudices,  or  an  imper- 
fect impressiim ;  or  even  a  right  one  as  regards  them- 
selves, yet,  not  taking  in  the  full  scope  of  what  was 
said.  If  I  am  to  Irelieve  Scripture,  the  prophets  them- 
selves, so  far  from  receiving  a  first  impression  and 
abiding  by  it,  inquired  into  the  sense  of  their  own  pro- 
phecies, and  were  taught  of  God  that  they  referred,  in 
the  great  topics  connected  with  the  puqx)se  of  &>d  and 
deliverance,  to  after  times.  See  1  Pet.  i.  II,  12.  But 
it  is  surely  useless  to  reason,  to  prove  that  if  I  am 
interpreting  a  writing  or  words,  I  must  seek  simply  the 
purpose  and  meaning  of  the  s|jeaker  and  nothing  else. 
Now,  this  only  one  right  thing  Mr.  Jowett  leaves  wholly 
out ;  it  never  occurs  to  him  to  think  of  it.  I  say,  there- 
fore, that  his  whole  system  is  irrational  and  false.  He 
is  so  full  of  the  borrowed  idea  that  they  wei-e  temporaiT 
themes,  referring  in  oriental  language  simply  to  tlia 
national  hearers  of  the  day,  that  he  takes  tha  i 


this  as  ttet^H 

Jl 


331 


}  measure  ot  the  meaning,  and  thus  lays  (Io\ni  a  principle 
that  is  as  false  as  can  be.  But  that  is  all  borrowed. 
That  is  German  Sli-.  Jowett-,  but  the  other  Mr.  Jowett, 
I  trust  the  true  one,  tells  us  we  are  to  listen  to  them  as 
the  words  of  One  with  whom  a  thousand  years  is  as  one 
day;  one  of  abiding,  unfailing  counsels,  which  everj- 
tiiing  tends  to  bring  about,  who  is  not  slack  concerning 
His  promise.  The  effect  of  the  great  fact,  that  it  is 
God  who  speaks,  I  have  already  spoken  of.  Let  me 
add  another  example  from  Ezekiel.  He  refers  to  the  last 
days  in  the  most  explicit  manner,  and  with  <levelo])ed 
details.  Yet,  in  the  final  scene  he  declares  that  the 
mighty  one  Gog  who  comes  up  had  been  often  spoken 
of  (Ezek.  xxx>nii.  17),  Hence,  if  I  take  the  prophets 
as  they  present  themselves,  and  as  Ezekiel  speaking  in 
God's  name  declares,  they  were  oei'tainly,  under  the 
name  of  a  then  existing  power,  sjieaking  of  a  mighty 
one  at  the  end  of  the  world's  course  when  Jehovali 
would  make  Himself  kno\ni  in  His  govenmieut.     It  is 

'  remarkable,  that,  when  the  projihecy  goes  out  of  the 
geographical  name  by  which  it  is  identified,  it  uses 
language  intelligible  at  the  time,  as  far  as  showing  it 

I  was  beyond  the  limits  of  their  geograjihical  designation, 
Isa.  xviii.  A  land  beyond  the  rivers  of  Cush,  that  is 
the  Euphrates  and  Nile.  The  prophet  connects  it  with 
Israelitish  ideas,  but  goes  far  away  l)eyond,  as  he  must, 
to  fill  up  the  pictiu«  of  the  last  days.  But  T  should  go 
too  much  into  detail  if  I  pursued  this  farther.    Only  re- 

Imark  that  the  prophets  {we  shall  come  to  the  New 
Testament)  were  simple  impostoi-s  if  they  were  not  in- 
spired, for  they  give  their  burdens  as  oracles,  as  directly 
the  words  of  God :  thus  saith  the  Lord ;  or.  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  or  a  vision  was  given.  If 
then  Mr.  Jowett  rejects  the  prophets  as  inspii-ed,  he 
must  hold  them  for  impostors.  If  not,  then  there  is 
direct  inspiration,  a  commimication  of  t'.o  mind  of  God 
through  a  man,  as  he  was,  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 

Lin  words  which  entitled  the  prophet  to  say,  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,  and  the  Apostles  certainly  did  not  bold  them 


332 

for  impostors,  but  refer  to  them  as  true  prophets  who 
had  prophesied  about  Jesus.  I  suppose  Mr.  Jowett 
would  hardly  hold  that  to  be  the  direct  and  only  mean- 
ing as  received  by  the  lirst  readers  or  hearers.  But  if 
this  be  so,  the  question  takes  a  new  form.  Is  the  New 
Testament  entirely  deprived  of  those  Divine  communica- 
tions which  abounded  before,  and  form  the  Old  Testa- 
ment ?  And  is  that  which  is  given  us  by  Apostles  and 
Evangelists  to  reveal  the  perfect  religion  of  God  less 
from  Himself  than  the  comraimications  which  were 
given  to  Israel  in  their  imperfect  and  preparatory  state  ? 
This  is  hard  to  believe.  But  all  this  leads  us  to  the 
second  point,  in  these  days  an  all  important  one.  Is 
there  inspiration,  and  what  is  it  ? 

W.  It  is  an  important  question,  and  is  even  more 
embarrassing  as  to  the  new  than  as  to  the  old :  because 
the  new  pronounces  on  the  old.  But  I  see  plainly, 
as  to  the  question  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament, of  the  prophets  at  least  (and,  indeed,  the  Lord 
cites  the  whole  volume),  they  must  be  inspired,  or 
impostors  giving  as  the  Lord's  words  what  were  not  so. 
But  then  the  Lord's  statements  are  insurmountable. 
"  The  Scriptures  cannot  be  broken,"  for  instance ;  for  He 
must  have  known  it  if  they  were  impostors,  yet  cites 
them  as  true  prophets,  and  declares  they  must  be  ful- 
filled, that  they  spoke  of  Him.  But  if  the  prophets  were 
inspired  we  have  direct  inspiration,  and  the  mind  of 
God  as  far  as  given  to  them.  And  this,  and  this  only,  is 
what  we  have  to  seek,  and  the  only  question  is,  as  you 
say :  Is  Christianity  founded  on  a  less  explicit  revelation 
from  God  than  Judaism?  You  cannot  say  it  was 
founded  on  Christ,  and  that  is  sufficient;  for  He  wrote 
nothing,  and  I  do  not  know  what  He  was,  with  any 
Divine  faith,  if  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament  were 
not  inspired.  I  see  the  question  is  a  most  grave  one ; 
while  it  is  of  the  utmost  weight  to  see  that  the  Old  Tes- 
tament is  certainly  inspired,  because  the  fundamental 
question  is  settled,  and  the  casting  the  New  Testament 
out  of  the  limits  of  inspired  conmiunications  is  a  poor 


idea  altogether  then.  To  say  that  an  imjierlect  revela- 
tion is  inspired,  a  i)erfect  one  not,  is  somewhat  hard  to 
believe  :  still  we  must  see  from  -Scripture  itself. 

JJ.  Surely  that  is  the  way  as  to  inquiry;  for  it 
really  proves  itself  its  Divine  power  in  the  conscience. 
And  this  last  is  the  only  true  knowledge  of  inspiration. 
I  know  rationalists  trj-  and  put  off  with  an  air  of  supe- 
riority, as  rejected  by  enlightened  people  (that  is,  them- 
selves), what  they  have  not  got,  and  therefore  cannot 
("eel  the  force  of;  but  I  am  not  afraid  of  avowing,  in  the 
fullest  extent,  the  docti'ine  of  the  Reformation,  which  is 
necessarily  the  doctrine  of  every  believer ;  that  Scriptuj'e 
proves  itself  by  its  own  jiower.  I  go  further — it  never 
proves  itself,  never  can  piove  itself,  if  it  be  true,  in  any 
other  way.  And  so,  moi-eover,  it  declares  :  faith  cometh 
by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Woixl  of  God.  He  that 
believeth  on  the  Sou  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  him- 
self. The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the 
soul.  The  entrance  of  Thy  Word  giveth  light,  it  giveth 
underetandiug  to  the  simple.  If  what  is  called  light 
requires  something  to  show  it,  it  is  a  proof  that  it  is  not 
really  light.  In  die  nature  of  things,  light  shows  itself 
and  all  else.  It  is  not  what  we  mean  by  light,  what  a 
man  who  has  eyes  knows  it  to  be  by  having  eyes,  if  it 
has  to  be  shown.  It  does  require  eyes  to  see  it.  If  a 
man  has  not  eyes  he  cannot  of  course  see  it,  or  know 
what  it  is  at  all.  Nor  can  any  one  tdl  kirn  what  it  is, 
or  make  himself  understood  in  speaking  of  it.  He  wants 
the  faculty  of  what  is  to  be  proved.  If  a  man  does  not 
see  the  Word  of  God  to  be  such,  it  is  a  proof  that  he  has 
no  moral  eyes,  no  faith,  A  man  asks  nie  how  I  can 
prove  honey  to  be  sweet.  I  say,  if  you  cannot  taste  it 
you  must  remain  ignorant.  And  note,  if  there  be  a 
Word  of  God,  it  must  be  moral  light,  and  perfect  light, 
Divine  light;  cannot  be  otherwise.  If  what  is  pre- 
sented to  nie  be  not  such,  I  say  at  once,  then  it  is  not 
God's  Word.  It  may  be  dawn,  or  shine  through  clouds, 
or  be  noon-day,  but  it  is  in  its  nature  light,  or  it  is  not 
God's  Word.     Hence,  in  the  iuiture][of  things  it  must  J 


I 


r 


334 


i-eveal  itself.  If  it  do  not  it  is  not  God's  Word.  Whi 
ther  a  man  has  eyes  to  see  is  another  ([uestion :  bu( 
one  who  has  knows  he  sees  the  light.  Hence  I  am  not 
afraid  of  the  language  of  another  of  our  Essays.  "  Calvin 
did  not  shrink  from  saying  that  Scripture  shone  su  " 
ciently  by  its  own  Hght.  As  long  as  this  could  be  k( 
to,  the  I'rotestant  theory  of  belief  was  whole  and  soui 
— at  least  it  was  as  sound  as  the  Cathohc.  In  both,' 
Reason,  aided  by  spiritual  illumination,  performs  the 
subordinate  function  of  lecognizing  the  supreme  autho- 
rity of  the  Church  and  of  the  Bible  respectively.  But 
learned  controversy  and  abatement  of  zeal  drove  the 
Protestants  generally  from  the  hardy  but  irrational 
assertifin  of  Calvin."  I  dare  say  they  did.  That  ' 
men  lost  faith,  they  lost  comiction  of  the  Divine  authi 
rity  of  the  Word.  IIow  could  they  do  otherwise? 
is  stating  the  same  thing  in  other  tenus.  But  Calvin; 
as  every  believer,  could  not  say  otherwise,  because  it 
had  shone  thus  in  his  ovm  soul,  and  in  no  other  way. 
The  Church  was  against  it,  nature  was  against  it,  inl 
est  was  against  it.  God's  Word  was  too  mighty.  Bi 
I  say  more :  If  the  Scripfuros  be  not  thus  received  th<  ^ 
are  never  received  at  all.  It'professes  to  be  the  Wori 
and  testimony  of  God.  If  a  witness  has  to  be  Accre- 
dited, and  proved  to  be  true,  the  n-itness  is  not  believed 
at  all  on  his  oivn  testimony.  Ilence,  as  long  as  Scrip- 
ture has  to  be  proved  by  reason,  or  accredited  by  the 
Church,  God  is  not  believed  because  He  has  spoken, 
that  is,  there  is  no  real  faith.  Such  reasoning  or  accre- 
diting may  lead  me  to  believe  it  afterwards,  so  far  av 
leadmg  me  to  examine  the  testimony,  which  thus  mt^ 
acquire  force  over  mv  soul  as  true.  But,  as  long  as 
reasoning  or  accrediting  is  the  reason  why  I  believe  it, 
I  do  not  receive  it  as  the  Word  of  God.  I  do  not 
telieve  God  in  it.  I  do  not  receive  it  as  His  Word. 
If  I  believe  Thomas  tecause  James  has  said  that  what 
he  has  said  is  true,  I  do  not  believe  Thomas  at  all. 

W.  Yes;  but  if  James  has  said  that  Thomas  was 
trutiifu],  not  that  what  he  said  was  truel 


I 


ivin 


»ay. 


H.  I  tlo  not  want  any  one  to  tell  me  God  is  truth- 
ful. What  is  wanting  is  to  know  that  it  is  His  testi- 
mony. And  mark,  if  I  cannot  without  James's  testimony 
kuiw  that  Thomas's  word  is  to  be  trusted,  it  is  a  proof 
that  I  do  not  know  Th<imas,  and  that  i  am  incapable 
of  myself  of  discovering  the  truthfulness  of  his  state- 
ments. He  is  true,  but  I  cannot  find  it  out.  So  with 
the  rationalist.  He  cannot  find  it  out  if  it  be  God's 
Word,  if  the  testimony  is  truthful.  Jt  is  his  incapacity. 
ITe  may  be  an  ojicn  infidel.  But,  if  not,  all  his  state 
means  is,  that  he  is  incapable  of  discerning  the  Word  of 
God.  He  has  the  will  to  make  difficulties,  because  he 
does  not  like  to  have  a  word  directly  from  God ;  but  he 
cannot  say  it  is  nf)t — he  cannot  help  me  in  judging  if  it 
he.  And,  indeed,  if  I  believe  Thomas  only  because 
James  says  he  is  truthful,  I  still  do  not  know  'ITiomas 
myself;  and  if  this  be  true  in  the  case  we  are  speaking 
of.  I  do  not  know  God  still,  and  my  believing  His  Word 
is  uf  no  real  use  whatever ;  for  the  knowledge  of  God  is 
its  true  value.  But  more  than  this, — if  God  has  spoken, 
either  He  has  not  so  spoken  as  to  bind  my  conscience, 
that  is.  He  has  spoken  to  no  purpose  at  all,  and  badly, 
or  He  has  spoken  so  as  to  bind  my  conscience,  and  it  is 
not  according  to  the  rationalist  bound.  I  therefore  am 
guilty  and  blind  ;  for  1  do  not  receive  and  Ixiw  to  w-hat 
ought  to  bind  my  conscience.  If  revelation  he  not, 
therefore,  wholly  denied,  either  God  has  spoken  incom- 
petently and  badly,  or  I  am  bound  to  receive  and  bow 
to  it. 

II'.  That  is  true;  and  it  is  easy  to  decide  which  is 
the  case.  But  do  you  mean  sound  reasonings  cannot 
1x3  a  means  of  convincing  the  mind  that  the  Scriptures 
are  the  Word  of  God ''. 

II.  They  cannot  give  faith  in  it.  They  may  lead  to 
it  in  this  way,  namely,  in  that  they  prove  the  absurdity 
of  what  is  said  to  deny  it,  and  prove  thus  the  absurdity 
of  denying  it,  so  that  the  mind  bows  to  it,  and  the  Word 
is  left  to  its  own  force ;  but  there  is  never  faith  till  it  has 
exercised  this  force. 


336 

W.  I  see,  it  may  open  all  the  way  to  the  Bible,  but 
the  Bible  must  do  its  own  work. 

H.  Exactly. 

W.  Well,  it  is  true  if  you  (lid  not  believe  me  till 
what  I  said  was  accredited  by  another,  it  would  not  be 
believing  me. 

JET.  And  note,  in  passing,  how  this  applies  to  the 
Romanist  ground.  The  word  or  testimony  of  God  may, 
of  course,  act  on  souls  there  as  elsewhere  by  its  own 
power ;  but  as  to  faith — real  Divine  faith — in  the  soul, 
as  long  as  I  believe  on  the  Church's  warrant,  I  do  not 
believe  God  at  all ;  that  is,  I  do  not  believe  anything 
Divine.  I  believe  in  the  Church,  but  not  yet  on  Grod 
or  His  Word.  The  Roman  Catholic  ground  of  feith  is 
total  unbelief.  They  say  I  cannot  believe  the  Word  of 
God  till  the  Church  accredits  it.  Now,  I  hold  it  a 
great  mercy  to  be  brought  up  to  receive  the  Bible  to  be 
the  Word  of  God,  because  I  go  to  it  as  a  little  child,  and 
it  is  free  to  exercise  its  power  over  me.  But  I  have  not 
faith  till  it  does. 

We  will  now  turn  to  Mr.  Jowett's  statements  as  to 
inspiration.  The  greater  part  is  utter  fallacy,  or  fancies 
of  men,  which  are  only  to  be  left  to  their  own  worth- 
lessness.  He  gives  various  views  of  inspiration  as  con- 
tradictory, in  order  to  show  the  uncertainty  of  men  on 
the  subject,  when,  in  fact,  all  are  compatible  and  true, 
so  that  there  is  no  dilemma  at  all — ^unless  what  is 
said  of  the  kind  of  inspiration  of  particular  books.  All 
this  is  throwing  dust  in  people's  eyes.  What  the  up- 
right soul  wants  to  know  when  it  takes  up  a  Bible,  is : 
I  can  trust  this ;  I  will  sit  down  to  know  what  Grod 
will  say  to  me,  what  He  has  said,  what  His  mind  is. 
As  to  the  manner  of  inspiration  he  knows  nothing  about 
it.  What  he  reads  must  be  the  Word  of  God  for  him. 
He  must  trust  it,  bow  to  it  as  such,  and  looks  for  the 
aid  of  that  Spirit  which  indited  it.  And  the  Doctors  in 
theology  know  no  more  about  it  than  he  does— nor 
cannot ;  because  they  are  not  inspired,  and  can  have  no 
consciousness  of  the  manner  of  the  Spirit's  action.    The 


337 

Apostie  could  uot  explain  it.  Mr.  Jowett  says  it  is  held 
by  some  that  there  is  an  inspiration  of  su(«rintendence, 
and  by  others  an  inspiration  of  suggestion.  Now,  I 
believe  Ixtth  fully.  If  the  evangelists,  as  eye-witnesses, 
ha<I  fai'ts  to  record  which  they  rememl>ered,  the  Spirit 
had  only  to  take  care  they  were  riglitly  iised,  Himself  so 
to  use  the  memory,  and  not  jjermit  the  nari'ator  to 
narrate  them  otherwise  than  according  to  His  mind. 
There  is  an  inspiration  of  suggestion — as  the  history  of 
creation  or  prophecy.  And  Christ  expressly  promises 
l)oth :  '"  The  Spirit  of  truth  will  guide  you  into  all 
tiTith  ;  for  He  shall  not  speak  of  Himself,  but  what  He 
shall  hear  that  shall  He  speak,  and  He  will  show  you 
things  to  come."  And  again  :  "  He  shall  teach  you  all 
things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance."  Of 
c-ourse  the  Essayists  know  Ijetter  about  it  than  the 
.Scripttn-es.  But  Mr.  Jowett  tells  us  we  are  to  take 
Scripture's  account  of  itself.  Next  we  have  opposed  an 
inspiration  in  which  the  inspired  person  is  passive,  and 
an  inspiration  which  acts  through  the  character  of  the 
sacred  writer.  But  here  there  is  no  opposition.  If 
God  has  formed  the  character  as  a  vessel,  He  can  use 
it  so  that  the  will  should  be  in  no  exercise,  and  what 
sets  the  character  in  activity  should  be  simply  the  Holy 
Ghost  moving  it,  and  it  remaining  a.s  an  instrument 
what  it  was,  as  I  have  no  doubt  was  usually  the  case. 
There  are  different  kinds  of  inspiration,  as  to  form, 
recognized  in  Scripture,  closely  connected  with  this 
remark.  I  may  speak  the  words  willed  by  God,  and 
not  understand  them,  or  I  may  understand  and  speak 
them.  This  last,  though  a  less  apparently  inspired  and 
glorious  form,  the  Apostle  prefers.  But  both  were 
inspired.  An  example  nf  one  was  tougues,  or  Old 
Testament  prophecy ;  the  other  was  prophecy  under  the 
New.  So  when  the  communication  of  the  facts  and 
ordinarj-  knowleflge  of  facts  are  contrasted,  the  con- 
trast has  no  ground.  The  Spirit  brought  to  their 
remembrance.  It  was  the  memory  of  things  known 
when  they  had  taken  place,  but  recalled  in  the  perfec- 


338 

tion  proper  to  the  mind  of  God  to  the  memory  of  the  in- 
spired person,  or,  if  needed,  revealed  if  unknown.  What 
I  look  for  in  inspiration  is,  that  the  words  should  be 
so  ordered  by  the  Spirit  as  to  convey  perfectly  what  it 
was  the  intention  of  the  Spirit  to  communicate.  Again, 
when  an  apostle  spoke  he  was  as  inspired,  when  it 
was  the  intention  of  God  he  should  be  so,  in  speak- 
ing as  in  vn-iting.  When  not,  he  was  like  another 
man  speaking  or  writing — ^perha})S  more  spiritual — not 
7ieces8arily  so  ;  but  his  words  had  no  inspired  authority. 
The  writing  was  different  in  this,—  it  was  to  abide,  and 
hence  had  a  permanent  character  of  inspiration.  Al- 
though as  to  this  Paul  might  have  written  uninspired, 
though  spiritual  letters,  or  not  inspired  for  perma- 
nent use.  But  I  shall  show  that  the  Apostles  do  pre- 
tend to  inspiration,  and  affirm  it  of  all  Scriptures,  that 
they  distinguish  between  personal  spirituality  and  in- 
spired communications  having  the  authority  of  the 
Lord. 

After  making  all  kinds  of  false  logical  divisions  and 
confusions,  so  as  to  puzzle  the  reader,  Mr.  Jowett  comes 
plainly  to  the  point,  and  asserts — "  Nor  for  any  of  the 
higher  or  supernatural  views  of  inspiration  is  there  any 
foundation  in  the  Gospels  and  Epistles."  Now  this  is 
simply,  totally  and  entirely  false,  an  incredible  state- 
ment ;  and  slurs  over  the  question  of  inspiration  in  a 
way  I  must  call  disingenuous.  Because  by  saying 
Gospels  and  Epistles,  the  Old  Testament  is  passed  over 
in  silence ;  and  does  it  mean  the  Gospels  and  Epistles 
do  not  pretend  to  it  themselves,  or  do  not  affirm  it  of 
Scripture  ?  But  it  is  false  in  any  case.  We  read  thus, 
"  No  prophecy  of  the  Scripture  is  of  any  private  inter- 
pretation ;  for  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time  by  the 
will  of  man,  but  holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost." 

Paul  says,  "  Now  the  Spirit  speaketh  expressly  (here 
we  are  in  the  New  Testament)  that  in  the  last  times 
some  shall  depart  from  the  faith.**  He  declares  that 
"  all  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God."     It  is 


339 

proi>er  to  make  the  man  of  God  pertect.  The  Old 
Testament  wTiters  are  positive — "Thus  saith  the  Lonl," 
they  say.  And  David,  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  spake 
by  me,  and  His  word  was  in  my  tongue ;"  and  Chiist,  in 
spite  of  rationalists,  declai-es  they  testiiy  of  Him,  and 
that  all  must  be  fulfilled,  lie  api:)eals  to  Scripture  as 
an  irrefragable  and  divine  testimony,  and  declares  in 
Luke  xvi.,  that  it  bound  the  consciences  of  its  readers 
as  much  as  His  own  resiurection  did.  But  St.  Paul 
is  more  precise.  He  ascribes,  in  New  Testament  com- 
munication, first  the  revelation,  next  the  communication, 
thirdly,  the  recejitiou  of  divine  truth,  exclusively  and 
absolutely  to  the  direct  operation  of  the  Spirit.  Thus 
only  can  it  be,  he  says.  "  What  man  knoweth  the  things 
of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  a  man  that  is  in  him  ?  Even 
so  knoweth  no  one  the  things  of  God.  but  the  Spirit  of 
God."  Next,  "Which  things  also  we  speak,  not  in 
words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  teacheth,  communicating  (such  is  the  force) 
spiritual  things  by  a  spiritual  medium,"  Then  they  are 
only  so  received.  "  But  the  natural  man  i-eceiveth  not 
the  things  of  the  Spirit  ...  for  they  are  spiritually 
discenied."  He  distinguishes  between  his  experience, 
in  which  he  hud  the  Spirit  acting  in  himself,  and  the 
revelation  which  made  his  communications  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Lord.  "  But  1  speak  this  by  permis- 
sion, not  of  commandment,  Unto  the  married  I  com- 
mand ;  yet  not  1,  but  the  Lord.  ,  .  But  to  the  rest  speak 
1,  not  the  Lord.  Now  concerning  virgins,  1  have  no 
commandment  of  the  Lord;  I  give  my  judgment  as  one 
that  has  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful. 
But  she  is  happier  if  she  so  abide  after  my  judgment; 
and  I  think  also  that  I  have  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord." 
Here  then  he  distinguishes  between  his  judgmeut,  as  to 
which  he  could  yet  api>eal  to  them  as  having  the  Spirit 
to  form  and  guide  his  experience,  and  a  revelation  from 
the  Lord  which  constituted  a  commandment.  Hence 
he  says  as  to  the  body  of  his  epistle  not  thus  formally 
excepted.  "  If  any  man  think  himself  to  l)e  a  prophet  or 


340 

spiritual,  let  him  acknowledge  that  the  things  that  I 
write  unto  you  are  the  commandments  of  the  Lordf 
Some  would  allef^e  from  his  saying,  "  I  have  no  con 
niandment,"  then  all  is  not  inspired.  Yes,  he  vr% 
inspired,  and  modem  attempts  [irove  the  immense  in 
jtortance  of  the  jtrecision  of  the  God  of  grace,  to  |>ooi 
out  the  difference  between  the  exjiression  of  his  exj 
rience  by  the  .Spirit,  and  a  revelation  by  the  .Spirit  whi 
had  the  direct  force  of  a  commandment.  But  as  to  t 
Gospels,  Mr.  Jowett  pleads  that  their  declaring  the  recol 
to  be  true  inasmuch  as  the  wi-iter  saw  that  of  which  1 
spoke,  is  a  proof  that  there  is  no  inspiration.  Tliis  is  a 
mistake,  the  Lord  had  said  the  Spirit  should  bear 
witness  of  what  they  could  not  see,  the  heavenly  glory  of 
Christ ;  the  discijiles  of  His  life,  as  they  had  been  with 
Him.  But  for  this  last,  that  all  might  be  according  to 
the  i>erfection  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  He  would  bring  to 
their  remembrance  what  lie  had  said.  That  is,  the 
Holy  Ghost  reveals  Uie  heavenly  glory  of  Christ  and 
doctrine  flowing  from  it,  and  calls  to  remembrance  the 
earthly  teaching  of  Christ,  which  they  had  already  heard. 
The  fitting  the  vessel  in  every  way  is  no  proof  of  the 
Lord's  not  using  it  Himself.  When  the  Lord  is  tempted 
by  Satan,  he  quotes  the  Scriptures  as  absolute  authority 
against  him,  and  Satan  can  make  no  reply  to  it  at  all. 
There  cannot  be  a  more  unfounded  or  false  assertion 
thau  that  the  Gos]iels  or  Ejiistles  do  not  present  the  Old 
Testament  and  themselves  as  inspired.  They  formally 
claim  inspiration  both  for  Old  and  New.  ^ana  ypa^i, 
Oroirriuar,!.  does  not  siniply  apply  to  the  Old  Testament. 
It  is  the  assertion  of  the  character  of  i^aaa  ypa-p^  :  and  io 
Rom.  xvi.  26.  prophetic  writings  (for  that  is  the  true 
force)  are  said  to  be  means  used  tor  propagating  the 
truth ;  and  Peter  in  his  Second  Epistle  refers  to  Paul's 
Epistles  as  Scriptures.  Scripture  is  not  an  essay  on 
inspiration.  Nor  does  it  in  every  E]Distle  or  book  set 
about  to  say  I  am  inspired.  It  would  be  a  proof  that 
it  was  not,  and  feared  )^>eople  should  say  so ;  but,  thei 
are  the  most  distinct  tostimonies,  when  the 


but,  th^e^H 


occurs,  that  it  is  so.  ^Vhat  can  be  stronger  than 
— "  the  Scripture  foreseeing  that  GoJ  would  justify 
heathen  by  faith  T  It  is  treating  the  Scri]iture  as  if  it 
were  God  Himself,  because  it  is  God's  own  expression 
of  ilis  mind  which  Scripture  gives;  the  Loi-d  Himself 
gives  testimony  to  inspiration,  and  to  the  inspiration  of 
Scrijiture,  which  is  what  rationalists  deny  :  the  referring 
to  the  New  Testament  merely  is  a  subterfuge,  and  the 
New  Testament  gives  the  plainest  declaration  of  the 
inspiration  of  the  testimony  by  which  Christianity  was 
founded,  and  that  the  New  Testament,  as  other  Scri))- 
tures,  are  inspired. 

W,  I  do  not  think  it  possible  for  any  one  reading 
the  New  Testament  to  call  in  question  its  inspiration. 

JfT.  Impossible.  A\Tiere  it  does  not  S])eak  of  inspira- 
tion it  gives  its  contents  as  definite  revelation.  I  refer 
now  to  the  Epistles.  They  s|>eak  of  mysteries,  that  is, 
things  known  only  to  the  initiated  by  revelation ;  and 
speak  of  them  avowedly  as  so  given.  '\\^here  Paul 
gives  only  his  ex}>erience  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  states 
it  to  be  different,  as  we  have  seen ;  a  large  part  of  it  is 
avowedly  prophecy.  And  the  ajjocalyjise  is  revealed  or 
an  imposture.  Some  is  said  to  !)e  "  by  the  word  of  the 
Lord,"  where  it  is  a  then  given  revelation ;  and  the 
most  ordinary  directions  are  said  to  1«  the  Lord's  com- 
mandments. The  Apostle  Paul  consecjuently  took  the 
greatest  care,  adding  a  salutation  as  a  testimony  that  all 
was  right.  However,  our  jtresent  object  is  to  consider 
Mr.  .Jowett's  essay,  not  to  give  a  treatise  on  inspiration. 

W.  But  how  do  you  account  tor  the  details  of  human 
life  and  difference  of  style,  and  special  occasions  of 
vn-iting  the  Epistles  ? 

S.  It  is  Just  the  perfection  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  very  essence  of  Christianity  is  God  manifest  in 
flesh.  What  is  Divine  clothed  in  all  the  details  and 
entering  into  all  the  circumstances  of  human  life.  Of 
course  tlie  revelation  partakes,  and  must  partake,  if  it  lie 
a  true  one.  of  the  nature  and  character  of  what  it  i-e- 
veals.     And  this  is  what  we  find :  first  the  connection 


I 

I 


342 


L-b  could  l^^l 


oi'  mail  with  what  is  heavenly  in  Christ,  whit-h  i 
only  Ituown  by  revelation  ;  and  thus  the  iutroduetion  a 
Dinne  jirinciples  into  every  payt  of  huniau  life.  Under 
the  old  covenant  God  was  hidden  I>ehind  the  veil,  aud 
sent  out  messages  with,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  There 
could  not  be  the  familiarity  there  is  under  the  new. 
But  though  Christianity  is  infinitely  higher,  yet  God  is 
revealed.  It  has  introduced  God  into  this  world  in 
man,  and  man  into  heaven  in  rjhrist.  This  is  unfolded 
in  doctrine,  the  former  specially  by  John,  the  latter  by 
Paul ;  and,  while  the  latter  makes  the  iwlievev  capable 
of  drawing  his  principles  from  above,  the  former  stamjts 
its  character  on  all  his  ways,  and  is  given  as  the  model 
of  all  our  walk.  Thus,  in  Phil,  ii.,  also,  you  get  Christ 
coming  down,  a  pattern  of  our  subjective  state — our 
mind  ;  iii„  of  our  activity  and  giving  up  all,  through  the 
objective  power  of  the  glory  seen  in  Hira — for  the 
former  no  circumstance  is  too  minute ;  for  Christ  was 
])erfeet  in  all,  from  childhood  to  the  cross.  The  latter 
makes  every  sacrifice  light.  All  is  dross  and  dung 
compared  to  it.  The  supposition  of  a  promise  given  to 
tlie  Apostles  of  guidance  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  every 
respect  for  their  service,  and  that  what  they  most  de- 
lilwrately  gave  to  the  Churches  was  without  it.  is  in 
itself  a  moral  aljsimlity.  Impossible  that  they  should 
do  so,  impossible  that  God  should  alhtw  it.  ITiis  pro- 
mise of  the  Comforter  as  their  giude,  and  as  managing 
all.  is  the  characteristic  feature  of  what  Christ  told  them 
on  going  away.  His  last  iujimction  was.  they  should 
not  stir  in  their  work  till  He  was  come,  and  they  were 
endued  with  power  from  on  high.  Yet  we  ai-e  told  that 
what  was  to  guide  the  Church  in  all  ages,  and  to  be  its 
sure  safeguard  in  perilous  times,  was  not  given  undf"^ 
this  power. 

IK  It  is  utterly  incredible.     And  while  direct  tes 
monies  from  Scripture  prove  the  assertion  of  Mr.  Jowett 
to  be  utterly  false,  it  is  well  to  see  tliat  it  Is  as  unnatural 
as  it  is  untrue,  and  contrary  to  the  whole  method  of 
Scripture. 


und^H 

testi^l 
owett 
atural 
_iod  of 

J 


343 


M.  Paul,  Uw.  reniemljer,  |)ositively  declares,  in  sjteak- 
iiig  of  the  mystery,  that  it  was  made  known  to  him  liy 
revelatiuu.  We  have  seen  ho  communicated  it  hy 
words  taught  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  mil  pass  to  other 
[wints  of  objection,  Mr.  Jowett  declares  that  Paul  was 
corrected  by  the  course  of  events  in  his  expectation  of 
the  coming  Christ.  For  this  there  is  not  the  smallest 
possible  ground.  At  the  extreme  dose  of  his  career  he 
urges  Timothy  to  keep  the  commandment  unrebukeably 
till  Christ's  appearing,  which  the  only  Potentate  was  to 
show  in  its  own  time  ;  that  is,  he  uses  e^rai-tly  the  same 
language  then  as  in  his  earliest  epistle  (1  Thess.)  It 
was  a  time  the  Father  had  put  in  lILs  own  power.  Of 
that  day  knew  no  one;  but  they  were  commanded  to 
Ix!  always  expecting  the  return  of  the  Master.  Paul 
never  knew, — for  it  was  not  revealed;  he  always  ex- 
|»ected.  for  Christ  had  told  men  to  do  so.  and  made 
it-  the  difference  of  the  faithful  aitd  unfaitlifid  servant ; 
and  the  Spirit  kept  it  alive  in  his  soul.  Christ  had 
marked  the  Church's  unfaithfulness,  by  the  servants 
sajnng,  '^My  Lord  dehiyeth  HLs  coming."  Into  Ihin 
Paul  did  not  fall.  The  Lord  at  the  same  time  pro- 
phetically declared  that  while  the  bridegroom  tarried 
(no  man  knew  how  long)  the  virgins  would  slumber 
and  sleep.  He  has  tarried,  and  the  early  expectation  of 
the  Church  has  been  lost.  It  went  to  sleep.  Itswordli-. 
ness  and  corruption  and  the  loss  of  this  expectation 
went  on  together.  The  midnight  cry  which  awakes 
her  is  i-ecalling  her  to  this  expectation.  Mr.  Jowett 
has  not  the  expectation  which  brightened  and  animated 
the  labours  of  Paul,  aud  the  course  of  events  has  more 
power  over  his  mind  than  the  words  of  Christ.  The 
2nd  Peter  tells  us  the  blessed  motive  of  the  delay.  God 
is  not  slack  concerning  His  ]>romise,  but  is  long-suifer- 
uig.  not  willing  that  any  should  perish.  His  long- 
suHering  is  salvation. 

IF,  I  see  no  ground  at  all  for  this  assertion.  It  is  a 
mere  hmnan  comment  imposed  on  Scripture,  and  evi- 
dently not  drawn  in  any  way  from  its  contents.     It  has 


fnanH 


344 

always  seemed  to  me — for  I  have  heard  it  elsewhf 
mere  ignorance  of  the  Word  and  its  principles — !«  th< 
principles  true  or  false.     -iVnd  it  is  quite  evident 
this  expectation  stamped  its  character  on  Paul's  laboi 
and  gave  them  an  unworldliness  wholly,  lost  now,  but 
which  was  no  loss  to  him.     The  virgins  got  in  some- 
where to  rest,  and  had  to  be  called  out  again  when  the 
bridegroom  was  really  coming. 

//.  Another  objection  to  inspiration  is  drawn 
the  introduction  to  Luke.  The  statement  of  the 
though  not  peculiar  to  Mr,  Jowett,  as  little  advanced 
by  these  Essayists  is,  is  entirely  unfounded.  Luke  does 
not  say  a  word  of  setting  forth  io  order  a  declaration  of 
what  eye-witnesses  delivered.  Others,  Luke  states,  hail 
done  this,  according  to  what  eye-witnesses  had  de- 
Uvered.  As  they  had  done  this,  he  says  that  he  who 
had  ,rapjiKoXov6,iKori  <n-(jfltr  iroBiv  a^p./Jwe,  had  followed  up 
accurately,  had  an  intimate  knowledge  of  everjthing 
from  the  very  beginning,  thought  good  to  write  to 
Theophilus  that  he  might  have  certainty  about  them. 

I  That  is,  because  the  others  were  insufficient,  he  did  it 

so  as  to  give  certainty.  This  remark,  simple  as  it  is,  is 
as  old  as  Origen,  who  refers  to  'taken  in  hand'  as  a  mere 
human  undertaking  in  contrast  with  Luke.  This  is 
not  a  question  in  itself  of  inspiration,  but  of  a  suited 
instrument.  But  tlie  statements  made  on  this  subject 
^^  are  the  exact  opposite  of  the  truth.     How  Mr.  Jowett 

^P  can  say  that  Matthew  supposes  Bethlehem  to  have  been 

^  the  dwelling-place  of  Joseph  and  Mary,  I  cannot  tell. 

B  It   is  a  pure  fable.      There  is   not   a  word    of  their 

I  dwelling-place,  good  or  bad,  nor  allusion  to  it,  nor  a 

■  supposition  of  it.  As  regards  other  objections.  In 
I  Luke  we  have  a  fall  account  of  the  state  of  the  godly 
I  remnant  in  Israel,  a  most  perfect  and  lovely  picture,  the 
W  dominion  of  the  Gentiles  over  Israel,  but  God's  provi- 
r  dential  ordering  of  their  political  movements,  to  bring 
L              about  His  ovm  designs   announced  in  prophecy — the 

■  movement  being  arrested  as  soon  as  ever  the  design 
I  was  accomplished.      The  genealogies    are  in  perfect 


345 


accordance  with  the  design  of  each  gospel.  Luke,  after 
the  first  two  chapters,  unfolds  the  character  of  Christ 
as  Son  of  Man,  and  grace  tJtwards  men ;  Matthew,  the 
presentation  of  the  Slessiah  Emmanuel  to  Israel,  and 
His  rejectioij.  and  the  .substitution  of  the  Church  and 
the  kingdom  for  that  people  in  their  theu  standing 
before  God.  Hence  Luke  traces  the  genealogy  to 
Adam  ;  Matthew  fioni  David  and  Abraham.  That 
men  cannot  explain  them  is  very  true.  That  may  prove 
man's  ignorance,  but  nothing  as  to  the  genealogies. 
They  were  available  to  those  of  that  day  directly ;  for 
us  they  rest  on  the  authority  of  his  word.  Matthew 
does  mention,  in  the  most  general  way,  the  thieves 
blaspheming,  because  he  is  giving  the  extent  of  Christ's 
snflerings.  The  very  thieves  insulted  Him,  as  I  might 
say  a  mob  attacked  the  queen  and  outraged  her,  though 
only  two  used  insulting  language.  Luke,  as  is  con- 
stantly the  case  with  hiui,  gives  a  full  moral  detail  on  a 
particular  point.  .So  he  does  as  to  the  two  at  Kmmaus ; 
so  as  to  Legion.  It  is  possible  that  both  thieves  did; 
but  not  the  least  necessary  to  the  account  in  Matthew. 
As  to  the  narration  of  the  woman's  anointing  the  Lord's 
feet,  it  is  a  mistake.  Mary's  anointing  at  Bethany 
was  evidently  a  wholly  different  occurrence. 

Mr,  Jowett  speaks  of  a  cycle  of  traditions,  beyond 
which  the  tradition  of  the  early  fathers  never  travel, 
"  though  the  world  could  not  contain  the  books  if  all 
were  written."  And  in  these  short  narratives  we  ought 
to  estimate  the  ''  accumulative  weight"  of  the  discre- . 
pancies.  So  of  prophecy  how  far  "  the  details  were 
minutely  fulhlled." 

Now  the  fact  that  the  early  Fathers  never  travelled 
beyond  these  narratives,  proves  this,  that  beyond  a  written 
revelation  they  knew  norfiing  about  the  matter.  That  all 
knowledge  of  the  life  of  Jesus  was  confined  to  a  wTitten 
revelation, — a  von'  important  point  in  its  nature,  as 
proving,  at  the  least,  that  the  positive  revelation  about 
it  was  from  the  first  so  absolutely  owned,  to  the  ex- 
clusion of  all  else,  that  every  other  tradition  dropped 
z2 


346 

intxj  ol>li\-ion  st  oiu-e.  A  pretended  oral  tradition  really 
falls  Ui  the  ground,  'fhls  alone  was  owned  and  trusted 
from  tlie  beginning.  These  alleged  traditions  had  no 
place  at  all  in  what  wns  known ;  and  I  think  we  may 
fairly  say  that  this  could  not  have  been  the  ease  without 
the  Divine  will  and  power.  A  Divine  account  was  to 
supersede,  and  did,  all  human  accounts.  There  must 
have  been  such,  and  Papias  tells  us  there  were,  and  that 
his  delight  was  to  listen  to  eye-witnesses  telling  of  them. 
Yet  none  appear.  The  apocrvphal  gospels  are  not  worth 
referring  to.  The  gosi>els  were  written  apart  from  one 
another,  probably  at  diflerent  epochs,  yet  with  much  of 
the  same  matter,  and  there  is  nothing  at  all  outside  them. 

W.  This  is  a  striking  fact,  and,  alleged  as  it  is  by 
Mr.  Jowett,  of  weight  in  the  inquiry  as  to  discrepancies  ; 
but  I  should  be  glad  that  jou  would  say  a  little  more  on 
this  point.  The  objections  seem  to  lue  to  have  very 
littJe  weight,  and  to  prove,  by  their  hitility,  rather  wo 
will  to  attack,  than  the  difticultj-  of  defence.  But  1 
should  hke  a  little  more  on  this  point  in  principle. 

If.  The  details  as  to  the  gospels  we  will  speak  of 
a  moment.  1  will  sjteak  now  of  general  principles, 
a  man  write  a  book,  he  must  have  some  design  in  doinj^ 
it.  And  if  a  consistent  man,  he  follows  out  that  design. 
If  God  inspires  one.  He  must  have  a  design;  and  Ho 
must  follow  it  out  peifectly  :  and  this  is  stamped  on 
every  page  of  Scripture.  In  this  petfcctiiess  all  details 
will  come  in.  Not  that  every  detail  has  the  same 
importance.  If  God  is  showing  the  whole  relationship 
of  God  with  man,  and  His  dealings  witJi  man,  I  must 
get  man  as  he  is ;  and  I  may  get  special  dealings,  not 
in  the  measure,  or  on  the  ground,  of  eternal  truth,  while 
I  shall  get  the  true  light  too.  All  this,  as  I  have 
previously  remarked,  we  have.  It  is  only  the  stupidiQ- 
of  the  objectors  to  supjtose  that  all  the  things  related  or 
said  are  inspired.  The  wickedness  and  unbelief  of  man 
is  largely  set  forth.  That  was  not  inspired  by  God.  But 
the  writers  were  inspired  to  give  it,  as  it  really  was  in 
truth,  that  I  might  have  a  true  divinely  given  accoimt 


P 


347 


of  tliLs  State  for  my  owii  heart  and  conscience.  God 
may  and  has  dealt  specially  with  man  in  all  jiatience. 
'I'o  know  the  real  state  of  things  I  must  have  these 
dealings,  ov  I  shall  know  most  superficially  the  human 
heart,  and  God's  wa)s,  and  His  love,  and  how  the  heart 
has  been  tested,  and  ^hat  it  is  under  these  tests.  My 
moral  knowledge  will  else  be  shallow.  Now  I  have  all 
this  in  Scripture,  and  the  ftiU  light  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment on  them.  Mr.  Jowett  is  ignorant  enough  of  the 
purport  of  Scripture  thus  to  describe  all  this.  "  It 
(inspiration)  is  reconcilable  with  the  mixed  good  and 
e>il  of  the  characters  of  the  Old  Testament,  which 
nevertheless  does  not  exclude  them  from  the  favour  of 
(tod,  «ith  the  attribution  to  the  Divine  Being  of  actions 
at  variance  with  that  higher  revelation  which  He  has 
given  of  Himself  in  the  Gospel." 

ir.  But  I  do  not  exactly  see  what  that  has  to  do 
witli  inspiration,  'l"hose  of  whom  an  inspired  account 
siicaks  may  be  good  or  evil. 

M.  Of  course  they  might.  It  has  no  more  to  do 
with  it  than  the  man  in  the  moon.  Nay,  prophecy 
would,  as  to  the  greater  |>art  of  it  (we  may  indeed  say 
all),  have  had  no  opportunity  for  its  exercise  if  evil 
had  nut  been  there.  It  was  the  sustaining  witness  of 
God  when  evil  was  there.  And  just  see  the  "never- 
theless does  not  exclude  them  from  the  favour  of  God." 
What  has  that  to  do  with  inspiration  ?  Supposing  God 
sends  an  inspired  message  to  one  on  whom  His  favour 
rests,  but  who  is  at  the  moment  going  astray.  It  shows 
patient  grace,  and  no  allowance  of  evil.  But  what  is 
there  in  that  which  has  to  do  mth  inspiration  ?  It  is 
utter  blundering,  and  nothing  more.  iTie  path  which 
led  to  it  is  evident.  It  is  tms :  he  would  show  that  if 
evil  be  there,  there  cannot  be  inspiration.  It  is  an 
attempt  to  discredit  Scripture  by  the  fact  of  evil  being 
there.  But  that  is  coidbunding  the  inspired  word  given 
about  the  evil,  which  rebukes  it  even,  with  the  evil 
itself.  What  shows  the  aninms  of  the  passage  is  that 
the   evil    does   not.    according  to    the   inspired  book. 


r  exclude  from  God's  iavour.  But  if  a  mixed  state  ■  _ 
good  and  ovil  is  t«  exclude  from  God's  favour,  every 
man  in  tlic  world  must  be  excluded  from  it.  But  the 
whole  argimiont  is  a  mere  Ijlunder,  and  a  very  stupid 
one,  Inspu'ed  history  is  true  Iiistory,  and  gives  the  ovil 
as  well  as  the  good.  A  mere  iianegyrical  history  would 
prove  itself  not  inspired,  like  the  legends  of  the  saints, 
01'  a  human  biography.  As  to  prophecy,  it  is  coastant. 
I  may  say,  invective  against  e\'il.  That  the  patience  of 
God  went  on  rising  up  early  and  sending  them,  till 
there  was  no  remedy,  Mr.  Jowett,  I  regret  to  say,  cai ' 
in  God's  teeth.  I  adore  Uim  for  it,  as  for  all  '" 
goodness. 

.       W.  I  really  begin  to  think  Mr.  Jowett  has  one  i 
\  the  most  inexact  and  iilogical  minds  T  ever  saw. 

II.  I  thoroughly  agi-ee  with  you.  I  can  hardly  sd 
I  begin  to  think  so.  But  this  is  a  very  excusabl 
infirmity.  But  it  seems  more  specious  to  say  actions  al 
attributed  to  Gotl  "  at  variance  with  that  higher  revela) 
tion  which  He  has  given  of  Himself  in  the  Gospel." 
First,  note  the  way  Christian  language  is  used ;  God 
has  given  a  higher  revelation  of  Himself  in  the  Gospel. 
Is  there  a  revelation  ^vithout  any  inspiration  ?  Don't 
let  us  dispute  about  the  word.  I  prefer  revelation— it 
is  plainer.  Is  there  a  revelation  without  direct  or 
inspired  communications  from  God?  If  so,  what  is  a 
revelation  ?  Now  God,  in  patient  grace,  did  deal  with 
men  on  lower  grounds  than  the  Gospel ;  put  them 
under  the  schoolmaster  up  to  Christ.  But  there  was 
no  contradiction  in  it.  It  took  the  ground  of  man's 
responsibility  to  God  ;  and  God  dealt  in  partial  temporal 
judgments,  and  even  in  cutting  otl'  the  peojde,  as  show- 
ing the  true  result  of  being  on  this  ground,  which  the 
Gospel  fully  confirms ;  though  this  way  of  dealing  be 
not  the  Gospel.  The  former  histor)'  was  promise  or 
law;  the  Gospel  is  neither.  But  perfectly  consistent 
with  and  illustrating  the  excellency  of  both,  while  put- 
ting man  on  another  ground,  and  that  is,  i-cdemption. 
where  the  true  light  can  fully  shine,  grace  and  heavenly 


349 

blessing  reign  through  righteousness.  God's  way  of 
meeting  mnn  nmler  promise,  and.  still  more,  His  way  of 
meetiug  man  under  law,  must  be  different  from  Hia 
relationship  with  them  under  redemption ;  but  promise 
told  the  redemption  would  come,  and  law  made  the 
need  of  the  redemption  felt,  by  putting  man  on  the 
ground  of  responsibility  to  God,  so  as  to  make  redemp- 
tion a  far  clearer  and  more  felt  thing,  and  God's  good- 
ness far  more  distinct  and  intelligible.  But  Mr.  Jowett, 
who  judges  of  nil  as  one  .system,  by  his  own  thoughts  and 
views,  insists  on  the  variance  as  if  it  was  a  contradic- 
tion, and  hence  all  could  not  be  Divine.  It  is  about  as 
much  sense  as  if  I  should  insist  on  the  contradiction  of 
a  man's  bringing  seed,  and  putting  it  into  a  field,  and 
then  reaping  it,  and  taking  it  all  out.  The  truth  is,  I 
think  I  never  met  with  a  person  who  had  be«nldered 
himself  in  attempting  to  deal  with  Divine  tpiestions  as 
Mr.  Jowett  has,  and  proved  his  entire  ignorance  of  ait 
God's  ways  by  the  judgment  which,  in  his  own  strength, 
he  has  passed  upon  them.  Think  of  a  man  writing  an 
elaborate  commentary  or  essay  on  the  Romans  (1  say 
essay,  for  even  in  the  notes  it  is  the  expression  of  his 
own  thoughts  explaining  how  the  Apostle  was  governed 
in  his  expressions  by  local  prejudices  and  habits  of 
thought  of  his  day ;  from  which,  of  course,  Mr.  Jowett 
is  quite  free):  but  think  of  his  coming  to  this  result — 
"  Sin  is  not  simply  evil,  but  intermediate  between  evil 
and  good,  implying  always  the  presence  of  God  within." 

W.  AVhat!' 

ff.  Aye,  that  is  it,  tolidetn  v^bis. 

W.  Well,  but  what  can  he  mean  ? 

H.  Well,  it  is  the  result  of  a  man's  reasoning  from 
his  own  ideas  to  St.  Paul's  Epistles  (of  course  believing 
that  this  higher  revelation  is  not  inspired),  instead  of 
learning  from  it,  or  even  expounding  it.  He  continues, 
"  If  we  are  surprised  at  .St.  Paul  regai-ding  the  law — 
holy,  just,  and  good  as  it  was — as  almost  sin,  we  must 
remember  that  sin  itself,  if  the  expression  may  be 
excused,  as  a  spiritual  state,  has  an  element  of  goc'  ' 


I 


350 

it."  You  know  how  indignantly  the  Apostle  rejects  the 
thought  of  law  being  so.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  one 
coming  to  such  a  conclusion  presenting  himself  as  an 
interpreter  of  Paul,  and  an  instructor  of  men  how  to 
interpret  Scripture?  "  Jt  was  the  nature  of  the  law," 
he  tells  us,  "  to  be  good  and  enl  at  once." 

W.  But  there  mustbesomepeculiarexplanation  of  this? 

jBT.  lie  takes  sin  to  mean  the  consciousness  of  sin, 
without  this  there  can  be  no  sin,  and  sin  as  the  trans- 
gression of  the  law.  But  all  this  is  blimder  on  blunder. 
He  takes  sin  as  guilt ;  hence  sin  is  the  consciousness  of 
sin,  t.  ^.,  sense  of  guilt.  But  sin  is  a  very  different  thing 
from  the  sense  of  guilt ;  were  it  not,  a  perfectly  hardened 
sinner  could  have  no  sin  at  all.  But,  besides,  when  he 
says  sin  is  intermediate  between  good  and  evil,  he  is 
making  the  faculty  which  judges  the  sin  the  same  thing 
as  the  sin  it  judges  ;  that  is,  conscience,  and  not  merely 
the  actual  consciousness  of  sin,  but  the  sin  we  are  con- 
scious of,  to  be  the  same  thing.  In  the  next  place,  he 
confoimds  TrapaBaffig  rofiov  and  ai'o/ica  as  equivalent,  a  mere 
acceptance  of  traditional  mistake  about  which  hd  is  so 
loud.  Sin  is  the  principle  of  self-will  or  lawlessness,  which 
does  not  own  God,  and  leads  a  man  to  gratify  his  own 
lusts  without  acknowledging  any  rein  upon  them.  Mr. 
Jowett,  too,  makes  all  these  blunders,  referring  specially 
to  a  chapter  in  which  the  Apostle  speaks  entirely  other- 
wise of  sin,  namely,  that  it  took  occasion  by  the  com- 
mandment to  work  lusts  and  become  exceeding  sinful. 
It  was  an  active  principle,  as  elsewhere  a  law  of  our 
nature.  And  again,  having  made  the  blunder  of  saying 
that  sin  is  transgression  of  law,  he  makes  the  Apostle 
correct  himself,  as  if  he  had  said  it  was  and  then  con- 
tradicted himself  by  saying  that  shi  was  in  the  world 
without  l?iw,  by  declaring  (softening  it  down)  that  he 
meant  it  was  not  imputed.  There  can  be  no  trmisgres" 
sion  when  there  is  no  law.  What  is  there  to  transgress  ? 
But  self-will  and  lust,  lawlessness,  there  may  be.  It  is 
the  state  of  fallen  man,  only  the  law  makes  sin  exceed- 
ing sinful.     Every  word  in  all  he  says  is  a  blunder,  not 


only  as  to  St.  Paul's  meaning,  but  as  to  intellectual  ap- 
prehension of  moral  truths.  He  has  no  idea  of  any  such 
thing  as  truth.  Hence  Anselm  has  one  set  of  ideas,  the 
Schoolmen  another,  the  Fathers  another,  Paul  another, 
arising  from  his  age,  from  which  ours  is  different ;  so 
that  our  views  of  truth,  i.  c.  what  is  truth  for  us  must  be 
difierent  from  what  was  truth  for  Paul,  and  Mr.  Jowett 
cleai-s  it  all  u[).  Thus;  "We  acknowledge  that  there 
is  a  difference  between  the  meaning  of  justification  by 
faith  to  St.  Paul  and  to  ourselves.  Kighteen  hundred 
years  cannot  have  ]iassed  away,  leaving  the  world  and 
the  mind  of  man,  or  the  use  of  language,  the  same  it 
was."'  And  the  truth  of  God — the  ti-uth  of  this  matter 
itself,  if  you  please  ?  It  does  not  even  occur  to  him 
there  is  or  can  be  such  a  thing.  The  ideas  of  the  day 
are  i-eally.  for  Mr.  Jowett,  the  Christianity  of  the  day. 
They  ai-e  all  that  he  can  see.  Not  that  he  does  not 
admit  that  other  ages  have  clothed  it  in  their  own  garb, 
but  that  he  holds  he  is  entitled  to  think  Paul,  in  every 
respect,  did  so  too.  And  this  age,  and  these  philoso- 
phical men,  are  capable  of  divesting  it  of  medijeval  and 
scholastic  forms,  and  Pauline  fonns  arising  from  his 
habits  of  thinking  and  apostolic  conflicts  with  Judaism, 
and  give  it  to  us  purified  by  modem  philosophy.  Such 
he  declares  is  the  task  of  modem  interpretation.  I 
rannot,  of  course,  now  pursue  a  critique  of  Mr.  Jowett's 
volume  on  the  Romans;  but  so  entire  a  misconception 
of  Paul's  meaning  and  all  moral  truth,  and  all  Justness 
of  thought.  I  could  hardly  have  supposed  possible  in  an 
intelligent  pei-son,  as  Mr.  Jowett  surely  is,  There  is  just 
activity  of  mind  enough  'to  make  hira  blunder  largely 
and  livelily.  "  WTio  would  speak."  he  asks,  "  of  the  un- 
regenerate  heart  of  Cj£sar  and  Achilles  ?■'  .  .  .  "Those 
who  never  heard  the  name  of  Chiist.  who  never  admit 
the  thought  of  Christ,  cannot  be  brought  within  the 
circle  of  Christian  feelings  and  associations."  Now.  ' 
do  not  touch  on  the  doctrinal  force  of  unregenerate, 
wliich  is  true  of  every  ono  till  he  is  regenerate.  It  ' 
the  excessive  blundering  of  Mr.  Jowett's  mind.     What 


-I 

at   ^M 


>,  to  tue 


r 


have  Christian  feelings  and  associations  to  do  with  uni,^ 
generate  ?  Cannot  ( 'hristianity  pronounce  on  the  state 
of  men  outside  its  palo?  Does  it  not  do  so?  Is  not  a 
salvation  sent  into  the  world  liocause  of  that  state,  to  the 
consciousness  of  which,  where  efiectual,  it  brings  them 
Is  not  the  Epistle  to  tlie  llomans  an  elaborate  discussk 
of  the  state  of  the  heathen  and  of  the  Jew,  leading^ 
the  conclusion  of  the  need  of  Chi-istianity,  of  justification 
by  faith,  because  of  that  state  ?  Does  it  not  declare  that 
they  that  have  sinned  without  law  shall  perish  \nthout 
law,  and  they  that  have  sinned  under  law  shall  be  judged 
by  the  law?  Uegeneration  is  not  the  fts]>ect  of  Panl's 
doctrine  as  much  n.s  justification.  But  except  a  man  be 
bom  again  applies  to  Cffsar  as  it  does  to  others.  But 
the  notion  of  Ciesar  not  being  in  the  circle  of  Christian 
feelings,  and  hence  not  to  be  called  unregenerate,  in- 
volving as  it  does  a  denial  of  Christianity's  pronouncing 
on  his  state,  whatever  it  is,  according  to  its  feelings,  is, 
especiaDy  in  the  Commentary  on  the  Komans,  as  great  a 
blunder  as  can  well  be  conceived.  It  has  no  sense,  be- 
cause if  he  speaks  of  a  heathen's  not  having  Christian 
feeling,  it  is  an  absurdity ;  if  he  means  that  Christianity 
does  not  pronounce  on  the  heathen  state  according  to 
its  feelings,  it  is,  in  commenting  on  the  lloraans, 
a  greater  absurdity  still.  It  is  founded  on  the  pro- 
position of  Mr.  Jowett's,  that  "the  guilt  of  sin 
inseparable  from  the  knowledge  of  sin. "  But 
even  has  that  to  do  with  holding  a  heathen  to  be 
generate?  Ail  are  loiregenerate  that  ai-c  not  regenerate. 
The  question  of  guilt  follows,  I  must  say,  he  is  the 
most  inaccurate  writer,  morally  and  logically,  I  ever 
met  with.  That  he  should  be  ignorant  of  the  com- 
munication of  Divine  life,  so  as  to  assert  the  impos- 
sibihty  of  such  contrasts,  is  too  evident  in  the  wiiola 
book  to  cause  any  surprise  here.  ~ 

W.  It  is  a  singular  absence  of  all  true  moral 
hensions.  and  forces  itself  on  one's  notice  in  a  coi 
tary  on  a  book  which  goes  into  all  the  depths 
sp/>i'ehensions  in  the  conscience. 


J  pro- 
sin  f^M 


ine  com- 
le  impos- 
the  wtiola      , 


H.  You  have  a  specimen  of  his  way  of  judging 
iu  the  following,  on  Rora,  v.  12  :  "  [f,^opT«i]  Neither  ori- 
ginal sin,  nor  actual,  nor  the  guilt  of  sin  as  distinguished 
from  sin  itself  (for  such  differences  had  no  existence  in 
the  Apostle's  age),  nor  like  ufia^r^^n,  confined  to  the  act 
of  sin."  Think  of  a  revelation  being  given  of  God,  in 
order  to  give  us  the  notions  of  the  Ajiostle's  age,  ob- 
scured by  receiving  the  colour  of  each  successive  age  tor 
1,800  years,  and  then  only  brought  to  light  by  what  is 
the  task  of  philosophy.  I  will  add  the  e.vplanation  this 
philosophy  gives :  "  n^mpTdi  describes  sin  rather  as  a  mental 
state  or  in  relation  to  the  mind"  (do  you  understand?). 
*•  It  is  often  the  power  of  sin.  or  sin  collectively ;  some- 
times, as  here,  a  personification."  That  gives  the  mean- 
ing of  '  sin  entered  into  the  world.' 

W.  He  is  a  singular  person  to  write  an  essay  on  the 
interpretation  of  Scripture. 

M.  Yet  it  seems  the  bent  of  his  mind.  We  will 
return  to  the  Essays.  Of  Scripture  testimony  to  its 
own  inspiration,  and  of  the  force  of  prophecy,  we 
have  spoken,  and  of  imperfect  presentations  of  truth. 
Presentations  of  moral  relationship  with  God  according 
to  the  responsibility  of  man,  and  the  actual  lesults  dS 
the  fall,  or  the  search  after  happiness  "  under  the  sun,' 
and  of  discipline  when  grace  is  not  liiHy  known,  nor 
redemption  reveale<l  as  accomplished,  we  do  find  in 
Scripture.  But  this  is  most  gracious  of  God,  and  full 
of  the  deepest  instruction.  As  to  any  opposition  be- 
tween that  and  Christianity,  such  a  thought  is  only  a 
confusion  between  man's  standing  on  his  own  resjionsi- 
bility,  man  in  flesh  as  Scripture  speaks,  and  grace 
meeting  the  consequences  of  all  this  by  redemption,  and 
so  man  in  Christ.  As  fo  reconciling  soieace  and  Scrip- 
ture. Mr.  Jowett's  next  topic,  1  have  sj)nken  of  it  id- 
ready.  Let  God  be  true  and  every  man  a  liar.  I  deny 
the  contradiction,  abhor  the  principle  of  policy,  Ixjt  us 
have  the  truth  at  all  events.  As  t^i  infidel  theologians' 
facts,  admitted  facts,  I  have  learned  to  distrust  them  all. 
The  long  existence  of  the  earth  T  have  little  doubt  c»f. 


I 
I 


Of  raao  upon  it  I  most  certainly  have.  Mi 
would  give  all  up  in  fear,  before  it  is  proved,  to  have 
his  own  ideas  of  inspiration.  I  am  not  afraid.  I  sec 
infidels  repeating  the  uotious  and  hypotheses  of  enemies 
of  the  truth  as  certain ;  and  because  they  all  take  it  for 
granted,  declaring  it  is  an  admitted  fact.  They  are  the 
most  unhistorical  class  I  know,  searching  the  least  of 
all  into  facts.  .Strauss  himself  has  declared  that  their 
objections  to  the  gospels  are  utterly  untenable,  and 
therefore  made  a  myth  of  it  all ;  about  as  absuni  as  the 
other  system,  if  once  it  is  exauiined:  Indeed,  it  has  died 
out.  One  pnives  that  tho  second  of  Luke,  if  by  the 
same  author  as  the  first,  must  have  also  had  lyric  poems 
in  it.  as  the  disciples  praised  God ;  the  first  therefore  is 
certainly  a  poetical  morsel  tacked  on,  being  written  bv 
another.  And  this  is  by  no  means  to  be  counted  oa 
extreme  example. 

W.  This  habit  of  making  theii-  assumption  that  ^ 
phecies,  miracles,  &c,,  cannot  be  true,  and  judging  of 
according  to  their  own  notions  to  prove  they  are 
true,  is  too  constant  and  of  too  gross  a  character  to  need 
your  saying  much  more  about  it.  None  can  have  read 
any  of  these  statements  without  noticing  this.  Daniel's 
jirophesj-ing  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  is  the  i)roof  as  we 
have  seen,  that  his  prophecy  is  spurious  ;  because  there 
cannot  be  a  prophecy,  and  the  writer  must  have  Hi 
theu.  Then  he  l:>ecomes  in  their  language  the  Mj 
bean  Daniel,  and  all  is  settled.  And  the  English  coi 
and,  credulous  as  our  nation  is,  and  apt  to  think  oti 
wiser  than  itself,  all  passes  tor  gospel  with  them, 

IT.  But  Mr.  Jowett,  inconsistent  as  he  is,  adoi 
this  pctltio  principii,  which,  starting  from  the  assumjH 
tion  that  prophecy  is  impossible,  proves  thereby  that 
those  that  pretend  to  be  prophets  are  not.  He  complains 
that  Isaiah's  mentioning  Cyrus  is  not  taken,  as  it  woi 
he  in  another  book,  as  a  proof  that  it  must  have 
written  after  his  time,  which  is  simply  the  (( priori 
ment  that  there  cannot  be  a  prophecy.  We  must  con- 
tinue a  little  with  some  further  details,  as  they  harass 


1  oa 
not 


upiauis 
■•  woid^H 


355 


the  niinti  when  passed  over.  Mr.  Jowett  tjnietly  takes 
for  granted,  leaves  it  to  be  supposed,  that  it'  Schleier- 
macher  has  spoken  of  discrepancies  in  the  narrative  of 
the  infancy,  it  is  all  true,  and  we  must  tin-n  to  what  is 
called  setting  free  by  the  truth  to  escape  it,  but  let 
inspiration  down  lo  a  nullity.  And  that  is  what  is 
done,  but  nothing  said  about  it.  Now,  I  deny  altoge- 
ther these  discrepancies.  ^  1  admit  traditions  as  to 
the  infancy  as  told  by  MatthcM',  there  may  be ;  but  in 
the  gospels  there  arc  none, — only  the  account  in  Mat- 
thew is  so  brief,  ur  rather,  there  being  no  account  of 
Jesus's  birth  at  all,  the  circunistanc-es  narrated  by  Luke 
have  no  chronological  place  in  Matthew,  Mr.  Jowett 
refers  to  the  7iatural  nieaning  of  "  Why  are  they  then 
baptized  for  the  dead  V  Now,  the  natural  way  of 
knowing  what  a  person  means  is  to  pay  attention  to 
what  he  says.  You  may  remark  that  verses  20 — 28 
form  (what  Paul  is  singularly  fond  of,  and  what  Mr. 
Jowett  more  singularly  objects  to  in  his  commentary — 
one  would  say  really  with  the  object  of  making  alt 
obscure — that  is)  a  parenthesis,  and  Si)  refers  to  18, 
and  30,  Sec,  to  19,  Baj)tizing  is.  in  the  nature  of 
Christianity,  baptizing  unto  death ;  and  the  case  of  those 
filling  up  the  ranks,  as  has  been  said,  when  some  were 
actually  dead,  is  referred  to  as  showing  the  folly  of  the 
whole  C'hiistian  course,  if  there  was  no  resurrection. 
The  dead  had  perished  ;  the  living  were  the  most 
miserable  of  all  men.  Whatever  should  men  become 
Christians  for,  or  jeopard  their  lives,  if  it  were  thus  'i 
At  any  rate,  Mr,  Jowett  leaves  us  to  di^-ine  what  true  in- 
terpretation would  afi'ord  us.  If  he  refer  to  a  subsequent 
superstition  of  baptizing  over  dead  bodies,  it  is  a  gross 
anachronism,  and  unworthy  of  Christianity;  but  that 
is  no  matter  for  a  rationalist.  It  is  an  objection,  and 
that  is  everything,  though  they  are  as  much  in  the  dark 
as  others.  The  difficulty  as  to  "  This  generation  shall 
not  pass  away,"  is  a  prejudice  flowing  from  the  English 
use  of  the  word  generation.  It  is  quite  as  much  used 
for  a  moral  class  in  Scripture,  as  for  the  |ieriod  marked 


irked       ^H 


356 

))y  human  life ;    and  if  Deut.  xxxii.  5,  20,  where  this 
very  subject  is  treated  of,  be  referred  to,  the  sense  is 
plain.     And  here  we  have  a  minute  and  most  striking 
fulfilment.     The  generation  is  not  passed  away.     The 
Jews  remain  a  perpetual  witness  that  there  are  other 
thoughts  in  Scripture  than   those   of  rationalists ;    an 
objective  fact,  witnesshig  to  God's  government  of  the 
world  according  to  the  words  of  the  prophet  and  of  the 
Lord.   As  to  "  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church," 
you  will  ever   find  rationalists   favouring   popery,  be- 
cause they  are  indifferent  to  truth,  and  dislike  Scripture. 
Christ  does  not  declare  He  will  build  His  Church  on 
Peter,  but  gives  that  name  to  him,  "  a  stone" — for  so 
it  is ;  because,  in  his  confession,  he  had  a  part  in  the 
power  of  that  truth  on  which  He  would  build  it, — not 
that  He  was  the  Messiah,  not  Son  of  God,  King  of 
Israel,  but  what  only  Simon  had  confessed,  and   the 
Father  had  revealed  to  him,  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of 
the  living  God.     This,  proved  in  resurrection,  was  the 
basis  of  the  Chm'ch  of  God.   All  this  side  Christ's  grave 
was,  save  Christ  Himself,  in  death's  power — and  He 
willingly  put  Himself  there.     But  as  Son  of  the  living 
God,  He  could  not  be  holden  of  it.     And  he  who  had 
his  seat  in  the  gates  of  Hades  had  no  power  over  what 
was  passed  beyond  his  realm  and  dominion.     Resur- 
rection of  Chi-ist's  person,  in  whom  the  power  of  it  (and 
righteousness  of  it  too)  was,  was  the  overthrow  of  and 
beyond  the  power  of  Satan,  and  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  Church — Christ's  person  as  Son  of  the  living  God. 
That  could  not  be  held  by  death.     Hence  Peter  clings 
to  this  word  in  his  Epistle:    "He  hath  begotten  us 
again  to  a  living  hope."     Christ  is  the  living  stone  to 
whom  we  come,  and  come  as  living  stones.     As  to 
Phil.  ii.  6,  I  believe  it  to  be  a  contrast  with  the  first 
Adam,  and  a  magnificent  one.     I  do  not  desire  to  rest 
the  argument  on  "  thinking  it  no  robbery.''     The  word 
is  a  very  difficult  one  indeed, — never  used,  I  believe, 
elsewhere ;  its  form  may  be  active,  and  not  the  object 
or  thing  done.    The  force  I  believe  to  be,  he  did  not  do 


357 

as  Adam,  who,  when  in  the  form  of  man,  sought  as  a 
robbery,  a  booty  to  Ijc  acquired,  to  bo  equal  with  God ; 
but,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  emptied  Himself  of  tlic 
glory  Ho  had.  It  does  suppose  Christ  to  be  in  the 
state  of  Godhead,  as  Adam  in  the  state  of  a  man ;  but 
the  special  force  of  the  proof  does  not  rest  in  the  word 
"  robbery."  as  contrasted  with  "  booty,"  or  object  of 
robbery— for  that  is  the  only  question  in  the  passage, 
because  it  is  tipiruyfiuv,  not  apTrayfia.  As  to  Roui.  iii.  25, 
Mr.  Jowett  rests  on  his  statement  in  his  owii  com- 
mentarj',  in  which  he  follows  De  Wette  and  Meyer,  and 
still  more  Winzer,  and  tJ'anslates  through  faith,  by  his 
blood.  I  do  not  see  what  he  gains  by  it;  he  gromids 
the  ti-anslation  on  faith  in  not  being  used,  which  is  u 
simple  mistake  which  a  concordance  would  have  recti- 
fied. If  a  man  is  justified  by  faith,  by  his  blood,  I 
suppose  the  blood  of  Christ  must  be  efficacious  to  justity 
him — as,  indeed,  is  expressly  said — and  his  faith  in  it 
is  right.  But  faith  "in"  is  used.  ITie  words,  "tiaith 
in  His  blood,"  are  not  found  elsewhere;  but  "justified 
by  His  blood,"  "redemption  through  His  blood,"  so  as 
to  present  its  efficacy  as  the  subject-matter  of  faith,  is 
often  found.  His  gloss  on  Gal.  iii.  26,  seems  to  me  an 
utterly  fake  interpretation.  His  allegation  is,  that 
"  faith,  like  all  other  Christian  states,  is  often  spoken  of 
as  existmg  in  Christ."  I  am  not  quite  sure  what  this 
lucid  phrase  mean?, — whether  it  is  that  Christ  had 
faith,  or  whether  Mr.  Jowett  refers  to  the  general  ex- 
pression '•  in  Christ,"  as  a  jtosition  in  whidi  anything 
was  reahzed.  At  ail  events,  Gal.  iii.  26,  cannot  be 
interpreted  in  either  way.  "We  aie  all  the  children  of 
God  through  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,"  seems  to  me  as  plain 
as  possible.  2  Tim.  i.  13,  may  be  taken  as  characteristic 
as  a  position :  "  Faith  and  love  which  are  in  Christ 
Jesus."  2  Tim.  iii.  15,  is  clearly  faith  in  Christ  Jesus, 
so  is,  beyond  all  question.  Ejih.  i.  15,  and  Col.  i.  4; 
and.  if  Tischendorf  is  to  be  believed,  John  i.  15, 
which  however  may  be  doubted.  Fritschs,  whose  com- 
mentai'y  has  been  called  a  Greek  grammar,  insists  that 


358 

on  grammatical  groimds  there  is  no  foundation  for  the 
assertion. ,  Doctrinally  I  could  have  no  objection ;  the 
word  his  own  would  incline  me  to  coimect  ev  tu>  avrov 
iufiari  with  iXaffrnpioy.  Avruv  is  emphatic,  and  a  propitia- 
tion in  [the  power  of]  His  own  blood,  [and  that] 
through  faith  is  perhaps  clearer  than  faith,  .in  His  own 
blood.  Were  avmv  after  ae/xar*,  I  should  be  disposed  to 
take  it  as  in  our  English  translation.  But  the  ground 
Mr.  Jowett  takes  is  imtenable,  and  the  use  of  it  here  as 
any  perversion  quite  unfounded.  There  is  nothing  to 
struggle  for.  Nor  in  Rom.  xv.  6.  The  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  well-known 
expression  of  Scripture,  as  putting  us  so  blessedly  in  the 
same  place  with  Himself  in  John  xx.  In  Eph.  i., 
where  the  blessings  to  be  referred  to  each  name  are 
distinguished  in  4  and  5.  And  the  prayer  of  chap.  i. 
founded  in  one  name ;  of  iii.  in  the  other.  I  do  not 
think  these  complaints  quite  free  from  being  disin- 
genuous. As  to  1  John  V.  7,  it  needs  no  remark ;  and 
as  to  1  Tim.  iii.  16,  it  is  a  question  of  criticism  which 
orthodox  and  rationalists  have  alike  discussed,  j>erhaj)s 
both  with  ])rejudices.  As  to  Rom.  ix.  5,  it  is  certain 
all  the  Fathers  took  it  as  said  of  Chiist,  all  the 
Reformers,  and  the  vast  majority  of  modems ;  and,  as 
far  as  I  am  aware,  Erasmus  first  proposed  the  change. 
The  moderns,  who  Avisli  it  otherwise,  do  so  on  doctrinal 
grounds.  So  Meyer,  Fritsche,  Tischendorf,  Wetstein, 
and  others.  De  Wette  declares  nothing  satisfactory. 
Holding  the  Deity  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  foundation 
of  all  my  faith,  the  usual  punctuation  of  a  full  stop  after 
Kara  crapKa  scoms  to  me  to  havc  uo  seusc.  And  if  all  do 
not  refer  to  Christ,  I  should  set  the  stop  after  '  over  all,' 
Of  whom  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came,  He  who 
is  over  all  things,  God  [be]  blessed  for  ever.  Amen. 
I  rather  think  Erasmus  spoke  of  this  too,  but  cannot 
exactly  say.  This  stopping  leaves  the  question  unde- 
cided. It  depends  on  the  insertion  of  [be].  All  these 
attempts  to  throw  discredit  on  ordinary  interpretation 
have  an   evident  animus.     And   Mr.  Jowett  and  his 


companions  have  not  left  it  to  nice  criticism  on  passages, 
admitted  to  be  difficult,  to  have  their  orthodoxy  called  in 
question.  This  part  of  Mr.  Jowett's  argument  I  leave. 
No  one  wishe.s  to  hinder  sound  critical  inquiry  into  the 
reading  or  interpretation  of  the  text. 

W.  He  who  believes  it  to  be  inspired,  would  be  the 
first  to  desire  it. 

H.  Clearly  so:  I  turn  briefly  to  another  pomt. 
These  interpreters  have  created  an  immense  difficulty  ■ 
for  themselves,  partly  incident  to  their  position,  but 
more  connected  still  with  their  doctrine.  Denying  the 
distinction  of  the  regenerate,  of  the  Church,  of  what 
Scripture  calls  saints,  this  being  for  them  only  a 
forced  and  unnatural  position  of  Christianity,  and  Uien 
all  the  world  being,  by  an  effort  of  imagination,  chris- 
tlauized,  they  seek  to  apply  the  precepts  of  Christianity 
to  civil  society.  Hence  I  read  "the  frame  of  civiliza- 
tion, that  is  to  say,  institutions  and  laws,  the  usages  of 
business,  the  customs  of  society ;  these  are  for  the  most 
part  mechanical,  capable  only  in  a  certain  degree  of  a 
higher  and  Ej)iritual  life.  Christian  motives  have  never 
existed  in  such  strength  as  to  make  it  possible  to 
entrust  tliein  with  the  preservation  of  social  order." 
Moral  light  Christianity  has,  I  admit,  brought  in  ;  it  has, 
I  admit,  acted  beneficially  on  society.  Men  do  not  do 
in  the  light  what  they  do  in  the  dark.  But  what  the 
spiritual  life  of  usages  of  business  is  w^oiUd  be  hard  to 
tell.  But  what  is  the  result  ?  Christianity  is  taken  as 
a  kind  of'  essence,  an  infusion,  which  is  to  influence 
men ;  and  followers  of  Christ  disappear.  "  Are  its 
maxims  to  be  modified  by  experience,  or  acted  on  in 
defiance  of  experience?  Are  the  accidental  circum- 
stances of  the  iirst  believers  to  become  a  rule  for  us  ?  .  . 
.  .  That  can  hai  dly  be,  consistently  with  the  changes  of 
human  things."  Now  that  you  cannot  frame  politics  on 
Christianity  I  do  not  deny.  It  is  felt  to  be  impossible; 
but  Mr.  Jowett  concludes,  not  that  the  Christian  is  to 
abide  by  what  is  pi-operly  Christian,  but  "  our  Lord 
Himself  has  left  I>ehind  Hira  words  which  contain 

A    A. 


I 

I 


•    360 

principle  large  enough  to  admit  all  the  forms  of  society 
or  life.  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  ;"  a  singular 
proof  of  it,  that  because  it  is  not  of  it  at  all,  it  admits 
them  all.  What  means,  '  admits  them'  ?  Does  it  mean, 
has  common  principles  with  them  all  ?  That  cannot  be. 
Is  exclusively  one '(  That  it  is  not.  It  directs  obedi- 
ence to  human  authorities  as  of  God.  Or  is  it,  that  it 
has  its  own  directions  for  its  true  followers,  not  the  letter 
perhaps,  but  its  own  guidance  for  those  who  follow  Christ 
as  pilgrims  and  strangers,  gives  a  Divine  path  through 
the  world,  guiding  in  all  real  common  duties,  but  giving 
a  heavenly  path  through  them  {  "  If  ye  live  in  the  Spirit 
walk  in  the  Spirit."  "  If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him 
follow  me;  and  where  I  am,  there  shall  also  my  servant 
be. '  "  Whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.''  Is  it  spiritual  direction  for 
those  who  are  strangers  and  pilgrims,  declaring 
plainly  that  they  seek  a  country;  or  an  arrangement 
to  have  an  inward  life,  and  do  at  Rome  as  they  do  at 
Rome  ? 

W,  I  cannot  doubt  for  a  moment  that  Christ  has 
left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps ; 
and  that  the  precepts  of  the  New  Testament  form  and 
guide  our  path:  that  he  who  loves  God  keeps  His 
commandments — and  that  they  are  not  grievous,  for  he 
that  is  bom  of  God  overcometh  the  world;  and  all  that 
is  in  the  world  is  not  of  the  Father.  Alas !  I  feel  I 
come  very  short,  but  I  cannot  doubt  an  instant  that  the 
principles  you  refer  to,  if  I  have  rightly  understood 
them  (and  in  reading  the  Essays  this  part  struck  me  as 
giving  a  key  note  to  much,  I  mean  the  mingling 
Christianity  Arith  the  world,  swamping  it  in  it),  are 
distinctive  of  all  that  is  heavenly,  of  all  that  is  Christian, 
all  that  lifts  the  whole  spirit  of  a  man  out  of  the 
wretched  motives  of  self  and  the  world  into  Christ's 
motives.  I  am  persuaded  that  it  is  this  which  has 
destroyed  the  testimony  of  Christianity  in  the  world. 
Men,  alas,  thinking  of  self  too,  have  put  out  almost  the 
light  under  the  pretext  of  winning  mm,  to  look  at  it. 


But  we  Jiave  lost  our  own  joys,  and  dimmed  the  witness 
to  Christ  hj  it, 

H.  1  am  glad  to  hear  you  say  so.  We  are,  alas ! 
short,  very  short ;  but  it  is  well  in  such  a  matter  to 
have  a  fixed  principle  of  conduct.  Mr,  Jowett  having 
.shown  the  impossibihty  of  framing  society  on  Christian 
principles,  Christ's  kingdom  being  not  of  this  world, 
then  lets  down  individual  Christianity  in  this  way — 
"  It  is  a  counsel  of  perfection,  and  has  its  dwelling-place 
in  the  heart  of  man.  .  .  ."  "That  is  the  answer  to  a 
doubt  which  is  also  raised  I'especting  the  obligation  of 
the  letter  of  the  Gosjrel  on  individual  Christians.  But 
this  inwardness  of  the  words  of  Christ  is  what  few  are 
able  to  receive."  So,  in  result,  you  have  the  words  of 
Christ  inward  in  the  heart,  smd  all  forms  of  society 
and  of  life  admitted,  because  Christ's  kingdom  is  not  of 
this  world,  so  we  are  not  to  bring  it  into  it.  It  is  a 
comfortable  mysticism  which  by  professing  to  have  the 
words  inwardly,  can  have  any  form  of  life  and  Morldli- 
ness  outwardly.  Now  I  admit  the  letter  kills.  We  have 
the  spirit  of  power,  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind.  But 
this  is  merely  the  denial  of  the  authority  of  Scripture  in 
the  largest  sense — •'  be  not  conformed  to  this  world." 
I  would  arrest  your  attention  a  moment  on  another 
passage  here,  as  very  deeply  characteristic  of  the  low 
ground  on  which  all  these  reasonings  rest.  Mr.  Jowett 
complains  of  the  "extraordinary  and  unreasonable 
importance  attached  to  single  words  .  .  .  divorce, 
marriage  with  a  wife's  sister,  inspiration,  the  personality 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  infant  baptism,  episcopacy,  tlivine 
right  of  kings,  original  sin."  Now  really  a  person  must 
have  been  in  a  very  singular  school  to  give  such  a  list. 
Lightness  in  divorce  is  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of 
God :  and  in  my  judgment  marriage  with  a  wife's  sister 
is  the  destruction  of  the  free  happiness  of  families. 
Epi3Cf)pacy  and  infant  baptism  have  their  importance 
through  their  connection  with  more  general  ti-utbs. 
Kings  have  a  divine  right  as  long  as  God  keeps  them 
on  the  throne.  That  is,  they  have,  however  they  geti 
aa2 


I 
I 


I 


there,  their  jiower  from  God.  But  to  mis  i 
subjects  with  inspiration,  the  jiersonality  of 
Ghost,  and  original  sin,  shows  an  absence  of  the 
spiritual  element  truly  remarkable.  If  there  be  no 
inspiration,  I  have  no  communication  from  God ;  the 
greatest  privilege  I  can  have  on  earth ;  the  only  thing 
that  puts  me,  in  a  sure  and  Divine  way,  in  relationship 
and  intercourse  with  God.  The  personality  of  the  .Sjiirit 
is  perhaps  the  most  practically  imjiortant  truth,  the 
most  characteristic  of  Christianity,  not  as  foundation, 
but,  as  to  state  and  power,  of  all  in  Scripture;  and 
original  sin,  whatever  view  we  may  have  of  it,  the  foun- 
dation question  of  all  man's  relationship  with  Go{l.  And 
these  Mr.  Jowett  casts  in  with  episcopacy,  and  ijues- 
tions,  serious  no  doubt  in  detail,  but  some  of  mere  forms 
of  thought.  Instead  of  rising  above  his  age,  he  is 
immersed,  and,  as  t^i  his  mind,  the  divinest  truths  with 
him,  in  the  comparatively  [letty  questions  which  aljsorb 
the  attention  of  the  narrow  circle  in  which  he  moves. 
I  do  not  charge  him  with  design  in  it,  but  singular 
narrowness.  If  he  had  said,  See  what  they  have  reduced 
f'hristianity  to,  questions  of  forms  of  Church  govern- 
ment, and  divorce,  and  ordinances,  I  should  have  under- 
stot>d  him,  though  he  would  have  found  assailants ;  but 
he  reduces  Christianity  to  this  level,  lor  he  puts  that  on 
which  as  a  present  thing  Christianity  rests  (for  redemp- 
tion is  the  foundation),  questions  as  to  (mr  alienation  iu 
natiu^  from  God,  the  reality  of  blessed  communications 
from  God  Himself,  and  His  living  pei-sonal  presence 
with  us,  on  the  same  footing,  in  the  same  categorv  of 
importance,  as  episcopacy  and  the  mai'riage  of  a  wife's 
sister. 

W.  It  is  surprising.  But  I  think  it  shows  he  does 
not  believe  himself  in  any  of  these  things  ;  he  could  not 
class  them  thus  if  he  did. 

fll  Surely,  he  does  not.  We  have  already  heard 
what  he  says  as  to  inspiration,  and  we  will  look  at  what 
he  says  as  to  the  others.  But  let  us  note  for  ourselves: 
— If  there  be  no  inspiration,  there  is  no  communication 


from  God  which  is  from  Himself,  which  is  the  commu- 
nication of  God's  mind  from  and  by  God,  which  gives 
to  man's  intelligence  Unine  thoughts,  to  his  heart  the 
witness  that  God  delights  to  give  them  to  him.  All 
that  has  enlarged  the  intelligence,  fed  the  heart,  sus- 
tained the  faith  of  all  that  have  trusted  God  in  all  ages, 
and  in  all  forms  of  Church  government ;  what  has 
marked  the  spiritual  tone  of  every  divinely  taught  and 
spiritually  elevated  mind  is  gone.  And  they  know,  the 
poorest  and  most  ignorant  believer  (I  do  not  say 
Mr.  Jowett)  knows  what  he  means  by  inspiration.  He 
could  not  define  it  perhaps,  does  not  know  what  define 
means,  but  he  knows  that  he  has  communications  from 
God  in  wliich  his  soul  drinks  of  living  water,  a  Word 
of  God,  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,  discerning 
the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart ;  he  eats  the  words 
of  God.  as  .Jeremiah  says,  and  they  are  the  joy  and 
rejoicing  of  his  heart.  They  have  an  authority  over 
him  which  he  delights  to  obey ;  reproofs,  if  needed,  his 
heart  bows  to ;  promises  his  faith  leans  on ;  a  Saviour 
revealed  whom  his  soul  loves ;  and  all  this  because  he 
receives  it  with  a  di^■ine  faith  as  inspired,  as  God's  Word, 
as  God's  having  condescended,  taken  pains,  shall  I  say, 
to  speak  to  him  for  every  want  here,  and  the  brightness 
of  heavenly  hopes  hereafter.  He  has  seen  his  Saviour 
quoting  them  as  authority,  iLsing  them  to  repel  Satan ; 
the  Apostles  proving  the  truth  by  them,  or  declaring 
that  their  own  words  were  God's  commands ;  he  takes 
them  as  all  this,  and  there  is  constant  intercourse 
l)etwcen  fiod  and  his  soul.  Mr.  Jowett  will  quibble  on 
Oeojt.  tuoT^i-,  and  quibble  wrongly.  I  deny  that  2  Tim.  iii. 
16  is  spoken  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  carefully 
worded,  so  as  to  leave  no  pretence  for  such  a  statement. 
llaaa  ypn^n  OtoiryivirTTi.  Whatever  comes  under  the  title 
yfiaiij  it  applies  to,  is  meant  tfl  apply  to.  The  Scriptures 
were  held  then  to  be  a  character  of  writing  which  had 
irrefragalile  authority,  could  not  bo  broken.  Iloly  men 
had  spoken  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Thev  had  not  come  of  the  will  of  man.    Whatever  was 


364 

that,  had  Divine  authority.  Before  Christ  there  was  only 
the  Old  Testament,  of  coui*se.  Mr.  Jowett  at  least  has 
owned  the  New  Testament  to  have  this  character,  has 
owned  that  the  Lord  has  caused  all  holy  Scripture  to  be 
written  for  our  learning.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  com- 
fort of  the  Scriptures.  Our  imiuiry  here  is  not  what 
books  belong  to  it,  but,  whether  prophetic  Scriptures 
are  a  blessed  communication  from  God  Himself  to  men. 
Does  Chi-ist  treat  them  so  Himself,  use  them  so,  de- 
claring from  them,  and  for  Himself,  that  men  live  of 
every  word  that  comes  out  of  the  mouth  of  God  ?  Does 
He  obey  them,  fulfil  them,  declare  that  they  must  be 
fulfilled,  all  that  is  written  in  them  concerning  Him? 
Was  it  what  man  had  invented  or  God  had  revealed 
that  was  to  be  fulfilled  ?  Have  words  proceeding  out  of 
the  mouth  of  God  no  hold  on  Mr.  Jowett's  heart? 
Does  he  mean  to  say  that  the  New  Testament  is  not 
holy  Scripture  which  God  has  caused  to  be  written  for 
our  learning  ?  If  so,  Traora  ypoKprj  deoTryevari].  It  is  inspired. 
He  has  declared  more  than  once,  I  believe,  that  the 
New  Testament  is  holy  Scripture.  I  know  in  the  esti- 
mation of  Essayists  subscriptions  are  elastic  things,  and 
conscience  as  to  them  still  more  so.  However  that  may 
be,  those  who  have  found  words  out  of  the  mouth  of 
God  full  of  grace  and  truth  to  theii*  souls  cling  to  them 
as  the  tokens,  and  precious  and  profitable  tokens,  of 
God's  love.  They  have  seen  the  Apostle  carefully  dis- 
tinguishing his  own  spiritual  experience  and  his  autho- 
ritative commimication  of  the  Divine  mind.  And  they 
believe,  as  Mr.  Jowett  professes  to  believe,  that  the 
New  Testament  is  Scripture,  and  hence,  that  it  is 
QiowvEvtfrr)  divinely  inspired,  and  they  have  no  doubt  what 
that  really  means  for  them.  They  have  the  words  that 
came  out  of  the  mouth  of  God.  They  believe  St.  Paul 
when  they  hear  him  saying,  that  what  he  had  been 
taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost  he  has  communicated  not  by 
words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  teacheth,  and  they  bless  God  for  so  infinite  a 
treasure.     If  Mr.  Jowett  has  it  not,  does  not  believe  it, 


365 


tliey  pity  him.  He  has  lost  what  is  the  greatest  trea- 
sure, communications  of  fiod  Ilimself  to  their  souls. 

W.  Oh !  how  I  agi-ee  with  you,  one  feels  one  has  to 
do  with  God;  and  whether  it  be  for  comfort,  the 
strength  Hnwhtg  from  feeling  such  an  One's  niiud 
guiding  you  when  weak  and  beset,  or  the  joy  it  gives 
when  the  mind  is  free ;  the  way  it  suits  our  weakest, 
aye,  our  worst  moments,  and  yet  in  our  most  elevated 
reaches  out  beyond  all  our  thoughts  with  Divine  fulness, 
one  learns  daily  more  it  is  the  Word  of  God.  It 
makes  me  think  of  the  words  of  the  Apostle  as  the 
revelation  of  what  he  is  there  speaking  of  the  fulness 
of,  "  that  lieing  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  we  may  be 
able  to  comprehend  with  all  saints,  the  length  and 
breadth,  and  depth  and  height,  and  to  know  the  love 
of  <_'hrist,  which  passeth  knowledge,  that  we  may  be 
filled  with  all  the  fidness  of  God."  A  largeness  which 
he  cannot  go  out  into,  a  nearness  of  that  love,  known, 
and  yet  wliich  passes  knowledge,  leading  the  heart, 
rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  into  all  the  fulness  of  God, 
Surely,  he  is  siiealdug  of  the  things  themselves,  but 
what  reveals  it  but  the  Word  ?     Can  man  do  it  ? 

fl.  Well,  we  will  leave  this,  to  use  it  through  grace, 
as  om-  own  resource  in  daily  life,  and  turn  to  the  second 
point  which  Mr.  Jowett  seeks  to  sink  as  far  as  possible. 

W.  The  pei-sonality  of  the  Spirit  ? 

7/.  Yes.  Here,  as  wherever  there  is  spirituality, 
our  Essayists  are  utterly  at  a  loss.  Surely  we  are  all 
most  poor  in  these  things,  without  any  false  modesty  in 
sajing  it.  But  I  do  not  mean  that.  They  have  not  the 
thing  to  Ije  poor  in.  •'  In  the  fourth  e.^araple  the  words 
are  mysterious  (John  .viv.  26 ;  xvi.  15),  and  seem  to  come 
out  of  the  depths  of  a  Divine  consciousness."  Now, 
what  does  that  mean  ? 

W.  Well.  I  really  do  not  know.  All  Christ's  words 
came  out  of  the  depths  of  a  Divine  consciousness.  , 

If.  Surely  they  did ;  but,  coupled  with  mysterious,  it 
intimates,  I  apprehend,  that  they  are  uninteUigible.  It 
is  added,  remark,   "  They  have  sometimes,  nowover. 


366 

received  a  more  exact  meaning  than  they  could  truly 
bear.     What  is  spoken  in  a  figure  is  construed  with  the 
severity  of  a  logical  statement."     It  is  thus  mysterious, 
not  of  the  supposed  exact  meaning,  cannot  bear  it,  and 
spoken  in  a  figure.      Thus  the  immense  and  all-im- 
portant fact  of  the  presence  of  a  Divine  person,  who  is 
sent,  wills,  distributes,  comes,  guides,  teaches,  is  God, 
who  is  lied  against,  is  all  a  figure.     And  this  is  the 
more  pointed,  because  in  the  quoted  passage  lie  was 
another  Paraclete,  who  was  to  take  the  place  of  the  Son 
of  God  personally  with  them  on  earth.     Now  that,  if  a 
Divine  person  dwell  in  us,  so  that  our  bodies  are  the 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  He  should  work  in  a  power 
and  influence  difficult  to  express  in  a  single  form  of 
words  ;  that  He  will  be  a  source  of  thoughts  and  feel- 
ings which  are  ours,  and  yet  His,  so  that  expressions 
necessarily  vary,  to  get  the  whole  of  the  truth,  I  fully 
admit.     It  must  be  so.     That  this  effect  will  be  spoken 
of  as  the  Spirit,  and  the  Divine  person  who  produces  it 
as  the  Spirit  apart  from  the  effect,  is  the  natural  conse- 
quence of  His  working  in  us  when  present.   And  Scrip- 
ture so  speaks ;  but  it  unfolds,  develops,  and  does  not 
weaken  the  truth  of  the  Divine  presence.  It  makes  power, 
but  not  a  figure  of  it.    Thus  I  find,  "  He  who  searcheth 
the  hearts,'*  that  is,  me,  "  knows  what  is  the  mind   of 
the  Spirit ;"  there  it  is  the  effect  that  is  wrought  by  it ; 
"  for  He  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints  according  to 
God ;"  there  it  is  the  Spirit  personally.     This  Scripture 
largely  teaches ;  but  it  does  not  make  a  figure  of  so  great 
a  truth.     These,  for  Mr.  Jowett,  are  passages  "  of  an 
opposite  tenor."      Now,  the  xiv.,  xv.,  xvi.  chapters  of 
John   are   specially   occupied   Avith    the   truth   of  the 
Comforters   coming  when  Christ  went   away.      It  is 
after  unfolding  what  Christ  was  in  the  world,  to  the 
end  of  chapter  vii.,  and  the  rejection  of  His  word,  in 
chapter   viii.,  and  of  His  work,  in  chapter   ix. ;    the 
witness  given  to  His  being  Son  of  God,  Son  of  David, 
Son  of  Man,  in  xi.,  xii.,  and  the  washer  of  His  people's 
feet  whom  He  had  cleansed,  that  they  might  have  a 


aer 


it  subjeotJ^H 
slarincr.  in    ^^ 


part  with  Him  oq  higli,  in  xiii.  (ihe  great 
which  ibllows  on  llis  going  away) ;  after  declaring,  in 
the  beginning  of  xiv.,  that  there  was  ]}Iace  for  them  on 
high,  and  lie  would  come  again  and  fetch  them  there ; 
that  thej  knew  where  He  was  going — for  lie  was  going 
to  the  Father;  and  they  had  seen  the  Father  in  Ilira, 
and  they  knew  the  way;  for  in  coming  to  Him  they 
came  to  the  Father,— lie  proceeds  to  tell  them  the 
great  blessing  of  their  position  while  He  was  away ;  and 
this  was  His  obtaining  another  Comforter,  the  Holy 
Ghost,  whom  JJis  Father  wonld  send  on  llis  going 
away,  and  who  would  bring  to  then-  remembrance*' 
wliat  He  had  said  when  living ;  and  then  in  xv.,  ■whom 
Ifii  would  send  from  the  Father,  so  that  He  would  bear 
witness  as  well  as  themselves;  and  thus  His  heavenly 
glory,  which  they  did  not  know,  would  be  known.  In 
the  xvi.  He  unfolds  all  the  Comforter  would  do  when 
He  came ;  first,  as  to  the  world,  and  then  as  to  them. 
Now,  in  this  we  have  the  plain,  however  momentous 
declaration,  that  as  He,  the  Son,  had  been  with  them 
bodily,  so  another  Comforter,  the  Holy  Ghost,  wonld  be 
with  them  when  He  went — they  would  not  be  left 
alone.  And  the  ditlerenco  is  distinctly  put  as  to  how 
He  could  be  known  in  the  world.  The  world  did  not 
see  Him  or  know  Him,  and  hence  could  not  receive 
Him.  The  world  oiu/ht,  at  least,  to  have  received  Christ ; 
but  there  was  no  question  of  its  receiving  the  Holy 
Ghost.  He  was  given  to  them  that  believe  (John  ever 
speaks  individually,  not  of  the  Church);  with  the  dis- 
ciples He  coidd  abide  (which  Christ  as  He  then  waa 
coiUd  not),  and  would  dwell  in  them  (Christ  had  only 
dwelt  with  them).  And  thus  they  would  know  Him. 
Now.  this  does  confine  the  tme  knowledge  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  those  in  whom  He  dwells.  That  He  ^vrought 
in  special  service,  to  remler  the  disciples  competent 
"ftituesses.  is  most  precious,  hut  no  figtu-c.  It  makes 
know  what  inspiration  is,  and  how,  while  eye-witnesf 
they  were  divine!)'  competent  to  I>o  «">  They  w 
human  witnesses,  but  their  record  '  '  witne; 


tenti^H 


368 

by  the  Holy  Ghost.     This  is  what  a  person,  who  denies 
anything  supernatural   in  inspiration,  of  course  must 
make  "  a  figure  "  of,  "  not  take  exactly  " !     All  that,  we 
understand,  understand  it  well ;  but  it  is  because  it  is 
too  plain,  that,  by  those  who  deny  inspiration,  it  is  said  to 
be  mysterious  and  a  figure  (just  as  Strauss,  ]>ecause  he 
saw  the  folly  of  rationalism,  but  would  not  believe,  made 
the  whole  history  of  the  gospels  a  mjrth)— not  because 
it  is  not  plain.     Of  course  one  verse  does  not  exhaust 
the  subject ;  but  we  are  speaking  of  the  verse  referred 
to  by  Mr.  Jowett.      Can  anything  be  plainer,  however 
solemn  and  blessed,  than  this,— "But  the  Comforter, 
the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will   send   in  my 
name.  He  shall    teach  you  all   things,  and  bring  all 
things  to  your  remembrance  whatsoever  I   have  said 
unto    you;"    that  is,   all   Divine   truth    and    needed 
remembrance  of  Christ's  living  words  ?     I  have  only  to 
believe  it,  and  all  is  plain.     I  do  believe  it.     I  believe 
when  Christ  went  up  on  high,  the  Father  did  send  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  Christ's  name,  that  He  did  teach  the 
Apostles,  and  bring  what  Christ  had  said  to  their  re- 
membrance,  and    that    they  acted,   and   taught,    and 
witnessed  of  Christ,  by  this  power.     What  means  a 
figure  here  ?      Did   not    Christianity   spread   by    this 
means  ?     Is  not,  in  the  Acts,  the  presence  of  this  Com- 
forter the  salient  fact  which  stamps  its  character  on  all 
their  proceedings  ?     That  the  Spirit  wrought  in  a  new 
life,  was  a  Spirit  of  adoption,  made  men  to  abound  in 
hope,  shed  the  love  of  God  abroad  in  believers'  hearts,  and 
ministered  a  thousand  other  blessings,  is  most  true.     A 
Christian's  career  is  designated  by  walking  in  the  Spirit. 
But  the  passage  we  are  considering  is  plain  enough  to 
those  that  understand,  to  those  that  believe.     In  John 
xvi.  15,  it  is  another  side  of  the  Holy  Ghost's  work, 
but  the  same  truth.     The  Holy  Ghost  reveals  to  be- 
lievers (llis  work  in  the  world  had  been  spoken  of), 
the  glory  and  riches  of  Christ— not  merely  recalling 
what  He  had  said  on  earth,  or  leading  unto  truth.     AU 
things  the   Father  has  are  Christ's  (it  was  not  as  if 


Christ,  or  the  Father,  had  some  independent  things); 
heuoe  the  Holy  Ghost  takes  of  what  is  ilis,  aiid  shows 
it.  And.  as  the  Father  was  known  in  the  Son  oa 
earth,  so  the  fulness  of  all  that  belongs  to  the  Father, 
is  known  as  the  Son's  now  He  is  in  heaven  by  the 
Holy  Ghost's  teaching.  Depth  surely  there  is ;  but  the 
passage  is  plain  enough.  You  may  remark  how  the 
blessed  Persons  in  the  Tiinitj'  are  associated  in  both 
cases,  i.  e.,  of  Christ  on  earth  and  (  hrlst  in  heaven,  The 
Holy  Ghost  comes,  and  '*  My  Father  anrl  I  will  come 
and  make  our  abode  with  Hipi."  When  Christ,  as 
Son,  was  working  miracles  on  earth,  the  Father  that 
was  in  Him  did  the  works^  and  He  cast  out  devils  by 
the  Spirit  of  God.  They  are  distinct,  yet  cannot  be 
separated.  Now  that,  on  such  subjects,  we  are  in 
Divine  depths  is  most  true ;  but  the  passages  we  are 
referring  to  are  most  simple  and  plain.  They  affirm 
the  coming  of  the  Comforter,  and  what  He  was  to  do ; 
and  He  came  and  did  it,  and  He  abides  in  true  Chris- 
tians who  thus  know  Him,  and  with  the  true  Church 
for  ever. 

TFl  It  is  simple.  What  we  want  is  to  believe  it  more. 
There  is  very  little  faith  in  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

If.  Alas !  there  is  not :  yet  it  is  appealed  to  so  dis- 
tinctly as  a  known  thuig  in  Scripture,  as  to  make  lis 
ashamed.  The  Apostle,  in  speaking  of  such  a  thing  as 
fornication,  says :  "  Know  yc  not  that  your  bodies  are 
the  temples  of  the  Uoly  Ghost  which  ye  have  of  God  ?" 
So  to  the  Galatians,  who  were  in  a  sad  state,  he  asks, 
"  How  did  you  get  the  Holy  Ghost  ? "  On  that  there 
was  no  obscurity.  .So  as  a  motive  to  avoid  evil  and  the 
measure  of  it:  "Grieve  not  that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise 
with  which  ye  are  sealed  for  the  day  of  redemption." 
So:  "  Hereby  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  Him  (God) 
and  He  in  us.  because  He  has  given  us  of  His  Spirit." 
It  ought  t«  be  an  elementary  point  of  faith,  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  the  Church  and  In  the  true 
Christian.      These  two  tn  ih    Mt 


1 


I 


370 

casts  all  the  slur  and  dimness  he  can,  are  the  hinges  of 
the  whole  condition  of  the  Church  and  of  the  individual 
saint.  The  Word  of  God  and  the  Spirit  of  God.  In 
the  first  alone  we  have  the  mind  of  God :  in  the  second 
alone  spiritual  understanding,  and  power;  and  so,  as 
John  tells  us,  fellowship — wondrous  word! — with  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  the  living  objects  of  daily  faith. 
May  we  be  found  here  simple  and  dependent  "  as  new- 
bom  babes." 

W.  It  is  very  hard  to  be  simple. 

H.  It  is  in  itself  perfection ;  true  simplicity  is  forget- 
fulness  of  self.  And  there  is  only  one  way  to  arrive  at 
it,  for  it  is,  as  all  spiritual  life,  a  matter  of  overcoming, 
and  that  way  is  being  much  with  God,  and  God  known 
in  grace,  because  then  self,  which  is  the.  opposite  of  sim- 
plicity, dies  down,  so  to  speak. 

W.  I  am  sure  it  is  the  way.  Nothing  replaces  that 
communion;  and  then  there  is  a  perception  of  Divine 
power  and  enlargement  which  is  not  found  anywhere 
else.  Our  eyes  see,  as  Peter  (negatively)  expresses  it, 
afar  oif.  We  are  not  ;ivw7rai:oiT£c.  But  pursue  your 
subject. 

ff,  Tlie  next  point  is,  original  sin.  Now,  I  have  no 
love  for  scholastic  terms :  I  prefer  Scripture  ones  infi- 
nitely. But  I  do  not  want  to  lose  things  in  getting  rid 
of  words.  Mine  may  be  no  better.  We  are  all  by 
nature  the  children  of  wrath.  Mr.  Jowett  speaks  thus 
of  it :  "  The  justice  of  God  who  rewardeth  every  man 
according  to  his  works,  and  the  Christian  scheme  of 
redemption,  has  (have)  been  staked  on  two  figurative 
expressions  of  St.  Paul,  to  which  there  is  no  parallel  in 
any  other  part  of  Scripture  "  ( 1  Cor.  xv.  22 ;  Hom.  v.  12). 
The  first  has  really  nothing,  or  only  in  an  indirect  way, 
to  do  with  it.  The  second  is  an  elaborate  statement  on 
the  subject.  But  to  say  that  there  is  no  parallel  in 
Scripture,  if  the  doctrine  and  not  the  form  be  referred  to, 
is  to  ignore  all  vital  truth  in  it.  The  history  of  the 
Bible  is  the  history  of  original  sin.  TTie  doctrine  of  the 
Bible  is  the  doctrine  of  God's  putting  it  away  for  etar. 


371 

W.  You  must  explain  yourself  a  little. 

//.  I  will.  Docs  not  the  history  of  our  race  ( I  do 
not  say  our  creatiou)  begin  with  the  declaration  that 
Adam,  fallen  and  driven  out  from  God,  begat  a  sob  in 
his  image  after  his  likeness,  the  fruit  being  shown  in 
sin  against  his  brother,  as  Adam's  sin  had  l)een  against 
God,  and  so  death  being  actually  brought  into  the  world, 
but  the  death  of  the  pious,  marking  the  predominance 
of  evil '( 

W.  It  does. 

H.  That  is  the  early  history  of  original  sin — sin 
attached  to  om-  origin  and  so  in  our  nature.  Furthei': 
when  the  Flood  had  swept  away  the  insupportable 
\ioleuce  and  corruption  of  the  world,  and  the  world 
began  again  in  Noah,  in  whom  rest  was  given  concern- 
ing the  work  of  men's  hands,  and  the  curse  taken  so  far 
of!'  the  ground,  did  he  not  turn  the  blessing  into 
drunkemiess,  he  to  whom  government  had  been  en- 
trusted, and  shame  and  a  son's  wickedness  inaugurate 
the  new  career  of  man  '? 

W.  Yes. 

H.  Tliis  is  the  history  of  original  sin.  Did  not  man 
then  sink,  what  there  is  no  appearance  of  his  doing 
before,  into  idolatry,  having  built  a  tower  to  establish 
his  own  will  ? 

W.  True. 

H.  This  too  is.  The  form  of  the  world  in  nations 
and  peoples  is  founded  on  it.  God  then  called  out 
Abraham  from  the  midst  of  this  idolatry,  and,  after 
a  lapse  of  some  400  years,  so  that  a  people  should  be 
formed,  brings  them  out  of  Egj'pt  with  a  high  hand, 
leads  thcra  to  Sinai  to  give  them  His  law.  the  rule  of 
life  for  a  child  of  Adam.  What  did  they  do  before 
they  had  time  to  get  it  graven  on  stone,  though  they 
had  heard  the  voice  of  God  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire  ' 

W.  They  made  the  golden  calf. 

S.  .Such,  then,  is  man  according  to  the  history  of  the 
Bible :  and  so  you  will  find  it  tlironghout.  Before  the 
coDseraation  of  Aaron  and  his  sous  was  over.  Nadab  and 


372 

Abihu  Lad  offered  strange  lire  and  were  slain,  and 
Israel,  responsible  under  the  priesthood,  closed  its  his- 
tory by  the  Ark's  being  taken,  and  judgments  coming  on 
the  priesthood  itself  in  Eli :  so  that  the  whole  system 
was  closed,  for  without  the  Ark  there  was  no  regular 
association  with  God  at  all.  God  interfered  by. a  pro- 
phet, but  that  was  sovereign  grace.  When  the  royalty 
was  established  Solomon  fell  into  idolatry ;  and  at  last 
Lo-ammi,  not  my  people,  was  written  on  the  chosen 
people  of  God,  where  He  had  set  His  name  that  it 
might  be  owned  in  the  midst  of  the  universal  corruption 
and  idolatry  of  the  world,  and  where  grace  and  warning 
had  dealt  "  till  there  was  no  remedy."  When  God  set 
up  a  head  of  Gentile  power  in  Nebuchadnezzar,  he  sets 
up  an  idol  and  persecutes  the  saints,  and  the  whole 
series  of  these  monarchies  take  the  character  of  unin- 
telligent ravenous  beasts.  But  chief  and  last  of  all 
(save  special  mercy  on  His  intercession),  w^hen  God  de- 
clared ;  "  I  have  yet  one  Son,  it  may  be  they  will  rever- 
ence my  Son  when  they  see  Him,"  when  they  saw  Him 
what  did  they  do  ? 

TF.  They  said,  "  This  is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill 
Him,  and  the  inheritance  shall  be  ours." 

H.  They  had  then  '"  no  cloak  for  their  sin."  '*  They 
had  both  seen  and  hated  both  Him  and  His  Father." 
1  here  was  a  reprieve  through  His  intercession  on  the 
cross,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  (that  figure  of  Mr.  Jowett's) 
announced  a  glorified  Christy  and  the  open  door  of  re- 
pentance, but  they  would  not  go  in.  They  closed  the 
liistory  of  man  with  this  word  of  judgment;  "Ye  do 
always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  your  fathers  did  so  do 
ye."  A  judged  world,  a  broken  law,  persecuted  prophets, 
the  slain  Just  One,  a  resisted  Spirit,  sum  up  the  history 
of  man,  the  history  of  original  sin.  Man  must  be  bom 
again. 

W.  It  is  a  sad  and  solemn  picture. 

H.  It  is,  and  ought  to  be  brought  home  to  one*s  own 
heart,  in  which  it  is  all  morally  true.  But  it  brings 
this  comfort  with  it,  that  it  shows  the  new  blessing 


373 


lm>ught  in  by  the  second  Adam  to  be  itself  entirely 
apart  from  the  corrupt  first  Adam,  though  moral  in- 
telligence be  brought  out  by  their  conflict,  and  the  need 
of  God's  grace  be  surely  found  in  it.  But  Christianity 
liSs  its  basis  iu  resurrection  after  the  work  of  redemp- 
tion ;  that  is,  a  passage  into  a  wholly  new  state  after 
God's  perfect  goodness,  and  His  righteousness  too,  had 
been  proved  as  to  the  old. 

W.  It  is  a  glorious  thing.  Christianity.  One  sees  it 
is  Divine  when  once  we  know  it.  It  is  deplorable  this 
effort  to  shut  us  down  into  the  first  Adam, 

If.  In  tiTith  it  is.  And  that  is  what  one  feels  in 
reading  the  works  of  all  these  rationalists  when  one  has 
the  new  man.  One  finds  also  one's  dej)cndance  on  God 
in  their  i-easoiiings  ;  for  the  vast  and  Divine  largeness  of 
Scripture,  full  of  thoughts  which  can  be  only  Divine,  is 
not  their  tield  of  view  at  all,  nor  the  richness  and 
fulness  which  a  di\inc  person  and  a  new  creatuit^  gives 
to  it.  You  might  as  w  ell  talk  of  a  beautiful  view  to  a 
blind  man.  The  bleuding  of  all  the  richness  of  lights 
and  shadows,  the  striking  features,  and  soft  distance^ 
and  enlivened  details,  do  uot  exist  for  their  faculties  at 
all,  nor  faculties  to  apprehend  them.  So  speaks  the 
Lord  liimselt^ — "  Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  speech, 
because  ye  cannot  hear  my  word."  Ancl  so  the 
Apostle — "The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of 
the  Spirit ;  they  are  foolishness  to  him,"  One  cannot 
but  answer  their  statements  as  the  Lord — "  If  he  called 
them  gods  to  whom  the  words  of  God  came,"  he  shows 
them  their  injustice  on  their  own  ground.  Still  by  the 
word."  I  have  deeply  felt  in  what  we  have  l)een  search- 
ing into,  the  absolute  impossibility  of  meeting  unljeliev- 
iug  objections  by  this  depth  and  riches  of  Scripture, 
which  to  a  believer  carries  the  absolute  evidence  of  their 
divinity.  Paul  sums  up  the  great  trath  in  saj-ing.  ' 
are  all  the  children  of  wrath  ;"  and  then,  "  but  God 
is  rich  in  mercy,  for  His  great  love  wherewith  He 
loved  us,  when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  has  riuipkened 
together    with    Christ;"     "we    are    risen 


I 

I 


374 


"  created  again  in  Christ  Jesus  :"  and  this  makes  death 
and  i-esuri'ection  the  great  topic  of  the  epistles — "  Reckon 
yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  and  alive  to  God 
through  Jesus  Christ."     So  Peter,  though  less  fully  and 
elaborately,  "  We  are  l)egotten  again  to  a  living  hope  Ijy 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead ;"  "  and 
as  Christ  has  suttered  in  the  flesh,  arm  yourselves  likewise 
with  the  same  mind."     Am  I  not  right  in  saying  that 
the  history  of  the  Bible  is  the  history  of  original  sin,  of 
one  who  had  to  confess,  if  he  knew  himself,  '-  Behold,  I 
was  shapen  in  wickedness,  and  in  sin  did  my  mother 
conceive  me  "  ?    Accompanied  by  marvellous  long-suflfer- 
ing  and  gracious  dealings,  but  which  only  brought  out 
this  sin,  till,  the  tree  having  been  digged  about  and 
dunged,  it  was  proved  no  care  could  make  a  bad  tree 
bring  forth  good  fruit,  and  the  Lord  says,  "  Now  is  the 
judgment  of  this  world."     "The  world  seeth  me  no 
more."     But  this  only  to  bring  in  redemption,  and  set 
man  on  a  wholly  new  footing,  beyond  evil  and  in  the 
glory  of  God.     So  that  it  should  be  said :  "  When  we 
were  in  the  flesh,"  "  but  ye  are  not  in  the  flesh."     And 
this  true  and  Divine  dealing  with  our  nature,  according 
to  the  revelation  of  God,  is  what  is  fully  brought  out  in 
the  Romans ;  and  hence,  deserved  condemnation,  atone- 
ment, death,  and  resurrection.     Indeed,  in  doctrine  it 
goes  no  further,  not  on  to  the  ascension,  because  it  is 
laying  the  great  moral  gi'ound,  of  sin,  and  putting  it 
away,  in  guilt  and  power  alike ;  and  man's  acceptance 
with  God  on  a  new  footing.     It  only  once  just  states 
the  result  of  ascension  as  a  final  fact  in  the  chain.     The 
passages  referred  to  by  Mr.  Jowett  arc  merely  summing 
up  the  great  universal  truth  in  Scripture  in  the  two 
heads  of  the  respective  races,  so  to  speak,  of  carnal  and 
spiritual  life.     But  the  same  truth  is  insisted  on  once 
and  again,  as  in  the  passages  I  have  quoted.     So  in 
experience.     "  I  know  that  in  me,  that  is  in  my  flesh, 
dwelleth  no  good  thing."     "  The  flesh  is  not  subject  to 
the  law  of  God,  neither,  indeed,  can  be.^'     "It  lusts 
against  the  Spirit."     "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot 


375 

pleoKe  God."  ■'  1  am  crucitied  with  (Jbrist,  nevertheless 
I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me.'  1  suppose  this 
is  "Oriental"  fur  Mr.  Jowett.  But,  if  so.  his  heart  is 
foUowiii^  its  o\pn  imaginings,  and  he  does  not  know  it. 
God  has  not  said  iu  vain,  ••  XU  the  imaginations  of 
his  heart  are  only  evil,  and  tliat  coniinually;"  and  this 
said  too  in  grace :  "  I  will  no  more  curee  the  ground 
for  man's  sake,  for  the  imaginations,"  &c.  It  was  not 
merely  the  previous  wickedness  of  the  antedlluviaus. 
They  were  gone.  It  was  His  motive  for  dealing  with 
the  race  no  more  in  that  way.  So  the  Lord,  "Out  of 
the  heart  of  man  ])roceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,"  &c. 
Did  you  ever  see  it  stated  in  Scripture  that  good  things 
came  out  of  his  heai-t  naturally  i  God  ha.s  tried  it  in 
every  way.  It  was  lawless,  broke  law,  killed  His  Son, 
resisted  Llis  Spirit. 

iV.  I  see  what  you  mean  by  Scripture  being  the 
history  of  origiual  sin;  and  in  truth  it  is  so.  The  deal- 
ings of  God,  iu  patient  mercy,  which  we  find  there,  in 
truth  only  brought  this  out.  so  that  we  might  liave  a 
scriptural  delineation,  a  history  wliich  proved  that  sin; 
which,  after  all,  is  the  history,  however  fai-  that  sin  may 
be  deveIo|)e(l  iu  them,  of  our  owu  hearts,  For  self-will, 
law-breaking,  slighting  Christ,  resisting  the  appeals  of 
God,  was  not  confined  to  antediluvians  or  Jews. 

U.  No;  it  is  the  jncture  of  my  heart  brought  care- 
fully out.  The  .ScrIi)tm'o  hath  concluded  all  under  sin, 
that  all  might  come  on  the  groun<l  of  pure  mercy.  And 
you  will  see  that.  develo|)eil  only  in  promise  in  Adam's 
time,  then  by  prophecy,  iu  figures  under  the  law  (in 
spite  of  senseless  rationalist  judgment  as  to  them),  in 
accomplishment  iu  Christ,  in  testimony  to  His  glory  by 
the  flolv  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven,  the  putting  of 
it  away  is  the  great  doctrine  of  Scripture.  "  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  {not  the  sins,  as 
often  falsely  cited)  of  the  world."  It  is  changing  the 
whole  ])rinciple  on  which  the  world,  as  such,  st^iod,  as 
we  saw  tjefore.  So,  again  :  "  But  now  once  in  tlie  con- 
summation of  ages" — thi>e  tunes  of  testing  responsible 


376 

man  from  Adam  to  Christ — "  He  hath  appeared  to  put 
away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,"  That  is  morally 
founded,  as  to  the  glory  of  God,  on  the  death  of  Christ ; 
and  man  after  Him  is  introduced  by  resurrection  into  the 
new  condition,  beyond  sin,  consequent  on  that  glorifjdng 
of  God.  At  the  same  time  there  is  the  bearing  of 
sins  for  the  redeemed ;  but  that  is  not  our  subject  now. 

W.  I  conceive  you  clearly  now,  and  I  think  it  brings 
the  heart  into  a  most  healthy  moral  atmosphere,  because 
it  is  not  merely  feeling  safe,  but  one  sees  that  God  is 
glorified;  that  all — speaking  reverentially — His  moral 
nature  is  fully  displayed,  and  glorified  in  that  wonderful 
sacrifice.  It  gives  a  depth  to  Christ's  sacrifice  which 
mere  salvation,  precious  as  it  is  to  us,  could  not  do, 
though  we  come  into  it  so.  But  I  imderstand  better : 
"  Now  is  the  Son  of  Man  glorified,  and  God  glorified  in 
Him ;  and  if  God  he  glorified  in  Him,  God  shall  also 
glorify  Him  in  Himself,  and  shall  straightway  glorify 
Him."  And  note  this  wondrous  word — ^it  is  "  The  Son 
of  Man." 

II.  Most  just.  And  hence,  while,  as  you  say,  we 
must  come  in  as  sinners  by  the  cross,  or  there  is  no 
truth  in  the  inward  parts,  and  sin  is  not  judged  in  our- 
selves, without  which  there  is  no  moral  deliverance,  and 
by  which,  if  I  may  so  speak,  we  morally  side  with  God 
against  ourselves  as  sinners,  and  against  sin ;  yet,  when 
we  have  enfered  in  by  this  new  and  living  way,  it  is  not 
a  standing  ^vithout,  in  the  hope  that,  by  the  blessed  One's 
bearing  our  sins  on  the  cross,  we  may  be  safe ;  but,  that 
though  that  has,  and  where  it  has,  been  fully  realized  in 
us  as  the  needed  and  oidy  way  (and  it  is  morally  neces- 
sary it  should  be),  we  have  now  passed  wthin,  by  the 
new  and  living  way,  and  contemplate  the  cross  in  peace, 
so  to  speak,  from  the  Divine  side,  and  see  all  the  abso- 
lute l)eauty  of  it.  And  there  is  nothing  like  it — nothing  in 
which  God  is  thus  morally  glorified.  "  Therefore  doth  my 
Father  love  me,  l)ecause  I  lay  down  my  life  that  I  might 
take  it  again."  He  does  not  even  say,  "  for  the  sheep," 
— it  is  the  thing  itself  which  is  so  excellent.     And  tUs 


377 


makes  me  so  often  fee!  mere  evangelical  teaching  so 
poor,  even  where  true,  as  I  thankfully  say  it  is,  as  far 
as  it  goes.  It  leaves  the  Christian  outside,  hoping  and 
thinking  only  of  himself,  instead  of,  on  the  deep  con- 
viction there  is  no  good  thing  in  himself  at  all,  bring- 
ing him  in  by  an  accomplished  work ;  and  then  looking 
that,  as  within,  he  should  display  the  character  suited 
to  it. 

IF".  But  they  dread  Antinomianism. 

JJ.  They  are  right  to  dread  every  inconsistency,  and 
to  distrust  themselves.  But  I  suspect  that  the  true 
secret  of  putting  Christians  under  the  law  (which  Chris- 
tianitj-  does  not.  and  that  these  rationalists  see,  I>ecause 
their  consciences  are  untroubled  by  it,  clear  enough)  is, 
that,  having  utithing  of  the  discipline  of  the  jirimitive 
Church,  they  are  obliged  to  modilj'  the  Gfisjiel,  and  make 
the  law  a  schoolmaster  after  Christ,  to  keep  men  in  order. 
Then  all  fall  naturally  into  it.  Because  man  has  the 
keeping  of  it ;  it  flatters  man.  If  he  has  a  tender  con- 
science, tortures  him,  as  we  often  see ;  if  not,  he  thinks 
of  himself,  takes  for  granted  some  failure  is  to  be  there. 
Judges  it  jierhaps  pretty  easy,  will  really  sorrow  over  it, 
if  the  new  nature  he  there ;  but,  in  any  case,  can  think 
of  himself,  and  that  the  heart  likes.  A  man  likes 
thinking  badly  of  himself,  ay,  and  saying  so,  better  than 
not  thinking  of  himself  at  all,  and  simply  displaying 
Christ's  gracious  lit  by  thinking  on  Him  only.  We 
have  to  judge  ourselvt  ;  but  om-  right  state  is  thinking 
of  the  Ijord  alone. 

W.  You  are  severe  oii  men. 

J31  Is  it  not  true  ?  Is  not  having  done  with  self  the 
really  difficult  thing  ?  Is  it  not  the  aim  of  Christianity, 
settling  first,  in  a  Divine  way,  the  question  of  sin  righte- 
ously with  God  by  atonement  ?  And  is  not  imwer  there 
to  deliver  from  self  or  Hesh,  and  give  us  the  victory, 
though  we  may  fail  ? 

W.  1  do  not  deny  it.  But  it  is  a  humbling  thought 
that  wo  are  such. 

H.  It  is  so.  'tter  to  know  ourselves ;  and 


378 

the  largest  supplies  of  grace,  and  Divine  objects,  are 
there  to  take  us  out  of  ourselves.  In  the  Philippians  we 
have  the  pattern  of  it  in  one  of  like  passions  with  our- 
selves. There,  in  the  picture  of  the  Christian  normal 
state,  the  flesh  (save  having  no  confidence  in  it)  and  sin 
are  not  mentioned.  Yet  the  writer  had  a  thorn  in  the 
flesh  to  keep  it  down.  If  we  were  jierfectly  humble, 
we  should  not  need  hmnbling.  But  we  do,  all  of  us, 
even  Paul,  as  we  see  in  this  case,  Christ,  then,  has 
been  manifested  to  put  away  sin  out  of  God's  sight, 
out  of  man's  heart,  and  out  of  the  world.  The  great 
work  which  does  it  is  accomplished,  the  results  not  all 
accomplished  in  power.  He  who  has  not  judged  ori- 
ginal sin,  has  not  that  estimate  of  the  new  nature 
animated  by  the  Si>irit  of  God  which  is  on  God's  side 
against  sin.  I  judge  the  individual  in  no  way.  He 
may  hate  what  he  sees  in  himself  of  actual  sin.  I  speak 
of  abstract  moral  truth.  He  who  does  not  see  the  prin- 
ciple, and  natiu^e,  and  guilt  of  sin,  as  it  stands  in  man's 
self-\^nll,  has  not  the  estimate  which  the  knowledge  of  a 
holy  nature  in  reconciliation  to  God  gives.  We  have 
made  a  long  excursion,  but  we  will  return  to  our  Essay. 
But  the  subjects  lay  at  the  root  of  the  matter. 

W,  Clearly  they  do.  I  was  struck,  as  by  a  kind  of 
providence,  how,  in  this  strange  list  of  subjects  in  the 
Essay,  these  three  great  vital  points  which  are  at  the 
root  of  the  question  —  inspiration,  the  Holy  Spirit, 
original  sin — are  dragged  in.  And  it  is  of  them  we 
have  been  speaking,  and  Scripture  is  quite  cleai*  as  to 
them. 

H.  We  will  continue,  then,  our  inquiry  into  the 
principles  of  the  Essay.  I  feel  how  tedious  entering 
into  these  details  is,  but  it  is  impossible  to  meet  the 
system  without  doing  so  in  a  measure. 

W.  Do  not  fear  to  do  so.  It  is  better  to  meet  it 
fully,  because  the  difficulties  are  raised,  and  the  doubt 
thrown  on  the  whole  truth  and  its  sources  by  them,  on 
the  spirit  in  which  we  are  to  read  Scripture,  can  only 
be   met   by  taking   up  the   details.      One   returns  to 


simplicity  by  it,  and  the  Woitl  to  its  full  and  simple 
authority  in  the  soul. 

H.  Well,  we  will  proceed,  then.  It  is  the  character 
of  what  follows,  as  in  general  of  the  Essay,  to  mingle 
a  mass  of  conventional  ideas  and  scriptural  precepts  or 
doctrines  together,  aiid,  by  proving  the  groundlessness  of 
men's  comments,  to  throw  like  doubt  on  scriptural  state- 
ments ;  and  hence  the  need  of  some  detail.  But  there 
is  a  deadly  principle  running  through  all ;  making 
men's  present  habit  of  thinking  the  measure  of  the 
fitness  of  the  Word  of  God  ;  and  thus  gradually  leading 
to  the  behef  that  it  was  the  product  of  the  age  and 
©(untry  it  was  WTitteu  in.  IVue,  it  may  be  said,  it  is 
only  its  form  and  expression.  But  as  we  have  biblical 
truth  only  in  that  expression,  if  I  change  it  for  what 
suits  the  West  and  the  nineteenth  century.  I  shall  soon 
change  it  for  what  suits  myself,  who  live  there  at  that 
epoch,  and  we  might  as  well  not  have  it  aU.  It  is  pre- 
tended to  save  it  by  great  principles ;  for  I  cannot  but 
think  that  the  Word  has  power  in  Mr.  Jowett's  soul.  Yet 
such  is  the  result  of  his  system.  I  call  your  attention 
with  pleasure  to  such  expressions  as,  "  But,  at  any  rate, 
they  (the  precepts  of  Christ)  are  not  to  be  explained 
away ;  the  standard  of  Christ  is  not  to  ire  lowered 
to  ordinary  Christian  life,  because  ordinary  Christian 
life  cannot  rise  even  in  good  men  to  the  standard  of 
Christ." 

ir.  That  is  excellent,  surely. 

H.  Undoubtedly.  It  is  the  same  happy  inconsistency 
with  what  I  quoted  Ijefore.  which  we  have  alreatly 
noticed ;  and  even  here,  in  the  same  ]iage,  speaking  of 
our  Lord's  remarks  on  the  danger  of  riches,  and  recom- 
menrlatiou  to  sell  all,  he  says,  "  Precepts  like  these  do 
not  apj)eal  to  nur  own  exi>erience  of  life."  "  Religious 
sects  or  orders  who  have  seized  this  as)^>ect  of  Chris- 
tianity have  come  to  no  good."  And  then  it  is  nil 
nielteil  down  in  the  following  words,  while  lainling  some 
rare  stars,  to  a  truth  of  feeling :  "  Let  not  the  refine- 
ment of  society  make  us  forget  that 


I 

I 


*  the  refined  ^^| 


380 

only  who  are  received  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c. 
Now,  I  find  Scripture  owning  the  rich,  as  such,  when  the 
Gospel  had  spread :  "  Charge  them  that  are  rich  in  this 
worid."  But  that  does  not  weaken  in  the  smallest 
degree  the  contrast  between  Lazarus  and  Dives,  or  the 
extreme  danger  to  true  heavenly  mindedness  of  treasure 
in  this  world.  At  no  time,  as  Peter  says  to  Ananias, 
was  it  claimed  from  any  one  that  they  should  give  their 
goods  to  the  Church,  nor  mentioned  to  them.  It  was 
the  free  power  of  the  Iloly  Ghost  working  in  love  to 
others.  There  was  no  commimity  of  people  or  goods 
established  at  all,  but  a  voluntaiy  giving  up  of  one's 
own  where  it  coidd  Ik)  made  available ;  and  most  blessed 
it  was,  and,  acting  in  the  spirit  of  it,  will  be  cdways 
blessed,  though  there  be  no  Apostles  at  whose  feet  I 
may  lay  what  I  have  to  disi)ose  of.  Riches  are  as  dan- 
gerous now  as  then,  devotedness  as  acceptable  now  as 
then.  There  is  in  principle  no  great  difference  in  these 
respects,  though  in  forms  of  life  there  may  be.  All  this, 
however,  is  a  mere  question  of  worldliness  or  its  degi*ees. 
"  The  friendship  of  the  worid  is  enmity  with  God,  and 
whosoever  will  be  the  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy 
of  God."  Mr.  Jowett  refers  to  "  swear  not  at  all."  As 
this  question  comes  often  into  public,  I  will  just  refer  to 
this  too.  The  same  principle  which  hinders  my  swear- 
ing of  myself,  makes  me  take  an  oath,  as  it  is  called, 
l3efore  a  magistrate.  I  bring  in  God  lightly  in  one  case ; 
I  own  Him  in  the  magistrate,  as  I  am  bound  to  do,  in 
the  other.  The  Lord  and  James  speak  only  of  volun- 
tary oaths — what  comes  from  self.  Whatsoever  is 
more  than  this  cometh  of  evil,  i.  e.,  more  than  yea,  yea, 
and  nay,  nay,  in  our  conversation.  So  the  I^rd  speaks 
of  vows,  i.  ^.,  voluntary  swearing  to  the  Lord.  But 
in  Lev.  v.  we  find  adjuring  and  a  man  bound  to  utter  it^ 
and,  consequently,  the  Lord  answers  tefore  the  High 
Priest.  Tlip  oath  imposed  by  a  magistrate  is  adjuring, 
and  I  judge  a  man  to  be  wholly  in  fault  who  does  not 
Utke  the  oath.  He  disov^iis  God's  authority  in  the 
magistrate.     Other  details  I  pass  by,  only  remarking, 


381 

that  the  instniction  contained  in  the  parable  of  the  Good 
Samaritan  is  grace  contrasted  with  law.  Id  answer  to 
the  (juestion.  Who  is  my  neighbour  whom  I  am  })ound 
to  love?  vre  find  love  acting  as  a  ueighlwiu-  to  need, 
and  that  is  God's  jirinci})le.  But  in  all  these  cases,  im- 
portant no  doubt  in  jiractice,  we  have  more  a  pastor's  or 
an  eximsitor's  work.  But  then  Mr,  Jowett,  men's  minds 
being  thus  th^ow^l  into  uncertainty,  suddenly  plunges  us 
into  doubts  on  the  fundaraental  truths  of  Christianitj'.  such 
as  the  Di\nnity  of  Christ,  justification  by  faith,  the  state 
of  condemnation  in  which  sinners  are  Ij-ing — the  doubt 
being  always  applied  to  the  truth.  Now  this  seems  to  me 
somewhat  disingenuous.  He  compares  the  Athanasian 
Creed,  which  he  must  be  supjiosed  to  have  signed  and 
use,  with  the  words,  "  Neither  the  Son",  in  Mark  xiii.  32. 
He  says  we  do  not  readily  recall  the  verse  when 
maintniuing  the  Athanasian  Creed.  Now  as  to  doctrine, 
what  may  seem  strange,  T  like  the  Athanasian  Creed 
the  best  of  all,  though  it  be  far  too  scholastic  in  form. 
But  I  maintain  no  creed,  but  I  do  maintain  the  proi>er 
Divinity  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  That  He  was  in  a  personal 
relationship  as  Son  to  Father,  every  one  who  believes  in 
His  Divinity,  unless  a  SabeUian,  owns.  But  it  is  to  me 
as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noonday,  that  Christ  was  the 
Jehovah  of  the  Old  Testament,  who  oould  say.  Before 
me  there  was  no  God.  I  know  not  any.  All  the  ftd- 
ness  of  the  Godhead  dwelt  in  Him,  and  dwells,  of  course, 
bodily.  Uo  was  Imnianuel :  His  name  called  Jesus 
(Jah,  the  Saviour),  fur  He  shall  save  His  [leople  from 
their  sins.  When  Isaiah,  in  eha|).  vi.,  saw  the  thrice 
holy  Jehovah  of  Hosts,  he  saw,  saj-s  John,  Christ's 
glory,  and  spake  of  Him.  ]f  the  Son  of  Man  was 
bniught  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  the  Ancient  of  days  came 
(Dan.  vii.).  If  the  blcsse<I  and  only  potentate.  King  of 
king  and  Lord  of  lords,  showed  the  apjiearing  of  Christ 
in  Timothy,  Christ  when  He  appears  is  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords.  It  Is  to  me  as  evident  as  possible, 
historically,  that  the  Arian  doctrine  came  du-ect  from 
Philo,  at  least  from  the  Alexandrian  school  of  philoso-  - 


382 

phers,  or  Platonist  Jews,  who  held  that  the  supreme 
God  could  not  be  directly  connected  with  the  material 
creation ;  and  spoke  of  the  Xoyof ,  the  Word,  as  between 
the  Supreme  God  and  the  creation,  begotten,  perhaps, 
rather  than  made ;  yet,  after  all,  existing  as  a  creature 
by  the  will  of  the  Creator,  the  Supreme  God.  Now,  save 
the  dear  gooil  old  Irensous,  and  a  word  or  two  from 
Polycarp  and  Ignatius,  all  the  earlier  Greek  Fathers 
were  of  this  school.  Justin  Martyr,  a  Platonist,  taught 
this  doctrine,  so  (.'lemens,  so  Origen.  It  was  Platonism, 
not  Scripture,  and  deeply  infeJcted  the  Church.  These 
Fathers  are  no  way  to  be  trusted  ;  they  show  it,  and  this 
spread  west,  too,  in  the  existence  of  the  words  ci^taOeroc 
and  Trpof^optKOQ.  All  that  is  directly  and  verbally  from  the 
Philo  school.  I  accept  none  of  this.  I  find  it  met  in 
face  by  John  and  Paul,  carefully  and  fully  met.  I  read, 
"  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with 
God,  and  the  Word  was  God."  AVherever  my  mind  can  go 
back  to  as  a  Ix^ginning  as  to  time,  there  lie  was.  And 
that  there  may  \ye  no  plea  of  ev^uuhTO':^  that  is  His  inhe- 
rence as  reason  without  hem^  a  person,  he  adds,  "  He 
was  in  the  l)eginning  with  God ;"  always  a  distinct  per- 
son. And  lest  any  inferiority  should  be  alleged,  Paul 
tells  us:  "All  the  fulness  was  pleased  to  dwell  in  Dim," 
for  that  is  the  true  force  of  the  passage.  And  so  the 
fact  is  declared  to  have  been :  "  J  or  in  Him  dwelleth  all 
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  As  a  person.  He 
emptied  Himself,  ek-fvuKre  mavrov.  He  could  not  have 
done  so  save  as  God.  A  creature  who  leaves  his  first 
estate  sins  therein.  The  sovereign  Lord  can  descend  in 
grace.  In  Him  it  is  love.  Then,  as  in  that  position, 
He  receives  all.  All  the  words  He  has  are  given  to 
Him.  He  is,  though  unchangeable  in  nature  as  God, 
yet  in  His  path  a  dependent  man.  He  lives  by  every 
word  that  proceeds  out  of  the  mouth  of  God,  is  sealed 
by  the  Father,  the  glory  lie  had  before  the  world  is  now 
given  Him  of  the  Father.  Now,  in  this  state  of  obe- 
dient servant  with  a  revelation  which  God  gave  to  Him, 
the  day  and  hour  of  His  judicial  action  was  not  revealed. 

L 


383 


'*  It  is  not  for  you,"  He  says  to  His  disciiiles,  "to  know 
the  times  anil  the  seasons  which  the  Father  ha^  put  in 
His  own  (Miwer."  And  to  this  exactly  Psalm  ex.  answers, 
as  has  been  observed  by  another :  "  Sit  on  my  right  hand 
till  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool."  When?  Sit 
there  in  this  place  of  Di\'ine  glory  till — no  more  is  said. 
Now,  I  do  not  pretend  to  exjilain  — God  forbid  I  should  !^ 
how  this  is.  1  see  in  Scripture  the  full  (not  iicor,,,:  merely, 
but)  Hfurijc  of  t'hrist  maintained  by  the  truth,  that  noiie 
can  hwtc  the  Son  but  the  Father ;  the  Father  we  do.  He 
is  simply  the  adorable  God.  "  \o  man  knows  the  .Son  but 
the  Father,  and  no  man  knows  the  Father  but  the  Son, 
and  he  to  whom  the  Son  shall  reveal  Him."  'llie  Son's 
Divine  nature  seemed,  so  to  sjvcak,  exposed  to  danger 
by  His  blessed  humiliation — not  so  the  Father.  It  is 
secured  (I  mean,  of  course,  as  to  thought)  by  His  beuig 
thereby  al)solutely  unfathomable.  Such  I  believe  He  is. 
I  know  He  is  the  Son ;  1  know  He  is  a  true  proijer 
man.  I  know  He  is :  "I  AM,"  "  the  true  GinI."  How 
to  put  this  together  1  do  not  know,  tliough  I  see 
and  know  they  are  together,  am  glad  I  do  not  as  a 
creature.  Did  I  know,  1  should  have  lost  that  Di\-ine 
fuineis  which,  if  capable  of  being  fathomed  when  in 
manhood,  was  not  truly  then  Divine.  God,  through 
grace.  I  know ;  man,  too,  I  know,  in  a  certain  sense ; 
but  God  Ijecome  a  man  is  Iwyond  all,  even  my  spiritual 
thoughts.  Be  it  so.  It  is  infinite  grac*.  and  1  can 
adore.  I  am  sure  for  my  soul's  blessing  He  is  both ; 
and  the  Son  of  the  Father  too — tor  the  [)ersons  are  as 
distinct  as  the  uatuve  is  clear.  Say  to  a  Christian,  the 
Son  sent  the  Father,  he  would  instinctively  revolt  at 
once.  That  the  Father  sent  the  Son,  is  the  deejiest  joy 
of  his  soul.  All  heresies  are  met  by  Scripture,  Saliel- 
lian,  Arian,  or  others :  but  the  Son  is  not  knovni  but  of 
the  Father.  The  Father  He  declares.  I  accept  no 
creeds,  but  I  do  bow  to  the  perfect  Divinity  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ;  the  fiilness  of  the  BioTiyro^  is  in  Him.  It  is 
painfull  to  see  Mr.  Jowett  say  not  what  he  believes,  but, 
in  the  midst  of  tpiestions  of  practice,  throw  a  doubt,  and 


384 

more  than  a  doubt,  on  the  Lord's  divinity — ^hold  his 
mind  in  a  Pyrrhonic  balance  as  to  everything.  Into 
the  Calvinistic  controversy  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  enter 
here.  I  l>elieve  Scripture  precise,  and  should  shock 
partizans,  I  sup])ose,  on  either  side.  I  believe  Christ 
died  for  all.  1  believe  in  an  elect  people.  The  XVIIth 
Article  gives  a  very  nice  statement  of  the  doctrine.  It 
is  equally  painful,  but  common  with  this  class,  to  see  a 
lift  given  to  Popery  over  the  stile.  I  believe  the  Church 
is  founded  on  the  rock — the  Rock  Christ,  as  Augustine 
even  says,  and  that  the  gates  of  hell  will  never  prevail 
against  it.  J  believe  Peter  had  the  keys,  not  of  heaven, 
nor  of  the  Church — men  do  not  build  with  keys,  there 
are  no  keys  of  the  Church  at  all  thought  of  in  Scripture, 
but  the  keys  of  the  kingdom.  I  believe  Peter  used 
them.  It  was  a  common  expression  for  administrative 
power,  and  he  had  and  exercised  it,  as  we  see  in  the  Acts. 
I  believe,  moreover,  according  to  Matt,  xviii.  18,  that 
what  the  Apostles  bound  on  earth  in  the  exercise  of  their 
ministry  was  sanctioned  by  Heaven :  and,  fiui:her,  that 
what  is  told  to  the  assembly,  and  in  which  the  assembly  so 
acts,  will  be  sanctioned,  and  that  wherever  two  or  three 
are  gathered  in  Christ's  name  Christ  is ;  but  what  the 
Pope  has  to  do  with  two  or  three  gathered  thus,  I  know 
not.  This  may  suffice  here.  ITiere  is  not  a  tittle  of 
ground  for  the  corruptest  system  that  ever  was  on  earth 
to  stand  ujKm.  The  word  Church  may  deceive;  but 
say  first.  Go  yourself;  then  two  or  three;  then  tell  it  to 
the  assembly  (which  is  what  is  said),  and  all  popish 
reasonings  and  rationalists'  objections  dissolve  in  air. 
This  is  not  freedom  from,  but  bondage  to,  conventional 
teaching  in  INIr.  Jowett.  I  know  not  to  what  he 
refers  in  1  Cor.  iii.  15,  unless  it  be  purgatory,  a  notori- 
ously modern  doctrine.  The  early  Fathers'  doctrine  of  a 
middle  state  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  purga- 
toiy.  Augustine  vaguely  hints  at  it ;  but  his  doctrine 
is  en  looae  as  can  he.  He  s]ieaks  of  the  judgment-day 
being  a  purgatorial  fire.  Gregory  the  Great  first  pTOm.'  «^ 
pounds  it  as  possible  for  any  very  little  sins.     Xhafc^^   '"^"^ 


385 


was  invented  some  600  years  after  Clirist ;  and  the 
plainest  historical  proofs  exist  of  its  modem  character. 
Tertullian  is  treated  as  uasound  by  Romanists  them- 
selves on  it.  But  the  doctrine  of  1  Cor.  iii.  applies  to 
lalxjurers,  not  simply  to  Christians  ;  their  work  is  tried 
and  burnt.  And,  further,  it  is  admitted  by  present 
writers  among  them,  that  this  caiuiot  be  applied  to  pur- 
gatoiy  (though  they  do  so  where  men  are  ignorant), 
because  here  oil  are  to  go  through  it.  and  that  is  not 
their  doctrine ;  for  the  saints  do  not  in  their  system. 
ITie  prayei-s  for  the  dead,  on  which  thshonest  lloman 
Catholics  found  their  doctrine,  included,  in  the  earher 
ages,  even  the  Virgin  Mary,  as  Epiphanius  says,  to  dis- 
tinguish all  from  (Christ.  But  what  is  the  result  of  all 
these  doubts  ?  '■  Nor  is  it,  indeed,  easy  to  say  what  is 
the  meaning  of  proving  a  doctrine  from  Scripture."  It 
is  easy  enough.  It  is  finding  it  there,  learning  it  there. 
and  showing  wliere  you  have  learned  it.  Those  who 
have  ci-eeds,  and  dogmas,  and  articles  to  ]irove  at  all 
costs,  are  naturally  embarrassed.  They  have  to  adapt 
.Scri|)turc  to  the  formularies  of  men;  to  what  scholas- 
ticism, or  partial  knowledge,  has  laid  down.  But  what 
I  have  really  learned  from  Scripture  I  can,  with  God's 
help,  easily  prove  from  it.  And  that  is  the  secret  of  their 
embarrassment.  They  have  not  leanit  their  doctrine 
from  Scripture,  and  they  do  not  know  how  to  prove 
anything  by  it.  And  then  see  where  you  are  landed. 
"  Nay,  more,  it  is  a  book  WTitten  in  the  East,  which  is 
in  some  degree  liable  to  be  misunderstood"  (1  read: 
"  Then  o(tened  He  their  understanding  to  understand 
the  Scriptures"),  "Iwcause  it  sjieaks  the  language  and 
has  the  feeling  of  Eastern  lands.  Nor  can  we  readily 
determine,  in  speaking  the  words  of  our  Lord  or  St. 
Paul,  how  much  even  of  the  p.*issages  just  (|uot#d  is  to 
be  attributed  to  Oriental  style."  I  will  just  i]uofe  yon 
another  passage  from  Mr.  Jowett's  coinmenr.irics,  which 
will  lead  us  somewhat  further  Id  this  path,  only  to 
Africa  instead  of  Asia.    After  so*  '  the  tendencies 

of  the  Jewish  miud,  he  sap  doubt  that 


386 

the  entrance  of  Christianity  into  the  world  was  not 
sudden  or  abrupt ;  that  is  an  illusion  which  arises  in  the 
mind  from  our  slender  accjuaintance  with  contemporary 
oi)inions.  Better,  and  higher,  and  holier  as  it  was,  it 
was  not  absolutely  distinct  from  the  teaching  of  the 
doctors  of  the  law,  either  in  form  or  substance ;  it  was 
not  unconnected  with,  but  gave  life  and  truth  to,  the 
mystic  fancies  of  Alexandrian  philosophy.  Even  in  the 
counsels  of  perfection  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  there 
is  probably  nothing  which  might  not  he  found,  either  in 
letter  or  sjnrit,  in  Philo  or  some  other  Jewish  or  Eastern 
writer.  The  peculiarity  of  the  Gosi)el  is,  not  that  it 
teaches  what  is  wholly  new,  but  that  it  draws  out  of  the 
treasure-house  of  the  human  heart  things  new  and  old, 
gathering  together  in  one  dist>ersed  fragments  of  truth." 
i  wish  I  could  quote  what  follows,  but  it  would 
lead  me  too  far.  Mr.  Jowett  turns  round  and  says 
there  remains  what  eludes  criticism — processes  of  life, 
al)out  which  we  know  nothing ;  the  figure  which  St. 
Paul  applies  to  the  resurrection  of  the  body  (except  it 
die),  "  is  true,  also,  of  the  renewal  of  the  soul,  especially 
in  the  first  ages,  of  which  we  know  so  little,  and  in  which 
the  Gospel  seems  to  have  acted  w4th  far  greater  power 
than  among  ourselves." 

IF.  How  singular !  Mr.  Jowett  puts  me  in  mind  of 
a  ])erson  who,  having  lived  blind  and  among  blind  people 
all  his  life,  has  just  got  his  eyes  open,  and  is  telling  us 
astonishing  news — the  first  impressioiLs  he  receives — as 
if  never  l)efore  discovered,  yet  reckoas  all  distances 
wrong,  and  judges  about  all  objects  falsely  ;  yet  is  no 
longer  blind,  but  refers  all  things  to  his  state  of  blind- 
ness, as  he  naturally  must.  It  is  so  new  that  the  poor 
man  judges  rightly  of  nothing.  All  is  inconsistent,  his 
head  full  of  his  old  ideas  mingled  \^ith  new  concej^tions. 
Men  are  ti-ees  walking.  What  he  would  have  known 
by  touch,  he  does  not  yet  by  sight :  as  a  dead  ortho- 
doxy may  be  truth,  and  is  gone  when  the  heart  wants 
truth  for  itself. 

TL  I  believe  it  is  really  the  truth  of  his  state.     But 


387 


is  a  pity,  in  such  a.  state,  a  man  should  set  up  to 
teach.  Deeper  wants  in  his  own  heart  would  have  ke|it 
him  from  it.  He  would  have  wante<l  to  have  learned — 
1  do  not  mean  from  man,  but  of  Christ,  He  had  the  habit 
of  teaching,  I  sujipose.  And  then  there  is  another  thing, 
he  got  into  the  hands  of  others,  iufeiior  in  this  res]iect 
to  himself— men  still  blind.  He  has  got  into  this 
wretched  system,  where  there  is  no  truth,  and  the  most 
offensive  pretensions  and  coj)j'ing  from  one  another. 
And  thus  his  Essay  is  a  treatise  of  contradictions.  I 
pursue  his  system  only,  for  others  are  injured  by  it. 
For  himself,  I  would  hoj)e  the  best.  But  see  what  his 
system  comes  to — his  Eastern  rhetoric.  The  revelation 
of  God  is  composed  of  Alexandrian  jihilosojihy  and  the 
scattered  fragments  of  truth  iu  the  human  heart.  All 
is  doubt.  What  is  rhetoric  in  it,  what  truth  'i  What 
comes  from  Philo?  How  can  the  human  heart,  in 
which  mas.ses  of  error  are  mixed  with  scraps  of  tmth, 
while  the  scraps  of  truth  only  make  the  error  more 
powerful,  judge  of  the  elements  of  truth  gathereil  up 
here  ?  Can  error  judge  of  truth  ?  All  is  confusion. 
Kow,  I  admit  that  there  were  dregs  of  traditional 
truth  worked  up  by  Satan  (who  can  use  truth  in  man's 
mind,  but  not  the  truth  as  it  is  in  God's)  into  idolatry, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  philosophy  on  the  other,  f 
admit  that  the  cravings  of  the  human  mind  after  Gotl, 
aud  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  actjuii-ed  at  tlie  fall, 
proiluced  some  apprehensions  of  partial  truths.  It  was 
like  the  Achamoth  of  Sojjhia's  cravings  after  Bythos,  iu 
the  Valentinian  system,  which  probably  was  an  efibi-t  of 
'  Eastern  lauds '  to  describe  these  atoms  of  truth  in  the 
sea  of  confusion,  aud  was  most  |)oetical, —  a  world 
formed  of  the  sighs  and  tears,  and  I  forget  what  else, 
of  Achamoth,  outside  the  Plei-oma.  In  the  Alexandrian 
system,  as  we  have  it  in  Philo,  and  jjurhaps  the  Book 
of  Wisdom,  much  hail  I>een  borrowed  fi-om  Scripture, 
much  from  Plato,  who,  I  cannot  doubt,  had  got  his 
notions  from  the  Feroohers  of  Zoroaster,  and  which, 
except  the  Feroohers,  is  reproiluced  m  Hegel  aud  Schil- 


388 

ling.  Gentiles  had  traditions ;  Alexandrian  philosophy 
had  shreds  of  Judaism ;  but  God  was  lost.  Now  God, 
who  had  conijiassion  on  man,  took  up  evenj  link  where 
He  could  connect  Himself  in  grace  with  man,  while 
jiositively  confirming  His  own  revelation  given  in  the 
Old  Testament.  He  could  take  up  the  imknown  God 
in  Attens,  the  Xoyoc  in  Alexandria,  the  Paraclete  itself 
as  a  term.  But  what  does  He  do  ?  The  unknown  God 
is  fully  revealed  with  positive  facts  and  Divine  truth. 
The  Xoyoc  ^vas  introduced  by  Platonic  Jews  in  Alexan- 
dria, because  God  could  have  nothing  to  say  to  the  mere 
creature ;  and  the  Xoydg  might  form  others,  but  remained 
alone  in  His  o\\ti  nature.  For  John  the  Xoyoc  is  God, 
who  Himself  l)ecomes  flesh.  The  cra\ings  which  philo- 
sophy had  made  a  false  system  out  of,  not  knowing 
God,  are  met  (not  a  system  made  out  of  them)  by 
the  revelation  of  God  Himself,  the  truth  of  all  they 
sought,  and  the  perfect  grace  they  needed.  It  put 
do\^Ti  the  philosophy,  while  it  met  all  the  seekings  of 
man  in  it.  It  took  up  the  old  thoughts  thus  far ;  but 
to  say  it  did  not  so  much  bring  in  what  was  new,  is 
utterly  false.  All  it  brought  in  was  new  (save  as  the 
Old  Testament  revelation  had  spoken  of  it).  But  it  did 
meet  the  hunp:crings  of  the  human  soul,  which  philosophy 
was  wasting  by  ideas,  and  told  the  truth  about  the  tra- 
ditions which  had  been  ])erverted  into  monstrous,  idola- 
trous, and  alxsurd  legends.  It  is  impossible  to  go 
through  the  discussion  of  some  childish  and  some  use- 
ful, though  perhaps  imaginative,  adaptations  of  Scrip- 
ture. But  some  points  claim  our  attention.  "  It  is 
admitted  Scripture  has  only  one  meaning.'*  We  have 
partly  spoken  of  this;  but  there  are  new  points  con- 
nected with  it  here.  We  are  not  now  to  decide  whether 
Scripture  is  wise  in  ha\ing  one  or  more,  but  whether  it 
has.  Now,  in  the  use  made  of  it  here,  the  proposition, 
that  it  lias  only  one  meaning,  is  wholly  false.  Mystical 
and  allegorical  interjiretations  of  the  Fathers,  I  throw 
overboard  at  once.  Scripture  is  not  answerable  for 
them  ;    but  our  friend   Philo   and   the  Alexandrians 


i   mainly. 


389 


mainly.  But  prophecy  and  symlwlism  of  the  Gospel  in 
il  the  law  are  referred  to.  Prophecy  we  have  spoken  of; 
but  symbolism  means  types  of  the  OKI  Testament  appli- 
cable to  things  in  the  New,  Now,  I  affirm  that  Old  and 
New  Testament  concur  in  stating  this  tti  be  so.  Moses 
was  commanded  ti>  make  the  tal)eriiaclG  according  t« 
the  pattern  he  had  seen  in  the  mount;  nay,  if  God 
made  such  a  system,  we  ought  to  expect  some  meaning 
in  it  more  than  gowns,  and  dresses,  and  curtains.  When 
I  read  through  the  Scri}jture,  I  find, the  whole  form  of 
language  framed  on  such  a  symbolical  use,  and  the 
great  foots  of  the  New  the  plain  counterpart  to  the 
symbols  of  the  Old,  You  must  crush  the  whole  struc- 
ture of  Scripture  in  its  most  vital  essences,  tear  the 
warp  out  of  it  so  that  it  ceases  to  l>e  a  texture,  liefore 
you  imdo  this.  Altars,  tabernacles,  the  dwelling-place 
of  God,  sacrifices,  priesthood,  the  rock,  the  water,  the 
anointing,  the  holy  place,  the  mei'cy-seat.  the  blood- 
shedding  ;  I  should  go  through  every  clement  of  what 
coastitutes  its  whole  texture  of  thought,  before  I  had 
closeil  the  list  of  sjTidjolical  facts  and  objects  presented 
in  the  Old  Testament  and  taken  uji  in  the  New,  and 
which  have  entered,  and  that  according  to  Scripture, 
into  the  whole  conception  and  framework  of  our  reli- 
gious thought.  It  is  not  a  way  of  interpreting  Scrip- 
ture, it  is  Scripture  itself.  Christ  is  the  Lamb  of  Go«l, 
Re  is  a  great  Uigh  Priest  entered  into  the  holiest.  And 
Paul  goes  further;  he  tells  us  as  to  the  history  itself : 
"  AU  these  things  happeneil  unto  them  for  tyjies,  and 
they  are  written  for  our  admonition,  on  whom  the  ends 
of  the  world  are  come."  One,  and  only  one,  tnie 
meaning,  therefore,  is  not  the  fact  in  this  case.  Say 
Moses  was  foolish,  and  Paul  foolish ;  but  if  you  so 
interjtret  Scrijiture,  you  interpret  it  contrary  to  its 
nature  and  positive  directions.  That  is,  you  do  not 
interpret  it,  you  correct  it.  I  have  the  facts — important, 
very  importanl,  in  the  history  of  the  people — important 
as  a  history  of  God's  dealings  with  the  |)eople ;  and  I 
get  them  avowedly  pattern  facts.    Keep  the  iinaguaation 


390 

in  check — all  quite  right.  Look  for  doctrines  in  doctrinal 
passages,  and  here  for  details  and  illustrations — all 
right.  But  do  not  pretend  you  are  teaching  us  to  inter- 
pret Scripture  rightly  when  you  are  directly  contradict- 
ing it,  and  saying  to  it,  You  are  wrong.  It  is  not  the 
Fathers  who  have  said  that  Sarah  and  Hagar  w  ere  an 
allegor}'.  We  do  not  follow  them  in  such  a  point,  as 
saying.  Does  God  take  care  for  oxen  ? 

W.  On  this  point  I  do  not  think  you  need  go  further. 
If  1  use  Scripture  at  all,  and  on  the  weightiest  subjects, 
Mr.  Jowett's  principle  becomes  impossible.  It  breaks 
down,  as  you  say,  the  w  hole  structure  of  Scripture  itself. 
And  I  see  that  he  does  not  ^merely  check  the  indulgence 
of  imagination  in  it,  which  is  quite  right,  but  rejects  the 
idea  of  more  or  less.  He  declares,  that  "  in  whatever 
degree  it  is  practised,  it  is  equally  incapable  of  being 
reduced  to  any  rule."  I  do  not  know  whether  he 
rejects  the  Ej)istle  to  the  Hebrews,  but  evidently  that 
lK)ok  is  gone  wholly  if  his  principle  be  true,  and  count- 
less j)assages  throughout  the  whole  New  Testament. 

7/.  Temporal  and  spiritual  Israel,  as  commonly  used, 
I  give  him  freely  up.  It  is  a  mere  abuse  of  w^ords.  1 
say,  as  commonly  used  ;  because  in  the  common  adapta- 
tion of  |)rophecies.  proi)hecies  exj)Iieitly  referring  to 
Israel  are  a})plied  to  the  Chm*cli,  where  the  subject- 
matter  and  principles  are  completely  opposed.  Ordained 
forms,  and  facts  of  history,  may  have  a  symbolical 
application,  but  moral  addresses  refer  to  the  objects  and 
moral  state  of  those  addressed,  and  do  not  give  us 
objects  to  interi)ret,  but  persons  addressed.  Zion  means 
Zion  when  she  is  i)rophesied  about.  The  prophecy  con- 
cerns her  because  it  speaks  to  her  on  the  moral  ground 
she  is  on,  and  the  arbitrary  application  to  the  Church  is 
entirely  false,  because  the  principle  of  relationshij)  with 
God  is  different.  A  general  princii)le,  as  that  God  is 
faithful  or  good,  may  be,  of  course,  applied,  with  just  care 
to  see  how  it  is  used ;  but  the  people  addressed  are  not 
symbolical  ol)jects,  but  moral  i)ersons,  and  the  fact^  to 
happen  real.     If  we  are  to  sjxiak  of  the  Lord  s  proi)hecy 


391 


as  to  Jerusalem,  I  apply  the  same  principle;  but  I  deny 
wholly  that  in  Matthew,  Titus,  &c.,  is  spoken  of  at  all. 
l"here  may  have  been  something  analogous ;  but  its 
only  direct  application  is  to  dealings  yet  to  come,  imme- 
diately after  which  the  Lord  will  appear.  I  believe  this 
because  it  says  so.  In  Luke  1  have  the  siege  of  Jeru- 
salem, and  the  language  is  carefully  altered.  I  believe 
what  is  said  in  both  passages.  In  Luke,  whose  Gospel 
always  looks  out  to  Gentiles,  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
after  the  siege  are  distinctly  spoken  of,  before  the  signs 
that  are  to  come.  Remark  here  how  doubt  is  thrown 
on  aU,  It  is  asked :  Is  the  application  of  tyjies  "  to  be 
regarded  as  the  meaning  of  the  original  text,  or  an 
accommo<lation  of  it  to  the  thoughts  of  later  times?" 
Now,  note  that  the  Lord  instituted  the  Last  Supper  as 
taking  the  place  of  the  Passover,  The  Apostles  apply 
in  every  passage  these  figures,  so  that  the  question  is 
not  if  we  are  interpreting  right ;  it  extends  to  this,  if 
the  Lord  and  the  Apostles  are  merely  accommodating 
these  figures  or  not  ?  What  does  Air.  Jowett  think  ? 
He  says :  "  Our  object  is  not  to  attempt  here  the  deter- 
mination of  these  questions,  but  to  point  out  that  they 
roust  be  determined  before  any  real  progress  can  be 
made."  ITie  answer  is,  tor  every  Christian  the  matter 
is  determined.  They  believe  m  the  Lord's  and  the 
Apostles'  use  of  them — man's  now  they  judge  by  Scrip- 
ture to  see  if  they  are  just. 

W.  I  see  no  difficulty  in  the  question.  The  use  of 
any  given  type  now  is,  of  coui-se,  to  be  judged  of  when 
it  is  used.  I  find  them  most  instructive,  and,  fitting  in 
with  positive  doctrines  which  warrant  what  is  drawn 
from  them,  they  become  living  pictures  and  illustrations 
of  what  otherwise  would  escape  you.  They  may  not,  in 
our  hands,  serve  to  found  a  doctrine  as  a  first  revelation 
of  it,  but  as  a  vivid  illustration  and  suggestion  of  truth 
they  are  invaluable. 

t{.  Mr.  Jowett  insists  on  this  because  "  The  Old 
Test-ament  will  receive  a  different  meaning  accordingly 
as  it  is  explained  from  itself  or  from  the  New.  In  the 
c  c 


392 

first  case,  a  careful  and  conscientious  study  of  each  one 
for  itself  is  all  that  is  required ;  in  the  second  case,  the 
types  and  ceremonies  of  the  law,  perhaps  the  very  facts 
and  persons  of  the  history,  will  be  assumed  to  be  pre- 
destined or  made  after  a  pattern  corresponding  to  the 
things  that  were  to  be  in  the  latter  days."     Now,  all 
this  is  confusion  from  beginning  to  end.     It  ignores  the 
positive  statements  of  the  voliune  pretended  to  be  inter- 
preted.   And  further,  if  the  book  be  inspired,  one  Mind 
has  formed  it  from  beginning  to  end,  and  we  must  look 
for  a  co-ordinated  system.     If  it  be  not,  we  find  there  is 
an  end  of  predestinating  facts  or  even  statements.     But 
we  have  seen  that,  if  it  is  a  true  history,  the  whole  sys- 
tem of  the  tabernacle  was  made  after  a  pattern,  which 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  largely  and  specifically  de- 
clares to  be  a  heavenly  one,  and  the  tabernacle  a  pattern 
of  things  in  the  heavens.     But  we  have  this  even  more 
specifically  defined.     The  law  was  a  shadow  of  good 
things  to  come,  and  not  the  very  image.     There  were 
sacrifices:  so  Jesus  was  a  sacrifice.     J3ut  the  Jewish 
were  repeated,  proving  that  sin  was  not  for  ever  put 
away  for   him  who   came  by  them;   Jesus'    was    not 
repeated,  because  it  was.     There  were  many   priests, 
because  they  died;   for  us  but  one,  because  lie  ever 
lives.     ITiere  was  a  veil,  and  no  one  could  go  into  the 
Holiest:  now  the  voir  is  rent,  and  we  have  boldness  to 
enter.     The  high  priest  stood,  because  his  work  was 
never  finished.     Jesus  is  set  dowa  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  because  His  work  is  finished  for  ever :  and  so  on. 
These  were  the  outlines  of  this  vast  exhibition  of  God's 
ways,   to  be  a  key,  so  to  speak,  near  the  eye.     But 
neither  Testament  is  simply  to  be  explained  by  the  other. 
In  some  points  there  is  contrast,  as  law  and  Gos])el,  in 
other  analogies,  in  other  common  principles,  in  other 
prophetic  announcements.     The  only  point  we  learn  to 
have  been  hidden  was  the  Church.     That  could  not  be 
revealed  because  it  was  based  on  the  casting  down  of 
the  middle  wall  of  partition,  and  the  Jewish  system  on 
its  being  strictly  kept  up.     But  if  God  be  the  Author  of 


393 


I  the  sacred  volume,  it  is  monstrous  to  suppose  there 
I  WIS  not  a  preparatory  leading  on  to  the  full  revelation 
r  of  God  Ilimself,  or  that  lie  revealed  something  which 
was  wholly  uQcoiinected  with  and  no  way  introductory 
to  what  followed.  It  was  necessary  to  make  distinct 
the  difference  between  man's  standing  on  the  ground  of 
his  own  responsibility,  and  gra^-e;  between  requiring, 
however  justly,  and  giving.  And  this,  though  prophets 
point  to  the  giving,  there  is.  But  promises  came  before 
law ;  and  even  under  law.  a  ministration  of  condemna- 
tion and  death,  there  were  ordinances  which  prefigured 
the  way  of  grace,  while  the  exacting  of  righteousness, 
which  man  had  not,  led  him  to  the  sense  of  the  need 
which  grace  met.  The  understanding  of  all  this  rests 
on  this ;  '•  They  shall  l>e  all  taught  of  God."  Each  part, 
as  to  its  statements,  is  to  be  understood  in  itself;  but, 
when  simijly  understood,  the  correspondences  and  dif- 
ferences will  appear,  and  rich  instruction  for  man's 
soul  l)e  acquired  out  of  them.  All  this  division  of  Mr, 
Jowett's,  and  its  consequences,  is  in  the  air.  and  written 
without  any  kind  of  reference  to  the  facts  of  the  case. 
We  do  not  as.sume  anything  about  it.  We  take  what 
is  said  in  the  book  itself  about  itself,  and  tind  it  verified 
in  the  richest  and  most  instructive  manner.  One  would 
think  Mr.  Jowett  had  never  read  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  or 
the  Hebrews,  or,  indeed,  any  part  of  the  New  Testament ; 
for.  as  I  said,  he  does  not  reason  on  Its  interpretation 
here,  but  against  its  contents.  And  man's  fancies,  and 
Scriptural,  that  is,  Divine  expositions,  are  thrown  to- 
gether as  of  eriual  weight. 

There  is  another  interesting  question  which  he  touches 
on — the  origin  of  the  three  first  Gos|)els;  but  his  con- 
clusions— for  he  is  one  of  the  most  illogical  persons  I 
ever  met  with — are  in  no  way  the  consetjuence  of  his 
premises.  He  is  constantly  making  a  false  dirision,  and 
the  true  conclusion  is  outside  all  he  says.  There  is  a 
difficulty  as  to  the  forms  of  reciUil  of  the  three  first  or 
synoptical  Gospels.  Marsh,  who  was  educated  in 
Germany,  introduced  into  this  com  ation 

cc2 


394 

of  Eichoms  German  theories.  Eichorn  changed  his 
somewhat  in  consequence,  afterwards,  if  I  remember 
right.  The  singular  fact  is,  that  tantamount  statements 
are  found  in  these  Gospels,  often  verbally  the  same,  and 
yet  sometimes  different,  and  the  facts  placed  in  different 
connection.  The  only  difficulty,  and  that  which  all  are 
really  entirely  ignorant  of,  is,  how  to  account  for  it.  It 
affijrds  no  difficulty  in  reading,  but  great  help.  The 
difficulty  is,  for  critics,  simply  how  it  should  have  hap- 
pened. Mr.  Jowett  supposes  the  main  facts  were  pre- 
served orally.  Now,  till  the  Gospels  were  written,  that 
seems  to  me  a  matter  of  fact,  not  "  a  probable  solution," 
whatever  use  we  may  make  of  the  fact.  Only  we  have 
to  remember  that  Christ  told  the  Apostles  they  should 
be  witnesses,  because  they  had  been  with  Him  from  the 
beginning.  That  they  were  kept,  according  to  the 
promise,  to  bring  all  things  to  their  remembrance,  as 
Jesus  had  said,  I  believe  ;  and  that  they  were  graciously 
secured  in  their  memory  and  use  of  facts ;  still  they 
spoke  of  what  they  had  seen.  But  this,  while  very 
simple,  does  not  at  all  account  for  the  phenomena, 
because  one  Evangelist,  even  an  Apostle,  recounts  facts 
where  he  was  not  present,  and  another  who  was  pre- 
sent does  not  recount  them  —as  Matthew  and  John,  as 
to  what  passed  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane.  The 
motive  of  the  histories,  and  they  had-  motives,  are  not 
in  the  casualty  of  memory,  nor  in  the  documents  pos- 
sessed. The  theory  is,  they  had  the  same  tradition  to 
use.  Now,  if  they  had  had  no  governing  motive,  they 
would  have  put  the  facts  together  according  to  the 
document  men  have  imagined,  or  the  current  tradition. 
But  they  do  not.  The  order  is  distinct.  The  allegation 
that  they  are  not  distinct  witnesses,  is  unfounded.  They 
may,  in  particular  parts,  have  used  what  all  knew ;  but 
they  are  wholly  in  their  accounts  independent  of  one 
another.  But  I  attach  no  kind  of  importance  to  inde- 
pendent witnesses,  because  I  believe  all  was  inspired. 
But  I  find  clear  proof  of  distinct  objects  in  the  Gospels, 
objects  pursued  in  each,  from  one  end  to  the  otiber; 


395 


which  rationalists,  who  always  j-est  ou  the  surface, 
have  never  found  a  trace  of,  and  which  gives  the  clearest 
proof  of  the  absurdity  of  their  theories  of  the  structiire 
of  the  Gospels.  But  as  to  the  question  raised,  the  facts 
of  the  case  prove  the  contrary  to  what  is  pretended.  If 
all  used  a  common  tradition,  how  comes  it  that  the  con- 
nection, order,  and  development  of  facts  is  so  different, 
if  there  was  not  in  each  (as  inspired,  I  l>elieve)  inde- 
pendent design  ?  Men  have  a  common  tradition  (it  is 
only  true  of  a  part),  and  yet  produce  very  different 
books.  They  are  not  memoranda  thrown  together  un- 
connected, but  a  set  of  facts  used  in  a  definite,  but 
divei-se  connection,  so  as  to  produce  a  ditFerent  picture 
altogether  of  the  Saviour's  life,  and  large  portions  wholly 
omitted,  and  large  portions  introduced,  all  in  connection 
with  this  design.  Yet,  all  together,  they  make  up  the 
full  character  of  the  Saviour  seen  on  earth.  It  is  de- 
clared, moreover,  that  there  were  a  mass  of  other  facts 
which  they  do  not  record,  because  these  suit  the 
purpose.  Again,  whole  scenes  of  labour  and  miracles 
are  told  in  a  few  verses,  where  it  met  the  point  sought 
for ;  large  details  are  given  of  single  ones,  when  it  re- 
vealed some  trait  of  Christ's  life  or  principle  of  Glod's 
dealings.  Let  me,  before  I  enter  on  this,  a  little " 
notice  Mr.  Jowctt's  conclusions  from  the  statement  I 
have  quoted  above.  (1.)  There  is  no  necessit)-  to  recon- 
cile inconsistent  narratives  — the  harmony  of  the  Gospels 
only  means  the  parallelism  of  words.  Now,  I  object 
totally  to  all  harmonies,  as  such ;  but  the  remark  is 
mifounded.  A  certain  number  of  passages  are  parallel 
in  words ;  but,  as  to  a  vast  quantity  of  the  materials,  it 
is  not  the  case.  A  harmony  is  merely  an  attempt  at 
chronological  order. 

W.  But  why  do  you  object  to  harmonies  ? 

H.  Because  they  are  the  confusion  of  accounts  which 
are  each  wTitten  with  a  distinct  Divine  object.  The 
facts  are  put  together  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  I  may 
speak  as  a  believe^  with  an  evident  purpose, 

each  Gospel  p  "Hst  and  the  ways  of 


396 

Grod  in  a  different  light.  To  throw  them  all  together  is 
to  destroy  this  purpose,  and  obscure  the  intelligence  of 
the  Gospels. 

W.  1  understand.     If  there  be  such  purpose  in  each, 
it  must,  of  course,  do  so.     Proceed. 

H.  The  second  conclusion  of  Mr.  Jowett  is :  ''  There 
is  no  necessity  to  enforce  anywhere  the  connection  of 
successive  verses,  for  the  same  words  will  be  found  in 
different  connections  in  different  Gospels."  Now,  the 
true  conclusion  is  exactly  the  contrary.  The  Evan- 
gelists had  some  leading  facts  in  common,  containing, 
for  they  do  so,  important  principles,  and  many  other 
facts  each  to  himself.  They  do  not  combine  them 
alike,  but  form  a  picture  different  one  from  another, 
though  combining  into  a  whole;  for  no  one  who  has 
examined  the  Gospels  carefully  can  deny  this.  Now, 
the  difference  of  connection  is  one  great  mark  of  this 
design.  And  the  different  connections  in  which  the 
statements  occur  are  one  great  clue  to  the  design,  though 
by  no  means  its  only  evidence.  Supposing  1  had  this 
phrase :  The  Jews  crucified  the  Son  of  God,  the  Lord  of 
glory,  at  Jerusalem.  And  one  wi-iter  went  on :  "  Think 
of  the  wickedness  of  this  peoj)le ;  this  was  their  cro\^Ti- 
.ing  sin.  There,  in  the  beloved  city,  whose  children  He 
would  so  often  have  gathered  under  His  \^ings,  these 
very  children  put  their  Messiah  and  Lord  to  death." 
As  far  as  this  goes,  I  should  conclude  this  writer  is 
bringing  out  the  guilt  of  this  people  in  Christ's  death. 
And  if  I  saw  him  going  on,  afterwards,  to  relate  dis- 
coveries as  to  something  else  coming  in,  instead  of 
Israel — as  the  Church  or  kingdom — the  bearing  of  his 
narrative  would  gradually  clearly  open  to  me.  Sup- 
posing another  gave  the  same  words,  and  said  :  "  See 
the  Son  of  God  Himself  crucified  ;  how  deep  is  His 
love,  how  sad  the  guilt  of  man !  and  those,  too,  who 
were  nearest  to  Him,  who  had  the  best  opportunity  of 
seeing  that  He  was  indeed  the  Lord  of  glory,  who" 
none  of  the  princes  of  this  world  have  knovni." 
should  gather,  this  writer  is  bringing  out  man' 


general,  and  that  no  evidence  will  correct  the  evil  of 
the  heart.  If  I  found  afterwards  the  most  touching 
doctrinal  and  parabolic  illustration  of  man's  evil  and 
God's  lovo,  and  not  the  Church  or  the  kingflom.  but 
heaven  and  another  world,  I  stould  get  hold,  of  course 
hy  study  and  Divine  help,  and  graduaUy.  of  the  hearing 
and  design  of  this  writing  also.  Patient  investigation 
and  waiting  on  Divine  help,  of  course,  are  called  for ; 
but  the  diffcreuce  of  the  connection  in  which  the  same 
words  are  found,  is  so  far  a  special  guiding  trace  to 
the  discovery  of  the  spirit  and  aim  of  the  particular 
Gospel. 

\V.  It  is  as  evident  as  evident  can  be. 
II.  And  what  shall  we  say  to  Mr.  Jowett's  conclusion, 
that  there  is  no  need  to  notice  the  connectioas  because 
they  are  different? 

IV.  We  had  better  leave  it, 

H.  Be  it  so.  But  you  cannot !«  surprised  if  ration- 
alists' re.isonings  have  no  great  weight  with  me.  He 
adds:  (3.)  "  Nor  can  the  designs  attributed  to  their 
authors  Iio  regarded  as  the  free  handling  of  the  same 
subject  on  ditterent  plans;  the  difference  consisting 
chiefly  in  the  occurrence  or  absence  of  local  or  verbal 
explanations,  or  the  a^ldition  or  omission  of  certain 
passages."  After  what  we  have  already  seen  we  cannot 
be  surprised  at  tlus  remark.  1  have  ordy  added  just 
now  to  my  example  certain  passages.  But  what  can 
possibly  be  more  absurd  than  this  ?  It  depends  wholly 
on  what  in  added  or  omitted,  or  what  the  local  explana- 
tion is.  I  do  not  see  how  an  explanation  in  this  case 
could  lie  anything  but  local  —  for  we  are  talking  of 
connection  of  passages — or  than  verbal — for  we  are 
talking  of  words,  and  additions  or  omissions  complete 
the  list;  so  it  is  only  saying  no  connection  can  explain 
the  design,  wliich  is  simply  aljsurd ;  for  the  addition 
or  verbal  explanation  might  l>e  even  a  statement  of  the 
design,  so  that  the  conclusion  is  utterly  foolish.  But  it 
'  Dt  tlie  fact.  The  order  of  the  tacts  is  constantly 
»  give  a  totally  different  colour  to  them. 


lain  poiod^H 

on  see  tb^^B 

the 

iject. 

esign^B 
I  go 
>  all. 
'isigD,  ^ 


Save  in  a  brief  early  part,  wben.  this  is  the  main 
the  choice  of  facts  is  totally  distinct,  though  you  s 
same  scenes.  And  then  the  difierent  order  and  the 
whole  structure  of  each  Gospel,  mark  clearly  its  object. 
The  |)arables  atibrd  the  strongest  jiroof  of  the  design  of 
the  Gospel,  and  vary  largely  and  abundantly ;  and  in 
last  Solemn  scenes,  while  certain  facts  must  be 
same,  the  special  adaptation  to  the  character  and  design 
of  the  Gospel  is  as  evident  as  possible.  But  I  go 
further.  Certain  leading  facts  are  common  to  dl, 
at  least  to  the  three ;  but  even  these  i)rove  design, 
not  a  tradition  gathered  up,  as  it  might  be,  fra 
memory.  They  are  significant  facts,  characteristic  fad 
connected  with  the  immense  change  that  was  taking 
place  by  the  rejection  of  Christ,  and  leading  to  this 
change.  We  are  assured  that  they  had  an  immense 
mass  of  other  facts ;  yet  he  who  had  them  does  not 
recount  them,  but  declares  what  his  design  is  in  what 
he  does  recount.  But  the  facts  were  there,  remem- 
bered, but  not  recounted  ;  and  those  that  are  character- 
istic and  common  to  all,  differently  coimected  with  one 
another.  I  see,  then,  evidently  design,  I  have  no  doubt 
Divine  design,  but  certainly  design.  A  selection  of 
facts  for  all.  By  whom  ?  Yet  (and  here  we  see  indt 
pendency)  these  facts  so  diflerently  used,  and  in  siu 
different  connections,  that  they  could  not  have  joined  in' 
arranging  them,  nor  could  thei-e  have  been  collusion. 
They  would  have  avoided  the  differences  reproached  to 
them.  We  have  a  vast  number  of  facts  known,  not 
used — a  choice  of  facts,  to  a  certain  degree  common  to 
all,  hence  brought  together  by  some  one ;  but  not  by 
the  writers  together,  for  they  use  them  all  differently, 
and  to  different  purposes,  though  ail  to  present  the  T^rd 
to  us.  And  they  have,  liesidas,  such  a  large  number  of 
other  facts  and  discourses,  which  they  introduce  in  the 
midst  of  the  former,  or  all  together — for  both  are  true — 
completing  evidently  the  specific  design  of  each.  Now, 
I  get  here  distinct  instruments,  distinct  objects,  each 
instrument  following  his  own,  but,  at  the  same  time. 


A  in  ^ 


u  common  Mind  which  has  guided  and  overruled  it  all. 
As  to  the  traditions  of  the  Fathers,  as  to  Mark  and 
Luke,  they  may  be  true ;  Ijetween  Luke  and  Paul  there 
is  certainly  spiritual  and  histurica!  connection;  but  they 
are  of  no  sort  of  consequence.  As  tbey  stand  they  are 
Tague  and  contraiUctory,  and  founded  on  an  utterly  false 
principle,  namely,  to  trace  each  Gospel  to  an  Apostle.  At 
the  Tery  best  they  are  curiosities  of  history,  which,  if  a 
pei-son  Ijelieves  the  book  Divine,  are  of  an  entirely 
secondary  interest. 

W.  But  you  must  go  through  the  Gospels  in  this 
view  a  little. 

Jt.  It  is  a  long  task,  but,  to  my  mind  at  least,  full 
of  interest. — an  inlet  into  the  mind  and  grace  of  our 
God,  and  not  merely  dry  antagonism  with  rationalism. 

W.  Qnite  so.  I  desire  it  the  rather  for  that  reason ; 
for  though  we  may  be  called  upon  to  occupy  ourselves 
with  these  Essays,  still,  by  going  effectually  into  Scrip- 
ture, we  get.  with  the  arguments  against  them,  by  the 
positive  proof  of  what  is  good.  food.  Divine  food,  for 
our  own  souls,  which  brings  a  convictiou  of  a  higher 
order. 

ff.  Well.  I  will  run  through,  then,  as  most  strongly 
characteristic,  the  Gospels  of  John  and  Matthew,  so  as 
to  mark  their  character ;  just  referring  to  Luke,  and 
Mark,  too,  which,  as  you  know,  is  a  shorter  one,  and 
rapid  in  its  course  as  to  facts,  to  confirm  the  general 
principle.  I  will  Ijegin  with  John,  because  it  is  perhaps 
the  most  easy  to  seize,  John's  great  doctrine  is  tlie  Son 
of  God  on  earth,  and  eternal  life  in  Him,  and  the  reve- 
lation of  God  in  and  by  Him.  In  his  Epistle  he  goes 
on  to  the  manifestation  of  this  same  life  in  the  disciple. 
He  is  the  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father,  and 
has  been  manifested  unto  iis.  Then,  "  he  that  hath  the 
Son  hath  life,"  and  so.  "  which  thing  is  true  in  Him  and  in 
you."  The  details  are  the  traits  of  this  life,  the  know- 
ledge of  the  love  of  God  in  it  through  the  Spirit,  and 
fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  In  the  Gospel 
to  which  I  will  now  confine  myself,  it  is  His  person  and 


400 

the  gift  of  the  Comforter  when  He  is  gone.  I  will  run 
through  the  chapters  of  this  Gospel,  to  see  if  there  be 
not  a  leading  idea  running  all  through,  to  which  the 
peculiar  facts  recorded  are  subservient.  That  idea  is 
the  Son  of  God  outside  of,  and  above  all  dispensational 
dealings,  in  the  blessedness  of  His  own  person,  though, 
as  a  man,  and  taking  fully  a  man's  place.  But  it  is,  as  I 
think  I  have  remarked,  not  man  taken  up  to  heaven, 
but  a  Divine  person  come  down  to  earth.  In  the  first 
chapter  there  are  three  parts,  1 — 18, 19—34,  and  thence 
to  the  end ;  but  this  continued  chap.  ii.  1 — 22.  The 
first  is  the  abstract  glory  of  His  nature.  He  is  God, 
but  a  distinct  person,  with  God,  and  that  in  eternity,  life, 
light :  John  was  His  witness.  There  was  this  singular 
.  phenomenon,  light  shining  in  darkness,  and  the  darkness 
remaining  what  it  was ;  and  then  the  Word  made  flesh 
and  dwelling  among  us, — ^the  only  begotten  S<m  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,  who  makes  God  known.  Next  we 
have  what  Christ  does.  His  work,  the  Lamb  of  God  who 
takes  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  the  baptism  with 
the  Holy  Ghost.  We  then  find  Christ  the  centre  and 
gatherer  of  the  remnant  of  Israel.  In  the  first  of  the 
tw^o  days,  John  the  Baptist's  work  to  this  end  is  si>oken 
of ;  in  the  second,  Christ's.  This  last,  I  doubt  not,  like 
Matt.  X.,  goes  down,  in  principle,  to  His  return.  I 
would  note,  in  })assing,  that  w^e  have  here  Christ  as  a 
Divine  centre,  for  none  can  be  such  truly  but  God ; 
next  the  one  only  path  through  a  world  in  which  there 
is  none  for  man,  for  there  can  be  none  for  children  who 
have  wilfullv  abandoned  their  Father's  house  till  they 
turn  back  to  it ;  and  then  the  heaven  open,  and  man  (in 
Christ)  the  object  of  Divine  favour,  and  the  mighty 
ones,  the  most  exalted  of  ci'eatures,  his  servants.  Na- 
thanael  owned  Him,  according  to  the  second  Psalm. 
He  takes  his  place,  according  to  the  eighth.  Here  note, 
that  the  Jew\s  and  world,  as  such,  are  wholly  outside, 
10,  1 1 ;  (the  Jews  are  always  treated  as  reprobates  in 
this  Ciospcl),  and  those  born  of  God  alone  owned, 
12,  13.     In  a  word,  we  have  not  dispensational  deal- 


401 

iugs,  but  the  deep  realities  (if  the  Divine  nature  in 
relationship  to  men  and  the  world,  though  it  is  fully 
owned  that  the  Jews  were  God'j  people.  l"he  se(!ond 
chapter,  called  the  third  day,  I  have  no  doubt  iutiuiates 
the  double  aspect  of  Christ's  reunion  with  His  earthly 
people — the  marriage  and  the  judgment.  I  can  quite 
accept  that  such  a  figure,  though  to  nie.  fi'om  the  con- 
nection, undoubted,  may  not  be  admitted.  I  do  not 
complain  of  this,  but,  as  I  am  saying  what  I  think.  I 
would  not  omit  it.  In  ii.  23,  iii.  21,  we  have  the  great 
foundations  of  the  new  state  of  things  -  boru  of  God. 
and  the  cross ;  the  latter,  iii  the  double  aspect  of  the 
Son  of  man  must  be  lifted  up ;  the  love  of  God  has  given 
His  Son.  The  condeumation  is,  the  coming  in  of  light. 
22 — 36  III  the  full  aspect  of  the  new  state  of  things, 
and  the  absolutely  heavenly  character  of  the  witness,  are 
gone  into.  iv.  After  this  introduction — for  such  it  is — 
(John  wa*;  not  yet  cast  into  prison,  and  Christ  had  not 
■yet  presented  Himself),  He  leaves  Judiea,  practically 
driven  out  by  the  Jews,  and  in  Samaria,  where  no 
promise  was  (salvation.  He  declares  in  the  chapter,  v/ns 
of  the  Jews),  unfolds  the  living  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  which  He  could  give  as  God — for  God  was 
giving,  not  requiring — and  which  He  was  humbled,  so 
as  to  be  the  weary  One  craving  a  drink  of  water,  that 
man  might  have ;  and  then  finds  the  way  to  man's  un- 
intelligent heart,  as  it  ever  must  be.  by  the  conscience. 
Nothing  iniire  lovely  than  this  whole  picture — the  re- 
jected and  weai7  One  finding  His  meat  in  showing  grace 
to  this  wearied  but  guilty  heart ;  but  I  must  nut  dwell  on 
it  here.  It  opened  to  His  view  the  fields  white  for  harvest 
at  the  moment  He  was  c-a.st  out.  In  v.  we  have  the 
Son  of  Go<i  giving  life  to  whom  He  will.  The  genera! 
picture  i-s  man's  incompetency  ta  get  hejiled  by  strength 
in  himself,  and  Christ,  in  contrast,  bringing  life,  and 
that  eternal  life,  so  as  to  csca|)e  judgment.  The  end  of 
the  chapter  shows  life  in  Him,  with  every  evidence,  and 
man  would  n<3t  come  t«  have  it.  ITiis  is  man's  responsi- 
bility as  to  Christ.     In  chap,  v.,  lie  is  the  life-giving 


402 

Son  of  God.  Chapter  vi.,  lie  is  the  Son  of  man,  the 
object  of  faith  come  into  the  world,  and  djing,  so  that 
faith  feeds  on  Him.  The  general  picture  is  Christ 
satisfying  the  poor  with  bread,  according  to  Ps.  cxxxii. ; 
owned  Prophet,  refusing  then  to  be  King,  going  up 
on  high  alone,  while  llis  disciples  were  tossed  and 
toiling  in  Hk  absence  ;  Me  rejoins  them,  and  they 
are  at  land ;  a  Christ,  the  true  manna  (2 — 9),  incar- 
nate, and  dying  (understood  in  spirit),  their  true  food, 
vii..  He  cannot  show  Himself  at  the  feast  of  Taber- 
nacles. The  feast  of  Passover  is  fulfilled  in  Him.  The 
Pentecost  on  the  day  so  called.  But  the  Tabernacles, 
where  Israel  celebrated  their  rest  after  the  harvest  and 
vintage  (known  figures  of  judgment),  are  not  even  yet. 
He  promises  the  Spirit  meanwhile,  as  Israel  had  the 
water  out  of  the  rock  in  the  desert ;  only  now  it  should 
be  in  him  who  came  to  Him  to  drink,  and  flow  forth  as 
rivers  in  this  desert  world.  Thus  we  have  the  triple 
fruition  of  the  Holy  Ghost  giving  life  as  born  of  Uim, 
the  Spiritual  power  of  life  in  us  rising  up  to  its  full 
blessing  as  eternal  life,  and  flowing  forth  in  blessing 
from  us  as  a  river.  This  closed  the  direct  communica- 
tion of  Christ  as  to  His  position  on  earth.  In  viii. 
His  word  is  rejected;  there  He  is  light.  In  ix.  His 
works ;  here  He  gives  eyes  to  see.  He  gives  eyes  to  a 
poor  sheep  cast  out,  who  having  owned  Uim  as  a  pro- 
phet, finds  He  is  the  vSon  of  God.  Then  comes  all  He 
is  for  His  sheep,  from  His  entering  in  Himself  by  the 
door  as  a  subject  man,  then  laying  do\^Ti  His  life  for 
them,  of  infinite  value  in  itself  also,  to  His  being  one 
with  the  Father.  In  xi.  and  xii.,  being  thus  rejected. 
He  receives  just  testimony,  in  spite  of  men,  to  His  being 
Son  of  God  (resurrection  and  life),  in  Lazarus'  resurrec- 
tion; to  his  being  Son  of  David,  in  riding  in  on  the  ass :  to 
His  l)eing  Son  of  man,  by  the  Greeks  coming  up.  But  He 
declares  that,  to  take  this  ])lacc.  He  must  die  or  abide 
alone.  He  must  l)e  lifted  up  to  draw  (not  Israel  as  a 
living  Messiah)  but  all  men.  The  Evangelist  then  unfolds 
how  it  stood  with  Israel,  and  Christ  how  it  stood  with  the 


worUl  at  large  in  respect  of  Himself.  He  is  now  owned, 
so  to  speak,  as  crucified,  i.  e..  His  teaching  takes  up 
what  is  beyond  it.  He  was  come  from  God  and  went 
to  God.  The  Father  had  delivered  all  into  His  hand. 
And  now  if  He  could  not  abide  with  His  disciples  as  a 
companion  upon  earth,  He  would  make  them  tit  to  be 
with  Him  iu  heaven,  have  a  part  with  Him.  They  were 
washed,  as  completely  regenerated  by  the  Word ;  but.  as 
priests  connected  with  the  sanctuary  and  holy  service, 
must  have  their  feet  washed  as  to  daily  conversation. 
That,  He  was  their  servant  still  to  do.  He  then  refers 
to  His  betrayal  and  Peter's  denial  of  Him,  the  perfect 
wickedness  of  flesh  and  its  weakness  ;  declares  the  value 
Godward  of  the  death  uf  the  Son  of  man  and  its  fruit  in 
His  then  entering  into  Divine  glory,  and  being  no  more 
(bodily)  for  any  in  the  world,  xiv..  He  unfolds  His 
disciples'  i)osition  in  consequence.  He  was  not  going 
to  be  alone  on  high.  He  was  going  to  prepare  a  place 
for  them;  but  having  revealed  the  Father  in  Himself, 
they  knew  where  He  was  going,  for  He  was  going  to 
the  Father,  and  they  had  seen  Him  in  Him;  and  they 
knew  the  way,  for  they  had  come  to  the  Father  in 
coming  to  Him.  That  was  as  already  there;  but  on 
going  away  He  would  obtain  another  Comforter  for 
them.  In  Spirit  He  would  come  to  them,  manifest 
Himself  to  them,  and  the  Father  and  Himself  make 
their  abode  with  them.  The  path  of  obedience  and 
responsibility  on  Christian,  not  on  Adam  ground,  is  in 
this  and  the  following  chapter  fully  set  out.  He  left  what 
He  could  only  give  in  leaving,  for  He  matle  it  by  the 
cross,  peace;  gave  them  His  own  peace;  but  He  was 
truly  a  man,  careil  for  their  love;  if  they  loved  Him 
they  would  be  glad  He  was  going  to  His  Father,  to 
rest  and  glory.  But  there  was  a  difficult)'.  What  about 
the  \iae  that  God  brought  out  of  Egypt  and  planted? 
This  He  meets  in  the  following  chapter.  Israel  was  not 
the  vine,  though  as  a  people  it  were  so.  He  Himself 
was  the  true  ^'ine.  they  were  the  branches.  He  was 
not,  as  they  thought  of  Messiah,  the  best  branch  of  the 


404 

old  vine;  He  was  the  vine,  and  they  the  branches. 
He  then  enlarges  upon  the  way  of  bearing  due  fruit, 
dependence  and  obedience,  and,  if  His  words  abod6  in 
them,  asking  what  they  would :  most  important  instruc- 
tions, which  I  regret  passing  over  so  rapidly,  only  that 
I  must  confine  myself  to  my  present  object — the  general 
idea.  As  He  has  returned  to  this  rejection  of  the  old 
provisional  vine,  so  to  speak.  He  shows  that  to  be  with- 
out excuse,  and  as  really  having  seen  and  hated  (not 
Messiah,  though  He  was  such),  but  Him  and  His 
Father.  It  is  laid  on  its  intrinsic  moral  grounds. 
Hence,  when  the  Comforter  was  come  —  before  He 
had  spoken  of  the  Father  s  sending  Him,  now  of  His 
sending  Him  from  the  Father  to  testify  of  Him  glorified 
(as  before,  to  bring  to  remembrance  what  He  had  said 
upon  earth),  they  also  having  to  bear  testimony  as  with 
Him  from  the  beginning— in  the  xvi.  chapter,  when 
the  Comforter  was  come,  He  would  bear  witness  in  the 
world,  of  sin,  righteoTisness,  and  judgment,  in  con- 
nection with  His  rejection,  and  going  away  to  His 
Father;  and  guide  the  discii)les  into  all  truth,  show 
them  things  to  come,  and  glorify  Christ  (all  that  the 
Father  had  being  His) ;  and  then  places  them  in  im- 
mediate confident  relationship  with  the  Father.  For 
the  moment  they  were  to  be  in  sorrow,  and  scat- 
tered. In  xvii.,  addressing  His  J'ather — wonderful 
thought  that  we  should  be  admitted  to  hear ! — He  looks 
to  taking  His  own  place,  as  Son  on  high,  to  glorify 
Him,  in  virtue  of  His  work  which  He  had  finished; 
the  one  our  place,  the  other  our  title  to  it.  He  puts 
them  in  it,  having  manifested  His  Father  s  name  to 
them,  and  gives  to  them  all  the  communications  made 
to  Him  in  it  on  earth,  and  prays  for  them,  on  the 
ground  of  their  being  the  Father  s,  and  on  the  ground 
of  His  being  glorified  in  them.  He  prays  they  may  he 
kept  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Father,  and  Div-ine 
names  are  the  power  of  the  thing  named.  Holiness, 
His  holiness,  and  children ;  these  are  our  place.  This, 
that  Christ's  own  joy  might  be  fulfilled  in  them.     Then 


405 


IJe  gives,  not  the  words,  but  the  Word,  the  testimony, 
and  the  world  hates  them.  They  are  completely  put  in 
Christ's  place  on  earth  in  every  respect,  sanctified  by 
the  truth,  and  lie  Himself  set  apart,  away  from  men,  on 
high,  to  be  the  source  of  this  their  setting  ajtart.  by  the 
revelatif^n  of  what  He  was  tn  their  hearts.  Next,  He 
gives  them  the  glory  the  Father  had  given  Him,  but, 
beyond  all,  will  have  them  with  Himself  where  He  is. 
And,  as  partaking  of  His  glory  hereafter,  will  prove  to 
the  world  they  nere  loved  as  He  was ;  so  that  He 
manifests  tlic  Father's  name  now,  that  the  Father's  love 
to  Him  may  be  in  them  on  earth,  and  He  in  them. 
Having  thus  completed  IHs  disciples'  place  in  His 
absence,  and  even  to  their  heavenly  rest — of  which  John 
Ejieaks  little,  barely  in  the  beginning  of  xiv.  and  at  the 
end  of  xvii.,  and  this  only  in  the  full  result — in  the 
xviii.  he  enters  on  the  final  history  of  the  Lord's  days 
on  earth.  But  this,  even  more  than  any  other  part, 
shows  tlie  Divine  j)erson  who  is  above  all  circumstances, 
John  was  one  of  the  three  present,  as  near  as  any  could 
be,  in  the  agony  in  Gethsemane.  He  gives  not  a  word 
of  it;  while  Matthew,  who  was  present  at  what  John 
recounts,  tells  nothing  of  that,  but  does  of  the  agony. 
Now,  if  these  contrasted  circumstances  were  not  charac- 
teristic they  might  not  prove  nmch,  but  they  are  most 
strikingly  characteristic.  1  will  briefly  recall  to  you 
those  mentioned  by  8t.  John.  All  jjoint  out  the  Son  of 
God,  wholly  above  circumstances ;  the  free  ottering  up 
of  Himself.  Judas  comes ;  the  Lord  advances  and 
names  Himself.  They  all  go  backward  and  fall  to  the 
ground.  Had  He  sought  escape  He  had  only  to  go  away, 
but  He  asks  again,  and  then  says.  "  If  ye  seek  me,  let 
these  go  their  way:"  the  blessed  sign,  as  the  Apostle 
witnesses,  how  He  8too<l  in  the  gap,  and,  however 
poor  and  weak,  the  discijiles  escaped  untouched.  With 
this  love  we  have  perfect  love  to  His  Father,  and 
perfect  obedience.  "  The  cup  which  my  Father  has 
given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it?" — and  no  more.  The 
miracle  of  healing,  even,  is  not  noticed  by  John,  though 


406 

he  can  give  the  servant's  name.  So  all  His  answers  to 
the  chief  priest  are  in  the  calm  superiority  of  one  above 
all  that  surrounded  Him,  while  the  full  guilt  and  mad- 
ness of  the  Jews  is  fully  brought  out,  as  they  are  seen 
in  all  the  Gospel ;  and  in  rejecting  Him  they  deny  their 
own  place,  ''  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar.'*  Christ's 
answers  before  Pilate  bear  the  same  stamp,  as  one 
above  all.  As  we  had  no  agony  in  the  garden,  so  no 
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? "  on  the 
cross.  Finally,  Jesus  knowing  now  all  was  finished,  a 
single  passage  remaining  to  be  fulfilled,  says,  "  I  thirst," 
and,  having  drank  the  vinegar,  says,  "It  is  finished." 
He  then  bows  His  head,  and  gives  up  His  own  spirit. 
Meanwhile,  in  perfect  calmness.  He  committed  His 
mother  to  John,  and  charged  John  with  the  care  of  her. 
No  bone  is  broken,  but  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  make 
Him  to  be  \\ith  the  rich  in  His  death.  Now,  in  all 
this — and  John,  mark,  was  with  Him,  as  near  as  any 
could  be  in  His  agony,  and  standing  by  at  the  cross — 
all  that  marked  the  anguished  man  is  omitted,  and  all 
that  presents  the  Son  of  God  is  introduced.  I  find 
design,  that  is ;  a  blessed  and  beautiful  appearing,  as  a 
true,  lowly,  and  obedient  man,  no  doubt,  but  —  an  appear- 
ing of  the  Son  of  God,  as  such,  for  faith  on  earth ;  reveal- 
ing His  Father  all  His  life,  and  even  in  the  circum- 
stances of  His  death,  Son  of  God  still. 

IV.  ITiough  the  whole  synoptical  analysis  of  the 
Gospel  is  important  to  our  purpose,  yet  the  character  of 
the  last  facts  referred  to,  in  connection  with  the  blessed 
Lord's  death,  is  to  me  even  more  striking  still.  I  do 
not  see  how  it  is  possible  to  avoid  seeing  a  Divine 
design  in  connection  with  the  purpose  of  the  whole 
Gospel,  and  the  aspect  in  which  the  Lord  is  viewed 
throughout  it ; — His  person,  as  the  new  foundation  of 
all  when  He  had  been  offered  up  in  sacrifice,  the  Jews 
being  wholly  rejected.  It  is  striking,  too,  that  he  does 
not  mention  what  he  alone  of  the  Evangelists  might 
have  been,  in  some  measure,  an  eye-witness .  of . 

S.  Two  chapters  remain  to  consider,  relating  His 


407 

history  after  the  resurrection.  Thev  are  throughout.  I 
do  not  douljt,  signitipative  as  to  the  dispensatioual  deal- 
ings consetiuent  on  the  truths  already  brought  out. 
Such  apjilicatious  are  not  like  doctrines,  we  must  leave 
them  to  the  judgments  of  others.  But  I  will  state  them 
to  you.  Theii-  .orderly  completeness,  1  have  no  doubt, 
proves  the  truth  of  the  view  I  suggest  llie  fact  of 
Christ's  resuj-rection  known  only  by  sight,  without  the 
testimony  of  God  in  the  word  that  He  must  rise,  pro- 
duces UD  effect.  They  go  home.  But  Mary,  out  of 
whom  seven  devils  had  been  cast,  wants  Jesus  Himself — 
in  ignorance,  no  doubt,  but  in  true  aflection.  When  this 
had  been  fully  and  most  Ijeautifully  brought  out — the 
world  had  nothing  for  her  but  Him— Jesus  reveals  Him- 
self to  her,  and  makes  her  the  messenger  of  the  witness 
of  the  believers"  position.  He  was  not  come  back  to  1)6 
corporally  present  for  the  kingdom,  and  reign  over 
Israel.  He  could,  through  redemption,  call  His  disciplies 
brethren,  and  tliey  were  in  the  same  relationship  to  His 
God  and  Father  as  He  was.  This  gathers  them,  and  He 
is  in  their  midst,  and  pronounces  peace — for  He  had 
now  made  it;  tlien  sends  them  forth,  breathing  into 
them  the  living  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Afterwards 
Thomas  believes  on  seeing,  but  full  blessing  arose  from 
believing  now  without  seeing.  Now,  I  have  no  doubt, 
white  this  put  the  discii)les.  historically,  in  their  true 
place  and  relationship  to  God ;  yet  we  have  a  picture  of 
the  whole  period  from  Christ's  resurrection  to  the  time 
of  His  return;  first,  the  remnant  who  had  known  Hun 
before ;  then  the  Church  formed  without  seeing  Him, 
and  in  possession  of  ]ieace  with  God.  and  His  i^resence. 
as  assembled ;  then  sent  forth  in  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  with  remission  of  sins,  for  others ;  then  the 
remnant  of  Israel,  ui  the  latter  days,  who  will  believe 
by  seeing.  This  Introduces  the  Millennium.  ITie  last 
chapter  has  avowedly  in  it  that  wliich  is  mysterious,  and 
eridently  intentionally  so.  I  have  no  doubt  myself  that 
it  tbilows  o:i  consecutively  after  the  lord's  return. 
.Seen  on  earth,  seen  in  resurrection,  seen  now  the  third 


p 


406 


iself  on  tiq^H 
rael  only  ^^H 


time,  I.  e.,  when  He  returns.  He  puts  Himself 
ori^nal  ground  of  His  associations  with  Israel  only  il 
power.  The  nets  do  not  break,  the  ships  do  not  sink, 
He  has  already  gathered  tish,  but  the  great  haul  is  then 
taken,  and  without  the  ensuing  failure  as  it  was  in  pre- 
vious service.  Remark,  too,  we  are  .in  Galilee,  and 
there  is  no  ascension.  This  suits  John;  it  is  l)i%ine 
manifestation  on  earth,  not  man's  going  to  heaven; 
hence,  it  links  on  to  the  future  display  of  [)ower,  not  to 
Christ's  coining  to  receive  the  C'hurch  which  is  unitol  to 
Him  while  in  heaven.  Peter  follows  Christ,  and  is  to 
be  cut  off,  and,  1  Iwlieve,  the  whole  Jewish  church 
system  with  him.  John  is  left  in  testimony  to  connect 
it  with  that  which  is  to  come,  so  that  the  diseip," 
thought  he  was  not  to  die,  but  this  was  not  said.  Ni 
these  last  points  I  leave  to  the  Christian  perception 
every  one  who  examines  the  Gospel  with  care ;  but  t 
facts  prove  the  co-ordinated  character  of  the  history, 
from  one  end  of  the  Gospel  to  the  other,  completing  one 
distinct  and  clear  exhibition  of  Christ  outside  legal 
Judaism,  in  every  chapter  up  to  His  taking  His  sheep, 
which  closed  all  recognition  of  the  fold,  being  Christ 
in  cotitrast  with  that  .Judaism,  and  presenting  the  setting 
up  of  a  new  thing  in  Him.  Peter's  ministry,  who  served 
in  the  circumcision,  like  Jesus,  would  end  like  His. 
But  John's,  who  represented  ministry  outside  it,  but 
not  heavenly,  though  leading  individuals  there,  \^"ould 
go  on  till  Christ  came. 

W,  All  this  requires  study  to  verify  the  consistency 
of  details,  and  the  general  character  yon  give  to  it,  where 
it  is  mysterious,  which  it  evidently  purposely  is ;  but  the 
fact  of  a  dehnite  character  and  design  in  the  Gospel  is 
evident. 

H.  There  is  another  point  I  would  note  here  on 
occasion  of  the  xv.  chapter.  The  notion  of  the  appli- 
cation of  the  words  in  Hosea,  "I  have  called  my  Son 
out  of  Egypt "  to  Christ,  is  ridiculed  by  rationalists. 
Now,  I  affirm  distinctly  that  it  is  according  to  the  tenor 
of  Scripture  testimony  and  perfectly  rightly  applied.    It 


nect 


409 


is  a  great  leadiag  truth.  If  you  look  at  Isaiah  xlix.. 
you  will  see  Messiah  distinctly  presented  as  taking  the 
place  of  Israel.  ■  I  think  we  have  spoken,  when  on  the 
pseudo-Isaiah  of  infidels,  of  the  elect  servant  of  Israel, 
Christ  the  elect  servant,  and  the  remnant  the  elect  ser- 
vant of  the  last  days.  But  this  xlixth  chapter  is  more 
definite.  Israel  is  first  presented  as  Jehovah's  witness 
in  the  earth,  as  the  polished  shaft  in  His  quiver.  "  Thou 
art  my  servant,  O  Israel,  in  whom  1  will  be  glorified. 
Then  I  said,"  says  Messiah,  '•  1  have  laboured  in  vain, 
and  S|M;nt  my  strength  for  nought  and  in  vain."  And  so 
it  was  with  Christ  on  earth.  ■'  But  now,  saith  Jehovah, 
who  formed  me  from  the  womb  to  be  His  servant,  to  bring 
Jacob  again  to  Ilim,  though  Israel  l>e  not  gathered,  yet 
shall  I  be  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  Jehovah,  and  my  God 
shall  be  ray  strength.  And  He  said.  It  is  a  light  thing 
that  thou  shouldest  be  my  servant  to  raise  up  the  tribes 
of  Jacob,  and  to  restore  the  preserved  of  Israel,  I  will 
also  give  tliee  for  a  light  to  the  Gentiles,  and  to  be  my 
salvation  to  the  end  of  the  earth."  That  is.  Israel 
is  presented  as  the  servant  of  the  Lord ;  but  when 
Christ  comes,  if  it  were  so.  His  labour  was  in  vain,  and 
then  Christ,  though  to  restore  the  remnant  in  due  time, 
is  Himself  God's  servant,  and  light  goes  forth  to  the 
GeuHlcs.  This  is  the  passage  Paul  so  strikingly  quotes 
as  justifying  his  turning  from  the  Jews  to  the  Gentiles, 
when  the  former  rejected  his  message.  Chiist  takes 
the  place  of  Israel  imder  the  law,  Israel  after  the  flesh. 
This  He  does  all  through  John,  though  in  a  higher  way, 
as  revealed  Son  of  God.  Hence,  in  xv..  He  proclaims 
Himself  as  the  true  vine;  Israel  was  the  well-known 
vine,  and,  as  remarked  before,  Messiah  vrf%  to  be  the 
best  branch,  the  topmost  bough.  But  Israel  is  set 
aside.  The  true  vine,  as  the  true  servant,  is  '^Wst. 
Israel  was  Jehovah's  son.  His  first  bom  ;  but  Ck.ist  was 
the  son,  the  true  first  bom  of  every  creature.  Hence, 
as  rejected  by  Israel.  He  begins  Israel's  whole  history 
afresh,  an<l,  as  not  deriving  His  position  from  the  people. 
He  is  called  out  of  Egypt,  to  begin  their  historv  accord- 
dd2 


L. 


410 


ing  to  God.  Now.  remark  hwe,  dear  W.,  I  am 
saying  whether  Scripture  be  wise  or  foolish,  I  believe  0 
divinely  wise ;  but  that  is  not  my  question  now.  What 
I  say  is,  it  is  the  system  of  Scripture  to  substitute 
Christ  for  Israel,  the  second  Adam  for  the  first,  and^ 
that  what  wholly  failed  as  founded  on  the  responsibilil 
of  man  was  taken  up  afresh  in  the  perfect  and  unfailii 
Son  of  God.  Indeed,  this  is  true,  as  we  have  seen, 
to  every  principle  of  God's  dealings  with  men,  but 
now  speak  only  of  Israel.  And  hence,  Matthew  aj 
the  New  Testament  using  the  Old  Testament  Scripture? 
use  it  rightly  according  to  the  intended  use  of  Scri|)- 
ture.  Peojile  may  quarrel  with  Scripture,  but  they 
cannot  say  that  Matthew  quotes,  "Out  of  Egyjit  have 
I  called  my  son."  in  a  way  not  according  to  the  inten- 
tion of  Scripture.  It  is  the  system  and  plan  of  Scrip- 
ture, of  the  Old  Testament  itself,  to  transfer  passages, 
from  Israel  the  provisional  son  to  Christ  the  true  " 
thus. 

W.  Well,  this  is  a  new  view  of  the  matter.     It 
taking  the  bull  by  the  horns. 

H.  I  believe  it  to  be  the  simple  matter  of  fact, 
think  the  real  weakness  of  the  defenders  of  Scripture  ic 
that  they  do  not  really  believe  in  its  perfection,  they 
yield  something  to  their  adversaries.     If  it  be   Divine, 
I  cannot  yield  what  is  Divine.     If  it  be  not  Divine, 
have  lost  all  Scripture.     If  I  l>elieve  it  Divine  I 
the  Divine  meaning,  and  I  shall  be  helped  to  discover  i) 
and  wait  till  1  do.     The  moment  you  compromise,  yw 
are  off  the  ground  on  whi<-h  the  Bible  is  of  any  value ;  or 
that  contending  for  it  is  of  any  consequence  whatever. 

W.  There  I  agree  with  you,  and  I  think  that,  for 
Christians,  these  attacks  will  bo  of  great  value  in  this 
respect.  For  even  Orthodox  persons  were  very  loose 
in  their  estimate  of  God's  Word,  and  of  inspiration.  The 
Divine  authority  of  God's  Word,  and  the  present  action 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  not  really  believed  in. 

iT.  An  unconverted  man  cannot  spiritually  recog 
either.     He  may  be  brought  up  with  respect  for 


e  i^^l 

hat 
tute 

ilit^H 
liij^l 

ure^H 


1 

ire  w^^ 

they 
ivine, 
ine,  X^^ 

seeUH 

B,  yoff^^ 


for  d^H 


411 


L 


Word  of  God,  and  it  is  a  very  great  mercy.  But  his 
owii  thoughts,  when  he  thinks,  must  be  human  as  to  it 
when  he  comes  to  the  point,  and  he  has  none  else. 
When  he  '  has  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true,'  all  this  is 
changed.     But  we  will  now  take  up  Matthew. 

W.  It' you  please.  What  is  the  aspect  in  which  Christ 
is  presented  in  this  Gospel,  as  you  suppase?  What  the 
ways  and  dealings  of  God  as  presented  in  it? 

H.  The  Emmanuel,  Jehovah-Messiah,  promised  and 
prophesied  of.  presented  to  Israel  but  rejected,  and,  thus, 
rejected  Isi-ael  making  way  for  the  Church  and  the 
kmgdom  ;  but  all  in  earthly  or  Jewish  connection ;  from 
that  point  of  view.  Hence,  as  in  .John,  the  final  scene 
is  in  Gahlee,  and  there  is  no  ascension.  Let  us  now  go 
through  its  general  structure  as  the  evidence  of  special 
design;  of  a  design  which  has  Divine  largeness  of  view 
and  object.  It  begins  with  the  rotita  of  promise  to  come 
to  the  promised  seed.  Abraham,  David,  Christ.  There 
are  none  of  the  lovely  details  of  the  state  of  the  poor 
and  godly  remnant  in  Israel  which  wo  find  in  Luke,  but 
simply  the  accomplishment  of  prophecy  in  the  mira- 
culous birth  of  Jesus,  whose  name  was  to  be  the  exproa- 
sion  of  the  coming  of  Jehovah  bi  nave  Hin  ])ei)p]e. 
Next  we  have  the  false  king  seeking  to  thrust  Ilim  out, 
the  Gentiles  having  come  to  own  Him,  (iod'n  won- 
drous testimony  according  to  prophe<'y,  and  God  pro- 
viding, when  once  Jesus  was  thus  owned,  for  the  non-ful- 
filment of  the  blessing  in  legal  Israel  then,  but  n 
recommencing  their  history  in  His  Son  called  out,  of 
Egypt.  All  this  in  Bethlehem,  a('«»rding  to  [irophi-ry. 
The  result  is,  that  He  is  cast  out  into  Galilee  anmng  the 
poor  of  the  flock,  to  be  brought  up  an  the  fte|)arut<i|  oiio 
from  among  His  peojile.  Next  comes  the  voico  fon<t(»I(l 
in  the  wilderness  to  announce  the  coming  of  Jdiovnli 
calling  for  repentance  to  meet  Him,  rliftowning  right  hy 
birth  from  Abruhani  ah  sufficient.  They  muitt  metft 
God.  The  fan  was  there  t^)  cleanse  Hit  flcHir  (iNrnid), 
the  axe  already  at  the  riK»t  of  the  trivd.  John  recog- 
nizes the  glory  of  the  ]>erson  of  .Iosuh,  but  JtmtB  laltM 


412 


f 


His  place  according  to  Ps.  xvi.  among  the  poor  in  spiril 
and  godly  ones  among  the  people,  the  excellent  of  the 
earth  :  there  He  is  owned  as  Sou  of  God  and  anointed, 
and  sealed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  for  His  service  in  the 
earth.     Then  He  is  tempted  and  put  to  the  test, 
answers  by  passages  from  IJeut,,  the  book  which  C( 
teniplated  Israel,  not  in  legal  order,  but  imder  a  Di' 
claim  of  obedience.     John  is  cast  into  prison,  and  Jesus 
begins  His  ministry  and  carries  it  on,  on  the  same  foot- 
ing among  the  people  as  John,  and  begins  to  gather 
disciples   to    Himself.     The    last   three  verses    give   a 
general  account  of  all  His  service  in  Galilee,  preaching 
Qie  glad  tidings  of  the  kingdom,  and,  by  a  display  «J 
power  in  goodness,  drawing  the  attention  of  the  whole 
country.     Thereupon,  that  there  might  be  no  mistake. 
He  sits  down  and  declares  to  Uis  disciples,  but  in  the 
audience  of  the  crowd,  who  thty  were  that  would  enter 
into  the  kingdom,  and  on  what  jirinciples.     This  is  the 
sermon  on  the  mount.     Israel  was  in  the  way  with 
Jeliovah  to  judgment.     If  he  did  not  come  to  agree- 
ment he  would,  as  to  earthly  government,  be  cast  into 
prison  and  remain  till  all  was  paid.     Note,  that  rejec- 
tion is  supposed  for  the  disciples,  v.  10,  11.     It  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  an  expression  peculiar  to  Matthew : 
that  is,  the  rule  of  the  kingdom  is  not  on  earth,  but  in 
heaven,  enlarged,  when  the  full  result  is  seen  (Matt.  xiii.). 
int*:i  the  Father's  kingdom  and  the  kingdom  of  the  Son 
of  Man,  a  name  which  Christ  takes  on  Ilis  rejection  as 
the  Christ,  and  always  gives  Himself,  and  which 
passage  from  the  prophecy  of  Him  in  Ps.  ii.,  in  whii 
character  He  was  rejected  and  the  kingdom  not  now 
up,  to  His  character  in  Ps,  ^-iii.,  in  which  He  is  h( 
over  a^l  things.     The  special  characteristics  of  the 
mon  on  the  mount  are  what  is  called  the  spirituality 
the  law,  the  claim  of  a  sanctifting  \\e\v  and  obedieni 
and  the  revelation  of  the  Father's  name.     In  a  cerl 
sense  this  part  of  the  Gospel  gives  Uis  whole  positi< 
in  Israel.     After  the  sermon  on  the  mount  we  hai 
details  fully  bringing  out  the  display  of  Emmannel, 


I 


413 


the  effect  on  Israel,  and  the  opening  the  door  to  Gentiles. 
These  we  w-ill  go  briefly  through.  We  shall  see  that  it 
passes  withal  directly  on  to  dealing  with  the  people  in 
the  last  days  in  connection  with  what  was  then  going 
on.  In  cleansing  the  leper  He  shows  Iliiuselt'  as  exer- 
cising Jehovah's  power  in  Israel,  and  yet  subject  to  the 
!aw  of  Closes.  In  healing  the  Centurion's  servant  with 
a  word  wo  find  Ilim  owned  as  the  Divine  Disposer  of  all 
things;  and  He  takes  occasion  by  this  faith,  not  found 
in  Israel,  to  declare  the  bringing  in  of  Gentiles  to  sit 
down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  the  children  of 
the  kingdom  of  Israel  after  the  flesh  being  shut 
out.  These  great  ])rinciples  being  established,  we 
have  His  present  condition,  the  blessed  fulfiller  of 
Isaiah  liii.,  and  an  outcast  in  Israel,  the  Son  of  Man, 
but  one  for  whom  all  must  bo  given  up.  Next  a 
picture  of  the  result  of  being  with  Him,  to  man's  eye  a 
storm,  which  left  no  hope — at  any  rate  they  were  in  the 
same  ship  with  Jesus — but  He  who  seemed  asleep  (and 
was  undisturbed  by  all)  with  a  word  commands  all  the 
elements ;  thus  gi-aciously  rebuking  their  want  of  faith. 
In  the  country  of  the  Gergesenes  His  word  dispels  all 
the  power  of  Satan ;  but  occasion  is  given  to  display  this 
power  in  the  unclean,  the  swine — a  figure,  I  have  no  doubt, 
of  Israel's  subsequent  history.  At  any  rate  those  who  have 
seen  this  power  in  Him,  when  fully  informed,  got  rid  of 
Him.  Thus,  all  His  power,  and  Israel's  and  the  Gen- 
tiles' history  in  connection  with  it,  have  been  displayed. 
Note,  herein,  the  beautiful  perfect  display  of  the  truth 
in  the  first  case,  Jehovah  alone  cleansed  the  leprosy. 
The  leper  saw  His  power,  but  doubted,  at  least,  His 
goodness,  could  not  reckon  on  it.  Jesus,  in  words 
which  God  alone  has  a  right  to  use,  declares  His  grace, 
"  I  will ; "  but  if  one  touched  a  leper  he  was  unclean ; 
but  His  holiness  and  nature  were  such.  He  c^idd  exer<'ise 
His  love  to  the  uttermost  in  the  midst  of  evil,  undefiled 
and  undofileable.  And  He  touches  him,  and  says,  "  I  will." 
Jehovah,  whom  none  coidd  defile,  a  man  to  bring  ])er- 
fect  love  in  power  to  the  vilest. 


414 

W.  How  a  few  words,  a  single  act,  in  these  Divine 
records  carries  a  volume  of  truth.  How  they  prove 
their  Divine  character  by  it.  It  has,  we  cannot  doubt  an 
instant,  a  Divine  Author,  and  a  Divine  subject.  Much 
as  your  explanation  interests  me,  the  simple  fact  in  the 
history  you  speak  of  says  more  than  volumes  of  any 
explanation. 

H.  In  truth,  it  does.  The  soul  taught  of  God  is  in 
contact  with  Divine  power  in  the  Word.  We  may,  by 
God's  grace,  serve  as  finger  posts  to  it.  He  makes  us, 
and  it  is  gracious,  helpful  to  one  another ;  but  all  must 
be  learnt  with  God.  We  will  proceed.  In  ix.  Christ 
is  the  Jehovah  of  Psa.  ciii.  He  forgives  and  heals  at 
the  same  time.  Next  He  abounds  in  grace  and  calls 
the  vilest,  comes  as  a  physician  to  call  sinners,  not  the 
righteous ;  nor  can  He  put  this  new  power  of  grace  into 
the  old  bottles  of  Judaism.  In  the  rest  of  the  chapter, 
a  picture,  I  do  not  doubt  a  moment,  of  God's  ways  in 
Israel,  He  comes  to  intercept  death.  When  there  was 
individual  faith  in  the  crowd  of  Israel,  i)ower  went  out 
to  heal;  but  really  the  object  of  His  compassion  was 
dead  l)efore  He  came.  Resurrection  must  restore  Israel. 
And  so  it  will  be  with  them.  Owned  as  Son  of  David, 
He  opens  the  blind  eyes  and  opens  the  dumb  mouth  to 
praise  God.  Such  was  His  work  in  Israel ;  but  the 
Pharisees,  the  nation  in  its  legal  pride,  committed  itself 
fatally,  and  ascribed  the  Divine  power  to  Satan.  Awful 
word  !  But  patient  compassion  was  not  exhausted,  and 
Jesus-Jehovah  went  healing  everyv^^here,  had  com- 
passion on  the  shepherdless  multitudes,  saw  the  harvest 
plenty  and  the  labourei-s  few,  directing  His  disciples  to 
pray  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  He  would  send  out  la- 
bourers. This  He  does  in  the  next  chapter,  but  exclu- 
sively in  Israel.  The  twelve  arc  sent  out,  but  the  terms 
of  their  mission  extend,  without  taking  the  Church  into 
account  at  all,  to  the  time  of  Christ's  coming  again. 
They  are  sent  out  in  the  midst  of  a  hostile  people,  seek- 
ing the  remnant,  the  worthy  in  Israel,  and  forbidden  to 
go  to  Gentiles  or  Samaritans.     But,  if  rejected,  judg- 


415 


ment  would  come.  He  goes  on  to  the  time  wheu 
the  Spirit  would  be  come,  and  till  the  time  when 
the  Son  of  Mau  would  be  come.  They  had  called  the 
Master  of  the  house  Beelzebub  (showing  His  estimate 
of  the  character  Israel  thus  took),  how  much  more  His 
servants.  But  lie  encourages  theui  by  every  promise, 
and  especially  the  Spirit's  help,  and  declares  that  all 
done  to  them  would  be  considered  as  done  to  llim.  This 
remarkable  chapter  shows  the  Lord,  as  we  Iiave  seen 
the  prophets  before,  passing  over  here  from  His  first 
coming  unbrokenly  to  the  last  days,  leanng  out  wholly 
the  present  period — for  He  forbids  any  gospel  to  Gentiles. 
The  patience  of  Christ  continued  to  deal  with  Israel; 
but,  in  a  certain  sense,  this  was  a  closing  testimony ;  I 
mean  as  to  its  character  and  nature,  This  is  supposed 
to  continue,  as  we  have  said,  or.  rather,  not  to  be  com- 
pleted till  He  came.  What  follows  in  the  Gospel  dis- 
cusses the  moral  character  of  His  rejection,  showing 
where  rest  was  to  be  found,  and,  afterwards,  what  would 
come  in  on  His  rejection.  Thus,  in  xi.,  on  the  inquiry 
by  John,  the  character  of  His  mission,  and  their  recep- 
tion of  it,  and  of  His  own,  and  their  reception  of  that,  is 
unfolded,  reproaching  the  cities  with  their  unbelief,  but 
showing  rest  in  Himself  for  the  weary ;  and  that  the 
truth  was,  all  was  given  to  Him  the  Son;  He  alone 
knew  the  Father,  and  could  reveal  Him ;  and  He  was 
the  Son,  none  at  all  could  know  Him  but  tlie  Father 
Himself.  But  He  did  reveal  the  Father  to  those  Who 
came  to  Him.  He  then  shows  the  triumph  of  mercy  over 
sacrifice— that  a  rejected  Da^Hd  had  eaten  the  show- 
bread,  and  that  the  priests  jirofaned  the  Sabbath  in  the 
temple,  and  a  greater  than  the  temple  was  there.  The 
seal  of  Israel's  covenant  must  give  place  to  the  Son  ofMan. 
The  same  point  is  again  insisted  on  with  the  Jews,  and 
their  whole  svstem  ju<!ged.  This  was  an  all-important 
point.  It  was  setting  the  whole  system  aside  for  grace. 
His  silent  and  unobtrusive  character  is  declared,  but.  when 
the  people  own  Him  .Son  of  David,  the  Pharisees  repeat 
their  blasphemy,  and  this  leads  to  the  formal  judgment 


416 

of  the  nation,  and  a  prophecy  of  their  last  estate :  that 
as  the  unclean  spirit  (of  idolatry)  had  gone  out,  it  would 
come  back,  with  seven  worse  ones,  to  Israel.  Then,  on 
His  mother  ami  brethren,  the  links  with  Israel  according 
to  the  flesh,  coming.  He  will  not  own  them,  but  only 
what  is  the  fruit  of  His  own  word.  This  is  fully  un- 
folded in  xiii.  There  the  Lord  takes  the  character  of 
a  Sower,  one  who  does  not  seek  fruit  from  what  is 
already  planted,  but  brings  with  Him  what  is  to  produce 
it.  Then,  in  the  six  following  parables,  propounds  the 
character  and  forms  the  kingdom  of  heaven  would  take 
while  the  King  was  hidden,  and  had  not  taken  to  Him 
His  great  power  and  reigned :  in  three  its  outer  as|)ect 
to  the  multitude,  in  three  its  inner  to  the  disciples.  Its 
character  as  kingdom  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  of 
Man  is  given  at  the  close.  They  are  things  new  and 
old,  the  new  unlooked-for  character  of  what  had  been 
told  of  in  prophecy,  which  a  Scribe  would  already  know. 
In  what  follows  we  have  the  signs  of  the  closing  scene — 
John  Baptist  is  beheaded,  and  the  Lord  retires.  But, 
followed  l3y  the  multitude,  His  compassions  still  continue. 
He  acts  as  the  Jehovah  of  promise,  and  satisfies  the 
poor  with  bread ;  but  then  retires  even  fi'ora  His  disciples, 
and,  returning  to  them,  shows  that  He  walks  as  on  dry 
ground  where  they  are  tossed  about,  and  can  give  power 
to  faith  to  do  it.  All  here  (le|>cnds  on  keeping  the  eye 
fixed  on  Jesus.  Peter  could  have  walked  on  a  smooth 
sea  no  better  than  on  a  rough  one.  When  they  were  in 
the  ship  the  wind  ceased.  Who  with  any  sense  can 
doubt  this  was  significant?  Israel  dismissed,  Christ 
alone  on  high,  His  disciples  tossed  about,  yet  taught 
to  walk  on  the  water  to  come  to  Him.  When  in 
the  ship  all  is  peace,  and  come  to  land  (Gennesaret), 
that  world  out  of  which  He  had  been  once  expelled, 
they  worship  Him  there,  xv.,  We  have  the  principles 
of  the  kingdom ;  truth  in  the  inward  parts  contrasted 
with  ordinances ;  man's  heart  evil,  but  grace  going  out 
to  the  vilest  of  an  accursed  race,  where  there  was  faith. 
The  Lord  again  feeds  the  multitude,  the  fact  having  a 


417 


distinct  character,  which  for  the  present  I  pass  by.  lu 
xvi..  leading  the  adulterous  generation,  the  Church  is 
revealed,  founded  on  His  being  the  Son  of  the  Imti/jf 
God, — as  such  lie  had  never  before  been  o^vned,  it  was 
proved  in  resurrection ;  aud  also  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
whose  administration  was  entrusted  to  I'eter.  J'his 
leads  to  the  clear  announcement  to  His  disciples  that  He 
must  be  rejected,  and  die.  At  this  moment,  conse- 
quently. Ho  charges  them  to  say  no  more  that  He  is  the 
Christ,  the  character  In  which  He  is  presented  to  Israel, 
In  xvii.  the  gloi-y  of  the  kingdom  is  revealed.  But  the 
disciples  even  could  not  profit  by  the  blessing  and  power 
then  present,  and  He  was  soon  to  leave  that  generation. 
He  owns  His  disciples  as,  with  Him,  sons  of  the  Great 
King;  but,  not  to  oflend,  submits  as  yet  to  the  temple's 
demands.  I  n  xviii.,  we  have  the  spirit,  and  flesh-judging 
princijiles,  of  the  kingdom.  The  meek  and  lowly,  and 
little  children,  are  on  His  heart;  for  now  it  was,  not 
Christ  to  Israel,  but  the  Son  of  Man  come  to  save  that 
which  was  lost:  and  the  Chiu-ch,  not  the  synagogue, 
became  tlie  place  of  which  within  and  without  could  be 
said.  Forgiveness  characterized  the  kingdom,  but  jiidg'- 
ment  when  grace  was  not  owned ;  and  so  it  bapjiened  to 
Israel.  We  then  get  spiritual  power,  judging  and  hold- 
ing flesh  as  dead,  while  the  relations  formed  of  God  are 
fiilly  maintained  — the  law,  the  way  of  life  to  the  Jew, 
sup|X)sing  it  to  be  kept ;  but  the  state  of  the  heart  spiri- 
tually judged,  and  Christ  to  be  followed.  All  this  is 
showing  the  effect  of  l)ringing  in  new  power,  applied  to 
what  the  law  treated  of.  In  relationships,  flesh  not 
being  judged,  the  law  had  gone  lielow  the  original  order 
of  God,  which  was  restored,  but  new  jiower  brought 
in,  to  live  wholly  to  God.  The  truth  ()f  life  by  law,  on 
the  other  hand,  abstractedly  ownerl,  but  the  state  of  the 
heart  judged  in  respect  of  it :  not  merely  outward  con- 
duct; and  Christ  the  tnie  test  of  this.  All  this  is*  of 
vast  importance  at  this  moment  of  transition.  Riches, 
instead  of  being  a  reward  of  righteousness  in  God's 
earthly  government,  were  a  snare  to  the  heart  as  to  iC 


418 

entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven;  while  giving 
up  everything  for  Christ  would  surely  not  lose  its 
reward ;  only  man  might  judge  amiss.  It  was  a  new 
thing  where  (xx.)  all  was  grace,  and  fleshly  claim  of 
reward  for  so  much  ran  athwart  the  ways  of  one  giving 
in  grace.  The  Lord  then  renews  His  announcement  of 
His  immediate  rejection;  and,  James  and  John  looking 
for  a  good  place  in  Messiah's  kingdom,  the  I^rd  shows 
them  the  Son  of  Man  was  to  suffer,  give  His  life  a  ran- 
som, and  they  nmst  take  up  the  cross  too ;  that  was  all 
He  could  give  them,  save  as  all  was  ordained  of  the 
Father.  He  that  was  least  among  them  would  be 
greatest,  'i'his  closes  tho  instruction.  The  closing  his- 
tory commences  here  with  the  blind  man  at  Jericho,  as 
in  all  three  Gospels, — an  additional  evidence  of  a  com- 
mon plan,  yet  unquestionably  not  formed  by  the  hu- 
man authors, — and  (Jhrist  in  the  presence  of  Israel  takes 
the  character  of  Son  of  Da\'id.  He  then  rides  in 
on  the  ass,  according  to  prophecy,  and  is  celebrated  as 
Son  of  David  coming  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  The 
fig-tree,  the  figure  of  Israel,  is  judged.  And  then,  in 
succession,  He  judges  virtually  (each  class  coming  up  in 
succession  to  tempt  Him)  the  chiefs  of  the  nation,  the 
whole  nation  being  God's  vineyard,  who  were  at 
last  rejecting  the  son  sent  for  fruit  according  to  the  old 
system,  here  the  kingdom  of  heaven  according  to 
^  grace    is  set  forth    (xxii.),  on    which  He  gathers  the 

Gentiles,  but  judges  when  they  are  come  in;  then 
the  Pharisees  and  llerodians  as  to  their  connection 
with  the  (ientile  monarchies;  then  the  Sadducees; 
then  He  takes  out  of  the  law  its  Divine  and  eternal 
essence,  and  by  one  question  confounds  the  Pharisees  as 
to  how  the  Son  of  David  could  l>e  David's  Lord,  and  te 
taken  up  to  God's  right  hand,  which  was  just  about  to 
happen.  This  closes  His  intercoui-se  with  the  nation. 
They  had  all  passed  in  review  before  Him.  Inxxiii.  He 
recognizes  the  seat  of  ]\Ioses,  however,  still,  and  His 
disciples'  connection  with  it;  owning  still  existing 
Judaism  ;  but  then  judges  in  the  severest  way  its  state, 


419 


declaring  that  theii-  last  hypocritical  excuse  would  be 
taken  away  from  them ;  that  projibets  and  scribes  (so 
be  calls  the  Gospel  witnesses  here,  as  in  connection  with 
the  people)  would  be  sent  to  them,  and  thus  the  mea- 
sure of  their  guilt  iw  filled  up,  and  their  house  lie  left 
desolate  till  the  last  days,  when  the  nation  would  own 
Him  that  came  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  In  chaji.  xxiv. 
the  disciples  are  told  of  the  destruction  of  the  temple, 
and  then  their  ministry  on  to  the  last  days  is  spoken  of  to 
V.  14;  then  the  last  half  week  of  Daniel's  seventy  weeks 
is  referred  to,  at  the  close  of  which  the  Son  of  Man 
would  come.  The  whole  hist<iry  of  the  Jews  in  Judrea, 
and  the  scattered  remnant,  is  given  to  v,  31 ;  thence  to 
XXV.  31,  we  have  practical  warnings  and  parables  as  to 
the  duty  of  tlie  Chiu-ch  and  saints  while  He  is  away ; 
thence  to  the  end  of  xxv.  the  judgment  of  the  nations 
in  the  earth  when  He  .shall  be  returned.  ITie  historical 
close  now  comes — the  attachment  of  Mary,  the  treachery 
of  Judas,  the  closing  of  Christ's  association  with  them 
(shown  in  not  drinking  of  the  wine  then  with  them),  till 
in  a  new  way  He  drank  it  in  His  Father's  kingdom,  the 
millennial  world  to  come.  Kingdom  of  heaven  and  king- 
dom of  my  Father,  the  latter  its  character  when  He  takes 
it  in  heavenly  glory,  are  peculiar  to  this  Gospel.  Then  we 
have  fully  the  sorrows  and  sutterings  of  Gethsemane,  but 
not  what  we  found  in  John  — only  He  could  pray  and  ask 
His  Father;  but  the  Scriptures  must  be  fulfilled.  He 
is  in  commimion  with  the  Father,  but  the  suffering, 
obedient  man.  So  He  answers  when  the  high  priest 
adjures  Him.  according  to  Lev.  v.,  but  even  here  refers 
to  His  being,  from  this'out,  only  known  as  Son  nf  Man 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  as  He  is  now,  or 
coming  again  in  that  character.  The  people  give  up 
Christ,  and  desire  a  murderer,  and  say,  His  blood  be  on 
us  and  on  our  childreu — their  true  judgment  to  this 
day.  We  have  the  details  of  His  humiliation  on  the 
cross,  too,  though  no  stupifying  Himself  with  the  oflei-ed 
potion,  but  oljedience  to  the  end.  It  is  marked  that  it  is 
not  by  ^veakness  He  expires,  but  crying  with  a  loud 


420 

voice.  But  His  death  closed  the  whole  system  publicly, 
the  veil  was  rent,  the  very  characteristic  of  the  Jewish 
state,  where  men  had  no  access  to  God,  and  the  bodies 
of  saints  (Jews)  arose.  At  the  close,  it  is  only  His 
connection  with  His  disciples  in  Galilee,  where  He  had 
connected  Himself  with  the  poor  of  the  flock,  that  is 
noticed,  and  there  is  no  ascension.  Thus  it  fits  in  to  the 
renewal  of  a  place  with  Israel  on  earth  when  the  time 
comes.  ITie  mission  supposes  this,  and  sends  the  Gospel 
out  only  to  the  nations ;  all  power  being  His  in  heaven 
and  in  earth,  they  were  to  make  disciples  of  them. 

Now,  no  one  can  doubt  that  the  whole  course  of  this 
Gospel  is  marked  by  a  character  wholly  its  own,  the 
revelation  of  Christ  to  the  Jews  as  theirs,  but  rejected 
by  them ;  and  thus  the  disj)ensational  substitution  of 
other  things,  the  Church  and  kingdom;  while  the 
connection  of  His  disciples  \\ith  Jewish  things,  only 
on  a  new  footing,  is  distinctly  marked  and  pursued  to 
the  last  days,  the  Church  being  overlooked  in  this  part. 

W.  Your  review  of  it  makes  it  very  plain,  and  gives 
an  entireness  to  it  which  greatly  facilitates  the  seizing 
the  sense  of  the  different  passages. 

H.  You  will  see,  too,  if  you  examine  the  passages, 
that  the  historical  order  is  neglected,  to  put  the  events 
into  a  just  succession,  with  a  view  to  God's  dealing  with 
Israel.  Where  we  have  the  same  events  in  Mark  and 
Luke,  these,  so  far  as  Luke  is  chronological,  follow  the 
same  historical  order ;  but  Matthew  leaves  it  to  give  a 
distinct  character  to  Christ's  ministry ;  while  in  Luke, 
in  the  temptation,  and  from  ix.  exclusive,  to  the  end  of 
xviii.,  we  have  no  chronological  order  at  all,  but  events 
morally  connected.  I  will  touch  now  on  the  Gospel  of 
Luke.  The'  first  two  chapters  are  wholly  Jewish; 
except  the  heavenly  song  of  the  angels,  more  so  than 
any  part  of  the  Gospels.  We  have  a  most  perfect 
picture  of  the  state  of  the  pious  remnant,  who  knew  and 
spake  one  to  another;  the  priestly  service,  and  God 
yet,  in  patience,  blessing  in  connection  with  it,  and  the 
relationship  Israel,  or  at  least  Judah,  bore  to  the  then 


421 


GentUe  mooan^T.  John's  nuoistiT  U  brought  in  in 
coonection  with  ii,  and  Israel's  rgectioD  of  him ;  but 
then,  after  this.  C  farist  is  geneali^callT  traced  as  Son  nf 
Man  to  Adam.  Hence  fraoe.  and  His  a^u>ciatiuus  nith 
man.  with  sinne*^  and  the  principles  on  which  those  asso- 
ciations rested,  characterize  benoeforth  all  the  Gospel. 
He  is  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  the  moral  templation 
comiug  last  in  the  wihlenie&s.  He  begins  His  ministry 
by  showing  sovereign  grace  and  blessing  sent  outside 
Israel  (chap-  iv.).  We  find  Him  often  praying.  He 
was  so  when  He  received  the  Holy  Spirit  like  a  dove; 
was  so  all  night  before  choosing  HJs  AjHistles;  was  so 
when  He  was  traa^figured.  AVhat  He  gives  of  the 
sermon  on  the  mount  speaks  Dot  of  how  people  could 
euter,  but  of  His  disciples  as  separated  actually  to  Him. 
We  have  not  the  dtspensatioual  change  of  Matthew  xi., 
hut  only  Wisdom  Ls  ju-stified  of  her  children;  and  then, 
what  Ls  not  found  elsewhere,  the  touching  account, 
in  contrast  with  the  Pharisee,  of  one  of  these 
children  of  Wisdom,  the  woman  in  the  city  that  was  a 
sinner.  la  the  country  of  the  Gadarenes  the  details  of 
one  of  the  cured  men  given,  a  soul  restored  desiring  to 
leave  the  world  and  be  with  Jesus,  but  sent  back  to  tell 
of  Him  where  He  had  I>een  ri^jected.  Fuller  details  of 
the  assoeiatioas  of  Moses  and  Elias  withChri-st  in  glory, 
searching  judgment  of  self  in  all  its  shapes  when  He 
came  down.  In  the  mission  of  the  twelve,  none  of  the 
directions  which  confined  it  to  Jews,  nor  those  which 
continued  it  to  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  The 
different,  and  here  historical  order,  I  have  alluded  to. 
From  hence  to  xViii.  there  is  no  chronology,  but  great 
moral  jirincipies ;  among  the  rest  the  lost  sheep,  the 
piece  of  money,  and  the  prodigal  son  ;  the  use  of  riches, 
and  the  iasight  into  a  moral  world  unfolding  grace  and 
heaven,  and  a  total  change,  not  of  dispensation,  but  of 
moral  system — from  earthly  government  to  grace  and 
heavenly  hoj*.  The  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan,  to 
the  same  purpose — answering  to  the  xiiith.  of  Matthew. 
Before  this  we  have  only  the  sower  and  the  diHerent 


422 

soils ;  none  of  the  parables  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
nothing  dispensational ;  but  a  moral  closing  warning  as 
to  how  they  heard.  The  prophetic  warning  as  to  the 
revelation  of  the  Son  of  Man  is  given  as  a  general 
warning  to  disciples,  not  in  connection  ^vith  anti- 
Christ  and  Jerusalem.  The  parable  of  pounds  (not  of 
so  many  talents)  rests  on  individual  responsibility, 
and  reward  is  proportionate  :  in  Matthew,  only 
*  enter  into  the  joy  of  the  Lord,'  for  all  alike.  In 
the  answer  to  the  Pharisees,  He  introduces  the  life  of 
the  souls  of  all  after  death.  In  the  prophecy  answering 
partly  to  Matt.  xxiv.  we  have  definitely  the  then  coming 
siege  of  Jerusalem,  consequently  no  abomination  of 
desolation,  but  the  desolation  of  Jerusalem,  till  the  end 
of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,  and  then  the  coming  of 
the  Son  of  Man.  Christ's  personal  feelings  are  more 
brought  out  as  a  man  in  the  passover.  There  is  a 
strife  for  greatness  even  then.  In  Gethsemane  there 
appeared  an  angel  from  heaven  strengthening  Him ;  the 
Lord  turns  and  looks  on  l^eter  when  the  cock  crows, 
a  touching  and  deeply  interesting  circumstance,  not  else- 
where. Pilate  and  Herod  are  made  friends,  another 
deep  moral  trait.  Here  only,  the  conflict  (agony)  in 
Gethsemane  is  noticed,  and  His  sweating,  as  it  were, 
great  drops  of  blood,  presenting  Him  so  deeply  as  the 
suffering  man,  more  than  the  rejected  Christ.  The 
remarkable  history  of  the  thief's  conversion,  in  which 
the  hai)pincss  of  a  soul  before  the  setting  up  of  the 
kingdom,  which  last  alone  the  thief  expected,  is  re- 
vealed, and  his  being  with  Christ  in  paradise,  the  abso- 
luteness of  grace,  and  the  efficacy  of  the  cross.  Then, 
while  all  the  history  of  the  women  is  thrown  together 
in  a  few  words,  the  history  of  Emmaus  is  very  largely 
recounted,  and  He  is  known  in  the  sign  of  death. 
Lastly,  He  assures  their  hearts  that  it  is  Himself.  Re- 
pentance and  remission  is  their  Gospel,  and  they  were 
to  wait  for  the  i)Ower  of  the  Holy  Ghost  promised — and 
the  Gosi)el  being  from  heaven,  was  to  begin  at  Jeru- 
salem— the  Jew  first,  and  also  the  Gentile.     Here  we 


423 

find,  lastly,  the  Ascension,  where  Christ,  as  from  Ileaven, 
blesses  them  with  outstretched  hands,  and  praise  became 
the  portion  of  His  saints.  Now,  though  I  have  gone 
very  rapidly  through  this  Gospel,  the  character  and 
d^ign  is  as  clear  as  that  of  Matthew. 

W.  My  feeling  is,  that,  from  its  nature  it  is  clear, 
because,  while  Matthew  is  dispensational,  the  moral 
character  of  this  is  so  very  evident,  Christ's  connection 
with  man,  grace,  the  interest  of  the  soul,  the  prodigal 
son  or  Gentile  sinner,  the  praying  of  Christ,  and  the 
touching  circumstances  found  in  this  Gospel  alone,  give 
it  a  character  not  to  be  mistaken.  But  the  comparison 
of  them  all  leaves  no  cloud  upon  the  fact,  and  I  feel 
what  you  say  now ;  what  a  feeble  idea  a  harmony  is,  and 
how  utterly  senseless  the  remark  of  Mr.  Jowett  is,  that 
the  connection  of  the  same  facts  with  others  could  not  be 
of  importance,  because  they  were  differently  connected 
in  different  Gospels.  Why  it  is  the  whole  pith  of  the 
matter,  and  one  chief  thing  which  prints  a  special 
character  on  them.     But  what  of  Mark  ? 

a.  I  have  not  much  to  say  of  Mark.  It  presents  to 
us  the  prophetic  service  of  Christ.  Hence,  we  have  not 
His  birth,  but  it  begins  with  the  testimony  of  John, 
then  of  Christ.  Its  order,  the  historical  one,  in  spite  of 
patristic  statement,  is,  as  remarked,  the  same  as  St. 
Luke,  where  the  latter  follows  any  historical  order.  In 
the  passage  answering  Matthew  xiii.,  we  have  only  the 
sower,  and  no  parables  of  the  Kingdom,  save  one  in 
which  he  shows  that  Christ  took  personally  part  at  the 
commencement.  His  prophetic  service,  and,  after  leaving 
it  seemingly  to  itself,  takes  a  personal  part  in  the  end 
at  the  harvest  or  judgment ;  and  a  second,  in  which  the 
outward  form  of  the  Kingdom  during  His  absence  is 
shown.  We  have  the  call  of  the  Apostles,  I  do  not 
doubt,  coincident  with  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  which 
is  not  found  in  Mark,  being  the  principles  of  the  Eang- 
dom  whose  character  and  dispensations  are  opened  in 
Matthew.  In  Matthew  we  have  the  twelve  only  intro- 
duced afterwards,  in  exclusive  connection  witn  tiheir 


424 

mission  to  Israel,  and  reaching  forward  to  the  time 
when  the  Kingdom  will  be  set  up  in  power.  I  need 
not  go  further  into  the  details  of  this  Gospel,  which  is 
more  rapid  in  its  character,  more  of  testimony  than  the 
unfolding  of  dispensations  and  dealings  of  God.  But  it 
seems  to  me  that  a  special  design  is  evident  in  each 
Gospel,  not  perhaps  of  the  writer,  but  of  the  Spirit  which 
indited  them,  because  all  concur  to  one  common  end, 
but  each  is  independent  and  treats  the  same  subject 
differently — each  pursuing  its  own  object;  but,  inas- 
much just,  as  the  same  facts  are  differently  connected, 
showing  that  each  has  a  different  one,  yet  all,  by  each 
pursuing  a  different  one,  completing  a  whole.  The 
Prophet,  the  Son  of  David,  the  Son  of  Man  in  grace, 
the  Son  of  God,  are  respectively  brought  out,  and  in  a 
great  measure  brought  out  wholly  by  the  same  facts. 

W.  It  seems  to  me  most  striking,  and  to  have  a  very 
Divine  character.  For  the  design  proves  a  designer ; 
yet  each  independent  document  has  a  separate  design  of 
its  own,  and  the  general  design  is  not  from  their  writers, 
even  if  that  of  each  i>articular  document  was,  which  I 
do  not  believe.  There  is  a  simplicity  of  relation  which 
forbids  me  to  think  of  a  plan  of  composition,  though  I 
do  not  doubt  the  hal)its  of  thinking  of  the  vessel  were 
fitted  to  its  task.  It  makes  the  Gospels  a  very  import- 
ant part  of  Scripture  as  to  knowledge ;  though,  I  con- 
fess, the  details  of  the  Lord's  life  are  the  most  attractive 
and  blessed  aspect  of  them. 

H,  May  it  ever  be  so.  I  have  found  that,  led  to 
occupy  myself  with  the  Epistles  as  divine  reasonings  on 
Christ's  work  and  place  now,  to  get  peace  for  my  soul ; 
when  I  had  it,  my  heart  turned  back  to  the  Gospels  to 
learn  and  feed  on  Ilim  whose  every  footstep  was  light 
and  gi-ace.  They  are  our  constant  food  in  this  respect. 
I  find  I  read  Scripture  two  ways :  as  study,  and  as  a 
child  to  learn  in  heart  and  conscience,  as  God  speaking 
to  me  that  I  may  be  comforted,  searched  out,  and 
taught,  and  listen  to  God.  And  the  last  is  the  most 
important  and  every  one's ;  the  former  is  more  in  the 


425 


way  of  gil^.  Here  we  are  studying  it.  Mnrk,  tmi, 
that  it  is  not  each  Gospel  choosing  its  facts,  marking 
thus  the  Milter's  design.  Mr.  Jowett's  own  theorv,  as 
of  others,  is  that  they  had  a  common  testimouv,  aiul, 
hence,  the  prorf  that  the  design  came  from  a  higher 
source  is  verr  strong  indeed. 

W.  It  requires  to  study  the  Gospels  to  have  the 
proof  of  this,  and  happily  souls  enjov  and  profit  by  them 
who  never  think  of  the  difficulties  presented  or  the 
answers  to  them.  But.  when  they  are  studied,  I  do 
not  think  we  can  hesitate  a  moment  in  seeing  the  jus- 
tice of  what  you  say.  It  brings  to  my  mind  your  old 
charge  of  superficiality.  One  finds  that,  when  any 
thing  is  studied,  the  rationalists  have  remained  wholly 
oa  the  surface  of  things,  and  their  crude  difficulties 
disappear. 

H.  It  is  the  beauty  and  blessedness  of  Scripture  as 
the  word  of  God  to  work  by  its  own  power,  aud  convey, 
through  grace,  its  divine  contents  to  the  heart.  Hence, 
it  does  work,  is  blessed  to  the  jioor  and  ignorant,  and 
til  every  simple  mind  which  has  received  what  is  itivinely 
given  and  found  in  it  a  certain  proof  of  its  divine 
nature,  without  ever  perceiving  the  difficulties.  All  we 
do,  who  look  into  them,  is  to  discover  that  they  are 
trashy,  and  the  fruit  of  minds  who  do  not  see  beyond  the 
surface.  But  the  inquiry  servas  to  show  that  we  arc 
looking  into  depths  which  prove  that  all  of  us  are,  com- 
paratively speaking,  at  the  surface  of  that  which  i.s  of 
infinite  dejjth,  its  waters  always  pure,  and  all.  and 
alwaj-s,  ours.  But  we  vvill  return  to  oui-  Essays.  Mr. 
Jowett.  after  .speaking  of  the  Gosjiels,  says:  ••  If  words 
have  more  than  one  meaning  they  may  have  any  moaning." 
This  may  sound  wise,  but  it  is  most  jterfect  tra.sli.  I 
take  an  example.  When  Christ  died,  it  is  said  the  veil 
of  the  temple  was  I'eut  in  twain  from  the  Ui]t  to  the 
bottom ;  and  then  the  resurrection  of  the  saintH  after 
His  resuri-ection  and  their  ap|)earing  in  the  city  i^  noted. 
Now  this  rending  of  the  veil  has  one  meaning.  It  is 
the  history  of  the  fact,  and  means  only  diat.  Now,  I 
E  E  2 


426 

say,  such  an  assertifjn  is  as  senseless  and  foolish 
can  jiossibly  I>e.  The  rending;  is  ascribed  to  Chrii 
death,  followed  hy  resurrection  of  dead  saints.  The 
veil  was  the  sign  that  God  was  hidden  and  could  not  be 
approached.  Now,  by  Christ's  death,  Tie  could  l>e. 
The  whole  mighty  change  of  dispensation  was  marked 
in  it,  and  the  fiill  power  of  redemption  in  Christ's  death. 
These  senses  are  indeed  ascribed  to  it  in  the  Epistle  t« 
th(r  Hebrews,  in  ix.  and  x.  But  they  are  evident.  ITie 
talking  of  one  meaning  is  simply  folly,  and  if  I  speak  uf 
the  uncertainty  of  interpretation,  which  of  course  is 
infallible,  am  I  to  choose  the  Judgment  of  an  interpi 
who  has  proved  himself  incapable  of  interpreting 
thing  by  embracing  an  evidently  false  and  inapplical>l 
principle,  or  of  one  who  has  a  right  one,  though  of 
course  I  must  watch  his  use  of  it  ? 

W.  You  may  proceed,  for  the  absurdity  of  their  prin- 
ciple here  is  too  evident  to  need  a  moment's  hesitation. 
We  are  returning,  too,  to  an  old  gromid.  that  they  are 
attacking  Scripture,  not  inter|)reting  it. 

ZT  I  do  not  think  we  have  much  more  to  examine, 

as  much  of  the  latter  part  of  Mr.  Jowett's  Essay  speaks 

of  general  principles  wliich  we  have  discussed  already. 

^  However,  we  will  run  through  it.     The  beginning  of  his 

H  Part  3  is  merely  that  dread  of  rationalists  and  their 

■  power  which  makes  him  anxious  to  reduce  Christianity 
f  to  the  level  at  which  they  will  not  object  to  it,  which  is 

no  level  at  all,  and  which  would  make  it  not  ChristianiQ', 

^^^  but  a  most  pitiable  and  despicable  imposture,  which  even' 

^^P  one,  but  one  sufficiently  IntellectuaJly  and  morally  low 

^^F  to  bo  a  rationalist,  would  repel  mth  scorn.     Their  in- 

^F  cessant  occupation  to  prove  it  such,  and  then  explain 

■  it,  only  proves  their  degradedly  low  moral  state,  which 

■  would  accept  such  a  system,  and  that  the  fang  of  Dirioe 
I  truth  is  in  their  conscience,  from  which  they  cannot  get 
I  themselves  free.  If  Mr.  Jowett  rejects  mere  convea- 
I  tional  Christianity  and  traditional  interpretation.  I  have 
I  nothing  against  it.  I  can  use  criticism  to  get  a  pure 
I  text  and  real  Christianity ;  but  to  get  an  imposture,  and 


aK  ui 
cao^^^ 


427 

continue  to  nse  it.  that  I  must  leave  to  him.  Nor  will 
I  use  a  double  tongue  to  deceive  myself,  for  I  really  do 
not  suapect  him  of  desiring  to  deceive  others ;  such 
language  I  mean  as  this ; — "  They  wish  to  preserve  the 
historical  use  of  Scripture  as  the  coutinuous  witness  in 
all  ages  of  the  higher  things  in  the  heart  of  man.  as 
the  inspired  source  of  truth,  and  the  way  to  the  better 
life."  Now,  whence  did  the  higher  things  in  the  heart 
of  man  come?  What  does  "inspired"  mean  here,  "an 
inspired  source  of  tnith  ?"  Any  one  would  think  it 
meant  it  had  not  come  of  the  will  of  man,  but  that 
the  Spiiit  of  God  had  moved  holy  men  of  old  to  speak 
as  they  were  moved  by  Him.  and  hence,  that  it  was  a 
source  of  truth.  And  note,  we  cannot  take  up  Old  and 
New  Testament  inspiration  here  as  distinct.  It  is  a 
'■  witness  in  all  ages."  Remember,  then,  we  have  been 
told  that,  "  not  for  any  of  the  higher  or  supernatural 
views  of  inspiration  is  there  any  foundation  in  the 
Gospels  or  Epistles."  If  he  meant  t«  shirk  the  Old 
Testament  there,  he  cannot  here.  He  speaks  of  the 
whole  of  Scripture,  and  we  soon  find  what  this  ambi- 
guous language  means,  T  cannot  here  acquit  Mr. 
.Jowett  of  disingenuousness,  though  quite  ready  to  admit 
that  it  is  the  influence  of  a  Ijing  system  over  his  mind. 
We  Iwgin  with  an  "  inspired  source  of  truth."  Here 
you  would  think  that  an  inspired  source  of  truth  must 
have  its  own  proper  and  Divine  authority.  But  we 
find  a  kind  of  half-way  house  of  uncertain  tones  in  the 
following  words :  "The  purer  the  light  in  the  human 
heart,  the  more  it  will  have  an  expression  of  itself  in 
the  mind  of  Christ;"  the  explanation  of  which,  though 
still  in  ambiguous  language,  really  reduces  the  word 
simply  to  the  higher  things  in  the  heart  of  man :  "  the 
individual  soul"  finds  a  "  sympathy  with  its  own  im- 
perfect feelings  in  the  broken  utterance  of  the  Psalmist, 
or  the  Prophet,  as  well  as  in  the  fulness  of  Christ," 
Now,  if  it  had  said  that  the  Psalms  provide  a  Divine 
utterance  for  feelings  imperfect  man  knew  not  how,  or 
dared  not,  to  express,  when  redemption  was  not  fully 


) 


known,  i  should  liaveaccej 

grace  of  God  is  shown  in  this  :  l)ut  for  Mr.  Jowett 
a  pious  person  not  inspii'&l  himself  and  imperfect, 
finding  broken  utterance  of  his  own  feeUngs  in  the  higher 
things  in  th^  hi'oH  of  man,  i.e.,  in  the  utterance  of  others 
like  himself,  Sj-rapathy  there  may  be.  but  the  Scriptures 
are  worth  nothing  more  than  any  Christian  neighbour ; 
only  really  that  I,  when  on  Christian  ground,  am  to  go 
lind-  to  Jewish ;  and  lose  wholly  "  the  increasing  purpose" 
of  revelation,  for  I  live  in  the  light,  and  am  to  go  back 
for  the  utterance  of  my  feelings  to  those  who  had  not 
got  it.  But  we  reach  the  home  of  this  thought  a  little 
further  on,  what  even  the  fulness  of  f"hrist  is.  "  No 
one  can  form  any  notion  of  the  power  which  Christianity 
might  have,  if  it  nvre  at  one  with  the  conscience  of  man, 
and  not  at  variance  with  his  intellectual  convictions." 
Here  we  have  the  truth.  My  state  of  mind  is  to  lie 
the  measure  of  revealed  truth.  The  "  inspired  source 
i)f  truth"  is  to  be  tampered  with  till  it  be  brought  into 
harmony  wth  it— nay,  Christianity  Itself  is.  What  the 
use  of  having  a  source  of  truth,  or  Christianity  is,  iu 
that  case,  is,  to  me,  perfectly  unintelligible.  I  should  have 
thought  that  an  inspired  source  of  truth  must,  by  its 
statements,  have  judged  the  state  of  the  conscience; 
that  Christianity  was  something  positive,  which  could 
only  be  itself,  and  was  a  Divine  light,  and  Divine  ft 
for  the  conscience ;  and  if  not  that,  an  im]>asture 
.  false ;  that  if  I  am  going  to  make  it  one  with  the 

^^  science  it    ceases  to   Ihj  it  at  all,    I    cannot  adapt 

^V  revelation  to  a  faculty,  because  it  is  not  then  a  revelation 

^B  at  all.     It  becomes  a  " pallus  in  campanili"  "ceases  to 

^T  have  any  meaning  at  all,"  and  to  whose  conscience  is  it 

f  to  be  conformed  ?     It  won't  do  to  talk  of  conscience.  i.e.. 

i  a  faculty  of  judging  of  good  and  evil ;  because,  in  fact, 

L  I  judge  it  by  something,  some  judgiiiciil  has  been  formed. 

I  conscience    has    its    raeasm-e,    unlcfs.    it    may  be.    in 

I  crimes,  and  even  in  that.     One  had  thought  the  fulness 

■  of  Christ  was  a  perfect  light  and  measure  which  jodj 

I  all  in  man,  and  formed  the  conscience ;  that  it  was 


■omu 
pt  ^^ 


fulness 
<ras  p^^M 


429 


rule  of  it.  It  appears  this  is  all  a  mistake.  I'hei-e  is 
a  Christianity,  but  ioan*s  conscience,  God  knows  whose, 
(the  majority  rejected  Christ),  is  to  be  made  the  measui*. 
and  Christianity  is  to  be  adapted  to  it,  A  jiretty  Chris- 
tianity we  shoiild  have  ;  but,  as  I  said,  the  statement  is 
simple  nonsense,  because,  when  adapted,  or  if  adaptable, 
then  there  is  no  such  thing  at  ail.  But  we  have  the 
.system  of  the  Essays.  Christianity  is  no  Divine  or 
Divinely  revealed  religion.  Talk  of  the  fulness  of 
f 'hrist  if  you  will,  the  hind  let  loose  will  give  you 
goodly  words.  It  is  the  result  in  the  year  one  of  the, 
till  then,  higher  things  of  the  human  heart,  which  is  to 
be  adapted  to  the  conscience  of  Mr,  Jowett  and  his 
friends.  We  may  conde^^cend  to  allow  God  t<i  give  an 
inspired  source  of  truth,  only  He  must  bend  and  make 
Himself  and  His  reUgion  one  with  Mr.  Jowett's  intel- 
lectual convictions.  Why  his  uext-door  neighbour  should 
not  say  the  same  I  cannot  tell,  or  an  American  Indian 
from  a  scalping  party,  or  the  Chinese,  who  are  very 
particular  in  paying  their  debts  the  first  of  January,  but 
have  no  scruple  in  robbing  to  do  it,  or  throwing  inconve- 
nient daughters  info  the  river ;  why  not  the  Chief  Priests, 
«ho  would  not  put  the  jirice  of  blood  into  the  treasury, 
but  had  no  scruple  iu buying  it?  Conscience  of  man — 
convenient  word  !  what  has  it  made  of  the  world  ?  If 
I  may  give  it,  thus  used,  Tapetic  interpretation,  after 
Baron  Bunsen,  it  is  man's  justifying  his  own  thoughts,  to 
please  his  own  will,  and  subject  everything  Divine  to  it. 

IV.  But  I  can  hardly  conceive  how  any  (»ne  can 
make  such  a  statement  as  Jowett's.  It  is  so  outrageous, 
not  merely  because  man's  conscience  has  been  so  cor- 
rupted and  hardened,  which  is,  though  true,  the  weaker 
side  of  the  argument;  but  that  it  makes  Christianity 
a  mere  paste  to  be  suited  to  intellectual  convic- 
tions ;  that  is,  makes  it  nothing  at  all — not  a  revelation, 
not  Divine,  not  truth  (aud  yet  calling  it  the  fulness  of 
Christ) — it  is  a  pure  and  simple  absurdity. 

fl".  It  is ;  but  we  get  exactly  here  what  the  system 
is.    All  jtrevious  adaptations  of  Christianity  to  other  ages. 


illec- 


430 

that  is  corruptions,  these  ^Titers  hold  for  forms  pro- 
duced by  the  age,  but  their  intellectual  convictions.  Chris- 
tiajiity  is  to  be  made  one  with.  They  only  deserve  the 
name  of  man — their  conscience  ia  man — ^their  intellec- 
tual convictions  man.  We  see  plainly,  too,  the 
that  has  led  them  to  this  modest  theory — "No  one 
form  any  notion  from  ■what  we  see  mvund  im  of 
power  which  Christianity  might  have  if  it  were  at  one,' 
&c.  Now  people  who  feel  that  "  what  they  see  around 
them  "  is  anything  but  what  Christianity  ought  to  be, 
which  is  not  very  difficult,  and  complaining  and  finding 
fault  very  easy,  jump  at  this,  and,  having  still  feith  in 
ChiTstiauity,  they  say.  That  is  true ;  oh.  if  we  had  it 
in  its  purity.  I  agree  largely  and  heartily  with  this 
feeling,  and  have  thjs  thirty  years,  and  more.  So  when 
he  talks  of  the  Bible's  Ijeauty  bemg  "  freshly  seen,  as  of 
a  picture  which  is  restored  after  many  ages  to  its 
original  state,"  it  is  delightful.  But  when  I  hear  that  it 
is  to  be  by  making  Christianity  one  with  the  conscience 
of  man.  I  say.  But  that  is  not  its  original  state,  it  is 
the  state  of  your  conscience,  your  present  intellectual 
convictions  as  you  call  them.  That  is  no  rule  by  which 
>■  I  judge  of  Christianity ;  it  is  denying  it  and  its  use 

L  altogether.     They  have  by  conscience,  when  the  -ways  of 

I  those  professing  Christianity  have  sunk  below  natural 

H  conscience,  judged  that  .state,  and  then  not  gone  back  to 

m  correct  their  own  state  by  the  original  revelation,  but 

I  have  assumed  their  conscience  and  present  intellectual 

^  convictions  to  \k  competent  to  judge  of  revealed  Chris- 

^k  tianity,  and  the  inspired  Woi-d  itself.     The  reasoning  is 

^V  this,  natural  conscience  has  judged  the  corruption  of 

H  f -hristianity  around  one,  therefore  it  is  the  right  judge 

■  of  the  Divme  revelation  which  has  been  misused.     But 

■  this  is  poor  logic,  and  worse  morality,  in  the  highest 

■  sense  of  mor^ity.  There  is  a  conscience  which  ia 
I  disgusted  at  the  hyjjocrisy  of  what  hears  the  name  of 
I  Christianity,  but  that  does  not  make  man's  intellectunl 
I  convictions  the  measure  of  what  revelation  meaua. 
I  Spe^diig  uf  a  Christianity  which  can  so  be  nude 


lectunl 
meaua.  ,^H 
deoHB 


431 


I 


■with  the  conscience  of  man,  is  saving,  there  never  was 
anj  Christianity  at  all ;  if  Christianity  means  a  reve- 
lation from  God.  aye,  a  final  revelation.  If  it  be  uut,  it 
is  an  imposition,  and  there  is  nothing  to.  be  adapted. 
But  I  am  only  showing  the  total  fallacy  of  the  ground 
Mr.  Jowett  stands  on,  and  how  in  fact  he  got  on  it. 
We  should  only  go  over  ground  we  have  trodden,  if  I 
should  remark  how  he  urges,  that  trom  the  Fathers  till 
now — till  the  German  rationalists  and  the  seven 
Essayists — "  they  read  the  Scriptures  in  connet-tion  with 
the  ideas  wbichwere  kindling  iu  the  mind  of  their  age." 
It  is  singular  to  say  of  Luther  and  the  like,  "  The  words 
of  Scripture  suggest  to  them  their  o^»ti  thoughts  and 
feelings."  I  thought,  "  the  purer  the  light  iu  the  human 
heart,  the  more  it  will  have  an  expression  of  itself  in  the 
mind  of  Christ ;"  so  that  I  should  have  thought  Luther 
and  Calvin  must  have  been  |)eriect,  if  the  words  of  -Scrip- 
ture thus  suggest  to  them  their  own  thoughts  and  feelings 
But  then  that  was  their  age,  this  is  Mr,  Jowett's;  so 
that  Christianity  must  be  one  with  his  intellectual  con- 
victions. A  pretty  thing  Christianity  must  be,  by  way  of 
"an  inspired  source  of  truth,  and  way  to  a  better  life." 
I  certainly  never  read  moi-e  incomparable  nonsense; 
and  yet  flowing  from  a  conscience  greatly  oHended  with 
the  inconsistencies  of  Christendom,  but  continuing  in  false 
self-eonfideuce.  and  in  connection  with  the  lowest  and 
most  contemptible  system  that  ever  a  man  drudged 
through  to  find  a  et-nmhi;  irpetitn  of  infidel  stupidity  and 
pretensions,  and  that  is.  German  rationalists'  comments 
on  Scripture. 

W.  But  is  there  not  research  in  these  German 
writers? 

ff.  There  is.  If  I  seek  mere  verbal  criticism,  they 
are  very  iisefitl.  Not  to  he  trusted,  "  liecause  they  read 
the  Scriptures  in  connection  with  the  ideas  kindling  in 
the  mind  of  their  age,"  but  still,  as  compiling  materials 
most  usefid.  But  if  1  took  a  man  who  bought  and 
hewed  my  wood  to  explain  the  nature  of  heat,  ur  the 
tissues  even  of  the  wood,  I  should  not  get  far  un ;  unly 


432 


and  dedu^^^ 


that  die  rationalist  pretends  to  do  it,  as  my  -^ 
would  not.     But  I  speak  of  tbeir  comments  and  t 
tif>us,  not  their  researrh.     We  have  si)oken  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  interpretation,  and  I  only  remark,  that  when 
Mr.  Jnwett  speaks  of  design,  what  he  says  is  utt 
false — 'There    is   no   more   design   than    in  Plato  . 
Homer' — 'no    proof  of   any  artificial    design.'      Nfl 
only  remark  how  God  is  wholly  left  out  here.     Therefl 
I  am  satisfied,  unless  it  l>e,  perhaps,  in  the  form  of  t 
Book  of  Job,  not  so  much  design  as  in  Plato,  as  regi 
the  writer ;  artificial,  none  at  all ;  unless  Job. 
suitposing  there  is  not  more  than  in  Plato,  but  God  ] 
the   designer,    what  an  immense   fact  that  would 
how  deep  and  Divine  the  design  must  be.     Now,  wi^ 
the  usual  superficiality  of  these  writers,  Mr.  Jowett  doe* 
not  even  take  that  into  consideration,     T  could  under- 
stand his  denying  it;  but  to  leave  it  out  is  stupidi^ 
As  to  human  design  extending  lieyond  a  book,  or  ew| 
an  epistle,  it  is  out  of  the  question.     The  authors  ■ 
mostly   different,    and   of  widely    ditieretit  ages ; 
where  one,  as,  for  example.  Paul,  his  writings  arechiaj 
occasional,  and  a  general  design  equally  out  of  the  qa 
tion.     Hence  the  only  real  question  is.  Is  there  a  desigf 
in  it  ?     Mr.  .Jowett  has  not  oven  found  out  the  question. 
Tliat  there  is,  I  do  not  think  any  intelligent  person  who 
has  read  the  Scriptures  carefully,  coidd  doubt  an  instant. 
I  believe  every  book  of  .Scripture  finds  its  place,  like 
the  parts  of  a  dissected  map,  and  give  a  whole  which 
proves  its  own  completeness.     His   next  rule   is  its  " 
just  as  superficial  and  false,  and  assumes  that  there  J 
no  inspiration.     "Each  writer,  each  successive  age,  I 
characteristics  of  its  own."     That  I  fidly  admit,  as  do 
every  one   who  has    read  them.     In   deigning  to    use 
iustruments,  God  did  not  mean  U.>  <lestroy  them.     He 
gave  them  talents  according  to  their  ability.     '"The* 
dillerences    ai-e  not  to  be  lost  in  the  idea  of  a  .Spi 
from  whom  they  proceed,  or  by  which  they  were  ovi 
ruled."     Even  this  I  do  not  quarrel  with,  tliough  i 
animus  be  evil.     Its  effect  is  to  swamp  inspiration  in 


iviuch 

I    use 
He 

OTfl^^H 

rha^ 


433 


the  diflfaicnees  cf  stjle.  but  I  admit  hs  terms — "  The 
diflfefeoees  are  doC  to  be  ket."  Be  it  so.  ^t  iioh-  the 
ooDclasioa — ^Mr.  Jowett  is.  I  tfaink.  the  n»i6t  illogical 
«Titep  I  erer  csme  acrrK?— "  And.  therefiMv.  illiistra- 
ticm  of  OQe  part  of  Seriptnre  br  another  should  be  roa- 
Hned  to  writiii^  of  the  <ai»e  age  and  the  same  ntithors, 
except  where  the  writings  of  diflerent  ages  or  |>ersous 
oflfer  obvious  aimilaritie?.'  N»iw  every  one.  exi-ept  Mr. 
Jowetl,  knoirs  that  the  later  writers  were  ihoroughlv 
imbued  with,  their  minds  whulty  formed  by.  what  pre- 
ceded ;  die  prophets  by  the  law.  and  the  New  Testament 
by  the  Old.  That  the  N'ew  Testament,  for  the  most 
disamilar,  is  yet  buiit  in  erery  diougfat  on  the  basis  of 
the  Old.  Though  the  truths  and  state  be  wholly  new. 
and  in  a  certain  sense  set  aside  the  whole  system  of  the 
Old.  yet  nine-tenths  of  its  language  is  nnintelligible. 
unless  we  are  versed  iu  the  Old.  This  is  the  more 
remarkable  indioarion  of  the  one  Divine  mind,  because 
it  was,  as  a  system,  the  total  setting  aside  of  the  Old. 
The  Cross  made  an  impassable  gulph  bet^veen  the  Old 
and  New,  yet  confirmed  and  adopted  the  Old ;  and  the 
Old  predicted  and  prepared  the  way  of  the  New,  wJUcli 
yet  set  it  aside.  As  Piiul  says — "  Now  the  righteous- 
ness of  God,  apart  from  law,  X">p«:  •■"fou  being  witnessed 
by  the  law  and  the  |irophets."  Now.  this  remarkable 
phenomenon  stands  alone.  Not  that  one  system  cannot 
borrow  from  another,  but  no  two  systems  on  earth  stand 
in  the  same  relation  as  these  do  to  one  another.  The 
principle  of  Mr.  Jowett  is  the  most  fntile  of  thoughts, 
contradietory  of  all  the  facts  of  the  case.  But  his  logic 
is  no  better.  Because  the  (Utierences,  which  we  admit, 
are  not  to  be  lost  in  the  idea  of  a  Sjiirit  i'Tora  whom  thoy 
proceed,  or  by  which  they  are  overnded,  therefore  they 
are  not  to  be  illustrated  from  one  another.  Now,  if 
they  proceed  from  one  .Spirit,  I  should,  admitting  the 
difterences.  expect  them  to  throw,  necessarily,  light  on  one 
another — or  even  if  one  Spirit  overruled  them.  Can  the 
.Spirit  of  God.  that  is,  God,  make  an  opening  series  of 
Divine  thoughts  which,  commimicated  by  diHereiit  per- 


434 

sons,  are  to  issue  in  one  great  culminating  fact, — the 
revelation  of  Himself  in  Christ, — can  there  be  "in- 
creasing purpose  of  revelation"  brought  out  by  these 
Divinely  accredited  i)ersons,  overruled  by  one  Spirit, 
without  one  part  clearing  up  another  ?  Be  it  that  I  first 
take  each  part  by  itself  in  its  own  context,  an  excellent 
and  important  rule  which  cannot  be  too  strongly  en- 
forced ;  but  is  not  so  much  as  an  illustration  (I  do  not 
like  the  term),  a  clearing  up  of  one  part  by  another^  in 
the  increasing  purpose  of  revelation  to  be  found,  if  all 
proceed  from  one  Spirit  ?  If  Mr.  Jowett  means  that  it 
does  not  so  proceed,  let  him  say  so  honestly,  and  deny 
the  Scriptures  as  "  an  inspired  source  of  truth ;"  but 
to  speak  of  a  Spirit  from  which  they  proceed,  or  by  which 
they  are  overruled,  and  that  with  an  increasing  purpose, 
and  that  therefore  we  are  not  to  illustrate  one  part  by 
another,  because  each  writer  has  characteristics  of  his 
own,  is  to  say  the  characteristics  are  not  oyerruled.  and 
that  I  am  not  to  look  at  the  one  Divine  power  from 
which  all  proceeds,  but  only  at  the  particular  forms  in 
which  this  one  mind  is  conveyed ;  and  this  is  just  the 
system,  and  a  more  illogical  and  absurd  one,  upon  the 
face  of  it,  cannot  be  conceived.  I  admit,  again,  that  I 
believe  this  inconsistency  flows  from  Mr.  Jowett's  feeling 
it  does  come  fi-om  one  Spirit.  But  a  double-minded 
man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways,  and  hence  his  exception 
as  to  obvious  similarities.  For,  if  this  be  of  style,  the 
exception  hardly  exists.  After  the  captivity,  the  pro- 
phets went  back  to  purer  Hebrew,  and  there  are  a  few 
resemblances  of  no  importance ;  but  if  this  saving  have 
any  meaning,  it  is  as  much  as  to  say,  Do  not  say  that 
there  is  any  light  during  the  day,  except  when  the  sun 
is  up.  This  inconsistency  of  Mr.  Jowett  is  regularly 
shown  in  a  subsequent  paragraph  :  "They  have  also  a 
sort  of  continuity  ....  and  at  length  the  idea  arises 
in  our  minds  of  a  common  literature,  a  pervading  life, 
an  everlasting  law."  No  God,  no  Spirit,  of  course,  in  it. 
But  to  proceed :  "  It  may  be  compared  to  the  effect  of 
some  natural  scene,  in  which  we  suddenly  (!)  perceive  a 


435 

harmony,  or  picture,  or  to  the  imperfect  appearance 
of  design  which  suggests  itself  in  looking  at  tie 
surface  of  the  glote.  That  is  to  say,  there  is  nothing 
miraculous  or  artificial  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
books  of  Scripture;  it  is  the  result,  not  the  design, 
which  appears  in  them  when  l>ouiid  in  the  same 
volume ;  or,  if  we  like  so  to  say,  there  is  design,  but 
a  natural  design  which  is  revealed  to  after  ages."  Did 
you  ever  in  your  life  read  anything  like  this  exti-aordi- 
nary  sentence?  M'^ere  not  God  shut  out  so  careftiUy.  I 
should  go  round  and  round  it,  like  the  suddenly 
perceived  beautifti!  picture,  to  admire  I  hardly  know 
what,  except  Professor  Jowett's  mi'm'te.  You  cannot 
accuse  such  a  man  of  any  dishonesty.  You  do  not  like 
to  accuse  him  of  anything — bonum  n'nmi  fadk  crederee 
maffnum  lUienter.  And  who  knows  what  he  would 
make  if  he  believed  God  had  something  to  do  with 
Scripture!  Here  you  have  him  suddenly  percei^g 
what  every  one  else  has  believed  these  thousand  years, 
a  thought  sanctioned  by  the  Lord  and  His  Apw*t!e5,  but 
combated  by  Mr,  Jowett  till  now;  but-,  thank  God,  felt. 
And  what  is  the  effect  it  is  hard  to  tell,  in  the  jieh  nille 
of  the  phrase.  This  continuity,  this  harmony,  appears 
in  them  when  bound  in  the  same  volume.  That  is  pro- 
found. But  then  the  idea, — what  is  to  be  done. — arises 
in  our  mind,  {i.e.,  you  cannot  help  seeing  it)  of  a 
common  literature,  a  i)ervading  life,  an  overriding  law. 
I  suppose  that  did  not  come  tiom  lieing  bound  in  the 
same  volume;  next  "it  is  the  result;"  I  suppose,  of 
something. — that  Mr.  Jowett  is  silent  upon,  only  it  is 
die  result,  not  the  design,  which  appears  in  them  when 
bound  in  the  same  volume.  But  the  result  of  what? 
But,  if  we  like  to  say  so,  it  is  design ;  but  a  natural 
design  which  is  revealed  to  after  ages.  Now,  I  grant 
the  revelation  to  after  ages,  because,  between  you 
and  T,  the  design  of  this  harmonious  whole  could 
not  be  Been  till  the  harmonious  whole  was  there.  But 
though  revealed  to  after  ages,  the  design,  I  suppose,  was 

before    it   began — apxij  rrjc  9<wpiac  rtXoi  njc   Tpaifwc        But 


436 

then  I  would  suggest  that,  if  there  is  a  design,  there 
must  be  a  Designer  of  the  whole;  for  the  design  is 
found  in  the  whole  before  any  of  it  was  there.  It 
proceeded  from  one  Spirit,  and  was  overruled  by  one. 
Who  was  the  Designer  of  this  which  suggests  one  over- 
ruling law,  the  harmony  of  our  picture  ?  Ah !  here  is 
silence;  nay,  worse  than  silence,  it  was  "a  natural 
design."     What  does  that  mean  ? 

W,  Well,  I  really  don't  know — a  natiutd  design — 
I  do  not  see  the  connection  of  the  ideas. 

//.  In  one  sense  no  human  being  can.    It  is  a  design 
which  has  no  designer,  but  has  grown  up  naturally,  a 
mere  contradiction  of  terms,  a  fortuitous  concurrence  of 
atoms  to  make  a  tree.    It  means  that,  if  anything  grows 
naturally,  God  is  to  be  shut  out  as  the  cause.     And  he 
would  have  Scripture  so  considered,  lest  God  should  be 
believed  to  l)e  in  it.     He  will — the  Lord  deliver  him 
from  it  —  at  the  cost  of  nonsense,  shut  out  God.    For,  if 
natural  means  springing  up  without  a  cause,  it's  a  con- 
tradiction in  terms  to  say  a  natural  design ;  and  it  is 
Atheism.    But  you  have  a  clue  to  it :  "  There  is  nothing 
miraculous  or  artificial,"  he  tells  us,  "in  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  books  of  Scripture."     Now,  arrangement  of 
the  books  is  of  his  usual  looseness.     Is  it  of  the  con- 
tents or  of  the  books  themselves?      But,  take  it  any 
way,    there   is   nothing   miraculous   or   artificial,   i.  6., 
neither  of  God  or  man,  in  it ;  it  grew  up  naturally,  yet 
was  a  design,  not  of  God's,  not  of  man's.     Of  whose? 
a  result  which  appeal's  when  bound  in  a  volume !     Did 
you  ever  see   a   man   labouring  and  toiling  under  a 
weight  upon  his  spirit,  in  a  labyrinth  of  his  own  mind, 
like  this  ?     And  let  me  add,  if  I  see  a  lovely  and  har- 
monious picture  in  nature,  do  I  say  it's  a  result  ?     Was 
there  no  Designer,  no  Creator,  no  one  who  formed  and 
made    the  lilies  of  the  field,  which  the  Blessed  One 
admired  ?     Did  God  clothe  the  grass,  which  to-day  is  iu 
the  field,  and  to-morrow  cast  into  the  oven,  and  not 
order,  and  arrange,  and  form  His  Word,  which  abideth 
for  ever,  and  by  which,  as  by  the  sword  out  of  Christ's 


437 


mouth,  nieii  will  be  judged  io  the  last  day  f  I  see  a 
c-reatioD  around  me.  a  harmony,  aye,  ■'  the  inii»erfcct  ai)- 
jiearance  of  design,"  in  luoking  at  the  surface  of  the 
globe.  iierha|>s  at  the  starry  heavens.  I  read  the 
Ajiostle  telling  rae  that  His  eternal  power  and  Godhea'l 
who  has  ordained  them  are  clearly  seen,  liaTatwvfun,, 
by  the  things  that  are  made,  so  that  men  are  without 
excuse.  To  Mr.  Jowett  it  is  a  result,  and  he  uses  the 
comparison  to  make  out  a  natural  design  whicli  grows 
up  where  God  and  man  are  not.  Yet  be  caimot  deny 
design  in  a  harmonious  whole,  and,  tx>  shut  out  4_iud 
from  -Scripture,  uses  an  exjiression,  "a  natural  design," 
which  is  simple  nonsense ;  white  the  object  of  it  is  simple 
and  clear,  from  the  exclusion  of  'miraculous  and  artifi- 
cial,' that  is,  God  and  man.  Design  means,  I  cannot 
help  perceiving  God.  Natural  means,  I  will  not  at  nnv 
rate  have  Him,  And  sec  the  foolishness  of  e\en  lliat 
comparison.  What  is  the  analogy  l>etween  a  picture  in 
nature  and  thoughts  of  men.  and  more,  the  thouglilj^  til' 
men  as  to  Christ,  and  all  that  God  has  told  us  in  Scri|p- 
ture  ?  Do  they  grow  up  like  a  tree  whose  seed  is  in 
itself  after  its  land?  Is  there  nothing  moral  in  them, 
nothing  but  natural  coiiseijuenees,  no  communications 
from  God  at  all  more  than  to  a  tree?  Is  that  Mr. 
Jowett's  idea  of  natural '.  If  not,  am  I  to  lie  guided,  as 
the  way  to  life,  by  mei-e  human  thoughts  in  dark  ages  i 
Who  was  Christ?  Or,  if  God  has  revealed  IJis  thoughts, 
am  I  to  have  them  spoiled,  perhaps  perverted,  by  human 
agency,  and  only  so?  Is  He  to  give  His  Son  to  work 
redemption  to  deliver  me,  and  I  only  to  know  it  in  such 
an  Oriental  garb,  and  so  mised  up  with  the  idciis  of  the 
age.  that  I  cannot  tell  what  this  .Sou  or  this  redemption 
is  ?  To  say  even  that  man,  with  religious  thoughts,  cuii- 
flirtiug  thoughts.  Divine  thoughts,  human  thoughts,  grows 
up  like  a  tree,  whicli  has  one  unchangeable  nature,  is 
rank  nonsense.  And  to  call  these  thoughts  a  revelation, 
or  the  inspired  sdiiree  of  truth,  if  it  l>e  not  God's  own  ac- 
count of  this,  is  trifling  with  words  and  things,  and  with 
the  things  of  God  too.     The  very  breaks  Mr.  Jowett 


438 

speaks  of,  prove  the  folly  of  his  thoughts.  The  harmony 
of  a  picture  is  a  whole.  But,  as  he  says,  we  have  cen- 
turies of  Judaism  without  a  word :  nigh  2,000  years  of 
Christianity  in  their  turn.  If  Scripture  be  a  harmo- 
nious whole,  it  is  something  else,  then,  than  natiutd 
growth  and  development.  For  the  development  was 
interi'upted  for  centuries  in  Judaism,  and  has  ceased  for 
near  2,000  years,  so  that  the  harmonious  whole  must 
belong  to  the  book  in  itself.  But  a  design,  which  har- 
mony denotes,  means  that  there  is  a  designer,  and,  if  a 
designer,  a  designer  of  the  whole.  And  this  says  all. 
For,  let  it  grow  like  nature,  which  is  nonsense  as  to 'a 
revelation,  or  let  each  word  be  dictated  to  a  machine,  if 
the  design  be  accomplished,  the  perfect  expression  of  the 
mind  of  the  designer  is  there.  Did  God  (every  wonl 
being  according  to  His  design,  or  there  is  not  harmony 
if  I  look  far  enough)  mean  to  teach  me  exactly  the 
truth  by  His  design  or  not  ?  Has  He  formed  the  Scrip- 
ture so  as  to  do  so,  supposing  I  am  willing  to  learn  ? 
If  so,  all  this  reasoning  is  the  pretension  of  a  candle  in 
sunshine  to  show  us  the  sun,  and  clear  up  by  it  what 
light  is. 

W.  But,  if  you  look  at  the  details  in  a  picture,  you 
lose  the  harmony, 

H,  To  be  sure  I  do,  but  I  learn  what  makes  it. 
But  only  think  of  the  language  of  this  sentence.  There 
is  a  harmony,  an  overruling  law,  but  a  result,  not  a 
design,  which  appears  when  bound  in  one  volume, 
yet  a  design,  but  a  natural  design.  Did  you  ever  see 
snch  a  rocking  of  the  mind,  as  the  hull  of  a  ship  with 
no  sail  filled,  no  rudder  to  guide ;  e  very  contradictory 
thought  brought  together,  following  each  other  like  the 
waves ;  the  beating  about  of  the  mind  sensible  of  the 
force  of  what  it  is  in,  but  without  God,  and  unwilling 
to  let  Him  in  ? 

W.  Well,  I  never  did. 

JEf.  That  there  is  progress  in  revelation,  and  in  man 
under  revelation,  no  Christian  child  denies,  or  is  igno- 
rant of.     But,  what  has  that  to  do  with  the  authority 


43ii 


auU  sinuTo  of  the  revolatlon  so  j;ivcii,  nutl  the  acrouiit 
it  affords  of  man  under  it  all  ?  The  true  present  result 
in  a  Cliiirch,  they  are  wholly  ignorant  of,  and  choose  to 
ignore  the  tacts,  Mr.  .Fowett  says,  "  Bnt  of  all  man- 
kind, whom  He  restores  to  His  I'ather  and  theii-  Father, 
to  His  God  and  their  God."  Now  that  it  is  for  all  the 
world,  is  true,  but  Chnst  says  this  to  His  disriples  only, 
*  Not  to  all  the  people,  Imt  to  witnoi^ses  chosen  before.' 
Of  course  those  diat  believed  caine  into  it ;  but  disciples 
are  there,  not  mankind.  The  \agueness  of  all  these 
men's  thoughts  is  siugulai*.  And  it  is  a  moral  vague- 
ness; for  it  supposes  men  to  be  in  a  Divine  position, 
without  one  Divine  ijuality. 

W.  The  whole  series  of  the  Essays  give  me  the  idea 
of  very  unformed  ininds;  like  half-fiedged  birds  got  ont 
of  their  nest,  they  attempt  the  air,  but  it  is  not  Hying. 
Neither  the  safety  of  the  quiet  goose,  nor  the  li)>ert)'  of 
the  Ketlged  wing;  they  tumble  instead  of  flying,  because 
they  attempt  to  fly. 

ff.  I  leave  you  to  your  simile,  but  that  is  the  neces- 
sary effect  of  man's  mind  pretending  to  occupy  itself 
wiOi  Di^nne  things  in  its  own  strength.  I  will  turn  uow 
to  some  passages  in  which  we  have  specimens  of  Mr. 
Jowett's  interju-etation,  to  show  how  in  every  respect,  as 
to  the  connection  of  the  ])assages.  the  force  of  the  state- 
ments, and  the  moral  judgment  of  good  and  e\i\,  his 
system  has  made  him  utterly  inca])able  and  incompetent 
as  an  interpreter.  Fii-st,  Romans  iii.  19,  he  attacks 
St.  Paul  as  false  in  logic,  as  arguing  fi-om  a  particular 
to  the  universal ;  the  blunder  is  simply  Mr.  Jowett's. 
The  Apostle  had  already  proved  the  Gentiles  as  wholly 
reprobate  morally.  But  he  could  not  deny  that,  how- 
ever evil,  as  he  had  showu,  the  Jews  had  special  privi- 
leges, and  particularly  the  oracles  of  God.  They 
boasted  that  the  law  was  theirs,  and  theirs  only  All 
right,  says  the  A[>ostle ;  what  the  law  says  it  says  t^. 
them  who  are  under  the  law;  but  it  says  that  there  is 
none  righteous,  that  those  it  spoke  to  were  torether  be 
couie  abommable ;  but  it  ^■-i— •■-  "•-        ..    *  -  '*'" 


II 


:  spoke  to  Jews,  therefore  thev 

P  F  ^ 


440 


very  mon^H 


were  .such  by  their  ctwn  cuul'ession,  and  every 
was  stopped,  and  all  the  world  become  guilty, 
fully  proved  the  GentJIe  so,  and  the  Jew  did  not  ijiies- 
tion  it;  only  sought  to  justify  himself  and  rest  fin  his 
privileges.  You  have  tieni,  I  admit,  says  the  Apostle, 
particularly  the  oracles  of  God ;  they  are  yours,  speak  to 
you :  let  us  hear  them,  hear  what  they  say  to  you ;  yoii 
are  abominable,  there  is  eveiy  luouth  stoppetl.  NotMng 
colli:!  be  more  conclusive  with  a  Jew  pleading  privilege. 
Ml'.  Jowett,  not  having  understood  one  atom  of  the 
argument,  which  is  evident  to  a  child,  sees  only 
Apostle  applying  what  is  said  avowedly  to  the  few, 
all  the  world. 

Next,  he  takes  Rom.  i.  1(3  — 18,  and  says  they, 
("the  series  of  inferences  which  follow  one  another,") 
are  for  the  most  part  different  aspects  or  statements  of 
the  same  truth.  Now,  yap.  with  Paul,  is  very  frequently 
no  inference  from  what  precedes,  but  from  a  principle 
he  has  laid  down,  or  which  is  the  ground  on  which  his 
mind  is  going  in  argument.  Thus,  "  because "  {i 
"because"  (21),  are  two  reasons  for  the  same  tl 
namely,  that  the  wrath  of  God  was  revealed  ;  first, 
rejection  of  the  witness  of  creation ;  secondly,  the  abao^ 
doning  the  knowledge  of  God  when  they  had  it  So 
continually  in  Paul's  writings,  though  what  the  '  for ' 
refers  to  is  not  always  so  on  the  surface.  But  further 
saying  that  16 — 18  are  different  aspects  or  statements 
of  the  same  truth,  has  no  sense.  He  is  ready  to  preach 
the  Gospel  at  Rome ;  for,  however  proud  and  greai 
the  city  and  people  may  be.  &.<.•.,  or  whatever  it  may  be, 
he  is  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel,  for  it  is  the  power  of 
God  to  salvation.  That  is  verse  16,  and  tells  why  he 
is  not  ashamed  ;  next  follows  why  it  is  the  power  of  God 
to  salvation;  because  God's  righteousness  was  revealed  in 
it  when  man  had  none  ;  and  thus  it  became  available  to 
faith,  whether  it  was  of  Jew  or  Gentile,  being  on  the  prin- 
ciple of  faith.  But  what  made  all  this  necessary  ?  How 
came  it  that  it  was  by  faith  to  any,  Jew  or  Gentile, 
so  to  all  ?     There  was  another  great  truth  that  had 


Lce 

1 


^n  nm 


lie,  ad^H 


441 

be  i-emembercd.  It  was  not  now  a  government  of  God 
in  earthly  judgments  on  tLe  one  family  Gnd  had  known, 
but  God's  wrath  froni  heaven  morally.  He  being  fully 
revealed,  against  all  inconsistent  with  His  nature,  be 
the  guilty  ones  where  they  may ;  and  particularly,  as  in  the 
uase  of  the  Jew  (and  now  of  the  Christian),  those  wh(i 
hold  the  truth,  but  in  unrighteousness.  "  Fur  the  wrath" 
is  not  a  direct  inference  from  what  precedes,  but  from 
the  whole  state  of  the  case.  All  this,  he  says.  Is  brought 
out,  and  my  service  and  object;  for,  Ac.  To  say  that  nis 
not  being  ashamed  of  the  Gospel,  the  revelation  of  the 
righteousness  of  God,  and  the  revelation  of  the  wrath  of 
God,  is  a  statement  of  the  same  truth,  could  be  found,  1 
suppose,  in  a  rationalist  alone,  and  from  the  erdarged 
light  he  alone  possesses.  Having  referred  to  these  three 
first  instances  of  proofs  of  fitness  for  directing  how  to 
interpret,  I  leave  all  this  part,  In  which  are  some  just 
remarks,  with  endence  of  utter  immaturity  as  a  whole, 
but  nothing  that  re([uires  particular  notice.  But  one 
statement  I  would  advert  to,  simply  because  Mr.  Jowett 
is  advancing  human  experience  to  overthrow  the  essen- 
tia] point  of  all  Paul's  teaching,  which  he  advances 
distinctly  as  Divine  truth,  against  the  false  conclusion 
which  Mr.  Jowett  draws.  Logical  '-  opposition  is  one 
of  ideas  only,  which  is  not  realized  in  fact.  Experience 
shows  us  not  that  there  are  two  classes  of  men  animated 
by  two  opposing  principles,  but  an  infinite  number  of 
classes  or  intfiriduals.  from  the  lowest  depth  of  misen- 
and  sin  to  the  highest  perfection  of  which  human  nature 
Is  capable,  the  last  not  whoUy  good,  the  worst  not 
entirely  evj.  But  the  figure  or  mode  of  representation 
changes  these  differences  of  degree  into  differences  of 
kmd.  Nor  does  Mr.  .Jowett  fear  to  include  in  this 
logical  opposition  even  the  setting  the  sheep  on  His 
right  hand  and  the  goats  on  His  left;  so  tha  not  even 
judgment  is  to  separate  the  evil  and  the  good  nllZ 
IS  restmg  on  man's  judgment  of  good  from  f  ] 
conduct,  in  defiance  of  hIs  who  seafcS  leV^^^'t 
IS  delymg  the  sentence  of^G^od.     It  i.  perf^u^'cleaj 


L 


442 

that  the  foundation  truth  of  Scripture  is  that  man  is  a 
sinner ;  not  that  men  are  criminals,  but  that  "  or  even 
as  this  publican,'*  is  the  proof  of  a  hard  heai-t,  not  of  a 
good  man.  That  he  who  thanks  God  he  is  not  as  other 
men,  is  a  Pharisee.  It  was  Christ's  reproach  that  He 
was  the  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners.  He  avowed 
it — He  did  not  come  to  call  the  righteous.  The 
Aix)stle's  whole  doctrine  is  in  the  most  striking  way,  not 
as  logical  opposition,  but  as  laboriously  proved  doctrine, 
that  there  is  no  difference,  that  men  by  nature  are 
children  of  wrath  ;  that  all  are  gone  out  of  the  way,  and 
need  redemption  and  to  be  justified  by  blood.  The  Lord 
declares  that  the  publicans  and  harlots  were  nearer  the 
kingdom  of  God  than  those  who  take  the  ground  Mr. 
Jowett  does.  The  Apostle  insists  that  they  that  are  in 
the  flesh  cannot  please  God.  He  knew  that  in  him, 
that  is  in  his  flesh,  dwelt  no  good  thing.  God  would 
not  curse  the  ground  any  more  for  man's  sake,  for  all 
the  imaginations  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  w^ere  only 
evil,  and  that  continually.  The  true  gardener  knows  a 
thistle  with  two  leaves  over  ground,  as  well  as  with 
mischievous  ripened  seed.  There  is  many  and  many  a 
person  in  the  depths  of  misery  and  sin  that  has  juster 
thoughts  of  God  and  of  the  truth  than  Mr.  Jowett; 
many  a  judge  upon  the  bench  with  a  harder  heart  than 
the  passionate  criminal  he  is  judging ;  many  a  Pharisee 
ready  to  cast  a  stone  (aye,  at  Christ  Himself  morally), 
till  he  meets  Christ's  eye,  that  goes  away,  to  save  his 
character  not  his  conscience,  from  His  eye,  and  leaves 
one  undoubtedly  guilty  to  the  Lord  of  mere} .  There  is 
no  good  in  sin,  that  is  certain,  but  less  in  covering  it. 
But,  besides,  Mr.  Jowett's  paragi'aph  destroys  all  the 
moral  doctrine  of  Scripture.  A  man,  all  men,  must  be 
converted,  must  repent,  must  be  bom  again  ;  has  not  life, 
if  he  has  not  the  Son  of  God.  All  is  lost  on  Mr.  Jowett. 
It  is  not  his  ejjyerieuce.  And  even  this  is  moral  blindness. 
His  experience,  and  nobody  else's,  in  looking  at  this 
world,  tells  the  secrets  of  hearts,  the  temptations,  con- 
flicts of  the  one  in  misery,  or  the  cold,  heartless,  selfish- 


443 

m 

ness  of  the  other  decent  and  respectable  moralist.    'I'lie 
history  of  Christianity,  the  doctrine  of  Christianity,  the 
path  of  the  Christ  of  God,  are  all  the  formal,  oxpre?n^. 
and  carefiil  denial  of  Mr.  Jowett's  doctrine ;  the  denial 
of  it,  because  that  doctrine  was  the  ruinous  .self-df:r:f;p- 
tion  of  men  s  souls.     Mr.  Jowett  seelcs  to  make  word.-, 
also  uncertain ;  and,  in  order  to  avoid   arlmittin;^  that 
religion   shifts   with    shifting    mrxle^    of   thou^rht  and 
si)eech — ^for  the  existence  of  truth  drjes  nol  ->rf!f n  t/i  4:rtf^-\ 
his  mind,  or  enter  as  a  jiossibility  into  his  rfjiir!#;|»tu>fj 
lie  makes  any  fixity  of  thought  immaterial   Ni  Chrl-. 
tianity.    What  is  Christianity,  then  ?     1  h*:  ^fsit/imtzut 
that  it  is  life,  and  not  doctrine-  while  tnj^:,  ri/hfly  i-^rrj 
is  of  no  force, — ^that  is  a  dfxrtriru;,-  nor  to    .;i;/  .*..-;* 
revelation  of  God,  becaase  the  revelaf.I<#ri  '*h^n:»  .fsiU-^[  .  ■ 
what  is  meant  bv  a  dfKrtririe.      lo  jii-.nlfv  r.h.-.  ■'•/^y^.^r.--. 
he  refers  to  a  commentatr>r,  who  apTi^Ar'.   •.:!.../  v,  -^^ : 
religion  on  the  literal  tninh  of  *  .rih  ^r.  «:/-.:•'<.  y,^.  * 
•'  We  shall  be  caught  u[»  Vi  rr.^.-f^-.  '.;-.<::  f^.r:   ;.    ..r-  ,. . 
audasks,  Wouldhe  bee».fiftii'.  .'«a^:  ■  v.    >.^f/,f.'   :  ,4/. 
on  the  literal   mesn.U.j   ^r  *>.r:    »■..-:         ^  ./;.-    v.^  . 
wurm  dieth  not.  arid  *!•*<: :!;•:  .   .0."     ..ry  y/:  '        '/•.     y. 
truth,  certainly ;   ori  rhft  . '. Vr."i .  :;.^:^. ;.  . . /  -.i .<      x/  \.,  >/  \o 
1>eing  &s  careles=  '^Jiy.  .v,''>:  >-•   .Vf  ■    .'-,  I'V,     ;.<«,   •,.,/, 
know  that  one  wji.^  ?. -^*-/'..:;    :  -:    *..;    /^  "•>«:./.•.    .»    ^^ 
Word  of  the  \jfrA  ;.  m   '^:— ;>•    *     -./     •'...•.  f.     .^/.-/ 
when  some  co:.?;-. ...   ;..:.:  >•  ■/:".  /        •.       y    »i 

saints,  and  the  ':»*;.^r  .    >     >,    , »  ■:;.    /  .  ••     .*  /.- 
end  of  Isaiah.       \\  .\  r^r  y  >,.  r^'    «./,•       \ 


/-_ .    •  -. .'  ' 


#■  » 


necessities  of  ^raf*^'-.    .v  .  •         .  v  •  -:....  %    .■    ...     ^  y 

■  - 

says,  and  prory.- v>:    .      -•  •  •    .  •  -  ..•,/         .  -.    . 

^etrle'l.     Thft^*- Jl;.  .  •      ..•••    •.,      ...»/  ..  *     ....    ./    '/ 

Te-tamenr.   >^ir*j!:r   •:•,>..     vy-     //,.*.  •  *        '      <   ^ .  ./ . 

'•  Hardl V  su\"*      '. ..  .r-%:'    »*          -  •.•  .'• .  ,•  . .» / 

have  ma^l^r.  •  ..'.  ■.•%.»=::.    •      -.     ■•  /     ■     / 

It  is  one  '*?.".  :.-%.     '    .1     •         •  /  *    ./     r/ 

Ijetween  *'/jr.  \-ji.  -^       -  '       •      * /  ''   *  /' 

and  g^iar.^  -.<.  ••.•r  •>•'        .»■    ■   *   .///-•  *  •  y/            •*  .,'.** 

alone  o-i<//r  ,-»!'v>ft:'        •>     •'•.•■     •  '«^     " //   ^  *.    -a 
1        *           . 


/  / 


f 


L 


444 


Apostles  and  the  Lord  are  wrong,  and  Mr.  Jowett  riglit  ? 
It  is.  that  the  way  of  quoting  is  in  agreement  with  the 
ideas  of  the  age  or  country  in  which  it  was  written. 
That  is,  if  it  were  so,  those  formed  by  the  Old  Testament 
and  the  teaching  of  the  prophets ;  and  liere,  mark,  all 
superintendence,  all  care,  of  the  Iloly  Spirit  is  denieil. 
And  what  is  the  conclusion  ?  First,  it  is  a  reason  for  uot 
insisting  on  the  applications  which  the  New  Testament 
makes  of  passages  in  the  Old,  as  their  original  meaning ; 
and,  secondly,  it  gives  authority  and  precedent  for  the  use 
nf  "  similar  applications  in  oui'  own  day ;"  which  have  thus 
as  much  authority  and  truth.  Nor  does  he  deny  this  last 
use  to  be  sanctioned  by  the  Lord  and  His  Apostles;  sn 
that  the  Lord  Himself  has  sanctioned,  according  to 
Mr.  Jowett,  the  total  perversion  of  the  Old  Testament, 
though  declaring  it  to  be  the  Word  of  God,  and  that  it 
must  be  fulfilled.  But  how  fulfilled,  if  it  was  applied 
wrong  ?  Which  was  fulfilled — the  sense  it  had,  or  the 
sense  the  Lord  (may  He  forgive  me  for  saying  such  a 
thing)  took  wrongly  out  of  it  ?  These  Scriptures  wit- 
nessed of  Him.  But,  if  they  were  all  wTongly  quoted 
and  misapplied  when  cited  as  witnessing  of  Him,  how 
could  this  be  ?  The  confidence  of  these  men  in  tiieir 
own  stupid  opinions,  in  presence  of  the  declarations  of 
the  Lord,  borders  on  blasphemy ;  save  that  their  loose- 
ness and  carelessness,  and  the  absence  of  all  inquiry  and 
research  in  what  they  say,  make  their  emptiness  an 
e.vcuse  for  what  would  be  otherwise  wicked.  Where 
they  have  lived,  1  know  not ;  one  would  think  among 
the  traditions  of  the  darkest  corners  of  the  land— for 
their  efforts  at  looseness  are  only  occasioned  by  tradi- 
tional applications,  exploded  by  every  one  who  has  cai-e- 
fully  studied  Scripture — only  that  they  have  given  up 
God  and  Scripture  with  these  traditions,  as  I  have  often 
seen  poor  Roman  Catholics  do,  who,  when  they  gave  U)i 
taking  a  bit  of  bread  for  God,  for  a  time  had  no  God  at 
all,  believed  nothing  at  all.  And  note,  we  make  this 
very  same  use  of  Scripture,  and  show  it  is  no  perversion 
at  all !     And,  while  insisting  that  Scripture  has  only  one 


445 


meaning,  it  is  curious  to  see  how  he  would  let  it  loose 
on  his  side  the  country.  "  Where,  for  our  example,  our 
Saviour  says,  ■  Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth 
shall  set  you  free ;'  it  is  not  likely  that  these  words 
wotild  have  conveyed  to  the  minds  of  the  Jews  who 
heard  Him,  any  of  the  perplexities  of  doubt  or  inquiry." 
J^or  to  anybody  else  in  dieir  senses,  I  should  Huok ; 
because  the  context  is,  "  If  you  continue  in  my  word, 
then  shall  ye  be  my  disciples  indeed,  and  you  shall 
know,"  &c.  "  Yet  we  cannot  suppose  that  our  .Saviour, 
were  He  to  come  again  on  earth,  would  refuse  thus  to 
extend  them."  Now,  the  blessed  Lord's  words  seem  to 
me  verj'  simple,  for  His  time  and  every  time.  Divine 
truth  sete  a  man,  when  really  received,  morally  free.  He 
is  not  a  slave,  as  he  is  when  he  is  a  sinner — lost.  T 
suppose  I  am  unfortunate ;  I  avow  I  do  not  understand 
what  Mr.  Jowett  means  by  "  conveying  any  notion  of 
the  perplexities  of  doubt  or  inquiry."  Does  that  mean, 
that  setting  free  is  givmg  doubt  and  inquiry,  or  delivering 
them  from  it  who  are  doubting  or  inquiring  ? 

W.  Well,  I  really  don't  know,  I  do  not  understand 
them  either.  How  knowing  the  truth  can  give  doubt 
and  inquiry.  I  do  not  understand ;  nor  how  the  words 
should  convey  notions  of  doubt  or  inquiry :  I  am  as  much 
at  sea  as  you. 

U.  1  suppose  he  must  mean,  by  what  follows,  freed 
from  doubt;  of  course,  knowing  the  tnith  does  free 
from  doubt.  But  continuing  in  Chi-ist's  word  is  not 
exactly  what  he  speaks  of  He  says ;  "  The  Apostle 
Paul,  when  describing  the  Gospel,  which  is  to  the  Greek 
foolishness,  speaks  also  of  a  higher  wisdom,  which  is 
known  to  them  who  are  perfect.  Neither  is  it  unfair  for 
us  to  apply  this  passage  to  that  reconcilement  of  faith 
and  knowledge  which  may  be  termed  Christian  philo- 
sophy, as  the  nearest  equivalent  to  its  (what's?)  language 
in  our  own  day."  Now,  the  Lord's  declaration  is.  "If  ye 
continue  in  my  word,  ye  sliall  know  the  truth,  and  the 
truth  shall  make  you  free."  This  means,  after  doubt 
and  perplexity,  that  reconcilement  of  faith  and  know- 


446 

ledge  which  may  be  termed  Christian  philosophy ;  that 
is,  not  continuing  in  Christ's  word,  but  adding  modem 
science,  and  so  getting  fi'ee.  Again,  in  the  passage 
i-eferred  to,  the  Apostle  Paul  declares  of  the  wisdom  in 
question,  '"  yet  not  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  nor  of  the 
])rinces  of  this  world,  that  come  to  nought ;  but  we  speak 
the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,  even  the  hidden  wisdom 
which  God  ordained  before  the  world  for  our  glory  C 
that  means  geology,  modern  German  criticism,  and 
Bunseu's  wild  Hegelianism.  The  Apostle  describes  it 
thus :  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have 
entered  into  the  heart  of  man  the  things  that  God  hath 
prepared  for  them  that  love  Him,  but  God  hath  revealed 
them  to  us  by  His  Spirit;"  and  then  the  Apostle  pro- 
ceeds to  show  how  he  taught  them.  That  means 
nou\  the  removing  doubt  and  inciuiry,  and  the  reconcile- 
ment of  faith  and  knowledge,  termed  Christian  philo- 
soj)hy. 

W,  But  this  is  really  puerile,  as  an  interpretation  of 
Scrij)ture ;    they  cannot  have  read  the  passages. 

H,  Just  puerile ;  but  they  had  the  texts  running  in 
tlieir  minds,  and  it  is  what  we  find  everywhere,  letting 
their  owti  minds  reason  without  research.  But  I  don't 
exactly  know  where  we  have  got  to  here,  save,  happily, 
nearly  to  the  end  of  tlie  Essay.  Our  master  taught  us, 
at  the  beginning  of  it,  there  could  be  but  one  nieaniuo- 
to  a  passage  of  Scripture.  Now,  though  it  is  inadmis- 
sible to  ai'cept  the  AjxKstles'  use,  because  that  gives  the 
ideas  of  their  age,  i)assages  are  become  so  expansive,  so 
Indian-rubber  like,  that, ;'  we  have"  now  "  only  to  enlai'ge 
the  meaning  of  Scripture,  to  ai)ply  it  even  to  the  novelties 
and  peculiarities  of  our  own  times ;"  "  and  we  cannot 
suppose," — 1  almost  regret  (]uoting  it  from  its  want  of 
reverence, — "  that  our  Saviour,  were  He  to  come  again 
upon  earth,  would  refuse  thus  to  extend  them."  And 
further,  the  onlv  meanini?  was  that  which  w-ould  have 
presented  itself  to  the  minds  of  those  who  first  heard  it. 
Here  it  is  not  likely  that  their  words  would  have  con- 
veyed to  the  minds  of  the  Jews  who  heai-d  Him  anv 


447 

notion  of  the  peri>lexities.  iS;v. ;  but  "  it  is  not  unfair  "  to 
apply  it  now  to  Jowett's  interpretation  anil  modem 
knowledge,  tenned  Christian  philosophy. 

W.  I  suppose  it  is  to  give  a  full  illustration  of  what  1 
read  in  p.  372  :  '•  If  Avords  have  more  than  one  meaning. 
they  may  have  any  tueauiug.  Instead  of  being  a  rule  of 
life  and  faith.  Scriptum  becomes  the  exjirossion  of  the 
ever-changing  aspect  of  religions.  ITic  unchaugeable 
Word  of  God,  in  the  name  of  which  we  rajxise,  is 
changed  by  ea<'h  age  and  each  genemtion,  in  accordance 
with  its  passing  fancy,  The  book  in  which  we  believe 
all  religious  truth  to  lie  contained,  is  the  most  uncer- 
tain of  all  l)Ooks,  Ijecause  interpreted  by  arbitrarv  and 
uncertain  methods. "  It  is  a  singular  description  for  a 
man  to  give  of  himself;  but,  I  suppose,  it  is  like  Ma- 
homet. Ilis  religion  forbad  any  good  Mussuluiau  to 
have  more  than  tour  wives,  but,  as  he  was  the  prophet 
of  it,  he  took  eighteen.  It  is  a  singular  exhibition  of 
the  human  mind,  and  of  the  pretensions  and  careless- 
ness of  these  rationalists. 

//.  Well,  dear  W..  we  are  happily  drawing  to  a  dost'. 
and  though  ha\ing  had  to  wade  through  ttHlious  details. 
the  system  is  pretty  well  judged,  I  think ;  at  any  rate,  it 
is  for  me.  and  the  pretensions  too. 

W.  They  have  not  a  leather's  weight  in  my  mind, 
and  their  weakness  only  makes  the  Divine  Word  stand 
out  in  its  simple  strength. 

H.  A  few  more  obsenations,  and  I  have  done.  ^A"e 
have  lookeil  at  most  of  the  observations  which  remain. 
I  will  just  notice  distinctly  one  or  two, 

"  The  original  meaning  of  Scripture  is  beginning  to  lie 
clearly  understood.  But  the  a]tprehensiou  of  tlie  firigiual 
meaning  is  inconsistent  with  flic  reception  of  a  typical  or 
conventional  one."  1  have  gone  through  the  cases  alleged 
to  prove  this.  A  conventional  one,  I  give  him  up;  l)ut 
that  a  tyjtical  one  is  not  to  bo  received  is  simple  folly,  when 
half  the  book  is  typical,  both  as  to  ordinances  and  facts ; 
and  the  whole  New  Testament  and  Christianity  in  its 
foundation  based  upon  its  l)eing  so.     Tbe    man    who 


448 

asserts  it  must  be  out  of  his  senses,  or  deny  Christianity 
and  the  Lord's  whole  history  and  place  in  it ;   and  he 
refers  expressly  to  these  types.     "We  shall  find  it  im- 
possible to  maintain  it  partially,  e,  g,^  in  the  types  of  the 
Mosaic  law."     Now,  I  say,  either  this  or  all  Scripture 
is  simple  nonsense ;  for  Christ  is  the  Lamb  of  God,  our 
Passover,  and  it  is  impossible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and 
of  goats  could  take  away  sin.     But  there  is  an  object,  a 
bent  of  purpose  in  all  this,  which  I  would  notice ;   per- 
haps, I  should  rather  say  an  effect  than  an  object,  for  I 
would  not  exaggerate,  but  which  is  certainly  Satan's 
object.     It  is  this.     Ha\ing  no  truth  at  all,  they  are 
indifferent  to  it,  and  like  to  be  free ;  and,  having  nothing 
which  they  value  as  truth,  they  are  content  to  leave 
others  free  too.     It  looks  liberal,  but  is  really  caring  for 
nothing  as  the  truth.     This  you  may  have  seen  in  their 
interpretation  of  the  remarkable  passage  of  the  blessed 
Lord,  "  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,  ye  shall  know  the 
truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."    An  immense 
announcement  of  the  love  of  God  giving  the  promise  of 
deliverance  by  certain  known  truth,  and,  it  is  added,  by 
the  Son,  from  all  immoral  influences,  all  that  w^as  not 
the  truth.    This  for  them  means  now  doubt  and  inquiry, 
and  a  mixture  of  philosophy  and  knowledge  with  faith, 
that  is,  wdth  Christ's  Word,  which  is  the  truth.    Hence, 
as   they  have  liberty  for   themselves,   they  must  have 
it   for  others,  that   is,  indifterence.     Hence,  they  say, 
a  change   is  observable  in  the  manner  in  which  doc- 
trines are  stated  and  defended ;    it  is  no  longer  held 
sufficient  to  rest  them  on  texts  of  Scripture,  one,  two,  or 
more,  which  contain  or  appear  to  contain  similar  words 
or  ideas.     That  is,  this  Divine  standard  of  truth,   "  the 
inspired  source  of  truth,"  to  use  their  own  words,  has 
lost  its  authority.     "They  are  connected  more  closely 
with  our  moral  nature,"  i.e.,  we  judge  for  ourselves  of 
their   truth    and   fitness —  "  extrenie   consequences   are 
shunned,  large  allowances  ai-e  made  for  the  ignorance  of 
mankind."     'They  are  wise,  they  suffer  fools  gladly.' 
"  It  is  held  there  is  truth  on  both  sides ;   about  many 


449 


questions  there  is  a  kind  of  union  of  opposites."  So  "  is 
it  a  mere  chimera,  that  the  diftei-ent  questions  of  Christen- 
dom maj  meet  on  the  common  ground  of  die  New 
Testament?"  each  believing  what  he  hkes,  of  course, 
and  meeting  in  ——  whatf  Akind  of  union  of  opposites. 
Thej  will  agree  in  receiving  the  New  Testament ;  but, 
Kke  inspiration,  "it  is  one  of  those  theological  terms 
which  may  be  regarded  as  great  peacemakers,  but 
which  are  also  sources  of  distrust  and  misunderstanding. 
For,  while  we  are  ready  to  shake  hands  with  any  one 
who  uses  the  same  language  as  ourselves,  a  doubt  is  apt 
to  insinuate  itself  whether  he  fakes  the  language  in  the 
same  sense."  p.  344.  It  is  a  kiud  of  hope,  or  advice, 
which,  he  told  us  there,  came  from  a  bad  quarter.  "  It 
is  jilaced  by  Goethe  in  the  mouth  of  Mephistopheles. 
Pascal  severely  charges  the  Jesuits  with  acting  in  a 
similar  mamier."  "But  this  is  not  the  way  to  heal  the 
wounds  of  the  Church  of  Christ."  To  be  sure  it  is  not, 
but  it  serves  for  something  else,  to  make  men  indifferent 
as  to  the  truth.  It  is  one  of  the  great  questions  of  the 
day,  Is  the  unity  of  Christians  to  be  founded  on  what 
Scripture  speaks  of — Z.ove  for  the  truth's  sake,  or  indif- 
ference to  it?  And  mark  the  fniit  of  it  here;  "Ex- 
amples of  this  sturdy  orthodoxy  in  our  own  generation 
rather  provoke  a  smile  than  any  serious  disapproval," 
Again,  "  But  that  (the  uselessness  of  a  formal  scheme 
of  union)  is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  the  divisions  of 
the  Christian  world  are  iHjginning  to  pass  away.  The 
progress  of  politics,  acfuiaintance  with  other  countries, 
the  growth  of  kinnvledge  and  material  greatness,  changes 
of  opinion  in  the  Church  of  England,  the  jtresent  posi- 
tion of  the  Roman  communion ;  all  these  phenomena 
show  that  the  ecclesiastical  state  of  the  world  is  not 
destined  to  Ite  [lerpetual."  Again.  "  The  recognition  of 
the  fact,  that  many  asiwcts  and  stages  in  religion  are 
found  in  Scripture ;  that  dilferent.  or  even  opposite 
parties  existed  in  the  Apostolic  Church ;  that  the  first 
teachers  fif  Christianity  had  a  separate  and  individual 
mode    of  regarding   the  Gospel    of  Clirist;    that  any 


450 

existing  communion  is  necessarily  much  more  unlike 
the  brotherhood  of  love  in  the  New  Testament  than  we 
are  willing  to  suppose — Protestants,  in  some  respects, 
as  much  as  ('atholics  —that  rival  sects  in  our  o\^ti  day — 
Calvinists   and   Arminians  —  those  who   maintain   and 
those   who   deny   the   final    restoration   of  man — may 
equally  find  texts  which  seem  to  favour  their  resi)ective 
tenets  (Mark  ix.  44 — 48;   Rom.  xi.  32) — the  recog- 
nition of  these  and  similar  facts  will  make  us  unwilling 
to  impose  any  narrow  rule  of  religious  opinion  on  the 
ever  varying  conditions  of  the  human  mind  and  ( 'hristian 
society."      Now,    the   incontrovertible    departure    from 
early  devotedness  and  brotherly  love,  if  we  take  the  dis- 
play of  it  in  the  Church  as  a  whole  as  a  standard,  the 
New  Testament  has  ])rophetically  and  even  historically 
made  known  to  us,  lussuring  us  that,  in  the  last  days, 
j)erilous   times    should    come.     That   the    Holy   Ghost 
employed  Peter  and  Paul,  and  John,  and  even  James 
and  rfude,  and,  indeed,  the  Gospels  themselves,  to  give 
us  different  asi)ects  of  Christ  and  Christianity,  that  we 
who  know  in  part,  might  have  a  complete  and  perfect 
a|)prehension  of  both,  is  full  of  the  deepest  interest  to 
the   intelligent   study   of   Scripture.     Of  the   extreme 
ignorance   of    Scripture    interjn'etation    showTi   in   the 
(|uotation   of  Rom.  xi.   32,  I  say  nothing.     I    notice 
purely  the  result  of  all  that  INIr.  Jowett  has  observed, 
the  effect  of  modern   thinking    and  searching.     It  is 
simply  to  arrive  at  Pilate's  question,  >vith  the  Truth,  the 
eternal  Son  of  God,  before  Him — What  is  truth  ?     And 
when  he  had  said  this,  he  went  out,  and,  though  he 
found  no  fault  in    Him,    it   all    ended   in,    "not   this 
man  but  Barabbas."     If  we  turn  to  Christian  missions, 
the   truth  is   equally  given  up.     "  You  may  take  the 
piner  light  or  element  of  religion,  of  which  Christianity 
is  the  exi)ression,  and  make  it  shine  on  some  principle 
in  human  nature,  which  is  the  fallen  image  of  it.     You 
cannot  give  a  ])eoi)le,  w^ho  have  no  histor)^  of  their  own, 
a  sease  of  the  importance  of  Christianity  as  an  historical 
fact."     The  fact  of  the  incarnation  of  the  eternal  Son  of 


iiai\  coming  into  the  world,  is  to  Ije  (b"0|»i)e(l.  "  We 
want  Ui  awaken  in  them  the  sense  that  GikI  is  their 
lather,  and  they  His  children;  and  that  is  of  more  ini- 
[loriance  than  anything  about  the  inspiiatitm  of  .Scri|i- 
tiire.  But  to  teach  in  this  spii-it,  the  nussioiiary  shoiiJd 
himself  l)e  altle  to  separate  the  accidents  from  the  es- 
sence of  religion ;  he  should  be  conscious  that  the  power 
of  the  t-io&iiel  resides,  uot  in  the  particulars  of  theology, 
Init  in  the  Chiistiaii  life."  So  it  was  all  a  mistake  to 
say  the  fnith  shall  make  you  free. 

Smv,  you  will  remark,  all  this  is  aii  effort  to  make 
truth  inmiateriai.  1  am  no  stickler  for  conventional  or 
trailitioual  deuominatiotis,  and,  if  anything  is  far  fi-om 
my  thoughts,  it  is  that  the  miserable  things  called  deno- 
minations are  one  or  another  of  them  the  ,^t  of  the 
wXtiptufia  of  salvation.  Mr.  Jowett  might  take  nie  rather. 
I  su|)pose,  for  au  achamoth  in  the  woi-Irl  composed  of 
my  sighs  and  tears.  A:c.,  for  the  state  of  tlnugs.  But 
what  I  remark  is,  that  having  neither  Christ  uor  alle- 
giance to  Him,  nor  the  truth — and  He  is  the  truth 
— ^mentioned,  nor  thought  of,  "  the  ju-ogress  tA'  politics, 
changes  of  opinion  in  the  estahlishraent,"  are  the  real 
agents  in  dissolving  "  the  Christian  world."  Now,  1  do 
not  dispute  this.  But,  for  him,  theretbre.  as  "opiK>sitc 
jKirties  existed  in  the  apostolic  Church."  Prote-stants  are 
no  Ijetter  than  Romau  Catholics;  Calvim'sts.  and  Armi- 
uians,  holdei-s  of  eternal  punishments  and  deiiiers  of  it, 
may  equally  find  texts  which  seem  to  favour  their 
respective  tenet.--,  truth  is  all  a  fancy,  and  no  one  "  will 
impose  any  narrow  rule  of  religious  opinion  on  the  ever 
varying  rule  of  the  human  mind  and  Christian  siwiety." 
\ow,  that  this  is  going  on,  mi  one  «ith  his  eyes  njicn 
can  deny.  But  a  more  absolute  negation  of  truth,  in- 
difference to  it,  or  rather  unconsciousness  that  there  is 
a  Christ  in  Chiistianity.  or  trutli  in  Scripture,  or  any- 
where else,  it  is  impossible  to  Itelieve.  It  is  not,  indeed, 
astonishing  in  one  who  holds  that  the  use  of  Scripture 
1  the  New  Testament,  satietioued  by  our  Lord  and  the 


I        AposI 


Apostles,  is  in.  prolmbly.  no  instance  based  on  the  n 


452 

ginal  sense  or  context,  and  liable  to  error  and  perversion ; 
so  that,  as  to  them  it  is  true,  that,  "  if  we  are  permitted 
to  apply  Scripture  imder  the  pretence  of  interpreting  it, 
the  language  of  Scripture  becomes  only  a  mode  of  ex- 
pressing the  public  feeling  or  opinion  of  our  own  day ;" 
so  that  what  Christ  and  the  Apostles  taught  is  only 
such  a  public  opinion  of  their  day,  for  they,  Mr.  Jowett 
declares,  did  so  apply  Scripture ;  yet  declaring  that  "  we 
have  only  to  enlarge  the  meaning  of  Scripture  to  apply 
it  to  the  novelties  and  peculiarities  of  our  own  times," 
and  that  our  Saviour  would  not  refuse,  if  He  were  to 
come  again  now,  thus  to  extend  them,  and  that  it  is  not 
unfair  to  use  St.  Paul's  statements  thus,  and  sanction  the 
views  of  our  day, — it  is  not  astonishing,  I  say,  that  one 
who  blames  the  Lord  and  His  Apostles,  so  as  to  make 
their  use  of  Scripture  no  kind  of  guide  to  its  meaning 
or  purpose,  but  assumes  fiill  right  to  get  at  the  truth  by 
giving  his  own  application,  and  to  get  freedom  promised 
by  Christ  through  it,  that  he  should  put  Christ  and  all 
truth  out  of  sight  in  a  Christian  world,  look  to  politics 
governing  it,  and  take  indifference  and  no  truth  as 
his  standard  and  his  hope.  But  it  is  all  a  delusion. 
Those  who  buy  the  truth  and  sell  it  not  ^ill  hold 
to  it,  and  take  Christ's  word  as  the  revelation  and 
standard  of  it  for  their  hearts,  owning  the  Apostles 
as  ministers  of  it  by  the  Spirit.  Many  will  take 
refuge  in  it,  too,  from  sorrow,  and  passion  s  rage 
on  the  other  side,  when  the  dissolution  looked  for 
takes  place.  But  the  present  working  will  be  this : 
the  philosophical  indifference  of  rationalists  will  palsy 
sL;:  Jy  Protestant  orthodoxy,  which  till  now  held  its 
ground  against  Popery.  Popery,  which  does  not  rest  on 
truth  a  bit  more,  but  on  authority,  and  in  its  nature  is 
essentially  infidel,  does  know  what  it  wants  and  what  it 
wills,  and  vdM  pursue  it  constantly,  cleverly,  and  ener- 
getically, and  all  hold  of  truth  will  be  gone  in  the  coun- 
try. This  state  of  things  the  Dissenters  will  help  on, 
and  then  find  how  weak  they  are.  The  main  effect  of 
this  rationalism  will  be  giving  power  for  a  time  to  what 


453 


knows  its  own  mind,  thai  is,  to  Popen-.  The  rationalism 
itself  has  no  future  at  all.  Of  what  would  it  be  the  future '( 
Of  inquiring  and  waiting  till  the  Pope  and  infidels 
take  the  New  Testament  for  a.  common  ground '.  Thev 
can  destroy,  perhaps,  faith  in  the  truth  (where  it  is  nut 
in  the  heart),  but  produce  nothing. 

W.  You  are  somewhat  a  sombi-e  prophet,  though  1 
see  the  truth  of  what  you  say  in  principle. 

H.  No ;  1  believe  the  word  of  God  abides  for  ever. 
I  believe  Christ,  our  blessed  Lord,  has  all  power  in 
heaven  and  in  earth ;  and  for  the  soid  who  loves  the 
truth,  I  l>elieve  it  is  a  very  bright  and  blessed  time.  I 
admit  that  what  old  associations  may  attach  men  to,  is 
disappearing.  Every  one  sees  it,  though  how  mucli  we 
have  to  thank  God  that  in  this  country  it  is  peacefully; 
though  I  doubt  that  Christian  or  religious  liberty  will 
last  verj'  long  as  it  is  now,  the  revival  will  help  to 
destroy  it :  but  as  outward  props  tumble  and  disapjioar, 
for  tbose  who  have  Christ  in  their  hearts,  and  to  whom 
the  truth  is  precious,  He  will  be  more  and  more  all, 
and  the  truth  have  infinitdif  more  power  and  pricts. 
They  will  live  more  in  Christianity,  and  less  in  th« 
Christian  world  formed  by  phases  of  the  uiwwe  toutov  I 
feel  thoroughly  that  they  are  times  mtjst  i^iinple  fnr 
those  who  love  the  truth,  and  bles-sed  tmes ;  wwrn  I  lru»i 
to  be  replaced  by  heavenly  and  better  ouc»  i»till.  Only 
Christ  and  the  truth  must  l»e  of  course  all. 

W.  But  it  requires  faith  thus  to  see  tliingi. 

H.  Of  course  it  does.  Did  y*rti  ever  ttrvl  tH«  l>/r'l 
propose   our  being  happ}'  witivnt  Hi    ('Ait  «riytliii*jg[ 


live  above  sight  and  aensc.  awJ  iti  tnllii' 
No  doubt  wesie  all  imperfect  in  tlii^  ' 
ment  that  associate*  a*  liviit^jr  wHh 
unseen ;  and  tberdbre  to  i^un  «-]/=:  ■ 
spirit,  we  may  have  trial*  a; '. 
tjings;  even,  ii  may  1*.  whi 
a  right  haaA  ur  f4aiiuaf  mii  • 
I  rMwL  "  In  the  wortd  ;«  •loi. 
of  good  cfaeer,  I  fc**  v^ai. 


>■  frtiihr 


454 

remarkable  thing  that  the  two  things  which  the  Lord 
refers  to  as  setting  us  free,  are  l^oth  of  them  wholly  out 
of  sight,  unmcntioned,  and  unthought  of  by  Mr.  Jowett: 
'"  The  truth  shall  make  you  free,  and  the  Son  shall 
make  you  free;''  though  he  quotes  this  passage  to 
make  Christian  i)hiloso])hy  of  it.  But  they  do  make  us 
free,  much  as  we  may  have  to  seek  to  know  their  po^ver 
tetter.  But  it  is  a  touchstone  of  their  whole  svsteni, 
the  total  leaving  out  of  the  two  things  which  the  Lord 
Himself  says  make  us  free.  But  it  could  not  be  other- 
wise. Their  system  is  doubt  and  inquiry.  Love  of 
truth  they  call  it ;  but  never  the  truth  loved  or  known. 
I  think  we  have  pretty  thoroughly  gone  through  the 
system.  The  narrower  fields  of  tendencias  of  religious 
thought  in  England  and  national  churches,  which  they 
say  the  heathen  had  too,  such  is  their  exclusion  of 
(  Inist  and  the  truth,  I  do  not  feel  there  is  much  need 
that  MO  should  enter  upon.  I  would  only  remark  how 
singular  the  darkness  as  to  the  power  of  Christianity 
was  a  century  or  more  ago,  and  thereby  note  the  limit 
of  proofs  of  Christianity.  Butler  s  '*  Analogy."  a 
standard  liook  known  to  all,  and  not  onlv  first  rate  for 
its  age,  but,  to  use  the  new  word  of  the  Germanizer: . 
on  its  stand-point  incomparable,  when  the  author  shows 
negatively  the  folly  of  those  who,  l)elieving  in  a  God  of 
nature,  would  questic»n  revealed  religion — breaks  down 
in  the  most  singular  manner  when  he  enters  on  positive 
Cliristian  ground.  He  shows  that  deists  have  no  proof 
of  auything ;  but  he  does  venture  a  little  on  to  positive 
ground.  He  rea.^ons,  however,  from  Aristotelian  to 
(Inistian  principles.  I'or  happiness  we  nmst  have 
virtue,  for  virtue  victory  and  a  formed  habit.  Then  he 
savs  that  this  supposes  that  these  propensions  (lusts) 
nni.Nt  exist  in  heaven;  "and  for  my  part,'*  he  adds,  "1 
do  not  see  how  it  could  be  otherwise." 

ir.   Is  it  possible  ? 

//.  It  is  a  fact.  It  only  shows  what  a  difterent 
thing  faith  and  the  proof  of  Christianity  are.  A  child 
that  had  faith,  in  any  age  since  Adam,  to  say  nothing  of 


455 


a  Christian,  would  have  rejected  such  a  thoiiglit.  But 
what? — except  the  kingdom  of  God  be  received  as  a  little 
child,  we  shall  in  no  case  enter  therein.  But  you  and 
I,  through  grace — and,  thank  God,  thousands  more- 
have  been  given  to  believe  in  the  truth,  to  know  the 
liord,  and,  feeble  as  it  may  be  in  us.  tvi  love  Christ. 
May  His  grace  keep  us  steadfast  in  faith,  and  in  its 
fruits.  The  question  for  a  ajul  now  is  Christ,  that 
blessed  Person  who  reveals  the  Father.  The  truth  of  a 
hving,  acting  Spirit,  the  Comforter,  given ;  and  the  re- 
vealed written  Word  of  God.  the  only  source  and  the 
standard  of  truth ;  and  that  that  which  we  are  called  on 
to  confess  is  the  truth,  known  by  the  Spirit  from  that 
Word,  known  in  the  heart  with  G<h1  ;  and,  while  acknow- 
ledging we  may  be  mistaken  in  a  hundred  points,  knowing 
that  we  have  the  truth  for  which  martjTs  have  died,  and 
that  we  had  rather  give  up  our  lives  than  lose,  or  deny 
it.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the 
Father.  He  may  sufter  us  to  be  tried,  but  He  is  above 
all.  and  will  prevail ;  watches  over  us  alwap  as  the  good 
Shepherd,  and  will,  in  the  Father's  own  time,  come 
and  receive  us  to  Himself,  that  where  He  is  we  may 
be  also. 

W.  I  do  heartily  believe  it,  and  thank  God  it  is  so ; 
but  I  am  sure  Christians  in  these  days  ought  to  give  a 
more  distinct  witness  to  whom  they  belong — 1  mean 
practically,  as  devoted  Ut  Him — by  their  profession, 
and  the  fruits  which  make  it  good.  "Show  us  thy 
faith,"  has  all  ite  force  now, 

S.  In  truth  it  has.  If  I  contend  for  the  truth, 
because  Christ  is  the  truth,  I  had  rather  one  did  not 
profess  it,  than  deny  it  in  woi'ks.  We  are  in  serious, 
most  serious  times,  and  there  must  be  reality.  Only  the 
Lord  keep  us  from  pretended  love  of  the  truth,  which 
destroys  the  truth  we  love ;  which  has  nothing  to  keep, 
and  hence  has  nothing  to  lose,  and  can  be  always  seeking. 
When  conventional  systems  are  crumbling  around,  and 
evil  raises  up  its  head,  may  men  l>e  seen  who  can  walk 
peacefully,  because  they  possess  what  can  never  crumble 


456 

till  God  makes  all  things  new  according  to  the  truth  He 
has  revealed. 

W.  I  am  glad  we  met ;  it  has  done  me  good.  Holding 
fast  the  truth,  and  feeling  one  has  it  (oh,  what  grace  it 
is !)  from  God,  always  does.  We  may  now  turn  to 
seek  directly,  and  with  humble  thankfulness,  into  the 
treasure  we  have  in  the  truth — the  unsearchable  ridies 
of  Christ,  which  is  made  over  to  us.  It  is  yet  happier 
work. 

H.  Adieu,  then,  for  the  present;  may  we  be  only 
found  at  our  watch-tower,  jjnd,  above  all,  humble  and 
dependent.  I  have  not,  after  all,  gone  into  the  article 
in  the  Edinburgh.  It  is  merely  an  attempt  to  justify 
infidelity,  because  it  has  prevailed  for  many  years  in 
Gei-many,  so  that  even  evangelical  professors  yield  more 
or  less  to  it ;  and  an  attempt  to  defend  the  Essayists,  by 
proving  the.  superior  clergy  to  be  as  bad;  and  I  dont 
really  see  how  this  affects  the  truth  or  falsehood  of 
the  principles  themselves.  I  think  many  non-infidel 
professors  in  Germany  have  yielded,  through  want  of 
faith,  to  the  current ;  and  I  see  the  same  tone  prevalent 
in  the  clergy  and  dissenting  ministers  in  England.  They 
like  the  credit  of  being  up  to  the  progress  of  the  age. 
And  there  is  so  verv  little  faith  in  the  intrinsic  truth  and 
power  of  Scripture,  in  its  being  the  Word  of  God,  that 
their  estimate  and  defence  of  it  necessarily  fails  on  that 
jside.  llie  clergy  must  answer  for  themselves  to  the 
charges  of  the  reviewer.  They  ought  to  l>e  morally 
indignant  at  the  article.  But  I  do  not  see,  if  he  provas 
the  assailants  of  the  Essayists  dishonest,  and  to  have 
l>een  previously  abettors  of  their  views,  what  an 
upright  mind  will  have  gained,  or  lost.  It  does  not 
aHect  the  question  in  the  smallest  degree,  but  merely 
the  reputation  of  the  clergy.  I  do  not  think  much  of  an 
opponent  who,  when  his  friend  is  charged  with  being 
dishonest,  declares  he  will  prove  the  accuser  as  bad. 
The  wliole  matter  savours  of  want  of  principle  and  per- 
sonality. Besides,  many  a  mind  may  be  led  away  from 
solid  ground  by  new  thoughts,  which,  when  their  ripe 


457 


fruit  is  shown,  honestly  discards  them  aU.  I  think  this 
Review  a  very  poor  thing;  lowerincf  eternal  questions 
to  personal  ones,  and  not  woi-thy,  therefore,  of  any 
particular  nqtice. 


W.  H.  Coliingridge,  City  rre^i,  117  to  11'^.  Aia«r;<K>tt'  >>tri''t.  LoikIud 


DR.    COLENSO 


/ 


'7 


AMD 


THE    PENTATEUCH. 


LONDON: 
W.    tt.    BROOM,   47,    ST.   PAUL'S   CHTTECHYABD. 


s>Biox  sizFiuBrom 


DK,    COLENSO 
THE    PENTATEUCH. 


"  I  thiiok  tbee,  0  Father,  Lord  of  Hasven  uid  Eulh,  becanae  thou  hut  hid 
tbeae  tliinfjii  from  the  viae  and  pnideut,  ami  hast  ceTsaletl  Uiem  unto  bibea." — 
Uatt.  li.  -iS. 

It  is  impoBsible  to  treat  the  author  of  this  book  aa  a  Christian. 
1  do  not  say  this  ae  forming  any  judgment  of  his  personal 
state,  in  any  way ;  I  speak  of  the  public  profession  of  a  re- 
ligion he  belongs  to — Christianity  as  contrasted  with  heathen- 
ism, MohammedaniBm,  Judaism,  or  Buddhism.  Dr.  Colenso 
states  that  "  our  belief  in  the  living  God  remains  as  sure  as 
ever,  though  not  the  Pentateuch  only,  but  the  whole  Bible 
were  removed.  It  is  written  on  our  hearts  by  God's  own 
finger  as  surely  as  by  the  hand  of  the  apostle  in  the  Bible, 
that  '  God  is,  and  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek 
Him.'  It  is  written  there  also  as  plainly  as  in  the  Bible, 
that '  God  is  not  mocked, — tlint  whatsoever  a  man  soweth 
that  shall  he  also  reap,'  and  that  '  he  that  soweth  to  the  flesh 
shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corrnption,' "  pp.  53,  5  4.  That  is, 
with  the  Bible  or  without  the  Bible,  Dr.  C.  believes  in  the 
existence  of  God,  and  His  rewarding  them  that  seek  Him, 
and  in  natural  conscience.  In  other  words  (as  far  ae  his 
book  goes,  which  he  puts  forth  as  a  manifesto],  he  is  a  pro- 
fessed Deist.  Even  with  the  Bible  he  only  believes  so  much 
as  his  heart  and  conscience  recognise,  and  that  the  latter  is  to 
be  preferred  to  the  Bible  as  the  means  of  knowing  God  :  "that 
He  Himself,  the  living  God,  our  Father  and  Friend,  is  nearer 
and  closer  to  us  than  any  book  can  be ;  that  His  voice  within 
the  heart  may  be  heard  continually  by  the  obedient  child  that 
listens  for  it,  and  that  shall  be  our  teacher  and  guide  in  the 
path  of  duty,  which  is  the  path  of  lii'e,  when  all  other  helpers 
— even  the  words  of  the  beWut'  book* — may  fail  ns,"  p.  54. 
Now  it  I»  clear  that  it^|||HMttibB|hat  God  is,  nor  natural 
conscience,  is  believ^^^^^^^^Hnets  of  C'hriHtiatiity — 
the  iucaruation,  ataJ^^^^^^^^Hbnde^mption,  being 
bam  again,  the  exalM^^^^^^^^^^^Bl[UK°^  baud,  the 


Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  In  a  word,  no  special  truth 
or  fact  of  Christianity  is  "  written  on  our  hearts  by  Grod's 
own  finger,"  or  can  be  possessed  by  mere  natural  conscience 
or  belief  in  God.  All  intervention  of  God  is  left  out.  But 
it  is  in  this,  and  the  statement  of  what  led  to  its  necessity, 
that  revealed  religion  consists.  There  is  a  conscience  in 
every  man.  The  word  of  God  acts  on  it.  I  do  not  doubt 
that  there  is  an  instinctive  knowledge  of  a  Gt>d  and  a  judg- 
ment. This  is  all  Dr.  C.  owns,  with  or  without  the  Bible. 
Revealed  religion  is  a  series  of  divine  and  marvellous  facts 
and  truths,  imfolding  an  intervention  of  God  in  grace  with 
sinful  man.  He  sets  this  aside.  His  relationship  with  God 
is  not  founded  on  it.  He  prefers,  as  teaching,  what  he  has 
without  it ;  that  is,  he  wholly  and  professedly  sets  aside 
Christianity.  He  goes  farther — ^he  recognizes  "  thfe  voice  of 
God's  Spirit  .  .  .  not  in  the  Bible  only,  but  out  of  the 
Bible :  not  to  us  Christians  only,  but  to  o^ur  fellow-men  of 
all  climes  and  countries,  ages  and  religions,  the  same  gra- 
cious Teacher  is  revealing,  in  diflferent  measures,  according 
to  His  own  good  pleasure,  the  hidden  things  of  God,"  p. 
222.  Dr.  C.  has,  in  substance,  solemnly  declared  that  tins 
is  not  so  (see  Article  xviii.  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles) ;  but 
I  suppose  this  is  no  matter  with  rationalists.  But  his  state- 
ment amounts  to  this :  Christians  and  heathens  have  all  their 
particular  religions,  but  beside  and  within  this,  all  have  a 
communication  in  their  own  hearts  of  the  hidden  things  of 
God.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  not  in  the  religion,  for 
heatliens  and  Cliristians  have  it  more  or  less,  whatever  their 
religion,  in  their  hearts.  He  confirms  tliis  by  quotations 
from  Cicero,  Sikhs,  and  Hindoos.  Cicero's  statement — I 
suppose  Dr.  C.  did  not  find  it  out — is  merely  asserting 
natural  conscience,  with  the  addition  of  a  denial  of  the 
foundation  fact  of  revelation,  that  man  is  a  sinner,  driven 
out  from  God.  ''  Whoever  will  not  obey  this  law,"  says 
Cicero,  "  will  be  flying  from  himself,  and  having  treated  with 
contempt  his  human  nature  wiU,  in  that  very  fact,  pay  the 
greatest  penalty,  even  if  he  shall  have  escaped  other  punish- 
ments, as  they  are  commonly  considered."  Now  this  makes 
human  nature  the  measure  of  good,  as  indeed  Cicero  every- 
where does.  And  just  see  the  result,  which  neither  Dr.  C. 
nor  Lactantius,  from  whom  he  quotes,  seem  to  have  noticed  : 
this  law  or  right  reason  ^'  to  the  good  never  commands  or 
forbids  in  vain,  never  influences  the  wicked  either  by  com- 
manding or  forbidding."  Could  grace  be  more  fully  denied  ? 
Could  the  eflect  of  law  or  conscience  be  more  entirely  mis- 


stated  ?  There  are  good  or  wicked  already — God  knows  how 
— and  this  law  or  right  reason  changes  notliing, — always 
succeeds  with  one,  and  leaves  the  other  where  he  is.  This  is, 
we  are  told,  "a  voice  almost  divine,"  "The  same  divine 
Teacher  revealed  also  to  the  Sikh  Gooroos  (teachers)  such 
p-eat  truths  as  these,"  p.  223.  He  then  quotes  statements 
of  the  unity  of  God,  but  which  is  Pantheism,  that  ia, 
tliat  God  is  in  every  thing ;  statements  which  recognize 
Mahoraets,  Brahmas,  Vishnus,  Sivas — of  course  not  Christ — 
and  that  is  a  revelation  of  God  for  Dr.  C,  He  then  quotes 
from  Hindoo  writings  "  riie  following  words,  which  were 
written  by  one  who  had  no  Pentateuch  nor  Bible  to  teach 
him,  but  who  surely  learned  such  living  truths  as  these  by 
the  direct  teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  God,"  p.  224,  In  these 
words  God  is  celebrated,  and  there  is  a  good  deal  of  moralis- 
ing, such  as  may  be  foimd  anywhere ;  but  in  which  we  find, 
"  He  that  partaketh  of  but  one  grain  of  the  love  of  God 
shall  be  released  from  the  sinfubiess  of  all-  his  doubts  and 
actions"— a  comfortable  quietus.  "  1  take  for  my  spiritual 
food  the  water  and  the  leaf  of  Ram,"  "  God  dwelleth  in  the 
mind,  and  none  other  but  God."  Ur.  C.  admires  what  is  the 
avowed  doctrine  of  these  same  teachers,  without  finding  out 
it  is  the  grossest  folly  of  Pantheism.  "  God  is  the  gift  of 
charity,  God  is  the  oftering,  God  is  the  fire  of  the  altar,  by 
God  the  sacrifice  is  jierformed,  and  God  is  to  be  obtained  by 
him  who  makes  God  alone  the  object  of  his  work."  Every- 
thing being  but  a  development  or  expansion  of  God,  we  are 
too,  and,  of  course,  so  far  as  we  rcaline  God  in  it,  becxime 
God  in  a  superior  degree.  But  all  is  God  ;  and  it  is  true  nf 
all  tilings,  man  among  the  rest.  This  last  sentence,  as  Dr. 
C.  approvingly  quotes,  was  by  "  one  who  had  experienced 
somewhat  of  what  Job  had  experienced,"  p.  223.  Ail  this 
is  but  extracting  Deism  from  Christianity  and  heathenism 
alike,  and  making  conscience  the  judge  of  what  ia  to  be 
received  from  each;  only,  unfortunately,  Dr.  C's  conscience 
accepts  the  very  grossest  Pautlieism  without  so  nmcli  as  find- 
ing it  out. 

But  there  is  more  than  this.  This  book  does  not  believe 
as  much  of  Christ  as  Mohammed  did.  Dr.  C.  openly  pro- 
fesses to  ktiow  much  better  than  Christ  upon  the  subject  of 
tlie  dtrinc  authority  of  revelation.  Mohammed  held  Christ 
to  be  a  prophet,  and  that  he  will  judge  the  world.  On  the 
last  point  the  book  does  not  declare  itself,  if  it  be  not  in 
an  intimation  borrowed  from  Cicero.  Here  is  Dr.  C's 
estimate  of  Christ's  authority  in   what  be  declared:    "We. 


L 


are  expressly  told,  in  Luke  ii.  52,'  tHat  Jesus  i 
in  witdom  as  veil  as  in  stature.  It  is  not  supposed  thai 
in  His  human  nature  He  was  acquainted,  more  than  any 
educated  Jew  of  the  age,  with  the  mysteries  of  all  modem 
sciences,  nor,  with  St.  Luke's  expressions  before  us,  can 
it  be  seriously  maintained  that,  as  an  infant  or  young  child 
He  possessed  a  knowledge  surpassing  that  of  the  most  pious 
and  learned  adults  of  His  nation,  upon  the  subject  of  the 
authority  and  age  of  the  different  portions  of  the  Pentateuch. 
At  wliat  period,  then,  of  His  life  upon  earth,  is  it  to  be  sup- 
posed that  He  had  granted  to  Him,  as  the  Son  of  Man,  super'< 
naturally,  full  and  aeeurate  information  on  these  points,  so' 
that  He  should  be  expected  to  speak  about  the  Pentateuch  in 
other  terras  than  any  other  dcTOut  Jew  of  that  day  would  have 
employed?  Why  should  it  be  thought  that  He  would  apeak 
with  certain  divine  knowledge  on  this  matter  more  than  upoa 
other  matters  of  ordinary  science  or  history  ?"  p.  32,  Thatj 
is,  when  Christ,  the  Blessed  One,  spoke  of  tlie  authority  of 
Word  of  God, — spoke  authoritatively  of  the  Scriptures  i 
of  Moses, — He  merely  followed  the  ignorance  and  prejudice 
of  the  pious  Kabbis  of  his  nation.  Dr.  Colenso  has  more 
knowledge.and  is  freed  from  tlie  prejudices,  and  in  consequence 
can  tell  us  positively  that  Christ  was  wrong  !  He  has  fonnd 
out  that  it  is  impossible  that  such  things  as  are  found  in  ths 
Pentateuch  could  come  from  our  loiing  Father.  This,  if  w») 
are  to  believe  Dr.  C,  Christ  had  not  moral  discernment  enougll 
to  find  out,  and  took  for  granted  all  was  right,  so  as  to  believe 
that  what  Moses  wrote  came  from  God.  Now  Christ  says, 
"  We  speak  that  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  we  liave  seen," 
for  1  le  was  of  and  in  heaven  ;  and  the  question  is  not  how  He 
learned  what  He  knew,  but,  when  he  tatight  positively,  did  He 
teach  perfectly,  or  only  under  the  influence  of  national  pre- 
judice ?  Dr.  C.  quotes  the  following  passages  of  Christ's 
words : — "  Had  ye  believed  Moses  ye  would  have  believed  me, 
for  he  wrote  of  me ;  but  if  ye  believe  not  his  writings,  how 
shall  ye  believe  my  words  ?"  But  it  seems  this  appeal  was  all 
beside  the  mark,  for  Moses  never  wrote  it  at  all.  Hence, 
conrse,  they  were  not  called  upon  to  believe  Christ's  woi 
either.  "  Now  that  the  dead  are  raised,  even  Moses  shei 
at  the  bush."  This  too  was  quite  a  mistake.  "They  hai 
MoRcs  and  the  prophets,  let  them  hear  them.  If  they 
not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded 
though  one  rose  from  the  dead,"  But  all  this  solemn  appeal 
of  Christ  to  Moses,  as  of  equal  authority  and  weight  with  His 
own  words  and  reauirection,  as  a  proof  of  truth,  is  a  mistaki 


I 

I 


ce,  o^^J 
lewflj^^H 

aaded 

with  His  ^1 
mistake^^^H 


the  prejudice  of  piotiB  Rabbis  of  His  nation  I  Dr.  C.  is  freed 
from  them,  and  can  prove  he  knows  much  better  than  Christ 
did.  And  this  man  is  what  is  called  "  Bishop  of  Natal."  I 
muy  be  asked,  has  he  not  declared  his  belief  in  all  the  canon- 
ical Scriptures,  and  bound  himself  in  this  otEcc  to  require  it  of 
those  he  ordains  ?  Me  has.  What  then  does  he  do  with  his 
conscieuce  ?  He  tells  ua  tiiat  too  :  it  is  governed  by  the  Court 
of  Arches.  It  ia  a  mercy  for  upright  men  that  modem 
rationalists  shew  themselves  so  plainly  mondiy.  I  do  not 
think  I  ever  read  anything  so  morally  base  as  the  reasons  for 
signing  the  Articles,  in  the  "  Essays  and  Reviews."  Old 
infidels  broke  with  Cliristianity — it  was  sad  enough — but 
modem  ones  keep  their  places  and  only  give  up  their  faith. 

The  boldness  of  Dr.  C.'s  assertions,  and  the  excessive  care- 
lessness of  his  statements  and  conclusions,  are  alike  remarkable, 
ile  tells  ua  that  he  does  not  believe  in  the  deluge,  because  he 
does  in  geology.  He  has  studied  it  in  the  Zulu  country, 
and  he  now  knows  for  certain  (for  Sir  C.  LycU  is  infallible, 
if  Scripture  and  the  Lord  Christ  be  not)  that  a  universal  deluge 
could  not  possibly  have  taken  place.  Now  Sir  C,  Lyell  is 
unquestionably  an  able  geologist,  as  well  as  the  constant  resort 
and  refuge  of  infidels ;  but  he  has  a  system,  and  a  system  which 
geologists  less  speculative  and,  at  the  very  least,  as  able  as  he, 
entirely  reject.  Nor  does  he  deny  that  the  science  is  in  its 
infancy.  The  ablest  inquirers  believe  in  a  universal  deluge ; 
the  latest  researches  tend  to  prove  it.  I  say  tend,  because  no 
certain  conclusions  can  yet  be  made  from  geology  as  to  dates. 
[  do  not  hesitate  to  affirm,  and  I  am  supported  by  the  ablest 
geologists,  that  geological  dates  and  periods  stand  on  the  most 
uncertain  and  unsatisfactory  footing.  Sir  C.  Lyell's  system 
is  utterly  unsatisfactory, — irreconcileable  with  the  endent 
facta  of  the  upheaval  theory,  which  is  generally  admitted. 
Dr.  C.  assures  us  that  a  partial  deluge  is  no  better,  so  that 
in  spite  of  universal  tradition,  Scripture,  the  authority  of 
Christ,  who  refers  specifically  to  the  deluge  as  true  (Matt.  xxiv. 
37 — 39),  and  much  geological  research,  we  are  to  have  no 
deluge  at  all.  I  do  not  know  that  I  should  ever  have  noticed 
this  point,  as  it  is  impossible  to  follow  it  out  here,  but  aa 
affording  a  proof  of  Dr.  C.'s  manner  of  reasoning.  It  was 
not  partial,  he  says,  because  a  flood  which  should  cover  Ararat 
must,  in  due  time,  sweep  over  the  Ihiy  de  Dflme,  because  water 
finds  its  own  level ! — that  is  to  say,  water  10,000  or  17,000 
feet  deep  in  a  narrow  locality,  must  have  been  some  5,000 
feet  deep  at  thousands  of  miles'  distance,  when  it  had  spread 
that  distance  in  every  direction  t     And  a  man  who  i 


8 

thus  is  to  call  in  question  the  accur&cy  of  Scripture.     But 
Dr.  Colenso  assures  us  the  Scriptures  never  affirm  their  own 
infallibility.     Abstractedly  "  infallibility*'  belongs  to  a  person, 
not  to  what  has  been  already  said ;  but  they  affirm  that  they 
are  inspired  by  God,  and  that  they  have  His  authority.     The 
Lord  says,  '^The  Scripture  cannot  be  broken"— appeals  to  it, 
as  we  have  seen,  as  of  equal  authority  with  His  own  words — 
refers  to  them  as  testifying  of  Him — ^expounds  them  after 
His  resurrection  in  what  they  taught  concerning  Himself — 
declares  that  all  they  said  must  be  fulfilled — opens  His  dis- 
ciples' understanding  to  understand  them — -declares  that  His 
rising  from  the  dead  would  be  useless  to  convince  those  by 
whom  they  were  not  believed ; — ^they  are  quoted  by  Him  as 
absolutely  conclusive  authority.     Facts  here  questioned,  or 
borne  with  because  they  may  be  ^^  ftiirly  disposed  of,''  are  re- 
ferred to  by  Christ  as  undoubted  history.     So  the  apostles 
write  whole  epistles,  in  which  their  entire  teaching  i&  based 
upon  the  truth  and  inspired  authority  of  Scripture.     Paul 
speaks  of  the  Scriptures  "  foreseeing,"  so  comj^etely  does  he 
identify  them  with  God.     "  But  what  saith  the  Scripture?" 
is  conclusive  :  not  only  so— they  declare  them  to  be  by  in- 
spiration.     They   are  called  the  oracles  of  God,  and  the 
possession  of  them  is  counted  to  be  the  main  privilege  of  God's 
people ;  so  the  law  is  called  '^  the  living  oracles.'^     Peter  says, 
''  No  prophecy  of  the  Scripture  is  of  any  private  interpreta- 
tion, but  holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the 
Holy  Ghost."     I  dare  say  Dr.  C.  will  call  the  authenticity  of 
this  in  question.      Take,  then,  the  first  Epistle  (though  I  am 
perfectly  satisfied  of  the  authenticity  of  the  second) .     There 
he  states  that  the  prophets  searched  as  men  into  their  own 
prophecies,  as  given  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them. 
Paiil  declares  that  "Every  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of 
God  " — the  security  of  the  saint  in  the  last  perilous  times. 
He  calls  the  Scriptures  ^^  prophetic  Scriptures "  (Scriptures 
of  the  prophets) .     I  have  no  doubt  this  refers  to  the  New 
Testament,  but  if  it  be  the  Old,  it  is  saying  they  are  inspired. 
So  his  own  teaching  he  declares  to  be  by  "  words  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  teacheth."      The  prophets  were  infamous  impose 
tors,  if  what  they  said  were  not  the  direct  testimony  of  God 
himself,  for  they  say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."     As  to  Christ, 
it  is  said,  "  He  whom  God  hath  sent  speaketh  the  words  of 
God,  for  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto  Him.'^ 
Thus,  as  Son  of  man,  what  He  spoke  He  spoke — ^to  refer  to 
Dr.  C.^s  question — :"  supernaturally,"  and  his  words  were  the 
words  of  God.     I  a-n^  aware  that  Dr.  C.  says  that,  on  such 


L 


9 

subjects,  He  was  no  wiser  than  other  pious  Jews,  and  that  he 
thinks  himself  wiser  than  Christ  and  the  apostles  oti  such  ; 
hut  does  he  expert  everyone  to  have  the  same  opinion  of  him 
that  he  has  of  himself?  Does  he  think  that  many  even  will 
respect  the  judgment  of  one  called  a  Bishop,  wlio  persiiadeB 
ns  that  Christ  was  prejudiced  and  Ae  is  not  ?  Poor  human 
nature  I 

Allow  me  to  ask  you.  Dr.  Colenso,  do  you  belie\'e  in  the  re- 
surrection ?  do  you  believe  in  this  stupendous  exercise  of 
Divine  power,  so  suited  to  man  subject  to  death  ?  I  mesn 
the  resurrection  of  Him  who  was  "  delivered  for  our  offences 
and  raised  again  for  oiu*  justili cation."  Is  it  not  something, 
this  coming  in  of  God  to  take  out  of  death  and  from  among 
the  dead  His  awn  Son,  given  for  our  sins  ?  Do  you  find  this 
without  a  revelation?  Does  Cicero  fiimish  you  with  this,  or 
do  Sikh  Gooroos,  or  Pantheistic  Brahmins  ?  They  may  say 
fine  things  about  God  and  patience,  and  do  the  same  things 
(as  Paul  says)  as  the  rest :  can  they  tell  of  the  deliverance  of 
sinful  man  ?  I  can  conceive  no  greater  proof  of  imbecility 
and  wilful  ignorance  of  facts  than  to  compare  the  revelation 
first  of  the  whole  history  of  man,  under  God's  dealings  with 
Ilia  responsibility,  and  then  of  atonement  and  the  intervention 
of  Qwl  in  deliverance,  with  the  fine  sayings  of  some  heathen; 
— one  who  shows,  too,  men  to  be  incapable  of  knowing  God, 
as  Cicero  docs,  or  with  the  moralizing  of  Pantheists. 

But  I  close.  1  am  not  writing  a  book  on  these  things,  but 
penning  an  ephemeral  article  on  the  poorest  piece  of  uifidelity 
I  ever  met  with,  and  I  turn  to  the  objections  to  run  them 
over  rapidly.  Let  my  reader  only  remember  this.  The  ob- 
ject of  Scripture  is  not  to  meet  objections  or  give  history,  but, 
on  the  part  of  God,  what  is  divinely  instructive  to  man ;  that, 
if  the  Old  Testament  gave  the  perfection  of  the  New, — it 
would  prove  it  was  not  true,  for  the  true  light  did  not  shine 
till  Chnst  came ;  that,  meeting  objections  docs  not  give  the 
force  of  the  positive  proofe.  It  seems  oandid  to  quote  Kurtz 
and  Hengstenherg  (men  who,  however  respectable,  know 
little,  as  I  judge,  of  the  power  of  Scripture},  but  in  merely 
giving  answers  to  objeotious  all  the  [xwitive  proofs  are,  of 
course,  left  out.  If  no  answer  could  be  given  to  an  objection, 
and  yet  there  were  [xisitivc  proof  of  that  against  which  the 
objection  was  brought,  this  would  only  prove  tlic  solution  of 
the  difficulty  was  not  known.  The  positive  proofe  of  the 
truth  of  Scripture  are  such,  that  the  denial  of  their  being,  as 
they  are  call«l,  "  the  oracles  of  God  "  is  an  ei-idence  only  of 
the  moral  darkness  of  the  rejector  of  them.     It  is  unite  truo 


^ 


10 

I  cannot  explain  light  to  a  blind  man ;  but  erery  one  who 
sees  knows  he  is  blmd.  Above  all,  let  my  reader  remember 
that  the  Lord  himself  treats  the  Scriptures  as  absolutely  in- 
spired and  authoritative,  quotes  them  as  we  now  have  them, 
and  declares  that  all  written  of  Him  must  be  fulfilled, — that 
"  not  a  jot  or  tittle  can  pass  from  the  law  till  all  be  fulfilled,^' 
the  law  which  Dr.  C.  pronounces  he  could  not  attribute  to 
God,  save  as  he  selects  bits  according  to  his  own  fancy,  for 
he  has,  of  course,  a  perfect  judgment; — a  man  who  sees 
nothing  in  the  minutiae  of  the  law,  which  (while  a  yoke  in 
the  letter)  as  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  is  full  of  the 
deepest  instruction :  let  him  remember  that  Dr.  C.  presents 
himself  as  wiser  and  better  informed  than  Christ,  and  if  he 
have  faith  to  do  it,  pray  for  one  who  can  think  so,  and  pub- 
lish a  book  to  tell  the  world  he  does. 

Such  views,  they  tell  us,  will  \mite  all  pious  people  in  one 
mother  church ;  and  if  such  questions  should  disturb  men^s 
minds,  and  a  serious  person  would  ponder  and  weigh  them 
before  doing  so,  he  has  only  to  remember  that  Dr.  C.  has 
such  a  sense  of  the  petty  importance  of  his  own  position,  that 
he  cannot  have  leisure  (so  he  tells  us)  to  ponder  a  while 
before  he  gives  forth,  pretending  to  be  wiser  than  Christ, — 
opinions  which  contradict  what  Christ  says. 

The  first  objection  is  that  in  Genesis  xlvi.,  Hezron  and 
Hamul  are  stated  to  have  gone  down  to  Egypt,  and  conse- 
quently to  have  been  bom  in  Canaan,  but  that  it  is  impossi- 
ble if  the  ages  of  Judah  and  Joseph  be  considered.  It  is 
contended  that  Judah  was  forty-two  when  Jacob  went  down 
into  Egypt,  inasmuch  as  Joseph  was  thirty-nine.  Genesis 
XXX.  24—26,  and  xxxi.  41,  are  cited  to  prove  that  Joseph 
was  born  in  the  seventh,  Judah  in  the  fourth  year  ^' of  Jacob's 
double  marriage."  The  impossibility  of  Hezron  and  Hamulus 
going  down  to  Egypt,  arises  from  this,  that  Judah  was 
twenty  when  Joseph  went  down  into  Egypt,  and  that  Hezron 
and  Hamul,  who  rank  in  point  of  time  with  Judah's  great 
grand-children,  though  his  own  grand-children  by  Tamar, 
could  not  have  been  born  when  he  was  forty-two,  i.e.  twenty- 
two  years  afterwards.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  insisted  that 
the  narrative  of  Jacob's  going  down,  makes  sixty-six  souls 
go  with  him,  and  there  are  not  sixty-six  without  Hezron  and 
Hamul. 

There  is  no  groimd  for  the  objection  at  all.  I  do  not 
insist  on  the  uncertainty  of  the  exact  diflFerence  between  the 
ages  of  Judah  and  Joseph,  as  what  might  be  added,  even  if 


n 

just,  would  hardly  clDar  up  the  point;  though,  bringing  it 
perhaps  withiii  the  limits  of  possibility,  it  is  siifficieiit  to 
throw  doubt  upon  Dr.  C.'s  assertions.  But  Gen.  slri.  is 
simply  to  record  the  immediate  descendants  of  Jacob  who 
were  associated  with  himself  in  Kgypt,  to  give  his  family. 
Thus  Er  and  Onan  are  noticed,  oidy  it  is  added,  they  died  in 
Canaan.  It  is  then  added  "  and  the  sons  of  Pharez  were 
Hezron  and  Hamul."  This  12th  verse  is  distinctly  genealogy, 
not  that  all  went  down  into  Egypt  who  are  named  in  it :  for 
Er  and  Onan  are  named  because  they  are  sons,  while  it  is 
expressly  stated  they  did  not  go  down  at  all.* 

In  the  12th  verse,  the  introduction  of  "were"  is  emphatic, 
and  the  phrase,  I  apprehend,  clearly  intended  to  be  supple- 
mentary.  It  is  not  "  Er,  and  Onan,  and  Shelah,  and  Pharez, 
and  Zarah,  and  the  sons  of  Pharez,  Hezron,  and  Hamul," 
which  would  clearly  have  been  the  case  if  they  had  been 
goers  down  into  Egypt.  But  the  historian  stops  at  Zarah, 
and  adds  supplementary  information  :  Er  and  Onan  were  on 
the  list  of  sons,  but  they  did  not  go  down — they  died  before, 
and  Pharez's  sons  were  Hezron  and  Hamul.  They  are  looked 
at  as  filling  up  the  breach,  but  the  latter  half  of  the  verse  is, 
in  contrast  with  going  down,  au  explanation  of  the  history 
of  that  family.  As  if  he  had  said  ;  these  were  Judah's  sons, 
but  I  must  add  this  explanation  to  the  statement  :  Er  and 
Onan  never  got  down,  for  they  died,  and  Pharez  had  two 
sons  who  are  counted  in  to  supply  their  place.  For,  though 
the  leading  thought  be  the  going  down  into  Egypt,  yet  in 
order  to  this  he  gives  the  whole  family ;  and  that  this  is  so 
is  evident,  for  he  introduces  Joseph's  sons,  adding  they  were 
bom  in  Egj-pt,  Indeed,  I  think  it  very  questionable  whether 
all  BenjaminV  sons  were  Imni  when  he  came  into  Egypt.  It 
was  after  Joseph's  birtli  that  Jacob  agreed  with  Laban  to  stay 
longer,  and  staid  six  years.  He  then  journeyed  to  Palestine, 
when  Joseph  must  have  been  seven  years  old.  He  was  sold  into 
Egypt  at  seventeen.  Hence  Jacob  had  been  only  ten  years 
in  Canaan  when  Joseph  went  there.  Jacob  had  scttlecl  first 
at  Succoth,  then  near  Shechem,  and  Dinah,  who  was  probably 

liitifTEri 


Ouon.  WD  have  t 

diapoied 


imputation  in  the  psssdge  is  not  ^ery  cleir. 

'  ue  Bans  ruiil  grandaaiu.  It  vo  leave  them  out  we  miut 
Duls  of  bia  own  Hina  and  dttiiKliten.  Iloweier,  I  un 
1  to  include  Dinah  uid  Jacob,  and  leave  oat  Er  and  Onan,  and  read 
"  iheae  be  the  aong  of  Lesb  which  she  bare  uuto  Jacob  in  Pailan  Arun. 
with  Ilia  danghtdr  Dinah,  all  the  souls  of  hi>  sons  and  ilaugbtera  :  thirty  and 
three."  Aa  if  he  had  aaid,  Ihia  nukea  thirty  aud  three.  If  not,  we  miut 
count  it)  Er  and  Onan.  and  make  it  mere  genealogical  compntalion  of  aoua,  and 
the  S6th  verae  wi>uld  be  general,  the  compntalian  already  givoa  eiolodiiu;  Jacnb, 
and  JoiDuh  and  hiH  song. 


nearly  of  Joseph's  age,  was  old  enough  to  be  iU-treated  by 
JIamor,  before  Benjamin  was  bom,  For  Jacob  went  off  to 
Bethel  after  the  dcBtniction  of  the  men  of  Shechem,  and 
after  leaving  Bethel,  Benjamin  was  bom,  and  Rachel  died. 
He  does  not  appear  either  in  the  history.  Joseph  is  a  boy, 
the  son  of  Jacob's  old  age.  Benjamin  could  only  have  been 
two  or  three  yeai-s  old  when  Joseph  went  down ;  for  if  Dinah 
were  seven  or  eight  years  old  when  she  eanie  to  Canaan,  say 
she  was  tifteen  or  sixteen  when  Hamor  wronged  her  ;  seven 
or  eight  years  had  elapsed  in  Canaan  before  Benjamin  was 
born,  and  two  or  three  years  more  elapsed  before  Joseph  went 
down,  We  must  add  twenty-two  for  the  interval  between 
Joseph's  and  Jacob's  going  down,  Benjamin  was  thus  at  the 
utmost  twenty-four  or  twenty-five.  So  he  Is  called  a  "  lad  " 
(nahar)  xliii.  3,  and  a  bttle  one  (katan)  in  xliv,  20,  and 
(nahar)  again,  31.  This  being  so,  and  giving  the  fullest 
possible  age  of  twenty-five,  which,  with  the  three  terms,  is 
very  improbable,  it  is  very  little  likely  that  he  had  ten  sons 
born  to  him.  I  doubt  even  whether  Rcubcu's  sons  were  all 
horn,  as  he  says,  "  slay  my  two  sons."  On  the  whole,  I 
think  it  is  evident  that  this  is  a  genealogical  list,  without 
reference  to  the  place  of  birth  :  the  statement  of  the  whole 
family,  as  a  family,  who  went  down.  This  manner  of  giving 
a  genealogy  complete,  and  a  general  fact  which  is  not  accur- 
ately true  as  to  each  individual  in  it,  though  it  characterizes 
the  subject  of  recital,  we  have  other  examples  of.  To  go  no 
further  than  chapter  sxxv.  :  All  Jacob's  sons  are  given,  includ- 
ing Benjamin,  immediately  after  the  account  of  Benjamin's 
birth  in  Canaan,  and  it  is  added,  "  these  are  the  sons  of 
Jacob  which  were  bom  to  him  in  Padan  Aram"  The  exact 
genealogy  was  the  important  thing,  and  it  is  given  accurately. 
ITie  main  fact  which  characterized  the  family  was  their  birth 
away  from  the  land  of  promise,  in  the  coiuitry  where  Jacob 
ser\ed  for  a  wife.  It  was  no  object  to  except  Benjamin  in 
the  statement ;  it  was  to  give  the  accurate  history  of  his 
birth.  I  doubt  not. a  moment  be  is  a  special  type  of  Christ 
in  connection  with  Israel :  the  son  of  his  mother's  affliction, 
bnt  of  his  father's  right  hand.  But  it  could  be  no  mistakt, 
for  the  writer  or  compiler,  or  whatever  he  was,  had  given  all 
the  details  of  his  birth  immediately  before,  and  speaks  in  the 
passage  itself  of  Jacob's  being  in  that  land.  But,  Benji 
being  bom,  the  time  was  come  to  give  the  whole  fami 
The  subjects  are  given  with  dirine  purpose,  in  view  of 
dealings  of  God,  which  He  foreknew,  not  as  mere  histontS- 
to  amuse ;  and  hence,  we  get  distinct  subjects  without  arrange* 


n  tbe 


13 

ment  of  dates.  Dr.  C.  states  tliat  Judah's  misconduct  vros 
after  Josepli'i*  going  down  to  Egypt,  because  it  is  said,  "  at 
that  time."  Now  Judah's  genealogy  and  ways  Were  all 
important  because  our  Lord  was  to  spring  out  of  Judah. 
But  after  this  history  of  Judah  which  lasts  some  twenty 
yeara  at  any  rate,  the  history  of  Joseph's  going  down  into 
Egypt  is  resumed  where  it  left  off.  Judah'a  history  is  intro- 
duced as  a  separate  subject  parenthetically.  The  last  verse 
of  xxxvii.,  and  the  first  verse  of  xjctii.  arc  connected,  and  the 
history  of  Judah  comes  in  between  as  a  whole  of  twenty 
years  by  itself.  "  At  that  time  "  is  only  the  general  epoch, 
and  the  whole  history  is  given  together.  This  is  e.^ceedijigly 
common  in  Scripture.  But  as  Joseph  was  a  remarkable  type 
of  Christ,  so  Judah  was  his  progenitor  according  to  the  Beah. 
And  this  Pharez  and  his  son  Hezron  were  so.  I  must  add 
that  the  relative  ages  of  Judah  and  Joseph  are  anything  but 
clearly  proved.  The  relative  dates  of  Joseph's  birth  and  his 
going  down  into  Egypt,  and  of  each  to  other  events  are 
far  more  distinctly  given. 

On  the  whole  the  purpose  of  the  statement  in  Gen.  xlvi., 
is  clearly  to  give  Jacob's  family,  and  hence  some  are  noticed 
who  did  not  go  down  to  E^ypt,  and  Ilezron  and  Ilamul  are 
specially  introduced  into  the  verse  not  with  the  list  of  sons, 
but  as  associated  with  them.  The  saying,  "  Thy  father  went 
down  into  Egypt  threescore  and  ten  persons,  and  now  ye  are 
as  the  stars,"  takes  up  the  general  fact,  to  show  the  man'el- 
lous  increase.  The  same  is  the  case  in  the  New  Testament, 
specially  in  Luke. 

Dr.  C,  in  fact,  admits  the  whole  case  where  he  says, 
"  wishing  to  sum  up  the  seventy  souls  under  one  category,  he 
uses  (inaccurately  as  he  himself  admits)  the  same  expression, 
'  came  into  Egypt.'"  Now  this  settles  the  whole  question. 
He  gives  a  category  of  persons,  that  category  being  Jacob's 
family,  with  the  general  fact  of  that  family's  leaving  Canaan 
and  going  into  Egypt,  But  he  introduces  some  who  did  not 
literally  go  down,  though  they  were  there.  If  this  be  so,  aud 
it  is  perfectly  evident,  Dr.  C.'s  argument  is  simply  worth 
nothing  at  all.  When  he  says:  "all  the  souls  which  came 
into  Egypt  were  threescore  and  ten,"  we  have  the  demon- 
stration  that  some  at  least  who  were  bom  in  Egypt,  provided 
they  were  of  the  family  that  came,  are  accounted  as  coming. 
The  case  of  Ilezron  and  Hatnul  is  much  clearer,  because 
there  is  only  an  accessory  statement  in  the  genealogy ;  "  and 
the  sons  of  Pharez  were  Hezron  and  Hamul."  And  we  have 
no  need  to  say  again  with  Dr.  C,  "  the  description  is,  of 


u 

Course,  literally  incorrect,  but  the  writer's  meaning  is  obvious 
enough,"  for  it  is  literally  correct,  and  the  meaning  obvious 
too.  But  I  may  add  Dr.  C/s  own  remark,  which  shews  the 
utter  wilfidness  and  equal  absurdity  of  his  objection  :  "  He 
wishes  to  specify  all  those  out  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  who  were 
living  at  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  the  sojourn  of  the 
Israelites  in  Egypt,  and  from  whom  such  a  multitude  had 
sprung  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus."  How  soon  Hezron  and 
Hamul  were  bom  we  cannot  say.  They  are  brought  into  the 
list  in  connection  with  the  loss  of  two  of  the  sons  of  Judah, 
with  whose  history  they  were  connected, — one  of  them  being 
ancestor  of  David  and  of  Christ. 

The  next  objection  is  really  almost  too  absurd  to  notice, 
but  worthy  the  futility  of  rsUionalist  arguments.  Dr.  C. 
makes  a  computation  of  how  fxt  files  of  men  as  many  in 
nimiber  as  could  stand  in  front  of  the  breadth  of  the  taber- 
nacle would  reach.  Does  he  think  the  writer  did  not  know, 
as  well  as  Dr.  C,  that  aU  the  congregation  could  not  have 
stood  in  the  court  ?  But  he  was  not  so  morally  dull  as  to 
think  of  it.  Supposing  the  riot-act  read  to  a  crowd  of 
100,000  persons,  and  I  say,  the  riot-act  was  read  to  the  mul- 
titude who  stood  before  the  magistrate,  and  I  computed  how 
far  100,000  men  would  reach,  standing  in  a  file  directly 
before  the  magistrate,  what  would  any  one  think  of  the  sense 
of  the  person  who  made  the  remark  ?  Or,  are  the  crowd  not 
responsible  because  they  cannot  hear  it  ?  Away  with  such 
childish  trifling.  But  the  fact  is,  there  is  no  ground  for  the 
remark  at  all.  "  Before  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
congregation,"  has  a  most  important  meaning  in  these  ordi- 
nances. Within  the  tabernacle  and  holiest  of  all  was  the 
place  of  Jehovah's  communing  directly  with  Moses  ;  outside, 
yet  in  connection  with  the  tabernacle,  the  place  of  meeting 
the  people,  of  God's  going  out,  not  in  the  revelation  of  Him- 
self, but  in  commimications  from  Himself  to  the  people,  and 
of  the  access  of  the  people  to  Him.  All  the  court  of  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  congregation  was  held  to  have  this  character  of '^be- 
fore the  door  of  the  tabernacle,"  and  all  done  there  and  commu- 
nicated thence  was  done  before  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
congregation.  All  brought  up  to  the  court  was  before  the 
door.  Thus  if  all  the  people  had  been  outside  the  court  and 
Moses  had  stood  in  the  doorway  of  the  court,  they  would  have 
been  before  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation." 
It  was  the  general  expression  for  coming  up  to  the  court  or 
entering  it,  though  not  going  near  the  tabernacle  where  the 
door  literallv  was.   "  The  women,"  we  read,  "assembled  them- 


15 

selves  ill  troops  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  cougrega- 
tion."  They  did  not  come  when  the  tabernacle  was  set  up  in 
order,  in  troops,  between  the  laver  and  the  holy  place.  But  we 
have  the  matter  definitely  stated. — In  ExoduB  xJ.  we  find,  ver. 
89,  "  he  put  the  altar  of  the  burnt  oflering  by  the  door  of  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation. .  ..  and  he  aet  the  laver  between 
the  tent  of  the  congregation  and  the  altar."  Thus  the  altar 
of  burnt  offering,  the  first  thing  met  with  on  entering  the 
court  was  by  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  Now  this  was  the 
place  where  God  was  to  meet  the  children  of  Israel,  aa  con- 
trasted with  meeting  Mosea  within  the  veil.  Exod.  xsix.  42, 
"  a  continual  burnt  offering. ...  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation  before  the  Lord,  where  I  will  meet  you 
to  speak  there  unto  thee,  And  there  I  will  meet  with  the 
chUdren  of  Israel."  Thus  Moses  standing  under  the  hangings 
of  the  court  and  speaking  to  the  crowd  without,  was  speaking 
to  them  gathered  before  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  Had  they 
been  inside  the  court  he  would  have  turned  his  back  to  them. 
So  when  a  person  oSered  a  burnt  o&ering,  he  offered  it  at  the 
door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  before  the  Lord. — 
He  killed  the  bullock  before  the  Lord,  and  the  blood  was 
sprinkled  upon  the  altar  that  is  before  the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  congregation.  They  came  up  to  the  Lord  there, 
instead  of  offering  it  where  they  pleased,  away  from  him.  And 
this  was  carefully  secured  by  ordinance,  as  a  guard  against 
idolatry.  They  bad  to  bring  all  the  beasts  they  slew  up  before 
the  Lord:  Lev.  xiii.  4,  The  gathering  of  the  congregation 
to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  was  bringinfc  them  up  to  the 
court,  so  that  Moses  standing  there  might  address  them.  And 
the  place  specifically  pointed  out  for  this  was  not  at  the  door, 
hut  whei'e  the  altar  was,  i.  e.  next  the  entrance  of  the  court 
where  the  people  were  to  come  up  with  their  sacrifices,  and 
the  Lord  met  with  them. 

Sucb  objections  as  these  are  child's  play,  proving  only 
entire  ignorance  of  Gocl's  ways  with  Israel,  and  the  purport 
of  the  ordinances,  carelessness  of  research  into  them,  with  the 
pretension,  the  common  accompanimcnt>of  ignorance,  to  see 
clearer  than  others,  and  the  desire  to  make  diMculties  in  pre- 
sence  of  all  the  divine  light  which  is  found  in  what  is  objected 
to.  Dr.  C.  seeks  to  prove  his  candour  and  care  by  showing 
that  the  elders  of  Israel  were  not  all  the  congregation.  He 
might  have  spared  himself  the  trouble.  And  he  has  gone 
through  siuns  of  aritlunc tic  to  prove  the  size  of  the  court.  I 
really  have  not  examined  whether  his  multiplication  is  correct. 
I  can  suppose  it. 


16 

Bis  next  objection  is  as  to  how  Moses  and  Joshua  addressed 
all  Israel ;  and  he  wisely  informs  us  that  the  crying  of  the 
children^  whose  mothers  must  be  supposed  to  have  pushed  to 
the  first  place^  woidd  hinder  all  but  those  dose  by  from  hearing. 
Was  ever  anything  more  childish!  Supposing  all  did  not  hear^ 
which  may  very  well  be  bdieved,  they  were  all  put  under  the 
responsibility  of  what  was  addressed  to  them^  of  which  those 
who  were  in  earnest  could  easily  put  themselves  in  possession. 
Supposing  the  elders  or  heads  of  tribes  were  nearest^  as  is 
probable^  they  would  have  both  informed  and  led  the  others 
according  to  what  was  said. 

The  next  objection  is  to  the  possibility,  with  so  few  priests, 
of  having  the  bullock  for  a  sin  offering  burned  without  the 
camp.  Now  I  admit  fuUy  that  the  great  object  here  is  doc^ 
trinal,  not  historical.  There  is  no  history  at  aU.  What  is 
ordained  was  only  to  be  done  in  the  case  of  the  priests'  or 
the  whole  congregation's  sinning ;  ought  never  to  have  hap^ 
pened,  and  may  never  have  happened.  And  from  the  way 
they  went  on  (for  they  never  circumcised  their  children,  and 
certainly  fell  into  idolatry)  if  the  case  did  arise,  they  proba- 
bly neglected  the  prescribed  sacrifice.  K  it  did  happen  once 
or  twice,  such  a  provision  was  no  difficulty.  That  once  or 
twice  in  forty  years,  or  even  in  one  year,  such  a  toilsome  ce- 
remony should  mark  their  sin  was  most  appropriate.  Nor  do 
I  doubt  a  moment  that  though  the  priest  was  responsible,  and 
must  have  had  and  seen  it  done,  the  Levites  or  yoimger  priests 
might  share  the  manual  toil.  And  this  is  implied  in  the  form 
of  the  Hebrew  verb  which  is  the  Hiphil,  ^^to  cause  to  go 
forth ;"  used  no  doubt  consequently  for  "  bringing  forth," 
but  which  may  be  by  another  as  by  oneself,  as  it  is  used  for 
causing  an  evil  report  to  come  on  some  one.* — For  the  rest, 
a  walk  of  a  mile  and  a  half,  or  three  miles,  for  their  com- 
mon bodily  wants,  was  nothing  out  of  the  way  for  a  people 
who  had  nothing  to  do  except  to  tend  their  cattle,  which 
would  in  itself  have  taken  them  there.  To  suppose  they 
used  fuel  as  in  London  is  simple  nonsense.      And  they  chose 

*  Yatsa  is  to  go  forth,  b&  Bo  is  to  go  in  or  to.  And  hence  the  causative  is 
used  for  bringing  forth,  because  one  who  does  cause  to  go  or  come  forth. 
But  there  is  no  ground  at  all  for  confining  it  to  the  personal  act  of  the  person 
causing  it  to  come  forth.  Thus,  not  only  in  the  case  of  an  evil  report,  Hotze 
Bibbs,  cited  in  the  text.  Deut.  xvi.  23,  Bringing  forth  the  tithe.  Lev.  xxiv. 
14,  Bringing  forth  him  that  had  cursed.  Zech.  iv.  7,  Oen.  xxjuv.  24, 25,  Bring- 
ing forth  Tamar.  Ex.  iii.  10,  Moses  is  to  bring  forth  Israel  from  Egypt ;  that 
is,  cause  them  to  come  out.  So  Ex.  xiv.  13,  Heb.  iv.  So  in  Ezra  i.  8.  We 
have  those  did  Cyrus  bring  forth  by  the  hand  of  Mithredath.  Where  he  ex- 
pressly uses  another  to  have  them  brought  out.  In  a  word,  there  is  no  ground 
at  all  for  Dr.  C.*b  remarks. 


17 

places  where  wells  were,  and  God  clave  the  roek  when  there 
was  no  water.  It  is  reaUy  absurd  bringing  forth  such  objec- 
tions. Had  Dr.  C.  bepn  a  soldier,  or  lived  in  the  dirt  I  have 
hod  to  live  iu,  he  would  have  known  that  a  walk  a  mile  and 
a  half  out  of  a  city,  for  the  uecessities  of  life,  was  a  very 
natural  thing. 

The  fifth  objection  is  first  that  the  shekel  is  called  the 
shekel  of  the  sanctuary,  before  there  was  a  sanctuary;  and 
that  the  money  of  wliich  the  silver  sockets,  &c.,  were  made 
was  the  redemption  money,  and  that  the  census  which  ascer- 
tained the  number  of  the  people,  on  which  the  redemption 
money  was  paid,  was  six  montlis  afterwards,  by  which  time 
the  number  must  have  increased.  This  has  no  foundation  what- 
ever. As  to  the  remark  that  it  was  called  the  shekel  of  the 
sanctuary  before  the  sanctuary  was  set  up.  The  book  is  a 
history,  and  gives  the  sum  taken  according  to  the  value  of 
the  money  known  when  it  was  written.  They  paid  at  the 
time  what  was  known,  when  the  book  was  written,  as  the 
shekel  of  the  sanctuary,  perhaps  settled  at  the  very  time.  As 
regards  the  nnmbering,  it  is  clear  the  computation  of  the  sum 
that  Was  paid  is  made  &om  the  numbering  itself,  the  result  of 
which  was  known  when  the  account  of  it  was  written. — There 
is  no  contimiing  of  the  same  number; — Exodus  xxxviii,  36, 
Numb.  i.  46 ; — it  is  the  number  itself.  I  do  not  know  what 
the  gronnd  for  saying  six  months  is.  The  tabernacle  was  Bet 
up  on  the  first  day  of  the  first  month,  the  uumberiug  took 
place  a  month  after.  The  sockets,  chapiters,  and  filaments 
may  have  been  made  just  before.  They  may  perfectly  well 
have  given  each  man  Ins  money,  and  the  actual  numbering 
been  made  six  weeks  afterwards  to  veriiy  it,  and  that  number 
be  given  as  the  ascertained  one,  even  if  some  few  had  attain- 
ed the  age  of  twenty  in  the  short  interval.  The  command  to 
give  the  half  shekel  is  given  iu  chapter  xxx.  But  this 
was'  by  uo  means  all  the  silver,  for  many  had  oifered 
willingly,  but  it  was  typically  important  that  it  should 
be  understood  that  that  on  which  the  tabernacle  of 
witness  was  founded  was  redem])tion,  and  what  separated 
the  service  of  God  from  the  world  was  redemption.  Hence 
the  sockets  of  the  boards  of  the  tabcruaolc,  and  the  hooks 
and  chapiters  on  which  the  hangings  of  the  court  were  fixed, 
were  of  this  silver. — The  actual  numbering  took  place  when 
the  tabernacle  was  set  up  to  verify  the  number  redeemed, 
which  had  its  own  importance.  If  some  shekels  more  were 
given  it  was  of  no  consequence  whatever  to  notice  them,  as 
the  direction  for  their  use  was  given  already.      Some  few 


18 

might  have  died  who  had  given  their  half  shekel,  some  tesw 
reached  twenty,  but  the  sum,  when  numbered,  is  taken  as 
the  sum  applied  to  the  service.  We  know  that  the  popu- 
lation in  the  wilderness  was  as  nearly  stationary  as  possible. 

The  next  difficulty  is  how  they  got  tents,  on  leaving  Egypt, 
and  carried  them.  I  might  fairly  say  I  do  not  know.  Some 
may  have  been  badly  off  for  want  of  them,  have  made  them 
on  the  journey,  and  while  staying  at  Sinai  for  a  year.  As  to 
carrying  them,  nothing  is  said;  they  had  asses  doubtless, 
perhaps  camels,  as  well  as  oxen.  The  history  says  nothing 
about  it.  To  say  they  could  not  have  them  is  absurd.  Very 
likely  they  were  at  first  greatly  in  want  of  them.  All  this  is 
to  the  last  degree  idle  :  it  is  not  the  object  of  the  history  to 
give  these  details.  Dr.  C.  then  takes  a  very  difficult  Hebrew 
word  to  prove  that  if  it  means  "  armed,''  there  are  difficulties 
in  knowing  how  they  got  arms,  or  how  they  were  afraid  of 
Pharaoh  if  they  had.  It  is  really  tedious  to  go  through  such 
absurdities.  The  word  probably  signifies  that  they  went  out 
"  in  array,'' — ^not  as  poor  hunted  runaways  :  for  God  took 
them  out  with  a  high  hand.  '^  By  strength  of  hand  the  Lord 
brought  us  out  of  Egypt."  But  it  does  not  by  any  means 
follow,  if  their  faith  were  not  lively,  that  they  would  not  be 
alarmed  when  attacked  by  trained  soldiers.  It  is  said  in  this 
same  1 3th  chapter:  Ood  did  not  take  them  the  short  way, 
lest  the  people  should  repent  when  they  saw  war,  and  return 
to  Egypt.  And  they  were  so  disposed.  God  suffered  their 
faith  to  be  tried  for  a  moment,  and  they  did  repent  when 
they  saw  war ;  only  now  it  was  but  to  make  His  deliverance 
the  more  conspicuous.  Nor,  where  faith  was  not  in  exercise, 
was  it  very  wonderful.  Accustomed  to  be  slaves,  with  all 
their  women  and  children  and  cattle,  the  way  of  escape 
barred,  no  practice  in  war,  or  even  in  any  common  military 
arrangements,  they  were  in  face  of  the  most  experienced  war- 
riors  on  earth,  with  chariots  and  cavalry ; — themselves  a  great 
mixed  multitude.  When  Dr.  C.  says  "a  body  of  600,000 
warriors,"  he  says  what  is  false.  They  were  not  warriors. 
They  were  of  an  age  fit  for  war,  even  if  that  were  true  of 
them  ;  but  they  were  poor  brickmakers,  though  now  roused 
by  God^s  intervention  to  leave  the  house  of  bondage. 

The  next  objection  as  to  the  passover,  is  founded  on  mis- 
statement and  carelessness.  Dr.  C.  insists  it  was  impossible 
to  notify  it,  and  have  all  ready  in  time.  He  tells  us  the  first 
notice  of  any  such  feast  to  be  kept  is  given  in  this  very  chap- 
ter, where  we  find  it  written,  verse  12.  "  I  will  pass  through 
the  land  of  Egypt  this  night  J*^     Hence  he  argues  it  was  im- 


^ 


w 


poBBible  to  have  all  Israel  ready,  and  insists  on  this  night  and 
tlie  Hse  of  tlie  Hebrew  word  liazeh.  But  zch  Las  not  this 
kind  of  exactitude  always.  At  any  rate  the  chapter  shews 
distinctly  the  falseness  of  the  conclusion  Dr.  C.  has  drawn 
from  it.  The  directions  had  been  given  at  the  bcp^nning  of 
the  month,  and  the  lamb  had  to  be  kept  up  three  days ; 
"  'ITiia  month  shall  be  imto  you  the  beginning  of  months,  it 
shall  be  the  first  month  of  the  year  to  you.  Speak  ye  unto 
all  the  congregation  of  Israel,  saying :  on  the  tenth  day  of 
this  month  they  shall  take  to  them  every  man  a  lamb,  .  .  , 
and  ye  shall  keep  it  up  until  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  same 
month."  Dr.  C,  says,  this  cannot  mean  that  they  bad  notice 
several  days  beforehand,  because  it  says,  I  will  pass  through 
the  land  of  Egypt  this  night.  Tliis  is  very  bad  indeed. 
Moses  is  told  to  notify  to  all  the  people  to  take  a  lamb  the 
tenth,  and  to  keep  it  to  the  fourteenth ;  and  this  we  are  told 
cannot  mean  that  they  got  notice  beforehand,  because  the 
chapter  says  "  this  night,"  when  it  comes  to  killing  and  eat- 
ing it.  And  what  can  it  mean  else  ?  If  the  lamb  was  not 
kept  up  from  the  tenth  to  the  fourteenth,  the  ordinance  was 
not  kept  at  all.  All  this  objection  does,  b  to  disclose  the 
will  of  the  objector.  No  doubt  the  momentous  ordinance 
itself  is  what  occupies  the  inspired  writer ;  but  the  Ijcginning 
of  the  chapter  fidly  suffices  to  show  that  the  objection  drawn 
from  want  of  time  and  notice,  is  as  perverse  as  it  is  nn- 
founded.  The  rest  of  the  article  does  not  desene  notice. 
In  the  first  place  kids  would  do,  so  that  there  was  no  danger 
of  all  the  male  lambs  pcFisbiug.  As  to  notice  to  start,  they 
ate  it,  loins  girded,  and  stafl'  in  hand,  ready  to  go,  and  were 
prepared  long  before  to  he  on  the  move,  to  sacrifice  in 
the  wilderness.  Nor  is  there  a  word  to  show  there  was  any 
sudden  notice  ;  or  that  their  move  was  caused  by  the  urging 
of  the  Egyptians. 

Dr.  C.  thinks  that  Ms  own  confusion,  in  fright  from  a 
false  alarm,  proves  that  there  must  have  been  hopeless  con- 
fusion in  Israel.  But  they  had  for  a  length  of  time  been 
demanding  to  move  with  all  their  Socks,  and  were  now  loins 
girt  and  staff  in  hand,  so  that  we  cannot  doubt  a  moment 
that  all  was  prepared  and  arranged.  There  is  no  hint  of  an 
order  to  start  communicated  suddenly.  The  Egyjrtians  were 
urgent  on  them  to  go.  They  had  already  borrowed  jewels 
from  the  Egj'ptians  in  anticipation  of  going.  The  whole 
theory  of  Dr.  C.  is  simply  inattention  to  the  scriptural  ac- 
count. Because  that  account  dwells  chiefiy  on  the  great 
facts  which  have  a  moral  import,  he  concludes  there  were 
a  2 


20 

none  else^  even  when  they  are  positively  stated^  and  makes 
statements^  moreover^  and  statements  upon  which  all  his 
argument  depends,  which  are  not  in  the  passage,  or  actually 
contradict  it.  I  may  add  that  I  do  not  even  a(^bnit  that  the 
600,000  were  only  men  in  the  prime  of  age ;  they  were  all 
above  twenty — ^twenty  and  above,  that  were  men,  besides 
children.  This  would  make  a  considerable  difference  in  the 
numbers. 

As  to  how  the  herds  were  fed  in  the  desert,  it  is  certain 
they  chose  their  encampment  where  there  were  springs.  At 
Sinai,  God  gave  them  water  out  of  a  rock.  I  may  add  that 
Dr.  C.  speaks  of  Mount  Serbal  as  Sinai,  which  is  more  than 
doubtful,  or  confounds  two  opinions,  applying  statements  as 
to  one  incorrectly  to  the  other,  ignorant  that  there  was  any 
difference ;  which,  aa  to  the  character  of  the  place  of  en- 
campment, is  important.  Lipsius  thought  Serbal  was  Sinai, 
but  more  exact  research  has  made  it  pretty  clear  it  was  not, 
and  shewn  where  Israel  encamped.  The  attempt  to  say,  as 
Dr.  C.  says,  that  the  wandering  in  the  desert  is  not  a  neces- 
sary preliminary  to  all  the  history  of  Israel,  is  too  barefaced, 
does  too  much  violence  to  the  common  sense  of  every  man 
who  has  read  Scripture,  to  call  for  an  answer.  Movements 
of  whole  nations  in  the  deserts  of  Upper  Asia  have  been  fre- 
quent when  there  was  not  the  miraculous  interposition  of 
God  to  give  water,  which  is  stated  in  the  history  of  Israel. 
Israel  stayed  mainly  in  the  north  of  the  desert  on  the  bor- 
ders of  Mount  Seir  and  the  land  of  Canaan,  where  there 
were  wells  and  pasture.  Though  what  is  related  in  detail  is 
what  happened  at  Sinai  at  the  beginning,  and  at  the  close. 
When  Dr.  C.  says  tlie  Scripture  story  says  not  a  word  about 
this  long  sojourn  near  Mount  Seir  and  the  Red  Sea,  he 
makes  a  blunder  with  his  usual  carelessness.  The  Israelites 
got  tlirough  the  desert  of  El  Tyh*  (which  is  not  the  desert 
of  Sinai,  as  Dr.  C.  says),  by  a  rapid  and  short  journey  to  the 
desert  of  Paran  and  Kadesh  Bamea  close  to  Canaan.  There 
they  were  called  on  to  go  up  the  mountain  of  the  Amorites 
and  take  possession  of  the  land.  Instead  of  this  they  sent  the 
spies,  the  Lord  giving  his  sanction  to  it,  but  at  their  desire. 
Their  faith  failed  and  they  would  not  go  up,  and  were  con- 
demned to  wander  the  forty  years,  till  the  men,  save  Joshua 
and  Caleb,  died. 

It  was  on  their  refusal  to  go  up  that  they  turned  and  went 
to  the  Red  Sea   (Numbers  xiv.  25),  and  then  it  was  they 

*  £1  Tjh  is  a  modem  name  (the  wandering)  for  the  desert  district  Ijing 
north  of  Biuai. 


compassed  Mount  Seir  (Deut.  i.  40),  and  were  on  the  bonier 
of  comitries  affording  supplira.  lu  one  place  where  they  had 
no  water  they  were  given  it  again  miraculously,  went  down 
finally  outside  the  Wady  Akaba  to  the  Hed  Sea,  returned  to 
Mount  Hor  for  Aaron's  death,  and  then,  at  last,  down  to  the 
Red  Sea  again,  going  np  the  eastern  side  of  the  mountains  of 
Seir  to  Moab  aud  Jordan.  The  statement  of  Dr.  C,  is  merely 
the  result  of  carelessness  in  searching  Scripture.  The  detail 
of  these  long  years  we  have  not ;  hut  we  have  of  a  stay  of  a 
year  in  Siiiai,  where  water  was  given  rairaeulonaly,  a  short 
journey  across  El  Tyh,  the  Lord  himself  leading  them,  their 
arrival  at  the  borders  of  the  land,  and  their  joumej-ing  about 
Mount  Seir  and  to  the  Red  Sea,  water  being  given  them 
miraculously  when  it  failed.  Let  me  remark  how  beautifully 
at  the  moment  they  were  sent  back  from  the  land  through 
their  unbelief  (Numb,  xiv,}  God  gives  directions  wbat  to  do 
in  the  land,  shewing  His  promise  and  purpose  as  sure  as  His 
Word  and  nature,  iu  spite  of  Man's  folly  and  failure. 
(Numb.  XV.)  Tlie  only  account  we  have  of  the  stations 
between  their  reaching  the  borders  of  the  land  in  the  second 
year,  and  their  reaehiug  Jordan,  is  in  Numb,  ixsiii.,  and  the 
localities  at  which  they  stopped  during  this  intc^iTal  of  time 
are  unknown  till  we  come  to  Moseroth.  Theuce  their  journey 
is  clear  to  the  Red  Sea,  back  to  Hor,  back  to  the  Red  Sea, 
and  round  Seir  to  Edom,  (Comp.  Numb.  xxi.  and  Deut.  x.) 
But  wc  know  that  from  Kadeah  to  Zered  was  thirty-eight 
years,  so  that  they  reached  Kadesh  in  the  second  year  before 
the  end  of  it,  probably  a  good  while  before,  because  the  wars 
against  the  Amorites  and  Og  were  after  Zcred  aud  before 
Jordan.  Now  they  did  not  leave  Sinai  til!  the  end  of  the 
second  month  of  the  second  year.  They  abode  in  Kadesh 
many  days,  certainly  more  than  forty,  so  that  we  are  sure 
that  the  journey  from  Sinai  to  the  borders  of  Canaan  was 
very  short  indeed.  Tliey  were  there  on  the  edge  of  cultivated 
land.  God  turned  them  back,  but  they  never  left  the 
neighbourhood  of  Canaan,  Seir,  and  the  Red  Sea.  And  He 
who  turned  them  back  took  care  of  them,  giving  them  water 
at  Meribali  miraculously  when  needed.  Of  all  this  Dr.  C, 
is  ignorant,  telling  us  Scripture  says  nothing  about  it, — ^not 
haiing  examined  that  which  he  is  pretending  to  prove  un- 
historical.  Tliis  is  true  that  the  Lord  gives  us  those  parts  of 
thejoimieyin  detaU  which  have  a  moral  bearing,  and  not 
how  the  cattle  were  provided  for.  But  the  book  is  all  false 
if  it  be  not  historical.  Wo  have  the  name  of  each  place 
where  they  stopped  during  the  whole  forty  years.     This  must 


L 


22 

be  history  or  forgery.  I  have  noticed  elsewhere  that  the 
statement  in  Dent.  x.  seems  to  contradict  the  list  in  Num- 
bers^ but  becomes  the  strongest  proof  of  the  historical 
character  of  the  book  when  closely  examined^  because  we  find^ 
by  careful  comparison  of  facts  and  passages,  that  they  tra- 
versed the  same  ground  twice  from  Hor  to  the  Red  Sea^  from 
the  Red  Sea  to  Hor,  and  then  back  to  the  Red  Sea  and  east 
of  Edom.  But  men  do  not  make  these  apparent  contradic- 
tions, solved  by  collateral  facts,  and  shewn  to  be  uncon- 
sciously true,  save  in  relating  real  history,  which,  as  they 
know  the  facts,  they  have  no  need  to  combine  and  arrange. 

Dr.  C.  makes  difficulties  as  to  there  being  wild  beasts  in 
Canaan  with  so  large  a  population.  His  objections  are  futile. 
What  is  the  population  of  India  ?  how  dense  is  well  known, 
yet  tigers  and  wild  beasts  aboimd.  Modem  European  popu- 
lations are  no  rule  at  all,  nor  even  Port  Natal,  because  they 
settled  more  in  Canaan  in  towns  and  villages.  Counting  in 
the  Canaanites  besides  Israel  is  only  another  instance  of  Dr. 
C's.  carelessness,  for  the  supposition  made  is  their  total  im- 
mediate destruction.  My  own  conviction  is  that  the  number  of 
Israelites  is  greatly  exaggerated.  The  600,000  are  all  males 
not  children,  all  the  grown  men. 

The  whole  of  the  reasoning  in  the  next  chapter  to  prove  the 
first-bom  more  numerous  than  is  stated  seems  to  me  an  un- 
doubted mistake.  I  cannot  doubt  that  those  only,  and  the 
same  in  Egypt,  who  were  still  members  of  their  father's 
families  are  counted.  The  captive  in  the  dimgeon  and  Pharaoh 
himself  may  have  been  first-bom,  but  it  is  not  supposed,  as 
in  question,  that  they  should  die.  It  was  the  house.  "  There 
was  not  a  house  where  there  was  not  one  dead.^'  In  each 
family  which  was  together  the  first-bom  was  taken.  I  do  not 
believe  that  a  first-bom  father  and  his  first-bom  son  were 
both  taken  or  numbered.  The  first-bom  children  of  child- 
bearing  mothers  were  counted.  The  first-bom  of  existing 
families  at  the  time  of  the  numbering.  It  clearly,  I  apprehend, 
did  not  include  old  men  and  grandfathers  whose  fathers  were 
dead,  or  even  heads  of  families  married  out,  but  first-bom  of 
living  mothers  whose  families  were  with  them.  Hence  coimted 
from  a  month  old.  Those  below  were  yet  unclean.  Remark 
here  that  the  question  must  have  presented  itself  to  the  mind 
of  the  writer.  It  is  a  proof  that  it  is  historical  that  an  evident 
difficulty  is  left  unsolved.  A  forger  does  not  put  an  evident 
difficulty  in  his  account.  Here  we  have  an  apparent  and  evident 
difficulty.  The  number  of  grown  men  is  in  the  previous 
chapter.     No  explanation  given.    Why  ?     Because  the  writer 


is  stating  fact,  not  inventing  a  story,  and  therefore  states  the 
fact  without  noticing  the  difficulty.  For  myself,  I  can  only 
aay,  when  I  never  thought  of  a  question  in  it,  1  never  took 
the  stRtement  as  to  Egjpt  or  Israel  as  referriug  to  other  than 
families  at  home,  unmarried  members  of  households.  Indeed, 
in  tliis  particular  case,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  it  was 
not  those  only  bom  after  the  destruction  of  the  first-bom 
Egyptians  to  whom  the  ordinance  here  referred  to  was  given. 
God  says  he  sanctified  then  to  Himself  all  the  first-bom.  It 
would,  perhaps,  suppose  an  unusual  number  in  their  first  year 
of  liberation,  which  would  be  nothing  extraordinary.  How- 
ever, on  this  I  do  not  insist,  as  those  under  a  month  must  be 
subtracted,  who,  in  this  case,  might  be  numerous.  "  All  the 
males,"  does  not  refer  to  nil  of  all  ages,  but  all  the  males  as 
contrasted  with  females.  Indeed,  in  verse  43,  it  is  rather 
implied  that  all  were  not :  "and  ail  the  first-born  ranlea  by 
the  number  of  names,  from  a  month  old  and  upwards  of  those 
that  were  numbered  of  them,  were  22,273,"  But  neither  do 
I  insist  on  this,  as  the  Hebrew  may,  I  apprehend,  be  taken  as 
"  in  their  numliering"  the  same  as  "  in  number." 

As  to  the  question  of  tlie  increase  of  population  during  the 
sojourn  of  Israel  in  Egypt  it  has  been  discussed  and  rediscussed 
a  hundred  times,  and  it  must  require  over-weening  self-confi- 
dence in  Dr.  C.  to  bring  it  forward  as  he  does  as  an  argumen- 
tum  crucig.  He  says  the  doubts  he  has  "raised  will  be 
confirmed  into  a  certain  conviction,  by  its  appearing  plainly 
from  the  data  of  the  Pentateuch  that  there  could  not  have 
been  any  such  population  itself  to  come  out  of  Egypt,"  p. 
148.  I  supjwse  he  must  be  ignorant  of  what  has  been  said  of 
it ;  if  not,  such  language  is  simply  overweening  impertinence 
to  men  far  better  versed  in  such  inquiries  than  himself.  If  the 
iBraelites  doubled  in  fifteen  years,  they  would  have  been 
l,14fi,883  in  two  hundred  and  fifteen  years ;  in  two  hundred 
and  thirty  years  2,293,760.  But  the  statement  of  Scripture  is, 
that  "  the  children  of  Israel  were  fruitful  and  increased  abun- 
dantly, and  multiplied,  and  waited  exceeding  mighty,  and 
the  land  was  filled  with  them ;"  and  the  new  king  said, 
"  Behold,  the  people  of  the  children  of  Isniel  are  more  and 
mightier  than  we,"  .  .  .  and  they  persecuted  them. 
Very  probably  they  were  all  removed  to  Goshen,  giving  rise 
to  Manetho's  story  of  Avaris.  "  But  the  more  they  afflicted 
them  the  more  they  multiplied  and  grew,"  so  that  their 
increase  was  not  such  as  makes  any  difficulty.  In  England 
the  increase  in  ten  years  was  more  than  23  per  cent,  where 
town  and  manufacturing  habits  largely  impede,  so  that  35 


24 

per  cent,  in  fifteen  years  is  reached  in  the  actual  state  of 
England.  So  that  doubling  in  the  circumstances  of  Israel, 
with  extraordinary  blessing  in  this  respect,  was  nothing  in- 
credible, though  we  have  no  proof  of  their  numbers  more 
than  the  600,000  males  above  twenty,  and  no  proof  that  the 
majority  of  women  were  not  Egyptians  or  other  strangers. 
If  this  fact  be'  taken  into  account,  the  increase  presents  no 
kind  of  difficulty.  But  the  duration  of  the  sojourn  is  a  very 
obscure  point :  Josephus  gives  it  both  as  two  hundred  and 
fifteen  and  as  four  hundred  and  thirty.  The  reader  may  see 
Clinton  Fynes'  investigation  of  the  point,  if  he  have  access 
to  it.  He  reckons  two  hundred  and  fifteen  years,  taking  the 
shorter  or  Hebrew  chronology.  Many  able  chronologists 
doubt  of  this,  as  Hales.  At  first  sight  Gal.  iii.  17  seems  to 
decide  the  question,  but  when  examined  it  does  not,  I  think, 
necessarily  do  so.  The  apostle  takes  the  time  of  promise  as 
a  general  fact.  To  Abraham  were  the  promises  made  and  to 
his  seed.  Now  the  confirmation  to  the  seed  does  not  come 
in  for  some  forty  years  after  the  promise.  It  is  of  this  con- 
firmation  the  apostle  speaks,  if  we  take  the  letter  of  what  he 
says.  But  his  object  was  not  the  date,  save  as  showing  the 
law  coming  long  after  the  promise.  He  refers  to  Ex.  xii.  40, 
which  was  sufficient  for  him,  and  is  ambiguous.  He  may 
refer  to  patriarchal  times  as  those  of  promise,  and  take  the 
Egyptian  state  as  four  himdred  and  thirty  years.  The  length 
of  the  sojourn  in  Egypt  is  an  imsettled  question. 

As  to  the  Chronicles,  it  is,  I  judge,  a  blunder  of  Dr.  C.'s, 
which  I  shoidd  not  think  much  of,  were  not  his  book  solely 
founded  on  affected  accuracy  of  detail.  1  Chron.  vii.  20, 
presents  difficulties.  This  is  always  hopeful  ground  for 
infidels.  What  is  difficult  to  understand  they  can  more  easily 
turn  to  their  own  purpose,  for  others  have  not  a  positive 
answer  ready.  If  we  follow  the  statement  simply,  however, 
there  is  no  great  difficulty.  The  Chronicles,  besides  giving  the 
history  of  Judah,  not  Israel,  and  especially  of  DaAdd^s  family, 
gather  up  all  the  fragments  possible  of  ancient  history  and 
genealogy  for  the  return  of  Israel  from  Babylon.  Take  the 
passage  thus — '^  The  sons  of  Ephraim  Shuthelah  :"  his 
genealogy  is  followed  down  to  a  second  Shuthelah,  and  there 
stops.  Then  the  passage  speaks  of  two  ether  sons  of  Ephraim, 
Ezer,  and  Elead,  who  made  a  raid  against  Gath,  and  were 
killed ;  and  then  follows  another  son  of  Ephraim,  which  is 
quite  natural,  and  his  genealogy  is  given.  His  daughter 
Sherah  is  simply  a  descendant  of  his.  Ammihud  was  fifth 
from  Ephraim. 


Tlie  objection  to  the  iiumbera  of  the  Daiiites  and  Levites, 
that  of  the  former  being  large,  thougli  Dan  had  only  one  son, 
which,  to  an  unpractiBed  eye,  may  seem  to  present  the  great- 
est difficulty,  is  fouudfd  on  want  of  attention  to  the  reckon- 
ings of  Scripture ;  as  if  in  every  case  those  mentioned  are  all. 
The  very  comparison  with  Chronicles  which  Dr.  C.  institutes 
ought  to  have  taught  him  it  was  not  so ;  for  there  are  persons 
mentioned  there  who  are  not  in  Exodns,  The  genealogies 
are  given  as  far  as  needed  to  make  out  the  moral  history 
according  to  God's  government  of  Israel,  but  no  further. 
Any  number  may  be  left  out,  even  geuerationa  may,  provided 
what  is  needed  is  given, — ^Next,  generations  are  taken  by 
Dr.  C.  as  if  they  were  the  same  then  as  now.  They  lived 
one  hundred  and  thirty  or  one  hundred  and  forty  years, 
and  tlicir  families  were  often  proportionate,  and  here  God 
interfered  expressly  to  multiply  tliem.  Thus  if  we  had  not 
Gen.  XXV.  all  Scripture  would  have  led  us  to  suppose  tliat 
Ishmael  and  Isaac  were  all  the  sons  Abraham  had.  Here 
we  see  he  had  six  sons  more  when  he  was  quite  an  old  man, 
of  whom  nations  sprung.  Here  for  other  purposes  it  was 
important  to  notice  it.  In  other  cases  it  was  not.  Next 
the  assumption  that  Israel  remained  only  two  hundred  and 
fifteen  years  in  Egypt  ia  a  questionable  one. 

The  number  of  the  generation  following  the  twelve  pa- 
triarchs is  no  way  decided.  To  begin  the  computation  one 
really  ought  to  take  at  any  rate  one  hundred  and  thirty-nine, 
not  seventy ;  that  is,  take  the  females  in.  So  the  children  of 
Dinah  and  Serah  do  not  appear  at  all.  The  fact  of  a  number 
of  children  in  one  generation  says  nothing  as  to  the  result. 
Benjamin  had  many;  Reuben  had  many.  Neither  were 
large  tribes.  Docs  Dr.  C.  suppose  that  a  forger  would  have 
been  insensible  to  this  if  he  had  been  inventing  ?  It  is  the 
strongest  possible  proof  that  the  account  is  liistorical,  drawn 
from  facts,  for  no  one  would  have  laid  himself  open  to  the 
objection.  There  was  no  need  whatever,  hut  that  the  facts 
were  so,  to  lend  a  handle  to  objectors.  It  was  unnatural  if 
it  were  not  true.  Dr.  C.  states  that  Moses'  ehUdren  were 
only  two,  I  doubt  it  much.  They  were  only  two  by  Zip- 
porali,  but  he  had  married  also  an  Ethiojiiau  woman.  It  did 
not  concern  the  Scripture  history  to  say  anything  of  children 
by  her.  We  see  from  tlie  genealogies  that  families  were 
reckoned  all  under  one  head  if  they  were  not  numerous  so  as 
to  make  a  distinct  family  (Ist  Cliron.  xxiii,  10,  11),  or  might 
come  in  as  two  when  properly  the  head  should  have  been  but 
one,  as  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.     If  Joseph  had  had  a  dozen 


J. 


r 


26 


SODB  aftenrards  they  would  not  have  formcil  distinct  fiunilii 
{Gen,  xlviii.  6).  They  would  have  merged  in  the  tribes 
£phraim  and  Manasseh.* 

All  these  t'onsiderationa  which  lie  at  the  hasia  of  the  wh( 
system  are  ignored  by  Dr.  C.  We  have  an  instance  hi 
much  the  names  are  taken  merely  to  represent  families,  and' 
how  many  may  be  left  out,  in  the  very  case  Dr.  C.  mentiona, 
who  in  his  usual  careless  and  superficial  way  does  not  notice 
or  perceive  it,  being  simply  bent  on  his  own  object.  "  The 
Amramites,  he  tells  us,  numbered  as  Levites  in  the  fburtli 
(Eliezcr's)  generation  were,  as  above,  only  two,  namely,  the 
two  sons  of  Moses, — the  sous  of  Aaron  being  reckoned  as 
Priests.  Hence  the  rest  of  the  Kohatbites  of  this  generatioii 
must  have  l)een  made  up  of  the  descendants  of  Ishar  and 
Uzziel,"  p.  169-170.  This  is  because  Ishar  and  Uzziel  are 
mentioned  (Exodus  vi.  21,  22).  But  this  is  simply  that  then 
was  some  special  reason  for  mentioning  them.  Kohath  "  ' 
another  son,  Hebron,  who  may  have  had,  for  ought  we  knowj 
ten  times  as  many.  In  a  word  those  are  noticed 
genealogies  as  to  whom  some  special  motive  existed,  others 
not.  Dr.  C.  has  not  even  found  it  out.  All  his  calculation 
here  is  based,  to  say  nothing  of  its  general  fallacy,  upon  his 
not  noticing  what  was  before  his  eyes  in  the  text.  But  this 
fact,  with  a  thousand  other  similar  ones,  involves  a  principle 
which  makes  the  ground  of  all  his  calculations  fundamentally 
false.  Let  the  reader  note  this  case,  as  it  may  clear  hia 
mind  as  to  these  statements  of  famihes.  A  genealogical  suc- 
cession is  given,  and  only  two  sons  out  of  four  mentioned. 
One,  it  so  happens,  we  can  supply  as  far  as  it  goes,  because 
Moses  and  Aaron  came  from  that  stock, — the  absence  of 
the  other  we  cannot  account  for.  In  this  case  we  are 
sure  of  it,  because  he  is  mentioned  a  few  verses  before. 
Now  it  is  just  as  possible,  very  likely  indeed,  that  Am- 
ram  may  have  had  a  host  of  sons  besides  Moses  and  Aaron, 
who  are  mentioned  because  of  their  importance.  The 
names  are  given  more  to  show  from  whom  people  are 
descended  who  arc  known,  than  to  tell  all  the  descendants. 
All  this  Dr.  C.  has  overlooked,  and  simply  made  mathe* 
matical  calculations  as  if  all  were  given, — His  whole  system 
is  false. 

*  Aa  to  Dui,  if  the  absPDce  of  otlion  of  the  tribe  not  jet  formed  hmdcved  ths 
^iplioation  of  the  rale  laid  •\owa  la  the  cue  of  ZelopheliaJ's  daoghten,  the  tui 
that  he  hud  only  one  bod  may  hmu  been  removeil  iii  a  few  genentions.  Hmhin 
maj  have  knd  ua  iiianj  as  Jair,  who  had  thirty  Boua  who  rude  on  tbirtj 


:^B 


27 

Dr.  C.'a  computations  are  merely  neglect  of  all  the  prmci- 
ples  of  acriptmal  genealogies.  Besides,  I  repeat,  the  numbers 
given  are  such  aa  prove  they  are  not  fabricated ;  and  the 
paucity  of  Lcvitcs,  and  the  numbers  of  Dan  prove  that  the 
statements  are  drawn  from  history  and  facts,  as  the  whole 
tenor  of  the  statements  bear  on  the  face  of  them,  and  are  such 
as  no  man  on  earth  would  have  invented.  Dr.  C.  says: — It 
is  incredible  the  Le^^te8  sliould  not  have  increased  more 
during  the  sojourn  in  the  wilderness.  The  fact  that  Kliezcr 
did  not  die  proves  nothing  aa  to  the  Lerites  not  coming  imder 
the  judgment  which  fell  on  Israel,  for  their  murmnrings  when 
the  spies  returned;  God  was  pleased  to  keep  Israel  at  the 
same  level  in  the  wilderness.  As  to  numbers  that  is  clear. 
The  Lcvitea  were  no  exception.  God  may  have  used  provi- 
dential means  for  this,  the  privations  of  the  wilderness,  which 
affected  the  Leiites  as  well  as  the  rest.  But  there  is  no 
motive  for  thinlting  they  were  exempt  from  the  judgment. 
But  the  truth  is  the  great  change  in  relative  numbers  in  the 
tribes  shews  all  the  reasoning  as  to  the  small  increase  of  the 
Levites,  utterly  valueless.  Population  may  increase  or  de- 
crease at  such  a  rate,  but  that  says  nothing  whatever  for  par- 
ticular families.  One  increases,  another  becomes  extinct. 
Thus  Mana«8eh  rose  from  32,200  to  53,700.  Ephraim  had 
sunk  fi'om  40,500  to  32,500.  Benjamin  increased  from 
35,410  to  45,G00,  Dan  was  stationary.  Asherhad  iucreafied 
from  41,500  to  53,400.  Judah  had  remained  pretty  sta- 
tionary. Issachar  largely  increased,  Simeon  had  fallen 
from  tiftj'-uine  thousand  to  twenty-two.  Thus  the  partictdar 
degree  of  the  increase  of  the  Levites,  on  which  Dr.  C.  has 
bestowed  so  much  labour,  is  of  no  import  whatever.  All  Dr. 
C.'s  remarks  indicate  a  singular  inattention  to  facts. 

As  regards  the  small  number  of  Priests  making  it  impos- 
sible they  could  fulfil  their  seri'ices ;  unless  in  the  case  of  the 
offering  of  birds,  it  is  a  mistake  to  think  the  priest  liad  any- 
thing to  do  save  to  receive  the  blood,  and  arrange  a  burnt- 
offering  on  the  altar.  All  the  operations  of  slaying,  flaying, 
cutting  up,  were  done  by  the  offerer.  But  let  it  be  remem- 
bered we  are  speaking  of  history.  The  doctrinal  import 
(which  is  their  real  value}  of  the  directions  for  the  sacrifices 
is  most  precious,  as  these  are  known  types  of  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ.  No  part  of  Scripture  is  more  important.  This  of 
course  is  lost  on  Dr.  C.  Now  as  to  history,  we  have  no  proof 
that  a  single  offering  was  brought  all  the  time  they  were  in 
the  wilderness.  Burnt-offerings  were  always  voluntary,  and, 
in  the  state  of  Israel,  it  is  just  as  likely  they  never  troubled 


L 


28 

their  heads  about  it ;  for  they  sinned  without  compunction^ 
and  certainly  had  never  circumcised  their  children,  so  that 
really  they  had  no  right  to  oflFer  any  sacrifice.  That  they  did 
not  offer  a  peace  offering  is  certain,  for  they  murmured  for 
meat,  complaining  of  the  manna,  and  got  the  quails  in  chas- 
tisement ;  at  any  rate  on  the  second  occasion.  Save  Miraim 
we  do  not  hear  of  any  one  having  the  leprosy.  There  is  no 
evidence  of  any  historical  diflScidty  whatever,  but  the  con- 
trary. Indeed,  Amos  v.  25,  complains  that  they  did  not  offer 
sacrifice  to  Jehovah,  but  took  Moloch  and  Chiun  for  their 
Gods.  History,  therefore,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  mat- 
ter ;  the  instruction  as  to  priests  and  sacrifices,  is  doctrinal, 
not  historic.  The  details  of  Dr.  C.^s  reasoning  are  as  trifling 
as  usual.  As  Scripture  speaks  often  of  doves  in  the  wilder- 
ness, he  assures  us  the  Psalmist  was  hardly  thinking  of  the 
terrible  deserts  of  Sinai— of  which  he  knows  nothing.  Was 
ever  more  egregious  trifling  ? 

As  regards  the  Passover,  Dr.  C.  says  it  was  impossible  the 
priests  could  suflSce  to  kill  the  Passover,  and  sprinkle  the 
blood.  If,  as  it  is  evident  they  naturally  would,  they  kept  it 
as  they  had  in  Egypt,  every  house  killed  the  lamb  for  itself. 
The  whole  difficulty  is  a  soap  bubble,  proving  only  Dr.  C.^s 
will  and  foolishness.  K  Dr.  C.  had  given  himself  the  trouble 
of  reading  2  Chron.  xxx.,  which  he  quotes,  he  would  have 
seen  that  the  Levites  (verse  17)  killed  the  Passover,  because 
many  of  the  people  had  not  sanctified  themselves,  and  they 
did  so  only  for  those  who  were  not  clean.  It  rather  appears 
that  it  was  the  blood  of  the  burnt  offering  which  the  priests 
sprinkled  then.  At  any  rate,  this  and  Josiah^s  Passover, 
when  the  priest  did  sprinkle  the  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb, 
were  special  exceptional  cases,  and  there  were  plenty  of 
priests  and  Levites  attending  in  their  places.  As  far  as  the 
New  Testament  goes,  it  would  seem  each  prepared  it  for 
himself.  It  is  really  disgraceful  for  a  person  in  Dr.  C.'s 
position,  or  for  any  one,  to  make  a  formd  attack  on  a  Book 
he  has  professed  to  believe  in,  on  grounds  so  futile,  and  with 
a  carelessness  which  proves  no  honest  research  for  himself, 
but  that  his  will  was  father  to  his  thought.  He  has  at  any 
rate  proved  himself,  logarithims  and  all,  to  be  an  equally  in- 
competent and  pretentious  man.  Probably  those  by  whom, 
nine  years  ago,  he  assures  us,  he  was  not  thought  unworthy 
of  the  position  which  he  holds,  supposed  that,  in  declaring 
he  believed  in  all  the  canonical  Scriptures,  he  said  the  truth. 
Just  think  of  a  man  taking  the  battle  of  Waterloo  (and  on 
the  side  of  the  victorious  army,  well  knoTvdng,  as  every  one 


20 

does,  it  b  in  pursuit  moat  are  slain,]  as  a  test  uf  the  numbera 
of  Asiatic  arraica,  as  to  which  a  child,  who  has  read  Rolliu's 
History  of  Greece  or  Persia,  knows  the  difference. 

Dr.  C,  complains  of  the  destructive  Aazzla  against  Midian. 
Miflian  had  been  the  means  of  corrupting  Israel,  and  leading 
them  to  idolatry,  so  as  to  lead  to  25,000  Israelites  fulling  in 
the  pestilence  Gud  sent  ;  and  that  by  the  inexpressible 
wickedness  of  Balaam,  who,  when  lie  could  not  curse  Israel, 
recommended  Balak  to  lead  them  into  sin,  and  then  God 
could  not  bless  them.  For  this  they  were  punished,  and,  as 
a  settled  nation  there,  destroyed.  Dr.  C.  cougratidatea  him- 
self that  he  is  not  called  on  to  believe  it.  But  thus  lie  must 
give  up  the  whole  Old  Testament  for  his  own  notions ;  he 
must  give  up  God's  judging  the  world.  God  sent  Abraham's 
seed  down  into  Egypt  because  the  iniquity  of  the  jVmorites 
was  not  yet  full.  The  whole  history  is  a  history  of  the 
judicial  extermination  of  these  races  for  their  wickedness. 
It  is  a  question  not  of  history,  but  of  the  whole  ways  and 
dealings  of  God  in  judgment.  He  will  find  it  in  the  Psalms ; 
he  will  find  it  in  Revelations.  God  presents  himself  as  a 
moral  governor,  and  in  this  special  case  used  human  inatru* 
ments  to  carry  out  his  judgments,  as  he  did  afterwards 
against  Israel,  as  he  had  warned  thein  by  the  prophets.  The 
whole  establishment  of  Israel  was  founded  on  tlic  principle 
rejected  by  Dr.  Colenso;  all  God's  judgments  are.  Dr.  C. 
does  not  Uke  to  believe  in  judgment.  Be  it  so.  But  that  is 
no  way  of  judging  of  history.  As  to  God's  revelation  of  him- 
self, it  is  objected  that  the  Old  Testament  character  of  God 
cannot  be  that  of  the  true  God.  lie  did  not  reveal  himself  in 
Judaism.  He  gave  laws,  promises,  but  he  dwelt  in  thick 
darkness,  was  avowedly  hid  belund  the  veil.  The  way  into  the 
holiest  was  not  made  manifest.  He  was  patient  in  goodness 
and  grace,  but  the  system  was  one  of  public  moral  go- 
vernment. The  sins  of  the  fathers  could  be  visited  on 
their  children,  ob  we  sec  still  in  providential  government. 
There  was  a  code  of  national  laws,  of  which  Christ  could  say, 
"  Moses  for  the  hardness  of  your  hearts  gave  you  this  com- 
mandment." In  the  national  laws  he  did  not  set  aside  slavery. 
The  law  made  nothing  perfect.  He  took,  as  a  people  in  the 
world,  the  people  where  they  were ;  put  checks  on  will,  soft- 
ened in  many  respects  the  manners  of  the  age  by  Hia  authority, 
and  what  was  an  immense  point,  suffered  notliing  to  l>e  done 
without  it^— an  immense  point,  because  arbitrary  will  was 
arrested.  But  all  this  was  not  bringing  soids  to  God,  nor 
revealing  God  as  he  is  to  souls.     He  is  light  and  love.     He 


80 

has  been  revealed  in  Christy  a  revelation  Dr.  C.^  it  appears^  is 
content  to  give  up.  He  is  so  wise,  so  competent  to  know  God, 
and  judge  of  what  He  ought  to  be,  that  he  can  give  up  all 
revelation  of  Him  ;  and  yet  is  ignorant  of  the  first  principles 
of  the  revelation  he  is  giving  up,  and  publishes  an  empty 
book,  if  ever  there  was  one,  to  prove  it, — ^assuming,  as  hi 
statements  are  conclusive,  Moses  and  all  the  prophets  are 
ignoramuses,  Christ  knows  no  better  than  the  Rabbis,  but 
Dr.  C,  of  course,  does.  Christ  attaches  His  sanction  to  the 
whole  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  having  the  authority  of  God. 
Now  this  does  not  merely  affirm  inspiration :  it  is  the  blessed 
Lord  putting  His  seal  to  God's  having  been  justly  represented 
there  as  thus  revealed.  Dr.  C.  thinks  differently ;  he  would 
not  have  such  a  God — is  relieved  in  thinking  it  is  not  true. 
Christ  felt  no  need  of  such  relief.  What  shall  we  think  of 
one  who  holds  the  nominal  place  of  bishop  of  the  Christian 
Church,  who  counts  himself  the  moral  superior  of  the  Lord  ? 
Who  else  will  think  so  ?  Think  of  the  vanity  and  character 
of  the  man  who  could.  Did  ever  a  man  degrade  himself  to 
the  same  degree  I  For  Christ  did  not  see  any  thing  moral  to 
make  Him  call  in  question  its  being  a  revelation  of  God.  Dr. 
C.  tloes.  Christ  coiild  see  that  there  were  national  laws  given, 
as  suited  to  the  hardness  of  their  hearts.  That  Dr.  Colenso 
does  not  see.  He  is  as  ignorant  of  the  relationship  of  the 
Gospel  to  the  law  as  a  national  code,  as  he  is  presumptuous 
and  ill-founded  in  judging  the  law  and  slighting  the  Gospel. 
For  every  man  of  sense  the  book  will  do  good. 

But  I  will  complete  the  question  of  detail  as  to  the  Midian- 
ites.  Numb.  xxxi. ;  Comp.  xxi.  1,  and  xxxiii.  33 — i3.  The 
objection  is,  that  time  is  not  allowed  for  the  destruction  and 
other  events  before  Moses  addressed  the  people,  Dcut.  i.  3. 
I  have,  as  will  be  seen,  no  objection  to  the  result  at  which  Dr. 
C.  arrives ;  but  I  will  show  the  levity  of  the  proofs,  and  then 
the  excessive  carelessness  of  the  author.  There  is  no  proof 
whatever  of  the  time  employed  in  the  destruction  of  Arad's 
cities.  It  is  very  probable  the  prisoners  alluded  to  had  been 
taken  thirty-eight  years  before,  when  they  would  go  up  the 
mountain  (Numb.  xiv.  44,  45) :  they  may  or  may  not.  Israel 
then  defeated  now  avenge  themselves.  Five  days  may  have 
very  easily  done  the  work.  Further,  it  appears  rather  to  have 
been  carried  into  effect  during  the  mourning  for  Aaron,  for 
they  left  Mount  Hor  afterwards.  Numbers  xxviii.  41.  Next 
we  are  told  that,  there  was  a  fortnight  for  the  serpents  and 
healing,  and  then  a  month  of  journeyings.  This  is  the  usual 
inattention  to  the  facts.     They  moved  on  from  one  station  to 


31 

another^  and  murmured  because  of  the  way^  and  the  serpents 
were  sent  while  on  the  journey.  They  had  made  four  encamp- 
ments of  this  journey,  before  the  serpents  were  sent ;  this  is 
certain,  by  comparing  Numb.  xxi.  10  and  xxxiii.  41-43.  Thus 
the  three  months  and  a  half  become  perhaps  a  month  and  a 
half  or  two  months.  Sihon  was  defeated.  It  may  have  been 
in  a  day  and  the  country  fell  to  Israel.  They  marched  thence 
up  north,  and  Og  came  out  with  all  his  people  and  was  defeated. 
For  all  this  there  may  have  been  a  month  possibly  more. 
''Jf  hus  three  months  at  the  outside  would  have  sufficed  for 
what  Dr.  C.  takes  six  months  for.  Let  it  be  three  and  a 
half.  This  much  is  certain  that  in  the  point  where  Dr.  C.  is 
precise,  the  serpents  and  supposed  subsequent  journey,  he  is 
precisely  wrong  by  not  consulting  the  text.  Dr.  C.  then  for 
the  remaining  facts  gives  "  March  forward  to  the  plains  of 
Moab.^^  March  forward  from  where  ?  They  were  in  Moab, 
the  expeditions  had  started  thence.  But  they  were  by  Amon 
the  border  of  Moab.  They  made  then  very  short  stages. 
They  might  move  their  head-quarters,  but  they  were  in  Moab^ 
only  they  moved  into  the  plain  frt)m  Mount  Abarim.  Balak 
was  alarmed  and  sent  for  Balaam.  This  may  have  taken  a 
week.  We  have  thus  some  four  months  gone.  Here  Israel 
fell  into  sin  with  Moab,  and  thereupon  Israel  attacks  the 
Midianites  by  divine  command.  My  statements  leave  two 
months  for  this.  I  should  be  quite  disposed  to  say  with  Dr. 
C,  six  weeks  perhaps,  and  probably  four,  was  ample  so  as  to 
allow  a  month  more  for  the  previous  marches  and  wars.  No 
one  can  pretend  to  say  how  much  each  took ;  there  was  time 
enough  for  all.  But  this  is  not  even  necessary,  though  it 
sufficed  to  shew  the  arbitrariness  and  even  error  of  Dr.  C.'s 
calculations.  More  was  spent  in  some  parts  ,*  in  others  the 
text  contradicts  him.  But  what  is  curious  enough  is  that 
Dr.  Colenso  has  made  the  passages  he  holds  to  be  irreconcil- 
able, so  as  to  prove  they  are  unhistoric,  exactly  coincide  by 
his  computation,  and  has  not  foimd  it  out.  Moses'  address 
in  Deut.  i.  3,  is  after  defeating  Sihon  and  Og,  as  it  is  expressly 
stated,  verse  4.  Dr.  C.  says,  ^'  Thus  then,  from  the  first  day 
of  the  fifth  month,  in  which  Aaron  died,  to  the  completion  of 
the  conquest  of  Og,  king  of  Bashan,  we  cannot  reckon  less 
together  than  six  months  .  .  .  and  are  thus  brought  down  to 
the  first  day  of  the  eleventh  month,  the  very  day  on  which 
Moses  is  stated  to  have  addressed  the  people  in  the  plains  of 
Moab,  Deut.  i.  3.^'  Just  so,  accordingly  Deut.  i.  4,  states 
that  it  was  after  he  had  slain  Og,  that  he  made  the  address. 
Dr.  C.  has  managed  to  make  a  blunder  in  his  proofs,  but  has 


{ 


tumbled  by  mistake,  uito  pro^inf;  exactly  historic  what 
attacks,  aud  this  is  to  set  aside  the  Bible  by  unquestioni 
facta. 

On  the  quotations  from  Cicero  and  the   Hindoo  author 
celebrating  Bam,  I  have  spoken,  and  add  no  more  here,     A 
mure  preteutious  and  iiitile  attempt  to  set  aside  the  revehil 
of  God,  it  never  came  to  my  lot  to  examine. 

It  may  be  well  just  to  add  that  the  quotation  from 
of  Mankind '  which  Dr.  Colenso  quotes,  as  he  sayi 
entire  syropathy,  is  from  one  of  two  works  by  Messrs. 
tiliddou  and  Nott  to  prove  that  there  are  several  races  of 
mankiiid,  as  there  are  of  animals,  and  following  the  analogy 
of  the  forms  of  these  last,  according  to  a  theory  of  Agassis, 
the  object  being  to  prove  that  the  negroes  are  a  distinct  race, 
and  formed  and  destined  to  be  fit  for  slavery.  I  can  hardly 
think  that  if  he  was  so  zealous  with  the  Zidu  for  the  honour 
of  the  true  God  as  to  condemn  the  Pentateuch  because  it 
recognized  slavery  in  Israel,  that  he  can  have  read  the  book. 
It  is  very  superficial,  is  wrong  according  to  the  best  author- 
ities as  to  America,  particularly  South  America,  and  con- 
tradicts itself  as  to  Africa.  His  only  argument,  to  which  he 
(Mr.  Gliddon)  constantly  recurs,  being  the  presence  of  negro 
figures  on  the  Egyptian  monuments,  of  which,  with  Lipsius 
and  others,  he  exaggerates  the  antiquity  in  a  way  which  the 
monuments  themselves  clearly  prove  to  be  false,  inasmiich  as 
kings  given  as  suecessive  are  proved  by  the  monuments  to  be 
contemporary,  as  many  as  eight  at  a  time.  Mr.  GUddon  was 
Consul  General  of  the  United  States  in  Egypt,  I  quite 
admit  Dr.  C.  does  not  quote  the  book  in  what  it  says  of 
negroes,  hut  the  argument  which  meets  his  entire  sympathy 
is  used  to  get  rid  of  the  'prejudice'  which  believes  with 
Paul  that  "  God  has  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men 
for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,"  in  order  to  j' 
the  reducing  the  blacks  to  slavery  as  a  tUstiuct  race. 


r 


THE  BORROWER  WILL  BE  CHARGED 
AN  OVERDUE  FEE  IFTHIS  BOOK  IS  NOT 
RKTL^RNED  TO  THE  LIBRARY  ON  OR 
BEFORE  THE  LAST  DATE  STAMPED 
BELOW.  NON-RECEIPT  OF  OVERDUE 
NOTICES  DOES  NOT  EXEMPT  THE 
IWER  FROM  OVERDUE  FEES 


iBQgap' 


