vIn THE BIBLE 


as Alone 


DIFFICULTIES IN 
THE BIBLE 


DIFFICULTIES IN 
THE BIBLE 


Alleged Errors and Contradictions 


By 
R. A. TORREY 


MOODY PRESS 


ISBN: 0-8024-2214-4 


Printed in the United States of America 


CHAPTER PAGE 
Introduction fi 
1 A General Statement of the Case 9 
2 Classes of Difficulties 19 
3 How Shall We Deal with the 
Difficulties of the Bible? 81 
4 Genesis One—Historical and Scientific? 34 
5 The Antiquity of Man According to 
the Bible and According to Science 40 
6 Where Did Cain Get His Wife? 44 
7 Jehovah’s Command to Abraham to 
Offer Up Isaac as a Burnt Offering 48 
8 God Hardening Pharaoh’s Heart ol 
9 The Slaughter of the Canaanites by 
God’s Command 56 
10 Joshua Commanding the Sun to 
Stand Still 63 
11 Deborah’s Praise of Jael, the 
“Murderess” 68 
12 The Sacrifice of Jephthah’s Daughter 70 
13 “Impure” Bible Stories 72 
14 David’s Sin 78 
15 The Imprecatory Psalms 83 
16 Does the God of Truth and Love 
Send Lying Spirits and Evil 
Spirits to Men? 87 
17 Jonah and the Whale 91 
18 Some Important “Contradictions” in 
the Bible 96 
19 “Mistakes” in the Bible 113 


CONTENTS 


5 


6 _ DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


CHAPTER PAGE 
20 The Two Genealogies of Jesus, the 
Christ 124 
21 Was Jesus Really Three Days and 
Three Nights in the Heart of 
the Earth? 128 
22 How Could Jesus Commend the 
Action of the Unrighteous Steward? 186 
23 Were Jesus and Paul Mistaken as to 
the Time of Our Lord’s Return? 142 
24 Did Jesus Go into the Abode of the 
Dead and Preach to the Spirits in 
Prison? Is There Another 
Probation After Death? 151 
Scripture Index 157 


INTRODUCTION 


Tuis BooK does not attempt to take up in detail 
every conceivable difficulty that could be found ° 
in the Bible. It would take many volumes to do 
that. I have simply taken up those objections of 
which the modern infidel makes the most, and 
which are most puzzling to many Christians. In 
going around the world, I have given people an 
opportunity to ask questions concerning matters 
that puzzle them. Pretty much everywhere I go, 
the questions are largely the same; and in this 
book I have taken up the questions which have 
been most frequently put to me, or which present 
apparently the greatest difficulties. 

In regard to the questions which I have not 
touched upon, one can easily see that if so many 
difficulties are answered which they had supposed 
were unanswerable, the overwhelming probabil- 
ity is that all the other difficulties could be an- 
swered also if there were time and space to take 


them up. 


Fie 
~ 


‘ eee ¢ a as T 
wStiey w aan 


lng al 


reaany iver Ste. 

AG a thai Ri cat “ io 
kn ovad ft doth acer ath . binge : 
virco Os Hdterlt S35 ene ices! Seth aneren eee 
woqeue bad gar’ tatday beseech eam eae 


lnxlarwz wuthestertore mires aE: oe 
“$88 ue bisa aati: ma —_ edbor edt 


- 


1 


A GENERAL STATEMENT 
OF THE CASE 


EVERY CAREFUL STUDENT and every thoughtful 
reader of the Bible finds that the words of the 
Apostle Peter concerning the Scriptures, that there - 
are some things in them hard to be understood, 
“which they that are unlearned and unstable 
wrest . . . unto their own destruction” (II Peter 
3:16), are abundantly true. Who of us has not 
found things in the Bible that have puzzled us, 
yes, that in our early Christian experience have 
led us to question whether the Bible was, after 
all, the Word of God? We find some things in the 
Bible which it seems impossible to reconcile with 
other things in the Bible. We find some things 
which seem incompatible with the thought that 
the whole Bible is of divine origin and absolutely 
inerrant. 

It is not wise to attempt to conceal the fact that 
these difficulties exist. It is the part of wisdom, as 
well as of honesty, to frankly face them and con- 
sider them. 

What shall we say concerning these difficulties 


9 


10 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


that every thoughtful student will sooner or later 
encounter? 

The first thing we have to say about these diffi- 
culties in the Bible is that from the very nature of 
the case difficulties are to be expected. 

Some people are surprised and staggered be- 
cause there are difficulties in the Bible. For my 
part, I would be more surprised and staggered if 
there were not. What is the Bible? It is a revela- 
tion of the mind and will and character and being 
of an infinitely great, perfectly wise and absolutely 
holy God. God Himself is the Author of this rev- 
elation. But to whom is the revelation made? To 
men, to finite beings who are imperfect in intel- 
lectual development and consequently in knowl- 
edge, and who are also imperfect in character and 
consequently in spiritual discernment. The wisest 
man measured on the scale of eternity is only a 
babe, and the holiest man compared with God 
is only an infant in moral development. There 
must, then, from the very necessities of the case, 
be difficulties in such a revelation from such a 
source made to such persons. When the finite try 
to understand the infinite, there is bound to be 
difficulty. When the ignorant contemplate the ut- 
terances of one perfect in knowledge, there must 
be many things hard to be understood, and some 
things which to their immature and inaccurate 
minds appear absurd. When beings whose moral 
judgments as to the hatefulness of sin and as to 
the awfulness of the penalty that it demands, lis- 
ten to the demands of an absolutely holy Being, 


A GENERAL STATEMENT OF THE CASE 11 


they are bound to be staggered at some of His 
demands; and when they consider His dealings, 
they are bound to be staggered at some of His 
dealings. These dealings will appear too severe, 
too stern, too harsh. 

It is plain that there must be difficulties for us 
in such a revelation as the Bible has proved to be. 
If someone should hand me a book that was as 
simple to me as the multiplication table, and say, 
“This is the Word of God; in it He has revealed 
His whole will and wisdom,” I should shake my 
head and say, “I cannot believe it; that is too easy 
to be a perfect revelation of infinite wisdom.” 
There must be in any complete revelation of God’s 
mind and will and character and being, things 
hard for the beginner to understand; and the wis- 
est and best of us are but beginners. 

The second thing to be said about these diffi- 
culties is that a difficulty in a doctrine, or a grave 
objection to a doctrine, does not in any way prove 
the doctrine to be untrue. 

Many people think that it does. If they come 
across some difficulty in the way of believing in 
the divine origin and absolute inerrancy and in- 
fallibility of the Bible, they at once conclude that 
the doctrine is exploded. That is very illogical. 
They should stop a moment and think, and learn 
to be reasonable and fair. 

There is scarcely a doctrine in science generally 
believed today, that has not had some great diffi- 
culty in the way of its acceptance. 

When the Copernican theory, now so univer- 


12 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


sally accepted, was first proclaimed, it encoun- 
tered a very grave difficulty. If this theory were 
true, the planet Venus should have phases as the 
moon has, but no phases could be discovered by 
the best glass then in existence. But the positive 
argument for the theory was so strong that it was 
accepted in spite of this apparently unanswerable 
objection. When a more powerful glass was made, 
it was found that Venus had phases after all. The 
whole difficulty arose, as most all of those in the 
Bible arise, from man’s ignorance of some of the 
facts in the case. 

The nebular hypothesis is commonly accepted 
in the scientific world today. But when this theory 
was first announced, and for a long time after- 
ward, the movements of the planet Uranus could 
not be reconciled with the theory. Uranus seemed 
to move in just the opposite direction from that 
in which it was thought it ought to move in ac- 
cordance with the demands of the theory. But the 
positive arguments for the theory were so strong 
that it was accepted in spite of the inexplicable 
movements of Uranus. 

If we apply to Bible study the commonsense 
logic recognized in every department of science 
(with the exception of Biblical criticism, if that 
be a science), then we must demand that if the 
positive proof of a theory is conclusive, it must 
be believed by rational men in spite of any num- 
ber of difficulties in minor details. He is a shallow 
thinker who gives up a well-attested truth be- 
cause there are some apparent facts which he can- 


A GENERAL STATEMENT OF THE CASE 13 


not reconcile with that truth. And he is a very 
shallow Bible scholar who gives up his belief in 
the divine origin and inerrancy of the Bible be- 
cause there are some supposed facts that he can- 
not reconcile with that doctrine. There are in the 
theological world today many shallow thinkers of 
that kind. 

The third thing to be said about the difficulties 
in the Bible is that there are many more, and’ 
much greater, difficulties in the way of the doc- 
trine that holds the Bible to be of human origin, 
and hence fallible, than there are in the way of 
the doctrine that holds the Bible to wi of divine 
origin, and hence infallible. 

Oftentimes a man will put forth some difficulty 
and say, “How do you explain that, if the Bible is 
the Word of God?” You may not be able to an- 
swer him satisfactorily. Then he thinks he has you 
cornered. Not at all. Turn on him, and ask him, 
“How do you account for the fulfilled prophecies 
of the Bible if it is of human origin? How do you 
account for the marvelous unity of the Book? 
How do you account for its inexhaustible depth? 
How do you account for its unique power in lift- 
ing men up to God?” For every insignificant ob- 
jection he can bring to your view of the Bible, 
you can bring very many more deeply significant 
objections to his view of the Bible. And any really 
candid man who desires to know and obey the 
truth will have no difficulty in deciding between 
the two views. 

Some time ago a young man, who was of a 


14 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


bright mind and unusually well read in skeptical 
and critical and agnostic literature, told me he 
had given the matter a great deal of candid and 
careful thought, and as a result he could not be- 
lieve the Bible was of divine origin. 

I asked him, “Why not?” 

He pointed to a certain teaching of the Bible 
that he could not and would not believe to be 
true. 

I replied, “Suppose for a moment that I could 
not answer that specific difficulty; that would not 
prove that the Bible is not of divine origin. I can 
bring you many things far more difficult to ac- 
count for on the hypothesis that the Bible is not 
of divine origin than on the hypothesis that the 
Bible is of divine origin. You cannot deny the 
fact of fulfilled prophecy. How do you account 
for it if the Bible is not God’s Word? You can- 
not shut eyes to the marvelous unity of the sixty- 
six books of the Bible, written under such diver- 
gent circumstances and at periods of time so 
remote from one another. How do you account 
for it if God is not the real Author of the Book 
back of the forty or more human authors? You 
cannot deny that the Bible has a power—to save 
men from sin, to bring men peace and hope and 
joy, to lift men up to God—that all other books 
taken together do not possess. How do you ac- 
count for it if the Bible is not the Word of God 
in a sense that no other book is the Word of 
God?” 

The objector did not answer. The difficulties 


A GENERAL STATEMENT OF THE CASE 15 


that confront one who denies that the Bible is 
of divine origin and authority are far more nu- 
merous and vastly more weighty than those which 
confront the one who believes it to be of divine 
origin and authority. 

The fourth thing to be said about the difficulties 
in the Bible is: the fact that you cannot solve a 
difficulty does not prove it cannot be solved, and 
the fact that you cannot answer an objection does 
not prove at all that it cannot be answered. 

It is remarkable how often we overlook this 
very evident fact. There are many who, when 
they meet a difficulty in the Bible and give it a 
little thought and can see no possible solution, at 
once jump at the conclusion that a solution is im- 
possible, and so they give up their faith in the 
inerrancy of the Bible and in its divine origin. 
Any man should have a sufficient amount of 
modesty, being so limited in knowledge, to say, 
“Though I see no possible solution to this diffi- 
culty, someone a little wiser than I might easily 
find one.” 

If we would only bear in mind that we do not 
know everything, and there are a great many 
things that we cannot solve now which we could 
very easily solve if we only knew a little more, it 
would save us from all this folly. We ought never 
to forget that there may be a very easy solution 
to infinite wisdom even for that which to our fi- 
nite wisdom—or ignorance—appears absolutely in- 
soluble. What would we think of a beginner in 
algebra who, having tried in vain for half an hour 


16 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


to solve a difficult problem, declared that there 
was no possible solution to the problem because 
he could find none! 

A man of unusual experience and ability one 
day left his work and came a long distance to see 
me in great perturbation of spirit because he had 
discovered what seemed to him a flat contradic- 
tion in the Bible. He had lain awake all night 
thinking about it. It had defied all his attempts 
at reconciliation, but when he had fully stated 
the case to me, in a very few moments I showed 
him a very simple and satisfactory solution of the 
difficulty. He went away with a happy heart. But 
why had it not occurred to him at the outset that, 
though it appeared absolutely impossible to him 
to find a solution, after all, a solution might be 
easily discovered by someone else? He. supposed 
that the difficulty was an entirely new one, but 
it was one that had been faced and answered 
long before either he or I was born. 

The fifth thing to be said about the difficulties 
in the Bible is that the seeming defects of the 
Book are exceedingly insignificant when put in 
comparison with its many and marvelous excel- 
lencies. 

It certainly reveals great perversity of both 
mind and heart that men spend so much time ex- 
patiating on such insignificant points which they 
consider defects in the Bible, and pass absolutely 
unnoticed the incomparable beauties and won- 
ders that adorn and glorify almost every page. 
Even in some prominent institutions of learning, 


A GENERAL STATEMENT OF THE CASE 17 


where men are supposed to be taught to appreci- 
ate and understand the Bible and where they are 
sent to be trained to preach its truth to others, 
much more time is spent on minute and insignif- 
icant points that seem to point toward an entirely 
human origin of the Bible than is spent upon 
studying and understanding and admiring the un- 
paralleled glories that make this Book stand apart 
from all other books in the world. What would 
we think of any man who in studying some great 
masterpiece of art concentrated his whole atten- 
tion upon what looked like a flyspeck in the cor- 
ner? A large proportion of the much vaunted 
“critical study of the Bible” is a laborious and 
scholarly investigation of supposed flyspecks. The 
man who is not willing to squander the major por- 
tion of his time in this erudite investigation of fly- 
specks but prefers to devote it to the study of the 
unrivaled beauties and majestic splendors of the 
Book is counted in some quarters as not being 
“scholarly and up to date.” 

The sixth thing to be said about the difficulties 
in the Bible is that they have far more weight 
with superficial readers than with profound stu- 
dents. 

- Take a man like Colonel Ingersoll, who was 
totally ignorant of the real contents and meaning 
of the Bible, or that class of modern preachers 
who read the Bible for the most part for the sole 
purpose of finding texts to serve as pegs to hang 
their own ideas upon. To such superficial readers 
of the Bible these difficulties seem of immense 


18 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


importance, but to one who has learned to medi- 
tate upon the Word of God day and night they 
have scarcely any weight at all. That rare man of 
God, George Miiller, who had carefully studied 
the Bible from beginning to end more than one 
hundred times, was not disturbed by any diffi- 
culties he encountered; but to the man who is 
reading it through for the first or second time 
there are many things that perplex and stagger. 

The seventh thing to be said about the diffi- 
culties in the Bible is that they rapidly disappear 
upon careful and prayerful study. 

How many things there are in the Bible that 
once puzzled and staggered us, but which have 
since been perfectly cleared up and no longer 
present any difficulty whatever! Every year of 
study finds these difficulties disappear more and 
more rapidly. At first they go by ones, and then 
by twos, and then by dozens, and then by scores. 
Is it not reasonable then to suppose that the dif- 
ficulties that still remain will all disappear upon 
further study? 


2 


CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES 


ALL THE DIFFICULTIES found in the Bible can be 
included under ten general headings: 

1. The text from which our English Bible was 
translated. No one, as far as I know, holds that 
the English translation of the Bible is absolutely 
infallible and inerrant. The doctrine held by many 
is that the Scriptures as originally given were ab- 
solutely infallible and inerrant, and that our Eng- 
lish translation is a substantially accurate render- 
ing of the Scriptures as originally given. We do 
not possess the original manuscripts of the Bible. 
These original manuscripts were copied many 
times with great care and exactness, but natu- 
rally some errors crept into the copies that were 
made. We now possess so many good copies that 
by comparing one with another, we can tell with 
great precision just what the original text was. In- 
deed, for all practical purposes the original text 
is now settled. There is not one important doc- 
trine that hangs upon any doubtful reading of the 
text. But when our Authorized Version was made, 
some of the best manuscripts were not within 


19 


20 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


reach of the translators, and the science of textual 
criticism was not so well understood as it is today, 
and so the translation was made from an imper- 
fect text. Not a few of the apparent difficulties in 
the Bible arise from this source. 

For example, we are told in John 5:4 that “an 
angel went down at a certain season into the 
pool, and troubled the water: whosoever then 
first after the troubling of the water stepped in 
was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.” 
This statement for many reasons seems improba- 
ble and difficult to believe, but upon investigation 
we find that it is all a mistake of the copyist. 
Some early copyist, reading John’s account, added 
in the margin his explanation of the healing prop- 
erties of this intermittent medicinal spring. A late 
copyist embodied this marginal note in the body 
of the text, and so it came to be handed down and 
got into the Authorized Version. Very properly 
it has been omitted from the Revised Version. 

The discrepancies in figures in different ac- 
counts of the same events as, for example, the 
differences in the ages of some of the kings as 
given in the text of Kings and Chronicles, doubt- 
less arise from the same cause, errors of copyists. 
Such an error in the matter of figures would be 
very easy to make, as in the Hebrew, numbers 
are denoted by letters, and letters that appear 
very much alike have a very different value as 
figures. For example, the first letter in the He- 
brew alphabet denotes one, and with two little 
points above it, not larger than flyspecks, it de- 


CuassEs oF DIFFICULTIES 21 


notes a thousand. The twenty-third or last letter 
of the Hebrew alphabet denotes four hundred, 
but the eighth letter of the Hebrew alphabet, that 
looks very much like it and could be easily mis- 
taken for it, denotes eight. A very slight error of 
the copyist would therefore make an utter change 
in figures. The remarkable thing when one con- 
templates the facts in the case is that so few er- 
rors of this kind have been made. 

2. Inaccurate translations. For example, in Mat- 
thew 12:40 Jonah is spoken of as being in “the 
whale’s belly.” Many a skeptic has made merry 
over the thought of a whale with the peculiar 
construction of its mouth and throat swallowing 
a man, but if the skeptic had only taken the trou- 
ble to look the matter up, he would have found 
the word translated “whale” really means “sea 
monster,’ without any definition as to the char- 
acter of the sea monster. We will take this up 
more in detail in considering the story of Jonah. 
So the whole difficulty arose from the translator's 
mistake and the skeptic’s ignorance. There are 
many skeptics today who are so densely ignorant 
of matters clearly understood by many Sunday 
school children that they are still harping in the 
name of scholarship on this supposed error in the 
Bible. 

3. False interpretations of the Bible. What the 
Bible teaches is one thing, and what men. inter- 
pret it to mean is oftentimes something widely 
different. Many difficulties that we have with the 


Zz DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Bible arise not from what the Bible actually says, 
but from what men interpret it to mean. 

A striking illustration of this is found in Gen- 
esis 1. If we were to take the interpretation put 
upon this chapter by many, it would indeed be 
difficult to reconcile it with much that modern 
science regards as established. But the difficulty 
is not with what Genesis 1 says, but with the in- 
terpretation put upon it. There is no contradic- 
tion whatever between what is really proven by 
science and what is really said in Genesis 1. This 
comes out clearly in chapter 4, “Is Genesis 1 His- 
torical and Scientific?” 

Another difficulty of the same character is with 
Jesus’ statement that He would be three days and 
three nights in the heart of the earth. Many in- 
terpreters would have us believe that He died 
Friday and rose early Sunday morning, and the 
time between these two is far from being three 
days and three nights; but we shall see later that 
it is a matter of biblical interpretation, and the 
trouble is not with what the Bible actually says, 
but with the interpretation that men put upon 
the Bible. We will take this matter up at length 
in chapter 21, “Was Jesus Actually Three Days 
and Three Nights in the Heart of the Earth?” 

4. A wrong conception of the Bible. Many 
think that when you say the Bible is the Word of 
God, of divine origin and authority, you mean 
that God is the speaker in every utterance it con- 
tains; but this is not at all what is meant. Often- 
times it simply records what. others say—what 


CxasseEs oF DIFFICULTIES 23 


good men say, what bad men say, what inspired 
men say, what uninspired men say, what angels 
and demons say, and even what the devil says. 
The record of what they said is from God and 
absolutely true, but what those other persons are 
recorded as saying may be true or may not be 
true. It is true that they said it, but what they 
said may not be true. 

For example, the devil is recorded in Genesis 
3:4 as saying, “Ye shall not surely die.” It is true 
that the devil said it, but what the devil said is 
not true, but an infamous lie that shipwrecked 
our race. That the devil said it is God’s Word, 
but what the devil said is not God’s word but the 
devil’s word. It is God’s word that this was the 
devil’s word. ; 

Very many careless readers of the Bible do not 
notice who is talking—God, good men, bad men, 
inspired men, uninspired men, angels or devil. 
They will tear a verse right out of its context re- 
gardless of the speaker and say, “There, God 
said that.” But God said nothing of the kind. 
God’s Word says that the devil said it, or a bad 
man said it, or a good man said it, or an inspired 
man said it, or an uninspired man said it, or an 
angel said it. What God says is true, namely, that 
the devil said it, or a bad man, or a good man, or 
an inspired man, or an uninspired man, or an 
angel. But what they said may or may not be true. 

It is very common to hear men quote what 
Eliphaz, Bildad or Zophar said to Job as if it 
were necessarily God’s own words because it is 


24 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


recorded in the Bible, in spite of the fact that 
God disavowed their teaching and said to them, 
“Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right” 
(Job 42:7). It is true that these men said the thing 
that God records them as saying, but often they 
gave the truth a twist and said what is not right. 
A very large share of our difficulties thus arises 
from not noticing who is speaking. The Bible al- 
ways tells us, and we should always note it. 

In the Psalms we have sometimes what God 
said to man, and that is always true; but on the 
other hand, we often have what man said to God, 
and that may or may not be true. Sometimes, and 
far oftener than most of us see, it is the voice of 
the speaker’s personal vengeance or despair. This 
vengeance may be and often is prophetic, but it 
may be the wronged man committing his cause 
to Him to whom vengeance belongs (Romans 12: 
19), and we are not obliged to defend all that he 
said. In the Psalms we have even a record of 
what the fool said: “There is no God” (Psalm 
14:1). Now it is true that the fool said it, but the 
fool lied when he said it. It is God’s Word that 
the fool said it, but what God reports the fool as 
saying is not God’s own word at all but the fool’s 
own word. 

So in studying our Bible, if God is the speaker 
we must believe what He says. If an inspired 
man is the speaker we must believe what he says. 
If an uninspired man is the speaker we must 
judge for ourselves—it is perhaps true, perhaps 
false. If it is the devil who is speaking, we do well 


CLAssEs OF DIFFICULTIES 95 


to remember that he was a liar from the begin- 
ning; but even the devil may tell the truth some- 
times. 

5. The language in which the Bible was writ- 
ten. The Bible is a book of all ages and for all 
kinds of people, and therefore it was written in 
the language that continues the same and is un- 
derstood by all, the language of the common peo- 
ple and of appearances. It was not written in the 
terminology of science. 

Thus, for example, what occurred at the Battle 
of Gibeon (Joshua 10:12-14) was described in 
the way it appeared to those who saw it, and the 
way in which it would be understood by those 
who read about it. There is no talk about the re- 
fraction of the sun’s rays, and so forth, but the 
sun is said to have “stood still” (or tarried) in 
the midst of heaven. It is one of the perfections 
of the Bible that it was not written in the termi- 
nology of modern science. If it had been, it would 
never have been understood until the present day, 
and even now it would be understood only by a 
few. Furthermore, as science and its terminology 
are constantly changing, the Bible if written in 
the terminology of the science of today would be 
out of date in a few years; but being written in 
just the language chosen, it has proved the Book 
for all ages, all lands and all conditions of men. 

Other difficulties from the language in which 
the Bible was written arise from the fact that 
large portions of the Bible are poetical and are 
written in the language of poetry, the language 


26 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


of feeling, passion, imagination and figure. Now 
if a man is hopelessly prosaic, he will inevitably 
find difficulties with these poetical portions of the 
inspired Word. 

For example, in Psalm 18 we have a marvelous 
description of a thunderstorm, but let the dull, 
prosaic fellow get hold of that, for example, verse 
8: “There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and 
fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kin- 
dled by it,” and he will be head over heels in dif- 
ficulty at once. But the trouble is not with the 
Bible, but with his own stupid, thickheaded pro- 
saicness. 

6. Our defective knowledge of the history, ge- 
ography and usages of Bible times. For example, 
in Acts 13:7 Luke speaks of “the deputy” (more 
accurately “the proconsul,” see Revised Version) 
of Cyprus. Roman provinces were of two classes, 
imperial and senatorial. The ruler of the imperial 
provinces was called a propraetor, of a senatorial 
province a proconsul. Up to a comparatively re- 
cent date, according to the best information we 
had, Cyprus was an-imperial province and there- 
fore its ruler would be a propraetor, but Luke 
calls him a proconsul. This certainly seemed like 
a clear case of error on Luke’s part, and even the 
conservative commentators felt forced to admit 
that Luke was in slight error, and the destructive 
critics were delighted to find this “mistake.” But 
further and more thorough investigation has 
brought to light the fact that just at the time of 
which Luke wrote the senate had made an ex- 


CiassEs OF DIFFICULTIES ras 


change with the emperor whereby Cyprus had 
become a senatorial province, and therefore its 
ruler was a proconsul. Luke was right after all, 
and the literary critics were themselves in error. 

Time and again further researches and discov- 
eries, geographical, historical and archaeological, 
have vindicated the Bible and put to shame its 
critics. For example, the book of Daniel has natu- 
rally been one of the books that infidels and de- 


structive critics have most hated. One of their ° 


strongest arguments against its authenticity and 
veracity was that such a person as Belshazzar was 
unknown to history, and that all historians agreed 
that Nabonidus was the last king of Babylon, and 
that he was absent from the city when it was cap- 
tured; so Belshazzar must be a purely mythical 
character, and the whole story legendary and not 
historical. Their argument seemed very strong. In 
fact, it seemed unanswerable. But Sir H. Rawlin- 
son discovered at Mugheir and other Chaldean 
sites clay cylinders on which Belshazzar (Belsaru- 
zar) is named by Nabonidus as his eldest son. 
Doubtless he reigned as regent in the city dur- 
ing his father’s absence, an indication of which 
we have in his proposal to make Daniel third 
ruler in the kingdom (Daniel 5:16). He himself 
being second ruler in the kingdom, Daniel would 
be next to him. So the Bible was vindicated again. 

The critics asserted most positively that Moses 
could not have written the Pentateuch because 
writing was unknown in his day. But recent dis- 
coveries have proved beyond a question that 


28 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


writing far antedates the time of Moses. So the 
critics have been compelled to give up their argu- 
ment, though they have had the bad grace to 
hold on stubbornly to their conclusion. 

7. The ignorance of conditions under which 
books were written and commands given. For ex- 
ample, to one ignorant of the conditions, God's 
commands to Israel as to the extermination of 
the Canaanites seem cruel and horrible, but when 
one understands the moral condition to which 
these nations had sunk, the utter hopelessness of 
reclaiming them, and the weakness of the Israel- 
ites themselves, their extermination seems to have 
been an act of mercy to all succeeding generations 
and to themselves. We will go into this more fully 
in chapter 9, “The Slaughter of the Canaanites 
by God’s Command.” 

8. The many-sidedness of the Bible. The broad- 
est-minded man is one-sided, but the truth is 
many-sided, and the Bible is all-sided. So to our 
narrow thought one part of the Bible seems to 
contradict another. 

For example, religious men as a rule are either 
Calvinistic or Arminian in their mental makeup. 
And some portions of the Bible are decidedly 
Calvinistic and present great difficulties to the 
Arminian type of mind, while other portions are 
decidedly Arminian and present difficulties to the 
Calvinistic type of mind. But both sides are true. 
Many men in our day are broad-minded enough 
to be able to grasp at the same time the Calvin- 
istic side of the truth and the Arminian side of the 


CLASsEs OF DIFFICULTIES 29 


truth; but some are not, so the Bible perplexes, 
puzzles and bewilders them. The trouble is not 
with the Bible, but with their own lack of capac- 
ity for comprehensive thought. _ _ 

So Paul seems to contradict James, and James 
seems sometimes to contradict Paul; and what 
Paul says in one place seems to contradict what 
he says in another place. But the whole trouble 
is that our narrow minds cannot take in God’s 
large truth. 

9. The fact that the Bible has.to do with the in- 
finite, and our minds are finite. It is necessarily 
difficult to put the facts of infinite being into the 
limited capacity of our finite intelligence, just as 
it is difficult to put the ocean into a pint cup. To 
this class of difficulties belong those connected 
with the Bible doctrines of the Trinity and of the 
divine-human nature of Christ. To those who for- 
get that God is infinite, the doctrine of the Trin- 
ity seems like the mathematical monstrosity of 
making one equal three. But when one bears in 
mind that the doctrine of the Trinity is an at- 
tempt to put into forms of finite thought the facts 
of infinite being, and into material forms of ex- 
pression the facts of the spirit, the difficulties 
vanish. The simplicity of the Unitarian conception 
of God arises from its shallowness. 

10. The dullness of our spiritual perception. The 
man who is farthest advanced spiritually is still 
so immature that he cannot expect to see every- 
thing yet as an absolutely holy God sees it, unless 
he takes it upon simple faith in Him. To this class 


30 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


of difficulties belong those connected with the 
Bible doctrine of eternal punishment. It often 
seems to us as if this doctrine cannot be true, 
must not be true, but the whole difficulty arises 
from the fact that we are still so blind spiritually 
that we have no adequate conception of the aw- 
fulness of sin, and especially of the awfulness of 
the sin of rejecting the infinitely glorious Son of 
God. But when we become so holy, so like God, 
that we see the enormity of sin as He sees it, we 
shall have no difficulty with the doctrine of eter- 
nal punishment. 

As we look back over the ten classes of diffi- 
culties, we see they all arise from our imperfec- 
tion, and not from the imperfection of the Bible. 
The Bible is perfect, but we, being imperfect, 
have difficulty with it. As we grow more and 
more into the perfection of God, our difficulties 
grow ever less and less, and so we are forced to 
conclude that when we become as perfect as 
God is, we shall have no more difficulties what- 
ever with the Bible. 


a 


HOW SHALL WE DEAL WITH 
THE DIFFICULTIES OF 
THE BIBLE? 


BEFORE TAKING uP those specific difficulties and 
alleged “contradictions” in the Bible which have 
caused the most trouble to seekers after truth, 
let us first consider how difficulties should be 
dealt with: : 

1. Honestly. Whenever you find a difficulty in 
the Bible frankly acknowledge it. Don’t try to 
obscure it. Don’t try to dodge it. Look it square in 
the face. Admit it frankly to whoever mentions it. 
If you cannot give a good, square, honest explana- 
tion, do not attempt any at all. Untold harm has 
been done by those who in their zeal for the in- 
fallibility of the Bible have attempted explana- 
tions of difficulties which do not commend them- 
selves to the honest, fair-minded man. People have 
concluded that if these are the best explanations, 
then there are really no explanations at all, and 
the Bible instead of being helped has been in- 
jured by the unintelligent zeal of foolish friends. 
If you are not really convinced that the Bible is 


31 


oo DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


the Word of God, you can far better afford to 
wait for an honest solution of a difficulty than you 
can afford to attempt a solution that is evasive and 
unsatisfactory. 

2. Humbly. Recognize the limitations of your 
own mind and knowledge, and do not for a mo- 
ment imagine that there is no solution just be- 
cause you have found none. There is, in all prob- 
ability, a very simple solution, even when you can 
find no solution at all. 

3. Determinedly. Make up your mind that you 
will find the solution if you can by any amount of 
study and hard thinking. The difficulties of the 
Bible are our heavenly Father’s challenge to us 
to set our brains to work. Do not give up search- 
ing for a solution because you cannot find one in 
five minutes or ten minutes. Ponder over it and 
work over it for days if necessary. The work will 
do you more good than the solution does. There 
is a solution somewhere, and you will find it if 
you will only search for it long enough and hard 
enough. 

4. Fearlessly. Do not be frightened when you 
find a difficulty, no matter how unanswerable or 
how insurmountable it appears at first sight. 
Thousands of men have encountered just such 
difficulties, and still the old Book stands. The 
Bible that has stood eighteen centuries of rigid 
examination, and also of incessant and awful as- 
sault, is not likely to go down before your discov- 
eries or before the discharges of any modern crit- 
ical guns. To one who is at all familiar with the 


How SuHauut WE DEA wiry DirFicuuties? 33 


history of critical attacks on the Bible, the confi- 
dence of those modern critics who think they are 
going to annihilate the Bible at last is simply 
amusing. 

5. Patiently. Do not be discouraged because 
you do not solve every problem in a day. If some 
difficulty persistently defies your very best efforts 
at a solution, lay it aside for a while. Later it will 
likely be resolved, and you will wonder how you 
were ever perplexed by it. 

6. Scripturally. If you find a difficulty in one 
part of the Bible, look for another scripture to 
throw light upon it and dissolve it. Nothing ex- 
plains scripture like scripture. Time and again 
people have come to me with some difficulty in 
the Bible that had greatly staggered them, and 
asked for a solution; and I have been able to give 
a solution by simply asking them to read some 
other chapter and verse, and the simple reading 
of that scripture has thrown such light upon the 
passage in question that all the mists have disap- 
peared and the truth has shone as clear as day. 

7. Prayerfully. It is simply wonderful how dif- 
ficulties dissolve when one looks at them on his 
knees. Not only does God open our eyes in an- 
swer to prayer to behold wonderful things out of 
His law, but He also opens our eyes to look 
straight through a difficulty that seemed impene- 
trable before we prayed. One great reason why 
many modern Bible scholars have learned to be 
destructive critics is because they have forgotten 
how to pray. 


4 


GENESIS ONE—HISTORICAL 
AND SCIENTIFIC? 


THERE IS NO PART of the Bible that the more 
scholarly opponents of its divine origin are more 
fond of attacking than the very first chapter in 
the Book. Time and again have we been assured 
that the teachings of this chapter are in hopeless 
conflict with the best established conclusions of 
modern science. Even a prominent theological 
teacher in a supposedly Christian university has 
said that “no one who knows what history and 
science are would think of calling the first chap- 
ter of Genesis either historical or scientific.” But 
in spite of this confident assertion, men who have 
gained a name as historians beyond anything that 
this teacher of theology can expect, assure us that 
it is not only historical but the very foundation of 
history. 

Other men, who have secured for themselves 
a position in the scientific world to which this 
teacher can never hope to aspire, assure us that 
this chapter agrees absolutely with everything 
that is known scientifically of the origin and early 


34 


GENEsIS ONE—HIsTORICAL AND SCIENTIFIC? 35 


history of the earth. For example, Lord Kelvin, 
whose name is honored in the scientific world, 
said in a private letter to a friend of mine, “Phys- 
ical science has nothing to say against the order 
of creation as given in Genesis.” 

But let us come to the specific difficulties in the 
first chapter of Genesis. 

The objector is fond of telling us that the first 
chapter of Genesis says that the world was cre- 
ated in six days of twenty-four hours each, when 
everyone who is familiar with modern science 
knows that the world as it now stands was mil- 
lions of years in the making. 

This objection sounds good, but the one who 
makes it displays a hopeless ignorance of the | 
Bible. Anyone who is at all familiar with the 
Bible and the Bible usage of words knows that 
the word “day” is not limited to periods of twenty- 
four hours. It is frequently used for a period of 
time of an entirely undefined length. For example, 
in Joel 3:18-20 the millennial period is spoken of 
as a day. In Zechariah 2:10-13 the millennial pe- 
riod is again spoken of as a day, and again in 
Zechariah 13:1-2 and 14:9. Even in Genesis 2 the 
whole period covered by the six days of the first 
account is spoken of as a day (Genesis 2:4-5). 
There is no necessity whatever for interpreting 
the days of Genesis 1 as solar days of twenty-four 
hours each. They may be vast periods of undefined 
length. 


But someone may say, “This is twisting the 


386 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Scriptures to make them fit the conclusions of 
modern science.” 

The one who says so simply displays his ignor- 
ance of the history of biblical interpretation. St. 
Augustine, as far back as the fourth century, cen- 
turies before modern science and its conclusions 
were dreamed of, interpreted the days of Genesis 
1 as periods of time, just what the word means in 
many places elsewhere in the Bible. 

Another point urged against the truth and ac- 
curacy of the account of creation given in Gene- 
sis 1 is that it speaks of “there being light before 
the sun existed, and it is absurd to think of light 
before the sun, the source of light.” 

The one who says this displays his ignorance of 
modern science. Anyone who is familiar with the 
nebular hypothesis, commonly accepted among 
scientific men today, knows that there was cosmic 
light ages before the sun became differentiated 
from the general luminous nebulous mass as a 
separate body. 

But the objector further urges against the sci- 
entific accuracy of Genesis 1 that its order of cre- 
ation is not the order determined by the investi- 
gations of modern science. 

This is an assertion that cannot be proven. It 
was the writer’s privilege to study geology under 
that prince of geologists, who was pronounced by 
competent authority to be the greatest scientific 
thinker of the nineteenth century with the excep- 
tion of Charles Darwin, namely, Professor James 
D. Dana of Yale. Professor Dana once said in my 


GENEsIs ONE—HIsTORICAL AND SCIENTIFIC? OF 


presence that one reason why he believed the 
Bible to be the Word of God was because of the 
marvelous accord of the order of creation given 
in Genesis with that worked out by the best sci- 
entific investigation. This agrees with what Lord 
Kelvin is quoted as saying in the early part of this 
chapter. 

It must be said, however, that men of science 
are constantly changing their views of what was 
the exact order of creation. Very recently discov- 
eries have been made that havé overthrown theo- 
ries of the order of creation held by many men of 
science, which did not seem to some to harmonize 
with the order as given in the first chapter of 
Genesis; but these recent discoveries have brought 
the order into harmony with the order as given in 
that chapter. 

There is no need of going in detail into this 
order of creation as taught by modern science and 
Genesis 1. For there is grave reason to doubt if 
anything in Genesis 1 after verse 1 relates to the 
original creation of the universe. All the verses 
after the first seem rather to refer to a refitting of 
the world that had been created and had after- 
ward been plunged into chaos by the sin of some 
pre-Adamic race, to be the abode of the present 
race that inhabits it, the Adamic race. 

The reasons for so thinking are, first, that the 
words translated “without form and void” (“waste 
and void,” RV) are used everywhere else in the 
Bible of the state of affairs that God brought upon 
persons and places as a punishment for sin. For 


38 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


example, in Isaiah 34:11 we read of the judgment 
that God shall bring upon Idumea as a punish- 
ment for their sins in these words: “He shall 
stretch over it a line of confusion, and the plum- 
met of emptiness” (RV). The Hebrew words 
translated “confusion” and “emptiness” are the 
same that are translated “without form and void” 
in Genesis 1:2. We read again in Jeremiah 4:23- 
27: “I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was waste and 
void.” In both instances the words “waste and 
void” refer to a ruin which God had sent as a 
punishment for sin, and the assumption is very 
strong that they have a similar significance in 
Genesis 1. 

The second reason for this interpretation is 
stronger yet, namely, that the Bible expressly de- 
clares that God did not create the earth “in vain” 
(Isaiah 45:18). But the word translated “in vain” 
in this passage is precisely the one translated 
“without form” in Genesis 1:2. In the Revised 
Version of Genesis 1:2 and Isaiah 45:18 the word 
is translated in both instances “waste.” Here then 
is a plain and specific declaration in the Bible 
that God did not create the earth “without form” 
(or rather “waste,” RV), so it is clear that Gene- 
sis 1:2 cannot refer to the original creation. The 
word translated “was” in Genesis 1:2 can with 
perfect propriety be translated “became.” Then 
Genesis 1:2 would read: “And the earth became 
waste and void.” In that case in Genesis 1:1 we 
have the actual account of creation. It is very 
brief but wonderfully expressive, instructive and 


GENEsIS ONE—HIsTORICAL AND SCIENTIFIC? 39 


suggestive. In Genesis 1:2 we have a brief but 
suggestive account of how the earth became in- 
volved in desolation and emptiness, presumably 
through the sin of some pre-Adamic race. Then 
all after verse 2 does not describe the original 
creation of the earth, but its fitting up anew for 
the new race God is to bring upon the earth— 
the Adamic race. Even if we allow the word 
“was to stand in Genesis 1:2, and do not substi- 
tute the word “became,” it does not materially 
affect the interpretation. | 

If this is the true interpretation of the chapter 
(and the argument for this interpretation seems 
conclusive), then of course this record cannot by 
any possibility come into conflict with any dis- 
coveries of geology as yet made or to be . made, 
for the geological strata lie back of the period 
here described. The agreement of the order as set 
forth in Genesis 1 with the order as discovered by 
science would be accounted for by the fact that 
God always works in orderly progress from the 
lower to the higher. 


5 


THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 
ACCORDING TO THE BIBLE 
AND ACCORDING TO SCIENCE 


ONE OF THE QUESTIONS that is greatly puzzling 
many Bible scholars today is how to reconcile the 
chronology of the Bible with discoveries that are 
being made as to the antiquity of man. It is said 
that the Bible chronology allows only about four 
thousand years from Adam to Christ, but the 
Egyptian and Babylonian civilizations were highly 
developed before four thousand years before 
Christ. If there were but four thousand years 
from Adam to Christ there would be only 5,907 
years for the whole age of the entire human race; 
historians and scientists are thought to have traced 
the history of the race back ten thousand or more 
years. How are we to reconcile these apparent dis- 
crepancies? 

In the first place, let it-be said that the dates 
commonly accepted by many historians are not 
at all certain. 

For example, in figuring out the dates of Egyp- 
tian dynasties the data upon which conclusions 


40 


THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 4] 


are built can hardly be considered decisive. True, 
discoveries have been made of ancient records 
which assert that the dynasties which preceded 
them covered certain vast periods of time which 
are named, but anyone who is at all familiar with 
the ancient and Oriental habit of exaggeration 
should receive these assertions as to the length of 
these dynasties with a great deal of caution. While 
these views of the vast antiquity of the ancient 
Egyptian civilization and ancient civilizations of 
Nineveh and Babylon as well are widely accepted, 
they are not by any means proved. We can afford 
to wait for more light. 

On the other hand, it is not at all certain that 
there were only about four thousand years from 
Adam to Christ. 

Bishop Ussher’s chronology, which is found in 
the margin of most reference Bibles, is not a part 
of the Bible itself, and its accuracy is altogether 
doubtful. It is founded upon the supposition that 
the genealogies of Scripture are intended to be 
complete, but a careful study of these genealogies 
clearly shows they are not intended to be com- 
plete, that they oftentimes contain only some out- 
standing names. For example, the genealogy in 
Exodus 6:16-24, if it were taken as a complete 
genealogy containing all the names, would make 
Moses the great-grandson of Levi, though 430 
years intervened. Again there is reason to question 
whether the lists of names in Genesis 5 and 11 
are complete. The total length of time from Adam 

to the flood and from the flood to Abraham is 


42 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


never mentioned in Scripture although the period 
from Joseph to Moses (Exodus 12:40) and that 
from the Exodus to the building of the temple 
(I Kings 6:1) are mentioned. The fact that there 
are just ten names in each list also suggests that 
a similar arrangement may have been made in the 
first chapter of Matthew. The regular formula is: 
A lived —— years and begat B. And A lived after 
he begat B —— years and begat sons and daugh- 
ters. B lived —— years and begat C, etc. The word 
translated “begat” is sometimes used not of an 
immediate descendent but of succeeding genera- 
tions. For example, Zilpah is said to have borne 
her great-grandchildren (Genesis 46:18). The He- 
brew word translated “bare” in this passage is the 
same word translated “begat” in the other pas- 
sages. Bilhah is said to have borne her grandchil- 
dren (Genesis 46:25). Canaan is said to have be- 
gotten whole nations (Genesis 10:15-18). So we 
see that in the formula quoted above the mean- 
ing is not necessarily that B is the literal son of 
A. B may be his literal son or a distant descend- 
ant. Thus many centuries may have intervened 
between A and B. Of course, no chronology is in- 
tended by these figures. Their purpose is not at 
all to show the age of the world. We see, there- 
fore, there is no real and necessary conflict be- 
tween real Bible chronology and any modern his- 
torical discoveries as to the antiquity of man. 

It may be that these ancient civilizations which 
are being discovered in the vicinity of Nineveh 


_ THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN) > _ 48 


and elsewhere may be the remains of the pre- 
Adamic race already mentioned. 

There are passages in the Bible which seem to 
hint that there were some existing even in Bible 
times who may have belonged to these _pre- 
_ Adamic races. Such may have been the Rephaim, 
the Zamzummim and the Emim (see Genesis 14: 
5, RV; Deuteronomy 2:20-21; 3:11, AV and RV). 
The hints given in those passages are somewhat 
obscure, but seem to suggest the remains of a 
race other than the Adamic race. If such was the 
case, these earlier civilizations .which are now 
being uncovered may have been theirs. No one 
need have the least fear of any discoveries that 
the archaeologists may make, for if it should be . 
found that there were early civilizations thousands 
of years before Christ it would not come into any 
conflict whatever with what the Bible really 
teaches about the antiquity of man, the Adamic 
race. 


6 


WHERE DID CAIN GET 
HIS WIFE? 


IN ALMOST EVERY PLACE that I have visited in 
going around the world I have given skeptics and 
others an opportunity of asking questions at one 
or two meetings. I do not think that I have ever 
held a question meeting at which someone has 
not put in the question “Where did Cain get his 
wife?” This seems to be a favorite question with 
unbelievers of a certain class. I have also met 
young Christians who have been greatly puzzled 
and perplexed over this question. But if one will 
study his Bible carefully and note exactly what it 
says, there is really no great difficulty in the ques- 
tion. 

Unbelievers constantly assert that the Bible 
says that Cain went into the land of Nod and took 
to himself a wife. In point of fact, it says nothing 
of the kind. An unbeliever in Edinburgh came to 
me with the assertion that the Bible did say this, 
and when I told him it did not, he offered to bet 
me one hundred pounds that it did. What the 
Bible does say is that “Cain went out from the 


44 


WuHeErE Dip Cain Get His WIFE? 45 


' presence of the Lorn, and dwelt in the land of 
Nod, on the east of Eden. And Cain knew his 
wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch” (Gene- 
sis 4:16-17). What the Bible means by “knew” in 
such connection anyone can discover for himself 
by taking his concordance and looking it up. He 
will discover that the word used in this connota- 
tion does not mean to get acquainted with, but is 
connected with the procreation of the species (see 
Genesis 4:1; Judges 11:39; I Samuel 1:19; Mat- 
thew 1:25). Cain doubtless had his wife before 
going to the land of Nod and took her there with 
him. 

But who was she, and where did he get her? 

In Genesis 5:3-4 we learn that Adam in his long 
life of 930 years begat many sons and daughters. 
There can be but little doubt that Cain married 
one of those numerous daughters. 

But someone will say, “In that case Cain mar- 
ried his own sister!” 

Yes, that was a necessity. If the whole Adamic 
race was to descend from a single pair, the sons 
and daughters must intermarry. But as the race 
increased, it remained no longer necessary for 
men to marry their own sisters, and the practice, 
if continued, would result in great mischief to the 
race. Indeed, even the intermarriage of cousins in 
the present day can bring frightful consequences. 
There are parts of the globe where the inhabitants 
have been largely shut out from intercourse with 
other people and intermarriage of cousins has 
been frequent, and the physical and mental re- 


46 ; DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


sults have been very bad. But in the dawn of 
human history, such intermarriage was not sur- 
rounded with these dangers. As late as the time 
of Abraham, that patriarch married his half sister 
(Genesis 20:12). But as the race multiplied and 
such intermarriages became unnecessary, and as 
they were accompanied with great dangers, God 
by special commandment forbade the marriage of 
brother and sister, and such marriage would now 
be sin because of the commandment of God; but 
it was not sin in the dawn of the race when the 
only male and female inhabitants of the earth 
were brothers and sisters. Such marriage today 
would be a crime, the crime of incest, but we can- 
not reasonably carry back the conditions of today 
into the time of the dawn of human history and 
judge actions performed then by the conditions 
and laws existing today. 

If we were to throw the Bible account over- 
board and adopt the evolutionary hypothesis as 
to the origin of the human race we would not re- 
lieve matters at all, for in that case our early an- 
cestors would have been beasts, and the father 
and mother of the human race would be descend- 
ants of the same pair of beasts, brother and sister 
beasts. Take whatever theory of the origin of the 
human race that we may, we are driven to the 
conclusion that in the early history of the race, 
there was the necessary intermarriage of the chil- 
dren of the same pair. 

To sum it all up, Cain married one of the many 


Were Dip Cain Get His Wire? 47 


daughters of Adam and Eve, and the so-called 
impenetrable mystery of where Cain got his wife 
is found to be no mystery whatever. 


7 


JEHOVAHS COMMAND TO 
ABRAHAM TO OFFER UP 
ISAAC AS A BURNT OFFERING 


ONE OF THE MOST FREQUENT objections is that the 
Bible says that God commanded Abraham to offer 
his son as a burnt offering. It is claimed that this 
story justifies the horrible practice of human sac- 
rifice. Some years ago when an insane man ac- 
tually did kill his son as a sacrifice to God, infidels 
proclaimed far and wide that the Bible in its story 
of Abraham and Isaac warranted and was respon- 
sible for the action. 

Not a few Christians have been bewildered and 
distressed by this story. How shall this apparent 
difficulty be removed? It can be easily met and 
removed in the same way most Bible difficulties 
may be met and removed, namely, by noticing 
exactly what the Bible says and all that it says. 

Notice in the first place that the Bible nowhere 
says that God commanded. Abraham to kill Isaac. 
It is constantly said by enemies of the Bible that 
God did command Abraham to slay Isaac, but 
this is not in reality what the Bible says. Exactly 


48 


JeHOvAH’s COMMAND TO ABRAHAM 49 


what the Bible says is that God commanded Ab- 
raham to “offer him for a burnt-offering” (Gene- 
sis 22:2). Literally translated, God commanded 
Abraham to “make him go up [that is, upon the 
altar] for a burnt-offering.” Abraham was merely 
commanded to lay Isaac upon the altar as a whole 
offering to God. Whether when he was thus laid 
upon the altar and presented to God, God would 
require him to go further and slay his son, he did 
not know. All that God commanded was to make 
him go up onto the altar, ready to be slain and - 
burned if God should so require. Did God so re- 
quire? The record expressly declares that He did 
not. On the contrary, God plainly forbade the ac- 
tual slaughter of Isaac (Genesis 22:11-12). That 
the original command was not to kill Isaac but 
merely to offer him up is as plain as day from the 
fact that we are explicitly told that Abraham did 
exactly what God told him to do. “Abraham of- 
fered up Isaac” is the Bible statement (Hebrews 
11:17), but Abraham did not kill Isaac—that he 
was not told to do. 

It is as clear as day, then, that the divine com- 
mandment to offer up was not a command to 
slay. The story as told in the Bible is not that God 
had first commanded Abraham to slay and burn 
Isaac and that afterward when He saw that Abra- 
ham was willing to do even this He took it back 
and provided a lamb to take Isaac’s place. The 
Bible story is that God commanded Abraham to 
make his son Isaac to ascend the altar to be pre- 
sented to God as a whole offering, and that Abra- 


50 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


ham actually did this which he was commanded 
to do. And this did not, either in God’s original 
intention or in the execution of the command, in- 
volve the slaughter of Isaac. 

This story, then, in no way justifies human sac- 
rifice in the sense of the actual slaying of a human 
victim. On the contrary, the whole force of the 
narrative is against such sacrifice. Instead of being 
commanded it is explicitly forbidden. It does, 
however, justify the offering of ourselves to God 
wholly, as “a living sacrifice” (Romans 12:1). But 
this is not all that the story as it actually occurs in 
the Bible tells us. It goes on to tell us that so far 
from God commanding Abraham to slay his son, 
when Abraham was about to go beyond what 
was explicitly commanded (namely, the offering 
of his son), and slay his son (which was not com- 
manded), God intervened and positively forbade 
it. Jehovah sent His own angel to speak in an au- 
dible voice from heaven forbidding the shedding 
of Isaac’s blood: “Lay not thine hand upon the 
lad, neither do thou anything unto him,” called the 
angel of Jehovah out of heaven (Genesis 22:12). 

This story, then, far from encouraging human 
sacrifice, positively and explicitly forbids it, and 
that in the most solemn manner. So all our diffi- 
culty with this narrative disappears when we look 
carefully with open eyes at the record and note 
precisely what is said. 


8 


GOD HARDENING PHARAOH’S 
HEART 


THE VARIOUS STATEMENTS that are made in the 
Scriptures in regard to God hardening Pharaoh’s ° 
heart have also perplexed a great many young 
Christians and have frequently been made use of 
by unbelievers in their attacks upon the Bible. It 
is said that if God hardened Pharaoh’s heart and; 
in consequence of this hardening, Pharaoh re- 
belled against God, then God Himself was respon- 
sible for Pharaoh’s sin, and it was unjust to hold 
Pharaoh accountable for his rebellion and to pun- 
ish him for it. 

In Exodus 4:21 (RV) we read: “And the Lorp 
said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into 
Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before 
Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I 
will harden his heart, that he shall not let the peo- 
ple go” (see also Exodus 7:3; 14:4). 

Now from reading these passages it does seem 
at the first glance as if there were some ground 
for criticism of God’s action in this matter, or of 
the Bible account of it. But when we study care- 


51 


52 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


fully exactly what the Bible says, and exactly what 
God is reported as saying, and the circumstances 
under which He said it, the difficulty disappears. 
For God to take a man who really desires to know 
and do His will, harden his heart and thus incline 
him not to do His will, would indeed be an action 
on God’s part that it would be difficult or impos- 
sible to justify. But when we read God's utterances 
on this matter in their setting, we find this is not 
at all what God did with Pharaoh. Pharaoh was 
not a man who wished to obey God. The whole 
account begins—not with God’s hardening Phar- 
aoh’s heart but with Pharaoh’s hardening his own 
heart. 

In Exodus 4:21 we have a prophecy of what 
‘ God would do with Pharaoh, a prophecy that God 
made fully knowing beforehand what Pharaoh 
would do before He hardened his heart. 

In Exodus 9:12 and later passages we have the 
fulfillment of this prophecy, but before God does 
here harden Pharaoh’s heart we have a description 
of what Pharaoh himself did. 

In Exodus 5:1-2 we are told that Moses and 
Aaron appeared in the presence of Pharaoh with 
Jehovah’s message: “Thus saith the Lorp God of 
Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a 
feast unto me in the wilderness,” and that Phar- 
aoh replied, “Who is the Lorn, that I should obey 
his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lorp, 
neither will I let Israel go.” Here Pharaoh defi- 
nitely and defiantly refused to recognize or obey 
God. This was before God hardened his heart. 


Gop HarpDENING PHARAOH’s HEART 53 


Then follows a description of how Pharaoh gave 
himself over to more cruel oppression of the Isra- 
elites than ever (Exodus 5:3-9). 

In Exodus 7:10 and following verses we see 
Moses and Aaron coming in to the presence of 
Pharaoh and doing signs before him as proof that 
they were messengers sent from God; but Pharaoh 
would not listen. We read in the Authorized Ver- 
sion, “And he hardened Pharaoh’s heart, that he 
hearkened not unto them” (v. 13). But the Re- 
vised Version correctly renders it thus: “Phar- ° 
aoh’s heart was hardened.” It-does not say as yet 
that the Lord hardened his heart. 

The facts in the case are these: Pharaoh was a 
cruel and oppressive tyrant, subjecting the peo-~ 
ple of Israel to most awful bondage, suffering and 
death. God looked down upon His people, heard 
their cries, and in His mercy determined to de- 
liver them (Exodus 2:25; 3:7-8). He sent Moses 
as His representative to Pharaoh to demand the 
deliverance of His people, and Pharaoh in proud 
rebellion defied Him and gave himself up to even 
more cruel oppression of the people. It was then 
and only then that God hardened his. heart. 

This was simply in pursuance of God's universal 
method of dealing with men. God’s universal 
method is, if man chooses error, to give him up to 
error (II Thessalonians 2:9-12, RV); if with a 
stout heart they choose sin, at last He gives them 
over to sin (Romans 1:24-26, 28, RV). This is 
stern dealing, but it is just dealing. 

If there is any difficulty that still remains in the 


54 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


incident, it all disappears when we consider the 
manner in which God hardened Pharaoh’s heart. 
It was, of course, not a physical act. God was not 
dealing with Pharaoh’s heart as a part of his body. 
He was dealing with the heart in the sense in 
which we constantly use the word as the supposed 
seat of intelligence, affection and will. The will 
cannot be coerced by force. The will can no more 
be moved by force than a train of cars can be 
drawn by an argument or an inference. The way 
in which God hardened Pharaoh’s heart was by 
sending to him a series of demonstrations of His 
own existence and power, and a series of judg- 
ments. If Pharaoh had taken the right attitude 
toward these revelations of God’s existence and 
power in these judgments that God sent upon 
him, they would have led to his repentance and 
salvation. But by willingly and willfully taking 
the wrong attitude toward them, he was hard- 
ened by them. Nothing that God sends us is more 
merciful than His judgments upon our sins. If we 
take these judgments right they will soften our 
hearts and lead us to repentance and entire sur- 
render to God, and thus bring us salvation. But if 
we rebel against them, they will harden our hearts 
and bring us eternal ruin. The fault is not with 
God, and the fault is not with His judgments; the 
fault is with ourselves and the attitude we take 
toward His judgments and toward the truth of 
God itself. The gospel is the savor of life unto life— 
unto men who receive it—but it is the savor of 
death unto death—to those who reject it. II Cor- 


Gop HarpEeNninc PHARAOH’s HEART 55 


inthians 2:15-16). The trouble is not with the 
gospel, which is “the power of God unto salvation 
to every one that believeth” (Romans 1:16). The 
trouble is with the man who rejects the gospel, 
and who is thus hardened, condemned and de- 
stroyed by it. To him it thus becomes the savor of 
death unto death. The same sermon brings life to 
one man and death to another. It brings life, par- 
don and peace to the one who believes it and acts 
upon it. It brings condemnation and death to the 
one that rejects its truth. It softens the heart of - 
one; it hardens the heart of the other. Jesus Christ 
Himself came into the world, not to condemn the 
world, but to save it (John 3:17); but to the one 
who does not believe He brings condemnation and 
eternal ruin (John 3:18, 36; Hebrews 10:28-29). 


9 


THE SLAUGHTER OF THE 
CANAANITES BY GOD'S 
COMMAND 


THERE ARE FEW THINGS in the Bible over which 
more intelligent readers have stumbled, and over 
which infidels have more frequently gloated and 
gloried, than God’s command that certain people 
should be utterly exterminated, sparing neither sex 
nor age. Men, women and children were to be 
killed. Thus, for example, we read in Deuteron- 
omy 20:16-17 this command of God to the people 
of Israel: “But of the cities of these peoples, which 
the Lorp thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, 
thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth: but 
thou shalt utterly destroy them; the Hittite, and 
the Amorite, the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, the 
Hivite, and the Jebusite; as the Lorp thy God 
hath commanded thee” (RV). In regard to other 
cities, it was commanded that if they sued for 
peace, it was to be granted and all the inhabitants 
spared; if they made war, the adult males were to 
be slain but the women and children were to be 
spared (Deuteronomy 20:10-15). These were the 


56 


THE SLAUGHTER OF THE CANAANITES 57 


cities that were far away. But the inhabitants of 
the cities of the lands that the Israelites them- 
selves were to inhabit were to be utterly extermi- 
- nated. 

How can we reconcile any such appallingly 
harsh commands as these with the doctrine so 
plainly taught in the New Testament that God is 
love? It is said that these commands can certainly 
not have been from God, and that the Old Testa- 
ment is certainly wrong when it says that they 
were from God. What shall we say in reply to 
this? 

1. It is certainly appalling that any people 
should be utterly put to the sword, not only the 
men of war but the old men and old women, the. 
young women and the children. 

But there is something even more appalling 
than this. That is that the iniquity of any people 
should have become so full, their rebellion against 
God so strong and so universal, their moral cor- 
ruption and debasement so utter and so pervasive, 
even down to babes just born, as to make such 
treatment absolutely necessary in the interests of 
humanity. But this was precisely the case with the 
nations in question. Not from the Bible alone do 
we learn how unfathomable were the depths of 
moral pollution to which these nations had sunk. 
They had become a moral cancer threatening the 
very life of the whole human race. That cancer 
must be cut out in every fiber if the body was to 
be saved. Cutting out a cancer is a delicate oper- 
ation, but often it is the kindest thing a surgeon 


58 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


can do under existing circumstances. The kindest 
thing that God could do for the human race was 
to cut out every root and fiber of sep grossly 
wicked people. 

2. God certainly has a right to visit judgment 
upon individuals and upon nations sunk in sin. 

The only wonder is, when one stops to think of 
it, that He is so long-suffering, and that He does 
not visit judgment upon individuals and upon na- 
tions sooner. When one really comes to under- 
stand His holiness on the one hand, and the 
depths of covetousness, greed, lust, vileness, law- 
lessness and contempt for God to which certain 
groups today have sunk, and how even the young 
children go astray into unmentionable vileness, 
one sometimes almost wonders why God does not 
blot them out as He commanded the Israelites to 
do with the Canaanites of old! The command to 
exterminate the Canaanites was a command big 
with mercy and love. It was mercy and love, first 
of all, to the Israelites. Unless the Canaanites were 
exterminated, they would themselves be extermi- 
nated. In point of fact, the Israelites were con- 
taminated for the very reason that they did not 
carry out God’s stern decree to its fullest extent. 
They stopped short of what God commanded 
them to do, to their own lasting loss. 

But what about the women—might not they be 
spared? 

The answer is very plain. The women were the 
prime source of contamination (Numbers $1:15- 
16). Though true women are nobler than true 


THE SLAUGHTER OF THE CANAANITES 59 


men, depraved women are more dangerous than 
depraved men. 

But what about the children? Might not they 
be spared? 

Anyone who has had experience with the chil- 
dren of the depraved knows how persistently the 
vices bred for generations in the ancestors reap- 
pear in the children even when they are taken 
away from their evil surroundings and brought up 
in the most favorable environment. By the regen- 
erating power of the gospel it is possible to cor- 
rect all this, but we must remember that this case 
was centuries before the gospel proclamation. 

Love and mercy for Israel demanded just what 
God commanded. Love and mercy for the whole - 
race demanded it. God’s purpose in Israel was not 
merely to bless them. Through Israel He planned 
to bless all men. He was training a people in the 
seclusion of centuries in order that when the train- 
ing was completed they might come out of the 
cloister and carry benediction, salvation and life 
to all nations. 

3. God’s plans are not only beneficent but vast, 
and it takes centuries to work them out. We crea- 
tures of a day in our conceit look at some little 
fragment of God’s infinite plan and presume to 
judge the whole, of which we know little or 
nothing. 

It would be well if we could only learn that 
God is infinite and we infinitesimal, and so of sci- 
entific and philosophic necessity His judgments 
are unsearchable and His ways past tracing out 


60 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


(Romans 11:33). A child never appears a greater 
fool than when criticizing a philosopher, and a 
philosopher never appears a greater fool than 
when criticizing God. 

4. The extermination of the Canaanite children 
was not only an act of mercy and love to the 
world at large; it was also an act of love and 
mercy to the children themselves. 

What awaited these children, if they were al- 
lowed to live, was something vastly worse than 
death. What awaited them in death it is impossi- 
ble to be dogmatic about, but unless one accepts 
the wholly unbiblical and improbable doctrine of 
the damnation of all unbaptized infants we need 
have no fears. Even today I could almost wish 
that all the babies born into families of wicked in- 
fluence might be slain in infancy, were it not for 
the hope that some concerned Christian will carry 
to them the saving gospel of the Son of God. 

5. But someone may still say, “Yes, I can see it 
was an act of mercy to blot out people so fallen; 
but why was it not done by pestilence or famine, 
rather than by the hand of the Israelites?” 

The answer to this question is very simple. The 
Israelites themselves were in training. They were 
constantly falling into sin and they needed the 
solemn lesson that would-come to them through 
their being made the executioners of God’s wrath 
against the wickedness and vileness of the Ca- 
naanites. A deep impression of God’s holiness and 
hatred of sin would thus be produced. They were 
distinctly told before they carried out God’s judg- 


THE SLAUGHTER OF THE CANAANITES 61 


_ ment that the reason why they were to utterly 
destroy the Canaanites was “that they teach you 
not to do after all their abominations, which they 
have done unto their gods” (Deuteronomy 20:18). 
The whole proceeding is an impressive illustration 
of the exceeding hatefulness of sin in God’s sight. 
It says to us that sin persisted in is a thing so 
grievous and ruinous as to necessitate the utter 
destruction of the entire race, male and female, 
young and old, that persists in it. It is simply the 
lesson that the whole Bible teaches, and that all 
history teaches: “The wages of sin is death.” 

6. Those who regard sin lightly and who have ~ 
no adequate concept of God’s holiness will always 
find insurmountable difficulty in this command of ~ 
God. But those who have come to see the awful- 
ness of sin and have learned to hate it with the in- 
finite hate it deserves, those who have caught 
some glimpses of the infinite holiness of God and 
have been made in some measure partakers of that 
holiness, will after mature reflection have no dif- 
ficulty whatever with this command. It is con- 
sciousness of sin in our own hearts and lives that 
makes us rebel against God’s stern dealings with 
sin. 

7. The sneering objection is sometimes made 
by infidels to the sparing, in certain cases, of the 
women as recorded in Deuteronomy 20:10-15, and 
also the sparing of the women in Numbers 31:21- 
35, 40. These critics claim that the women were 
to be spared for immoral purposes. One writer 
asks, “Am I to understand that God approved of 


62 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


taking as tribute in spoils of war, a number of 
virgins for a use that is only too obvious?” Words 
of similar import are to be found in a number of 
books. But to any fair-minded man who reads the 
actual Scripture account there is. not the slightest 
intimation that the virgins were preserved for the 
use suggested. The whole context of the passage 
in Numbers 31, which is the one most frequently 
cited in this connection by unbelievers, is a solemn 
warning against immorality of this kind. Far from 
being a suggestion that God countenances acts of 
this character, it shows how sternly God dealt 
with this impurity. 

In Numbers 25:1-9 we are told how the men of 
Israel did give themselves up to impurity with the 
daughters of Moab, but how in consequence the 
anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and 
how God visited their impurity with the sternest 
judgment. In the very chapter in question every 
woman who had been guilty of impurity was slain 
(Numbers 31:17). In actual fact, it is suggested 
at least by verse 18, that it was only the female 
children who could be spared. It was certainly ar 
act of mercy on God’s part to deliver these 
“women children” from their evil surrounding: 
and hand them over to Israel for training where 
they would be brought in contact with a pure re. 
ligion and trained up to become pure women. Ac 
cording to the record, far from being handed over 
to the Israelites for immoral purposes, they were 
entrusted to them for the highest purposes. 


10 


JOSHUA COMMANDING THE 
SUN TO STAND STILL 


ONE OF THE GREATEST DIFFICULTIES in the Bible to 
many a student is found in the story contained in 
Joshua 10:12-14: “Then spake Joshua to the Lorp 
in the day when the Lorp delivered up the 
Amorites before the children of Israel, and he ~ 
said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still - 
upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of 
Ajalon. And the sun stood still, and the moon 
stayed, until the people had avenged themselves 
upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book 
of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of 
heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole 
day. And there was no day like that before it or 
after it, that the Lorn hearkened unto the voice 
of a man: for the Lorp fought for Israel.” 
Bishop Colenso wrote: “The miracle of Joshua 
is the most striking incident of Scripture and sci- 
ence being at variance.” It is said by destructive 
critics and infidels that this story cannot possibly 
be true; that if the sun were to stand still in the 


63 


64 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


way here recorded it would upset the whole 
course of nature. 

Whether that statement is true or not no one 
can tell. It is simply a supposition. But certainly 
the God who made the earth and the sun and the 
whole universe could maintain it even if the sun 
stood still, or (to speak more accurately) if the 
earth stood still on its axis and the sun appeared 
to stand still. But by a careful study of the He- 
brew of the passage we find that the sun is not 
said to have stood still. 

The command of Joshua in verse 12 rendered 
in the Authorized and Revised versions thus: 
“Stand thou still,” literally translated means “Be 
silent” (see also RV marg.). And the words ren- 
dered “stood still” in verse 18 literally translated 
mean “was silent.” Nine times in the Bible is it 
translated “keep silence”; five times at least, “be 
still”; in another passage, “held his peace’; in an- 
other, “quiet one’s self”; in another, “tarry”; in 
another, “wait”; and in another, “rest.” These 
renderings occur some thirty times, but it is never 
rendered “stand still” except in this one passage. 
Indeed, in the very passage in which it is rendered 
“tarry” (I Samuel 14:9), the words “stand still” do 
occur, but as the translation of an entirely differ- 
ent Hebrew word. The word translated “stayed” 
in verse 13 is sometimes translated “stand still.” It 
means literally “to stand” or “stand up,” but it is 
used of “tarrying” or remaining in any place, state 
or condition, as, for example, in II Kings 15:20; 
Genesis 45:1. So then, what the sun and moon are 


Josaua COMMANDING THE SUN To STAND STILL 65 


said to have done in the passage is to have tar- 
ried, tarried from disappearing, not that they 
stood absolutely still, but that their apparent mo- 
tion (or their disappearance) was slowed up or 
delayed. 

Furthermore, the Hebrew words translated “in 
the midst of heaven” mean literally “in the half of 


heaven.” The word translated “midst” in consid- ° 


erably more than one hundred cases is translated 
“half.” In only five or six cases is it rendered 
“midst,” and in one of these cases (Daniel 9:27) 
the revisers have changed “midst” to “half.” In the © 
remaining cases, it would be better translated 
“half” (e.g., Psalm 102:24). What Joshua then 
bade the sun to do was to linger in the half of the 
heavens, and that is what the sun is recorded as 
doing. There are two halves to the heavens, the 
half that is visible to us and the other half visible 
on the other side of the globe. 

The Hebrew preposition rendered “about” 
means primarily “as” or “so.” 

So put these facts together, and what the story 
tells us is that the sun continued or tarried above 
the visible horizon “as a whole day.” Apparently 
this means that an event occurred on this day 
near Gibeon, in the Valley of Ajalon, that occurs 
many days every year at the North Pole, namely, 
that the sun remained visible for the entire twen- 
ty-four hours. 

We are not told the method by which this was 
accomplished. It might have been a slight dip of 
the pole, or possibly by a refraction of the rays of 


66 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


light, or in other ways that we cannot conjecture. 
It certainly would not have necessitated such a 
crash in the physical universe as objectors have 
imagined. 

As to whether such a thing happened or not is 
a question of history. The history that we have 
reason to suppose is authentic in the book of 
Joshua says that it did. It is a remarkable fact that 
we have a suggestion of the same thing in history 
outside the Bible. Herodotus, the great Greek his- 
torian, tells us that the priests of Egypt showed 
him a record of a long day. The Chinese writings 
state that there was such a day in the reign of 
their emperor Yeo, who is supposed to have been 
a contemporary of Joshua. The Mexicans also have 
a record that the sun stood still for one entire day 
in the year which is supposed to correspond with 
the exact year in which Joshua was warring in 
Palestine. There is nothing of real weight to prove 
that there was no such day. So, upon careful ex- 
amination, this which is asserted to be “the most 
striking incident of Scripture and science being at 
variance” is found to be in no sense whatever an 
incident of Scripture and science, or Scripture and 
history, being at variance. 

The theory has been advanced that the words 
rendered ‘Stand thou still;” but which mean liter- 
ally “Be silent,” should be interpreted as meaning 
that Joshua commanded the sun to be silent in 
the sense of withholding its light, and that what 
occurred on this occasion was ‘not the prolonga- 


tion of a day but a dark day, so that Joshua had 


JosHua COMMANDING THE SuN TO STAND STILL 67 


the advantage of fighting practically at night, 
though it was really the time of day that ought 
to have been light. If this is the true interpretation 
of “Stand thou still,” all difficulty with the passage 
disappears. But while this interpretation might be 
admissible, it is difficult to see how some other 
portions of the narrative can be reconciled with 
this theory. And as already seen, the theory is 
not necessary to remove all difficulties in the pas- 
sage. 

In any event it was a miracle, but no one who 
believes in a God who is the Creator of the entire 
material universe, a God who is historically proved 
to have raised Jesus Christ from the dead, ever 
stumbles at the mere fact of a miracle. We believe 
in the miracle-working God. 


11 


DEBORAH'S PRAISE OF JAEL, 
THE “MURDERESS” 


IT Is FREQUENTLY ARGUED against the divine origin 
of the Bible that it defends and glorifies the 
treacherous murder of Sisera by Jael, and that any 
book that defends so violent and cruel and deceit- 
ful an action as this cannot have God for its au- 
thor. 

The very simple answer to this objection is that 
the Bible does not defend or glorify the action of 
Jael. The Bible records the act in all its details. It 
also records the fact that Deborah, the prophetess 
who judged Israel at that time (Judges 4:4), pre- 
dicted that the Lord would sell Sisera into the 
hand of a woman (Judges 4:9). It also records the 
fact that Deborah and Barak, in their joyful song 
of praise to the Lord after their deliverance from 
the cruel oppression of Sisera did say: “Blessed 
above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the 
Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in 
the tent” (Judges 5:24). But it is nowhere hinted 
in the Bible account that Deborah and Barak were 
speaking by divine inspiration in this song of 


68 


Dersoran’s PRAISE OF JAEL, THE “MurDERESS” 69 


thanksgiving and praise. The Bible, by speaking 
of Deborah as a prophetess, no more endorses 
every action and every utterance of Deborah than 
it endorses every action and utterance of Balaam, 
of whom it likewise speaks as a “prophet” (II Peter 
2:16). In the very passage in which it speaks of 
Balaam as a prophet, it speaks about his being re- 
buked for his iniquities. It is not the teaching of 
the Bible that every utterance of every prophet is 
the inspired Word of God. On the contrary, the 
Bible teaches that a prophet may tell lies (I Kings 
13:11-18). 

The Bible nowhere justifies Jael’s action. It re- 
cords the action. It records Deborah and Barak's 
praise of the action, but it nowhere endorses this 
praise. We are under no necessity, therefore, of 
trying to justify all the details of Jael’s conduct, 
nor indeed of trying to justify her conduct at all. 

But on the other hand, we must not unjustly 
judge Jael. We cannot judge her in the light of 
New Testament ethics, for she lived some 1,300 
years before Christ. She lived in a cruel age. Fur- 
thermore, she had to deal with a cruel oppressor 
who was working ruin among the people. It was a 
time of war, and war not conducted according to 
modern ideas of war, and we must judge her in 
the light of the conditions in which she lived. But 
even if her conduct were absolutely without ex- 
cuse, it does not in the least affect the proven 
fact of the divine origin of the Bible. For that 
Book makes absolutely no attempt to defend her 
conduct. It simply describes it. 


12 


THE SACRIFICE OF 
JEPHTHAHS DAUGHTER 


THE story of Jephthah’s daughter as recorded in 
the Bible has presented a great difficulty to many 
superficial students of the Bible, as well as to 
many critics of it. How can we possibly justify 
Jephthah’s burning of his daughter as a sacrifice 
to Jehovah? 

In the first place, we are nowhere told that 
Jephthah did burn his daughter. We are told that 
Jephthah vowed, “Whatsoever cometh forth of the 
doors cf my house to meet me, when I return in 
peace - om the children of Ammon, shall surely be 
the Lorp’s, and I will offer it up for a burnt-offer- 
ing” (Judges 11:31). 

The word translated “burnt-offering” does not 
necessarily involve the idea of burning. There is 
no record that Jephthah’s daughter was actually 
slain and burned. The passage that relates what 
actually was done with her is somewhat obscure, 
and many think that she was devoted by her 
father as an offering to God by her living a life of 
perpetual virginity (Judges 11:37-39). 


70 


THE SACRIFICE OF JEPHTHAH’S DAUGHTER TL 


But even supposing that she was actually slain 
and burned, as some Bible students believe 
(though the Bible does not actually say so), even 
in this case we are under no necessity of defend- 
ing Jephthah’s action any more than we are of de- 
fending any other wrong action of all the imper- 
fect instruments that God, in His wondrous grace 
and condescension, has seen fit to use to defend or 
help His people. The Bible itself nowhere defends 
Jephthah’s action. If Jephthah really did slay his 
daughter, he simply made a rash vow without any 
command or other warrant from God for so doing; 
and having made this rash vow, he went further 
in his wrongdoing and carried that rash vow into 
execution. 

So the whole story instead of being a warrant 
for human sacrifice is intended to be a lesson on 
the exceeding foolishness of hasty vows made in 
the energy of the flesh. 


13 


“IMPURE” BIBLE STORIES 


AN OLD AND FAVORITE OBJECTION to the Bible on 
the part of unbelievers is that there are in it 
“chapters that reek with obscenity from beginning 
to end.” 

That there are chapters in the Bible which de- 
scribe scenes that cannot be wisely dealt with in 
a mixed audience we have no desire to deny; but 
these chapters are not obscene. To speak in the 
plainest terms of sin, even the vilest of sins, in 
order to expose its loathsomeness and in order to 
picture man as he really is, is not obscenity. It is 
purity in one of its highest forms. Whether the 
story of sin is obscene or not depends entirely 
upon how it is told and for what purpose it is 
told. If the story is told in order to make a jest of 
sin, or in order to minimize or excuse sin, it is ob- 
scene. If the story is told in order to make men 
hate sin, to show men the hideousness of sin, to 
induce them to give sin as wide a berth as possi- 
ble, and to show their need of redemption, it is 
not obscene but morally wholesome. Now this is 
precisely the way in which sin is pictured in the 


72 


“ImpurRE’ BIBLE STORIES 73 


Bible. It is true that adultery and similar offenses 
against purity are mentioned by name without any 
attempt at mincing words. Revolting deeds of 
this character are plainly described, and their 
awful results related; but everything is so told as 
to make one recoil from these horrid and disgust- 
ing sins. Beyond a doubt many have been kept 
back from the practice of these sins by the plain 
things the Bible has said about them. Many others 
who have already fallen into these sins have been 
led by the Bible stories to see their enormity and 
their frightful consequences, and have thus been 
led to forsake them by what the Bible says about 
them. I am not speculating about this, but speak 
from large observation of men and women who 
have been tempted to these sins and have been 
held back by the Bible utterances regarding them, 
and also from wide experience with others who 
have fallen and have been lifted up and saved by 
the truth on these subjects contained in the Bible. 

It is said, “There is much in the Bible that is 
not fit to read in public,” and this is brought for- 
ward as if it were an argument against the Bible. 
But it is a foolish argument. There are many pas- 
sages in the very best and most valuable medical 
works that are not fit to be read in public, they 
are not even fit for a father to read to his children; 
but he would be a fool who would cut these pas- 
sages out of these medical works on that account; 
and he is equally a fool who objects to the Bible 
because there are passages in it which are invalu- 
able in their place, but which were not: intended 


74 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


for and are not adapted to public reading. The 
Bible is in part a book of moral anatomy and spir- 
itual therapeutics, and it would be a great defect 
in the book, in fact an indication that it was not 
from God, if it did not deal with these frightful 
facts about man as he is and with the method of 
healing for these foul moral diseases. 

I, for one, thank God that these passages are in 
the Bible. There are things that every boy and girl 
needs to know at a comparatively early age about 
some forms of sin, and loathsome sin. Many boys 
and girls have dropped into these forms of sin be- 
fore they realized their character simply because 
they were not warned against them. Ignorance 
about them is a misfortune. I know of no better 
way for them to become acquainted with the ef- 
fects of these sins that they need to know about 
than to read what the Bible had to say about 
them. 

Instead of finding fault with the Bible for these 
things in it, we ought to praise God for putting 
them there. For example, there are things in Ro- 
mans 1 that one cannot dwell upon in detail in 
public address. But these verses have been of 
greatest value in dealing with the heathen, and 
they have saved many a man in so-called Chris- 
tian lands from the loathsome sins that are there 
exposed and denounced. 

An objector to the Bible stated that parts of it 
consist of history and the narration of facts that 
cannot be mentioned in the presence of a modest 
woman without exciting discomfort. He ques- 


“ImMpuRE BIBLE STORIES 75 


tioned whether a woman should read in her room 
what she would dislike hearing at her dining table. 
This is considered a logical argument against the 
Bible. When one looks carefully at it and consid- 
ers it, it is seen to be utterly foolish. Most as- 
suredly a woman should be permited to read in 
her room what she would not discuss at her din- 
ing table. Every wise woman does it. I know of 
books most desirable for every woman to read, 
which if they were read at the table would cause 
her to wish to rise and leave the room in embar- 
rassment. There are many things that men and 
women ought to think about, and must think 
about, in private that they would not discuss in 
public. There are books on the proper conduct of 
women in the most sacred relation of life, a rela- 
tion as holy as any, which can be entered into the 
presence of a holy God with no question of His 
approval, but which does not call for public’ dis- 
cussion. It is strange that intelligent men and 
women should use arguments so childish as this. 

The Bible is a pure book as evidenced by the 
fact that it is not a favorite book in places of 
wickedness. On the other hand. authors that try 
to show that the Bible is an obscene book and that 
endeavor to keep people from reading it are ad- 
mired by those who seek excuse for their sinful 
practices. 

The infidel objectors to the Bible as an “obscene 
book” constantly betray their insincerity and hy- 
pocrisy. Colonel Ingersoll, in one passage where 
he dwelt upon this subject, objected to the Bible 


76 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


for telling vile deeds “without a touch of humor.” 
In other words, he did not object to telling stories 
of vice if only a joke was made of this sin. Thank 
God, that is exactly what the Bible does not do— 
make a joke of sin! It makes sin hideous. Men who 
are obscene in their own hearts object to the Bible 
as being an obscene book. 

Some of those who make the most of the so- 
called obscenity of the Book are themselves no- 
torious as tellers of obscene stories. 

One of the men who led the attack on the Bible 
on the ground of its obscenity was retained by 
publishers of obscene literature to defend their 
case. 

Another man, who was a leader in his city in 
attacking the Bible, challenging Christians to read 
in public certain portions of Scripture that were 
said to be immoral, was shortly afterward found 
dead by his own hand in a Boston hotel side by 
side with a young woman who was not his wife. 

A man who said, “I protest against the Bible 
being placed in the hands of the young because 
its pages reek with filth,” and who did not wish 
people to read these “vile portions” of Scripture 
lest their minds be defiled, took care to give a list 
of the passages that he did not wish read and 
asked his readers to “look them up.” Can anything 
exceed the hypocrisy of that? 

In one city where I was holding meetings a 
man would interrupt a service by calling out 
about portions of the Scripture that he regarded 
as improper and immoral. I learned he himself 


“IMPURE BIBLE STORIES ve: 


had been arrested and convicted for publishing 
obscene literature. The truth is, these men hate 
the Bible. They hate it because it denounces sin 
and makes them uneasy in sin. 

To sum it all up, there are in the Bible de- 
scriptions of sins that cannot wisely be read in 
every public assembly, but these descriptions of 
sin are morally most wholesome in the places 
where God, the Author of the Book, manifestly 
intends them to be read. The child who is brought 
up to read the Bible as a whole, from Genesis to 
Revelation, will come to know in the very best 
way possible what a child ought to know very 
early in life if he is to be safeguarded against the 
perils that surround our modern life on every 
hand. A child who is brought up upon a constant, 
thorough, continuous reading of the whole Bible 
is more likely than any other child to be free from 
the vices that are undermining the mental, moral 
and physical strength of our boys and girls, young 
men and young women. But the child who is 
brought up on infidel literature and conversation 
is easy prey for temptations of all kinds, as is the 
one who, through neglect of the Bible, is left in 
ignorance of the awful pitfalls of life. 


14 


DAVID’S SIN 


In II Samuet 11 we read the story of one of the 
saddest downfalls of a man of God recorded any- 
where in history, and at the same time we read 
the record of one of the most contemptible and 
outrageous sins that any man ever perpetrated 
against a faithful friend. We read how David com- 
mitted against his faithful warrior Uriah one of 
the most contemptible offenses that one man can 
commit against another, and how in order to cover 
up his sin he stained his hands with the blood of 
this faithful servant. After the deed was done, God 
in His mercy sent His prophet to David, declar- 
ing to him, “By this deed thou hast given great 
occasion to the enemies of the Lorp to blaspheme” 
(II Samuel 12:14). History has proved the truth 
of this declaration. There is scarcely anything in 
the Bible that has caused more of the enemies of 
the Lord to blaspheme than this dastardly crime 
of King David. They are constantly bringing it up 
and making it the butt of pitiless ridicule. 

Some who desire to defend the Bible have 
thought it necessary to defend David’s action, or 


78 


Davw’'s SIN 79 


at least to try to make it appear that it was not as 
heinous as it looks at first sight. But why should 
we seek to defend David's action? The Bible no- — 
where seeks to defend it. On the contrary, God 
rebuked it in the sternest terms. It was punished 
by a train of such frightful calamities as have sel- 
dom overtaken any other man. 

It is true that David is spoken of in the Scrip- 
tures as “a man after God’s own heart” (I Samuel 
13:14; Acts 13:22), but this does not mean by any 
means that David was an absolutely faultless man. 
It simply means that in distinction from Saul, who 
was constantly disposed to go his own way, David 
was a man who sought to know God’s will and to 
do it exactly. Therefore he was a man after God’s 
own heart; but though this was the abiding atti- 
tude of Davids’ mind and heart toward God, it 
was still possible for him, as it is possible for men 
today whose wills on the whole are entirely sur- 
rendered to God, to step out of the position of ab- 
solute surrender to God and in a moment of weak- 
ness and folly commit an act hideous in the sight 
of God—an act that would bring upon him His 
sternest judgment. 

The recording of David’s sin without any at- 
tempt to extenuate it in the Scripture is one of the 
many proofs of the divine origin and absolute re- 
liability of the Bible. David was the great hero of 
his times. Unless his Bible biographers had been 
guided by the Holy Spirit, they certainly would 
have concealed or at least have sought to palliate 
this awful fault of David; but in point of fact they 


80 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


did nothing of the kind. The Holy Spirit, who 
guided them in their record, led them to picture 
this event in all its hideousness, just as it is. Here 
is a radical difference between Bible biographers 
and all other biographers. Even the heroes of the 
Bible, when they fall, are not whitewashed. No 
excuses are offered for their sins. Their sins are 
not concealed from the public eye. They are re- 
corded with fullness of detail, and the sinner is 
held up as a warning to others. 

In this matter David “despised the command- 
ment of the Lorp, to do evil in his sight,” and the 
Bible plainly says so (II Samuel 12:9-10). “The 
thing that David had done displeased the Lorp” 
(II Samuel 11:27), and God sets him forth before 
the whole world as an adulterer and a murderer 
(II Samuel 12:9). The whole story is horrible, but 
if one will read it with earnest prayer he may find 
exceedingly precious lessons in it. It was a das- 
tardly and horrible crime, but I am glad it is re- 
corded in the Bible. The record of it and its con- 
sequences has held many back from contemplated 
sin. 

The story of David’s sin abounds in great les- 
sons. The first is that an exceptionally good man, 
yes, a man “after God’s own heart,” if he gets his 
eyes off God and His Word, may easily fall into 
very gross sin. Any man who trusts in his own 
heart is a fool. Any man who fancies that he is a 
match for the devil in his own wisdom and 
strength is badly deceived. David was one of the 
noblest men of his day. He was brave, he was gen- 


Davw’s SIN 81 


erous, he had a single-hearted purpose to do the 
will of God; but he allowed himself to trifle with 
temptation, and he went down to the depths of 
vileness, baseness and dishonor. 

The story also teaches that God never looks 
upon any man’s sin with the least degree of al- 
lowance. God has no favorites. He allows no one’s 
sins to go unpunished. God loved David. He had 
given David remarkable proofs of His love. But 
when David sinned, God dealt with David’s sin 
with the sternest and most relentless judgment. 
He allowed David's sin to dog him and to embit- _ 
ter and to blast his life to his dying day. God for- 
gave David's sin and restored him to fellowship 
and the joy of His salvation, but He let David 
drink deeply of the bitter cup he had mixed for 
himself. One of his sons followed him into adul- 
tery, the burden of which came upon David’s own 
daughter. Another son followed him into murder; 
and, as David had rebelled against his heavenly 
Father, his own son rebelled against him. David 
reaped what he sowed. When this rebellious son 
lay before him silent in death, David cried, “O 
my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would 
God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my 
son!” (II Samuel 18:33). David knew that Ab- 
salom’s wandering and death were the fruit of his 
Own sin. 

But there is another precious lesson for us too 
in the history of David’s sin. There is full and free 
pardon for the vilest sinner. David's sin was black, 
black as midnight; it was appalling, it was inex- 


82 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


cusable, but he found pardon full and free. David 
said, “I have sinned against the Lorp,” and God 
said through His prophet, “The Lorp also hath 
put away thy sin” (II Samuel 12:13). David him- 
self has told us in one of his most beautiful psalms 
the story of his pardon (Psalm 32:1-5). 

God is a holy God. He hates sin with infinite 
hatred. He will not look upon the smallest sin with 
the least bit of allowance. But God is also a God 
of pardoning love. He stands ready to pardon the 
vilest sinner. He is ever calling to men and women 
who- have sinned: “Let the wicked forsake his 
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and 
let him return unto the Lorn, and he will have 
mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will 
abundantly pardon” (Isaiah 55:7). There are 
those that think they have sinned too deeply to 
ever find pardon, but it is not so. It would be 
hard to find one who had sinned more deeply than 
David. He had committed the greatest wrong one 
man can commit against another, and he had 
stained his hands with the blood of his victim; 
still he found pardon. 

I do thank God for this story of David. It gives 
me hope for any man. In the light of it as told in 
the Bible, no matter who comes and asks me, “Is 
there salvation for me?” I do not hesitate to an- 
swer, “Yes, for you. David found mercy, and you 
can. 


15 


THE IMPRECATORY PSALMS 


A FREQUENT OBJECTION urged against the Bible is 
founded upon some of the utterances in the so- 
called imprecatory psalms. Many of these utter- 
ances have greatly perplexed earnest-minded 
Christians who have carefully studied the New 
Testament teaching regarding the forgiveness of 
enemies. 

Three passages in the Psalms are especially 
cited as showing that the Bible is not the Word 
of God. These are Psalm 58:6: “Break their teeth, 
O God, in their mouth.” It is said that this utter- 
ance exhibits so much vindictive passion that it 
could not possibly have been written under the 
inspiration of the Holy Spirit. The second passage 
objected to is Psalm 109:10: “Let his children be 
continually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek 
their bread also out of their desolate places.” The 
third passage is Psalm 137:8-9: “O daughter of 
Babylon, who are to be destroyed; happy shall he 
be, that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us. 
Happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy 


little ones agains the stones.” 


83 


84 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


What shall we say about these passages? 

First, we have already said in chapter 2 that 
God often simply records what others said—bad 
men, good men, inspired men and uninspired men. 
In the Psalms we have sometimes what God said 
to man, and that is always true; on the other hand 
we often have what men said to God, and that 
may or may not be true. All of the passages cited 
are what men said to God. They are the inspired 
record of men’s prayers to God. To God they 
breathed out the agony of their hearts and to God 
they cried for vengeance upon their enemies. 

Judged even by Christian standards, this was 
far better than taking vengeance into their own 
hands. Indeed, this is exactly what the New Tes- 
tament commands us to do regarding those who 
wrong us. Vengeance belongs to God, and He will 
repay (Romans 12:19). Instead of taking ven- 
geance into our own hands we should put it in 
His hands. 

There is certainly nothing wrong in asking God 
to break the teeth of wicked men who are using 
those teeth to tear the upright. This prayer is 
taken from a psalm that there is every reason to 
suppose is Davidic, as is also the second passage 
quoted. But it is a well-known fact that David in 
his personal dealings with his enemies was most 
generous, for when he had his bitterest and most 
dangerous enemy in his hand, an enemy who per- 
sistently sought his life, he not only refused to 
kill him, but refused to let another kill him (I 
Samuel 26:5-9). And even when he did so small 


THE IMPRECATORY PsaALMS 85 


a thing to Saul as to cut off the skirt of his robe, 
his heart convicted him even for that slight in- 
dignity offered to his bitterest and most implaca- 
ble enemy (I Samuel 24:5). 

How much better it would be if instead of tak- 
ing vengeance into our own hands we would 
breathe out the bitterness of our hearts to God and 
then treat our enemies as generously as David did! 
While David prayed to Jehovah in Psalm 109:10: 
“Let his children be continually vagabonds, and 
beg: let them seek their bread also out of their 
desolate places,” in point of fact, when he was in 
a place of power, he asked, “Is there yet any that 
is left of the house of Saul, that I may show him - 
kindness?” He found a grandson of Saul’s and had 
him eat at the king’s table as one of his own sons 
(II Samuel 9:1-2, 11). 

The utterance in Psalm 137:8-9 does sound very 
cruel, but the utterance is a prophecy rather than 
a prayer. It is the declaration of awful judgment 
that will come upon Babylon because of the way 
in which Babylon had treated the people of God. 
Babylon was to reap what it had sown. It was to 
be treated by others as it had treated the people 
of God. This was a literal prophecy of what ac- 
tually occurred afterward in Babylon. We find a 
similar but even more awful prophecy of the com- 
ing doom of Babylon in Isaiah 13:15-18. 

When we study these imprecatory psalms in the 
light that is thrown upon them from other pas- 
sages of Scripture, all the supposed difficulties dis- 
appear, and we find that there is nothing here 


86 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


that is not in perfect harmony with the thought 
that the whole Bible is God’s Word, though in 
some instances while the record of what is said 
is correct and exact, that which is recorded as 
being said may not in itself be right; but it is 
God’s Word that man said it, though what man 
said was not God’s word. 


16 


DOES THE GOD OF TRUTH AND 
LOVE SEND LYING SPIRITS 
AND EVIL SPIRITS TO MENP 


ONE OF THE MosT puzzling passages in the Bible 
is found in I Kings 22, and in the parallel account ~ 
in II Chronicles 18. In these passages the Prophet 
Micaiah is reported as saying, “Therefore hear 
thou the word of the Lorn” (v. 19, RV). Then he 
goes on: “I saw the Lorp sitting on his throne, and 
all the host of heaven standing by him on his right 
hand and on his left.” Jehovah is pictured as ask- 
ing the assembled host who would go and per- 
suade Ahab that he may go up to Ramoth-gilead. 
Then a lying spirit is represented as coming forth 
and standing before the Lord, and saying, “I will 
go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of 
all his prophets.” Then Jehovah is represented as 
saying to the lying spirit, “Thou shalt entice him, 
and shalt prevail also: go forth, and do so” (vv. 
20-22, RV). 

At first glance it appears as if the Lorp sanc- 
tioned and took part in lying and deception. What 
is the explanation? 


87 


88 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


It is clearly given in the context. Micaiah, speak- 
ing by the Holy Spirit, is seeking to dissuade Ahab 
and Jehoshaphat from going up to Ramoth-gilead. 
All the false prophets have told the two kings that 
they should go up to victory. Micaiah, the mes- 
senger of the Lord, tells them on the contrary that 
they shall go up to defeat and to the certain death 
of Ahab. He tells them that the spirit that had 
spoken by the false prophets was a lying spirit. 
He puts this in a highly pictorial way. Though the 
picture is exceedingly vivid, it does not teach 
error, but truth, and teaches it in a most forcible 
way, namely, that it was a lying spirit that was in 
the mouth of the false prophets. But that Jehovah 
was not really a party to the deception appears 
clearly in the narrative, if we take it as a whole. 
Far from being a party to the deception, He sends 
His own prophet to warn them that the spirit that 
spoke by the false prophets was a lying spirit, and 
to tell them the exact facts in the case as to what 
the issue of the battle would be. If they would 
choose to listen to God and His prophet they 
would be saved from calamity, but if they would 
not listen to God and His prophet then God 
would give them over to the working of error, 
that they should believe a lie; but He would not 
do this without abundant warning. 

This is God’s universal method, not only as 
taught in the Bible but as taught in experience. 
He allows every man to choose either to listen to 
Him and know the truth, or to turn a deaf ear to 
Him and be given over to strong delusion. If men 


Does Gop SEnp Ly1nc ANnb Evin Spirits? 89 


will not receive the love of the truth that they 
may be saved, then God gives them over to strong 
delusion to believe a lie. If men want lies, God 
gives them their fill of them (II Thessalonians 2: 
10-12, RV). 

Other passages of the Bible seem to teach that 
God sends evil spirits to men, and the question 
arises: How can we believe that a good God, a 
God of love, sends evil spirits to men? Let us 
turn to a passage in which this is taught, and we 
will soon find an answer to the difficulty. 

In I Samuel 16:14 (RV) we read: “Now the 
Spirit of the Lorp had departed from Saul, and 
an evil spirit from the Lorp troubled him.” , 

What is meant by “an evil spirit”? The context 
clearly shows. It was a spirit of discontent, unrest, 
depression. 

The circumstances were these: Saul had proved 
untrue to God. He had deliberately disobeyed 
God (I Samuel 15:4-35, especially vv. 22-23), and 
consequently God had withdrawn His Spirit from 
him, and a spirit of discontent and unrest had 
come upon him. 

This was not an unkind act on God's part. There 
was nothing kinder that God could have done. It 
is one of the most merciful provisions of our 
heavenly Father that when we disobey Him and 
wander from Him He makes us unhappy, discon- 
tented in our sin. If God should leave us to con- 
tinue to be happy in sin, it would be the unkind- 
est thing He could do. God in His great mercy 
will win every sinner possible back to Himself; 


90 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


and if we sin, God for our highest good sends us 
deep depression and unrest in our sin. If we make 
the right use of this spirit of unrest and depression 
that God sends us, it brings us back to God and te 
the joy of the Holy Ghost. Saul made the wrong 
use of it. Instead of allowing his unrest of heart to 
bring him to repentance and back to God, he al- 
lowed it to embitter his soul against one whom 
God favored. The sending of the evil spirit was an 
act of mercy on God’s part. The misuse of this act 
of mercy resulted in Saul’s utter undoing. 

There is many a man today who once knew 
something about the Spirit of the Lord and the 
joy of the Holy Ghost, who has fallen into sin, 
and God in His great love and mercy is sending 
him at the present time an evil spirit, a spirit of 
unrest, dissatisfaction, deep discontent, or even of 
abject misery. Let him thank God for it! Let him 
inquire humbly on his face before God where he 
has sinned against God and lost the joy of his sal- 
vation! Let him put away and confess his sin and 
come back to God and have the joy of God’s sal- 
vation renewed to him. An evil spirit of unrest and 
discontent was sent to David, too, when he sinned; 
but when after some resistance David confessed 
his sin to the Lord, the Lord blotted it out and 
brought him into a place of glad joy in the Lord, 
where he could instruct and teach others in the 
way they should go (Psalm 32:4-8; 51:9-13). 


17 
JONAH AND THE WHALE 


THE sTorY OF Jonah and “the whale” has for many 
years been a butt of ridicule with unbelievers, and 
the cause of not a little perplexity with those who 
are “unlearned and unstable.” The story is quite 
generally discredited by the destructive critics as 
being unhistorical. They attempt to explain it as 
allegory or parable. Those who desire to discredit 
the full inspiration and absolute veracity of the 
Bible have again and again assured us with a 
great show of scientific knowledge that such is the 
structure of a whale’s mouth and the configuration 
of his throat that it would be impossible for a full- 
grown man either to pass through the sieve in its 
mouth or the narrow orifice of its throat, to say 
nothing of his coming out again alive and whole. 

What shall we say to all this? 

First of all, let us notice the fact that the Bible 
nowhere says that Jonah was swallowed by a 
whale. In Jonah 1:17 we are told that Jehovah 
“prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah, and 
Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and 
three nights.” There is no mention here whatever 


91 


92 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


of this great fish being a whale, with its peculiarly 
constructed mouth and throat. It may have been 
either a fish altogether prepared for the occasion, 
or a fish already existing providentially sent 
around for the purpose God had in view. It is true 
that in Jesus’ reference to this historical event in 
Matthew 12:40 in the Authorized and the Revised 
versions He said that Jonah was three days and 
three nights in “the whale’s belly”; but we read in 
the margin of the Revised Version that the Greek 
of the word rendered “whale” is “sea monster.” 
One cannot help wondering why the translators 
should continue to put “whale” in the text if the 
Greek. word means “sea monster,” and it certainly 
does. In the Septuagint translation of the book of 
Jonah, “a great fish” is rendered by a Greek ad- 
jective meaning “great” and by the same word 
that is used in Matthew 12:40 and translated 
“whale.” The word whale was in the mind of the 
translators and not in the word spoken by Jesus, 
so in neither the Old Testament nor the New Tes- 
tament account is it said that Jonah was swal- 
lowed by a whale, but by a great fish or sea mon- 
ster. These scholarly critics have spent much labor 
in proving the absurdity of something God did not 
say. 

We are not told what the great fish was, but it 
is a well-known fact that there exist or have ex- 
isted until recent times in the Mediterranean Sea, 
where the recorded event seems to have taken 
place, sea monsters—that is, dog sharks—large 
enough to swallow a man or horse whole. In fact, 


JONAH AND THE WHALE 93 


it is recorded that a man fell overboard in the 
Mediterranean and was swallowed by one of these 
_ sea monsters, the monster was killed and the man 

rescued alive. A whole horse was taken out of the 
belly of another. as 

Furthermore, even if the Bible had said that the 
great fish was a whale, there would be no such 
difficulty with the narrative as has been supposed 
by unbelievers and the uninformed. While it is 
true that there are some kinds of whales whose 
mouth and throat are of such a formation that it 
would be impossible for a full-grown man to pass 
through, it is not true of all kinds of whales. 

The well-known author, Frank Bullen, in his 
book The Cruise of the Cachalot says that “a 
shark fifteen feet in length has been found in the 
stomach of a cachalot.” He tells further that 
“when dying, the sperm whale always ejects the 
contents of its stomach.” He tells of one whale that 
was caught and killed, “the ejected food from 
whose stomach was in masses of enormous size, 
some of them being estimated to be the size of our 
hatch-house, viz., 8 feet by 6 feet by 6 feet.” Of 
course such a whale would have no difficulty in 
swallowing a man, so the whole objection to the 
Bible narrative from the standpoint that a whale 
could not swallow a man is not founded upon su- 
perior knowledge, but upon ignorance. 

Someone may say that the action of the gastric 
juices would kill a man within a whale or other 
sea monster. 

But this leaves God out of the transaction, 


94 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


whereas in the Bible story God is very prominent 
in the whole transaction. The God who made both 
the monster and the man and the gastric juices 
could quite easily control the gastric juices and 
preserve the man alive. We are not trying to infer 
that the transaction was not miraculous in any 
event, but those who really believe in God and 
have had any large experience with God have no 
trouble with the miraculous. 

It ought to be added, moreover, that the Bible 
does not tell us that Jonah remained alive during 
the period that he was in the belly of the great 
fish. There are things in the narrative as recorded 
in the book of Jonah that make it appear as if he 
did not remain alive (Jonah 2:2, 5-6, RV; see mar- 
gin). There seems to be a strong probability that 
Jonah actually did die and was raised from the 
dead. If he actually did die, this only adds one 
more to the resurrections recorded in the Bible 
and makes Jonah a still more remarkable type of 
Christ. To those who believe in God, there is no 
difficulty in believing in the resurrection if suffi- 
ciently well attested. “Why should it be thought 
a thing incredible with you that God should raise 
the dead?” There are numerous instances on rec- 
ord, at least of resuscitation of men and women 
who to all appearances had been dead for some 
days. The historicity of this event is endorsed by 
Jesus Christ Himself (Matthew 12:40). To think 
of it as being merely allegory or parable is to dis- 
credit the words of Jesus. 


JONAH AND THE WHALE 95 


So, on careful examination of what the Scripture 
says, and of the facts of history, all the difficulties 
supposed to exist in’ the story of Jonah and the 
_ whale are found té disappear. 


18 


SOME IMPORTANT 
“CONTRADICTIONS” IN 
THE BIBLE 


I AM CONSTANTLY MEETING MEN who say that the 
Bible is full of contradictions. When I ask them to 
show me one, they reply, “It is full of them.” 
Wher I press them to point out one, usually they 
have no more to say. But now and then I meet an 
infidel who does know enough about his Bible to 
point out some apparent contradictions. In this 
chapter we shall consider some of these. 


Can MAN SEE Gop? 


One of those most frequently brought forward 
is the apparent contradiction between John 1:18, 
where we read, “No man hath seen God at any 
time,” and Exodus 24:10, where we are told that 
Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy 
of the elders of Israel “saw the God of Israel.” 
(There are also other passages in which men are 
said. to have seen God.) 

Now this certainly looks like a flat contradic- 
tion, and many besides skeptics have been puzzled 


96 


SOME ImporTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 97 


by it. Indeed, one of the most devout men I ever 
knew was so puzzled by it that he left his place of 
business and came miles in great perturbation of 
spirit to ask me about it. The solution of this ap- 
parently unanswerable difficulty is in reality very 
simple. 

We must remember first of all that two state- 
ments which in terms flatly contradict one another 
may both be absolutely true, for the reason that 
the terms are not used in the same sense in the 
two statements. 

For example, if any man should ask me if I ever 
saw the back of my head, I might answer, “No, I 
never saw the back of my head,” and this state- 
ment would be strictly true. Or I might answer, 
“Yes, I have seen the back of my head,” and this 
statement would also be true, though it appears 
to flatly contradict the other. The back of my head 
I never have seen, but more than once when look- 
ing into a mirror with another mirror back of me 
I have seen the back of my head. What I should 
answer depends entirely upon what the man 
means. If he means one thing I answer no, and 
that is true. If he means another thing I answer 
yes, and that is equally true. 

But someone may object, “In the latter case you 
did not really see the back of your head. What 
you saw was a reflection of the back of your head 
in the mirror.” 

But to this I would reply, “Neither do you see 
the back of anyone’s head when you are looking at 


98 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


it. What you see is the reflection of that person's 
head upon the retina of your eye.” 

But everyone knows what you mean when you 
use language in this common sense, everyday way. 
They know that when you say you saw the back 
of another man’s head you mean you saw a reflec- 
tion of it upon the retina of your eye, and they 
know when you say you saw the back of your own 
head in the glass that you mean you saw the re- 
flection of the back of your head in the glass. In 
the one case you see the reflection, in the other 
case you see the reflection of the reflection, and in 
both cases what you actually see is the thing that 
was reflected. 

Now this case is very much like this illustration. 
God in His eternal essence is invisible (“unsee- 
able,” I Timothy 1:17). No man has seen Him, 
nor can we see Him (I Timothy 6:16). He is 
spirit, not form (John 4:23-24). John tells us in 
the passage before us a profound and wondrous 
truth: “No man hath seen God at any time. The 
only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Fa- 
ther, he hath declared him.” That is, this invisible 
(unseeable) God is unfolded to us, interpreted to 
us (the word here translated “declared” is the 
word from which our word “exegesis” is derived), 
in the words and in the person of Jesus Himself. 
So fully is He declared, not only in the words of 
Jesus but in His person, that Jesus could say, “He 
that hath seen me hath seen the Father” (John 
14:9). 

But this essentially invisible God has been 


SoME ImMporTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 99 


pleased in His great grace to manifest Himself 
again and again in bodily form. Moses and the 
seventy elders saw such a manifestation of God 
(or a theophany) when they were in the mount. 
Isaiah saw such a manifestation in the temple 
(Isaiah 6:1), and in describing it he properly de- 
clared, “I saw the Lorn.” Job saw such a manifes- 
tation and was so humbled by the actual coming 
face to face with God Himself that he cried, “I 
abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes” (Job 
42:6). It was God that was manifested in these 
theophanies, so it was God they saw. 

We see then that both of these apparently flatly 
contradictory statements: “No man hath seen God 
at any time” and “Moses [and the others] saw 
God” are perfectly true. 

Jesus Christ Himself was the crowning mani- 
festation of God. “In him dwelleth all the fulness 
of the Godhead bodily” (that is, in bodily form, 
Colossians 2:9). So Jesus said to Philip with perfect 
propriety, “He that hath seen me hath seen the Fa- 
ther.” The time is coming when all the pure in 
heart shall behold God permanently manifested in 
bodily form (Matthew 5:8). The form in which 
Jesus existed in His preexistent state in the glory 
was the form of God (Philippians 2:6, see RV 
marg.). The Greek word which is translated 
“form” in this passage means “the form by which 
a person or thing strikes the vision—the external 
appearance” (Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of 
the New Testament), so we are clearly taught that 
the external appearance of Jesus in His preexistent 


100 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


form was the external appearance of God, that is, 
that the invisible God, who is a spirit in His es- 
sential essence, manifests Himself in an external, 
visible form. 


THE SUPERSCRIPTIONS ON THE Cross 


A second “contradiction,” of which the infidels 
make a great deal, and by which not a few be- 
lievers are puzzled, is that found in the four ac- 
counts of the superscriptions on the cross. We read 
in Matthew 27:37: “And set up over his head his 
accusation written, This is Jesus the King of the 
Jews.” We read in Mark 15:26: “And the super- 
scription of his accusation was written over, The 
King of the Jews.” We read in Luke 23:38: “And 
there was also a superscription over him, This is 
the King of the Jews” (RV). And we read in John 
19:19: “And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the 
cross. And the writing was, Jesus of Nazareth the 
King of the Jews.” Now no two of these agree ab- 
solutely in the words used. How can all four pos- 
sibly be right? It is said that at least three must 
be wrong, at least in part. A great deal is made of 
this difficulty by those who argue against the 
verbal inspiration of the Scriptures. 

I am surprised that anyone should make so 
much of it, for the answer is found so plainly 
stated in the very passages cited that it is surpris- 
ing that any careful student should have over- 
looked it. John tells us in John 19:20 (RV) that 
in order that all the different nationalities present 


SOME ImporTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 101 


might read it, the charge upon which Jesus was 
crucified was written in Hebrew, Latin and Greek; 
in Hebrew for the common people, in Latin for 
the Romans, and in Greek, the universal language. 
The substantial part of the charge was that Jesus 
claimed to be “the King of the Jews” and-was cru- 
cified for making this claim, so these words, “The 
King of the Jews,” appear in the Hebrew and 
Latin and Greek. They also appear in all four ac- 
counts of the four Gospels. Matthew (writing for 
the Jews) would naturally give the inscription as 
it appeared in Hebrew; Mark (writing for the Ro- 
mans ) would be likely to give it as it appeared in 
the Latin; and Luke as it appeared in the Greek. 
Presumably John gives it in the full Roman form, 
“Jesus of Nazareth” being a full and explicit state- 
ment of who Jesus was, and the charge being His 
claim to be “the King of the Jews.” 

The only thing left to account for is the differ- 
ence between Mark and John. But if we carefully 
read Mark 15:26 we see that Mark does not claim 
to give the full wording that appeared on the 
cross. He simply says, “The superscription of His 
accusation was written over.” The accusation was 
“the King of the Jews,” and this Mark gives, and 
this alone. The words “This is Jesus of Nazareth” 
were not the accusation, but the name of the ac- 
cused. 

So all this difficulty, of which so much is made, 
disappears altogether when we notice exactly what 
is said and all that is said. 


102 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


THE CONVERSION OF SAUL 


Another “contradiction” of which a great deal is 
made is that which seems to. exist between two 
different accounts of the conversion of Saul of Tar- 
sus. We are told in Acts 9:7 that those who jour- 
neyed with Saul to Damascus heard the voice that 
spoke to Saul, but saw no man. On the other hand 
Paul, in relating to the Jews in Jerusalem the story 
of his conversion, says, “They that were with me 
beheld indeed the light, but they heard not the 
voice of him that spoke to me” (Acts 22:9, RV). 
Now these two statements seem to flatly contra- 
dict one another. Luke, in recounting the conver- 
sion, says that the men that journeyed with Paul 
heard the voice; but Paul himself in recounting 
his conversion says that they did not hear the 
voice. Could there possibly be a flatter contradic- 
tion than this? 

But this apparent contradiction disappears when 
we look at the Greek of the two passages. The 
Greek word translated “heard” governs two cases, 
the genitive and the accusative. When the voice 
of a person or thing which is heard is spoken of, it 
is followed by the genitive. When the message 
that is heard is spoken of it is followed by the ac- 
cusative. In Acts 9:7 the-genitive is used. They 
did hear the voice, the sound. In Acts 22:9 the 
words translated “the voice” are in the accusative. 
They did not hear the message of the One that 
spoke. The word rendered “voice” also has two 
meanings: first, “a sound, a tone,” and second, “a 
voice,” that is, “a sound of uttered words” (Thay- 


SOME ImMporRTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 1038 


ers Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testa- 
ment). The voice as a mere sound they heard; 
they did not hear the voice as the sound of uttered 
words; they did not hear the message. 

So another seeming difficulty entirely disappears 
when we look exactly at what the Bible in the 
original says. Instead of having an objection to 
the Bible we have another illustration of its ab- 
solute accuracy, not only down to a word but 
down to a single letter that ends a word and by 
which a case in indicated. 


THE RESURRECTION OF JEsus CHRIST 


A good deal is made of the apparent contradic- 
tions in the various accounts of the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ from the dead. A prominent unbe- 
liever sent to the daily papers the following prob- 
lem for me to solve. He said, “The account of the 
visit to the grave is entirely different in the four 
Gospels. Two of the Gospels state that the women 
saw two angels at the grave, and two of the other 
Gospels state that they only saw one angel.” 

What is the solution of this apparent difficulty? 

First of all, the objector does not truly state the 
facts in the case. Far from its being true that two 
of the Gospels state that they “saw only one 
angel,” not one of the Gospels states that they saw 
only one angel. It is true that Matthew says that 
“they san an angel” (28:1-5), and Mark says: 
“They saw a young man,” presumably an angel 
(16:5-7); but neither Matthew nor Mark says that 
they saw “only” one angel. Saying that they saw 


104 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


one does not preclude the possibility of their see- 
ing two. 

Furthermore, it is not true that two of the Gos- 
pels state that the women saw two angels at the 
grave. It is true that Luke says (24:3-4) that after 
they had entered into the sepulcher two men (pre- 
sumably angels) stood by them in dazzling ap- 
parel. But this apparently does not refer to the 
incident that Matthew refers to at all, for the angel 
there mentioned was an angel who was outside 
the sepulcher. Nor does it seem to refer to the 
same fact of which Mark speaks, for the young 
man (or angel) in Mark’s gospel was one who was 
sitting on the right side of the sepulcher. This 
angel may have been joined later by the one who 
was on the outside, and these two together may 
have stood by the women. This seems more likely, 
as the message uttered by the two in Luke is in 
part the same as that uttered by the angel outside 
the sepulcher in Matthew, and by the young man 
inside the sepulcher in Mark (cf. Luke 24:5-6; 
Matthew 28:5-7; Mark 16:5-7). The very simple 
solution is that there was an angel outside the 
tomb when the women approached, and they saw 
another one inside sitting. The one outside en- 
tered, and the one sitting arose, and standing by 
the women they uttered together or after one an- 
other the words recorded in Matthew and in Mark 
and in Luke. 

But how about the account in John? John does 
tell us that there were two angels in white sitting, 
one at the head and one at the feet where the 


SoME Important “ConTRADICTIONS” 105 


body of Jesus had lain (John 20:12-13). How can 
we reconcile that with the other three? Very eas- 
ily. It was not the group of women at all that saw 
these two angels, but we are distinctly told it was 
Mary alone. Mary started out with the other 
women for the sepulcher, got a little ahead of the 
group, was the first to see the stone rolled away 
from the tomb (John 20:1), immediately jumped 
at the conclusion that the tomb had been rifled, 
and ran at top speed to the city to carry the news 
to Peter and John (John 20:2), While she was 
going into the city, the other women reached and 
entered the tomb, and the things recorded in Mat- 
thew, Mark and Luke occurred. These women 
left the sepulcher before Mary reached it the sec- 
ond time. Peter and John had also left it when 
Mary reached the sepulcher; and two angels, the 
one who had been on the outside and the one who 
at first had been sitting on the inside, were both 
sitting, one at the head and the other at the feet 
where the body of Jesus had lain. 

All the other apparent contradictions in the four 
accounts of the resurrection—and they are quite 
numerous—also disappear on careful study. But 
these apparent contradictions are themselves proof 
of the truth and the accuracy of the accounts. It 
is evident that these four accounts are separate 
and independent accounts. If four different per- 
sons had sat down to make up a story in collusion 
of a resurrection that never occurred, they would 
have made their four accounts appear to agree, 
at least on the surface. Whatever contradictions 


106 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


there might be in the four accounts would only 
come out after minute and careful study. But just 
the opposite is the case here. It is all on the sur- 
face that the apparent contradictions occur. It is 
only by careful and protracted study that the real 
agreement shines forth. It is just such a harmony 
as would not exist between four accounts fabri- 
cated in collusion. It is just such an agreement as 
would exist in four independent accounts of sub- 
stantially the same circumstances, each narrator 
telling the same story from his own standpoint, 
relating such details as impressed him, omitting 
other details which did not impress him but which 
did impress another narrator and which the other 
narrator related. Sometimes two accounts would 
seem to contradict one another, but the third ac- 
count would come in and unintentionally recon- 
cile the apparent discrepancies between the two. 
This is precisely what we have in the four ac- 
counts of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. We may 
heartily thank God that there are these apparent 
discrepancies among them. And even if we cannot 
find the solution of some apparent discrepancies, 
the fact that we do by careful study find a solu- 
tion of what appeared to be an inexplicable con- 
tradiction will suggest to us the certainty that if 
we knew all the facts in the case, we would also 
find a solution of the apparent discrepancies which 
we cannot reconcile as yet. The more one studies 
the four accounts of the resurrection, the more he 
will be convinced, if he is candid, that they are 
separate and independent accounts, and a truth- 


SOME ImMporTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 107 


ful narration of what actually occurred. They 
could not have been fabricated in collusion with 
one another—the very discrepancies urged prove 
this. Much less could they have been fabricated 
independently of one another. Four men sitting 
down independently of one another to fabricate 
an account of something that never occurred 
would have agreed with one another nowhere, 
but in point of fact the more we study these four 
accounts the more clearly we discover how mar- 
velously they fit in with one another. 

What has been said about the apparent dis- 
crepancies between the four accounts of the resur- 
rection will apply also to other apparent discrep- 
ancies in the different gospel narratives of the 
same event. They are very numerous, and to take 
them all up in detail would require a volume, but 
the illustration given above will serve to prove 
how these apparent discrepancies can be recon- 
ciled one by one if we take them up thoroughly. 


Does Gop REPENT? 


Another apparent “contradiction” of the Scrip- 
ture of which a great deal is made and which has 
puzzled a great many believers follows. 

We read in Malachi 3:6, “For I am the Lorp, I 
change not”; in James 1:17, “Every good gift and 
every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down 
from the Father of lights, with whom is no vari- 
ableness, neither shadow of turning”; and in I 
Samuel 15:29, “And also the Strength of Israel will 
not lie nor repent: for he is not a man, that he 


108 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


should repent.” But in apparently flat contradic- 
tion of these we read in Jonah 3:10, “And God 
saw their works, that they turned from their evil 
way; and God repented of the evil, that he had 
said that he would do unto them; and he did it 
not”; and in Genesis 6:6, “And it repented the 
Lorp that he had made man on the earth, and it 
grieved him at his heart.” Here it not only says “it 
repented God,” but “it grieved him at his heart.” 
Now this appears like a flat contradiction. What is 
the explanation? 

What the first set of passages says is absolutely 
true, that God is absolutely unchangeable. He is 
“the same yesterday, and today, and for ever” 
(Hebrews 13:8). But the second class of passages 
is also true, for if God does remain the same in 
character, infinitely hating sin and absolutely un- 
changeable in His purpose to visit sin with judg- 
ment, then if any city or any person changes in 
atitude toward sin, God must necessarily change 
in His attitude toward that person or city. If God 
remains the same, if His attitude toward sin and 
righteousness is unchanging, then His dealings 
with men must change as they turn from sin to 
repentance. His character remains ever the same, 
but His dealings with men change as they change 
from the position that is hateful to His unchang- 
ing hatred of sin to one that is pleasing to His un- 
changing love of righteousness: . 

We may illustrate this by the direction of a rail- 
way station that remains stationary, relative to a 
train that moves along the track in front of the 


SOME ImporTANT “CoNnTRADICTIONS” 109 


' station. When the train begins to move it is to the 
east of the station, but as the train moves west- 
ward it is soon west of the station. The only way 
in which the station could maintain the same di- 
rection relative to the moving train would be by 
moving as the train moves. If the station is un- 
changeable in its position, its direction relative to 
the train must change as the train moves. So it is 
with God’s attitude toward man. If God remains 
unchangeable in His character, His purpose and 
His position, then as man moves from sin to 
righteousness, God's attitude relative to that man 
must change. The very fact that God does not re- 
pent (change His mind), that He remains always 
the same in His attitude toward sin, makes it nec- 
essary that God should repent in His conduct 
(change His dealings) with men as they turn 
from sin to righteousness. 

As to Jehovah’s repenting of having made man 
on the earth and its grieving Him at His heart, 
this too is necessitated by the unchanging attitude 
of God toward sin. If Goes does not repent 
(change His mind about sin, His attitude toward 
sin), and if man’s wickedness becomes great, then 
God’s unrepenting, unchanging hatred of sin ne- 
cessitates that the man whom He has created, who 
has fallen into sin so great and so abhorrent to 
Himself, should become the object of great grief 
to Him, and that He should turn from His cre- 
ative dealings with man to His destroying deal- 
ings with man. This was necessitated by man’s sin. 
An unchangeably holy God must destroy man 


HIG: *- DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


who has become so hopelessly sunken in sin. The 
only condition upon which He could spare him 
would be that God Himself change from the holi- 
ness of His character as it was when He created 
him to become an unholy God. 

So again we see that what appears at the first 
glimpse like a flat contradiction is really no con- 
tradiction at all but an entire agreement in fact 
and thought between passages that seem to con- 
tradict in words. 


Wuo Movep Davip To NUMBER ISRAEL? 


Another apparent contradiction of Scripture is 
found in II Samuel 24:1 compared with I Chron- 
icles 21:1. In II Samuel 24:1 (RV), we read that 
“the anger of the Lorp was kindled against Is- 
rael, and he moved David against them, saying, 
Go number Israel and Judah.” But in I Chronicles 
21:1 we read, “And Satan stood up against Israel 
and moved David to number Israel.” In one pas- 
sage, therefore, we are told that Jehovah moved 
David against the people when He said, “Go 
number Israel and Judah”; in the other passage 
we are told that Satan moved David to number 
Israel. Which is the correct account? 

The very simple answer to this question is that 
both accounts are correct. 

We need not suppose that an error has crept 
into the text and that “he” appears instead of 
“Satan,” so that what really was recorded in 
Samuel would be “And again the anger of the 
Lorp was kindled against Israel, and Satan moved 


SOME IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” Ith 


David against them,” meaning that the anger of 
‘the Lord was kindled because David yielded to 
Satan's moving him. Of course it is possible that 
such an error may have crept into the text, or it 
is possible that the pronoun “he” really refers to 
Satan, who is not mentioned; or the “he” might 
be interpreted “one,” without any designation as 
to who the “one” was. If this were so there would 
be no difficulty whatever in the passage. 

But there is no insuperable difficulty in any 
case to anyone who understands the Bible teach- 
ing regarding God’s relation to temptation, and 
the attitude that He takes toward Satan. In II 
Corinthians 12:7 (RV) we are told by Paul that 
lest he should be exalted above measure through 
the abundance of the revelations made to him 
there was given him a thorn in the flesh, “a mes- 
senger of Satan,” to buffet him. Now as the pur- 
pose of this thorn in the flesh, this “messenger of 
Satan,” was most salutary, to keep Paul from 
being “exalted overmuch,” evidently it was God 
who gave him the thorn in the flesh, the “messen- 
ger of Satan”; but nonetheless the messenger was 
a messenger of Satan. In other words God uses 
Satan, evil as he is, for our good, for our moral 
discipline. Just as God makes the wrath of man to 
praise Him (Psalm 76:10), so He makes even the 
wrath of Satan to praise Him. What Satan intends 
only for evil God uses for our good. It was Satan 
who tempted David, but it was by God's permis- 
sion that Satan tempted him, and back of the 
testing and consequent failure of David and the 


112 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


salutary humiliation of David that came out of it 
was God; and in this sense it was God who moved 
David to the act that David might discover 
through his failure what was in his own heart. 


19 


“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 


Tue BIBLE Is samp not only to be full of contradic- 
tions, but also to contain mistakes. 

One of the “mistakes” most constantly referred 
to by critics is found in Matthew 27:9-10 (RV): 
“Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by 
Jeremiah the prophet, saying, And they took the 
thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was 
valued, whom certain of the children of Israel did 
price, and gave them for the potter's field, as the 
Lord appointed me.” 

Now the passage here referred to by Matthew 
is found in the prophecy ascribed in the Old Tes- 
tament to Zechariah (Zechariah 11:11-13). At first 
sight this appears as if Matthew had made a mis- 
take and ascribed to Jeremiah a prophecy that was 
really made by Zechariah. 

Even John Calvin seems to have thought that 
Matthew made a mistake. He says, “How the 
name of Jeremiah crept in I confess I do not know, 
nor do I give myself much trouble to inquire. The 
passage itself plainly shows the name of Jeremiah 
has been put down by mistake instead of Zecha- 


113 


lizy. DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


riah; for in Jeremiah we find nothing of this sort, 
nor anything that even approaches it.” 

This passage has been pressed as proof that the 
gospel narratives are not necessarily historical ac- 
counts of what actually occurred. Must we admit 
that Matthew was mistaken? There is not the 
slightest necessity. 

In the first place, in some manuscripts the word 
“Jeremiah” does not appear, but the passage 
reads: “Then was fulfilled that which was spoken 
by the prophet” without any mention as to who 
the prophet was. In still another reading, “Zech- 
ariah” appears instead of “Jeremiah.” Wescott and 
Hort do not accept the reading without “Jere- 
miah,” nor the reading which substitutes “Zech- 
ariah” for “Jeremiah,” but they do mention these 
readings, especially the first, as “noteworthy re- 
jected readings.’ Some of the earliest and best 
manuscripts omit the word “Jeremiah.” So the 
apparent mistake here may be due to the error of 
a copyist. 

However, the best textual critics all accept the 
reading “Jeremiah” in this passage, and it seems 
to the writer that this is probably the correct 
reading. If then in the gospel of Matthew as | 
originally written Matthew used the word “Jere- 
miah” here, was it not a mistake? 

Not necessarily. That these words, or words 
very similar to them, are found in the prophecy 
which in our Old Testament bears the name of 
Zechariah is unquestionably true. But it does not 
follow at all from this that Jeremiah did not 


“MISTAKES IN THE BIBLE 115 


speak them, for it is a well-known fact that the 
later prophets of the Old Testament often quoted 
the predictions of earlier prophets. For example, 
Zechariah himself (1:4) quoted a_ prophecy 
known to be Jeremiah’s (see Jeremiah 18:11), 
and in the passage which we are now considering 
Zechariah may also have quoted from the proph- 
ecy of Jeremiah. There is no record in the book of 
Jeremiah of his having uttered this prophecy, but 
there is no reason whatever to think we have in 
Jeremiah all the prophecies that he uttered, and 
Zechariah may easily have had access to proph- 
ecies of Jeremiah not recorded in the book of 
Jeremiah. 

Furthermore it is to be noted that Zechariah 
himself says in Zechariah 7:7, “Should ye not hear 
the words which the Lorn hath cried by the 
former prophets?” So it is evident that Zechariah 
regarded it as part of his mission to recall the 
prophecies of the prophets that had gone before 
him. He would be especially inclined to recall the 
prophecies of the prophets that had gone before 
him. He would be especially inclined to recall the 
prophecies of Jeremiah, for it was a saying among 
the Jews that “the spirit of Jeremiah was upon 
Zechariah.” 

So we see that this so-called mistake of Mat- 
thew does not appear to have been a mistake at 
all when we closely examine it. 

Perhaps it ought to be added that there has 
been much question by the critics as to whether 
the closing chapters of the book of Zechariah were 


116 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


really a portion of the prophecies of Zechariah. 
There is nothing in the chapters themselves to in- 
dicate that they were. It is true that for centuries 
they have been attached to the prophecies of 
Zechariah, but nowhere in the»Bible does it state 
that they were by Zechariah, and it has been held 
that they were in reality not by Zechariah but by 
Jeremiah. This, however, is a question for the crit- 
ics. If it should prove to be so, it would simply be 
an additional confirmation of the accuracy of 
Matthew’s statement. But even if it is not so, if 
Zechariah is the author of this prophecy (Zech- 
ariah 11:11-13) as we find it in the Bible, it does 
not at all prove that Jeremiah may not have ut- 
tered a similar prophecy to which Zechariah re- 
ferred and which Matthew has accurately quoted. 
And the critics will have to search further if they 


wish to prove Matthew to have been in error. 


ABRAHAM'S SEPULCHERS 


A second alleged “mistake” in the Bible is the 
statement of Stephen in Acts 7:16: “And were 
_ carried over into Sychem, and laid in the sepul- 
chre that Abraham bought for a sum of money of 
the sons of Emmor, the father of Sychem.” Gene- 
sis 23:17-18 states, “And the field of Ephron, 
~ which was in Machpelah, which was before 
Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, 
and all the trees that were in the field, that were 
in all the borders round about, were made sure 
unto Abraham.” Stephen seems, then, to have 


“MISTAKES IN THE BIBLE 17 


been mistaken in his statement that Abraham 
bought it of the sons of Emmor. 

Let me put the supposed mistake in the words 
of a prominent doctor of divinity: “According to 
Luke’s report, Stephen says Abraham bought a 
sepulchre of the sons of Emmor, the father of Sy- 
chem (Acts 7:16). But Genesis 23:17-18 says Ab- 
raham bought it of Ephron the Hittite, and Gene- 
sis 33:19 says that Jacob bought it of the sons of 
Emmor. . . . John Calvin says Stephen evidently 
made a mistake. Dr. Hackett admits that Stephen 
appears to have confounded the two transactions 
.. but what do those say about it . . . who main- 
tain the absolute inerrancy of the Bible?” 

This seems like a puzzler until one notices ex- 
actly what the three passages say, then the puzzle 
is solved. The solution is very simple. 

First, Genesis 23:17-18 does not say what the 
objector says it does say; that is, does not say that 
Abraham bought this sepulcher to which Stephen 
refers of Ephron the Hittite. It does state that Ab- 
raham bought a field of Ephron the Hittite, in 
which there was a cave, and that Abraham buried 
his wife Sarah in this cave. But there is no good 
reason for supposing that this was the sepulcher 
in which Jacob and the patriarchs were buried. 
There is no reason for supposing that Abraham in 
his long lifetime bought but one burial place. The 
writer of this book has himself purchased two, 
one in Chicago where his brother is buried, and 
one in Northfield, Massachusetts, where his 
daughter is buried. He is also interested in a third 


118 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


in Brooklyn where his father and mother and 
other brother are buried. There is not the slight- 
est hint in the Scriptures that these two sepulchers 
mentioned in Genesis 23:17-18 and in Acts 7:16 
are the same. 

As to the passage in Genesis 33:19 where, ac- 
cording to the objector, it is said that Jacob, and 
not Abraham (as Stephen puts it), bought the 
sepulcher, this passage does not, in point of fact, 
say that Jacob bought the sepulcher. It says he 
bought “the parcel of a field at the hand of the 
children of Hamor” (the ones of whom Stephen 
says Abraham bought the sepulcher). The infer- 
ence is that Abraham had already purchased the 
sepulcher at an earlier date and that Jacob in his 
day purchased the ground (“a parcel of land”) in 
which the sepulcher was located. When Abraham 
purchased a sepulcher to bury Sarah he took the 
precaution of buying the field as well as the sep- 
ulcher, but in the latter case he seems to have pur- 
chased the sepulcher without buying the whole 
piece of ground, which therefore Jacob himself 
bought at a later date. It is altogether likely that 
Abraham should have purchased a sepulcher in 
this spot in his later life, for it was a place dear to 
him by many memories (see Genesis 12:6-7). 

So, after all, the mistake was not Stephen’s, but 
the mistake of the commentators who were not 
careful to note exactly what Stephen said and 
what is said in the two passages in Genesis. 

Joshua informs us that it was in this parcel of 
ground which Jacob bought (which presumably 


“MISTAKES IN THE BIBLE 119 


contained the sepulcher that Abraham had bought 
at an earlier date) that the bones of Joseph were 
buried (Joshua 24:32). Apparently Stephen was 
a more careful student of Old Testament Scripture 
than some of his critics. 

But even allowing for the moment that Stephen 
was mistaken in this case, it would prove nothing 
whatever against the divine origin of the Bible or 
its absolute inerrancy, for Stephen is not one of 
the authors of the Bible. He was not a prophet or 
an apostle. It is true he was a Spirit-filled man, 
but he was not the writer of a book in the Bible. 
The inspired author of the Acts of the Apostles re- 
cords that Stephen said these words, and if these 
words that Stephen uttered had been mistaken, 
the record that he said them would still be correct. 
It would be God’s Word that Stephen said this, 
but what Stephen said would not be God's word. 
The one who contends for the divine origin of the 
Bible and its absolute accuracy is under no obli- 
gation whatever to prove the accuracy of every 
statement that every speaker in the Bible, even 
every Spirit-filled speaker, is recorded as saying. 


Tue User or STRONG DRINK IN PROVERBS 31:6-7 


Another alleged “mistake” in the Bible is found 
in Proverbs 31:6-7: “Give strong drink unto him 
that is ready to perish, and wine unto the bitter in 
soul. Let him drink and forget his poverty, and re- 
member his misery no more” (RV). It is said that 
this advocates the use of intoxicating liquor under 
certain conditions, and that as the use of intoxi- 


120 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


cating liquor under any and all circumstances is 
wrong this teaching of the Bible is a mistake. 

But the difficulty disappears, as many another 
difficulty will disappear, if we do not rip the verses 
out of their context, but study them, as any pas- 
sage in any book should be studied, in the con- 
text. The whole section from verses 1 to 9 is a 
protest against kings (and by implication persons 
in any place of responsibility) using wine or 
strong drink at all. It is plainly taught that any 
use of wine has a tendency to make them forget 
the law and to pervert judgment. Verses 6 and 7 
go on to add that wine and strong drink should 
only be used in cases of extreme physical weak- 
ness and despondency, when the man is so far 
gone that he is “ready to perish,” and is conse- 
quently in the deepest depths of despondency 
(“bitter in soul,” RV). The words are addressed to 
the king (RV) who, though able to buy wine, in- 
stead of using it himself should give it to those 
who are in such physical condition that they need 
it. The one in this condition would be stimulated 
by the wine, lifted out of his depression, by the 
generosity of the king who gave the wine, so that 
he would be enabled to. “forget his poverty,” 
which would naturally preclude him from buying 
the wine for himself. The whole passage goes on 
to urge the king's attention to “the cause of the 
poor and needy.” 

So there remains no difficulty in this passage 
except for those who hold that the use of intoxi- 
cating liquors is wrong under any circumstances. 


“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 12] 


But there are many who hold that in cases of 
physical weakness the use of wine is wise and per- 
missible. 

We do not need to go into the question of 
whether the wine and strong drink in this case 
were alcoholic. Those who urge that “strong 
drink” in the Old Testament often refers to a 
heavy, sweet, unfermented wine have a good deal 
to say in favor of their position. Of course, if this 
interpretation were true, it would remove all dif_i- 
culty from the passage. But in any case there is 
really no difficulty here at all for anyone who be- 
lieves that there are circumstances in which the 
use of alcoholic stimulants is advisablé. As there 
was a time in the early life of the writer of this 
book when the doctors had all given him up to 
die and his life was sustained by a prescription of 
an old nurse, one of the main ingredients of the 
prescription being brandy, he is naturally disposed 
to think there are cases like that mentioned in the 
text when the use of strong drink is warrantable. 
But he thoroughly agrees with the context of the 
passage, which teaches that all use of wine should 
be renounced by people in health and strength 
and prosperity. 


JEsus TURNING WATER INTO WINE 


A stock objection against the Bible, and not 
only against the Bible but against Jesus Christ 
Himself, is found in the story of Jesus turning the 
water into wine at the marriage festival at Cana 
of Galilee as recorded in John 2:1-11. 


122, DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


There need be no difficulty in this action of 
Jesus even for the extreme teetotaler if he con- 
siders carefully exactly what is said and precisely 
what Jesus did. 

The wine provided for the marriage festivities 
at Cana failed. A cloud was about to fall over the 
joy of what is properly a festive occasion. Jesus 
came to the rescue. He provided wine, but there 
is not a hint that the wine He made was intoxi- 
cating. It was fresh-made wine. New-made wine 
is never intoxicating. It is not intoxicating until 
some .time after the process of fermentation has 
set in. Fermentation is a process of decay. There 
is not a hint that our Lord produced alcohol, 
which is a product of decay or death. He pro- 
duced a living wine uncontaminated by fermenta- 
tion. It is true it was better wine than they had 
been drinking, but that does not show for a mo- 
ment that it was more fermented than that which 
they had before been drinking. The writer of this 
book is a thoroughgoing teetotaler. He does not 
believe at all in the use of alcoholic stimulants 
even in cases of sickness, except in the most ex- 
treme cases, and even then only with the greatest 
caution. But he has not the slightest objection, and 
does not think that any reasonable person can 
have the slightest objection, to anyone’s drinking 
new-made wine, that is, the fresh juice of the 
grape. It is a wholesome drink. Even if some of 
the guests were already drunken, or had drunk 
freely (see v. 10, R.V.) of wine that may have 
been intoxicating, there would be no harm, but 


“MISTAKES IN THE BiBLE 123 


good, in substituting an unintoxicating wine for 
the intoxicating drink which they had been taking. 
Our Lord, as far as this story goes at least, did not 
make intoxicating liquor for anybody to drink, but 
simply saved a festive occasion from disaster by 
providing a pure, wholesome, unintoxicating drink. 
By turning the water into a wholesome wine, He 
showed His creative power and manifested His 


glory. 


20 


THE TWO GENEALOGIES OF 
JESUS, THE CHRIST 


A FAVORITE POINT of attack on the Bible for those 
who deny its divine origin and inerrancy is the 
two varying genealogies of Jesus Christ. Not only 
is this a favorite point of attack by unbelievers, 
but it is also a point that often puzzles earnest 
students of the Bible. It is perfectly clear that the 
two genealogies differ widely from one another, 
and yet each is given as the genealogy of Christ. 
How can they by any possibility both be true? 

There is a very simple answer to this apparently 
difficult question. 

1. The genealogy given in Matthew is the gen- 
ealogy of Joseph, the reputed father of Jesus, his 
father in the eyes of the law. The genealogy given 
in Luke is the genealogy of Mary, the mother of 
Jesus, and is the human genealogy of Jesus Christ 
in actual fact. The gospel of Matthew was written 
for Jews. All through it Joseph is prominent, Mary 
is scarcely mentioned. In Luke, on the other hand, 
Mary is the chief personage in the whole account 
of the Saviour’s conception and birth. Joseph is 


124 


THE Two GENEALOGIES OF JEsus 125 


_ brought in only incidentally and because he was 
Mary’s husband. In all of this there is a deep sig- 
nificance. 

2. In Mathew Jesus appears as the Messiah. In 
Luke He appears as “the Son of man,” our Brother 
and Redeemer, who belongs to the whole race 
and claims kindred with all kinds and conditions 
of men. So in Matthew the genealogy descends 
from Abraham to Joseph and Jesus, because all 
the predictions and promises touching the Mes- 
siah are fulfilled in Him. But in Luke the gene- 
alogy ascends from Jesus to Adam, because the 
genealogy is being traced back to the head of the 
whole race and shows the relation of the second 
Adam to the first. 

3. Joseph's line in Matthew is the strictly royal 
line from David to Joseph. In Luke, though the 
line of descent is from David, it is not the royal 
line. In this Jesus is descended from David 
through Nathan, David’s son indeed, but not in 
the royal line, and the list follows a line quite 
distinct from the royal line. 

4. The Messiah, according to prediction, was to 
be the actual son of David according to the flesh 
(II Samuel 7:12-19; Psalm 89:3-4, 34-37; 132:11, 
Acts 2:30; 13:22-23; Romans 1:3; II Timothy 2:8). 
These prophecies are fulfilled by Jesus being the 
son of Mary, who was a lineal descendant of 
David, though not in the royal line. Joseph, who 
was of the royal line, was not His father according 
to the flesh, but was His father in the eyes of the 
law. 


126 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


5. Mary was a descendant of David through her 
father, Heli. It is true that Luke 3:23 says that 
Joseph was the son of Heli. The simple explana- 
tion of this is that according to Jewish usage 
Mary’s name, being a woman, could not appear in 
the genealogy, males alone forming the line. So 
Joseph’s name is introduced in place of Mary’s, 
he being Mary’s husband. Heli was his father-in- 
law, and so Joseph is called the son of Heli, and 
the line is thus completed. While Joseph was son- 
in-law of Heli, according to the flesh he was in 
actual fact the son of Jacob (Matthew 1:16). 

6. Two genealogies are absolutely necessary to 
trace the lineage of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ, the royal and legal, and the natural and 
literal. We find the legal and royal genealogy in 
Matthew’s gospel, the gospel of law and kingship; 
the natural and literal in Luke’s, the gospel of 
humanity. 

7. We are told in Jeremiah 22:30 that any de- 
scendant of Jeconiah could not come to the throne 
of David. Joseph was of this line, and while Jo- 
seph’s genealogy furnishes the royal line for Jesus, 
his son under the law, nevertheless Jeremiah’s pre- 
diction is fulfilled to the very letter, for Jesus 
(strictly speaking) was not Joseph's descendant 
and therefor was not of the seed of Jeconiah. If 
Jesus had been the son of Joseph in reality, He 
could not have come to the throne, but He is 
Mary's son through Nathan and can come to the 
throne legally by her marrying Joseph and so 
clearing His way legally to it. 


THE Two GENEALOGIES OF JESUS 127 


As we study these two genealogies of Jesus care- 
fully and read them in the light of Old Testament 
prediction, we find that far from constituting a 
reason for doubting the accuracy of the Bible 
they are rather a confirmation of the minutest ac- 
curacy of that Book. It is amazing how one part 
of the Bible fits into another part when we study 
it thus minutely. We need no longer stumble over 
the fact of two genealogies, but discover and re- 
joice in the deep meaning of the fact. 


21 


WAS JESUS REALLY THREE 
DAYS AND THREE NIGHTS IN 
THE HEART OF THE EARTH? 


MATTHEw reports Jesus as saying, “As Jonah was 
three days and three nights in the belly of the 
whale (“sea monster,” RV marg.), so shall the 
Son of man be three days and three nights in the 
heart of the earth” (12:40). According to the com- 
monly accepted tradition of the church Jesus was 
crucified on Friday, dying at 3:00 p.M., or some- 
where between 3:00 p.m. and sundown, and was 
raised from the dead very early in the morning of 
the following Sunday. Many readers of the Bible 
are puzzled to know how the interval between 
late Friday afternoon and early Sunday morning 
can be figured out to be three days and three 
nights. It seems rather to be two nights, one day 
and a very small portion of another day. 

The solution of this apparent difficulty proposed 
by many commentators is that “a day and a night” 
is simply another way of saying “a day,” and that 
the ancient Jews reckoned a fraction of a day as 


128 


Was Jesus IN THE Heart OF THE EARTH? 129 


a whole day, so they say there was a part of Fri- 
day (a very small part), or a day and a night; all 
of Saturday, another day, or a day and a night; 
part of Sunday (a very small part), another day, 
or a day and a night. 

There are many persons whom this solution does 
not altogether satisfy, and the writer confesses it 
does not satisfy him at all. It seems to him to be ° 
a makeshift—a very weak makeshift. 

Is there any solution that is altogether satisfac- 
tory? There is. 

The first fact to be noticed in the proper solu- 
tion is that the Bible nowhere says or implies that 
Jesus was crucified and died on Friday. It is said 
that Jesus was crucified on “the day before the 
sabbath” (Mark 15:42). As the Jewish weekly 
Sabbath came on Saturday, beginning at Sunset 
the evening before, the conclusion is naturally 
drawn that as Jesus was crucified the day before 
the Sabbath He must have been crucified on Fri- 
day. But it is a well-known fact, to which the 
Bible bears abundant testimony, that the Jews had 
other Sabbaths beside the weekly Sabbath which 
fell on Saturday. The first day of Passover week, 
no matter upon what day of the week it came, was 
always a Sabbath (Exodus 12:16; Leviticus 23:7; 
Numbers 28:16-18). The question therefore arises 
whether the Sabbath that followed Christ’s cruci- 
fixion was the weekly Sabbath (Saturday) or the 
Passover Sabbath, falling on the 15th of Nisan, 
which came that year on Thursday. Now the Bible 
does not leave us to speculate in regard to which 


1380 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Sabbath is meant in this instance, for John tells us 
in so many words, in John 19:14, that the day on 
which Jesus was tried and crucified was “the prep- 
aration of the Passover” (RV), that is, it was not 
the day before the weekly Sabbath (Friday) but 
it was the day before the Passover Sabbath, which 
came that year on Thursday. That is to say, the 
day on which Jesus Christ was crucified was 
Wednesday. John makes this as clear as day. 

The gospel of John was written later than the 
other gospels, and scholars have for a long time 
noticed that in various places there was an evi- 
dent intention to correct false impressions that 
one might get from reading the other gospels. One 
of these false impressions was that Jesus ate the 
Passover with His disciples at the regular time of 
the Passover. To correct this false impression John 
clearly states that He ate it the evening before, 
and that He himself died on the cross at the very 
moment the Passover lambs were being slain “be- 
tween the two evenings” on the 14th of Nisan 
(Exodus 12:6, Hebrew; cf. RV marg.). God’s real 
Paschal Lamb, Jesus, of whom all other Paschal 
lambs offered through the centuries were only 
types, was therefore slain at the very time ap- 
pointed of God. 

Everything about the Passover lamb was ful- 
filled in Jesus. (1) He was the Lamb without 
blemish and without spot (Exodus 12:5). (2) He 
was chosen on the 10th of Nisan (Exodus 12:3), 
for it was on the tenth day of the month, the pre- 
ceding Saturday, that the triumphal entry into 


Was JEsus IN THE HEART OF THE EARTH? 131 


Jerusalem was made, since they came from Jeri- 
cho to Bethany six days before the Passover (John 
12:1—that would be six days before Thursday, 
which would be Friday); and it was on the next 
day that entry into Jerusalem was made (John 
12:12 ff.), that is, on Saturday, the 10th of Nisan. 
It was also on this same day that Judas went to 
the chief priests and offered to betray Jesus for 
thirty pieces of silver (Matthew 26:6-16; Mark 
14:3-11). As it was after the supper in the house 
of Simon the leper, and as the supper occurred 
late on Friday, that is, after sunset, or early on 
Saturday, “after” the supper would necessarily be 
on the 10th of Nisan. This being the price set on 
Him by the chief priests, it was the buying or 
taking to them of a lamb which according to law 
must occur on the 10th of Nisan. Furthermore, 
they put the exact value on the lamb that Old 
Testament prophecy predicted (Matthew 26:15; 
cf. Zechariah 11:12). (3) Not a bone of Him was 
broken when He was killed (John 19:36; cf. Ex- 
odus 12:46; Numbers 9:12; Psalm 34:20). (4) And 
He was killed on the 14th of Nisan between the 
evenings, just before the beginning of the 15th 
of Nisan at sundown (Exodus 12:6, RV marg.). 
If we take just exactly what the Bible says, that 
Jesus was slain before the Passover Sabbath, the 
type is marvelously fulfilled in every detail; but if 
we accept the traditional theory that Jesus was 
crucified on Friday, the type fails at many points. 
Furthermore, if we accept the traditional view 
that Jesus was crucified on Friday and ate the 


132 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Passover on the regular day of the Passover, then 
the journey from Jericho to Bethany, which oc- 
curred six days before the Passover (John 12:1), 
would fall on a Saturday, that is, the Jewish Sab- 
bath. Such a journey on the Jewish Sabbath would 
be contrary to the Jewish law. Of course it was 
impossible for Jesus to take such a journey on the 
Jewish Sabbath. In reality His triumphal entry 
into Jerusalem was on the Jewish Sabbath, Satur- 
day. This was altogether possible, for the Bible 
elsewhere tells us that Bethany was a Sabbath 
day’s journey from Jerusalem (Acts 1:12; cf. Luke 
24:50). 

It has been figured out by the astronomers that 
in the year 30 a.v., which is the commonly ac- 
cepted year of the crucifixion of our Lord, the 
Passover was kept on Thursday, April 6, the moon 
being full that day. The chronologists who have 
supposed that the crucifixion took place on Friday 
have been greatly perplexed by this fact that in 
the year 30 a.p., the Passover occurred on Thurs- 
day. One writer in seeking a solution of the diffi- 
culty suggests that the crucifixion may have been 
in the year 33 a.p., for although the full moon 
was on a Thursday that year also, yet as it was 
within two and half hours of Friday, he thinks 
that perhaps the Jews may have kept it that day. 
But when we accept exactly what the Bible says, 
namely, that Jesus was not crucified on the Pass- 
over day but on “the preparation of the Passover,” 
and that He was to be three days and three nights 
in the grave, and as “the preparation of the Pass- 


Was JEsus IN THE HEarRT OF THE EARTH? 133 


over’ that year would be Wednesday and His 
resurrection early on the first day of the week, this 
allows exactly three days and three nights in the 
grave. 

To sum it all up, Jesus died about sunset on 
Wednesday. Seventy-two hours later, exactly three 
days and three nights, at the beginning of the first 
day of the week (Saturday at sunset), He arose 
again from the grave. When the women visited 
the tomb just before dawn the next morning, they 
found the grave already empty. So we are not 
driven to any such makeshift solution as that any 
small portion of a day is reckoned as a whole day 
and night, but we find that the statement of Jesus 
was literally true. Three days and three nights His 
body was dead and lay in the sepulcher. While 
His body lay dead, He Himself, being quickened 
in the spirit (I Peter 3:18), went into the heart 
of the earth and preached to the spirits which 
were in prison (I Peter 3:19). 

This supposed difficulty solves itself, as do so 
many other difficulties in the Bible, when we take 
the Bible as meaning exactly what it says. 

It is sometimes objected against the view here 
advanced that the two on the way to Emmaus 
early on the first day of the week (that is, Sunday) 
said to Jesus in speaking of the crucifixion and 
events accompanying it, “Besides all this, today is 
the third day since these things were done” (Luke 
24:21); and it is said that if the crucifixion took 
place on Wednesday, Sunday would be the fourth 
day since these things were done. But the answer 


134 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


is very simple. These things were done just as 
Thursday was beginning at sunset on Wednesday. 
They were therefore completed on Thursday, and 
the first day since Thursday would be Friday, the 
second day since Thursday would be Saturday, 
and “the third day since” Thursday would be Sun- 
day, the first day of the week. So the supposed 
objection in reality supports the theory. On the 
other hand, if the crucifixion took place on Friday, 
by no manner of reckoning could Sunday be made 
“the third day since” these things were done. 
There are many passages in Scripture that sup- 
port the theory advanced above and make it nec- 
essary to believe that Jesus died late on Wednes- 
day. Some of them are as follows: “For as Jonah 
was three days and three nights in the whale’s 
belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and 
three nights in the heart of the earth” (Matthew 
12:40). “This fellow said, I am able to destroy the 
temple of God and to build it in three days” (Mat- 
thew 26:61). “Thou that destroyest the temple 
and buildest it in three days, save thyself” (Mat- 
thew 27:40). “Sir, we remember that that deceiver 
said, while he was yet alive, After three days I 
will rise again” (Matthew 27:63). “The Son of 
man must suffer many things, and be killed, and 
after three days rise again” (Mark 8:31). “They 
shall kill him, and when he is killed, after three 
days he shall rise again” (Mark 9:31, RV). “They 
shall scourge him, and shall kill him, and after 
three days he shall rise again” (Mark 10:34, RV). 
“Destroy this temple that is made with hands, and 


Was JEsus IN THE HEART OF THE EARTH? 135 


in three days I will build another made without 
hands” (Mark 14:58, RV). “Ah, thou that de- 
stroyest the temple and buildest it in three days, 
save thyself!” (Mark 15:29). “Besides all this, 
today is the third day since these things were 
done” (Luke 24:21). “Jesus answered and said 
unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days 
{ will raise it up. Then said the Jews, Forty and 
six years was this temple in building, and wilt 
thou raise it up in three days? But he spake of the 
temple of his body. When therefore he was risen 
from the dead, his disciples remembered that he 
had said this, and they believed the Scripture and 
the word which Jesus had said” (John 2:19-22). 

There is absolutely nothing in favor of Friday 
crucifixion, but everything in the Scripture is per- 
fectly harmonized by Wednesday crucifixion. It is 
remarkable how many prophetical and typical pas- 
sages of the Old Testament are fulfilled and how 
many seeming discrepancies in the gospel narra- 
tives are straightened out when we once come to 
understand that Jesus died on Wednesday and not 
on Friday. 


y Ht 


HOW COULD JESUS COMMEND 
THE ACTION OF THE 
UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD? 


A VERY PUZZLING PASSAGE in the Bible to many is 
the story of the unrighteous steward recorded in 
Luke 16:1-14. Once when this passage was as- 
signed by the International Sunday School Com- 
mittee, a lady told me that she had made up her 
mind not to teach it. She said, “The three points 
of difficulty are first, that Jesus should hold this 
dishonest scoundrel up for our imitation; second, 
that the rich man should commend his unrighteous 
steward; and third, that Jesus should command 
the disciples to make themselves friends of the 
mammon of unrighteousness.” 

We will take up these three points in order. By 
noticing exactly what is said, we will soon see 
that in each point, if we adhere strictly to the 
very words of Jesus, the difficulty will disappear, 
and the incident instead of staggering us will be 
profoundly instructive along the line where in- 
struction is greatly needed today. 


136 


How Coutp Jesus CoMMEND THE STEWARD? 137 


1. Why did Jesus hold this “dishonest scoun- 
drel” up for our imitation? 

The answer is found in the text itself. Jesus did 
not hold him up for imitation. 

He held him up, first of all, as a warning of 
what would overtake unfaithful stewards, how 
they would be called to give account of their 
stewardship, and their stewardship be taken from 
them. 

Having taught this solemn and salutary lesson, . 
one that is much needed today, Jesus went on to 
show how “the sons of this world are for their 
own generation wiser than the sons of the light” 
(v. 8, RV). They are wiser at this point, for they 
use their utmost ingenuity and put forth their ut- 
most effort to make present opportunities count 
for the hour of future need. “The sons of light” 
often do not do that. Indeed, how many twenti- 
eth century sons of light, who profess to believe 
that eternity is all and time is nothing in compari- 
son, are using their utmost ingenuity and putting 
forth their utmost efforts to make the opportunity 
of the present life count most for the needs of the 
great eternity which is to follow? 

The average professed Christian today uses the 
utmost ingenuity and puts forth his utmost effort 
to bring things to pass in business and other affairs 
of this brief present world. But when it comes to 
matters that affect eternity he is content with the 
exercise of the least possible amount of ingenuity 
and with the putting forth of the smallest effort 
that will satisfy his conscience. 


138 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Jesus did not point to the steward’s dishonesty 
to stir our emulation—He plainly rebuked his dis- 
honesty, but He did point to his common sense in 
using the opportunity of the present to provide 
for the necessities of the future, and would have 
us learn to use the opportunities of the present to 
provide for the necessities of the future, the eter- 
nal future. Even in pointing out his common sense, 
Jesus carefully guarded His statement by saying 
that the unjust steward was “wiser for his own 
generation.” He knew only the life that now is, 
and from that narrow and imperfect standpoint 
he was wiser than “the sons of light” from their 
broad and true standpoint of knowing eternity. 

There are other utterances of our Lord and 
Saviour, where wicked and selfish men are held 
up by way of contrast to show how much more 
godly men, or even God Himself, may be expected 
to act in the way suggested (e.g., Luke 18:6-7; 
11:5-8; Matthew 12:11-12). 

The first difficulty then in the passage has dis- 
appeared upon careful scrutiny of exactly what is 
said. 

2. Why did the Lord commend the unrighteous 
steward? 

The answer to this too is very simple. The 
Lord Jesus did not commend the unrighteous 
steward. 

This is evident by a single glance at the Revised 
Version of verse 8. The Authorized Version, it is 
true, reads, “The Lord commended the unright- 
eous steward.” Now if we were to leave it stand- 


How Coutp Jesus CoMMEND THE STEWARD? 139 


ing that way there might be some possible doubt 
as to whether the “lord” was the lord of the stew- 
ard, or whether it was the Lord Jesus, who relates 
the parable. The Revised Version removes this 
possible ambiguity by translating it “his lord” 
(that is, the steward’s lord) who commended the 
unrighteous steward. It was not the Lord Jesus 
who commended him, but his own lord, and he 
only commended his shrewdness. That the inter- 
pretation of the Revised Version is the correct in-: 
terpretation of the verse is beyond dispute, for the 
Lord Jesus is the speaker, and it is He that speaks 
about the one who does the commending as “the 
lord,” evidently not speaking about Himself, but ~ 
about the lord of the unjust steward. It is only by 
careless reading of the passage that anyone could 
make “the lord” of this passage the Lord Jesus. 
The Lord Jesus, far from commending him, flatly 
calls him “the unrighteous steward,” and further- 
more warns against unfaithfulness in stewardship 
(vv. 10-11). 

So the second difficulty entirely disappears on a 
careful noticing of what is said. 

3. Why did Jesus command His disciples to 
make themselves friends of the mammon of un- 
righteousness? 

This difficulty disappears when we get the cor- 
rect and exact biblical definitions of the terms 
used. 

First of all, what does “the mammon of unright- 
eousness” mean? It means nothing more or less 
than money. Money is called “the mammon of un- 


140 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


righteousness” because it is such a constant temp- 
tation to sin and selfishness (e.g., the case of the 
scoundrel above mentioned), and because “the 
love of money is a root of all kinds of evil” (I 
Timothy 6:9-10, RV). Jesus in passing would lift 
a word of warning against the perils of money by 
speaking of it as “the mammon of unrighteous- 
ness.” He often packed a whole sermon into a 
single phrase. 

In the second place, what does “of” mean when 
our Lord tells us to make ourselves friends “of” 
the mammon of unrighteousness? 

The answer to this question is found in the Re- 
vised Version, where “of” is properly rendered “by 
means of.” So then what Jesus bade His disciples 
do (and what He bids us do) was to make friends 
by means of money; that is to say, to so use the 
money God entrusted to them in the present life 
as to make friends for themselves by their use of 
it, and (as the context shows) to make these 
friends among God’s poor and needy ones, who 
would go to the eternal “tabernacles” (v. 9, RV) 
and be ready to give their benefactors, who had 
used money to bless them, a royal welcome when 
their life here on earth was ended and their money 
had failed. In other words, Jesus simply put into 
a new and striking form His oft-repeated teach- 
ing, not to keep our money hoarded, not to spend 
it on ourselves, but to spend it in doing good, es- 
pecially to God’s needy ones, and so invest it in 
heavenly and abiding securities (cf. Matthew 6: 


How Coup Jesus COMMEND THE STEWARD? 141 


19, 21; 19:21, 29; 25:40; I Timothy 6:17-19; Prov- 
erbs 19:17). 

That this teaching of Jesus was clearly under- 
stood by His hearers is proved by verse 14 (RV), 
where we are told that the Pharisees, “who were 
lovers of money, heard all these things, and they 
scoffed at him” (RV). 

So the third and last difficulty has disappeared, 
and this passage stands out in glorious light, teach- 
ing with great force a lesson that our day greatly - 
needs to learn. Money is a stewardship, and he 
who seeks to enjoy it in the brief present, and not 
rather so to expend it that it will bring him inter- 
est for all eternity, it a fool. Even the petty ~ 
shrewdness of “the sons of this world” rebukes 
him. 


23 


WERE JESUS AND PAUL 
MISTAKEN AS TO THE TIME 
OF OUR LORD’S RETURN? 


Ir Is CONSTANTLY TAUGHT not only by unbelievers 
but even in many Christian pulpits and in some 
of our theological seminaries that Jesus and Paul 
were mistaken as to the time of our Lord’s return. 
In an interesting little pamphlet published by the 
American Unitarian Association, five ministers, 
once preaching in orthodox churches but now 
Unitarians, tell how they became Unitarians. 

One writer says, “In a lecture one day on Thes- 
salonians, our professor remarked that Paul evi- 
dently was mistaken as to the time of the coming 
of Christ. I was thunderstruck, and stared rigidly 
at the speaker, while my pencil dropped from my 
fingers. It was true, then, after all the denuncia- 
tion of the preachers. Higher criticism was not 
the false, shallow thing that it was made out to 
be. I can hear yet, after many years, the echo of 
that slamming book and that cedar pencil clatter- 
ing to the floor.” 

Evidently this young man was easily shaken. If 


142 


WERE JEsuS AND PauL MISTAKEN? 143 


a professor in a theological seminary said any- 
thing, that settled it for him. The professor must 
certainly be correct, and all other professors who 
taught differently, and all others who studied the 
Bible for themselves, must be wrong. The fact 
that the professor made such a remark as this was 
proof positive that higher criticism was not “the 
false, shallow thing it was made out to be.” I do 
not wonder that such a young man should wind 
up as a Unitarian preacher. But even theological 
professors are sometimes mistaken, and this one 
was. The mistake was altogether the professor’s, 
and not at all Paul’s, as we shall see in a few 
moments. 

Let us begin with Jesus, and not with Paul. Was 
Jesus mistaken as to the time of His own return? 
In proof that He was, Matthew 24:34 and parallel 
passages in the other gospels (Mark 13:30; Luke 
21:32) are constantly cited. Our Lord is here re- 
ported as saying, “Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
This generation shall not pass away until all these 
things be accomplished” (Matthew 24:34, RV). 
And it is held that Jesus here plainly taught that 
the generation living on earth at the time that He 
spoke these words would not have passed away 
before all the things recorded in the preceding 
verses had come to pass; and of course this would 
be a mistake. 

But if anybody will read the entire passage 
carefully, he will see that Jesus here taught noth- 
ing of the kind. In the context He was teaching 
how rapidly things will culminate at the end; that 


144 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


when certain signs begin to appear events will 
ripen so fast that the generation then living will 
not have passed away until all things belonging 
to that particular epoch shall have come to be. 
These signs mentioned as indicating the speedy 
close of the age are found in verse 29—the sun 
darkened, the moon not giving her light, stars 
falling from heaven, and the powers of heaven 
shaken. These signs did not occur while our Lord 
was on earth, nor in that generation, but when 
they do occur, things will ripen so fast that the 
sign of the Son of man shall be seen in heaven; 
and the Son of Man shall come in clouds with 
power and great glory before the generation then 
existing passes away. 

That this is the true interpretation of the pas- 
sage is evident from verse 33, where Jesus said 
distinctly, “When ye see all these things, know ye 
that he is nigh, even at the doors” (RV). Here 
Jesus taught that just as the putting forth of ten- 
der shoots and young leaves is an indication that 
summer is near, so the appearing of these signs 
will be an indication that the Lord is near, so near 
that that generation will not pass away until the 
Lord actually comes. And “this generation” of 
verse 34 clearly refers, if taken in context, to the 
generation existing when these signs shall appear. 

The connection is just the same in Mark 18, 
where similar words are found. If possible, it is 
even clearer in Luke 21:25-32, where the words 
are found again. So the whole difficulty is not 
with what Jesus actually said, but with the fail- 


WERE JEsuS AND Paut MIsTAKEN? 145 


ure of expositors to carefully notice exactly what 
the thought in mind was when Jesus uttered the 
_ words to which objection has been made. 

Another interpretation of this verse has been 
offered which is full of suggestion, namely, that 
the word rendered “generation” in this passage 
often means “race” or “family,” men begotten of 
the same stock,” and this doubtless is the meaning 
of the word used. In fact, this is the meaning 
given as the second meaning of the word in Thay- 
ers Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 
and the meaning of age (or generation) is the 
fourth meaning given. Taking this as the meaning 
of the word, the passage is interpreted to mean 
that “this race” or generation (that is, the Jewish 
race) shall not pass away (that is, shall maintain 
its race identity ) until the coming of the Lord. It 
is a remarkable fact—indeed, one of the most re- 
markable facts of history—that though the Jews 
have for centuries been driven from their native 
land and scattered throughout all the nations, they 
have always retained their race identity. This 
thought may also have been in Jesus’ mind, and 
the utterance pregnant with a fullness of mean- 
ing that cannot be exhausted by one interpreta- 
tion. But from the context, the primary meaning 
seems to be the one given in the first explanation 
above. 

Another passage urged to show that Jesus was 
mistaken about the time of His return is Matthew 
16:28: “Verily, I say unto you, there be some 
standing here that shall not taste of death till they 


146 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


see the Son of man coming in his kingdom (see 
also the parallel passages, Mark 9:1; Luke 9:27). 
It is held that in this passage Jesus taught that 
His coming again would be before some of those 
standing there should die. 

But here again in the context is found the en- 
tire solution of the difficulty. There ought to be 
no chapter division where Matthew 17 begins (the 
chapter divisions are not a part of the original 
Scriptures ). We should read right on as we do in 
the parallel passages in Mark and Luke, and if we 
read right on and notice what is said, the mean- 
ing of Jesus’ words becomes as clear as day. The 
words were spoken as a prophecy of the trans- 
figuration, the account of which immediately fol- 
lows with the closely connecting article “and.” 
Three of those standing with Jesus when He spoke 
the words were to go up with Him into the mount, 
and there in the mount they were to see His true 
glory shining forth in His face, in His person, in 
the very clothes He wore (Matthew 17:2). They 
were to hear the Father declare, “This is my be- 
loved Son, in whom I am well pleased” (v. 6). In 
all this they saw “the Son of man coming in his 
kingdom.” If events had been allowed to take 
their natural course, Jesus then and there would 
have been manifested to the world as He was to 
the disciples, as King; but Jesus chose rather, in 
order that men might be saved, to go down from 
this mount of transfiguration where He was mani- 
fested in His glory as coming in His kingdom, 
where the kingdom of God came with power 


WERE JEsuS AND PauL MISTAKEN? 147 


(Mark 9:1), where Peter and James and John saw 
the kingdom of God (Luke 9:27), to die as an 
_ atoning sacrifice on the cross of Calvary. It is a 
significant fact in this connection that the subject 
of which Moses and Elijah, who appeared talking 
with Him in the mount, spoke was the decease 
which He should accomplish at Jerusalem (Luke 
9:31). 

Here again we see that the mistake was not on 
Jesus’ part, but arises from the carelessness of the 
interpreter in overlooking the context in which 
the words of Jesus are found, and the interpreta- 
tion that is put upon the words by the writers 
themselves immediately after they have recorded 
them. So all these arguments of the destructive 
critics built upon our Lord’s being mistaken as 
to the time of His own return, fall to the ground. 

But was not Paul mistaken? It is said over and 
over again that Paul evidently was mistaken in 
his early writings as to the time of the coming of 
Christ. In defense of this contention the words of 
Paul contained in I Thessalonians 4:15-18 (RV), 
are brought forward: “For this we say unto you 
by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive 
and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall in 
no wise precede them that are fallen asleep.” It is 
said that these words make it evident that Paul 
expected to be alive when the Lord came. 

What Paul may have expected I do not know. 
Very likely he did hope to be alive when the Lord 
came, but he certainly did not teach that he would 
be alive, and no one holds any theory of inspira- 


148 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


tion that maintains that the Bible writers did not 
entertain mistaken hopes. The one who contends 
for the plenary theory of inspiration and absolute 
veracity and accuracy of Bible teaching holds that 
the Bible writers nowhere teach error. No one 
questions that they may have entertained errone- 
ous notions on a great many things. All that is 
maintained is that if they had such erroneous no- 
tions, the Holy Spirit kept them from teaching 
them. 

Paul certainly does not teach here that he would 
be alive when the Lord came. He does teach that 
some persons would have fallen asleep and others 
would be alive. As he was still alive, he naturally 
put himself in the class to which he belonged at 
the time of writing, “those which are alive” (that 
are left). He certainly was alive at the time. He 
certainly was one of those left at that time. He 
does not say that he should continue to be alive. 
Very likely he hoped to be. Every believer who 
has a true understanding of the doctrine of the 
coming of the Lord naturally entertains a hope 
that he may be alive when the Lord comes. I 
hope that I may be, but not for a moment do I 
venture to teach that I will be. I do know that I 
am alive at this moment. I know that I am not 
one of those who have as yet fallen asleep, and if 
I were differentiating between the two classes, 
those who are alive and those who are fallen 
asleep, I should certainly put myself with those 
who are alive, and would not be mistaken in so 
doing. Paul knew perfectly well that the Lord 


WERE JEsUS AND PauL MISTAKEN? 149 


Himself had taught long before he wrote these 
words to the Thessalonians that it is not for us 
to know times or seasons which the Father has set 
within His own authority (Acts 1:7, RV). He did 
not attempt to know times or seasons which His 
Master had so distinctly taught it was not for 
him, or for us, to know; but he did teach by “the 
word of the Lord” Himself that “the Lord Him- 
self shall descend from heaven with a shout, with 
the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of 
God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then 
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, to meet the 
Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the 
Lord.” In the context of verses 18 and 14; Paul is 
urging those who are alive (and are left) at that 
time not to sorrow over those who have already 
fallen asleep. And as he was among the class that 
were alive (that were left) up to that time, he 
naturally and correctly put himself with them, 
and not with those over whom they were not to 
sorrow, namely, those who had already fallen 
asleep. 

So in this passage instead of finding that the 
Holy Spirit allowed Paul to make mistakes, in 
point of fact the Holy Spirit kept him from mak- 
ing a mistake even in regard to the matter about 
which, in his own longing, he might have enter- 
tained a mistaken hope. The whole passage. then, 
instead of being an argument against the verbal 
accuracy of the Scriptures, is an argument for it, 
and shows how the men whom the Holy Spirit 


150 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


chose to be the vehicles of His revelation to us 
were kept absolutely from putting into their 
teaching any mistaken hope which they might 
have entertained. 


24 


DID JESUS GO INTO THE ABODE 
OF THE DEAD AND PREACH TO 
THE SPIRITS IN PRISON? 

IS THERE ANOTHER PROBATION 
AFTER DEATH? 


Wuat bores I Peter 3:18-20 mean when it says 
that Jesus went and preached to the spirits in 
prison? 

A very simple answer to this question is that it 
means exactly what it says. But let us notice care- 
fully what it does say: “Because Christ also suf- 
fered for sins once, the righteous for the unright- 
eous, that he might bring us to God; being put to 
death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit; in 
which also he went and preached unto the spirits 
in prison, which aforetime were disobedient, when 
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of 
Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, 
that is, eight souls, were saved through water” 
(RV). 

The point of difficulty with this passage is the 
thought that seems to be conveyed that Jesus ac- 
tually went into the abode of the dead and there 


151 


152 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


preached to spirits in prison; and this would seem 
to imply to many that there is an opportunity for 
repentance after death. 

Many, in order to avoid this conclusion, have 
attempted to explain the verses by saying that the 
spirit in which Jesus was quickened is the Holy 
Spirit, and that in the Holy Spirit Jesus Christ 
preached, through Noah while the ark was pre- 
paring, to the spirits which were then disobedient 
and who consequently are now in prison. 

One writer has argued for this interpretation 
with a great deal of ability and skill and with a 
large display of knowledge of Greek grammar. 
But nonetheless I think he fails to prove his case. 
After all has been said, it seems to me this inter- 
pretation is an evasion. 

“The spirit” in verse 18 cannot mean the Holy 
Spirit. 

A contrast is being drawn between the two 
parts of Christ’s nature, the flesh in which He was 
put to death and the spirit in which He was quick- 
ened (that is, made alive) at the time He was put 
to death in the flesh. In His spirit in which He 
was made alive, while the body lay motionless in 
death, He went and preached to the spirits in 
prison. It seems to me that this is the only fair in- 
terpretation. 

But does not this involve a second probation for 
those who have died in disobedience to God and 
who consequently have gone to the place of pen- 
alty and suffering? Even if it did, we ought not to 
dodge it on that account. We ought to be fair 


Dw Jesus Go into THE ABODE OF THE DEAD? 153 


with the Scriptures whether they conform to our 

theories or not. But in point of fact, this does not 
in any way involve a second probation for those 
who have died. in disobedience and who conse- 
quently have gone to the place of penalty and 
suffering. 

This is apparent if we notice three things: to 
whom Jesus preached, what He preached, and 
the results of His preaching. 

First of all, to whom did Jesus preach? To “the 
spirits in prison.” But who were these spirits in 
prison? Were they the spirits of departed wicked 
men? There is nothing whatever to indicate that 
they were. The word “spirits” is never used in this 
unqualified way of the spirits of departed men, 
but it is used constantly of angelic or supernatural 
beings (Hebrews 1:7, 14; Matthew 10:1; Mark 3: 
11; Luke 6:18; 7:21; Acts 19:12; I John 4:1; etc.). 
The only place in Scripture where “spirits” is used 
of men in any way analogous to this is Hebrews 
12:23. The constant use is of angels or other super- 
natural beings. If we so interpret it here, the 
preaching was not at all to men who had been 
wicked in the days of Noah but to supernatural 
beings who had been disobedient in the days of 
Noah and who were now in prison in consequence 
of this disobedience. Are there any Scripture pas- 
sages that hint that there were supernatural be- 
ings who were disobedient in the days of Noah 
and who were consequently in prison? There are. 
In Genesis 6:1 we are told that “the sons of God 
saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and 


154 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


they took them wives of all which they chose.” 
Many commentators understand the descendants 
of Seth, a godly man, to be “the sons of God” in 
this passage. But if we are to interpret scripture 
by scripture they seem rather to have been an- 
gelic beings. There seems to be a clear reference 
to this passage in Jude 6, where we are told of 
“angels which kept not their own principality but 
left their proper habitation” and in consequence 
were kept in everlasting chains in darkness until 
the judgment of the great day (RV). And in the 
next verse we are told that Sodom and Gomorrah 
in like manner with these (that is, these angels) 
gave themselves over to fornication and went after 
strange flesh (RV). From this it seems clear that 
the sin of the angels was going after strange flesh, 
the very sin mentioned in Genesis 6:2. Further- 
more, we read in II Peter that “God spared not 
the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, 
and committed them to darkness, to be reserved 
unto judgment” (II Peter 2:3-4, RV). The clear 
implication of all this is that the spirits to whom 
Jesus preached when He went to the abode of the 
dead were the angels that sinned in the days of 
Noah and were then in prison in consequence of 
that sin. 

Let us notice, in the next place, what the word 
translated “preach” in I Peter 3:18-20 means. 
There are two words in constant use in the New 
Testament which are translated “preach.” One 
means “to preach the gospel,” the other “to herald 
the king or kingdom.” The latter of these two 


Dw Jesus Go INTO THE ABODE OF THE DEap? 155 


words is used in this passage. There is not a sug- 
gestion in the passage that the gospel with its 
offer of salvation was preached to anyone. The 
King and the kingdom were heralded. So then 
even if we take “the spirits in prison” to mean the 
spirits of men who had died in sin, there is not a 
hint of another probation. We are simply told that 
the King and the kingdom were heralded to them. 
Christ has been heralded as King in heaven, earth 
and hell. 

In the third place, notice the results of this 
preaching. There is not a word of suggestion that 
any of the spirits in prison were converted by it. 
If they were we must learn it from other sources 
than this passage, but there is not a single passage 
anywhere in the Scriptures that suggests that 
there were any conversions or any salvation re- 
sultant from this preaching. The purpose of the 
preaching evidently was not the salvation of those 
already lost but the proclamation of the kingdom 
and the King throughout the universe. The time 
is coming when every knee shall bow, of things in 
heaven, and things on earth, and things under the 
earth, and every tongue shall confess that Jesus 
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father 
(Philippians 2:10-11). But that enforced confes- 
sion of Christ on the part of disobedient men and 
angels will bring them no salvation. We must all 
take our choice of either confessing and accepting 
Christ of our own free will now and obtaining 
salvation thereby, or of confessing Him and ac- 
knowledging Him against our will in the world to 


156 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


come. We must confess Him sometime. We must 
bow the knee to Him some day. Happy the man 
who gladly now in this time of probation bows 
the knee to Jesus and confesses that Jesus Christ 
is Lord to the glory of God the Father, and does 
not wait until that day when he is forced to do it 
and when the confession will bring him no salva- 
tion! 


GENESIS 


— 
Cae 
1 ive) 

= 


et ea 


i=) 
| 
vi 
—_ 
[e'e) 


23:17-18 
33:19 
45:1 


SCRIPTURE INDEX 


PAGE 


37-38 
22, 37 
38-39 
35 

23 

45 

45 
153-154 
108 

42 

4] 

118 

43 

46 

49 

49, 50 
116-118 
117-118 
64 


157 


PAGE 


Leviticus _ 
23:7 129 
NUMBERS 
9:12 131 
25:1-9 62 
28:16-18 129 
31:15-16 58 
31:17-18 62 
31:21-35, 40 61 
DEUTERONOMY 
2:20-21 43 
3:11 43 
20:10-15, 16-17 56, 61 
20:18 61 
JosHua 
10:12-14 25, 63 
24:32 119 
JuDGEs 
4:4,9 68 
5:24 68 
11:31, 37-39 70 
11:39 45 
I SAMUEL 
1:19 45 
13:14 79 
14:9, 13 64 
15:4-35 89 
15:29 107 
16:14 89 
24:5 85 
26:5-9 84 
II SAMUEL 
7:12-19 125 
9:1-2, 11 85 
11:27 80 
12:9-10 &0 
12:18 82 
12:14 78 


158 


18:33 
24:1 
I Kincs 
6:1 
13:11-18 
22:19, 20-22 
II Kincs 
15:20 
I CHRONICLES 
21:1 
II CHRONICLES 
18 
Jos 
42:6 
42:7 
PSALMS 
14:1 
18:8 
32:125 
82:4-8 
34:20 
51:9-13 
58:6 
76:10 
89:3-4, 34-37 
102:24 
109:10 
182:11 


81 
110 


141 


DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


JOEL 
3:18-20 35 
JoNAH 
1:17 91 
2:2, 5-6 94 
3:10 108 
ZECHARIAH 
1:4 115 
2:10-18 85 
eae 115 
11:11-18 113, 116 
P1312, 131 
13:1-2 35 
14:9 35 
MALACHI 
3:6 107 
MATTHEW 
1:16 126 
1:25 45 
5:8 99 
6:19, 21 140-141 
10:1 153 
1 3p) Th bes ed 188 
12:40 21, 92, 94, 128, 184 
16:28 145 
iy (Sy 146 
19:21, 29 141 
24:34 143 
25:40 141 
26:6-16 131 
26:61 134 
27:9-10 1138 
27:87 100 
27:40, 68 184 
28:1-5 103 
28:5-7 104 
Mark 
8:11 153 
8:31 134 
9:1 146 
9:31 134 
10:34 134 
13:30 143 
14:8-11 131 
14:58 1385 


SCRIPTURE INDEX 159 


15:26 100, 101 1:16 55 
15:29 185 1:24-26, 28 53 
15:42 129 11:33 60 
16:5-7 103, 104 12:1 50 
LUKE 12:19 24, 84 
3:23 126 II CorntInTHIANS 
6:18 153 2:15-16 55 
7:21 153 12:7 111 
9:27 147 PHILIPPIANS 
9:31 147 2:6 99 
11:5-8 138 2:10-11 155 
16:1-14 136 COLOssIANS 
18:6-7 138 2:9 99 
21:25 143 I THESSALONIANS 
21-25-32 144 4:15-18 147 
23:38 100 II THESSALONIANS 
24:5-6 104 2:9-12 53 
24:2) 133, 185 2:10-12 89 
24:50 132 I TimotTHy 
Joun 1:17 98 
1:18 96 6:9-10 140 
2:1-11 121 6:16 98 
2:19-22 135 6:17-19 141 
3:17, 18, 36 55 II TimotuHy 
4:23-24 98 2:8 125 
5:4 20 HEBREWS 
TF 2, 131 1:7, 14 153 
14:9 98 10:28-29 55 
19:14 130 11:17 49 
19:19-20 100 12:23 153 
19:36 131 13:8 108 
20:1-2, 12-13 105 JAMES 
Acts 1:17 107 
1:7, 13-14 149 I PETER 
1:12 132 3:18-20 133, 151, 154 
2:30 125 II PETER 
7:16 116-117 9-3-4 154 
9:7 102 2:16 69 
13:7 26 3:16 9 
13:22 79 I Joun 
13:22-23 125 4:] 153 
19:12 153 JUDE 
22:9 102 Verse 6 154 
ROMANS 


1:3 125 


RS ae 


DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 
R. A. Torrey 


Most Christians, when discussing the Bible, will 
express their lack of understanding about certain pas- 
sages. The “difficulties,” as Torrey calls them, can 
hinder one’s study of the Scriptures. 


Difficulties in the Bible deals with questions re- 
garding the creation account, man’s antiquity, Cain’s 
wife, the sun standing still, Jonah’s “whale,” “impure” 
Bible stories, and others. In twenty-four chapters, 


Torrey gives straightforward, conclusive answers. 


Before tackling these “difficulties and contra- 
dictions,” Torrey offers some valuable advice to the 
reader: 


1. Difficulties are to be expected and must be dealt 
with honestly. 


2. Certain classes of difficulties stem from man’s 
imperfection, not the Bible’s. 


3. There is a seven-step guide to seeking the right 
answers to these difficulties (which Torrey out- 
lines and demonstrates) . 


When you find yourself puzzled, bewildered, or 
troubled by alleged problems in God’s Word, this 
book will guide you to finding the right answer to 
your “difficulties in the Bible.” 


2214-4 
0125MP 


& 


909-S69-SM 


