School of Theology at Claremont 


iii 








The Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 








‘DIE F ICULTIES 


- AND ALLEGED ERRORS: sake CONTRADICTIONS 


“IN THE BIBLE» 


i ese aameeee ; em imine 
Diag 
eae “ 
4 


salielaialiie lela 














DIFFICULTIES 


AND ALLEGED ERRORS AND CONTRADICTIONS 


IN THE BIBLE 


By R. A. TORREY 


AUTHOR OF 
**What the Bible Teaches,’’ ‘‘How to Work for Chriss,” 


‘‘How to Pray,’’ étc.  _. 





3 CHICAGO 
THE BIBLE INSTITUTE COLFORTAGE ASSOCIATSON 


826 La SALLE AVENUE ‘ 


COPYRIGHTED 1907, 


BY : 
, PLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 
: R, A, TORREY, 


OWNER, 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOEY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


INTRODUCTION 


Tuts book does not attempt to take up in detail every con- 
ceivable difficulty that could be found in the Bible. It would 
take many volumes to do that. I have simply taken up those 
objections of which the modern infidel makes the most, and 
which are most puzzling to many Christians. In going around 
the world, I have given people an opportunity to ask questions 
concerning matters that puzzle them. Pretty much every- 
where I go, the questions are largely the same; and in this 
book I have taken up the questions which have been most fre- 
quently put to me, or which present apparently the greatest 
difficulties. 

In regard to the questions which I have not touched upon, 
one can easily see that if so many difficulties are answered 
which they had supposed were unanswerable, the overwhelm- 
ing probability is that all the other difficulties could be 
answered also if there were time and space to take them up. 





CONTENTS 


Page 
Cuapter I—A GENERAL STATEMENT OF THE CASE : . $ 
Difficulties are to be expected—A difficulty in a doctrine, 
or a grave objection to a doctrine, does not in anywise 
prove the doctrine to be untrue—Many more difficulties in 
the doctrine that holds the Bible to be of human origin— 
The fact that you cannot solve a difficulty does not prove 
it cannot be solved—Seeming defects are insignificant— 
Difficulties have more weight with superficial readers 
than with profound students—and rapidly disappear upon 
careful and prayerful study. 
Cuapter [I—C.LAsses oF DIFFICULTIES ‘ < 3 17 
Those that arise (1) from the text from oitieh eur 
English Bible was translated—(2) from inaccurate trans- 
lations—(3) from false interpretations—(4) from a wrong 
conception of the Bible—(5) from the language in whieh 
the Bible was written—(6) from our defective knowledge 
of the history, knowledge and usages of Bible times—(7) 
from ignorance of conditions under which books were 
written and commands given—(8) from the many sided- 
ness of the Bible—(9) from the fact that the Bible has 
to do with the infinite, and our minds are finite—(10) 
from the dullness of our spiritual perceptions. 
Cuapter I1I—How SHALL We DEAL WITH THE DIFFICULTIES 
OF THE BIBLE? : . . 5 26 
Padig 2h umbls odeterutucdly.tearlesely-—patienily 
—Scripturally—prayerfully. 
Cuaprer IV—Is THE First CHAPTER oF GENESIS HISTORICAL 
- AnD SCIENTIFIC? ; “ : ‘ 29 
Lord Kelvin’s Spinion= The six “days” of creation— 
Light “before the sun—The order of creation—A refitting 
of the world. 
CHAPTER V—THE ANTIQUITY OF Man AccoRDING TO THE BIBLE 
AND ACCORDING TO SCIENCE . A A 3 33 
Dates commonly accepted by guny iietorians are not 
at all certain—It is not at all sure that there were only 


7 


8 CONTENTS 


Page 
4000 years from Adam to Christ—Ancient civilizations 
which are being discovered may be the remains of a pre- 
Adamic race. 


CHAPTER VI—WHERE Dip Cain Get His WIre? P ‘ 36 
CHAPTER VII—JEHOVAH’s CoMMAND TO ABRAHAM TO OFFER UP 
Isaac AS A BURNT OFFERING 5 = s : - 39 
CuapterR VIII—Gop HarpENING PHARAOH’S HEART ‘ 42 
Cuapter IX—THE WHOLESALE SLAUGHTER OF THE CANAANITES 
By Gop’s COMMAND : ‘ 5 3 A ; i 46 


CHAPTER X—JosHuA COMMANDING THE SUN TO STAND STILL. 52 
CHAPTER XI—DEBORAH’S PRAISE OF JAEL “THE MURDERESS” 56 


CHAPTER XII—THE SACRIFICE OF JEPHTHAH’S DAUGHTER 58 
Cuaprter XIJI—‘ImMpuge” BIBLE STORIES : 5 5 59 
CHapreR XITV—DAvin’s SIN : : , ; 64 
CHAPTER XV—THE IMPRECATORY ee a : 68 
Cuaprer XVI—Dors THE Gop or TruTH AND Love suns LyrIna 

SPIRITS AND Evi Spirits TO MEN? : 3 é {4 
CHAPTER XVII—JoNAH AND “THE Wate” F 74 
CHAPTER XVIII—Some Important “CONTRADICTIONS” IN THE 

BIBLE : p : 0 ; A A 18 


Can man see God?—The s super Steintious on the cross— 
The conversion of Saul—The resurrection of Jesus Christ 


—Does God repent?—Who moved David to number Israel? 
CHAPTER XIX—‘MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE : ; 3 90 


“Jeremiah” in Matthew 29:7-10—Abraham’s sepulchres 
—tThe use of strong drink in Proverbs 31:6, 7—Jesus turn- 
ing water into wine. 
Cuaprer XX—TuE Two GENEALOGIES or JESUS, THE CHRIST 98 
CHarreR XXI—Was Jesus Reatty Turems Days AND THREE 

NIGHTS IN THE HEART OF THE HARTH? A % : 101 
Cuaprer XXII—How Covutp Jesus ComMMEND THE ACTION OF 


THE UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD? : ; at ; 107 
CHaprrr XXIII—WerRE Jesus AND PauL Mranlteiee AS TO THE 
Time oF Our Lorp’s RETURN? ‘ ‘ 5 112 


CuarTer XXIV—Dip Jesus Go Intro THE oc OF THE DEAD 
AND PREACH TO THE SPIRITS In PRison? AND IS THERE 
ANOTHER PROBATION AFTER DEATH? . : 5 - 119 


q 
A GENERAL STATEMENT OF THE Case 


Every careful student and every thoughtful reader of the Bibie 
finds that the words of the apostle Peter concerning the 
Scriptures, that there are some things in them hard to be 
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest 
unto their own destruction (2 Peter 3:16), are abundantly 
true. Who is there of us who has not found things in the 
Bible that have puzzled us, yes, that in our early Christian 
experience have led us to question whether the Bible was, after 
all, the Word of God? We find some things in the Bible-which 
it seems impossible for us to reconcile with other things in 
the Bible. We find some things which seem incompatible 
with the thought that the whole Bible is of divine origin and 
absolutely inerrant. 

It is not wise to attempt to conceal the fact that these 
difficulties exist. It is the part of wisdom, as well as cf 
honesty, to frankly face them and consider them. 

What shall we say concerning these difficulties that every 
thoughtful student will sooner or later encounter? 


1. The first thing we have to say about these dificulties in 
the Bible is that from the very nature of the case difficulties 
are to be expected. 

Some people are surprised and staggered because there are 
difficulties in the Bible. For my part, I would be more gur- 
prised and staggered if there were not. What is the Bible? 
It is a revelation of the mind and will and character and being 
of an infinitely great, perfectly wise and absolutely holy God. 
_ God Himself is the Author of this revelation. But to whom 

is the revelation made? To men, to finite beings, to men who 
are imperfect in intellectual development and consequently in 
knowledge, and who are also imperfect in character and conse- 


9 


10 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


quently in spiritual discernment. The wisest man measured 
on the scale of eternity is only a babe, and the holiest man 
compared with God is only an infant in moral development. 
There must, then, from the very necessities of the case, be 
difficulties in such a revelation from such a source made to 
such persons. When the finite tries to understand the infinite, 
there is bound to be difficulty. When the ignorant contemplate 
the utterances of one perfect in knowledge, there must be 
many things hard to be understood, and some things which . 
to their immature and inaccurate minds appear absurd. 
When beings whose moral judgments as to the hatefulness of 
sin and as to the awfulness of the penalty that it demands 
are blunted by their own sinfulness listen to the demands of 
an absolutely holy Being, they are bound to be staggered at 
some of His demands, and when they consider His dealings, 
they are bound to be staggered at some of His dealings. 
These dealings will appear too severe, too stern, too harsh, 
too terrific. 
It is plain that 


THERE Must BE DIFFICULTIES 


for us in such a revelation as the Bible has proven to be. 
If someone should hand me a book that was as simple to me 
as the multiplication table, and say: “This is the Word of 
God; in it He has revealed His whole will and wisdom,” 1 
should shake my head and say: “I cannot believe it; that is 
_too easy to be a perfect revelation of infinite wisdom.” There 
must be in any complete revelation of God’s mind and will 
and character and being-things hard for the beginner to 
understand, and the wisest and best of us are but beginners. 


2. The second thing to be said about these difficulties is 
that a difficulty in a doctrine, or a grave objection to a doc- 
trine, does not in any wise prove the doctrine to be untrue. 


-1Proof that the Bible is the Word of God may be found in the 
author’s book, The Bible and Tis Christ 


“- A GENERAL STATEMENT 11 


Many thoughtless people fancy that it does. If they come 
across some difficulty in the way of believing in the divine 
origin and absolute inerrancy and infallibility of the Bible, 
they at once conclude that the doctrine is exploded. That is 
very illogical. Stop a moment and think, and learn to be 
reasonable and fair. There is 


ScaRcELY A DocTRINE IN ScIENCE GENERALLY BELIEVED TODAY 


that has not had some great difficulty in the way of its 
acceptance. 

‘When the Copernican theory, now so universally accepted, 
was first proclaimed, it encountered a very grave difficulty. 
If this theory were true, the planet Venus should have phases 
as the moon has, but no phases could be discovered by the - 
best glass then in existence. But the positive argument for 
the theory was so strong that it was accepted in spite of this 
apparently unanswerable objection. When a more powerful 
glass was made, it was found that Venus had phases aiter 
all. The whole difficulty arose, as most all of those in the 
Bible arise, from man’s ignorance of some of the facts in 
the case. 

The nebular hypothesis is commonly accepted in the scien- 
tific world today. But when this theory was first announced, 
and for a long time afterward, the movements of the planet 
Uranus could’ not be reconciled with the theory. Uranus 
seemed to move in just the opposite direction from that in 
which it was thought it ought to move in accordance with 
the demands of the theory. But the positive arguments for 
the theory were so strong that it was accepted in spite of the 
inexplicable movements of Uranus. 

If we apply to Bible study the common sense logic recog- 
nised in every department of science (with the exception of 
Biblical criticism, if that be a science), then we must demand 
that if the positive proof of a theory is conclusive, it must 
be believed by rational men in spite of any number of diffi- 
culties in minor details. He is a very shallow thinker in- 
deed who gives up a well-attested truth because there are 


We 


dai DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 
. 

some apparent facts which he cannot reconcile with that 
truth. And he is a very shallow Bible scholar who gives up 
his belief in the divine origin and inerrancy of the Bible 
because there are some supposed facts that he cannot recon- 
cile with that doctrine. There are in the theological world 
today many shallow thinkers of that kind. 


3. The third thing to be said about the difficulties in the 
Bible is that there are many more, and much greater, difji- 
culties in the way of the doctrine that holds the Bible to be 
of human origin, and hence fallible, than there are in the way 
of the doctrine that holds the Bible to be of divine origin, 
and hence infallible. : 

Oftentimes a man will bring you some difficulty and say: 
“How do you explain that, if the Bible is the Word of God?” 
and perhaps you may not be able to answer him satisfac- 
torily. ‘Then he thinks he has you cornered, but not at all. 
Turn on him, and ask him: “How do you account for the 
fulfilled prophecies of the Bible if it is of human origin? 
How do you account for the marvellous unity of the Book? 
How do you account for its inexhaustible depth? How do 
you account for its unique power in lifting men up to God? . 
And so on.” For every insignificant objection he can bring 
to your view of the Bible, you can bring very many more 
deeply significant objections to his view of the Bible. And 
any really candid man, who desires to know and obey the 


‘truth will have no difficulty in deciding between the two 


views. 


Some time ago a young man, who was of a bright mind 
and unusually well read in sceptical and critical and agnostic 
literature, told me he had given the matter a great deal of 
candid and careful thought, and as a result he could not be- 
lieve the Bible was of divine origin. © 

I asked him: “Why not?” 


He pointed to a certain teaching of the Bible that he could 


not. and would not believe to be true. 


I replied: “Suppose for a moment that I could not answer 
that specific difficulty, that would not prove that the Bible 


A GENERAL STATEMENT 13 


is not of divine origin. I can bring you many things far 
more difficult to account for on the hypothesis that the Bible 
is not of divine origin than this is on the hypothesis that 
the Bible is of divine origin. You cannot deny the fact of 
fulfilled prophecy. How do you account for it if the Bible 


is not God’s Word? You cannot shut your eyes to the mar- 


vellous unity of the sixty-six books of the Bible, written 
under such divergent circumstances and at periods of time so 
remote from one another. How do you account for it, if God 
is not the real Author of the Book back of the forty or more 
human authors? You cannot deny that the Bible has a power 
to save men from sin, to bring men peace and hope and joy, 
to lift men up to God, that all other books taken together 
do not possess. How do you account for it if the Bible is 
not the Word of God in a sense that no other book is the 
Word of God?” 

The objector did not answer. The difficulties that confront 
one who denies that the Bible is of divine origin and author- 
ity are far more numerous and vastly more weighty than 
those which confront the one who believes it to be of divine 
origin and authority. 


4. The fourth thing to be said about the difficulties in the 
Bible is: the fact that you cannot solve a difficulty does not 
prove it cannot be solved, and the fact that you cannot answer 
an objection does not prove at all that it cannot be answered. 

It is remarkable how often we overlook this very evident 
fact. There are many, who, when they meet a difficulty in 
the Bible and give it a little thought and can see no possible 
solution, at once jump at the conclusion that a solution is 
impossible by anyone, and so they throw up their faith in 
the inerrancy of the Bible and in its divine origin. It would 
seem as if any man would have a sufficient amount of that 
modesty that is becoming in beings so limited in knowledge 
as we all undeniably are to say: 

“Though I see no possible solution to this difficulty, some- 
one a little wiser than I might easily find one.” 

If we would only bear in mind that we do not know every- 


14 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


thing, and there are a great many things that we eam 
not solve now that we could very easily solve if we only 
knew a little more, it would save us from all this folly. 
Above all, we ought never to forget that there may be 8 
very easy solution to infinite wisdom even to that which te 
our finite wisdom —or ignorance—appears absolutely insolu- 
able. What would we think of a beginner in algebra, who, 
having tried in vain for half an hour to solve a difficult 
problem, declared that there was no possible solution to the 
problem because he could find none? 

A man of unusual experience and ability one day left his 
work and came a long distance ‘to see me in great perturbation 
of spirit because he had discovered what seemed to him a flat 
contradiction in the Bible. He had lain awake all night 
thinking about it. It had defied all his attempts at recon- 
ciliation, but when he had fully stated the case to me, in a 
very few moments I showed him a very simple and satis- 
factory solution of the difficulty. He went away with a happy 
heart. But why had it not occurred to him at the outset 
that though it appeared absolutely impossible to him te find 
a solution after all a solution might be easily discovered by 
someone else? He supposed that the difficulty was an ecn- 
tirely new one, but it was one that had been faced and 
answered long before either he or I was born. 


5. The fifth thing to be said about the difficulties im the 
Bible is that the seeming defects of the Book are exceedingly 
insignificant when put in comparison with its many and mar- 
vellous excellencies. - 

It certainly reveals great perversity of both mind and heart 
that men spend so much time expatiating on such insignifi- 
cant points that they consider defects in the Bible, and pass 
absolutely unnoticed the incomparable beauties and wonders 
that adorn and glorify almost every page. Even in some 
prominent institutions of learning, where men are supposed 
to be taught to appreciate and understand the Bible and 
where they are sent to be trained to preach its truth to 
others, much more time is spent on minute and insignificant 


A GENERAL STATEMENT : 15 


points that seem to point toward an entirely human origin 
of the Bible than is spent upon studying and understanding 
and admiring the unparalleled glories that make this Book 
stand apart from all other books in the world. What would 
we think of any man who -in studying some great master- 
piece of art concentrated his whole attention upon what 
looked like a fly-speck in the corner? A large proportion of 
the much vaunted “critical study of the Bible” is a laborious 
and scholarly investigation of supposed fly-specks. The man 
who is not willing to squander the major portion of his 
time in this erudite investigation of fly-specks but prefers 
to devote it to the study of the unrivalled beauties and ma- 
jestic splendors of the Book is counted in some quarters as 
not being “scholarly and up to date.” 


6. The sixth thing to be said about the difficulties in the 
Bible is that they have far more weight with superficial read- 
ers than with profound students. 

Take a man like the late Colonel Ingersoll, who was 
totally ignorant of the real contents and meaning of the 
Bible, or that class of modern preachers who read the Bible 
for the most part for the sole purpose of finding texts to 
serve as pegs to hang their own ideas upon, To such super- 
ficial readers of the Bible these difficulties seem of immense 
importance, but to the one who has learned to meditate upon 
the Word of God day and night they have scarcely any 
weight at all. That rare man of God, George Miiller, who 
had earefully studied the Bible from beginning to end more 
than one hundred times, was not disturbed by any difficul- 
ties he encountered, but to the man who is reading it through 
for the first or second time there are many things that per- 
plex and stagger. 


7. The seventh thing to be said about the difficulties in the 
Bible is that they rapidly disappear upon ei and prayer- 
ful study. 

How many things there are in the Bible that once puzzled 
and staggered us, but which have since been perfectly cleared 


16 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


up and no longer present any difficulty whatever! Every 
year of study finds these difficulties disappear more and more 
rapidly. At first they go by ones, and then by twos, and 
then by dozens, and then by scores. Is it not reasonable 
then to suppose that the difficulties that still remain will all 
disappear upon further study? 


x 


is 
CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES 


Aut the difficulties found in the Bible can be included under 
ten general heads. 


1. The first class of difficulties: those that arise from the 
text from which our English Bible was translated. 

No one, as far as I know, holds that the English transla- 
tion of the Bible is absolutely infallible and inerrant. The — 
doctrine held by many is that the Scriptures as originally 
given were absolutely infallible and inerrant, and that our 
English translation is a substantially accurate rendering ot 
the Scriptures as originally given. We do not possess the 
original manuscripts of the Bible. These original manu- 
scripts were copied many times with great care and exact- 
ness, but naturally some errors crept into the copies that 
were made. We now possess so many good copies that by 
comparing one with another, we can tell with great precision 
just what the original text was. Indeed, for all practical 
purposes the original text is now settled. There is not one 
important doctrine that hangs upon any doubtful reading of 
the text. But when our Authorised Version was made some 
of the best manuscripts were not within reach of the trans- 
jators, and the science of textual criticism was not so well 
understood as it is today, and so the translation was made 
from an imperfect text. Not a few of the apparent difficul- 
ties in the Bible arise from this source. 

For example, we are told in John 5:4 that “an angel went 
down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the 
water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water 
stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.” 
This statement for many reasons seems improbable and diffi- 
cult to believe, but upon investigation we find that it is all 


2 17 


18 E:FFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE - 


a mistake of the copyist. Some early copyist, reading John’s 
account, added in the margin his explanation of the healing 
properties of this intermittent medicinal spring. A late copy- 
ist embodied this marginal note in the body of the text, and 
so it came to be handed down and got into the Authorized 
Version. Very properly it has been omitted from the Revised 
Version, 

The discrepancies in figures in different accounts of the 
same events, as, for example, the differences in the ages of 
some of the kings as given in the text ef Kings and Chron- 
icles, doubtless arise from the same cause, errors of copyists. 
Such an error in the matter of figures would be very easy 
to make, as in the Hebrew numbers are denoted by letters, 
and letters that appear very much alike have a very differ- 
ent value as figures. For example, the first letter in the 
Hebrew alphabet denotes one, and with two little points above 
it, not larger than fly-specks, it denotes a thousand. The 
twenty-third or last letter of the Hebrew alphabet denotes 
four hundred, but the eighth letter of the Hebrew alphabet, 
that looks very much like it and could be easily mistaken 
for it, denotes eight. A very slight error of the copyist 
would therefore make an utter change in figures. The re- 
markable thing when one contemplates the facts in the case 
is that so few errors of this kind have been made. 


2. The second class of difficulties: those that arise from 
inaccurate translations. 

For example, in Matthew 12:40 Jonah is spoken of as be- 
ing in “the whale’s belly.” Many a seeptic has made merry 
over the thought of a whale with the peculiar construction 
of its mouth and throat swallowing a man, but if the sceptic 
had only taken the trouble to look the matter up, he would 
have found the word translated “whale” really means “sea 
monster,” without any definition as to the character of the 
sea monster. We will take this up more in detail in con- 
sidering the story of Jonah. So the whole difficulty arose 
from the translator’s mistake and the sceptie’s ignorance. 
There are many sceptics today who are so densely ignorant 


CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES 19 


of matters clearly understood by many Sunday school cnil- 
dren that they are still harping in the name of scholarsnfp 
on this supposed error in the Bible. 


3. The third class of dificulties: those that arise from 
false interpretations of the Bible. 

What the Bible teaches is one thing, and what men inter- 
pret it to mean is oftentimes something widely different. 
Many difficulties that we have with the Bible arise not from 
what the Bible actually says, but from what men interpret 
it to mean. 

A striking illustration of this is found in the first chapter 
of Genesis. If we were to take the interpretation put upon 
this chapter by many interpreters, it would indeed be diffi- 
cult to reconcile it with much that modern science regards 
as established. But the difficulty is not with what the first 
chapter of Genesis says, but with the interpretation that is 
put upon it. But there is no contradiction whatever between 
what is really proven by science and what is really said in 
the first chapter of Genesis. This will come out clearly in 
the chapter that follows on “The First Chapter of Genesis.” 

Another difficulty of the same character is with Jesus’ 
‘statement that He would be three days and three nights in 
the heart of the earth. Many interpreters would have us 
believe that He died Friday night and rose early Sunday 
morning, and the time between these two is far from being 
three days and three nights; but we shall see later that it 
is a matter of Biblical interpretation, and the trouble is not 
with what the Bible actually says, but with the interpretation 
that men put upon the Bible. We will take this matter up 
at length in the chapter “Was Jesus Actually Three Days 
and Three Nights in the Heart of the Earth?” 


4. The fourth class of difficulties: those that arise from 
a@ wrong conception of the Bible, : 

Many think that when you say the Bible is the Word af 
God, of divine origin and* authority, you mean that God rs 
the speaker in every utterance it contains; but this is not at - 


90 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


all what is meant. Oftentimes it simply records what others 
say,—what good men say, what bad men say, what inspired 
men say, what uninspired men say, what angels and demons 
say, and even what the devil himself says. The record of 
what they said is from God and absolutely true, but what 
those other persons are recorded as saying may be true or 
may not be true. It is true that they said it, but what they 
said may not be true. 

For example, the devil is recorded in Genesis 3:4 as say- 
ing: “Ye shall not surely die.” It is true that the devil 
said it, but what the devil said is not true, but an infamous 
lie that shipwrecked our race. That the devil said it is God’s 
Word, but what the devil said is not God’s word but the 
devil’s word. It is God’s Word that this was the devil’s 
word. 

Very many careless readers of the Bible do not notice who 
ig talking—God, geod men, bad men, inspired men, unin- 
spired men, angels or devil. They will tear a verse right 
out of its context regardless of the speaker and say: ‘‘There, 
God said that,’ but God said nothing of the kind, God's 
Word says that the devil said it, or a bad man said it, or a 
good man said it, or an inspired man said it, or an unin- 
spired man said it, or an angel said it. What God says is 
true, namely, that the devil said it, or a bad man, or a good 
man, or an inspired man, or an uninspired man, or an aneet, 
But what they said may or may not be true. 

It is very common to hear men quote what Eliphaz, Bildad, 
or Zophar said to Job as if it were necessarily God’s own 
words because it is recorded in the Bible, in spite of the fact 
that God disavowed their teaching and said to them: “Ye 
have not spoken of Me the thing which is right” (Job 42:7). 
It is true that these men said the thing that God records 
them as saying, but oftentimes they gave the truth a twist 
and said what is not right. A very large share of our. diffi- 
culties thus arises from not noticing who is speaking. The 
Bible always tells us, and we should always note it. 

In the Psalms we have sometimes what God said to man, 
and that is always true, but on the other hand, we often have 


CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES 91 


what man said to God, and that may or may not be true. 
Sometimes, and far oftener than most of us see, it is the 
voice of the speaker’s personal vengeance or despair. This 
vengeance may be and often is prophetic, but it may be the 
wronged man committing his cause to Him to whom venge- 
‘ance belongeth (Romans 12:19), and we are not obliged to 
defend all that he said. In the Psalms we have even a record 
of what the fool said, namely: “There is no God” (Psalm 
14:1). Now it is true that the fool said it, but the fool lied 
when he said it. It is God’s Word that the fool said it, but 
what God reports the fool as saying is not God’s own word 
at all but the fool’s own word. 

So in studying our Bible, if God is the speaker we must 
believe what He says. If an inspired man is the speaker 
’ we must believe what he says. If an uninspired man is the 
speaker we must judge for ourselves—it is perhaps true, per- 
haps false. If it is the devil who is speaking, we do well to 
remember that he was a liar from the beginning, but even 
the devil may tell the truth sometimes. 


5. The fifth class of difficulties: those that arise from 
the language in which the Bible was written. 

The Bible is a book for all ages and for all kinds of peo- 
ple, and therefore it was written in the language that con- 
tinues the same and is understood by all, the language of 
the common people and of appearances. It was not written 
in the terminology of science. E 

Thus, for example, what occurred at the battle of Gibeon 
(Joshua 10:12-14) was described in the way it appeared to 
those who saw it, and the way in which it would be under- ~ 
stood by those who read about it. There is no talk about the 
refraction of the sun’s rays, and so forth, but the sun is said 
to have “stood still” (or tarried) in the midst of heaven. It 
is one of the perfections of the Bible that it was not written 
in the terminology of modern science. If it had been, it 
would never have been understood until the present day, 
and even now it would be understood only by a few. Further- 

more, as science and its terminology are constantly changing, 


99 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


the Bible if writteh in the terminology of the science of to- 
day would be out of date in a few years, but being written 
in just the language chosen it has proved the Book for ali 
ages, all lands and all conditions of men. 

Other difficulties from the language in which the Bible 
was written arise from the fact that large portions of the 
Bible are poetical and are written in the language of poetry, 
the language of feeling, passion, imagination and figure. 
Now if a man is hopelessly prosaic, he will inevitably find 
difficulties with these poetical portions of the inspired Word. 

For example, in Psalm 18 we have a marvellous description 
of a thunderstorm, but let the dull, prosaic fellow get hold of 
that, for example the 8th verse: ‘‘There went up a smoke 
out of His nostrils, and fire out of His mouth devoured: 
coals were kindled by it,’ and he will be head over heels in 
difficulty at once. But the trouble is not with the Bible, but 
with his own stupid, thick-headed prosaicness. 


6. The sixth class of difficulties: those that arise from 
our defective knowledge of the history, geography and usages 
of Bible times. i 

For example, in Acts 13:7 Luke speaks of “the deputy” 
(or, more accurately, ‘the proconsul,’ see Revised Version) 
of Cyprus. Roman provinces were of two classes, imperial 
and senatorial. The ruler of the imperial provinces was 
called a “propraetor,” of a senatorial province a “proconsul.” 
Up to a comparatively recent date, according to the best in- 
formation we had, Cyprus was an imperial province. and 
therefore its ruler would be a “propraetor,” but Luke calls 
him a “proconsul.” This certainly seemed like a clear casa 
of error on Luke’s part, and even the conservative’ commen- 
tators felt forced to admit that Luke was in slight error, and 
the destructive critics were delighted to find this “mistake.” 
But further and more thorough investigation has brought to 
light the fact that just at the time of which Luke wrote the 
senate had made an exchange with the emperor whereby 
Cyprus had become a senatorial province, and therefore its 


CLASSES: vl’ DIFFICULTIES 23 


ruler a proconsul; and Luke was right after all, and the lit- 
erary critics were themselves in error. 

Time and time again further researches and discoveries, 
geographical, bistorical and archeological, have 


VINDICATED THE BIBLE 


and put to shame its critics. For example, the book of 
Daniel has naturally been one of the books that infidels and 
destructive critics have most hated. One of.their strongest 
arguments against its authenticity and veracity was that 
such a person as Belshazzar was unknown to history, and _ 
that all historians agreed that Nabonidus was the last king 
of Babylon, and .that he was absent from the city when it 
Was captured; and so Belshazzar must be a purely mythical 
character, and the whole story legendary and not historical. 
Their argument seemed very strong. In fact, it seemed un: 
answerable. But Sir H. Rawlinson discovered at Mugheir 
and other Chaldean sites clay cylinders on which Belshazzar 
(Belsaruzur) is named by Nabonidus as his eldest son. 
Doubtless he reigned as regent in the city during his father’s 
absence, an indication of which we have in his proposal te 
make Daniel third ruler in the kingdom (Daniel 5:16)—he 
himself being second ruler ix the kingdom, Daniel would be 
next to himself. So the Bible was vindicated and the critics 
put to shame. 4 

It is not so long since the destructive crifics asserted most 
positively that Moses could not have written the Pentateuch 
' because writing was unknown in his day, but recent discoy- 
eries have proved beyond a question that writing far ante- 
dates the time of Moses. So the destructive critics have been 
compelled to give up their argument, though they have had 
the bad grace te hold on stubbornly to their conclusion. 


7. The seventh class of difficulties: those that arise from 
the ignorance of conditions under which books were written 
and commands given. 

For example, to one ignorant of the conditions God’s com- 
mands to Israel as to the extermination of the Canaanites, 


94 ‘ DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


seem cruel and horrible, but when one understands the moral 
condition to which these nations had sunken, and the utter 
hopelessness of reclaiming them, and the weakness of the 
Israelites themselves, their extermination seems to have been 
an act of mercy to all succeeding generations and to them- 
selves. We will go into this more fully in the chapter on 
“The Slaughter of the Canaanites.” 
? 


8. The eighth class of difficulties: those that arise from 
the many-sidedness of the Bible. 

The broadest minded man is one-sided, but the truth is 
many-sided, and the Bible is all-sided. So to our narrow 
thought one part of the Bible seems to contradict another. 

For example, men as a rule are either Calvinistic or Armin- 
ian in their mental make-up, and some portions of the Bible 
are decidedly Calvinistic and present great difficulties to the 
Arminian type of mind, while other portions are decidedly 
Arminian and present difficulties to the Calvinistic type of 
mind. But 

BotH SIpEs ARE TRUE. © 


Many men in our day are broad-minded enough to be able 
to grasp at the same time the Calvinistic side of the truth 
and the Arminian side of the truth, but some are not, and 
so the Bible perplexes, puzzles and bewilders them,—but the 
trouble is not with the Bible, but with their own lack of 
capacity for comprehensive thought. 

so, too, Paul seems to contradict James, and James seems - 
sometimes to contradict Paul, and what Paul says in one 
place seems to contradict what he says in another place. But 
the whole trouble is that our narrow minds cannot take in 
God’s large truth. 


9. The ninth class of difficulties: those that arise from 
the fact that the Bible has to do with the injinite, and our 
minds are finite. 

It is necessarily difficult to put the facts of infinite being 
into the limited capacity of our finite intelligence, just as it 


CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES Se 


is difficult to put the ocean into a pint cup. To this class of 

difficulties belong those connected with the Bible doctrine of 
the Trinity and with the Bible doctrine of the divine-human 
nature of Christ. To those who forget that God is infinite, 
the doctrine of the Trinity seems like the mathematical mon- 
strosity of making one equal three. But when one bears in 
mind that the doctrine of the Trinity is an attempt to put 
into forms of finite thought the facts of infinite being, and 
into material forms of expression the facts of the spirit, the 
dificulties vanish. The simplicity of the Unitarian concep- 
tion of God arises from its shallowness. 


10. The tenth class of difficulties: those that arise from 
the dullness of our spiritual perceptions. 

The man who is farthest advanced spiritually is still so 
immature that he cannot expect to see everything yet as an 
absolutely holy God sees it, unless he takes it upon simple 
faith in Him. To this class of difficulties belong those con- 
nected with the Bible doctrine of eternal punishment. It 
oftentimes seems to us as if this doctrine cannot be true, 
must not be true, but the whole difficulty arises from the fact 
that we are still so blind spiritually that we have no ade- 
quate conception of the awfulness of sin, and especially of 
the awfulness of the sin of rejecting the infinitely glorious 
Son of God. But when we become so holy, so like God, that 
we see the enormity of sin as He sees it, we shall have no 
difficulty with the doctrine of eternal punishment. 


As we look back over the ten classes of difficulties, we see 


Tury ALL ARISE FROM OUR IMPERFECTION 


4 
and not from the imperfection of the Bible. The Bible is 
perfect, but we, being imperfect, have difficulty with it. As 
we grow more and more into the perfection of God, our diffi- 
culties grow ever less and less, and so we are forced to con- 
clude that when we become as perfect as God is, we shall 
bave no more difficulties whatever with the Bible. 


ili 
How SHALL We DEAL WITH THE DIFFICULTIES OF THE BIBLE? 


Berorr taking up those specific difficulties and alleged ‘‘con- 
tradictions” in the Bible which have caused the most trouble 
to seekers after truth, let us first consider how difficulties in 
general should be dealt with. 


1. First of all, let us deal with them honestly. 

Whenever you find a difficulty in the Bible frankly acknowl- 
edge it. Don’t try to obscure it. Don’t try to dodge it. Look 
it square in the face. Admit it frankly to whoever mentions 
it. If you cannot give a good, square, honest explanation, do 
not attempt any at all. Untold harm has been done by those 
who in their zeal for the infallibility of the Bible have at- 
tempted explanations of difficulties which do not commend 
themselves to the honest, fair-minded man. People have con- 
cluded that if these are the best explanations, then there are 
really no explanations at all, and the Bible instead of being 
helped has been injured by the unintelligent zeal of foolish 
friends. If you are not really convinced that the Bible is the 
Word of God, you can far better afford to wait for an honest 
solution of a difficulty than you can afford to attempt a solu- 
tion that is evasive and unsatisfactory. 


2. In the second place, let us deal with them humbly. 

Recognize the limitations of your own mind and knowl: 
edge, and do not for a moment imagine that there is no solu- 
tion just because you have found none. There is, in all prob- 
ability, a very simple solution, even when you can find no 
solution at all. 


3. In the third place, deal with the dificulty determinedly. 
Make*up your mind that you will find the solution if you 
can by any amount of study and hard thinking. The difficul 


26 


, 


HOW DEAL WITH THE DIFFICULTIES? 27 


ties of the Bible are our heavenly Father’s Gasicids to us 
to set our brains to work. Do not give up searching for a 
Solution because you cannot find one in five minutes or ten 
minutes, Ponder over it and work over it for days if neces- 
sary. The work will do you more good than’ the solution 
does. There is a solution somewhere, and you will find it if 
you will only search for it long enough and hard enough. 


4. In the fourth place, deal with the difficulty fearlessly. 

Do not be frightened when you find a difficulty, no matter 
how unanswerable or how insurmountable it appears at first 
sight. Thousands of men have found just such difficulties 


BEFORE You WERE Born. 


‘they were seen hundreds of years ago, and still the old Book 
stinds. The Bible that has stood eighteen centuries of rigid 
ex..mination, and also of incessant and awful assault, is not 
likvly to go down before your discoveries or before the dis- 
chaiges of any modern critical guns. To one who is at all 
familiar with the history of critical attacks on the Bible, the 
confictence of those modern destructive critics who think they 
are guing to annihilate the Bible at last, is simply amusing. 


5. In the fifth place, deal with the difficulty patiently. 

Do not be discouraged because you do not solve every prob- 
lem in a day. If some difficulty persistently defies your very 
best efforts at a solution, lay it aside for a while. Very likely 
when you come back to it, it will have disappeared and you 
will wonder how you were ever perplexed by it. 


6. In the sixth place, deal with the difficulty Scripturally. 
If you find a difficulty in one part of the Bible, look for 
other Scripture to throw light upon it and dissolve it. Noth- 
ing explains Scripture like Scripture. Time and again peo- 
ple have come to me with some difficulty in the Bible that 
had greatly staggered them, and asked for a solution, and 7 


28 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


have-been able to give a solution by simply asking them to 
read some other chapter and verse, and the simple reading 
of that chapter and verse has thrown such a light upon the 
passage in question that all the mists have disappeared and 
the truth has shone as clear as day. df 


7. In the seventh place, deal with the dificulty prayerfully. 

It is simply wonderful how difficulties dissolve when one 
looks at them on his *knees. Not only does God open our 
eyes in answer to prayer to behold wonderful things out of 
His law, but He also opens our eyes to look straight through 
a difficulty that. before we prayed seemed impenetrable. One 
great reason why many modern Bible scholars have learned 
to be destructive critics is because they have forgotten hew 
to pray. 7 


IV 
Is THE First CHAPTER OF GENESIS HISTORICAL AND SCIENTIFIC? 


TueERrE is no part of the Bible that the more scholarly oppo- 
nents of its divine origin are more fond of attacking than the 
very first chapter in the Book. Time and again have we been 
assured that the teachings of this ¢hapter are in hopeless 
conflict with the best established conclusions of modern 
science. HEven a prominent theological teacher in a sup- 
posedly Christian university has said that “no one who- 
Knows what history and science are would think of calling 
the first chapter of Genesis either historical or scientific.” 
But in spite of this confident assertion, men who have gained 
a name as historians beyond anything that this teacher of 
theology can expect, assure us that it is. not only historical 
but the very foundation of history. Other men, who have 
secured for themselves a position in the scientific world to 
‘which this teacher can never hope to aspire, assure us that 
this chapter agrees absolutely with everything that is known 
scientifically of the origin and early history of the earth. 
For example, there is no name more honored in the scien- 
tific world today than that of Lord Kelvin. Lord Kelvin, in 
a private letter to a friend of mine, says: 

“Physical science has nothing to say against the order of 
creation as given in Genesis.” 

But let us come to the specific difficulties in the first chap- 
ter of Genesis, 

The objector is fond of telling us that “the first chapter of 
Genesis says that the world was created in six days of twen 
ty-four hours each, when everyone who is familiar with mod- 
ern science knows that the world as it now stands was mil- 
fions of years in the making.” 

This objection sounds well, but the one who makes it dis- 
plays a hopeless ignorance of the Bible. Anyone who is at 


29 


30 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


all familiar with the Bible and the Bible usage of words 
knows that the word “day” is 


Not Limirep To PEeRiops oF TWENTY-FOUR Hovugs. 


It is frequently used of a period of time of an entirely unde- 
fined length. For example, in Joel 3:18-20 the millennial 
period is spoken of as a “day.” In Zechariah 2:10-13 the 
millennial period is again spoken of as a “day,” and again 
in Zechariah 13:1, 2 and 14:9. Even in the second chapter 
of Genesis the whole period covered by the six days of the 
first account is spoken of as a “day” (Genesis 2:4, 5). There 
is no necessity whatever for interpreting the days of Gene 
sis 1 as solar days of twenty-four hours each. They may bi: 
vast periods of undefined length. 

But someone may say: “This is twisting the Scriptures 
to make them fit the conclusions of modern science.” 

The one who says so simply displays his ignorance of ths 
history of Biblical interpretation. St. Augustine, as far back 
as the fourth century, centuries before modern science and 
its conclusions were dreamed of, interpreted the days of Gene- 
sis 1 as periods of time, just what the word means in many 
places elsewhere in the Bible. 

Another point urged against the truth and accuracy of the 
acoount of creation given in Genesis 1 is that it speaks of 
“there being light before the sun existed, and it is absurd to 
think of light before the sun, the source of light.” 

The one who says this displays his ignorance of modern 
science. Anyone who is familiar with the nebular hypothesis, 
commonly accepted among scientific men today, knows that 
there was cosmic light ages before the sun became differen- 
tiated from the general luminous nebulous mass as a separ- 
ate body. 

But the objector further urges against the scientific accu- 
racy of Genesis 1 that its order of creation is not the order 
determined by the investigations of modern science. 

This is an assertion that cannot be proven. It was the 
writer’s privilege to study geology under that prince of geol- 


THE FIRST CHAPTER OF GENESIS Sl 


ogists, who has been pronounced by competent authority to 
be the greatest scientific thinker of the nineteenth century 
with the exception of Charles Darwin, namely, Professor 
James D. Dana of Yale. Professor Dana once said in my pres- 
ence that “one reason why he believed the Bible to be the 
Word of God was because of the marvellous accord of the 
order of creation given in Genesis with that worked out by 
the best scientific investigation.” Note also what Lord Kel- 
vin is quoted as saying in the early part of this chapter. 

It must be said, however, that men of science are constantly 
changing their views of what was the exact order of creation. 
Very recently discoveries have been made that have over- 
thrown theories of the order of creation held by many men 
of science and which did not seem to some to harmonize with 
the order as given in the first chapter of Genesis, but these 
recent discoveries have brought the order into harmony ‘with 
the order as given in that chapter. 

There is no need of going in detail into this order of crea- 
tion as taught by modern science and taught in Genesis 1. 
For there is grave reason to doubt if anything in Genesis 1 
after verse 1 relates to the original creation of the ..niverse. 
All the verses after the first seem rather to refer to 


A REfFITTING OF THE WORLD 


that had been created and had afterwards been plunged into 
_ chaos by the sin of some pre-Adamic race, to be the abode of 
the present race that inhabits it, the Adamic race. 

‘The reasons for so thinking are, first, that the words trans- 
lated “without form and void’ (R. V., “waste and void’) are 
“used everywhere else in the Bible of the state of affairs that 
God brought upon persons and places as a punishment for 
sin. For example, in Isaiah 34:11 we read of the judgment 
that God shall bring upon Idumea as a punishment for their 
- gins in these words: “He shall stretch over it a line of con- 
fusion, and the plummet of emptiness” (R. V.). The Hebrew 
words translated “confusion” and “emptiness” are the same 
that are translated “without form and void” in Genesis 1:2. 


32 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


We read again in Jeremiah 4:23-27: “I beheld the earth, and, 
lo, it was waste and void.” In both instances the words 
“waste and void” refer to a ruin which God had sent as a 
punishment for sin, and the assumption is very strong that 
they have a similar significance in Genesis 1. 

The second reason for this interpretation is stronger yet, 
namely, that the Bible expressly declares that God did not 
create the earth “in vain” (Isaiah 45:18). But the word 
translated “in vain” in this passage is precisely the one 
translated “without form” in Genesis 1:2. In the Revised 
Version of Genesis 1:2 and Isaiah 45:18 the word is trans- 
lated in both instances “waste.” Here then is a plain and 
specific declaration in the Bible that God did not create the 
earth “without form” (or rather “waste,” R. V.), so it is 
plain that Genesis 1:2 cannot refer fo the original creation. 
The word translated “was” in Genesis 1:2 can, with perfect 
propriety, be translated “became,” then Genesis 1:2 would 
read: “And the earth became waste and void.” In that case 
in Genesis 1:1 we have the actual aceount of creation. It 
is very brief but wonderfully expressive, instructive and sug- 
gestive. In Genesis 1:2 we have a brief but suggestive ac- 
count of how the earth became involved in desolation and 
emptiness, presumably through the sin of some preAdamic - 
race. Then all after verse 2 does not describe the original 
creation of the earth, but its fitting up anew for the new 
race God is to bring upon the earth—the Adamic race, Even 
if we allow the word “was” to stand in Genesis 1: 2, and do 
not substitute the word “became,” it does not materially affect 
the interpretation. 

If this be the true interpretation of the chapter (and the 
argument for this interpretation seems conclusive), then of 

course this record cannot by any possibility come into conflict 
with any discoveries of geology as yet made or to be made, 
for the geological strata lie back of the period here described. 
The agreement of the order as‘set forth in Genesis 1 with 
the order as discovered by science would be accounted for by 


the fact that God always works in Orton progress from the 
lower to the higher. 


Vv 


THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN ACCORDING TO THE BIBLE AND ACCORD 
ING TO SCIENCE 


One of the questions that is greatly puzzling Many Bible- 
scholars today is how to reconcile the chronology of the Bible 
with discoveries that are being made as to the antiquity or 
man. It is said that the Bible chronology only allows about 
4000 years from Adam to Christ, but the Egyptian and Baby- 
lonian civilizations were highly developed before 4000 years 
before Christ. If there were but 4000 years from Adam to 
Christ there would be only 5907 years for the whole age of 
the whole human race, and historians and scientists are 
thought to have traced the history of the race back 10,000 
or more years. How are we to reconcile these apparent dis- 
crepancies? 


In the first place, let it be said that the dates commonly 
accepted by many historians are not at all certain. 

For example, in figuring out the dates of Egyptian dynas- 
ties the data upon which conclusions are built can hardly 
be considered decisive. It is true, discoveries have been made 
of ancient records which assert that the dynasties which pre- 
ceded them covered certain vast periods of time which are 
named, but anyone who is at all familiar with the ancient 
and oriental habit of exaggeration should receive these asser- 
tions as to the length of these dynasties with a great deal of 
caution. While these views of the vast antiquity of the an- 
cient Egyptian civilization and ancient civilizations of Nine- 
veh and Babylon, as well, are widely accepted, they are not. 
by any means proven. We can afford to wait for more light. 


On the other hand, it is not at all sure that there were only 
about 4000 years from Adam to Christ. 


3 33 


84 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Bishop Ussher’s chronology, which is found in the margin 
ef most reference Bibles, is not a part of the Bible itself, and 
its accuracy is altogether doubtful. It is founded upon the 
supposition that the genealogies of Scripture are intendea to 
be complete, but a careful study of these genealogies clearly 
shows they are not intended to be complete, that they often- 
times contain only some outstanding names. For example, 
the genealogy in Exodus 6:16-24, if it were taken as a com- 
plete genealogy containing all the names, would make Moses 
the great-grandson of Levi, though 430 years intervened. 
Again there is reason to question whether the lists of names 
in Genesis 5 and 11 are complete. ‘The total length of time 
from Adam to the flood and from the flood to Abraham is 
never mentioned in Scripture, although the period from 
Joseph to Moses (Exodus 12:40) and that from the Exodus 
to the building of the temple (1 Kings 6:1) are mentioned.” 
“The fact that there are just ten names in each list also 
suggests that a similar arrangement may have been made in 
the first chapter of Matthew.” The regular formula is: “A 
lived —— years and begat B. And A lived after he begat B 
—— years and begat sons and daughters. B lived years 
and begat C,” etc. The word translated “begat” is some- 
times used not of an immediate descendant but of succeed- 
ing generations, For example, Zilpah is said to have borne 
her great-grandchildren (Genesis 46:18). The Hebrew word 
translated “bare” in this passage is the same word trans- 
lated “begat” in the other passages. Bilhah is said to have 
borne her grandchildren (Genesis 46:25). Canaan is said to 
have begotten whole nations (Genesis 10:15-18). So we see 
that in the formula quoted above the meaning is not néces- 
sarily that B is the literal son of A. B may be his literal son 
or a distant descendant. Thus many centuries may have in- 
tervened between A and B. Of course, no chronology is in- 
tended by these figures. Their purpose is not at all-to show 
the age of the world. We see, therefore, there is no real and 
necessary conflict betwen real Bible chronology and any mod- 
ern historical discoveries as to the antiquity of man. 





THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 3h 


It should be said further that it may be that these ancient 
civilizations which are being discovered in the vicinity of 
Nineveh and elsewhere may be the remains of the pre-Adamic 
race already mentioned. 

There are passages in the Bible which seem to hint that 
there were some existing even in Bible times who may have 
belonged to these pre-Adamic races. Such may have been 
the Rephaim and Zamzummin and the Hmim (see Genesis 
14:5, R. V.; Deuteronomy 2:20, 21; 3:11, A. V. and R. V.). 
The hints given in those passages are somewhat obscure, but 
seem to suggest the remains of a race other than the Adamic 
race. If such was the case, these earlier civilizations which. 
are now being uncovered may have been theirs. No one need 
have the least fear of any discoveries that the archeologists 
may make, for if it should be found that there were early 
civilizations thousands of years before Christ it would not 
come into any conflict whatever with what the Bible really 
teaches about the antiquity of man, the Adamic race. 


VI 
Wuere Dip Cain Ger His Wire? 


In almost every place that I have visited in going around 
the world I have given sceptics and others an opportunity of 
asking questions at one or two meetings. I do not think that 
I have ever held a question meeting at which someone has 
not put in the question: ‘Where did Cain get his wife?” 
This seems to be a favorite question with unbelievers of a 
certain class. I have also met young Christians who have 
been greatly puzzled and perplexed over this question. But 
if one will study his Bible carefully and note exactly what it 
says, there is really 


No “Great DIFFICULTY IN THE QUESTION. 


Unbelievers constantly assert that the Bible says that “Cain 
went into the land of Nod and took to himself a wife.” In 
point of fact, it says nothing of the kind. An unbeliever in 
Edinburgh came to me with the assertion that the Bible did 
say this, and when I told him it did not, he offered to bet 
me one hundred pounds that it did. What the Bible does 
say is that “Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, 
and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden. And 
Cain knew his wife; and she conceived and bare Enoch” 
(Genesis 4:16, 17). What the Bible means by “knew” in 
such connection anyone can discover for himself by taking 
his concordance and looking it up. He will discover that the 
word “knew” used in such connection does not mean to get 
acquainted with, but is connected with the procreation of the 
species (see for example Genesis 4:1; Judges 11:39; i 
Samuel 1:19; Matthew. 1:25). Cain doubtless had his wife 
before going to the land of Nod and took her there with him. 

But who was she, and where did he get her? 


36 


WHERE DID CAIN GET HIS WIFE? 37% 


In Genesis 5:3, 4 we learn that Adam in his long life of 
- 930 years begat many sons and daughters. There can be but 
little doubt that Cain married one of those numerous 
daughters. 

But someone will say: “In that case Cain married his own 
sister.” 

Yes, that was a necessity. If the whole Adamic race was 
to descend from a single pair, the sons and- daughters must 
intermarry. But as the race increased, it remained no longer 
necessary for men to marry their own sisters, and the prac- 
tice, if continued, would result in great mischief to the race. 
Indeed, even the intermarriage of cousins in the present day 
is fraught with frightful consequences. There are parts of 
the globe where the inhabitants have been Jargely shut out 
from intercourse with other people and the intermarriages of 
cousins have been frequent and the physical and mental re- 
sults have been very bad. But in the dawn of human history, 
such intermarriage was not surrounded with these dangers. 
As late as the time of Abraham, that patriarch married his 
half-sister (Genesis 20:12). But as the race multiplied and 
such intermarriages became unnecessary, and as they were 
accompanied with great dangers, God by special command- 
ment forbade the marriage of brother and sister, and such 
marriage would now be sin because of the commandment of 
God; but it was not sin in the dawn of the race when the 
only male and female inhabitants of the earth were brothers 
and sisters. Such marriage today would be a crime, the 
crime of incest, but we cannot reasonably carry back the 
conditions of today into the time of the dawn of human his- 
tory and judge actions performed then by the conditions and 
laws existing today. 

If we were to throw the Bible account overboard and adopt 
the evolutionary hypothesis as to the origin of the human 
race we would not relieve matters at all, for in that case our 
early ancestors would have been beasts, and the father and 
mother of the human race would be descendants of the same 
pair of beasts, brother and sister beasts, Take whatever 


38 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


theory of the origin of the human race that we may, we are 
driven to the eonelusion that in the early history of the race, 
there was the necessary intermarriage of the children of the 
same pair. 

To sum it all up, Cain married one of the many daughters 
of Adam and Eve, and the impenetrable mystery that some 
fancy surrounds the question of where Cain got his wife is 
found to be no mystery whatever. 


Vil 


JEHOVAH’s COMMAND TO ABRAHAM TO OFFER UP ISAAC AS A 
BuRNT OFFERING 


One of the most frequent objections made to the Bible is that 
“the Bibie says that God commanded Abraham to offer his - 
son as a burnt offering.” It is claimed that this story justi- 
fies the horrible practice of human sacrifice. Not many 
years ago when an insane man actually did slay his son as - 
aA sacrifice to God, infidels proclaimed far and wide that the 
Bible in its story of Abraham and Isaac warranted and was 
responsible for the action. 

Not a few Christians have been bewildered and distressed 
by this story. How shall this apparent difficulty be removed? 
It can be easily met and removed in the same way that most 
Bible difficulties may be met and removed, namely, by noticing 
exactly what the Bible says and all that it says. 

Notice in the first place that 


Tue Briste NowHeERE Says 


that God commanded Abraham to slay Isaac. It is constantly 
said by enemies of the Bible that God did command Abraham 
to slay Isaac, but this is not in reality what the Bible says. 
Exactly what the Bible says is that God commanded Abraham 
to “offer him for a burnt offering” (Genesis 22:2). Literally 
translated, God commanded Abraham to “make him go up 
[that is, upon the altar] for a burnt offering.” Abraham was 
merely commanded to lay Isaac upon the altar as a whole 
offering to God. Whether when he was thus laid upon the 
altar and presented to God, God would require him to go 
further and slay his son, he did not know. All that God com- 
manded was to make him go up on to the altar, ready to 
be slain and burned if God should so require. Did God so 


39 


40 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


require? The record expressly declares that He did not. On 
the contrary, God plainly forbade the actual slaughter of 
Isaac (Genesis 22:11, 12). That the original command was 
not to kill Isaac but merely to offer him up is as plain as 
day from the fact that we are explicitly told that Abraham 
did exactly what God told him to do, that is, “to offer up 
Isaac.” “Abraham offered up Isaac” is the Bible statement 
(Hebrews 11:17), but Abraham did not slay Isaac—ihat he 
was not told to do. 

It is as clear as day, then, that the divine commandment 
to offer up was 


Nor a CoMMAND TO SLAY. 


The story as told in the Bible is not that God had first com- 
manded Abraham to slay and burn Isaac and that He after- 
wards when He saw that Abraham was willing to do even 
this He took it back and provided a lamb to take Isaac’s 
place. The Bible story is that God commanded Abraham to 
make his son Isaac to ascend the altar to be presented to 
God as a whole oifering, and that Abraham actually did this 
which he was commanded to do. And this did not, either in 
God’s original intention or in the execution of the command, 
involve the slaughter of Isaac. 

This story, then, in no way justifies human sacrifice in the 
sense of the actual slaying of a human victim. On the con- 
trary, the whole force of the narrative is against such sacri- 
fice. Instead of being commanded it is explicitly forbidden. 
It does, however, justify the offering of ourselves to God 
wholly, as “a living sacrifice’ (Romans 12:3). But this is 
not all that the story as it actually occurs in the Bible tells 
us. It goes on to tell us that so far from God commanding 
Abraham to slay his son, when Abraham was about to go 
beyond what was explicitly commanded, (namely, the offer- 
ing of his son), and to slay his son, (which was not com- 
manded), God intervened and positively forbade it. Jehovah 
sent His own Angel to speak in an audible voice from heaven 


ABRAHAM OFFERING ISAAC 41 


forbidding the shedding of Isaac’s blood. “Lay not thine 
hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything unto him,” 
called the Angel of Jehovah out of heaven (Genesis 22:12). 

This story, then, so far from encouraging human sacrifice 
positively and explicitly forbids it, and that in the most solemn 
manner, So all our difficulty with this narrative disappears 
when we look carefully with open eyes at the record and 
note precisely what is said. 


VIII 
Gop HAarDENING PHARAOH’S HART 


Tue various statements that are made in the Scriptures in 
‘regard to God hardening Pharaoh’s heart have also perplexed 
a great many young Christians and have frequently been 
made use of by unbelievers in their attacks upon the Bible. 
It is said that if God hardened Pharaoh’s heart and in conse- 
quence of this hardening Pharaoh rebelled against God, then 
God Himself was responsible for Pharaoh’s sin, and that it 
was unjust to hold Pharaoh accountable for his rebellion and — 
to punish him for it. ~ 

In Exodus 4:21, R. V., we read: “And the Lord said unto 
Moses, When thou goest back into Egypt, see that thou do 
before Pharaoh all the wonders which I have put in thy hand: 
but I will harden his heart, and he will not let the people go.” 
See also Exodus 7:38; 14:4. 

Now from reading these passages it does seem at the first 
glance as if there were some ground for criticism of God’s 
action in this matter, or of the Bible account of it. But when 
we. study carefully exactly what the Bible says, and exactly 
what God is reported as saying, and the circumstances under 
which He said it, the difficulty all disappears. For God to 
take a man who really desires to know and do His will, 
harden his heart and thus incline him not to do His will, 
would indeed be an action on God’s part that it would be dif- 
ficult or impossible to justify. But when we read God’s utter- 
ances on this matter in their setting, we find this is not at all 
what God did with Pharaoh. Pharaoh was not a man who 
wished to obey God. The whole account begins—not with 
God’s hardening Pharaoh’s heart but with Pharaoh’s harden- 
ing his own heart. 

In Exodus 4:21 we have a prophecy of what God would do 
with Pharaoh, a prophecy that God made fully knowing be- 


EL 


GOD HARDENING PHARAOH’S HEART 48 


forehand what Pharaoh would do. before He hardened his 
heart. : 

In Exodus 9:12 and later passages we have the fulfilment 
of this prophecy, but before God does here harden Pharaoh’s 
heart we have a description of what Pharaoh himself did. 

In Exodus 5:1, 2 we are told that Moses and Aaron ap- 
peared in the presence of Pharaoh with Jehovah’s message: 
“Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Let my people go, that 
they may hold a feast unto Me in the wilderness,” and that 
then Pharaoh replied: “Who is the Lord that I should obey 
His voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither 
will I let Israel go.” Here Pharaoh definitely and defiantly 
refused to recognize or obey God. This was before God 
hardened his heart. 


Her HERE HARDENED His Own Heart. 


Then follows a description of how Pharaoh gave himself 
over to more cruel oppression of the Israelites than ever 
(Exodus 5:3-9). 

In Exodus 7:10 and following verses we see Moses and 
Aaron coming into the presence of Pharaoh and doing signs 
before him as proof that they were messengers sent from 
God, but Pharaoh would not listen. In the 13th verse we 
read in the Authorized Version: ‘And he hardened Pharaoh’s 
heart, that he hearkened not unto*them,” but the Revised Ver- 
sion correctly renders: “Pharaoh’s heart was hardened.” It 
does not say as yet that the Lord hardened his heart. ~ 

The facts, then, in the case are these, that Pharaoh was a 
-eruel and oppressive tyrant, subjecting the people of Israel 
to most awful bondage, suffering and death. God looked 
down upon His people, heard their cries, and in His mercy 
determined to deliver them (Exodus 2:25; 3:7, 8). He sent 
Moses, as His representative, to Pharaoh to demand the de- 
liverance of His people, and Pharaoh in proud rebellion defied 
Him and gave himself up to even more cruel oppression of 
the people. It was then and only then that God hardened 


his ‘heart. 


44 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 
This was simply in pursuance of 
Gop’s UNIvERSAL METHOD 


of dealing with men. God’s universal method is, if man 
chooses error, to give them up to error( 2 Thessalonians 2:9-12, 
R. V.); if with a stout heart they choose sin, at last He gives 
_ them over to sin (Romans 1:24-26, 28, R. V.). This is stern 
dealing, but it is just dealing. 

If there is any difficulty that still remains in the incident, 
it all disappears when we consider the manner in which God 
hardened Pharaoh’s heart. It was, of course, not a physical - 
act. God was not dealing with Pharaoh’s heart as a part of 
his body. He was dealing with Pharaoh’s heart in the sense 
in which we constantly use the word as the supposed seat 
of intelligence, affection and will. The will cannot be co- 
erced by force. The will can no more be moved by force 
than a train of cars can be drawn by an argument or an in- 
ference. The way in which God hardened Pharaok’s heart 
was by sending to him a series of demonstrations of His own 
existence and power, and a series of judgments. If Pharaoh 
had taken the right attitude toward these revelations of God’s 
existence and power in these judgments that God sent upon 
him, they would have 


Lep to His REPENTANCE AND SALVATION. 


But by willingly and wilfully taking the wrong attitude to- 
ward them, he was hardened by them. There is nothing that 
God sends us which is more merciful than the judgments 
which He sends upon our sins, If we take these judgments 
aright they will soften our hearts and lead us to repentance 
and entire surrender to God, and thus bring us salvation. 
But if we rebel against them, they will harden our hearts 
and bring us eternal ruin. ‘i'he fault ig not with God, and 
the fault is not with His judgments; the fault is with our- 
selves aud the attitude we take toward His judgments and 
* e 


GOD HARDENING PHARAOH’S HEART 45 


toward the truth of God itself. The Gospel is the savor of 
life unto life unto men who receive it aright, but it is the 
savor of death unto death to those who reject it (compare 
2 Corinthians 2:15, 16). The trouble is not with the Gospel, 
which is “the power of God unto salvation to every one that 
believeth” (Romans 1:16). The trouble is with the man who 
rejects the Gospel, and who is thus hardened, condemned and 
destroyed by it, and to him it thus becomes the savor of 
death unta death. The same sermon brings life to one man- 
and death to another. It brings life, pardon, and peace to 
the one who believes it and acts upon it. It brings con- 
demnation and death to the one that rejects its truth. It 
softens the heart of one, it hardens the heart of the other. 
Jesus Christ Himself came into the world, not to condemn 
the world but to save the world (John 3:17), but to the one 
who believes not He brings condemnation and eternal ruin 
(John 8:18, 36; Hebrews 10:28, 29). 


<a 


Ix 


Tum WHOLESALE SLAUGHTER OF THE CANAANITES BY Gop's 
CoMMAND 


THERE are few things in the Bible over which more inielli- 
gent readers have stumbled, and over which infidels have 
more frequently gloated and gloried, than God’s command 
that certain people should be utterly exterminated, sparing 
neither sex nor age. Men, women and children were to be 
slain. Thus, for example, we read in Deuteronomy 20:16, 17 
this command of God to the people of Israel: “But of the 
cities of these people, which the Lord thy God doth give thee 
for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breath- 
eth, but thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the Hittites, 
and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the 
Hivites, and the Jebusites; as Jehovah thy God hath com- 
manded thee” (R. V.). In regard to other cities, it was com- © 
manded that if they sued for peace, peace was to be granted 
and all the inhabitants spared, but if they made war, the 
adult males were to be slain but the women and children 
were to be spared (Deuteronomy 20:10-15). These were the 
cities that were far away, but the inhabitants of the cities 
of the lands that the Israelites themselves were to inhabit 
were to be utterly exterminated. 

We are asked: “How can we reconcile any such appallingly 
harsh commands as these with the doctrine so plainly taught 
in the New Testament that ‘God is love’?” It is said that 
these commands can certainly not have been from God, and 
that the Old Testament is certainly wrong when it says that 
they were from God. What shall we say in reply to this? 


1. First of all, let us say that it is certainly appalling 
that any people should be utterly put to the sword, not only 
the men of war, but the old men and old women as well, 
and the young women and the children. 


46 


as 


SLAUGHTER OF THE CANAANITES 47 
But there is 
SomMETHING HvEN More ApPaLLine 


than this, when one stops to think about the matter, and that 
is that the iniquity of any people should have become so full, 
their rebellion against God so strong and so universal, their 
moral corruption and debasement so utter and so pervasive, 
even down to babes just born, as to make such treatment 
absolutely necessary in the interests of humanity. But this 
was precisely the case with the nations in question. Not from 
the Bible alone do we learn how unfathomable were the 
depths of moral pollution to which these nations had sunken. 
They had become a moral cancer threatening the very life of 
the whole human race. That cancer must be cut out in every 
fibre if the body was to be saved. Cutting out a cancer is a 
dreadful operation, an operation from which any kind-hearted 
surgeon must shrink, but oftentimes the cutting out of the 
cancer is the kindest thing the surgeon can do under exist- 
ing circumstances, and 


Tue KInDEST THING THAT Gop CouLp Do 


for the human race was to cut out this cancer in every root 
and every fibre. 


2. Let us say, in the second place, that God certainly has 
a right to visit judgment upon individuals and upon nations 
sunk in sin. 

The only wonder is, when one stops to think of it, that He 
is so long-suffering, and that He does not visit judgment upon 
individuals and upon nations sooner. When one really comes 
to understand His holiness on the one hand, and what are 

_ the depths of covetousness, greed, lust and sin, vileness, law- 
jJessness and contempt for God to which certain cities even 
today have sunken, and how young the children go astray 
into unmentionable vileness, one sometimes almost wonders 


48 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


why He does not blot them out as He commanded the Israel- 
ites to do with the Canaanites of old! The command to ex- 
terminate the Canaanites was a command big with mercy and 
love. It was mercy and love, first of all, to the Israelites. 
Unless the Canaanites were exterminated, they would them- 
selves be exterminated. In point of fact, they were contami- 
nated for the very reason that they did not carry out God’s 
stern decree to its fullest extent. They stopped short of what 
God commanded them to do, and 


Srorprrep SHortT To THEIR Own Lasrine Loss. 


But what about the women—might not they be spared? 

The answer is very plain. The women were the prime 
source of contamination (Numbers 31:15, 16). Though true 
women are nobler than true men, depraved women are more 
dangerous than depraved men. 

But what about the children? Might not they be spared? 

Anyone who has had experience with the children of the 
depraved knows how persistently the vices bred for genera- 
tions in the ancestors reappear in the children even when 
they are taken away from their evil surroundings and brought 
up in the most favorable environment. By the regenerating 
power of the Gospel it is possible to correct all this, but we 
must remember that the case with which we have to deal 
was centuries before the Gospel proclamation. 

Love and mercy for Israel demanded just what God com- 
manded. Love and mercy for the whole race demanded it. 
God’s purpose. in Israel was not merely to bless Israel. 
Through Israel He planned to bless the whole race. He was 
training a people in the seclusion of-centuries in order that 
when the training was completed they might come out of the 
tloister and carry benediction, salvation and life to all nations, 


3. Let it be said, in the third place, that God’s plans are 
not only beneficent but vast, and 


SLAUGHTER OF THE CANAANITES 49 


4 


Ir Taxes CENTURIES TO Work THEM OUT, 


and we creatures of a day, in our little conceit, look at some 
little fragment of God’s infinite plan and presume to judge 
the whole, of which we know little or nothing. 

It would be well if we could only learn that God is infinite 
and we infinitesimal, and so of scientific and philosophic 
necessity His judgments are unsearchable and His ways past 
tracing out (Romans 11:33). A child never appears a greater 
fool than when criticising a philosopher, and a philosopher 
never appears a greater’ fool than when criticising God. 


4. Let it be said, in the fourth place, that the extermina- 
tion of the Canaanite children was not only an act of mercy 
and love to the world at large, it was also an act of love and 
mercy to the children themselves. 

What awaited these children, if they were allowed to live, 
was something vastly worse than death. What awaited them 
in death it is impossible to be dogmatic about, but unless 
one accepts the whoily unBiblical and improbable doctrine 
of the damnation of’all unbaptized infants we meed have no 
fears. Even today I could aimost wish that all the babes 
born in the slums might be slain in infancy, were it not for 
‘the hope that the church of Christ would awake and carry 
to them the saving Gospel of the Son of God. 


5. But someone may still say: “Yes, I can see it was an 
aet of mercy to blot out people so fallen, but why was it not 
done by pestilence or famine, and not by the slaying hand 
of the Israelites?’ 

The answer to this question is very simple... The Israel- 
ites themselves were in training. They were constantly falling 
into sin and they needed the solemn lesson that would come 
to them through their being made the executioners of God’s 
wrath against the wickedness and vileness of the Canaanites. 
A deep impression of God’s holiness and hatred of sin would 
thus be produced. They were distinetly told before they car- 


4 ‘ 


50 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


ried into execution God’s judgment upon the Canaanites that 
the reason why they were to utterly destroy the Canaanites 
was “that they teach you not to do after all their abomina- 
tions which they have done unto their gods” (Deuteronomy 
20:18). The whole proceeding is an impressive illustration of 


Tur ExcrepING HATEFULNESS OF SIN 


in God’s sight. It says to us that sin persisted in is a thing 
so grievous and ruinous as to necessitate the utter destruc- 
tion of the entire race, male and female, young and old, that 
persists in it. It is simply the lesson that the whole Bible 
teaches, and that all history teaches, written in characters of 
fire: ‘‘The wages of sin is death.” 


6. Let it be said, in the next place, that those who regard 
sin lightly and who have no adequate conception of God’s 
holiness will always find insurmountable difficulty in this 
command of God, but those who have come to see the awful- 
ness of sin and have learned to hate it with the infinite hate 
it deserves, and who have caught some glimpses of the infinite 
holiness of God and have been made in some measure par- 
takers of that holiness, will, after mature reflection, have no 
difficulty whatever with this command. It is consciousness 
of sin in our own hearts and lives that makes us rebel against 
God’s stern dealings with sin. 


7. There is one thing more that needs to be said., Tne 
sneering objection is sometimes made by infidels to the spar- 
ing, in certain cases, of the women as recorded in Deuteron- 
omy 20:10-15, and also the sparing of the women in Num- 
bers 31:21-35, 40, that the women were to be spared for 
immoral purposes. Thus one writer asks: “Am I to under- 
stand that God approved of taking as tribute in spoils of 
war, a number of virgins for a use that is only too obvious?” 


Words of similar import are to be found in a number of in- 
fidel books. 


SLAUGHTER OF THE CANAANITES 5A 


Of course, what the questioner means to imply is that these 
women were taken for immoral purposes. This is the use 
meant which is “only too obvious” to the objector. But this 
is not at all obvious to any pure-minded man who reads the 
actual Scripture account. There is in the Scripture account 
not the slightest intimation that the virgins were preserved 
for the use suggested. To the man whose own heart is evil 
and impure it will always be obvious that if women are pre- 
served alive and taken as tribute they are taken for this 
purpose, but this will not even occur to the pure-minded man. 

The whole context of the passage in Numbers 31, which is 
the one most frequently cited in this connection by unbeliev- 
ers, is a solemn warning against immorality of this kind. 
And so far from this being a suggestion that God counte- 
nances acts of impurity of this character, it shows how sternly 
God dealt with this impurity. 

In Numbers 25:1-9 we are told how the men of Israel did 
give themselves up to impurity with the daughters of Moab, 
but how in consequence the anger of the Lord was kindled 
against them, and how God visited their impurity with the 
sternest judgment. In the very chapter in question every 
woman who had been guilty of impurity was slain (Numbers 
31:17). And in point of actual fact, it is suggested, at least 
by verse 18, that it was only the female children who could 
be spared. It was certainly an act of mercy on God’s part 
to deliver these “women children” from their evil surround- 
ings and hand them over to Israel for training where they 
would be brought in contact with a pure religion and trained 
up to become pure women. So far, according to the record, 
from being handed over to the Israelites for immoral pur: 
poses they were entrusted to them for the highest purposes 


x 
JosHuUA COMMANDING THE SuN TO STAND STILL 


One of the greatest difficulties in the Bible to many a student 
js found in the story contained in Joshua 10:12-14: “Then 
spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered 
up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said 
in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and 
thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon. And the sun stood still, 
and the’ moon stayed, until the people had avenged them- 
‘selves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book 
of Jasher?, So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven. 
and hasted not to go down about a whole day. And there 
was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lord 
hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for 
Israel.” 

Bishop Colenso wrote: “The miracle of Joshua is the most 
striking incident of Scripture and science being at variance.” 
It is said by the destructive critics and the infidels that this 
story cannot possibly be true; that if the sun were to stand 
still in the way here recorded it would upset the whole 
course of nature. 

Whether that statement by infidels be true or not no one 
can tell. It is simply a supposition. But certainly the God 
who made the earth and the sun and the whole universe 
could maintain it even if the sun stood still, or (to speak 
more accurately,) if the earth stood still on its axis and the 
sun appeared to stand still. But by a careful study of the 
Hebrew of the passage we find that the sun is not said to 
have stood still. 

The command of Joshua in verse 12 rendered .in the 
Authorized and Revised Versions: “Stand thou still,” lit 
erally translated means: “Be silent” (see also R. V. mar- 


52 


\ 


COMMANDING SUN TO STAND STILL 53 


gin), and the words rendered “stood still” in verse 13 lit- 
erally translated mean “was silent.” Nine times in the Bible 
is it translated “keep silence’; five times at least, “be still”; 
in another passage, “held his peace’; in another, “quiet one’s 
self”; in another, “tarry”; in another, ‘wait’; and in another, 
“rest.” These renderings occur some thirty times, but it ig 
never rendered “stand still” except in this one passage. In- 
deed, in the very passage in which it is rendered “tarry” (1 
Samuel 14:9), the words “stand still” do occur, but as the - 
translation of an entirely different Hebrew word. The word 
iranslated “stayed” in verse 13 is sometimes translated “stand 
still.” It means literally “to stand” or “stand up,” but it is 
used of “‘tarrying” or remaining.in any place, state or eon- 
Jlition, as, for example, in 2 Kings 15:20; Genesis 45:1. So, 
then, what the sun and moon are said to have done in the 
passage is to have tarried, tarried from disappearing, not that 
they stood absolutely still, but that their apparent motion (or 
their disappearance) was 


SLOWED Up orn DELAYED. 


Furthermore, the Hebrew words translated “in the midst 
of heaven” mean literally “in the half of heaven.” The word 
translated “midst” in considerably more than one hundred 
cases is translated “half.’’ In only five or six cases is it ren- 
dered “midst,” and in one of these cases (Daniel 9:27) the 
Revisers have changed ‘‘midst” te “half.” In the remaining 
cases, it would be as well or better “half.” (For example, 
Psalm 102:24.) What Joshua then bade the sun to do was te 


LINGER IN THE HALF or THE HEAVENS, 


and that is what the sun is recorded as doing. There are 
two halves to the heavens, the half that is visible to us and 
the other half visible on the other side of the globe. 

The Hebrew preposition rendered “about” means primar‘tiy 
ag”? or stag.” 


54 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


So put these facts together, and what the story tells us is 
that the sun continued or tarried above the visible horizon 
“as a whole day.” Apparently this means that an event 
oceurred on this day near Gibeon, in the valley of Ajalon, 
that occurs many days every year at the North Pole, namely, 
that the sun remained visible for the entire twenty-four hours. 


THe METHOD 


by which this was accomplished we are not told. It might 
be by a slight dip of the pole, or possibly by a refraction of 
the rays of light, or in other ways that we cannot conjecture. 
It certainly would not necessitate such a crash in the physi- 
cal universe as objectors have imagined. 

As to whether such a thing happened or not is a question of 
history. The history that we have reason to suppose is 
authentic in the Cook of Joshua says that it did. It is a re- 
markable fact that we have a suggestion of the same thing in 


History OUTSIDE THE BIBLE. 


Herodotus, the great Greek historian, tells us that the priests 
of Egypt showed him a record of a long day. The Chinese 
writings state that there was such a day in the reign of their 
emperor Yeo, who is supposed to have been a contemporary 
of Joshua. The Mexicans also have a record that the sun 
stood still for one entire day in the year which is supposed 
to correspond with the exact year in which Joshua was war- 
ring in Palestine. There is nothing of real weight to prove 
that there was no such day. So, upon careful examination, 
this which is asserted to be “the most striking incident of 
Scripture and science being at variance” is found to be in no 
sense whatever an incident of Scripture and science, or Scrip- 
ture and history, being at variance. 5 

The theory has been advanced-that the words rendéred 
“Stand thou still,” but which mean literally “Be silent,” 
should be interpreted as meaning that Joshua commanded 


ut 


COMMANDING SUN TO STAND STILL 55 


fhe sun to withhold its light, to be silent in this sense, and 
that what occurred on this occasion was not the prolonga- . 
tion of a day but a dark day, so that Joshua had the advan- 
tage of fighting practically at night, though it was really ‘the 
hours of the day that ought to have been light. If this is the 
true interpretation of “Stand thou still,’ all difficulty with 
the passage disappears. But while this interpretation might 
be admissible, it is difficult to see how some other portions of 
the narrative can be reconciled with this theory. And as 
already seen, the theory is not necessary to remove all difil- 
culties in the passage. 

In any event it was a miracle, but no one who believes in 
a God who is the Creator of the entire material universe, and 
a God who is historically proven to have raised Jesus Christ 
from the dead, ever stumbles at the mere. fact of a miracle. 
We believe in a miracle-working God. 


ea 


XI 
DEBORAH’S PRAISE OF JAEL, “THE MURDERESS” 


Ir is frequently urged against the divine origin of the Bible 
that it defends and glorifies the treacherous murder of Sisera 
by Jael, and that any book that defends so violent and cruel 
and deceitful an action as this cannot have God for its author. 


Tue Viky SIMPLE ANSWER 


to this objection is that the Bible does not defend or glorify 
the action of Jael. The Bible records the act in all its details. 
It also records the fact that Deborah, the prophetess who 
“ judged Israel at that time (Judges 4:4), predicted that the 
Lord would sell Sisera into the hand of a woman (Judges 
4°5). It also records the fact that Deborah and Barak, in 
their joyful song of praise to the Lord after their deliverance 
from the cruei oppression of Sisera did say: “Blessed abova 
women shali Jael tne wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed 
shall she be above women in the tent” (Judges 5:24). But 
it is nowhere hinted in the Bible account that Deborah and 
Barak were speaking by divine inspiration in this song of 
thanksgiving and praise. The Bible, by speaking of Deborah 
as a prophetess, no more endorses every action and every 
utterance of Deborah than it endorses every action and every 
utterance of Balaam, of whom it likewise speaks as a 
“prophet” (2 Peter 2:16). In the very passage in which it 
speaks of Balaam as a prophet, it speaks about his being 
rebuked for his iniquities. It is not the teaching of the 
Bible that every utterance of every prophet is the inspired 
Word of God. On the contrary, the Bible teaches that a 
prophet may tell lies (1 Kings 13:11-18). 

The Bible nowhere justifies Jael’s action. It records the 
action. It records Deborah and Barak’s praise of the action, 


56 


DEBGRAH’S PRAISE OF JAEL 57 


_ but it nowhere endorses this praise. We are under no neces- 
sity, therefore, of trying to justify all the details of Jael’s 
conduct, nor indeed of trying to justify her conduct at all. 

But on the other hand, we must not unjustly judge Jael. 
We cannot judge her in the light of New Testament ethics, 
for she lived some 1,300 years before Christ. She lived in a 
cruel age. Furthermore, she had to deal with a cruel 
oppressor who was working ruin among the people. It was 
a time of war, and war not conducted according to modern 
ideas of war, and we must judge her in the light of the con- 
ditions in which she lived. But even if her conduct were 
- absolutely without excuse, it does not in the least affect the 
proven fact of the divine origin of the Bible. For that Book 
makes absolutely no attempt to defend her conduct. It sim- 
ply describes it. 


ms 


XII 
THe SACRIFICE or JEPHTHAH’S DAUGHTER 


Tue story of Jephthah’s daughter as recorded in the Bibla 
has presented a great difficulty to many superficial students 
of the Bible, as well as to many critics of it. How can we 
possibly justify Jephthah’s burning of his daughter as a sac- 
rifice to Jehovah? we are often asked. ? 

In reply we would say, in the first place, that we are 
nowhere told that Jephthah did burn his daughter. We are 
told that Jephthah vowed: 

“Whatsoever cometh forth from the doors of my house to 
meet me, when I return in peace from the children of 
Ammon, shall surely be the Lord’s, and I will offer it up for 
a burnt offering” (Judges 11:31). 

The word translated “burnt offering’ does not necessarily 
involve the idea of burning. There is no record that Jeph- 
thah’s daughter was actually slain and burned. The passage 
that relates what actually was done with her is somewhat 
obscure, and many think that she was devoted by her father 
as an offering to God by her living a life of perpetual vir- 
ginity (Judges 11:37-39). 

But even supposing that she was actually slain and burned. 
as many candid Bible students believe that she was, (thougn 
the Bible does not actually say so), even in this case we are 
under no necessity of defending Jephthah’s action any more 
than we are of defending any other wrong action of all the 
imperfect instruments that God, in His wondrous grace and 
condescension, has seen fit to use to defend or help His people. 
The Bible itself nowhere defends Jephthah’s action. If Jeph- 
thah really did slay his daughter, he simply made a rash 
vow without any command or other warrant from God for 
so doing, and having made this rash vow he went further 
in his wrong doing and carried that rash vow into execution. 

So the whole story instead of being a warrant for human 
sacrifice is intended to be a lesson upon the exceeding folly 
of hasty vows made in-the energy of the flesh. 


58 


XIII 


“IMPURE” BIBLE STORIES 


Aw old and favorite objection to the Bible on the part of 
unbelievers is that there are in it “chapters that reek with 
obscenity from beginning to end.” 

That there are chapters in the Bible which describe scenes 
that cannot be wisely dealt with in a mixed audience we have 
no desire to deny; but these chapters are not obscene. To 
speak in the plainest terms of sin, even the vilest of sins,-in 
order to expose its loathsomeness and in order to picture man 
as he really is, is not obscenity. It is purity in one of its 
highest forms. Whether the story of sin is obscene or not 
depends entirely upon how it is told and for what purpose 
it is told. If the story is told in order to make a jest of sin, 
or in order to palliate or excuse sin, it is obscene. If the 
story is told in order to make men hate sin, to show men 
the hideousness of sin, to induce men to give sin as wide a 
berth as possible, and to show man his need of redemption, 
it is not obscene, it is 


MorRALLY WHOLESOME. 


Now, this is precisely the way in which sin is pictured in 
the Bible. It is true that adultery and similar offenses 
against purity are mentioned by name without any attempt 
at mincing words. Revolting deeds of this character are 
plainly described, and their awful results related; but every- 
thing is so told as to make one recoil from these horrid 
and disgusting sins. Beyond a doubt many have been kept 
back from the practice of these sins by the plain things the 
Bible has said about them, Many others who have already 
fallen into these sins have been led by the Bible stories ta 
see their enormity and their frightful consequences, and have 


59 


60 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


thus been led to forsake them by what the Bible says about 
them. I am not speculating. about this, but speak from a 
large experience of men and women who have been tempted 
to these sins and have been held back by the Bible utterances 
regarding them, and also from a large experience with others 
who have already fallen and who have been lifted up and 
saved by the truth on these subjects contained in the Bible. 

It is said: “There is muck in the Bible that is not fit to 
read in public,” and this is brought forward as if il were an 
argument against the Bible. But it is an exceedingly foolish 
argument. There are many passages in the very best and 
most valuable medical works that are not fit to be read in 
public, they are not even fit for a father to read to his chil- 
dren, but he would be a fool who would cut these passages 
out of these medical works on that account; and he is equally 
a fool who objects to the Bible because there are passages in 
it which are invaluable in their place, but which were not 
intended for and are not adapted to public reading. The 
Bible is in part a book of moral anatomy and spiritual 
therapeutics, and it would be a great defect in the book, in 
fact an indication that it was not from God, if it did not deal 
with these frightful facts about man as he is and with the 
method of healing for these 


Fount Moran DISBAseEs. 


I, for one, thank God that these passages are in the Bible. 
There are things that every boy and girl need to know at 
a comparatively early age about some forms of sin, and 
loathsome sin. Many a boy and girl has dropped into these 
forms of sin before they realized their character simply be- 
cause they were not warned against them. Ignorance about 
them is a misfortune. I know of no better way for them to 
become acquainted with the effects of these sins that they 
need to know about than for them to read what the Bible 
has to say about them. Of course, boys and girls ought not 
to read them together, but they ought to read them. 


“IMPURE” BIBLE STORIES SL 


Instead of finding fault with the Bible for these things in 
it, we ought to. 


PraisE Gop rok Putting THEM THERE. 


For example, there are things in the first chapter of Romans 
that one cannot dwell upon in public address, and, as a rule 
at least, one will omit two verses in the public reading of 
this chapter, but these two verses have been of greatest value 
in dealing with the heathen, and they have saved many a 
man in so-called Christian lands from the loathsome sins that 
are there exposed and denounced. An infidel in one of his 
' works challenges Christians to know if they ‘dare to pick 
up the Bible and read from the book of Genesis the fact of 
Onan.” He seems to think that this is a conclusive argu- 
ment against the Bible, but it is simply silly. It might not 
be wise to read this chapter in public, but a private reading of 
that very story has saved many a man from the practice of a 
like sin. Indeed, this whole chapter, which is a favorite 
point of attack with infidels, has been greatly used in expos- 
ing lust and its appalling consequences. 

Again, it has been said by an objector to the Bible: “Part 
of the holy writings consist of history and the narration of 
facts of a kind that cannot be mentioned in the presence of 
a, virtuous woman without exciting horror; and should a 
woman be permitted to read in her chamber what she would 
tremble to hear at her domestic board?” 

This, too, is considered a logical argument against the 
Bible. When one looks carefully at it and considers it, it is 
seen to be utter folly. Most assuredly a woman should be 
permitted to read in her chamber what she would tremble 
to hear at her domestic board. Every wise woman does it. 
I know of books that it would be most desirable for every 
woman to read in her private chamber, which if they were 
read at the domestic board would cause her to wish to rise 
from the table and leave the room with cheeks burning with 
shame. There are many things that men and women ought 
to think about, and must think about, in private that they 


wt 


O2 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


would not for a moment discuss in public. There are books 
on the proper conduct of women in certain most sacred rela- 
tions of life, relations of life which are as holy as any, and 
_ which can be entered into in the presence of a holy God with 
no question of His approval, but which do not permit of pub- 
lie mention. It is passing strange that intelligent men and 
' women should use arguments so childish as this. 

That the Bible is a pure book is evidenced by the fact that 
it is 


Not A Favorite Book IN DrEns or INFAMY. 


On the other hand, books that try to make out that the Bible 
is an obscene book and that endeavor to keep people from 
reading it are favorite books in dens of infamy. The unclean 
classes, both men and women, were devoted admirers of the 
most brilliant man this country ever produced who attackeé 
what he called “the obscenity of the Bible.’ These unclean 
classes do not frequent Bible classes. They do frequent in- 
fidel lectures. é 

These infidel objectors to the book as an “obscene book”’ 
constantly betray their insincerity and hypocrisy. Colonel 
Ingersoll, in one passage where he dwelt upon this subject, 
objected to the Bible for telling these vile deeds “without a 
touch of humor.” In other words, he did not object to telling 
stories of vice if only a joke was made of the sin. Thank 
God, that is exactly what the Bible does not do,—make a joke 
of sin! It makes sin hideous, so men who are 


OBSCENE IN THEIR Own HEARTS 


object to the Bible as being an obscene book. 

Some of those who make the most of the so-called “obscen- 
ity of the Book” are themselves notorious as tellers of obscene 
stories. 

One of the men who led the attack on the Bible on the 


ground of its obscenity was retained by the publishers of 
obscene literature to defend their case, 


“IMPURE” BIBLE STORIES 63 


Another man, who was a leader in his city in sending out 
attacks upon the Bible, challenging Christians to read in pub- 
lic certain portions of Scripture that were said to be immoral, 
was shortly afterwards found dead by his own hand in a 
Boston hotel side by side with a young woman who was not. 
his wife. 

A man who says: “I protest against the Bible being placed 
in the hands of the young because its pages reek with filth,” 
and who does not wish people to read these “vile portions’ of 
Scripture lest their minds be defiled, takes care to give 3 
catalogue of the passages that he does not wish read and 
asks his readers to “look them up.” Can anything exceed the 
hypocrisy of that? 

I found in one city where I was holding meetings that a 
man who would interrupt a service by calling out about por- 
tions of the Scripture that he regarded as improper and im- 
moral. had himself been arrested and convicted for publiish- 
ing obscene literature. ‘The truth is, these men hate the 
Bible. They hate it because it denounces sin and makes 
them uneasy in sin. . 

To sum it all up, there are in the Bible descriptions of sins 
that cannot wisely be read in every public assembly, but 
these descriptions of sin are morally most wholesome in the 
places where God, the Author of the Book, manifestly in- 
tends them to be read. The child who is brought up to read 
the Bible as a whole, from Genesis to Revelation, will come 
to know in the very best way possible what a child ought to 
Enow very early in life if he is to be safeguarded against 
the perils that surround our modern life on every hand. A 
child who is brought up upon a constant, thorough, contin- 
uous reading of the whole Bible is more likely than any 
other child to be free from the vices that are undermining 
the mental, moral, and physical strength of our boys and 
girls, young men and young women. But the child who ig 
brought up on infidel literature and conversation is the easiest 
prey that there is for the seducer and procuress. The next 
easiest is the one who, through neglect of the Bible, is left 
in ignorance of the awful pitfalls of life. 


XIV, 


Davin’s SIN 


In 2 Samuel, 11th chapter, we read the story of one of tne 
saddest downfalls of a man of God recorded anywhere in his- 
tory, and at the same time we read the record of one of the 
most contemptible and outrageous sins that any man ever 
committed against a faithful friend. We read how Davia 
committed against his faithful servant, Uriah, one of the 
most outrageous offenses that one man can commit against 
another, and how in order to cover up his sin he stained 
his hands with the blood of this faithful servant. After tne 
deed was done, God in His great mercy sent His prophet te 
Davia, declaring to him: “By this deed thou hast give 
great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme” (2 
Samuel 12:14). History has proven the truth of this declar- 
ation. There is scarcely anything in the Bible that has caused 
more of the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme than this das- 
tardly crime of king David. The enemies of the Lord are 
constantly bringing it up and making it the butt of pitiless 
ridicule. 

Some who desire to defend the Bible have thought it neces- 
sary to defend David’s action, or at least to try to make it 
appear that it was not as heinous as it looks at the first 
sight. But why should we seek to defend David’s action? 
The Bible nowhere seeks to defend it. On the contrary, 


Gop REBUKED IT 
? 
in the sternest terms. It was punished by a train of such 
frightful calamities as have seldom overtaken any other man. 
It is true that David is spoken of in the Scriptures as “a 
man after God’s own heart” (1 Samuel 13:14; Acts 13:22), 
but this does not mean by any means that David was an abso- 


64 


DAVID’S SIN 65 


lutely faultless man. It simply means that in distinction 
from Saul, who was constantly disposed to go his own way, 
David was a man who sought in all things to-know God’s 
will and to do it exactly. Therefore, he was a man after, 
God’s own heart, but though this was the abiding attitude 
of David’s mind and heart toward God, it was still possible 
for him, as it is possible for men today whose wills on tke 
whole are entirely surrendered to God, to step out of their 
position of absolute surrender to God and in a moment of 
weakness and folly to commit an act hideous in the sight of 
God, that will bring upon the one who commits it His stern- 
est judgment. , 

The recording of David’s sin without any attempt to ex- 
tenuate it in the Scripture is one of the many 


PROOFS OF THE DIVINE ORIGIN 


and absolute reliability of the Bible. David was the great 
hero of his times. Unless his Bible biographers had been 
guided by the Holy Spirit, they certainly would have con- 
cealed or at least have sought to palliate this awful fault of 
David, but in point of fact they did nothing of the kind. 
The Holy Spirit, who guided them in their record, led them 
to picture this event in all its hideousness, just as it is, 
Here is a radical difference between Bible biographers and 
all other biographers. Even the heroes of the Bible, when 
they fall, are not whitewashed. No excuses are offered for 
their sins. Their sins are not concealed from the public eye. 
They are recorded with fulness of detail, and the sinner is 
held up as a warning to others. 

In this matter David “despised the word of the Lord to 
do that which was evil in His sight,” and the Bible plainly 
says so (2 Samuel 12:9,10 R.V.). “The thing that David had 
done. displeased the Lord” (2 Samuel 11:27), and God sete 
him forth before the whole world as an adulterer and a mur- 
derer (2 Samuel 12:9). The whole story is too horrible for 
public recital, but if one will read it in private with earnest 


8 7) 


6% DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


prayer he may find exceedingly precious lessons in it, It wis 
one of the most dastardly and horrible crimes of history, but 
I am glad that it is recorded in the Bible. The record of it 
and its consequences has held many back from contemplated 
sin. 

The story of David’s sin abounds in 


GREAT LESSONS. 


The first is that an exceptionally good man, yes, a2 man 
“after God’s own heart,” if he gets his eyes off from God and 
His Word, may easily fall into very gross sin. Any man 
who trusts in his own heart is a fool, Any man who fancies 
that he is a match for the devil in his own wisdom and 
strength is badly deceived. David was one of the noblest 
men of his day. He was brave, he was generous, he had a 
single-hearted purpose to do the will of God, but he allowed 
himself to trifle with temptation, and he went down to the 
deepest depths of vileness, baseness and dishonor. 

The story also teaches that God never looks upon any man’s 
sin with the least degree of allowance. God has no favorites, 
in the sense that He allows some men’s sins to go unpun- 
ished. God loved David. He had given David remarkable 
proofs of His love, but when David sinned, God dealt with 
Davyid’s sin with the sternest and most relentless judgment. 
He allowed David’s sin to dog him and to embitter and to 
plast his life to his dying day. God forgave David’s sin and 
restored him to fellowship and the joy of his salvation, but 
He let David drink deeply of the bitter cup he had mixed 
for himself. One of his sons followed him into adultery, 
and that an adultery the burden of which came upon David’s 
own daughter. Another son followed him into murder, and 
as David had rebelled against his heavenly Father, his own 
son rebelled against him. David was left to 


Reap WHat He Sowep. 


When he cried over this rebellious son as he lay before hinv 


‘ 


DAVID’S SIN 61 


Silent in death: “O my son Absalom! my son, my son 
Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, 
my son!” (2 Samuel 18:33), David knew full well that 
Absalom’s wandering and Absalom’s death were simply the 
fruit of his own sin. 

But there is another precious lesson for wus, too, in the his- 
tory of David’s sin, and it is that there is full and free par- 
don for the vilest sinner. David’s sin was black, black as 
midnight, it was appalling, it was inexcusable, but he found 
pardon full and free. David said: “I have sinned against 
the Lord,” and God said through His prophet: “The Lord 
also hath put away thy sin” (2 Samuel 12:13). David him- 
self has told us in one of his most beautiful psalms the story 
of his pardon (Psalm 32:1-5). 

God is a-holy God. He hates sin with infinite hatred. He 
will not look upon the smallest sin with the least. bit of 
allowance, but God is also 


ad A. Gop oF Parponing Love. 
- 

He stands ready to pardon the vilest sinner. He is ever call- 
ing to men and women who have sinned: “Let the wicked 
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and 
let him return unto the Lord, for He will have mercy upon 
him, and to our God, for He will abundantly pardon” (Isaiah 
55:7). There are those that think they have sinned too deeply 
to ever find pardon, but it is not so. It would be hard to find 
one who had sinned more deeply than David. He had com- 
mitted the greatest wrong one man can commit against an- 
other, and he had stained his hands with the blooa of his 
victim, still he found pardon. 

I do thank God for this story of David. It gives me hope 
for any man. In the light of it as told in the Bible, I care 
not.who comes and asks me: 

“Ts there salvation for me?” 

I hesitate not to answer: “Yes, for you. David found 


' mercy and you can.” 


xV 
Tur ImMPRECATORY PSALMS 


A FREQUENT objection urged against the Bible is founds) 
upon some of the utterances in the so-called “Imprecatory 
Psalms.” Many of these utterances have greatly perplexed 
earnest-minded Christians who have carefully studied the 
New Testament teaching regarding the forgiveness of ene- 
mies, 

Three passages in the Psalms are especially cited by a re- 
cent writer as showing that the Bible is not the Word of 
God. These are’Psalm 58:6: “Break their teeth, O God, in 
their mouth.” It is said that this utterance exhibits so much 
vindictive passion that it could not possibly have been writ- 
ten under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. The*second pas~ 
sage objected to is Psalm 109:10: “Let his children be con- 
tinually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek their bread also 
out of their desolate places.’ The third passage is Psalm 
137:8, 9: “O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, 
happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served 
us. Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little 
ones against the stones.” 

What shall we say about these passages? 

The first thing we have to say is what we have already said 
{n- Chapter 2, namely, that God oftentimes simply records 
what others said—bad men, good men, inspired men and 
uninspired men. In the Psalms we have sometimes. what 
God said to man, and that is always true; and on the other 
hand we often have what men said to God, and that may or 
may not be true. All of the passages cited are what men 
said to God. They are the inspired record of men’s prayers 
to God. To God they breathed out the agony of their hearts, 
and to God they cried for vengeance upon their enemies, 


68 


THE IMPRECATORY PSALMS 69 


Judged even by Christian standards, this was far better 
than taking vengeance into their own hands. Indeed, this 
is exactly what the New Testament commands us to do re- 
garding those who wrong us. Vengeance belongs to God, 
and He will repay (Romans 12:19), and instead of taking 
vengeance into our own hands we should put it in His hands. 

There is certainly nothing wrong in asking God to break 
the teeth of wicked men who are using those teeth to tear. 
the upright. This prayer is taken from a psalm that there is 
every reason to suppose is Davidic, as is also the second 
passage quoted. But it is a well-known fact that David in 
his personal dealings with his enemies was most generous, 


for when he had his bitterest and most dangerous enemy in - 


his hand, an enemy who persistently sought his life, he not 
only refused to kill him, but refused to let another kill him 
(1 Samuel 26:5-9). And even when he did so small a thing to 
Saul as to cut off the skirt of his robe, his heart smote him 
even for that slight indignity offered to his bitterest and 
_ most implacable enemy (1 Samuel 24:5). 


How Mvucu Brerrer WE WOULD BE 


if instead of taking vengeance into our own hands we would 
breathe out the bitterness of our hearts to God and then 
treat our enemies in actual fact as generously as David did! 
While David prayed to Jehovah in Psalm 109:10: “Let his 
children be continually vagabonds and beg: let them seek 
their bread also out of their desolate places,” in point of fact, 
when he was in a place of power, he asked: “Is there yet any 
that is left of the house of Saul, that I may show him kind- 
ness?” He found a grandson of Saul’s and had him eat at 
the king’s table as one of his own sons (2 Samuel 9:1, 2, 11). 

The utterance in Psalm 137:8, 9 does sound very cruel, but 
the utterance is a prophecy rather than a prayer. It ig the 
deelaration of awful judgment that will come upon Babylon 
because of the way in which Babylon had treated the peo- 
ple of God. Babylon was to reap what it had sown. They 


\ 


70 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


were to be served by others as they had served the people of 
God. It was a literal prophecy of what actually occurred 
afterwards in Babylon. We find a similar but even more 
' awful prophecy of the coming doom of Babylon in Isaiah 
13:15-18. 

So when we.study these Imprecatory Psalms in the light 
that is thrown upon them from other passages of Scripture, 
all the supposed difficulties disappear, and we find that there 
is nothing here that is not in perfect harmony with the 
thought that the whole Bible is God’s Word, though in some 
instances while the record of what is said is correct and 
exact, that which is recorded as being said may not in itself 
be right; but it is God’s Word that man said it, though what 
man said was not God’s word. 


XVI ” 


Dors THE Gop or TrRurH AND Love Senp Line ‘SPIRITS AND 
Evin SPrIrRits To MEN? 


Onr of the most puzzling passages in the Bible is found in 
I Kings 22, and the parallel account in 2 Chronicles 18. In 
these passages the prophet Micaiah is reported as saying: 
“Therefore hear thou the word of the Lord” (v. 19, R. V.). 
Then he goes on to tell: “I saw the Lord sitting on His 
throne, and all the host of heaven standing by Him on His 
right hand and on His left.” Jehovah is pictured as asking 
the assembled host who would go and persuade Ahab that 
he may go up to Ramoth-gilead. Then a lying spirit is rep- 
resented as coming forth and standing before the Lord, and 
saying: .“I will go forth and will be a lying spirit in the 
mouth of all his prophets,’ and Jehovah is represented as 
‘saying to the lying spirit: ‘Thou shalt entice him and shail 
prevail.” Also: “Go forth and do so” (vs. 20-22, R. V.). 
-. At the first glance it appears here as if the Lord sanc- 
tioned and took a part in lying and deception. What is the 
explanation? 

It is found clearly given in the context. Micaiah, speak- 
ing by the Holy Spirit, is seeking to dissuade Ahab and Jehosh- 
aphat from going up to Ramoth-gilead. All the false proph- 
ets have told the two kings that they should go up to Vic- 
tory. Micaiah, the messenger of the Lord, tells them on the 
contrary that they shall go up to defeat and to the certain 

, death of Ahab. He tells them that the spirit that_had spoken 
by the false prophets was a lying spirit. He puts this in a 
highly pictorial way. But though the picture is exceedingly 
vivid, it does not teach error, but truth, and teaches it in a 
most forcible way, namely, that it was a lying spirit that 
was in the mouth of the false prophets. But that Jehovah 
‘was not really a party to the deception appears clearly in 


71 


42 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


the narrative, if we take it as a whole. So far from being» 
a party to the deception, He sends His own prophet to warn 
them that the spirit that spoke by the false prophets was a 
lying spirit, and to tell them the exact facts in the case ag ~ 
to what the issue of the battle would be. If they would 
choose to listen to God and His prophet they would be saved 
from calamity, but if they would not listen to God and His 
prophet then God would give them over to the working or 
error, that they should believe a lie; but He would not do 
this without abundant warning. This is 


Gop’s UNIvERSAL MutnHop, 


not only as taught in the Bible but as taught in experience, 
that He gives to every man to choose either to listen to Him 
and know the truth, or to turn a deaf ear to Him and to be 
given over to strong delusion. If men will not reeeive the 
love cf the truth that they may be saved, then God gives. 
them over to strong delusion to believe a lie, If men want 
lies, God gives them their fill of them (2 Thessalonians 
2:10-12, R. V.). 

In other passages of the Bible it seems to be taught that 
God sends evil spirits to men, and the question arises: How 
can we believe that a good God, a God of love, sends evil 
spirits to men? Let us turn to a passage in which this is 
taught, and we will soon find an answer to the difficulty. 

In 1 Samuel 16:14, -R. V., we read: “Now the Spirit of the 
Lord had departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord 
croubled him.” 

What is meant by “an evil spirit’? The context clearly 
shows. It was a spirit of discontent, unrest, depression. 

The circumstances were these: Saul had proved untrue to 
God. He had deliberately disobeyed God (1 Samuel 15:4-35, 
especially vs. 22, 23), and consequently God. had withdrawn 


His Spirit from him, and a spirit ee discontent and unrest 
had come upon him. 


DOES GOD SEND EVIL SPIRITS? 43 
This was = 
Not aN UNKIND Act ON Gop’s Part. 


' There was nothing kinder that God could have done. It is 
one of the most merciful provisions of our heavenly Father 
that when we disobey Him and wander from Him He. makes 
us unhappy, discontented in our sin. If God should leave us 
to continue to be happy in sin, it would be the unkindest 
thing He could do, but God in His great mercy will win 

every sinner possible back to Himself, and if we sin God for 
our highest good sends to us deep depression and unrest in 
dur sin. If we make the right use of this spirit of unrest 
and depression that God sends us, it brings us back to Goé 
and to the joy of the Holy Ghost. Saul made*the wrong use 
of it. Instead of allowing his unrest of heart to bring him 
to repentance and back to God, he allowed it to embitter his 

soul against one whom God favored. The sending of. the 
- evil spirit was an act of mercy on God’s part. The misuse 
of this act of mercy resulted in Saul’s utter undoing;- 

There is many a man today who once knew something 
about the Spirit of the Lord and the joy of the Holy Ghost, 
who has fallen into sin, and God in His great love and mercy 
is sending him at the present time an evil spirit, a spirit 
of unrest, dissatisfaction, deep discontent, or even of abject 
misery. Let him thank God for it! Let him inquire humbly 
on his face before God wherein it is he has sinned against - 
God and lost the joy of his salvation! Let him put away and 

confess his sin and come back to God and have renewed 
unto him the joy of God’s salvation! An evil spirit of unrest 
and discontent was sent to David, too, when he sinned; but 
when after some resistance David confessed his sin unto the 
‘Lord, the Lord blotted it out and brought him into a place 
of glad joy in the Lord, where he could instruct and teach 
others in the way they should go (Psalm 32:4-8; 51:9-13). 


XVII 


JONAH AND “THE WHALE.” 
¥ j 
Tue story of Jonah and “the whale” has for many years 
been the favorite butt of ridicule with unbelievers, and the 
cause of not a little perplexity with those who are “unlearned 
and unstable.’ The story is quite generally discredited by 
the destructive critics as to its being dctually historical. 
They attempt to explain it as allegory or parable. Those 
who desire to discredit the full inspiration and absolute 
veracity of the Bible have again and again assured us with 
‘a great show of scientific knowledge that such is the struc- 
ture of a whale’s mouth and the configuration of his throat 
that it would be impossible for a full-grown man either to 
pass through the sieve in its mouth or the narrow orifice of 
its throat, to say nothing of his coming out again alive and 
whole. 
What shall we say to all this? 
First of all, Jet us notice the fact that 


TuE Binte NOWHERE Says 


that Jonah was swallowed by a whale. In Jonah 1:17 we 
are told that Jehovah “prepared a great fish to swallow up 
Jonah, and Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days 
and three nights.” There is no mention here whatever of 
this great fish being “a whale,” with its peculiarly constructed 
mouth and throat. It may have been either a fish altogether 
prepared for the occasion, or a fish already existing provi- 
dentially sent around for the purpose God had in view. In 
Jesus’ reference to this historical event in Matthew 42:40 
it is true that in the Authorized Version and in the text of 
the Revised Version, we read that He said that Jonah was 


74 


' 


JONAH AND “THE WHALE” 15 


three days and three nights in “the whale’s belly’; but we 
read in the margin of the Revised Version that the Greek of 
the word rendered “whale” is “sea monster.” One cannot 
help wondering why the translators should continue to put 
“whale” in the text if the Greek word means “sea monster,” 
and it certainly does. In the Septuagint translation of the 
book of Jonah, “a great fish” is rendered by a Greek adjective 
meaning “great”? and by the same word that is used in Mat- 
thew 12:40 and translated “whale.” The word “whale” was 
in the mind of the translators and not in the word spoken by 
Jesus, so in neither the Old Testament nor the New Testament 
account is it said that Jonah was swallowed by a “whale,” but 
by a great fish or sea monster. So we see that these very ; 
“scholarly critics’ have spent much labor in proving the © 
absurdity of something God did not inspire, and which they 
would have known the inspired record did not say if they had 
been as scholarly as they supposed. 


As TO WHAT THE GREAT FIsH WAS 


we are not told, but it is a well-known fact that there exist 
or have existed until recent times in the Mediterranean Sea, 
-where the recorded event seems to have taken place, sea mon- 
stefs—that is, dog sharks—large enough to swallow a man 
or horse whole. In fact, it is recorded that a man fell over- 
board in the Mediterranean and was swallowed by one of 
these sea monsters, the monster was killed and the man 
rescued alive. A whole horse was taken out of the belly of 
another. 

Furthermore, even if the Bible had said that the great fish 
was a whale, there would be no such difficulty with the nar- 
rative as has been supposed by unbelievers and the unin- 
formed. While it is true that there are some kinds of whale 
“whose mouths and throats are of such a formation that it 
wouid be Ympossible for_a full-grown man to pass through, 
it ig not true of all kinds of whales. 

The well-known author, Frank Bullen, in his book, The 


16 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Cruise of the Cachalot, says that “a shark fifteen feet in 
length has been found in the stomach of a cachalot.” He 
tells further that “when dying, the sperm whale always ejects 
the contents of its stomach.” He tells of one whale that 
was caught and killed, “the ejected food from whose stom- 
ach was in masses of enormous size, some of them being 
estimated to be the size of our hatch-house, viz., 8 feet by 6 
feet by 6 feet.” Of course such a whale would have no dif- 
ficulty in swallowing a man, so the whole objection to the 
Bible narrative from the standpoint that a whale could not 
swallow a man is not founded upon superior knowledge, but 
upon ignorance. 3 

“But,” someone may say, “the action of the gastric juices 
would kill a man within a whale, or other sea monster.” 

But this leaves God out of the transaction, whereas in the 
Bible story God is very prominent in the whole transaction. 
The God who made both the monster and the man and the ~ 
gastric jufces zould quite easily control the gastric juices and © 
preserve the man alive. We are not trying to make out that 
the transaction was aot miraculous in any event, but those 
who really believe in God and have had any large experience 
with God have no trouble with the miraculous. 

It ought to be added, moreover, that the Bible does not~™ 
tell us that Jonah remained alive during the period that he 
was in the belly of the great fish. There are things in the 
narrative as recorded in the Book of Jonah that make it 
appear as if he did not remain alive (Jonah 2:2, 5, 6, R. V., 
see margin). There seems to be 


A Strona PROBABILITY THAT JoNAH AcTUALLY Dip Dim 


and was raised from the dead. If he actually did die, this — 
only adds one more to the resurrections recorded in the Bible 

and makes Jonah a still more remarkable type of Christ. To 
those who believe in God, there is no difficulty in believing 
in the resurrection if sufficiently well attested. “Why should. 
it be thought a thing incredible with you that God should 


Viagem 2 Se 


JONAH AND “THE WHALB” TT 


- raise the dead?” There are numerous instances on record, 
at least of resuscitation of men and women who to all appear- 
ances had been for some days dead. The historicity of this 
event is endorsed by Jesus Christ Himself (Matthew 12:40). 
To think of it as being merely allegory or parable is to dis- 
credit the words of Jesus. 

So, on careful examination of what the Scripture says, and 
of the facts of history, all the difficulties supposed to exist. 
in the story of Jonah and “the whale” are found to disappear. 


XVIII 
Some ImporTaANT “CONTRADICTIONS” IN THE BIBLE 


I am constantly meeting men who say that the Bible is “full 

_of contradictions.” When I ask them to show me one, they 
reply: “It is full of them.” When I press them to point 
out one, usually they have no more to say. But now and 
then I meet an infidel who does know enough about his 
Bible to point out some apparent contradictions. In this 
chapter we will consider some of these. 


Can Man SEE Gop? 


1. One of those most frequently brought forward is the 
apparent contradiction between John 1:18, where we read: 
“No man hath seen God at any time,’ and Hxodus 24:10, — 
where we are told of Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu 
and seventy of the elders of Israel that “‘they saw the God 
of Israel.’ (There are also other passages in which men 
are said to have seen God.) } 

Now this certainly looks like a fiat contradiction, and 
many besides sceptics and infidels have been puzzled by it. 
Indeed, one of the most devout men I ever knew was so 
puzzled by it that he left his place of business and came 
miles in great perturbation of spirit to ask me about it. The 
solution of this apparently unanswerable difficulty is in real- 
ity very simple. 

We must remember first of all that two statements which 
in terms flatly contradict one another may be both of them - 
absolutely true, for the reason that the terms are not used 
in the same sense in the two statements. 

For example, if any man should ask me if I ever saw the 
back of my head, I might answer: “No, I never saw the 
back of my head,” and this statement would he strictly trve, 


78 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 19 


. Or I might answer: “Yes, I have seen the back of my head,” 

and this statement would also be true, though it appears to 
flatly contradict the other. The back of my head I never have 
seen, but more than once when looking into a glass with 
another glass back of me I have seen the back of my head. 
It depends entirely upon what the man means when he asks 
me the question if I ever saw the back of my head what I 
should answer him. If he means one thing I answer “No,” 
and that is true. If he means another thing I answer “Yes,” 
and that is equally true. ° 

But someone may object: “In the latter case you did not 
really see the back of your head, What you saw was a 
refiection of the back of your head in the mirror.” : 

But to this I would reply: ‘Neither do you see the back of 
janyone’s head when you are looking right at it. What you 
see is the reflection of that person’s head upon the retina of 
your eye.” 

But every one knows what you mean when you use lan- 

guage in this common sense, every-day way of using it. They 
know that when. you say you saw the back of another man’s 
head that you mean you saw a reflection of it upon the reti- 
na of your eye, and they know when you say you saw the 
_back of your own head in the glass that you mean that you 
saw the reflection of the back of your head in the glass. In 
the one case you see the reflection, in the other case you 
see the reflection of the reflection, and in both cases what 
you actually see is the thing that was reflected. 

Now in this case before us in the Bible it is all very like 
this illustration. God in His eternal essence is “invisible” 
(“unseeable,” 1 Timothy 1:17). No man hath seen Him, 
nor can we see Him (1 Timothy 6:16). He is spirit, not 
form (John 4:23, 24), so Jobn tells us in the passage before 
us the profound and wondrous truth: “No man hath seen 
God at any time. The only begotten Son which is in the 
bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him.” That is, this 
invisible (unseeable) God is unfolded to us, interpreted to 

us, (the word here translated “declared” is the word from 


80 7 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


which our word “exegesis” is derived), in the words and in 
the person of Jesus Himself. So fully is He declared, not 
only in the words of Jesus but in His person, that Jesus 
could say: “He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father” 
(John 14:9): : 

But this essentially invisible God has been- pleased in His 
great grace to manifest Himself again and again in bodily 
form. Moses and the seventy elders saw such a manifesta- 
tion of God. (or theophany) when they were in the mount. 
@saiah saw such a manifestation in the temple (Isaiah 6:1), 
and in describing it he properly declared: “I saw the Lord.” 
Job saw such a manifestation and was so humbled by the 
actual coming face to face with God Himself in this manifes- 
tation of God, that he cried: “I abhor myself, and repent 
in dust and ashes” (Job 42:6). It was God that was mani- 
fested in these theophanies, and so it was God they saw. 

We see then that both of these apparently flatly contra- 
dictory statements that “No man hath seen God at any 
time” and that “Moses [and the others] saw God” are per- 
fectly true. 7 

Jesus Christ Himself was the crowning manifestation of 
God. “In Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily” 
(that is, in bodily form, Colossians 2:9). So Jesus said to 
Philip with perfect propriety: “He that hath seen Me hath 
seen the Father.” The.time is coming when all the pure in 
heart shall behold God permanently manifested in bodily 
form. (Matthew 5:8). The form in which Jesus existed in 
His pre-existent state in the glory was the form of God 
(Philippians 2:6, see R. V. margin). The Greek word which 
is translated “form” in this passage means “the form by 
which a person or thing strikes the vision—the external 
appearance” (Thayer’s Greek-English Lexicon of the New 
Testament), so we are clearly taught that the external ap- 
pearance of Jesus in His pre-existent form was the external 
appearance of God, that is, that the invisible God, who is a 


spirit in His essential essence, manifests Himself in an ex- 
ternal, visible form, 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 81 
THE SUPERSCRIPTIONS ON THE CROSS. 


2. A second “contradiction,” of which the infidels make 
a great deal and by which not a few believers are puzzled, 
is that found in the four accounts of the superscriptions on 
the cross. We read in Matthew 27:37: “And set up over 
His head His accusation written, This is Jesus the King 
of the Jews.” We read in Mark 15:26: “And the super- 
scription of His accusation was written over, The King of the 
Jews.” We read in Luke 23:38: ‘And there was also a 
superscription over Him, This is the King of-the Jews” (R. 
V.). And we read in John 19:19: “And Pilate wrote a title, 
and put it on the cross. And the writing was, Jesus of Naza- 
reth the King of the Jews.” Now no two of these agree 
absolutely in the words used, and it is asked by the objector: 
“How can all four possibly be right?” It is said that at 
least three must be wrong, at least in part. A great deal 
is made of this difficulty by those who argue against the 
verbal inspiration of the Scriptures. 

I am surprised that anyone should make so much of it, 
for the answer is found so plainly stated in the very pass. 
ages cited that it is surprising that any careful student should 
have overlooked it. John tells us in John 19:20, R. V., that 
in order that all the different nationalities present might read 
it, the charge upon which Jesus was crucified was written 
in Hebrew, in Latin and in Greek; in Hebrew for the com- 
‘mon people, in Latin for the Roman, and in Greek, the uni- 
versal language. The substantial part of the charge was that 
Jesus claimed to be “the King of the Jews” and was cruci- 
fied for making this claim, so these words, “The King of the 
Jews,” appear in the Hebrew and the Latin and the Greek, 
and it also appears in all four accounts of the four Gospels. 
Matthew (writing for the Jews) would naturally give the 
inscription as it appeared in Hebrew, Mark (writing for the 
Romans ) would be likely to give it as it appeared in the Latin, 
- and Luke as it appeared: in the Greek, Presumably John 
gives it in the full Roman form, “Jesus of Nazareth” being 


6 


4 


a2 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


a full and explicit statement of who Jesus was, and the | 
ciiarge being His claim to be “The King of the Jews.” 

The only thing that is left then to account for is the dif- 
ference between Mark and John, but if we carefully read 
Mark 15:26 we see that Mark does not claim to give the full 
wording that appeared on the cross. He simply says: “The 
superscription of His accusation was written over.” The 
accusation was: “The King of the Jews,” and this Mark 
gives, and this alone. The words, “This is Jesus of Naza- 
reth,” were not the accusation, but the name of the accused. 

So all this difficulty, of which so much is made, disappears 
altogether when we notice exactly what is said and all that 
is said. 


THE CONVERSION OF SAUL. 


8. Another “contradiction” of which a great deal is made 
is that which seems to exist between two different accounts 
,of the conversion of Saul of Tarsus. We are told in Acts 
9:7 that those who journeyed with Saul to Damascus heard 
the voice that spoke to Saul, but saw ‘no man. On the other 
hand Paul, in relating to the Jews in Jerusalem the story of 
his conversion, says: “They that were with me beheld in- 
deed the light, but they heard not the voice of Him that 
spake to me” (Acts 22:9, R. V.) Now these two statements 
seem to flatly contradict one another. Luke, in recounting the 
conversion, says that the men that journeyed with Paul 
heard the voice, but Paul himself in recounting his conver- 
Sion says that they heard not the voice. Could there possibly 
be a flatter contradiction than this? 

But this apparent contradiction disappears when we look 
at the Greek of ‘the two passages. The Greek word trans- 
lated “‘heard” governs two cases, the genitive and the accusa- 
tive. When a person or thing the voice of which is heard is 
spoken of, it is followed by the genitive. When the message 
that is heard is spoken of it is followed by the accusative. 
In Acts 9:7 the genitive is used. They did hear the voice, 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 83 
tbe sound. In Acts 22:9 the words translated “the voice” 
are in the accusative. They did not hear the message of the 
One that spoke. The word rendered “voice” also has two 
meanings: first, “a sound, a tone,” and second, “a voice,” 
that is, “a sound of uttered words” (Thayer’s Greek-Hnglish 
Lexicon of the New Testament). The voice as a mere sound 
they heard; the voice as the sound of uttered words, the 

- message, they did not hear. 

So another seeming difficulty entirely disappears when we 
look exactly at what the Bible in the original says, and tn- 
stead of having an objection to the Bible we have another 

' illustration of its absolute accuracy, not only down to a word -~ 
but down to a single letter that ends a word and by which 
a case is indicated. 


THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS CHRIST. 


4. A good deal is made by some who deny the accuracy 
of the Bible of the apparent contradictions in the various 
accounts of the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. 
' The most prominent unbeliever in his own city sent to the 
daily papers the following problem for me to solve. He said: 
“The account of the visit to the grave is entirely different 
in the four Gospels. Two of the Gospels state that the wo- 
men saw two angels at the grave, and two of the other Gos- 
pels state that they only saw one angel.” 
What is the solution of this apparent difficulty? 
First of all, let it be said that the objector does not truly 
' state the facts in the case. So far from its being true that 
two of the Gospels state that they “saw only one angel,” not 
one of the Gospels states that they saw only one angel. It 
is true that Matthew says that “they saw an angel’ (Matthew 
28:1-5), and Mark says: “They saw a young man,” presum- 
ably an angel, (Mark 16:5-7), but neither Matthew nor 
. Mark says that they saw “only” one angel. Saying that they 
saw one does not preclude the possibility of their seeing twa, 
Furthermore, let it be noticed that it is not true, as stated 


84 ‘ DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


by the objector, that two of the Gospels state that the wo- 
men saw two angels at the grave. It is true that Luke 
says (Luke 24:3, 4) that after they had entered into the 
sepulchre two men (presumably angels) stood by them in 
dazzling apparel. But this apparently does not refer to the 
incident that Matthew refers to at all, for the angel there 
mentioned was an angel who was outside the sepulchre. 
Nor does it seem to refer to the same fact of which Mark 
speaks, for the young man (or angel) in Mark’s Gospel was 
one who was sitting on the right side of the sepulchre. This 
angel may have been joined later by the one who was on the 
outside, and these two together- may have stood by the 
women. This seems the more likely, as the message uttered 
by the two in Luke is in part the same as that uttered by 
the angel outside the sepulchre in Matthew, and by the young 
man inside the sepulchre in Mark (compare Luke 24:5, 6 
with Matthew 28:5-7; Mark 16:5-7). The very simple solu- 
tion of it all is that there was an angel outside the tomb 
when the women approached, and they saw another one in- 
side sitting. The one outside entered, and the one sitting 
arose, and standing by the women they uttered together or 
after one another the words recorded in Matthew and in 
Mark and in Luke. 

But how about the account in John? John does tell us 
that there. were two angels in white sitting, one at the head 
and one at the feet where the body of Jesus had lain (John 
20:12, 18). How can we reconcile that with the other three? 
Very easily. It was not the group of women at all that 
saw these two angels, but we are distinctly told it was Mary 
alone. Mary started out with the other women for the sep- 
ulchre, got a little ahead of the group, was the first to see 
the stone rolled away from the tomb (John 20:1), immedi- 
ately jumped at the conclusion that the tomb had been rifled 
and ran at the top of her speed to the city to carry the news 
to Peter and John (John 20:2). While she is going into the 
city, the other women reach and enter the tomb, and the 
things recorded in Matthew, Mark and Luke occur, Thes® 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 85 
' women have left the sepulchre before Mary reaches it the 
second time. Peter and John have also left it when Mary 
reaches the sepulchre, and two angels, the one who had been 
on the outside and the one who at first had been sitting on 
the inside, were both sitting, one at the head and the other 
at the feet where the body of Jesus had lain. 
_ All the other apparent contradictions in the four accounts 
of the resurrection, and they are quite numerous, also dis- 
appear on careful study. But these apparent contradictions 
are themselves 


PROOF OF THE TRUTH AND THE ACCURACY 


ef the accounts. It is evident that these four accounts are 
separate and independent accounts. If four different persons 
had sat down to make up a story in collusion of a resurrec- 
tion that never occurred, they would have made their four 
accounts appear to agree, at least on the surface. Whatever 
of contradictions there might be in the four accounts would 
only come out after minute and careful study. But just the 
_ Opposite is the case here. It is all on the surface that the 
- apparent contradictions occur. It is only by careful and pro- 
tracted study that the real agreement shines forth. It is just 
such a harmony as would not exist between four accounts 
fabricated in collusion. It is just such an agreement as 
would exist in four independent accounts of substantially the 
same circumstances, each narrator telling the same story from 
his own standpoint, relating such details as impressed him, 
omitting other details which did not impress him but which 
did-impress another narrator and which the other narrator 
related. Sometimes two accounts would seem to contradict 
one another, but the third account would come in and unin- 
tentionally reconcile the apparent discrepancies between the 
two. This is precisely what we have in the four accounts of 
the resurrection of Jesus Christ. We may heartily thank God 
that there are these apparent discrepancies among them. And 
even if we cannot find the solution of some apparent discrep- 
ancies, the fact that we do by careful study find a solution of 
‘ 


‘ 
B6 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


what appeared to be an inexplicable contradiction will sug- 
gest to us the certainty that if we knew all the facts in the 
case, we could also find a solution of the apparent discrep- 
ancies which we cannot reconcile as yet. The more one 
studies the four accounts of the resurrection, the more he 
will be convinced, if he is candid, that they are separate and 
independent accounts, and a truthful narration of what actu- 
ally occurred. They could not have been fabricated in col- 
lusion with one another,—the very discrepancies urged prove 
this. Much less could they have been fabricated independ- 
ently of one another. Four men sitting down independently 
of one another to fabricate an account of something that never 
occurred would have agreed with one another nowhere, but 
in point of fact the more we study these four accounts the 
more clearly do we discover how marvellously they fit in to 
one another. 

What has been said about the apparent discrepancies be- 
tween the four accounts of the resurrection will apply also 
to other apparent discrepancies in the different Gospel nar- 
ratives of the same event. They are very numercus, and to 
take them all up in detail would require a volume,- but the 
illustration given above will serve to prove how these appar- 
ent discrepancies can be reconciled one by one if we take 
them up thoroughly. And if there are any that still refuse 
, to yield to our hardest study, we may be confident that if 
we knew all the facts in the case the apparent discrepancy 
eould be readily reconciled. 


Dors Gop Repent? 


5. Another apparent “contradiction” of the Scripture of 
which a great deat is made and which has puzzled a great 
many believers is this: 

We read in Malachi 8:6: “For I am the Lord, I change 
not”; and in James 1:17: “Hvery good gift and every per- 
fect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father 
of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of — 
turning”; and I Samuel 15:29: “And also the Strength of 


) + 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” ’ 87 


Israel will not lie nor repent: for He is not a man that He 
_ should repent.” But in apparently flat contradiction of these 
we read in Jonah 3:10: “And God saw their works, that 
they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the 
evil that He had said that He would do unto them, and He 
did it not’; and in Genesis 6:6: “And it repented the Lord 
that He had made man on the earth, and it grieved Him at 
His heart.” Here it not only says “it repented God,” but “it 
grieved Him at His heart.” Now this appears like a flat 
contradiction. What is the explanation? 

The explanation is that what the first set of passages says 
is absolutely true, that God is absolutely unchangeable, He 
is “the same yesterday, and today and forever’ (Hebrews ~ 
13:8). But the second class of passages is also true, for if 
God does remain the same in character, infinitely hating sin 
and absolutely unchangeable in His purpose to visit sin with 
judgment, then if any city or any person changes in attitude 
toward sin, God must necessarily change in His attitude to- 
ward that person or city. If God remains the same, if His 
attitude toward sin and righteousness is unchanging, then 
must His dealings with men change as they turn from sin 
to repentance. His character remains ever the same, but His 
dealings with men change as they change from the position 
that is hateful to His unchanging hatred of sin to one that 
is pleasing to His unchanging love of righteousness. 

We may illustrate this by the direction of a railway station 
that remains stationary, relative to a train that moves along 
the track in front of the station. When the train begins to 
move it is to the east of the station (say), but as the train 
moves westward it is soon west of the station. The only 
way in which the station could maintain the same direction 
relative to the moving train would be by moving as the train 
moves. If the station is unchangeable in its position, its di- 
rection relative to the train must change as the train moves. 
So it is with God’s attitude toward man. If God remains 
unchangeable in His character, His purpose and His position, 
then as man moves from sin to righteousness, God’s attitude 
relative to that man must change, The very fact that God 


4 


88 : DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


does not repent (change His mind), that He remains always 
the same in His attitude toward sin, makes it necessary that 
God should repent in His conduct (change His dealings with 
men) as they turn from sin to righteousness. 

As to Jehovah’s repenting of having made man on the. 
earth and its grieving Him at His heart, this too is necessi- 
tated by the unchanging attitude of God toward sin. If God 
does not repent (change His mind about sin, His attitude to- 
ward sin), and if man’s wickedness becomes great, then God’s 
unrepenting, unchanging hatred of sin necessitates that the 
man whom He has created, who has fallen into sin so great 
and so abhorrent to Himself, should become the object of 
great grief to Him, and that He should turn from His crea- 
tive dealings with man to His destroying dealings with man. 
This was necessitated by man’s sin. An unchangeably holy 
God must destroy man who has become so hopelessly sunken 
in sin. The only condition upon which He could spare him 
would be that God Himself change from the holiness of His 
character as it was when He created him to become an unholy 
God. 

So again we see that what appears at the first glimpse like’ 
a flat contradiction is really no contradiction at all but an 
entire agreement in fact and thought between passages that 
seem to contradict in words. 


Wo Movep Davin to NumsBer ISRAEL? 


6. Another apparent “contradiction” of Scripture that is 
frequently urged is found in 2 Samuel 24:1 compared with 
1 Chronicles 21:1. In 2 Samuel 24:1, R. V., we read that 
“the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and He 
moved David against them, saying, Go number Israel and 
Judah,” but in 1 Chronicles 21:1 we read: “And Satan stood 
up against Israel and moved David to number Israel.” In 
one passage, therefore, we are told that Jehovah moved 
David against the people when He said: “Go and number 
Israel and Judah,” in the other passage we are told that 
Satan moved David to number Israel, and we are asked: 
“Which is the correct account?” 


~ 
2 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 89 

The very simple answer a this question is that both ac- 
counts are correct. 

We do not need even to suppose that an error has crept 
into the text and that “he” appears instead of Satan, so that 
what really was recorded in Samuel would be: “And again 
the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and Satan 
moved David against them,’ meaning that the anger of the 
Lord was kindled because he yielded to Satan’s moving him. 
Of course it is possible that such an error may have crept 
into the text, or it is possible that the pronoun “he” really 
refers to Satan, who is not mentioned, or the “‘he” might be 
interpreted “one,” without any designation as to who the 
- “one” was. If this were so there would be no difficulty what-— 
ever in the passage. 

But there is no insuperable difficulty in any case to any- 
one who understands the Bible teaching regarding God’s rela- 
tien to temptation, and the attitude that He takes toward 
Satan. In 2 Corinthians 12:7, R. V., we are told by Paul 
that lest he should be exalted above measure through the 
abundance of the revelations made to him there was given. 
him a thorn in the flesh, ‘a messenger of Satan,” to buffet 
him, Now as the purpose of this thorn in the flesh, this 
“messenger of Satan,’ was most salutary, to keep Paul from 
being “exalted overmuch,” evidently it was God who gave 
the thorn in the flesh, the “messenger of Satan”; but none the 
less the messenger was a messenger of Satan. In other 
“words, God uses Satan, evil as he is, for our good, for our 
moral discipline. Just as God makes the wrath of man to 
praise Him (Psalm 76:10), so He makes even the wrath of 
Satan to praise Him. What Satan intends only for evil God 
uses for our good. It was Satan who tempted David, but it 
was by God’s permission that Satan tempted him, and back 
of the testing and consequent failure of David and the salu- 
tary humiliation of David that came out of it was God, and 
in this sense it was God who moved David to the act that 
David might discover through his failure what was in his 
own heart. ; 


xIx 
“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 


Tur Bible is said not only to be full of “contradictions,” but 
-also to contain “mistakes.” 


1. One of the “mistakes” most constantly referred to by 
destructive critics is found in Matthew 27:9, 10 (R. V.): 
“Then was fulfilled that. which was spoken by Jeremiah the 
prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the 
price of Him that was valued, whom certain of the children 
of Israel did price, and gave them for the potter’s field, as 
the Lord appointed me.” 

Now the passage here referred to by Matthew is found in 
the prophecy ascribed in the Old Testament to Zechariah 
(Zechariah 11:11-13). At first sight this appears as if 
Matthew had made a mistake and ascribed to Jeremiah a 
prophecy that was really made by Zechariah. Even John 
Calvin seems to have thought that Matthew made a mistake. 
He says: ; 

“How the name of Jeremiah crept in I confess I do not 
know, nor do I give myself much trouble to inquire. The 
passage itself plainly shows the name of Jeremiah has been 
put down by mistake instead of Zechariah; for in Jeremiah 
we find nothing of this sort, nor anything that even’ ap- 
proaches it.” 

This passage has been pressed as proof that the Gospel nar- 
ratives are not necessarily “historical accounts of what actu- 
ally occurred.” Must we admit that Matthew was mistaken? 
There is not the slightest necessity of admitting that Mat- 
thew was mistaken. 

In the first place, in some manuscripts the word “Jeremiah” 
does not appear, but the passage reads: “Then was fulfilled 


90 


“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 91 


that which was spoken by the prophet,’ without any men- 
tion as to who the prophet was. In still another reading, 
“Zechariah” appears instead of “Jeremiah.” Westcott and 
Hort do not accept the reading without “Jeremiah,” nor the 
reading which substitutes “Zechariah” for “Jeremiah,” but 
they do mention these readings, especially the first, as “note- 
worthy rejected readings.” Mrs. Lewis says that some of the 
earliest and best manuscripts omit the word “Jeremiah.” So 
the apparent mistake here may be due to the error of a 
copyist. 

However, the best textual critics all accept the reading 


“Jeremiah” in this passage, and it seems to the writer that . 


this is probably the correct reading. If then in the Gospel 
of Matthew as originally written Matthew used the word 
“Jeremiah” here, was it not a mistake? 

Not at all necessarily. That these words or words very 
similar to them are found in the prophecy which in our Old 
Testament bears the name of Zechariah is unquestionably 
true, but it does not follow at all from this that Jeremiah 
_ did not speak them, for it is a well-known fact that the later 
prophets of thc Old Testament often quoted the predictions 
of earlier prophets. For example, Zechariah himself in Zech- 
ariah 1:4 quoted a prophecy known to be Jeremiah’s (see 


Jeremiah 18:11), and in the passage which we are now con- - 


sidering Zechariah may also have 
QUOTED FROM THE PROPHECY Or JEREMIAH. 


There is no record in the book of Jeremiah as we now have 
it in the Old Testament of Jeremiah’s having uttered this 
prophecy, but there is no reason whatever to think we have 
in Jeremiah all the prophecies that Jeremiah uttered, and 
Zechariah may easily have had access to prophecies of Jere- 
miah not recorded in the book of Jeremiah. 

Furthermore it is to be noted that Zechariah himself says 
in Zechariah 7:7: “Should ye not hear the words which the 


- Lord hath cried by the former prophets?” so it is evident that 


4 


92 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 3 
Zechariah regarded it as part of his mission to recall the 
prophecies of the prophets that had gone before him. He 
would be especially inclined to recall the prophecies of Jere- 
miah, for it was a saying among the Jews that “the spirit of - 
Jeremiah was upon Zechariah.” 

So we see that this much-vaunted mistake of Matthew does 
not appear to have been a mistake at all when we closely 
examine it. 

Perhaps it ought to be added that there has been much 
question by the critics as to whether the closing chapters of 
the book of Zechariah were really a portion of the prophe- 
cies of Zechariah. There is nothing in the chapters them- 
selves to indicate that they were. It is true that for cen- 
turies they have been attached to the prophecies of Zechariah, 
but nowhere in the Bible does it state that they were by 
Zechariah, and it has been held that they were in reality not 
by Zechariah but by Jeremiah. This, however, is a question 
for the critics. If it should prove to be so, it would simply 
be an additional confirmation of the accuracy of Matthew’s 
statement, but even if it is not so, if Zechariah is the author 
of this prophecy (Zechariah 11:11-13) as we find it in the 
Bible, it does not at all prove that Jeremiah may not have 
uttered a similar prophecy to which Zechariah referred and 
which Matthew has accurately quoted. And the critics will 
have to search farther if they wish to prove Matthew to have 
been in error. £ 


ABRAHAM’S SEPULCHRES. 


2. A-second alleged “mistake” in the Bible is the statement 
of Stephen in Acts 7:1t: “And were carried over into Sy- 
chem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a 
sum of money of the sons of Emmor, the father of Sychem.” 
Genesis 23:17, 18 states: “And the field of Ephron, which was 
in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the 
cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, 
that were in all the borders round about, were made sure unto 


“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 93 


_ Abraham.” Stephen seems, then, to have been mistaken in 
his statement that Abraham bought it of the sons of Hmmor, 

Let me put the supposed mistake in the words of a promi- 
nent doctor of divinity. He says: ‘According to Luke’s re- 
port, Stephen says Abraham bought a sepulchre of the sons 
of Hmmor, the father of Sychem (Acts 7:16). But Genesis 
28:17, 18 says Abraham bought it of Ephron the Hittite, and 
Genesis 33:19 says that Jacod bought it of the sons of Em-. 
mor. . . . John Calvin says Stephen evidently made a 
mistake. Dr. Hackett admits that Stephen appears to have 
confounded the two transactions . . . but what do those 
- say about it . . . who maintain the absolute inerrancy of 
the Bible?” 

This seems like a puzzler until one notices exactly what 
the three passages referred to say, then the puzzle is solved. 
The very simple solution is as follows: _ 

First, Genesis 23:17, 18 does not say what the objector 
says it does say; that is, it does not say that Abraham 
bought this sepulchre to which Stephen refers of Hphron tha 
Hittite. It does state that Abraham bought @ field of Ephron 
the Hittite, in which there was a cave, and that Abraham 
buried his wife Sarah in this cave. But there is no good ~ 
reason for supposing that this was the sepulchre in which 
Jacob and the patriarchs were buried. There is no reason for 
supposing that Abraham in his long lifetime bought but one 
burial place. The writer of this book has himself purchased 
two, one in Chicago where his brother is buried, and one in 
Northfield, Mass., where his daughter is buried, and is also 
‘interested in a third in Brooklyn where his father and 
mother and other brother are buried, There is not the slight- 
est hint in the Scriptures that these two sepulchres mentioned 
in Genesis 23:17, 18 and in Acts 7:16 are the same. 

As to the passage in Genesis 33:19, where, according to the 
objector, it is said that Jacob, and not Abraham (as Stephen 
puts it), bought the sepulchre, this passage does not, in point 
of fact, say that Jacob bought the sepulchre. It says he 
bought “the parcel of a field at the hand of the children of 


94 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


‘Hamor” (the ones of whom Stephen says Abraham bought 
the sepulchre). The presumption in the case is that Abra- 
ham had already purchased the sepulchre at an earlier date 
and that Jacob in his day purchased the ground (“a parcel 
of land’) in which the sepulchre was located. When Abra- 
ham purchased a sepulchre to bury Sarah he took the pre- 
caution of buying the field as well as the sepulchre, but in 
the latter case he seems to have purchased the sepulchre 
without buying the whole piece of ground, which therefore 
Jacob himself bought at a later date. It is altogether likely 
that Abraham should have purchased a sepulchre in this spot 
in his later life, for it was a place dear to him by ee 
memories (see Genesis 12:6, 7). 

So, after all, the mistake was not Stephen’s, but the mis- 
take of the commentators who were not careful to note ex- 
actly what Stephen said and what is said in the two passages 
in Genesis. 

Joshua informs us that it was in this parcel of ground 
which Jacob bought (which presumably contained the sep- 
ulchre that Abraham had bought at an earlier date) that the 
bones of Joseph were buried (Joshua 24:32). Apparently 
Stephen was a more careful student of Old Testament Scrip- 
ture than some of his critics. 

But even allowing for the moment that Stephen was mis- 
taken in this case, it would prove nothing whatever against 
the divine origin of the Bible or its absolute inerrancy, for 
Stephen is not one of the authors of the Bible. He was not 
a prophet or an apostle. It is true he was a Spirit-filled 
man, but he was not, the writer of.a book in the Bible. The 
inspired author of the Acts of the Apostles records that 
Stephen said these words, and if these words that Stephen 
uttered had been .mistaken, the record that he said ther 
would still be correct. It would be God’s Word that Stephen | 
said this, but what Stephen said would not be God’s word. 
The one who contends for the divine origin of the Bible and 
its absolute accuracy is under no obligation whatever to prove 
the accuracy of every statement that every speaker in the 


“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 95 


Bible, even every Spirit-filled speaker, is recordeé as saying 
(see page 20). 


THE Uses or Strona DRInK IN Proverss 31:6, 7. 


4, Another alleged “mistake” in the Bible is found in 
Proverbs 31:6, 7: “Give strong drink unto him that is ready 
to perish, and wine unto the bitter in soul. Let him drink 
and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more” 
(R. V.). It is said that this advocates the use of intoxicating 
liquor under certain, conditions, and that as the use of intoxi- | 
cating liquor under any and all circumstances is wrong this 
teaching of the Bible is a mistake. 

But the difficulty disappears, as many another difficulty will 
disappear, if we do not rip the verses out of their context, 
but study them, as any passage in any book should be studied, 
in the context. The whole section from verses 1 to 9 is a 
protest against kings (and by implication persons in any 
place of responsibility) using wine or strong drink at all. It 
is plainly taught that any use of wine has a tendency to 
.make them forget the law and to pervert judgment. Verses 
6 and 7 go on to add that wine and strong drink should only 
be used in cases of extreme physical weakness and despond- 
ency, when the man is so far gone that he is “ready to per- 
ish,” and is consequently in the deepest depths of despond- 
ency (“bitter in soul,’ R. V.). The words are addressed to 
the king (R. V.), and the king, who was able to buy wine, 
instead of using it himself should give it to those who are 

‘in such physical condition that they need it. The one in this 

condition would be stimulated by the wine, lifted out of his 
depression, by the generosity of the king who gave the wine. 
so that he would be enabled to “forget his poverty,’ which ° 
would naturally preclude him from buying the-wine for him- 
self. The whole passage goes on to urge the king’s attention 
to “the cause of the poor and needy.” 

So there remains no difficulty in this passage except for 
those who hold that the use of intoxicating liquors is wrong 


96 DIFFICULTIHS IN THE BIBLE 


under any circumstances. But there are many who hold that 
in extreme cases of physical weakness the use of wine is wise 
and permissible. 
We do not need to go into the question as to whether the 
wine and strong drink in this case were alcoholic. Those 
who urge that “strong drink” in the Old Testament often- 
times refers to a heavy, sweet unfermented wine have a good 
deal to say in favor of their position. Of course, if this inter- 
pretation were true, it would remove all difficulty from the 
passage. But in any case there is really no difficulty here at 
all for anyone who believes that there are circumstances in 
‘which the use of alcoholic stimulants is advisable. As there 
-was a time in the early life of the writer of this book when 
_the doctors had all given him up to die and when his life was 
sustained by a prescription of an old nurse, one of the main 
ingredients of the prescription being brandy, he is naturally 
disposed to think there are cases like that mentioned in the 
text when the use of strong drink is warrantable. But he 
thoroughly agrees with the context of the passage, which 
teaches that all use of wine should be renounced by people 
in health and strength and prosperity. 


JESUS TURNING WATER INTO WINE. 


6. A stock objection against the Bible, and not only 
against the Bible but against Jesus Christ Himself, is found 
in the story of Jesus turning the water into wine at the mar- 
riage festival at Cana of Galilee as recorded in John 2:1-11. 

But there need be no difficulty in this action of Jesus even 
for the extreme teetotaler if he considers carefully exactly - 
what is said and precisely what Jesus did. : 

The wine provided for the marriage festivities at Cana 
failed. A cloud was about to fall over the joy of what is 
properly a festive occasion. Jesus came to the rescue. He 
providea wine, but there is not a hint that the wine He made 
was intoxicating. It was fresh-made wine. New-made wine 
és never intoxicating. It is not intoxicating until some time ~ 


“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 97 


after the process of fermentation has set in. Fermentation 
is a process of decay. There is not a hint that our Lord pro- 
duced alcohol, which is a product of decay or death. He 
produced a living wine uncontaminated by fermentation. It 
is true it was better wine than they had been drinking, but 
that does not show for a moment that it was more fermented 


than that which they had before been drinking. The writer - 


of this book is a thorough-guing teetotaler. He does not be- 
lieve at all in the use of alccholic stimulants even in cases 
of sickness, except in the most extteme cases, and even thén 
only with the greatest caution, but he has not the slightest 
objection, and does not think that any reasonable person can 
have the slightest objection, to anyone’s drinking new-madé 
Wine, that is, the fresh juice of the grape. It is a wholesome — 
drink. Even if some of the guests were already drunken, or 
had drunk freely (see v. 10, R. V.) of wine that may have 
been intoxicating, there would be no harm, but good, in sub- 
stituting an unintoxicating wine for the intoxicating drink 
‘which they had been taking. Our Lord, as far as this story 
goes at least, did not make intoxicating liquor for anybody 
to drink, but simply saved a festive occasion from disaster 
‘by providing a pure, wholesome, unintoxicating drink. By 
turning the water into a wholesome wine, He showed His 
treative power and manifested His glory. 


z 


xx 
Tur Two GENEALOGIES OF JESUS, THE CHRIST 


A Favorite point of attack on the Bible for those who deny 
its divine origin and inerrancy is the two varying genealo- 
gies of Jesus Christ. Not only is this a favorite point of at- 
tack by unbelievers, but it is also a point that often puzzles 
earnest students of the Bible. It is perfectly clear that the 
two genealogies differ widely from one another, and yet each 
is given as the genealogy of Christ. How can they by any 
possibility both be true? One has recently written me on this 
question in these words: “Two genealogies of Jesus are 
given, one in Matthew and one in Luke, and one is entirely 
different from the other. How can both be correct?” 

A very simple answer to this apparently difficult question 
is this: 


1. The genealogy given in Matthew is the genealogy of 
Joseph, the reputed father of Jesus, his father in the eyes 
of the law. The genealogy given in Luke is the genealogy of 
Mary, the mother of Jesus, and is the human genealogy of 
Jesus Christ in actual fact. The Gospel of Matthew was writ- 
ten for Jews. All through it Joseph is prominent, Mary is 
searcely mentioned. In Luke, on the other hand, Mary is 
the chief personage in the whole account of the Saviour’s con- 
ception and birth. Joseph is brought in only incidentally and 
because he was Mary’s husband. In all of this there is a 
deep significance. 


2. In Matthew Jesus appears as the Messiah. In Luke He 
appears as “the Son of man,” our Brother and Redeemer, 
who belongs to the whole race and claims kindred with all 
kinds and conditions of men. So in Matthew the genealoz” 


98 


TWO GENEALOGIES OF JESUS _ 99 


descends from Abraham to Joseph and Jesus, because an the 
predictions and promises touching the Messiah are fuifirled. 
in Him. But in Luke the genealogy ascends from Jesus to 

_ Adam, because the genealogy is being traced back to the 
head of the whole race and shows the relation of the sécond 
Adam to the first. ; ‘ 


- 8. Joseph’s line in Matthew is the strictly royal line from 

David to Joseph. In Luke, though the line of descent is from 

David, it is not the royal line. In this Jesus is descended 

from David through Nathan, David’s son indeed, but not in 

the royal line, and the list follows a line quite distinct from 
_ the royal line. 


4, The Messiah, according to prediction, was to be the © 
actual son of David according to the flesh (2 Samuel 7:12-19; 
Psalm 89:3, 4, 3437; 132:11; Acts 2:30; 13:22, 23; Romans 

1:3; 2 Timothy 2:8). These prophecies are fulfilled by Jesus 
being the son of Mary, who was a lineal descendant of David, 

though not in the royal line. Joseph, who was of the royal 
' line, was not his father according to the flesh, but was his 
father in the eyes of the law. 


5. Mary was a descendant of David through her father, 
Heli. It is true that Luke 3:23 says that Joseph was the son 
of Heli. The simple explanation of this is that Mary being 
@ woman her name according to Jewish usage could not ap- 
year in the genealogy, males alone forming the line, so 
Joseph’s name is introduced in the place of Mary’s, he being 
Mary’s husband. Heli was his father-in-law, and so Joseph 

is called the son of Heli, and the line thus completed. While 
Joseph was son-in-law of Heli, according to the flesh he was 
in actual fact the son of Jacob (Matthew 1:16). 


6. Two genealogies are absolutely necessary to trace the 
lineage of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the one the 
royal and legal, the other the natural and literal; and these 


100- DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBL — F 

e z > } ; 
two genealogies we find—the legal and royal in Matthew’s 
Gospel, the Gospel of law and kingship; the natural and lit- 
eral in Luke’s, the Gospel of humanity. 


7. We are told in Jeremiah 22:30 that any descendant of — 
Jeconiah could not come to the throne of David. Joseph was 
of this line, and while Joseph’s genealogy furnishes the royal 
ne for Jesus, his son before the law, nevertheless Jere- 
“aiah’s prediction is fulfilled to the very letter, for Jesus, 
(strictly speaking) was not Joseph’s descendant and there- 
fore was not of the seed of Jeconiah. If Jesus had been the 
son of Joseph in reality, He could not have come to the 
throne, but He is Mary’s son through Nathan and can come 
to the throne legally by her marrying Joseph and so clearing. 
His way legally to it. 


As we study these two genealogies of Jesus carefully and 
read them in the light of Old Testament prediction; we find 
that so far from constituting a reason for doubting the accu- 
racy of the Bible they are rather a confirmation of the min- 
utest accuracy of that Book. It is amazing how one part 
of the Bible fits into another part when we study it thus 
minutely. We need no longer stumble over the fact of two 
genealogies, but discover and rejoice in the deep meaning of 
the fact. 


a 


XXI 


Was Jesus REALLY THREE Days AND THREE NIGHTS IN THE 
HEART OF THE EARTH? 


Matrurw, in the twelfth chapter of his Gospel and the for- : 
tieth verse, reports Jesus as saying: “As Jonah was three 
days and three nights in the belly of the whale (“sea mon- 
ster,” R. V. margin), so shall the Son of man be three days 
and three nights in the heart of the earth.” According -to 


the commonly accepted tradition of the church Jesus was 


-erucified on Friday, dying at 3 Pp. M., or somewhere between” 
3 Pp. M. and sundown, and was raised from the dead very 


early in the morning of the following Sunday. Many read- 
ers of the Bible are puzzled to know how the interval be- 
tween late Friday afternoon and early Sunday morning can* 


-be figured out to be three days and three nights. It seems 


rather to be two nights, one day and a very small portion 
of another day. 

The solution of this apparent difficulty proposed by many 
commentators is that “a day and a night” is simply another 


way of saying “a day,” and that the ancient Jews reckoned 


a fraction of a day as a whole day, so they say there was a 
part of Friday (a very small part), or a day and a night; 
all of Saturday, another day, or a day and a night; part of 
Sunday (a very small part), another day, or a day and a 
night. ; 

There are many persons whom this solution does not alto- 


‘gether satisfy, and the writer is free to confess it does not 


-patisfy him at all. It seems to him to be a makeshift, and a 


very weak makeshift. 

Is there any solution that is altogether satisfactory? There 
is. : 

The first fact to be noticed in the proper solution is that 


‘the Bible nowhere says or implies that Jesus was crucified 


101 


102 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


and died on Friday. It is said that Jesus was crucified of. 
“the day before the sabbath” (Mark 15:42). As the Jewish 
weekly sabbath came on Saturday, beginning at sunset the 
evening before, the conclusion is naturally drawn that as. 
Jesus was crucified the day before the sabbath He must have 
been crucified on Friday. But it is a well-known fact, to 
which the ible bears abundant testimony, that the Jews had 
other sabbaths beside the weekly sabbath which fell on Sat- 
urday. The first day of the Passover week, no matter upon 
what day of the week it came, was always a sabbath 
(Exodus 12:16; Leviticus 23:7; Numbers 28:16-18). The 
question therefore arises whether the sabbath that followed 
Christ’s crucifixion was the weekly sabbath (Saturday) or 
the Passover sabbath, falling on the 15th of Nisan, which 
came that year on Thursday. Now the Bible does not leave 
us: to speculate in regard to which sabbath is meant in this 
instance, for John tells us in so many words, in John 19:14, 
‘that the day on which Jesus was tried and crucified was “the 
preparation of the Passover’ (R. V.), that is, it was not the 
day before the weekly sabbath (Friday) but it was the day 
before the Passover sabbath, which came that year on Thurs- 
day. That is to say, the day on which Jesus Christ was cruci- 
fied was 


WEDNESDAY. 


John makes this as clear as day. 


The Gospel of John was written later than the other Gos-’ 


pels, and scholars have for a long time noticed that in vari- 
ous places there was an evident intention to correct false 
impressions that one might get from reading the other Gos- 


* 


pels. One of these false impressions was that Jesus ate the 


Passover with His disciples at the regular time of the Pass- 
over. To correct this false impression John clearly states 


that He ate it the evening before, and that He Himself died _ 


on the cross at the very moment the Passover lambs were 
being slain “between the two evenings” on the 14th Nisan 


Se 


7 


. JESUS IN THE GRAVE . 103 


(Exodus 12:6, Hebrew and R.:V. margin). God’s real Paséal - 
Lamb, Jesus, of whom all other pascal lambs offered through 
the centuries were only types, was therefore slain at the very 

_ time appointed of God. 

Everything about the Passover lamb was 


FULFILLED IN JESUS. 


(1) He was a Lamb without blemish and without spot (Ex- 
odus 12:5). (2) He was chosen on the 10th day of Nisan 
(Exodus 12:3), for it was on the tenth day of the month, the 
preceding Saturday, that the triumphal entry into Jerusalem 
was made, since they came from Jericho to Bethany six days- 
before the Passover (John 12:1—that would be six days be- 
fore Thursday, which would be Friday), and it was on the 
next day that the entry into Jerusalem was made (John 12:12 
and following verses), that is, on Saturday, the 10th Nisan. 
It was also on this same day that Judas went to the chief 
priests and offered to betray Jesus for thirty pieces of silver 
(Matthew 26:6-16; Mark 14:3-11). As it was after the sup- 
per in the house of Simon the leper, and as the supper oc- 
_ curred late on Friday, that is, after sunset, or early on Sat- 
urday, after the supper would necessarily be,on the 10th 
Nisan. This being the price set on Him by the chief priests, 
it was the buying or taking to them of a lamb which accord- 
ing to law must occur on the 10th Nisan. Furthermore, they 
put the exact value on the lamb that Old Testament prophecy 
predicted (Matthew 26:15, compare Zechariah 11:12). (3) 
Not a bone of Him was broken when He was killed (John 
19:36, compare Exodus 12:46; Numbers 9:12; Psalm 34:20). 
{4) And He was killed on the 14th Nisan between the even- 
ings, just before the beginning of the 15th Nisan at sundown 
(Bxodus 12:6, R. V., margin). 

If we take just exactly what the Bible says, viz., that Jesus 
was slain before the Passover sabbath, the type is mar- 
vellously fulfilled in every detail, but if we accept the tra- 
ditional theory that Jesus was crucified on ge the type 
fails at many points. 


4 


104 Dif FICULTIES 1.N THE BIBLE 


Furthermore, if we accept the traditional view that Jesus — 
was crucified on Friday and ate the Passover on the regular 
day of the Passover, then the journey from Jericho to Beth- 
any, which occurred six days before the Passover (John 12:1) 
would fall on a Saturday, that is, the Jewish sabbath. Such 
a journey on the Jewish sabbath would be contrary to the 
Jewish law. Of course it was impossible for Jesus to take. 
such a journey on the Jewish sabbath. In reality His tri- 
umphal entry into Jerusalem was on the Jewish sabbath, 
Saturday. This was altogether possible, for the Bible else- 
where tells us that Bethany was a sabbath day’s journey 


. from. Jerusalem (Acts 1:12; compare Luke 24:50). 


4 Furthermore, it has been figured out by the astronomers 


that in the year 30 a. p:, which is the commonly accepted 


year of the crucifixion of our Lord, the Passover was kept 
on Thursday, April 6th, the moon being full that day. The 
chronologists who have supposed that the crucifixion took 
place on Friday have been greatly perplexed by this fact that 
in the year 30 a. p., the Passover occurred on Thursday. One 
writer in seeking a solution of the difficulty suggests that 
the crucifixion may have been in the year 33 A. p., for al- 
though the full moon was on a Thursday that year also, yet 
as it was within two and half hours of Friday, he thinks 


~ that perhaps the Jews may have kept it that day. But when 


We accept exactly what the Bible says, namely, that Jesus 
was not crucified on the Passover day but on “the prepara- 
tion of the Passover,” and that He was to be three days and 
three nights in the grave, and as “the preparation of th2 
Passover” that year would be Wednesday and His resurrec- 
tion early on the first day of the week, this allows exactly 
three days and three nights in the grave. 
To sum it all up, 


Jesus Diep ABouT SUNSET ON WEDNESDAY. 


Seventy-two hours later, exactly three days and three nights, 


at the beginning of the first day of the week (Saturday at 


JESUS IN THE GRAVE 105 


sunset}, He arose again from the grave. When the women 
visited the tomb just before dawn next morning, they found 
_ the grave already empty. So we are not driven to any such 
makeshift as that any small portion of a day is reckoned as 
a whole day and night, but we find that the statement of 
Jesus was literally true. Three days and three nights His 
body was dead and lay in the sepulchre. While His body 
lay dead, He Himself being quickened in the spirit (1 Peter 
3:18) went into the heart of the earth and preached unto 
the spirits which were in prison (1 Peter 3:19). 
This supposed difficulty solves itself, as do so many 
difficulties in the Bible, when we take the Bible as mea 
exactly what it says. 


of the week (that is, eines said to Jesus in speaking of! 
the crucifixion and events accompanying it: “Besides all 
this, today is the third day since these things were done” 
(Luke 24:21), and it is said that if the crucifixion took place 
on Wednesday, Sunday would be the fourth day since these 
things were done. But the answer is very simple. These_ 
- things were done just as Thursday was beginning at sunset 
on Wednesday. They were therefore completed on Thursday, 
and the first day since Thursday would be Friday, the second 
day since Thursday would be Saturday, and “the third day 
since’ Thursday would be Sunday, the first day of the week 
So the supposed objection in reality supports the theory. On 
the other hand, if the crucifixion took place on Friday, by 
no manner of reckoning could Sunday. be made “the third 
day since” these things were done. 
There are 


\ 


MANY PASSAGES IN SCRIPTURE 


that support the theory advanced above and. make it neces: 
sary to believe that Jesus died late on Wednesday. Some of 
them are as follows: “For as Jonah was three days and 






106 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


three nights in the whale’s belly, so shall the Son of Man be 

three days and three nights in the heart of the earth” (Mat- 

thew 12:40). “This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple 
of God and to build it in three days” (Matthew 26:61). “Thou 
that destroyest the temple and buildest it in three days, save | 
Thyself” (Matthew 27:40). “Sir, we remember that that de- 
ceiver said, while He was yet alive, After three days I will 
rise again” (Matthew 27:63). “The Son of Man must suffer 
ymany things, and be killed, and after three days rise again” 
(Mark 8:31). ‘They shall kill Him, and when He is killed, 
after three days He shall rise again” (Mark 9:31, R. V.). 
“They shall scourge Him, and shall kill Him, and after 
three days ‘He shall rise again’ (Mark 10:34, R. V.). “De- 
stroy this temple that is made with hands, and in three days 
I will build another made without hands” (Mark 14:58, R: 
- V.). “Ah, Thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it in 
three days, save Thyself!” (Mark 15:29). “Besides all this, 
today is the third day ‘since these things were done” (Luke 
24:21). “Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this 
temple, and in three days I will raise it up. Then said the 
Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and 
wilt thou raise it up in three days? But He spake of the tem- 
ple of His body. When therefore He was risen from the 
dead, His disciples remembered that He had said this, and - 
they believed the Scripture and the word which Jesus had 

said” (John 2:19-22). 

There is absolutely nothing in favor of Friday crucifixion, 
but everything in the Scripture is perfectly harmonized by 
Wednesday crucifixion. It is remarkable how many prophet- 
ical and typical passages of the Old Testament are fulfilled 
and how many seeming discrepancies in the Gospel narra- 
tives are straightened out when we once come to understand 
that Jesus died on Wednesday and not on Friday. 


XXII 
E F 
How Coutp Jesus ComMEND THE ACTION or THE UNRIGHTEOUS 
STEWARD? 


A very puzzling passage in the Bible to many is the story of. 
the unrighteous steward recorded in Luke 16:1-14. Once 
when this-passage was assigned by the International Sunday 
School Committee, a lady told me that she had made up her 
mind not to teach it. She said: tar 

“The three points of difficulty are: First, that Jesus should Z 
hold this dishonest scoundrel up for our imitation; second, 
that the Lord should commend the unrighteous steward; and 
third, that Jesus should command the disciples to make them- 
selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness.” 

We will take up these three points in order. By noticing 
exactly what is said, we will soon see that in each point, if 
we adhere strictly to the very words.of Jesus, the difficulty 
will disappear, and that the incident instead of staggering us 
will be found to be profoundly instructive along the line 
-_ where instruction is greatly needed today. 


1. Why did Jesus “hold this dishonest scoundrel up for 
-our imitation’? ¥ 
. The answer is found in the text itself. Jesus did not hold 
him up for imitation. 

He held him up, first of all, as a warning of what would 
overtake unfaithful stewards, ‘how they would be called to 
give account of their stewardship, and their stewardship be 
taken from them. 

Having taught this solemn and salutary lesson, one that is 
much needed today, Jesus went on to show how ‘the sons 
of this world are for their own generation wiser than the 
‘sons of the light” (v. 8, R. V.). They are wiser at this 
point, for they use their utmost ingenuity and put forth their 
utmost effort to make present opportunities count for the 
107 ; 


~ 


X 


108 DITYICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


hour of future need. “The sons of light” oftentimes do not 
do that. Indeed, how many twentieth century sons of light, 
who profess to believe that eternity is all and time is neth- 
ing in comparison, are using their utmost ingenuity and put- 
ting forth their utmost efforts to make the opportunity of 
the present life count most for the needs of the great eternity 
which is to follow? 


Tue AVERAGE PROFESSED CHRISTIAN 


today uses the utmost ingenuity and puts forth his utmost 
effort to, bring things to pass in business and other affairs of 
this brief present world, but when it comes to matters that 
affect eternity he is content with the exercise of the least 
possible amount of ingenuity and with the putting forth of 
the smallest effort that will satisfy his conscience, 

Jesus did not point to the steward’s dishonesty to stir our 
emulation—He plainly rebuked his dishonesty, but He did 
point to his common sense in using the opportunity of the 
present to provide for the necessities of the future, and would 
have us learn to use the opportunities of the present to pro- 
vide for the necessities of the future, the eternal future. 
Hven in pointing out his common sense, Jesus carefully 
guarded His statement by saying that the unjust steward 
was “wiser for his own generation.” He knew only the life 

_that now is, and from that narrow and imperfect standpoint 
he was wiser than ‘the son of light” from his broad and true 
standpoint of knowing eternity, but an eternity for which he 
is not wise enough to live wholly. 

There are other utterances of our Lord and Saviour, where 
wicked and selfish men are held up by way of contrast to 
show how much more godly men, or even God Himself, may 
be expected to act in the way suggested, for instance, Luke 
18:6, 7; 11:5-8; Matthew 12:11, 12. 

The first difficulty then in the passage has disappeared upon 
careful scrutiny of exactly what is said. Jet us pass on to 
the second difficulty. , 


COMMENDING UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD 109 


- 2 Why did the Lord “commend the unrighteous steward”? 
The answer to this, too, is very simple, namely, that 


Tue Lorp JESUS DID NoT COMMEND 
the unrighteous steward. 

This is evident by a single glance at the Revised Version 
of verse 8. In the Authorized Version, it is true, it reads: 
“The lord commended the unrighteous steward.” Now if 
we were to leave it standing in that way there might be some 
possible doubt as to whether “the lord’ meant was the “lord” 
mentioned in the passage, (the lord of the steward), or. 
whether it was the Lord Jesus, who relates the parable. The | 
Revised Version removes this possible ambiguity by trans- 
lating “his lord” (that is, the steward’s lord), who com- 
mended the unrighteous steward. It was not the Lord Jesus 
who commended him, but his own lord, and he only com: 
mended his shrewdness, That the interpretation of the Re- 
vised Version is the correct interpretation of the verse*is be- 
yond dispute, for the Lord Jesus is the speaker, and it is 
He that speaks about the one who does the commending as 
“the lord,” evidently not speaking about Himself, but about 
the lord of the unjust steward. it is only by very careless 
Teading of the passage that anyone could make “the lord” of 
this passage the Lord Jesus. The Lord Jesus, so far from 
commending him, flatly calls him “the unrighteous steward,” 
and furthermore just below warns against unfaithfulness in 
stewardship (vs. 10, 11). 

So the second difficulty entirely disappears on a careful 
noticing of what is said, Let us pass on to the third difficulty. 


3. Why does Jesus “command His disciples to make them- 
selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness’? 
This difficulty disappears when we get 


Tur CoRRECT AND EXAcT BIBLICAL DEFINITIONS 


of the terms used. 


110 : DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE - 


First of all, what does “the mammon of unrighteousness” 
mean? It means nothing more or less than money. Money ig 
called “the mammon of unrighteousness” because money is such 
a constant minister to sin and selfishness (as, for example, 
the case of the scoundrel above mentioned), and because “the 
love of money is a root of all kinds of evil’ (1 Timothy 
‘8:9, 10, R. V.). Jesus in passing would lift a word of warn- — 
ing against the perils of money by speaking of it as “the mam- 
mon of unrighteousness.” He often packed a whole sermon 
into a single phrase. o : 

In the second place, what does “of” mean when our Lord 
tells us to make to ourselves friends “of’’ the mammon of 
unrighteousness? 

The answer to this question is found in the Revised Ver- 

' gion, where “of” is properly rendered “by means of.” So 
then what Jesus bade His disciples do (and what He bids us 
do) was to make themselves friends by means of money, 
that is to say, to so use the money God entrusted to them 

_in the present life as to make friends for themselves by their 
use of it, and (as the context shows) to make these friends 
among God’s poor and needy ones, who would go to the eter- | 
nal “tabernacles” (v. 9, R. V.) and be ready to give us, their. 

- benefactors who had used our money to bless them, a royal 
welcome when our life here on earth is ended and so our 
money has failed. In-other words, Jesus simply put into a 
new and striking form His oft-repeated teaching, not to keep 
our money hoarded, not to spend it on ourselves, but to spend 
it in doing good, especially to God’s needy ones, and so invest 
it in heavenly and abiding securities (compare Matthew 
6:19, 21; 19:21, 29; 25:40; 1 Timothy. 6:17-19; Proverbs 
19:17). ‘ 

That this teaching of Jesus was clearly understood by His 
hearers is proved by v. 14 (R. VY.) that follows. In this 
verse we are told that the Pharisees, “who were lovers ‘of 
‘money, heard all these things, and they scoffed at Him” (R. V.). 

So the third and last difficulty has disappeared, and this 


_ COMMENDING UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD 111 


passage stands out in glorious light, teaching with great force 
a lesson that our day greatly needs to learn, namely, that 


MONEY IS A STEWARDSHIP, 


and that he who seeks to enjoy it in the brief present, and 
not ratner so to expend it that it will bring him interest for 
all eternity, is a great fool, and even the petty shrewdness 
9f “the sons of this world’ rebukes him. 


XXTIL 


WerRE JESUS AND PAUL MISTAKEN AS TO THE TIME OF ©UB 
Lorp’s RETURN? 

Ir is constantly taught not only by unbelievers Dut ever tn 
, many Christian pulpits and in some of our theological semi- 
_ naries that Jesus and Paul were mistaken~as to the time of ~ 

our Lord’s return. In an interesting little pamphlet published 

by the American Unitarian Association, in which five minis- 
ters, once preaching in orthodox churches but now Unitar 
Sians, tell how they became Unitarians, one writer says: 

“But in a lecture one day on Thessalonians, our professor 
remarked that Paul evidently was mistaken as to the time of 
the coming of Christ. I was thunderstruck, and stared rig- 
idly at the speaker, while my pencil dropped from my fingers. 
It is true, then, after all the denunciation of the preachers. 
Higher criticism isn’t the false, shallow thing that it was 
made out to be. I can hear yet, after many years, the echo 
of that slamming book in the vacant library, and that cedar 
pencil clattering to the floor.” 

Evidently this young man was easily shaken. If a pro- 
fessor in a theological seminary said anything, that settled 
it for him. The professor must certainly be correct, and all 
other professors who taught differently, and all others who 
studied the Bible for themselves, must be wrong. The fact 
that the professor made such a remark-as this was proof 
positive that higher criticism was not “the false, shallow 
thing it was made out to be.” I do not wonder that such a 
young man should wind up as a Unitarian preacher. But~- 
even theological professors are sometimes mistaken, and this 
professor was mistaken. The mistake was altogether the pro- 
fessor’s, and not at. all Paul’s, as we shall see in a few 
moments, 


S 112 


THE TIME OF OUR LORD’S RETURN j13 
Let us begin with Jesus, and not with. Paul. 
Was JESUS MISTAKEN 


as to the time of His own return? In proof that He was, 
Matthew 24:34 and parallel passages in the other Gospels 
(Mark 13:30; Luke 21:32) are constantly cited. Our Lordg 
is here reported as saying: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
This generation shall not pass away until all these things be 
accomplished” (Matthew 24:34, R. V.). And it is held that 
Jesus here plainly teaches that the generation living on earth 
at the time that He spoke these words would not have passed 
away before all the things recorded in the preceding verses 
had come to pass; and of course this would be a mistake. 

But if anybody will read the entire passage carefully, he 
will see that Jesus here teaches nothing of the kind. In the 
context He is teaching : 


How RapipLy THINGS WILL CULMINATE AT THE END, 


that when certain signs begin to appear events will ripen so_ 
fast that the generation then living when these signs appear, 
will not have passed away until all things belonging to that 
particular epoch shall have come to be. These signs men- 
tioned as indicating the speedy close of the age are found in 
verse 29,—the sun darkened, the moon not giving her light, 
stars falling from heaven, and the powers of heaven shaken. 
These signs did not occur while our Lord was on earth, nor 
in that generation, but when they do occur, then things will 
ripen so fast that the sign of the Son of man shall be seen 
in heaven, and the Son of man shall come in clouds with 
power and great eg before the generation then existing 
passes away. 

That this is the true (ivekuretation of the passage is evi- 
dent from»verse 33, where Jesus says distinctly; “When ye 
see all these things know ye that He is nigh, even at the 
doors” (R. V. and v. 32). Here Jesus teaches that just as 


114 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


the putting forth of tender shoots and young leaves is an 
indication that summer is nigh, so the appearing of these 
signs will be an indication that the Lord is nigh, so nigh 
that that generation will not pass away until the Lord actu- 
ally comes. And “this generation” of verse 34 clearly refers, 
if taken in the context, to the generation existing when these 
signs shall appear. 

The connection is just the same in Mark 13, where similar 
words are found. If possible, it is even clearer in Luke 
21:25-82, where the words are found again. So the whole 
difficulty is not with what Jesus actually said, but with the 
failure of expositors to carefully. notice exactly what the 
thought in mind was when Jesus uttered the words to which 
objection has been made. 


ANOTHER INTERPRETATION OF THIS VERSE 


has been offered which is full of suggestion, namely, that the 
word rendered “generation” in this passage means often- 
times “race” or “family,” “men begotten of the same stock,” 
and this doubtless is the meaning of the word used. In fact, 
this is the meaning given as the second meaning of the word 
in Thayer’s Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, and 
the meaning of, “age” (or “‘generation”) is the fourth mean- 
ing given. Taking this as the meaning of the word, the pass- 
age is interpreted to mean that this “race’ or generation 
(chat is, the Jewish race) shall not pass away (that is, shall 
maintain its race identity) until the coming of the Lord. It 
is a remarkable fact,—indeed, one of the most remarkable 
facts of history,—that though the Jews have for centuries 
been driven from their native land and scattered throughout 
all the nations, they have always retained their race identity. 
This thought may also have been in Jesus’ mind, and the 
utterance thus have been a pregnant utterance with a fulness 
of meaning that cannot be exhausted by one interpretation. 
But from the context, the primary meaning seems to be the 
one given in the first. explanation above. 


‘ 


THE TIME OF OUR LORD’S RETURN 115 


Another passage urged to show that Jesus was mistaken 
about the time of His return is Matthew 16:28: “Verily, 
I say unto you, there be some standing here that shall not 
taste of death till they see the Son of man coming in His 
Kingdom.” (See also the parallel passages, Mark 9:1; Luke 
9:27.) It is held that in this passage Jesus teaches that His 
coming again would be before some of those standing there 
should die. 

But here again in the context is found the entire solution 
of the difficulty. There ought to be no chapter division where 
Matthew 17 begins (the chapter divisions are not a part of 
the original Scriptures, and there should be no chapter di- 
vision here). We should read right on as we do in the paral- 
lel passages in Mark and Luke, and if we read right on and 
notice what is said, the meaning of Jesus’ words becomes as 
elear as day. The words were spoken as 


A PROPHECY OF THE TRANSFIGURATION, 


the account of which immediately follows with the closely 
connecting article “And.” Three of those standing with 
Jesus when He spoke the words were to go up with Him into 
the mount, and there in the mount they were to see His 
true glory shining forth in His face, in His person, in the 
very raiment He wore (Matthew 17:2), they were to hear 
the Father declare: ‘This is My beloved Son, in whom I am 
well pleased” (v. 6). In all this they saw “the Son of man 
coming in His kingdom.” If events had been allowed to take 
their natural cours®, Jesus then and there would have been 
manifested to the world as He was to the disciples, as King; 
but Jesus chose rather, in order that men might be saved, to 
go down from this mount of transfiguration where He was 
manifested in His glory as coming in His kingdom, where 
the kingdom of God came with power (Mark. 9:1), where 
Peter and James and John saw the kingdom of God (Luke 
9:27), to die as an atoning sacrifice on the cross of Cavalry. 
It is a significant fact in this connection that the subject of 


/ 


2 


é 


116 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


which Moses and Elijah, who appeared talking with Him in 
the mount, spoke was the decease which He. should accom- 
_plish at Jerusalem (Luke 9:31). 

Here again then we see that the mistake was not on Jesus” 
part, but arises from the carelessness of the interpreter in 
overlooking the context in which the words of Jesus are 
found, and the interpretation that is put upon the words by 
the writers themselves immediately after they have recorded 
them. So all these arguments of the destructive critics built 
upon our Lord’s being mistaken as to the time of His own 
return, fall to the ground. 


Bur was not PauL MISTAKEN? 


It is constantly said that he was by those who contend 
against the verbal accuracy of the New Testament writings. - 
It is said over and over again that “Paul evidently was mis- 
taken in his early writings as to the time of the coming of 
Christ.” In defense of this contention the words of Paul con 
tained in 1 Thessalonians 4:15-18, R. V., are brought forward. 
Paul here says: “For this we say unto you by the word of 
the Lord that we which are alive and remain unto the com- 
ing of the Lord shall in no wise precede them that are fallen 
_asleep,” etc. It is said that these words make it evident that 
Paul expected to be alive when the Lord came. 

What Paul may have expected I do not know. Very likely 
he did hope to be alive when the Lord came, but he certainly 
did not teach that he would be alive, and no one holds any 
.tkeory of inspiration that maintains that the Bible writers 
did not entertain mistaken hopes. All that the one who con- 
tends for the plenary theory of inspiration and absolute ve- | 
racity and accuracy of Bible teaching is that the Bible writ- 
ers nowhere teach error. That they may have entertained 
erroneous notions on a great many things no one questions. 
All that is maintained is that if they hac such erroneous 
notions, the Holy Spirit kept them from teaching them. 

- Paul certainly does not teach here that he would be alive 


THE TIME OF OUR LORD’S RETURN as iy 


when the Lord came. He does teach that some persons would 
have fallen asleep and others would be alive. As he was still 

alive, he naturally put himself in the class to which he be- 
longed at the time of writing, “Those which are. alive” (that 
are left). He certainly was alive at the time. He certainly 
was one of those left at that time. That he should continue 
to be alive he does not say. Very likely he hoped to be. 
Every believer who has a true understanding of the doctrine 
of the coming of the Lord naturally entertains a hope that 
he may be alive when the Lord comes. I hope that I may be, 
but not for a moment do I venture to teach that I will be, 
but I do know that I am alive at this moment. I know that 
I am not one of those who have as yet fallen asleep, and if 
I were differentiating between the two classes, those who are 
alive and those who are fallen asleep, I should certainly put 
myself with those who are alive, and would not be mistaken 
in so doing. Paul knew perfectly well that the Lord Himself 
had taught long before he wrote these words to the Thessa- 
Jonians that it is not for us to know times or seasons which 
the Father hath set within His own authority (Acts 1:7, 
R. V.). He did not attempt to know times or seasons which 
his Master had so distinctly taught it was not for him, or 
for us, to know; but he did teach by “the word of the Lord” 
Himself that “the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven 
with a shout, with the voice of the archangel and the trump 
of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which 
are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them 
in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we 
ever be with the Lord.” In the context, verses 13 and 14, 
Paul is urging those who are alive (and are left) at that 
time not to sorrow over those who had already fallen asleep, 
and as he was among the class that were alive (that were 
left) up to that time, he naturally and properly and correctly 
put himself with them and not with those over whom they 
were not to sorrow, namely, those who had already fallen 


asleep. 2 


118 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


; So in this passage instead of finding that the Holy Spirit 
left Paul to make mistakes, in point of fact the Holy Spirit 


Kept Him rrom Maxine A MISTAKE 


even in regard to the matter about which in his own longing 
he might have entertained a mistaken hope. The whole pass- 
age then instead of being an argument against the verbal 
accuracy of the Scriptures is an argument for it, and shows 
how the men whom the Holy Spirit chose to be the vehicles 
of His revelation to us were kept absolutely from putting 
into their teaching any mistaken hope which they might have 
entertained. Our critical friends who are hunting so persist- 
ently for some mistake in the teaching of Paul will have to 
' carry their search farther, and possibly the experience of the 
young theological student that was so thunderstruck by his 


-. professor in the orthodox school saying that Paul was mis- 


taken as to the time of the coming of Christ and who there: 
fore launched forth into Unitarianism, may learn to be cau- 
tious lest his teaching ‘prove equally disastrous to some other 
weak-minded young men. 


& 


XXIV 


Dip Jesus Go into THE ABODE OF THE DEAD, AND PREACH TO THE 
SPIRITS IN PRIsoN? AND IS THERE ANOTHER PROBATION AFTER 
DratH? . 


I THinK I have never had a question box in any city but 
someone put in the question: “What does I Peter 3:18-20 
mean when it says that Jesus went and preached unto the 
spirits in prison?” - 

A very simple answer to this question is that it means just 
exactly what it says. But let us notice carefully exactly what 
it does say: 

“Because Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous 
for the unrighteous, that He might bring us to God; being - 
put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit; in 
which also He went and preached unto the spirits in prison, 
which aforetime were disobedient, when the longsuffering of 
God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a-prepar- 
ing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved through 
water” (R. V.). 

The point of difficulty with this passage with many people 
is the thought that seems to be conveyed that Jesus actually 
went into the abode of the dead and there preached to spirits 
in prison; and this would seem to imply to many that there 
is an opportunity for repentance after death. 

Many have attempted to explain the verses, in order to 
avoid this conclusion, by saying that the spirit here mentioned 
in which Jesus was quickened is the Holy Spirit, and that in 
the Holy Spirit Jesus Christ preached through Noah while _ 
the ark was preparing to the spirits which were then diso- . 
bedient and who consequently are now in prison. 

One writer, William Kelly, has argued for this inter- 
pretation with a great deal of ability and skill and with a 

‘large display of knowledge of Greek grammar. Of Mr. Kelly’s 


119 


ef 


- 


120 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


unusual knowledge of Greek there can be no question, but 
mone the less I think he fails to make out his case. After 
all has been said, it seems to me this interpretation is an 
evasion. z 

“The spirit” in verse 18 cannot mean the Holy Spirit. 

A contrast is being drawn between the two parts of Christ’s 
nature, the flesh in which He was put to death and the spirit 
in which He was quickened (that is, made alive) at the time 
He was put to death in the flesh. In His spirit in which He 

“was made alive, while the body lay motionless in death, He 
went and preached unto the spirits in prison. It seems to me 
that this is 


Tur ONLY FAIR INTERPRETATION 


to put upon the words, and if we are to take the Scriptures 
_ as meaning exactly what they say, this is what we must take 
them as meaning. 

But does not this involve 


A SECOND PROBATION 


for those who have died in disobedience to God and who con- 
sequently have gone to the place of penalty and suffering? 
Even if it did, we ought not to dodge it on that account, we 
ought to be fair with the Scriptures whether they conform 
to our theories or not. But in point of fact, this does not 
in any wise involve a second probation for those who have 
died in disobedience and who consequently have gone to the 
place of penalty and suffering. 

This is apparent if we notice three things: TFirst, if we 
notice to whom Jesus preached; second, if we notice what He 
preached 10 them; and third, if we notice what were the re- 
sults of His preaching. 

First of all, then, 

ra 
To WHom Dm Jesus PrREAcH? 


“The spirits in prison.” But who were these spirits in prison? 


} 

PREACHING TO THE SPIRITS IN PRISON “j[2i -- 
Were they the spirits of departed wicked men? There is 
nothing whatever to indicate that they were. The word 

“spirits” is*never used in this unqualified way of the spirits 
of departed men, but it is used constantly of angelic or supere 
natural beings (Hebrews 1:7, 14; Matthew 10:1; Mark 3:11; 
Luke 6:18; 7:21; Acts 19:12; 1 John 4:1; and many other 
places). The only place in Scripture where “spirits” is used — 
of men in any way analogous to this is Hebrews 12:23. The - 
constant use is of angels or other supernatural beings. If 
we so interpret it here, the preaching was not at all to men 
who had been wicked in the days of Noah but to supernatural - 
beings who had been disoledient in the days of Noah and 
who were now in prison in consequence of this disobedience. 

_ Are there any Scripture passages that hint that there were 
supernatural beings whe were disobedient in the days of Noah 
and who were consequently now in prison? There are, In 
Genesis 6:1 we are told that “the sons of God saw the daugh- 
ters of men that they were fair, and they took them wives of 
all which they chose.” By “the sons of God” in : is passage 
many commentators understand the des:endants of Seth, a ~ 
godly man, but if we are to interpret Scripture by Scripture 
they seem rather to have been angelic beings. There seems 
to be a clear reference to this passage in Jude 6, where we 
are told of “angels which kept not their own principality but 
left their proper habitation’ and in consequence were kept 
in everlasting chains in darkness into the judgment of the 
great day (R. V.), and in the next verse we are told that 
Sodom and Gomorrah in like manner with these (that is, 
these angels) gave themselves over to fornication and went 

_after strange flesh (R. V.). Now from this it seems clear 
that the sin of the angels was going after strange flesh, the 
very sin mentioned in Genesis 6:2. Furthermore, we read in 
_2 Peter that “God spared not the angels that sinned but cast 

them down to hell and committed them to darkness to be 
reserved unto judgment” (2 Peter 2:3, 4, R. V.). The clear 
{mplication of all this is that the spirits to whom Jesus 
‘preached when He went to the abode of the dead were the 


192 _ DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 
angels that sinned in the days of Noah and who were then 
_in prison in consequence of that sin. 
Let us notice, in the next place, - 


WHAT THE WoRD TRANSLATED “PREACH” 


in 1 Peter 3:18-20 means. There are two words in constant 
use in the New Testament which are translated “preach.” 
One means “to preach the Gospel,” the other “to herald,” to 
herald the king or kingdom. It is the latter of these twe 
‘words which is used in this passage. There is not a sugges- 
tion in the passage that the Gospel with its offer of salvation 
was, preached to anyone. The King and the kingdom were 
heralded, So then even if we take “the spirits in prison” to 
mean the spirits of men who had died in sin, there is not a 
hint of another probation. We are simply told that the King 
and the kingdom were heralded te them. Christ has been 
heralded as King in heaven, earth and hell. 
In the third place, notice 


THE RESULTS OF THIS PREACHING. 


There is not a word of suggestion that any of the spirits in 
prison were cunverted by it. If they were we must learn it 
from other sources than this passage, but there is not a sin- 
gle passage anywhere in the Scriptures that suggests that 
there were any conversions or any salvation resultant from 
this preaching. The purpose of the preaching evidently was 
not the salvation of those already lost but the proclamation 

of the kingdom and the King throughout the universe. The 
time is coming when .every knee shall bow, of ‘things in 
heaven and things on earth and things under the earth, and 
every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the 
glory of God the Father (Philippians 2:10, 11). But that 
enforced confession of Christ on the part of disobedient men 
and angels will bring them no salvation. We must all take 
aur choice of either confessing and accepting Christ of eur 


~, 


t 


PREACHING TO THE SPIRITS IN PRISON 193 


own free will now and obtaining salvation thereby, or of con- 
fessing Him and acknowledging Him against our will in the 
world to come. Confess Him we must sometime. Bow the 
knee to Him we must some day. Happy the man who gladly 
now in this time of probation bows the knee to Jesus and 
confesses that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the 
Father, and foes rot wait until that day when he is forced 
to do it and when the confession will bring him no salvation! 


INDEX OF BIBLE TEXTS 


GENESIS 





OA a oe Stee 43 
See taeeiaim aigreieisitis sisveiote « 43 
ED My siete sora 6 Bale trace 42 
Eig OO a oteke icteleniane 43 
GRC 2AS iia tig hazeleistsiss 34 
7 ES Mein perience EAS 42 
LOS, Ghowanat s.cneweAis 43 
VAs civ cei ves eral are 

12°:3),.5, 6, 462.05. 103 
AD irchO arcmin Perch a tite 102 
UPI OYA ar acon enone 34 
ALT eres rescues stale aici 42 
ae OMiileriselee scien so 78 

LEVITICUS 
DPI ssse septa le pees LOZ 
NUMBERS 

DEMO ets aeawarsede seas 103 
Ber Oe eraperatrelclnspierpslaraate 51 
DB LO=1 Be wrsssicte gsiere -102 
BAe LD; LG: ve cicewises se 

31:17, 18.. 51 
$1: 21-35, Pri eran 50 


DEUTERONOMY 


3:1 Sa orGconche as 35 
20: 1018; ze 17..46, nee 


: wcceceeeecscore 


JOSHUA 


Or 
Late ate 
Perens) 

a 


13: ae ee vate ee 
22:19, 20-22....... “a1 


2 KINGS 





1 CHRONICLES 


PAG& 
2121 ......0.s200s 20 88 


2 CHRONICLES 
LS evanataceea dees elaedil: 





PROVERBS 
LOTT csaswcgese sel dO 
SLO aaa ces Sv cow 

ISAIAH 
Geile Porters SSielelsie es 80 
VSc Ube Sipe ceetewrcene 70 
BATU sos atoeealeneeties 31 
AD VAS eannmeeeetannte 32 
BOS 7 cau cuncicnts einen 67 

JEREMIAH 
A DBA T aoe aa eeRe et 32 
Bp Ip Geren na ance 91 
220: farce as cokes 100 

DANIEL 
BL Ga, wets cates seein 
Dr27. sas cicereis Bisel sie cow 





; i 
INDEX 138 
JOEL LUKE PHILIPPIANS 
PAGE PAGE PAGER 
Be Se 2Ouis she slesee ss BSOwerS2Se.tecknaas aes 209) 9G hashes ania 80 
< 6:18 Berne tects 121 22t0F 11 veoe ol 
JONAH : Stersisuvereeunlalorstaele 1 
VT seeseseeeeeeses 74 OTe pa de Aen aae COLOSSIANS 
32y Dy Ooeeeerrereeee EA BoB sae anne 3 TOS 22219 core eee: 85 
SelO. torescxc wean 87 16: 1-14 ree Me ee 107 
B56) Teese as. 0 
ZECHARIAH 21:25-32 ....113, 114 *1 THESSALONIANS 
14 “OL BOs Faden ceeceres £:15-18 woeeledce Cee he 
ae x 
Oe, 91 2 THESSALONIANS - 
3 ES Pence roe 44 
ZELO=1 2 yk eee 72 
1 TIMOTHY 
6: 9 16/1790. ile 
. 2 TIMOTHY 
28 Srckeadeoraed 99 
A HEBREWS 
12 i, PDO. tne 108 20: ie Dn bg Beene 84 4:7, 14.. 
T9940) sees. 18, 74, 75, 10:28, 29 
77, 101, 106 11:17 
Ee SG erae 115 ACTS is%94-% 
DRDO en wicicacie ares DLO TN TAS ATA, w.gecallt— at 368 
19:21, 29.......... Ay 1h TO ea ahem eeanbe 104. Sa aa 
24:34 UL TELA Maes BO ees fee ctr eeige « 99 
OA Me eisiat cis nielaieisitiee 110 ToGo avon che 92, 93 
PGC 1G orcas siclercie ve 103 £5 Lae SO os See ov ae 1:17 
IGGL Mt awe ces 106 ipa a Tee ee sean ha CON a ES OO 
PAIS TUR OMB prec oee 90 13:22. 23; 64, 99 
QTIBT eee seer sense RR G12 Pee ee 1 1 PETER 
27:40, 63......00+- LOGS RHoDT Ones... Dah 2eS3, alates eRe 120 
BBY cise ec8a $18.6. 165, 118, 1a2 
; ROMANS BEE Oiots carareleeatnetcls oi 
MARK 
1 eee SE AR AS eae 99 
BELL vaseeeveessese 121 A it eel ABs oe gig eee 
PBL seeeeeee sees eee PAIR 98 oe cate 44 miehge Ladies eeielaitaielstels 
Geile N tees. Fes 115 eS Ba 28 Sean tak DRA Getta. aera eee hc 5G 
IAs tar cic io aisle the a9) 3):2 TO Sie OG 1 ee eee ei SEh6 agcesesaetcececs --9 
Os A tec ie claves sie ene 106 TSHIDS, cc oeeead., GO 
eae inia dist ais 113, eS 1 JOHN ‘ ’ 
Pies) hee 108 > + 2°CORINTUIANS. > 451 ticce sient ec 121 
Te eS aoe 81, 82 
Za ceth ODT BP Gie ss vies sce 4 
Meat tse. 106 2:15, ps ee otras ap JUDE 
P5242 occas 102 oe 
6357 ass. e388, 84 Verse 6 ......50- + 123 





WHOL Oty LIBRARY - 
CLAREMONT, CAR 


a a fGen toxepan 











































The Bible Institute Colportage AReasion 


\ x 
826 NORTH LA SALLE STREET, CHICAGO, ILL. 






Had its beginning in D. L. Moody’s conviction and under- 
standing of the vital need for low-priced books carrying 
the gospel message to all classes. It was after he had tried 
in vain to secure books for inquirers, at a local book store 
in a Wisconsin town, that he set about to establish a Col- 
portage Department in connection with his Chicago school 
for training Christian workers. Founded in 1894, in connec- | 
tion with the Bible Institute for Home and Foreign Missions, 

as the school was then called, this Association has continued 

to deliver, through means of the prinied page, messages that 
convict of sin, quicken the devotional life, arouse to evan- 
gelistic effort and missionary activity. It has carried the 
gospel where church privileges were wanting, or not em- 
braced, and is doing so yet. Young and old have felt its 
influence to counteract the opposition of Satan. 

Terms are cheerfully quoted to those who would seriously 
consider “book missionary,” or colportage work in co-opera- 
tion with this Association. Previous experience not essen- 
tial. Full printed instructions and suggestions promptly 
provided. Your spare time can be employed very profitably. 
The more time given, the better the results. 


SOME REASONS FOR ENGAGING IN COLPORTAGE WORK 


It is God’s work, preéminently so, in aim, method and blessing 
attendant. Not merely book selling, but a definite form of Chris- 
tian work. 

A means is furnished for carrying the gospel, and messages of 
comfort, into thousands of homes where pastors or Christian work- 
ers cannot, or perhaps seldcm, if ever, visit, 4 

Opportunities for doing personal work, enlisting men’s lives and 
sympathies in the cause of Christ are ever open to the colporter. 

The work can be undertaken in various ways.—from home to 
home, in churches, in connection with a permanent book table or 
stand, in various societies, conferences and. through the mail. 

The plan is workable and thoroughly tried as one of the great 
avenues through which the non-church goer can be reached. It is 
applicable in YOUR community, whether village, town or city. 

Employment is presented you at the smailest outlay of money 
and the least possible risk of failure or loss. The remuneration is 
in accordance with interest, time and energy expended. 


The eye of faith sees the rapid extension of this work, with some 
opposition, no doubt, but there is need for many more helpers to 
co-operate in bringing things to pass. Diligent and consecrated men 
and women are needed and you are urged to write for further in- 


formation. , 
WHAT MAY NOT BE ACCOMPLISHED! 


a 


NUMERICAL CATALOGUE oF 


THE MOODY COLPORTACE LIBRARY 


A series of books by well-known Christian authors, uidenominational, 


thoreughly evangelical, for all classes of recders, in several languages. © All| 
y uniform in size and style, attractive paper c. vers, 4%4 x 634 inches. ch. 


1 All. of Grace. 
2 The Way to God. D.L. Moody 

3 Pleasure and Profit in Bible Study. 

. L. Moody 

4 Life, Warfare and Victory. D. W. Whittle 
& Heaven. D.L. Moody 

6 Prevailing Prayer, D. L. Moody 

@ The Way of Life. Various authors 

9 To the Work. L. Moody 
16 According to Promise. _C. H. Spurgeon 
11 Bible Characters, D.L, Moody 

12 Gospei ea does and seo Sermons. 


Whit 
13 “And Peter.” J. W. Chapman 
15 Light on Life’s Duties. F. B. Meyer 
16 Point and Purpose in Story and Saying 
18 The Goca Shepherd. Life of Christ 
19 Good Tidings. Talmage and others 


Cc. H. Spurgeon. 


20 Sovereign Grace. D. L. Moody 


; a5 Zerstles from Nature. 


21 Select Sermons. L. Moody 

22 Fifty Temperance Tales 

23 Nobody Loves Me—A Story. Mrs.0.F, 

Walton 

24 The Empty Tomb. Various Authors 

26 Sowing and Reaping. D.L. Moody 

28 Probable Sons—A Story. Amy LeFeuvre 

80 Good News. Robert Boyd 

82 The Secret of Guidance, F. B. Meyer 

34 The Second Coming of Christ __ 

86 Sunday Talks tothe Young. Josiah Meu 
Mrs, Alfred 


Gatty 
40 The Story of a Surrendered Life, or 
Kadesh-Barnea. J- W. Chapman 


A 42 Whiter Than eae! and Little Dot.— 


, 64 Our Bible. 





Stories. Mrs. O. F. Walton 

44 The Overcoming Life. M 

46 A Royal Exile, T. D. Talmage 

48 The Prodigal. Various Authors 

49 The Spirit-Filied Life. John MacNeil 
50 Jessica’s First Prayer—A Story. Stretton 
61 A Castaway. F. B. Meyer. , 

52 Heaven on Earth. A. C. Dizon 

53 Select Northfield Sermons 

54 Absolute Surrender. Andrew Murray 
55 Possibilities. J.G. K. McClure 

56 What is Faith?. Spurgeon, Moody and 


others 
57 Christie’s Old Organ—A Story. Walton 
58 Naaman the Syrian. A.B. Mackay 
60 Weighed and Wanting. Addresses on 
the Ten Commandments. D. L. 


Moody F 

61 The Crew of the Dolphin—A Story. 
Hesba Stretton 

63 Meet for the Master’s Use. F.B. Meyer 

C, Leach and R. A. Torre 

65 Alone in London—A Story. Hesbe 
Stretton 

66 Moody's Anecdotes 

$7 Drummond’s Addresses 

68 The Mirage of Life. W. BH. Miller 

68 Children o’ the Bible | 

7O The Power of Pentecost. Thomas Waugh 

71 Men of the Bible. D. L. Moody 


orrey |} 


ea 
0. F 
Andrew 


WA Peep : Behind the Scenes. 
n 
73 The School of Obedience, 


urray 
74 Home Duties. R. T. Cross 
76 Moody’s Stories 
77 The True Estimate of Life. G. Campbell 
Morgan 
78 The Robber’s Cave—A Story. A.L.O.B. 
81 ‘Thoughts for the Quiet Hour 


83 ths Shorter LifeofD.L. Moody. Vol.I. §j, 


P. D. Moody and A. P. Fitt 
85 Revival of a Dead Church, 
Broughton 
86 Moody’s Latest Sermons 
87 A Missionary Penny—A Story. 
88 Calvary’s Cross. Ree Whittle end 
others 
89 How to Pray. R.A. 


L. G. 


90 Little King Davie—A sto Nellie Hellis | 
- L. Moody 


91 Short Talks. 
93 Pilgrim’s Progress. John Bunyan 
95 Our Lord’s Return, or What is “M is “Maran- 
atha’’? illings 
96 Kept for the Master's when Eavereal 
98 Back to Bethel. F. B. M 
100 Up from Sin. RE aunhiow 
101 Ten Commandments, G. 


Morgan 3 
102 Popular Amusements and the Christian 


Life. Sinks 
104 Answers to Prayer, from George Muller’s 


Narratives 
105 The Way Home. D.L. Moody 


108 Life of Adoniram Judson. 
Jobnston 
109 ate os David Livingston. 


‘ Mrs. J. He 

ter, JT. 

111 Lite. of He Henry Martyn and Samuel Mills, 
Mrs. Sarah J. Rhea 


112 Life of Robert Moffat. M.L. Wilder 
114 oy aveet to Young Christians. Robt. 


115 Ross Sete Story. 

116 Difficulties in the Bible. R. A. Torrey 

119 Practical and Perplexing Questions Ane 
swered. R.A. Torrey 

120 Satan and the Saint. James M. Gray 

121 ie ere Day Life and Religion. 


122 Great cnpethe of Sacred History. James 


»M. Gray 
128 Salvation from Start to Finish. James } 


. Gray 
126 Life in a Look. M.S. Baldwin 
12€ Burton Street Folks. Anna P. Wright 
127 Bible lla ae Expisined. Jamos M. 


Gra; 
128 ey on Our Lord’s Coming. “C.H.M." 
129 The Christian: His Cresd and Conduct. 
William Evans 
130 Intercessory Prayer, J.G. K. McClure 
131 From Death Unto Life, James H. Brookes 
132 Ruth, the Moabitess. Henry eet 
133 “Thus Saith the Fords”. ts D. W. 


¥. 
Simic Or THE FOREGOING TITLES ARE ISSUED IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES— 


48K ' FOX: DETAILED INFORMATION 


@URTHER NUMBERS ANNOUNCED LATER} 


L.c.w. 


Campbell ff 


Julia He 


A.C. # 


Whittle f 


¥ 


Anna P. Wright § - 


~ 


+ 


Usefal Tracts For: Varied Needs 





For the Unsaved 


By LADY HOPE. 

Bessie’s Choice. A touching story 
that shows the meaning of Jesus as our 
Guide, Suitablefor children, 8 pages. 
Doz., 15c; 100, $1.00. ~ 
By E.E. FISK. 

A Gospel Alphabet. Being six and 
twenty salvation texts, in neat booklet 
of 16 pages, with covers, size 24x 3% 
inches. Each, 3c; doz., 25c, 

By CHARLES C. COOK. 

The Offense of the Cross. The cross 
reveals man’s true nature. A tract for 
the self-righteous. 16 pages. Each, 
4c; doz., 35c; 100, $2.00. 

By OSWALD J. SMITH. 

Three Solemn Facts. All will not 
be saved; the majority will -be lost; 
many will perish who expect to be 
saved. Astrong appeal to the indiffer- 
ent and self-righteous. 16 pages. Each, 
3c; doz., 30c; 100, $2.00: 

By VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Howto Becomea Christian. A2-page 
leaflet, with “How to Livethe Christian 
Life’ on one side. The essentials 
plainly put. Per doz., 4c; 100, 25ce 


Salvation First! A one-page leaflet; 
large type, for broadcast distribution, 
Doz., 5c3 100, 20c; 1,000, $1.25. 

Three Gospel Dialogues. D, L. 
Moody, Rev. Marcus Rainsford, and 
Mr. Radstock discuss “What it is to be 
a Child of God,”’ ““How to Become a 
Christian,”’ and “What it is to be Con- 
verted. 32 pages. Each, 5c; doz., 40cz 


i ° e 








For Believers 


By E. E. FISK. 

An Alphabet of Comfort. For those 
in trouble. Neat 16-page booklet, with 
ae eg 24%, x3'%4 inches. Each, 3c; 

0z., 25c. 


ey. a L. BUCHANAN. 

isti R i bili e 1 
V festctoaree Pita chap shay Wty 
doz., Gc; 100, 40c; 1,000, $3.00. 


By EDWARD A. MARSHALL, 

Seven Dispensations. A 2 - page 
leaflet describing and cha the dis- 
pensations of God to man, 10Z., 4c 
By F. W. FARR. 

Ten Reasons for Loving His Appear- 
ing. Awakening reasons, scriptural, 
important, and plainly put, teaching 
“that blessed hope.” 12 pages. Each, 
3c; doz., 25c; 100, $1.50. 

By A. F. G, 

Two PagesFrom “Daily Light.”’Con- 
solation and help in time of trouble; a 
testimony by A. F. G, Doz.. 6c; 100, 40c. 
By CHARLES A. BLANCHARD, 

What is Confession of Sin? The con- 
dition of pardon; To whom shall we 
confess? What shall we _ publicly 
confess? 12 pages. Each, 3c; doz. 
25c; 100, $1.50. 


Messages of Cheer 


Artistically printed cards with just 
the message needed, to insert in letters 
and distribute in hospitals and homes, 

An Absolute Certainty. “All things 
work together for good to them that 
love God.” 


An Unseen Reality. Words of com- 
fort and hope by George Muller, 

Blessed Assurance. “Fear not: for 
I have redeemed thee.’”’ 

My Prayer. “That in all things He 
might have the pre-eminence.” 

Each of the above on neat, tinted card 
3 x 5% inches, nicely printed in two 
colors. Per doz., 12c; 100, 75c. 

Fret Not, He loves thee. Faint not, 
He holds thee, Fear not, He keeps 
thee. Doz., 15c; 100, $1.00. 

God’s Message to You. Isaiah 43: 
2, 3 neatly printed on white card 
24 x Sh in. Doz. 10cz 100, 40cs 

You Can Do More than pray after 
you have prayed, but you cannot do 
more than pray until you have prayed. 
Doz., 15c; 100, $1.00. 


A Sample Package of all the tracts 
named on this page will besent for 15e, 


SE <TC SN SE SEA oe, 
THE BIBLE INSTITUTE COLPORTAGE ASSOCIATION, 826 North Lo Salle Strect- Chicage 


HOW MAY WE SERVE YOU? : 





HECK in the squares below, the items in which you are 

especially interested and for which you desire information, 

and don’t forget to write plainly your name and address in the 

space designated for it. Then enclose this page in an envelope, 
and mail to us. The reply will be prompt. 


Addtess THE BIBLE INSTITUTE COLPORTAGE ASSOCIATION 
826 La Salle Avenue, CHICAGO. 


[] Please send particulars of 
your ‘‘book missionary”’ 
work. I am personally inter- 
ested in reaching the unchurched 
with the Gospel in print. 


[| Please send a sample of the 
Gospel Alphabet Booklets, 
suitable for S. S, rewards, letter 
enclosure, hospital use, for 
*‘comfort’’ bags, etc. 


[] Please send a catalogue of 
Bibles and Testaments. 


[| Please send descriptive cir- 
cular and specimen pages of 
your latest hymn book, suitable 
for Sunday-school, prayer meet- 
ing and all-around church use. 


Fe] Please send free specimen 
copies of the Gospel tracts 
you publish. 


My Name is 


My Address is 


es Please put’ my name and _ 
address upon your perma- 
nent mailing list for announce- 
ments and samples of new pub- 
lications and aids to Christian 
work. 


=] Please send catalogue of 
Enamel Texts and Wall 
Mottoes, showing a large vari- 
ety, suitable for use in home, 
Sunday-schoo], church, mission 
and hospital. 


Es] Please send a copy of 
‘*Good Books You Should 
Have,’’ a unique list of seven 
hundred of the world’s best 
books on Bible study, evangele 
istic work, Ghristian biography, 
Sunday-school methods, works 
of devo:ion and Bible commen- 
taries. 





GIVE BTREET AND NUMBER, BOX OR R.F,D., iF PART OF ADDRESS 


; Qty or Town ee 


State or Province —_________ 


fam Especially Interested in > 
WERE MENTION tig, 5. WORK"? “*TEACHING.*? ‘‘SINGING.?” “¢PRCACHING.?? ETC.. AS THE CASE MAY BE 


we 








Three Valuable Books! 








_ By REV. JAMES M. GRAY, D.D. 


BIBLE PROBLEMS. EXPLAINED 


The author for years has been in receipt of questions from cor- 
respondents in all parts of the world, bearing on problems of the 
Bible, the church and Christian experience. ‘They have had 
attention in due course, and many of these inquiries are now culled 
and presented (anonymously) with their answers for the benefit of 
others. For convenience the matter is arranged under the follow- 


ing-named heads: 
Questions on the Bible. Applied Christianity. 
The Doctrine of God. The Future Life. 


The Person of Christ. Israel, or the Jews. 


The Church. Second Coming of Christ and the : 


The Christian Ministry. Millennium. e 
Christian Doctrine and Life. Satan, Angelology and Modern Isms.’* 


Besides this, the contents are readily accessible under the addi- 


tional classifications of ‘‘Subject Index’’ and ‘‘Bible Texts.’? ' 


By REV.’R. A. TORREY, D.D. 
DIFFICULTIES AND ALLEGED ERRORS AND 
| CONTRADICTIONS IN THE BIBLE 


After a general statement of the case, indicating the classes of 
difficulties and suggesting their treatment, the author discusses 
specific difficulties, such as: 


The First Chapter of Genesis. The Sacrifice of Jephthah’s anbeiec! 
The Antiquity of Man. *“Impure’* Bible Stories. 

Where Did Cain Get His Wife? Jonah and “the Whale.” 

Sehovah’s Command to Offer Isaac. Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 
God Hardening Pharaoh’s Heart. “Contradictions” and ““Mistakes” in 
The Slaughter of the Canaanites. the Bible. 


The Sun Standing Still. Etc., etc. 


PRACTICAL AND PERPLEXING QUESTIONS 
ANSWERED 


Over 150 answers to difficulties met in Bible Study. Christian 
work and personal experiencé. All the ever-recurring questions 
about Christian conduct and belief anticipated and answered. 





te 


16mo, 125 pages each, paper, 30c, sith, 75c net 





THE BIBLE INSTITUTE COLPORTAGE ASSOCIATION 
826 North La Salle Street, Chicago 














BS480 .159 
Torrey, R. A. (Reuben Archer), 1856-192 
Difficulties and alleged errors and con 





Torrey, Reuben Archer, 1856-1928. 
Difficulties and alleged errors and contra- 
dictions in the Bible / by R.A. Torrey. -- 
Chicago : Bible Institute Colportage Associat: 
c1907. 
125p. 3; 18cm. 


Wn. 216," 
Includes index. 


1. Bible--Eyldences, authority, etc. I. Ti 


AAIV5 5 








