TORREY 





Meth 








Reet R.A 





3) 


The Library 


of the 
School of Theology 
at Claremont 


1325 North College Avenue 
Claremont, CA 91711 

















DIFFICULTIES AND ALLEGED ERRORS AND 
CONTRADICTIONS IN THE BIBLE 






By R. A. TORREY, D. D. 













For Bible Study 


Difficulties and Alleged Errors and 
Contradictions in the Bible 
12mo, Cloth, - - - - net 50c. 


What the Bible Teaches 
Tenth Edition. 8vo, Cloth, - - $2.50. 


The Divine Origin of the Bible 
Its ee ey and Power Demonstrated. 
. 12mo, Cloth, - = 50c. 


How to Study the Bible for Greatest ie 
Methods that yield results. 12mo, Cloth, - 


For the Christian Life 
How to Succeed in the Christian Life 
Cloth, 50c net. Paper, - - net 25c 
How to Pray 
Cloth, - - - 50c. 


aja to Obtain Fullness of Power ae 
The Baption With the Holy Spirit 
12mo, Cloth, - - 50c. 


A Vest Pocket Chmpantan 
for Christian Workers. Flexibleleather, - net 25c. 


For Revival Addresses 


The Bible and Its Christ 
New Edition of ‘ Talks to Men.” 
Cloth, 75c net. Paper, - - - net 25c. 


Revival Addresses 
12mo, Cloth, - - - net $1.00. 


Real Salvation and Whole-Hearted Service 
A. second volume of Revival Addresses. 
loth, - - - - - net $1.00. 


For Revival Work 


How to Bring Men to Christ 
Paper cover, 25c net. Cloth, = - - 5c. 


How to Work for Christ 
A compendium of effective methods. 8vo, Cloth. $2.50 


How to Promote and ae 


Conduct a Successful Revival a 
New Edition, - ° net $1.00. 



















DIFFICULTIES 


AND ALLEGED ERRORS 
AND CONTRADICTIONS 


IN THE BIBLE 


BY 


R. A. TORREY __- 


Author of ‘‘ Anecdotes and Illustrations,’’ ete. 


New Yorr Cuicaco Toronto 
Fleming H. Revell Company 


Lonpon and EDINBURGH 





Copyright, 1907, by 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


All rights reserved 


New York 158 Fifth Avenue 
Chicago: 80 Wabash Avenue 
Toronto: 25 Richmond St., W. 
London: 21 Paternoster Square 
Edinburgh: 100 Princes Street 


CHAPTER 


at. 
Tit; 


AMS 


VI. 
VII. 


VIII. 


rx. 


SE 


XII. 


XIII. 
XIV. 


XV. 


XVI. 


CONTENTS 


Introduction : he 

A General Statement of ge tee 

Classes of Difficulties 

How Shall We Deal with the Difficulties 
of the Bible? 

Is the First Chapter of itenests ante 
ical and Scientific? 

The Antiquity of Man According es the 
Bible and According to Science 

Where Did Cain Get His Wife? 

Jehovah’s Command to Abraham to 
Offer up Isaac as a Burnt Offering 

God Hardening Pharaoh’s Heart 

The Wholesale Slaughter of the Canaan- 
ites by God’s Command 

The Story of Joshua Oonanding af 
Sun to Stand Still 

Deborah’s Praise of Jael, “the iets 
deress ” 

The Sacrifice of J aaitah's Dough 

Impure Bible Stories : 

David’s Sin . : : ; é 

The Imprecatory Psalms 

Does the God of Truth and Le Send 
Lying Spirits and Evil Spirits to Men? 


PAGE 


1? 


26 


29 


34 
37 


40 
43 


4Y 
53 
5? 
59 
61 
66 
70 


%3 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 
XVII. Jonah and the Whale . Z ee 
XVIII. Some Important “ Contradictions: rare 
the Bible . ; ‘ 2 - 80 
XIX. “ Mistakes” in the Bible ¢ d 93 
XX. The Two Contradictory Genealogies of 
Jesus the Christ : , .- 101 


XXI. Was Jesus Really Three Days and Three 
Nights in the Heart of the Harth? . 104 

XXII. How Could Jesus Commend the Action 
of the Unrighteous Steward? . Bye thi 

XXIII. Were Jesus and Paul Mistaken as to the 
Time of Our Lord’s Return? . . 114 

XXIV. Did Jesus Go into the Abode of the Dead 

and Preach the Gospel to the Spirits 

in Prison? And is There Another 
Probation after Death? . : :, 2h 
Index of Bible Texts . . e « 125 
Index of Subjects .. aye tthe » 128 


INTRODUCTION 


Tuts book does not attempt to take up in detail every 
conceivable difficulty that could be found in the Bible. 
It would take many volumes to do that. I have simply 
taken up those objections of which the modern infidel 
makes the most, and which are most puzzling to many 
Christians. In going around the world, I have given 
people in many lands an opportunity to ask questions 
concerning matters that puzzle them. Everywhere I go, 
the questions are largely the same; and in this book I 
have taken up the questions which have been most fre- 
quently put to me, or which apparently present the 
greatest difficulty. 

In regard to the questions which I have not fraahed 
upon, one can easily see that if so many difficulties are 
answered which he had supposed were unanswerable, 
the overwhelming probability is that all the other dif- 
ficulties could be answered also if there were time and 
space to take them up. 





I 
A GENERAL STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Every careful student and every thoughtful reader of 
the Bible finds that the words of the Apostle Peter con- 
cerning the Scriptures, that there are some things in 
them hard to be understood, which they that are un- 
learned and unstable wrest unto their own destruction 
(II Peter 3:16), are abundantly true. Who is there of 
ms who has not found things in the Bible that have 
puzzled us, yes, that in our early Christian experience 
have led us to question whether the Bible was, after all, 
the Word of God. We find some things in the Bible 
which it seems impossible for us to reconcile with other 
things in the Bible. We find some things which seem 
incompatible with the thought that the whole Bible is 
of Divine origin and absolutely inerrant. It is not wise 
to attempt to conceal the fact that these difficulties 
exist. It is the part of wisdom, as well as of honesty, 
to frankly face them and consider them. What shall we 
say concerning these difficulties that every thoughtful 
student will sooner or later encounter? 

1. The first thing we have to say about these difficul- 
ties in the Bible is, that, from the very nature of the 
case, difficulties are to be expected. Some people are 
surprised and staggered because there are difficulties in 
the Bible. For my part, I would be more surprised 
- and staggered if there were not. What is the Bible? 
It is a revelation of the mind and will and character 
and being of an infinitely great, perfectly wise, and 
absolutely holy God. God Himself is the Author of 
this revelation, But to whom is the revelation made? 
To men, to finite beings, to men who are imperfect in 

9 


10 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


intellectual development and consequently in knowledge, 
and who are also imperfect in character and conse- 
quently in spiritual discernment. The wisest man meas- 
ured on the scale of eternity is only a babe, and the 
holiest man compared with God only an infant in moral 
development. There must then, from the very neces- 
sities of the case, be difficulties in such a revelation, 
from such a source, made to such persons. When the 
finite tries to understand the infinite, there is bound 
to be difficulty. When the ignorant contemplate the 
utterances of one perfect in knowledge, there must be 
many things hard to be understood, and some things 
which to their immature and inaccurate minds appear 
absurd. When beings, whose moral judgments as to 
the hatefulness of sin and as to the awfulness of the 
penalty that it demands are blunted by their own sin- 
fulness, listen to the demands of an absolutely holy 
Being, they are bound to be staggered at some of His 
demands, and when they consider His dealings, they 
are bound to be staggered at some of His dealings. 
These dealings will appear too severe, too stern, too 
harsh, too terrific. 

It is plain that there must be difficulties for us in 
such a revelation as the Bible has been proven to be.2 If 
someone should hand me a book that was as simple to 
me as the multiplication table, and say, “This is the 
Word of God. In it He has revealed His whole will 
and wisdom,” I should shake my head and say, “I 
cannot believe it; that is too easy to be a perfect revela- 
tion of infinite wisdom.” There must be in any com- 
plete revelation of God’s mind and will and character 
and being, things hard for the beginner to understand, 
and the wisest and best of us are but beginners. 

2. The second thing to be said about these difficul- 
ties, is, that, a difficulty in a doctrine, or a grave 


1The proof that the Bible is the Word of God is given in the 
author’s book, ‘‘The Bible and Its Christ.’’ 


A GENERAL STATEMENT aly | 


objection to a doctrine, does not, in any wise, prove the 
doctrine to be untrue. Many thoughtless people fancy 
that it does. If they come across some difficulty in the 
way of believing in the Divine origin and absolute iner- 
rancy and infallibility of the Bible, they at once con- 
clude that the doctrine is exploded. That is very 
illogical. Stop a moment and think, and learn to be 
Teasonable and fair. There is scarcely a doctrine in 
science generally believed to-day that has not had some 
great difficulty in the way of its acceptance. When 
“the Copernican theory,” now so universally accepted, 
was first proclaimed, it encountered a very grave diffi- 
culty. If this theory were true, the planet Venus 
should have phases as the moon has, but no phases 
could be discovered by the best glass then in existence; 
but the positive argument for the theory was so strong 
that it was accepted in spite of this apparently un- 
answerable objection. When a more powerful glass 
was made, it was found that Venus had phases, after 
all. The whole difficulty arose, as most all of those 
in the Bible arise, from man’s ignorance of some of 
the facts in the case. The nebular hypothesis is com- 
monly accepted in the scientific world to-day. But 
when this theory was first announced, and for a long 
time afterward, the movements of the planet Uranus 
could not be reconciled with the theory. Uranus seemed 
to move in just the opposite direction from that in 
which it was thought it ought to move in accordance 
with the demands of the theory, but the positive argu- 
ments for the theory were so strong that it was accepted 
in spite of the inexplicable movements of Uranus. If 
we apply to Bible study the common sense logic recog- 
nized in every department of science (with the excep- 
tion of Biblical criticism, if that be a science), then 
we must demand that if the positive proof of a theory 
is conclusive, it must be believed by rational men, in 
spite of any number of difficulties in minor details. He 


12 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


is a very shallow thinker indeed who gives up a well- 
attested truth because there are some apparent facts 
which he cannot reconcile with that truth. And he is 
a very shallow Bible scholar, who gives up his belief in 
the Divine origin and inerrancy of the Bible because 
there are some supposed facts that he cannot reconcile 
with that doctrine. There are in the theological world 
to-day many shallow thinkers of that kind. 

3. The third thing to be said about the difficulties in 
the Bible is that there are many more, and much greater 
difficulties in the way of the doctrine that holds the 
Bible to be of human origin, and hence fallible, than 
there are in the way of the doctrine that holds the Bible 
to be of Divine origin, and hence infallible. Oftentimes 
a man will bring you some difficulty and say, “ How do 
you explain that if the Bible is the Word of God? ” and 
perhaps you may not be able to answer him satisfac- 
torily. Then he thinks he has you, but not at all. 
Turn on him, and ask him “ How do you account for the 
fulfilled prophecies of the Bible if it is of human origin? 
How do you account for the marvellous unity of the 
Book? How do you account for its inexhaustible 
depth? How do you account for its unique power in 
lifting men up to God?” etc., etc., etc. For every in- 
significant objection he can bring to your view of the 
Bible, you can bring very many more deeply significant 
objections to his view of the Bible. And any really 
candid man, who desires to know and obey the truth, 
will have no difficulty in deciding between the two views. 
Some time ago a young man, who was of a bright mind, 
and unusually well read in sceptical and critical and 
agnostic literature, told me he had given the matter 
a great deal of candid and careful thought, and as a 
result he could not believe the Bible was of Divine 
origin. I asked him, “Why not?” He pointed to a 
certain teaching of the Bible that he could not and 
would not believe to be true. I replied, “ Suppose for 


A GENERAL STATEMENT vq aa 


a moment that I could not answer that specific diffi- 
culty, that would not prove that the Bible was not of 
Divine origin. I can bring you many things far more 
difficult to account for on the hypothesis that the Bible 
is not of Divine origin, than this is on the hypothesis 
that the Bible is of Divine origin. You cannot deny the 
fact of fulfilled prophecy. How do you account for 
it if the Bible is not God’s Word? You cannot shut 
your eyes to the marvellous unity of the sixty-six books 
of the Bible, written under such divergent circumstances 
and at periods of time so remote from one another. 
How do you account for it, if God is not the real author 
of the Book back of the forty or more human authors? 
You cannot deny that the Bible has a power to save 
men from sin, to bring men peace and hope and joy, 
to lift men up to God, that all other books taken to- 
gether do not possess. How do you account for it if 
the Bible is not the Word of God in a sense that no 
other book is the Word of God?” The objector did not 
answer. The difficulties that confront one who denies 
that the Bible is of Divine origin and authority are 
far more numerous and vastly more weighty than those 
which confront the one who believes it to be of Divine 
origin and authority. 

4, The fourth thing to be said about the difficulties 
in the Bible is, the fact that you cannot solve a diffi- 
culty does not prove it cannot be solved, and the fact 
. that you cannot answer an objection does not prove at 
all that it cannot be answered. It is remarkable how 
often we overlook this very evident fact. There are 
many, who, when they meet a difficulty in the Bible 
and give it a little thought, and can see no possible 
solution, at once jump at the conclusion that a solution 
is impossible by anyone, and so they throw up their 
faith in the inerrancy of the Bible and in its Divine 
origin. It would seem as if any man would have a 


wee ee ke 


14 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


beings so limited in knowledge as we all undeniably are 
to say, “ Though I see no possible solution to this diffi- 
culty, someone a little wiser than I might easily find 
one.” If we would only bear in mind that we do not | 
know everything, and that there are a great many things 
that we cannot solve now that we could very easily solve 
if we only knew a little more, it would save us from 
all this folly, Above all, we ought never to forget that 
there may be a very easy solution to infinite wisdom 
even to that which to our finite wisdom—or ignorance— 
appears absolutely insoluble. What would we think of 
a beginner in algebra, who, having tried in vain for 
half an hour to solve a difficult problem, declared that 
there was no possible solution to the problem because 
he could find none. A man of unusual experience and 
ability one day left his work and came a long distance 
to see me in great perturbation of spirit because he 
had discovered what seemed to him a flat contradiction 
in the Bible. He had lain awake all night thinking 
about it. It had defied all his attempts at reconcilia- 
tion, but when he had fully stated the case to me, in a 
very few moments I showed him a very simple and 
satisfactory solution of the difficulty. He went away 
with a happy heart. But why had it not occurred to 
him at the outset that, though it appeared absolutely 
impossible to him to find a solution, that after all a 
solution might be easily discovered by someone else? 
He supposed that the difficulty was an entirely new one, 
but it was one that had been faced and answered long 
before either he or I were born. 

5. The fifth thing to be said about the difficulties in 
the Bible is that the seeming defects of the Book are 
exceedingly insignificant when put in comparison with 
tis many and marvellous excellencies. It certainly re- 
veals great perversity of both mind and heart that men 
spend so much time expatiating on such insignificant 
points that they consider defects in the Bible, and pass 


A GENERAL STATEMENT 15 


absolutely unnoticed the incomparable beauties and 
wonders that adorn and glorify almost every page. 
Even in some prominent institutions of learning, where 
men are supposed to be taught to appreciate and under- 
stand the Bible, and where they are sent to be trained 
to preach its truth to others, much more time is spent 
on minute and insignificant points that seem to point 
toward an entirely human origin of the Bible than is 
spent upon studying and understanding and admiring 
the unparallelled glories that make this Book stand 
apart from all other books in the world. What would 
we think of any man who, in studying some great 
masterpiece of art, concentrated his whole attention 
upon what looked like a flyspeck in the corner. A large 
proportion of the much vaunted “ critical study of the 
Bible” is a laborious and scholarly investigation of 
supposed flyspecks. The man who is not willing to 
squander the major portion of his time in this erudite 
investigation of flyspecks, but prefers to devote it to 
the study of the unrivalled beauties and majestic splen- 
dours of the Book, is counted in some quarters as not 
being “scholarly and up to date.” 

6. The sixth thing to be said about the difficulties in 
the Bible is that the difficulties in the Bible have far 
more weight with superficial readers of it than with 
profound students. Take a man like the late Colonel 
Ingersoll, who was totally ignorant of the real contents 
and meaning of the Bible, or that class of modern 
preachers who read the Bible for the most part for the 
sole purpose of finding texts to serve as pegs to hang 
their own ideas upon. To such superficial readers of 
the Bible these difficulties seem of immense importance, 
but to the one who has learned to meditate upon the 
Word of God day and night they have scarcely any 
weight at all. That rare man of God, George Miller, 
who had carefully studied the Bible from beginning to 
end more than one hundred times, was not disturbed 


16 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


by any difficulties he encountered, but to the man who 
is reading it through for the first or second time 
there are many things that perplex and stagger. 

%. The seventh thing to be said about the difficulties 
in the Bible is that they rapidly disappear upon careful 
and prayerful study. How many things there are in 
the Bible that once puzzled and staggered us, but which 
have since been perfectly cleared up and no longer 
present any difficulty whatever. Every year of study 
finds these difficulties disappear more and more rapidly. 
At first they go by ones and then by twos and then by 
dozens and then by scores. Is it not reasonable then 
to suppose that the difficulties that still remain will all 
disappear upon further study? 


II 
CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES 


Att the difficulties found in the Bible can be included 
under ten general heads. 

1. The first class of difficulties: those that arise 
from the teat from which our English Bible was trans- 
lated. No one, as far as I know, holds that the Eng- 
lish translation of the Bible is absolutely infallible 
and inerrant. The doctrine held by many is that the 
Scriptures as originally given were absolutely infalli- 
ble and inerrant, and that our English translation is a 
substantially accurate rendering of the Scriptures as 
originally given. We do not possess the original manu- 
scripts of the Bible. These original manuscripts were 
copied many times with great care and exactness, but 
naturally some errors crept into the copies that were 
made. We now possess so many good copies that by 
comparing one with another, we can tell with great 
precision just what the original text was. Indeed, for 
all practical purposes the original text is now settled. 
There is not one important doctrine that hangs upon 
any doubtful reading of the text. But when our Author- 
ized Version was made, some of the best manuscripts 
were not within reach of the translators, and the science 
of textual criticism was not so well understood as it 
is to-day, and so the translation was made from an im- 
perfect text. Not a few of the apparent difficulties in 
the Bible arise from this source. For example, we are 
told in John 5:4 that “an angel went down at a cer- 
tain season into the pool, and troubled the water: who- 
soever then first after the troubling of the water 
stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease he 
had.” This statement for many reasons seems improba- 
ble and difficult to believe, but upon investigation we 

17 


18 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


find that it is all a mistake of the copyist. Some early 
copyist, reading John’s account, added in the margin his 
explanation of the healing properties of this intermit- 
tent medicinal spring. A late copyist embodied this 
marginal note in the body of the text, and so it came 
to be handed down and got into our Bibles. Very 
properly it has been omitted from the Revised Version. 
The discrepancies in figures in different accounts of 
the same events, as, for example, the differences in the 
ages of some of the kings as given in the text of Kings 
and Chronicles, doubtless arise from the same cause, 
errors of copyists. Such an error in the matter of fig- 
ures would be very easy to make, as in the Hebrew 
figures are made by letters, and letters that appear very 
much alike have a very different value as figures. For 
example, the first letter in the Hebrew alphabet de- 
notes one, and with two little points above it, not larger 
than flyspecks, it denotes a thousand. The twenty- 
third, or last, letter of the Hebrew alphabet denotes four 
hundred, but the eighth letter of the Hebrew alphabet, 
that looks very much like it, and could be easily mis= 
taken for it, denotes eight. A very slight error of the 
copyist would therefore make an utter change in figures. 
The remarkable thing when one contemplates the facts 
in the case, is that so few errors of this kind have been 
made. 

2. The second class of difficulties: those that arise 
from inaccurate translations. For example, in Matthew 
12:40 Jonah is spoken of as being in the whale’s belly. 
Many a sceptic has made merry over the thought of a 
whale with the peculiar construction of its mouth and 
throat swallowing a man, but if the sceptic had only 
taken the trouble to look the matter up, he would have 
found the word translated “whale” really means “sea 
monster,” without any definition as to the character 
of the sea monster. We will take this up more in detail 
in considering the story of Jonah. So the whole diffi- 
culty arose from the translator’s mistake, and the scep- 


CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES 19 


tic’s ignorance. There are many sceptics to-day who 
are so densely ignorant of matters clearly understood by 
many Sunday School children that they are still harping 
in the name of scholarship on this supposed error in 
the Bible. 

3. The third class of difficulties: those that arise 
from false interpretations of the Bible. What the Bible 
teaches is one thing, and what men interpret it to mean 
is oftentimes something widely different, Many diffi- 
culties that we have with the Bible arise not from 
what the Bible actually says, but from what men in- 
terpret it to mean. A striking illustration of this is 
found in the first chapter of Genesis. If we were 
to take the interpretation put upon this chapter by 
many interpreters, it would indeed be difficult to recon- 
cile it with much that modern science regards as estab- 
lished. But the difficulty is not with what the first 
chapter of Genesis says, but with the interpretation that 
is put upon it. But there is no contradiction whatever 
between what is really proven by science and what is 
really said in the first chapter of Genesis. This will 
come out clearly in the chapter on The First Chapter 
of Genesis. 

Another difficulty of the same character is that with 
Jesus’ statement that He should be three days and three 
nights in the heart of the earth. Many interpreters 
would have us believe that He died Friday night and 
rose early Sunday morning, and the time between these 
two is far from being three days and three nights, but 
we shall see later that it is a matter of Biblical inter- 
pretation, and the trouble is not with what the Bible 
actually says, but with the interpretation that men put 
upon the Bible. We will take this matter up at length 
in the chapter “ Was Jesus actually three days and three 
nights in the heart of the earth?” We shall see that 
the difficulty is not at all with what the Bible says, but 
with the interpretation that men put upon the Bible. 

4. The fourth class of difficulties: those that arise 


20 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


from a wrong conception of the Bible. Many think that 
when you say the Bible is the Word of God, of Divine 
origin and authority, you mean that God is the 
speaker in every utterance it contains; but this is not 
at all what is meant. Oftentimes God simply records 
what others say, what good men say, what bad men 
say, what inspired men say, what uninspired men say, 
what angels and demons say, and even what the devil 
himself says. The record of what they said is from 
God and absolutely true, but what those other persons 
are recorded as saying may be true or may not be true. 
It is true that they said it, but what they said may not 
be true. For example, the devil is recorded in Genesis 
3:4 as saying, “Ye shall not surely die.” It is true 
that the devil said it, but what the devil said is not 
true, but an infamous lie that shipwrecked our race. 
That the devil said it, is God’s word, but what the devil 
said is not God’s word but the devil’s word. It is 
God’s word that this was the devil’s word. Very many 
careless readers of the Bible do not notice who is talk- 
ing, God, good men, bad men, inspired men, uninspired 
men, angels or devil. They will tear a verse right out 
of its context regardless of the speaker and say, “ There, 
God said that,” but God said nothing of the kind. God 
said that the devil said it, or a bad man said it, or a 
good man said it, or an inspired man said it, or an un- 
inspired man said it, or an angel said it. What 
God says is true, namely, that the devil said it, or a 
bad man, or a good man, or an inspired man, or an un- 
inspired man, or an angel, said it. But what they 
said may or may not be true. It is very common 
to hear men quote what Eliphaz, Bildad, or Zophar 
said to Job, as if it were necessarily God’s word be- 
cause it is recorded in the Bible, in spite of the fact 
that God disavows their teaching and says to them, “ Ye 
have not spoken of me the thing which is right.” (Job 
42:7. It is true that these men said the thing that God 
records them as saying, but oftentimes they gave the 


CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES 21 


truth a twist and said what is not right. A very large 
share of our difficulties arise from not noticing who is 
speaking. The Bible always tells us and we should 
always note. In the Psalms we have sometimes what 
God said to man, and that is always true; but on the 
other hand we often have what man said to God, and 
that may or may not be true. Sometimes, and far 
oftener than most of us see, it is the voice of the 
speaker’s personal vengeance or despair. ‘This ven- 
geance may be and often is prophetic, but it may be the 
wronged man committing his cause to Him to whom 
vengeance belongeth (Rom. 12:19), and we are not 
obliged to defend all that he said. In the Psalms we 
have even a record of what the fool said, viz., “ There 
is no God” (Ps. 14:1). Now it is true that the fool 
said it, but the fool lied when he said it, It is God’s 
word that the fool said it, but what God reports the 
fool as saying is not God’s word at all, but the fool’s 
own word. So in studying our Bible, if God is the 
_ speaker, we must believe what He says; if an inspired 
man is the speaker, we must believe what he says; if 
an uninspired man is the speaker, we must judge for 
ourselves, it is perhaps true, perhaps false; if it is 
the devil who is speaking, we do well to remember that 
he was a liar from the beginning, but even the devil may 
tell the truth sometimes. 

5. The fifth class of difficulties: those that arise 
from the language in which the Bible was written. The 
Bible is a book for all ages and for all kinds of people, 
and therefore it was written in the language that con- 
tinues the same and is understood by all, the language 
of the common people and of appearances. It was not 
written in the terminology of science. Thus, for ex- 
ample, what occurred at the battle of Gibeon (Josh. 
10:12-14), was described in the way it appeared to 
those who saw it, and the way in which it would be 
understood by those who read about it. There is no 
talk about the refraction of the sun’s rays, etc., but 


22 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


the sun is said to have “ stood still” (or tarried) in the 
midst of heaven. It is one of the perfections of the 
Bible that it was not written in the terminology of 
modern science. If it had been, it would never have 
been understood until the present day, and even now it 
would be understood only by a few. Furthermore,. as 
science and its terminology are constantly changing, 
the Bible, if written in the terminology of the science 
of to-day, would be out of date in a few years; but being 
written in just the language chosen, it has proved the 
Book for all ages, all lands, and all conditions of men. 

Other difficulties from the language in which the 
Bible was written arise from the fact that large portions 
of the Bible are poetical and are written in the language 
of poetry, the language of feeling, passion, imagina- 
tion, and figure. Now if a man is hopelessly prosaic, 
he will inevitably find difficulties with these poetical 
portions of the inspired Word. For example, in Psalm 
18 we have a marvellous description of a thunderstorm, 
but let the dull, prosaic fellow get hold of that, for 
example the 8th verse, and he will be head over heels 
in difficulty at once. But the trouble is not with the 
Bible, but with his own stupid, thickheaded prosaicness. 

6. The sixth class of difficulties: those that arise 
from our defective knowledge of the history, geography, 
and usages of Bible times. For example, in Acts 13:7 
Luke speaks of “ the deputy ” (or more accurately “ the 
proconsul,” see R. V.), of Cyprus. Roman provinces 
were of two classes, imperial and senatorial. The ruler 
of an imperial province was called a “ propraetor,” 
of a senatorial province a “ proconsul.” Up to a com- 
paratively recent date, according to the best information 
we had, Cyprus was an imperial province and therefore 
its ruler would be a “ propraetor ”; but Luke calls him 
a “proconsul.” This certainly seemed like a clear case 
of error on Luke’s part, and even the conservative com- 
mentators felt forced to admit that Luke was in slight 
error, and the destructive critics were delighted to find 


CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES 23 


this “mistake.” But further and more thorough in- 
vestigation has brought to light the fact that just at 
the time of which Luke wrote, the senate had made an 
exchange with the emperor, whereby Cyprus had become 
a senatorial province, and therefore its ruler a procon- 
sul; and Luke was right after all and the literary critics 
were themselves in error. Time and time again further 
researches and discoveries, geographical, historical, and 
archeological, have vindicated the Bible and put to 
shame its critics. For example, the book of Daniel 
has naturally been one of the books that infidels and 
destructive critics have most hated. One of their 
strongest arguments against its authenticity and verac- 
ity was that such a person as Belshazzar was unknown 
to history, and that all historians agreed that Nabonidus 
was the last king of Babylon, and that he was absent 
from the city when it was captured; and so Belshazzar 
must be a purely mythical character, and the whole 
story legendary and not historical. Their argument 
seemed very strong. In fact, it seemed unanswerable. 
But Sir H. Rawlinson discovered at Mugheir and other 
Chaldean sites clay cylinders, on which Belshazzar (Bel- 
saruzur) is named by Nabonidus as his eldest son. 
Doubtless he reigned as regent in the city during his 
father’s absence, an indication of which we have in his 
proposal to make Daniel third ruler in the kingdom 
(Daniel 5: 16)—he himself being second ruler in the 
kingdom Daniel would be next to himself. So the 
Bible was vindicated and the critics put to shame. It 
is not so long since the destructive critics asserted most 
positively that Moses could not have written the Pen- 
tateuch, because writing was unknown in his day; but 
recent discoveries have proved beyond a question that 
writing far antedates the time of Moses. So the de- 
structive critics have been compelled to give up their 
argument, though they have had the bad grace to hold 
on stubbornly to their conclusion. 

%, The seventh class of difficulties: those that arise 


24 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


from the ignorance of conditions under which books were 
written and commands given. For example, God’s com- 
mands to Israel as to the extermination of the Canaan- 
ites, to one ignorant of the conditions seems cruel and 
horrible; but when one understands the moral condition 
to which these nations had sunken, and the utter hope- 
lessness of reclaiming them, and the weakness of the 
Israelites themselves, their extermination seems to have 
been an act of mercy to all succeeding generations and 
to themselves. We will go into this more fully in the 
chapter on the Slaughter of the Canaanites. 

8. The eighth class of difficulties: those that arise 
from the many-sidedness of the Bible. The broadest 
minded man is one-sided, but the truth is many-sided, 
and the Bible is all-sided. So to our narrow thought 
one part of the Bible seems to contradict another. For 
example, men as a rule are either Calvinistic or Armin- 
ian in their mental make-up, and some portions of the 
Bible are decidedly Calvinistic and present great diffi- 
culties to the Arminian type of mind, and other portions 
of the Bible are decidedly Arminian and present diffi- 
culties to the Calvinistic type of mind. But both sides 
are true. Many men in our day are broad-minded 
enough to be able to grasp at the same time the Calvin- 
istic side of the truth and the Arminian side of the 
truth, but some are not. And so the Bible perplexes, 
puzzles and bewilders them; but the trouble is not with 
the Bible, but with their own lack of capacity for com- 
prehensive thought. So, too, Paul seems to contradict 
James, and James seems sometimes to contradict Paul, 
and what Paul says in one place seems to contradict 
what he says in another place. But the whole trouble 
is that our narrow minds cannot take in God’s large 
truth. 

9. The ninth class of difficulties: those that arise 
from the fact that the Bible has to do with the infinite, 
and our minds are finite. It is necessarily difficult to 
put the facts of infinite being into the limited capacity 


CLASSES OF DIFFICULTIES 25 


of our finite intelligence, just as it is difficult to put 
the ocean into a pint cup. To this class of difficulties 
belorg those connected with the Bible doctrine of the 
Trinity and with the Bible doctrine of the Divine- 
human nature of Christ. To those who forget that 
God is infinite, the doctrine of the Trinity seems like 
the mathematical monstrosity of making one equal 
three. But when one bears in mind that the doctrine 
of the Trinity is an attempt to put into forms of finite 
thought the facts of infinite being, and into material 
forms of expression the facts of the Spirit, the diffi- 
culties vanish. The simplicity of the Unitarian con- 
ception of God arises from its shallowness. 

10. The tenth class of difficulties: those that arise 
from the dulness of our spiritual perceptions. The 
man who is farthest advanced spiritually is still so im- 
mature that he cannot expect to see everything yet as 
an absolutely holy God sees it, unless he takes it upon 
simple faith in Him. To this class of difficulties belong 
those connected with the Bible doctrine of eternal pun- 
ishment. It oftentimes seems to us as if this doctrine 
cannot be true, must not be true, but the whole diffi- 
culty arises from the fact that we are still so blind 
spiritually that we have no adequate conception of the 
awfulness of sin, and especially of the awfulness of 
the sin of rejecting the infinitely glorious Son of God. 
But when we become so holy, so like God that we see 
the enormity of sin as He sees it, we shall have no 
difficulty with the doctrine of eternal punishment. 

As we look back over the ten classes of difficulties, we 
see that they all arise from our imperfection, and not 
from the imperfection of the Bible. The Bible is perfect, 
but we being imperfect, have difficulty with it. But 
as we grow more and more into the perfection of God, 
our difficulties grow ever less and less, aud so we are 
forced to conclude that when we become as perfect 
as God is, we shall have no more difficulties whatever 
with the Bible. 


III 


HOW SHALL WE DEAL WITH THE DIFFICUL- 
TIES OF THE BIBLE? 


Berore taking up those specific difficulties and “ con- 
tradictions” in the Bible which have caused the most 
trouble to seekers after truth, let us first consider how 
difficulties in general should be dealt with. 

1. First of all, let us deal with them honestly. When- 
ever you find a difficulty in the Bible, frankly acknowl- 
edge it. Don’t try to obscure it; don’t try to dodge it. 
Look it square in the face. Admit it frankly to who- 
ever mentions it. If you cannot give a good, square, 
honest explanation, do not attempt any at all. Untold 
harm has been done by those who in their zeal for the 
infallibility of the Bible have attempted explanations 
of difficulties which do not commend themselves to 
the honest, fair-minded man. People have concluded 
that if these are the best explanations, then there are 
really no explanations at all. And the Bible, instead of 
being helped, has been injured by the unintelligent zeal 
of foolish friends. If you are really convinced that the 
Bible is the Word of God, you can far better afford 
to wait for an honest solution of a difficulty than you 
can afford to attempt a solution that is evasive and 
unsatisfactory. 

2. In the second place, let us deal with them humbly. 
Recognize the limitations of your own mind and knowl- 
edge, and do not for a moment imagine that there is 
no solution just because you have found none. There 
is, in all probability, a very simple solution, even when 
you can find no solution at all. 

3. In the third place, deal with the difficulties de- 

26 


HOW DEAL WITH DIFFICULTIES? 27 


terminedly. Make up your mind that you will find the 
solution if you can by any amount of study and hard 
thinking. The difficulties of the Bible are our Heay- 
enly Father’s challenge to us to set our brains to work. 
Do not give up searching for a solution because you 
cannot find one in five minutes or ten minutes. Ponder 
over it and work over it for days, if necessary. The 
work will do you more good than the solution does. 
There is a solution somewhere, and you will find it if 
you will only search for it long enough and hard enough. 

4, In the fourth place, deal with the difficulties fear- 
lessly. Do not be frightened when you find a difficulty, 
no matter how unanswerable, or how insurmountable, 
it appears at first sight. Thousands of men have found 
just such difficulties before you were born. They were 
seen hundreds of years ago, and still the old Book 
stands. The Bible that has stood eighteen centuries 
of rigid examination, and also of incessant and awful 
assault, is not likely to go down before your discoveries 
or before the discharges of any modern critical guns. 
To one who is at all familiar with the history of critical 
attacks on the Bible, the confidence of those modern de- 
structive critics who think they are going to annihilate 
the Bible at last, is simply amusing. 

5. In the fifth place, deal with the difficulty pa- 
tiently. Do not be discouraged because you do not 
solve every problem in a day. If some difficulty per- 
sistently defies your very best efforts at a solution, lay 
it aside for a while. Very likely when you come back 
to it, it will have disappeared and you will wonder how 
you were ever perplexed by it. 

6. In the sixth place, deal with the difficulties Scrip- 
turally. If you find a difficulty in one part of the 
Bible, look for other Scripture to throw light upon it 
and dissolve it. Nothing explains Scripture like Scrip- 
ture. Time and again people have come to me with 
some difficulty in the Bible that had greatly staggered 


28 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


them and asked for a solution, and I have been able to 
give a solution by simply asking them to read some 
other chapter and verse, and the simple reading of 
that verse has thrown such a light upon the passage 
in question that all the mists have disappeared and the 
truth has shone out as clear as day. 

% In the seventh place, deal with the difficulties 
prayerfully. It is simply wonderful how difficulties 
dissolve when one looks at them on his knees. Not 
only does God open our eyes in answer to prayer to 
behold wonderful things out of His law, but He also 
opens our eyes to look straight through a difficulty that 
before we prayed seemed impenetrable. One great rea- 
son why many modern Bible scholars have learned to 
be destructive critics is because they have forgotten 
how to pray. 


IV 


IS THE FIRST CHAPTER OF GENESIS HIS- 
TORICAL AND SCIENTIFIC? 


THERE is no part of the Bible that the more scholarly 
opponents of its Divine origin are more fond of at- 
tacking than the very first chapter in the Book. Time 
and again have we been assured that the teachings of 
this chapter are in hopeless conflict with the best estab- 
lished conclusions of modern science. Even a promi- 
nent theological teacher in a supposedly Christian 
university has said that “ no one who knows what history 
and science are would think of calling the first chapter 
of Genesis either historical or scientific.” But in spite 
of this confident assertion, men who have gained a 
name as historians beyond anything that this teacher of 
theology can expect, assure us that it is not only his- 
torical, but the very foundation of history. Other men, 
who have secured for themselves a position in the scien- 
tific world to which this teacher can never hope to 
aspire, assure us that this chapter agrees absolutely 
with everything that is known scientifically of the origin 
and early history of the earth. For example, there 
is no name more honoured in the scientific world to- 
day than that of Lord Kelvin. Lord Kelvin, in a 
letter to a friend of mine, says, “ Physical science has 
nothing to say against the order of creation as given 
in Genesis.” 

But let us come to the specific difficulties in the first 
chapter of Genesis. The objector is fond of telling us 
that “the first chapter of Genesis says that the world 
was created in six days of twenty-four hours each, when 
everyone who is familiar with modern science knows 

29 


30 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


that the world as it now stands was millions of years in 
the making.” This objection sounds well, but the one 
who makes it displays a hopeless ignorance of the Bible. 
Anyone who is at all familiar with the Bible and the 
Bible usage of words knows that the use of the word 
“day” is not limited to periods of twenty-four hours. 
It is frequently used of a period of time of an entirely 
undefined length. For example, in Joel 3: 18-20, the 
millennial period is spoken of as a “day.” In Zech. 
2: 10-13, the millennial period is again spoken of as a 
“ day,” and again in Zech. 13:1, 2; 14:9. Even in the 
second chapter of Genesis the whole period covered by 
the six days of the first account is spoken of as a “ day ” 
(Gen. 2:4, 5). There is no necessity whatever for in- 
terpreting the days of Genesis 1 as solar days of twenty- 
four hours each. They may be vast periods of 
undefined length. But someone may say, “ This is 
twisting the Scriptures to make them fit the conclu- 
sions of modern science.” The one who says so simply 
displays his ignorance of the history of Biblical inter- 
pretation. St. Augustine, as far back as the fourth 
century, centuries before Modern Science and its con- 
clusions were dreamed of, interpreted the days of Gene- 
sis 1 as periods of time, just as the word means in many 
places elsewhere in the Bible. 

Another point urged against the truth and accuracy 
in the account of creation given in Genesis 1 is, that 
it speaks of “there being light before the sun existed, 
and it is absurd to think of light before the sun, the 
source of light.” The one who says this displays his 
ignorance of modern science. Anyone who is familiar 
with the nebular hypothesis, commonly accepted among 
scientific men to-day, knows that there were cosmic 
light ages before the sun became differentiated from 
the general luminous nebulous mass as a separate body. 

But the objector further urges against the scientific 
accuracy of Genesis 1 that the order of creation in 


THE FIRST CHAPTER OF GENESIS 31 


Genesis 1 is not the order determined by the investiga- 
tions of modern science; but this is an assertion that 
cannot be proven. It was the writer’s privilege to study 
geology under that prince of geologists, who has been 
pronounced by competent authority to be the greatest 
scientific thinker of the nineteenth century with the 
exception of Charles Darwin, namely Professor James 
D. Dana, of Yale. Professor Dana once said in my 
presence that one reason why he believed the Bible 
to be the Word of God was because of the marvellous 
accord of the order of creation given in Genesis with 
that worked out by the best scientific investigation. 
Note also what Lord Kelvin is quoted as saying in the 
early part of this chapter. It must be said, however, 
that men of science are constantly changing their views 
of what was the exact order of creation. Very recently 
discoveries have been made that have overthrown theo- 
ries of the order of creation held by many men of science 
and which did not seem to some to harmonize with the 
order as given in the first chapter of Genesis; but these 
recent discoveries have brought the order into harmony 
with the order as given in that chapter. 

There is no need of going in detail into this order 
of creation as taught by modern science and taught 
in Genesis 1. There is grave reason to doubt if 
anything in Genesis 1, after verse 1, relates to the 
original creation of the universe. All the verses after 
the first seem rather to refer to a refitting of the world 
that had been created, and had afterwards been plunged 
into chaos by the sin of some pre-Adamic race, to be 
the abode of the present race that inhabits it, the 
Adamic race. The reasons for so thinking are, first, 
that the words translated “without form and void” 
(R. V. “waste and void”) are used everywhere else 
in the Bible of the state of affairs that God brought 
upon persons and places as a punishment for sin. For 
example, in Is. 34:11 we read of the judgment that 


32 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


God should bring upon Idumea as a punishment for 
their sins in these words, “ He shall stretch over it a line 
of confusion and a plummet of emptiness” (R. V.). 
The Hebrew words translated “ Confusion and empti- 
ness” are the same that are translated “without form 
and void” in Gen. 1:2. We read again in Jer. 4: 23-27 
“T beheld the earth, and, lo, it was waste and void,” 
etc., etc. In both instances the words “ waste and 
void ” refer to a ruin which God had sent as a punish- 
ment for sin, and the assumption is very strong that 
they have a similar significance in Genesis 1. 

The second reason for this interpretation is stronger 
yet, namely, that the Bible expressly declares that God 
did not create the earth “in vain” (Is. 45:18). But 
the word translated “in vain” in this passage is pre- 
cisely the one translated “ without form” in Gen. 1: 2. 
In the Revised Version of Gen. 1:2 and Is. 45:18 the 
word is translated in both instances “ waste.” Here, 
then, is a plain and specific declaration in the Bible that 
God did not create the earth “ without form” or (rather 
“waste” R. V.), so it is plain that Gen. 1:2 cannot 
refer to the original creation. The word translated 
“was” in Gen. 1:2 can, with perfect propriety, be 
translated “ became ”; then Gen. 1: 2 would read, “ And 
the earth became waste and void.” In that case in 
Gen. 1:1 we have the actual account of creation. It 
is very brief, but wonderfully expressive, instructive and 
suggestive. In Gen. 1:2 we have a brief but sugges- 
tive account of how the earth became involved in deso- 
lation and emptiness, presumably through the sin of 
some pre-Adamic race. Then all after verse two 
does not describe the original creation of the earth, but 
its fitting up anew for the new race God was to bring 
upon the earth—the Adamic race. Even if we allow 
the word “was” to stand in Gen. 1:2, and do not 
substitute the word “became,” it does not materially 
affect the interpretation. 


THE FIRST CHAPTER OF GENESIS 33 


If this be the true interpretation of the chapter (and 
the argument for this interpretation seems conclusive), 
then of course this record cannot by any possibility 
come into conflict with any discoveries of geology as 
yet made or to be made, for the geological strata lie 
back of the period here described. The agreement of 
the order as set forth in Genesis 1 with the order as dis- 
covered by science would be accounted for by the fact 
that God always works in orderly progress from the 
lower to the higher. 


v 


THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN ACCORDING TO 
THE BIBLE AND ACCORDING TO SCIENCE 


One of the questions that is greatly puzzling many 
Bible scholars to-day is, how to reconcile the chronology 
of the Bible with discoveries that are being made as to 
the antiquity of man. It is said that the Bible chro- 
nology only allows about 4000 years from Adam to 
Christ, but the Egyptian and Babylonian civilizations 
were highly developed before 4000 years before Christ. 
If there were but four thousand years from Adam to 
Christ there would, of course, be only 5907 years for the 
whole age of the whole human race, and historians and 
scientists are thought to have traced the history of the 
race back 10,000 or more years. How are we to 
reconcile these apparent discrepancies? 

In the first place, let it be said that the dates com- 
monly accepted by many historians are not at all cer- 
tain. For example, in figuring out the dates of Egyptian 
dynasties the data upon which conclusions are built 
can hardly be considered decisive. It is true discoveries 
have been made of ancient records which assert that the 
dynasties which preceded them covered certain vast 
periods of time which are named, but anyone who is at 
all familiar with the ancient and Oriental habit of exag- 
geration should receive these assertions as to the length 
of these dynasties with a great deal of caution. While 
these views of the vast antiquity of the ancient Egyptian 
civilization and ancient civilizations of Nineveh and 
Babylon, as well, are widely accepted, they are not by 
any means proven, We can afford to wait for more 

34 


THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 35 


On the other hand, it is not at all sure that there 
‘were only about 4000 years from Adam to Christ. 
Bishop Ussher’s chronology, which is found in the mar- 
gin of most reference Bibles, is not, of course, a part of 
the Bible itself, and its accuracy is altogether doubtful. 
Tt is founded upon the supposition that the genealogies 
of Scripture are intended to be complete; but a careful 
study of the genealogies of Scripture clearly shows that 
they are not intended to be complete, that they often- 
times contain only some outstanding names. For exam- 
ple, the genealogy in Ex. 6: 16-24, if it were taken as a 
complete genealogy containing all the names, would 
make Moses the great-grandson of Levi, though 430 
years intervened. Again there is reason to question 
whether the list of names in Gen. 5 and 11 is complete. 
“ The total length of time from Adam te the Flood, and 
from the Flood to Abraham, is never mentioned in 
Scripture, although the period from Joseph to Moses 
(Ex. 12: 40) and that from the Exodus to the building 
of the temple (1 Kings 6:1) are mentioned.” 

“The fact that there are just ten names in each list 
also suggests that a similar arrangement may have been 
made in the first chapter of Matthew.” The regular 
formula is, “ A. lived years and begat B. And 
A. lived after he begat B years and begat sons and 
daughters. B. lived years and begat C.,” etc. The 
word translated “begat” is sometimes used not of an 
immediate descendant but of succeeding generations. 
For example, Zilpah is said to have borne her great- 
grandchildren (Gen. 46:18). The Hebrew word trans- 
lated “bare” in this passage is the same word trans- 
lated “begat” in the other passages. Bilhah is said to 
have borne her grandchildren (Gen. 46:25). Canaan 
is said to have begotten whole nations (Gen. 10: 15-18), 
so we see that in the formula quoted above the meaning 
is not necessarily that B. is the literal son of A. B. 
may be his literal son or a distant descendant. Thus 











36 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


many centuries may have intervened between A. and B. 
Of course, no chronology is intended by these figures. 
Their purpose is not at all to show the age of the world. 
We see, therefore, that there is no real and necessary 
conflict between real Bible chronology and any modern 
historical discoveries as to the antiquity of man. 

It should be said further that it may be that these 
ancient civilizations which are being discovered in the 
vicinity of Nineveh and elsewhere may be the remains 
of the pre-Adamic race already mentioned. There are 
passages in the Bible which seem to hint that there were 
some existing even in Bible times who may have be- 
longed to these pre-Adamic races. Such may have been 
the Rephaim and Zamzummin and the Emim (see Gen. 
14:5 R. V.; Deut. 2:20, 21; 3:11 A. V. and RB. V.). 
The hints given in those passages are somewhat obscure, 
but seem to suggest the remains of a race other than the 
Adamic race. If such was the case, these earlier civi- 
lizations which are now being uncovered may have been 
theirs. No one need have the least fear of any dis- 
coveries that the archeologists may make; for if it should 
be found that there were early civilizations thousands 
of years before Christ, it would not come into any con- 
flict whatever with what the Bible really teaches about 
the antiquity of man, the Adamic race, 


VI 
WHERE DID CAIN GET HIS WIFE? 


In almost every place that I have visited in going 
around the world, I have given sceptics and others an 
opportunity of asking questions at one or two meetings. 
I do not think that I have ever held a question meeting 
at which someone has not put in the question “ Where 
did Cain get his wife?” This seems to be a favourite 
question with unbelievers of a certain class. I have also 
met young Christians who have been greatly puzzled 
and perplexed over this question. But if one will study 
his Bible carefully and note exactly what it says, there 
is really no great difficulty in the question. Unbelievers 
constantly assert that the Bible says that “Cain went 
into the land of Nod and took to himself a wife.” In 
point of fact, it says nothing of the kind. An unbe- 
liever in Edinburgh came to me with the assertion that 
the Bible did say this, and when I told him it did not, 
he offered to bet me one hundred pounds that it did. 
What the Bible does say, is that “ Cain went out from 
the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the land of Nod, 
on the east of Eden. And Cain knew his wife; and 
she conceived and bare Enoch (Gen. 4:16, 17). What 
the Bible means by “knew” in such connection anyone 
can discover for himself by taking his concordance and 
looking it up. He will discover that the word “ knew” 
used in such connection does not mean to get acquainted 
with, but is connected with the procreation of the species 
(see for example Gen. 4:1; Judges 11:39; I Sam. 
1:19; Matt. 1:25). Cain doubtless had his wife before 
going to the Land of Nod and took her there with him. 
But who was she, and where did he get her? In 
37 


38 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Gen. 5:3, 4 we learn that Adam in his long life of 930 
years begat many sons and daughters. There can be 
but little doubt that Cain married one of those numerous 
daughters as his wife. But someone will say, “ In that 
case Cain married his own sister.” Yes, that was, of 
course, a necessity. If the whole Adamic race was to 
descend from a single pair, the sons and daughters 
must intermarry. But as the race increased, it remained 
_ no longer necessary for men to marry their own sisters, 
and the practice, if continued, would result in great 
mischief to the race. Indeed, even the intermarriage of 
cousins in the present day is fraught with frightful 
consequences. There are parts of the globe where the 
inhabitants have been largely shut out from intercourse 
with other people, and the intermarriages of cousins have 
been frequent and the physical and mental results have 
been very bad. But in the dawn of human history 
such an intermarriage was not surrounded with these 
dangers. As late as the time of Abraham that pa- 
triarch married his half-sister (Gen. 20:12). But as 
the race multiplied and such intermarriages became 
unnecessary, and as they were accompanied with great 
dangers, God by special commandment forbade the mar- 
riage of brother and sister, and such marriage would 
now be sin because of the commandment of God; but it 
was not sin in the dawn of the race when the only male 
and female inhabitants of the earth were brothers and 
sisters. Such marriage to-day would be a crime, the 
crime of incest, but we cannot reasonably carry back 
the conditions of to-day into the time of the dawn of 
human history and judge actions performed then by the 
conditions and laws existing to-day. 

If we were to throw the Bible account overboard and 
adopt the evolutionary hypothesis as to the origin of the 
human race, we would not relieve matters at all, for in 
that case our early ancestors would have been beasts, 
and the father and mother of the human race would be 


WHERE DID CAIN GET HIS WIFE? 39 


descendants of the same pair of beasts, brother and 
sister beasts. Take whatever theory of the origin of the 
human race that we may, we are driven to the con- 
clusion that in the early history of the race there was 
the necessary intermarriage of the children of the same 
pair. 

To sum it all up, Cain married one of the many 
daughters of Adam and Eve, and the impenetrable mys- 
tery that some fancy surrounds the question of where 
Cain got his wife is found to be no mystery whatever. 


VII 


JEHOVAH’S COMMAND TO ‘ABRAHAM TO 
OFFER UP ISAAC AS A BURNT OFFERING 


Onz of the most frequent objections made to the Bible 
is that “the Bible says that God commanded Abraham 
to offer his son as a burnt offering.” It is claimed that 
this story justifies the horrible practice of human sac- 
Tifices. Not many years ago when an insane man ac- 
tually did slay his son as a sacrifice to God, infidels 
proclaimed far and wide that the Bible in its story of 
Abraham and Isaac warranted and was responsible for 
the action. 

Not a few Christians have been bewildered and dis- 
tressed by this story. How shall this apparent difficulty 
be removed? It can be easily met and removed in the 
same way that most Bible difficulties may be met and 
removed, namely, by noticing exactly what the Bible 
says, and all that it says. Notice in the first place that 
the Bible nowhere says that God commanded Abraham 
to slay Isaac. It is constantly said by enemies of the 
Bible that the Bible did command Abraham to slay 
Isaac; but this is not in reality what the Bible says. 
Exactly what the Bible says is that “ God commanded 
Abraham to “offer him as a burnt offering” (Gen. 
22:2). Literally translated God-commanded Abra- 
ham to “make him go up [that is, upon the altar] for 
a burnt offering.” Abraham was merely commanded to 
lay Isaac upon the altar as a whole offering to God. 
Whether, when he was thus laid upon the altar and pre- 
sented to God, God would require him to go further and 
slay his son, he did not know. All that God com- 
manded was for him to “make him go up on to the 

40 


JEHOVAH’S COMMAND TO ABRAHAM 41 


altar,” ready to be slain and burned if God should so 
require. Did God so require? The record expressly 
declazes that He did not. On the contrary, God plainly 
forbade the actual slaughter of Isaac (Gen. 22: 11, 12). 
That the original command was not to kill Isaac, but 
merely to offer him, is as plain as day from the fact 
that we are explicitly told that Abraham did exactly 
what God told him to do, that is “to offer Isaac.” 
“Abraham offered up Isaac,” is the Bible statement 
(Heb. 11:17). That is, Abraham did exactly what he 
was told to do, but Abraham did not slay Isaac—that, 
he was not told to do. 

It is as clear as day, then, that the divine command- 
ment to offer was not a command to slay. The story 
as told in the Bible is not that God had first com- 
manded Abraham to slay and burn Isaac, and that, 
afterwards, when He saw that Abraham was willing to 
do even this, took it back and provided a lamb to take 
Isaac’s place. The Bible story is that God eommanded 
Abraham to make his son Isaac to ascend the altar to 
be presented to God as a whole offering, and that Abra- 
ham actually did this which he was commanded to do. 
And this did not, either in God’s original intention or 
in the execution of the command, involve the slaughter 
of Isaac. 

This story, then, in no way justifies human sacrifice 
in the sense of the actual slaying of a human victim. 
On the contrary, the whole force of the narrative is 
against such sacrifice. Instead of being commanded, it 
is explicitly forbidden. It does, however, justify the 
offering of ourselves to God wholly, as “a living sac- 
rifice ” (Rom. 12:1). But this is not all that the story 
as it actually occurs in the Bible tells us. The Bible 
goes on to tell us that so far from God’s commanding 
Abraham to slay his son, that when Abraham was about 
to go beyond what was explicitly commanded, viz., the 
offering of his son, and to slay his son, which was not 


42 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


commanded, God intervened and positively forbade it. 
Jehovah sent His own angel to speak in an audible 
voice from heaven forbidding the shedding of Isaac’s 
blood. “ Lay not thine hand upon the lad. Neither do 
thou anything unto him,” called the angel of Jehovah 
out of heaven (Gen. 22:12). This story, then, so far 
from encouraging human sacrifice, positively and ex- 
plicitly forbids it, and that in the most solemn man- 
ner. So all our difficulty with this narrative disappears 
when we look carefully with open eyes at the record, 
and note precisely what is said. 


VIII 
GOD HARDENING PHARAOH’S HEART 


THE various statements that are made in the Scriptures 
in regard to God’s hardening Pharaoh’s heart have per- 
plexed a great many young Christians, and have fre- 
quently been made use of by unbelievers in their 
attacks upon the Bible. It is said that if God hardened 
Pharaoh’s heart, and in consequence of this hardening 
of Pharaoh’s heart, Pharaoh rebelled against God, then 
God Himself was responsible for Pharaoh’s sin, and 
that it was unjust to hold Pharaoh accountable for his 
rebellion and to punish him for it. In Exodus 4:21 we 
read, “ And the Lord said unto Moses, when thou goest 
back into Egypt see that thou do before Pharaoh all the 
wonders which I have put in thy hand, but I will harden 
his heart and he will not let the people go,” (see also 
Ex. 7:3; 14:4). Now from reading these passages it 
does seem at the first glance as if there were some 
ground for criticism of God’s action in this matter, or of 
the Bible account of it. But when we study carefully 
exactly what the Bible says, and exactly what God is 
reported as saying, and the circumstances under which 
He said it, the difficulty all disappears. For God to 
take a man who really desires to know and do His will, 
and harden his heart and thus incline him not to do 
His will, would indeed be an action on God’s part that 
it would be difficult or impossible to justify. But when 
we read God’s utterances on this matter in their setting, 
we find this is not at all what God did with Pharaoh. 
Pharaoh was not a man who wished to obey God. The 
whole account begins, not with God’s hardening Pha- 
taoh’s heart, but with Pharaoh’s hardening his own 
43 


44 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


heart. In Ex. 4:21 we have a prophecy of what God 
would do with Pharaoh, a prophecy that God made, fully 
knowing beforehand what Pharaoh would do before He 
hardened his heart. In Ex. 9:12 and later passages 
we have the fulfilment of this prophecy, but before God 
does here harden Pharaoh’s heart, we have a description 
of what Pharaoh himself did. In Ex. 5:1, 2 we are 
told that Moses and Aaron appeared in the presence of 
Pharaoh with Jehovah’s message, “thus saith the Lord 
God of Israel, let my people go that they may hold a 
feast unto me in the wilderness,” and that then Pharaoh 
replied, “ Who is the Lord that I should obey His voice 
and let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I 
let Israel go.” Here Pharaoh definitely and defiantly 
refuses to recognize or obey God. This was before God 
hardened his heart. He here hardened his own heart. 
Then follows a description of how Pharaoh gave himself 
over to more cruel oppression of the Israelites than ever 
(Ex. 5:3-9). In Ex. 7:10 and following we see Moses 
and Aaron coming into the presence of Pharaoh and 
doing signs before him as proof that they were mes- 
sengers sent from God; but Pharaoh would not listen. 
In the 13th verse we read in our Authorized Version, 
“And he hardened his heart for he hearkened not 
unto them ”; but the Revised Version correctly renders 
“Pharaoh’s heart was hardened.” It does not say as 
yet that the Lord hardened his heart. The facts, then, 
in the case are these, that Pharaoh was a cruel and 
oppressive tyrant, subjecting the people of Israel to 
most awful bondage, suffering and death. God looked 
down upon His people, heard their cries, and in His 
mercy determined to deliver them. (Ex. 2:25; 3:7, 
8). He sent Moses, as His representative, to Pharaoh to 
demand the deliverance of His people, and Pharaoh in 
proud rebellion defied Him and gave himself up to even 
more cruel oppression of the people. It was then, and ° 
only then, that God hardened his heart. This was sim- 


GOD HARDENING PHARAOH’S HEART 45 


ply in pursuance of God’s universal method of dealing 
with men. God’s universal method is, if man chooses 
error to give them up to error (II Thess. 2: 9-12 R. V.) ; 
if with a stout heart, they choose sin, at last He gives 
them over to sin (Rom. 1: 24-26, 28 R. V.). This is 
stern dealing, but it is just dealing. If there is any 
difficulty that still remains in the incident, it all dis- 
appears when we consider the manner in which God 
hardened Pharaoh’s heart. It was, of course, not a 
physical act. God was not dealing with Pharaoh’s heart 
as a part of his body. He was dealing with Pharaoh’s 
heart in the sense in which we constantly use the word, 
as the supposed seat of intelligence, affection and will. 
The will cannot be coerced by force. The will can no 
more be moved by force than a train of cars can be 
drawn by an argument or an inference. The way in 
which God hardened Pharaoh’s heart was by sending 
to him a series of demonstrations of His own existence 
and power, and a series of judgments. If Pharaoh had 
taken the right attitude toward these revelations of 
God’s existence and power in these judgments that God 
sent upon him, they would have led to his repentence 
and salvation. But by willingly and wilfully taking 
the wrong attitude toward them, he was hardened by 
them. There is nothing that God sends us which is 
more merciful than the judgments which He sends 
upon our sins. If we take these judgments aright they 
will soften our hearts and lead us to repentance and 
entire surrender to God, and thus bring us salvation. 
But if we rebel against them, they will harden our 
hearts and bring us eternal ruin. The fault is not with 
God, and the fault is not with His judgments; the fault 
is with ourselves and the attitude we take toward His 
judgments, and toward the truth of God itself. The 
Gospel is the savour of life unto life unto men who 
receive it aright, but it is the savour of death unto 
death to those who reject it (cf. IL Cor. 2:15, 16). 


46 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


The trouble is not with the Gospel, that is “the power 
of God unto salvation to every one that believeth” 
(Rom. 1:16). The trouble is with the man who re- 
jects the Gospel, and who is thus hardened, condemned 
and destroyed by it, and to him it thus becomes the 
savour of death unto death. The same sermon brings 
life to one man and death to another. It brings life, 
pardon, and peace to the one who believes it and acts 
upon it; it brings condemnation and death to the one 
that rejects its truth. It softens the heart of one; it 
hardens the heart of the other. Jesus Christ Himself 
came into the world, not to condemn the world, but to 
save the world (John 3:17); but to the one who be- 
lieves not, He brings condemnation and eternal ruin 
(John 3:18, 36; Heb. 10: 28, 29). 


Ix 


THE WHOLESALE SLAUGHTER OF THE CA- 
NAANITES BY GOD’S COMMAND 


THERE are few things in the Bible over which more 
intelligent readers have stumbled, and over which in- 
fidels have more frequently gloated and gloried, than 
God’s command that certain people should be ut- 
terly exterminated, sparing neither sex nor age. Men, 
women and children were to be slain. Thus, for ex- 
ample, we read in Deut. 20:16, 17, this command of 
God to the people of Israel, “ But of the cities of these 
people, which the Lord thy God doth give thee for an 
inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth. 
But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the Hit- 
tites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Periz- 
zites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; as Jehovah thy God 
hath commanded thee” (R. V.). In regard to other 
cities, it was commanded that if they sued for peace, 
peace was to be granted and all the inhabitants spared, 
but if they made war, the adult males were to be slain, 
but the women and children were to be spared (Deut. 
20: 10-15). These were the cities that were far away; 
but the inhabitants of the cities of the lands that the 
Israelites themselves were to inhabit were to be utterly 
exterminated. 

We are asked “ How can we reconcile any such ap- 
pallingly harsh commands as these with the doetrine so 
plainly taught in the New Testament that ‘God is 
love’??” It is said that these commands can certainly 
not have been from God, and that the Old Testament 
is certainly wrong when it says that they were from 
God. What shall we say in reply to this? 

47 


48 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


1. First of all, let us say, it is certainly appalling 
that any people should be utterly put to the sword, not 
only the men of war, but the old men-and old women 
as well, and the young women and the children. But 
there is something more appalling than even this, when 
one stops to think about the matter, and that.is that the 
iniquity of any people should have become so full, their 
rebellion against God go strong and so universal, their 
moral corruption and debasement so utter and so per- 
vasive, even down to babes just born, as to make such 
treatment absolutely necessary in the interests of hu- 
manity. But this was precisely the case with the na- 
tions in question. Not from the Bible alone do we learn 
how unfathomable were the depths of moral pollution 
to which these nations had sunken. They had become 
a moral cancer threatening the very life of the whole 
human race. That cancer must be cut out in every 
fibre, if the body was to be saved. Cutting out a can- 
cer is a dreadful operation, an operation from which 
any kind-hearted surgeon must shrink; but oftentimes 
the cutting out of the cancer is the kindest thing the 
surgeon can do under existing circumstances, and the 
kindest thing that God could do for the human race 
was to cut out this cancer in every root and every fibre. 

2%. Let us say, in the second place, that God certainly 
has a right to visit judgment upon individuals and upon 
nations sunken in sin. The only wonder is, when one 
stops to think of it, that He is so long-suffering, and 
that He does not visit judgment upon individuals and 
upon nations sooner. When one really comes to under- 
stand His holiness on the one hand, and what are the 
depths of covetousness, greed, lust and sin, and vile- 
ness, and lawlessness and contempt for God to which 
certain cities even to-day have sunken, and how young 
the children go astray into unmentionable vileness, one 
sometimes almost wonders why He does not blot them 
out, as He commanded the Israelites to do with the 


SLAUGHTER OF CANAANITES 49 


Canaanites of old. The command to exterminate the 
Canaanites was a command big with mercy and love. 
It was mercy and love, first of all, to the Israelites. 
Unless the Canaanites were exterminated, they would 
themselves be exterminated. In point of fact, they were 
contaminated, for the very reason that they did not 
carry out God’s stern decree to its fullest extent. They 
stopped short of what God commanded them to do, and 
stopped short to their own lasting loss. 

But what about the women, might not they be spared ? 
The answer is very plain. The women were the prime 
source of contamination (Num. 31:15, 16). Though 
true women are nobler than true men, depraved women 
are more dangerous than depraved men. But what 
about the children? Might not they be spared? Any- 
one who has had experience with the children of the 
depraved knows how persistently the vices bred for 
generations in the ancestors reappear in the children 
even when they are taken away from their evil sur- 
roundings and brought up in the most favourable en- 
vironment. By the regenerating power of the Gospel 
it is possible to correct all this, but we must remember 
that the case with which we have to deal was centuries 
before the Gospel proclamation. Love and mercy for 
Israel demanded just what God commanded; love and 
mercy for the whole race demanded it. God’s purpose 
in Israel was not merely to bless Israel. Through 
Israel He planned to bless the whole race. He was 
training a people in the seclusion of centuries in order 
that when the training was completed they might come 
out of the cloister and carry benediction, salvation and 
life to all nations. 

3. Let it be said, in the third place, that God’s plans 
are not only beneficent, but vast, and it takes centuries 
to work them out: and we creatures of a day, in our 
little conceit, look at some little fragment of God’s in- 
finite plan and presume to judge the whole, of which 


50 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


we know little or nothing, It would be well if we could 
only learn that God is infinite and we infinitesimal, and 
so of scientific and philosophic necessity His judgments 
are unsearchable and His ways past tracing out (Rom. 
11:33). A child never appears a greater fool than 
when criticizing a philosopher, and a philosopher never 
appears a greater fool than when criticizing God. 

4, Let it be said in the fourth place, that the ex- 
termination of the Canaanite children was not only an 
act of mercy and love to the world at large, it was also 
an act of love and mercy to the children themselves. 
What awaited these children, if they were allowed to 
live, was something vastly worse than death. What 
awaited them in death, it is impossible to be dogmatic 
about; but unless one accepts the wholly unbiblical and 
improbable doctrine of the damnation of all unbaptized 
infants, we need have no fears. Even to-day I could 
almost wish that all the babes born in the slums might 
be slain in infancy, were it not for the hope that the 
church of Christ would awake and carry to them the 
saving Gospel of the Son of God. 

But someone may still say, “ Yes, I can see it was 
an act of mercy to blot out people so fallen, but why 
was it not done by pestilence or famine, and not by the 
slaying hand of the Israelites?” The answer to this 
question is very simple. The Israelites themselves were 
in training. They were constantly falling into sin, and 
they needed the solemn lesson that would come to them 
through their being made the executioners of God’s 
wrath against the wickedness and vileness of the Ca- 
naanites. A deep impression would thus be produced of 
God’s holiness and hatred of sin. They were distinctly 
told, before they carried into execution God’s judgment 
upon the Canaanites, that the reason why they were 
to utterly destroy the Canaanites was “ that they teach 
you not to do after all their abominations which they 
have done unto their gods” (Deut. 20:18). The whole 


SLAUGHTER OF CANAANITES 51 


proceeding is an impressive illustration of the exceeding 
hatefulness of sin in God’s sight. It says to us that 
sin persisted in is a thing so grievous and ruinous as to 
necessitate the utter destruction of the entire race, male 
and female, young and old, that persists in it. It is 
simply the lesson that the whole Bible teaches, and that 
all history teaches, written in characters of fire, “ The 
‘wages of sin is death.” 

5. Let it be said in the fifth place, that those who 
regard sin lightly, and who have no adequate conception 
of God’s holiness, will always find insurmountable dif- 
ficulty in this command of God; but those who have 
come to see the awfulness of sin, and have learned to 
hate it with the infinite hate it deserves, and who have 
caught some glimpses of the infinite holiness of God, 
and have been made in some measure partakers of 
that holiness, will, after mature reflection, have no 
difficulty whatever with this command. It is conscious- 
ness of sin in our own hearts and lives that makes us 
rebel against God’s stern dealings with sin. 

6. There is one thing more that needs to be said. 
The sneering objection is sometimes made by infidels 
to the sparing, in certain cases, of the women as recorded 
in Deut. 20: 10-15, and also the sparing of the women 
in Num. 31: 21-35, 40, that the women were to be 
spared for immoral purposes. Thus one writer asks, 
“Am I to understand that God approved of taking as 
tribute in spoils of war a number of virgins, for a use 
that is only too obvious?” Words of similar import are 
to be found in a number of infidel books. Of course, 
what the questioner means to imply is that these women 
were taken for immoral purposes. This is the use 
meant which is “only too obvious” to the objector. 
But this is not at all obvious to any pure-minded man 
who reads the actual Scripture account. There is in 
the Scripture account not the slightest intimation that 
the virgins were preserved for the use suggested. To 


52 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


the man whose own heart is evil and impure, of course 
it will always be obvious that if women are preserved 
alive and taken as tribute, they are taken for this pur- 
pose; but this will not even occur to the pure-minded 
man. The whole context of the passage in Num, 31, 
which is the one most frequently cited in this con- 
nection by unbelievers, is a solemn warning against 
immorality of this kind. And so far from this being 
a suggestion that God countenances acts of impurity 
of this character, it shows how sternly God dealt with 
this impurity. In Num, 25 we are told how the men 
of Israel did give themselves up to impurity with the 
daughters of Moab, but how in consequence the anger 
of the Lord was kindled against them (Num. 25: 8), 
and how God visited their impurity with the sternest 
judgment (Num. 25:5, 8,9). In the very chapter in 
question, every woman who had been guilty of impurity 
was slain (Num. 31:17). And in point of actual fact, 
it is suggested, at least by verse 18, that it was only the 
female children who could be spared. It was certainly 
an act of mercy on God’s part to deliver these “ women 
children ” from their evil surroundings, and hand them 
over to Israel for training where they would be brought 
in contact with a pure religion and trained up to be- 
come pure women. So far, according to the record, 
from being handed over to the Israelites for immoral 
puposes, they were entrusted to them for the highest 
purposes. 


x 


THE STORY OF JOSHUA COMMANDING THE 
SUN TO STAND STILL 


One of the greatest difficulties in the Bible to many a 
student is found in the stcry contained in Joshua 10: 
12-14. “Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day 
when the Lord delivered up the Amorites before the 
children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, 
Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, 
in the valley of Ajalon. And the sun stood still, and 
the moon stayed, until the people had avenged them- 
selves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the 
book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of 
heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day. 
And there was no day like that before it or after it, 
that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man: for 
the Lord fought for Israel.” Bishop Colenso wrote, 
“ The miracle of Joshua is the most striking instance 
of Scripture and science being at variance.” It is said 
by the destructive critics and the infidels that this story 
cannot possibly be true; that if the sun were to stand 
still in the way here recorded it would upset the whole 
course of nature. Whether that be true or not no one 
can tell. It is simply a supposition. But certainly the 
God who made the earth and the sun and the whole uni- 
verse could maintain it even if the sun stood still, or to 
speak more accurately, if the earth stood still on its 
axis and the sun appeared to stand still. But by a 
careful study of the Hebrew of the passage we find 
that the sun is not said to have stood stili. The com- 
mand of Joshua in verse 12 rendered in our Authorized 
Version and Revised Version, “Stand thou still,” lit. 
53 


54 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


erally translated means “be silent” (see also R. V., 
margin), and the words rendered “stood still” in verse 
13 literally translated mean “ was silent.” Nine times 
in the Bible is it translated “ Keep silence,” five times 
at least “Be still”; in another passage, “held his 
peace”; in another, “quiet one’s self”; in another, 
“tarry”; in another, “wait”; and in another, “ rest.” 
These renderings occur some thirty times, but it is never 
rendered “stand still” except in this one passage. In- 
deed, in the very passage in which it is rendered “ tarry ” 
(I Sam. 14:9), the words “stand still” do occur, but 
as the translation of an entirely different Hebrew word. 
The word translated “stayed” in verse 13 is some- 
times translated “ stand still.” It means literally “ to 
stand ” or “stand up”; but it is used of “ tarrying ” 
or remaining in any place, state or condition, as, for 
example, in II Kings 15: 20; Gen. 45:1. So, then, 
what the sun and moon are said to have done in the 
passage is to have tarried, tarried from disappearing, 
not that they stood absolutely still, but that their ap- 
parent motion (or their disappearance) was slowed up 
or delayed. Furthermore, the Hebrew words trans- 
lated “in the midst of heaven” mean literally in the 
half of heaven. The word translated “ midst,” in con- 
siderably more than one hundred cases is translated 
half. In only five or six cases is it rendered “ midst” 
and in one of these cases (Dan. 9: 27) the Revisers have 
changed “midst” to “half.” In the remaining cases 
it would be as well, or better, “half.” (For example, 
Ps. 102: 24.) What Joshua then bade the sun to do 
was to linger in the half of the heavens, and that is 
what the sun is recorded as doing. There are two 
halves to the heavens, the half that is visible to us 
and the other half visible on the other side of the globe. 
The Hebrew preposition rendered “about ” means pri- 
marily “as” or “so.” So put these facts together, 
and what the story tells us is that the sun continued 


STORY OF JOSHUA 55 


or tarried above the visible horizon as a whole day. 
Apparently this means that an event occurred on this 
day near Gibeon, in the valley of Ajalon, that occurs 
many days every year at the North Pole, namely, that 
the sun remained visible for the entire twenty-four 
hours. The method by which this was accomplished 
we are not told. It might be by a slight dip of the 
pole, or possibly by a refraction of the rays of light, 
or in other ways that we cannot conjecture. It cer- 
tainly would not necessitate such a crash in the physical 
universe as objectors have imagined. As to whether 
such a thing happened or not is a question of history. 
The history that we have reason to suppose is authentic 
in the Book of Joshua says that it did. It is a re- 
markable fact that we have a suggestion of the same 
thing in history outside the Bible. Herodotus, the 
great Greek historian, tells us that the priests of Egypt 
showed him a record of a long day. The Chinese writ- 
ings state that there was such a day in the reign of their 
emperor Yeo, who is supposed to have been a con- 
temporary of Joshua. The Mexicans also have a record 
that the sun stood still for one entire day in the year 
which is supposed to correspond with the exact year in 
which Joshua was warring in Palestine. There is really 
nothing of any weight to prove that there was no such 
day. So, upon careful examination, this which is as- 
serted to be “the most striking instance of Scripture 
and science being at variance ” is found to be in no sense 
whatever an instance of Scripture and science, or Scrip- 
ture and history, being at variance. 

The theory has been advanced that the words rendered 
“ stand thou still,” but which mean literally “be silent,” 
should be interpreted as meaning that Joshua com- 
manded the sun to withhold its light, to be silent in 
this sense, and that what occurred on this occasion was 
not the prolongation of a day, but a dark day, so that 
Joshua had the advantage of fighting practically at 


56 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


night, though it was really the hours of the day that 
ought to have been light. Of course, if this is the 
true interpretation of “stand thou still,’ all difficulty 
with the passage disappears. But while this inter- 
pretation might be admissible, it is difficult to see how 
some other portions of the narrative can be reconciled 
with this theory. And as already seen, the theory is 
not necessary to remove all difficulties in the passage. 

Of course, in any event, it was a miracle, but no one 
who believes in a God who is the Creator of the entire 
material universe, and a God who is historically proven 
to have raised Jesus Christ from the dead, ever stumbles 
at the mere fact of a miracle. We believe in a miracle- 
working God. 


XI 


DEBORAH’S PRAISE OF JAEL, “THE 
MURDERESS ” 


Ir is frequently urged against the divine origin of the 
Bible that it defends and glorifies the treacherous mur- 
der of Sisera by Jael, and that any book that defends 
so violent and cruel and deceitful an action as this 
cannot have God for its author. The very simple an- 
swer to this objection is, the Bible does not defend nor 
glorify the action of Jael. The Bible records the act 
in all its details. It also records the fact that Deborah, 
the prophetess who judged Israel at that time (Judges 
4:4), predicted that the Lord would sell Sisera into the 
hand of a woman (Judges 4:9). It also records the 
fact that Deborah and Barak, in their joyful song of 
praise to the Lord after their deliverance from the cruel 
oppression of Sisera, did say, “ Blessed above women 
shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be; blessed shall 
she be above women in the tent (Judges 5: 24).” But 
it is nowhere hinted in the Bible account that Deb- 
orah and Barak were speaking by divine inspiration 
in this song of thanksgiving and praise. The Bible, 
by speaking of Deborah as a prophetess, no more en- 
dorses every action and every utterance of Deborah than 
it endorses every action and every utterance of Balaam, 
of whom it likewise speaks as a “ prophet” (II Pet. 
2:16). In the very passage in which it speaks of 
Balaam as a prophet, it speaks about his being rebuked 
for his iniquities. It is not the teaching of the Bible 
that every utterance of every prophet is the inspired 
Word of God. On the contrary, the Bible teaches that 

a prophet may tell lies (I Kings 13: 11-18). The Bible 
57 


58 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


nowhere justifies Jael’s action. It records the action. 
It records Deborah and Barak’s praise of the action, 
but it nowhere endorses this praise. We are under no 
necessity, therefore, of trying to justify all the details 
of Jael’s conduct, nor indeed of trying to justify her 
conduct at all. But on the other hand, we must not un- 
justly judge Jael. We cannot judge her in the light of 
New Testament ethics, for she lived some 300 years be- 
fore Christ. She lived in a cruel age. Furthermore, 
she had to deal with a cruel oppressor who was working 
Tuin among the people. It was a time of war, and war 
not conducted according to modern ideas of war, and 
we must judge her in the light of the conditions in 
which she lived. But even if her conduct were abso- 
lutely without excuse, it does not in the least affect the 
proven fact of the Divine origin of the Bible. For that 
Book makes absolutely no attempt to defend her con- 
duct. It simply describes it. 


XII 
THE SACRIFICE OF JEPHTHAH’S DAUGHTER 


Tue story of Jephthah’s daughter as recorded in the 
Bible has presented a great difficulty to many super- 
ficial students of the Bible, as well as to many critics 
of it. How can we possibly justify Jephthah’s burning 
of his daughter as a sacrifice to Jehovah? we are often 
asked. In reply we would say, in the first place, that 
we are nowhere told that Jephthah did burn his daugh- 
ter. We are told that Jephthah vowed that “ what- 
soever cometh forth from the doors of my house to meet 
me when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, 
shall surely be the Lord’s and I will offer it up for a 
burnt offering (Judges 11:31). The word translated 
“burnt offering ” does not necessarily involve the idea 
of burning. There is no record that Jephthah’s daugh- 
ter was actually slain and burned. The passage that 
relates what actually was done with her is somewhat 
obscure, and many think that she was devoted by her 
father as an offering to God by her living a life of per- 
petual virginity (Judges 11: 37-39). But even sup- 
posing that she was actually slain and burned, as many 
candid Bible students believe that she was, though the 
Bible does not actually say so, even in this case, we are 
under no necessity for defending Jephthah’s action 
any more than we are for defending any other wrong 
action of all the imperfect instruments that God, in 
His wondrous grace and condescension, has seen fit 
to use to defend or help His people. The Bible itself 
nowhere defends Jephthah’s action. If Jephthah really 
did slay his daughter, he simply made a rash vow with- 
out any command or other warrant from God for so 
69 


60 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


doing, and having made this rash vow, he went further 
in his wrong doing and carried that rash vow into 
execution. So the whole story, instead of being a war- 
rant for human sacrifice, is intended to be a lesson 
upon the exceeding folly of hasty vows made in the 
energy of the flesh. 


XIII 
IMPURE BIBLE STORIES 


An old and favourite objection to the Bible on the part 
of unbelievers is that there are in it “chapters that 
reek with obscenity from beginning to end.” That 
there are chapters in the Bible which describe scenes 
that cannot be wisely dealt with in a mixed audience 
we have no desire to deny; but these chapters are not 
obscene. To speak in the plainest terms of sin, even 
the vilest of sins, in order to expose their loathsomeness, 
and in order to picture man as he really is, is not 
obscenity. It is purity in one of its highest forms. 
Whether the story of sin is obscene or not depends en- 
tirely upon how it is told and for what purpose it is 
told. If the story is told in order to make a jest of 
sin, or in order to palliate or excuse sin, it is obscene. 
If a story is told in order to make men hate sin, and 
to show us the hideousness of sin, and in order to induce 
men to give sin as wide a berth as possible, and in 
order to show man his need of redemption, it is not 
obscene, it is morally wholesome. 

Now, this is precisely the way in which sin is pic- 
tured in the Bible. It is true that adultery and similar 
offences against purity are mentioned by name without 
any attempt at mincing words. Revolting deeds of this 
character are plainly described and their awful results 
related ; but everything is so told as to make one recoil 
from these horrid and disgusting sins. Beyond a doubt 
many have been kept back from the practice of these 
sins by the plain things the Bible has said about them. 
Many others who have already fallen into these sins 
have been led by the Bible stories to see their enormity 
and their frightful consequences, and have thus been led 
to forsake them by what the Bible says about them, I 

61 


62 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


am not speculating about this, but speak from a large 
experience with men and women who have been tempted 
to these sins and have been held back by the Bible 
utterances regarding them. And also from a large ex- 
perience with others who have already fallen and who 
have been lifted up and saved by the truth on these 
subjects contained in the Bible. 

It is said, “there is much in the Bible that is not 
fit to read in public,” and this is brought forward as if 
it were an argument against the Bible. But it is an 
exceedingly foolish argument. There are many pas- 
sages in the very best and most valuable medical works 
that are not fit to be read in public, they are not even 
fit for a father to read to his children, but he would 
be a fool who would cut these passages out of these 
medical works on that account, and he is equally a fool 
who objects to the Bible because there are passages in 
it which are invaluable in their place, but which were 
not intended for and are not adapted to public reading. 
The Bible is in part a book of moral anatomy and 
spiritual therapeutics, and it would be a great defect 
in the book, in fact, an indication that it was not from 
God, if it did not deal with these frightful facts about 
man as he is, and with the method of healing for these 
foul moral diseases. I, for one, thank God that these 
passages are in the Bible. There are things that every 
boy and girl needs to know at a comparatively early 
age about some forms of sin, and loathsome sin. Many 
a boy and girl has dropped into these forms of sin 
before they realized their character, simply because they 
were not warned against them. Ignorance about them 
is a misfortune. I know of no better way for them to 
become acquainted with the effects of these sins that 
they need to know about than for them to read what 
the Bible has to say about them. Of course, boys and 
girls ought not to read them eee, but they ought 
to read them, 


IMPURE BIBLE STORIES 63 


Instead of finding fault with the Bible for these 
things in it, we ought to praise God for putting them 
there. For example, there are things in the first chap- 
ter of Romans that one cannot dwell upon in public 
address, and, as a rule at least, one will omit two verses 
in the public reading of this chapter; but these two 
verses have been of greatest value in dealing with the 
heathen, and they have saved many a man in so-called 
Christian lands from the loathsome sins that are there 
exposed and denounced. An infidel in one of his works 
challenges Christians to know if they “ dare to pick up 
the Bible and read from the book of Genesis the fact 
of Onan.” He seems to think that this is a conclusive 
argument against the Bible; but it is simply silly. It 
might not be wise to read this chapter in public, but 
a private reading of that very story has saved many a 
man from the practice of a like sin. Indeed, this whole 
chapter, which is a favourite point of attack with in- 
fidels, has been greatly used in exposing lust and its 
appalling consequences. 

Again it has been said by an objector to the Bible: 
“Part of the holy writings consist of history and the 
narration of facts of a kind that cannot be mentioned 
in the presence of a virtuous woman without exciting 
horror, and should a woman be permitted to read in her 
chamber what she would tremble to hear at her domestic 
board?” This, too, is considered a logical argument 
against the Bible. When one looks carefully at it and 
considers it, it is seen to be utter folly. Most assuredly 
a woman should be permitted to read in her chamber 
what she would tremble to hear at her domestic board. 
Every wise woman does it. I know of books that it 
would be most desirable for every woman to read 
in her private chamber, which if they were read at the 
domestic board would cause her to wish to rise from the 
table and leave the room with cheeks burning with 
shame. There are many things that men and women 


64 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


ought to think about, and must think about, in private, 
that they would not for a moment discuss in public. 
There are books on the proper conduct of women in 
certain most sacred relations of life, relations of life 
which are as holy as any, and which can be entered 
into in the presence of a holy God with no question 
of His approval, but which do not permit of public 
mention. It is passing strange that intelligent men 
and women should use arguments so childish as this. 

That the Bible is a pure book is evidenced by the 
fact that it is not a favourite book in dens of infamy. 
But on the other hand, books that try to make out 
that the Bible is an obscene book, and that endeavour to 
keep people from reading it, are favourite books in dens 
of infamy. The unclean classes, both men and women, 
were devoted admirers of the most brilliant man this 
country ever produced who attacked what he called the 
“obscenity of the Bible.’ These unclean classes do 
not. frequent Bible classes. They do frequent infidel 
lectures. 

These infidel objectors to the book as an “ obscene 
book” constantly betray their insincerity and hypocrisy. 
Colonel Ingersoll, in one passage, where he dwelt upon 
this subject, objected to the Bible for telling these vile 
deeds “ without a touch of humour.” In other words, 
he did not object to telling stories of vice, if only a 
joke was made of the sin. Thank God, that is exactly 
what the Bible does not do—make a joke of sin. It 
makes sin hideous, so men who are obscene in their 
own hearts object to the Bible as being an obscene book. 
Some of those who make the most of the so-called “ ob- 
scenity of the Book” are themselves notorious as tellers 
of obscene stories. One of the men who led the attack 
on the Bible on the ground of its obscenity was retained 
by the publishers of obscene literature to defend their 
case. Another man, who was a leader in his city in 
sending out attacks upon the Bible challenging Chris- 


IMPURE BIBLE STORIES 65 


tians to read in public certain portions of Scripture 
that were said to be immoral, was shortly afterwards 
found dead by his own hand in a Boston hotel side by 
side with a young woman who was not his wife. A 
man who says, “I protest against the Bible being placed 
in the hands of the young because its pages reek with 
filth,” and who does not wish people to read these “ vile 
portions ” of Scripture lest their minds be defiled, takes 
care to give a catalogue of the passages that he does 
not wish read and asks his readers to “look them up.” 
Can anything exceed the hypocrisy of that? 

I found in one city where I was holding meetings 
that a man who would interrupt a service by calling 
out about portions of the Scripture that he regarded as 
improper and immoral, had himself been arrested and 
convicted for publishing obscene literature. The truth 
is, these men hate the Bible. They hate it because it 
denounces sin and makes them uneasy in sin. 

To sum it all up, there are in the Bible descriptions 
of sins that cannot wisely be read in every public assem- 
bly, but these descriptions of sin are morally most 
wholesome in the places where God, the Author of the 
Book, manifestly intends them to be read. The child 
who is brought up to read the Bible as a whole, from 
Genesis to Revelation, will come to know in the very 
best way possible what a child ought to know very early 
in life if he is to be safeguarded against the perils that 
surround our modern life on every hand. A child who 
is brought up upon a constant, thorough, continuous 
reading of the whole Bible is more likely than any other 
child to be free from the vices that are undermining the 
mental, moral, and physical strength of our boys and 
girls, and young men and young women. But the child 
who is brought up on infidel literature and conversation 
is the easiest prey there is for the seducer and procuress. 
The next easiest is the one who, through neglect of the 
Bible, is left in ignorance of the awful pitfalls of life. 


XIV) 
DAVID’S SIN 


In IT Sam., 11th chapter, we read the story of one of 
the saddest downfalls of a man of God recorded any- 
where in history, and at the same time we read the 
record of one of the most contemptible and outrageous 
sins that any man ever committed against a faithful 
friend. We read how David committed against his faith- 
ful servant, Uriah, one of the most outrageous offences 
that one man can commit against another, and how in 
order to cover up his sin he stained. his hands with 
the blood of this faithful servant. After the deed was 
done, God in His great mercy sent His prophet to 
David, declaring to him, “ By this deed thou hast given 
great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme” 
(II Sam. 12:14). History has proven the truth of 
this declaration. There is scarcely anything in the 
Bible that has caused more of the enemies of the Lord 
to blaspheme than this dastardly crime of King David. 
The enemies of the Lord are constantly bringing it up 
and making it the butt of pitiless ridicule. Some of 
those who desire to defend the Bible have thought it 
was necessary to defend David’s action, or at least to 
try to make it appear that it was not as heinous as it 
looks at the first sight. But why should we seek to 
defend David’s action? 'The Bible nowhere seeks to 
defend it. On the contrary, God rebuked it in the 
sternest terms. It was punished by a train of such 
frightful calamities as have seldom overtaken any other 
man. It is true that David is spoken of in the Scrip- 
tures as “a man after God’s own heart ” (I Sam. 13: 14; 
Acts 13:22); but this does not mean by any means 
66 


DAVID’S SIN 6%, 


that David was an absolutely faultless man. It simply 
means that in distinction from Saul, who was constantly 
disposed to go his own way, David was a man who 
sought in all things to know God’s will and to do it 
exactly. Therefore he was a man after God’s own heart; 
but though this was the abiding attitude of David’s mind 
and heart toward God, it was still possible for him, as it 
is possible for men to-day, whose wills on the whole are 
entirely surrendered to God, to step out of their position 
of absolute surrender to God and in a moment of weak- 
ness and folly to commit an act hideous in the sight of 
God, and that will bring upon the one who commits it 
His sternest judgment. The recording of David’s sin, 
without any attempt in the Scripture to extenuate it, 
is one of the many proofs of the Divine origin and 
absolute reliability of the Bible. David was the great 
. hero of his times. Unless his Bible biographers had 
been guided by the Holy Spirit. they certainly would 
have concealed, or at least have sought to palliate, this 
awful fault of David; but in point of fact they did 
nothing of the kind. The Holy Spirit, who guided 
them in their record, led them to picture this event in 
all its hideousness, just as it is. Here is a radical dif- 
ference between Bible biographers and all other biog- 
raphers. Even the heroes of the Bible, when they 
fall, are not whitewashed, no excuses are offered for 
their sins. Their sins are not concealed from the public 
eye. They are recorded with fulness of detail, and the 
sinner is held up as a warning to others. In this matter 
David “ despised the word of the Lord to do that which 
was evil in His eyes,’ and the Bible plainly says so 
(II Sam. 12:9, 10). “The thing that David had 
~ done displeased the Lord” (II Sam. 11:27), and God 
sets him forth before the whole world as an adulterer 
and a murderer (II Sam. 12:9). The whole story is 
too horrible for public recital, but if one will read it 
in private with earnest prayer he may find exceedingly 


68 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


precious lessons in it, It was one of the most dastardly 
and horrible crimes of history, but I am glad that it 
is recorded in the Bible. The record of.it and its con- 
sequences has held many back from contemplated sin. 

The story of David’s sin abounds in great lessons. 
The first lesson that it teaches us is that an exceptionally 
good man, yes, a man “after God’s own heart,” if he 
gets his eyes off from God and His words may easily 
fall into very gross sin. Any man who trusts in his 
own heart is a fool. Any man that fancies that he is 
a match for the devil in his own wisdom and strength 
is badly deceived. David was one of the noblest men 
of his day. He was brave, he was generous, he had a 
single-hearted purpose to do the will of God, but he 
allowed himself to trifle with temptation, and he went 
down to the deepest depths of vileness, baseness and 
dishonour. 

The story also teaches us that God never looks upon 
any man’s sin with the least degree of allowance. God 
has no favourites, in the sense that He allows some 
men’s sins to go unpunished. God loved David. He 
had given David remarkable proofs of His love, but 
when David sinned God dealt with David’s sin with the 
sternest and most relentless judgment. He allowed 
David’s sin to dog him and to embitter and to blast his 
life to his dying day. God forgave David’s sin and 
restored him to fellowship and the joy of his salvation, 
but God let David drink deeply of the bitter cup he had 
mixed for himself. One of his sons followed him into 
adultery, and that, too, into an adultery the burden of 
which came upon David’s own daughter. Another son 
followed him into murder; and as David had rebelled 
against his Heavenly Father, his own son rebelled 
against him. David was left to reap what he sowed. 
When David cried over this rebellious son as he lay 
before him silent in death, “O my son Absalom! my 
son, my son Absalom! Would God I had died for thee, 
O Absalom, my son, my son!” (II Sam. 18: 33) David 


DAVID’S SIN 69 


knew full well that Absalom’s wandering, and Absa- 
lom’s death, was simply the fruit of his own sin. 

But there is another precious lesson for us, too, in 
the history of David’s sin, and it is that there is full 
and free pardon for the vilest sinner. David’s sin was 
black, black as midnight, it was appalling, it was inex- 
cusable, but David found pardon full and free. David, 
said, “I have sinned against the Lord,” and God said 
through His prophet, “'The Lord also hath put away 
thy sin (II Sam. 12:13).” David himself has told 
us in one of his most beautiful Psalms the story of his 
pardon (Ps. 32:1-5). God isa holy God. He hates 
sin with infinite hatred. He will not look upon the 
smallest sin with the least bit of allowance, but God 
is also a God of pardoning love. He stands ready to 
pardon the vilest sinner. He is ever calling to men 
and women who have sinned, “ Let the wicked forsake 
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and 
let him return unto the Lord, and He will have mercy 
upon him; and to our God, for He will abundantly par- 
don ” (Is. 55:7). There are those that think they have 
sinned too deeply to ever find pardon, but it is not so. 
It would be hard to find one who had sinned more deeply 
than David sinned. He had committed the greatest 
wrong one man can commit against another, and he 
had stained his hands with the blood of his victim, 
still he found pardon. I do thank God for this story 
of David. It gives me hope for any man. In the light 
of it as told in the Bible I care not who comes and 
asks me, “Is there salvation for me?” I hesitate not 
to answer, “ Yes, for you. David found mercy, and 
you can.” One night I was speaking to a man under 
deep conviction of sin. He had stained his hands with 
the blood of a fellow man. He had shot another to 
death. He said there could be no pardon for him. I 
took him to David’s prayer in Ps. 51:14, and showed 
him that David was delivered from blood-guiltiness, and 
that so there was pardon for him. 


XV. 
THE IMPRECATORY PSALMS 


A FREQUENT objection urged against the Bible is some 
of the utterances in the so-called “ Imprecatory Psalms.” 
And many of these utterances have greatly perplexed 
earnest-minded Christians who have carefully studied 
the New Testament teaching regarding the forgiveness 
of enemies. Three passages in the Psalms are especially 
cited by a recent writer as showing that the Bible is 
not the Word of God. These are Ps. 58:6, “ Break 
their teeth, O God, in their mouth.” It is said that 
this utterance exhibits so much vindictive passion that 
it could not possibly have been written under the in- 
spiration of the Holy Spirit. The second passage 
objected to is Ps. 109: 10, “ Let his children be con- 
tinually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek their bread 
also out of their desolate places.” The third passage is 
Ps. 137: 8, 9, “ O daughter of Babylon, who art to be 
destroyed; happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as 
thou hast served us. Happy shall he be, that taketh 
and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.” What 
shall we say about these passages ? 

The first thing we have to say is what we have already 
said in Chapter II, namely, that God oftentimes simply 
records what others said, bad men, good men, inspired 
men and uninspired men, etc., and in the Psalms we 
have sometimes what God said to man, and that is 
always true. And on the other hand, we often have 
what men say to God, and that may or may not be 
true. All of these passages cited are what men said 
to God. They are the inspired record of men’s prayers 
to God. To God they breathe out the agony of their 

70 


THE IMPRECATORY PSALMS a1 


hearts, and to God they cry for vengeance upon their 
enemies. Judged even by Christian standards, this 
was far better than taking vengeance in their own hands. 
Indeed, this is exactly what the New Testament com- 
mands us to do regarding those who wrong us, Ven- 
geance belongs to God and He will repay (Rom. 12:19), 
and instead of taking vengeance into our own hands, 
we should put it in His hands. There is certainly 
nothing wrong in asking God to break the teeth of 
wicked men who are using those teeth to tear the up- 
right. This prayer is taken from a Psalm that there 
is every reason to suppose is Davidic, as is also the 
second passage quoted. But it is a well-known fact 
that David in his personal dealings with his enemies 
was most generous, for when he had his bitterest and 
most dangerous enemy in his hand, an enemy who per- 
sistently sought his life, he not only refused to kill him, 
but refused to let another kill him (I Sam. 26: 5-9). 
And even when he did so small a thing to Saul as to cut 
off the skirt of his robe, his heart smote him, even for 
that slight indignity offered to his bitterest and most 
implacable enemy (I Sam. 24:5). How much better 
we would be if, instead of taking vengeance into our 
own hands, we should breathe out the bitterness of our 
hearts to God, and then treat our enemies in actual fact 
as generously as David did. Whiie David prayed to 
Jehovah in Ps. 109: 10, “ Let his children be continually 
vagabonds and beg: let them seek their bread also out 
of their desolate places,” in point of fact, when he was 
in a place of power, he asked, “ Is there any that is left 
of the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness? ” 
He found a grandson of Saul’s and had him eat at the 
king’s table as one of his own sons (II Sam. 9:1, 2, 11). 

The utterance in Ps. 137: 8, 9. does sound very cruel, 
but the utterance is a prophecy rather than a prayer. 
It is the declaration of awful judgment that will come 
upon Babylon because of the way in which Babylon had 


dy 


72 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


treated the people of God. Babylon was to reap what 
it had sown (cf. Gal. 6:7). They were to be served 
by others as they had served the people of God. It was 
a literal prophecy of what actually occurred after- 
wards in Babylon. We find a similar, but even more 
awful prophecy of the coming doom of Babylon in 
Is. 13: 15-18. 

So when we study these Imprecatory Psalms in the 
light that is thrown upon them from other passages 
of Scripture, all the supposed difficulties disappear and 
we find that there is nothing here that is not in perfect 
harmony with the thought that the whole Bible is God’s 
Word, though in some instances, while the record of 
what is said is correct and exact, that which is recorded 
as being said may not in itself be right; but it is God’s 
Word that man said it, though what man was recorded 
as saying may not be God’s Word. 


XVI 


DOES THE GOD OF TRUTH AND LOVE SEND 
LYING SPIRITS AND EVIL SPIRITS TO 
MEN? 


OnE of the most puzzling passages in the Bible is found 
in I Kings 22, and the parallel account in II Chron. 18. 
In these passages the prophet Micaiah is reported as 
saying, “Therefore hear thou the word of the Lord” 
(v. 19, R. V.). Then he goes on to tell how, “I saw 
the Lord sitting on His throne and all the host of 
heaven standing by Him on His right hand and on 
His left.” And Jehovah is pictured as asking the 
assembled host. who would go and persuade Ahab that 
he may go up to Ramoth-Gilead. Then a lying spirit is 
represented as coming forth and standing before the 
Lord and saying, “I will go forth and will be a lying 
spirit in the mouth of all his prophets,” and Jehovah 
is represented as saying to the lying spirit, “ Thou shalt 
entice him and shall prevail.” Also, “Go forth and 
do so” (vs. 20-22, R. V.). At the first glance it appears 
here as if the Lord sanctioned and took a part in lying 
and deception. What is the explanation? It is found 
clearly given in the context. Micaiah, speaking by 
the Holy Spirit, is seeking to dissuade Ahab and 
Jehoshaphat from going up to Ramoth-Gilead. All the 
false prophets have told the two kings that they should 
go up to victory. Micaiah, the messenger of the Lord, 
tells them on the contrary that they shall go up to 
defeat and to the certain death of Ahab. He tells them 
that the spirit that had spoken by the false prophets 
was a lying spirit. He puts this in a highly pictorial 
way. But though the picture is exceedingly vivid, it 
does not teach error, but truth, and teaches it in a most 
73 


"4 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


forcible way, namely, that it was a lying spirit that 
was in the mouth of the false prophets. But that 
Jehovah was not really a party to the deception appears 
clearly in the narrative, if we take it as a whole. So 
far from being a party to the deception, He sends His 
own prophet to warn them that the spirit that spoke 
by the false prophets was a lying spirit, and to tell 
them the exact facts in the case as to what the issue 
of the battle would be. If they would choose to listen 
to God and His prophet, they would be saved from 
calamity; but if they would not listen to God and His 
prophet, then God would give them over to the work- — 
ing of error, that they should believe a lie, but He 
' would not do this without abundant warning. This 
is God’s universal method, not only as taught in the 
Bible, but as taught in experience, that He gives to 
every man to choose either to listen to Him and know 
the truth, or to turn a deaf ear to Him and to be 
given over to strong delusion. If men will not receive 
the love of the truth that they may be saved, then God 
gives them over to strong delusion to believe a lie. If 
men want lies, God gives them their fill of them. (See 
II Thess. 2: 10-12, R. V.). 

In other passages of the Bible it seems to be taught 
that God sends evil spirits to men, and the question 
arises how can we believe that a good God, a God of 
love, sends evil spirits to men? Let us turn to a 
passage in which this is taught and we will soon find 
an answer to the difficulty. In I Sam. 16:14 we 
read, “ Now, the Spirit of the Lord had departed from 
Saul and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him.” 
What is meant by “an evil spirit”? The context 
clearly shows. It was a spirit of discontent, unrest, 
depression. The circumstances were these: Saul had 
proved untrue to God. He had deliberately disobeyed 
God (I Sam, 15: 4-35, and especially vs. 22, 23), and 
consequently God had withdrawn His Spirit from him 


DOES GOD SEND LYING SPIRITS? 75 


and a spirit of discontent and unrest had come upon 
him. This was not an unkind act on God’s part. 
There was nothing kinder that God could have done. 
It is one of the most merciful provisions of our Heav- 
enly Father, when we disobey Him and wander from 
Him, that He makes us unhappy and discontented 
in our sin. If God should leave us to continue to be 
happy in sin, it would be the unkindest thing He could 
do; but God in His great mercy will win every sinner 
possible back to Himself, and if we sin, God, for our 
highest good, sends to us deep depression and unrest in 
our sin. If we make the right use of this spirit of 
unrest and depression that God sends us, it brings us 
back to God and to the joy of the Holy Ghost. Saul 
made the wrong use of it. Instead of allowing his 
unrest of heart to bring him to repentance and back to 
God, he allowed the unrest of heart to embitter his 
soul against one whom God favoured. The sending 
of the evil spirit was an act of mercy on God’s part. 
The misuse of this act of mercy resulted in Saul’s 
utter undoing. There is many a man to-day who once 
knew something about the Spirit of the Lord and the 
joy of the Holy Ghost, who has fallen into sin, and God, 
in His great love and mercy, is sending him at the pres- 
ent time an evil spirit, a spirit of unrest, dissatisfaction, 
deep discontent, or even of abject misery. Let him 
thank God for it. Let him inquire, humbly on his face 
before God, wherein it is he has sinned against God 
and lost the joy of his salvation. Let him put away 
and confess his sin and come back to God and have 
renewed unto him the joy of God’s salvation. An 
evil spirit of unrest and discontent was sent to David, 
too, when he sinned; but when, after some resistance, 
David confessed his sin unto the Lord, the Lord blotted 
it out and brought him into a place of glad joy in 
the Lord, where he could instruct and teach others in 
the way they should go (Ps. 32:4-8; 51: 9-13).. 


XVII 
JONAH AND THE WHALE 


Tue story of Jonah and “the whale” has for many 
years been the favourite butt of ridicule with unbe- 
lievers, and the cause of not a little perplexity with 
those who “are unlearned and unstable.” The story 
is quite generally discredited by the destructive critics 
as to its being actually historical. They attempt to 
explain it as allegory or parable. Those who desire 
to discredit the full inspiration and absolute veracity 
of the Bible have again and again assured us, with a 
great show of scientific knowledge, that such is the 
structure of a whale’s mouth and the configuration of 
his throat that it would be impossible for a full-grown 
man, either to pass through the sieve in its mouth or 
the narrow orifice of its throat, to say nothing of his 
coming out again alive and whole. What shall we 
say to all this? 

First of all, let us notice the fact that the Bible 
nowhere tells us that Jonah was swallowed by a whale. 
In Jonah 1:17 we are told that Jehovah “prepared a 
great fish to swallow up Jonah, and Jonah was in the 
belly of the fish three day and three nights.” There is 
no mention here whatever of this great fish being “a 
whale,” with its peculiarly constructed mouth and 
throat. It may have been either a fish altogether pre- 
pared for the occasion, or a fish already existing provi- 
dentially sent around for the purpose God had in view. 
In Jesus’ reference to this historical event in Matt. 
12: 40, it is true that in our Authorized Version, and 
in the text of the R. V., we read that He said that Jonah 
was three days and three nights in “ the whale’s belly ” ; 

16 


JONAH AND THE WHALE vis 


but we read in the margin of the Revised Version that 
the Greek of the word rendered “whale” is “sea mon- 
ster.” One cannot help wondering if the Greek word 
means sea monster, and it certainly does, why the trans- 
lators should continue to put “whale” in the text. 
In the Septuagint translation of the book of Jonah, “a 
great fish” is rendered by a Greek adjective meaning 
“ great ” and the same word that is used in Matt. 12: 40 
and translated “whale.” The word “whale” was in 
the mind of the translators and not in the word spoken 
by Jesus, so in neither the Old Testament nor the 
New Testament account is it said that Jonah was swal- 
lowed by a “ whale,” but by a great fish, or sea mon- 
ster. So we see that these very “ scholarly critics ” have 
spent much labour in proving the absurdity of something 
the Bible did not say and which they would have known 
it did not say if they had been as “scholarly ” as they 
supposed. As to what the great fish was, we are not 
told; but it is a well-known fact that there exist, or 
have existed until recent times, in the Mediterranean 
Sea, where the recorded event seems to have taken place, 
sea monsters—that is, dog sharks—large enough to 
swallow a man or horse whole. In fact, it is recorded 
that a man fell overboard in the Mediterranean and was 
swallowed by one of these sea monsters, the monster 
was killed and the man rescued alive. A whole horse 
was taken out of the belly of another. 

Furthermore, even if the Bible had said that the 
great fish was a whale, there would be no such difficulty 
with the narrative as has been supposed by unbelievers 
and the uninformed. While it is true that there are 
some kinds of whales whose mouths and throats are of 
such a formation that it would be impossible for a 
full-grown man to pass through, it is not true of all 
kinds of whale. The well-known author, Frank Bul- 
len, in his book “The Cruise of the Cachalot,” says 
that “a shark fifteen feet in length has been found in 


"8 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


the stomach of a cachalot.” He tells us further that 
“when dying, the sperm whale always ejected the con- 
tents of its stomach.” He tells us of.one whale that 
was caught and killed, “the ejected food from whose 
stomach was in masses of enormous size, some of them 
being estimated to be the size of our hatch-house, viz., 
8 feet by 6 feet by 6 feet.” Of course, such a whale 
would have no difficulty in swallowing a man, so the 
whole objection to the Bible narrative from the stand- 
point that a whale could not swallow a man is not 
founded upon superior knowledge, but upon ignorance. 

“ But,” someone may say, “ the action of the gastric 
juices would kill a man within a whale, or other sea 
monster.” But this leaves God out of the transaction, 
whereas in the Bible story God is very prominent in 
the whole transaction. The God who made both the 
monster and the man and the gastric juices could quite 
easily control the gastric juices and preserve the man 
alive. We are not trying to make out that the tran- 
saction was not miraculous in any event, but those who 
really believe in God and have had any large experience 
with God have no trouble with the miraculous. 

It ought to be added, moreover, that the Bible does 
not tell us that Jonah remained alive during the period 
that he was in the belly of the great fish. There are 
things in the narrative as recorded in the Book of 
Jonah that make it appear as if he did not remain 
alive (Jonah 2:2, 5, 6, R. V. See margin). There 
seems to be a strong probability that Jonah actually did 
die and was raised from the dead.. If Jonah actually 
did die, this only adds one more to the resurrections 
recorded in the Bible and makes Jonah a still more 
remarkable type of Christ. To those who believe in 
God there is no difficulty in believing in the resurrec- 
tion, if sufficiently well attested. “Why should it be 
thought a thing incredible that God should raise the 
dead?” ‘There are numerous instances on record at 


JONAH AND THE WHALE 79 


least of resuscitation of men and women who from 
appearances had been for some days dead. The his- 
toricity of this event is endorsed by Jesus Christ Him- 
self (Matt. 12:40). To think of it as being merely 
allegory or parable is to discredit the words of Jesus. 

So, on careful examination of what the Scripture 
says, and of the facts of history, all the difficulties sup- 
posed to exist in the story of Jonah and “the whale” 
are found to disappear. 


XVIII 


SOME IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” IN 
THE BIBLE 


T am constantly meeting men who say that the Bible is 
“full of contradictions.” When I ask them to show 
me one, they reply, “ It is full of them.” When I press 
them to point out one, usually they have no more to 
say. But now and then I meet an infidel who does 
know enough about his Bible to point out some appar- 
ent contradictions. In this chapter, we will consider 
some of these. 

One of those most frequently brought forward is the 
apparent contradiction between John 1:18, where we 
read, “ No man hath seen God at any time,” and Exodus 
24:10, where we are told of Moses and Aaron, Nadab 
and Abihu and seventy of the elders of Israel, that “ they 
saw the God of Israel.” (There are also other pas- 
sages in which men are said to have seen God.) Now, 
this certainly looks like a flat contradiction, and many 
besides sceptics and infidels have been puzzled by it. 
Indeed, one of the most devout men I ever knew was 
so puzzled by it that he left his place of business and 
came miles in great perturbation of spirit to ask me 
about it. The solution of this apparently unanswera- 
ble difficulty is in reality very simple. 

We must remember first of all that two statements 
which in terms flatly contradict one another may be 
both of them absolutely true, for the reason that the 
terms are not used in the same sense in the two state- 
ments. For example, if any man should ask me if I 
ever saw the back of my head, I might answer, “No, I 
never saw the back of my head,” and this statement 

80 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 81 


would be strictly true. Or, I might answer, “Yes, I 
have seen the back of my head,” and this statement 
would also be true, though the two statements appear to 
flatly contradict one another. The back of my head 
I never have seen, but more than once when looking 
into a glass with another glass back of me, I have seen 
the back of my head. It depends entirely upon what 
the man means when he asks me the question if I ever 
saw the back of my head, what I should answer him. 
If he means one thing, I answer “No,” and that is 
true. If he means another thing, I answer, “ Yes, I 
have seen the back of my head,” and that is equally true. 
But someone may object: “In the latter case you did 
not really see the back of your head. What you saw was 
a reflection of the back of your head in the mirror.” 
But to this I would reply, “ Neither do you see the back 
of anyone’s head when you are looking right at it. 
What you see is the reflection of that person’s head. 
upon the retina of your eye.” But every one knows 
what you mean when you use language in this common- 
sense, every-day way of using it. They would know 
that when you said you saw the back of another man’s 
head that you meant you saw a reflection of it upon the 
retina of your eye, and they would know when you 
said you saw the back of your own head in the glass 
that you meant that you saw the reflection of the back 
of your head in the glass. In the one case you see the 
reflection; in the other case you see the reflection of the 
reflection; and in both cases what you actually see is 
the thing that was reflected. 

Now, in this case before us in the Bible. it is all very 
like this illustration. God in His eternal essence is 
“invisible ” (“ unseeable,”? I Tim. 1:17). “No man 
hath seen Him, nor can we see Him” (I Tim. 6:16). 
He is spirit, not form (John 4: 23, 24), so John tells 
us in the passage before us the profound and wondrous 
truth that “ No man hath been God at any time. The 


82 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


only Begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, 
He hath declared Him.” That is, this “ invisible” 
(“unseeable”) God is unfolded to us, interpreted to 
us (the word here translated “ declared” is the word 
from which our word “exegesis” is derived) in the 
words and in the person of Jesus Himself. So fully 
is He declared, not only in the words of Jesus, but in 
His person, that Jesus could say, “ He that hath seen 
Me hath seen the Father ” (John 14:9). 

But this essentially invisible God has been pleased 
in His great grace to manifest Himself again and again 
in bodily form. Moses and the seventy elders saw such 
a manifestation of God (or Theophany) when they 
were in the mount. Isaiah saw such a manifestation in 
the temple (Is. 6:1), and in describing it, he properly 
declares “ I saw the Lord.” Job saw such a manifesta- 
tion (Job 42:6), and was so humbled by the actual 
coming face to face with God Himself in this mani- 
festation of God, that he cried, “I abhor myself and 
repent in dust and ashes.” It was God that was mani- 
fested in these theophanies, and so it was God they saw. 
We see, then, that both of these apparently flatly con- 
tradictory statements, that “ No man hath seen God at 
any time,” and that “Moses [and the others] saw. 
God,” are perfectly true. 

Jesus Christ Himself was the crowning manifestation 
of God, “In Him dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead 
bodily ” (that is, in bodily form, Col. 2:9). So Jesus 
said to Philip with perfect propriety, “He that hath 
seen Me, hath seen the Father.” The time is coming 
when all the pure in heart shall behold God permanently 
manifested in a bodily form (Matt. 5:8). The form 
in which Jesus existed in His pre-existent state in the 
glory was “the form of God” (Phil. 2:6, see R. V. 
margin). ‘The Greek word which is translated “ form ” 
in this passage means “the form by which a person 
or thing strikes the vision—the external appearance” 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 83 


(Thayer’s Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testa- 
ment), so we are clearly taught that the external ap- 
pearance of Jesus in His pre-existent form was the 
external appearance of God, 1.e., that the invisible God, 
who is a spirit in His essential essence, manifests Him- 
self in an external, visible form. 

2. A second “contradiction” of which the infidels 
make a great deal, and by which not a few believers are 
puzzled, is that found in the four accounts of the in- 
scriptions on the cross. We read in Matt. 27:37, 
* And set up over His head his accusation written, 
This is Jesus the King of the Jews.” We read in 
Mark 15:26, “And the superscription of His accusa- 
tion was written over, The King of the Jews.” We 
read in Luke 23:38, “And there was also a super- 
scription over Him, This is the King of the Jews” (R. 
V.). And we read in John 19:19, “ And Pilate wrote 
a title, and put it on the cross. And the writing was, 
‘Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.” Now, no 
two of these agree absolutely in the words used. And 
it is asked by the objector, “ How can all four possibly 
be right?” It is said that at least three must be 
wrong, at least in part. A great deal is made of this 
difficulty by those who argue against the verbal inspira- 
tion of the Scriptures. In many of our theological 
seminaries a great deal is made of this point. 

I am surprised that anyone should make so much 
of it, for the answer is found so plainly stated in the 
very passages cited that it is surprising that any careful 
student should have overlooked it. John tells us in 
John 19:20, R. V., that in order that all the different 
nationalities present might read it, the charge upon 
which Jesus was crucified was written in Hebrew, 
in Latin, and in Greek. In Hebrew for the common 
people; in Latin for the Romans; in Greek, the uni- 
versal language. The substantial part of the charge 
was that Jesus claimed to be the King of the Jews and 


84 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


was crucified for making this claim, so these words, 
“The King of the Jews” appear in the Hebrew and 
the Latin and the Greek, and it also appears in all four 
accounts of the four Gospels. Matthew would nat- 
urally give the inscription as it appeared in Hebrew; 
Mark would be likely to give it as it appeared in the 
Latin; and Luke as it appeared in the Greek. Pre- 
sumably John gives it in the full Roman form, “ Jesus 
of Nazareth ” being a full and explicit statement of who 
Jesus is, and the charge being “King of the Jews.” 
The only thing that is left then to account for is the 
difference between Mark and John; but if we carefully 
read Mark 15: 26 we will see that Mark does not claim 
to give the full wording that appeared on the cross. 
He simply says “ The superscription of his accusation 
was written over.” The accusation was, “'The King of 
the Jews,” and this Mark gives, and this alone. The 
words, “ This is Jesus of Nazareth,” was not the accusa- 
tion, but the name of the accused. So all this diffi- 
culty, of which so much is made, disappears altogether 
when we notice exactly what is said and all that is 
said. 

3. Another “contradiction” of which a great deal 
is made is that which seems to exist between two dif- 
ferent accounts of the conversion of Saul of Tarsus. 
We are told in Acts 9: 7 that those who journeyed with 
Saul to Damascus “ heard the voice that spoke to Saul, 
but saw no man.” On the other hand Paul, in relating 
to the Jews in Jerusalem the story of his conversion, 
says “They that were with me beheld indeed the light 
but they heard not the voice of Him that spake to me ” 
(Acts 22:9). Now, these two statements seem to flatly 
contradict one another. Luke, in recounting the con- 
version, says that the men that journeyed with Paul 
heard the voice, but Paul himself in recounting his 
conversion says that they heard not the voice. Could 
there possibly be a flatter contradiction than this? 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” — 85 


But this apparent contradiction all disappears when we 
look at the Greek of the two passages. The Greek word 
translated “ heard” governs two cases, the genitive and 
the accusative. When a person or thing is spoken of, 
the voice of which is heard, it is followed by the geni- 
tive. When the message that is heard is spoken of 
it is followed by the accusative. In Acts 9: the geni- 
tive is used. They did hear the voice, the sound. In 
Acts 22: 9 the words translated “the voice” are in the 
accusative. They did not hear the message of the One 
that spoke. The word rendered “voice” also has two 
meanings; first, “a sound, a tone,” and second, a voice, 
that is, “a sound of uttered words” (Thayer’s Greek- 
English Lexicon of the New Testament). The voice, as 
_ a mere sound, they heard. The voice as the “ sound of 
uttered words,” the message, they did not hear. So 
another seeming difficulty entirely disappears when we 
look exactly at what the Bible in the original says; and 
instead of having an objection to the Bible, we have 
another illustration of its absolute accuracy, not only 
down to a word, but down to a single letter that ends a 
word and by which a case is indicated. 

4, A good deal is made by some who deny the ac- 
curacy of the Bible of the apparent contradictions in 
the various accounts of the resurrection of Jesus Christ 
from the dead. The most prominent unbeliever in his 
own city sent to the daily papers the following problem 
for me to solve. He says, “The account of the visit 
to the grave is entirely different in the four Gospels. 
In one case two of the Gospels state that the women 
saw two angels at the grave and two of the other Gospels 
state that they only saw one angel.” What is the 
_ solution of this apparent difficulty ? 

First of all, let it be said that the objector does not 
truly state the facts in the case. So far from its being 
true that two of the Gospels state that “they only saw 
one angel,” not one of the Gospels states “ that they only 


86 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


saw one angel.” It is true that Matthew says that “ they 
saw an angel” (Matt. 28: 1-5) and Mark says, “ They 
saw a young man” (presumably an angel) (Mark 
16:5-7), but neither Matthew nor Mark say that 
“they only saw one angel.” Saying that they saw one 
does not preclude the possibility of their seeing two. 
Furthermore, let it be noticed that it is not true, as 
stated by the objector, that two of the Gospels state 
that the women saw two angels at the grave. It is 
true that Luke says (Luke 24: 3, 4) that after they had 
entered into the sepulchre two men (presumably angels) 
stood by them in dazzling apparel. But this apparently 
does not refer to the incident that Matthew refers to 
at all, for the angel there mentioned was an angel who 
was outside the sepulchre. Nor does it seem to refer 
to the same fact of which Mark speaks, for the young 
man (or angel) in Mark’s Gospel was one who was 
sitting on the right side of the sepulchre. This angel 
may have been joined later by the one who was on the 
outside and these two together have stood by the women. 
This seems the more likely, as the message uttered by 
the two in Luke is in part the same as that uttered by 
the angel outside the sepulchre in Matthew, and by the 
young man inside the sepulchre in Mark (cf. Luke 
24:5, 6 with Matt. 28: 5-7; Mark 16:5-7). The very 
simple solution of it all is, that there was an angel 
outside the tomb when the women approached and they 
saw another one sitting inside. The one outside entered 
and the one sitting arose and, standing by the women, 
together or after one another they uttered the words 
recorded in Matthew and Mark and in Luke. 

But how about the account in John? John does tell 
us that there were two angels in white sitting, one at 
the head and one at the feet where the body of Jesus 
had Jain (John 20:12, 13). How can we reconcile 
that with the other three? Very easily. It was not the 
group of women at all that saw these two angels, but 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 87 


we are distinctly told it was Mary alone. Mary started 
out with the other women to the sepulchre, got a little 
ahead of the group, was the first to see the stone rolled 
away from the tomb (John 20:1), immediately jumped 
at the conclusion that the tomb had been rifled, and ran 
at the top of her speed to the city to carry the news to 
Peter and John (John 20:2). While she is going 
into the city the other women reach and enter the 
tomb, and the things recorded in Matthew, Mark and 
Luke occur. These women have left the sepulchre 
before Mary reaches it the second time. Peter and 
John have also left it when Mary reaches the sepulchre, 
and two angels, the one who had been on the outside, 
and the one who at first had been sitting on the inside, 
were now both sitting, one at the head and the other at 
the feet where the body of Jesus had lain. 

All the other apparent contradictions in the four ac- 
counts of the resurrection, and they are quite numerous, 
also disappear on careful study. But these apparent 
contradictions are themselves proof of the truth and the 
accuracy of the accounts. It is evident that these four 
accounts are separate and independent accounts. If 
four different persons had sat down to make up a story in 
collusion, of a resurrection that never occurred, they 
would have made their four accounts appear to agree, at 
least on the surface. Whatever of contradictions there 
might be in the four accounts would only come out after 
minute and careful study. But in the Gospel just the 
opposite is the case. It is all on the surface that the 
apparent contradictions occur. It is only by careful 
and protracted study that the real agreement shines 
forth. It is just such a harmony as would not exist 
between four accounts fabricated in collusion. It is 
just such an agreement as would exist in four inde- 
pendent accounts of substantially the same circum- 
stances, each narrator telling the same story from his 
own standpoint, relating such details as impressed him, 


88 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


omitting other details which did not impress him, but 
which did impress another narrator and which the other 
narrator related. Sometimes two accounts would seem 
to contradict one another, but the third account would 
come in and unintentionally reconcile the apparent dis- 
crepancies between the two. This is precisely what we 
have in the four accounts of the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ. We may heartily thank God that there are 
these apparent discrepancies among them. And even 
if we cannot find the solution of some apparent dis- 
crepancies, the fact that we do by careful study find 
a solution of what appeared to be an inexplicable con- 
tradiction will suggest to us the certainty that if we 
knew all the facts in the case we could also find a solu- 
tion of the apparent discrepancies which as yet we 
cannot reconcile. The more one studies the four ac- 
counts of the resurrection, the more he will be con- 
vinced, if he is candid, that they are separate and 
independent accounts and a truthful narration of what 
actually occurred. They could not have been fabricated 
in collusion with one another, the very discrepancies 
urged prove this. Much less could they have been 
fabricated independently of one another. Four men 
sitting down independently of one another to fabricate 
an account of something that never occurred would 
nowhere have agreed with one another: but in point 
of fact the more we study the four accounts the more 
clearly do we discover how marvellously the four ac- 
counts fit in to one another. 

What has been said about the apparent discrepancies 
between the four accounts of the resurrection will apply 
also to other apparent discrepancies in the different 
Gospel narratives of the same event. They are very 
numerous, and to take them all up in .detail would 
require a volume; but the illustration given above will 
serve to prove how these apparent discrepancies can be 
reconciled one by one if we take them up thoroughly. 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 89 


And if there are any that still refuse to yield to our 
hardest study, we may be confident that if we knew all 
the facts in the case the apparent discrepancy could 
be readily reconciled. 

5. Another apparent contradiction of the Scripture 
of which a great deal is made, and which has puzzled 
a great many believers, is this: 

We read in Mal. 3: 6, “ For I am the Lord, I change 
not,” and in James 1:17, “ Every good gift and every 
perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the 
Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither 
shadow of turning.” And I Sam. 15:29, “And also 
the strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for He 
is not a man that He should repent.” But in appar- 
ently flat contradiction of this we read in Jonah 3:10, 
“And God saw their works, that they turned from their 
evil way; and God repented of the evil, that He had 
said that He would do unto them; and He did it not,” 
and in Gen. 6:6, “ And it repented the Lord that He 
had made man on the earth, and it grieved Him at 
His heart.” Here it not only says “It repented God,” 
but “it grieved Him at His heart.” Now, this appears 
like a flat contradiction. What is the explanation? 
The explanation is this, that what the first set of pas- 
sages says is absolutely true, that God is absolutely un- 
changeable: He is “the same yesterday, to-day and 
forever ” (Heb. 13: 8). But what the second class of pas- 
sages says is also true, for if God does remain the same 
in character, absolutely unchangeable, infinitely hating 
sin, and in His purpose to visit sin with judgment, then 
if any city or any person changes in his attitude toward 
sin, God must necessarily change in His attitude toward 
that person or city. If God remains the same, if His 
attitude toward sin and righteousness is unchanging, 
then must His dealings with men change as they turn 
from sin to repentance. His character remains ever 
the same, but His dealings with men change as they 


90 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


change from the position that is hateful to His un- 
changing hatred of sin to one that is pleasing to His 
unchanging love of righteousness. We may illustrate 
this by the direction of a railway station, that remains 
in one place, relative to the train that moves along the 
track in front of the station. When the train begins 
to move it is to the east of the station, but as the train 
moves westward, it is soon west of the station. The 
only way in which the station can maintain the same 
direction from the moving train is by moving as the 
train moves. If the station is unchangeable in its posi- 
tion, its direction relative to the train must change as 
the train moves. So it is with God’s attitude toward 
man. If God remains unchangeable in His character, 
His purpose and His position, then as man moves from 
sin to righteousness, God’s attitude relative to that man 
must change. The very fact that God does not repent 
(change His mind), that He remains always the same in 
His attitude toward sin, makes it necessary that God 
should repent in His conduct (change His dealings with 
men) as they turn from sin to righteousness. 

As to Jehovah’s repenting of having made man on 
the earth and its grieving Him at His heart, this, too, is 
necessitated by the unchanging attitude of God toward 
sin. If God does not repent (change his mind about 
sin, His attitude toward sin), if man’s wickedness 
becomes great, then God’s unrepenting, unchanging 
hatred of sin necessitates that the man whom He has 
created, who has fallen into sin so great and so abhor- 
rent to Himself, become the object of great grief to 
Him, and that He should turn from His creative deal- 
ings with man to His destroying dealings with man. 
This was necessitated by man’s sin. An unchangeably 
holy God must destroy man who has become so hope- 
lessly sunken in sin. The only condition upon which 
He could spare him would be that God Himself change 
from the holiness of His character as.it was when He 


IMPORTANT “CONTRADICTIONS” 91 


created him to become an unholy God. So again we 
see that what appears at the first glimpse like a flat 
contradiction is really no contradiction at all, but an 
entire agreement in fact and thought between passages 
that seem to contradict in words. 

6. Another apparent contradiction of Scripture that 
is frequently urged is found in II Sam. 24:1 compared 
with I Chron. 21:1. In II Sam. 24:1, R. V., we read 
that the “ Anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel 
and He moved David against them, saying, ‘Go num- 
ber Israel and Judah,’ ” but in I Chron. 21:1 we read 
“ And Satan stood up against Israel and moved David 
to number Israel.” In one passage we are told that 
Jehovah moved David against the people when he said, 
“Go and number Israel and Judah.” In the other 
passage we are told that Satan moved David to number 
Israel, and we are asked, “ Which is the correct ac- 
count?” The very simple answer to this question is 
that both accounts are correct. We do not need even 
to suppose that an error has crept into the text, and 
that “he” appears instead of Satan, so that what really 
was recorded in Samuel would be “ And again the anger 
of the Lord was kindled against Israel and Satan moved 
David against them,” meaning that the anger of the 
Lord was kindled because He yielded to Satan’s moving 
him. Of course it is possible that such an error may 
have crept into the text, or it is possible that the pro- 
noun “he” really refers to Satan, who is not men- 
tioned, or the “ he” might be interpreted “ one ” with- 
out any designation as to who the “one” was. If this 
were so, of course there would be no difficulty whatever 
in the passage; but there is no insuperable difficulty in 
any case to anyone who understands the Bible teaching 
regarding God’s relation to temptation and the attitude 
that He takes toward Satan. In II Cor. 12:7, R. V., 
we are told by Paul that lest he should be exalted above 

measure through the abundance of the revelations made 


92 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


to him, there was given him a thorn in the flesh, “a 
messenger of Satan,” to buffet him, that he “should 
not be exalted overmuch.” Now as the purpose of this 
“thorn in the flesh,” this “ messenger of Satan,” was 
most salutary, to keep Paul from being “exalted over- 
much,” evidently it was God who gave the thorn in 
the flesh, the “messenger of Satan,” but none the less 
the messenger was a messenger of Satan. In other 
words, God for our good uses Satan, evil as he is, for 
our moral discipline. Just as God makes the wrath 
of man to praise Him (Ps. 76:10) so He makes even 
the wrath of Satan to praise Him. What Satan in- 
tends only for evil, God uses for our good. It was 
Satan who tempted David, but it was by God’s per- 
mission that Satan tempted him, and back of the test- 
ing and consequent failure of David and the salutary 
humilation of David that came out of it was God, 
and in this sense it was God who moved David to the 
act that David might discover through his failure what 
was in his own heart. 


XIX 
“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 


THE Bible is said not only to be full of “ contradic- 
tions,” but also to contain mistakes. 

One of the mistakes most constantly referred to by 
destructive critics is found in Matt. 27:9, 10 (R. V.). 
“Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jere- 
miah, the prophet, saying, ‘ And they took the thirty 
pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom 
certain of the children of Israel did price; and gave 
them for the potter’s field, as the Lord appointed me.’ ” 
Now, the passage here referred to by Matthew is found 
in the prophecy ascribed in the Old Testament to Zecha- 
riah (Zech. 11:11-13). At first sight this appears as 
if Matthew had made a mistake and ascribed to Jere- 
miah a prophecy that was really made by Zechariah. 
Even John Calvin seems to have thought that Matthew 
made a mistake. He says, “ How the name of Jere- 
miah crept in, I confess I do not know, nor do I give 
myself much trouble to inquire. The passage itself 
plainly shows the name of Jeremiah has been put down 
by mistake instead of Zechariah; for in Jeremiah we 
find nothing of this sort, nor anything that even ap- 
proaches it.” This passage has been pressed as proof 
that the Gospel narratives are not necessarily “ histori- 
cal accounts of what actually occurred.” Must we 
admit that Matthew was mistaken? There is not 
the slightest necessity of admitting that Matthew was 
mistaken. 

In the first place, in some MSS. the word Jeremiah 
does not appear, but the passage reads, “ Then was ful- 
filled that which was spoken by the prophet,” without 
93 


94. DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


any mention as to who the prophet was. In still an- 
other reading, “Zechariah” appears instead of “ Jere- 
miah.” Westcott and Hort do not accept the reading 
without Jeremiah, nor the reading which substitutes 
Zechariah for Jeremiah, but they do mention these 
readings, especially the first, as “noteworthy rejected 
readings.” Mrs. Lewis says that some of the earliest 
and best MSS. omit the word “Jeremiah”; so the 
apparent mistake here may be due to the error of a 
copyist. 

However, the best textual critics all accept the read- 
ing “Jeremiah” in this passage, and it seems to the 
writer that this is probably the correct reading. If in 
the Gospel of Matthew as originally written Matthew 
used the word “Jeremiah ” here, was it not a mistake? 
Not at all necessarily. That these words, or words very 
similar to them, are found in the prophecy which in our 
Old Testament bears the name of Zechariah is unques- 
tionably true, but it does not follow at all from this 
that Jeremiah did not speak them, for it is a well-known 
fact that the later prophets of the Old Testament often 
quote the predictions of earlier prophets. For ex- 
ample, Zechariah himself in Zech. 1:4 quotes a proph- 
ecy known to be Jeremiah’s (cf. Jer. 18:11), and in the 
passage which we are now considering Zechariah may 
also have quoted from the prophecy of Jeremiah. There 
is no record in the book of Jeremiah as we now have it 
in the Old Testament of Jeremiah’s having uttered this 
prophecy, but there is no reason whatever to think we 
have in the book of Jeremiah all the prophecies that 
Jeremiah uttered, and Zechariah may easily have had ac- 
cess to prophecies of Jeremiah not recorded in the book 
of Jeremiah. Furthermore, it is to be noted that Zecha- 
riah himself says in Zech. 7:7, “Should ye not hear 
the words which the Lord hath cried by the former 
prophets ”; so it is evident that Zechariah regarded it 
as part of his mission to recall the prophecies of the 


“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 95 


prophets that had gone before him. He would be espe- 
cially inclined to recall the prophecies of Jeremiah, 
for it was a saying among the Jews that “ the spirit 
of Jeremiah was upon Zechariah,” so we see that this 
much-vaunted mistake of Matthew does not appear to 
have been a mistake at all when we closely examine it. 

Perhaps it ought to be added that there has been 
much question by the critics as to whether the closing 
chapters of the Book of Zechariah were really a portion 
of the prophecies of Zechariah. There is nothing in 
the chapters themselves to indicate that they were. It 
is true that for centuries they have been attached to 
the prophecies of Zechariah, but nowhere in the Bible 
does it state that they were by Zechariah, and it has 
been held that they were in reality not by Zechariah but 
by Jeremiah. This, however, is a question for the 
critics. If it should prove to be so, it would simply 
be an additional confirmation of the accuracy of Mat- 
thew’s statement; but even if it is not so, if Zechariah 
is the author of this prophecy (Zech. 11:11-13) as we 
find it in the Bible, it does not at all prove that Jere- 
miah may not have uttered a similar prophecy to which 
Zechariah referred and which Matthew has accurately 
quoted. And the critics will have to search farther, if 
they wish to prove Matthew to have been in error. 

2. A second alleged mistake in the Bible is the state- 
ment of Stephen in Acts 7:16, “And were carried 
over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abra- 
ham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor, 
the father of Sychem.” Gen. 23:17, 18, states, “ And 
the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which 
was before Mamre, the field and the cave which was 
therein were made sure unto Abraham.” Stephen seems, 
then, to have been mistaken in his statement that Abra- 
ham bought it of the sons of Emmor. Let me put the 
supposed mistake in the words of a prominent Doctor 
of Divinity. He says, “According to Luke’s report, 


96 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Stephen says Abraham bought a sepulchre of the sons 
of Emmor, the father of Sychem (Acts 7:16). But 
Genesis 23: 17, 18, says, Abraham bought it of Hphron, 
the Hittite, and Gen. 23:19 says that Jacob bought it 
of the sons of Emmor. . . . John Calvin says, 
‘ Stephen evidently made a mistake.’ Dr. Hackett ad- 
mits that Stephen appears to have confounded the two 
transactions . . . but what do those say about it 
. « . who maintain the absolute inerrancy of the 
Bible?” This seems like a puzzler until one notices 
exactly what the three passages referred to say; then 
the puzzle is solved. The very simple solution is as 
follows: 

First, Gen. 23:17, 18, does not say what the objector 
says it does say; that is, it does not say that Abraham 
bought this sepulchre to which Stephen refers of Ephron, 
the Hittite. It does state that Abraham bought a field 
of Ephron, the Hittite, in which there was a cave, and 
that Abraham buried his wife Sarah in this cave. But 
there is no good reason for supposing that this was the 
sepulchre in which Jacob and the patriarchs were 
buried. There is no reason for supposing that Abra- 
ham in his long lifetime bought but one burial place. 
The writer of this book has himself purchased two, 
one where his brother is buried, in Chicago, and 
one where his daughter is buried, in Northfield, Mass., 
and is interested in a third in Brooklyn, where his 
father and mother and other brother are buried. There 
is not the slightest hint in the Scriptures that these two 
sepulchres mentioned in Gen. 23:17, 18, and in Acts 
%:16 are the same. As to the passage in Gen. 33:9, 
where, according to the objector, it is said that Jacob, 
and not Abraham (as Stephen puts it), bought the 
sepulchre, this passage does not, in point of fact, say 
that Jacob bought the sepulchre. It says he bought 
“the parcel of a field at the hand of the children of 
Hamor [the persons of whom Stephen says “ Abraham 


“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 9Y 


bought the sepulchre ”].” The presumption in the case 
is that Abraham had already purchased the sepulchre 
at an earlier date and Jacob in his day purchased the 
ground (“a parcel of land”) in which the sepulchre 
was located. When Abraham purchased a sepulchre 
to bury Sarah he took the precaution of buying the 
field as well as the sepulchre; but in the latter case he 
seems to have purchased the sepulchre without buying 
the whole piece of ground, which therefore Jacob him- 
self bought at a later date. It is altogether likely that 
Abraham should have purchased a sepulchre in this 
spot in his later life, for it was a place dear to him by 
many memories (see Gen. 12:6, 7). So, after all, the 
mistake was not Stephen’s, but the mistake of the com- 
mentators, who were not careful to note exactly what 
Stephen said and what is said in the two passages in 
Genesis. Joshua informs us that it was in this parcel 
of ground which Jacob bought (which presumably con- 
tained the sepulchre that Abraham had bought at an 
earlier date) that the bones of Joseph were buried 
(Josh. 24:32). Apparently Stephen was a more care- 
ful student of Old Testament Scripture than some of 
his critics. 

But even allowing for the moment that Stephen was 
mistaken in this case, it would prove nothing whatever 
against the Divine origin of the Bible or its absolute 
inerrancy, for Stephen is not one of the authors of the 
Bible. He was not a prophet nor an apostle. It is 
true he was a Spirit-filled man, but he is not the writer 
of a book in the Bible. The inspired author of the Acts 
of the Apostles records that Stephen said these words, 
and if these words that Stephen uttered had been mis- 
taken, the record that he said them would still be cor- 
rect. It would be God’s word that Stephen said this, 
but what Stephen said would not be God’s word. The 
one who contends for the Divine origin of the Bible, 
and its absolute accuracy, is under no obligation what- 


98 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


ever to prove the accuracy of every statement that every 
speaker in the Bible, or even every Spirit-filled speaker 
is recorded as saying (see pages 10-12). 

4. Another alleged mistake in the Bible is found in 
Prov. 31:6, 7, “Give strong drink unto him that is 
ready to perish and wine unto the bitter in soul. Let 
him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his 
misery no more.” (R. V.) It is said that this advo- 
cates the use of intoxicating liquor under certain condi- 
tions, and that, as the use of intoxicating liquor under 
any and all circumstances is wrong, this teaching of 
the Bible is a mistake. But the difficulty disappears, as 
many another difficulty will disappear, if we do not rip 
the verses out of their context, but study them, as any 
passage in any book should be studied, in the context. 
The whole section from verses 1 to 9 is a protest against 
kings (and by implication persons in any place of re- 
sponsibility) using wine or strong drink at all. It is 
plainly taught that any use of wine has a tendency to 
make them forget the law and to pervert judgment. 
Verses 6 and 7 themselves go on to add that wine and 
strong drink should only be used in cases of extreme 
physical weakness and despondency, when the man is so 
far gone that he is “ready to perish,” and is conse- 
quently in the deepest depths of despondency (“ bitter 
in soul,” R. V.). The words are addressed to the king 
(R. V.), and the king who was able to buy wine instead 
of using it for himself should give it to those who are 
in such physical condition that they need it. The one 
in this condition would be stimulated by the wine, lifted 
out of his depression, by the generosity of the king who 
gave the wine, so that he is enabled to “ forget his 
poverty ” which would naturally preclude him from 
buying the wine for himself. The whole passage goes 
on to urge the king’s attention to “the cause of the 
poor and needy.” So there remains no difficulty in this 
passage except for those who hold that all use of in- 


“MISTAKES” IN THE BIBLE 99 


toxicating liquors is wrong under any circumstances, 
but there are many who hold that in extreme cases of 
physical weakness the use of wine is wise and permis- 
sible. We do not need to go into the question as to 
whether the wine and strong drink in this case were 
alcoholic. Those who urge that “strong drink” in the 
Old Testament oftentimes refers to a heavy, sweet, un- 
fermented wine have a good deal to say in favour of 
their position. Of course, if this interpretation were 
true, it would remove all difficulty from the passage. 
But in any case there is really no difficulty here at all 
for anyone who believes that there are circumstances 
in which the use of alcoholic stimulants is advisable. 
As there was a time in the early life of the writer of 
this book when the doctors had all given him up to die, 
and when his life was sustained by a prescription of an 
old nurse, one of the main ingredients of the prescrip- 
tion being brandy, he is naturally disposed to think 
there are cases like that mentioned in the text when 
the use of strong drink is warrantable. But he thor- 
oughly agrees with the context of the passage that 
teaches that all use of wine should be renounced by 
people in health and strength and prosperity. 

5. A stock objection against the Bible, and not only 
against the Bible, but against Jesus Christ Himself, is 
found in the story of Jesus turning the water into wine 
at the marriage festival at Cana of Galilee, as recorded 
in John 2:1-11. But there need be no difficulty in 
this action of Jesus even for the extreme teetotaler, if 
we would consider carefully exactly what is said and 
precisely what Jesus did. The wine provided for the 
marriage festivities at Cana failed. A cloud was about 
to fall over the joy of what is properly a festive occasion. 
Jesus came to the rescue. He provided wine, but there 
is not a hint that the wine He made was intoxicating. 
It was a fresh-made wine. Newmade wine is never in- 
toxicating. It is not intoxicating until some time after 


100 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


the process of fermentation has set in. Fermentation 
is a process of decay. There is not a hint that our Lord 
produced alcohol, which is a product of decay or death. 
He produced a living wine uncontaminated by fermen- 
tation. It is true it was better wine than they had been 
drinking, but that does not show for a moment that it 
was more fermented than that which they had before 
been drinking. The writer of this book is a thorough- 
going teetotaler. He does not even believe at all in the 
use of alcoholic stimulants, even in cases of sickness, 
except in the most extreme cases, and even then only 
with the greatest caution, but he has not the slightest 
objection, and does not think that any reasonable per- 
son can have the slightest objection, to anyone’s drink- 
ing newmade wine—that is, the fresh juice of the grape. 
It is a wholesome drink. Even if some of the guests 
were already drunken, or had drunk freely (see v. 10, 
R. V.) of wine that may have been intoxicating, there 
would be no harm, but good, in substituting an unin- 
toxicating wine for the intoxicating drink which they 
had been taking. Our Lord, as far as this story goes, 
at least, did not make intozicating liquor for anybody 
to drink, but simply saved a festive occasion from disas- 
ter by providing a pure, wholesome, unintoxicating 
drink. By turning the water into a wholesome wine, 
a showed His creative power and manifested His 
glory. 


XX 


THE TWO CONTRADICTORY GENEALOGIES 
OF JESUS, THE CHRIST 


A FAVOURITE point of attack on the Bible for those who 
deny its Divine origin and inerrancy are the two vary- 
ing genealogies of Jesus Christ. Not only is this a 
favourite point of attack by unbelievers, but it is also 
a point that often puzzles earnest students of the Bible. 
It is perfectly clear that the two genealogies differ 
widely from one another, and yet each of them is given 
as the genealogy of Christ. How can they by any pos- 
sibility both be true? One has recently written me on 
this question in these words, “Two genealogies of Jesus 
are given, one in. Matthew and one in Luke, and one 
is entirely different from the other. How can both be 
correct?” A very simple answer to this apparently 
difficult question is this: 

1. The genealogy given in Matthew is the genealogy 
of Joseph, the reputed father of Jesus, his father in the 
eyes of the law. The genealogy given in Luke is the gen- 
ealogy of Mary, the mother of Jesus, and is the human 
genealogy of Jesus Christ in actual fact. The Gos- 
pel of Matthew was written for Jews. All through 
it Joseph is prominent, Mary: is scarcely mentioned. 
In Luke, on the other hand, Mary is the chief per- 
sonage in the whole account of the Saviour’s conception 
and birth. Joseph is brought in only incidentally and 
because he was Mary’s husband. In all of this, of course, 
there is a deep significance. 

2. In Matthew, Jesus appears as the Messiah. In 
Luke He appears as “the Son of Man,” our Brother 
and Redeemer, who belongs to the whole race and 

101 


102 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


claims kindred with all kinds and conditions of men. 
So in Matthew, the genealogy descends from Abraham 
to Joseph and Jesus, because all the predictions and 
promises touching the Messiah are fulfilled in Him. 
But in Luke the genealogy ascends from Jesus to 
Adam, because the genealogy is being traced back to 
the head of the whole race, and shows the relation of the 
Second Adam to the First. 

3. Joseph’s line is the strictly royal line from David 
to Joseph. In Luke, though the line of descent is from 
David, it is not the royal line. In this Jesus is de- 
scended from David through Nathan, David’s son in- 
deed, but not in the royal line, and the list follows a 
line quite distinct from the royal line. 

4, The Messiah, according to prediction, was to be 
the actual son of David according to the flesh (II Sam. 
%:12-19; Ps. 89:3, 4, 34-37; 182:11; Acts 2:30; 13: 
22, 23; Rom. 1:3; IJ Tim. 2:8). These prophecies 
are fulfilled by Jesus being the Son of Mary, who was 
a lineal descendant of David, though not in the royal 
line. Joseph, who was of the royal line, was not his 
father according to the flesh, but was his father in the 
eyes of the law. 

5. Mary was a descendant of David through her 
father, Heli. It is true that Luke 2:23 says that 
Joseph was the son of Heli. The simple explanation of 
this is that, Mary being a woman, her name according to 
Jewish usage could not come into the genealogy, males 
alone forming the line, so Joseph’s name is introduced 
in the place of Mary’s, he being Mary’s husband, Heli 
was his father-in-law and so Joseph is called the son 
of Heli, and the line thus completed. While Joseph 
was son-in-law of Heli, according to the flesh he was 
in actual fact the son-of Jacob (Matt. 1:16). 

6. Two genealogies are absolutely necessary to trace 
the lineage of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the 
one the royal and legal, the other the natural and 


GENEALOGIES OF JESUS 103 


literal, and these two genealogies we find, the legal and 
royal in Matthew’s Gospel, the Gospel of law and king- 
ship; the natural and literal in Luke’s, the Gospel of 
humanity. 

%. We are told in Jer. 22:30 any descendant of 
Jeconiah could not come to the throne of David, and 
Joseph was of this line, and while Joseph’s genealogy 
furnishes the royal line for Jesus, his son before the 
law, nevertheless Jeremiah’s prediction is fulfilled to 
the very letter, for Jesus, strictly speaking, was not 
Joseph’s descendant and therefore was not of the seed 
of Jeconiah. If Jesus had been the son of Joseph in 
reality, He could not have come to the throne, but He 
is Mary’s son through Nathan, and can come to the 
throne legally by her marrying Joseph and so clearing 
His way legally to it. 

As we study these two genealogies of Jesus carefully 
and read them in the light of Old Testament predic- 
tion, we find that, so far from constituting a reason for 
doubting the accuracy of the Bible, they are rather a 
confirmation of the minutest accuracy of that Book. 
It is amazing how one part of the Bible fits into another 
part when we study it thus minutely. We need no 
longer stumble over the fact of there being two genealo- 
gies, but discover and rejoice in the deep meaning in 
the fact that there are two genealogies. 


XXT 


WAS JESUS REALLY THREE DAYS ‘AND 
THREE NIGHTS IN THE HEART OF THE 
EARTH? 


MarrHew in the twelfth chapter of his Gospel and the 
fortieth verse reports Jesus as saying, “ As Jonah was 
three days and three nights in the belly of the whale 
[“sea monster” R. V. margin]; so shall the Son of 
Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the 
earth.” According to the commonly accepted tradition 
of the church, Jesus was crucified on Friday, dying at 
3 P. M., or somewhere between 3 P. M. and sundown, and 
was raised from the dead very early in the morning of 
the following Sunday. Many readers of the Bible are 
puzzled to know how the interval between late Friday 
afternoon and early Sunday morning can be figured out 
to be three days and three nights. It seems rather to be 
two nights, one day and a very small portion of another 
day. 

The solution of this apparent difficulty proposed by 
many commentators is that “a day and a night” is 
simply another way of saying “a day,” and that the 
ancient Jews reckoned a fraction of a day as a whole 
day, so they say there was a part of Friday (a very 
small part) (or a day and a night); all of Saturday, 
another day (or a day and a night); part of Sunday 
(very small part) another day (or a day and a night). 
There are many persons whom this solution does not 
altogether satisfy, and the writer is free to confess it 
does not satisfy him at all. It seems to me to be a 
makeshift, and a very weak makeshift. Is there any 
solution that is altogether satisfactory? ‘There is. 

104 


IN THE HEART OF THE EARTH 105 


The first fact to be noticed in the proper solution is 
that the Bible nowhere says or implies that Jesus was 
crucified and died on Friday. It is said that Jesus was 
crucified on “the day before the Sabbath” (Mark 
15:42). As the Jewish weekly Sabbath came on Sat- 
urday (beginning at sunset the evening before), the 
conclusion is naturally drawn that, as Jesus was crucified 
the day before the Sabbath, He must have been crucified 
on Friday. But it is a well-known fact, to which the 
Bible bears abundant testimony, that the Jews had other 
Sabbaths beside the weekiy Sabbath, which. fell on Sat- 
urday. The first day of the Passover week, no matter 
upon what day of the week it came, was always a Sab- 
bath (Ex. 12:16; Lev. 23:7; Num. 28:16-18). The 
question therefore arises whether the Sabbath that fol- 
lowed Christ’s crucifixion was the weekly Sabbath 
(Saturday) or the Passover Sabbath, falling on the 
15th of Nisan, which came that year on Thursday. 
Now the Bible does not leave us to speculate in regard 
to which Sabbath is meant in this instance; for John 
tells us in so many words, in John 19: 14, that the day 
on which Jesus was tried and crucified was “the 
preparation of the Passover” (R. V.). That is, it was 
not the day before the weekly Sabbath (that is, Friday), 
but it was the day before the Passover Sabbath, which 
came this year on Thursday—that is to say, the day on 
which Jesus Christ was crucified was Wednesday. John 
makes this as clear as day. 

The Gospel of John was written later than the other 
Gospels, and scholars have for a long time noticed that 
in various places there was an evident intention to cor- 
rect false impressions that one might get from reading 
the other Gospels. One of these false impressions was 
that Jesus ate the Passover with His disciples at the 
regular time of the Passover. To correct this false im- 
pression John clearly states that He ate it the evening 
_ before, and that He Himself died on the cross at the 


106 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


very moment the Passover lambs were being slain “ be- 
tween the two evenings” on the 14th Nisan (Ex. 12: 
6 Hebrew and R. V. margin). God’s real Pascal Lamb, 
Jesus, of Whom all other Pascal lambs offered through 
the centuries were only types, was therefore slain at the 
very time appointed of God. Everything about the 
Passover Lamb was fulfilled in Jesus. (1) He was a 
Lamb without blemish and without spot (Ex. 12:5). 
(2) He was chosen on the 10th day of Nisan (Ex. 
12:3); for it was on the tenth day of the month, the 
preceding Saturday, that the triumphal entry into 
Jerusalem was made, for they came from Jericho to 
Bethany six days before the Passover (John 12:1— 
that would be six days before Thursday, which would 
be Friday), and it was on the next day that the entry 
into Jerusalem was made (John 12:12 and following) 
that is, on Saturday, the 10th Nisan. . It was also on 
this same day that Judas went to the chief priests and 
offered to betray Jesus for thirty pieces of silver. (Matt. 
26: 6-16; Mark 14:3-11). As it was after the supper 
in the house of Simon the, leper, and as the supper 
occurred late on Friday or early on Saturday, after 
sunset, after the supper would necessarily be on the 
10th Nisan. This being the price set on Him by the 
chief priests, it was, of course, the buying or taking to 
them of a lamb, which according to law must occur on 
the 10th Nisan. Furthermore, they put the exact value 
on the lamb that Old Testament prophecy predicted 
(Matt. 26:15; cf. Zech. 11:12). (3) Not a bone of 
Him was broken when He was killed (John 19: 36; cf. 
Ex. 12:46; Num. 9:12; Ps. 34:20). (4) And He 
was killed on the 14th Nisan between the evenings just 
before the beginning of the 15th Nisan, at sundown 
(Ex. 12:6, R. V. margin). If we take just exactly 
what the Bible says, viz., that Jesus was slain before the 
Passover Sabbath, the type is marvellously fulfilled in 
every detail; but if we accept the traditional theory that 


IN THE HEART OF THE EARTH 107 


Jesus was crucified on Friday, the type fails at many 
points. 

Furthermore, if we accept the traditional view that 
Jesus was crucified on Friday and ate the Passover on 
the regular day of the Passover, then the journey from 
Jericho to Bethany, which occurred six days before the 
Passover (Jno. 12:1), would fall on a Saturday—that 
is, the Jewish Sabbath. Such a journey on the Jewish 
Sabbath would be contrary to the Jewish law. Of 
course it was impossible for Jesus to take such a jour- 
ney on the Jewish Sabbath. In reality his triumphal 
entry into Jerusalem was on the Jewish Sabbath, Sat- 
urday. This was altogether possible, for the Bible else- 
where tells us that Bethany was a Sabbath day’s jour- 
ney from Jerusalem (Acts 1:12; cf. Luke 24:50). 

Furthermore, it has been figured out by the astrono- 
mers that in the year 30 A. D., which is the commonly 
accepted year for the crucifixion of our Lord, the Pass- 
over was kept on Thursday, April 6th, the moon being 
full that day. The chronologists who have supposed 
that the crucifixion took place on Friday have been 
greatly perplexed by this fact that in the year 30 A. p. 
the Passover occurred on Thursday. One writer in 
seeking a solution to the difficulty suggests that the 
crucifixion may have been in the year 33 a. D., for al- 
though the full moon was on a Thursday that year 
also, yet as it was two and half hours of being Friday, 
he thinks that perhaps the Jews may have kept it that 
day. But when we accept exactly what the Bible says, 
namely, that Jesus was not crucified on the Passover day 
but on “the preparation of the Passover,” and that He 
was to be three days and three nights in the grave, as 
the “preparation of the Passover” that year would be 
Wednesday and His resurrection early on the first day 
of the week, this allows exactly three days and three 
nights in the grave. 

To sum it all up, Jesus died just about sunset on 


108 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


Wednesday. Seventy-two hours later, exactly three days 
and three nights, at the beginning of the first day of 
the week, Saturday at sunset, He arose again from the 
grave. When the women visited the tomb just before 
dawn in the morning they found the grave already 
empty. So we are not driven to any such makeshift as 
that any small portion of a day is reckoned as a whole 
day and night, but we find that the statement of Jesus 
was literally true. Three days and three nights His 
body was dead and lay in the sepulchre. While His 
body lay dead, He Himself being quickened in the 
spirit (1 Peter 3:18) went into the heart of the earth 
and preached unto the spirits which were in prison. 
(1 Peter 3:19). This supposed difficulty solves itself, 
as do so many other difficulties in the Bible, when we 
take the Bible as meaning exactly what it says. 

It is sometimes objected against the view here ad- 
vanced that the two on the way to Emmaus early on 
the first day of the week, that is, Sunday, said to Jesus in 
speaking of the crucifixion and events accompanying it, 
“ Besides all this, to-day is the third day since these 
things were done” (Luke 24:21), and it is said that, 
if the crucifixion took place on Wednesday, Sunday 
would be the fourth day since these things were done; 
but the answer is very simple. These things were done 
just as Thursday was beginning at sunset. They were 
therefore completed on Thursday, and the first day since 
Thursday would be Friday, the second day since Thurs- 
day would be Saturday, and “the third day since” 
Thursday would be Sunday, the first day of the week. 
So the supposed objection in reality supports the theory. 
On the other hand, if the crucifixion took place on 
Friday, by no manner of reckoning could Sunday be 
made “the third day since” these things were done. 
There are many passages in the Scripture that support 
the theory advanced above and that make it necessary to 
believe that Jesus died late on Wednesday. Some of 


IN THE HEART OF THE EARTH 109 


them are as follows: “ For as Jonah was three days and 
nights in the whale’s belly, so shall the Son of Man be 
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth ” 
(Matt. 12:40). “This fellow said ‘I am able to 
destroy the temple of God and to build it in three days’ ” 
(Matt. 26:61). “Thou that destroyest the temple 
and buildest it im three days save Thyself” (Matt. 
27:40). “Sir, we remember that this deceiver said 
while He was yet alive, after three days I will rise 
again” (Matt. 27: 63); “The Son of Man must suffer 
many things and be killed and after three days rise 
again” (Mark 8:31) ; “ They shall kill Him, and after 
He is killed, after three days, He shall rise again” 
(Mark 9: 31, R. V.); “ They should scourge Him and 
should kill him and after three days He shall rise 
again” (Mark 10:34, R. V.); “ Destroy this temple, 
that is made with hands and in three days I will build 
another made without hands” (Mark 14: 58, R. V.). 
“ Ah, thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it in 
three days, save Thyself” (Mark 15:29). “ Besides 
all this, to-day is the third day since these things were 
done” (Luke 24: 21); “ Jesus answered and said unto 
them, ‘ Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise 
it up.’ Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was 
this temple in building and wilt thou raise it up in three 
days, but He spake of the temple of His body. When 
therefore He was risen from the dead, His disciples re- 
membered that He had said this and they believed the 
Scripture and the word which Jesus had said” (John 
2:19-22). There is absolutely nothing in favour of 
Friday crucifixion, but everything in the Scripture is 
perfectly harmonized by Wednesday crucifixion. It is 
remarkable how many prophetical and typical passages 
of the Old Testament are fulfilled and how many seem- 
ing discrepancies in the Gospel narratives are straight- 
ened out when we once come to understand that Jesus 
died on Wednesday, and not on Friday. 


XXII 


HOW COULD JESUS COMMEND THE ACTION 
OF THE UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD? 


A very puzzling passage in the Bible to many is the 
story of the unrighteous steward recorded in Luke 16: 1- 
14. Once when this lesson was appointed by the Inter- 
national Committee, a lady told me that she had made 
up her mind not to teach that lesson. She said, “ The 
three points of difficulty are: First, that Jesus should 
hold this dishonest scoundrel up for our imitation. 
Second, That the Lord should commend the unrighteous 
steward. And third, that Jesus should command these 
disciples to make themselves friends of the mammon of 
unrighteousness.” 

We will take up these three points in order. By 
noticing exactly what is said, we will soon see that in 
each point, if we adhere strictly to the very words of 
Jesus, the difficulty will disappear, and that the inci- 
dent instead of staggering us will be found to be pro- 
foundly instructive along the line where instruction is 
greatly needed to-day. 

1. Why did Jesus “hold this dishonest scoundrel up 
for our imitation”? 'The answer is found in the text 
itself. Jesus did not hold him up for imitation. He 
held him up first of all as a warning of what would 
overtake unfaithful stewards, and how they would be 
called to give account of their stewardship, and their 
stewardship be taken from them. - Having taught this 
solemn and salutary lesson, one that is much needed 
to-day, Jesus goes on to show how the “sons of this 
world are for their own generation wiser than the sons 
of the light” (v. 8, R. V.). They are wiser at this 
point, that they used their utmost ingenuity and put 
forth their utmost effort to make present opportunities 
count for the hour of future need. “ The sons of light ” 

110 


THE UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD 111 


oftentimes do not do that. Indeed, how many twentieth 
century sons of light, who profess to believe that eternity 
is all and time is nothing in comparison, are using their 
utmost ingenuity and putting forth their utmost efforts 
to make the opportunity of the present. life count most 
for the needs of the great eternity which is to follow? 
The average professed Christian to-day uses the utmost 
ingenuity and puts forth his utmost effort to bring things 
to pass in business and other affairs of this brief present 
world, but when it comes to matters that affect eter- 
nity he is content with the exercise of the least possible 
amount of ingenuity and with the putting forth of the 
smallest effort that will satisfy his conscience. 

Jesus did not point to the steward’s dishonesty to stir 
our emulation. Jesus plainly rebukes his dishonesty, 
but Jesus did point to his common sense in using the 
opportunity of the present to provide for the necessities 
of the future, and would have us learn to use the oppor- 
tunities of the present to provide for the necessities of 
the future, the eternal future. Even in pointing out 
his common sense, Jesus carefully guards his statement 
by saying that the unjust steward was “wiser for his 
own generation.” He knew only the life that now is, 
and from that narrow and imperfect standpoint he was 
wiser than the “son of light,” from his broad and true 
standpoint of knowing eternity, but an eternity for 
which he is not wise enough to live wholly. 

There are other utterances of our Lord and Saviour, 
where wicked and selfish men are held up by way of 
contrast to show how much more godly men, or even God 
Himself, may be expected to act in the way suggested 
(e. g., Luke 18:6, 7; 11: 5-8; Matt. 12:11, 12). The 
first difficulty then in the passage has disappeared upon 
careful scrutiny of exactly what is said. Let us pass 
on to the second difficulty. 

2. Why did “the Lord commend the unrighteous 
steward”? The answer to this, too, is very simple, 
namely, that the Lord Jesus did not commend the un- 


112 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


righteous steward. This is evident by a single glance 
at the R. V. of verse 8. In our Authorized Version it 
is true it reads, “The Lord commended the unrighteous 
steward.” Now if we were to leave it standing in that 
way, there might be some possible doubt as to whether 
“the lord” meant was the “lord” mentioned in the 
passage, 1. ¢., the lord of the steward, or whether it was 
the Lord Jesus, who relates the parable. The Revised 
Version removes this possible ambiguity by translating 
“his lord” (that is, the steward’s lord) commended 
the unrighteous steward. It was not the Lord Jesus 
who commended him, but his own lord, and he only 
commended his shrewdness. That the interpretation of 
the R. V. is the correct interpretation of the verse is be- 
yond dispute; for the Lord Jesus is the speaker, and it is 
He that speaks about the one who does the commending 
as “the lord,” evidently not speaking about Himself, 
but about the lord of the unjust steward. It is only by 
very careless reading of the passage that anyone could 
make “the lord” of this passage the Lord Jesus. The 
Lord Jesus, so far from commending him, flatly calls 
him “the unrighteous steward,” and, furthermore, just 
below warns against unfaithfulness in stewardship (vs. 
10, 11). So the second difficulty entirely disappears on 
a careful noticing of what is said. So then, let us pass 
on to the third difficulty. 

3. Why does Jesus “command His disciples to make 
themselves friends of the mammon of unrighteous- 
ness”? This difficulty disappears when we get the cor- 
rect. and exact Biblical definition of the terms used. 
First of all, what does “mammon of unrighteousness ” 
mean? It means nothing more nor less than money. 
Money is called “mammon of unrighteousness,” be- 
cause money is such a constant minister to sin and 
selfishness (as for example in the case of the scoundrel 
above mentioned) : and because “the love of money is 
the root of all kinds of evil” (1 Tim. 6; 9, 10, R. V.). 


THE UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD 113 


Jesus, in passing would lift a word of warning against 
the perils of money by speaking of it as the “mammon 
of unrighteousness.” He often packed a whole sermon 
into a single phrase. 

In the second place what does the “of” mean when 
our Lord tells us to make to ourselves friends “ of” 
the mammon of unrighteousness. The answer to this 
question is found in the Revised Version, ‘where the 
“of” is properly rendered “by means of.” So then 
what Jesus bade His disciples do (and what he bids us 
do) was to make themselves friends by means of money, 
that is to say, to so use the money God entrusted to them 
in the present life as to make friends for themselves by 
their use of it, and (as the context shows) to make these 
friends among God’s poor and needy ones, who would go 
to the eternal “tabernacles” (v. 9, R. V.), and be 
ready to give us, their benefactors, who had used our 
money to bless them, a royal welcome when our life 
here on earth is ended and so our money has failed. In 
other words, Jesus simply puts into a new and striking 
form His oft-repeated teaching not to keep our money 
hoarded, not to spend it on ourselves, but to spend it in 
doing good, especially to God’s needy ones, and so invest 
it in heavenly and abiding securities (cf. Matt. 6:19; 
21; 19: 21, 29; 25:40; 1 Tim. 6:17-19; Prov. 19:17). 
That this teaching of Jesus was clearly understood by 
His hearers is proven by v. 14 (R. V.) that follows. In 
this verse we are told that the Pharisees, “ who were 
lovers of money,” heard all these things and they scoffed 
at Him (R. V.). So the third and last difficulty has 
disappeared, and this passage stands out in glorious 
light, teaching with great force a lesson that our day 
greatly needs to learn, that money is a stewardship, and 
that he who seeks to enjoy it in the brief present, and 
not rather so to expend it that it will bring Lim interest 
for all eternity, is a great fool, and even the petty 
shrewdness of the “ sons of this world ” rebukes him. 


XXIII 


WERE JESUS AND PAUL MISTAKEN AS TO 
THE TIME OF OUR LORD’S RETURN? 


Ir is constantly taught not only by unbelievers, but even 
in many Christian pulpits, and in some of our theologi- 
cal seminaries, that Jesus and Paul were mistaken as 
to the time of our Lord’s return. In an interesting 
little pamphlet published by the Boston American Uni- 
tarian Association, in which five ministers, once preach- 
ing in orthodox churches, but now Unitarians, tell how 
they came to become Unitarians, one writer says, “ But 
in a lecture one day on Thessalonians, our professor re- 
marked that Paul evidently was mistaken as to the time 
of the coming of Christ. I was thunderstruck and 
stared rigidly at the speaker, while my pencil dropped 
from my fingers. It is true, then, after all the denun- 
ciation of the preachers, Higher Criticism wasn’t the 
false, shallow thing that it was made out to be. I can 
hear yet, after many years, the echo of that slamming 
book in the vacant library, and that cedar pencil clatter- 
ing to the floor.” Evidently this young man was easily 
shaken. If a professor in a theological seminary said 
anything, that settled it for him. The professor must 
certainly be correct, and all other professors who taught 
differently, and all others who studied the Bible for 
themselves, must be wrong. The fact that the professor 
made much a remark as this was proof positive that 
Higher Criticism was not “the false, shallow thing it 
was made out to be.” I do not wonder that such a 
young man should wind up as a Unitarian preacher. 
But even theological professors are sometimes mistaken, 
and this professor was mistaken. The mistake was al- 
114 


TIME OF OUR LORD’S RETURN 115 


together the professor’s, and not at all Paul’s, as we 
shall see in a few moments. 

But let us begin with Jesus, and not with Paul. Was 
Jesus mistaken as to the time of His own return? In 
proof that He was, Matthew 24:34, and parallel pas- 
sages in the other Gospels (Mark 13: 30; Luke 21: 32) 
are constantly cited. Our Lord is here reported as 
saying, “ Verily, verily, I say unto you, this generation 
shall not pass away until all these things be accom- 
plished ” (Matt. 24:34, R. V.). And it is held that 
Jesus here plainly teaches that the generation living on 
earth at the time that He spoke these words would not 
have passed away before all the things recorded in the 
preceding verses had come to pass; and of course, this 
would be a mistake. But if anybody will read the en- 
tire passage carefully, he will see that Jesus here teaches 
nothing of the kind. In the context He is teaching 
how rapidly things will culminate at the end, that when 
certain signs begin to appear events will ripen so fast 
that the generation then living when these signs appear 
will not have passed away until all things belonging to 
that particular epoch shall have come to be. These 
signs mentioned as indicating the speedy close of the 
age are found in verse 29: the sun darkened, the moon 
not giving her light, stars falling from heaven, and the 
powers of heaven shaken. These signs did not occur 
while our Lord was on earth, nor in that generation; but 
when they do occur, then things will ripen so fast that 
the sign of the Son of Man shall be seen in heaven and 
the Son of Man shall come in clouds with power and 
great glory before the generation then existing passes 
away. That this is the true interpretation of the pass- 
age is evident from v. 33, where Jesus says distinctly, 
“ When ye see all these things know ye that He is nigh, 
even at the doors (R. V. and yv. 32). Here Jesus teaches 
that just as the putting forth of tender shoots and young 
leaves is an indication that summer is nigh, so the 


116 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


appearing of these signs will be an indication that the 
Lord is nigh, so nigh that that generation will not pass 
away until the Lord actually comes. And “ this genera- 
tion” of verse 34 clearly refers, if taken in the context, 
to the generation existing when these signs shall appear. 
The connection is just the same in Mark 13, where simi- 
lar words are found. If possible, it is even clearer in 
Luke 21: 25-32, where the words are found again. So 
the whole difficulty is not with what Jesus actually said, 
but with the failure of expositors to carefully notice 
exactly what the thought in mind was. when Jesus 
uttered the words to which objection has been made. 

Another interpretation of this verse has been offered 
which is full of suggestion, namely, that the word 
rendered “generation” in this passage means often- 
times “race” or “family,” “men begotten of the 
same stock,” and this doubtless is one meaning of the 
word used. In fact, this is the meaning given as the 
second meaning of the word in Thayer’s Greek-English 
Lexicon of the New Testament, and the meaning of 
“age” (or generation) is the fourth meaning given. 
Taking this as the meaning of the word, the passage is 
interpreted to mean that this “race ” (generation), that 
is, the Jewish race, shall not pass away, that is, shall 
maintain its race identity, until the coming of the Lord. 
It is a remarkable fact, indeed, one of the most re- 
markable facts of history, that though the Jews have 
for centuries been driven from their native land and 
scattered throughout all the nations, they have al- 
ways retained their race identity. This thought may 
also have been in Jesus’ mind, and the utterance thus 
have been a pregnant utterance with a fulness of mean- 
ing that cannot be exhausted by one interpretation. 
But from the context, the primary meaning seems to be 
the one given in the first explanation above. 

Another passage urged to show that Jesus was mis- 
taken about the time of His return is Matt. 16:28, 


TIME OF OUR LORD’S RETURN 11’ 


“Verily, I say unto you, there be some standing here 
that shall not taste of death until they see the Son of 
Man coming in His kingdom” (see also parallel pas- 
sages, Mark 9:1; Luke 9:27). It is held that in this 
passage Jesus teaches that His coming again would be 
before some of those standing there should die. But 
here again in the context is found the entire solution 
of the difficulty. There ought to be no chapter divisions 
where Matt. 17 begins (of course, the chapter divisions 
are not a part of the original Scriptures, and there 
should be no chapter division here). We should read 
right on as we do in the parallel passages in Mark and 
Luke, and if we read right on and notice what is said, 
the meaning of Jesus’ words becomes as clear as day. 
The words were spoken as a prophecy of the transfigura- 
tion, the account of which immediately follows with the 
closely connecting particle “and.” Three of those 
standing with Jesus when he spoke the words were to 
go up with Him into the mount, and there in the moun- 
tain they were to see His true glory shining forth in His 
face, in His person, in the very raiment He wore (Matt. 
17:2), they were to hear the Father declare, “ This is 
My beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased” (v. 6). 
In all this they saw “the Son of Man coming in His 
kingdom.” If events had been allowed to take their 
natural course, Jesus then and there would have been 
manifested to the world as He was to the disciples, as 
the King; but Jesus chose rather, in order that men 
might be saved, to go down from this mount of trans- 
figuration where He was manifested in His glory as 
coming in His kingdom, where the kingdom of God 
came with power (Mark 9:1), where Peter and James 
and John saw the kingdom of God (Luke 9:27), to 
die as an atoning sacrifice on the cross of Calvary. It 
is a significant fact in this connection that the subject 
of which Moses and Elijah, who appeared talking with 
Him in the mount, spoke was the the decease which He 


118 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


should accomplish at Jerusalem (Luke 9:31). Here 
again then we see that the mistake was not on Jesus’ 
part, but arises from the carelessness of the interpreter 
in overlooking the context in which the words of Jesus 
are found, and the interpretation that is put upon the 
words by the writers themselves immediately after they 
have recorded them. So all these arguments of the de- - 
structive critics built upon our Lord’s being mistaken 
as to the time of His own return, fall to the ground. 
| But was not Paul mistaken? It is constantly said 
that he was, by those who contend against the verbal 
accuracy of the New Testament writings. It is said 
over and over again that “ Paul evidently was mistaken 
in his early writings as to the time of the coming of 
Christ.” In defence of this contention the words of 
Paul contained in I Thess. 4:15-18 are brought for- 
ward. Paul here says, “ For this we say unto you by 
the Word of the Lord, that we which are alive and re- 
main unto the coming of the Lord shall in no wise 
precede those that are fallen asleep,” ete. It is said 
here that these words make it evident that Paul ex- 
pected to be alive when the Lord came. What Paul 
may have expected, I do not know. Very likely he did 
hope to be alive when the Lord came, but he certainly 
did not teach that he would be alive, and no one holds 
any theory of inspiration that maintains that the Bible 
writers did not entertain mistaken hopes. All that the 
one who contends for the plenary theory of inspiration 
and absolute veracity and accuracy of Bible teaching 
is that the Bible writers nowhere taught error. That 
they may have entertained erroneous notions on a great 
many things no one questions. All that is maintained 
is that if they had such erroneous notions, the Holy 
Spirit kept them from teaching them. Paul certainly 
does not teach here that he would be alive when the 
Lord came. He does teach that some persons would 
have fallen asleep and others would be alive. As he 


TIME OF OUR LORD’S RETURN 119 


was still alive, he naturally puts himself in the class 
to which he belonged at the time of writing, “ Those 
which are alive” (that are left). He certainly was alive 
at the time of writing. He certainly was one of those 
left at that time. That he should continue to be alive, 
he does not say. Very likely he hoped to be. Every be- 
liever who has a true understanding of the doctrine of 
the coming of the Lord naturally entertains a hope that 
he may be alive when the Lord comes. I hope that I 
may be, but not for a moment do I venture to teach 
that I shall be, but I do know that I am alive at this 
moment. I know that I am not one of those who have 
as yet fallen asleep, and if I were differentiating be- 
tween the two classes, those who are alive and those who 
are asleep, I should certainly put myself with those 
which are alive, and would not be mistaken in so doing, 
and Paul puts himself with those who “are alive” at 
that time. He had not as yet fallen asleep. Paul knew 
perfectly well that the Lord Himself had taught long 
before he wrote these words to the Thessalonians, that 
it is not for us “to know times or seasons which the 
Father hath set within His own authority” (Acts 1: 
%7,R. V.). He did not attempt to know times or seasons 
which his Master had so distinctly taught it was not 
for him, nor for us, to know, but he did teach by “ the 
word of the Lord” Himself that the “Lord Himself 
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice 
of the archangel and the trump of God and the dead in 
Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and 
remain shall be caught up together with them in the 
clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever 
be with the Lord.” In the context, vs. 13, 14, Paul 
is urging those who are alive (and were left) at that 
time not to sorrow over those who had already fallen 
asleep, and as he was among the class that were alive 
(that were left) up to that time, he naturally and 
properly and correctly puts himself with them and not 


120 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 

with those over whom they were not to sorrow, namely 
those who had already fallen asleep. So in this passage 
instead of finding that the Holy Spirit left Paul to 
make mistakes, that in point of fact the Holy Spirit 
kept him from making a mistake even in regard to the 
matter about which in his own longing he might have 
entertained a mistaken hope. The whole passage, then, 
instead of being an argument against the verbal ac- 
curacy of the Scriptures, is an argument forit, and 
shows how the men whom the Holy Spirit chose to be 
the vehicles of his revelation to us were kept absolutely 
from putting into their teaching any mistaken hope 
which they might have entertained. Our critical 
friends who are hunting so persistently for some mis- 
take in the teaching of Paul will have to carry their 
search farther, and possibly from the experience of the 
young theological student who was so thunderstruck by 
his professor in the orthodox school saying that Paul 
was mistaken as to the time of the coming of Christ, 
and who therefore launched forth into Unitarianism, 
may learn to be cautious lest their teaching prove 
equally disastrous to some other weak-minded young 
man, 


XXIV 


DID JESUS GO INTO THE ABODE OF THE 
DEAD, AND PREACH TO THE SPIRITS 
IN PRISON? AND IS THERE ANOTHER 
PROBATION AFTER DEATH? 


I THINK I have never had a question box in any city 
but what someone put in the question, “What does 
I Peter 3: 18-20 mean when it says that Jesus went and 
preached unto the spirits in prison?” A very simple 
answer to this question is that it means just what it 
says, but let us notice carefully exactly what it does say. 

“ Because Christ also suffered for sins once, the 
righteous for the unrighteous, that He might bring us 
to God; being put to death in the flesh, but quickened 
in the spirit; in which also he went and preached unto 
the spirits in prison, which aforetime were disobedient, 
when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of 
Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that 
is eight souls, were saved through water” (R. V.). 
The point of difficulty with this passage with many peo- 
ple is the thought that seems to be conveyed that Jesus 
actually went into the abode of the dead and there 
preached to spirits in prison, and this would seem to 
imply to many that there is an opportunity for re- 
pentance after death. Many have attempted to explain 
the verses in order to avoid this conclusion, by saying 
that the spirit here mentioned in which Jesus was 
quickened is the Holy Spirit, and that in the Holy 
Spirit Jesus Christ preached through Noah while the 
ark was preparing to the spirits which were then dis- 
obedient and who consequently are now in prison. One 
writer, Mr. William Kelly, has argued for this inter- 
pretation with a great deal of ability and skill and with 
a large display of knowledge of Greek grammar. Of 
Mr. Kelly’s unusual knowledge of Greek there can be 
i 121 


122 DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


no question, but none the less. I think he fails to make 
out his case. After all has been said, it seems to me 
this interpretation is an evasion. The spirit in verse 
18 cannot mean the Holy Spirit. A contrast is being 
drawn between the two parts of Christ’s nature, the 
flesh in which He was put to death and the spirit in 
which He was quickened (that is, made alive) at the 
time He was put to death in the flesh. In His spirit 
in which He was made alive, while the body lay motion- 
less in death, He went and preached unto the spirits 
in prison. It seems to me that this is the only fair 
interpretation to put upon the words, and if we are to 
take the Scriptures as meaning exactly what they say, 
this is what we must take them as meaning. But does 
not this involve a second probation for those who have 
died in disobedience to God and who consequently have 
gone to the place of penalty and suffering? Even if it 
did, we ought not to dodge it on that account: we ought 
to be fair with the Scriptures whether they conform to 
our theories or not. But in point of fact this does not 
in any wise involve a second probation for those who 
have died in disobedience, and who consequently have 
gone to the place of penalty and suffering. 

This is apparent if we notice three things: First, if 
we notice to whom Jesus preached, and, second, if we 
notice what He preached to them, and, third, if we no- 
tice what were the results of His preaching. 

First of all, then, to whom did Jesus preach? “ The 
spirits in prison.” But who were.these spirits in prison. 
Were they the spirits of departed wicked men? There 
is nothing whatever to indicate that they were. The 
word “spirits” is never used in this unqualified way 
of the spirits of departed men, but it is used cons 
stantly of angelic or supernatural beings (Heb. 1:7, 14; 
Matt. 10:1; Mark 3:11; Luke 6:18; 7:21; Acts 19: 
12; I John 4:1, and many other places). The only 
place in Scripture where “ spirits ” is used of men in 
any way analogous to this is Heb. 12:23. The con 


PROBATION AFTER DEATH? 123 


stant use is of angels or other supernatural beings. If 
we so interpret it here, then of course the preaching 
was not at all to men who had been wicked in the days 
of Noah, but to supernatural beings who had been dis- 
obedient in the days of Noah and who were now in 
prison in consequence of this disobedience. Are there 
any Scripture passages that hint that there were super- 
natural beings who were disobedient in the days of 
Noah and who were consequently now in prison? There 
are. In Gen. 6:1 we are told that “the sons of God 
saw the daughters of men that they were fair and they 
took them wives of all which they chose.” By the 
“sons of God” in this passage many commentators 
understand the descendants of Seth, a godly man; but 
if we are to interpret Scripture by Scripture, they seem 
rather to have been angelic beings. There seems to be 
a clear reference to this passage in Jude 6, where we 
are told of “angels which kept not their own princi- 
pality but left their proper habitation,” and in con- 
“sequence were kept in everlasting chains in darkness 
unto the judgment of the great day (R. V.) ; and in the 
next verse we are told that Sodom and Gomorrah in like 
manner with these [that is, these angels] gave them- 
selves over to fornication and went after strange flesh ” 
(R. V.). Now from this it seems clear that the sin of 
the angels was going after strange flesh, the very sin 
mentioned in Gen. 6:3. Furthermore, we read that 
“ God spared not the angels that sinned but cast them 
down to hell and committed them to pits of darkness to 
be reserved unto judgment ” (II Peter 2:3, 4, R. V.). 
The clear implication of all this is that the spirits to 
whom Jesus preached when He went to the abode of the 
dead were the angels that sinned in the days of Noah, 
and who were now in prison in consequence of that sin. 

Let us notice in the next place what the word trans- 
lated “ preach,” in I Peter 3: 18-20, means. There are 
_ two words in constant use in the New Testament which 

are translated “preach.” One of them means “to 


124. DIFFICULTIES IN THE BIBLE 


preach the Gospel.” ‘The other “to herald” (to herald 
the king or kingdom). It is the latter of these two 
words which is used in this passage. There is not a 
suggestion in the passage that the Gospel with its offer 
of salvation was preached to anyone. The King and 
the kingdom were heralded. So then, even if we take 
“the spirits in prison ” to mean the spirits of men who 
had died in sin, there is not a hint of another proba- 
tion. We are simply told that the King and the king- 
dom were heralded to them. Christ has been heralded 
as King in heaven, earth and hell. 

In the third place, notice the results of this preach- 
ing. There is not a word of suggestion that any of the 
spirits in prison were converted by it. If they were, 
we must learn it from other sources than this passage; 
but there is not a single passage anywhere in the Scrip- 
tures that suggests that there were any conversions or 
any salvation resultant from this preaching. The pur- 
pose of the preaching evidently was not the salvation of 
those already lost, but the proclamation of the kingdom 
and the King throughout the universe. The time is 
coming when “ every knee shall bow of things in heaven 
and things on earth and things under the earth, and 
every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to 
the glory of God, the Father” (Phil. 2:10, 11). But 
that enforced confession of Christ on the part of dis- 
obedient men and angels will bring them no salvation. 
We must all take our choice of either confessing and 
accepting Christ of our own free will now and obtaining 
salvation thereby, or of confessing Him and acknowl- 
edging Him against our will in the world to come. 
Confess Him we must some time. Bow the knee to Him 
we must some day. Happy the man who gladly now in 
this time of probation bows the knee to Jesus and con- 
fesses that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the 
Father, and does not wait until that day when He is 
forced to do it and when the confession will bring him 
no salvation. 


INDEX OF BIBLE TEXTS 


GENESIS 

PAGE 
Weis sc.01s10;..31 
OSE tesehmorees 
DrrAMe Bocce ce ki 30 
SIV Sie en One 20 
4:1 +37 
Anite 17s cc sintte 37 
Eo A aeanoceesrd 35) 
Reon of) Be ee cee 37 
OQke Fen aen sae 123 
OB cereiceis were 123 
OXO> . 89 
ROS TS=18 Fisje cic oc 35 
Daina Pee cere cere 97 
T4295". 36 
20:12 38 
ZARCY. ae ACRE 40 
BO Disel2..-4T, 42 
291751 BOS 
33:19 96 
Abipiaes Note cos >: 54 
AG plies ohare cesta 35 


LEVITICUS 
PAGE 
Doe atsls csbsle 105 
NUMBERS 
Qi 2iwe te rod 
DE ee ere Mek satelart coieie 52 
Pini, ete AO habia 52 
BS 10-18 ee os 105 
BETIS IO ae wane 49 
aa ee Nanee?: 
BT2t-355. A000 SE 
DEUTERONOMY 
DAO Poise caiets 36 
SiUT TARE wate ses aie 36 
20: 10-15 47, 51 
ZO 1O. D7 te.se oie 47 
BOOT SVs ae cig 0 ee 50 
JOSHUA 


10: 12-14 ...2I, 53 





2 SAMUEL 
PAGE 
72 T2-10 wis ee LOZ 
OnE Way Bh iodade 71 
ETHQ7/ 0s vtrmate sos 67 
22 OselOmereetsist 67 
T2219 excieleejercte 69 
IQSTAs) wes esiesss 66 
TS AIFS vie cecs ees 68 
BAST Hs sl ecccte oe oI 
I KINGS 
DL Fis splsreesare 35 
ke Go toe 57 
PROS) Bacon Ronny e) 
22) 20-22) eisai 7 
2 KINGS 
Te S20 Geese «0-54 


I CHRONICLES 


132: 11 
137; OssQne 70), 78 


126 


PROVERBS 


PAGE 
TOT Ms cee 113 


BuO me 7 coe. OS 


ISAIAH 
OA Toreecleer 82 
T3215 1S eee 72 
SA ETc meee 31 
AS 1S cco caiee 32 
BG Fi ates ce scteie 6 69 
JEREMIAH 
INSOLE A Slag atia 32 
TSS IT eee - 04 
22/80 prele cess 103 
DANIEL 
pT Out ereisveleletree> 
DISCy le GAB COEOENS ast | 
JOEL 
3:18-20 .......30 
JONAH 
Teg zowncne race 70 
BOQ GAO oe vis 78 
BecTO wearers 
ZECHARIAH 
DAC ROMP ge 04 
2° /TO-T3 iw cwwel 30 
ON TES aar tai ee te 04 
II: II-13....93, 95 
ELSES r owes Nets 106 
TPPOT Secs 30 
T4s'Qu ne cstestiens 30 
MALACHI 
SPO cere cenSG 
MATTHEW 
PSVTOWua Serle ete 102 
pi) in tah Ie Rak AS) 37 
Lots Resa aeists sy 
GAIOM2T st ose 113 
TON Tep mat 122 
TOIT ES Aa III 
T2240) Woes 18/77; 
79; 109 


INDEX 


MATTHEW 
PAGE _ 

TOPS aikiie oare oe 116 
A yO Mab cueitertiar 117 
One teeeOeee 113 
24°34 «s.:97, 115 
DERIVA tel eeelens 113 
BG AO-TOies salsa 106 
26:15 . 106 
QOZOE se noes 6 109 
Z7TOW SLO ie eters 93 
Pg fete y Bae Buns ney 83 
27 ADM Meese ene, LOO 
BG'S'OB Me cree cies 109 
SADR Me eces pete 86 
BeSNty Meteo ry. 86 

MARK 
BveL Ty stencts ares 122 
RE parece cele 109 
OPT erancswtee 117 
Oe ST evo care 109 
TO GAY ett earners 109 
Tai BO Mesias eercie 115 
Lees Se sels 106 
Tic nS Mans areleratcls 109 
ES POO Mewar 83, 84 
T5020 wren witout 109 
TG IVAZ ie ndanelerelars 105 
TOnNGa7 ess siblepe ‘ 

LUKE 
ea Cat eR et ry 102 
ORISe close eles 
7 STP ralete SGRies; 
RE TAN San peoriase ky, 
11:5-8 DOS ORE ET 
IGAi-T4 eee se LO 
TONY cece LE 
BT HOR esOK iG 116 
ALN ae ON GAN ON I eIRS ite 
PURO RO ANH Nts fy 
Eee Aalkcto Shea AIP a eo 1 
PY, We Wate” UN ANS Poa 20) 
BA ENO 86 
2A HOT.) 2.108; LOO 
ZANGOMy eis ey aclaye 107 

JOHN 
TUL SMe cer Neukeo) 
BiIeLE. ooe000 0.99 


JOHN 

PAGE 
2219-22 .+++-.100 
S17 ovis sie sAO 
BER Ns sae ateieie eA 
ZA BOR eats Pry. | 
AS22,OSA nea cle Bera § 
SPAN Lela alee 17 
T29 Teas 106, 107 
TDeID)) Sosa 106 
PASO) caterer nporeseeete 82 
TO TAsre eereatoets 105 


TOs 2OU sistent 83 
TOSAOn Vawter 106 
BOUT os aeeyeeenoyt 
BOL se aicsle seers 


ACTS 
: By EEN 119 
Tih T2 asec 107 
2 GO vareres Riven 102 
7a leNerae ..95, 96 
are aes . 84, 85 
1337 ‘“Sckisocemee 22 
E35 Sis heveisremroeers 66 
TQe22 es 102 
193}12 eee 122 
22 1Ooceent 84, 85 

ROMANS 
Teo Ve eae e ees 102 
TP IO Te wea este 46 
1: 24-26, 28 ....45 
LD? 93 nade cr 50 
12:1 Leases Al 
ID2IGA vw cele ee 


2 CORINTHIANS 
2:15, 16 
T2t7 en wacineeae Oe 


GALATIANS 
eee 


PHILIPPIANS 
27 OS sik ieee 82 
2310, Il. cos wted 


COLOSSIANS 
PAGE 


PRION siclclclaysiay se 
I THESSALONIANS 
QSTS-18. 3. we LIS 


2 THESSALONIANS 
AS CHT s nner bs 
DeNO=-12 5. viceiais 674 


I TIMOTHY 
Healy, 
ORO FOS... 58 BaF 
GAIOW us ncieiereaic Ok 
Oet7-19) 206+ e113 


INDEX 


2 TIMOTHY 
PAGE 


DiSers aias oe kOe 
HEBREWS 
Tee TAR E22 
10:28, 20......46 
PEST) Seidl 
OCR mele akin Oe: 
TAOS Risen 89 


I PETER 


BATS. cite ae ve oo LOS 


127 


I PETER 
PAGE 
3: 18-20 ..12I, 123 
B50 08 


ceececeeel 


2 PETER 
2S ReAeswecsase les 
ATO vieiacre verses 7 


DT Og caesar maine Ol 


I JOHN 


IPS PPL Pras G Ee 


JUDE 
Verse 6:......123 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Antiquity of Man, 34-36 

Assaults on the Bible, Results 
of, 26-28 

Augustine, 30 

Belshazzar, 23 

Bullen, Frank, 77 

Cachalot, the Cruise of, 77 

Cain’s Wife, 37, 30 ; 

Calvinism and Arminianism, 24 

Canaanites, the slaughter of, 


47-52. : 

Classes of Difficulties, 17-25 

Colenso, Bishop, 53 

Contradiction between Paul 
and James, 24 : 

Contradictions of the Bible, 
80-92 

Copernican Theory, 11 

Cosmic Light, 30 

Creation, The Bible Story of, 
29-33 

Creative Days; 
periods of 
hours? 29, 30 

Dana, Prof. James D., 31 

Darwin, Charles, 31 

David’s Numbering of Israel, 


QI 

David’s Sin, 66 

Destructive Critics, 14, 15 

Discrepancies in the Accounts 
of the Resurrection of 
Jesus, 85-88 

Dog Sharks, 77 

Egyptian Dynasties, 34 


were they 
twenty-four 


Emmin, 36 

Endless Punishment, the Doc- 
trine of, 25 

Evil Spirits, 73-75 

Genealogies of Jesus, How 
Reconcile, 101-103 

Hardening of Pharaoh’s 


Heart, 43-46 
Holiness of God, 48, 51 


Imprecatory Psalms, 70-72 
Impure Bible Stories, 61-65 
Ingersoll, Col. R. G., 15, 63 
Inscription on the Cross of 
Jesus, 83, 84 : 
Intermarriage of Cousins, 38 
Jael, 57, 58 
Jephthah’s Daughter, 59, 60 
Jonah and “the whale,” 18, 


.76-79 
Joshua’s Long Day, 21, 53-56 
Kelvin, Lord, 29-31 
Lying Spirits, 73-75 
Mistakes in the Bible, 93-100 
Mosaic Authorship of the 
Pentateuch, 23, 24 
Offering up of Isaac, 40-42 
Prayer, 28 
Pre-Adamic Race, 32-36 
Preaching to the Spirits in 
Prison, 121-124 
Probation after Death, 121-124 
Prose and Poetry, 22 
Rawlinson, Sir Henry, 23 
Rephaim, 36 
Repent, Does God? 80, 90 
Sin, the Awfulness of, 48 
Time of our Lord’s Return, 
Were Jesus and Paul mis- 
_ taken regarding? 114-120 
Trinity, the Doctrine of the, 
25 


Unjust Steward, 110-113 

Uriah, 

Wednesday, not Friday, the 
Day of the Crucifixion of 
Jesus, 104-109 
ale, man swallowed by, 76 

Whales, 76-79 

Word of God, Is every state- 
ment in the Bible? 20 

Zamzummin, 36 


444798 
THEOLOGY LIBRARY 








BS 
40 
159 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


; ree 91711 
a al add re) fo by 





ra Sicekengeerentas ot then peony aveeeesveenes 
rersrenespreessorees percent eet 
Setercs-seonsesssreresreen fo -3 Tri 


eyeoetaes 
Seterscensent 


eee 


paste 


rr 


she pe, 





