LIBRARY  OF  PRINCETON 

n 

MAR  2  9  2005 

THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

2.5  - 


/ 

IDisruption  Worthies 


A  Memorial  of  iSjj. 


liaitb  nn  UMi^toricnl  Shctcb  of  tbc  Jfrcc  Cburcb  ot  ScotlnnD 
from  IS43  ^o\vn  to  tbc  present  cliinc 

Bv    TiiK    REV.    JAMES     A.    \VV  E I  E,    LE.D. 


^-/^  )M£Mc^^ 


-^S1 


I'DINIU'RCIl 
T  1 1  O  M  A  S    C.    J  A  C  K,    G  R  A  X  (i  ]•:    1"  U  15  L  I  S  1 1  I  X  G     W  O  R  K  S 

i,S,Hcrswr  :o  A.   ludUnon  i-   t\'.) 

LOXDOX:  45  LUDGATK  HILL 


TMaBYOFpffiwrrrnN 


MAR  2  9  2006 


.■rr>innirei  QFMINARY 


MINISTERS,  OFFICE-BEARERS,  AND  MEMBERS 


C!jt  fxtt  Cijurcij  of  Scotlanb, 


MEMORIAL   VOLUME 


IS  RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED. 


PUBLISHER'S   NOTE. 


In  preparing  the  present  edition  of  "Disruption  Worthies,"  it  has  been  felt 
that  it  ought  to  be  more  complete  than  the  plan  of  the  former  edition  permitted. 
There  was  a  certain  convenience  in  confining  the  Biographical  Sketches  to  the 
deceased.  But  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  continuing  this  arrangement. 
Happily,  there  are  not  a  few  Disruption  Worthies  still  spared,  to  the  advantage 
of  the  Church  and  of  tite  world,  and  the  title  of  the  Publication  suggests  that 
Sketches  of  their  lives  and  labours  should  be  included  in  a  Nav  Edition.  Alas 
that  more  than  one  who  lived  when  their  biographies  were  here  written,  have 
since  passed  over  to  the  majority. 

In  this  edition  appear  the  iiames  of  three  Ministers  ivho  had  no  direct 
share  in  the  act  of  the  Disruption.  No  excuse,  ho^va'cr,  is  needed  for  adding 
Sketches  of  the  late  Dr.  M'Crie,  Dr.  Goold,  and  Dr.  Rainy,  considering  their 
peculiar  relations,  as  representative  men  and  otherwise,  to  t/ie  Church  of  the 
Disruption. 

The  Publisher  has  introduced  in  this  edition  an  entirely  ?iru>  series  of 
Portraits,  for  the  most  part  produced  by  a  highly  accomplished  Artist.  In 
other  respects  the  present  will  be  found  an  improvement  on  the  old  edition.  The 
Publisher  is  much  indebted  to  Mr  fames  B.  Gillies  for  editing  this  volume. 


Grange  Publishing  Works, 
Edinburgh,  iSSi. 


Contents. 


INTRODUCTION 

Hy  the  Hon.  Lord  Ardmillan. 

HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  FREE  CHURCH 
By  the  Rev.  James  A.  Wylie,  LL.D.,  Edinburgh. 

SKETCH  OF  THE  DISRUPTION  DAY 

By  HfGH  Miller  (from  the  Witness,  May  1843). 

Rev.  WILLIAM  ARNOT,  Free  High  Church,  Edinburgh    (Portrait) 
By  John  Gifford,  Esq.,  National  Bank,  Edinburgh. 

Ra'.  JAMES  BANNERMAN,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Apologetics,  N'cw  College,  Edinburgh 
By  the  Rev.  J.  R.  Omohd,  Monzie.      (Portrait) 

Rev.  JAMES  BEGG.D.D.,  Neuiington  Free'Church,  Edinburgh    (Portrait)   . 
By  the  Rev.  J.  Mom  Porteous,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 

Rro.  ANDREW  A.  BONAR,  D.D.,  Finnicston  Free  Church,  Clasgo-.u     (Portrait)     . 
By  the  Rev.  Alexander  Moody  Stuart,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 

Rev.  HORATIUS  BONAR,  D.D.,  Grange  Free  Church,  Edinburgh     (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  William  Cousin,  Melrose. 


JAMES  BONAR,  Esq.,  W.S.,  Eainburgh 

By  the  Rev.  George  R.  Davidson,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 


The  Most  Noble  THE  MARQUIS  OF  BREADALBANE,  K.  T. 

By  the  Rev.  William  Chalmers,  D.D.,  Principal,  Presbyterian  College,  London. 


1 

DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

1 

Sir  DAVID  BREWSTER,  K.T.     (Porlyail) 

i                                                  By  the  Rev.  John  Dlns.  D.D.,  Professor  of  Natural  Science,  New  College,  Edinburgh. 

59 

Rev.  CHARLES  JOHN  BROWN,  D.D.,  Free  New  North  Church,  Edinburgh  (Portrail) 
By  David  Dickson,  Esq.,  Edinburgh. 

65 

Ret'.  DAVID  BROWN,  D.D.,  PHncipal  of  Free  College,  Aberdeen     (Portrait) 

By  the  Rev.  Willum  G.  Bl.mkie,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Apologetics,  New  College,  Edinburgh. 

73 

Rev.  JOHN  BRUCE,  D.D.,  Freest.  Andrc.d's,  Edinburgh     (Portrait) 

By  the  Rev.  James  M'Gregor,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Systematic  Theology,  New  College, 
Edinburgh. 

79 

GEORGE  BUCHAN,  Esq.  of  K'elloe 

By  the  Rev.  Adah  Spekce,  Houndwood. 

S7 

Rcz'.  JAMES  BUCHANAN,   D.D.,    LL.D.,  Professor  of  Systematic    Theology,  Nc.u 
College,  Edinburgh     (Portrait)         ...... 

By  the  Rev.  R.  G.  Balfouk,  Edinburgh. 

95 

Rev.  ROBERT  BUCHANAN,  D.D.,  Free  Church  College,  Glasgow    (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  Robert  Rainy,  D.D.,  Principal  of  New  College,  Edinburgh. 

lOI 

Pro.  ROBERT  BURNS,  D.D.,  Professor,  Toronto  College,  C.W.     (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  James  C.  Birns,  M.A.,  Kirkliston. 

III 

Rr<i.  ADAM  CAIRNS,  D.D.,  Melbourne    (Portrait) 

By  the  Rev.  J.  C.  DivoRTY,  Scottish  Reformation  Society,  Edinburgh. 

117 

ALEXANDER  CAMPBELL,  Esq.  of  Monzie 

By  the  Rev.  Samuel  Miller,  D.D..  Glasgow. 

125 

WILLIAM  CAMPBELL,  Esq.  of  Titlieclu-ivan 

By  the  Rev.  John  Roxbi  rgh,  D.D.,  Glasgow. 

131 

Rev.  ROBERT  SMITH  CANDLISH,  D.D.,  Free  St.  George's  Church,  Edinburgh      . 
By  the  Rev.  Sir  Henry  Wellwood  Moncreiff,  Bart.,  D.D.,  Edinburgh.      (Portrait) 

139 

Rev.  DA  VID  GARMENT,  M.A.,  Rosskeen 

By  the  Rev.  James  Cakment,  M.A.,  Comrie. 

147 

Rrv.  THOMAS  CHALMERS,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Principal  and  Professor  of  Theolog};  N-!v 
College,  Edinburgh     (Portrait,  Frontispiece)            .... 
By  the  Rev.  David  Coiper,  D.D.,  Burntisland. 

153 

CONTENTS. 

Rev.  PATRICK  CLASON,  D.D.,  Free Btudench  Church,  Edmbursh    (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  John  M'Farlan,  Greenock. 

i6i 

WILLIAM  COLLINS,  Esq.,  Publisher,  Glasgow 

By  the  Rev.  James  .\.  Wvlie,  LL.D.,  Edinburgh. 

165                          i 

JAMES  CRAWFORD, Jim.,  Esq.,  W.S.,  EJinburi^h 

By  the  Rev.  HoRATius  Bonar,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 

.73                          i 

WILLLIM  HOWIESON  CRAWFURD,Esq.ofCrawfurdla,ul 
By  the  Rev.  Thomas  Main,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 

179 

DAVID  MAITLAND  MAKGILL  CRICHTON,  Esq.  of  Rankcillour    (Portrait)     . 
By  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Tavlob,  Flisk. 

i8s 

Rev.  WILLIAM  CUNNINGHAM,  D.D.,  Principal  ami  Professor  of  Church  History, 

Ne7u  College,  Editiitirgh     (Portrait) 

By  the  Rev.  John  J.  Bonar,  Greenock. 

"93 

Right  Ilonotirable  THE  EARL  OF  DALIIOUSIE,  K.  T.,  K.C.B.     (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  William  Grant,  .\yr. 

201 

Rev.  ALEXANDER  DYCE  DA  VIDSON,  D.D.,  Free  West  Church,  Aberdeen 
By  the  Rev.  Alexander  Wmyte,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 

211 

1 

Rev.  ALEXANDER  DUFF,  D.D.     (Portrait)    ■ 

By  the  Rev.  Thomas  S.mith,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Evangelistic  Theolog>',  New  College, 
Edinburgh. 

215 

Rc-j.  HENRY  DUNCAN,  D.D.,  Ruthwell    (Portrait) 

By  the  Rev.  Jamrs  Dodds,  Dunbar. 

223 

Ret:  JOHN  DUNCAN,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Nc.o  College,  Edinburgh  (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  Alex.  Moodv  Stuart,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 

231 

ALEXANDER  MURRA  Y  DUNLOP,  Esq.  ofCorsock,  Advocate     (Portrait; 

By  the  Rev.  Thosias  M.  Lindsay,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Church  History,  Free  Church  College, 
Glasgow. 

237 

Rev.  PATRICK  FAIRBAIRN,  D.D.,  Principal  and  Professor  of  Theolog};  Free  Church 
College,  Glasgow     (Portrait)            ...... 

By  the  Rev.  James  Dodds,  Dunbar. 

245 

Rev.  JOHN  FORBES,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Free  St.  PauFs  Church,  Clasgnu   . 

By  the  Rev.  Thomas  Smith,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Evangelistic  Theologj-.  New  College, 
Edinburgh. 

2S3 

DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Rc'j.  JAMES    GIBSON,  D.D.,   Professor  of  Church   History,  Free  Church  College, 
Glasso-M    (Portrait)  ........ 

By  the  Rev.  Robert  M.  Wilson,  Marj-hill. 

261 

Rev.  WILLIAM  H.  GOOLD,  D.D.,  Martyrs'  Free  Church,  Edinburgh     ( Portrait )    . 
By  the  Rev.  William  Bin.nie,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Church  History,  Free  Church  College, 
Aberdeen. 

26S                              1 

Rcj.  ROBERT  GORDON,  D.D.,  Free  High  Church,  Edinburgh    (Portrait)  . 
By  the  Rev.  Norma.v  L.  Walker,  Dysart. 

309 

Her  Grace  THE  DUCHESS  OF  GORDON    (Portrait)            .... 

271 

By  the  Rev.  H.  M.  Williamson,  Belfast. 

Rci:  ANDREW  GRAY,  Perth 

By  the  Rev.  J.  B.  Irvine,  Strathkinness. 

279 

Rev.  THOMAS  GUTHRIE,  D.D.,  Free  St.  John's,  Edinburgh     (Portrait)     . 
By  the  Rev.  John  Ker,  D.D.,  United  Presbyterian  Church,  Glasgow. 

28s 

JOHN  HAMILTON,  Esq.,  Advocate,  Edinburgh 

By  the  Rev.  William  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Apologetics,  New  College,  Edinburgh. 

295 

Rev.  WILLIAM  M.  HETHERINGTON,  D.D.,  Edinburgh     (Portrait)        . 
By  the  Rev.  W.  M.  Falconer,  M.A.,  Edinburgh. 

301 

JAMES  MAITLAND  HOG,  Esq.  of  Newliston 

By  the  Rev.  James  C.  Burns,  M.A.,  Kirkliston. 

317 

Rev.  JAMES  INGRAM,  D.D.,  Unst    (Portrait) 

By  James  B.  Gillies,  Esq.,  Edinburgh. 

32s 

Rev.  ALEXANDER  KEITH,  D.D.,  Free  Church,  St.  Cyrus     (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  David  Brown,  D.D.,  Aberdeen. 

331 

Rev.  ROBERT  LORIMER,  LL.D.,  Haddington  , 

By  A.  P.  LoEiMER,  Esq.,  Banker,  Tillicoultry. 

339 

Rrv.  JAMES  MCOSH,D.D.,  Princeton  College,  N.J.    (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  Professor  M'Closkie,  Princeton  College,  N.J. 

343 

Rev.  THOMAS  M'CRIE,  D.D.,  Presbyterian  College,  London    (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  Charles  G.  M'Crie,  Ayr. 

349 

Rev.  JOHN  MACDONALD,  D.D.,  Fcnntosh    (Portrait)         .... 
By  the  Rev.  Thomas  M'Lal-chlan,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 

357 

CONTENTS. 


Km.  ROBERT  M.ACDONALD,  D.D.,  Xorth  Lcith    (Poiiiail) 
By  the  Rev.  Rodert  Cowan,  Elgin. 


Rn:  P.i  TRICK  M'FARLAN,  D.D.,  Creaiock    (Porlrail) 
By  the  Rev.  William  Lauchton,  Greenock. 


PATRICK-  BOYLE  MURE  MACREDIE,  Esq.  of  Pacelon 
r.y  the  Rev.  Thomas  Maix,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 


Rn'.  RODERICK  APLEOD,  Snizorl 
By  the  Rev.  John  S.  MAcrHAiL, 


JOHN  MAITLAND,  Esq.,  Accountant,  Auditor  of  Court  of  Session 
By  Benjamin  Bell,  Esq.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  Edinburgh. 


Ret:  A.XCVS  MAKELLAR,  D.D.,  Petuaitland    (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  John  Thomson,  D.D.,  Paisley. 


I/UGH  MILLER,  Editor  of  the  "  IVitness,"  Edinburgh     (Porlrail) 
By  James  Sime,  Esq.,  Craigmount  House,  Edinburgh. 


ALEXANDER  EARLE  MONTEITII,  Esq.,  Advocate,  Sheriff  of  Fifcshire 
By  Francis  Brown  Dolglas,  Esq.,  Advocate,  Edinburgh. 


Rm.  Sir  HENRY  VVELLWOOD  MONCREIFF,  Bart.,  D.D.,  Edinbursh  (Porlrail) 
By  the  Rev.  Thomas  Crerar,  M.A.,  North  Leith. 


pace 
363 


3S3 
3S9 
397 
405 
413 


ROBERT  PAUL,  Esq.,  Banker,  Edinburgh 

By  David  Maclagan,  Esq.,  C.A.,  Edinburgh. 


Rro.  THOMAS  PITCAIRN,  Cockfen    (Portrait) 
By  the  Rev.  Andrew  A.  Bonar,  D.D.,  Glasgow. 


Rm.  ROBERT  RAINY,  D.D.,  Principal  of  New  Collese,  Edinburgh    (Portrait) 
By  Alexander  Taylor  Innes,  Esq.,  Advocate,  Edinburgh. 


GRAHAM  SPEIRS,  Esq.,  Advocate,  Sheriff  of  Mid-Lothian 
By  Lord  Cowan,  Edinburgh. 


Rev.  ALEXANDER  STEWART,  Cromarty       . 
By  the  Rev.  Alexander  Beith,  D.D.,  Stirlin:;. 


Rr.:  ALEXANDER  MOODY  STUART,  D.D.,  Edinburgh    ( Portrait j 
By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Cu.NNlNGHAM,  Edinburgh. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

ALEXANDER  THOMSON,  Esq.  of  Bamhoiy 473 

By  Robert  Lumsden,  Esq.,  Banker,  Aberdeen. 

Rev.  WILLIAM  KING  TiVEEDIE,  D.D.,  Free  Tolhooth  Church,  EJinlmrsk  (Portrait)      4S1 
By  William  Brown,  E.sq.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  Edinburgh. 

Rev.  DA  VID   WELSH,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Theology  and  Church  History,  Nc~iv  Collcffe, 

Edinhirgh     (Portrait)  .......       4S9 

By  the  Rev.  William  Wilson,  D.D.,  Dundee. 

Rev.  JOHN  WILSON,  D.D.,F.R.S.,  Bombay    (Portrait)  .  .  .  -497 

By  the  Rev.  J.  Mirkay  Mitchell,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 


Rr.:  WILLIAM  WILSON,  D.D.,  Convener  of  Sustciitation  Fund  Co» 
By  the  Rev.  John  Maci'HERSOn,  Dundee. 


(Portrait)       505 


r«#?, 


m^^' 


INTRODUCTION. 


BY  THE  HON.  LORD  ARDMILLAN, 

ONE  OK  THE  SENATORS  OF  THE  COLLEGE  OK  JUSTICE. 


Intro  Jiuttmtt. 


S  this  work  may  be  considered  a  chapter 
in  tiie  "  Memories  of  the  Disruption," 
illustrating  and  commemorating  some 
of  the  leaders  and  the  heroes  in  the 
memorable  struggle  of  which  it  was 
the  culminating  point,  the  retrospect, 
whether  personal  or  historical,  is  full 
of  deep  interest.  The  wise  man 
finds  in  it  sometimes  the  "  pleasures 
of  memory,"  sometimes  the  bitterness 
of  regret,  but  always  grounds  for 
thankfulness  and  trustfulness,  and  lessons  for  the  guidance  of  life. 

To  intelligent,  earnest,  and  loyal  Free  Churchmen,  Disruption  Memories 
must  be  unspeakably  precious  ;  and  dear  to  them  must  be  the  names  of  those 
worthies — foremost  in  the  conflict  for  conscience — who  have  now  passed  from 
the  struggles  of  the  Church  on  earth  to  the  peace  and  the  glory  of  the  upper 
sanctuary. 

As  no  true  Protestant  would  discard  the  memory  of  the  Reformation, — as  no 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
true  patriot  would  discard  the  Revolution  Settlement, — so  no  true  Free  Church- 
man would  part  with  the  memory  of  the  Disruption. 

But  more  than  thirty  years  have  now  passed  since  the  Disruption.  A  new 
generation  has  arisen,  to  some  of  whom  ignorance  is  natural,  and  to  others 
forgetfulness  is  easy.  Ingenious  efforts  are  made  to  commend  oblivion,  to  induce 
indifference,  and  to  enlist  selfishness  in  aid  of  suggested  surrender ;  and  it  may 
not  be  useless  or  inappropriate  to  offer  a  few  brief  remarks  in  explanation  of 
the  Origin,  the  Principles,  the  Progress,  and  the  Result,  of  the  conflict. 

As  of  a  stream  winding  through  a  fertile  vale,  the  spring  may  be  discovered 
far  back  amid  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  so  of  the  Free  Church,  which  was  the  out- 
come of  the  Disruption  struggle — the  source  and  spring  of  the  movement  may 
be  found  in  the  great  divisions  of  the  Church  more  than  a  century  back.  The 
people  of  Scotland  can  scarcely  require  to  be  reminded  of  the  theology,  the 
policy,  the  literature,  and  the  preaching  of  the  party  in  the  Church  known  as 
"  Moderates."  The  sad  results  of  the  reign  and  the  fruits  of  Moderatism  are 
well  known.  Yet  it  was  a  potent  and  distinguished  party.  Its  culture  was 
attractive  and  commendable,  and  procured  for  it  a  general  acceptance  among 
the  upper  classes ;  but  its  influence  on  religious  conviction,  sentiment,  and 
character,  was  chilling  and  withering.  Under  the  ascendancy  of  this  "  Moderate  " 
party,  the  Church  of  Scotland,  as  established  and  endowed  by  the  State,  became 
a  great  political  institution  ;  and,  accordingly,  the  advantages  of  State  connection 
rose  higher  and  higher  in  ecclesiastical  estimation.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Church,  in  its  own  pecuhar  and  essential  character  as  a  Church  of  Christ,  apart 
from  its  establishment — the  Church,  as  a  witness-bearer,  and  a  message-bearer, 
and  a  missionary  institution — was  lowered  and  weakened  in  purity,  power,  and 
acceptance,  by  the  prevalence  and  the  influence  of  the  Moderate  party. 

But  there  was  another  party  in  the  Church,  called  by  some  in  derision  "  the 
Wild,"  and  known  by  the  people  as  the  "  Evangelical,"— a  party  whose  theology 


INTRODUCTION. 
was  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  first  and  second  Reformation,  and 
whose  principles  were  those  of  the  Puritans  and  the  Covenanters,  and  whose 
preaching,    faithful  and   fervent,    had   the   scarlet  thread   through   it,    and    tlie 
blood-bought  salvation  in  its  freencss  and  fullness,  as  its  constant  and  urgent 
theme.     To  that  party  the    spiritual   liberty   and   life  of  the  Church  was  far 
more  important  and  more  precious  than  its  establishment  or  endowment.     Tims 
it  came  to  pass  that  the  stream  of  the  Church's  history  flowed,  as  it  were,  in  two 
different  channels.     To  the  Moderate  party  the  establishment  of  the  Church— 
the  favour  of  the  State,  and  the  dependence  of  the  Church  on  the  State — was 
the  muniment  of  her  political  and  social  position.    To  the  Evangelical  party  the 
spiritual  independence  of  the  Church  was  the  muniment  of  her  Christian  liberty 
and  her  living  power.     So  also  in  regard  to  Patronage,  the  channels  of  thought 
and  feeling  were  quite  distinct.      The  Moderate  party,  desirous  to  retain  the 
fitvour  of  the  patrons  and  the   government,  naturally  supported  and   enforced 
the  rights  of  Patronage,   quite  without  consent,  and  almost  without  limit   or 
restriction,   on  the  part  of  congregations ;  while  the  Evangelical  party,  leaning 
on  popular  rather  than  State  support,  sought  to  protect  congregations  from  the 
intrusion  of  unacceptable  ministers.     It  naturally  followed  tiiat,  so  long  as  the 
Moderate   party  retained   the   ascendancy  in  the  Church,   the  enforcement   of 
Patronage — the  settlement  of  ministers  over  reclaiming  congregations — was  con- 
tinued and  accepted,  and  no  attempt  was  made  to  vindicate  the  separate  and 
independent  spiritual  jurisdiction  of  the  Church.     But  it  was  manifest  that,  if  the 
time  came  when  the  Evangelical  and  popular  party  could  guide  the  councils  of 
the  Church,  the  abolition  or  effectual  limitation  of  Patronage  would  be  attempted, 
and  spiritual   independence  would  be  proclaimed.      And  so  it  came  to  pass. 
Sir  Henry  Moncreiff,  Dr  Andrew  Thomson,  and  others,  did  not  live  in  vain. 
The  Evangelical  party — the  party  whom  the  people  trusted,  and  through  whom 
the  most  devout  and  earnest  of  the  people  hoped  to  see  a  revival  of  religion 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
in  the  land — became  the  majority  in  the  Assembly;  and  gradually,  but  surely, 
the  principles  now  held  by  the  Free  Church  were  developed,  proclaimed,  and 
carried  into  action.  Tlie  adoption  and  practical  vindication  of  these  principles 
of  non-intrusion  and  spiritual  independence,  was  the  natural  and  appropriate 
result  of  the  transfer  of  Church  influence  from  the  Moderate  to  the  Evangelical 
party.  It  was  a  result  expected  by  intelligent  observers  on  both  sides  of  the 
Church — expected  with  desire  by  the  one  party,  and  with  apprehension  by  the 
other.  It  was  also  a  result  to  be  anticipated  from  the  progressive  earnestness 
and  piety  of  congregations  trained  under  the  influence  of  Evangelical  ministers. 
It  was  plain,  that  those  who  had  been  taught  and  stirred  by  the  full,  faithful, 
and  fervent  preaching  of  the  gospel  of  grace  and  love,  would  not  long  submit  to 
the  enforced  settlement  of  "Moderate"  ministers,  and  would,  when  opportunity 
offered,  assert  the  congregational  right  to  resist  Intrusion,  and  the  Church's  right 
to  Spiritual  Independence.  No  one  could  doubt  that  the  people  would  follow 
their  faithful  pastors. 

Occasion,  fit  and  urgent,  soon  appeared.  In  the  case  of  the  parish  of 
Auchterarder,  where  only  two  persons  out  of  three  thousand  signed  the  call,  and 
in  several  other  cases,  the  most  high-handed  and  tyrannical  patronage  was 
exercised,  and  was  enforced  by  all  the  authority  and  the  severity  of  the  law; 
and  the  exercise  of  that  patronage  was  accepted,  and  the  severe  interposition  of 
the  Civil  Courts  was  craved,  approved,  and  defended,  by  the  Moderate  party,  then 
the  minority  in  the  Assembly,  who  afterwards  formed  the  Established  Church, 
when  the  Evangelical  party  were  compelled  by  conscience  to  secede.  These 
Moderates  are  represented  by  the  Church  now  established,  as  the  Evangelical 
party  are  represented  by  the  Free  Church.  In  the  cases  of  Settlement, — in 
the  Stewarton  Case — in  the  Strathbogie  Interdict, — the  distinct  and  independent 
jurisdiction  of  the  Church  in  matters  spiritual  was  denied,  assailed,  and  crushed 
bvthe  judgments  of  the  Civil  Courts;  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  attempt  to 


INTRODUCTION. 
impose  on  Patronage  even  the  mildest  restraint,  failed,  and  was  pronounced 
illegal.  Revered  ministers  were  called  to  the  bar  of  the  Civil  Court,  and  publicly 
rebuked.  It  became  impossible,  and  was  authoritatively  declared  impossible, 
to  maintain  the  spiritual  independence  of  the  Church  within  a  Church 
established  and  endowed  by  the  State.  The  surrender  by  the  Church  of  power 
to  protect  reclaiming  congregations,  and  the  surrender  by  the  Church  of  free 
and  independent  spiritual  jurisdiction,  was  felt  to  be,  and  was  indeed  declared 
to  be,  the  condition  and  the  price  of  Establishment. 

The  principle  of  spiritual  independence  has  been  much  misunderstood.  It 
has  been  imagined  that  our  Free  Church  view  of  spiritual  independence  savours 
of  priestcraft.  This  is  a  great  mistake.  There  is,  on  the  contrary,  no  Church 
in  which  the  lay  element  has  more  weight  and  influence.  We  hold  that  no  eccle- 
siastic is,  as  a  citizen,  above  the  law,  or  beyond  the  reach  of  the  law.  We  loyally 
and  respectfully  recognise  the  authority  of  the  law  on  all  questions  of  civil  rights. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  hold,  that  of  every  true  man  and  every  true  Church  our 
Lord  Jesus  is  the  spiritual  Head,  and  that  within  the  sphere  of  spiritual  jurisdic 
tion,  His  Church  has,  in  her  orderly  courts,  distinct  and  independent  authority. 
The  Free  Church  principle,  when  rightly  understood  and  applied,  does  indeed 
guard  alike  the  true  liberty  of  the  State  and  the  true  liberty  of  the  Church,  by 
drawing  a  clear  distinction  between  civil  and  spiritual  jurisdiction.  The  freedom 
of  the  State  from  ecclesiastical  usurpation  is  imperilled  by  Vaticanism.  The 
freedom  of  the  Church  from  usurpation  by  Civil  Courts  is  imperilled  by 
Erastianism.  The  Free  Church  protests  against  both  usurpers.  She  maintains 
the  freedom  of  both  jurisdictions  against  encroachment  from  either  side,  on  a 
jurisdiction  distinct  and  independent— in  the  one  case  civil,  and  in  the  other  case 
spiritual.  Practically  the  spiritual  jurisdiction  of  the  Church  was,  during  the 
conflict,  chiefly  exercised  to  protect  congregations  Irom  the  intrusion  of  ministers 
by  violent  settlements.     It  was  exercised  in  vain.     The  violent  settlements  were 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
enforced  by  law  ;  and  both  to  the  people  and  to  the  Church  it  was,  by  deed  and 
by  word,  plainly  intimated,  that  continued  connection  with  the  State  could  only 
be  maintained  on  the  condition  of  the  surrender  of  congregational  liberty,  and  of 
spiritual  independence. 

Separation  from  the  State  then  became  the  duty,  the  urgent  and  paramount 
duty,  of  all  who  were  not  prepared  to  accept  that  condition  and  pay  that  price. 
Those  who  remained  established  at  the  Disruption  of  1843,  accepted  the  con- 
dition, and  consented  to  pay  the  price  ;  and  they  still  enjoy  the  State  favour,  and 
the  State  endowments,  and  enjoy  them  on  the  condition  which  they  accepted,  and 
.It  the  price  which  they  paid.  Those  who  rejected  the  condition,  and  refused 
to  pay  the  price,  of  Establishment,  seceded,  surrendered  the  advantages  of  State 
connection,  and  formed  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland.  Continued  conformity 
involved  the  sacrifice  of  conscience  ;  and  that  sacrifice  being  in  regard  to  matters 
of  momentous  and  sacred  principle.  Nonconformity  became  an  imperative  duty. 

If,  after  the  rise  of  the  Evangelical  party  to  influence  in  the  Church,  and 
after  the  Ten  Years'  Conflict,  there  had,  in  1843,  been  no  Disruption,  all  con- 
fidence in  the  power  or  reality  of  conscience,  and  in  the  sincerity  of  religious 
profession,  would  have  been  destroyed.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  anything 
more  injurious  to  the  cause  and  progress  of  vital  religion  than  would  have  been 
the  cowardice  or  unfaithfulness  of  the  Evangelical  party  at  that  crisis.  The  tone 
of  feeling  at  the  solemn  Convocation  of  Ministers  which  preceded  the  Disruption, 
made  it  certain  that  surrender  or  compromise  could  not  be  thought  of  without 
dishonour ;  and  the  elders,  with  responding  fidelity,  resolved  to  maintain  the  same 
great  principles,  and  to  adhere  to  the  out-going  ministers.  The  words  of  the  Rev. 
Mr  Stewart  of  Cromarty  made  a  deep  and  lasting  impression.  "  When  I  read  that 
interdict  by  a  Civil  Court,  which  the  Church  was  called  and  commanded  to  obey, 
I  felt,  as  I  could  imagine  a  child  to  feel  hanging  at  the  breast  of  its  mother,  if  that 
mother  had  been  suddenly  shot  through  the  heart.     I  might  cling  to  the  body, 


IXTRODUCTION 
but  the  life  has  gone  out  of  hei."  In  this  state  of  feehiig,  with  the  lieart  of  the 
Church  deeply  stirred,  with  conscience  sensitive,  and  honour  pledged.  Disruption 
and  continued  separation  became  inevitable.  This  was  felt  and  appreciated— 
the  serious  step  was  deliberately  and  prayerfully  considered,  and  bravely  taken 
—and  graciously  has  God  guided  the  Free  Church,  and  has,  in  her  Noncon- 
formist condition,  blessed  her  with  peace,  liberty,  and  purity.  One  part  of  this 
gracious  dealing  has  been  the  gift  to  the  Church  of  her  "  Disruption  Worthies," 
whose  wisdom,  courage,  faithfulness,  and  godliness,  have  promoted  her  progress 
and  her  usefulness,  and  sustained  her  renown.  The  purity  of  motive,  the  un- 
flinching stedfastness  of  principle,  the  spiritual  elevation  and  evangelical  earnest- 
ness of  character,  by  which  these  leaders  of  the  Exodus  were  distinguished,  have 
won  the  admiration  of  all  good  men— even  of  many  who  honestly  differed  and 
remained  behind.  Another  part  of  God's  gracious  dealing  has  been  the  bringing 
the  Free  Church  into  close  and  cordial  relations  with  the  Evangelical  Seceders  of 
an  earlier  date,  with  churches — Protestant,  Presbyterian,  Evangelical — holding,  as 
their  forefathers  held,  all  the  great  principles  for  which  our  "  Disruption  Worthies" 
contended. 

It  is,  however,  now  said,  that  Disruption  Memories  should  be  consigned  to 
oblivion,  and  that,  as  Patronage  has  been  abolished  by  Act  of  Parliament,  Free 
Churchmen  should  return  to  the  Establishment ;  and  it  is  indeed  obvious  that  to 
attract  them  back  is  the  policy  of  the  hour.  It  is  therefore  necessary  for  Free 
Churchmen  seriously  to  review  the  past  history,  and  to  consider  the  present 
position,  of  the  Church.  This  they  must  do,  in  order  to  estimate  aright  the 
attractions  or  invitations  presented  or  suggested.  Now,  no  narrow-minded 
jealousy,  no  unkind  feeling,  should  actuate  Free  Churchmen  in  this  matter. 
There  is  much  worth,  capacity,  and  piety  within  the  Established  Church.  She 
has  a  wide  field  for  usefulness,  and  she  has  done,  and  is  doing,  much  good.  In 
all  such  good.  Free  Churchmen  rejoice.     It  is  the  duty  and  privilege  of  Free 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
Churchmen  to  cherish  friendly  feelings,  and  to  maintain  friendly  relations,  and  to 
co-operate  heartily  in  Christian  work;  and  all  this  they  can  do  without  com- 
promise of  principle.  But,  for  members  of  the  Free  Church  to  ignore  or  forget  the 
Disruption,  and  to  make,  or  indicate  a  readiness  to  make,  any  movement  in  the 
direction  of  returning  to  the  Establishment,  or  resuming  connection  with  the  State, 
is  quite  out  of  the  question.  It  would  be  foolish,  and  it  would  be  wrong,  to 
think  of  such  a  step,  or  even  to  dream  of  returning  again  to  bondage.  It  is  alike 
the  part  of  wisdom  and  of  duty  to  hold  fast  the  principles  vindicated  at  such 
cost  in  the  Disruption,  and  to  maintain  the  position  of  Nonconformity ;  for  that  is 
our  true  position,  since  Nonconformists  all  Free  Churchmen  became,  when  they 
quilted  the  Establishment  in  1843.  The  recent  alteration  in  the  law  of  Patronage 
does  not  affect  our  position.  It  may,  or  may  not,  be  satisfactory  to  the  Established 
Church.  Of  course,  we  cannot  approve  of  Patronage.  We  have  never  done 
so.  It  was  not  in  the  Evangelical  party  that  Patronage  found  support,  nor 
can  it  find  support  in  the  Free  Church.  But  the  new  Statute,  whatever  it  does, 
does  not  remove  the  causes  of  separation  ;  it  does  not  secure,  and  was  not 
intended  to  secure,  the  spiritual  independence  of  the  Church ;  and  after  thirty 
years'  experience  of  Disruption  life,  all  thoughtful  Free  Churchmen  must  have 
been  taught,  that  Evangelical  Nonconformity  has  in  it  a  charm  and  a  power  which 
the  State  cannot  bestow,  and  must  have  been  taught  also,  that  the  Church  is 
freer,  safer,  and  purer,  when  depending  only  on  the  free-will  offerings  of  the 
Christian  people.  All  our  experience  has  tended  to  deepen  our  convictions  on 
these  points.  Nor  can  it  be  overlooked,  that  return  to  State  connection  would 
painfully  rend  asunder  the  ties  now  uniting  us  to  those  older  Nonconformists  who 
have  done  such  great  service  to  the  cause — the  good  old  cause — of  gospel  truth  and 
civil  and  religious  liberty.  The  true  part  for  the  Free  Church,  at  once  the  wisest 
and  the  bravest  part,  is  to  hold  fast  our  freedom,  and  to  strengthen  our  alliance 
with  the  free. 


INTRODUCTION. 

But  it  has  been  recently  maintained,  on  the  part  of  the  Established  Church, 
and  of  those  politicians  who  invite  return  to  State  connection,  that  the  spiritual 
independence  of  the  Church  is  not  in  danger,  that  it  has  never  been  authorita- 
tively denied,  and  that  the  law  has  never  negatived  the  Church's  claim  to  such 
spiritual  independence,  and,  therefore,  that  the  subject  need  not  trouble  us  or 
scare  us  from  return.  This,  after  all  that  has  passed,  is,  indeed,  a  strange 
view ;  but  the  stating  of  it  at  present  is  not  without  importance.  It  seems  to 
be  adopted  to  serve  the  purpose  of  the  passing  hour,  and  is  somewhat  rashly 
adopted,  for  it  cuts  away  the  only  excuse  which  can  even  palliate  the  oppressive 
proceedings  that  led  to  the  Disruption.  To  sunender  the  Church's  liberty  when 
the  law  demanded  it,  was  a  weakness  and  a  grave  mistake.  But  to  surrender  it, 
when  the  law  did  not  demand  it,  would  have  been  an  act  of  treachery  and  guilt. 
If  it  really  were  the  case,  as  is  now  alleged  or  suggested,  that  the  law  of  the 
Established  Church,  and  the  constitution  of  the  Established  Church,  never 
enforced,  accepted,  or  recognised  the  authority  of  the  Civil  Courts,  and  the 
subordination  of  the  Church  Courts,  in  matters  spiritual,  then,  how  can  the  actual 
facts  of  enforced  edicts  of  the  Civil  Courts,  and  the  ready  submission  of  that 
portion  of  the  Church  which  is  now  established,  be  explained] 

That  the  Civil  Courts  did  actually  command  and  ordain  the  doing  of  spiritual 
acts,  and  did  forbid  and  prohibit  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  in  Strathbogie,  and 
that  the  command  and  the  prohibition  were  both  obeyed  without  protest  by  the 
Moderate  party — the  party  remaining  in  the  Church — is  beyond  doubt.  The 
defence  or  explanation  given  at  the  time,  and  till  recently,  was,  that  the  Church 
was,  in  respect  of  its  establishment,  bound  in  law  and  in  duty  to  obey  the  edicts 
of  the  Civil  Court,  even  in  these  matters  clearly  spiritual,  even  in  the  calling 
and  the  collation,  involving  the  ordination,  of  ministers,  even  in  the  preaching  of 
the  word.  The  Lord  President  (Hope)  said,  on  5th  March  1841,  "What  makes 
the  Church  of  Scotland,  but  the  law?"     Lord  Mackenzie  said,  that  the  Court 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
did  not,  in  the  first  Auchterarder  case,  pronounce  "  a  judgment  limited  to  the 
effect  of  determining  the  right  to  the  stipend  only,  or  the  manse  and  glebe  ;" 
and  he  added,  what  the  Lord  President  had  stated  on  i8th  November  1840,  that 
the  obligation  to  receive  and  admit  a  qualified  person,  implies  an  obligation  to 
ordain,  since  ordination  is  necessary  to  admission.  The  Strathbogie  Interdicts 
were  recognised  by  the  Moderate  party— by  those  who  adhered  to  the  Establish- 
ment— as  competent  and  legal,  as  according  to  the  law  of  the  land  and  the 
constitution  of  the  Church.  The  Non-Intrusionists  were  accused  of  disloyalty 
for  not  obeying  them.  Dr  Guthrie,  Dr  Cunningham,  and  Dr  Candlish  were 
denounced  in  the  strongest  terms. 

Now,  on  this  law,— a  law  recognising  and  enforcing  authority  in  Civil  Courts, 
and  obedience  in  Church  Courts,  even  in  matters  spiritual, — there  has  been  no 
change.  The  repeal  of  the  law  of  Patronage  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.  A  settle- 
ment on  a  presentation  was  only  an  occasion  for  crushing  or  for  vindicating  the 
principle  of  spiritual  independence.  The  condition  or  status  of  subordination, 
and  the  relative  or  emerging  duty  of  obedience,  to  Civil  Courts,  remains  now 
exactly  as  it  was  in  1841.  The  facts  in  regard  to  violent  settlement,  and  enforce- 
ment of  the  edicts  of  a  Civil  Court,  are  beyond  question.  The  authority,  in 
its  most  startling  form,  was  exercised,  maintained,  and  vindicated ;  and  was  not 
only  distinctly  accepted,  but  was  invoked  and  appealed  to,  by  the  party  led  by 
Dr  Cook — the  party  who  adhered  to  the  Establishment  in  1843,  ^'^^  who  sub- 
stantially constituted  the  Established  Church  from  and  after  the  Disruption. 

This,  therefore,  is  the  alternative.  Either  there  is  no  spiritual  independence 
— no  distinct  and  final  spiritual  jurisdiction — in  the  Established  Church,  and  the 
edicts  of  1840  and  1S41  are  still  competent,  legal,  and  constitutional,  and  may  be 
repeated ;  or  the  great  Moderate  party  which  forced  out  the  Non-Intrusionists, 
and  remained  established,  were  voluntary  actors  in  those  violent  settlements,  and 
in  that  acceptance  of  spiritual  subordination,  and  have  been  excusing  themselves, 


INTRODUCTION. 
by  laying  on  llie  law  and  constitution  of  the  Church  a  guilt  and  a  responsibility 
which  were  all  their  own.  On  the  one  alternative,  the  same  law  may  be  again 
enforced,  and  the  Church's  spiritual  jurisdiction  again  crushed.  On  the  other 
alternative,  the  same  surrender  of  the  Church's  rights  may  be  again  made — the 
same  wrong  may  be  again  done  by  the  same  party,  and  done  with  the  same  results. 
In  any  view,  it  is  plain  that  the  position  of  the  present  Established  Church  is  not 
mended  by  this  suggestion,  and  is  not  such  as  to  invite,  or  justify,  or  even  excuse, 
the  return  of  any  leal-hearted  Free  Churchman.  None  but  the  weak  or  the 
unfaithful  could  think  of  returning.  Those  who  quitted  the  Establishment  on 
religious  conviction  and  for  conscience  sake,  may  and  should  feel  kindly  towards 
those  from  whom  they  have  parted  ;  but  they  cannot  return  without  compromise 
of  conscience,  and  cannot  resume  State  connection  without  surrendering  the 
principles  on  which  they  acted.  Besides,  the  invitation  or  suggestion,  such  as  it 
is,  has  been  mere  talk.  No  approach  to  the  Nonconforming  Churches  generally 
or  to  any  Nonconformist  Church  as  a  body,  has  been  made,  or  is  likely  to  be 
made.  The  idea  of  union  between  a  Church  supported  by  the  State  and  a  Church 
supported  by  voluntary  contributions,  is  ridiculous ;  and  the  device  of  attracting 
weak  or  selfish  adherents  one  by  one,  in  the  hope  of  aftecting  statistical  returns, 
is  too  transparently  foolish  to  require  remark.  Mr  Gladstone  asked  in  Parliament 
if  such  a  course  was  "  fair  or  generous"  \  The  question  was  natural.  No  answer 
to  this  question  has  been  given,  in  Parliament,  or  in  the  Assembly  of  the  Church. 
On  the  probability  of  continued  permanent  Establishment,  it  is  premature 
now  to  speculate.  Questions  now  raised  in  England  as  to  education,  and  as  to 
burials,  and  as  to  ceremonies  and  services,  will  not  be  without  influence.  The 
question  can  wait.  Time — it  may  be  a  short  time — may  clear  it  up.  Disestablish- 
ment is  not  directly  or  specially  the  aim  of  the  Free  Church.  Her  aim  is  to 
convert,  and  to  build  up,  to  instruct  and  to  edify,  to  proclaim  and  commend  the 
gospel.     But  Disestablishment  may  be  the  result  of  the  advancing  strength  and 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
progress  of  Free  Church  principles,  since  these  are  alike  the  principles  of  Evan- 
gelical Presbyterianism,  and  of  civil  and  religious  liberty.  Duty,  faithfulness, 
conscience — these  are  our  guides.  Results  are  in  the  hands  of  God.  There  are 
good  men  in  the  Free  Church,  who  would  regret  to  see  the  State  Church  dis- 
established. There  is  no  sound  and  loyal  Free  Churchman,  who,  for  the  sake  of 
supporting  the  Establishment,  would  compromise  the  principles,  or  imperil  the 
spiritual  liberty  and  independence  of  the  Free  Church. 

The  time  has  come  for  friendly  co-operation  among  all  earnest  Christians,  since 
vice,  ignorance,  infidelity,  and  superstition  are  our  common  enemies.  The  time 
may  come — God  grant  that  it  may  soon  come ! — when,  under  general  awakening 
and  revival,  increased  depth  of  conviction  and  intensity  of  devotional  feeling 
may  lead  to  union  among  all  sound  and  free  Evangelical  Presbyterians.  Mean- 
while, let  all  Free  Churchmen  maintain  their  principles  and  their  liberty.  Let 
them  resist  all  temptations  to  Erastianism,  and  hold  in  grateful  memory  the 
"DISRUPTION  WORTHIES." 


listovical  Slutclj  of  tijc  Jfitc  Cljuitlj  of  Scotlanb, 


BY    JAMES    A.     WYLIE,    LL.D. 


CHAPTER    I. 

V^z  ((Hstatiltsfjmrut  jFalls  anli  tijc  Jrrc  Cijurrlj  Ixtsrs. 

)HE  Reformed  Church  of  Scotland,  has,  from  the  very 
moment  of  her  birth,  claimed  to  be  free.  She  has 
rested  that  great  claim  on  no  insufficient  grounds,  and 
she  has  stated  it  in  no  ambiguous  terms.  From  no 
monarch  or  government  did  the  Church  receive  her 
being.  She  is  a  Divine  institution  :  and  therefore, 
though  in  the  world  she  is  distinct  from  it,  and  owns  no  subjection 
to  the  principalities  and  powers  of  a  secular  kind,  with  which  she  is 
surrounded.  Such,  in  brief,  are  the  grounds  on  which  she  has  advanced 
her  claim  of  immunity  from  all  control  from  without.  God  is  her 
Author,  Christ  is  her  King,  and  the  Bible  is  her  law. 

TiiK  Liberty  of  the  Church. 
The  source  whence  the  freedom  of  the  Church  springs,  determines 
both   its  nature  and  its  limits.     As  regards  its  nature,  it  is  eminently 


DISR UP TIO.\  IVOR THIES. 


spiritual,  and  as  regards  its  limits,  it  is  restricted  to  things  spiritual. 
The  Church  is  not  free  to  gainsay  or  resist  the  edicts  of  princes  in 
matters  political,  much  less  to  claim  supremacy  over  them.  Neither 
is  she  free  in  the  sense  of  being  absolute  mistress,  and  sole  unchal- 
lenged disposer  of  the  goods  and  temporalities  with  which  she 
may  happen  to  be  endowed.  Nor  is  she  free,  even  to  enact  what 
doctrines  she  pleases,  and  bind  them  upon  the  consciences  of  men, 
or  to  set  up  what  polity  may  seem  to  her  expedient.  Her  freedom 
may  be  summed  up  in  a  single  phra.se — the  Church  is  free  to  obey 
Christ. 

The  freedom  of  the  Church,  then,  is  a  freedom  that  consists,  not  so 
much  in  power  to  rule  as  in  power  to  obey — liberty  to  submit  to 
the  authority,  and  carry  out  the  will  of  Him  who  is  her  alone  Lord 
and  Monarch.  He  has  communicated  to  her  a  system  of  truths  which 
she  is  to  believe,  and  a  code  of  laws  which  she  is  to  administer,  and 
no  power  under  heaven  has  a  right  to  step  in  and  offer  hindrance 
to  her  in  the  profession  of  the  one  and  the  execution  of  the  other. 
This  liberty  is  altogether  indispensable  to  the  accomplishment  of 
the  great  ends  for  which  she  has  been  called  into  existence.  Not 
to  flatter  her  pride,  and  enable  her  to  lift  up  her  head  in  idle  or 
mischievous  supremacy  over  other  societies,  was  this  freedom  bestowed 
upon  the  Church,  but  that  through  her  the  Heavenly  King  might 
reign  upon  the  earth,  and  society  be  built  up  in  righteousness.  This 
it  is  that  makes  that  liberty  so  unspeakably  precious.  And  this  it 
is  that  makes  it  so  imperative  on  the  Church  to  vindicate  it  at 
all  costs,  and  never  to  surrender  it,  be  the  wealth,  the  power,  the  tem- 
poral advantages  which  may  be  offered  in  exchange  ever  so  great. 
In  surrendering  it  she  not  only  dishonours  her  King  ;  she  not  onl)- 
degrades  herself,  she  inflicts  an  injur}-  on  that  verj'  power  at  whose 
feet  she  lays  it  down. 


}1IST0RICAL  SKETCH. 

The  Liuektv  oi-  the  Church  Guaranteed  nv  Siatute  in 
Scotland. 

The  Reformed  Church  of  Scotland  was  careful  at  the  outset  uf  her 
career  to  set  before  the  world  in  precise,  full,  and  well-defined  terms, 
that  spiritual  independence  which  she  claimed  as  her  birth-right.  No 
sooner  had  she  emancipated  herself  from  the  tyranny  of  the  Papacy  than 
she  boldly  traced  the  line  over  which  she  pledged  herself  not  to  pass 
to  assail  the  state,  and  within  which  she  was  equally  resolved  not  to 
suffer  invasion  from  the  secular  powers.  In  the  Book  of  Policy,  or 
First  Book  of  Discipline,  drawn  up  by  Knox  and  other  leading  ministers 
in  1 560,  the  foundations  on  which  the  Reformed  Church  is  seen  to  place 
herself,  are  those  of  spiritual  independence.  The  power  of  admission  to, 
or  exclusion  from,  membership  and  office  in  the  Church,  the  Book  of 
Policy  reserved  to  the  Church  exclusively.  In  doing  so  it  conferred  upon 
her  the  right  of  independent  self-government.  For  the  authority  that 
can  admit  or  exclude,  without  challenge  from  without,  has  in  its  own 
hands  the  supreme  government  of  the  society.  All  Church  power  centres 
here.  On  this  one  point  did  Calvin  suspend  the  whole  battle  for  the 
Church's  independent  jurisdiction  in  Geneva ;  and  though  it  may  seem  a 
part  only  of  that  power  which  the  Church  of  Scotland  in  after  times 
claimed  and  exercised,  it  is  in  reality  the  whole ;  it  clearly  establishes 
a  principle  which  carries  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Church  triumphantly 
to  the  veiy  frontier  of  the  spiritual  domain  ;  for  to  say  that  ministers 
are  not  obliged  to  admit  the  unworthy  to  the  communion  table, 
is  but  another  way  of  saying  that  ecclesiastical  sentences  cannot  be 
reviewed  and  reversed  by  the  civil  courts,  and  that  their  interfer- 
ence is  shut  out  in  things  sacred.  In  her  very  dawn  the  Reformed 
Church  of  Scotland  is  seen  taking  up  this  ground.  She  is  free  from 
her  birth. 

She  never  once,  in  the  course  of  her  future  career,  abates  or  modifies 


DISK  UP  TION  1 1 VK  THIES. 


that  high  claim,  but,  on  the  contrar}',  presents  it  in  terms  more  explicit, 
and  embodies  it  in  declarations  and  acts  more  formal  and  complete.  In 
the  Second  Book  of  Discipline,  drawn  up  by  Andrew  Melville,  and  agreed 
upon  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  in  1578,  the  essential  line 
of  distinction  between  civil  and  ecclesiastical  power  is  boldly  traced, — 
"Jesus  Christ,"  it  declares,  "has  appointed  a  government  in  His  Church, 
distinct  from  civil  government,  which  is  to  be  exercised  in  His  name  by 
such  office-bearers  as  He  has  authorised,  and  not  by  civil  magistrates,  or 
under  their  direction."  *  Commenting  on  this  declaration,  the  historian 
M'Crie,  says : — "  It  establishes  their  (the  ecclesiastical  authorities)  inde- 
pendence in  all  matters  that  belong  to  their  cognisance,  and  guards 
against  what  is  the  great  bane  of  religion  and  curse  of  the  Church,  a 
priesthood,  which  is  merely  the  organised  puppet  of  the  State,  and  moves 
and  acts  only  as  it  is  directed  by  the  State.  ...  It  has  secured  the 
cordial  and  lasting  attachment  of  the  people  of  Scotland ;  whenever  it 
has  been  wrested  from  them  by  arbitrary  violence,  they  have  uniformly 
embraced  the  first  favourable  opportunity  of  demanding  its  restoration; 
and  the  principal  secessions  which  have  been  made  from  the  national 
church  in  this  part  of  the  kingdom  have  been  stated,  not  in  the  way  of 
dissent  from  its  constitution  as  in  England,  but  in  opposition  to  depar- 
tures, real  or  alleged,  from  its  genuine  principle."  f 

This  spiritual  independence,  though  co-eval  with  the  Church,  and 
of  her  very  nature  and  constitution,  had  to  fight  its  way  to  recog- 
nition over  the  dislike  and  resistance  of  the  civil  power.  The  years  that 
followed  1578  witnessed  numerous  collisions  between  the  two  authorities, 
and  it  was  not  till  1592  that  a  satisfactory  adjustment  of  the  relations 
between  Church  and  State  was  reached.  Speaking  of  that  famous  settle- 
ment, M'Crie  says:— "What  she  (the  Church)  now  obtained  was  a  legal 
recognition  of  those  powers  which  she  had  long  claimed  as  belonging  to 
her  by  Scriptural  institution  and  the  gift  of  her  Divine  Head.     She  had 

*  M'Crie's  Life  of  iMclvillc,  i.  167,  Edin.,  1810.  +  Life  of  Melville,  \.  172. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

now  a  riglit  by  human  as  well  as  by  divine  law,  in  foro  f^oli  et  soli,  to  hold 
her  assemblies  for  worship  and  discipline,  and  to  transact  all  the  business 
competent  to  her  as  an  ecclesiastical  society,  without  being  liable  to  any 
challenge  for  this,  and  without  being  exposed  to  any  external  interrup- 
tion or  hindrance  whatever,  either  from  individuals  or  from  the  executive 
government."  * 

There  followed  in  the  seventeenth  century  a  series  of  terrific  assaults 
on  the  spiritual  independence.  The  last  three  Stuarts  set  themselves 
to  crush  the  Presbyterian  Kirk  of  Scotland,  and,  along  with  it,  all  the 
rights  and  liberties  of  her  members,  and  to  erect  upon  the  ruins  of  Pres- 
byterianism  their  own  sole  prerogative.  They  sustained  themselves 
supreme  in  all  causes  ecclesiastical.  It  needs  not  that  we  here  recite 
the  tale  of  that  frightful  period.  All  through  the  "  Twenty-eight  Years  " 
our  fathers  are  seen  contending  on  scaffold  and  battle-field  for  the 
"  Headship  of  Christ,"  as  the  spiritual  independence  now  began  to  be 
termed.  The  Stuarts  were  worsted ;  the  Church  came  triumphant 
out  of  the  conflict,  and  again  re-asserted  her  God-given  and  indestruc- 
tible liberties.  The  Fifth  Statute  of  the  first  Parliament  of  Scotland, 
after  the  Revolution  of  1688,  ratified  and  established  the  Presbyterian 
form  of  Church  government,  and  also  the  Westminster  Confession  of 
Faith,  which  the  Church  of  Scotland  had  adopted  as  its  confession 
in  1649.  In  that  noblest  of  all  the  symbolic  books  of  the  Reformed 
Church  how  clearly  and  fully  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church's  inherent 
jurisdiction  in  all  matters  spiritual  proclaimed.  "The  Lord  Jesus," 
says  the  Confession  (chap,  xxx.),  "  as  King  and  Head  of  this  Church, 
hath  therein  appointed  a  government  in  the  hands  of  church-officers 
distinct  from  the  civil  magistrate."  And  again  (chap,  xxxiii.),— "The 
civil  magistrate  may  not  assume  to  himself  the  administration  of  the 
Word  and  Sacraments,  or  the  power  of  the  Keys  of  the  Kingdom 
of  Heaven." 

*  Life  of  Melville,  i.  403. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


The  Disruption. 
The  Powers  of  the  world  have  ever  been  jealous  of  all  rights  which 
do  not  owe  their  origin  to  them,  and  which  are  not  supen'ised  and 
controlled  by  them.  A  few  years  only  was  the  Church  of  Scotland 
left  in  undisturbed  possession  of  the  liberty  which  the  Revolution 
Settlement  had  recognised  as  rightfully  hers,  and  which  the  Union 
of  Scotland  and  England  in  1707,  had  solemnly  sealed,  as  what  was 
to  remain  unchallenged  and  unrevoked  in  all  time  to  come — a  preroga- 
tive inviolable.  This  national  pledge  hindered  not,  however,  that  in  1712, 
the  Act  of  Patronage  was  passed.  The  object  sought,  was  by  the  subtle 
working  of  a  hostile  law,  to  undermine  and  destroy  what  the  open 
violence  of  the  dragoons  and  scaffolds  of  a  foregoing  period  had  been 
unable  to  overthrow.  The  Act  of  Patronage  gave  to  the  State  the 
power,  not  indeed  of  seating  men  at  the  communion  table,  but  of 
putting  them  into  the  pulpits  of  the  Church.  Whether  through  the 
"  pulpit  "  or  through  the  "  communion  table  "  mattered  not :  Patronage 
held  open  the  door  for  the  State  to  enter  the  ecclesiastical  courts, 
and  to  take  into  its  own  hands,  in  process  of  time,  the  whole  adminis- 
tration of  ecclesiastical  affairs  to  the  destruction  of  the  inherent 
spiritual  jurisdiction  of  the  Church.  Divers  checks  were  employed  in 
the  hope  of  preventing,  or  at  least  delaying  the  disastrous  effects  which 
it  was  foreseen  would  flow  from  the  working  of  this  Act.  The  call  of 
the  congregation  was  maintained  with  the  view  of  balancing  the  power 
of  the  Patron.  But  the  latter,  backed  by  the  State,  and  favoured  by  the 
indifference  that  began  to  weigh  upon  the  Church  courts,  gradually 
encroached  upon  the  rights  of  the  people.  At  last  the  call  of  the 
congregation  fell  before  the  nomination  of  the  Patron.  From  a  reality 
the  call  became  a  mere  form,  and  from  a  form  it  soon  sunk  into  a  nullit)-. 
The  entire  independent  action  of  the  Church  was  threatened  with 
paralysis.     At  that  crisis,  there  arose  a  party  in  the  ecclesiastical  courts, 


ff/S  TO  RIC  1 1.  SKE  TC  7/. 

led  by  Sir  Ilciiiy  MoncrcilT  and  Dr.  Andrew  Thomson,  and  ultimately 
by  the  great  Chalmers,  which  sought  to  roll  back  the  tide  of  civil 
invasion  which  threatened  to  overwhelm  the  Church's  liberties.  This 
party  strove  to  resuscitate  the  call,  and  so  give  an  effective  voice  to  the 
people  in  the  settlement  of  their  minister.  Never  did  a  more  brilliant 
phalanx  fight  in  the  battles  of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  Those  who 
lived  through  the  period  and  still  survive,  will  recall  with  emotion, 
the  splendours  of  that  golden  age.  Genius,  learning,  eloquence,  rushed 
to  save  an  ancient  and  venerated  jurisdiction,  under  the  shadow  of  which 
Scotland  had  grown  to  greatness.  The  battle  is  not  always  to  the 
strong.  The  champions  of  the  imperilled  liberties  failed  to  save  them 
in  the  way  they  wished,  and  which  it  was  then  thought,  was  the  only 
way  in  which  they  could  be  saved.  One  hostile  decision  followed 
another,  fulminated  by  the  civil  courts,  each  sapping  more  deeply  the 
independent  spiritual  jurisdiction  of  the  Church  than  that  which 
had  gone  before  it.  The  Veto  Law  by  which  the  reforming  partj- 
sought  to  make  the  call  effective,  and  to  restore  to  congregations 
their  ancient  rights  in  the  choice  of  their  pastor  was  declared  to 
be  illegal.  This  inevitably  led  to  collision  with  the  civil  courts  along 
the  whole  line  of  the  Church's  spiritual  action.  The  luminous  state- 
ment of  Lord  Ardmillan,  and  the  graphic  sketch  of  Hugh  Miller, 
render  here  unnecessary  a  detailed  narration  of  the  steps  that  led  up 
to  the  issue.  It  soon  came  to  pass  that  the  spiritual  sentences  of  the 
General  Assembly  were  reviewed  and  reversed  by  the  civil  courts  ;  and 
the  Church  was  held  bound,  under  pains  and  penalties,  to  discharge 
certain  functions,  undeniably  spiritual,  and  clearly  falling  within  her 
own  domain  at  the  bidding  of  the  State.  This  laid  the  axe  at  the  root 
of  the  independent  self-government  of  the  Church.  These  decisions 
quietly  ignored  the  Church's  Divine  institution,  and  God-given  powers, 
and  ranked  her  no  higher  than  a  department  of  the  State  for  ecclesiastical 
affairs.     They    made    her    the    organ    simply    through    which    the   civil 


DISRUPTION  n-ORTHIES. 

authority  might  give  effect  to  its  will  in  matters  ecclesiastical  and 
spiritual.  The  spectacles  of  other  days,  believed  to  have  gone  by  for 
ever,  again  reappeared,  and  ministers  were  seen  standing  at  a  temporal 
bar  to  be  rebuked  and  punished,  for  disobedience  to  a  civil  mandate 
in  things  spiritual.  Clear  it  was  that  if  this  authority  could  legitimately 
place  them  in  the  criminals'  dock,  it  could  quite  as  legitimately  send 
them  to  the  Grassmarket.  The  Church  sought  relief  in  the  Parliament 
of  the  nation.  That  relief  was  refused  her.  The  State  would  not  undo 
the  j'oke  which  the  law  courts  had  wreathed  round  her  neck  ; 
the  Church  herself  must  break  it.  And  now  came  the  Disruption 
of  1843. 

Possessions  of  which  the  Church  could  not  be  stripped. 
The  Disruption  carried  back  the  Church  of  Scotland  to  her  starting 
ground.  The  event  of  the  i8th  May,  1843,  set  down  the  Free  Pro- 
testing Church  at  the  same  point  where  the  Reformed  Presbyterian 
Church  had  stood  on  the  22nd  of  August,  1560.  Naked  and  penniless, 
she  escaped  at  the  Reformation  out  of  the  immuring  walls  of  the  Papacy 
where  she  had  been  held  captive  four  centuries.  Naked  and  penniless 
she  escaped  from  the  new  thraldom  into  which  the  hostile,  and  as 
she  deemed  them,  unconstitutional  decisions  of  the  civil  courts, 
confirmed  by  Parliament,  had  thrown  her.  Of  all  her  temporal 
emoluments,  and  legal  defences,  she  retained  nothing.  She  was  left 
without  churches,  without  glebes,  without  manses,  without  stipends, 
without  school-houses.  She  was  stripped  of  all.  Thus,  literalh-,  was 
she  brought  back  to  her  beginning.  "  I  remember,"  said  I\Ir.  David 
Fergusson,  in  the  Synod  of  Fife,  relating  when  an  old  man  what  had 
been  the  experiences  of  his  youth,  "  I  remember  when  such  was  the 
unfortunate  state  of  our  affairs,  that  we  were  stript  of  all  our  temporalities, 
and  there  was  no  such  thing  as  a  stipend,  or  a  glebe,  or  a  manse,  through 
the  whole  of  Scotland.     And   there  were  just  si.x  of  us  who  laid  our 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

heads  together,  and  we  determined  to  plant  congregations  wherever 
we  could."  A  second  time  she  presents  herself  before  Scotland  without 
the  fence  of  law,  or  the  doiuiy  of  earthly  goods. 

But  there  were  things  of  which  the  Dis-Established  Church  of 
Scotland  could  not  be  stript.  No  human  power  could  annul  the  charter 
which  she  held  of  God,  and  which  was  written  in  the  Bible.  No 
decision  of  court,  and  no  edict  of  Parliament  could  filch  from  her  her 
right  to  a  liberty  which  a  higher  than  earthly  monarch  had  bestowed 
upon  her.  Nor  could  she  ever  be  robbed  of  the  memory  of  her  past. 
The  halo  of  that  glory  would  be  for  ever  around  her,  and  its  impulse 
for  ever  stirring  within  her.  Nor,  whatever  the  degradation,  distress, 
and  poverty  into  which  she  might  be  reduced,  could  she  ever  cease 
to  be  the  object  of  reverence  and  affection  on  the  part  of  a  people 
for  whose  rights  and  liberties  she  had  so  often  poured  out  her  blood. 
These  were  riches  more  precious  by  far  than  those  of  which  she  had 
been  stript.  No  external  power  could  despoil  her  of  them.  And 
if  she  must  needs  go  back  to  her  first  condition,  and  plod  her  weary 
way  over  again,  she  had  the  satisfaction  of  thinking,  that  she  had 
now  at  her  service  an  array  of  spiritual  forces,  which  had  been  silently 
growing  up  during  the  past  three  hundred  years,  and  which  the 
Disruption,  so  far  from  extinguishing,  had  set  free  and  awakened  into 
tenfold  mightier  energy.  In  the  exercise  of  these  powers  she  would 
soon  recover  all,  and  more  than  all  of  what  had  been  taken  from  her. 
When  she  looked  abroad  over  Scotland  on  the  i8th  of  May,  1843,  her 
fathers'  land  was  no  longer  hers,  she  had  suddenly  become  a  stranger 
in  it.  She  found  herself  on  the  morrow  of  the  Disruption  an  exile ;  but 
if  she  had  lost  Scotland,  it  was  only  for  a  moment,  she  would  again 
take  possession  of  it,  and  would  hold  it  by  a  new  and  more  sacred 
bond,  which  no  exterior  power  should  be  able  to  break.  Strong  in  faith, 
she  went  forth  to  re-possess  the  land,  and  we  are  rapidly  to  follow  her  in 
the  accomplishment  of  her  great  task. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Three  months  before  the  Disruption,  that  is,  in  the  February  of  1843, 
there  was  sketched  a  programme  of  work  to  be  undertaken  by  the 
Church  after  the  Disruption,  which  was  now  looked  upon  as  certain. 
That  work  was  arranged  under  the  four  following  heads: — (i.)  The 
erection  of  churches.  (2.)  The  providing  of  a  Sustentation  for 
the  ministry,  together  with  a  Theological  College.  (3.)  The  extension 
of  the  Gospel  at  home  by  the  planting  of  new  charges.  (4.)  The 
evangelisation  of  the  heathen  world  by  means  of  foreign  missions.  This 
was  no  light  programme  on  the  part  of  a  Church  that  stood  face  to  face 
with  dis-establishment.  In  the  prosecution  of  it  numerous  calls  to 
labour,  not  specified  in  this  outline,  and  which  could  not  then  be  foreseen, 
would,  she  well  knew,  emerge,  of  a  subordinate  but  not  unimportant 
kind  ;  for  these  also  she  stood  prepared.  Manifestly  her  spirit  did  not 
quail.  At  a  time  when  many  thought  she  was  about  to  vanish  from 
the  land,  she  was  meditating  wider  conquests,  and  girding  herself  for 
greater  labours.  Let  us  follow  her  as  she  fulfils  her  programme  of 
work,  and  step  by  step  builds  herself  up. 


The  Work  before  the  Disestablished  Church. 
The  essential  and  primary  duty  of  a  Church  is  worship,  and  conse- 
quently the  first  care  of  the  now  disestablished  and  disendowed  Church 
of  Scotland  was  to  make  provision  for  the  orderly  and  commodious  cele- 
bration of  public  ordinances.  All  her  sanctuaries  had  been  taken  from 
her.  Accordingly  the  erection  of  suitable  fabrics  for  her  congregations 
was  the  first  work  to  which  the  Free  Protesting  Church  of  Scotland  must 
put  her  unfettered  hand.  She  could  worship,  it  is  true,  on  the  mountain, 
or  on  the  wild,  or  on  the  sea-shore  ;  or,  if  these  places  should  be  inter- 
dicted to  her,  she  could  hold  her  solemn  convocations  on  the  highway. 
But  only  during  the  summer  months  would  this  be  practicable.  As  soon 
as  the  dripping  rains  and  the  keen  blasts  of  winter  should  set  in,  it 
would  be  impossible  without  serious  risk  to  health  and  life  to  worship 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

without  shelter  from  the  elements.  Early  in  the  year  of  the  Disruption 
provision  began  to  be  made  in  prospect  of  the  emergency.  All  idea  of 
costly  edifices  was  laid  aside.  This  was  left  over  for  wealthier  and 
better  times,  should  such  times  ever  come.  Meanwhile,  plain  but  com- 
modious fabrics,  such  as  were  suitable  for  the  Presbyterian  worship, 
would  suffice.    Their  erection  was  set  about  with  system  and  vigour. 

A  Provisional  Committee  was  formed  by  the  conjunction  of  the  com- 
mittees respectively  appointed  by  the  Convocation  of  Ministers  which 
met  at  Edinburgh  in  the  November  of  1842,  and  the  General  Meeting  of 
Elders,  which  had  been  held  in  Edinburgh  on  the  ist  of  February,  1843  ; 
and  on  this  Provisional  Committee  was  laid  the  burden  of  making  all 
necessary  preparations  for  an  event  which  was  now  seen  to  be  impending. 
That  committee  issued  its  first  "Circular"  to  the  friends  of  the  Church 
on  the  17th  of  February,  1843.  It  bore,  prefixed  as  its  motto,  the  words 
of  Psalm  cxxxii.  3,  4,  5  :  "  Surely  I  will  not  come  into  the  tabernacle  of 
my  house,  nor  go  up  into  my  bed  ;  I  will  not  give  sleep  to  mine  eyes,  or 
slumber  to  mine  eyelids,  until  I  find  out  a  place  for  the  Lord,  an  habita- 
tion for  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob."  It  opened  thus  : — "  In  the  judgment 
of  all  men  the  period  is  near  when  the  pleasant  and  the  beautiful  house 
in  which  our  fathers  worshipped  will  be  laid  waste.  In  that  mournful  day 
we  are  not  to  sit  sad  and  inactive  amid  the  ruins  of  the  sanctuary,  nor  to 
hang  our  harp  upon  the  willows  when  assailed  by  the  mockings  of  the 
stranger ;  but,  in  duty  to  ourselves,  in  duty  to  generations  yet  to  come, 
above  all,  in  duty  to  Him  whose  mercy,  amidst  the  judgments  sent  upon 
us,  is  conspicuous,  we  must  arouse  ourselves  to  determined  action — not 
only  that  we  may  secure  for  ourselves  the  means  of  worshipping  our  God 
according  to  our  consciences,  but  that  a  testimony  for  the  pure  truth  of 
God  may  not  fail  from  this  land,  in  which  our  fathers  were  strengthened 
to  witness  so  goodly  a  confession  in  the  times  of  old." 

The  undertone  of  sadness  which  these  words  breathe  was  well  fitted 
to  give  depth  and  power  to  the  call  to  active  exertion,  which,  as  with 


DISR UP TION  M'OR THIES. 

trumpet's  peal,  the  circular  sent  forth.  The  men  whose  words  we 
have  quoted  saw  clearly  the  approaching  overthrow;  all  beyond  was 
veiled  in  uncertainty  and  darkness,  but  their  resolution  is  seen  rising  only 
the  higher  as  the  day  of  discomfiture  and  trial  draws  nigh.  Accordingly 
the  "  Circular  "proceeds  :— "  Let  it  be  assumed  that  the  Church  is  to  be 
disestablished  after  the  meeting  of  Assembly  in  May,  that  five  or  six 
hundred  ministers  are  then  to  resign  their  livings  and  leave  their  churches, 
that  these,  with  their  congregations,  are  to  be  provided  with  places  of 
worship  with  the  least  possible  delay,  that  the  two  hundred  faithful  pro- 
bationers are  to  be  employed  as  ministers  or  missionaries  among  the 
people  who  adhere,  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  where  the  ministers 
do  not  quit  the  Establishment,  that  the  means  of  decent  support  are  to  be 
found  for  these  labourers,  and  that,  too,  without  neglecting  the  care  of 
education  and  the  cause  of  missions,  and  that  all  this  is  to  be  done  in  the 
course  of  the  ensuing  summer,  so  that,  if  possible,  before  winter  sets  in, 
the  Church  may  be  in  a  comparatively  organised  state — safe  and  sheltered, 
if  it  please  God,  at  all  events  from  the  winds  of  heaven,  even  should  she 
be  followed  in  her  retreat  by  the  wrath  of  man,  which,  however.  He,  in 
His  mercy,  can  restrain." 

They  had  verily  good  cause  to  add — "  This,  it  will  be  seen,  is  a  good 
summer's  work  carved  out  for  our  poor  Kirk." 

The  Disruption  viewed  Before  and  After. 
We  who  stand  on  this  side  the  Disruption  and  look  back  upon  it 
from  the  midst  of  well-filled  exchequers,  flourishing  schemes,  and  sump- 
tuous churches,  would  do  well  to  place  ourselves  where  our  fathers 
stood,  and  view  the  Disruption,  and  the  Church  that  arose  from  it, 
from  their  stand-point.  What  they  risked  was  not  the  loss  of  their 
livings.  That  would  have  been  comparatively  a  small  matter.  Their 
stipends  were  in  their  own  power,  and  they  could  keep  them  or  cast  them 
away,  as  it  seemed  good  to  them.     They  incurred  a  responsibility  infin- 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

itely  higher  than  the  loss  of  their  emoluments,  and  nothing  but  a  strong 
confidence  in  God  could  have  enabled  them  to  adventure  on  that  respon- 
sibility.    They  risked  the  overthrow  of  the  Church  of  Scotland, — the  \ 
Church  which  Knox  had  founded,  which  martyr-blood  had  nourished,  and 
which  had  ministered  the  Bread  of  Life  to  many  successive  generations 
of  Scotchmen.     It  was  in  this  light — the  razing  even  of  the  Church,  the 
throwing  down  of  what  they  never  would  be  able  to  rebuild — that  the 
world  beheld  the  coming  Disruption.     It  was  faith  only  that  could  sec 
the  Free  Church  while  as  yet  she  was  not — while,  as  j'et,  there  was  not  a 
penny  in  her  exchequer,  nor  a  sanctuary  in  all  the  land  which  she  could 
call  her  own.    The  words  we  have  quoted  seem  sober,  read  at  this  day, 
and  the  anticipations  which  they  express  seem  well  founded,  now  that 
they  have  been  fulfilled.     But  to  the  bulk  of  those  who  were  living  when 
these  words  were  first  written  and  given  to  the  world,  they  sounded  like 
the  effusions  of  fanaticism,  and  the  hopes  which  they  held  out  were  pro- 
nounced to  be  Utopian  and  chimerical.     It  is  when  we  carry  ourselves 
back  to  those  days,  that  we  are  able  to  take  the  measure  of  the  faith  ' 
and  courage  of  the  men  of  the  Disruption,  and  the  grace  given  them  of  ; 
God  to  go  forward  in  the  face  of  a  universal  scepticism  and  derision,  in                     j 
the  way  of  vindicating  the  honour  of  the  Church's  Head,  and  maintain-                     I 
ing  the  liberties  of  her  members,  not  doubting  that  if  the  ancient  and  ^ 
beautiful  house  in  which  their  fathers  had  worshipped  should  be  rent  ! 
asunder  and  cast  down,  another  would  arise  upon  its  ruins,  fairer,  purer,  j 
and  statelier  than  that  which  had  been  overthrown. 

The  Building  of  New  Churches. 
Full  of  this  faith,  they  began  to  build.     Promptitude,  method,  and 
professional  skill  came  to  the  aid  of  a  devout  faith  in  the  execution  of  this 
work.     A  sub-committee  was  formed  for  collecting  funds  and  obtaining  - 

subscriptions  for  the  erection  of  the  new  edifices.   Another  sub-committee 
was  formed  for  obtaining  sites,  procuring  plans  and  estimates,  and  taking 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

charge  of  the  erection  of  the  fabrics.  A  third  sub-committee  was 
appointed  to  correspond  with  local  committees  and  individuals  as  to  the 
localities  in  which  the  new  churches  should  be  planted.  This  triple 
machinery  was  soon  in  busy  operation  over  the  whole  country.  The  note 
of  preparation  was  heard  in  rural  glen  as  well  as  in  populous  city.  It 
was  resolved  that  the  new  fabrics  should  be  commodious,  but  severely 
plain,  and  reared  on  a  system  of  rigid  economy.  Not  a  penny  was  to 
be  lavished  in  useless  ornament.  And  it  was  also  enacted  that  the  city 
churches  should  be  of  the  same  unpretending  style  of  architecture  with 
the  country  sanctuaries,  for  the  present  at  least,  that  all  might  share  to 
the  extent  of  their  needs  in  the  offerings  of  the  people,  and  the  unseemly 
spectacle  be  avoided  of  the  wealthy  congregations  worshipping  in  splen- 
did edifices,  while  their  poorer  brethren  were  insufficiently  accommo- 
dated, or,  it  might  be,  compelled  to  assemble  on  the  open  wild.  Half-a- 
million  sterling,  said  the  Committee,  would  not  suffice  to  provide  churches 
for  the  outcoming  congregations,  if  these  were  to  be  ornamental,  and,  of 
course,  costly.  If  it  were  attempted  to  realise  the  object  on  this  scale 
the  result  would  be  that  the  Church  would  be  crushed  by  the  insuperable 
load  she  had  taken  upon  herself,  whereas,  should  plainness  and  economy 
be  studied,  a  third  of  that  sum  would  suffice  to  construct  six  hundred 
commodious  churches,  guaranteed  to  last  for  a  considerable  number  of 
years,  and  would  leave  the  energies  of  the  Church  free  for  the  prosecu- 
tion of  her  higher  spiritual  work. 

On  this  principle,  plans  were  prepared  and  issued,  accompanied  with 
drawings,  exhibiting  the  exterior  appearance  and  the  internal  arrange- 
ments of  the  proposed  edifices.  In  form  they  were  quadrangular,  the 
width  being  about  two-thirds  of  the  length.  Their  capacity  varied  from 
350  sittings  to  600  or  1000,  and  were  to  cost,  in  some  cases  only  five 
shillings  a  sitting,  and  in  no  case  more  than  fifteen  shillings.  The 
churches  hitherto  in  use  had  cost,  at  an  average,  £2  a  sitting.  The  seats 
were  to  be  placed  on  the  ground  floor,  arranged  in  a  semi-octagonal 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

form,  and  sloping  upwards  from  the  pulpit,  which  was  placed  low  to 
render  the  speaking  without  effort.  The  walls  were  to  be  of  stone,  or  of 
brick,  or  of  timber,  according  to  the  peculiar  resources  of  the  different 
districts.  The  roof,  which  in  some  cases  consisted  of  a  single  span,  in 
others  of  a  series  of  spans  resting  on  timber  pillars  placed  twelve  feet 
apart,  was  to  be  covered  with  patent  felt,  or  the  thinnest  Welsh  slates. 
Galleries  were  rarely  introduced.  The  heating  and  ventilating  processes 
were  carefully  attended  to.  In  their  acoustic  properties  and  general 
convenience  these  new  structures  excelled  the  old  churches.  They  were 
humble,  but  comfortable  withal.  "If,"  said  the  Committee  in  their  "  Fifth 
Communication,"  which  unfolded  the  plan  of  the  new  sanctuaries  with 
which  they  were  about  to  cover  Scotland,  "  if,  in  respect  of  lowly,  con- 
trite, exercised  worshippers  entering  their  unadorned  gates  to  meet  with 
God,  they  are  found  really  '  heaven's  gate '  and  '  God's  house,'  the 
remembrance  of  glories  which  have  passed  away  will  be  obliterated  by 
the  felt  presence  of  a  glory  that  excelleth." 

It  needs  no  gorgeous  cathedral,  no  fane  rich  in  the  glories  of 
architecture,  in  order  that  God's  message  of  forgiveness  may  be  preached 
to  sinful  men  ;  it  needs  that  no  mystic  rite,  no  blaze  of  taper,  and  cloud 
of  incense  accompany  the  celebration  of  the  sacraments,  in  order 
that  they  may  impart  their  efficacy  to  the  worshippers.  Else  what  had 
become  of  religion  in  early  times,  and  in  many  subsequent  periods,  when 
the  Church's  sky  was  overcast,  and  the  storm  of  persecution  blew  loud 
and  fierce.  A  boat  anchored  a  little  offshore  served  as  a  pulpit  for  Him 
who  spake  as  never  man  spake.  Peter's  first  sermon,  which  resulted  in 
the  conversion  of  four  thousand  souls,  was  preached  on  the  street  of 
Jerusalem.  The  catacombs  below  the  city  served  as  the  oratories  and 
chapels  of  the  first  Roman  Christians.  Luther  opened  his  ministry  in  a 
tottering  wooden  shed  in  the  great  square  of  Wittemberg.  A  fish-stall 
in  the  market-place  formed  the  pulpit  of  the  first  Protestant  preacher 
in  Geneva.     The  Huguenots  worshipped  in  woods,  and  our  fathers  in 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


dens  and  on  mountains.  The  Disruption  Assemblies,  on  the  eve  of 
expulsion  from  their  national  edifices,  had  the  prospect  of  being  not 
so  badly  off  as  their  predecessors.  "  In  the  adaptation  of  the  plans 
proposed  to  our  circumstances  and  resources,"  said  the  Provisional 
Committee,  "  and  to  the  wants  of  this  suffering  land,  we  acknowledge 
the  unspeakable  goodness  of  the  Lord,  who,  we  trust,  will  continue  to 
smile  upon  our  unworthy  efforts  to  testify  for  His  injured  truth,  and  to 
rebuild  the  ruined  walls  of  His  sanctuary." 

Under  the  government  of  the  Most  High,  the  world  is  advancing 
from  age  to  age  to  a  higher  platform.  Governments  are  growing  in 
humanity,  and  peoples  in  intelligence  and  piety.  Had  the  Disruption 
taken  place  in  the  seventeenth  century,  a  horde  of  dragoons  would  have 
been  poured  in  upon  Scotland,  the  leaders  in  the  movement  would  have 
been  hunted  out,  shot  down  or  hanged,  and  the  people  would  have  stood 
by  in  callous  indifference,  or  in  helpless  despair.  But  happening,  as  it 
did,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  the  severities  employed  to  crush  the 
movement  were  confined  to  legal  measures.  The  faith  and  enterprise 
of  the  pastors  were  met  by  the  abundant  offerings  of  a  willing  people. 
What  the  devotion  of  the  one  surrendered,  the  piety  of  the  others  gave 
back.  Associations  were  formed  all  over  the  land ;  local  and  con- 
gregational agencies  were  multiplied ;  collectors  offered  their  services ; 
to  each  collector  was  assigned  a  district  containing  twenty-five 
contiguous  families ;  the  rich  gave  their  thousands,  the  poor  their 
pence,  and  in  some  instances  their  pounds,  and  soon  a  Treasury  was 
formed,  filled  beyond  the  expectations  of  the  most  sanguine,  to  rear 
up  the  tabernacles  which  had  fallen,  and  to  presei-ve  to  Scotland  that 
evangelical  ministry  which  had  been  the  glory  of  the  land,  and  which 
its  sons  showed  they  knew  how  to  appreciate. 

The  report  of  the  Building  Fund  Committee  was  given  in  to  the 
General  Assembly,  which  met  at  Glasgow  in  October,  1843,  the  Free 
Church  being  then  just   five  months  old.     From  schedules  which  had 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

been  sent  out,  and  to  which  returns  had  been  made,  the  Committee,  say, 
"We  cannot  calculate  the  number  of  churches  now  building,  or  speedily 
to  be  proceeded  with,  at  fewer  than  700.  Four  hundred  and  seventy 
ministers  left  their  churches  on  the  18th  of  May;  and  in  the  course  of 
five  months,  we  find  ourselves  in  the  course  of  being  called  upon  to  form 
seven  hundred  congregations,  and  to  erect  seven  hundred  churches." 
The  report  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  Fund  whence  the  erection  of  these 
seven  hundred  churches  was  to  be  defrayed.  The  total  amount  of 
donations  and  subscriptions  sent  in  to  the  general  Treasurer  of  the 
Fund  was  £y6,iio,  2s.  iid.  The  total  subscriptions  for  local  objects 
reported  to  the  treasurer  of  the  Financial  Committee  amounted  to 
£^,t)62,  4$.  6|d.  "And,"  say  the  Committee,  "adding  the  central 
Fund,  and  the  subscriptions  for  local  objects  together,  we  have  thus 
the  sum  of  £i66,yo2,  ys.  5id.  as  the  amount  of  the  pecuniary  contribu- 
tions to  the  great  building  object  of  our  Church." 

To  this  is  to  be  added  the  churches  built  and  presented  b\-  indi- 
vidual donors,  sites  for  edifices,  and  also  stones  and  timber,  and  other 
materials  wherewith  to  erect  them,  the  munificent  gifts  of  noblemen, 
landed  proprietors,  rich  merchants,  and  wealthy  ladies,  estimated  at  a 
value  not  less  than  ;^i 5,000,  and  swelling  the  amount  contributed 
towards  the  accomplishment  of  this  great  undertaking  to  ;£'i8i,702 
7s.  5^d.  Nor  did  this  sum,  great  as  it  was,  fully  indicate  the  height  to 
which  the  liberality  of  the  members  of  the  Church  had  risen.  The 
Committee  had  good  reason  to  conclude  that,  from  inaccuracies  and 
omissions,  the  sums  reported  to  the  Committee  was  less  than  the  sums 
at  that  moment  available  throughout  the  country  for  local  building 
purposes  by  ;f  25,000.  "  So  that  if  we  add  this  sum,"  say  the  Committee, 
"  to  the  amount  already  paid,  or  actually  reported  to  the  Committee, 
we  shall  have  as  the  grand  total,  which  we  may  consider  available  for 
our  great  object,  the  sum  of  ;^206,702,  7s.  5  id.,  being  not  very  greatly 
short  of  two-third  parts  of  the  entire  sum  of  ;^3 50,000  requisite  for  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

absolute  completion  of  our  vast  undertaking."  Hardly  had  the  old 
edifices  been  lost  when  they  were  as  good  as  replaced  by  others,  and 
these  even  more  commodious.  The  Church  expected,  when  the  stroke 
of  State  disestablishment  should  have  fallen,  that  she  would  open  her 
eyes  on  ruins,  she  opens  them  instead  on  the  pleasant  though  unexpected 
vision  of  fair  tabernacles  spread  out  over  the  land,  with  her  flocks 
gathering  into  them  and  uplifting  the  psalm  in  worship  of  the  God  of 
their  fathers.  Let  no  Church,  in  any  country  or  in  any  age,  after  this, 
hesitate  to  follow  where  the  voice  of  conscience  calls.  Much  less  let 
no  one  imagine  that  by  obeying  the  Word  of  God  we  can  by  any 
possibility  be  exposing  to  ruin  the  Church  of  God. 

It  was  not  expected  that  the  Building  Fund  would  maintain  the  same 
continuous  flow  as  other  funds  of  the  Church.  It  was  an  emergency 
which  had  called  it  forth,  and  its  tendency  was  to  extinguish  itself  by 
extinguishing  the  object  which  had  made  it  necessary.  But  the  exten- 
sion of  the  Church  demanded  year  by  year  the  erection  of  additional 
fabrics,  and  year  by  year  the  Building  Fund,  with  continuous  increase, 
furnished  the  means  for  the  construction  of  the  needed  edifices.  We  do 
not  go  into  minute  details,  because  we  aim  at  compiling  not  a  statistical 
account,  but  an  historical  sketch.  The  average  of  the  annual  amount  of 
the  Building  Fund  since  the  Disruption  has  been,  in  round  numbers, 
£6\fXX>.  Additional  burdens  came  immediately  to  be  laid  on  this  Fund, 
for  it  is  not  necessary  to  say  that  not  only  did  congregations  require 
churches  in  which  to  worship,  but  ministers  needed  houses  in  which  to 
live,  and  the  youth  schools  in  which  to  be  taught.  The  first  and  most 
pressing  necessity,  which  was  churches,  being  so  far  met,  manses  and  ele- 
mentary schools  were  next  thought  of  The  amount  raised  for  all  build- 
ing purposes  in  the  year  succeeding  that  of  the  Disruption  was  ;£'i3 1,731. 
This  year,  for  obvious  reasons,  was  an  exceptional  one.  In  the  following 
year  the  building  pressure  was  less,  and  the  Fund  diminished  in  propor- 
tion.   Its  amount  was  ;^89,840.    From  this  time  the  Fund  gradually  dimin- 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

ished  as  the  claims  upon  it  grew  fewer,  till  in  1S50  it  stands  at  £77,2,17. 
Ten  years  onward,  i860,  it  shows  a  total  of  £<\2,t,7i.  From  this  point  it 
begins  to  advance.  In  other  ten  years  it  has  increased  its  annual  aver- 
age by  ;^20,ooo,  showing  a  total  in  1869  of  ^£'62,3 19.  By  this  time  the 
Free  Church  had  built  920  churches,  719  manses,  597  schools.  The 
total  amount  raised  and  expended  on  these  numerous  fabrics  was,  in 
round  numbers,  ;£' 1,667,000.* 

Advancing  another  decade,  we  find  the  "  Local  Building  Fund,"  in 
1879,  amounting  to  £67,072.  The  number  of  churches  built  may  now 
be  reckoned  roundly  at  1000.  Steadily,  this  great  Fund,  ever  since  the 
Disruption,  is  seen  to  keep  pace  with  the  necessities  of  the  Church,  and 
to  display  an  elasticity  which  enables  it  to  contract  or  expand  according 
to  the  demands  upon  it  And  now  we  see  its  place  taken,  to  some 
extent,  and  its  work  crowned,  by  the  "  Church  Extension  Fund,"  with  its 
munificent  realization,  the  effort  of  one  or  two  years,  of  One  Hundred 
Thousand  Pounds. 

The  significance  of  these  sums  lies  in  their  being  the  indices  of  a 
spiritual  Power,  which,  mightier  than  the  edicts  of  kings,  can  fill  to 
overflow  the  Church's  treasury  with  the  free-will  offerings  of  her  people. 


CHAPTER    II. 

3[  j^eijj  ((Fxctcqucr  for  a  0cb)  i^attonal  Cljurrfj. 

HERE  is  there  a  land  on  earth  better  known  than  America? 
,^  Letters  and  intelligence  from  it  are  seen  on  our  tables  every  day. 

Ships  by  the  hundred  are  setting  out  or  returning  from  it  every  week. 
We  cannot  even  conceive  of  our  globe  without  this  great  fourth  con- 

*  The  authorities  on  which  these  statements  are  made  are  the  "  Communications," 
issued  before  and  after  the  Disruption,  the  "Records"  of  the  Free  Church, and  Dr 
Buchanan's  "  Finance  of  the  Free  Church." 


DISR  L  P  TION  1 1  -OR  THIES. 


tinent ;  and  were  it  by  any  possibility  to  be  dropped  out  of  the 
terraqueous  sphere,  what  a  void  would  be  thereby  occasioned  !  Com- 
merce would  be  paralysed,  politics  would  be  less  healthy  and  free,  and 
the  shadow  would  go  back  on  the  dial  of  Christianity  itself. 

And  yet  not  a  very  long  while  ago  there  was  no  America.  That 
country,  now  so  powerful  a  factor  in  the  world's  affairs,  was  then 
unknown.  Till  Columbus,  by  dint  of  long,  wearisome,  and  venturous 
search,  found  it  out  no  one  knew  the  road  to  it,  or  even  dreamed  of 
what  mighty  sources  of  power,  wealth,  and  enjoyment  lay  hid  in  the 
unexplored  darkness  of  the  far  West. 

The  "  Sustentation  Fund "  is  a  household  word.  It  is  so,  not  in 
Scotland  only,  but  in  almost  every  land  where  Christianity  is  known,  or 
Christian  churches  have  been  planted.  Nothing  appears  to  us  more 
natural  and  equitable,  than  that  the  men,  whether  few  or  many,  who 
discharge  the  common  ministry  of  a  church  should  be  supported  out  of 
the  common  offerings  of  its  members.  And  yet,  till  Thomas  Chalmers 
announced  the  idea  of  a  common  Sustentation  Fund,  no  one  had  thought 
of  the  plan,  or  ventured  to  act  upon  it.  A  method  which  works  with 
such  simplicity,  which  so  apportions  its  burden  as  to  make  it  oppres- 
sive to  no  one,  and  lightens  it  to  all,  which  gathers  its  store  from  week 
to  week  with  regularity  and  certainty,  and  distributes  it  so  equitably 
and  impartially,  which  carries  its  aid  to  the  obscurest  pastor  in  the 
remotest  part  of  the  country,  as  well  as  to  the  most  distinguished 
metropolitan  minister,  which  expands  with  the  expansion  of  the  Church 
— this  method,  we  say,  of  sustaining  the  ministry  was  no  more  believed 
in,  than  were  the  boundless  and  munificent  capabilities  of  the  world 
that  lay  concealed  in  the  western  ocean  prior  to  the  discovei-y  of 
Columbus. 

There  had  been,  it  is  true,  approximations  in  former  times,  to  this 
method  of  supporting  the  ministry.  But  neither  in  conception  nor  in 
practice  had  the  plan  of  the  Sustentation   Fund  been  really  hit  upon. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

Its  special  characteristic,  and  that  which  gives  it  its  peculiar  power,  was 
lacking  in  these  earlier  methods.  In  primitive  times  the  ministers  of 
the  Gospel  were  supported  by  the  voluntary  oblations  of  the  people. 
These  offerings  were  made  in  some  cases  weekly,  in  others  monthly,  and 
the  two  together  would  seem  to  have  furnished  sufficient  maintenance 
for  the  Church's  pastors  ;  but  a  time  came  when  the  Church  began  to  be 
enriched  with  lands  and  houses.  The  gifts  of  the  few  were  poured 
in  with  a  too  plentiful  prodigality,  and  the  oblations  of  the  many 
began  to  be  withheld,  their  donors  deeming  them  no  longer  necessary. 
Thus  what  was  designed  to  suppleiiietit  came  eventually  to  supplant  the 
Church's  ordinary  revenue,  and,  to  the  great  body  of  the  pastors,  abund- 
ance was  succeeded  by  comparative  indigence.  So  does  Bingham, 
gleaning  his  information  from  the  early  fathers,  represent  the  matter. 

At  a  period  long  subsequent,  the  ancient  method  of  supporting  the 
ministry  was  again  brought  into  use.  The  pastors  of  the  first  Secessions 
from  the  Scottish  Establishment  in  the  eighteenth  century,  were  sup- 
ported each  by  the  congregation  to  which  he  ministered.  But  different 
were  the  position  and  aims  of  the  Free  Church,  and  this  necessitated 
in  her  case  a  different  scheme  of  finance. 

The  Secession  began  with  some  six  ministers,  the  Free  Church 
started  into  being  with  six  hundred.  But  the  main  difference  between 
the  two  does  not  lie  here.  The  Secession  neither  professed  to  be 
national,  nor  contemplated  being  permanent.  The  Free  Church  claimed 
to  be  both.  The  special  object  of  the  Secession  was  to  testify  against 
the  corrupt  and  tyrannical  administration  of  the  prevailing  party  in  the 
Courts  of  the  Establishment.  It  fulfilled  this  end,  if  it  was  able  to 
plant  its  congregations  in  those  places  of  the  country  where  there  was 
wealth  enough  to  sustain  them.  It  was  not  necessary  that  it  should 
take  possession  of  the  whole  land,  or  that  it  should  displace  the  National 
Church.  It  disavowed  any  object  of  this  sort.  The  Secession  thought 
only  of  reforming  the  administration  of  the  Establishment,  especially 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


as  respected  the  enforcement  of  the  law  of  patronage,  and,  this  end 
accompHshed,  to  resume  communion  with  tlie  National  Church.  It  had 
no  quarrel  with  the  constitution  of  the  Established  Church — no  quarrel 
with  its  doctrine,  government,  and  worship.  These  it  venerated  and 
clung  to.  Its  quarrel  was  with  the  prevailing  party  in  the  Church 
Courts.  From  this  party,  and  this  party  alone  the  Secession  held  that 
it  had  separated.  Doubtless  in  process  of  time  it  came  to  modify  these 
views,  and  to  contemplate  both  a  more  permanent  existence,  and  a 
wider  sphere  of  operations :  but  these  were  the  views  with  which  the 
Secession  started.  And  it  is  easy  to  see  that  a  congregational  scheme 
of  finance  might  suit  a  Church  whose  position  and  aims  were  what  we 
have  described. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland  let  us  mark  the 
difference.  It  was  not  a  body  of  ministers,  less  or  more,  protesting 
against  a  dominant  party  in  the  Church,  and  separating  from  that 
party,  or  even  from  the  Church ;  it  was  the  Church  herself  protesting 
against  and  dissolving  her  connection  with  the  State.  All  through 
these  contendings,  from  the  initial  step  in  1833,  to  the  final  act  of 
constituting  her  General  Assembly  in  Tanfield  Hall,  on  the  i8th  of  May, 
1843,  she  acted  in  her  character  as  tlic  Church,  the  Reformed  Pres- 
byterian Church  of  Scotland. 

She  complained  that  the  State  had  broken  Treaty  engagements, 
and  altered  the  conditions  on  which  she  was  established,  and  that  the 
homage  which  she  owed  to  her  Head,  and  the  care  she  was  bound  to 
exercise  over  the  liberties  of  her  members,  forbade  that  she  should 
longer  retain  her  State  connection.  But  she  was  still  the  same  Church. 
Though  she  had  suffered  wrong,  that  was  no  reason  why  she  should 
denude  herself  of  her  rightful  character.  She  dared  not  do  so.  The 
memories  of  the  past  and  the  duties  of  the  present  alike  forbade  it.  But 
if  she  claimed  to  be  the  Reformed  National  Church  of  Scotland — the 
Church  which    Knox   had    led  out  of  the  Papacy ;    the  Church  whose 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

Moderator's  chair  Melville  and  Henderson  had  filled  ;  the  Church  which 
had  sent  so  many  martyrs  to  die  in  the  Grassmarket ;  the  Church  which 
had  been  set  up  again  on  the  old  foundations  at  the  Revolution, — if  she 
claimed  to  be  this  Reformed  National  Church,  she  must  sustain  that 
claim  suitably  and  worthily  ;  that  is,  she  must  in  very  deed  and  fact 
be  national. 

She  must  spread  herself  out  and  fill  the  whole  land.  It  were  not 
enough  that  she  should  plant  her  churches  in  the  wealthy  localities  and 
keep  herself  visible  by  a  few  representative  fabrics  scattered  over  the 
country.  She  must  build  her  churches  eveiywhere,  even  in  districts 
where  she  could  not  hope  to  receive  so  much  as  a  single  pound  or  a 
single  penny  for  their  support.  She  must  supply  the  ordinances  of 
grace  to  the  whole  population,  to  the  men  of  the  Highlands  and 
Islands  as  well  as  to  those  of  the  Lowlands.  But  with  her  pecuniary 
resources  suddenly  and  completely  cut  off,  with  not  a  shilling  to  be  now 
got  from  the  National  Exchequer,  where  was  she  to  find  the  means  of  ] 

discharging  these  vast  obligations  and  enlarging  herself  to  these  truly 
national  dimensions  ?  It  was  now  that  Chalmers,  filled  with  that  wisdom 
that  cometh  from  above,  showed  the  Church,  as  she  stood  in  presence 
of  these  tremendous  responsibilities,  where  she  might  open  a  richer 
treasury  than  that  which  had  just  been  closed  against  her. 

It  was  in  November,  1842,  at  a  general  meeting  of  ministers  in 
Edinburgh,  termed  the  Convocation,  that  Dr  Chalmers  first  made  kncwn 
his  plan  of  a  Sustentation  Fund.  "The  arithmetic,"  he  said,  "on  which 
I  found  the  confidence  I  feel,  that  is,  of  creating  a  new  National 
Exchequer  on  which  to  base  a  new  National  Church  is  soon  told. 
It  is  not  because  I  count  on  a  multitude  of  great  things.  These 
may  be  either  more  frequent,  or  more  numerous  than  I  shall  attempt 
to  specify.  But  I  do  count  on  a  multitude  of  little  things.  It  is 
not  on  the  strength  of  large  sums  that  I  proceed,  it  is  on  the  strength 
and    accumulation    of  littles.      It   is   on    the   assiduities   of  habit   and 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


principle,  sucli  as  a  verj-  common  and  every  day  exertion  in  our 
land  might  secure  if  begun,  and  such  as  the  general  influence  of  custom 
alone  might  suffice  to  perpetuate.  Such  is  the  character — the  plain 
unimaginative  character — of  the  premises  with  which  I  am  dealing  ;  and 
the  conclusion  I  draw  from  them,  what  I  call  my  minimum  result ; "  and 
we  may  imagine  how  the  assembled  ministers  would  here  hold  their 
breath,  to  catch  what  was  the  "minimum  result"  which  the  speaker 
anticipated  from  this  as  yet  untried,  and,  as  it  seemed  to  them,  not  verj* 
hopeful  experiment.  They  expected  doubtless  to  hear  the  Doctor  name 
thirty  thousand,  or  it  might  be  forty  thousand  a  year.  "  The  very  least 
to  which  I  aspire,"  Dr  Chalmers  went  on  to  say,  "  is  a  hundred  thousand 
pounds  in  the  year ! " 

It  was  a  new  Utopia  which  was  being  disclosed  to  their  gaze.  So 
did  some,  perhaps  most  of  the  men  who  were  now  listening  to  this 
address  believe.  As  the  crew  of  Columbus  heard  with  incredulous  ears 
the  assurances  which  he  gave  them,  and  which  he  reiterated  from  day  to 
day,  that  in  the  far-off  depths  of  the  ocean  on  which  they  were  voyaging 
there  lay  hid  magnificent  lands,  whose  virgin  fields  teemed  with  all 
kinds  of  riches,  and  that  they  had  only  to  hold  on  in  their  present 
track,  in  order  to  reach  this  goodly  inheritance,  so  too,  we  can  ima- 
gine, did  the  members  of  the  Convocation  listen  to  Chalmers  as  he 
painted,  with  an  eloquence  which  he  alone  could  wield,  the  resources  of 
this  new  El  Dorado,  this  as  yet  uncreated  Sustentation  Fund.  They 
did  not  doubt  or  hesitate  a  moment  as  regarded  their  own  dutj^,  but 
they  doubted  the  practicability  and  success  of  the  financial  scheme  on 
which  they  were  invited  to  rest  the  support  of  the  ministrj'.  It  might 
realise  the  expectations  of  its  founder,  in  part  at  least,  in  the  period  of 
enthusiasm,  but  in  years  to  come,  when  the  fire  had  burned  out,  and  all 
things  had  returned  to  their  ordinary  course,  would  not  this  Fund  drj'  up 
and  disappear  ?     This  was  the  fear  that  possessed  them. 

The  doctor  went  on  to  expound  the  ground  on  which  he  based  his 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

expectation.  This  was,  in  brief,  the  Gospel, — the  enduring  Divine  power 
of  the  Gospel.  Enthusiasm  was  transient,  the  moral  forces  by  which  he 
hoped  to  create  this  Fund  were  eternal.  It  was  not  on  the  transient,  but 
on  the  eternal  that  he  leaned.  He  passed  next  to  speak  of  the  dispensa- 
tion of  the  Fund.  "  All  the  means  raised  throughout  all  the  localities,"  he 
said,  "  should  be  remitted  to  a  large  central  Fund,  whence  a  distribution 
of  it  should  be  made  of  the  requisite  sums  or  salaries  for  the  ministers  of 
all  our  parishes.  .  .  .  The  ministers  of  the  most  opulent  parishes, 
whence  the  largest  contributions  will  be  made  to  the  General  Fund,  agree 
to  share  and  share  alike  with  the  ministers  of  the  poorest  parishes  in 
Scotland."  But  with  this  equal  division,  beautiful  as  it  was  in  itself,  the 
ministers  of  the  Church  might  yet,  owing  to  the  greater  cost  of  living  in 
cities  than  in  rural  parishes,  fare  unequally.  To  remedy  this  inequality, 
Chalmers  proposed  that  congregations  should  be  at  liberty,  over  and 
above  their  quarterly  contribution  to  the  general  treasurj-,  to  make  a 
supplementary  effort  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  the  stipend  of  its 
own  minister.  And  lastly,  and  to  complete  his  scheme,  he  proposed,  as 
an  essential  feature  of  it,  that  provision  should  be  made  for  not  only 
maintaining  the  existing  ministr>',  but  for  increasing  its  numbers  as 
occasion  might  require.  Such  was  the  earliest  sketch  in  outline  of  the 
future  financial  system  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland. 

The  machinery  for  carrjMng  out  this  plan  was  speedily  constructed 
and  set  a-working.  The  first  tentative  efforts  were  most  encouraging. 
We  find  Dr  Chalmers  stating  to  a  public  meeting  in  Glasgow,  in  the 
March  following,  that  in  his  own  particular  parish,  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  Edinburgh,  consisting  of  about  1600  people,  an  experi- 
ment had  been  made.  Operations  had  been  begun  amid  a  perfect  storm 
of  opposition  from  the  higher  classes,  but  the  collectors  persevered,  "  and 
we  are  now  receiving,"  said  the  doctor,  "at  the  rate  of  £6,  i6s.  a- week 
from  1600  individuals,  which  amounts  to  £lS^  a-year;  and  if  that 
proportion  were  carried  over  the  whole  of  Scotland  it  would  yield  half- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


a-million  a-year,  and  pay  the  whole  expense  of  the  present  estabhshment 
twice  over.  Is  it  to  be  endured  that  the  upper  classes  shall  tell  us  that 
they  support  the  Church?  They  don't.  The  only  relation  in  which 
they  exist  to  the  Church  is,  that  two  hundred  years  ago  they  robbed  it ; 
and  now  they  offer  to  enslave  it.  But  say  that  they  give  us  the  ;^250,ooo 
a-year — say  that  they  do  it — when  we  go  forth  among  the  people,  and 
raise  half-a-million  a-year,  is  it  to  be  endured  that,  on  the  plea  of  their 
endowment,  we  shall  surrender  the  liberties  that  belong  to  a  free 
Christian  Church  ?  .  .  .  Princes  and  parliaments  may  now  look  hardly 
on  the  Church  of  Scotland.  But  our  consciences  are  at  rest ;  and  the 
confidence  of  all  is  strong  and  high  that  our  God  has  not  forsaken  her — 
and  at  this  moment  He  is  sending  us  the  visible  tokens  of  His  favour. 
We  are  like  to  be  over-borne  by  a  heartless  Government  and  a  hostile 
aristocracy.  But  at  a  time  when  we  have  been  deserted  by  a  'i<t\\  feeble 
and  faint-hearted  amongst  ourselves,  the  people  of  the  land  have  nobly 
flown  to  the  rescue;  and,  by  their  offerings  and  their  testimonies 
together,  have  given  triumphant  assurance  that,  by  the  Divine  blessing, 
we  shall  still  have  a  free,  and  full,  and  efficient  ministry  of  the  Gospel 
among  our  families.  ...  In  the  feebleness  of  my  lame  and  imperfect 
advocacy  I  feel  assured  that  the  cause  will  not  suffer  even  from  my 
inadequate  representation  of  it — a  cause  worthy  of  him  whose 
"  Resisdess  eloquence 
Wielded  at  will  the  fierce  democracy, 
Shook  the  arsenal  and  fulmined  over  Greece 
To  Macedon  and  Artaxerxes'  throne  ' 

"  Little  did  I  think  but  that  I  should  spend  the  remainder  of  m}-  days 
in  studious,  and  literary,  and  let  me  add  devotional  pursuits ;  but  these 
are  extraordinary  times,  and  enthusiasm  is  a  virtue  rarely  to  be  met 
with  in  seasons  of  calm  and  unruffled  prosperity.  Enthusiasm  flourishes 
in  adversity — kindles  in  the  hour  of  danger — and  awakens  to  deeds  of 
renown.     The  terrors  of  persecution  only  serv^e  to  quicken  the  cnerg)-  of 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

its  purposes,  it  swells  in  proud  integrity,  and,  great  in  the  puiity  of  its 
cause,  it  can  scatter  defiance  amid  a  host  of  enemies." 

In  no  long  time  after  the  delivery  of  this  speech  the  confidence  it 
breathed  was  fully  justified,  and  the  incredulity  which  till  then  had 
haunted  many  minds,  was  effectually  dispelled.  What  they  had  taken 
for  an  Utopia,  they  now  saw  was  a  reality.  Just  two  months  after  the 
Glasgow  meeting,  at  the  first  General  Assembly  of  the  Free  Church  of 
Scotland,  the  first  ingatherings  of  this  great  Fund  were  announced,  and 
their  amount,  considering  how  incomplete  as  yet  was  the  machinery,  and 
how  short  had  been  the  time,  were  truly  magnificent,  and  gave  welcome 
promise  that  the  harvest  would  be  plenteous, — plenteous  even  beyond 
what  the  originator  of  the  Fund  had  dared  to  promise  himself,  or 
picture  to  others.  When  the  first  General  Assembly  met,  it  was 
reported  that  no  fewer  than  687  congregational  associations  had  been 
formed  on  behalf  of  the  sustcntation  of  the  ministry.  Of  these  687 
associations,  239  were  in  complete  working  order,  and  had  sent  into 
the  Sustcntation  Fund  ;^I7,S25.  A  calculation,  founded  on  these  data, 
as  to  the  amount  which  the  remaining  448  associations  had  raised,  but 
not  yet  sent  in,  made  the  sum  to  be  received  ;6'32,553  i  and,  adding  these 
two  sums  together,  the  total  amounted  to  ;^50,078.  When  to  this  was 
added  the  amount  contributed  for  the  building  of  churches,  it  was  seen 
that  the  grand  total  had  been  reached  of  ;^232,347.  As  the  result  of 
two  months'  appliance,  upwards  of  Two  Hundred  Thousand  Pounds  had 
been  tendered  for  the  support  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland. 

This  was  no  spasmodic  effort,  done  in  a  moment  of  enthusiasm,  and 
followed  by  exhaustion.  Increase  continued  to  be  the  normal 
characteristic  of  the  Sustcntation  Fund.  The  spiritual  forces  which 
had  opened  this  fountain  kept  it  open,  and  made  its  flow  perennial.  At 
the  Assembly  which  met  in  Glasgow  in  October  that  same  year  (1843), 
Dr  Chalmers  was  able  to  announce  that,  had  not  disturbing  influences 
diverted  to  other  objects  sums  which  ought  properly  to  have  been  sent 


DISK  UP  TION  I VOR  7  HIES. 


to  the  Sustentation  Fund,  the  contemplated  stipend  of  ;^I50  would  have 
been  reached  ;  as  it  was,  the  Church  was  able  to  divide  as  a  salary  to 
each  minister  on  the  equal  dividend  ;^I0S.  The  total  of  ministers  on 
the  Fund  in  that  >-ear  was  583,  and  of  these  470  received  a  full  equal 
dividend. 

The  sum  raised  in  the  first  year  of  the  Free  Church  for  the  support 
of  the  ministry  was  £62,^6?i ;  and  for  all  objects,  including  the  building 
of  churches,  missions,  Highlands,  School-Master's  Fund,  ^366,719. 
"  Turning  round  to  the  population  of  the  country,"  said  Dr  Chalmers  in 
the  Glasgow  Assembly,  "  after  it  had  cost  us  years  of  unavailing  negotia- 
tion with  the  Government,  in  a  few  months  the  population  came  back 
with  the  magnificent  response  of  ^300,000. 

In  the  second  year  of  the  Free  Church  (1844-45)  the  sum  cast  into 
the  treasury  of  the  Sustentation  Fund  was  £y6,200;  the  number  of 
ministers  receiving  a  full  equal  dividend  was  557  ;  and  the  sum  allotted 
to  each  was  ;^I22.  The  amount  raised  this  year  for  all  objects  was 
^334.483-  In  the  seventh  year  of  the  Free  Church  (1850)  the  Susten- 
tation Fund  had  risen  to  £ig,6^Z ;  the  number  of  ministers  on  the 
equal  dividend  to  647  ;  and  the  stipend  to  each  to  £123.  By  this  time 
churches  had  been  erected  in  nearly  all  the  localities  where  they  were 
needed;  as  a  consequence,  the  Building  Fund,  the  largest  of  all  the 
Funds  in  the  Disruption  year,  had  fallen  to  ;£'SS,7S3  ;  but  this  was 
balanced  by  an  increase  in  the  other  Funds  of  the  Church,  which 
amounted  in  the  aggregate  to  the  munificent  sum  of  upwards  of  three 
hundred  thousand  pounds.  The  number  of  her  ordained  ministers  had 
risen  to  706.  She  had  besides  a  body  of  some  200  probationers,  or 
licensed  preachers,  who  were  constantly  employed  in  her  service,  under 
whose  ministrations  stations  were  being  nursed  into  congregations,  and 
thus  was  going  on  a  steady  extension  of  the  Church's  boundaries,  and  a 
gradual  increase  in  the  numbers  of  her  pastors. 

Other  ten  years  pass  on.      We  measure  the  progress  of  the   Free 

Ui 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

Church  during  this  decade,  by  marking  the  point  at  which  tiic  Fund 
stands  in  i860,  the  seventeenth  year  of  her  existence.  Her  ministers 
are  now  846.  The  full  equal  dividend  is  ^^135  ;  and  the  income  of 
the  Sustentation  Fund  is  ;^  109,259.  Thus  does  the  Fund  pursue  its 
prosperous  course.  Every  year  the  Church's  treasury  is  more  amply 
replenished ;  and  eveiy  }-car  a  more  liberal  allowance  is  dispensed 
from  it  to  its  ministers.  In  1869  it  has  risen  to  ^132,125,  i6s.  7d.,  and 
the  equal  dividend  to  ;^I50.  In  1879  it  reaches  ;^  175,990,  os.  5d.,  and 
the  dividend  ;£■  160.  The  number  of  ministers  participating  in  the  Fund 
this  year  is  1094.  The  above  dividend  is  exclusive  of  the  congrega- 
tional supplement,  which  adds  considerably  to  the  ministerial  income. 
The  average  congregational  supplement  in  1879  was  £^6.  Taking 
these  two  together,  the  Free  Church  distributed  as  stipend  last  year 
no  less  a  sum  than  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  thousand  pounds,  which 
gives  an  average  of  two  hundred  and  twenty  pounds  to  each  charge. 
Enjoying,  as  the  Fund  now  does,  the  benefit  of  the  financial  and 
administrative  talents  of  the  Rev.  Dr  Wilson,  a  still  further  increase 
may  be  looked  for  in  years  to  come.  Meanwhile,  we  are  warranted 
in  saying  that  the  idea  of  Chalmers  has  been  realised.  A  new  national 
exchequer  has  been  provided  for  a  new  national  Church. 


CHAPTER     III. 

lUstoratton  of  iBanscs. 

EANSES  for  her  outgoing  pastors  was  one  of  the  first  and  most 
urgent  of  the  many  necessities  which  pressed  upon  the  attention 
of  the  Free  Church.     How  many  memories,  tender  and  thrilling,  how 
many  hallowed  associations  cluster  round  a  manse !     It  is  no  common 
home.     The  joys  that  brighten  it,  and  the  sorrows  that  at  times  darken 
liii 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


it,  are  both  of  them  of  a  kind,  to  sanctify  and  endear  the  spot  beyond 
the  measure  of  ordinary  dwellings.  It  was  in  leaving  the  manse  that 
the  Disruption  culminated :  for  not  till  that  hour  had  come  and  the 
manse  had  to  be  left,  could  all  that  the  sacrifice  involved  be  fully  realised. 
When  the  pastor  had  seen  his  family  go  forth,  and  he  only  remained 
behind  to  extinguish  the  fire  on  the  hearth,  and  to  follow  those  who 
had  preceded  him  over  that  threshold  which  they  were  to  cross  no  more, 
he  might  truly  say  that  now  the  bitterness  of  the  Disruption  was  past. 
Dr  Chalmers  had,  by  anticipation,  painted  the  "manse  leaving"  with 
graphic  power,  the  event,  in  itself  sufficiently  painful,  being  made  still 
more  so  by  its  taking  place  at  a  season  of  the  year  when  Nature  was 
attiring  herself  in  the  fresh  robes  of  her  summer  glory.  The  pathos  of 
his  words  lingered  in  the  memories  and  in  the  hearts  of  his  hearers,  and 
gave  birth  to  the  first  efforts  to  replace  with  new  abodes  the  sweet  and 
hallowed  homes  which  had  been  left. 

And  then  to  second  this  appeal  there  came  the  hardships  to  which 
not  a  few  of  the  outgoing  ministers  were  subjected,  in  consequence  of  the 
difficulty  of  finding  accommodation  for  themselves  and  their  families. 
Not  a  house,  not  even  a  room  could  some  of  them  obtain  in  their  old 
parishes  to  live  in :  they  were  compelled  to  remove  to  a  distance  of 
many  miles,  some  twenty,  some  more,  from  their  flocks.  In  some 
instances  they  had  to  take  up  their  abode  in  hovels,  where  the  walls 
streamed  with  damp,  and  the  roof  was  so  chinky,  that  as  they  lay  in 
bed  they  could  see  the  stars  as  they  looked  down  upon  them  from  out 
the  winter's  sky.  Where  the  victims  of  these  oppressions  did  not  wholly 
succumb,  they  came  out  of  them  with  health  vitally  injured.  Plain  it 
was  that  the  erection  of  manses  was  a  matter  which  the  Church  must 
not  delay  or  postpone  beyond  the  very  earliest  moment  when  the  pres- 
sure of  other  things  should  leave  her  at  liberty  to  give  herself  to  this 
new  labour. 

We  find  no  contributions  for  manse  building  in  the  first  year  of  the 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

existence  of  the  Free  Church.*  In  the  second  year  the  sum  raised  for 
this  object  was  the  wholly  inadequate  one  of  £\^6o.  While  this  is  all 
that  appears  in  the  public  accounts,  it  could  hardly  be  but  that  local 
efforts  were  being  made,  and  local  contributions  raised  for  an  object  the 
necessity  of  which  was  so  urgent  and  so  obvious. 

To  the  cause  of  manse  building,  Dr  Guthrie  communicated  a 
mighty  impulse,  as  he  did  to  every  object  to  which  he  lent  the  advocac)- 
of  his  marvellous  eloquence.  A  whole  year  did  he  devote  to  this  herculean 
but  philanthropic  labour.  He  travelled  over  almost  all  Scotland  in 
prosecution  of  his  self-imposed  task,  and  Dr  Guthrie's  voice,  we  may  say, 
it  was  that  called  into  existence  the  early  manses  of  the  Free  Church  of 
Scotland.  He  began  his  tour  at  the  close  of  one  Assembly,  and  when  he 
appeared  in  the  next,  he  was  able  to  report  as  the  result  of  his  year's 
efforts,  a  subscribed  sum  of  ;^i  16,370.  In  1847  the  contributions  to  the 
Manse  Building  Fund  amounted  to  ;£'28,959.  In  1848  the  contributions 
were  £1^,216.  In  1849  they  were  ;^i 3,198.  They  continue  at  about  the 
same  amount  during  the  years  that  follow,  and  by  the  end  of  the  first 
decade  of  the  Free  Church,  the  sum  total  realised  for  the  building  of 
manses,  is  ;£"98,ooo.  The  number  of  manses  may  now  (1880)  be  fairlj- 
set  down  at  750.  The  average  cost  of  each  being  calculated  at  /"icxxi, 
we  have  a  total  expenditure   on  the  manses  of  the  Free  Church  of 

;^700,000. 

To  the  Church  that  believes,  all  things  are  possible.  The  same 
generation  that  witnessed  the  desolations  of  the  Disruption — that  saw 
churches  and  manses  swept  away — saw  them  all  brought  back  again ! 
When  one  looked  abroad  over  Scotland  and  saw  the  flocks  of  the 
Presbyterian  Kirk,  after  their  old  estate,  gathering.  Sabbath  by  Sabbath, 
into  their  sanctuaries,  and  the  pastor  and  his  family  again  in  the  manse, 
one  might  well  ask  in  wonder.  Has  there  been  a  Disruption,  or  have 
men  been  only  dreaming  of  it?  Had  not  the  churches  and  manses  of 
*  Vidimus  or  Progress  of  Schemes— Record  for  1854-55. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Scotland  been  cast  down,  and  lo!  do  we  not  see  them  all  raised  up 
again !  The  restoration  was  marvellous  in  its  suddenness.  Nor  were 
the  new  manses,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  a  whit  behind  the  old  ones  in 
comfort  and  elegance.  They  were  the  abodes  of  Christian  refinement, 
and  literary  culture,  not  to  speak  of  the  higher  graces  of  piety.  And 
while  these  virtues  made  them  attractive  within,  their  exterior  embellish- 
ments were  such  as  did  honour  to  the  taste  that  presided  over  their 
arrangement.  Goodly  trees,  the  planting  mayhap  of  the  ministers'  own 
hand,  rose  to  give  them  shade.  A  bit  of  lawn  brightened  their  front. 
The  rose  and  other  flowers  festooned  their  door,  or  bloomed  in  their  par- 
terres ;  while  the  fruits  indigenous  to  the  Scottish  soil  ripened  in  their 
garden.  There  they  were,  the  monuments  of  the  liberality  of  a  people 
loyal  to  the  Church's  Head,  with  Disruption  memories  clustering  thick 
about  them,  and  imparting  to  them  a  more  sacred  prestige  than  that 
which  had  belonged  to  the  fabrics  which  had  been  given  up  for 
conscience'  sake. 


CHAPTER     IV. 

Vc^t  iFounlitng  of  EJjfoIogtral  Sfalls. 

fHE  Disruption  left  the  Free  Church  in  possession  of  a  goodly  band 
of  pious  and  learned  ministers,  but  time  would  thin — would 
annihilate  this  noble  arm)-,  and  means  must  be  taken  to  perpetuate 
the  race.  This  could  be  looked  for  only  through  the  erection  of 
a  Divinity  Hall.  The  work  of  educating  students  for  the  ministry 
could  not  be  suspended  for  even  a  single  session.  Accordingly, 
at  the  meeting  of  the  first  Assembly  of  the  Free  Church,  steps  were 
taken  for  the  erection  of  a  Theological  College.  It  was  resolved  that 
meanwhile  there  should  be  only  one  such  institution,  and  that  its 
teaching  staff  should  consist  of  three   Professors ;  namely,  a  Principal 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

and  Primarius  Professor  of  Divinity,  a  Professor  of  Divinity  and  Cliurch 
Historj-,  and  a  Professor  of  Divinity  and  Hebrew.  In  years  to  come,  it 
might  be  desirable  to  add  to  the  professorial  staff,  and  to  enlarge  the 
curriculum  of  stud)-. 

The  attention  of  the  Assembly  was  earnestly  turned  to  the  founding 
and  endowment  of  chairs,  and  the  creation  of  what  was  almost  as 
necessary,  a  well-furnished  library.  No  one  who  was  present  will  ever 
forget  the  inimitable  and  characteristic  persuasiveness  with  which  Dr 
Welsh  pleaded  for  both  objects,  and  especially  the  latter.  Not  a  penny 
of  endowment  had  yet  been  got.  No  matter,  the  chairs  were  instituted. 
In  the  first  was  placed  Chalmers;  a  name  alone  enough  to  give  European 
fame  to  any  institute  in  which  he  might  teach.  To  Dr  Welsh  was 
assigned  the  chair  of  Church  History.  He  filled  it  for  but  one  session, 
when  he  was  removed  by  death.  He  lived  to  lead  out  as  moderator  of 
the  Church  of  Scotland,  the  Disruption  host,  and  to  see  laid  the 
foundations  of  the  "Second  House,"  and  departed.  The  chair  of  Hebrew 
was  offered  to  Dr  Duncan,  a  man  who,  as  Dr  Guthrie  quaintly  observed, 
"  could  speak  his  way  to  the  wall  of  China,"  and  whom  the  Jews,  never 
too  ready  to  award  the  palm  to  Gentile  eminence  in  Hebrew  lore, 
signalised  by  bestowing  upon  him  the  ancient  and  venerated  title  of 
"  Rabbi."  The  general  voice  of  the  Church  indicated  Dr  Cunningham, 
who,  to  his  powers  as  a  debater,  added  a  profound  acquaintance  with 
Theolog>',  historic  and  dogmatic,  to  a  fourth  chair.  His  services  not 
being  needed  till  the  session  1844-45,  it  was  resolved  that,  meanwhile, 
he  should  proceed  to  America  and  observe  the  methods  of  theological 
instruction  pursued  in  the  seminaries  of  the  New  World.  The  conven- 
ience of  students  in  the  North  of  Scotland  was  consulted  by  the  appoint- 
ment of  Dr  Black,  a  man  of  vast  erudition,  and  gifted  with  a  singular 
mastery  over  languages,  to  act  as  Professor  in  Aberdeen. 

The  Principalship  in  the  New  College,  first  held  by  Chalmers,  has 
since  been  filled  by  a  succession  of  distinguished  men — Cunningham, 


DJSRUPTJON  WORTH  J ES. 

Candlish,  and  now  Dr  Rain)-.  The  humble  tenement  in  George  Street, 
in  which  its  first  sessions  were  held,  has  been  exchanged  for  the  stately 
building  at  the  head  of  the  Mound  ;  and  the  k\v  scores,  or  mayhap  hun- 
dreds, of  books  which  the  appeal  of  Dr  Welsh  drew  forth  have  grown  to 
a  magnificent  librarj'  of  35,000  volumes.  These  include  not  a  few  rare, 
curious,  and  valuable  works  in  many  languages,  and  in  most  depart- 
ments of  literature — especially  works  on  Patristic  and  Reformation 
theology — the  gifts  of  learned  men  in  other  countries,  or  of  friends  at 
home,  who  have  willingly  parted  with  their  treasures  to  enrich  the 
spacious  halls  of  the  Nev/  College  Library,  and  give  its  students  access 
to  what  otherwise  would  have  been  bej'ond  their  reach. 

As  regards  funds,  the  founders  of  the  New  College  v/ere  chaiy  of 
thrusting  its  claims  in  among  a  multitude  of  rival,  at  least  contempor- 
aneous, objects.  But  the  institution  pleaded  for  itself  A  school  for  the 
training  of  pastors  all  could  see  was  a  first  necessity,  and  a  liberality 
which  was  descending  like  a  copious  shower  on  all  around  it  did  not 
leave  unwatered  the  seminary  over  which  Chalmers  presided.  The 
building  fund  was  opened  by  one  contributor  giving  £2000.  Other 
twenty-one  contributors  followed,  giving  each  ;!f  1000.  The  foundation- 
stone  was  laid  by  Dr  Chalmers  in  presence  of  a  vast  concourse 
on  3rd  June  1846,  and  opened  for  the  reception  of  Professors  and 
students  on  6th  November  1850.  The  net  cost  of  the  building  was 
^37.856,  8s.  lOd.  The  institution  of  classes  in  Natural  Science,  Evan- 
gelistic Theology,  and  other  branches,  has  since  increased  the  chairs 
to  seven.  The  main  source  of  the  support  of  the  College  is  an  annual 
collection,  but  its  permanent  endowment  is  contemplated,  and  a  sum 
of  over  ;£'50,ooo  has  been  collected  towards  this  object.  The  College 
possesses,  moreover,  a  goodly  array  of  scholarships,  fellowships,  and 
bursaries. 

Theological  Halls  have  since  been  planted  at  the  two  university 
cities  of  Glasgow  and  Aberdeen.      The  Theological  Hall   at    Glasgow 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

was  instituted  in  1856.  It  owes  its  foundation  to  the  magnificent  gift  of 
£20,000  from  Dr  Clark  of  Wester  Moffat,  supplemented  by  an  equal  sum 
from  liberal  donors  in  Glasgow.  It  has  a  faculty  of  four  Professors,  with 
scholarships,  fellowships,  and  bursaries. 

The  Free  Church  Hall  at  Aberdeen  was  opened  in  1845  with  two 
Professorial  chairs,  which  have  since  been  increased  to  four.  It  is 
supported  by  funds  which  have  been  contributed  at  various  times  by 
friends  of  the  College.  It  is  presided  over  by  Dr  David  Brown,  a  man 
whose  praise  as  a  theologian  is  in  all  the  churches. 


CHAPTER     V. 

^Tfjc   i^cfaj    Schools. 


^  NOX  struck  the  key-note  on  the  all-important  question  of  an 
^  efficient  educational  provision  for  his  native  land.  He  proposed 
"that  there  should  be  a  school  to  eveiy  church,  a  grammar  school  in 
all  our  towns,  and  a  university  in  three  of  our  chief  cities."  The  con- 
ception of  the  great  Scotchman  has  stood  three  hundred  years  before 
the  country.  It  has  not  to  this  hour  been  fully  realised.  It  does  not 
follow  that  the  proposal  has  been  in  vain  :  on  the  contrary,  it  has  done 
good  service  to  the  cause  of  education  in  Scotland.  It  has  kept 
constantly  before  the  minds  of  Scotchmen  the  goal  they  were  bound 
to  aim  at.  And  while  it  has  been  a  reproof  to  them  in  so  far  as  they 
came  short  of  it,  it  has  continually  stimulated  their  efforts  to  reach  it, 
and  kept  alive  the  hope  that  what  Knox  had  the  patriotism  to  propose, 
his  countrymen  would  one  day  have  the  wisdom  to  realise. 

In  the  thick  of  its  battle  against  Napoleon  for  its  independence, 
Prussia  continued  to  prosecute  vigorously  that  educational  plan  which 
has  since  made  it  so  distinguished  intellectually.     Our  reformers,  in  tlic 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


very  turmoil  of  a  j-et  greater  battle,  that  with  Rome  even,  did  not  cease 
to  plan  and  labour  in  the  cause  of  the  "godly  upbringing  of  the  young." 
Nor  was  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland,  amid  the  manifold  and  almost 
overwhelming  labours  which  the  Disruption  imposed  upon  her,  unmind- 
ful of  this  matter.  She  aimed  at  restoring  the  School  as  well  as  the 
Church, — not  only  so,  she  sought  to  establish  in  Scotland  a  more 
extensive  and  complete  educational  machinery  than  the  parochial  system, 
which  the  Disruption  had  left  shattered  and  maimed.  She  asked,  Is  it 
not  possible,  now  at  last,  by  a  combined  effort,  to  reach  the  goal  of 
Knox  ? 

In  the  first  General  Assembly  little  could  be  done  beyond  intimating, 
as  was  done  by  Dr  Welsh,  the  convener  of  the  Education  Committee,  what 
the  Church  had  in  eye  and  hoped  to  accomplish  in  the  future.  In  the 
second  Assembly  at  Glasgow,  the  progress  achieved  in  this  matter  during 
the  summer  was  reported.  It  was  announced  that  no  fewer  than  360 
teachers  had  cast  in  their  lot  \\'ith  the  Free  Church.  The  avowal  of  their 
principles  in  almost  every  case  had  involved  the  forfeiture  of  their 
office.  These  360  teachers  represented  a  body  of  20,000  youths  who  now 
looked  to  the  Free  Church  for  instruction.  The  sum  at  the  disposal  of 
the  Education  Committee  was  ^2600,  which  enabled  the  Committee  to 
divide  about  ;£'20  to  each  of  the  ejected  schoolmasters.  This  sum  was 
utterly  inadequate  as  a  salary  for  educated  men,  but  the  other  claims  on 
the  Church  were  enormous,  and  the  countrj'  was  only  awakening  as  yet 
to  the  supreme  importance  of  the  thorough  training  of  the  young. 

Amid  the  loss  of  the  parish  schools,  the  Free  Church  had  some  reason 
to  congratulate  herself  at  having  come  into  possession  of  a  Normal 
Seminary,  greatly  superior  in  its  capabilities  for  the  training  of  teachers 
to  that  which  had  been  taken  from  her.  And  further,  what  the  Church 
had  lost  was  only  the  bare  fabric;  the  teachers  had  come  over  to  her  in  a 
body,  the  scholars  had  followed  their  teachers,  and  now  the  pupils  had 
increased  a  third  beyond  the  attendance  of  former  years. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

The  work  of  building  schools  and  providing  salaries  for  schoolmasters 
might  have  made  but  slow  progress,  pressed  as  the  Church  then  was  on 
cverj^  side,  but  for  the  devotion  of  the  Rev.  Mr  Macdonald  of  Blairgowrie, 
now  the  Rev.  Dr  Macdonald  of  North  Leith.  Dr  Macdonald  devised  a  plan 
for  raising  ;^50,ooo  to  aid  in  the  erection  of  500  schools.  The  chief  feature 
of  the  plan  was  a  graduated  scale  of  subscription,  ranging  from  a  shilling 
to  a  penny  for  each  of  the  500  schools,  and  a  correspondingly  graduated 
number  of  subscribers,  beginning  with  500  persons  who,  it  was  assumed, 
would  be  willing  to  give  the  highest  sum,  and  ending  with  6000  who 
would  be  ready  to  give  the  lowest.  Dr  Macdonald  visited  England  as 
well  as  Scotland  in  the  prosecution  of  his  mission,  and  so  zealously  and 
ably  did  he  conduct  it,  and  so  liberal  was  the  response  to  his  appeals, 
that  in  a  short  time  he  had  successfully  accomplished  his  task,  and  had 
placed  the  school-building  scheme  of  the  Free  Church  beyond  risk  of 
failure.     From  this  time  the  work  went  prosperously  onward. 

Let  us  glance  at  the  schools  and  school  system  as  seen  in  the  twelfth 
year  (1855)  of  the  Free  Church. 

We  find  Dr  Candlish  reporting  to  the  Assembly  on  the  state  of  the 
schools  of  the  Free  Church  in  that  jear  as  follows  : — "  We  have  of  con- 
gregational schools  reported  this  year,  439  ;  we  have  of  district  or  side- 
schools  reported,  142  ;  and  of  missionary  schools — that  is,  schools  in 
destitute  districts  where  an  aggressive  movement  is  made  on  the  terri- 
torial plan,  17;  then  the  number  of  our  grammar  or  superior  schools  is 
5  ;  besides  the  two  Normal  Schools, — ^in  all,  605  schools.  In  connection 
with  these,  we  have  industrial  schools  reported  to  the  number  of  about 
30  this  year.  We  have  not,  however,  been  able  to  get  a  return  of  all 
schools  fairly  doing  Free  Church  work.  In  these  schools  we  have  642 
teachers  receiving  salaries  or  gratuities,  more  or  less,  from  the  scheme. 
In  connection  with  your  Normal  Schools,  2  rectors,  and  13  male  and  7 
female  teachers,  —  the  whole  teachers  make  642.  There  are  56,840 
scholars  attending  our  salaried  day-schools ;  and,  taking  into  account 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  Normal  Schools,  and  a  proportional  estimate  for  schools  not  included 
in  these  returns,  we  have  75,904— in  round  numbers,  say  76,000.  .  .  . 
With  regard  to  the  state  of  the  funds,  I  may  mention  that  the  total  sum 
contributed  for  last  year  was  £12,672;  total  available  this  year,  ;^i  3,460. 
The  increase  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  large  amount  we  have  been  able 
to  obtain  from  the  Government  in  connection  with  our  Normal  Schools, 
and  this  amount  from  Government  is  given  in  proportion  to  our  merits, 
that  is  to  say,  to  our  work  and  the  result  of  our  work."  Dr  Candlish 
went  on  to  explain  that  over  and  above  the  income  of  the  Education 
Committee,  which  was  £10,000  a-year,  were  to  be  added  sums  given 
directly  by  congregations  and  deacons'  court  to  the  amount  of  about 
£4000,  which,  together  with  Government  allowances  and  grants,  made 
the  sum  which  the  Free  Church  was  instrumental  in  drawing  out  for 
education,  irrespective  of  school  fees,  not  far  short  of  £20,000  a-year. 

In  the  following  years  the  educational  scheme  continued  to  flourish, 
without  greatly  exceeding  the  bounds  it  had  reached  in  1855.  In  this 
scheme  the  Free  Church  did  good  service  to  the  State.  The  parochial 
schools  of  Scotland  were  lapsing  into  stagnancj',  and  the  education  of  the 
country  was  retrograding.  The  Free  Church  brought  new  life  to  the 
cause  by  improving  the  methods  of  teaching,  and  elevating  its  quality  by 
more  thoroughly  pervading  it  with  Christian  principles.  She  acted,  in 
short,  as  the  pioneer  of  a  national  system,  and  her  example  furnished 
the  model  of  what  that  system  ought  to  be,  both  in  its  basis  and  spirit. 

At  length,  in  1872,  came  the  Act  of  Parliament  severing  the  connec- 
tion between  the  Established  Church  and  the  parochial  schools  of  Scot- 
land, and  providing  for  the  election  in  every  parish  and  burgh  of  a 
School  Board.  In  these  Boards  the  management  of  all  public  schools 
is  vested.  The  Free  Church  enrolled  nearly  all  her  schools  in  the  list 
of  national  ones  by  transferring  them  to  the  Board  as  the  Act  permitted 
her  to  do.  It  was  no  mean  gift  to  the  country.  Her  teachers  were 
highly  qualified,    her   methods   of  instruction   were   superior  to   those 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

hitherto  in  use,  and  the  transference  of  an  educational  machinery,  reared 
and  perfected  with  so  much  care  and  skill,  imported  into  the  national 
s)-stem  an  element  of  health  and  vigour,  which,  so  far  as  we  can  see, 
would  otherwise  have  been  lacking  to  it.  The  two  Normal  Schools  or 
Training  Colleges,  to  the  support  of  which  the  Education  Fund  of  the 
Free  Church  is  now  mainly  applied,  arc  among  the  most  efficient  semin- 
aries of  their  class  in  the  kingdom. 

We  can  bestow  only  a  glance  on  another  most  important  branch  of 
tuition.  The  Sabbath-school  system  of  the  Free  Church,  under  the 
devoted  and  able  superintendence  of  Mr  William  Dickson,  has  developed 
into  marvellous  proportions.  The  number  of  schools  is  over  three  thou- 
sand. The  total  of  teachers  is  over  seventeen  thousand.  And  the  total 
of  scholars  rises  to  over  one  hundred  and  eighty-nine  thousand.  The 
annual  gatherings  from  them  on  behalf  of  missions  are  oxtr  four  thousand 
pounds.  It  is  not  easj-  estimating  the  value  of  a  machinerj-  like  this, 
or  the  many  it  may  send  forth,  by  the  Spirit's  blessing,  to  adorn  society 
and  serve  the  Church. 

The  Protestant  Institute  forms  part  of  the  educational  provision 
of  the  Free  Church.  The  idea  was  first  mooted  by  Dr  Welsh  in  the 
Assembly  of  1843.  In  his  report  on  the  College,  he  recommended 
the  institution  of  "  Lectureships, "  specially  mentioning  the  subject  of 
Popery.  The  Papal  Aggression  of  1850  led  to  a  more  definite  shape 
being  given  to  the  project.  Its  execution  was  devolved  on  the  Assembly's 
Committee  on  Poperj',  of  which  Dr  Tweedie  was  then  convener.  In  the 
General  Assembly  of  1851,  and  in  following  Assemblies,  we  find  Dr 
Candlish  referring  to  the  contemplated  Institute,  and  recommending  a 
collection  over  the  Church  on  its  behalf  When  Dr  Begg  became 
convener  of  the  Assembly's  Committee  on  Popery,  the  matter  was 
vigorously  taken  up.  To  his  shrewd  business  habits  and  true  Scottish 
interest  in  the  question  was  mainly  owing  the  successful  accomplishment 
of  the  Church's  object.     In  i860,  the  Tercentenary  of  the  Reformation, 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  foundation-stone  of  the  Lecture  Hall  was  laid.  In  the  same  year, 
by  appointment  of  the  Assembly,  a  collection  was  made  over  the 
Free  Church  in  behalf  of  the  Institute.  This  was  supplemented  by 
liberal  donations  and  subscriptions  from  members  of  all  the  Protestant 
Churches  in  Scotland.  An  endowment  having  thus  been  secured,  the 
Free  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,  at  its  meeting  on  the  30th  October  1861, 
appointed  a  minister  of  the  Free  Church  to  the  Lectureship  in  the 
Institute,  on  the  same  tenure  of  office  with  the  other  ministers  of  the 
Church :  and  on  the  Sth  November  following,  he  was  publicly  inducted 
into  his  office  by  the  Presbytery. 

The  classes,  which  meet  in  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow,  and  open  and 
close  with  the  Theological  Halls,  have  been  in  full  operation  ever  since. 
They  are  attended  by  students  of  all  Protestant  denominations,  to  the 
number,  winter  by  winter,  of  about  eighty.  The  buildings  which  form 
the  endowment  of  the  Institute,  are  the  property  of  the  Free  Church  of 
Scotland,  and  include  the  Magdalene  Chapel,  one  of  the  most  ancient 
and  interesting  of  the  ecclesiastical  edifices  in  Scotland,  being  that  in 
which  John  Craig  preached,  and  in  which  the  first  General  Assembly 
and  some  subsequent  Assemblies  of  the  Reformed  Church  of  Scotland 
were  held. 


CHAPTER    VI. 

V^z  JiTC  Cljurci)  in  \\t  5?tcj!)Iantis. 

tHE  Highlands  ranged  themselves  en  masse,  we  may  say,  beneath 
^^  the  banner  of  the  Free  Protesting  Church  of  Scotland.  So  uni- 
versal and  cordial  an  adhesion  to  the  principle  of  the  spiritual  independ- 
ence brought  strength  to  the  cause,  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  greatly 
enhanced  the  responsibilities  and  labours  of  the  Church.  How  were  the 
Highlands  to  be  supplied  with  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  ? 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

The  Highlands  comprehend  about  a  half  of  the  superficial  area  of 
Scotland.  But  their  extent  is  not  the  only  nor  the  main  difficult)'  con- 
nected with  their  ecclesiastical  arrangement  and  spiritual  supervision. 
Their  physical  character  interposes  even  greater  obstacles.  Here  they 
are  traversed  by  chains  of  lofty  mountains  ;  there  they  are  intersected 
by  stormy  friths ;  and,  as  a  consequence,  many  districts  are  of  difficult 
access.  The  population  generally  is  poor,  and,  save  in  certain  localities, 
thinly  scattered.  And  then  there  comes  in  some  places  the  difference  of 
tongue — the  knowledge  of  no  speech  save  Gaelic — which,  to  the  Lowland 
preacher,  forms  barrier  more  impassable  than  either  mountain  or  frith,  or 
expanse  of  desolate  moor. 

But  if  the  field  is  of  more  than  ordinary  difficulty,  it  is  of  more  than 
ordinary'  interest.  Nowhere  are  the  principles  of  the  Free  Church  better 
understood,  and  nowhere  have  they  been  more  steadfastly  maintained. 
All  along,  from  the  Disruption  day,  the  Highlanders  have  preserved 
unshaken  their  loyalty  to  the  Free  Church,  which  they  venerate  as  the 
Church  of  their  fathers.  This  devotion  on  their  part  has  much  facilitated 
the  labours  of  the  Committee  having  charge  of  them. 

The  Disruption  changed  on  the  instant  the  whole  ecclesiastical  aspect 
of  the  Highlands.  It  was  as  if  a  magician  had  waved  his  wand  over 
them,  and  lo !  where  a  moment  before  was  seen  a  flourishing  scene  of 
churches  and  congregations,  there  was  now  nothing  to  be  beheld  but 
desolations.  There  were  pastors  without  flocks,  and  flocks  without 
pastors.  There  were  churches  without  congregations,  and  congregations 
without  churches.  There  were  communion  tables  without  communicants, 
and  even  if  communicants  there  had  been,  there  were  no  elders  to  carry 
round  the  sacred  symbols  to  them.  So  entire  was  the  change  produced 
in  the  Highlands  by  this  great  ecclesiastical  earthquake.  It  was  stated  by 
Dr  Mackay  of  Dunoon,  in  the  General  Assembly  of  October  1843,  that 
"the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  has  not  been  administered  in  that 
county  (Suthcrlandshire)  by  the  Establishment  in  any  one  parish  since 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  Disruption  took  place."  The  Doctor  added,  "I  am  credibly  informed, 
on  authority,  that  in  the  county  of  Sutherland,  consisting  of  seventeen 
parishes,  and  with  a  population  of  24,666  souls,  there  are  not  fifty  com- 
municants in  the  Established  Church."  The  Highlanders,  in  ranks 
unbroken,  had  passed  over  to  the  Free  Church.  This  was  the  case  in 
particular  in  the  three  northern  counties  of  Ross,  Sutherland,  and  Caith- 
ness. Three  hundred  years  before  the  Earls  of  Sutherland  had  stood  at 
the  head  of  the  Reformation  movement  in  Scotland,  and  ever  since  the 
principles  of  the  Reformed  Church  had  remained  rooted  in  the  affection 
of  the  people.  Hence  the  marvellous  unanimity  with  which  they  declared 
in  favour  of  the  Free  Protesting  Church  of  Scotland.  The  feeling  that 
rallied  them  to  her  banner  was  no  newly  implanted  one,  no  sentiment 
begotten  of  the  hour.  Their  enthusiasm  was  an  old  fire  not  }-et  burned 
out,  which  the  stirring  and  solemn  events  of  the  Disruption  era  had 
kindled  into  a  fresh  flame. 

But  the  fidelity  of  the  Highlanders  was  severely  tried.  The  people 
were  on  one  side  ;  the  great  owners  of  the  soil  on  the  other.  The  latter 
entirely  misconceived  the  tendency  of  the  Disruption  ;  they  thought  it  was 
precipitating  the  country  upon  revolution,  and  they  resolved  that  the  Free 
Church  should  not,  if  they  could  prevent  it,  build  a  single  manse,  nor 
rear  a  single  sanctuary  in  the  domain  over  ^\'hich  they  bore  sway.  The 
ministers  who  had  come  out  were  warned  off  their  former  parishes ;  no 
friend  dare  give  them  a  night's  lodging  but  at  the  risk  of  incurring  the 
frown,  or  heavier  infliction,  it  might  be,  of  his  landlord.  Banished  to  a 
distance,  in  some  instances  of  sixty  or  eighty  miles  from  their  flocks,  the 
pastors  were  unable  to  visit  them,  or  minister  to  them  consolation  or 
advice  save  at  long  and  uncertain  intervals.  The  people  who  had  lost 
their  old  churches  were  denied  sites  on  which  to  erect  new  ones.  Even 
the  right  of  assembling  in  the  open  air,  in  strath  or  on  hill-side,  for  the 
purpose  of  public  worship  was  forbidden  to  them.  They  bethought 
them  of  their  churchyards.      Surely  amid  the  graves  of  their  fathers  they 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

would  be  left  undisturbed  to  sing  their  psalm  and  offer  their  prayer  to 
their  fathers'  God.  But  no;  they  were  chased  even  from  the  churchyard. 
No  spot  was  left  them  on  which  to  perform  their  worship  save  the  narrow 
strip  of  beach  which  separates  the  line  of  ebb-tide  from  high-water  mark. 
Here  their  worshipping  assemblies  might  often  be  seen,  the  roar  of  the 
surges  mingling  with  their  psalms  and  prayers,  and  drowning  at  times 
the  voice  of  the  preacher. 

But  not  an  adherent  fell  away.  Despite  this  multiform  oppression, 
they  stood  unflinchingly  by  the  cause  they  had  espoused.  As  Sabbath 
after  Sabbath  they  met  to  worship  amid  the  tempests  of  their  hills,  and 
the  yet  fiercer  tempests  of  persecution,  they  proclaimed  that  they  were 
not  to  be  driven  back  to  the  old  churches.  The  parish  edifices  stood 
empt}-,  the  pathways  leading  to  them  were  grass-grown ;  and  the 
parishioners,  pressing  onward  through  snow-drift,  and  over  quaking  bog 
or  bleak  moor,  sought  the  appointed  spot,  on  high  road  or  sea-shore, 
where  public  worship  was  to  be  celebrated.  Their  patient  endurance  at 
last  brought  them  victory. 

Their  sufferings  for  conscience'  sake  attracted  the  eyes  of  the  rest 
of  the  nation.  The  misconception  and  prejudice  which  had  obscured 
both  themselves  and  their  cause  began  to  clear  away.  A  more  tolerant 
policy  was  adopted  towards  them,  and  sites  were  granted.  There 
came  now  a  busy  scene  of  the  building  of  churches  and  manses. 
The  people  poor  in  gold  and  silver  could  bring  no  rich  offerings,  but 
help  in  another  form  they  willingly  and  abundantly  gave  towards  the 
rearing  of  the  new  fabrics.  The  fisherman  freighted  his  boat  with  sand 
and  gravel ;  the  farmer  transported  stones  from  the  quarry  in  his  cart ;  the 
mason  gave  a  week's  free  labour,  and  so,  too,  did  the  members  of  other 
trades;  and  thus,  partly  by  help  from  the  Building  Fund,  and  partly 
by  the  labour  of  unhired  hands,  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  ecclesiastical 
edifices  went  busily  fonvard  all  over  the  Highlands  and  Islands.  The 
old  Establishment  was  forgotten    in  presence  of  the   new   and   better 


DlSJiUPJION  WORTHIES. 

Establishment  which  had  so  suddenly  risen  to  replace  it,  and  which  was 
seen  to  possess  a  spiritual  life  and  an  evangelical  glory  which  were 
lacking  in  the  old.  And  now  there  is  no  part  of  Scotland  where  the 
Free  Church  is  so  strong  as  in  the  Highlands,  and  there  is  no  part  of 
Scotland  which  is  so  secure  against  the  irruption  of  those  evils  which 
it  was  predicted  by  many  the  Disruption  would  bring  after  it. 

From  what  we  have  said  it  will  be  seen  that  there  was  not  the  same 
room  for  expansion  on  the  part  of  the  Free  Church  in  the  Highlands, 
which  there  was  in  the  Lowlands.  She  had  filled  the  land  from  the 
first.  Enough  if  she  kept  possession — enough  if  she  did  not  recede  from 
the  limits  to  which  the  impulse  of  the  Disruption  had  carried  her.  But 
no,  she  was  not  content  to  cover  simply  the  former  area ;  to  enroll  on 
her  list,  from  year  to  year,  the  same  number  of  congregations.  Even  in 
the  Highlands  there  was  increase — a  stretching  out  of  the  curtains  of 
her  habitation.  The  Free  Church  aimed  at  giving  to  Northern  Scot- 
land a  more  plentiful  supply  of  the  means  of  grace  than  even  the 
Establishment  had  given  it.  She  sought  out  remote,  and  till  then, 
uncared-for  districts,  and  planted  stations  in  them.  In  Highland  glen 
as  in  city  alley,  neglect  in  some  instances  had  permitted  ignorance 
to  gather,  till  it  had  deepened  into  heathenism.  The  Church  sent 
thither  licentiates  and  catechists,  who  preached  the  Gospel  in  a  freeness 
and  fulness  with  which  it  had  never  before  been  proclaimed  in  these 
places.  We  find  Dr  Mackay  reporting  to  the  Glasgow  Assembly  in 
October  1843,  that  of  the  206  Gaelic-speaking  ministers  in  the  Established 
Church,  loi,  nearly  the  half  of  the  whole,  had  left  the  Establishment. 
In  the  105  parishes  where  the  minister  remained  in,  the  people  in  almost 
every  instance,  had  come  out,  and  were  now  looking  to  the  Free  Church 
for  a  supply  of  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel. 

Moreover,  there  were  parishes  so  large,  both  in  extent  and  popula- 
tion, that  their  effectual  spiritual  oversight  far  exceeded  the  strength 
of  one  man.     These  had  to  be  broken  up  into  two,  and  in  some  cases, 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

three  congregations,  and  placed  each  under  a  pastor,  so  that  not  fewer 
than  1 50  stations  were  at  that  hour  craving  the  fostering  hand  of  the 
Tree  Church.  That  hand  was  wiUingly  put  forth  in  their  help ;  and 
soon,  as  the  consequence,  the  Highlands  and  Islands  had  a  more 
plentiful  supply  of  the  ministrations  of  the  Gospel  than  they  had  ever 
before  enjoyed.  This  was  followed  by  a  spiritual  revival,  and  the  field 
which  the  Disruption  had  at  first  threatened  to  throw  out  of  cultivation, 
began  to  be  covered  with  a  richer  spiritual  verdure  than  it  had  known 
since  the  days  of  the  early  Celtic  evangelisation,  if  even  then. 

It  only  remains  that  we  state  the  present  condition  of  the  Free 
Church  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands.  So  far  from  falling  back  from 
her  first  limits,  she  has  from  year  to  year  been  steadily  extending  them. 
Besides  the  congregations  on  the  equal  dividend,  she  has  170  sanctioned 
ministerial  charges  in  which  service  is  conducted  in  Gaelic.  In  addition 
to  the  regular  charges,  there  are  upwards  of  50  stations,  some  in  islands, 
— most  in  outlying  districts,  which  are  served  by  preachers  and  catechists. 
But  for  this  provision  the  people  in  these  remote  localities  would  be 
altogether  without  the  means  of  grace.  Over  and  above,  there  are  37 
catechists,  men  of  piety  and  gifts,  who  visit  from  house  to  house,  and 
hold  meetings  for  prayer,  and  the  reading  and  exposition  of  the  scriptures. 
They  labour  in  localities  where  licentiates  cannot  conveniently  be  sent, 
or  they  assist  ministers  in  districts  too  extensive  for  the  oversight  of  a 
single  pastor.  The  committee  expend  about  ;^2000  a-year  in  the  supply 
of  stations,  and  ;£'iooo  a-year  in  the  support  of  catechists ;  but  were 
this  sum  doubled  it  could  be  well  expended  in  supplying  necessities 
never  yet  reached,  notwithstanding  the  success  which  has  attended  the 
operations  of  the  committee  under  a  succession  of  able  conveners. 

The  Highlands  of  to-day  may  be  said  to  be,  in  a  sense,  the  creation 
of  the  Free  Church.  There  is  no  part  of  Scotland  on  which  the  Disrup- 
tion has  not  left  its  mark,  but  nowhere  is  the  change  it  has  produced 
so  perceptible  as  in  the  Highlands.     The  lawlessness  and  ignorance  of 


DISRUPTIOX  WORTHIES. 

which  the  Highlands  were  believed  to  be  the  abode  only  so  recently 
as  the  middle  of  last  century  have  been  rooted  out.  Then  the  traveller 
was  afraid  to  venture  within  their  limits,  now  he  passes  on  with  a  perfect 
sense  of  safety,  for  nowhere  are  life  and  property  more  secure.  Their  quiet 
Sabbaths,  their  crowded  churches,  and  the  solemnity  of  their  simple 
worship  cannot  but  suggest  trains  of  not  unprofitable  reflection  to  the 
visitor  from  the  South.  Even  their  moors  are  giving  place  to  fields 
bearing  marks  of  a  skilful  husbandry  and  a  rich  cultivation.  And 
when  the  stranger  learns  that  this  transformation  of  a  once  barbarous 
region  into  a  highly  civilised  land,  and  this  conversion  of  fighting  and 
marauding  clans  into  an  obliging,  industrial,  and  intelligent  population, 
has,  to  a  veiy  considerable  extent,  been  co-eval  with  the  rise  of  the  Free 
Church,  he  can  hardly  avoid  admitting  to  himself,  even  though  he  may  not 
confess  it  to  others,  that  the  Disruption  must  have  embodied  a  principle 
of  mighty  moral  force,  seeing  it  has  changed  so  deeply,  and  so  bene- 
ficially, the  condition  of  a  whole  people. 


CHAPTER     VII. 


etc  ©utftfllis  ^lousljrli  ani  Soiun  ig  tJjc  jFrrc  (a:i)urrlj. 

'X-'X.T'ITHIN  the  Free  Church  a  vigorous  evangelism  was  rapidly 
^f^  renewing  the  face  of  Scotland.  This  was  simply  the  old 
Gospel,  which,  recovering  from  the  torpedo-touch  of  Moderatism,  was 
stirring  the  activities,  freshening  the  knowledge,  and  evoking  the  liber- 
ality of  the  people.  But  outside  the  Church  was  a  zone  of  spiritual 
stagnancy  and  death.  The  Church  felt  that  it  was  not  enough  to  culti- 
vate her  own  domain,  she  must  enter  the  outfield  territorj',  and  sow  anew 
its  desolate  and  death-like  fields  with  the  seeds  of  life. 

The  population  of  the  country  had  been  rapidly  growing,  but  there 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

had  been  no  corresponding  increase  of  the  means  of  grace.  Wliat  was 
the  consequence  ?  There  were  large  masses  of  the  people,  here  crowded 
into  cities,  there  gathered  in  country  districts,  which  had  lapsed  into 
practical  heathenism.  They  kept  no  Sabbath,  they  entered  no  church, 
the}-  never  opened  a  Bible,  in  their  dwellings  psalm  or  prayer  was  never 
heard,  and  their  families  were  growing  up  without  instruction  to  swell 
the  tide  of  ignorance  and  immorality.  This  frightful  condition  of  things 
accused,  trumpet-tongucd,  the  negligence  of  a  past  age.  The  evil  habits 
and  truculent  vices  which  so  rapidly  and  rankly  spring  up  in  the  human 
soil  when  left  without  Divine  culture  were  rampant  among  them.  Law- 
less, defiant,  and  augmenting  from  year  to  year  their  godless  ranks,  they 
threatened,  if  left  alone,  not  only  to  over-master  the  Christianity  of  the 
nation,  but  to  subvert  the  foundations  of  the  State. 

In  these  neglected  masses  the  Free  Church  found  herself  face  to  face 
with  one  of  the  most  difficult  of  the  problems  she  had  to  grapple  with. 
Struggling  to  meet  the  claims  of  her  own  people,  how  should  she  be  able 
to  overtake  the  additional  work  of  subjugating  these  revolted  men  to  the 
Gospel  ?  A  pretext  for  declining  this  arduous  task  lay  ready  to  her 
hand  had  she  chosen  to  make  use  of  it.  She  might  have  said,  "  These 
masses,  festering  in  ignorance,  in  filth,  in  vice  and  wretchedness,  are  the 
spawn  of  Moderatism.  I  shall  leave  it  to  cure  the  disease  it  has  caused. 
This  is  no  affair  of  mine :  let  Moderatism  see  to  it."  The  Free  Church 
did  not  avail  herself  of  this  excuse.  She  showed  that  she  was  the 
real  mother ;  the  true  Church  of  Scotland  ;  her  heart  yearned  over  these 
poor  perishing  outcasts  ;  she  said,  "  In  no  ways  slay  them  ;  give  them  to 
me  ;  I  will  take  care  of  them  ;  I  will  give  these  famishing  ones  '  bread 
that  perisheth  not.'"  It  was  thus  that  she  made  good  her  title  as  the 
Church  of  Scotland,  the  Church  of  the  people  of  Scotland. 

The  Home  Mission  in  importance  is  second  to  no  one  scheme  of  the 
Free  Church,  the  support  of  the  ministry  excepted.  If  it  flourishes,  all 
the  other  schemes  of  the  Church  will  flourish  ;    if  it  languish,  all  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

others  will  decay.  This  is  especially  true  of  the  Foreign  Missions,  which 
will  be  the  first  to  feel  any  decline  in  home  Christianity,  just  as  weakness 
of  the  heart  makes  itself  first  felt  at  the  extremities.  Command  is  laid 
upon  us  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature.  But  in  order  to  evan- 
gelise the  world,  we  must  first  evangelise  our  own  neighbourhood,  our 
own  city,  our  own  countrj',  and  every  advance  in  this  is  a  step  nearer  to 
the  conversion  of  the  world.  Every  member  added  to  the  Church  at 
home  is  an  additional  contributor  to  the  cause  of  missions  abroad.  Wo 
have  one  more  who  contributes,  and  one  more  who  prays.  As  we  multi- 
ply contributors,  we  multiply  Bibles,  we  multiply  missionaries,  and  so  we 
increase  that  agency  which  God  has  promised  to  bless  for  the  saving  of 
mankind.  There  can  be  no  antagonism,  no  conflict  of  interests  betwixt 
Home  and  Foreign  Missions.  The  idea  of  rivalship  between  the  two  is 
out  of  the  question,  save  the  rivalship  of  which  shall  convert  most  souls. 
Britain  is  the  centre  of  the  evangelistic  host,  the  citadel  of  the  world's 
Christianity,  and  not  only  must  Britain  be  thoroughly  evangelised  in 
order  that  Christianity  may  itself  be  impregnable,  but  that  influences  of 
mighty  converting  power  may  thence  go  forth  to  all  nations,  and  the  light 
be  spread  in  India,  in  Africa,  and  in  every  dark  land. 

The  Home  Mission  of  the  Free  Church  began  b}^  being  small.  It 
did  not  become  at  all  prominent  till  1850.  In  the  autumn  of  that  year  a 
little  band  of  Probationers  was  sent  to  operate  in  Glasgow,  Dundee, 
Paisley,  Perth,  Montrose,  and  Airdrie.  They  returned  with  tidings  of  the 
ignorance  and  irreligion  they  had  witnessed  in  these  places,  and  the 
frightful  dimensions  to  which  these  evils  had  grown.  We  give  an  instance. 
In  one  district,  out  of  176  contiguous  families,  comprising  a  population  of 
843,  only  40  individuals  attended  any  church.  In  the  same  district,  out 
of  453  children,  only  58  were  attending  school.  In  some  of  these  districts 
the  missionary  encountered  not  indifference  only  but  positive  hostility. 
This  was  the  first  direct  aggressive  movement  of  the  Free  Church  on  the 
heathenism  of  the  country,  if  we  except  what  Chalmers — returning  in  the 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

evening  of  his  life  to  the  work  which  had  occupied  him  in  his  earlier 
days — had  accomplished  in  the  West  Port.  The  Territorial  Church 
which  he  there  erected  as  an  example  of  what  might  be  done  in  the  most 
unlikely  spots,  was  speedily  followed  by  similar  churches  at  Fountain- 
bridge  and  Holyrood,  and  other  places. 

Henceforward,  year  by  year,  evangelistic  deputies  were  sent  to  those 
dark  places  in  our  land  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  men  who  were  almost 
as  ignorant  of  it  as  if  their  homes  had  been  placed  in  Africa.  Ministers 
were  pressed  into  the  service,  the  number  of  deputies  was  increased,  and 
a  more  s3-stematic  plan  of  operations  was  adopted.  The  forenoon  was 
spent  by  the  deputies  in  visiting  the  families  in  their  own  houses ;  in 
the  evening  there  was  open-air  preaching.  The  population  came  out  in 
large  numbers  to  the  evening  sermon,  the  behaviour  of  the  crowd  was 
most  respectful,  the  blessing  of  God  rested  on  the  effort,  individual  con- 
versions took  place,  and  by-and-by  there  came  to  be  a  little  company  of 
regular  attenders.  These  were  formed  into  a  Territorial  Station,  and 
placed  under  the  care  of  a  probationer  or  licentiate  of  the  Church. 
Their  numbers  increasing,  a  church  was  built,  and  they  were  formed 
into  a  Ministerial  or  Church-extension  Charge,  with  an  ordained  pastor. 
By  another  and  final  advance  they  reached  the  platform  of  the  equal 
dividend,  and  ranked  among  the  regular  congregations  of  the  Church. 
Not  a  few  of  the  now  flourishing  congregations  of  the  Free  Church  had 
just  such  beginning  as  this.  Spots  which  thirty  years  ago  were  in  the 
exclusive  occupation  of  a  world liness,  which  from  one  year's  end  to 
another,  never  paused  to  pray  or  to  keep  a  Sabbath,  have  now  their 
sanctuary  and  their  Sabbath-school  —  in  short,  to  them  the  shadow  of 
death  has  been  turned  into  the  morning. 

In  the  summer  of  1858  not  fewer  than  eighty-five  evangelistic  deputies 
were  employed  in  preaching  the  Gospel  to  thousands  of  their  country- 
men, multitudes  of  whom  had  never  before  heard  the  glad  tidings  of 
salvation.       Everywhere    the    visits    of    the    deputies    were    cordially 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


welcomed,  and  their  labours  gratefully  appreciated.  In  that  year  the 
Free  Church  had  sixteen  home  missions,  not  yet  erected  into  regular 
stations ;  fifty-three  home  mission  stations  proper ;  six  territorial 
charges  in  large  towns ;  five  church  extension  charges,  supported  at  a 
cost  of  upwards  of  £4000;  a  sum  which  the  committee  felt  to  be 
inadequate  for  providing  the  agencies  required  for  carrying  on  a  mission 
which  was  extending  its  sphere  not  only  from  year  to  year  but  from 
month  to  month.  The  Home  Jllission  Stations  proper  were  planted 
mostly  in  rural  districts,  with  a  widely  scattered  population,  or  in 
mining  and  manufacturing  districts,  and  populous  suburbs  of  large 
mercantile  towns,  for  whose  moral  and  religious  benefit  no  provision  had 
been  made,  other  than  was  supplied  by  the  stations  of  the  Free  Church. 
The  Territorial  Charges  were  placed  in  the  great  cities,  where  the  non- 
church-going  population  of  a  particular  neighbourhood,  were  gathered 
into  a  church,  and  admitted  as  they  became  qualified,  to  Christian 
privileges ;  and  the  success  which  crowned  these  efforts  attested  the 
perfect  practicability  of  recovering  the  lapsed  masses. 

The  heathenism  of  Glasgow  was  grappled  with  by  a  special  effort. 
Nowhere  in  all  Scotland  had  the  means  of  grace  been  left  so  far  behind 
by  the  increase  of  the  people.  Glasgow  had  quintupled  its  inhabitants 
since  the  beginning  of  the  century,  while  in  the  rest  of  Scotland  the 
population  had  scarcely  more  than  doubled.  The  noble  enterprise  of 
William  Collins  had  mitigated,  but  had  by  no  means  rooted  out  the  evils 
that  preyed  on  that  great  and  ever-growing  city.  These  evils  had  grown 
with  the  growth  of  Glasgow,  and  now  hideous  forms  of  irreligion  and 
infidelity  were  appearing  in  the  lanes  and  streets  of  her  who  bore  on 
her  escutcheon  the  proud  motto,  "  Let  Glasgow  flourish  by  the  preaching 
of  the  Word."  Glasgow  had  not,  indeed,  erased  these  words, — they 
were  still  to  be  read  on  her  shield, — but  she  had  fallen  sadly  out  of 
harmony  with  them,  and  something  must  be  done  to  restore  the  lost 
congruity  between  the  city  and  its  symbol. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

But  the  exertions  and  appliances  which  might  be  sufficient  to  cope 
with  the  evils  of  a  rural  district  or  a  provincial  town,  would,  it  was  plain, 
be  wholly  inadequate  to  combat  the  gigantic  forces  that  were  entrenched 
in  Glasgow.  At  the  same  time  it  was  felt  that  if  that  great  city  should 
be  raised  from  its  spiritual  decline,  and  made  to  flourish  as  of  old 
by  "  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,"  a  mighty  impulse  would  thereby  be 
given  to  the  work  of  recovering  the  ignorant  and  careless  in  all  the  large 
towns  of  the  country.  It  was  resolved,  therefore,  to  take  the  western 
metropolis  separately  in  hand,  and  to  bring  to  bear  upon  it  for  a  certain 
number  of  years  the  gathered  energies  and  united  action  of  the  whole 
Free  Church  of  Scotland. 

Accordingly  in  1850,  a  Committee  was  formed  to  carry  out  that 
resolution.  Funds  were  collected ;  Glasgow  was  divided  into  half-a- 
dozen  districts,  large  enough  to  afford  a  field  for  the  agencies  to  operate 
among  only  the  non-church  goers ;  for  out  of  this  class  was  it  meant 
that  the  churches  to  be  built  should  be  filled.  A  minister  of  a 
missionary  spirit  was  placed  in  each  district,  with  a  staff  of  teachers 
and  catechists,  who  were  to  prosecute  evangelistic  operations  and 
organise  a  congregation  in  the  district.  Provision  was  made  for  the 
pecuniary  support  of  the  mission  till  such  time  as  it  had  come  with  its 
church  and  schools,  to  be  fully  equipped,  and  had  been  placed  on  the 
Sustentation  Fund.  This  scheme  differed  from  preceding  ones  in  the 
same  city,  in  that  it  was  not  merely  a  church-building  scheme,  but  a 
church  extending  scheme ;  it  not  only  provided  the  material  machinery, 
it  provided  and  also  supported  the  living  agency.  It  reared  at  one  and 
the  same  time,  two  temples,  one  of  stone  and  lime,  another  of  living 
stones, — renewed  men, — a  spiritual  temple. 

Such  was  the  commencement  of  a  work,  which  soon  developed  into 
much  larger  dimensions,  and  began  perceptibly  to  change  the  aspect, 
and  influence  the  moral  destinies  of  the  great  commercial  capital  of  the 
west.     That  work,  at  this  day,  can  show  as  its  monuments  many  stately 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

sanctuaries  and  flourishing  congregations  where,  it  may  be,  the  infidel 
club  was  wont  to  hold  its  obscene  discussions,  or  the  tavern  sent  forth 
its  peals  of  riotous  merriment,  or  crowds  of  skulking,  brutal,  and  inebriate 
men  \\ere  wont  to  congregate  for  deeds  of  violence.  And  not  in 
Glasgow  only,  but  in  Dundee  and  other  towns  this  movement  has 
reared  like  monuments  of  its  vitality,  its  success  and  its  beneficence — 
a  beneficence  that  rises  high  above  the  ordinary  v/alks  of  philanthropy. 

In  other  cases  the  evil  day  was  anticipated,  and  the  cure  of  our 
home  heathenism  rendered  unnecessary,  by  timely  precautions  against 
its  ever  coming  into  existence.  On  the  shores  of  the  Clyde,  whose 
beauty  and  salubrity  were  attracting  numerous  annual  visitors — new 
towns  were  rapidly  springing  up.  Profiting  by  the  lesson  of  Glasgow 
it  was  resolved  to  take  possession  of  these  towns,  while  yet  in  their 
infancy,  in  the  name  of  the  Gospel.  Unless  the  field  was  pre-occupied 
the  enemy  was  sure  to  come  in  and  sow  his  tares.  A  little  effort  now, 
it  was  felt,  would  be  a  saving  of  much,  and  perhaps  fruitless  labour  in 
the  future.  Let  us  not  wait  till  these  places  have  grown,  and  the 
publican,  and  the  pawnbroker,  and  the  Popish  priest  have  taken  up 
their  abode  in  them,  and  have  begun  to  ply  their  arts,  and  are  spreading 
intemperance,  and  spendthrifty,  and  soul-destroying  errors  among 
their  population.  Let  us  now,  when  these  towns  are  in  the  act  of 
forming,  plant  a  church  with  its  school,  and  system  of  week-day 
visitations,  and  let  habits  of  church-going  be  established  among  its 
inhabitants,  and  the  morning  and  evening  psalm  be  heard  in  its  dwell- 
ings, and  the  publican  and  the  pawnbroker  will  flee  from  it,  scared  by  its 
sobriety  and  industry,  as  birds  of  the  night  are  scared  by  the  light. 
But  let  the  place  grow  till  it  becomes  a  city,  with  its  dark  lanes  and 
closes,  its  blind  alleys,  its  dens  of  thievery  and  infamy ;  its  city-arabs, 
its  drunkards,  and  criminals,  its  pawnshops  and  gin-palaces  ;  its  crowds 
of  squalid,  neglected  children ;  its  Sabbath  breakers,  and  its  scowling 
infidels,  its  raving  socialists,  and  may  it  not  then  be  too  late  to  cleanse 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

it  of  the  "  unclean  spirits "  we  have  permitted  to  enter  in  and  take 
possession  of  it  ?  A  few  hundred  pounds  expended  in  planting  a  Home 
Mission  now,  will  do  what  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  may  not  be 
able  to  accomplish  afterwards.  If  we  refuse  to  plant  a  church  and 
school  at  this  stage,  we  will  have  to  tax  ourselves  for  poorhouses,  police- 
offices,  and  prisons  by-and-b)-,  and  all,  it  may  be,  to  no  purpose  as 
regards  the  suppression  of  the  evils  we  have  permitted  to  spring  up. 

This  policy  of  "  prevention  better  than  cure "  was  adopted,  among 
other  places,  specially  in  Indian.  In  1852,  Inellan  was  a  small  place, 
without  a  church  of  any  denomination,  but  giving  promise  of  becoming 
rapidly  the  seat  of  a  large  population.  A  Home  Mission  was  set  a-going 
in  it.  The  Mission  soon  grew  into  a  station,  and  the  station  eventually 
into  a  congregation,  which  continues  to  flourish  and  to  dispense  the 
ordinances  of  grace,  not  only  to  the  inhabitants  of  Inellan,  but  to  the 
numerous  visitors  which  are  attracted  to  it  during  the  summer  months, 
and  who  all  the  more  readily  resort  thither,  that  they  find  the  spirit  of 
the  Gospel  prevailing  where,  but  for  the  measures  taken  at  the  proper 
time,  other  influences  of  a  very  different  kind  might  have  been  dis- 
astrously dominant. 

The  light  which  the  investigations  of  the  Home  Mission  Committee 
threw  on  the  religious  condition  of  our  great  cities  was  alone  a  great 
service.  The  facts  brought  out  were  truly  startling.  Of  the  400,000 
inhabitants  of  Glasgow  twenty-five  years  ago,  100,000,  according  to  the 
most  moderate  calculation;  according  to  other  calculations  180,000,  or 
nearly  one-half  of  the  whole,  never  entered  a  church.  In  Edinburgh, 
matters  were  not  much  better.  In  some  of  our  missionary  districts, 
two-thirds  of  the  people  had  fallen  away  from  church  attendance.  In 
Dundee,  of  a  population  then  amounting  to  70,000,  it  was  estimated  that 
only  15,000  were  church  goers.  Paisley,  with  a  population  of  50,000, 
furnished  22,000  church  goers.  Dumfries,  with  a  population  of  16,000, 
had  a  church  attendance  of  4000,  and  Bo'ness  with  6000  inhabitants,  had 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

only  looo  church  attenders.  So  did  the  list  run  on.  The  investigations 
of  the  Home  Mission  Committee,  and  the  reports  which  the  evangelistic 
deputies  brought  back  from  the  villages  and  districts  where  they  had 
been  sent  to  labour,  furnished  a  moral  diagnosis  of  our  country.  A 
revolution  was  effected  by  these  startling  revelations  in  the  sentiments 
of  Christian  men.  They  saw  that  heathendom  was  not  afar  off,  thousands 
and  thousands  of  miles  away,  across  broad  oceans,  but  that  it  was  here,  even 
at  their  own  door,  with  all  its  crime,  its  guilt,  and  its  danger.  The  Church 
felt  more  than  ever  her  responsibility  for  the  masses,  and  she  began  with 
redoubled  vigour,  and  on  a  larger  scale  than  ever,  to  cleanse  the  land 
from  these  frightful  pollutions,  and  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  raise 
a  moral  bulwark  against  an  irreligion  which  had  only  to  become  con- 
scious of  its  strength,  to  overmaster  the  piety  of  the  countr}-,  and  inflict 
terrible  political  and  social  calamities  upon  the  nation.  But  for  these 
efforts,  it  is  hard  to  say  what  would  have  been  the  state  of  Scotland  at 
this  hour. 

It  only  remains  that  we  sum  up  in  a  few  sentences,  what  the  Free 
Church  of  Scotland  has  accomplished  in  the  Home  Mission  Field,  and 
\\hat  is  the  state  of  that  mission  at  this  hour.  The  Free  Church  in  1843 
began  with  between  500  and  600  congregations  ;  she  has  now  in  round 
numbers  iioo.  This  one  fact  exhibits  the  Church  as  having  about 
doubled  the  area  of  Christianity  in  Scotland.  As  regards  the  present 
state  of  the  mission,  which  is  confined  to  the  Lowlands,  the  Free  Church 
has  thirty-three  Missioti  Stations.  These  are  planted  in  rural  districts 
and  villages.  They  have  an  aggregate  membership  of  upwards  of  2000 : 
an  average  Sabbath  attendance  of  nearly  4000,  and  their  influence  and 
action  embrace  a  population  of  40,000.  They  are  in  charge  of  licentiates 
of  the  Church,  who  conduct  two  diets  of  public  worship  on  the  Sabbath, 
and  spend  three  days  of  each  week  in  household  visitation.  The  Mission 
Station  on  reaching  a  certain  stage  of  advance  becomes  a  Church-exten- 
sion Charge.  This  processs  is  continually  going  on,  as  the  Station  is  always 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

aiming  at  becoming  a  Charge,  while  the  Charge  aspires  to  its  final 
landing,  which  is  on  the  platform  of  the  equal  dividend.  The  last 
Assembly  elevated  six  Jilission  Stations  to  the  platform  of  Chtirch- 
cxtcnsion  Charges,  destined,  after  another  course  of  advance  to  reach  the 
final  platform  of  the  Sustentation  Fund. 

The  Territorial  Missions  at  present  are  four.  They  arc  confined  to 
the  large  cities,  and  operate  in  destitute  districts  which  have  been 
selected  by  city  congregations,  under  the  sanction  of  the  Presbyter)-,  for 
spiritual  cultivation.  As  with  the  Mission  Station  so  with  the  Territorial 
Mission  it  may,  by  the  increase  of  its  numbers,  and  its  general  progress, 
"  earn  for  itself  a  good  degree,"  and  be  transformed  into  the  Territorial 
Charge,  which  is  a  step  in  its  path  to  a  fully  sanctioned  charge  with  a 
place  on  the  equal  dividend.  The  Church  has  at  present  twenty-seven 
Territorial  Charges. 

The  Home  Mission  Committee  has  besides  a  host  of  agencies  and 
labourers  in  its  service  which  do  not  come  under  the  above  categories. 
Besides  its  Evangelistic  Deputies,  which  we  have  already  made  prominent, 
the  committee  has  ninety-five  Congregational  Missions.  They  are  carried 
on  by  students:  the  student  giving  ten  hours  a-week  to  household  visita- 
tion with  Scripture  reading  and  prayer  in  the  district  mapped  out  to  him. 
[Moreover  it  is  required  of  him  that  he  give  a  service  every  Sabbath 
evening  in  a  house  belonging  to  the  locality  for  the  benefit  of  its  families. 
There  are  two  probationers  and  catechists  whose  work  it  is  to  visit  non- 
church-going  families,  and  by  religious  services  on  the  Sabbath,  and 
prayer  meetings  and  Bible  classes  on  the  week  evenings  to  reclaim  them 
to  the  observances  of  religion,  and  draw  them  into  already  existing 
congregations. 

There  are,  moreover,  labouring  in  the  cause  of  this  Home  reclamation 
laymen  of  experience,  with  evangelistic  gifts,  who  work  for  short  periods, 
in  agricultural,  mining,  or  manufacturing  districts.  And  not  to  make 
our  narration  too  tedious,  there  are  Missions  in  Mining  Districts.    Perman- 


DISRUPTIOX  WORTHIES. 

ent  or  temporary  churches  or  halls  are  provided,  with  a  staff  of  mission- 
aries, evangelists,  and  Bible-women  to  operate  among  those  engaged  in 
mining  and  kindred  industries.  These  amount  to  about  a-tenth  of  the 
whole  population  of  the  country.  The  income  of  the  Mission  since  the 
Disruption  in  1843  to  31st  JMarch  1878  amounts  in  gross,  to  .^230,363, 
2s.  4d. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

2rf)r  Jrcc  (!i:|)urrlj  srntis  \\t  ffiosjid  to  tfjc  Scto  ftrst. 

to  an  earnest  Christian  layman,  the  late  Mr  Robert  Wodrow  of 
Glasgow,  is  mainly  traceable  that  awakened  interest  in  behalf  of 
"  the  lost  sheep  of  the  House  of  Israel "  which  has  characterised  the  Free 
Church  of  Scotland.  A  man  of  faith  and  prayer,  not  only  did  Mr  Wodrow 
labour  himself,  but  he  strove  to  enlist  others  in  a  work  which  most  people 
in  his  day  deemed  futile,  if  not  impossible,  even  that  of  dispelling  the  dark- 
ness, and  disarming  the  hostility  of  the  Jews  to  the  Gospel,  and  gathering 
them  round  the  cross.  Mr  Wodrow,  while  he  acted  in  the  capacity  of  secre- 
tarj'  to  the  Jewish  Society  of  Glasgow,  which  was  composed  of  all  religious 
denominations,  was  animated  by  the  strong  desire  of  seeing  this  great 
cause  taken  up  by  the  Church  of  Scotland  as  a  church.  He  petitioned 
the  Presbytery  of  Glasgow  to  that  effect ;  and  this  led  to  the  first 
overture  that  ever  was-  laid  on  the  table  of  the  General  Assembly  for 
the  appointment  of  a  committee  to  labour  in  the  work  of  the  conversion 
of  Israel.  God  granted  him  the  desire  of  his  heart.  Mr  Wodrow  was 
the  father  of  the  Church  of  Scotland's  Mission  to  the  Jews.  Among  a 
multitude  of  other  services  rendered  in  this  cause,  Mr  Wodrow  drafted 
the  address  which  the  General  Assembly  sent  to  the  seed  of  Abraham, 
scattered  over  the  earth.  This  address  was  translated  into  all  the 
European    languages,    and    some   of  the   Asiatic   ones,   and   circulated 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

wherever  Jews  were  known  to  dwell.  What  a  welcome  message  to  a 
race  which  for  ages  had  heard  nothing  from  those  among  whom  they 
dwelt  but  words  of  contempt  and  scorn,  and  experienced  nothing  but 
acts  of  spoliation  and  oppression  ! 

The  first  step  taken  by  the  Church  of  Scotland  in  this  cause  was  to 
send  to  Palestine  and  the  East  a  deputation  of  four  ministers,  of  which 
one  honoured  father,  Dr  Andrew  Bonar,  still  sun,'ives,  to  seek  after  these 
"lost  sheep,"  despised  of  man,  but  "beloved  for  their  father's  sake."  The 
deputation  was  instructed  to  inquire  into  their  condition,  the  most  likely 
methods  of  approaching  them,  and  the  spots  where  it  might  be  advisable 
to  plant  mission  stations  in  the  future. 

The  God  of  Abraham  guided  the  steps  of  the  deputation.  On  their 
way  back  to  their  own  land,  one  of  their  number,  the  late  Rev.  Dr  Keith, 
fell  sick  at  Pesth.  It  was  told  the  Arch-Duchess  of  Austria,  whose 
palace  of  Buda  rose  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  Danube,  that  a  Scotch 
minister  lay  dangerously  ill  in  the  hotel.  The  Arch-Duchess  had  herself 
been  no  stranger  to  suffering,  and  her  distress  had  led  her  to  the  study 
of  the  Bible.  Having  found  a  Saviour  for  her  own  soul,  the  next  objects 
of  her  compassion  were  her  subjects  of  Hungary,  whom  she  saw  to  be 
plunged  in  darkness.  Often  as  she  stood  at  her  palace  windows,  the 
Danube  rolling  beneath  her,  the  roofs  of  Pcsth  spread  out  on  the 
further  bank,  and  the  vast  Hungarian  plains  stretching  far  to  the  east, 
she  had  thought  of  the  moral  gloom  that  covered  this  fair  region,  and  had 
earnestly  prayed  that  God  would  send  some  one  to  make  known  to  the 
Hungarians  the  way  of  life.  Here,  now,  is  an  answer  to  my  prayer,  she 
said  to  herself,  when  told  that  a  Scotch  clerg>'man,  on  his  way  through 
her  capital,  had  been  arrested  by  sickness.  The  Arch-Duchess  hastened 
to  the  hotel,  she  tenderly  nursed  Dr  Keith  in  his  illness,  and  when  his 
recovery  was  completed,  she  told  him  what  was  the  earnest  desire  of  her 
heart,  even  that  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  might  be  sent  to  proclaim  the 
tidings  of  salvation  to  the  Hungarian  people. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

The  hand  of  God  thus  opened  the  door.  The  Church  of  Scotland 
entered  in  and  established  missions  at  Pesth  and  Jassy.  Dr  Duncan, 
assisted  by  Messrs  Smith,  Allan,  and  Wingate  was  stationed  at  the 
former  city,  and  Mr  Edward  at  the  latter.  God  did  not  leave  without  a 
witness  the  men  whom  he  had  so  specially  called  to  labour  in  this  part 
of  the  vineyard.  Their  mission  bore  early  and  abundant  fruit,  not  only 
in  the  conversion  of  the  seed  of  Israel,  but  in  the  revival  of  religion  in 
Hungary.  Its  darkness  is  not  now  so  deep  as  when  the  Arch-Duchess 
was  wont  to  survey  the  Hungarian  plains  from  her  palace  window  with 
heart  lifted  up  to  God  in  behalf  of  her  land.  Its  Protestantism,  over- 
whelmed by  armies  and  executioners  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth 
century  was  giving  no  signs  of  revival,  but  no  sooner  had  the  mission- 
aries been  stationed  at  Pesth,  than  they  began  to  make  missionary  tours 
through  the  land,  and  to  institute  a  colportage  of  Hebrew  Bibles  and 
Testaments,  and  from  that  day  the  Protestant  Church  of  Hungary, 
which  so  long  dwelt  among  the  dead,  has  continued  to  revive — exhibit- 
ing on  a  small  scale  what  will  yet  be  realised  on  a  far  greater,  even  that 
the  ingathering  of  Israel  will  be  as  life  from  the  dead  to  the  Gentile 
churches.     At  this  stage  of  the  Jewish  Mission  the  Disruption  came. 

The  re-commencement  of  the  Jewish  Mission  after  the  Disruption, 
was  marked  by  providential  circumstances,  scarcely  less  striking  than 
those  which  had  attended  its  first  beginning.  The  first  notable  thing 
about  its  second  starting,  was  the  fact  that  all  the  Jewish  missionaries 
adhered  to  the  principles  of  the  Free  Church.  The  second  was  that  the 
first  missionary  collection  made  by  the  Free  Church  was  for  the  Jews. 
And  the  third  notable  thing  was  that  the  proceeds  of  this  collection  all 
but  exactly  replaced  the  sum  lost  by  the  Committee  in  consequence  of 
the  Disruption.  The  Committee  found  themselves  in  the  position,  after 
the  Disruption,  of  having  all  the  missionaries  to  support,  while  all  the 
funds,  ;^3SOO,  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  others.  But  the  collection 
for  the  Jews  on  the  sixth  Sabbath  of  the  existence  of  the  Free  Church 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

(June  25th  1843),  amounting  as  it  did  to  £l\QO,  placed  tlic  Committee 
very  nearly  in  the  same  position  for  carrj'ing  on  the  Mission  in  which  they 
had  been  before  the  Disruption.  The  Free  Church  heard  the  voice  of 
God  in  these  events,  saying,  "  go  forward."  Cease  not  to  care  for  the 
lost  sheep  of  the  House  of  Israel.  Not  only  shall  you  have  your 
reward  by  conversions  among  them,  but  a  double  reward  shall  be  given 
you  in  the  richer  blessing  that  will  attend  your  labours  among  the  Gentile 
churches. 

The  funds  for  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  continued  steadily  to  increase. 
In  1839,  when  the  scheme  was  first  started,  the  collection  amounted  only 
to  ;^382.  In  the  year  of  the  Disruption  it  had  risen,  as  we  have  seen,  to 
,£lipo.  In  the  following  years  it  reached  an  average  ranging  from  five 
to  six  thousand  pounds.  New  stations  were  planted,  and  more  mission- 
aries were  sent  out.  The  income  of  the  committee  has  this  year  (iSSo) 
been  ;^9702,  and  the  ordinary  expenditure  £l<^2\.  The  income  for  the 
year  is  exceptionally  high,  and  is  mainly  owing  to  an  increase  in  the 
legacies.  The  average  income  of  the  past  five  years  may  be  stated  at 
£5000.  The  excess  of  this  year  has  been  employed  to  establish  a  Home 
for  neglected  children  in  Constantinople. 

The  Committee  feel  that  they  might  with  profit  multiply  their  stations 
did  their  funds  permit.  They  have  for  some  years  been  desirous  of 
sending  a  missionary  to  Russia,  where  there  is  a  large  body  of  Jews. 
Palestine,  too,  is  beginning  to  force  itself  upon  their  attention.  The  Jews 
are  ilocking  to  their  old  land  in  larger  numbers  than  ever  before.  The 
Hebrew  population  has  doubled  in  the  Holy  Land  within  these  twenty 
years :  and  were  the  sway  of  the  Turk  in  Syria  to  come  to  an  end, 
these  exiles  would  return  in  tenfold  greater  numbers.  Along  with  this 
reviving  affection  for  the  early  home  of  their  race,  there  is  said  to  be  a 
growing  yearning  of  the  heart,  more  universal  than  ever  before  known 
in  their  histor}',  for  reconciliation  to  Him  who  gave  that  land  to  Abraham 
and  his  seed  for  "  an  everlasting  possession." 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

It  only  remains  that  we  glance  at  the  present  state  of  the  mission. 
The  stations  are  not  numerous,  but,  as  we  have  said,  the  labours  of  the 
missionaries  among  the  Jews  overflow  in  blessings  to  the  surrounding 
populations.  The  stations  are  six — Amsterdam,  Pesth,  Constantinople, 
Breslau,  Prague,  and  Strasburg,  at  each  of  which  is  an  ordained  mission- 
ary with  assistants,  above  fifty  in  all.  Pesth  still  maintains  its  pre-eminence 
among  Jewish  mission  stations.  Its  schools  are  attended  by  about  400 ; 
and  much  precious  seed  is  being  sown  in  the  minds  of  young  Jews  and 
Jewesses.  Its  colportage  embraces  the  length  and  breadth  of  Hungary. 
Its  agencies  ramify  into  Transylvania,  Servia,  Roumania,  and  even 
Russia.  Its  Bethesda  has  always  in  it  some  Jewish  patients,  and  is  a 
centre  of  missionary  work  among  both  Jews  and  Gentiles.  A  number  of 
earnest-minded  young  men  have  recently  formed  themselves  into  an 
association,  with  a  well-assorted  library,  and  an  annual  course  of  lectures. 
The  station  is  further  supplied  with  a  printing  press,  which  issues  tracts 
and  books  in  six  languages.  This  bird's-eye  view  of  the  operations  at 
Pesth  may  be  accepted  as  a  fair  sample  of  the  work  done,  though  perhaps 
on  a  more  limited  scale,  at  the  other  stations  of  the  Jewish  Mission. 
To  go  farther  into  detail  is  beyond  our  scope ;  and  the  reader  who  wishes 
to  know  particulars  has  easy  access  to  them  in  the  official  sources. 

Some  may  think  that  our  success  in  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  has 
not  been  answerable  to  our  expectations  and  our  efforts.  But  when  we 
reflect  on  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  work,  and  the  tremendous  hindrances 
in  the  way  of  its  accomplishment,  we  shall  wonder  rather  that  we  have 
so  long  a  list  of  converts  to  show.  Foremost  among  the  impediments  to 
the  conversion  of  the  Jew  is — to  use  the  phraseology  of  his  own  prophets 
— "  the  heart  of  stone."  This  hardness  of  heart,  with  the  blindness  of 
understanding  which  it  induces,  is  common  to  the  Jew  with  the  idolater 
of  India  and  the  infidel  of  Europe.  But  the  Jew  is  "  twice  dead."  To 
his  original  hardness  of  heart  is  to  be  added  the  influence  of  a  perverted 
education.     No  sooner  does  a  Jewish  infant  open  his  eyes  than  a  veil  is 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

spread  over  them.  His  mind  is  filled  with  traditions  and  fables,  with 
prejudices  and  hatred  of  the  truth.  His  fetters  grow  stronger  with  every 
succeeding  year. 

What  his  education  began  is  perfected  and  finished  by  the  Talmud. 
Modern  Judaism  is  a  system  of  "carnal  observances."  The  Jew's  system 
of  religion  embraces  no  spiritual  truth,  and  his  worship  implies  no  exer- 
cise of  the  soul ;  it  consists  mainly  in  washings,  in  the  observance  of 
feasts,  the  lighting  of  lamps,  and  the  reciting  of  prayers  in  the  Hebrew 
tongue.  Of  renewal  of  the  heart  he  does  not  even  dream.  Such  is  the 
whole  tendency  of  the  Talmud ;  and  the  longer  the  Jew  studies  it,  the 
further  does  he  wander  from  the  light,  and  goes  the  deeper  into  the  dark- 
ness. When  a  text  of  Scripture  is  produced,  the  Jew  is  prepared  with 
the  comment  of  some  Rabbi.  It  matters  not  how  ridiculous  it  may  be, 
the  Jew  clings  pertinaciously  to  it.  The  sense  of  the  Hebrew  words,  the 
connection  of  the  passage,  and  even  the  more  reasonable  explication  of 
the  ancient  Hebrew  writers,  avail  nothing  with  him.  He  is  held  fast  in 
the  fetters  of  Rabbinism.  He  has  worn  them  from  infancy  ;  and  by  the 
time  he  attains  manhood  his  intellect  has  become  warped,  and  his  under- 
standing hopelessly  beclouded. 

By  his  birth  he  is  an  heir  of  heaven.  So  does  the  Jew  regard  him- 
self He  is  a  son  of  Abraham,  a  member  of  a  peculiar  people.  He 
accounts  it  foul  scorn  to  come  down  to  the  same  level  with  the  Gentile, 
and  to  own  that  he  is  by  nature  as  bad  as  others.  He  fortifies  himself 
with  these  false  hopes.  He  has  the  blood  of  Abraham  in  his  veins,  but 
he  is  totally  regardless  of  having  the  faith  of  Abraham  in  his  heart. 

Moreover,  in  the  condition  and  character  of  the  Jew  the  most  anti- 
thetical qualities  are  mixed.  He  is  at  once  above  and  below  the  rest  of 
mankind.  He  is  above  them  as  regards  the  grandeur  of  his  descent ; 
below  them  as  regards  the  degradation  into  which  he  has  fallen.  The 
heir  of  a  glorious  land,  yet  without  a  foot-breadth  in  actual  possession  ! 
Carrying  in  his  bosom  the  noblest  aspirations,  yet  passing  through  life 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

amid  ignoble  pursuits.  Scorning  the  world  with  haughty  pride,  yet 
cowering  slavishly  beneath  its  frown.  Scrupulously  exact  as  regards  the 
letter  of  the  law,  yet  habitually  neglectful  of  its  spirit.  Clinging  to  the 
promises,  yet  refusing  to  accept  of  their  accomplishment.  Pliable  and 
accommodating  in  all  things,  yet  obdurate  and  inflexible  in  one  thing, 
the  acceptance,  even,  of  Him  of  whom  "Moses  in  the  law  and  the 
prophets  did  write."  We  at  once  venerate  and  pity  the  Jew.  Even 
Providence  seems  to  regard  him  with  the  same  mixed  feelings.  To  the 
God  of  his  fathers  he  is  an  object  at  once  of  anger  and  love.  For  two 
thousand  years  the  darkness  of  Divine  judgments  has  been  ever  around 
him,  yet  all  the  while  he  has  remained  the  heir  of  promises  that  fill  the 
world's  future  and  his  own  with  glory. 

The  long  and  bitter  persecution  to  which  he  has  been  subjected  has 
helped  farther  to  rivet  on  the  mind  of  the  Jew  his  prejudices  against  the 
truth,  and  his  suspicion  and  hatred  of  nominal  Christians.  Chased  from 
land  to  land,  denied  the  rights  of  a  citizen,  denied,  sometimes,  the  rights 
of  a  man,  robbed  and  spoiled,  held  as  dishonourable  and  vile,  and 
alway  trampled  upon,  can  we  expect  that,  after  enduring  for  centuries 
these  cruel  wrongs  at  the  hands  of  nations  calling  themselves  Christian, 
the  Hebrew  race  should  at  the  first  call  open  their  understandings  and 
hearts  to  Christianity  ?  And  when  the  Jew  turns  to  observe  the  great 
religious  systems  around  him,  where  is  the  proof  of  their  superior  truth 
or  their  superior  virtue  ?  He  beholds  one-half  of  Europe  groaning  under 
a  religion  that  planted  itself  by  the  sword,  and  is  grossly  sensual  in 
character ;  he  beholds  the  other  half  occupied  by  a  Church  that  is  grossly 
idolatrous.  Is  it  for  these  that  he  is  to  forsake  the  sublime  doctrines 
and  grand  forms  of  the  Hebrew  faith  ?  "  Will  it  profit  me  in  any  way," 
he  asks,  "if  I  shall  exchange  the  synagogue  for  the  church?"  We 
know  of  no  other  nation  or  race  in  whose  path,  early  training,  social 
isolation,  the  world's  hatred,  Rabbinical  authority,  and  the  persecution 
of  ages,  have  united  to  build  up  so  numerous  and  so  mighty  obstacles  to 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

their  reception  of  the  Gospel  as  those  that  have  been  reared  in  the  path 
of  the  Jews.     When  we  take  these  tremendous  difficulties  into  account 
wc  may  well  wait,  while  we  continue  to  work. 
I  But  these  barriers  shall  all  one  day  give  way  before  the  sovereign  and 

gracious  power  of  the  Spirit.  On  the  Jews,  there  is  reason  to  believe, 
will  fall  the  first  great  copious  shower  when  the  heavens  shall  again  open. 
What  an  amazing  transformation  will  this  second  and  greater  Pentecost 
bring  with  it !  Then  there  will  be  a  springing  up  as  among  the  grass, 
as  willows  by  the  water-courses.  As  the  bursting  of  the  green  spring 
in  the  Arctic  regions,  chasing  the  ice  and  snow  before  it,  and  strew- 
ing the  earth  with  blossoms,  or  as  the  flood  of  splendour  which  in 
a  few  moments  fills  the  skies  of  the  Tropics  at  sunrise,  so  shall  then 
be  the  conversion  of  the  Jews.  It  will  not  be  "one  of  a  city  and  two 
of  a  family,"  but  "  all  Israel "  shall  be  saved.  Oh  then  1  when  the  veil  of 
Moses  shall  have  been  rent,  when  the  glory  of  the  Cross  shall  beam  full 
upon  them,  and  their  eyes,  no  longer  holden,  shall  see  their  Messiah, 
in  what  a  flood  of  tears  shall  their  penitence  flow  forth !  Looking  on 
Him  whom  they  have  pierced,  how  loud  shall  rise  the  voice  of  their 
weeping!  But  that  voice  of  sorrow  will  soon  be  drowned  in  the  yet 
louder  voice  of  shoutings  and  hosannahs.  Speedily  round  the  earth  will 
run  the  tidings  of  their  conversion.  The  stupendous  miracle  will  startle 
the  nations  amid  their  idolatries.  They  too  will  open  their  eyes  to  the 
glory  of  the  Gospel,  smitten  by  this  new  and  amazing  proof  of  its  truth. 
Nay,  the  Jews  themselves,  anxious  to  redeem  the  centuries  they  have 
lost,  will  run  from  east  to  west,  from  continent  to  continent,  and 
from  island  to  island,  to  tell  the  world,  and  say,  "Behold,  thy  King 
cometh."  Arise  1  let  your  fetters  be  rent,  and  your  idols  cast  away. 
Gather  yourselves  round  the  Cross,  and  own  your  submission  to  Him 
who  came  a  first  time  that  He  might  redeem  you  by  His  blood,  and  now 
comes  a  second  time  that  He  may  govern  you  by  His  Gospel.  Then  will 
the  prophecy  be  fulfilled.— "  And  strangers  shall  stand  and   feed  your 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


flocks,  and  the  sons  of  the  ahen  shall  be  your  plowmen  and  your  vine- 
dressers. But  ye  shall  be  named  the  priests  of  the  Lord,  men  shall  call 
you  the  ministers  of  our  God  :  ye  shall  eat  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
in  their  glory  shall  ye  boast  yourselves." 


"~1 


CHAPTER     IX. 

^fjc  jFree  Cljurcl)  in  Continental  anti  Colonial  2.anlis. 

tHE  spiritual  forces  which  were  liberated  by  the  Disruption  were 
instantaneously  and  powerfully  felt  far  beyond  the  shores  of  Great 
Britain.  Everywhere  churches  were  seen  awakening  from  slumber, 
reconstituting  themselves  on  a  purer  basis,  and  exchanging  the  inaction 
of  past  centuries  for  a  future  of  activity  and  vigour.  From  all  sides,  far 
and  near,  came  the  cry  to  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland,  "  Send  us  help. 
Your  example  has  roused  us  to  a  new  sense  of  our  responsibilities,  give 
us  your  aid  in  fulfilling  them."  From  the  Continent  of  Europe :  from 
almost  every  colony  under  the  British  sceptre,  came  importunate  entrea- 
ties for  missionaries  and  ministers,  that  the  Gospel  which  had  lent  a  new 
glory  to  Scotland  might  gladden  their  skies  also.  How  was  it  possible 
for  the  Free  Church  to  respond  to  these  numerous  calls,  her  strength 
tasked  to  the  uttermost,  as  it  then  was,  in  the  reconstruction  of  her 
own  financial  and  ecclesiastical  organisation.  It  seemed  as  if  she  must 
cut  herself  loose  from  all  her  foreign  dependencies, — in  a  word,  drop  her 
Continental  and  Colonial  schemes,  and  care  only  for  herself.  But  no, 
she  had  faith  in  Him  whose  are  the  silver  and  the  gold,  and  believing 
that  she  should  have  enough  for  herself,  and  something  over  to  give  to 
others,  she  resolved  to  prosecute  her  labours  in  these  distant  and 
necessitous,  but  most  inviting  fields. 

The  Church  of  Scotland  before  the  Disruption,  guiding  herself  by 


HfSTORlCAf.  SKETC/f. 

two  vciiciablc  precedents,  had  begun  to  show  solicitude  for  those  vast 
multitudes  who,  from  necessity  or  choice,  yearly  went  forth  from 
Scotland  to  settle  in  lands  beyond  the  sea.  The  Old  Testament  Church 
took  care  to  follow  her  children  with  the  ordinances  of  religion,  by  the 
institution  of  Synagogues,  or  Houses  of  Prayer,  in  the  heathen  lands  and 
cities  where  her  expatriated  sons  had  fixed  their  abode.  The  Church  of 
the  Reformation,  both  in  Geneva  and  Scotland,  followed  with  the  means 
of  grace  those  of  its  sons  and  daughters  who  were  compelled  by  the  storms 
of  persecution  to  seek  shelter  in  America,  in  Holland,  and  other  countries. 
When  anew  the  reforming  spirit  descended  on  the  Church  of  Scotland, 
her  care  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  her  sons  in  foreign  lands  revived. 
The  first  country  for  whose  religious  necessities  provision  was  made  by 
the  mother  Church  was  British  North  America.  This  was  mainly  owing 
to  the  efforts  of  the  Rev.  Dr  Burns  of  Paisley,  afterwards  of  Toronto,  who 
devoted  himself  with  unwearied  zeal  to  the  cause  of  pure  religion  in 
Canada  and  Nova  Scotia.  In  1832,  the  sanction  of  the  Assembly  was 
given  to  the  establishment  of  Presbyteries  and  Synods  in  these  provinces; 
and  in  a  few  years  afterv/ards  (1836),  "Missions  to  Colonial  Churches" 
was  formed  into  a  separate  scheme  of  the  Church.  In  1840,  the  scheme, 
limited  hitherto  to  the  Colonies,  was  enlarged  so  as  to  embrace  Scottish 
Prcsb)-terians  in  foreign  countries  other  than  those  subject  to  the  British 
Crown.     Such  was  its  position  when  the  Disruption  took  place. 

The  Disestablished  Church,  without  a  moment's  hesitation,  resolved 
to  carry  on  the  scheme.  Contributions  for  that  object  were  sent  in,  not 
only  from  Scotland,  but  from  the  Colonies  themselves.  Associations 
were  formed  to  aid  the  Church  in  her  efforts  to  promote  the  spiritual 
good  of  Scotsmen  dispersed  over  all  the  countries  of  the  globe,  in 
numbers  exceeding,  it  was  believed,  that  of  the  home  population,  and 
who,  had  they  carried  with  them  the  spirit  and  influences  of  the  Gospel, 
might  have  been  a  purifying  salt  in  the  earth— a  leaven  in  the  mass  of  the 
world.     Ministers  and  missionaries  were  sent  to  occupy  new  stations,  or 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

to  supply  the  destitution  caused  by  those  who  had  deserted  their  posts, 
and  returned  to  occupy  charges  at  home,  left  vacant  by  ministers  who  had 
quitted  the  Establishment.  A  special  colony,  with  its  pastor,  its  school- 
master, its  families,  and  trades,  was  organised  and  sent  out  to  New  Zea- 
land. The  complete  machinery  of  Christian  civilisation  was  set  down  at 
once  in  the  country,  and  the  natives  had  the  advantage  of  having  Christ- 
ianity not  only  preached  to  them  in  its  doctrines,  but  exhibited  to  them 
in  its  family  and  social  life.  This  idea  has  since  been  more  fully  carried 
out  in  the  Livingstonia  Mission,  one  of  the  magnificent  results  of  the 
missionary  zeal  and  heroism  of  the  man  whose  name  it  bears.  Follow- 
ing with  a  mother's  heart  her  sons  in  far-off  lands,  from  whose  minds 
the  hallowed  memories  and  sacred  influences  of  home  were  rapidly  being 
obliterated,  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland  became  a  mother  of  churches, 
even  as  Britain  has  become  a  mother  of  nations.  The  traveller  as  he 
passed  along  the  great  highways  of  the  world,  or  halted  at  its  great 
capitals  and  centres  of  influence,  saw  there  her  flag  unfurled,  and 
heard  the  Gospel  from  the  lips  of  her  ministers  or  missionaries — in 
Gibraltar,  in  Malta,  in  Madeira,  and  the  continents  of  the  Pacific.  It 
was  a  vast  work,  undertaken  by  the  Church,  not  in  the  fulness  of  her 
strength,  but  in  the  weakness  and  comparative  poverty  of  her  beginning 
As  year  by  year  the  field  expanded,  so  too  did  the  means  of  its  cultivation. 
More  ardent  prayers  went  up  for  the  success  of  the  Colonial  scheme,  and 
richer  gifts  were  poured  into  its  treasur}-. 

It  is  not  our  intention  to  trace  the  growth  of  this  great  scheme.  We 
mean  only  to  glance  at  the  position  to  which  it  has  now  attained,  and 
the  vast  sweep  over  which  its  operations  extend.  If  we  have  a  Free 
Church  on  the  soil  of  Scotland,  it  may  also  be  truly  affirmed  that  we 
have  a  Free  Church  outside  its  shores,  and  the  latter  is  a  greater  Church 
than  the  former.  The  daughter  has  outgrown  the  mother.  The  Colonial 
Presbyterian  Church  at  this  hour  consists  of  70  presbyteries,  1225  minis- 
terial charges,  1 146  ministers.     These  are  dispersed  over  the  four  con- 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

tinents  of  the  globe,  being  most  numerous  in  Canada,  the  earliest  scene 
of  the  foreign  operations  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.  The  Church  in 
Australasia  comes  next  in  point  of  numbers.  These  Churches  are  either 
in  immediate  or  in  very  close  relationship  with  the  Free  Church  of  Scot- 
land, and  most  of  them  look  to  her,  though  not  exclusively,  for  labourers, 
which  their  own  resources  do  not  as  yet  enable  them  adequately  to  supply. 
The  revenue  of  the  Colonial  Committee  for  the  year  at  last  Assembly 
(1880)  was  A574.  14s. 

The  fostering  hand  of  the  mother  Church  needs  now  to  be  put  forth 
towards  the  Colonial  Churches  only  in  the  way  of  giving  supplemental 
aid.  The  Australasian  and  Canadian  Churches  are  able  to  see  to  their 
own  support.  It  is  men  rather  than  money — labourers  to  cultivate  the 
vast  and  ever-expanding  fields — which  they  ask  from  Scotland.  They  are 
now  not  only  self-supporting,  they  are  aid-giving.  They  have  a  mission 
fund  for  providing  Gospel  ordinances  to  the  colonists.  As  the  tide  of 
immigration  flows  in  upon  them,  and  the  area  of  population  stretches 
farther  and  farther  into  the  wilderness,  and  new  villages  and  towns  spring 
up,  they  are  ready  to  plant  at  these  new  centres  a  minister  and  school- 
master, and  the  whole  apparatus  of  Christian  civilisation,  and  so  antici- 
pate the  evils  which  would  be  sure  to  arise  were  these  masses,  continu- 
ally augmented  by  new  swarms,  left  without  the  Gospel.  It  is  hardly 
possible  to  conceive  a  greater  service  than  that  which  the  Free  Church  is 
rendering  through  her  Colonial  Committee  to  the  future  of  the  world.  She 
is  taking  pledges  of  these  young  empires  that,  when  they  have  become 
great,  they  shall  array  themselves  on  the  side  of  the  Gospel,  and  sub- 
ordinate their  resources  to  the  promotion  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord 
Jesus. 

Till  the  Assembly  of  1868  the  colonial  and  continental  operations  of 
the  Church  formed  one  scheme  under  the  direction  of  the  same  Com- 
mittee ;  but,  the  field  continuing  to  expand  and  the  labourers  to  multi- 
ply, a  separation  of  the  two  became  necessary,  and  the  Continent,  disjoined 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

from  the  Colonies,  was,  in  the  above-named  year,  placed  under  the  special 
and  exclusive  oversight  of  the  "  Committee  for  Continental  IVIissions." 
Though  inferior  in  extent  to  the  Colonial  field,  the  area  of  the  "  Contin- 
ental Missions"  is  still  large.  It  embraces,  leaving  India  out  of  view, 
the  world  of  the  ancients,  and  the  world  of  the  first  preachers  of  the 
Gospel.  It  is,  moreover,  unspeakably  interesting.  The  conversion  of 
Europe  to  a  pure  Scriptural  Christianity  is  of  all  objects  the  one  most  to 
be  desired.  It  is  among  the  nations  of  so  called  Christendom  that  the 
great  predicted  Apostacy  has  found  its  seat,  and  could  these  nations  be 
rescued  from  its  blinding  influence — and  every  conversion  on  the  Con- 
tinent is  a  step  in  thai  direction — not  only  would  the  European  nations 
themselves  recover  their  faith  and  liberty,  but  the  mightiest  of  all 
existing  hindrances  to  the  progress  of  the  Gospel  all  over  the  globe 
would  be  taken  out  of  the  way,  a  new  life  would  descend  upon  the 
Churches  of  the  Reformation,  and  brighter  and  vaster  triumphs  would 
cheer  the  path  of  the  missionary  in  every  country'  of  the  world.  Tidings 
from  that  part  of  the  earth  have,  to  the  Christian  who  is  waiting  for  the 
redemption  of  the  world,  a  tenfold  interest ;  for  he  knows  that  from 
thence  is  to  be  sounded  forth  the  knell  that  shall  announce  that  now  at 
last  old  things  have  passed  away,  and  all  things  have  become  new. 

The  operations  of  the  Committee  have  for  their  object — i.  The  support 
of  permanent  stations  on  the  Continent.  Of  these  five  are  in  Italy — viz., 
Rome,  Florence,  Leghorn,  Genoa,  and  Naples ;  two  in  France — viz.,  Pau 
and  Nice  ;  one  in  Lausanne  ;  one  in  Lisbon  ;  and  one  in  Constantinople. 
The  first  pioneer  of  the  Gospel  in  Italy  in  our  day  was  the  Rev.  Dr 
Stewart  of  Leghorn.  He  had  begun  to  operate  while  yet  the  old  restric- 
tions against  the  Bible  and  the  missionary  were  in  force,  and  by  his 
persevering  and  wisely-directed  efforts  he  had  made  a  few  converts  and 
introduced  the  Word  of  God  into  that  land  from  which  it  had  been  so 
long  excluded.  Changes  of  great  moment  followed.  The  revolution 
of  1848  emancipated  Piedmont,  and  brought  enlargement  to  the  ancient 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

Church  of  the  Waldenses.  The  War  of  Independence  in  1859  extended 
the  area  of  hberty  to  the  frontier  of  the  Papal  States.  In  1870  the  entrance 
of  the  ItaHans  into  Rome  completed  the  emancipation  of  that  land, 
and  made  it  free  from  the  Alps  to  Sicily.  In  many  of  its  cities  the 
Gospel  is  now  preached  by  missionaries  of  the  Libera  Chiesa  and  the 
Waldensian  Synod,  and  the  only  hindrance  in  the  path  of  the  evangelisa- 
tion of  Italy  is  the  indifference  of  the  people,  and  the  power  of  super- 
stition, whose  moral  yoke  still  remains  although  its  political  fetters  have 
been  rent. 

A  second  object  of  the  Continental  Missions  Committee  is  the  supply 
of  ordinances  in  summer  in  those  places  which  are  the  resort  of  English 
and  American  travellers,  and  all  the  year  through  where  there  are  Scotch 
and  English  residents  in  connection  with  health  or  business.  A  third 
object  is  the  assistance  of  native  churches  in  Continental  lands.  This  is 
the  most  important  of  all.  These  Churches  have  their  roots  in  the  past, 
and  are  more  likely  to  take  hold  of  the  sympathies,  and  to  adapt  them- 
selves to  the  feelings  of  the  native  population  than  churches  of  foreign 
importation.  Chief  among  these  is  the  Waldensian  Church,  whose 
venerable  name  and  tragic  story  give  it  claims  which  are  unique  and  of 
most  touching  power,  not  on  Italy  only,  but  on  all  Christendom.  There 
is  the  Evangelical  Society  of  Geneva,  which  recalls  the  name  of  the 
greatest  champion  of  the  Reformation,  and  the  memory  of  a  Church 
which  was  the  light  of  the  sixteenth  century.  And,  not  to  mention 
other  Churches  and  Societies  which  are  aided  by  the  Continental 
Committee  of  the  Free  Church,  there  is  France,  whose  religious  con- 
dition at  this  hour  is  more  full  of  promise  than  it  has  ever  been  since 
the  period  of  the  Reformation.  It  was  the  mob  of  Parrs  that  effected 
the  first  turning  of  the  tide  against  Protestantism  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  and  now  the  Gospel  is  beginning  at  the  point  where  it  was 
stopped  three  centuries  ago.  It  is  finding  its  most  attentive  listeners 
and  its  most  earnest  converts  among  the  ouvriers  of  the  great  cities.    We 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

refer  to  the  Belleville  Mission  in  Paris.  Prosperous  from  the  beginning, 
and  growing  more  so  as  it  advances,  that  Mission  is  filling  Paris  with 
evangelical  stations ;  it  is  awaking  the  sweet  voice  of  psalms  where  the 
Marseillaise  was  wont  to  be  defiantly  pealed  forth,  and  is  planting  its  out- 
stations  here  and  there  throughout  the  country  in  the  provincial  towns. 
It  is  a  new  revolution,  led  on  by  Mr  M'All  and  Miss  de  Broen,  in  which 
no  barricades  with  the  Tricolour  waving  over  them  play  their  part,  but 
an  open  banner,  held  peacefully  aloft,  with  the  motto  "The  Word  of  God" 
inscribed  upon  it,  is  seen  floating  over  the  little  army  which  marches 
onward  to  storm  the  true  bastile  of  the  French  people — the  Papacy. 

If  the  quarter  in  which  and  the  classes  among  whom  this  evangelical 
movement  has  arisen  remind  us  by  contrast  of  the  early  days  of  the 
French  Reformation,  the  following  incident  suggests,  not  by  contrast  but 
resemblance,  another  passage  in  the  same  history.  Our  readers  may 
recollect  that  in  the  very  dawn  of  the  Reformation  in  Paris,  the  Louvre 
was  opened  for  a  short  while  under  the  patronage  of  Margaret  of  Navarre 
for  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  and,  day  after  day,  its  halls  were  crowded 
with  nobles  and  burgesses  listening  with  eager  attention  to  the  words  of 
Roussell  unfolding  to  them  the  message  of  life.  We  have  something 
like  a  repetition  of  this.  "  While  their  own  place  of  worship  is  being 
rebuilt,"  writes  Dr  Pressense  of  Paris,  "  the  Minister  of  Public  Works,  with 
the  consent  of  the  Minister  of  Public  Instruction,  granted  accommodation 
to  the  Protestants  luithiii  the  palace  of  Versailles.  A  large  audience 
assembled  (2nd  November,  1879)  on  the  first  occasion  of  meeting  in  this 
unwonted  place.  '  French  Protestantism,'  writes  one  who  was  present, 
'  made  its  solemn  entry  into  the  palace  of  the  king,  .  .  .  and  the  Gospel 
proclamation  resounded  through  the  chamber  of  Louis  XIV.,  not  far  from 
the  room  in  which  in  171 5  the  great  king  breathed  his  last.'"  The  same 
witness  of  this  extraordinary  scene  adds,  "  When  we  heard  the  Bible  and 
Huguenot  Liturgj-  read  in  that  building,  where  in  an  upper  room  Madame 
dc  Maintcnon  had  made  Louis  XIV.  sisjn  the  revocation  of  the  Edict  of 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

Nantes,  nearly  two  hundred  years  ago,  we  were  profoundly  moved,  and 
blessed  God  from  the  depth  of  our  hearts." 

As  a  further  proof  that  war  and  revolution,  and  the  sufferings  conse- 
quent thereon,  are  gaining  their  end  in  the  ripening  of  the  fields  of  France, 
I\I.  Pressens(^  says  of  the  town  of  St.  Juste,  in  the  Department  of  the 
Oise,  "  that  there  are  1 500  persons  manifesting  the  keenest  interest  in 
the  Gospel.  It  seems  as  if  the  entire  town  would  pass  over  in  a  body, 
with  the  Mayor  at  its  head,  to  the  Protestant  Church.  Similar 
conditions  exist  in  many  other  parts  of  the  country." 

Another  auspicious  sign  of  the  times  is  the  acceptance  which  the 
evangelistic  labours  of  Dr  Somerville  have  met  with  among  Frenchmen 
and  Italians.  The  simple  Gospel,  with  no  adornment  of  rhetoric  or  rite, 
nay,  told  under  no  common  disadvantages,  finds  crowds  of  impressed 
listeners.  "The  Reverend  Dr  Somerville,"  say  the  Committee  in  their 
report  for  the  present  year  (1880),  "preaching  in  English  and  translated 
sentence  by  sentence,  addressed  for  months  together  during  the  past 
j-car,  in  the  metropolis  (of  France),  and  in  various  leading  cities  and 
towns,  crowded  churches  and  halls,  the  listeners  in  thousands  drinking 
in  the  truth,  and  beseeching  that  these  words  might  again  be  spoken 
to  them.  ...  At  Florence,  Naples,  and  Rome,  large  theatres,  hired  for 
the  purpose,  have  been  filled  with  calm,  attentive,  and  earnest  audiences 
of  all  ranks  of  people,  to  whom  the  simple  Gospel,  interestingly  enforced 
and  illustrated,  seemed  strangely  good  news." 

Still,  with  all  these  presages  of  coming  good,  the  reflection  must  force 
itself  on  many  minds  that  the  evangelisation  of  Europe  in  the  nineteenth 
century  is  slow  compared  with  its  rate  of  progress  in  the  sixteenth. 
The  greater  part  of  Italy  for  now  twenty  years,  and  all  of  it  absolutely 
for  ten  years,  has  been  open  for  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  and  yet 
how  little  way  has  it  advanced  towards  spiritual  emancipation !  In  the 
course  of  a  decade,  Germany,  in  the  days  of  Luther,  had  triumphantly 
fought  its  way  out  of  the  Papacy,  though  menaced  with  the  ban  and 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  armies  of  the  Empire.  Italy  still  lingers  in  its  prison-house,  though 
neither  stake  nor  dungeon  bars  its  escape.  Why  is  this?  Why  do 
these  nations  linger  in  darkness  and  seem  in  love  with  their  chains  ?  The 
populations  which  responded  so  promptly  to  the  call  of  the  Reformation 
in  the  sixteenth  century  were  just  as  blinded,  as  superstitious,  and  as 
immoral  as  those  which  in  our  day  remain  obdurately  deaf,  and  are  so 
hard  to  be  won.  For  this  difference  there  is,  we  may  be  sure,  a  cause. 
The  latter  class  of  nations,  those  even  that  are  to  this  day  in  the 
Roman  pale,  entered  not  in  when  the  door  was  open.  Not  only  did 
they  slight  the  call  given  them  to  escape,  while  yet  it  was  possible,  from 
a  society  on  which,  as  they  were  warned,  God  was  about  to  pour  the 
vials  of  His  wrath,  but  they  stoned  the  messengers  sent  to  them  ;  and 
they  sealed  their  impenitency  in  the  blood  of  thousands  and  tens  of 
thousands  of  martyrs.  God's  Spirit  ceased  to  strive.  Nor  can  we  hope 
that  that  Spirit  will  return, — drops  we  may  have,  but  not  the  great  shower 
— till  judgment  has  been  done  on  her  in  whose  skirts  this  blood  shall 
be  found.  While  therefore  we  labour  for  the  conversion  of  these 
unhappy  nations,  while  we  cease  not  to  send  Bibles  and  evangelists  to 
them,  let  us  not  forget  at  the  same  time  to  pray  that  this  mighty 
impediment  to  their  evangelisation  may  be  taken  out  of  the  way,  so 
that  the  work  may  go  forward,  with  a  speed  and  power  corresponding 
to  our  wishes  and  God's  promise.  This  mighty  obstruction  removed, 
there  will  come  times  of  blessedness.  The  morning  will  no  longer  tarry. 
A  Divine  influence  descending  from  the  skies  will  go  forth  in  renovating 
power  over  all  the  earth ;  everywhere  nations  will  be  seen  coming  out 
of  their  graves :  and  instead  of  sighing  and  tears  as  of  men  who  lie 
bound  in  fetters  and  dwell  in  darkness,  songs  will  be  wafted  from  eveiy 
shore,  and  a  great  shout,  as  of  those  who  have  long  struggled  but  have 
now  gotten  the  victory,  will  proclaim  the  joy  of  the  nations  over  the 
fall  of  their  great  oppressor,  and  their  own  deliverance  from  the  darkness 
in  which,  from  age  to  age,  that  oppressor  kept  them  immured. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 


CHAPTER     X. 


Z\)t  Jrcr  Cljurdj  in  Entiia ;  or,  JHar  tottf)  tl^r  grrat  paganisms 
of  tJjc  Morlti. 

^^\  T  a  time  when  revolution  and  war  were  shaking  the  Continent  of 
■J^^  Europe,  and  convulsing  the  Popish  nations,  the  evangelistic  and 
missionarj-  forces  were  beginning  to  stir  in  the  Protestant  Churches  and 
countries  of  Christendom.  Awakening,  after  long  slumber,  to  a  con- 
sciousness of  her  duty  towards  the  heathen,  the  Church  of  God  in  Great 
Britain  had  her  attention  drawn,  earliest  of  all  the  countries,  to  India. 
That  land  exerted  a  powerful  influence  on  the  imagination,  but  it  exerted 
a  yet  more  powerful  and  sacred  influence  on  a  diviner  faculty,  even  the 
conscience.  Its  fabled  riches  and  storied  magnificence,  its  moulder- 
ing pagodas  and  solemn  mausolea — hoar  monuments  of  its  vanished 
grandeur  and  departed  power — its  customs  and  institutions,  whose 
beginnings  are  lost  in  the  darkness  of  a  remote  antiquity,  the  mountains 
that  fill  its  sky,  the  loftiest  on  the  globe,  and  the  rivers  that  water  its 
plains,  the  greatest  in  the  old  world,  invested  India  with  a  charm  that 
dazzled  the  senses  ;  but  its  moral  condition — the  night  that  had  so  long 
brooded  over  it,  the  hideous  forms  of  its  gigantic  idolatries,  and  the 
temporal  and  spiritual  misery  in  which  its  millions  were  sunk,  made  it 
speak  with  a  more  affecting  emphasis  to  the  heart  and  soul.  But  that 
which  gave  to  India  its  peculiar  claim  on  the  Churches  of  Great  Britain, 
was  that  its  people  owned  the  sway  of  the  same  sovereign  with  ourselves, 
they  were  our  fellow-subjects,  and  if  bound  to  send  the  Gospel  to  all 
lands  where  the  name  of  Jesus  was  yet  unknown,  surely  we  were  bound 
to  send  it,  first  of  all,  to  this  land — to  India. 

In  the  year  1743,  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society  sent  out  Thomas 
and  Carey  to  India.  They  witnessed  but  little  fruit  of  their  labours, 
though  they  prosecuted  thocn  prayerfullj',  assiduously,  and  in  faith.    The 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

chief  missionary  labour  of  Carey  was  the  translation  of  the  New 
Testament  into  the  Bengali  language,  which  was  published  in  India  in 
iSoi.  The  London  Missionary  Society  in  1804,  and  the  Scottish 
Missionary  Society  in  1822,  sent  out  their  first  missionaries  to  India, 
and  from  time  to  time  followed  them  with  others,  who  planted  stations, 
opened  schools,  and  translated  the  Word  of  God  into  several  of  the 
languages  of  the  country.  Nevertheless,  the  evangelisation  of  India 
languished.  The  conversions  were  few,  and  the  hold  of  its  superstitions 
on  the  mind  of  the  natives  was  not  perceptibly  loosened.  The  Christ- 
ianisation  of  India  properly  dates  from  the  arrival  on  its  shores  in  1830 
of  Alexander  Duff. 

Duff  was  sent  out  by  the  Established  Church  of  Scotland.  There 
were  two  modes  by  which  he  might  operate  on  India.  He  could 
traverse  that  vast  country  in  his  character  of  missionary,  preaching  the 
Gospel  and  distributing  Bibles  and  tracts  in  the  villages  and  towns  as 
he  passed  on.  Of  the  seed  he  should  thus  sow,  some  little  would  take 
root  and  spring  up.  He  could  hardly  hope  in  a  field  so  vast  to  return 
and  water  that  seed,  or  watch  over  its  growth.  There  would  come  to 
be,  in  course  of  years,  a  few  converts  scattered  over  the  face  of  India, 
but  lacking  union,  they  would  be  incapable  of  combined  action.  Duff 
saw  that  by  this  method  of  evangelising  he  should  spend  all  his  days, 
and  at  the  end  of  them  have  made  no  permanent  impression  on  the 
national  mind,  nor  shaken  the  great  system  of  Hinduism. 

He  resolved,  therefore,  to  adopt  as  the  radical  principle  of  his  opera- 
tions, not  diffusion,  but  concentration.  Not  all  India,  but  a  portion  of  it 
only  would  he  aim  at  cultivating.  Not  the  whole  nation,  but  a  select 
class  would  he  seek  in  the  first  instance  to  enlighten.  He  would 
continue  to  operate  systematically  on  these  till  he  had  made  them  fit 
to  be  teachers  of  others.  Of  the  hundreds  or  thousands,  which,  year  by 
year,  he  would  bring  under  instruction,  he  should  hope  that  a  few, 
taught  of  the  Spirit  and  enlightened  by  the  Word,  might,  year  by  year. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

offer  themselves  to  carry  the  Gospel  to  their  countrymen.  From  this 
centre  the  hght  would  spread  over  all  that  dark  land.  Every  year  the 
labourers  would  multiply,  every  year  the  spiritual  vineyard  would 
enlarge,  and  this  process  would  go  on  till  all  the  fields  of  India  were 
sown  with  the  good  seed,  and  that  magnificent  country  had  become  the 
Lord's. 

In  July  1830,  Dr  Duff  opened  a  school  in  Calcutta.  The  score  or  so 
of  Hindu  youths  that  took  their  seats  on  its  benches  on  the  opening 
day  had,  before  a  week  passed,  grown  into  hundreds.  There  was 
now,  in  short,  a  numerous  and  flourishing  institution  on  the  English 
model,  in  the  capital  of  Bengal.  The  young  Brahmins  were  thirsting 
to  be  taught,  they  were  eager  especially  to  acquire  the  English  tongue. 
Not  less  eager  was  their  teacher  to  make  them  proficients  in  that  tongue, 
but  along  with  the  English  there  came  to  the  Hindu  mind  the  unveiling 
of  a  new  world.  The  English  language  was  the  key  that  admitted  them 
into  the  whole  circle  of  the  literature,  the  science,  and  the  religion  of 
Europe.  This  result,  although  not  foreseen  by  the  Hindus,  was  what  the 
missionary  had  reckoned  upon. 

The  sacred  books  of  the  Brahmins,  as  is  well  known,  contain  a  system 
of  philosophy  and  a  system  of  religion,  inseparably  conjoined  and  blended. 
The  two  claim  the  same  Divine  origin,  plead  the  same  infallible 
authority,  and  must,  by  consequence,  stand  or  fall  together.  This  will 
prepare  us  for  the  crisis  that  eventually  ensued  in  the  classes  of  the 
Institution  of  Calcutta.  The  astronomy  of  Newton  and  La  Place  had 
exploded  the  astronomy  of  the  Brahmins.  But  the  disaster,  for  so  did  it 
appear  to  the  Hindus,  did  not  end  with  the  overthrow  of  the  Brahmini- 
cal  astronomy,  the  Brahminical  theology,  which  was  mixed  up  with  and 
largely  founded  upon  it,  was  shattered  along  with  it,  and  began  to  totter 
to  its  fall. 

Of  the  youth  in  the  Institution,  the  faith  of  some  in  the  religion  of 
Brahminism  was  seriously  shaken,  in  the  case  of  others  it  was  wholly 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


uprooted,  and  in  the  case  of  a  few  the  doubts  and  convictions  thus 
awakened  ripened  into  a  firm  belief  in  the  truth  of  Christianity  and  a 
cordial  acceptance  of  the  Gospel.  But  the  change  extended  far  beyond 
the  walls  of  the  Institution  and  the  city  of  Calcutta.  From  this  school, 
in  a  few  years,  came  forth  a  body  of  educated  natives,  familiar  with  the 
English  Scriptures,  and  this  new  race  diffused  around  them,  in  the  offices 
and  relations  they  came  afterwards  to  fill,  a  healthy  influence,  which 
began  to  leaven  public  opinion,  and  to  undermine,  as  we  shall  afterwards 
find,  the  foundations  of  those  systems  which  had  stood  for  so  many  ages, 
their  truth  unquestioned  and  their  power  dominant,  that  the  Brahmins 
believed  that  they  would  stand  unshaken  to  all  time. 

More  labourers  were  required  to  carry  on  with  efficiency  a  scheme  of 
operations,  the  value  of  which  had  been  well  tested,  and  the  sphere  of 
which  was  continually  widening.  In  the  second  year  of  his  Indian 
career  Dr  Duff  was  joined  by  several  ordained  missionaries  from  Scot- 
land, who  shared  his  labours  in  the  Institution,  among  whom  was  Dr 
Thomas  Smith,  now  his  successor  in  the  chair  of  Evangelistic  Theology. 
Not  only  so;  in  1835  an  institution  similar  to  that  at  Calcutta  was 
established  at  Bombay,  under  the  presidency  of  the  Rev.  Dr  John 
Wilson,  who  had  come  out  to  India  some  years  previously  under  the 
direction  of  the  Scottish  Missionary  Society.  And  in  1837  a  third  insti- 
tution, also  on  the  plan  of  that  at  Calcutta,  was  established  at  Madras 
under  the  direction  of  the  Rev.  John  Anderson.  Such  was  the  machinery 
in  action  in  India  when  the  Disruption  came  upon  the  Church  at  home. 

Of  all  the  Committees  of  the  Church  the  Foreign  Missions  Committee 
had  the  largest  sum  in  hand  when  the  Disruption  took  place.  That 
event  made  these  funds  the  legal  property  of  those  who  remained  with 
the  Establishment.  The  Free  Church  Committee  was  now  the  owner  of 
but  an  empty  treasury.  Every  penny  had  they  lost.  Nevertheless,  they 
remained  the  heirs  of  three  valuable  possessions,  any  one  of  which  was 
really  of  more  value  than  all  the  money  that  was  gone.    T\\q.  first  was  the 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

missionary  spirit ;  the  second  was  the  missionary  staff,  every  member  of 
which,  without  one  exception,  remained  with  the  Free  Church  ;  and  the 
l/iird  was  the  liberality  of  the  people,  which  would  speedily  replace  in  the 
exhausted  treasury  an  equal,  and,  it  might  be,  a  larger  sum  than  that 
which  had  left  it.  The  Free  Church,  therefore,  at  its  first  Assembly,  though 
ignorant  as  yet  at  what  decision,  as  betwixt  the  two  Churches,  the  foreign 
missionaries  might  arrive,  resolved  to  prosecute  with  unabated  vigour 
her  great  foreign  enterprise. 

At  the  Glasgow  Assembly  in  October  the  Moderator  was  able  to 
announce  the  adherence  of  ten  out  of  the  thirteen  missionaries  in  India 
to  the  Free  Church,  viz.,  those  in  Calcutta  and  Bombay.  The  delay  in 
obtaining  the  decision  of  the  brethren  at  Madras  was  owing  to  no  hesi- 
tation on  their  part,  but  solely  to  a  disaster  that  befell  the  ship  that 
carried  their  letter  to  Scotland.     On  the  loth  of  July  they  had  emitted  j 

and  despatched  their  adherence,  but  the  Menou,  which  carried  the  mails, 
sunk  in  a  storm  in  the  Red  Sea.  A  band  of  divers,  some  time  after, 
descended  to  the  wreck,  brought  up  the  mail-bags,  and  the  document  of 
the  missionaries,  in  a  dilapidated  state,  was  received  on  the  17th  of  Nov- 
ember, after  being  some  months  at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean.  We  need 
not  add  that  it  is  carefully  preserved.  The  reception  of  the  Madras 
letter  completed  the  adherence  of  the  Indian  missionaries,  and,  along 
with  them,  there  passed  over  to  the  Free  Church  all  the  native  assistants, 
as  did  also  the  whole  body  of  pupils  and  students  in  the  head  institu- 
tions and  in  the  branch  schools  which  had  been  planted  in  the  towns 
lying  around  the  capitals  of  the  three  Presidencies. 

As  in  Scotland,  so  too  in  India,  all  the  financial  resources  and 
material  appliances  for  carrying  on  the  Mission  had  been  swept  away, 
and  this  department  had  to  be  built  up  again  from  the  foundation. 
The  Institution  buildings  at  Calcutta  and  Bombay,  the  valuable  libraries, 
the  costly  scientific  apparatus,  and  the  scholarships  were  all  retained 
by   the    Establishment.      The    money   value   of    this    property,   which 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

had  been  created  chiefly  by  the  efforts  of  Drs  Duff  and  Wilson,  was 
estimated  at  some  ^20,000.  The  sacrifice  was  submitted  to.  The 
missionary  spirit  being  intensified  thereby,  the  damage  inflicted  on  the 
material  machinery  of  the  mission  was  speedily  repaired  ;  the  empty 
treasury  was  filled  afresh.  New  and  equally  commodious  Institution 
buildings  arose  to  replace  those  which  had  been  lost.  The  crowd  of 
students  which  occupied  the  benches  of  the  Institutions  was  greater 
than  ever  ;  and  the  work  inside  the  Institution  walls  and  outside  at  the 
preaching  stations  went  on  with  continuity  unbroken  and  vigour 
unabated.  Let  us  trace  briefly  the  steady  progress  of  the  Mission  to 
what  it  has  now  grown  to. 

The  annual  revenue  of  the  Indian  Mission  at  the  outset  was  ;^I200. 
"Instead  of  twelve  hundred  it  ought  to  be  twelve  thousand,"  wrote 
Duff  to  Dr  Inglis,  the  Convener  of  the  Foreign  Missions  Committee. 
Read  in  the  then  cold  missionary  atmosphere  of  Scotland,  these  seemed 
the  words  of  one  beside  himself  "Is  the  man  mad?"  wrote  the 
Convener  on  the  margin  of  the  letter  which  contained  this  astounding 
proposition.  Not  many  years  thereafter  this  seeming  extravagance  was 
converted  into  an  actual  reality.  Failing  health  compelled  Duff  in  1835 
to  seek  the  restorative  influence  of  his  native  air.  During  the  years  he 
spent  at  home,  he  visited  all  the  cities  and  parishes  of  Scotland,  and 
thrilled  his  audiences  by  his  impassioned  appeals  on  behalf  of  India. 
It  was  Duff  who  was  the  first  to  make  that  great  country  really  known 
to  the  people  of  Scotland.  They  knew  that  it  existed,  for  they  had 
seen  its  place  on  the  map,  but  that  was  nearly  all  they  knew  about  it. 
It  was  Duff  that  enabled  them  to  realise  its  vast  extent,  the  inexhaustible 
riches  of  its  soil,  the  stupendous  grandeur  of  its  scenery,  the  foul  and 
revolting  superstitions  with  which  it  was  darkened,  and  the  moral  and 
spiritual  ruin  in  which  its  millions  lay  whelmed  and  perishing.  These 
pictures,  rich  and  glowing  like  the  land  they  portrayed,  never  left  the 
memories  of  those  who  had  listened   to  the  great  missionary  orator. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

India  was  no  longer  to  them  a  mere  name,  a  figuration  on  tlie  map, 
Ij'ing  within  certain  degrees  of  latitude  and  longitude  ;  it  was  a  real  land, 
it  was  the  abode  of  human  interests  and  passions  ;  it  was,  alas  1  a  land 
of  darkness ;  it  was  a  vast  prison-house  in  which  millions  of  wretched 
bondmen  were  shut  up,  and,  unpiticd  and  unhelped,  lay  groaning  in  the 
fetters  of  the  strongest  of  all  the  Paganisms.  The  people  of  Scotland 
could  now  sympathise  with  the  Hindu  nations  because  they  could  now 
realise  them.  The  fountains  of  their  compassion,  and  by  consequence 
of  their  liberality,  were  opened,  and  by  the  time  that  Duff  had  ended 
his  visitation  of  Scotland,  and  was  ready  to  sail  for  India,  the  year's 
income  of  the  Foreign  Missions  from  Scotland  had  been  raised  to  the 
impossible  sum — as  it  had  been  deemed  only  a  few  j-ears  before — 
of  £12,000. 

This  income  was  cut  down,  was  annihilated  as  we  have  seen  b)-  the 
Disruption.  The  Free  Church  started  a  second  time  in  this  great 
enterprise  with  ;^300  in  its  treasury.  But  the  sum  was  soon  enlarged 
by  the  liberality  of  her  people.  Notwithstanding  that  the  Free  Church 
had  on  her  hands  the  manifold  herculean  labours  of  reorganisation,  she 
was  enabled  in  this  the  first  year  of  her  existence  to  give  £6^0^  to  the 
India  Missions,  which  was  more  than  half  what  the  unbroken  Church  had 
contributed  in  its  best  year.  Three  great  missionary  centres,  as  we  have 
seen,  had  been  established  in  India ;  to  these  a  fourth  was  now  added. 
The  first  three  were  planted  on  the  coast,  the  fourth  was  set  down 
in  the  centre  of  India,  at  Nagpore,  and  the  Rev.  Stephen  Hislop  was 
called  to  preside  over  it.  It  was  resolved,  over  and  above  this  extension 
of  the  field  in  India,  to  enlarge  the  sphere  of  the  Foreign  Missions  so  as 
to  embrace  all  our  dependencies  not  already  included  in  the  Colonial 
Scheme.  South  Africa  was  now  added  to  the  Foreign  Mission  field. 
This  multiplication  of  stations,  and  by  consequence  of  labourers,  left  the 
annual  income  inadequate  for  the  inevitably  increased  expenditure. 
Dr  Duff  was  summoned  home  a  second  time  to  revive  the  missionary' 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

spirit.  His  appeals  were  not  less  eloquent,  and  his  success  not  less 
great  than  on  occasion  of  his  earlier  visit.  In  room  of  church-door 
collections — the  method  by  which  the  fund  hitherto  had  mainly  been 
supported — he  substituted  in  many  cases  congregational  associations, 
with  quarterly  collections,  and  so  placed  the  income  on  a  less  fluctuating 
and  uncertain  basis.  In  1851-52  it  was  ;i^io,9ii,or  rather  more  than 
^4000  above  the  point  at  which  it  stood  in  1844.  In  1855-56  it  had 
risen  to  ^14,219.  In  1873-74  to  .£'19,959;  and  in  1877-78  to  ^24,006, 
its  highest  point.  The  year  1879  was  the  fiftieth  of  the  existence  of  the 
Foreign  Mission  Scheme.  Its  Jubilee  year  was  not  financially  its  best, 
the  revenue  showing  a  recess  of  ^727,  a  circumstance  doubtless  attribut- 
able to  the  commercial  calamities  of  that  year.  There  is  ground  for 
believing,  however,  that  the  annual  income  of  the  Foreign  Missions 
will  soon  and  permanently  rise  to  what  it  was  in  1879, — and,  it  may 
be,  mount  higher,  seeing  its  normal  condition  since  1843  has  been  that 
of  progress. 

The  income  is  growing  richer,  the  labourers  are  becoming  more 
numerous,  and  the  field  is  widening,  but  what  of  the  harvest?  Do  any 
fruits  appear?  After  long  centuries  of  neglect,  and  but  one  short  half 
century  of  labour,  are  we  entitled  to  speak  of  the  harvest  ?  Is  it  not 
greatly  too  soon  ?  It  is  matter  of  profound  thankfulness  to  God  that 
already,  though  we  have  hardly  done  more  than  begun  to  sow,  a  few  ripe 
ears — presage  of  the  future  harvest — have  been  gathered — some  sheaves 
have  been  carried  home.  Confining  our  view  meanwhile  to  the  Indian 
portion  of  the  vast  field,  let  us  note  the  general  results,  chiefly  of  a 
preparatory  kind,  which  have  been  achieved.  The  India  of  to-day  is  not 
the  India  of  fifty  years  ago.  There  is  now  motion  in  the  heavy  stagnant 
moveless  atmosphere  that  then  brooded  over  it.  There  is  a  loosening  in 
the  foundations  of  Hinduism  :  it  begins  to  be  mistrusted  and  doubted  by 
multitudes  of  the  natives.  Their  Shasters,  or  holy  books,  are  read  with 
less  submission  to  their  teaching.     The    Brahmin  speaks  with  a   dim- 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

inislicd  authority.  The  festivals  have  been  shorn  of  half  their  pomp, 
and  their  annual  celebration  is  attended  by  decreasing  crowds.  Many  of 
the  cruel  and  horrible  rites  of  their  superstition  have  ceased  to  be  prac- 
tised :  Suttee  has  been  abolished,  female  infanticide  suppressed.  The 
widow,  instead  of  being  compelled  to  immolate  herself  on  the  funeral 
pile  of  her  husband,  is  free  to  re-marry ;  and  the  Hindu  mother,  on  the 
festival  day  in  January,  no  longer  throws  her  infant  into  the  Ganges  as 
an  offering  to  the  goddess  Gunga  :  she  throws  a  cocoanut  into  the  stream 
in  room  of  her  child. 

The  fetters  of  caste  are  being  thrown  off.  The  holy  stream  of  the 
Ganges  is  beginning  to  lose  its  virtue.  In  short,  Brahminism  has  been 
shattered,  and  that  whole  system  of  society  which  was  reared  on  this 
basis  has  been  shattered  along  with  it,  and  gives  signs  of  passing  away. 
An  ever-growing  stream  of  educated  youth  is  being  poured  into  the 
nation  through  the  Missionary  Institutions  and  Government  Colleges. 
These  bring  with  them  Western  ideas,  which,  with  steady  and  irresistible 
force,  are  displacing  the  time-honoured,  but  also  time-worn  prejudices 
and  traditions  of  the  Indian  world,  and  bearing  down  Shaster  and 
temple.  Brahmin  and  Fakir,  with  the  whole  system  of  delusion, 
demoralisation,  and  misery  of  which  they  are  the  pillars,  into  the  grave. 
"  Not  in  all  history,"  says  a  truly  competent  and  trustworthy  witness, 
Dr  George  Smith,  in  his  valuable  tractate,  Fifty  Years  of  Foreign 
Missions,  "is  there  a  record  of  such  a  spiritual  and  intellectual  revolution 
as  these  fifty  years  have  witnessed  in  India,  north  and  south." 

But  fruits  still  more  precious  begin  to  appear.  It  is  not  a  new 
social  India  only  that  is  coming  into  view.  A  Christian  India  is  rising 
to  reward  the  missionary,  and  to  change  a  past  of  darkness  and  bondage 
to  the  millions  of  that  land,  into  a  future  of  light  and  freedom.  This 
was  the  one  grand  ultimate  result  contemplated  from  the  beginning  by 
the  founders  of  the  India  Mission.  They  adopted  the  educational 
method  as  the  best  for  arriving  at  this  great  end,  which  they  knew, 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

working  on  these  lines,  they  would  reach,  not  immediately,  but  after  the 
lapse  of  years,  but  surely  in  the  end.  Accordingly,  their  teaching  has 
all  along  been  largely  impregnated  with  religious  truth.  It  was  not 
literature  and  science  only  in  which  they  initiated  the  youth  which 
enrolled  themselves  by  thousands  in  their  institutions  and  schools,  they 
took  care  also  to  instruct  them  in  the  evidences  of  Christianity,  and  the 
principles  of  Evangelical  religion.  The  results  of  this  method  of  operating 
have  been  threefold : — First,  there  has  issued  from  the  halls  of  the 
institutions  a  class  of  youths  whose  faith  in  Brahminism,  and  in  all 
religion  along  with  it,  has  been  destroyed.  They  are  sceptics.  Second, 
there  are  others  who  have  not  only  cast  off  their  belief  in  Hinduism,  but 
have  become  convinced  of  the  truth  and  divinity  of  Christianity.  They 
are  believers,  though  not  converted  men.  Third,  there  is  a  class  who 
have  felt  the  saving  influence  of  Christianity  on  their  hearts.  The 
Spirit  working  along  with  their  instructors,  has  convinced  them  of  sin, 
and  they  have  come  to  the  Saviour.  They  are  true  Christians.  From 
this  select  class  the  Free  Church  has  been  able  to  gather  a  small  but 
choice  band  of  preachers,  for  the  great  work  of  India's  evangelisation  ; 
which  it  was  foreseen  from  the  first,  though  necessarily  begun  by  ordained 
missionaries  from  Scotland,  must  be  taken  up  and  carried  forward  by 
truly  converted  and  thoroughly  qualified  native  preachers,  who  know 
the  feelings  and  habits,  and  speak  the  tongue  of  their  countrymen.  It 
is  worth  all  the  labour  which  has  been  bestowed  to  know  that  at  length 
the  Free  Church  has  such  a  body  of  preachers  in  her  service  in  India, 
and  that  in  course  of  time,  by  the  means  now  in  operation,  this  Evan- 
gelical army  will  be  irKreased  an  hundredfold,  and  not  a  village  or 
district  but  will  be  visited  by  them,  and  the  Gospel  preached  through- 
out the  whole  of  that  mighty  realm,  and  then  India  shall  be  the  Lord's. 
Half-a-century  ago  India  was  closed  by  its  own  unbroken  prejudices ; 
in  vain  would  the  messengers  of  salvation  have  gone  forth  into  it.  But 
the  ground  has  since  been  prepared,  inveterate  and  hostile  beliefs  have 


HIS  TO  RICA  L  SKE  TCH. 

been  shattered,  and  these  bearers  of  "good  tidings"  now  go  forth  at  the 
right  moment  "to  proclaim  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are 
bound." 

Since  1850-55,  this  method  of  operation — namely,  by  native  preachers, 
has  been  in  use;  that  is,  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.  In  1856,  the  Free 
Church  had  at  least  nine  native  ministers  able  to  proclaim  in  some  of 
the  Indian  tongues  "the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  Among  her 
agents  were  Mohammedans,  Parsees,  and  Hindus.  In  Hindustani,  in 
Guzerati,  in  Mahratti,  in  Tamil,  in  Teluga,  and  in  several  other  dialects 
of  India  the  Gospel  has  been  and  is  being  preached.  On  Sabbaths,  and 
throughout  the  week,  thousands  of  adults  are  hearing  the  glad  tidings 
in  village  after  village,  and  bungalow  after  bungalow.  The  steps  of 
some  pagoda  perhaps  form  a  pulpit,  and  the  shadow  of  the  idol,  it  may 
be,  serves  as  a  canopy  for  the  preacher.  At  times  in  the  early  dawn, 
at  other  times  in  the  brilliant  light  of  an  Eastern  moon,  do  the  mission- 
aries go  forth  and  gather  the  natives  round  them,  and  seek  to  guide 
them  to  Him  who  is  "  the  True  Light." 

It  does  not  follow  that  because  only  a  select  few  of  our  Indian 
Christian  converts  become  preachers  that  the  rest  are  lost  to  the  public 
service  of  the  Gospel.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  utilised  as  teachers, 
catechists,  or  as  private  members  of  the  native  congregations,  with 
which  India  in  now  beginning  to  be  dotted.  In  one  capacity  or  another 
these  now  numerous  converts  serve  in  the  great  Christian  army,  and 
contribute  each  his  modicum  of  influence  to  help  forward  and  consum- 
mate that  mightiest  and  most  beneficent  of  all  revolutions  now  in  pro- 
gress in  India — the  substitution  of  Hinduism  by  the  blessed  Gospel. 

Since  the  year  named  above,  it  has  been  the  aim  of  both  the  Church 
at  home  and  the  missionaries  abroad  to  give  prominence  to  the 
evangelistic  over  the  educational  in  the  India  Mission  by  planting 
preaching  stations  throughout  the  country,  and  nourishing  them  up  into 
congregations,  which  might  ultimately  become  self-supporting.     This  is 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

but  the  orderly  development  of  the  system  as  planned  at  first,  even  that 
of  gradual  extension  outwards  in  all  directions  from  a  common  centre. 
In  carrying  this  expansion  into  effect,  the  method  pursued  has  been  to 
begin  by  planting  in  the  district  fixed  upon  a  school  for  anglo-vernacular 
education,  conducted  by  native  converts.  At  these  stations,  the  time 
and  strength  of  the  catechists  and  preachers  have  been  nearly  equally 
divided  between  instructing  the  young  in  the  school  and  preaching  to 
the  adult  population  at  their  homes,  or  in  the  villages,  or  in  the 
market-places.  Whenever  at  any  of  these  out-stations  conversions  by 
God's  grace  are  multiplied  so  as  to  permit  of  a  congregation  being 
constituted,  the  native  flock  is  placed  under  a  native  shepherd,  and  the 
evangelistic  now  merges  into  the  pastoral.  As  soon  as  the  evangelisa- 
tion of  the  district  has  been  placed  on  that  footing,  the  missionaries  are 
left  free  to  advance  with  their  apparatus  of  means  and  labourers  into  the 
regions  beyond.  It  has  pleased  Him  who  waters  and  causeth  to  grow 
what  His  servants  plant,  to  bless  their  efforts.  The  seed  sown  at  the 
four  central  institutions  in  India  has  in  each  case  grown  into  a  sapling, 
and  that  sapling  has  expanded  into  a  tree  with  outspreading  branches, 
like  the  banyan  tree  of  the  same  land,  celebrated  by  Milton  as — 

"  Spreading  her  arms. 
Branching  so  broad  and  long,  that  in  the  ground 
The  bended  t^vigs  took  root,  and  daughters  grow 
About  the  mother  tree,  a  pillared  shade." 

"The  Church's  native  congregations  of  baptised  heathen,"  says 
Dr  G.  Smith,  in  his  "  Fifty  Years  of  Foreign  Missions,"  "  now  number 
twenty-eight,  with  3500  communicants,  and  4100  baptised  adherents, 
besides  800  catechumens,  all  under  their  own  'called'  or  native  ministers." 
There  are  thirty-one  mission-stations.  At  and  from  these  centres  forty 
missionaries  evangelise.  Of  these,  twenty-one  are  ordained  ministers 
from  Scotland,  three  are  medical  graduates,  and  the  remaining  sixteen 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

arc  native  preachers.  This  mission-staff  directs  20S  Christian  workers 
of  all  grades,  English  and  vernacular.  This  evangelistic  army  of  248 
is  assisted  by  234  teachers.  These  being  not  yet  Christian,  though  under 
Christian  influence,  labour  in  the  secular  work  of  the  Mission,  making  a 
total  agency  of  482. 

Each  of  the  four  parent  institutions  has  a  numerous  retinue  of 
branch  schools  distributed  throughout  the  surrounding  villages.  Accord- 
ing to  the  latest  returns,  these,  along  with  the  Anglo-vernacular  schools 
had  an  attendance  of  4268  male  pupils.  In  vernacular  and  Anglo- 
vernacular  schools  for  girls,  there  were  2570  scholars,  making  a  total  of 
6S38  pupils  in  the  Indian  Mission  Schools. 

Still  wider  is  the  field  over  which  the  Free  Church  operates  through 
its  Foreign  Missions  Committee.  Since  the  origination  of  the  greatest 
of  its  missions,  which  undoubtedly  is  India,  with  its  250,000,000  of 
British  subjects,  other  territories,  of  no  mean  size,  have  been  added 
to  its  already  vast  domain.  These  are  Syria,  South  Africa,  and,  more 
recently,  Melanesia,  or  "New  Hebrides."  As  regards  Syria,  most 
interesting  it  is  to  aid  in  carrying  back  the  Gospel  to  its  early  home,  but 
the  American  Presbyterian  Church  have  so  long  and  so  successfully  evan- 
gelised in  Palestine  as  to  have  made  the  field  in  a  sense  their  own,  and 
the  Free  Church,  feeling  that  its  evangelisation  could  not  be  in  better 
hands,  aims  at  acting  in  concert  with  their  American  brethren,  and  has 
only  two  agents  in  Syria,  the  one  an  ordained  missionary,  the  other  a 
medical  missionary  and  teacher,  both  acting  in  the  Lebanon. 

Africa  comes  next ;  equal  to  eight  Indias  in  size,  but  greatly  inferior 
to  it  in  population.  Africa  was  a  land  for  which  no  man  cared. 
Century  after  century  the  cloud  that  covered  it  remained  unlifted. 
Even  the  missionary  did  not  dare  to  cross  its  boundary  and  explore 
the  horrors  of  which  it  was  the  theatre.  It  was  approached  only  by 
the  slave-dealer,  who  received  his  frightful  cargo  and  retired.  But  now 
the  hour  of  Africa's  redemption  has  come.     Since  the  beginning  of  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

present  century  its  regeneration  has  gone  rapidly  on.  First,  in  1806, 
came  the  acquisition  of  the  Cape  by  British  arms ;  then  followed  its 
colonisation  by  British  settlers,  and  these  were  succeeded  by  Protestant 
missionaries.  The  Kaffrarian  Mission,  founded  by  the  Glasgow  Mission- 
ary Society  in  1 821,  was  transferred  to  the  Free  Church  the  year  after 
the  Disruption,  and  since  then,  despite  the  occasional  ravages  of  war, 
the  Mission  has  continued  to  increase  in  both  ministers  and  congregations. 
Lovedale,  its  chief  seat,  is  700  miles  north-east  of  Cape  Town.  Its 
Industrial  and  Educational  College  is  the  most  flourishing  in  all  South 
Africa.  It  has  400  students  paying  fees,  and  under  the  management  of 
the  Rev.  Dr  Stewart  it  has  become  a  model  of  such  institutions.  There 
are,  besides,  Training  schools  for  Kaffir  girls.  Its  church  is  attended 
by  2000  natives,  of  whom  570  are  communicants.  There  are  six  other 
churches,  with  their  pastors,  and  teachers,  and  Scripture  readers. 

In  1867,  the  territory  adjoining  Kaffirland  on  the  north,  namely 
Natal,  running  up  to  the  borders  of  Zululand,  was  adopted  by  the  Free 
Church  as  a  mission-field.  This  Mission  though  only  in  infancy  has  its 
three  stations,  and  small  congregations  of  Zulus,  which  are  sure  to  grow 
should  the  land  have  rest  from  war. 

The  greatest  benefactor  Africa  has  ever  seen  was  Dr  Livingstone. 
He  gave  his  life  for  it,  and  the  impulse  communicated  by  his  Christian 
heroism  has  already  led  to  marvellous  results,  and  promises  to  accomplish 
in  the  end  the  emancipation  of  the  whole  continent  from  the  darkness 
of  fetichism,  which  has  so  long  overshadowed  it,  and  the  crimes  and 
woes  of  slavery  from  which  it  has  so  long  bled.  The  consent  of  the 
Churches  and  Missionary  Societies  of  Britain  in  combination  with  its 
science  and  commerce,  for  the  Christianisation  and  civilisation  of  Africa, 
presents  a  union  as  rare  as  it  is  beautiful  of  spiritual  and  material  forces 
directed  towards  the  attainment  of  an  object  unspeakably  beneficent  and 
surpassingly  sublime,  and  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  events  of  our 
times.     It  is  to  the  honour  of  the  Free  Church  that  it  has  led  the  van 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

in  this  great  movement.  Entering  Africa  by  the  most  accessible  of  all 
the  four  or  five  possible  routes  into  the  interior — viz.,  from  the  Indian 
Ocean  by  the  Zambezi  and  the  Shird — she  has  planted  in  1875,  in  the 
heart  of  the  country,  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Nyassa,  a  mission  which  is 
at  once  a  church  and  a  colony — a  fountain  of  Evangelical  truth,  and  a 
school  of  art  and  industry.  It  is  Christian  Europe  in  miniature  trans- 
planted into  the  midst  of  fetich  Africa.  It  is  the  growth  of  long 
centuries  brought  to  the  door  of  the  poor  African,  and  offered  to  him 
as  an  immediate  possession.  We  who  have  toiled  to  achieve  it  do  not 
grudge  to  endow  with  it  this  son  of  barbarism.  We  shall  be  none  the 
poorer,  and  he  will  be  greatly  the  richer. 

In  the  Livingstonia  settlement  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Nyassa,  the 
Free  Church,  through  her  Foreign  Missions  Committee  and  the  Living- 
stonia Sub-Committee,  direct  the  spiritual  operations.  The  agricultural 
and  trading  affairs  of  the  settlement  are  under  the  direction  of  a  distinct 
and  independent  agency.  While  the  former  evangelises  the  adults, 
teaches  the  young,  and  heals  the  sick,  the  latter  instructs  the  natives  in 
the  arts  of  civilised  life,  and  especially  do  they  take  care  to  make  them 
sensible  how  much  better  it  is  to  live  by  tilling  their  own  lands  than  by 
robbing  those  of  their  neighbours,  and  how  much  more  enriching  are  the 
gains  of  honest  commerce  than  the  blood-money  of  the  slave  merchant- 
Thus  it  is  a  twofold  warfare  which  is  being  waged  from  the  central 
station  of  Livingstonia  for  the  emancipation  of  that  long  enslaved  land. 
The  one  assault  is  directed  against  the  idol-priest,  and  the  other  against 
the  man-stealer,  and  when  Africa  shall  be  rid  of  the  pollution  and 
suffering  which  these  two  vampires  have  inflicted  upon  her,  what  a 
blessed  consummation  will  be  hers  1  Then  may  be  applied  to  her,  in  a 
modified  sense,  the  symbol  by  which  the  Apocalyptist  sets  forth  the 
happy  condition  of  the  Millennial  Church,  even  that  now,  her  former 
darkness  chased  away,  there  is  in  her  "  no  night,"  and  her  slavery  rooted 
out,  there  is  in  her  "  no  more  curse." 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

The  revenue  of  the  Foreign  Missions  Committee  from  all  sources,  in 
1878-79,  amounted  to  ^45,165,  6s.  3d.  It  had  an  agency  of  393  labourers. 
Its  schools  and  colleges  were  220,  through  which  there  passes  year  by 
year  a  stream  of  15,000  youth  of  both  sexes.  This  is  exclusive  of  the 
much  larger  array  of  churches,  schools,  and  labourers  in  the  colonies. 
Into  this  goodly  army  of  pastors,  missionaries,  and  teachers,  of  congre- 
gations, institutions,  and  schools,  have  grown  the  474  men  who  consti- 
tuted their  first  Free  General  Assembly  in  Tanfield  Hall  on  the  i8th 
of  May,  1843.  Their  operations  have  opened  out  into  a  sphere  whose 
circuit  embraces  all  the  continents  and  many  of  the  islands  of  the  globe, 
and  convey  their  blessings  to  the  nations  and  kindreds,  the  peoples  and 
tongues  that  inhabit  these  vast  and  diversified  realms. 

Little  do  India  and  Africa  know  at  this  hour  what  they  owe  to  the 
men  who  have  laboured  and  died  in  the  cause  of  their  evangelisation. 
But  the  day  will  come  when  they  will  be  fully  sensible  of  the  debt. 
Through  all  the  ages  of  the  future  Africa  will  mention  with  reverence  and 
gratitude  the  name  of  Livingstone.  The  father  will  tell  the  heroic  story 
to  the  son,  as  they  sit  together,  at  eve,  beneath  the  shade  of  their  banana- 
trees,  and  look  forth  on  a  land  redeemed  by  the  Gospel  from  its  manifold 
unspeakable  woes.  In  India  too,  an  eternal  remembrance  awaits  the 
names  of  Duff  and  Wilson,  of  Anderson  and  Hislop.  When  the 
names  of  kings  and  proconsols  who  have  ruled  her  shall  have  been 
forgotten,  when  the  fame  of  her  great  battles  shall  have  faded,  and  the 
glory  of  her  heroes  have  waxed  dim,  when  Brahma  shall  have  perished 
for  ever  from  the  earth,  and  the  sanctuary  of  the  living  God  shall  rise 
where  the  idol's  obscene  fane  now  burdens  the  soil  and  pollutes  the  air, 
shining  all  down  the  ages  will  be  seen  the  names  of  those  who  first 
carried  to  the  shores  of  India  and  published  to  her  sons  "the  Gospel  of 
the  grace  of  God."  "  They  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of 
the  firmament,  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for 
ever  and  ever." 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 
CHAPTER     XI. 

®})c  %m%  at  tfjE  Centre. 

^ROM  the  humble  Hall  of  Tanfield,  where  the  Church,  driven  out 
^_  ^  from  the  State,  assembled  to  rally  and  reorganise,  we  have  seen 
her  spreading  out  on  all  sides,  covering  her  native  land  of  Scotland  with 
churches  and  schools,  planting  Highlands  and  Lowlands  with  pastors, 
reinstituting  the  order  and  discipline  of  her  courts,  framing  the  machinery 
of  her  finance — in  short,  bringing  into  vigorous  operation  that  whole 
order  of  things  which  had  existed  before  the  "fatal"  as  it  was  believed 
to  be  before  it  came — the  " aiispicmis"  as  it  was  seen  to  be  after  it  had 
passed,  i8th  of  May.  This  was  much  ;  and  they  who  beheld  it  "  were  as 
men  who  dream,"  their  hearts  were  filled  with  the  joy  of  deliverance,  and 
their  tongues  with  the  melody  of  thanksgiving,  while  it  was  said  on  every 
side,  "  What  hath  God  wrought ! "     But  this  was  only  the  beginning. 

Having  set  up  the  "  stakes  "  of  her  habitation  in  her  own  land,  she 
lengthened  her  "cords"  so  as  to  bring  within  the  sphere  of  her  operations 
countries  afar  off,  and  peoples  who  had  long  sat  in  darkness.  Her 
expatriated  sons  in  the  Colonies  she  followed  with  the  ordinances  of  the 
Gospel,  not  giving  way  for  an  hour  to  the  unbelieving  fear  that  by  this 
prodigality  her  children  at  home  should  come  to  lack  bread.  She  began 
to  grapple  with  the  Popery  of  Continental  Europe,  recognising  in  the 
Roman  apostacy  the  predicted  Antichrist,  and  the  Church's  greatest 
foe.  She  unfurled  the  banner  of  the  Cross  in  India,  and  proclaimed 
war  against  the  strongest  of  all  the  paganisms, — Hindooism.  Advanc- 
ing into  the  deep  night  of  Africa,  she  kindled  at  the  centre  of  that  vast 
continent  a  lamp  of  blessed  light,  which  will  not  cease  to  burn  till  that 
whole  land,  from  the  snowy  Atlas  to  the  storm-swept  Cape,  is  illu- 
minated, and  the  cruel  crushing  doom  which  has  so  long  pressed  upon 
its  nations  lifted  off. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES- 

But,  besides  these  great  lines  along  which  the  Free  Church  of 
Scotland  has  so  rapidly  and  powerfully  developed,  there  are  a  number 
of  side  lines — a  multitude  of  miscellaneous  schemes,  which  it  is  impos- 
sible to  include  under  any  one  category,  in  which  her  reforming  and 
evangelising  energies  have  found  vent.  These,  though  of  a  subordinate 
character,  are  nevertheless  most  important,  as  auxiliaries  to  the  great 
ecclesiastical  and  missionary  operations,  out  of  which  they  spring,  and 
to  which  they  render  support  in  return.  Some  of  these,  in  a  brief 
sketch  like  the  present,  we  cannot  even  name. 

There  are  the  following : — The  Aged  and  Infirm  Ministers'  Fund ; 
the  Widows'  and  Orphans'  Fund  ;  the  Pre-Disruption  Ministers'  Fund. 
There  is  the  Sabbath  Observance  Committee ;  there  is  the  Temperance 
Committee.  There  are  Local  Missionary  Societies,  for  supplementing 
the  resources  of  the  Church's  Committees,  or  promoting  special  objects, 
such  as  the  evangelisation  of  the  Karens,  the  Santals,  &c.  There  is 
the  Mission  to  China,  till  lately  so  closely  shut  in,  but  now  in  God's 
wonderful  providence  open  from  end  to  end.  There  are  the  Girls' 
Schools  in  Syria  and  India,  and  there  are  associations  for  the  aiding  of 
students  from  Continental  Protestant  Churches.  There  are,  moreover, 
Scholarships,  Fellowships,  and  Bursaries  for  home  students ;  there  is 
the  Welfare  of  Youth  Committee ;  there  are  Students'  Missionary  Asso- 
ciations ;  there  is  the  Church  Extension  Building  Fund,  under  the  ener- 
getic direction  of  the  Rev.  Dr  Adam ;  there  is  the  Pan-Presbyterian 
Council,  and  other  schemes  which  we  cannot  even  name.  The  amount 
of  time,  skill,  and  care  which  these  multifarious  managements  demand 
and  receive,  it  would  not  be  easy  estimating.  They  attest  the  existence 
in  the  Free  Church  of  a  liberality  which  is  not  exhausted  by  the  sums  it 
pours  year  by  year  into  the  general  treasury  of  the  Church,  but  which, 
after  replenishing  the  central  fund,  overflows  to  the  support  of  those 
subsidiary  schemes  which  we  have  enumerated.  These  form  a  most 
gratifying  proof  of  the  vitalities  and  energies  unceasingly  at  work  in 


HIS  TO  RICA  L  Sk'E  TCH. 

the  Free  Church,  seeking  to  plant  yet  more  deeply  in  Scotland,  and 
to  spread  wider  and  yet  wider  over  the  earth,  the  kingdom  of  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

Having  surveyed  the  mechanism  and  seen  how  steady  its  working, 
and  how  vast  the  sweep  of  its  operations,  let  us,  before  closing,  take  our 
stand  a  moment  at  the  centre.  What  do  we  there  behold?  At  the  centre 
of  this  spiritual  organisation  we  behold  a  Divine  Person,— a  great  monarch  ! 
The  Disruption  was,  so  to  speak,  the  Jtnveiling  of  this  glorious  King.  It 
was  His  unveiling  as  the  Head  of  the  Church,  and  head  over  all — of 
principalities  and  powers  in  heaven,  of  thrones  and  dominions  on  earth — 
to  His  body  the  Church. 

The  Disruption  was,  first  of  all,  the  unveiling  of  Christ  in  His 
character  of  Head  of  the  Church  to  the  Church  herself.  During  the  evil 
days  that  preceded  this  epoch,  the  Church,  to  a  large  extent,  had  lost 
sight  of  Christ  as  her  King.  She  had  fixed  her  eye  on  earthly  thrones : 
and,  dazzled  by  their  glory,  she  had  suffered  their  occupants  to  usurp  the 
prerogatives  of  Him  whom  God  has  set  as  King  upon  His  holy  hill  of 
Zion.  What  was  the  consequence?  The  Spirit  was  withdrawn,  the 
power  of  her  ministrations  ebbed  away,  and  her  work  stood  still,  for  her 
members,  removed  from  the  one  grand  centre  of  life  and  influence,  had 
folded  their  hands,  and  lay  sunk  in  slumber.  Suddenly,  the  voices  of  a 
few  earnest  and  faithful  men  — Erskine,  M'Crie,  Moncreifif,  Thomson, 
and  others — were  heard,  breaking  the  stillness,  and  crying  to  the  Church, 
"  Behold,  thy  King  cometh."  Hastily  she  arose  and  trimmed  her  lamp, 
and  went  forth  to  meet  Him.  And  in  what  fashion  did  He  return? 
Even  as  He  was  seen  by  the  apocalyptist,  having  on  His  head  a  crown, 
in  His  hand  a  bow,  and  on  His  vesture  and  on  His  thigh  a  name  written, 
"  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  The  Church  laid  her  undivided 
homage  at  His  feet ;  acknowledging  Him  as  her  Divine,  sole,  immediate, 
and  eternal  Sovereign.  And  by  the  same  act  by  which  she  acknow- 
ledged His  Headship  did  she  assert  and  recover  her  own  liberty.     For 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

if  Christ  be  a  King,  the  Church  is  a  kingdom.     If  Christ  be  the  first  and 
highest  of  all  kings,  the  Church  is  the  first  and  freest  of  all  kingdoms. 

But  further,  the  Disruption  was  the  unveiling  of  Christ's  Headship  to 
the  world.  If  that  glorious  truth  had  waxed  dim  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Church,  need  we  wonder  that  it  had  become  totally  obscured  to  the 
apprehension  of  the  world.  There  was  a  King  on  the  earth,  the  greatest 
of  all  kings,  but  the  world  knew  Him  not.  But  the  Disruption — we 
mean  that  whole  series  of  secessions  or  disruptions  from  the  Establish- 
ment, which,  commencing  in  1732,  culminated  in  1843 — revealed  once 
more  that  King  to  the  world.  The  Church  said  to  the  foreign  powers 
which  had  intruded  into  her  domain,  and  climbed  up  to  the  throne  of  her 
King,  "This  is  not  your  seat.  Take  hence  your  sceptres,  your  edicts,  your 
patronages,  and  leave  me  free  to  obey  my  Lord,  and  to  walk  by  the  rule 
of  His  Word."  And  when  the  State  refused,  saying,  "I  know  not  your 
King,  neither  will  I  let  you  go,"  the  Church  rose  up,  and,  severing  her 
connection  with  the  State,  and  leaving  it  to  dispose  of  her  temporal 
possessions  as  might  seem  good  to  it,  she  went  forth,  and  with  the 
measuring  line  of  the  Word  in  her  hand  she  traced  out  anew  the 
boundary  line  of  her  habitation,  and  in  the  midst  of  her  restored  taber- 
nacles she  set  up  a  throne  whereon  her  king  might  sit.  She  did  all  this, 
not  with  the  slow  toil  of  a  century,  as  at  the  Reformation,  but  in  a  day 
almost.  In  a  single  decade  she  had  spread  herself  abroad,  and  filled  the 
land,  to  its  remotest  borders,  with  congregations,  churches,  and  schools. 
Men  saw  in  this  the  visible  unloosening  of  a  mighty  influence  within  her. 
That  Divine  power  had  been  withheld  for  many  a  dreary  year,  it  had 
ceased  to  work ;  but  anew  it  revealed  itself  in  this  sudden  burst  of 
vitality  and  expansion.  The  world  saw  that  there  was  a  King  in  the 
Church,  not  a  doctrine  of  Headship  onl)^,  but  a  living  potentate,  who, 
when  He  pleases,  can,  with  a  power  as  mighty  as  that  which  brings 
back  the  day  or  restores  the  spring,  raise  up  the  Church  when  she  has 
been  cast  down,  enlighten  her  after  the  darkness  of  eclipse,  or,  when  she 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

lies  cold  and  dead,  send  the  breath  of  a  new  Hfc  tliroiif,di  her,  to  chase  her 
winter  away,  and  clothe  her  anew  with  beauty  and  fruitfulness. 

The  Free  Church  having  herself  accepted  Christ  as  her  King,  was  in 
a  condition  to  go  forth  and  call  upon  the  world  to  accept  Him  as  its 
King  also.  This  she  did  by  sending  missionaries  abroad  to  call  upon 
the  heathen  to  submit  themselves  to  the  sceptre  of  Him  who  is  King  of 
Zion  by  believing  the  Gospel.  Where  does  the  Church  find  her  warrant 
for  sending  her  missionaries  to  every  land  on  earth  ?  Whence  has  she 
authority  to  say  to  every  king  and  government,  Open  the  doors  of  your 
kingdom,  and  let  the  Gospel  be  preached  throughout  the  length  and 
breadth  of  your  realm  ?  Where  is  her  right  to  require  of  every  kindred 
and  tribe  under  heaven  that  they  shall  believe  and  obey  the  Gospel? 
Her  right  to  do  all  this  does  not  lie  merely  in  that  the  Gospel  is  tnie. 
Many  things  are  both  true  and  important  which  we  have  no  right  to 
require  others  to  believe  and  act  upon.  The  Church's  authority  for 
requiring  of  every  human  being  submission  to  the  Gospel  lies  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  Headship.  Both  the  message  and  the  messenger  come 
from  Him  who  is  "  Head  over  all  to  His  body  the  Church."  "  By  what 
authority,"  demanded  Charles  IX.  of  Calvin,  "  By  what  authority  do  you 
send  your  preachers  and  missionaries  into  France  ? "  "  By  the  authority 
of  Him  who  made  you  King  of  France,"  replied  the  intrepid  reformer. 
He  held  that  he  fulfilled  a  clear  dictate  of  piety  in  sending  competent 
men  to  labour  in  preaching  the  Gospel  wherever  it  was  practicable, 
"seeing  that  it  is  the  sovereign  duty  of  all  kings  and  princes  to  do 
homage  to  Him  who  has  given  them  rule." 

And  while  the  Church  summoned  the  ends  of  the  earth  "to  fear 
Him"  who  is  her  King,  she  was  not  unmindful  of  her  duty  in  this 
respect  to  governments  at  home.  She  began  to  preach  to  them  the 
forgotten  doctrine  that  the  Father  has  given  Christ  "  to  be  head  over  all 
to  the  Church  which  is  His  body;"  and  she  called  upon  them  to  do 
homage  to  this  King,  by  recognising   the  rights   and    respecting   the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

liberties  of  His  Church  which  is  His  kingdom,  and  conducting  their 
own  administration  on  the  principles  of  the  Gospel  of  Him  by  whom 
"kings  reign  and  princes  decree  justice." 

Here,  then,  is  the  source  of  power.  According  as  the  Church 
withdraws  from  or  again  approximates  this  grand  central  influence, 
so  will  her  condition  be  flourishing  or  decaying,  advancing  or  falling 
back.  Near  her  King  she  is  near  the  light ;  His  glory  will  beautify  her, 
and  His  power  will  act  through  her.  Far  away  from  Him,  darkness 
will  cover  her,  and  langour  will  weigh  upon  all  her  movements.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Headship  of  Christ  has  ever  been  and  ever  will  be  that 
of  the  standing  or  the  falling  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.  It  was  this 
doctrine  which  brought  her  out  of  the  great  prison-house  of  the  Papacy. 
The  banner  uplifted  by  Knox  had  this  blazoned  upon  it,  even  that 
neither  Rome  on  the  one  hand,  nor  the  State  on  the  other,  but  Christ 
alone  is  Head  of  the  Church,  and  that  His  voice,  and  His  only,  must  she 
hear  and  obey.  It  was  under  this  banner  that  Melville  fought  the  battle  of 
the  Church's  independence  against  the  usurpations  of  the  sixth  James. 
It  was  with  the  same  great  doctrine  that  Henderson  met  the  yet  more 
audacious  assault  of  the  first  Charles.  With  this  banner  floating  over 
her,  is  the  Church  seen  entering  the  darkness  of  the  "twenty-eight 
years," — that  sad  yet  glorious  era  of  our  history.  Is  it  battle-field  ?  is  it 
scaffold  ?  the  watchword  is  still  "  Christ  a  King."  Every  glimpse  we 
have  of  the  Church  amid  the  tempests  of  that  cloud,  it  is  with  her  banner 
displayed  ;  and  when  at  last  she  comes  forth  again  into  full  view,  it  is 
with  her  old  banner  broadly  unfurled.  "  Christ  a  King  "  was  the  word 
of  her  testimony,  and  by  it  she  overcame. 

Once  more,  in  our  own  day,  the  doctrine  of  the  "Headship"  has 
attested  its  undiminished  and  undying  force.  "  Christ  a  King,"  said  the 
first  Secession.  "  Christ  a  King,"  said  the  second  Secession — viz.,  the 
"  Relief."  "  Christ  a  King  "  once  more,  and  for  the  third  time,  said  the 
Disruption.     In  this  "sign"  has  the  Church  of  Scotland  conquered  in 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH. 

the  past,  and  in  tliis  "  sign  "  must  she  continue  to  conquer  in  the  future. 
Let  us  go  forward,  but  let  us  remember  that  there  can  be  no  advance 
save  on  the  former  lines  ;  no  new  victories  save  beneath  the  old  standard. 
If  the  day  should  ever  come  when  that  banner  should  be  folded  up  and 
put  away  ;  if  the  day  should  ever  come  when  the  "  Headship  "  shall  be, 
we  do  not  say  dropped  from  the  Church's  creed,  but  displaced  from  the 
position  it  has  occupied,  from  the  days  of  Knox  downward,  in  the  front 
of  the  Church's  testimony,  "  Ichabod  "  will  be  written  upon  her,  and  the 
list  of  her  triumphs  will  be  numbered  and  finished.  But  not  in  Scotland 
—the  land  which  God  has  chosen  above  all  lands  for  the  vindication  of 
the  royal  prerogatives  of  His  Son— shall  this  great  truth  ever  be 
disowned.  It  is  written  on  every  page  of  our  Church's  history.  It  is 
engraven  on  the  tombstones  of  all  our  martyrs.  Behind  us,  and  all 
around  us,  are  the  mementoes  of  it.  How,  then,  can  it  ever  be  for- 
gotten ?  On  many  a  day— on  dark  days  and  on  bright  days— has  that 
banner  been  unfurled,  but  there  awaits  it — oh,  welcome  and  happy  day 
—one  other  grand  unfolding  of  it.  Under  this  same  banner  it  is  that 
the  dispersed  of  the  Scottish  Israel  shall  be  gathered  into  one.  And 
when  that  day  shall  have  come,  and  Jerusalem  is  "  a  quiet  habitation, 
a  tabernacle  that  shall  not  be  taken  down,"  over  her  gates  and  palaces 
shall  be  seen  to  float  the  old  banner,  not  hung  out  as  a  summons  to 
battle,  but  displayed  as  a  symbol  that  the  Church,  more  eminently  and 
visibly  than  ever,  has  now  become  the  residence — the  seat  and  throne, 
of  the  great  King,  for  "  the  name  of  the  city  from  that  day  shall  be, 
The  Lord  is  there." 


^htch  of  tijr  i3tsntpt:an  lag. 


By  //fc//  a//i././;a'. 

HE    fital    die   has   been   cast.      On   Thursday 

last  the  religion  of  Scotland  was 

disestablished,   and    a    principle 

^  recognised    in    its   stead,    which 

has  often   served   to  check  and 

-         modify  the  religious    influences, 

but  which  in  no  age  or  country 

ever  yet  existed  as  a  religion  ; 

'      i     \   ^  >  ^     "ot  but  that  it  has  performed  an 

^La  ^^j^  ''  "-^  important  part,  even  in  Scotland. 

._-::  — .-  KA"--  -  It  has  sen-cd  hitherto  to  control 

the  Christianity  of  the  Establish- 
ment— to  dilute  it  to  such  a  degree,  if  we  may  so  speak,  as  to  render  it 
bearable  to  statesmen  without  God.  And  now  its  appointed  work  seems 
over.  It  constituted  at  best  but  the  drag-chain  and  the  hook — things 
that  have  no  vocation  apart  from  the  chariot.  But  the  time  has  at 
length  arrived  in  which  the  State  will  bear  with  but  the  hook  and  the 
drag  apart  from  that  which  they  checked,  with  but  the  diluting  pabulum 
apart  from  that  which  it  diluted  ;  and  so  a  mere  negation  of  Christianity, 


iU^. 


SKETCH  OF  THE  DISRUPTION  DA  Y. 

an  antagonistic  force  to  the  religious  power,  has  been  virtually  recog- 
nised as  exclusively  the  principle  which  is  to  be  entrenched  in  the 
parish  churches  of  Scotland.  The  day  that  witnessed  a  transaction  so 
momentous,  can  be  a  day  of  no  slight  mark  in  modern  history.  It 
stands,  between  two  distinct  states  of  things,  a  signal  to  Christendom. 
It  holds  out  its  sign  to  these  latter  times,  that  God  and  the  world  have 
drawn  oflf  their  forces  to  opposite  sides,  and  that  His  sore  and  great 
battle  is  soon  to  begin. 

The  future  can  alone  adequately  develope  the  more  important  con- 
sequences of  the  event ; — at  present  we  shall  merely  attempt  presenting 
the  reader  with  a  few  brief  notes  of  the  aspect  which  it  exhibited.  The 
early  part  of  Thursday  had  its  periods  of  fitful  cloud  and  sunshine,  and 
the  tall  picturesque  tenements  of  the  old  town  now  lay  dim  and  indistinct 
in  shadow,  now  stood  prominently  out  in  the  light.  There  was  an 
unusual  throng  and  bustle  in  the  streets  at  a  comparatively  early  hour, 
which  increased  greatly  as  the  morning  wore  on  towards  noon.  We 
marked,  in  especial,  several  knots  of  Moderate  clergy  hurrying  along  to 
the  levee,  laughing  and  chatting  with  a  vivacity  that  reminded  one 
rather  of  the  French  than  of  the  Scotch  character,  and  evidently  in  that 
state  of  nervous  excitement  which,  in  a  certain  order  of  minds,  the  near 
approach  of  some  very  great  event,  indeterminate  and  unappreciable  in 
its  bearings,  is  sure  always  to  occasion. 

As  the  morning  wore  on,  the  crowds  thickened  in  the  streets,  and 
the  military  took  their  places.  The  principles  involved  in  the  anticipated 
Disruption  gave  to  many  a  spectator  a  new  association  with  the  long 
double  line  of  dragoons  that  stretched  adown  the  High  Street,  far  as 
the  eye  could  reach,  from  the  venerable  Church  of  St  Giles,  famous  in 
Scottish  story,  to  the  humbler  Tron.  The  light  flashed  fitfully  on  their 
long  swords  and  helmets,  and  the  light  scarlet  of  their  uniforms  con- 
trasted strongly  with  the  dingier  vestments  of  the  masses,  in  which  they 
seemed  as  if  more  than  half  engulphed.     When  the  sun  glanced  out,  the 


SKETCH  OF  THE  DISRUPTION  DA  Y. 

eye  caught  something  pecuharly  picturesque  in  the  aspect  of  the  Calton 
Hill,  with  its  imposing  masses  of  precipices,  overtopped  by  towers  and 
monuments,  and  its  intermingling  bushes  and  trees,  now  green  with  the 
soft,  delicate  foliage  of  May.  Between  its  upper  and  under  line  of  rock, 
a  dense  living  belt  of  human  beings  girdled  it  round,  sweeping  gradually 
downwards  from  shoulder  to  base,  like  the  sash  of  his  order  on  the  breast 
of  a  nobleman.  The  Commissioner's  procession  passed,  with  sound  of 
trumpet  and  drum,  and  marked  by  rather  more  than  the  usual  splendour. 
There  was  much  bravery  and  glitter,  satin  and  embroidery,  varnish  and 
gold  lace — no  lack,  in  short,  of  that  cheap  and  vulgar  magnificence 
which  can  be  got  up  to  order  by  the  tailor  and  upholsterer  for  carnivals 
and  Lord  Mayors'  days.  But  it  was  felt  by  the  assembled  thousands,  as 
the  pageant  swept  past,  that  the  real  spectacle  of  the  day  was  one  of  a 
different  character. 

The  morning  levee  had  been  marked  by  an  incident  of  a  somewhat  ex- 
traordinary nature,  and  which  history,  though  in  these  days  little  disposed 
to  mark  prodigies  and  omens,  will  scarcely  fail  to  record.  The  crowd  in 
the  chamber  of  presence  was  very  great,  and  there  was,  we  believe,  a 
considerable  degree  of  confusion  and  pressure  in  consequence.  Suddenly 
— whether  brushed  by  some  passer-by,  jostled  rudely  aside,  or  merely 
affected  by  the  tremor  of  the  floor  communicated  to  the  partitioning — a 
large  portrait  of  William  the  Third,  that  had  held  its  place  in  Holyrood 
for  nearly  a  century  and  a-half,  dropped  heavily  from  the  walls.  "  There," 
exclaimed  a  voice  from  the  crowd,  "  there  goes  the  Revolution  Settlement." 

For  hours  before  the  meeting  of  the  Assembly,  the  galleries  of  St 
Andrew's,  with  the  space  behind,  railed  off  for  the  accommodation  of 
office-bearers  not  members,  were  crowded  to  suffocation,  and  a  vast 
assemblage  still  continued  to  besiege  the  doors.  The  galleries  from 
below  had  the  "  overbellying "  appearance  in  front,  described  by  Blair, 
and  seemed  as  if  filled  up  to  the  roof  behind.  Immediately  after  noon, 
the  Moderate  members  began  to  drop  in  one  by  one,  and  to  take  their 


SKETCH  OF  THE  DISRUPTION  DA  Y. 

places  on  the  Moderator's  right,  while  the  opposite  benches  remained 
well-nigh  empty.  What  seemed  most  fitted  to  catch  the  eye  of  a 
stranger  was  the  rosy  appearance  of  the  men,  and  their  rounded  contour 
of  face  and  feature.  Moderatism  in  the  present  day  is  evidently  not 
injuring  its  complexion  by  the  composition  of  "  Histories  of  Scotland," 
like  that  of  Robertson,  or  by  prosecuting  such  "  Inquiries  into  the 
Human  Mind,"  as  those  instituted  by  Reid.  We  were  reminded,  in 
glancing  over  the  benches,  of  a  bed  of  full-blown  peonj^-roses  glistening 
after  a  shower;  and  could  one  have  but  substituted  among  them  the 
monk's  frock  for  the  modern  dress-coat,  and  given  to  each  crown  the 
shaven  tonsure,  not  only  would  they  have  passed  admirably  for  a 
conclave  of  monks  met  to  determine  some  weighty  point  of  abbey 
income  or  right  of  forestry,  but  for  a  conclave  of  one  determinate  age — 
that  easily-circumstanced  middle  age,  in  which  the  days  of  vigil  and 
maceration  being  over,  and  the  disturbing  doctrines  of  the  Reformation 
not  yet  aroused  from  out  of  their  long  sleep,  the  Churchman  had  little 
else  to  do  than  just  amuse  himself  with  concerns  of  the  chase  and  the 
cellar,  the  larder  and  the  dormitory.  The  benches  on  the  left  began 
slowly  to  fill ;  and  on  the  entrance  of  every  more  distinguished  member, 
a  burst  of  recognition  and  welcome  shook  the  gallery.  Their  antagonists 
had  been  all  permitted  to  take  their  places  in  ominous  silence.  The 
music  of  the  pageant  was  heard  outside  ;  the  Moderator  entered,  attired 
in  his  gown ;  and  ere  the  appearance  of  the  Lord  High  Commissioner, 
preceded  by  his  pages  and  mace-bearer,  and  attended  by  the  Lord 
Provost,  the  Lord  Advocate,  and  the  Solicitor-General,  the  Evangelical 
benches  had  filled  as  densely  as  those  of  their  opponents  ;  and  the  cross 
benches,  appropriated  in  perilous  times  like  the  present  to  a  middle 
party,  careful  always  to  pitch  their  principles  below  the  sufiering  point, 
were  also  fully  occupied.  Never  before  was  there  seen  so  crowded  a 
General  Assembly  ;  the  number  of  members  had  been  increased  beyond 
all   precedent  by  the    double    returns,   and    almost   every  member  was 


SKETCH  OF  THE  nrSIHUPT/ON  DAY. 

in  his  place.  The  Moderator  opened  the  proceedings  by  a  deeply 
impressive  prayer ;  but  though  the  silence  within  was  complete,  a  Babel 
of  tumultuary  sounds  outside,  and  at  the  closed  doors,  expressive  of  the 
intense  anxiety  of  the  excluded  multitude,  had  the  effect  of  rendering 
him  scarcely  audible  in  the  more  distant  parts  of  the  building.  .  .  . 

The  Moderator,  Dr  Welsh,  rose  and  addressed  the  House  in  a  few 
impressive  sentences.  There  had  been  an  infringement,  he  said,  on  the 
constitution  of  the  Church,  an  infringement  so  great  that  they  could  not 
constitute  its  General  Assembly  without  a  violation  of  the  union  between 
Church  and  State,  as  now  authoritatively  defined  and  declared.  He  was 
therefore  compelled,  he  added,  to  protest  against  proceeding  further ; 
and  unfolding  a  document  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  he  read,  in  a  slow 
and  emphatic  manner,  the  Protest  of  the  Church.  For  the  first  few 
seconds  the  extreme  anxiety  to  hear  defeated  its  object — the  universal, 
Hush,  hush,  occasioned  considerably  more  noise  than  it  allayed  ;  but 
the  momentary  confusion  was  succeeded  by  the  most  unbroken  silence, 
and  the  reading  went  on  till  the  impressive  close  of  the  document,  when 
he  laid  it  down  on  the  table  of  the  House,  and  solemnly  departed.  He 
was  followed,  at  a  pace's  distance,  by  Dr  Chalmers ;  Dr  Gordon  and 
Dr  Patrick  M'Farlan  immediately  succeeded  ;  and  then  the  numerous 
sitters  on  the  thickly  occupied  benches  behind  filed  after  them,  in  a  long 
unbroken  line,  which  for  several  minutes  together  continued  to  thread 
the  passage  to  the  eastern  door,  till  at  length  only  a  blank  space 
remained.  As  the  well-known  faces  and  forms  of  some  of  the  ablest  and 
most  eminent  men  that  ever  adorned  the  Church  of  Scotland  glided 
along  the  current,  to  disappear  from  the  Courts  of  the  State  institution 
for  ever,  there  rose  a  cheer  from  the  galleries,  and  an  impatient  cr>'  of 
"  Out,  out,"  from  the  ministers  and  elders  not  members  of  the  Assembly, 
now  engaged  in  sallying  forth  to  join  with  them,  from  the  railed  area 
behind.  The  cheers  subsided,  choked  in  not  a  few  instances  in  tear.':. 
The  occasion  was  bv  far  too  solemn  for  the  commoner  manifestations  of 


SKETCH  OF  THE  DISRUPTION  DA  V. 

either  censure  or  approval.  It  excited  feelings  that  lay  too  deep  for 
expression.  There  was  a  marked  peculiarity  in  the  appearance  of  their 
opponents,  a  blank,  restless,  pivot-like  turning  of  head  from  the  fast 
emptying  benches  to  one  another's  faces,  but  they  uttered  no  word,  not 
even  in  whispers.  At  length,  when  the  last  of  the  withdrawing  party 
had  disappeared,  there  ran  from  bench  to  bench  a  hurried,  broken 
whispering — "How  many.'"  "how  many.?"  "A  hundred  and  fifty.'" 
"No";  "yes."  " Four  hundred  .' "  "No"; — and  then  for  a  moment  all 
was  still  again.  The  scene  that  followed  we  deemed  one  of  the  most 
striking  of  the  day.  The  empty  vacated  benches  stretched  away  from 
the  Moderator's  seat,  in  the  centre  of  the  building,  to  the  distant  wall. 
There  suddenly  glided  into  the  front  rows  a  small  party  of  blighted- 
looking  men,  that,  contrasted  with  the  well-known  forms  of  our 
Chalmerses  and  Gordons,  Candlishes  and  Cunninghams,  M'Farlans, 
Brewsters,  and  Dunlops,  reminded  one  of  the  thin  and  blasted  corn-ears 
of  Pharaoh's  vision,  and,  like  them,  too,  seemed  typical  of  a  time  of 
famine  and  destitution.  Who  are  these .-'  was  the  general  query ;  but 
no  one  seemed  to  know.  At  length  the  significant  whisper  ran  along 
the  house,  "  The  Forty."  There  was  a  grin  of  mingled  contempt  and 
compassion  visible  on  many  a  broad  Moderate  face,  and  a  too  audible 
titter  shook  the  gallery.  There  seemed  a  degree  of  incongruity  in  the 
sight,  that  partook  highly  of  the  ludicrous.  For  our  own  part,  we  were 
so  carried  away  by  a  vagrant  association,  and  so  missed  Ali  Baba,  the 
oil  kettle,  and  the  forty  jars,  as  to  forget  for  a  time  that,  at  the  doors  of 
these  unfortunate  men,  lies  the  ruin  of  the  Scottish  Establishment.  The 
aspect  of  the  Assembly  sank  when  it  had  in  some  degree  recovered 
itself,  into  that  expression  of  tame  and  flat  commonplace,  which  it  must 
be  henceforth  content  to  bear,  until  roused  happily  into  short-lived 
activity  by  the  sharp  paroxysms  of  approaching  destruction. 


W"" 


^  REV,  WILLIAM  ARITOT,  M.A 


=^^-?. 


Milliaw  ^rnot 


S   wc   sit   under   the   shadow   of  a   lofty   hill,  \vc   can 
ajjprcciate  the  beauty  of  the  green  turf,  and  of  the 
wild    flowers   at   our   feet,   but   we   cannot   estimate 
'^        Ifll  ''^^    grandeur    aright ;    it    is    too    near    us.       It    was 

thus  we  felt  when  William  Arnot  was  taken 
from  us. 
He  had  been  known  to  us  for  many  years  ;  we  knew  the  warmth  of 
his  heart,  the  beauty  and  vigour  of  his  mind  ;  we  had  rested  under  the 
shadow  of  his  friendship ;  but  when  death  widened  the  distance  between 
us  and  we  gazed  on  the  loved  form  as  it  receded  from  our  view,  then 
we  felt  not  only  how  good  but  how  great  he  was !  This  feeling  was 
deepened  when  we  looked  around  and  could  not  find  among  the  foremost 
ranks  of  the  Christian  Church  one  gifted  and  graced  as  he. 

His  personal  appearance  was  impressive.  He  stood  rather  above  the 
average  height,  with  shoulders  strong  and  massive  ;  his  frame,  supported 
on  well-set  limbs,  was  of  corresponding  strength.  His  head  was  large 
and  deep  ;  till  later  years  his  hair  was  black.  His  face  was  tremulously 
full  of  thought  and  emotion,  which  glistened  in  his  dark  eye,  and  played 
round  his  full  lips ;  yet  the  expression  of  the  eye  was  thoughtful  and 
loving,  it  had  no  fierceness  in  it.     We  think  we  see  him  still,  entering 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  pulpit  with  slow  and  pensive  step,  the  manner  which  naturally 
expressed  his  mental  state. 

The  three  outstanding  features  of  his  preaching  were — first,  the  amount 
of  embodied  thought  it  contained.  His  sermons  were  thoughtful — 
eminently  so — but  the  clear  conception  was  always  clothed  in  illustration. 
There  is  a  faculty  of  decerning  the  analogy  between  God's  Word  and 
God's  works,  of  tracing  the  Worker's  name  and  the  similarity  of  the 
handiwork  in  both,  possessed  by  some  men.  Such  a  gift  Mr.  Arnot  had. 
If  an  incident  happened  to  him  of  the  most  ordinary  description  he 
could  find  in  it  the  illustration  of  a  wide-stretching  law,  and  could 
unravel  its  details  so  that  you  were  delighted  with  the  discovery.  Or 
if  some  abstract  doctrine  lay  in  his  path,  he  took  it  up,  and  reversing  the 
process,  followed  it  down  from  the  region  of  thought  to  the  highway 
of  daily  life  trodden  by  the  feet  of  men. 

Once  he  enforced  brotherly  kindness  thus  :— "  Crossing  the  Meadows, 
yesterday,  I  saw  before  me  two  ragged  boys  running  on  the  pathway. 
One  of  them  had  shoes,  the  other  was  barefooted.  Suddenly  the}- 
came  to  a  place  where  the  way  had  been  recently  gravelled  ;  the  stones 
cut  the  bare  feet  and  the  boy  without  the  shoes  limped  and  suddenly 
stopped  ;  his  companion  looked  round,  saw  the  difficulty,  backed  like  a 
horse  to  the  edge  of  the  gravel,  and  bent  forward  his  head  and  shoulders. 
With  a  leap  and  a  merry  shout  his  comrade  sprang  on  his  back,  and 
gaily  the  burden-bearer  trotted  with  him  over  the  stones." 

The  second  feature  of  his  pulpit  work  was  its  power.  It  was  effectual. 
If  he  wished  you  to  understand  any  truth,  he  calmly  and  deliberately, 
word  after  word,  printed  it  on  your  mind.  If  he  wished  to  reach  the 
conscience  he  remembered  how  the  truth  reached  his  own  heart,  and  he 
employed  his  knowledge  and  experience  to  send  the  arrow  home  to 
yours.  This  gave  his  power  to  his  preaching.  He  understood  the 
thoughts  and  the  feelings  of  his  fellow-men.  He  fully  sympathised 
with  them  and  thus  he  could  effectually  make  them  sympathise  with  him. 


WILLIAM  ARXOT. 

But  the  dominant  prevailing  truth  and  spirit  of  his  preaching  was 
the  Gospel,  and  the  love  of  Christ.  Even  the  most  terrible  and  alarming 
texts  were  handled  so  as  to  give  new  and  precious  views  of  our  Saviour's 
grace.  In  reading  the  words  of  our  Lord,  "where  their  worm  dicth  not, 
and  the  fire  is  not  quenched,"  he  paused  and  said,  "  These  words  are  full 
of  love,  for  they  were  uttered  by  Christ,  that  the  poor  sinner  who  heard 
them  might  escape,  and  never  come  to  that  place  of  torment.  In 
mercy  Christ  hurls  this  fearful  thunderbolt  not  at  them,  but  on  their 
path,  to  make  them  stop  and  turn.  No  hand  but  His  could  wield  it,  no 
heart  but  His  would  do  so."  Thus  he  spoke  of  his  Lord,  and  thus  he 
sought  to  win  souls. 

Let  us  briefly  sketch  his  life.  It  began  in  the  village  of  Scone, 
Perthshire,  in  the  year  1808.  His  father  was  the  tenant  of  a  small  farm 
at  Forgandenny,  about  four  miles  from  Perth.  William  was  the  youngest 
of  a  family  of  seven,  and  his  mother  died  at  his  birth.  His  parents  and 
his  ancestors  seem  to  have  been  sober,  intelligent,  and  industrious  folk, 
with  that  solid  basis  of  Scriptural  earnest  religion  which  long  distinguished 
our  Scotch  peasantrj-. 

He  never  knew  his  mother,  yet  he  clung  to  the  faintest  tradition 
regarding  her  with  fondest  affection.  Surely  all  the  dying  mother's  love 
and  tenderness  passed  into  the  heart  and  character  of  her  babe,  and 
made  him  what  he  afterwards  was,  for  such  exuberant  kindness  was  not 
inherited  from  his  wise,  good,  but  unimpulsive  father. 

The  boy  grew  up,  carefully  tended  among  the  scenes  of  rural  life  and 
beauty  of  nature's  scenery.  All  these  influences  sank  deep  into  a 
retentive  memory  and  a  susceptible  nature.  The  cottage,  the  trees,  the 
stream,  the  boat,  the  green  field  and  heathy  upland  were  ever  with  him 
to  his  latest  day.  His  school  education  was  such  as  the  parish  schools 
afforded,  and  made  him  a  sound  good  English  scholar. 

But  children  in  such  a  rank  of  life  early  begin  to  share  in  their  parents' 
toil,  and  William  when  only  entering  his  teens,  herded  the  cattle  and 


n/S/^  UP  77 ON  U  'OR  TH7F.S. 

helped  his  father  on  the  farm,  till  when  about  sixteen  years  of  age  he 
became  a  gardener,  and  that  employment  for  three  or  four  )-ears  left  an 
aroma  of  fiowers  in  his  mind  which  never  passed  away.  In  that  occupa- 
tion he  was  associated  with  his  brother  Robert,  and  this  companionship 
proved  the  turning-point  of  his  life.  His  brother  was  his  superior  in 
everything  ;  specially  he  felt  Robert's  spiritual  and  intellectual  influence. 
Robert  fell  into  feeble  health,  and  ultimately  into  hopeless  paralysis. 
This  drew  William  closer  to  him,  he  helped  to  move  him,  aided  him  in  his 
studies  at  home,  and  spent  his  leisure  and  his  strength  in  soothing  and 
comforting  him,  till  death,  in  1828,  separated  the  brothers.  Deeply  did 
the  separation  affect  him  who  was  left.  The  light  of  eternity  from  the 
gate  of  that  world  into  which  that  loved  one  had  entered,  shone  into 
his  soul,  and  kindled  there  an  earnest  desire  and  a  steady  purpose  to 
devote  his  life  to  the  service  of  Christ  and  his  fellow-men. 

William  had  already  begun  studying  Latin,  and  now  commenced 
that  hard  long  struggle  which  so  many  Scotch  students  know  ere  they 
reach  the  object  of  their  ambition  in  the  Church,  in  law,  or  in  medicine. 
He  carried  his  Latin  grammar  to  the  garden  with  him,  conned  it  on  the 
way  in  early  morning,  snatched  a  look  at  it  at  the  end  of  digging  a 
furrow,  or  at  any  minute  of  rest,  yet  always  careful  that  his  work  should 
never  suffer.  During  this  time  he  wrought  hard,  and  lived  so  economically 
that  in  November,  1828,  he  had  gathered  twenty  pounds.  With  this 
capital  he  commenced  his  student  life,  and  after  a  year's  private  study, 
entered  Glasgow  University  in  October,  1829.  His  life  there  was  a  happy 
one,  for  he  had  high  aims  and  steadily  pursued  them.  He  had  dear, 
good  friends  at  the  College,  James  Hamilton,  and  James  Halley,  and 
earnestly,  yet  cheerily,  they  studied,  talked,  and  lived  together.  He  and 
a  companion  shared  a  single  room,  which  was  both  bedroom  and  study. 
He  writes  home : — "  I  am  very  comfortable.  If  I  had  a  bit  of  the  pig  at 
dinner-time,  I  could  keep  my  expenses  of  meat,  lodging,  and  light, 
within  five  shillings  a-week."     That  was  thirteen  pounds  a-ycar !     Such 


WILLIAM  ARAOT. 


was  the  st)-lc  of  many  a  student  at  our  Scotch  colleges.  Mr.  Arnot  was 
a  good  classical  scholar,  and  most  creditably  passing  all  his  examinations, 
was  licensed  in  October,  1837. 

Not  a  month  elapsed  before  he  was  appointed  assistant  to  Rev.  John 
Bonar,  Minister  of  the  parishes  of  Larbert  and  Dunipacc.  It  was  a 
privilege  to  help  so  good  a  Minister,  and  it  was  esteemed  such  by  the  new 
assistant.  Here,  and  in  the  beginning  of  his  ministry  in  Glasgow,  we 
find  traces  of  weak  health,  of  the  mind  overworking  its  willing,  and  in  his 
case  able,  servant  the  body,  and  though  they  passed  out  of  sight  we  fear 
they  never  passed  away,  but  only  hid  themselves  in  his  frame,  to  awake 
in  after  years  with  sudden,  sad  power. 

Not  a  year  elapsed  after  his  settlement  at  Larbert,  when  he  was  called 
to  St.  Peter's  Church  in  Glasgow.  He  went,  and  there  commenced  his 
most  laborious  and  most  efficient  ministiy.  We  cannot  tell  how  often  he 
was  tempted  away  from  Glasgow  to  other  parts  of  the  country  and  the 
world,  but  he  never  left  it  till,  in  1863,  he  came  to  the  Free  High  Church 
in  Edinburgh.  During  these  years  many  important  events  happened 
In  1843,  the  Disruption  took  place,  and  among  the  noble  men  who  proved 
to  the  world  that  faith  was  still  a  stronger  motive  than  money,  Mr.  Arnot 
gladly  took  his  place,  sharing  the  labours,  the  trials,  with  the  honour.  In 
July,  1844,  he  married  the  second  daughter  of  Mr.  Fleming  of  Clairmont, 
and  found  by  his  glad  experience  that  undoubtedly  this  alliance  was 
made  by  heaven.  Four  sons  and  five  daughters  blessed  his  happy 
home,  and  mourned  his  death.  Next  year  he  went  to  Montreal,  to 
strengthen  the  Free  Church  cause  in  Canada,  and  remained  some  months. 
He  did  his  work  well,  and  enjoyed  it. 

During  his  ministry  in  St.  Peter's,  his  greatest  and  most  efficient 
work  as  a  pastor  and  an  evangelist  was  done.  The  large  congrega- 
tion was  gathered  in  and  nourished  up  into  a  high  style  of  life.  The 
young  were  his  especial  care.  In  Bible  classes  and  in  Sabbath  schools 
Mr.  Arnot  moved   a  burning  and    a  shining  light,  often  did  he  travel 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


to  London  to  comply  with  the  invitation  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian 
Association  of  that  city,  and  deliver  a  lecture  to  them  in  Exeter  Hall. 

Two  objects  excited  his  earnest  sympathy — the  effort  to  gather  the 
irreligious  population  to  Christ,  and  the  struggle  against  intemperance. 
A  vigorous  organisation  was  maintained  to  labour  among  the  former, 
and  against  the  evil  of  drunkenness  his  hand  and  his  heart,  his  pen 
and  his  voice  maintained  an  uncompromising  warfare.  His  views  of 
what  temperance  was  were  strictly  Scriptural,  and  frequently  the  more 
extreme  total  abstainers  thought  him  only  half-hearted  in  the  cause, 
while  the  fact  was  his  temperance  was  a  far  wider,  deeper  thing  than 
theirs.  He  writes  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Free  Church  Abstinence 
Society,  "  It  is  peculiarly  necessaiy  in  our  place,  and  with  our  difficulties, 
to  be  patient  and  charitable.  I  don't  mean  to  counsel  softness  in  dealing 
with  the  abominations,  of  drinking  habits.  I  mean  we  should  depend 
more  on  the  sureness  and  sharpness  of  the  edge  than  the  mere  boister- 
ousncss  of  the  blow." 

After  much  discussion  and  some  division  in  the  Free  High  Church 
Congregation  in  1 863,  Mr.  Arnot  accepted  the  call,  and  came  to  Edinburgh, 
where  the  last  twelve  years  of  his  life  were  spent.  Most  unwilling  were 
his  friends  in  St.  Peter's  to  part  with  him,  yet  we  never  heard  that  Mr. 
Arnot  regretted  the  change.  The  Edinburgh  congregation  was  small, 
but  steadily  and  surely  under  such  a  ministry,  it  grew  till  it  took  its  place 
among  the  first  in  the  city.  All  the  refined  experience  of  the  past, 
guiding  a  loving  heart  and  clear  powerful  mind,  made  Mr.  Arnot's  services 
to  the  Church  and  to  society  even  more  valued  and  more  valuable  than 
they  had  been  in  Glasgow.  Of  course  the  departments  of  labour  were 
the  same,  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  detail  them.  Two  events  may  be 
noted ;  in  1870  he  enjoyed,  and  so  did  America,  a  visit  paid  to  that  country. 
His  former  visits  and  his  books  made  him  a  great  favourite,  and  very 
useful  there.  Then  1873  saw  the  Revival,  in  which  Messrs.  Moody  and 
Sankey  were  instrumental. 


n■/LIJA^r  ARNOT. 

Mr.  Aniot's  daughter,  Mrs.  Fleming,  in  her  Memoir  of  her  father,  says, 
"His  assistance  was  given  heartily  and  joyfully,  up  to  and  often  beyond 
the  measure  of  his  strength.  He  found  it  impossible  to  refuse  an 
invitation  to  help  at  one  of  those  meetings  where  God's  hand  was  so 
evidently  and  so  mightily  at  work,  and  many  a  time  when  he  went 
out  in  great  bodily  weakness,  he  would  return  full  of  joy  and  gratitude." 
While  thus  describing  the  course  of  Mr.  Arnot's  labours,  we  feel  painfully 
that  he  was  greater  than  his  works.  They  give  no  idea  of  the  richness  and 
variety  and  depth  of  his  mental  attainments,  nor  of  the  loving,  living 
heart  which  guided  them  in  daily  employment.  Those  nearest  to  him 
loved  him  most,  for  they  knew  him  best.  But  one  feature  of  his 
character  was  so  prominent  wc  must  bring  it  to  the  front — Mr.  Arnot's 
keen  sense  of  humour.  It  was  the  fruit  of  his  childlike  sympathy,  he 
was  naturally  so  happy  and  easily  pleased,  and  he  so  rapidly  caught  any 
point  of  incongruity  that  his  eye  twinkled  and  the  smile  gleamed  over 
his  features,  ere  others  could  see  the  cause  of  laughter.  This  was  no 
small  gift ;  it  added  to  his  influence  over  many  a  popular  audience,  and 
that  influence  was  always  used  for  their  good. 

During  his  residence  in  Edinburgh,  Mr.  Arnot  wrote  much  for  the 
press,  he  took  charge  of  the  Faintly  Treasury  from  the  beginning  of  1871. 
Here  let  us  gather  together  the  principal  publications  from  his  ready, 
graceful,  and  thoughtful  pen.  The  first  was  his  "Memoir  of  James 
Halley,"  his  loved  friend  and  fellow-student.  It  was  published  in  1842. 
While  labouring  in  Glasgow,  the  materials  of  the  next  book  were 
gathered  and  matured  in  185 1,  under  the  following  title,  "The  Race 
for  Riches,  and  some  of  the  Pits  into  which  Runners  Fall :  Six  Lectures 
applying  the  Word  of  God  to  the  Traffic  of  Men."  The  book  was  most 
useful ;  like  an  arrow  well-aimed,  it  hit  "  the  gold."  Its  writer  records, 
"  One  day  after  preaching  on  dishonesty,  a  gentleman  came  to  tell  me 
that  he  approved  of  it ;  that  his  mind  did  not  resent  it ;  he  thought  I 
must  suffer  from  the  apprehension  of  offence."     This  book  was  followed 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

by  an  address  to  young  men,  "The  Foe  and  the  Fight ;  or  the  Dangers  and 
Defences  of  Youth."  Five  years  after^vards  the  first  volume  on  Proverbs 
appeared,  under  the  title,  "Laws  from  Heaven  for  Life  on  Earth;" 
and  next  year  saw  the  second  volume.  A  large  volume  of  Sermons 
was  published  in  1859,  under  the  name  of  "Roots  and  Fruits  of  Christian 
Life."  Many  were  the  tracts,  addresses,  contributions  to  periodicals 
that  he  sent  forth  from  his  fertile  mind  and  glowing  heart,  especially 
during  the  latter  half  of  his  work-day.  After  the  change  of  residence 
to  Edinburgh,  the  Family  Treasury  was  enriched  with  many  a  beautiful 
and  useful  thought.  All  his  writings  have  these  distinguishing  excellen- 
ces ;  they  place  the  Lord  on  His  rightful  throne,  and  they  have  an 
intense  opposition  to  sin,  while  they  are  embued  with  kindest,  truest 
sympathy  with  human  nature.  They  show  better  than  any  memoir 
what  Mr.  Arnot  was  ;  the  vigour,  fortitude,  clearness,  and  massive  power 
of  his  mind,  combined  with  the  most  delicate  touch  of  imagination, 
and  the  whole  atmosphere  warmed  and  filled  with  the  sunny  radiance 
of  his  loving  heart. 

His  strength  perceptibly  declined  in  the  winter  of  1874-75.  He  was 
now  always  ill  after  preaching,  and  could  hardly  struggle  through  ordinarj- 
duties.  But  he  did  struggle  earnestly  and  constantly  up  to,  and  beyond 
his  strength.  Weakness  and  weariness  followed  him  through  every  effort 
and  place,  and  gradually  increased,  till  suddenly  on  the  morning  of  3rd 
of  June,  1875,  he  entered  into  rest.  In  sure  hope  of  a  blessed  resurrec- 
tion, his  body  lies  in  the  Grange  Cemeten'. 

J.  G. 


■C' 


BA¥NERMAN,I' 


«= 


=» 


lamrs  Dannmnait,  i).50. 


F  tlic  ministers  who  felt  themselves  constrained  to  withdraw 
from  the  Establishment  in  1843,  not  a  few  were  sons  of 
the  manse,  and  of  these  the  subject  of  this  sketch  was  one. 
He  was  born  on  the  9th  of  April  1807,  in  the  manse  of 
Cargill,  Presbytery  of  Dunkcld,  of  which  parish  his 
father  was  minister.  His  grandfather,  the  minister  of  St 
Martin's,  Presbytery  of  Perth,  married  Janet,  daughter  of  Sir  John 
Turing,  Bart.,  minister  of  Drumblade.*  He  died  in  June  18 10,  in  the 
ninety-eighth  year  of  his  age,  and  the  sixty-ninth  of  his  ministry,  and 
was  at  the  time  of  his  death  the  father  of  the  Church  of  Scotland. 
This  aged  minister's  father,  ordained  in  1703,  was  settled  first  in  the 
parish  of  Inveravon,  Presbytery  of  Aberlour,  and  translated  to  Forglen, 
where  he  died  in  1749.  In  the  session  records  of  the  former  parish 
there  are  not  a  few  curious  entries  very  characteristic  of  the  times. 
The  district  was  a  wild  Highland  one,  full  of  feuds  and  fightings,  and 
the  minister  and  his  elders,  with  the  occasional  aid  of  the  Laird  of 
Grant,  appear  to  have  exercised  discipline  after  a  most  vigorous  fashion. 
His  son,  Professor  Bannerman's  grandfather,  afterwards  removed  to  St 
Martin's,  was  appointed  assistant  and  successor  to  his  father  in    1742. 

*  The  baronetcy,  dating  from  163S,  was  for  some  reason  allowed  to  fall  into  abeyance,  but 
was  revived  in  1792  by  the  minister  of  Drumblade's  grandson,  Sir  Robert  Turing  of  Banff 
Castle,  who  was  the  son  of  the  Rev.  Alexander  Turing,  minister  of  Oyne. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Another  son,  Patrick,  was  minister  of  St  Madoes  in  1741,  was  translated 
to  KinnouU  in  1746,  and  thence  to  Salton,  Presbytery  of  Haddington. 
His  sister  married  his  successor  at  St  Madoes,  the  Rev.  Archibald  Steven- 
son, who  was  distinguished  for  his  general  talents,  and  especially  for  his 
knowledge  of  Church  law.  In  the  well-known  debate  on  the  subject  of 
the  repeal  of  the  penal  statutes  against  the  Roman  Catholics,  in  the 
Assembly  1779,  he  seconded  the  motion  made  by  the  Rev.  Dr  M'Farlan 
of  the  Canongate,  which,  with  certain  suggestions  proposed  by  Principal 
Robertson,  became  the  judgment  of  the  house. 

The  subject  of  our  sketch,  whose  father  died  in  1807,  received  his  ele- 
mentary education  at  the  Perth  Academy,  and  had  as  his  tutor  the  late 
Dr  Gordon  of  Edinburgh,  for  whom  he  ever  cherished  the  warmest  affec- 
tion. He  resided  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Perth,  and  attended 
the  ministry  of  Dr  William  Thomson,  until  he  went  to  Edinburgh 
University  in  1S22.  He  was  a  distinguished  student — Professor  Wilson's 
certificate  bearing  that  he  "was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  students," 
and  Sir  John  Leslie's  running  thus,  "  He  distinguished  himself  so  much 
as  to  carry  the  highest  prize."  He  graduated  A.M.  in  1826,  an  honour 
at  that  period  rarely  coveted,  at  least  in  Edinburgh.  After  the  usual 
attendance  at  the  Divinity  Hall,  Edinburgh,  he  was  licensed  by  the 
Presbytery  of  Perth  in  January  1830.  His  gifts  as  a  preacher  were 
speedily  perceived  and  appreciated.  Extensive  acquaintance  with  theo- 
logy even  then,  the  capacity  of  taking  a  large  view  and  a  firm  grasp  of 
the  subject-matter  of  which  he  was  treating,  and  a  masculine  style  of 
writing,  characterised  his  discourses.  His  own  estimate  of  his  pulpit  gifts 
was  modest  enough.  The  writer  of  this  notice  remembers  well  walking 
with  him  in  Nicolson  Square  (in  the  Methodist  chapel  there,  during  the 
repairs  of  St  Giles,  the  New  North  congregation  worshipped)  on  the 
day  when  he  was  first  to  officiate  for  Dr  Gordon,  whom  they  had  both 
heard  in  the  forenoon,  and  his  saying,  "The  idea  of  my  going  up  to  preach 
after  him ! " 


JAMES  BAXNERMAN,  D.D. 

During  his  residence  in  Perth  he  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  Apocry- 
plial  controversy,  and  aided  in  more  ways  than  one  the  labours  of  those 
who  were  protesting  against  the  conduct  of  the  committee  of  the  British 
and  Foreign  Bible  Society.  During  this  period  also,  and  on  the  occasion 
of  the  death  of  Dr  Andrew  Thomson  of  St  George's,  Edinburgh,  he 
prepared  for  one  of  the  Perth  papers  a  short  but  discriminating  article  on 
the  life  and  character  of  that  eminent  man,  a  few  sentences  of  which  we 
may  quote,  to  shew  at  once  the  style  of  the  writer,  and  the  estimate  that 
he  had  formed  of  the  subject  of  his  article  : — 

"As  a  public  debater,  he  was  confessedly  unrivalled.  His  knowledge  of  Church 
law  was  extensive  and  accurate,  and  the  power  with  which  he  brought  this  knowledge 
to  bear  on  any  particular  point  was  truly  astonishing.  He  seized  upon  the  arguments 
of  his  adversary  with  the  grasp  of  a  giant,  and  tossed  them  about  in  every  form,  until 
their  emptiness  and  insufficiency  were  obvious,  even  to  the  simplest  comprehension. 
He  was  superior  to  the  trickeries  and  claptraps  of  a  mere  public  declaimer.  He  pro- 
ceeded directly  and  unflinchingly  to  the  establishment  of  his  object ;  and  although  he 
frequently  rose  to  the  highest  pitch  of  eloquence,  he  disdained  to  turn  from  his  way  in 
search  of  a  figure,  or  to  attempt  to  move  a  feeling  without  at  the  same  time  implanting 
a  principle.  Disingenuousness  in  all  its  forms  was  most  alien  to  his  nature,  and  never 
failed  to  arouse  his  keenest  indignation,  and  the  cutting  sarcasm  and  stern  reproof  which 
he  thundered  forth  against  every  exhibition  of  it  in  public  men,  often  made  the  stoutest 
heart  to  quail  with  terror.  The  votes  of  the  Assembly,  and  the  voice  of  an  interested 
few,  may  have  often  been  against  him  ;  but  where  is  the  case  in  which  the  conviction  o( 
his  auditors,  and  the  voice  of  the  country,  were  not  ultimately  in  his  favour  ?  No  public 
man  was  ever  more  entirely  free  from  the  influence  of  interested  motives.  Even  his 
most  inveterate  enemies  have  never  dared  to  bring  an  accusation  against  him." 

In  the  month  of  August  1833,  Mr  Bannerman  was  settled  at 
Ormiston,  in  the  Presbytery  of  Dalkeith,  and  in  1839  he  married  the 
younger  daughter  of  the  Hon.  Lord  Reston,  one  of  the  senators  of  the 
College  of  Justice. 

Mr  Bannerman 's  influence  and  weight  of  character  were  soon  felt  in 
his  own  Presbytery  and  Synod,  and  on  him,  as  convener  of  the  com- 
mittee appointed  to  examine  and  report  on  the  writings  of  Mr  Wright 
of  Borthwick,  no  small  share  of  the  responsibility  and  labour  of  conducting 
the  case  devolved.     When  the  case  came  before  the  Assembly  in  184 1 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

for  final  judgment,  the  opening  speech  was  made  by  him  ;  and  his  reply 
to  the  defence  offered  by  Mr  Inglis  (now  the  Lord  Justice-General),  Mr 
Wright's  counsel,  was  most  characteristic,  shewing  that  as  he  knew 
when  to  speak,  he  knew  also  when  speaking  was  unnecessarj'. 

In  the  conflict  which  preceded  the  Disruption  Mr  Bannerman  was 
not  idle,  and  a  letter  which  he  addressed  to  the  Marquis  of  Tweeddale, 
and  published  in  March  1840,  in  reply  to  the  speeches  made  at  an 
intrusion  meeting  held  in  Haddington  in  the  month  of  February  of  that 
year,  did  great  and  good  service.  His  knowledge  of  the  history  and 
constitution  of  the  Church,  his  full  acquaintance  with  the  principles 
involved  in  the  struggle  then  raging,  his  ability  to  defend  his  own 
convictions,  and  to  meet  the  statements  and  repel  the  arguments  of 
opponents,  are  most  apparent.  The  commencement  of  this  letter  shews 
how  effectively  Mr  Bannerman  could  have  employed  sarcasm,  had 
he  chosen  to  use  that  weapon.  The  concluding  sentences  may  be 
quoted  : — 

"  I  have  already  probably  bestowed  more  attention  on  the  speeches  at  Haddington 
than  their  worth  or  importance  demanded.  I  doubt  not  that  your  lordship  now 
looks  back  upon  the  meeting  over  which  you  presided  with  anything  but  emotions  of 
pleasure.  Allow  me  to  say,  my  lord,  that  it  is  neither  a  very  suitable  nor  a  very  safe 
position  for  the  aristocracy  of  our  country  to  occupy,  when  they  place  themselves  in 
opposition  to  the  people  and  the  Church  of  Scotland,  and  league  themselves  with 
those  who  would  deny  her  Christian  rights,  and  help  on  her  present  affliction.  I 
observe  in  the  resolutions  of  the  meeting,  signed  by  you  as  chairman,  that  the  advice 
IS  tendered  to  the  Church  to  yield  obedience,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  sentence  ol 
the  Civil  Court,  as  a  means  of  obtaining  the  interposition  of  the  Legislature  in  her 
favour  afterwards.  My  lord,  if  we  could  submit  to  the  sentence  of  the  Civil  Court  at 
all,  there  would  be  no  need  for  the  interposition  of  the  Legislature — it  is  because  we 
cannot,  that  we  decline  that  interposition.  We  cannot  submit,  because  in  doing  so 
we  would  sacrifice  our  own  consciences,  we  would  sacrifice  the  rights  of  the  Christian 
people,  we  would  sacrifice  our  duty  to  our  living  and  exalted  Head.  If  the  friendship 
and  support  of  your  lordship  are  to  be  purchased  only  by  that  submission,  they  would 
be  purchased  at  too  dear  a  price.  There  are,  indeed,  fearful  odds  against  the  Church 
in  her  present  conflict,  if  you  look  merely  to  outward  appearances.  On  the  one  side 
is  the  power  of  the  Civil  Court,  armed  by  those  civil  sanctions  which  the  bravest 
must  feel,  although  he  does  not  fear  them.     And  on  the  other  side,  there  is  to  be 


y.lMES  BANNERAfAN,  D.D. 

found  only  reason  and  scripture,  and  the  prayers  of  a  Christian  people.  Bui  the  eye 
of  faith,  even  amid  all  this  darkness,  will  behold  a  brighter  sight.  The  servant  of  the 
man  of  God  in  Dothan  could  discern  nothing  but  the  host  of  the  Syrian  around  him, 
and  apprehended  nothing  but  death  approaching,  until  his  eyes  were  opened  to  behold 
the  mountain  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  Elisha.  And  even  so  the 
eye  that  is  lifted  up  to  God  in  faith,  and  looks  beyond  the  darkness  that  covers  the 
field  of  our  present  contendings  here  below,  will  be  enabled  to  discern  the  horses  and 
chariots  of  fire  round  about  the  Church  of  our  fathers." 

The  Assembly  of  1840  appointed  a  Special  Commission  to  co-operate 
with  the  Presbytery  of  Strathbogie  in  providing  for  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  and  the  administration  of  the  ordinances  of  religion  and  the 
exercise  of  discipline  in  the  parishes  of  the  seven  suspended  ministers 
of  that  Presbytery ;  and  as  indicating  the  high  estimation  in  which  by 
this  time  Mr  Bannerman  was  held,  he  was  named  Convener  of  this 
Commission  ;  and  nine  years  afterwards,  when  moving  that  he  should  be 
appointed  to  the  vacant  professorship,  Dr  Candlish  thus  spoke  of  the 
manner  in  which  he  had  discharged  the  duties  of  Convener  :^ 

"  He  (Dr  Candlish)  had  taken  the  liberty  of  referring  formerly,  and  he  would  refer 
again  to  the  fact,  that  in  one  of  the  most  weighty  matters  the  Church  had  in  considera- 
tion before  the  Disruption,  during  the  '  ten  years'  conflict,'  he  alluded  to  the  matter  of 
the  Strathbogie  Commission,  the  Church  committed  that  business  to  Mr  Bannerman, 
and  was  thoroughly  satisfied  with  the  admirable  manner  in  which  he  discharged  it." 

From  the  Report  of  the  Commission  given  in  by  him  to  the  Assembly 
of  1 841,  a  few  sentences  may  be  quoted  : — 

"  The  Commission  have  reason  to  know  that  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  both  by 
the  licentiates  and  the  ministers  of  the  Church  appointed  by  them,  has  met  with 
peculiar  and  very  general  acceptance  among  the  people  of  the  different  parishes,  and 
they  have  good  reason  for  believing  that  in  not  a  few  instances  the  blessing  of  God 
has  accompanied  and  given  testimony  to  his  own  word.  And  further,  your  Commis- 
sion must  be  permitted  to  say,  that  considering  the  manifest  blessing  which  has  followed 
the  labours  of  the  Church  in  the  district  of  Strathbogie.  even  in  circumstances  of 
much  painfulness,  they  have  been  encouraged  to  entertain  the  assurance,  that  in  the 
midst  of  present  trials  her  God  has  not  forgotten  to  be  gracious,  but  that  he  takes 
pleasure  in  her  stones,  and  favours  the  dust  thereof" 

In  September  1841  Dr  M'Farlan  of  Greenock,  along  with  Mr 
Bannerman,    were   in    London  as  a  deputation  to  prepare   the  way   for 


DISRUPTION   WORTHIES. 

the  larger  party  who  followed,  and,  as  he  wrote  at  the  time,  they  had 
"  very  disagreeable  work  "  in  holding  meetings  with  official  people. 
They  were  joined  by  Dr  Gordon,  Dr  Candlish,  and  others,  and  on  25th 
September  1841  had  their  interview  with  Sir  Robert  Peel.  A  letter  of 
Mr  Bannerman's  of  that  date  states — "  He  was  very  courteous,  but  very 
close ;  .  .  .  was  not  prepared  to  say  anything  decisive,  but  was  ready  to 
hear  all  we  had  to  say." 

After  the  Disruption,  Mr  Bannerman  continued  minister  of  the  con- 
gregation at  Ormiston  adhering  to  the  Free  Church,  till  he  was  appointed 
Professor  of  Apologetics  and  Pastoral  Theology  in  the  New  College, 
Edinburgh,  by  the  Assembly  1849.  This  is  not  the  place  to  speak  of 
his  fitness  for  the  office,  nor  of  the  admirable  manner  in  which  he 
discharged  its  duties,  and  neither  is  it  necessary  to  do  so.  The 
introductory  lecture,  on  "The  Prevalent  Forms  of  Unbelief,"  published 
in  1849;  another  lecture  on  "  Apologetical  Theology,"  published  in 
185 1  ;  the  treatise  on  "Inspiration:  The  Infallible  Truth  and  Divine 
Authority  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,"  which  was  given  to  the  Church 
in  1865  ;  and  the  posthumous  volumes  on  the  "  Nature,  Powers, 
Ordinances,  Discipline,  and  Government  of  the  Christian  Church," 
edited  by  his  son,  and  published  in  1868,  affiard  ample  proof  of  his 
qualifications ;  and  they  who  studied  under  him  are  not  slow  to  tell  of 
the  benefit  which  they  derived  from  his  lectures,  and  from  his  kind  and 
considerate  counsels. 

In  his  address  as  Moderator  to  the  Assembly  of  186S,  Mr  Ni.xon  of 
Montrose  well  said  : — 


"And  we  have  lost  Dr  Bannerman,  the  able  and  accomplished  Professor  of 
Apologetical  Theology,  enduring  proofs  and  memorials  of  whose  clear,  massive, 
energetic,  logical  mind,  have  been  furnished  by  his  teaching  to  not  a  few  ministers  of 
the  Church  in  their  student  days,  and  by  his  admirable,  but  alas  !  too  scanty  writings 
to  the  Church  at  large." 

Doubtless  had  his  life  been  spared,  his  writings  would  have  been 
more  numerous  ;  but  in  addition  to  the  works  already  mentioned — and 


7A.UES  nAA'.XEI^MAN,  D.D. 
the  largest  of  these  was  unpublished  when  Mr  Nixon  spoke— Dr 
Bannerman  was  the  author  of  a  number  of  articles  in  the  North  British 
Review  on  a  variety  of  subjects.  A  posthumous  volume  of  Sermons  has 
also  been  edited  by  his  son.  And  we  must  not  forget  to  mention  the 
large  share  he  had  in  the  responsibility  of  preparing  for  publication  the 
posthumous  works  of  his  much  loved  and  intimate  friend,  Principal 
Cunningham.  The  death  of  this  eminent  man  was  felt  by  him,  not  only 
as  an  irreparable  loss  to  the  Church,  but  as  a  deep  personal  affliction. 
Theirs  was  a  long-tried  friendship,  endeared  and  strengthened  by  the 
truest  fellowship  in  the  work  of  the  College,  over  whose  welfare  they  had 
many  an  earnest  and  prayerful  deliberation. 

In  1850  Mr  Bannerman  received  the  degree  of  D.D.  from  the 
Princeton  College,  New  Jersey, 

In  the  movement  in  favour  of  union  with  the  United  Presbyterian, 
the  Reformed  Presbyterian,  and  the  English  Presbyterian  Churches,  Dr 
Bannerman  took  a  warm  interest  and  a  decided  and  active  part  from 
the  first,  and  soon  became  one  of  the  most  prominent  advocates  of  the 
measure.  However  much  some  of  the  members  of  the  joint-committee 
diflfered  from  him,  all  admitted  his  ability  and  the  fairness  with  which 
he  stated  and  defended  his  own  convictions  The  substance  of  the 
speech  which  he  made  in  his  Presbytery  in  January  1867,  when  he 
moved  and  carried  an  amendment  to  a  motion  made  by  Dr  Begg,  was 
afterwards  published,  and  contains,  in  brief  compass,  a  most  clear  and 
distinct  vindication  of  the  motives  by  which  he  and  his  friends  were 
actuated,  and  at  the  same  time  an  admirable  statement  of  the  principles 
embodied  in  the  word  of  God  and  recognised  by  our  Church,  that  should 
regulate  the  duty  of  union  between  separate  churches. 

Elected  a  member  of  the  Assembly  1867,  he  was  not  able  to  take 
any  part  in  the  proceedings,  and  though,  with  his  usual  self-denial,  he 
continued  to  meet  his  classes  till  the  following  spring,  increasing  weak- 
ness too  plainly  intimated  that  hi.=  valuable  life  was  near  its  close  ;  and 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  end  came  on  2-j\.\\  March  1868.  The  truth,  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  which 
he  had  so  firmly  held  and  so  faithfully  preached  and  taught,  was  the 
ever-abiding  foundation  of  his  hopes,  and  the  presence  of  the  Master 
whom  he  loved  sustained  him  to  the  end.  His  weakened  frame  was 
resting  on  her  who  was  dearest  to  him,  when  he  said,  "  This  is  death  ; " 
and  to  the  remark,  "  Yes,  but  you  have  peace,"  he  replied,  "  Let  Thy 
servant  now  depart  in  peace.  I  have  waited  for  Thy  salvation,  O  God  !  " 
Thus  passed  from  among  us  one  who  only  required  to  be  known  to  be 
loved.  A  natural  reserve  made  him  appear  to  superficial  observers  cold 
and  somewhat  distant  in  manner,  but  he  was,  on  the  contrary,  easy  of 
access,  with  very  true  and  tender  sympathies.  Early  brought  under  the 
saving  power  of  divine  truth,  there  was  a  reality  and  a  symmetry  about 
his  Christianity  that  commanded  confidence  and  respect  in  all  who  knew 
him.  Generous,  high-minded,  and  thoroughly  trustworthy,  with  a  heart 
true  to  God  and  true  to  all  around  him,  loveable  and  loving,  he  had  a 
large  circle  of  deeply  attached  friends,  who  greatly  felt  his  departure ; 
and  he  left  his  widow  and  nine  children — seven  of  whom  still  survive — 
to  mourn  his  irreparable  loss.  J.  R.  O. 


w 


JAME  S    BE&G,  D.D, 


Jurats  Btgg,  ©.1, 


N  the  front  of  the  Gallery,  close  by  the  right-hand  pillar,  in 
the  picture  of  "  The  First  General  Assembly  of  the  Free 
Church  of  Scotland  Signing  the  Act  of  Separation  and 
Deed  of  Demission,"  an  interesting  group  of  seven  Scottish 
Worthies  is  conspicuous.  Dr.  R.  S.  Candlish,  of  St.  George's, 
Edinburgh,  has  the  roll  of  Members  of  Assembly  open  in  his  hand. 
Next  to  him  are  seen  the  venerable  Dr.  Muirhead  of  Cramond,  and  Dr. 
Wm.  Cunningham,  after\vards  Principal  of  the  New  College.  In  the 
midst — between  these  and  Dr.  Thomas  Guthrie,  with  Mr.  Andrew  Gray, 
of  Perth,  speaking  to  one  of  the  most  notable  of  Disruption  elders,  Mr. 
Makgill  Crichton, — stands  a  dark-haired,  vigorous  looking  man,  who, 
staff  in  hand,  has  his  eye  fixed  upon  the  Moderator,  and  seems  to  be 
profoundly  meditating  on  the  scene.  That  one  in  the  centre,  the  only 
one  of  the  seven  who  still  survives,  is  the  Rev.  Dr.  Begg,  then  Parish 
Minister  of  Liberton. 

The  second  son  of  an  energetic  and  influential  Minister  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland  (who  survived  till  his  83rd  year) — Dr.  Begg — was  born 
in  the  manse  of  New  Monkland,  near  Airdric,  on  the  31st  October,  1808. 
There  those  Church  principles  to  which  he  ever  after  clung,  were  instilled 
into  his  mind.  "  I  heard,"  he  told  in  1865,  "the  doctrine  of  the  spiritual 
independence  of  the  Church,  the  struggles  of  Knox,  Henderson,  and 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


others,  the  atrocities  of  the  violent  settlements,  discussed  in  my  father's 
manse  by  eminent  men  long  since  gone  to  their  rest."  After  a  preliminary 
education  at  the  parish  school,  extremely  well  taught,  he  entered  the 
Glasgow  University,  where  he  speedily  gave  evidence  of  those  talents, 
and  that  energy  for  which  he  became  so  distinguished,  passing  what  is 
called  the  "  Black-Stone  Examination  "  on  the  9th  April,  1824,  when  he 
was  under  sixteen  years  of  age.  After  taking  his  degree  of  M.A.,  James 
Begg  was  licensed  to  preach  the  Gospel  by  the  Presbytery  of  Hamilton, 
on  the  lOth  June,  1829.  He  was  immediately  appointed  Assistant  to 
the  Rev.  James  Buchanan,  of  North  Leith,  and  before  a  year  expired 
he  was  called  as  Minister  of  the  new  Chapel  of  Ease  in  Maxwelltown, 
Dumfries.  At  his  ordination  on  the  i8th  May,  1830,  the  Church  was 
crowded  to  excess.  Here  he  immediately  secured  a  large  congregation, 
but  was  only  allowed  to  remain  for  six  or  seven  months,  becoming 
Assistant  to  the  venerable  Dr.  Jones,  in  Lady  Glenorchy's  Chapel, 
Edinburgh.  Thereafter,  inducted  as  Minister  of  the  Middle  Parish 
Church,  Paisley,  his  popularity  increased ;  and,  there  he  spent  three 
of  his  most  stirring  years,  throwing  himself  heart  and  soul  into  the 
controversies  of  the  day,  contending  for  the  legitimacy  of  establish- 
ments or  national  religion,  as  also  for  the  Church's  freedom  from  civil 
dictation  in  spiritual  matters.  In  the  sixth  of  his  recent  articles  on 
"The  State  and  Prospects  of  Scotland,"  Dr.  Begg  gives  copies  of 
petitions  of  his  session  and  congregation  in  1834 — prior  to  the  passing 
of  the  Veto  and  Chapel  Acts — setting  forth  that  the  Patronage  Act 
of  Queen  Anne,  in  violation  of  the  Treaty  of  Union,  and  the  want  of 
power  to  subdivide  parishes  lay  at  the  root  of  the  Church's  difficulties. 

After  untiring  labours  in  the  West,  he  was  translated  to  Liberton 
parish  on  the  i8th  February,  1835,  remaining  there  till  the  Disruption, 
and  effecting  a  decided  moral  reformation.  At  his  entry,  there  were  thirty- 
three  public-houses  in  the  parish,  in  which  9CXX)  gallons  of  spirits  were 
annually  consumed,  at  an  expense  of  ;£'4500.     Publishing  a  statement  to 


JAMES  BEGG,  D.D. 

the  heritors  and  a  statistical  account  of  the  parish,  he  revealed  the  cause 
of  abounding  poverty,  the  result  being  that  seven  dram-shops  were 
immediately  closed.  Preaching  a  full  and  free  Gospel,  and  embracing 
and  promulgating  what  he  felt  to  be  the  truth  of  God,  Mr.  Begg  went 
resolutely  forward  on  the  side  of  the  Evangelical  party,  and  when  the 
solemn  Convocation  and  day  of  the  Disruption  came,  he  was  not 
found  wanting.  He  was  an  active  worker  along  with  Dr.  Chalmers, 
and  one  of  those  honoured  ministers  of  Christ  interdicted  from 
preaching  at  Huntly  in  the  famous  Presbytery  of  Strathbogie,  on  the 
2nd  April,  1840.  This  civil  interdict  in  the  performance  of  a  spiritual 
duty  he  disregarded,  while  retaining  the  document.  Again,  on  the  i  ith 
May  of  that  year,  along  with  Dr.  Guthrie,  he  was  once  more  interdicted 
from  speaking  in  Gilcomston  Church,  Aberdeen,  with  a  like  result — the 
document  bearing  that  "  the  said  Messrs.  Guthrie  and  Begg  are  travelling 
tlirough  the  country  haranguing  the  people  for  the  purpose  of  subverting 
the  Established  Church,"  &c. 

Immediately  after  the  Disruption,  as  two  ministers  left  the  Establish- 
ment in  Liberton  and  none  at  Newington,  with  a  number  of  his  people, 
Mr.  Begg  removed  his  public  ministrations  to  Newington,  Edinburgh, 
taking  a  site  where  the  present  handsome  edifice  stands.  Soon  a  large 
and  influential  congregation  gathered  around  the  earnest  and  enthusiastic 
preacher,  which  to  this  day  has  fully  maintained  its  ground.  His  method 
of  expounding  a  portion  of  Old  and  New  Testament  alternately,  with 
clear  Scriptural  preaching  faithfully  applied,  has  been  greatly  relished. 
It  was  in  Mr.  Begg's  drawing-room  at  Liberton  that  The  Witness 
newspaper  was  initiated  by  the  eminent  brethren  assembled.  The 
Scottish  Guardian  for  ten  years  had  done  good  service  in  the  West ;  but 
money  had  been  subscribed  for  a  paper  in  the  East,  and  when  Hugh 
Miller's  "Letter  to  Lord  Brougham"  was  there  introduced,  they  felt  and 
said,  this  is  the  man  we  want. 

Sent  as  a  deputy  to  Canada  to  preach  and  to  disseminate  intelligence, 


DISR  UP  TION  U  'OR  THIES. 

the  narrative  of  his  visit  to  the  American  Continent  in  the  depth  of  the 
winter  of  1845,  as  described  by  himself  in  The  Free  Chiircli  Magazine,  is 
deeply  interesting,  and  brings  out  the  shrewd  Christian  energy  of  the 
man.  Some  suggestions  he  then  made  have  since  been  reahsed.  He 
then  crossed  over  to  the  United  States.  Having  preached  and  spoken 
with  great  acceptance  in  Boston,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and  having 
ultimately  preached  to  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  at  Washington, 
after  his  return,  Mr.  Begg  received  a  letter  from  Dr.  M'Elroy,  an  eminent 
minister  of  New  York,  enclosing  a  Degree  in  Divinity  from  Lafayette 
College,  Pennsylvania,  of  which  Dr.  M'Elroy  was  one  of  the  directors, 
of  date  14th  September,  1847. 

In  the  year  1850,  the  Pope,  presuming  on  the  apathy  of  the  English 
people,  divided  England  into  thirteen  dioceses,  appointing  over  them  as 
many  Bishops,  thus  re-establishing  the  Papal  Hierarchy  in  England. 
This  called  out — in  a  storm  of  indignation — the  Protestant  zeal  and 
energy  of  Christians  of  every  name.  In  none  were  these  more  conspicuous 
and  continuous  than  in  Dr.  James  Bcgg.  Instead  of  allowing  that 
powerful  wave  to  float  past  unimproved,  by  a  vigorous  combination,  the 
Scottish  Reformation  Society  was  called  into  existence,  a  mission  to 
Romanists  organised,  and  The  Bulwark  or  Reformation  Journal  launched, 
with  a  circulation  of  32,000.  Dr.  Begg  ably  edited  this  journal  for  twenty- 
one  years.  Out  of  these  movements  arose  a  general  desire  to  celebrate 
the  Tercentenary  of  the  Reformation,  which,  mainly  under  Dr.  Begg's 
guidance,  was  suitably  accomplished.  Protestants  from  all  parts  of  the 
world  met,  and  thoughtfully  and  thankfully  conferred  for  four  days  in 
Edinburgh.  That  Protestant  Congress,  on  the  17th  August,  i860,  went 
in  procession  from  the  New  Assembly  Hall  and  laid  the  foundation 
stone  of  the  Protestant  Institute  of  Scotland  as  a  training  college  for 
students  of  all  denominations  in  Protestant  principles.  Dr.  Begg  had 
previously  secured  by  purchase  the  Cowgate  Chapel,  in  which  the  first 
General  Assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  was  held,  and  where  John 


JAMES  ni:GG,  D.D. 

Craig,  the  colleague  of  John  Knox,  preached  at  that  period.  The 
purchase  of  the  chapel,  a  site  on  George  IV.  Bridge,  and  the  feu-duty, 
the  plan,  erection,  and  endowment  of  the  Institute — the  labour  of  years — 
were  all,  with  the  help  of  two  assistants,  the  Rev.  Drs.  Badenoch,  of  the 
Protestant  Educational  Institute,  London,  and  J.  Moir  Porteous,  Wan- 
lockhead,  the  work  of  Dr.  Begg.  The  whole  cost  about  ;£'io,ooo.  On 
the  4th  February,  1864,  an  oil  painting  of  its  founder,  by  Norman 
Macbeth,  R.S.A.,  giving  a  life-size  and  life-like  representation  of  Dr.  Begg 
in  the  attitude  of  addressing  a  public  meeting,  was,  as  the  inscription  on 
it  bears,  "  Presented  by  a  few  friends  to  the  Protestant  Institute  of 
Scotland,  the  establishment  of  which  is  chiefly  owing  to  Dr.  Begg's  long- 
sustained  and  arduous  efforts  on  Its  behalf,  and  of  the  Protestant  cause 
at  large." 

Social  questions,  also,  occupied  much  of  Dr.  Begg's  attention,  and  by 
his  public  advocacy  of  remedial  measures,  as  well  as  by  the  utilisation 
of  Church  organisation,  the  attention  of  the  community  and  of  the 
Government  were  drawn  to  these.  The  Bothy  system,  the  want  of  proper 
cottages  for  ploughmen  and  field-labourers,  the  dreadful  scenes  and 
immorality  consequent  thereon,  the  growing  evils  of  pauperism  and 
crime  through  intemperance  and  thriftlessness,  the  want  of  proper 
legislation  suited  to  the  requirements  and  rights  of  Scotland,  for  a  long 
series  of  years  were  enforced  in  Church  Courts,  on  platforms,  and  through 
the  press.  Dr.  Begg  continuously  argued  that  no  arrangements  could 
secure  prosperity  which  superseded  the  family  system,  which  lay  at  the 
foundation  of  all  social  morality.  By  these  and  other  efforts,  working 
men  were  led  to  organise,  save,  act  together,  and  erect  numbers  of  houses 
for  themselves,  while  benevolent  landlords  were  stimulated  to  improve 
their  cottars'  dwellings. 

These  objects  were  not  suffered  to  monopolise  public,  or  stand  in  the 
way  of  more  private  ecclesiastical  duties.  After  the  Disruption,  Dr.  Begg 
had   mainly  to  do  with   getting  an   Act  of  Parliament  to  secure  the 


D/S/i  UP  TION  1 1  -OK  THIES. 

perpetuation,  without  formal  renewal,  of  the  titles  of  Dissenting  Church 
property,  by  which  an  immense  amount  of  risk  and  expense  has  been 
saved,  a  similar  Act  being  aftenvards  secured  by  the  Dissenters  of  England. 
It  was  also  considerably  through  his  efforts  that  such  clauses  were 
inserted  in  the  Education  Act  as  enable  School  Boards  in  Scotland  to 
continue  religious  teaching  according  to  "  use  and  wont."  More  recently 
still.  Dr.  Bcgg  was  Convener  of  a  Committee  which  secured  an  Act  of 
Parliament  to  enable  the  Free  Church  to  sell  such  schools  as  have 
become  unnecessary,  a  service  that  was  specially  acknowledged  by  the 
Commission  and  Assembly. 

Into  the  proposals  for  Union  amongst  the  disestablished  Churches 
in  Scotland  Dr.  Begg  entered  at  first  very  cordially,  an  approximation, 
under  a  different  form  and  in  other  circumstances,  to  the  grand  idea 
of  Alexander  Henderson.  To  heal  divisions  would  be  most  important. 
"  But  then,"  said  he,  "  the  question  arises,  '  Can  it  be  brought  about  in 
such  a  way  as  to  conser\"e  our  principles,  which  we  cannot  surrender?'" 

On  one  of  Dr.  Begg's  frequent  journeys  to  London  on  public  duty, 
he  met  with  a  severe  railway  accident,  the  carriage  having  been  over- 
turned and  dragged  a  considerable  way.  Laid  up  in  a  railway  hotel  for 
some  time,  the  sympathies  of  his  congregation,  the  Church,  and  countiy 
were  fervently  called  forth.  This  was  in  the  beginning  of  1S65,  he 
having  been  previously  chosen  as  Moderator  elect  of  the  General 
Assembly,  and,  notwithstanding  his  being  very  lame,  he  was  able  to 
discharge  the  duties.  His  fitness  to  preside  over,  and  guide  the  delibera- 
tions of,  the  Assembly  were  fully  acknowledged,  this  highest  honour 
proving  the  Church's  appreciation  of  his  services. 

By  a  majority,  the  Free  Church  Union  Committee  resolved  to  carry 
forward  the  union,  and  in  the  Assembly  1867,  by  a  large  majority,  it  was 
declared  that  the  distinctive  principles  of  the  Free  Church  in  regard  to 
national  duty  and  obligation  might  be  made,  as  the  majority  thought,  an 
open  question,  and  that  "  there  was  no  bar  to  union  on  the  first  head  of 


JAMES  DECG,  V.D. 

the  programme."  Ur.  Begg  and  others  felt  called  upon  to  lodge  a 
protest  against  this  resolution  as  implying  "  an  abandonment  and  subver- 
sion of  an  admittedly  constitutional  principle,"  and  as  being  ultra  vires 
of  the  Assembly.  With  six  or  seven  members  of  the  Committee,  he 
resigned.  An  intense  conflict  now  arose,  and  prevailed  until  the  Assembly 
of  1873.  A  "Free  Church  Defence  Association"  was  organised,  and 
T/ie  Watchword,  "  a  magazine  for  the  defence  of  Bible  truth  and  the 
advocacy  of  Free  Church  principles,"  edited  by  Dr.  Begg,  was  widely 
circulated.  As  in  the  previous  "  Ten  Years'  Conflict,"  the  battle  raged 
again,  not  only  in  Church  Courts,  but  in  every  corner  of  the  land  ;  and 
as  the  pressure  increased  so  did  the  resistance.  After  consultation,  the 
opinion  of  learned  counsel  having  been  obtained,  every  preparation  was 
made  for  another  Disruption,  along  with  a  claim  on  church  property  by 
the  minority,  as  adhering  to  the  constitutional  principles  of  the  Free 
Church.  All  through  the  forenoon  sitting  of  the  Assembly  on  Thursday, 
28th  May,  1873,  a  bitter  separation  alone  was  in  prospect;  while  hearts 
were  bowed  in  sorrow,  although  clear  as  to  the  path  of  duty.  Hapi^ily, 
appeals  to  heaven  were  not  in  vain,  and  light  arose  in  the  darkness 
Dr.  Candlish  proposed  a  modification  of  the  Mutual  Eligibility  Scheme, 
which  practically  conserved  the  principles  of  the  Church,  and  time  being 
given  for  consideration,  that  was  finally  accepted  by  Dr.  Begg  and  the 
minority,  the  Moderator,  Dr.  Duff,  declaring,  "  It  is  the  doing  of  the  Lord," 
and  causing  special  thanksgivings  to  be  offered  up. 

On  his  return  from  a  six  months'  journey  to  New  Zealand,  on  a  visit 
to  his  sons.  Dr.  Begg,  receiving  a  public  welcome,  described  his  experience 
in  Australasia,  in  the  Literaiy  Institute,  on  the  28th  February,  1874. 
Sailing  by  Melbourne  to  New  Zealand,  after  traversing  the  country.  Dr. 
Begg  returned  by  Melbourne,  Ceylon,  and  Bombay.  .  Preaching,  speak- 
ing, and  interchanging  views,  he  everywhere  received  an  ovation. 

The  estimation  of  Dr.  Begg  as  a  Christian  patriot  was  thereafter 
evinced  in  various  ways.     A  presentation  of  the  sum  of  £4600,  got  up 


nJSRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

during  his  absence,  was  made  to  him  by  a  deputation  of  gentlemen  of 
several  denominations.  Another  proof  of  public  estimation  was  given  in 
his  return  at  the  head  of  the  poll  as  an  independent  member  of  the 
School  Board  in  1S75,  by  the  inhabitants  of  Edinburgh — strongly  sup- 
porting the  teaching  of  religion  in  the  public  schools,  and  deprecating 
removal  of  the  central  governing  Board  to  London. 

Notwithstanding  his  continual  and  multifarious  engagements,  Dr.Begg 
has,  with  slight  exceptions,  enjoyed  much  good  health.  His  "  Hints  on 
Health,"  as  to  the  minister's  sleep,  food,  throat,  dress,  and  exercise,  give 
the  results  of  his  own  practical  experience. 

Besides  numerous  speeches  and  tracts,  Dr.  Begg  has  issued  what 
would  make  volumes  of  pamphlets.  In  addition  to  editing  the  publica- 
tions named,  and  the  "  Select  Anti-Patronage  Library,"  with  prefaces  to 
important  works  re-issued,  Dr.  Begg  has  published  a  "  Handbook  of 
Popery,"  "  Happy  Homes  for  Working  Men,"  "  Free  Church  Principles," 
and  "  A  Treatise  for  the  Times  on  Worship." 

Twice  married,  he  has  had  a  large  family.  Not  unlike  the  statue  of 
Christopher  North  in  Princes  Street — tall,  strongly  built,  with  pleasing 
yet  settled  countenance  and  well-modulated  voice — Dr.  Begg,  ever  full  of 
his  subject,  has  invariably  commanded  the  attention  even  of  the  most 
hostile  audiences.  Principal  Fairbairn  not  inaptly  described  him,  as  "  one 
who  is  distinguished  for  his  practical  sense  and  business  habits,  whose 
counsel  and  sagacity  have  materially  contributed  to  the  success  of  what- 
ever scheme  he  favoured.  His  talents  as  a  public  speaker,  his  skill  and 
power  in  debate,  coolness  of  temper,  promptitude  of  decision,  and  readiness 
of  thought  and  utterance,  have  been  conspicuous." 

J.  M.  P. 


(<       ANDREW  A.  BONAR,D,D.^)(^ 


^ubrcb  ^.  Boniir,  iD.D. 


^.  Brook  Bcsor,  by  Andrew  Bonar,  D.D.,  Author  of 
'Memoir  of  R.  M.  M'Cheync,'  1879,"  is  a  title 
singularly  suggestive  of  much  that  is  fruitful  in  the 
religious  and  eventful  in  the  ecclesiastical  history  of 
Scotland  in  the  generation  that  is  now  fast  passing 
away. 

Thirty-five  years  have  intervened  between  Dr.  Andrew  Bonar's 
beautiful  and  characteristic  little  book  of  last  year,  and  the  faithful 
and  graphic  Memoir  which  has  made  his  friend's  name  and  his  own 
for  ever  fragrant.  The  lot  of  "two  men  in  the  field,  the  one  taken 
and  the  other  left,"  may  number  among  its  many  applications  the 
history  of  these  fellow-labourers  in  the  field  of  the  Gospel.  As  with  the 
two  apostolic  brothers,  James  and  John,  one  was  taken  the  first  of  all 
the  apostles,  and  the  other  left  the  last  of  all ;  so  with  these  two 
brethren  in  the  ministry — one  was  removed  by  his  Lord  in  youth,  while 
for  the  other  it  has  been  given  by  the  same  Lord  to  outlive  his  comrade 
by  more  years  than  he  had  seen  at  his  early  death,  and  with  the  hope  of 
many  useful  years  still  to  come.  The  wide  spiritual  and  moral  influence 
of  the  life  and  work  of  Robert  M'Cheyne,  enhanced  as  it  has  been  by 
his  apparently  premature  death,  is  in   no  small  degree  indebted  to  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

inimitable  biography  by  Andrew  Bonar ;  which,  by  the  blessing  of  God, 
has  embalmed  his  memory,  not  only  in  Scotland,  but  in  all  lands 
where  our  English  tongue  is  spoken,  and  is  of  itself  a  great  work  for  a 
lifetime. 

But  of  the  two  together  in  the  field,  whilst  the  one  was  graciously 
taken,  the  other  has  been  graciously  left ;  and,  apart  from  his  abundant 
and  fruitful  work  in  his  own  two  churches,  first  in  the  retired  country, 
and  afterwards  in  the  crowded  city,  it  is  not  easy  to  estimate  the  influ- 
ence for  good  through  our  Church  and  land  that  has  flowed  from  Dr. 
Bonar's  life  and  ministry.  The  fruit  of  a  brief  work,  an  early  death, 
and  a  holy  memory  in  the  case  of  his  beloved  friend,  has  in  him  been 
exchanged  for  a  high  and  consistent  Christian  life,  sustained  through  a 
long  course  of  years,  with  his  head  anointed  with  fresh  oil,  and  his 
vigour  like  the  palm  tree  that  still  bears  fruit  in  its  age. 

The  Church  of  Christ  on  earth  needs  all  kinds  of  men  for  her  varied 
service  in  an  adverse  world,  which  she  is  sent  at  once  to  conquer  and  to 
win  ;  men  to  lead  her  counsels,  men  to  fight  her  battles,  men  to  state 
and  vindicate  her  truths,  men  to  search  and  explain  her  Scriptures.  But 
most  of  all  she  needs  men  to  preach  her  Gospel  and  to  illustrate  her 
grace  in  their  own  character  and  lives.  This  blessing  in  his  own  place  is 
found  in  every  faithful  minister  of  Christ.  But  it  is  an  incalculable 
gain  to  the  Church  and  to  our  human  family  when  a  man  eminent 
for  gifts  is  still  more  distinguished  by  grace ;  like  a  lamp  on  a  watch- 
tower  seen  near  and  far,  and  guiding  men  to  Him  who  is  "The  Light 
of  the  World."  Such  a  minister  is  a  constant  vindication  of  the  Gospel, 
and  a  daily  lesson-book  of  its  truths ;  "  an  epistle  known  and  read  of 
all  men."  One  man,  with  the  joy  of  the  Lord  for  his  strength,  in  truth 
and  meekness  bearing  the  image  of  his  Master,  humbling  himself  and 
exalting  his  Lord,  and  by  his  life  saying  to  others,  "  Be  ye  followers  of 
me  as  I  also  am  of  Christ ;"  one  man  whose  character  all  own  as  a  work 
of  grace,  when  divinely  upheld  through  a  long  course  of  active  service. 


ANDREW  A.  BONAR,  D.D. 

is  a  great  boon  both  to  his  brethren  in  the  ministry,  and  to  all  the 
Churches  in  the  land. 

Such  a  man  is  the  subject  of  this  sketch.  What  Dr.  Candlish  once 
remarked  of  M'Cheyne  was  equally  true  of  his  biographer.  "  I  can't 
understand  M'Cheyne,"  he  said,  "  grace  seems  to  be  natural  to  him,  as  if 
it  needed  no  effort  for  him  to  be  good."  Yet  this  is  only  by  grace  so 
abounding  as  to  become  a  second  nature;  and  both  these  brothers  were  in 
fullest  sympathy  with  Paul  in  saying,  "Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I  am  chief"  Andrew  Bonar  has  been  enabled 
to  unite  the  gentleness  of  Christ  with  great  steadfastness  of  purpose ;  love 
with  faithfulness  ;  strength  of  personal  affection  with  kindness  to  all ; 
retirement  with  the  greatest  openness  and  frankness  ;  great  activity  and 
perseverance  in  ministerial  work,  so  as  to  be  "  in  labours  more  abundant," 
with  a  most  characteristic  calmness  and  freedom  from  haste  ;  along  with 
singlene-ss  of  eye,  absence  of  self,  and  an  uncommon  transparency.  These 
elements,  happily  mingled,  have  formed  a  character  at  once  so  consistent 
and  so  attractive,  that  if  this  one  name  had  been  lacking  in  the  roll 
of  our  ministers,  we  cannot  estimate  the  loss  our  Church  would  have 
suffered  through  an  entire  generation. 

Mr.  Andrew  Alexander  Bonar  was  born  in  Edinburgh  on  the  29th 
of  May,  1 8 10.  He  was  the  seventh  son  of  James  Bonar,  Esq.,  Search 
Solicitor  of  Excise,  of  whom  it  has  been  said,  that  he  was  "  a  man  of 
varied  and  extensive  literature,  and  Christian  excellency,  author  of 
several  philological  and  other  treatises,  and  a  valued  correspondent  of 
the  most  learned  men  of  his  day." 

Of  his  honoured  ancestors  Dr.  Bonar  gave  the  following  account 
from  the  Moderator's  chair  in  the  General  Assembly  at  Glasgow, 
dividing  the  honour  of  his  election  with  them  :  "  I  am  persuaded  that,  in 
choosing  me  for  this  office,  you  had  regard  to  my  forefathers  and 
relatives,  so  many  of  whom  have  in  this  Church  served  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  sought  the  good  of  His  people.     We  who  are  of  this  tribe  (if  I  may 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

SO  speak)  like  to  think  ourselves  connected  with  that  James  Bonar, 
minister  of  Maybole,  who  stood  by  the  side  of  the  great  Alexander 
Henderson  in  the  struggle  against  Prelacy ;  but  especially  we  boast 
of  our  descent  from  one  who  in  the  days  of  the  Covenant  forsook 
Episcopacy,  and  forfeited  ease  and  position,  if  not  wealth,  that  he 
might  become  a  minister  of  Christ  in  the  Presbyterian  Church  of 
Scotland.  Ordained  in  1692,  John  Bonar  was  spared  to  labour  as  the 
humble  pastor  of  the  parish  of  Torphichen  for  more  than  half  a  century. 
He  was  one  of  the  '  Twelve '  in  the  famous  '  Marrow  Controversy,' 
and  in  his  declining  years  was  more  than  ever  intent  on  the  conversion 
of  souls.  Having  seen  the  awakening  in  Kilsyth,  and  having  found 
something  of  the  same  blessing  among  his  own  people,  he,  in  the  last 
year  of  his  life,  journeyed,  with  great  difficulty,  to  witness  the  revival 
scenes  at  Cambuslang ;  and  returning  from  that  visit,  stood  on  the 
threshold  of  his  house,  exclaiming  in  the  fulness  of  his  heart,  '  Now, 
Lord,  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine  eyes  have  seen 
thy  salvation.'  From  that  manse  of  Torphichen  have  descended  all  of 
our  name  who  have  ministered  in  the  Church." 

Mr.  Bonar  was  educated  at  the  High  School,  in  which  he  distin- 
guished himself  as  Dux  of  the  School ;  he  gained  the  Macgregor  Medal 
in  1825,  and  the  Gold  Medal  given  by  the  Writers  to  the  Signet  in  1827. 
Afterwards  he  studied  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  In  1835  he  was 
licensed  to  preach  by  the  Presbytery  of  Jedburgh;  and  both  there,  in  assist- 
ing the  Rev.  Dr.  Purves,  and  afterwards  in  assisting  Dr.  Candlish  in  St. 
George's,  Edinburgh,  he  was  engaged  in  much  earnest  work  in  the  Gospel. 
In  1838  he  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  on  a  presentation  to  the  parish 
of  Collace,  in  Perthshire  ;  and  while  quietly  and  most  faithfully  working  in 
that  very  rural  parish,  there  came  across  his  secluded  path  a  providential 
call,  which  brought  him  more  prominently  before  the  Christian  community, 
and  has  associated  his  name  ever  since  with  the  salvation  of  Israel. 

His  early  friend,  Mr.  M'Cheyne,  was  engaged  in  his  fruitful  ministr>' 


ANJ)KEll-  A.  no  AAA',  D./l 

in  Dundee,  and  the  distance  from  Collacc  not  being  great,  they  saw 
much  of  each  other,  and  often  preached  in  each  other's  pulpits.  But  the 
labours  of  a  congregation  in  a  large  town  had  told  on  his  delicate 
frame,  and  the  state  of  his  health  caused  some  anxiety  to  his  relatives. 
A  double  interest  in  the  neglected  Jews  and  in  the  welfare  of  his  young 
friend,  suggested  to  Dr.  Candlish's  singularly  fertile  mind  the  idea  of  a 
mission  of  inquiry  to  the  Jews,  in  which  he  hoped  that  the  spiritual 
welfare  of  Israel  might  be  combined  with  recovery  of  health  to  an 
overtasked  minister.  One  day  on  the  street  he  said  to  the  present 
writer,  "  What  would  you  think  of  sending  M'Cheyne  to  Palestine  ?  it 
would  help  us  with  the  Jews,  and  would  give  him  a  rest."  According 
to  his  "  use  and  wont,"  he  quickly  followed  up  the  thought.  Mr.  Bonar, 
both  as  familiar  with  the  Hebrew  Bible  and  full  of  love  to  God's  ancient 
people,  and  as  M'Cheyne's  special  friend,  was  selected  to  form  with 
him  the  younger  branch  of  the  mission  ;  Dr.  Keith  and  Dr.  Black  as  the 
senior  members,  the  latter  distinguished  as  an  Oriental  scholar,  and  the 
former  very  widely  known  and  highly  honoured  as  a  writer  on  prophecy, 
which  is  so  closely  bound  up  with  Israel. 

Mr.  Bonar,  assisted  by  Mr.  M'Cheyne,  drew  up  the  "  Narrative  of 
Inquiry,"  which  awakened  in  Scotland  an  interest  in  the  Jews  that  has 
never  quite  abated,  and  is  now  increasing  with  the  providential  revival 
of  the  nation  out  of  the  dust  of  ages  ;  in  preparation,  doubtless,  for  a 
spiritual  resurrection  from  the  dead,  when  the  Spirit  shall  breathe  on 
the  dry  bones  which  are  "  coming  together,  bone  to  his  bone,"  while  as  yet 
"there  is  no  breath  in  them."  This  lively  interest  in  Israel  from  his 
youth  has  been  constant  and  fresh  ever  since  ;  his  name  is  ever  associated 
with  them  ;  and  he  has  done  much  to  keep  alive  the  hopes  which  seem 
now  to  be  hastening  toward  their  fulfilment.  Over  the  door  of  his  new 
church  in  Glasgow,  Mr.  Bonar  has  had  cut  in  the  stone  the  Hebrev/ 
words  of  the  text,  "  He  that  winneth  souls  is  wise  ; "  saying  that  it 
might  attract  some  passing  Jew. 


DISRUPTION  IVORTHIES. 

On  his  return  from  Palestine,  Mr.  Bonar  found  that  during  his  absence 
there  had  been  in  his  own  neighbourhood  a  remarkable  work  of  grace 
under  the  preaching  of  Mr.  William  Burns,  who  was  occupying  Mr. 
M'Cheyne's  pulpit.  The  absent  pastor  rejoiced  in  the  blessing  that  had 
come  on  his  flock,  and  associated  it  with  his  having  sought  the  good  of 
Jerusalem,  and  with  the  promise,  "  They  shall  prosper  that  love  thee." 
Mr.  Bonar  entered  with  his  whole  heart  and  with  labours  more  abundant 
into  the  work  of  the  Lord,  which  extended  to  his  own  as  to  many  other 
districts  in  the  land  ;  and  in  himself  throughout  his  future  ministrj',  as 
in  many  of  his  brethren,  the  hand  of  the  Lord  with  his  servants  at  that 
time  inspired  larger  hopes  of  the  kingdom  of  God  coming  with  power 
in  the  preaching  of  the  everlasting  Gospel. 

Side  by  side  with  a  reviving  ministrj^,  and  with  a  quickened  desire  in 
the  people  for  faithful  preaching,  there  had  for  a  number  of  years  been  a 
growing  desire  throughout  the  country  for  renewing  the  right  of  the 
Church  to  choose  its  own  ministers — the  intrusion  of  pastors  by  patrons 
on  an  unwilling  people  having  always  been  a  source  of  spiritual  deadness 
in  the  community.  The  religious  progress  of  a  generation  had  given 
rise  to  ecclesiastical  energy,  and  the  quickened  conscience  and  life  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland  gave  occasion  to  the  conflict  which  ended  in  its  Dis- 
ruption in  I S43. 

About  two  }-ears  before  that  great  event,  Mr.  Bonar,  along  with  many 
of  his  brethren,  preached  in  the  parishes  of  the  deposed  ministers  in 
Strathbogie  with  much  acceptance,  and  with  the  ingathering  of  a  spiritual 
han-est.  Although  amongst  the  meekest  of  men,  the  interdict  of  the 
civil  courts  could  not  deter  him  from  his  Master's  work ;  and  he  might 
have  added  his  own  name  to  the  words  of  M'Cheyne,  whom  we  met  in 
preaching  through  that  forbidden  district :  "  I  can  say  with  Paul,  that 
'from  Jerusalem  round  about  unto  Illyricum,  I  have  preached  the  Gospel 
of  Christ ; '  and  no  interdict  will  keep  me  from  preaching  in  Strathbogie." 
If  narrowness  of  mind,  restlessness  under  lawful  restraint,  pleasure   in 


ANDREW  A.  BONAR,  D.D. 

contention,  and  ecclesiastical  ambition  had  been  the  moving  springs  of 
that  great  conflict,  Mr.  Andrew  Bonar  would  have  been  the  last  man  in 
the  world  to  have  had  any  sympathy  with  its  objects,  or  to  have  taken 
any  part  in  its  proceedings. 

In  the  final  issue  in  1843,  Mr.  Bonar  cheerfully  left  the  Parish  Church 
of  Collace,  but  could  not  be  persuaded  to  think  of  leaving  the  old  sphere 
of  his  labours  till  1856,  when,  most  happily,  he  accepted  a  call  to  the 
Free  Church  of  Finnieston,  in  Glasgow.  In  1848,  he  married  Isabella, 
daughter  of  James  Dickson,  Esq.,  Edinburgh,  who  died  in  1864,  leaving 
one  son  and  three  daughters.  In  1874,  he  received  the  well-merited 
degree  of  D.D.  from  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  He  was  unanimously 
and  most  cordially  elected  Moderator  of  the  Free  Church  Assembly  in 
Glasgow  in  1878;  and  he  discharged  the  duties  of  the  office  with  the 
greatest  acceptance  and  success,  and  with  all  his  own  characteristic 
aptitude  and  happiness  of  address.  In  addition  to  his  earlier  works  of 
the  Mission  of  Inquiry  to  the  Jews,  and  his  Memoir  of  Mr.  M'Cheyne, 
and  besides  a  number  of  smaller  books  and  tracts  from  time  to  time, 
Dr.  Bonar  has  published  a  Commentary  on  Leviticus,  and  an  Exposition 
of  the  Psalms. 

Dr.  Bonar  ministers  in  Glasgow  to  a  devotedly  attached  people  in  a 
large  and  full  Church  ;  and  wherever  he  preaches,  is  listened  to  by 
crowded  and  deeply  interested  congregations.  His  preaching  is  singularly 
like  the  Bible.  It  abounds  in  the  clearest  enunciations  of  the  doctrines 
of  grace,  and  is  pervaded  by  a  natural  order  ;  but  never  approaches  the 
form  either  of  a  confession  of  faith  or  of  a  theological  argument.  Full 
of  the  Bible  in  both  its  Testaments,  it  much  resembles  the  Bible  in  its 
simple  and  altogether  natural  cast,  and  partakes  not  a  little  of  its 
richness  and  fulness. 

One  of  the  elements  of  his  permanent  power  in  preaching  is,  that 
his  sermons,  although  well  prepared  and  remarkably  equal,  are  never 
wrought   up.     The   faculty  of  working    for  a   great    effort   is   one  that 


DISRUPT] ON  IVORTHIES. 

he  has  never  cultivated,  and  can  hardly  be  said  to  possess.  But  he  is 
so  thoroughly  at  home  in  all  that  he  utters,  that  his  words  tell  with  the 
force  of  one  who  speaks  from  the  overflowing  of  his  own  heart,  "  believing 
and  therefore  speaking."  The  heart  of  the  preacher  is  perfectly  open  to 
his  hearers ;  as  with  no  cloak  concealing  it,  so  with  no  effort  to  make  it 
visible  ;  and  they  listen  to  words  of  the  most  unalloyed  sincerity.  Of  his 
composition,  M'Cheyne  said  that  "  he  had  no  style ; "  and  while  he  has 
more  system  than  most  men  in  all  his  habits  and  all  his  work,  his  style 
is  certainly  without  systematic  art.  But  his  sermons  are  full  of  poetry. 
Not  gifted  like  his  brother  to  write  exquisite  hymns,  his  sermons  are 
nevertheless,  and  perhaps  all  the  more,  rich  in  poetic  images,  like  the 
letters  of  Samuel  Rutherford  which  he  has  edited  with  a  perfect 
sympathy.  The  variety  of  his  happy  illustrations  gives  wings  to  his 
weighty  truths.  May  God  still  grant  him  many  years  for  preaching  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  with  the  heavenly  wisdom  of  winning 
souls  for  the  Master  he  has  loved  and  served  so  long. 

A.  M  S. 


-^.:i-ri.     HORATIUS    BONAR,D,D 


SJoratius  Bonar,  ©.©. 


(S^IIE  REV.  HORATIUS  BONAR,  son  of  James  Bonar, 
Esq.,  Solicitor  of  Excise  for  Scotland,  was  born  in 
Edinburgh  on  the  19th  December,  1808.  Descended 
from  an  ancestry  which  had  contributed  to  the 
Church  of  Scotland  a  succession  of  faithful  ministers 
stretching  back  to  the  times  before  the  Revolution 
of  1688,  he  was  himself  reared  amidst  all  the  amenities  and  stimulating 
influences  of  a  singularly  happy  and  cultivated  Christian  home.  His 
father  was  a  man  of  scholarly  tastes  and  no  small  scientific  attainments, 
whose  house  was  the  resort  of  such  men  as  Sir  David  Brewster,  then  in 
the  midst  of  those  great  discoveries  which  have  shed  such  lustre  on  his 
name.  Amidst  the  bright  intelligence  and  eager  life  of  this  household, 
no  fewer  than  three  ministers  were  in  training  for  the  Free  Church— 
Dr.  Andrew  A.  Bonar,  Dr.  Horatius  Bonar,  and  their  elder  brother  the 
Rev.  John  J.  Bonar,  the  honoured  and  faithful  minister  of  Free  St. 
Andrew's  Church,  Greenock,  known  throughout  the  Church  as  one  of  its 
most  brilliant  and  effective  preachers,  a  man  of  great  theological  and 
literary  attainments,  though,  with  perhaps  too  exclusive  devotion  to  his 
study  and  his  flock,  he  has  hitherto  been  content  to  exercise  within  a 
comparatively  limited  circle  those  rare  gifts  so  well  fitted  to  enrich  and 
edify  the  whole  Church. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Under  such  influences,  and  with  such  companionship,  Horatius 
Bonar  began  his  preparation  for  the  ministry  with  all  the  habits 
and  characteristics  of  a  thorough  student  and  accomplished  scholar, 
prepared  to  take  advantage  of  the  full  and  lengthened  curriculum  of 
study  required  by  the  Church  in  Scotland  of  all  her  students,  before 
entering  her  Hall  of  Theolog)'.  Dr.  Chalmers  in  the  maturity  of  his 
powers  was  then  presiding  over  the  Metropolitan  Divinity  Hall,  and  by 
his  magnificent  exposition  of  the  Evangelic  system,  and  his  own  intense 
spiritual  life,  had  rendered  it,  under  God,  a  grand  Missionary  Institute 
and  centre  of  spiritual  power,  from  which  our  students  went  forth  to 
their  work  as  preachers  of  the  Gospel,  inflamed  with  a  zeal  that  shrank 
from  no  labour,  and  strong  in  a  faith  that  knew  no  doubt.  It  was  in 
these  times  that  a  noble  band  of  evangelists,  represented  by  such  men  as 
Robert  M'Cheyne,  William  Burns,  John  Milne,  James  Hamilton,  of 
London,  and  others  like-minded,  some  of  whom  are  still  amongst  us, 
went  forth  upon  their  fruitful  labours.  They  were  all  men  of  studious 
habits  and  scholarly  acquirements,  well  read  in  the  literature  of  theology 
and  at  home  in  the  languages  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  ;  and  they 
were  all  possessed  by  a  strong  and  invigorating  faith ;  having,  before 
approaching  the  ministry,  cleared  themselves  by  prayer  and  study  from 
the  enfeebling  spirit  of  doubt  and  uncertainty  by  which  nothing  great 
was  ever  accomplished. 

Amongst  these  men,  Mr.  H.  Bonar  occupied  a  very  prominent  and 
influential  position,  by  his  weight  of  character,  his  masculine  thought- 
fulness,  and  great  attainments  as  a  scholar  and  theologian.  While  yet  a 
student  of  divinity,  he  had,  in  common  with  the  majority  of  our  ablest 
students  acquired  experience  in  Home  Mission  work,  by  regular 
visitation  in  some  of  the  more  necessitous  districts  of  the  Old  Town ; 
and  after  his  license  as  a  Probationer,  this  was  much  extended  by  his 
labours  as  Missionary  Assistant  to  Mr.  Lewis  of  South  Leith,  who  was 
one  of  the  first  in  that  day  to  work  his  overgrown  parish  in  the  lines  laid 


HO  RATI  US  nOXAR,  D.D. 

down  by  Dr.  Chalmers  in  his  admirable  works  on  "  Parochial  and  Civic 
Economy." 

It  was  about  this  time  that,  as  the  fruit  of  the  great  Evangelical  Re- 
vival in  the  Church  of  Scotland,  her  Scheme  of  Church  Extension  was 
being  prosecuted  with  a  measure  of  success  that  bade  fair,  with  the  bless- 
ing of  God,  to  transform  the  waste  places  of  the  land  into  a  garden  of  the 
Lord.  Among  more  than  200  churches  which,  in  answer  to  the  magnifi- 
cent appeals  of  Chalmers,  had  within  a  few  years  sprung  into  existence, 
the  North  Church,  Kelso,  had  just  been  completed.  The  attention  of 
its  chief  promoters  having  been  called  to  the  remarkable  character  and 
abundant  labours  of  Mr.  Bonar,  a  deputation  of  inquiry  visited  Leith, 
and  having  heard  him  preach,  reported  so  favourably  that  he  was  at 
once  appointed,  and  entered  on  his  labours  as  Ordained  Minister  of  the 
North  Church,  Kelso,  on  30th  November,  1838.  It  was  a  blessed  time 
for  any  man  to  enter  on  his  ministry.  In  our  day  it  is  said  that  doubt 
and  uncertainty  are  in  the  very  air.  It  was  otherwise  then.  The  very 
air  seemed  charged  with  hope  and  expectancy,  based  on  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  in  the  Gospel  as  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every 
one  that  believeth."  Earnest  men  will  always  be  expecting  and  looking 
for  fruit  in  the  conversion  of  sinners  under  the  faithful  preaching  of  the 
Gospel.  But  at  that  time  a  body  of  men  had  been  raised  up  in  the  Estab- 
lished Church  of  Scotland,  who,  more  than  had  been  common  even  with 
faithful  ministers,  waited  and  watched  for  conversion  in  prayerful 
reliance  on  the  promised  blessing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  every  fresh 
announcement  of  Christ  and  Him  crucified,  as  fitted  and  intended  to 
"fill  the  heart  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing." 

It  was  in  this  spirit  that  Mr.  Bonar  entered  on  his  ministry  in  Kelso. 
In  his  preaching,  the  line  was  clearly  drawn  between  the  converted  and 
the  unconverted,  with  no  border  land  between.  The  prominence  and 
persistency  with  which  this  was  pressed  home  was  felt  as  something  new 
and  startling.     And  so  was  the  urgency  with  which  free  and  immediate 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

salvation,  meeting  ever}-  want,  was  pressed  on  the  acceptance  of  the 
individual  sinner.  "  See  that  your  preaching  be  really  glad  tidings  to 
the  sinner,"  he  once  said  to  a  young  probationer,  now  an  earnest  and 
honoured  minister  of  the  Free  Church ;  and  from  the  beginning  of  his 
own  ministry  he  had  acted  on  that  principle.  He  had  faith  in  the  Cross 
of  Christ  to  guard  itself,  and  never  found  it  necessary  to  impose  any 
conditions,  or  erect  any  fence  around  the  grace  of  God.  Faith  in  Jesus 
Christ  was  pressed  home  on  every  sinner  as  his  first  and  immediate  duty 
to  God,  and  the  only  sure  way  of  honouring  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  sent  to 
bear  witness  to  Jesus,  and  to  show  the  things  freely  given  us  of  God. 
No  one  was  allowed  to  regard  it  as  humility  to  wait  for  deeper  conviction 
or  anything  else  in  himself,  before  putting  his  trust  for  salvation  in  Jesus 
Christ.  In  his  preaching,  as  in  all  his  writings,  he  followed  the  Reformers 
rather  than  the  later  Puritans,  and  reflected  Luther's  frank  outlook  to 
the  cross,  and  hearty  reliance  on  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  rather  than 
Baxter's  tendency  to  introspection  in  search  of  marks  and  evidences  in 
self 

And  from  the  beginning  of  his  ministry  there  was  visible  blessing  on 
his  work.  Even  before  the  wide-spread  revivals  of  1 839,  and  subsequent 
years  immediately  preceding  the  Disruption,  for  which  they  formed  the 
preparation,  a  remarkable  though  quiet  work  of  God  had  begun  in  Kelso. 
For  in  the  old  Established  Church  of  Scotland,  revival  and  faithful 
testimony  to  Christ  as  at  once  King  of  Nations  and  sole  Head  of  the 
Church  had  always  gone  together.  And  it  was  so  then.  In  that  genera- 
tion the  Church  had  been  called  on  to  take  up  her  ancestral  testimony 
under  both  its  forms :  and  amidst  all  the  perils  and  distractions  apt  to 
be  attendant  on  controversy,  God  bore  her  witness  by  out-pourings  of 
the  Spirit  on  so  many  portions  of  the  Church  as,  by  His  blessing, 
imparted  fresh  life  and  strength  to  the  whole.  In  that  day  it  was 
almost  exclusively  by  the  preaching  of  the  Ministry  that  God  was 
to  grant  revival  to  the  Church.     And  it  was  noticed  as  a  general 


HORATIUS  BONAR,  D.D. 

rule  that  those  who  were  most  greatly  blessed  were  men  of  cultivated 
minds  and  studious  habits  no  less  than  of  deep  spirituality  and  of  strong 
faith.  When  it  is  otherwise,  there  ought  to  be  no  jealousy  indeed,  but 
certainly  deep  searchings  of  heart  among  those  set  apart  to  the  Ministry 
of  the  Gospel.  The  writings  of  Mr.  M'Cheync,  Mr.  Milne  of  Perth, 
Mr.  Wm.  Burns,  and  Dr.  Mackintosh  of  Tain  may  give  some  idea  of  the 
revival  preaching  and  revival  preachers  of  those  days.  Such,  with  ver>' 
marked  characteristics  of  his  own,  was  the  preaching  of  Mr.  Bonar.  He 
never  affected  what  is  vaguely  enough  called  "  intellectual "  preaching. 
But  none  the  less  it  was  the  preaching  of  a  very  strong  and  cogent 
intellect,  not  unfrequently  profound,  but  always  so  clear  and  well-defined 
as  to  be  perfectly  simple,  and  ever  moving  in  the  lines  of  truth,  straight 
to  the  mark.  "  Every  separate  sentence  tells,"  said  an  intelligent 
mechanic  in  the  Merse,  "  like  strokes  of  a  hammer,  every  stroke  sends 
the  nail  further  in  and  deeper  down."  In  the  truth  set  forth  there  was 
nothing  peculiar,  and  nothing  peculiar  in  the  style,  except  the  amazing 
simplicity  and  power  with  which  he  was  enabled  to  set  forth  the  com- 
pleteness of  man's  ruin,  as  utterly  lost,  met  by  the  completeness  of 
Christ's  finished  work  for  securing  free  and  immediate  salvation  for  the 
chief  of  sinners.  It  was  not  the  mere  cry  "  Believe,"  or  "  Come,"  for 
there  was  always  a  great  body  of  truth  presented ;  and  it  was  Christ 
Himself  as  the  object  of  faith,  rather  than  the  act  of  believing,  that 
formed  the  staple  of  his  preaching  and  gave  it  all  its  power.  No  truth 
in  the  entire  round  of  the  Gospel  system  was  omitted  or  overlooked,  but 
certainly  the  doctrine  of  acceptance  with  God,  of  free  and  immediate 
justification  through  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  gave 
tone  and  character  to  his  entire  ministry,  and  was  often  deepened  into 
overawing  power  by  the  proclamation  of  Christ's  second  coming  "in 
flaming  fire  to  take  vengeance  on  those  who  know  not  God  and  obej- 
not  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

One  memorable  sermon  in  which  these  truths  were  set  forth  in  com- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

bination,  rises  to  the  writer's  mcmor)'  as  preached  in  his  own  church, 
and  resulting  in  the  final  decision  of  at  least  two  young  men,  one  early 
called  away  resting  on  Christ  in  perfect  peace,  the  other  still  labouring 
as  an  elder  in  a  distant  land,  full  of  faith  and  of  good  works.  And  this 
is  but  a  specimen  of  the  blessing  that  rested  on  his  labours  in  those 
blessed  days  of  revival. 

In  Kelso  itself  it  was  not  perhaps  so  much  the  stir  and  excitement 
of  one  or  more  revivals,  as  the  spiritual  power,  the  still  solemnity,  the 
continuous  life  and  action  of  a  revived  church,  that  made  it  the  centre  of 
life  and  refreshing  to  all  the  district  round,  through  many  a  successive 
year.  The  Spirit  came  less  as  "  the  rushing  of  a  mighty  wind,"  or  "  as 
floods  upon  the  dry  ground,"  than  as  "rain  upon  the  mown  grass,  as 
showers  that  water  the  earth."  Meetings  for  prayer  abounded,  and  "  they 
that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  another,"  so  that  to  some  of  us 
who  had  only  begun  our  ministry,  a  visit  to  Kelso  was  felt  to  be  a  season 
of  refreshing,  whence  we  returned  to  our  own  work  with  new  encourage- 
ment and  hope.  Classes  for  the  young  were  greatly  blessed.  And  none 
more  so  than  his  boarding-school  classes  drawn  from  all  parts  of  the 
country,  the  fruits  of  which  arc  still  to  be  met  with  in  many  a  family 
throughout  the  land. 

In  the  midst  of  all  his  labours  as  pastor  and  evangelist,  Mr.  Bonar 
assiduously  maintained  the  habits  of  a  thorough  student.  So  early 
as  183 1  he  had  been  amongst  the  first  promoters  of  the  "Presby- 
terian Reviev;,"  which  for  many  a  year  before  and  after  the  Disruption 
represented  all  that  was  best  in  the  Literature,  the  Theology,  and  the 
Spiritual  life  of  the  Church.  From  its  commencement  he  was  a  regular 
contributor,  and  for  many  years  acted  as  editor.  In  later  years,  as 
editor  of  the  "Journal  of  Prophecy,"  and  more  recently,  of  "The  Christ- 
ian Treasur)',"  he  addressed  different  classes  of  readers  with  the  same 
deep  spirituality  of  tone  and  savour  of  Christ,  which  made  them  welcome 
to  many,  even  of  those  who  did  not  sympathise  with  all  his  views  on 


MORA  TIUS  DONAR,  D.D. 

prophecy.  The  "  Kelso  Tracts,"  written  in  his  early  ministiy  to  meet 
the  wants  and  difficulties  of  his  own  flock  in  times  of  spiritual  quicken- 
ing, were  greatly  blessed  to  many  throughout  the  Church,  in  clearing 
their  way  to  Christ.  These  have  been  followed  by  numerous  writings  in 
different  departments  of  literature,  prose  and  verse,  which  have  made  his 
name  known  throughout  the  Church  of  God  in  all  its  branches,  and  on 
both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Of  his  numerous  hymns,  many  are  to  be 
found  in  nearly  all  the  collections  of  every  branch  of  the  Protestant 
Church.  And  not  a  few  appear  to  have  taken  their  place  in  its  per- 
manent hymnology.  "  My  Old  Letters,"  Dr.  Bonar's  greatest  essay  in 
poetry  is  one  of  his  last, — a  work  simple  and  original  in  its  idea,  rich 
in  culture,  and  profound  and  varied  in  poetic  feeling  and  thought.  Of 
his  minor  pieces,  less  known  perhaps  than  his  hymns,  the  following 
may  be  accepted  as  a  specimen,  characteristic  at  once  of  his  poetic 
style,  and  of  the  mode  of  thought  that  appears  to  have  given  tone  and 
colour  to  his  life  : — 

LIVE. 

Make  haste,  O  man,  to  live, 

For  thou  so  soon  must  die  ; 
Time  hurries  past  thee  like  the  breeze  ; 

How  swift  its  moments  fly. 

Make  haste,  O  man,  to  li\c  ! 

To  breathe,  and  wake,  and  sleep, 

To  smile,  to  sigh,  to  grieve  ; 
To  move  in  idleness  through  earth, 

This,  this  is  not  to  live  ! 

Make  haste,  O  man,  to  live  ! 

Up  then  with  speed,  and  work  ; 

Fling  ease  and  self  away  ; 
This  is  no  time  for  thee  to  sleep. 

Up,  watch  and  work  and  pray  ! 

Make  haste,  O  man,  to  live  I 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

The  useful,  not  the  great, 

The  thing  that  never  dies  ; 
The  silent  toil  that  is  not  lost, — 

Set  these  before  thine  eyes. 

Make  haste,  O  man,  to  live 

The  seed,  whose  leaf  and  flower, 

Tho'  poor  in  human  sight, 
Bring  forth  at  last  the  eternal  fruit, 

Sow  thou  both  day  and  night. 

Make  haste,  O  man,  to  live 

Make  haste,  O  man,  to  live. 

Thy  time  is  almost  o'er ; 
O  sleep  not,  dream  not,  but  arise, 

The  Judge  is  at  the  door. 

Make  haste,  O  man,  to  live 


In  1843,  Mr.  Bonar  felt  constrained  to  join  the  great  Exodus  from 
the  Estabhshment,  as  being  no  longer  free,  and  has  laboured  ever  since 
as  a  minister  of  the  Free  Church.  In  the  same  year  he  married  Jane 
Catherine,  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Robert  Lundie  of  Kelso ;  and,  of  his 
family,  his  eldest  daughter  is  now  engaged  along  with  her  husband  the 
Rev.  G.  Theophilus  Dodds  in  the  great  Paris  Mission  originated  by  the 
Rev.  Mr.  M'All,  perhaps  the  noblest  and  most  hopeful  mission  in  which 
the  Church  of  Christ  has  engaged  in  our  day.  In  1853,  Mr.  Bonar 
received  the  degree  of  D.D.  from  the  University  of  Aberdeen.  In  1866, 
after  a  fruitful  ministry  of  eight  and  twenty  years  in  Kelso,  he  was 
translated  to  Chalmers  Memorial  Church,  the  Grange,  Edinburgh,  of 
which  he  was  the  first  minister.  Of  his  abundant  labours  there,  as 
belonging  to  the  present  rather  than  the  past,  it  will  be  for  others  to 
speak  at  some  future  time. 

W.  C. 


|am£s  Uonar. 


I  HE  Bonars  with  whom  the  subject  of  this  sketch  was 
connected  are  descendants  of  an  old  family  belonging 
to  Perthshire,  who  possessed  considerable  property,  in- 
cluding part  of  ^ilgraston,  in  that  county.  They  have 
been  largely — indeed  almost  hereditarily — connected  with 
the  gospel  ministry  in  Scotland. 
The  son  of  John  Bonar  of  Kilgraston  was  minister  of  Torphichen. 
His  eldest  son  was  the  Rev.  John  Bonar  of  Fetlar,  in  Shetland  ;  and  his 
son  again,  also  John,  became  minister  successively  of  Cockpen  and  Perth. 
The  son  and  grandson  of  this  Rev.  John  Bonar  of  Perth  were  respec- 
tively the  Rev.  Archibald  Bonar  of  Cramond  and  the  Rev.  John  Bonar  of 
Larbert ;  while  no  fewer  than  three  brothers  of  James  Bonar,  the  subject 
of  this  memoir,  are  well-known  ministers  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland 
at  this  day,  viz.,  the  Rev.  Drs  Horatius  and  Andrew  Bonar,  and  Jolm 
James  Bonar  of  Free  St  Andrew's  Church,  Greenock. 

The  father  of  the  subject  of  this  sketch  was  James  Bonar,  Depute- 
Solicitor  of  Excise  in  Edinburgh, — himself  a  man  of  varied  and  extensive 
literature  and  Christian  excellency,  author  of  several  philological  and 
other  treatises,  and  a  valued  correspondent  of  the  most  learned  men  of 
his  day.  In  his  public  situation  under  Government,  he  proved  himself 
to  be  also  a  man  of  most  self-sacrificing  integrity. 

His  virtues  and  strict  Christian  piety  descended  in  large  measure 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

upon  his  son,  James  Bonar,  of  whose  Hfe  and  character  we  present  the 
following  outline.  Like  his  father,  he  too  was  a  scholar ;  and  having  a 
well-cultivated  mind,  based  on  a  good  foundation  early  laid,  by  dint  of 
reading  and  continuous  study  he  kept  up  his  literary  tastes  and  attain- 
ments to  the  last.  Not  only  was  this  his  own  habit  from  student  life 
upwards,  but  in  his  earlier  correspondence,  we  find  him  earnestly  pressing 
upon  his  fellows  an  equal  course  of  diligence.  Though  never  intended 
for  a  sacred  or  theological  profession,  there  was  scarcely  a  class  in  the 
University  or  in  the  Theological  Hall  which  he  had  not  attended.  Along 
with  a  rich  and  varied  acquaintance  with  general  literature,  he  was  par- 
ticularly partial  to  the  writings  of  the  Puritan  divines,  for  whose  views  in 
theology,  as  well  as  for  their  personal  piety,  he  cherished  a  high  regard. 

Brought  up  domestically  under  unusual  advantages,  both  as  to 
literary  culture  and  habits  of  strictest,  yet  cheerful,  piety,  James  Bonar 
shewed  himself  an  apt  scholar  in  both  departments  ;  and  such  had  been 
his  advance  in  early  piety,  that  when  his  father  was  removed  by  death, 
though  the  son  was  only  about  nineteen,  the  evening  of  that  day  found 
him  quietly  taking  his  father's  place  at  the  family  altar,  the  duties  of 
which  place  he  never  afterwards  relinquished,  much  to  the  joy  of  his 
godly  mother  and  of  the  younger  members  of  the  family,  of  which,  from 
that  hour,  he  became  the  honoured  and  acknowledged  head. 

In  those  days  when  young  men's  associations  for  mutual  improve- 
ment were  little  known,  Mr  Bonar  became,  in  December  182 1,  a  member 
of  "  The  Homiletical  Society."  Being  composed  of  a  few  devout  young 
men,  chiefly  students,  its  meetings  for  many  years  were  held  in  one  or 
other  of  their  rooms.  In  its  later  stages  the  ordinary  meeting-place  was 
the  session-house  of  St  Andrew's  Church.  The  character  of  the  society 
was  eminently  devotional,  consisting  chiefly  of  prayer  and  praise,  Bible 
reading,  and  exhortation.  In  the  conducting  of  its  business,  Mr  William 
Brown,  surgeon,  now  an  elder  in  Tolbooth  Free  Church,  and  Mr  James 
Bonar,  took  a  leading  part. 


JAMES  DONAR. 

Mr  Bonar  was  an  original  member  of  another  young  men's  society, 
that  which  is  now  known  as  the  Diagnostic,  though  it  was  then  formed 
under  another  name.  Besides  Mr  Bonar,  who  was  secretary,  we  find  the 
following  among  its  original  members : — ^John  Purves,  John  Archibald 
Bonar,  John  Henderson,  James  Thomson,  James  Cochrane,  of  Harburn. 
This  society,  at  its  earliest  stages,  met  in  Mr  John  Purvcs's  room,  Rich- 
mond Place ;  next  in  the  house  of  Mr  James  Bonar's  father,  Paterson's 
Court,  Broughton  ;  afterwards  in  the  school-room,  Grcenside,  under  the 
Tabernacle.  It  was  afterwards  joined  by  John  James  Bonar,  William 
Cunningham,  John  Brown  Paterson,  Thomas  Pitcairn — names  well  known 
and  revered  amongst  us. 

Mr  Bonar's  calling  in  business  life  was  that  of  a  W'ritcr  to  the 
Signet.  For  this  profession  he  was  trained,  first  in  the  office  of  his 
uncle,  Mr  Tawse,  and  afterwards  in  that  of  the  late  Sir  James  Gibson 
Craig.  Business  in  those  days  being  often  carried  over  into  the  Sabbath, 
and  the  clerks'  attendance  at  the  office  required  on  that  day,  young  Bonar 
expressed  a  conscientious  objection,  upon  which,  to  the  credit  of  the  late 
head  of  that  firm,  he  was  at  once  exempted  from  all  such  duty. 

Closely  and  originally  attached  as  his  parents  had  been  to  Lady 
Glenorchy's  Chapel  (so  called  from  the  name  of  its  noble  and  pious 
foundress),  then  under  the  pastorate  of  ihc  late  venerable  Dr  Jones,  Mr 
Bonar  was  early  admitted  a  member.  In  the  summer  of  1830  he  was 
called  to  the  eldership  ;  and  of  his  modesty  and  humility,  as  well  as 
conscientious  consideration  in  accepting  and  entering  upon  that  office,  we 
have  a  record  in  a  letter  then  addressed  to  one  of  his  brothers  : — 

"I  have  not  consented  to  this  nomination,"  says  he,  "without  much  hesitation, 
nor,  I  can  safely  say,  without  great  reluctance;  never  did  I  feel  more  disinclined  to 
engage  in  any  duty,  and  never  have  I  seen  more  of  my  disqualifications  for  any  public 
responsible  situation  than  I  have  seen  since  this  resolution  was  taken.  .  .  .  Anything 
like  publicity  is  a  snare  into  which  so  many  far  older  men  than  I  am  have  fallen,  that  I 
begin  to  fear  that  it  may  prove  too  strong  for  me.  .  .  .  One  benefit  I  have  no  doubt 
found  from  having  my  mind  directed  to  the  subject  of  the  eldership,  that  it  has  led  me 
to  seek  more  earnestly  direction  in  prayer,  and  to  strive  to  act  more  circumspectly  ; 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

and  this  is  one  advantage  which  I  anticipate,  should  I  be  ordained,  may  still  con- 
tinue  I  cannot  see  that,  with  the  exception  of  preaching  and  administration 

of  ordinances,  an  elder  stands  in  a  different  situation  from  a  minister,  and  he  surely 
must  (as  one  who  rules  well)  be  able  to  rule  well  himself,  and  his  own  family,  before 
he  can  undertake  or  expect  to  rule  well  the  Church." 

Wliat  ultimately  decided  him  was,  that  "  he  could  not  see  that  he  would 
not  have  been,  in  some  measure,  rejecting  an  invitation  from  Christ,  made 
through  His  Church,  had  he  given  a  negative  to  the  proposal." 

Notwithstanding  this  serious  reluctance  to  enter  upon  public  reli- 
gious office,  so  characteristic  of  his  humbleness  of  mind,  yet  never  was 
there,  in  fact,  a  more  diligent,  devoted,  or  practically  useful  elder.  He 
was  not  only  for  many  years  clerk  to  the  session,  but  he  devised 
and  carried  out,  at  his  own  instance,  very  many  practical  measures  for 
raising  and  maintaining  the  spiritual  standing  of  the  congregation,  such 
as  getting  up  sessional  meetings  specially  for  prayer,  establishing  similar 
district  meetings,  instituting  Bible  classes  for  young  persons  and  children 
belonging  to  the  congregation  ;  and  lamenting,  moreover,  the  condition  of 
the  territorial  locality  in  Greenside,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  hiring  a  room 
in  that  locality,  at  his  own  expense,  to  which  he  might  call  wanderers 
in,  and  there  conduct  classes  and  prayer-meetings  for  that  neglected 
population.     In  all  such  efforts  Mr  Bonar  was  ever  active  for  good. 

In  the  congregational  class  which  he  conducted,  he  prescribed  regular 
exercises  on  some  head  of  religion  to  be  written  out  by  the  pupils  in 
private  during  the  week ;  and,  considering  his  extensive  professional 
business,  it  was  marvellous  what  time  he  contrived  to  spend,  not  only  in 
correcting  the  many  papers  given  in,  but  in  writing  out  at  length  his 
comments  upon  each  in  particular. 

Along  with  such  self-imposed  duties  as  these,  in  which  he  took  great 
delight,  Mr  Bonar  was  also  an  active  member  and  official  in  various 
other  societies  of  religious  and  philanthropic  tendency.  These  included, 
e.g.,  the  Edinburgh  City  Mission,  the  Orphan  Hospital,  the  Society  for 
Propagating  Christian  Knowledge  in  the    Highlands  and   Islands,  also 


JAMES  RONAR. 
the  Edinburgh  and  Leith  Seamen's  Friend  Society.  Of  this  last  Mr 
Bonar  was  a  director  almost  from  its  commencement  in  1830  and  eld 
theofi-^ceofsecretarytiU  he  died.  It  was  mainly  by  h.s  exert.on  tha 
the  proposal  to  erect  a  church  (Free  St  Nin.an's)  was  brought  to  a 
uccessful  issue.  In  carrying  out  these  undertakings  he  not  only  gave 
gTatu^Ly  his  valuable   professional  services,  but  also,  from  t.me  to 

"^^^7:^.  he  was  secreta.  to  the  Senatus  of  the  New 
College,  which  brought  him  much  in  contact  with  both  professors  and 
student;,  who  not  only  enjoyed  his  kindred  sympathies,  but  a  so  va  ed 
.reatly  his  counsel  and  assistance.  He  held  also  a  Government  appomt- 
ment  in  connection  with  the  Bible  Printing  Board  for  Scotland^ 

While  his  attachment  to  Lady  Glenorchy's  Chapel,  -d  subsequen  ly 
Free  Church,  was  unbounded,  he.  at  the  same  tm.e  cher.shed  a  truly 
catholic  spirit,  his  sympathies  not  only  embracing  the  whole  church  of 
:.  ich  he  was  a  member  and  omce-bearer.  but  leading  him  to  take  a  very 
Lrm  interest  in  every  mission  enterprise  undertaken  for  the  conversion 
of  the  heathen,  and  more  particularly  of  the  Jews. 

Throughout  the  "  ten  years' conflict "  the  non-mtrus.on  and  sp.r.tual 
independence  party  had  not  a  more  conscientious  or  ardent  suppor  er 
than  James  Bonar;  and  when  the  Disruption  came  he  threw  h.mse 
heart  and  soul,  into  the  Free  Church,  and  became  the  zealous  agent  m 
defence  in  the  lawsuit  forced  on  by  the  '^^^  J^^^^^ 
Edinburgh,  in  their  too  successful  attempt  to  wrest  Lady  Glenorchy  s 
Chapel  and  endowments  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Free  Church  Trustees. 

Mr  Bonar's  personal  character  and  attainments,  along  with  an  honest 
plainness  and  frankness  of  expression,  were,  as  indicated,  of  a  h.gh  order, 
and  in  eve.y  respect  worthy  of  the  family  name  which  he  bore. 

He  had  very  manifestly,  a  most  invincible  love  of  truth,  and  though 
naturally  quiet  and  unobtrusive  in  his  general  bearing,  this  d.d  not 
prevent  his  thorough  and  outspoken  repudiation  of  ever>-thmg  that  was 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
mean  or  disingenuous,  or  immoral  in  conduct.  His  Christianity,  waile 
deep  and  all-pervading,  was  yet  ever  of  the  most  cheerful  and  attractive 
kind.  Combined  with  a  lofty  seriousness,  there  was,  especially  when 
among  young  people  and  at  his  own  fireside,  often  a  playfulness  of 
spirit,  which  never  failed  to  win  their  affections,  and  thereby  to  render 
his  instructiovis  all  the  more  acceptable  and  lasting. 

The  love  and  veneration  indeed  in  which  he  was  held  by  the  young 
who  had  been  under  his  charge,  may  be  gathered  not  only  from  the 
interesting  and  edifying  correspondence  which  he  kept  up  with  some 
of  them  long  years  after  they  had  parted,  but  no  less  from  the  following 
expression  which  passed  involuntarily  from  the  lips  of  one  such  as  he 
approached  the  house  in  which  his  loved  and  revered  instructor  died — "  I 
never  pass  this  house  without  feeling  as  if  I  should  take  off  my  hat." 

Having  removed  to  the  country  in  hope  of  benefit  from  the  change, 
he  there  sank  rapidly,  his  cheerful  composure  and  entire  submission  to 
his  heavenly  Father's  will  continuing  to  the  last — the  silence  of  the 
death-chamber  broken  only  at  intervals  by  such  breathings  as  these: 
"  The  Rock  is  everything."  ..."  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for 
all  His  benefits  towards  me." 

Indeed,  even  in  the  most  affecting  moments — such  as,  when  crossing 
the  threshhold  of  his  much-loved  home  in  York  Place,  fully  believing  it  to 
be  for  the  last  time,  and  stepping  into  the  carriage  which  was  to  convey 
him  to  the  country — his  first  care  was  to  seek  to  cheer  and  comfort  Mrs 
Bonar  and  the  other  dear  ones  who  accompanied  him.  He  died  without 
the  shadow  of  a  cloud  upon  his  brow,  at  Juniper  Green,  in  the  parish  of 
Currie,  on  the  i  ith  of  July  1867,  his  last  words  being,  "  Peace  as  a  river." 

G.  R.  D. 

(0^  ^ 


f be  Starqtiis  of  lOriiatiaHiane,  %M' 


HE  Marquis  of  Breadalbane  was  born  at  Dundee  on  the 
26th  October  1796.  At  an  early  age  he  followed  in 
the  footsteps  of  his  ancestors  by  embracing  Liberal 
opinions,  when  the  very  name  of  Reformer  was  odious, 
and  by  joining  himself  to  the  Scottish  Wliigs,  who 
strenuously  supported  those  principles  which  have  long 
since  been  in  the  ascendant.  Entering  upon  public  life  at  a  period  of 
great  excitement,  when  the  Reform  of  Parliament  was  the  absorbing 
question  of  the  day,  he  threw  all  his  energies  into  the  struggle.  To 
the  memorable  contest  in  1832  for  the  representation  of  Pcrthsliirc, 
which  he  sustained  with  such  spirit,  and  brought  to  so  triumphant  an 
issue, — his  rank,  position,  prospects,  as  the  Earl  of  Ormelie,  gave  special 
significance  and  weight.  It  struck  a  blow  at  the  old  system  which  re- 
sounded through  the  land  ;  and  it  produced  an  effect  on  public  opinion 
in  favour  of  Liberal  politics  which  did  not  speedily  pass  away.  And 
though  in  later  years,  and  especially  from  the  time  when  as  Lord  Cham- 
berlain he  became  connected  with  the  Court,  Lord  Breadalbane  took 
little  If  any  part  in  Parliamentary  discussions  and  public  business,  to  the 
last  he  was  a  steady  and  consistent  supporter  of  the  Liberal  party,  and 
never  for  a  moment  swerved  from  his  early  views. 

*  For  our  sketcli  of  the  Marquis  of  Breadalbane  we  are  mainly  indebted  to  "In  Memoriam," 
a  tribute  to  his  Lordship  by  the  Rev.  Professor  Chalmers,  D.D.,  London. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

It  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at  that  in  1843,  when  the  Disruption  of 
the  Church  of  Scotland  took  place — this  strenuous  advocate  of  popular 
right  and  devoted  friend  of  civil  and  religious  liberty  should  cast  in  his 
lot  with  the  Free  Presbyterian  Church.  His  sympathies  had  been  with 
the  Non-Intrusion  party  throughout  the  whole  of  the  controversy  ;  and, 
when  the  crisis  arrived,  he  did  not  fail  them.  He  acted,  indeed,  with  his 
usual  deliberation  ;  for  it  was  not  till  some  days  after  the  Disruption  had 
taken  place  that  he  announced  his  decision.  Reposing  a  degree  of  con- 
fidence in  the  intentions  of  the  Government,  he  waited  in  the  hope  that 
some  satisfactory  settlement  would  be  made ;  but  as  soon  as  he  ascer- 
tained that  his  confidence  was  misplaced,  he  sent  the  following  letter  to 
Mr  Dunlop,  intimating  the  resolution  he  had  formed  :— 

'•  London,  May  23.  1S43. 
"  Dear  Mr  Duxlop, — I  received  your  note  of  the  19th  instant  yesterday  morning, 
and  as  I  have  also  received  the  Scotch  papers,  I  am  aware  of  all  your  proceedings 
down  to  Saturday.  After  a  careful  perusal  of  these,  and  having  given  my  an.xious  con- 
sideration to  the  various  topics  of  the  Queen's  Letter,  and  the  spirit  which  pervades  it, 
I  am  most  reluctantly  obliged  to  give  up  that  hope  which  I  had  till  now  fondly  enter- 
tained, that  the  Government  were  really  in  earnest  in  their  desire  to  bring  in  a  measure 
consistent  with  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  and  securing  to 
the  parishes  of  Scotland  the  appointment  of  ministers  acceptable  to  the  people.  My 
resolve  is  therefore  now  taken,  to  vindicate  my  own  principles  as  a  Presbyterian,  and 
to  leave  the  Established  Church  ;  and  I  beg  of  you  to  command  my  humble  services 
in  any  way  which  can  be  most  useful  in  the  cause  of  the  Free  Presbyterian  Church.  I 
remain,  dear  Mr  Dunlop,  very  faithfully  yours,  Breadalbane." 

This  step  was  most  gratifying  to  thousands  of  his  countrj-men,  and  was 
of  immense  importance  to  the  cause  of  the  Free  Church.  His  character 
stood  so  high — superior  even  to  the  rank  which  he  held — that  his  adher- 
ence among  the  laity  was  what  that  of  Dr  Chalmers  had  been  among  the 
clergy — an  answer  to  a  thousand  calumnies,  and  a  very  tower  of  strength. 
Who  could  connect  anything  of  the  fanatical  or  revolutionary  with  the 
name  of  Breadalbane,  or  believe  that  he  was  the  patron  of  "rebellion 
against  the  laws  of  the  land,"  or  the  supporter  of  any  schemes  of  "  priestly 


THE  MARQUIS  OF  DREADALBANE. 

ambition  or  clerical  domination"?  And  yet,  standing  as  he  did  almost 
alone  among  his  peers  and  the  aristocracy  of  Scotland,  there  must  have 
been  such  a  sacrifice  of  feeling  demanded  of  him  as  only  a  high  sense  of 
duty,  sustained  by  rare  independence  of  mind,  and  no  ordinary  amount 
of  moral  courage,  could  have  enabled  him  to  make.  But  the  patriotism 
and  the  religion  of  Lord  Breadalbane  combined  to  bear  him  through. 
He  saw  and  appreciated  what  many  Liberal  politicians  failed  to  see  or 
recognise — the  bearing  on  the  national  life  and  best  interests  of  Scotland 
of  the  questions  that  had  been  raised  by  the  Non-Intrusion  controversy, 
as  to  the  supremacy  of  conscience  and  the  liberties  of  the  Christian. 
Church  ;  and,  warmly  attached  as  he  was  to  the  principles  of  evangelical 
truth,  and  knowing  their  power,  he  gave  his  influence,  heart  and  soul,  to 
the  party  and  the  cause  which  held  forth  the  best  promise  of  their 
ascendancy.  His  pecuniary  support  of  the  principles  he  had  espoused 
was  munificent.  Churches,  manses,  and  schools  were  built  by  him  in  the 
different  parishes  of  his  extensive  property,  and  ample  provision  of  reli- 
gious ordinances  made  for  the  adherents  of  the  Free  Church  on  his  estates. 
The  manses  he  built  on  his  own  estates  were  valued  at  £4000  ;  he  also 
contributed  ;£'iooo  to  the  General  Manse  Fund,  and  an  equal  sum  for  the 
New  College  in  Edinburgh,  while  an  almost  unlimited  draft  of  slates  for 
Free  Church  requirements  was  allowed  from  his  quarries  at  Ballachulish 
and  Easdale. 

To  the  ground  taken  up  by  him  in  1843,  he  resolutely  adhered  to  the 
end  of  his  life.  No  opinions  he  had  ever  entertained  were  held  by  him 
with  greater  tenacity,  or  asserted  by  him  with  greater  emphasis  to  the 
very  last,  than  those  he  had  formed  on  the  freedom  of  the  Church.  In 
every  subsequent  discussion  of  them  he  took  the  warmest  interest ;  and 
in  reference  to  the  Cardross  case,  he  declared  himself  less  than  ever 
disposed  to  acknowledge  the  civil  judges  as  his  spiritual  chiefs.  But, 
decided  in  his  own  opinions,  he  was  most  tolerant  of  others  ;  and  the 
freedom  which  he  claimed  for  himself  he  cheerfully  accorded  to  them. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

His  treatment  of  the  Established  Church  which  he  had  left,  and  of 
her  adherents,  was  uniformly  fair  and  honourable.  His  patronage  he 
exercised  with  a  view  to  her  advantage,  and  in  deference  to  the  wishes 
of  the  congregations  ;  while  over  the  broad  lands  of  Breadalbane  no  man 
ever  suffered  at  his  hands  for  his  religious  convictions ;  and  never  was 
the  question  raised  by  him,  in  regard  to  tenant,  servant,  or  dependent, 
to  which  Church  he  belonged. 

We  might  justly  advert  here  to  the  decided  part  taken  by  Lady 
Breadalbane,  a  descendant  of  Baillie  of  Jerviswood  and  of  John  Knox 
himself,  on  the  occasion  of  the  Disruption  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  in 
1843,  and  to  her  steadfast  maintenance  of  the  great  principles  on  which 
the  Free  Church  is  founded.  Devoted  to  her  noble  husband,  the  faithful 
companion  for  nearly  forty  years,  the  wise  counsellor  and  active  coadjutor 
in  whatever  engaged  his  attention  or  effort,  the  light  of  his  home  and  the 
pride  of  his  heart, — in  her  removal  fourteen  months  before  his  own  death, 
the  noble  Marquis  met  with  an  irreparable  loss.  The  tomb  which  closed 
over  her  mortal  remains  on  6th  of  September  1861,  was  re-opened  on 
Tuesday,  25  th  November  1862,  to  receive  those  of  her  lamented  husband, 
the  noble  Marquis. 

Lord  Breadalbane's  general  character  was  that  of  manly  strength. 
Like  his  person,  square,  and  firmly  built,  it  was  solid,  sturdy,  simple,  un- 
pretentious, but  breathing  unmistakably  an  air  of  conscious  elevation, 
inborn  dignity,  and  native  greatness. 

His  intellect,  though  not  of  that  order  which  is  marked  by  rapidity  of 
movement,  or  needle-like  acuteness  and  power  of  penetration,  was  never- 
theless uncommonly  vigorous,  searching,  and  comprehensive  ;  capable  of 
grappling  with  any  subject ;  sure  to  examine  it  on  every  side  ;  fond  ol 
entering  into  minute  details :  and  almost  certain,  not  swiftly,  but  after 
due  deliberation,  to  arrive  at  the  soundest  conclusion.  Indeed,  his  common 
sense  and  practical  sagacity  were  truly  remarkable  ;  and,  although  not  a 
man  of  business  habits,  he  had  the  greatest  aptitude  for  business,  and  was 


THE  MARQUIS  OF  DREADALBANE. 

able  to  get  through  a  large  amount  of  it :  and  no  sooner  did  he  direct  his 
mind  to  any  question  than  he  saw  all  its  bearings,  would  detect  real 
difficulties  which  escaped  the  attention  of  an  ordinary  observer,  and  start 
sound  objections,  which  had  not  previously  been  raised,  infallibly  putting 
his  finger  upon  a  blot,  if  any  such  existed,  and  so  sifting  the  whole  matter 
in  hand,  that  the  result  reached  in  the  end  could  hardly  fail  to  be  satis- 
factory and  safe.  No  doubt,  there  was  a  certain  amount  of  irresolution 
in  his  character,  and  a  tendency  to  procrastinate,  and  delay  action,  which 
increased  with  his  years  ;  but,  though  a  weakness,  it  was  the  irresolution, 
not  of  a  weak,  but  of  a  strong-minded  man.  He  was  not  quick  in  making 
up  his  mind  ;  but  then  he  had  much  more  of  mind  to  make  up  than 
many,  and  an  immense  variety  of  subjects  on  which  to  make  it  up.  His 
irresolution  was  mainly  due  to  his  Scottish  caution  and  his  strong  con- 
scientiousness, to  his  want  of  confidence  in  his  first  impressions,  coupled 
with  his  anxiety  to  do  what  was  right,  and  to  his  consequent  habit  of 
going  over  the  ground  again  and  again,  and  weighing  thoroughly  the 
issues  to  which  it  was  leading  him.  And  well  for  him  it  was  so.  For 
when  once  his  decision  was  reached,  he  moved  steadily  in  the  path  he  had 
chosen,  and  could  with  difficulty  be  brought  to  listen  to  any  change. 

His  Lordship's  moral  qualities  were  of  the  first  order :  honour,  bright 
as  the  or  emblazoned  on  his  shield  ;  truth,  that  could  not  equivocate,  and 
was  abhorrent  of  a  lie  ;  a  sense  of  justice,  keen  and  strong,  and  carried 
out  inflexibly,  at  any  cost  to  his  interests  or  his  feelings  ;  and  a  heart,  as 
warm  and  tender  in  its  affisctions  as  ever  throbbed  in  human  breast. 

Never  perhaps  was  there  a  man  more  marked  by  strict  integrity, 
manly  sincerity,  and  downright  honesty,  in  all  he  did  and  said.  He 
despised  everything  like  meanness  or  chicanery,  and  was  incapable  of 
taking  an  unfair  advantage  of  another.  Where  he  had  the  advantage 
his  chivalrous  spirit  would  not  permit  him  to  press  it ;  and  he  was  always 
most  disposed  to  be  generous  then,  when  his  opponent  lay  at  his  mercy. 
Even   in   his   school-days,  he   was   the   champion  of  the  weak  or   the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

oppressed.  "  Send  for  Glenorchy,"  was  the  cry  at  Eton,  when  any  of  his 
Scottish  comrades  was  maltreated  by  EngHsh  boys  ;  and  his  impetuous 
courage  and  stalwart  arm  soon  swept  the  assailants  away.  Had  he 
been  a  soldier,  we  doubt  not  his  spirit  would  have  lightened  forth  in 
deeds  of  heroism,  and,  in  battle,  his  clansmen  would  have  found  in  him  a 
daring  leader,  from  whose  lips  no  words  could  have  more  fitly  sounded 
than  the  motto  of  his  house — "  Follow  me."  If  there  was  a  degree  of 
inertness  in  his  composition,  it  was  either  the  calmness  and  the  quiet  of 
conscious  strength,  or  the  smouldering  of  a  fire  that  needed  only  to  be 
stirred  in  order  to  blaze.  On  all  questions  involving  principle  there  was 
a  ready  response.  The  metal,  when  rightly  struck,  instantly  and  in- 
variably rang  true.  If  he  was  slow  to  repose  confidence  in  others,  or  to 
admit  them  to  his  love — when  once  that  confidence  was  gained  and 
given,  it  was  unbounded  ;  and  where  his  judgment  went  along  with  his 
heart,  there  was  no  friend  more  firm  or  fast — no  cause  that  could  have 
supporter  more  staunch  and  true.  His  deepest  sympathies  were  with  his 
people.  A  Highlander  himself,  his  heart  was  in  the  Highlands,  and 
devoted  to  everything  which  concerned  the  honour  and  prosperity  of  that 
romantic  country.  It  was  his  pride  to  be  hailed,  and  to  bear  himself 
among  his  people,  as  a  Highland  chieftain  ;  whilst  the  cause  dearest  to 
him  on  earth  was  that  of  their  mental  and  moral  elevation.  He  had  his 
reward.  The  day  before  the  news  of  his  death  arrived  at  Taymouth,  a 
person  was  expressing  to  some  of  the  crofters  in  the  neighbourhood 
concern  for  the  state  of  their  crops,  still  out  and  rotting  in  the  rain, — "  We 
are  not  caring  at  present  about  the  weather,"  they  said  ;  "we  arc  anxious 
about  the  Marquis." 


^ir  Oabib  '^xcbJsUx. 


)OUR  church  may  well  be  proud  of  her  men  of 
science  —  Brewster,  Fleming,  Miller,  and  Lands- 
borough,"  said  Edward  Forbes  in  1854,  in  the 
course  of  a  pleasant  geological  ramble,  as  we  rested 
in  sight  of  the  thatched  cottage,  Kirkroads,  Bath- 
gate, where  Fleming  was  born.  These  men  had 
won  a  fame  wider  than  European,  and  were  then  drawing  the  attention 
of  the  foremost  thinkers  of  their  day  to  the  principles  for  which  the 
Free  Church  of  Scotland  had  been  honoured  to  witness  and  suffer. 
Ere  six  or  seven  years  had  passed,  all,  except  Brewster,  had  gone  to 

"  A  higher  place, 
More  to  behold,  and  more  in  love  to  dwell." 

David  Brewster  was  born  on  the  nth  December  17S1,  at  Jedburgh, 
Roxburghshire,  where  his  father  was  rector  of  the  grammar  school. 
David  was  the  third  of  six  children — four  sons  and  two  daughters.  One 
son  became  minister  of  Craig,  another  of  Scoonie,  and  a  third  of  the 
Abbey  Church,  Paisley.  David  also  entered  the  University  of  Edin- 
burgh, with  the  view  of  qualifying  himself  for  the  ministry  of  the  Scotti.sh 
Church,  but  other  work  was  to  be  laid  to  his  hand. 

The  chief  subjects  of  interest  in  the  life  of  a  man  of  science,  are  the 
records  of  his  observations  and  discoveries ;  his  influence  on  scientific 
progress  and  on  public  culture.     This  outline  sketch  of  Brewster's  life  is 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

necessarily  very  general,  but  it  may  indicate  what  he  was,  and  what  he 
did,  as  "  by  the  force  of  his  own  merit  he  made  his  way."  The  man  who 
conquers  adverse  circumstances,  or  makes  them  the  steps  of  the  ladder 
by  which  he  climbs  to  eminence,  is  nobler  and  worthier  than  he  to  whom 
high  position  is  secured  by  birth. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  dwell  on  David  Brewster's  boyhood.  The 
quiet  beauty  of  the  scenery  around  Jedburgh,  the  lingering  legends  of 
the  stirring  strife  of  feudal  times,  and  the  weird  stories  of  superstition 
still  rife  in  the  district,  together  with  the  genial  influence  of  Dr  Somer- 
ville,  the  parish  minister,  and  the  companionship  of  lads  whose  mental 
bent  was  towards  physical  studies,  all  helped  to  mould  and  fashion  the 
mind  and  habits  of  "  the  young  philosopher."  He  entered  college  when 
only  twelve  years  of  age,  and  graduated  at  nineteen.  Self-reliant  from 
the  outset,  he  acted  as  a  tutor  from  1799  to  1807.  He  was  licensed  to 
preach  by  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh  in  1804.  He  early  identified 
himself  with  the  Evangelical  party  in  the  Church,  several  of  whose  dis- 
tinguished members  anticipated  for  him  a  brilliant  and  useful  career  as  a 
minister.  Even  before  his  licence,  public  attention  had  been  turned  to 
him,  and  he  had  won  the  high  regard  of  many  literary  and  scientific  men. 
When  it  was  known  that  he  was  to  preach  his  first  sermon  in  the  West 
Church,  Edinburgh,  there  was  an  unusually  large  muster,  both  of  the 
congregation  and  of  strangers.  We  are  assured  by  one  who  was  present 
that  the  discourse  was  thoughtful,  earnest,  full  of  gospel  truth  and  good 
sense.  "He  had  his  discourse  thoroughly  committed  to  memory,  and 
delivered  it  with  great  energy,  increasing  to  the  close,  which  was  in  these 
words : — '  Let  it  be  our  firm  resolution,  our  earnest  endeavour,  our  im- 
portunate prayer,  that,  so  long  as  we  have  being  and  breath,  we  will 
serve  the  Lord.'  "  After  this  he  preached  frequently,  with  much  accept- 
ance, in  Edinburgh  and  the  neighbourhood.  But,  from  the  outset,  Mr 
Brewster  suffered  from  a  nervous  infirmity,  which  led  to  most  painful 
feelings  whenever  he  was  called  in  person  to  address  others.     This  ulti- 


SIR  DAVID  BREWSTER. 

matoly  determined  him  to  leave  the  profession  of  his  early  choice  for  the 
service  of  science. 

The  twofold  curriculum  lhrou!,di  which  he  had  passed  served  him  well 
in  after  years,  when,  like  other  physicists,  he  reached  points  where  observa- 
tion must  give  place  to  faith— points  which  lie  on  the  edge  of  that  great 
mystery  of  Being,  at  whose  closed  gates  all  science  comes,  sooner  or  later, 
to  knock,  and  where  all  true  workers  are  made  to  feel  that,  if  they  are  to 
enter  in,  it  will  not  be  in  the  light  of  the  transient  fire,  struck  out  by  their 
own  efforts  like  sparks  from  flint,  but  in  the  steady  light  of  faith.  The 
discipline  of  the  arts'  course  ripened  in  him  that  trained  common  sense 
which  finds  its  highest  scope  and  satisfaction  in  rigidly  scientific  methods 
of  observation  and  research,  while  the  theological  course  gave  a  healthy 
tone  and  dcfiniteness  of  doctrinal  view  to  his  religion.  To  all  his  scientific 
work  he  brought  a  quick  habit  of  the  eye,  great  breadth  of  view,  strong 
imagination,  a  vigorous  mind,  persistent  capacity  of  application,  and, 
withal,  a  faith  which  kept  the  heart  awake  to,  or  on  the  alert  for,  hints  of 
the  unseen  world  among  the  patent  phenomena  of  this. 

At  the  time  of  Mr  Brewster's  birth  Scottish  physical  science  had 
begun  to  attract  great  attention.  Black,  Robison,  and  Playfair  were  in 
the  heart  of  their  fruitful  labours.  Walker  had  left  his  manse  at  Moffat 
for  the  Natural  History  Chair  in  Edinburgh  University.  Geology  was 
just  about  to  take  a  step  forward,  prophetic  of  the  high  place  since 
assigned  to  it.  Hutton's  "  Theory  of  the  Earth  "  was  laid  before  the 
Royal  Society  in  1789.  Brewster  hastened  to  take  part  in  the  move- 
ment, and  to  give  direction  to  it.  While  yet  in  his  teens,  he  began  to 
publish  his  researches  on  the  inflection  of  light, — a  department  in  which 
he  continued  to  gather  fresh  laurels  till  he  was  within  six  or  seven  of  a 
hundred  years  of  age. 

Revived  science  very  soon  began  to  influence  the  work  of  the  Church. 
Unbelief  turned  to  it  for  weapons  against  revealed  truth.  The  battle  of 
the  Evidences  came  to  be  fought  on  physical  rather  than,  as  in  the  past, 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

on  metaphysical  ground.  And  men  ■were  needed  whose  attainments 
commanded  the  respect  of  scientific  workers,  and  in  whose  theological 
acquirements  the  Church  herself  had  confidence.  Such  were  Chalmers, 
Brewster,  and  Fleming.  A  work  of  vast  moment  fell  to  them.  They 
secured  for  men  of  science  the  sympathy  and  encouragement  of  thought- 
ful churchmen,  while  they  held  back  the  opposition  to  science  on  the  part 
of  an  imperfectly  instructed  Christian  communit)\ 

In  1806  Mr  Brewster  projected  the  "Edinburgh  Encyclopaedia," 
which  he  edited  till  its  completion  in  1830,  and  enriched  by  valuable 
contributions.  An  event  occurred  in  connection  with  this  work  destined 
to  have  vitally  important  bearings,  not  on  Scottish  Christianity  only,  but 
on  Christian  thought  throughout  the  world — an  event,  moreover,  closely 
related  to  that  religious  and  ecclesiastical  movement  within  the  Church 
which  culminated  in  the  Disruption.  I  refer  to  the  remarkable  spiritual 
change  through  which  Chalmers  passed  when  preparing  the  article, 
"  Christianity,"  for  Brewster's  Encyclopaedia.  When  he  began  the  work, 
he  had  only  a  name  to  live ;  but,  in  the  course  of  it,  views  of  the  God- 
head of  Christ,  the  divine  origin  of  the  religion  of  Christ,  and  of  his  own 
need  of  a  personal  Saviour,  filled  his  mind,  and  were  used  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  give  him  a  place  "  among  the  living." 

In  conjunction  with  Professor  Jameson,  Dr  Brewster  started  the 
"  Edinburgh  Philosophical  Journal."  Indeed,  from  the  commencement  of 
the  Encyclopaedia,  he  continued  to  take  a  leading  part  in  the  literature 
of  Scottish  science.  In  the  appendix  to  the  admirable  memoir — "The 
Home  Life  of  David  Brewster" — by  his  daughter  Mrs  Gordon,  the  titles 
of  three  hundred  and  fifteen  papers  are  given,  contribiited  by  him  to 
learned  societies  or  to  scientific  journals.  A  searching  analysis  of  these, 
in  their  relations  to  the  views  of  other  workers,  has  still  to  be  made. 
When  the  scientific  life  of  Sir  David  Brewster  shall  be  written,  it  will  be 
a  record  of  untiring  application,  painstaking  research,  persistent  devo- 
tion to  scientific  method,  careful  generalisation,  and  brilliant  discoven-. 


S//i  DAVID  DREU'STER. 

His  papers  on  Light — the  phenomena  of  refraction,  polarisation,  and 
absorption — won  for  him  a  foremost  place  among  physicists.  Even  his 
kaleidoscope,  "  the  philosopher's  toy,"  has  been  turned  to  good  practical 
account.  "Where  got  you  that  striking  pattern.'"  I  once  asked  in  a 
Birmingham  warehouse.  "In  the  kaleidoscope,"  was  the  ready  reply. 
Sir  David  also  published  several  popular  works,  as  "The  Life  of 
Newton,"  "  Martyrs  of  Science,"  "  Letters  on  Natural  Magic,"  and  "  More 
Worlds  than  One."  His  articles  in  the  quarterlies  were  many  and 
interesting.  Among  those  contributed  to  the  "  North  British  Review,"  one 
deserves  special  notice.  In  1845  Sir  David  reviewed  the  fourth  edition 
of  "  The  Vestiges  of  the  Natural  History  of  Creation,"  a  work  which,  at 
the  time,  was  as  much  talked  of  as  Mr  Darwin's  "Origin  of  Species"  was 
later.  In  this  paper  Sir  David's  great  ability,  varied  accomplishments, 
and  tact  as  a  Christian  apologist,  stand  very  boldly  out.  His  facts  in 
disproof  of  the  author's  confident  assertions  were  overwhelming.  Indeed, 
the  review  was  virtually  the  death  of  that  work  as  a  plea  for  materialism. 
It  contains,  moreover,  the  refutation  of  several  of  the  strongest  pleas 
recently  urged  in  support  of  the  factless  theory  of  organic  evolution. 
My  personal  acquaintance  with  Sir  David  began  in  1858,  when  I  became 
editor  of  the  "  North  British  Review."  From  that  date  till  my  resignation 
of  the  editorship,  I  had  frequent  communications  from  Sir  David,  both 
personally  and  by  letter.  At  this  time  an  article  written  by  him  gave  so 
much  offence  to  certain  workers,  that  strong  efforts,  successful  for  a  time, 
were  made  to  keep  him  from  a  position  which  was  his  by  merit.  At  the 
request  of  Sir  James  Simpson,  in  whose  house  at  Trinity  he  was  then 
living,  and  several  other  friends,  it  fell  to  me  to  inform  Sir  David  of 
the  cabal.  I  have  a  lively  recollection  of  the  dignified  bearing  of  Sir 
David  as  a  philosopher  and  as  a  Christian  gentleman,  in  circumstances 
peculiarly  tr}'ing  to  a  man  of  science.  The  honour  was  later  bestowed, 
and  lustre  shed  on  it  by  Sir  David  consenting  to  receive  it* 

*  We  have  not  space  for  the  list  of  his  honours.     Here  are  the  chief :— M.A.,  Cambridge, 
63 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Sir  David  continued  loyal  to  the  evangelical  party  in  the  Church, 
whose  views  of  doctrine  and  work  he  had  deliberately  chosen  at  the 
outset  of  his  career.  And  when,  on  the  iSth  of  May  1843,  the  Disrup- 
tion took  place,  he  joined  the  procession  from  St  Andrew's  Church  to 
Canonmills  Hall,  his  brother,  the  venerable  Dr  Brewster  of  Craig, 
leaning  on  his  arm — fit  representatives  of  Scottish  science  and  Scottish 
piety.  Sir  David  had,  in  the  heat  of  the  conflict,  been  a  valued  adviser 
of  those  who  took  an  active  and  prominent  part  in  it.  Its  close  brought 
him  into  even  more  familiar  and  friendly  relations  with  them.  The 
College  arrangements  of  the  Free  Church  got  much  of  his  attention. 
The  institution  of  the  Chair  of  Natural  Science  in  the  New  College,  and 
the  appointment  of  his  friend  Dr  Fleming  as  its  first  Professor,  greatly 
gratified  him.* 

Sir  David  was  twice  married — first,  in  18 10,  to  Juliet,  youngest 
daughter  of  James  Macpherson,  M.P.,  Esq.  of  Belleville,  editor  of 
"  Ossian."  Four  sons  and  one  daughter  were  the  fruit  of  this  marriage. 
Second,  in  1857,  to  Jane,  daughter  of  Thomas  Purnell,  Esq.,  Scarborough, 
by  whom  he  had  one  daughter.  Sir  David  died  at  his  favourite  country 
residence,  AUerly,  Melrose,  on  the  loth  Februaiy  1868.  His  last  words 
were,  "  Life  has  been  very  bright  to  me,  and  now  there  is  the  brightness 
beyond."  "  I  shall  see  Jesus,  who  created  all  things ;  Jesus  who  made 
the  worlds  ;  I  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  "  I  have  had  the  light  for  many 
years,  and  oh  !  how  bright  it  is  !     I  feel  so  SAFE,  SO  SATISFIED." 

1S07;  LL.D.,  Aberdeen,  1S07  ;  F.R.S.E.,  iSoS;  Copley  Medallist,  1815;  French  Institute 
Prize,  1816  ;  Rumford  Medallist,  iSiS  ;  six  other  royal  medals  subsequently;  F.R.S.,  i8lS; 
M.I.C.E.,  1822;  Corresponding  Member  of  French  Institute,  1825;  Guelphic  Order,  1S30; 
Knighthood  by  William  IV.,  1832;  Principal  of  the  United  Colleges  of  St  Salvador  and  St 
Leonard's,  St  Andrews,  1838;  one  of  the  Eight  Associates  of  the  French  Institute,  1849; 
Principal  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  1859. 

*  See  article  on  "The  Vestiges,"  referred  to  above. 

J.  D 


-^^^^HE   REV.   CHARLES   JOHN   BROWN,  D.D,  Senior 
"^  Pastor  of  the  Free  New  North  Church,  Edinburgh,  was 

born  at  Aberdeen,  on  2ist  August,  1806,  the  fifth  son  of 
Mr.  Alexander  Brown,  Bookseller,  and  Collector  of  the 
Inland  Revenue  for  the  counties  of  Aberdeen  and 
Kincardine,  and  for  several  years  Lord  Provost  of 
Aberdeen.  He  received  his  education  at  the  Grammar  School  and  at 
Marischal  College  and  University  of  Aberdeen.  After  an  attendance  of 
two  years  at  the  Arts  Classes,  he  went  to  Edinburgh  with  the  view  of 
studying  for  the  Bar.  In  preparation  for  this  he  entered  the  office  of 
a  Writer  to  the  Signet.  At  this  time  he  became  a  hearer  of  Dr.  Gordon 
in  Hope  Park  Chapel  which  was  opened  in  1824.  Soon  after  he  was 
brought  under  the  saving  power  of  the  truth,  and  became  a  new  creature 
in  Christ  Jesus.  This  led  him  to  devote  himself  to  the  work  of  the 
Gospel  ministry.  Returning  to  Aberdeen,  he  completed  his  curriculum 
at  the  University,  and  thereafter  attended  the  Divinity  Hall,  at  the  close 
of  the  usual  course  receiving  license  from  the  Presbytery  of  Aberdeen. 

In  1 83 1,  he  was  elected  minister  of  Anderston  Church,  Glasgow,  an 
arduous  and  important  charge.  During  the  six  years  he  remained  there, 
he  made  full  proof  of  his  ministry,  both  as  a  preacher  and  pastor. 
He  also  took  part  in  more  public  work.     When  the  Voluntary  Contro- 

K  6s 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

versy  began  in  1832,  he  delivered  very  able  lectures,  both  in  Glasgow 
and  Edinburgh.  He  also  at  that  time  published  a  small  volume  on  the 
subject,  the  logical  acuteness  of  whose  reasoning  was  acknowledged  even 
by  those  who  differed  widely  from  him  on  the  points  at  issue. 

In  the  year  1837  the  Town  Council  of  Edinburgh  presented  him  to 
the  New  North  Church,  vacant  by  the  translation  of  Dr.  John  Bruce  to 
St.  Andrew's  Church.  This  presentation  he  accepted,  and  began  a 
ministry  there  of  singular  usefulness  and  success,  giving  himself  wholly 
to  his  work,  and  making  a  deep  impression,  not  only  on  his  own  con- 
gregation but  on  the  whole  community. 

When  the  awakening  began  at  Kilsyth,  in  1839,  Dr.  Brown,  as  might 
have  been  expected,  was  deeply  interested  in  that  remarkable  work,  and 
paid  several  visits  to  the  place.  Returning  with  his  heart  greatly 
stirred,  he  gave  his  own  people  an  account  of  what  he  had  seen  of  the 
grace  of  God.  He  was  not  only  made  glad  like  Barnabas  of  old,  but 
the  sight  seemed  to  give  a  new  edge  to  his  ministry.  The  lecture  by 
him  in  the  Glasgow  course,  on  Revivals  of  Religion,  in  1840 — his  subject 
being,  "  Symptoms  and  Fruits  of  a  Revival  of  Religion  " — is  one  of  the 
most  powerful  and  interesting  of  his  publications. 

At  this  period  of  his  ministry,  and  for  several  years  afterwards,  he 
had  a  weekly  class  for  young  men,  for  the  exposition  of  the  Confession 
of  Faith.  This  was  attended  by  a  large  number  of  divinity  students, 
as  well  as  others,  and  many  have  testified  to  the  great  benefit  they 
derived  from  it. 

He  always  made  conscience  of  preparing  carefully  for  his  ordinary 
pulpit  work.  The  opening  prayer  before  his  forenoon  lecture,  will  be 
memorable  to  all  who  waited  on  his  ministry.  We  have  heard  said  of 
it  by  more  than  one,  that  they  could  have  gone  home  with  the  feeling 
that  they  had  received  spiritual  strength  from  it  for  many  days,  so  full 
was  it  of  true  devotional  spirit  and  communion  with  God.  But,  indeed, 
in  everything  Dr.  Brown  was  pre-eminently  a   man  of  prayer.     The 


CHARLES  JOHN  BROWN,  D.D. 

Lecture,  at  which  he  greatly  excelled,  whether  on  the  historical  or 
doctrinal  books  of  Scripture,  was  much  valued,  for  he  made  history 
tell  plainly  its  doctrine,  and  he  showed  the  doctrinal  to  be  powerfully 
practical.  In  his  lectures  and  sermons  there  was  a  rare  combination 
of  intellectual  power  and  spiritual  earnestness,  proceeding  from  a  mind 
and  heart  full  of  the  treasures  of  the  Word.  These  were  not  given 
out  in  mere  strings  of  texts.  The  armour  had  become  his  own  ;  he 
had  proved  it.  He  was  mighty  in  the  Scriptures,  and  the  Word 
prayed  over  and  meditated  on  by  day  and  night  was  in  him  as  a  well 
of  water,  ever  springing  up.  Truly  the  Word  of  Christ  dwelt  in  him 
richly  in  all  wisdom,  so  that  alike  in  the  pulpit  and  at  the  Communion 
Table,  at  his  prayer  meetings,  in  his  classes,  in  family  visitation,  and  at 
the  sick-bed,  he  fed  his  people  with  what  had  first  of  all  enriched  his 
own  soul. 

Dr.  Brown  was  from  the  first  an  anti-patronage  man,  and,  from  the 
beginning  of  the  Ten  Years'  Conflict  till  its  close  in  victory,  he  took  the 
deepest  interest  in  every  movement  connected  with  it.  "  The  right  of 
Christ  to  reign  in  His  own  house,"  was  felt  by  him  to  be  a  great 
principle,  worth  living  for,  and  worth  suffering  for.  He  often  reminded 
his  own  people  and  others  that  the  battle  must  be  fought  in  the  strength 
and  grace  of  the  Lord  ;  and  for  this  prayer  must  be  made  by  the  Church 
to  God  without  ceasing.  His  ardour  throughout  the  struggle  was  not 
merely  that  of  a  patriot  or  an  ecclesiastic,  but  of  a  public  servant  of 
God,  jealous  for  the  honour  of  his  risen  Lord  and  Saviour.  He  thus 
gave  peculiar  help  all  through  the  controversy,  by  keeping  up  in  the 
minds  of  brethren  a  high  spiritual  tone.  Although  without  Dr. 
Candlish's  wonderful  versatility,  Dr.  Cunningham's  learning  and  invin- 
cible argumentative  power,  Dr.  Buchanan's  statesman-like  tact  and 
knowledge  of  the  Church  and  the  world,  or  Dr.  Guthrie's  great  gifts  of 
imagination  and  pathos.  Dr.  Brown  gave  invaluable  assistance  to  the 
chief  captains  who  bore  the  burden  and  heat  of  that  ever-memorable 
67 


disruption:  worthies. 

time.  He  was  called  to  take  part  in  many  grave  public  meetings,  he 
was  sent  to  visit  the  Strathbogie  Presbytery,  and  also  as  a  deputy  to 
Ireland  along  with  Dr.  Guthrie,  a  visit  to  which  he  often  afterwards 
referred.  He  also  rendered  useful  service  in  conferences  with  influential 
persons,  which,  as  a  Christian  gentleman,  he  often  conducted  with 
peculiar  effect.  The  combination  of  warm  catholicity,  with  great 
doctrinal  and  denominational  earnestness  was  a  peculiar  feature  in  his 
character.  At  the  memorable  Convocation  in  November,  1842,  he 
took  an  active  part,  and  one  speech  which  he  delivered  there,  showing 
no  common  logical  and  legal  power,  was  known  to  have  had  great 
influence  on  the  minds  of  the  assembled  ministers.  On  the  first  Sabbath 
after  the  Disruption,  Dr.  Brown,  by  appointment  of  the  General 
Assembly,  preached  in  the  Tanfield  Hall  in  the  afternoon,  from  the  text, 
"I  have  set  watchmen  on  thy  walls,  O  Jerusalem;  which  shall  never 
hold  their  peace,  day  nor  night."  There  seemed  a  deep  impression 
produced  on  the  3000  worshippers. 

Nearly  all  his  congregation  left  the  Establishment  along  with  him, 
and  worshipped  for  several  months  in  Arg>'le  Square  Chapel,  kindly 
offered  to  them  by  Dr.  Lindsay  Alexander's  congregation.  They  after- 
wards met  in  Brighton  Street  Church  and  Potterrow  Church  till  they 
occupied  their  present  place  of  worship  in  Forrest  Road  in  June,  1848. 

During  the  autumn  of  1843  he  went  with  others  as  a  deputation  to 
England,  to  explain  the  principles  of  the  Free  Church,  and  obtain  contri- 
butions for  the  Central  Building  Fund.  He  was  much  in  London,  and 
enjoyed  greatly  the  sympathy  and  fellowship  of  the  Hon.  and  Rev. 
Baptist  Noel,  and  other  evangelical  ministers  of  the  Church  of  England. 

When  the  Assembly  of  1844  drew  near,  it  was  felt  by  many,  and 
very  strongly  by  Dr.  Brown,  that  after  a  "  Ten  Years'  Conflict "  for  what 
many  would  deem  the  mere  outworks  of  the  Church,  there  was  great 
danger  of  the  people  sinking  into  apathy  and  settling  down  into  a  dry 
Non-Intrusion  body,  without  spiritual  life.     Under  this  impression  much 


CHARLES  JOHN  BROWN,  D.D. 

prayer  was  invited  for  the  Assembly  of  1844;  and,  when  it  met,  it  was 
resolved  to  devote  Tuesday,  the  21st  May,  to  special  religious  services. 
That  was  a  memorable  day.  Dr.  Brown  was  called  to  preach  before 
the  Assembly,  and,  short  as  the  notice  was,  he  preached  with  unusual 
power  from  Habakkuk  ii.  i,  "  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch,  and  set  me 
upon  the  tower,  and  will  watch  to  see  what  he  will  say  unto  me,  and 
what  I  shall  answer  when  I  am  reproved."  The  solemn  views  there 
given  of  a  minister's  responsibility  and  aim  made  a  deep  impression. 
The  sermon  was  largely  circulated,  not  only  in  Scotland,  but  elsewhere. 
Having  been  read  by  an  eminent  dignitary  of  the  Church  of  England, 
he  sent  a  copy  of  it  to  all  the  clergymen  in  his  diocese.  Dr.  Brown 
at  this  time  also  published  a  letter  addressed  to  the  excellent  Edward 
Bickersteth,  the  object  of  which  was  to  give  information  on  the  subject 
of  the  Free  Church  to  evangelical  Episcopalians  in  England,  by  many 
of  whom  it  had  been  much  misunderstood.  It  may  here  be  added,  as 
the  issue  of  that  day's  proceedings,  that  a  Committee  was  appointed, 
with  Dr.  Brown  as  convener,  for  sending  through  all  the  Presbyteries  of 
the  Church  preaching  deputations  of  two  and  two,  to  rouse  the  people 
to  increased  attention  to  the  things  that  belonged  to  their  peace ;  a 
movement  which  gave  a  quickened  tone  to  the  ministrations  of  the 
pulpit,  and  was  blessed  to  many  souls.  Dr.  Brown,  however,  found  the 
business  details  of  this  Committee  too  much  for  him. 

Naturally  possessing  an  impulsive  and  mercurial  temperament, 
which  sometimes  was  misunderstood  by  those  who  did  not  know  him 
well,  he  could  never  do  work  by  halves.  Whatever  he  did,  he  did 
with  all  his  might,  often  indeed  wasting  his  great  nervous  energy  on 
details  which  could  have  been  done  more  easily  by  less  able  men.  This 
overstrain  brought  on  a  very  serious  illness,  by  which  he  was  laid  aside 
from  all  work  for  nearly  two  years.  In  the  providence  of  God,  this  long 
rest  may  have  strengthened  him  for  the  good  work  he  was  still  to  do, 
amid  intervals  of  ill  health,  for  nearly  thirty  years  after.  From  1846 
69 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

to  1857,  he  was  able  for  full  duty,  and  his  manifold  labours  were 
followed  with  a  blessing  from  on  high.  But  periods  of  weak  health 
now  ensued.  After  several  temporary  assistants,  the  Rev.  Andrew 
Crichton  was  ordained  as  his  colleague  in  i860;  and  on  his  translation 
to  Dundee,  the  Rev.  R.  G.  Balfour,  of  Rothesay,  became  his  colleague 
in  1866.  Dr.  Brown,  however,  was  able  till  1876  to  take  a  share  of 
the  work  of  the  Congregation  as  well  as  more  public  duty. 

Dr.  Brown  was  invited  from  time  to  time  to  address  the  Theological 
Students  at  the  New  College.  His  valuable  book  "The  Divine  Glory 
of  Christ,"  the  indirect  proofs  from  Scripture  of  our  Lord's  Divinity,  was 
one  result  of  these  addresses.  The  substance  of  later  addresses  to  them 
may  be  found  in  a  collected  form  in  "  The  Ministry,  being  Addresses  to 
Students  of  Divinity  in  1872."  He  there  discusses  shortly  but  power- 
fully and  practically  such  subjects  as  the  connection  between  Godliness 
and  the  Christian  ministry,  Public  Prayer,  Preaching— its  properties, 
place,  and  power,  &c. 

At  the  Assembly  of  1863,  Dr.  Buchanan  moved  for  the  appointment 
of  a  Committee  to  consider  the  subject  of  union  with  the  United 
Presbyterian  Church.  In  seconding  this  motion,  Dr.  Brown  made  a 
speech,  distinguished  by  great  ability,  and  some  tender  allusions,  which 
touched  the  Assembly,  to  the  too  strong  things  which  in  the  heat  of  the 
Voluntary  controversy  had  fallen  from  the  lips  and  the  pens  of  both 
parties  in  that  memorable  controversy.  This  speech  gave  very  much 
the  keynote  to  the  subsequent  discussions  on  the  question.  In  the 
joint  meetings  of  the  various  Union  Committees,  his  warmly  devotional 
and  brotherly  spirit  helped  to  make  their  intercourse  most  pleasant 
and  refreshing,  while  his  thorough  knowledge  of  all  the  questions  which 
successively  arose,  and  his  logical  acuteness,  were  of  real  value. 

Dr.  Brown  was  called  by  the  voice  of  the  Church  to  fill  the 
Moderator's  chair  in  1S72,  an  office  which  his  state  of  health  at  the 
time  happily  enabled  him  to  accept.     In  his  address   at   the  opening 


CHARLES  JOHN  BROW  N,  D.D. 

of  the  Assembly  he  referred  in  a  very  striking  way  to  the  providential 
hand  of  God  in  circumstances  preceding  and  preparing  for  the  Dis- 
ruption. In  his  closing  address  he  spoke  of  the  duties  of  ministers 
and  elders  in  a  way  fitted  to  elevate  and  impress  them.  Both  addresses 
were  subsequently  printed. 

In  all  the  work  of  his  Congregation,  Dr.  Brown  took  the  deepest 
interest.  Their  Home  Mission  and  other  work  by  his  office-bearers  and 
people  were  greatly  helped  by  him.  While  he  spared  no  personal 
labour,  as  in  the  matter  of  the  Cowgate  Territorial  Congregation,  in 
connection  with  their  church  and  manse,  yet  he  did  even  more  by  his 
hearty  encouragement  to  all  in  their  Christian  work,  wisely  considering 
that  he  could  thus  do  more  good  than  by  involving  himself  in  details 
which  others  could  do,  and  which  would  take  him  off  from  the  ministry 
of  the  Word  and  prayer.  The  spiritual  temperature  of  the  members 
and  office-bearers  being  kept  high,  there  was  no  jarring  or  jealousy. 
Never  had  any  minister  a  more  attached  or  united  congregation ;  and 
they  have  been  a  highly  favoured  one.  One  of  the  latest  acts  by 
which  they  showed  their  attachment  to  Dr.  Brown,  was  the  presentation 
to  him  and  his  family,  of  his  portrait,  an  admirable  likeness,  painted 
by  Mr.  Norman  Macbeth. 

Ever  longing  for  the  revival  of  religion,  he  prepared  several  of  the 
papers  for  United  Prayer  from  time  to  time,  and  the  movement  in  1874, 
at  the  time  of  Mr.  Moody's  visit,  warmly  engaged  his  heart.  Akin  to 
this  it  may  be  mentioned  that  several  of  the  Pastoral  Addresses  issued 
by  the  General  Assembly  were  prepared  by  him. 

A  wish  had  been  often  expressed  that  he  would  prepare  a  volume  of 
sermons  for  publication.  Various  reasons  long  prevented  him  from 
complying  with  this  desire.  Besides  his  state  of  health,  there  was  the 
difficulty  arising  from  his  mode  of  study.  Gifted  with  an  excellent 
memor}',  he  studied  his  subjects  most  laboriously,  but  committed  little 
to   paper,  and   scarcely   ever  wrote  out  a  sermon  or   lecture  till  after 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

delivery — even  then  only  in  few  cases.  He  was  able,  however,  to 
comply  with  the  wishes  of  his  friends,  by  the  publication  of  a  volume, 
in  1874,  entitled  "The  Word  of  Life,  being  Selections  from  the  Work 
of  a  Ministry."  While  this  volume  shows  the  richness  of  his  preaching, 
and  his  power  in  the  exposition,  collocation,  and  application  of 
Scripture  truth,  it  cannot  give  a  full  idea  of  his  liveliness  and  warmth 
in  the  pulpit.  While  retaining  solidity  and  strength  in  his  discourses 
with  little  illustration  or  imaginative  sentiment,  in  the  later  years  of 
his  ministry  there  was  a  growing  tenderness  and  sympathy,  shown 
for  example  by  favourite  hymns  being  often  introduced  with  exquisite 
feeling  in  his  discourses. 

For  the  last  five  years  he  has  been  laid  aside  from  his  much  loved 
work.  May  the  Lord,  whom  he  has  served  so  well,  comfort  him  with 
the  consolation  with  which  he  has  so  often  comforted  others. 

D.  D. 


^%^^ 


B  RO  WN ,  D ,  D .       y^>s;^F7^ 


©a&ib  Brobn,  Q.ID. 


DAVID  BROWN  was  born  in  Aberdeen,  17th 
August,  1803.  He  was  the  fourth  son  of  Alexander 
Brown,  bookseller,  and  Collector  of  Inland  Revenue 
for  the  counties  of  Aberdeen  and  Kincardine,  a  promi- 
nent citizen  of  Aberdeen,  who  twice  filled  the  office 
of  chief  magistrate  of  the  city.  His  mother,  Catharine  Chalmers,  the 
eldest  of  a  large  and  well-known  family,  was  a  member  of  the  Original 
Secession  Church,  and  bore  the  highest  character  for  Christian 
consistency  and  earnestness.  He  was  educated  at  the  Grammar  School 
of  Aberdeen,  and  at  Marischal  College  and  University,  where  he 
graduated  in  1821.  Having  completed  his  divinity  course  there, 
he  went  at  the  close  of  his  fourth  .session  to  Edinburgh,  somewhat 
uncertain,  owing  to  theological  difficulties,  whether  or  not  he  should 
prosecute  his  views  to  the  ministry.  In  Edinburgh,  however,  partly 
through  the  powerful  ministry  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Gordon  of  the  New  North 
Church,  his  difficulties  were  removed,  and  he  returned  to  Aberdeen. 
During  his  early  studies,  a  close  intimacy  with  the  late  well-known 
John  Duncan,  afterwards  Professor  in  the  New  College,  Edinburgh, 
proved  in  no  wise  favourable  to  his  religious  state.  But  now  that  a 
great  change  had  taken  place  on  himself,  and  stimulated  by  intercourse 
with  Dr.  Csesar  Malan  of  Geneva,  his  resumed  intercourse  with  his  old 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

friend,  and,  above  all,  Dr.  Malan's  own  interviews  with  him,  resulted  in 
the  change  which  Dr.  Brown  has  described  in  his  Memoir  of  his  friend. 

Mr.  Brown  was  licensed  in  1826,  and  family  circumstances  taking 
him  soon  after  to  London,  he  met  with  Edward  Irving,  then  in  the  height 
of  his  popularity  as  a  preacher  in  the  Caledonian  Chapel,  Hatton  Garden. 
Week  after  week  he  stood  in  the  gallery,  behind  such  men  as  the  Duke 
of  Sussex,  Lord  Brougham,  Mr.  Canning,  and  a  galaxy  of  literary  men 
seldom  seen  together,  while  the  adjoining  streets  were  filled  with 
carriages.  Soon  after,  Irving  removed  to  Regent  Square,  and  Mr.  Brown 
was  invited  by  him  to  become  his  assistant,  an  office  which  he  held 
about  a  year  and  a-half.  Irving  was  led  to  adopt  peculiar  views  of  the 
gifts  of  the  Spirit,  holding  that  the  primitive  gifts  were  never  formally 
withdrawn  from  the  Church,  but  were  lost  by  unbelief,  and  might  be 
restored  when  faith  claimed  them.  This  at  length  led  to  claims  to  the 
possession  of  these  gifts  by  members  of  Mr.  Irving's  congregation.  Mr. 
Brown  watched  this  process  with  much  anxiety,  and  all  the  more  as  the 
gifts  claimed,  though  having  certain  features  not  easily  explained,  were 
very  different  from  all  that  he  had  been  accustomed  to  think  of  as 
gifts  of  the  Spirit.  At  length,  finding  something  wrong,  he  resigned  his 
post  and  returned  to  Aberdeen.  His  next  situation  was  that  of  assistant 
to  the  minister  of  Dumbarton,  and  thereafter,  in  1835,  he  was  ordained 
minister  in  the  newly-erected  chapel  of  Ord,  in  the  parish  of  Banff,  and 
Presbytery  of  Fordyce.  Mr.  Brown  set  himself  with  great  earnestness  to 
the  duties  of  this  rural  sphere,  and  was  soon  recognised  as  one  of  the 
most  able  and  earnest  evangelical  ministers  in  a  district  of  country 
where  Moderatism  had  prevailed  for  a  very  long  time.  While  at  Ord  he 
was  married  to  Catharine  Dyce,  third  daughter  of  the  late  Dr.  William 
Dyce  of  Aberdeen,  and  sister  of  the  late  Mr.  William  Dyce,  the  dis- 
tinguished painter,  a  lady  of  the  highest  gifts  and  character,  like  himself 
very  musical,  and  an  active  helper  in  every  good  work. 

Part  of  the  quoad  sacra  district  of  Ord  lay  in  the  parish  of  Marnoch, 


DAVID  BROWN,  D.D. 

and  Mr.  Brown  naturally  felt  a  peculiarly  lively  interest  in  the  whole 
circumstances  of  the  struggle  of  which  that  parish  was  the  scene.  He 
was  present  on  the  occasion  of  the  settlement  of  Mr.  Edwards,  or  rather 
he  was  with  the  parishioners  outside  while  the  mockery  of  ordination 
was  going  on  within  the  church.  The  snow  was  deep  on  the  ground, 
and  the  occasion  was  one  of  great  solemnity.  Mr.  Brown  took  his  share 
in  the  ministrations  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly  in  the  parishes 
of  the  seven  suspended  ministers  of  Strathbogie,  especially  in  the  parish 
of  Glass,  ministrations  that  were  much  blessed  in  spite  of  the  Interdicts 
which  the  Court  of  Session  showered  on  all  who  took  part  in  conducting 
them. 

At  the  "  Convocation"  in  1842,  Mr.  Brown  adhered  to  the  resolutions 
which  bound  the  Convocationers  to  abandon  their  connexion  with  the 
State,  in  the  event  of  no  relief  being  given  by  the  Legislature  to  the 
grievances  of  the  Church.  When  the  Disruption  came  in  1843,  he  left 
without  hesitation,  followed  by  the  great  majority  of  his  people.  A 
congregation  of  the  Free  Church  was  organised  in  the  village  of  Corn- 
hill,  three  miles  off,  a  more  convenient  locality  than  that  of  the  old 
church.  A  few  months  after  the  Disruption,  he  received  a  unanimous 
call  to  be  minister  of  Free  St.  James's,  Glasgow,  which  he  accepted.  He 
was  inducted  in  October,  1843,  during  the  sitting  of  the  General  Assembly 
that  met  in  Glasgow.  Besides  discharging  the  duties  of  that  important 
charge,  he  superintended  for  two  sessions  the  training  of  the  Glasgow 
Divinity  Students  in  Biblical  criticism.  He  had  his  share,  likewise, 
in  the  stirring  work  of  organising  and  watering  the  churches,  charac- 
teristic of  the  time,  and  during  an  evangelistic  tour  in  the  Presbyteries 
of  Stirling  and  Auchtcrarder,  witnessed  scenes  of  blessing  never  to  be 
forgotten. 

Having  in  1845  contributed  a  series  of  papers  to  the  Free  Church 
Magazine  on  the  question  of  the  Premillennial  Advent,  then  creating  a 
"onsiderable  stir  among   many  of  the   most   estimable   ministers   and 


VJSRUP HON  WORTH  1E6. 

elders  of  the  Church,  he  was  induced  by  the  editor,  the  late  Rev.  Dr. 
Hetherington,  to  recast  them  and  form  them  into  a  volume.  In  1846 
the  first  edition  was  published  ;  the  second,  in  1S47,  was  virtually  a  new 
work.  The  book  has  gone  through  six  or  seven  editions  in  all,  and  it 
has  been  generally  accepted  as  the  standard  exposition  of  the  anti- 
premillennial  side  of  the  question. 

When  the  British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review  was  started  by  the 
late  Rev.  Dr.  Andrew  Cameron,  Mr.  Brown  was  sought  by  him  as  a 
collaborateur.  Among  his  papers  in  this  journal  were — "John  Albert 
Bengel,"  "  Sir  William  Hamilton  on  the  Apocalypse,"  "  Maurice's  Theo- 
logical Essays,"  "  Professor  Jowctt  on  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,"  "Revision 
of  English  New  Testament,"  "John  of  Barnevelt  and  the  Synod  of  Dort," 
"The  Miraculous  Conception  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  It  was  during 
this  period  that  the  degree  of  D.D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  College 
of  Princeton,  New  Jersey. 

In  1854  he  was  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly  Convener  of  the 
Committee  for  the  Conversion  of  the  Jews,  and  he  continued  to  hold  the 
office  till  his  appointment  to  a  theological  chair. 

In  1856,  at  the  urgent  request  of  Messrs.  William  Collins  &  Co.,  pub- 
lishers, he  undertook  the  preparation  of  a  "  Portable  Commentary  on  the 
New  Testament,"  to  be  published  in  monthly  parts  ;  the  commentary  to 
occupy,  so  far  as  possible,  no  more  space  than  the  text.  This  work  went  on 
at  intervals  till  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  was  reached  ;  but  as  no  con- 
densation could  pack  a  commentary  on  that  book  into  anything  like  the 
same  space  as  the  text,  it  was  issued  in  a  separate  form,  and  was  after- 
wards somewhat  abridged  for  the  "Portable  Commentary."  The  process 
of  extreme  compression,  however,  was  distasteful,  and  by  and  by  Dr. 
Brown  set  about  the  preparation  of  a  larger  commentaiy  on  the  New 
Testament  for  the  use  of  ministers  who  had  neither  time  nor  inclina- 
tion to  consult  purely  critical  commentaries,  and  for  cultivated  private 
Christians.  The  first  volume,  embracing  the  Gospels,  was  issued  in 
76 


DAVJn  BROUW,  D.D. 

,863,  and  has  been  repeatedly  reprinted.  The  second,  embracing  Acts 
and  Romans,  was  issued  some  years  thereafter,  and  the  concludmg 
volume  was  the  work  of  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England. 

In  May,  1857.  the  General  Assembly  appointed  Dr.  Brown  to  the 
Chair  of  Apologetics,  Exegesis  of  the  Gospels,  and  Senior  Church 
History  in  Aberdeen.  All  these  branches  he  continued  to  teach  till 
,875,  when  a  separate  Chair  of  Church  History  was  instituted,  to 
which  the  Rev.  Dr.  Binnie  was  appointed.  A  few  years  after  his  return 
to  Aberdeen,  his  Alma  Mater,  the  University  of  Aberdeen,  conferred  on 
Dr.  Brown  its  own  degree  of  D.D. 

In  1870,  the  Convocation  of  the  English  Church  of  the  Province  of 
Canterbury'having  appointed  a  committee  of  Biblical  scholars  of  their 
own  Church,  with  power  to  associate  with  them  scholarly  men  of  other 
denominations  for  the  revision  of  the  Authorised  Version  of  the  Bible, 
Dr.  Brown  was  chosen  one  of  the  New  Testament  Company,  who  were  to 
sit  four  days  a-week  in  each  month  (save  August  and  September),  until 
the  work  should  be  completed.  Dr.  Brown  has  taken  a  great  interest  in 
the  work,  never  having  been  absent  from  the  meetings  except  during  the 
College  session.  After  the  labour  of  nearly  ten  years,  the  work  is 
understood  to  be  now  all  but  completed. 

The  lifelong  intimacy  of  Dr.  Brown  with  the  late  Professor  John 
Duncan  led  to  his  being  asked  by  Dr.  Duncan's  Trustees  to  prepare  a 
Memoir  of  his  remarkable  friend,  which  appeared  in  1872.  Two  large 
editions  of  that  work  have  been  exhausted,  and  a  supplementary  volume, 
entitled  "The  late  Rev.  Dr.  John  Duncan  in  the  Pulpit  and  at  the 
Communion  Table,"  is  now  also  out  of  print. 

In  1876,  Principal  Lumsden  having  died.  Dr.  Brown  was  appointed 

by   the    General   Assembly  Principal   of  the    Free  Church   College  of 

Aberdeen,  which  office,  along  with  his  professorship,  he  continues  to  hold. 

Among  the  more  fugitive  literary-  pieces  of  Dr.  Brown  were  several 

papers  chiefly  in  Church  historj-,  contributed  to  the  Sunday  Magazine 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

chiefly  during  the  editorship  of  his  friend  and  relation  Dr.  Guthrie. 
They  were  uniformly  vigorous,  substantial,  and  well  toned.  Mr.  Strahan, 
the  publisher,  used  to  say  that  whatever  Dr.  Brown  sent  was  "  always 
good." 

Nor  ought  we  to  omit  mention  of  a  touching  volume  bearing  the  title, 
"Crushed  Hopes  Crowned  in  Death."  It  was  the  memoir  of  the  short 
life  of  his  eldest  son,  a  young  man  of  remarkable  talents,  who,  after  a 
distinguished  career  at  Oxford,  had  gone  to  India,  but  was  driven 
homeward  by  illness,  and  died  during  the  voyage.  The  title  delicately 
indicates  that  it  was  the  discipline  of  sickness  and  the  shadow  of  death 
that  led  him,  after  a  period  of  darkness,  to  manifest  that  assured  trust  in 
the  Saviour,  which  to  his  parents  was  the  token  of  answered  prayers  and 
of  the  presence  of  Him  who  leadeth  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they  know 
not. 

Dr.  Brown  is  one  of  the  men  who  have  helped  to  sustain  a  high  tone 
of  scholarship  in  the  Free  Church,  and  always  in  connection  with 
orthodox  views  and  high  spirituality  of  mind. 

W.  G.  B. 


M)\x  Bruce,  B.l. 


Bruce. 


|pi2)  T  is  said  that  our  Queen,  after  seeing  an  exhibition  portrait 
of  a  certain  minister,  said,  "Let  me  have  another  look 
at  the  dear  old  man."  Of  those  who  once  have  i<no\vn 
him,  we  suppose  that  there  is  not  one  who  will  fail  to 
receive  a  peculiar  pleasure  on  looking  at  the  portrait  of 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  think  that  he  is  still  spared  to  the 
Church  and  land,  and  that,  though  tried  with  infirmities  incidental  to 
old  age,  he  is  a  very  happy  man,  quietly  waiting  for  his  fm?ic  dhnittis. 

Born  in  the  Manse  of  Forfar,  30th  November,  1794;  ordained  at 
Guthrie  in  September,  1818;  translated  to  New  North  Church,  Edinburgh, 
in  February,  1831 ;  and  thence  to  St.  Andrew's,  Edinburgh,  1836;  married 
to  Miss  Ramsay  in  1836,  who  died  in  1841,  and  to  Miss  Abcrcrombie  in 
September,  1845,  who  died  in  January,  1857,  and  whose  daughter  succeeds 
to  that  name — Miss  Bruce, — which  is  so  fragrant  in  the  memory  of  those 
who  knew  his  sister  in  the  Manse ; — such  are  the  external  notes  of  the 
career  of  John  Bruce,  who  now,  though  happily  surviving,  is  to  many  a 
pleasant  memory  of  an  active  ministry,  in  which  he  gained  an  amount 
and  quality  of  affectionate  veneration,  or  revering  affection,  from  his  own 
flock  and  from  all  who  knew  him  well,  such  as  is  very  rarely  paralleled 
in  the  history  of  the  Churches. 

We  shall  speak  of  him  as  he  was  known  to  the  Church  and  general 
community  before  being  laid  aside  (in  September,  1869)  from  the  work  of 


DISR  UP  TION  IVOR  J  HIES. 

the  pastorate.  Even  his  bodily  aspect  was  memorable.  At  one  time  it 
was  said  that  the  three  beautiful  men  of  Edinburgh  were  the  three  Rev. 
Doctors,  John  Brown  of  Broughton,  Muir  of  St.  Stephen's,  and  Bruce  of 
Free  St.  Andrew's.  In  Dr.  Bruce's  case  the  beauty,  while  delicate  and 
spiritiielle,  was  austerely  masculine.  He  was  thin  in  figure,  and  not  lofty 
in  stature.  Yet  any  expert  in  manhood,  obser\'ing  him  pass  along  the 
street  in  his  quietly  meditative  manner,  would  have  marked  him  as 
a  clean-built  and  strenuous  man,  a  physical  athlete.  But  what  dwells  in 
the  heart's  memory  is  the  intellectual  and  moral  aspect  of  one  whose 
bust,  as  emerging  in  the  pulpit,  appeared  that  of  an  idealised  Roman 
centurion.  A  noble  brow,  overshadowed  with  dark  rolling  hair,  a  face 
of  melancholy  grandeur,  often  lighted  up  with  a  wonderfully  sweet  smile, 
and — from  those  eyes,  so  deep  and  tender — an  occasional  glint  of  ethereal 
humour,  weird  and  subtle ;  those  features  at  once  come  back  to  recol- 
lection as  soon  as  we  begin  to  recall  the  man  to  mind. 

But  these  were  only  the  meet  garment,  or  transparent  veil,  of  nobler 
characters  further  "  ben  ;"  those  characters  which  occasioned  his  peculiarly 
close  personal  intimacy  with  the  great  Chalmers,  whom  he  now  remembers 
well,  after  he  has  forgotten  all  other  men  of  his  past  time.  To  the 
apprehension  of  his  flock,  and  of  others  who  knew  him  well,  he  was  a 
perfect  minister,  in  respect  not  only  of  preaching  power  and  pastoral 
assiduity,  but,  also  and  especially,  of  personal  gifts  and  graces,  shining 
through  all  his  public  and  private  intercourse  with  them.  To  them  he 
was  a  rarely  pure  and  lofty  gentleman  serving  Christ  in  the  Gospel 
ministry,  and  as  winsome  as  he  was  lofty.  Along  with  authority,  which 
was  firm  though  gentle,  he  evinced  towards  the  flock,  both  lambs  and 
sheep,  a  peculiar  affcctionateness,  a  truly  paternal  familiarity,  often 
running  into  sallies  of  playful  humour,  the  outcome  of  a  sanctified 
bonhomie  and  gaiety  of  heart,  which  in  his  case  curiously  blended  with 
keen  shrewd  insight  into  men  and  things.  A  chance  conversation  with 
him  on  the  street,  a  visit  from  him  in  the  family,  a  students'  breakfast- 


JOIIX  BRrCE,  D.n. 

party  at  the  manse,  a  meeting  of  Kirk-Scssion  or  Deacons'  Court,  a 
talk  with  collectors  or  Sabbath-school  teachers ; — perhaps  no  such 
occasion  of  coming  into  close  intercourse  with  him  over  passed  away 
without  leaving  an  abiding  sense,  a  fragrant  memory,  of  his  many-sided 
Christian  gcnialit)-. 

One  who  knew  him  in  his  highest  moods  has  said  to  us  : — You  cannot 
account  for  the  peculiar  impression  made  by  Dr.  Bruce,  even  through  his 
preaching,  when  it  was  most  austerely  intellectual,  or  almost  wildly 
imaginative,  unless  you  take  into  view,  as  a  thing  in  respect  of  which  he 
excelled  all  other  Christian  teachers  of  our  time,  his  completeness  of 
humanity,  his  all-round  comprehensiveness  of  sympathy.  Over  the 
mantle-piece,  students  at  his  breakfast  parties  observed,  in  Dr.  Bruce's 
own  hand,  this  subscription  to  a  picture  of  Chalmers,  "  The  Numidian 
lion  sleeping  in  the  sun."  He  was  at  home  with  Chalmers  in  his 
loftiest  moods  of  solitary  contemplation.  But  he  was  equally  at  home 
with  a  kitten  gambolling  on  the  hearth.  His  humaneness  was  com- 
plete. His  sympathy  seemed  to  be  vividly  in  relation  to  all  sentient 
creatures.  Those  who  have  closely  studied  the  secret  sources  of  social 
success,  in  private  intercourse  or  in  public  assemblies,  and  who  know 
how  much  depends  on  a  look  or  a  tone  from  the  heart,  will  understand 
how  largely  a  Christian  minister  must  have  gained  upon  the  minds  and 
hearts  of  his  flock  through  that  gift  or  grace,  of  quick  and  true  and 
tender  sympathy,  so  widely  comprehensive  in  its  range. 

Dr.  Bruce  was  one  of  those  ministers  who  love  to  "dwell  among  their 
own  people."  It  is  known  that  he  twice  refused  to  be  Moderator  of 
Assembly.  His  church  is  to  this  hour,  in  marked  measure,  sensibly 
and  almost  visibly  a  home  of  Christian  worshippers.  His  junior  colleague 
is  well  qualified  to  sustain  in  the  congregation  the  character  of  domcsticit)- 
in  connection  with  what  is  loftiest  in  religion.  But  even  at  this  hour, 
visitors  to  Free  St.  Andrew's,  renewing  their  sense  of  domesticity 
as  the  ,q;ciiius  loci,  will  instinctively  think  of  Dr.   Bruce  as  the  prime 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
originator,  and  say,  "  The  cask  has  retained  the  flavour  of  that  which 
filled  it." 

Homekeeping  and  peaceful,  the  doctor,  as  he  was  wont  to  remember 
with  much  glee,  on  some  occasions  played  the  man  of  war.  And  on 
those  occasions  he  manifested  a  hearty  relish  for  sheer  fun,  which  cannot 
with  propriety  be  spoken  of  in  connection  with  his  pulpit  services,  and 
yet  which  cannot  be  left  unmentioned  by  any  one  giving  a  faithful 
delineation  of  this  dear  old  man.  Is  it  Charles  Lamb  that  said  that  our 
generation  shows  degeneracy  from  the  Shakespearean  by  incapacity  of 
relishing  bad  jokes?  In  the  once  famous  Moderatorship  Controversy 
(a.d.  1837),  Mr.  Bruce  published  a  small  pamphlet  about  a  conversation, 
to  which  he  had  been  witness,  between  Dr.  Chalmers  and  another 
grandee  of  the  Church.  The  peroration  was  to  this  effect : — Christian 
people  may  think  that  in  thus  doing  battle  I  have  departed  from  the 
meekness  of  the  Gospel ;  but  the  meekest  man  on  earth,  when  he  saw 
an  Egyptian  smiting  an  Hebrew,  killed  the  Egyptian,  and  buried  him 
in  the  sand.  The  grandee  lamented  bitterly  his  being  alluded  to  as 
"  an  Egyptian."  But  Mr.  Bruce,  who  had  no  more  malice  than  a  dove, 
must  have  keenly  enjoyed  the  fun  resulting  from  the  happiness  of  the 
allusion,  as  well  as  from  the  ruffling  of  the  equanimity  of  that  ecclesi- 
astical grandee ;  for  long  after,  in  the  terrific  college  controversy  in  the 
Free  Church,  Dr.  Bruce,  at  the  end  of  a  presbytery  speech,  reminded  his 
hearers  that  they  ought  not  to  wonder  at  his  taking  part  in  this  strife  of 
tongues,  seeing  that  in  his  comparative  youth,  when  he  saw  an  Egj'ptian 
smiting  an  Hebrew,  he  killed  the  Egyptian,  and  buried  him  in  the  sand. 

But  his  true  battlefield  was  the  pulpit— with  its  complementary  pastoral 
care.  Dr.  Bruce's  preaching  was  always  evangelical.  But  many  of  his 
pulpit  contemporaries  were  as  earnestly  evangelical  as  he  was ;  and  of 
them  some  had  far  greater  gifts  of  popular  oratory  than  he  had,  and 
others  had  more  of  naked  intellectual  strength.  Yet,  in  that  golden  age 
of  the  Edinburgh  pulpit,  he  had  a  success  as  preacher  which  in  some 


JOHN  BRUCE,  D.D. 

respects  was  unique.  A  marked  characteristic  of  his  pulpit  ministration 
was  the  extent  to  which  it  proved  (in  the  highest  sense)  winning  and 
commanding  to  the  highest  type  of  men.  Among  these  wc  include  such 
as,  like  Robert  M'Cheync  and  William  Burns,  were  peculiarly  high  in 
respect  of  spirituality  and  earnestness.  But  they,  it  will  be  observed, 
were  men  of  great  intellectual  power.  The  students  of  greatest  intellectual 
power  were  attracted  to  his  ministrations  in  a  proportion  far  beyond  the 
proportion  attracted  elsewhither  by  the  greatest  pulpit  oratory  of  the  time. 
And  it  is  a  "public  secret"  that  his  ministry  proved  attractive  and 
beneficent  to  a  very  unusually  large  number  of  highly  intellectual  men 
who  otherwise  stood  in  no  friendly  relation  to  the  Christian  Church. 

What — under  God— was  the  secret  of  this  peculiar  power  for  good  ? 
Perhaps  there  can  be  no  answer  to  this  question.  Divine  grace,  leading 
him  to  see  clearly  and  speak  strongly  in  relation  to  the  things  of  God, 
was  shared  by  others.  And  perhaps  beyond  this  the  secret  is  undefin- 
able.  It  is  largely  represented  by  the  expression,  genius.  It  becomes 
more  clear  to  us  when  we  remember  that  this  man  of  genius  had  wonder- 
ful comprehensiveness  of  sympathy,  so  that  from  his  own  heart  he  spoke 
to  the  heart  of  every  man,  and  woman,  and  child.  But  still,  as  we  en- 
deavour to  grasp  the  precious  secret,  the  prhnaiy  condition  eludes  our 
grasp:— He  so  succeeded  because  he  was  John  Bruce,  purified  and 
exalted  by  grace,  but  always  John  Bruce.  We  despair  of  defining  the 
primary  condition  ;  and  will  consent  to  the  humbler  office  of  indicating 
certain  secondary  aspects. 

From  the  typical  Boanerges  of  the  pulpit  he  was  entirely  different. 
His  discourses  were  closely  read.  His  reading,  and  speaking,  at  the  out- 
set, was  notably  quiet,  with  an  unaffectedly  strong  Forfarshire  accent ; 
and  he  had  no  "  gesture  "  whatever  at  the  outset.  But  even  from  the 
outset,  as  soon  as  the  minister  came  into  view  on  his  way  to  the  pulpit, 
there  was  a  certain  impressiveness  of  aspect,  as  if  of  one  under  the  power 
of  things  spiritual  and'eternal.     His  prayers  were  sensibly  in  the  spirit 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

of  prayer,  sensibly  representing  the  exercise  of  a  sinful  creature  at  the 
foot  of  the  throne  of  a  holy  God,  humbly  yet  hopefully  wrestling  for  pro- 
mised blessings.  And  thereupon  came  the  discourse,  in  which  his 
peculiar  power  was  felt  though  not  comprehended. 

His  published  series  of  discourses  on  Samson  and  on  Gideon  might 
lead  a  true  critic  like  Hugh  Miller  to  say  that  they  reveal  a  certain 
Miltonic  majesty,  and  solemnity,  and  moral  imagination.  But  one  who 
had  heard  the  discourses  might  feel  impelled  to  say,  when  hearing  such 
criticism  of  mere  readers,  what  .^schines  said  after  listening  to  the 
applause  of  those  who  had  heard  him  recite  the  oration  of  his  rival, 
Demosthenes,  On  the  Crown, — " Ah  1  but  what  if  jou  had  heard  {the 
monster)  himself"  No  printed  discourse  of  Dr.  Bruce  can  ever  approach 
to  his  sermons ;  for  a  sermon  consists  not  only  in  the  discourse,  but  in 
the  discourse  along  with  the  congregation  and  the  preacher. 

He  never  was  a  professed  exegete  according  to  the  methods  of  the 
schools.  Students  believed  that  he  was  avowedly  non-learned,  because 
his  only  professed  "  reading  "  was  in  the  Bible  and  Pascal's  "  Thoughts." 
But  he  deeply  meditated  on  the  few  things  he  chose  to  read,  as  well  as 
on  the  many  things  he  saw  and  felt.  Meditation,  an  almost  "  lost  art "  in 
our  time,  was  a  marked  characteristic  of  his  preaching.  It  is  not  unlikely 
that  one  reason  why  he  attracted  so  many  lofty  minds  is  to  be  found  in 
the  amplitude  of  his  elevated  meditation  on  the  great  things  of  God.  The 
habit  of  meditation,  of,  so  to  speak,  solitary  contemplation,  in  disregard  of 
miscellaneous  "  book  "  learning,  may  have  occasioned  a  certain  appear- 
ance of  strangeness  in  his  views  and  utterances.  Some  said  that  his 
method  of  ascertainment  was  best  represented  by  the  Latin  word  rimare 
— as  if  his  mind  had  been  one  of  those  birds  which,  peering  into  nooks  and 
crannies,  find  jewels  where  no  other  creature  would  have  seen  anything. 
Some  said— stupidly— that  he  characteristically  found  things  where  they 
are  not.  And  in  truth,  there  was  in  his  preaching  much  that  must  have 
been  disconcerting  to  the  plain  scholastic  mind — stupid  or  clever. 
84 


JOHN  BRUCE,  D.D. 

For  instance,  what  can  tliat  plain  scholastic  mind  make  of  this: — 
Dr.  Bruce,  with  great  earnestness,  preaches  about  the  nexus.  A  steam- 
engine  is  a  good  thing,  and  so  is  a  train  of  carriages  filled  with  would-be 
passengers.  But  there  can  be  no  travelling, — it  is  all  "no  go" — unless 
there  be  tlie  nexus,  between  steam-engine  and  carriages.  The  simply 
scholastic  mind  is  offended,  thinking  that  this  minister  is  preaching 
about  railway  secular  business.  But  Dr.  Bruce's  ordinary  qualified 
hearers  know  that,  when  he  so  emphatically  affirms  the  vital  importance 
of  the  nexus,  he  is  really  preaching  about  the  necessity  of  saving  faith. 
Again,  the  scholastic  man  hears  him  prelect  on  "the  four  elementary 
operations  of  Arithmetic."  Addition  is  necessary  ;  subtraction  must  be 
added  ;  besides,  multiplication  is  very  important ;  but  oh  !  my  brethren, 
be  sure  that  you  have  division  (pronounced  devecshoii),  along  with  addi- 
tion, subtraction,  and  multiplication.  The  sheer  scholastic  mind  docs 
not  take  in  the  fact,  well  understood  by  ordinary  hearers,  that  Dr.  Bruce, 
in  a  way  memorably  impressive  to  them,  though  in  somewhat  fantastic 
form,  is  emphasising  and  illustrating  great  truths  of  religion. 

Strangeness  there  was,  not  oddity,  in  his  case.  Those  things  which 
in  isolation,  of  prosaic  reporting,  appear  grotesque,  were  in  his  case  only 
picturesque.  And  under  his  master-hand  the  picturesque  continued  to 
be  vividly  impressive  and  memorable  when  it  rose  to  be  morally  sub- 
liinc.  Thus,  preaching  about  the  dead  body  of  Moses,  Dr.  Bruce 
impressed  our  mind  and  heart  powerfully,  with  the,  so  to  speak,  phj'sical 
circumstantials  of  the  wilderness  behind,  and  Canaan  before.  A  whole 
tragic  history  was  thus  laid  before  us,  and  we  were  deeply  impressed 
with  the  singular  event  of  the  disappearance  of  the  dead  body  of  Moses. 
The  orator,  who  had  no  thought  of  being  an  orator,  thus  placed  us  on 
the  spot  w-here  Moses  died,  and  in  the  perplexed  condition  of  contem- 
poraneous Israel,  which  did  not  know  what  to  think  of  the  mysterious 
disappearance  of  his  body.  This,  at  first  sight,  was  a  very  grand  historical 
description,  of  the  wilderness,  and  the  wilderness  warfare  and  suffering. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

and  of  Moses,  simply  as  the  man  of  God,  consciously  looking  his  first  and 
last  look  on  Canaan.  But  underlying  this  there  was  a  spiritual  principle, 
which  was  the  real  theme  of  discourse,  that  those  who  once  have  got  into 
Canaan  shall  never  more  see  the  dead  body  of  Moses.  For  Dr.  Bruce  it  was 
perhaps  impossible  to  avoid  the  question, — rhnare,—\\\\?X  is  meant  by 
the  debate  (in  Jude  9)  between  the  good  angel  and  the  bad.  In 
ostensibly  perfect  good  faith,  he  set  forth  two  theories: — (i.)  That  the 
bad  angel  simply  tried  to  reason  or  persuade  the  good  angel  into  telling 
what  was  the  site  of  Moses'  grave ;  and  (2.)  That  what  the  unclean 
demon  sought  to  do  was,  to  worry  and  "chaff"  the  good  spirit  from 
heaven,  so  that  this  latter  should  be  provoked  into  blurting  out  revelation 
of  the  secret.  Even  this  grotesque  episode  served  to  deepen  the  main  im- 
pression, and  the  main  impression  of  deep  spiritual  truth  became  insepar- 
ably blended  with  a  grand  historical  picture  of  the  death  of  Moses. 

At  the  opening  of  Stockbridge  Church,  a  daughter  of  St.  Andrew's, 
Dr.  Bruce  preached  on  John  iii.  i,  &c.  The  substratum  of  his  discourse 
was  solid  earnest  utterance  of  the  evangelical  doctrine  of  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  in  regeneration  and  sanctification.  But  the  special  aspect  of  it 
was  a  new  view  of  the  figure  of  a  Wind,  as  representing  the  Divine  Spirit, 
not  simply  in  respect  of  sovereign  freeness,  but  in  respect  of  desolation 
preparing  for  rehabilitation.  Gradually  the  doctor's  description  placed  us 
in  a  hurricane,  from  which  we  vainly  strove  to  flee  away,  and  which  drove 
away  into  nothing  every  refuge.  Yes  :  every  refuge  ;  this  Wind  has  for  a 
first  work  the  demolition  of  all  refuges  of  lies,  leaving  the  sinner  houseless 
and  naked,  in  order  that  God  may  house  him  and  clothe  him. 

On  such  occasions,  with  imaginative  splendour  of  conception  and 
diction,  and  glowing  power  of  utterance  through  gesture  as  well  as 
word.  Dr.  Bruce  often  wore  the  aspect  of  a  prophet,  or  eloquent  seer, 
sometimes  almost  Berserker  of  the  pulpit.  But  the  more  we  endeavour 
to  show  what  he  was,  and  how,  the  more  we  consciously  fail. 

J.  M. 


(^tox^t  Uucban. 


(OF  KEI.LOE.) 


IFE  late   George   Buchan,   Esq.   of  Kclloc,  was  born  on 

tlic  29th   of  May   1775,   in   Adam   Square,   Edinburgh. 

E.^cccpting  one  who  died  in  infancy,  he  was  the  eldest  son 

v^    il  )7x       '"   ^   family  of  seven   sons   and   seven    daughters.     Of 

^/ir^        the  sons,  only  General  Sir  John  Buchan,  a  distinguished 

^  peninsular  officer,  and  the  subject  of  this  Memoir,  lived 

to  years  of  maturity.      One  of  the  daughters  afterwards  became  Mrs 

Fordyce  of  Ayton. 

Mr  Buchan  was  of  ancient  and  honourable  lineage  on  both  sides. 
His  great-grandfather  was  a  son  of  Mr  Buchan  of  Auchmacoy,  in  Aber- 
deenshire, and  was  descended  from  the  early  Earls  of  Buchan.  His 
grandfather  owned  the  estates  of  Letham  in  East  Lothian,  and  Kclloe 
and  Cumledge  in  Berwickshire  ,  and  his  father  succeeded  to  the  Ber- 
wickshire property.  His  paternal  grandmother  was  Christian,  daughter 
of  Sir  Francis  Grant,  Bart,  of  Monymusk,  in  the  county  of  Aberdeen. 
His  own  mother  was  Anne,  fourth  daughter  of  the  Right  Honourable 
Lord  President  Dundas  of  Arniston,  sister  to  Henry  Dundas,  the  first 
Viscount  Melville,  and  sister-in-law  to  Admiral  Duncan  of  Camperdown 
He  was  thus  connected  with  many  distinguished  Scotch  families. 

When  about  fifteen  years  of  age,  Mr  Buchan  obtained  an  appoint- 
ment  in  the  ^Lidras    Civil   Sen-ice.   and   sailed   for  that  destination  in 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

May  1792,  in  the  Wintcrton  East  Indiaman,  commanded  by  Captain 
George  Dundas.  The  voyage  was  a  most  disastrous  one.  On  the 
20th  August,  after  the  Indian  Ocean  had  been  reached,  the  vessel,  with 
280  souls  on  board,  was  wrecked  on  a  coral  reef  north  from  Augustine's 
Bay,  on  the  coast  of  Madagascar.  A  narrative  of  the  loss  of  the 
Wintcrton,  with  an  account  of  Madagascar,  was  published  by  Mr 
Buchan  in  1820,  which  contains  a  vivid  and  heartrending  account  of 
the  loss  of  life  involved  in  the  shipwreck,  and  the  sufferings  endured 
by  the  hapless  survivors.  Two  days  after  the  wreck,  on  the  vessel 
breaking  up,  the  captain  and  forty-seven  others  were  drowned.  Mr 
Buchan  was  thrown  into  the  sea,  the  darkness  of  night  adding  to  the 
horrors  of  the  situation ;  and  after  having  been  twice  washed  from  a 
plank  to  which  he  had  clung,  was  providentially  floated  alongside  part 
of  the  dismembered  ship,  which  formed  a  raft,  whereon  were  about  forty 
of  his  companions,  who  drew  him  up  among  them.  This  raft  grounded 
on  an  inner  reef,  and  for  four  days  they  suffered  fearfully  from  hunger, 
thirst,  and  cold :  the  blood  and  raw  flesh  of  a  live  pig  which  had  been 
on  the  wreck  forming  their  chief  sustenance.  On  the  si.xth  day  after 
the  wreck  the  famished  castaways  were  rescued  by  some  native  canoes ; 
only  to  commence  a  toilsome  week's  journey  on  foot  to  Tullear,  where 
the  king  resided.  Mr  Buchan  had  lost  his  shoes,  and,  to  use  his  own 
words,  "had  all  in  life  depended  on  it,  he  could  not  have  gone  many 
miles  further."  Though  kindly  treated,  it  was  seven  months  ere  an 
opportunity  occurred  of  leaving  the  island,  and  during  that  time  nearly 
a  hundred  of  the  survivors  died.  Those  who  still  remained  experienced 
a  further  delay  of  two  months  at  Mozambique ;  and  when  near  Ceylon 
they  were  captured  by  a  French  privateer,  and  detained  three  months 
more  at  the  Mauritius,  so  that  they  did  not  reach  Madras  until  January 
1 794,  having  been  over  twenty  months  on  the  passage. 

In  his  appointment,  Mr  Buchan's  talents  and  faithfulness  soon  raised 
him  to  a  high  position,  and  he  became  chief  secretary  to  the  government 


GEORGE  BUCHAiX. 

at  Madras;  in  which  responsible  oUice  he  served  his  country  till  1S09. 
Continued  ill  healtii  and  urgent  private  reasons  then  induced  him  to 
return  to  Scotland,  when  he  took  up  his  residence  chiefly  at  Kelloe. 

Disastrous  as  Mr  Buchan's  voyage  to  India  had  been,  it  was  not 
the  only  occasion  on  which  he  was  exposed  to  the  perils  of  the  deep. 
At  one  time  the  sliip  in  which  he  was  a  passenger  grounded  on  a  shoal, 
and  was  nearly  lost  ;  at  another,  the  vessel  sprang  a  leak  in  rough 
weather,  and,  though  suffering  from  the  effects  of  a  recent  illness,  he  had 
I  to  take  his  turn  at  the  pumps  along  with  others,  until  the  sea  was  wash- 

ing over  the  deck.  In  this  case  the  ship  went  down  only  a  few  minutes 
after  those  on  board  had  left  her.  They  suffered  several  days  of  great 
privation  in  a  small  boat,  and  had  relinquished  all  hope  of  escape,  when 
they  were  providentially  carried  through  a  raging  surf  to  the  rocks. 
Again,  an  unseen  Hand  guided  him  past  a  ship  in  which  it  seemed  likely 
he  would  take  his  passage  for  Malacca.  His  luggage  was  actually  sent 
off,  but  circumstances  prevented  his  leaving  by  the  same  vessel ;  and 
shortly  after,  every  European  on  board  of  her  was  murdered  by  the 
Malays.  At  yet  another  time  his  passage  home  had  been  taken  in  one 
of  the  vessels  of  a  fleet  about  to  leave  Madras.  To  his  great  disappoint- 
ment, he  was  prevented  from  embarking.  The  fleet  encountered  a  storm, 
and  the  ship  in  which  he  had  engaged  to  sail  was  never  again  heard  of  A 
month  later  he  was  sent  home  on  confidential  busine.ss  by  the  Madras 
Government,  and  arrived  in  England  as  soon  as  the  remaining  part  of 
the  ill-fated  fleet. 

But  notwithstanding  all  these  deliverances,  and  though  possessing 
high  mental  endowments,  and  transparent  integrity  and  truthfulness  in 
all  his  engagements,  yet — as  he  afterwards  lamented  and  published — Mr 
Buchan  was  still  under  the  darkness  of  unbelief,  and  it  was  not  until 
after  his  return  from  India  that  he  was  called  out  of  this  darkness  into 
God's  marvellous  light.  The  influence  of  near  and  dear  relatives, 
including  the  late  Mr  Robert  Cathcart  of  Drum,  W.S.,  was,  we  believe, 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


greatly  blessed  to  him  in  this  connection  ;  and  one  work  which  he  read 
at  this  time  with  absorbing  interest,  and  to  which  he  frequently  in  after 
life  referred,  was  Lord  Lyttleton's  treatise  on  the  conversion  of  Paul. 
As  was  to  be  expected  in  one  of  his  naturally  decided  and  energetic 
character,  Mr  Buchan  now  heartily  joined  his  excellent  sisters  in  carrying 
out  the  works  of  Christian  benevolence  in  which  he  found  them  engaged, 
and  in  promoting  others  on  a  large  scale.  Amongst  these  we  can  only 
mention  the  multiplication  of  Sabbath  schools,  himself  taking  active  part 
as  a  teacher  ;  extension  of  a  valuable  circulating  library,  and  the  wide 
dissemination  of  religious  and  morally  wholesome  periodical  literature ; 
also,  at  a  somewhat  later  period,  the  establishment  of  a  day-school  at 
Kclloc  House,  and  the  maintenance  of  home  missionaries  in  various 
localities.  Kelloe  House  thus  became  a  sacred  centre,  and  the  Sabbath 
school  was  long  a  nursery  for  heaven. 

In  1825  Mr  Buchan  was  ordained  an  elder  in  the  parish  church 
of  Edrom,  and,  as  such,  he  most  worthily  exercised  the  elder's  office, 
spending  great  part  of  his  time  in  visiting  throughout  a  wide  district, 
at  the  same  time  dispensing  a  munificent  but  discriminating  charity. 
Among  many  striking  instances  of  the  blessed  results  of  these  visits, 
we  can  only  briefly  refer  to  two.  One  was  a  veteran  soldier  and 
huntsman,  who  had  been  in  the  royal  army  at  Prestonpans,  and  had 
reached  extreme  old  age  in  a  state  of  great  spiritual  ignorance,  but  who 
before  his  death,  which  happened  in  1831,  in  his  105th  year,  gave 
undoubted  evidence  of  having  passed  from  darkness  to  light,  through 
Mr  Buchan's  agency.  The  other  was  the  writer's  own  brother,  who  in 
his  last  days  was  brought  to  a  clear  view  and  blessed  experience  of 
salvation  through  the  visits  and  conversation  of  Mr  Buchan  ;  the  thought 
of  whose  great  kindness  still  calls  up  deep  emotions  of  admiration  and 
gratitude. 

At  Kelloe  House  evangelical  clergymen  of  all  denominations  were 
frequent   and  honoured   guests  ;  and  full  advantage  was  taken   of  their 


GEORGE  BUCHAN. 

presence  to  have  meelings  for  i)r;i)-er  and  preaching  of  the  gospel  in  a 
large  apartment  within  the  house,  and  at  various  points  on  the  estate. 
Mr  Buchan's  society  was  also  sought  and  prized  by  not  a  few  of  those 
whose  Christian  philanthropy  has  earned  for  them  the  lasting  gratitude 
of  their  country.  Among  his  attached  friends  and  correspondents, 
we  name  only  Hannah  More,  Mr  Wiiberforce,  Dr  Chalmers,  and  Dr 
Gordon. 

For  many  years  Mr  Buchan  was  a  member  of  the  General  Assembly 
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  and,  as  such,  zealously  supported  the  spread 
of  true  religion  and  the  maintenance  of  spiritual  independence  in  the 
Church.  In  1841  he  seconded  Dr  Candlish's  conciliatory  motion  ;  also, 
he  was  sent  with  Principal  Dewar  and  Mr  Dunlop  for  the  Commissioner, 
who  was  absent,  when  the  deposed  Strathbogie  ministers  attempted  to 
serve  an  interdict  on  the  Assembly.  Though  strongly  conservative,  and 
formerly  favourable  to  patronage,  if  restricted  ; — yet  in  1842  he  seconded 
the  motion  for  its  abolition,  decidedly  holding  that  to  preserve  spiritual 
independence,  both  patronage  and  State  connection  must,  if  ilecessary,  be 
given  up.  He  had,  in  1840,  published  "A  Historical  Sketch  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland,"  an  able  pamphlet,  wherein  are  the  following  sen- 
tences :  "  The  Church  of  Scotland  possesses  an  inherent  and  indefeasible 
right  of  internal  jurisdiction  in  all  spiritual  matters,  derived  from  the 
supreme  Head  of  the  Church,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  a  right  which  has 
been  recognised  by  various  statutes,  especially  those  of  1567,  1592,  and 
1690."  Again,  "The  great  point  in  our  Church  should  be  to  recognise 
most  distinctly,  and  maintain  most  firmly,  the  principle  of  non-intrusion  ; 
for  if  relinquished,  the  days  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  are  certainly 
numbered :  then  would  be  an  end  of  her  character  and  stability  as  a 
national  Church."  He  held  these  principles  to  the  last  with  unwavering 
decision. 

Throughout  the   "ten   years' cuntiict "    Mr  Buchan's   services  to  the 
Church  were  invaluable.     Hi.s  hospitable  mansion  at  Kclloe  became  more 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


than  even  formerly  the  resort  of  evangehcal  clergymen  and  laymen, 
especially  those  directly  interested  in  the  non-intrusion  controversy. 
There  they  were  always  sure  of  finding  sympathetic  intercourse  and 
hearty  support.  The  prominent  place  which  Mr  Buchan  held  in  the 
county,  his  high  intelligence,  gentlemanly  bearing,  and  sterling  Christian 
worth,  made  his  name  a  tower  of  strength  on  the  side  of  those  who 
struggled  for  "  the  Church  of  Scotland  free."  A  severe  accident  which 
he  sustained  in  being  thrown  from  his  horse  prevented  him  from  being 
present  at  the  Disruption  Assembly.*  In  the  Free  Assembly  of  1844, 
and  again  in  1845,  he  sat  as  a  representative  of  the  Presbytery  of  Dunse 
and  Chirnside. 

For  many  years  Mr  Buchan  had  been  dissatisfied  with  the  ministra- 
tions in  his  parish  church  ;  and,  in  consequence,  he,  along  with  others, 
carried  out  the  erection  of  Boston  Church  at  Dunse,  in  which  from  1S40 
he  was  an  office-bearer  under  Mr  Cousin,  now  of  Melrose ;  and,  from 
1848  till  his  death,  under  Mr  Manson. 

From  1813,  when  he  entered  on  the  possession  of  Kelloe,  Mr  Buchan 
took  a  large  share  in  county  business,  for  which  he  had  a  special  aptitude, 
and  in  the  discharge  of  which  he  exhibited  marked  ability.  In  this 
public  activity  he  continued  to  the  last,  interesting  himself  keenly  in  the 
wellbeing  of  all  classes  of  the  population.  His  liberality  was  like  a 
flowing  river,  widening  as  it  proceeds.  The  extent  of  his  charities  was 
never  known  ;  and  he  was  one  who  carefully  shunned  all  display  in  such 
matters.  While  his  own  domestic  arrangements  were  a  perfect  model  for 
a  gentleman's  house,  supplies  of  coals,  food,  clothing,  cordials,  and 
money  were  given  to  the  deserving  poor,  whether  on  his  own  property 
or  not,  with  a  liberality  that  was  princely  in  character.  His  minister,  Mr 
Manson,  at  Dunse,  had  a  commission  to  give  away  whatever  he  saw  to 
be  necessary,  and  send  the  account  to  him.     Every  good  cause,  indeed, 

*  By  a  singular  fatality,  Mr  Buchan  sustained  severe  fractures  on  other  two  occasions,  and 
as  a  consequence  suffered,  in  some  degree,  from  permanent  lameness. 


GEORGE  BUCHAN. 
was  freely  supported.  To  students  in  difficulties,  and  ministers  suffering 
from  illness  or  exhausted  by  work,  he  ever  most  readily  gave  assistance, 
as  the  writer  of  this  sketch  can  personally  testify.  Sometime  after  his 
return  to  Scotland,  he  had  invested  ;^iooo  for  mission  work  in  Mada- 
gascar, and  the  interest  on  that  sum  having  accumulated  over  many 
years,  the  gift  was  found  a  most  valuable  one  when  a  door  of  entrance  to 
that  island  was  opened.  In  addition  to  the  large  contributions  made 
by  him  during  his  life-time,  Mr  Buchan,  by  his  will,  bequeathed  a 
permanent  annual  supplement  of  ;^25  to  the  minister  of  Boston  Church, 
;^3000  to  the  Sustentation  Fund,  ;^i50O  for  Aged  and  Infirm  Ministers, 
;^500  for  Bursaries,  and  ;^S000  for  the  Missionary  Schemes  of  the  Free 
Church.  Old  and  valued  servants  in  his  family  were  also  handsomely 
remembered. 

From  what  has  been  already  said,  some  general  idea  will,  we  trust,  be 
obtained  of  the  varied  and  remarkable  life  experience  of  the  subject  of 
this  sketch,  as  well  as  of  the  high  qualities  that  distinguished  his  personal 
character.  We  have  referred  to  his  great  capacity  for  business  ;  and  in 
this  relation  his  ready  grasp  of  principles,  his  quick  decision,  and  faculty 
of  command,  fitted  him  to  take  the  lead  in  affairs,  while  it  gave  to  his 
judgments  something  of  a  statesmanlike  breadth.  Ever  keenly  observant, 
both  of  general  movements  and  of  what  affected  himself  more  nearly,  we 
find  him  at  different  times  issuing  three  vigorously  written  pamphlets 
against  the  barbarous  practice  of  duelling;  and  also  (in  1829)  putting 
forth  his  sentiments  in  the  form  of  a  volume,  entitled,  "  Illustrations  of  a 
Particular  Providence,"  wherein  his  own  remarkable  experiences  were 
devoutly  referred  to.  And  as  he  grew  in  years,  his  sympathies  only 
broadened  and  deepened.  A  noteworthy  feature  in  one  whose  mental 
character,  in  harmony  with  his  physical  frame,  was  naturally  robust  and 
self-reliant  rather  than  softly  emotional,  was  his  great  fondness  for 
children,  and  his  singular  kindness  to  the  lower  animals.  But  far  above 
all  this,  was  his  visible  growth  in  grace.     His  views  of  the  glorious  gospel 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

became  clearer  and  richer,  and  his  humility  and  love  more  conspicuous 
as  he  approached  his  latter  end.  When  an  attack  of  bronchitis  brought 
him  to  the  closing  days,  his  chamber  was  in  deed  and  in  truth  on  the 
verge  of  heaven.  His  peace  was  wonderful  ;  he  was  more  than  a  con- 
queror through  Christ,  who  had  loved  him  ;  and  amidst  great  physical 
suffering,  he  abounded  in  praise  and  triumph.  His  servants  were  called 
in  one  by  one,  and  lovingly  exhorted  to  seek  the  Lord.  Having  ex- 
pressed much  love  to  his  niece,  who  had  long  resided  with  him,  and  to  his 
sister  and  nephew,  he  said,  "  Make  a  bold  stand  for  Christ !"  On  the  3d 
of  Januaiy  1856,  in  the  eighty-first  year  of  his  age,  he  fell  asleep  in  Jesus. 
His  last  days  on  earth  had  been  soothed  by  the  presence  of  his  much- 
loved  sister,  Miss  Margaret  Buchan,  the  youngest  and  last  remaining 
member  of  the  family,  a  woman  of  elevated  piety,  who  only  survived 
her  brother  six  weeks.  In  the  closing  sentence  of  the  inscription  on 
a  marble  tablet  to  his  memory  in  Edrom  church,  it  is  truly  said  of 
him  that,  "  Zealous  in  every  good  work  for  the  service  of  God  and 
the  benefit  of  mankind,  his  active  benevolence  and  munificent  bounty 
endeared  him  to  the  poor  ;  while  his  rare  mental  endowments,  his  high- 
toned  principle,  and  his  consistency  of  character,  obtained  universal 
respect  and  esteem,  A.  S. 


lames  iBucljanatt,  D.D..  II.H. 


JAMES  BUCHANAN  was  one  of  those  members  of  the 
Disruption  band  who  won  for  himself,  in  the  pulpit  and 
through  the  press,  a  more  than  Scottish  reputation,  and 
thus  shed  lustre  on  the  Church  with  which  he  was 
connected  and  the  cause  which  he  espoused.  He  was 
born  in  Paisley  in  the  year  1804.  He  studied  at  the 
University  of  Glasgow,  and  although  he  had  to  cope  with  competitors 
of  no  ordinary  ability,  of  whom  Dr  Candlish  was  one,  he  took  a  most 
distinguished  place  among  his  fellow-students,  and  one  that  seemed  to 
warrant  the  highest  expectations  of  his  future  career.  Nor  were  these 
expectations  belied  by  the  actual  result.  After  a  brief  ministry  spent  in 
a  quiet  country  parish  amid  the  classic  scenes  of  Roslin  and  Hawthornden, 
Mr  Buchanan  was  called  to  the  populous  and  important  parish  of  North 
Leith  in  the  year  1828.  Here  the  fame  of  his  preaching  soon  filled  the 
large  church  to  overflowing  with  a  crowd  of  admiring  and  delighted 
hearers.  Many  carry  with  them  to  this  day  a  vivid  remembrance  of  the 
way  in  which  their  attention  was  rivetted,  their  minds  instructed,  and 
their  hearts  moved  by  the  lucid  exposition,  the  eloquent  illustration,  and 
the  tender  appeal,  that  poured  forth  from  the  lips  of  the  preacher  in  rich 
mellifluous  stream.  At  times  his  eye  would  kindle,  and  his  voice  become 
tremulous  with  emotion,  and  a  burst  of  impassioned  earnestness  would 
sweep  over   the   congregation  like  a  gust  of  wind  upon   the  waters  of 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

a  lake.  But  more  commonly  he  was  the  Barnabas  rather  than  the 
Boanerges  of  the  pulpit.  His  doctrine  dropped  as  the  rain  and  distilled 
as  the  dew.  His  eloquence  was  more  like  the  waters  of  Siloah  that 
flowed  slowly,  than  the  impetuous  torrent  that  carries  everything  before 
it.  In  short,  while  the  preaching  of  Mr  Buchanan  was  not  wanting  in 
intellectual  force,  it  was  much  more  conspicuous  for  its  theological 
completeness,  the  chaste  beauty  of  its  style,  the  impressiveness  and 
unction  of  its  delivery.  A  lady  who  had  been  long  in  India  used  to  say 
that  he  always  reminded  her  of  Henry  Martyn. 

How  many  actual  conversions  took  place  under  that  North  Leith 
ministry  the  "day"  alone  will  declare,  though  there  is  reason  to  be- 
lieve they  were  not  few.  And  we  cannot  doubt  that  it  contributed 
largely,  along  with  the  preaching  of  Chalmers  and  Thomson,  Gordon  and 
Grey,  Candlish  and  Guthrie,  to  promote  that  revival  of  evangelical 
religion  of  which  we  are  now  enjoying  the  fruits.  During  his  ministry  in 
Leith,  Mr  Buchanan  was  repeatedly  laid  aside  for  a  season  through  ill- 
health,  the  result  partly  of  his  studious  habits,  and  partly  of  the  labours 
connected  with  so  heavy  a  charge.  One  incidental  consequence  of  this 
was  the  publication  of  those  practical  and  consolatory  works — "  Comfort 
in  Affliction,"  "  Improvement  of  Affliction,"  "  The  Office  and  Work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit " — which  have  obtained  so  wide  a  circulation,  and  with 
which,  probably,  more  than  his  later  and  more  strictly  theological  works, 
his  name  will  be  permanently  associated. 

These  illnesses  may  have  contributed,  along  with  other  causes,  to 
induce  him  to  accept,  at  considerable  pecuniary  sacrifice,  the  appointment 
to  the  High  Church,  Edinburgh,  made  by  the  Town  Council  in  1840. 
In  this  new  position  he  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  having  Dr  Gordon  for 
his  colleague.  Never  surely  were  colleagues  more  suitably  or  happily 
conjoined.  Never  was  there  a  congregation  more  highly  privileged  than 
that  which  enjoyed  the  ministry  of  two  such  men.  But  this  pleasant 
fellowship  and  this  position  of  peculiar  privilege  wore  not  destined  to  be 


JAATRS  BUCHANAN,  D.D.,  I.L.D. 

of  long  continuance.  The  Disruption  took  place  on  the  i8th  of  May 
1843,  and  the  following  Sabbath  found  Dr  Gordon  and  Mr  Buchanan, 
with  almost  the  entire  congregation  of  the  High  Church,  worshipping 
in  the  Music  Hall.  The  colleagueship  continued  for  two  years  longer, 
when  it  was  dissolved  by  mutual  consent,  that  Mr  Buchanan  might  devote 
himself  to  the  task  of  raising  and  organizing  the  congregation  of  Free  St 
Stephen's,  of  which  he  was  the  first  pastor. 

In  1844  Mr  Buchanan  received  the  degree  of  D.D.  from  Princeton 
University,  well  known  and  deservedly  esteemed  in  this  country  from  its 
own  high  standing,  and  from  its  connection  with  Princeton  Theological 
Seminary,  the  scene  of  the  labours  of  the  Alexanders  and  the  Hodges, 
and  the  principal  school  for  the  training  of  the  Presbyterian  ministry  in 
the  Northern  States  of  the  Union.  It  was  greatly  to  the  honour  of  that 
University  that  it  had  the  generosity  and  the  discrimination  to  confer 
degrees  on  such  distinguished  foreigners  as  Candlish,  Cunningham,  and 
Buchanan,  while  it  reflects  lasting  discredit  on  the  governing  bodies  in 
our  own  Universities  at  the  time,  that  they  left  it  to  Americans  to  recog- 
nise and  reward  the  merit  of  their  most  distinguished  sons.  At  a  later 
period,  when  more  liberal  counsels  began  to  prevail,  his  own  Alma  Mater 
made  some  amends  by  conferring  upon  him  the  degree  of  LL.D.  On 
the  death  of  Dr  Welsh,  Dr  Cunningham  was,  as  if  by  acclammation, 
appointed  his  successor  in  the  Chair  of  Church  History.  With  equal 
unanimity  Dr  Buchanan  was  called  to  the  Chair  of  Apologetics  vacated 
by  Dr  Cunningham,  his  ripe  scholarship  and  sound  judgment,  the  com- 
pleteness of  his  theological  survey,  and  his  power  of  clear  and  interesting 
exposition,  pointing  him  out  as  the  most  suitable  man  whom  the  Church 
could  find  to  occupy  the  post.  Another  change,  consequent  upon  the 
death  of  Dr  Chalmers  in  1847,  placed  Dr  Buchanan  in  the  Chair  of 
Systematic  Theology,  which  he  continued  to  occupy  till  his  retirement, 
owing  to  deafness  and  increasing  infirmity,  in  186S. 

Of  the  way  in  which  he  discharged  the  duties  of  both  these  chairs,  we 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

have  a  sample  in  the  works  which  he  published  during  his  professorial  life, 
entitled,  "  Faith  in  God  and  Modern  Atheism,"  "Analogy :  a  Guide  to 
Truth  and  an  Aid  to  Faith,"  and  "The  Doctrine  of  Justification  "—this 
last  being  the  Cunningham  Lecture  for  1866.  It  is  only  necessary  to  add 
that,  besides  the  clearness,  comprehensiveness,  and  sound  learning  of  which 
these  works  give  evidence,  Dr  Buchanan's  prelections  were  marked  by 
a  calm  dignity  and  impressiveness ;  that  there  breathed  through  them 
the  fragrance  of  a  deep  personal  piety;  and  that  he  was  affable  and 
kindly  in  his  private  intercourse  with  the  students.  There  was  indeed 
a  marked  contrast  in  some  respects  between  him  and  his  beloved 
colleague.  Principal  Cunningham — the  one  a  lion-like  Luther,  the  other 
a  gentle  and  retiring  Melancthon.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  which  would 
be  the  more  popular  with  a  band  of  ardent  and  impetuous  young  men, 
having  their  own  share  of  the  perfervidum  ingeniiim  Scotormn.  But  let 
us  rather  rejoice  in  the  variety  of  these  gifts,  as  tending  to  the  better 
edification  of  the  Church,  and  rejoice  in  this,  also,  that  they  laboured  side 
by  side  for  so  many  years  with  the  utmost  mutual  confidence  and 
esteem. 

Dr  Buchanan,  with  his  fervent  personal  piety  and  strong  evangelical 
convictions,  could  not  but  feel  a  deep  interest  in  the  conversion  of  the 
heathen  world.  Of  this  he  gave  a  striking  proof  when,  at  the  call  of  the 
Church,  he  undertook  for  a  time  the  arduous  and  responsible  work  of 
the  Convener  of  the  Foreign  Missions  Committee.  In  this  capacity  he 
worthily  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  his  revered  predecessor  Dr  Gordon. 
During  the  short  period  in  which  he  held  this  office,  he  published  one 
interesting  tract  upon  the  Indian  Mission  ;  and  had  he  not  been  obliged 
to  resign,  in  consequence  of  his  many  other  duties,  he  would  doubtless 
have  succeeded  in  extending  and  deepening  the  interest  felt  in  this  great 
cause,  by  the  eloquence  and  impressiveness  with  which  he  enforced  it. 
As  might  have  been  expected  from  his  sensitive  and  shrinking  dis- 
position,  Dr    Buchanan  did    not  often    come    forward  on  the    arena  of 


JAMES  BUCM.LX.IN,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

ecclesiastical  debate.  He  had,  however,  decided  views  of  the  Church 
questions  of  the  day,  defended  them  fearlessly  when  he  had  opportunity, 
and  acted  on  them  faithfully  when  the  time  for  action  came. 

In  1843  he  published  a  short  treatise  on  the  "Tracts  for  the  Times," 
in  the  form  of  seven  letters  to  an  Englishman.  The  work  is  an  admirable 
specimen  of  the  way  in  which  such  controversies  should  be  carried  on. 
While  the  writer  is  thoroughly  in  earnest  contending  for  the  faith  he 
loves  against  dangerous  and  deadly  error,  he  writes  as  a  Christian  gentle- 
man, with  fairness  and  candour,  never  reviling  or  misrepresenting  his 
opponents.  The  treatise  is  at  once  popular  and  learned,  and  it  served 
more  than  any  other  at  the  time  to  direct  the  attention  of  the  Christian 
public  to  the  true  bearing  and  tendency  of  the  Tractarian  movement.  In 
the  Voluntary  Controversy  he  took  an  important  part,  by  writing  a 
prefatory  discourse  to  a  series  of  lectures  on  Church  Establishments,  in 
which  he  ably  maintained  the  thesis,  that  Church  and  State,  though 
essentially  different  and  rightly  independent  of  each  other,  have  yet 
certain  ends  in  common,  and  may  act  harmoniously  towards  the 
attainment  of  these  ends,  without  any  encroachment  being  made  by 
cither  on  the  peculiar  prerogatives  of  the  other,  and  that  if  any  evil 
results  from  such  a  connection,  it  is  to  be  ascribed,  not  to  the/rt^/,  but  to 
the  fatilty  terms  of  the  alliance.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  line  of 
defence  was  carefully  adjusted  with  reference  to  another  controversy 
then  emerging  as  to  the  spiritual  independence  of  the  Church,  and  that 
consistency  would  require  the  writer  to  renounce  the  benefits  of  State 
connection  if  that  independence  could  not  be  enjoyed  in  the  Established 
Church.  And,  accordingly,  when  this  became  too  evident  to  admit  of 
doubt,  he  at  once  resigned  his  status  and  emoluments  as  a  minister  of 
the  Establishment,  believing  that  such  an  encroachment  had  been  made 
upon  its  peculiar  prerogatives  as  no  church  of  Christ  is  at  liberty  to 
submit  to.  In  the  movement  towards  union  with  the  United  Presbyterian 
Church,  begun  in  1863,  Dr  Buchanan  at  first  took  no  part  either  for  or 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

against  it.  When,  however,  a  difference  of  opinion  arose  within  the 
Free  Church  on  the  subject,  some  advocating  the  proposed  union  as  a 
thing  in  the  circumstances  warrantable  and  expedient,  and  others 
opposing  it  as  involving  a  dereliction  of  important  principles,  Dr 
Buchanan  took  the  latter  view ;  in  this  differing  from  his  beloved  friend 
and  colleague,  Dr  Bannerman,  with  whom  on  most  subjects  he  cordially 
agreed. 

Dr  Buchanan  was  twice  married.  His  widow  and  family  survive 
him.  In  his  last  illness  he  suffered  much,  but  bore  his  suffering  with 
exemplary  patience  and  resignation  to  his  Master's  will.  He  died  on 
the  19th  of  April  1870,  and  was  buried  in  the  Grange  Cemetery,  the 
resting-place  of  Chalmers,  Tweedie,  Guthrie,  and  many  more  who,  like 
them,  having  ser\'ed  their  own  generation  by  the  will  of  God,  have  fallen 
on  sleep. 

"  They  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament ; 
and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever." 

K.  G.  B. 


^ 


M 


ROBERT  BUCHANAN,  D,D 


lUhnt  IBucIjaitan,  ID.B. 


OBERT  BUCHANAN  was  born  at  St  Ninians  on  15th 
August  1S02.  The  private  history  of  his  mind,  and 
tlic  circumstances  which  led  him  to  study  for  the 
Church  as  his  profession,  are  topics  which  cannot  be 
entered  on  in  this  brief  notice.  It  may  be  enough  to 
refer  to  the  fact,  that  the  spiritual  revival  which  was 
making  itself  felt  in  Scotland,  as  elsewhere,  reached  and  touched  various 
minds  by  various  means.  Young  Buchanan  was  brought  early  into 
contact  with  some  of  the  most  powerful  representatives  of  evangelical 
influence.  Before  his  ordination  to  his  first  charge,  he  was  already 
intimately  acquainted  with  Dr  Andrew  Thomson. 

He  studied,  with  distinction,  at  Glasgow,  and  afterwards  at  Edinburgh. 
For  some  years  he  acted  as  tutor  in  the  family  of  Mr  Home-Drummond, 
at  Blair-Drummond  during  the  summer,  and  at  Edinburgh  during  the 
winter  months. 

His  first  charge  was  at  Gargunnock,  where  he  was  settled  on  6th 
March  1827.  The  day  before  that  fixed  for  his  settlement  a  tremendous 
snow-storm  took  place,  which  made  the  roads  all  but  impassable.  The 
writer  has  heard  him  describe  how  he  made  his  way  from  Edinburgh  to 
Stirling  on  horseback,  with  great  fatigue  and  considerable  risk,  reaching 
Stirling  the  second  day.  The  larger  part  of  the  journey  was  accomplished 
across  country,  without  reference  to  the  roads,  which  in  many  places  were 


DISRUPTION   WORTHIES. 

perfectly  impracticable.  From  Gargunnock  he  was  translated,  in  1830, 
to  Salton  in  East  Lothian,  where  he  exercised  his  ministry  for  three 
years. 

The  manner  in  which  his  pastoral  efficiency  and  his  ministerial 
character  had  approved  themselves  in  these  fields  of  labour,  led  to  his 
being  recommended  for  the  important  vacancy  of  the  Tron  Parish, 
Glasgow.  This  was  the  parish  made  famous  as  the  scene  of  Dr 
Chalmers'  ministry,  during  the  first  portion  of  his  stay  in  Glasgow. 
Mr  Buchanan  was  inducted  on  23d  August  1833.  Long  before  Mr 
Buchanan's  time,  the  congregation  had  ceased,  to  a  great  extent,  to  be 
drawn  from  the  parish.  They  assembled  from  all  parts  of  the  city. 
But  Mr  Buchanan  had  embraced  the  maxims  of  Chalmers  too  cordially 
to  be  in  danger  of  overlooking  the  interests  of  the  parochial  population. 
The  growth  of  the  city,  and  the  movements  of  its  inhabitants,  had  the 
effect  of  bringing  to  the  Tron  parish  a  continually  increasing  proportion 
of  poor  and  neglected  people.  Here,  for  the  first  time,  Mr  Buchanan 
became  practically  acquainted  with  the  wants  and  dangers  of  the  city 
masses,  and  received  impressions  which  were  practically  operative  in  his 
life,  down  to  the  very  end  of  it. 

Meanwhile  the  activities  of  the  evangelical  revival  within  the  Church 
of  Scotland  were  in  full  progress,  under  the  leadership  of  Chalmers ;  and 
Buchanan's  extraordinary  capacities  for  practical  church  work,  and  his 
sagacity  as  an  adviser,  made  themselves  abundantly  manifest.  By  none 
were  they  more  appreciated  than  by  Dr  Chalmers,  with  whom  he  was 
associated  in  Church  Extension  projects  and  excursions,  as  well  as  in 
other  movements  of  these  days.  It  is  still  remembered  how,  in  speaking 
of  his  younger  friend,  the  doctor  would  comment  on  the  distinction 
between  his  clear  insight  and  efficient  work  and  the  high-sounding  talk 
which  vexed  him  in  other  quarters. 

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  Mr  Buchanan  took  a  cordial  interest  in  the 
steps  and  measures,  adopted  with  a  view  to  reform  the  administration  of 


ROBERT  BUCHANAN,  D.D. 

the  Scottisli  Established  Church  ;  and  wlien  the  difficulties  arose  which 
involved  the  church  in  danger  and  perplexity,  he  rapidly  acquired  great 
influence  in  the  conduct  of  affairs.  The  earliest  Assembly  in  which  he 
took  a  very  conspicuous  position  was  that  of  1838.  The  first  Auchterarder 
decision  had  then  been  given  in  the  Court  of  Session,  and  the  principles 
which  it  indicated,  as  likely  to  be  affirmed  as  law,  were  occupying  men's 
minds.  It  was  manifest,  that  in  addition  to  the  question  of  the  rights  of 
the  people  in  the  settlement  of  ministers,  the  wider  question  of  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  Church  in  her  own  province  was  coming  into  debate. 
All  that  the  Church  could  do,  was  to  make  it  plain  without  delay,  how 
serious  the  issues  would  prove  to  be,  if  the  indications  given  by  the  civil 
courts  were  followed  out.  To  Buchanan,  accordingly,  was  entrusted  the 
duty  of  moving  the  "  Independence  Resolutions,"  which  struck  the  key- 
note of  the  struggle  that  followed.  The  manner  in  which  he  performed 
this  duty  confirmed  him  in  his  position  as  one  of  the  remarkable  cluster 
of  leading  minds  to  whom,  under  God,  the  Church  looked  for  guidance 
during  the  years  that  followed. 

The  position  which  he  thus  took  up,  was  achic\ed  wholly  in  virtue  of 
his  admirable  strength  and  balance  of  mind,  his  expertness  in  all 
practical  affairs,  and  his  known  and  proved  devotedncss  to  the  public 
cause.  He  was  a  forcible  and  polished  speaker,  but  he  did  not  attract 
admiration  by  rhetorical  brilliancy.  Neither  did  he  interest  men  by 
picturesque  manifestations  of  personal  character ;  for  he  was  disposed  to 
no  singularities ;  and  although  his  sympathies  were  wide  and  his  affec- 
tions strong,  he  was  not  the  man  to  parade  them.  But  he  proved  to  be 
one  on  whom  even  strong  men  found  it  a  comfort  to  lean.  Very  soon  he 
was  recognised  as  the  most  influential  minister  in  the  west  of  Scotland, 
and  as  the  most  powerful  representative  of  the  Evangelical  party  in  that 
section  of  the  Church.  But  few,  comparatively,  were  then  aware,  or  are 
yet  aware,  how  powerfully  he  contributed  to  guide  the  counsels  and  the 
policy  of  the  whole  party  during  the  years  that  preceded  the  Disruption. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

A  sen'ice  on  which  he  was  often  and  long  employed  was  to  act  as 
deputy  for  the  Church  in  the  wearisome  and  anxious,  and  finally 
fruitless,  negotiations  with  successive  Governments  which  arose  out  of 
the  successive  phases  of  the  Disruption  Controversy.  His  knowledge 
of  the  world,  his  ease  in  intercourse  with  men  of  all  ranks,  his  presence 
of  mind,  and  his  unfailing  coolness  and  judgment,  rendered  him 
invaluable  in  this  department.  When  things  were  in  his  hands,  men 
felt  sure  that  what  was  possible  would  be  done,  and  well  done.  If 
his  letters  to  private  friends  written  during  those  visits  to  London 
are  still  preserved,  they  would  prove  to  be,  we  believe,  even  now,  full  of 
interest. 

During  the  whole  conflict  he  himself  kept,  and  he  was  anxious 
that  the  Church  should  keep,  carefully  within  the  line  of  the  position 
originally  taken  up.  He  was  not  more  resolute  to  maintain  the  ground 
of  principle,  than  careful  to  guard  against  exaggerations,  which  might 
expose  the  Church's  position  to  misconstruction.  The  motives  of  this 
comparative  moderation  were  not  always  understood ;  and  those  who 
thought  that  strength  of  principle  was  synonymous  with  extremeness  of 
principle,  might  consider  him  at  times  not  sufficiently  loud,  or  not  suffi- 
ciently advanced.  When  the  proceedings  of  the  Convocation  (November 
1842)  were  drawing  to  a  close,  he  took  an  opportunity  of  referring  to  this 
matter.  He  stated  that  he  was  aware  that  some  might  have  thought 
him  timid  and  cautious.  But  he  had  all  along  foreseen  how  the  conflict 
might  too  probably  end.  And  his  anxiety  had  been  that  when  the  end 
came,  the  Church  might  be  able  to  say,  that  she  had  all  along  simply 
maintained  principles,  and  that  no  ground  might  exist  for  imputing  the 
grave  results  of  the  controversy  to  mere  rashness  or  temper  on  the 
Church's  side. 

After  the  Disruption,  Dr  Buchanan's  share  in  the  work  which  devolved 
upon  the  Free  Church  was  too  large  and  multifarious  to  admit  of  its 
being  particularly  described  here.     The  remark  already  made  as  to  his 


ROBERT  BUCHANAN,  D.D. 

influence  in  counsel  during  the  period  before  the  Disruption  is,  if  possible, 
still  more  emphatically  applicable  to  the  period  that  succeeded.  What- 
ever might  be  his  share  in  the  plans  adopted,  he  was  never  anxious  to  be 
prominent  in  the  public  advocacy  and  execution  of  them.  His  cordial 
admiration  of  his  distinguished  fellow-labourers  led  him  rather  to  desire 
to  impel  them  to  the  front.  But  whatever  good  guidance  the  affairs  of 
the  Free  Church  experienced  during  many  busy  and  anxious  years,  a 
very  large  share  of  the  credit  of  it  must  be  imputed  to  the  counsels  of 
Buchanan.  It  may  be  added,  that  in  the  department  of  silent  and 
resolute  subordination  of  all  personal  feelings  and  interests  to  the  peace 
and  the  well-being  of  the  Church,  few  names  indeed  can  claim  a  rank- 
near  to  his. 

Of  specific  services,  two  especially  must  be  briefly  noticed.  His 
"  History  of  the  Ten  Years'  Conflict "  is  at  once  a  statement  of  the 
events  which  led  to  the  separate  position  of  the  Free  Church,  and  a 
vindication  of  the  principles  she  professed,  and  of  the  steps  taken  in 
defence  of  them.  It  is  singularly  clear  and  comprehensive  ;  the  difficult 
work  of  selection,  so  important  with  a  view  to  unembarrassed  narrative, 
being  performed  with  admirable  judgment.  As  the  Free  Church  grows 
older,  the  work  will  gain  in  value.  Dr  Buchanan  publicly  expressed  an 
intention  of  writing  an  account  of  the  first  ten  years  of  the  Free  Church, 
as  the  record  of  its  upbuilding.  Circumstances  prevented  him  from 
executing  this  purpose.  An  expository  volume  on  Ecclesiastes,  and  a 
very  useful  record  of  a  tour  in  the  Holy  Land,  were  later  contributions  to 
professional  literature. 

It  was  in  1847  that  Dr  Buchanan  became  Convener  of  the  Sustenta- 
tion  Fund  Committee,  and  entered  on  the  long  series  of  important 
services  which  he  rendered  to  that  great  fund.  In  addition  to  anxieties 
with  respect  to  the  amount  of  the  yearly  income  and  its  adequacy  to  the 
purposes  for  which  it  is  intended,  others  still  more  trying  had  to  be 
encountered.     Differences  with  respect  to  the  administration  and  distribu- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


tioii  of  the  fund  gave  rise  to  controversies,  which  were  not  the  less  serious 
that,  in  some  instances,  men  of  high  character  and  intellectual  force  were 
ranked  on  different  sides.  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  how  much  the 
fund,  and  the  Church  which  benefits  by  it,  owed  to  the  circumstance  that 
a  man  of  Buchanan's  weight  of  character,  calmness,  and  firmness,  presided 
over  the  fund  during  these  periods.  He  had  the  strongest  sense  of 
the  fatal  effects,  which  the  indulgence  of  a  bitter  and  wrangling  temper 
must  produce  in  a  matter  like  this.  No  labour,  no  sacrifice  of  personal 
feeling,  no  efforts  of  conciliation  that  seemed  consistent  with  sound  prin- 
ciples, were  grudged  by  him,  in  order  to  avert  such  evils.  The  convener  of 
the  Sustentation  Fund,  indeed,  is  far  from  being  an  autocrat  in  this  matter. 
He  presides  over  a  committee  which  is  very  large,  representative  in  its 
constitution,  independent  in  its  temper,  and  thoroughly  awake  to  the 
bearings  of  steps  which  may  be  proposed.  But  the  oldest  members 
of  the  committee  will  be  most  forward  to  testify  to  the  manner  in  which 
their  remarkable  convener  infused  his  own  spirit  into  his  associates,  and 
contributed  to  form  the  temper  and  mode  of  view  which  prevails  in  that 
committee,  and,  it  may  be  added,  in  the  Church  at  large. 

After  the  first  absorbing  years  of  the  upbuilding  of  the  Free  Church 
had  passed  away,  Dr  Buchanan's  mind  reverted  to  the  case  and  claims  of 
the  lapsed  masses  in  the  city  where  he  ministered.  He  set  himself  to 
call  attention  to  the  facts  and  statistics  bearing  on  the  subject,  so  as  to 
awaken  and  impress  the  Christian  community.  But,  at  the  same  time, 
he  set  himself  to  practical  work,  in  the  way  of  rendering  more  efficient 
the  agencies  which  his  congregation  maintained  among  the  people  of  the 
Tron  Church  parish.  In  the  Wynds,  in  that  parish,  the  work  of  Mr  M'CoU 
was  commenced,  the  centre  of  which  was  the  Wynd  Church,  erected  by 
Dr  Buchanan's  efforts.  Out  of  the  Wynd  Mission  have  sprung  directly 
four  large  congregations.  These  congregations  have  established  seven 
other  sanctioned  charges,  and  five  charges  more  have  sprung,  more  or  less 
directly,  from  the  Wynd  Church.     This  mission  has  therefore  been  the 


ROBERT  BUCHANAN,  D.D 
means,  directly  or  indirectly,  of  adding  to  the  Presbytery  of  Glasgow  six- 
teen sanctioned  charges,  besides  assisting  in  the  formation  of  others.  The 
work  has  proved  to  be  the  nursery  of  some  of  the  very  best  evangelistic 
labourers  whom  Glasgow  has  seen.  Dr  Buchanan  took  the  lead  in 
it,  in  the  most  direct  and  practical  way.  The  writer  well  remembers 
listening  to  him  preaching,  in  the  open  air,  in  a  close  in  the  Wynds  ;  his 
hearers  partly  crowding  a  comparatively  open  space,  partly  presenting 
themselves  at  every  window,  on  both  sides,  from  top  to  bottom  of  the 
houses,  for  a  considerable  distance  along  the  close.  An  interesting 
incident  took  place  on  one  of  these  occasions.  A  man,  who  had  become 
desperate,  was  on  his  way  to  the  river  to  drown  himself,  when  his  atten- 
tion was  attracted  by  the  gathered  people,  to  whom  Dr  Buchanan  was 
preaching.  The  subject  happened  to  be  the  Philippian  jailor.  The  suit- 
ableness to  his  own  case  of  the  statements  made  in  illustration,  struck  the 
unfortunate  man  ;  he  became  impressed,  communicated  after  the  sermon 
with  some  of  those  present,  became  apparently  a  changed  man,  and  lived 
a  consistent  as  well  as  an  industrious  life  for  years  afterwards. 

In  the  year  1857  Dr  Buchanan  was  transferred  from  the  Free  Tron 
to  the  Free  College  Church,  built  in  immediate  proximity  to  the  Free 
Church  College.  The  step  was  the  result  of  a  strong  conviction,  that  it 
was  necessary  to  take  vigorous  steps  to  supply  churches  timeousiy,  not 
merely  to  the  masses  in  the  centre  of  the  city,  but  to  the  new  districts  on 
the  outskirts,  successively  occupied  by  inhabitants  of  the  wealthier  classes. 
It  appeared  to  him,  that  a  proposal  by  himself  to  remove,  with  part  of  his 
congregation,  was  a  suitable  and  impressive  way  of  turning  attention  to 
this  subject.  A  large  part  of  the  congregation  remained  in  their  old 
place  of  worship,  and  soon  became  again  a  numerous  and  powerful  con- 
gregation under  the  ministry  of  Dr  Walter  Smith. 

In  the  year  i860  Dr  Buchanan  was  appointed  moderator  of  the  Free 
Church  Assembly.  His  predecessor  in  that  office,  Dr  Cunningham, 
recommended  him  to  the  Assembly  as  "  one  whose  claims  to  this  honour, 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


and  to  any  honour  the  Church  can  confer  upon  him,  arc  of  the  highest 
order." 

Another  great  and  absorbing  service  remained  for  Dr  Buchanan  to 
discharge,  which  he  was  not  destined  to  see  rewarded  by  success.  In 
1863  he  was  named  convener  of  the  committee,  appointed  to  confer 
with  committees  of  the  United  Presbyterian,  Reformed  Presbyterian,  and 
English  Presbyterian  Churches  regarding  union.  The  history  and  result 
of  the  negotiations,  which  lasted  for  ten  years,  are  known.  When  Dr 
Buchanan's  life  is  adequately  written,  the  importance  which  he  attached 
to  this  step  in  the  history  of  his  Church,  and  the  sorrow  with  which  he 
saw  the  expected  union  postponed  for  a  time,  may  appear.  For  the 
present  it  may  be  enough  to  quote  the  statement  which  he  made,  in 
reference  to  this  subject  in  the  General  Assembly  of  1873  : — 

"  Its  history  will  be  written  and  read  when  we  are  in  our  graves— written  and  read 
in  a  calmer  and  clearer  atmosphere  than  that  which  now  surrounds  it  ;  and  for  my  part  I 
am  not  afraid  of  the  verdict  posterity  will  then  pronounce  on  the  views  which  have 
been  advocated  on  this  great  question  by  the  majority  of  this  Church.  It  is  true  that 
no  such  merely  human  verdict  will  or  can  be  infallible.  It  is  a  light  thing  to  be 
judged  of  men  or  of  man's  judgment.  He  that  judgeth  us  is  the  Lord.  Speaking  as  in 
His  presence,  and  in  the  great  Assembly  of  this  Church,  all  I  shall  say  is  this,  that  in 
looking  back  on  what  it  fell  to  me  to  do,  as  Convener  of  the  Union  Committee  of  the 
Free  Church,  I  am  conscious  of  much  imperfection, — conscious  of  having  come 
miserably  short  in  those  high  qualities  that  were  needed  for  the  fitting  advocacy  of 
so  great  and  sacred  a  cause.  But  I  also  am  conscious  of  having  done  my  best  to  carry 
for^vard  what,  in  my  inmost  soul,  I  believe  to  have  been  a  work  of  God.  And  in  this 
day  resigning,  as  I  shall  do,  into  the  hands  of  the  Assembly  the  office  which  I  have 
been  so  long  honoured  to  hold,  I  shall  do  so  with  the  earnest  prayer  and  in  the  humble 
hope  that  from  the  field  in  which  so  much  precious  seed  has  been  patiently  and 
prayerfully  sown, — sown  latterly,  I  might  truly  say,  in  tears— some  happier  husband- 
man shall  ere  long  come  with  rejoicing,  bringing  his  sheaves  with  him." 

It  fell  to  the  lot  of  Dr  Buchanan  to  survive  all  the  other  leaders  of  the 
Disruption  struggle.  He  did  not  allow  the  successive  bereavements  to 
abate  his  energy  or  to  break  his  spirit ;  but  they  touched  his  latter  years 
with  a  visible  tenderness,  and  brought  out  more  evidently  his  regard 
to  the  things  unseen  and  eternal.     The  death  of  Dr  Candlish  in  1873 


ROBERT  BUCHANAN,  D.D. 
was  a  blow,  which,  tliougli  not  unforeseen,  innictcd  a  deep  wound 
on  Dr  Buchanan's  affections.  A  peculiar  love  and  confidence,  equally 
strong  on  either  side,  existed  between  the  two  friends  ;  and  the  previous 
bereavements  which  left  them  alone  together,  had  tended  to  associate 
them  more  absolutely  with  one  another.  Whatever  his  feelings, 
however,  Dr  Buchanan,  as  usual,  continued  steadfastly  to  perform 
every  service  it  was  still  possible  to  render  to  the  Church  and  to  the 
Christian  cause. 

In  the  winter  of  1874-75  he  accepted  the  proposal  that  he  would 
supply  for  a  few  months  the  place  of  worship  which  the  Free  Church 
maintains  at  Rome.  A  tendency  to  bronchitic  ailment,  which  had  begun 
to  give  him  some  trouble,  made  this  proposal  the  more  welcome.  He 
proceeded  to  his  destination  with  his  usual  cheerfulness  ;  and  with  the 
special  interest  which  a  residence  at  Rome  could  not  but  awaken,  in  one 
who  felt  the  liveliest  interest  in  history,  and  who  had  special  aptitudes 
for  tracing  out  and  storing  up  all  manner  of  local  relations  and 
associations.  Though  the  winter  proved  unusually  severe,  his  health  did 
not  seem  to  suffer  from  it  seriously.  An  apparently  slight  indisposition 
had  confined  him  to  his  room  ;  but  he  was  looking  forward  to  com- 
pleting some  intended  excursions  before  returning  home.  During  the 
night,  on  31st  March  1875,  he  unexpectedly  and  most  peacefully  passed 
away. 

Dr  Buchanan  was  married,  first,  in  1827,  to  Miss  Anne  Handyside, 
sister  of  the  late  Hugh  Handyside,  Edinburgh.  This  lady  died  in  1841. 
He  married,  secondly,  in  1S43,  Miss  Elizabeth  Stoddart,  daughter  of 
Laurence  Stoddart,  Esq.,  who  survives  him.  Children  of  both  marriages 
survive. 

A  certain  refinement  and  sclectness,  combined  with  strength  and 
decision,  were  perhaps  the  qualities  suggested  by  Dr  Buchanan's 
countenance.  Much  the  same  impression  might  be  derived  from  his 
whole   appearance.     Fond   of  all  athletic  exercises  in   his   youth,    and 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

successful  in  them,  his  fine  form  and  carriage  were  impressive  to  the 
last.  In  private,  he  was  a  charming  associate ;  full  of  knowledge,  a 
strong  and  ready  converser,  and  in  the  highest  degree  companionable. 
His  Christian  character  partook  of  the  stability  and  consistency  which 
marked  the  whole  man.  It  was  not  obtrusive  or  demonstrative  ;  but  the 
more  and  the  longer  one  knew  him,  the  more  one  felt  how  the  faith  of 
Christ  pervaded  and  determined  his  life.  AH  men  knew  how  calm  and 
self-possessed  his  demeanour  was,  in  the  most  trying  circumstances.  As 
usual,  in  such  cases,  this  was  often  ascribed  to  a  placid  or  insensible 
disposition.  Those  who  knew  better,  knew  how  suppressed  feelings 
and  undisclosed  anxieties  signalised  themselves  occasionally  by  sharp 
and  sudden  fits  of  illness.  R.  R. 


Txohtxt  Burns,  ©A 


R.  BURNS  of  Paisley,"  by  which  name  he  was  long  and 
familiarly  known,  before  he  went  to  Canada  and 
became  "  Dr.  ]5urns  of  Toronto,"  was  born  at 
Bo'ness,  in  the  year  1789,  the  seventh  in  a  family 
of  eight  sons,  other  three  of  whom  were  ministers 
of  the  Established  Church  along  with  himself;  two  of  them  surviv- 
ing the  Disruption,  and  sharing  in  it,  as  the  third,  the  eldest  of  the 
family  (for  nearly  forty  years  one  of  the  ministers  of  Brechin),  had  he 
been  spared  so  long,  would  certainly  have  done.  His  father,  John 
Burns  (Surveyor  of  Customs  at  Bo'ness),  was  neither  a  minister  nor  an 
elder,  but  he  was  an  eminently  devout  man,  one  who  was  "  upright  in 
his  generation,  who  walked  with  God,  and  his  seed  was  blessed." 
The  celebrated  George  Whitefield,  with  whom  both  he  and  his  father 
before  him  were  on  terms  of  intimacy,  seems  to  have  left  a  hallowed 
influence  behind  him  in  the  paternal  home  ("Burns'  Court")  at  Falkirk, 
of  which  he  was  on  several  occasions  an  inmate;  and  the  type  of 
character,  as  well  as  of  theology,  thus  formed  was  transmitted  "  to  the 
generation  following."  Robert,  like  other  members  of  the  family,  ver>' 
early  discovered  a  clerical  and  theological,  if  not  a  sph-itual  instinct, — a 
taste  for  literature  of  a  much  more  solid  kind  than  boys  are  wont  to 
care  for.  When  little  more  than  ten  years  of  age,  he  was  wont  to  read 
such   works   as   "Flavel's   Sermons"   aloud,  not   only   for   his   father's 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

regalement,  but  his  own  ;  although  it  was  not  till  some  considerable  time 
afterwards  that  he  came  decidedly  under  the  power  of  the  truth,  which 
was  thus  already  familar  to  him,  and  that  ex  animo  he  embraced  it. 
His  appetite  for  learning  of  all  kinds  was  voracious.  When  at  the  age 
of  twelve  and  a-half,  he  passed  from  the  parish  school  to  the  University, 
he  was  a  good  classical  scholar,  quite  at  home  in  Livy  and  Juvenal,  and 
able  to  read  the  Greek  Testament  ad  apcrturaui.  During  his  summer 
vacations  he  was  wont  to  write  out  carefully  a  resume,  of  every  book 
which  he  read  ;  and  this  practice,  no  doubt,  had  much  to  do  both  with 
the  storing  and  the  strengthening  of  his  memory, — that  rare  faculty  of  his 
which  to  the  last  day  of  his  life  was  never  known  to  fail  him,  and 
which  used  to  be  spoken  of  by  his  friends  as  "  approaching  the  Divine." 

In  his  seventeenth  year  he  entered  the  Divinity  Hall  in  Edinburgh, 
and  attended  its  three  classes  (under  Drs.  Hunter,  Moodie,  and  Meikle- 
john)  with  exemplary  fidelity,  but  without  much  profit.  He  was  noted 
not  only  as  one  of  a  few  who  really  were  students,  but  as  one  of  a  still 
smaller  number  who  either  were,  or  professed  to  be,  "serious."  In  a 
class  of  I  So,  not  more  than  a  tenth  part  made  any  such  profession.  The 
other  nine-tenths  were  not  only  "  Moderate "  but  Arminian  in  their 
avowed  leanings ;  and  Darwinianism,  even  Pantheism  in  embr>'o,  had 
not  a  few  disciples  among  them.  One  of  his  class-fellows  was  Thomas 
Wright,  afterwards  the  deposed  minister  of  Borthwick.  Being  not  only 
very  decided,  but  very  pronounced  in  his  opinions,  Robert  Burns  soon 
became  a  marked  man  among  his  class-fellows,  and  was  known  by  the 
soubriquet  of  "Young  Orthodox."  His  two  elder  brothers  had  enjoyed 
a  like  distinction  before  him. 

Licensed  in  1 8 lo  to  preach  the  Gospel,  he  assisted  for  a  short  time 
the  excellent  minister  of  Cramond  (Mr.  Archibald  Bonar),  in  whose 
family  he  had  for  a  year  and  a-half  previously  acted  as  tutor, — one  of  his 
pupils  being  John  Bonar,  afterwards  the  much-loved  minister  of  Larbcrt, 
and  Convener  of  the  Colonial  Committee  of  the  Free  Church.     Sub- 


ROBERT  BURNS,  D.D. 

sequcntl}-,  during  the  vacancy  in  the  East  Churcli,  Perth,  caused  by  the 
translation  of  Mr.  Andrew  Thomson  to  Edinburgh  that  same  year,  he 
supphed  the  vacant  pulpit,  and  with  so  much  acceptance,  that  but  for 
his  extreme  youth  and  youthfulness  of  appearance,  it  was  thought  not 
improbable  he  might  have  been  appointed  successor  to  the  celebrated 
man  who  had  left  it.  His  youth,  however,  though  it  hindered  his 
success  at  Perth,  rather  helped  it  at  Paisley,  for  very  soon  after  he  was 
chosen  by  a  large  majority  over  three  formidable  rivals  of  mature  year.s, 
minister  of  the  Low  Church  there,  and  was  ordained  to  that  important 
charge  on  the  19th  July,  181 1,  being  twenty-two  and  a-half  years  old. 

From  this  time  forward,  during  a  good  deal  more  than  half-a-centurj', 
his  life  was  one  of  such  incessant  activity, — an  activity  so  irrepressible 
and  so  productive,  so  full  of  work,  so  full  of  incident,  too,  and,  better 
than  either,  so  full  of  fruit — that  the  merest  summary  of  its  principal 
tnemorabilia  (as  recorded  at  length  in  his  "  Life  and  Times,"  edited  by 
his  son)  is  all  that  can  be  attempted  here.  His  ministry  in  Paisley 
extended  over  a  period  of  nearly  thirty-four  years.  His  popularity  as 
a  preacher,  great  at  the  outset,  was  well  sustained  to  the  last.  As  a 
Lecturer  especially  he  was  thought  to  be  "unrivalled  in  the  West  of 
Scotland,"  and  so  laboriously  had  he  given  himself  to  this  part  of  his 
pulpit  work,  that  before  he  left  Paisley  he  had  been  able  to  overtake  the 
whole  of  the  New  Testament,  besides  the  leading  historical  and 
prophetical  parts  of  the  Old.  Fluent,  moreover,  though  he  was  beyond 
almost  any  of  his  contemporaries,  he  never  trusted  to  his  fluency, 
without  more  or  less  of  careful  written  preparation. 

Nor  less  laborious  was  he  as  a  pastor.  His  capacity  for  work  as  a 
visitor  was  something  marvellous.  Though  his  congregation  was  large, 
and  his  parish  had  in  it  a  population  of  7000,  he  made  a  point  of  visiting 
the  families  both  of  the  one  and  of  the  other  annually,  besides  his 
visitations  of  the  sick,  of  which  eighteen  or  twenty,  even  on  a  Saturday 
afternoon,  was  no  uncommon  occurrence;  and  this  perhaps  (as  on  one occa- 

Q  "3 


DISRUPTJON  WORTHIES. 

sion  the  present  writer  well  remembers)  after  having  written  his  lecture  for 
next  day,  in  the  forenoon,  and  before  writing  his  sermon  in  the  evening. 

As  a  citizen  (with  the  exception,  of  course,  of  the  Provost  and 
Magistrates),  there  was  no  man  in  Paisley  who  did  more,  if  so  much,  for 
the  benefit  of  the  working-classes,  especially  during  the  frequently- 
recurring  seasons  of  distress  with  which  Paisley  was  wont  to  be  visited, 
in  devising  and  carrying  out  plans  of  relief  for  the  poor  operatives.  On 
four  different  occasions,  within  ten  or  twelve  years,  he  was  sent  as  a 
Delegate  to  London,  and  other  leading  cities  of  England,  to  plead  their 
cause  in  the  high  places  of  the  land  ;  and  on  one  of  these  occasions,  he 
had  the  honour  of  presenting  to  Her  Majesty  a  specimen  of  Paisley 
manufacture,  in  the  form  of  a  magnificent  shawl. 

In  most  of  the  controversies  of  the  time  he  took  an  active  part,  both 
with  his  tongue  and  his  pen.  The  Bible  Society  controversy  and  the 
Voluntary  controversy  were  two,  out  of  six  or  seven,  into  which  he 
thus  keenly  entered.  And  his  published  writings,  on  these  and  other 
questions  of  general  interest,  were  not  only  varied  but  voluminous. 
Not  fewer  than  forty  such  publications,  of  one  kind  or  another,  came 
from  his  pen,  of  which  the  most  important  were  the  following: — 
"  Historical  Dissertations  on  the  Law  and  Practice  of  Great  Britain 
with  regard  to  the  Poor,  1819;"  "Treatise  on  Pluralities,"  1824  (the 
writing  of  which,  a  volume  of  300  pages,  within  little  more  than  a 
month,  nearly  cost  him  his  life);  "TheGareloch  Heresy  Tried,"  1830; 
"  Wodrow's  History,"  edited,  with  Life,  Notes,  and  Dissertations,  4  vols., 
1830;  "Life  of  Dr.  M'Gill,"  1842;  "Edinburgh  Christian  Instructor," 
edited,  1838-40,  besides  contributing  regularly  to  its  pages,  from  the  time 
of  his  ordination  till  the  death  of  its  great  founder.  Dr.  Andrew  Thomson. 

In  the  midst  of  all  these  home  avocations  he  found  time  to  look 
abroad,  and  interest  himself  in  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  North 
American  Colonies.  In  1825  he  took  the  principal  share  of  work  in  the 
formation  of  the  "Colonial  Societj',"  became  its  Secretary,  and  for  fifteen 


ROBEKJ  IS  UNAS,  D.D. 

)-cars  was  its  mainspring.  In  this  way,  having  had  to  do  personally  with 
the  finding  out  and  the  sending  out  of  not  fewer  than  eighty  ordained 
ministers  to  Canada  and  Nova  Scotia,  before  the  General  Assembly 
moved  in  the  matter  at  all,  he  may  truly  be  said  to  have  been  the  father 
of  the  whole  Colonial  enterprise,  and  the  founder  of  the  Canada  Pres- 
byterian Church. 

In  the  Ten  Year's  Conflict  he  had  of  course  his  share,  having  been  a 
strong  Anti-patronage  man  from  the  beginning,  one  of  the  forty-two  who 
first  hoisted  the  flag  in  the  General  Assembly,  so  early  as  1833.  His 
evidence  on  the  subject  before  the  House  of  Commons  Committee  was 
very  valuable,  and  with  such  volubility  did  he  pour  forth  his  stores  of 
information  in  reply  to  the  questions  addressed  to  him,  that  the  short- 
hand reporters  are  said  to  have  been  fairly  baffled,  and  to  have  given  up 
their  task  in  despair.  A  man  who  could  speak  "with  a  forty-horse  power" 
was  too  many  for  them.  When  the  time  came  for  action,  unlike  not  a 
few  who  had  occupied  the  same  high  ground  with  himself  during  the 
Non-intrusion  struggle,  and  who,  with  strange  inconsistency,  remained  in 
the  Establishment,  he  proved  himself  a  true  man,  and  if  he  did  not  lead 
the  way,  at  least  followed,  and  fell  into  the  ranks  of  the  outcomers,  his 
whole  congregation,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  going  heartily  with  him. 

In  1844,  along  with  Dr.  Cunningham,  and  other  deputies  from  the 
Free  Church,  he  visited  the  United  States  and  Canada,  to  plead  the 
cause  of  the  "  Building  Fund  ; "  and  among  other  results  that  followed 
from  his  visit,  one  was  a  call  to  return  and  accept  a  Colonial  charge 
himself,  which,  after  full  consideration  and  consultation,  he  at  length 
agreed  to  do 

In  1845,  he  became  pastor  of  Knox  Church,  Toronto,  a  position  of 
great  usefulness  and  influence,  which  he  continued  to  occupy  for  eleven 
years,  till  1856.  From  that  time,  till  1868,  he  held  the  professorship  of 
Church  History  and  Apologetics  in  Knox  College,  and  during  the  whole 
of  these  twenty-three  years,  especially  the  latter  twelve,  he  acted  as  a 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

sort  of  Superintendent,  or  Missionary  Bishop,  to  the  entire  Canadian 
Church.  His  "  Episcopal  visitations  "  were  so  frequent  and  so  extensive, 
that  there  was  scarcely  a  settlement  or  a  congregation  within  "the 
Dominion"  which  he  did  not  know  everything  about;  and  there  was  not  a 
minister  or  elder  with  whom  on  these  occasions  he  made  acquaintance 
whom  he  did  not  remember,  and  whom  he  could  not  easily  recognise, 
ever  after. 

He  was  Moderator  of  the  Canadian  Synod  the  first  year  after  his 
arrival,  and  was  asked  to  accept  that  dignity  a  second  time,  after  its 
union  with  the  "United  Presbyterian  Synod"  in  1861.  Two  visits  he 
paid  to  the  mother-country,  in  i860  and  1868-69,  o"  both  which 
occasions  he  addressed  the  General  Assembly,  receiving  quite  an  ovation, 
— in  the  latter  case,  his  snow-white  locks  and  his  tardily  feeble  step 
(though  these  were  the  only  marks  of  feebleness  about  him)  making  it 
all  too  certain  that  (as  he  was  then  just  about  to  return  to  the  land  of 
his  adoption)  the  "  fathers  and  brethren  "  whom  he  addressed  "  would 
see  his  face  no  more."  And  so  it  was,  sooner  than  any  one  thought. 
He  had  scarcely  been  a  week  in  Toronto  when  the  summons  came. 
Arriving  on  the  6th  August,  and  preaching  with  much  of  his  old  fire  on 
Sabbath  the  7th,  he  began  to  complain  on  the  Thursday  after ;  and  that 
day  week,  the  19th  of  August,  1869,  he  "fell  asleep,"  at  the  "good  old 
age  "  of  eighty  years  and  six  months. 

Dr.  Burns  was  twice  married.  First,  to  Janet,  daughter  of  John  Orr, 
Esq.,  Provost  of  Paisley,  who  died  on  the  14th  December,  1841, — having 
for  twenty-eight  years  been  his  counsellor  and  comforter, — a  lady  of  rare 
worth  and  usefulness;  and  second,  on  the  12th  December,  1844,  to 
Elizabeth  Bell  Bonar,  daughter  of  Thomson  Bonar,  Esq.,  Edinburgh, 
and  niece  of  his  early  friend  and  counsellor  at  Cramond,  who — with  two 
sons  by  his  first  marriage — survives  him. 

J.  C.  B. 


^Um  €m\x%,  ^M. 


DAM  CAIRNS  was  born  at  tlie  Manse  of  Longforgan, 
on  the  30th  Januaiy,  1802.  Of  that  parish  his 
father,  the  Rev.  Adam  Cairns,  was  minister  for  many 
years.  Ecclesiastically  within  the  bounds  of  the 
Presbytery  of  Dundee,  the  parish  is  in  Perthshire,  and 
its  eastern  extremity  is  coincident  with  the  bounds  of  the  county  in  that 
direction,  the  Burn  of  Grey  forming  the  dividing  line  from  the  county 
of  Forfar.  About  midway  in  the  long  and  straggling  village,  and  a 
little  over  five  miles  from  Dundee,  the  church  and  manse  of  Longforgan 
occupy  a  most  beautiful  and  commanding  position.  To  the  westward 
lies  the  rich  and  lovely  Carse  of  Cowrie,  sheltered  on  the  north  by  the 
fertile  Braes  of  the  Carse,  whose  southward  trend  at  both  extremities 
embraces  in  their  gentle  sweep  a  district  perhaps  the  fairest  and  the 
richest  in  Scotland.  The  view  to  the  south  takes  in  a  long  reach  of  the 
Tay,  with  the  opposite  coast  of  Fife,  from  Newport  to  Newburgh,  a  dis- 
tance of  ten  or  twelve  miles,  while  the  eastern  border  of  the  parish,  being 
near  Dundee,  embraces  the  growing  population  of  Invergowrie  and  its 
vicinity.  In  close  proximity  to  this  latter  village  are  to  be  seen  the  ruins 
of  Dargie  Church,  with  its  burying-ground — a  favourite  resort  of  the  late 
Rev.  R.  Murray  M'Cheyne  in  his  private  walks  into  the  countiy.  Its 
walls,  almost  entirely  covered  with  ivy,  are  still  in  a  good  state  of  pre- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

servation  for  its  age,  if  the  legend  of  the  place  be  true,  that  it  was  the 
first  Christian  church  north  of  the  Tay.  At  this  spot  the  river  expands 
into  a  bay  of  shallow  water,  whose  dimensions  must  have  greatly 
diminished  in  course  of  years.  Two  rocks,  known  as  the  Gows  of 
Gowrie,  and  said  to  have  at  one  time  stood  out  visible  in  the  water,  are 
now  more  on  land  than  in  the  water,  almost  concealed  by  a  luxuriance  of 
sedge,  fulfilling  a  saying  attributed  to  Thomas  the  Rhymer:  — 

"  \Mien  the  Gows  of  Go^vrie  come  to  land 
The  day  of  judgment 's  near  at  hand." 

Dr.  Cairns's  father  appears  to  have  belonged  to  the  parish  of  Temple. 
His  mother's  father  was  minister  of  the  parish  of  Kinnaird,  in  the  Carse 
of  Gowrie.     He  is  descended  from  a  long  line  of  ministers. 

Having  received  the  rudimentaiy  part  of  his  education  in  his  native 
parish,  he  very  soon  gave  promise  of  future  success  in  his  studies,  and 
entered  the  University  of  St.  Andrews  before  he  was  fourteen  years  of 
age — too  young,  as  he  himself  has  often  confessed.  Yet  as  a  student  he 
did  more  than  hold  his  own  among  his  class-fellows,  many  of  them  b}' 
far  his  senior  in  years.  Throughout  his  whole  course  of  study,  both  in 
the  University  and  in  the  Theological  Hall,  he  occupied  a  distinguished 
place.  With  more  than  average  natural  gifts  he  combined  more  than 
average  application.  He  was  a  hard  student ;  and  the  habit  formed  in 
early  youth  has  stuck  to  him  throughout  a  lengthened  and  successful 
ministry.  Of  himself  he  has  been  heard  to  say,  "  I  have  no  great 
natural  ability ;  and  any  measure  of  success  to  which  I  have  attained 
has  been  won  through  hard  labour  and  close  application  to  present 
duty." 

He  was  licensed  as  a  preacher  on  the  5th  October,  1824.  Soon  after 
this,  he  passed  through  a  severe  ordeal,  which  lasted  for  several  years. 
Tall  and  handsome,  of  commanding  appearance,  yet  never  robust,  his 


ADAM   CAIRNS,  P.P. 

health  at  this  stage  siifVcred  greatly,  and  threatened  lor  a  time  entirely 
to  give  way.  Cast  on  his  own  resources,  he  was  obliged  to  support 
himself  by  private  teaching.  In  various  ways  his  strength  was  ovei 
taxed  ;  he  was  in  a  state  of  physical  exhaustion,  nervous  and  irritable 
But  no  one  knew  the  conflict  of  spirit  through  which  at  that  time  he 
was  passing,  save  the  Great  Searcher  of  hearts.  It  was  this  that  was 
telling  upon  him.  Pangs  and  sorrows  within  were  drying  up  his 
strength  like  a  potsherd.  It  was  the  crisis  in  his  life,  the  turning-point 
in  his  spiritual  and  eternal  destiny.  The  struggle  was  long,  the 
wrestling  was  great,  the  darkness  terrible,  almost  bordering  on  despair. 
He  had  none  to  counsel  and  direct  him.  His  only  resort  was  the 
Bible,  and  secret  wrestling  with  God  in  prayer.  In  his  own  words — 
"  I  can  never  forget  the  ministers  whose  words  were  sweet  to  my  taste, 
and  acted  as  a  healing  ointment  on  my  truly  stricken  spirit.  They  were 
the  Lord's  messengers  to  me ;  but  they  were  neither  famous  for  their 
pulpit  oratory,  nor  burning  and  shining  lights  in  popular  estimation. 
Preachers  they  were  of  humble  standing,  and  of  no  intellectual  pre- 
tensions, but  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  rich  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
will  of  God,  and  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding."  God  took 
him  from  the  fearful  pit,  and  from  the  miry  clay.  The  darkness  passed 
away  ;  the  shadow  of  death  was  turned  into  the  morning. 

After  serving  for  a  time  as  assistant  to  the  late  Rev.  Sir  Hcnrj- 
Moncreiff,  minister  of  the  parish  of  St.  Cuthbcrt's,  Edinburgh,  Dr. 
(then  Mr.)  Cairns  was  presented  to  the  parish  of  Manor,  in  the  county  of 
Peebles,  where  he  was  ordained  on  the  2ist  of  August,  1828.  He  was 
weak  in  body  and  in  mind,  but  at  peace  with  God,  and  walking  in  the 
light  of  life.  The  parish  is  a  quiet  pastoral  valley.  The  inhabitants 
were  few,  but  of  an  excellent  spirit,  and  full  of  kindness  to  their  young 
pastor ;  and  for  four  years  and  a-half  he  went  in  and  out  among  them. 
He  had  many  tokens  for  good,  and  many  seals  of  his  ministry. 

But  now  his  work  in  this  his  first  charge  was  drawing  to  a  close. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

His  health  was  again  seriously  affected.  His  old  complaint  returned 
upon  him.  It  was  brought  on,  or  at  all  events  accelerated,  by  the  illness 
of  a  brother,  who  had  returned  from  America  in  quest  of  health, 
Having  come  to  reside  at  the  manse  at  Manor,  Mr.  Cairns  was 
unremitting  in  his  attention  to  him,  both  as  regarded  his  spiritual  and 
his  temporal  welfare.  The  complaint  in  his  brother's  case  got  worse. 
He  died.  It  was  a  triumphant  death.  His  departure  was  with  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  But  the  care  and  anxiety  of  waiting  at 
that  death-bed  left  serious  effects  on  Mr.  Cairns's  own  health.  And  just 
at  the  time  when  a  change  was  desirable,  he  received  a  presentation 
to  the  parish  of  Dunbog,  in  the  north-west  of  Fife.  Feeling  it  to  be  his 
duty  to  accept  the  offer,  he  was  inducted  into  that  charge,  on  the  7th 
of  April,  1833.  Being  strictly  a  rural  parish,  the  work  was  easy.  While 
it  presented  no  scope  for  the  powerful  but  dormant  energies  of  its  new 
pastor,  it  gave  the  opportunity,  much  required,  for  recruiting  his  shattered 
health.  It  was  here,  and  on  the  nth  February,  1834,  that  Mr.  Cairns 
was  united  in  marriage  to  Miss  Jessie  Ballingall,  a  lady  of  very  superior 
parts,  and  gifted  in  no  ordinary  degree  with  Christian  prudence  and 
kindness.  She  is  still  spared  to  be  the  companion  of  his  advancing 
years.  Of  their  six  children,  three  have  been  taken,  an  only  son  of 
great  promise,  cut  off  in  the  flower  of  his  opening  youth,  and  two 
married  daughters,  one  of  them  having  been  left  in  early  widowhood. 
Three  married  daughters  still  survive. 

After  a  successful  ministry  in  his  second  charge  of  about  equal  dura- 
tion with  that  of  his  first,  Mr.  Cairns  was  translated  to  Cupar-Fife.  It 
was  a  collegiate  charge.  He  was  inducted  on  the  ist  September,  1837. 
Forgetful  of  his  former  ailment,  he  entered  on  the  work  of  his  new  sphere 
with  all  his  strength.  Much  required  to  be  done.  Religion  had  suffered 
from  the  blight  of  Moderatism  for  upwards  of  half-a-century.  He  felt  that 
a  great  work  was  given  him  to  do ;  and,  fired  with  zeal  in  his  Master's 
cause,  he  was  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season,  not  sparing  himself,  that 


ADAM  CAIRNS,  D.D. 

he  m\g\\\.  fulfil  the  ministry  which  lie  had  received,  "  to  testify  the  gospel  of 
the  grace  of  God."  But  in  the  midst  of  such  exciting  labour  his  strength 
again  gave  way.  For  months  his  life  hung  quivering  in  the  balance.  He 
was  an  invalid  for  years.  But  the  work  which  he  had  begun  was  not  re- 
tarded. He  was  cheered,  as  he  himself  has  stated,  "by  abundant 
evidence  that  the  cause  of  salvation  was  actually  promoted  by  my  sore 
affliction."  The  Disruption  was  approaching  ;  and  though  in  shattered 
health,  he  threw  himself  into  the  very  thick  of  the  controversy,  at  once 
identifying  himself  with  the  Evangelical  part)-.  An  esteemed  minister, 
then  of  another  denomination,  now  of  the  Free  Church,  says  of  Mr. 
Cairns  :— "  He  soon  awakened  a  strong  and  extensive  sympathy  in  the 
congregation  and  neighbourhood.  Yet  I  believe  his  main  attraction  lay 
in  the  earnest  and  effective  way  in  which  he  expounded  and  applied  the 
truths  of  the  glorious  Gospel.  His  expectations  of  Cupar  (as  regards  the 
Disruption)  were  ver>'  low.  But  he  could  not  but  be  amazed  at  the 
numbers  and  weight  of  his  following.  He  left  about  the  largest  and 
most  prosperous  congregation  in  Fife,  and  it  continues  to  be  so  to  the 
present  day." 

But  again  there  is  another  break,  and  it  seemed  at  the  time  that 
his  ministry  was  at  end.  In  November,  1S47,  during  the  afternoon 
service,  with  the  speed  of  a  lightning  flash,  he  was  struck  down  in  the 
pulpit.  He  was  carried  to  the  vestry,  and  there  laid  down  as  a  dying 
man.  Contrary  to  expectation,  he  soon  recovered.  Having  gone  to 
Gibraltar,  in  the  hope  that  the  climate  there  would  renovate  his 
shattered  system,  and  feeling  greatly  benefited  by  the  change,  he  hired 
a  hall  in  the  principal  street,  where  he  preached  forenoon  and  evening, 
the  morning  attendance  being  always  crowded.  His  services  on  the 
Rock  made  a  good  impression ;  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that 
numbers  were  won  to  Christ.  The  work  then  begun  at  Gibraltar  has 
been  continued  by  the  Free  Church  ever  since  ;  and  as  a  regular  station 
of  the  Colonial   Mission,  it  has  the  services  of  a  stated  ministrj'.     It 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

should  be  noted  at  this  stage  that,  notwithstanding  his  hard  work  and 
feeble  strength,  the  Free  Church  minister  of  Cupar  was  able  to 
contribute,  as  he  has  often  done  since  then,  to  the  current  literature 
of  the  day.  In  view  of  this,  and  in  particular,  in  recognition  of  an  able 
and  interesting  volume  produced  by  him,  entitled  "  The  Second  Woe," 
the  Senatus  of  St.  Andrews  University  conferred  on  him  the  degree 
of  D.D.     It  was  a  well-earned  distinction. 

We  now  come  to  what  may  well  be  regarded  as  the  most  interesting, 
as  well  as  the  most  important  era  of  Dr.  Cairns's  ministry.  The  gold 
discovery  in  Australia  was  attracting  universal  interest.  Crowds  were 
leaving  for  the  shores  of  that  distant  country.  They  were  landing  daily 
there  in  thousands.  The  Free  Church  was  impressed  with  the  urgent 
necessity  of  providing  them  with  the  means  of  grace.  It  was  therefore 
determined  to  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  ministers  already  in  Australia, 
by  sending  immediately  other  ten  or  twelve  at  least.  By  the  active 
exertions  of  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  John  Bonar,  ten  young  men,  of  whom  the 
writer  had  the  honour  to  be  one,  gave  their  consent  to  go.  They  were 
but  newly  licensed,  and  though  now  to  be  ordained,  they  had  no  ex- 
perience. It  was  needful,  therefore,  to  secure  along  with  them  one  or  two 
ministers  of  standing  and  experience.  Two  such  men  were  fixed  upon. 
They  declared  their  readiness  to  go.  The  one  was  the  Rev.  Dr.  Mack- 
intosh Mackay,  of  Dunoon,  and  the  other  the  Rev.  Dr.  Cairns,  of  Cupar. 
It  was  an  occasion  of  intense  anxiety  to  all  concerned.  On  the  1 3th  of 
April,  1853,  a  meeting  was  held  in  Free  St.  Luke's  Church,  Edinburgh, 
to  implore  the  blessing  of  God  on  the  mission.  The  church  was 
crowded.  All  the  ministers  were  present  with  the  exception  of 
Dr.  Mackay.  The  proceedings  were  conducted  by  the  Rev.  Dr. 
M'Kellar,  Rev.  Dr.  John  Bonar,  Rev.  Dr.  Cunningham,  and  Rev.  Dr. 
Gordon.  The  General  Assembly  was  at  hand ;  and  before  sailing. 
Dr.  Cairns  had  an  opportunity  of  speaking.  In  the  address  which  he 
delivered,  the  following  words  occur : — "  Painful  it  is  to  bid  farewell  to 


ADAM  CAIRNS,  D.D. 


relations  and  friends.  It  is  exquisitely  painful  to  break  asunder  the  many 
ties  of  affection  which  bind  me  to  my  people ;  and  it  is  witli  peculiar 
pain  that  I  take  leave,  as  I  must  do,  of  the  Free  Church,  the  Church  of 
my  heart,  my  affections,  and  my  hopes — the  Church  of  my  country  and 
my  God.  I  go,  sir,  trusting  in  the  promise,  '  I  shall  give  thee  the 
heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for 
thy  possession.'  I  shall  work  in  the  distant  vineyard  depending  on  the 
presence  and  support  of  the  great  Head  of  the  Church,  waiting  and 
listening  for  the  crj',  sweeter  from  the  lips  of  redeemed  men  than  when 
uttered  by  the  highest  seraphim  around  the  throne,  'Glory  to  God 
in  the  highest ;  on  earth,  peace  and  good-will  to  men.' " 

The  twelve  ministers,  sailing  some  together,  and  others  singly,  in 
different  vessels,  all  arrived  safely  in  Australia.  The  sphere  assigned  to 
Dr.  Cairns  was  Melbourne.  It  was  then  in  a  state  of  strange  transition  ; 
passing  from  a  small  town  into  the  dimensions  of  a  great  and  populous 
city.  It  arose  to  greatness  as  in  a  day.  There  were  two  congregations 
of  the  Free  Church  in  Melbourne  at  the  time,  but  only  one  church,  the 
second  congregation  worshipping  in  a  rented  hall.  The  arrival  of  Dr. 
Cairns  was  an  event  which  cheered  immensely  the  hearts  of  all  Presby- 
terians, especially  those  who  belonged  to  the  Free  Church.  He  at  once 
commenced  his  labours,  preaching  in  the  Temperance  Hall  in  the  fore- 
noon, and  in  Knox's  Church  in  the  evening.  A  large  congregation 
sprang  into  existence  at  once.  It  was  one  of  the  largest  in  the  southern 
hemisphere.  From  his  first  public  appearance  it  was  felt  by  all  classes 
that  he  was  to  wield  an  immense  power  in  the  colony.  With  pulpit 
qualifications  of  a  high  order,  a  graceful  personal  appearance,  an  attract- 
ive manner,  and  a  fluent  and  impressive  utterance,  he  commanded  the 
attention  of  his  audience.  On  a  valuable  piece  of  ground  on  the  Eastern 
Hill,  granted  by  the  Government,  a  large  wooden  erection  was  hastily 
run  up,  which  served  as  a  church  for  two  or  three  years,  till  the  present 
substantial  building  was  erected.     An  iron  cottage  was  also  put  up  on 


DISRUPTION  nORTHJES. 

the  same  ground,  which  was  ultunately  vacated  for  a  comfortable  manse. 
Here  Dr.  Cairns  ministered  to  a  large  and  attached  congregation  for 
more  than  twenty  years.  In  1876  he  demitted  his  charge,  constrained  to 
do  so  on  account  of  advancing  years  and  failing  strength. 

Anything  like  an  adequate  view  of  Dr.  Cairns's  work  in  Australia 
would  swell  the  publication  for  which  this  sketch  is  intended  far  beyond 
the  limits  assigned  by  the  Publishers.  Of  necessity,  therefore,  but  with 
great  reluctance,  the  narration  must  be  cut  short.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that 
the  name  of  Dr.  Cairns  is  written  on  the  very  foundations  of  the  Victorian 
Church,  and  of  the  colony  itself  In  the  Union  of  the  Presbyterian 
Churches,  effected  in  April,  1859,  his  services  were  invaluable.  In  all 
great  questions  affecting  the  religious  and  moral  welfare  of  the  colony  Dr. 
Cairns  was  the  ready  champion,  never  daunted  at  the  frown  of  impiety, 
never  moved  from  his  purpose  by  the  abuse  of  an  irreligious  press.  The 
unswerving  defender  of  the  Sabbath,  the  advocate  of  religious  education, 
the  generous  host  of  the  stranger,  the  friend  of  the  poor,  and  the  helper 
of  the  fallen,  his  work  as  an  ambassador  for  Christ  and  as  a  large-hearted 
philanthropist  will  leave  lasting  impressions  on  his  adopted  country.  A 
fit  and  becoming  tribute  was  paid  to  him  in  the  public  celebration  of  his 
Jubilee  in  Melbourne  in  September,  1878,  when,  at  a  crowded  meeting,  a 
handsome  testimonial  was  presented  to  him.  Though  now  out  of  harness 
as  a  minister,  he  continues  still  to  labour  in  the  cause  of  his  Lord  and 
Master.  May  the  day  be  yet  distant  when  another  and  fuller  account 
shall  be  called  for  of  the  life  and  ministry  of  this  honoured  servant  of 
God. 

G.  D. 


^UjEantifr  CampbrlL 


iHE  Monzic  branch  of  the  Clan  Campbell  springs  from  Sir 
Duncan  of  Glcnorchy,  well  known  to  genealogists  as 
"  Black  Duncan  of  Lochow,"  the  patriarch  of  the  noble 
house  of  Breadalbane.  Archibald,  a  younger  son  of  this 
old  knight,  inherited  from  his  father  various  estates  in 
"'■"^  several  of  the  Highland  counties,  and  transmitted  them 

to  his  lineal  descendants,  the  Campbells  of  Monzie.*  The  original 
designation  was  "  of  Fonab,"  a  property  in  Perthshire,  near  Killie- 
crankie,  where  Viscoimt  Dundee  was  slain  ;  and  the  tradition  is, 
that  Claverhousc  fell  by  a  shot  fired  by  Fonab  himself,  or  by  one  of 
his  dependants  who  followed  his  chief  to  the  field.  The  Fonab  of  1702 
commanded  the  British  troops  sent  to  protect  the  interests  of  the  colonists 
of  Darien  against  the  attacks  of  the  Spaniards,  and  obtained  a  signal  and 
decisive  victory  over  a  vastly  more  numerous  force  of  the  enemy  at 
Toubocantc.  For  this  gallant  action  a  gold  medal,  bearing  on  one  side  a 
yAaw  of  the  battle,  was  voted  to  him  by  the  Directors  of  the  Indian  and 
African  Company  of  Scotland  ;  while  the  British  Crown  rewarded  him 
with  a  grant  of  a  special  coat  of  arms,  with  supporters,  bearing  the  motto, 


*  Among  the  matrons  of  the  Monzie  family  are  found  ladies  of  the  noble  houses  of  Lennox, 
Mar,  Athole,  Ruthven,  Sinclair,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  gentlemen  became  a  Lord  of  Session,  taking 
the  name  of  Lord  Monzie. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Quid  lion  pro  patria  ;  and  as  this  latter  honour  was  bestowed  on  him  as 
"  Campbell  of  Monzie,"  that  designation  has  been  retained  ever  since. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch,  born  on  the  30th  December  181 1,  was  the 
eldest  son  of  Lieutenant-General  Alexander  Campbell  of  Monzie,  M.P., 
and  his  wife  Christina  Menzies.  After  his  education,  partly  at  home  and 
partly  at  Sandhurst  College,  he  entered  the  army  in  1828  as  ensign  in  the 
32d  Foot,  of  which  regiment  his  father  had  been  colonel.  Semng  some 
time  in  Canada  with  that  regiment,  he  changed  into  the  isth  Hussars 
under  the  Earl  of  Cardigan;  but  in  1835  he  left  the  army,  and  betook 
himself  to  the  management  of  his  landed  property,  his  father  having  died 
in  1832.  When  he  thus  assumed  the  position  of  a  country  gentleman,  the 
non-intrusion  controversy  was  agitating  all  Scotland  ;  and  Mr  Campbell 
having  carefully  studied  the  question,  at  once  cordially  adopted  the  views 
of  the  evangelical  party  in  the  Church.  About  this  time  he  was  asked  by 
the  Conservative  electors  in  Argyllshire  to  oppose  the  Liberal  candidate ; 
but  though  he  was  unsuccessful  in  the  election  of  1S37,  he  so  effectively 
advocated  the  Church's  claims  during  his  canvass,  as  to  draw  the  attention 
and  win  the  confidence  of  the  non-intrusion  leaders.  Having  been 
ordained  an  elder  in  1838,  he  began  still  more  prominently  to  plead  the 
Church's  cause;  for  instance,  when  in  1840  he  proposed  Mr  Home 
Drummond  on  the  hustings  at  Perth,  he  embodied  in  his  speech  a 
proposal  for  Parliamentary  interference  to  obviate  the  dead-lock  between 
the  ecclesiastical  and  civil  courts,  which  Dr  Chalmers  characterized  as 
"presenting  a  most  felicitous  solution  of  the  whole  difficulty."  In  1841 
he  was  returned  M.P.  for  the  county  of  Argyll  without  a  contest.  He 
entered  Parliament  as  a  Liberal  Conservative,  and  so  attracted  the 
notice  of  Sir  Robert  Peel  as  to  be  oiTered  by  him  a  subordinate  place 
under  Government ;  but  Mr  Campbell  felt  it  better  to  be  free  from 
party  control,  and  declined  the  appointment.  At  this  period,  in  addition 
to  his  strong  ecclesiastical  convictions,  he  held  Free  Trade  principles,  and 
was  a   supporter   of  Vote  by   Ballot,  both  of  which  he  insisted  would 


ALEXANDER  CAMPBELL. 
prove  truly  Conservative  measures.  His  first  speech  in  the  House  of 
Commons  on  Scotch  Church  matters  was  deHvercd  in  March  1842,  in 
the  debate  on  Sir  A.  L.  Hay's  motion  as  to  the  exercise  of  Crown 
Patronage  in  the  case  of  Elgin, — a  speech  which  again  drew  forth  the 
encomiums  of  Dr  Chalmers,  who,  at  the  same  time,  urged  him  to  push  his 
proposed  motion  that  the  House  should  appoint  a  committee  of  its 
members  to  inquire  into  the  Church's  claims.  This  motion  he  did  bring 
forward  soon  thereafter,  and  pled  the  expediency  of  such  a  step  with  great 
force  of  argument;  but  the  motion  was  lost  by  139  to  62.  These  Par- 
liamentary appearances  so  commended  him  to  the  Church  Defence 
Committee  in  Scotland,  that,  after  the  Duke  of  Argyll's  Bill  was  coldly 
received  in  the  House  of  Lords,  Mr  Campbell  was  requested  to  introduce 
a  similar  bill  into  the  House  of  Commons.  Acceding  heartily  to  this 
request,  he,  on  the  14th  April  1842,  brought  in  a  "Bill  to  regulate  the 
exercise  of  Church  Patronage  in  Scotland."  Though  not  granting 
the  anti-patronage  claims  which  the  Church  regarded  as  the  best 
settlement,  it  would  have  saved  both  the  rights  of  the  people  and  the 
Church's  spiritual  independence,  and  thus  have  prevented  the  secession 
of  next  year.  When  the  order  of  the  day  for  its  second  reading  was 
moved  in  the  beginning  of  May,  Sir  James  Graham,  on  the  part  ot 
Government,  requested  Mr  Campbell  to  postpone  the  second  reading  for 
six  weeks,  as  Government  intended  to  propose  a  course  which  would  put 
an  end  to  the  collision  between  the  Church  and  the  civil  courts.  Mr 
Campbell  consented  to  this,  with  the  distinct  proviso,  that,  should  the 
Government  measure  prove  unsatisfactory,  he  would  that  day  six  weeks 
proceed  with  the  second  reading  of  his  own  Bill ;  but  Mr  Fox  Maule, 
intimating  his  hopelessness  of  any  proper  measure  from  Government, 
moved  "That  the  Bill  be  now  read  a  second  time,"  and,  after  some 
debate,  Mr  Maulc's  amendment  was  lost  by  131  to  48.  Thus  ended  what 
was  called  "  Monzie's  Bill."  Sir  James  Graham's  pledge  was  never 
fulfilled,  for  Government  did  nothing.      Most  people  now  saw — and  none 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

more  plainly  than  Mr  Campbell— that  a  Disruption  was  imminent.  In 
the  prospect  of  this,  the  memorable  Convocation  of  ministers  was 
held  in  Edinburgh,  followed  by  active  arrangements  throughout  many 
congregations  in  Scotland  in  preparation  for  the  event.  The  rejection  ol 
Mr  Fox  Maule's  motion  by  the  House  of  Commons  in  the  spring  of  1843 
rendered  the  Disruption  so  certain,  that  Mr  Campbell  left  London 
for  a  time,  and  at  once  set  about  the  building  of  a  wooden  church  for 
his  residential  parish  of  Monzie.  This  was  quickly  finished  at  his  own 
expense,  while  he  purchased  a  church  which  was  for  sale  in  Crieff,  and 
presented  it  to  the  Free  Church  congregation  there.  After  delivering 
several  earnest  speeches  in  Scotland  on  the  impending  crisis,  he 
resumed  for  a  time  his  place  in  Parliament,  and  wrote  what  has  been 
called  "  a  solemn  letter  to  Sir  Robert  Peel,  imploring  him  even  at  the 
eleventh  hour  to  avert  the  breaking  up  of  the  Church,  by  instantaneous 
and  satisfactory  legislative  interposition."  All  in  vain.  The  General 
Assembly  met.  Mr  Campbell,  as  a  representative  elder,  was  present;  and 
after  Dr  Welsh  had  read  the  Protest,  bowed  to  the  Lord  High 
Commissioner,  and  stepped  down  from  the  chair,  Dr  Chalmers  took  Mr 
Campbell's  arm,  saying,  "  Come  away  now,  Monzie,"  and  the  two  walked 
together  down  to  the  Canonmills  Hall,  where  the  first  Free  Church 
General  Assembly  was  constituted.  Before  the  sessions  of  that 
Assembly  were  concluded,  Mr  Campbell  returned  to  London,  to  make 
final  arrangements  for  retiring  from  Parliament ;  but  the  Assembly,  on 
the  30th  of  May,  passed  a  cordial  vote  of  thanks  to  him  for  his  eminent 
services,  which  was  communicated  to  him  by  a  much-prized  letter  under 
Dr  Chalmers'  own  hand. 

On  the  very  day  of  the  Disruption,  Mr  Campbell  wrote  a  circular  to 
the  Argyllshire  constituency,  intimating  his  resolution  to  resign  his 
position  as  their  representative,  having  felt  constrained  in  conscience  to 
differ  widely  from  many  of  those  who  had  originally  elected  him.  Being 
thus,  as  it  were,  set  free  from  other  influences,  he  devoted  himself  to 


ALEXANDER  CAMPDEU.. 

promote  the  interests  of  the  Free  Church,  the  object  '  nearest  and  dearest 
to  liis  heart."  Hence  he  was  much  occupied  for  several  years  in 
labours  connected  with  the  Sustentation  Fund,  the  General  Assembly, 
the  formation  of  the  Evangelical  Alliance,  the  Christian  education  of 
the  people,  the  endowment  of  Popery,  the  sanctity  of  the  Sabbath  in 
reference  to  railway  traffic,  the  destitution  in  the  Highlands,  and  many 
other  Christian  and  patriotic  undertakings.  His  open  hand  also  con- 
tributed liberally  to  every  scheme  of  usefulness,  specially  those  of  his 
own  Church,  giving  ;^iooo  to  the  building  of  the  Free  Church  College 
in  Edinburgh,  ;^300  to  the  manse  fund,  ;£'250  towards  extinguishing 
debt  on  Free  Church  buildings,  along  with  notable  yearly  subscriptions  to 
the  Sustentation  Fund  in  the  various  districts  where  his  property  was 
situated.  As  a  public  testimony  of  how  much  he  was  esteemed  for  his 
many  labours  of  love,  the  ladies  of  the  West  of  Scotland  presented  him 
with  a  carpet,  sewed  by  their  own  hands,  and  valued  at  ;^200.  The  pre- 
sentation was  made  in  Glasgow,  on  the  14th  April  1846,  by  Dr  Thomas 
Brown,  in  presence  of  an  enthusiastic  audience  ;  while,  on  the  iSth  of  May 
following,  the  East  of  Scotland  shewed  their  appreciation  of  his  services 
by  choosing  him  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the  John  Knox  Memorial 
Church,  hard  by  the  house  of  the  Reformer  in  the  city  of  Edinburgh. 

Mr  Campbell  was  a  man  of  great  natural  ability,  captivating  address, 
and  geniality  of  manner,  besides  possessing  in  a  peculiar  degree  the  gift 
of  ready,  racy,  pointed,  telling  speech,  carrying  his  audience  with  him  in 
his  public  appearances,  and  proving  the  life  and  soul  of  private  society. 
His  bearing  was  ever  frank  and  fearless.  Constitutionally  impulsive,  he 
was  often  impetuous,  and  sometimes  rash  ;  but  none  could  ever  doubt  the 
generosity  of  his  spirit  and  the  warmth  of  his  heart.  His  uniform  bene- 
volence to  the  poor,  and  acts  of  kindness  in  aiding  struggling  merit,  were 
very  marked  ;  but  he  ever  resiled  from  ostentation,  considering  himself  as  a 
brother  indebted  to  every  man  who  needed  a  helping  hand.  A  favourite 
with  all  who  knew  him,  his  general  popularity  was  undoubtedly  increased 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

by  the  fact  that  he  was  a  singularly  accomplished  sportsman.  In  this 
character  he  was  selected  to  initiate  the  late  Prince  Consort  into  the 
mysteries  of  deer-stalking  in  the  romantic  wilds  celebrated  in  the  opening 
of  "The  Lady  of  the  Lake ;"  and  when,  shortly  afterwards,  he  presented 
to  the  prince  a  Scotch  deer-hound,  his  Royal  Highness  replied,  through 
his  secretary,  that  "while  he  returned  his  best  thanks  for  the  hound,  it 
was  not  necessary  for  him  to  see  it  to  remind  him  of  the  time  spent  with 
him  in  Glenartney  forest." 

During  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life,  Mr  Campbell  laboured  under 
insidious  disease,  which  gradually  unhinged  his  whole  nervous  system,  and 
rendered  him  increasingly  and  painfully  unlike  his  former  self  This  state 
of  things  was  much  aggravated  by  several  accidents,  by  which  his  head 
was  severely  injured.  His  robust  and  active  frame  partially  recovered 
strength ;  but  after  much  suffering,  he  died  at  Leamington  on  the  Sth  of 
January  1869,  having  just  completed  the  fifty-seventh  year  of  his  age. 

In  May  1844  Mr  Campbell  married  Christina,  only  child  of  the  late 
Sir  Duncan  Cameron  of  Fassfern,  Bart,  who  survives  him,  with  three 
daughters,  the  eldest  of  whom  is  the  wife  of  Henry  Spencer  Lucy,  Esq., 
of  Charlecote  Park,  Warwickshire ;  and  the  second  has  been  lately 
married  to  Colonel  J.  P.  W.  Campbell  of  the  Bengal  Staff  Corps. 

Mr  Campbell's  remains  were  buried  in  the  vault  within  St  Mary's 
Ciiurch,  Warwick,  where  his  father  and  liis  only  son  are  also  interred. 

S.  M. 


^^ 


EXilltam  Campbell. 


'(SrWlLLIAM   CAMPBELL 

f 


the  fifth  child  of  a 
family  of  nine,  and  was  born  in  1793,  near  the  Port 
of  Monteith,  in  Perthshire,  where  his  father  was 
tenant  of  a  farm  on  the  Gartmore  estate.  All  the 
schooling,  strictly  so  called,  which  he  ever  got,  he 
received  at  the  parish  school.  But  the  most  valuable 
part  of  his  education — the  education  of  principle — was  imparted  at 
home,  under  the  careful  culture  of  a  godly  mother,  who  was  supremely 
concerned  that  her  children  should  be  taught  to  fear  God,  and  keep  his 
commandments.  She  was  a  woman  of  capacity  as  well  as  piety,  and 
her  influence  pervaded  the  whole  family.  To  the  pains  and  prayers  of 
this  excellent  parent,  and  to  the  influence  of  her  character,  the  subject 
of  this  sketch  was  wont,  under  God,  to  ascribe  whatever  "good  thing 
was  found  in  him  toward  the  Lord  God  of  Israel." 

In  the  year  1805,  when  he  was  yet  a  boy  about  eleven  or  twelve 
years  of  age,  his  father  removed  with  his  family  to  Glasgow,  with  the 
view  of  finding  in  that  centre  of  industry  suitable  employments  for  his 
children.  Being  intended  for  a  mercantile  life,  William  began  at  the 
beginning.  In  order  to  give  him  a  thorough  practical  knowledge  of  goods, 
he  was  taught  weaving ;  and  in  due  time,  after  having  thus  far  qualified 
himself,  he  entered  the  employment  of  Mr  John  Craig,  who  at  that  time 
carried  on  a  respectable  Scotch  cloth  business  in  the  High  Street,  near 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  Cross.  Here  he  remahied  for  some  years,  in  the  course  of  which 
his  attention  to  business,  his  mercantile  abihty,  and  his  upright  and 
amiable  character,  secured  for  him  the  good-will  and  patronage  of 
several  influential  friends,  and  earned  for  him  a  good  name  wherever  he 
was  known.  Offers  of  assistance  were  made  him  ;  and  thus  aided  and 
encouraged,  he  (having  now  attained  the  age  of  twenty-two)  resolved  to 
start  in  business  on  his  own  account.  His  first  place  of  business  was 
situated  in  the  Saltmarket,  and  consisted  of  a  flat,  one  stair  up,  of  an  old 
tenement  in  that,  even  then,  somewhat  unfashionable  locality.  The  build- 
ing has  since  been  demolished,  in  order  to  make  way  for  London  Street. 
Here  his  success  was  unprecedented.  The  warehouse  was  crowded  from 
morning  till  night.  The  tide  of  prosperity  flowing  on  and  increasing, 
until  the  business  had  outgrown  the  ability  of  any  single  individual 
personally  to  superintend  it,  his  brother,  the  present  Sir  James  Campbell 
of  Stracathro,  and  sometime  Lord  Provost  of  the  city,  brought  his 
talents  and  business  habits  to  his  help.  A  partnership  was  formed 
between  the  two  brothers,  and  the  firm  was,  and  continues  to  be, 
conducted  under  the  name  of  "J.  &  W.  Campbell  &  Co.,  General 
Warehousemen."  Under  their  joint  management  the  same  extraordinary 
success  as  before  continued  to  attend  them,  until  every  flat  and  attic  of 
the  old  tenement  being  turned  to  use,  they  were  compelled  to  contem- 
plate the  necessity  of  leaving  the  too  contracted  premises,  and  seeking 
more  commodious  accommodation  elsewhere.  In  this  needful  step  their 
pace  was  quickened  in  consequence  of  the  condemnation  by  the  public 
authorities  of  several  old  houses,  among  which  was  "  Campbell's  ware- 
house in  the  Saltmarket."  They  got  notice  to  quit  it  in  fifteen  months. 
This  of  course  subjected  them  to  great  inconvenience  and  anxiety.  But, 
cheered  by  the  wise  counsels  of  their  mother,  who  "  was  sure  an  open 
door  would  be  found  somewhere,"  they  in  due  time  secured  a  property 
in  Candleriggs,  on  which  they  undertook  to  erect  a  suitable  warehouse. 
And  so  concerned  were  they  to  lose  no  time,  that  the  builder,  after  the 


WILLIAM  CAMPBELL. 

first  floor  was  built,  gave  them  a  floor  a  week,  and  the  firm  speedily 
moved  into  their  new  and  spacious  premises.  But  in  process  of  time 
even  these  became  too  narrow  for  them,  and  they  were  obliged  ultimately 
to  take  refuge  in  the  palatial  warehouse  now  occupied  by  them  in  Ingram 
Street,  which  not  only  continues  to  be  the  seat  of  their  original  home 
trade,  but  has  become  the  centre  of  an  extensive  commerce  with  all  parts 
of  the  world. 

Such  is  a  brief  sketch  of  a  prosperous  career  which  has  been  rarely 
equalled  in  the  mercantile  world.  It  is  worthy  of  consideration  whether 
there  were  any  special  circumstances  to  account  for  it.  Doubtless  it  was 
greatly  owing  to  Mr  Campbell's  intense  energy,  his  strict  attention  to 
the  duties  of  his  calling,  with  which  no  temptation  to  ease  or  pleasure 
was  sufifered  to  interfere,  and  to  his  upright  character  and  popular 
manners.  But  besides  these  qualities,  which  were  common  to  him  with 
other  merchants  of  his  day,  his  success  is,  without  doubt,  to  be  mainly 
attributed  to  the  introduction  of  a  .system  which  was  a  novelty  when  he 
began  business.  Of  this  system  the  leading  features  were — (i)  small 
profits,  (2)  quick  returns,  (3)  no  abatement  of  the  price  asked.  The  last 
rule  was  rigorously  enforced,  and  aimed  at  the  overthrow  of  the  corrupt 
and  discreditable  practice  of  "  prigging,"  then  commonly  followed.  The 
principles  of  the  Campbells  were  so  sound  and  reasonable  as  to  com- 
mand the  favour  of  the  public.  In  point  of  fact,  they  revolutionized  the 
system  of  buying  and  selling  then  in  vogue ;  and  in  founding  on  them 
the  conduct  of  his  business,  Mr  Campbell  was  greatly  fortified  by  the 
influence  of  Dr  Chalmers,  on  whose  ministry  he  was  a  regular  attendant, 
and  whose  "  Commercial  Discourses "  were  of  immense  service  in 
arousing  the  public  conscience  to  a  sense  of  evils  and  dishonesties,  to 
the  immorality  of  which  custom  had  reconciled  society  at  large. 

But  in  seeking  to  account  for  Mr  Campbell's  great  and  rapid  success, 
can  we  warrantably  leave  out  of  view  the  manifest  blessing  of  God  on 
one  who  sought  habitually  to  realize  that  he  was  not  a  proprietor,  but 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

merely  an  administrator  and  steward,  of  God's  manifold  mercies  ?  In 
his  case  the  promise  was  strictly  fulfilled,  "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy 
substance,  and  with  the  first  fruits  of  all  thine  increase :  so  shall  thy 
barns  be  filled  with  plenty,  and  thy  presses  shall  burst  with  new  wine." 
As  his  riches  increased,  his  benefactions  multiplied  ;  and  as  these  multi- 
plied, God  supplied  him  with  the  means  of  still  further  extending  his 
usefulness.  He  took  an  active  part  in  promoting  the  scheme  of  Mr 
William  Collins  for  the  building  of  twenty  new  churches  in  Glasgow,  and 
that  of  Dr  Chalmers  for  the  erection  of  two  hundred  additional  churches 
in  Scotland.  These,  and  similar  efforts,  seem  to  have  been  a  preparation, 
in  the  providence  of  God,  for  the  still  grander  and  more  comprehensive 
schemes  that  were  soon  after  to  be  demanded  by  the  Disruption  of  the 
Church.  When  that  event  took  place  in  1843,  he  was  among  the  fore- 
most and  most  munificent  of  the  contributors  to  the  various  funds  of 
the  Free  Church,  and  to  every  movement  by  which  her  efficiency  and 
usefulness  could  be  advanced.  Indeed,  it  has  been  affirmed  by  those 
who  had  the  best  opportunities  of  knowing  the  extent  of  his  private  and 
public  liberalities,  that  he  laid  out  a  handsome  income  year  by  year  in 
charity ;  and  that  during  his  lifetime  he  expended  in  this  way  a  fortune 
of  not  less  than  from  ^^80,000  to  ^90,000.  The  larger  proportion  of  this 
wealth  being  consecrated  directly  or  indirectly  to  the  service  of  the  Free 
Church,  afforded  unmistakable  evidence  of  the  strength  and  constancy 
of  his  loyal  and  devoted  attachment  to  her  cause  and  principles.  Indeed, 
her  interests  were  ever  as  dear  to  his  heart  as  his  own  ;  and  with  her 
prosperity  and  progress  he  identified  the  progress  of  the  country  in  vital 
spiritual  religion  and  social  happiness. 

Thus  did  he  honour  God  with  his  substance.  And  how  has  God 
honoured  him .'  He  has  assigned  him  a  distinguished  place  in  the  noble 
company  of  Disruption  Worthies  ;  and  this,  not  because  of  any  eminent 
services  on  the  field  of  debate  or  diplomacy — for  these  he  had  personally 
neither  taste  nor  talent,  though  ever  a  generous  admirer  of  them  in 


WILLIAM  CAMPBELL. 

otliers— but  because  of  the  heartfelt,  practical,  self-sacrificing  interest  he 
ever  cherished  in  the  social  and  religious  wellbcing  of  his  fellovv-mcn. 
And  God  has  further  honoured  him  by  making  him  largely  instrumental 
to  the  introduction  of  a  new  era  and  standard  of  Christian  liberality  in 
the  days  in  which  we  live.  The  narrow,  selfish,  grudging  views  which 
were  previously  entertained  on  this  subject,  were  wholly  unadaptcd  to 
the  circumstances  and  wants  of  a  new  age.  The  Disruption  was 
approaching,  and  an  impressive  example  was  needed  of  that  unbounded 
liberality  which  should  replace  the  surrendered  endowments  of  the  State 
by  the  voluntary  endowments  of  the  people.  Mr  Campbell  was  one 
of  those  who  supplied  this  want.  And  it  is  pleasing  to  think  that  he 
had  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  before  he  died  that  his  large-hearted 
benevolence  had  a  double  value :  it  not  only  directly  helped  many  a 
good  cause,  but  it  exercised  a  wide-spread  and  permanent  influence  in 
enlarging  the  views  of  others  on  the  duty  of  giving,  and  in  stimulating 
them  to  "go  and  do  likewise." 

Mr  Campbell's  public  spirit  discovered  itself,  as  occasion  offered,  with 
regard  to  other  things  than  public  charities  and  Free  Church  objects. 
He  was  for  some  years  in  the  Town  Council,  having  been  carried  by 
the  Catholics  for  the  Saltmarket  and  Bridgegate  wards.  When  asked  to 
support  him,  an  Irish  voter  exclaimed,  in  a  fit  of  enthusiastic  gratitude, 
"  \Vliat !  not  vote  for  William  Campbell,  who  sends  the  half  of  our  people 
to  the  infirmary !"  As  a  councillor,  he  took  an  active  interest  in  a  scheme 
for  buying  up  old  house  property  in  the  wynds,  as  it  came  into  the 
market,  with  a  view  to  the  sanitary  good  of  the  city.  Also,  through  his 
exertions  in  a  large  measure,  and  in  the  face  of  much  opposition,  the 
market-day  was  changed  from  Monday  to  Thursday,  by  which  means 
much  unnecessary  work  on  the  Sabbath  was  stopped,  and  the  rest  of  the 
sacred  day  better  secured.  On  no  subject  did  he  kindle  into  greater  earnest 
ness  than  the  importance  of  the  Sabbath,  in  every  view—  physical,  social, 
and  religious— especially  to  the  working-classes.     His  sentiments  on  this 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

subject  entirely  accorded  with  those  of  his  friend,  Sir  Andrew  Agnew,  by 
whom  he  was  much  esteemed,  and  who  frequently  consulted  him  on  his 
measures  with  reference  to  Sabbath  desecration.  His  generous  interest 
in  the  working-classes  was  farther  notably  evinced  by  his  contribution  of 
;^500  to  the  funds  of  the  Botanic  Garden,  on  the  condition  that  those 
classes  should  have  free  admission  to  the  gardens  during  the  Fair  week. 
His  sympathy  with  the  friendless  and  homeless  poor  was  shewn  in  the 
active  part  which  he  took  in  instituting  and  maintaining  the  "  Glasgow 
Night  Asylum  for  the  Houseless,"  to  which  he  bequeathed  a  legacy  of 
£  1 500.  And  many  are  the  "  indigent  gentlewomen"  who,  when  enjoying 
the  benefits  of  the  fund  specially  provided  for  their  relief,  will  remember 
with  gratitude  the  kindness  and  consideration  of  Mr  Campbell,  who  was 
one  of  its  founders  and  most  zealous  promoters.  Indeed  every  enterprise, 
religious  or  benevolent,  had  in  him  a  warm  and  generous  friend.  He  was 
a  living  illustration  of  the  words,  "  A  cheerful  giver,  rich  in  good  works, 
ready  to  distribute,  willing  to  communicate." 

Mr  Campbell's  successive  family  residences,  like  the  successive  ware- 
houses in  which  his  business  was  carried  on,  indicated  the  progressive 
improvement  of  his  temporal  circumstances,  until  ultimately  he  became 
the  proprietor  of  that  charming  mansion,  Tillichewan  Castle,  with  its 
splendid  surroundings.  To  its  attractions  he  was  by  no  means  insensible  ; 
for  he  possessed  an  intense  love  of  nature,  and  had  a  quick  eye  for  the 
perception  of  the  beautiful  and  sublime  in  scenery.  Here  he  spent  his 
days  of  well-earned  rest  and  relaxation  from  the  cares  and  toils  of  business 
surrounded  by  fields  and  woods,  yet  ever  planning  or  executing  some 
improvement — the  opening  of  some  new  vista,  giving  a  new  direction  to 
some  gurgling  stream,  or  clearing  his  trees  and  shrubs  of  their  superfluous 
branches.  Nor  did  he  confine  his  enjoyments  to  himself  and  family.  His 
grounds  were  open  to  all  who  desired  to  visit  them,  a  liberty  which  was 
never  abused.  He  was,  moreover,  fond  of  society,  and  delighted  to  be 
surrounded  by  his  friends.     Tillichewan  was  accordingly  the   resort  of 


WILLIAM  CAMPBELL. 

many  wlio,  singly  or  in  company,  paid  it  at  least  their  annual  visit,  and 
its  hospitable  gates  were  ever  open  to  welcome  any  who  came  on  an 
errand  of  religion  or  benevolence.  Every  stranger  of  distinction  who 
visited  the  west  of  Scotland,  or  whose  love  of  Scottish  scenery  attracted 
him  to  the  neighbouring  shores  of  Loch  Lomond,  was  sure  of  a  hospitable 
reception  at  the  castle,  which  seemed  often  to  partake  more  of  the 
cliaracter  of  a  hotel  than  of  a  private  residence.  Here  the  genial  nature 
of  the  host,  and  his  mental  peculiarities,  while  they  made  every  one  feel 
at  home,  diffused  through  the  whole  company  a  happy  and  improving 
influence.  For  Mr  Campbell  thought  for  himself  on  every  matter  of 
public  and  private  concernment,  and  was  distinguished  by  an  originality 
of  mind,  a  raciness  of  expression,  and  sometimes  a  touch  of  drollery, 
which  imparted  a  singular  zest  to  his  conversation.  Among  those  who 
visited  occasionally  at  Tillichewan,  there  was  no  one  whose  arrival  was 
hailed  throughout  the  family  with  more  joyful  anticipation  than  Dr 
Chalmers,  between  whom  and  Mr  Campbell  there  existed  a  cordial 
feeling  of  mutual  esteem  and  affection.  They  thoroughly  sympathised 
in  their  views  on  the  great  questions  of  their  time,  eminently  so  on  all 
that  concerned  the  extension  and  spiritual  independence  of  the  Church. 
And  Mr  Campbell's  mercantile  experience  enabled  him  sometimes  to 
throw  out  practical  suggestions  which  the  other  knew  how  to  turn  to  useful 
account.  Mr  Campbell  was  likewise  a  warm  friend  and  advocate  of  the 
union  of  the  Presbyterian  Churches  of  this  country.  He  was  impatient 
of  the  delay  which  has  taken  place  in  conducting  the  measure  to  a  pros- 
perous issue.  But  he  lived  and  died  in  the  happy  assurance  that  another 
generation  would  see  it  consummated,  and  all  the  sound  Presbyterianism 
of  Scotland  comprehended  and  united  in  one  Church,  founded  on  a 
disestablished  basis. 

The  following  description  from  the  graphic  pen  of  a  lady  friend  of 
Mr  Campbell  will  fitly  close  this  part  of  the  narrative  : — 

"  One  must  not  forget  Mr  Campbell's  Sundays.     They  were  not  gloomy  days  to 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

him,  but  days  of  rest  and  enjoyment  in  serious  things.  He  liked  a  sedateness 
throughout  his  household,  and  he  never  absented  himself  from  church.  Good 
preaching  was  to  him  an  intellectual  and  spiritual  feast.  His  sympathetic  nature 
was  responsive  to  everything  the  minister  said,  the  tear  was  ever  ready  to  start,  and 
his  whispered  'hear,  hear,'  shewed  where  a  sympathetic  chord  was  struck.  Do  you 
remember  his  delight  in  the  Old  Testament  ?  and  what  a  picture  he  was  of  the 
old  Scottish  Presbyterian,  with  his  glengarry  bonnet  laid  reverently  aside,  whilst  he 
conducted  family  worship?  If  the  subject  was  Job,  or  Joseph,  or  David,  tears 
invariably  choked  his  utterance,  and  he  became  so  absorbed  in  the  story  as  to  be 
wholly  insensible  to  what  was  passing  around." 

But  the  time  came  when  this  good  man  had  to  die,  and  be  carried  to 
"tlie  liouse  appointed  for  all  living."  His  death  was  gradual,  and  its 
advances  were  borne  with  that  calmness  and  serenity  which  are  the  fruit 
of  a  believing  dependence  on  Christ  and  His  finished  work,  and  with  the 
resignation  and  preparedness  of  one  whose  mind  was  familiar  with  the 
contemplation  of  his  latter  end.  When  told  he  was  dying,  he  clung  with 
increased  earnestness  to  the  great  truth  of  reconciliation  through  the 
blood  of  atonement,  a  gleam  of  the  coming  glory  seemed  to  light  up 
his  face,  and  shaking  hands  with  two  friends  who  stood  by  his  bedside, 
he  said  "  he  was  perfectly  happy :  he  had  lived  his  threescore  and  ten 
years,  but  his  life  looked  like  yesterday."  After  about  a  month's  serious 
illness,  his  spirit  quitted  its  earthly  tenement  on  the  forenoon  of  2d 
April  1864,  in  the  seventy-first  year  of  his  age.  And  it  may  be  said 
with  truth,  that  rarely  has  any  one  descended  to  the  grave  more  beloved 
and  lamented  by  survivors,  and  to  whom  the  words  more  appropriately 
apply,  "  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed." 

In  June  1822,  Mr  Campbell  married  Margaret,  second  daughter  of 
Archibald  Roxburgh,  merchant.  Their  married  life  was  eminently 
happy.  Mrs  Campbell  still  survives,  surrounded  by  a  numerous  circle  of 
children  and  grandchildren,  endowed  with  not  a  few  of  the  excellent 
qualities  of  their  progenitor,  and  all  of  them  inspired  with  a  profound 
respect  for  his  memory.  J.  R. 


ROBERT  S.  CANDLISH,D,d!^ 


Ilokrt  ^mitij  CanbUsIj,  B.B. 


N  tlic  list  of  our  Disruption  Worthies,  the  place  belonging  to 
lljil  Principal    Candlish   is   altogether   unique   as  well   as   enii- 

;H:  ncntly  illustrious.      Dr  Chalmers  takes  precedence,  by  the 

['%  combination    of    considerable    seniority   with     the     extra- 

ordinary character  of  a  very  original  genius.  But,  after 
deducting  what  is  due  to  this  remarkable  exception,  Dr 
Robert  Smith  Candlish  will  appear  in  the  pages  of  our  ecclesiastical 
history  as  the  chief  and  wonderfully  qualified  instrument  who  was  raised 
up  by  God's  providence  for  expounding  the  principles,  directing  the 
spirit,  and  organising  the  government  and  system  of  the  Free  Church  of 
Scotland. 

His  father  having  died  a  month  after  his  birth,  he  had  the  benefit  in 
his  mother  of  a  strong  character  watching  over  him  in  his  youth.  But 
he  seems  to  have  been  largely  indebted,  under  God's  guidance,  to  the 
secret  workings  of  his  own  vigorous,  quick  and  impulsive,  but  deep 
and  penetrating,  mind.  He  had  a  full  and  regular  Scotch  education 
in  Glasgow.  Attending  the  literary  and  philosophical  classes  of  the 
University  during  five  sessions,  he  afterwards  prosecuted  studies  in  the 
Divinity  Hall  for  three  full  sessions  till  the  month  of  JDecember  1823, 
when  he  had  the  advantage  of  varying  the  scene  of  his  occupation  by 
going  to  Eton  as  a  private  tutor.  Significant  fruits  of  his  continuance 
for  three  years  in  this  position  might  be  discovered  even  in  the  brightest 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

manifestations  of  his  powers  at  subsequent  periods.  And  long  before 
he  shone  forth  as  an  accomphshed  leader  of  men,  he  had  very  happily 
exhibited  his  famiharity  with  the  best  English  writing.  No  intelligent 
judge  of  literary  acquirement  could  fail  to  perceive,  in  listening  to  his 
preaching,  the  tokens  of  a  cultivated  intellect  alive  to  the  beauties  of 
Shakespeare  and  other  English  classics. 

At  what  stage  of  his  life  he  first  felt  the  full  power  of  the  gospel,  and 
was  stirred  by  zeal  for  the  cause  of  Jesus  and  for  the  salvation  of  souls, 
there  may  be  no  evidence  to  shew.  But  whether  the  highest  influence 
laid  hold  of  his  powerful  nature  at  an  earlier  or  a  later  period,  indications 
of  conscientious  devotion  to  his  Master's  work  may  be  found  in  his 
correspondence  for  some  time  before  his  ordination.  While  still  a 
probationer  of  the  Established  Church  of  Scotland,  he  had,  as  assistant, 
the  entire  charge  of  two  very  different  congregations  in  succession — 
the  one  in  Glasgow,  from  1S29  (the  twenty-third  year  of  his  age)  till 
1831  ;  and  the  other  in  the  country,  at  Bonhill,  from  183 1  till  1833. 
Thus,  in  addition  to  his  protracted  course  of  education  and  tutorship, 
he  had  an  extended  experience  of  ministerial  work  both  in  town  and 
country  before  he  was  called  to  occupy  what  was  in  many  respects,  in 
1834,  the  most  conspicuous  pulpit  in  Scotland.  Who  can  tell  what 
progress  of  thought  or  ^vhat  spiritual  growth  went  on  in  that  lively, 
clear-sighted  and  fervent  soul,  while  the  great  ones  of  the  earth  and  even 
the  approved  guides  of  the  Church  had  taken  no  note  of  him  .•" 

Mr  Martin,  the  excellent  and  much  loved  person  who  immediately 
followed  Dr  Andrew  Thomson  in  the  pastorate  of  St  George's,  Edinburgh, 
was  so  quickly  removed  by  death,  that  the  name  of  Dr  Candlish  must 
always  stand  out  in  a  commanding  light  as  the  name  of  the  real  successor 
to  that  extraordinary  man  in  building  effectively  and  largely  on  the 
foundation  which  his  energy  and  earnestness  had  laid.  The  assistant  at 
Bonhill  had  become  in  some  measure  known  to  the  late  Dr  Welsh, 
Professor  of  Church   Histon^,  who   afterwards,  as  Moderator,  laid   the 


ROBERT  SMITH  CASDLISH,  D.D. 

Disruption  Protest  on  the  table  of  the  Assembly  in  1843.  That  distin- 
guished and  consistent  man  was  a  member  of  the  congregation  of  St 
George's  at  the  time  of  Mr  Martin's  illness.  Through  him  Lord  Moncreiff 
and  others  heard  of  Mr  Candlish,  and  thus  came  his  nomination  to  occupy 
a  pulpit  which  he  afterwards  illustriously  adorned.  At  the  very  outset 
of  his  course  in  it,  he  exhibited  so  much  greater  minuteness  and  subtlety 
of  discussion  than  the  hearers  of  Dr  Thomson  had  been  accustomed  to, 
that  there  was  some  division  of  opinion  about  him.  But  the  present 
writer  remembers  well  that,  in  the  view  of  Dr  Thomson's  experienced 
admirers,  such  as  Lord  Moncreiff,  Mr  Donaldson,  Mr  John  Thomson, 
Mr  John  Tod,  Mr  Shank  More,  and  others,  members  of  session,  the 
differences  between  his  style  and  that  of  the  young  preacher  whom  they 
now  welcomed,  were  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  manifest  signs  in 
the  latter  of  uncommon  mental  power  and  special  capacity  for  effective 
speaking,  both  to  the  understanding  and  the  heart,  along  with  independ- 
ence and  earnestness  of  spirit.  Their  judgment  was  thoroughly  justified 
by  the  result.  He  speedily  commanded  the  attention  and  regard  of  all 
classes  in  the  congregation,  and,  as  a  preacher,  gradually  acquired  the 
reputation  which  has  become  so  great  and  well  known. 

Having  been  occupied  only  as  an  assistant  during  five  years  previously 
to  the  full  appreciation  of  his  ministerial  gifts  and  his  ordination  for 
the  charge  of  St  George's,  an  equal  number  of  years  elapsed  before  his 
eminence  in  the  pastoral  office  was  accompanied  by  the  discovery  and 
exercise  of  his  unrivalled  ability  for  the  management  of  affairs  and  the 
leadership  of  the  General  Assembly.  He  took  no  prominent  part  even 
in  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh  till  1839.  In  the  spring  of  that  year  the 
adverse  judgment  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  the  first  Auchterarder  Case 
was  pronounced.  Great  anxiety  was  felt  by  the  Evangelical  party  on 
the  question  of  having  adequately  qualified  persons  to  take  the  lead  in 
the  ensuing  Assembly.  Though  the  name  of  Mr  Candlish  was  in  the 
order  of  rotation  for  the  representation  of  his  Presbytery,  no  such  opinion 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

had  as  yet  been  formed  of  him  as  to  relieve  that  anxiety.  The  character 
and  superiority  of  his  eloquence  appeared  for  the  first  time  when  he 
spoke  in  answer  to  Dr  Muir,  and  supported  the  motion  of  Dr  Chalmers 
for  maintaining  the  principle  of  Non-intrusion  in  the  continued  exercise 
of  spiritual  independence.  But  the  brilliant  displays  which  elevated  him 
to  the  undisputed  leadership  of  the  Non-intrusion  party  and  of  the 
Church,  were  made  at  the  meetings  of  the  Assembly's  Commission  in  the 
latter  portion  of  1839  and  the  beginning  of  1840,  when  that  body  was 
called  to  deal  with  the  rebellion  of  the  majority  of  the  Presbytery  of 
Strathbogie  against  the  authority  of  the  Assembly.  The  position  thus 
acquired  by  him  was  maintained  till  1873,  the  year  in  which  he  died. 
In  the  Free  Church  Assembly  of  that  year  he  was  specially  blessed  as 
an  instrument  of  peace ;  and  though  enfeebled  much  in  bodily  strength, 
shewed  a  large  measure  of  his  former  mental  power. 

From  1840,  the  enumeration  of  the  services  rendered  by  Dr  Candlish, 
first  to  the  majority  of  the  Established  Church  before  the  Disruption, 
and  subsequently  to  the  Disruption  Church  herself,  not  only  in  the  prime 
of  his  life,  but  for  the  advantage  of  her  action  in  his  more  advanced  age, 
would  be  to  recount  the  history  of  Scottish  ecclesiastical  events  for 
more  than  thirty  years.  From  the  suspension  of  the  seven  ministers  in 
the  Presbytery  of  Strathbogie  to  the  final  passing  of  the  Act  in  1873, 
by  which,  in  connection  with  a  fresh  Overture  then  agreed  to,  the  object 
of  Mutual  Eligibility  between  the  Free  Church  and  the  United  Presby- 
terian Church  was  attained,  so  as  to  prevent  disruption  in  the  Free 
Church,  this  remarkable  man  made  his  influence  predominantly  lelt 
in  the  prospering,  the  safety,  and  the  vigorous  working  of  his  church. 
The  confidence  of  an  overwhelming  majority  never  ceased  to  follow 
him.  The  high  qualities  of  an  eminently  Christian  and,  at  the  same 
time,  of  a  singularly  master  mind,  were  luminously  evident  in  him  along 
a  particularly  chequered  course  of  trial  and  success. 

It  was  said  at  the  commencement  of  tliis  sketch  that  he  was  a  chief 


ROBERT  SMITH  CANDLISH,  D.D. 

instrument  for  expounding  the  principles,  directing  the  spirit,  and 
organizing  the  government  and  system  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland. 
His  exposition  of  her  principles  was  given  in  its  clearest  and  most 
impressive  manner,  at  dates  previous  to  the  actual  escape  of  himself  and 
his  associates  from  the  harassment  of  the  Erastian  chains  which  in  1843 
were  threatening  to  encompass  them.  The  principles  specially  concerned 
in  that  memorable  escape  were  at  the  time  represented  as  two  in 
number — the  principle  of  non-intrusion,  and  the  principle  of  spiritual 
independence.  His  exposition  of  the  principle  of  non-intrusion  began 
with  the  striking  outburst  of  eloquence  already  referred  to,  by  which, 
replying  to  Dr  Muir  in  1839,  he  proclaimed  the  necessity  of  giving  to 
the  members  of  congregations  an  absolute  right  to  prevent  the  settlement 
over  them  as  pastors  of  persons  whom  they  could  not  conscientiously 
receive  as  such.  Throughout  the  various  negotiations,  consultations, 
and  discussions  which  followed  during  the  next  four  years,  Dr  Candlish 
took  a  leading  part  in  maintaining  and  guarding  the  ground  thus  taken  up 
by  him  at  the  outset.  The  integrity  of  her  adherence  to  it  was  an 
essential  element  in  the  liberty  which  his  energy,  more  than  that  of  any 
other  man,  enabled  the  Church,  by  God's  blessing,  to  achieve  when  she 
carried  away  her  standard  to  the  hall  at  Canonmills. 

The  benefit  of  his  acute,  perspicacious,  and  thoroughly  comprehensive 
intellect,  was  still  more  felt  and  enjoyed  in  his  dealing  with  the  great 
principle  of  spiritual  independence.  Not  to  speak  of  his  splendid  asser- 
tion of  ecclesiastical  liberty,  in  his  treatment  of  the  grave  case  in  which 
the  ministers  of  the  Strathbogie  Presbytery  were  concerned,  nor  of  the 
instances  in  which,  from  time  to  time  after  the  Disruption,  he  defended 
and  enforced  the  Free  Church  view,  it  is  well  that  attention  should  be 
fixed  on  the  lucid  declarations  which  appear  in  his  speeches  between  the 
date  of  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Session  in  the  Stewarton  case  and 
the  date  of  the  meeting  of  Assembly  thereafter.  The  masterly  manner 
in  which  he  met  the  conceptions  of  the  majority  of  the  court  as  tending 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

to  the  destruction  of  all  religious  liberty,  produced  a  lasting  effect  upon 
the  convictions  of  multitudes  of  earnest  people.  Adverting  to  the 
imputation  brought  against  the  Church,  of  claiming  to  be  the  sole  judges 
of  what  is  spiritual  and  what  is  civil,  he  electrified  his  audience  by  the 
three  following  declarations.  He  said,  first  of  all,  "Whoever  may  put 
forth  this  monstrous  claim  to  be  sole  judge  of  what  is  spiritual  and  civil, 
tramples  under  foot  the  rights,  spiritual  and  civil,  of  all  mankind,  and 
establishes  a  despotism  altogether  intolerable."  He  said,  secondly,  "  If 
this  claim  be  put  forth  by  a  Church,  it  necessarily  follows  that  that  Church 
is  dragging  under  her  superintendence,  to  the  exclusion  of  civil  courts,  all 
ecclesiastical  persons,  and  assuming  an  authority  in  all  causes,  civil  as 
well  as  in  those  ecclesiastical."  He  said,  thirdly,  "  But  if  this  amounts 
to  a  violation  of  civil  liberty  when  the  claim  is  put  forth  by  a  court  of 
Christ,  is  it  less  a  violation  when  put  forth  by  a  Court  of  Session  ?  If 
such  a  claim  be  admitted  on  the  part  of  civil  authorities,  they  may  crush 
under  their  foot  every  vestige  of  religious  liberty  ;  they  may  put  an  end 
to  the  free  holding  of  Assemblies;  they  may  put  an  end  to  the  free 
preaching  of  the  gospel."  These  and  other  statements  of  Dr  Candlish 
were  welcomed  with  great  applause  and  sympathy.  They  had  a  chief  part 
in  carrying  to  a  largely  prevailing  extent  the  mind  of  the  Scottish  religious 
population  into  a  clear  persuasion,  that  a  principle  which  lawyers  and 
statesmen  rejected  as  extravagant  and  dangerous,  was  nevertheless  a 
sacred  principle  not  to  be  abandoned,  and  the  only  principle  on  which 
the  scriptural  freedom  of  a  Church  could  safely  rest.  The  idea  became 
fixed  among  multitudes  of  carefully  considering  men,  that  no  adjustment 
of  ecclesiastical  relations  could  satisfy  conscience  which  did  not  fix 
"that,"  to  use  the  words  of  Dr  Candlish,  "the  Church  should  be  fully 
entitled  to  determine  for  herself,  and  for  the  regulation  of  her  own  con- 
duct in  spiritual  matters,  what  falls  under  her  spiritual  jurisdiction  ; 
leaving  the  Court  of  Session  to  determine  for  itself,  and  ior  its  own 
guidance,  in  deciding  civil  questions,  what  falls  within  its  civil  jurisdiction." 


ROnr.RT  S.\fITH  CANDLISH,  D.D. 

Dr  Candlish  not  only  expounded  Free  Church  principles  in  a 
felicitous  manner  ;  he  also  had  much  to  do  with  directing  the  spirit  of 
Free  Church  action.  Besides  the  force  of  his  inspiriting  addresses, 
imbued  as  they  were  with  the  influence  of  the  gospel  in  its  highest  tone, 
he  gave  a  peculiar  impulse  at  once  by  example,  by  exhortation,  and  by 
his  proposals,  to  a  habit  of  personal  disinterestedness  and  self-sacrificing 
zeal  in  the  various  ecclesiastical  movements  of  the  emancipated  Church. 
The  success  of  the  new  organization,  and  its  continually  growing  strength, 
even  in  the  face  of  outward  assaults  and  inward  conflicts,  are  due  in  an 
incalculable  measure  to  the  strength  of  the  spiritual  fire  which  was  thus 
cherished,  by  God's  grace,  in  response  to  the  endeavours  of  Dr  Candlish, 
and  those  who  went  along  with  him  or  followed  him. 

Dr  Candlish  was  the  chief  instrument  in  organising  the  government 
and  system  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland.  He  possessed  a  marvellous 
combination  of  high-reaching  thought  so  as  to  be  always  applying  the 
most  commanding  principles,  with  a  capacity  for  sifting  and  arranging 
the  most  minute  details.  This  combination,  accompanied  as  it  was  by  a 
most  unselfish  disposition,  produced  in  him  one  very  rare  quality,  the 
absence  of  which  is  often  manifest  in  very  excellent  and  intelligent 
persons.  He  had  so  great  a  habit  of  putting  himself  in  thought  into  the 
place  of  other  men,  that  he  almost  always  saw  things  not  only  from  his 
own  point  of  view,  but  also  from  theirs.  Whether  he  were  dealing  with 
the  minister  of  a  small  country  congregation,  or  with  the  office-bearers  of 
a  large  one  in  the  Highlands,  or  with  any  party  in  a  large  town,  or  with 
the  clerk  of  a  Presbytery,  or  with  the  clerk  of  the  General  Assembly,  or 
with  the  convener  of  a  committee,  he  scarcely  ever  failed  to  shew  that 
he  appreciated  the  other  person's  difficulties,  and  made  every  allowance 
for  the  necessities  and  obligations  of  his  position.  Hence  arose  the  great 
and  general  confidence  placed  in  him.  Thus,  whatever  faults  he  had 
were  regarded  by  those  who  knew  him,  and  by  great  numbers  of  persons 
who  had  experience  of  his  consideration  and  tenderness,  as  well  as  of  his 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

ability  and  his  painstaking  and  disinterested  labour,  as  nothing  in  com- 
parison with  his  surpassing  merits. 

It  is  astonishing  how  he  was  enabled,  amid  his  incessant  work  for 
the  Church  during  more  than  thirty  years,  to  maintain  the  character  of 
a  pastor  and  preacher  of  a  very  high  order,  and  to  keep  gathered  round 
him  an  overflowing  congregation  of  intelligent  and  devoted  men  and 
women.  His  success,  both  in  the  pulpit  and  among  those  to  whom  he 
ministered  othenvise,  went  on  increasing  in  place  of  abating,  while  he 
gave  so  much  of  his  vigour  to  the  general  and  public  cause.  At  the  same 
time  he  contributed  various  publications  to  theological  literature,  which 
of  themselves  are  sufficient  to  establish  a  high  place  for  him  among  the 
gifted  servants  of  Christ.  He  was  not  a  mere  advocate  of  Free  Church 
opinions.  His  mind  took  a  large  grasp  of  Christian  interests  and  objects 
throughout  the  world,  and  he  heartily  sympathised  with  all  sincere  efforts 
for  their  promotion  by  churches  and  denominations  differing  from  his  own. 

Great  as  the  loss  of  him  was  to  his  congregation  and  the  Free  Church 
at  large,  those  who  had  the  privilege  of  his  personal  friendship  are, 
next  to  his  own  family,  the  greatest  mourners  in  thinking  of  the 
bereavement  occasioned  by  his  removal.  That  friendship  was  indeed  a 
treasure.  He  was  very  true  and  faithful.  He  was  full  of  loving-kindness 
and  sympathy.  He  thought,  in  any  contingency,  of  the  interests  and 
prospects  of  others  in  the  view  of  their  comfort  and  usefulness,  even 
before  they  had  begun  to  look  at  that  contingency  themselves.  He 
entered  readily  into  their  anxieties,  and  did  his  best  to  guide  them. 
He  cordially  reciprocated  all  confidence  placed  in  him.  He  quickly 
forgot  all  unpleasant  occurrences,  and  dealt  with  the  persons  concerned 
as  if  those  occurrences  had  never  been.  To  any  one  now  called  upon  to 
take  any  measure  of  responsibility  with  respect  to  Free  Church  affairs, 
the  feeling  is  strongly  brought  home  that  a  channel  of  strength  and 
goodness  has  been  withdrawn,  to  which  he  formeriy  had  recourse  with 
lively  expectation  and  with  continual  satisfaction.  H.  W.  M. 


rxtij.  ©a&ib  Carmtnt  ftl^. 


^i^5s.  R  GARMENT  was  born  on  28th  September  1772, 
at  Kciss,  near  Wick,  where  his  father,  James  Gar- 
ment, kept  a  school.  His  ancestors  belonged  to 
the  south  of  Scotland,  his  father  being  a  native  of 
the  parish  of  Irongray.  His  grandfather,  John 
Garment,  was  born  in  1672,  and  was  baptised  in 
the  hills,  under  cloud  of  night,  by  John  Welsh,  the  outed  minister  of 
Irongray. 

Mr  Garment  received  his  early  education  from  his  father.  When 
thirteen  years  of  age,  he  went  to  the  parish  school  of  Ganisbay,  where  he 
was  taught  Latin  and  Greek.  He  made  rapid  progress ;  and  when  he 
had  just  completed  his  seventeenth  year,  was  appointed  parochial  school- 
master of  Kincardine,  in  Ross-shire.  He  remained  there  only  one  year, 
and  being  desirous  to  pursue  his  studies  at  college,  he  entered  King's 
Gollege,  Aberdeen,  in  November,  1791. 

His  father  was  not  in  circumstances  to  afford  him  pecuniary  aid,  and 
he  had  a  hard  struggle  to  get  through  his  college  course.  At  the  close 
of  the  first  session,  he  obtained  the  situation  of  tutor  in  the  family  of  the 
Rev.  George  Munro,  minister  of  South  Uist.  This  enabled  him  to 
complete  his  attendance  at  the  arts  classes.  He  passed  through  the 
curriculum  with  much  credit ;  and  at  the  close  of  the  session  in  the 
spring  of  1795,  obtained  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts.     He  was  then 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

appointed  parish  schoolmaster  of  Strath,  in  the  Isle  of  Skye,  where  he 
remained  for  four  years.  Having  completed  during  this  period  his 
attendance  at  the  Divinity  Hall  in  Aberdeen,  he  was  licensed  to  preach 
by  the  Presbytery  of  Skye,  on  4th  April  1799. 

After  being  licensed,  he  gave  up  the  parish  school,  and  became  tutor 
in  the  family  of  Mr  Macdonald,  tacksman  of  Scalpa,  a  small  island 
adjoining  Skye.  Mr  Garment  always  referred  to  this  as  one  of  the 
happiest  periods  of  his  life,  and  it  is  believed  that  it  was  while  here  he 
underwent  a  saving  change. 

In  March  1803,  he  was  appointed  assistant  to  the  Rev.  Hugh  Calder, 
minister  of  the  parish  of  Croy,  near  Inverness,  where  the  principal  minis- 
terial duties  had  to  be  performed  in  the  Gaelic  language."  Mr  Garment, 
not  being  a  Highlander,  knew  nothing  of  Gaelic  till  he  went  to  Uist  in 
1792,  and  the  preparation  of  his  Gaelic  discourses  taxed  him  severely. 

His  preaching  soon  proved  attractive,  and  many  from  neighbouring 
parishes  came  to  hear  him.  He  preached  with  power  and  energy 
those  truths  which,  not  long  before,  had  become  realities  in  his  own 
experience.  Not  a  few  had  cause  to  bless  the  Lord  for  sending  them 
such  a  ministry. 

In  January  18 10,  he  was  chosen  minister  of  the  new  Gaelic  chapel  in 
Duke  Street,  Glasgow,  and  having  been  ordained  by  the  Presbytery  of 
Nairn,  he  removed  to  Glasgow  in  April  following.  He  continued  to 
labour  there  for  twelve  years,  and  these  were,  perhaps,  the  busiest  years 
of  his  life.  Besides  two  Gaelic  services,  he  had  an  English  sermon  on  the 
Sabbath  evening,  which  was  largely  attended  by  many  who  were  not 
Highlanders.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  management  of  the  various 
religious  and  charitable  institutions  of  the  city ;  and  formed  the  friend- 
ship of  Dr  Love,  Dr  Balfour,  Dr  Hamilton  of  Strathblane,  and  Dr 
Chalmers.    His  labours  in  Glasgow  were  much  countenanced  and  blessed. 

In  i8i5,he  married  Margaret  Stormonth, daughter  of  the  Rev.  James 
Stormonth,  minister  of  Airlie,  in  Forfarshire.     She  was  a  woman  of  very 


REV.  DAVID  GARMENT,  M.A. 

superior  mind  and  eminent  piety.     She  survived  her  husband  for  many 
years,  and  died  in  her  son's  house  in  Edinburgh,  in  October,  1874. 

In  December  1821,  Mr  Garment  was  presented  to  the  parish  of 
Rosskcen,  in  the  Presbytery  of  Tain,  as  assistant  and  successor  to  the 
Rev.  John  Ross.  He  was  inducted  shortly  after,  and  entered  upon  his 
ministerial  duties  in  the  spring  of  1822.  Mr  Ross  was  an  old  man,  dis- 
abled from  duty,  and  died  soon  after  Mr  Garment's  induction.  The 
charge  was  an  arduous  one.  There  were  three  villages  in  the  parish, 
besides  a  large  rural  population,  the  total  population  being  about  2600. 
The  parish  was  at  that  time  in  a  very  rude  state.  Its  educational 
requirements  were  inadequately  provided  for,  and  many  of  the  people 
had  no  copy  of  the  Word  of  God.  He  set  himself  vigorously  to  remedy 
this  state  of  things,  and  ere  long  there  were  four  schools  in  the  parish, 
besides  the  parochial  school  in  the  village  of  Invergordon.  He  also 
made  an  arrangement  with  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society,  by 
which  he  obtained  from  them  large  supplies  of  Bibles  and  Testaments, 
both  in  Gaelic  and  English.  Hundreds  of  copies  were  distributed  in 
this  way,  the  price  being  regulated  according  to  the  means  of  the  parties, 
and  none  being  given  without  payment,  except  to  parties  in  very  poor 
circumstances.  Every  one  in  the  parish  able  to  read  had  soon  a  copy  of 
the  Word  of  God. 

Mr  Garment's  preaching  made  a  great  impression  in  the  parish  from 
the  outset,  and  he  soon  acquired  an  influence  over  the  people  such  as  is 
rarely  attained.  This  may  be  thought  the  more  remarkable,  as  he  had 
no  Geltic  blood  in  his  veins,  and  his  character  was  thoroughly  Saxon. 
His  preaching  was  eminently  practical,  and  there  was  a  directness  and 
terseness  in  his  style  to  which  Highlanders,  at  that  period  at  least,  were 
not  much  accustomed.  He  was  a  man  of  large  bodily  presence,  and  of 
almost  herculean  strength.  His  utterance  was  clear  and  distinct,  and  his 
voice  had  a  compass  which  enabled  him,  without  straining  or  apparent 
effort,  to  be  heard  by  the  largest  assemblages  in  the  open  air. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

In  1822,  the  system  of  "The  Men"  was  dominant  in  Easter  Ross. 
Mr  Garment's  straightforwardness  and  independence  of  spirit  did  not  suit 
them,  and  he  and  they  soon  came  to  an  open  rupture.  Such  an  event, 
in  ordinary  circumstances,  was  fatal  to  a  minister's  influence.  The  people 
left  him,  and  followed  "The  Men."  In  Mr  Garment's  case,  however,  this 
result  was,  for  the  first  time,  reversed.  The  people  left  "  The  Men,"  and 
followed  the  minister. 

The  limits  within  which  this  sketch  must  be  confined  do  not  admit 
of  any  detailed  account  of  Mr  Garment's  unwearied  labours  in  the  parish 
during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  His  own  impression  was,  that  a 
considerable  portion  of  his  ministry  in  Rosskeen  was  less  fruitful  of 
spiritual  results  than  his  ministry  in  Glasgow  and  Croy ;  but  in  the 
year  1840  there  was  a  remarkable  revival  of  religion  in  Rosskeen,  in 
common  with  many  other  places,  and  he  had  reason  to  believe  that 
many  were  brought  to  the  saving  knowledge  of  the  truth. 

Mr  Garment  was  seldom  absent  from  his  own  parish,  though  he 
occasionally  visited  other  districts,  where  his  services  were  much  prized. 
He  enjoyed  being  returned  to  the  General  Assembly,  where  he  made  not 
a  few  highly  effective  appearances. 

He  took  an  active  part  in  the  pre-Disruption  controversy,  and  in 
preparing  his  people  for  the  result.  And  when  the  day  of  trial  came,  the 
people,  almost  to  a  man,  followed  their  minister.  Out  of  a  population  of 
upwards  of  3000,  it  is  believed,  not  fifty  remained  behind.  Mr  Garment 
did  not  go  out  till  the  middle  of  June.  He  preached  for  the  last  time  in 
the  parish  church  on  iSth  June,  taking  his  text  from  2  Samuel  xv.  25,  26. 
It  was  a  day  long  to  be  remembered.  At  the  close  of  the  sermon  he  read 
a  solemn  protest,  which  he  recorded  in  the  minute-book  of  the  kirk- 
session,  where  it  still  remains.  It  breathes  much  of  the  spirit  of  his 
covenanting  ancestors. 

The  manse  had  been  built  for  Mr  Garment  some  years  after  his 
induction.     It  was  situated  in  a  lovely  spot,  with  a  lawn  in  front,  fringed 


RF.V.  DAVID  GARMENT,  M.A. 

by  a  small  stream,  which  in  those  early  days  contained  wondrous  trout. 
There  was  a  sweet  garden,  which  had  all  been  laid  out  under  his  own 
superintendence.  The  churchyard  was  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of 
the  manse.  Six  of  Mr  Garment's  children  lay  buried  there.  They  were 
the  flower  of  the  flock.  Often,  as  the  twilight  drew  on,  the  old  man 
stole  out  to  the  churchyard  to  visit  the  graves  of  his  loved  ones.  Their 
very  dust  was  dear  to  him. 

The  pecuniary  sacrifice  which  the  Disruption  involved,  though  large 
in  itself,  was  as  nothing  compared  with  the  disruption  of  those  tender 
and  hallowed  ties,  which  linked  father  and  mother  and  the  surviving 
children  to  the  manse  and  garden  and  glebe  and  the  solemn  churchyard. 

Mr  Garment  was  one  of  those  who  doubted  whether  the  Ghurch, 
before  resorting  to  disruption,  should  not  have  longer  continued  the  fight 
with  the  civil  courts ;  but  the  pecuniary  results  never  for  a  moment 
influenced  his  judgment  in  the  matter.  The  emoluments  told  for  very 
little ;  but  to  leave  to  strangers  the  manse,  hallowed  by  so  many  death- 
beds ;  the  garden,  and  its  quiet  walks ;  the  green  lawn,  with  the  little 
babbling  brook — places  sanctified  by  communion  and  fellowship  with  his 
God — and  the  churchyard  and  its  sacred  memories;  this  was  a  sore  trial. 
It  was  in  the  true  spirit  of  martyrdom  that  Mr  Garment  and  his  saintly 
spouse  turned  their  backs  on  the  commodious  manse,  and  took  up  their 
abode  in  a  small  house  in  the  village  of  Invergordon.  It  was  a  noble 
thing  for  a  man  with  a  family  to  sacrifice  an  income  of  between  £yx) 
and  ;£'400  a-year  for  conscience'  sake.  But  to  tear  asunder  all  those 
tender  ties  and  associations,  w  hich  bound  their  hearts  to  the  manse  and 
its  surroundings,  was  worse  than  death.  Still,  they  bore  it  bravely  ;^ 
Martyrs,  not  by  mistake — but  martyrs  for  conscience'  sake. 

After  the  Disruption,  Mr  Garment  had  two  Sabbath  services— one  in 
a  small  chapel  in  Invergordon,  for  the  east  part  of  the  parish  ;  another 
on  a  moor,  some  four  miles  from  Invergordon,  where  the  inhabitants  of 
the  upper  part  of  the  parish  met  to  worship.     There  was  a  good  deal  of 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

excitement  in  the  district  when  a  new  minister  came  to  take  possession 
of  the  manse  and  parish  church ;  but,  though  there  was  some  rioting, 
nothing  serious  occurred.  Mr'  Garment's  influence  was  sufficient  to 
prevent  that.  Within  two  years,  a  commodious  church,  seated  for  eleven 
hundred,  was  built  in  a  central  situation,  and  was  filled  to  overflowing. 
He  continued  to  discharge  the  whole  parochial  duty  till  July  1852,  when 
he  was  within  a  few  months  of  eighty  years  of  age.  His  strength  at  last 
began  to  give  way,  and  the  Rev.  John  H.  Fraser  was  appointed  assistant 
and  successor.  Mr.  Garment  continued  to  preach  once  every  Sabbath 
until  March  1S55.     He  died  on  26th  May  1S56. 

The  following  quotation  from  an  article,  written  at  the  time  of  Mr 
Garment's  decease  by  the  late  Rev.  Andrew  Gray,  of  Perth,  one  of  his 
most  intimate  and  valued  friends,  may  fitly  conclude  this  sketch  : — 

"  In  1S25,  Mr  Garment  was  a  member  of  the  Assembly.  He  spoke  in  the  great 
debate  upon  PluraHties.  In  his  own  homely  and  earnest  way,  he  drew  a  Bible  from  his 
pocket,  and  read  to  the  house  a  passage  or  two  respecting  pastoral  duties  and  respon- 
sibilities. The  Assembly  gave  signs  of  impatience,  and  derisive  murmurs  assailed  him. 
Mr  Garment's  spirit  was  kindled  within  him.  '  Moderator,'  he  cried,  '  are  there  men 
in  this  house  that  will  not  hear  the  Word  of  God?  For  my  part,  I  was  sent  up  to  this 
Assembly,'  added  he,  producing  his  commission,  and  reading  from  it,  'to  consult,  vote, 
and  determine  in  all  matters  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  His  Ghurch,  according 
to  the  Word  of  God.'  '  Read  on,'  said  some  of  the  doctors  near  the  table  ;  '  read  on.' 
Mr  Garment  obeyed  :  '  According  to  the  Word  of  God,  the  Gonfession  of  Faith,  and 
agreeably  to  the  constitution  of  this  Ghurch.'  No  sooner  had  he  read  the  clause,  '  and 
agreeably  to  the  constitution  of  this  Ghurch,'  than  the  great  phalanx  of  Moderatism 
before  which  he  stood  broke  into  explosions  of  merriment  and  shouts  of  laughter. 
'  Wait  a  little,'  whispered  Dr  Andrew  Thomson,  who  was  present  as  a  spectator,  and 
was  looking  gravely  on,  'wait  a  little,  and  you  will  see  that  Garment  is  a  match  for 
them.'  Mr  Garment  drew  himself  up,  and  glancing  round  the  hall  with  an  expression 
of  face,  in  which  indignation  and  glee  were  strangely  mingled,  exclaimed,  in  a  \oice 
that  put  down  the  storm  instantly — '  Moderator,  I  was  not  aware  that  the  learned 
doctors  and  la\v)'ers  on  the  other  side  would  have  been  so  ready  to  confess  that  their 
views  of  the  constitution  of  this  Ghurch  are  not  according  to  the  Word  of  God.'  They 
never  laughed  at  him  again." 

J.  G. 


fbnmas  Cljalmm,  B.B.,  II.B, 


(§?^p?©  N  tlic  roll  of  Disruption  Worthies,  the  first  place  belongs,  by 
hii  universal  consent,  to  the  name  of  THOMAS  CHALMERS. 

He  was  born  of  respectable  and  pious  parentage,  at 
Anstruther,  Fifeshire,  on  17th  March  1780.  During  his  early 
years  he  was  much  more  remarkable  for  glee  and  frolic  than 
for  steady  application :  yet  even  then  he  gave  proof  of  his 
mental  vigour,  for  when  he  chose  to  exert  himself,  he  could  easily  out- 
strip all  his  schoolfellows.  Before  he  had  passed  the  stage  of  boyhood, 
he  was  enrolled  as  a  student  in  the  University  of  St  Andrews.  During 
his  first  two  sessions  he  made  little  progress  in  his  studies,  and  his  great 
faculties  were  not  yet  roused  into  activity  ;  but  in  his  third  session  his 
aptitude  for  mathematical  science  was  strikingly  developed,  and  he  never 
afterwards  relapsed  into  anything  like  mental  indolence.* 

In  July  1799,  when  considerably  below  the  statutory  age,  he  was 
licensed  as  a  preacher  of  the  gospel.  At  this  period  he  was  ignorant  of 
the  way  of  salvation,  both  theoretically  and  experimentally.  He  is 
known  to  have  prayed  publicly  in  such  terms  as  these  :  "  Deliver  us  from 


*  An  early  instance  of  his  vehemence  and  concentration  of  mind  may  be  worth  preserving. 
He  spent  the  college  recess  in  his  father's  house,  where  he  was  in  the  habit  of  retiring  to  an 
upper  room,  that  he  might  prosecute  his  studies  undisturbed.  On  one  occasion  when  he  was 
intensely  occupied,  the  sudden  announcement  that  dinner  was  ready,  broke  up  his  equanimity, 
and  drew  forth  a  burst  of  indignation.  "Oh,"  cried  the  rapt  votary  of  science,  "  I  wish  I  were 
alone  in  the  world." 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
the  fanaticism  of  faith,"  and  to  have  quoted  in  one  of  his  discourses  a 
portion  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  then  asked  with  an  air  of 
triumph,  "Is  there  anything  about  faith  here?"  In  May  1803,  after 
having  officiated  for  some  time  as  assistant  in  the  parish  of  Cavers,  and 
subsequently  as  assistant  in  the  Mathematical  Classes  at  St  Andrews, 
he  was  ordained  minister  of  Kilmany,  in  the  north  of  Fife.  His  con- 
ceptions of  pastoral  duty  were  meagre  in  the  extreme.  In  a  letter 
publicly  addressed  to  Professor  Playfair,  when  he  became  a  candidate 
for  the  Mathematical  Chair  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  he  proclaimed 
his  conviction  that,  after  giving  two  days  in  the  week  to  the  duties  of  his 
parish,  a  clergyman  might  warrantably  devote  the  rest  of  his  time  to 
extra-professional  pursuits.  And  his  practice  was  in  accordance  with  his 
theory  ;  for,  after  his  settlement  at  Kilmany,  he  devoted  much  of  his  time 
and  energy  to  the  teaching  of  chemistry  at  St  Andrews.  His  pulpit 
ministrations  were  characterised  by  intellectual  power,  but  as  yet  evan- 
gelical fervour  was  entirely  wanting.  He  preached  on  moral  subjects 
with  great  energy  and  earnestness,  and,  as  he  afterwards  acknowledged, 
without  any  practical  results.  A  great  change,  however,  was  at  hand. 
Laid  aside  by  illness  for  some  months,  during  which  various  good  influ- 
ences were  brought  to  bear  upon  him,  especially  that  of  Wilberforce's 
Practical  View  of  Christianity,  he  came  forth  from  his  sick-chamber  an 
altered  man — "  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind."  He  now  preached  the 
pure  doctrine  of  the  gospel  with  amazing  fervour,  and,  from  that  time  till 
he  was  taken  to  his  rest,  he  shone  forth  over  Scotland,  and  ultimately  over 
a  large  portion  of  the  civilised  world,  as  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude. 

Translated  in  181 5  to  the  Tron  Church,  Glasgow,  and  thereafter  to 
St  John's  in  the  same  city,  Dr  Chalmers  attracted  vast  multitudes  by  the 
fame  of  his  extraordinary  eloquence,  and  contributed  mightily  to  the 
triumph  of  Evangelical  truth  over  the  cold  and  withering  Moderatism 
that  had  been  long  in  the  ascendant.  In  addition  to  his  ordinary  pulpit 
work,  he  gave  to  the  world  his  Astronomical  Discourses,  which,  both  from 


Tf/OMAS  CHALMERS,  D.U.,  LL.D. 
the  pulpit  and  througli  the  press,  obtained  a  larger  measure  of  accept- 
ance than  any  series  of  discourses  in  the  English  language.  In  the  best 
sense  of  the  expression,  his  was  a  prosperous  ministry,  many  having 
been  won,  by  means  of  it,  to  the  faith  and  obedience  of  the  gospel  ;  and, 
in  another  respect,  it  was  eminently  fruitful.  Endowed  beyond  most 
men  with  the  power  of  influencing  the  minds  of  others,  Dr  Chalmers 
gathered  round  him  in  Glasgow  a  band  of  devoted  laymen,  by  whom  his 
plans  for  the  social  and  spiritual  elevation  of  the  common  people  were 
zealously  worked  out.  The  parochial  organisation  of  St  John's  became 
a  powerful  instrument  for  grappling  with  the  ignorance,  the  vice,  and  the 
pauperism  of  a  crowded  population  ;  and  had  this  example  been  duly 
followed,  society  would  have  felt  much  more  lightly  at  this  day  the 
pressure  of  enormous  evils  with  which  it  is  burdened  and  distracted. 

While  he  urged  the  importance  of  turning  the  existing  parochial 
machinery  to  the  best  account,  Dr  Chalmers  saw  clearly,  and  announced 
most  emphatically,  that  it  was  far  from  being  adequate  to  the  necessities 
of  the  time.  In  an  appendix  to  his  sermon  on  the  death  of  Princess 
Charlotte,  published  in  1 8 17,  he  unfolded  his  plan  for  providing  twenty 
additional  churches  for  the  city  of  Glasgow  ;  and  this  may  be  regarded  as 
the  first  of  a  series  of  efforts  which  resulted  in  a  vast  extension  of  the 
means  of  grace,  not  in  Glasgow  only,  but  over  a  great  part  of  Scotland. 

In  1823  Dr  Chalmers  was  transferred  to  the  Chair  of  Moral  Philo- 
sophy in  his  native  University.  Here  he  wielded  a  commanding  and 
most  healthful  influence, — rousing  young  minds  into  active  exercise,  in- 
spiring many  of  his  students  with  something  of  his  own  lofty  enthusiasm, 
and  kindling  in  others  the  flame  of  missionary  zeal,  which  burned  in  after 
years  with  no  common  ardour.  There  still  survive  a  few  who  can  look 
back,  with  thankfulness  and  unabated  interest,  to  the  plain  old  class- 
room in  which,  day  by  day,  they  listened  to  such  strains  of  eloquence 
and  wisdom  as  could  nowhere  else  be  heard.  Frequently,  as  the  Pro- 
fessor was  rising  to  the  height  of  some  great  argument,  a  deep  and 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

almost  breathless  hush  prevailed  throughout  the  class ;  and  then  fol- 
lowed a  burst  of  enthusiastic  applause,  which,  however  unacadcmic,  was 
absolutely  irrepressible.* 

Dr  Chalmers  did  not  confine  his  labours  within  the  walls  of  the 
University ;  and  though  there  is  little  room  for  details  in  a  sketch  like 
this,  it  would  be  wrong  to  leave  unnoticed  his  monthly  missionary  meet- 
ings in  the  Town  Hall.  These  were  largely  attended,  and  were  very 
helpful  to  the  great  cause  of  missions. 

But  a  wider  field  was  soon  opened  for  his  gigantic  energies.  In  1828 
he  entered  on  his  labours  as  Professor  of  Systematic  Theology  in  the 
Metropolitan  University.  In  this  new  and  more  appropriate  sphere,  his 
influence  was  at  once  intensified  and  expanded  :  it  operated  more  directly 
than  before  on  the  rising  ministry  of  the  Church,  and  was  soon  felt,  and 
that  most  advantageously,  in  many  of  her  pulpits.  The  Divinity  Class- 
room was  crowded  from  day  to  day,  not  only  with  regular  students,  but 
also  with  amateurs,  among  whom  were  men  of  high  intellectual  and 
social  eminence.  Examinations,  introduced  for  the  first  time  into  the 
theological  course,  alternated  with  lectures,  and  were  conducted  in  the 
most  kindly  and  instructive  manner.  The  substance  of  the  lectures  was 
ultimately  published  in  the  Institutes  of  Tlicology  and  the  Notes  on 
Butler's  A  nalogy, — works  which  testify  to  the  profound  wisdom  and  the 
intense  earnestness  with  which  the  Professor  sought  to  train  his  students 
for  the  work  of  the  holy  ministry. 

Dr  Chalmers  took  little  part  in  the  ordinary  procedure  of  the  Church 
Courts.  He  reserved  his  strength  for  great  vital  questions,  and  some  of 
the  brightest  triumphs  of  his  eloquence  were  won  on  the  floor  of  the 

*  He  stated  in  one  of  his  opening  addresses  tliat,  on  comparing  notes  with  the  Professor  of 
Mathematics  regarding  the  students  by  whom  their  classes  were  attended,  he  found  that  those 
who  were  distinguished  in  the  one  class  were,  for  the  most  part,  distinguished  also  in  the  other ; 
and  he  added,  with  great  emphasis,  that  his  brother  Professor  and  himself  were  thoroughly 
agreed  on  one  point — that  they  would  rather  have  a  response  from  the  heads  than  from  the  heels 
of  the  rising  generation. 

156 


THOMAS  CHALMERS,  D  D.,  LL.D. 

General  Assembly — as,  for  example,  on  the  question  of  I'luralitics.  It 
was  in  a  debate  on  this  question,  and  in  reply  to  one  who  had  brought  up 
against  him  the  letter  to  Professor  Playfair  previously  referred  to,  that  Dr 
Chalmers  gave  utterance  to  the  memorable  words,  "What,  sir,  is  the  object 
of  mathematical  science  ?  Magnitude  and  the  proportions  of  magnitude. 
But  then,  sir,  I  had  forgotten  two  magnitudes.  I  thought  not  of  the  little- 
ness of  time — I  recklessly  thought  not  of  the  greatness  of  eternity."  The 
Church  Extension  enterprise,  which  was  committed  to  his  hands,  brought 
him  more  frequently  before  the  Assembly ;  and  the  Reports  which  he 
submitted  from  year  to  year  were  looked  for^vard  to  with  the  deepest 
interest,  and  listened  to  with  admiration  and  delight.  In  prosecuting 
that  enterprise,  he  failed  in  obtaining  additional  endowments  from  the 
State,  but  succeeded  beyond  expectation  in  drawing  forth  the  liberality 
of  the  people.  Churches  were  erected  in  many  localities  where  they  were 
urgently  required ;  parochial  districts  were  attached  to  them  ;  and,  in  a 
very  few  years,  the  Church  was  enlarged  to  a  vastly  greater  extent  than 
it  had  been  for  a  whole  century  before. 

From  an  early  period,  Dr  Chalmers  had  been  a  strenuous  supporter 
of  Church  Establishments,  but  always  with  the  proviso,  that  the  State 
should  not  trench  on  the  Church's  freedom.  State  support  he  regarded 
as  a  matter  of  Christian  expediency;  the  freedom  of  the  Church  he 
regarded  as  a  matter  of  scriptural  principle,  not  to  be  surrendered  on  any 
consideration.  He  would  have  retained  both,  if  he  could  ;  but  when  it 
became  evident  that  both  could  not  be  retained,  he  was  clear  and  decided 
as  to  the  course  that  should  be  taken.  The  famous  Veto  Act,  though 
not  precisely  what  he  wished,  received  his  acquiescence,  because  it  pro- 
tected congregations  from  the  intrusion  of  unacceptable  ministers ;  and 
when  it  was  disallowed  by  the  Court  of  Session,  and  the  civil  and 
ecclesiastical  authorities  were  thus  brought  into  collision,  he  took  up  his 
position  at  once  in  the  veiy  forefront  of  the  battle.  It  is  impossible  here 
to  enter  into   the  details  of  the  great   controversy  that    issued    in   the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Disruption.  Enough  to  say,  that  Dr  Chalmers  was  the  Church's  trusted 
leader — the  powerful  and  unflinching  champion  of  its  independence. 
And  when,  in  consequence  of  the  encroachments  of  the  Court  of  Session, 
and  the  refusal  of  Parliament  to  afford  protection  or  redress,  it  became 
necessary  either  to  break  with  the  State  or  to  violate  the  Church's  scrip- 
tural constitution,  he  not  only  held  that  the  former  course  was  imperative, 
but  formed  his  plan  for  the  support  of  the  ministry  when  the  Disruption 
should  take  place.  That  plan  he  unfolded  at  the  Convocation  with  a 
noble  confidence  and  ardour.  By  many  it  was  regarded  with  great  mis- 
givings ;  but  experience  soon  proved  its  adaptation  to  the  Church's 
altered  circumstances,  and  now,  after  the  lapse  of  a  generation,  the 
Sustentation  Fund  stands  forth  before  the  world  as  a  monument  of  the 
genius  and  wisdom  of  its  founder, — proclaiming,  as  it  does,  that  he  who 
was  foremost  in  eloquence  among  the  Church's  sons,  was  also  foremost 
in  practical  sagacity. 

The  Convocation  alluded  to  above,  adopted  resolutions  embodying 
the  conditions  on  which  alone  the  Church  could  remain  in  connection 
with  the  State ;  and  when  these  were  finally  disallowed  by  Parliament, 
there  was  no  alternative  but  to  surrender  emoluments  which  could  not 
be  innocently  or  honourably  retained.  This  was  the  issue  involved  in 
the  proceedings  of  i8th  May  1843.  Dr  Chalmers  was  the  first  to  follow 
the  Moderator,  Dr  Welsh,  in  walking  out  of  St  Andrew's  Church,  where 
the  Assembly  had  convened  ;  and  on  him,  by  universal  acclamation,  was 
conferred  the  honour  of  being  appointed  Moderator  of  the  Free  General 
Assembly.  The  scene  in  Canonmills  Hall  on  that  memorable  day  was 
such  as  Scotland  had  never  witnessed  ;  and  assuredly  not  a  little  of  its 
grandeur  and  impressiveness  was  due  to  the  presence,  the  counsels,  and 
the  prayers,  of  the  illustrious  man  by  whom  the  chair  was  occupied. 

During  the  remainder  of  his  life,  he  watched  with  unremitting  care 
over  the  interests  of  the  Free  Church,  while  his  chief  attention  was  given 
to  the  duties  ot  the  Divinity  Chair  in  the  New  Colle?e  of  which  he  was 


THOMAS  CHALMERS,  D.D.,  LI..D. 

appointed  Principal.  One  of  his  latest  labours  is  entitled  to  prominence, 
even  in  so  brief  a  sketch  as  this.  In  the  West  Port,  one  of  the  worst 
districts  of  Edinburgh,  he  founded  a  Territorial  Mission,  which,  in  its 
infancy,  he  fostered  with  loving  assiduity,  and  which,  in  the  able  hands 
of  the  Rev.  W.  Tasker,  soon  attained  to  remarkable  prosperity.  The 
example  thus  set  was  followed  zealously  and  successfully  in  other 
districts  of  Edinburgh,  in  Glasgow,  Dundee,  and  other  large  towns  ;  and 
from  the  seed  sown  by  Dr  Chalmers  in  the  West  Port,  there  has  sprung 
a  rich  and  a  still  increasing  harvest. 

A  careful  economist  of  time,  and  very  systematic  in  his  habits,  he 
accomplished  with  his  pen  an  amount  of  work  which,  taken  in  connection 
with  his  other  labours,  may  be  regarded  as  immense.  But  it  was  easier 
for  him  to  write  than  to  sit  in  dreamy  idleness  :  his  pen  kept  pace  with  the 
operations  of  his  mind.*  Not  to  speak  of  his  multifarious  correspondence, 
his  authorship  ranged  over  wide  and  varied  fields — the  Evidences  and 
Doctrines  of  Christianity,  Natural  Theology,  Mental  and  Moral  Philo- 
sophy, Political  and  Social  Economy,  Church  organisation,  and  kindred 
topics — besides  many  pamphlets  on  pressing  questions  of  the  day.  His 
works  are  characterised  by  a  majestic  eloquence,  often  vehement  and 
somewhat  rugged  in  its  style  ;  they  evince  a  most  unusual  combination  of 
power,  comprehensiveness,  and  penetration ;  and  they  are  charged  with 
great  principles  and  lessons  of  practical  wisdom,  which  the  Church  and 
society  at  large  have,  to  their  detriment,  been  all  too  slow  to  learn. 

About  the  end  of  March  1847,  Dr  Chalmers  was  summoned  to 
London  to  give  evidence  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons 
with  reference  to  the  refusal  of  church  sites.  His  evidence  was  worthy 
of  his  character   and    fame,   not  only   as   exposing   the    paltriness   and 


*  A  few  days  before  his  death,  he  was  asked  by  his  brother,  the  late  Charles  Chalmers, 
Esq.,  wliile  the  two  were  together  in  the  Doctor's  study,  "  Now  could  you  not  sit  down  quietly 
and  muse  for  half  an  hour  in  that  chair?"  "No,"  was  the  reply,  "I  must  either  have  a  pen 
or  a  book  in  my  hand." 

'59 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

injustice  of  site-refusers  and  their  abettors,  but  as  involving  a  most  noble 
testimony  to  the  principles  and  policy  of  the  Church  which  he  so  fitly 
represented.  This  was  his  last  public  service.  After  spending  some 
time  with  friends  in  England,  he  returned  to  his  home  on  Friday,  the 
25th  of  May.  On  the  evening  of  the  Sabbath  thereafter,  he  retired  to 
rest  as  usual,  intending  to  be  at  work  early  in  the  morning,  as  he  had  the 
College  Report  to  submit  on  Monday  to  the  General  Assembly.  In  the 
morning,  when  his  chamber  door  was  opened,  he  was  found  in  bed 
in  a  half-reclining  posture,  with  a  calm  and  majestic  expression  on  his 
countenance,  but  without  a  trace  of  life.  His  spirit  had  passed  away, 
apparently  without  a  struggle,  to  its  joyful  rest. 

He  was  interred  in  Grange  Cemetery.  Hugh  Miller  says  of  the 
funeral :— "  There  was  a  moral  sublimity  in  the  spectacle.  It  spoke  more 
emphatically  than  by  words  of  the  dignity  of  intrinsic  excellence,  and  of 
the  height  to  which  a  true  man  may  attain.  It  was  the  dust  of  a  Presby- 
terian minister  v/hich  the  coffin  contained  ;  and  yet  they  were  burying 
him  amid  the  tears  of  a  nation,  and  with  more  than  kingly  honours." 

Those  who  wish  to  have  a  finished  portraiture  of  the  man,  of  his 
humility  and  gentleness,  of  his  child-like  simplicity,  of  his  bland  and 
radiant  humour,  of  his  "leonine  nobleness  and  potency,"  of  his  geniality 
in  private,  and  his  grandeur  in  public  life,  must  be  referred  to  the 
invaluable  biography  by  Dr  Hanna.  And  those  who  would  look  still 
more  closely  into  the  inner  life  of  the  man,  and  form  a  just  estimate  of 
the  depth  of  his  piety,  of  his  struggles  on  the  field  of  spiritual  conflict, 
of  his  aspirations  after  holiness,  of  his  prayerfulness  of  spirit,  and  of  his 
love  to  God  and  man,  must  consult  the  Horce  Bib/icce  Quotidians,  and 
the  HorcB  Biblicce  Sabbatica,  a  series  of  daily  and  Sabbath  scripture 
studies  which  Dr  Chalmers  indited  for  his  private  use  during  the  last 
years  of  his  life,  which  he  kept  secret  from  his  most  familiar  friends,  and 
which  of  course  did  not  see  the  light  until  after  his  decease. 

D.  C. 


x'-y-^ 


■^^zM:k_  PATRICK  GLASON,  D,D 


^^ 


f  atrick  Clason,  D.D. 


tlic  iSth  of  May  1843,  Dr  Clason  was  appointed  Joint- 
Clerk,  witli  Mr  Pitcairn,  of  the  Free  Church  General 
Assembly.  This  office  he  continued  to  hold  for  upwards 
of  twenty-four  years,  and  was  thus  closely  associated 
with  the  early  history  of  the  Church,  and  with  the  events 
that  succeeded  the  Disruption. 
Patrick  Clason  was  born  at  the  Manse  of  Dalziel — a  quiet  spot  on 
the  banks  of  the  Clyde  above  Hamilton — on  the  13th  of  October  1789. 
He  was  the  youngest  of  a  family  of  three  sons  and  two  daughters.  His 
father,  the  Rev.  Robert  Clason  (afterwards  translated  to  the  parish  of 
Logic,  near  Stirling),  was  a  man  of  singular  gifts  and  graces.  It  was 
under  his  tuition  that  Patrick,  together  with  several  youths  of  the  same 
age,  received  the  first  elements  of  learning  ;  and  in  course  of  time,  having 
decided  for  the  ministry,  he  was  entered  at  the  College  of  Glasgow,  and 
there  completed  his  literary  course.  He  was  wont  to  recall  the  memory 
of  these  old  times,  when  he  toiled  hard  at  his  books  in  a  lodging  in  a 
lofty  tenement  in  the  High  Street.  His  course  in  divinity  he  prosecuted 
in  Edinburgh,  and  was  in  due  time  licensed  to  preach  the  gospel  in  181 1. 
We  have  no  record  of  his  probationary  experiences,  but  in  1815  he 
was  ordained  minister  of  Carmunnock,  near  Glasgow.  In  that  quiet  rural 
parish  he  continued  to  labour  for  about  nine  years,  and  throughout  life 
took  a  warm  interest  in  the  people  of  his  first  charge. 


DISRUPTIOA'  WORTHIES. 

In  1824  he  was  translated  to  St  Cuthbert"s  Chapel  of  Ease — now 
Buccleuch  Church,  Edinburgh.  There  he  ministered  with  much  accept- 
ance to  a  considerable  congregation.  As  a  pastor,  he  was  faithful 
and  sympathizing  ;  and  in  his  whole  bearing  there  was  an  exceeding 
geniality,  combined  with  dignity,  which  greatly  endeared  him  to  his 
flock.  His  ministry  in  the  word  was  greatly  relished  by  the  more 
thoughtful  and  intelligent.  It  was  not  what  is  commonly  called  popular, 
but  it  was  rich  in  exposition  of  divine  truth,  while  his  language  was 
chaste,  and  abounding  in  the  old  Saxon  ;  and  his  manner  warm  and 
attractive.  None  could  listen  to  him  without  the  impression  that  his 
heart  was  filled  with  the  divine  word,  and  that  he  loved  to  open  up  its 
treasures. 

In  1830  he  was  brought  forward  as  a  candidate  for  a  divinity  chair 
in  St  Andrews ;  and  though  unsuccessful,,  yet  the  occasion  brought  out 
from  some  of  the  leading  men  of  the  day  strong  testimonies  of  the 
estimation  in  which  he  was  held.  Thus  one  writes  of  "the  purity  and 
consistency  of  his  Christian  character,  his  companionable  manners,  and 
the  extent  and  solidity  of  his  professional  literature  ;"  and  another,  "  of 
his  clear  and  sound  judgment,  his  extensive  attainments,  alike  in  general 
and  in  professional  literature,  and  his  kind  and  conciliatory  manners." 

The  memorable  era  of  the  Disruption  came,  and  Dr  Clason,  with 
the  greater  proportion  of  his  congregation,  left  the  old  chapel,  and  wor- 
shipped for  several  years  in  a  low-roofed  building  at  the  east  end  of 
Buccleuch  Place,  until  the  handsome  edifice  now  occupied  by  the 
congregation  was  built. 

One  great  interest  in  any  notices  of  Dr  Clason's  life  proceeds  from 
his  close  association  with  the  early  days  of  the  Free  Church.  There  are 
many  who  will  remember  his  stately  form  at  the  clerks'  bar,  his  genial 
greeting  of  old  friends,  his  thorough  courtesy  to  all ;  and  perhaps, 
specially,  the  peculiar  grace  and  tenderness  of  his  reading  of  the  Bible 
portion  at  the  opening  of  the  diets  of  Assembly.     His  labours  in  con- 


PATRICK  CJ.ASON,  D.D. 

ncction  with  the  clciksliip  were,  we  believe,  congenial  to  his  taste,  and 
he  continued  to  the  last  to  take  an  intelligent  interest  in  all  the  great 
movements  of  the  Church. 

In  1846  Dr  Clason  was  deputed  to  visit  some  of  the  Mediterranean 
stations,  and  spent  a  considerable  time  at  Malta,  afterwards  visiting 
Italy,  and  bringing  home  much  interesting  information.  It  was  at  his 
instance  that  steps  were  taken  towards  opening  a  Protestant  church  at 
Rome.  Soon  after  his  return  he  was  called  to  the  chair,  as  Moderator 
of  the  General  Assembly,  Dr  Wood  taking  his  place  as  interim-clerk. 
His  stately  appearance,  arrayed  in  the  old  court  dress  and  hat,  is  still 
remembered. 

In  the  year  1854  his  health  was  seriously  impaired  by  an  affection  of 
the  throat,  and  he  was  accordingly  advised  to  go  for  the  winter  season  to 
Egypt.  The  visit  was  not  only  favourable  for  the  recovery  of  his  health, 
but  was  peculiarly  attractive  to  his  antiquarian  tastes.  The  account  of 
his  interviews  w'ith  the  priests  of  the  old  Coptish  Church,  and  of  his 
sojourn  within  an  ancient  tomb  at  the  Pyramids,  was  very  graphic. 
From  Egypt  he  went  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  formed  one  of  a  select  party 
who  were  permitted,  through  favour  of  the  Pasha,  to  visit  the  Mosque  of 
Omar,  accounted  the  holiest  of  Mahommedan  shrines. 

The  succeeding  winter  was  spent  by  Dr  Clason  in  Madeira,  where 
he  enjoyed  pleasant  Christian  fellowship,  and  returned  home  greatly 
recruited  in  health. 

The  appointment  about  this  time  of  a  colleague  in  the  oversight  of 
the  congregation  relieved  him  in  some  measure  from  his  pastoral  labours, 
but  he  still  continued  to  retain  his  wonted  chair  in  the  General  Assembly, 
and  to  take  a  warm  and  intelligent  interest  in  all  the  enterprises  of  the 
Church.  He  had  much  pleasure  in  social  intercourse  with  his  friends, 
opening  up  the  rich  stores  of  his  mind,  and  his  knowledge  of  men  and  of 
books — abounding  in  anecdote  and  in  memories  of  former  days. 

His  last  journey  was  into  South  Wales,  to  visit  the  son  of  an  elder 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

sister,  wliom  for  many  years  he  had  not  seen.  He  was  taken  seriously 
ill  on  the  journey  home,  and  when  at  length  he  reached  his  own  house, 
he  felt  that  his  end  was  near.     He  said  to  his  faithful  servant,  as  he  sat 

down  on  the  sofa,  "  B ,  this  is  the  end  of  the  journey."     He  had  great 

peace  in  his  soul.  He  had  an  impression  for  a  long  time  previous  that 
he  was  soon  to  be  taken  home,  and  when  the  hour  of  his  departure  came, 
he  was  at  rest.  "  Now,  Lord,  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace." 
He  died  on  the  30th  July  1S67,  and  his  remains  were  laid  in  the  Grange 
Cemetery,  beside  many  dear  and  honoured  friends  with  whom  he  had 
been  associated  in  the  Lord's  work.  "  Thus  blessed  is  the  man  that 
feareth  the  Lord."  J.  M. 


miUiam  Collins. 


fSlLLIAM  COLLINS,  the  well-known  publisher,  and 
for  many  years  the  zealous  fellow-labourer  of  Dr 
Chalmers,  was  born  at  Eastwood,  Renfrewshire,  on  the 
1 2th  of  October  1789.  His  memoir  places  us  beside 
the  infant  springs  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland. 
Of  independent,  penetrating,  and  courageous 
intellect,  Mr  Collins  was  ever  on  the  quest  for  new  channels  through 
which  to  develop  his  energies,  but  he  was  happily  guarded  from  that 
tendency  to  theorise,  which  is  the  besetting  sin  of  such  minds,  by  the 
forethought  and  practical  wisdom  which  he  added  to  all  his  other 
qualities.  His  chief  end  and  aim  was  the  good  of  others.  His  philan- 
thropy, early  manifested,  strengthened  with  his  years,  and  opened  out 
into  a  life  which  unfolded  itself  in  a  succession  of  great  labours,  wisely 
conceived  and  resolutely  carried  out,  for  the  welfare  of  his  fellow-men. 
Feeling  that  all  that  was  really  good  in  himself  had  its  source  in  the 
gospel,  Mr  Collins'  efforts  for  the  welfare  of  others  were  put  forth  along 
the  line  of  that  divinely  restorative  and  elevating  force  which  is  found 
in  the  Cross,  and  nowhere  else. 

At  the  age  of  twenty-five  Mr  Collins  was  ordained  an  elder  in  the 
congregation  of  the  Tron  Church,  Glasgow,  then  under  the  pastoral  care 
of  Dr  M'Gill.  In  the  course  of  his  reading  he  happened  to  peruse  the 
article  on  the  Evidences  of  Christianity  in  tlic  Encydopcedia  Brittaiiica. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

The  freshness  of  its  intellectual  power,  and  the  glow  of  its  moral  and 
evangelical  enthusiasm,  impressed  and  delighted  him.  Accordingly,  when 
Dr  M'Gill  died,  Mr  Collins  turned  his  eyes  to  the  author  of  the  article 
which  had  so  fascinated  him,  the  Rev.  Thomas  Chalmers,  as  a  suitable 
successor  to  Dr  M'Gill,  and  greatly  aided  in  the  movement  which  resulted 
in  the  appointment  by  the  Town  Council  of  the  young  minister  of 
Kilmany  to  the  church  and  parish  of  the  Tron.  From  no  one  did  Dr 
Chalmers  receive  a  heartier  welcome  on  his  induction  in  1815  than 
from  the  youngest  member  of  his  session,  Mr  Collins. 

The  subject  of  our  memoir  now  took  his  place  by  the  side  of  Dr 
Chalmers,  and  continued  to  co-operate  with  him  in  his  manifold  labours 
all  the  time  the  latter  remained  in  Glasgow.  The  two  men  resembled 
each  other  in  spirit  and  aim,  in  genuine  piety  and  large  benevolence. 
It  was  not  the  minister  alone,  nor  the  elder  alone,  but  minister  and  elder 
together,  that  wrought  out  that  marvellous  social  and  moral  change  that 
now  began  to  transform  the  wide  district  that  was  the  field  of  their  joint 
labours.  When  Dr  Chalmers  originated  the  idea  of  local  Sabbath 
Schools,  Mr  Collins  opened  the  first  school,  and  thus  gave  the  religious 
community  a  proof  of  the  practicability  and  efficiency  of  the  idea  of  his 
great  leader. 

Dr  Chalmers  was  next  transferred  to  the  new  parish  of  St  John's.  Mr 
Collins  accompanied  his  minister  to  his  new  charge,  and  still  kept  his  place 
by  his  side  as  his  valued  adviser  and  zealous  and  efficient  fellow-labourer. 
To  Dr  Chalmers,  with  his  keen  political  and  social  insight,  it  belonged 
to  originate  methods  of  civic  and  Christian  economy,  more  varied 
and  novel,  perhaps,  than  any  age  had  yet  known,  and  to  expound  and 
recommend  them  by  an  eloquence  of  unrivalled  brilliance  and  power. 
But  his  elder,  quiet  and  unobtrusive,  with  keen  untiring  activity,  and 
soul  on  fire,  came  after  him,  testing  the  ideas  of  his  chief,  and  giving 
them  practical  realization  in  the  hovels  of  the  poor,  in  the  haunts  of 
the  godless,  and  in  the  dens  of  the  proHigate,  thus  convincing  a  some- 


WILLIAM  COLLINS. 

what  incredulous  world  that  the  schemes  of  Dr  Chalmers  did  not  belong 
merely  to  the  region  of  philosophy  and  rhetoric,  but  were  thoroughly 
practical — indeed,  the  only  agencies  that  ever  would  recover  the  lapsed 
masses,  replacing  thriftlessness  with  frugality,  and  ignorance  and  vice 
with  that  fear  of  the  Lord  which  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  The 
movement  then  begun  was  the  first  turning  in  that  dangerous  tide,  whose 
volume  had  been  growing  larger  and  its  waters  darker  with  each  succeed- 
ing decade,  and  which,  had  it  been  suffered  to  flow  unchecked  till  our 
day,  would  have  burst  its  embankments,  in  defiance  alike  of  the  moral 
power  of  the  pulpit  and  the  legal  authority  of  the  state. 

Mr  Collins'  philanthropy  moved  within  no  narrow  circle.  Every  good 
object  evoked  the  sympathy  of  his  earnest  nature.  He  advocated  with 
characteristic  warmth  and  courage  the  abolition  of  African  slavery,  at  a 
time  when  that  cause  was  not  so  popular  as  it  came  to  be  at  a  later 
date.  This  brought  him  into  contact  and  co-operation  with  Wilberforce, 
Macaulay,  and  other  champions  of  the  emancipation  of  the  slave.  The 
fact  that  he  took  openly  the  side  of  the  negro,  and  that  petitions  for  eman- 
cipation lay  in  his  book  shop,  alienated  some  of  his  business  customers, 
many  of  whom  were  largely  interested  in  the  West  India  trade. 

Mr  Collins,  moreover,  rendered  no  small  service  to  the  cause  of 
religious  literature  by  his  reprints,  in  a  more  accessible  form  than  here- 
tofore, of  many  of  the  writings  of  the  divines  of  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  century.  To  these  volumes  suitable  introductions  were 
prefixed,  written  by  the  more  eminent  clergymen  and  laymen  of  the  day, 
of  all  denominations.  This  was  a  wide  sowing  of  the  seeds  of  evan- 
gelical truth  throughout  the  land.  Besides  impregnating  the  general  soil, 
it  planted,  doubtless,  in  many  a  home  and  heart  the  knowledge  and  the 
love  of  genuine  piety,  where  before  the  gospel  had  neither  been  known 
nor  prized.  In  this  .scheme,  moreover,  Mr  Collins  furnished  an  example 
which  soon  began  to  be  imitated  in  the  numerous  societies  that  by  and 
by  arose,  and  which  had  as  their  object  the  reprinting  of  the  historical, 


DISK  UP  TION  1 1  -OR  THIES. 

literary,  and  religious  works  of  former  days.  Since  that  time,  popular 
knowledge  has  been  advancing  with  rapid  strides. 

When  the  temperance  cause  found  its  way  to  this  country  from  the 
United  States  in  1829,  Mr  Collins  hailed  it,  as  "throwing  a  ray  of  light," 
to  use  his  own  words,  upon  a  dark  problem.  He  was  the  earliest  member 
of  the  Glasgow  and  West  of  Scotland  Temperance  Society,  and  he 
laboured  in  season  and  out  of  season  to  promote  its  object.  He  visited, 
on  this  errand,  many  of  the  towns  of  Scotland,  and  even  extended  his 
tours  to  Manchester,  Liverpool,  and  London,  in  all  which  places  he 
delivered  addresses  to  large  audiences.  He  visited  the  metropolis  three 
times,  and  succeeded,  on  his  third  visit,  in  forming  the  British  and  Foreign 
Temperance  Society.  At  one  of  its  early  meetings  in  Exeter  Hall  he 
delivered  his  famous  lecture  on  the  "  Harmony  of  the  Gospel  and  Tem- 
perance Societies," — a  lecture  which  contains  the  germs  of  the  ablest 
arguments  employed  in  behalf  of  the  movement,  even  under  its  later 
phases.  From  1829  to  1834  a  large  portion  of  his  time  and  means  were 
devoted  to  the  maintenance  of  a  cause  which  he  regarded  as  one  of  the 
handmaids  of  the  gospel,  and  which  commanded  his  sympathy  and 
support  to  his  dying  day. 

Dr  Chalmers,  some  time  before,  had  left  Glasgow  to  fill  the  Chair  of 
Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  St  Andrews.  The  departure  of 
the  master,  however,  did  not  cause  the  disciple  to  relax  in  the  prosecution 
of  those  labours  of  Christian  benevolence  in  which  the  two  had  been  so 
enthusiastic  and  so  successful  fellow-workers.  It  was  now,  1834,  that 
Mr  Collins  projected  the  greatest  of  all  his  enterprises.  This  scheme, 
with  which  his  name  came  afterwards  to  be  mainly  associated,  had  birth 
in  an  incident  of  a  domestic  kind.  He  had  an  only  daughter,  who  was 
confined  to  her  chamber  by  a  lingering  illness.  To  beguile  the  hours  and 
mitigate  the  sufferings  of  the  invalid,  Mr  Collins  would  sit  down  by  her 
bedside,  and  relate  the  sad  history  of  individuals  and  families  whom  it 
had  been  his  lot,  as  an  elder  of  a  very  poor  district,  to  visit  in  the  course 


WILLIAM  COLLIXS. 

of  the  day.  As  she  listened,  she  could  not  help  contrasting  her  own 
happy  condition,  refreshed  by  the  Divine  promises  and  upheld  by  the 
Everlasting  arms,  with  the  utter  misery  of  those  who  were  living  without 
God  and  dying  without  hope.  Can  nothing  be  done,  she  one  day 
asked  her  father,  as  he  sat  beside  her  recounting  the  tale  of  the  day's 
experiences,  can  nothing  be  done  to  bring  the  glorious  truths  on  which 
I  am  reposing  within  the  reach  of  these  God-forsaking  and  God-forsaken 
ones.'  The  question  struck  him.  "Can  nothing  be  done.'"  beseemed 
to  hear  his  daughter  say  again  and  again,  as  he  continued  to  ponder  over 
the  matter.  Yes,  surely,  he  made  answer  to  himself,  something  can 
be  done.  These  men  are  not  far  oflf — they  are  living  in  a  Christian  city 
— and  surely  there  is  wealth  enough  in  Glasgow  to  bring  the  cheapest  of 
all  commodities,  but  the  greatest  of  all  blessings,  to  their  door.  As 
he  pondered,  a  gracious  impulse  led  him  to  devise  and  propound  his 
grand  enterprise  of  aiming  to  provide  twenty  additional  parish  churches 
for  Glasgow.  Many  pronounced  his  scheme  a  "devout  imagination  ;" 
but  the  very  greatness  of  the  enterprise  contributed  largely  to  its 
success.  Christian  philanthropy  in  those  days  found  vent  in  contributions 
of  one  guinea,  five  guineas,  and,  on  very  extraordinary  occasions,  ten 
guineas.  Here  was  an  appeal  to  Christian  men  to  unite  in  achieving  a 
great  object  of  an  evangelical  kind  by  contributions  of  ;^200  each,  pay- 
able in  five  instalments !  This  was  a  novelty ;  but  a  novelty  that  first 
astounded  and  next  attracted  men.  The  originator,  they  saw,  was  in 
earnest.  He  had  given  proof  of  this  by  subscribing  at  once  his  own 
quota,  from,  as  was  known,  very  slender  means.  His  example  stimulated 
the  liberality  of  those  whose  incomes  were  five,  ten,  twenty  fold  that  of  the 
propounder  of  the  scheme,  and  the  result  was  that  in  a  few  months  Mr 
Collins  had  obtained,  mainly  by  his  own  exertions,  the  sum  of;^22,ooo; 
and  only  eight  years  after  he  had  first  mooted  his  proposal  before  an 
incredulous  public,  he  had  the  happiness  of  consummating  his  noble 
enterprise  by  laying  the  foundation  stone  of  the  twentieth  church  erected 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

under  the  auspices  of  the  Glasgow  Church  Building  Society.  Of  these 
churches,  not  fewer  than  thirteen  or  fourteen  had  most  appropriatel}-  the 
name  of  William  Collins  graven  on  their  foundation  stone. 

The  key-note  thus  struck,  the  work  was  taken  up  by  Dr  Chalmers, 
who  resolved  on  doing  for  Scotland  what  Collins  had  so  nobly  done  for 
Glasgow.  When  this  illustrious  divine  put  his  giant  shoulder  to  the  wheel, 
and  went  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land,  arousing  the 
country  to  the  need  of  additional  church  accommodation,  his  former  elder, 
far  from  restricting  his  sympathies  and  efforts  to  Glasgow,  once  more  took 
his  place  by  his  side,  and  accompanied  his  chief  in  prosecution  of  this 
enterprise  of  Christian  philanthropy,  along  with  other  distinguished  men 
who  were  raised  up  at  this  crisis  of  Scottish  history  to  aid  in  the  movement. 

A  Government  Commission  was  appointed  to  inquire  into  the  matter. 
Elaborate  statistics  of  the  spiritual  destitution  of  Glasgow  were  given  in 
by  Mr  Collins  to  that  Commission.  These  were  not  without  important 
results.  Copies  were  sent  to  all  the  dignitaries  of  the  Church  of  England, 
and  the  result  of  their  circulation  among  the  English  bishops  and  clergy, 
was  the  formation  of  church  building  societies  in  at  least  two  of  the 
dioceses  of  the  sister  kingdom.  The  metropolis  of  England  did  not  deem 
it  beneath  it  to  follow  in  the  wake  of  Presbyterian  Glasgow,  nor  its 
metropolitan  pastor  to  copy  the  example  of  the  humble  elder  of  the  Tron. 

But  it  concerns  us  more  to  trace  the  effect  of  this  church  extension 
movement  upon  the  future  fortunes  of  the  Scottish  Church.  In  the  first 
place,  it  established  a  much  higher  scale  of  Christian  liberality  than  had 
been  in  use  aforetime.  This,  in  the  providence  of  God,  was  a  prepara- 
tion for  a  time  of  greater  necessities  and  still  more  urgent  claims,  then 
near  at  hand,  though  as  yet  altogether  unforeseen.  In  the  second  place, 
the  number  of  churches  and  zealous  and  faithful  pastors  were,  within  a 
few  years,  greatly  multiplied.  While  in  1833  there  were  only  twenty-four 
churches  in  Glasgow  in  connection  with  the  Church  of  Scotland,  in 
ten  years  the  number  had  increased   to  forty-four,  and  within  the  same 


IVIUJAM  COLLINS. 
decade  over  the   whole  countr>-  not  less  than   one  hundred   and  eighty- 
seven  new  churches  had  been  erected. 

But  these  were  the  least  important  of  the  results  flowing  from  the 
Church  extension  movement  in  which  Mr  Collins  had  taken  the  initiative. 
Its  fully  ripened  fruits  were  not  gathered  till  the  Disruption,  which,  as 
every  one  knows,  was  followed  by  years  of  church  building  on  a  scale 
never  before  witnessed.  It  is  true  that  the  material  fabrics  erected  by 
the  efforts  of  Chalmers  and  Collins  were  in  almost  every  case  lost  to  the 
Free  Church.  But  let  us  reflect  how  little  was  lost,  when  the  stones  and 
timber  were  adjudged  to  belong  to  those  who  remained  in  the  Establish- 
ment and  how  much  was  gained,  when  the  numerous  and  zealous  con- 
crregations  which  had  been  nursed  in  these  fabrics,  with  the  faithful 
pastors  who  ministered  to  them,  cast  in  their  lot  in  almost  every  instance 
with  the  disestablished  Church  of  Scotland.  Let  us  reflect  also  how 
important  an  item  these  ministers  and  members  formed  in  the  noble  army 
that  gathered  round  the  standard  uplifted  on  the  i8th  of  May  1843  for 
the  crmvn  rights  of  Christ,  and  the  liberties  of  the  Christian  people. 

In  all  these  labours  we  see  Mr  Collins  working  for  an  issue  he  did  not 
foresee,  at  least  till  it  was  close  at  hand.  The  experiments  he  had  made 
were  afterwards  to  be  repeated  on  a  much  larger  scale,  and  the  success 
that  attended  them  in  the  first  instance  emboldened  himself  and 
others  when  similar  operations  had  to  be  undertaken  in  every  city  and 
parish  of  Scotland.  Without  the  enlarged  scale  of  contribution  established 
by  Mr  Collins,  it  would  have  been  all  but  impossible  to  have  reared  the 
five  hundred  new  churches  imperatively  demanded  by  the  Disruption  ; 
and  without  the  living  congregations,  which  his  Church  extension  scheme 
had  called  into  being,  how  very  much  smaller  would  have  been  that  host 
of  ministers,  elders,  and  adherents  that,  marching  out  of  the  Establish- 
ment in  1843,  constituted  themselves  into  the  Free  Protesting  Church  of 
Scotland. 

His  interest  in  all  that  appertained  to  the  highest  good  of  his  native 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


land  continued  unabated  after  the  Disruption.  In  the  labours  of  the 
subsequent  busy  years  to  provide  churches,  manses,  and  schools  for  the 
congregations  of  the  Free  Church,  he  took  part,  according  to  the  measure 
of  his  strength.  He  laid  the  foundation  stone  of  the  new  and  elegant 
Church  erected  for  the  congregation  of  Free  St  John's,  then  under  the 
pastoral  care  of  Dr  Thomas  Brown.  He  also  laid  the  foundation  stone 
of  the  Free  Tron,  of  which  Dr  Robert  Buchanan  was  minister ;  and  now 
he  connected  himself  once  more  with  the  session  of  that  congregation. 
He  had  left  it  twenty-one  years  before ;  he  now  returned  and  acted  as  an 
elder  in  it  till  called  to  the  General  Assembly  and  Church  of  the  first- 
born on  high. 

In  1848,  failing  health  compelled  him  to  seek  the  more  genial  air  of 
Rothesay.  Even  there  the  noble  passion  of  his  soul  could  not  help  dis- 
playing itself  Despite  his  bodily  weakness,  he  took  an  active  part  in  the 
establishing  of  a  missionary  station  in  the  most  destitute  part  of  that 
town.  The  accomplished  biographer  of  Dr  Chalmers,  writing  of  Mr 
Collins  as  one  of  Chalmers'  chosen  and  beloved  friends,  speaks  of  him  as 
one  who,  after  a  life  of  honourable  service  in  the  cause  of  Christ — as 
few  busy  men  among  us  have  ever  lived— in  that  retirement  into  which 
feeble  health  has  forced  him,  still  cherishes  with  unabated  zeal  those 
interests  which  in  bygone  years  he  loved  so  much  to  promote.  The 
writer  of  this  short  memoir  had  the  privilege  of  spending  part  of  a 
day  with  him  in  his  retreat  only  a  little  while  before  his  decease,  and 
he  never  can  forget  the  sweet  serenity  of  spirit  which  breathed  forth  in 
every  word  and  look  ;  the  glow  into  which  his  conversation  kindled  when 
it  turned  on  the  progress  of  Christ's  kingdom  throughout  the  earth,  and 
the  deep  repose  and  joy  of  his  heart  resting,  as  it  evidently  did,  on  his 
Saviour.  On  Sabbath,  the  2d  of  January  1853,  as  the  church  bells  were 
summoning  the  worshippers  to  the  sanctuary,  Mr  Collins  ceasing  to 
breathe,  entered  into  rest.  J.  A.  W. 


lamijs  Cralnfortr. 


AMES  CRAWFORD  was  born  in  North  Fjerwick,  in 
December  1808.  Part  of  his  education  he  received  in  that 
town,  and  part  in  Edinburgh.  In  his  native  town  he 
always  took  the  deepest  interest  to  the  last,  and  was  con- 
nected with  the  burgh  by  legal  ties  throughout  his  life,  as 
well  as  by  relationships  and  old  friendships.  With  the 
whole  surrounding  region  he  was  intimately  acquainted  ;  each  spot  was 
an  old  friend  to  him.  He  delighted  to  shew  his  friends  the  beauties  of 
North  Berwick  Law,  Tantallon  Castle,  and  Dirleton,  and  to  point  out 
the  small  islands  that  lie  out  in  the  bay ;  but  especially  did  his  eye  turn 
to  the  Bass  Rock,  the  prison-house  of  the  martyrs,  which  he  visited  and 
re-visited,  and  of  which  he  at  last  secured  a  permanent  memorial  in  a 
handsome  volume,  embodying  all  that  can  be  told  historically  and 
geologically  of  that  well-known  and  picturesque  island. 

In  Edinburgh  he  betook  himself  to  the  law,  and  entered  the  office  of 
Walter  Dickson,  Esq.,  W.S.  There  he  was  known  for  his  diligence  and 
conscientiousness,  and  especially  for  his  benevolence  and  good  nature  ;  so 
that  to  try  to  "  provoke  Crawford  "  was  one  of  the  feats  which  his  fellow 
apprentices  sometimes  attempted  but  had  to  give  up  as  hopeless. 

In  1831  he  was  one  of  a  small  band  who  planned  the  Presbyterian 
Reviezv  —  a  periodical,  literary,  ecclesiastical,  and  theological  in  its 
character,  which  in  after  years  exercised  no  small  influence  upon  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

affairs  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.  Though  not,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
word,  a  "  literary  man,"  he  shewed  by  his  unwearied  energetic  support  of 
that  Quarterly,  how  thoroughly  he  appreciated  literary  work,  and  how 
intelligently  he  sympathized  with  the  literary  labours  of  others. 

In  the  religious  poetry  of  the  olden  time  Mr  Crawford  was  much 
interested,  and  had  a  large  and  accurate  acquaintanceship  with  the 
names  and  works  of  the  old  poets,  from  the  Reformation  downwards. 
More  than  one  of  his  favourite  hymns  he  printed  in  neat  leaflets  for 
letters,  and  for  general  distribution. 

Perhaps  we  might  say  that  his  favourite  book  was  "  Rutherford's 
Letters,"  with  which  he  was  thoroughly  versant,  and  from  which  he 
delighted  to  quote  to  friends  when  sitting  by  the  fireside  or  walking  by 
the  way.  It  is  in  great  measure  to  him  that  the  public  are  indebted  for 
that  splendid  edition  of  the  "  Letters,"  in  two  handsome  octavo  volumes, 
which  was  published  in  Edinburgh  in  the  year  1863.  It  was  one  of  the 
last  things  to  which  he  set  his  hands,  and  he  was  greatly  gladdened  at 
being  helpful  in  raising  this  monument  to  the  memory  of  his  beloved 
divine  before  he  himself  was  taken  away. 

Having  all  along  taken  an  interest  in  ecclesiastical  affairs,  and  being 
well  versed  in  Church  law,  he  assisted  in  editing  the  "  Book  of  Styles," 
published  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Church  Law  Society,  of 
which  he  was  a  lay  member.  He  was  one  of  a  small  committee  of  that 
society  to  whom  were  entrusted  in  1842  the  editing  of  the  Acts  of  the 
General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.  The  volume  was 
published  in  the  following  year,  with  a  brief  preface  by  the  Rev. 
Thomas  Pitcairn,  dated  just  three  days  before  the  Disruption,  15th 
May  1843. 

At  the  Disruption  he  was  appointed  Depute  Clerk  of  the  Free 
Church  General  Assembly,  which  office  he  continued  to  discharge  till 
he  was  taken  from  us  with  singular  exactness,  urbanity,  and  painstaking 
toil.     He  grudged  no  labour  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  and  no  one 


JAMES  CRAWFORD. 

ever  saw  him  ruffled  in  temper  by  the  pressure  of  business,  or  the 
inconsiderateness  of  those  who  had  to  deal  with  him  as  clerk. 

He  was  firm  and  decided,  not  only  in  principle,  but  in  his  actings. 
With  all  his  gentleness,  he  would  not  allow  himself  to  be  moved  away 
from  what  he  believed  to  be  the  path  of  duty.  He  was  not  only  the 
Christian  friend  in  private,  but  he  was  the  Christian  man  of  business  in 
public.  He  did  not  obtrude  his  religion  upon  others,  but  he  made  them 
feel  at  all  times  "  whose  he  was,  and  whom  he  served." 

A  thorough  Presbyterian,  and  an  intelligent  Free  Churchman,  he  was 
yet  a  Christian  all  over,  and  knew  how  to  recognise  Christ  in  his  members 
everywhere.  Not  confounding  distinctive  testimony  with  sectarianism, 
he  was  not  ashamed  of  his  creed  or  his  church ;  yet  he  always  held  his 
own  without  censorious  depreciation  of  others.  Full  of  the  charity  which 
thinketh  no  evil,  he  yet  possessed  a  far  greater  amount  of  shrewdness 
and  accurate  discernment  of  character  than  he  was  credited  with.  With- 
out artifice  or  subterfuge,  without  affectation  or  show,  he  went  about  his 
daily  duties,  whether  sacred  or  secular,  shewing  how  to  resist  as  well  as 
how  to  yield.  With  a  punctuality  and  attendance  to  business  rarely 
equalled,  he  found  time  in  the  midst  of  common  duties  for  reading,  for 
prayer,  for  visiting  the  poor,  for  assisting  the  many  religious  institutions 
of  the  city.  Business  did  not  blunt  the  edge  of  his  spirit,  nor  unfit  him 
for  the  study  of  the  Word,  which  was  to  him  not  a  book  of  theology,  or 
poetry,  or  sentiment,  but  a  book  of  life,  a  well  of  living  water  for  his 
thirsty  soul.  While  studying  the  whole  Scriptures,  he  dwelt  specially  on 
those  passages  which  revealed  the  person  of  his  Lord,  either  in  the  grace 
of  his  first  coming,  or  the  glory  of  his  second.  The  prophetic  Word  he 
pondered  much,  and  delighted  to  meditate  on  the  predictions  of  the  coming 
glory  of  the  Church  and  of  Israel.  He  "  loved  the  appearing"  of  Christ ; 
he  "  watched  "  for  it ;  he  longed  to  see  the  King  in  his  beauty. 

He  not  only  read,  but  studied  his  Bible.  It  was  his  companion 
wherever  he  went.     He  treasured  up  and  noted  down  cven,^  illustration 


niSRUPTTOX  WORTHIES. 

of  it  that  he  could  lay  hold  of,  from  friends,  from  books,  from  sermons. 
One  could  not  be  with  him  five  minutes  without  having  the  attention 
called  to  some  passage  on  which  he  had  been  meditating,  or  on  which  he 
had  obtained  fresh  light.  The  Bible  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  using 
daily  is  all  written  over  with  references  and  remarks,  sometimes  original 
and  sometimes  borrowed.  The  interlinings  and  the  marginal  annotations 
frequently  cover  the  page,  and  almost  hide  the  print.  It  may  be  worth 
while  to  gather  up  a  few  of  these,  not  so  much  for  the  importance  or 
originality  of  the  remarks,  as  for  the  exhibition  of  the  writer's  mind. 
On  Rev.  iii.  14,  he  remarks,  "  Laodicea  is  sunk  in  lukewarm  apathy, 
dreaming  of  peace  when  on  the  edge  of  an  undone  eternity ;  but  not 
conclusively  abandoned."  On  the  margin  of  ist  John  v.  11,  there  is 
written  :  "  Boston  says,  Sweet  and  comfortable  prop  of  my  soul."  On 
the  words,  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death"  (Jas.  i.  15),  we 
have,  "Perhaps  'finished'  has  allusion  to  the  sin  of  our  first  parents  not 
being  finished  till  the  forbidden  fruit  was  eaten,  although  both  Eve  and 
Adam  had  sinned  before — the  former  by  believing  the  devil,  and  the 
latter  in  also  believing  a  lie."  On  Heb.  xiii.  15,  we  read,  "Nothing  shews 
the  degeneracy  of  the  heart  more  than  the  not  praising  God.  David  did 
it  continually."  At  the  title  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  written, 
"The  royal  and  eternal  priesthood  of  the  Messiah."  On  Phil.  iv.  13, 
"  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ,  which  strengtheneth  me,"  his  brief 
remark  is,  "  Every  one  should  be  able  to  say  this."  Above  2d  Cor. 
iii.  6  is  written  in  red  ink,  "  Quoted  by  Dr  Cunningham  on  his  death- 
bed, as  a  message  to  the  students,  December  1S61";  and  over  ist  Cor. 
XV.  is  written,  "This  chapter  was  read  to  John  Knox  by  his  desire  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  day  of  his  death."  On  ist  Cor.  ii.  14,  he  writes, 
"  A  man  who  is  in  the  Spirit  discerns  things  ;  does  not  judge,  but  has 
perception  or  discernment  of  which  the  world  is  totally  ignorant."  At 
the  top  of  the  eighth  of  Romans  is  written,  "  The  secret  of  living  in  the 
faith  of  an  ever-present  Saviour  ;  lo\-ing,  tender,  watchful,  faithful."     At 


JAMES  CRAWFORD. 

Prov.  xi.  24,  "  He  that  watereth  shall  be  watered  also  himself,"  he  has 

written  these  four  words,  as  if  expressi\e  of  his  own  experience  as  a 

teacher  and  elder:  "What  encouragement  to  teachers."     On  the  Song 

of  Solomon  iv.  6,  "  Until  the  day  break,"  &c.,  there  is  this  note,  "This 

verse  was  wished  to  be  put  upon  a  tombstone  in  Rome  by  a  Protestant 

father  for  a  daughter.     It  was  forbidden,  as  the  Bible;  for,  if  permitted, 

it  would  admit  the  possibility  of  Protestants  being  saved."     At  the  close 

of  the   fifty-third   of  Isaiah  he  writes,  "The    Church   (believers)   is   in 

Christ,  complete  in  Him,  holy  in  Him,  powerful  in  Him,  hopeful  in  Him, 

glorious  in  Him."     At  Lsaiah  Ivii.  i,  this  note  is  made:  " Dr  Duncan,  St 

Luke's,   Kdin,   25th   October    1853,  after   Dr  Gordon's  death:"  "Salt" 

{Matt.  V.   12),  "  light"  (Matt.  v.  14).     Psa.  cxix.  20,  "My  soul  breaketh," 

&c.,  he  marks  b\-  a  quotation  from  Dr  Chalmers,  which  was  evidently 

j  meant  to  be  a  declaration  of  his  own  feeling  as  in  coincidence  with  that 

I  of  Dr  Chalmers,  "  Most  descriptive  of  my  own  state  and  experience  of 

j  any  in  the  Bible."     And  on  the  same  Psalm,  ver.  130,  he  quotes  the  saying 

I  of  another,  "  You  cannot  handle  any  saying  of  God  in  a  true  frame  of 

I  spirit  without  finding  yourself,  in  so  doing,  at  a  door  which  may  lead 

you  far  in  into  the  palace, — to  the  innermost  thoughts  of  God's  heart 

toward  us."     On  Amos  v.  18,  he  writes  briefly,  "Woe  to  those  who  are 

I  not  prepared,  as  wise  virgins,  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord."     On  Obadiah 

'  and  the  brevity  of  his  prophecy,  he  makes  or  quotes  the  remark,  "  If 

I  angels  were  to  write  books,  we  should  have  few  folios."     On  the  side  of 

the  first  verse  of  the  13th  of  Zechariah,  about  the  fountain  opened,  there  is 

this  entry,    "Tent  at  Ballachulish,  September  1846."     On  Matt.  xi.  28, 

"  I  will  give  you  rest,"  he  writes,  "Unrest  is  the  great  characteristic  of 

J  the  world."     On  Matt,  xxviii.  10,  he  writes,  '"My  birt/iirii.'     No  change 

j  in  Christ's  feelings  after  His  resurrection — '  My  Father  and  your  Father, 

my  God  and  your  God.'     How  lovely!"     On  Mark  xiv.  8,  "She  hath 

done  what  she  could,"  he  says,  "  Sweet  foretaste  of  things  yet  to  come  ! 

Jesus  will  plead  our  cause,  as  he  pleads  this  woman's." 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  the  different  places  and  ministers  recorded 
in  the  margin  of  this  well-used  Bible.  We  have  Dr  Cunningham,  Dr 
Chalmers,  Dr  Duncan,  Dr  Candlish,  Dr  Bruce,  Dr  Hamilton,  Mr  Hewit- 
son,  with  others.  We  have  many  of  the  Edinburgh  churches,  such  as 
St  Andrew's,  St  Luke's,  Lady  Glenorchy's,  as  well  as  North  Berwick, 
Dirleton,  and  Regent  Square,  London.  He  delighted  to  go  where  he  might 
hear  the  words  of  grace.  Sabbath  or  week-day  ;  and  he  was  above  many 
"  a  lover  of  good  men."  The  image  of  Christ  in  any  one  had  an  irresistible 
attraction  for  him.  Loving  the  Master,  he  loved  the  disciple.  The  prayer 
meeting,  the  Bible  reading,  or  the  gathering  of  the  "  two  or  three "  he 
delighted  in.  No  one  who  observed  him  at  these  gatherings  will  forget 
his  attitude  of  earnest  looking  and  listening,  as  if  drinking  in  every  word. 
He  was  sensitive  as  to  the  soundness  of  the  doctrine  taught,  and  turned 
away  from  novelties  that  please  the  ear,  but  do  not  feed  the  soul. 

One  of  the  last  conversations  which  the  writer  of  this  memoir  had 
with  him  was  when  he  lay  upon  his  death-bed.  The  subject  was  "  Christ 
our  life,"  on  which  his  mind  had  evidently  been  dwelling.  Once  and 
again  did  he  repeat  the  words,  "  The  promise  of  life  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus"  (2  Tim.  i.  2).  Having  in  his  days  of  early  manhood  found 
his  way  to  the  Cross,  and  learned  there  the  forgiving  love  of  God,  he 
had  walked  this  life  as  one  who  had  tasted  that  the  Lord  was  gracious, 
and  who  sought  to  lay  everything  that  he  possessed  at  the  foot  of  the 
Cross.  Surrounded  with  friends,  burdened  oftentimes  with  business, 
called  to  do  much  secular  work,  he  yet  maintained  his  conversation  in 
heaven.  "Blessed  are  the  meek,"  might  be  his  epitaph;  for  with  an 
uncommon  meekness,  gentleness,  and  tranquillity,  did  he  pass  through 
earth,  leaving  most  blessed  fragrance  behind  him. 

He  died  in  November  1863;  and  he  lies  buried  in  the  Grange 
Cemetery,  not  far  from  Chalmers  and  Cunningham  and  the  other  wor- 
thies of  his  generation,  to  whom  he  was  so  fondly  attached.  H.  B. 


IliUiam  lotobson  CraufurtJ. 


CRAUFURDLAND ) 


FINER  specimen  of  a  country  gentleman  could  not 
anywhere  be  found  than  William  Howieson  Craufurd. 
He  was  the  representative  of  one  of  the  oldest  families 
in  Scotland.  His  mother  was  the  only  surviving  child 
of  John  Howieson  of  Braehead,  in  the  county  of  Mid- 
lothian, and  Elizabeth  Craufurd  of  Craufurdland,  in 
the  county  of  Ayr.  By  this  marriage  the  two  families  of  Howieson  and 
Craufurd  were  united,  and  eventually  the  two  properties  passed  into  the 
possession  of  Mr  Craufurd.  Each  of  these  has  a  history  of  its  own— a 
romantic  interest  attaches  to  the  one,  a  legal  interest  attaches  to  the 
other.  The  possession  of  Braehead  dates  as  far  back  as  the  time  of 
James  V.  The  king  had  sallied  forth  unattended  on  one  of  his  adven- 
turous expeditions,  and,  according  to  the  tradition,  he  was  attacked  by 
four  or  five  gipsies,  who  were  proving  more  than  a  match  for  him, 
when  John  Howieson,  a  bondsman  on  Braehead  farm,  came  to  his 
rescue,  and  delivered  him  out  of  their  hands.  The  king  invited  him  to 
call  next  day  at  Holyrood,  and  inquire  for  the  goodman  of  Ballengiech, 
and  he  would  at  least  shew  him  the  king's  apartments.  On  doing  so,  he 
found  to  his  surprise  that  it  was  the  king  he  had  befriended.  In  token  of 
his  gratitude  he  conferred  upon  him  the  lands  of  Braehead  ;  and  from  that 
day  to  this  they  have  continued  in  the  family  in  an  unbroken  line.     This 


DISRUPTION    WORTHIES. 

gift  was  coupled  with  the  condition,  that  whenever  the  king  came  to 
Holyrood  or  passed  over  Cramond  Bridge,  tlie  Laird  should  bring  forth  a 
basin  to  him  in  which  to  wash  his  hands.  When  George  IV.  visited 
Scotland  in  1822,  Mr  Craufurd  had  the  honour  of  performing  that  service 
to  his  majesty  at  the  banquet  given  to  him  by  the  city  of  Edinburgh 
on  the  24th  of  August.  The  ceremony  is  thus  described  by  authority  : — 
"As  soon  as  the  king  had  dined,  a  silver  basin  containing  rose  water 
was  brought  to  his  majesty  by  William  Howieson  Craufurd,  younger  of 
Braehead,  who,  in  the  right  of  his  mother  as  proprietrix  of  Braehead, 
in  the  county  of  Midlothian,  claims  this  privilege,  the  service  performed 
being  the  ancient  tenure  by  which  the  estate  of  Braehead  is  held." 

The  succession  to  Craufurdland  was  the  subject  of  protracted  litigation. 
In  the  year  1793  Colonel  Craufurd  of  Craufurdland  died  in  Edinburgh 
unmarried.  By  a  deed  made  on  his  deathbed  he  settled  his  estate  on 
Thomas  Coutts,  Esq.,  banker,  London.  The  validity  of  this  deed  was 
disputed  by  his  aunt  and  heir,  who  had  married  the  Laird  of  Braehead, 
and  an  action  of  reduction  was  instituted.  Dying  before  it  was  finished, 
it  was  carried  on  by  her  daughter  who  succeeded  her,  and  after  many 
long  delays,  it  was  eventually  reduced  by  a  decree  of  the  House  of 
Lords.  This  decision  is  frequently  appealed  to  as  determining  the 
question  of  law  in  all  such  cases. 

Born  on  the  29th  of  November  17S1,  Mr  Craufurd  was  educated  at 
the  High  School  of  Edinburgh,  from  which  he  passed  to  the  University, 
where  he  prosecuted  those  studies  that  enlarged  his  mind  and  fitted  him 
for  filling  worthily  and  well  the  position  he  was  afterwards  to  occupy. 
At  a  comparatively  early  period  he  was  brought  under  the  power  of 
divine  grace.  This  was  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  an  invalid  sister,  to 
whom  he  was  greatly  attached.  Before  she  passed  away,  she  had  the 
unspeakable  joy  of  finding  that  he  had  passed  from  death  to  life.  The 
change  was  decided,  and  its  genuineness  was  attested  by  a  long  life  of 
sustained  consistent  Christianity.     While  nature  gifted  him  with  all  the 


IVILLIAM  HOWIESON  CRAUFURD. 
amiabilities  of  a  gentle  and  loving  disposition,  grace  clothed  him  with 
those  higher  attributes  that  assimilate  the  soul  to  the  Saviour.  His 
religion,  like  himself,  was  lovely  ;  it  knew  no  gloom,  and  put  on  no 
austerity.  He  adorned  the  doctrine  he  professed,  and  commended  it  to 
other  men. 

In  1808  he  was  married  to  Janet  Esther,  only  daughter  of  James 
\Vh)'tc,  Esq.  of  Newmains,  a  lady  of  great  intelligence,  who  took  a  deep 
interest  in  all  that  concerned  the  welfare  of  the  people,  and  in  the  neigh- 
bouring town  of  Kilmarnock  lent  her  influence  in  promoting  every 
good  work.  Domestic  in  their  habits,  they  dwelt  among  their  own  people. 
The  situation  of  the  castle  is  very  beautiful.  "It  stands  on  the  summit  ot 
a  steep  bank  overlooking  Craufurdland  water,  which  bounds  the  estate 
upon  one  side,  while  Fenwick  water  limits  it  on  the  other.  The  castle  is 
surrounded  with  wood,  and  there  are  shady  avenues  in  the  vicinity,  as 
v/ell  as  a  beautiful  lake."  In  all  public  matters  Mr  Craufurd  took  a 
great  and  active  interest.  As  a  Deputy-Lieutenant  of  the  County  of  Ayr, 
Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  Commissioner  of  Supply,  he  filled  many  impor- 
tant positions.  All  through  life  he  was  a  keen  politician,  thoroughly  Con- 
servative ;  no  one  canvassed  with  greater  eagerness  or  greater  success  than 
he  :  while  the  progress  of  events  somewhat  modified  his  views,  he  retained 
his  political  opinions  to  the  end.  But  while  these  things  received  a  share 
of  his  attention,  it  was  the  cause  of  Christ  that  awakened  his  deepest 
interest,  and  his  sympathies  were  all  on  the  right  side.  At  a  time  when  the 
friends  of  evangelical  religion  were  few,  and  those  who  espoused  it  were 
exposed  to  reproach,  Mr  Craufurd  stood  forward,  and  made  an  open  and 
fearless  avowal  of  his  convictions  ;  occupying  the  chair  at  Bible  Society 
and  missionary  meetings  in  Edinburgh,  and  joining  with  Dr  Andrew 
Thomson  in  the  defence  of  pure  Bible  circulation,  he  enrolled  himself  in 
the  ranks  of  Anti-patronage,  a  cause  which  in  those  days  was  treated  with 
ridicule  and  scorn,  and  made  any  one  who  maintained  it  become  a  marked 
man.     As  an  elder  of  the  church,  he  sat  for  nearly  sixty  years  in  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
General  Assembly,  and  if  his  voice  was  seldom  heard  in  the  discussions, 
his  influence  and  vote  were  always  given  for  the  removal  of  abuses,  and 
in  defence  of  the  liberties  of  the  people,  and  the  purity  of  the  Church. 
One  example  may  be  given.  Once  and  again  what  was  known  as  the 
«  Bracadale  Case  "  came  up  before  the  General  Assembly.  It  involved 
the  question  whether  a  minister  could  be  compelled  to  administer  sealing 
ordinances  to  persons  whom  he  considered,  from  their  ignorance  and 
character,  unsuitable — a  rampant  Moderatism  having  issued  orders  which, 
pressing  upon  the  conscience  of  the  minister,  involved  him  in  jeopardy  of 
deposition  for  contumacy.  The  case  became  complicated,  but  the  friends 
of  evangelical  religion  rallied  round  him;  and  from  the  moderator's  chair, 
after  the  lapse  of  well-nigh  half  a  century,  the  minister  in  question,  Mr 
Roderick  M'Leod  of  Skye,  made  graceful  reference  to  Mr  Craufurd  as 
one  of  the  few  survivors  who  had  stood  by  him  in  an  evil  day. 

It  was  but  in  keeping  with  his  whole  character  and  antecedents,  that 
when  "the  ten  years'  conflict"  arose,  he  should  be  found  on  the  evan- 
gelical side,  and  that  when  the  day  of  decision  came,  he  should  march 
forth  under  the  leadership  of  those  noble  men  who  surrendered  position 
for  principle,  worldly  interest  and  honour  for  Christ's  cause  and  crown. 
During  those  eventful  years,  when  we  were  denounced  as  rebels  and  revolu- 
tionists, disloyal  to  the  throne,  and  turning  the  world  upside  down,  it  was 
a  matter  of  no  small  moment  to  have  a  man  of  the  social  position  and 
high  character  of  Mr  Craufurd  lending  to  our  cause  the  weight  of  his 
honoured  name.  In  politics  a  warm  supporter  of  Sir  Robert  Peel's 
government,  and  in  himself  the  very  impersonation  of  law  and  loyalty — 
a  man  who  would  have  died  for  his  queen  and  country — the  idea  of  Mr 
Craufurd  being  revolutionary  was  felt  to  be  an  impossibility  :  the  accusa- 
tion died  away  upon  the  tongue.  But  while  his  political  connections 
must  have  made  it  a  greater  trial  and  sacrifice  to  him,  it  only  served  to 
bring  out  into  brighter  exhibition  the  strength  of  his  Christian  principle. 
The  well-known  incident  of  the  falling  of  the  picture  of  King  William 


WILLIAM  HOWIESON  CRAUFURD. 
in  the  ancient  Palace  of  Holyrood,  when  the  crowds  attended  the  levee  of 
the  Lord  High  Commissioner  on  the  Disruption  morning,  is  associated 
with  his  name  :   it  was  he  that  exclaimed  from  a  distant  part  of  the 
throng,  "There  goes  the  Revolution  Settlement !" 

At  the  Disruption,  along  with  several  other  valued  elders  and  a 
considerable  following  of  the  people,  he  left  the  Low  Church  of  Kil- 
marnock, and  attached  himself  to  the  Free  High  Church,  in  which  for 
twenty-eight  years,  till  the  day  of  his  death,  he  continued  to  bear  office. 
In  ever>'thing  connected  with  the  congregation  he  took  the  deepest 
interest,  and  by  his  character  and  influence  he  contributed  largely  to  its 
strength.  The  Sustentation  Fund  especially  shared  his  liberality,  and 
he  made  the  Deacons'  Courts  of  the  various  congregations  in  which  his 
properties  were  situated  the  channel  of  communication.  It  was  no  half- 
hearted adhesion  which  he  gave  to  the  cause  ;  he  was  a  most  enthusiastic 
and  thorough-going  Free  Churchman.  But  while  he  was  firm  and  un- 
bending in  his  adherence  to  principle,  he  passed  through  those  exciting 
scenes,  when  sharp  words  were  spoken  and  ungracious  deeds  were  done, 
with  perfect  calmness  and  serenity,  preserving  his  friendships  unbroken. 

Few  men  ever  gathered  around  them  so  large  a  share  of  general 
estimation  as  Mr  Craufurd.  As  an  expression  of  their  admiration  of  his 
hi"-h  character,  he  was  requested  by  his  numerous  friends  to  sit  for  his 
portrait,  which  now  hangs  in  the  fine  old  castle.  The  Presbytery  of 
Irvine,  whose  representative  in  the  General  Assembly  he  had  been  for 
fifty  years,  invited  him  to  a  public  entertainment  to  celebrate  his  official 
jubilee.  Spared  beyond  the  ordinary  term  of  human  life,  he  moved 
among  his  fellows  like  a  venerable  patriarch,  and  wherever  he  went  the 
eyes  of  a  new  generation  were  turned  towards  him  with  respectful  regard. 
Time  laid  her  hand  very  gently  upon  him,  and  till  very  near  the  close  he 
had  few  of  the  infirmities  of  old  age.  He  had  a  long  twilight,  and  his  sun 
went  down  without  a  cloud.  His  place  in  the  sanctuary  which  he  loved  so 
well  bcran  to  be  frequently  empty.     At  several  communion  seasons  he 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

was  able  to  be  present  only  at  the  table  service.  On  the  last  occasion  he 
took  the  minister  and  his  fellow-elders  by  the  hand  with  an  affectionate 
grasp,  and  on  retiring,  he  looked  round  and  said,  "  The  Lord  be  with  you 
all  ;  my  heart  is  with  you,  but  I  am  not  able  to  remain."  For  a  period  of 
nine  months  he  was  confined  to  his  room.  He  suffered  no  pain,  but  there 
was  great  feebleness.  The  last  time  I  saw  him  he  received  me  with  the 
same  pleasant  smile ;  his  countenance  was  lighted  up  with  the  old  genuine 
geniality  ;  time  had  written  no  wrinkles  on  his  brow,  and  age  had  brought 
along  with  it  no  gloom,— even  his  memory,  sadly  failed  though  it  was, 
seemed  singularly  fresh.  Pointing  to  a  portrait  on  the  wall,  he  asked  if 
I  remembered  that  lady.  It  was  that  of  his  deceased  wife— the  old  affec- 
tion unabated — but  above  all  there  was  the  calm  repose  in  his  Saviour, 
and  the  bright  hope  of  a  speedy  entrance.  During  all  those  months  no 
repining  word  escaped  him.  He  enjoyed  being  read  to,  but  by-and-bye 
all  other  books  were  laid  aside ;  he  could  listen  to  nothing  but  the 
Bible  and  a  few  hymns,  his  chief  favourites  being,  "  I  heard  the  voice  of 
Jesus  say,"  and  "  Just  as  I  am,"  adding  at  the  close  of  it,  "  These  were  my 
father's  last  words."  As  the  end  drew  near,  the  happier  he  grew.  His  con- 
finement to  his  bed  was  short,  but  his  exhaustion  was  extreme.  His  con- 
sciousness continued  almost  to  the  close.  On  the  morning  of  the  17th  of 
September  1871,  he  passed  away  without  a  struggle,  in  the  ninetieth  year 
of  his  age,  leaving  behind  him  a  memory  which  will  long  survive  as  that 
of  a  man  of  stainless  honour,  of  winning  gentleness,  and  of  genuine,  but 
unobtrusive  piety.  His  wife  and  two  daughters  predeceased  him,  and  he 
is  succeeded  in  his  estates  by  his  only  son.  T.  M. 


^L  M.MAKGILL  CRICHTON 


'-Q-' 


labift  itaitlantr  Jltakgill  Cmljtmt. 


AVID  MAITLAND  MAKGILL  CRICHTON  took  rank 
in  the  Disruption  days  as  one  of  "the  Lords  of  the 
Congregation."  His  birth,  his  bearing,  his  shrewdness 
in  discerning  what  ought  to  be  done,  at  once  assigned 
to  him  this  honoured  place.  In  addition  to  this,  he  was 
one  of  the  foremost  and  lealest  in  the  promulgation  and 
defence  of  tlie  Church's  principles  and  rights,  when  church  court  and 
platform  were  distinguished  by  the  noblest  band  of  eloquent  men  that 
Scotland  had  ever  listened  to.  And  all  was  heightened  by  the  generous 
self-devotion  with  which  all  was  done.  Time,  labour,  health,  horses, 
hospitality,  means,  were  all  unstintedly  surrendered  by  him  in  the  great 
struggle.     The  spirit  of  Christian  chivalry  was  in  the  man. 

Makgill  Crichton  was  bom  at  Rankeilour  in  1801.  His  ancestry 
connected  him  with  the  Maitiands  of  Lauderdale  ;  with  James  Makgill, 
the  friend  of  John  Knox,  and  the  founder  of  the  Rankeilour  family  ; 
with  Viscount  Frendraught,  Lord  Crichton,  to  whose  title  he  ser\'ed 
himself  as  heir  ;  and  with  the  Johnstons  of  Lathrisk.  Being  the  second 
son,  he  studied  law,  and  passed  as  advocate  in  1822.  By  the  death 
of  his  brother  he  succeeded  to  the  heritage  of  Rankeilour. 

But  his  highest  distinction,  and  as  Baron  Bunsen  said  of  himself  on  his 
death-bed,  "  his  richest  experience,  was  the  having  known  Jesus  Christ." 
To  this  he  was  "won"  by  the  Christian  conversation  of  his  first  wife,  a 

^  H  135 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
daughter  of  Mr  Hog  of  Newliston.  He  saw  in  her  during  a  lengthened 
illness  the  sustaining  power  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  And  what  he  saw  in 
her  he  sought  and  got  for  himself — a  saving  interest  in  the  same  Redeemer. 
From  the  very  first  to  the  very  last  of  his  religious  life,  the  inner  character 
of  his  religion  never  altered.  It  was  that  of  an  individual  soul  dealing  with 
a  personal  God.  It  was  a  transacting  with  God  on  the  provisions  and  pro- 
mises of  the  gospel  for  all  that,  as  a  fallen  creature,  he  felt  that  he  needed. 

If  then,  as  Carlyle  says,  "  belief  is  the  whole  basis,  essence,  and 
practical  outcome  of  human  souls,"  it  is  to  the  faith  of  Makgill  Crichton  j 

that  we  are  to  look  for  the  purpose  and  the  energy  which  he  put  forth 
in  the  struggles  of  the  Church,  and  "  by  this  he  obtained  a  good  report." 
This  only  can  adequately  explain  the  man's  entire  consecration  to  the 
work.     It  was  faith  that  worked,  it  was  love  that  laboured. 

In  1834  it  was  that  Makgill  Crichton  enlisted  as  a  willing  worker, 
under  the  leadership  of  Dr  Chalmers,  in  the  cause  of  Church  Extension. 
The  commencement  of  his  labours  consisted  in  hard,  patient,  obscure 
local  efforts  to  call  forth  thought  and  interest  and  liberality  to  the 
subject.  Chalmers  acknowledged,  "  with  the  deepest  feelings  of  gratitude, 
his  exertions,"  and  was  accustomed  to  express  it  as  his  wish  that  there 
was  a  "  Makgill  Crichton  in  every  parish."  By-and-bye  he  was  moved 
forward  to  the  front  as  a  platform  speaker.  There  he  culminated  at 
once  as  the  most  efficient  of  orators.  Everything  was  in  his  favour.  He 
was  in  his  thirty-fourth  year.  An  air  of  distinction  sat  upon  the  man. 
His  figure  was  tall.  An  expression  of  firmness  gave  character  to  his 
sharp-cut  features.  His  voice  rung  clear  and  trumpet-toned  through  the 
largest  meeting.  The  cause  which  he  advocated  was  of  the  very 
noblest.  The  motive  which  inspired  him  was  of  the  very  highest.  "  If 
under  the  Church,"  he  said,  "  we  have  ourselves  tasted  of  the  word  of  life, 
we  have  in  ourselves  the  true  and  only  spring  of  pure  philanthropy,  and 
of  love  to  God."  The  high-souled  look  which  lighted  him  up  when  he 
pled  his  cause,  convinced  every  observer  of  his  sincerity  and  earnestness. 


DAVID  MAITLAND  MAKGILL  CRICHTON. 

His  success  was  very  great,  but  sometimes  he  was  trysted  with 
disappointments  and  downcasting.  After  a  church  extension  tour,  in 
wliich  he  met  with  discouragement,  he  returned  to  Rankeilour.  His 
mind  was  weighted  with  its  own  depressions.  It  chanced  to  be  the 
night  of  the  prayer-meeting,  which  was  held  in  the  house  of  old  Saunders 
Honeyman  in  Springfield,  and  being  one  of  the  members,  David  Makgill 
Crichton  went  to  it.  Before  the  service  commenced,  he  unburdened  his 
heart  by  telling  his  humble  friends  how  much  discouraged  he  was. 
All  they  of  the  meeting  gave  him  their  attention  and  sympathy. 
It  was  old  Saunders'  turn  to  conduct  the  services.  Saunders  selected 
tlic  1 32d  Psalm,  and  with  solemn  Scotch  accent  read  out — 

' '  David  and  his  afflictions  all, 
Lord,  do  Thou  think  upon." 

After  singing  the  usual  four  verses,  they  knelt  on  the  earthen  flojr, 
Saunders  led  in  the  prayer,  asking  for  the  kneeling  company  all  promised 
and  purchased  blessings,  and  not  forgetting  "  David  and  his  afflictions." 
The  laird  returned  home,  and  his  countenance  was  no  longer  sad. 
Those  clay-floor  cottage  prayers  were  the  presage  of  success. 

With  the  view  of  aiding  the  cause  of  Church  Reform  and  Church 
Extension,  Mr  Makgill  Crichton  complied  with  a  call  which  was  given 
him,  to  offer  himself  for  the  representation  of  the  St  Andrews  district  of 
Burghs  in  Parliament.  He  entered  the  field  as  a  moderate  Conservative. 
He  left  the  field,  "declaring  his  mistrust  both  of  Whig  and  Tory,  and 
assuming  the  independent  position  of  a  Bible  politician,"  words  which 
Merle  D'Aubigne  adopted  as  a  motto  to  one  of  his  own  pamphlets.  Mr 
EUice  was  his  opponent  in  the  contest  ;  and  out  of  551  votes  given,  it 
was  only  by  the  narrow  majority  of  29  votes  that  Mr  Ellice  was  returned. 

It  was  because  the  Christian  men  and  women  of  Scotland  believed 
that  the  Church  of  Scotland,  "  like  Jerusalem  which  is  above,"  was  free, 
and  protected  in  her  freedom  by  the  constitutional  law  of  the  country, 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

that  they  wished  to  promote  the  extension  of  that  Church.  But  as  the 
Church  went  for\vard,  reforming  her  practice  according  to  the  word  of 
God  and  her  own  standards,  the  law  courts,  by  a  strange  fatuity, 
obstructed  her  path  at  every  stage  by  a  series  of  decisions  which  have 
deprived  her  of  every  shred  of  jurisdiction.  "  He  that  is  spiritual 
discerneth  all  things."  As  these  law  court  decisions  succeeded  each 
other,  the  Evangelical  leaders  felt,  that  such  a  church  as  the  law  courts 
leave  to  us,  is  a  church  not  worth  extending.  It  would  be  a  moral  and 
spiritual  nullity  in  the  land.  And  the  men  and  women  in  Scotland  who 
knew  their  Bibles  and  the  Church  history  of  Scotland,  responded,  the  true 
Church  of  Scotland,  which  is  the  mother  of  us  all,  is  and  has  been  a  free 
church,  and,  God  helping  us,  she  shall  be  free.  And  so  the  great  question 
of  spiritual  independence  came  up  and  stirred  the  countrj-. 

No  one  was  more  impressed  than  was  Makgill  Crichton,  of  the  far- 
reaching  importance  of  this  subject.  As  a  Christian  who  read  his  Bible, 
he  saw  that  this  spiritual  independence  was  "  a  thing  touching  the  King," 
and  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Church.  As  a  Scotchman,  he  knew  Scottish 
Church  history,  and  that  in  the  words  of  Froude,  "  the  political  freedom 
of  the  country  had  been  hitherto  wrapped  up  in  the  kirk,"  or  in  the  words 
of  Professor  Blackie,  "  the  centre  of  Scottish  nationality  lay  in  the  Scotch 
Presbyterian  religion."  As  a  lawyer,  he  was  well  convinced  that  the 
constitution  of  the  country  and  special  statutes  had  secured,  as  far  as  it 
was  possible  for  legislation  to  do  it,  protection  to  the  Church  in  all 
spiritual  matters.  He  was  quite  equipped  for  the  conflict,  and  most 
heroically  did  he  enter  on  its  self-denying  labours.  In  church,  in  school- 
house,  in  hall,  in  barn,  all  throughout  Scotland,  and  in  many  parts  of 
England  and  of  Ireland,  did  he  advocate  that  Scottish  doctrine  of  the 
co-ordinate  jurisdiction  of  church  and  state,  which  Minghetti  has  in  this 
year  of  1875  been  commending  to  his  constituents  at  Boulogne,  and  to  the 
Italian  Parliament,  as  that  which  can  alone  secure  a  free  church  in  a 
free  state.     If  it  is  in  the  masses  that  the  feelings  of  a  community  reside, 


DA  VID  MAITLAND  MAKGILL  CRICHTON. 

no  man,  cither  clerical  or  lay,  did  more  to  implant  those  great  church 
principles  in  the  mind  of  the  masses,  than  did  Makgill  Crichton. 

It  is  not  easy  to  convey  to  the  reader  an  idea  of  the  multitudinous 
subjects  which  were  constantly  pressing  upon  the  attention  of  Makgill 
Crichton,  and  of  the  stern  working  to  which  he  subjected  himself,  during 
these  eventful  years.  Here  is  a  bundle  of  his  letters,  about  the  year  1843. 
By  opening  them,  we  may  see  the  multiplicity  of  questions  which  dis- 
tracted his  thoughts  and  time. 

The  first  is  from  Dr  Ferrie,  refusing  an  offer  to  address  the  people  of  Kilconquhar 
on  the  Church  question.  The  second  is  a  letter  dated  "  St  Andrews,"  and  signed  "  A 
Working  Man,"  saying,  "  a  new  era  is  about  to  commence  in  the  history  of  our  Church 
and  country.  The  Lord  in  his  goodness  grant  that  it  may  be  found  worthy  to  be  called 
the  third  Reformation.'"  The  third  is  from  a  zealous  layman,  beseeching  Mr  Crichton 
"  to  let  the  dead  bury  their  dead,  and  to  allow  the  Quarter  Sessions  for  that  day  to 
take  care  of  themselves,  and  not  fail  to  be  present  as  corresponding  member  at  the 
Synod  meeting  at  Brechin."  The  fourth  is  from  Sir  David  Brewster,  telling  "  that  the 
St  Andrews  University  have,  by  a  scandalous  and  illegal  decision,  expelled,  without 
even  the  form  of  a  trial,  three  of  the  most  distinguished  students,  all  these  being 
members  of  the  Church  Defence  Association,  which  is  their  crime,"  and  asking  his 
presence  in  St  Andrews.  The  fifth  is  from  Charles  Leckie,  acknowledging  with 
gratitude  a  cheque  for  ^8,  and  continuing,  "  I  have  little  hope  for  betterness.  I  am 
endeavouring  to  contemplate  the  Cross  of  Christ  in  its  variety  of  associations,  as  my 
sure  ground  of  hope,  and  I  have  reason  to  bless  God  that  although  my  light  and 
experience  are  not  of  the  first  magnitude,  yet  they  leave  me  not  without  comfort  and 
peace  of  mind.  Dear  friend,  pray  for  me,  that  God  would  enable  me  to  glorify  Him  m 
the  day  of  His  visitation."  A  sixth  is  dated,  "  The  Reform  Club,"  London.  It  says  : 
"  Twice  since  I  was  under  your  hospitable  roof,  I  have  been  on  the  verge  of  eternity,  and 
t/ioi:  nothing  seems  worth  standing  up  for  except  eternal  truth  and  right.  In  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  one  cannot  see  the  greatness  of  cabinet  ministers."  The 
seventh  is  from  Hugh  Miller.  It  has  this  sentence  :  "  I  sadly  miss  your  companionship, 
and  my  thoughts  get  mouldy  for  want  of  airing."  Hugh,  whose  words  were  well  con- 
sidered, usually  closed  bis  letters  to  Makgill  Crichton  with  "  Very  affectionately  yours." 

These  letters  shew  the  range  of  his  sympathies.  His  activities  were 
represented  by  his  being  week  after  week  away  from  his  home,  in  all 
parts  of  the  country,  and  night  after  night  addressing  meetings,  yet 
taking  care  to  be  at  Rankeilour  every  Saturday,  that  he  might  spend  the 
Sabbath  with  his  family,  and  be  in  his  own  pew  in  Collessie  church.     It 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

was  in  tlic  face  of  the  most  vituperative  opposition,  both  public  and 
private,  that  all  this  was  done.  The  editor  of  Tlic  Witness  newspaper 
tells  us,  that  for  a  few  days  he  had  clipped  out  of  the  newspapers  all  that 
he  had  seen  written  against  Mr  Crichton,  and  by  fastening  it  together,  he 
found  that  it  had  extended  to  eleven  feet  six  inches  and  three-eighth 
parts  of  undiluted  abuse,  in  one  brief  fortnight. 

In  1 844,  under  the  strain  of  this  excessive  work  and  excitement,  health 
gave  way.  Paralysis  shewed  itself  unmistakeably,  shattering  for  a  time 
both  body  and  mind.  As  Mr  Percival  Bunting  of  Manchester,  wrote — 
"  Many,  very  many,  friends,  both  known  and  unknown,  sympathised  with 
him  in  his  afflictions,  and  prayed,  not  coldly  or  unfrequently,  for  his  re- 
covery." Among  such,  it  is  deeply  affecting  to  see  the  venerable  Chalmers 
bending  over  his  fellow-labourer  and  fellow-soldier  when  he  was  stricken 
down,  relating  to  him  his  own  somewhat  similar  experience,  and  comfort- 
ing him  with  the  comfort  wherewith  he  himself  had  been  comforted  of  God. 

"  My  very  dear  sir,"  writes  Chalmers,  iSth  August  1844,  "  I  was  forcibly  reminded 
of  my  own  situation  in  1834,  when  an  arrest  was  laid  upon  me  in  going  along  the 
North  Bridge,  after  a  three  hours'  speech  in  the  Presbytery,  and  I  was  conveyed  home 
in  a  coach.  The  treatment  which  my  physician  laid  upon  me  reduced  me  in  the 
course  of  the  summer  by  thirty-five  pounds  weight,  so  that,  when  1  picked  up  again,  it 
was  more  like  a  reconstruction  than  a  recovery.  .  .  . 

"  A  very  remarkable  experience  of  mine  during  that  summer  was,  that  I  often  in 
speaking  stuck  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,  and  it  seemed  as  much  due  to  a  failure  in 
thought  as  a  failure  in  articulation.  I  mention  this  because  I  have  been  recently 
visited  by  the  same  symptoms.  .  .  . 

"  It  is  a  great  comfort,  amid  the  uncertainties  of  this  ever-shifting  pilgrimage,  to 
think  that  we  are  in  good  hands,  and  under  the  vigilant  eye  of  Him  who  likes  to  be 
trusted,  and  bids  us  cast  all  our  care  upon  Himself.  May  you,  my  dear  sir,  have  great 
peace  and  joy  in  believing,  and  may  you  realise  in  your  own  person  that  most  beautiful 
of  Scripture  verses,  '  in  quietness  and  confidence  ye  shall  have  strength.'  I  ever  am, 
my  dear  sir,  yours  most  cordially  and  with  great  affection,  Thos.  Chalmers." 

Another  evidence  of  the  wide-spread  sympathy  with  which  he  was 
regarded,  was  the  presentation  of  a  silver  centre  piece,  combining  the 
properties  of  an  epergne  and  candelabrium,  bearing  this  inscription— 
"To  David   Maitland   Makgill  Crichton,  Esq.  of  Rankeilour,  from  ten 


DA  VID  MAITLAND  MAKGILL  CRICHTON. 

tliousand  members  of  the  Free  Church."  Dr  Candlish,  in  making  tl.e 
presentation,  said,  "The  principles  in  support  of  which  you  have  sub- 
mitted to  so  much  labour  and  to  so  many  sacrifices,  are  worthy  of  an 
apostle's  zeal  and  a  martyr's  faith,  connected  as  they  are  with  the  kingly 
crown  of  our  blessed  Saviour,  and  the  freedom  of  his  people." 

Wc  have  not  space  to  particularize  further.  The  years  of  life  which 
>-ct  remained  were  actively  spent  in  the  midst  of  the  practical  questions 
which  were  always  turning  up,  and  the  course  which  he  followed  was  the 
same  "slapdash,  straightforward,  earnest  course"  it  had  ever  been.  But 
it  was  marked  by  more  irritability,  and  impatience  of  contradiction,  and 
severity  of  censure.  And  what  were  these  but  the  symptoms  of  what  the 
post-mortem  inspection  afterwards  revealed,  that  structural  disease  had  so 
pervaded  the  system  as  to  make  life  a  continual  struggle  and  disturbance ! 

His  last  efforts  were  called  forth  on  behalf  of  Dr  Thomson  of 
Coldstream,  who  had  spent  many  years  of  his  life,  and  "  all  he  had  left 
in  the  world,"  in  contending  for  a  cheap  Bible  against  Bible  monopoly. 
Again  did  Mr  Crichton  traverse  Scotland,  raising  the  needed  funds,  and 
relieving  a  good  man's  heart  "  from  a  heavy  load  of  anxiety." 

Of  all  who  still  remain  and  knew  Makgill  Crichton  intimately,  there 
is  not  one  but  will  regard  his  memory  with  fond  affection.  His  likeness 
hangs  in  the  "ben  room"  of  their  heart.  One  who  was  much  with  him, 
and  knew  him  well,  penned  this  statement  the  other  day,  and  many  will 
endorse  it :  "  The  general  impression  of  the  grandness  and  nobility  of 
his  character  has  been  only  deepened  in  my  mind  with  the  lapse  of  years, 
and  with  my  increased  knowledge  of  the  littleness  and  selfishness  of  the 
mass  of  mankind."  Who  that  knew  him  will  forget  his  zeal  and  gene- 
rosity ;  his  ready  humour,  and  the  twist  of  the  mouth  and  the  twinkle  of 
the  eye  that  accompanied  it ;  the  hospitality  of  his  home,  lighted  up  by 
the  presence  and  the  varied  converse  of  Brewster  and  Hugh  Miller,  of 
Guthrie,  Candlish,  Patrick  Clason,  Begg,  and  James  Mackenzie,  whose 
fiftccnpcncc  History  reflects  more  truthfully  the  spirit  of  Scottish  history 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

than  all  the  volumes  which  have  been  written  ?  Who  will  not  remember 
his  readiness  humbly  to  acknowledge  wherein  he  had  erred,  when  dealt 
with  in  the  spirit  of  meekness, — his  gentleness  in  the  midst  of  his  family, — 
and  the  feeling  of  lowly  reverence  with  which  at  family  worship  he  pros- 
trated himself  before  God  ?  It  is  his  religion,  and  the  nature  of  it,  which 
after  all  is  the  great  fact  to  him  now,  and  ever  was,  for  it  gave  complexion 
to  his  character  and  life.  His  religion  was  strong  in  its  scriptural  sim- 
plicity. It  was  to  him  a  matter  of  certainty,  not  so  much  logical  or  inferen- 
tial as  experimental,  for  he  felt  that  it  righted  his  relation  with  God 
through  Christ,  and  maintained  daily  fellowship  with  God  through  Christ. 
His  religion  was  definite  and  doctrinal,  for  he  knew  it  as  a  system  of 
divine  truth  wherein  one  doctrine  harmoniously  combined  with  and  sus- 
tained another.  His  religion  was  a  simple,  childlike  devoutness,  healthily 
fed  by  the  varied  elements  which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  infused  into  Bible 
narrative  and  Bible  statement,  and  gathered  by  him  daily,  as  the  manna 
was  gathered  by  the  Israelites,  with  the  dew  of  heaven  fresh  upon  it.  On 
this  religion  he  lived  the  life  he  led,  and  by  it  he  died  in  the  quietness  of  faith. 
There  was  a  soldier-like  simplicity  in  the  manner  of  his  death.  He 
had  sat  up  to  evening  family  worship.  He  had  requested  to  be  allowed 
to  ascend  the  stair  to  his  bed-room  unattended.  He  had  his  portion  of 
Scripture  read  to  him  after  he  had  gone  to  bed.  In  the  early  morning  a 
fit  of  breathlessness  aroused  him.  His  son  was  immediately  at  his  side. 
"  Thank  God,"  he  said,  "  my  boy,  I  am  better."  Scarcely  were  the  words 
uttered,  when  the  spirit  fled. 

"  We  bless  Thee  for  the  quiet  rest  thy  servant  taketh  now. 

And  for  the  good  fight  Ibughten  well,  and  closed  light  peacefully." 

Makgill  Crichton  was  one  of  the  row  of  hard-wood  trees  which  stood  on 
the  outskirts  of  the  forest,  and  sheltered  it  from  the  tempest.  These  have 
now  been  mostly  removed  one  by  one.  The  stormy  blasts  noW  get  entrance 
into  the  depths  of  the  wood,  and  many  a  green  spruce  is  seen  lying  on  its 
side,  with  its  surface-spread  roots  high  up  in  the  air.  J.  W.  T. 


/^ILLIAM   CUNNINGHAM, D.I 


Milliam  Ctinntngljam,  D.l. 


RINCIPAL  CUNNINGHAM  was  born  on  the  2d  of 
October  1805,  at  Hamilton,  where  he  also  spent  the 
earlier  years  of  his  youth,  and  was  taught  to  read.  His 
father,  a  merchant  in  the  town,  having  died  suddenly,  the 
widow,  with  three  orphan  sons,  removed  to  the  grand- 
father's farmhouse  of  Drafane,  near  Crossford,  in  the 
parish  of  Lesmahagow ;  and  amid  the  happiest  advantages  of  rural 
seclusion  and  domestic  comfort,  the  education  of  the  boys  went  on  as 
hitherto.  But  the  aged  tenant  of  Drafane  was  taken  away  by  death 
not  long  after,  and  the  family  whom  he  had  so  generously  sheltered, 
exchanged  Lanarkshire  for  Berwickshire,  to  be  comfortably  settled  at 
Cheeklaw,  a  farm-steading  not"  far  from  Dunse. 

There  were  kind  relatives  at  Dunse,  and  a  superior  school,  where  the 
lad  who  had  excelled  in  all  the  branches  of  Elementary  tuition,  kept  still 
the  highest  place  in  Classical  competition.  No  boy  is  more  eager  than 
William  Cunningham  on  the  playground,  but  even  at  this  stage  he  was 
not  less  bent  on  reading.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  blood  of  Peden 
was  in  the  mother's  veins  ;  and  at  all  events,  in  mental  sinew,  as  well  as 
in  outward  frame,  the  matron  was  worthy  of  the  hero.  But  if  slightly 
austere,  as  a  covenanter  might  well  be,  tenderly  did  the  mother  love  her 
son,  and  as  affectionately  did  the  son  love  his  mother ;  and  though  then 
he  knew  not  God  at  all,  yet,  anxious  to  ease  her  of  any  burden,  and  win 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

her  smile,  William  took  his  mother's  place  in  conducting  family  worship, 
whilst  he  was  no  more  than  fourteen  years  of  age. 

In  1820,  William  Cunningham  proceeded  from  the  provincial  school 
of  Dunse  to  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  and  there  he  lost  no  time  in 
shewing  that  he  was  a  match,  both  in  Latin  and  Greek,  for  even  the 
duxes  of  the  Metropolitan  High  School.  Only  a  week  after  the  Session 
had  commenced.  Professor  Pillans  asked  the  meaning  of  a  hard  pas- 
sage in  a  difficult  Roman  author,  and  William  Cunningham  was  the 
first  out  of  the  large  Humanity  class  who  stood  up  ready  to  give  the 
translation.  All  the  classes  embraced  in  the  Literary  curriculum  of  the 
college  William  Cunningham  attended,  in  their  usual  order,  with  marked 
distinction.  But  he  did  not  graduate.  And  for  this  reason,  that  in  his 
day,  the  degree  of  M.A.  was  no  badge  of  merit,  and  even  Professors 
discouraged  students  from  making  it  an  object  of  ambition. 

It  was  in  1816  that  the  Edinburgh  University  Diagnostic  Society 
was  set  on  foot,  and  in  1821  William  Cunningham  became  a  member. 
We  record  this  fact  with  especial  interest,  for  now  had  he  taken  a  step, 
or  entered  on  a  path,  which  was  eventually  to  change  the  entire  direction 
and  object  of  his  life.  From  the  first  he  was  punctual  in  his  attendance 
at  all  the  meetings  of  the  society,  and  evinced  the  same  readiness  in 
debate,  the  same  fearless  candour,  and  the  same  lucid,  though  bald  ex- 
pression, which  were  the  characteristics  of  his  eloquence  ever  afterwards. 
But  it  was  here  he  was  brought  into  contact  with  those  who  now  became 
the  constant  companions  of  his  day  and  the  chosen  friends  of  his  bosom 
— young  men  like  himself  in  tastes  and  aims,  but  who,  perhaps,  in  Christ 
before  him,  were  the  means  of  waking  him  up  to  spiritual  thoughtfulness 
and  concern.  Born  and  bred  a  Moderate,  William  Cunningham  had 
up  to  this  hour  no  inward  wants  which  required  more  than  what  the 
negative  theology  and  hollow  ethics  of  Moderatism  were  sufficient  to 
meet.  Drawn,  however,  by  his  new  associates  within  the  sphere  of 
evangelical  influence,  he  now  often  attended  the   ministrj'  of  Gordon  ; 


n- ILL] AM  CUNNINGHAM,  D.D. 
and  in   1825,  a  sermon  from  that  wonderful  preacher  on  Regeneration 
was  the  means,  in  the  hand  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  subduing  the  enmity 
of  his  carnal  heart,  and  making  him  a  new  creature  by  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ. 

Old  things  are  passed  away  with  William  Cunningham,  but  not  less 
are  all  things  made  new  ;  and  whilst  ardent  as  ever  in  the  accumulation 
of  learning,  he  took  part,  with  all  his  intense  enthusiasm,  in  every 
scheme  or  society  within  the  university  which  had  the  progress  of  the 
gospel  and  the  glory  of  Christ  for  their  object.  Previous  to  this  date,  the 
Spirit  had  been  poured  out  on  the  students  of  the  Edinburgh  Divinity 
Hall,  and  during  the  decade,  extending  from  1823  to  1833,  in  the  much 
prayer  and  holy  joy  and  zealous  activity  which  were  conspicuous, 
it  seemed  as  if  the  days  of  RoUock  and  Leighton  were  come  back. 
The  Theological  students  formed  their  Association  for  the  Diffusion  of 
Christian  Knowledge  towards  the  end  of  1825  ;  the  Church  Law  Society 
was  instituted  in  1827;  a  committee  was  organised  that  same  year  to 
place  the  Library  of  the  Hall  upon  a  more  liberal  basis,  after  an  age  of 
resolute  and  inexplicable  mismanagement :  and  in  each  of  these  efforts 
William  Cunningham  always  bore  a  leading  part. 

He  finished  his  curriculum  as  a  student  of  divinity  in  the  spring  of 
1828,  and  being  licensed,  a  few  months  later,  as  a  probationer  by  the 
Presbytery  of  Dunse,  he  preached  his  first  sermon  on  the  14th  of 
December  at  Larbert,  in  the  pulpit  of  the  late  Dr  John  Bonar. 

Dr  Cunningham  was  desirous  of  visiting  the  Continent,  and  his  w  ish 
seemed  to  be  on  the  point  of  being  realised  at  this  time,  when  the 
arrangement  he  was  counting  on  unexpectedly  failed  : — 

"While  at  Dunse,"  he  writes  in  a  letter  dated  25th  August  1828,  "I  received  a 
letter  from  an  acquaintance  of  mine,  wishing  to  know  if  I  would  accept  the  situation 
of  tutor  to  the  Marquis  of  Twceddale's  son,  to  reside  on  the  Continent,  and  talking  of 
it  as  if  he  had  the  disposal  of  it.  I  would  not  have  liked  to  have  gone  to  the  Con- 
tinent with  every  family,  but  as  the  Marquis  and  Marchioness  are  truly  Christian 
people,  I  wrote  that  I  had  no  general  objection  to  the  situation,  and  requested  to  have 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

some  particular  information  about  it.  Now,  I  have  been  expecting  to  receive  an 
answer  to  this  letter  every  day  literally  for  a  fortnight,  and  I  wished,  of  course,  to  be 
able  to  tell  you  of  the  result.  I  am  a  good  deal  surprised  at  not  having  heard,  and 
don't  know  very  well  how  to  account  for  it.  However,  I  have  ceased  to  think  of  it, 
and  give  myself  no  concern  about  the  matter." 

Dr  Cunningham  was  now  on  tei'ms  of  most  affectionate  intimacy 
both  with  Dr  Thomson  and  Dr  Chalmers,  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  which 
of  these  great  men  had  the  highest  place  in  his  esteem. 

"I  spent,"  he  writes  in  a  letter  dated  17th  November  1829,  "Saturday  and 
Sunday  se'nnight  with  Dr  Chalmers  at  Penicuik  very  delightfully.  But  nothing 
pleased  me  so  much  in  his  conversation  as  the  way  in  which  he  spoke  of  Dr  Thomson 
— the  kindliness  and  admiration  he  expressed  towards  him.  '  A  most  valuable  man, 
he  said.  '  One  of  the  blithest  and  most  delightful  men  you  can  meet  with  ;  just  a 
tower  of  strength.  I  cannot  express  the  thankfulness  I  feel  for  his  great  talents  as 
a  public  speaker,  and  his  importance  in  the  General  Assembly.  I  never  felt  myself 
so  impregnable  as  in  the  Assembly  1825,  when  Thomson  was  a  member.'  Chalmers 
also  thinks  that  'the  second  statement'  for  the  Bible  Society  by  Thomson,  was  one 
of  the  ablest  and  most  conclusive  pieces  of  argument  he  ever  read." 

What  has  long  gone  by  the  name  of  "  the  Row  Heresy,"  broke  out 
first  in  1828,  and  as  one  who  was  very  suspicious  of  its  tendencies,  Dr 
Cunningham  thus  expresses  himself  in  a  letter  of  1S29 : — 

"The  Row  doctrines  continue  to  spread.  Thomson  has  been  preaching  against 
them  for  two  Sabbaths  past.  It  is  a  most  injurious  perversion  of  the  gospel.  Some 
of  the  Campbellites,  I  understand,  have  the  boldness  to  allege  that  Paul  mis-stated 
the  gospel  to  the  jailor,  when  he  said,  '  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou 
shall  be  saved,'  in  place  of  saying,  '  Believe  that  thou  art  pardoned,  and  be  saved.' 
They  seem  to  be  under  no  apprehension  of  the  consequences  that  must  inevitably 
attend  the  preaching  of  another  gospel  than  Paul  preached.  Like  other  heretics,  they 
seem  waxing  worse  and  worse.  Readiness,  high-mindedness,  and  itching  ears,  are  the 
epidemic  diseases  of  the  theological  world  in  the  present  day,  against  which  young 
theologians  are  especially  called  to  watch  and  pray." 

In  1830  Dr  Cunningham  became  assistant  and  colleague  to  Dr  Scott, 
of  the  Middle  Church,  Greenock,  and  greatly  was  he  blessed  here,  both 
in  the  pulpit  and  in  the  parish.  At  the  same  time  he  keenly  watched 
the  evolutions  of  Rowism,  and  not  only  warned  his  flock  against  that 


WILLIAM  CUNNINGHAM,  D.D. 

insidious  licrcsy,  but  deposed  one  of  his  elders  who  was  bold  enough  to 
avow  it  at  a  meeting  of  Session. 

Dr  Cunningham  visited  London  for  the  first  time  in  1833,  and 
preached  in  Regent  Square  Church,  from  which  Irving  had  been  recently 
ejected.  During  the  week  he  heard  some  of  the  ministers  best  known 
for  their  talents  and  usefulness,  and  greatly  admired  them. 

"I  have  been  now,"  he  writes  in  March  1833,  "nearly  a  fortnight  at  Bcrners 
Street,  and  have  been  very  busy  and  very  happy.  I  have  been  in  both  Houses  of 
Parliament,  and  it  was  most  interesting  to  behold  the  men  on  whom,  under  God, 
depends,  in  a  great  measure,  not  only  the  destinies  of  Britain,  but  of  the  World.  I 
have  heard  some  of  the  most  popular  preachers  in  the  Established  Church — M'Ncile 
of  Albury,  who  has  got  quite  clear  of  Irvingism  ;  Melvill,  who  took  an  active  part, 
and  made  a  powerful  and  eloquent  speech,  at  the  formation  of  the  Trinitarian  Bible 
Society  ;  and  Baptist  Noel,  whose  character  as  an  efficient  pastor  stands  very  high, 
although  he  has  been  weak  enough  to  go  back  to  Earl  Street.  Melvill  and  M'Ncilc 
are  both  decidedly  superior  men  to  Noel,  and  men  who  preach  faithfully  and 
powerfully  to  the  times,  although  they  are  neither  of  them  men  who  commend  them- 
selves to  your  understanding  as  authorities— persons  to  whose  sleeve  you  would  be  at 
all  inclined  to  pin  your  faith.  I  have  preached  two  Sabbaths  in  the  Scotch  National 
Church,  and  I  attended  a  meeting  of  the  Presbytery  of  London,  who  are  really  a  very 
respectable  body.  They  are  desirous  that  our  Assembly  should  do  something  to 
encourage  them,  and  they  send  a  deputation  to  ne.\t  Assembly.  That  Assembly  will 
probably  be  the  most  important  in  its  consequences  of  any  that  has  sat  for  many  years. 
May  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  send  up  to  it  men  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  guide  them  in  all  their  deliberations." 

So  far  back  as  1826,  Dr  Cunninghain,  while  only  at  the  Hall,  used  to 
declare  that  were  he  a  member  of  Presbytery,  and  a  presentation  against 
which  the  people  reclaimed  laid  on  the  table,  he  would  move  that  it 
be  rejected.  This  early  announcement  of  non-intrusion  principles  was 
mentioned  by  a  fellow-student  to  Dr  George  Cook,  and  the  quick 
remark  of  the  astute  politician  of  Laurencekirk,  even  at  that  date,  was, 
"  Let  the  attempt  be  made,  and  there  is  an  immediate  conflict  between 
the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  courts." 

The  view  which  Dr  Cunningham  had  formed  in  1S26,  he  expounded 
with   matchless   clearness   and   force   in    the   Assembly  of   1833,  when 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

supporting  Dr  Chalmers'  proposal  of  the  Veto  ;  and  the  impression  then 
left  by  his  speech  was,  that  though  defeated  on  that  occasion,  defeat 
was  only  the  prelude  of  a  coming  and  conclusive  victorJ^ 

A  battle,  however,  must  be  fought  ere  this  issue  is  achieved ;  and 
that  he  might  be  at  the  centre  of  Scottish  influence  when  the  crisis  was 
advancing,  Dr  Cunningham  was  translated  to  Edinburgh  in  1834,  and 
became  minister  of  Trinity  College  Church.  In  this  sphere,  though  the 
disadvantages  were  manifold,  he  wrought  with  energy,  and  acceptance, 
and  encouragement.  But  possessed  of  an  aptitude  for  ecclesiastical 
business,  and  a  capacity  for  ecclesiastical  discussion,  such  as  rendered 
George  Gillespie  so  famous,  Dr  Cunningham  soon  exchanged  pastoral 
duty  for  political  conflict ;  and  from  this  point  his  life  was  bound  up  in 
the  history  of  that  Church  which  he  strove  so  manfully  to  reform,  if 
haply  it  might  be  preserved,  and  not  overthrown. 

There  were  public  questions  lying  outside  the  Cluirch  of  Scotland, 
such  as  Popery,  Voluntaryism,  Education,  Tests ;  and  each  of  these  Dr 
Cunningham  took  up  and  set  in  their  true  light.  But  it  was  rather 
Domestic  measures  and  controversies  he  reserved  himself  for,  and  it  was 
seldom  that  his  wise  and  temperate  judgment  on  such  matters  was 
disputed,  or  even  modified. 

In  1838  Dr  Cunningham  was  brought  to  the  verge  of  life  by  fever; 
but  graciously  spared,  he  girt  himself  for  more  strenuous  labour  than 
ever  from  that  time,  and  in  1839  prepared  his  "Reply  to  the  Dean  of 
Faculty  "  on  the  Auchterarder  case  ;  following  up  this  masterly  exposure 
with  his  "  Defence  of  the  Rights  of  the  People,"  in  answer  to  Robertson 
of  Ellon,  in  1840.  It  was  in  1841  that  Dr  Chalmers  moved  the  deposi- 
tion of  the  Strathbogie  ministers  who  refused  to  obey  the  authority  of 
the  General  Assembly,  and  the  speech  of  Dr  Cunningham  in  seconding 
<-he  motion  was  eminently  distinguished  as  much  for  a  lofty  tone  as  by 
luminous  argument. 

The  Convocation  met  in    1842,   and  the   Disruption   took  place  in 


WILLIAM  CUNNINGHAM,  D.D. 

1S43- 

Without 

OSS  of  time 

'the  New  College"  was  constituted, 

and 

Dr  Cunningham 

appointed  J 

jnior  Professor  of  Theology, 

with  Ap 

olo- 

getics 

as  his  department. 

Though  this  was  a  department  of  theological  literature  in  which  he 
never  felt  peculiar  interest,  yet  he  at  once  addressed  himself  to  it  with 
thorough  earnestness,  as  the  following  extract  from  a  letter,  dated  8th 
August  1844,  will  shew  : — 

"  It  is  my  earnest  wish  that  I  may  be  enabled  to  do  something  for  promoting  the 
cause  of  sound  theological  education,  and  to  contribute  to  make  our  future  pastors 
able  ministers  of  the  New  Testament.  I  hope  I  may  be  able  to  carry  out  some  of 
the  leading  views  upon  the  subject  which  have  been  put  forth  in  the  Prcshytcrian 
Review,  and  which  I  know  to  be  approved  by  many  of  the  best  ministers  in  our  church. 
As  I  will  have  only  the  first  year's  students  under  my  charge  next  winter,  I  must  be 
mainly  occupied  with  the  origin,  authority,  character,  objects,  and  uses  of  the  Word, 
and  the  way  and  manner  in  which  it  is  to  be  interpreted  and  applied  as  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit— that  is,  very  much  in  illustrating  the  first  chapter  of  the  Confession,  and 
bringing  out  the  information  which  the  Word  of  God  gives  us  concerning  itself,  and  the 
means  by  which  the  knowledge  of  it  is  to  be  acquired.  I  propose  to  give  some  promi- 
nence to  the  subject  of  the  Bible  as  the  rule  of  faith — not  merely  negatively,  by  expos- 
ing the  Apocrypha  and  Tradition,  but  positively,  by  opening  up  the  sufficiency  and 
perfection  of  the  Scriptures,  as  these  topics  used  to  be  discussed  between  the  Papists 
and  the  Reformers. 

"  All  these  subjects  may  be  handled  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  the  students  a  good 
deal  into  contact  with  the  Bible  itself ;  and  when  taken  together,  they  should,  I  think, 
lay  a  good  foundation  for  their  theological  studies." 

At  the  request  of  the  Church,  and  just  at  the  time  when  he  was  in 
much  sorrow  for  the  loss  of  a  beloved  child,  Dr  Cunningham  crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  mid-winter  of  1844,  to  inquire  into  the  constitution  and 
working  of  the  Presbyterian  theological  seminaries  in  the  States ;  as 
also  to  explain  the  principles  of  the  Free  Church.  Soon  after  he  had 
arrived  (in  1845)  from  America,  owing  to  the  lamented  death  of  Dr  Welsh 
Dr  Cunningham  was  placed  in  the  Chair  of  Church  History ;  and  two 
years  afterAvards  (in  1847)  he  became  Principal  of  the  New  College,  as  suc- 
cessor to  Dr  Chalmers,  of  whom  the  Church  had  been  suddenly  bereaved. 

Earnestly  alive  to  his  responsibility,  as  Principal,  for  the   develup- 


DISKUPTION  WORTHIES. 

ment  of  theological  education,  and  the  advancement  of  theological 
science,  Dr  Cunningham  now  directed  all  his  energies  to  the  equipment 
of  the  New  College  as  a  Model  institute  for  training  students  of  divinity ; 
and  his  hope  was,  that  he  might  be  allowed  to  carry  out  his  ideas  in 
all  their  extent  before  other  Halls  were  contemplated.  But  what  he 
pleaded  for  was  not  granted.  Aberdeen  and  Glasgow  insisted  on  being 
dealt  with,  from  the  outset,  as  Edinburgh,  and  their  claims  were  looked 
upon  with  favour  by  those  who  guided  the  affairs  of  the  Church.  The 
College  controversy  then  broke  out,  and  after  an  arduous  struggle, 
Dr  Cunningham,  to  his  chagrin  and  sorrow,  was  foiled. 

A  wide  chasm  after  this  severed  Dr  Cunningham  from  those  with 
whom  he  had  hitherto  acted  in  the  Free  Church,  and  the  alienation, 
as  obvious  as  it  was  unhappy,  continued  from  1852  to  1858,  when  the 
wound  was  closed,  whether  it  were  healed  or  not.  Old  friends  were 
induced  to  come  together  once  more,  and  in  1859  Dr  Cunningham  was 
chosen  Moderator  of  the  General  Assembly,  amid  the  acclamation  of  the 
whole  Church. 

Perhaps  it  would  have  been  well  had  this  honour  been  postponed  ;  for 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  his  official  duty  in  the  chair  told  against  the 
failing  health  of  Dr  Cunningham,  and  ripened  the  seeds  of  lurking  disease. 

During  the  summer,  however,  Dr  Cunningham  seemed  to  rally ;  and 
in  1 860  he  opened  the  Assembly,  as  retiring  Moderator,  with  a  masterly 
discourse  upon  the  Atonement.  This  was  the  last  sermon  he  ever 
preached,  and  it  was  his  greatest.  The  greatest  speech  he  ever  delivered 
was  on  the  Australian  Union,  in  1861,  and  it  was  his  last. 

Throughout  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1861,  Dr  Cunningham  had 
apparently  gained  strength,  and  he  was  cheerful  as  of  old.  But  all  at 
once  the  tall  cedar  shook :  and  now  it  was  the  root,  not  the  branch, 
that  was  smitten.  On  the  15th  of  December  he  died,  and  on  the  i8th 
he  was  buried — his  sorrows  ended,  and  his  labours  crowned,  in  the 
saints'  everlasting  rest.  J.  J.  B. 


^THE    EARL  OF  DALHOUSIE 


mn  iad  of  Dalljousie,  1.^, 


iHIS  nobleman,  for  more  than  forty  years,  from  1831  to 
1874,  lived  in  the  public  eye,  taking  an  active  and  influ- 
ential part  in  all  the  stirring  and  important  questions — 
civil  and  ecclesiastical — which  agitated  the  country 
during  that  eventful  period. 

As  one  of  the  Disruption  Worthies,  this  memoir 
has  principally  to  record  the  services  which  he  rendered  to  the  Church. 
Yet  the  nature  and  importance  of  these  services  cannot  be  fully  under- 
stood without  adverting  to  his  position  in  society,  and  to  his  political 
career. 

He  was  lineally  descended  from  two  of  the  oldest  families  of  Scotland 
— the  Ramsays  of  Dalhousie  and  the  Maules  of  Panmure,  both  famous 
in  Scottish  story.  The  Ramsays  of  Dalhousie  trace  their  descent  to  the 
days  of  David  I.  Nearly  two  hundred  years  ago  Allan  Ramsay  the 
poet  wrote  of  the  Earl  of  that  day — 

"  Dalhousie  of  an  auld  descent, 
My  pride,  my  stoup,  my  ornament." 

And  throughout  their  history,  down  to  the  subject  of  this  memoir  and 
his  cousin  and  immediate  predecessor,  the  Governor  General  of  India,  the 
Ramsays  have  been  represented  by  many  famous  names,  not  unworthy 
of  the  poet's  praise. 

The   Maules  of  Panmure   are  of  an   equal  antiquity,  tracing  their 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

descent  to  the  days  of  William  the  Conqueror.  In  1224,  one  of  the 
Maules  married  Christian,*  the  heiress  of  the  Panmure  estates.  As  a 
race  the  Maules  seem  to  have  been  distinguished  by  great  strength  of 
will,  determination  of  purpose,  and  unwavering  fidelity  to  every  cause 
they  espoused.  On  the  death  of  one  of  the  heads  of  the  House  of  Maule 
without  issue,  the  estates  of  Panmure  passed  to  his  nephew,  the  seventh 
Earl  of  Dalhousie.  At  his  death  the  estates  of  Panmure  were  inherited 
by  his  second  son,  the  Hon.  William  Ramsay,  who  then  assumed  the 
name  of  Maule.  In  token  of  his  admiration  of  the  great  Whig  statesman, 
Charles  James  Fox,  he  named  his  firstborn  son,  the  subject  of  this 
memoir.  Fox.  This  early  dedication  to  political  principles  was  fully 
accepted  by  his  son  in  after  life. 

Fox  Maule  was  born  in  Brechin  Castle,  22d  April  iSoi.  He  was 
educated  at  the  Charter  House,  London.  In  18 19  he  received  his 
commission  as  ensign  in  the  79th  Regiment  of  Cameron  Highlanders. 
It  is  not  a  little  characteristic  of  the  man  that,  when  he  joined  his 
regiment  in  Edinburgh  Castle,  he  used  after  drill  to  doff  his  uniform  and 
attend  the  Humanity  Class  in  the  University,  and  at  the  close  of  the 
session  carried  off  the  prize  for  Latin  declamation. 

For  some  years  he  served  in  Canada  on  the  staff  of  his  uncle,  the 
Earl  of  Dalhousie.  The  practical  knowledge  which  he  then  acquired  of 
military  duties  and  of  a  soldier's  life  was  eminently  useful  to  him  as  a 
member  of  Parliament,  and  especially  as  Secretarj'  at  War  during  the 
latter  part  of  the  Crimean  war. 

In  183 1,  having  attained  to  the  rank  of  captain,  he  retired  from  the 
army,  and  having  married  the  Hon.  Montagu,  daughter  of  the  second 
Lord  Abercrombie,  he  took  up  his  residence  at  Dalguise  House,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Tay,  near  Dunkeld.  This  was  his  home  for  twenty  years. 
Being  then  thirty  years  of  age,  in  the  freshness  of  manly  strength,  fond 
of  society,  and  devoted  to  field  sports,  his  life  might  long  have  been  one 

*  A  name  still  nohly  represented  in  the  family. 


EARL  OF  DALHOUSIE. 
of  mere  pleasure.  But  those  were  the  stirring  days  of  the  Reform  Bill 
when  Scotland  was  excited  to  an  unusual  degree.  Fox  Maulc  caught 
the  enthusiasm  of  the  times,  and  issuing  from  his  Highland  home, 
plunged  with  his  whole  heart  into  the  midst  of  the  first  election  for 
Perthshire,  canvassing  in  favour  of  his  friend,  the  Marquis  of  Breadalbane, 
then  Lord  Ormelie.  It  was  greatly  owing  to  his  indefatigable  and 
persuasive  efforts  that  tlie  contest  was  won.  The  die  was  then  cast. 
His  aptitude  for  a  political  life  was  manifest  at  once.  As  he  after%vards 
said,  "I  was  politically  born  then."  At  the  next  election,  in  1834,  he 
was'returned  as  member  for  Perthshire.  Having  lost  his  seat  at  the  next 
election,  he  was  returned  for  the  Elgin  Burghs.  Having  resigned  his 
seat  for  the  Elgin  Burghs,  he  was  elected  by  the  city  of  Perth,  which  he 
continued  to  represent  for  ten  years,  until  he  was  called  to  the  House  of 
Lords  after  his  father's  death. 

But  Fox  Maule  was  more  than  an  ordinary  member  of  Parliament. 
During  his  Parliamentary  career  he  filled  several  important  offices  of 
State.  He  was  successively  Under-Secretary  for  the  Home  Department, 
Vice-President  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  President  of  the  Board  of  Control, 
and  twice  Secretary  at  War.  He  was  also  a  Privy  Councillor.  On  the 
overthrow  of  the  Aberdeen  Ministry  in  1855,  on  account  of  the  alleged 
mismanagement  of  the  Crimean  war,  Viscount  Palmerston  was  called  to 
the  helm  of  affairs,  and  Lord  Dalhousie,  then  Lord  Panmure,  was  selected 
by  him  to  extricate  the  War  Department  from  the  difficulties  in  which 
it  had  become  involved.  His  Lordship  fully  justified  the  confidence 
reposed  in  him,  and  by  his  good  management  and  persevering  labours, 
the  British  army  was  at  the  close  of  the  war  in  a  more  effective  state 
than  at  its  commencement.  His  administration  at  the  War  Office  was 
eminently  successful.  One  of  his  first  achievements  was  so  to  minimise 
and  regulate  the  use  of  the  lash  as  speedily  to  lead  to  its  entire  abolition. 
He  introduced  the  system  of  competitive  examination  for  commissions, 
which  has  tended  so  much  to  raise  the  standard  of  military  education. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

He  also  reduced  the  period  of  enlistment ;  and  in  many  ways  promoted 
the  comfort  of  soldiers. 

The  position  which  he  had  earned  for  himself  as  a  public  man  was 
manifested  when  in  1842  he  was  elected  as  Lord  Rector  of  Glasgow 
University,  though  his  opponents  were  the  Marquis  of  Bute  and  the 
Duke  of  Wellington.  In  token  of  his  sovereign's  favour,  he  was  appointed 
Lord-Lieutenant  of  Forfarshire,  and  made  Knight  of  the  Thistle  and 
Knight  Commander  of  the  Bath.  Midway  in  his  political  career,  when 
after  twenty  years'  service  in  the  House  of  Commons  he  took  his  place 
in  the  House  of  Lords,  a  farewell  banquet  was  given  to  him  by  his 
constituents  at  Perth.  Lord  John  Russell  said  of  him  :  "  During  the 
whole  time  I  was  at  the  Home  Office,  and  since  which  I  had  to  conduct 
in  a  higher  sphere  the  affairs  of  the  nation,  I  have  derived  the  greatest 
advantage  from  the  sentiments,  the  intelligence,  the  perseverance,  and 
the  ability  of  my  noble  friend.  But  all  this  would  not  have  so  recom- 
mended him  had  I  not  been  satisfied  that  he  is  thoroughly  impressed 
with  the  great  maxim  of  the  great  statesman  (Mr  Fox),  from  whom  he 
has  derived  his  name,  that  what  is  morally  wrong  cannot  be  politically 
right." 

Educated  in  England,  for  ten  years  actively  occupied  in  military 
duties  chiefly  in  Canada,  surrounded  by  social  enjoyments,  and  then 
plunging  into  political  life,  it  seemed  unlikely  that  Fox  Maule  would 
interest  himself  in  the  ecclesiastical  questions  that  then  agitated  the 
Church  of  Scotland.  Perhaps  till  he  entered  public  life  they  had  never 
engaged  his  attention.  And  probably  at  that  time  he  might  have 
thought  it  most  unhkely  that  he  would  ever  take  any  prominent  part  in 
religious  questions.  Various  influences,  however,  prepared  his  mind  and 
led  him  on.  Among  the  earliest  and  most  powerful  of  these  was  the 
teaching  and  example  of  a  pious  and  much-loved  mother.  As  the 
excitement  of  the  first  election  after  the  Reform  Bill  led  him  into  the 
arena  of  political  life,  so  there  were  external  circumstances  which  forcibly 


EARL  OF  DALHOUSIE. 
drew  his  attention  to  ecclesiastical  affairs.  Dr  Chalmers  was  urging  his 
scheme  for  church  extension  on  the  notice  of  the  legislature  when  Fox 
Maule  entered  public  life.  As  Under  Secretary  for  the  Home  Department, 
Scottish  affairs  were  largely  submitted  to  his  consideration.  Being  thus 
brought  into  contact  with  such  men  as  Drs  Chalmers  and  Guthrie,  he 
could  not  but  feel  their  influence.  Again,  at  the  election  for  Perthshire, 
in  1834,  when  he  secured  his  .seat  in  the  House  of  Commons  for  the  first 
time,  the  question  of  non-intrusion  occupied  so  prominent  a  place,  that 
both  parties  found  themselves  constrained  to  profess  themselves  to  be 
friendly  to  the  popular  side  of  that  question.  This  may  have  been  his 
first  introduction  to  the  subject.  But  from  the  professions  then  made  he 
never  swerved  nor  drew  back.  In  addition  to  this,  the  disputed  settle- 
ments of  Lethendy  and  Auchterarder,  both  in  Perthshire,  must  have  led 
him  more  thoroughly  to  consider  the  principles  which  were  involved. 
But  however  this  may  have  been,  from  that  date  Fox  Maule  was  the 
zealous  friend  of  all  philanthropic  and  missionary  enterprises,  and  the 
staunch  supporter  of  the  rights  and  principles  for  which  the  Church  was 
then  contending,  the  refusal  of  which  led  to  the  Disruption. 

When  the  conflict  thickened,  and  the  Church  refused  to  obey  the 
orders  of  the  civil  courts  in  regard  to  spiritual  things.  Sir  Robert  Peel,  in 
1842,  in  his  place  in  the  House  of  Commons,  accused  the  Church  of 
Scotland  as  "  defying  and  opposing  the  law."  "  This  attack,"  writes  the 
author  of  the  "  Ten  Years'  Conflict,"  "  was  not  unanswered.  It  called  up 
one  whose  enlightened  and  unflinching  advocacy  of  the  great  scriptural 
principles,  and  constitutional  privileges  for  which  the  Church  was  con- 
tending, had  earned  for  him  the  gratitude  and  esteem  of  all  who  venerate 
the  work  of  the  Scottish  Reformers,  and  who  know  how  to  appreciate 
that  integrity  and  manly  firmness  of  character,  which  fears  not  to  avow 
honest  convictions,  and  to  defend  'diem  wherever  they  may  be  assailed. 
It  is  told  in  Scripture,  to  the  honour  of  Onesiphorus,  that  even  at  Rome 
he  was  not  ashamed  of  Paul's  chain.     It  will  be  told,  in  the  ecclesiastical 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

liistory  of  his  country,  to  the  honour  of  Mr  Fox  Maule,  that  lie  was  not 
ashamed  to  identify  himself,  even  in  the  House  of  Commons,  with  the 
calumniated  Church  of  Scotland."  "  If,"  said  he,  in  replying  to  Sir 
Robert  Peel,  "  that  Church  had  set  itself  up  against  the  law  of  the  land  in 
matters  of  civil  right,  he  would  be  the  last  man  to  stand  up  in  its  defence. 
But  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  had  over  and  over 
again  declared,  that  as  far  as  civil  rights  were  concerned,  it  would  bow 
implicity  to  the  decisions  of  the  land.  All  that  the  Church  and  the 
General  Assembly  had  done  was  to  say  that,  while  on  the  one  hand 
they  obeyed  the  law  as  to  benefices — still,  they  owed  a  duty  to  a  higher 
authority  than  man  when  they  inducted  to  any  portion  of  their  Church 
an  individual  who  had  a  cure  of  souls." 

No  better  estimate  can  be  formed  of  the  position  which  Fox  Maule 
had  earned  for  himself  in  Parliament,  and  of  the  confidence  which  the 
Church  reposed  in  him,  than  is  manifested  in  the  fact,  that  when,  after 
ten  years'  conflict,  the  Church  resolved  to  make  a  last  appeal  to  the 
Legislature  to  inquire  into  and  to  redress  its  grievances,  by  special 
appointment  of  the  Commission  he  was  requested  to  bring  the  matter 
before  the  House  of  Commons.  On  7th  March  1843,  little  more  than 
two  months  before  the  Disruption,  he  did  so  in  a  speech  of  singular 
power  and  lucidity.  "  No  Free  Churchman  can  read  without  unfeigned 
gratitude  the  clear,  intelligent  defence  of  her  position  and  privileges  made 
by  Mr  Fox  Maule  in  the  House  of  Commons.  His  statement  of  the 
independent  spiritual  jurisdiction  of  the  Church  on  the  occasion  referred 
to  may  be  read  at  the  present  day  with  interest  and  instruction,  and 
shew  what  a  just  and  true  grasp  his  mind  had  taken  of  the  controversy 
which  terminated  in  the  Disruption."  * 

His  motion  for  inquiry  in  the  House  of  Commons  was  rejected  by  a 
majority  of  135.  "  It  is  not  undeserving  of  notice,"  writes  the  author  of 
the  "  Ten  Years'  Conflict,"  "  that  of  the  thirty-seven  Scottish  members 

*  Minute  of  the  General  Assembly  of  llie  Free  Church  on  the  death  of  Lord  Dalhou.sie. 


EARL  OF  DALHOUSIE. 

who  were  present,  twenty-five  voted  with  Mr  Maulc.  It  was  not  there- 
fore simply  the  voice  of  Scotland's  Church,  but  the  voice  also  of  her 
national  representatives  that  was  that  night  overborne  in  the  British 
Parliament.  The  fact  is  one  which  an  impartial  posterity  will  mark  and 
remember."  It  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  on  the  6th  of  July  1874, 
the  very  day  of  Lord  Dalhousie's  death  thirty-one  years  later,  the  debate 
on  the  Patronage  Bill  took  place  in  the  House  of  Commons.  On  which 
occasion  it  was  fully  acknowledged  by  all  parties  that  the  statesmen  of 
1843  had  grievously  erred  in  refusing  to  make  such  concessions  as  might 
then  have  satisfied  the  just  demands  of  the  Church. 

The  same  evening  on  which  Fox  Maule  brought  this  subject  before 
the  House  of  Commons,  a  great  public  meeting  was  held  in  the  City 
Hall,  Glasgow.     Dr  Thomas  Guthrie  then  said  : — 

"  The  last  battle  is  now  at  this  moment  fighting  on  the  floor  of  Parliament.  The 
voices  of  Maule,  Rutherford,  and  Stewart — and  I  can  hardly  mention,  in  that  House 
of  five  hundred  men,  more  than  these  three  that  will  stand  up  for  our  rights — they  are 
now  pleading  our  cause  ;  and  did  I  not  know  that  God  rules  on  earth  as  well  as  in 
heaven,  you  might  write  '  Ichabod  '  already  on  the  brow  of  Scotland.  I  confess  I  have 
no  hope.  My  motion  says  it  is  our  duty  to  use  every  lawful  eiTort  to  avert  this  calamity. 
Now  we  have  used  every  lawful  effort.  We  have  petitioned,  we  have  remonstrated, 
we  have  negotiated.  .  .  .  We  have  resolved  never  to  give  up  our  principles.  We  shall 
give  them  their  stipends,  their  manses,  their  glebes,  and  their  churches.  They  are 
theirs,  and  let  them  make  '  a  kirk  or  a  mill  of  them.'  But  we  cannot  give  up  the 
crown  rights  of  Christ ;  and  we  cannot  give  up  our  people's  privileges.  ...  If  this 
night  they  say,  '  You  must  sell  your  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage,'  then  I  say  I  am 
done  for  my  lifetime  with  the  Establishment." 

"And  so,"  wrote  Dr  Guthrie  at  a  later  period,  "we  went  forth  under  the 
old  banner  to  enjoy  that  freedom  without  the  Establishment  which  we 
were  denied  within  its  pale." 

Fo.x  Maule  was  not  awanting  in  the  day  of  trial.  He  entered  at  once 
into  all  the  preparations  for  the  new  state  of  the  Church,  and  with  an 
unflagging  interest  and  most  loyal  enthusiasm  continued  his  services  to 
the  last.      No   doubt   his   rank  and   public   position    lent  value  to  his 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

adherence  and  services ;  "  but,  apart  from  this,  the  warmth,  the  intelli- 
gence, the  sagacity,  the  inherent  weight  of  his  counsels,  the  effective 
character  of  his  advocacy,  and  the  munificent  liberality  he  displayed, 
gave  him  a  prominent  place  among  the  leading  and  most  trusted  advisers 
of  the  Free  Church."  For  thirty  years  he  was  returned  by  the  Free 
Presbytery  of  Dunkeld  as  their  representative  elder  to  the  General 
Assembly,  and  took  an  active  part  in  its  proceedings.  After  the  Disrup- 
tion, when  so  many  proprietors  refused  sites  for  the  building  of  churches 
and  manses,  it  was  mainly  through  his  firm,  but  calm,  speeches  in 
Parliament  that  the  difficulty  was  surmounted. 

At  the  time  of  his  lamented  death  it  was  well  said,  "  It  is  no  secret — 
the  fact  was  made  so  public  in  many  ways  that  there  need  be  no  delicacy 
in  recalling  it — that  during  the  latter  years  of  his  father's  lifetime,  the 
relations  of  Mr  Fox  Maule  .towards  him  were  exceedingly  constrained 
and  uncomfortable.  It  is  proper  to  mention,  however,  that  the  cause  of 
disagreement  was  well  known  to  be  highly  honourable  to  the  son.  Its 
existence  was  the  cause  of  bringing  out,  in  a  variety  of  ways,  the  firmness, 
the  chivalry,  and  the  good  sense  that  were  embodied  in  his  character. 
In  one  way,  this  disagreement  was  connected  with  family  and  private 
arrangements.  In  another,  it  was  of  a  more  public  nature.  His  property 
was  left  in  a  condition  that,  in  the  case  of  a  person  endowed  with  less  of 
manliness,  generosity,  and  clear-headedness,  would  have  led  to  much 
embarassment  and  unpleasantness.  He  avoided  this  by  taking  his 
tenantry  into  his  confidence  at  once,  and  laying  down  rules  as  to  the 
re-letting  of  his  farms,  which  they  cordially  acquiesced  in.  His  rental 
was  enormously  increased  during  the  period  of  his  administration,  and 
yet  there  was,  by  common  consent,  no  better,  fairer,  or  more  liberal  land- 
lord. The  social  qualities  of  his  lordship  were  of  the  rarest  order.  He 
was  the  life  of  every  circle  in  which  he  appeared.  There  was  about  him 
an  irresistible  charm  of  manner  ;  high  and  low  alike  owned  the  spell." 
By  Her  Majesty  he  was  esteemed  as  a  friend.     In  London  society  he  was 


EARL  OF  DALHOUSIE. 

always  welcome  ;  in  his  own  county  everybody  was  proud  of  him,  and  he 
knew  almost  everybody,  and  could  make  himself  at  home  with  them, 
whatever  their  rank  or  station.  This  picture,  however,  is  not  complete 
unless  it  be  added  that  none  could  be  more  stern  or  repellant  in  his 
manner  to  mere  tuft-hunters,  or  to  those  of  whose  character  or  conduct 
he  disapproved.  Firm  in  his  opinions,  and  determined  in  action,  he  had 
many  opponents.  Yet  transparently  honest  in  his  convictions,  and 
genial  in  his  manner  of  expressing  them,  he  had  few,  if  any,  lasting 
enemies. 

During  the  last  seven  years  of  his  life.  Lord  Dalhousie  spent  the 
winter  at  his  charming  villa  at  Cannes,  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean. 
There  he  made  arrangements,  without  expense  to  the  Church,  for  the 
maintenance  of  Presbyterian  worship,  which  he  loved  so  well.  During 
the  last  two  winters  of  his  life  the  writer  of  this  memoir  officiated  there, 
and  bears  most  loving  and  willing  testimony  that,  on  Sabbaths  and  week 
days,  he  had  no  hearer  more  regular  or  appreciative,  nor  any  who  took  a 
more  lively  interest,  not  only  in  the  temporal  prosperity  of  the  congrega- 
tion, but  also  in  the  spiritual  welfare  of  its  members.  Though  with 
characteristic  modesty  he  sensitively  shrunk  from  a  loud  profession  of 
high  personal  religion,  the  depth,  the  earnestness,  and  the  solemnity  of 
his  piety  were  manifest  to  all  those  to  whom,  in  confidence  of  private 
conversation,  he  felt  himself  at  liberty  to  open  his  heart. 

After  the  death  of  his  wife,  in  1854,  the  honours  01  his  house  were 
done  by  his  sister  the  Lady  Christian  Maule.  Brother  and  sister  never 
loved  each  other  more  truly  or  tenderly.  His  latest  energies  were  spent 
in  the  service  of  the  Free  Church.  Hastening  home  from  Cannes,  at 
that  season  in  its  richest  beauty,  he  attended,  and  took  his  wonted  part 
in  the  meetings  of  the  General  Assembly  at  the  end  of  May.  In  June 
he  was  in  his  place  in  the  House  of  Lords,  and  took  part  in  the  debate 
on  the  Patronage  Bill.  Towards  the  close  of  the  same  month  he  laid  the 
foundation  stone  of  the  new  Free  Church  at  Dunkeld.     Full  of  vigour 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

and  of  cheerful,  thougli  chastened  hope,  apparently  in  better  health  tha.i 
for  many  years,  it  seemed  unlikely  that  the  end  of  his  earthly  career  was 
so  close  at  hand.  On  24th  June,  accompanied  by  the  Lady  Christian 
Maule,  he  went  to  pay  his  respects  to  his  sovereign  at  the  Bridge  of  Dun 
station  as  she  passed  on  her  way  south  from  Balmoral.  The  same  even- 
ing he  was  taken  ill,  and  on  the  6th  of  July,  in  the  seventy-fourth  year  of 
his  age,  he  died  in  Brechin  Castle  in  the  same  room  in  which  he  had  been 
born. 

Though  hopes  were  entertained  of  his  recovery  by  his  medical 
attendants,  he  anticipated  the  issue  from  the  first,  and  trusting  to  the 
merits  of  Christ,  he  calmly  waited  to  know  the  will  of  God.  At  the 
commencement  of  his  illness,  to  one  of  whose  love  he  \\as  well  assured, 
he  sent  the  message,  "  Pray  for  me — but  whatever  the  issue  may  be,  all 
is  well."  Among  his  last  words,  in  reply  to  a  question  as  to  the  grounds 
of  his  hope,  he  said  to  his  pastor. 

"  Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  thee. " 

Many  touching  incidents  might  be  given  illustrative  of  the  warmth 
and  tenderness  and  humility  of  his  heart,  did  not  delicacy  towards  the 
living  and  the  dead,  in  the  meantime,  forbid  it.  "  It  will  be  many  a 
day  ere  the  Free  Church  find  a  man  to  ser\e  her  with  such  devotion 
and  capacity." 

Dying  without  issue,  he  has  been  succeeded  in  his  Scottish  titles  by 
his  cousin,  Vice-Admiral  George  Ramsay,  second  son  of  the  late  Hon. 
Licut.-Gen.  John  Ramsay,  fourth  son  of  George  Eighth  Earl  of  Dalhousie. 

W.  G. 


HE  Memorial  Tablet  which  stands  in  the  Free  West 
Church,  Aberdeen,  bears  the  following  inscription, 
which  sets  forth  in  few  words  the  leading  outlines  of 
a  devoted  but  uneventful  life  : — 

IN     MEMORY    OF 
ALEXANDER  DYCE  DAVIDSON,   D.D, 

MINISTER  OF  THIS  CHURCH 

BORN  IN  ABERDEEN  8  MAY  1807 

ORDAINED  MINISTER  OF  THE  SOUTH  CHURCH  3  AUGUSf  1832. 

TRANSLATED  TO  THE  WEST  CHURCH  S  MAY  1 836. 

SEPARATED  FROM  THE  ESTABLISHMENT  AT  THE  DISRUPTION  ALONG  WITH 

A  LARGE  CONGREGATION,  23  MAY  1 843 

OPENED  THEIR  CHURCH  IN  BELMONT  STREET  28  JANUARY  1844 

REMOVED  TO  THIS  CHURCH  I4  FEBRUARY  1869 

AND  AFTER  LABOURING  SUCCESSFULLY  FOR  NEARLY  FORTY  YEARS  AS  A 
PREACHER  OF  CHRIST'S  RIGHTEOUSNESS  TO  WARMI.Y-A  ITACHED 

FLOCKS  HE  FELL  ASLEEP  27  APRIL  1872 

DECLARING  "  HIS  TRUST  TO  BE  IN  THE  GREAT  SALVATION  AND 

THE  GLORIOUS  REDEEMER." 

These  lines  sufficiently  sum  up  the  life  of  Dr  Davidson.     For  his  long, 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

laborious,  and  successful  career  was  spent  among  his  own  people.  He 
was  a  pillar  of  the  Free  Church  ;  and  he  was  one  of  the  best  preachers 
of  a  day  that  saw  many  famous  preachers.  But  he  was  not  a  man  of 
affairs.  He  took  no  part  in  public  life  :  if  ever  minister  spent  his  whole 
time  and  strength  on  a  congregation,  Dr  Davidson  did.  These  memorial 
lines,  therefore,  with  the  addition  of  his  marriage,  but  long  loneliness, 
caused  by  the  early  death  of  wife  and  child,  contain  all  that  can  be  called 
biography  of  this  able  and  excellent  minister. 

A  volume  of  lectures  on  "  The  Book  of  Esther,"  which  the  writer  of 
these  lines  heard  in  the  old  Free  West  Church,  in  the  winter  of  1858,  and 
which  made  an  exceptionally  deep  impression  when  delivered,  was  the 
only  work  Dr  Davidson  published.  Indeed  that  volume,  along  with  a 
volume  of  sermons  edited  by  one  of  his  executors,  and  published  in 
1872,  is  all  of  the  rich  treasures  of  Dr  Davidson's  study  that  has  seen 
the  light.  To  the  latter  work  a  preface  was  drawn  up  by  the  loving  and 
dutiful  hand  of  Mr  Francis  Edmond  ;  and  it  is  simply  a  perfect  model 
of  what  such  things  should  be.  But  it  is  referred  to  here,  not  for  its 
own  sake,  but  because  it  supplies  us  with  material  whereby  to  estimate 
somewhat  the  noble  and  unflagging  life  of  this  honoured  minister  in 
the  sphere  he  had  chosen  for  himself — the  pulpit.  It  is  an  inspiring 
thing  to  read  and  ponder  the  pages  of  this  preface,  where  the  editor 
has  done  all  ministers  the  service  of  letting  them  see  how  his  minister 
wrought  for  his  pulpit.  A  table  is  here  given  of  1800  lectures  and  ser- 
mons, carefully  prepared  and  fully  written  out,  ready  for  the  West 
Church  pulpit,  and  therefore  ready  for  the  press.  To  those  who  know 
what  a  lecture  or  sermon  cost  Dr  Davidson,  the  reading  and  considera- 
tion of  pages  6  and  7  of  Mr  Edmond 's  preface  will  administer  a  hum- 
bling reproof,  or  a  fresh  impulse  to  faithful  work,  according  to  their 
own  fulfilment  of  their  pulpit  duties. 

Of  course  Dr  Davidson  could  not  have  done  such  work,  and  so  much 
of  it,  had  he  not  resolved  to  give  up  his  whole  time,  and  thought,  and 


ALEXANDER  DYCE  DAVIDSON,  D.D. 
strength  to  it.  He  might  have  been  the  most  influential  man  in  tlie 
affairs  of  the  city  in  which  he  was  so  much  loved  and  revered,  but  he 
retired  from  all  public  and  social  life,  that  he  might  discharge  fully  the 
office  to  which  he  was  ordained.  Dr  Davidson  was  never  so  happy  as 
when  he  was  at  work  in  his  study.  Perhaps  he  denied  himself  needful 
relaxation  in  his  unceasing  care  for  each  Sabbath's  work.  Considering 
his  power  and  popularity  as  a  preacher,  it  was  often  remarked  how  little 
he  was  from  home ;  and  we  have  heard  it  told  by  ministers  whom  he 
assisted  at  communion  seasons,  how  resolute  he  was  in  getting  home  by 
the  first  opportunity  after  his  work  was  done.  He  would  on  no  account 
lose  a  day  from  the  work  he  loved  so  well,  and  consequently  fulfilled  with 
such  signal  success. 

Dr  Davidson's  facility  in  composition  was  very  great,  and  it  was 
no  doubt  largely  the  result  and  reward  of  the  honest,  regular,  daily 
work  he  performed  through  a  long  and  happy  ministry.  His  methods 
of  composition  were  such  as  we  might  have  expected  from  the  mental 
characteristics  and  scholarly  habits  of  the  man.  He  wrote  only  after 
the  greatest  industry  in  preparing  his  matter,  but  when  he  once  sat 
down  to  write,  his  work  immediately  took  on  its  peculiar  neatness  and 
accuracy.  It  passed  in  the  first  draft  from  under  his  hand  in  a  state  of 
correctness  and  finish  to  which  he  could  add  nothing.  Happy  workman! 
He  never  needed  to  recast  and  correct,  to  destroy  and  restore !  Indeed, 
he  has  been  heard  to  say  that  he  never  drafted  a  discourse  in  his  life. 
With  such  gifts  and  habits,  natural  and  acquired,  we  come  to  see  how  it 
was  possible  that  every  Sabbath  he  went  up  to  the  pulpit  with  his  work 
so  thoroughly  prepared,  and  carried  to,  and  sustained  at,  such  a  high 
level  of  theological  and  homiletical  excellence. 

There  was  one  part  of  his  daily  pulpit  work  which  alwaj-s  was 
particularly,  and  indeed  unapproachably,  well  done.  It  was  his  regular 
practice  to  give  a  running  commentary  on  the  passage  of  Scripture  read 
each  Sabbath  morning.     In  few,  sagacious,  clear,  and  suggestive  words 


DISRUPTWy   WORTHIES. 

he  laid  open  the  sense  and  bearinfj  of  the  passage  read,  and  that  in  a 
space  of  time  that  did  not  seem  to  add  materially  to  the  mere  reading  of 
the  verses.  But  this,  too,  was  only  another  result  of  those  habits  of  mind 
which  ruled  and  shaped  all  his  life.  Careful  preparation,  method,  and  a 
fine  sense  of  fitness  and  proportion,  were  all  characteristically  displayed 
in  this  incidental  looking  exposition. 

It  could  not  but  be  that  offers  of  promotion  to  offices  of  wider 
theological  influence,  and  other  preferments  and  promotions,  should  be 
set  before  such  a  man  ;  but  his  quiet  and  retiring  manner  of  dealing  with 
all  personal  and  public  matters  made  these  offers  to  be  little  heard  of 
Thus  it  was  that  Dr  Davidson  lived  and  laboured,  and  died  in  the  city 
which  had  given  him  birth,  and  which  is  so  justly  proud  of  and  grateful 
for,  his  memory.  A.  W. 


ALEXANDER  DUFF.DD,     > 


^Icpnbcr  IDuff,  Q.D. 


.^  MONG  the  men  who  in  1843  '^'^  the  foundation  of  the 
Free  Church,  there  was  not  one  who  occupied  a  more 
prominent  position  in  the  ej'cs  of  the  Church  and  of 
the  world  than  Dr  Duff  The  course  which  he  and 
his  brother  missionaries  might  adopt  on  hearing  of  the 
Disruption  of  the  Church  was  awaited  with  considerable 
anxiet)'  on  both  sides,  because  it  was  felt  that  the  adhesion  to  one  party  or 
the  other  of  such  a  body  of  men  would  be,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  testimony 
in  favour  of  the  party  to  which  they  might  adhere.  There  was  not  only 
anxiety  but  uncertainty  as  to  the  course  which  the  missionaries  might 
consider  it  their  duty  to  pursue.  Separated  by  distance,  and  by  their 
views  regarding  the  relation  in  which  they  stood  to  the  Church  as  a 
whole,  they  had  avoided  any  public  declaration  of  their  sentiments 
concerning  questions  which  were  still  matters  of  "conflict"  within  the 
Church  whose  representatives  they  were.  It  so  happened  also  that  the 
two  Conveners  of  the  Foreign  Missions  who  held  office  before  the  Dis- 
ruption— Dr  Inglis  and  Dr  Brunton — belonged  to  the  Moderate  party  ; 
and  between  them  on  the  one  hand,  and  Dr  Duff  and  his  colleagues  on 
the  other,  the  most  amicable  relations  had  uniformly  subsisted.  In  fact, 
Dr  Gordon  was  the  only  man  who  held  an  important  official  position  in 
the  Home  Administration  of  the  Foreign  Missions  that  cast  in  his  lot 
with  the  Free  Church.     I  have  understood  that  it  was  witli  vcrv  real 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

satisfaction  that  the  Glasgow  Assembly  received  the  announcement  that 
all  the  missionaries  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  to  Jews  and  to  Gentiles, 
unhesitatingly  adhered  to  its  Free  section. 

It  were  impossible,  and  happily  it  is  unnecessary,  to  give  here  any 
full  biographical  notice  of  Dr  Duff.  His  public  life  is  universally  known, 
while  his  private  life  was  that  of  the  loving  and  beloved  husband  and 
father,  the  genial  friend,  the  wise  counsellor,  the  beneficent  helper.  At 
home  alike  in  the  lordly  hall,  in  the  gatherings  of  the  learned,  and  in 
the  dwellings  of  the  humblest,  he  maintained  in  all  his  intercourse  with 
his  fellow-men,  in  a  very  unusual  degree,  the  distinctive  character  of  the 
Christian  man,  the  Christian  minister,  and  the  Christian  missionary. 
Naturally  somewhat  impatient  of  contradiction,  and  with  his  whole  soul 
possessed  with  convictions  on  the  only  subjects  on  which  he  cared  to 
speak,  the  first  impression  that  he  made  on  strangers  was  apt  to  be  that 
he  was  a  man  of  overbearing  dogmatism.  But  gradually  the  impression 
wore  off,  and  those  who  came  to  know  him  well  beheld  in  him  the 
simplicity  of  the  child,  united  with  the  fire  of  the  zealot,  and  an  ardour 
of  love  which  called  forth  their  earnest  love  in  return. 

His  public  life  was  nearly  equally  divided  into  two  parts — in  India 
and  at  home.  It  is  impossible  to  over-estimate  the  importance  of  the 
former.  His  style  of  eloquence  was  precisely  fitted  to  captivate  the 
Oriental  ear,  and  influence  the  Oriental  mind.  With  a  large  range  of 
knowledge,  and  immense  power  of  acquisition,  and  unequalled  faculty 
of  retention,  he  knew  how  to  turn  this  to  account  in  convincing  the  under- 
standing and  gaining  the  affections  of  all  with  whom  he  came  into 
contact.  He  was  essentially  the  orator.  Even  his  ordinary  letters  were 
orations.  The  consequence  of  this  is,  that  those  who  never  heard  him 
speak  must  deem  his  writings  somewhat  turgid,  overlaid,  as  regards 
their  matter,  with  imagery,  and  in  respect  of  style,  with  superabundant 
adjectives  and  epithets.  But  those  who  can  remember  him,  as  he  poured 
forth    a    stream    of  eloquence,   now    dashing    impetuously    and    almost 


ALEXANDER  DUEE,  D.D. 

furiously  over  all  obstacles,  now  gliding  in  glittering  beauty  between  its 
banks,  will  not  fail  to  recognise  in  his  writings  masterpieces  of  eloquent 
oratory.  He  was,  of  course,  as  a  missionary,  more  occupied  with  the 
defence  than  with  the  exposition  of  the  Christian  system.  But  he  was 
a  powerful  preacher.  Ever  handling  the  Word  of  God  with  profoundest 
reverence,  and  deeply  penetrated  with  a  sense  of  the  unspeakable 
preciousness  of  revealed  truth,  he  brought  all  his  great  powers  into 
requisition  in  order  to  commend  that  truth  to  others. 

His  work  at  home  was  a  continued  effort  to  arouse  a  slumbering 
Church  to  a  sense  of  its  duty  and  its  privilege,  as  put  in  trust  of  the 
sacred  deposit  of  the  Gospel  for  the  benefit  of  the  world.  This  was  his 
one  theme,  and  in  handling  it  he  was  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season. 
Whether  in  his  professorial  chair,  in  church  courts,  in  the  pulpit,  in 
private  intercourse  with  all  classes  of  men,  or  in  doing  from  day  to  day 
the  work  that  lay  to  his  hand  as  Convener  of  the  Foreign  Missions 
Committee  of  the  Free  Church,  he  lived  for  this  end,  and  cared  not  to 
live  if  he  could  not  promote  it ;  and  for  the  furtherance  of  this  end  he 
had  both  the  will  and  the  power  to  cultivate  habits  which  might  seem 
almost  contrary  to  his  nature.  But,  indeed,  his  nature  was  many-sided. 
With  all  the  exuberance  of  his  fancy,  and  the  apparently  uncontrollable 
flight  of  his  imagination,  he  had  a  singular  power  of  mastering  details, 
and  forming  conclusions  as  to  their  bearings  upon  matters  of  business. 
It  will  perhaps  surprise  some  to  be  told  that  he  was  a  man  of  remark- 
ably accurate  and  painstaking  business  habits.  Endowed  with  unlimited 
power  of  work,  sustained  by  over-mastering  zeal,  even  during  the  later 
years  of  his  life,  which  were  years  of  great  physical  pain  and  suffering, 
he  spent  long  sleepless  nights  in  meditating  on  his  work,  and  reverentially 
dealing  with  his  God  and  Saviour  respecting  the  establishment  of  His 
kingdom  in  his  heart  and  in  the  world  ;  while  day  after  day  he  resumed 
his  patient  toil,  ever  glad  to  spend  and  to  be  spent  in  doing  the  work  of 
the  Master  whom  he  scr\-ed  with  the  service  of  ardent  love. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Of  the  men  of  our  age  regarding  whom  our  children  will  be  proud  to 
tell  their  children  and  their  grandchildren  how  they  walked  in  our  streets, 
and  how  they  pleaded  from  pulpit  or  from  platform  for  God  with  men,  and 
for  men  with  God,  there  is  no  one  who  will  be  held  in  fresher  or  holier 
remembrance  than  Dr  Duff.  He  rests  from  his  labours,  and  his  works 
do  follow  him.  And  over  most  of  his  compeers  and  associates  he  had 
this  advantage:  their  work,  all-important  as  it  was,  could  not  but  be 
to  a  considerable  extent  of  a  denominational,  or,  at  the  most,  of  a 
national  character.  But  the  work  of  Dr  Duff  was  catholic  in  the  widest 
sense.  His  heart  was  set  upon  the  evangelisation  of  all  the  world  ;  his 
influence  was  felt  over  all  the  Churches. 

We  shall  now  append  a  mere  chronicle,  consisting  of  little  more  than 
the  dates  of  the  principal  events  of  Dr  Duff's  life. 

He  was  born  at  the  farm-house  of  Auchnachyle,  in  the  parish  of 
Moulin,  Perthshire,  on  the  25th  of  April  1806.  His  parents  were  not 
only  sincere  Christians,  but  were  earnestly  interested  in  the  cause  of  God, 
and  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  all  over  the  world.  To  their  influence  and 
their  prayers  he  ever  acknowledged  himself  a  debtor  for  all  that  he  was 
enabled  by  the  grace  of  God  to  become  and  to  do.  When  eight  years 
old  he  was  sent  to  school,  and  after  that  early  age  he  was  but  seldom, 
and  for  short  times,  in  his  father's  house.  After  receiving  the  ordinary 
primary  education  in  the  parish  school  of  Kirkmichael,  and  the  usual 
secondary  instruction  in  the  Grammar  School  of  Perth,  at  the  age  of  fif- 
teen he  became  a  student  in  the  University  of  St  Andrews.  From  many 
testimonies  it  is  manifest  that  here  he  made  the  most  of  his  golden  oppor- 
tunities. In  all  his  classes  he  held  a  high  place,  in  some,  the  highest. 
He  attended  as  a  student  the  first  course  of  lectures  which  Dr  Chalmers 
delivered  as  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  St  Andrews,  and  the  genius 
of  the  student  caught  an  enlivening  spark  from  the  genius  of  the  teacher. 
Under  the  genial  auspices  of  this  teacher  and  friend,  he  entered  upon  a 
course  of  study  and  of  missionary  effort,  which  closed  only  with  his  life. 


ALEXANDER  DUFF,  D.D. 

Immediately  after  the  close  of  his  University  course,  he  was 
licensed  as  a  preacher,  and  was  straightway  appointed  by  the  Foreign 
Missions  Committee  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  as  the  first  Missionary 
of  the  Church  to  India.  His  appointment  was  sanctioned  by  the 
General  Assembly  of  1829,  and  he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  the 
ministry  on  the  12th  of  August.  After  a  disastrous  voyage,  and  two 
shipwrecks,  in  one  of  which  the  Lady  Holland  was  totally  destroyed, 
he  landed  in  Calcutta  on  the  27th  of  May  1830,  and  immediately  began 
the  great  work  with  which  his  name  will  ever  be  associated.  This  is  not 
the  place  either  for  the  exposition  of,  or  the  apology  for,  that  work.  In 
the  day  of  India's  regeneration,  when  its  converted  millions  shall  stretch 
out  their  hands  to  God,  the  arrival  of  Duff  on  her  shore  will  be  acknow- 
ledged to  have  marked  an  important  epoch  in  the  national  and  spiritual 
history  of  that  great  land.  The  hand  of  God  was  in  it.  Never  before  or 
since  was  there  a  time  so  opportune  for  the  great  experiment  which 
Duff"  instituted ;  never  before  or  since  was  there  a  man  so  qualified  to 
conduct  that  experiment  to  a  successful  issue.  In  the  doing  with  his 
might  what  his  hand  found  to  do,  the  young  missionary  "lighted  the  candle 
at  both  ends,"  and  after  little  more  than  four  years  of  bright  burning, 
it  was  all  but  burnt  out.  By  the  middle  of  1834  he  was  prostrated  with 
illness,  and  was  carried  on  board  a  homeward-bound  ship.  Immediately 
on  his  arrival  at  home,  though  still  in  an  extremely  feeble  state  of  health, 
he  began  the  work  of  pleading  the  cause  of  missions  all  over  Scotland, 
and  inaugurated  a  movement  which  has  already  accomplished  much,  and 
is  destined  to  accomplish  far  more,  towards  placing  the  Church  of  Christ 
in  the  position  which  her  Divine  Head  designed  her  to  occupy  towards 
the  world  which  He  came  to  save.  He  returned  to  India  in  1840,  and  at 
once  resumed  his  labours  in  the  Mission  which  he  had  been  honoured  to 
found.  These  labours  we  cannot  describe  in  detail.  They  were  abun- 
dant, and  very  various. 

The  event  which  gives  its  special  character  to  the  present  publication. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  "  Disruption  "  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  was  met  by  Dr  Duff  as 
all  who  knew  him  might  have  expected  that  he  would  meet  it.  He 
and  his  colleagues  might  have  misgivings  as  to  the  ability  of  a  portion 
of  the  Church  to  bear  the  cost  of  those  operations  which  had  been 
regarded  by  some  as  too  heavy  a  tax  to  be  paid  by  the  undivided 
Church  ;  but  they  had  no  hesitation  as  to  the  course  of  duty  ;  and  hence 
the  name  of  Dr  Duff  stands  in  the  roll  of  "  Disruption  Worthies."  The 
work  of  the  Mission  went  on  without  interruption  ;  and  neither 
missionaries,  nor  converts,  nor  students,  had  more  to  suffer  than  the 
painful  breach  which  divided  them  from  many  friends  with  whom  they 
had  hitherto  been  united.  The  death  of  Dr  Chalmers,  in  1847,  led  to 
great  anxiety.  The  position  which  he  had  occupied  in  the  Free  Church, 
all  felt,  could  never  be  filled  by  another.  Men  when  they  met  were 
engrossed  with  the  momentous  question  as  to  a  successor  to  him  in  his 
office  as  Principal  and  Professor  in  the  Edinburgh  College.  The 
response  was  gradually  given  more  and  more  distinctly,  that  if  Duff 
would  accept  it,  he  was  the  man.  A  proposal  was  accordingly  made 
to  him  by  the  Commission  of  the  General  Assembly  that  he  should 
return  home  and  be  appointed  to  this  office.  This  proposal  he  felt 
himself  constrained  to  decline.  But,  believing  that  one  object  that  the 
Church  had  in  view  in  making  it  was,  that  he  might  carry  forward  the 
work  which  he  had  begun  as  an  advocate  of  the  Mission  cause,  he 
consented  to  visit  this  country,  and  prosecute  that  work  for  a  time.  In 
order  to  prepare  himself  for  it,  he  made  an  extensive  tour  over 
India,  of  which  he  had  not  till  then  seen  much,  and  made  himself 
acquainted,  by  personal  observation,  with  all  the  work  carried  on  in  all 
its  length  and  breadth.  When  this  survey  was  completed,  he  left  India, 
and  reached  home  in  May  1850.  He  now  entered  upon  that  course  of 
exposition  and  advocacy  of  the  cause  of  Missions,  of  which  he  had 
before  given  a  foretaste,  which  may  be  said  without  exaggeration  to 
have   revolutionised    the   sentiment   of  the   Church   of   Christ,    not    in 


ALEXANDER  DUFF,  D.D. 

Scotland  only,  nor  in  the  British  Islands,  but  also  on  the  European  and 
American  continents.  It  was  in  the  beginning  of  1854  that  he  visited 
the  latter  continent.  No  pen  of  ours  can  describe  the  enthusiastic 
character  of  his  reception,  or  the  blessing  that  accompanied  his  visit. 
Before  this,  in  185 1,  he  had  enjoyed  the  highest  honour  that  is  open  to 
the  ambition  of  a  Presbyterian  minister,  the  Moderatorship  of  the 
General  Assembly  of  his  Church.  His  superabundant  labours  in  this 
country  and  in  America  were  again  a  lighting  of  the  candle  at  both 
ends.  For  a  time  he  was  laid  aside  from  all  work,  and  had  to  learn 
that  God  requires  of  his  servants  patience  as  well  as  action.  He 
returned  to  India  at  the  close  of  1855,  and  resumed  his  work  in  his 
50th  year  with  as  much  energy  as  he  had  expended  on  it  in  his 
24th.  But  this  could  not  continue  always.  Repeated  illnesses  con- 
vinced him  that  his  work  in  India  must  cease,  and  prepared  him  to 
accept  an  invitation  which  was  addressed  to  him  to  return  home  and 
work/^r  India,  and  for  the  world,  as  Convener  of  the  Foreign  Missions 
Committee  of  the  Free  Church.  This  was  to  him  a  great  disappointment. 
He  had  often  spoken  to  the  writer  of  his  desire  to  "  die  in  harness,"  and 
to  lay  his  bones  to  mingle  with  the  clods  of  his  beloved  Gangetic  valley. 
Reaching  Scotland  in  August  1864,  he  entered  with  characteristic  energ>' 
on  the  work  of  his  new  office.  How  faithfully  and  how  laboriously  he 
discharged  his  duties  is  known  in  the  general  to  all  the  Church,  but  the 
writer  may  be  excused  the  egotism  of  saying  that  he  alone  knew  it  to  the 
full  extent,  from  the  circumstance  that  he  was  for  several  years  associated 
with  him  as  Vice-Convener.  By  the  generous  liberality  of  a  few  friends 
he  was  enabled  to  present  to  the  Church  a  sum  of  ;£'io,ooo  for  the  endow- 
ment of  a  Chair  of  "  Evangelistic  Theology  ;"  and,  says  his  biographer, 
"When  the  General  Assembly  of  1867,  with  whom  the  appointment  of 
the  first  Professor  rested,  could  not  agree  as  to  which  of  two  experienced 
Missionaries,  from  Calcutta  and  Bombay,  should  be  appointed  to  it,  Dr 
Duff  was  most  unwillingly  compelled  to  accept  the  appointment  b>'  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

unanimous  call  of  his  Church."  Thus  he  became  at  last  a  Professor  in 
that  College,  of  which  he  had  fifteen  years  before  declined  to  be  a 
Professor  and  Principal.  In  1873  he  had  the  unique  honour  conferred 
on  him  of  a  second  election  to  the  Moderator's  Chair  of  the  General 
Assembly,  and  that  at  a  trying  time  in  the  Church's  history.  When  the 
Assembly  of  1874  had  to  appoint  a  Principal  of  the  New  College  in  suc- 
cession to  Dr  Candlish,  many  of  the  friends  of  Dr  Duff  deemed  that  he 
was  the  fittest  man  to  be  appointed  to  the  office.  He  did  not  desire 
the  appointment,  but  when  he  had  consented  to  be  nominated,  he  was 
certainly  disappointed,  and  perhaps  for  the  moment  somewhat  em- 
bittered, when  he  found  that  his  appointment,  if  it  took  place  at  all,  would 
not  be  unanimous.  He  therefore  declined  to  be  proposed.  It  were  alto- 
gether out  of  place  to  revive  the  controversy  here,  and  out  of  time  to 
revive  it  anywhere.  I  have  no  doubt  that  Dr  Duff  received  this  disap- 
pointment as  a  gift  of  his  Heavenly  Father,  and  that  it  contributed  to 
that  which  had  long  been  the  strongest  desire  of  his  heart,  his  growth  in 
holiness,  and  in  submission  to  his  Father's  will. 

During  the  sitting  of  the  Assembly  of  1876  Dr  Duff  met  with  a 
severe  accident,  from  the  effects  of  which  I  do  not  think  that  he  ever 
fully  rallied.  From  that  time  his  friends  anticipated  that  the  day  of  his 
departure  would  not  be  distant.  For  many  months  he  suffered  from  one 
affection  after  another,  and,  when  the  College  session  opened  in  Novem- 
ber 1877,  he  was  obliged  to  acknowledge  to  himself  that  he  could  not 
discharge  the  duties  of  his  Chair.  On  the  12th  of  February  1878  came 
the  end  of  a  career  marked  by  unflinching  faithfulness  to  the  cause  of 
God  and  of  man,  a  career  whose  track  will  not  soon  be  obliterated  from 
the  sands  of  time,  and  which  will  be  remembered,  to  the  praise  of  God's 
grace,  in  the  anthems  of  eternity. 

His  remains  were  reverently  laid  beside  those  of  his  loving  and  beloved 
wife,  who  had  predeceased  him  by  twenty-three  years. 

T.  S. 


liitru  ilxtncatt,  i.B, 


ENRY  DUNCAN  was  bom  on  the  8th  October  1774,  at 
the  Manse  of  Lochrutton,  Kirkcudbrightshire.  He  was 
the  third  son  of  the  Rev.  George  Duncan,  minister  of 
that  parish.  1 1  is  paternal  grandfather,  a  native  of 
Aberdeen,  was  also  minister  of  Lochrutton,  and  was 
drowned  when  bathing  in  the  loch,  soon  after  his  son 
had  been  licensed  to  preach  the  gospel.  Perhaps  no  minister  of  the 
Cluirch  of  Scotland  was  ever  so  closely  connected  with  its  clergy  as 
the  subject  of  this  sketch.  Before  he  was  past  middle  life,  he  used  to 
say  that  he  was  surely  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  as  he  could  trace  his  con- 
nection with  no  less  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  Scottish  ministers  ;  and 
before  he  died,  he  could  have  added  considerably  to  that  long  list. 

As  a  boy,  Henry  Duncan  manifested  those  fine  talents  and  amiable 
dispositions  which  afterwards  raised  him  to  distinction  as  a  minister,  an 
author,  and  a  philanthropist.  Having  finished  his  preliminary  education 
at  the  Grammar  School  of  Dumfries,  he  went,  in  1788,  to  prosecute 
his  studies  at  the  University  of  St  Andrews.  Having  studied  at  that 
University  for  two  sessions,  he  was  sent  to  Liverpool,  and  became  a 
clerk  in  an  eminent  banking  firm,  with  a  view  to  the  mercantile  pro- 
fession. Under  the  patronage  of  his  relative,  Dr  Currie,  the  biographer 
of  Burns,  he  had  the  fairest  prospects  of  success  in  business ;  but  his 
decided  taste  for  literature  and  the  pur^^uits  of  a  clerical  life  induced  him 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

to  leave  Liverpool,  and  study  for  the  ministry  of  the  Scottish  Church. 
Yet  the  experience  he  gained  in  the  Liverpool  banking  house  was  of 
great  use  to  him  in  his  after  life.  In  1793  he  resumed  his  studies  at  the 
University  of  Edinburgh,  and  there  he  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  the 
Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy,  Dugald  Stewart.  His  talents  and 
general  character  commended  him  highly  to  the  kind  offices  of  that 
eminent  philosopher.  He  also  spent  two  college  sessions  at  Glasgow, 
and  specially  profited  by  the  profound  and  interesting  lectures  of  Mr 
John  Millar,  Professor  of  Law.  His  last  two  sessions  were  spent  in 
Edinburgh.  At  this  period  of  his  academic  career  he  was  elected  a 
member  of  the  celebrated  Speculative  Society,  and  became  acquainted 
with  many  young  men  of  high  promise,  among  others  with  Henry 
Brougham,  afterwards  so  famous  in  law  and  politics.  He  continued  on 
habits  of  friendship  and  correspondence  with  this  distinguished  states- 
man during  the  greater  part  of  his  life. 

In  the  year  1798  he  was  licensed  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  imme- 
diately received  from  the  Earl  of  Mansfield  the  choice  of  two  livings  in 
his  gift,  both  vacant  at  the  time,  Lochmaben  and  Ruthwell.  He  chose 
the  latter,  inferior  though  it  was  in  value,  because  it  appeared  to  be  a 
more  suitable  field  for  his  peculiar  pastoral  work  and  philanthropic 
experiments.  And  soon,  as  the  minister  of  Ruthwell,  he  displayed  that 
intellectual  activity,  fertility  of  resource,  and  fine  benevolent  spirit,  which 
enabled  him  to  do  so  much,  both  for  the  temporal  and  spiritual  welfare 
of  his  people.  He  imported  Indian  corn  from  Liverpool  for  the  supply 
of  their  wants  during  a  time  of  great  scarcity.  He  also  effected,  amidst 
not  a  little  opposition,  important  social  reforms,  and  in  many  ways 
sought  to  improve  the  habits  and  manners  of  his  flock.  During  the  time 
of  the  dreaded  French  invasion,  he  raised  in  his  parish  a  company  of 
Volunteers,  of  which  he  was  appointed  captain.  On  several  occasions 
he  put  off  his  military  uniform,  to  assume  the  clerical  dress,  and  enter  on 
the  duties  of  the  pulpit.     As  his  views  of  divine  truth  and  the  nature  of 


HENRY  DUNCAN,  D.D. 

the  pastoral  office  grew  deeper  and  more  spiritual,  he  ceased  to  regard 
with  much  satisfaction  this  part  of  his  career;  but  his  loyalty  and 
patriotism  did  not  suffer  from  his  progress  in  personal  religion. 

In  1808  he  commenced  with  a  few  literary  friends  the  publication  of 
the  "  Scottish  Cheap  Repository  Tracts,"  which  were  intended  to  furnish 
sound  instruction  to  the  common  people.  The  best  of  the  scries  were 
written  by  himself,  and  by  far  the  best  of  all,  "The  Cottage  Fireside," 
was  soon  published  separately,  and  attained  great  popularity.  In  point 
of  spirit,  pathos,  and  humour,  it  has  never  been  surpassed  by  any  composi- 
tion of  its  class.  Soon  after  this  period  he  started  the  Dumfries  and 
Galloway  Courier,  of  which  for  seven  years  he  was  editor.  Under  his 
management,  and  the  more  professional  control  of  his  successor,  Mr  John 
MacDiarmid,  this  paper  reached  a  very  high  position  among  Scottish 
journals. 

As  the  advocate  of  the  Bible  Society,  when  it  was  a  new  and 
struggling  institution,  as  an  enlightened  educational  reformer,  and  the 
champion  of  every  cause  that  appeared  to  bear  upon  the  real  welfare  of 
the  country,  the  minister  of  Ruthwell  gradually  became  highly  distin- 
guished among  his  brethren;  and  at  length,  in  1810,  his  practical 
philanthropy  took  a  form  which  made  his  name  known  over  the  whole 
country'.  In  that  year  the  first  SAVINGS  Bank  was  instituted  at 
Ruthwell,  and  by  the  indefatigable  exertions  of  its  founder,  the  merits  of 
banks  of  the  kind  for  popular  use  were  speedily  acknowledged  by  states- 
men and  philanthropists  of  all  classes.  The  first  Act  of  Parliament  to 
encourage  and  facilitate  the  institution  of  such  banks  was  passed  mainly 
through  Mr  Duncan's  personal  efforts  in  London  among  members  of 
both  branches  of  the  Legislature.  By  pamphlets,  lectures,  and  other 
appliances,  he  rapidly  made  known  the  claims  of  Savings  Banks  over  the 
whole  island.  Before  long,  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  such  banks 
instituted  in  many  places,  and  carried  on  with  high  success.  For  his 
great  exertions  and   large  personal   outlay  in  connection  with  this  new 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

and  noble  system  of  Savings  Banks,  he  never  received  any  public 
reward.  His  letters  and  parcels,  chiefly  on  bank  business,  one  year  cost 
him  more  than  ;^8o  ;  yet  he  cheerfully  bore  such  a  heavy  burden  in  the 
service  of  his  countr>^ 

At  this  period  he  published  another  excellent  tale  of  humble  Scottish 
life, — "  The  Young  South-Country  Weaver,"  a  fit  sequel  to  "  The  Cottage 
Fireside."  A  number  of  years  later  (1826)  he  published,  anonymously, 
a  work  of  fiction  in  three  volumes,  "  William  Douglas  ;  or,  The  Scottish 
Exiles,"  intended  to  counteract  Sir  Walter  Scott's  aspersions  on  the 
Covenanters  in  "Old  Mortality."  This  was  hailed  as  a  work  of  real 
genius,  and  was  remarkably  well  received  by  the  Scottish  public. 

In  1823  Mr  Duncan  received  the  degree  of  D.D.  from  the  University 
of  St  Andrews,  in  recognition  of  his  philanthropic  labours  and  literary 
merit.  It  was  not  till  1836  that  the  first  volume  of  his  chief  literary 
work,  "  The  Sacred  Philosophy  of  the  Seasons,"  made  its  appearance. 
It  was  rapidly  succeeded  by  the  three  others  ;  for  a  volume,  containing 
papers  for  every  day,  was  devoted  to  each  Season.  The  work,  written 
in  a  popular  and  devout,  yet  truly  philosophic  spirit,  rapidly  ran  through 
several  editions,  and  was  long  a  great  favourite  with  the  public.  The 
philosophy  is  by  no  means  yet  out  of  date,  and  most  of  the  papers  are 
as  fresh  and  useful  as  when  they  first  appeared.  No  better  work  of  its 
class  than  "  The  Sacred  Philosophy  of  the  Seasons  "  is  to  be  found  in 
British  literature, 

Dr  Duncan  rendered  a  service  of  the  highest  kind  to  the  antiquarian 
world  by  his  discovery  and  restoration  of  the  famous  Runic  cross,  which, 
as  erected  and  repaired  by  him,  now  stands  in  the  garden  of  Ruthwell 
Manse.  He  made  several  beautiful  models  and  drawings  of  this  remark- 
able relic  of  antiquity,  and  wrote  a  learned  description  of  it,  which  was 
published  in  the  "Transactions  of  the  Scottish  Antiquarian  Society."  No 
professed  and  experienced  antiquary  could  have  done  greater  justice  to  a 
monument  about  which  volumes  have  been  written  since  he  first  brought 


HENRY  DUNCAN,  D.D. 
it  to  light,  and  the  mystery  of  whose  Runic  inscriptions  has  only  of  late 
been  solved.  To  the  same  accomplished  observer  belongs  the  credit  of 
having  intelligently  brought  before  the  geologists  of  Great  Britain  the 
footmarks  of  quadrupeds  on  the  new  red  sandstone  of  Corncockle  Muir, 
near  Lochmaben.  This  discovery  constituted  a  new  era  in  geology,  and 
gave  Dr  Duncan  an  honourable  place  among  the  geologists  of  his  day. 

During  the  early  part  of  his  ministerial  career,  Henry  Duncan  was 
claimed  by  the  "  Moderate "  party  in  the  Church ;  but  he  gradually 
grew  more  decided  in  his  evangelical  sentiments,  aud  cast  in  his  lot 
entirely  with  the  party  of  Dr  John  Erskine,  Sir  Henry  Moncreiff,  Dr 
Andrew  Thomson,  and  Dr  Chalmers.  With  the  latter  two  eminent  men 
he  lived  on  terms  of  the  warmest  friendship.  He  contributed  to  the 
"  Christian  Instructor,"  when  edited  by  Dr  Thomson,  and  corresponded 
with  Dr  Chalmers  on  various  subjects  of  Christian  philanthropy.  So 
early  as  1827,  he  addressed  a  long  and  admirable  letter  to  his  old  friend 
Mr  Brougham,  on  reform  in  the  Church  of  Scotland,  especially  in  regard 
to  Patronage.  Afterwards,  in  1831,  he  published  in  the  "Christian 
Instructor"  another  letter  on  the  subject,  addressed  to  Lord  Melbourne,  the 
Home  Secretary.  In  these  letters,  as  well  as  in  a  third  which  he  wrote  by 
request  to  Lord  Lansdowne,  another  of  his  college  friends,  he  advocated 
that  check  on  the  exercise  of  Patronage  which  was  in  1834  embodied  in 
the  famous  Veto  Act.  If  any  man  in  Scotland  was  the  real  parent  of 
that  measure,  which  had  such  memorable  consequences,  it  was  the 
minister  of  Ruthwell ;  and  in  all  the  controversies  to  which  it  gave  rise, 
up  to  the  time  of  the  Disruption,  the  .same  minister  took  a  prominent 
part.  Dr  Duncan,  though  at  times  a  graceful  speaker,  had  no  great 
talent  for  debate ;  but  he  wielded  a  powerful  and  practised  pen  on  the 
popular  side,  and  contributed  not  a  little  to  the  triumph  of  the  Evan- 
gelical party  in  the  Church.  In  1839,  when  the  "Ten  Years'  Conflict" 
was  almost  at  its  height,  he  was  chosen  Moderator  of  the  General 
Assembly.     This  mark  of  distinction  was  amply  merited  by  his  varied 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

services  to  the  Church,  of  which  he  was  an  ornament,  and  by  his  eminent 
achievements  as  a  patriotic  philanthropist. 

When  the  great  conflict  between  the  Church  and  the  Civil  Power 
ended  in  the  Disruption  of  1843,  Dr  Duncan  unhesitatingly  joined  the 
Free  Church,  of  which  he  became  one  of  the  fathers  and  founders.  He  was 
accompanied  in  his  retirement  from  the  Establishment  by  his  two  sons, 
George  John  Duncan,  minister  of  Kirkpatrick-Durham,  and  W.  Wallace 
Duncan,  minister  of  Cleish ;  also  by  his  two  sons-in-law,  Dr  Horatius 
Bonar,  minister  of  the  North  Church,  Kelso,  and  the  Rev.  James  Dodds, 
minister  of  Humbie.  Few  of  his  brethren  made  such  sacrifices  at  the 
Disruption  as  Dr  Henry  Duncan.  His  manse,  surrounded  with  gardens 
and  grounds  which  he  had  laid  out  with  exquisite  taste,  was  one  of  the 
finest  residences  of  the  kind  in  Scotland.  Everything  around  it  had  a 
history,  or  was  endeared  to  him  and  his  family  by  many  hallowed 
associations.  But  he  cheerfully  left  the  charming  spot,  and  took  up  his 
abode  in  a  humble  cottage  by  the  highway  side.  He  also  met  with 
much  unworthy  hostility  from  various  classes  of  people  in  the  parish  and 
district,  many  of  whom  should  have  been  specially  forward  to  do  him 
honour.  He  could  procure  no  site  for  a  church  in  the  parish  of 
Ruthwell,  and  was  forced  to  accept  of  a  site  in  the  neighbouring  parish 
of  Mousewald,  kindly  offered  by  the  late  Dr  James  Buchanan  and  Mrs 
Buchanan.  By  his  energetic  efforts  a  new  church,  manse,  and  school 
were  erected  free  of  debt ;  and  at  this  day,  along  with  an  obelisk  reared 
to  his  memory,  they  form  a  worthy  monument  of  noble  devotedness  to 
high  principle.  Built  on  what  has  been  called  by  the  people,  "  Mount 
Kedar,"  they  are  conspicuous  from  various  points  of  the  railway  between 
Dumfries  and  Annan. 

This  amiable  and  admirable  man,  on  the  appointment  of  the  Rev. 
Alexander  Brown  as  his  colleague,  removed,  in  1845,  with  his  family  to 
Edinburgh  ;  but,  returning  early  in  the  following  year  to  visit  his  much- 
loved  people  of  Ruthwell,  he  was  struck  down  by  a  deadly  paralytic 


HENRY  DUNCAN,  D.D. 
attack  while  holdin.^  an  evening  prayer-meeting  in  the  house  of  one  of 
his  old  elders  who  still  adhered  to  the  Establishment.  He  was  imme- 
diately conveyed  to  Comlongon  Castle,  the  residence  of  his  brother-in-law, 
Mr  Walter  Philips,  factor  of  the  Earl  of  Mansfield  ;  but  consciousness 
only  slightly  returned  at  intervals,  and  in  two  days  he  calmly  expired. 
The  grief  of  his  old  parishioners  knew  no  bounds  at  his  death,  and 
all  classes  of  the  people  in  the  whole  district  lamented  him  as  an 
eminent  servant  of  the  Lord,  suddenly  taken  away  from  the  scene  of 
his  lengthened  and  devoted  ministry.  He  died  on  Thursday,  the 
1 2th  February  1846,  and  was  interred  on  the  Tuesday  following  in 
RuthweU  Churchyard. 

Dr  Duncan  thus  died  among  his  people,  in  the  place  he  loved  so 
well,  and  which  will  long  be  associated  with  his  name.  The  cause  of 
Evangelical  religion,  the  principles  of  the  Scottish  Reformation,  and 
the  privileges  of  the  Scottish  Church,  always  found  in  him  a  faithful 
advocate  ;  and  when  the  time  of  trial  came  in  his  old  age,  he  gloried  in 
the  name  and  position  of  a  Free  Church  minister.  He  was,  in  lifting  up 
his  testimony  for  precious  principles,  more  severely  tried  than  most  of 
the  brethren  who  left  the  Established  Church  along  with  him  ;  but,  with 
characteristic  cheerfulness  and  serenity,  he  bore  hardship  in  the  service 
of  his  Divine  Master. 

Dr  Duncan  was  twice  married,  first  to  Miss  Agnes  Craig,  daughter  of 
the  Rev.  John  Craig,  his  predecessor  in  the  parish  of  Ruthwell,  by  whom 
he  had  two  sons  and  one  daughter  ;  and,  secondly,  to  Mrs  Lundie,  widow 
of  his  early  friend,  the  Rev.  Robert  Lundie,  minister  of  Kelso.  His  son, 
the  Rev.  Wallace  Duncan,  died  in  1864,  as  minister  of  the  Free  Church, 
Peebles  ;  his  elder  son,  Dr  George  Duncan,  who,  on  leaving  Kirkpatrick- 
Durham,  had  been  successively  minister  of  the  English  Presbyterian 
Church  at  North  Shields  and  Greenwich,  and  was  for  many  years  clerk 
of  the  Synod  of  that  Church,  died  at  Dumfries  towards  the  close  of  1868. 
His  widow,  the  mother  and  biographer  of  Mary  Lundie  Duncan,  and  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

author  of  many  excellent  works,  a  woman  distinguished  for  her  high 
talent  and  her  consistent  Christian  usefulness,  still  survives  in  her 
honoured  retirement.  She  belongs  to  a  noble  band  of  Christian 
workers  who  rendered  great  service  to  Evangelical  religion  during  the 
past  generation,  all  of  whom  but  herself  have  been  summoned  to  their 
blessed  rest. 

Dr  Duncan  was  remarkable  for  the  variety  of  his  accomplishments. 
There  was  scarcely  a  literary  or  scientific  subject  that  was  strange  to 
him,  and  he  had  an  excellent  knowledge  of  art  in  its  various  forms.  His 
manual  dexterity  was  something  quite  extraordinary,  and  was  far  above 
what  is  often  connected  with  "a  mechanical  turn."  He  excelled  in 
drawing  and  modelling,  was  a  first-rate  landscape  gardener,  and  on 
different  occasions  proved  himself  an  excellent  architect.  He  had  a 
great  genius  for  sculpture,  and  delighted  at  times  in  producing  specimens 
of  that  noble  art.  But  in  domestic  life,  and  in  all  the  refinements  of  a 
cultivated  social  circle,  he  eminently  shone.  His  piety,  his  benevolence, 
his  literary  culture,  and  manifold  social  accomplishments,  never  failed  to 
impress  all  who  visited  Ruthwell  Manse  in  those  days  when,  under  his 
sway,  it  was  a  model  of  a  refined  and  happy  Christian  home. 

J.D. 


JOHN    DUNCAN,  LL.D. 


lobn  JBuncan,  II.l, 


)OHN  DUNCAN  was  born  in  Aberdeen  in  1796.  He  was 
a  delicate,  dreamy,  clever,  engaging,  affectionate,  high- 
spirited,  and  occasionally  passionate  boy,  sometimes  crying 
bitterly  under  the  severity  of  paternal  discipline,  some- 
times abruptly  laughing  aloud  at  the  brightness  or  at  the 
humour  of  his  own  hidden  thoughts.  His  father,  who  was 
of  strict  religious  principles,  and  a  member  of  the  Secession  Church,  was 
by  trade  a  shoemaker,  and  meaning  to  bring  up  his  son  in  his  own 
calling,  he  set  him  on  a  stool  beside  himself.  But  manuallabour  was 
very  irksome  to  the  boy  ;  and  his  father,  whose  character  was  extremely 
stern,  had  little  patience  for  his  blundering  work,  and  no  pleasantry  to 
make  shoemaking  attractive.  After  a  time  he  was  released  from  this 
bondage,  through  his  mother's  intercession,  and  to  his  great  joy  was  sent 
to  the  grammar  school,  whence  he  worked  his  way  to  the  university, 
where,  with  a  hard  struggle,  he  supported  himself  by  teaching. 

In  his  college  course  he  seems  to  have  had  the  characteristics  of  his 
later  years  ;  acquiring  great  fluency  in  writing  Latin,  yet  not  distinguishing 
himself  in  the  regular  work  of  the  classes,  but  labouring  hard  in  his  own 
fitful  way  in  languages,  literature,  and  philosophy.  His  insatiable  love 
for  languages  grew  side  by  side  with  an  intense  delight  in  philosophic 
speculation,  into  which  he  threw  himself  with  an  ardour  that  would 
recognise  no  barriers  in  heaven  or  earth.     The  ground  of  Revelation  was 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

lost,  he  sank  down  through  unbcHef,  deism,  pantheism,  into  material 
atheism ;  and  man  was  in  his  eyes  a  mere  animal,  like  the  other  beasts, 
living  only  to  go  through  the  degrading  sameness  of  the  daily  round  of 
nature's  wants  and  supplies,  "  born  to  eat,  and  to  drink,  and  to  digest,  and 
to  die."  Atheism  had  not  on  him  the  effect  of  exciting  pride  in  man's 
greatness ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  was  deeply  mortified  at  his  own 
littleness  and  the  littleness  of  all  humanity,  for  man  without  God  ar.d 
without  immortality,  presented  to  him  nothing  to  interest,  to  admire,  to 
respect,  or  to  love. 

His  inward  history  is  inseparable  from  his  outward  life,  both  on 
account  of  its  marked  and  singular  character,  and  because  he  was  remark- 
ably communicative  about  those  personal  transactions  in  the  region  of  the 
great  unseen,  on  which  most  men  are  apt  to  be  reserved.  Along  with 
deep  abstraction,  he  had  an  irrepressible  love  of  intercourse  with  others, 
which  often  took  the  form  of  asking  prayer  for  relief  in  doubt  about  his 
own  salvation,  but  sometimes  also  of  narrating  the  mental  facts  of  his  past 
life.  Chief  among  these  were  three  outstanding  events — his  deliverance 
from  atheism,  his  conversion,  and  his  recovery  out  of  spiritual  declension. 

His  recovery  out  of  atheism  he  ascribed,  in  the  first  instance,  to  Dr 
Mearns,  whoae  cogent  reasonings  in  his  lectures,  along  with  his  prayers 
to  the  "  Great  King,"  convinced  him  of  the  existence  of  God.  But  the 
conviction  had  been  reached  by  a  logical  process  without  any  more  direct 
mental  perception  ;  and  the  full  breaking  in  of  the  light  on  this  first  of 
all  truths  he  looked  back  upon  to  the  last  as  a  great  era  in  his  life. 
"  I  first  saw  clearly  the  existence  of  God,"  he  said,"  in  walking  along  the 
bridge  at  Aberdeen  ;  it  was  a  great  discovery  to  me  ;  and  I  stood  in  an 
ecstacy  of  joy."  But  while  he  could  now  "  thank  God  for  His  existence," 
this  measure  of  light  wrought  no  abiding  change  on  his  heart  or  life,  and 
he  accepted  of  licence  to  preach  the  gospel  while  practically  a  Socinian, 
though  nominally  a  Sabellian,  and  with  nothing,  either  in  his  character  or 
his  views,  consistent  with  the  high  calling  on  which  he  was  entering. 


JOHN  DUNCAN,  LL.D. 

The  next  great  event,  after  eight  years  intellectually  fruitful  but 
spiritually  barren,  was  meeting  with  Dr  Malan  of  Geneva,  who  visited 
Aberdeen  in  1826,  and  pressed  him  closely  with  salvation  freely  given  and 
to  be  instantly  accepted.  Towards  the  close  of  their  conversation,  Mr 
Duncan  quoted  a  text  of  Scripture  which  Dr  Malan  instantly  seized,  and 
said,  "  Man,  you  have  got  the  word  of  God  in  your  mouth  ;"  to  which  he 
replied,  "  And  may  He  not  take  it  utterly  out  of  my  mouth."  He 
frequently  spoke  with  deep  impression  of  the  electric  power  which  in  that 
moment  accompanied  the  word  that  was  at  once  in  the  heart  of  God  and  in 
his  own  heart,  and  he  regarded  it  as  the  great  beginning  of  all  communion 
between  God  and  himself  in  time  and  in  eternity.  This  turning  event  in  his 
life  was  followed  by  liberty  and  light  and  joy  in  his  own  spirit,  and  holy 
boldness  in  testifying  of  free  grace  both  in  preaching  and  in  conversation. 

His  third  great  inward  event  was  the  recovery  of  his  soul  out  of 
declension  after  a  year  or  two  had  passed,  and  he  had  lost  the  fervour  of 
his  first  love.  Through  an  exclusive  adherence  to  promise  and  privilege 
and  peace,  apart  from  repentance,  self-scrutiny,  and  watchfulness,  his  love 
and  joy  had  lost  their  freshness,  and  all  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  had 
withered.  His  words  were  the  same  as  before,  the  doctrinal  assurance 
remained,  and  the  profession  was  as  high  as  ever ;  but  the  reality  and 
power  were  gone,  the  lips  and  the  heart  were  not  one.  He  could  not 
endure  this  hollowness.  "  I'm  not  a  hypocrite,"  he  said,  "  and  I  won't 
be  one."  He  let  go  the  "  name  to  live,"  that  he  might  recover  the  life 
itself ;  and  he  fell  into  darkness,  doubt,  fear,  all  but  absolute  despair. 
Through  a  conflict  very  protracted  and  at  length  severe,  with  a  deep 
submission  to  the  sovereign  will  of  God,  he  was  restored  to  a  good 
measure  of  light  and  liberty.  After  his  conversion  he  was  never  troubled 
with  doubts  about  the  word  of  God  ;  but  he  said  that  "  he  was  naturally 
of  a  sceptical  turn  of  mind,  but  his  scepticism  now  took  the  forni  of  doubt 
about  his  own  salvation."  His  conversion  and  his  recovery  embraced  the 
two  extremes  of  spiritual  exercise ;  and  they  formed  the  man  in  his  long 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

subsequent  life.  Each  was  the  complement  of  the  other  ;  and  if  for  a 
time  the  last  became  first,  the  fervour  and  simplicity  of  the  first  recovered 
and  retained  its  place.  The  two  combined  introduced  him  into  a 
marvellous  fulness  of  the  word  of  God,  which  he  cordially  received  in  its 
length  and  in  its  breadth  as  few  men  have  ever  done.  Through  life  his 
anger  burned  against  a  surface  gospel  that  did  not  grapple  with  the 
conscience,  but  it  kindled  as  keenly  against  the  gospel  withheld  or  robbed 
of  its  simplicity.  "The  best  preaching,"  he  said,  "is,  Believe  on  Jesus 
Christ,  and  keep  the  Ten  Commandments." 

In  the  earlier  part  of  his  course,  and  indeed  throughout  his  life,  his 
own  preaching  at  its  best  was  of  a  very  high  order.  At  its  worst  it  was 
scarcely  possible  for  him  to  speak  without  uttering  weighty  truths  in  an 
original  and  memorable  form  ;  his  reading  of  the  Bible  was  singularly 
instructive  and  impressive,  and  his  prayers  were  the  words  of  one  standing 
in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  great  Jehovah.  But  his  preaching  was 
too  abstract,  and  was  sometimes  the  slow  utterance  of  thoughts  that 
seemed  to  be  gathering  themselves  in  drops  while  he  was  in  the  pulpit — 
big  drops,  but  with  great  intervals  between  them,  and  the  whole  occupying 
an  excessive  time  before  he  could  be  satisfied  that  there  was  enough  in 
the  cup  to  offer  to  a  thirsting  soul.  But  at  other  times  his  whole  discourse 
was  a  continuous  flow  of  heavenly  eloquence,  in  which  both  the  intellect 
and  the  spirit  soared  in  so  lofty  a  region  that  the  body  itself  seemed  to 
partake  of  the  elevation.  On  such  occasions  his  language  was  concise, 
oracular,  and  singularly  beautiful  ;  every  word  was  a  thought  sought  out 
as  a  jewel,  and  artistically  fitted  in  its  place.  His  discourse  was  not  one 
idea  presented  in  many  forms,  nor  many  ideas  fitted  up  with  loosci 
materials,  nor  a  chain  of  successive  arguments  ;  but  a  unity  made  up  o) 
parts,  each  fine  in  itself,  and  each  helpful  to  the  whole,  fitted  together  aj 
in  a  beautiful  mosaic,  and  lighted  up  with  the  frequent  flashes  of  sanctified 
genius.  In  beauty  it  was  a  picture  ;  but  in  power  it  was  the  rushing  of 
sparkling  wine  that  had  burst  its  bottles. 


JOHN  DUNCAN,  LL.D. 

In  1830  Mr  Duncan  was  appointed,  but  without  ordination,  to  the 
very  rural  charge  of  Persie  Chapel,  in  the  eastern  borders  of  Perthshire. 
On  the  brief  period  of  his  pastoral  duty  there  he  always  looked  back  with 
peculiar  interest ;  and  a  deep  mutual  attachment  was  formed  between 
himself  and  the  people  of  the  district,  who  highly  appreciated  his 
ministry.  His  tenderness  and  the  strength  of  his  affection  tempered  his 
faithfulness,  which  at  that  time  was  occasionally  characterised  by  a 
severity  which  would  otherwise  have  given  offence.  In  183 1  he  was 
called  to  a  Sabbath  lectureship  in  Glasgow,  where  he  was  afterwards 
ordained  as  minister  of  Milton  Church,  and  where,  in  1837,  he  married 
Miss  Gaven,  of  Aberdeen,  who  died  after  two  years,  to  his  great  grief 
While  there  he  received  from  Aberdeen  the  degree  of  LL.D.  in  acknow- 
ledgment of  his  Hebrew  and  Oriental  learning,  in  which  he  had  few 
equals  ;  but  by  a  strange  omission  none  of  the  Universities  enrolled  him 
among  their  Doctors  in  Divinity,  although  beside  him  most  other  men 
seemed  scarcely  to  be  theologians. 

In  1841  Dr  Duncan  was  appointed  as  a  missionary  to  the  Jews  in 
the  beautiful  city  of  Buda-Pesth,  on  the  Danube,  where  the  Archduchess  of 
Hungary  had  been  long  praying  for  the  help  of  a  man  of  God.  Before 
leaving  Scotland,  he  had  been  married  again  to  a  widow  lady,  Mrs 
Torrance,  who  entered  with  great  energy  and  wisdom  into  all  his 
missionary  work.  His  work  in  Hungary  was  in  all  respects  one  of  the 
happiest  and  most  fruitful  portions  of  his  life.  His  intimate  acquaintance 
with  their  sacred  language  and  their  literature  excited  an  interest  in  the 
Jews,  and  rendered  them  unusually  accessible  ;  the  spiritual  power  that 
rested  on  himself  was  divinely  used  for  their  religious  awakening ;  and 
there  was  abiding  fruit  in  some  remarkable  conversions.  At  the  same 
time  he  was  greatly  honoured  and  beloved  by  the  leading  Protestant 
ministers ;  and  his  memory  is  cherished  with  a  singular  affection  by 
pastors  of  the  Reformed  Hungarian  Church.  At  a  later  period  he  took 
a  similar  interest  in  the  Protestant  Churches  of  Bohemia  ;  and  nothing 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

could  exceed   the  gratitude   and   attachment  of  the   Bohemian    pastors 
toward  him. 

In  the  ever  memorable  era  of  1843,  Dr  Duncan,  with  all  his  mind  and 
heart,  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland  ;  and  not  alone, 
but  along  with  all  the  missionaries  to  the  Jews  from  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  for  the  character  of  the  grand  event  of  that  time  was  not 
mainly  ecclesiastical,  but  deeply  religious.  He  was  then  recalled  to  fill 
the  Hebrew  Chair  in  the  New  College,  Edinburgh  ;  and  this  position  he 
occupied  till  his  death  in  1870. 

In  genius,  in  learning,  and  in  devotion,  Dr  Duncan  was  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  men  of  the  Disruption.  His  knowledge  of  languages 
was  so  great,  that  Dr  Guthrie  spoke  of  him  in  the  General  Assembly  as 
"the  man  who  could  talk  his  way  to  the  wall  of  China  ;"  but  he  knew 
languages  better  than  he  could  use  them,  and  he  said  himself  that 
English  and  Latin  were  the  only  tongues  in  which  he  could  speak  with 
fluency.  His  irregularity  of  habit,  his  mental  abstraction,  and  his  weak- 
ness of  will  in  ordinary  life,  made  him  in  many  things  of  less  service  than 
inferior  men.  But  his  wonderful  insight  into  divine  things  ;  his  fruitful 
thoughts  clothed  with  light  and  beauty ;  his  acute,  brilliant,  sententious 
sayings  ;  his  deep  devoutness,  his  tenderness  of  conscience,  his  transpar- 
ency, his  humility,  his  continual  repentance  toward  God,  and  his  ardent 
love  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  have  left  priceless  impressions  that  can 
never  be  erased  from  the  hearts  of  his  hearers,  his  students,  and  his 
friends.  His  own  words  form  the  best  memorial  of  his  character : — 
"  Methought  I  heard  the  song  of  one  to  whom  much  had  been  forgiven, 
and  who  therefore  loved  much  ;  but  it  was  the  song  of  the  chief  of  sinners, 
of  one  to  whom  most  had  been  forgiven,  and  who  therefore  loved  most.  I 
would  know,  O  God,  what  soul  that  is  ;  O  God,  let  that  soul  be  mine !  " 

A.  M.  S. 


^Uxan&ijr  itnrrag  Dunlop. 


ALEXANDER    DUNLOP    was    born    in    Greenock    on 

the  27th  of  December  1798.     He  was  educated  at  the 

Grammar  School  of  that  town,  and  at  the  University 

of   Edinburgli.     After    the    usual   attendance    on  the 

classes  in  the  faculties   of  Arts   and  of  Law,  he  was 

called  to  the  Scottish  Bar  in  the  year  1820. 

He  was  the  fifth  son  of  Alexander  Dunlop,  Esq.  of  Kcppoch,  and 

belonged  to  a  family  which  had  furnished  many  leaders  to  the  Church 

and  people  of  Scotland. 

Soon  after  he  was  called  to  the  bar,  Mr  Dunlop  began  to  study  care- 
fully the  working  of  the  poor-law  system  of  Scotland,  and  it  was  in  this 
way  that  he  began  to  take  an  interest  in  Church  questions.  Eike 
most  well-educated  young  Scotchmen,  he  had  had  a  transient  admira- 
tion for  Episcopacy,  but  his  sympathetic  nature  soon  threw  that  off; 
and  when  his  poor-law  investigations  led  him  to  study  carefully  the 
ecclesiastical  system  of  his  country,  which  his  ancestors  had  so  greatly 
helped  to  fashion,  he  soon  came  to  see  the  real  grandeur  of  the  old 
democratic  Church  government  of  Scotland.  The  first  edition  of  his  book 
on  the  Poor  Law  was  published  in  1825,  and  the  fourth  which  appeared 
in  1834  contained  an  appendix  upon  the  Law  of  Patronage.  During 
the  first  ten  years  of  his  life  at  the  bar,  he  devoted  himself  to  the  work 
of  his  profession.     In   1822  he  became  one  ot  the  editors  of  Shaw  and 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


Dunlop's  Reports,  and  in  this  capacity  and  others  gave  evidence  of  his 
legal  attainments.  But  ere  long  Church  questions  absorbed  the  greater 
portion  of  his  time. 

In  his  early  life  Mr  Dunlop  was  a  Tory.  His  family  held  Tory 
principles ;  and  in  the  pleasant  letters  which  passed  between  the  busy 
young  Edinburgh  advocate  and  the  lively  family  circle  in  Greenock,  there 
are  many  half-bantering,  half-earnest  references  to  the  family  political 
creed.  His  opinions  gradually  changed,  however;  and  at  the  Dumbarton- 
shire election  of  1832,  he  published  a  letter  to  the  electors  of  the  county, 
which  was  warmly  welcomed  by  the  Scotch  Whig  leaders,  more  especially 
as  "  coming  from  one,"  wrote  Cockburn,  "  not  steeped  like  me  in  the 
errors  of  Whiggery,  but  rather  addicted  to  the  follies  of  Toryism." 

The  year  1832  saw  the  beginning  of  Mr  Dunlop's  public  life.  He 
became  really  well  known  and  a  confidential  leader,  just  when  the  party 
in  the  Church  which  he  supported  became  dominant  in  the  Assembly. 

His  great  knowledge  of  old  Scotch  law,  especially  in  its  bearing  on 
the  relation  between  Church  and  State,  as  well  as  his  powers  of  clear 
thought  and  expression,  made  his  services  specially  valuable.  He  was 
the  mediator  in  every  dispute,  the  confidant  in  every  plan,  the  active 
manager  in  all  the  more  important  matters  of  popular  Church  business. 
His  correspondence  on  public  affairs  soon  grew  very  voluminous,  and 
now  reads  like  the  inner  history  of  the  "ten  years'  conflict."  He  was  an 
active  member  of  the  various  Church  societies — of  the  Church  Law 
Society,  of  the  Anti-Patronage  Society,  and  so  on— and  his  whole  time 
was  occupied  in  the  business  which  Church  affairs  brought  upon  him. 
In  1833  he  was  busiest  with  the  Chapel  Act,  and  was  actively  engaged 
in  promoting  anti-patronage  meetings;  in  1834  he  became  editor  of  the 
"Presbyterian  Review,"  which  did  good  service  to  the  cause  which  lay 
nearest  his  heart ;  in  1835  Church  extension  occupied  him ;  in  1837  and 
in  1838  the  Auchterarder  case,  the  conflict  between  the  Church  and  the 
Court  of  Session,  and  non-intrusion  meetings,  absorbed  his  attention.     In 


ALEXANDER  MURRA  Y  DUNLOP. 
the  busy  years  that  followed,  Mr  Duulop's  activity  was  enormous.     The 
Church  then  entered  on  a  double  struggle ;   self-defence  was  added  to 
self-reform,  and   double   labour  fell   to  the   lot   of  the   leaders  of  the 
movement. 

Among  Church  reforms  Mr  Dunlop  took  special  interest  in  the  restora- 
tion of  the  eldership  to  its  old  place  in  the  Church  of  Scotland.  He  wrote 
two  valuable  articles  upon  this  subject  in  the  "  Presbyterian  Review,"  and 
prepared  an  elaborate  report  for  the  General  A.ssembly.  He  also  left 
some  valuable  historical  notes  upon  the  place  of  the  eldership  in  the 
ancient  Church  of  Scotland,  which  have  not  been  published.  Church 
extension,  too,  interested  him  greatly ;  but,  as  was  natural  from  his  pre- 
vious studies,  the  relation  of  the  Church  to  education  and  to  the  poor 
occupied  most  of  his  attention.  The  information  furnished  by  the 
Church  to  the  Government  about  the  number  of  paupers  in  Scotland,  and 
the  elaborate  Report  on  the  same  subject  presented  to  the  Assembly  of 
1 841,  were  both  the  result  of  Mr  Dunlop's  almost  unaided  labour.  He 
took  an  active  part  in  the  Voluntary  controversy,  and  so  thoroughly 
matured  were  his  opinions  upon  the  real  connection  which  ought  to 
subsist  between  State  and  Church— opinions  framed  not  on  a  sentiment 
of  what  things  ought  to  be,  but  on  an  historical  study  of  the  old  Scottish 
Church— that,  in  later  days,  none  of  his  speeches  on  the  Irish  Church  or 
the  Union  questions  in  any  way  contradicted  his  earlier  statements  or 
ideas. 

Mr  Dunlop's  services,  however,  in  the  struggle  between  the  Church 
and  the  majority  of  the  Court  of  Session,  are  those  which  will  ever 
be  held  in  kindliest  remembrance.  He  had  already  made  himself 
obnoxious  to  most  of  the  heads  of  the  Parliament  House  by  his  anti- 
patronage  views,  and  by  his  support  of  the  Veto  Act;  but  when  he 
followed  his  church  in  her  quarrel  with  the  Court  of  Session,  he  deliber- 
ately surrendered  all  hopes  of  professional  advancement.  The  services  he 
rendered  the  Church  in  this  unhappy  strife,  by  pamphlet  and  by  speech. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

in  the  court  and  at  public  meeting,  can  scarcely  be  over-estimated.  The 
ground  which  he  took  up  at  first  he  never  abandoned.  He  did  not 
indulge  in  promiscuous  declamation ;  he  always  appealed  to  the 
history  of  the  Church.  His  argument,  the  same  in  speech  and  pamphlet, 
and  at  last  set  forth  in  detail  in  the  Claim  of  Rights,  was  substantially 
this :  There  is  no  need  in  Scotland  to  dispute  about  the  precise  meaning 
and  efifects  of  the  abstract  doctrine  of  spiritual  independence.  In  virtue 
of  a  concordat  between  Church  and  State,  the  Church  of  Scotland  has 
had  certain  rights  and  liberties  which  can  be  enumerated,  guaranteed 
her,  and  recognised  as  hers.  These  she  claims  to  possess,  not  merely  by 
inherent  right,  but  also  by  legal  recognition,  and  these  are  now  being 
illegally  wrested  from  her.  This  was  the  position  he  took  up,  and  he 
maintained  it  to  the  last. 

It  would  be  impossible  to  give  a  list  of  all  the  pamphlets  and  speeches 
which  he  published  during  the  struggle.  The  most  important  was  his 
answer  to  the  letter  of  the  Dean  of  Faculty  Hope;  but  the  short 
tract,  "Which  Party  breaks  the  Law.'"  was  equally  telling;  and  the  pre- 
face and  appendix  to  his  edition  of  Wedderspoon's  "  Maxims  for  the 
Moderates,"  were  full  of  very  effective  sarcasm. 

When  a  compromise  was  found  to  be  impossible,  and  when  the 
Church  felt  that  either  State  connection  or  liberty  must  be  surrendered, 
the  task  of  preparing  documents  befitting  the  occasion  was  entrusted  to 
Mr  Dunlop.  He  prepared  that  memorable  overture  setting  forth  the 
ancient  relation  between  Church  and  State,  and  the  guaranteed  rights  of 
the  Church,  which  was  afterwards  published  as  the  Church's  Claim  of 
Right.  I  have  before  me  now  the  various  proof-sheets,  which  shew  the 
gradual  growth  of  the  document,  and  the  changes  which  were  made  upon 
it  ere  it  saw  light  in  the  form  in  which  we  now  have  it.  On  the  margins 
are  corrections,  mostly  in  Mr  Dunlop's  handwriting ;  but  here  and  there 
occur  suggestions  made  by  others  to  whom  the  sheets  were  submitted. 
On  one,  Dr  Candlish  has  nervously  pencilled  two  important  additional 


ALEXANDER  MURRA  V  DUN  LOP. 

clauses ;  on  another,  John  Hamilton  has  suggested  additions  and  altera- 
tions ;  but  perhaps  the  most  interesting  is  the  one  on  which  Dr  Gordon 
was  set  to  work,  where  he  begins  by  suggesting  alterations  which  tend  to 
soften  the  sternness  of  the  document,  and  ends,  for  divine  wrath  has 
kindled  in  him,  with  emendations  which  make  the  draft  sterner  and  more 
severe.  Those  old  proof-sheets,  yellowish  with  age,  stained  with  printer's 
ink,  and  scored  over  with  hasty  pens  and  hastier  pencils,  bring  back  in  a 
strange  vivid  way  the  mingled  anxiety  and  resolution  of  the  times.  The 
MS.  draft  of  the  Protest  which  Dr  Welsh  left  upon  the  table  of  the 
Assembly  on  the  day  of  the  Disruption,  is  also  an  interesting  document 
Its  corrections  are  all  in  Mr  Dunlop's  handwriting,  except  one  clause, 
which  seems  to  have  been  added  by  Mr  Hamilton.  Among  Mr  Dunlop's 
papers  there  are  two  drafts  of  the  programme  of  procedure  on  the  day  of 
the  Disruption  ;  the  first  proposes  to  have  a  discussion  before  leaving 
the  hall.  This  difference  is  probably  explained  by  the  following  MS. 
note  appended  to  the  MS.  draft  of  the  Protest,  which  is  the  only 
reference  Mr  Dunlop  makes  to  the  obloquy  thrown  upon  him  by  many 
of  the  Scotch  and  English  newspapers  for  the  part  he  was  taking  in 
Church  affairs : — "  The  Tivies  gave  Dr  Chalmers  great  credit  for  the 
quiet  and  orderly  way  in  which  the  Disruption  was  effected — contrast- 
ing it  with  what  it  might  have  been  supposed  would  have  taken 
place  had  Candlish  or  the  author  of  the  Protest  had  had  their  way. 
How  little  did  they  know  of  the  matter!  Till  Chalmers  read  this 
draft,  he  was  fierce  for  a  discussion  before  leaving  the  hall,  and  that 
in  opposition  to  the  arguments  of  all  his  intimate  friends.  The  '  arch 
agitator,'  in  the  Times'  estimation,  was  the  person  really  entitled  to 
credit  for  the  course  followed." 

After  the  Disruption,  Mr  Dunlop  was  made  legal  adviser  of  the 
Church,  an  office  which  he  held  till  his  death,  and  in  which  he  continued 
to  render  eminent  service  to  the  cause  which  he  had  made  his  own. 
But  want  of  space  compels  me  to  refrain  from  even   mentioning  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

numerous  evidences  of  his  labours  which  are  to  be  found  among  his 
papers. 

In  1S44  Mr  Dunlop  married  Eliza  Esther,  only  child  of  John  Murray, 
Esq.,  of  Ainslie  Place,  Edinburgh.  On  the  death  of  his  father-in-law  in 
1849,  he  assumed  the  name  of  Murray,  to  which  he  added  the  additional 
surname  of  Colquhoun-Stirling,  on  succeeding,  in  1866,  to  the  estate  of 
his  cousin,  William  Colquhoun-Stirling  of  Law  and  Edinbarnet.  It  was 
Mrs  Murray  Dunlop's  rare  good  fortune  to  be  able  to  make  amends  to 
her  husband  for  the  sacrifices  which  his  devotion  to  the  Church  had  cost 
him.  His  marriage  rendered  him  independent  of  the  hostile  influences 
of  the  Parliament  House,  and  enabled  him  at  last  to  yield  to  the  wishes 
ot  his  friends,  who  had  long  been  urging  him  to  enter  Parliament.  Mr 
Dunlop's  first  efforts  were  unsuccessful.  In  1845  and  1847  ^e  failed  ;  but 
in  1852  he  was  returned  by  the  electors  of  Greenock,  his  native  town,  and 
he  kept  the  seat  until  failing  health  compelled  him  to  resign. 

Mr  Dunlop's  Parliamentary  career  was  very  successful.  Few  Scotch 
members  have  had  as  much  influence  in  the  House,  and  none  were  able 
to  pass  so  many  useful  measures.  His  position  was  due  almost  entirely 
to  his  weight  of  character,  and  to  the  wisdom  and  diligence  he  shewed 
on  committees  and  in  the  House ;  and  although  hindered  by  a  weak 
voice  and  a  somewhat  hesitating  manner,  he  was  always  respectfully 
listened  to  when  he  rose  to  speak.  As  was  to  be  expected  from  his  pre- 
vious training  and  character,  Mr  Dunlop  assiduously  devoted  himself 
during  his  Pariiamentary  career  to  the  cause  of  legal  and  social  reform. 
The  Parliamentary  work  which  he  himself  looked  back  upon  with  most 
satisfaction  was  that  done  in  connection  with  the  marriage  law  of  Scot- 
land, the  series  of  measures  regarding  reformatories  and  industrial  schools 
which  culminated  in  Dunlop's  Act,  and  the  Act  to  facilitate  the  erection 
of  dwelling-houses  for  the  working  classes.  His  Pariiamentary  career 
was  marked  by  the  same  lofty  moral  courage  and  disdain  of  all  that 
was  tyrannical  and  selfish  which  had  characterised  his  cariier  public  life. 


ALEXANDER  MURRA  V  DUNLOP. 

In  the  "Arrow"  affair,  he  testified  his  abhorrence  of  the  conduct  of  tlic 
Liberal  Government  in  the  war  with  China  in  1857.  The  defeat  of  the 
Ministry  involved  a  general  election,  and  it  was  felt  that  many  of  the 
Liberals  who  had  voted  against  the  Government  would  lose  their  scats. 
Mr  Dunlop  at  once  placed  his  resignation  in  the  hands  of  his  constituency, 
and  declared,  with  his  usual  high  sense  of  honour,  that  he  would  not  even 
stand  as  a  candidate  if  they  disapproved  of  his  conduct.  The  people  of 
Greenock,  however,  were  not  unworthy  of  their  member,  and  re-elected 
him  in  such  a  way  as  to  shew  their  admiration  for  his  honourable  and 
high-minded  course  of  action.  Perhaps  Mr  Dunlop's  conduct  in  his 
vindication  of  Sir  Alexander  Burnes  was  still  more  courageous.  The 
Government  sought  to  justify  the  Afghan  war  in  which  they  had  engaged, 
by  extracts  from  the  despatches  of  the  late  envoy  at  the  Afghan  court. 
The  papers  thus  published  were  so  different  from  the  documents  sent  home 
by  Sir  Alexander  to  his  relatives  in  this  country,  that  they  were  led  to 
seek  an  explanation.  The  result  shewed  that  "  mutilated,  false,  forged 
opinions  of  a  public  servant,  who  had  lost  his  life  in  the  public  service,"  had 
been  offered  to  the  House,  to  support  a  policy  which  Sir  Alexander  had 
always  opposed.  Members  of  the  House  of  Commons  have  described  the 
appearance  of  Mr  Dunlop  on  the  occasion  when  he  led  the  attack  upon 
Lord  Palmerston.  His  quiet  and  almost  timid  manner  disappeared,  and 
in  a  firm,  almost  loud  tone,  he  said  that  he  had  read  the  papers  with 
amazement,  indignation,  and  shame ;  he  declared  that  these  papers  had 
been  laid  on  the  table  of  the  House  by  her  Majesty's  command  ;  that  her 
name  was  appealed  to  as  the  stamp  of  their  truthfulness,  and  that  her 
servants  had  not  shrunk  from  using  that  name  as  the  voucher  and  the 
cover  of  a  lie.  Although,  with  the  help  of  the  leader  of  the  opposition, 
the  Government  were  not  defeated  on  the  vote,  yet  the  character  and 
reputation  of  Sir  Alexander  Burnes  were  vindicated  ;  it  was  felt  that  such 
a  mutilation  of  Parliamentary  documents  could  not  again  take  place,  and 
a  great  victory  was  gained  in  the  interests  of  public  morality. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

In  1868,  at  the  general  election,  Mr  Dunlop  resigned  his  seat  in 
Parliament.  His  health,  never  robust,  had  begun  to  give  way,  and  he 
wished  to  spend  the  rest  of  his  life  out  of  the  din  of  public  service,  and 
in  calm  preparation  for  the  rest  that  remaineth  to  the  people  of  God. 
That  rest  came  soon  after.  He  died  the  ist  of  September  1870,  and 
was  buried  in  the  beautiful  little  grave-yard  of  the  Free  Church  at 
Corsock.  He  left  to  mourn  him  his  widow,  four  sons — three  of  whom 
were  not  long  separated  from  their  father — and  four  daughters. 

Mr  Dunlop  never  received  any  of  the  honours  which  the  Scottish  Bar 
has  to  bestow  upon  her  distinguished  sons,  but  this  was  from  his  own 
unwillingness  to  accept  them.  Even  in  his  early  days,  when  he 
experienced  considerable  persecution,  Cockburn,  when  Solicitor-General, 
offered  him  a  sheriffship,  which  Mr  Dunlop  declined,  because  he  thought 
it  would  interfere  with  his  work  for  the  Church  ;  and  later  he  was  offered 
a  judgeship,  and  the  office  of  Lord  Advocate.  I  cannot  close  this  sketch 
in  a  better  way  than  by  quoting  Lord  Cockburn's  description  of  Mr 
Dunlop's  character,  lately  published  in  his  journals.  He  ranks  him  in 
everything,  except  impressive  public  exhibition,  superior  to  both  Dr 
Chalmers  and  Dr  Candlish. 

"  Dunlop,"  he  says,  "  is  the  purest  of  enthusiasts.  The  generous  devotion  with 
which  he  has  given  himself  to  this  cause  [that  of  the  Church],  has  retarded  and  will 
probably  arrest  the  success  of  his  very  considerable  talent  and  learning  ;  but  a  crust 
of  bread  and  a  cup  of  cold  water  would  satisfy  all  the  worldly  desires  of  this  most  dis- 
interested person.  His  luxury  would  be  in  his  obtaining  justice  for  his  favourite  and 
oppressed  Church,  which  he  espouses  from  no  love  of  power,  or  any  other  ecclesiastical 
object,  but  solely  from  piety,  and  love  of  the  people." 

1".  M,  L. 


PATRICK  FAIRBAIRN.D.D    >  — 

4 


5Patrirk  Jairlbatrn,  5i,5i, 


ATRICK  FAIRBAIRN  was  born  on  the  2Sth  January 
1S05,  at  Hallyburton,  in  the  parish  of  Greenlaw,  Ber- 
wickshire. He  was  the  second  son  of  a  family  of  five 
children.  His  father,  a  respectable  farmer,  gave  all  his 
children  a  good  education.  Two  of  them  he  educated 
for  the  ministry,  Patrick,  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  and 
John,  now  minister  of  the  Free  Church  at  Greenlaw.  In  November  181 8 
Patrick  was  sent  to  prosecute  his  studies  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh. 
On  leaving  the  Divinity  Hall,  he  was  licenced  as  a  preacher  of  the 
gospel  by  the  Presbytery  of  Dunse  on  the  3d  October  1826.  In  the  year 
following  he  went  to  Orkney  as  tutor  in  the  family  of  Captain  Balfour, 
a  large  Orkney  proprietor  Through  the  interest  of  that  gentleman  he 
was  appointed  by  the  Crown  in  1830  to  the  Parliamentary  parish  of 
North  Ronaldshay. 

In  his  new  sphere  of  action  Mr  Fairbaim  found  the  need  of  all  his 
natural  firmness  and  resolution.  His  parishioners  were  addicted  to  many 
semi-barbarous  practices ;  and  many  of  them  had  the  repute  of  being 
"wreckers."  They  had  not  formerly  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  a  faithful 
gospel  ministry,  and  their  standard  of  morality  was  very  low.  But  the 
young  minister,  by  his  powerful  pulpit  services  and  faithfulness  m  dealing 
privately  with  the  people,  soon  wrought  a  great  reform  in  the  island. 
While  diligently  discharging  his  pastoral  duties,  he  had  ample  time 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


for  private  study.  During  his  whole  college  career  he  had  always  been 
a  laborious  student,  forced  to  depend  more  on  his  own  efforts  than  on 
the  assistance  of  his  teachers.  In  this  way  a  spirit  of  independent  and 
original  research  was  fostered  as  he  pursued  his  studies.  In  the  manse 
of  North  Ronaldshay  he  carried  out  with  great  regularity  a  scheme  oi 
study  which  he  had  previously  planned.  He  made  himself  an  excellent 
Hebrew  and  German  scholar  ;  but  he  read  largely  in  theology,  and  laid 
the  foundation  of  that  eminence  in  biblical  literature  which  he  after- 
wards attained.  When  appointed  to  his  Orkney  parish,  he  had  been 
asked  how  long  he  was  likely  to  be  buried  in  that  remote  locality,  and 
had  replied  that  he  would  not  probably  remain  in  it  above  six  years,  as 
he  had  given  himself  that  period  to  complete  the  course  of  study  he  had 
projected.  This  prediction  was  one  that  was  likely  to  lead  to  its  own 
fulfilment.  At  all  events,  when  he  had  been  about  six  years  in  North 
Ronaldshay  he  was  called  to  the  new  "  Extension  "  Church  of  Bridgeton, 
in  the  city  of  Glasgow. 

As  the  minister  of  a  new  and  important  city  charge,  Mr  Fairbairn 
laboured  with  great  zeal  and  energy.  He  soon  collected  a  good  congre- 
gation, and  gained  the  entire  respect  of  his  people  by  his  vigorous 
preaching  and  faithful  pastoral  labours.  But  he  had  scarcely  entered  on 
his  work  in  Glasgow  when  he  lost  his  wife  and  two  fine  children.  In 
Orkney  he  had  married  Miss  Margaret  Pitcairn,  sister  of  Mr  Thomas 
Pitcairn  of  Cockpen,  afterwards  well  known  as  the  first  Clerk  of  the 
General  Assembly  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland.  Of  his  children  by 
that  lady  only  one  survived,  John  Fairbairn,  who,  after  spending  some 
years  in  Java,  ultimately  settled  in  Australia,  where  he  died  a  few  days 
after  receiving  intelligence  of  his  father's  death. 

When  he  had  been  about  three  years  in  Glasgow,  Mr  Fairbairn  was 
presented  to  the  parish  of  Salton,  East  Lothian,  of  which  his  distinguished 
friend,  Dr  Robert  Buchanan,  had  once  been  minister.  Salton  is  also 
noted  as  having  been   the  first   charge  of  the   celebrated   Dr   Gilbert 


PATRICK  FAIRBAIRN,  D.D. 

Burnet,  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  who  left  an  endowment  for  the  education  of 
a  number  of  poor  children,  and  for  the  foundation  of  a  ministerial  librar>^ 
This  library,  which  had  long  been  neglected,  Mr  Fairbairn  put  into 
excellent  order,  and  turned  to  much  better  account  than  had  been  done 
by  any  of  his  predecessors.  When  he  went  to  Salton  in  1840,  the  conflict 
which  led  to  the  Disruption  was  approaching  its  climax,  and  he  thoroughly 
identified  himself  with  the  Evangelical  or  Non-Intrusion  party.  In  1843 
he  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland,  and  was  the  first 
in  the  Presbytery  of  Haddington  who  left  a  pleasant  manse  to  brave  all 
the  hardships  of  a  trying  period.  He  took  an  active  part  in  organizing 
the  Free  Church  Presbytery  of  the  district,  and  in  supporting  every 
movement  that  bore  upon  the  diffusion  of  scriptural  principles  and 
practical  religion.  With  some  difficulty  he  procured  a  site  for  a  church 
and  manse  in  the  parish  of  Salton  ;  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  years 
he  was  enabled  to  reside  once  more  among  his  people. 

In  184s  Mr  Fairbairn  published,  in  one  thick  duodecimo  volume,  his 
"  Typology  of  Scripture,"  a  work  which  had  occupied  much  of  his  leisure 
for  several  years.  It  was  afterwards  published  in  two  octavo  volumes,  and 
in  its  greatly  enlarged  form  it  reached  a  fifth  edition.  It  was  instantly 
recognised  both  in  this  country  and  America  as  a  work  of  extraordinary 
merit.  Not  so  much  from  any  elegance  or  splendour  of  style,  9f  from  the 
sterling  weight  and  value  of  its  matter,  it  was  hailed  by  the  best  judges 
as  a  real  contribution  to  modern  theology.  The  Old  Testament  types 
had  never  previously  been  expounded  in  a  truly  philosophical  manner, 
and  it  was  reserved  for  the  Free  Church  minister  of  Salton  to  produce 
a  work  on  the  subject  which,  for  grasp  of  principle,  soundness  of  judg- 
ment, and  solid,  though  unostentatious  learning,  has  not  been  surpassed,  if 
ever  equalled,  by  any  similar  performance.  The  publication  of  the 
"Typology"  naturally  fixed  the  eyes  of  his  brethren  on  its  author  as  a 
man  qualified  to  fill  with  distinction  a  theological  chair. 

Mr  Fairbairn  had  translated,  when  at  North  Ronaldshay,  two  German 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

works — "Stieger  on  ist  Peter,"  and  "Lisco  on  the  Parables,"  both  of  which 
were  published  by  Messrs  Clark  of  Edinburgh  as  parts  of  their  "  Biblical 
Cabinet."  Soon  after  the  appearance  of  the  "  Typology,"  the  same  emi- 
nent firm  published,  in  three  volumes,  Hengstenberg's  "  Commentary  on 
the  Psalms,"  translated  by  Mr  Fairbairn  and  the  Rev.  John  Thomson,  now 
minister  of  St  Ninian's  Free  Church,  Leith.  His  knowledge  of  German 
introduced  Mr  Fairbairn  into  the  vast  region  of  German  theology,  and 
no  Scottish  minister  ever  explored  that  region  to  better  purpose.  It  has 
been  justly  observed,  that  his  works  present  an  excellent  combination  of 
some  of  the  best  fruits  of  German  erudition  with  the  solid  attainments  of 
Scottish  orthodoxy.  In  1851  Mr  Fairbairn  published,  in  one  volume, 
"  Ezekiel  and  the  Book  of  his  Prophecy,"  which  was  well  received  by 
the  public,  and  added  to  its  author's  reputation.  He  next  published  a 
translation,  in  two  volumes,  of  Hengstenberg's  "Commentary  on  the 
Revelation  of  St  John,"  a  performance  which,  whatever  may  be  said  of 
the  general  views  of  its  learned  author,  is  certainly  an  important  contri- 
bution to  Apocalyptic  literature. 

In  the  autumn  of  1852  Mr  Fairbairn  was  appointed  assistant  to  Dr 
Maclagan,  Professor  of  Divinity  in  the  Free  Church  College,  Aberdeen. 
He  had  scarcely  entered  on  his  duties  when  he  met  with  a  most  painful 
bereavement  in  the  death  of  his  second  wife,  Mary  Playfair,  who  died 
soon  after  giving  birth  to  her  fourth  child.  In  spite  of  this  terrible  trial, 
he,  through  grace  given  him,  performed  his  work  at  Aberdeen  with  signal 
energy  and  success.  Dr  Maclagan  having  died  before  the  winter  session 
began,  Mr  Fairbairn  was  appointed  his  successor  by  the  following  General 
Assembly.  The  new  professor  gave  fresh  life  and  vigour  to  the  Aberdeen 
College,  which  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  became  a  well-equipped  Theo- 
logical Institution.  While  Professor  Fairbairn  was  at  its  head,  he  received 
the  well-merited  distinction  of  D.D.  from  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

In  1856,  when  the  Free  Church  College  of  Glasgow  was  instituted, 
Dr  Fairbairn  was  appointed  its  first  professor,  and  in  the  year  following 


PATRICK  FAIRBAIRN,  D.D. 

he  was  elected  to  the  office  of  Principal.  In  this  new  and  important 
situation  he  taught  his  classes  with  distinguished  ability,  and  managed 
with  consummate  prudence  the  general  affairs  of  the  college.  Everything 
connected  with  the  buildings,  the  endowments,  the  library,  and  the 
business  of  the  different  classes,  were  directed  by  him  with  great  zeal 
and  judgment.  He  also  endeared  himself  to  the  students,  not  only  by  his 
ability  in  the  chair,  but  by  the  genuine  and  kindly  interest  he  took  in 
their  welfare.  They  came  to  look  upon  him  as  a  father  and  a  friend  as 
well  as  a  learned  and  judicious  theological  instructor.  When  he  had 
presided  over  the  college  about  fifteen  years,  his  "present  and  former 
students,"  with  enthusiastic  eagerness,  subscribed  a  sum  of  ;£'200,  in  order 
to  present  the  Principal  with  a  portrait  of  himself  by  an  eminent  artist. 
This  was  but  a  demonstration  of  that  feeling  of  affectionate  reverence 
with  which,  from  first  to  last,  he  was  regarded  by  the  young  men  who 
studied  under  his  care.  The  portrait,  painted  by  Mr  Norman  Macbeth, 
A.R.S.A.,  was  publicly  presented  to  the  Principal,  and  by  his  directions 
hung  up  in  the  College  library.  There  it  still  remains,  having  been 
bequeathed  by  him  to  that  Institution. 

Between  1856  and  1858  Dr  Fairbairn  published  a  volume  on 
"Prophecy,"  as  a  sequel  to  the  "Typology,"  and  a  Hermaneutical  Manual 
intended  chiefly  for  the  use  of  theological  students.  Both  of  these  works 
bear  the  impress  of  the  author's  learning  and  intellectual  power,  and  are 
characterised  by  good  sense  and  sound  judgment.  But  neither  of  them 
has  attained  any  degree  of  popularity,  though  they  well  deserve  to  be 
studied  by  professional  theologians.  During  many  years  of  his  residence 
at  Glasgow,  Dr  Fairbairn  acted  as  editor  of  the  "  Imperial  Bible  Dic- 
tionary," published  by  Messrs  Blackie  &  Son.  His  labours  in  conducting 
this  great  work  were  exceedingly  onerous.  Many  of  the  best  articles 
proceeded  from  his  own  pen,  and  the  necessary  correspondence  with  his 
contributors  severely  taxed  his  energies.  The  work  has  taken  a  high 
place  in    Biblical   literature.     Soon   after  he    had   finished    his   editorial 


DISRUPTION   WORTHIES. 

labours,  he  was  appointed  to  deliver  the  third  series  of  "  Cunningham 
Lectures."  He  chose  for  his  subject  the  "  Revelation  of  Law  in  Scrip- 
ture," which  he  treated  in  nine  separate  lectures,  the  first  six  of  which 
he  delivered  in  Edinburgh  early  in  March  1868.  The  whole  of  them 
were  published  soon  after  their  delivery.  The  work  is  very  profound  and 
able,  but  is  too  abstract  in  subject  and  style  to  be  popular. 

Principal  Fairbairn  was  chosen  Moderator  of  the  General  Assembly 
of  the  Free  Church  in  1864,  and  by  his  excellent  bearing  in  the  chair, 
he  amply  justified  the  confidence  of  his  brethren.  None  ever  better 
deserved  the  honour  of  the  chair,  or  bore  it  with  more  dignity.  Though 
eminently  a  scholar,  versed  in  books  and  devoted  to  theological  studies, 
Dr  Fairbairn  was  an  admirable  man  of  business,  well  acquainted  with 
ecclesiastical  forms,  and  not  shrinking  from  his  fair  share  of  the  burden 
of  Church  government.  When  he  spoke  in  the  Presbytery  or  General 
Assembly,  he  was  always  listened  to  with  marked  respect.  The  gravity 
of  his  character  added  force  to  the  weight  of  his  arguments,  and 
commanded  the  attention,  if  they  did  not  change  the  convictions,  of  his 
keenest  opponents  in  debate.  He  warmly  advocated  the  Union  side  in 
the  great  controversy  that  agitated  the  Free  Church  from  1863  to 
1873  ;  but  he  always  spoke  with  studied  moderation,  and  strove  to 
mitigate  the  fierce  contentions  that  for  some  time  estranged  so  many 
of  his  brethren  from  one  another. 

In  1867  Principal  Fairbairn,  along  with  the  Rev.  James  Wells  of  the 
Barony  Free  Church,  Glasgow,  visited  America,  to  represent  the  Free 
Church  of  Scotland  in  various  Presbyterian  General  Assemblies  held  in 
the  United  States  and  in  Canada.  Dr  Fairbairn's  name  had  travelled 
before  him  across  the  Atlantic,  and  American  scholars  vied  with  one 
another  in  doing  him  honour.  He  visited  President  M'Cosh  at  Princeton, 
and  had  an  interesting  interview  with  Dr  Hodge  at  Washington. 

Principal  Fairbairn  was  chosen  one  of  the  Committee  appointed  to 
revise  the  Authorised  Version  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.     He  was 


PATRICK  FAIRBAIRN,  D.D. 

one  of  four  Free  Church  professors  selected  to  represent  Scottish  scholar- 
ship in  this  great  matter  of  national  concern.  He  attended  to  the  close  of 
his  life  the  meetings  of  the  Committee  with  remarkable  regularity,  and  was 
held  in  great  respect  by  his  learned  colleagues.  He  took  a  deep  interest 
in  the  work  of  revision,  and  contributed  not  a  little  to  its  real  progress. 

Early  in  1874  Principal  Fairbairn  published  a  volume  on  the 
"  Pastoral  Epistles."  It  contains  a  learned  introduction  vindicating  the 
authenticity  of  the  epistles,  a  new  translation  of  the  Greek  text,  and  a 
valuable  commentary  on  each  verse.  This  is  one  of  the  best  of  his 
works,  and  ought  to  be  in  the  hands  of  every  minister  of  the  gospel. 
For  judicious  criticism,  sound  theology,  and  a  practical  spirit,  it  is  not 
surpassed  by  any  modern  work  of  the  kind.  An  excellent  sequel  to 
it,  "  Pastoral  Theology,"  which  he  had  prepared  for  the  press,  was  pub- 
lished shortly  after  his  death,  under  the  superintendence  of  the  writer 
of  this  sketch.  These  two  volumes  are  legacies  to  the  Church  of 
Christ,  which  would  of  themselves  have  been  sufficient  to  give  their 
author  a  good  place  in  theological  literature. 

While  this  distinguished  man  was  spending  his  best  energies  in  the 
service  of  that  religious  denomination  which  he  adorned,  and  in  the 
cultivation  of  that  sacred  learning  which  belongs  to  the  Church  of  Christ 
at  large,  he  never  forgot  what  was  due  to  his  own  spiritual  life ;  and  to 
the  very  last  he  grew  in  that  spirituality  of  mind  which  best  becomes 
intellectual  accomplishments.  Holding  fast  the  great  doctrines  of  evan- 
gelical religion,  he  took  a  deep  interest  in  all  evangelistic  work.  He 
gave  his  hearty  support  to  the  remarkable  evangelistic  labours  asso- 
ciated with  the  names  of  Messrs  Moody  and  Sankey.  He  presided 
over  several  meetings  at  Glasgow  at  which  Mr  Moody  was  the  chief 
speaker,  and  on  the  i6th  April  1874  he  attended  the  Evangelistic 
Convention  held  in  the  Glasgow  Crystal  Palace.  After  delivering  a  very 
earnest  address,  he  suddenly  felt  unwell,  and  was  obliged  to  go  home, 
where  he  was  confined  several  days  by  what  was  his  first  serious  illness. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

A  hitherto  unsuspected  affection  of  the  heart  was  discovered  by  his 
physician,  and  he  was  advised  to  take  some  quiet  relaxation  in  the 
country.  Accordingly  he  went  with  Mrs  Fairbairn  and  a  few  relatives 
to  Arrochar,  where  he  gradually  recovered  strength,  and  soon  was  fit  to 
resume  with  caution  his  ordinary  duties.  On  the  30th  June  he  went  up 
to  London  to  attend  a  meeting  of  the  Revision  Committee :  and  after 
paying  several  visits  in  Berwickshire  on  his  way  home  from  England,  he 
returned  to  Glasgow,  and  resumed  his  ordinary  work  ;  but  on  the  evening 
of  Thursday,  the  7th  August,  after  he  had  retired  to  rest,  he  was  suddenly 
seized  with  a  fatal  illness,  and  before  Mrs  Fairbairn  could  summon  any 
medical  aid,  he  calmly  expired.  Thus,  while  his  usefulness  was 
undiminished,  and  his  mental  faculties  were  as  strong  as  ever,  this 
honoured  servant  of  the  Lord  was  called  to  his  eternal  rest  and  reward. 
Deeply  was  his  departure  lamented  by  good  men  in  all  the  churches. 
His  eminence  as  a  learned  theologian  was  universally  acknowledged,  and 
every  one  felt  that  his  death  had  made  a  blank  in  the  ranks  of  sacred 
scholarship  which  could  not  be  easily  filled  up.  But  while  he  was  an 
undoubted  ornament  of  Scottish  theology,  he  was  a  true-hearted  Free 
Churchman,  whose  character  and  talents  raised  him  to  a  high  place 
among  the  heroes  of  the  Disruption.  In  manners  and  bearing  he  was 
mild,  yet  dignified.  To  great  force  of  will  and  soundness  of  judgment  he 
united  meekness  of  temper  and  a  conciliatory  disposition.  His  tall,  well- 
formed  figure  and  majestic  presence  were  admired  wherever  he  went,  and 
appropriately  set  off  the  solidity  and  strength  of  his  intellectual  powers. 

Principal  Fairbairn  was  married  in  1861  to  Miss  Frances  Turnbull, 
sister  of  a  worthy  Disruption  minister,  the  late  Rev.  John  Turnbull  of 
Eyemouth.  This  lady  survives  him,  as  well  as  three  children,  two  sons 
and  a  daughter,  all  by  his  second  wife.  He  was  buried  in  the  Grange 
Cemetery,  Edinburgh,  where  Chalmers,  Cunningham,  Guthrie,  and  other 
mighty  men  of  the  Free  Church  are  laid,  in  the  hope  of  a  blessed 
resurrection.  J.  D. 


J0bn  foxhts,  ^M..  113. 


'(^^FWHILE  the  Presbyterian  Churches  in  Scotland  have 
always  maintained  an  honourable  place  in  respect  of 
the  general  intelligence  and  culture  of  their  clergy, 
they  have  never  at  any  time  had  a  large  number  of 
men  who  occupied  foremost  places  in  the  fields  of 
literature  or  science.  Probably  the  third  part  of  a 
century  immediately  preceding  the  beginning  of  the  "  ten  years'  conflict," 
on  account  of  the  revived  activity  of  ministerial  work,  was  less  productive 
of  literary  or  scientific  attainments  of  a  high  order  among  the  clergy  than 
the  days  of  Moderatism,  when  pulpit  preparation  and  pastoral  duties 
claimed  a  smaller  share  of  men's  thoughts  and  energies,  or  had  not  their 
claims  allowed.  In  point  of  fact,  we  believe  that  we  do  no  injustice  to 
any,  when  we  say  that  the  Church  of  Scotland  on  the  morning  of  the 
Disruption  day  contained  three  men  who  occupied  places  in  the  first  rank 
of  scientific  men,  and  that  on  the  evening  of  that  day  the  Established 
Church  contained  not  one.  It  so  happened  that  this  trio  consisted  of  a 
minister,  a  probationer,  and  a  layman,  though  the  probationer  had  for  a 
long  time  ceased  to  be  more  than  nominally  such.  Their  special  depart- 
ments of  science  were  respectively  the  demonstrative,  the  experimental, 
and  the  observational — mathematics,  physics,  and  geology.  The  men 
were  John  Forbes,  David  Brewster,  and  Hugh  Miller.  We  do  not  mean 
to  say  that  Dr  Forbes  was  as  eminent  as  a  mathematician  as  Sir  David 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Brewster  was  as  a  physicist,  or  Hugh  Miller  as  a  geologist.  But  he  had 
long  before  given  evidence  that  he  had  the  power  to  do  anything  in 
mathematics,  and  had  left  it  beyond  doubt  that  if  he  had  abandoned 
the  work  of  the  ministry  at  an  early  age,  as  Brewster  had  done,  and  had 
made  mathematical  study  the  business  of  his  life,  as  Brewster  had  made 
physical  research  the  business  of  his,  he  would  not  merely  have  been,  as 
he  actually  was,  in  the  foremost  rank  of  mathematicians,  but  he  would 
have  occupied  one  of  the  foremost  places  in  that  rank. 

It  will  be  through  our  incompetency  if  it  be  not  made  to  appear  that, 
while  of  the  heroes  of  the  Disruption,  none  but  Dr  Chalmers  and  Dr  Gordon 
came  near  him  in  the  faculty  of  mathematical  investigation,  he  did  not 
fall  behind  either  of  them  in  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity,  in  zeal  for  the 
glory  of  God,  and  for  the  salvation  of  men  ;  while  it  is  freely  admitted 
that  in  the  power  of  leading  a  great  movement  and  stirring  up  men  to 
enthusiasm  in  a  great  cause,  he  was  not  for  a  moment  to  be  compared 
to  one,  and  in  pulpit  eloquence  and  power  he  was  much  inferior  to  both. 

Those  who  have  read  much  of  Scottish  ecclesiastical  biography  have 
become  familiar  with  the  sentence  which  might  be  stereotyped  as  an 
almost  universally  applicable  introduction,  that  "the  subject  of  this 
memoir  was  the  son  of  poor  but  pious  parents."  From  the  way  in  which 
we  have  frequently  heard  our  friend  allude  to  his  early  days,  we  presume 
that  the  statement  is  strictly  applicable  to  him.  A  native  of  Perthshire, 
and  shewing  even  at  an  early  age  a  liking  for  the  ministry,  he  was 
placed  as  a  pupil  at  the  Perth  Academy, — a  seminary  which  has  sent 
forth  many  who  have  done  it  honour.  In  Forbes's  days  one  of  the 
teachers  of  mathematics  in  the  Perth  Academy  was  Mr  Gordon  ;  and 
the  relation  of  close  friendship,  cemented  by  congenial  tastes  and  similar 
sentiments,  which  led  to  so  close  an  association  of  Robert  Gordon 
and  John  Forbes  in  the  thoughts  of  those  who  enjoyed  their  friend- 
ship, began  while  the  one  was  the  earnest  teacher  and  the  other  the 
earnest  pupil.      Often  have  wc  heard  Dr  Forbes  speak  of  all  that  he 


JOHN  FORBES,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

owed  to  Ur  Gordon,  both  as  the  first  cultivator  of  his  mathematical  powers, 
and  as  his  ideal  model  of  a  Christian  man  and  a  Christian  minister.  At 
an  early  age  Forbes  became  a  student  in  the  University  of  St  Andrews  ; 
and,  as  a  matter  of  course,  when  his  natural  abilities,  his  habits  of 
application,  and  his  previous  advantages  are  taken  into  account,  he 
passed  through  his  university  course  with  distinction  and  high  credit. 
At  the  close  of  it  he  was  licensed  as  a  preacher  ;  but  whether  because  in 
those  days  of  patronage  there  was  no  place  open  to  him,  or  whether 
because  he  desired  to  have  time  to  consolidate  his  knowledge  and 
prepare  himself  more  fully  for  the  great  work  of  the  ministry,  he  docs 
not  seem  to  have  been  much  occupied  in  preaching  for  a  time.  He 
became  instead  an  assistant-teacher  in  his  old  Perth  Academy ;  and 
on  the  appointment  of  Mr  Gordon  as  minister  of  the  parish  of  Kinfauns, 
Mr  Forbes  succeeded  him  in  the  mathematical  mastership  of  the 
Academy.  From  Kinfauns  Mr  Gordon  was  translated  to  Buccleuch 
Chapel,  Edinburgh,  thence  to  Hope  Park  Chapel  (now  Newington 
Church),  thence  to  the  New  North,  and  ultimately  to  the  High  Church 
of  Edinburgh.  On  his  removal  from  Hope  Park  to  New  North,  Mr 
Forbes  became  his  successor  there,  and  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  in 
1826.  From  this  time  onward,  for  very  nearly  half-a-century,  his  life  was 
that  of  a  faithful,  laborious,  earnest  city  minister.  In  Edinburgh  he 
remained  only  about  two  years,  and  was  removed  to  Glasgow,  to  what 
was  then  called  the  Outer  High  Church.  In  consequence  of  the  incon- 
venience of  having  two  congregations  meeting  in  the  old  Cathedral,  the 
church  of  St  Paul's  was  built  for  him  and  his  congregation.  Thither  he 
and  they  removed,  and  there  he  continued  to  minister  to  a  large  and 
intelligent  congregation,  who  regarded  him  with  a  singular  union  of 
affection  and  reverence.  The  cares  inseparable  from  the  life  of  a  city 
minister  did  not  press  so  heavily  on  him  as  they  do  on  some,  not  because 
he  discharged  his  duties  more  perfunctorily,  but  because  his  well-balanced 
mind  and  his  methodical  habits  enabled  him  to  go  through  more  work 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

with  less  appearance  of  efifort,  and  probably  less  consciousness  of  effort, 
than  a  less  amount  of  work  would  have  cost  almost  any  other  man.  At 
no  time  did  he  take  a  prominent  place  in  the  discussion  of  public 
questions,  social  or  ecclesiastical.  The  pulpit  was  more  appropriate  to 
his  powers  than  the  platform  ;  and  of  this  he  was  perfectly  aware.  He 
took  indeed  such  a  share  in  the  public  work  of  the  Church  through  her 
courts  as  every  Presbyterian  minister  ought  to  feel  himself  conscientiously 
bound  to  take  ;  and  when  the  Voluntary  controversy,  and  the  Church 
Extension  controversy,  and  the  unhappy  Moderatorship  controversy, 
arose  one  after  another,  he  did  not  withhold  the  sagacity  of  his  counsel 
and  the  influence  of  his  character,  but  heartily  threw  them  into  the  scale. 
And  his  brethren  always  knew  that  when  any  matter  arose  which  required 
sustained  thought  and  clear  logical  exposition,  they  could  count  upon 
Dr  Forbes  as  ready  to  render  the  aid  which  they  needed.  Speaking 
now  of  the  time  when  our  own  interest  in  such  matters  began,  the  decade 
from  1830  to  1840,  we  recall  with  pleasure  the  interest  which  students  in 
Edinburgh  took  in  the  then  comparatively  young  and  chivalrous 
champions  of  the  truth  and  of  the  Church  in  the  western  metropolis — 
Lorimer  and  Buchanan,  Gibson  and  Forbes — now,  alas !  all  passed  away. 
It  was  on  such  occasions  that  he  produced  almost  the  only  professional 
publications  that  he  ever  gave  to  the  world,  with  the  exception,  probably, 
of  a  few  occasional  sermons,  and  one  or  two  pamphlets  on  subjects  of 
comparatively  temporary  interest.  In  1838,  a  course  of  lectures  was 
delivered  by  ministers  in  Glasgow,  on  the  Evidences  of  Revealed  Religion, 
which  were  afterwards  published  in  a  volume  ;  and  in  the  following  year 
another  course  was  delivered  on  Infidelity.  Each  of  the  volumes  contains 
a  lecture  by  Dr  Forbes.  We  have  just  read  these  lectures,  and  cannot 
state  in  too  strong  terms  our  admiration  of  the  clearness  of  the  arguments, 
and  of  the  felicity  of  the  illustrations.  The  former,  especially,  on  the 
"  Harmony  of  Scripture  and  true  Philosophy  or  Science,"  is  one  of  the 
most   comprehensive   treatises   that  we   have   ever   seen    on    this    most 


JOHN  FORBES,  D.D.,  LI..D. 
important  subject.      It  contains   passages  of  real  eloquence  ;    and  the 
wlu.lc  bespeaks  the  earnestness  which  was  characteristic  of  the  man. 

In  the  "ten  years'  conflict"  he  sustained  exactly  the  part  that  his 
friends  would  have  expected  him  to  take.  While  he  never  occupied  a 
very  prominent  place  in  the  discussions,  no  one  who  knew  him  ever 
doubted  for  a  moment  on  which  side  he  would  be  when  the  crisis  should 
come.  Cautious  and  somewhat  slow  in  coming  to  a  conclusion,  balancing 
the  arguments  for  and  against  a  particular  course  of  action,  rather  than 
coming  to  a  conclusion  by  intuitive  or  instinctive  perceptions,  strongly 
conservative  in  all  his  mental  leanings,  and  knowing  that  a  Disruption 
would  break  many  ties  which  to  him  were  very  binding,  when  once  he 
had  made  up  his  mind  as  to  the  right,  few  men  could  be  more  confidently 
counted  upon  to  pursue  unhesitatingly  and  unflinchingly  the  path  of  duty. 
If  a  solution  of  the  difficulty  had  been  offered  which  should  have  con- 
served the  great  principle  for  which  the  Church  contended,  he  would  have 
been  one  of  the  first  to  hail  it  with  joy.  His  extreme  simplicity  of 
character  might  even  have  rendered  him  liable  to  be  imposed  upon  by 
the  plausible  schemes  which  were  propounded  ;  and  the  fact  that  none  of 
these  schemes  ever  made  him  hesitate,  is  to  us  one  of  the  strongest  proofs 
that  their  glitter  was  not  of  gold.  We  are  persuaded  that  amongst  out- 
siders, intellectual  scientific  Englishmen,  who  never  could  understand  what 
the  controversy  was  about,  there  were  not  a  few  who  began  to  think  that 
there  must  be  something  in  it  after  all,  when  they  came  to  learn  that  John 
Forbes  was  one  of  those  who  unhesitatingly  signed  the  deed  of  demission. 
For  by  this  time  Forbes  was  well  known  to  the  mathematicians  of 
Europe.  It  must  have  been  very  scanty  leisure  that  the  minister  of  St 
Paul's  could  give  to  the  study  of  mathematics;  but  it  was  the  only 
relaxation  for  which  he  cared,  and  to  him  it  was  really  a  relaxation. 
Some  years  before  the  Disruption  he  had  published  a  most  remark- 
able book  on  the  Differential  and  Integral  Calculus ;  not  remarkable 
merely  on  the  ground  that  it  was  composed  in  tlie  snatches  of  leisure 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
in  a  busy  life,  but  remarkable  in  itself,  by  whomsoever  composed. 
We  have  made  a  careful  examination  of  this  book  with  a  view  to 
the  preparation  of  this  sketch,  and  have  no  hesitation  in  saying, 
that  it  is  as  original  a  work  on  a  purely  mathematical  subject  as 
has  appeared  in  this  country  in  our  time.  Almost  all  our  books  on 
this  subject  are  largely  borrowed  from  the  French ;  they  have  been 
written  by  mathematical  teachers,  with  a  view  to  their  being  used  as 
text-books,  and  in  most  of  them  rigidity  of  investigation  has  been 
occasionally  sacrificed  to  simplification.  We  do  not  know  whether  Dr 
Forbes  expected  that  his  book  should  be  used  as  a  text-book.  It  is 
certainly  not  suited  to  that  use.  But  it  is  suited  to  a  higher  use,  even  to 
point  out  to  the  mathematician  hundreds  of  unsuspected  connections 
betwixt  the  truths  which  he  has  learned  apart,  and  so  to  contribute  to  the 
unification  of  mathematical  science.  We  are  afraid  that  we  may  expose 
ourselves  to  some  measure  of  good-natured  ridicule  on  the  part  of  some 
who  may  peruse  these  pages,  when  we  say  that  Dr  Forbes's  book  suggests 
to  our  thought  the  singing  of  a  lark  on  a  summer's  morning ;  and  that 
because  of  the  recklessness  with  which  he  throws  out  his  formulae,  and 
the  abandon  with  which  he  revels  in  the  profusion  of  his  harmonies.  Be 
it  noted  that  there  is  not  a  sentence  in  the  book  in  which  he  tells  us  his 
delight — indeed  there  is  scarcely  anything  in  it  that  can  be  called  a 
sentence  at  all,  only  formulae, — but  neither  does  the  lark  tell  us  that  he 
delights  in  his  own  song.  We  only  infer  it  from  the  way  in  which  he 
sings. 

It  may  be  as  well  to  say  here  that  Dr  Forbes  never  abandoned  his 
mathematical  pursuits.  About  a  dozen  years  ago  he  told  the  present 
writer  that  he  would  take  it  as  a  great  favour  if  he  would  look  over  a 
manuscript,  containing  an  investigation  of  some  questions  relating  to 
"  elliptic  functions,"  as  the  results  that  he  had  brought  out  were  so  strange 
that  he  thought  he  must  have  introduced  some  erroneous  assumption, 
which  a  stranger's  eye  might  perhaps  detect.      Having  very  willingly 


JOHN  FORBES,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

undertaken  tlic  task,  we  were  not  a  little  taken  aback  when,  after  a  few 
days,  we  received  some  three  hundred  closely-written  folio  pages !  W'e 
were  obliged  to  break  the  promise  which  we  had  rashly  made,  and  we 
do  not  know  what  has  become  of  the  MS. 

When  the  Disruption  occurred  in  1843,  Dr  Forbes  became  minister 
of  Free  St  Paul's.  A  great  portion  of  his  congregation  quitted  the 
Establishment  along  with  him,  and  the  affection  betwixt  him  and  his 
congregation  grew  with  length  of  years.  They  were  to  him  as  wife  and 
children,  and  he  was  to  them  as  a  father  whom  they  revered,  a  friend  in 
whom  they  confided,  and  of  whose  character  and  reputation  they  were 
far  prouder  than  he  ever  was  himself.  His  preaching,  without  being 
eloquent,  as  eloquence  is  commonly  understood,  was  earnest,  impressive, 
solemn,  in  no  ordinary  degree.  Few  men  have  given  sound  instruction 
to  so  many,  or  given  it  so  acceptably,  as  Dr  Forbes  did  during  his  long 
ministry.  Up  to  the  last  his  preaching  lost  none  of  its  freshness,  while 
of  course  it  gained  in  those  qualities  which  depend  upon  experience,  and 
continued  converse  with  God  and  with  divine  things ;  and  his  pastoral 
dealings  with  his  people  were  in  accord  with  his  strong  common  sense, 
and  with  the  tenderness  of  a  peculiarly  sensitive  nature,  sanctified  by  a 
large  measure  of  divine  grace. 

There  are  two  points  on  which  we  must  touch  before  we  close,  and, 
upon  the  whole,  we  are  not  sorry  that  our  exhausted  space  compels  us  to 
touch  upon  them  with  extreme  brevity. 

A  vacancy  having  occurred  in  one  of  the  Chairs  in  the  Glasgow  Free 
Church  College,  it  fell  to  the  Assembly  of  1864  to  appoint  a  professor. 
Dr  Forbes  was  proposed,  but  was  not  elected.  Those  who  opposed  his 
election  grounded  their  opposition  mainly  on  his  age,  and  strongly 
expressed  their  respect  and  affection  for  his  character,  their  admiration  of 
his  gifts,  and  their  gratitude  for  the  services  which  he  had  rendered  to  the 
Church  and  to  the  cause  of  truth.  It  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  present  writer 
to   take  a  somewhat   prominent    part   in   advocating  the  claims  of  Dr 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Forbes  ;  and  while  thankfully  acknowledging  that  the  appointment 
actually  made  was  a  good  one,  he  still  regrets  that  Dr  Forbes  was  not 
then  put  into  a  position  for  which  he  had  very  singular  qualifications. 

The  other  point  on  which  we  must  touch  was  the  part  that  Dr  Forbes 
took  in  the  Union  negotiations.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Assembly  of 
1863,  made  a  long  speech  on  the  Union  question,  and  accepted  a 
place  in  the  Committee.  Afterwards,  when  he  and  some  of  his  brethren 
came  to  believe  that  union  with  the  United  Presbyterians  could  not  be 
achieved  but  by  the  relinquishment  of  one  of  the  fundamental  principles 
of  the  Free  Church,  he  felt  that  he  had  no  alternative  but  to  withdraw 
from  the  Committee.  This  is  not  the  place  to  argue  the  question  of  the 
accuracy  or  erroneousness  of  his  belief.  No  one  could  doubt  the  sincerity 
of  it.  Very  keenly  he  felt  the  painfulness  of  the  position  which  he  had 
henceforth  to  occupy,  of  antagonism  to  those  with  whom  he  had  so  long 
and  so  lovingly  dwelt  together  in  unity  ;  and  his  somewhat  recluse 
habits  made  him  more  sensitive  than  those  who  are  more  habituated  to 
the  rubbings  and  knockings  of  public  life. 

Although  time  seemed  to  sit  but  lightly  on  his  stately  frame,  and  it 
seemed  to  his  friends  that  he  might  yet  do  good  work  for  his  Master  on 
earth  ;  yet  with  his  characteristic  conscientiousness,  he  would  not  under- 
take responsibilities  which  he  felt  himself  not  able  fully  to  discharge  ; 
he  therefore  applied  to  the  Assembly  of  1874  for  a  colleague  and 
successor,  spontaneously  abandoning  his  right  to  a  retiring  allowance 
either  from  the  general  funds  of  the  Church  or  the  particular  funds  of  the 
congregation.  While  steps  were  being  taken  to  obtain  a  colleague,  he 
continued  to  discharge  his  full  duties.  On  the  20th  of  December  he 
conducted  the  services  as  usual  in  his  own  pulpit ;  on  the  Wednesday 
following  he  was  seized  with  an  inflammatory  affection  in  the  chest,  and 
on  Christmas  day  he  closed  a  seventy-three  years'  service  of  his  genera- 
tion according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  fell  on  sleep.  T.  S. 


lam^s  O^ibson,  D.D. 


JAMES  GIBSON  was  born  in  Crieff  on  the  31st  of 
January  1799,  of  parents  who  were  much  respected 
in  the  place.  Their  house  was  the  resort  of  the  pious 
ministers  who,  at  communion  times,  came  to  officiate 
there. 

After  leaving  college,  where  he  proved  an  indus- 
trious and,  especially  when  attending  the  Divinity  Hall,  successful 
student,  he  was  employed  as  tutor  in  a  family  in  the  Presbytery  of 
Hamilton,  and  it  was  from  his  residence  there  that  he  obtained  licence 
from  that  Presbytery.  He  next  filled  the  same  office  in  a  family  in  the 
Presbytery  of  Jedburgh,  where  he  remained  three  and  a  half  years. 

In  1825  Dr  Gibson  became  travelling  companion  to  Captain  Elliot,  a 
cousin  of  the  Earl  of  Minto.  They  first  went  to  Portugal,  and  as  they 
remained  a  considerable  time  in  Lisbon,  he  had  full  opportunity,  by 
visiting  the  churches  and  cathedrals  of  that  city,  of  witnessing  the 
corruptions  and  gross  superstitions  of  the  Church  of  Rome. 

Returning  to  this  country,  Dr  Gibson  was  appointed  assistant  to  Mr 
Steel  of  the  West  Church,  Greenock.  After  labouring  there  for  two 
years,  he  accepted  an  offer  unexpectedly  made  to  him,  to  be  tutor  to  a 
young  gentleman  who  was  about  to  travel  on  the  Continent.  But  before 
leaving  Greenock,  he  received  a  testimonial  from  the  congregation, 
expressive  of  their  esteem  for  him  both  as  a  man  and  a  minister. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

His  continental  tour  occupied  a  year  and  a  half.  In  company  witli 
his  young  charge  he  travelled  through  France,  Switzerland,  and  Italy, 
especially  visiting  Paris,  Geneva,  and  Rome ;  and  what  he  saw  of  the 
irreligion,  infidelity,  immorality,  and  licentiousness  of  these  countries,  he 
traced  in  a  great  measure,  after  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart,  to  the 
monstrous  forms  of  popery  which  fell  under  his  observation.  Indeed, 
what  he  saw  of  the  corruption  of  popery,  had  a  saddening  and  yet  a 
beneficial  effect  upon  his  mind.  Writing  to  a  friend,  he  says,  "  I  have 
just  come  from  St  Peter's,  disgusted  with  the  crowd,  noise,  bustle,  glare, 
folly,  trickery,  absurdity,  and  impiety  of  ceremonies  called  religion.  In 
the  great  part  of  the  popish  ceremonies  which  I  have  seen,  it  would 
baffle  any  human  being  not  initiated  into  the  mystery  to  find  any 
resemblance  to  religion  either  Pagan  or  Christian.  It  is  a  strange 
compound  of  human  pride,  gaudy  show,  and  abject  degradation.  How 
the  earth  does  not  shake  it  off  its  bosom,  I  cannot  comprehend  ;  but, 
by  the  most  ingenious  methods  and  deep-laid  policy,  it  has  laid  hold 
of  the  strongest  principles  of  our  nature,  and  drawn  into  its  sphere 
everything,  good  and  bad,  by  which  it  can  rivet  the  chains  on  poor 
human  nature."  This  was  a  training  for  the  future.  And  the  hand 
of  God  in  leading  him  by  the  way  was  also  seen  in  his  unsuccessful 
attempts  to  obtain  a  ministerial  charge.  He  longed  for  rest  after  so 
much  wandering.  He  would  have  deemed  himself  happy  could  he  have 
obtained  a  "guid  little  charge,"  with  the  opportunity  of  devoting  himself 
to  his  Master's  service,  and  many  were  the  efforts  made  by  himself  and 
others  to  obtain  such  a  charge.  The  highest  influence  was  put  forth  on 
his  behalf,  and  on  one  occasion  there  was  the  almost  certain  prospect  of 
obtaining  a  rural  parish  in  the  south  of  Scotland.  But  this  hope,  so 
bright,  was  doomed  to  disappointment.  In  short,  every  door  was  closed. 
There  was  to  be  no  "  guid  little  charge  "  for  him.  It  was  to  be  on  a 
wider  sphere  that  he  was  to  be  engaged  in  his  Master's  service  ;  and  the 
training  having  in  God's  providence  been  completed,  that  wider  field  was 


JAMES  GIBSON,  D.D. 

opened  up.  Returning  from  the  continent,  Dr  Gibson  became  assistant 
to  Dr  Lockhart  of  the  College  Church,  Glasgow. 

It  was  during  the  heat  of  the  Voluntary  Controversy,  and  having 
been  led  from  circumstances  to  take  part  in  that  controversy,  he  so  ably 
defended  the  cause  of  Establishments  by  his  writing,  that  certain  influential 
members  of  the  church  put  it  in  his  power  either  to  accept  a  sum  of  money, 
which,  it  is  believed,  amounted  to  ;^2000,  or  that  a  church  should  be  built 
in  a  destitute  locality  of  Glasgow,  of  which  he  should  be  the  minister. 
He  adopted  the  latter  alternative,  and  in  1839  he  was  inducted  into 
Kingston  Church.  In  1843  came  the  Disruption,  and  having  joined  his 
brethren  who  formed  the  Free  Church,  he  was  obliged  to  leave  his  place 
of  worship  ;  but  soon  after  another  was  erected  for  him  and  those  of  his 
congregation  who  adhered  to  the  principles  of  the  Free  Church. 

The  Clerkship  of  the  Glasgow  Presbytery  having  become  vacant,  Dr 
Gibson  was  unanimously  requested  to  accept  the  office  ;  and  such  was 
his  knowledge  of  Church  law  and  practice,  that  he  rendered  important 
scr\'ice  to  the  Presbytery  in  that  office.  On  resigning  it,  the  Presbytery 
recorded  their  sense  of  the  painstaking  zeal  and  careful  efficiency  with 
which,  for  twelve  years,  he  had  discharged  its  duties. 

In  1855  the  Assembly  resolved  to  proceed  with  the  erection  of  a 
Theological  College  in  Glasgow,  Dr  Clark  of  Wester  Moffat  having 
promised  a  grant  of  ;^30,cxx)  for  its  erection  and  endowment,  and  it  is 
well  known  that  he  frequently  communicated  with  Dr  Gibson  on  the 
subject,  whose  influence  with  Dr  Clark  contributed  materially  to  his 
liberal  proposal.  In  1856  Dr  Gibson  was  elected  by  the  Assembly 
Professor  of  Systematic  Theology  and  Church  History. 

Dr  Gibson  had  a  vigorous  mind,  and  was  quick  of  apprehension. 
When  he  once  formed  his  opinion,  no  one  was  better  able  to  hold  and 
defend  it.  Tenax  propositi  (firm  of  resolve)  was  a  characteristic  feature 
of  him.  He  was  of  a  noble  and  generous  disposition.  He  could  not 
brook  anything  that  was  mean  and  grovelling.     He  shrank  from  it  as 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

from  the  touch  of  a  loathsome  reptile.  We  remember  with  what  con- 
tempt he  spoke  of  a  fellow-student  who  had  stooped  to  a  low  artifice  to 
secure  a  prize.  "  It  was,"  he  said,  "  the  essence  of  meanness."  It  was  the 
noble  in  conduct  which  fired  his  soul.  He  looked  up  to  it  with  the 
admiration  with  which  we  gaze  on  a  lofty  mountain. 

In  debate  there  was  no  want  of  the  fortiter  in  re.  He  would  have 
liked  a  little  more  of  the  suaviter  in  vwdo,  but  then  we  must  make  some 
allowance  for  the  warmth  of  his  feelings;  and  however  he  might  treat 
the  argument  of  his  opponent,  there  was  no  ill-feeling  towards  the 
opponent  himself.  On  the  contrary,  we  have  known  him  burst  into 
tears  when  the  hand  of  reconciliation  was  stretched  out,  and  the  hope 
expressed  that  no  difference  of  opinion  should  henceforth  mar  their 
social  intercourse.  Nor  was  this  generous  regard  for  the  manliness  of 
his  honesty  confined  to  his  brethren  of  the  Presbytery ;  the  same  justice 
was  done  him  by  the  world  outside. 

But  under  the  stern  countenance  of  the  polemic,  there  was  a  genial 
loving  heart.  It  shone  forth  in  his  family,  rendering  it  a  happy  home, 
and  in  private  life ;  and  those  who  experienced  his  friendship  can  best 
speak  of  its  warmth. 

As  a  minister,  he  admitted  that  he  was  not  "  popular  in  his  manner," 
and  thus  did  not  attract  crowds ;  but  his  discourses  were  rich  in  gospel 
truth.  His  writings  on  the  Voluntary  Controversy,  on  the  Claims  and 
Protection  of  the  Sabbath,  on  the  Marriage  Affinity  Question,  on  the 
Errors  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  on  the  Distinctive  Principles  of  the 
Free  Church,  shew  the  good  he  was  the  means  of  doing  by  the  press  as 
well  as  the  pulpit.  And  no  doubt  the  students  Avho  listened  to  his 
instructions  from  the  chair  can  bear  testimony  to  the  advantages  they 
received  from  his  teaching. 

[In  the  foregoing  Sketch,  which  is  substantially  the  Minute  adopted  by  the  Free  Presbytery  of 
Glasgow  expressive  of  its  appreciation  of  the  life  and  work  of  Dr  Gibson,  no  reference  is  made 
to  his  views  on  the  Union  question.  Throughout  these  negotiations  he  ably  and  consistently  main- 
tained that  Union  was  inadmissible  on  the  footing  of  the  proposals  of  the  majority  of  the  Church.] 


3^^  WILLIAM  H.  OOOLD.D.D, 


William  Jlcnrg  <l^oolb,  JB.©. 


iLTHOUGH  Dr.  Goold's  present  relation  to  the  Free 
Church  goes  no  further  back  than  to  the  summer  of 
1 876,  his  name  is  not  out  of  place  in  the  roll  of  the 
Disruption  Worthies.  His  father,  the  minister  of  the 
congregation  of  Reformed  Presbyterians  in  Edinburgh, 
belonged,  like  his  neighbour  and  friend  the  elder 
Thomas  M'Crie,  to  the  number  of  those  old-fashioned  Dissenters  who 
witnessed  with  warm  sympathy  the  reforming  movement  which  began 
to  stir  the  Established  Church  in  the  early  part  of  this  century.  These 
men,  although  conscientiously  dissenting  from  the  Established  Church, 
rejoiced  to  see  the  growing  zeal  and  strength  of  a  party  within  it, 
which  not  only  maintained  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  grace  through 
faith,  but  laboured  to  carry  the  light  of  this  gospel  into  the  dark 
places  of  the  nation, — a  party  which,  moreover,  claimed  for  the  Church 
authority  under  Christ  to  do  its  proper  work,  independently  of  the 
State,  and  asserted  the  liberties  of  the  Christian  people.  The  elder 
Goold  rejoiced  in  the  newly-awakened  zeal  for  these  ancient  principles 
of  the  Scottish  Church,  all  the  more  that  it  was  taking  place  in  a 
community  so  much  larger  and  more  influential  than  that  to  which 
he  himself  belonged.    When  the  Non-Intrusion  party  at  length  achieved 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

predominance  in  the  counsels  of  the  Establishment,  he  saw  in  the  fact 
a  token  that  the  Church  of  Scotland  was  returning  to  her  first  love  ;  and, 
like  a  true  son  of  that  Church,  he  rejoiced  at  the  sight.  The  effect  on 
his  son  was  just  what  might  have  been  expected.  Dr.  Goold  was,  from 
his  boyhood,  a  frequenter  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Assemblies ;  and  among 
the  ministers  of  sister  Churches  who  were  present  at  the  Disruption 
Assembly,  when  it  met  at  Canonmills,  under  the  presidency  of 
Dr.  Chalmers,  no  one  looked  with  a  more  rapt  interest  on  the  stirring 
scene. 

Dr.  Goold  is  of  Covenanting  lineage.  His  father,  a  native  of  the 
Upper  Ward  of  Lanarkshire,  belonged  to  a  family  which  had  been 
connected  with  the  " Cameronians"  or  "Society-people"  from  the  time 
of  the  eight-and-twenty-years'  persecution.  For  a  good  many  years, 
subsequently  to  the  Revolution  of  1688,  this  community  subsisted  as 
a  number  of  praying  societies.  It  was  not  till  1743  that  they  were  in 
a  condition  to  constitute  a  Presbytery.  Long  after  this,  a  curious 
tradition  of  the  persecuting  time  cleaved  to  them  in  the  shape  of  a  fancy 
for  erecting  their  meeting-houses  in  out-of-the-way  places.  Thus  the 
Glasgow  people  met  for  worship  at  Sandhills,  near  Shettleston,  three 
miles  out  of  town  ;  the  Dumfries  people,  smitten  with  a  similar  shyness, 
met  at  Quarrelwood  ;  the  Kilmarnock  people  at  Crookedholm ;  the 
Falkirk  people  at  Laurieston.  Thus  it  came  about  that  the  "  Society- 
people,"  in  and  about  Edinburgh,  held  their  meetings  at  the  village 
of  Pentland,  not  far  from  the  battle-field  of  RuUion  Green.  Here  the 
Rev.  John  Thorburn  ministered  to  them  during  the  closing  decades 
of  last  century  ;  and  here  the  elder  William  Goold  was  ordained  to 
the  ministry  on  the  13th  of  December,  1804. 

The  congregation  after  a  while  divided,  one  part  clinging  to  the 
Pentland  meeting-house,  the  rest  transferring  themselves,  along  with 
their  pastor,  to  a  place  of  worship  which  they  erected  for  themselves 
in  Lady  Lawson's  Wynd,  near  the  Grassmarket.     It  was  in  Edinburgh, 


IVILUAAf  HENRY  GOOLD,  D.D. 

accordingly,  that  the  subject  of  this  sketch  first  saw  the  light.  The 
date  of  his  birth  was  the  15th  of  December,  181 5.  He  was  a  bright 
boy,  and  as  he  was  the  only  son  in  the  family,  special  care  was 
bestowed  on  his  education.  Entering  the  Edinburgh  High  School  at  an 
early  age,  he  ran  a  brilliant  course,  and  in  1831  attained  the  much- 
coveted  position  of  Dux  of  the  Rector's  Class.  Thereafter  he  prose- 
cuted the  usual  course  of  classics  and  philosophy  at  the  University 
of  Edinburgh.  Divinity  he  studied  under  Dr.  Andrew  Symington, 
of  Paisley,  in  the  Divinity  Hall  of  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church ; 
but  he  attended  also  the  lectures  of  Dr.  Chalmers  and  Dr.  Welsh  in 
Edinburgh.  It  is  known  that  Dr.  Symington  conceived  for  him  a 
singular  affection  and  admiration.  Of  all  the  students — Scotch  or 
Irish— who  passed  through  the  Hall  at  Paisley,  he  undoubtedly  stood 
highest  in  the  esteem  of  the  venerable  Professor. 

From  the  first,  there  was  something  about  William  Goold  which  left 
on  the  minds  of  those  about  him  a  deep  impression  of  unfeigned  piety. 
He  belongs  to  the  class  of  men — never  very  numerous — who  are 
exceptions  to  the  proverb,  that  "  a  prophet  is  not  without  honour  save 
in  his  own  country  and  in  his  own  house."  The  members  of  his  father's 
congregation  watched  with  loving  eyes  his  brilliant  academic  course ; 
and  rejoicing,  above  all,  to  see  the  grace  of  God  in  him,  they  spon- 
taneously and  unanimously  called  him  to  be  his  father's  colleague, 
immediately  after  he  was  licensed  to  preach  the  Gospel. 

Dr.  Goold  "  has  never  changed— nor  wished  to  change — his  place." 
The  congregation  to  which  he  now  ministers,  in  the  Martyrs'  Church 
on  George  the  IV.  Bridge,  is  the  same  over  which  he  was  ordained  in 
1840,  in  Lady  Lawson's  Wynd.  Soon  after  his  ordination,  he  married 
the  eldest  daughter  of  the  elder  Dr.  William  Symington,  of  Glasgow, 
who,  like  his  brother  Andrew,  of  Paisley,  was  long  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  preachers  in  the  West  of  Scotland.  In  addition  to  the 
ordinary  duties  of  the  pastorate.  Dr.  Goold  soon  came  to  have  more 

=6; 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

than  an  ordinarj'  share  of  pubhc  service  allotted  to  him.  In  1850,  an 
enterprising  Edinburgh  firm  having  undertaken  an  extensive  republi- 
cation of  the  works  of  the  Puritan  divines,  it  was  resolved  to  begin  with 
the  voluminous  writings  of  Dr.  Owen ;  and  Dr.  Goold  was  appointed 
editor.  This  entailed  on  him  much  labour  during  six  years — labour 
so  well  bestowed  that  the  new  edition  has  finally  superseded  all  previous 
ones.  The  vacancy  in  the  Divinity  Hall,  caused  by  the  death  of 
Dr.  Andrew  Symington  in  1853,  was  supplied  in  the  following  year 
by  a  double  appointment,  Dr.  Goold  being  appointed  Professor  of 
Biblical  Literature  and  Church  History,  his  father-in-law.  Dr.  William 
Symington,  receiving  the  Chair  of  Systematic  Theology.  As  the 
session  extended  to  no  more  than  eight  weeks  each  year,  the  appoint- 
ment did  not,  in  either  case,  involve  separation  from  pastoral  work. 
New  labour  it  certainly  did  involve  ;  but  the  labour  was  congenial 
in  the  highest  degree.  And  among  the  students  who  passed  through 
the  Hall  during  the  twenty-two  years  of  Dr.  Goold's  Professorship, 
there  is,  we  believe,  but  one  opinion  regarding  the  ability  and  efficiency 
of  his  teaching. 

A  variety  of  circumstances  led  Dr.  Goold,  at  an  early  age,  to  take 
an  uncommon  interest  in  the  work  of  the  Bible  Societies.  Accordingly, 
when  the  Scottish  National  Bible  Society  was  constituted  by  the  union 
of  the  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  Societies,  and  a  Secretary  was  required, 
on  whose  judgment  reliance  could  be  placed,  in  relation  to  the  business 
connected  both  with  the  translation  and  the  circulation  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  the  Directors  turned  their  eyes  towards  him.  After  some 
hesitation  on  the  score  of  the  paramount  claims  of  pastoral  and  pro- 
fessorial work,  he  saw  his  way  to  accept  the  Secretaryship,  and  a 
reference  to  the  Records  of  the  Society  will  show  that  the  work  has 
prospered  greatly  under  his  care. 

Dr.  Goold's  aptitude  for  the  management  of  affairs  is  such  that  his 
help  has  always  been  much  sought  in  conducting  the  schemes  of  the 


IVILLIAM  HENRY  GOOLD,  D.D. 

Church.  For  this,  as  well  as  other  reasons,  when  negotiations  for  union 
were  entered  upon  by  the  Free  and  United  Presbyterian  Churches  in 
1863,  and  the  Reformed  Presbyterians  agreed,  on  invitation,  to  take  part 
in  these,  the  Synod  unanimously  appointed  him  Convener  of  its  Union 
Committee.  This  position  he  did  not  accept  without  hesitation  ;  for 
although,  even  at  that  time,  an  ardent  friend  of  the  projected  Union,  he 
had  a  stronger  sense  than  most  of  his  brethren  of  the  difficulties  likely  to 
be  encountered.  But,  after  having  accepted,  he  never  once  turned  aside. 
His  time  and  strength  were  ungrudgingly  expended  on  the  cause;  and  it 
certainly  was  not  through  any  fault  of  his  that  the  negotiations,  after 
having  been  prosecuted  for  ten  long  years,  had  at  length  to  be  broken  off 
In  the  progress  of  the  negotiations,  the  leading  men  of  the  two  larger 
bodies  expressed  a  great  and  growing  appreciation  of  his  sound  judg- 
ment, his  wisdom,  and  his  high  Christian  integrity.  The  indefinite 
postponement  of  the  general  Union  is  known  to  have  caused  him 
poignant  sorrow.  This  was  somewhat  alleviated  by  the  success  with 
which  it  pleased  the  Head  of  the  Church  to  crown  the  endeavours 
afterwards  made  to  effect  a  separate  union  between  the  Reformed 
Presbyterian  Church  and  the  Free  Church.  The  great  speech  delivered 
by  him  in  the  General  Assembly  of  the  United  Church  on  the  day  of 
the  consummation  of  the  Union  (Thursday,  the  2Sth  of  May,  1876), 
was  the  most  thrilling  feature  in  the  proceedings  of  a  memorable  day. 

Dr.  Goold  was  appointed  Moderator  of  the  General  Assembly  of 
1877,  a  graceful  recognition  of  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  section  of  the 
Church,  and  at  the  same  time  a  token  of  the  regard  and  confidence  in 
which  he  was  himself  held.  He  had  rejoiced  in  the  Union  of  1876,  and 
he  was  not  insensible  of  the  honour  done  him  in  the  Moderatorship  of 
1877,  but  these  had  been  immediately  preceded  by  domestic  afflictions, 
which  chastened  the  gratification  he  felt.  During  the  winter  of  1875-76, 
the  Lord  took  from  him  first  one  son,  and  then  another,  both  dearly 
beloved,  and  both  on  the  threshold  of  active  life.     In  the  short  interval 

»69 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

between  these  trj-ing  bereavements,  Mrs.  Goold,  who  had  till  that  time 
enjoyed  fair  health,  and  whose  cheerful  godliness  and  winning  ways  had 
imparted  an  uncommon  charm  to  the  house,  was  suddenly  called  away. 
In  all  the  three  instances  there  was  solid  ground  for  a  good  and  assured 
hope  regarding  the  departed,  nevertheless  the  blow  was  heavy.  But 
grace  has  sustained  under  it,  and  the  tree  so  much  chastened  has  not 
ceased  to  bring  forth  fruit. 

W.  B. 


.-<cS 


yA-^ 


<---%<   THE  DUCHESS  OF  GORDON, 


-n?: 


^ 


■ilr^^^' 


t^ 


(0li^abttij,  ©ucljess  of  (!?or^on. 

J  HE  last  Duchess  of  Gordon  meetly  finds  and  honourably 

-y^^  I  fills  a  place  in  the  roll  of  the   Disruption   Worthies. 

^AL  /?l^^        In  the  exalted  position  in  which  God  had  placed  her, 

with   a  grace  and  wisdom  very  engaging,  and  with  a 

piety  ever  ardent  and  active,  she  greatly  advanced  the 

cause  of  truth  and  godliness  in  all  the  north  of  Scotland. 

Descended  from  a  race,  many  members  of  which  were  singular  in 

their  age  for  their  piety,  in  due  time  she  yielded  herself  to  the  yoke  of 

Christ,    and    thus    became    an    inheritor    of    the    covenant    blessing, 

which  descends,  as  promised,  upon  the  seed  of  the  righteous. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  trace  her  history  as  a  citizen  of  earth,  and 
as  one  of  the  nobles  of  the  land.  These  brief  sketches  of  the  Disruption 
Worthies  are  intended  to  exhibit  chiefly  their  connection  with  that 
series  of  events  in  the  history  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  culminating 
in  what  is  aptly  termed  the  Disruption.  These  transactions  are  still  too 
recent,  to  be  viewed,  either  by  friends  or  foes,  in  their  due  proportion. 
We  confidently  hazard  the  assertion  that  with  increasing  years  their 
magnitude  will  be  acknowledged,  and  their  weighty  influence  upon  the 
progress  of  true  religion,  not  only  in  Scotland,  but  throughout  the 
world,  freely  admitted. 

Elizabeth,  Duchess  of  Gordon,  was  born  in  London,  20th  Januarj', 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

1794.  Her  father  was  Alexander  Brodie,  a  younger  son  of  Brodie  of 
that  Ilk.  Having  acquired  a  large  fortune  in  India,  he  returned  to  his 
native  land,  and  purchased  the  estates  of  Arnhall  and  Burn,  in 
Kincardineshire,  and  sat  as  Member  of  Parliament  for  Elgin.  Her 
mother  was  Miss  Elizabeth  Wemyss,  of  Wemyss  Castle.  Having  lost  her 
mother  at  the  early  age  of  six  years,  she  was  carefully  trained  by  her 
aunts.  Educated  with  a  culture  not  the  usual  then  for  ladies,  she  passed, 
in  due  course,  through  the  customary  routine  of  fashionable  life,  and 
was  married  to  the  Marquis  of  Huntly  in  181 3,  and  was  widowed  in  1836. 

Adorning  the  position  in  which  she  was  placed  by  the  providence 
of  God,  she  would  have  been  a  remarkable  woman  in  any  rank  of  life. 
Distinguished  for  beauty  of  person  in  her  youth,  she  retained  to  her 
latest  years,  features  indicative  of  sweet  gentleness,  great  good  sense, 
Christian  benevolence  and  heavenly  rest.  She  had,  it  may  be  added, 
a  most  winning  smile,  and  an  unconscious,  but  irresistibly  attractive 
manner.  She  possessed  very  fair  natural  abilities,  carefully  cultivated, 
great  stores  of  general  information,  derived  from  her  intercourse  with  all 
classes,  and  from  the  constant  habit  of  having  in  course  of  reading  some 
standard  work.  She  was  distinguished  for  great  tact,  with  a  singular 
combination  of  firmness  and  gentleness. 

As  with  many  eminent  servants  of  God  it  seems  difficult  to  say  when 
first  she  truly  came  to  know  the  Lord.  Some  links  in  the  chain,  some 
helpers  on  the  way  appear — Erskine's  Essay  on  Faith,  seems  to  have 
made  a  great  impression,  subsequently  intercourse  with  Lady  Olivia 
Sparrow,  and  specially  with  the  Duke  of  Manchester.  Step  by  step 
she  was  led  on  till  at  length  the  dawning  brightened  into  noon-day,  and 
she  knew  the  Lord,  and  knew  that  she  knew  Him.  Ever  after,  in  often 
most  testing  circumstances  and  amid  great  temptation,  with  notable 
wisdom  and  humility,  and  sweetness  and  courage,  she  confessed  Christ 
before  all. 

The  histor)'  of  her  connection   with   the  Disruption  is  noteworthy, 


ELIZABETH,  DUCHESS  OF  GORDON. 

exhibiting,  as  it  does,  the  steps  of  an  ingenuous  and  truth-loving  mind 
making  its  way  to  the  light  through  mists  of  error  and  over  mountains 
of  prejudice.  Born  and  bred  an  Episcopalian,  and  living  in  an  atmo- 
sphere and  surrounded  by  a  society  to  which  "  The  Church  "  was  every- 
thing, and  all  outside,  socially  and  religiously,  nothing,  her  leanings 
naturally  were  very  strong  towards  Episcopacy.  Then,  too,  the  barriers 
which  separated  her  politically  from  Presbyterianism  were,  if  possible, 
stronger  still.  The  questions  which  were  connected  with  the  Disruption 
were  intensely  disagreeable  to  all  Tory  minds.  The  struggle  for  the 
crown  rights  of  Christ  and  the  liberties  of  His  Church  was  viewed  by  most 
of  the  aristocracy  as  radical  and  revolutionary,  and  all  who  favoured  it 
were  suspected  of  disloyalty.  To  any  in  such  a  position  and  with 
such  surroundings,  it  required  very  strong  convictions  of  duty  and  very 
clear  light  to  enable  them  to  break  through  and  follow  the  teachings  of 
the  Word  of  God  and  the  dictates  of  conscience. 

Very  early  in  her  spiritual  history  she  seems  to  have  got  a  firm  grasp 
of  what  are  distinctively  known  as  the  Doctrines  of  Grace.  Few  could 
more  quickly  detect,  whether  in  the  living  voice  or  the  printed  page, 
any  deviation  from  a  pure  Gospel,  either  towards  legality  or  antino- 
mianism.  While,  therefore,  continuing  nominally  an  Episcopalian,  during 
these  earlier  years  she  sought  after  and  waited  upon  the  ministrations  of 
the  Evangelical  clergy  in  the  Church  of  Scotland. 

Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  for  some  years  before  the  Disruption  she 
and  the  ministers  of  the  Evangelical  party  in  the  Church  of  Scotland 
stood  in  a  somewhat  peculiar  relation.  She  honoured  them  much  for 
their  Master's  sake.  She  waited  upon  their  services,  and  received  them 
as  welcome  guests  in  her  home,  and  yet  she  stood  aloof  from  them  in  all 
their  efforts  to  deliver  the  Church  from  Erastian  bondage,  and  to  restore 
to  Christ  his  crown  rights  as  the  Church's  King  and  Head. 

Strathbogie  is  familiar,  ecclesiastically,  to  every  one  who  knows  any- 
thing of  the  history  of  the  Disruption.     The  intrusion  of  a  minister  upon 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  people  of  Marnoch — the  deposition  from  the  ministry  of  the  majority 
of  the  ministers  of  the  Presbytery  by  the  General  Assembly  for  the 
breach  of  their  ordination  vows — the  Interdicts  of  the  Court  of  Session — 
the  proclamation  of  the  Gospel  in  these  parishes  by  leading  ministers  of 
the  Assembly  in  the  face  of  these  Interdicts !  During  this  time  the 
Duchess  was  absent  upon  the  Continent.  With  her  measure  of  light  she 
acted  in  the  circumstances  with  what  might  almost  be  termed  a  beautiful 
inconsistency.  With  her  still  strong  episcopal  and  political  leanings, 
she  greatly  disapproved  of  the  steps  taken  by  the  Church,  not,  indeed,  in 
the  deposition  of  the  ministers,  but  in  breaking  connection  with  the 
State.  On  the  other  hand,  with  her  quick  spiritual  instinct  and  love  of 
the  Gospel,  she  gave  express  orders  for  the  honourable  reception,  as  her 
guests,  of  the  ministers  sent  from  Edinburgh  to  preach  in  the  parishes  of 
the  deposed  incumbents,  although  she  knew  they  were  acting  in  the  face 
of  Interdicts  from  the  Court  of  Session. 

The  Disruption  at  length  came,  breaking  the  stillness  of  death — 
opening  avenues  of  access  for  the  Gospel  to  many  a  parish  from  which 
it  had  been  banished  for  more  than  a  century.  The  Duchess,  on  her 
return  to  Huntly,  found  herself  in  exceedingly  trying  circumstances, 
nominally  an  Episcopalian,  politically  strong  in  the  belief  of  the  inviola- 
bility of  the  union  between  Church  and  State,  religiously  full  of  clear 
light  as  to  the  truth  of  the  evangelical  doctrine  which  the  ministers  of 
the  Free  Church  preached !  But,  doing  "  His  will,"  ere  long  she  came 
to  know  of  the  doctrine  that  it  was  of  God.  Her  path  was  made  plain, 
and  became  as  the  shining  light  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the 
perfect  day.  She  came  at  length  clearly  to  apprehend  the  glorious 
truths  clustered  round  the  doctrine  of  the  Headship  of  Christ.  She 
cast  in  her  lot  with  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland,  and  ever  after  gave 
herself,  with  all  her  influence  and  means,  to  the  cause  of  God  in  connec- 
tion therewith. 

To  form  any  due  estimate  of  the  services  she  was  enabled  to  render 


ELIZABETH,  DUCHESS  OF  GORDON. 

to  Evangelical  Religion  in  the  north  of  Scotland,  one  requires  to  under- 
stand something  of  its  previous  history.  From  the  combined  effects 
of  Scottish  Episcopacy  and  Presbyterian  Moderatism,  true  religion  was 
almost  extinct.  The  whole  region  was  aptly  termed  "  the  Dead  Sea." 
It  is  strictly  correct  to  say  that  at  the  period  prior  to  the  Disruption, 
in  whole  parishes,  scarcely  one  could  be  found  who  would  openly 
confess  his  personal  and  saving  interest  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  if  he  did  so, 
such  a  confession  would  be  met  with  incredulity  and  derision.  The 
history  of  the  revival  of  religion  in  Aberdeenshire,  Banffshire,  and  the 
surrounding  region,  during  the  past  half  century,  has  yet  to  be  written. 
The  landowners  as  a  rule,  discountenanced,  and  often  violently  opposed 
the  quietest  efforts  made  to  preach  the  Gospel  by  any  one  and  every  one 
outside  the  Established  Church.  In  some  parishes  the  preachers  of  the 
Gospel  were  denied  a  lodging,  and  the  tenants  who  would  shelter  them 
were  threatened  with  eviction !  The  people  themselves  were  in  gross 
ignorance  of  the  Gospel ;  while  parishes  by  the  combined  influence  of 
the  Laird  and  the  Minister  were  hermetically  sealed.  Half  the  Queen's 
highway  was  the  only  place  where  a  man  dare  stand  and  preach  Christ ! 
Sabbaths  were  sometimes  spent  by  parish  ministers  in  the  effort  to 
refute  the  new  doctrine  of  regeneration  by  the  Spirit,  and  justification 
by  faith  alone.  The  proclamation  of  the  Gospel  in  feeing-markets,  a 
plan  approved  of  and  aided  by  the  Duchess,  where  salvation  by  free 
grace  was  set  forth,  was  received  with  wonder  and  incredulity,  and  often 
with  the  exclamation,  "  That's  a  new  way  o'  it ! " 

Now  it  was  in  such  circumstances  that  God  raised  up  the  Duchess 
of  Gordon  to  do  a  work  for  His  name  and  for  the  souls  of  men,  for  which 
He  so  admirably  qualified  her.  In  her  own  high  social  circle  she 
disarmed  prejudices,  stood  sponsor  for  the  loyalty  of  the  members  of 
the  Free  Church,  and  exhibited  to  all  with  whom  she  came  in  contact, 
the  attractive  beauty  of  living  Christianity.  Visitors,  not  a  few,  of  all 
ranks  and  classes,  and  from   all  lands,  were  made   familiar  with   the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

doctrine  and  practices  of  the  Free  Church  in  Huntly  Lodge,  in  the 
ministration  of  the  Sabbath,  to  which  almost  all  invariably  accompanied 
her.  Of  these  visitors,  many  were  disarmed  of  their  prejudices,  and  not 
a  few  were  attracted  and  blessed.  Thus  the  Free  Church,  through  her, 
was  exhibited  to  many  in  high  places,  as  loyal  to  the  sovereign,  as  the 
mother  of  true  piety,  and  a  blessing  to  the  land. 

But  while  thus,  by  wise  words  and  a  holy  life  she  testified  to  those  in 
her  own  circle,  seeing  the  fearful  state  of  spiritual  death  every\vhere 
around,  she  took  the  most  prudent  and  active  measures  to  have  the 
Gospel  widely  and  faithfully  preached.  It  was  her  custom  for  many 
years  both  before  and  after  the  Disruption  to  invite  to  her  house,  for  a 
monthly  conference,  all  evangelical  ministers  within  access  of  Huntly 
Lodge.  At  such  meetings  the  forenoon  was  spent  by  the  ministers  in 
much  prayer  and  brotherly  conference  on  some  difficulty  in  the  way  of 
the  spread  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  best  measures  for  its  removal. 
In  the  afternoon  there  was  a  prayerful  review  of  the  subjects,  in  com- 
pany with  the  Duchess  and  all  her  visitors  who  desired  to  be  present. 
In  the  evening  some  two  of  the  ministers  addressed  a  public  meeting  in 
the  church.  The  power  of  such  meetings  for  good  it  is  impossible  to 
estimate,  and  the  fruit  that  followed.  There  is  great  reason  to  believe 
that  the  revival  of  religion  which  spread  over  the  north  of  Scotland,  may 
in  no  small  measure  be  traced  to  these  meetings.  Certainly,  it  can  be 
established  as  a  fact,  that  very  remarkable  revivals  of  religion  were 
witnessed  in  the  parishes  of  all  the  ministers  who  attended  these 
conferences. 

But  there  were  large  districts  lying  spiritually  waste  without  any 
to  cultivate  them — large  masses  of  the  people  who  seldom,  if  ever, 
heard  the  Gospel  preached  in  purity  and  power.  For  such  districts  she 
sought  to  provide  evangelists  and  missionaries.  Her  name  and  influence 
obtained  access  for  these  labourers  to  places  and  persons  from  which 
they  would  otherwise  have  been  completely  shut  out. 


ELIZABETH,  DUCHESS  OF  GORDON. 

Frequently  under  her  auspices,  evangelistic  tours  were  undertaken, 
and  the  Gospel  preached  from  parish  to  parish — in  the  fair  green  of  the 
village — in  the  market  square — not  seldom  in  the  quiet  meadow  of  a 
Highland  glen.  Multitudes  heard  the  Gospel  in  the  half-yearly  fceing- 
markcts.  From  such  labours  abundant  increase  was  gathered.  The 
first  access  to  a  parish,  lying  in  great  spiritual  darkness,  whose  minister 
was  a  prominent  leader  of  the  Moderate  party  in  the  Disruption  conflict, 
was  obtained  through  the  conversion  of  a  farmer  under  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel  at  a  fceing-markct.  Having  welcomed  Christ  to  his  heart, 
he  gladly  welcomed  Him  to  his  house.  In  his  barn  the  first  evangelical 
sermon  was  preached  that  had  been  heard  in  that  parish  for  very  many 
years. 

In  later  years  of  her  life,  the  expedient  was  tried  of  holding  large 
gatherings  in  the  parks  surrounding  Huntly  Lodge.  Many  had  been 
brought  to  God  by  the  faithful  preaching  of  the  Gospel  throughout  the 
region.  But  although  numerous  they  were  scattered,  and  as  yet  timid, 
and  surrounded  also  by  opposers  and  scoffers.  It  was  thought  that  if 
they  could  be  collected  together,  for  mutual  recognition  and  encourage- 
ment, a  strong  stimulus  might  be  given  to  the  work  ;  and  moreover,  that 
an  opportunity,  upon  a  large  scale,  would  be  afforded  for  the  proclama- 
tion of  the  Gospel.  Such  meetings  were  then  a  new  thing.  It  is  difficult 
to  realise  with  what  fear  and  anxiety  the  step  was  taken.  Many  true 
Christians  spoke  against  them.  Others  stood  aloof  in  wonder !  God 
greatly  owned  them !  Believers  were  greatly  strengthened  and  edified, 
and  multitudes  of  sinners  were  led  to  Christ,  who  by  their  future  lives, 
proved  the  reality  of  the  change.  Some  who  found  Christ  at  these 
meetings  are  now  in  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel ;  many  in  the  eldership 
of  the  Church,  and  others  serving  the  Lord  in  almost  every  colony  of 
the  British  Empire. 

As  the  fruit  of  all  these  prajcrs  and  efforts,  and  of  the  full  con- 
secration of  herself  to  the  Lord,  and  of  uninterrupted   labour  for  His 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

name's  sake,  it  might  safely  be  affirmed,  comparing  the  present  with  the 
past,  that  in  no  part  of  Scotland  has  vital  godliness  made  such  progress, 
and  acquired  such  a  hold  as  in  these  northern  counties.  When  she  came 
to  Strathbogie,  she  found  it  spiritually  a  region  and  shadow  of  death, 
and  when  she  ceased  from  her  labours  and  went  to  her  reward,  she  left 
it  full  of  the  life  and  light  of  the  Gospel. 

As  one  thoughtfully  reviews  her  life,  and  notes  the  fruit  of  her 
influence  and  efforts  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  he  is  ready  to  say  concerning 
the  nobility  of  our  land,  "  O  si  sic  onines  !  "  If  in  their  exalted  station 
they  would  become,  as  she,  nursing  fathers,  and  nursing  mothers  to  Zion, 
the  widening  gulf  between  class  and  class  would  quickly  be  filled  up,  the 
whole  breath  of  society  sweetened,  many  difficult  social  problems  solved, 
our  land  would  become  a  delightful  land  ;  then  should  we  not  only  hear 
it,  in  prophetic  utterance,  but  see  it  with  our  eyes,  "  Thou  shalt  be  called 
Hephzibah,  and  thy  land  Beulah  ;  for  the  Lord  delighteth  in  thee,  and 
thy  land  shall  be  married." 


Ktb.  ^ntirclti  ^ran. 


^HE  pen  of  Hugh  Miller  delineates  Mr  Gray  to  the  life,  as 
he  appeared  among  the  leaders  in  the  heat  of  the  "  ten 
years'  conflict"  : — 


"  Now,  mark  that  strongly- featured  man  a  few  benches  away. 
He  is  barely  of  the  middle  size,  and  stoutly  made.  The  nose  has 
an  almost  Socratic  degree  of  concavity  in  its  outline  ;  indeed,  the 
whole  profile  more  nearly  resembles  that  of  Socrates,  as  shewn  in  cameos  and  busts, 
than  it  does  any  other  known  profile  to  which  we  could  compare  it.  The  expression 
of  the  lower  part  of  the  face  indicates  a  man  who,  if  once  engaged  in  battling  in  a  good 
cause,  would  fight  long  and  doggedly  ere  he  gave  up  the  contest.  The  head  is  also 
marked  by  the  Socratic  outline  in  a  singularly  striking  degree  ;  the  forehead  is  erect, 
broad,  high,  and  the  coronal  region  of  immense  development.  He  rises  to  speak.  His 
voice,  though  not  too  finely  modulated,  is  powerful  ;  his  style  of  language  plain, 
energetic,  and  full  of  point— such  a  style  as  Cobbet  used  to  write,  and  which,  when 
employed  as  a  medium  for  the  conveyance  of  thoughts  of  large  volume,  is  perhaps  of 
all  kinds  of  style  the  most  influential.  He  is  evidently  a  master  of  reason  ;  and  there 
runs  through  the  lighter  portions  of  his  speech  a  vein  of  homely,  racy  humour,  \ery 
quiet  but  very  effective.  That  speaker  is  Andrew  Gray  of  Perth,  one  of  the  vigorous  and 
original  minds  which  the  demands  of  the  present  struggle  have  called  from  comparative 
obscurity  into  the  controversial  arena,  full  in  the  view  of  the  country.  Mr  Gray's 
admirable  pamphlet,  '  The  Present  Conflict,'  took  the  lead,  wc  believe,  of  all  the  publi- 
cations of  which  the  unhappy  collision  between  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  courts  has 
been  the  occasion  ;  and  it  must  be  regarded  surely  as  no  slight  proof  of  the  judgment  of 
the  man,  that  of  all  the  positions  he  then  took  up,  not  one  has  since  been  abandoned.  He 
marked  out  the  Tones  Vedras  of  the  question ;  and  the  lines  have  not  yet  been  forced." 

Mr  Gray  was  born  at  Aberdeen,  2d  November  1805,  and  he  used  to 
remark  with  pleasure,  that  most  of  the  leaders  in  the  controversy  which 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


ended  in  the  Disruption,  were  born  about  the  same  time.  As  his  parents 
were  unable  to  meet  the  expenses  of  his  education  for  the  ministry,  he 
had  much  hard  work  in  supporting  himself  during  his  preparatory  course 
by  teaching  privately  and  in  schools.  His  father  early  dedicated  him  to 
the  Lord's  work,  and  instilled  into  his  mind  the  doctrines  of  the  Reforma- 
tion and  the  principles  of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  This  humble  and 
singularly  pious  man  spent  his  latter  years  under  the  roof  of  his  son,  in 
whose  congregation  at  Perth  he  acted  as  an  elder.  Even  while  a  student 
Mr  Gray  was  recognised  as  a  man  of  mark.  Although  he  entered 
Marischal  College,  Aberdeen,  when  religion  there  was  at  a  low  ebb,  yet 
he  found  a  few  companions  like-minded  with  himself,  and  great  was  his 
delight  in  them  as  well  as  his  influence  over  them.  He  had  all  his  life  a 
keen  relish  for  the  company  of  men  of  his  own  calling.  The  reserve 
which  he  sometimes  maintained  in  general  society  gave  place,  among  his 
trusted  brethren,  to  genial  frankness  and  hilarity,  especially  when  he 
recalled  the  happy  years  of  his  youth.  Mr  Milne  of  Free  St  Leonard's, 
Perth,  in  preaching  Mr  Gray's  funeral  sermon,  mentioned  that  I\Ir  Gray 
once  led  him  out  into  the  country,  and  spoke  to  him  faithfully  and  affec- 
tionately about  the  state  of  his  soul  and  the  way  of  salvation  ;  "  the  first 
time,"  added  Mr  Milne,  "  that  any  one  had  ever  addressed  me  directly  on 
the  subject."  This  pleasing  circumstance  must  have  had  a  good  effect  on 
the  relations  between  these  men  of  God,  who  occupied  the  most  important 
positions  in  Perth  at  the  Disruption.  While  Mr  Gray  was  at  college,  the 
tide  turned,  and  the  evangelical  section  of  the  students  which  had  been 
despised  became  most  influential.  He  was  largely  instrumental  in  bring- 
ing about  this  change,  and  preserved  in  a  book  intimations  of  meetings 
and  other  memoranda  of  his  activity  among  his  fellow  students.  In  after 
years,  his  exertions  for  the  erection  of  a  Free  Church  Divinity  College  in 
Aberdeen,  led  to  differences  with  honoured  friends,  which,  to  the  writer's 
knowledge,  caused  Mr  Gray  intense  pain.  Aberdeen  should  remember 
him,  for  all  that  concerned  her  was  to  him  most  dear.     When  Dr  Andrew 


REV.  ANDREW    GRAY. 

Tliomson  remonstrated  against  the  insertion  of  the  Apocrypha  in  the 
bibles  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society,  and  the  great  questions 
of  the  canon  and  the  verbal  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures  came  to  be 
publicly  discussed,  Mr  Gray,  though  only  a  student,  wrote  with  unusual 
power  against  the  loose  views  of  Dr  Thomson's  opponents. 

But  the  controversy  with  which  his  name  was  most  closely  associated, 
and  in  which  he  best  evinced  the  energy  and  determination  which  charac- 
terised him,  was  what  is  called  the  "Chapel  Question."  While  yet  at 
college,  he  took  the  foremost  place  in  assailing  the  unscriptural  practice  of 
excluding  chapel  ministers  from  the  government  of  the  Church,  and  even 
forbidding  them  to  hold  kirk-sessions  in  their  own  congregations.  In  1825, 
when  he  had  scarcely  completed  his  twentieth  year,  he  published,  in  the 
"  Christian  Instructor,"  an  able  vindication  of  the  right  of  all  ordained 
ministers  to  rule  as  well  as  to  teach.  Both  Dr  Andrew  Thomson  and  Dr 
Chalmers  opposed  the  movement  for  procuring  the  acknowledgment  of 
this  right  by  the  General  Assembly,  in  the  case  of  ministers  of  Chapels  of 
Ease.  Yet  undaunted  even  by  such  opposition,  Mr  Gray  kept  the  matter  in 
various  ways  before  the  public  mind,  and  stirred  up  those  who  had  a  voice 
in  church  courts  to  bring  it  forward,  before  he  could  procure  a  hearing  in 
them  himself  His  ordination  as  minister  of  the  Chapel  of  Ease  at 
Woodside,  near  Aberdeen  (ist  September  1831),  brought  home  to  him 
very  painfully,  in  his  own  experience,  the  restrictions  which  so  anomalous 
a  position  imposed  on  the  exercise  of  the  Christian  ministry.  He  delighted 
to  tell  that  on  his  return  from  the  Assembly  of  1834,  in  which,  greatly 
owing  to  his  powerful  speech  at  the  bar,  the  evil  was  remedied,  Mr 
Garment  of  Rosskeen  recommended  him  to  give  out  in  Woodside  Chapel, 
as  their  first  psalm  in  their  state  of  freedom,  Psalm  cxxix. 

Notvv'ithstanding  bitter  opposition  from  some  influential  individuals  in 
the  neighbourhood,  Mr  Gray's  labours  in  his  first  charge  were  highly 
successful.  The  congregation,  of  which  he  was  the  first  minister,  became 
numerous,  and  five  hundred  scholars  attended  the  Sabbath  school.     Con- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

versions  gladdened  his  heart,  especially  among  the  members  of  his  bible 
class.  Woodside  was  a  field  which  the  Lord  was  blessing  up  to  the  time  of 
Mr  Gray's  removal  to  the  West  Church,  Perth  (14th  July  1836).  In  this 
new  sphere  he  was  soon  the  acknowledged  leader  of  the  evangelical  party 
in  the  church  courts  of  the  district,  while  the  congregation  became  much 
larger  than  it  had  ever  been,  though  he  found  it  in  a  flourishing  state. 
He  began  weekly  prayer  meetings,  and  during  the  sittings  of  the 
Assembly  great  numbers  met  every  evening  to  hear  a  letter  from  their 
minister,  when  the  struggle  became  serious,  and  to  pray  for  the  peace  of 
Jerusalem.  Aided  by  a  munificent  member  of  his  congregation,  he 
erected  a  handsome  parish  school,  and,  amid  far  greater  difficulties,  he 
built,  after  the  Disruption,  another  school  and  teacher's  house.  His 
preaching  was  of  a  very  high  order,  as  his  published  sermons  prove,  and 
those  who  loved  a  pure  gospel  rejoiced  in  the  simplicity  and  fervour  with 
which  he  proclaimed  salvation.  It  was  to  him  a  painful  trial  that  his 
work  for  the  church  at  large,  coupled  with  his  frequent  ill  health  and 
consequent  absence  from  home,  prevented  him  from  accomplishing  the 
amount  of  pastoral  visitation  he  felt  to  be  due  to  his  people.  Of  his  lack 
of  service  in  this  respect,  and  of  his  own  shortcomings  as  a  man,  he  had 
a  deep  and  lowly  conviction.  "  A  minister's  sins  are  so  aggravated,"  he 
once  exclaimed,  and  burst  into  tears. 

But  few,  if  any,  rendered  more  valuable  service  to  the  Free  Church. 
Dr  Candlish,  as  well  as  Hugh  Miller,  assigns  to  Mr  Gray's  pamphlet 
on  the  conflict  between  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  courts,  the  merit  of 
marking  out  the  precise  ground  which  was  subsequently  taken  by  all  the 
leaders  on  the  evangelical  side.  He  says  it  became  the  text-book  of  the 
controversy.  Dr  Chalmers  pronounced  it  "one  of  the  most  masterly 
and  conclusive  reasonings  that  ever  issued  from  the  press."  It  is  not 
therefore  surprising  that  after  the  Disruption  Mr  Gray  was  requested  to 
draw  up  a  Catechism  for  the  instruction  of  the  young  in  the  principles  of 
the  Free  Church.     If  some  of  the  answers  in  that  Catechism  are  rather 


REV.  ANDREW  GRAY. 

long,  many  are  both  short  and  pithy.  Thus,  having  quoted  from  the 
authorised  "Proceedings"  of  the  EstabHshed  Church  Assembly  of  1843, 
that  the  Assembly  appointed  a  committee  to  draw  up  a  full  and  formal 
answer  to  the  Protest  of  the  Free  Church,  and  report  to  the  Assembly  on 
Saturday,  he  asks,  "  What  happened  on  Saturday?"  Ans.  "There  was 
no  report."  He  then  records  that  the  committee,  having  been  enlarged, 
did,  in  August,  give  in  a  report  to  the  Commission,  and  quotes  from  the 
"  Proceedings  "  that  the  Commission  agreed  to  consider  this  report  "  at 
their  meeting  to-morrow."  We  then  have — Ques.  "  What  occurred  on 
the  morrow.'"  Ans.  "No  quorum  appeared,  and  the  Commission  did 
not  meet."  Qiics.  "What  became  of  the  answer  to  the  Protest.'" 
A  ns.  "  It  zuas  ncocr  heard  of  more!  " 

Mr  Gray  would  gladly  have  retained  the  benefits  of  an  Established 
Church,  could  he  have  done  so  with  a  good  conscience.  He  confessed 
that,  as  an  endowed  minister,  he  felt  more  at  rest  in  regard  to  his  income 
than  at  Woodside,  or  after  the  Disruption.  It  was  chiefly  owing  to  him 
that  the  large  congregations  of  the  Free  Church  in  Perth  were  content 
with  humble  structures  for  themselves,  more  aid  being  consequently  given 
to  country  churches.  The  claims  of  the  Sustcntation  Fund  were  vehe- 
mently urged  from  his  pulpit,  while  congregations  had  not  yet  learned 
to  look  on  the  things  of  others,  though  his  personal  interests  might  thus 
have  suffered.  He  was  himself  a  liberal  contributor.  His  labours  for 
the  Free  Church  in  his  own  Presbytery  were  most  abundant ;  and  he 
took  a  leading  part  in  the  Assembly,  both  in  the  arrangement  of  its 
business  and  in  its  legislation.  His  profound  sagacity  and  knowledge  of 
Church  law  made  his  advice  much  sought  and  followed  in  the  many 
perplexing  questions  that  arose  both  before  and  after  the  Disruption. 
He  was  the  first  to  suggest  the  scheme  for  the  evangelisation  of  the 
masses  in  Glasgow  which  has  been  so  marvellously  successful  ;  and  the 
Assembly  made  him  Convener  of  the  Committee  on  that  scheme  as  long 
as  his  health  permitted  him  to  take  charge  of  it. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


In  the  prosecution  of  this  great  and  difficult  undertaking,  he  was 
separated  for  weeks  together  from  his  own  congregation,  and  subjected  to 
toils  which  seriously  injured  his  constitution.  No  one  more  clearly  saw  the 
danger  to  which  the  Church  is  exposed,  not  only  from  the  encroachments 
of  the  State  on  its  freedom,  but  from  the  prevalence  of  ungodliness  in  our 
great  centres  of  population.  Strict  as  he  was  in  his  views  of  ecclesiastical 
order,  he  reckoned  it  expedient  in  the  circumstances  of  our  overgrown 
cities,  to  employ  effective  speakers,  chosen  from  the  ranks  of  working  men, 
to  reason  with  their  neighbours,  "  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judg- 
ment to  come."  Had  his  life  been  spared,  he  would  have  developed  original 
and  valuable  ideas  and  modes  of  operation  in  the  department  of  Home 
Missions.  Revival  work  always  lay  near  his  heart ;  but  a  suspected  under- 
valuing of  the  ministerial  office  on  the  part  of  some  who  were  active  in  its 
advancement  rather  alarmed  him,  though  he  rejoiced  at  the  co-operation 
of  ministers  and  gifted  members  of  different  churches  in  giving  addresses. 

From  the  time  of  his  coming  to  Perth  to  his  death  (March  lo.  iS6i), 
he  was  labouring  under  chronic  bronchitis,  which  often  brought  him  very 
low,  and  made  public  speaking,  especially  such  vehement  oratory  as  his, 
a  perilous  task.  He  said  he  made  men  think  rather  than  feel ;  but  as 
his  weakness  increased,  his  pulpit  addresses  became  very  touching.  In 
his  eyes  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  always  seemed  the  best  and  noblest 
work  to  which  he  was  called.  If  his  abrupt  manner  repelled  strangers, 
those  who  enjoyed  his  friendship  found  him  true  as  steel,  and  of  a  generous 
disposition.  He  had  a  great  desire  to  visit  the  Exhibition  in  London  in 
185 1,  but  to  an  old  fellow-student  who  asked  pecuniary  aid  from  him  at 
the  time,  he  gave  the  sum  required  for  his  own  expenses,  and  stayed  at 
home  himself  Yet  perhaps  in  public  life  he  was  apt  to  be  too  eager  in 
the  pursuit  of  the  objects  he  sought ;  and  he  himself  looked  on  his  afflic- 
tions as  a  curb  on  this  natural  impetuosity.  Once,  after  a  severe  paroxysm 
of  coughing,  he  said  to  a  friend,  "  I  would  have  been  a  terrible  fellow  had 
the  Lord  not  put  some  such  restraint  on  me."  J.  B.  I. 


uW, 


fljoinas  (Bntlnh,  B.B, 


HOMAS  GUTHRIE,  to  be  known  as  Dr  Guthrie  the 
preacher  and  philanthropist,  was  born  in  Brechin  on  the 
1 2th  of  July  1803,  and  died  at  St  Leonard's,  Hastings, 
4th  February  1873,  having  all  but  completed  his  three- 
score years  and  ten.  His  father,  David  Guthrie,  a 
burgher  of  some  note  in  the  town,  was  a  man  of  strong 
sense  and  Christian  principle ;  his  mother,  Clemintina  Cay,  had  force 
of  character  and  deep  piety.  The  ancestors  on  both  sides  were  farmers 
of  the  hill  country  of  Angus.  Thomas,  the  twelfth  child  and  sixth  son, 
had  his  lot  early  cast  for  the  ministry.  His  College  course  commenced 
in  Edinburgh  in  1815,  and  he  was  licenced  to  preach  the  gospel  in  1825. 
Lay  patronage,  as  then  exercised  in  the  Church  of  Scotland,  delayed 
his  settlement,  and  only  in  1830  did  he  obtain  a  charge.  With  the 
energy  that  afterwards  marked  him,  he  gave  part  of  that  interval  to 
scientific  and  medical  studies  in  Edinburgh  and  Paris,  and  part  to  the 
management  of  the  paternal  bank  in  Brechin,  preaching  and  public 
speaking  not  being  intermitted,  and  the  knowledge  he  gained  of  men 
and  of  practical  business  bestowing  a  second  training  for  his  life-work. 
In  1830  he  was  ordained  to  Arbirlot,  a  country  parish  near  Arbroath, 
and  the  same  year  married  to  Anne,  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Rev. 
James  Burns  of  Brechin.  Here  he  entered  with  great  earnestness  on 
the  chief  lines  of  action    to    which   he   devoted   himself  through    life. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


preaching  to  his  congregation  of  farmers  and  labourers  with  all  the 
clearness,  warmth,  and  power  of  illustration  which  shone  out  afterwards, 
visiting  from  house  to  house,  organising  prayer  meetings.  Sabbath 
schools,  a  library  and  savings  bank,  and  taking  share  in  the  movement 
against  Patronage  which  was  then  stirring  the  heart  of  Scotland.  His 
power  and  originality  as  a  preacher,  and  his  effectiveness  as  a  platform 
speaker,  brought  him  rapidly  to  the  front,  and  with  a  sore  wrench  to 
himself  and  his  people  ("  they  were  a'  greetin' "  is  the  account  given  by 
one  of  them),  he  was,  in  1837,  transferred  to  Old  Greyfriars',  Edinburgh, 
the  historic  church  of  the  covenant  and  the  martyrs.  Here  began  that 
wonderful  popularity  which  continued  to  grow  for  years,  and  attended 
him  while  he  could  ascend  a  pulpit.  It  was  a  very  busy  period  with 
him,  occupied  with  constant  pastoral  work,  his  hands  full  of  the 
benevolent  and  religious  movements  of  the  time,  and  with  a  large  share 
in  the  Church  discussions  which  were  shaking  the  country  ever  more 
widely  and  deeply.  In  1840  he  entered  the  new  church  of  St  John's, 
a  parish  formed  from  Old  Greyfriars',  to  carry  out  the  territorial  principle 
— one  of  the  chief  reasons  which  had  forced  him  from  Arbirlot,  and  a 
favourite  conception  of  Chalmers.  He  laboured  at  this  with  incessant 
vigour  till  the  Disruption  came  in  1843,  to  change  his  position  and 
the  condition  and  prospects  of  the  Church  of  Christ  in  Scotland. 

The  movement  which  ended  in  this  event  had  been  progressing 
in  the  "ten  years'  conflict";  a  battle  waged  over  the  breadth  of  the 
land,  in  country  homes  and  hamlets  as  well  as  in  church  courts,  in 
remote  islands  as  keenly  as  in  the  great  towns,  by  lecture  and  debate, 
through  book,  newspaper,  and  pamphlet,  and  every  agency  of  speech 
and  pen  by  which  the  heart  of  the  people  could  be  reached.  It  was  one 
of  the  periodical  uprisings  that  have  made  the  nation  what  it  is.  "  Scot- 
land," wrote  Lord  Palmerston,  "is  in  a  flame  about  the  Church  question," 
and  men  who  imagined  the  ages  of  faith  gone,  and  materialism  lord  of 
the  future,  were  surprised  to  see  the  same  unquenched  spirit  that  leapt 


THOMAS  GUTHRIE,  D.D. 

into  being  at  the  voice  of  Knox,  and  signed  the  covenant  amid  tears 
of  enthusiasm  on  the  tombstone  in  Greyfriars'  churchyard.  In  the 
surging  eddies  of  the  fight  Thomas  Guthrie  was  often  seen,  and  his 
winged  words,  with  the  pen  of  Hugh  Miller,  were  powerful  co-efficients 
in  bringing  out  the  response  which  the  heart  of  the  people  gave  to  the 
self-sacrifice  of  the  ministers,  and  in  securing,  under  God,  the  success  of 
the  Free  Church  from  the  first  day  of  its  existence.  He  was  in  the  band 
that  burst  from  the  doors  of  St  Andrew's,  Edinburgh,  on  the  i8th  May 
1843,  and  which,  beginning  with  474  ministers,  has  grown  to  900  churches, 
three  Divinity  Halls,  and  a  yearly  free-will  revenue  of  half  a  million 
sterling.  He  formed  one  of  a  deputation  that  visited  the  chief  towns  of 
England  and  Ireland,  to  explain  the  principles  of  the  Church,  and  not 
long  after  commenced  his  operations  for  the  Manse  Scheme,  which  ended 
with  his  reporting  £ii6,2,yo  for  this  one  object,  as  the  result  of  a  year's 
labour.  The  journeys,  speeches,  and  business  work  compressed  into  this 
effort  might  have  been  spread  through  an  ordinary  life,  and  shook  a  frame 
of  unusual  strength.  From  homeless  ministers,  his  exertions  turned  to 
what  had  long  been  in  his  heart,  houseless  children,  and  in  1847  came 
out  the  "Plea  for  Ragged  Schools."  Its  effect  was  electric,  for  the 
Christian  conscience  was  ready ;  and  he  became  identified  with  the  move- 
ment personally  in  his  own  city,  and,  in  name  and  influence,  throughout 
the  country.  One  plea  followed  another ;  hundreds  of  "  life-boats,"  to 
take  his  own  favourite  figure,  were  launched,  and  he  was  called  on  to 
advocate  the  cause  with  the  people,  and  to  watch  the  part  taken  in  it  by 
Parliament.  To  the  close  of  his  life  it  held  the  place  nearest  to  his  heart 
of  all  public  questions  ;  not  as  a  piece  of  politics,  or  branch  of  social 
improvement,  but  as  a  chief  part  of  the  religion  of  Christ.  His  numerous 
speeches,  and  his  fervent  pleadings  through  the  press,  have  entered  deeply 
into  the  general  zeal  for  the  education  and  elevation  of  the  people  which 
is  one  of  the  best  features  of  our  time. 

In  the  midst  of  these  multiplied  efforts  his  health  broke  down,  and  a 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

silence  of  two  years  from  pulpit  work  made  many  fear  that  his  public 
course  was  finished.  But  it  had  half  its  way  to  run.  In  1850  the  happy 
settlement  of  Dr  Hanna,  the  son-in-law  and  accomplished  biographer 
of  Dr  Chalmers,  as  co-pastor  in  St  John's,  divided  his  pulpit  labour, 
and  doubled  his  power  and  opportunity.  His  name  as  a  preacher 
had  been  growing  like  sunlight ;  it  was  now  at  its  zenith,  and  audiences 
representing  all  classes  of  rank  and  culture,  mixed  with  strangers  from 
every  part  of  the  world,  were  drawn  to  listen  to  the  same  gospel  preached 
with  a  clearness  and  force,  a  vividness  and  human  interest,  that  satisfied 
a  common  need.  Another  field  opened  in  the  use  of  his  pen.  It  is 
seldom  that  eloquence  of  speech  can  flow  through  the  press  without  losing 
a  large  portion  of  its  colour  and  vitality,  and  accordingly  his  first  "  Plea 
for  Ragged  Schools  "  took  many  by  surprise,  and  was  the  revelation  to 
himself  of  a  latent  power.  His  heart  had  been  touched  in  what  lay 
nearest  to  it,  and  the  string  of  his  tongue  was  loosed  to  speak  on  other 
matters.  In  1855  his  first  volume,  "The  Gospel  in  Ezekiel,"  appeared, 
and  at  this  date  it  has  reached  its  fortieth  thousand.  "  The  City :  its 
Sins  and  Sorrows,"  rose  to  fifty  thousand,  with  others  corresponding,  too 
long  here  to  mention.  His  books  cannot  represent  him  to  those  who 
never  heard  him,  as  he  was  in  his  mastery  over  an  audience,  not  merely 
by  gesture,  and  voice,  and  look,  but  by  the  mysterious  soul  magnetism 
which  some  speakers  possess  ;  nevertheless  it  is  remarkable  how  much  of 
his  heart  and  life  he  was  able  to  transmit  through  the  conducting  rod  of 
the  pen.  It  is  proof  of  the  great  store  of  impressive  power  with  which 
his  spiritual  nature  was  charged,  and  also  of  an  instinctive  literary  skill, 
for  though  his  style  in  both  was  the  same,  there  was  a  change  of  manner 
and  proportion  of  which  few  orators  are  capable.  To  thousands  who 
never  saw  him,  he  was  familiar  as  the  editor  of  the  "  Sunday  Magazine," 
known  as  "  Dr  Guthrie's  Magazine,"  which  reached  a  great  circulation  in 
his  hands,  and  where  he  gave  to  the  world  not  only  many  of  his  sermons, 
but  his  view  of  things  civil    and  sacred,  his  observations  on  men  and 


THOMAS  GUTHRIE,  D.D. 

manners,  as,  in  later  years,  he  extended  his  journeys  at  home  and  abroad. 
His  independence  and  breadth  of  handling  made  his  papers  always  racy 
reading,  while  there  was  felt  through  them  the  discrimination  of  the  best 
touch-stone — "A  good  understanding  have  all  they  that  do  his 
commandments."  To  number  up  the  subjects  in  which  he  took  the 
interest,  not  of  a  man  who  is  an  editor,  but  of  an  editor  who  is  a  man, 
and  proved  it  also  by  speech  and  action,  would  be  to  give  a  list  of  most 
of  the  great  concerns  that  touch  the  welfare  of  mankind.  Anti-slavery, 
total  abstinence,  the  purity  and  morality  of  national  law,  the  improve- 
ment of  the  condition  of  the  army,  sanitary  reformation,  better  homes 
for  the  people,  working-men's  clubs,  continental  missions,  with  a  peculiar 
love  for  the  old  Church  of  the  Valleys,  the  union  of  the  Presbyterian 
denominations,  are  some  of  the  questions  that  occupied  him.  His  fugitive 
papers  have  an  interest,  in  shewing  the  comprehensiveness  of  his  nature 
as  well  as  its  intensity,  the  curious  pleasure  he  took  in  peering  into,  and 
the  curiosa  felicitas  he  had  in  touching,  whatever  belongs  to  genuine 
human  nature,  and  helps  it  on.  Differing  as  he  and  the  late  Dr  Norman 
Macleod  did  in  Church  polity  and  some  other  things,  these  two  distin- 
guished men  had  the  same  ground  of  a  true  and  broad  humanity  in  them, 
playful  in  its  rippling  creeks,  sadly  earnest  in  its  depths,  with  the  sure 
sign  of  this  breadth,  a  sympathy  that  moistened  into  humour  and  melted 
into  tears ;  and,  never  far  off,  the  endeavour  to  make  a  wider,  nobler, 
human  nature,  of  which  Christ  is  the  alone  possible  centre. 

Some  of  his  later  papers  were  entitled,  "  Out  of  Harness,"  but  this 
condition  he  never  reached  till  he  lay  down  to  die.  A  winter's  preaching 
in  Rome,  and  a  visit  to  America,  to  work  his  way  across  the  States  to 
California,  where  he  had  a  son,  were  among  his  last  plans,  an  extra- 
ordinary proof  of  courageous  energy  on  the  verge  of  his  seventieth  year  ; 
and  with  his  heart  still  pressing  forward,  his  strength  failed.  His  end 
was  by  the  border  of  the  sea,  which  had  been  making  its  music  within 
him  for  many  years,  and  he  looked  out  on  it,  as  Bunyan  describes  his 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


back  to  that  kind  of  help,  and  the  fear  that,  if  he  did,  he  should  lose  what 
he  had  gained.  And,  after  all,  this  is  what  will  determine  the  form  of 
Church  reconstruction  in  Scotland,  not  the  lines  drawn  across  the  water 
by  statesmen,  but  the  deep  currents  below — the  necessities  and  cravings 
of  spiritual  life  in  the  Christian  people.  Statesmanship  has  often  had  to 
recognise  that  there  are  things  done  in  the  world  by  its  mistakes  which 
it  cannot  undo.  The  abolition  of  the  tea  tax  would  not  have  reclaimed 
America  when  independence  was  declared  ;  and  when  Israel  was  once 
across  the  sea,  in  the  freedom  of  the  wilderness,  with  its  divine  provisions, 
and  Canaan  before,  not  the  land  of  Goshen  and  a  constitution,  octroi  or 
other,  under  a  repentant  Pharaoh,  could  have  brought  them  back,  though 
some  would  fain  have  tried. 

In  describing  a  man,  it  is  the  custom  to  begin  with  his  appearance, 
and  the  likeness  which  this  sketch  is  to  accompany  invites  its  continu- 
ance. He  was  tall  beyond  the  ordinary  stature,  with  a  strength  of  frame 
that  would  have  made  him  a  "shepherd  of  the  people"  in  the  old 
Homeric  time,  as  his  other  gifts  made  him  in  the  movements  of  ours. 
The  face  was  not  regular,  but  had  much  expression,  first  in  the  eyes,  keen 
and  gray,  and  then  in  the  mouth,  which  spoke  by  its  lines,  as  well  as  its 
words ;  a  face  that  was  the  farthest  from  being  a  cover  to  the  feelings, 
but  let  them  through  in  their  quick  changes,  flitting  up  in  sympathy  and 
mirth,  and  honest  anger  and  righteous  scorn.  The  photographer  cannot 
give  this,  the  reader's  imagination  must  help.  The  complexion  was 
swarthy,  especially  in  youth,  with  long  dark  hair,  which  retreated  as  age 
advanced,  and  waved  in  a  cloud-like  white  about  his  temples,  the  general 
remark  being  that  he  grew  comelier  as  he  grew  older. 

His  intellectual  nature  was  not  of  the  abstract  or  contemplative  order, 
but  strongly  concrete  and  objective,  thinking  in  analogies  and  speaking 
in  figures,  as  old  Homer  used  them,  with  picture-like  fulness  that  would 
have  been  dangerous  to  the  sustained  interest  but  for  the  glow  and 
movement  that  made  them  one  with  the  subject.     It  recalled  the  eddy 


THOMAS  GUTHRIE,  D.D. 
of  a  Highland  pool  in  love  with  the  overhanging  birch  and  rowan,  but 
still  part  of  the  stream.  His  knowledge  was  drawn  from  nature  more 
than  science,  and  from  men  more  than  books,  gathering  all  his  life  from 
every  one  he  met,  and  having  his  library  of  fact  and  incident  and  observa- 
tion ready  at  hand.  The  amount  and  variety  of  these,  and  the  power  of 
putting  them  in  easy  dramatic  form  with  naturalness  and  geniality,  were 
the  charm  of  his  conversation.  Those  whose  conception  of  Scottish 
divines  is  represented  by  the  dried  mummies  that  fill  the  vaulted  niches 
of  the  Capucin  Monastery  at  Rome  would  have  had  their  ideal  disturbed  ; 
and  yet  the  type  to  which  he  belonged  has  great  antiquity,  as  any  one 
may  see  who  will  study  the  character  of  John  Knox  himself  in  his 
"  History  of  the  Reformation."  Connected  with  this  was  a  stock  of 
prompt  common  sense  in  reaching  instinctive  judgments  about  men  and 
things,  much  of  what  is  thought  to  be  the  national  peculiarity  of  shrewd- 
ness^  that  is,  penetration  for  cases  of  entanglement,  and  much  also  of 
what  is  thought  to  be  not  so  national,  tact,  the  perception  of  things 
delicate.  But  the  centre  of  his  natural  character  was  his  power  of 
emotion-commonly  called  heart-a  great  breadth  of  human  nature, 
inflammable  all  round,  crackling  in  playful  flames,  burning  also  with 
steady  worklike  purpose,  and  capable  of  deepening  to  a  still  white  heat. 
This  made  him  the  preacher  and  philanthropist  he  was-a  preacher  who 
needed  to  fill  his  study  in  thought  with  his  congregation,  and  kindle 
himself  thereby  to  fire  them  in  turn  ;  and  a  philanthropist,  not  of  the 
Benthamite  school,  but  with  a  personal  friendship  for  waifs  and  strays,  a 
romantic  interest  in  them,  and  a  human  naturalist's  study  of  the  curious 
shell  under  which  he  hoped  to  find  his  pearl.  In  little  things  it  was 
seen,  in  the  ready  confidences  he  made  up  with  children,  and  the  good 
understanding  he  was  on  with  dogs  ;  for  humane  is  only  human  widened 
out.  And  humanity  lay  at  the  root  of  his  theology.  Not  but  that  he 
was  sound  to  the  core  in  his  Christian  and  Calvinistic  faith,  that  "all 
things  are  of  God,"  and  drew  it  from  God's  book.     But  there  are  different 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


Cambridgeshire,"  associated  with  the  names  of  Simeon  and  Thomason, 
of  Henry  Martyn  and  Henry  Kirke  White,  it  is  beheved  that  Mr 
Hamilton  first  felt  the  power  of  grace,  and  gave  his  heart  to  the  Lord. 

Mr  Hamilton  was  called  to  the  Bar  in  1821,  and  for  a  number  of 
years  lived  quietly  with  his  mother  and  brothers,  among  whom  there 
subsisted  a  warm  family  affection.  In  1836  he  married  Miss  Louisa 
Balfour,  daughter  of  Mr  James  Balfour  of  Dantzic,  a  connection  of  the 
family  of  Balfour  of  Pilrig.  She  was  a  young  lady  of  singular  beauty, 
and  not  less  simplicity  and  sweetness  of  character.  When  on  a  visit  to 
some  relations  in  Banff,  and  under  the  ministry  of  the  late  Mr  Grant, 
she  received  her  first  impressions  of  divine  truth  ;  and  we  have  been  told 
by  some  who  knew  her  intimately,  that  her  progress  in  the  divine  life 
was  singularly  interesting  and  rapid,  and  that  a  more  beautiful  Christian 
character  could  hardly  have  been  conceived.  The  fair  prospect  of 
domestic  happiness  which  thus  opened  to  Mr  Hamilton  was  destroyed 
in  less  than  a  year,  by  his  wife  dying  in  childbed,  both  mother  and 
infant  having  been  laid  together  in  the  grave.  This  was  felt  by  Mr 
Hamilton  as  a  terrible  blow  :  he  bore  it  like  a  Christian,  but  it  was  long 
before  he  regained  his  wonted  tranquillity  of  mind. 

In  politics,  Mr  Hamilton  was  a  Conservative,  and  being  a  member  of 
the  congregation  of  the  late  Dr  Muir  of  St  Stephen's,  it  did  not  seem 
likely  that  he  would  take  side  with  what  Lord  Cockburn  and  many 
others  called  the  wild  party  in  the  Church.  His  taking  that  side,  and 
taking  it  with  great  decision  and  earnestness,  was  due  to  his  strong  con- 
viction that  it  was  constitutionally  right,  and  to  his  not  less  strong 
intuitive  perception,  that  the  most  vital  interests  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland  were  bound  up  with  the  maintenance  of  non -intrusion  and 
spiritual  independence.  Nothing  short  of  this  could  have  induced  Mr 
Hamilton  to  labour  as  he  did  in  the  cause.  We  have  said  that  he  was 
no  platform  man  or  public  speaker.  He  was  a  chamber-counsel  for  the 
Church,  a  wise  adviser  in  her  difficulties,  a  compiler  of  important  docu- 


JOHN  HAMILTON. 

ments,  a  writer  of  pamphlets  for  statesmen  and  public  men,  a  negotiator 
in  delicate  transactions,  the  trusted  and  valued  friend  of  the  more 
prominent  leaders,  particularly  Dr  Candlish,  with  whom  Mr  Hamilton 
had  extraordinary  influence,  and  in  whose  congregation,  after  the  Dis- 
ruption, he  took  ofiice  as  an  elder.  During  the  conflict  (1840-41),  he 
wrote  two  pamphlets  that  did  yeoman's  service  in  the  cause  of  the 
Church  ;  the  one  entitled,  "  The  Present  Position  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland  Explained  and  Vindicated,"  the  other,  "A  Remonstrance, 
especially  addressed  to  the  Members  of  the  Legislature  and  others,  in 
relation  to  the  Scottish  Church  question,  embodying  an  answer  to  an 
article  on  the  same  subject  in  the  Quarterly  Rcviciv'.'  Mr  Hamilton 
filled  for  some  time  the  laborious  and  irksome  post  of  Secretary  of  the 
Non-Intrusion  Committee ;  and  when  the  Disruption  hove  in  sight,  and 
for  a  considerable  time  thereafter,  he  was  Convener  of  the  Building 
Committee.  He  rendered  another  important  service,  as  editor,  for  a 
considerable  time,  ot  the  Scottish  Guardian  newspaper. 

The  chief  feature  that  distinguished  Mr  Hamilton  among  the  galaxy 
of  great  men  at  that  remarkable  time,  was  his  singular  fairness  and  calm- 
ness in  controversy,  joined  to  profound  earnestness,  and  deepest  concern 
for  the  interests  involved.  These  were  qualities  remarkably  fitted  to  gain 
the  esteem  of  opponents,  at  a  time  when  those  whose  post  was  often  on 
platforms  and  in  Church  Courts  were  naturally  more  hot  and  excited. 
How  remarkably  Mr  Hamilton  impressed  public  men  with  his  fairness 
and  honesty,  may  be  gathered  from  the  opinion  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington 
and  the  Earl  of  Aberdeen.  The  latter  nobleman  wrote  to  Mr  Thomson 
of  Banchory  (Jan.  27.  1840):  "Mr  Hamilton  will  perhaps  like  to  be 
informed  that  I  have  placed  his  pamphlet  in  the  hands  of  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  who,  at  my  request,  has  read  it,  and  entertains  a  very  favour- 
able opinion  of  the  work.  The  Duke  takes  a  warm  interest  in  the  affairs 
of  our  Church,  and  deeply  laments  the  unhappy  differences  which  exist." 
A  few  months  afterwards,  Lord  Aberdeen  wrote  of  Mr  Hamilton,  with 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

whom  he  had  now  become  acquainted,  contrasting  him  with  some  other 
champions  of  the  Church :  "  Your  friend  Hamilton  is  a  man  of  another 
stamp  altogether.  I  had  the  greatest  pleasure  in  all  my  intercourse  with 
him,  and  found  him  always  the  same,  honest  and  straightfonvard,  and 
invariably  adhering  to  his  words.  I  did  not  agree  with  him,  far  from  it, 
but  that  was  quite  a  different  matter ;  he  is  as  well  entitled  to  his  opinion 
as  I  am  to  mine,  but  I  always  had  pleasure  in  discussing  with  him,"  &c. 
A  similar  impression  of  Mr  Hamilton's  character  was  conveyed  by  an 
eminent  member  of  the  Parliament  House,  shortly  after  the  publication 
of  his  second  pamphlet.  It  was  understood  that  this  gentleman  was  the 
author  of  the  article  in  the  Quarterly  to  which  the  pamphlet  was  a  reply. 
"  I  was  much  gratified  to-day,"  wrote  Mr  Hamilton  to  Mr  Thomson  (2d 
March  1841),  "by  G.  M.  [George  Moir]  coming  up  to  me  in  the  House 
with  great  frankness,  and  saying  he  had  read  me,  and  had  nothing  to 
complain  of,  as  he  might  say  what  Chalmers  had  said  in  relation  to  the 
Dean,  that '  it  was  a  great  happiness  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  gentleman.'  " 
The  celebrated  pamphlet  of  the  Dean  of  Faculty,  however,  Mr  Hamilton 
could  not  regard  with  respect.  "  It  appears  to  me,"  he  said,  "  to  distort 
the  whole  subject  of  controversy  to  an  extent  that  I  should  have  thought 
absolutely  impossible.  Unquestionably  it  is  written,  throughout,  in  the 
spirit  or  tone  of  a  counsel  or  party  in  a  private  cause,  which  is  far  from 
the  temper  of  mind  with  which  it  befits  either  the  duty  or  the  interest  of 
the  country  to  regard  the  proceedings  of  its  Established  Church." 

It  is  not  easy  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  calm,  fair,  judicial  tone 
of  a  man  like  Mr  Hamilton,  in  the  face  of  the  unexampled  torrent 
of  denunciation  which  the  attitude  of  the  Church  drew  down  on 
it.  There  was  such  a  gentle,  honest  look  about  him,  that  the  usual 
epithets,  "  firebrand  and  fanatic,"  would  not  fit  him  in  any  degree.  The 
world  has  long  since  learned  to  regard  the  lofty  spirit  of  self-sacrifice 
as  the  outstanding  feature  of  the  Free  Church  movement,  and  before  the 
splendour  of  that  spirit  the   infirmities   of  controversy,   which   marked 


JOHN  HAMILTON. 

some  of  her  leading  men,  have  passed  out  of  view.  But  in  those  days 
this  was  reversed.  The  world  would  not  believe  in  the  sincerity  of  the 
Church,  and  its  refusal  to  obey  the  law  exasperated  the  friends  of  law 
and  order  to  the  verge  of  madness.  The  whole  tone  and  character 
of  Mr  Hamilton,  and,  indeed,  of  not  a  few  other  leading  men,  was  a 
demonstration  of  the  world's  injustice.  As  shrewd  as  any  man,  as  true 
a  Conservative,  as  good  a  friend  of  the  law,  as  sincere  a  lover  of  the 
constitution,  he  not  only  sailed  with  the  wild  men,  but  helped  to  steer 
the  ship.  On  some  points  of  policy,  it  is  true,  he  did  not  agree  with 
some  of  his  friends.  When  the  veto  was  declared  illegal,  he  would  have 
made  some  concession,  and  in  some  other  matters  he  would  have  been 
more  cautious,  but  he  was  too  loyal  to  the  great  principles  involved  in 
the  controversy  to  allow  such  matters  to  cool  his  earnestness  in  the 
cause. 

Mr  Hamilton  died  in  the  prime  of  life.  His  last  illness  was  sudden 
and  short.  In  the  end  of  August  1S47,  he  was  seized  with  diarrhoea, 
which  ended  fatally  on  2d  September.  Dr  Candlish  hastened  to  the 
bedside  of  his  friend,  and  found  him  in  the  last  extremity  of  weakness. 
"  He  could  scarcely  speak  articulately,"  says  Dr  Candlish,  in  an  interest- 
ing notice  of  him,  "  but  his  breathings  were  all  ejaculatory  thanksgivings 
and  prayers.  We  asked  him  if  he  had  anything  to  say  regarding  the 
affairs  of  the  Church,  in  which  together  we  had  taken  so  deep  an  interest, 
and  shared  so  many  toils.  No,  he  briefly  answered ;  you  know  my 
views  on  all  points  sufficiently  already.  Nothing  then  passed  but  what 
pertained  to  the  common  salvation.  His  smile  was  radiant  as  in  broken 
sentences  he  poured  out  his  soul,  adoring  Christ's  love,  and  wondering 
that  it  should  have  reached  such  a  sinner  as  himself.  We  asked  if  he 
would  wish  us  to  join  in  prayer,  and  immediately,  with  a  beaming 
countenance,  he  himself  offered  up  a  short  collected  supplication.  The 
scene  was  too  affecting.  He  had  on  the  previous  day  commissioned  one 
of  his  medical  attendants,  who  was  also  a  personal  friend,  to  convey  a 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

message  to  the  writer,  and  to  another  of  the  brethren,  to  the  effect,  that 
on  his  deathbed  he  derived  great  comfort  from  the  thought  of  the 
principles  he  had  maintained,  and  the  cause  in  which  he  had  contended. 
But  while  thus  bearing  testimony,  along  with  so  many  others,  to  the 
preciousness  of  these  principles  and  of  that  cause,  as  seen  in  the  light  of 
the  eternal  world  breaking  in  upon  the  departing  soul — while  deriving 
consolation  from  the  remembrance  of  his  having  been  enabled  to  be 
faithful  to  the  crown  rights  of  the  Redeemer,  in  whose  presence  he  was 
so  soon  to  appear — he  was  far  from  resting  his  confidence  on  any  other 
ground  than  the  mediatorial  work  of  the  Great  High  Priest.  It  was  of 
Jesus,  as  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  he  spoke ;  it  was  atoning  blood  that 
gave  him  all  his  hopes ;  and  redeeming  love  formed  the  burden  of  his 
last  feeble  utterance  of  praise.  We  saw  him  in  the  same  frame  on  the 
night  before  he  died.     Early  on  the  22d  he  fell  asleep  in  Jesus." 

The  names  of  champions  whose  eloquence  resounded  through  the 
country  and  stirred  the  soul  of  the  multitude,  are  naturally  remembered 
longest,  and  by  the  greatest  number.  But  there  are  still  some  who  are 
moved  with  a  tender  and  respectful  affection,  if  perchance,  sauntering 
through  St  Cuthbert's  churchyard,  their  eye  lights  on  the  stone  that  bears 
the  name  of  JOHN  HAMILTON.  It  recalls  to  them  a  man  eminently 
good  and  loveable,  and  reminds  them  how  much  the  Free  Church  owes 
to  such  men,  who,  in  the  noblest  spirit,  and  with  much  self-sacrifice, 
built  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  in  troublous  times. 

W.  G.  B. 


-<^^^H;awilliam  m.  hetheringtor  dd^'  " 


^ 


u^ 


I  HE  subject  of  our  Memoir,  William  Maxwell  Hether- 
ington,  was  born  on  the  4th  of  June  1803,  in  the 
parish  of  Troqueer,  in  the  Stewartry  of  Kirkcudbright. 
His  parents  were  of  humble  station,  but  seem  to  have 
been  endowed  with  those  sterling  qualities  of 
character,  which  have  so  often  made  the  homes  of 
the  Scottish  peasantry  the  nurseries  of  greatness. 

He  received  his  primary  education  in  the  parish  school  of  Troqueer, 
which  he  left  however  without  introduction  to  the  study  of  the  Classical 
Languages.  In  1822,  after  a  few  months'  private  study  of  Latin  and 
Greek,  he  matriculated  in  the  Universit)'  of  Edinburgh,  at  the  age  of 
nineteen,  and  in  spite  of  disadvantages  in  preliminary  training,  achieved 
marked  success  as  a  student  all  along  the  lines  of  study ;  taking  the 
highest  place  in  Greek,  and  the  second  in  the  class  of  Moral  Philosophy. 
His  relations  to  Professor  Wilson  developed  rapidly  into  intimate 
friendship ;  and  it  was  under  his  encouragement,  that  he  ventured  to 
publish  in  1829,  before  completing  his  Theological  Curriculum,  a  small 
volume  of  poems,  under  the  title  of  "  Dramatic  Sketches." 

On  the  completion  of  his  course  of  study,  Mr  Hcthcrington  received 
an  appointment  as  tutor,  first  in  the  family  of  a  Scottish  nobleman,  and 
then  to  the  son  of  an  Irish  peer  resident  in  London.  During  this  period 
of  comparative  leisure  which  extended  over  several  years,  he  devoted 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

himself  to  the  study  of  general  history;  and  in  the  course  of  his  research 
became  impressed  with  the  idea  that  there  was  room  for  a  popular 
exposition  of  the  course  of  providential  discipline  by  which  the  world 
was  prepared  for  the  advent  of  the  Son  of  God.  In  prosecution  of 
this  idea,  he  published  in  1S34  an  elaborate  treatise,  felicitously  titled 
"The  Fulness  of  Time,"  in  which  he  traced  the  progress  of  the 
mental  and  moral  development  of  the  race  during  the  Patriarchal 
Age,  and  under  the  dynasties  of  Egj'pt,  Babylon,  Persia,  Greece,  and 
Rome.  The  work  is  one  of  profound  erudition,  and  is  confessedly 
the  ablest  and  most  original  of  his  writings. 

In  1836,  Mr  Hetherington  accepted  a  presentation  to  the  parish  of 
Torphichen,  in  the  Presbytery  of  Linlithgow,  where  he  speedily  won  for 
himself  a  position  of  influence,  by  the  earnest  evangelism  of  his  ministry, 
and  the  ardour  with  which  he  entered  into  the  discussion  of  the  public 
questions  of  the  day. 

Shortly  after  his  ordination  he  married  a  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Dr 
Meek,  of  Hamilton,  formerly  of  Torphichen,  who  by  a  singular  arrange- 
ment of  Providence,  returned  as  his  wife,  to  the  manse  in  which  she 
had  been  born,  and  where  she  had  spent  the  years  of  girlhood. 

During  these  opening  years  of  his  ministry,  Mr  Hetherington, 
though  a  young  man,  gained  the  confidence  of  the  more  public  leaders 
of  the  Evangelical  party ;  he  was  looked  to  as  a  representative  in  his 
district  of  the  country ;  and  was  in  frequent  and  intimate  communication 
with  them.  Perhaps  the  most  effective  of  his  platform  appearances  on 
the  Church  question  was  made  at  this  time,  in  Linlithgow,  when,  in 
response  to  a  sudden  call  to  take  the  place  of  a  deputation  from 
Edinburgh  who  had  failed  to  appear,  he  held  the  large  audience  spell- 
bound, while  in  an  extempore  address  of  three  hours,  he  expounded 
the  principles  at  stake. 

His  ministry  at  Torphichen  was  a  period  of  great  litcrarj'  activity ; 
his   "Minister's    Family,"   the   article   "Rome"  for  the  "Encyclopaedia 


U:  M.  HETHERINGTON,  D.D. 

Britannica,"  and   numerous  contributions  to  the  Presbyterian  Reviezv, 
and  other  Magazines,  being  amongst  his  Hghter  efforts. 

As  the  Ecclesiastical  Controversy  advanced,  Mr  Hethcrington 
became  alive  to  the  want  of  a  Treatise,  which  would  present,  in  a 
popular  form,  the  historical  bearings  of  the  questions  in  debate  ;  a  want 
which  he  supplied  by  his  "History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland," 
published  in  1841.  The  rapidity  with  which  new  editions  were 
called  for,  testified  at  once  to  the  seasonableness  of  the  Work,  and  to 
the  important  part  it  played  in  ripening  the  minds  of  the  people  for 
the  brilliant  issue  of  1843.  In  the  Autumn  of  that  year  the  history  was 
brought  down  to  the  Disruption  ;  and  by  the  year  1848  the  work  had 
reached  the  sixth  edition. 

His  next  important  literaiy  contribution  to  the  solution  of  existing 
ecclesiastical  problems,  was  a  "  History  of  the  Westminster  Assembly," 
published  in  1843.  Written  with  the  avowed  intention  of  "vindicating 
the  principles  and  the  character  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,"  the  work  did 
an  important  service  at  a  time  when  these  were  both  "  misrepresented 
and  condemned."  It  is  characterised  by  the  author's  wonted  intensity 
of  thought  and  feeling,  and  stands  alone  as  a  popular  History  of 
the  Genesis  of  the  Standards  of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  In  a  recent 
edition,  published  in  1878,  under  the  editorship  of  the  Rev.  Dr  William- 
son, Ascog,  Bute,  the  work  has  been  enhanced  in  value,  by  the  addition 
of  a  considerable  amount  of  new  matter,  and  by  various  important 
corrections  which  have  been  supplied  by  the  publication  of  a  portion  of 
the  Original  Minutes  of  the  Assembly  proceedings,  a  document,  which 
until  after  the  death  of  the  historian  was  supposed  to  have  been  "  irre- 
coverably lost." 

In  1840,  Mr  Hethcrington  was  one  of  the  General  Assembly's  deputies 
to  the  refractory  Presbytery  of  Strathbogie,  and  in  the  discharge  of  his  work 
received  the  usual  attention  of  a  Civil  Interdict,  which  he  defied  on  tlie 
strength  of  his  higher  commission  as  a  servant  of  Christ  and  of  His  Church. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Mr  Hctheringtoii  was  present  at  all  the  diets  of  the  memorable 
Convocation  in  1842,  in  which  the  Church's  line  of  action  was  finally- 
determined  ;  and  has  left  behind  him  an  interesting  memorandum  of 
each  day's  proceedings,  noted  on  the  spot. 

There  is  no  need  that  we  should  here  describe  the  familiar  and 
stirring  events  of  the  i8th  of  Maj-  1843  ;  but  a  few  lines  from  a  letter  of 
that  date  to  his  "disinherited  wife"  may  be  of  more  than  personal 
interest. 

"  The  deed  is  done  ! !  We  are  now  sitting  in  the  hall  of  our  new 
Assembly  with  feelings  of  the  deepest  solemnity,  yet  holy  joy,  and  unutter- 
able peace.  .  .  .  All  was  done  in  calm  and  solemn  sacredness  of  manner 
and  spirit.  The  protest  was  read  without  interruption  ;  then  Dr  Welsh 
stepped  down  from  the  chair  and  walked  out,  followed  closely  by 
Drs  Chalmers,  Gordon,  Makellar,  Macfarlane,  &c.  Then  we  all  rose  and 
left  the  house  as  quietly  as  we  could.  .  .  .  The  hall  (Tanfield)  is  quite 
full,  and  it  will  contain  at  least  3000  people.  About  460  ministers  have 
signed  the  protest  .  .  .  were  there  no  more,  etiough.  Glory  to  God  alone ! 
.  .  .  All  has  gone  on  most  nobly,  and  every  one  seems  light  and  happy, 
and  thankful  to  God  for  the  great  things  which  He  has  done  for  us." 

On  the  second  Monday  of  its  session,  the  Assembly  of  1843,  "taking 
into  consideration  all  the  goodness  which  the  Church  had  received  at  the 
Lord's  hands,"  appointed  Thursday  the  15th  of  June  as  a  day  of  thanks- 
giving, to  be  observed  in  all  the  congregations  of  the  Church.  The  pas- 
toral address  issued  on  the  occasion  was  prepared  by  Mr  Hetherington. 

On  the  28th  of  May  Mr  Hetherington  preached  for  the  last  time  in 
the  Parish  Church  of  Torphichen,  closing  the  service  with  a  solemn  pro- 
test against  the  action  of  the  Legislature,  by  which  "  wrong  had  been 
done  to  the  constitution  of  the  kingdom,  and  to  the  Church  of  God."  It 
is  an  interesting  evidence  of  the  deliberate  certainty  with  which  he  had 
anticipated  the  issue  of  the  controversy,  that  the  site  for  the  new  church 
at  Torphichen  was  secured,  and  some  materials  collected,  before  he  set 


11'.  .]/.  IIF.TllERINGTOX,  D.D. 

out  for  the  meeting  of  the  Assembly  in  1843.  The  removal  of  earth  for 
the  foundations  was  begun  on  the  12th  of  June,  and  on  the  6th  of  August, 
within  eight  weeks  of  its  commencement,  the  church  was  opened  for 
public  worship.  On  the  24th  day  of  the  same  month  Mr  Hetheringtoii 
entered  the  new  manse  ;  and,  on  the  2nd  of  October,  a  new  building  was 
opened  as  a  school-house.  Thus  it  was  given  to  the  congregation  of 
Torphichen  to  complete  successively  the  first  church,  manse,  and  school- 
house  in  connection  with  the  F"ree  Church  of  Scotland. 

In  addition  to  the  enormous  labour  of  organising  the  Free  Church, 
there  fell  upon  the  leaders  of  the  Disruption  the  work  of  expounding  its 
principles  far  and  wide,  at  the  earnest  solicitation  of  friends  interested  in 
its  history.  Mr  Hctherington  was  sent  in  November  of  1843,  along  with 
Dr  Candlish.  Rev.  Andrew  Gray  of  Perth,  D.  M.  Makgill  Crichton,  Esq., 
and  others,  to  visit  certain  of  the  leading  towns  in  Yorkshire.  A  short 
extract  from  a  letter,  dated  Bradford,  24th  November  1843,  will  give  an 
idea  of  the  straining  character  of  these  missions.  "For  three  days  I  have 
been  driven  from  place  to  place,  travelling  every  day,  I  know  not  how 
many  miles,  scarcely  reaching  the  place  of  meeting  till  the  hour  was  come, 
and  then  commencing  to  speak  immediately  ;  again  resuming  conversa- 
tion after  returning  from  the  meeting,  and  continuing  till  two  or  three 
o'clock  in  the  morning ;  then  getting  up  at  seven  in  order  to  resume 
travelling  on  next  morning.  Such  has  been  my  course  since  Monday,  at 
Sheffield,  and  must  be  for  another  week,  till  I  leave  Leeds.  This  fore- 
noon I  addressed  the  meeting  at  Bradford,  and  have  to  speak  again  this 
evening.  To-morrow  I  obtain  a  little  respite  ;  and,  on  Sabbath,  have  to 
preach  three  times.  On  Monday  I  have  to  be  at  Leeds ;  on  Tuesday, 
Dr  Candlish  and  I  return  to  Sheffield,  and  thence  again  to  Leeds.  .  .  ." 

Early  in  1844,  Mr  Hetherington  accepted  a  call  from  the  congrega- 
tion of  St  Andrews.  He  was  a  fitting  representative  of  the  evangelical 
cause  in  a  university  city,  which  was  a  hereditary  stronghold  of  Eras- 
tianism,  and   the  very  "  Siberia  of  Moderatism."     By  appointment  of 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


General  Assembly  he  received  a  certain  Professorial  charge  of  the 
students  attending  the  University  of  St  Andrews  who  adhered  to  the 
Free  Church.  One  of  them,  who  remembers  his  friendship  with  a 
grateful  enthusiasm,  thus  writes  :— "  It  was  of  great  value  to  us  in  that 
testing  time  and  place  to  be  in  habitual  contact  with  a  man  of  nerve 
and  vigour  like  Dr  Hetherington.  There  was  about  him  a  wholesome 
atmosphere  of  sharply  defined  opinion,  which  was  a  shield  to  our 
young  convictions.  .  .  .  Altogether,  with  his  literary  wealth,  his  eccle- 
siastical lore,  his  fertility  and  vigour  of  thought,  his  robust  convictions, 
and  his  manly  courage  in  maintaining  them,  he  made  his  years  in 
St  Andrews  a  time  of  forcible  and  effective  service." 

As  a  pastor  and  preacher  he  was  held  in  the  highest  esteem  by  his 
congregation,  and,  although  circumstances  arose  which  somewhat  marred 
the  peacefulness  of  his  work  at  the  close  of  his  ministry  in  St  Andrews, 
the  attachment  of  the  congregation  was  evinced  by  a  memorial,  couched 
in  the  most  affectionate  terms,  and  signed  by  427  members  and  adherents, 
urging  him  to  refuse  the  call  which  an  Edinburgh  congregation  had 
addressed  to  him. 

Immediately  on  his  settlement  in  St  Andrews,  Mr  Hetherington 
received  the  Degree  of  LL.D.  from  the  College  of  New  Brunswick,  U.S. ; 
and,  eleven  years  later,  in  1855,  the  Degree  of  D.D.  was  conferred  on  him 
by  the  Jefferson  College,  Pennsylvania.  At  St  Andrews,  he  started 
and  for  four  years  edited  the  Free  C/iurck  Magazi)ie. 

In  1848  Dr  Hetherington  was  translated  to  Edinburgh,  to  the 
pastoral  charge  of  the  congregation  of  St  Paul's.  His  Edinburgh 
ministry  was  an  influential  and,  in  many  respects,  a  remarkable  one. 
The  notes  of  daily  work  which  he  has  left  indicate  a  rare  amount  of 
pastoral  activity.  In  the  pulpit  he  was  always  fresh,  always  vigorous, 
and  not  unfrequently  rose  to  a  height  of  real  eloquence,  when  his  theme 
kindled  the  passionate  fire  that  was  so  characteristic  of  him.  His  widest 
fame  as  a  preacher  was  achieved  in  connection  with  his  monthly  Sabbath 
306 


li:  J/.  IIETHERINGTON,  D-D. 

evening  lectures  on  the  characters  and  scenes  of  Old  Testament  histoiy. 
These  lectures  were  enriched  by  a  free  use  of  his  extensive  stores  of 
historical  and  scientific  information;  and  in  them  Old  Testament 
incident  was  often  used  as  a  foil  to  set  off  some  moral  principle  bearing 
a  contemporaiy  national  or  social  life.  They  attracted  hearers  from 
all  parts  of  the  citj-,  and  throughout  the  whole  course  the  large 
church  was  crowded  month  after  month,— pews,  passages,  and  pulpit 
stairs  being  thronged  with  eager  listeners. 

At  this  period  he  was  a  frequent  lecturer  on  subjects  of  general 
interest— social,  literarj',  and  historical;  in  1853,  delivered  in  Exeter  Hall, 
London,  a  brilliant  lecture  on  "Coleridge  and  his  Followers  ;"  and  dur- 
ing his  Edinburgh  ministry  wrote  his  well-known  "  Memoir  of  Mrs 
Coutts." 

After  a  laborious  ministry  of  nine  years  in  Edinburgh,  he  received  a 
unanimous  appointment  by  the  General  Assembly  of  1857  to  the  chair  of 
Apologetics  and  Systematic  Theology  in  the  Free  Church  College  of 
Glasgow.  A  posthumous  volume  entitled  "The  Apologetics  of  the 
Christian  Faith,"  which  contains  the  lectures  prepared  for  his  students 
during  his  first  session,  and  almost  in  the  form  in  which  they  were 
originally  delivered,  testifies  to  the  enthusiasm  and  thoroughness  with 
which  he  entere'd  on  the  duties  of  the  professorship. 

In  connection  with  this  period  of  Dr  Hetherington's  life,  it  is  due  to 
him  to  refer  to  his  unwearied  labours  in  fostering  the  young  charge  of 
Kelvinside,  of  whose  provisional  scnsion  he  was  the  first  moderator,  and 
over  whose  beginnings  he  watched  with  all  a  pastor's  affectionate  care. 

The  heavy  strain  of  the  first  two  years  of  his  professorship  fatally 
undermined  his  constitution,  and  prepared  the  way  for  a  stroke  of 
paralysis  in  1862,  by  which  he  was  entirely  laid  aside  from  public  duty. 
During  three  years  he  bore  his  affliction  with  the  most  perfect  resigna- 
tion. Though  the  vigour  of  his  mental  powers  was  much  impaired,  and 
his  remarkable  memory  sadly  shattered,  he  manifested  occasionally  some- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


thing  of  his  old  clearness  of  perception,  and  was  to  the  end  keenly  alive 
to  the  preciousness  of  Divine  truth.  The  end  came  peacefully  on  the 
23rd  of  May  1865.  His  wife,  who  tended  him  with  the  most  affectionate 
devotion  through  his  protracted  illness,  thus  wrote  a  few  months  after 
his  departure : — "  When  I  remember  his  irrepressible  energy  and  restless 
activity  of  both  mind  and  body  in  younger  days,  I  look  back  with  thank- 
fulness and  something  like  wonder  to  the  calm,  cheerful,  submissive, 
patient  sufferer.  Never  a  murmur  escaped  his  lips  ;  and  when,  on  that 
bright  morning,  he  fell  asleep  in  Jesus,  without  a  struggle,  without  a 
pained  look,  without  even  a  nervous  quiver,  I  truly  felt  how  graciously 
and  tenderly  the  Lord,  in  His  mercy  and  loving-kindness,  had  dealt 
with  me  and  mine  ;  and  now  all  my  reminiscences  of  him  are  pure,  un- 
mingled  love — love  that  draws  me  onward  and  upward  to  my  Saviour 
and  my  God." 

By  his  own  request,  his  remains  were  interred  in  the  Grange  Cemeter}-, 
Edinburgh,  "  as  near  as  possible  to  Cunningham."  The  ses.sion  of  the 
General  Assembly  afforded  to  many  of  his  old  friends  and  admirers  the 
melancholy  satisfaction  of  following  his  body  to  the  grave.  The  graceful 
monument  that  marks  his  resting-place  was  erected  to  his  memory  by 
the  congregation  of  St  Paul's,  who  never  ceased  to  cherish  the  most 
affectionate  regard  for  their  former  pastor. 

W.  M.  F. 


Eokrt  C^nrbon,  D.B. 


)MONG  the  names  which  apjicar  in  tlic  niart\T  roll  of 
tlie  Disruption  period,  tlicrc  is  nut  one  wliich  was 
rcj^ardcd  in  its  day  with  a  deeper  re\-erence  than 
that  of  Dr  Gordon.  He  did  not  mingle  mucli  in 
the  strife.  He  tool<  little  part  in  the  debates  which 
were  constantly  occurring  in  popular  assemblies  and 
church  courts.  So  far  as  we  know,  he  wrote  no  controversial  pamphlets. 
And  it  was  never  to  him  that  his  party  looked  when  they  were  battling 
with  the  politicians.  But  there  was  no  man  who  moved  forward  ^\•ith  a 
firmer  tread — no  man  who  was  more  resolute  in  asserting  the  Church's 
independence,  or  more  ready  to  brave  all  consequences  in  order  to 
maintain  it  ;  and  the  very  quietness,  and  calmness,  and  dignity,  which 
characterised  his  usual  demeanour,  gave  an  almost  startling  imprcssivc- 
ness  to  his  words  and  actions  when  he  emerged,  as  he  did  once  and 
again,  from  the  crowd,  and  took  up  an  advanced  position  as  one  of  the 
undoubted  leaders  in  the  great  movement  of  his  time. 

His  outward  personal  hi-story  was  not  an  eventful  one.  He  was  born 
at  Glencairn,  in  Dumfriesshire.  After  receiving  license  to  preach  the 
gospel,  he  became  Mathematical  Assistant  to  the  Rector  of  the  Perth 
Academy, — an  office  in  which  he  was  succeeded  by  the  Rev.  Dr  Forbes 
of  Glasgow.  There  his  gifts  came  to  be  known  to  Lord  Gra>',  who  pre- 
sented him  to  the  parish  of  Kinfauns,  where  he  continued  to  labour  from 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


iSi6  to  1820,  when  he  was  translated  to  Edinburgh.  In  that  city  lie 
remained  till  his  death  in  1853,  but  during  that  long  period  his  services 
were  not  confined  to  one  congregation.  His  first  charge  was  that  of 
Hope  Park  Chapel ;  his  next  was  the  New  North,  in  Brighton  Street ; 
his  third  was  the  High  Church  Parish ;  and  his  last  the  Free  High 
Church,  at  the  head  of  the  Mound.  In  all  he  maintained,  from  first  to 
last,  the  character  of  an  able  and  earnest  evangelical  preacher.  His  dis- 
courses were  prepared  with  extraordinary  thoroughness  and  care.  They 
were  delivered  in  a  manner  which  was  particularly  impressive.  And 
there  is  the  best  reason  for  believing  that  his  ministry  was  eminently 
successful,  in  the  highest  sense  of  that  expression.  A  volume  of  his 
sermons  was  published  in  1825,  and  since  his  death  two  other  volumes, 
containing  additional  examples  of  his  method  of  expounding  Scripture, 
especially  the  prophecies  relating  to  the  Messiah,  have  been  given  to  the 
world.  We  have  it  also  on  good  authority  that  he  contributed  several 
articles  on  mathematical  subjects  to  the  Edinburgh  Cyclopcedia,  a  publi- 
cation which  was  edited  by  Sir  David  Brewster.  But  his  highest  memo- 
rial is  the  spiritual  fruit  which  followed  from  his  pastoral  labours,  and  the 
emphatic  testimony  which,  with  all  the  weight  of  his  character,  he  gave  to 
the  principles  which  constitute  the  heritage  of  the  Church  of  Scotland. 

In  the  latter  connection,  there  are  several  outstanding  incidents  in  the 
life  of  Dr  Gordon  which  are  peculiarly  worthy  of  being  referred  to  in 
such  a  record  as  the  present. 

One  of  these  was  his  appearance  at  the  bar  of  the  Court  of  Session, 
along  with  the  Presbytery  of  Dunkeld.  That  Presbytery  had  been 
placed  in  a  somewhat  singular  position.  Two  men — Mr  Clark  and  Mr 
Kessen — had  been  nominated  to  the  pastorate  of  Lethendy,  a  parish 
within  their  bounds.  The  former  was  first  in  the  field,  but  he  was 
vetoed,  and,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  patron,  was  set  aside.  Mr 
Kessen  was  then  presented,  and  he  having  received  in  addition  a  call 
from  the  people,  the  usual  steps  ^\•crc  taken  with  a  view  to  his  settlement. 


ROnERT  GORDON,  D.D. 
Mr  Clark,  however,  was  not  prepared  to  be  thus  dropped.  He  asked  the 
Court  of  Session  to  interfere  on  his  behalf,  and  the  Court  did  so,  issuing 
an  interdict  forbidding  the  Presbytery  to  proceed  to  Mr  Kessen's 
ordination.  Lord  Cockburn,  commenting  not  long  afterwards  on  this 
act.  says  in  his  Journal :— "  This  is  the  second  deep  cut  into  the  nervous 
system  of  the  Church,  for  if  we  can  order  a  Presbytery  not  to  induct,  I 
don't  see  that  we  have  not  the  power  to  bid  it  induci.  And  after  this, 
where  is  the  peculiar  poiccr  of  the  Church  ?"  So  reasoned  the  Church 
itself.  The  Presbytery  was  forced  to  settle  for  itself  the  question,  of 
whether  in  a  matter  so  purely  spiritual  as  the  ordination  of  a  minister,  it 
was  bound  to  obey  the  civil  court  or  its  own  spiritual  superior.  The 
General  Assembly's  command  was  explicit:— "You  shall  proceed  to  Mr 
Kessen's  induction  to  the  pastorate  of  the  people  of  Lethendy,  leaving 
the  law  to  determine,  as  it  has  a  right  to  do,  to  whom  the  benefice  shall 
belong."  The  Court  of  Session  was  equally  articulate :—"  This  is  a 
matter  which  concerns  us,  and  you  must  not  ordain  Mr  Ke.ssen  until  we 
give  you  leave  to  do  so."  In  just  such  a  dilemma  was  once  the  famous 
Presbytery  of  Strathbogie.  The  civil  power  said  one  thing,  the  Church 
said  another,  and  they  were  in  a  strait  between  the  two.  But  they  came 
to  a  very  different  conclusion  from  that  which  was  reached  by  the  Pres- 
bytery of  Dunkeld.  At  Marnoch,  the  will  of  the  Court  of  Session  was 
carried  out,  and  the  ministers  got  their  reward  by  being  upheld  by  the 
law  in  the  performance  of  all  their  spiritual  functions,  even  after  their 
deposition.  At  Lethendy  the  order  of  the  Church  was  obeyed,  and  the 
offenders  were  threatened  in  consequence  with  fine  and  imprisonment. 
It  is  no  secret,  now,  that  in  the  breasts  of  some  of  the  judges,  who  had 
been,  as  they  thought,  defied,  there  raged  such  a  feeling  of  anger  that, 
if  it  had  not  been  for  the  influence  of  some  of  their  more  temperate 
brethren,  measures  of  a  very  extreme  character  would  certainly  have  been 
taken.  As  it  was,  the  men  who  had  dared  to  ordain  a  minister  without 
the  permission  of  the  Parliament  House,  were  summoned  to  answer  for 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

their  conduct  at  the  bar  of  the  Court  of  Session.  And  in  the  remarkable 
historical  picture  which,  in  consequence  of  this  summons,  came  to  be 
framed  in  Edinburgh  on  the  14th  of  June  1839,  one  of  the  figures  which 
appears  most  prominently  in  the  foreground  was  that  of  Dr  Gordon. 

He  was  not,  of  course,  a  member  of  the  Presbytery  of  Dunkeld  ;  but 
he  believed  that  they  were  being  called  to  suffer  in  a  public  cause,  and 
for  the  maintenance  of  a  great  principle — the  freedom  and  independence 
of  the  Church — and  he  resolved  to  place  himself  by  their  side,  to  share 
their  shame  and  their  glory,  and  to  give  to  them  what  comfort  was  to  be 
derived  from  his  openly  identifying  himself  with  their  interests. 

It  must  have  been  a  striking  scene  : — 

"  In  front,  elevated  on  their  bench,  clothed  in  their  robes  of  human  authority,  and 
invested  with  the  stern  insignia  of  secular  power,  sat  the  judges,  twelve  in  number. 
Opposite  stood  another  court — a  court  of  Christ — called  to  their  bar  for  e.Kecuting  the 
spiritual  functions  conferred  by  the  Lord  Jesus  on  His  Church.  ...  A  very  few  of 
the  most  respected  ministers  of  Edinburgh  and  the  neighbourhood — sufficient  to 
countenance  their  brethren,  but  not  to  have  the  slightest  appearance  of  a  bravado- 
attended  them  to  the  bar.  First  one,  then  another,  and  then  a  third,  followed  them. 
A  frown  darkened  the  brow  of  the  court ;  but  the  crowd  closing,  as  if  all  had  come  in, 
nothing  was  said.  After  a  moment's  pause  the  crowd  opened  again,  and  yet  another 
entered.  It  was  Dr  Gordon.  No  sooner  was  his  noble  and  venerable  head  seen 
emerging  from  the  crowd,  at  the  end  of  the  bar,  than  the  smothered  feeling  broke 
forth,  and  a  proposal  burst  from  the  bench  to  turn  out  these  clergymen  from  the  bar ; 
but  an  indignant  and  solemn  remonstrance  from  Lord  Moncreiff  checked  the  attempt." 

What  followed  belongs  to  the  ecclesiastical  history  of  the  period.  It 
is  enough,  in  the  present  sketch,  to  connect  Dr  Gordon,  as  a  leader,  with 
one  of  the  most  significant  battles  of  the  "  ten  years'  conflict." 

Two  years  later,  in  1841,  Dr  Gordon  received  the  well  merited  dis- 
tinction of  being  called  to  the  Moderatorship  of  the  General  Assembly; 
and  in  that  capacity  he  was  required  to  perform  a  duty  which  could  not 
but  have  been  painful,  but  which  he  discharged,  there  can  be  no  doubt, 
with  the  entire  approbation  of  his  own  conscience — we  refer  to  the 
pronouncing  of  the  sentence  of  deposition  on  the  seven  Strathbogie 
ministers.     Occupying  the  chair  of  the  Assembly,  as  he  did,  it  did  not 


ROBERT  GORDON,  D.D. 
fall  to  him  cither  to  take  part  in  the  discussion  which  preceded  the 
judgment,  or  to  vote  upon  the  two  motions  which  were  made  on  the 
occasion.  It  is  rather  remarkable,  however,  that  in  the  history  we  should 
find  him  so  closely  associated  with  the  two  cases  in  connection  with 
which  the  Church  asserted  its  Spiritual  Independence  most  emphatically, 
and  in  the  face  of  all  hazards.  The  good-will  and  active  support  of  the 
civil  pov.'ers  he  no  doubt  highly  valued,  and  it  could  not  but  pain  him  to 
find  himself  in  such  direct  collision  with  them.  But  whether  these 
powers  were  for  him  or  against  him,  there  was  one  principle  which  he 
could  surrender  in  no  circumstances — that  of  the  Church's  inherent 
freedom — its  right  to  rule  without  secular  interference,  within  its  own 
province. 

And  some  months  later  he  gave  distinct  and  articulate  expression  to 
these  feelings  in  the  famous  meeting  of  office-bearers  which  was  held  in 
St  Cuthbert's  Church,  Edinburgh.  That  meeting  was  attended  by  over 
twelve  hundred  ministers  and  elders,  and  was  the  first  of  a  series  held  in 
different  parts  of  Scotland,  in  which  the  Evangelicals  everywhere  banded 
themselves  to  resist  the  encroachments  of  the  State.  Dr  Gordon  was 
called  on  to  preside  ;  and  those  who  heard  his  opening  speech,  as  chair- 
man, were  never  weary  afterwards  of  telling  of  the  profound  impression 
which  was  made  by  it.  He  uttered  strong  words,  but  these  did  not 
exceed  in  strength  the  feeling  which  manifestly  possessed  him.  Never, 
we  have  heard  it  said,  did  Chalmers  himself  speak  with  more  power,  and 
intensity,  and  effect : — 

"  It  has  come  to  this,"  said  he,  "plainly  and  distinctly,  that  I,  a  minister  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland,  who  have  solemnly  sworn  before  God,  and  as  I  shall  answer  to 
Him  at  the  great  day  of  judgment,  that  I  believe  in  my  heart  and  conscience  that 
Christ  is  the  great  Head  of  the  Church,  and  that  He  has  appointed  office-bearers  in  it, 
distinct  from  the  civil  magistrate,  to  whom  He  has  committed  the  keys  of  His  spiritual 
kingdom  ;  who  are  to  loose  and  to  bind,  to  lay  on  and  to  take  off,  spiritual  ecclesiastical 
censures  ;  it  has  come,  I  say,  to  this,  that  I  am  called  upon  either  to  renounce  these 
principles,  or  to  renounce  the  privileges  which  I  hold  as  an  ordained  minister  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland." 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Having  thus  clearly  stated  the  nature  of  the  issue  which  was  at  stake, 
he,  with  equal  explicitness,  announced  the  practical  conclusion  to  which 
he  had  come — viz.,  that  he  would  maintain  the  great  principle  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland,  luhatever  anight  be  the  consequence. 

It  was  one  of  the  first  unmistakeable  foreshadowings  of  the  coming 
Disruption.  Dr  Gordon  even  then  clearly  foresaw  the  catastrophe 
toward  which  the  civil  courts  were  driving ;  and  his  address  derived  an 
additional  solemnity  from  the  picture  which  he  silently  held  up  before 
his  audience. 

One  other  outstanding  incident  of  these  times  is  well  worthy  of 
mention  in  this  connection.  The  General  Assembly  of  1842  adopted 
The  Claim  of  Rights — a  document  in  which  the  position  of  the  Church 
was  finally  defined,  with  a  view  to  a  last  appeal  being  made  to  the 
legislature.  The  adoption  of  that  great  historical  State  Church  paper 
was  moved  by  Dr  Chalmers,  and  seconded  by  Dr  Gordon.  In  the  short 
speech  which  he  delivered  on  that  occasion,  Dr  Gordon  expressed  a  hope 
that  Parliament  would  act  in  a  wiser  way  than  the  Court  of  Session  had 
done. 

"  But,  Sir,"  he  went  on  to  say,  "  if,  unhappily,  it  should  be  otherwise,  if  they  have 
resolved  on  refusing  to  grant  what  we  think  reasonable  on  our  part  to  ask,  I  feel,  for 
one,  that  we  are  bound,  as  honest  men  and  Christian  ministers,  with  all  calmness  and 
all  respect,  but  with  all  firmness  and  determination,  to  tell  them  that  we  cannot  carr)' 
on  the  affairs  of  Christ's  house  under  the  coercion  of  the  civil  courts  ;  and,  however 
deeply  we  may  deplore  the  loss  of  those  advantages  which  we  derive  from  our  con- 
nection with  the  State,  if  ultimately  the  legislature  determine  that  they  will  not  listen 
to  our  claim,  then  those  advantages  we  must  relinquish,  because  we  could  not  hold 
them  with  a  good  conscience." 

When  the  18th  of  May  1843  arrived,  and  intimation  was  formally 
given  that  no  more  was  to  be  hoped  for  from  the  legislature  than  from 
the  civil  courts,  Dr  Gordon  took,  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  the  now 
unavoidable  step  of  seeking,  with  his  brethren,  spiritual  liberty  outside  of 
the  Establishment ;  and  for  ten  years  more  he  was  honoured  to  do  the 


ROBERT  GORDON,  D.D. 
work   of  an   evangelist   in    Edinburgh,   and    to   aid   cftcctually   in   the 
organisation  of  the  Church  of  Scotland, /;w. 

But  he  was  not  allowed  to  spend  this  last  decade  of  his  life  in  absolute 
quiet.  The  refusal  of  sites,  in  many  places,  for  the  erection  of  Free 
Churches,  had  resulted  in  the  appointment  of  a  Parliamentary  Commis- 
sion to  take  evidence  on  the  subject,  and  Dr  Gordon  was  summoned  to 
London  as  a  witness.  He  appeared  before  the  Commission  on  the  27th 
of  March  1847,  and  some  of  the  things  which  he  said  on  this  occasion  are 
important  enough  to  warrant  our  quoting  them  here  : — 

"  Sir  James  Graham  :  A  very  important  point  in  dispute  between  the  Free 
Church  and  the  Established  Church,  which  you  have  left,  is  the  efficacy  of  the  call  by 
the  hearers  of  the  clergyman  to  be  appointed  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  The  main  question  I  hold  to  be  the  spiritual  independence  of  the 
Church  ;  the  interference  of  the  civil  authority  with  matters  purely  spiritual. 

"  Sir  J.  Graham  :  Is  not  the  call  a  very  important  check,  among  others,  against 
the  abuse  of  patronage  in  your  opinion  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  No  doubt,  but  the  question  which  led  to  the  Disruption, 

»VAS  THE  question  OF  THE  INDEPENDENCE  OF  THE  CHURCH.   .   .   . 

"  Mr  Fox  Maule  :  The  question  of  Patronage  was  not  that  upon  which  the  Free 
Church  separated  from  the  Establishment  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  Certainly  not. 

"  Mr  F.  Maule  :  It  was  a  question  entirely  as  to  the  spiritual  jurisdiction  of  the 
Church  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  Yes.  ... 

"Mr  W.  Patten:  At  what  period  do  you  think  the  Established  Church  relin- 
quished the  truth  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  At  the  time  of  the  Disruption. 

"  Mr  W.  Patten  :  Were  any  steps  taken  at  the  time  of  the  Disruption,  other  than 
those  which  had  been  taken  previously  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  They  then  homologated  the  act  and  deed  of  the  civil  authority  in 
interfering  in  spiritual  matters. 

"  Mr  W.  P.-vtten  :  Was  that  the  first  time  they  had  done  that  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  The  first  time  they  gave  consent  to  it.  .  .  . 

"  Mr  G.  W.  Hope  :  Is  it  not  denied  by  those  who  adhere  to  the  Church,  that  they 
do  exercise  these  functions  under  the  guidance  of  the  State  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  They  believe,  I  suppose,  that  Lord  Aberdeen's  Bill  has  protected 
them  ;  but  the  very  introduction  of  the  Bill  appeared  to  me  to  be  an  admission  that 
the  law  which  led  to  the  Disruption  had,  in  fact,  deprived  the  Church  of  her  rights  and 
privileges  as  a  spiritual  court.  .  .  . 


DISRUPTIOA'  WORTHIES. 

"  Mr  Brotherton  :  Have  they  changed  within  the  last  seven  years  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  We  think  that  they  have  admitted  the  civil  power  to  interfere  in 
SDiritual  matters,  so  that  the  spiritual  liberty  of  the  Church  has  been  sacrificed. 

"  Mr  Brotherton  :  In  what  respect  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  In  permitting  themselves  to  be  dictated  to  in  spiritual  matters  by 
the  civil  authorities. 

"  Chairman  :  Has  the  great  body  of  the  Scottish  dissenters  separated  from  the 
Church  of  Scotland  upon  the  same  ground,  that  of  interference  with  the  spiritual  inde- 
pendence of  the  Church  ? 

"  Dr  Gordon  :  The  original  dissenters  from  the  Church  of  Scotland  left  it  partly 
on  the  ground  of  patronage.  They  considered  that  as  an  interference  with  the  liberties 
of  the  Church.  We  continued  in  the  Church,  and  thought  that  we  retained  our 
liberties,  even  with  the  law  of  patronage,  although  among  us  there  were  many  who 
looked  upon  patronage  as  rather  a  grievance — indeed,  a  great  grievance — but  still  we 
did  not  consider  that  patronage  itself,  if  the  call  had  its  proper  place,  was  such  an 
encroachment  upon  the  liberties  of  the  Church  as  to  compel  us  to  leave  it." 

The  Scottish  worthy,  of  whom  the  above  is  a  most  imperfect  sketcli, 
was  engaged  in  the  preparation  of  a  sermon  for  his  communion  Sabbatii, 
when  the  summons  reached  him  to  go  up  higher.  The  sermon  was  never 
finished  and  never  preached  ;  but  after  his  death  it  was  pubHshed  for  the 
edification  and  comfort  of  his  people.  We  have  that  discourse  of  his 
now  before  us,  and  it  is  most  striking  and  affecting  to  see  that  the  last 
words  he  ever  penned  were  these  : — "  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory. 
O  death !  where  is  thy  sting .?    O  grave  !  where  is  thy  victory .'" 

N.  L.  W. 


lames  illaitlan^  Ing. 


(i)F  XKWLISTON.) 


R  HOG  was  one  of  the  comparatively  small  number 
of  "  lairds,"  or  landed  proprietors,  in  Scotland  who, 
ha\ing  been  attached  to  the  Evangelical  party  in 
the  Establishment  previous  to  1S43,  "came  out"  at 
the  Disruption.  In  his  own  county  of  Linlithgow 
he  stood  alone. 
From  the  year  1S28  (the  date  of  his  ordination  to  the  eldership  by 
Dr  Gordon),  he  had  taken  an  active  interest  in  Church  affairs,  as  well 
as  in  Christian  work  generally.  He  resided  at  that  time  in  Edinburgh, 
having  been  called  to  the  bar  a  few  years  previously, — a  contemporar>' 
and  confr'ere  of  such  men  as  Graham  Speirs,  Alexander  Earle  Monteith, 
and  Mungo  P.  Brown,  who  were  ordained  to  the  eldership  along  with  him. 
In  1834,  when,  at  the  call  of  the  General  Assembly,  Dr  Chalmers 
placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  "  Church  Extension  Movement,"  Mr 
Hog  was  his  chosen  ally ;  and,  having  his  time  largely  at  his  own  com- 
mand, he  did  more,  perhaps,  than  any  other  man  in  the  way  of  personal 
service  to  promote  its  success.  He  accompanied  the  great  doctor  on  most 
of  his  tours  throughout  Scotland,  and  took  charge  of  the  general  subscrip- 
tion, which  (having  his  own  name  next  to  the  doctor's  at  the  top  of  it) 
swelled  up  to  what  was  then  thought  the  munificent  amount  of  ;^ 200,000. 
in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  twelve  months. 


DISRUPTION    WORTHIES. 

During  the  ten  years  of  the  "conflict,"  until  within  a  year  and  a  half 
or  so  of  its  close,  Mr  Hog  was  a  trusty  and  much  esteemed  member  of 
the  "  Non-intrusion  Committee."  About  that  time,  however,  being  con- 
stitutionally "conservative"  and  cautious,  and  having  taken  alarm  at 
what  appeared  to  him  to  be  rash,  or  prematurely  exacting,  in  the  demands 
of  the  Committee,  he  was  one  of  a  small  minority  who  retired,  and  thus 
kept  themselves  uncommitted  by  any  of  the  subsequent  negotiations. 
For  so  doing,  he  lost  his  seat  in  the  Assembly  of  1842  ;  the  Presbytery 
of  Linlithgow,  which  for  several  years  he  had  represented,  withdrawing 
from  him  for  the  time  their  confidence,  and  returning  a  more  decided  non- 
intrusionist  in  his  stead.  It  is  amusing  as  well  as  instructive  now  to  remem- 
ber, that  when  the  day  of  trial  came,  it  was  not  he  that  proved  faithless, 
but  they,  so  little  did  they  know  either  him  or  themselves.  Of  the  sixteen 
members  of  Presbytery  who  should  have  come  out,  only  five  came. 

Mr  Hog  was  among  the  very  last  to  be  convinced  that  the  case  of  the 
Church  was  hopeless.  He  clung  to  the  persuasion  that  Lord  Aberdeen 
meant  bona  fide  to  acknowledge  the  Church's  jurisdiction,  and  that  Sir 
George  Sinclair's  clause  might  have  done.  He  could  not  bring  himself  to 
believe  that  the  Conservative  Government  was  capable  of  so  destructive 
a  deed  as  the  breaking  up  of  the  Establishment.  He  refused  to  admit 
that  a  Disruption  was  inevitable,  until  it  had  actually  taken  place.  And 
even  then  he  tried  to  persuade  himself  that  it  was  premature,  or  that  the 
breach  was  not  irreparable.  It  was  not  till  a  week  or  more  had  elapsed, 
till  the  two  General  Assemblies  had  got  through  the  greater  part  of  their 
business,  till  the  Deed  of  Demission  had  been  signed,  and  the  separation 
was  complete,  that  he  finally  made  up  his  mind. 

And  it  was  not,  after  all,  what  the  State  had  done,  or  rather  refused  to 
do  ;  it  was  not  even  the  Queen's  letter  that  decided  him ;  but  what  the 
Church  herself  (the  "  remanent "  part  of  it)  did,  in  formally  homologating 
and  adopting  as  her  own  the  policy  of  the  civil  courts.  The  point  on  which 
he  had  all  along  felt  most  strongly,  which  alone  touched  his  conscience  as 


JAMES  MAITLAXn  HOG. 

a  Christian  man,  wliicli  lie  regarded  as  absolutely  vital  (vital  no  less  to 
"  the  body,"  than  it  is  to  each  member  in  particular),  was  Christ's  headship 
of  the  Church,— //J  absolute  dependence  upon  Him,  its  inherent  indepen- 
dence and  freedom  under  Him :  and  so  it  was,  when  he  came  to  see  that 
not  only  had  that  independence  been  trampled  on  by  the  civil  courts, 
and  repudiated  by  the  State,  but  surrendered  and  sacrificed  at  the  State's 
bidding  by  the  Church  herself, — and  not  till  then,  that  he  saw  the  path  of 
duty  made  plain  before  him.  He  did  not  hesitate  a  moment  after  that. 
The  reponing  of  the  seven  deposed  ministers  of  Strathbogie,  or  rather 
the  finding  that  they  had  never  been  deposed,  because  the  Court  of 
Session  said  so,  was  what  at  length  convinced  him,  that  though  the 
Establishment  still  remained,  the  dear  old  "  Church  of  his  fathers  "  was 
no  longer  to  be  found  within  its  walls. 

It  was  on  Friday,  the  26th  May,  that  tlic  "  Seven  "  were  thus  re- 
habilitated;  a  minority  of  thirty-three  protesting  against  the  deed,  on  the 
same  ground  substantially  as  that  on  which  Mr  Hog  condemned  it, — 
and  one  of  the  number  (Mr  Story  of  Roseneath)  denouncing  it  as  being 
equivalent  to  a  declaration  that  "what  had  been  had  not  been,  and  that 
a  sentence  pronounced  by  the  Assembly  was  not  a  sentence."  These 
thirty-three  protested,  and  remained.  Next  day  Mr  Hog  wrote  the 
following  letter  to  Dr  Gordon  : — 

"Newliston,  27///  May  1843. 
"  My  De.\R  Dr  Gordon, — Having  been  confined  to  the  house  since  the  i6th  by  an 
attack  of  influenza,  I  have  been  unable  personally  to  witness  the  events  of  the  last 
ten  days  ;  but  this  solitude  has  been  favourable  to  that  calm  review  of  all  the  circum- 
stances affecting  the  Church,  which  I  had  always  resolved  to  take  before  committing 
myself  to  any  particular  step.  I  can  no  longer  hesitate  to  which  communion  I  shall 
attach  myself. 

"  Believing  that  the  constitution  of  the  Church  has  been  violated  by  the  decisions 
of  the  civil  courts  exceeding  their  province  in  suspending  ecclesiastical  sentences, 
declaring  them  null  and  void,  and  interdicting  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  ;  seeing 
no  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  Government  to  admit  any  grievance,  or  to  secure  what 
is  essential  to  the  existence  of  a  Christian  community  ;  and,  finally,  having  observed 
the  '  remaining '  Assembly  bowing  in  the  dust,  and  echoing  the  very  words  of  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

civil  courts,  declaring  the  solemn  sentences  of  the  Church  to  be  '  null  and  void,'  I 
feel  that  I  have  no  choice  but  to  turn  from  her  with  the  most  melancholy  aversion. 

"  If  I  have  been  tardy  in  declaring  myself,  it  is  because  I  felt  it  my  duty  to  watch  the 
last  struggles  of  the  Church  as  I  would  the  death-bed  of  an  expiring  parent,  not  feeling 
at  liberty  to  depart  till  the  spirit  was  fled,  and  the  work  of  corruption  begun.  My  duty 
to  myself,  to  my  children,  and,  I  believe,  to  my  country,  requires  me,  therefore,  to  join 
the  communion  of  those  who  have  sacrificed  their  all  to  maintain  their  principles. 

"  I  make  this  communication  through  you,  because  it  was  from  you  that  I 
received  my  ordination  as  an  elder ;  and  it  was  my  difference  of  opinion  with  yourself 
in  the  Non-intrusion  Committee  that  gave  me  the  greatest  pain. — Believe  me  to  be, 
my  dear  Dr  Gordon,  with  the  greatest  respect  and  regard,  yours  faithfully, 

"J.  M.  Hog. 

"  To  the  Rev.  Dr  GORDON." 

Such  was  the  enthusiasm  awakened  by  the  reading  of  this  letter,  when 
the  Assembly  met  on  Monday,  the  29th,  in  the  Brick  Church,  Lothian 
Road,  that  a  demand  was  made  for  its  being  read  a  second  time,  and  that 
Dr  Gordon  should  re-read  it,  in  Tanfield  Hall  (which,  as  always,  was 
crowded  to  the  roof),  in  the  evening.  The  rev.  doctor  in  coming  forward 
"  was  received  with  loud  and  long  continued  cheering  from  the  immense 
assemblage."  When  the  applause  had  subsided,  he  said,  "  I  appear 
before  you  this  night  as  a  proxy,  and  therefore  I  thank  you  for  the  way 
in  which  you  have  received  me.  I  take  your  approbation  as  offered  to 
my  dear  and  much  esteemed  friend  Mr  Hog,  who  is  worthy  of  it  all." 
Dr  Guthrie  used  to  say,  "  that  letter  of  Mr  Hog's  was  a  stroke  of  genius." 

One  of  Mr  Hog's  oldest  and  most  intimate  friends  (his  brother-in-law) 
was  Mr  Patrick  Fraser  Tytler,  the  historian,  and  it  is  interesting  to 
know  what  he  thought  of  this  "  weighty  and  powerful "  letter.  Writing 
from  London  a  few  days  after,  he  says  : — 

"  I  liked  your  letter  to  Dr  Gordon  much,  and  do  not  see  how,  consistently  with 
your  principles  and  belief  in  what  constitutes  a  true  Presbyterian  Kirk,  you  could 
have  acted  otherwise.  Had  I  been  a  Presbyterian,  I  must  have  done  the  same. 
Popular  election  of  their  ministers  and  complete  spiritual  independence,  were,  from  the 
first,  the  two  great  principles  laid  down  by  Knox  as  the  foundation  on  which  their 
whole  superstructure  rested.     And,  indeed,  without  the  last,  no  Church  could  stand."  * 

From  that  day  for^vard  Mr  Hog  threw  himself,  heart  and  soul,  into 

•  This  important  document  is  deposited  in  the  Library  of  the  New  College,  Edinburgh. 


yA.\fEs  .^rAiTLAsn  hog. 

the  movement — indeed  he  devoted  to  it  the  rest  of  his  hfe,  feehng  liim- 
self  called  (as  he  said)  to  do  double  senice,  to  work  "double  tides,"  as 
"  one  born  out  of  due  time. " 

His  first  care  was  to  "shew  piety  at  home,"  by  looking  after  the 
supply  of  ordinances  for  "  those  of  his  own  house,"  and  by  associating 
himself  with  those  of  his  fellow-elders  and  fellow-parishioners  of  Kirkliston 
who  had  already  been  moving,  or  who  might  afterwards  adhere  to  the  Free 
Church  ;  and,  having  learned  that  steps  had  been  taken,  in  view  of  the 
event,  both  for  the  erection  of  a  church  and  the  providing  of  a  house  for 
its  future  minister,  he  at  once  offered  to  relieve  his  brethren  of  all  further 
anxiety  about  either  by  providing  both  himself,  on  the  single  condition 
that  the  whole  sum  which  had  been  or  might  be  contributed  for  local 
purposes  should  be  transmitted  to  the  Central  Church  Building  Fund. 
How  fully  and  handsomely  he  implemented  this  engagement  need  not 
here  be  told.  Dr  Chalmers  laid  the  foundation-stone  of  the  new  church 
in  August,  and  Dr  Guthrie  opened  it  (introducing  at  the  same  time  its 
first  minister)  in  December  following. 

Of  his  public  services  to  the  Church,  its  records  supply  ample  informa- 
tion—and, indeed,  they  speak  lor  themselves.  Of  the  three  great  move- 
ments with  which  he  specially  identified  himself,  it  may  be  truly  said  that 
he  completed  them  all,  leaving  little  or  nothing  for  any  one  else  to  do. 

The  Bursary  Scheme  for  the  New  College  was  his  scheme  alone,— he, 
in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  Dr  Chalmers  and  his  colleagues,  having 
taken  it  up  in  the  first  instance,  rather  than  another  which  he  had  con- 
templated, for  the  endowment  of  the  Professors'  Chairs.  He  went  about 
quietly  among  his  friends,  informing  and  interesting  them  in  the  subject, 
getting  one  and  another  to  do  as  he  had  done — to  found  a  bursary,  and 
name  it ;  and  only  ceased  from  his  assiduities  when  he  had  secured  what 
he  thought  enough — an  annual  income  of  somewhere  about  ;^6oo. 

In  1848,  after  the  lamented  death  of  Sheriff  Speirs,  Mr  Hog  was 
selected  a.s  next  to  him,  the  fittest  man  in  the  Church  to  preside  over 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  Committee  on  "  Refusal  of  Sites,"  and  manage  the  difficult  business 
entrusted  to  it.  How  wellhe  acquitted  himself  in  this  position  is  proved 
by  the  fact  that  the  battle  was  successfully  fought,  and  sites  ultimately 
obtained, — "owing  mainly,"  said  Dr  Candlish,  "to  the  tact,  judgment, 
patience,  and  perseverance  of  Mr  Hog." 

The  Debt  Extinction  Scheme  was  mainly  his  scheme  also,  having 
associated  with  him  in  it  a  "true  yoke-fellow,"  Mr  William  Campbell_of 
Tillichewan.  The  multitude  of  letters  he  wrote,  of  meetings,  public  and 
private,  he  attended,  and  of  journeys  he  undertook  in  this  cause,  would 
seem  almost  incredible,  were  it  named  ;  but  he  grudged  neither  time  nor 
labour,  any  more  than  he  grudged  money,  for  any  good  cause  which  he 
embarked  in ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  remember,  that  at  the  last  meeting 
of  his  Committee  which  he  was  able  to  attend,  when  he  had  to  be  carried 
into  the  room  in  his  chair,  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  intimating  that  the 
whole  contemplated  sum  of  ;^ 50,000  had  been  subscribed,  with  several 
hundreds  over, — that  his  work  in  connection  with  it  was  done. 

The  "  Sabbath  Question "  was  one  in  which,  it  may  be  added,  he 
took  a  lively  interest,  especially  in  connection  with  the  running  of  pas- 
senger trains  on  the  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  railway  ;  and  it  was  to 
him,  in  conjunction  with  his  much  esteemed  co-director,  Mr  Henderson 
of  Park,  more  than  to  any  one  else — to  his  combined  firmness  of  purpose 
and  suavity  of  bearing — that  the  satisfactory  settlement  of  the  contro- 
versy then  arrived  at  was  due. 

The  "Elders'  Association  "  of  the  Free  Church  was  formed  in  1858  ; 
and  had  he  been  able,  he  would  have  been  its  first  president.  As  it  was, 
he  could  only  write  (and  with  great  difficulty),  within  a  month  or  two  of 
his  death— in  the  form  of  a  letter  to  Mr  Robert  Paul — some  of  his 
thoughts  on  the  subject  of  the  eldership,  which  formed,  I  believe,  the 
basis  of  Mr  Paul's  ov.-n  address  at  the  next  general  meeting,  and  which 
are  as  judicious  and  wise  as  in  the  circumstances  they  were  felt  to  be 
impressive— like  a  message  to  his  brethren  from  the  other  world. 


JAMES  AfAITLAND  HOC. 
During  the  last  two  years  of  his  hfe  Mr  Hog  was  an  invaUd,  confined, 
not  to  his  bed  nor  his  room,  but  to  his  chair  or  his  pony-carriage,  by  a 
stealthy  paralytic  affection,  which  deprived  him  of  all  power  of  loco- 
motion. Beginning  at  his  lower  extremities,  the  disease  "crept"  up 
gradually  over  his  body,  reducing  him  to  great  physical  prostration  ; 
and  in  the  end— some  months  before  his  death— producing  a  painfully 
depressing  effect  on  his  mind.  From  being  the  sunniest,  the  most 
cheerful,  he  became  one  of  the  saddest  of  men.  His  countenance  lost 
the  smile,  which  no  one  had  ever  missed  before.  But  never  did  his 
character  shine  out  more  impressively,  or  the  genuineness  of  his  piety 
make  itself  more  evident  (to  all  but  himself),  than  under  that  severely 
trying  discipline.  Even  when  cheerfulness  was  no  longer  possible,  his 
patience  never  gave  way.  No  murmur  ever  crossed  his  lips,  nor,  sad 
though  his  countenance  looked,  did  it  ever  betray  a  symptom  of  peevish- 
ness or  of  unwillingness  to  bear.  He  seemed  to  grow,  even  in  the  absence 
of  sensible  comfort  from  his  religion.  His  graces  ripened  in  the  shade. 
I  may  have  read  or  heard  of,  but  certainly  I  never  witnessed,  either  a 
humility,  a  sense  of  sin  so  deep,  or  a  faith  so  simple,  so  exclusive,  as  his. 
He  could  see  nothing  in  himself  from  which  to  derive  comfort,  even  in 
the  way  of  evidence.  "Assurance"  he  had  none.  But  all  the  more  did 
he  cling,  did  he  adhere,  to  Christ,  who  was  truly  "  all  in  all "  to  him. 
And  at  the  very  worst,  he  could  not  help  admitting,  with  as  sweet  a 
smile  as  of  old,  that  Christ  was  "  precious "  to  him,  though  refusing  to 
admit  the  inference  that  he  was  one  of  "  them  that  believe." 

In  his  recently  published  Autobiography  (written  within  a  month  or 
two  of  his  own  death),  Dr  Guthrie  makes  the  following  reference  to  Mr 
Hog,  and  to  these  his  last  days  :— 

"  Mr  Hog,  with  whom  I  have  spent  many  a  happy  day  at  Newliston,  was  one  of 
the  most  generous  and  amiable  of  men.  He  was  attacked  by  paralysis,  and  died  of 
that  disease  after  a  long  and  most  painful  illness  :  an  event  which  occurred  some 
fifteen  years  after  the  Disruption.  It  began  with  a  pain  and  weakness  in  one  of  his 
limbs,  and  at  length  extended  itself  over  the  whole  body,  making  him,  so  far  as 


l>/SJi  UP  TION  IVOR  THIES. 

moving;  life  or  limb  was  concerned,  perfectly  helpless.  The  only  way,  latterly,  that  he 
could  communicate  with  his  family,  was  by  pointing  with  a  little  reed  in  his  mouth  to 
letters  of  a  printed  alphabet.  On  one  occasion  he  made  signs  of  wishing  to  indicate 
something.  The  reed  was  fixed  between  his  teeth,  and  the  alphabet  held  before  his 
face.  The  words  he  spelt  were,  'last  day'— 'up,'  casting  at  the  same  time  a  sweet 
glance  heavenwards." 

It  was  not  the  last  day  of  his  life  when  the  above  incident  occurred, 
but  it  was  the  last  day  he  was  able  to  be  dressed,  or  to  leave  his  room. 
There  were  other  two  days  remaining,  which,  though  they  were  days  of 
severe  suffering  (from  fever,  oppression  in  breathing,  and  otherwise), 
were  yet  days  of  perfect  calmness,  and  apparently  undisturbed  peace. 
The  cloud  was  being  dispersed  ;  the  sun  was  gleaming,  shining,  through. 
It  was  "  evening  time,"  and  it  was  "  light." 

An  hour  or  two  before  the  close,  calling  once  more  for  the  little  tube, 
he  spelled  out  his  dying  testimony  thus  :  "  I  am  looking  to  the  Saviour : 
my  only  hope  is  in  Jesus."  Then  he  asked  that  a  psalm  might  be  read 
to  him,  the  143d;  after  that,  Charles  Wesley's  hymn,  "Jesus,  lover  of 
my  soul"  ;  also  that  other  sweet  hymn  (long  a  favourite  with  him),  "Just 
as  I  am,  without  one  plea."  Then,  declining  to  hear  anything  further, 
and  knowing  that  he  had  nothing  more  to  do  but  to  die,  he  expressed  a 
wish  to  be  removed  to  his  bed  from  the  chair,  where  he  had  been  sitting 
all  night  (taking  his  farewell  look,  from  the  window,  of  the  sweet  landscape 
which  he  knew  so  well) ;  and  this  had  scarcely  been  done,  when  the  loud 
breathing  ceased,  the  oppressed  bosom  gave  its  last  heave,  and  all  was  over. 

"  It  was  somewhat  singular,"  a  dear  friend  of  his  and  mine,  Mr 
Robert  Paul,  afterwards  remarked,  "he  died  at  twelve  o'clock  on  the 
night  of  Saturday,  the  31st  day  of  July  ;  and  the  glorified  spirit  opened 
his  eyes  then,  on  a  new  day,  a  new  week,  a  new  month,  a  new  Sabbath, 
a  new  life,  a  new  heaven — an  eternity,  at  once ! "  Had  Mr  Hog  been 
spared  till  that  day  week  he  would  have  entered  on  a  new  year  also — the 
fifty-ninth  year  of  his  age — having  been  born  on  the  7th  August  1799. 

J.  C.  B. 


-<3^    JAMES   INGRAM.D.D 


Barnes  ^Ingram,  ©.B, 


(osjlIK  RKV.  DR  JAMES  INGRAM  of  Unst,  the  noith- 
inost  island  of  Shetland,  and  the  most  northerly  point 
of  Her  Majesty's  dominions,  was  for  many  years  the 
father  of  the  Free  Church.  The  inhabitants  of 
Shetland  have  some  compensation  for  the  bleakness 
of  their  place  of  abode,  its  wild  seas,  and  its  stormy 
winds,  its  rocky  shores,  and  its  boggy  soil.  They  enjoy  an  equable 
temperature,  pure  air,  and  a  mode  of  existence,  which,  with  all  its  hard- 
ships, is  free  from  the  exciting  turmoil  of  the  busy  haunts  of  trade 
and  commerce.  It  is  probably  to  these  advantages,  more  than  to  its 
inheritance  of  a  robust  Scandinavian  ancestry,  that  Shetland  owes  its 
reputation  for  the  longevity  of  its  people.  Dr  Ingram,  the  oldest 
minister  of  the  Gospel  in  the  British  Isles  at  his  death,  was  not  a 
native  Shetlander.  He  was  born  in  Logic  Coldston,  Aberdeenshire, 
3rd  April  1776,  and  lived  till  within  a  few  weeks  of  completing  his 
103rd  year.  He  came  of  a  long-lived  family.  His  father  lived  to  the 
age  of  100,  and  his  grandfather  to  the  patriarchal  age  of  105.  Both 
of  them  spent  their  long  years  on  the  same  farm,  in  the  Daugh,  parish 
of  Logic  Coldston. 

James  Ingram,  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  received  his  early  educa- 
tion in  the  parish  school  of  Tarland,  and  afterwards  in  the  Grammar 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


Scliool  of  Old  Aberdeen.  He  entered  upon  his  Arts  curriculum  in 
King's  College  there,  when  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  was  a  distinguished 
student,  carrying  off  the  highest  competition  bursary  of  his  entrance 
session.  He  commended  himself  by  his  diligence  and  talent  to  the 
whole  professorial  body,  and  particularly  to  Dr  Jack,  then  the  Principal 
of  the  College,  and  during  life  the  warm  friend  of  his  promising  pupil. 
He  began  his  Divinity  course  at  Aberdeen  in  1795,  and  the  following 
year  he  was  appointed  tutor  to  the  family  of  Mrs  Barclay,  widow  of  the 
parish  minister  of  Unst,  obtaining  in  this  way  his  first  introduction  to 
the  island  where  he  laboured  as  a  minister  for  more  than  half-a- 
century.  Supporting  himself  for  the  most  part  by  his  emoluments  as 
a  teacher,  he  continued  his  attendance  at  the  Divinity  Hall,  from  time 
to  time,  till  the  year  1800,  when  he  was  licensed  as  a  probationer  by 
the  Presbytery  of  Shetland. 

His  first  appointment  as  a  minister  of  the  Gospel,  was  to  be  assistant 
to  the  Rev.  James  Gordon,  minister  of  Fetlar  and  North  Yell,  on  whose 
death  he  was  presented  to  the  vacancy  by  the  patron.  Lord  Dundas. 

After  his  ordination,  he  was  married  to  Mary,  daughter  of  Mrs 
Barclay,  and  the  happy  union  was  blessed  with  a  family  of  four 
daughters  and  three  sons.  The  manse  was  in  Fetlar,  but  -  having  charge 
of  the  congregation  of  Yell  also,  Mr  Ingram  had  to  cross  and  re-cross 
almost  weekly,  the  channel,  six  miles  broad,  which  separates  the  two 
islands.  Only  those  who  have  sailed  among  the  fierce  and  rapid  tides 
of  the  Shetland  Isles,  can  form  any  conception  of  what  it  must  have 
been  to  navigate  such  seas  in  an  open  boat,  summer  and  winter,  for 
eighteen  years.  Not  many  constitutions  could  have  endured  the  hard- 
ships which  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  parish  minister  of  Fetlar  at  this  time. 
He  braced  himself  to  his  work  cheerfully  and  joyously,  preaching  and 
visiting  and  catechising  from  house  to  house,  with  all  the  more  diligence 
because  it  was  impossible  to  tell  how  long  it  might  be  before  the  warring 
elements  might  permit  of  his  next  visit. 


JAMES  INGRAM,  D.D. 

In  1 82 1,  he  obtained  some  relief  from  this  incessant  toil  and 
exposure.  The  church  of  Unst  became  vacant,  and  the  godly  of 
the  people  cast  their  eyes  upon  the  devoted  minister  of  Fetlar,  as  the 
man  best  known  to  them  as  a  faithful  steward  in  things  pertaining  to 
the  kingdom.  Lord  Dundas  was  pleased  to  have  the  opportunity  of 
again  doing  a  kindness  to  Mr  Ingram ;  and  to  the  great  joy  of  the 
people  of  Unst,  the  object  of  their  choice  was  settled  amongst  them  in 
1 82 1,  to  remain,  as  Providence  had  ordained,  till  almost  every  individual 
of  his  new  charge  had  preceded  him  to  the  grave  or  left  the  island. 

The  new  pastor  did  not  enter  upon  another  man's  line  of  things 
made  ready  to  his  hand.  Previous  to  the  time  of  the  Haldanes  and 
others,  who  in  the  beginning  of  this  centuiy,  preached  the  Gospel  in 
these  far-off  islands  of  the  North  Sea,  this  Ultima  Thule  of  the  Romans 
was  as  dreary  in  its  spiritual  as  in  its  physical  condition.  The  island 
of  Unst  in  particular,  so  far  as  the  ministry  was  concerned,  had  known 
nothing  of  religion  except  in  the  form  of  Moderatism,  and  the  virtuous 
life  which  was  the  theme  of  the  pulpit  ministrations  was  rarely 
exemplified  in  the  habits  of  the  people.  Mr  Ingram  may  almost  be 
said  to  have  re-christianised  Unst.  He  found  the  people  grossly 
ignorant,  and  he  established  schools.  He  found  them  addicted  to 
intemperance,  through  the  facilities  offered  for  smuggling  by  foreign 
vessels,  as  well  as  through  the  entire  want  of  intellectual  resources, 
and  he  founded  a  temperance  society  which  entirely  changed  the 
habits  of  the  greater  part  of  the  people.  There  is  probably  no  part  of 
the  British  Isles  where  intoxicating  liquors  are  now  less  used  than 
in  Shetland.  The  hardy  Zetlanders  who  prosecute  the  haaf-fishing 
make  tea  their  beverage  when  engaged  in  their  arduous  calling,  and  the 
visitor  to  the  Shetland  Isles  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  appearance 
of  the  tea-kettle,  not  only  at  every  fireside,  but  in  every  peat-field  and 
scene  of  out-door  labour.  Much  of  this  reformation  is  owing  to  the 
early   and    long-continued    inculcation    of    temperance    principles    by 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Dr  Ingram  among  his  parishioners  in  the  northmost  island  of  the  group. 
As  an  illustration  of  the  character  of  the  people,  and  the  good  effects 
of  temperate  habits,  we  may  note  that  we  found  in  1870,  two  constables 
responsible  for  the  peace  of  the  whole  group  of  islands ;  and  we  were 
amused  to  find  the  one  who  had  charge  of  Lerwick  (with  a  population 
of  over  4000)  enjoying  a  day's  fishing  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  main- 
land, because  he  had  nothing  else  to  do. 

But  the  Gospel  was  after  all  the  great  lever  power  employed  bj'  the 
minister  of  Unst  for  raising  the  moral  standard  of  the  people.  He  was  an 
instructive,  earnest,  and  faithful  preacher  of  the  Word,  and  from  his  first 
entrance  among  his  flock,  he  instituted  the  practice  of  regular  visitation 
and  catechising.  The  ordinance  of  Church  discipline  was  also  revived, 
and  became  a  subordinate  but  real  means  of  grace.  His  labours 
were  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  The  outward  reformation  of  manners 
was  not  the  only  outcome  of  his  fidelity  as  a  preacher  and  a  pastor. 
There  are  still  those  in  Unst  who  can  speak  of  him  as  their  spiritual 
father,  and  many  more  who  could  give  the  same  testimony,  have  gone 
before  him  to  heaven. 

In  1838,  Mr  Ingram's  son  was  associated  with  his  father  in  the 
pastorate  by  his  steady  friend.  Lord  Zetland,  moved,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  senior  minister,  by  the  free  voice  of  the  people  as  well  as  by  his 
own  inclination. 

In  number  of  years,  Mr  Ingram,  senior,  was  an  old  man  at  the  date 
of  the  Disruption.  He  was  then  sixty-seven.  But  his  eye  was  not  dim, 
nor  his  natural  force  abated.  He  was  as  forward  and  decided  as  his  son 
in  taking  his  side  in  the  conflict  which  came  to  a  climax  in  1843.  And 
this,  although  he  held  strong  views  in  favour  of  church  establishments 
founded  on  a  Scriptural  basis,  and,  although  the  difficulties  of  erecting 
new  church  buildings  and  organising  a  new  congregation  were  peculiarly 
formidable  in  a  place  where  poverty  is  extreme,  most  of  the  people  being 
in   a  chronic  state  of  debt  to  the  landowners  and   merchants,   seldom 


JAMES  INGRAM,  D.D. 

fingering  money,  but  bartering  their  labour  for  articles  of  necessity,  and 
sometimes  —  against  their  will  — for  articles  of  superfluity.  A  large 
majority  of  the  natives  of  Unst,  however,  encouraged  their  ministers  by 
their  adherence,  and  by  their  material  support  as  far  as  their  slender 
resources  permitted.  The  peculiarity  of  their  position,  so  remote  from 
the  stimulus  and  fellowship  of  brethren  like-minded,  came  at  last  under 
the  notice  of  the  great  leader  of  the  Disruption.  For  several  months  the 
ministers,  father  and  son,  had  to  conduct  Divine  worship  in  the  open  air, 
and,  afterwards,  the  congregation  and  Sabbath  school  had  to  content 
themselves  with  the  precarious  shelter  of  a  tent.  Dr  Chalmers,  on  hear- 
ing of  the  circumstances,  used  his  influence  with  the  Countess  of  Effing- 
ham to  such  good  purpose  that  her  ladyship  provided  funds  for  the 
erection  of  two  churches,  one  on  the  east  and  the  other  at  the  south  end 
of  the  island. 

In  1864  the  University  of  Glasgow  conferred  upon  Mr  Ingram  the 
Degree  of  D.D.,  while  he  was  still  in  the  exercise  of  his  ministry. 
The  last  time  he  ascended  the  pulpit  was  in  1875.  It  was  the  failure 
of  memory  and  of  sight  that  prevented  him  preaching  after\vards. 
His  voice  was  as  strong  as  ever,  and  he  was  as  much  at  home  as 
ever  in  prayer ;  it  was  only  in  his  pulpit  address  that  he  was  not  his 
former  self. 

There  were  others  besides  the  Scnatus  Academicus  of  Glasgow  who 
felt  it  an  honour  to  themselves  to  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man.  Dr 
Guthrie  and  his  son,  the  minister  of  Liberton  Free  Church,  paid  a  visit 
to  Dr  Ingram  in  1 871,  and  greatly  cheered  the  heart  of  their  venerable 
friend  by  their  genial  company  and  conversation.  On  his  return  to 
Edinburgh,  Dr  Guthrie  set  about  the  raising  of  a  subscription  for  a  por- 
trait of  Dr  Ingram,  and  Mr  Otto  Leyde  went  to  the  Free  Church  Manse 
of  Unst  to  execute  the  commission  assigned  to  him.  He  succeeded  in 
producing  a  characteristic  likeness,  life  size,  and  the  portrait  having  been 
presented  to  the  Free  Church,  now  adorns  the  walls  of  the  Common 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Hall  of  the  New  College,  Edinburgh.  A  replica  of  this  canvas  was 
taken  by  the  artist,  and,  along  with  a  silver  tea  service,  was  presented 
to  Dr  Ingram,  to  be  preserved  as  an  heir-loom  in  the  family. 

Extreme  old  age,  as  a  rule,  is  not  desirable.  It  is  pitiful  when  the 
grasshopper  becomes  a  burden,  and  the  once  strong  active  man  falls  into 
second  childhood.  With  Dr  Ingram  there  was  less  to  suggest  this  pain- 
ful feeling  than  in  the  case  of  many  others  who  had  not  nearly  attained 
his  years.  When  wisdom  was  shut  out  at  both  ear-gate  and  eye-gate,  he 
had  still  the  resource  of  a  memory  retentive  of  early  lessons.  With  all 
his  active  labours  as  a  pastor,  he  had  found  time  to  keep  up  his  early 
studies  in  theology  and  classics,  and  to  store  his  mind  with  general 
information.  To  his  hundredth  year  he  could  repeat  long  passages  from 
favourite  Latin  authors,  and  regale  himself  with  texts  from  the  Hebrew 
as  well  as  the  Greek  Scriptures.  As  Hebrew,  strange  to  say,  was  no  part 
of  the  curriculum  of  the  Aberdeen  College  when  he  was  a  student,  he 
became  a  self-taught  Hebrew  scholar,  after  the  age  of  sixty,  and  acquired 
even  a  critical  acquaintance  with  the  language.  He  mastered  German 
also,  later  in  life. 

The  mens  sana  was  lodged  in  corpore  satio,  and  it  is  worthy  of  note 
that  his  green  old  age  was  not  indebted  to  the  stimulus  of  wine  or  strong 
drink,  for  he  maintained  his  total  abstinence  principles  to  the  last.  Two 
years  before  his  death,  he  remarked  to  a  friend,  in  the  vernacular  of  his 
early  days,  "  It's  a  very  guid  warld  to  leeve  in,  efter  a',  for  though  I'm  a 
hundred  noo,  an'  gey  stupid  tae,  yet  I'm  neither  sick  nor  sair." 

His  sunset  of  life  was  without  a  cloud.  During  the  winter  of  1878-79, 
the  cold  compelled  him  to  keep  his  room,  but  not  till  within  twelve 
hours  of  his  last  breath  was  there  any  symptom  of  serious  illness.  Like 
a  shock  of  corn  fully  ripe  he  was  gathered  into  the  heavenly  garner  on 
the  3rd  of  March  1879. 

J.  B.  G. 


.n. 


^%' 


ALEXANDE  R  KEITH,  D.D.    )> 


^Itpnbtt  lititlj,  aa 


ALEXANDER  KEITH  was  born  in  the  year  1791. 
His  father,  Dr  George  Skene  Keith— minister  of  the 
parish  of  Keithhall,  Aberdeenshire,  and  latterly  of  the 
parish  of  Tulliallan,  Perthshire — was  a  man  of  superior 
intelligence,  wide  information,  and  great  energy. 
Though  not  slack  in  his  clerical  duties,  he  made 
agriculture  a  special  study,  and  published  an  able  work,  entitled,  "  An 
Agricultural  Survey  of  Aberdeenshire."  At  the  beginning  of  this  century, 
Aberdeen  occupied  a  distinguished  position  in  the  literature  of  Scotland. 
The  Principal  and  Professor  of  Divinity  in  the  University  and  Marischal 
College  was  the  celebrated  Dr  Campbell,  author  of  the  best  work  on 
Miracles,  in  reply  to  Hume ;  in  the  neighbouring  University  and  King's 
College,  Old  Aberdeen,  the  Professor  of  Divinity  was  Dr  Gerard,  author 
of  the  first  work  ever  published  in  Scotland  on  Biblical  Criticism  ;  while 
the  well  known  Dr  Beattie,  author  of  "The  Minstrel,"  was  Professor  of 
Moral  Philosophy  in  Marischal  College.  Along  with  these  there  were 
others  in  the  Presbytery  and  Synod  of  Aberdeen  whose  literary  and 
theological  tastes  found  vent  in  an  association  for  the  reading  and 
discussion  of  papers,  such  as  Dr  Campbell's  valuable  "  Dissertations  on 
the  Gospels,"  originally  prepared  for  and  discussed  at  these  reunions. 
With  such  men  Dr  Skene  Keith  was  thoroughly  at  home,  while  his 
broad  intelligence,  gentlemanly  bearing,  and  commanding  presence  made 


DISRUPTIOX  WORTHIES. 

him  a  general  favourite  alike  with  the  gentiy  and  with  society  in  general. 
The  manse  of  Keithhall  was  the  home  of  all  that  was  genial,  and  the 
subject  of  this  sketch  enjoyed  in  it  every  advantage  for  early  develop- 
ment. As  a  youth,  his  tall  figure,  and  powerful  physique  attracted  general 
notice,  while  his  feats  of  walking  and  running — such  as  seemed  to  defy 
fatigue — were  the  wonder  of  every  one.  To  what  occupation  would  such 
a  youth  be  likely  to  devote  his  days?  Probably  to  the  militar}-  or  naval 
service,  or  perhaps  to  colonial  enterprise,  but  least  of  all  to  the  quiet  and 
study  of  a  clerical  life,  one  should  say.  But  just  this  was  the  choice  of 
Alexander  Keith.  Having  taken  his  degree  at  Marischal  College,  he 
entered  the  Divinity  Hall,  was  in  the  year  1813  licensed  to  preach  the 
Gospel,  and  thereafter  ordained  minister  of  the  parish  of  St.  Cyrus, 
Kincardineshire.  In  the  year  18 16  he  married  Miss  Jane  Blaikie,  sister 
of  the  late  James  Blaikie  and  Sir  Thomas  Blaikie,  both  Provosts  of  Aber- 
deen, and  aunt  of  Professor  Blaikie  of  the  New  College,  Edinburgh.  By 
this  lady  Dr  Keith  had  seven  sons  and  one  daughter.  The  eldest  son 
became  assistant  and  successor  to  his  father  in  the  parish  of  St.  Cyrus, 
and  was  the  author  of  a  Commentary  on  Isaiah.  Four  of  his  sons  made 
choice  of  the  medical  profession,  two  of  whom  have  risen  to  eminence  in 
Edinburgh — Dr  George  Skene  Keith  and  Dr  Thomas  Keith. 

For  the  first  ten  years  of  his  ministry  Dr  Keith  devoted  himself 
exclusively  to  the  duties  of  his  parish — authorship  never  being  dreamt  of 
But  meeting  one  day  with  a  professional  gentleman,  who  had  imbibed  the 
views  of  Hume  on  the  subject  of  Miracles,  and  failing  to  satisfy  him  with 
the  usual  arguments,  he  appealed  to  facts,  such  as  those  recorded  by 
Volney  in  his  "  Ruins  of  Empires,"  as  undeniable  evidence  of  the  fulfil- 
ment of  prophecy,  in  other  words,  as  evidence  of  miracles  in  the  form  of 
knowledge,  demanding  immediate  Divine  interposition  no  less  than  mir- 
acles oi pozuer.  Overawed  by  this  new  style  of  argument,  his  friend  was 
candid  enough  to  say,  "  I  cannot  answer  you."  Encouraged  by  this  result 
Dr  Keith  thought  that  a  book  specially  devoted  to  that  line  of  argument 


ALEXANDER  KEITH,  D.D. 

ini-ht  be  eminently  useful.  Newton's  "Dissertations  on  the  Prophecies," 
though  coming  nearest  to  his  idea,  had  two  defects— it  mixed  up  literal  and 
symbolical  prophecies,  clear  predictions  and  obscure  ;  and  it  wanted  the 
testimony  of  recent  travellers.  And  having  tried  in  vain  to  induce  one 
or  two  clerical  friends  to  prepare  such  a  work,  he  determined,  rather  than 
abandon  the  idea,  to  try  it  himself ;  and  thus  originated  the  work  by 
which  Dr  Keith  has  been  and  will  be  known  as  long  as  works  of 
this  nature  in  our  language  retain  their  interest.  It  was  in  1823  that  it 
first  appeared  in  modest  form,  with  the  following  title  as  afterwards 
enlarged  :— "Evidence  of  the  Truth  of  the  Christian  Religion  derived  from 
the  Literal  Fulfilment  of  Prophecy,  particularly  as  illustrated  by  the 
History  of  the  Jews,  and  by  the  discoveries  of  recent  travellers."  In  the 
second  and  following  editions,  the  new  matter  regarding  Palestine  and  the 
surrounding  countries— drawn  from  the  newest  works  of  travel,  with  a 
number  of  engravings  representing  the  ruins  of  Babylon  and  Petra— made 
the  book  virtually  a  new  work,  and  one  peculiarly  suited  to  the  time. 
Such  was  the  popularity  which  it  attracted  that  edition  after  edition  was 
called  for  ;  it  was  translated  into  most  of  the  European  languages  ;  and  the 
Tract  Society's  abridged  and  stereotyped  edition  of  it  has  had  a  steady 
sale  to  this  day.  "  One  chief  feature  of  the  book,"  as  is  well  observed  by 
the  Society's  edition,  "was  to  make  unbelievers  the  leading  witnesses, 
their  testimony  being  unexceptionable  and  conclusive.  Volney  did  not 
visit  Palestine  as  a  devout  pilgrim,  nor  was  he  even  a  believer  in  inspira- 
tion or  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  Neither  was  Burckhardt,  who  never 
alludes  to  the  prophecies,  and  was  himself  a  sceptic.  The  testimony  of 
.such  men  has  more  force  than  that  of  many  who  visit  and  describe  the 
scenes  of  sacred  history  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  finding  confirmation 
of  Scripture."  Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  example  of  the  effect  pro- 
duced by  this  book  was  that  of  Dr  Meshakah  of  Damascus,  a  man  of  some 
authority  in  the  Greek  Catholic  Church.  An  Arabic  translation  of  Dr 
Keith's  work  having  fallen  into  his  hands,  he  read  and  studied  it  with 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

intense  interest.  Tlie  issue  was  his  conversion  from  nominal  religion,  or 
no  real  faith  at  all,  to  the  faith  of  Evangelical  Christianity.  The  change 
became  immediately  known,  and  made  a  great  stir  in  the  Church  to  which 
he  had  belonged.  For  many  years  after  this  he  held  the  office  of  Consul 
at  Damascus  to  the  United  States  of  America,  and  since  1848  his  writings 
have  done  more  perhaps  for  Protestant  Evangelical  Christianity  in  Syria 
and  other  Arabic-speaking  countries  than  any  others.  The  excellent  man 
is  still  alive,  and  in  the  controversy  between  the  Oriental  and  Evangelical 
Churches  his  books  are  regarded  as  standard  works.  In  the  introduction 
to  one  of  the  best  of  them  his  obligations  to  Dr  Keith  for  all  that  is  most 
precious  to  him  in  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  Gospel  are  particularly 
recorded,  and  Dr  Keith  had  the  gratification  of  hearing  this  from  his  own 
lips  and  in  his  own  house  at  Damascus. 

On  the  28th  August,  1833,  on  the  motion  of  the  Rev.  Dr  Black, 
Professor  of  Oriental  Languages,  the  Senatus  of  his  Alma  Mater 
unanimously  conferred  "the  honorary  degree  of  D.D.  on  the  Rev. 
Alexander  Keith,  minister  of  St.  Cyrus,  and  author  of  the  well-known 
work  on  the  '  Fulfilment  of  Prophecy ; '  in  testimony  of  their  high 
estimation  of  his  character  as  a  clergj'man,  and  respect  for  his  attain- 
ments in  Theology  and  General  Literature." 

In  the  year  1839,  the  General  Assembly,  having  resolved  to  seek 
the  conversion  of  the  children  of  Israel,  appointed  a  deputation  to  visit 
the  Continent  of  Europe  and  the  sacred  lands,  for  the  purpose  of  collect- 
ing information  respecting  them ;  and  Dr  Keith  was  naturally  selected 
as  one  of  four  for  the  discharge  of  that  interesting  duty.  On  their  way 
home,  having  arrived  at  Pesth,  Dr  Keith  was  prostrated  with  fever,  and 
brought  to  the  gates  of  death.  To  the  astonishment  of  the  medical 
professor  who  attended  him,  he  survived,  and  on  his  strength  slowly 
returning,  he  found  at  his  bedside  that  noble  Christian  lady,  Maria 
Dorothea,  wife  of  the  Prince  Palatine  and  Viceroy  of  Hungary.  The 
effect  of  her  frequent  visits,  first  on  herself,  in  the  enlargement  of  her 


{ 


ALEXANDER  KEITH,  D.D. 

views  of  Divine  trutii  and  the  strengthening  of  her  Christian  character — 
and  next,  on  the  great  object  of  Dr  Keith's  visit,  in  the  establishment  of 
a  mission  to  the  Jews  in  Pesth,  and  its  singular  success  from  its  outset 
to  the  present  day — this  was  a  subject  to  which,  in  after  years,  Dr  Keith 
was  wont  to  recur  with  unceasing  wonder  and  devout  acknowledgment 
of  the  Hand  that  had  so  marvellously  led  the  blind  in  a  way  that  thcj- 
knew  not.     The  details  of  it,  however,  must  be  read  elsewhere.* 

In  the  year  1840,  his  health  being  then  indifferent,  and  his  eldest 
son,  as  already  stated,  being  associated  with  him  in  the  duties  of  his 
parish,  he  retired  from  pastoral  work  and  henceforth  devoted  himself  to 
his  peculiar  studies.  When  the  memorable  "Disruption"  took  place, 
Dr  Keith,  as  might  have  been  expected,  was  found  among  those  who  at 
the  cost  of  their  all  in  life,  refused  to  surrender  to  the  Civil  power  the 
spiritual  independence  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  became  one  of  the 
members  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland.  Having  been  Convener  of 
the  Committee  for  the  Conversion  of  the  Jews  since  its  first  formation, 
he  for  many  years  continued  in  that  office  in  connection  with  the  Free 
Church.  But  though  in  this  capacity,  he  had  to  read  to  the  General 
Assembly  his  annual  report,  he  took  no  active  part  in  ecclesiastical  affairs. 
In  fact,  once  only  does  the  present  writer  remember  him  coming  openly 
forvvard.  At  one  of  the  early  post-Disruption  Assemblies,  an  effort  was 
made,  in  a  somewhat  veiled  form,  to  pledge  the  Church  to  what  was 
called  "The  Descending  Obligation  of  the  Covenants"  (meaning  the 
National  Covenant  of  the  i6th  and  the  Solemn  League  and  Covenant  of 
the  17th  centuries).  When  the  true  nature  of  this  proposal  came  to  be  seen, 
and  some  .strong  speeches  by  eminent  members  had  been  made  against 
it,  Dr  Keith  rose,  and  in  a  speech  of  but  a  sentence  or  two,  put  an  end 
to  the  whole  thing.  It  was  about  midnight,  and  his  tall  figure  wrapt  in 
a  long  cloak,  and  his  dark  visage  reminded  the  present  writer  of  the 

♦  .See  Life  of  the  late  John  Duncan,  LL.I).,  by  David  Brown,  D.D.,  Chap.  .\ii. 
Second  Edition,  1872. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

prophet  Elijah  ;  while  the  rarity  with  which  he  opened  his  mouth,  and 
the  solemnity  with  which  he  spoke  spread  a  stillness  over  the  crowded 
house,  as  he  uttered  words  to  the  following  effect : — "  Moderator,  God 
never  made,  and  never  will  make,  a  National  Covenant  with  any  people 
but  one — the  children  of  Abraham  ;  and  the  day  that  sees  this  Church 
recognising  any  other  National  Covenant  than  that,  will  see  me  for  the 
last  time  a  member  of  it." 

In  the  year  1844,  Dr  Keith  revisited  the  East,  examining  all  the 
sacred  spots,  and  this  time  he  was  accompanied  by  his  son,  Dr  George 
Skene  Keith,  who  then  first  applied  the  daguerreotype  process  to  the 
illustration  of  the  scenery  they  witnessed.  These  illustrations,  being  trans- 
ferred to  Dr  Keith's  pages  in  subsequent  editions,  greatly  enhanced  their 
interest  and  value.  In  fact  Dr  Keith  kept  ever  availing  himself  of  the 
most  recent  works  of  travel  in  those  parts  for  the  illustration  of  his 
subject.  Of  none  did  he  make  more  use  than  that  of  M.  Leon  de  Laborde 
on  Idumaea,  a  region  then  almost  unknown  ;  transferring  to  his  book, 
at  considerable  expense,  his  magnificent  engravings  of  the  rock-tombs 
and  temples  of  Edom,  and  the  ruins  of  Petra. 

The  popularity  of  his  first  work  on  Prophecy,  and  the  length  of  time 
during  which  it  was  his  chief  study,  naturally  led  Dr  Keith  to  think  that 
the  same  subject  might  be  turned  to  account  in  the  direction  of  symboli- 
cal prophecy.  By  some,  indeed,  even  his  first  work  was  thought  to  go 
too  far,  in  pressing  literal  fulfilment  where  the  evidence  seemed  more 
fanciful  than  real.  But  when  he  undertook  to  interpret  symbolical  pro- 
phecy he  was  on  more  precarious  ground ;  and  his  next  work,  "  The 
Signs  of  the  Times,  illustrated  by  the  Fulfilment  of  Historical  Predic- 
tions, from  the  Days  of  Nebuchadnezzar  to  the  Present  Time,"  encountered 
opposition  from  other  expositors  of  the  same  predictions,  who  viewed 
them  differently.  Another  work,  "  Demonstration  of  the  Truth  of  the 
Christian  Religion  from  existing  Facts  and  collateral  Proof,"  was  more  in 
the  line  of  his  first  work  ;   and  not  a  few  found   the  same  fault  with 


ALEXANDER  KEITH,  D.D. 

it  as  with  the  former— of  building  too  mucli  on  slender  data.  It  had, 
nevertheless,  a  considerable  sale ;  Dr  Keith's  glowing  style  and  forcible 
way  of  putting  things  kindling  general  interest.  A  subsequent  work, 
"  The  Land  of  Israel  according  to  the  Covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,"— the  object  of  which  was  to  show  that  the  land  originally 
granted  extended  much  further  northward  and  eastward  than  was  usually 
supposed— made  a  considerable  sensation.  The  only  other  works  we  are 
aware  that  he  issued  were  in  the  same  line  as  his  second  one — "  The 
Harmony  of  Prophecy  concerning  the  Time  of  the  Restitution  of  All 
Things,  in  a  Comparison  of  the  Book  of  Revelation  with  other  Prophecies 
of  Scripture,"  and  "  History  and  Destiny  of  the  World  and  the  Church 
according  to  Scripture." 

"  The  great  service  rendered  by  Dr  Keith  to  the  Christian  Church," 
says  his  nephew,  the  Rev.  Dr  Blaikie,  "  we  believe  to  have  been  three- 
fold—7^/rj^,  Establishing  on  the  clearest  footing  the  reality  of  specific 
predictions  uttered  before  they  came  to  pass  ;  Second,  Directing  earnest 
attention  to  the  Jews  and  their  place  in  the  purposes  of  God  ;  and  Third, 
Bringing  out  clearly  and  minutely  the  character  of  the  Papal  Church,  as 
delineated  in  prophecy  and  fulfilled  in  histor>',  and  making  Rome  a 
witness  against  herself— a  witness  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  in 
regard  to  her." 

Latterly,  Dr  Keith  resided  chiefly  at  Buxton— so  well  known  as  a 
place  of  resort  for  invalids.  From  this  time  to  the  day  of  his  death, 
having  little  or  no  communication  with  Scotland,  his  name  gradually 
passed  out  of  notice ;  indeed  owing  to  the  great  age  which  he  reached,  it 
was  the  impression  of  not  a  few  of  his  Scottish  friends  that  he  had 
ceased  to  live,  and  the  announcement  of  his  death  alone  disabused 
them  of  that  impression.  But  his  Buxton  days,  prolonged  as  they  were, 
were  far  from  dull.  Until  shortly  before  his  death,  he  retained  much 
of  that  lively  and  genial  manner  which  made  his  society  so  valued  by 
those  who  enjo>ed  it ;  with  congenial  visitors,  delighting  to  recall  his 

jX  3-7 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

first  literary  efforts,  the  progress  of  his  studies  and  researches,  and,  above 
all,  the  marvels  of  his  illness  and  recovery  at  Pesth.  "  A  distinguished 
minister,"  said  the  present  Free  Church  minister  of  St.  Cyrus,  in  the 
funeral  sermon  which  he  preached  after  Dr  Keith's  death,  "was  surprised 
when  I  told  him  I  had  never  seen  him.  He  remarked,  with  some 
emotion,  '  You  should  go  and  see  the  old  man  before  he  dies,  and  get  his 
blessing.  I  should  count  it  a  rich  possession.'  He  was  confined  to  his 
bed  during  his  last  months,  and  the  writings  which  gave  him  most 
pleasure  were  Spurgeon's  Sermons.  He  was  very  gentle,  very  contented, 
and  very  happy."  He  died  at  the  ripe  age  of  eight)--nine,  and  was 
buried  in  a  country  church)-ard  near  Bu.xton. 

D.  B. 


mmr^A.. 


'^il^ 


%ohtvt  totimn,  II.B. 


OBERT  LORIMER,  LL.D.,  was  bom  at  Kirkconnel,  in 
Dumfriesshire,  on  nth  May  1765.  He  received  his 
university  education  at  Glasgow,  and  after  passing 
through  the  usual  literary  and  theological  curriculum, 
he  was  licensed  to  preach  the  Gospel  by  the  Presbytery 
of  Abernethy  in  September  1792.  On  ist  March,  in 
tlic  following  year,  he  was  appointed  to  the  Chaplaincy  of  the  Southern 
Regiment  of  Fencibles,  commanded  at  that  time  by  James,  Earl  of 
Hopetoun,  and  a  few  months  later  he  was  ordained  by  the  Presbytery  of 
Penpont.  In  1795  he  had  his  degree  from  the  University  of  Glasgow, 
and,  in  February  1796,  he  received  simultaneously  the  presentation  to  the 
First  Charge  of  the  parish  of  Haddington  from  the  Earl  of  Hopetoun, 
and  to  the  parish  of  Smailholm,  in  the  Presbytery  of  Lauder,  from 
George  Baillie,  Esq.  of  Jerviswoode.  After  due  consideration  he  decided 
to  accept  the  former,  and,  on  the  i6th  June,  he  was  inducted  as  successor 
to  Dr  George  Barclay.  During  forty-seven  years  he  faithfully  discharged 
all  the  duties  pertaining  to  the  oversight  of  so  important  a  parish,  and 
when  at  the  Disruption  he  was  required  to  choose  whether  to  remain  in 
the  benefice  he  had  held  so  long,  or  to  go  out  into  the  wilderness,  he 
did  not  hesitate  to  remain  true  to  his  convictions,  and  chose  the  latter 
course.  He  then  became  colleague  in  the  pastorate  of  St  John's  Church, 
Haddington,  the  duties  of  which  he  fulfilled  to  the  day  of  his  death. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

When  Dr  Lorimer  went  to  Haddington,  there  were  only  two  ministers 
within  the  bounds  of  that  large  Presbytery  who  were  decidedly  Evan- 
gelical, but  he  lived  to  see  the  cause  to  which  he  was  attached  predomi- 
nate as  much  in  East  Lothian  as  in  other  parts  of  the  country,  and  to  both 
local  and  national  changes  he  contributed  his  own  part  by  his  able,  evan- 
gelical, and  acceptable  ministry.  When  the  contest  between  the  Church 
and  the  State  reached  its  critical  point,  and  the  Convocation  of  ministers 
adhering  to  the  Evangelical  cause  in  the  Church  of  Scotland,  met  in 
November  1842,  Dr  Lorimer  was  chosen  to  preside  over  the  deliberations. 
The  Convocation  continued  its  sittings  for  nearly  a  week.  Two  series 
of  Resolutions  were  adopted.     In  the  second  series,  after  stating 

"  That  the  assumption  by  the  Civil  Courts  of  authority  in  matters  spiritual,  and 
especially  in  the  ordination,  admission,  or  deposition  of  ministers,  and  the  other 
proceedings  there  set  forth,  is  in  violation  of  the  law  establishing  the  Church,  which 
was  made  unalterable  by  the  Act  of  Security  and  Treaty  of  Union,"  and  recognising 
"  that  it  is  not  the  duty  of  the  Church,  as  a  kingdom  not  of  this  world,  which  has  not, 
and  cannot  have,  any  power  of  the  sword,  or  any  secular  dominion  whatever,  to  plead 
her  title,  thus  acquired  and  secured,  to  the  temporal  benefits  of  the  Establishment,  in 
opposition  to  the  supreme  power  of  the  State,  except  in  the  way  of  remonstrance, 
protest,  and  serious  warning,"  it  is  declared,  "  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  ministers  now 
assembled,  and  of  all  who  adhere  to  their  views,  to  make  a  solemn  representation  to 
Her  Majesty's  Government,  and  to  both  Houses  of  Pariiament,  setting  forth  the 
imminent  and  extreme  peril  of  the  Establishment,  the  inestimable  benefits  it  confers 
upon  the  country,  and  the  pain  and  reluctance  with  which  they  are  forced  to 
contemplate  the  possibility  of  the  Church's  separation,  for  conscience  sake,  from  the 
State— respectfully  calling  upon  the  rulers  of  this  nation  to  maintain  the  Constitution 
of  the  kingdom  inviolate,  and  to  uphold  a  pure  establishment  of  religion  in  the  land  ; 
and,  finally,  intimating  that,  as  the  endowments  of  the  Church  are  undoubtedly  at  the 
disposal  of  the  supreme  power  of  the  State,  with  whom  it  rests  either  to  continue  to 
the  Church  her  possession  of  them,  free  from  any  limitation  of  her  spiritual  jurisdiction 
and  freedom,  or  withdraw  them  altogether,  so  it  must  be  the  duty  of  the  Church,  and, 
consequently,  in  dependence  on  the  grace  of  God,  it  is  the  determination  of  the  brethren 
now  assembled— if  no  measure  such  as  they  have  declared  to  be  indispensable  be  granted 
—to  tender  the  resignation  of  those  civil  advantages  which  they  can  no  longer  hold  in 
consistency  with  the  free  and  full  exercise  of  their  spiritual  functions,  and  to  cast  them- 
selves on  such  provision  as  God  in  His  providence  may  afford  ;  maintaining  still  uncom- 
promised  the  principle  of  a  right  scriptural  connection  between  the  Church  and  State, 
and  solemnly  entering  their  protest  against  the  judgments  of  which  they  complain." 


ROBERT  LORIMER,  LL.D. 

On  completing  the  fiftieth  year  of  his  ministry  in  Haddington,  all 
classes  of  men  united  in  shewing  their  high  esteem  for  him  by  inviting 
him  to  a  public  dinner,  which  was  presided  over  by  his  valued  friend  and 
co-presbyter,  Dr  Makellar. 

After  a  very  short  illness,  Dr  Lorimer  died  on  9th  November  1848, 
in  the  eighty-fourth  year  of  his  age.  He  had  preached  on  the  preceding 
Lord's  day  from  the  text,  "  Enoch  walked  with  God  ;"  and  was  engaged 
in  preparing  for  the  following  Lord's  day  a  discourse  on  that  passage  in 
Job,  "All  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I  wait  till  my  change 
come,"  shewing  that  his  mind  was  fully  occupied  with  the  contemplation 
of  that  heavenly  rest  for  which  he  longed.  He  was  buried  in  the  Parish 
Churchyard,  in  the  presence  of  a  large  concourse  of  persons,  who  had 
assembled  out  of  respect  to  his  memory. 

His  valuable  library,  on  the  collection  of  which  he  bestowed  much 
time  and  thought,  he  bequeathed  to  the  Free  Church  College,  Edinburgh. 
As  his  old  friend  Archibald  Constable  said,  there  was  "less  trash"  in  it 
than  in  any  library  he  had  ever  examined. 

In  his  home  life,  Dr  Lorimer  was  singularly  happy,  the  influence  of 
the  manse  for  good  being  felt  throughout  the  parish.  In  1801  he  was 
married  to  Elizabeth,  eldest  daughter  of  John  Gordon,  Esq.  of  Balmoor. 
Writer  to  the  Signet,  by  whom  he  had  two  daughters  and  four  sons. 
The  second  son  was  the  Rev.  John  Gordon  Lorimer,  D.D ,  who,  finst  in 
Torryburn,  and  then  in  the  parish  of  St  David's,  Glasgow,  contended  for 
the  same  Evangelical  principles  upheld  by  his  father.  At  the  Disruption 
he  became  minister  of  Free  St  David's  Church,  and,  along  with  Dr 
Robert  Buchanan  and  Dr  James  Gibson,  did  no  mean  service  by  his 
writings  and  by  his  preaching  in  upholding  and  strengthening  the  cause 
of  the  Free  Church  in  the  West.  By  his  constant  correspondence  with 
the  Churches  abroad,  he  did  what  lay  in  his  power  to  awaken  their 
sympathy  with  tlie  Free  Church  movement.  He  died  suddenly  on  9th 
October  1868. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

In  estimating  the  services  of  Dr  Lorimer  to  the  cause  of  religion,  it 
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  greater  portion  of  his  ministry  preceded 
the  Disruption,  and  it  would  be  an  error  to  measure  the  labours  of  him, 
and  others  like  him,  by  the  same  standard  that  is  applied  to  the  great 
leaders  of  the  movement.  The  Church  cannot  but  admire  and  honour 
the  able  band  of  men  whom  God  raised  up  during  the  "Ten  Years' 
Conflict";  at  the  same  time,  she  must  not  forget  what  is  due  to  their 
predecessors,  the  Evangelical  minority  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.  They 
were  the  pioneers  of  the  Free  Church,  the  harbingers  of  a  better  state 
of  things.  In  many  great  movements  it  has  seemed  as  if  the  heroic 
element  was  first  developed,  to  be  followed  by  a  time  of  comparative 
calmness  and  tranquillity ;  but  at  the  Disruption  the  evangelistic  element 
had  first  leavened  the  whole  lump,  and  the  heroism  was  manifested  at  a 
later  stage.  From  1784  there  was  half-a-century  of  Evangelical  preach- 
ing, which  silently  and  gradually  prepared  the  materials  out  of  which  the 
Free  Church  was  to  arise.  Whilst,  therefore,  all  due  praise  is  to  be 
given  to  the  leaders  who  achieved  the  triumph,  it  is  for  the  honour  of 
the  Church  to  remember  that  the  whole  movement  sprang  from  the 
pious  and  fruitful  ministry  of  the  Evangelical  minority.  Among  the 
honourable  band  who  formed  it, — such  as  Innes,  Balfour,  Davidson, 
Campbell,  Colquhoun,  Moncreiff,  and  Thomson,—  Dr  Lorimer  held  a 
high  place  fifty  years  before  the  Disruption. 

A.  P.  L. 


IXtk  3m\\t%  JTO'Cosi),  Q.©.,  IIM. 


)AMES  M'COSH  was  born  on  the  banks  of  the  Doon, 
Ayrshire,  ist  April  iSii,  and  received  his  early 
education  at  a  parochial  school.  He  studied  five 
years  at  the  University  of  Glasgow,  and  then  went 
to  Edinburgh,  where  he  studied  other  five  years  under 
Dr  Chalmers ;  while  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  he 
paid  considerable  attention  to  Natural  Science,  and  received  from  the 
Senatus  the  Honorary  Degree  of  A.M.,  for  an  essay  on  the  "  Stoic 
Philosophy,"  which  showed  his  proclivities  towards  philosophic  reading 
and  investigation. 

In  1835  he  was  called  to  the  Abbey  Church  in  Arbroath,  and 
continued  there  for  three  years,  visiting  from  house  to  house  in  the 
parish  allotted  to  him.  When  in  the  Divinity  Hall  of  Edinburgh,  he 
had  defended  the  cause  of  Non-Intrusion,  or  rather  of  Direct  Election  by 
the  people,  in  the  Theological  Society ;  and  now  in  the  Presbytery  of 
Arbroath,  and  all  along  the  east  coast  of  Forfarshire,  he  and  several 
other  young  men  lately  settled  there,  joined  the  Rev.  Thomas  Guthrie, 
who  was  their  leader,  in  resolutely  maintaining  and  promulgating  the 
grand  principles  of  the  rights  of  the  members  of  the  Church.  In  1838 
he  was  appointed  by  the  Crown,  on  the  recommendation  of  his  former 
teacher,  Dr  Wel.sh,  to  the  first  charge  of  the  church  in  Brechin,  one  of 
the  most  enviable  livings  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.     There  he  worked 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

laboriously  in  preaching  not  only  in  the  large  cathedral  church,  but  in 
barns  and  kitchens,  in  visiting  from  house  to  house,  and  in  teaching  in 
a  large  class,  often  numbering  1 50,  the  young  men  and  women  of  the 
parish.  The  Gospel  had  been  preached  in  Brechin  by  a  succession  of 
faithful  ministers  from  the  days  of  Willison  at  the  beginning  of  last 
century;  there  was  a  large  amount  of  Bible  knowledge  among  the 
people ;  with  scarcely  an  exception,  the  whole  population  went  to  some 
place  of  worship.  He  and  his  colleague,  the  Rev.  A.  L.  R.  Foote,  had  a 
communion-roll  of  upwards  of  1400. 

During  the  four  years  of  his  ministry  in  the  Established  Church,  he 
kept  steadily  before  his  people  and  throughout  the  district  the  great 
principles  for  which  the  Church  was  contending.  In  "  Recollections  of 
the  Disruption  in  Brechin,"  printed  for  private  circulation,  we  have 
extracts  from  addresses  delivered  in  the  years  1842  and  1843,  which 
show  how  fully  he  perceived  the  character  and  measured  the  difficulties 
of  the  situation.  He  believed  that  by  the  decision  of  the  House  of 
Lords,  spiritual  jurisdiction  was  taken  away  from  the  Church.  In  an 
address,  dated  13th  November,  1842,  he  says  : — "The  principles  which  I 
have  endeavoured  to  state  have  long  been  entertained  by  me ;  I  had 
lately,  when  on  a  bed  of  distress,  an  opportunity  of  reviewing  them. 
My  regret,  with  eternity  in  view,  was,  not  that  I  had  done  too  much, 
but  that  I  had  done  so  little.  Deliberation  has  only  tended  to  show 
me  that  the  principles  I  hold  are  connected  with  all  that  is  noble  in  the 
Church  of  Christ,  of  which  I  am  honoured  to  be  a  minister."  This  was 
his  language  to  his  people  immediately  before  going  up  to  the  Con- 
vocation in  Edinburgh.  As  the  Disruption,  now  evidently  coming, 
drew  on,  he  was  actively  employed  in  helping  to  organise  his  own 
congregation  and  several  other  congregations  in  neighbouring  parishes 
where  the  ministers  adhered  to  the  Established  Church.  At  the 
Disruption,  825  of  his  congregation  adhered  to  the  Free  Church. 

On  the  first  Sabbath  after  the  Disruption  he  preached  on  Haggai  ii.  9, 


RF.V.  JAMES  iWCOSH,  P.D.,  LL.D. 

"  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  greater  than  of  the  former,"  and 
referred  to  the  sorrow  they  felt  in  leaving  the  Established  Church,  and 
the  confidence  they  felt  that  God  would  bless  the  Free  Church.  At  the 
opening  of  their  new  church  in  November  following,  he  gave  his  reflec- 
tions on  the  crisis  through  which  he  and  others  had  passed.  He  said  that 
if  they  had  given  up  their  principles,  the  wicked  would  have  triumphed 
on  seeing  the  cause  of  God  betrayed  by  the  so-called  Church  of  God. 
"  In  this  contest,"  continued  he,  "  we  have  lost  much.  Some  of  us  have 
lost  that  means  of  support  of  which  at  one  time  we  never  expected  to 
be  deprived  but  by  death ;  we  have  lost,  it  may  be,  some  of  our  status 
in  the  society  of  this  world  ;  we  have  been  exposed,  as  our  Master  was, 
to  reproaches  and  scorn  ;  wc  have  all  of  us  lost  those  churches  in  which 
we  worshipped,  and  the  very  stones  of  which  were  dear  unto  us  ;  some 
of  you  may  have  lost  friends  and  favours."  Yet  he  added  that  they 
had  not  been  defeated,  nor  had  they  cause  to  be  ashamed ;  they  would 
bless  God  that  they  had  been  permitted  and  enabled  to  give  a  testi- 
mony for  Christ's  kingdom  and  crown. 

The  year  following  the  Disruption  was  one  of  hard  and  trying  work 
to  Mr  M'Cosh,  in  which  he  displayed  the  energ)',  tact,  and  courage  which 
are  characteristic  of  him.  He  was  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly 
"  Convener  of  Supply  "  for  the  district  of  the  county  of  Mearns,  and  the 
North-East  of  Forfarshire  ;  and  he  now  set  himself  to  organise  congrega- 
tions, to  provide  them  with  ordinances,  to  advise  and  aid  in  getting  sites, 
in  raising  funds,  and  having  churches  erected.  The  ministers  who 
remained  in  the  Established  Church  did  their  utmost  to  obstruct  the 
members  of  their  churches  who  desired  to  join  the  Free  Church.  Lords, 
lairds,  and  their  factors  scowled  on  the  movement,  and  threatened  their 
tenants  and  dependants.  Mr  M'Cosh  had  many  adventures  in  confront- 
ing their  hostility  and  in  gathering  the  people  into  churches.  In  a  number 
of  places  no  sites  could  be  obtained  for  churches  from  the  proprietors  of 
the  soil.     In  Fettercairn  the  people  could  get  no  place  to  worship  in  till 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

a.  widow  offered  a  field  which  she  rented,  and  there  on  the  green  grass 
Mr  M'Cosh  dispensed  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  Supper  a  few  Sabbaths 
after  the  Disruption,  to  213  communicants,  and  this  under  the  immediate 
view  of  Sir  John  Gladstone  who  in  the  first  instance  did  all  he  could  to 
crush  the  movement.  In  Menmuir  Mr  M'Cosh  after  officiating  twice  to 
his  own  congregation  preached  on  the  Sabbath  evening  on  the  roadside, 
and  gathered  a  congregation  who  after  keen  persecution  got  a  site  for  a 
church.  In  Lochlee  the  Free  Church  members  met  with  determined 
opposition  from  a  very  powerful  man,  Lord  Panmure,  who  possessed  the 
whole  district ;  and  for  a  long  time  they  had  to  worship  in  a  shepherd's 
house  provided  for  them  by  a  courageous  farmer,  David  Inglis.  Mr 
M'Cosh  also  aided  in  forming  congregations  and  building  churches  in 
Fordoun,  Laurencekirk,  Stonehaven,  and  Bervie.  In  carrj'ing  on  this 
work  he  rode  around  the  country  on  horse-back,  preaching  in  barns  and 
ballrooms,  sometimes  riding  thirty  miles,  and  preaching  thrice  on  a 
Sabbath.  It  is  believed  that  now  for  the  first  time  was  the  Gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God  preached  in  parishes  from  which  it  had  in  all  previous  ages 
been  excluded  by  Moderatism  and  Prelacy. 

In  the  winter  of  1843-44  he  went  as  a  member  of  a  deputation  to  the 
parts  of  England  in  and  around  the  city  of  York,  in  Northamptonshire, 
and  about  Olney,  addressing  meetings  on  the  cause  of  the  Free  Church, 
and  soliciting  the  sympathy  and  help  of  the  English  Nonconformists.  In 
the  year  1844  he  removed  from  the  West  to  the  East  Free  Church  of 
Brechin,  where  he  ministered  until  the  end  of  1S51. 

Disruption  struggles  began  to  subside  in  1846,  and  Mr  M'Cosh  was 
thus  able  to  apply  himself  to  the  preparation  of  his  first  great  work,  "  The 
Method  of  the  Divine  Government."  The  appearance  of  this  work  in  1850 
at  once  placed  its  author  amongst  the  foremost  thinkers  and  apologists 
of  the  age,  and  led  soon  afterwards  to  his  being  offered  the  Chair  of 
Logic  and  Metaphysics  in  Queen's  College,  Belfast.  He  entered  on  the 
duties  of  this  chair  in   1852,  where  he  soon  proved  himself  as  able  a 


REV.  JAMES  M'COSH,  D.D.,  LED. 

teacher  as  he  liad  been  a  successful  writer.  During  the  sixteen  years  of 
his  Belfast  Professorship,  he  created  a  taste  for  the  study  of  Philosophy 
in  the  North  of  Ireland,  and  sent  out  a  number  of  students  who  have 
already  made  their  mark  in  this  department.  At  this  time  he  was  usually 
an  E.xaminer  in  the  Queen's  University,  he  was  one  of  the  distinguished 
Board  of  Examiners  who  organised  the  first  Competitive  Examination 
for  the  Civil  Service  of  India,  and  he  was  twice  Examiner  for  the  Ferguson 
Scholarships  open  to  graduates  of  the  Scottish  Universities.  He  also 
published  whilst  in  Belfast  "An  Examination  of  John  Stuart  Mill's 
Philosophy,"  and  "The  Intuitions  of  the  Mind  Inductively  Investigated," 
and  several  other  philosophical  works.  He  advocated  the  cause  of 
Intermediate  Education  in  Ireland,  and  did  much  to  promote  the 
circulation  of  Sound  Literature  through  the  Bible  and  Colportage 
Society,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  secretaries.  He  took  a  leading 
part  in  organising  the  Ministerial  Support  Fund  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  and  was  for  some  years  Joint  Convener  of  that  scheme.  His 
last  publication  before  leaving  Ireland  was  a  vigorous  protest  against  a 
project  for  endowing  Poper>',  which  was  then  seriously  proposed  by  the 
leaders  of  both  political  parties. 

In  1868  Dr  M'Cosh  was  called  to  the  Presidency  of  the  College  of 
New  Jersey,  at  Princeton  in  the  United  States,  a  post  formerly  occupied 
by  Aaron  Burr,  and  Jonathan  Edwards,  and  (another  Scotchman)  John 
Witherspoon.  Under  his  supervision  the  College  has  had  remarkable 
success,  having  doubled  the  numbers  of  its  buildings,  professors,  and 
students,  within  the  eleven  years  of  hi?  administration,  and  having  been 
enriched  by  large  benefactions,  and  having  greatly  improved  its  methods 
of  teaching. 

Notwithstanding  the  multifarious  work  incident  to  the  office  of 
President  of  a  large  American  College,  and  the  duties  of  the  Chair  of 
Psychology  which  he  ably  fills,  Dr  M'Cosh  has  found  leisure  for  a  good 
deal  of  outside  work.     He  favoured  from  the  first  the  Union  of  the  Old 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

and  New  School  Branches  of  the  American  Presbyterians,  and  he  is 
entitled  to  the  credit  of  having  planned  and  in  some  measure  carried  out 
the  Catholic  Alliance  of  all  Presbyterian  Churches  in  the  Pan-Presbyterian 
Council.  He  has  also  issued  in  America,  his  books  on  "  The  Discursive 
Laws  of  Thought,"  on  "  Christianity  and  Positivism,"  and  on  "  The  Scot- 
tish Philosophy  from  Hutcheson  to  Hamilton  ; "  besides  a  large  number 
of  smaller  works,  public  addresses,  sermons,  and  contributions  on  Philoso- 
phical and  Apologetic  subjects  to  TJie  Princeton  Reviezv,  The  North 
American  Review,  and  other  Revieivs,  and  to  Tlie  Popular  Science 
Monthly. 

All  his  writings  are  characterised  by  penetration  and  boldness  of 
thought,  by  giving  full  force  to  ever>'  newly  discovered  truth,  and  by 
uniform  allegiance  to  the  supreme  authority  of  the  Word  of  God. 

G.  ML. 


Cljomas  ikV^xit,  QS,  iLQ. 


HE  family  of  the  biographer  of  Knox  consisted  of  four 
sons  and  one  daughter.  Of  these,  Thomas,  the  subject 
of  this  brief  memoir,  was  the  eldest.  He  was  born  in 
Edinburgh,  November  1797,  and  received  his  classical 
education  at  the  High  School  of  that  city.  One  of 
his  teachers  there  was  James  Pillans,  who  afterwards 
became  Professor  of  Humanity  in  the  Edinburgh  University,  to  which 
his  High  School  pupil  in  due  time  passed.  The  intercourse  between 
the  two  was  ever  after  of  a  friendly  nature,  the  Professor  retaining 
a  pleasing  remembrance  of  the  elegant  Latin  Composition  of  Thomas, 
while  often  expressing  his  high  estimate  of  the  fine  scholarship  and 
brilliant  parts  of  his  youngest  brother  George,  whom  Pillans  regarded 
as  lost  when  he  became  his  brother's  successor  at  Clola,  and  who  died 
at  Edinburgh  in  1878.  Destined  from  an  early  age  for  the  ministry  of 
the  Original  Secession  Church — the  branch  of  the  Secession  to  which 
the  family  belonged, — Thomas  M'Crie  next  attended  the  Theological 
Hall,  having  Archibald  Bruce  of  Whitburn  for  his  professor,  with  John 
Duncan,  the  "  Rabbi,"  professor  of  the  New  College,  Edinburgh,  and 
Robert  Shaw,  expositor  of  the  Confession  of  Faith,  for  fellow  students. 
The  early  years  of  his  ministry  were  spent  first  in  Crieff,  where  he  was 
ordained  in  1822  and  laboured  for  eight  years,  and  thereafter  at  Clola, 
Aberdeenshire,  where  he  remained  other  seven  years.      It  was  while 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

cnjo}-ing  and  endeavouring  to  profit  by  the  ease  of  a  rural  charge,  and 
in  compHance  with  the  suggestion  of  his  father,  that  he  undertook, 
as  his  first  literary  work,  the  translation  of  Pascal's  "  Provincial  Letters." 
Although  completed  at  Clola,  the  volume  was  not  published  till  several 
years  later ;  so  soon  as  given  to  the  public  it  received  a  cordial  welcome, 
passed  through  several  editions,  and  has  lately  been  added  to  their 
"  Golden  Library  "  series  by  Chatto  &  Windus. 

In  1835  the  great  Scottish  Historian  died;  and  shortly  afterwards 
the  son,  responding  to  a  call  from  the  vacant  congregation,  became  the 
father's  successor.  For  twenty  years  he  was  minister  of  what,  in 
his  time,  was  known  as  "  Davie  Street  Church,"  situated  in  the  south 
.side  of  the  town,  in  a  street  bearing  that  name,  that  runs  off  the  main 
thoroughfare  of  Nicolson  Street :  since  then  the  place  of  worship  has 
been  called  "  Rl'Crie  Church."  The  position  of  M'Crie  the  younger  as  a 
preacher  fell  short  of  the  highest.  Academical  in  his  style,  fastidious  in 
his  composition,  and  not  possessing  any  great  amount  of  ease,  freedom 
or  readiness  in  delivery,  he  ought,  if  justice  were  to  be  done  to  his 
carefully  prepared  and  fully  written  out  lectures  and  discourses,  to  have 
had  ample  liberty  to  read  in  the  pulpit  what  he  had  elaborated  in  the 
study.  That,  however,  was  a  thing  not  to  be  thought  of  in  the  Secession 
Church  of  his  day,  "  the  paper "  being  sternly  reprobated  by  professors 
in  the  hearing  of  trial  discourses,  and  held  in  utter  abhorrence  by  all 
vacant  congregations  sitting  in  judgment  upon  candidates. 

In  after  years,  when,  as  a  Free  Church  and  English  Presb}'terian 
minister,  Dr  M'Crie  felt  himself  at  liberty  to  make  use  of  his  manuscript 
in  the  pulpit,  he  became  a  more  effective  and  much  more  popular 
preacher,  his  services  being  eagerly  sought  and  highly  appreciated  in  the 
preaching  of  anniversary  and  other  special  services.  But  although  the 
son  did  not  attain  to  the  pulpit  popularity  of  the  father,  and  his  Edin- 
burgh congregation  was  never  a  large  one,  lacking  elements  of  growth 
and  expansion,  the  name  of  Thomas  M'Crie  the  younger  soon  became 


THOMAS  M'CRIE,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

known  in  the  literary  circles  of  Edinburgh,  and  thereafter  familiar  to  the 
reading  public  of  Scotland.  It  speedily  became  evident  that  he  had  in 
no  ordinary  degree  the  pen  of  a  ready,  graceful,  and  popular  writer,  and 
several  works  with  which  his  name  has  ever  since  been  associated,  belong 
to  the  period  of  his  life  with  which  we  are  now  dealing.  Thus,  in  1840  he 
wrote  the  "  Life  of  Thomas  M'Crie,  D.D.,"  which  is  replete  with  valuable 
information  bearing  upon  the  church  controversies  and  conflicts  of 
that  ecclesiastic's  times :  from  a  very  early  pcj-iod  of  its  history  he 
was  connected  with  the  Wodrovv  Society,  rendering  valued  services  in 
the  selection  of  its  publications,  and  personally  editing  three  volumes; 
and  in  1850  he  wrote  the  "Memoirs  of  Sir  Andrew  Agncw,"  which  reached 
a  second  edition  in  the  following  year.  By  the  time  this  work  was  pub- 
lished, the  author  of  it  had  received  two  University  honours — the  Degree 
of  D.D.  from  the  University  of  Aberdeen,  and  that  of  LL.D.  from  the 
University  of  Glasgow.  There  was  one  department  of  literary  work  in 
which  Dr  M'Crie's  help  was  often  sought,  and  much  thought  of  when 
rendered,  that,  namely,  of  periodical  and  journal  literature.  He  had 
great  skill  and  ease  in  the  composition  of  leading  articles,  reviews,  and 
magazine  papers.  Hugh  Miller,  in  the  height  of  his  career  as  editor 
of  The  Witness,  discovered  the  ability  of  the  Davie  Street  minister, 
gladly  secured  his  services  as  an  occasional  contributor  to  the  columns  of 
his  paper,  and  continued  to  be  ever  after  a  warm  friend  of  his  coUabora- 
teur.  The  Witness  editor  is  known  to  have  said  that  among  all  the  liter- 
ary men  and  famous  ecclesiastics  in  Edinburgh  at  that  time,  there  was 
not  one  who  could  throw  off  a  leader  or  a  literary  criticism  so  effectively 
and  gracefully  as  the  Secession  minister;  and  it  was  no  uncommon  thing 
for  some  brilliant  leading  article  or  dashing  review  to  be  attributed  to 
the  author  of  "The  Testimony  of  the  Rocks,"  which  in  reality  came  from  the 
pen  of  his  contributor  and  friend.  This  was  the  case  as  regards  an  article 
upon  a  "  New  Edition  of  the  Holy  Bible,  edited  by  the  Rev.  Dr  Robert 
Lee,"  in  which  the  writer  professed,  like  Cowpcr's  cottager,  to  "just  know. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

and  know  no  more,  our  Bible  true,"  but  in  which  he  severely  handled  the 
Moderatism  in  Theology  and  Bible  interpretation  of  the  Greyfriars'  Pro- 
fessor of  Biblical  Criticism ;  and  it  was  notably  so  as  regards  several 
articles  upon  Lord  Macaulay's  "  History  of  England,"  which  attracted 
great  notice  at  the  time  they  appeared,  were  widely  regarded  and  spoken 
of  in  this  country  and  America  as  Hugh  Miller's,  and  were  afterwards 
published  in  a  pamphlet  form. 

The  second  leading  period  in  Dr  M'Crie's  life  may  be  dated  from 
1852,  in  which  year  a  union  was  effected  between  a  majority  of  the 
Secession  body  to  which  he  belonged  and  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland. 
In  the  negotiations  that  preceded  he  took  his  own  share,  although  not 
figuring  in  the  deliberations  and  debates  of  Church  Courts,  for  which, 
indeed,  he  had  no  aptitude  ;  and  when  the  union  was  consummated,  Dr 
M'Crie  appeared  at  Tanfield  Hall  along  with  Dr  Shaw  of  Whitburn, 
Dr  Laing  of  Colmonell,  and  Mr  White  of  Haddington,  these  having 
been  selected  by  their  brethren  as  representatives  of  the  smaller  uniting 
Church.  Four  years  later,  the  Free  Church  conferred  upon  him  her 
highest  honour,  by  placing  him  in  the  Moderator's  Chair  of  her  General 
Assembly.  His  predecessor  in  the  office  was  the  Rev.  Dr  James  Hender- 
son of  Glasgow,  whose  loving  spirit,  fine  taste,  and  ripe  scholarship 
found  congenial  employment  in  introducing  not  only  his  own  personal 
friend,  but  also  the  son  of  one  whom  he,  when  a  student,  had  known  and 
revered  as  the  friend  of  Andrew  Thomson  who  had  been  the  guide  of  his 
youth.  The  meetings  of  Assembly  over  which  Dr  M'Crie  presided  were 
held  in  the  Music  Hall,  Edinburgh,  the  Free  Church  having  by  that  time 
left  Canonmills  with  its  memories  of  post-Disruption  Assemblies,  and  the 
present  Assembly  Hall  at  the  head  of  the  Mound  not  being  then  built ; 
and  the  likeness  which  accompanies  this  sketch  is  associated  with  his 
Moderatorship,  the  photograph  of  which  it  is  an  engraving  having  been 
taken  by  Tunny  of  Edinburgh  after  the  May  meetings,  and  so  represent- 
ing the  subject  of  it  as  he  was  in  the  fifty-ninth  }-car  of  his  age.     Before 


THOMAS  M'CRIE,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

another  Assembly  met  Dr  M'Crie  had  ceased  to  be  a  minister  of  the  Free 
Church  and  a  citizen  of  Edinburgh,  having  accepted  an  invitation 
addressed  to  him  by  the  English  Presbyterian  Church  to  fill  the  Chair  of 
Church  History  and  Systematic  Theology  in  her  College,  and  having 
accordingly  removed  to  London  in  October  of  1856.  In  addition  to 
hereditary  and  acquired  qualifications  for  such  work  as  now  lay  before 
him,  the  Professor-elect  possessed  the  great  advantage  of  having  pre- 
viously discharged  the  duties  of  a  Divinity  Professor.  At  the  death  of 
Dr  Paxton  he  had  been  appointed  Theological  Professor  by  the  Synod  of 
United  Original  Seceders,  and  acted  as  such  till  the  union  above  referred 
to ;  in  the  Free  Church  also  he  had,  at  the  request  of  the  College  Com- 
mittee, acted  for  a  session  as  Professor  in  Aberdeen,  after  the  death  of 
Dr  Maclagan,  and  before  the  Hall  in  that  city  was  finally  placed  among 
the  theological  institutions  of  the  Free  Church.  With  Dr  Lorimer  as 
colleague  professor,  and  Dr  James  Hamilton  as  lecturer— men  to  whom 
he  felt  strongly  drawn,  not  only  because  of  kindred  pursuits,  but  also 
through  perfect  congeniality  of  temperament— Dr  M'Crie  gave  ten  years 
of  arduous  labour  to  the  enlarging  and  upbuilding  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church  in  England  in  what  may  be  regarded  as  the  period  of  that 
Church's  renaissance.  The  high  esteem  and  warm  affection  in  which  he 
was  held  by  the  successive  bands  of  ministers  who  studied  under  him, 
and  also  by  the  ministers  and  members  of  the  Church  at  large,  were 
strikingly  evinced  in  1866,  when  the  Professor  found  it  needful,  owing  to 
increasing  infirmities,  and  more  especially  to  cataract,  which  rendered 
writing  and  reading  painful  and  unsafe,  to  place  the  resignation  of  his 
professorship  in  the  hands  of  the  Synod.  On  that  occasion  a  handsome 
presentation  was  made  to  him  by  all  who  were  or  had  been  his  students, 
and  the  Synod  marked  its  sense  of  the  services  he  had  rendered  the 
Church  at  large  by  according  to  him  a  retiring  allowance  and  the  rank 
of  emeritus  Professor.  On  his  part,  the  disabled  Professor  testified  his 
unabated  interest  in  the  revived  Presbyterian  Church  of  England,  and 


DISRUPTIOX  WORTHIES. 

his  undiminished  attachment  to  those  with  whom  he  had  been  asso- 
ciated, by  publishing,  as  soon  as  partial  restoration  of  sight  enabled  him, 
a  volume  entitled  "  Annals  of  English  Presbytery,"  inscribed,  "  To  the 
Reverend  the  Moderator  and  Ministers,  with  the  Elders,  Deacons,  and 
Members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  England,  with  sincere  grati- 
tude and  respect." 

The  closing  years  of  Dr  M'Crie's  life  were  spent  partly  at  Gullane,  in 
East  Lothian,  on  the  Links  of  which  he  had,  in  younger  days,  spent 
many  a  happy  hour  in  the  bracing  recreation  of  golf,  and  partly  in  his 
native  city,  living  during  the  winter  months  in  a  Newington  house,  dis- 
tant only  about  a  stone's  cast  from  that  in  which  his  illustrious  father  died. 
The  most  important  work  accomplished  in  his  retirement  was  in  connection 
with  his  "Sketches."  Originally  a  course  of  week  night  lectures  on  the  His- 
tor>'  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  delivered  to  overflowing  audiences,  first  in 
the  Old,  and  then  in  the  New  Town,  a  still  wider  popularity  had  been  given 
to  them  by  their  publication  in  a  cheap  form  by  the  Free  Church  Publication 
Committee,  when  they  circulated  widely  in  Great  Britain  and  America, 
and  were  translated  on  the  Continent.  As  now  extended  and  brought 
"  down  to  a  time  which  is  within  the  memory  of  men  still  living,"  the  two 
thin  volumes  have  given  place  to  one  thick  octavo,  and  the  "  Sketches"  bear 
the  name  of  "  The  Story  of  the  Scottish  Church  from  the  Reformation 
to  the  Disruption,"  published  by  Messrs  Blackie  of  Glasgow.  This  book 
was  published  in  December  1874 — it  being  the  privilege  of  his  nephew, 
the  writer  of  this  notice,  to  correct  the  proofs  and  construct  the  index ; 
and,  when  that  took  place,  the  author  remarked,  "  My  work  in  this  world 
is  now  done."  So  it  proved  to  be ;  for,  shortly  after,  he  was  prostrated 
with  the  infirmities  under  which  he  finally  sunk,  and,  in  the  evening  of 
the  9th  May  1875,  the  evening  of  a  peaceful  Sabbath  on  earth,  he  entered 
without  a  struggle  into  "  the  Sabbaths  of  eternity,  one  Sabbath  deep  and 
wide."  Of  his  beloved  wife,  who  predeceased  him  by  an  interval  only  of 
weeks  ;  of  his  brother,  John,  who,  after  graduating  with  marked  honour 


THOMAS  M'CRIE,  IIP.,  LL.D. 

at  the  Edinburgh  Univcrsit)-,  and  further  quaUfying  himself  for  the 
scholastic  profession  by  Continental  travel  and  study,  was  appointed  first 
Rector  of  the  Normal  Seminary  of  Glasgow,  but  was  cut  off  in  the 
twenty-ninth  year  of  his  age,  when  opening  powers  gave  fine  promise  of 
distinction  ;  of  his  father,  whom  Christopher  North  described  in  the 
Chaldee  Manuscript  as  "  a  Griffin  with  a  roll  of  the  names  of  those  whose 
blood  had  been  shed  between  his  teeth,  and  who  stood  over  the  body  of 
one  that  had  been  buried  long  in  the  grave,  defending  it  from  all  men, 
and  behold  1  there  were  none  who  durst  come  near  him  " — of  these  and 
other  relatives  the  remains  rested  in  the  family  burying-ground  of  Old 
Greyfriars  Churchyard,  Edinburgh  ;  and,  towards  the  end  of  the  week  in 
which  he  died,  we  laid  his  body  within  the  same  hallowed  enclosure — fit 
resting-place  for  a  leal-hearted  son  of  the  Reformation  and  the  Covenants. 

In  addition  to  the  works  of  Dr  M'Crie  already  specified,  it  fell  to  his 
lot  to  edit  a  volume  of  his  father's  Sermons  in  1836;  a  volume  of  the 
Miscellaneous  Writings  of  the  same  in  1841  ;  and  a  uniform  edition  of 
the  principal  works  of  the  historian,  in  four  volumes,  published  by  Messrs 
Blackwood,  Edinburgh,  in  1856. 

When  it  is  added  that  during  his  Edinburgh  ministry  he  delivered  and 
published  a  course  of  "  Lectures  on  Baptism,"  that  he  was  a  frequent  con- 
tributor to  and  for  several  years  editor  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Evangel- 
ical Revieiv,  and  that  he  edited  for  Messrs  Johnstone  &  Hunter  an  edition 
of  Barrow  on  the  "  Supremacy,"  notice  has  been  taken  of  the  outstanding 
literaiy  labours  of  one  whose  pen  was  that  of  a  ready  writer,  and  to 
whom  it  was  a  necessity  of  nature  to  be  always  engaged  upon  some  work, 
historical,  theological,  or  literary.  From  what  was  said  at  an  early  stage 
regarding  his  preaching,  it  may  be  inferred  that  in  general  bearing  and 
manner  Dr  M'Crie  was  somewhat  formal  and  stiff.  And,  doubtless, 
he  was  so  to  some  extent.  On  coming  into  his  company,  a  stranger 
might  feel  that  a  considerable  amount  of  constraint  pervaded  the  inter- 
course, and  that  there  were  a  formality  and  a  frigidity  which  would  be  sad 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

hindrances  in  the  way  of  free  and  pleasant  conversation  ;  but  the  impres- 
sion would  probably  soon  give  way  to  the  persuasion  that  all  this  was  on 
the  surface,  and  that  he  was  in  the  company  of  a  kindly,  simple,  and 
genial  nature,  of  one  who  loved  sport  and  humour,  as  he  enjoyed  and  culti- 
vated the  music  of  the  voice  and  the  violin.  What  he  was  to  those  who 
lived  alongside  of  him  in  the  privacy  of  the  domestic  circle  we  may  not 
venture  to  express,  except  by  stating  that,  with  no  children  of  his  own  to 
brighten  his  dwelling,  he  has  left  a  pleasant  and  tender  memory  in  the 
affections  of  brothers'  and  sisters'  children,  and  that  he  was  never  for  any 
length  of  time  without  some  young  relative  who  found  under  his  roof  a 
home.  What  he  was  to  those  who  knew  him  as  a  college  chum,  or 
brother  minister,  or  colleague  professor,  or  literary  confrere,  may  be 
gathered  from  the  testimony  of  Dr  Wylie,  one  of  his  oldest  and  most 
valued  friends,  who,  preaching,  in  the  church  that  now  bears  his  name, 
on  the  Sabbath  after  the  funeral,  concluded  with  these  touching  words, 
which  may  fitly  close  this  sketch : — "  My  friendship  with  the  deceased 
was  the  longest,  the  sweetest,  and  the  most  profitable  of  my  life.  I 
watched  by  the  bedside  of  the  elder  M'Crie,  the  historian  of  Knox, 
during  the  twenty  hours  he  lay  dying.  It  was  also  my  privilege  to  be 
present  during  the  last  hours  of  the  younger  M'Crie.  I  recited  to  him  at 
intervals  promises  from  the  Word  of  God.  The  eye  which  had  already 
closed  opened  once  more,  and  filled  with  a  tender  intelligence,  a  serene 
peace.  The  words  of  Holy  Writ  evidently  were  to  him  draughts  of  the 
water  of  life.  He  expired  so  peacefully  that  his  hand,  which  he  had 
placed  in  mine  an  hour  before,  was  never  withdrawn.     Thus  he  slept." 

C.  G.  M'C. 


1 


■_:-(      JOHN   MACDONALD.D.D      >\— ,~>j:^ 


301)11  iilacii0uali5,  Q.Q. 


MONG  the  great  names  that  adorned  the  Disruption 
Church,  none  was  held  in  higher  esteem  in  the 
Northern  Counties  of  Scotland,  and  among  many  in 
the  South,  than  that  of  Dr  Macdonald  of  Ferintosh. 
In  the  Highlands  he  was  known  as  "  Ministear  mor 
na  Toisidheachd."  It  is  not  consistent  with  fact  to 
say,  that  in  matters  of  religion  the  Highlanders  are  the  mere  followers  of 
their  popular  ministers.  There  were  popular  ministers  in  the  Highlands 
whom  the  people  forsook,  because  of  their  deserting  what  they  held  to 
be  the  cause  of  truth  at  the  period  of  the  Disruption.  Yet  in  no  part  of 
the  country  are  ministers  of  power  and  grace  more  esteemed  than  in  the 
Highlands,  and  it  cannot  be  questioned  that  the  teaching  and  example 
of  such  ministers  exercised  a  vast  influence  over  the  popular  mind  in 
1843,  and  of  none  more  than  the  subject  of  our  sketch. 

We  learn  from  Dr  Kennedy's  biography  of  Dr  Macdonald,  that  he 
was  born  in  the  parish  of  Reay,  in  Caithness,  on  the  .12th  November 
1779.  His  father,  James  Macdonald,  or  M'Adie,  as  he  was  called,  in 
accordance  with  Celtic  usage,  which  distinguishes  the  septs  in  the  same 
tribe,  was  a  man  of  note  among  the  religious  community.  He  was  early 
brought  to  the  saving  knowledge  of  divine  truth  ;  and  at  a  later  period 
he  was,  with  universal  consent,  appointed  catechist  of  his  native  parish. 
For  this  post  he  was  admirably  qualified  by  both  his  gifts  and  his  graces. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


and  he  retained  the  affection  and  esteem  of  the  godly  over  a  wide  dis- 
trict unchanged  to  the  end  of  a  long  life  of  ninety-seven  years.  The 
part  of  the  country  where  he  resided  was  at  the  time  much  torn  by 
religious  differences.  The  people  in  a  body  adhered  to  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  but  within  the  Church  they  were  much  divided.  James  held 
firmly  by  the  Church  and  its  ordinances,  while  he  maintained  Christian 
fellowship  with  the  truly  good  who  had  separated  themselves.  He  was 
a  man  of  a  bold,  and  yet  a  loving  spirit.  His  aim  was  to  win  souls  to 
Christ.  On  one  occasion  he  met  the  leader  of  the  separatist  party  in  the 
parish,  who  began  to  reprove  him  as  being  too  soft,  and  told  him  he 
should  be  more  faithful  in  denouncing  sinners.  It  was  the  habit  of 
the  people  of  the  Highlands  at  the  time  to  send  their  horses  away  to 
the  hills  in  summer,  where  they  were  set  loose ;  and  there  was  often 
some  difficulty  afterwards  in  taking  them  when  required.  James's  reply 
to  his  neighbour's  reproof  was,  "  Well,  let  you  and  me  go  to  the  hill, 
John,  to  catch  the  horses  ;  take  you  a  whip,  and  I'll  take  a  sheaf  of  corn, 
and  see  which  of  us  will  be  most  successful." 

John  Macdonald  was  the  worthy  son  of  such  a  father.  At  school  he 
soon  took  the  highest  place,  and  at  college,  which  he  attended  in  King's 
College,  Aberdeen,  he  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  students.  He 
especially  excelled  in  Mathematics — a  science  which  he  cultivated  to  the 
last  days  of  his  life.  It  was  during  his  school  and  college  days  that  he 
was  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  saving  truth.  Dr  Kennedy  specifies 
the  three  means  which  the  Spirit  of  God  appears  to  have  employed  in 
bringing  about  this  great  end.  They  were  the  early  teaching  and  ex- 
ample of  his  father,  the  writings  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  and  the  preaching 
of  the  Rev.  J.  Robertson  of  Achrenny  Mission,  afterwards  of  Kingussie. 

In  1805,  he  was  licensed  by  the  Presbytery  of  Caithness  to  preach 
the  Gospel.  Previous  to  his  ordination  he  officiated  as  missionary  in 
Achrenny  and  Halladale  for  some  months,  and  in  1806  he  was  ordained 
to  the  mission  charge  at  Berriedale — all  in  the  Presbytery  of  Caithness. 


JOIfX  MACDOXALD,  IIP. 

His  incumbency  here  was  a  very  short  one,  and  in  January  1807  he  was 
translated  to  what  was  then  the  Gaelic  Chapel  of  Edinburgh,  as  successor 
to  the  Rev.  James  Maclauchlan,  after%vards  of  Moy.     When  he  came 
first  to  Edinburgh,  he  had  little  of  the  power  in  preaching  to  which  he 
afterwards  attained.     He  was  sound,  clear,  and  accurate  ;  but  somewhat 
stiff  in  his  manner  and  delivery.     This  might  have  arisen  from  various 
causes,  but  mainly,  no  doubt,  was  the  result  of  youth  and  inexperience. 
Gradually  this  sense  of  constraint  wore  away,  and  he  came  to  speak  in 
public  with  wonderful  eloquence  and  power.     It  was  once  said  to  the 
writer  by  an  old  Edinburgh  hearer  of  his,  "  It  was  here  that  he  got  his 
wings."     During  his  Edinburgh  ministry  an  attempt  was  made  to  intro- 
duce English  preaching  in  the  afternoon  into  the  Gaelic  congregation,  to 
meet  the  wishes  of  hundreds  who  wished  to  benefit  by  Mr  Macdonald's 
ministiy  ;   but  the  more  ardent  Celts  among  the   people  resisted  the 
change  strenuously  and  successfully.     To  meet  the  desire,  however,  Mr 
Macdonald  resolved  to  preach  English  at  night,— thus  undertaking  three 
regular  ser\-ices  each  Lord's  da>-.     \Mth  week-day  meetings  and  visita- 
tions, this  made  his  life  a  busy  one.     It  was  also  a  useful  one,  for  during 
his  Edinburgh  ministry  he  had  many  souls  for  his  hire.     His  ministry  in 
Edinburgh  extended  over  a  period  of  six  years;  and  in  1813  he  was 
presented  to  the  Parish  of  Ferintosh  in  Ross-shire,  vacant  by  the  death 
of  the   excellent  and  much-esteemed  Mr.  Charles  Calder.     The  scene 
when  he  parted  with  his  Edinburgh  flock  was  a  somewhat  remarkable 
one.    He  had  preached  in  Gaelic  as  usual  during  the  day,  taking  farewell 
of  the  people ;  and  at  night  the  English  congregation  met  in  the  usual 
place  of  worship  in  North  College  Street.     Ere  the  service  began,  the 
crowd  collecting  was  such  that  there  was  no  prospect  of  their  finding 
accommodation  in  the  church,  although  it  could  accommodate  eleven 
hundred  worshippers.     Mr  Macdonald  was  just  going  to  the  pulpit,  when 
it  was  proposed  that  a  request  should  be  made  for  the  use  of  the  West 
Church  for  the  occasion.     A  messenger  was  sent  for  the  keys,  which 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

were  readily  given.  The  West  Church  was  opened,  and  Mr  Macdonald 
putting  himself  at  the  head  of  his  congregation,  they  marched  westward 
through  the  Grassmarket,  and  soon  filled  the  church  to  the  roof.  Here 
amidst  the  tears  and  sobs  of  many,  he  took  farewell  of  his  English-speaking 
hearers,  who  had  for  years  enjoyed  and  profited  by  his  earnest  ministry. 

In  due  time  he  was  settled  in  Ferintosh,  where  he  continued  to 
minister  with  great  success  till  the  year  1 849,  a  period  of  forty-two  years. 
Much  of  his  time  was  spent  in  assisting  brother  ministers  at  their  com- 
munions. In  such  services  he  was  acceptable  to  both  ministers  and 
people,  many  of  the  ministers  who  differed  widely  from  him  on  eccle- 
siastical questions  making  him  heartily  welcome.  This  he  owed  much  to 
his  kind,  genial,  and  brotherly  disposition,  which  displayed  itself  so 
pleasantly  in  the  family  circle,  his  interesting  conversation,  and  especially 
his  fund  of  anecdote,  all  making  him  a  favourite  with  old  and  young. 
Many  ministers'  sons  and  daughters,  who  were  young  at  the  time, 
remember  well  how  welcome  he  was  at  their  fathers'  fireside.  By  the 
people  his  appearance  was  hailed  with  enthusiasm,  thousands  collected 
to  hear  the  Word  at  his  mouth,  and  many  of  these  gatherings  were 
followed  by  rich  and  abounding  spiritual  blessings. 

He  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  distant  island  of  St.  Kilda.  At  the 
instance  of  the  Society  in  Scotland  for  Propagating  Christian  Knowledge, 
he  visited  the  island  four  times  in  as  many  different  years,  and  preached 
to  the  people,  at  the  time  without  a  minister,  the  gospel  of  salvation. 
Besides  these  visits,  so  much  valued  by  the  people,  he  made  strenuous 
efforts  to  secure  the  erection  of  a  church  and  manse  in  the  island, 
and  on  his  last  visit,  in  1827,  accompanied  by  the  minister  appointed 
by  the  Society  which  he  represented,  he  found  the  buildings  completed, 
and  provision  made  for  the  regular  maintenance  of  gospel  ordinances. 
For  many  years  the  Free  Church  has  maintained  a  minister  on  the  island. 

In  1827,  he  paid  a  visit  to  Ireland,  at  the  request  of  Mr  Daly,  after- 
wards Bishop  of  Cashcl,  with  a  view  to  preaching  the  Gospel  to  the  Irish 


JOHN  MACDONALD,  D.D. 

in  their  native  tongue.  He  studied  the  Irish  dialect  of  the  Gaelic 
language,  and  preached  frequently  in  that  dialect  to  the  people  along 
the  south-west  coast. 

Dr  Macdonald's  zeal  for  preaching  the  Gospel  led  him  sometimes  into 
difTiculties.  In  the  year  1817,  he  preached  in  a  Dissenting  chapel  in 
Strathbogie,  without  the  consent  of  the  parish  minister.  For  this  he  was 
brought  before  the  General  Assembly,  where,  although  no  special  censure 
was  passed  upon  him,  such  proceedings  were  severely  censured. 

His  ministry  was  richly  blessed  of  God.  Perhaps  no  minister  of 
modern  times  was  more  owned  as  the  means  of  converting  souls.  While 
in  Edinburgh,  he  took  a  deep  and  active  interest  in  the  great  revival  at 
Muthil,  under  the  ministry  of  the  Rev.  Mr  Russell.  Soon  after  his 
removal  to  Fcrintosh,  a  deeply  interesting  movement  took  place  among 
his  own  people.  After  that  the  Word  was  much  blessed  on  both 
sides  of  Loch  Tay,  and  in  Glenlyon  ;  and  he  frequently  visited  the 
district  and  preached  with  great  power  and  success.  The  fruits  of 
the  revival  of  religion  there  are  visible  to  this  day.  There  were  great 
spiritual  movements  in  Ross-shire,  the  revivals  in  Kilsyth  and  Dundee 
took  place,  and  in  all  these  Dr  Macdonald  took  his  share  of  the  work 
with  warm  interest.  Wherever  he  heard  of  the  Lord's  cause  prospering, 
he  made  a  point  of  being  present  to  help  it  forward. 

Though  not  disposed  to  take  much  part  in  ecclesiastical  controversy, 
he  found  no  difficulty  in  taking  his  side  when  the  great  questions  of  Non- 
Intrusion  and  Spiritual  Independence  arose  for  discussion  in  the  Church. 
lie  became  a  firm  supporter  of  the  policy  of  the  Evangelical  party  ;  and 
his  weight  of  character  and  influence  over  the  popular  mind  aided  much 
the  cause  which  they  maintained  in  the  north.  At  the  Disruption  he  took 
a  foremost  place,  and  was  selected  to  preach  the  first  sermon  in  Tanfieid 
Hall.  His  text  was  John  xv.  16.  He  showed  the  power  of  the  principle 
which  actuated  him  by  the  extent  of  the  sacrifice  which  he  made,  for  the 
living  of  the  parish  of  Ferintosh  was  one  of  the  largest  in  that  part  of 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  country.  He  was  not  in  the  habit  of  referring  often  to  ecclesiastical 
subjects  in  the  pulpit;  but,  preaching  at  Edinburgh,  in  the  Gaelic  Church, 
soon  after  the  Disruption,  he  said  of  the  Established  Church  as  it  then 
existed,  that  it  v/as  "a  Christ- denying,  God-dishonouring,  and  soul- 
destroying  Church."  These  were  strong  words — too  strong,  perhaps,  for 
courtesy  or  for  charity,  but  he  spoke  under  a  deep  sense  of  wrong  done 
to  the  cause  of  Christ.  He  was  much  censured  for  using  them,  but  it  does 
not  appear  that  he  ever  withdrew,  or  even  modified  them  afterwards. 

At  the  Inverness  Assembly  he  was  associated,  as  Gaelic  Moderator, 
with  Dr  M'Farlan  of  Greenock,  the  Moderator  for  the  year.  In  this 
capacity  he  preached  a  Gaelic  sermon  at  the  opening  of  the  Assembly, 
and  many  who  were  then  present  still  remember  the  mingled  feeling  of 
amusement  and  admiration  which  pervaded  the  house  as  he  announced 
his  text,  and  proceeded  to  expound  it.  The  words  were,  "  These,  who 
have  turned  the  world  upside  down,  are  come  hither  also."  The  sermon 
was  one  in  every  way  worthy  of  his  fame,  and  a  complete  vindication 
of  the  Disruption. 

On  the  1 8th  of  April  1849,  he  was  called  to  his  rest,  leaving  behind 
him  a  name  fragrant  and  precious  among  thousands,  and  which  shall  not 
be  forgotten,  especially  in  the  Highlands,  so  long  as  Gospel  truth  is 
prized  by  the  people. 

Dr  Buchanan,  in  his  Ten  Years'  Conflict,  says  : — 

"The  devotional  services  at  the  Convocation  were  conducted  by  Dr  Macdonald  of 
Ferintosh, — that  eminent  servant  of  God,  of  whom  it  is  enough  to  say  that  he  was  the 
Wliitefield  of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland.  The  proudest  and  most  powerful  chieftains 
of  the  Celtic  race  never  possessed  such  a  masteiy  over  the  clans,  which  the  fieiy 
cross  or  the  wild  pibroch  summoned  into  the  field  in  the  fierce  days  of  feudal  strife,  as 
belonged,  in  these  more  peaceful  modern  times,  to  this  humble  minister  of  Christ. 
From  Tarbatness  to  the  outer  Hebrides,— from  the  Spey  to  the  Pentland  Firth, — the 
fact  needed  but  to  be  known  that  John  Macdonald  had  come,  and  was  about  to  preach 
the  Word,  in  order  that  the  country  for  twenty  miles  around  should  gather  at  his  car- 
Ten  thousand  people  have  often  been  swayed  as  one  man, — stirred  into  enthusiasm, 
or  melted  into  sadness,  by  this  mighty  and  faithful  preacher's  voice." 

T.  M'L. 


-<-^<?^ROBERT  MACDONALD.D.D 


2!vobtrt  ilnc^onalb,  ©.©. 


OBERT  MACDONALD  was  born  at  Perth  on  the  i8th 
day  of  May  1813.  His  father  was  Alexander  Mac- 
donald,  wine  merchant,  Perth, —  a  much  respected 
gentleman  in  the  community.  His  mother,  Charlotte 
Macfarlane,  was  a  native  of  Moulin,  where  her  mother 
(who  was  the  eldest  daughter  of  Mr  Dick,  of  Tuliymet) 
had  been  brought  to  the  Lord  in  the  revival  of  1798.  Charlotte  herself, 
also,  although  very  young,  received  at  that  time  abiding  spiritual 
impressions,  the  good  effect  of  which  was  felt  by  her  whole  family 
afterwards,  so  that  Dr  Macdonald,  like  Dr  Duff,  may  be  said  to  have 
been  gained  to  the  Church  of  Christ  as  one  of  the  remoter  fruits  of  that 
revival. 

After  receiving  a  good  preliminary  education  at  Perth  Academy, 
Robert  entered,  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  St  Andrews  University.  His 
mind,  however,  had  not  yet  been  awakened  to  any  serious  interest,  either 
literary  or  religious,  and  the  first  session  at  College  yielded  little  result. 
Meanwhile,  his  eldest  brother  lay  at  home  dying  from  the  effects  of  an 
accident.  He  was  a  godly  youth,  of  fine  mental  powers  and  rare  pro- 
mise. He  died  22nd  January  1830,  in  the  full  comfort  of  the  Gospel ; 
the  last  two  verses  of  the  eighth  chapter  of  Romans  being  his  firm  anchor 
amid  the  great  sea-billows.  His  father,  who  was  then  also  ill,  died  nine 
months  after.  To  Robert  his  brother's  death  proved,  as  in  the  case  of 
363 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

his  friend  M'Cheyne,  the  beginning  of  a  new  life.  Returning  to  St 
Andrews,  he  now  applied  himself  with  much  diligence  and  success  to  his 
literary  studies,  and  completed  the  usual  course  there.  He  had  at  first 
had  some  thoughts  of  medicine  as  a  profession,  but,  apart  from  other 
considerations  tending  to  divert  his  mind  from  this,  the  one  desire  now 
was  to  serve  God  in  the  Gospel  of  His  Son.  He  studied  divinity  at 
Edinburgh  University  under  Chalmers  and  Welsh,  attracting  the  special 
notice  of  Dr  Chalmers,  who,  shortly  after,  in  answer  to  a  correspondent, 
wrote  regarding  him,  "  He  was  one  of  the  ablest  of  my  students." 

Mr  Macdonald's  first  sphere  of  ministerial  service  was  at  Logiealmond, 
in  Perthshire.  It  was  a  field  in  which  he  had  previously  sown  some  good 
seed,  having,  while  a  student,  usually  spent  the  long  summer  vacation 
at  his  uncle's  house,  Drummond  Park,  and  having,  during  that  period, 
-ommenced  a  Sabbath  school,  and  held  Sabbath  evening  meetings  for 
the  district.  But  in  1834  an  old  chapel  at  Chapelhill  was  restored.  Mr 
Omond,  now  of  Monzie  Free  Church,  was  its  first  incumbent,  labouring 
there  devotedly  for  two  years.  Mr  Macdonald,  who  was  licensed  to 
preach  by  the  Presbytery  of  Perth  on  8th  June  1836,  succeeded  him,  and 
ministered  at  Logiealmond  for  nearly  a  year,  not  without  a  first-fruits  of 
that  harvest  which  was  afterwards  to  crown  his  labours  in  the  Gospel- 
field. 

His  first  charge  as  an  ordained  minister,  and  that  with  which  his 
name  was  long  so  happily  associated,  was  Blairgowrie,  in  the  Presbytery 
of  Meigle,  where  his  settlement  took  place  on  the  iSth  of  June  1837. 
The  patron,  Mr  Oliphant,  of  Gask,  with  a  liberality  not  common  in  those 
days,  had  given  the  people  a  choice,  and,  till  his  lamented  death  in  1847, 
although  not  himself  connected  with  the  Free  Church,  he  followed  Mr 
Macdonald's  course  with  a  gratified  and  sympathetic  interest.  His 
first  text  after  ordination  was  Acts  xviii.  10,  "I  have  much  people  in  this 
city;"  it  was  a  fitting  keynote  for  the  ministry  that  day  begun.  Blair- 
gowrie was  even  then  a  populous  as  well  as  an  extensive  parish.    Strctcii- 


ROBERT  MACDONALD,  D.D. 

ing  for  eleven  miles  up  the  right  bank  of  the  Ericht,  the  town  containing 
2000  inhabitants,  the  country  1500  more,  the  population  comprising  both 
the  manufacturing  and  the  agricultural  class,  it  was,  even  with  the  aid  of 
a  chapel,  procured  after  Mr  Macdonald  came,  and  fostered  by  him, 
a  laborious  field  for  a  spiritual  husbandman  to  cultivate.  But  both  as 
a  pastor  and  as  a  preacher  Mr  Macdonald  was  soon  seen  to  be  making 
full  proof  of  his  ministry.  From  time  immemorial  the  parish  had 
had  a  seed  of  the  righteous;  but  a  special  blessing  came  to  it  with 
the  advent  of  the  young  pastor,  so  that  the  church  of  Blairgowrie  began 
to  be  known  as  a  centre  of  spiritual  life  and  evangelistic  work.  Those 
times  of  refreshing  also  in  which  William  Burns  was  a  chosen  instrument 
quickly  followed,  and  Blairgowrie  shared  largely  in  the  blessing.  Robert 
M'Cheyne  was  a  frequent  visitor,  and  his  Memoir  indicates  how  close  the 
bond  of  brotherhood  between  the  two  like-minded  ministers  was  drawn. 
Indeed,  M'Cheyne,  Andrew  Bonar  (then  of  Collace),  John  Milne,  of  Perth, 
Robert  Macdonald,  and  a  few  others  of  kindred  spirit,  were  at  that  time 
in  the  heart  of  Scotland,  in  their  evangelistic  work  and  evangelical  influ- 
ence, "  like  a  torch  of  fire  in  a  sheaf." 

As  a  preacher,  Mr  Macdonald's  power  as  well  as  popularity  was 
from  the  first  very  great.  His  natural  gifts  contributed  much  to  this ; 
the  tall  and  graceful  form,  the  animated  and  speaking  countenance,  and 
the  singularly  just  and  expressive  elocution  and  action.  Speaking  of 
delivery  alone,  we  have  never  thought  it  going  beyond  the  mark  to 
regard  him  as  an  almost  faultless  model  of  the  pulpit  orator;  the 
combination  of  grace  and  energy,  without  languor  and  without 
vehemence,  and  the  power  to  make  everything  spoken  tell  upon  the 
hearers,  being  so  well  adjusted  and  complete.  It  is  a  token  of  the  truth 
of  this,  that  one  discovers  these  things  only  on  reflection  ;  when  listening 
to  the  Word  as  preached  by  him,  the  very  efficiency  of  the  candle-stick 
drew  the  eye  to  the  light  alone  that  shone  from  it.  And  the  secret  of 
the  power  lay  much  deeper.     Besides  that  which  is  known  only  between 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

a  minister  and  God,  few  men  have  laboured  so  ungrudgingly,  and  few 
so  judiciously,  in  the  preparation  of  the  message,  as  throughout  life 
Dr  Macdonald  has  done.  His  pulpit  speech  has  always  been  the 
outcome  of  earnest  study ;  his  doctrine,  pure  gold  of  Gospel  ore,  rich 
and  various  as  the  mine  from  which  it  was  drawn  ;  all  clearly  stated  and 
aptly  illustrated,  and  all  coming  forth  embathed  in  that  unction  and 
urged  with  that  fervour  which  come  from  above  and  move  men  thither. 
One  thing,  moreover,  which  has  strikingly  characterised  his  preaching  is, 
that,  with  abundance  of  impressiveness  and  awakening  power,  a  certain 
brightness  and  cheerfulness  always  pervaded  it,  as  if  the  preacher  never 
forgot  that  the  message  with  which  he  was  charged  was  a  message  of 
"glad  tidings." 

Apart  from  his  preaching,  his  more  private  pastoral  work  at  Blair- 
gowrie was  very  fruitful,  and  has  precious  memories  in  many  hearts. 
In  addition  to  having  much  of  the  grace  of  Christian  love,  he  was  rarely 
gifted  with  an  attractive  natural  courtesy  of  manner  and  bearing.  No 
one  who  has  known  him  will  be  surprised  that  he  has  been  described,  by 
one  well  entitled  to  speak  on  such  a  point,  and  not  biassed  by  sympathy 
with  his  evangelical  spirit,  as  a  man  of  "  most  fascinating  manners." 
But  the  characteristic  so  referred  to  has  often  won  him  access  where  iesv 
could  have  found  it ;  and,  not  only  in  his  spheres  of  pastoral  labour, 
but  wherever  he  has  sojourned,  there  have  been  delightful  fruits  of  his 
private  dealing  and  intercourse,  some  signal  instances  of  which  are 
already  known. 

Of  all  his  Blairgowrie  work,  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  was  that 
connected  with  his  Sabbath  school.  It  is  almost  hopeless  to  attempt 
to  give  a  picture,  such  as  would  enable  one  who  was  not  for  a  season 
in  the  midst  of  it,  to  realise  the  scene  and  the  spirit  that  animated  it. 
But  his  plan  was  this.  He  prepared  his  own  lessons,  which,  besides 
taking  up  in  order  the  Gospels  and  the  Acts  (the  latter,  as  it  happened, 
very  seasonably,  about  Disruption  time),  included,  as  we  remember,  a 


ROBERT  MACnOKALD,  D.D. 

course  on  the  Shorter  Catechism,  and  on  the  places  mentioned  in  Scrip- 
ture with  their  associations.  The  teachers  met  at  half-past  five  each 
Sabbath  evening,  when  he  dictated  to  them  the  notes  for  the  following 
Sabbath.  The  school  met  in  the  church  at  six,  and,  after  opening  it, 
he  taught  his  young  men's  class  in  the  session-house  till  seven.  Then 
he  entered  the  church,  by  this  time  filled,  and  often  crowded,  with  a 
congregation  of  six  or  seven  hundred  adults,  besides  the  five  hundred 
scholars.  After  a  hymn  sung,  he  catechised  the  classes  from  the  pulpit 
for  forty  minutes  on  the  lesson  taught,  interspersing  anecdote,  illustra- 
tion, and  appeal,  concluding  all  with  praise  and  prayer.  This  went 
uniformly  on  for  the  whole  nineteen  years  of  his  Blairgowrie  ministry. 
The  labour  implied,  after  the  two  stated  services,  was  enormous ;  but 
the  interest  was  extraordinary,  and  the  blessing  great  and  continuous. 
Many  can  trace  their  first  ideas  of  a  happy  heaven  to  the  teaching  and 
hymn-singing,  and  the  atmosphere  altogether  of  that  Sabbath  school ; 
and  there  are  hundreds  at  this  moment  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  besides 
those  that  have  fallen  asleep,  whose  first  impressions  of  religion,  and  first 
thoughts  of  wisdom's  ways  as  "  ways  of  pleasantness,"  date  from  Blair- 
gowrie Sabbath  School.  The  pastor  had  a  rare  aptitude  for  the  work 
and  rare  ardour  in  it,  and  his  spirit  seemed  to  infect  both  teachers  and 
scholars.  His  own  words  when  leaving  Blairgowrie  shed  light  both  on 
the  process  and  the  result:— "The  happiest  hours  I  have  ever  spent 
have  been  in  my  Sabbath  school,  and  no  part  of  my  labours  has  been 
more  abundantly  blessed." 

Mr  Macdonald  took  his  full  share  in  the  work  and  witness-bearing 
of  the  latter  half  of  the  Ten  Years'  Conflict.  Besides  work  at  home, 
he  was  one  of  the  evangelists  sent  to  Aberdeenshire  in  the  years  preced- 
ing the  Disruption.  In  one  of  these  expeditions  he  followed  M'Cheyne 
in  his  last  preaching  tour,  with  many  tokens  of  blessing  on  his  labours. 
One  interesting  case  was  that  of  a  husband  and  wife,  the  one  of  whom 
was  converted  through  Mr  M'Chcyne's  preaching,  the  other  through  Mr 
36; 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Macdonald's.  He  had  much  to  do  in  his  own  presbytery,  in  which  Mr 
White  of  Airlie  and  he  were  the  only  ministers  who  came  out ;  and  it 
was  chiefly  owing  to  his  influence  that  the  Free  Church  mustered  so 
strong  throughout  the  bounds  of  that  Presbytery.  In  his  own  parish 
the  great  body  of  the  people  accompanied  him  into  the  Free  Church. 
The  parish  church  had  been  seated  for  less  than  800 ;  the  Free  Church 
was  built  to  accommodate  iioo,  and  even  with  that  accommodation  the 
sitters  were  soon  cramped  for  room. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  enter  here  into  the  details  of  his  great  School- 
Building  Scheme,  that  having  been  effectively  done  in  the  "  Annals  of 
the  Disruption"  (Annals,  ii.  loS).  The  conception  of  the  scheme 
revealed  a  financial  genius  which  took  most  people  by  surprise,*  and  its 
execution  illustrated  one  of  his  own  favourite  quotations,  "  Prayer  and 
pains,  with  faith  in  God,  can  accomplish  anything."  One  thing  was 
highly  characteristic,  namely,  the  manner  in  which  the  spirit  of  the 
evangelist  dominated  in  him  that  of  the  financier.  Wherever,  through- 
out the  land,  he  advocated  his  scheme,  he  first  preached  the  Gospel  to 
the  people  ;  and  those  preachings  are  still  remembered  and  referred  to 
v/ith  lively  zest  and  gratitude.  Perhaps,  because  overshadowed  by  the 
greatness  of  this  enterprise,  his  service  in  connection  with  the  building 
of  the  New  College,  Edinburgh,  has  been  partly  lost  sight  of  All  the 
circumstances  cannot  be  made  known  during  the  life-time  of  some  of 
the  contributors.  It  is,  however,  simply  matter  of  fact,  that  it  is  chiefly 
to  Dr  Macdonald  the  Church  is  indebted  for  the  prosperous  inauguration 
of  that  work,  and  the  procuring  of  the  necessary  funds  for  carrying  it  out 
(Annals,  ii.  123). 

Owing  to  these  excessive  labours  his  health  in  some  degree  suffered 
for  several  years,  and,  in  1852,  he  went  abroad  for  a  year,  visiting  the 

*  He  had  always,  however,  a  genius  for  organisation.  An  old  school-fellow  mentions,  that 
when  they  used  to  play  soldiers  at  Perth  Academy,  it  was  an  object  of  ambition  to  "  get  into 
Bob  Macdonald's  regiment  ! " 


ROBERT  MACDONALD,  D.D. 

Mediterranean,  and  making  a  prolonged  tour  in  the  Holy  Land, — the 
fruit  of  which,  although  not  formally  given  to  the  world,  was  yet  exceed- 
ingly enriching  to  his  own  mind,  and  added  an  enriching  element  to  his 
ministrations  in  subsequent  years. 

Dr  Macdonald  was  translated  to  North  Leith  in  1857.  It  was  not 
without  reluctance  that  he  could  contemplate  leaving  a  sphere  where, 
as  he  said,  "the  Lord  Himself  had  from  the  beginning  graciously 
smiled  on  his  labours,  and  given  him  seals  of  his  ministry,  many  dear 
spiritual  children,  some  of  whom  were  now  in  heaven,  and  others  still 
living  adorning  their  Christian  profession."  And  it  was  a  sore  wrench 
to  his  people,  numbering  at  this  time  lioo  communicants,  and  who,  as 
one  of  their  commissioners  expressed  it,  "could  not  think  of  a  Blair- 
gowrie without  a  Macdonald."  But  considerations  of  health  constrained 
him  to  accept  the  measure  of  relief  which  change  of  sphere  was  fitted  to 
afford.  He  accepted  the  call  on  14th  January,  1857,  and  on  15th  March, 
began  his  ministry  at  North  Leith,  preaching  from  the  text,  Romans 
XV.  29-32  :  "And  I  am  sure  that,  when  I  come  unto  you,  I  will  come 
in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,"  &c.  The  manner 
in  which  the  Lord  has  verified  that  confidence  of  His  servant,  in  the 
experience  of  the  congregation  of  North  Leith,  is  matter  not  only  of 
past  but  of  still  current  history.  Some  of  his  first  sermons  at  Leith  are 
known  to  have  been  blessed  to  the  conversion  of  souls.  The  Lord's 
own  people  have  been  built  up  and  comforted ;  and  more  than  one 
season  of  special  refreshing  has  been  enjoyed.  The  outward  prosperity 
has  also  been  great.  During  the  first  years  of  his  ministry,  a  beautiful  and 
commodious  new  church  was  built,  at  a  cost  (including  halls  and  offices)  of 
^■9000 ;  the  communion  roll  speedily  rose  from  450  to  its  present  point 
of  1 100;  whilst  the  Christian  liberality  has  increased  proportionally. 

His  degree  of  D.D.  was  conferred  on  him,  in  the  most  spontaneous 
and  complimentary  manner,  by  his  own  University  of  St.  Andrews, 
in  1870. 

3  r.  369 


DISRUPT! ox  WORTHIES. 

In  1S79,  Mr  T.  Crciar,  M.A.,  minister  at  Cardross,  was  settled  as 
colleague  to  Dr  Macdonald  in  the  pastorate  of  North  Leith,  an  arrange- 
ment which  has  added  greatly  to  his  comfort,  and  is  full  of  promise  for 
the  congregation. 

Dr  Macdonald  has  lately  become  very  favourably  known  as  an 
author.  Some  of  his  former  writings — and  in  particular  his  "  Lessons 
for  the  Present  from  the  Records  of  the  Past,"  a  practical  and  experi- 
mental treatise  on  Genesis,  published  in  1850 — have  been  much  prized 
by  many.  But  the  work  by  which — of  all  as  yet  given  by  him  to  the 
Church — he  will  be  best  known,  is  the  volume  of  daily  readings,  entitled 
"From  Day  to  Day,"  published  in  1879.  This  volume  has,  in  little 
more  than  a  year,  reached  its  fifth  thousand,  and  will  long  hold  its 
place  as  probably  the  best  book  of  the  kind  yet  written.  In  clearness, 
point,  and  grace  of  style,  in  evangelical  savour,  in  abundance  and 
aptness  of  illustration,  and  in  home-coming  persuasiveness  and  force,  it 
would  be  difficult  to  find  a  rival  to  it.  In  these  respects  also,  it  is  a 
good  example  of  what  the  author's  preaching,  in  its  more  practical 
parts,  has  always  been.  R.  C. 


\b  .. 


fatruk  gi'faxhn,  D.B. 


)HE  subject  of  this  notice  was  born  in  the  Canongate  of 
Edinburgh,  of  which  parish  his  father  was  minister,  in 
the  year  1781.  Whilst  yet  a  child  he  lost  his  father; 
but  he  was  brought  up  under  the  care  of  a  godly 
mother,  from  whom  he  received  those  early  impressions 
which  prove  most  deep  and  lasting.  Almost  from 
boyhood,  his  thoughts  were  turned  to  the  ministry.  Having  frequent 
intercourse,  as  he  grew  up,  with  such  eminent  ministers  of  the  day  as  Dr 
John  Erskine,  Sir  Henry  Moncreiff,  and  Dr  Buchanan,  his  father's  suc- 
cessor, he  did  not  fail  to  profit  by  their  example  and  advice.  He  entered 
the  Hall  as  a  student  of  divinity  in  1798,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  the 
gospel,  by  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,  in  1803.  It  was  about  this  time 
he  received  further  and  clearer  impressions  of  divine  truth,  by  the  perusal 
of  Wilberforcc's  "  Practical  View  of  Christianity,"  the  book  which  some 
>-cars  after  exerted  such  a  powerful  influence  on  Dr  Chalmers.  In  1806, 
Mr  M'Farlan  was  ordained  minister  of  the  parish  of  Kippen,  in  the  Pres- 
bytery of  Dunblane  ;  here  he  remained  till  18 10,  when  he  was  translated 
to  the  parish  of  Polmont,  near  Linlithgow.  He  continued  there  for 
fourteen  years,  during  which  he  devoted  himself  to  pastoral  duties  with 
great  earnestness  and  fidelity,  and  with  no  common  measure  of  success  ; 
proving  himself  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ,  both  in  the  pulpit 
and   in   private  visitation.      It  wa.s  at  this  time,  too,  that  ho  acquired 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

that  experience  in  ecclesiastical  affairs,  and  that  knowledge  of  the  forms  of 
Church  Courts,  which  afterwards  proved  of  so  much  service.  The  high 
position  he  now  occupied  in  the  estimation  of  the  Church,  was  shewn  by 
his  appointment  in  1824  as  successor  to  Dr  Chalmers  in  St  John's  parish, 
Glasgow.  It  was  an  arduous  undertaking  indeed,  to  carry  on  the  work  of 
his  illustrious  predecessor  both  in  the  congregation  and  the  parish  ;  but 
he  applied  himself  to  it  with  his  usual  earnestness  and  energy.  After  two 
years,  however,  finding  it  too  heavy  a  burden,  he  removed  to  St  Enoch's 
parish,  where  he  ministered  for  several  years  to  a  large  and  influential 
congregation.  In  1832,  he  was  translated  to  the  west  parish  of  Greenock, 
and  in  that  town  he  continued  his  ministerial  labours  for  seventeen  years, 
till  his  death. 

Dr  M'Farlan  had  always  taken  an  active  part  in  Church  affairs,  and 
in  such  questions  as  interested  the  Christian  community.  For  public 
debate  and  controversial  discussion,  he  had  special  qualifications.  In  the 
Assembly  of  1825  he  distinguished  himself,  in  connection  with  the  debate 
on  Pluralities  ;  and  in  the  Apocrypha  controversy,  his  pen  was  employed 
with  characteristic  clearness  and  decision.  The  influence  he  had  attained 
and  the  confidence  reposed  in  him  by  his  brethren,  were  evidenced  in  the 
most  unequivocal  manner,  when  he  was  made  Moderator  of  the  General 
Assembly  of  1834.  At  that  Assembly  the  Veto  Act  was  passed,  and  the 
conflict  was  begun,  which  ended  in  the  Disruption.  In  that  great  struggle 
no  man  took  a  more  decided  and  honourable  part  than  Dr  M'Farlan. 
He  was  indeed,  in  the  strictest  sense,  a  non-intrusionist ;  always  refusing 
to  take  up  anti-patronage  ground ;  believing  that  the  operation  of  the 
Veto  Law,  would  effectually  protect  the  Church,  from  those  abuses  which 
had  done  it  such  injury  in  time  past.  But  he  was  quick  to  perceive  the 
vital  nature  of  the  question,  raised  by  the  judgment  of  the  civil  courts  in 
the  Auchterarder  case  ;  as  regarded  the  Church's  spiritual  independence 
he  would  admit  of  no  compromise  ;  he  took  up  a  decided  position  from 
the  outset,  and  maintained  it  with  unwavering  consistency  to  the  end. 


PATRICK  M'FARLAN,  D.D. 

At  a  public  meeting  in  Greenock,  in  December  1839,  having  set  forth 
with  great  clearness  the  position  in  which  the  Church  was  placed,  he 
concluded  as  follows  : — 

"'Oh!'  say  some  well-intentioned  people,  'just  submit  to  the  deliverance  of  the 
civil  courts.  It  is  really  painful  to  think  of  this  contention  ;  you  will  tear  the  country 
and  the  church  in  pieces  ;  just  submit.'  Now  I  do  not  understand  this  whining.  To 
me  it  seems  sheer  nonsense.  It  is  just  saying,  '  We  conjure  you  to  sacrifice  your  con- 
sciences, and  all  your  views  of  duty,  and  all  your  sense  of  obligation  to  the  authority 
of  Christ,  as  the  great  Head  of  the  Church.  Do  sacrifice  these  on  the  altar  of  ex- 
pediency, and  make  a  low  bow  of  submission  to  the  Court  of  Session.'  For  myself  I 
answer,  I  will  not  yield  :  If  you  ask  why,  I  reply,  Because  I  cannot. 

"  It  has  pleased  God  in  His  providence  to  fill  me,  as  far  as  stipend  is  concerned,  a 
fuller  cup  than  has  fallen  to  many  of  my  brethren  ;  but  this  I  say,  and  say  it  advisedly, 
so  help  me  God— holding  the  views  I  entertain  of  this  subject,  and  regarding  it  as 
impossible,  without  a  sacrifice  of  conscience,  to  submit  to  and  acquiesce  in  that  decree 
to  which  I  have  referred,  I  would  rather  cast  that  cup  to  the  ground  than  I  would  taste 
it  again,  embittered,  as  it  would  be  if  I  were  to  yield,  by  the  consciousness  of  having 
deserted  what  I  believe  to  be  my  duty  to  God,  and  my  duty  to  the  Church." 

In  the  Assemblies  of  1840  and  1841  Dr  M'Farlan  took  a  leading 
part,  especially  in  the  discussion  on  Lord  Aberdeen's  Bill,  and  in  the 
various  proceedings  connected  with  the  case  of  the  Strathbogie  ministers. 
At  the  August  Commission  of  1841,  when  the  leaders  of  the  Moderate 
party  had  openly  taken  part  with  the  deposed  ministers,  and  were  mani- 
festly bent  on  bringing  matters  to  a  crisis,  he  made  a  most  impressive 
speech,  at  the  close  of  which  he  called  on  his  brethren  to  stand  fast  to 
their  principles,  in  the  following  terms  : — 

"  If  we  shrink,  we  are  undone.  If  we  depart  from  principle,  there  is  no  hope  for 
us  :  we  shall  neither  propitiate  men  in  power  nor  gain  the  respect  of  the  country. 
Let  us  trust  in  God,  who  has  been  the  protection  of  the  Church  in  ages  past— in  that 
divine  Saviour  to  whom  we  profess  allegiance  as  the  great  King  and  Head  of  His 
Church,  that  the  struggle  in  which  we  are  now  to  be  engaged  shall  issue  in  triumph. 
But  if,  in  the  mysterious  providence  of  God,  it  should  prove  otherwise,  we  shall  have 
the  satisfaction,  in  looking  back,  to  think  that  we  stood  forth  in  defence  of  sound 
scriptural  principles  ;  and  we  shall  never  have  cause  to  regret,  though  left  houseless 
and  homeless,  and  without  the  means  of  support,  that  we  preferred  peace  of  conscience 
to  all  that  is  valuable  to  us  in  this  world." 

That  he  should  have  exerted  much  influence  in  the  counsels  of  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Church  at  such  a  crisis,  was  not  surprising,  considering  his  great  ex- 
perience in  ecclesiastical  affairs,  his  soundness  of  judgment,  and  skill  in 
debate.  But  besides  this,  when  the  issue  of  the  struggle  began  to  be 
foreseen,  and  the  sacrifices  it  would  entail  on  those  who  adhered  to  their 
principles,  Dr  M'Farlan's  position  and  the  attitude  he  maintained 
attracted  special  attention,  on  the  part  both  of  friends  and  opponents,  for 
the  simple  reason,  that  the  west  parish  of  Greenock  was,  at  that  time,  the 
richest  living  in  the  Church  of  Scotland.  Would  a  minister  deliberately 
give  up  such  emoluments  for  the  sake  of  principle .'  Amongst  worldly 
men  there  were  few  that  believed  it.  Dr  M'Farlan  indeed  had  declared, 
in  the  most  explicit  manner,  that  he  was  prepared  to  do  so.  But  by  too 
many  this  was  regarded  as  no  better  than  an  empty  threat ;  and  the 
expectation  that  he  would  draw  back  found  frequent  expression.  Those 
who  thought  so  little  knew  the  man — the  integrity  of  his  character,  the 
depth  of  his  convictions,  and  the  steadfastness  of  his  purpose.  It  is 
scarcely  necessary  to  add,  that  when  the  time  came  he  nobly  redeemed 
his  pledge.  Nothing  became  him  better — the  strength  and  dignity  of  his 
Christian  character — than  the  way  in  which  he  accepted  the  change  of 
circumstances  which  the  Disruption  involved.  In  his  case  the  change  was 
a  very  material  one,  such  as  a  man  of  his  tastes  and  habits,  of  his  liberal 
disposition  and  large  hospitality,  could  not  possibly  be  insensible  to. 
But  no  one  ever  heard  a  complaint  from  him  ;  he  had  the  same  cheerful, 
happy  demeanour  as  before :  his  was  the  unbroken  serenity  of  a  good 
conscience. 

After  the  Disruption,  Dr  M'Farlan  continued  for  more  than  six  years 
to  minister  to  a  numerous  and  attached  congregation.  In  the  Free  Church 
at  large,  he  held  a  prominent  place,  and  exerted  very  great  influence. 
His  noble  testimony,  his  long  experience  and  mature  wisdom,  secured 
for  him  no  ordinary  measure  of  respect  and  attention.  He  was  called 
to  the  Moderator's  chair  in  the  Assembly  of  1845,  presiding  both  at 
its  ordinary  meeting  in  May,  and  its  special  meeting  at   Inverness  in 


PATRICK  AfFARLAN,  D.D. 

August.  His  sympathies  were  by  no  means  confined  to  the  limits  of  his 
own  communion  :  he  was  one  of  the  original  promoters  of  the  Evangelical 
Alliance,  and  he  took  a  special  interest  in  the  Continental  Churches,  and 
the  revival  amongst  them  of  evangelical  religion.  His  death  took  place 
at  Greenock,  after  a  short  but  severe  illness,  in  November  1S49,  in  the 
sixty-ninth  year  of  his  age.  He  retained  his  mental  faculties  to  the  last, 
giving  frequent  e.xpression  to  his  faith  and  hope  as  a  Christian,  with 
singular  distinctness  and  solemnity.  It  deserves  to  be  noticed  that  he 
was  the  fourth  in  a  succession  of  ministers,  continued  from  father  to  son, 
since  the  time  of  the  Revolution.  In  the  ministry  of  the  Free  Church, 
he  has  been  worthily  succeeded  by  his  son,  the  Rev.  John  M'Farlan  of 
the  Free  Middle  Church,  Greenock,  and  his  grandson,  the  Rev.  Andrew 
Melville  of  Free  St  Enoch's,  Glasgow. 

Dr  M'Farlan's  personal  appearance  was  very  prepossessing.  His 
head  and  face  would  have  attracted  observation  in  any  assembly — 
suggesting  the  idea  of  culture  and  refinement,  of  mental  acuteness  and 
moral  elevation.  His  voice  was  clear  and  ringing,  rather  than  strong. 
His  speaking,  both  from  the  pulpit  and  in  debate,  was  characterised  above 
everything  by  clearness  and  precision.  He  was  wanting  in  the  power 
of  illustration  ;  but  there  was  an  admirable  distinctness  which  went  far 
to  make  up  for  the  defect;  he  always  knew  what  he  meant  to  say 
and  made  it  perfectly  plain  to  his  hearers.  He  was  distinguished, 
too,  in  a  remarkable  degree,  by  business  talents;  in  this  respect  his 
acquaintance  with  forms,  his  tact,  his  readiness  of  word  and  pen,  were  of 
invaluable  service  to  his  brethren.  Indeed,  one  of  his  most  characteristic 
features  was  facility  of  execution  :  what  he  had  to  do,  he  could  do  at 
once,  without  hesitation  or  delay,  an  important  quality  for  one  so  much 
engaged  in  public  aftairs.  In  the  pulpit,  that  defect  in  the  illustrative 
faculty  just  referred  to,  was,  no  doubt,  a  serious  drawback.  The  want 
of  imagination  necessarily  interfered  with  any  widespread  popularity, 
beyond  the  sphere  of  his  own  congregation.     But,  on  the  other  liand, 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

his  clear  exhibition  of  gospel  truth,  set  forth  with  simplicity  and 
earnestness,  made  his  preaching  most  weighty  and  acceptable  among 
the  people  of  his  charge.  It  was  the  old  gospel,  known  and  realised  in 
his  own  experience,  which  he  preached  to  others  with  fulness  and 
fidelity.  In  the  more  private  duties  of  the  pastoral  office  he  was 
unwearied ;  having  a  strong  hold  on  the  affections  of  his  people  by  his 
sympathy  with  them  in  times  of  difficulty  and  trial ;  while  the  cheerful 
affability  of  his  manner  was  attractive  alike  to  young  and  old.  Indeed, 
in  him  the  Christian  minister  and  the  Christian  gentleman  were  most 
happily  blended  :  he  was  a  gentleman  of  the  old  school,  always  courteous, 
with  that  ease  and  self-possession,  which  tended  to  relieve  others  from 
any  feehng  of  restraint  or  embarassment.  He  shone  in  company  by  his 
conversational  powers  ;  but  however  lively  and  entertaining,  he  never 
forgot  what  was  due  to  his  office,  nor  allowed  others  to  forget  it.  There 
was  an  unfailing  dignity  and  propriety  in  his  demeanour,  which  added 
greatly  to  his  weight  and  influence.  He  was  a  man  with  much  warmth 
of  heart  and  feeling  :  in  his  family,  overflowing  with  affection,  and  the 
object  of  affection  in  a  corresponding  degree  ;  while  to  others  on  intimate 
terms  with  him,  he  was  the  most  steadfast  of  friends  and  the  most 
delightful  of  companions.  Those  who  remember  how,  in  early  life,  they 
were  admitted  to  his  society  and  enjoyed  his  confidence,  and  the 
encouragement  thereby  aff^orded  them  at  the  outset  of  their  ministry, 
can  never  cease  to  cherish  his  memory,  as  of  one  of  their  best  and 
dearest  friends.  By  the  Free  Church  at  large,  the  name  of  Dr 
Patrick  M'Farlan  is  to  be  remembered,  as  occupying  a  prominent  place 
in  the  list  of  Disruption  Worthies,  on  account  of  the  noble  part  he  acted 
at  that  memorable  crisis.  As  one  of  the  fathers  and  founders  of  the 
Free  Church  of  Scotland,  his  name  will  ever  be  associated  with  her 
history.  W.  L. 


Patrirh  IB05U  glnu  M^txzhu, 


OF  PEKCETON.) 


|T   was   not   possible   for  one  to   know   Patrick    Boyle   Mure 
Macredie  without  receiving  a  very  deep  impression  of  the 
soundness  of  his  judgment,  the  extent  of  his  information, 
the  warmth  of  his  heart,  and  the  depth  of  his  piety ;   and 
though  from  constitutional  diffidence  he  was  not  fitted  for 
debate,  and  never  entered  the  arena  in  the  "  ten  years'  con- 
flict," yet  from  his  great  moral  worth,  and  his  high  tone  of  Christian 
consistency,  he  was  of  great  service   to  the  Disruption  cause,  and  his 
name  must  ever  rank  high  among  Disruption  Worthies. 

He  was  born  at  Warriston,  near  Edinburgh,  on  the  28th  of  September 
iSoo.  His  father  was  Thomas  Mure,  Esq.  of  Warriston.  His  mother 
was  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Honourable  Patrick  Boyle  of  Shewalton. 
He  had  the  misfortune  to  lose  both  his  parents  in  very  early  life ;  but  he 
came  under  the  care  of  his  maternal  grandmother  and  uncle  at  Shewalton, 
as  well  as  of  his  mother's  sister,  Mrs  Smollet  of  Bonhill,  at  Cameron 
House  ;  and  it  was  one  of  the  enjoyments  of  his  later  life  to  recall  the 
happy  days  he  spent  there.  He  was  one  of  a  large  family.  George,  his 
elder  brother,  was  in  the  Grenadier  Guards,  and  carried  the  colours  at 
Waterloo.  Thomas,  his  younger  brother,  entered  the  navy,  and  died  of 
fever  in  the  fatal  Irrawady. 

Patrick,  destined  for  the  Bar,  entered  the  University  of  Edinburgh  in 

3C  377 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

i8i2,  and  passed  with  credit  and  approbation  through  the  usual  curri- 
culum of  the  Arts  Classes,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Law.  In  1822  he  was 
one  of  nineteen  who  passed  Advocate — seven  of  them  on  the  same  daj-, 
among  whom  were  Sir  Charles  Ferguson  of  Kilkerran,  Mr  Hog  of 
Newliston,  and  Lord  Neaves,  who  alone  survives. 

Eager  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge,  and  honourable  in  his  whole 
bearing  and  deportment,  Mr  Mure  was  still  a  stranger  to  the  saving 
grace  of  the  gospel.  In  those  days  Moderatism  prevailed  in  the  pulpit. 
In  many  parts  of  the  country  the  proclamation  of  a  free  salvation, 
through  the  atoning  blood  of  the  Lamb,  was  the  exception  and  not  the 
rule.  Towards  the  close  of  1822  he  begins  to  take  note  in  his  diary  of 
the  sermons  he  heard.  The  preaching  of  Dr  Andrew  Thomson  pro- 
duced a  powerful  impression  on  his  mind  ;  but  it  was  chiefly  through 
the  ministry  of  Dr  Henry  Grey  that  he  was  brought  to  a  knowledge  of 
the  truth.  Under  date  21st  December  of  that  year,  he  writes:  "Heard 
two  sermons  from  Mr  Grey ;  like  his  preaching  very  much ;  first  time." 
March  2.  1823 — "  Heard  an  excellent  sermon  from  Mr  Grey,  from  Exodus 
xii.  42.  It  is  a  night  much  to  be  remembered,"  &c.  To  this  he  has 
appended,  at  a  later  date,  "This  sermon,  if  I  remer  .^r  right,  caused  me 
to  consider  if  ever  I  could  speak  of  such  a  day."  March  21 — "Fell  in 
with  a  tract  on  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  taught  me  some  things 
of  which  I  was  ignorant."  May  18 — "Received  at  church  deeper  alarm 
— driven  almost  to  despair.  How  much  I  have  been  changed  this  last 
week ! — despair,  little  sleeps  I  am  wretched ;  everything  appears  a 
dream."  May  21 — "  I  called  to-day  on  Mr  Grey;  received  by  him  very 
kindly.  I  go  home  with  much  joy  and  peace,  but  my  joy  like  the  crack- 
ling of  thorns — the  joy  of  nature  at  seeing  a  hope."  Pages  might  be 
filled  with  most  interesting  extracts,  which  reveal  the  struggle  that  was 
going  on  within — his  eager  thirst  for  the  word,  and  the  delight  he  had  in 
the  ministry  of  Mr  Grey.  His  eldest  sister  was  of  great  service  to  him 
at  this  eventful  period  of  his  life ;  and  though  for  a  season  he  was  dis- 


PATRICK  BOYLE  MURE  M ACRE  DIE 

tressed  with  doubts  and  fears,  yet  these  eventually  passed  away,  and  he 
settled  down  into  that  child-like  repose  in  the  Saviour  that  continued 
unbroken  to  the  end.  From  this  time  forward  he  became  a  daily  and 
systematic  student  of  the  Bible,  availing  himself  of  all  the  helps  he  could 
obtain.  He  soon  afterwards  became  a  Sabbath-school  teacher,  and  his 
diaries  reveal  how  deep  was  the  interest  he  took  in  his  class,  and  how 
diligently  he  prepared  himself  for  it.  When  Dr  Chalmers  was  appointed 
to  the  Divinity  Chair,  like  many  others  who  were  non-theological,  he 
attended  his  lectures,  and  caught  the  enthusiasm  for  theological  inquiry. 
Church  history  became  a  favourite  study  ;  and  he  set  himself  to  acquire 
a  knowledge  of  Hebrew,  that  he  might  be  able  to  read  the  Old  Testa- 
ment Scriptures  in  the  original  tongue. 

For  ten  years  of  his  Edinburgh  life,  he  and  his  life-long  friend, 
Alexander  Dunlop,  occupied  the  same  apartments,  and  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  his  intimacy  with  one  so  versed  in  ecclesiastical  law  could 
not  fail  to  awaken  his  interest  in  ecclesiastical  affairs,  and  this  must 
have  been  deepened  by  the  part  he  took  in  connection  with  the  two 
settlements  at  Dreghorn.  Twice  over  within  the  space  of  two  short 
years  that  unfortunate  parish  was  subjected  to  protracted  litigation 
before  the  ecclesiastical  courts,  and  in  both  Mr  Mure  was  employed  as 
counsel  on  behalf  of  the  heritors  and  people.  In  the  spring  of  1830  a 
licentiate  was  presented,  who  was  suspected  of  holding  unsound  views  in 
regard  to  the  sinless  humanity  of  Christ.  A  libel  was  prepared,  and 
evidence  led.  The  General  Assembly  of  1831  found  the  libel  proven, 
and  the  presentation  was  set  aside.  An  acceptable  appointment  fol- 
lowed ;  but  as  the  health  of  their  new  minister  was  extremely  delicate, 
llie  people  of  Dreghorn  trembled  lest  he  should  pass  away  before  some 
other  vacancy  had  occurred  in  the  patron's  gift,  for  it  was  known  what 
name  stood  next  on  the  patron's  list.  Their  fears  were  realised — in  the 
spring  of  1834  their  pastor  died,  the  obnoxious  presentation  was  issued, 
and  the  parish  was  plunged  anew  into  conflict.     This  was  the  memorable 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES,. 

year  of  the  Veto  Act,  and  the  pecuHarity  in  the  case  of  Dreghorn  was 
that  the  Act  was  passed  betwixt  the  time  of  the  issuing  of  the  presenta- 
tion and  the  moderation  of  the  call.  On  all  hands  it  was  admitted  that 
the  special  provisions  of  that  Act  could  not  apply ;  but  forasmuch  as 
that  Act  declared  "  that  it  is  a  fundamental  law  of  this  church  that  no 
minister  should  be  intruded  on  a  congregation  against  the  will  of  the 
people,"  the  parishioners  very  naturally  held  that  respect  should  be  had 
to  this  fundamental  principle  in  the  settlement  of  the  minister  of  Dreg- 
horn.  On  the  day  of  the  moderation,  the  call  was  signed  by  very  few, 
while  the  great  majority  objected  to  his  settlement.  The  Presbytery 
decided  in  favour  of  the  people,  and  the  case  was  brought  up  by  appeal 
to  the  next  General  Assembly  ;  after  a  keen  discussion,  by  a  majority  of 
one,  the  presentee  was  rejected.  The  people  went  home  rejoicing  in  the 
victory  they  had  won,  but  it  was  short-lived.  It  turned  out  that,  in 
answer  to  the  name  of  a  gentleman  who  was  not  present,  some  one  had 
voted  in  their  favour.  How  it  occurred,  and  by  whom  it  was  done,  was 
never  discovered.  It  was  believed  to  have  been  accidental.  It  was  most 
unfortunate  for  the  people  ;  but  for  this,  the  votes  being  equal,  they  would 
have  obtained  the  benefit  of  the  casting  vote  of  the  Moderator,  but  from 
this,  in  the  peculiar  circumstances,  they  were  precluded,  and  it  was  held 
that  no  decision  had  been  given.  This  involved  the  delay  of  another 
year.  The  whole  question  was  re-argued  in  the  General  Assembly  of 
1836,  when  it  carried  by  a  majority  of  thirty-one  in  favour  of  the  pre- 
sentee, who  was  intruded  on  the  parish  with  the  usual  results. 

Having  married  the  heiress  of  Perceton  in  1835,  he  assumed  the  name 
of  Macredie,  and  gave  himself  heartily  to  the  discharge  of  the  duties  that 
now  devolved  upon  him.  In  all  the  affairs  of  the  county  he  took  an 
active  interest.  An  adept  in  figures,  he  was  made  Chairman  of  Finance, 
and  from  the  intelligence  and  impartiality  he  brought  to  bear  upon  every 
question,  his  opinion  was  felt  to  be  of  value.  A  Conservative  in  politics, 
he   threw  himself  with    characteristic    energy  into    every  electioneering 


PATRICK  BOYLE  MURE  M ACRE  DIE. 

contest,  and  in  the  winter  of  1854-5  he  nominated  Sir  James  Ferguson 
for  the  county  of  Ayr,  who  carried  the  election.  Nor  were  his  scientific 
studies  laid  aside.  He  became  a  member  of  the  Royal  Society,  and  other 
kindred  institutions.  He  joined  the  British  Association  at  its  commence- 
ment, and  was  seldom  absent  from  any  of  its  annual  gatherings.  But 
while  he  kept  himself  abreast  of  the  progress  of  science,  he  took  the 
deepest  interest  in  all  the  religious  questions  of  the  day.  Having  been 
ordained  an  elder  in  1832,  he  sat  in  the  General  Assembly  during  nearly 
the  whole  of  the  ten  years  preceding  the  Disruption,  and,  as  might  have 
been  expected,  alike  from  his  religious  convictions  and  his  Dreghorn 
experience,  he  was  always  found  on  the  side  of  loyalty  to  Christ,  and 
liberty  to  the  people.  When,  in  his  own  immediate  neighbourhood,  the 
Stewarton  case  arose,  involving  the  right  of  the  quoad  sacra  ministers  to  a 
scat  in  the  church  courts,  he  stood  nobly  forward  in  the  defence,  and 
rendered  essential  service  to  the  Presbytery  in  the  conduct  of  the  case. 
True  to  his  convictions,  never  wavering  for  a  moment — neither  before 
nor  after — he  left  St  Andrew's  Church  on  the  memorable  Disruption  day  ; 
and  though  it  brought  along  with  it  an  experience  which,  from  his  sensitive 
nature,  he  keenly  felt — he  bore  it,  he  outlived  it,  quieter  times  came,  and 
it  passed  away. 

In  addition  to  his  other  duties,  Mr  Macrcdie  devoted  a  large  share  ot 
time  and  attention  to  the  mines  and  the  fire-clay  works  which  he  carried 
on.  This  involved  him  in  much  hard  work,  but  success  attended  his 
efforts,  and  supplied  him  with  the  means  of  giving  to  the  cause  of  Christ 
on  a  scale  of  liberality  that  is  very  rare  :  his  private  account-book  is 
before  me,  from  which  I  find  that  sometimes  a  fourth  and  sometimes  a 
fifth  of  his  income  was  consecrated  to  the  Lord. 

The  welfare  of  those  immediately  under  his  charge  lay  very  near  his 
heart.  At  a  time  when  the  question  of  improved  accommodation  for  the 
labouring  classes  had  not  come  to  the  front,  he  built  fifteen  miners' 
cottages,  of  three  apartments  each,  for  which  he  received  a  medal  from 


DTSRUPTTOX  WORTHIES. 

the  Highland  Society.  He  taught  a  class  of  grown-up  lads  on  the 
Sabbath  evenings,  and  besides  employing  a  missionary  to  labour  among 
them,  he  held  prayer-meetings  in  the  cottages.  When  the  revival  of 
1859-60  visited  the  West  of  Scotland,  he  threw  himself  into  it  with  the 
greatest  zeal,  aided  in  building  a  mission  hall,  and,  at  his  own  expense, 
provided  additional  labourers  to  cultivate  the  field— a  work  which  his 
family  still  continue.  But  his  interest  was  not  confined  to  his  own  locality. 
The  cause  of  Christ  in  every  land  shared  his  liberality.  He  sowed  beside 
all  waters.  One  example  may  be  given.  From  his  frequent  intercourse 
with  the  South,  he  found  that  the  Westminster  Catechism  was  scarcely 
known  to  the  clergy  of  the  Church  of  England.  He  printed  a  special 
edition  of  the  Catechism,  and  sent  a  copy  to  every  Episcopal  clergyman. 
In  the  summer  of  1863  he  was  visited  with  a  very  serious  illness,  from 
the  effects  of  which  he  never  fully  recovered.  The  few  remaining  years 
of  his  life  passed  quietly  awa}'.  He  was  suffering  from  disease  of  the 
heart.  Though  it  weakened,  it  did  not  confine  him.  He  was  able  to 
conduct  family  worship  till  within  two  days  of  his  death ;  and  when  no 
longer  able  to  read  the  portion  of  Scripture,  he  continued  to  lead  their 
devotions.  His  mind  was  unclouded,  and  his  peace  unbroken.  On  the 
morning  of  15th  April  1868  he  breathed  his  last,  leaving  behind  him  a 
widow,  two  sons  and  two  daughters,  to  revere  his  memory  and  follow  in 
his  steps.  T.  M. 

[This  Sketch  should  here  have  closed,  but  the  appalling  railway  accident  at  Abbots  Ripton, 
on  the  evening  of  the  21st  January  1S76,  which  plunged  so  many  families  into  such  deep  and 
crushing  sorrow,  sent  the  thrill  of  anguish  to  this  happy  home.  Among  the  sufferers  was  Thomas 
Mure,  the  eldest  of  the  two  sons.  Partially  injured  in  the  first  collision,  he  was  crashed  beneath 
the  engine  in  the  second.  There  for  three  hours  he  lay  amid  the  drifting  snow  of  that  awful 
night.  Never  a  murmur  escaped  his  lips.  His  Christianity  shone  out  as  with  a  blaze  of  bril- 
li.incy,  and  his  unselfishness  did  not  fail  him  in  death.— "Tell  my  mother  that  I  die  in  Jesus." 
"Try  and  help  the  man  that  is  near  me,"  were  his  words  to  those  who  were  kindly  helping 
him.  For  two  days  he  lingered.  He  sent  touching  and  weighty  messages  to  his  friends  and 
fellow-officers  in  the  militia.  On  Sabbath  the  23d  he  died,  in  the  presence  of  his  mother  and 
sisters,  who  had  hastened  to  be  with  him.  And  so  there  passed  away,  at  the  early  age  of  thirty- 
four,  one  of  the  purest,  gentlest,  and  most  generous  of  the  children  of  men.] 
382 


^tk  Holitruk  HVltQ'a. 


^  MONG  the  great  and  good  men  of  Disruption  days  a 
prominent  place  may  well  be  claimed  for  Roderick 
M'Leod ;  and  the  Church  acknowledged  the  claim  by 
unanimously  calling  him  to  preside  over  her  General 
Assembly  of   1863,   thus  conferring   upon   him   the 
highest  honour  she  had  to  bestow. 
Mr  M'Leod  was  born  in  Glen-Haltin,  Isle  of  Skye,  in  the  year  1794. 
Mis  father,  the  parish  minister  of  Snizort,  was  a  younger  son  of  M'Leod 
of  Raasay.     His  family  connection  thus  gave  him  a  position  in  society, 
and  may  also  have  contributed  to  the   formation  of  that   chivalrous 
bearing  which  characterised  him  through  life.    He  possessed  great  natural 
force  of  character,  superior  intcllectnal  power,   and   a   fearlessness   of 
disposition  that  even  in  early  youth  made  him  a  hero  among  his  asso- 
ciates at  school  and  college.      Having  completed    his   college  course 
at    Aberdeen,    he   was   licensed    by    the    Presbytery    of    Skye    as    a 
preacher  of  the   Gospel,   and   was  soon   thereafter  appointed   to  the 
mission  of  Lynedale,  in  his  father's  parish.     At  this  period  of  his  life, 
and  for  a  year  or  two  thereafter,  Mr  M'Leod  was  still  a  man  of  the  world 
—gay  and   light-hearted— and   from   his   gentlemanly   bearing  was   a 
universal  favourite  in  the  society  of  Skye.     He  felt  little  interest  in  the 
souls  of  others,  for  he  was  a  stranger  to  the  requirements  of  his  own  soul 
and  to  the  love  of  the  Saviour.    But,  by  the  perusal  of  Bellamy's  "Chri.st- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

lan  Religion  Delineated,"  he  was  awakened  to  a  sense  of  his  spiritual 
state,  and  when  he  was  thus  exercised  it  happened  in  providence  that 
Dr  Chalmers'  "  Lectures  on  the  Romans "  fell  into  his  hands.  He 
studied  these  lectures  prayerfully;  and  to  the  light  and  comfort  he 
obtained  by  means  of  them  he  made  a  touching  allusion  in  his  address 
at  the  close  of  the  General  Assembly  in  1863. 

At  the  time  of  this  crisis  in  Mr  M'Leod's  history,  there  lived  in  his 
neighbourhood  a  remarkable  man  in  humble  circumstances  whose 
enlightened  views  and  ripe  Christian  experience  were  the  means  of 
keeping  and  strengthening  him  in  the  way  of  the  Lord.  This  man  was 
blind  Donald  Munro,  a  name  revered  in  Skye  only  second  to  that  of  Mr 
M'Leod  himself.  When  the  history  of  living  religion  in  Skye  shall  be 
written,  one  of  its  most  interesting  chapters  will  be  the  life  and  labours  of 
this  man  of  God.  He  was  converted  through  hearing  a  sermon  preached 
by  Mr  Farquharson,  an  itinerant  preacher  sent  to  Skye  by  the  Messrs 
Haldane ;  and  soon  it  became  evident  that  God  had  raised  him  up  to  be 
a  faithful  and  much-acknowledged  labourer  in  His  vineyard.  He  had 
rare  mental  gifts,  and  was  mighty  in  the  Scriptures.  His  meetings  for 
prayer  and  exhortation  were  abundant,  and  the  power  of  the  Lord  was 
present  in  those  humble  gatherings  at  the  river  side  in  Snizort. 

Along  with  the  great  spiritual  change  in  the  minister,  there  was  seen 
a  very  striking  change  in  the  Mission  House  of  Lynedale.  The  preaching 
was  new.  The  services  were  multiplied.  Meetings  were  held  on  week 
days  as  well  as  Sabbaths.  Soon  these  meetings  became  crowded,  for  the 
people  flocked  to  them  from  the  surrounding  districts,  and  many  who 
afterwards  became  eminent  Christians  dated  their  first  deep  impressions 
from  the  earnest  services  of  that  time. 

When  the  parish  of  Bracadale  became  vacant  by  the  death  of  Mr 
Shaw,  a  minister  of  eminent  piety,  Mr  M'Leod  was  presented  to  the 
living,  and  inducted  into  that  charge  in  1823.  He  used  to  remark  that 
it  was  with  his  sword  and  his  bow  that   he  gained  this   preferment. 


REV.  RODERICK  APLEOD. 

referring  to  the  manner  in  which  he  formerly  commended  himself  to  his 
patron,  by  excelling  in  the  use  of  the  gun  and  in  other  amusements. 

His  ministry  in  Bracadale  extended  over  fifteen  years.  Here  he  had 
trials,  but  he  had  also  great  encouragement  in  his  work.  His  church 
was  crowded  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  with  eager  hearers.  Not  only 
his  own  parishioners,  but  many  from  the  surrounding  parishes  resorted 
to  his  ministry.  Bracadale  became  famous  as  the  birthplace  of  souls, 
and  the  memories  still  floating  in  the  island  of  the  success  that  attended 
Mr  M'Leod's  labours  there  would  fill  a  volume. 

His  views  of  the  sacraments  caused  him  to  delay  in  some  cases  the 
administration  of  baptism,  and  this  unusual  strictness  gave  rise  to  com- 
plaints and  appeals  to  the  Presbytery  of  Skye.  His  Presbytery  had  no 
sympathy  with  him  or  his  views,  and  endeavoured  to  force  him  into 
compliance  with  their  own  laxcr  notions.  But  standing,  as  he  believed 
he  did,  on  the  firm  foundation  of  God's  truth,  Mr  M'Leod  was  not 
the  man  to  be  moved  from  his  strong  convictions.  And  so  his  refusing 
baptism  to  a  parishioner  came  up  before  the  General  Assembly  of  1824 
by  reference  from  the  Presbyterj'. 

At  three  different  Assemblies  Mr  M'Leod's  case  was  under  discussion 
in  one  form  or  another.  His  Presbytery  treated  him  with  the  utmost 
harshness,  and  gave  him  no  rest.  They  harassed  him,  at  first  with  threats, 
then  by  suspending  him  from  the  functions  of  the  ministry  for  a  year, 
and  finally  they  proceeded  against  him  by  libel  with  the  view  of  deposing 
him  from  the  ministry.  It  was  to  this  treatment  that  Mr  (afterwards 
Lord)  Cockburn,  who  was  Mr  M'Leod's  counsel,  referred,  when,  in  an 
eloquent  speech  before  the  Assembly,  he  lashed  the  Presbytery  of  Skye 
with  his  powers  of  ridicule,  describing  them  as  a  troop  of  foxhunters, 
who  had  not  much  to  occupy  them,  and  who  agreed  to  keep  a  bagged 
fox,  at  which  they  might  have  a  run  when  they  wanted  a  hunt.  The 
case  was  ultimately  disposed  of  in  1827,  when  the  Assembly  appointed  a 
committee  of  its  most  respected  members  to  make  full  investigation,  and 


D/SR  f  T  TION  won  THIES. 

to  report  to  the  House.  This  committee  vindicated  Mr  M'Leod,  and 
recommended  that  the  suspension  be  removed,  and  the  Hbel  be  rejected. 
The  Assembly  unanimously  adopted  their  committee's  report,  and  Mr 
M'Leod  was  set  free,  and  returned  to  his  home  and  his  flock  a  happy  man. 
Mr  M'Leod  continued  his  ministry  in  Bracadale  till  the  year  1838, 
when,  on  a  vacancy  occurring  in  the  parish  of  Snizort,  the  people  peti- 
tioned the  Home  Office,  praying  that  Mr  M'Leod  should  be  presented  to 
the  charge.  The  application  was  successful,  and  he  was  accordingly 
translated  to  Snizort.  It  was  now  the  period  of  the  "  Ten  Years'  Con- 
flict," and  into  that  movement  Mr  M'Leod  threw  himself  with  all  the 
ardour  of  his  heart.  His  sympathies  were  entirely  on  the  side  of  the 
spiritual  independence  of  the  Church,  and  the  spiritual  rights  and  privi- 
leges of  the  Christian  people.  The  circumstances  of  the  time  called  for 
a  large  amount  of  extra-parochial  duties,  and  perhaps  no  man  passed 
through  more  bodily  toil  and  privation  in  the  service  of  the  Church  than 
Mr  M'Leod  did  on  to  1S43.  But  however  excessive  his  labours  may  have 
been  before,  it  was  the  Disruption  in  that  year  that  laid  on  him  a  burden 
which  demanded  all  the  mental  vigour  and  elasticity,  and  all  the  physical 
strength,  with  which  the  Lord  had  endowed  him.  The  Island  of  Skye, 
containing  eight  ministerial  charges,  with  a  population  of  20,000  souls, 
was  the  field  he  was  called  to  occupy,  and  he  held  it  for  years  single- 
handed.  Of  his  brethren  in  the  island,  none  stood  by  him  when  the 
day  of  trial  came,  except  one  who  was  called  to  another  charge  a  few 
months  after  the  Disruption.  But  it  was  not  only  Skye  which  he  had 
to  hold  for  the  Free  Church.  That  portion  of  the  Long  Island  which 
extends  from  Harris  to  Barra  Head,  with  its  population  of  16,000  or 
more,  and  with  only  one  minister  who  joined  the  Free  Church,  was  added 
to  the  Presbytery  of  Skye,  and  demanded  a  large  share  of  Mr  M'Leod's 
thoughts  and  labours.  He  did  not,  however,  shrink  from  the  work,  but 
courageously  and  cheerfully  set  his  face  to  the  duties  before  him.  His 
labours  for  some  years  after  the  Disruption  were  not  exceeded  by  those 


REV.  RODE  HICK  M'LEOD. 

of  any  minister  in  the  Free  Church.  It  was  no  uncommon  thing  with 
him  in  those  years  to  preach  to  congregations  on  the  hillside  in  the 
midst  of  a  snow-storm  ;  and  although  he  felt  no  injurious  effects  at  the 
time,  privations  and  continuous  exertions,  which  were  far  beyond  what 
any  ordinary  human  strength  could  bear,  left  their  mark  upon  him.  But 
in  the  midst  of  it  all  no  one  ever  found  him  desponding.  He  was  always 
cheerful,  and  often  even  playful.  By  degrees  relief  came  to  him,  and  his 
labours  were  lightened.  One  after  another  of  the  island  charges  was 
filled  up  ;  and  before  his  removal  he  saw  the  whole  island  supplied  with 
ministers,  from  Rhu  Hunish  to  the  Point  of  Sleat. 

Mr  M'Leod  was  married  to  Miss  Anne  M'Donald,  of  Skeabost,  in 
whom  he  found  a  partner  who  sympathised  with  him  in  all  his  labours, 
and  who  strengthened  him  in  his  various  trials.  They  had  a  family  of 
thirteen  children ;  and  before  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  visit  them  with 
bereavements,  the  well-ordered  and  happy  household  greatly  impressed 
many  a  visitor  to  the  manse.  But  one  after  another  they  were  taken 
away,  until  at  the  time  of  his  own  removal,  only  four  remained.  His 
bearing  in  connection  with  those  family  sorrows  was  very  remarkable. 
He  meekly  and  quietly  took  all  from  a  Father's  hand. 

Mr  M'Leod  continued  in  robust  health  till  he  neared  the  threescore 
years  and  ten.  But  at  length  the  iron  frame  began  to  yield.  In  the  year 
1864  he  had  an  illness  which  confined  him  to  the  house  for  several  weeks ; 
but  he  rallied  again,  and  continued  to  labour  with  unabated  zeal  for  some 
>-cars  longer.  It  may  be  said  of  him  that  he  fell  in  the  field  ;  for  it  was 
on  returning  from  South  Uist,  after  several  days  of  preaching,  that  his 
last  illness  came  on.  He  performed  this  long  journey  in  an  open  boat, 
where  there  was  neither  shelter  nor  comfort.  Exposure  to  storm  and 
wet,  for  a  night  and  a  day,  left  evil  effects  behind,  and  his  strength 
I  rapidly  forsook  him.     The  end  was  like  a  summer  sunset,  calm  and 

I  tranquil.     There  was  no  ecstacy,  and  there  was  no  fear  ;  and  without  a 

struggle  he  passed  away. 

387 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

It  is  difficult  now  to  credit  the  "  gross  darkness "  that  covered  the 
population  of  Skye  at  the  commencement  of  this  century.  But  a  refor- 
mation period  arrived.  A  tide  of  religious  feeling  set  in  through  the 
island,  and  the  trusted  leader  of  the  movement  was  Roderick  M'Leod. 
No  one  acquainted  with  the  religious  history  of  Skye  can  doubt  that 
he  was  an  instrument  specially  raised  up  by  God  to  guide  and  mould  the 
revived  spiritual  life  of  the  people  at  that  time.  But  Mr  M'Leod  was  no 
mere  revivalist.  He  was  a  man  of  wide  sympathies,  who  took  a  deep 
and  intelligent  interest  in  all  matters  civil  and  ecclesiastical.  In  eccle- 
siastical questions  he  was  always  in  harmony  with  the  great  leaders  of 
the  Church.  This  was  true,  not  only  previous  to  the  Disruption,  but 
since  that  event.  When  there  was  an  agitation  on  the  subject  of  Church 
Unions  in  the  colonies,  he  strongly  advocated  the  side  of  union.  And 
when  the  question  of  union  among  the  unestablished  churches  of  our 
own  country  came  on,  he  entered  into  it  most  cordially.  It  was  charac- 
teristic of  him  that,  when  once  he  took  up  a  position,  he  was  not  to  be 
moved  from  it.  And  so,  on  the  subject  of  union,  having  made  up  his 
mind,  he  never  wavered  to  his  dying  day  in  giving  it  his  earnest  support. 

Those  who  had  the  privilege  of  intimate  acquaintance  with  him  found 
him  a  man  of  very  warm  affections,  a  most  congenial  companion,  and  a 
confiding  and  steadfast  friend,  who  could  be  relied  on  in  any  emergency. 
Among  his  younger  brethren,  instead  of  seeking  to  lord  it  over  them, 
he  often  made  them  feel  ashamed  by  refusing  to  take  the  place  that  they 
thought  belonged  to  him  of  right.  In  their  manses  none  was  a  greater 
favourite  with  the  little  children.  Such  a  man  could  not  fail  to  be 
beloved  by  the  people  of  his  native  island,  and  his  sufferings  for  right- 
eousness' sake  gave  him  a  place  in  their  hearts  that  no  other  man  has 
ever  had.  It  will  be  indeed  a  degenerate  race  of  Skyemen  that  will 
cease  to  cherish  with  reverence  and  love  the  memory  of  Mr  Roderick 
M'Leod.  J.  S.  M. 


lolm  ffaitlantr. 


iT  is  difficult  to  convey  to  a  younger  generation  an  adequate 
idea  of  the  remarkable  manner  in  which  Scottish  minds, 
hearts,  and  consciences  were  possessed  and  moved  during  the 
Disruption  period.  Most  of  those  who,  at  the  time,  were  old 
enough  to  understand  what  was  going  on,  and  had  already 
given  themselves  to  the  Lord,  felt,  as  by  a  religious  instinct, 
that  the  question  at  issue  was  a  vital  one — was  in  reality  and  essentially 
the  same  question  which  has  been  contested  on  divers  fields  in  all  ages  of 
the  Church  :  "  Shall  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  or  shall  He  not,  rule  in  and 
over  His  own  house  ?"  or,  in  other  words,  "  Shall  any  earthly  or  temporal 
authority  be  suffered  to  interpose  between  Him  and  His  true  church,  His 
body,  His  bride,  His  believing  people  ? " 

If  the  religious  instincts  of  one  party  were  clear  and  unhesitating,  there 
was  a  corresponding  unanimity  on  the  side  of  their  opponents,  who,  not 
appreciating  the  religious  aspects  of  the  question,  allowed  themselves  to 
be  swayed  by  political  sentiments,  by  a  constitutional  dread  of  change, 
and  perhaps,  too,  by  an  overweening  estimate  of  the  importance  of  State 
support. 

In  trying  to  recall  that  momentous  period,  we  must  remember  that  it 
had  been  preceded  by,  and  was  in  fact  the  natural  outcome  of,  a  remark- 
able season  of  religious  awakening  and  revival.     Many  young  persons, 

just  entering  on  the  serious  responsibilities  of  life,  had  shortly  before  re- 

339 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

ceived  a  baptism  from  above  ;  a  constellation  of  men,  so  to  speak,  all  bom 
about  the  same  time  in  the  early  years  of  the  century,  had  risen,  specially 
prepared  and  fitted  to  take  up  and  carry  forward  the  ancestral  testimony 
handed  down  by  Knox,  Melville,  and  Henderson,  and  latterly  maintained 
by  Sir  Henry  Moncreifif,  by  the  elder  M'Crie,  by  Thomson  and  Chalmers  ; 
and  it  seemed  as  if  a  glorious  work  was  in  store  for  the  Church  of  Scot- 
land, under  the  fostering  care  of  a  recently  reformed,  a  liberal  and  paternal 
government.  The  cause  of  Establishments  had  virtually  triumphed,  in 
spite  of  a  formidable  assault,  conducted  with  great  ability  and  earnestness 
for  several  years  by  the  nonconformists  of  both  England  and  Scotland, 
while  a  scheme  of  church  extension,  conceived  on  the  most  enlightened 
principles  by  Dr  Chalmers,  was  pressed  upon  the  mind  of  his  countrymen 
with  that  burning  eloquence  and  enthusiasm  which  already  made  him  the 
acknowledged  leader  of  a  third  Reformation.  But  this  splendid  prospect 
was  not  to  be  realised  in  the  manner  which  man  ignorantly  anticipated. 
It  was  to  be  learned  once  more,  as  events  thickened  during  the  "  ten 
years'  conflict,"  that  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  had  higher  and  more 
comprehensive  lessons  to  teach  than  His  servants  had  imagined.  He 
shewed  them  that  the  politicians  and  legislators  of  this  world  will  not 
tolerate  that  spiritual  independence  which  He  claims  for  His  bride,  and 
that  State  support  can  be  obtained  only  by  her  submitting  to  unwarrant- 
able limitations  of  that  blood-bought  inheritance.  The  controversy  which 
commenced,  as  is  well  known,  with  the  comparatively  small  question  of 
how  the  scriptural  choice  and  call  of  ministers  might  be  reconciled  with 
the  law  of  Patronage,  unjustly  restored  to  the  statute  book  by  the  Act  of 
Queen  Anne,  raised,  in  rapid  succession,  a  series  of  questions  still  more 
vital  to  a  church  of  Christ,  until  it  became  too  obvious  to  be  doubted, 
that  unless  a  legislative  enactment  could  be  obtained,  recognising  the 
claims  of  the  Church  in  a  full  and  satisfactory  manner,  no  alternative  was 
left  to  her  but  to  abandon  her  connection  with  the  State,  and  trust  to  the 
providence  of  her  divine  Head,  who,  having  the  hearts  of  men  in  His 


JOHN  MAITLAND. 

liand,  can  incline  them  to  give  what  is  needed  of  their  worldly  substance 
for  the  maintenance  and  extension  of  His  own  cause  and  kingdom. 

The  sacrifice  was  made  on  the  i8th  of  May  1843,  and  the  greatness 
of  it  we  can  hardly  realise.  A  few  considerations  may  help  us  to  do  so 
in  some  degree.  Chalmers  himself,  backed  by  many  of  those  whom  he 
had  inspired  with  his  enthusiasm  for  State  endowments  and  an  Estab- 
lished Church,  felt  the  sacrifice  in  giving  up  the  splendid  purpose  so 
long  and  ardently  cherished,  when  it  could  no  longer  be  carried  out, 
without  a  still  greater  sacrifice  of  principle,  and  without  disloyalty  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  hundreds  of  ministers  resigned  for  the  same  reason 
their  charges,  and  with  their  families  abandoned,  at  the  call  of  duty,  the 
pleasant  homes  in  which  they  had  reasonably  hoped  to  spend  their  lives  ; 
professors  had  to  leave  their  posts  of  time-honoured  influence  in  the 
universities,  and  to  undertake,  amid  new  surroundings,  the  theological 
training  of  students,  who  in  great  numbers  flocked  to  them  with  youthful 
ardour  and  confidence ;  all  the  missionaries  of  the  Church  cast  in  their 
lot  with  the  faithful  minority,  and,  of  course,  they  and  their  work  in 
foreign  parts  had  to  be  maintained  by  contributions  from  a  willing  people, 
already  burthened  with  many  anxieties  at  home ;  while  parish  school- 
masters— and  these  the  best — whose  sympathies  were  on  the  same  side, 
justly  claimed  similar  support.  In  short,  the  whole  machinery  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland  needed  to  be  set  up  afresh,  so  great  was  the  Disrup- 
tion in  its  results,  so  real  and  deep-seated  were  the  religious  convictions 
which  called  for  the  sacrifice.  History  can  now  tell  that  the  demands 
which  all  these  changes  made  on  the  liberality  of  the  faithful  people  of 
Scotland,  were  responded  to  in  a  manner  so  remarkable  as  to  prove 
emphatically  that  they  too  considered  the  question  at  issue  to  be  one  of 
vital  and  religious  moment.  So  indeed  it  was  ;  and  no  lower  considera- 
tions could  have  sustained  the  nascent  Free  Church  in  the  crisis  through 
which  she  had  to  pass.  The  hand  of  God  was  visible  in  the  Disruption  ; 
and  on  looking  back,  after  thirty-three  years,  the  worthies  of  that  eventful 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

period  are  now  seen,  when  most  of  them  are  gone  to  their  reward,  to  have 
been  specially  chosen,  endowed,  and  equipped  for  the  work  which  each 
had  to  accomplish.  Who  that  witnessed  these  men  and  their  arduous 
labours  with  a  sympathetic  interest  in  the  struggling  church  of  his 
fathers,  can  ever  forget  the  glad  sense  of  relief,  the  hopeful  enlargement 
of  heart,  the  gratitude  to  God  which  prevailed  on  every  hand,  recalling 
vividly  those  early  pentecostal  days  which  we  read  of  in  the  second 
chapter  of  the  Acts. 

In  making  these  preliminary  remarks,  we  have  not  lost  sight  of  John 
Maitland,  but  have  been  trying  to  explain  those  deep  convictions  which 
underlay  his  quiet  energy  and  zeal,  rendering  him  in  great  measure  the 
useful  man  he  was  in  his  generation. 

The  fourth  son  of  the  late  Sir  Alexander  Gibson  Maitland,  Baronet, 
of  Clifton  Hall,  county  of  Edinburgh,  he  was  born  on  the  17th  of  January 
1803.  We  do  not  possess  many  particulars  of  his  boyhood  and  youth, 
but  old  surviving  friends  speak  of  him  as  being  then  the  same  sensible, 
well-conducted,  and  reliable  person  that  he  continued  to  be  during  his 
subsequent  career.  At  what  period  he  came  under  serious  and  saving 
impressions  is  not  known  ;  but  he  shewed  in  early  manhood  what  side  he 
had  taken,  by  devoting  himself  to  Sabbath-school  teaching  and  other 
occupations  and  duties  of  like  significance. 

When  the  time  came  for  choosing  a  profession,  following  his  own 
natural  bias,  he  became  an  accountant  in  Edinburgh,  a  calling  which  he 
followed  on  his  own  account  for  many  years  with  reputation  and  success. 
Latterly  he  was  associated  in  business  with  his  future  brother-in-law,  Mr 
William  Wood,  C.A.,  a  gentleman  of  like  mind  and  kindred  tastes.  Mr 
Maitland's  professional  aptitude  and  benevolence  led  him  at  an  early 
period  to  take  a  deep  interest  and  a  very  influential  part  in  the  organiza- 
tion and  development  of  the  National  Security  Savings  Bank.  We  are 
informed  on  good  authority,  that  by  devising  a  method  whereby  all  the 
numerous  small  accounts  of  such  useful  institutions  could  be  brought 


JOHN  MAITLAND. 

annually  to  an  exact  balance,  he  solved  a  difficulty  which  had  previously 
stood  in  the  way  of  their  success,  and  made  the  Edinburgh  Savings 
Bank  a  model  for  others  throughout  the  country.  The  institution  has 
now  grown  to  such  large  dimensions,  and  its  admirable  management  has 
been  so  prolific  of  good  elsewhere,  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  over- 
estimate these  early  services  of  Mr  Maitland. 

During  the  years  of  public  earnestness  and  anxiety  of  which  we  have 
already  spoken,  our  friend  was  no  idle  onlooker ;  but  like  his  contemporary 
and  brother-in-law,  the  late  Mr  James  Hog  of  Newliston,  stood  by  the 
Church  of  Scotland  with  unwavering  firmness  in  the  time  of  her  trials, 
and  when  the  Disruption  came,  like  him,  "  turned  from  the  remaining 
Establishment  with  the  most  melancholy  aversion."  Is  it  conceivable 
that  either  of  these  earnest  calm-thinking  men,  had  they  lived  to  the 
present  day,  could  possibly  have  entertained  a  thought  of  retracing  their 
steps — even  with  Patronage  abolished — until  the  General  Assembly  of 
the  Established  Church,  which  then  "bowed  in  the  dust,  and  echoed 
the  very  words  of  the  Civil  Courts,  declaring  the  solemn  sentences  of  the 
Church  to  be  'null  and  void,'"  had,  as  a  preliminary,  acknowledged  its 
unfaithfulness,  and  endorsed  the  Claim  of  Rights  presented  by  the  Free 
Church  of  Scotland  ? 

From  the  very  first  Mr  Maitland  threw  himself  with  heart  and  soul 

into  that  round  of  active  labour  which  an  event  so  momentous  demanded 

from  all  who  would  help  the  Free  Church  in  her  emergency  ;  and  his 

business  capacity,  his  soundness  of  judgment,  his  social  position,  made 

him  a  most  valuable  and  a  trusted  coadjutor.     He  became  a  deacon  in 

1843,  and  in  1846  an  elder,  in  Free  St  George's,  Edinburgh,  and  being 

thus  in  the  centre  of  affairs,  was  enabled  to  render  much  effective  service. 

His  professional  talents  were  at  all  times  available ;  and  no  man  probably 

bestowed  more   earnest  and  successful  thought  than  he  did  upon  the 

general  Sustentation  Fund  and  other  financial  departments  of  the  Church. 

Several  able  pamphlets,  remarkable  for  clearness,  terseness,  and  pith,  did 
3E  393 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

a  great  deal  towards  enlightening  the  minds  of  those  who  were  mainly 
responsible,  and  inaugurating  those  principles  of  distribution  which  have 
rendered  the  Sustentation  Scheme  so  eminently  successful,  and  made  it  a 
model,  probably,  to  other  self-supporting  churches  in  the  future.*  These 
exertions  of  Mr  Maitland  were  veiy  disinterested  in  the  eyes  of  those 
who  could  duly  appreciate  them,  inasmuch  as  they  partially  estranged 
towards  him  not  a  few  friends  in  the  upper  classes  of  society,  with  whom 
he  had  been  associated  by  family  relationship. 

In  the  year  1850,  when  the  public  office  of  accountant  to  the  Court  of 
Session  was  created,  he  was  nominated  by  the  Crown  to  fill  it ;  and  the 
appointment  was  all  the  more  honourable  and  gratifying,  that  it  was 
conferred  without  solicitation  made  or  influence  exerted  on  his  behalf. 
He  filled  the  position  for  fifteen  years,  until  the  day  of  his  death,  and  the 
admirable  manner  in  which  the  duties  were  discharged  fully  justified  the 
confidence  reposed  in  him.  His  public  responsibilities  did  not  preclude 
the  performance,  and  that  very  efficiently,  of  those  duties  which  devolved 
upon  him  as  a  private  Christian  and  an  office-bearer  in  the  Church. 
Although  frequently  a  member  of  the  General  Assembly,  he  was  not  in 
the  habit  of  addressing  the  house,  because  his  inclination,  perhaps  his 
talent,  did  not  lead  him  in  that  direction  ;  but  a  more  intelligent,  a  more 
shrewd  and  trustworthy  adviser,  was  not  to  be  easily  found,  and  there 
was  something  too  in  his  appearance,  in  his  handsome  countenance  and 
aristocratic  bearing,  which  made  him  a  conspicuous  member  of  the  court. 

He  was  a  director  of  the  Commercial  Bank  and  of  the  North  British 
Insurance  Company,  both  positions  indicating  unmistakeably  the  value 
attached,  by  competent  judges,  to  his  good  sense,  his  knowledge  of  affairs, 

*  Mr  Maitland  wrote  an  admirable  tractate,  entitled,  "  A  help  to  Adherents  of  the  Free 
Church,  to  decide  on  principle  and  for  themselves  the  question,  What  contribution  is  equitably 
due  by  me  to  the  Sustentation  Fund?"  It  was  very  useful  at  the  time,  and  is  well  worthy  of 
republication.  "The  Political  Economy  of  the  Sabbath"  also  eng.iged  his  pen;  and  a  very 
able  anonymous  pamphlet,  with  a  clear  statement  of  principles,  true  for  all  time,  on  "  Spiritual 
Independence  in  its  lower  or  Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  Bearings." 


JOHN  MAITLAND. 

and  his  business  habits.  It  would  be  no  easy  task  to  enumerate  tiie 
many  other  fields  of  usefulness  in  which  any  spare  time  at  his  disposal 
found  occupation.  One  or  two  may  be  specially  noted  —  the  Home 
Mission  operations  of  the  Free  Church,  and  everything  connected  with 
the  reparation  of  those  breaches  which  the  shock  of  the  Disruption  had 
occasioned.  In  the  building  of  churches,  of  manses,  of  schools,  he  took  a 
very  warm  interest ;  and  the  extent  of  his  contributions  in  such  cases 
was  remarkable,  considering  his  means,  and  only  to  be  accounted  for  by 
the  strength  of  religious  principle  which  animated  him,  and  by  the  good 
.scriptural  habit,  early  formed,  of  setting  apart  a  fixed  portion  of  his  income 
for  philanthropic  and  Christian  objects.  In  this  matter  he  was,  so  to 
speak,  a  reformer  before  the  reformation, — his  sagacity  shewing  him  how 
greatly  the  pecuniary  means  needed  for  the  promotion  of  these  great 
causes  would  be  multiplied,  wcvq  systematic  giving  the  rule,  and  not  the 
exception. 

A  few  years  before  his  death,  Mr  Maitland  eclipsed  all  his  previous 
benefactions,  by  building  on  a  most  eligible  site,  which  he  had  secured  in 
close  proximity  to  the  New  College,  very  commodious  and  handsome 
premises  for  the  various  offices  of  the  Church,  including  a  spacious  hall 
of  elegant  proportions,  worthy  of  the  metropolitan  Presbytery.  Although 
the  Church  handed  over  to  him  the  former  less  suitable  offices  in  Frederick 
Street  in  part  exchange,  this  munificent  gift,  erected  primarily  at  his  own 
expense,  must  have  cost  him  betwixt  five  and  six  thousand  pounds.  The 
whole  Church  was  thus  placed  under  great  obligations  to  him,  and  will 
always  associate  his  memory  with  that  substantial  and  noble  structure. 
An  excellent  portrait  of  the  donor,  by  Mr  Norman  Macbeth,  graces  the 
Presbytery  Hall ;  and  we  may  here  mention  that  another  portrait,  in  full 
length,  by  Sir  John  Watson  Gordon,  has  been  placed  in  the  principal 
room  of  the  adjoining  National  Security  Savings  Bank,  as  an  expression 
of  the  value  attached  to  his  long  services  there  by  the  directors  of  that 
institution. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Mr  Maitland's  last  illness  was  a  rapid  one,  and,  as  he  usually  enjoyed 
good  health,  and  seemed  to  possess  a  robust  constitution,  his  death  came 
with  sudden  and  stunning  surprise  on  his  numerous  friends  and  the  public 
at  large.  On  Tuesday,  29th  August  1865,  he  attended  to  his  official 
duties  in  apparent  health.  Returning  in  the  afternoon  to  his  residence — 
that  summer  at  Swinton  Bank,  near  Peebles — he  complained  of  what,  for 
the  three  following  days,  appeared  to  be  an  influenza  cold.  On  Satur- 
day, however,  this  illness  assumed  a  more  serious  aspect ;  and,  with 
occasional  interruptions  of  his  consciousness,  he  sank  beneath  the  attack, 
and  on  Wednesday,  6th  September,  breathed  his  last.  He  was  buried 
in  the  Grange  Cemetery,  near  the  grave  of  Chalmers,  by  the  north  wall, 
where  Graham  Speirs,  Andrew  Agnew,  Hugh  Miller,  James  Miller,  and 
other  good  and  true  men  have  also  found  a  resting-place. 

Instead  of  attempting  any  summary  of  our  own,  it  seems  fitting  to 
incorporate  with  this  short  notice  the  following  tribute  to  his  memory 
which  Principal  Candlish,  who  knew  him  well,  delivered  from  the  pulpit 
of  St  George's  on  the  forenoon  of  ist  October  1865  : — 

"  Within  the  last  few  weeks  death  has  been  very  busy  among  men  of  mark  in  our 
church,  and  in  the  Christian  community.  In  quick  succession  General  Anderson,  John 
Maitland,  John  George  Wood,  have  been  taken  away  from  us  ;  all  the  three  men  not 
to  be  easily  replaced.  But  chiefly  in  this  congregation  we  shall  long  miss  our  noble 
brother  and  friend,  Maitland.  I  cannot  trust  myself  here  and  now  to  give  expression 
to  my  feelings.  The  news  of  his  decease  burst  terribly  upon  me,  like  a  sudden  clap  of 
thunder ;  and  even  yet  I  can  scarcely  realise  the  fact  that  he  is  gone.  To  me  person- 
ally it  is  like  a  very  sore  personal  bereavement,  so  highly  did  I  esteem  him  and  so 
warmly  love  him.  And  when  I  think  of  his  services  in  every  good  cause— services 
unceasing,  unselfish,  ungrudging;  free,  generous,  simple,  and  unostentatious,  in  a 
manner  well-nigh  unprecedented  ;  exemplifying  more  than  ever  anywhere  else  I  have 
witnessed  the  love  and  liberality  of  apostolic  times  and  the  pentecostal  Christianity,  I 
cannot  but  lament,  though  I  dare  not  complain,  that. so  high  a  specimen  of  the  character 
which  the  gospel  is  designed  to  form,  should  no  longer  be  exhibited  before  our  eyes. 
But  though  dead,  he  yet  speaks.  His  memory  will  be  cherished  for  many  days.  And 
the  Lord  can  raise  up  others  to  catch  his  mantle,  to  imbibe  his  spirit,  and  to  follow  in 
his  steps." 

B.  B. 


^ 


ip- ---^ 

(      ANGUS    MAKELLAR.D.D 


■■^ 


^ngit5  JHakiUar,  B.B. 


HIE  Rev.  Dr  Angus  Makellar  of  Pcncaitland  was  a  native 
of  the  county  of  Argyll.  As  to  his  parentage  and  the 
place  of  his  birth,  as  well  as  his  early  history,  his  univer- 
sity studies,  and  the  exact  date  of  his  receiving  licence  to 
preach  the  gospel,  we  have  been  unable  to  obtain 
accurate  information.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
he  was  "  brought  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord,"  and 
gave  decided  indications  of  early  piety,  and  of  his  desire  to  dedicate 
himself  to  the  Lord's  service  in  the  work  of  the  holy  ministry.  He 
was  born  in  the  year  1780,  and  died  at  Edinburgh  in  1859,  i"  the 
seventy-ninth  year  of  his  age,  and  the  forty -eighth  of  his  ministry.  As 
he  received  in  1835  his  degree  of  D.D.  from  the  University  of  Glasgow, 
it  is  probable  that  his  literary  and  theological  studies  had  been  pro- 
secuted there. 

His  first  pastoral  charge  was  the  parish  of  Carmunnock,  in  the  imme- 
diate neighbourhood  of  Glasgow.  There  he  was  ordained  in  the  year 
181 2;  and  at  a  time  when  evangelical  preaching  in  the  Established 
Church  was  comparatively  rare,  he  soon  attracted  notice,  and  won 
esteem  and  regard,  by  his  full  and  faithful  proclamation  of  the  gospel, 
and  by  his  earnest  and  devoted  efforts  to  win  souls  to  Christ,  and  to 
advance  His  cause  and  kingdom.  It  was  there  that  he  formed  the 
acquaintance  and  gained  the  affections  of  her  who  was  afterwards  to 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

be  his  life  companion,  and  whose  decided  piety,  amiable  character,  singular 
sweetness  of  temper,  and  readiness  to  every  good  work,  rendered  her  a 
most  suitable  helpmate  to  her  like-minded  husband,  and  made  religion  so 
attractive  to  all  who  came  within  the  sphere  of  her  influence.  She  was 
the  eldest  daughter  of  William  Stirling,  Esq.  of  Keir,  near  Stirling. 

In  1 8 14,  after  a  ministry  of  between  two  and  three  years  at  Car- 
munnock  (where  he  was  succeeded  by  the  Rev.  Dr  Patrick  Clason),  he 
was  translated  to  Pencaitland,  in  Haddingtonshire ;  and  in  about  two 
months  thereafter,  he  was  united  in  marriage  to  Miss  Helen  Stirling.  At 
that  time,  and  for  some  years  after.  East  Lothian  was  under  the  reign  of  a 
cold  Moderatism,  and  in  most  of  its  pulpits  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God 
was  supplanted  by  a  frozen  and  dead  morality.  The  chief  exceptions 
were  the  pulpits  of  the  patriarchal  Mr  Innes  of  Yester,  who  for  sixty-one 
years  held  forth  faithfully,  in  that  parish,  the  word  of  life  ;  and  of  the  able 
and  venerable  Dr  Lorimer  of  Haddington,  who  was  long  a  bright  light 
"  shining  in  a  dark  place,"  and  who  verified  the  truth  of  the  old  appellation 
given  to  his  parish  church — "  Lucerna  Laudonise."  With  these  exceptions, 
the  faithful  ministers  of  the  gospel  in  the  Establishment  had  been  "  few 
and  far  between."  From  the  time,  however,  of  Dr  Makellar's  accession  to 
their  ranks,  a  happy  change  was  gradually  brought  about.  There  was 
a  shaking  of  the  dry  bones,  and  a  new  life  was  breathed  into  them  from 
above.  The  deserted  churches  began  to  be  filled  with  eager  worshippers 
and  anxious  inquirers ;  and  a  blessed  influence,  commencing  in  a  revival 
of  the  Lord's  work  at  Pencaitland,  spread  over  the  district,  till  at  length, 
at  the  Disruption  of  1843,  eleven,  out  of  the  eighteen  members  of  the 
Presbytery  of  Haddington,  cast  in  their  lot  with  the  Free  Church, 
and  were  followed  by  very  large  numbers  of  their  flocks.  In  two 
parishes,  for  instance,  containing  a  population  of  1050  and  800,  the 
number  of  Free  Church  adherents  was  830  in  the  one,  and  600  in  the 
other.  It  was  made  abundantly  manifest  that,  beneath  the  mere  eccle- 
siastical conflict,  the  real  source,  as  well  as  the  strength,  of  the  movement 


AXGLS  MAKELLAR,  D.D. 

was  a  revival  of  the  life  and  power  of  vital  godliness  among  the  people. 
To  this  revival  Dr  Makellar's  able  and  effective  preaching,  as  well  as 
his  holy  life  and  his  high-toned  spirituality  of  mind,  contributed  in  no 
ordinary  degree.  Previous  to  the  passing  of  the  Veto  Act  in  1834, 
patrons  had  come  to  see  that  it  was  their  interest,  as  well  as  their  duty, 
to  give  presentations  to  those  who  would  preach  the  gospel  faithfull)-, 
and  would  care  more  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  the  flock  than  for 
the  fleece ;  and  the  people,  having  begun  to  taste  of  the  old  wine  of 
Reformation  theology,  refused  to  receive  any  longer  the  new  wine  of 
Modcratism.  Hence  arose,  in  a  great  measure,  the  moral  and  spiritual 
change  to  which  we  have  referred,  and  which  was  mainly  promoted  by 
the  ministers  already  named,  as  well  as  by  Dr  Makellar,  and  his  much- 
esteemed  friend  the  Rev.  Daniel  Wilkie  of  Yester,  whose  earnest  and  happy 
Christianity  told  with  great  power  upon  all  who  knew  and  heard  him. 

It  was  in  the  year  1831  that  the  writer  first  became  acquainted  witn 
Dr  Makellar ;  and  he  looks  back,  with  much  interest,  to  the  friendship 
with  him  which  he  had  ever  after  the  privilege  of  enjoying,  and  the 
many  happy  days  he  spent  under  his  hospitable  roof  Of  him  it  might  be 
truly  said,  that  he  "  walked  within  his  house  with  a  perfect  heart ;"  and 
that  what  he  was,  as  seen  by  the  outside  world,  that  he  was  also  in  his 
own  house  at  home.  When  any  new  phase  of  the  "ten  years'  conflict" 
appeared,  his  like-minded  brethren  were  summoned  to  Pencaitland  ;  and 
most  readily  did  they  obey  the  call,  and  consult  and  pray  together  as 
to  the  measures  to  be  adopted  for  maintaining  the  Church's  independ- 
ence against  the  encroachments  of  the  civil  courts.  To  him  they  all 
looked  up  as  their  leader  and  counsellor,  and  they  often  had  cause  to 
admire  his  remarkable  wisdom,  his  steadfast  adherence  to  principle,  and 
his  entire  freedom  from  everything  like  bitterness,  or  evil-speaking 
against  those  of  opposite  views.  His  influence  with  all  classes,  and 
especially  with  the  higher  classes,  was  as  great  as  it  was  well  deserved  ; 
and  it  was  no  small  trial  to  him  to  be  compelled  to  adopt  a  course  which 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

they  disapproved.  But  none  of  these  things  could  move  him  from  his 
path  of  duty,  or  cause  him  to  hesitate  or  falter  in  his  attachment  to 
the  vital  principle  of  Christ's  sole  Headship  over  the  Church,  and  her 
spiritual  independence  under  Him  alone,  and  her  right  to  he  free  from 
the  coercion  and  control  of  civil  courts,  in  conducting  her  own  spiritual 
affairs.  While  he  and  his  brethren  were  resolutely  opposed  to  the 
abuses  of  patronage  in  the  Church,  yet  it  was  not  the  mere  existence  of 
patronage,  but  the  Church's  right  to  her  blood-bought  freedom,  that, 
in  their  opinion,  formed  the  real  essence  and  ground  of  the  controversy. 

In  1840,  the  universal  esteem  and  confidence  with  which  Dr  Makellar 
was  regarded  led  to  his  appointment  as  moderator  of  the  General 
Assembly.  It  was  a  critical  period  of  the  Church's  conflict  with  the 
civil  courts,  but  he  was  fully  equal  to  the  occasion,  and  gained  the 
respect  of  all  by  his  Christian  courtesy  and  gentlemanly  deportment,  as 
well  as  by  his  indomitable  firmness  and  his  steadfast  adherence  to  his 
cherished  principles.  As  to  his  conduct  on  that  occasion,  and  his 
eminent  qualifications  for  such  an  important  office,  we  may  quote  the 
following  passage  from  a  speech  of  Dr  Duff,  on  proposing  him  a  second 
time  for  the  moderatorship  of  the  General  Assembly.     He  said  : — 

"  His  very  antagonists  eulogised  our  friend  as  '  an  excellent  man,  pious  and 
fervent  as  a  Christian,  and  an  honour  to  the  Church  to  which  he  belonged.'  His 
election  to  the  chair  being  carried  by  a  majority,  it  was  unanimously  agreed  on  all 
hands,  alike  by  friends  and  foes,  that  amid  scenes,  at  times  the  most  perplexing,  he 
discharged  his  official  duties  throughout  with  an  uncommon  mixture  of  '  firmness, 
kindness,  dignity,  impartiality,  ability,  and  fidelity.'  To  his  wise  and  saintly  suggestion 
in  the  Assembly  of  1842,  we  are  indebted  for  the  very  great  improvement  in  conduct- 
ing our  daily  devotional  services,  namely  by  the  introduction  of  the  reading  of  a 
portion  of  Scripture,  and  the  singing  of  a  Psalm.  'Instead,'  said  he,  'of  this  being  a 
waste  of  time,  it  will,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  save  much,  and  dispose  our  hearts  to  the 
exercise  of  those  feelings  of  brotherly  kindness  and  mutual  forbearance  which  we 
might  otherwise  overlook." 

To  those  who  enjoyed  Dr  Makellar's  intimate  friendship,  and  partook 
of  his  hospitality,  this  last-mentioned  circumstance  will  seem  very  charac- 
teristic of  him,  and  in  full  harmony  with  his  own  invariable  custom  in  the 


ANGUS  MAKELLAR,  D.D. 

Manse.  It  was  his  practice,  after  dinner,  to  have  the  Bible  produced  at 
liis  own  table,  and  to  read  a  portion  of  it  in  the  hearing  of  his  guests. 
Nothing  could  be  better  fitted  to  give  a  right  tone  to  the  subsequent 
conversation,  and  to  maintain  the  character  of  a  Christian  household, 
which  should  ever  be  "  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God  and  by  prayer." 

As  the  day  of  the  Disruption  drew  near,  the  writer  (who  then  acted  as 
Clerk  of  the  Presbytery  of  Haddington)  was  necessarily  much  in  the 
society  of  Dr  Makellar,  in  making  arrangements  rendered  necessary  by 
the  immediate  prospect  of  that  memorable  event ;  and  in  all  these  it  was 
impossible  not  to  admire  his  clear  and  calm  judgment,  the  practical 
wisdom  of  his  suggestions,  and  the  intelligent  and  intense  interest  he 
manifested  in  the  work  of  up-building  the  Free  Church  in  East  Lothian. 
The  sacrifice  of  pecuniary  emoluments  was  the  smallest  part  of  the  trial 
to  the  out-going  ministers ;  but  the  quitting  of  the  manse,  with  its 
tender  associations  and  memories,  the  renunciation  of  worldly  position 
and  status,  the  alienation  of  some,  and  the  bitter  opposition  of  others, 
few  though  they  were  in  most  cases — these  were  extremely  painful  to  a 
sensitive  and  honourable  mind.  But  no  hesitation  was  felt  by  Dr 
Makellar  in  making  the  sacrifice  ;  and  when  the  day  of  trial  came,  he  was 
not  found  wanting,  and  he  cheerfully  obeyed  the  dictates  of  his  conscience 
and  the  demands  of  Christian  principle. 

At  the  first  meeting  of  the  Free  Presbytery  of  Haddington,  held  on 
the  4th  June  1843,  Dr  Makellar  was  chosen  moderator,  and  "constituted 
the  Presbytery  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  King  and 
Head  of  His  Church."  He  stated,  as  the  minute  bears,  that  "  he  had  pro 
cured  a  large  granary,  and  also  a  site  for  a  new  church  at  Fountainhall ;' 
to  the  mansion-house  of  which  he,  in  due  time,  removed  his  family. 
He  presided  also  at  seven  subsequent  meetings  of  Presbytery  in  July, 
August,  September,  October,  and  November,  when  his  counsels  were 
invaluable  in  rebuilding  the  ruined  walls  of  our  Jerusalem,  and  in  pro- 
viding for  the  due  celebration  of  Christian  ordinances  throughout  the 
3F  40. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

county,  while  he  himself  "  preached  in  various  places  by  appointment  of 
Presbji:ery."  Although  those,  who  resigned  their  office  in  large  towns 
and  wealthy  congregations,  rendered  most  signal  services  to  the  Church 
at  this  eventful  period,  yet  their  labours,  and  difficulties,  and  privations, 
supported  as  they  were  by  numerous  flocks  and  influential  laymen,  can 
scarcely  be  compared  with  those  of  their  brethren  in  country  districts, 
where  the  chief  labour  often  devolved  upon  the  minister  himself,  and 
where  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  suitable  dwellings  was  often  very  great. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  General  Assembly  at  Glasgow,  in  October  1843, 
Dr  Makellar  was  unanimously  appointed  chairman  of  the  Board  of 
Missions,  in  room  of  Mr  Alexander  Dunlop,  who  resigned  the  office,  after 
having  for  some  time  ably  discharged  its  important  duties.  As  these 
duties  were  "sufficient  to  occupy  his  whole  time,"  and  rendered  it 
necessary  that  Dr  Makellar  should  reside  in  Edinburgh,  he  was  released 
from  his  pastoral  charge  ;  and  his  son,  the  Rev.  William  Makellar,  was 
elected  and  ordained  as  his  successor. 

Soon  afterwards  Dr  Makellar  removed  to  Edinburgh,  and  devoted 
his  whole  heart  and  energies  to  the  cause  of  Missions.  At  such  a  time, 
when  all  the  foreign  missionaries  of  the  Establishment  declared  their 
adherence  to  the  Free  Church,  and  when  so  many  as  between  200  and 
300  congregations  at  home  were  unsupplied  with  ministers,  it  was  most 
important  that  one  possessed  of  his  sagacity,  and  zeal,  and  aptitude  for 
business,  should  be  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Mission  Board ;  and  it  is 
well  known  that  his  services  were  of  the  greatest  value  in  supplying  the 
means  of  grace  at  home  and  abroad,  in  promoting  and  fostering  a  spirit 
of  large-hearted  liberality  among  the  people,  and  in  consolidating  the 
extensive  operations  of  the  Free  Church  in  so  wide  a  mission  field.  As 
to  this  Dr  Duff  truly  said  : — 

"  The  addresses  which,  in  this  new  capacity,  Dr  Makellar  was  wont  annually  to 
deliver  at  the  opening  of  subsequent  Assemblies  can  never  be  forgotten,— addresses 
abounding  with  large  and  comprehensive  views  of  the  gospel,  as  the  sole  panacea  for 
fallen   humanity,   in  all  its   endlessly  varied  developments  of  corruption, — addresses 


ANGUS  MAKELLAR,  D.D. 

pervaded  throughout  with  the  unction  of  sanctified  experience,  and  redolent  with  the 
bahny  fragrance  of  devoted  piety." 

In  the  year  1852,  the  General  Assembly  unanimously  called  Dr 
Makellar  a  second  time  to  preside  over  their  deliberations  as  Moderator. 
All  who  were  present  at  that  Assembly  cannot  but  remember  the  remark- 
able ability  and  tact,  as  well  as  the  urbanity  and  self-command,  which  he 
displayed  in  difficult  circumstances.  Painful  cases  were  brought  before  the 
Assembly,  and  there  were  keen  discussions,  and  considerable  differences  of 
opinion,  on  various  subjects,  such  as  the  right  ordering  of  the  Sustenta- 
tion  Fund  ;  and  great  fears  were  entertained  of  unpleasant  collisions.  But, 
owing  in  no  small  degree  to  the  Moderator's  wisdom,  impartiality,  and 
unfailing  courtesy,  these  fears  were  happily  disappointed.  There  was, 
however,  one  memorable  event  which  occurred  at  that  Assembly,  and 
which  greatly  rejoiced  the  heart  of  the  Moderator,  viz.,  the  consummation 
of  the  Union  between  the  Synod  of  United  Original  Seceders  and  the 
Free  Church  of  Scotland,  warranting  as  it  did  the  hope  that  ere  long 
all  the  dispersed  of  our  Israel  would  be  gathered  into  one.  In  reference 
to  this,  the  words  of  Dr  Makellar,  in  welcoming  Dr  M'Crie  and  his 
much-esteemed  brethren,  will  be  read  with  interest.     He  said : — 

"  It  is  with  emotions  of  gratitude  and  joy,  which  no  language  can  adequately 
express,  that  you  and  we  are  met  together  on  this  occasion.  It  necessarily  presses 
upon  our  minds  the  recollection  of  that  period  of  misrule  and  oppression  when  your 
fathers  withdrew  from  the  communion  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  and  entered  into  a 
state  of  separation  that  has  now  continued  for  more  than  a  hundred  years.  In  the 
recollection  of  that  sad  event,  it  is  consoling  to  know  that,  though  lost  to  the  Estab- 
lishment, they  were  not  lost  to  their  country,  or  to  the  Church  of  their  fathers.  On 
the  contrary,  they  carried  with  them,  into  their  new  position,  the  love  of  the  truth,  as  it 
is  in  Jesus,  that  was  rooted  and  grounded  in  their  hearts  ;  the  deep  conviction  of  the 
independence  and  spirituality  of  the  Church,  without  which  it  is  but  the  contrivance 
of  man,  instead  of  the  ordinance  of  God  ;  and  that  faithful  ministration  of  the  gospel 
on  which  He  has  promised  His  effectual  blessing.  May  our  union  be  hallowed  with 
the  divine  blessing,  and  may  you  and  we  receive  grace  so  to  act  as  that  the  world 
shall  be  constrained  to  say,  '  Behold,  how  good  and  how  pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to 
dwell  together  in  unity  !'  and  may  ours  be  the  earnest  of  a  still  more  comprehensive 
union  among  the  Churches  of  Christ, — the  dawn  of  that  blessed  day  when  there  shall 
be  nothing  to  hurt  or  destroy  in  all  God's  holy  mountam." 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

During  the  ^oxv  remaining  years  of  his  life,  Dr  Makellar  did  not  often 
appear  in  public ;  but  he  continued  to  give  his  earnest  attention  to  all 
that  pertained  to  the  welfare  of  Zion,  and  to  manifest  a  growing  interest 
in  the  extension  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion,  while  his  example  of  faith 
and  love  and  hope,  rendered  him  still  more  a  living  epistle  of  Christ,  known 
and  read  of  all.  By  his  wise  counsels,  by  his  meekness  and  gentleness, 
by  his  humility  and  charity,  by  his  heavenly  temper  and  conversation,  by 
his  large-hearted  generosity  and  numerous  benefactions  to  the  worthiest 
objects,  he  continued  still  to  flourish  like  the  palm  tree,  and  "  brought 
forth  fruit  in  old  age." 

His  latter  end  was  peace  and  good  hope.  The  Rev.  James  Dodds, 
of  Dunbar,  who  frequently  visited  him  on  his  death-bed,  and  who  was 
among  the  last  of  his  brethren  that  saw  him  and  prayed  with  him,  informs 
us,  that  he  died  as  he  had  lived,  in  the  firm  faith  of  the  gospel  which  he 
had  so  earnestly  preached,  and  in  the  sure  hope  of  the  eternal  reward.  He 
says,  that  Dr  Makellar  was  "a  really  good  and  kind  man  ;  and  as  long  as 
I  live  I  can  never  forget  the  kindness  he  shewed  to  me  when  I  was  at 
Humbie."  His  kindness  to  young  ministers,  as  many  can  testify,  was 
very  characteristic  of  him,  and  the  benefits  which  he  thus  conferred  cannot 
be  told.  But  the  day  will  declare  it.  Dr  Makellar  died  at  Edinburgh  on 
the  loth  of  May  1859,  having  reached  the  seventy-ninth  year  of  his 
age  ;  thus  passing  away,  as  a  shock  of  corn  fully  ripe,  to  the  heavenly 
garner — "Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord."  His  devoted 
partner,  who  was  spared  so  long  to  him,  died  about  a  month  after  her 
husband.  "  They  were  lovely  and  pleasant  in  their  lives ;  and  in  their 
death  they  were  not  divided." 

It  is  a  cause  of  regret  that  no  permanent  record  has  been  left  of  his 
pulpit  addresses.  Those  who  heard  his  able  expositions  of  Scripture,  and 
his  full  and  earnest  proclamation  of  the  gospel,  cannot  but  desire  that 
one  or  more  volumes  had  been  published  from  his  manuscripts. 

J.  T. 


=:^: 


HUGH    MILLER. 


"fugb  iitiUcr, 


§)UGH  MILLER  was  born  at  Cromarty  in  1802.  After  a 
school  time  which  gave  his  friends  a  foretaste  of  the 
manly  independence  he  shewed  throughout  life,  he 
became  a  thoughtful  youth,  fond  of  reading  whatever 
fell  into  his  hands,  and  of  discussing,  as  young  men 
will  discuss,  every  point  in  the  politics  or  theology  of 
the  country.  His  early  years  he  has  described  as  those  of  "  a  thoughtless, 
careless,  school  boy,  who  proved  his  spirit  by  playing  truant  three  weeks 
in  the  four,  and  his  genius  by  writing  rhymes  which  pleased  nobody  but 
himself,"  till  "in  1823  that  same  school  boy  finds  himself  a  journeyman 
mason,  not  quite  so  free  from  care,  but  as  much  addicted  to  rhyming  as 
ever."  A  few  years  later,  the  gospel  of  Christ  became  the  acknowledged 
centre,  round  which  all  his  thoughts  were  ranged,  and  to  which  all  his 
purposes  in  life  paid  homage.  Among  these  purposes  perhaps  the  most 
deep-seated  was  his  resolution  to  become  a  poet.  But  he  had  the  wisdom 
to  see,  that  though  the  paths  of  all  great  writers  are  usually  the  same  for 
the  first  part  of  the  way,  there  is  a  point  at  which  poet  and  prose  writer 
branch  off  into  different  roads  seldom  again  to  meet.  Before  that  point 
is  reached,  songs  and  tragedies  of  even  more  than  average  merit  may  be, 
and  often  have  been,  composed  by  a  prose  writer,  but  they  are  only  the 
practice  needed  to  fit  him  for  his  own  field  of  literary  work.  In  seeing 
this,  Hugh  Miller  at  last  saw  where  his  strength  lay. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

In  the  columns  of  the  Inverness  Courier,  in  1S29,  he  first  shewed  his 
power  as  a  writer  of  prose,  by  five  letters  on  the  Herring  Fishery.  Two 
years  later  he  stepped  forward  as  the  champion  of  the  people  of  Cromarty 
in  their  defence  of  the  minister,  Mr  Stewart,  against  the  attempted 
intrusion  of  a  neighbouring  minister,  whom  they  had  not  called  to  be 
his  colleague,  while  few  of  them  were  disposed  to  receive  him  as  a  pastor. 
But  the  friends  he  had  gained  in  his  native  town  were  anxious  to  lift 
Miller  into  a  sphere  of  life  more  congenial  to  his  literary  tastes  than  that 
of  a  stone-mason.  Opportunities  seem  to  have  been  wanting,  till,  about 
the  end  of  1834,  Mr  Ross,  then  agent  for  the  Commercial  Bank,  offered 
him  a  situation  in  the  office.  With  the  modesty  of  true  genius,  Hugh 
Miller  hesitated  before  accepting  the  offer.  A  salary  of  sixty  pounds 
a-year  from  this  source  was  the  staff  he  had  to  lean  on  in  the  battle  for 
fame  ;  he  was  married,  too,  in  1837.  Certainly  the  outlook  was  far  from 
cheering.  But  he  found  James  Watt's  theory  of  the  progress  of  genius 
true  to  the  letter — when  Want  looks  in  at  the  door.  Genius  devises  ways 
and  means  to  keep  him  out.  It  was  this  apparition  that  roused  the 
inborn  science  of  Watt  to  a  successful  wrestling  with  the  difficulties  that 
then  beset  the  use  of  steam-engines  in  mining  ;  it  was  the  same  unwel- 
come ghost  that  haunted  Hugh  Miller,  till  he  armed  himself  with 
literature  and  geology  to  drive  Want  away.  But  another  subject 
quickened  the  power  within  him  even  more  fiercely  than  these  great 
themes ;  it  was  the  rights  of  the  Christian  people  of  Scotland.  In  May 
1839  the  House  of  Lords  delivered  judgment  in  the  Auchterarder  case  ; 
in  June,  Hugh  Miller's  letter  to  Lord  Brougham  attracted  the  attention 
of  the  Church,  and  towards  the  end  of  December  he  arrived  in  Edin- 
burgh to  become  editor  of  the  newly  started  Witness,  an  office  that  he 
continued  to  hold  till  his  death  on  the  24th  of  December  1856.* 

No   one   who  reads  the   "  Letter  to  Lord   Brougham,"  can   fail  to 

*  For  fuller  details,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Life  ami  Letters  oj  Hu^h  Millei,  b\-  later 
Bayne   M.A. 

406 


HUGH  MILLER. 
understand  that,  as  soon  as  it  saw  the  light,  tlie  battle  between  the 
Church  and  the  State  had  entered  on  a  new  phase.     A  demand  for  four 
editions  in  as  many  weeks  proved  that  an  ally  had  joined  the  Church, 
which  statesmen  have  often  reckoned  of  small  worth  for  fighting  power, 
till  they  have  discovered  by  experience  the  grievousness  of  their  mistake 
—the  public  opinion  of  the  most  earnest,  and  not  the  least  enlightened, 
among  the  Commons.    So  long  as  ministers  and  lawyers  carried  on  the  war, 
the  fight  was  little  more  than  a  distant  cannonade  from  one  hill-top  to 
another ;  the  people  in  the  plains  below  were  not  greatly  stirred  by  the 
noise.     But  the  "  Letter  to  Lord  Brougham  "  was  followed  by  an  awaken- 
ing among  the  slumbering  host ;  there  was  a  putting  of  themselves  in 
array— there  was  a  growing  belief  that  their  most  cherished  rights  were 
at  stake.     For  the  letter  touched  on  matters  that  lay  very  near  to  the 
hearts  of  all  true  lovers  of  Scotland.     Never,  since  the  days  of  John  Knox, 
had  there  sprung  from  the  ranks  of  the  people  a  man  whose  words  struck 
home  so  thoroughly  and  so  well,  with  a  power  of  wit  and  raillery  more 
chastened,  but  not  less  biting,  than  the  great  Reformer's;  with  the  same 
command  of  strong  Saxon  speech  as  his  ;  and  with  a  knowledge  of  the 
historical  development  of  his  country,  creditable  to  any  one,  but  most 
honourable  in  this  self-taught  stone-mason.     The  manliness  with  which 
he  makes  his  bow  to  the  great  la\vyer  in  the  first  few  lines  of  the  "  Letter," 
displays  a  writer  thoroughly  acquainted  with  his  subject,  and  feeling  him- 
self on  the  same  level  as  Lord  Brougham  in  the  commonwealth  of  letters. 
Then,  acknowledging  that  the  statesman's  high  estimate  of  the  political 
wisdom  of  Scotchmen  is  well  deserved,  he  passes  at  one  bound  to  the 
unavoidable  conclusion  that,  since  their  politics  are  known  to  have  been 
but  an  offset  from  their  faith,  much  greater  must  be  their  wisdom  in  the 
latter  than  in  the  former.     Why  should  they  be  reckoned  unfit  to  choose 
their  own  ministers,  if  they  are  entitled  to  the  highest  praise  for  their 
choice  of  members  of  Parliament  >.     "  I  am  a  plain,  untaught  man,"  he 
says,  "but  the  opinions  which  T  hold  re-arding  the  law  of  patronage  are 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

those  entertained  by  the  great  bulk  of  my  countrymen,  and  entitled,  on  that 
account,  to  some  little  respect."  But  plain  and  untaught  though  Hugh 
Miller  was,  he  knew  better  than  a  Lord  Chancellor  that  the  ground 
on  which  had  been  fought  the  battles  of  civil  liberty,  not  in  Scotland 
only,  but  through  it  in  all  Britain,  was  the  right  of  the  Scottish  people  to 
choose  their  own  ministers.  Tyrants  and  their  slaves  had  reft  that  right 
from  them  in  their  times  of  weakness  ;  but  as  soon  as  they  regained  lost 
strength,  it  was  always  demanded  back.  "  Liberty  of  rejection  without 
statement  of  reasons,"  in  choosing  ministers  of  the  gospel,  was  the  small 
fraction  of  the  greater  right  put  in  peril  by  Lord  Brougham's  utterances. 
But  the  lawyer  had  gone  farther.  He  "  ungenerously  insinuated  "  that 
the  object  might  be  "  to  reject  men  too  strict  in  morals,  and  too  diligent 
in  duty,  to  please  our  vitiated  tastes."  Again  had  the  great  law  Lord 
laid  himself  open  to  a  thrust  from  his  antagonist's  weapon  ;  for  all  history 
testifies  to  the  fact  that  this  right  of  the  people  required  of  ministers 
"  that  they  should  be  no  longer  immoral  or  illiterate ;"  while  "  the  law, 
which  re-established  patronage  in  Scotland,  formed,  in  its  first  enactment, 
no  unessential  portion  of  a  deep  and  dangerous  conspiracy  against  the 
liberties  of  our  country."  And  with  an  insight  into  the  future,  fully 
justified  by  the  past,  he  seems  to  foresee  what  was  sure  to  happen.  "  In 
all  her  after  conflicts,  it  was  not  the  Church  that  yielded  to  the  law,  but 
the  law  that  yielded  to  the  Church  ;"  while,  with  the  manly  freedom  of  a 
man  whom  promises  could  not  bribe,  nor  threats  silence,  he  winds  up  the 
argument  with :  "  We  do  not  think  the  worse  of  our  Church,  my  Lord, 
for  her  many  contests  with  the  law— not  a  whit  the  better  of  her  opposers 
for  their  having  had  the  law  on  their  side." 

Hugh  Miller  has  himself  described  the  growth  of  his  mind,  from  the 
glimmering  dawn  of  boyhood  to  the  full  light  of  maturity.  Here  and 
there  he  has  wrought  into  the  history  as  much  as  is  worth  knowing  of 
the  surroundings,  which  helped  to  mould  his  thoughts  at  each  step  of 
their  progress,  while  he  climbed  the  steep  path  that  led   him   upward 


HUGH  MILLER. 

from  the  mason's  shed  to  the  editor's  room,  from  the  chisel  to  the  pen. 
More  there  should  scarcely  be  a  wish  to  know,  unless  it  were  given  to 
any  one  to  record  the  gradual  oncoming  of  that  terrible  darkness  which, 
for  years  before  his  untimely  end,  haunted  his  great  heart  with  ever- 
gathering  gloom,  till  at  last,  overwhelmed  by  the  blackness,  reason  in  an 
unhappy  moment  forgot  her  right  to  command.  No  one  can  read  what 
he  has  written  of  the  progress  of  his  mind  in  strength  and  knowledge, 
without  feeling  that  during  these  sorrowful  years,  and  especially  during 
his  last  few  sorrowful  days,  he  was  as  busy  watching  the  ebb  and  flow 
of  thought  within  him  as  in  earlier  times.  But  it  was  not  ordered  that 
he  should  narrate,  as  others  have  done,  his  wanderings  to  the  brink  of 
the  precipice,  and  a  gracious  escape  from  hurling  himself  over — trials 
common  to  him,  with  many  of  the  best  and  brightest  of  our  race.  Where 
others  fought  and  lived,  he  yielded  and  died,  under  the  crushing  weight 
of  years  of  sorrow. 

But  though  Hugh  Miller's  own  pen  has  recorded  his  mental  history 
from  boyhood  to  manhood,  it  is  left  to  others  to  assign  him  his  place  and 
to  estimate  his  services  in  the  greatest  strife  between  the  spiritual  and 
temporal  powers,  that  has  raged  within  the  bounds  of  the  British  Empire 
for  almost  two  hundred  years.  It  was  not  as  a  man  of  science  that  he 
figured  in  the  fight ;  nor  is  it  as  a  man  of  science  that  he  fills  a  prince's 
niche  in  the  Free  Church  temple  of  fame.  Unquestionably  the  fact,  that 
he  was  a  geologist  of  the  first  rank,  endeared  him  the  more  to  his 
countrymen,  and  made  his  contendings  known  in  quarters  to  which  the 
din  of  the  strife  might  never  have  reached  ;  while  it  also  revealed  to  the 
world  that  the  combatants  were  not  impracticable  church  leaders,  or,  as  it 
pleased  even  a  peer  to  assert,  a  vulgar  throng,  but  men  disciplined  by 
science  and  the  business  of  life.  Still,  Hugh  Miller's  place  and  work  in 
the  great  battle  were  unusual.  He  was  not  a  minister  ;  he  was  not  even 
an  elder  in  the  Church.  "  I  never  signed  the  Confession  of  Faith,"  he 
wrote  in   1839,  "but  I  do  more,  I  believe  it."     He  was  the  outstanding 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

representative  of  a  vast  host,  who  felt  that  their  liberties  were  invadea 
and  their  rights  refused  by  the  ruHng  classes  of  the  day.  By  common 
consent,  by  an  unwritten  agreement,  Hugh  Miller  stood  before  the  world 
as  the  champion  of  the  people's  rights.  What  he  wrote,  they  read  with 
more  eagerness  than  any  speeches  delivered  in  the  great  battle.  What 
he  maintained,  they  backed  him  out  in,  as  a  fair  expression  of  their 
wishes.  When  the  oratory  of  the  pulpit  or  the  church  court  would  have 
failed  to  awaken  an  echo  in  their  hearts,  his  words  of  fire  stirred  them  to 
joyous  action.  He  asked  what  his  countrymen  felt  they  needed,  and  in  a 
way  that  commended  itself  for  outspoken  manliness.  "  I  am  one  of  the 
people,"  he  wrote,  "full  of  the  popular  sympathies — it  may  be  of  the 
popular  prejudices."  What  Chalmers  was  among  the  ministers  of  the 
Church,  Hugh  Miller  was  among  the  laymen,  at  once  an  expounder  of 
their  rights  and  a  standard-bearer  to  rally  round.  That  he  was  neither 
bigot  nor  fool,  but  a  man  of  sterling  common  sense,  was  proved  in  1874, 
when  the  least  intelligent  on  the  opposite  side  of  church  politics  were 
glad  to  accept,  as  their  only  plank  of  safety  from  destruction,  what  he 
claimed  as  the  heritage  of  the  whole  people,  in  his  "  Letter  to  Lord 
Brougham,"  in  1839. 

Of  the  fearlessness  with  which  he  wrote  when  truth  and  right  were  at 
stake,  both  friends  and  foes  were  thoroughly  aware.  What  the  Regent 
Morton  said  of  John  Knox  may  with  all  truth  be  said  of  Hugh  Miller, 
"  He  never  feared  the  face  of  man."  Compared  with  his  country's  welfare, 
everything  else  was  in  his  eyes  lighter  than  vanity.  Whether  fighting 
the  great  battle  of  the  Church  against  the  State,  or  demanding  for  the 
people,  a  few  years  afterwards,  the  heritage  of  a  truly  national  system  of 
education,  as  it  was  bequeathed  to  them  from  their  fathers,  or  with  indig- 
nant scorn  branding  the  depopulators  of  a  great  county,  in  his  papers 
on  "  Sutherland  as  it  Was  and  Is,"  love  to  his  native  land  breathed  from 
every  word  he  wrote.  But  it  was  sometimes  expressed  in  fiercer  language 
than  men  of  a  different  way  of  thinking  relished.     Witness  the  manly 


HUGH  MILLER. 

freedom  with  whicli  he  handles  a  Lord  Chancellor  in  his  famous 
"  Letter  to  Lord  Brougham,"  not  to  mention  later  outbursts  of  this  inner 
fire.  High-soulcd  men  respected  the  striker,  even  while  they  sought  to 
moderate  his  language  or  to  appease  his  wrath,  for  they  felt  that  the 
battles  of  such  a  life  as  the  present  are  not  fought  with  blunted  foils. 
All  that  was  loving  and  kindly  in  his  heart  was  stirred  to  its  deepest 
depths  by  these  good  and  generous  friends.  All  the  soldier-fire  of  his 
warrior  nature  was  blown  into  a  fiercer  glow  by  opposition  from  hirelings, 
like  "the  creatures  of  the  proprietor,"  in  "Sutherland  as  it  Was  and  Is;" 
so  true  it  is,  and  so  sad  withal,  that  a  host  of  little  men  have  often  more 
power  to  vex  great  hearts  by  petty  slights,  than  noble  minds  have  to 
soothe  them  by  respectful  sympathy. 

Of  the  freedom  and  power  with  which  he  hit  his  adversaries,  not  a  few 
of  them  carried  through  life  scars  that  nothing  could  efface  or  heal.  His 
was  neither  gloved  hand  nor  honeyed  tongue.  Regret  for  rashness,  into 
which  he  was  unfairly  hurried  by  wrong  reports  received  from  smaller 
men,  it  was  natural  a  man  of  his  warmth  of  heart  would  not  fail  to  feel 
and  express.  But  for  men  who  betrayed  their  trust,  or  found  it  convenient 
to  call  truth  one  thing  to-day  and  another  thing  to-morrow,  he  had 
neither  regard  nor  pity.  Adherence  to  principle  in  his  opponents  Hugh 
Miller  could  and  did  respect;  but  "the  t\vo  Mr  Clarks "  offered  an 
irresistible  chance  to  a  naturalist  like  him  of  pinning  to  his  album  a 
specimen  of  transformation  such  as  even  the  insect  world  could  barely 
equal.  Even  when  the  dust  of  battle  has  long  been  laid,  and  slayer  with 
slain  are  together  sleeping  in  the  narrow  house,  it  is  difficult  for  an 
impartial  historian  to  deny  the  justice  of  Hugh  Miller's  onslaughts  and 
the  fairness  of  his  fighting.  Others  could  not  wield  the  weapons  he 
carried,  or  put  on  the  armour  he  wore.  He  struck  with  a  might 
that  seldom  needed  a  second  blow  to  complete  the  work  ;  the  fallen  were 
crushed  beneath  a  giant's  stroke,  not  half-slain  by  repeated  thrusts  from 
a  pigmy's  arm.     A  strong  love  of  truth,  combined  with  an  equally  strong 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

power  of  expression,  makes  a  man  as  dangerous  a  foe  to  all  dalliers  with 
falsehood  as  Hector  found  Achilles: 

Him  as  the  gates  of  hell  my  soul  abhors, 
Whose  outward  speech  his  secret  thought  belies. 

Hugh  Miller  was  not  a  public  speaker.  However  quick  thought  may 
have  been  with  him,  language  was  slow,  well  weighed,  and  accurate. 
The  fire,  that  fiercely  blazed  in  his  writings,  would  have  been  a  feeble 
flame  at  the  best,  or  an  extinguished  spark,  on  the  platform.  Even  in 
private  his  words  were  few,  but  they  were  well  ordered.  One  day  he  was 
at  dinner  with  several  friends,  some  of  them  leading  men  in  the  Free 
Church.  Most  of  the  conversation  was  absorbed  for  a  time  by  a  guest, 
whose  fancy  had  been  excited  by  a  small  hand-book  on  popular  science, 
then  recently  published.  His  descriptions  were  entertaining  enough,  but 
they  were  so  full  that  it  was  difficult  to  do  more  than  listen.  Hugh 
Miller  had  nothing  to  say.  At  last  the  conversation  swung  into  a 
different  channel.  Some  one  told  of  a  yachting  voyage  in  which  a  young 
lady  and  a  young  gentleman  found  themselves  the  only  two  of  nearly  the 
same  age  in  the  cabin.  What  could  be  expected  to  result,  was  asked,  but 
marriage .'  "As  well  think  of  Adam  refusing  Eve,"  was  Hugh  Miller's 
comment  in  reply.  When  Dr  Whewell  and  Sir  David  Brewster  were 
waging  war  with  each  other  on  the  subject  of  "  More  Worlds  than  One," 
a  friend  happened  to  express  to  Hugh  Miller  his  feeling  of  the  absurdity 
of  supposing  that,  because  several  fixed  stars  may  be  immeasurably 
bigger  than  our  earth,  or  even  than  our  sun,  their  bulk  should  lead  us 
to  regard  them  as  the  seats  of  nobler  races  of  beings.  "Ay,"  he  said,  "it 
may  be  comparing  Newton  with  a  whale." 

J.S. 


^hiantujr  (&avh  iHontntl). 


R  ALEXANDER  EARLE  MONTEITII  became  a 
member  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates  at  the  period 
when  Moncreifif,  Jeffrey,  Cockburn,  Rutherfurd,  and 
others,  shed  more  than  usual  lustre  on  the  Scottish 
Bar.  While  intimate  with  these  eminent  men,  he 
was  more  closely  allied  with  Shaw-Stewart,  Cowan, 
Speirs,  Dunlop,  Hamilton,  and  Mungo  Brown.  The  friendship  of  this 
little  band  manifested  the  power  of  Christian  companionship  for  good, — 
it  greatly  strengthened  the  influence  they  exercised  on  the  Church  of 
which  they  were  members,  as  well  as  on  general  public  questions ; — 
and  they  maintained  to  the  end  of  life  mutual  affection  for,  and  mutual 
confidence  in,  one  another. 

Mr  Monteith  was  born  in  1793.  His  father  was  Mr  Robert  Monteith 
of  Rochsoles,  and  his  mother  a  daughter  of  Captain  Earle,  an  officer  in 
the  army.  His  uncle,  Mr  Monteith,  of  Carstairs,  was  for  some  time 
Member  of  Parliament  for  Glasgow.  He  was  thirteen  years  old  when 
his  father  died,  and  his  mother  and  family,  not  long  after,  came  to 
reside  in  Edinburgh.  In  1814  he  was  called  to  the  Bar,  and  pursued 
his  profession  with  early  success.  He  was  a  fluent  speaker,  a  man  of 
much  information  and  good  judgment,  fond  of  reading  and  of  general 
literature;  and  having  naturally  an  amiable  disposition  and  engaging 
manners,  he  soon  made  his  way,  and  his  society  was  vcrj-  generally  culti- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

vatcd.  In  1S3S  he  was  appointed  Sheriff  of  Fife.  He  had  abilities  and 
attainments  to  qualify  him  for  any  position  to  which,  as  a  member  of 
the  Bar,  he  might  have  aspired  ;  but,  from  whatever  cause,  he  never  took 
the  position  and  practice  of  a  successful  leading  senior  counsel.  This 
would  have  necessarily  led  to  higher  promotion ;  and  even  without  it, 
the  Liberal  party  to  which  he  belonged  might,  as  far  as  his  merits  were 
concerned,  have  most  justly  elevated  him  to  a  seat  on  the  judicial  bench. 

Mr  Monteith  faithfully  and  zealously  discharged  the  duties  he 
owed  to  the  county  over  which  he  had  been  appointed  Sheriff.  He 
presided  regularly  in  all  his  courts,  and  especially  at  jury  trials,  with 
marked  success.  He  attended  the  county  meetings,  where  his  legal 
experience  was  of  great  value,  and  where  his  ability  and  invariable 
courtesy  secured  for  his  views  on  public  and  on  local  questions  the 
deference  to  which  they  were  so  justly  entitled.  His  courage  and 
firmness  in  times  of  excitement  and  difficulty  were  conspicuous — they 
were  often  referred  to  by  his  friends  on  one  special  occasion  of  riot  at 
Dunfermline  ;  and  the  instinct  with  which  he  took  and  pursued  the  right 
course  preserved  the  peace  of  his  county  in  times  of  disturbance  and 
disquiet,  from  which,  during  his  sheriffship,  it  as  well  as  other  parts  of 
Scotland  was  not  exempt. 

In  several  questions  of  general  interest,  Mr  Monteith  gave  to  the 
community  gratuitously  the  benefit  of  his  ability  and  attention.  He  was 
a  member  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Scottish  Universities  ;  and 
it  is  understood  he  wrote  the  reports  on  those  of  Aberdeen  and  Glasgow. 
He  served  also  on  two  other  Royal  Commissions,  the  results  of  whose 
inquiries  were  of  great  value — one  on  the  Forbes  Mackenzie  Act,  for 
restraining  the  evils  of  intemperance,  and  the  need  of  a  remedy,  with 
which  he  was  much  impressed  ;  the  other,  on  Lunacy,  and  the  harsh 
treatment  then  too  often  prevailing  in  private  asylums.  He  was  a 
member  also  of  the  General  Prison  Board,  and  took  an  active  share 
in    the    management    of  the    General   Prison    at    Perth.       The    state    of 


ALEXANDER  EARLE  MOSTEITII. 

this  establishment  must  have  presented  to  his  mind  a  very  gratifying 
contrast  to  the  condition  of  matters  in  1836,  when  he  and  others  insti- 
tuted a  society  for  remedying  the  evils  existing  in  our  county  prisons, 
which  were  then  too  truly  described  as  in  many  respects  nurseries  for 
crime.  There  was  a  lamentable  lack  of  cleanliness,  employment,  and 
moral  and  religious  instruction  among  the  inmates  ;  and  the  baneful 
influences  of  the  older  on  the  less  hardened  prisoners,  between  whom 
there  was  not  much  separation,  is  referred  to  in  one  of  Miss  Graham's 
"  Mystifications"  at  Tulliallan,  when  she  says  of  her  pretended  son,  "  He 
was  a  gude  weel-living  lad  afore  ye  sent  him  to  bridewell."  Mr  Mon- 
teith's  able  and  eloquent  speech  at  the  first  annual  meeting  of  the  Prison 
Discipline  Society  in  Edinburgh,  greatly  helped  to  draw  public  attention 
to  this  subject,  and  the  society  did  not  cease  its  efforts  until  these 
resulted  in  the  present  improved  condition  of  all  our  prisons.  Most 
justly  in  reference  to  all  these  matters  did  the  Fife  Commissioners  of 
Supply,  at  their  first  meeting  after  his  death,  unanimously  adopt  a  minute 
in  very  suitable  terms  expressive  of  the  loss  which  the  county  had  sustained. 
The  interest  which  Mr  Monteith  felt  in  the  Church  of  Scotland,  and 
his  share  in  its  struggles  against  Moderatism  and  Erastianism,  originated 
with  him,  as  with  many  others,  in  the  interest  which  he  was  led  to 
take  in  vital  personal  religion.  In  his  younger  days,  with  other  mem- 
bers of  his  family,  he  was  an  Episcopalian.  He  attended  Dr  Alison's 
church,  and  afterwards  Bishop  Sandford's.  The  first  of  his  family  who 
adopted  evangelical  views  was  his  sister,  Mrs  Stothert  of  Cargen,  who 
was  next  to  him  in  age,  and  he  often  argued  with  her  about  her  new 
opinions.  He  considered  himself  abler  than  she  was,  yet  he  felt  she  had 
often  the  best  of  the  argument,  for  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them 
that  fear  Him,"  and  "through  His  precepts  they  get  understanding." 
At  this  time  he  went  to  hear  Dr  Chalmers.  In  the  sermon  now  well 
known,  a  character  was  described  of  great  moral  excellence,  and  as 
he  listened,  he  wished  his  sister  could  be  present  to  hear  how  differently 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Dr  Chalmers  judged  of  human  nature  from  the  way  in  which  she 
did.  Presently  the  preacher  proceeded  to  shew,  that  as  rebels  might 
be  just  and  fair  in  their  dealings  one  with  another,  while  they  were 
traitors  to  their  lawful  sovereign,  so  all  he  had  described  might 
consist  with  entire  alienation  of  the  heart  from  God,  and  entire 
disregard  of  His  authority.  This  Mr  Monteith  used  to  refer  to  as  his 
first  lesson  in  the  doctrine  of  the  depravity  of  human  nature.  But 
Dr  Chalmers'  sermon  seems  to  have  had  a  wider  and  a  deeper  influence 
— at  least  it  was  after  it  that  he  began  the  regular  reading  of  his  Bible, 
writing  down  as  he  read  what  each  book  or  passage  seemed  to  teach, 
and  summing  up  its  doctrines  and  lessons.  In  this  way  he  went  through 
the  whole  of  the  Scriptures,  and  came  substantially  to  the  views  which  he 
ever  afterwards  held.  His  practice  of  studying  the  word  of  God  is  worthy 
of  notice  and  of  imitation.  Whenever  he  was  in  doubt  about  anything  in 
doctrine  or  practice — and  the  metaphysical  character  of  his  mind  exposed 
him  not  a  little  to  such  doubts  on  religious  questions — his  habit  was  to 
mark  down  every  passage  of  Scripture  which  he  thought  could  bear  in 
any  way  on  the  subject,  and  when  he  had  the  whole  collected  together, 
he  read  it  all  over,  and  saw  to  what  conclusion  it  appeared  to  lead. 

In  his  religious  life,  of  which  this  proved  the  beginning,  he  used  to  say 
he  as  well  as  others  was  greatly  helped  by  Mr  Mungo  Brown,  who  married 
his  favourite  sister.  He  left  the  English  Church,  attaching  himself 
to  the  ministry  of  the  Rev.  Dr  Gordon ;  and  in  process  of  time  he 
became  an  elder  in  the  High  Church.  He  visited  his  district,  and  dis- 
charged the  other  spiritual  duties  of  his  eldership,  and  was  year  by 
year  returned  to  the  General  Assembly,  and  so  came  to  take  an  active 
interest  in  all  the  affairs  of  the  Church. 

On  the  important  questions  which  then  agitated  the  public  mind  and 
occupied  the  attention  of  the  Church,  Mr  Monteith  formed  and  main- 
tained a  very  clear  opinion.  He  objected  to  Patronage,  not  as  anti- 
.scriptural,  but  as  opposed  to  the  principles  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  ; 


ALEXANDER  EARLE  MONTEITH. 

and  among  these  he  very  clearly  stated,  in  his  speech  during  a  debate  in 
1842,  "  Spiritual  independence  and  non-intrusion."  With  these  views,  he 
entertained  no  doubt  as  to  the  right  of  Chapel  ministers  to  be  admitted 
to  the  courts  of  the  Church,  and  as  to  the  right  of  the  Church  to  inde- 
pendent jurisdiction  in  the  purely  spiritual  province.  When  these  rights 
were  assailed  by  the  decisions  of  the  Civil  Courts,  he  disregarded  these 
decisions ;  and  when,  on  the  other  hand,  the  somewhat  insidious  com- 
promise was  proposed  of  giving  to  Presbyteries  the  power  of  judging 
of  the  objections  of  congregations,  he  foresaw  the  danger  arising  in  this 
direction,  and  denounced  it  as  inconsistent  with  the  rights  and  liberties 
of  the  Christian  people. 

He  accordingly,  without  any  hesitation,  joined  the  Free  Church  in  its 
course  in  1843  ;  ^"d  he  took  an  active  and  constant  interest  in  all  its 
proceedings.  In  consultation  and  in  debate,  both  before  and  after  the 
Disruption,  his  legal  knowledge,  his  judgment,  and  his  eloquence,  proved 
of  the  greatest  service.  In  some  of  the  subjects  which  occupied  the 
attention  of  the  Church  he  naturally  took  a  more  active  part  than  in 
others.  He  supported  the  proposal  of  modifying  the  distribution  of  the 
Sustentation  Fund,  so  as  to  rescue  it  from  the  too  evident  perils  of  the 
simple  Equal  Dividend.  He  joined  in  the  endeavour  which,  after  a  vain 
but  prolonged  resistance,  was  at  last  successful,  for  the  abolition  of  tests 
in  the  non-theological  university  professorships,  maintaining  that  the 
mere  subscription  of  a  formula  gave  no  adequate  security  for  religious 
character,  and  that  a  Christian  legislature  ought  not  to  extend  its  aim 
beyond  the  provision,  that  nothing  contrary  to  certain  truths  should  be 
taught  from  the  professorial  chairs.  On  the  question  of  a  plurality  of 
colleges,  he  sided  with  the  late  Principal  Cunningham  and  others  in 
favour  of  one  central  institution  in  Edinburgh.  The  New  College,  with 
all  its  arrangements — first,  in  the  erection  of  the  building  so  much  ad- 
mired, and  then,  in  the  selection  of  its  professors — was  a  very  special 
object  of  his  interest  and  care.     It  was  he  who,  on  his  own  responsibility, 


DISRUPTION  IVORTHIES. 

and  with  many  an  anxious  thought,  acquired  the  admirable  site  on  which 
it  and  the  Free  High  Church  now  stand,  and  for  which  he  knew  a  sum  of 
^10,000  must  be  provided.  The  marble  bust  placed  in  the  New  College 
Library  is  a  suitable  memorial  of  his  deeply  cherished  regard  for  this 
important  Free  Church  institution.  He  annually  sat  in  the  General 
Assembly  as  one  of  the  representatives  of  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh, 
his  last  appearance  being  in  1859,  when  he  opposed  the  continuance  of 
the  Chair  of  Natural  Science.  The  Assembly  in  1861  passed  a  minute 
embodying  a  sincere  and  universally  felt  tribute  of  respect  for  his  memory. 

In  his  later  years  Mr  Monteith's  health  began  to  give  way,  under  the 
result  of  disease  of  the  heart,  with  which  he  knew  he  was  aftected.  In  a 
journal  which  he  kept  he  more  than  once  referred  to  this,  and  those  who 
were  nearest  to  him  and  most  intimate  with  him,  observed  the  maturing 
and  ripening  for  the  Master's  presence,  which  is  so  often  noticed  in  the 
people  of  God  as  they  draw  towards  their  end.  In  his  case  the  end 
came  sooner  than  his  friends  expected.  He  died  on  12th  January  1861. 
In  a  sermon  which  he  preached  with  reference  to  the  event,  the  Rev.  Dr 
Rainy,  Dr  Gordon's  successor,  alluded  to  his  last  visit  to  him  but  a  few 
days  before.  He  spoke  of  Mr  Monteith's  calmness  and  humility,  and 
the  simplicity  of  his  faith — the  secret  of  which  is  probably  to  be  found 
in  an  extract  from  his  diary,  with  which  this  record  of  his  worth  may  be 
suitably  closed.  "  O  God,  give  me  grace  to  follow  fearlessly  wheresoever 
Thy  Spirit  leads  me,  and  to  listen  to  the  softest  whisper  of  the  still  small 
voice,  and  to  carry  about  with  me  continually  as  the  oil  to  feed  the  divine 
lamp  of  my  soul,  the  self-sacrificing  love  of  my  dying  and  risen  Saviour." 

Mr  Monteith  was  twice  married,  first  in  1829  to  Miss  Emma  Clay,  and 
afterwards  in  1838  to  Frances,  daughter  of  the  late  General  Dunlop  of 
Dunlop,  who  for  many  years  represented  the  Stewartry  of  Kirkcudbright 
in  the  House  of  Commons.  He  had  two  daughters,  of  whom  only  one 
now  survives.  F.  B.  D. 


Iclj.  Sir  Sttirs  ^mclliuoob  iiloncrtiff,  Bart,  ID.ID. 


I  HE  name  Moncreiff  is  a  familiar  one  on  the  ministerial 
roll  of  the  Scottish  Church.  The  subject  of  this 
sketch  is  the  eighth  link  in  a  Levitical  chain  that 
has  been  broken  only  once  since  the  days  of  Archi- 
bald Moncreiff,  the  minister  of  Abernethy  in  the  early 
part  of  the  seventeenth  century.  The  great-grandson 
of  the  minister  of  Abernethy  was  Archibald,  the  first  minister  of  Black- 
ford, after  the  Revolution.  In  this  parish  he  spent  his  whole  ministerial 
life,  and  in  his  later  years  his  son  William,  who  afterwards  became  Sir 
William,  was  associated  with  him  as  his  assistant  and  successor.  Sir 
William  Moncreiff,  like  his  father,  adhered  steadfastly  to  the  parish  of 
IMackford,  and  the  attachment  was  mutual,  for,  on  his  death,  the  Presby- 
ter)', the  patron,  and  the  people  made  very  peculiar  and  successful  efforts 
to  have  his  son  Sir  Henry  ordained  as  his  successor.  After  a  brief 
incumbency  of  four  years,  Sir  Henry  accepted  a  call  to  St.  Cuthbcrt's 
Church  in  Edinburgh,  and  his  ministrj'  there  was  of  great  service  to  the 
cause  of  evangelical  religion.  He  ultimately  fell  heir  to  the  position 
of  the  learned  and  saintly  Dr  Erskine  of  Greyfriars,  as  the  leader  of  the 
evangelical  minority  in  the  Church  of  Scotland. 

Sir  James  Moncreiff,  the  son  of  the  minister  of  St.  Cuthbert's,  chose 
the  bar  instead  of  the  pulpit — a  profession  in  which  he  achieved  dis- 
tinguished success,  rose  to  the  head  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  and. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

under  his  title  of  Lord  Moncreiff,  has  left  a  reputation  which  ranks 
with  that  of  our  greatest  judges.  But  this  involved  no  real  departure 
from  ancestral  traditions  and  sympathies.  Amid  the  engrossing  occu- 
pations of  a  busy  and  successful  career  he  found  time  to  take  an  active 
part  in  the  work  of  the  Church,  and  in  the  history  of  the  incidents 
and  issues  of  the  Ten  Years'  Conflict  his  name  will  always  occupy 
a  prominent  place.  The  great  attachment  which  he  and  his  lady 
formed  for  Dr  Andrew  Thomson  induced  him,  even  before  his  father's 
death,  to  become  an  elder  of  St  George's  Church,  though  he  con- 
tinued to  attend  in  St  Cuthbert's  when  his  father  was  to  occupy 
the  pulpit.  The  members  of  Lord  MoncreifPs  family  were  thus 
brought,  early  in  life,  under  the  influence  of  a  man  who  was  pre- 
eminently successful  in  arousing  in  the  minds  of  those  who  sat  under 
his  ministry  an  enthusiasm  for  the  pure  Gospel  of  Christ,  and  we 
believe  that  his  eldest  son, — the  Sir  Henry  Moncreiff  of  whose  life 
these  pages  present  a  brief  sketch, — derived  an  impulse  from  Dr  Thom- 
son, which  had  much  to  do  with  the  shaping  of  his  future  career. 
Other  causes,  doubtless,  co-operated  to  form  his  spiritual  character,  and 
to  turn  his  thoughts  to  the  Christian  ministry,  but  it  is  not  the  function 
of  the  writer  to  intrude  into  the  sacred  region  of  private  religious  experi- 
ence. His  task  is  to  relate  outward  facts,  and  to  allow  these  to  speak 
for  themselves,  and  suggest  the  spiritual  facts  which  underlie  them. 

Mr  Henry  Moncreiff  was  born  in  Edinburgh  in  1809.  When  he 
was  of  suitable  age  he  was  sent  to  the  High  School  of  his  native  city. 
There  are  those  who  still  remember  that  he  was  distinguished  from  his 
fellow-pupils  by  the  size  of  his  bundle  of  books.  Not  content  with  the 
ordinary  number  of  volumes,  he  had  added  an  imposing  Latin  dic- 
tionary, which  he  carried  daily  to  school.  His  attachment  to  the  dic- 
tionary must  have  been  great,  for  a  story  has  floated  down  on  the 
stream  of  tradition,  that  when  the  junior  members  of  the  Moncreiff 
family  were  asked  what  they  would  severally  carry  away  in  the  event  of 


REV.  S/R  HENRY  IVELLIVOOD  MONCREIFF,  BART.,  D.D. 

ihc  house  taking  fire,  Henry  declared  that  he  would  carry  off  the  big 
"  Ainsworth  "  as  his  special  treasure. 

After  leaving  the  High  School,  he  matriculated  as  a  student  of  the 
University  of  Edinburgh,  in  1823.  A  college  friend  who  was  intimately 
associated  with  him  says  that  he  was  distinguished  by  his  close  applica- 
tion to  study,  and  by  a  steadfast  friendliness  of  character  which  never  gave 
pain  or  caused  disappointment,  and  that  he  was  even  then  conspicuous 
for  his  clear  intellectual  perceptions  and  his  acute  reasoning  powers. 

In  the  year  1826  he  left  the  University  and  went  to  Hartley  Rectory, 
Worcestershire,  where  he  was  associated  with  several  other  pupils  under 
the  care  of  the  Rev.  Henry  James  Hastings,  for  about  two  years. 

Mr  Hastings  was  a  sterling  evangelical  clergyman  of  the  school  of 
Venn  and  Simeon  ;  and  a  distinguished  scholar  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge.  Private  tuition  was  at  that  time  preferred  by  many  to 
the  teaching  of  the  public  schools,  and  the  tide  of  general  opinion  did 
not  turn  into  the  opposite  direction  till  Dr  Arnold  had  achieved 
eminence  as  Head-master  of  Rugby.  Lord  Moncreiff  accordingly 
followed  the  example  of  other  members  of  the  upper  classes,  and  sent 
his  son  to  Martley  Rectory  at  the  critical  period  of  his  education. 

In  April,  1827,  Mr  Moncreiff  was  matriculated  in  Oxford  as  a 
Gentleman  Commoner  of  New  College,  and  kept  the  usual  residence 
until  1 83 1,  in  which  year,  in  Easter  term,  he  took  his  degree.  One  of 
his  fellow-students,  who  has  since  risen  to  eminence  in  Oxford,  recalling 
these  old  days,  says  that  he  was  "  a  quiet,  regular  student  of  unblamc- 
able  life,  at  a  time  and  under  circumstances  not  over-favourable  to  study, 
and  that  he  won  the  regard  and  respect  of  his  contemporaries  in  the 
University  as  well  as  within  the  College."  Many  of  these  contem- 
poraries have  passed  away,  but  the  chief  among  those  who  survive  is 
Mr  Gladstone,  the  present  Prime  Minister  of  Great  Britain,  whose  friend- 
ship with  his  former  fellow-student  still  continues.  Writing  to  a  friend, 
Mr  Gladstone  says  of  Sir  Henry  : — "  When  I  was  an  undergraduate  at 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Oxford,  I  had  the  privilege  of  his  friendship,  and  we  had  also  many 
common  friends.  I  therefore  knew  in  what  estimation  he  was  held,  and 
I  do  not  think  that  any  young  man  of  his  day  enjoyed  either  a  warmer  or 
a  more  unmixed  regard.  There  was  not  a  drawback  of  any  kind  to  the 
sentiment.  Nor,  indeed,  could  there  be.  He  was  more  liberal  in  his 
political  ideas  than  most  of  us  at  that  date,  but  this  circumstance  cer- 
tainly offered  no  impediment  to  the  free  course  of  friendship,  warmed 
by  all  the  qualities  of  his  heart  and  mind."  It  was  in  connection  with 
the  Union  Debating  Society  at  Oxford,  of  which  Mr  Moncreiff  was  at 
one  time  president,  and  in  which  he  gained  a  high  reputation  as  a 
debater,  that  Mr  Gladstone  delivered  the  famous  speech  against  the 
Grey  Government,  which  brought  him  under  the  notice  of  the  Duke  of 
Newcastle,  through  whose  influence  he  entered  Parliament.  Mr  Mon- 
creiff was  one  of  those  who  spoke  in  opposition,  and  upheld  the  tradi- 
tional politics  of  his  family — politics  which  Mr  Gladstone  was  aftenvards 
to  maintain  and  to  develop  with  all  the  force  of  his  genius. 

Before  Mr  Moncreiff  left  Scotland  for  Martley,  a  deep  love  for  the 
Scottish  Church  was  already  rooted  in  his  mind  ;  and,  although  his  future 
career  was  not  finally  decided  on,  he  was  disposed  to  follow  in  the  foot- 
steps of  his  clerical  ancestors.  The  opinions  of  contemporaries,  however, 
pointed  in  the  direction  of  the  Bar,  and  for  a  time  this  was  regarded  by 
them  and  by  himself  as  his  probable  destination.  But  before  he 
left  Oxford,  circumstances  made  his  path  clear  in  the  line  of  his  original 
inclination,  and  he  decided  to  qualify  himself  for  the  ministry  in  the 
Church  of  his  fathers.  His  after-attachment  to  its  traditions,  doctrine,  and 
polity  was  not  weakened  by  his  long  residence  in  a  community  where 
the  dominant  ecclesiastical  ideas  were  different,  and  though  living  at 
Oxford  at  a  time  when  those  forces  which  developed  the  Tractarian 
Movement  were  already  at  work,  he  resisted  their  seductive  influence  and 
continued  loyal  to  the  Presbyterianism  and  Calvinism  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland.     Possibilities  of  advancement,  such  as  he  could  not  find  else- 


REV.  SIR  HENRY  WELLWOOD  MONCREIFF,  BART.,  D.D. 

where,  were  within  his  reach  in  the  Church  of  England  through  his  own 
talents,  and  the  influence  of  his  maternal  relative,  the  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  and  the  fact  that  he  turned  aside  from  them  for  the  sake  of 
the  modest  prospects  of  a  Scotch  minister,  was  a  strong  testimony  to 
the  depth  and  intensity  of  his  convictions. 

After  leaving  Oxford  in  1831,  he  returned  to  Edinburgh,  and  re- 
entered the  University.  At  the  close  of  the  usual  course  of  theological 
study,  he  was  duly  licensed  to  preach  the  Gospel,  and  in  1835  he  received 
and  accepted  a  call  to  the  parish  of  Baldernock,  where  he  was  ordained  in 
January  of  the  following  j-ear.  His  ministry  there  lasted  less  than  two 
years,  as  he  was  translated  to  East  Kilbride  in  November  1837.  The 
Church  soon  afterwards  came  into  the  midst  of  the  controversies  which 
led  to  the  Disruption,  and  though  the  minister  of  Kilbride  abstained 
from  taking  a  prominent  part  in  them,  he  watched  their  progress  with 
keen  interest.  His  sympathies,  however,  were  expressed  on  many 
occasions,  and  in  particular  in  a  letter  to  Lord  Melbourne,  published 
in  1 84 1,  in  which  he  defended  his  grandfather  from  a  charge  of  having 
been  unfriendly,  or  at  least  indifferent,  to  some  of  the  great  principles 
involved  in  the  controversy  between  the  two  parties  in  the  Church, 
and  conclusively  proved  that  the  imputation  was  founded  on  a  mis- 
understanding of  Sir  Henry's  real  position,  and  a  misinterpretation  of 
what  he  had  written  in  the  Appendix  to  his  Life  of  Dr  Erskine. 

In  1843  men's  sympathies  were  tested  by  acts,  and  Mr  Moncreiff  at 
the  call  of  duty  abandoned  the  Establishment  and  allied  himself  with 
the  fortunes  of  Evangelicalism.  A  congregation  rallied  round  him,  and 
was  organised  ;  and  in  due  time  a  suitable  place  of  worship  and  a  manse 
were  erected  in  connection  with  the  Free  Church. 

A  co-presbyter,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  the  events  of  that 
period,  gives  an  interesting  account  of  the  Kilbride  ministr)-,  which  he 
characterises  as  "  earnest,  laborious,  and  successful."  "  After  Sir  Henry 
had  left  the  Establishment,"  says  the  same  authority,  "  he  continued  to 


DISR  UP  TION  1 1  -OR  THIES. 

retain  the  respect  of  all  classes  in  the  parish."  Sir  William  Maxwell,  of 
Calderwood  Castle,  was  his  near  neighbour,  and  Sir  Henry  and  his  lady 
often  visited  him.  On  one  occasion  he  dined  at  the  Castle,  along  with 
the  Established  Presbytery,  after  the  examination  of  Sir  William's 
school.  The  co-presbyter  above  referred  to  tells  the  following  amus- 
ing anecdote  : — "  The  examination  having  been  protracted  beyond 
the  time  fixed  for  its  termination,  the  Presbytery  were  late  in  arriv- 
ing at  the  castle,  where  Lady  Maxwell  and  two  friends — a  military 
officer  and  an  English  rector — were  awaiting  them.  Very  soon  after  they 
had  entered  the  drawing-room,  and  before  the  strangers  could  be  intro- 
duced to  the  ministers,  the  bell  summoned  the  party  to  dinner.  At  the 
table  Sir  Henry  was  seated  beside  the  clergyman.  He,  genial  and 
affable,  in  the  course  of  conversation,  remarked,  '  I  find  from  my  letters 
this  morning  that  Bishop  Stanley  is  dead,'  adding,  '  But  likely  you  do 
not  feel  interested  in  our  bishops.'  '  Oh,'  replied  his  neighbour, '  I  am 
concerned  to  hear  of  Bishop  Stanley's  death.  He  was  at  Alderly  when 
I  was  in  that  quarter,  just  before  going  to  Oxford.'  The  Englishman  re- 
joined, '  Did  you  study  at  Oxford  ?  Then  you  will  feel  an  interest  in  the 
affairs  of  our  Church.'  '  Oh  yes,'  was  the  reply  ;  '  and  I  learn  what  is  going 
on  with  you  from  my  brother,  who  is  rector  at  Tattenhall  in  Cheshire.' 

"  By-and-by,  the  conversation  somehow  turned  to  Bishop  Turner, 
of  Calcutta  ;  and  the  two  friends  differed  in  their  opinion  about  the 
matter  under  discussion.  The  rector,  appealing  to  the  Presbyterian,  said, 
'You  will  allow,  I  am  sure,  that  I,  as  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of 
England,  am  likely  to  be  better  informed  than  yourself  on  this  subject' 
'  I  can  hardly  allow  that,'  was  the  answer ;  '  for  Bishop  Turner  was 
my  uncle.'  '  Bishop  Turner  your  uncle  ! '  exclaimed  the  rector ;  '  then 
the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  is  your  uncle  ! '  '  Yes,  he  is,'  was  the  Free 
Church  minister's  reply. 

"  When  the  gentlemen  returned  to  the  drawing-room,  the  evening  was 
far  advanced,  and  very  soon  afterwards  Sir  Henry  said  to  his  stranger 


REV.  SIR  HENRY  IVELLIVOOD  MONCREIFF,  BART.,  D.D. 

friend, '  I  shall  bid  you  Good  night,  as  I  have  to  go  home.'  The  rector 
replied,  '  I  am  sorry  you  have  to  go  ;  I  suppose  you  live  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood ? '  '  Oh  yes  ;  my  house  is  at  hand,'  was  the  reply.  '  Well,'  said 
the  clergyman,  '  I  am  sorry  you  must  go,  as  I  v/as  wishing  to  have  had 
some  conversation  with  you  about  the  Free  Church.  I  suppose  you  are 
not  much  bothered  with  it  here.'  Sir  Henrj',  somewhat  taken  aback, 
slowly  replied,  '  Oh— well— I  am  the  Free  Church  minister.'  But  the 
Episcopalian,  proving  equal  to  the  occasion,  rejoined, '  Oh,  you  are  not 
troubled  about  the  incotne  ;  you  have  a  Sustentation  Fund  which  answers 
its  purpose  well.'  '  Yes,'  he  replied,  smiling  ;  '  but  I  was  going  to  observe 
that  I  was  formerly  the  parish  minister  here,  and  that  gentleman  over 
there  was  my  missionary,  or,  as  you  would  say,  curate;  and  when  I 
gave  up  the  living  he  was  appointed  to  it.     Good  evening.'  " 

Lord  Moncreiff  having  died  in  1851,  his  son  succeeded  to  the 
baronetcy.  In  the  following  year  he  accepted  a  call  to  St  Cuthbert's, 
Edinburgh,  and  thus  became,  in  a  Free  Church  sense,  the  successor 
of  his  grandfather,  the  minister  of  St  Cuthbert's  parish.  While  throw- 
ing himself  heartily  into  all  the  work  of  his  new  charge,  he  mani- 
fested a  special  interest  in  its  mission  operations  and  in  the  intellectual 
welfare  of  its  young  men.  The  Literaiy  Association  connected  with  the 
church  being  composed  of  the  older  as  well  as  the  younger  members  of 
the  congregation,  happily  combined  the  vivacity  of  the  one  with  the 
gravity  of  the  other.  In  the  period  with  which  the  writer  is  acquainted. 
Sir  Henry  was  the  most  active  member  of  the  Society,  and  his  presence 
at  its  meetings  gave  them  a  peculiar  charm.  One  did  not  know  whether 
to  admire  more,  his  kind  but  discriminating  criticisms  of  youthful 
essayists,  or  the  amiability  with  which  he  accepted  juvenile  criticism  of 
his  own  wise  and  thoughtful  papers. 

After  labouring  in  St  Cuthbert's  for  about  twenty  years,  Sir  Henry 
obtained  the  help  of  a  colleague  in  1872.  The  necessity  for  this 
assistance,  however,  did  not  arise  from  failing  health  or  strength,  but  from 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

the  fact  that  his  public  ecclesiastical  work  demanded  a  large  amount  of 
his  time.  It  was  impossible  that  one  who  felt  so  deep  an  interest  in  his 
Church,  and  who  was  so  richly  endowed  with  spiritual  and  intellectual 
gifts,  could  escape  the  responsibilities  and  burdens  of  ecclesiastical 
leadership.  This  office  gradually  devolved  on  Sir  Henry,  not  as  an 
honour  which  he  coveted,  but  rather  as  a  duty  which  he  could  not  decline. 
His  hereditary  and  acquired  talents  marked  him  out  as  the  Jurist  of  the 
Church,  and  when  one  of  the  principal  Clerkships  became  vacant  by  the 
death  of  Mr  Pitcairn,  he  was  chosen  as  his  successor.  All  who  have 
been  in  the  habit  of  attending  the  meetings  of  the  Supreme  Court  know 
how  much  he  has  contributed  to  their  dignity  and  order.  His  unfailing 
courtesy,  his  avoidance  of  dogmatism,  his  remarkable  fairness,  his  skill 
in  extricating  a  question  and  showing  its  real  state,  account  for  the  fact 
that  his  decisions  are  received  with  the  utmost  deference,  and  arc  rarely 
disputed. 

Sir  Henry  excels  as  a  debater.  Scrupulously  just  to  opponents,  he 
treats  their  arguments  with  respect,  neither  dismissing  them  scornfully 
nor  criticising  them  with  undue  severity.  He  calmly  reasons  out  his 
own  views  without  appealing  to  passion  or  prejudice,  and  as  he  never 
employs  sophism,  it  is  difficult  to  evade  his  conclusions  if  his  premisses 
be  admitted.  If  his  reasonings  should  fail  to  convince  opponents,  they 
do  not  irritate  them,  and  if  he  has  sometimes  lost  a  cause,  it  is  almost 
certain  that  his  conduct  of  an  argument  has  never  been  the  occasion  of 
his  losing  a  friend  or  creating  an  enemy. 

Although  so  skilful  as  a  controversialist.  Sir  Henry  is  not  eager  to 
rush  into  debate.  Being  by  nature  more  of  a  judge  than  an  advocate,  he 
is  slow  to  range  himself  on  one  side  of  a  disputed  question,  and  keeps 
his  mind  long  in  an  inquiring  attitude.  On  this  account  his  utterances 
in  the  earlier  stages  of  a  controversy  are  sometimes  of  a  tentative 
character,  but  the  process  of  crystallisation  soon  sets  in,  and  the  opinions 
which  were  held  in  solution  in  his  mind  become  definite  in  their  form. 


REr.  SIR  HENRy  WELLIVOOD  MONCREIFF,  DART.,  D.D. 

The  position  which  he  has  taken  up  in  the  ecclesiastical  debates  of 
recent  years  has  allied  him  now  with  the  more  Liberal,  and  now  with  the 
more  Conservative  side  of  Church  politics.  He  was  a  warm  advocate  of 
the  proposed  Union  between  the  Free  and  United  Presbyterian  Churches, 
and  took  a  leading  part  in  the  negotiations  which  resulted  in  the  union 
of  the  Free  Church  with  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church  in  1876- 
Being  Convener  of  the  Assembly's  Committee  at  the  time  the  union 
was  effected,  it  devolved  on  him  to  make  all  the  necessary  arrange- 
ments for  carrying  it  out,  and  it  was  largely  owing  to  his  tact  and 
skill  that  the  ceremonies  were  conducted  in  a  manner  so  orderly, 
dignified,  and  impressive,  that  they  can  never  be  forgotten  by  those 
who  witnessed  them. 

Sir  Henry's  attitude  in  late  doctrinal  discussions  in  the  Church  has 
been  conservative,  and  on  the  Disestablishment  question  he  occupies  a 
middle  position. 

For  many  years  Sir  Hcnrj-  has  made  a  diligent  use  of  his  pen.  Most 
of  his  writings  have  been  designed  to  serve  an  immediate  end  by 
enlightening  public  opinion  in  regard  to  the  Church,  or  by  directing  and 
moulding  opinion  within  the  Church  itself.  Some  of  them,  however, 
have  permanent  value,  as  his  "  Vindication  of  the  Free  Church  Claim  of 
Right ; "  the  "  Manual  of  Procedure,"  which  is  usually  quoted  as  his, 
though  nominally  drawn  up  by  a  Committee  under  his  superintendence ; 
and  his  masterly  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Argyll  on  "  The  Identity  of 
the  Free  Church  Claim  from  1838  till  1875,"  in  which  he  proved  with 
consummate  ability  that  the  Free  Church  had  not  departed  from  the 
position  of  the  leaders  of  1842,  and  that  the  Patronage  Act  of  1874 
had  not  conceded  to  the  Establishment  all  that  was  asked  for  in  1843. 
It  is  expected  that  Sir  Henry's  forthcoming  "  Chalmers  Lectures  on 
Free  Church  Principles  "  will  form  a  standard  work  on  the  subject. 

Many  years  have  passed  since  the  University  of  Edinburgh  testified 
its  appreciation  of  his  theological  learning  by  conferring  on  him  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

degree  of  Doctor  of  Divinity.  The  Free  Church  has  few  honours  to  give, 
else  it  would  gladly  bestow  them.  The  one  dignity  it  has  in  its  gift  it 
conferred  on  Sir  Henry  in  187 1  by  appointing  him  Moderator  of  the 
General  Assembly. 

There  are  no  bishops  in  a  Presbyterian  Church,  but  there  are  men 
whose  experience  and  wisdom,  as  well  as  their  known  interest  in  all  that 
concerns  the  welfare  of  their  Church,  place  them  in  an  almost  Episcopal 
position.  Individual  ministers  from  all  parts  of  the  country  consult 
them  on  matters  affecting  their  congregations  and  presbyteries  ;  the 
Church  expects  them  to  take  the  lead  in  her  Superior  Courts,  and  to 
stand  by  the  helm  in  times  of  crisis,  and  when  they  speak  on  public 
questions  they  are  regarded  as  representatives.  Episcopal  functions  of 
this  character  Sir  Henry  has  long  discharged.  He  has  been  a  "  great 
part "  of  the  history  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland  for  many  years. 
Intimately  associated  with  the  great  ecclesiastical  leaders  of  the  past,  and 
inheriting  their  responsibilities  and  influence,  one  cannot  but  pray  that 
he  may  be  long  spared  to  his  Church,  to  guide  her  in  times  of  difficulty, 
and  to  be  the  Nestor  of  her  Council  Chamber. 

T.  C. 


Kobrt  ^anl 


OBERT  PAUL  was  born  at  Edinburgh  on  15th  May  1788. 
His  father,  the  Rev.  WiUiam  Paul,  was  Colleague  of  Sir 
Henry  Moncreiff  in  the  pastorate  of  the  West  Kirk,  and 
in  17S0  married  Miss  Susan  Moncreiff,  Sir  Henry's  sister. 
His  ministry  was  brief,  but  in  a  marked  degree  useful ; 
his  views  of  Divine  truth  being  evangelical,  and  his 
preaching,  in  these  dark  times,  attractive  to  a  very  large  and  earnest  con- 
gregation. At  the  time  of  his  father's  death,  Robert  was  only  fourteen 
years  of  age  ;  and  although  he  dated  the  commencement  of  his  religious 
life  somewhat  later  than  this,  he  was  even  then  singularly  thoughtful  and 
mature,  taking  his  part  in  the  direction  of  household  affairs,  guiding  the 
studies  of  the  younger  children,  conducting  family  worship,  and  engaging 
at  his  spare  moments  in  works  of  benevolence. 

Having  completed  his  High  School  and  University  curriculum,  he 
commenced  business  life,  and  entered  the  Commercial  Bank  in  one  of  its 
subordinate  appointments,  from  which,  by  rapid  strides,  he  rose  to  be  its 
Manager,  which  office  he  held  until  1853,  when  he  retired  from  the 
arduous  position,  but  became  one  of  the  Bank  Directors.  He  married,  in 
1814,  Miss  Charlotte  Erskine  of  Aberdona — a  union  which  endured,  and 
was  characterised  by  a  very  tender  affection,  until  1847,  when  he  was  left 
a  widower. 

In  a  letter  addressed  to  a  friend  in   1862,  Mr  Paul  said  :  "It  is  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

vcr)-  busy  men  who  find  time  for  everything,  not  your  leisurely  men  who 
sit  with  their  feet  on  the  fender  and  read  newspapers."  This  remark 
found  a  striking  illustration  in  himself.  Placed  at  the  head  of  a  great 
public  Company  whose  interests  required  constant  thought  and  watch- 
fulness, and  whose  demands  upon  his  time  were  incessant,  he  found,  or 
made,  leisure  for  added  work  of  the  most  multifarious  kinds. 

His  experience,  sagacity,  and  readiness  to  help,  led  to  his  being 
appealed  to  for  counsel  and  for  aid  in  connection  with  matters  political, 
benevolent,  and  religious. 

Never  a  keen  party  man  in  State  politics,  he  threw  himself  into  such 
movements  as  those  connected  with  Slavery  and  the  Test  and  Corporation 
Acts,  his  sympathies  with  everything  that  advanced  the  cause  of  freedom 
leading  him  to  associate  himself  in  these  and  other  questions  with  the 
Liberal  party.  But  his  available  leisure  and  strength  were  reserved  for 
Church  matters.  Hereditarily  attached  to  evangelical  opinion  as  regarded 
both  doctrine  and  discipline,  he  had  carefully  formed  his  own  judgments 
regarding  these  matters ;  and  then  with  characteristic  energy  he  threw 
himself  into  the  current  of  affairs  which  deepened  in  interest  and  im- 
portance until  the  Church  threw  off  its  State  connection  in  1S43.  Along 
with  the  wonderful  roll  of  men  who  clung  to  her  in  her  day  of  trouble, 
he  became  one  of  the  Disruption  Worthies. 

He  had  a  striking  and  memorable  way  of  expressing  himself  in 
connection  with  matters  in  which  his  affections  were  deeply  engaged.  It 
was  in  the  view  of  the  Disruption  that,  in  speaking  at  a  congregational 
meeting  of  the  necessary  breaking  up  of  a  Missionary  Association  which 
had  done  good  service,  he  said,  "  I  consent  to  its  dissolution  vcr}'  much 
as  I  consent  to  my  own — in  the  hope  of  a  better  resurrection." 

His  mental  and  physical  activities  were  at  their  best  in  these  memor- 
able times.  He  had  no  misgivings  as  to  the  course  pursued  by  the 
Church,  or  as  to  her  future.  He  was  emphatically  a  man  of  faith  and 
prayer,  and,  as  those  who  knew  him  best  will  remember,  used  to  accept 


ROBERT  PAUL. 

the  promises  of  Scripture  with  a  singularly  natural  and  childlike  trust. 
On  3d  June  1843,  writing  to  a  distance  of  the  great  events  of  the  past 
weeks,  he  says,  "  God  will  overrule  all  for  His  own  glory  in  the  advance- 
ment of  His  spiritual  church  and  kingdom." 

Mr  Paul  was  ordained  an  Elder  of  the  West  Kirk  by  Sir  Henry 
Moncreifif  in  1816;  and  it  was  not  until  after  the  Disruption  that  he 
became  an  Elder  of  St  George's.  His  admiration  of  the  unrivalled 
preaching  of  Dr  Candlish,  between  whom  and  himself  a  very  true  and 
tender  friendship  existed,  was  great.  To  a  friend  he  wrote  in  1864,  when 
Dr  Candlish  preached  the  last  of  his  sermons  on  the  First  Epistle  of 
John,  "  A  magnificent  sermon  as  he  closed  his  long  series  of  discourses 
on  First  John,  the  text  being,  'This  is  the  true  God,  and  (the)  eternal 
life.'  I  wish  I  could  give  you  a  notion  of  its  aim  and  scope,  and  some 
of  its  noble  passages."  His  discharge  of  all  his  congregational  duties 
in  the  midst  of  his  burdened  life  throughout  the  week,  are  examples  and 
encouragements  to  the  hardest  worked  men  of  business  to  give  some  of 
their  time  and  strength  to  the  service  of  the  Lord. 

While  interesting  himself  in  all  the  needful  administrative  arrange- 
ments consequent  on  the  Church's  new  condition,  he  specially  identified 
himself  with  matters  affecting  the  Theological  College  and  Library  and 
the  Educational  Schemes  of  the  Free  Church  generally,  associated  in 
these  great  questions  with  his  much-loved  friend  Dr  David  Welsh. 

The  General  Assembly  of  each  year  brought  round  a  time  which  he 
much  enjoyed.  His  wide  acquaintance  with  Ministers  and  Elders  in 
all  parts  of  Scotland  led  him  to  open  his  house,  with  even  more  than 
its  wonted  hospitality,  to  the  members  who  came  up  to  this  great  annual 
gathering. 

In  Assembly  business  he  was  constantly  consulted,  his  judgment  being 
felt  to  be  of  the  highest  value  in  delicate  and  difficult  questions.  His 
bright  cheerfulness  of  spirit,  his  ready  sympathy  with  those  in  doubt, 
and  his  plca.sant  jest  as  things  seemed  to  be  taking  a  warm  or  excited 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

turn,  were  of  the  utmost  service  in  the  Church's  Business  Committee. 
And  in  the  Assembly  itself,  although — owing  to  a  somewhat  feeble  voice 
— not  a  powerful  speaker,  his  presence  on  the  platform  elicited  an  imme- 
diate call  for  silence ;  and  his  words,  always  delivered  with  clearness 
of  expression  and  earnestness  of  purpose,  were  listened  to  with  marked 
respect. 

In  his  latest  days  the  work  in  which  he  was  most  deeply  interested 
was  the  formation  of  a  Society  for  aiding  the  education  and  business 
training  of  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Ministers  and  Missionaries  of  the 
Free  Church  ;  in  the  originating  of  which  the  writer  of  this  notice  had 
the  happiness  of  being  associated  with  him.  It  was  a  movement  much 
after  his  own  heart,  and  he  worked  at  it  with  marvellous  energy. 

Among  the  many  benevolent  institutions  in  whose  welfare  he  was 
interested,  and  in  the  management  of  which  he  took  part,  was  the 
Orphan  Hospital.  From  a  very  early  period  of  life  he  was  one  of  its 
Managers,  and  contributed  by  his  wise  and  practical  help  to  lay  the 
foundations  of  the  admirable  system  under  which  it  has  become  a  model 
institution. 

Mr  Paul  was  a  man  of  quite  unique  character.  Having  received 
a  liberal  education,  he  followed  it  up  by  varied  reading  and  careful 
reflection.  His  constant  use  of  his  Bible  made  him  one  of  the  most 
completely  furnished  of  Scripture  students.  It  was  an  exercise  at  once 
intellectually  and  spiritually  refreshing  to  hear  him  expound  the  Word, 
and  illustrate  it  by  comparisons  of  passages  and  texts.  He  was  singularly 
thoughtful,  with  perhaps  an  over-fastidious  taste,  and  with  a  tendency 
— sometimes  too  pronounced — to  dwell  upon  fine  distinction.s.  These 
features  of  mind  revealed  themselves  not  only  in  conversation,  but  in  his 
writings,  which  were  the  product  of  an  original  and  cultivated  mind,  and 
were  marked  by  great  elegance  and  grace  of  diction.  His  Memoir  of  the 
Rev.  James  Martin,  who  succeeded  Dr  Andrew  Thomson  as  Minister  of 
St  George's,  and  his  many  contributions  to  the  periodical  publications  of 


ROBERT  PA  UL. 
tlie  day,  abundantly  illustrate  his  literary  power.  As  a  letter  writer  he 
was  quite  remarkable,  having  a  singular  gift  of  selecting  topics  congenial 
to  his  correspondent,  and  communicating  them  with  the  most  graphic 
description  and  with  exquisite  touches  of  humour  or  pathos,  as  the  subject 
demanded. 

In  social  intercourse  he  was  a  charming  companion.  Full  of  anecdote 
of  the  best  kind,  told  in  the  best  way,  he  at  once  instructed  and  amused. 
From  the  seniors  of  the  party  with  whom  he  was  holding  grave  discussions 
of  Church  questions  and  principles,  he  turned  with  perfect  naturalness  to 
the  more  youthful,  and  with  some  kindly  jest  drew  them  into  conversa- 
tion ;  they  in  their  turn  easily  attracting  him  to  join  in  their  games,  or  to 
tell  them  once  again  some  familiar  story  associated  in  their  minds  with 
former  visits  from  their  old  friend. 

His  villa  of  Kirkland  Lodge,  near  Edinburgh,  was  the  rendezvous  of 
the  choicest  men,  clerical  and  lay,  of  his  acquaintance  ;  and  there  on  the 
bowling-green,  with  its  grand  view  of  the  Pentlands  and  the  intervening 
valley,  he  presided  over  hard-contested  games  ;  and  with  alternating  con- 
versation on  high  themes,  or  ready  quotation  applicable  to  some  passing 
incident,  or  boy-like  rush  after  the  ball  that  threatened  to  dispute  his  own 
or  his  partner's  claim  to  be  victor,  he  kept  the  scene  full  of  the  purest  and 
most  joyous  life.  The  happy  party  around  his  table  afterwards,  and  the 
closing  "  worship  "  ere  the  guests  dispersed,  are  memories  that  refuse  to 
leave  us. 

But  the  outward  man  began  to  perish  Marly  in  1865  he  wrote  to 
a  friend  :  "  The  springs  of  life  are  gradually  weakening,  I  am  verj- 
conscious ;  ...  yet  the  remembering  and  thinking  powers  are  in  great, 
I  had  almost  said  in  terrible,  force,  concentrated  on  fewer  subjects, 
but  on  these  intensely."  In  April  1866  the  process  of  physical  decline 
was  accelerated,  but  the  mind  and  heart  were  as  fresh  as  ever.  '  Though 
grave  and  more  silent  than  formerly,  I  am  not  downhearted,  and  very 
far  from  joyless.     Indeed  I  have  sometimes  wonderful  gleams.     Conflicts, 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 
no  doubt  often  betwixt  flesh  and  spirit,  yet  I  do  feel  that  the  blessed 
hope  is  burning  brighter  every  day." 

And  yet  again  on  22d  May,  within  two  months  of  his  death :  ''This 
day  the  General  Assembly  meets,  and  it  does  seem  a  strange  thing,  that 
instead  of  being  there  in  the  thick  of  it,  I  should  be  here  reposing  in 
quiet  and  comparative  solitude." 

Still  he  carried  on  his  reading  and  writing,  received  his  friends, 
and  continued  to  hold  his  Sabbath  evening  meetings  in  the  carpenter's 
shop  at  the  gate,  or  under  his  own  roof,  at  Kirkland,  and  with  rare 
taste  and  spiritual  fervour  "opened  the  Scriptures"  to  the  gathered 
cottars  and  servants. 

To  his  greatly  loved  friend  Lord  Cowan,  who  saw  him  a  few  days 
before  his  death  as  he  sat  on  the  lawn  in  the  bright  sunshine,  and  who 
asked  him  as  to  his  feelings  in  view  of  his  approaching  departure,  he 
replied,  looking  up  into  the  blue  sky,  "  I  feel,  my  dear  friend,  as  if  my 
true  life  were  just  about  to  begin." 

On  the  night  before  he  passed  away — a  calm  and  quiet  Sabbath 
evening — he  was  carried  in  his  chair  to  be  present  at  the  meeting,  which 
was  that  night  held  under  Kirkland  roof,  and  the  services  of  which  were 
conducted  by  his  friend  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Wilson  of  the  Barclay  Church. 
When  Mr  Wilson  reminded  him  of  the  Saviour's  legacy,  he  replied, 
"Yes!  I  have  no  terror,  but  a  solid,  substantial,  abiding  peace."  The 
service  was  closed  by  singing  the  twenty-third  Psalm. 

"And  so,  nith  soothed,  confiding  heart, 
And  cheering  smiles  of  peace, 
He  hasted  through  the  shadow  dark 
Unto  the  bright  release  ! " 

Within  a  few  hours — in  the  early  morning  of  i6th  July  1866 — he 
had  "  departed  out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father," — which  he  was  wont 
to  call  "  the  grandest  definition  of  the  death  of  a  believer." 

D.  M. 


■^^ 


REV,  THOMAS    PITCAIRN.^ 


H^b.  f  bnmas  ^itrairn. 


iN  reading  the  proceedings  of  the  famous  Westminster 
Assembly,  there  is  one  of  the  scribes  (or  clerks  as  we 
would  call  them),  Adoniram  Byfield,  to  whom  our  eye  turns 
from  time  to  time,  amid  all  the  discussions.  His  services 
are  much  in  request,  and  he  has  evidently  great  sagacity 
and  skill  in  his  department  of  work.  Such  another  clerk 
was  Thomas  Pitcairn,  in  the  Convocation  and  in  the  early  days  of  our 
Free  Church  General  Assembly. 

He,  was  born  at  Edinburgh,  6th  February  1800.  His  father,  Mr 
Alexander  Pitcairn,  was  a  merchant  in  Leith  and  Edinburgh,  and  was 
well-known  as  an  elder  in  Lady  Gienorchy's  Chapel,  where  the  venerable 
Dr  Jones  ministered  as  pastor  for  more  than  fifty  years.  It  was  while 
under  the  ministrationsofDr  Jones  that  Mr  Pitcairn  was  led  to  the  truth  ; 
and  often  in  after  days  did  he  relate  incidents  connected  with  the 
preaching  and  labours  of  that  man  of  God,  who  so  long  and  so 
faithfully  witnessed  for  evangelical  truth  in  Edinburgh,  in  the  Moderate 
era  that  preceded  the  times  of  Dr  Andrew  Thomson. 

After  finishing  the  usual  literary  curriculum  at  College,  he  gave 
himself  for  a  time  to  business,  with  considerable  prospects  of  success  in 
that  department  opening  up  to  him.  But  as  the  work  of  grace  in  his 
soul  deepened,  his  thoughts  turned  to  the  ministry,  and  he  abandoned 
without   regret   all   hopes    of   worldly   advancement.      Having    passed 


DISKC/'TIUN  WORTHIES. 

through  the  Edinburgh  Divinity  Hall  he  was  licensed  by  the  Presbytery 
to  preach  in  1828.  While  still  a  probationer,  he  assisted  successively 
Dr  Stewart  of  Erskine,  and  Dr  William  Thomson  of  Perth ;  and  there- 
after was  ordained  assistant  and  successsor  to  Dr  Grierson  of  Cockpcn. 

Cockpen  is  in  the  Presbytery  of  Dalkeith— its  name  chiefly  known  by 
the  old  ballad  song.  Here  Mr  Pitcairn  found  work  to  do  for  his  Master, 
among  a  population  partly  rural  and  partly  connected  with  the  collieries 
of  the  neighbourhood.  His  preaching  was  solid  and  scriptural ;  he 
handled  the  truths  of  the  Atonement  and  divine  grace  with  deep 
earnestness  and  power  from  the  pulpit,  and  in  his  visitings  enforced  what 
he  preached.  His  consistent  life  and  godly  sincerity  gave  weight  to  all 
he  taught ;  while  his  pleasant,  kindly  manner,  ensured  him  access  to  the 
people,  and  won  their  affection  as  well  as  respect.  Nor  was  his  labour  in 
\ain.  The  writer  of  this  notice  was  one  day,  in  Glasgow,  visiting  at  the 
house  of  an  intelligent  ship-carpenter,  whose  wife  manifested  much  interest 
in  the  conversation.  He  at  length  asked  her  if  she  had  long  known  the 
Saviour  as  her  Saviour.  She  replied,  "Many  years  ago — more  than  thirty 
— I  was  brought  to  Christ  on  a  Communion  Sabbath,  when  I  was  in  the 
parish  of  Cockpen.  Mr  Pitcairn  preached  on  '  The  Rock  that  is  higher 
than  I,'  and  that  day  my  heart  was  opened  to  receive  Christ."  And  to 
this  hour  often  does  she  speak  with  grateful  delight  of  that  sermon,  and 
of  Mr  Pitcairn. 

An  incident  like  this  gives  a  glimpse  of  the  blessing  that  attends  on 
the  work  of  a  true  pastor.  And  Mr  Pitcairn  was  such,  during  the  twenty- 
two  years  he  laboured  there,  animated  by  zeal  for  his  Master's  glory,  and 
by  the  desire  to  win  souls.  But  his  former  years  of  business-life  were  not 
without  use  to  him.  A  man  little  knows  what  he  may  be  preparing  for 
by  what  he  passes  through  in  early  days.  Divine  wisdom  has  a  special 
view  to  the  future  in  the  secular  training  of  one  who  is  to  be  a  vessel  to 
carry  the  name  of  Christ.  Mr  Pitcairn's  experience  in  business  fitted  him 
to  be  specially  useful  in  after  years,  and  was  soon  recognised  by  his 


REV.  THOMAS  PITCAIRN. 

brctliren.  In  1837,  he  was  chosen  to  he  Clerk  to  the  Synod  of  Lothian 
and  Tweeddale.  Then  came  on  the  days  of  trial  to  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  when  the  Government  refused  to  acknowledge  her  right  to 
spiritual  independence.  When  matters  had  come  to  a  point,  the 
memorable  Convocation  was  held  at  Edinburgh,  17th  November  1842,  at 
which  were  present,  from  all  quarters  of  Scotland,  those  ministers  who 
saw  that  now  they  must  look  forward  to  a  Disruption,  since  their  liberties 
were  invaded.  Above  four  hundred  and  fifty  were  present ;  they  met  in 
Roxburgh  Church.  Dr  Chalmers  was  called  to  preside,  and  after  the 
proceedings  had  been  opened  by  prayer,  the  first  step  was  to  choose  a 
clerk.  Unanimously,  Mr  Pitcairn  was  fixed  upon.  When,  next  year, 
the  Disruption  did  take  place,  with  the  same  unanimity  Mr  Pitcairn  was 
chosen,  along  with  Dr  Clason  of  Edinburgh,  to  the  Clerkship  of  the  Free 
Church  General  Assembly.  And  all  the  brethren  who  remember  him 
will  testify  to  the  fidelity,  sagacity,  and  skill,  which  characterised  his 
discharge  of  duty.  Unobtrusive,  yet  ready  to  act,  with  a  remarkable 
command  of  temper,  always  courteous  and  obliging,  he  evidently  had 
special  qualities  for  that  office.  Methodical  and  correct,  possessed  of 
firmness,  with  great  equanimity  of  spirit,  he  was  able  to  go  through 
perplexing  business  unruffled  ;  and  often  did  his  brethren  remark  to  each 
other  the  masterly  manner  in  which  he  was  able  to  minute  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Assembly.  He  was  thus  able  to  render  invaluable 
service  to  the  Church  at  that  important  juncture. 

In  the  year  of  the  Disruption,  those  of  the  people  of  Cockpen  who  left 
the  Established  Church  with  him  built  for  him  a  church  at  Bonnyrig,  in  the 
same  parish.  There  he  ministered  to  the  day  of  his  death.  He  was 
conscientiously  regular  in  his  visits  to  his  flock ;  took  much  interest  in 
the  young ;  and  was  ever  ready  to  attend  a  call  of  sickness  or  distress. 
At  the  same  time,  he  gave  his  labours  cheerfully  to  several  stations  in 
the  neighbourhood,  then  in  their  infancy,  and  held  most  brotherly 
intercourse   with   his   co-presbyters.     They  used  to  speak  of  his  coming 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

in  among  them  at  a  meeting  as  bringing  sunshine,  there  was  so  much 
of  radiant  benevolence  in  his  broad  countenance. 

In  1854,  near  the  beginning  of  the  year,  he  was  suddenly  seized  with 
what  proved  a  fatal  illness.  It  lasted  many  months.  He  had  been  a 
man  of  robust  health,  accustomed  to  the  activities  of  life  ;  yet  when  laid 
on  his  sickbed,  and  called  to  endure  a  long  and  painful  illness,  was 
upheld  in  patience  and  cheerfulness.  Even  then  he  undertook  a  public 
duty  ;  for  the  General  Assembly  having  agreed  to  send  a  Pastoral  Letter 
to  their  people  in  regard  to  the  calamities  of  pestilence  and  war,  at  that 
time  visiting  the  nations  of  Europe,  he  drew  up  the  letter  on  his  sickbed. 

"  From  week  to  week,"  says  his  brother,  "  I  found  him  enjoying  that 
true  rest  that  can  come  only  from  the  Blood  of  the  Cross."  One  day  his 
friend,  Mr  James  Crawford,  had  come  to  see  him.  Mr  Crawford  in 
conversing  with  him  had  said  that  there  was  a  grace  of  the  Spirit  which 
he  would  be  enabled  to  manifest  now  in  a  new  manner,  viz.,  that  of  being 
"patient  in  tribulation"  (Rom.  xii.  12.)  Mr  Pitcairn  very  pleasantly 
replied,  "  But  see,  Crawford,  what  is  on  each  side  of  the  '  patience.'  On 
the  one  side  is,  '  rejoicing  in  hope,'  and  on  the  other,  '  continuing  instant 
in  prayer.'      I  must  have  these  also,  for  '  patience'  is  between  them." 

He  fell  asleep  on  21st  December  1854.  When  the  Commission  of  the 
Free  Church  Assembly  met  in  March  following,  in  referring  to  the  great 
loss  they  had  sustained  by  his  death,  they  record  "the  affectionate 
respect  entertained  for  their  departed  brother;"  and  they  add  their 
conviction,  "  that,  in  no  small  measure,  the  Free  Church  has  been 
indebted  to  him  for  much  of  what  is  good  in  the  tone  and  character 
of  the  proceedings  of  her  supreme  court,  and  in  the  general  conduct 
of  her  ecclesiastical  affairs." 

In  1836,  he  was  married  to  Miss  Trotter  of  Broomhouse,  Berwick- 
shire. She  died  in  1862.  He  left  an  only  son,  Alexander  Young  Pitcairn, 
VV.S.,  Edinburgh.  He  is  buried  in  the  Grange  Cemetery,  Edinburgh,  in 
hope  of  the  Resurrection  of  the  Just  and  the  Crown  of  Life.      A.  A.  B. 


lobnt  laing,  ©.©. 


OBERT  RAINY,  D.D.,  Principal  and  Professor  of  Church 
History  in  the  New  College,  Edinburgh,  was  born 
in  Glasgow,  on  ist  January  1826.  His  father,  Dr 
Harry  Rainy,  for  many  years  Professor  of  Medical 
Jurisprudence  in  the  Glasgow  University,  was  the  son 
of  Mr  Rainy,  minister  of  the  parish  of  Creich,  in 
Suthcrlandshirc  ;  while  Principal  Rainy  is  also  connected  with  the  North 
Highlands  through  his  mother,  a  daughter  of  Captain  Gordon,  Inver- 
carron.  He  had,  of  course,  no  active  part  in  the  Disruption,  being  then 
only  seventeen  years  old,  and  was,  indeed,  at  the  time  studying  in  prepar- 
ation for  his  father's  profession  of  medicine.  But  in  that  year  (1843),  Dr 
Harry  Rainy  was  surprised  by  an  intimation  from  his  eldest  son  that  he 
wished  to  change  the  destination  of  his  studies,  and  to  cast  in  his  lot  with 
the  outed  ministers  of  the  Free  Church.  The  father's  whole  heart  was 
with  the  same  cause,  but  he  promptly  replied  that  it  should  never  be 
said  that  a  son  of  his  had  changed  his  profession  in  a  fit  of  enthusiasm. 
"  Go  back  to  your  studies,"  he  added,  "  and  if  you  have  anything  to  say 
to  me  a  year  after  this,  I  shall  be  willing  to  hear  it."  His  son  quietly 
went  back  to  his  medical  studies,  and  a  year  after  returned  to  his  father 
with  an  unchanged  resolve,  now  gladly  sanctioned.  After  a  distinguished 
course  at  the  Glasgow  University  and  at  the  Edinburgh  New  College, 
Mr  Robert  Rainy  became  minister  of  the  Free  Church  at  Huntly  in 


D/SKUPJIOX  WO R7 HIES. 

185 1,  of  the  Free  High  Church,  Edinburgh,  in  1854,  Professor  of  Church 
Historj-  in  the  New  College  in  1862,  and  Principal  of  the  same  institution 
in  1874  He  was  appointed  to  this  last  office  in  succession  to  Dr 
Candlish,  and  that  at  a  time  when  men  like  Dr  Duff  and  Dr  Robert 
Buchanan,  the  veterans  of  a  former  generation,  yet  survived.  But  Dr. 
Duff,  in  a  letter  so  honourable  to  himself  that  it  should  not  be  forgotten, 
wrote  immediately  as  to  the  vacancy,  "  I  never  had  but  one  thought 
as  to  who  ought  to  be  appointed,  and  that  is  Dr  Rainy— as  in  every 
respect,  from  age,  experience,  services,  &c.  &c.,  the  best  fitted  for  the 
office."  And  on  receipt  of  this  letter,  Dr  Buchanan  himself  proposed 
in  his  Presbytery  what  afterwards  became,  on  the  motion  of  Sir 
Henry  Moncreiff,  the  finding  of  the  General  Assembly. 

During  the  later  years  of  his  course,  Principal  Rainy  has  become, 
more  perhaps  than  any  single  man  in  the  Free  Church,  the  trusted 
counsellor  of  his  brethren  in  the  General  Assemblies,  and  the  accepted 
representative  of  the  body  with  those  outside.  Such  a  position,  even 
under  the  free  Presbyterian  constitution,  is  seldom  so  early  conceded 
to  mere  eminence  in  personal  gifts.  In  the  present  case  it  has  been  also 
a  visible  inheritance  from  not  a  few  of  the  great  men  who  founded  and 
built  up  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland. 

Dr  Harry  Rainy  was  an  elder  of  Dr  Chalmers  in  St  John's,  and  his  son 
shared  in  earlj'  years  the  friendship  which  Dr  Chalmers  cherished  for  the 
father  and  a  large  family  connection.  The  power  over  him  of  the  highest 
and  most  attractive  things  in  the  character  of  Dr  Chalmers  is  testified 
to  in  a  remarkably  beautiful  passage  of  the  third  lecture  on  the  Church 
of  Scotland,  delivered  in  answer  to  Dean  Stanley.  But  these  and  other 
early  external  influences  were  no  doubt  merged  in  that  exercised  upon 
the  subject  of  our  notice  by  his  own  father — a  man  of  great  originality  of 
mind,  fervour  of  heart,  and  nobility  of  character.  Dr  Chalmers,  too,  died 
so  early  as  1 847  ;  but  another  leader  of  the  Free  Church  who  was  a  friend 
both  of  Principal  Rain}'  and  of  hi^  father — viz.,  Dr  Robert  Buchanan — 


ROBERT  RAINY,  D.D. 

survived  almost  all  his  contemporaries,  and  saw  the  boy  whose  career 
he  had  long  affectionately  watched  established  in  a  succession  of  the 
highest  usefulness.  During  the  interval  between  Dr  Candlish's  death  in 
1873,  and  his  own,  Dr  Buchanan,  one  of  the  wisest  administrators 
that  Scotland  has  ever  seen,  was  also  the  most  trusted  guide  whom  the 
Free  Church  possessed.  But  those  who  watched  him  narrowly  knew 
that  his  physical  strength  was  failing,  and  it  was  touching  to  see  how 
now,  even  more  than  in  previous  years,  he  took  every  opportunity  ot 
devolving  upon  the  Edinburgh  Professor  of  Church  History  the  harder 
questions  with  regard  to  which  the  General  Assembly  looked  to  himself 
for  counsel. 

The  man,  however,  whose  influence  has  been  most  visibly  traceable 
in  Dr  Rainy's  work  hitherto  is  Dr  William  Cunningham.  Rainy  is  said 
to  have  been  declared  by  him  his  favourite  pupil ;  and  on  the  death  of 
Dr  Robert  Gordon,  while  the  three  New  College  professors  who  sat  in 
that  session,  Dr  Cunningham,  Dr  James  Buchanan,  and  Dr  Banncrman, 
united  in  ardently  recommending  the  minister  of  Huntly  as  the  best 
successor,  Dr  Cunningham  took  the  leading  part  in  the  transaction. 
Hence  a  renewal  of  the  old  connection  between  them,  confirmed  by 
association  in  public  matters,  for  it  was  in  support  of  Mr  Rainy's  motion 
on  the  Victoria  Union  that  Dr  Cunningham  made  his  last,  and  as 
Dr  Candlish  used  always  to  declare,  his  greatest  speech.  The  relation 
lasted  until  the  young  minister  was  called  to  warn  the  out-wearied 
master  of  theology  that  he  had  but  a  few  hours  to  live,  and  to  receive 
and  record  his  latest  expressions  of  personal  trust  in  Christ.  Nor  was 
even  this  the  close  of  the  connection  between  them.  Dr  Rainy  was  at 
once  elected  Dr  Cunningham's  successor  in  the  Chair  of  Church  History, 
and  in  the  year  1 871  he  completed  and  published  the  life  of  his  illustrious 
predecessor.  This  work,  from  the  eighteenth  chapter  on  "  The  Church 
and  Public  Questions  "  onwards,  is  an  analysis  and  record  of  the  new 
.  problems  into  which  the  Disestablished  Church  necessarily  drifted,  and  a 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

powerful  vindication  of  Dr  Cunningham's  application  of  the  old  principles 
to  the  new  facts.  It  will  be  invaluable  in  future  as  a  piece  of  philosophi- 
cal history,  written  almost  contemporaneously,  and  although  the  exposi- 
tion of  the  line  taken  by  the  Free  Church  under  Dr  Cunningham's 
guidance  is  strictly  confined  to  the  questions  which  emerged  before  his 
death,  it  is  evident  that,  in  the  view  of  his  biographer,  its  history,  since 
that  date,  amid  still  newer  facts,  has  been  a  prolongation  of  the  same 
course  under  the  same  principles.  But  Dr  Cunningham's  principles  are 
not  the  only  things  which  Dr  Rainy  is  alleged  to  have  inherited.  A  good 
deal  in  his  mental  habit  and  manner,  especially  as  these  come  out  in 
debate,  are  plainly  derived  from  the  same  source.  There  are  in  his  speak- 
ing a  curtness  and  drjmess,  a  love  of  abstract  statement,  and  an  abstinence 
from  popular  illustration,  all  of  which  seem  to  be  the  fruit  of  admiring 
imitation.  And  there  are  some  results  more  advantageous.  An  English 
Quarterly  traces,  in  part  at  least,  to  the  same  source,  "the  somewhat 
scornful  candour  with  which  Dr  Rainy  declines  to  snatch  a  cheap  or 
premature  victory,  and  among  a  nation  of  '  dogmatical  word-warriors,' 
tosses  aside  even  legitimate  advantages  in  debate.  You  are  pretty  sure 
to  hear  him  state  the  case  for  the  men  on  the  opposite  side  more  power- 
fully and  persuasively  than  they  themselves  will  do  it ;  and  if  he  chooses 
to  attempt  an  answer  he  is  quite  certain  to  give  one,  not  barely  conclusive, 
but  with  a  broad  margin  of  reason  over  what  is  technically  necessary." 
This  is  Dr  Cunningham  all  over ;  but  the  same  paper  goes  on  to  state 
a  contrast  in  rme  point  between  the  mental  tendencies  of  the  two  men. 
"  Cunningham's  mind  was  logical  and  doctrinal,  and  loved  to  deal  simply 
with  the  status  qii(Bstio7iis.  Rainy's  is  historical  and  formative,  and 
moves  in  the  region  of  dynamics.  The  latter  is  of  course  the  proper 
temperament  for  a  statesman.  Hence,  however,  a  mental  circumspection 
and  roundaboutness,  as  of  one  instinctively  providing  for  future  develop- 
ments and  possibilities,  which  spread  a  haze  and  film  over  his  speeches. 
But  hence,  also,  a  most  instructive  originality,  partly  impressing  you  in 


Roni-RT  RAjyy.  d.d. 

the  uncommon  use  ol  common  words,  which  so  used  become  loaded 
with  meaning,  and  partly  in  the  careless  rough-hewing  of  the  whole  idea 
as  the  speech  goes  on.  And  beneath  both  there  is  a  certain  moral 
thoughtfulness  and  conscientiousness  even  of  the  intellect,  which  makes 
each  exposition  rich  and  strengthening,  even  to  those  who  care  nothing 
for  the  subject.  All  this,  under  a  youthful  appearance  and  a  statuesque 
coolness  and  self-repression,  against  which  the  Celtic  fire  within  heaves 
in  vain."  * 

But  the  Disruption  Father  whose  connection  with  Principal  Rainy 
became  most  intimate  and  affectionate  was  unquestionably  Dr  Candlish. 
On  two  most  important  occasions  in  the  later  history  of  the  Church, 
Dr  Candlish,  after  giving  notice  to  the  Assembly  of  the  motion  he  was 
to  propose,  devolved  it  at  the  shortest  notice  upon  his  young  brother. 
The  first  of  these  was  the  Glasgow  Students'  case  in  1859,  when  a 
maiden  Assembly  speech  of  extraordinary  power  from  Mr  Rainy 
practically  settled  that  grave  and  difficult  question.  The  second  was 
in  1867,  when,  after  the  Union  question  had  gone  on  for  five  years, 
Dr  Rainy,  "speaking  for  the  first  time  in  any  Church  Court  on  this 
subject,"  accepted  and  enforced  the  view  which  Dr  Candlish  had  from 
1863  expounded  and  urged.  Henceforth  the  two  men,  the  older  and 
younger,  were  associated  on  this  subject  as  on  others  till  its  close.  It 
was  Dr  Robert  Buchanan  and  Dr  Robert  Rainy  (as  the  former  of  the 
two  told  the  writer),  who,  on  the  afternoon  of  28th  May,  1873,  went 
down  from  the  Assembly  to  Dr  Robert  Candlish's  house,  and  finding  that 
the  latter  had  gone  to  bed,  after  having  that  forenoon  tabled  what  he 
intended  as  an  ultimatum  on  the  Mutual  Eligibility  question,  wakened 
him,  and  suggested  to  him  yet  another  modification.  Dr.  Candlish,  not 
without  difficulty,  consented  to  propose  this  in  the  evening,  and  the 
instantaneous    acceptance  of   it    is   understood    to   have   prevented   a 

•The  British  Quarterly  Review.  July,  1872.  P.  134.  On  the  "Ecclesiastical 
Tournament"  between  Dean  Stanley  and  Dr  Rainy. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

secession  which  would  otherwise  that  night  have  taken  place.  Next 
day  Dr  CandHsh  took  leave  of  this  great  question  by  placing  on  the 
records  of  the  Assembly  his  view  of  the  duty  of  the  Free  Church  to  it ; 
and  henceforth  he  took  no  more  to  do  with  general  Church  matters. 
But  from  this  till  his  death,  the  relation  of  Dr  Rainy  to  him  and  his 
congregation,  as  "  a  son  with  him  in  the  Gospel,"  was  closer  than  before — 
a  relation  only  closed  by  his  receiving  from  Dr  Candlish  on  his  death-bed 
a  last  legacy  of  counsel  and  confidence. 

But  Principal  Rainy  has  already  had  great  tasks  laid  upon  him 
other  than  those  which  he  wrought  out  in  the  General  Assembly  and 
in  conjunction  with  older  men.  We  cannot  pass  over  his  pulpit  work. 
He  never  was  a  popular  preacher,  so  as  to  attract  Edinburgh  men 
generally  to  his  High  Church  congregation ;  yet  some  who  were  members 
of  it,  looking  back,  hold  that  all  his  subsequent  public  and  Assembly 
work  has  not  as  yet  fulfilled  the  promise  of  a  preaching  in  which 
great  masses  of  truth  were  made  one  by  being  viewed  from  the  centre 
of  things.  For  them  at  least  his  future  holds  more  than  his  past,  while 
even  of  his  past  public  work,  that  part  appears  to  them  highest  which 
appeals  most  directly  to  conscience  and  faith,  dealing  with  great 
principles  of  Church  life  rather  than  with  its  details.  Three  important 
publications  may  be  mentioned  as  falling  under  this  description.  The 
first  and  most  massive  was  the  Cunningham  Lectures  for  1873,  which, 
under  the  indistinct  title  of  the  "  Delivery  and  Development  of  Doctrine," 
treat,  with  extraordinary  power,  of  the  two  great  subjects  of  Divine 
Revelation  (the  "  delivery  "  of  doctrine  to  men  in  Scripture),  and  human 
Theology  or  creed  (the  "development"  of  doctrine  by  men  from 
Scripture).  The  volume  has  been  described  as  a  magazine  of  important 
principles  to  which  churchmen  in  Scotland  will  have  occasion  to  recur 
every  six  months  for  a  generation.  This  gift  of  opportune  wisdom 
shown  by  Principal  Rainy  in  laying  down  in  the  present  the  general 
principles  which  have  to  be  applied  to  the  most  difficult  questions  in 


ROBERI  RAJNY,  D.D. 

the  immediate  future,  even  while  he  postpones  applying  them  as  long 
as  possible,  came  out  still  more  clearly  in  another  publication.  In  the 
spring  of  1878,  he  was  engaged  to  deliver  four  lectures  in  London,  on 
a  subject  not  yet  fixed,  while  at  the  same  time  his  individual  course  at 
the  approaching  General  Assembly,  on  the  case  of  Professor  Robertson 
Smith,  was  looked  forward  to  with  great  interest  and  doubt.  He  at 
once  chose  as  his  subject  what  is  expressed  in  the  title,  "  The  Bible  and 
Criticism,"  and  before  the  meeting  of  Assembly  he  had  published  a 
small  volume,  in  which  he  faced  the  whole  general  question  of  the 
necessity  and  legitimacy  of  criticism  in  reference  to  Scripture  and 
the  books  of  Scripture.  But  perhaps  his  most  public  and  conspicuous 
service  hitherto  was  his  answer  to  Dean  Stanley.  In  January,  1872, 
the  Dean  of  Westminster  came  down  to  Scotland,  and  in  four  charming 
lectures,  ostensibly  devoted  to  the  history  and  defence  of  our  Established 
Church,  attacked  most  skilfully  the  deeper  doctrinal  and  historical 
principles  of  Presbyterian  ism.  Scarcely  had  his  challenging  voice  died 
away  when  the  trumpet  of  an  opponent  sounded  in  the  lists.  In  three 
lectures  in  the  same  Music  Hall,  Dr  Rainy  passed  over  the  same 
ground,  and  by  the  time  the  last  was  delivered,  the  immediate  influence 
of  Dean  Stanley's  bold  move  was  far  more  than  neutralised.  But 
Principal  Rainy's  three  lectures  will  be  often  re-read  and  republished 
in  Scotland  ;  occasional  as  they  were,  they  are  already  recognised  as 
the  best  defence  of  the  Presbyterian  and  Scottish  system  which  this 
century  has  produced.  "Yes,"  he  exclaims,  " Presbyterianism  is  a 
.system  for  a  free  people  that  love  a  regulated,  a  self-regulating  freedom  ; 
a  people  independent,  yet  patient,  considerate,  trusting  much  to  the 
processes  of  discussion  and  consultation,  and  more  to  the  promised  aid 
of  a  much-forgiving  and  a  watchful  Lord.  It  is  a  system  for  strong 
Churches— Churches  that  are  not  afraid  to  let  their  matters  see  the 
light  of  day— to  let  their  weakest  parts  and  their  worst  defects  be 
canvassed  before  all  men  that  they  may  be  mended.     It  is  a  system 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

foi  believing  Churches,  that  are  not  ashamed  or  afraid  to  cherish  a 
high  ideal,  and  to  speak  of  lofty  aims,  and  to  work  for  long  and  far 
results,  amid  all  the  discouragements  arising  from  sin  and  folly  in  their 
own  ranks  and  around  them.  It  is  a  system  for  catholic  Christians, 
who  wish  not  merely  to  cherish  private  idiosyncrasies,  but  to  feel  them- 
selves identified  with  the  common  cause,  while  they  cleave  directly  to 
Him  whose  cause  it  is."  And  in  a  concluding  and  very  characteristic 
passage  he  indicates  that  the  same  principles  which  strove  and  conquered 
in  the  past  must  work  among  us  still.  "We  have  to  deal  with  the 
present,  not  according  to  past  convictions,  but  according  to  present 
convictions ;  not  according  to  the  beliefs  of  our  fathers,  but  according 
to  our  own ;  we  have  to  convey,  in  so  far  as  we  represent  the  Church, 
the  message  and  the  influence  which  Christ's  Church  ought  to  convey 
to  the  men  of  our  time,  who  inherit  the  past  and  are  looking  forward 
to  the  future.  For  that  we  would  be  free  of  every  bond  except  the 
regard  we  owe  to  Christ's  word,  and  the  regard  which  He  has  appointed 
us  to  have  to  one  another's  convictions  in  shaping  our  message  and  our 
action.  That  has  never  been  an  easy  task  at  any  time.  It  is  not  likely 
to  be  an  easy  task  in  our  time." 

A.  T.  I. 


^raljam  ^pcirs. 


I  HE  subject  of  this  memoir  died  in  December  1847.  Few 
are  now  left  who  enjoyed  his  friendsliip,  and  knew  his 
many  admirable  qualities  and  lofty  character,  or  were 
personally  cognisant  of  the  great  services  which  he 
rendered  to  the  Free  Church.  A  fitting  opportunity  is 
presented,  by  this  publication,  to  preserve  a  record  of 
those  services,  and  to  recall  the  memor)-  of  one  who  pre-eminently 
deserves  to  be  kept  in  grateful  remembrance. 

Graham  Speirs  was  born  in  June  1797,  and  was  thus  cut  off  in  the  prime 
of  his  manhood.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Mr  Peter  Speirs  of  Culcrcuch, 
brother  to  Mr  Speirs  of  Elderslie  ;  and  his  mother  was  of  the  family  of 
Gartmore.  His  early  edvication  was  conducted  partly  at  the  High  School 
of  Edinburgh,  and  partly  at  a  school  in  Warwickshire,  where  he  remained 
till  December  181 1.  He  then  entered  the  Royal  Navy,  and  continued  in 
the  Naval  Service  for  five  years,  when,  directing  his  attention  to  the  study 
of  law,  he  was  called  to  the  Bar  of  Scotland  in  1820.  His  professional 
career  was  distinguished  by  steady  but  not  rapid  progress  ;  no  one,  how- 
ever, brought  into  contact  with  him  in  professional  matters,  even  at  an 
early  period,  could  doubt  that  he  must  ultimately  attain  the  highest 
eminence.  He  was  throughout  of  liberal  politics,  and  on  the  occasion  of 
the  party  attaining  to  power  in  1830,  Lord  Advocate  Jeffrey— who  fully 
estimated  his  talent'?  and  character — appointed  him  one  uf  his  Advocates- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Depute,  and  soon  afterwards  he  was  appointed  Sheriff  of  Elgin  and 
Nairn.  Subsequently,  in  1840,  on  a  vacancy  occurring  in  the  Metropolitan 
Sheriffdom,  he  was  offered  and  accepted  the  office  of  Sheriff  of  Edinburgh, 
which  he  held  until  his  death.  He  was  thus,  for  a  time  at  least,  removed 
from  practice  at  the  bar,  to  the  regret  of  his  more  intimate  friends,  who 
looked  to  him  as,  in  certain  probabilities,  sure  to  be  called  to  fill  a  still 
more  distinguished  position  of  public  usefulness. 

At  the  time  of  his  decease,  there  appeared  in  the  Witness  newspaper, 
from  the  pen  of  its  distinguished  editor,  Hugh  Miller,  a  notice,  from  which 
we  cannot  do  better  than  make  one  or  two  quotations  :— 

"  Seldom  has  a  more  melancholy  Christmas  dawned  upon  this  town  than  that  of 
1847.  The  death  of  Mr  Speirs,  which  happened  late  on  the  evening  of  the  24th, 
spread  a  gloom  and  sorrow  through  the  city  that  we  have  seldom  known  equalled.  .  .  . 
He  was  a  remarkable  man,  not  from  brilliancy  either  of  parts  or  attainments,  though 
in  both  he  was  eminent,  but  from  the  singular  combination  of  his  qualities,  and  the 
commanding  tenor  of  his  daily  life.  He  was  a  man  who  united  deep  knowledge  of  the 
world  with  the  most  active  and  earnest  religious  impression,  one  whose  manners  and 
demeanour,  as  well  as  his  birth  and  education,  commanded  respect  in  the  highest 
circles,  and  placed  him  on  terms  of  equality  with  all  stations,  and  yet  exhibited  so 
bright  and  burning  a  Christian  example,  that  even  scoffers  respected  the  light  which 
shone  in  him  with  so  much  dignity  and  constancy.  Consistent,  imperturbable,  of  great 
discretion,  conscientious,  and  yet  tolerant,  he  held  a  course  of  uncompromising  courage 
and  honesty,  and  yet  seldom  lost  a  friend  or  made  an  enemy." 

To  this  truthful  portrait  of  the  man,  there  is  little  to  add,  but  we 
cannot  refrain  from  adverting  to  similar  testimony  to  be  found  in  the 
recently  published  (1874)  Journal  of  Lord  Cockburn.  Amid  the  graphic 
and  racy  descriptions  of  events  and  delineations  of  character  with 
which  these  volumes,  like  their  predecessor  ("  Memorials  of  his  Times  "), 
abound,  there  is  none  so  life-like  as  the  following,  written  in  1843 : — 

"  The  apostolic  Speirs,  whose  calm  wisdom,  and  quiet  resolution,  and  high-minded 
purity,  made  his  opinion  conclusive  with  his  friends  and  dreaded  by  his  opponents. 
He  had  no  ambition  to  be  the  flaming  sword  of  his  party,  but  in  its  keenest  hours  he 
was  the  pillar  of  light.  Amidst  all  the  keenness,  and  imputations,  and  extravagances 
of  party,  it  never  occurred  to  any  one  to  impeach  the  motives,  or  the  objects,  or  the 
sincerity  of  Graham  Speirs." 


GRAHAM  SPEIRS. 

Afterwards,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  Lord  Cockburn  says  : — 

"  Graham  Speirs,  Sheriff  of  Midlothian,  died,  to  the  great  regret  of  everybody,  but 
especially  of  the  thoughtful.  He  was  a  most  excellent  and  valuable  man,  and  of  a  sort 
of  which  we  have  few."  ..."  A  strong  Whig,  he  was  too  gentle  to  avert  any  honest 
Tory,  and  too  candid  to  encourage  any  folly  on  his  own  side  ;  and,  deeply  religious, 
those  who  are  not  so,  instead  of  being  repelled  by  any  severity,  were  attracted  by  his 
reasonableness  and  toleration."  His  early  career  in  the  Navy  is  adverted  to,  and  it  is 
added—"  From  the  moment  that  he  began  his  civil  course,  he  put  on  a  new  nature, 
and,  aided  by  his  friends  Mungo  Brown  and  John  Shaw  Stewart,  both  of  whom  pre- 
ceded him,  by  several  years,  to  the  grave,  matured  that  character  of  calm  and  resolute, 
but  gentle  honour,  and  of  pious  thoughtfulness,  that  distinguished  all  the  three." 

Just  as  this  observation  is,  we  would  rather  say  that  the  Rev.  Dr  Gordon, 
of  whose  kirk-session,  when  translated  to  the  High  Church,  Speirs  was  for 
many  years  a  member,  had  fully  more  influence  in  moulding  his  character 
and  views,  as  he  certainly  had  with  others  of  the  same  class  and  standing. 
Between  them,  indeed,  there  was  a  remarkable  similarity — the  same 
gravity  of  manner ;  the  same  wisdom  and  sagacity  in  counsel ;  and  the 
same  reticent  demeanour, — but  not  the  less  prompt  and  decided  in  action 
in  matters  of  conscience  and  of  duty.  No  one  who  knew  that  truly  excel- 
lent and  admirable  divine,  can  wonder  at  the  power  and  influence  which 
he  exercised  for  good  in  this  city,  from  the  time  when  he  first  came,  com- 
paratively a  young  man,  but  in  the  full  vigour  of  his  powerful  intellect 
and  impressive  eloquence,  to  fill  the  pulpit  of  Buccleuch  Chapel. 

But  however  this  might  be  in  Speirs'  case,  it  is  certain  that  the  di\-ine 
and  the  layman  acted  in  entire  concert  in  the  eventful  struggles  for  the 
independence  of  the  Church  and  the  rights  of  the  people  in  the  election 
of  their  ministers,  which  occurred  in  the  ten  years  which  preceded  1843. 
And  that  Speirs  did  so  from  deep  religious  conviction  of  the  truth  of  the 
principles  contended  for,  is  undeniable.  His  was  not  a  character  to  be 
swayed  by  any  other  motives  in  such  a  matter.  To  be  convinced  of  the 
rectitude  of  any  particular  course  of  conduct,  was  for  him  to  be  followed 
as  its  sure  sequence  by  active  co-operation. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Sheriff  Spcirs  was  no  mere  Churchman  ;  he  interested  himself  in 
svhatever  tended  to  the  wellbeing  of  society.  In  connection,  for  instance, 
with  Prison  reformation  and  discipHne,  he  was  an  active  member  of  the 
society  formed  in  1835  on  that  subject,  which  by  its  efforts  so  materially 
contributed  to  the  enactment  of  1839,  by  which  the  jails  of  Scotland, 
once  described  as  "  nurseries  of  vice  and  crime,"  have  been  placed  in 
their  present  satisfactoiy  condition.  In  this  work  his  associates  were  men 
of  all  classes  and  denominations — the  accomplished  Dr  Kaye  Greville, 
the  benevolent  John  Wigham  junior,  Dr  David  Maclagan,  Mr  George 
Forbes,  and  other  like-minded  citizens.  Afterwards  under  the  Statute  as 
chairman  of  the  Edinburgh  Prison  Board,  and  as  member  of  the  General 
Board  of  Prisons  in  Scotland,  Speirs  was  in  a  position  to  give  his  valuable 
aid  in  carrying  through  this  national  reform.  In  defence  of  the  observ- 
ance of  the  Sabbath,  the  establishment  of  Ragged  Schools,  and  in  the 
cause  generally  of  education,  he  was  no  less  zealous  and  useful. 

Our  purpose,  however,  is  to  record  his  connection  with  the  struggles 
which  preceded  and  followed  the  formation  of  the  Free  Church.  His 
support,  based  as  it  was  on  conscientious  principle,  ^\•as  felt  to  be  all- 
important,  and  his  advice  of  the  greatest  moment  in  the  organisation 
of  the  Church.  Nevertheless  it  is  true,  but  quite  consistent  with  what  we 
have  said  of  him,  that  his  name  does  not  occur  as  taking  a  leading  part 
in  the  discussions,  whether  in  or  out  of  the  Assembly,  until  about  the 
time  of  the  Disruption.  We  shall  refer,  however,  to  two  occasions,  as 
illustrative  of  the  leading  position  which  he  then  assumed,  and  energeti- 
cally maintained. 

The  one  was  at  the  time  of  the  Convocation  of  ministers  which 
preceded  the  Assembly  of  1843,  when  it  was  thought  right  that  the 
laymen  attached  to  the  principles  then  upheld  by  the  majority  of  the 
Assembly,  and  especially  the  eldership,  should  come  forward  and  at  once 
strengthen  the  hands  of  the  ministers,  and  provide  means  for  their  sus- 
tentation  on  the  Disruption  taking  place.     The   meeting  of  the  eldership 


GRA^A^r  speirs. 

occurred  on  the  1st  February  1843.  ^t  was  mentioned  at  the  time  in  the 
Witness  newspaper.  Speirs  proposed  the  first  resolution,  and  in  doing 
so  he  is  reported  to  have  represented  the  Church  of  Scotland  "as  she  has 
existed  since  the  Reformation,  as  by  far,  he  would  venture  to  say,  without 
any  comparison  whatever,  the  cheapest  institution  for  good  government 
that  ever  any  nation  had  to  boast  of ;  "  and  to  have  been  affected  even 
to  tears  when  he  uttered  the  words,  "  I  cannot  look  forward  without 
dismay  to  the  prospect  of  the  Disruption  of  the  Church  of  Scotland," 
which  he  so  characterised  and  loved.  The  Committee  formed  at  this 
meeting  was  united  to  another  appointed  by  the  Convocation,  under  the 
auspices  of  Dr  Chalmers.  This  most  effective  body,  organised  under 
the  title  of  the  "  Provisional  Committee,"  held  its  first  meeting  the 
following  day  ;  and  to  its  labours  the  Free  Church  mainly  owes  that 
state  of  orderly  preparation,  and  absence  of  all  division  and  confusion,  by 
which  the  days  of  the  Disruption  were  so  signally  characterised.  This 
is  fully  explained  in  Dr  Chalmers'  Life  and  Correspondence  by  Dr  Hanna. 

The  other  occasion  when  Speirs  was  of  the  utmost  service  to  the 
Church,  was  in  relation  to  sites  for  Churches  and  Manses,  in  those 
districts  where  hostile  proprietors  had  refused  the  applications  made  to 
them  in  that  matter.  It  is  known  that,  for  some  years  after  the  Dis- 
ruption, great  inconvenience  and  much  discomfort  and  suffering  was 
experienced  by  ministers  and  their  congregations  who  adhered  to  the 
Free  Church  in  those  districts.  For  a  time  the  Assembly  were  unwilling 
to  take  any  steps,  in  the  expectation  that  the  first  feelings  excited  by 
the  Disruption  might  pass  away.  But  this  expectation  not  being  realised, 
a  special  Committee  was  appointed  in  May  1845  by  the  General  Assembl>- ; 
and  that  Committee  having  reported  to  the  Assembly,  which  met  at 
Inverness  in  August  thereafter,  the  appointment  of  the  Committee  was 
renewed,  with  special  instructions  ;  and  of  this  Committee  Air  Speirs 
was  appointed  Convener. 

It  was  in  a  verbal  Report  to  the  Commission,  held  in  Edinburgh 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

19th  November  1S45,  that,  as  Convener,  Speirs  made  one  of  the  most 
effective  and  practical  speeches  ever  delivered  in  the  General  Assembly. 
In  this  he  developed  the  principles  on  which  the  Committee  had  acted, 
and  detailed  the  proceedings  in  such  a  way  as  to  command  the  "  profound 
admiration,"  and  "the  warmest  and  most  unqualified  approbation,"  of 
all  who  listened  to  his  stirring  statement.  Can  anything,  indeed,  be 
better  expressed  than  the  following  reference  to  the  abortiveness  of  the 
first  application  to  Parliament  by  the  Assembly  of  1845  : — 

"  It  is  our  duty  to  persevere  in  this  struggle.  I  regard  it  not  only  as  a  religious,  but 
as  a  constitutional,  question.  The  brunt  of  the  battle  has  fallen  on  us,  but  it  is  not 
our  own  cause  alone  for  which  we  are  contending — it  is  the  great,  the  sacred  question 
of  liberty  of  conscience  ;  and  I  am  persuaded  that  the  Church  will  only  lay  down  the 
weapons  of  her  warfare  when  the  victory  is  won."  And,  when  meeting  the  argument 
by  the  individual  site-refusing  proprietors,  based  on  the  ground  of  their  absolute  right 
of  property,  he  said  : — "  There  is  no  person  has  more  respect  for  the  rights  of  private 
property  than  I  have,  but  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  these  rights  are  peculiarly 
insecure  when  the  owners  have  merely  the  law  to  look  to  for  their  support.  I  believe 
that  property  is  best  secured  in  that  country  where  the  corresponding  duties  are  best 
performed  ;  and  I  am  not  aware  of  any  duties  so  incumbent  upon  them  as  that  of 
refraining  from  interfering  with  the  rights  of  conscience." 

For,  as  he  justly  reasoned — 

"There  is  a  kind  of  oppression  which  maketh  a  man— aye,  a  wise  man — mad.  I 
would  just  ask,  what  must  be  the  feelings  of  any  intelligent  man  who  finds  himself  in 
this  country,  on  account  and  in  respect  of  opinions  which,  as  a  Christian,  he  entertains, 
subjected  to  a  system  of  treatment  for  obeying  the  dictates  of  his  conscience,  which 
I  declare  would  be  severe, — if  that  man,  instead  of  being  a  Christian,  were  a  heathen 
idolater  ;  and  yet  such  is  the  position  in  which  many  of  our  people  are  placed." 

A  renewed  application  to  Parliament  was  made  in  the  spring  of  1847, 
and  a  select  Committee  was  then  appointed  to  inquire  in  what  parts  of 
Scotland,  and  under  what  circumstances,  sites  had  been  refused.  A 
great  deal  of  evidence  was  laid  before  the  Committee,  and,  amongst 
others,  Dr  Chalmers,  and  Mr  Speirs,  as  Convener  of  the  Sites  Com- 
mittee, were  especially  under  examination.  The  evidence  of  the  former, 
as  regards  the  cross-exainination  by  Sir  James   Graham  and  others,  is 


GRAHAM  SPEIRS. 

very  happily  explained  by  himself  in  letters  written  by  him  at  the  time, 
minutely  referred  to  by  Dr  Hanna.  The  evidence  of  the  Convener  of 
the  Sites  Committee  cannot  be  read  without  exciting  the  utmost  admi- 
ration, for  the  calm,  full,  and  satisfactory  way  in  which  he  explains  the 
course  taken  by  the  Committee,  and  meets  the  objections  with  which 
their  proceedings  were  met.  It  is  impossible  here  to  go  into  the  details 
of  that  evidence.  One  great  object  of  the  hostile  examiners  was  to 
make  out  that  there  was  so  little  difference  between  the  two  Churches, 
as  to  justify  the  site-refusing  proprietors  in  their  refusal.  We  shall  con- 
fine ourselves  to  his  answers  on  this  point,  as  illustrating  the  principles 
on  which  he  had  throughout  acted,  and  the  fearless  avowal  of  them  he 
was  ever  prepared  to  make  : — 

"  The  moving  cause  of  the  Disruption,"  he  says,  "  was  the  religious  fcchng  of  that 
part  of  the  community  who  now  constitute  the  Free  Church.  They  beheved  con- 
scientiously that  the  principles  involved  in  the  question  were  the  true  principles  of  the 
Established  Church  of  Scotland."  And  afterwards,  "  that,  according  to  my  appre- 
hension, the  great  and  cardinal  difference  between  the  two  churches  is  this— that  the 
Free  Church,  in  consistence  with  what  has  always  been  maintained  by  a  large  part  of 
the  Establishment,  and  in  consistence  with  the  doctrines  of  all  the  old  divines  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland — holds  that  she  has  a  right  of  legislating  for  herself  in  matters 
spiritual— that,  in  fact,  she  is  entitled  to  exercise  spiritual  independence  within  her 
o»vn  jurisdiction,  without  the  interference  of  the  civil  power." 

In  the  same  pamphlet  w  hich  contains  his  speech  before  the  General 
Assembly  in  1845,  to  which  we  have  referred,  is  given  the  correspondence 
which,  as  Convener  of  the  Sites  Committee,  he  maintained  with  the 
proprietors  and  their  agents.  The  calm  and  dispassionate,  but  decided 
terms  in  which,  throughout  that  correspondence,  he  contended  for  the 
constitutional  principle  of  toleration,  and  stated  the  hardships  to  which 
its  refusal  had  subjected  the  people,  had  much  practical  effect  in 
obviating  the  objections  in  some  quarters,  even  before  the  result  of  the 
Parliamentary  inquiry  and  publication  of  the  evidence.  That  result,  as 
reported  to  the  House  of  Commons,  was  that  the  Committee  held  it 
to  be  proved  that  there  were  a  number  of  Christian  congregations  in 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Scotland  who  have  no  place  of  worship  within  a  reasonable  distance  of 
their  home,  where  they  can  unite  in  the  public  service  of  Almighty  God, 
according  to  their  conscientious  convictions  of  religious  duty,  under 
convenient  shelter  from  the  severity  of  a  northern  climate.  And  the 
Committee  farther  reported  to  the  House  that  they  had  heard  with 
pleasure,  in  course  of  the  evidence,  that  concessions  had  been  made  and 
sites  granted  ;  and  they  expressed  an  earnest  hope  that  those  which 
have  hitherto  been  refused  may  no  longer  be  withheld.  Such  has  hap- 
pily been  the  case,  and  no  farther  proceedings  were  taken.  We  cannot 
doubt  that  for  this  the  Church  was  mainly  indebted  to  Graham  Speirs. 

Our  space  will  not  permit  of  the  insertion  of  some  interesting  details 
connected  with  his  death,  which  occurred  so  soon  afterwards.  During  his 
illness,  and  when  he  was  suffering  much,  on  the  name  of  Dr  Candlish  being 
mentioned  by  his  medical  attendant.  Professor  Miller,  he  said  with  anima- 
tion, "  Give  him  my  love,  and  tell  him  that  I  am  quite  happ)-.  I  know  in 
whom  I  have  believed,  and  if  He  lias  more  work  for  me  to  do.  He  can 
raise  me  up  for  a  year  or  two."  On  seeing  his  brother-in-law,  Mr  Grant 
(of  Kilgraston),  who  came  up  to  him  from  the  country  on  hearing  of  his 
danger,  he  said  with  deep  emotion,  "  I  have  suffered  much — very  much 
— but  all  is  right."  In  his  anticipation  of  death  he  was  singularly 
resigned  and  peaceful.  Surely  of  such  a  man  it  may  be  truly  said, 
"  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord." 

On  the  30th  December  his  remains  were  laid  in  the  Grange  cemetcr\% 
near  the  grave  of  Dr  Chalmer.'^,  in  accordance,  it  is  understood,  with 
his  own  request. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  General  Assembly  held  in  May  1848,  a 
resolution  was  engrossed  in  the  minutes,  expressing  in  very  strong  terms 
their  sense  of  the  loss  which  the  Church  had  sustained  in  Mr  Speirs' 
death,  and  the  high  and  affectionate  regard  which  they  entertained  for 
his  memory. 

J.C. 


lUh.  ^Inmhtt  ^Uiaaxt 


LKXANDllR  STEWART  was  bom  in  the  Manse  of 
Moulin,  Perthshire,  of  which  parish  his  father,  the  late 
Dr  Alexander  SteAvart,  was  then  minister,  as  he  after- 
wards was  of  the  parish  of  DingAvall,  Ross-shire,  and 
ultimately  of  the  parish  of  Canongate,  Edinburgh. 
His  family  were  from  Argyleshire — of  the  Stewarts  of 
Appin — one  of  the  oldest  houses  of  that  county.  Dr  Stewart  was 
eminent  in  his  day  as  a  minister  whom  God  greatly  honoured,  after  he 
had  himself  become  a  living  witness  to  the  power  of  divine  truth,  by 
making  him  the  instrument  of  an  extensive  awakening  in  the  district  of 
country  in  which  his  lot  was  then  cast.  He  was  distinguished,  also,  in 
the  world  of  literature— his  grammar  of  the  Gaelic  language  giving 
evidence  of  his  scholarly  attainments,  and  indicating  the  eminence  to 
which  he  might  have  risen  had  he  given  himself  to  literary  pursuits. 

The  subject  of  our  memoir  was,  in  the  first  instance,  educated  in  the 
Moulin  Parish  School,  and  thereafter  at  the  Tain  Academy.  Subsequently 
he  became  a  student  of  King's  College,  Old  Aberdeen,  where  he  continued 
for  two  sessions.  Then,  being  considered  sufficiently  educated  for  enter- 
ing on  the  business  of  life  in  the  line  chosen  for  him,  he  first  became  a 
clerk  in  a  house  at  Perth,  and  thereafter  in  a  house  in  London.  Whilst 
resident  in  the  metropolis,  he  attended  the  ministry  of  Mr  George 
Clayton,  the  word  preaclied  li)-  whoni  God  was  pleased  to  make  effectual 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

for  his  spiritual  illumination  and  saving  conversion.  When  it  pleased 
God  thus  to  call  him  by  His  grace— the  way  for  the  change  in  his 
prospects  for  life  which  he  desired  having  been  wondrously  opened  to 
him — he  resolved,  with  the  consent  of  his  father  and  other  relations,  to 
resume  his  university  studies,  now  with  a  \iew  to  the  ministry.  His 
paternal  aunt  being  resident  in  Glasgow,  he  came  there,  and  was  enrolled 
a  student  of  the  college  of  that  city.  During  his  course  there,  he  sought 
no  distinction,  but  shrank  instinctively,  with  provoking  sensitiveness,  from 
any  notice  of  a  public  kind  which  at  any  time  was  taken  of  him.  Yet  he 
did  not  escape  observation,  as  the  suffrages  of  his  fellow-students  on 
more  than  one  occasion,  in  awarding  him  prizes,  gave  evidence.  In  the 
Divinity  Hall,  as  a  student  with  Dr  M'Gill,  he  was  more  especially 
noticed,  where  he  raised  expectations  in  the  minds  of  those  who  knew 
him  well,  which  were  more  than  realized  in  after  life. 

From  the  date  of  his  first  appearance  in  the  pulpit,  he  became 
eminent  as  a  preacher.  The  attention  of  the  first  ministers  of  his  time 
was  attracted  to  him.  It  is  well  kno\\n  by  his  contemporaries  that  Dr 
Chalmers,  after  hearing  him,  was  so  impressed  with  his  pulpit  powers, 
that  he  used  every  influence  with  him  to  gain  his  consent  to  be  nomi- 
nated as  his  successor  in  the  great  church  and  parish  of  St  John's, 
Glasgow,  from  which  he  was  about,  himself,  to  be  removed  to  the  Moral 
Philosophy  Chair,  St  Andrews.  In  this  Dr  Chalmers  was  unquestionably 
right,  though  it  may  seem  to  be  a  bold  thing  to  say  so,  considering  only 
Mr  Stewart's  high  talents  and  attainments,  whilst  not  taking  into  account 
his  bodily  constitution  and  mental  temperament.  These  made  the 
proposal  one  not  to  be  entertained.  That  the  proposal  should  have 
been  made  was,  perhaps,  the  most  marked  testimony,  in  evidence  of  the 
appreciation  of  Mr  Stewart's  qualifications  as  a  young  minister  of  the 
gospel,  which  he  could  have  received.  His  natural  diffidence  and  self- 
distrust  made  him  shrink  from  contemplating  the  proposal,  or  allowing 
it  to  become  \\\\X\  him  a  matter  of  serious  consideration  at  all  ;  the  friends 


REV.  ALEXANDER  STEWART. 

who  knew  him  best,  whilst  they  regretted  the  occasion,  approved  of  the 
course  which  he  adopted  in  so  acting. 

Mr  Stewart  was  h'censed  to  preacli  the  gospel  early  in  1823  by  the 
Presbytery  of  Lorn,  Argyleshire.  His  preliminary  trials,  with  a  view  to 
license,  were  taken  by  the  Presbytery  of  Glasgow.  He  passed  the  Synod 
of  Glasgow  and  Ayr,  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  the  Church  in  such 
cases,  and  thereafter  obtained  a  transference  of  the  remaining  portion  of 
his  trials  to  the  Presbytery  of  Lorn.  He  was  a  Gaelic-speaking  student, 
and  desired  to  devote  himself  to  the  Highlands,  as  well  became  the  son 
of  a  father  eminent  alike  for  piety  and  for  critical  knowledge  of  the 
mountain  tongue.  Buried  in  the  seclusion  of  a  remote  Highland  glen, 
selected  by  him  as  a  district  where  the  sound  of  no  English  word  was 
ever  heard,  he  devoted  himself,  with  his  usual  ardent  student  habits,  to 
acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  idioms  of  the  Gaelic,  and  the  power 
of  familiar,  ready  expression  therein.  His  success  was  what  might  be 
expected  ;  and  at  the  end  of  his  year  of  hermit  life,  he  came  forth  from 
his  seclusion  thoroughly  versed  in  all  that  he  had  sought  to  acquire. 

He  was  soon  summoned  to  stated  occupation  in  his  holy  calling.  In 
November  1823  he  was  chosen  to  be  the  minister  of  the  Chapel  of  Ease, 
Rothesay,  where  the  Sabbath  services  were  half  in  Gaelic  and  half  in 
English.  His  period  here  was,  however,  short,  as  was  also  the  use  of  his 
acquired  tongue.  A  presentation  to  the  parish  of  Cromarty,  in  course  of 
the  year  in  which  he  was  ordained  at  Rothesay,  which  he  saw  it  his  duty 
to  accept,  changed,  after  a  short  but  highly  valued  ministry  in  the  West 
Highlands,  the  sphere  of  his  labours.  At  Cromarty  he  was  not  required 
to  preach  in  Gaelic,  but  as  the  town  is  situated  in  a  Highland  district, 
and  as  he  was  there  in  charge  of  a  large  Highland  population,  his 
knowledge  of  the  language  was  of  much  value.  From  Cromarty  he  never 
removed.  The  seclusion  which  he  enjoyed,  or  which  he  fancied  he 
enjoyed,  in  that  ancient  burgh,  was  to  his  mind  very  congenial.  He  used 
to  hug  himself  in  the  thought  tliat  he  had  got  hid  from  the  great  world. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

It  was  a  vain  fancy.  "  I  have  got  into  the  toe  of  the  hose,"  he  used  to 
say  with  much  glee,  referring  to  the  Black  Isle,  from  its  shape,  as  the 
hose, — and  to  Cromarty,  lying  at  the  extreme  point  of  that  bleak  wilder- 
ness track  of  cheerless  moorland,  as  the  toe.  Abundant  testimony  has 
been  borne,  though  the  half  may  not  have  been  told,  to  his  course  there ; 
to  his  "  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  ;"  his  most  painstaking  study 
of  the  word  of  God ;  his  success,  numbering  such  men  as  Hugh  Miller 
among  his  converts ;  his  attractiveness  in  drawing  many  warm  hearts  to 
him,  and  in  making  himself  to  be  beloved  by  all  to  whom  he  ministered, 
all  the  days  of  his  life,  till  the  end  came. 

Of  him  Miller  has  written  : — 

"One  of  the  most  striking  characteristics  of  INIr  Stewart's  originality  was  the 
solidity  of  the  truths  which  it  always  evolved.  His  was  not  the  ability  of  opening  up 
new  vistas  in  which  all  was  unfamiliar,  simply  because  the  direction  in  which  they  led 
was  one  in  which  men's  thoughts  had  no  occasion  to  travel,  and  no  business  to  perform. 
It  was,  on  the  contrary,  the  greatly  higher  ability  of  enlarging,  widening,  and  lengthen- 
ing the  avenues  long  before  opened  up  on  important  truths,  and,  in  consequence, 
enabling  men  to  see  new  and  unwonted  objects  in  old  familiar  directions.  That  in 
which  he  excelled  all  men  we  ever  knew,  was  the  analogical  faculty— the  power  of 
detecting  and  demonstrating  occult  resemblances.  He  could  read  off  as  if  by 
intuition — not  by  snatches  and  fragments,  but  as  a  consecutive  whole — that  old  revela- 
tion of  type  and  symbol  which  God  first  gave  to  man  ;  and  when  privileged  to  listen 
to  him,  we  have  been  constrained  to  recognise,  in  the  evident  integrity  of  the  reading 
and  the  profound  and  consistent  theological  system  which  the  pictorial  record  con- 
veyed, a  demonstration  of  the  divinity  of  its  origin  not  less  powerful  and  convincing 
than  the  demonstration  of  the  other  and  more  familiar  departments  of  the  Christian 
evidences.  Compared  with  other  theologians  in  this  department,  we  have  felt  under 
his  ministry  as  if— when  admitted  to  the  company  of  some  party  of  modern  savaus 
employed  in  deciphering  a  hieroglyphic-covered  obelisk  of  the  desert,  and  here  suc- 
cessful in  discovering  the  meaning  of  an  insulated  sign  and  there  of  a  detached 
symbol — we  had  been  suddenly  joined  by  some  sage  of  the  olden  time,  to  whom  the 
mysterious  inscription  was  but  a  piece  of  common  language  written  in  a  familiar 
alphabet,  and  who  could  read  off  fluently  and  as  a  whole  what  the  others  could  but 
darkly  and  painfully  guess  at  in  detached  and  broken  parts." 

Of  this  magnificent  preacher's  manner  in  his  public  appearances, 
another  friend,  for  quoting  at  large  from  whom  we  make  no  apology, 
writes  : — 

«8 


REK  ALEXANDER  STEWART. 

"  I  sec  him  enter  the  pulpit  with  a  solemnity  of  nspect  \vhich  is  the  fruit  of  real 
feelmg.  He  is  a  tall,  clumsily-made  man— fivc-feet-elcven,  at  least.  The  outline  of 
his  figure  is  more  that  of  the  female  than  the  male.  His  limbs  are  full  and  round. 
There  is  a  little  tendency  to  stoop  ;  a  little  tendency,  too,  to  corpulence,  but  very  little. 
His  chest  is  well  thrown  out,  his  shoulders  are  somewhat  raised,  and  his  neck  is  short. 
The  head  is  a  curiosity.  It  is  nearly  round,  with  a  sort  of  wrench  to  one  side.  It 
rises  high,  being  well  developed  in  a  circular  arch  above  his  cars,  which  arc  small  and 
beautifully  formed.  It  is  covered  with  thick-set  hair  of  a  lightish  sandy  colour,  which 
invades  the  brow,  covers  the  temples,  and  reaches  to  within  an  inch-and-half  of  the 
eyebrows  on  all  sides.  Instead  of  being  brushed  down  in  the  direction  of  its  natural 
set.  It  is  brushed  up,  to  clear  it  off  the  short  brow,  and  so  stands  like  a  peak  at  right 
angles  with  the  brow.  The  noble  dimensions  of  that  portion  of  the  head  are  wholly 
concealed,  and  the  effect,  at  first  sight,  on  the  beholder  is  not,  certainly,  to  make  him 
e-xpect  any  depth  of  intellectual  power,  but  the  reverse.  The  eyebrows  are  not  large 
nor  expanded,  but  they  rise  a  little  at  the  extremities  towards  the  temples.  The  nose 
IS  beautifully  formed  ;  large,  but  not  too  large,  aquiline  and  symmetrical,  as  if  cut  with 
the  chisel.  The  eyes  are  small,  grey,  rather  deep  set,  sparkling,  and  expressive.  The 
mouth  is  large,  the  line  of  the  lips,  which  are  thin,  being  beautifully  curved.  The  lips 
shut  easily,  and  look  as  if  they  had  a  superabundance  of  longitude.  The  chin  is 
rather  long,  and  is  in  a  slight  degree  peaked,  but  is  neither  retiring  nor  protruding. 
The  skin  is  smooth,  as  that  of  early  youth.  The  cheeks  are  not  large.  Taking  it  all 
in  all,  it  is  a  handsome,  though  most  uncommon,  head  and  face.  I  have  never  seen 
anything  to  compare  with  it. 

"  Well,  he  enters  the  pulpit,  and  after  a  moment's  pause  rises  to  read  the  psalm.  It 
is  not  a  female  voice,  and  yet  it  is  not  the  rough  voice  of  a  man  of  his  size  and  form. 
It  is  deep,  clear,  solemn,  sweet,  fiexiblc,  and  of  great  compass.  Every  word  is  uttered 
as  if  the  speaker  felt  himself  standing  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  in  sight  of  the 
throne,  and  as  if  he  desired  all  should  feel  the  same.  The  emphasis  is  so  laid  in  reading 
the  psalm,  as  to  bring  out  a  meaning  I  had  never  discovered.  His  prayer  is  simplicity 
itself  ;  a  child  can  comprehend  every  word,  yet  his  thoughts  are  of  the  richest ;  whilst 
Scripture  phraseology,  employed  and  applied  as  I  never  heard  it  in  another,  clothes 
them  all.  By  the  time  the  prayer  is  ended,  I  have  been  instructed  and  edified.  I 
have  received  views  of  truth  I  had  not  possessed  before,  and  have  had  awakened 
feelings  which  have  set  me  on  edge  for  the  sermon,  and  which  I  desire  to  cherish  for 
ever.  The  sermon  comes.  It  seems  to  be  a  most  deeply  interesting  and  animated 
conversation  on  a  common  topic.  '  We  ought  to  think  like  great  men,  and  speak 
like  the  common  people,'  appears  to  be  the  maxim  which  regulates  the  style.  The 
manner  is  that  of  one  who  converses  with  a  friend,  and  who  has  chosen  a  subject  by 
the  discussion  of  which  he  desires,  from  his  inmost  soul,  to  do  him  good.  Illustration 
follows  illustration  in  rapid  succession,  shedding  light  on  his  doctrine,  and  confirming 
it.  Sometimes  the  illustrations  seem  puerile,  scarcely  dignified  enough  for  the  pulpit, 
but  that  impression  lasts  only  for  a  moment.  Some  Scripture  allusion,  or  Scripture 
([uotation,  reveals  the  source  from  which  they  have  been  drawn  ;  and  I  am  filled  with 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

admiration  of  the  genius  which  has  discovered  what  I  never  discovered,  and  has 
made  a  use  of  the  discovery,  which  I  think  I  and  every  man  should  have  made,  but 
which  I  never  did.  Scarcely  any  gesture  is  employed.  One  hand  rests  usually  on  the 
open  Bible.  The  other  is  sometimes  quietly  raised,  and  its  impressive,  short  motion 
gives  emphasis  to  the  earnest  words  which  are  being  spoken.  The  earnestness  seems 
under  severe  control.  It  looks  as  if  the  speaker  desired  to  conceal  the  emotion  of  his 
heart  in  speaking  for  Christ  to  sinners— as  if  he  thought  noise  and  gesticulation  un- 
becoming. The  eyelids  grow  red,  the  tears  apparently  struggle  to  escape,  but  no  tear 
comes.  A  pink  spot,  almost  a  hectic  flush— but  it  is  not  so— appears  like  the  reflec- 
tion of  an  evening  sunbeam  on  the  cheek.  Some  burning  words  clothe  some  fine 
thought,  which  seems  to  come  fresh  from  heaven  ;  and  the  speaker,  as  I  think,  half 
ashamed  of  the  emotion  which  he  has  manifested,  and  which  he  has  sensibly  com- 
municated to  his  hearers,  returns  to  the  calm  manner  from  which  he  had  for  an  instant 
departed,  only,  however,  to  be  enticed  from  it  again  and  again,  yielding  as  if  by  com- 
pulsion to  the  inspiration  which  ever  revisits  him.  So  he  proceeds,  until,  to  my  deep 
regret,  he  closes  his  wonderful  discourse,  which  has  extended  long  beyond  the  hour." 

Mr  Stewart  continued  minister  of  Cromarty  till  his  death.  At  the 
Disruption  he,  of  course,  joined  his  brethren  and  abandoned  his  con- 
nection with  the  State,  abjuring  the  new  ecclesiastical  Establishment. 
He  never  made  himself  prominent  in  the  discussions  which,  in  his  time^ 
filled  the  land.  His  local  influence  was  great.  Speeches  by  him  in  his 
Presbytery  and  Synod  were  described  by  those  who  heard  them  as  some- 
thing unlike  any  that  other  men  had  ever  spoken.  But  on  no  occasion 
during  his  ministry  did  he  open  his  mouth  in  the  General  Assembly  of  the 
Church.  He  did  not  feel  it  to  be  required.  He  did  not  think  it  would 
have  been  useful.  All  that  he  could  say  he  heard  spoken  by  others,  and, 
as  he  thought,  better  spoken  than  it  could  have  been  by  him,  and  there- 
fore he  did  not  speak.  This  is  not  to  be  justified.  Could  he  have  over- 
come, as  he  might  have  done,  his  native  timidity  and  want  of  self- 
possession  ;  could  he  have  roused  himself  to  the  effort,  or  had  conscience 
impelled  him  to  put  himself  forward  as  a  public  speaker,  he  would  not 
have  stood  second  to  any  in  the  ranks  of  those  wonderful  men  whom 
God  raised  up  for  His  work  in  Scotland  in  his  time.  He  believed  that 
he  could  be  useful  in  the  provinces ;  he  believed  that  he  was  required  to 
take  part  in   the  discussions  there — that  the  great  cause  might  suffer  if 


REV.  ALEXANDER  STEWART. 

he  declined  to  do  so  ;  and,  therefore,  on  wisely  selected  occasions,  he 
delivered  speeches  that  were  admitted  to  be  of  the  very  highest  order  of 
oratory,  for  wisdom,  beauty,  and  power. 

It  would  have  been  in  vain,  eveiy  one  knew,  to  propose  to  Mr  Stewart 
a  change  in  his  field  of  labour,  at  any  time  during  his  life  at  Cromarty,  in 
anything  like  ordinary  circumstances.  But  when,  in  1847,  the  lamented 
death  of  Dr  Chalmers,  and  the  advancement,  consequent  on  that  event, 
of  Dr  Candlish  to  a  chair  in  the  New  College,  created  a  vacancy  in  St 
George's,  the  minds  of  all  friends  of  the  Church  turned  to  the  distin- 
guished subject  of  this  memoir,  as  the  man  who  should  succeed  the  great 
preacher  of  the  day  in  that  pulpit.  It  need  hardly  be  narrated  that  this 
proposal  was  not  welcome  to  Mr  Stewart.  It  created  an  excitement 
calculated  to  affect  injuriously  a  mind  sensitive  and  shrinking  to  a  fault, 
inhabiting  a  body  Avhich  took  its  character  but  too  much  from  his  natural 
temperament.  Earnest  representations  and  urgent  solicitations  at  length 
appeared  to  prevail  with  him.  The  late  Dr  Robert  Buchanan,  of  Glasgow, 
was  one  ot  the  Commissioners  sent  to  the  north  to  prosecute  the  call  by 
the  congregation  of  St  George's.  When  the  business  in  the  Presbytery  of 
Chanonry  in  this  matter  was  ended,  as  the  two  friends  walked  along  the 
street,  perceiving  the  downcast  appearance  of  his  companion,  and  ex- 
pressing regret,  Dr  Buchanan  said,  "  You  look  as  if  you  were  carrying  a 
millstone  on  your  back."  "  No,  Dr  Buchanan,"  was  the  reply,  "  I  am  not 
carrying  a  millstone,  but  I  am  carrj'ing  my  gravestone  on  my  back."  His 
words  proved  but  too  true.  An  attack  of  fever  came,  and  ran  its  course. 
His  time  had  come,  and  he  knew  it.  To  his  physician  inquiring  as  to  his 
feelings,  he  said,  "I  am  going  to  die.  It  is  a  solemn  thing,  doctor,  to  die, 
and  to  meet  God  in  judgment!"  To  Christian  friends  he  declared  his 
abiding  confidence  in  the  everlasting  God,  his  Saviour ;  and  in  this  state 
he  quietly  fell  asleep  in  Jesus,  on  the  5th  November  1847,  in  the  fifty-third 
year  of  his  age.  "  He  got  faith,"  said  a  friend  who  was  with  him  at  the 
close,  referring  to  the  case  of  the  St  George's  call,  "  to  lay  his  Isaac  bound 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

upon  the  altar  ;  his  hand,  in  humble  submission,  took  the  knife  ;  he  was 
prepared  to  do  his  Lord's  will ;  he  did  it ;  and  the  Lord  then  relieved  him 
for  ever  from  all  his  cares,  all  his  anxieties,  and  all  his  pains." 

Mr  Stewart  was  never  married.  A  maternal  aunt,  the  widow  of  a 
minister,  became,  after  the  death  of  her  husband,  an  inmate,  put  in  charge 
of  the  domestic  affairs  of  the  manse  of  Cromarty.  She  formed  a  precious 
gift  from  his  heavenly  Father,  for  a  great  part  of  the  closing  portion  of 
her  nephew's  ministry — the  cause  of  much  solicitude,  too,  in  anticipation 
of  the  effect  which  her  removal  might  have  upon  him  and  his  usefulness — 
a  solicitude  quite  as  great  on  her  side.  He  was  spared  the  trial,  to  meet 
which  he  ever  sought  to  fortify  himself.  His  aunt  survived  him  for  a  little  ; 
but  his  death  was  never  revealed  to  her,  the  infirm  condition  of  her  body 
and  mind  both  making  it  at  once  advisable  and  kind  that  the  departure  ot 
her  "dear  boy"  should  be  concealed.  So  they  were  exempted  from 
sorrow  to  which  they  had  each,  respectively,  looked  forward  with  solemn 
thought, — sorrow  which  came  not.     "  So  He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep." 

Mr  Stewart  never  indulged  in  authorship.  Nothing  from  his  pen 
passed  through  the  press  at  any  time.  The  volume  of  posthumous  lectures 
on  Leviticus,  entitled,  "The  Tree  of  Promise,"  compiled  from  the 
skeleton  outlines  from  which  he  had  discoursed,  give  but  a  faint  impression 
of  what  he  was  as  a  preacher.  The  work,  nevertheless,  is  of  great  value, 
especially  to  the  student — original,  suggestive,  and  unique.  No  minister, 
who  deals  with  Scripture  typology  can  want  it  without  loss  or  employ  it 
without  profit  A.  Vi, 


l\tk  X  ftTootrij  Stuart,  ©.Q. 


S  DR  MOODY  STUART  is  happily  still  spared  to 
the  Church — sen/s  in  coclnm  redeat — it  does  not  lie 
within  our  province  to  record  any  estimate  of  his 
gifts  and  character  ;  our  endeavour  shall  be  merely 
to  present  a  brief  outline  of  the  distinguished  career 
of  public  usefulness  which  entitles  him  to  honourable  recognition  in 
this  volume. 

Alexander  Moody  w-as  born  in  Paisley  15th  June  1809,  the  sixth 
son  of  the  late  Mr  Andrew  Moody,  who  was  for  some  years  chief 
magistrate  of  the  burgh.  The  esteem  in  which  his  father  was  held  by 
all  classes  was  memorably  illustrated  on  one  occasion  by  the  fact 
that,  when  an  excited  political  mob  was  proceeding  with  a  universal 
demolition  of  windows,  the  rioters  paused  abruptly  in  their  work  of 
destruction  and  permitted  his  dwelling  to  remain  uninjured,  obeying 
at  once  the  command  of  their  leaders,  "  Let  Mr  Moody's  house  alone 
— he  is  a  good  man."  Having  availed  himself  of  the  best  educational 
advantages  of  his  native  town,  and  having  subsequently  attended  the 
Rector's  class  in  the  Glasgow  Grammar  School,  Alexander  early  laid 
the  foundations  of  exact  and  varied  attainments  in  scholarship,  and 
in  his  fourteenth  year  he  passed  to  the  University  of  Glasgow,  in  which, 
after  the  usual  curriculum  in  the  arts  classes,  he  took  the  degree  of  M.A. 
in  1826.  The  holidays  of  his  boyhood  were  almost  all  spent  in  the 
463 


DISRUPTIOX  WORTHIES. 


parish  of  Lochwinnoch,  on  his  father's  property  of  Muirsheil,  an  estate 
embracing  the  upper  part  of  Calder  Glen  and  a  wide  expanse  of  solitary 
moorland  from  the  heather-clad  heights  of  which  magnificent  views  are 
commanded  on  every  side.  When  we  had  the  pleasure  of  accompanying 
Dr  Moody  Stuart  a  short  time  ago  on  a  visit  to  this  home  of  his  early 
days,  and  of  observing  how  many  associations  with  it  still  linger  vividly 
in  memoiy  after  an  absence  of  fifty  years,  we  could  not  help  feeling 
that  the  romantic  scenery  of  the  Renfrewshire  hills  was  no  unimportant 
factor  in  the  education  of  one  whose  character  and  writings  have  ever 
been  conspicuous  for  an  intensely  appreciative  love  of  nature. 

In  his  eighteenth  year  (1826),  Mr  Moody  entered  the  Theological 
Hall,  and  attended  the  classes  in  Divinity  for  two  sessions  in  Glasgow. 
The  two  last  sessions  were  spent  in  Edinburgh,  where  he  attended  the 
lectures  of  Dr  Chalmers  and  shared  with  many  who  afterwards  became 
much  beloved  fellow-labourers,  the  mighty  impulse  which  that  master  in 
Israel  communicated  to  the  cause  of  evangelical  religion. 

After  receiving  license  as  a  probationer  from  the  Presbytery  of 
Glasgow  in  1831,  Mr  Moody  was,  towards  the  end  of  the  following 
year,  requested  by  Mr  Buchan  of  Kelloe  (of  whom  a  notice  has  been 
given  in  an  earlier  sketch),  to  go  as  a  missionary  to  Holy  Island,*  off 
the  coast  of  Northumberland.  The  whole  extent  of  the  island  is  about 
3000  acres,  and  the  population,  mostly  dependent  on  fishing,  was  then 
about  500.  Mr  Moody's  labours  were  continued  for  more  than  two 
years,  and  were  graciously  owned  of  God.  This  was  more  especially 
the  case  in  the  autumn  of  1834,  when,  although  the  mainland  was 
exempted  at  that  time  from  the  calamity,  the  island  was  afflicted  with 
a  terrible  visitation  of  cholera.  Many  of  the  inhabitants  died,  and  lest 
the  plague  should  spread,  all  communication  with  the  shore,  except  of 
an  occasional  character,  ceased  for  six  or  seven  weeks.  Mr  Moody  at 
once  accepted  it  as  his  duty  to  remain  where  he  was,  that  he  might 
*  Noted  for  the  .Xbbey  of  Lindisf.irne  (Scott's  Marmion,  Canto  ii.) 


A.  MOODY  STUART,  D.D. 

minister  to  the  plague-stricken  and  the  bereaved,  and  in  the  incessant 
and  trying  labours  of  that  time,  he  was  not  only  sustained  in  health, 
but  also  mercifully  exempted  from  even  a  passing  shadow  of  solicitude 
as  to  the  preservation  of  his  own  life  in  the  midst  of  danger.  It  may 
well  be  believed  that  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  precious  in  those 
days;"  many  listened  anxiously  to  the  demands  of  the  Divine  law  and 
the  consolations  of  the  Gospel,  when  these  were  daily  proclaimed,  both 
publicly  and  from  house  to  house,  under  the  solemnising  shadow  of  the 
wing  of  the  angel  of  death.  A  few  of  the  more  remarkable  incidents 
of  these  eventful  weeks  were  afterwards  communicated  to  the  Scottish 
Christian  Herald,  and  appeared  under  the  title  of  "  Death-bed  Scenes  " 
in  the  first  volume  of  that  magazine. 

Within  a  short  time  after  the  induction  of  Dr  Candlish  into  the 
pastoral  charge  of  St  George's,  Edinburgh,  an  invitation  was  given  to 
Mr  Moody  to  become  his  territorial  assistant,  and  in  compliance  with 
this  call  he  came  from  Holy  Island  to  Edinburgh  early  in  1835.  The 
text  of  his  first  sermon  in  Edinburgh  was  Luke  xx.  17,  18  ;  and  in 
the  words  of  one  who  was  present  on  the  occasion — the  late  devout 
and  accomplished  Rev.  John  Mackenzie  of  Ratho — the  discourse  was 
remarkable  for  "  the  unction  and  evangelical  fervour  and  high  mental 
culture  which  have  ever  since  so  eminently  characterised  Dr  Moody 
Stuart's  ministrations."  After  officiating  for  a  few  months  on  the 
Sabbath  evenings  in  St.  George's  Church  for  Dr  Candlish,  Mr  Moody 
was  appointed  by  the  Session  of  St  George's  to  labour  in  the  district 
which  was  afterwards,  under  the  name  of  St.  Luke's,  disjoined  quoad 
sacra  from  St  George's  parish.  In  a  short  time  the  power  of  an 
earnest  and  faithful  ministry  was  felt  throughout  the  district,  and  the 
congregation  became  almost  immediately  too  numerous  to  be  accom- 
modated in  the  original  chapel  (purchased  from  the  Unitarian  body),  in 
Young  Street.  Upon  the  site  of  this  chapel  the  large  church  now  in 
Young  Street  was  built,  and  was  opened   for   public  worship  in    M.iy 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

1837.*  In  the  following  month,  Mr  Moody  was  ordained  by  the  Pres- 
bytery of  Edinburgh,  as  the  minister  of  St  Luke's  quoad  sacra  parish. 
In  1839  he  married  Miss  Stuart,  daughter  of  Kenneth  Bruce  Stuart, 
Esq.  of  Annat,  Perthshire,  and  thenceforward  added  to  his  own  the 
name  of  the  family  with  which  he  had  become  allied.f 

After  seven  years  of  abundant  and  successful  labour  in  St  Luke's 
parish,  Mr  Moody's  health  broke  down,  and  at  a  time  when  his  counsel 
and  service  were  apparently  most  required,  both  by  his  congregation 
and  by  the  Church  at  large,  he  was  called  by  the  Lord  to  "  come  apart 
and  rest  awhile."  In  the  autumn  of  1841,  he  complied  with  the  urgent 
recommendation  of  his  medical  advisers  and  left  this  country  for 
Madeira.  After  spending  two  winters  in  that  island,  he  took  a  voyage 
to  Brazil,  and  sailing  thence  in  early  summer,  arrived  in  this  country 
in  the  end  of  July,  and  was  enabled  to  begin  his  work  again  with 
restored  health  and  hope. 

During  the  months  of  his  absence  from  St  Luke's,  Mr  William  C. 
Burns,  the  apostolic  evangelist  and  missionary,  and  afterwards  his  brother 
Mr  Islay  Burns,  had  occupied  his  pulpit,  and  the  Lord  had  given  to  them 
many  seals  of  their  ministry.  The  Session  also  had  maintained  their 
practice,  as  the  minute-book  testifies,  of  meeting  every  week  for  prayer 
and  for  the  transaction  of  all  business  relating  to  the  spiritual  interests 

*  The  original  trustees  of  St  Luke's  in  Young  Street,  were  :— Mr  Archibald  Bonar, 
banker,  Mr  Archibald  Gibson,  W.S.,  Dr  James  Russell,  F.R.C.S.E.,  Mr  Adam 
M'Cheyne,  W.S.  (the  father  of  the  Rev.  R.  M.  M'Cheyne),  Dr  John  Home  Peebles, 
Mr  Thomas  Gardner,  and  the  Rev.  Robert  Cunningham  (who  had  five  years  before 
founded  the  Edinburgh  Institution).  Of  these  seven,  the  last  (the  father  of  the  writer 
of  this  notice)  alone  sur\'ives. 

t  Of  Dr  Moody  Stuart's  children,  numbering  seven  sons  and  three  daughters,  the 
second  son,  Andrew,  died  in  1866,  after  completing  his  theological  studies,  in  the 
course  of  which  he  had  given  evidence  that  he  was  by  grace  as  well  as  by  superior 
gifts,  peculiarly  fitted  for  the  work  of  the  ministiy ;  and  the  eldest  daughter  Margaret 
died  in  "the  peace  of  believing"  in  March  18S0.  Of  those  who  survive,  the  eldest, 
Kenneth,  is  a  Free  Church  minister  (at  Moffat),  and  the  author  of  a  Memoir  of  the 
public  life  of  the  late  Brownlow  North. 


A.  MOODY  STUART,  D.D. 

of  the  flock,  "  over  which  the  Holy  Ghost  had  made  them  overseers." 
It  was  accordingly,  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  Gospel  of 
Christ,  that  Mr  Moody  Stuart  was  brought  back  to  those  from  whom 
he  had  been  separated  unwillingly  for  a  season.  We  have  been  told 
by  one  of  those  who  worshipped  in  St  Luke's  on  the  first  Sabbath  after 
his  return,  of  the  profound  impression  made  on  the  congregation  which 
crowded  the  church,  and  of  the  emotion,  never  forgotten,  which  thrilled 
the  whole  assemblage  when  the  preacher  opened  the  services  with  the 
appropriate  lines : — 

"  I  shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  shaU 

The  works  of  God  discover. 

The  Lord  hath  me  chastised  sore. 

But  not  to  death  given  over." — Ps.  cxviii.  17,  iS. 

Meanwhile  the  Disruption  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  had  taken 
place.  There  had  never  been  any  uncertainty  in  Mr  Moody  Stuart's 
own  mind  as  to  the  necessity  of  maintaining  at  all  hazards  the  principles 
of  Non-intrusion  and  Spiritual  Independence,  and  the  Church  at  large 
had  received  full  proof  of  the  thoroughness  of  his  sympathy  with  the 
party  by  which  these  principles  were  maintained,  for  St  Luke's  was 
conspicuously  honoured  in  some  of  the  most  momentous  events  of  these 
stirring  times.*  As  to  the  congregation,  there  was,  so  far  as  we  have 
been  able  to  learn,  little  difference  of  opinion   amongst  the  members 

*  On  nth  August  1840,  the  Solemn  Engagement  by  which  many  members  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland  pledged  themselves  to  be  faithful  to  the  liberties  of  the  Church 
and  the  crown-rights  of  the  Redeemer  was  signed  in  St  Luke's.  On  iSth  November 
1840,  the  Commission  of  the  General  Assembly  met  in  St  Luke's  when  no  other 
Established  church  in  the  city  was  opened  to  receive  it.  On  25th  August  1841,  an 
extraordinary  meeting  of  the  Commission  of  the  General  Assembly  was  held  in  St 
Luke's,  at  w^hich  the  same  resolution  as  had  been  declared  in  the  Solemn  Engagement 
a  year  before  was  adopted  by  the  Commission.  On  24th  May  1842,  the  overture 
which  was  on  30th  May  adopted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  that  year  as  the  Claim 
of  Right,  was  subscribed  in  St  Luke's  by  members  of  the  Assembly. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

regarding  the  duty  of  the  church  ;  as  to  the  Session,  all  the  twelve  elders* 
signed  the  Act  of  Separation  and  Deed  of  Demission  at  a  meeting  of 
which  the  Minute-book  preserves  a  touching  record,  on  19th  June 
1843,  and  Mr  Moody  Stuart  took  an  early  opportunity  of  adhibiting  his 
signature  to  the  same  testimony  after  he  returned.f 

That  the  congregation  which  so  unanimously  left  the  Establishment 
was  morally  bound  at  the  same  time  to  quit  the  building  in  which  they 
had  hitherto  worshipped,  no  one  ever  presumed  to  affirm.  The  Estab- 
lished Church  for  which  the  quoad  sacra  chapel  in  Young  Street  was 
built,  was  the  Church  by  which,  on  31st  May  1834,  the  "  Declaratory- 
Enactment  as  to  Chapels  of  ease  "  was  passed,  and  by  which  the  promises 
encouraging  the  erection  of  such  chapels  had  been  faithfully  implemented. 
Those  who  built  St  Luke's,  including  all  the  trustees,  were  for  the 
most  part  still  living,  and  had  given,  by  their  adherence  to  the  Free 
Church,  the  clearest  proof  that  they  never  intended  it  to  be  connected 
with  an  Establishment  which  repudiated  the  Chapel  Enactment,  or 
else  confessed  that  the  fulfilment  of  its  provisions  lay  beyond  the 
constitutional  functions  of  the  Church :  for  of  the  Kirk-Session  of 
St  George's,  who  bought  the  original  site  for  ;^655,  the  smaller  propor- 
tion had  remained  in  the  Established  Church  ;  and  of  the  sum  of  ;^444S 

*  ;\Iessrs  Stotheit,  Russell,  Macdonald  (the  General  Treasurer  of  the  Free 
Church),  Gardner,  Howden,  Hogg,  Smith,  M'Cheyne,  Pringle,  Boyack,  Henderson, 
and  Robertson. 

t  The  first  intimation  which  Mr  Moody  Stuart  received  of  the  actual  consimimation 
of  the  Disruption  was  somewhat  singular.  Arriving  in  Plymouth  after  the  two 
months'  voyage  from  Brazil,  he  searched  earnestly  the  columns  of  the  English 
newspapers  for  information  as  to  what  had  taken  place,  but  found  nothing  beyond 
occasional  allusions  to  the  troubles  of  the  Church  in  Scotland,  until  his  eye  fell  upon 

a  short   paragraph   mentioning  the  induction  of  the   Rev.   as  minister 

of  the  parish  of  Kilsyth.  It  was  in  reading  of  the  transference  of  the  emoluments 
and  the  manse  of  the  pastor  of  Kilsyth  to  another,  that  he  first  learned  that  the 
ministers  who  esteemed  the  principles  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  more  highly  than 
the  privileges  of  connection  with  the  State,  had  made  the  sacrifice  which  conscience 
required  of  them. 


A.  MOODY  STUART,  D.D. 

spent  in  the  erection  of  the  Church,  less  than  £-/0  was  contributed  by 
parties  who  remained  in  the  Establishment  after  the  Disruption.  For 
nearly  six  years  no  attempt  was  made  to  disturb  the  congregation's 
possession  and  use  of  the  building, — but  at  length  after  the  decision  of 
other  cases  had  established  precedents  enough  to  show  that  the  question 
of  ownership  would  be  decided  by  an  appeal  to  the  terms  of  the  trust- 
deed,  without  equitable  and  honourable  consideration  of  the  intention  of 
the  parties  who  prepared  it,  the  Kirk-Session  of  St.  George's  (Estab- 
lished Church),  sent  notice  to  the  Session  of  Free  St.  Luke's  on 
1st  March  1849,  requiring  the  congregation  to  quit  the  church  in  order 
that  "  the  chapel  might  be  applied  strictly  to  the  purposes  of  tlie  trust"  (!), 
but  offering  respite  until  Martinmas,  so  that  time  might  be  given  for 
necessary  arrangements  as  to  another  place  for  worship.  The  Session 
of  Free  St  Luke's  declined  "to  accept  a  small  kindness  in  palliation  of 
a  great  wrong,"  and  the  congregation  held  the  last  meetings  for  public 
worship  within  the  walls  of  the  church  in  Young  Street  on  the  following 
Sabbath,  4th  March  1849.  For  more  than  three  years  they  met  in  the 
Hall,  5  Queen  Street,  until  27th  June  1852,  when  their  large  new 
church  in  43  Queen  Street  was  ready  for  occupation.  For  a  season, 
doubtless,  many  looked  back  with  lingering  regret  to  the  place  in  which 
their  altar  had  been  at  the  first,  but  the  blessing  of  God  was  given  very 
abundantly  in  the  new  church.  Mr  Moody  Stuart's  own  ministry 
continued  to  be  honoured  as  before  with  the  success  which  attends  clear, 
full,  and  experimental  preaching  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  and  this, 
together  with  the  labours  of  Brownlow  North  and  others,  whose  help  was 
heartily  welcomed,  made  St  Luke's,  for  many  years,  widely  known  as  a 
centre  of  evangelistic  life  and  effort.  In  1874,  Mr  Moody  Stuart, 
with  the  concurrence  of  the  office-bearers  and  congregation  of  St  Luke's, 
requested  the  General  Assembly  to  sanction  the  appointment  of  a 
colleague  and  successor,  as  the  burden  of  the  undivided  pastorate  had 
been  for  some  time  felt  by  him  to  be  beyond  his  strength.     The  request 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 


was  granted,  and  the  congregation  having  addressed  a  unanimous  call 
to  the  writer  of  this  notice,  he  left  Lochwinnoch,  after  a  ministry  of 
sixteen  and  a-half  years  in  that  place,  and  was  inducted  in  Free  St  Luke's 
on  22nd  June  1876. 

In  187s,  Mr  Moody  Stuart  had  received  from  the  University  of 
Glasgow  the  degree  of  D.D.,  and  had  been  invited  by  the  Free 
Church  to  be  Moderator  of  the  General  Assembly  held  at  Edinburgh 
in  that  year.  His  claim  to  both  of  these  honours  was  universally  and 
cordially  conceded.  In  acknowledging  the  merit  of  the  contributions  by 
which  he  had  added  to  the  literary  wealth  of  the  countrj',  his  Alma 
Mater  endorsed  what  had  been  already  certified  by  a  large  measure  of 
popular  acceptance.  These  writings  claimed  esteem,  not  only  by  their 
intrinsic  value,  but  also  by  the  charm  of  a  unique  and  attractive  style.* 
And  in  promoting  him  to  the  Moderator's  Chair,  the  Free  Church 
willingly  acknowledged,  not  merely  forty  years  of  faithful  effective 
service  in  one  of  her  most  conspicuous  congregations,  '^but  also  the 
prompt  and  influential  counsel  with  which  he  had  always  aided  the 
discussion  of  subjects  engrossing  public  attention,  and  above  all,  his 
unwearied  fidelity  in  the  office  of  convener  of  her  Mission  to  the  Jews,  a 
cause  which  has  for  a  whole  generation  owed  a  great  measure  of  its  success 
to  the  unshaken  confidence  in  the  promises  of  God,  and  the  burning 
enthusiasm  for  Israel's  welfare,  which  have  given  eloquence  and  power  to 
the  appeals  made  from  year  to  year  by  Dr  Moody  Stuart  on  its  behalf 

Dr  Moody  Stuart  continues  to  preach,  as  an  ordinary  rule,  alternately 

*  Besides  numerous  occasional  discourses  and  pamphlets  on  topics  of  public 
interest,  Dr  Moody  Stuart  had  then  published  "The  Life  of  Elizabeth  the  last 
Duchess  of  Gordon,"  "Recollections  of  John  Duncan,  D.D.,"  "The  Land  of  Huss," 
"Commentary  on  the  Song  of  Solomon,"  "Capernaum,"  and  "The  Three  Marj-s." 
To  these  he  has  added  within  the  last  few  years  several  brief  treatises  on  subjects 
connected  with  the  tendencies  of  modern  Biblical  Criticism,  which  are  the  fruits  of 
mature  thinking  and  scholarly  research,  "  ISIoses  on  the  Plains  of  Moab,"  "The 
Prophecy  of  Isaiah,"  "The  Fifty-First  Psalm,"  "The  Fall  of  Babylon  :  Its  Prediction 
not  Anonymous." 


A.  MOODY  STUART,  D.D. 

with  his  colleague.  His  voice  was  never  strong,  and  by  reason  of  years 
the  limits  within  which  he  can  be  distinctly  heard  by  his  audience  are 
now  more  circumscribed,  but  he  has  retained  in  a  rare  degree  freshness 
of  style  and  warmth  of  interest  in  proclaiming  the  glorious  Gospel. 
With  a  brief  sketch  of  our  impressions  of  his  ordinary  pulpit  work  we 
shall  close  this  notice. 

In  his  public  prayers,  the  confession  of  sin  is  not  a  mere  repetition  of 
formal  phrases  of  self-humiliation,  but  a  reverent  and  careful  acknow- 
ledgment of  felt  transgression  ;  the  mercies  of  redemption  are  spoken  of 
with  unfeigned  thanksgiving,  according  to  the  measure  of  recent  personal 
experience ;  the  various  ranks,  conditions,  and  circumstances  of  men 
are  remembered  with  considerable  variety  of  detail ;  any  outstanding 
public  calamity  or  deliverance  is  made  the  subject  of  allusion  maturely 
considered  and  felicitously  expressed  ;  the  salvation  of  the  heathen,  the 
gathering  in  of  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel,  the  interests  of  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  at  home,  and  the  peace  of  all  nations  are  remembered 
in  definite  and  urgent  intercession,  while,  perhaps  above  everj-thing  else, 
the  hearts  of  the  worshippers  are  drawn  out  in  fervent  supplication  for 
the  present  gracious  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  without  whom  prayer 
obtains  no  blessing,  and  preaching  has  no  power. 

The  sermon  is  not  read,  but  spoken  from  notes  on  the  pages  of  an 
interleaved  Bible.  The  gestures,  including  occasional  transitions  from 
one  side  of  the  pulpit  to  the  other,  suggest  rather  the  unconscious  action 
of  a  thinker  absorbed  in  the  excogitation  of  his  theme,  than  of  an 
orator  bespeaking  the  attention  of  his  hearers.  The  text  (or  texts,  for 
the  disccurse  is  often  based  upon  several  cognate  or  contrasted  passages), 
having  been  announced,  a  brief  introduction  presents,  in  short,  almost 
epigrammatic  sentences,  some  striking  thought,  after  which  the  leading 
divisions  of  the  sermon  are  intimated,  so  as  to  indicate  at  a  glance  the 
region  to  be  traversed.  The  discussion  of  these  topics  in  succession 
seldom  occupies  less  than  three-quarters  of  an  hour.     The  preacher  has 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

not  proceeded  far  before  the  interest  of  the  devout  listener  is  enchained  by 
the  luminous  fulness  with  which  some  verse  hitherto  almost  unnoticed 
flashes  out  from  its  neglected  place  in  Scripture;  or  two  texts,  both  familiar 
but  seldom  considered  before  as  bearing  upon  each  other,  are  suddenly 
brought  together,  so  as  to  yield  a  spark  which  kindles  thought  and 
feeling  with  strange  power.  Often  the  imagination  is  quickened  to 
vigorous  and  delighted  exercise  by  some  bold  stroke  of  fancy  or 
unexpected  poetical  conception.  Presently  there  is  an  appeal  to  the 
conscience ;  sin  is  not  spared,  while  a  vivid  presentation  of  the  actions 
and  feelings  of  yesterday  in  the  searching  light  of  God's  law,  or  a 
description  of  some  phase  of  religious  experience  lays  bare  the  heart's 
inmost  thoughts.  In  every  discourse  a  place  is  found  for  the  Cross  of 
Christ  and  for  a  loving  declaration  of  the  glorious  largeness  of  that 
Divine  mercy,  which  is  high  as  heaven  and  greater  far  than  the  cloud 
of  sin  which  hangs  portentous  between  any  sinner  and  God  ;  and 
the  word  of  reconciliation  is  pressed  home  by  the  direct  question  and 
personal  entreaty,  well  fitted  to  win  the  ear  and  subdue  the  heart. 
That  this  kind  of  preaching  has  been  highly  appreciated  by  earnest 
Christians  is  not  strange,  and  we  have  reason  to  know  that  it  has 
been  largely  honoured  with  the  blessing  of  God — how  largely  shall  be 
known  in  the  day  when  "  they  that  have  turned  many  to  righteousness 
shall  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever." 

J.  G.  C. 


^li^iatttt^r  f^boittson. 


NOTE  appended  to  Dr  M'Crie's  "  Life  of  John  Knox  " 
contains  the  following  pedigree  of  Mr  Thomson  : — 

"  John  Knox,  the  celebrated  Reformer,  left  three  daughters, 
one  of  whom  was  married  to  a  Mr  Baillie  of  the  Jer\'iswoodc 
family,  and  by  him  had  a  daughter,  who  was  married  to  a  Mr 
Kirkton  of  Edinburgh.  By  this  marriage  Mr  Kirkton  had  a 
daughter,  who  was  married  to  Dr  Andrew  Skene  of  Aberdeen.  Dr  Skene  had  several 
children,  the  eldest  of  whom  had  by  his  wife.  Miss  Lumsden  of  Cushnie,  several  sons 
and  daughters.  One  of  these,  Mary,  was  married  to  Andrew  Thomson  of  Banchory, 
who  had  issue  by  her,  IMargarct,  Andrew,  and  Alexander.  Andrew  married  Miss 
Hamilton,  daughter  of  Dr  Hamilton  of  Marischal  College,  Aberdeen,  and  by  her  had 
issue,  Alexander,  born  21st  June  179S,  present  proprietor  of  Banchory." 

By  the  death  of  his  father,  Mr  Thomson  was  left  at  the  early  age  of 
eight  under  the  care  of  his  mother,  a  superior  and  pious  woman.  Young 
Thomson  studied  at  the  Grammar  School  and  at  Marischal  College, 
Aberdeen,  and  early  shewed  that  fondness  for  study,  and  those  habits 
of  application,  which  remained  with  him  through  life.  As  a  youth  he 
was  cheerful,  playful,  and  kind ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  methodical 
and  conscientious  in  the  disposal  of  his  time.  Having  completed  the 
arts  curriculum,  he  graduated  in  18 16.  Besides  acquiring  an  intimate 
acquaintance  with  the  Latin  and  Greek  classics,  and  attaining  consider- 
able proficiency  in  mathematics,  he  obtained  an  introduction  to  several 
of  those   branches   of  Natural    Science,    the   prosecution    of  which    in 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

after  life  afforded  him  much  pleasure.  His  intercourse  with  his  learned 
grandfather  and  his  friends  fostered  those  academic  tastes  and  that  love 
of  general  culture  which  afterwards  marked  out  Alexander  Thomson  as 
the  most  accomplished  country  gentleman  in  the  north  of  Scotland.  In 
order  to  study  law  he  went  to  Edinburgh  at  the  beginning  of  session 
1 8 16-17.  He  joined  the  Speculative  Society,  and  took  a  share  in  the 
debates.  He  passed  Advocate  in  1820,  but  never  practised  at  the  bar. 
Besides  assiduously  prosecuting  his  legal  and  cognate  studies,  Mr  Thomson, 
whilst  in  Edinburgh,  began  the  study  of  Italian.  To  the  close  of  his  life 
he  retained  a  fondness  for  that  language  and  for  Italian  literature.  He 
also  formed  friendships  which  were  lasting,  with,  among  others  of  note, 
Alexander  Dunlop,  Sir  William  Hamilton,  and  John  Hamilton.  On 
attaining  majority,  Mr  Thomson  was  appointed  a  Deputy-Lieutenant  for 
Aberdeenshire  and  Kincardineshire ;  he  was  elected  Dean  of  Marischal 
College ;  and  he  began  to  devote  attention  to  the  improvement  of  his 
estates,  and  to  county  business.     His  private  life  was  exemplary. 

In  1825  Mr  Thomson  was  married  to  Jessy,  daughter  of  Alexander 
Eraser,  Esq.,  an  ex-Lord  Provost  of  Aberdeen.  The  following  year  Mr 
and  Mrs  Thomson  visited  Holland,  Germany,  Switzerland,  and  Italy. 
During  the  journey,  Mr  Thomson  made  copious  notes  of  his  observations 
on  the  state  of  education  in  these  countries,  and  their  social  and  moral 
condition.  They  spent  about  three  years  in  Florence,  Rome,  and  Naples, 
Antiquities,  the  geology  and  vegetation  of  the  country,  and  more  parti- 
cularly its  social  and  religious  state,  engaged  his  attention ;  and  he 
carefully  studied  the  doctrines  and  practices  of  popery  at  its  headquarters. 
He  had  much  pleasant  intercourse  with  Christian  men  then  resident 
in  Italy ;  among  others,  General  Macaulay,  Chevalier  Bunsen,  Professor 
Tholuck,  and  the  Rev.  Mr  Burgess;  and  that  visit  to  Italy  gave  Mr 
Thomson  an  abiding  interest  in  the  fate  and  fortunes  of  that  classic  land. 

Mr  and  Mrs  Thomson  returned  to  Banchory  in  1829.  Besides  models 
of  ancient  temples,  Mr  Thomson  brought  six  copies  of  the  medal  struck 


ALEXANDER  THOMSON. 

to  commemorate  tlie  massacre  of  St  Bartholomew's  Day.  Papists  some- 
times deny  that  such  a  medal  was  struck,  and  Mr  Thomson  was  careful 
to  distribute  his  specimens.  One  of  these,  and  the  models,  are  now  in 
the  museum  of  the  Free  Church  College  at  Aberdeen.  Resuming  his 
public  duties  and  literary  and  scientific  pursuits,  Mr  Thomson  shewed  a 
deepened  seriousness  and  increased  interest  in  religious  objects.  He 
withdrew  from  attendance  on  the  ministrations  of  the  parish  clergyman, 
a  Moderate,  and  availed  himself  of  the  Evangelical  preaching  of  ministers 
in  Aberdeen.  In  1833  Mr  Thomson  spent  a  few  months  in  Edinburgh, 
and  having  heard  the  discussions  about  patronage,  as  a  Conservative,  his 
fears  were  aroused  "lest  anything  rash  should  be  done."  He  came 
within  the  influence  of  the  Church  Extension  movement,  became  an 
enthusiastic  supporter,  and  on  his  return  home,  got  an  auxiliary 
society  formed  in  Aberdeen,  and  secured  the  erection  of  a  church  in  a 
destitute  part  of  his  own  district.  In  1834  he  published  "Facts  from 
Rome ; "  and  contributed  a  sketch  of  Dr  Hamilton  to  the  EncyclopcEdia 
Britannica.  In  1835  he  visited  Belgium  ;  and  brought  before  the  Highland 
Society  the  plan  followed  in  that  country  for  reclaiming  waste  land,  and 
for  cultivating  flax  and  chicory.  He  originated  schemes  for  organising  a 
county  police  force,  and  for  improving  prison  discipline ;  and  his  labours 
for  these  two  objects  were  crowned  with  success.  During  the  first  half 
of  the  ten  years'  conflict  Mr  Thomson  took  no  share  in  the  discussions 
and  deliberations  which  engrossed  some  of  the  leading  minds  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland.  In  December  1839  his  friend,  John  Hamilton, 
advocate,  sent  to  him  his  pamphlet,  "  Our  Present  Position  ; "  and  from 
the  time  he  perused  that  pamphlet  Mr  Thomson  became  deeply  interested 
in  the  question.  The  great  spiritual  issues  involved  had  awakened  that 
interest ;  for  with  many  of  his  friend's  views  he  did  not  concur,  nor  was 
the  course  of  action  to  be  taken  at  all  clear  to  him.  It  was  after  much 
earnest  thought  and  many  discussions  that  he  became  thoroughly  satisfied 
that  the  Church  had  taken  up  a  right  position.     As  a  leading  Aberdeen- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

shiro  Conservative,  and  an  intimate  friend  of  Lord  Aberdeen,  Mr  Thomson 
was  the  medium  of  conveying  to  his  lordship  a  copy  of  that  publication, 
and  of  others  issued  by  the  Evangelical  party  in  the  Church.  He  also 
corresponded  frankly  with  his  lordship  on  the  vexed  question.  The  most 
valuable  part  of  Professor  Smeaton's  admirable  memoir  of  Mr  Thomson  is 
probably  the  ninety  pages  of  correspondence  between  Mr  Thomson  and 
John  Hamilton,  Lord  Aberdeen,  Sir  Robert  Peel,  and  other  statesmen 
and  persons  of  influence.  There  is  no  better  confutation  of  the  insidious 
attempts  now  made  in  certain  quarters  to  falsify  the  history  of  the 
struggle  which  preceded  the  Disruption,  than  what  is  contained  in  those 
pages.  They  are  also  interesting  as  exhibiting  the  progress  of  a  candid 
mind  alive  to  spiritual  things,  grappling  with  the  great  question  at 
issue  between  the  Church  and  the  State,  and  arriving  at  a  settled  con- 
viction that  the  Church  was  right.  In  his  earliest  letter  to  Mr  Hamilton 
(6th  January  1840)  Mr  Thomson  writes  : — 

"  My  own  view  of  the  question  is,  that  it  is  far  above  and  beyond  all  party  and 
political  consideration,  and  one  of  the  most  solemn  and  important  subjects  which  is 
only  to  be  thought  of  and  spoken  of  with  the  deepest  seriousness."  .  ..."  I  have 
refused  to  join  the  requisitions  for  meetings  as  yet,  thinking  they  go  too  far  on  both 
sides." 

In  striking  contrast  is  his  letter  to  Sir  Robert  Peel,  of  27th  May  1842  : — 

"  In  this  controversy  the  Church  of  Scotland  asks  no  more  than  is  granted  to  the 
smallest  Dissenting  body— the  power  of  arranging  her  own  discipline,  doctrine,  and 
office-bearers,  without  interference  on  the  part  of  the  civil  courts,  and  without 
possessing  the  power  it  docs  not  appear  possible  for  a  church  to  fulfil  aright  its  high 
functions,  by  pursuing  that  purity  of  doctrine  among  its  teachers  for  which  it  is 
responsible  alike  to  its  heavenly  Master  and  Head  and  to  the  people  among  whom 
and  for  whose  benefit  it  is  established  by  the  State." 

At  county  meetings  and  on  the  public  platform,  Mr  Thomson  main- 
tained and  vindicated  the  views  of  the  Church  ;  and  in  December  1842 
he  suggested  that  a  meeting  of  Scottish  Lairds  should  be  held,  "  as  the 
Baroncs  Minorcs  of  Scotland  had  much  to  do  with  the  former   Rcfor- 


ALEXANDER  THOMSON. 

matioii."  He  issued  a  circular  calling  a  meeting,  to  hold  at  Edinburgh 
on  24th  January  1843, 

"  to  express  concurrence  in  the  resolutions  of  the  Convention,  and  to  consult  as  to  the 
course  which  we,  as  lay  members  of  the  Church,  ought  to  pursue  in  order  to  enforce 
upon  the  Legislature  the  necessity  of  giving  practical  effect  to  the  principle  of  the 
independence  of  the  Church  in  all  spiritual  matters." 

Forty-nine  lairds  attended,  and  nearly  as  many  sent  apologies  for  being 
unavoidably  absent.  The  resolutions  of  the  meeting  were  transmitted 
to  Sir  Robert  Peel.     The  third  was — 

"  That  under  these  circumstances  we  are  firmly  persuaded  that  unless  the 
exclusive  jurisdiction  of  the  Church  in  things  spiritual  be  fully  acknowledged  by  the 
State,  the  inevitable  consequence  must  be  the  separation  of  this  large  portion  of  the 
Church  from  the  State,  with  all  the  evils  which  will  thence  ensue  ;  and  therefore  it  is 
our  imperative  duty,  as  landed  proprietors  of  Scotland,  to  take  c^'ery  means  in  our 
power  to  avert  so  great  a  national  calamity." 

Thursday  the  18th  May  1843  arrived,  and  Mr  Thomson  was  relieved 
of  negotiations  with  politicians  and  prelates.  His  diary  and  letters 
vividly  bring  before  readers  the  Disruption  day.  He  was  present  at 
the  levee  in  the  morning,  and  saw  the  portrait  of  William  HI.  fall,  and 
heard  the  remark  made  by  a  spectator,  "There  goes  the  Revolution 
Settlement ! "  He  joined  the  solemn  procession  to  Canonmills  Hall. 
He  was  incessantly  occupied  during  the  next  ten  days  with  General 
Assembly  and  Committee  duties  ;  and  reached  hoine,  "  after  a  most 
delightful,  and  exciting,  and  I  hope  profitable  fortnight."  On  the  ist 
of  June,  Mr  Thomson  laid  the  foundation  of  a  Free  Church  at  New 
Machar,  on  his  estate  of  Rainineshill.  In  his  own  parish  he  assisted  in 
forming  a  congregation  and  procuring  a  minister  (the  Rev.  D.  F.  Arthur, 
highly  esteemed  by  Mr  Thomson);  he  gave  sites  for  church  and  manse, 
and  largely  contributed  to  the  erection  of  both.  In  September  1843  Dr 
Chalmers  spent  a  week  at  Banchory  House,  and  Mr  Thomson  often 
referred  to  that  visit,  and  always  looked  back  to  it  with  pleasure.  On 
Sabbath  the  loth,  Dr  Chalmers  preached  to  an  immense  congregation 
assembled  on  the  lawn. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

The  refusal  of  sites  by  certain  landowners  occasioned  much  suffering 
to  members  of  the  Church.  Mr  Thomson  took  an  active  share  in  the 
endeavour  to  have  this  cowardly  form  of  persecution  removed.  In  con- 
cert with  the  Marquis  of  Breadalbane,  Mr  Thomson  arranged  that  a 
meeting  of  landowners  should  hold  at  Glasgow  at  the  close  of  the 
General  Assembly  in  October  1843  to  consider  the  subject.  The  meet- 
ing agreed  to  address  the  noblemen  and  gentlemen  who  had  refused  sites  ; 
and  an  able,  respectful,  and  earnest  address  was  agreed  on. 

Mr  Thomson  proposed  to  the  General  Assembly  in  1844  a  plan 
for  providing  manses,  and  when,  in  a  subsequent  year,  the  manse  scheme 
was  sanctioned,  it  met  with  Mr  Thomson's  warmest  support.  Nor  was 
he  unmindful  of  the  wants  of  the  Church  in  foreign  lands.  Having 
learned  that  "  Dr  Duff  mourned  the  loss  of  his  fine  library  and  apparatus, 
locked  up  in  the  unused  buildings  now  belonging  to  the  Established 
Church,"  he  assisted  in  procuring  subscriptions  to  provide  library  and 
apparatus  ;  and  in  a  short  time  the  required  sum  was  raised  and  remitted 
to  Calcutta,  and  the  great  missionary's  heart  was  glad. 

Mr  Thomson  regarded  the  institution  of  a  theological  hall  in  Aber- 
deen as  of  great  importance  to  the  Church.  It  was  opposed,  and  a 
controversy  arose,  painful  at  the  time,  now  uninteresting,  and  hardly 
intelligible  to  those  who  were  not  engaged  in  it.  In  conjunction  with 
Mr  F.  Edmond  of  Kingswells,  Mr  Thomson  persevered  in  urging  his  views 
upon  the  Church  ;  and  the  Aberdeen  Theological  Hall  was  established. 
In  its  extension  and  permanence  Mr  Thomson  took  a  lasting  interest. 

Concurrently  with  his  efforts,  general  and  local,  on  behalf  of  the 
Free  Church  of  Scotland,  Mr  Thomson  laboured  to  promote  Sabbath 
observance  by  Railways.  He  had  co-operated  with  Sheriff  Watson  in 
planting  in  Aberdeen  the  first  "  Ragged  School "  attempted  in  Scotland  ; 
and  he  continued  to  aid  the  learned  Sheriff  in  extending  the  experiment. 
It  was  not  till  1854  that  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  finding  his  views 
embodied  in  statute. 


ALEXAXDER  THOMSOX. 

In  consequence  of  impaired  health,  he  spent  half  of  1847  and  the 
following  year  in  England.  He  occupied  himself  with  antiquarian  and 
geological  investigations,  and  still  more  with  inquiry  into  the  social 
condition  of  the  people.  Stimulated  by  his  observations  during  this 
visit,  he  published  in  1852,  "Social  Evils:  their  Cause  and  their  Cure." 
In  1857  appeared  "Punishment  and  Prevention  ;"*  and  in  papers  read 
before  the  Social  Science  Association  or  published,  he  advocated  stop- 
ping juvenile  offenders  on  the  road  to  crime ;  treated  the  game  laws  as 
fertile  sources  of  crime  and  misery  ;  sought  to  have  vagrancy  repressed  ; 
opposed  the  bothy  system  and  feeing  markets ;  and  urged  the  abolition 
of  tolls. 

In  1857  Mr  Thomson  was  chosen  Convener  of  the  County  of 
Aberdeen.  In  the  following  year  he  saw  carried  out,  though  in  a 
mutilated  form,  a  scheme  which  he  had  tried  to  promote  during  thirt}- 
years,  viz.,  the  amalgamation  of  King's  and  Marischal  Colleges. 

In  1859  the  British  Association  met  in  Aberdeen.  H.  R.  H.  Prince 
Albert,  the  President  of  the  year,  did  Mr  Thomson  the  honour  to  be  his 
guest ;  and  Mr  Thomson  took  an  active  part  in  all  arrangements  for  the 
promotion  of  the  objects  of  the  association  as  well  as  in  the  discussions. 

In  consequence  of  attempts  by  the  Scottish  Episcopal  Church  to 
obtain  some  recognition  by  Parliament,  such  as  would  identify  it  with 
the  Church  of  England,  Mr  Thomson  engaged  in  a  vigorous  correspond- 
ence on  the  subject ;  and  published  an  able  pamphlet — "  Scottish  Epis- 
copacy :  Past  and  Present " — in  order  to  disseminate  correct  views  as 
to  the  aggressive  practices  and  dangerous  tenets  of  that  sect. 

Symptoms  of  failing  health  appeared  in  1859,  and  weakness  of  the 
eyes  compelled  Mr  Thomson  to  discontinue  these  investigations  by  the 
microscope  in  which  he  delighted.  Succeeding  years  found  Mr  Thom.son 
with  diminished  vigour,  pursuing  literary  and  scientific  studies,  publishing 
on  various  subjects,  and  interested  in  all  that  concerned  the  social,  moral, 
*  London:  Nisbet  &  Co.     1S57. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

and  religious  wellbeing  of  those  around  him.  He  had  for  two  or  three 
years  contemplated  the  great  change  as  approaching,  and  early  in  1 868 
increasing  weakness  warned  the  relatives  that  it  was  near.  On  i8th  May 
1868  Mr  Thomson  sent  a  message  to  Dr  Candlish,  expressing  a  hope 
that  God  would  be  with  the  General  Assembly.  His  dying  utterances 
were,  "  Bought  with  a  price,"  "  Swallowed  up  in  victory  ; "  on  Wednesday 
night,  the  20th  May  1868,  his  spirit  departed. 

Mr  Thomson  bequeathed  his  valuable  museum  and  extensive  library, 
and  about  ;f  16,000  in  money  to  the  Free  Church  College  in  Aberdeen. 
The  money  was  apportioned  for  bursaries,  maintenance  of  museum  and 
library,  a  lecturer  on  natural  science  and  theology,  and  "  to  increase  the 
too  small  salaries  of  the  Professors." 

The  large  collection  of  journals,  letters,  and  other  MSS.  was  placed 
in  the  hands  of  the  Rev.  Professor  Smeaton,  who  had  kindly  agreed  to 
prepare  a  memoir  of  his  departed  friend.  The  work  was  faithfully  per- 
formed ;  and  a  most  interesting  volume  was  published  in  1869.  Of  the 
Professor's  labours  the  writer  of  this  notice  has  freely  availed  himself. 

At  the  close  of  the  "  Funeral  Sermon,"  the  late  Principal  Lumsden 
said  : — • 

"  He  enrolled  himself  from  the  outset  among  the  adherents  to  the  cause  of  the 
Church's  independence,  and  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  that  noble  band  of  elders 
whom  God  in  His  signal  grace  gave  us  at  the  time  of  the  Disruption,  composed  of  men 
so  conspicuous  by  social  station,  and  professional  renown,  and  Christian  character, 
that  I  know  not  that  the  annals  of  any  church,  at  any  period,  can  supply  the  like." 
.  .  .  .  "  Called  by  his  social  status  to  mingle  much  with  men  of  all  classes  and 
opinions,  he  was  amongst  them  all,  and  at  all  times,  the  consistent  disciple,  never 
ashamed  to  confess  Christ,  always  adorning  the  doctrine  by  his  varied  intelligence  and 
his  gentlemanly  urbanity,  by  his  meekness,  wisdom,  finnness,  and  self-possession." 

R.  L. 


=^ 


'ILLIAM  K.TWEEDIE.D.D 


^ 


=a 


vr 


^.  ^ 


Milliam  ling  ^iouhh,  l.D. 


LLIAM  KING  TWEEDIE,  son  of  John  Tweedie 
and  Janet  King,  was  born  at  Ayr,  8th  May  1803. 
Tlic  family  removed  very  early  to  South  America, 
where  the  father  became  intendant  of  the  public 
gardens  at  Buenos  Ayres.  William  was  left  under 
the  care  of  a  kind  relative  at  Maybole,  where  he 
spent  his  boyhood,  and  received  his  early  education.  His  parents  did 
not  return  to  this  country,  and  he  never  saw  them  again.  His  friend  and 
guardian  made  him  his  heir,  and  hence  he  was  enabled  to  enter  upon 
his  studies  with  great  advantage. 

He  spent  his  first  and  second  sessions  at  the  University,  Glasgow. 
He  afterwards  passed  one  or  two  sessions  in  Edinburgh.  His  University 
education  was  completed  at  St  Andrews,*  to  which  his  chief  attraction 
was  Dr  Chalmers,  then  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy,  and  whose  rare  and 
commanding  genius  entranced  the  minds  of  many  other  aspiring  young 
men.  Here  also  he  obtained  the  friendship  of  Professor  Ferrie,  minister 
of  Kilconquhar, — a  friendship  which  continued  even  after  they  were 
separated  ecclesiastically.  While  there,  he  became  tutor  to  the  son  of  Mr 
Mudie  of  Pitmuis,  and  in  this  character  travelled  about  fifteen  months 
on  the  Continent.  The  young  tutor  and  young  pupil  visited  France, 
Switzerland,  Italy,  and  Germany.  Both  had  their  minds  enlarged  by  this 
*  In  1851  he  received  from  this  University  the  degree  of  Doctor  in  Divinity. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

lengthened  sojourn,  and  the  former  obtained  those  stores  of  knowledge 
which  he  turned  to  such  important  uses  in  his  subsequent  life.  Pitmuis 
is  in  the  parish  of  Guthrie,  of  which  the  gifted  Dr  John  Bruce*  was  then 
the  minister.  He  was  thus  brought  into  close  contact  with  a  man  who 
was  the  means  of  conveying  to  him  those  clear  views  and  deep  impressions 
of  divine  truth  which  he  ever  after  retained.  Some  of  his  first  earnings 
as  a  young  man  were  expended  in  the  purchase  of  a  copy  of  Calvin's 
voluminous  writings ;  and  although  he  called  no  man  his  master  on 
earth,  he  considered  that  the  great  French  Reformer  expressed  the 
mind  of  God  more  correctly  than  most  of  the  divines  of  that  period. 

His  veneration  for  Calvin  himself  was  affectionately  profound,  and 
he  wished  much  that  there  should  be  a  more  adequate  memoir  of  his  life 
and  doctrines  than  was  then  to  be  found.  He  diligently  sought  for 
information  on  this  subject,  and  had  collected  documents  which  he  hoped 
to  bring  before  the  public.  It  illustrates  his  own  noble  character,  that 
while  thus  employed,  he  learned  that  the  biographer  of  Knox  was 
engaged  on  a  biography  of  Calvin,  and  he  did  not  hesitate  to  relinquish 
his  own  purpose,  and  transferred  to  Dr  M'Crie  the  information  he  had 
obtained.  At  a  later  period,  in  1846,  he  published  a  translation  from  the 
French  of  M.  Rilliet,  entitled,  "  Calvin  and  Servetus :  The  Reformer's 
Share  in  the  Trial  of  Michael  Servetus,  historically  ascertained." 

He  received  licence  to  preach  the  gospel  from  the  Presbytery  ot 
Arbroath  on  2d  December  1828,  and  on  26th  July  1832  he  was  ordained 
as  minister  of  the  Scots  Church,  London  Wall.  Here  he  had  a  small 
congregation,  but  the  connection  was  a  happy  one :  there  was  mutual 
regard  between  pastor  and  people,  and  good  was  done  in  the  highest 
sense. 

When  in  London,  he  married  Miss  Margaret  Bell,  and  thus  secured 
the  blessings  of  a  happy  domestic  life.  In  London,  also,  he  acquired 
the  friendship  of  Mr  John  Macdonald,  who  was  minister  of  the  Presby- 

*  Afterwards  of  Free  St  Andrew's,  Edinburgli. 
482 


WILLIAM  KING  TWEEDIE,  D.D. 

tcrian  Church  at  River  Terrace.  This  friendship  did  not  terminate 
after  both  had  left  London,  but  continued  unbroken  till  the  death  of 
the  missionary  minister  of  Calcutta.  In  1849  he  published  an  interesting 
memoir  of  his  beloved  friend. 

The  reputation  for  intellectual  power  and  ministerial  faithfulness 
which  he  had  now  acquired,  led  to  his  appointment  as  minister  of  the 
South  Parish  of  Aberdeen.  His  induction  took  place  on  ist  September 
1837,  and  on  the  following  Sabbath  Dr  Duff  introduced  the  young 
minister  to  the  congregation.  Dr  Duff  had  been  the  first  choice  of  the 
congregation,  but  he  refused  the  call,  because  he  considered  India  as  still 
his  mission  field.  The  sermon  was  printed,  and  in  it  Dr  Duff  refers  to 
Mr  Tweedie's  "gifts  and  graces,  whether  in  the  pulpit  or  in  the  closet, 
at  the  family  altar  or  at  the  weary  pilgrim's  death-bed,  his  walk  and 
conversation,  his  outgoings  and  incomings."  In  this  charge  he  occupied 
a  position  of  great  influence ;  his  labours  were  very  abundant,  and  his 
high  powers  were  appreciated  by  all  who  knew  him. 

In  September  1841  the  congregation  of  the  Tolbooth  Parish,  Edin- 
burgh, sustained  a  heavy  affliction  by  the  secession,  into  the  Episcopal 
communion,  of  their  beloved  minister.  They  desired  to  have  as  his 
successor  one  who  should  combine  pulpit  talent  with  vigorous  intellect 
and  parochial  activity.  When  Mr  Tweedie's  name  was  suggested  to 
them,  scarcely  any  of  them  had  heard  him  preach ;  but  there  was  so 
unvarying  a  report  of  his  character  from  all  quarters,  that  they  applied 
in  his  favour  to  the  Town  Council,  then  patrons  of  the  city  churches. 
Their  application  was  successful ;  he  accepted  the  call,  and  was  inducted 
on  loth  March  1842,  leaving  in  Aberdeen  a  much  attached  congregation. 

From  this  date  till  his  death  in  1863,  he  was  the  loved  and 
honoured  minister  of  the  Tolbooth  Church.  On  i8th  May  1843  he 
ceased  to  be  minister  of  the  parish,  as  he,  with  the  entire  kirk-session, 
and  nearly  all  the  congregation,  withdrew  from  the  Establishment,  and 
joined  the  Free  Church ;   but  they  retained  the  name,  and  with  it  the 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

religious  and  ecclesiastical  principles  which  had  characterised  the  Tol- 
booth  Church  for  a  long  series  of  years.  They  continued  their  schools 
and  their  other  parochial  labours.  During  the  brief  period  that  Mr 
Tweedie  occupied  the  place  of  a  parochial  minister  in  Edinburgh,  he 
pursued  with  much  zeal  his  parochial  duties.  Among  other  things, 
he  printed  a  tract  addressed  to  the  parishioners,  which  was  intended  to 
be  the  first  of  a  series. 

Mr  Tweedie  took  an  active  part  in  the  proceedings  which  led  to  the 
Disruption,  and  for  many  years  subsequent  to  this,  his  high  business 
talents  enabled  him  to  promote  the  success  of  the  Church  in  every  one 
of  its  departments. 

For  a  short  time  he  was  convener  of  the  Sustentation  Committee. 
He  was  also  Convener  of  the  Committee  on  Popery,  and  for  fifteen 
years  he  was  Convener  of  the  Committee  on  Foreign  Missions.  This 
last  office  he  would  not  have  resigned,  had  he  not  felt  that,  with  his 
impaired  health,  he  could  not  fulfil,  to  his  own  satisfaction,  the  duties 
of  it  and  of  his  pastoral  office  at  the  same  time.  His  close  relations 
with  Duff",  Anderson,  Wilson,  Mackay,  Ewart,  Johnston,  Maccallum, 
Smith,  Mitchell,  besides  Macdonald  and  other  honoured  names,  gave 
him  a  weight  and  influence  which  no  one  else  could  have.  His  letters  to 
the  missionaries  during  the  long  period  of  his  convenership  were  greatly 
valued.  Indeed,  wherever  there  was  need  for  work  in  the  service  of 
the  Master,  there  he  was  a  willing,  untiring,  disinterested  worker. 

To  his  own  congregation,  and  the  varied  interests  connected  with 
it,  he  gave  his  heart  and  all  his  powers.  There  was  much  difficulty  in 
obtaining  a  suitable  place  of  worship.  On  the  first  Sabbaths  after  the 
Disruption  he  conducted  public  worship  in  Freemasons'  Hall,  Niddry 
Street,  but  the  accommodation  was  quite  inadequate  for  the  hearers. 
An  ineffectual  attempt  was  made  to  induce  an  existing  congregation  to 
alter  somewhat  their  hours  of  worship ;  and  at  length  the  church  in 
Infirmary  Street,  where  Mr  Paxton  had  been  minister,  was  purchased, 


WILLIAM  KING  TWEED  IE,  D.D. 

and  tlierc  the  congregation  assembled  till  1853,  when  the  Music  Hall 
in  George  Street  was  obtained.  This  was  in  many  respects  a  comfort- 
able place  of  meeting  ;  but  it  was  not  suitable  as  a  "  Sabbath  Home," 
and  efforts  were  made  to  obtain  a  site  for  a  permanent  structure.  Of 
course,  nearness  to  the  former  parish  was  felt  to  be  the  first  requisite ; 
but  at  least  five  or  six  situations  on  the  High  Street,  or  on  the  northern 
slope  of  the  Old  Town,  were  successively  selected,  examined  by  an  archi- 
tect, and  abandoned.  With  great  reluctance,  one  in  St  Andrew  Square 
was  finally  adopted,  and  it  was  occupied  by  the  congregation  on  i6th  May 
1858.  Considering  the  difficulties  of  the  site,  Mr  Bryce,  the  architect, 
might  be  said  to  be  successful ;  but  many  of  the  congregation  were 
much  inconvenienced. 

The  style  of  Dr  Twccdie's  discourses  could  not  be  called  flowing 
oratory,  but  he  stated  the  truths  which  he  himself  believed  with  clearness 
and  force.  Every  hearer  knew  that  the  preacher  was  in  earnest,  and  that 
it  behoved  him  to  be  in  earnest  as  well.  He  rarely  addressed  the  con- 
gregation without  having  written  what  he  said.  He  never  preached  a 
sermon  to  his  people  a  second  time  ;  although  the  sermon  may  have  been 
the  same,  he  invariably  re-wrote  it,  assigning  as  his  reason  for  this,  that  his 
people  ought  to  have  his  freshest  thoughts,  and  that  in  writing  again  he 
thus  gave  any  new  views,  or  even  new  expressions,  which  had  occurred  to 
him.  His  sermons  were  clear  expositions  of  Scripture,  searching  delinea- 
tions of  character,  and  telling  addresses  to  the  consciences  of  his  hearers. 
The  illustrations  drawn  from  natural  objects  and  from  books  gave  force 
to  his  doctrinal  statements. 

He  had  classes  for  the  instruction  of  the  young,  and  his  conversations 
with  intending  communicants,  while  tender  and  skilful,  were  unusually 
faithful  and  searching,  and  were  specially  owned  of  God  in  preparing  for 
the  solemn  step  in  life  which  they  contemplated.  For  several  years  he 
held  a  meeting  in  his  house  for  students  every  Saturday  evening,  which 
was  largely  attended,  and  was  greatly  valued  by  many  who  now  occupy 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

important  positions  in  the  ministry,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  In  the 
Kirk-session  and  Deacons'  Court,  his  clear  and  large  views  of  the 
business  transacted  at  the  meetings  promoted  the  success  of  every  under- 
taking and  the  solution  of  every  difficulty.  His  frank  address  and  his 
friendly  consideration  of  those  with  whom  he  came  into  contact,  tempered 
the  differences  of  opinion  which  are  so  ready  to  occur  in  the  intercourse 
of  life. 

Dr  Tweedie's  writings  form  an  important  part  of  his  life-work.  He  had 
the  love  of  writing,  and  the  power  of  writing.  His  works  were  numerous, 
and,  if  not  profound  or  exhaustive,  led  on  the  reader  from  one  step  to 
another  in  the  path  of  truth  and  righteousness.  Many  were  especially 
written  for  the  young,  and  not  a  few  young  men  and  young  women  were 
guided  upward  in  the  Christian  life  by  the  perusal  of  these  varied 
volumes.  His  aim  in  all  his  writings  was  to  promote  the  cause  of  Christ 
and  the  good  of  souls,  and  in  doing  so,  he  never  shrunk  from  declaring 
the  truth,  even  although  it  might  be  unpalatable. 

His  correspondence  was  very  extensive.  Indeed  he  delighted  to 
address  his  friends  in  this  way,  and  the  letters  were  of  a  valuable 
character.  They  were  representative  of  himself  as  a  Christian  friend  and 
instructor,  and  they  supplied  the  counsel,  or  comfort,  or  expostulation 
that  might  be  respectively  suitable.  Some  people  resented  this,  but  many 
more  relished  it,  and  felt  grateful.  One  replied  to  him,  "  Write  a  common- 
sense  letter.  When  I  wish  a  sermon,  I  can  get  one  on  the  other  side  of 
the  street."  But  the  same  individual,  at  a  later  period  said,  "  He  was 
right,  and  I  was  wrong." 

Dr  Twcedie  used  conversation  for  the  same  purpose  for  which  he 
made  such  large  and  effective  use  of  correspondence.  He  often  spoke 
a  word  in  the  ordinary  intercourse  of  life  which  arrested  the  attention 
of  the  careless,  or  gave  a  spark  of  light  to  the  downcast.  His  pastoral 
visitation  was  .systematic  and  faithful.  He  addressed  himself  at  once  to 
the  important  business  about  which  he  had  come.     Even  in  casually 


WILLIAM  KING   TWEE  DIE,  D.D. 

meeting  with  his  people  on  the  street,  it  was  his  habit  to  leave  a  good 
word  as  he  passed  on.  He  illustrated  well  the  remark,  "  A  word  spoken 
in  season,  how  good  is  it ! " 

He  was  never  a  robust  man.  He  often  suffered  from  cough,  and 
this  sometimes  interfered  with  his  pulpit  duties.  Other  ailments  were 
superadded,  and  he  became  infirm.  In  the  summer  of  1861  he  went 
with  his  family  to  the  Continent,  and  passed  several  months  in  Switzer- 
land and  Germany,  enjoying  very  much  the  salubrious  climate,  and 
delighting  in  the  varied  scenery  spread  around  him.  His  health 
was  considerably  benefited  by  this  sojourn,  and  he  returned  home 
strengthened  for  his  important  duties.  But  he  became  more  easily 
influenced  by  atmospheric  changes,  and  his  loved  work  was  performed 
with  greater  difficulty.  He  at  length  became  convinced  that  the 
services  of  an  assistant  or  colleague  were  necessary.  He  was  less 
sanguine  than  others  as  to  the  issue.  He  thought  the  disease  had  now 
taken  a  deeper  hold  of  his  body,  and  that  his  active  working  life  would 
probably  not  be  very  long ;  yet  he  spoke  calmly  and  cheerfully,  and  in 
his  graceful,  dignified  manner,  acquiesced  in  the  arrangements  made  and 
intended  for  his  comfort. 

It  pleased  God  to  withhold  His  blessing  from  the  means  used  for  his 
recovery.  His  death-bed  was  a  bed  of  suffering — of  very  great  suffering, 
with  few  interruptions.  In  the  early  part  of  it,  there  were  intervals  when 
he  was  comparatively  free  from  pain,  and  then  his  conversation  was 
cheerful  as  was  his  wont;  but  latterly  pain  and  exhaustion  gave  a  sombre 
hue  to  all  that  he  said.  More  than  once  he  declared  that  he  knew  whom 
he  had  believed,  and  felt  thankful  that  he  had  not  left  till  that  hour  of 
weakness  the  grand  work  of  life.  He  addressed  striking  admonitions  to 
some  of  those  who  were  beside  him,  which  they  are  not  likely  ever  to 
forget  ;  he  gave  utterance  to  his  affectionate  feelings  ;  he  expressed  his 
thankfulness  for  services  rendered  to  him.  To  one  friend  he  said,  "  Be 
sure  that  you  have  Christ."    On  one  occasion  he  exclaimed,  without  refer- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

encc  to  anything  that  had  been  said  either  by  himself  or  others,  "  There 
is  licrht  before  the  throne."  We  cannot  tell  certainly,  but  we  may  imagine 
what  he  meant  by  these  words.  He  was  in  a  dark  valley  :  all  was  dark 
except  one  spot,  and  that  spot  was  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb. 
There  was  light  there,  and  when  the  valley  had  been  passed  through,  all 
was  light. 

It  can  be  tnily  said  that  he  bore  a  life-testimony  to  the  Saviour  whom 
he  loved  and  served.  Having  dedicated  himself  to  the  ministry — first, 
perhaps,  merely  as  a  profession,  but  afterwards  as  a  heart-work — he  gave 
all  his  energies  of  mind  and  heart  to  its  prosecution.  He  derived  his 
views  of  doctrine  and  of  duty  from  the  holy  Scriptures  ;  and  the  written 
word,  as  he  often  said,  "  led  to  the  Incarnate  Word."  He  preached  the 
freeness  of  the  gospel  invitation  to  all  sinners  without  exception  ;  but  he 
never  lost  sight  of  the  grand  cardinal  truth,  that  God  is  supreme,  all  in 
all ;  that  man's  salvation  originated  in  the  mind  of  God,  and  that  in  the 
case  of  each  individual  soul,  it  is  the  grace  of  God  which  draws  the  sinner 
to  Himself  He  was  not  only  a  bold,  uncompromising  herald  of  the 
heavenly  message,  but  a  skilful,  painstaking,  loving  pastor ;  and  in  both 
capacities  his  ministry  was  blessed  with  peculiar  success,  alike  in  the 
awakening  and  conversion  of  sinners  and  in  the  edification  of  believers. 
He  never  belied  his  character  as  a  Christian  minister,  or  as  a  Christian 
gentleman. 

Need  it  be  added  that  he  was  emphatically  a  lover  of  good  men  ?  He 
cherished  such  wherever  he  found  them,  and  co-operated  with  them  in 
works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love.  He  was  Secretary  of  the  Society  for 
Relief  of  the  Destitute  Sick  from  1843  to  his  death,  and  did  what  he 
could  to  promote  the  success  of  that  admirable  association. 

Dr  Tweedie  died  on  the  24th  March  1863  (being  survived  by  Mrs 
Tweedie,  two  sons,  and  three  daughters),  and  on  the  Saturday  following 
his  remains  were  laid  in  the  Grange  Cemetery,  not  far  from  the  resting- 
place  of  his  revered  and  beloved  friend  Dr  Chalmers.  W.  E. 


L_ 


DAVID    ^AELSH.D.D 


--^ 


J^'^- 


Habib  Mthh.  1.1. 


AVID,  the  youngest  of  twelve  children  of  tlie  family,  was 
born  on  the  nth  December  1793,  at  Braefoot,  in  the 
parish  of  Moffat.  The  farm-house  in  which  this  event 
took  place  stands  at  the  head  of  a  deep  dell,  near 
the  source  of  the  Annan.  It  is  in  the  midst  of  a 
purely  pastoral  country,  and  his  parents,  who  were 
both  eminently  pious,  belonged  to  the  class  of  intelligent  gentlemen- 
farmers.  Their  youngest  son  was  named  after  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel, 
and  from  this  circumstance,  as  well  as  from  their  devoted  religious  char- 
acter, we  may  believe  that  he  was  specially  consecrated  from  his  infancy 
to  the  service  of  God.  At  a  comparatively  early  period  of  his  life,  his 
father  surrendered  all  charge  of  his  worldly  affairs  into  the  hands  of  his 
sons,  and  retired  to  spend  the  evening  of  his  days  in  Moffat,  where  he 
died  in  1825,  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God. 

In  his  early  years  David  attended  the  parish  school  of  Moffat,  to  which 
he  rode  daily  a  distance  of  three  miles,  and  enjoyed  besides,  the  services 
of  a  competent  tutor  at  home,  the  Rev.  Mr  M'Whir,  who  became  after- 
wards minister  at  Urr  in  Galloway,  and  was  distinguished  for  his  zeal  and 
manifold  labours.  In  his  thirteenth  year  he  was  sent  to  the  High  School 
of  Edinburgh,  which  he  attended  for  one  year  as  a  pupil  of  Dr  Carson. 
In  the  year  following  he  entered  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  in  which 
he  regularly  passed  through  the  Arts  classes.     In  the  third  year  of  his 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

course  he  became  the  pupil,  as  afterwards  the  intimate  friend,  and 
ultimately  the  biographer,  of  Dr  Brown,  then  the  Professor  of  Moral 
Philosophy.  He  early  shewed  a  decided  predilection  for  the  science  of 
logic  and  psychology.  It  was  this  which  brought  him  into  such  intimate 
relationship  with  Dr  Brown,  and  distinguished  him  as  a  student,  although 
in  the  prosecution  of  his  studies  in  mental  science  he  departed  very 
widely  from  the  method  of  his  instructors,  and  became  an  ardent  advo- 
cate of  phrenology,  of  which  he  continued  to  be  a  disciple  to  the  end 
of  his  life. 

In  November  1811,  when  he  was  in  his  seventeenth  year,  he  entered 
the  Divinity  Hall,  and  devoted  himself  with  peculiar  ardour  to  those 
studies  by  which  he  was  to  prepare  himself  for  the  work  of  the  ministry, 
and  which  were  so  congenial  to  the  taste  and  habits  of  mind  of  a  youth  of 
ardent  piety.  While  prosecuting  these  studies,  he  also  acted  as  the  private 
tutor  of  Alexander  Dunlop,  who  afterwards  earned  such  merited  distinc- 
tion as  one  of  the  Disruption  Worthies ;  and  this  connection  resulted  in  a 
life-long  friendship,  which  was  mutually  pleasant  and  profitable.  During 
his  theological  course  he  attended  the  ministry  of  Dr  Andrew  Thomson, 
which  could  hardly  fail  to  have  a  stimulating  effect  upon  him,  and  to  aid 
in  moulding  those  ecclesiastical  views,  of  which  he  became  such  an  earnest 
promoter. 

In  1 8 16  he  was  licensed  as  a  preacher  of  the  gospel  by  the  Presbytery 
of  Lochmaben.  He  was  not  ordained  as  a  minister  till  1821.  His 
father  had  been  advised  to  purchase  a  presentation  for  him,  but  declined, 
saying — "  I  gave  him  up  to  God  twenty  years  ago,  and  in  His  hands  I 
will  leave  him."  Mr  Welsh's  ecclesiastical  and  political  views  were  alike 
hostile  to  his  obtaining  the  favour  of  patrons  of  parishes;  but,  in  1820, 
Sir  Alexander  Gordon,  for  the  good  of  the  parish,  so  far  overcame  his 
political  predilections,  as  to  present  him  to  the  parish  of  Crossmichael,  of 
which  he  became  the  minister  in  March  182 1. 

He  at  once  set  himself  with  great  zeal  and  vigour,  and  with  eminent 


DAVID  WELSH,  D.D. 

success,  to  tlic  work  of  the  ministry.  In  prosecuting  that  work,  he 
laboured  under  very  considerable  disadvantages.  He  had  a  weak  chest, 
and  preaching  was  always  to  him  an  oppressive  labour.  He  had  little 
facility  of  utterance,  and  his  bodily  frame  was  but  ill  fitted  to  endure  the 
laborious  fatigue  of  his  pastoral  duties.  Notwithstanding,  he  soon  came 
to  be  beloved  by  his  congregation,  and  to  be  known  over  all  the  district 
as  a  preacher  of  singular  power.  The  publication  by  him  in  1825, 
moreover,  of  a  life  of  Dr  Brown,  made  him  known  in  all  literary  and 
scientific  circles  as  a  man  of  extensive  reading,  of  cultivated  taste,  of 
sound  and  acute  judgment,  and  of  searching  and  discriminating  analytical 
power.  At  this  period  of  his  history,  the  following  quotation  from  his 
diary  will  let  us  see  in  what  frame  of  mind  his  work  was  carried  on,  and 
wherein  lay  the  secret  of  his  power  : — 

"  Oh,  1  am  backward  in  spiritual  things.  O  Lord,  shed  abroad  Thy  love  in  my 
heart,  by  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  for  Christ's  sake.  Amen  and  Amen.  Enable  me  to 
cultivate  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity.  I  feel  much  attachment  to  my  people,  but 
little,  little  anxiety  for  their  eternal  souls.  Enable  me  to  be  more  zealous  in  this 
respect.  I  read  and  think  a  good  deal,  but  consult  too  much  the  inclination  of  the 
hour.  Give  me  strength  to  do  what  my  hand  fmdcth  to  do.  Enable  me,  O  Lord,  to 
make  this  my  constant  feeling.  Lord,  what  would'st  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?" 

It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  a  minister  of  Mr  Welsh's  accomplish- 
ments and  power,  especially  at  such  a  time  in  the  history  of  the  Church 
of  Scotland,  should  be  permitted  to  remain  in  the  seclusion  of  Cross- 
michael;  and  accordingly,  in  1827,  the  congregation  of  St  David's, 
Glasgow,  which  was  then  vacant,  recommended  him  to  the  Town 
Council  of  the  city  for  presentation  to  that  parish.  This  they  were 
induced  to  do  mainly  on  the  recommendation  of  Dr  Brown,  of  St  John's 
Parish,  who,  as  former  minister  at  Tongland,  had  been  a  co-presbyter  of 
Mr  Welsh.  The  Town  Council  acted  on  the  recommendation,  and  Mr 
Welsh,  having  accepted  the  presentation,  was  translated  to  Glasgow,  to 
the  deep  regret  of  all  his  congregation,  and  with  a  sore  wrench  to  his 
own  tender  nature.     "  The  tic  that  connected  us  together,"  he  said,  "  was 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

of  the  closest  and  most  endearing  nature,  though  I  never  knew  with 
what  strength  it  mutually  bound  us  till  it  came  to  be  broken." 

Mr  Welsh  engaged  in  the  work  of  his  city  charge  with  all  the  faithful 
diligence  and  ardour  which  had  characterised  his  previous  ministry, 
although  now  the  field  of  his  operations  was  greatly  enlarged.  Besides 
tlie  duties  of  his  parish  and  congregation,  he  could  not  fail  to  encourage 
every  philanthropic  scheme  for  the  good  of  his  fellow-citizens.  His 
interest  in  the  cause  of  education  was  peculiarly  active  and  intelligent, 
and,  in  conjunction  with  David  Stow,  and  others  like-minded,  he  con- 
tributed greatly  to  extend  the  means  of  education  in  the  city,  particularly 
in  setting  up  infant  schools  for  the  training  of  the  young.  He  was  in 
labours  most  abundant,  too  much  so,  indeed,  for  his  weak  bodily  frame ; 
and  although  he  was  daily  growing  in  the  affectionate  esteem  of  his 
congregation,  and  in  his  influence  for  good  in  the  community  at  large,  it 
became  evident  that  he  could  not  long  endure  the  strain  upon  his  physical 
strength. 

This  formed  at  least  one  powerful  inducement  to  him  to  accept  the 
offer  made  to  him  by  the  Government  of  the  day,  to  accept  the  Chair  of 
Church  History  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  to  which  he  was  appointed 
in  October  1831,  and  he  entered  upon  his  work  as  professor  in  November 
following.  The  year  before  leaving  Glasgow,  he  was  united  in  marriage 
to  the  sister  of  Mr  William  Hamilton,  Provost  of  Glasgow  at  the  time  of 
his  translation  from  Crossmichael,  and  on  the  occasion  of  his  removal  to 
Edinburgh  he  received  the  degree  of  D.D.  from  the  Glasgow  University. 

By  the  students  of  the  Theological  Hall  in  the  University  of  Edin- 
burgh his  appointment  was  hailed  with  universal  delight,  and  short  as  was 
his  time  for  preparation,  he  got  through  the  labour  of  his  first  session 
with  great  credit  and  acceptance.  His  work  as  professor  was  very  con- 
genial to  his  tastes,  and  he  grew  more  and  more  in  successive  years  in  the 
esteem  of  his  students  and  of  all  who  knew  him.  His  tenderly  affectionate 
nature,  notwithstanding  his  peculiar  shyness  and  reserve,  drew  their  hearts 


DA  VID  WELSH,  D.D. 

towards  him,  and  the  high  tone  and  abiUty  of  his  prelections  commanded 
their  respect.  The  spirit  that  animated  him  in  the  duties  of  his  class,  will 
appear  from  the  following  record  of  his  aims :  "  To  set  apart  one  hour 
every  Saturday  for  prayer  for  my  students.  To  make  a  study,  as  oppor- 
tunity presents,  of  the  passages  of  Scripture  that  relate  to  my  duties  as  a 
teacher,  and  to  the  duties  of  the  young.  To  add  to  my  resolutions,  from 
time  to  time,  as  new  light  shines.  In  looking  at  a  student,  ask.  How  can 
I  do  him  good  .'  or.  Have  I  ever  done  him  good  .''" 

So  long  as  he  could  resist  the  pressure  of  higher  obligations,  Dr  Welsh 
devoted  himself  exclusively  to  the  business  of  his  class,  refusing  all  solici- 
tations to  engage  in  other  work,  and  refusing  even  to  preach  except  on 
rare  occasions.  The  time,  however,  was  hastening  on  which  constrained 
him  to  depart  from  this  rigid  rule.  He  had  never  been  an  ecclesiastic ; 
but  ecclesiastical  questions  of  high  moment  were  pressing  to  the  front, 
and  his  sense  of  duty  was  such  that  he  could  not  avoid  taking  part  in 
them.  From  the  time  when  he  became  a  professor  till  his  death,  he  was 
a  member  of  the  General  Assembly.  He  was  one  of  the  comparatively 
few  at  that  time  who  regarded  the  total  abolition  of  Patronage  as  necessary 
for  the  wellbeing  of  the  Church,  and  in  the  Assembly  1833  made  his  first 
speech  on  that  subject.  Notwithstanding  some  slight  hesitation  in  manner, 
he  spoke  with  admirable  effect,  although  at  the  close  of  the  debate  only 
thirty-two  voted  along  with  him. 

Dr  Welsh  was  not  present  at  the  Assembly  1834,  which  passed  the 
Veto  Act,  having  gone  with  his  family  to  reside  at  Bonn,  but  he  heartily 
approved  of  what  was  done.  In  that  year  also  he  published  a  volume  of 
sermons  on  practical  subjects,  which  amply  sustained  the  reputation  he 
had  acquired  as  a  preacher  of  the  gospel.  From  this  time  forward  he 
felt  himself  under  obligation  to  take  a  larger  share  than  hitherto  in  the 
general  business  of  the  Church.  He  never,  indeed,  became  a  prominent 
leader  in  public  discussions,  whether  in  the  General  Assembly  or  in 
public  meetings.     His  physical  infirmities  were  a  barrier  to  his  efforts  in 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

that  direction.  "  But  he  joined,"  Rlr  Dunlop  tells  ns,  "in  the  consulta- 
tions and  exertions  of  the  time,  contributing  much,  by  his  judgment  and 
prudence,  to  the  wisdom  of  the  counsels  adopted,  and  cheering  all  by 
his  confident  spirit  of  reliance  on  the  righteousness  of  the  cause,  what- 
ever the  immediate  issue  might  be." 

The  Ten  Years'  Conflict  had  begun.  It  is  not  our  part  here  to  speak 
of  its  successive  stages,  but  during  its  progress,  Dr  Welsh,  in  several 
departments  of  Christian  work,  was  busily  and  profitably  engaged.  In 
1838  he  was  appointed  Vice-Convener  of  the  Colonial  Committee,  and 
in  1 84 1  became  Convener.  From  the  time  of  his  appointment,  he 
infused  a  new  and  vigorous  spirit  into  the  work  of  the  Committee,  and 
not  a  few  of  our  expatriated  countrymen  owe  to  him  the  blessing  of  a 
faithful  ministry  among  them.  His  eye  was  upon  every  emigrant  seaport, 
and  he  made  it  his  business  to  infuse  students,  probationers,  and  ministers, 
with  a  desire  to  devote  themselves  to  the  service  of  God  in  the  colonies. 

About  the  same  time,  on  the  abolition  of  the  monopoly  for  printing 
the  Bible,  Dr  Welsh  was  made  Secretary  of  the  Bible  Board  in  Scotland, 
and  upon  him  chiefly  devolved  the  responsibility  of  securing  that  the 
editions  of  the  Bible  issued  by  several  publishers  were  in  conformity 
with  the  authorized  version.  His  aptitude,  intelligence,  and  zeal  were 
also  conspicuously  manifested  in  the  duties  of  this  office,  of  which  the 
Government  of  1843  had  the  discredit  of  depriving  him,  because  of  his 
having  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  Free  Church. 

In  1842  he  was  Moderator  of  the  General  Assembly,  perhaps  the 
most  momentous  Assembly  ever  held  by  the  Church  of  Scotland  in 
connection  with  the  State,  and  on  him  it  devolved  to  preside  at  the 
opening  of  the  Assembly  1843.  Never,  perhaps,  was  a  man  of  such 
humility  and  modesty  as  Dr  Welsh  placed  in  a  position  of  such  con- 
spicuous eminence.  But  he  proved  himself  fit  for  the  occasion.  The 
crisis  seemed  to  inspire  him  with  new  life  and  vigour,  and  nerved  him  to 
powerful   and    eloquent   speech.      I  lis   sermon    in   the    High    Church— 


DAVID  U-RLSH,  D.D. 

from  the  text,  Rom.  xiv.  5,  "  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own 
mind  "—thrilled  through  every  heart,  and  when  he  took  the  chair  in  St 
Andrew's  Church,  in  which  the  Assembly  met,  the  crowded  audience 
gazed  upon  him  in  breathless  silence.     Mr  Dunlop  says  :— 

"Nothing  but  the  highest  mental  energy,  aided  by  strength  from  above,  could 
have  sustained  him  now— feeble  in  body  through  previous  illness  and  anxiety,  and 
e.\hausted  by  the  labour  already  gone  through.  But  he  was  firm  and  collected  ;  very 
pale,  but  full  of  dignity,  as  one  about  to  do  a  great  deed  ;  and  of  elevation  from  the 
consciousness  that  he  was  doing  it  for  the  cause  of  Christ.  His  opening  prayer 
ended,  the  Assembly  became  still  as  death.  In  a  voice  not  strong,  but  clear  and 
distinct,  and  heard  in  every  corner  of  the  building,  he  said,  'According  to  the  usual 
form  of  procedure,  this  is  the  time  for  making  up  the  roll;  but  in  consequence  of 
certain  proceedings  affecting  our  rights  and  privileges— proceedings  which  have  been 
sanctioned  by  Her  Majesty's  Government,  and  by  the  Legislature  of  the  country,  and 
more  especially,  that  there  has  been  an  infringement  on  the  liberties  of  our  consti- 
tution, so  that  we  could  not  now  constitute  this  Court  without  a  violation  of  the  terms 
of  the  Union  between  Church  and  State  in  this  land,  as  now  authoritatively  declared, 
I  must  protest  against  our  proceeding  farther.  The  reasons  that  have  led  to  this 
conclusion  are  fully  set  forth  in  the  document  which  I  hold  in  my  hand,  and  which, 
with  the  permission  of  the  house,  I  will  now  proceed  to  read.' " 

The  Protest  being  read,  Dr  Welsh  left  the  Chair,  followed  by  a  proces- 
sion of  ministers  and  elders  who  constituted  a  majority  of  the  Assembly, 
to  the  amazement  of  many  incredulous  statesmen  and  others,  and  in 
conformity  with  the  glad  expectation  of  the  great  body  of  the  religious 
people  of  Scotland.  Dr  Welsh  constituted  the  Free  Church  Assembly  in 
Tanfield  Hall,  after  which  Dr  Chalmers  was  called  to  the  Chair,  and 
presided  over  its  deliberations.  Dr  Welsh,  however,  was  enabled  to  take 
part  in  its  proceedings,  and  amazed  those  who  knew  him  best,  by  the 
freedom  and  fluency  with  which  he  spoke,  and  by  the  gladsome  spirit 
with  which  he  was  animated. 

The  branch  of  the  Church's  business,  which  was  specially  committed 
to  him,  was  Education  in  all  its  departments.  As  Convener  of  the  Com- 
mittee appointed  on  this  subject,  the  Free  Church  owes  to  him,  in  great 
measure,  the  noble  library  of  the  New  College,  as  well  as  the  stately 
building  which  contains  it ;  and  to  him  also  the  Church  is  to  a  consider- 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

able  extent  indebted  for  the  normal  and  elementary  scliools  which  have 
been  conducted  with  so  much  success. 

But  his  manifold  and  distinguished  labours  were  now  drawing  to  a 
close.  He  was  able  at  the  Assembly  1 844  to  attend  only  a  few  of  the 
sederunts,  and  in  the  November  following,  when  he  had  commenced  the 
labours  of  his  class,  he  was  able  to  continue  in  them  only  for  a  few  weeks. 
He  retired  to  Drumfork  House,  near  Helensburgh,  on  the  estate  of  his 
brother-in-law,  so  soon  as  the  weather  permitted,  but  his  health  did  not 
improve.  He  was  subject  to  violent  spasms  of  pain,  which  he  bore  with 
great  fortitude  and  resignation.  On  the  last  day  of  his  life,  the  24th 
April  1845,  he  was  able  to  take  a  drive,  and  was  more  cheerful  than  usual. 
"  After  dinner  he  slept  for  a  little,  leaning  his  head  on  the  table.  On  his 
waking  up,  Mrs  Welsh  began,  as  usual,  to  read  occasionally  a  verse  or 
two  from  the  Bible.  She  read  Isaiah  Ixi.  10,  '  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the 
Lord,  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God  ;  for-He  hath  clothed  me  with  the 
garments  of  salvation,  He  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness, 
as  a  bridegroom  decketh  himself  with  ornaments,  and  as  a  bride  adorneth 
herself  with  jewels.'  He  turned  the  passage,  as  was  his  wont,  into  a 
fervent  prayer;  and,  in  a  few  moments  afterwards,  stretching  out  his 
arms,  he  passed  into  the  presence  of  his  God  and  Saviour." 

VV.  W^ 


^ss^ 


f>^'\y< 


lolm  milson,  ®  J.  fM3. 


^OHN  WILSON  was  born  at  Lauder,  in  Berwickshire,  on 
the  nth  December' 1804.  He  received  his  early  education 
at  his  native  town  ;  from  which  he  proceeded  to  Edinburgh 
University,  passing  through  the  usual  curriculum  in  the 
Arts  classes  to  the  Theological  Hall.  Mr  Wilson  threw 
himself  with  ardour  into  the  various  subjects  of  study  which 
the  College  and  Hall  successively  presented.  Probably  the  special  bent 
of  his  mind  was  towards  the  Natural  History  sciences.  In  these, 
especially  Zoology  and  Geology,  he  took  through  life  a  deep  interest. 
But  his  mind  was  wonderfully  comprehensive ;  he  rapidly  accumulated 
knowledge  of  all  kinds,  and  seldom  lost  what  he  once  acquired. 

His  interest  in  missionary  work,  which  began  early,  deepened  in  his 
progress  through  the  Hall.  Towards  the  end  of  his  theological  course 
he  published  a  life  of  John  Eliot,  the  great  North-American  missionary. 
He  was  one  of  the  founders— if  not  indeed  the  founder— of  the  Missionary 
Society  in  the  Edinburgh  Hall ;  and  an  earnest  address,  which  he 
delivered  to  the  members  on  the  subject  so  dear  to  his  heart,  was  given 
to  the  public. 

He  had  by  this  time  been  accepted  as  a  candidate  by  the  Scottish 
Missionary  Society,  a  catholic  institution,  founded  in  1796,  which  received 
support  from  the  Evangelical  party  in  the  Established  Church,  as  well  as 
from  other  bodies  in  Scotland. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

He  was  ordained  by  the  Presbytery  of  Lauder  in  June  1828.  Soon 
after,  he  was  married  to  Margaret,  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Kenneth  Bayne 
of  Greenock — a  woman  remarkable  in  many  respects,  highly  gifted, 
highly  cultivated,  and  entirely  devoted  to  the  great  Master's  service. 
The  marriage  ceremony  was  performed  by  Dr  Andrew  Thomson  on  the 
1 2th  August,  and  on  the  30th  of  the  same  month  Mr  and  Mrs  Wilson 
sailed  from  Newhaven  to  London,  on  their  way  to  Western  India. 

The  American  Mission,  after  much  opposition  on  the  part  of  Govern- 
ment, had  commenced  operations  at  Bombay  in  the  end  of  18 14.  The 
Scottish  Missionary  Society  turned  its  attention  to  the  great  continent  of 
India  in  1822.  The  Society  was  by  no  means  wanting  in  comprehensive- 
ness of  plan ;  and  among  other  reasons  for  selecting  the  Presidency  of 
Bombay,  they  mentioned  its  contiguity  to  Persia — to  which  they  hoped 
to  send  missionaries.  The  Rev.  Donald  Mitchell,  the  first  agent  of  the 
Society,  reached  Bombay  in  1823 — Messrs  John  Cooper,  James  Mitchell^ 
Alexander  Crawford,  and  John  Stevenson  following  speedily  after.  Of 
this  band  of  honoured  men,  Mr  Cooper  yet  survives,  "  still  bringing  forth 
fruit  in  old  age."  Mr  Robert  Nesbit  joined  them  in  September  1S27. 
Mr  and  Mrs  Wilson  reached  Bombay  in  February  1829.  They  speedily 
proceeded  to  a  village  in  the  Southern  Konkan,  that  they  might  learn 
the  Marathi  language  without  distraction  ;  and,  having  made  rapid  pro- 
gress, they  began  their  missionary  labours  at  Bombay  in  the  November 
following. 

Even  then  Bombay  was  a  large  city — about  as  large  as  Edinburgh 
and  Leith  put  together  are  now  ;  and  it  contained  a  truly  remarkable 
assemblage  of  races  and  creeds.  Mr  Wilson,  with  his  usual  quickness  of 
eye,  surveyed  the  entire  field.  The  American  Mission,  and  one  or  two 
agents  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society,  were  labouring  with  all  fidelity 
among  the  Hindus.  Not  neglecting  them — nay,  with  his  zealous  wife's 
assistance,  planting  schools  for  males  and  females  wherever  he  could  find 
an  entrance — he  was  deeply  moved  by  the  spiritual  destitution  of  the 


JOHN  WILSON,  D.D. 

IMoIiammadans  and  Parsis.  Mr  and  Mrs  Wilson  were  heartily  aided,  in 
their  efforts  to  arouse  the  people,  by  a  band  of  Christian  friends,  among 
whom,  without  disparaging  other  excellent  men,  we  may  single  out  the 
late  Dr  Smyttan,  and  Messrs  R.  C.  Money,  J.  Farish,  and  R.  T.  Webb,  of 
the  Bombay  Civil  Service,  as  specially  remarkable.  Mr  Wilson  was 
incessantly  engaged  in  lecturing,  preaching,  writing,  publishing.  In 
1830,  along  with  two  other  friends,  he  established  a  monthly  periodical 
called  the  Oriental  Christian  Spectator ;  a  valuable  repository  of  infor- 
mation on  Indian  literature  and  missions.  He  also  took  extensive 
missionary  tours.  Having  acquired  the  Marathi  language,  he  next 
learned  Gujarat!  and  Hindustani  ;  and,  following  the  example  of  his 
learned  colleague,  Stevenson — who  early  studied  Sanskrit,  and  published 
a  portion  of  the  Rig  Veda  with  a  translation,  before  Rosen's  celebrated 
"  Specimen  "  had  come  out — he  made  progress  in  the  far-famed  holy 
tongue  of  the  Brahmans.  He  then  attacked  the  enigmatical  Zend,  which 
the  distinguished  savant  Burnouf  had  just  begun  to  elucidate  ;  and  he 
was  able  to  discuss,  at  least  on  equal  terms,  with  the  Parsi  priests,  the 
meaning  of  the  Zendavesta. 

Mrs  Wilson  died  in  1835 — a  most  grievous  blow  to  her  husband  and 
the  whole  mission.  Her  Memoir,  compiled  by  her  husband,  is  one  of  the 
best  of  missionary  biographies.  About  Mrs  Wilson's  letters,  which  make 
up  a  great  part  of  the  book,  there  is  an  indescribable  charm.  Two  of  Mrs 
Wilson's  sisters — Anna  and  Hay  Bayne — soon  after  her  death  proceeded 
to  Bombay  at  Dr  Wilson's  earnest  request,  and  were  a  great  comfort 
to  him  in  his  solitude.  Both  of  them  were  highly  gifted  and  devoted 
women.    The  younger  sister  became  the  wife  of  the  saintly  Robert  Nesbit. 

The  same  year,  in  the  month  of  August,  the  three  Scottish  missionaries 
then  labouring  in  West  India — Messrs  James  Mitchell,  Nesbit.  and  Wilson 
— were  received  as  agents  of  the  Established  Church  of  Scotland.  Mr 
Wilson  had  been  the  moving  spirit  in  making  the  application,  which  was 
most  heartily  agreed  to. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

In  the  year  1S36  Mr  Wilson  received  the  degree  of  D.D.  from  the 
University  of  Edinburgh. 

Mr  Alexander  Duff,  the  General  Assembly's  first  missionary,  had 
reached  Calcutta  in  May  1830  ;  and  the  marvellous  success  of  his  educa- 
tional efforts  had  stimulated  the  desire  that  a  seminary  on  the  model  of 
his  should  be  set  up  in  Western  India.  Mr  Wilson  did  all  that  he  could 
attempt  single-handed  to  conduct  such  a  school ;  and  by  the  end  of  1838, 
when  the  Mission  was  reinforced  by  Mr  Nesbit's  return  from  the  Cape, 
and  Mr  Murray  Mitchell's  arrival  from  Scotland,  the  General  Assembly's 
Institution  was  fully  organized.  It  was  numerously  attended  by  Parsis  ; 
but  the  baptism  of  two  Parsi  pupils  (now  the  Rev.  Messrs  Hormazdji 
Pestonji  and  Dhanjibhai  Nauroji)  speedily  shook  the  school  to  its  founda- 
tions. The  attendance,  from  being  nearly  three  hundred,  fell  at  once  to 
forty-five  ;  and  these  were  nearly  all  Portuguese.  Of  the  very  few  Hindus 
who  remained,  one  was  Narayan  Sheshadri ;  who  said  he  could  safely  do 
so,  as  he  was  determined  the  missionaries  should  never  catch  /mn  in  their 
net ! 

Dr  Wilson  now  commenced  a  series  of  lectures,  which,  in  the  end  of 
1 842,  he  published  in  a  volume  of  fully  six  hundred  pages,  entitled,  "  The 
Parsi  Religion."  This  was  the  most  elaborate  work  on  the  Zoroastrian 
system  that  had  appeared  since  Hyde  had  given  to  the  world  his  cele- 
brated treatise,  De  Veteri  Religione  Persarum. 

Dr  Wilson  sailed  for  Europe  early  in  January  1843,  accompanied  by 
Mr  Dhanjibhai  Nauroji;  travelled  through  the  Holy  Land  ;  and  reached 
Scotland  soon  after  the  great  Disruption.  No  one  had  watched  with 
deeper  anxiety  the  sore  struggle  which  the  Church  had  been  called  to  pass 
through.  No  one  more  firmly  held  the  great  principle  of  spiritual  inde- 
pendence. He  lost  no  time  in  signifying  his  hearty  adherence  to  the 
Church  of  the  Disruption  ;  he  rejoiced  and  gave  thanks  to  God  that,  on  this 
deeply  important  question,  all  the  missionaries  of  the  Church,  whether  to 
Gentiles  or  Jews,  were  of  the  same  mind  ;  and  he  took  part  at  home  in 


JOHN  WILSON,  D.D. 
explaining  and  vindicating  the  position  assumed  by  the  Free  Churcli.  He 
accompanied  Dr  Candlish  into  England ;  and  at  Oxford,  in  particular,  in 
presence  of  a  somewhat  critical  audience,  he  preached  on  the  spiritual  glor>- 
of  the  Church  of  Christ  and  its  inalienable  freedom.  Dr  Wilson  often 
mentioned  with  great  gusto  his  delight  at  the  answer  given  by  one  of  the 
boatmen  when  he  landed  at  Dover.  He  had  asked  the  man,  "Any  news 
about  the  Church  of  Scotland  .? "  "  They're  all  out,  sir,"  was  the  reply  ;  and 
to  Dr  Wilson  they  were  thrilling  words.  "  My  mind,"  he  used  to  say,  "  was 
made  up ;  I  would  have  gone  out  although  I  had  only  had  half  a  dozen 
associates."  It  is  right  to  add  that,  while  strongly  attached  to  the  Pres- 
byterian form  of  Church  government,  and  to  the  Free  Church,  Dr  Wilson 
was  a  man  of  truly  catholic  sympathies,  and  ever  ready  to  co-operate 
in  all  good  works  with  men  of  evangelical  sentiments.  He  heartily 
favoured  the  Evangelical  Alliance,  and  he  took  his  share  in  preparing  the 
way  for  a  great  confederation  or  alliance— the  doctor  himself  called  it  a 
consociation— of  Presbyterian  Churches  in  India.  On  the  question  of 
the  union  of  the  Free  Church  with  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  and  United 
Presbyterian  bodies,  Dr  Wilson  sided  with  the  majority  of  his  own  Church. 

Passing  rapidly  over  the  time  he  remained  in  Scotland,  during  which 
he  was  mainly  occupied  with  the  composition  of  an  elaborate  work  on 
the  "  Lands  of  the  Bible,"  we  find  Dr  Wilson  back  at  his  post  in  Bombay 
by  November  1847.  In  1846,  he  had  married  as  his  second  wife 
Miss  Isabella  Dennistoun— an  admirable  woman,  simply  and  earnestly 
devoted  to  the  work  of  God.  He  had  been  elected  a  Fellow  of  the 
Royal  Society  during  his  residence  at  home,  as  he  had  been  made  Pre- 
sident of  the  Bombay  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  during  the 
latter  part  of  his  residence  in  India. 

The  next  ten  years  of  Dr  Wilson's  life  passed  over  without  anything 
very  remarkable  taking  place.  He  was  as  active  in  mind  and  body  as 
before,  assisting  in  the  revision  of  the  translations  of  Scripture,  gathering 
acquaintance  with  the  aboriginal  tribes,  and  promoting  every  religious 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

and  philanthropic  effort  in  the  western  capital.  The  great  Mutiny  oc- 
curred in  1857  ;  and  since  then  the  main  literary  occupation  of  Dr 
Wilson  has  been  the  preparation  of  a  very  full,  elaborate  work  on  Caste, 
which  he  was  led  to  take  up  by  his  conviction  that  caste-prejudices  were 
closely  connected  with  the  outbreak.  But  his  pen  was  never  idle.  He 
published  a  careful  resume  of  the  efforts  of  the  Bombay  Government  to 
suppress  infanticide,  and  several  Memoirs  on  the  remarkable  cave-temples 
of  Western  India.  In  the  new  and  exceedingly  important  step  taken 
for  the  advancement  of  education,  in  the  establishment  of  three  great 
Universities  in  India,  Dr  Wilson  took  a  deep  interest ;  and  by-and-by  he 
received  the  honour  of  being  appointed  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University 
of  Bombay. 

Years  passed  on,  and  Dr  Wilson  had  attained  quite  a  patriarchal 
position  in  Bombay.  He  connected  a  present  and  past  that  were  in 
many  respects  strangely  contrasted.  No  man  had  more  acquaintance 
with  India  as  it  was  ;  and  no  man  had  so  much  with  India  as  it  is.  His 
knowledge  of  Western  India,  in  particular,  with  its  endless  complexity  of 
tribes  and  dialects  and  customs,  was  perfectly  marvellous.  He  became 
an  authority  superior  to  all  others  on  any  question  connected  with  the 
native  races.  In  his  judgment  as  well  as  in  his  knowledge,  both  Govern- 
ment and  the  public  could  repose  the  most  entire  confidence.  He  was  by 
no  means  a  mere  scholar  ;  he  was  a  man  of  great  practical  sagacity.  In 
the  dark  and  trying  times  of  the  Mutiny — darker  and  more  trying  than  any 
one  who  was  not  then  in  India  can  possibly  understand — Dr  Wilson  was 
an  invaluable  counsellor  to  Government.  Lord  Elphinstone,  who  proved, 
under  God,  a  ruler  equal  to  the  terrible  emergency,  often  sought  his  sym- 
pathy and  advice  ;  and  never  did  so  in  vain. 

The  applications  made  to  him  for  information,  for  advice,  were  endless, 
and  would  have  worn  out  any  ordinary  man's  patience  ;  but  he  hardly 
seemed  to  look  upon  the  tax  as  unreasonable.  To  every  one  who  came 
to  him,  whether  European  or  Asiatic,  he  was  uniformly  kind,  accessible 


JOHN  WILSON,  n.n. 

obliging.  The  feeling  of  regard  entertained  for  him  was  beautifully 
witnessed  in  1868,  when  a  sum  of  2i,cxx)  rupees  was  contributed  by  the 
Bombay  community  to  form  the  Wilson  Memorial,  the  interest  being 
drawn  by  Dr  Wilson  during  his  life,  and  the  capital  being  devoted, 
according  to  his  own  suggestion,  to  the  endowment  of  a  chair  of  Com- 
parative Philology  in  the  Bombay  University. 

The  death  of  his  excellent  wife  in  1867  had  been  a  very  sore  affliction, 
though  his  niece,  Miss  Taylor,  did  all  she  could  to  minister  to  his  comfort. 

In  1870  he  was  called  home  by  the  Church  to  fill  the  Moderator's  chair. 
We  do  not  require  to  tell  our  readers  how  well  he  did  his  part.  Courteous, 
conciliatory,  dignified,  with  a  ready  tact  that  seldom  failed  in  doing  and 
saying  the  right  thing,  he  was  one  of  the  best  of  Moderators.  During 
the  months  that  followed  the  Assembly,  he  did  much  to  advance  the 
cause  of  missions.  If  not  an  eloquent,  he  was  a  winning  advocate.  His 
powers  of  persuasion  were  great ;  and  he  seemed  to  draw  to  himself  the 
hearts  of  all. 

Since  his  return  to  India,  with  the  infirmities  of  age  becoming  too 
serious  to  be  any  longer  doubted  even  by  himself,  his  error  was  that  he  con- 
tinued to  attempt  too  much.  Doubtless  by  so  doing  he  wore  himself  out 
too  soon.  We  often  thought  of  a  remark  which  Dr  Candlish  once  made 
regarding  the  venerable  Dr  Gordon  :  "  It  is  far  more  important  that  he 
should  live  ten  years  than  that  he  should  do  any  work."  But  the  veteran 
would  work  on  in  spite  of  entreaties,  till  he  has  fallen  at  his  post. 

One  of  his  letters,  dated  i8th  April  1875,  thus  refers  to  the  death  of 
his  sister-in-law.  Miss  Bayne  :  "  How  few  of  my  early  friends  now  remain 
on  earth  !  and  how  many  of  them  have  gone  to  heaven  before  me !  May 
'  upwards  and  onwards '  be  more  and  more  my  watchword  !" 

On  June  i8th  he  wrote : — 

"  I  have  just  got  the  Assembly  papers,  and  am  greatly  pleased  with  the  glance  I 
have  been  able  to  take  of  them.  None  of  the  great  men  removed  from  us  will  be 
reproduced  in  their  individualities  and  combinations.  Yet  the  Lord  will  not  overlook 
the  exigencies  of  His  Church  and  people." 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

The  last  letter  we  received  from  him  is  dated  November  i.  1875  : — 

"  You  have  no  doubt  heard  of  my  severe  illness.  In  the  goodness  of  my  heavenly 
Father  I  think  I  am  a  little  better  ;  but  if  you  saw  my  difficulty  of  breathing,  &c.,  &c., 
you  would  much  pity  me.  Let  that  pity  pass  into  petitions  addressed  to  the  throne  of 
all  grace." 

After  this,  "  he  fell  by  leaps,"  as  Mr  Beaumont  expresses  it.  The 
day  before  his  death  he  said  to  a  friend,  "  I  have  perfect  peace,  and  am 
content  that  the  Lord  should  do  what  may  seem  good  to  Him."  He 
died  without  much  suffering  on  ist  December.  He  has  passed  away ; 
but  neither  the  Church  nor  India  ever  can  forget  him. 

Dr  Wilson  has  left  two  sons.  The  elder  is  the  accomplished  author 
ot  "  The  Abode  of  Snow,"  and  other  works.  The  younger,  who  studied 
medicine,  has  long  been  in  shattered  hea;lth. 

The  following  resolution  of  the  Senate  will  shew  the  estimate  in  which 
Dr  Wilson's  services  are  held  by  the  University  of  Bombay  : — 

"  That  this  University  place  on  record  its  deep  and  unfeigned  regret  at  the  death 
of  the  Rev.  John  Wilson,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  one  of  the  Fellows  mentioned  in  the  Act  of 
Incorporation,  late  Vice-Chancellor,  and  for  several  years  and  at  his  death  Dean  and 
Syndic  in  Arts.  In  its  foundation  on  a  sound  and  permanent  basis,  in  the  preparation 
of  those  rules  and  regulations  which  were  necessary  for  carrying  out  the  objects  for 
which  it  was  established,  in  the  prominent  part  he  took  in  the  examinations  for  its 
prizes  and  honours,  and  in  the  constant  attendance  he  gave  to  the  meetings  of  its 
various  governing  bodies,  Dr  Wilson  shewed  the  great  and  never-failing  interest  he 
took  in  this  Institution,  the  success  of  which  is  in  no  small  degree  due  to  the  able 
advice  and  fostering  care  of  this  great  and  good  man  ;  and  while  lamenting  his 
removal,  the  University  would  point  to  the  bright  example  of  his  life  and  conversation 
as  a  pattern  to  be  followed  by  all  engaged  in  the  work  of  education,  as  well  as  by  those 
who  profit  thereby.  That  although  Dr  Wilson's  memory  will  be  preserved  in  the 
University  by  the  '  Wilson  Philological  Lectureship,'  which  was  founded  in  his  honour 
in  the  year  1870,  yet  as  that  testimonial  was  provided  by  friends  and  admirers  of  Dr 
Wilson  outside  of  the  University,  it  would,  in  the  opinion  of  this  meeting,  be  specially 
appropriate  that  the  Senate  as  such  should,  in  some  manner  to  be  hereafter  determined, 
commemorate  the  distinguished  services  rendered  by  Dr  Wilson  to  this  University." 

j.   M.    M. 


milli-m  mihmx,  ©.©. 


R  WILSON  was  born  in  the  parish  of  Wcstruther, 
Berwickshire,  in  the  year  1808.  As  in  the  case  of 
most  of  our  eminent  men,  the  foundations  of  his 
education  were  laid  in  the  parish  school. 

The  winter  of  1825-26  saw  him  enter  the 
Edinburgh  University,  where  he  prosecuted  his  studies 
with  the  energy  and  success  that  never  fail  to  command  the  respect 
alike  of  fellow-student  and  teacher.  With  intellectual  powers  of  the 
higher  order  and  a  rare  capacity  for  work,  the  Westruther  student  could 
occupy  no  mean  place.  One  can  easily  imagine  with  what  infinite  zest, 
tempered  with  method  and  the  self-restraint  of  a  well-ordered  mind, 
he  would  pursue  his  curriculum.  In  the  Divinity  Hall,  four  years 
later,  he  sat  at  the  feet  of  Chalmers,  Welsh,  and  Brunton.  How 
far  he  profited  by  the  rare  lights  of  sanctified  genius  he  then  enjoyed, 
and  how  far  he  succeeded  in  grasping  the  grand,  clear,  profound 
Christian  philosophy,  which  can  only  be  superseded  when  something 
nobler,  or  truer,  or  anywise  better  appears,  of  which  the  present 
somewhat  murky  theological  horizon  affords  not  even  a  prophetic 
ray,  let  his  own  subsequent  career  as  a  preacher  and  a  master  in 
Israel  testify. 

The  sympathies  of  the  student  were  wholly  with  the  Evangelical 
party  in  the  Church.     He  was  one  of  a  band  of  young  men  who,  fearing 


D/SRUPTIOX  n-ORTHIES. 

the  Lord,  met  often  for  fellowship  in  the  truth.  Meeting  at  half-past 
six  on  Saturday  mornings  in  what  was  called  the  Exegetical  Societj', 
such  young  men  as  Robert  M.  M'Cheyne,  Horatius  Bonar  and  his 
brother  Andrew,  Alexander  Somerville,  George  Smeaton,  Henry 
Moncreiff,  Walter  Wood,  William  Wilson,  and  others  of  a  kindred 
spirit,  gave  themselves  to  the  study  of  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer, 
little  dreaming  they  were  then  sharpening  swords  soon  to  be  erriployed 
in  one  of  the  noblest  battles  for  the  independence  of  the  Church  and 
the  crown-rights  of  her  Divine  Head,  this  age,  or  for  that  matter,  an)- 
age  has  witnessed. 

Licensed  by  the  Presbytery  of  Earlston  in  1833,  the  young  preacher 
boldly  launched  forth  as  an  evangelical  divine,  a  teacher  of  the  ancient 
Gospel  in  its  purity  ;  and  to  venture  out  on  the  troubled  sea  of  that 
period,  in  the  primitive  craft  in  which  the  apostolic  fishermen  of  Galilee 
prosecuted  the  first  Christian  voyage,  demanded  no  little  courage.  To 
raise  the  simple  banner  of  the  doctrines  of  grace  at  that  time  was  to 
provoke,  in  many  quarters,  opposition,  and  odium,  and  scorn.  But  it  was 
the  fearless  bearing  of  this  cross  that  made  the  Disruption  men  the 
heroes  they  were,  that  made  the  Disruption  the  great  fact  it  was,  and 
gave  the  young  Free  Church  that  apostolic  fervour,  purity,  and  spiritual 
power,  which  was  her  truest  glory. 

From  1S35  to  1837,  Mr  Wilson  held  the  important  position  of 
bearing  aloft  the  evangelical  banner  of  that  period,  the  well-known 
Scottish  Gjiardian,  of  which  he  was  editor.  It  was  with  no  trembling 
hand  the  standard  bearer  carried  the  flag.  A  non-intrusionist  of  his 
calibre,  and  standing  so  well  to  the  front  as  he  did,  could  not  expect 
favours  from  quarters  where  the  proud  but  mean  spirit  of  patronage 
reigned.  So,  when  he  became  minister  of  Carmylie,  it  was  not  by  the 
grace  of  the  Crown,  which  then  held  the  patronage  of  that  parish.  For 
the  man  with  the  non-intrusion  banner  in  his  hand  to  become  the 
favoured  child  of  patronage  would  have  been  a  kind  of  miracle.     Mr 


WILLIAM  iriLSOy,  D.D. 

Wilson  entered  Carmjlie  as  its  minister  in  a  more  excellent  way. 
Under  the  Jus  devoliitu/n,  the  Presbytery  of  Arbroath,  in  compliance 
with  a  petition  from  the  parishioners  presented  him,  and  he  was  ordained 
in  1837. 

The  movement  that  preceded  and  prepared  the  way  for  the  Disruption 
was,  beyond  dispute,  a  great  spiritual  awakening.  The  grace  that 
settled  in  a  man's  soul  the  question  of  his  entire  subordination  in  heart 
and  conscience  to  his  Lord  and  Saviour,  of  necessity  also  settled  in  the 
mind  of  the  same  intelligent  inquirer  the  question  of  the  Church's 
independence,  and  Christ's  sovereignty,  absolute  and  undivided,  in  His 
Church  and  over  her.  The  minister  of  Carmylie  threw  himself  with 
energy  and  ardour  into  the  twofold  work  of  seeking  the  emancipation  of 
the  souls  of  men  from  sin  and  of  the  Church  from  the  fetters  that  were 
being  riveted  upon  her. 

The  Disruption  came  and  Mr  Wilson  found  himself  without  church 
or  manse.  Refused  a  site,  denied  the  liberty  of  public  worship  on  a  single 
square  yard  of  ground  in  the  parish,  the  only  place  of  meeting  left  the 
minister  and  his  people  was  the  highway.  The  time  had  come  when, 
in  many  a  parish,  the  people,  loyal  to  their  Divine  Head,  were  content 
to  worship  with  the  heavens  for  a  canopy,  and  surrounding  nature  for  a 
cloud  of  witnesses.  In  Carmylie,  the  conflict  was  peculiarly  severe. 
The  minister  was  compelled  to  seek  a  lodging  in  East  Haven,  some 
seven  miles  distant  from  the  sphere  of  his  labours.  Week  after  week,  in 
sunshine  and  in  storm,  in  the  pelting  rain,  in  the  piercing  east  "  haar," 
in  season  and  out  of  season,  he  trudged  those  weary  miles,  prosecuting 
his  ministry  with  indomitable  courage  and  undoubted  success.  Nor 
were  the  faithful  adherents  of  the  Free  Church  cause  found  wanting. 
The  farmer  of  Mains  of  Carmylie,  boldly  defying  the  powers  that  were, 
heroically  risked  his  lease  by  permitting  the  congregation  to  erect  its 
tent  on  one  of  his  fields.  In  the  same  spirit  of  fearless  independence, 
this  noble-hearted  elder  gave  up  his  dwelling-house  to  the  homeless 


DISRUPTION  IVOKTHIES. 

minister,  contented  himself  with  his  own  household  to  lodge  in  the  barn. 
For  a  period  the  minister  and  his  people  were  driven  from  post  to 
pillar,  now  worshipping  in  a  tent  here,  anon  in  a  barn  yonder,  and 
again  in  a  wooden  shed,  often  on  one  Sabbath  not  knowing  where  they 
should  assemble  the  next.  At  length,  to  Christian  endurance  fell  the 
victory.  Sites  were  granted  ;  a  church  and  a  manse  were  built,  and  the 
heroic  struggle  reached  a  happy  close. 

Those  who  remember  Mr  Wilson's  preaching  at  that  period,  speak 
of  it  with  enthusiasm.  Such  as  have  only  seen  him  in  the  cool  discharge 
of  official  routine,  or  heard  him  calmly  reading  one  of  his  clear,  terse, 
weighty  discourses,  could  not  easily  imagine  the  outbursting  energy,  the 
vehemence,  the  fire,  with  which  he  preached  in  those  days.  In  regard 
to  his  church  warfare,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  quote  the  words  of  a 
parishioner.  "Oor  minister,"  said  he,  "can  haud  the  gully  o'er  the  dyke 
tae  ony  o'  them."     This  witness  was  true. 

Translated  to  Dundee  in  1848,  he  became  minister  of  the  Mariners' 
church,  afterwards  named  St  Paul's.  Under  his  ministry  the  congrega- 
tion flourished  remarkably,  its  membership  increasing  well-nigh  threefold. 
A  handsome  new  church  was  erected,  and  a  congregation  embracing  not 
a  little  of  the  intelligence  and  influence  of  the  town  gathered  and 
consolidated. 

Of  the  many  services  rendered  by  the  minister  of  St  Paul's  to  the 
Free  Church  and  the  cause  of  the  Gospel  in  Scotland,  not  the  least 
important  were  his  labours  as  Convener  of  the  Home  Mission  Committee. 
To  this  office  he  was  appointed  in  1863,  and  for  ten  years  discharged  its 
onerous  duties,  with  admirable  tact,  untiring  energy,  and  much  success. 

In  1870,  the  Church  conferred  upon  him  her  highest  honour  by 
raising  him  to  the  Moderator's  Chair;  and  in  1870,  he  received  the 
degree  of  D.D.  from  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  It  is  hardly  necessary 
to  remark  in  passing,  that  Dr  Wilson  discharged  the  duties  of  Moderator 
with  perfect  dignity  and  efficiency.     Those  who  attended  the  opening 


WILLIAM  WIL.SOX,  D.D. 

services  of  the  Assembly  in  1867,  will  readily  recall  an  incident,  too 
impressive  to  be  ever  forgotten.  The  retiring  Moderator,  Dr  Wilson, 
was  in  the  midst  of  a  sermon  characterised  by  wonted  lucidity  and  weight 
of  statement,  and  a  more  than  ordinary  freshness  and  point,  when 
suddenly  a  shrill  crj-  was  heard,  and  Dr  Clason,  the  venerable  Clcrk 
of  Asscmbl)',  was  seen  to  throw  up  his  hand  and  fall  backwards  on  his 
seat,  as  if  dead.  A  thrill  of  deepest  solemnity  passed  through  the 
audience,  while  the  preacher  paused,  and  several  members  of  the  court 
hastened  to  raise  the  prostrated  form  of  the  aged  minister  upon  their 
shoulders  and  carry  liim  out.  It  was  the  beginning  of  the  end,  the 
work  of  a  faithful  servant  of  the  Church  had  reached  its  close.  The 
Master  found  him  at  his  post,  and  called  him  up  higher,  from  tiie 
assembly  on  earth,  to  the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first-born 
in  heaven.  In  the  intense  excitement  produced  by  this  incident  the 
man  who  seemed  most  calm  and  self-possessed  was  the  preacher. 
Resuming  his  discourse,  he  proceeded  to  fulfil  the  solemn  duties  of  the 
ofifice  and  the  hour  in  a  manner  befitting  the  occasion  and  the  scene. 

In  1868,  Dr  Wilson  was  elected  by  the  General  Assembly  to 
the  ofifice  of  Junior  Clerk,  and  in  1877,  he  was  with  entire  unanimity 
and  cordiality  appointed  Secretaiy  to  the  Sustentation  Fund  Com- 
mittee, of  which  he  is  also  Joint-Convener.  This  rendered  necessary 
his  retiring  from  the  pastorate  of  St  Paul's,  Dundee ;  but  he  is  still 
minister  eineritus  of  that  congregation.  His  removal  to  Edinburgh  was 
the  occasion  of  deep  regret  to  his  numerous  friends  in  Dundee,  and 
indeed  to  the  entire  community,  by  whom  he  was  held  in  high  respect. 
As  natural  and  appropriate  tokens  of  grateful  appreciation  of  his  many 
invaluable  services,  two  presentations  were  made  to  him  at  this  time, 
one  in  Edinburgh  by  friends  of  the  Church  generally,  the  other  by  his 
friends  in  Dundee,  where  he  had  exercised  his  ministiy  and  served  the 
Church  and  cause  of  Christ  with  so  much  ability  and  success  for  well- 
nigh  a  whole  generation. 


DISRUPTION  WORTHIES. 

Among  his  literary  efforts,  his  last  and  most  important  work  is 
the  Memoir  of  Dr  Candlish,  his  long  and  close  intimacy  with  that 
great  and  good  man  giving  him  a  peculiar  title  and  fitness  to  discharge 
the  office  of  biographer. 

Possessing  gifts  of  an  order  solid  rather  than  brilliant,  an  intellect 
strong  and  clear,  robust  common  sense,  far-seeing  sagacity,  a  judicial 
faculty  of  rare  soundness,  immense  capacity  for  work,  uncommon 
firmness  of  purpose  and  power  of  endurance,  Dr  Wilson,  as  a  loyal 
sen'ant  of  the  Church,  a  judicious  counsellor  in  her  times  of  trouble,  a 
man  of  affairs  proficient  in  the  silence  that  is  golden,  as  well  as  the 
speech  that  is  silvern,  an  indefatigable  worker  in  the  vineyard,  a  valiant 
soldier  of  the  truth,  and  a  hearty  lover  of  his  country,  has  spent  a  long 
and  laborious  life  in  the  service  of  the  Gospel. 

J.  M.  P. 


2365TC,.  lUJ 


1    1012  01152  6789 


