DR. COLENSO 


“ AND THE 


PEN TATEUOHE, 


TORONTO: 
ROLLO AND ADAM, KING STREET. 
LONDON; 
GEORGE MORRISH, 24, WARWICK LANE, PATERNOSTER BOW. 


1863. 


a 
TORONTO: 
: LOVELL AND GIBSON, PRINTERS, YONGE STRERT. 
, 
¢ ia 
3 2 yd 


DR. COLENSO 


AND THE 


PENTATEUCH. 


I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou hast 


hid these things from the wise and prudent and has revealed them unto 
babes.—-Martr. x1. 25. 


Ir is impossible to treat the author of this book as a 
Christian. I do not say this as forming any judgment of 
his personal state, in any way ; I speak of the public pro- 
fession of a religion he belongs to—Chri-tianity as con- 
trasted with heathenism, Mohammedanism, Judaism, or 
Buddhism. Dr. Colenso states that ‘our belief in the 
living God remains as sure as ever, though not the Pen- 
tateuch only but the whole Bible were removed. It is 
written on our hearts by God’s own finger as surely as 
by the hand of the apostle in the Bible, that ‘ God is, and 
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him.’ It is 
written there also as plainly as in the Bible, that ¢ God is 
not mocked,—that whatsoever a man soweth that shall he 
also reap,’ and that ‘he that soweth to the flesh shall of 
the flesh reap corruption,” pp. 53,54. ‘That is, with the 
Bible or without the Bible, Dr. C. believes in the exist- 
ence of God, and His rewarding them that seek Him, 
and in natural conscience. In other words (as far as his 
book goes, which he puts forth as a manifesto), he is a 
professed Deist. Even with the Bible he only believes 
so much as his heart and conscience recognize, and that 
the latter is to be preferred to the Bible as the means of 
knowing God; “that He Himself, the living God, our 


Father and Friend, is nearer and closer to us than any 
book can be; that His voice within the heart may be 
heard continually by the obedient child that listens for it, 
and that shall be our teacher end guide in the path of 
duty, which is the path of life, when all other helpers— 
even the words of the best of books—may fail us,” p. 54. 
Now it is clear that neither believing that God is, nor 
natural conscience, is believing in the special facts of 
Christianity—the incarnation, atonement, resurrection, 
redemption, being born again, the exaltation of a man 
to God’s right hand, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 
In 2 word, no special truth or fact of Christianity is 
“written on our hearts by God’s own finger,” or can be 
possessed by mere natural conscience or belief in God, 
All intervention of God is left out. But it is in this, and 
the statement of what led to its necessity, that revealed 
religion consists. There is a conscience in every man. 
The word of God acts on it. I do not doubt that there 
is an instinctive knowledge of a God and of judgment. 
This is all Dr. C. owns, with or without the Bible. 
Revealed religion is a series of divine and marvellous 
facts and truths, unfolding an intervention of God in 
grace with sinful man. He sets this aside. His relation- 
ship with God is not founded on it, He prefers, as 
teaching, what he has without it; that is, he wholly and 
professedly sets aside Christianity. He goes farther—he 
recognizes “ the voice of God’s Spirit . . . . not in the 
Bible only, but out of the Bible: not to us Christians 
only, but to our fellow-men of all climes and countries, 
ages and religions, the same gracious Teacher is reveal- 
ing, in different measures, according to His own good 
pleasure, the hidden things of God,” p. 222. Dr. C, has, 
in substance, solemnly declared that this is not so (see 
Article xviii. of the Thirty-nine Articles) ; but I suppose 
this is no matter with rationalists. But his statement 


amounts to this: Christians and heathens have all their 


5 


particular religions, but beside and within this, all have 
a communication in their own hearts of the hidden things 
of God. The knowledge of God is not in the religion, 
for heathens and Christians have it more or less, what- 
ever their religion, in their hearts. He confirms this by 
quotations from Cicero, Sikhs and Hindoos,  Cicero’s 
statement—I suppose Dr. C. did not find it out—is merely 
asserting natural conscience, with the addition of a denial 
of the foundation fact of revelation, that man is a sinner, 
driven out from God. “ Whoever wil! not obey this law,” 
says Cicero, * will be flying from himself, and having 
treated with contempt his human nature will, in that 
very fact, pay the greatest penaity, even if he shall have 
escaped other punishments, as they are commonly consi- 
dered.”?”, Now this makes hurnan nature the measure of 
good, as indeed Cicero everywhere does, And just see 
the result, which neither Dr. C. nor Lactantius, from 
whom he quotes, seem to have noticed ; this law or right 
reason “to the good never commands or forbids in vain, 
,never influences the wicked either by commanding or 
forbidding.”? Could grace be more fully denied ? Could 
the effect of law or conscience be more entirely mis- 
stated? There are good or wicked already—God knows 
how—and this law or right reason changes nothing,— 
always succeeds with one, and leaves the other where he 
is, This is, we are told, * a voice almost divine,” ‘ The 
same divine Teacher revealed also to the Sikh Gooroos 
(teachers) such great truths as these,” p. 223. He then 
quotes statements of the unity of God, but which is Panthe- 
ism, that is, that Cod isin every thing; statements which 
recognize Mahomets, Brahmas, Vishnus, Sivas—of course 
not Christ—and that is a revelation of God for Dr. C. He 
then quotes from Hindoo writings ‘ the following words, 
which were written by one who had no Penteteuch nor 
Bible to teach him, but who surely learned such living 
truths as these by the direct teaching of the Spirit of 


steer: ee NL RT 


> 
ve 


en a 


IN eR EL ON ETE I 


se 


4 
$ 
‘ 
t 
it 
4 
4, 
a 
} 


6 


God,” p. 224, In these words God is celebrated, and 
there is a good deal of moralizing, such as may be found 
anywhere ; but in which we find, * He that partaketh of 
but one grain of the love of God shall be released from 
the sinfulness of all his doubts and actions”—a comfort- 
able quietus, “J take for my spiritual food the water 
and the leaf of Ram.” ‘ God dwelleth in the mind, and 
none other but God.” Dr. C, admires what is the avowed 
doctrine of these same teachers, without finding out it is 
the grossest folly of Pantheism. ‘ God is the gift of 
charity, God is the offering, God is the fire of the altar, 
by God ihe sacrifice is perlormed, and God is to be ob- 
tained by him who makes God alone the object of his 
work.” Everything being but a development or expan- 
sion of God, we are too, and, of course, so far as we 
realize God in it, become God in a superior degree. But 
all is God; and it is true of a!l things, man among the 
the rest. This last sentence, as Dr. C. approvingly quotes, 
was by “one whe had experienced somewhat of what 
Job had experienced,” p. 223. All this is but extracting 
Deism from Christianity and heathenism alike, and mak- 
ing conscience the judge of what is to be received from 
each; only, unfortunately, Dr. C.’s conscience accepts 
the very grossest Pantheism without so much as finding 
it out. 

But there is more than this. This book does not be- 
lieve as much of Christ as Mohammed did. Dr. C. openly 
professes to know much better than Christ upon the sub- 
ject of the divine authority of revelation, Mohammed held 
Christ to be a prophet, and that He will judge the world. 
On the last point the book does not declare itself, if it be 
not in an intimation borrowed from Cicero, Here is Dr. 
C.’s estimate of Christ’s authority in what he declared : 
“We are expressly told, in Luke ii. 52, that Jesus in- 
creased in wisdom as well as in stature, It is not sup- 
posed that in His human nature He was acquainted, more 


Sea ARENA 


" ' 


than any educated Jew of the age, with the mysteries of a 

all medern sciences, nor, with St. Luke’s expressions be- 

fore us, can it be seriously maintained that, as an infant 
or young child He possessed a xnowledge surpassing 

that of the most pious and learned adults of His nation, 

upon the subject of the authority and age of the different | 

portions of the Pentateuch. At what period, then, of His 

life upon earth, is it to be supposed that He had granted to : 

_Him, as the Son of man, supernaturally, full and accu- 
rate information on these points, so that He should be | 

expected to speak about the Pentateuch in other terms | 

than any other devout Jew of that day would have em- 

ployed? Why shor'* ** be thought that He would speak 


with certain divin »dge on this matter more than an 
upon other matter ry science or history?” p. 32. i. 
That is,when Chri: sed One, spoke of the author- aoe 
| ity of the Word of Goa, 2 authoritatively of the Scrip- ! 
Fey tures and of Moses,—He merely followed the ignorance 


and prejudice of the pious Rabbis of hisnation. Dr. Colen- 
| so has more knowledge, and is freed from the prejudices, 
+ and in consequence can tell us positively that Christ was 
wrong! He has found out that it is impossible that such 
things as are found in the Pentateuch could come from 
our loving Father. This, if we are to believe Dr. ae 
Christ had not moral discernment enough to find out, and 
took for granted all was right, so as to believe that 
what Moses wrote came from God. Now Christ says, ie 
 < “© We speak that we do know, and testify that we have | 
seen,” for He was of ard in heaven; and the question is 
not how He learned what He knew but, when He taught 
bid positively, did He teach perfectly, or only under the in- it 
fluence of national prejudice? Dr. C. quotes the follow- | 
ing passages of Christ’s words: —‘“‘ Had ye believed | 
Moses ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me; 
but if ye believe not his writings how shall ye believe : - 
my words.” But it seems this appeal was all beside the a 


8 


mark, for Moses never wrote it at all. Hence, of course,, 


they were not called upon to believe Christ’s words either, 
“Now that the dead are raised, even Moses shewed at 
the bush,” This too was quite a mistake. “They have 
Moses and the prophets, let them hear them. If they hear 
not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be per- 
suaded though one rose from the dead,” But all this 
solemn appeal of Christ to Moses, as of equal authority 
and weight with His o..n words and resurrection, as a 
proof of truth, is a mistake, the prejudice of pious Rabbis 
of His nation! Dr. C. is freed from them, and cen prove 
he knows much better than Christ did. And this ran is 
what is called “Bishop of Natal.” I may be asked, has 
he not declared his belief in ail the canonical Scriptures, 
and bound himself in this office to require it of those he 
ordains? He has. What then does he do with his 
conscience? tie tells us that too; it is governed by the 
Court of Arches. It is a mercy for upright men that 
modern rationalists shew themselves so plainly morally. 
I do not think I ever read any thing so morally base 
as the reasons for signing the Articles, in the “Essays 
and Reviews.” Old infidels broke with Christianity—-it 
was sad enough—but modern ones keep their places and 
only give up their faith. 

The boldness of Dr. C.’s assertions, and ihe excessive 
carelessness of his statemen‘s and corclusions, are alike 
remarkable. He tells us that he does not believe in the 
deltige, because he does in geology. He has studied it in 
the Zulu country, and he now knows for certain (for Sir 
C. Lyell is infallible, if Scripture and the Lord Christ be 
not) that a universal deluge could not possibly have taken 
place. Now Sir C. Lyell is unquestionably an able geo- 
logist, as well as the constant resort and refuge of infi- 
dels ; but he has a system, and a system which geologists 
less speculative and, at the very least, as able as he, en- 


tirely reject. Nor does he deny that the science is in its. 


4 


ee 


—— a ee 


9 


infancy. ‘The ablest inquirers believe in a universal de- 
luge ; the latest researches tend to prove it, I say tend, 
becanse no certain conclusions zan yet be made from 
geology as todates, Ido not hesitate to affirm, and { am 
supported by the ablest geologists, that geological dates 
and periods stand on the most uncertain and unsatisfac- 
tory footing. Sir C, Lyell’s system is utterly unsatis- 
factory,—irreconcileable with the evident facts of the up- 
heaval theory, which is generally admitted, Dr. C., 
assures us that a partial deluge is ao better, so that in 
spite of universal tradition, Script »°, ‘he authority of 
Christ, who refers specifically to the deluge as true (Matt, 
xxiv. 37-39), and much geological research, we are to 
have no deluge at all. ‘J do not know that I should ever 
have noticed this point, as it is impossible to follow it 
out here, but as affording a proof of Dr, C.’s manner of 
reascaing. it was not partial, he says, because a flood 
which should cover Ararat must, in due time, sweep over 
the Puy de Déme, because water finds its own level !— 
that is to say, water 16,000 or 17,000 feet deep in a nar- 
row locality must have been some 5,000 feet deep at 
thousands of miles’ distance, when it had spread that 
distance in every direction! And a man who reasons 
thus is to call in question the accuracy of Scripture, But 
Dr. Colenso assures us the Scriptures never affirm their 
own infallibility. Abstractedly “ infailibility” belongs 
to a person, not to what has been already said ; but they 
affirm that they are inspired by God, and that they have 
His authority. The Lord says, “ The Scripture cannot be 
broken ”’—-appeals to it, as we have seen, as of equal au- 
thority with His own words—refers to them as testifying 
of Him—expounds ihem after His resurrection in what 
they taught concerning Himself—declares that all they 
said must be fulfilled—opens His disciples’ understand- 
ing to understand them—declares that His rising from the 
dead would be useless to convince those by whom they 


OO ES 
- oa 


10 


were not believed ;—they are quoted by Him as abso- 
lutely conclusive authority. Facts here questioned, or 
borne with because they may be “ fairly disposed of,” 
are referred to by Christ as undoubted history. So the 
apostles write whole epistles, in which their entire 
teaching is based upon the truth and inspired authority 
of Scripture. Paul speaks of the Scriptures “ foreseeing,” 
sc completely does he identify them with God. ‘ But 
what saith the Scripture’ is conclusive ; not only so— 
they declare them to be by inspiration. They are called 
the oracles of God, and the possession of them is counted 
to be the main privilege of God’s people ; so the law is 
called “the living oracles.” Peter says, “ No prophesy 
of the Scripture is of any private interpretation, but holy 
men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.” 
I dare say Dr. C. will call the authenticity of this in ques- 
tion. Take, then, the first Epistle (though I am perfectly 
satisfied of the authenticity of the second), There he 
states that the prophets searched as men into their own 
prophecies, as given by the Spirit of Christ which was 
in them. Paul declares that ‘‘ Every Scripture is given 
by inspiration of God”’—the security of the saint in the last 
perilous times. He calls the Scriptures “‘ prophetic Scrip- 
tures”? (Scriptures of the prophets). I have no doubt 
this refers to the New Testament, but if it be the Old, it is 
saying they ave inspired. So his own teaching he de- 
clares to be by * words which the Holy Ghost teacheth.”’ 
The prophets were infamous impostors, if what they said 
were not the direct testimony of God himself, for they 
say, “Thus sith the Lord.” As to Christ, it is said, 
‘“¢ He whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God, for 
God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto Him.” Thus, 
as Son of man, what He spoke He spoke—to refer to 
Dr. C.’s question—“ supernaturally,’’ and His words were 
the words of God. I am aware that Dr. C. says that, on 
such subjects, He was no wiser than other pious Jews, and 


11 


that he thinks himself wiser than Christ and the apostles 
on such; but does he expect every one to have the same 
opinion of him that he has of himself? Does he think 
that many even will respect the judgment of one called 
a Bishop, who persuades us that Christ was prejudiced 
and he is not?) Poor human nature ! 

Allow me to ask you, Dr, Colenso, do you believe in 
the resurrection ? do you believe in this stupendous exer- 
cise of Divine power, so suited to man subject to 
death? 1 mean the resurrection of tiim who was “ deli- 
vered for our offences and raised again for our justifica- 
tion.” Is it not something, this coming in of God to take 
out of death and from among the dead His own Son, 
given for our sins? Do you find this without a revela- 
tion? Does Cicero furnish you with this, or do Sikh 
Gooroos, or Pantheistic Brahmins? They may say fine 
things about God and patience, and do the same things 
(as Paul says) as the rest: can they tell of the deliverance 
of sinful man? I can conceive no greater proof of imbe- 
cility and wilful ignorance of facts than to compare the 
revelation first of the whole history of man, under God’s 
dealings with his responsibility, and then of atonement 
and the intervention of God in deliverance, with the fine 
sayings of some heathen,—one who shows, too, men to 
be incapable of knowing God, as Cicero does, or with the 
moralizing of Pantheists. 

But I close. J am not writing a book on these things, 
but penning an ephemeral article on the poorest piece of 
infidelity I ever met with, and I turn to the objections to 
run them over rapidly. Let my reader only remember 
this, The object of Scripture is not to meet objections or 
give history, but, on the part of God, what is divinely in- 
structive to man; that, if the Old Testament gave the 
perfection of the New,—it would prove it was not true, 
for the irue light did not shine till Christ came ; that, 
meeting objections does not give the force of the positive 


12 


proofs. It seems candid to quote Kurtz and Hengsten- 
berg (men who, however respectable, know little, as I 
judge, of the power of Scripture), but in merely giving an- 
swers to objections all the positive proofs are, of course, 
left out. If no answer could be given to an objection, 
and yet there were positive proof of that against which 
the objection was. brought, this would only prove the so- 
lution of the difficulty was not known. The positive 
proofs of the truth of Scripture are such, that the denial of 
their being, as they are called, ‘the oracles of God” is 
an evidence only of the moral darkness of the rejector of 
them. It is quite true I cannot explain light to a blind 
man; but every one who sees knows he is blind. Above 
all, let my reader remember that the Lord himself treats the 
Scriptures as absolutely inspired and authoritative, quotes 
them as we now have them, and declares that all written 
of Him must be fulfilled,—that “ not a jot or tittle can 
pass from the law till all be fulfilled,” the law which 
Dr. C. pronounces he could not attribute to God, save as 
he selects bits according to his own fancy, for he has, of 
course, a perfect judgment ;—a man who sees nothing in 
the minutize of the law, which (while a yoke in the 
letter) as a shadow of good things to come, is full of the 
deepest instruction: let him remember that Dr. C. pre- 
sents himself as wiser and better informed than Christ, 
and if he have faith to do it, pray for one who can think 
so, and publish a book to tell the world he does. 

Such views, they tell us, will unite all pious people in 
one mother church ; and if such questions should disturb 
men’s minds, and a serious person would ponder and 
weigh them before doing so, he has only to remember 
that Dr. C. has such a sense of the petty importance of 
his own position, that he cannot have leisure (so he tells 
us) to ponder a while before he gives forth, pretending to 
be wiser than Christ,—opinions which contradict what 
Christ says, 


13 


Tue first objection is that in Genesis xlv1., Hezron 
and Hamiui are stated to have gone down to Egypt, and 
consequently to have been born in Canaan, but that this 
is impossible if the ages of Judah and Joseph be consi- 
dered. It is contended that Judah was furty-two when 
Jacob went down into Egypt, inasmuch as Joseph was 
thirty-nine. Gen, xxx, 24-26, and xxxi. 41, are cited to 
prove that Joseph was born in the seventh, Judah in the 
fourth year “of Jacob’s double marriage.” The impos- 


sibility of Hezron and Hamul’s going down to Egypt, 


arises froin this, that Judah was twenty when Joseph went 
down into Egypt, and that Hezron and Hamul, whe rank 
in point of time with Judah’s great grand children though 
his own grand children by Tamar, could not have been 
born when he was forty-two, i. e. twenty-two years after- 
wards. On the other hand it is insisted that the narra- 
tive of Jacob’s going down, makes sixty-six souls go 
with him, and there are not sixty-six without Hezron 
and Hamul. | 

There is no ground for the objection at all. I do not 


insist on the uncertainty of the exact difference between 


the ages of Judah and Joseph, as what might be added, 
even if just, would hardly, clear up the point; though, 
bringing it perhaps within the limits of possibility, it is 
sufficient to throw doubt upon Dr, C.’s assertions. But 
Gen. xlvi., is simply to record the immediate descendants 
of Jacob who were associated with himself in Egypt, to 
give his family. Thus Er and Onan are noticed, only ‘tis 
added, they died in Canaan. It is thenadded “ and the 
sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.” This 12th 
verse is distinctly genealogy, not that all went down 
into Egypt who are named in it: for Er and Onan are 


14 


named because they are sons, while it is expressly stated 
they did not go down at all.* 

In the 12th verse the introduction of “were” is em- 
phatic, and the phrase, I apprehend, clearly intended to 
be supplementary. It is not “ Er, and Onan, and Shelah, 
and Pharez, and Zarah, and the sons of Pharez, Hezron, 
and Hamul,” which would clearly have been the case 
if they had been goers down into Egypt. But the histo- 
rian stops at Zarah, and adds supplementary information : 
Er and Onan were on the list of sons, but they did not 
go down, they died before, and Pharez’s sons were Hez- 
ron and Hamul. They are looked at as filling up the 
breach, but the latter half of the verse is, in contrast with 
going down, an explanation of the history of that fami- 
ly. Asif he had said: these were Judah’s sons, but I 
must add this explanation to the statement: Er and 
Onan never got down, for they died, and Pharez had 
two sons who axe counted in te supply their place. For, 
though the leading thought be the going down of the famil 
into Egypt, yet in order to this he gives the whole family ; 
and that this is so is evident, for ie introduces Joseph’s 
sons, adding they were born in Egypt. Indeed, I think 
it very questionable whether all Benjamin’s sons were 
born when he came into Egypt. It was after Joseph’s 
birth that Jacob agreed with Laban to stay longer, and 
staid six years. He then journeyed to Palestine, when 


*The computation in the passage is not very clear. If we count in 
Er and Onan, we have thirty-three sons and grandsons. If we leave 
them out we ‘must count Jacob among the souls of his own sons and 
daughters. However, I am disposed to include Dina and Jacob, and 
leave out Er and Onan, and read thus; “These be the sons of Leah 
which she bare unto Jacob in Padan Aram, with his daughter Dinah, all 
the souls of his sons und daughters: thirty and three.” Asif he had 
said, this makes thirty and three. If not, we must count in Er and Onan, 
and make it mere genealogical computation of sons, and the 26th verse 
would be general, the computation already given excluding Jacob, and 
Joseph and his sons. 


s 


a 
» 
° 


| 


| 


15 


Joseph must have been seven years old. He was sold 
into Egypt at seventeen. Hence Jacob had been only 
ten years in Canaan when Joseph went there. Jacob 
had settled first at Succoth, then near Shechem, and 
Dinah, who was probably nearly of Joseph’s age, was 
old enough to be ill-treated by Hamor, before Benjamin 
was born. For Jacob went off to Bethel after the des- 
truction of the men of Shechem, and after leaving Bethel, 
Benjamin was born and Rachel died. He does not 
appear either in the history. Joseph is a boy, the son of 
Jacob’s old age. Benjamin could only have been two 
or three years old when Joseph went down; for if 
Dinah were seven or eight years old when she came to 
Canaan, say she was fifteen or sixteen when Hamor 
wronged her; seven or eight years had elapsed in 
Canaan before Benjamin was born, and two or three 
years more elapsed before Joseph went down. We must 
add twenty-two for the interval between Joseph’s and 
Jacob’s going down. Benjamin was thus at the utmost 
twenty-four or twenty-five. So he is called a “lad” 
(nahar) xliii. 3, and a little one (katan) in xliv. 20, and 
(nahar) again, 31. This being so, and giving the fullest 
possible age of twenty-five, which, with the three terms, is 
very improbable, it is very little likely that he had ten sons 
born to him. I doubt even whether Reuben’s sons were 
all born, as he says, “slay my two sons.” On the 


whole, I think it is evident that this is a genealogical - 
list, without reference to the place of birth :—the — 


statement of the whole family, as a family, who 
went down. This manner of giving a genealogy 
complete, and a general fact which is not accurately 
true as to each individual in it, though it characteri- 
zes the subject of recital, we have other examples of. 
To go no farther than chapter 35: All Jacob’s sons are 
given, including Benjamin, immediately after the account 
of Benjamin’s birth in Canaan, and it is added, “ these 


16 


are the sons of Jacob which were born to him in Padan 
Aram.” The exact genenlogy was the important thing, 
and it is given accurately. The main fact which 
characterized the family was their birth away from the 
land of promise, in the country where Jacob served for a 
wife. Jt was no object to except Benjamin in the state- 
ment; it was to give the accurate history of his birth. 
J doubt not a moment he is a special type of Christ in 
connection with Israel: the son of his mother’s afHiction, 
but of his father’s right hand. But it could be no mis- 
take for the writer, or compiler, or whatever he was, had 
given all the details of his birth immediately before, and 
speaks in the passage itself of Jacob’s being in that 
land. But, Benjamin being born, the time was come to 
give the whole family. The subjects are given with 
divine purpose, in view of after dealings of God, which 
He foreknew, not as mere histories to amuse; and hence 
we get distinct subjects without arrangement of dates. 
Dr. C. states that Judah’s misconduct was after Joseph’s 
going down to Egypt, because it is said, ‘at that time.” 
Now Judah’s genealogy and ways were all important 
because our Lord was to spring out of Judah. But 
after this history of Judah which lasts some twenty years 
at any rate, the history of Joseph’s going down into 
Egypt is resumed where it left off. Judah’s history is 
introduced as a separate subject parenthetically. The 
last verse of xxxvii., and the first verse of xxxix, are 
connected, and the history of Judah comes in between 
as a whole of twenty years by itself ‘At that time” 
is only the general epoch, and the whole history is given 
together. This is exceedingly common in Scripture. 
But as Joseph was a remarkable type of Christ, so Judah 
was his progenitor according to the flesh. And _ this 
Pharez and his son Hezron were so. I must add that the 
relative ages of Judah and Joseph are anything but 
clearly proved. The relative dates of Joseph’s birth and 


3 
| 
| 


e 
a i ES 


° 17 


his going down into Egypt, and of each to other events 
are far more distinctly given. 

On the whole the purpose of the statement in Gen. 
xlvi., is clearly to give Jacob’s family, and hence some 
are noticed who did not go down to Egypt, and Hezron 
and Hamul are specially introduced into the verse not 
with the list of sons, but as associated with them. The 
saying, “‘ Thy father went down into Egypt threescore 
and ten persons, and now ye are as the stars,” takes up 
the general fact, to shew the marvellous increase. The 
same is the ca.* in the New Testament, specially in 
Luke. 

Dr. C. in fact admits the whole case where he says, 
“wishing to sum up the seventy souls under one catego- 
ry, he uses (inaccurately as he himself admits) the same 
expression, ‘came into Egypt.’”? Now this settles the 
whole question. He gives a category of persons, that 
category being Jacob’s family with the general fact of 
that family’s leaving Canaan and going into Egypt. Bunt 
he introduces some who did not literally go down, though 
they were there. If this be so, and it is perfectly evident, 
Dr. C.’s argument is simply worth nothing at all. When 
he says: “all the souls which came into Egypt were 
threescore and ten,” we have the demonstration that 
some at least who were born in Egypt, provided they 
were of the family that came, are accounted as coming. 
The case of Hezron and Hamul is much clearer, because 
there is only an accessory statement in the genealogy ; 
““and the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul,” 
And we have no need to say again with Dr. C., “ the de- 
scription is, of course, literally incorrect, but the writer’s 
meaning is obvious enough,” for it is literally correct, and 
the meaning obvious too. But I may add Dr. C.’s own re- 
mark, which shews the utter wilfulness and equal 
absurdity of his objection: ‘“ He wishes to specify all 
those out of the sons of Jacob who were living at the 


B 


18 


time of the commencement of the sojourn of the Israel- 
ites in Egypt, and from whom such a multitude had 
sprung at the time of the Exodus.”” How soon Hezron 
and Hamul were born we cannot say. ‘They are 


brought into the list in connection with the loss of two of. 


the sons of Judah, with whose history they were con- 
nected,—one of them being ancestor of David and of 
the Christ, 

The next objection is really almost too absurd to notice, 
but worthy the futility of rationalist arguments. Dr. C. 
makes a computation of how far files of men as many 
in number as could stand in front of the breadth 
of the tabernacle would reach. Does he think the 
writer did not know, as well as Dr. C., that all the con- 
gregation could not have stood in the court. But he was 
not so morally dull as to think of it. Supposing the riot 
act read to a crowd of 100,000 persons, and J say, the 
riot act was read to the multitude who stood before the 
magistrate, and I computed how far 100,000 men would 
reach, standing in a file directly before the magistrate. 
What.would any one think of the sense of the person 
who made the remark? Or are the crowd not responsi- 
ble because they cannot hear it? Away with such 
childish trifling. But the fact is there is no ground for 
the remark at all. “ Before the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation,” has a most important meaning in 
these ordinances, Within the tabernacle and holiest of 
all was the place of Jehovah’s communing directly with 
Moses ; outside, yet in connection with the tabernacie, 
the place of meeting the people, of God’s going out, not in 
the revelation of Himself, but in communications from 
Himself to the people, and of the access of the people to 
Him. All the court of the tabernacle of the congregation 
was held to have this character of * before the door of 
the tabernacle,” and all done there and communicated 
thence was done before the door of the tabernacle of the 


| 
| 
+p 


19 


congregation, All brought up to the court was before 
the door, Thus if all the people had been outside the 
court and Moses had stood in the doorway of the court, 
they would have been before the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation.” It was the general expression for 
coming up to the court or entering it, though not 
going near the tabernacle where the door literally 
was “The women,” we read, “assembied them- 
selves in troops at the door of the tabernacle of the 
congregation.” They did not come when the tabernacle 
was set up in order, in troops, between the laver and the 
holy place. But we have the matter definitely stated.— 
In Exodus x!. we find, ver. 29, “he put the altar of the 
burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation... . and he set the laver between the tent of the 
congregation and the altar.” Thus the altar of burnt of- 
fering, the first thing met with on entering the court was 
by the door of the tabernacle. Now this was the place 
where God was to meet the children of Israel, as contrast- 
ed with meeting Moses within the veil. Exod. xxix. 42, 
“a continual burnt offering... at the deor of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation before the Lord, where 1 will 
meet you to speak there unto thee. And there I 
will meet with the Children of Israel.””> Thus Moses 
standing under the hangings of the ce. _1 and speaking to 
the crowd without was speaking to them gathered before 
the door of the tabernacle. Had they been inside the 
court he would have turned his back to them. So when 
a person offered a burnt offering, he offered it at the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord.— 
He killed the bullock before the Lord, and the blood was 
sprinkled upon the aliar that is by the dcor of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation. They came up to the Lord 
there, instead of offering it where they pleased, away 
from him. And this was carefully secured by ordinance, 
as a guard against idolatry. They had to bring all the 


2) 


beasts they slew up before the Lord: Lev. xvii. 4. The 
gathering of the congregation to the door of the tabez- 
nacle was bringing them up tothe court, so that Moses 
standing there might addressthem, And the place spe- 
cifically pointed out for this was not at the door, but where 
the altar was, i. e. next the entrance of the court where 
the people were to come up with their sacrifices, and the 
Lord met with them. 

Such objeciions as these are child’s play, proving only 
entire ignorance of God’s ways with Israel, and the pur- 
port of the ordinances, carelessness of research into them, 
with the pretension, the common accompaniment of ignor- 
ance, to see clearer than others, and the desire to make 
difficulties in presence of all the divine light which is 
found in what is objected to. Dr. C. seeks to prove his 
candour and care by showing that the elders of Israel 
were not all the congregation. He might have spared 
himself the trouble. And he has gone through sums of 
arithmetic to prove the size of the court. I really have 
not examined whether his multiplication is correct. I can 
suppose it. 

His next objection is as to how Moses and Joshua ad- 
dressed all Israel ; and he wisely informs us that the ery- 
ing of the children, whose mothers must be supposed to 
have pushed to the first place, would hinder all but those 
close by from hearing. Was ever anything more child- 
ish! Supposing all did not hear, which may very well 
be believed, they were all put under the responsibility of 
what was addressed to them,of which those who were in 
earnest could easily put themse’ves in possession, Sup- 
posing the elders or heads 0: —>s were nearest, as is 
probable, they would have bothin ined and led the oth- 
ers according to what was said. 

The next objection is to the possibility, with so few 
priests, of having the bullock for a sin offering burned 
withont the camp. Now I[ admit fully that the great ob- 


21 


ject here is doctrinal not historical. There is no history 
atall. What is ordained was only to be done in the case 
of the priest’s, or the whole congregation’s sinning ; ought 
never to have happencu, and may never have happened. 
And from the way they went on(forthey nevercircumcised 
their children, and certainly fell into idolatry) if the case 
did arise, they probably neglected the prescribed sacrifice. 
If it did happen once or twice, such a provision was no 
difficuity. That once or twice in forty years or even in 
one year, such a toilsome ceremony should mark their 
sin was most appropriate. Nor dol doubt a moment 
that though the priest was responsible and must have had 
and seen it done the Levites or younger priests might 
share the manual toil, And this is implied in the form 
of the Hebrew verb which is the Hiphil, ‘ to cause to 
go forth ;” used no doubt consequently for “ bringing 
forth,” but which may be by anoiher as by oneself, as it 
is used for causing an evil report to come on some one.*— 
For the rest, a walk of a mile and a half or three miles 
for their common bodily wants was nothing out of the 
way for a people who had nothing to do except to tend 
their cattle, which would in itself have taken them there. 
To suppose they used fuel as in London is simple non- 
sense. And they chose places where wells were, ana 
God clave the rock when there was no water. It is real- 


ASO A A 8S we ee ee NN a a Sete NE 


me 


* Yatsa is to go forth, as Bo is to go inor to, And hence the causative 
is used for bringing forth, because one who does does cause to go or come 
forth. But there is no ground at all for confining it to the personal act 
of the person causing it to come forth. Thus, not only in the case of 
#@ evil report, Hotze Dibba, eited in the text. Deut. xvi. 23, Bringing 
forth the tithe, Lev. xxiv. 14, Bringing forth him that had cursed. 
Zech. iv. 7, Gen, xxxiv. 24, 25, Bringing forth Tamar. Ex. iii. 10, Moses 
is to bring forth Israel from Egypt; that is, cause them to come out. 
So Ex. xiv, 13, Heb. 14. So in Ezra i. 8. We have those did Cyrus 
bring forth by the hand of Mithredath. Where he expressly uses another 
‘@ have them brought out. In a word, there is no ground at all for 
Dr, C.’s remarks. 


- 


o 


ly absurd bringing forward such objections. Had Dr. C. 
been a soldier, or lived in the dirt I have had to live in, he 
would have known that a walk a mile and a half out of 
a city, for the necessities of life, was a very natural thing, 

The fifth objection is first that the shekel is called the 
shekel of the sanctuary before there was a sanctuary; and 
that the money of which the silver sockets, &c., were made 
‘was the redemption money, and that the census which as- 
certained the number of the people on which the redemp- 
tion money was paid was six months afterwards, by 
which time the number must have increased. This has 
no joundation whatever. As to the remark that it was 
called the shekel of the sanctuary before the sanctuary 
was set up. The book is a history and gives the sum ta- 
ken according to the value of the money known when it 
was written. They paid at the time what was known, 
when the book was written, as the shekel of the sancti 
ary, perhaps settled at the very time. As regards the num- 
bering, it is clear the computation of the sum that was 
paid is made from the numbering itself, the result of 
which was known when the account of it was written.— 
There is no confining of the same aumber ;—Exodus 
xxxviii. 26, Numb. i. 46,—it is the number itself. I 
do not know what the ground for saying six months is, 
The tabernacle was set up on the first day of the first 
month, the numbering took place a month after, The 
sockets, chapters and filaments may have been made 
just before. They may perfectly well have given each 
man his money, and the actual numbering been made 
six weeks afterwards to verify it, and that number be 
given as the ascertained one, even if some few had 
attained the age of twenty in the short interval. ‘Ihe 
command to give the half shekel is given in chapter 30. 
But this was by no means all the silver, for many had 
offered willingly, but it was typically important that it 
should be understood that that on which the tabernacle 


{ 
| 
' 
' 


direction for their use was given already, 


23 


of witness was founded was redemption, and what 
separated the service of God from the world was re- 
demption, Hence the sockets of the boards of the 
tabernacle and the hooks and chapiters on which the 
hangings of the court were fixed were f this silver.— 
The actual numbering took place when the tabernacle 
was set up to verify the number redeemed, which had its 
own importance, If some shekels more were given it 
was of no consequence whatever to notice them, as the 
Some few 
might have died who had given their half shekel, some 
few reached twenty, but the sum, when numbered, is 
taken as the sum applied to the service, We know that 
the population in the wilderness was as nearly stationary 
as possible. 

The next difficulty is how they got tents, on leaving 
Egypt, and carried them. I might fairly say I donot know. 
Some may have been badly off for want of them, have made 
them on the journey, and while staying at Sinai for a 
year. As to carrying them, nothing is said; they had 
asses doubtless, perhaps camels, as well as ox2n. The 
history says nothing about it. To say they could not 
have them is absurd. Very likely they were at first great- 
ly in want of them. All this is to the last degree idle: it 
is not the object of the history to give these d: tails. Dr. 
C. then takes a very difficult Hebrew word to prove that 
if it means “ armed,” there are difficulties in knowing 
how they got arms, or how they were afraid of Pharaoh 
if they had. It is really tedious to go through such ab- 
surdities, The wo.d probably signifies that they went 
out “in array,”—not as poor hunted runaways: for God 
tuok them out with a high hand. “ By strength of hand 
the Lord brought us out of Egypt.” But it does not by 
any means follow, if their faith were not lively, that they 
would not be alarmed when attacked by trained soldiers. 
It is said in this same 13th chapter: God did not take 


; eS, ¢ “«< 


a 
> 


24 


them the short way lest the people should repent when 
they saw war, and return to Egypt. And they were so 
disposed. God suffered their faith to be tried for a mo- 
ment, and they did repent when they saw war; only now 
it was but to make His deliverance the more conspicuous. 
Nor, where faith was not in exercise, was it very wonder- 
ful. Accustomed to be slaves, with all their women and 
children and cattle, the way of escape barred, no practice 
in war or even in any common military arrangements, 
they were in face of the most experienced warriors 
on earth, with chariots and cavalry ;—themselves a 
great mixed multitude. When Dr. C says “a body of 
600,000 warriors,” he says what is false. They were not 
warriors. They were of an age fit for war, even if that 
were true of them; but they were poor brickmakers, 
though now roused by God’s intervention to leave the 
house of bondage. 

The next objection as to the passover, is founded 
on misstatement and carelessness. Dr. C. insists it 
was impossible to notify it, and have al! ready in 
time. He tells us the first notice of any such feast 
to be kept is given in this very chapter, where we 
find it written, verse 12. “I will pass through the land 
of Egypt this night.” Hence he argues it was im- 
possible to have all Israel ready, and insists on this night 
and the use of the Hebrew word hazeh. But zeh has 
not this kind of exactitude always. At any rate the 
chapter shews distinctly the falseness of the conclusion 
Dr. C. has drawn from it. The directions had been 
given at the beginning of the month, and the lamb had 
tobe kept up three days; “This month shall be unto 
you the beginning of months, it shall be the first month 
of the year to you, Speak ye unto all the congregation 
of Israel, saying: on the tenth day of this month they 
shall take to them every mana lamb, . . . and ye 


shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same - 


month.” Dr. C. say 
notice several days | 
pass through the land 
bad indeed. Moses | 
take a lamb the tenth, 
this we are told cann 
hand, because the cl 
comes to killing and 
else? If the lamb w 
fourteenth, the ordin 
objection does, is to 
No doubt the momen 
pies the inspired writ 
fully suffices to shew 
of time and notice, 
The rest of the articl 
first place kids woulc 
all the male lambs pe 
ate it, loins girded, 
were prepared long h 
in the wilderness. 
was any sudden noti 
by the urging of the 
Dr. C. thinks that 
false alarm, proves tl 
confusion inIsrael. { 
demanding to move ° 
loins girt and staff ir 
moment that all was 
no hint of an ordei 
The Egyptians were 
already borrowed je 
pation of going. Th 
inattention to the s 
account dwells chie 
a moral import he c 


25 


onth.” Dr. C. says this cannot mean that they had 
1otice several days beforehand, because it says, [ will 
pass through the land of Egypt this night. This is very 
yad indeed. Moses is told to notify to all the people to 
ake a lamb the tenth, and to keep it to the fourteenth, and 
his we are told cannot mean that they got notice before- 
and, because the chapter says “ this night,’? when it 
omes to killing and eating it. And what can it mean 
‘ise? =If the lamb was not kept up from the tenth to the 
ourteenth, the ordinance was not kept at all. All this 
ybjection does, is to disclose the will of the objector. 
o doubt the momentous ordinance itself is what occu- 
vies the inspired writer, but the beginning of the chapter 
ully suffices to shew that the objection drawn from want 
f time and notice, is as perverse as it is unfounded. 
he rest of the article does not deserve notice. In the 
irst place kids would do, so that there was no danger of 
a11 the male lambs perishing. As to notice to start, they 
ate it, loins girded, and staff in hand, ready to go, and 
were prepared long before to be on the move, to sacrifice 
n the wilderness. Nor is there a word to shew there 
was any sudden notice ; or that their move was caused 
by the urging of the Egyptians. 
Dr. C. thinks that his own confusion, in fright from a 
alse alarm, proves that there must have been hopeless 
onfusion inIsrael. But they had for a length of time been 
demanding to move with all their flocks, and were now 
oins girt and staff in hand, so that we cannot doubt a 
oment that all was prepared nd arranged. There is 
no hint of an order to start communicated suddenly. 
he Egyptians were urgent on them to go. They had 
already borrowed jewels from the Egyptians in antici- 
pation of going. The whole theory of Dr. C. is simply 
nattention to the scriptural account. Because that 
account dwells chiefly on the great facts which have 
amoral import he concludes there were none else even 


26 


when they are positively stated, and makes statements 
moreover, and statements upon which all his argument 
depends, which are not in the passage, or actually contra- 
dict it. I may add that I do not even admit that the 
600,000 were only men in the prime of age; they were 
all above twenty—twenty and above, that were men, 
besides children. This would make a considerable 
difference in the numbers. 

As to how the herds were fed in the desert, it is certain 
they chose their encampment where there were springs. 
At Sinai God gave them water out of a rock. I may 
add that Dr. C. speaks of Mount Serbal as Sinai, which is 
more than doubtful, or confounds two opinions, applying 
statements as to one incorrectly to the other, ignorant that 
there was any difference ; which, as to the character of 
the place of encampment, is important. Lipsius thought 
Serbal was Sinai, but more exact research has made it 
pretty clear it was not, and shewn where Israel encamped. 
The attempt to say, as Dr. C. says, that the wandering 
in the desert is not a necessary preliminary to all the 
history of Israel, is too barefaced, does too much violence 
to the common sense of every man who has read scripture 
to call for an answer. Movements of whole nations in 
the deserts of Upper Asia have been frequent when there 
was not the miraculous interposition of God to give 
water, which is stated in the history of Israel. Israel 
stayed mainly in the north of the desert on the borders 
of Mount Seir and the land of Canaan, where there were 
wells and pasture. Though what is related in detail is 
what happened at Sinai at the beginning, and at the close, 
When Dr. C. says the Scripture story says not a word 
about this long sojourn near Mount Seir and the Red Sea 
he makes a blunder with his usual carelessness. The 
Israelites got through the desert of El Tyh* (which is not 


*El Tyh is a modern name (the wandering) for the desert district lying 
north of Sinai. 


oset 


aed 


27 


the desert of Sinai as Dr. C. says) by a rapid and short 
journey to the desert of Paran and Kadesh Barnea close 
to Canaan. There they were called on to go up the 
mountain of the Amorites and take possession of the 
land. Instead of this they sent the spies, the Lord 
giving His sanction to it, but at their desire. Their faith 
failed and they would not go up, and were condemned 
to wander the forty years, till the men, save Joshua and 
Caleb, died. 

It was on their refusal to go up that they turned and 
went to the Red Sea (Numbers xiv. 25), and then it was 
they compassed Mount Seir (Deut. i, 40), and were on 
the border of countries affording supplies. In one place 
where they had no water they were given it again 
miraculously, wert down finally outside the Wady Akaba 
to the Red Sea, returned to Mount Hor for Aaron’s death, 
and then, at last, down to the Red Sea again, going up 
the eastern side of the mountains of Seir to Moab and 
Jordan. The statement of Dr. C. is merely the result of 
carelessness in searching Scripture. The detail of these 
long years we have not; but we have of a stay of a year 
in Sinai, where water was given miraculously, a short 
journey across E] Tyh, the Lord himself leading them, their 
arrival at the borders of the land, and their journeying 
about Mount Seir and to the Red Sea, water being given 
them miraculously when it failed. Let me remark how 
beautifully at the moment they were sent back from the 
land through their unbelief (Numb. xiv.) God gives direc- 
tions what to do in the land, shewing His promise and 
purpose as sure as His Word and nature, in spite of man’s 
folly and failure.—Numb, xv. The only account we have 
of the stations between their reaching the borders of the 
land in the second year, and their reaching Jordan, is in 
Num. xxxiii., and the localities at which they stopped 
during this interval of time are unknown till we come 
to Moseroth. Thence their journey is clear to the Red 


28 


Sea, back to Hor, back to the Red Sea,and round Seir to 
Edom. (Comp. Numb. xxi. and Deut. x.) But we know 
that from Kadesh to Zered was thirty-eight years, so that 
they reached Kadesh in the second year before the end 
of it, probably a good while before, because the wars 
against the Amorites and Og were alter Zered and before 
Jordan. Now they did not leave Sinai till the end of the 
second month of the second year. They abode in Kadesh 
many days, certainly more than forty, so that we are sure 
that the journey from Sinai to the borders of Canaan was 
very short indeed. They were there on the edge of 
eultivated land. God turned them back, but they never 
left the neighbourhood of Canaan, Seir, and the Red Sca. 
And He who turned them back took care of them, giving 
them water at Meribah miraculously when needed. Of 
all this Dr. C. is ignorant, telling us Scripture says no- 
thing about it,—not having examined that which he is 
pretending to prove unhistorical. This is true that the 
Lord gives us those parts of the journey in detail which 
have a moral bearing, and not how the cattle were pro- 
vided for. But the book is all false if it be not historical, 
We have the name of each place where they stopped during 
the whoie forty years. This must be history or forgery. 
I have noticed elsewhere that the statement in Deut. x. 
seems to contradict the list in Numbers but becomes the 
strongest proof of the historical character of the book 
when closely examined, because we find, by careful 
comparison of facts and passages, that they traversed the 
same ground twice from Hor to the Red Sea, from the Red 
Sea to Hor, and then back to the Red Seaand east of Edom. 
But men do not make these apparent contradictions, 
solved by collateral facts and shewn to be unconsciously 
true, save in relating real history, which, as they know 
the facts, they have no need to combine and arrange, 

Dr. C. makes difficulties as to there being wild beasts 
in Canaan with so large a population. His objections 


a 


29 


are futile. What is the population of India? how dense 
is well known, yet tigers and wild beasts abound, 
Modern European populations are no rule at all, nor 
even Port Natal, because they settled more in Canaan in 
towns and villages. Counting in the Canaanites besides 
Israel is only another instance of Dr. C’s, carelessness, 
for the supposition made is their tota! immediate destrue- 
tion. My own conviction is that the number of Israelites 
is greatly exaggerated. The €00,000 are all males not 
children, all the grown men. 

The whole of the reasoning in the next chapter to 
prove the first-borm more numerous than is stated seems 
to me an undoubted mistake. [I cannot doubt that: 
those only, and the same in Egypt, who were still 
members of their father’s families are counted. The 
captive in the dungeon and Pharaoh himself may have 
been first-born, but it is not supposed, as in question, 
that they should die. It was the house. ‘‘ There was 
not a house where there was not one dead.’’ In each 
family which was together the first-born was taken. I 
do not believe that a first-born father and his first-born son 
were both taken or numbered. The first-born children of 
child-bearing mothers were counted. The first-born of 
existing families at the time of the numbering. It clearly, 
J apprehend, did not include old men and grandfathers 
whose fathers were dead, or even heads of families married 
out, bui first-born of living mothers whose families were 
with them. Hence counted from a month old. Those 
below were yet unclean. Remark here that the question 
must have presented itself to the mind of the writer. Itis 
a proof that it is historical that an evident difficulty is left 
unsolved. A forger doesnot put an evident difficulty in his 
account. Here we have an apparent and evident difficulty. 
The number of grown men is in the previous chapter. No 
explanation given. Why? Because the writer is stating 
facts, not inventing a story, and therefore states the fact 


30 


without noticing the difficulty. For myself, I can only 
say, when I never thought of a question in it, I never 
took the statement as to Egypt or Israel as referring to 
other than families at home, unmarried members of 
households. Indeed, in this particular case, it may be 
questioned whether it was not those only born after the 
destruction of the first-born Egyptians to whom the ordi- 
nance here referred to was given. God says he sanctified 
then to Himself all the first-born, It would, perhaps, 
suppose an unusual number in their first year of liberation, 
which would be nothing extraordinary. However, on 
this I do not insist, as those under a month must be sub- 
tracted, who, in this case, might be numerous. “ All 
the males,” does not refer to all of all ages, but all the 
males as contrasted with females, Indeed, in verse 43, 
it is rather implied that all were not: “ and all the first- 
born males by the number of names, from a month old 
and upwards of those that were numbered of them, were 
22,273.” But neither do I insist on this, as the Hebrew 
may, I apprehend, be taken as “in their numbering ” the 
same as ‘¢ in number,” 

As to the question of the increase of population during 
the sojourn of Israel in Egypt it has been discussed and re- 
discussed a hundred times, and it must require over- 
weening self-confidence in Dr. ©. to bring it forward as 
he does as an argumentum crucis. He says the doubts he 
has “raised will be confirmed into a certain conviction, 
by its appearing plainly from the data of the Pentateuch 
that there could not have been any such population itself to 
come out of Egypt,” p. 148. [suppose he must be ignorant 
of what has been said of it; if not, such language is 
simply overweening impertinence to men far better versed 
in such inquiries than himself, If the Israelites doubled 
in fifteen years, they would have been 1,146,880 in two 
hundred and fiften years; in two hundred and thirty 
years 2,293,760. But the statement of Scripture is, that 


, . 
: 
Hy 


31 


“the children of Israel were fruitful and increased abun- 
dantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty, 
and the land was filled with them ;” and the new king 
said, * Behold, the people of the children of Israel are 
more and mightier than we,” . . . and they perre- 
cuted them. Very probably they were all removed to 
Goshen, giving rise to Manetho’s story of Avaris. * But 
the more they afflicted them the more they multiplied and 
grew,” so that their increase was not such as makes any 
difficulty. In England the increase in ten years was more 
than 23 per cent., where town and manufacturing habits 
largely impede, so that 35 per cent. in fifteen years is 
reached in the actual state of England. So that doubling 
in the circumstances of Israel, with extraordinary bless- 
ing in this respect, was nothing incredible, though we 
have no proof of their numbers more than the 600,000 
males above twenty, and no proof that the majority of 
women were not Egyptians or other strangers. If this 
fact be taken into account, the increase presents no kind 
of difficulty. But the duration of the sojourn is a very 
obscure point: Josephus gives it both as two hundred 
and fifteen and as four hundred and thirty. The reader 
may see Clinton Fynes’ investigation of ihe point, if he 
have access to it. He reckons two hundred and fifteen 
years, taking the shorter or Hebrew chronology. Many 
able chronologists doubt of this, as Hales. At first sight 
Gal. iii, 17 seems to decide the question, but when exa- 
mined it does not, I think, necessarily do so, The apostle 
takes the time of promise as a general fact. To Abraham 
were the promises made and to his seed. Now the con- 
firmation to the seed does not come in for some forty 
years after the promise. It is of this confirmation the 
apostle speaks, if we take the letter of what he says. But 
his object was not the date, save as showing Wie law 
coming long after the promise. He refers to Ex. xii. 40, 
which was sufficient for him, and is ambiguous, He 


2585 3:35 asaare SSA tre >e> 


32 


may refer to patriarchal times as those of promise, and 
take the Egyptian state as four hundred and thirty years. 
The length of the sojourn in Egypt is an unsettled ques- 
tion. 

As to the Chronicles, it is, I judge, a blunder of Dr. 
C.’8, which I should not think much of, were not his book 
solely founded on affected accuracy of detail. 1 Chron, 
vii. 20, presents difficulties. This is always hopeful 
ground for jufidels. What is difficult to understand they 
can more easily turn to their own purpose, for others 
have not a positive answer ready. If we follow the 
statement simply, however, there is no great difficulty. 
The Chronicles, besides giving the history of Judah, 
not Israel, and especially of David’s family, gather up 
all the fragments possible of ancient history and genea- 
logy for the return of Israel from Babylon. Take the 
passage thus—‘ The sons of Ephraim Shuihelah :” his 
genealogy is followed down to a second Shuthelah, and 
there stops. Then the passage speaks of two other song 
of Ephraim, Ezer and Elead, who made a raid against 
Gath, and were killed; and then follows another son of 
Ephraim, which is quite natural, and his genealogy is 
given. His daughter Shesah is simply a descendant of 
his. Ammihud was fifth from Ephraim, 

The objection to the numbers of the Danites and Levites, 
that of the former being: large, though Dan had only one 
son, which, to an unpraztised eye, may seem to present the 
greatest difficulty, is founded on want of attention to the 
reckonings of scripture ; as ifinevery case those mentioned 
are all. The very comparison with Chronicles which Dr. 
C. institutes ought to have taught him it was not so; for 
there are persons mentioned there who are not in Exo- 
dus. The genealogies are given as far as needed tomake 
out the moral history according to God’s government of 
Israel, but no farther. Any number may be left out, even 
generations may, provided what is needed is given.— 


33 


Next, generations are taken by Dr. C. as if they were 
the same then as now. They lived one hundred and thirty 
orone hundred and forty years, and their families were 
olten proportionate, and here God interfered expressly to 
multiply them. Thus if we had not Gen. xxv. all scrip- 
ture would have led us to suppose that Ishmael and 
Isaac were all the sons Abrahamhad. Here we see he 
had six sons more when he was quite an old man, of 
whom nations sprung. Here for other purposes it was 
important to notice it. In other cases it was not. Next 
the assumption that Israel remained only two hundred 
and fifteen years in Egypt is a questionable one. 

The number of the generation following the twelve pa- 
triarchs is no way decided. To begin the computation 
one really ought to take at any rate one hundred and 
thirty-nine, not seventy ; that is, take the females in. So 
the children of Dinah and Serah do not appear at all. 
The fact ofa number of children in one generation says 
nothing as to the result. Benjamin had many; Reuben 
had many. Neither were large tribes. Does Dr. C. sup- 
pose that a forger would have been insensible to this if 
he had been inventing. It is the strongest possible proof 
that the account is historical, drawn from facts, for no one 
would have laid himself open to the objection. There 
was no need whatever, but that the facts were so, to iend 
a handle to objectors. It was wu. ‘atzral if it were not 
true. Dr. C. states that Moses’ children were only two. 
ae. I doubt it much. They were only two by Zipporah, but 
he had married also an Ethiopian woman. It did not 
concern the scripture history to say anything of children 
by her. We see from the genealogies that families were 
reckoned all under one head if they were not numerous 
so as tomake a distinct family—I1st Chron. xxiii. 10, 11-— 
or might come in as two when properly the head should 
have been but one, as Ephraim and Manasseh. If Josenh 
had had a dozen sons afterwards they would not have 

0 


34 


formed distinct families—Gen. xviii. 6. They would 
have merged in the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh.* 
All these considerations which lie at the basis of the 
whole system are ignored by Dr.C. We have an instance 
how much the names are taken merely to represent fami- 
lies, and how many may be left out, in the very case Dr. 
C. mentions, who in his usual careless and superficial 
way does not notice or perceive it, being simply bent es 
his own object. “ The Amramites, he tells us, numbered 
as Levites in the fourth (Eliezer’s) generation were, 28 
above, only two, namely, the two sons of Moses,—the sons 
of Aaron being reckoned as Priests. Hence the rest of the 
Kohathites of this generation must have been made up of 
the descendants of Ishar and Uzziel,” p. 169-170. ‘This 
is because Ishar and Uzziel are mentioned—Exodus. vi. 
21, 22, But this is simply that there was some special 
reason for mentioning them. Kohath had another son, 
Hebron, who may have had for cught we know ten times 
as n.any. Ina word those are noticed in the genealogies 
as to whom some special motive existed, others not. 
Dr. C. has noteven found it out. All his calculation here 
is based, to say nothing of its general fallacy, upon his 
not noticing what was before his eyes in the text. But 
this fact, with a thousand other similar ones, involves a 
principle which makes the ground of all his calcr lations 
fundamentally false. Let the reader note this case, as it 
may clear his mind as to these statements of families. 
A genealogical succession is given, and only two sons 
out of four mentioned. One, it so happens, we can 
supply as far as it goes, because Moses and Aaron came 
from that stock,—the absence of the other we cannot ac- 


* As to Dan, if the absi nce of others of the tribe not yet formed hin- 
dered the application of the rule laid down in the case of Zelophehad’s 
daughters, the fact that he had oniy one son may have been removed in 
a few generations. Hushim may have had as many ag Jair who had thirty 
sons who rode on thirty agses colts. 


— a —¥ ~ 


4 


| 


4 


35 


cow.t for. In this case we are sure of it, beceuse he is 
mentioned a few verses before. Now it is just as possi- 
ble, very ‘ikely indeed, that Amram may have had a host 
cf sons besides Moses and Aaroa who are mentioned 

cause of their importance, The names are given more 
to show from whom people are descended who aie known 
than to tell all the descendents. All this Dr. C. has over- 
looked, aad simply made mathematical calculations as 
ifall were given.—Ilis whole system is false. 

Dr. C.’s computations are merely neglect of all the 
principles of scriptural genealogics, Besidcs, I repeat, 
the numbers given are such as prove they are not fabri- 
cated ; and the paucity of Levites, and the numbers of Dan 
prove that the statements are drawn from history and 
facts, as the whole tenor of the statements bear on the 
face of them, and are such as no man on earth would 
have invented. Dr. C. says:—It is incredible the Le- 
vites should noi have increased more during the sojourn 
in the wilderness. The fact that Eliezer did not die proves 
nothing as to the Levites not coming under the judgment 
which fell on Israel, for their murmerings when the spies 
returned ; God was pleased to keep Israel at the same 
level in the wilderness. As to numbers that is clear. 
The Levites were no exception. God may have used 
providential means for this, the privations of the wilder- 
ness, which affected the Levites as well as the rest. But 
there is no motive for thinking they were exempt from 
the judgment. But the truth is the great change in 
relative numbers in the tribes shews all the reasoning as 
to the small increase of the Levites, utterly valueless. 
Population may increase or decrease at such a rate, but 
that says nothing whatever for particular families. One 
increases, another becomes extinct. Thus Manasseh 
rose from 32,200 to 52,700. Ephraim had sunk from 
40,500 to 32,500. Benjamin increased from 35,410 to 
45,600. Dan was stationary. Asher had increased 


SuSE eepetnsnenvensnre-eseaenssrerer—wreranermesntionemov 


36 


fror.. 41,500 to 53,400. Judah had remained pretty 
stationary. Issachar largely increased. Simeon had 
fallen from fifty-nine thousand to twenty-two. Thus the 
particular degree of the increase of the Levites, on which 
Dr. C. has bestowed so much labour, is of no import 
whatever. All Dr. C.’s remarks indicate a singular in- 
attention to facts. 

As regards the small number of Priests making it 
impossible they could fulfil their services; unless in the 
case of the offering of birds, it is a mistake to think the 
priest had anything to do save to receive the blood, and 
arrange a burnt-offering on the altar. All the operations 
of slaying, flaying, cutting up, were done by the offerer. 
But let it be remembered we are speaking of history. 
The doctrinal import, (which is their real value) of the 
directions for the sacrifices, is mst precious as these are 
known types of the sacrifice of Christ. No part of Scripture 
is more important. Thisofcourseis loston Dr.C. Now 
as.to history, we have no proof that a single offering was 
brought all the time they were in the wilderness. Burnt- 
offerings were always voluniary, and, in the state of Israel, 
it is just as likely they never troubled their heads about it ; 
for they sinned without compunction, and certainly had 
never circumcised their children, so that really they had 
no right to offer any sacrifice. That they did not offer a 
peace oficving is certain, for they murmured for meat, 
complaining of the manna, and got the quails in chas- 
tisement; at any rate on the second occasion. Save 
Miriam we do not hear of any one having the leprosy. 
There is no evidence of any historical difficulty what- 
ever, but the contrary. Indeed, Amos. v. 25, complains 
that they did not offer sacrifice to Jehovah, but iook 
Moloch and Chiun for their Gods. History, therefore, 
has nothing to do with the matter; the instruction as to 
priests and sacrifices, is doctrinal, not historic. The 
details of Dr. C.’s reasonings are as trifling as usual. 


87 


As Scripture speaks often of doves in the wilderness, he 
assures us the psalmist was hardly thinking of the terri- 
ble deserts of Sinai—of which he knows nothing. Was 
ever more egregious trifling ? 

As regards the Passover, Dr. C. says it was impossible 
the priests could suffice to kill the passover, and sprinkle 
the blood. If, as it is evident they naturally would, they 
kept it as they had in Egypt, every house killed the lamb 
for itself. ‘The whole difficulty is a soap bubble, proving 
only Dr. C.’s will and foolishness. If Dr. C. had given 
himself the trouble of reading, 2 Chron. xxx., which he 
quotes, he would have seen that the Levites (verse 17) 
killed the passover, because many of the people had not 
sanctified themselves, and they did so only for those who 
were not clean. It rather appears that it was the blood 
of the burnt-offering which the priests sprinkled then, 
At any rate this, and Josiah’s passover, when the priest did 
sprinkle the blood of the paschal lamb, were special ex- 
centional cases, and there were plenty of priests and 
Levites attending in their »laces. As far as the New 
Testament goes it would seem each prepared it for him- 
self. It is really disgraceful for a person in Dr. C.’s posi- 
tion, or for any one, to make a formal attack on a Book he 
has professed to beuueve in, on grounds so futile and 
with a carelessness which proves no honest research for 
himself, but that his will was father to his thought. 
He has at any rate proved himself, logarithims and all, 
to be an equally incompetent and pretentious man. Pro- 
bably, those, by whom nine years ago, he assures 
us, he wa’ not thought unworthy of the position which 
ne holds, supposed that, 11 declaring he believed in all 
the canonical Scriptures, he said the truth. Just think of 
a man taking the battle of Waterloo (and on the side of 
the victorious army, well knowi'., as every one does, it 
is in pursuit most are slain,) as a iest of the numbers of 
Asiatic armies, as to which a child, who has read 


38 


Rollins’ History of Greece or Persia, knows the dif- 
ference. 
Dr. C. complains of the destructive Razzia against Mi- 
dian. Midian had been the means of corrupting Israel, 
and leading them to idolatry, so as to lead to 25,000 
Israelites falling in the pestilence God sent; and that by 
ine inexpressible wickedness of Balaam, who, when he 
could not curse Israe!, recommended Balak to lead them 
into sin, and then God couid not bless them. For this 
they were punished, and, as a settled nation there, de- 
stroyed. Dr. C. congratulates himself that he is not 
called on to believe it. Bu! thus he must give up the 
whole Old Testament for his >wn notions ;. he must give 
up God’s judging the worid. God sent Abraham’s seed 
down into Egypt because the iniquity of the Amorites was 
not yet full. The whole history is a history of the judicial 
extermination of these races for their wickedness. It is 
a question not of history, but of the whole ways and deal- 
ings of God in judgment. He will fiad it in the Psalms ; 
he will find it in Revelations. God presents Himself as 
a moral governor, and in this special case used human 
instruments to carry out His judgments, as He did after- 
wards against Israel, as He had warned them by the 
prophets. The whole es‘eblishment of Israel was founded | 
on the principle rejected by Dr. Colenso: all God’s judg- 
ments are. Dr. C. does not like to believe in judgment. 
Be it so. But that is no way of judging of history. As 
to God’s revelation of Himself, it is objected that the Old 
Testament character of God cannot be that of the true 
God. He did not reveal Himself in Judaism. He gave 
laws, promises, but He dwelt in thick darkness—was 
: avowedly hid behind the veil. The way into the holiest 
| was not made manifest. He was patient in goodness 
| and grace, but the system.was one of public moral 
government. The sins of tie fathers could be visited 
on their children, as we see still in providential govern- 


| 


39 


ment. There was a code of national laws, of which 
Christ could say, ‘“‘ Moses for the hardness of your hearts 
gave you this commandment.” In the nctional laws he 
did not set aside slavery. The law made nothing perfect. 
He took, as a people in the world, the people where they 
were ; put checks on will, softened in many respects the 
manners of the age by His authority, and what was an 
immense point, suffered nothing to be done without it— 
an immense point, because arbitrary will was arrested. 
But all this was not bringing souls to God, nor revealing 
God as he is to souls. He is light and love. He has 
been revealed in Christ, a revelation Dr. C., it appears, 
is content to give up. He is sv wise, so competent to 
know God, and judge of what He ought to be, that he 
can give up all revelation of Him; and yet is ignorant of 
the first principles of the revelation he is giving up, and 
publishes an empty book, if ever there was one, to prove 
it,—assuming, as his statements are conclusive, Moses 
and all the prophets are ignoramuses, Christ knows no 
better than the Rabbis, but Dr. C., of course, does. 
Christ attaches His sanction to the whole of the Old 
Testament, as having the authority of God. Now this 
does not merely affirm inspiration : it is the blessed Lord 
putting His seal to God’s having been justly tepresented 
there as thus revealed. Dr. C. thinks differently ; he 
would not have such a God—is relieved in thinking it is 
not true. Christ felt no need of such relief. What shall 
we think of one who holds the nominal place of bishop of 
the Christian Church, who counts himself the moral supe- 
rior of the Lord? Who else will think so? Think of the 
vanity and character of the man who could. Did ever a 
man degrade himself to the same degree! For Christ did 
not see any thing moral to make Him call in question its 
being a revelation of God. Dr. C. does. Christ could 
see that there were national laws given, as suited to the 
hardness of their hearts. That Dr. Colenso does not see. 


40 


He is az ignorant of the relationship of the Gospel to the 
law as a national code, as he is presumptuous and ill- 
founded in judging the law and slighting the Gospel. 
For every man of sense the book will do good. 

But I will complete the question of detail as to the 
Midianites. Numb. xxxi.; Comp. xxi. 1, and xxxiil. 33- 
40. The objection is, that time is not allowed for the de- 
struction and other events before Moses addressed the 
people, Deut. i. 3. I have, as will be seen, no objection 
to the result at which Dr. C. arrives ; but I will show the 
levity of the proofs, and then the excessive carelessness 
of the author. There is no proof whatever of the time 
employed in the destruction of Arad’s cities. It is very 
probable the prisoners alluded to had been taken thirty- 
eight years before, when they would go up the moun- 
tain (Numb. xiv. 44, 45): they may or may not. Israel 
then defeated now avenge themselves. Five days 
may have very easily done the work. Further, it 
appears rather to have been carried into effect during 
the mourning for Aaron, for they left Mount Hor after- 
wards, Numbers xxviii. 41. Next we are told that 
there was a fortnight for the serpents and healing, 
and then a month of journeyings. This is the usual inat- 
tention to thé facts. They moved on from one station to 
another, and murmured because of the way, and the 
serpents were sent while on the journey. They had 
made four encampments of this journey, before the ser- 
pents were sent; thisis certain, by comparing Numb. xxi. 
10 and xxxiii. 41-43. Thus the three months and-a-half 
become perhaps a month and a-half or two months. 
Sihon was defeated. It may have been in a day and 
the country fell toIsrael. They marched thence. up north, 
and Og came out with all his people and was defeated. 
For all this there may have been a month possibly more. 
Thus three months at the outside would have sufficed for 
what Dr. C. takes six months for. Let it be three and a 


41 


half. This much is certain that in the point where Dr. C. 
is precise, tae serpents and supposed subsequent journey, 
he is precisely wrong by not consulting the text. Dr. C, 
then for the remaining facts gives ‘* March forward to the 
plains of Moab.” March forward from where? They 
were in Moab, the expeditions had started thence. But 
they were by Arnon the border of Moab, They made 
then very short stages. They might move their head- 
quarters, but they were in Moab, only they moved into 
the plain from Mount Abarim. Balak was alarmed and 
sent for Balaam. This may have taken a week. We 
have thus some four months gore. Here Israel fell into 
sin with Moab, and thereupon Israe! attacks the Midian- 
ites by divine command. My statements leave two 
months for this. J should be quite disposed to say with 
Dr. C., six weeks perhaps, and probably four, was 
ample so as to allow a month more for the previous 
marches and wars. Noone can pretend to say how much 
each took ; there was time enough forall. But this is not 
even necessary, though it sufficed to shew the arbitra- 
ness and even error of Dr. C.’s calculations. More was 
spent in some parts; in others the text contradicts him. 
But what is curious enough is that Dr. Colenso has made 
the passages he holds to be irreconcilable, so as to prove 
they are unhistoric, exacily coincide by his computation, 
and has not found it out. Moses’ address in Deut. i. 3, 
is after defeating Sihon and Og, as it is expressly stated, 
verse 4. Dr. C. says ‘Thus, then, from the first day of 
the fifth month, in which Aaron died, to the completion of 
the conquest of Og, king of Basham, we cannot reckon 
less together than sixmonths . . . and are thus brought 
down to the first day of the eleventh month, the very day 
on which Moses is stated to have addressed the people 
in the plains of Moab, Deut. i. 3” Just so, accordingly 
Deut. i. 4, states that it was after he had slain Og, that he 
made the address. Dr, C. has managed to make a 
B 


42 


blunder in his proofs, but has tumbled by mistake, into 
proving exactly historic what he attacks, and this is to 
set aside the Bible by unquestionable facts, 

On the quotations from Cicero and the Hindoo author 
celebsating Ram, I have spoken, and add no more here. 
A more pretentious and futile attempt to set aside the 
revelation of God, it never came to my lot to examine, 

It may be well just to add that the quotation from 
‘types of mankind’ which Dr. Colenso quotes, as he 
says, with entire sympathy, is from one of two works 
by Messrs. Gliddon and Nott to prove that there are 
several races of mankind, as there are of animals, and 
following the analogy of the forms of these last, according 
to a theory of Agassiz, the object being to prove that the 
negroes are a distinct race, and formed and destined to 
be fit for slavery. I can hardly think that if he was so 
zealous with the Zulu for the honour of the true God as 
to condemn the Pentateuch because it recognized slavery 
in Israel, that he can have read the book. It is very 
superficial, is wrong according to the best authorities as 
to America, particularly South America, and contradicts 
itself as to Africa. His only argument, to which he 
(Mr. Gliddon) constantly recurs, being the presence of 
negro figures on the Egyptian monuments, of which, 
with Lipsius and others, he exaggerates the antiquity 
in a way which the monuments themselves clearly prove 
to be false, inasmuch as kings given as successive are 
proved by the monuments to be contemporary, as many 
as eight ata time. Mr. Gliddon was Consul General of 
the United States in Egypt. I quite admit Dr. C. does 
not quote the book in what it says of negroes, but the 
argument which meets his entire sympathy is used to 
get rid of the ‘prejudice ? which believes with Paul that 
‘God has made of one blood all nations of men for to 
dwell on all the face of the earth,’ in order to justify the 
reducing the blacks to slavery as a distinct race. 


