Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



jiGoogle 



jiGoogle 



EARTH'S MORNING: 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



jiGoogle 



jiGoogle 



Carta's Jllornmg: 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



HORATIUS BONAR, D.D. 



NEW YORK; 

ROBERT CARTER AND BROTHERS. 

187 S- 



jiGoogle 



jiGoogle 



PREFACE. 



Within the last twenty years tlie book of Genesis has 
come very promiaently into view, as the starting-point of 
numerous discussions. Science and history have com- 
bined to lead us back to it. The former has taken up its 
story oi creation; the latter its nationalities, as contained in 
its genealogies and chronology. 

The present volume does not enter into these discus- 
sions. It aims at exposition, not controversy. Its object 
is to investigate the meaning of each verse and word; 
that, having done so, the exact revelation of God in these 
may be brought out, and the spiritual truth evolved. 

Here axe the rudiments of all Scripture-truth. And in 
this book we have the first materials on which to construct 
a true theory of i/^f^OT^;;/,— development not simply of 
'truth,' but of tbe purpose of God respecting man, and 
man's earth. The germs of true development are to be 
found here in their earliest stage. God here unfolds 
Himself and reveals His mind step by step ; His truth 
expanding itself age after age, under divine superintend- 
ence, so as to prevent the consequences of mere human 
interpretations, or development according to the mind 
of man. 



I ..Google 



All Scripture connects itself with Genesis, and ought to 
be read in this connection ; for it is not so much the later 
Scriptures that throw light on Genesis, as it is Genesis that 
throws light on the later Scriptures. 

Genesis is not merely the first book of Scripture, but it 
is the fountainhead of revelation. It must be studied as 
such if we would understand it aright 



I ..Google 



CONTENTS. 



GENESIS. 



CHAPTER V 



NOTES. 

E SABBATH, .... 



369 



I ..Google 



jiGoogle 



Thoti^hts on Geitesis, 



CHAPTER I. 

IT is our 'faithful Creator' {i Pet. iv, rg) who here 
speaks to us. He loves us too well to hide from 
us the great things which He has done. He would 
have us know how He made all things; and as He de- 
lighted in them, so He would have us delight in them. 

When creation came forth, 'the morning stars sang 
together, and the sons of God shouted for joy' (Job 
xxxviii. 7) ; and when the different parts of the new 
creation come into being, there is hkewise 'joy in heaven,' 
In both creations God is represented as taking divine 
delight (Prov. viii. 31); and in both cases 'He calls 
together His friends and neighbours, saying unto them, 
Rejoice with me' {Luke xv. 6). 

'He has not left Himself without witness' {Acts xiv. 
17) : and in this first book of Scripture we have His 
testimony to Himself and to the work of His hands. 
Creation says ' God is love,' though on a lower key and 
with less distinctness than redemption. 'The invisible 
things of Him from the creation of the world are clearly 



I ..Google 



2 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

seen, being understood by the things that are made ' 
(Rom. i. 20). 

And this creation bears testimony to the Son of God ; 
for by 'Him He made the worlds' (Heb. i. 2). *Ey 
Him were all things created that are in heaven and 
that are in earth, visible and invisible : all things were 
created by Him and for Him' (Col. i. 16). His con- 
nection with creation reveals to us His love. His love 
to man and man's world is no new thing. It did not 
begin when He was made flesh. Long before that we 
find that He 'rejoiced in the habitable parts of His 
earth, and that His delights were with the sons of men ' 
(Prov. viii. 31).^ 

Nor less has the Holy Spirit His part in the mighty 
work. He 'moved' or 'brooded' over the face of the 
waters (Gen. i. 2). 'By His Spirit He hath garnished 
the heavens' (Job xxvi. 13). 'Thou sendest forth Thy 
Spirit, they are created' {Ps. civ. 30). In creation, as 
in redemption, Father, Son, and Spirit are spoken of 
as working. Creation belongs to each : and the love 
manifested in creation is the love of Father, Son, and 
Spirit 'God is love :' and this, though in dimmer cha- 
racters, is written on the heavens and earth, and shines 
out in sun, and moon, and stars. The Holy Spirit is 



' All things at first was Gofl, ivh 
Willirn H!a boundless self. 



That other things by Him might happie t 
And atthe last Inlo h world burst out.' 



jiGoogle 



love ; and His love is in the sunshine of the first creation 
as truly as of the second. 

Yet, though surrounded with the loving works of God 
each day, how litde have we learned the lessons of 
heavenly love which creation teaches ! How sadly do 
we misinterpret creation; — reading in it power, wisdom, 
majesty, and greatness ; yet how seldom, love ! 

Heaven and earth are the two places or regions 
whose history God, in His word, purposes to write. 



He who alone knows everything relating to these, 
secret or open, visible or invisible, physical or spiritual, 
undertakes to put on record for us, 'at sundry times 
and in divers manners,' some memorials of the varied 
wonders which have taken place within their bounds : 
to tell us something of what 'eye hath not seen, nor 
ear heard;' and what man, in the full sweep of his. 
science, could not discover. 

It is to 'heaven and earth' that He confines Hi^ in- 
formation ; and of things beyond these He says but 
little. Of what He intended them to be ; of what He 
made them; of what they have been; and of what 
they yet shall be, when His great original purpose shall 
unfold itself in all its parts in the ages to come. He 
gives us His own account. Who but Himself could do 
this? Man may guess or fancy, God only can make 
known the thmgs of God, in any part of His universe 
(i Cor. ii. ii); the Architect alone can give us the 



I ..Google 



4 THOUGHTS ON GBNESTS. 

eternal plan of His great structmre, at least in outline, 
and tell us something of its carrying out, the process of 
erection, the hindrances, the successes, the failures. 

The Bible is God's history of heaven and earth, — the 
only authentic history of tliem in existence. He is His 
own historian. He begins and ends His volume with 
these : and throughout it, they form the scene of His 
manifold plans and workings, the circle ever which His 
divine love spreads itself in its manifestations of wisdom 
and power, and within which it gets vent to its eternal 
fulness, — a fulness which finds its way into all that 
which we call ' nature ' {j.e. essential constitution of things, 
Rom. xi. 24), or 'creation' {i.e. things as coming from 
a Creator; Mark x, 6).' 

He sets out with asserting His own prerogative as 
Creator, — His exclusive and undivided prerogative, — 
the originating One, the unbeginning One.' He tells 
us that the things we see are not self-produced, nor are 
they from eternity. They once were not. They once 

1 Both of these words are sanctioned by inspiration ; the latter 
expressive of deiivation from God, the former of the nature or essence 
of that which God has imparted to that which He has brought into 
being. 

^ ' Begmning' is sometimes used, as here, to mean former ages or times 
(Gen. X. 10 ; Isa. xlvi. 10) ; the corresponding Greek word ("cx^) 
is applied to Ciurist in reference to the eternal past (John i i ; Prov, 
viii. 32). Hence His name, ' Him from thi deginning ' (i John ii. 13), 
and ' the beginning' (or head) of the creation of God ; and simply 
' the beginning ' (Col. i. 18). Hence He is named ' the beginning and 
the end' (Rev. i. 8, xxi. 6, xxii. 13); and we may notice that 
the words in which He is designated (Heb. xii. 2) 'anthor (or leader) 
and finisher ' (bringer up of the tear), are derived from the above 
IS of the Apocalypse. 



jiGoogle 



began to be. It was He whose name is God (Elohim) 
that caused them to begin. He created them all, upper 
and lower, far off and near: thus giving the lie to the 
pretensions of every idol, and setting aside the gods 
of the heathen as non-creators (Ps. xcvi. 5 ; Jer. x. 11). 

He gives us no date for His creation. In many places 
afterwards He dates His signs and wonders, as when 
He brought the deluge over earth, or led Israel out of 
Egypt. But He does not tell us when the heavens and 
earth began to be. He affirms that they had a beginning, 
but when that was He does not say. It might be six 
thousand or it might be sixty thousand years ago. At 
some time during that past period which He calls ' the 
beginning' {cipx^, before 'the ages ' (ctttuves) commenced, 
(which we call time). He created the heavens and earth. 
His object here' is to claim creation as His own direct 
and exclusive handiwork, and to declare that when it 
began to be, it did so not as the result of a certain pre- 
existing, eternal order of things or laws, but as the 
simple offspring of His creating power. 

It seems strange that any other thought should have 
entered man's mind. Self-creation, how absurd ! Chance 
creation, how irrational ! Evolution by innate law, how 
imphilosophical 1 A palace self-built I A temple evolving 
itself from dead atoms ! A city reared by chance ! Life 
without a living One to originate it ! How incredible ! 

The world declares its Creator {Ps. viii. i). It has 
a voice which says beyond mistake, ' I did not create 
myself: He who created me is infinitely more glorious 
than I am' (Rom. i. 20). Even man's reason sees this; 



I ..Google 



6 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

yet it is faitk that discerns it fully, and sees who it is that 
made all things. The God of the Bible is just such an 
one as we could suppose to be the Creator of the world. 
What ' nature ' shows us of God is altogether in harmony 
with the Jehovah of Revelation. The jarring things in 
this fallen creation are only to be explained and recon- 
ciled at the cross. The gods of the heathen (taking the 
loftiest descriptions of these deities) could not have made 
the world. It is far too glorious a creation for Baal, or 
Buddha, or Jupiter to have produced, or even conceived. 
Look at this earth and these starry heavens, and say if 
the worship of such gods as these is not the height of 
unreason. But read what the Bible makes known of 
God, and you will say this is just such a God as could 
have planned and made such a world as this. Read 
what is written on these blue heavens above us, and yon 
wiU say, 'He who made these heavens is just such a 
God as could have written this Book.' 
■ He who made all things to be, must be the 1 am, the 
Being of beings, the fountainhead of being. And who 
but He can give us the history of creation? Who but 
the Beginning and tlie Ending could speak from His 
own knowledge, and say thus with authoritative certainty, 
' In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.' 
Reason may speak of ' a God,' for the visible creation 
does declare an invisible Creator (Rom. i. 20) ; but when 
asked ' what is His name, and what is His Son's name, 
if thou canst tell ' (Prov. xxx. 4), it is speechless. God 
Himself must be the revealer of the mighty secret And 
He has revealed it. He has told us His name, and His 



I ..Google 



GENESIS I, 



Son's name. Man cannot give a name to God ; God 
Himself lias done it ; and the name is our refuge and 
our joy. ' The name of the Lord is a strong tower ; 
the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.' 

O folly of atheism ! O folly of those who tell us that 
matter is God, and God is matter! A world without a 
Maker I A law without a Lawgiver ! O misery of 
atheism J No glorious One, no perfect One, no blessed 
One. How sad 1 What a blank, if this were true ! A 
sky without a star, a world without a sun 1 

What feebleness in reason ! It cannot even name 
the name of God ; and when it tries, as heathenism has 
done, to repeat the name first given, it does so with a 
stammering tongue. What could reason tell us of 
Jehovah? What can it reveal to us of that which is 
outside the creature? What can it say without a Bible? 
No voice of God heard or to be heard ! Nothing but 
the dull, unmeaning clank of matter's dead machinery, 
as it moves round and on ; — as it rises and falls ; — as it 
grinds on its various axles, — self-impelled, or driven by 
fate t No heart, no soul ; what we call conscience only 
a corporeal nerve ; what we call affection, only a pulsa- 
tion of the blood ; what we call sorrow and joy, only 
the movements of a finer materialism, — the twitclies of 
invisible nerves which science will soon be able to dis- 
cover and control ! No communication between Creator 
and creature 1 No message either of love or wisdom 
from One infinitely wise and. loving! No Book of sure 
wisdom, whose ' teachings can be beyond dispute ! Im- 
possible. Surely this is the height, or rather the depth. 



I ..Google 



8 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

of unreasoning credulity : sillier than the fables of 
heathendom, poorer than the dreams of pagan savage. 



Such w^ the state of this earth about the period when 
this history begins. It was a region of rayless darkness. 
Deepest night rested over it. It was without form, utterly 
shapeless in all its parts. It was void, that is, unfilled up. 
None of these things existed which make up its 'fulness' 
{Ps, xxiv. i). In none of its parts was there any filling 
up. It was like the newly quarried block ere the sculp- 
tor's chisel has touched it. Evidently pointing back to 
this chaos, and using it as a figure, Job describes 
the grave as 'a land of darkness, and the shadow of 
death; a land of dajkness ; as darkness itself; of the 
shadow of death ; without any order, and where the light 
is as darkness.' Jeremiah also describes the land of 
Israel, in the day of calamity, in language of the same 
kind (Jer. iv. 23), and Nahum predicts the ruin of 
Nineveh in words taken from this description of the 
original chaos (chap. ii. 10). Then further it is called 
' deep,' or abyss; as if it presented one great mass of 
confused and turbid water. 

How long this, state of chaos might have existed, wc 
know not. Not a word is said to intimate the time. It 
is not such a condition of things as might have been ex- 
pected to come directly from the hand of God; for all 
that comes from Him is perfect, in its kind and in its 
degree. The infant is perfect in all its parts, though it 



I ..Google 



GENESIS I. 2, 9 

is not a man ; the seed is perfect, tliough it is not a flower 
or a tree. So that this chaos looks like the wreck of a 
former world, the ruins of some vast city or temple ; it 
seems to be the result of the destruction of a previous 
state of things. It is not the infancy of a new creation 
that we behold, but the mangled and corrupting corpse 
of the old, which must be buried out of sight ere the new 
can be begun. 

Ver. 2. ' And the Spirit of God moved upon, tks face of the wakrs: 

How long or how brief the period of chaos was, it 
matters not. The appointed time was now come when 
these ruins were to undergo a change, and under the 
hand of the great Master Builder to rise into another 
temple. God's Spirit went forth to renew the face of 
creation.' Like a bird brooding over its e^s, and bring- 
ing hfe out of them by its vital heat, the Spirit brooded 
over the face of the deep or abyss. Immediately the 
quickening, renewing process began. In what way He 
wrought upon creation we know not, but His almighty 

' The diffecent senses of Ihe word may be llras classified :— I. It 
means jaif&i (Ex, x. 13), which is by a. figure the spirit of the earth. 
2. The spirit of a man {Prov. xviil. 4). 3. The spirit of the evil one 
(Judg. is. 2, 3). 4. The Spirit of God (Isa. Ixi. l). In all of these 
there 'n petsonalify impEed, not mere vague influence. As when the 
spirit of s, man is spoken of it is a personalitji that is referred to, not 
an influence; so when the Spirit of God is spoken of it is the same. 
It is of this personality in God, which comes out everywhere in Scrip- 
ture, so vividly and so blessedly, that rationalism rolls us ; thereby 
snapping the firmest links that bind us, whose own personality is such 
a conscious thing, to Him who is infinitely personal, tlie three-one 
Jehovah. 



jiGoogle 



to THOUGHTS O.V GENESIS. 

touch produced some change, and vitality was diffused 
throughout creation (Job xxvi. 13 ; Ps, xxxiii. 6, civ. 30), 
And when the great restoring process is begun at the 
Lord's second coming, the Holy Spirit takes the same 
part in the work of restitution as at first ; for it is when 
He ' is poured out from on high,' that ' the wilderness 
becomes a fruitful field' (Isa. xxxii. 15), thus identifying 
Him as at once the converter of the soul and the restorer 
of creation. He is the great agent in every process for 
restoring or perfecting or beautifying soul and body, nay 
the very earth itself. He is the author of all the loveliness 
that we see around us in herb, or shrub, or tree, or flower. 
All life, all beauty, all order, all perfection are from the 
Holy Spirit ! How near should we feel Him to be, how 
gracious, how willing to quicken us, and to restore to us 
the lost beauty of our first creation ! 

Ver. 3. ' And God said. Let there be Ugkt, and iha-e was light ' 

God put this question to Job, ' 'Where is the way where 
light dwelleth ? ' (chap, xxxviii. 19) ; ^ and this verse is an 
answer to this, as if God had said, 'The light dwelleth 
with me; for I issued the command, "Be light," and 
" light was." ' Thus God claims Hght as His production, 

' In Job xxsvii. 15 we read, ' Dost thou know when God disposed 
lliem, and caused the light 0/ Hisdoud to shine?' As this seems to 
refer to the thne of creation, are we not to understand that the light 
then made to shine was kindled by the ' doud, ' the same cloud which 
gave light to Israel in the desert, and is, in the latter day, to pour 
down its gloriou.1 brightness on Mount Zion ? {Isa. iv, 5.) Is not the 
Shekinah the abode and fountainhead of light? 'whocoverest Thy- 
self with light as with a garment ' (Ps. dv. a). 



I ..Google 



GENESIS i-z- " 

as He had already claimed creation. The name of the 
Maker of light is EloMm, — God 1 ' 1 form the light' (Isa, 
xlv. 7). Of all light, both for soul and body, He is the 
Creator, nay the great central sun and source. 'I am 
the light of the world' (John yiii. 12).' 

God does not mean to teach us here that this was the 
&st time that such a thing as light existed at all. There 
must have been light before, light with God, light with 
the angels, light in heaven, and, it may be, light shining 
on this very earth before its state of chaos began. It is a 
heathen or philosophic fable that darkness was the original 
and uncreated state of thii^s.^ Darkness is always 
associated with death in Scripture, Just as light is with 
life. Nay, darkness is associated with 'him who has 
the power of death, even the devil ; ' he is ' the ruler of 
the darkness of this world ; ' and it is in connection with 

• ' Hail, holy light 1 Offspring of heaven lirst-bom, 

Or of the Eternal co - eternal tieam. 

May I express thee unblamed? Since God is light, 

And never but in unapproadied light 

Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thee 

Bright effluence, of bright essence increate; 

Or hear'st thou rather, pure ethereal stream. 

Whose fountain who can tell ? Before the sun. 

Before the heavens thou wert, and at the voice 

Of God as with a mantle didst invest 

The rising world of waters dart and deep, 

Won from the vast and formless infinite. ' 

—Milton's Paradise Lost, b. iiL 
> We may notice that Christ adds here, ' He that foUoweth me shall 
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light efli/e,' — to fa; •rSi {lu^e, 
'the light ol the life;' referring to chap. i. 4, 'the life was the l^hi 
of men,' i %tik h ri ^Si tSv ei^piuTio. It is as the liviii^ One thai He 
is the lig&i-giving One. 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



the sin and doom both of him and his angels that dark- 
ness is spoken of (2 Pet. ii. 5 ; Jude 4).^ Whatever may 
have been the origin of the darkness, we know that it 
covered the earth, thick and impenetrable in its gloom. 
But now the command went forth, and the darkness 
began to disappear. The sun did not at once show 
itself, but its light began to find its way dimly and faintly 
through the gloom, which from this time became less 
and less dense, so that there was now only partial dark- 
ness, such as there is in a dull misty morning. How this 
alteration was produced we know not. We know this, 
indeed, that a very slight change in the component parts 
or elements of our atmosphere, or in the proportions in 
which these elements are combined, would completely 

' The question may arise Here, "What was the connection of Satan 
witli this world before this time ? Was it through him and his rebel- 
lion that the world was first wrecked and brought to the state of chaos 
and darkness mentioned in the second verse ; was the restoration of 
light (third verse) an invasion of his domain ? Was the ftdl a partial 
quenching of the light y—fartial, for grace was to prevent its being 
total ? Has not the state of the world ever since been one of dark- 
ness and subjection to the prince of darkness ? Were not the words 
of Christ (Luke xxii. 53! an inthnation of a crisis in the history of this 
darkness and of its ruler, as if it were for a time to succeed in its long- 
waged conflict with the light : «iIt» l/fiZi iiTiv h Ufa, xal i i^aurlx mi/ 
TuiTatii. The expression, iloaria ruS rxifovs, is a very remarkable one, 
and full of solenin meaning. And had not the darkness on the cross 
a reference to the past history of the world, as the region of darkness 
and the kingdom of its prince ? And does not the darkening of the 
sun and moon, just before the coming of the Lord, betoken that dark- 
ness had reached its destined crisis, both spiritually and morally, the 
earth being reduced to the state of chaos described by Moses ; and 
therefore ready once more for the interposing power of Him who said 
at first, ' Let Hght be ' ? 



I ..Google 



ul<3 


by 


\ 


d 




no 


humd 


hy 





disorganize it, and prevent 1 h 1 f J §,1 

Its transparency depends on mb o vtl 1 qu 
to be most nicely proport d lade 

hand, an alteration in thes uld 1 i d d tl i 
vious state of total darkne ai 1 I nge 

restoring its lucidity, let in 1 gl i n tl 1 

ingly the command went f h h h w o 
patency to our atmosphe wh h h n 
only unfit to transmit, but b h d 

vapours that loaded it. On d fr Al 

effected the charge, what gh b H pak 

and it was done ! A wo d H w y w h 

God ! And He who ligh d i 1 Id 1 e as 

He that lights up the soul (2 Cor. iv. G). He is the 
' light of the world,' ' the morning star,' the sun of right- 
eousness. His work in the soul is to fit it for receiving 
light, and then to pour it in. He restores transparency to 
the faculties of the soul, and tlien the light begins to find 
its way into each region and recess. 

' On whom does not His light arise ? ' asks Bildad (Job 
XXV. 3). David says, in reference to the heavenly orbs, 
' Their line is gone out through all the earth ' {Ps. xix. 4) ; 
and our Lord says, ' He maketh His sun to rise on the 
evil and the good ' (Matt. v. 45). What a declaration of 
grace does each day's light make to us ! What a gospel 
does each sunbeam preach! He has not turned our 
earth into a region of ' outer darkness ; ' and this is grace. 
He still bids His sun go forth each morning to light our 
ways, sinners as we are ; and this tells us of His willing- 
ness to give light to the darkest. 



I ..Google 



14 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

' Light is sown for the righteous 1' Yes, it is sown in 
the fullest sense of that word ; not merely scattered abroad, 
as commentators would have it, but sown. And this both 
naturally and spiritually, (i.) NaturaUy. This is not the 
time of light. A change has passed upon it by the fall. 
It has lost much of its purity and brightness. And the 
mere increase of its iftiensily would not serve unless its 
innocuous mildness were restored along with it. But 
there is a time predicted when 'the light of the moon 
shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun 
shallbesevenfold, as the light of seven days' (Isa. XXX. 26).^ 
Were the sun still to ' smite by day, and the moon by 
night ' (Ps. cxxi, 6), this increase of light would be no 
blessmg ; but the ' restitution of all things ' shall embrace 
in it a restitution trf primeval mildness to the light; and 
who can tell how much of the removal of the curse upon 
the earth may be effected by this restoration of its genial, 
health-giving, fructifying properties to the light. But this 
is only the time of sowing. It doth not yet appear what 
it sliall be. It is underground, or at most it is but in the 
blade or bud. And oh, if this its imperfect state be so 
very beautiful, what will not its perfection be in the 

1 Tliere seems to be in reference to tlie UgAt, just ss in regaid. to all 
the various parts of creation, a time of crisis spoken of in those pre- 
dictions, whict point to tlie latter-day glory, and the previous signs 
of its arrivaL The deterioration which took place at the fall, and 
which has been going on since, arrives at its aids just at the coming 
of tlie Great Restorer, Everything is to fae at its worst just when on 
the point of being renewed. Hence the darkness which is to be 
spread over the earth — ' the day of darkness and gloominess, ' etc. , — 
the darkening of the sun, and the withdrawal of the light of the moon, 
etc. [Matt. xxLv. zg). 



I ..Google 



coming harvest? if the bud be so fair and fragrant, what 
will be the expanded blossom in the new earth wherein 
dwelleth righteousness? The sowing time is one of tears, 
tlie shower and the sunshine mingled together; but the 
reaping time shall be glorious, (z.) SpirituaUy. This is 
the hour and the power of darkness. In one sense we have 
been brought into 'marvellous light' {i Pet. ii.); 'Christ 
has given us light' (Eph. v.). But still we see through 'a 
glass darkly' (i Cor. siii.). Clouds fold themselves round 
us ; sorrow and conflict, misgivings and faintings, beset us 
on each side. But sunshine shall yet burst on us. Light 
is sown for us ; the light of an unsetting and an unsmiting 
sun ; the light of Him who is light itself, and in whom is 
no darkness at ail. Through this sowing time of darkness 
and sorrow we are passing to the reaping time of light and 
joy. 

Vec. 4. 'And God saw the light, that it was good: and Cod divided 
the light from the darkness.' 

On the light that was now b^inning to stream in upon 
the earth God fixed His eye. He saw the light; it did 
not steal in imobserved; it was not too trivial to attract 
His notice. It is minute, noiseless, unaccompanied with 
vast or terrible results. Yet He looked upon it, con- 
sidered it, surveyed it fully. For each stray beam of 
light, each twinkle of the distant star, each undulation 
of the atmosphere, each faint ripple of the ocean, came 
under the notice of His eye. He sees them all. Such 
is the eye of Him with whom we have to do, — the eye 
that searches all things : yet the eye that delights to 



I ..Google 



i5 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

rest in love upon each part of the workmanship of His 
hand. 

But God not only looked upon the light; — He tells us 
His opinion of it. It was good. Such is the divine 
verdict He made it, He compounded it of its subtle 
elements, and therefore He knows it well. It was He 
who arranged its parts and proportions; it was He who 
twisted its sevenfold radiance; it was He who bade it 
shine forth in its beauty. Who, then, can speak of it as 
He can? And He calls it good. He approves of it, 
delights in it, sees it to be altogether suited to the end 
He held in view. It was 'good' in respect of its innate 
excellence, 'good' in respect of its beauty, 'good' in 
respect of its usefulness ■ one of the fairest, most needful, 

d m gladd g f 11 H 1 ndiworks; apparently 
f b > k m fjl w ders ; altogether noise- 

I y pi h 1 it, by its silent, secret 

jtu g II 1 I gl ling or the hurricane ; 

1 g f 1 1 1 f m w d or praise, yet diffusing 
1 h 1 d m re continuous amount 

fid h J h fie material elements ; 

m dw Idyp wh reviving, refreshing, 

h 1 g p All G d is good, but light is 

J ly U t, 1 b gl nd purest part of all. 

It IS the only thmg that cannot be soiled or stained, It 
corrupts not, it withers not. We may bend a sunbeam, or 
decompose a sunbeam, or shut it out of our dwelling, but 
we cannot soil it. It is the fairest, and freshest^ and most 
heaven-like of all created things, — fittest emblem trf God- 
head, both of the Father and the Son. 



I ..Google 



The wise man says, 'Truly the light' is sweet, and a 
pleasant tiling it is for the eyes to behold the sun ' 
(Eccles. XL 7). Yes, it is even so; and what marvellous 
love does this betoken in our God! — love that was not 
dried up when sin entered, but only came out more 
lai^ely in another fonn, that of grace. Though, doubt- 
less, there has been some change in the light since the 
fall, some deterioration, yet still it is the most joyous 
thing in nature/ It might have been made so feeble as 
hardly to impart the needed warmth and light, or it might 
have been so intense (as it shall be when tlie fourth 
angel pours out his vial on the sun. Rev. xvi. 8) as to 
scorch the dwellers on the earth, but it has not been 
so, God has so attempered it to our condition that it 
suits us well. And in so suiting us sinners, it preaches 
to us the 'grace' of God. We might have been in the 
blackness of darkness, but we are not ; and this is grace. 
We miglit have been in the everlasting burnings, but we 
are not j and this is grace. 

^nd if light be so ' good ' even now when shining 
through a sin-obscured atmosphere upon a cursed earth, 
what will it be hereafter when coming down through the 
new heavens upon the new earth, wherein dwelleth right- 

^ In that passage of th^ book of Esther which speaks of the deliver- 
ance of tlie Jews, we read that 'the Jews had light, snA gladness, and 
joy, and honour ' (Esth. viii. 16). And when referrii^ to Israel's 
coining days of gladness, Isaiah says, 'Thy snn shall no more go 
down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself; for the Ix>rd shall be 
tliine everlasting light, and the days of thy joouming shall be ended ' 
(Isa. Ix. 20). In both of these, aa in other passages, 
between light and. joy on the one hand, and darkness and grief 01 
other, is strikingly brought out. 

VOL. VI. 3 



I ..Google 



i3 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

eousness? What will it be in the New Jerusalem, 'when 
the glory of God shall lighten it, and the Lamb shall be 
the light thereof.' 

But next, God made a division between light and dark- 
ness. He then introduced the alternation between them 
which has continued ever since, the 'grateful vicissitude 
of day and night' Now it was, perhaps, that the earth 
began again to revolve round its axis, God laying His 
finger on it and giving it the precise impulse needed. 
How simply is the division effected ! No vast curtain 
alternately drawn and undrawn ; no huge cloud wrapping 
the earth in its foldings, and again disappearing; no 
alternate kindling and quenching of the great source of 
light I God speaks, or stretches out His hand, or sends 
out one of those 'angels that excel in strength,' and the 
earth begins to revolve.^ Thus the light and the dark- 
ness are sundered, or rather alternated. 

' Milton speaks of angels as employed in altering tlie earth's 
position and motions : 



From the sun's aifle ; fhey i«fh Jahour pualied 
Oblique the cenltic globe.' 

A commentator on tlie Apocalypse lias thus finely caught up the 
thought; 'That angels do escel in strength we well know, from 
Ps. ciii., and other parts of Scripttire. And when the proclamation. 
Who is able to open the book? was to be made throughout the r^ion 
of the heaven and the earth and the deep, a strong angel was chosen 
io lift up the creation-filling voice. Whose is it to wheel the spheres 
in their courses, as if they were bowling balls ? Whose strength is it 
that splits the solid rocks, that heaves tlie ocean from its oozy bed, that 
holdeth the winds, and .anon letteth them fly amain ? I believe these 
tilings are under the angels. God will uot leave in 



jiGoogle 



In the prtsent state of our eaith, and according to 
t!ie present constitution of its inhabitant? (both animate 
and inanimate — mm, animals, and herbs), this alternation 
is absolutely needful A world all bght would be nearly 
as uninhabitable and unhealthy as a world all darkness ! 
What wisdom and grace are displayed in this division T 
We sometimes say, What would become of us if it were 
always mght^ Have we ever thought what Tvould be- 
come of US if it were alwajs day? We need the change, 
and God has kmdly thought on us and piovided for it, 
in. the surest, jet the simplest ot all \;ays, — a way which, 
in producmg this alternation, produces along with it a 
thousand other things, all pleasing and helpful. Let us 

have the glory of these wonderful powers. He hath some intelligent 
ones, I make no doubt, who have the noble consciousness of working 
the will of God therein, and of rendering unto Him the homage which 
thence is due. This is the way in which these philosophists have dis- 
peopled the world of intelligence, by supposing that, because they see 
not spiritual agencies in tlie loechanical and chemical regions of 
' nature which they examine, therefore there are no such mtelligences. . 
B bee we cannot see beings whose property it is to be invisible, 
th therefore no such bemgsP Not to see them is the very 
nd ti f their l>eing. If we could see them, they were not. But, 
f my part, I believe out of this text, that the strength, the main 
ng 1 d force of things, consisleth in their subjection to mighty 
ang 1 »1 work the work under God, and so display the goodness 
— h tive goodness, and the riches of the providence of God. I 

reverence tradition ; and I find herein the most venerable traditions of 
all men concurring, from the superstitions of my native land, which 
people the waters, and the earth, and the woods, and everything with 
invisible power and agencies, up to those of the remotest antiquity of 
which we have any recoid. In ascribing their strength unto the I^mh, 
therefore, I do thinli that these angels acknowledge all the powers 
which we are wont to call the powers of nature, the laws of the created 
world, to be due unto Him, and unto Him alone.' 



jiGoogle 



20 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

praise Him for the revolving earth ! Let us praise Him 
for the darkness as well as for the light, for the night 
as well as for the day ! ^ 

Ver. 5. ' And God called the light Day, and the darkness Hs called 
Night: 

God does not leave His works nameless. He who 
made them and knew their properties and uses, gave 
them their names; for names are the properties or 
features of a being or. thing expressed to the ear or eye 
in words, so that He who hears or reads them may at 
once nnderst d hat the thing or being is, and wherein 
it differs fro n oth th g and beings. At the outset we 
see how God 1 o 1 n d His own name ; now He names 
all His ere iLir n u sion. Of the stars we read, 
'He calletl tl all by names' (Ps. cxlvii. 4). He 

tells us how to call His works. Let us not overlook this 
part of God's proceedings, nor forget Him as the namer 
of His works. When we speak of night or day, let us 
remember that He called them by these names. God 
does not count even the naming of His creatures be- 
neath Him. He has named the heavens and the earth ; 

' Yet the darkness whicli God has so graciously given foe repose 
and refreshment, and the quiet both of tlie vexed soul and the weary 
body, man has perverted and made a. covering for his sin. Deeds 
which he fears to do in the light he reserves for the darluiess. Hence 
the expression 'works of darltness, ' 'children of night,' and such-like; 
and hence the use of the term darkness for 'sin;' and hence Satan is 
called ' ruler of this world's darkness ; ' and hence the difference 
between the world and God is spoken of as that between darkness 
and light; 'What communion hath light with darkness?' (2 Cor. 
vi. 14.) 



I ..Google 



He has named the changes of light and darkness. How 
closely and how lovingly must His eye have rested on 
our world 1 Is there anything, great or small, of which 
He was or is unmindful? 

Ver. 5. ' And tks evening and the fiwrnmg vlere the first day ' 
Thus He sums up these wondrous statements by an- 
nouncing the completion of a day, — of that period which 
embraces an evening and a morning. He begins now 
to number time, 'This is day the first,' Thus God 
dates His operations. He not only says, 'I did these 
things,' but He adds, 'I did them then and there, in 
such a place, and at such a time.' And throughout 
Scripture we may notice the same minute accuracy as 
to dates. In the prophets especially, God sets down 
the year, the month, the day when He spoke or did 
such and such things. How wonderful is it to see the 
Eternal One thus numbering the minutest sections of 
time ! He is truly the God of order, and arrangement, 
and method, and accuracy, in all things great and small. 
It is the fool that takes ijo note of time. God takes 
note of it, and in so doing teaches us to prize it, and 
to 'number our days.' Though He 'inhabiteth eternity' 
(Isa. Ivii, 1 6) ; though He calls Himself the ' Eternal God ' 
(Deut, xxxiii. 27); though a 'thousand years are in His 
sight as yesterday' (Ps. xc. 4), yet He reckons up and 
names the smallest fragments of time. And He who says, 
' Before the day was, 1 am He ' (Isa. xliii, 13), is the same 
who records so carefully the date of His doings as Creator; 
' It was evening and it was morning, day the first.' 



I ..Google 



23 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

What a marvellous day has this been 1 Order, light, 
motion, beauty, are all now begun. God has spoken 
the word ! He has set His hand to the mighty work, 
and He will not rest till He has finished it, for He is 
the eternal Purposer, and all His purposes shall stand. 
There can be no defeat, no reversal. This earth is to 
be the sphere of His mightiest work ; and in these first 
days' operations He is gathering together the stones 
for the foundation of His vastest and fairest temple, 
which, though delayed and obstructed for a season in 
its erection by Satan's craft and man's sin, shall not on 
that account suffer loss, but shall, by this temporary 
frustration, have its foundations laid broader and deeper, 
that its walls may rise the higher, and its compass stretch 
the wider, in the day of final restitution still in reserve 
for it Scoffers may mock, and say, What ! all this caie 
for this little fragment of creation, this pebble on the 
shore of infinite space ! Yes, even so. It is God's way, 
and shall be so to the last, alike in creation and redemp- 
tion, 'for the stone which the builders rejected has be- 
come the head of the comer.* 

Vers. 6-8. Atid God said, Lei there be a firmament (or expanse) m 
the midst of the waiers, and lelii divide the waisrs. frem the waters. 
7- And God made the firmament, and divided iAe footers tuiicS were 
under th£ Ja-mament fi-om the ■maters which were ahmie the firmament : 
and it was so. 8. And God called thg firmament Hemien. And the 
evening and the morning were the second day. 

Up to this time the atmosphere had not been suffi- 
ciently dense to bear up the evaporating waters ; for 
there had hitherto been two kinds of waters, the more 



I ..Google 



GENESIS- 1. 6-8. 23 

solid waters of the abyss, and the evaporating waters 
rising from these. This evaporation would go on much 
more rapidly and incessantly if the atmosphere were 
rarer {or thinner), and yet it would not be borne np, but 
would rest over the immediate surface of the earth, so 
that there were these two bodies of water, the thicker 
and the thinner, the more solid and the rarer, in close 
conjunction with each other; the deep still throwing 
up its vapours, yet these vapours unable to rise, but 
mantling the earth with one vast watery shroud, allowing 
light to penetrate, yet not revealing the bright round 
disc of sun or moon, nor permitting the stars to show 
their sparkling lustre. The scene somewhat resembled 
the state of earth during those months when the waters 
of the deluge were descending ; the waters above meeting 
the waters beneath, and wrapping the globe round with 
inexhaustible rain-clouds. 

God again interposes. There is need for both kinds 
of waters in that world which He is preparing ; but they 
must be separate, not intermingled. There can be no 
life either of man, or beast, or vegetable so long as they 
are thus mingled. Accordingly the word goes forth ; the 
athiosphere is made to undergo a change by which it is 
enabled to bear up the vapours, and thus divide the 
two bodies of water, while the needful process of evapora- 
tion is still carried on. This atmosphere is made to 
stretch round the earth like a firmament or expanse, and 
bears up into its higher regions the ever-ascendhig waters 
of the lower, yet furnishing them also with the means of 
re-descent in the form of the gladdening shower. How 



I ..Google 



■24. THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

simple the change ! How vast and wonderful its results ! 
Let us note the following passages in connection with 
all this : — Gen. vii. ii, iz ; Job xxvi. 8, and xxxvii. ii, 
i8 ; Ps. cxlviii. 4 ; Prov. viii. 28 , Jer x 10-13, ^- ^5) ^^ > 
Zecli. xii. r. Such are some of the rtlerLnres in Scrip- 
ture to the two great bodies of water, upper and under, 
and such the way in which the division is ascribed to 
the wisdom of Jehovah; as if no^\ His wisdom were 
specially coming forth, whereas hitherto it had been His 
power chiefly that had been seen. 

God names and dates His handiwork. He calls the 
firmament, heaven or the lofty place ; and this character- 
istic is in many ways and figures brought under our 
notice in Scripture (Job xi. 8 ; Ps. ciii. 2 1 ; Prov. xxv. 
3 ; Isa. Iv. 9). The love, the power, the majesty of 
God, His thoughts, His ways. His purposes, when com- 
pared with those of man, are set forth to us by the height 
of the heaven above the earth. And in this way He gives 
us some faint measure of these, some poor conception 
of His infinite glory and grace. This heaven or firma- 
ment shared the curse when man fell, either directly, by 
being in itself altered for the worse, or indirectly through 
the curse which took possession of the soil and exhaled 
into the mantling ain There is something in earth's 
atmosphere that blights and injures. It is not the same 
healthful, genial, joyous firmament that it was when 
God created it. And this deterioration has doubtless 
contributed to the decay of creation, to the propagation 
of disease, and to the curtailment of life ; as if the seeds 
of death were in it after the fall as largely as were the 



I ..Google 









GEIiESIS I. 6-8. 


=5 


1 


f 


If 


b f Af th d 1 g 
d d mm 1 f b m 


1 ca 
h d 
1 d h 
h 


y 


d 

1 all 
J 


1 


^ 


d Sim 


mai 


d 1 


s 


d p b H> 11 d 
1 d f 1 fll 


d 

\ d 


h 


m 


d 
1 


d d 

I 


f 


I d II tl I 
1 h (R VI 


1 
7) f 




h d 




ha h g b b 


h 




d 




p par g p 


b — 


] 


\ h 




y ,rr 1 


>-b 1 


f 






1 h h 


1 




y 


Af 1 1 fi m 


d 


f 


1 f 


11 
1 


1 f h arh 
mp m ph 


h 
Tl PI 


P 


f 




u& p rtak I d 1 


f 


1 


bo d 


11 


f mil Tl 

tnl 1 p L 


f II 
1 






d 




1 h 11 aJ d y 




d 


II 




b h 11 






af h 1 


1 


d y 1 11 b h d y f 1 


(Isa. 


i 


) 


H y f 1 gr 




11 


1 




Il h 1 g f h fi 




Wh 


h 11 




h b dy I VI 






11 


d 1 h 




ih 


d 


1 


h h d 1 






TV 




ed t. 




im ys 

dn 





I ..Google 



26 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

What new strength, yet also whit new gentleness of 
nature, will it bring to the animil creation ' What new 
lerdure to the leaf, what new beauty ind fri^rance to 
the flower will it impart i Whit a change m the blue 
of the heavens and m the green of the earth, when this 
long poisoned an is it length disinfected by the heiling 
touch of Him ■Kho has disease, with all its \aried sources, 
seen and unseen, at His commind, who, when on 
earth, showed Himself as the worlds great Healer and 
whose TOice shall then be heard sa)mg, 'Behold, I 
make all things new ' ' 

It IS m this old firmament, this defiled atrao';| here 
of ours that Sataji ha-i taken up his abode How the 
darknesi became his pecuhar buthright we know not 
How or when he was permitted to take up his abode 
m the air so as to become ' the pnnce of the power of 
the air,' and thence to widd the darkness, which is his 
heritage, we know not Vie know simpl) that it is so 
The encompassing an: of earth is Satan s special resi 
dence and domain. From it he 'rams his plagues on 
men like dew.' In it he has set his throne, and from 
that throne he rules this world and its kingdoms, send- 
ing down his legions to scour the earth, to reinforce 
his citadels, to assail the Church, to form the body- 
guard of Antichrist, to lead men captive at his will, 
till the day arrive when he shall be cast down from his 
seat and bound in the dark abyss for a thousand years, 
in preparation for the 'outer darkness' in which he is 
to dwell for ever. And who, believing these things, can 
look up into the fair yet wan azure without longing 



I ..Google 



for the time when its sickliness shall be exclianged for 
the intensity of brightness? Who, remembering that 
it is liie haunt of Satan and his angels, can gaze into 
its depths, either of midnight or of noon, without long- 
ing for the time when he shall be cast out, and these 
old haunts of his purified and filled with blessed angels 
carrying on their glad ministry both in , the upper and 
lower regions of God's redeemed creation? 

It is into the air that the saints are to be caught up 
to meet their reappearing Lord. In the progress of 
His descent to earth, He halts there with His angelic 
retinue ; and pitching His pavilion on the confines of 
earth. He calls up His saints to meet Him; there to 
hear the final sentence of 'no condemnation' announced, 
to celebrate the completed union, to sit down at the 
marriage-supper, and to begin tlie long festivity of the 
bridal day/ 



' These verses give us one of the first intimations of the distinction 
which Scripture preserves throughout, between ' the earthly' and 'the 
heavenly, ' the upper and the lower chamber of the palace of the great 
King, this earth the lower, these skies {the floor of a more glorious 
heaven) the upper. At present it is full of ungodliness, it lies \t lii 
Tovaf^ ; and the air is full of unclean spirits. But God's purpose 
must be fulfilled, and the day is coming when both shall be purged ; 
when earth and heaven shall be reunited ; when the ladder of com- 
munication between the upper and the lower region shall be set up 
(Gen. Kxviii. 12 ; John i. 51) ; when, in the Jerusalem above, the risen 
sainB shall dwell ; and in the Jerusalem below, Israel shall abide ; 
and over the whole blessed earth, now delivered from the cur.se, .'ihall 
dwell the nations of the saved, rejoicing in the double splendour of the 
upper and the lower glory, tilling the new firmament with the odour 
of their incense and the harmony of their songs. ' Change of air ! ' 
how common the expression, how little thought of what it implies 1 



jiGoogle 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



Vers. 9, lo. 'And God said. Let the ■makrs undir the keavm. bs 
gathend togahfr unto one place, and lei the dry land appear : ami 
il was SD. lo. And Qui called the dry land Earth ; and the gather- 
ing together of the wate>-s called He Seas: and Ged sum thai it was 

No change had as yet taken place upon the mighty 
mass of waters, which, hke one vast and unbroken ocean, 
covered the whole earth: It was still in the condition 
referred to in the 104th Psahn, 'Thou coveredst it with 
the deep as with a garment : the waters stood above 
the mountains.' It was truly 'the melancholy main.' 
There was no life, no joy, no intercourse of happy 
being. If then tie earth is to be the dwellmg-place 
of life, there must be a change. These waters must, 
in part at least, be dried up. They are not wholly to 
pass off; for they are needful in many ways. They 
are needful for beauty, and God considers this in all 
His works. They are needful for supplying the atmo- 
sphere with vapours, and the earth with showers, as 
well as for filling the rivers which fertilize and gladden 
it. They are not indeed needful to the extent in which 
they now exist; and hence in the new earth they shall 
be largely curtailed, if not wholly done away (Rev. 
xxi. i). But though in a measure needful, they must 
be changed, and their limits abridged. The land which 
they cover must rise above the surface, and become 
a fit habitation for man. JIow this was done we are 
not told. God said, 'Let it be, and it was so.' It 
is but a word, and all is done. This one word went, 
like lightning, through the deep foundations of earth, 



I ..Google 



GENESIS 1, 9, la 29 

Upheaving some parts into mountains, sinking others 
into valleys or deeper receptacles for the ocean. The 
process is alluded to in such passages as the follow- 
ing: — Job xxvi, 10, xxxviii, 8; Ps. xxxlii. 7, xcv, 5, 
cxxxvi. 6; Prov. viil 29; Jer, v. 22; 2 Pet. iii, 5. 
Thus God refers to His operations, giving us indeed 
but litde insight into the actual process, yet finely 
painting and spreading out before us its great fea- 
tures. 

The two parts of the globe, thus formed, received 
their names from God, the dry land being called eart/i, 
and the gathering of the waters seas. God then looked 
upon His handiwork, surveying it in aU its parts, and 
then pronounced it 'good.' The earth was 'good,' as 
it now spread itself out in all its inequalities of valley 
and mountain, of plain and precipice. A goodly earth ! 
Fit to be the dweUing of creatures made in His own 
image; fit to be the material out of which the bodies 
of these creatures were to be fashioned; nay, fi.t to 
be the material out of which the body of His own 
Son was to be composed when He took flesh in the 
virgin's womb. A goodly sea ! Goodly in its stretch of 
illimitable vasfness, ■ and in its transparent depths of 
unpolluted blue ; goodly in the grandeur of its deafening 
storms, and in the still more wondrous grandeur of its 
majestic calms; goodly in all its moods whether of 
gloom or gladness, whether shadowed with the cloud, 
or spanned with the rainbow, or reflecting the sky's 
clear azure, or bathed in sunshine, or silvered with 
the moonbeam, or strewn with starlight ; whether break- 



I ..Google 



30 THOUGBTS ON GENESIS. 

ing in surges against the rock, or stealing in soft ripples 
over the glittering sand.i 

If sea and earth be thus 'good,' according to God's 
own judgment, there can be no inherent evil in matter, as 
philosophy would teach. Matter is not in itself carnal. 
It is not the corrupter of spirit. It was created good, 
and it cannot corrupt itself. It is spirit that has done 
this. It is spirit, not matter, that is the fountainhead 
of evil. 

What a world is this of ours for scenes, and associations, 
and remembrances ! Earth and sea are full of them; evil 
and good, sorrowful and glad. What feet have trodden 
this earth, what eyes have gazed on that sea, since God 
brought them into being! Here holy men have lived; 
here the wicked have triumphed ; here Abel's blood was 
shed ; here Enoch walked with God ; here angels have 
been visitors ; here the Son of God abode ; His footsteps 
were on the earth and on the sea. It is a small enough 
speck in the map of the universe, but it is the most 
wondrous of alL And though it has felt the curse for a 
season, it is to taste the blessing again. And when the 
mighty angel is seen descending to claim the heri- 
tage (Rev. X. i), he sets his right foot on the sea, 
and his left upon the earth, in token of his having 

' We may notice some things connected witli this part of creation, 
(1.) God is very often spoken of as Maker of heaven and eardiandsea, 
and as such to be praised [Ps. Kcv. 4-6, cxxxvi. 6; Rev. xiv. 7), (3.) 
The wicked are compared to the troubled sea. (Isa. Ivii. ao). {3.) It 
is symbolically the place whence the four great beasts come up (Dan. 
vii. 3). (4,) It is the emblem of vastnesa (Job xi, 9), (5.) Of tumult 
(Ps. Ixv, 7). (6.) Of instability (Jos. i 6). 



I ..Google 



come to take possession of all things which God at first 
created. 
The earth and sea are now the depositories of the dead. 



Th b d b h I h 


ly nd h 1 ly are resting 


the B 1 d J SI 


1 f hat earth and 


tha h p h U 


11 1 d 1 Neither shall 


be bl d m 1 


1 1 1 e-giving Yoice 


shall b 1 ard (J h 


R 13). In the 


du 1 ! pb 




sle p ui dly p 


f 1 b d 11 J us come. In 


tha m d b h 


1 m Id surges, the 



sinner lies, like the criminal in his cell, awaiting the sum- 
mons of the Judge. 

Vers. 11-13. ■'^'"^ God said, Ld the earth bring forth grass,^ 
the herb yidding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, 
whose seed is in ttself, upon the earth: and it teas so. 12. And the earth 
brought forth grass, arid h^h yieldmg seed after his kind, and the tree 
yieldii^ fruit, whose seed is in itself, qftsr his hind : and God saw that 
it ■was good. 13. And the evening and the morning were the third day. 

The great work proceeds apace. We are made to trace 
its successive steps, rising the one above the other, in fail 
order. There was first /tg^kt, followed by the division into 
day and night Then there was the atmosphere, followed 
by the division of the upper and the under waters. Then 
the earth, with its division into sea and land, so that a 
soil was prepared, with all the needful accompaniments 
and appliances for making it productive. This liaving 

' Literally, ' Let the earth spront forth grass of green herbage 
{(3sTi!»H» a;o(itoij, as the LXX. give it), seeding seed; tree of fruif, 
making fruit after its kind,' 



jiGoogle 



32 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

been done, the word goes forth, and the clothing of the 
earth begins, with the two great divisions of grass .and 
trees, the smaller and tlie larger orders of the vegetable 
creation. All these sprang up at once when the divine 
command went otit^ And in this first generation there 
is contained provision for all fnture time, each class being 
so created as to be able to reproduce itself. They could 
not produce others of a different kind, or gradually pass 
up from a lower into a higher order ; each could only 
bring forth his own. Each species was to be separate 
from the other^ bringing forth seed ' after its kind.' There 
was to be no confusion, no intermingling of diverse kinds. 
Such was the law of the Creator, and in the carrying out of 
that law no mistakes occur, and no rebellion is ever seen. 
Man may mistake or resist the law, but into the lower parts 
of creation mistakes and self-willed resistances cannot come. 
All there is order, certainty, continuity, and regularity of 
the most perfect kind. There is a law woven into every 
fibre of their being, — a law from which no power or skill 
can force them to deviate. In that law we read the will 
of God Himself, — a will stamped upon all creation, and 
meeting us in every clod of the soil, and in every herb, 

' Milton thus describes the scene ; 

' He scarce hsi tsii, whtn the bare eaiih, till then 
Destrt and bate, uqsishlly, unadorned, 
Brought forth Jh' tender gtaas, whoae verdure clad 
Ber iBiiva-sal/iUj with fleasa-a ireea.'— Far. I.Mt.HaoVi-^l.iii. 

Tlie description of Lucretius is so exact that we may cite it : 
' Prmdplo genus herbatuiD, vliidemque nitotem. 
Terra dedk, drcum coUes. caiupDsque per omues 

—Dl Rer. Nat Sool: v. 781. 



I ..Google 



GEIfESIS I. 11-13. 33 

or flower, or tree. Why does this seed bring forth only 
grass, and that other only corn, and that otlier only the 
shrub or tree? Because God so willed it at first, and 
because He has left the stamp of that sovereign will upon 
the minutest seed that ripens under the autumn sun. Why 
do they never run into each other, and become mixed or 
confounded, but everywhere preserve the original diver- 
sity assigned to them six thousand years ago; so that when 
at any time man with all his skill fails to discriminate 
different seeds, be has but to appeal to these seeds them- 
selves, by covering them with a little moist soil, and 
forthwith each seed declares itself, without mistake or 
uncertainty? Because in each of these atoms of creation 
there is a force at work, far superior to man, — the will of 
Jeliovah. Why does not the acorn sometimes through mis- 
take produce the elm, or the fir-cone the chestnut, or the 
thistle-down the rose of Sharon ? Why does not the fig- 
tree sometimes pass uito the vine, or the branching cedjir 
shoot up into naked stateliness, and put on the coronet 
of the palm? In all these myriads of seeds there is 
oftentimes abortion, but never a mistake. The seed may 
rot and die, so failing in its end, but otherwise it fails 
not In a perfect world there would be no abortion or 
decay, but this world of ours is blighted, and therefore 
failure exists. But it is sinaply failure, not mistake. It is 
Jehovah's will that they should often prove abortive, in 
order to be a witness to sin and the curse ; but it is also 
His will that there should be no mistake or confusion, 
that it may be seen, even in the lowliest, that He is still 
the sovereign of creation. Thus has God engi^aven the 

VOL. VL C 



I ..Google 



34 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

insignia of His sovereignty upon all His' handiworks, even 
tlie minutest The form and colour of each seed, each 
leaf, each blossom ; all these continuing to this day 
without mixture or . confusion, are the badges of His 
sovereignty as well as the witnesses of His wisdom and 
love. 

This da khGdp dd 

which He d p d h 

the clothing g F 

proportion h d b g: n b U 

a dark-bro d an B 

the command F G 

purpose ii) b II 

stability, s H m h d u: 

of all that b H tl ur 

of sky and ai 

His word ts d 

which has mhd ibm bkiwn 

the ' green ar h 

1 Let us ce 

Song of Sol S wn 

of nuts to see the ^^irnas of the valley, for it is greeraiass, not fiuit, 
that is signified, by the wx)rd. (see Job viii. 12) ; the beauty of the great 
valley is what is reierred to. In Rev. iv. 3, the rainbow round the 
throne was ' to look upon like an emerald. ' As the emerald is gveen, 
BO the synibohcal rainbow, all tinctured with lliab hue, declares the 
connection of the scene mentioned in the chapter with the gnm 
earth. It seems like the reflected verdure oi earth formed into a 
canopy above the throne, to show that He who sat upon the throne 
was earth's Redeemer and King. Tliat emeiald rainbow is God's 
covenant-pledge to creation Uiat He remembers it, and will ere long 
restore to it its blighted vei'dure. 



jiGoogle 



Vers. 14-19. 'And God said. Lei there ie Hghls in the firmament of 
the heaven to divide the day from tie night (isiioseit the day and between 
the night) ; and let them de for signs, and for seasons {set times), and 
/or days, and years : 15. And let them 6e/br lights in the firmament of 
the Aeaven, to give light upon the earth ; and it 'was so. 16. And God 
made taio great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser 
light to rule the night : He made the stars also. 17. And God set thsm 
m the firmament of the heaven, to give light upon the earth, 18. And to 
rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from tht: 
darkness: and Gad saw that it was goad. 19, And the evening and the 
morning mere thefiturth day. 

There had been Hght'^ before, but there are to be lights; 
tlie light hitherto had been dimly diffused over creation. 
Its source has not yet become visible. The firmament was 
still clouded, so that neither sun nor moon could be seen ; 
and it was under this cloud that God sowed His seed, and 
planted His herbs and trees. But now the veil is to be 
brushed away, and the two great centres of radiance to 
become visible. They, with the stars, had been created 
at first, as parts of the heaven and earth spoken of in the 
first verse. But not till now are they unveiled ; for now 
they are needed to nourish and mature the springing 
plants of herb and tree, which God had on the previous 
day been planting. The operations of the third day 
suited best the sJiade, but now something more is required, 

' In Ps. Isxiv. 16, the disliiiclioii between the light and the source 
of light is marked, whUe both are ascribed to God \ ' Thou bast pre- 
pared light and the sua.' The words of the 136th Psalm are a com- 
mentary on the whole passage, teaching us, moreover, the infinite 
love of God in this part of His creation, so that we cannot enjoy the 
brightness of sua, or moon, or star, without feeling that ' His mercy 
endureth for ever.' Everlasting mercy is written on these great lights 
of the firmament. And as truly as they tell His love, so truly do they 
'declare His glory' (Ps, xix. l). 



jiGoogle 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



and the sun bursts forth in its strength. But let us 
more particularly mark the uses here assigned to these 
luminaries. 

1. The first use is to divide between the day and 
between the night. Here again the process of division 
comes in, the sun and moon being the instruments for 
effecting it. This division is not arbitrary or useless. 
Man's health and comfort require it. The wellbeing of 
all the various tribes of being, living or lifeless, requires 
this. Without it, the present condition of creation would 
be undermined, and creation ere long destroyed. With- 
out it there could be no order, no regularity. When day 
and night are confounded, then man suffers ; for no law 
of creation can be violated without suffering or evil 
follovring. But while man neglects this regularity of 
division at the call either of pleasure or business, God 
keeps up His silent protest in the heavens against him.. 
He prevents that disorder from becoming general by the 
iixture of the heavenly orbs, whose inexorable law of 
revolution is always bringing back order and regularity, 
restraining the folly and disorderliness of man, 

2. To he for signs and for seasons, for days and for years. 
~ (i.) Signs J that is, tokens, by means of which God points 
to something not before the eye, past, present, or to come, 
as the rainbow after the flood, or as the Sabbath, which 
was to be a' sign.' These heavenly bodies are specially 
to be used as 'signs' in the latter day {Luke xxi. 25 ; 
Acts ii. 19). (2.) Seasons; that is, set times, not only the 
seasons of the year, but festivals and solemn days; all 
the recurring periods of man's time, great or small (Isa. 



I ..Google 



Ixvi. 23 ; I Chron. xxiii, 31 ; Ps. civ. 19). Thus God has 
committed the keeping of mail's time to tlie unintelligent, 
nay, the inanhnate creation. The sun and moon keep 
time for man; he cannot do it for himself; and the 
regularity of the world as to time must be entrusted to 
creatures without mmd or life. Much as man can do, he 
cannot keep or measure his time without their aid. He 
can construct an instrument for this, or he can let tlie sun 
or taoon do it for him ; but without some such appliances 
he soon loses all count of time. " Thus, at every turn man's 
helplessness comes out, and he is made to feel his little- 
ness as well as his greatness; his dependence on the 
inanimate creation as well as his superiority to it. 

3. To give light. — Several times over this is stated, as if 
it were their prime and special object, to which the others 
were subordinate. They are man's servants— his torch- 
bearers, appointed for this service by God.' They shine, 
not for themselves, but for Him. It is towards Him that 
each ray is bending, as if doing homage to its King. 
Vet man in his folly has worshipped the light as if it were 
God I The master has bowed down to the servant : 
Oh, folly and stupidity beyond conception ! Man alone 

' Is not this the special reference in the 8th Psalm, when David 
exclaims, ' What is man, tliat Thou art mind/iil? ' etc. It is not merely 
to contrast tlie magnificence of the stany arch with the meanness of 
man, as is generally supposed. It is rather to ask, What is man, that 
Thou shouldst make such provision for his comfort and wellbeing as 
these skies do furnish? What Is man, that Thou shouldst light up so 
many sparkling orbs to give light to him? In reference to the stars 
being man's servants, Theodoret lias somewhere this idea, that they 
turn their tack upon the heavens in order to give light to the earth 



jiGoogle 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



mistakes or forgets the end of his creation; other creatures, 
even the inanimate, fulfil their end I 

4. To rule the day and night} — Each has his toyal 
throne assigned. They sit like monarchs in the firmament, 
determining the bounds of day and night ; that the light 
may not encroach upon the darkness, nor the darkness on 
the light, but each have its allotted share of time. They 
sit also there as if to regulate the movements of man, pre- 
scribing to hira what these movements are to be during the 
day, and during the night, — saying to man each morning, 
Arise, and go forth to thy labour; and each evening, 
Return and rest. Thus these 'powers that be (emblems 
of the princedoms of earth) are ordained of God.' It is 
His purpose that they are fulfilling; it is by His law that 
they are moving, and revolving, and radiating, carrying 
healing and gladness as well as bght along with them, — 
being to man ' the ministers of God for good.' 

In all this we see again the impress of Jehovah's 
■sovereign will. It is that will that shines out in the day, 
or dattens in the night It is that will that is to be traced 
in the hours, and days, and weeks, and months, aiid years', 
and cycles, that give to earth and its inhabitant man, a 
chronology and a history To all this God sets His seil 

^ As each of the tit peiiods is measuied fiom the eiening to the 
morning the iiiooii miist have appeared first In th^t night when 
her face was first unveiled she begin her less potent rule, and it 
was not bll morning that the sun hurst forth So it is first the 
Chuich, 'fair BS the moon, shinmg in and ruling tins worlds 
deep midnight, till the mom ng wanes a.nd Ihe long hidden Sun of 
Righteousness goes ft rth '1 Ice a bridegroom out of his chamber, ' 
lo take His place in the fimnment, and mlh His bride, the Chun.h, 
to rule the endless day 



jiGoogle 



It was good- And again, He dates His work, 'The 
evening was, and the morning was, day the fourtL' 

Vers. 20-35- ' ■^"'^ ^"'^ ■""'^t ^i '■^ maiers bring fiiik oBandantly 
the m(rving creature thai hoik lifs (lit. Id ths ■waters maks to creep ths 
creefiin^ thing, soul of lift, i.e. thai has lift in it), and fowl that may 
fly above the earth on the open finnamatl of Aeaiiea (lit- and lei fowl 
fly upon or above the earth on the face of the expanse of the heavens), 
21- And God created great shales (lit. the great sea-monsters), and 
every living creature that moveth (or creepetk), ■aihick the waters broti^ki 
forth abundantly, after their kind, and eriay winged fowl (lit- soeryfowl 
of wing) afier his tfts) kind: and God saw that it was good, 32. And 
God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and flll the waters 
in the seas, and Id the fowl multiply on the earth. 23. And the 
evening and the morning were ths flftk day, 34- And Cod said. Let 
the earth bring forth the living creature (lit. the soul of life) after Ms 
kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth afier his hind: 
and it was so, 25. And Gad made the beast of the earth after his kind, 
and cattle after their kind, and everything that creepelh upon the earth 
after his kind : and God saw that it was good.' 

We have seen the creation of vegetable life, we have 
now to mark that of animal life. We are now climbing 
upwards in the scale of being, yet each step is a distinct 

1 It is interesting to notice the many applications made in Scripture 
of the heavenly bodies as emblems of the spiritual, (i.) God is a. 
sun and shield <Ps. Ixxklv- ii). (2.) Christ is the Sun of Righteous- 
ness (Mai. iv. 2) ; the light of the world (John viii. 12) ; the morn- 
u)g star (Rev n 16) , Ih'' dispeller of the darkness (2 Sam. xxiii. 4). 
(3 ) The Church is fair as the moon (Song vi, 10) ; dear as the sun 
(Song VI 10) , the moon under her feet (Rev. xii. i) ; crowned 
with stars (ib ) the saints are to shine as the stars (Dan. xii. 3)', 
with diflerent glones (1 Cor xv 41) , as the sun'in his might yudg, 
V ^l) as the sun in the k ngdom of then' Father {Matt. xiii. 43). 
(4.) Lhnsts ministers are hkened to stars (Rev. i. 16-20). (5.) 
Apostates lie 1 1 ened to wa deriig stars (Jude 13). (6.) It was 
a star that 1 ghf ed the wise mon (Matt ii. 2). (7.) At the coming 
cnsia uf earth s histon all these heayenly orbs are to be shaken and 
d^rl ened for a season (Maik \ni 25) 



I ..Google 



40 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

one. There is no confusion nor jntenningling with each 
other. The rock does not gradually hecome a vegetable, 
and the vegetahle gradually pass into an animal. No. 
There is entire separation in each class, and at every step 
the fiat of the Creator must come in. They cannot, by 
any innate power, or intermixture of species or develop- 
ment of latent power or capacity, create or produce each 
other. The stone remains the stone, however rough, and 
the gem remains the gem, however precious. The tree 
remains the tree, neither passing downwards into some- 
thing less, nor upwards into something higher. The 
flower abides the flower, neither casting oft' its petals and 
shrinlving into a clod, nor expanding its blossoms into the 
plumage of the dove or the eagle. On each, God has 
imprinted the law of its kind, which it cannot pass nor 
annul 

God first created, then He arranged, then He enlightsned, 
then He divided, then He clothed, then He regulated time; 
now He proceeds to people the earth. Up to this time it 
might be fair and goodly, but it was nnpeopled. No life 
was to be found on it. Now it was to be peopled hy 
what are called ' things having a soul of life,' or living 
souL The inanimate creation had been completed, the 
animate must now be proceeded with. In this the order 
of procedure is, first, the creatures belonging to the sea ; 
second, those belonging to the air; third, those belonging 
to the earth. This was the order in which these three 
parts or regions of creation were prepared, and so the 
same order is preserved when providing inhabitants for 
them. 



I ..Google 



I. The creatures of the sea. — ^These we know are the 
lowest in the scale of creation, so God begins with these. 
And all species which the sea Contains He creates at 
once ; firom the great sea-monsters down to the meanest 
reptile. God Himself gives us in the book of Job 
(chap, xli.) a description of Leviathan as a specimen 
of these {see also Ps. civ. 26), How mighty in power 
and manifold in wisdom must their Creator be ! On 
every element He has representatives of His might and 
majesty. In the rugged caves of ocean there are creatures 
to glorify Him, so that the ' dragons and eiII deeps ' are 
called on to praise Him {Ps. cxlviii, 7). And from the 
depth of ocean there comes up a hallelujali to Him 
' who alone doetb great wonders ; for whatsoever the Lord 
pleased, that did He in heaven and in earth — in the seas 
and all deep places' (Ps. cxxsv. 6). Nay, the voice which 
John heard ascribing blessing to the Lamb for ever, was 
from ' such as are in the sea, and all that are in them ' 
(Rev, V. 13). 

a. The creatures of the air.—^Ws take the marginal 
reading as the true one, 'let the fowl fly,' that is, let 
the fowl be created, and let them fly in the firmament, 
there talcing up their abode. Of these two, God has 
given His own description (Job xxxix. 13-26, 27), singling 
out specially the peacock, the ostrich, the hawk, and the 
eagle. Thns the air is vocal. It has a hallelujah of its 
own. The 'flying'fowl' praise Him (Ps. cxlviii. 10); 
whether it be 'the stork that knoweth her appointed 
time' (Jer. viii, 7), or the 'sparrow alone upon the house- 
top' (Ps. cii. 7), or 'the raven of the valley' (Prov, xxx. 17}, 



I ..Google 



42 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

or the eagle ' stirring up her nest, and fluttering over lier 
young' (Deut. xxxii. ri), or the turtle making its voice to 
be heard in the land (Song ii, 12), or the dove winging 
its way to the wilderness (Ps. Ixv. 6). This is creation's 
harp (truer and sweeter than Menmon's), which each sun- 
rise awakens, 'turning all the air to music' 

3. The creatures of the earth.— Tht beast, the cattle, the 
creeping thing ; all that the earth now rears upon its 
bosom. Of these also God has given us His description 
(Job xxxix. r-12, 19), proclaiming His wondious works. 
Thus earth too has her hallelujah, for 'beasts and all 
cattle' (Ps. cxlviu. 10) are summoned to join in the 
chorus, that the diapason of creation may be complete. 
Thus sea, air, earth, are peopled, the three regions 
referred to in Ps. viii., which is quoted by the apostle 
(Heb li), as so specially containing man's charter, and 
setting forth God's purpose. The ' soul of life ' has now 
been given ; sentient beings have taken up their abode 
on earth ; beings capable of suffering and rejoicing. It 
is in LIFE that God is now manifesting Himself. Hitherto 
it has been in order, in shape, in colour, in beauty ; now 
it is in life,—'i!a2.t which is nearest to His own nature, 
likest to Himself. The manifestation which it is His 
purpose to make of Himself is becoming more and more 
complete. 

He blesses them, and pronounces them 'good.' He 
pours into them all the blessing of which their nature 
is capable, and gives it to them in perpetuity. For 
when God blesses His creatures. He is looking forward 
into the far future, and securing to them all that that 



I ..Google 



GENJ^SIS 1, 36-31, 43 

future stands in need of. And having blessed them, 
He bids them multiply, as if He would point out that 
the blessing which He gives is an active and com- 
municative blessing, to be spread abroad. And here 
we learn that the propagative powers of creation are' 
the direct impartation of God. They are .not a mere 
natural property or physical law, but the special gift of 
God. His sovereign will, His authoritative command 
are here. Fruitfulness and barrenness, the power to 
increase, or the drying up of that power, are from His 
hand ! (Ps. cxiii. g.) Hence it is that David gives vent to 
his joyful confidence, 'O Jehovah, Thou preservest man 
and beast: how excellent is Thy loving -kindness, O 
God ! therefore the children of men put their trust in 
the shadow of Thy wings' (Ps. xxxvi. 7). And hence 
also, after surveying the work of God's hands, he thus 
concludes : ' I will sing unto the Lord as long as I 
live; I will sing praise to my God while I have any 
being. My meditation of Him shall be sweet ; I will 
be glad in the Lord' (Ps. civ. 33, 34). 



Vers. 26-31. 'And Gad said. Lei us m,iie iium in our image, after 
BUT likeness ; and lei them hone dominiBn aver the fish of the sea, and 
over the fowl of the mr (lit. heaven), and over the caille, and over all 
Ike earth, and aver every creeping thing thai creefelh upon the earth. 

27. So (lit. and) God created mait (lit. the man) ia His awn image : 
in the image 0/ God created He him ; male and female created He them. 

28. And God Slened them ; and Gad said unto them, Be fraUful, and 
multiply, and replenish (fill) the earth, and subdue it; and have 
dominion mer the fish of the sea, and oaer the fowl of the air, and over 
every living thing thai maveth (lit. creefieth) upon the earth. 29. And 
Cad said, Behdd, I hast given you every heri tearing seed (liL ail 
grass seeding seed), which is upon the face of all the earth, and every 



jiGoogle 



44 THOUGTTTS ON GENESIS. 

Ira, in ivhick is the fruU of a irte yielding sesd (lit. seeding seed) ; ia 
you il shall he for meat.' 30. And to every beasi of the earth, and to 
every fowl of the ai^ (lit. heanens), and te every thing thai ere^h 
upon the earth, wherein there is life {lit. the soul of life), I have given 
eoery green ha-b for meat: and it was so. 31. And God saw every- 
thing that He had made, and, behold, it ■was very good. And the 
evening and the -morning were Ihe sixth day,' 

The great temple of creation has now been reared 
,aiid roofed in, It is perfect in its kind, — a glorious 
manifestation of its glorious Maker. But it wants a 
worshipper. It is at best but splendid desolation — a 
silent though wondrous city of the dead. 

There must be a living inhabitant, and a living wor- 
shipper. God cannot rest in His work till this is done. 
And, accordingly, the completion of the work proceeds. 
But it is the most important part, and must be planned 
with care. The great idea h^ been in the divine mind 
from eternity, and is now to be executed ; but in a way 
which manifests the profound interest which God took 
in what He was about to do. Hitherto it has been but 
the swift forth-going of a command; now there is a 
consultation, as if God were solemnly deliberating upon 
the great design. Hitherto it had been, ' Let there be;' 
now it is, 'Let us make;' — it is not a command to the 
elements, to bring forth what they contain ; it is a, work, 
spoken of as specially God's ovm. The creature to be 
formed must come more directly from the divine hand 
than any other; and hence we often read elsewhere, 
'He made us, and not we ourselves.' 

And with whom is this consuhation held? 'With 
whom took He counsel?' Not with angels surely. But 



I ..Google 



GENESIS r. 26-31. 45 

with Himself — Father, Son, and Spirit The peculiar' 
form of expression is not made use of without a purpose. 
And this is the more to be noted, because afterwards, 
when each of the Three Persons had come out as it 
were into greater disttncttiess of manifestation, so that 
sometimes the Fatlier speaks, and at other times the 
Son, and at other times the Spirit, this plural form of 
speech is not made use of. It is always I, not we. The 
same remarks apply to the use of the word our imme- 
diately after. 

The being about whose formation this consultation was 
held, was he to whom the name of man was to be given, 
as we read, ' He called their name Adam (or man), in the 
day when they were created' (chap. v. 2). The word 
signifies red, or ruddy, referring to the colour of his 
flesh, either as it appears under the skin, or as it is 
seen shining through the skin, forming the bright com- 
plexion of health ; the token of perfect and vigorous man- 
hood and womanhood. And hence it is said of Christ, 
who in body as well as soul was the perfection of man- 
hood, ' He that sat on it was to look upon like a jasper 
and a sardine stone ' (Rev. iv. 3). It is the same word 
used in the following passages:—! Sam. xvi. 12 : 'He 
was ruddy and withal of a beautiful countenance;' Song 
V. la: 'My beloved is white and ruddy;' Lam, iv, 7: 
' Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were whiter 
than milk, they were more ruddy in body than rubies ; 
their polishing was of sapphire.' 

This being is to be made ' in our image, after our like- 
ness' (this is repeated in ver. 37). The use of both 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



image and likeness is not a repetition. Its meaning is, 
' Let us make man in our image,' in order that he may 
resemble us, and so be our representative, the reflector of 
our image to others. The two words are used in Ex. 
XX. 4, 'Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, 
or any likeness of anything,' that is, anything intended to 
resemble or represent anything whatever on earth. God's 
special characteristics may be summed up in these : in- 
telligence, holiness, blessedness. Man therefore was to 
be an intelligent, holy, blessed being ; in these great 
features dilfering from and rising above all that had 
hitherto been created (see i Cor, xi. 7 ; Eph. iv, 24 ; 
Col. iii. 10). The idea of some, that the image of God 
consisted in his having dominion, is one resting on no 
Scripture, and is disproved by the passage before us, in 
which the possession of dominion is described as the 
result of bis having the image, and so could not be the 
image itself. Man was to be God's king, because he was 
fitted to be so by being made in the image of God. 

Then the gift of dominion follows. This kingship was 
directly from God. It was unlimited in so far as earth 
was concerned. All things were put under him, setting 
before us at the outset the great truth that it was God's 
purpose to rule the earth by a king, and that king not an 
angel, but a man (Heb. ii. 6). The further exercise of this 
dominion is afterwards expressed by 'subduing the earth,' 
bringing everything into submission to his royal will, and 
into conformity with God's plan and purpose. Not as if 
there was to be resistance to man in any part of creation, 
requiring coercion, but merely such a kind of resistance 



I ..Google 



CEN'ESIS 1. 26-31. 47 

as he was to have in cultivating Eden; such a kind of 
resistance as implied that creation stood waiting for the 
utterance of his will, and the forth-putting of his power. 

Then there comes the blessing (ver. 28). God blessed 
them, that is, He poured into tbem all the goodness, and 
the life, and the joy that they could contain, and declared 
that such as they were just now, such they were to be in 
time to come. This is the filling of the vessel, according 
to its measure, with the fulness of God. In virtue of this 
blessing, they were to be fruitful, and multiply, and fill 
the earth. And here, as we noticed formerly, is the true 
source of all power of propagation in man or beast, in 
herb or flower. The earth at first was 'void,' or empty, 
but now it was to be 'filled' (Ps. xxiv. i). 

Then food is granted. All that the earth brings forth 
of herb and tree. It would seem by the statement of the 
3otb verse, that the beasts and fowl were restricted to the 
herb of the field, while to man was specially assigned the 
fruit of the tree. That man was restricted to the latter 
cannot be said ; but the special food befitting his higher 
nature was the fruit of the tree. No life was then taken 
for food; life did not need to be supported by death. 
Death was not then a necessary prerequisite to any 
creatures obtaining food for the body. The lion did eat 
straw like the ox, as it did even afterwards, in the ark, 
during die year of confinement there. Such was the 
divine law, and such was the true condition of creation 
ere sin liad disordered the earth. 

Then, when all is finished, God looked round upon His 
handiwork, surveying all its parts. He gives His verdict 



I ..Google 



4S THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

— ' veiy good.' He is well, pleased, and He tells us this. 
Such is His estimate of creation. It is all perfect, all 
according to His plan and mind, each of its parts ex- 
hibiting the idea which He designed. And again He 
dates His work : ' The evening was, and the morning was, 
day the sixth.' 

And is this the six days' work that we see around us ? 
Yes; but how changed ! It is not wholly ruined, for God 
has interrupted it in its fall, so that by its midway position 
it should point forward to restitution while it proclaims 
decay. But still it is not what God made it, and man is 
its destroyer I It is man that has made creation groan. 
It is man that is the undoer of what the great Maker had 
done. 

And man himself, what is he now ? The image of 
Elohim, where is it? Marred, faded, gone 1 A few 
fragments stiU remaining, a few torn leaves to show what 
hag been the flower! We cannot recognise him as the 
same being. Man, ' thou hast destroyed thyself!' Com- 
pare thy present and thy former self, and be ashamed. 
Let the contrast between the first Adam and thyself 
humble thee profoundly; and let the contrast between 
the second Adam and thyself humble thee more pro- 
foundly still. The contrast, how sad ! The ruin, how 
awful ! And you did it ! 

Retrace your steps, get back the lost image ; get it 
back in God's way. Thy connection with the first Adam 
is thy undoing; nothing but connection with the Second 
can be thy salvation. 'Put on Christ;' let every linea- 
ment of the earthly Adam be erased ; let each feature of 



I ..Google 



GENESIS 1. 26-31. 49 

the heavenly Adam be engraven upon thee. Aim high ; 
yet not in pride, as man did, and fell. To have the image 
of God is one thing, and it is right and blessed ; to ' be 
as God' is another, and it is awfully presumptuous, — it is 
self-deification, and has been the ruin of the race. The 
day of perfection, and restoration, and dominion is 
coming J but it has not yet arrived. Live looking for it; 
live as men who believe it ; walk worthy of it. It will 
then be seen what a God of glory our God is, and what 
blessedness there is in being knit to the second Adam, 
who shall then be manifested as the head of creation and 
the King of Glory. 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



CHAPTER IT. 

'! finished, 

GOD now proclaims the completion of His creation- 
work.^ It was no mere sketch or outhne ; it was 
no half-finished plan : it was a ' finished ' work. A goodly 
and glorious work I Not merely on account of what we 
see and touch in it, but on account of what we cannot 
see or touch. For creation is full of secrets. Science, 
in these last days, has extracted not a few, but how many 
remain secrets still ! What a multitude of hidden wonders 
does each part of creation contain ! Outwardly, how 
marvellous for the order, beauty, utility of all its parts ; 
inwardly, how much more marvellous for the secret 
springs of life, motion, order, health, fruitfolness, and 
power ! Each part, how wondrous in itself as perfect 
in its kind ; yet no less wondrous, as wrapping up within 

' It may be well to notice timt file word ' finished ' here is (he same 
as is used in such passages as tte following : Ex. xl. 33, ' So Moses 
Jinished ^t work ; 1 2 Chron. vii, 11, 'Thus Solomon jjBitiSfl/ the 
house.' And as of these types of redemption, the tabernade and 
temple, it is said tliey were 'finished,' bo of redemption itself it is 
said, ' It is finished ' (John xx. 30). And as the old creation is thus 
spoken of as being ' finished,' so is Uie new ; for after He that sat on 
the throne had said, ' Behold, I make all things new, ' it is added, 
'it is done' — it is finished (Rev. sxi. 5, 6). 



I ..Google 



itself the seeds of ten thousand other creations, as perfect, 
hereafter to spring from them ! God proclaims the per- 
fection of His works, not as man does, in vainglorj', but 
that He may fix our eye on their excellency, and let us 
know that He, the Former of them, is fiilly satisfied, and 
that His work is now ready for its various functions and 
uses. The great machine is completed, and now ahout 
to begin its operations.' 

Vers. 2, 3- 'And on the seventh day God ended {had finished, 
eonipUted)^ JlisvrBri Tahich lie Aad made; and Hs rested en Skeseueath 
day from all His viaik which He haa made 3. Ani Cod blessed the 
levenlh day, and sancUpsd it bmasise that in U He had rtsied from all 
His work which God <.reaiia and madt 

By the close of the si\th day God had finished His. 
work, so that, as that diys sun set announcing the 
seventh day begun, -ill was completed God stands here 
on the line that separates these two di>s , He looks bids, 
on the past, and forward to the future He sees md 

' The Most, Snch passages as Deut. iv. tg and Isa. xxxiv. 4 show ' 
that this expression is used in referaice to sun, moon, and stars ; 
Josli. V. 14, that it means God's living array, probably referring to 
Israel, not to angels. (See Ex, xii. 41 : ' The hosls of Jehovah went 
out from the land of Egypt.') It is used of angels, I Kings xxii. 19 ; 
Ps. ciii 21, cxlviii. 2. In Luke ii. 13 we read of ' tiie heavenly 
host,' ffTfUTiSt slfityiiB tefening to angels ; and in Matt. xxiv. 29, 
2uva|itsi; itS< aifuwy, the powers of heaven, referxing to stars, etc, 
God's special name, Jehovah Sabaoth, Lord of hosts, is not used in 
the earlier books of Scripture. It does not occur till I Sam. L 3; 
but after that it occurs about 300 times in the Old Testament; only 
twice in the new, Rom. ii. 29, Jas. v. 4. 

* The Hebrevir word here is the same as in the preceding verse, 
though our translation gives it as if it were different. IMoses' meaning 
is, that God ' on the seventh Ai.-;/ had eem^letedtlm -wot^L.' 



I ..Google 



$z, THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

surveys afinished work, and He 'returns to His place' — 
He 'rests.' His rest is soon disturbed, as we shall see, 
by man's sin, so that He is compelled to begin anew His 
work (the far more laborious work of renewing a world) ; 
but meanwhile He ' rests ; ' and His purpose is to make 
all creatares partakers of this rest. He rests, not because 
weary, but because His work is done ; and yet, no doubt, 
that word 'rest' was intended to declare to us the pro- 
founder tranquillity that tbere is, even to the Creator, in 
rest than in labour. 

The day of this completion and this rest must be made 
memorable for ever.' From that moment, each seventh 
day must be maiked off as a day of remembrance, a day 
to be kept differently from other days, even had man 
never iallen. For as man, being a dweller on earth, has 
many common duties to perform, which are no less needful 
than those which are directly spiritual, so God has ap- 
pointed six days during which these common duties are 
to be sanctified, and one day dunng which they are to be 
wholly set aside. They that confound these two things, 



' Calvin, in his Commentary on Genesis, points out this. He shows 
that God blessed and sanctified, the Sabbath, ' ut seculis omnibus inter 
homines sancta foret ; ' and that its observance was not to be confined, 
'to one age or people, but is common to the whoie human race.' He 
then shows tliat Judaism introduced certain pecuijatities into the ob- 
servance of the Sabbath. These were done away in Christ, but the 
Sabbath itself remained. Nay, in so &r as the Sabbath prefigured 
the spiritual rest which Christ brongiit, it might be s^d to have passed 
into its antit]^. Bnt, in so &r as it was a day set apart from the 
beginning for the Service of God, it was to remain, ad tnuiidi finent 
usque durare eporlel. Such were Calvin's ideas of the ' abrogation ' 
of the Sabbath, of which so much has 'been said 1 



jiGoogle 



and profess to make every day a Sabbath, are making void 
the original purpose of God. God's purpose never was 
to make every day a Sabbath, and it is mock-sanctity to 
say so. They who would raise every day to the level of 
a Sabbath are quite as far fi-om the aim of the divine 
institution as they who drag down the Sabbath to the 
level of a common day. During the six days man was 
to show how he could serve and glorify God in the 
common duties of life ; on the Sabbath, he was to show 
how God was to be served and glorified by acts of direct 
and unmingled worship. This is the principle of the great 
Sabbath-institute,— a principle which runs through all ages, 
more so than ever in these last days, when men are 
either denying religion altogether, or endeavouring to 
eject it from everyday life, and confine it to a peculiar 
region of its own. 

This seventh day God 'blest,' He uttered His mind 
concerning it, calling it a day of blessing; and in so doing, 
communicated to it (as it were) the power to impart 
blessing — that is, He made it the day in which He would 
specially give blessing.^ This is then the primary mean- 
ing and object of the Sabbath. It is the day on which 

' Ii7 this sense it is that inanimate things ai-e often, spoken of as 
being blessed by God ; Ex. xxiii. 25, ' He shall Hess thy bread and tliy 
water ;' Ps, Ixv. lo, 'Thou ilessesl the springing therof ; ' cxxxv. 15, 
' I will abundantly ii^as her provision ; ' Prov. iii. 33, ' He ilesselk 
the habitation of the just.' M. Stuart paraphrases it, 'God declared 
this day to be worthy of peculiar distinction, honour, and observance' 
(Hebrejo Chrestomathy, p. 123). In the Greek it is iiiSyi'h 'He 
spake well of the day.' We 'bless' God when we spedc well of 
Him, that is, tell of His goodness. He blesses us when He spealts 
well of us, and impai-ls His goodness. 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON' GENESIS. 



God specially blesses man. But mgre than this. It is 
added, He 'sanctified it.' He marked it off from all 
other days, as the tabernacle was marked off from all the 
tents of Israel. He drew a fence around it, which was 
not to be broken through. He set it apart for Himself, 
just as He set the six days apart for man. It was to be 
His day, not man's; just as the altar was His altar, the 
laver His laver, not man's.' And when, or where, or how 
has God's claim to a Sabbath been renounced? When 
has His setting apart been done away? Men speak and 
act as if this ' blessing,' this ' sanctification ' of the day 
were a yoke not to be borne ; as if the Sabbath were a 
curse, not a blessing; as if the gospel had at length 
broken fetters forged in Eden by God for man I But, 
no. The Sabbath wa» set up by God, and by Him only 
can be taken down. It was set up (r) as a memorial 
of past labour ; (2) as a pillar of testimony to God as 
Creator ; (3) as a proclamation of rest ; (4) as a type and 
earnest of coming rest. These four points in particular 
contain God's reasons for the institution of this day. All 
these are still in force ; nor has the gospel blunted the 
edge of any of them, least of all the last. Till the antitype 
come, the type must remain. Till that glorious rest 

'- This use of the word sancfi^ is so coraraon, tliat we need only 
refer to such passages as the following in proof: Ex. xxix. 37, 44; 
Josh. XX. 7 ; Neh. iiL i. The literal seventh was of no consequence. 
It couM not be the same day over all the world. A seventh of days 
was all that was implied. In HeK iv. 3, 4, the apostle's object is to 
state that there was a rest, — a rest which began on the finishing of the 
wotks, which was therefore fast, not Juiare; so that it could not be 
this rest into which faith is to introduce, and from which unbelief 
shuts us out. It is 3. future rest to which fa.ith looks forward. 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS n. /<t, S, 5S 

arrive, — better than creation-rest, better than Canaan-rest 
(Heb. iv,), — its type must remain. Not is it easy to 
understand tlie reason why some, calling themselves ex- 
pectaiite of this coming rest, should be so anxious to set 
aside the type of it It is strange also that now, when 
the resurrection of Cluist has added another to the many 
reasons for observing a day like this, we should be asked 
to abolish it' 



Vers. 4, S- ' Tkese are the i^nerations of the kearvens and of the earth 
■when lAey ■were crcaled, in the day thai l/ie Lord God made the earth 
and the hea/vem, 5. And evety plant of the fidd before ii was in the 
earth, and every herb of the fidd before it grew: for the Lord God 
had not earned it to rain u^n the earth, and there was not a man 
to till the ground.' 

This fourth verse should commence a new chapter, 

' No doubt God's rest was broJten by man's sin. Eut this made it 
only the more needful to keep up the Sabbath as a memorial of that 
rest which man had broken, and an earnest of that rest which is in 
reserve for us. Let «s not foi^et that the Sabbath was not a Judaical 
ordinance ; and to prevent such an idea, the fourth commandment 
commences with kemembee, calling on Israel to keep in mind an old 
commandment which had been in the world fi-om the b^inping. 
The word Sabbath (signifymg rat) does not only refer to onr resting, 
but to God's resting. Man's sin marred God's rest-day, by compel- 
ling Him (we apeak after the maimer of men) to begin working anew. 
This new creation-work is still going on ; and to this onr Lord refers 
(John V. 17), ' My Father worketh hitherto, and I work ' — that is, our 
Sabbath is not yet begun, and therefore I cannot be chaiged with 
breaking the Sabbath in working miracles. When this new creation- 
work has been finished (the old creation took six days, the new crea- 
tion 6doo years), then the interrupted Sabbath shall be resumed, at 
the point where it was broken in upon ; onlyon a higher and heavenlier 
scale, with Eden restored, Satan expelled, all things made new, the 
second Adam and the second Eve having dominion over all things ; 



jiGoogle 



55 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

and is connected with what follows.* The first three 
verses should be thrown back into the previous chapter. 
A new section of creation-hiitory now begins, and the 
fourth verse is the title or heading: 'The followirjf are 
the details of what took place when God created heaven 
and eaith.' The fifth is intended to state that al! that 
was done was entirely God's doing, without the help of 
second causes, without the refreshment of rain, without 
the aid of man. There had been no power in action 
hitherto but God'.s alone. His hand, directly and alone, 
had done all that was done, in making plants and herbs 
to grow. The soil was not of tfself productive ; no 
previous seed existed ; there was no former growth to 
spring up again. All was the finger of God. He is 
the solo Creator. Second causes, as they are called, 
are His creations : they owe their being, their influence, 
to Him. The operations of nature, as men speak, are 
but the actings of the invisible God, God is in every- 
thing. Not as the Pantheist would have it, a part of 

God resting from His work, and rejoicing in His Sabbath, — tlie 
SahbatUm whicli the apostle speaks of as remaining for the people of 
God (Heb.' iv. 5). 

1 Generations, nilSta- The LXX. render it bBtb ^ 0;j5?..s yiviriwf, 
as in Matt. i. I. IJterally it is Urths, things brought forth. Here 
and in chap. vi. 9, xi. 27, xxxyii. a, it signifies accounts of the origin 
of — generations, descents, genealogical notices. After quoting this 
fo rth vers Pearson remarks, ' So the creation or prodnction of any- 
t ling by Inch it is, and before was not, is a kind of gsnei-ation, and 
consequen ly the creator or producer of it a kind oi father: " Hath 
lie a n a f ther, or who hath begotten the drops of Aevi ? " (Job 
XXXV 8) by which worijs Job signifies, that as there is no other 
cause a g able of the rain but G(id, so may He, as the cause, be 
Cid ed \ era her of it.'— 19» the Ct^d, Arl. /. 



I ..Google 



GEA'ESIS II. 4, 5- 



57 



eveijrtlimg so that nature i3 God but a personal Being 
m everjthng jet distinct from ever^thu^ fillmg 
qiickeiimg guidma; creat n in all its parts jet no more 
the some with it tlian the pilot is with the \essel he 
stei-TS, or the painter with the canvas on which he 
flmgs ill the hues of earth -ind heaven Let us beware 
of this subtle delusion of the evil one thi. confoui d ng 
of the aeature with the Creator of God the Ivn|, 
eternal immortal and ii visibk w th the 1 ills and phms 
and forests and floners which He has made To deify 
nature seems one of the special errors of the last days 
And no wonder fjr if nature be defied then man is 
de led too Man tecomcb God ind nature is the 
throne on wh ch he sits Let us not lose si^ht of God 
in nature Let not that whch is the manifestat on of 
H s glory be t irned by us into an obscuration of Him 
self. Let us look straight to the livmg God. Not 
nature, but God; not providence, but God; not the 
law, but the Lawgiver; not the voice, but the Speaker; 
not the instrument and its wide melodies, but the Master 
who formed the lyre, and whose hands are drawing the 
music out of its wondrous chords ! ' 

■" Schiller's poetry is perhaps the saddest yet most fascinating ex- 
emplification of the spirit referred to above. His very beauties are 
often the most pdnful parts of his works. His poem on. TAe iGods of 
Greece is one of his worst, much admired as it has been. 

To lift and link her to the breast of love ! 
Cold, from tlie DOtth, has gone 



All this, and much n 



e of the lords of modern thought ! 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



Ver. 6. 'Bat there inenl tip a mkt from the carta, and ■wakrei the 
■whole face of the ground.' 

To supply the want of rain, God called up a mist 
which watered the ground, so that herb and plant were 
now refreshed. Ere He brings man into the midst of 
His works, He burnishes them, and makes them re- 
splendent with freshest green. It is of this 'raist' that 
Job speaks (xxxvi. 27): 'He maketh small the drops 
of water; they pour down rain according to the vapour 
thereof;' Jeremiah also: 'He causeth the vapours to 
ascend from the ends of the earth ' (x, i^,) ; thus directly 
ascribing to Jehovah as much the conrinuance as the 
creation of this watering mist. He makes it ! He 
who built the hills, and lighted up the stars, — He is 
the Creator of the thin airy vapour which disappears 
in a moment. And in all these parts of His infinitely 
varied handiwork He has taught us to read solemn 
lessons. In the ocean, the breadth of eternity; in 
the mountains, the stability of the covenant; in the 
vapour, the shortness of our mortal hfe (Jas. iv. 14). 

S ore beaufifully disguised as an angel of liglit 

h ? Is not Geiman poetry, German metaphysics, 

G sn °y making havoc among us ? Is it not the combined 

hat is producing that school which, with such 

sup Lk of Evangelical truth, is setting itself to mate 

n gau h so childishly calls Bibliolatry? Under covert 

IS n m thus, after no brave or manly fashion, fastened 

n tl pp they hope to advance to their great work of 

d mg d avthrowing the verbal inspiration of the Word 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS ir. 7. 59 

All nature teems with truth, concerning the past, the 
present, and the future. And this God, who created 
the vapour, and made that vapour a figure of man's 
life, is the God who careth for us, the God who wants 
to give us the life that is no vapour, — the heritage 
that cannot pass away! And the mist that waters and 
revives the summer flower is not more free than the 
eternal life which He gives us in His Son, 

Ver. 7. ' And Ike Lord God formed man of the dast of the ground, 
db atl i • t h' twf! t! b Ik flf d be s 

I h ffh rs w sp lly m d d th 

h m II h g d his 

b d d f m 1 y f 

m h h t, h ct: d 

d f was m d f 1 d 

H 1 1 d h lai 1 n. 

A d gl> h I cul 1 k b h d 

1 g d 1 d H 

ly I 1 h If f h 

d H h h b ly Id f 

bg dbyOdb dhb d 

i Im f ; h IN 

Id f h d f 1 d f 1 fin 

dm 1 1 p f 1 m al th H 

fmdd ft df h dru 

1 Tlly Th f h b dy h 

h wmliir dh fthGd 

bthd h tnl]blflf{l) 



I ..Google 



d i \ 






nag 


1 b 


h 


pit 


t 


h 


if 1 


b 


h 


d b d 


h 





THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



h f 

hid n f 

1 1 k b h I 

h 1 and I dy 

f 1 d H I p d I 1 M 

b pir I H fl 1 k 

f h d b h 1 1 1 d 

I f G d I d f k n 

wh 11 d p h p d ly f hm Tl 

hhisitilym f \ 

ly 1 wh 11 y I li 

m 1 b gh f f p ly 

ID r N TI 1 f H 

h 1 H If d 1 f 

hllfm(J! )I1 h d 

person of the Godhead, that is ' the Life '—the living and 
life-giving One. It was He who with one hand, as it 
were, talcing up a body out of the dust, and with the 
other creating a soul by the word of His power, brought 

^rrn C^DS* Uterallj-, a soul of life, a living animafed being, — i'; 
■^oxi" XZ<"^i, Sept. It is to this the apostle refers in I Cor. xv. 45, 
in which he uses the very words of the Septuagint, above quoted, 
preserving even the Hebrew idiom. The ' breath of lives ' Seems to 
be that breath by which the lines (animal and rational) are kept in 
play, as well as linked to the body. It is to this expression that the 
apostle seems to refer in Acts xvii. 25 ; 'He giveth to all, life and 
breath,' — Jsjin xxi 'rinh. On this whole subject the reader may con- 
sult Howe's Principles of the Oracles of God, Lect. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 ; 
Flavel's Treatise on the Seal ; and Chmtophec Ness' qudnt work. 
The History and Mystery of Ikt Old and New Testament, chap, iv. 
See also TertulUan's curious treatise, De Anima. 



I ..Google 



them together, and then cemented them together with 
the ' breath of lives,' which He breathed into the nostrils. 
Thus the threefold cord which is not quickly broken {the 
corporeal life, the animal life, and the inteUectual life) 
was thrown around this new piece of creation, and the 
soul and body married together in a union which only 
sin could dissolve. 

Such are the two extremes of man's nature, body 
and soul. Such are the sources of both; the one low, 
the other lofty. And possessed of this twofold being, 
—thus strangely compounded of the low and the high,- 
of the material and the immaterial, — is he not taught 
on the one hand to be profotmdly humble, and on the 
other to soar upwards to Jehovah with a noble ambition, 
resting satisfied nowhere but in the bosom of his God? 

Of our original dust we are often reminded by God. 
He recurs frequently to the term, as a figure for such 
things as the following; — It is the emblem of frailty 
(Ps. ciii. 14) ; can we then be self-confident, or ever 
cherish ' the pride of life ' ? It is the emblem of nothing- 
ness (Gen. xviii. 27); and can we boast of our sufficiency, 
or deem ourselves aught when compared with the All- 
sufficient One ? It is the emblem of defilement (Isa. Hi, z) ; 
and shall we vaunt of purity? It is the emblem of 
humiliation (Lam. iii. 29 ; Job xlii. 6) ; and shall we be 
puffed up, we who are but dust and ashes? It is tlie 
emblem of mourning (Josh. vii. 6) ; and shall we exult, 
as if no tribulation could reach us, or say with Babylon, 
' I shall see no sorrow ' ? It is the emblem of mortality 
(Eccles. iii 20, xii. 7) ; and shall we trust in our dying 



I ..Google 



62 THOUGHtS ON GENESIS. 

life, as if death could not invade us? O man, thou 
art dust! Canst thou be proud or high-minded? Canst 
thou put thy confidence in anything into which tlie 
element of dust enters ? 

Yet, let us remember, there is nothing sinful in this 
dust out of which we are framed. Ours is indeed a 
lowly origin, but not an unholy one. There is nothing 
sinful in the soil of eartli. The curse is on it and in 
it, for man's sin. But the soil itself contains no defile- 
ment. Out of this very dust was fashioned the body 
of Him who took our flesh The Son of the Highest 
has taken into His person this verj du^t of ours, thereby 
showing us that there is nothmg m it really vile ; nay, 
thereby putting wondrous honour upon it, and elevating 
it to a seat upon the very throne of t.od Out of this 
dust our resurrection bodies are to be formed; so that 
when this corruptible shall put on incorruption, we shall 
not liie less be possessors of a body derived from the 
' dust of the ground.' Tliis body of ours is yet to sit 
upon the throne of the universe. We have borne the 
image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of 
the heavenly. 

But we have souls as well as bodies; and these souls 
are specially God's handiwork. He made them what 
they are. We got them directly from Him at first, and 
' 'in Him we live, and move, and have our being' {Job 
xii. lo, xxvii. 3, iii. 4, xKxiv. 14; Eccles. xii, 7). This 
is the highest and noblest kind of creation. Man can- 
not make, but he can unmake; he cannot create, but 
he can ruin; for he can introduce into the soul that 



I ..Google 



GENESIS 11 



63 



wliich is its ruin, — sin. God only can either mate 
it out of nothing, or re-make after it is ruined. Both 
are the acts of Him who is 'the Life.' The first life 
came from Him, much more the new life; and His act 
when creating thp first life corresponds strildngly to that 
of which it is said, 'He breathed on, them, and said. 
Receive ye the Holy Ghost.' The second life is indeed 
produced in the way of birth (a birth of God, a birth 
from above), so that the whole mature soul is not im- 
parted at once, but still the source of the life is the 
same, — the life-giving fountain is the same, only it com- 
municates a higher kind of life {i Cor. xv. 45). 'The 
first man Adam was made a living soul ; the last Adam 
was made a quickening spirit.' It is more abundant 
life {John x. 10). ' I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly.' Our 
whole new being is to be after a higher model, and cast 
in a far finer mould (i Cor. :i.v. 49). 'As we have borne 
the image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of 
the heavenly.' 

Ver. 8. 'And the Lord God planted a garden, eastward, in Eden 
(Heb. in Eden from the East), and there He fat thi man whom He 
Had formed' 

We now learn in what region, and in what part of 
that region, man was placed. It was in the eastern ex- 
tremity of a r^ion named Eden ; a region whose locality 
was, it would seem, well known in the days of Moses, 
but now only to be guessed at. When it took the 
name of 'Eden,' whether so named at first by God, or 



I ..Google 



64 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

af nv d by Ad m lU I 



b ty 
1 h las 



ed h m Ik d I 



aadgld Idffl aidm Idf 

1 J 1 , d 1 1 , d h p^lnl, d h 
land, which was the glory of all lands ; which has left its 
name behind it to all ages, as a name of fruitfulness, and 
fragrance, and beauty. 

In the eastern corner of this * delightsome land,' this 
more than Beulah, God planted a garden with His own 
hand, a garden which afterwards, from an Eastern term, 
took the name of Paradise, and is often alluded to in 
Scripture as the 'garden of the Lord,' the ' garden of God' 
(Gen. xiii. lo; Isa. li, 3; Ezek, xsviii. r3, xxxi, 8, g, 
xxxvi 35 ; Joel ii. 3).^ This peculiar spot of earth, 
this inner circle, was to be man's residence. There he 
was to dwell. There he was to meet with God, there 
to walk with God, there, as in creation's palace, to take 
np his abode as creation's king; and from his throne 
there to exercise his kingly dominion over an undefiled 
and happy earth.^ 

'Tha pacadise mentioned in Luke xxiii. 43, 2 Cor. xii. 4, Rev. 
ii, 7, is the heavenly counterpart to the earthly paradise ; for no doubt 
the latter was ' after the pattern of heavenly things.' 

' Paradise was the inner circle ; Eden, around it, tlie outer ; the 
whole earth around, the outermost ; corresponding to the three 
divisions in the tabernacle, the most holy, the holy, and the outer 
court J and correspondmg to the three great divisions in millennial 



I ..Google 



GENESIS n. 9, 



Ver. 9. ' And cut of the ^ound made the Lord God to grow (or 
spring) euery tree that is pUasmtt to the sight, and ^oi for food ; the 
tree of lifi also (Heb. and the tree of th£ life, or lives) in the midst of 
the garden, and the tree of the knvwledge of good and mill,' 

The garden was nobly stored. It was a princely 
orchard. Its fruitful soil gave growth to every various 
tree and shrub. Nothing was awanting to make it al- 
together suitable for its dwellers. Every tree which the 
eye loves to look upon, or which is good for food, was 
there. No sense remained ungratified. But two special 
trees were there, the tree of life, and the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil^ 

I. The tree of life. — This was a real tree, as real as 

days, — the heavenly Jerusalem, and the Church its dweller ; the 
earthij' Jerusalem, with Israel its dweller ; and the earth at large, 
with tiie Gentile nations inhabiting it. 

' It is interesting to notice the references to the trees of Edeu, Not 
only is Eden itsell used as a figure for a region of excellent beauty 
(Isa. li. 3 ; Eiek. xxxvi. 35 ; Joel ii. 3), but the trees ol Eden are re- 



ferred to three times by Ezekiel 
'fir-trees,' and ' chestnut - trees ' 
Assyrian is compared to the trees 
'that no tree in the garden of God n 
nay, ' all the trees of Eden that wi 
him.' Ezekiel's references to Eden 



striking way, 'cedars,' 

being specified (xxxL 8). The 

of Eden, and it is s«d of him, 

nas like luito hint in his beauty,' 

in the garden of God envied 

mot fail to strike the reader. 



1 the Edenic region that he dwelt in his captivity, on the 
banks of Iliddekel, asintlie case of Daniel (x. 4); and just as David's 
psalms hear witness to the deserts and hills where he was hunted, so 
Ezekiel's prophecies show cs that before his eyes visions of Eden were 
brought, called up by the scene around and the hisiories or traditions 
connected with the scene. E^ekiel and John are the two prophets 
that abound in references to Eden and Paradise, with its trees and 
precious stones. Now Ezekiel's is the Jemish apocalypse, and John's 
the Christian. The former is the apocalypse of the 'earthly thmgs,' 
the latter of the 'heavenly things.' 

VOL. VI. E 



I ..Google 



66 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

any of the rest, and evidently placed there for like pur- 
poses with the rest. The only difference was, that it 
had peculiar virtues which the others had not. It was 
a life-giving or life-sustaining tree, — a tree of which, so 
long as man should continue to eat, he should never 
die. Not that one eating of it could confer immortality ; 
but the continuous use of it was intended for tliis, Not 
that man was made mortal as he now is ; the use of 
means does not necessarily denote some such innate 
defect Man had to eat of food even when unfallen, 
yet this did not prove him to have been originally a 
dying creature. Nay, Christ had to partake of food, 
but this did not argue any defect in Him. So did 
not the existence of the tree of life, and man's need 
to eat thereof, argue any original defect in man. The 
link between soul and body was to be maintamed by 
this tree. So long as he partook of this, that tie could 
not be broken. t 

2. The tree of the knowledge of qood and eviL — Why may 
we not take this in the same literality of meaning as the 
former ? Why may it not mean a tree, the fruit of which 

' This is the natural meaning of tie expression ' tree of life,' namely 
a lile -imparting tree, just as 'the bread of life' means life -imparting 
bread, and as the 'water of life' means life -imparting water. Of 
course tlie expression itself does not prove it to be a literal tree, just 
as these others are not literal bread nor literal water. Bat then the 
tree having been proved to be a literal tree from the context, we may 
use these parallel forms of speech to illustrate its meaning. ' The 
very denomination "tree of life" would signify to us that there was in 
it a faculty of either giving or preserving life. '—-Burton's View of the 
Creaiiott of the World, p. 209. The son of Sirach calls it SivS^ev 
ainmiriat, the tree of immortality. Lcoii Barrington, in his E^saj' on 



I ..Google 



GENESIS u 



fid n h m n 11 tual 1 

B dd h I d mr 

Pwkn llfh m fhbdy 1 

11 ca f bl ]\ J 

mhfhff flbdyp 1 1 

b h h p d bl 1 d Ilk f 

11 1 1 m y 1 

II 1 k 1> W ly b fe b 

f h d d I y f mid 1 

n h m d 1 y 1 1 m ! 

mi dblb Ihn IbdjA 

h 11 b 1 d ly p d 1} 

1 Itl y lb 1 1 hy Ik h 

nly 1 11} p fy ! — h 

11 ean d b 1 1 Id 

d r bl d b 1 f 1 

tl h h Ihy 1 

b ftl drbldlbbld h 

11 1 d 1 1 g h 1 fe 

1 Ij 1 Id f d by 1 

1 1> d d b d> C p 

expression, A mmd ii.ell Iodised, and mauuhru of count, 

the Dispensalisns, says, ' The tree of life is a tree tliat could preserve 
life.' He then gives eight reasons for this. Works, vol. ii. pp. 40S- 
413. He is more successful in these than when in a subsequent para- 
graph he endeavours to prove that the tree of knowledge was a 
poisonous tree pcodadng death. Veiiema takes the same view of the 
tree of life ; ' Nothing remains but that we consider the name given 
to it as meaning that it did possess a certain power, communicated to 
it by God, ol preserving, prolonging, and gladdening the life of man 
on earth, ' — System of Theology, chap. 26. Also his EccUs. Hist. vol. 



jiGoogle 



6S THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

lias in it more meanii^ than we have commonly attached 
toiti 

Vers. 10-14. ' Aiida river went mt of Eden to iiiater the garden ; 
aitd from thence it was parted, and became into four heads. 11. The 
name of the first u Pisoti : that is it which compasseth the whole land 
of Havilah, where there is gold ; 12. And the gold of that land is good : 
there is bdellium and the onyx-stone. 13. And the name of the second river 
isCihon: the sam^ is that which compasseth the wMe land of Ethiopia 
(Heb. Ctuh). 14. And the name of the third reverts Hiddekel! that is 
it whick goeth towards the east of Assyria, And the fourth river is 
Euphrates." 

For this fair region a river was provided, — a noble river, 
— fit counterpart of that ' river of bliss ' which 

' Tliro' midst of heaven, 
Rolls o'er Elysian flowers her amber stream.' 

Where this mighty river rose. is not said. It found its 
way into Eden from the lofty mountains which encircled 

' If our translation of Isa. vii. 15 (and the Vulgate) be correct 
('Butter and boney shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, 
and choose the good '), there would be a strilciag instance of the truth 
referred fo above. But as the passage may as well run, ' when he 
shall know,' etc., I do not press it. Jonathan's eyes were enlightened 
by the fasting of the honey (r Sam. xiv, 27]. 

' Both in the writings of the Fathers and in tlie old Latin hymns, 
these four streams are spiritualized into the four evangelists. 'Paradisi 
, hsc fluenta,' says one hynmisi, and another enlarges on this with some 
beauty, — 



Fona est altos, hi prodLvi, 
Ut sapravm fonds vm, 
HmiatrcDt AdcIibuB.' 

-Daniel, TA,s. 



I ..Google 



that glorious region. Then passing through Eden, it 
glided onwards into Paradise, and there might be seen 
'winding at its own sweet will,' till it reached the other 
extremity of the garden. There it was subdivided into 
four heads. ■" These were: (i) tison^ compassing the 



' Heads, &''t;'i{^^ or beginnings, tliat is, 'four lesser rivers into whioli 
a laiger spreads itself. ' Ezek. xvL 25, ' Eyery head of the way, ' that 
is, the beginning, the place where ways hranch off. That ' rivers ' 
or ' begmnings of rivers ' is meant, is evident from what follows. 

^Pison. Robertson gives as the meaning of this, magna aqtia diffusio ; 

Gesenius, 'water poured forth, overflowing.' The latter thinks it to 

be the Indzu ; Josephus, the Ganges ; Reland and Rosenmuller, the 

I'hasis or Araxes. In none of these is there aught of certainty, and 

we mention them only to show the difficulty of coming to a conclusion 

on this point. The land of Havilah, Gesenius makes to be India. 

B VI certainty. Ham had a descendant of that name (Gen. 

) m also had (Gen. x. 29) ; but ftora which of these the land 

k ne we cannot say. Only, it is remarkable that next to 

H Vila nong the posterity of Shem, stands Ophir, who, in all 

gave his name to the land of Ophir; which conjunction 

£h ns, Havilah and Ophir, would lead us to infer a juxta- 

the lands. In a paper read by Colonel Rawlinson at a 

the Royal Get^raphical Society some time ago, ' On the 

ca n of the Biblical cities of Assyria, and on the geography 

Tigris,' it was shown 'that below tlie confluence of the 

Euphrates, four cities had been successively built, as the sea 

had rethed before the deposit of alluvium, to serve as commercial 

emporia. These cities were the HavilaK of Genesis, Beth Yakina 

of the Assyrian inscriptions, Teredon of Nebuchadneizar, and Obillah 

of the Sassanians.' This may lead us to place Havilah much nearer 

the Tigris and Euphrates than Gesenius would do. There ts uncer- 

tdnty also as to the meaning of Meilmm. Most seem to understand 

it as the pearl. See Roseiimiiller, Gesenius, and Robertson, the last 

of whom throws out crystal a]so as perhaps its meaning. It is curious 

that the LXX. should have rendered it atSfu^ a burning coal or fiery 

stone, such as the carbuncle or ruby. Is there any connection between 

this and the ' stones of liie ' mentioned in Ezekiel as the gems of Eden ? 



jiGoogle 



70 THOVGHTS O.V GENESIS. 

land of Havilah, in which land there is the fine gold, 
with bdellium and the onyx stone, showing us what a 
land of wealth it must have heen, its soil fruitful, and its 
very rocks veined with gems and gold. To that land 
Job refers when he says, 'The stones of it are the place 
of sapphires; and it hath dust of gold' (Job xxviii. 6). 
To it also Ezekiel points when, speaking to the Prince of 
Tyre, he says, 'Thou hast been in Eden, the garden of 
God ; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, 
topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the 
jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, and 
gold.' ' (z) Gihon.^ It flowed round Ethiopia or Cush, 
and signifies a breaking forth of waters. More than this 
we cannot say of it. (3) Hiddekel? It is said to go to 

There is the same difficulty as to tlie word translated onyx. The 
Sept. give it i >.!hs S a-faonot, the emerald. It is more generally 
rendered anjix ot lan/onyx, on account of its supposed resemblance 
to the human nail ; though Robertson derives it from a woid signi- 
fying, 'igneo aidore prseditns,' and says it means, 'lapis coruscis 
micans ignibns.' 

^ It is remarkable that_;frB should be referred to in both the above 
passages. In Job it is, ' Under it is turned np as it were ^re. ' In 
Ezekiel it is, ' Thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the 
stone lA fire.'' Had not fire-worship its seat in these re^ons? 

' Cihon. It was the opinion of Josephus and of most ancient 
writers, that the Nile is meant. Gesenius makes it to be Ihe Elhiopic 
Nile. There is little lilielihood in these conjectures, 

* Hiddeid, It signiiies lightness or swiftness, something active, 
vehement, rapid, as does the word Tiger from which Tigris is derived. 
The E-upkratis is said to derive its name from the sweetness of its 
taste. These two latter rivers are well ^certained ; the two formei- 
ave, we believe, not now in eKistence, and cannot be ascerttuned. 
We say this, not only because no writer has ever been able to identify 
them ; Trot because the whole foarrivers had one common head, which 
is nowhere now the case ; and also because it is an ascertained fact 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS II, 10-14. 71 

the east of Assyria, and is certainly the Tigris. (4) 
The Euphrates. This was too well known to require 
minute description. It is spoken of elsewhere as 'the 
river' (i Kings iv. ai ; Ps. Ixxii. , 8), the 'great river' 
(Deut. i. 7), the 'flood' (Josh. xxiv. 2). It was the 
Euphrates that was to form one of the boundaries of 
Abraham's land : ' Unto thy seed have I given this land, 
from the river of Egypt (Nile) to the great river, the river 
Euphrates ' (Gen, xv. 18). It was towards this river that 



that the Tigris has more than once been divided into tnoo streams, 
perhaps more. If so, or if the Euphrates were so divided, we have 
the four rivers on the Spot Colonel Eawlinson thus states the point ; 
' After describing the ruins of Seldierieh, which, on varions grounds, 
he identified with the Mesene of the Greelcs, he went on to notice the 
bifurcation of tlie Tigris. This curious natural feature had been very 
accurately described both by Pliny and Stephen, and the Arab 
writers enabled us to connect those ancient notices with the modem 
geography of the country. The Cauchion plains of PHuy were shown 
to be the Coche of the Syrians and Jukha of the Arabs, while the 
Deios of Stephen was still preserved in the name of Dieleh (quite 
distinct from Dijleh), which the Bedouins oi the present day apply 
to the dry bed of the Tigris, running by the ruins of Wasit. The 
Tigris had changed its course several times. At the period of the 
Christian era it was divided into two streams. Under the Sassanjans, 
the left hand or eastern branch was alone navigable. In the seventh 
year of the Hegira the right hand or western branch was reopened, 
while in the fifteenth centnry of our ei'a the river took the form wliidr 
it retains to the present day. The tract of country between the two 
arms, owing to its natural depression, had been always more or less 
subject to inundations, and boats had passed from Wasit to the 
Euphrates, along tracts artificially formed for them in the marshes. 
The character of the country was the same at the present day, and 
the Tigris from the tomb of Abdullah Ibn Ali to Kiirna now ran in 
a channel which was formerly named the Abul Assad Canal, and 
which had been cleared out under the Caliph Mansur for the purpose 
of navigation. ' 



jiGoogle 



72 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

Israel was commanded to turn theii steps (Deut. i. '7). 
It was on tfie banks of this river that Israel sat down and 
wept, remembering Zion (Ps. cxxxvii. i). It was in a hole 
of one of the rocks that skirt Euphrates that Jeremiah 
w^ to hide his girdle (Jer. xiii. 4). It was into Euphrates 
that Jeremiah was to cast the book containing Babylon's 
burden, with the stone bound to it, as the type of 
Babylon's more terrible plunge {Jer. li. 63). It was in 
the Euphrates that the Apocalyptic angels were bound, 
■ and on it that the sixth angel poured out his vial, drying 
up its waters, and preparing the way for the kings of the 
East (Rev. is. 16, xvi. 13). Babylon stood upon 
Euphrates, — Babylon, the great enemy of Jehovah and 
His people, as well as the representative of their great 
enemy through all ages. Hard by Paradise, it may be 
on the very spot, was Satan permitted to rear his mighty 
citadel. He had driven man from that happy seat; he 
held blighted its beauty, and now, as if in defiance of 
God and man, he rears his city upon the faded flowers of 
Eden. One has asked, — 

' Having waste ground enougli, 
Sliall we desiie to raae the sanctuary. 
And pitch our evils there?' 

So was it with' Satan, whether we regard Babylon as 
actually reared on the site of Paradise, or merely in some 
comer of the wider circk of Eden,' God's garden and 

' There are several passages which seem to show some connec- 
tion between Eden and the district around Babylon, as if the name 
of Eden had been retained in some parts (Isa. xxxvii. 13; EzeU. 
xxvii. 23). 



I ..Google 



Satan's city, close by each other, as if the latter were 
triumphing over the former ! The emblem of the 
heavenly paradise and the symbol of the great city, 
' Mother of harlots,' city of Antichrist, side by side with 
each other ! The earthly pattern of heavenly things 
passing away, and replaced by the abode of darkness, 
the cage of unclean beasts, the counterpart of Satan's 
own dark dwelling below! 

But what care and love God has shown towards man ! 
What pains and cost to make him happy and comfortable I 
It is a father providing for his child, his first-bom. God's 
desire was to bless. And that desire remains unchanged 
and undiminished. Our sin might have been expected 
to quench this desire, and to turn the blessing into a 
curse, the love into hate. It did so in the case of angels. 
It has not done so to us. He loves us stilL He blesses, 
apd curses not Paradise with all its beauty and abun- 
dance was but a faint expression of God's love when 
compared with His unspeakable gift, or with the more 
glorious paradise yet in reserve. The earthly tree of 
life is as nothing compared with the heavenly original 
which shall ere long be ours, when, as the ' overcoming ' 
ones, we shall eat of the 'tree of life which is in the midst 
of the paradise of God ' (Rev. ii. 7, xxii. 2, 14), 



Ver. 15. ' J}«il the Lord God look the man, and pal hint into (Heb. 
filaced, or set him in) the garden of Eden, to dress it (Heb. io till U), 
and to keep ii,^ 

Having prepared the garden, the Lord God took the 
man and placed him in it, that he might till it and keep 



I ..Google 



74 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

it. It was made for him, and he for it, as the body is 
made for the soul, and the soul for the body.^ It was 
fruitful beyond anything we now know of, yet it was not 
so fruitful as to make any kind of care or cultivation 
needless. It was so fruitful as to occasion no toil nor 
weariness to the cultivator, yet not so fruitful as not to 
afford occasion to man's skill and watchfulness. No 
amount of skill or toil now can call up beauty, or verdure, 
or fruit, beyond a certain narrow limit ; for man has to 
do with a rugged soil. But in Adam's case the ground 
easily and gladly yielded its substance without limit to 
the most gentle toil. Nay, it was not toil ; it was simple, 
pleasant occupation. No doubt the amount and kind of 
its actual fruit-bearing was to depend upon himself j he 
was to regulate this according to his wants and tastes; 
but still the fruit-bearing source was in the soil, imparted 
directly by the hand of God,— that all-quickening, all- 
fertilizing Spirit that brooded over the face of the deepj 
Afterwards that Spirit was grieved away from the soil by 
man's sin ; but at first His power was most signally mani- 
fested in its fruitful ricliness. Man was lord of the soil, 
and of all that trod it or greiv on it, and his daily employ- 
ments were to manifest his dominion, — not dominion over 



' There is evidently a meaning in so much being spolteu of and 
to the man alone, before the creation of the woman. He was to 
be the head and representative of llie race, of the female as well as 
the male, which he would not so properly have been had Eve 
been created at the same time, or directly out of the ground, instead 
of oat o( the man. 'Naturam igitur humanam in Ada; pei^ona 
condidit, atque inde formavit Hevam, ut Icemina taiitum pottio esset 
totius generis.'— Calvin, in loc. 



jiGoogle 



GE^/SS/S 11. i6, 17. 



7S 



a rebellious earth, needing to be cuibed or scoui^ed into 
obedience, but a dominion over a willing world, that 
stood eagerly awaiting liis commands. All creation was, 
like a well-tuned instrument, ready made to his hand, 
and all that was needed on his part was simply the amount 
of happy effort needful to set its strings in motion, ind 
bring out of them all the rich compass of their music 
And if such was creation under the first Adam, whit wiU 
it be under the second ? Then truly shall the wilderness 
and the solitary place be glad, the desert shall rejoice 
and blossom as the rose.' 

Vera. 16, 17. ' And tlis Lerd God commanded the man, saying. Of 
csmy tree of the garden tkou mayist (or sliaU) freely eat (Heb. eatrn-g 
thou shall eat, that is, thou shalt ^0 on eating xahindavd) ; 17. Bui 
of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou sha!t nol eat of it: for 
in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die (Heb. dying 
t/!ou shalt die, thai is, thou shalt i^n to die, and go on dying).' 

We now come to the constitution under which God 
placed man. It was given in the form of a command- 
ment, — 'thou shalt,' and 'thou shalt not,' — an injunction, 
and a prohibition. 'The Lord God commanded the 
man.' There was, as it were, a moral iiecessity laid upon 

' Adam's tillage of the ground was of course not toil; but since 
the fall it has been hard and unceasing toil. Man ]ias had to carry 
on a continual warfare with barrenness, — wringing from the soil 
its unwilling produce. In this process we notice that he keeps 
lip the same two circles as before the fal], an outer and an inner, — 
Eden and Paradise, — seeking in general to fertilize and beautify the 
soil, yet always selecting some nook on wliich he bestows more 
special pains, convertii^ it into a garden or paradise. In Sir Thomas 
Brown's Treatise on the Garden of Cyrus, the reader may get an idea 
of these eftotts. 



I ..Google 



76 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

him to obey. This utterance of God's ■will imposed this 
necessity. It was not the mere declaration of certain 
consequences to arise from obedience or disobedience. 
It was such a declaration of will on the part of Jehovah 
as hedged him in on every side with the most overwhelm- 
ing of all moral necessities. It was not indeed a necessity 
that left lion without a free choice, but it was a necessity 
which gave a most preponderating bias to that free 
choice m the direction of obedience e\en apirt from 
consequences Under a similar necessity his God in 
His announcement of ^race pkced fallen man He lias 
not simply left to us a choice of the eMl or the good. 
He has gnen utterance to His will 'This is His com- 
mandment, that we believe m the name of His bon Jesus 
Christ.' A necessity is laid upon us. It is not a mere 
question as to our own woe or weal ; it is a question of 
obedience or disobedience. Hence the inquiry so often 
made by those who have begun to learn what it is to be, 
lost, but who as yet only dimly see how they may be 
saved, — ' Am I at liberty to believe and to come to Christ 
as I am?' is one of the strangest that could be made. 
What should we have thought of Adam, had he asked, 
'Am I at hberty to obey God's commands?' What are 
we to think of the sinner who asks, 'Am I at liberty to 
come to Christ ? ' At liberty to .come ! You dare not 
do otherwise, except you are prepared to defy God and 
disobey His commandment. At liberty to come ! You 
are not at liberty to refuse. A necessity lies on you to 
come, — even that most solemn of all necessities, which 
springs from the declaration of the will of God. You 



I ..Google 



i6, 17. 



can only be lost by acting all your life long in deliberate 
disobedience to the plainest of all commandments that 
ever came from the lips of God. 

But let us consider the two points of this law given to 
Adam, — 'Thou shalt,' and 'Thou shalt not.' 

I. The injuiution. — ' Of every tree of the garden, eating 
thou shalt eat' It is not 'mayest eat,' as our translation 
has it, but 'shalt eat' As a sovereign's wishes ai-e com- 
mands, so is it here. It is not a mere permission or 
invitation, but a command. And it is a peculiar form 
of speech, — the positive injunction that most truly com- 
ports with die authoritative dignity of a sovereign Jehovah, 
as well as suits best the condition of the responsible 
creature, by leaving no room for any doubt on his part 
as to what is the sovereign will of Him to whom all 
obedience is due. 

2 The prohibition — One tree is forbidden only one, 
— the tree ot the knowledge of good and evrl and this 
with the added threatenint; of death for any breach of 
this solemn prohibition What mi^ht be Gods ultimate 
purpose regardmi, this tree, we cannot say Nor can we 
fully comprehend the reasons for settmg it m Paradise, 
withm sight and reach of man It was both m appeal 
ance and in its pioperties the most attractive ot all the 
trees (Gen. ui. 6), the one which appealed mo'>t dircctlj 
to man's intelligent nature. And had the prohibition 
been permanent and irreversible, had God meant that 
a tree possessing such qualities should never, throu£,hout 
man's whole future existence, be partaken of by him, jt 
is not easy to see the reason either of the planting or the 



I ..Google 



78 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

prohibiting of the tree But take the prohibition as a 
tempoiarj one, intended to pro\e man, suppose that 
after a certain tune of obedience free v i ess to the tiee 
was to be allowed, then the difiiLuhy le'^sens, it it does 
not wholly disappear ^ Man nis, ultimately, to eat freely 
of it, and to obtim all its singulai benefits B) means 
of it he ^onld rise m the scale of being, and obtain, m 
so fai as a linite niture can, a participation of the divine 
knowledge of good and evil, without having to pa-^s 
through that sore and long experience through which 
alone we non reach it The eitmg of that tree would 
have done for him, through phjsical means, m some 
mcisure at le-ist, what our participation of Christ, our 
eating of His bodj, does for us now, and will do jet 
more aLund^ntiy hereafter Had man waited God s time, 
— had he exercised faith, — he would have gotten all that 

' We cannot help tlimkmg that this tree gets its mme ftom the 
physical properties of its fruit 'Venema and others, v>ho strongly 
insist that the t>a of Itfe geti its name from its physical properties, 
yet reject the idea that the tree of knowledge has its nime from a 
like cause, simply because they cannot conceive how the body can 
so act upon the mind as that the latter shall be mvigjrated or elevited 
by means of the former This, how ever, is no ailment, as w e have 
seen. To make it deti\ e its name from the consequences of a dts- 
ufefiOT/ eating of it, is suiely a perversion of the words of the pro 
hibition. It might have bettef been called in that case the 'tree 
of death, as, indeed, some have insisted on naming it Keni icott 
■would paraphrase the name thus, ' the tree which is the test of good 
and evil , that is, the tiee by which God tiied them to see whether 
they would thoose good oi evil, but this will not do (see his in 
genious Disssrtatien on the Ires e/ Life, p, 35). It surely means 
some particular tree whose Iruit had certain properties, so operative 
upon the soul of man as to make him grow in the knowledge or 
discernment of good and evil. 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS 11 



le, 17. 



79 



the tree could give him ere long, and that in the way of 
obedience. 'Believing' in God, he would not have 'made 
haste.' But he believed not; and made haste, as if 
resolved to have, whether through obedience or dis- 
obedience, all tliat the tree could yield him. It was to 
be proved whether he could trust God, and whether he 
loved God's will better than his own. Concerning this 
prohibition, we may note, (i) /;■ was a needful prohibition. 
Man must be kept in remembrance that he is not an 
absolute sovereign, — that he is but a vicegerent He 
must be made to feel that there is another will in the 
universe besides his own, greater than his own, indepen- 
dent of his own, an absolutely sovereign will, (a) li was 
but one prohibition. There was but one point in which 
his will and God's could come into collision. In great 
loving-kindness God had made it so. Man was not 
burdened, or fretted, or perplexed with many points of 
this kind. Only one! How gracious ! How considerate, 
as if God sought to make man's trial the least possible, 
so as to leave him without excuse if he should disobey. 
(3) It was a simple prohibition. It had nothing intricate 
or dark about it. There was nothing mysterious about 
it, nothing in which man could mistake, nothing which 
could leave room for the question, Am I obeying or not? 
It was distinct beyond the possibility of mistake. {4} II 
was a visible prohibition. It was connected with some- 
thing both visible and tangible. It was not inward, but 
outward. It was not a thing of faith, but of sight. 
Everything about it was palpable and open — the tree, the 
fruit, tlie place, the threat, the consequences. (5) It was 



I ..Google 



8o THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

an tasy piohihhon Man could not say it was hard to 

keep He was only to refrain from eating one fruit 

Being a negative, not a positive requirement, it reduced 

obedience to ita lowest form and easiest terms Hence 

man's sm was the greitei He was wholly inexcusable. 

(6) Xt -was tnforud by a most sohmn ptmitty It began 

with a declq.ration of God's will, and it ended with the 

proclamation of tlie penilty, — deaik How much this 

e\pression includes has be d Th 

no need of this In the da 

came under condemnation h b m d 

man ; the sentence went for h G can 

in afterwards, and suspend d tl h 

sentence; but still the sei — d 

stialt die.' That temporal d — 

dissolution of soul and bod — ^ fi 

tained in this sentence, th tl N 

as if the sentence rested th T d w 

the entrance into that glo n d im 

' ' Tunc morti addictus fuit Am m rs eg m m 
inclioavit.' — Calvin. 'Sinners ac ua 
and destruction from that mom 
between them and life.' — NlTZSC 

IL sec. 2. From the moment th ma am m 

curse ; he was under doom. H 

sponds exactly to the way in which the repeal of the curse is declared, 
' He that helieveth hath everlasting life. ' From the moment he 
believes he gets possession of this life, though the fall life is reserved 
for another state; and as the first stroke of the sentence inflicted 
on Adam was comUmnation, so the first part of its removal in be- 
lieving is ' no condemnation : ' and as the close and seal of the 
curse, m Adam's case, was bodily death, so the consummation of 
it, in the case of the saint, is resurrection. 



jiGoogle 



GSNESIS II. i8. 8r 

within which all things terrible await the sinner. Tem- 
poral death was to be, not then only, but ever after, the 
visible fledge or mark of the sentence. Hence it is that 
^ve read, 'It is appointed unto men once to die;' in 
which words the apostle refers to the primeval sentence, 
—/nan's once dying, — and shows how this sentence was 
fulfilled in the once dying of the Substitute (Heb. ix.. 28). 
This death brought with it all manner of infinite ills and 
woes. It brought with it, or included in it, condemna- 
tion, wrath, misery, separation from God ; all endless ; 
all immediate ; all irreversible, had not free love come 
in; had 'grace not reigned through righteousness, unto 
eternal hfe, through Jesus Christ our Lord.' The sen- 
tence was, 'The soul that sinneth, it shall die.' But 
'where sin abounded, grace did much more abound.' 

Ver, iS. ' And the Lord God said. It is not good that the man' 
should h alone; ItoUI niakehim an help me^ for him.' 

The previous vei^es have described the preparation 
of man's dwelling ; the eighteenth and those that follow 
contain a minute detail of the formation of his help meet.. 
In the case of the animal creation, male and female were- 
created together. Not so with man. There must be 
an interval between his creation and that ot the woman, 
just as there was to be an interval between the incarna- 
tion and the ingathering of the Church. In all things, 
pertaining to man there must be something more special 
than in other beings. The work must be done more 
deliberately, step by step, that each thing done may be 
seen in itself before it is seen in its connection with 



I ..Google 



82 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

Other parts of creation. Man is created alone at first, 
that he uoay stand forth as the great model of God's 
workmanship, and that oui eye may be fixed on liim as 
the representative of our nature. He is the great head 
of humanity ; its root ; its fountain. In him, thus placed 
before us alone, we have the intimation of God's purpose 
regarding man's nature, and man's rule over the earth. 
Besides, he is thus made to feel his loneliness, his need 
of another like himself. He feels as if one half of his 
nature were awanting. He stood, indeed, amid a glorious 
world, — a world bursting with fresh, glad beauty on every 
side, and teeming with boundless life ; but he stood 
alone! There was no one like himself — no soul to 
meet his soul, in all its buoyant outgoings. He stood 

' An exile amid splendid desolation, 
A prisoner with infinity surrounded.'' 

He had, it is true, God for his companion ; but this was 
not all that was needed, as God Himself here testifies. 
There must be one like himself, in whom there will be 
more of equality and sympathy and nearness ; one neither 
too high nor too low for him. ' I will make ' (says God) 
'an help meet for him.' God only understands his case, 
and can satisfy the cravings of his spirit for the inter- 
course of a spirit like his own. I will make for him an 
helper, corresponding to him; another self; his counter- 
part ; the very being to fill up the void within him.^ 

' Montgomery's Fdican Island. 

* ilJSa "ItJJt literally, ' a helper as over against liim '— coxtespond- 
Kig to him. The Sept. has it ^aiiiii hit aiiii in this verse, hut at 



I ..Google 



Vers, rg, 20. 'And (or tiow) out of the ground the Lord God' 
fortasd (or had formed) svery bmst of the field, and every frwl of the 
air {Heb. hemiet^, and drought them iinio Adam (or to the man)^ 
to sei vihat hs viould call them : and ■whatsoever Adam (or the man) 
called every living creature, that was the name thereof. 20. And Adam 
gsoe names to all {the) cattle, and to the fo'wls of the air (the heaven), 
and to every least ofikeJUld? 

God now proceeds to show man the exact point where 
the void lay. Adam had been made to feel that void, 
but God's object is to place him in circumbtances such 
as shall lead him step by step to the seat of the unsatis- 
fied longing within. Accordingly, God brings before 
him all the creatures which He had made, that Adam, 
in his chuice, may have the whole range of creation. 
Adam surveys them all. He sees by instinrtive wisdom 
the nature and properties of each, so that he can affix 
names to all in turn. His knowledge is large and fiill; 
it has come direct from God, just as his own being had 
come. It is not discovery, it is not learning, it is. not 

ver. 20, where Ihe words are the same, it has o^mt kut^. The Vulgate 
makes it ' adjutorium simile sibi,' which I^dore Clarins, in his amended 
edition of the Vulgate (1542), turns into 'adjntorium opportunum." 
Coverdale renders it ' an helpo to bear him company. ' The Hebrew 
expression seems to denote Ihe correspondency or fitting in of the one 
nature to the other ; the perfect nn'o^itoiD?; of the woman to the man^ 
" LS brought out part of this idea ia the fourth book of Paradise 



Lost. 



writer of the last generalion puts if tiius : ' Is not man himself 
niiy) split into two parts, man for condescending lov^ woman 



I ..Google 



S4 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 


1 


p t t m 




Ik 1 t tl 


t k g if Ij k 


bj h fe S 1 


1 1 k ft f m 


th d t th t 


Lb mt th hy p 


tl t I mg tl t f th w 11 1 p L 1 f b t i' 


d f f wl d f 


p t, th g d f fih 


{ Kms 33) B 


t Ad k wl d t f 


b y d thi I th 


-IS b 1 f Ad d f 


Sim wh 


an h U y t tt t It 


vid I d ki wl 1 


1 11 b th h th 


th t d Ad 


h ai hd ill th tl 


f d d k 1 


dg F tl t 


t m ly th f 


ly b t th f th wl de- 


p t ft 


w tl 1 dm d f dl 


d h It 1 th 


f 11 S rely m d h 


b dly 1 t ft 


t p b t th 1 


d G d I h 


f 1 m i th c t b 


b tw tl tut 


f th le. d d th g p 1 f 


th f G d F 


f !lj h t ht d dly 


1 t tl h 


p t th i th kini, f 


p d d If ffi 


} d d 1 t J f th 


B t t^ th u d 


11 tl It 1 t I Id f t 


tl trutl 1 h Ad 


1 tu t t 1 


tl t Ik 1 dg 


t If m t t ilj d 1 


good ;— not evil. 




S m 


Ihat is, that lie 


ga ed 


j,cter. There is 


no oo m 


'U e results of the 


fa 


m ally. 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS li. zo-ZiV. 85 

Ver. 20. ' But for Adam ikere -was not found an kelp mat for him. ' 
No coimtetpait, — no being to fill up tlie void within 
him, was to be found in all these. There was no response 
from any one of them to the deep feelings of his breast. 
They were too far asunder from him ; their nature was 
not in harmony or sympathy with his. The two ex- 
tremities of being had thus been presented to Adam, — 
God Himself on the one hand, and the animal creation 
on the other. In neither of these can a help meet be 
found. The one is too far above him, the other too 
much beneath him. A being must be found liker and 
nearer himself. The whole creation, perfect as it was, 
yet contained nothing for true and loving companionship. 
Men may speak of fellowship with nature, in its various 
forms and orders of life, — of finding sympathies in the 
breeze, the cloud, the wave, the rock, the flower j but 
all this is but the exaggeration of sentiment or poetry. 
In all creation, animate or inanimate, there is no fellow, 
no companion for man. 

Vers, 21-24. ^ And ths Lord Cod caused a deep sleep to fall upon 
Adam, and he slept: and kt took one of Ms ribs, and closed up theflesk 
instead thereof. 22. Ana the rib, •whuk the Lord God had taken from 
man, made He a •woman, and brought her unto the man. 23. Ana 
Adam said. This is now hone of my bones, and fiesh of my fiesk : she 
shall be called Woman, iecatise she teas taken out ef man. 24. There- 
fore shall a man leave Ms father and Ms mother, and shall cleave to 
his wife j and they shall be one flesh. ' 

God now proceeds to supply the void, but in such a 
way as shall make man feel God's design and meaning. 
The peculiar process adopted by the Creator in forming 



I ..Google 



85 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

the help meet was to iiitimite to min tlie n-itmi. of the 
compinion presented to liim, and the closeness of the 
tie between them Adam uas thrown into a deep sleep, 
which made him insensible to p\m, thou(>h, perhaps, 
not unconscious, of what was passing 'When in this 
state, God took one of his nbs, and fashioned out of it 
a woman, heahng the wound at once Then God brought 
her to Adim, levealmg at the same time to him the 
history of her formation Adam recognises Jehovah's 
gracious purpose m this, he feels the ■void supplied; 
he arknowledges the oneness between himself and her; 
he gives her a name expressHe of this Her name is 
to be woman, Isha, denied from his own, Jsh, man. 
Then follows the histoiians statement le^rdmg the one- 
ness of the two, -ind mans duty to make this tie para- 
mount The conjugal relationship is closer thm the, 
filial All other bonds must jield to this, however 
sicied and tender thej miy be. The words of the 
twentj fourth veise are evidently not the words of Adam 
himself, but the comment of Moses upon the words of 
Adam And a greater than Mosls has enlarged this 
comment — Tiom the begmnmg of the aeation God 
made them a mak and a female For this cause shall a 
man leaie his father and mother, and cleave to his wife; 
■md the} twain shall be one flesh, so then they are no 
more twam, but one flesh What theiefore God hath 
joined together, let not man put asundei (Mark x. 6). 

With one or two further remarks, we leave this passage. 

I, As to Adam's sleep. — It was a heavy, or deep sleep. 
It was a sleep sent directly from God. It was a sleep 



I ..Google 



GENESIS II. 21-24. S7 

for a special end. In the case of Abraham and Daniel 
we see the same thing (Gen. xv, is ; Dan. viii. 18, x. 9). 
A deep sleep from God fell on both these, when God 
designed to communicate visions to them. In their 
case, God caused them to sleep that He might show 
them what was to be done ; in the case of Adam, that 
He might actually do the thing. In both instances the 
individuals were rendered unconscious to outward things 
by that which we call sleep, and in that state God took 
possession of them; in Abraham's and Daniel's case, 
of the soul ; in Adam's, of the body. It would seem to 
be intimated, that not until Adam had been brought into 
that state which approaches nearest to death could God 
accomplish his design. There must be sleep in the first 
Adam ere God can take out of him the ordained spouse ; 
and there must be death in the second Adam ere God 
can take out of Him the chosen Bride. In this way 
there might be something prefigurative in Adam's sleep.' 

2. As to the taking of woman out of man. — As it was 
God that caused Adam to sleep, so it was God Himself 
that took the rib out of him. Thus God shows Him- 

' This suliject was, of course, likely to be a favourite one with. 
the Fathers. Their allusions to it are without number. Thus 
Augustine, ' Quando dormivit in cruce implebat quod sigmficatum 
erat in Adam, quia cum dormiret Adam, costa illi detracta est et 
Eva iacta est.'^Oit Ps. cxsvii. And Gotschalc, the Augustine or 
Calvin of the ninth century, writes, ' Eva de Adam, sic Ecclesia 
de Ciiristo ; et sicnt Adamo dormiente inde formata est Ecclesia, 
sic Christo dormiente in cruce, inde formata est Ecclesia.' — Senrma 
on the Nativity. TertulHan thus writes, 'Somnus Ads mors erat 
Chtisti dormitun in mortem et de injuria perinde lateris ejus, vera 
mater viventiiim figuraretur Ecclesia.' — De Anima, chap, xliii. 



jiGoogle 



88 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

self to us as at once the great Purposer and the great 
Doer of all things. ' Second causes,' as we speak, are 
but the mysterious tools or instruments which He makes 
use of in carrying out His designs. He lays us to sleep 
each night, and He awakens us each tooming with His 
own lo\ing hand He is the God of our nights and of 
our dajs It was from Adam that God took the sub- 
stince which He meant to ftshion rato woman, indicating 
that, as man wis formed first, ind as woman sprang 
from man, &o man is to be her head He from the dust, 
sht. from him Ht, duectly from the Former's hand, 
slie mduectlj, and through hn 'Adam,' says the 
apostle, 'was fiist formed, then E\e' (i Tim. iL 13); 
therefore, si>s he, she is 'not to teach nor to usurp 
authority oier the man, but to be m silence.' Thus, 
agam, he states the j,ridation (i) the head of the 
woman is the man, (2) the head of the man is Christ, 
(3) the head of Christ is God (i Cor. xi. 3). Further, 
he adds that 'the woman is the glory (or ornament) 
of the man ; ' for, says he, ' the man is not of the woman, 
but the woman of the man ; neither was the man created 
for the woman, but the woman for the man'i (i Cor. 

'We may notice here tow all tlie different conditions of womanhood 
are made use of by God as setting forth sonie peculiar aspect of I-Iia 
Church :— (I.) Virgin. 2 Cor. xi. 2 ; Rev. xiv. 4. <a.) Betrelhed. 
Hos. ii. 19 ; 2 Cor. xi. 2. (3.) Wjft. Rev. xis. 7, xxi: g. (4.) 
TVavidlmg, Rev. iL 2. (5.) Desolate and forscAeTi. Gal. iv. 27. 
(6.) iJ/fWAff. Gal. iv. 36. (7,) Barren. Isa. liv. i. (8.) Widow. 
Luice xviii. 3 ; Isa. liv, 4. And thus one of the Fathers ilhistrales 
the idea ; ' Sfonsa est (ecclesia) quia inh;Eret Christo ; Mater est, 
qui ftecundatur a Christo ; Virgo, quia incorrupta perseveiat in. 
Christo.' — Eiilgin£us, Epist. 



jiGoogle 



xi. 8, 9). Such is God's order of things; such His 
assignment of place and rank to the creatures which 
He has made. We may be sure that there is a reason 
for this gradation, not merely a typical, but a natural 
one, whether we fully understand it or not We cannot 
alter this law, and be blameless. We cannot reverse 
it, and not suffer loss. The construction of our world's 
fabric is far too delicate and complex for man to attempt 
the slightest change without dislocating the whole. One 
star displaced, one planet thrown off its orbit, will con- 
found the harmonies of space, and strew the firmament 
mth the wrecks of the universe; so one law lost sight 
of or set at nought, will mar the happy order of God's 
living world below. In one age or nation man treads 
down woman as a slave ; in another he idolizes her, and 
sings of her as of a goddess ; in both cases inflicting a 
social wrong upon the race; in the latter case as truly 
as in the former ; and who can say how deep an injury, 
both spiritual and social, has been wrought^ and how 
fatal an influence has been sent forth, by that fond 
sentimentalism which, impregnating our poetry, and, 
coursing like fever through the veins of youth, not only 
'costs the fresh blood dear,' but saps the whole social 
system, nay, propagates a principle of subtle ungodh- 
ness and creature-worship, in its praise of woman's 
beauty, and idolatry of woman's love. 

3. As to the taking of woman from the side of man. — 
From neither extremity of Adam's body did God take 
the woman, signifying that she was neither to be man's 
lord, nor man's drudge, but his fellow, only with this 



I ..Google 



go THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

mfenonty, that she was taken out of him inJ theicfoie 
he was to be her head From that jart which hes 
neirest his heart did woinin come She was not so 
much to p^rt^lce of min s mtelLctu il as of hislo\mg 
nituie It was not liom man's thinkmi; torehead oi 
smewy arm thit she sprang, but from those p^rl:s where 
It may be said there is the least of miit to be found. 
From the region where the waim blood flows, and the 
heart throbs, and the pulses take their nse, and the 
fountam of life wells up, did woman come From that 
quarter of man s being where, m all ages, aflection has 
been concei'ved to make its home, where loy and sorrow 
have their flowmgs and leflowmgs, where fear and hope 
are each hour sinking and swellmg, did uoman corae 
The fragrant plumage of the tuitle tells us out of what 
spicegro\e she has come So does womans tendei 
nature of itself declare that it is from the region ot the 
kindly and the gentle thit she has bten bi ought furth 
As it ivas out of the bo'iom of the Father that the Eternal 
Son came down to us laden with the Father's love ; as 
it was out of the bosom of the Son that the Church 
came forth, at once the object and the reflection of His 
mighty love , so it was out of man s side, — man s bosom 
— that she came forth who was to be at once the em 
bodiment of his gentler affections, and the being round 
whom these affections were to clmg And ^s it was 
on the high priests breast, — his place of love — that 
the names of Israel rested, in jewelled sjlendour, so 
IS It on mms breast that woman is to rest, — a), and so 
is It hereafter, on the breast of the eternal Bridegroom 



I ..Google 



21-24- 



that the Church is to repose, in more than earthly glory, 
in that day when His 'left hand shall be under her 
head, and His right hand shall embrace' her; when 
she shall be 'set as a seal upon His heart, as a seal 
upon His arm ' for ever. 

4. As to the making of woman from a rib of man. — One 
of those protecting circles which prevents the sinking 
in of the flesh upon the heart, and which gives the 
heart full room to play, was to be taken out entire, that 
out of it woman might be formed. The bone and the 
flesh were both taken, — the softer and more sohd parts 
of man's body, — that it might be seen how truly she 
was of man's very nature, though in some respects dif- 
fering. Not a separate being formed out of the dust, 
in which man could not recognise a pait of himself, 
but a being thoroughly identified with him ; not merely 
like him, but one with him, so that her absence would 
be the absence of a part of himself, — a blank, a void, 
without whom he would be incomplete. This taiing 
out a rib in order to form the woman, suggests very 
much the idea that would have been called up had a 
cedar plank, or a piece of gold, been taken out of the 
'holiest of all' in the temple, to fashion into one of the 
vessels of the sanctuary. A vessel formed in such a 
way would be very different in the eyes of Israel from 
one formed of cedar direct from Lebanon, or gold direct 
from Ophir. It could not fail to remind them of the 
sacred place from which its materials were taJten, and 
it would be for ever associated in their minds with all 
that ' the holy of holies ' suggested to an Israelite. Thus 



I ..Google 



93 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

woman, taken from the very shrine of man's corporeal 
sanctuary (for the apostle teaches us to call our bodies 
temples, i Cor. vi. 19), is linked with all the sacred 
or tender associations that are called up by that well- 
known but mysterious word, — the heart! 

5. As to the making of the woman. — The expression 
is a very peculiar one. It is neither of the two former 
that have been already employed, — 'created' or 'made.' 
It is, literally, 'builded.' The word is a very common 
one, occurring about four hundred times, but here only 
in so peculiar a sense. It is the word used in reference 
to the building of a city, a house, a family, a temple, a 
throne, an altar, and such like. And there is surely 
some signification in applying such a word to the forma- 
tion of woman. Of man it is said he was made, of 
woman she was iuilded. Now man was the type of 
Christ; and of the latter, in reference to His human 
nature, it might be said simply He was 'made,' — formed 
at once. But the woman signifies the Church, taken out 
of the wounded side of her dying Lord. And of the 
Church it is often said she is 'builded;' 'in whom,' 
says the apostle, 'all the building, fitly framed together, 
groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord; in whom ye 
also are builded together for an habitation of God, through 
the Spirit' (Eph. ii. 21, 22) ; and again, 'for the edifying' 
— literally, the bmlding—' oi the body of Christ' (Eph. 
iv. 12). By the term 'building,' applied to the forma- 
tion of Eve, God has thought fit to shadow forth to us 
the process by which, age after age, the Church (which 
is the second Eve) was to be fashioned into a help 



I ..Google 



meet or counterpart for Christ, the second Adam; yet 
as the second Adam was far more glorious than the 
first, so does the second Eve, taken out of His pierced 
breast, far transcend the first, God in all respects bestow- 
ing more cost and pains upon the new creation than 
upon the old. For redemption has brought in, not simply 
a new order of things, but one far higher than that 
which it is designed to replace : the one being earthly, 
the other heavenly; the one 'fleshly, the other spiritual; 
the one human, the other divine. And thus the Church, 
Christ's chosen Bride, springing from his smitten side, 
is ' builded ; ' — builded by the same Almighty hands 
that built the wondrous heavens ; builded, as was the 
temple of old, without sound of axe or hammer ; builded, 
at once as the CUy of the Lamb's special habitation, 
and the Companion for His dearest fellowship, without 
whom this goodly universe would have been incomplete 
to Him; for even in it, though renewed and glorified, 
it would have been found that it was 'not good for 
Him to be alone.' For Him no help meet could have 
been found, had not the Father provided this 'glorious 
Church,' and had not He Himself, in the greatness of 
His longing for that help meet, consented to sleep the 
deep sleep of death upon the cross, that thus she might 
be taken out of Him, whose beauty, as seen pictured 
in the Father's purpose, had already 'ravished His heart' 
(Song iv. g) ; whose presence could alone make even 
the better paradise complete; and union to whom, 
throughout eternity, was what His heart desired (John 
XV. 9, xvii. 33-26). 



I ..Google 



94 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

6. As to the closing tip of the flesh instead of what was 
taken out. — Adam was not to be the loser in any way 
or sense, but the gainer. All deficiency was replaced, 
all loss supplied. God would teach him the nature of 
woman and the object of her creation (wrapping up in 
this also a type of things to come), but He would teach 
it in a way that would not leave man the sufferer. 
Jacob's lesson was to be learned by 'halting on his 
thigh' all his life after; but Adam's was to be learned 
by looking at his help meet, and then while remembering 
how she had been 'buUded,' to feel that she had cost 
him nothing beyond the sleep into which he had been 
so mysteriously thrown. A sleep, but nothing more, — 
this was all the price for a boon so precious ! No 
abiding pain, or loss, or weakness. He was still the 
same Adam as when he came from the hands of his 
Maker. Neither has the second Adam suffered loss 
for us. It did indeed cost him much to redeem us. It 
cost Him a darker, sadder, and more troubled sleep 
than Adam's. But it is all over now I He retains 
nothing of the weakness, or sorrow, or darkness of His 
low estate. He is not less the King of glory because 
He was once the humbled Jesus. He does indeed 
appear in heaven a Lamb 'as it had been slain;' He 
may, perhaps, retain the wounds of the cross ; but more 
than this He does not. All other traces of His humilia- 
tion are erased. He has lost nothing 'by the Eride that 
He has gained. Nay, He has won much ; for His weak- 
ness, sorrow, shame, when here, have bought for Him 
new strengtli, and gladness, and glory. Hence the song 



I ..Google 



GENESIS II. 21-24- , 9S 

of angels, 'Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to 
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, 
and honour, and glory, and blessing' (Rev, v. 12). 

7, As to the woman's introduction to the man. — 'He 
brought her unto the nian-' God Himself, as if standing 
in a father's room, and acting the father's part, brings 
the bride to the bridegroom. As a beloved daughter 
He presents her to her future husband. He joined 
their hands and pronounced over them the marriage- 
blessing (chap. i. 28), ' Be fruitful, and multiply, and re- 
plenish the earth.' ^ A stranger, and yet no stranger, 
—a part of himself, the filling up of his being, she was 
brought before him, and knit to him in inseparable 
bonds. And it is thus that the true Eve speaks of her- 
self in the Song, 'The King hath brought me into His 
chambers' (chap. i. 4); and again, '~ii&broitght me to the 
ban que ting-house ' (chap. ii. 4). Of her also it is written, 
' She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle- 
work' (Ps. xlv. 14), and again, that she is 'prepared as 
a bride adorned for her husband' (Rev. xxi, 2). One 
of her special characteristics is, that she is 'given' of 
the Father to the Son ; and in that day when He comes 
in His glory she shall be caught up to meet Him in 

' Marriage was thns instituted iefore the fall ; yet it remains aftet 
the fall, a standing ordinance. No precept concerning it was given 
afterwards till the lime of Moses, yet it remtuned in force, and Christ 
appeals to this marriage transaction in the unfallen state as the basis 
of the Uw ot marriage. The same with the Sabbath, It was ^ven 
to unfallen man, yet the law remains in force after the fall, though 
there is no precept regarding it till Moses. And when that precept 
comes, it points bach at once to the first institution of the rest-day. 
Our Lord does the same, — ' Tlie Sabbath was made for man, ' 



jiGoogle 



96 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

the air, and be brought into His presence by the Father, 
there to have the marriage service celebrated, and as 
a 'chaste virgin' (a Cor. xi. 2), to be presented to Him 
to whom she has been so long betrothed. Then shall 
that song be sung to which all the new creation shall 
echo, ' Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to 
Him ; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His 
wile hath made herself ready; and to her was granted 
that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and 
white, for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints' 
(Rev. xix. 7, 8). 

8. As to Adam's recognition of her.^ — Whether by 
revelation or consciousness we know not; but Adam 
knows the woman thus brought to him, and calls her 
woman, as being a part of man. This is his response 
to God's introduction of her. He acknowledges the 
oneness, and receives her as himself We have God's 
consent in bringing, the woman's consent in coming, 
and now we have Adam's consent in receiving. Thus 
is the marriage completed by the full concurrence of 
all. And so is it with the second Adam toa He re- 

' The words in the original are peculiar. It is not simply ' this is 
KDTu bone of my bones ; ' the word translated airm means ' tiiis time ' 
or ' ttis turn,' as il he liad sitid, ' God has brought tiie animals to me 
one by one, and I have not found a counterpart to me,— bnt this time 
I have, — the being that He has brought to me this time is just such 
an one as I needed.' Bishop Kidder's explanation will not stand, 
'for this once, as she should be otherwise produced afterwards.' — 
Commentary' on the Books qJ Moses, yol. i. p. II. Rungius comes 
nearer it when he translates it nunc tandem, now at length, and adds 
that it is the voice of one exulting and giving thanks to God for the 
boon conferred (p. 144). 



I ..Google 



CBNESTS 1! 



97 



ceives and owns His Bride. He welcomes her as indeed 
part of Himself, one with Himself 'Both He that 
sanctifietli and they who are sanctified are all of one, 
for which cause He is not ashamed to call thera brethren ' 
(Heb. ii. ii). And again it is written, 'We are members 
of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones ' (Eph. v. 
30).^ And thus recognising the mysterious oneness 
between Himself and His Bride, He expresses His 
admiration of her beauty, as the 'fairest among women' 
(Song i. 8), 'all glorious within' (Ps. xlv. 13); whilst 
she with joy responds and speaks of Him as 'fairer 
than the children of men' (Ps. xlv, 2). 'Behold, thou 
art fair, my love; thou art all fair; there is no spot in 
thee' (Song iv. 7), is the utterance of His admiring love 
of her; while she replies, 'My beloved is white and 
ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. His head is 
as the most fine gold ; His locks are bushy, and black 
as a raven : His countenance is as Lebanon, excellent 
as the cedars : His mouth is most sweet ; yea, He is 
altogether lovely' (Song v. 16). And in the happy con- 
sciousness of possessing Him and His love, she gives 
' Tlieodoret, commenting on the verse in Ephesiana, applies it thus : 
' As Eve was formed (nrj.»i*ii) out of Adam, so are we out of tlie 
Lord Christ ; for we are buried with Him in baptism, and rise again 
with Him ; and we eat His body and we drink His blood.' And 
then, referring to a man's leaving his father, etc., he applies it thus : 
'He (Christ) leaving His Father above (tif Hm usTifx), was joined to 
the Church ' {tj ixx^ar'i^ Tm4<fSn). We may notice here, that while in 
the passage before ns it is the man that is said to leave his fether's 
house, not the wife, yet this latter is evidently understood ; for if the 
man must do it, much more the wife. Our readers also will lemeraber 
in the 45th Psalm, it is the iride that is exhorted to forget her father's 

VOL. VI, (S 



I ..Google 



gS , THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

vent to the deep feeling of her satisfied soul, ' My be- 
loved is mine, and I am His; He feedeth among the 
lilies until the day break and the shadows flee away' 
(Song ii. i6). 

All this transaction took place in silence ; without 
noise and mthout violence. In die silence of deep 
sleep ^ (it might be midnight too) the Lord wrought His 
work. It might seem a deed of pain and violence to man. 
But no. There was the unconscious opening of the side, 
the gentle abstraction of the needed part, the tender and 
unfelt healing of the wound ! How strange the work, yet 
how silent the doing ! And how like the noiseless building 
of the temple on Moriah, on which no sound of axes or 
hammers was ever heard. How like the process that is 
now going on in this world for the building of the ' living 
Temple ! The work advances in silence. No uproar, no 
shouting, no Babel-clamour of discordant tongues. From 
day to day it moves on noiselessly. Stone after stone 
is cut from the rude rock, hewn and polished, ready 
to be fitted into the glorious fabric. Member after 
member is gathered in, and added to the mystic body, 

' ' May we not Tje allowed to suppose that man was created early on 
the sixth day ;— during the day he reviewed and named the creatures, 
— tlien as it drew towards evening he feil into the deep trance-lilie 
sleep, and on awakening on the Sabbath morning, he saw and 
welcomed his mysterious help meet 7 On that Sabbath dawn it was 
that ' the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God sliQuted 
tor joy,' — chanting the bridal song;^anii on the world's great 
Sabbath dawn shall that song be sung over paradise regamed, as the 
Bride is seen descending, ' BehoM, the tabernacle of God is with 
men, and He will dwell with ihem, and they shall .be His people, 
and God Himself shall be with ihem, and be their God ' (Eey. ixi, 3). 



I ..Google 



GENESIS 11 



99 



— the Bride, the Lamb's wife ! All by an invisible 
hand, and by a process of which the world knows 
nothing ! And when this midnight is over, and the 
world's great Sabbath dawns, then in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, shall this prepared Bride, in full 
maturity of being, and bloom of resurrection beauty, 
stand forth to view, when the Bridegroom's voice shall 
be heard, ' Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come 
away ; for lo ! the winter is past, the rain is over and 
gone ; the flowers appear on the earth ; the time of the 
singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is 
heard in our land' (Song ii, lo). 



Ver. 25, 'And they u 
U!ire not askamed. ' 



■cd, the n 



i his 'wife, and 



There they stood, just as they came trom the hands 
of God. They did not need to blush ; they felt no 
shame. It is sin that has connected nakedness and 
shame together. No sin, no shame. There is no blush 
upon an angel's brow. Unfallen man had the unashamed 
nakedness of innocence ; but with the fall this has passed 
away, not to be returned to, even under redemption, but 
to be replaced by something higher, the glorious raiment 
of a righteousness that is unfading and divine. "Unfallen 
man needed no covering, and asked for none; but fallen 
man, under the bitter consciousness of the unworthy and 
unseemly condirion to which sin has reduced him, as 
unfit for God, or angels, or man to look upon, cries out 
for covering, — covering such as will hide his shame even 
from the eye of God. Hence He who undertook to 



I ..Google 



lOo THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

provide this covering, must bear the shame. And He 
has borne it, — all the shame of hanging nalced on the 
cross ; the shame of a sinner ; the shame of being made 
the song of the drunkard ; the shame of being despised 
and rejected of men; the shame of being treated as an 
outcast, one unfit for either God or man to look upon, — 
unfit' not only to live, but even to die within the gates 
of the holy city (Heb. xiii. ii, 12). All that shame has 
He borne for us, that we might inherit His glory. He 
stooped to the place of shame below, that we might obtain 
the place of honour in the better paradise above. 

Thus walked our first parents amid the groves of a 
paradise that had not then been lost. Thus dwelt they 
in its bowers as a home, and worshipped in it as a 
sanctuary.^ For with them the family mansion was the 
temple of their God. These were one, ere man had 
sinned. The entrance of sin divided these. Nor did 
grace, though coming in so largely and so swiftly, unite 
tliem again. From that day onward tliey have been 
separate. But the time is at hand when they shall be 
again united as in paradise ; and in the new Jerusalem, 
the Church shall find at once her temple and her home. 

'The long preserved traditions of paradise led men in after ages to 
worship Oi gravis and under trees, and even to construct their temples 
in imitation of these. A Gothic calhedralis just a petrified forest- 
shrine, — the pillared trees shooting up on each side, and the inter- 
woven branches embracing overhead and forming the roof. God 
seems to have taken special care to suppress this idea, both on 
account of the heathen abominations done in groves, and also because 
His times for a return to Eden worship was not yet come. Hence 
both the tabernacle and temple have nothing of the kind atiout them, 
save a few engravings of palm-trees .on the walls. 



jiGoogle 



CMNESIS n. sj. mi 

Even now we anticipate this blessed reunion, for fiith 
brings us into the holy of holies, there to worship and 
to dwell We pitch our tents beside the mercy seat and 
under the shadow of the glory In the innermist shnne 
of the temple is the Church s proper home And when 
we pass from the visions of faith into the realities of 
posses '-ion and enjoyment we shaU find the same happy 
union of the home and the temple In the Jerusalem 
beneath, the separation may be still kept up but in the 
Jerusalem abo\e, the palace and the temple are one, 
for as it IS the Lord God \lmighty that is to be the 
temple there so it is in the Lord God Almighty and 
the Lamb that we aie to abide, we m Him and He in 
us It IS the bosom of the Father that is to be our 
dwelling foi eier 

That promised inheritance of the samts was prefigured 
bj Adams paradise, with this difference, that as the 
second Adam far transcends the first, so shall the paradise 
of the second Adam fai excel and outshme the piradise 
of the first The gloi) of the terrestrial is one but the 
glory of the celestial is another The glory of unfollen 
creation is one but the i;lory of restoied creation is 
aiiothei The t,lor) of earth standmg aione m its beauty 
is one but the cjlory of earth and heaven united — of 
earth and heaven reflectmg and augmenting each others 
splendour, — is another. Yet still the earthly and the 
heavenly have their common features, by which the one 
is known to be a copy of the other, just as the tabernacle 
was a copy of heavenly things shown to Moses on the 
mount. In the Apocalyptic picture of the 'inheritance 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS O!^ GEN'ESIS. 



of the saints m hght we can trice the likeness between 
the two m tl e main aspect of the outline though the 
fill ng up may so Tie« hat d ffer This unhlmtss certa nly 
we notice that ui the one there was no building what 
soe\er n the other then, is a m-igiificent citj Yet 
thi? c t) s embosomed in a gorgeous parad ?e and it 
IS bu It of the vinous jjcmb for wh Ca the ancient parad se 
was noted as if God had for the e miny a^es hedged 
in and veded the sacred spot, that He might eilarge 
and beautify it after a fashion wh ch eje hai not seei 
naj that He might rear withm its bowers, ind out of 
its rich mines a city worthy of Himself and of that bon 
who was to be its Lord and of that cnmpanj redeemed 
by bio id who w ere to inhab t it so that w hen at last 
the fence is taken down and the covering lemoved 
there stands forth to view not the ai cient pir-id se, for 
the dwelling of 'the man and his wife,' but the 'many 
mansions' (John xiv. 2), the 'prepared city' (Heb. xi, 16) ; 
the city of gems and gold, for the habitation of the nobler 
heirs, the great multitude that no man can number. 

In the midst of the street of this city there reappears 
the tree of life; just as the former tree of life had been 
'in the midst of the garden,' and just as the pot of 
manna (sole memorial for ages of the tree of life) was 
in the midst of the ark (Heb. ix. 4). Of the tree of 
knowledge no trace is to be found, as if no memorial 
of man's sin were to remain ; or as if, the interdict being 
removed, there was no longer any need to specify it ; 
or as if it had been entirely superseded by Hira in whom 
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge ; or as 



I ..Google 



if knowledge arid life, once separated, had now become so 
entirely one, that the tree of life might represent both ; for 
'this is life eternal, that they mii^ht know Thee the only 
true God, and Jesus Ch h r 
in paradise had the f 1 f 

had the manna (ang 1 f d 
supply till the true b d h I 



nTI 



Ad 



) 



Church, in the N J 
glorious tree, of wl hi 
shadow. Beyond ' 1 m 
of frankincense,' 'v h 1 
shadows fled ; beyo d L b 
and Hermon; beyo d h 
tains of the leopard (S g 
in the garden of he G d 



as b 



1 



d y 1 b k 
d A ( 

d and 1 

6 S) h h 11 
d h f irb 1 



' The spiritual reference to the tree of life may be seen in sucli 
passages as the following : — ' She (wisdom) is a tree of life to them that 
lay hold of her' {Prov. iii. l8), and 'the fruit of the righteous one is 
a tree of life ' (Prov. xi. 30) — that is, the fruit which the rigivteous one 
prodnces (words and deeds) is lilce a tree of life to all around ; as 
in Jas. jii. iS, ' The finit of righteousness is sown in peace of them 
(hat make peace ' — that is, the fi:uit of righteousness, or lighteous 
ftait, is sown by the peaceful walk and character of those who seek 
and mate peace. The root of holiness is peace. Again we have, 
'When the desire cometh (when the thing desired is oblamed), 
it is a tree of life' (Prov. xiiL 12) ; deferred hope sickens, fulfilled 
hope revives and invigorates. Ag^n, ' A wholesome tongue is a 
tree of life ' (Prov. xv. 4) ; tlie healing of the tongue is like planting 
a tree of life. It diffuses life and health. Christ spealcs of Himself 
as the ' Bread of life ; ' as if He were not merely fruit, but fruit 
specially prepared as the soul's food, ready to be partaken of, sent 
down from heaven, prepared by the Father's hands, — 'The bread 
of God which came down from heaven, of which if a man eat he 
shall never hunger and never die. ' 



jiGoogle 



I04 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

' Plant of renown,' partaking of Him who is her life, in 
a way such as she has never done on earth, and feeling 
that thus she has a life which Adam had not, which 
angels have not, — a life that flows out of the deepest 
well of life, the bosom of Him who is in the bosom ,of 
the Father. 



I ..Google 



CHAPTER III. 

WE have been looking at a perfect world. We 
have seen it to be such as God could call 
'goolj' not a cloud m its slj not i ruffle on its ocean- 
bieadth, not a tinge upon its verdure; not a pang, or 
';igb or groan, or teat, all o^er its bright plains. It is 
the dw cllni£, uf the unfallen, the outer chamber of heaven, 
thi. Knd wherein dwelleth righteoubness. We have seen 
thi, harmony oi creation all its paits linked together in 
loMng oneness, the animate and inanimate, the intelligent 
■uid irrational , no jar, no d sson^nce in any. Man is 
tlie head the lord, appomted to exercise holy dominion 
under Jehovah is his Head and Lord. We have seen 
the ^ciT/^/y of creation, with its Sowers and dew, its 
gems and gold, its sunshine ind starlight above ; its 
gieen stretch of hill, plain, forest, below. We have seen 
It is 1 world without a sin, oi a shadow, or a .sigh, or a 
wrinkle , neither decaj nor disease have entered it ; there 
\K no tossing sickbeds, no heartbieaking deathbeds, no 
severing bonds no bitter farewelh, no heaving tombs. 
It is 1 world altogether good, a world which, angels 
mn,ht Msit, o\ei which God might delight, and in which 
He might dwell with man We need not say of it, as 
has been done, 'Fit hiimts of gods;' we may at once 
say, 'Fit dwelling of Jthovah A visible dwelling for 



I ..Google 



io6 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

the invisible God is that which was designed. This 
has always formed one special part of God's purpose 
in all its unfoldings.' 

We have now to- learn the story of its change; its 
change from being the seat of life and righteousness and 
joy, to becoming the region of death and evil and sorrow ; 
from being the dwelling of God, to becoming the haunt, 
nay, the regal residence of Satan, and the sphere of 
peculiar action to his hosts, ' the rulers of the darkness 
of this world.' From this chapter onwards to the twenty- 
first of Revelation we have the sad story of its sin. The 
two first cliapters of Scripture tell of its unfallen glory, 
the two last of its restored perfection ; but all between 
is gloom, a story of ruin and desolation-—' written within 
and without with lamentation, and mourning, and woe.' ^ 
We have seen a summer's sky overcast in an hour, the 
heavens putting on sackcloth, and the sun which had 

' Tliece is a curious old book of the sisteenth century, in quarto, 
with the following title : — A ffyve full of Hv-nnye, cenlayning Ihe 
firsts iaoke of Moses called Genesis, turned into English meelre, by 
William Hnnnis, 1578. From the 'argument' of this work we ex- 
tract the foIlowiDg verses as a spedmen. After 'describing creation 
he speaks of man : — 

' Who viewing these His gracious gilte, 
Sliould praise His holy name, 



And God tha.t m 



Who thro" his disohedience 

Enthralleii liimself in woe. 
And fcll ftom God, from whom to him 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS 11 



risen in calm going down in storm. So was it with our 
world, as this chapter proceeds to record; once holy, 
yet only for a day. How sudden and sad the change ! 
Yesterday it was paradise ; to-day, the wilderness. Yester- 
day it neighboured heaven ; to-day it is the suburb of hell. 
Yesterday It was God's footstool; to-day it is Satan's 
throne. Yesterday it w^ linked to the sanctuary above 
by a bond that seemed everlasting ; to-day that bond is 
broken, and it commences a swift descent into the utter- 
most darkness. 

This third chapter records the manner in which this 
change was effected; the different steps which led to it. 
And here we have the true origin of evil — God's own 
account of the way in which tares were first sown in 
the field m which God h^d sown the finest of the wheat. 

The pass-ige takes for granted that there was already 
an tnemy m e\istence There had been sin before, 
somenhcrt., thouf,h ■!t.?ieie is not said. There had been 
■xn enemj somewhere, but how he had become so, or 
where he had hitherto dwelt, or how he had found his 
way to this woild i=i not recorded. That he knew about 
our world, ^nd that he had some connection with it, is 
evident, though whether as its original possessor, or a 
strmger coming from far in search of spoil, we cannot 
discover All thit is implied in the narrative is, that 
there did exist an enemy, — one who hated God, and 
who now sought to get vent to that hatred by undoing 
His handiwork.^ 



,'If I 



nation is tlie first wonder of time, the second \i 
n element which extends through all genecatii 



the 



I ..Google 



I08 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

This enemy now makes his appearance. He has not 
been bound ; he has cot been prohibited entrance : he 
gets free scope to work. He shall be bound hereafter, 
when the times of restitution of all things commence, 
but not yet. He shall not be peimitted to enter the 
'new earth,' but he is allowed to enter and do his work 
of evil in the first earth. In order to deceive, and in 
order to prevent any suspicions arising, ov any questions 
being put as to what he was, or whence he came, or 
what he sought, he takes the form of one of those 
animals with which man was snrronnded ; he selects 
that which possessed more intelligence than the rest,^ 
not only to excite less suspicion, but probably because, 

trance of evil into the pure creation, tlie defilement of that which, was 
formed good, by the first sin. As the history of creation can possess 
complete truth only where the idea of the Creator and the creature 
is a true one, so also can the history of the fall only where the idea of 
good and evil may be discovered, in its true form, where the history 
proves itself to iie true in its' idea." — Havemick On the Pentattatk, 

' ' Quum instramento opus haberet, delegit es animalibns qnod 
sibi aptissimum for videbat.' — Calvik. This expositor, after showing 
that the serpent was but ' the mouth of the devil,' goes on to consider 
the question why Moses does not explicitly state Satan's agency in 
this scene. He gives various reasons for this, such as 'puerilis ec- 
clesiie setas,' etc. They do not satisfy. May not the true reason be 
just the very opposite of these suppositions ? May it not be, that 
from the beginning men so thoroughly understood the thmg to be 
Sata-rCs doing, that there was no need for nsing other language? 
The personality and agency of Satan were far better imderstood and 
realized in early days than in our own. Hence, not only a.11 Jewish, 
but all heathen traditions, while making mention of the serpent as 
helping in the ori^nation of sin, introduce also along with him tlje 
evil spirit as the great agent. Serpent- worship was universal among 
the heathen. (SeeFaber's Hom Mosaics, voL i. p. 71, etc.) 



I ..Google 



according to the nature of things, he could more easily 
and more fully take possession of it, and wield it more 
successfully as the instrument of his deception. 

It is, however, only from other parts of Scripture that 
we directly learn who the real tempter was, It is simply 
said here, 

Ver. t. ' Ns7!) (or and) iks serpent was more subtle t&ali any beast 
J fi heLoi G 

Th Ian g mil b 11 <] P 

d I b ly i h fi pi h 

lip Tl w 1 bl 1 gh 

wl 1 1 my p k d d N 

dffily II IS ik Elgh 

1 f al C d p k B laa 

hgihtupd hHpdh mh 

ttH a^Thdp hg 

as 1 f h ] is // / I I 

p a \ dhardi 1 p 

th d h gh far E Ad m md 

d huH 1 rpnalnh 



cp ns ca im us 

'.rin. ds Septem S/miiius. As Adam had ]u=t been 
naming the animals accoiiiing to their natures, Eve would linow lliat , 
the serpent was more subtle or cunning than the rest. (See Lord 
Barriiigton's Dissertation on the TemptaHoit aiid Fall, p. 4.) 

' ' As Satan can change himself into an angel of light, so did he 
abuse the wisdom of the serpent to deceive man.' — Bis/iofs' Bible, 
The original nature of the serpent is evidently referred to as being 
' more subtle ' than other animals. 



jiGoogle 



I lo THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

is mentioned. Yet that it was Satan assuming the dis- 
guise of a serpent, is evident. No mere animal could 
thus of itself reason of good and evil ; could thus plot 
man's ruin, and show such hatred of God. Besides, 
the sentence afterwards pronounced on it implies this, 
just as the apostle's statement does^ (2 Cor. xi. 3. See 
^o Rev. xii. 9-14, xv, 20-22). 

Thus we learn, even at the outset, that God is not 
the author of sin. It is the creature that introduces it. 
God, no douht, could have hindered it, but for wise ends 
He allows it We know also how sin spreads itself. 
It is always active. It multiplies and propagates itself. 
Every fallen being becomes a tempter, seeking to ruin 
others,— to drag them down to the same death into 
which he has himself been driven. 

Nor is it merely the upper orders of being that become 



' The plagiie of the fiery serpejils seems to point to this, showing 
us the way of man's ruin by Salan, and the way of restovation by 
Christ Qohn iii. 14). We may notice the other allusions to the 
serpent. I. Its bite (Gen. xlix. 17 ; Jer. viii. 17 ; Prov. xxxiii. 32). 
2. Its tongue (Ps.cxl. 3}. 3. Its Tioke (Jer. nlvi, 23). 4, Its foisiin 
(Ps. Iviii. 4). 5. lis luisdom (Matt. x. 26). 6. Its katefulness (Matt 
Kitii'- 33)- Such ave the Scripture references. They preserve an 
awful uniformity throughout, piesenting to us this one aniraal as pre- 
eminent above the rest for its evil qualities, and associating that one 
creatnie with Satan himself; with the introduction, propagation, and 
punishment of sin, giving us in it tlie emblem of sin's exceeding sin- 
fulness, and of the ruinous results of contact or connection with it. 
See a very full collection of passages from the Fatliers relating to tlie 
serpent and his subtlety, in Suicer's Tkesa-urus^ voL ii. pp. 535-537. 
He thinks that ^ansfym, not PfiH|U« (as the LXX. render it), is the 
proper translation, citing in proof the words of the apostle, ' As tlifi 
serpent deceived Eve by his cunning ' (ffomnytj-fa), 2 Cor. xi. 3. 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS 11 



snares or tempters. The lower parts of creation can be 
made instruments of ruin. God cannot tempt, but the 
creature does, in all its parts. The smallest, commonest 
thing — a leaf, a tree, aa animal— may become Satan's 
instrument. Whatever can touch or affect any of our 
desires or feelings, may be made use of hy Satan for 
our injury, just as the serpent was made use of here. 
How watchful ought we to be in such a world, where 
so many things minister to the lust of the flesh and the 
lust of the eye ! Flee sin ; flee its very shadow ; flee 
its most distant approach under any guise 1 Say not 
the temptation is a feeble one. That cannot be. The 
strength of the temptation lies in yourself, far more than 
in the tempting object. Get as far from sin and as 
near to God as you can ; that is your only security. In 
God you are safe, but nowhere else. In Him who is 
God manifest in flesh, you are beyond the reach of 
danger. No tempter can succeed ; no enemy can reach 
you there. 

Ver. I. 'And he said unto the woman, Ysa, hoik God said. Ye 
shall not lat of every tree of Ike garden V'' 

The angels fell untempted. Man's case was different. 

^ The use of ' God ' (Elohim) Iiere and in what follows, instead of 
the Lord God (Jehovah-Elohim), gives rise to the following striking 
remark of Hengstenberg : — ' The masterstroke of the tempter's policy 
was then, as it is siill now, to change yehovah into EloMm, the living, 
holy God into a nesdo quod niimen. (With what vagueness the term 
Elohim is used by the serpent, is shown by the expression, Ye shall 
beasElohim, ye shall be raised to an unearthly nature and dignity.) 
Having done this, and not before, he could venture upon deluding 



jiGoogle 



113 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

A tempter ensnared him. That tempter took the form 
of a serpent. Hence he is named so specially, 'that 
old serpent, which is the devil and Satan ' (Rev. xx. 2). 
He had himself fallen uniempted, but this did not make 
him less willing to tempt. He had become the enemy 
of God, and thus became the enemy of man. A ruined 
being himself, he sought to ruin others, that so he might 
have companions in guilt and woe, and thus avenge him- 
self upon God. 

From the first clause regarding flie serpent's subtldy, 
we are prepared for a well-laid plot, manifesting con- 
summate art and guile.^ The temptation will be well 
disguised; the snare will be well laid. The tempter 
must speak fair, if he hopes to succeed at all. He 
must veil himself as well as his object; for if he be 
recognised, or if his object be discovered, the victim 
will elude his grasp. 

tliem with a downright falsehood. Jehovah is not a man that He 
should lie. The woman should have employed the name of Jehovah 
as art impenetrable shield to repel the fiery darts of the wiched one. 
The use of the uame Elokim (that this was not from ignorance of the 
name Jehovah, is proved by chap. iv. i) was the beginning of her fall. 
First, there was a depression or obscuration of the religious senti- 
ment ; then the tree appeared good to eat and pleasant to the eye ; 
God died in the soul, and sin became alive.' — On the Penialeuch, 
voL i. p. 317. 

' ' Magis metuendus est cum fallit quam, cum s;evit,' says 
Augustine (on Ps. xl.). This will remind the reader of Rufherlord's 
well-known remark, ' Brother, since we must have a devil to trouble 
us, I love a raging devil best.' Hence the apostle speaks of the 
' wiles of the devil ; ' and hence the serpent seems to have been fixed . 
on by God as the animal of all others fitted to set forth Satan's 
characteristic,— deadly cunnmg. The violence of the ' roaring lion ' 
is subordinate to this. 



jiGoogle 



It is the woman that he assails, as being 'the weaker 
vessel,'^ and therefore more likely to yield, and, in 
yielding, to draw the man with her. Then, as now (as, 
for example, in Popery ^), he avails himself of woman's 
weakness and woman's influence. 

He comes up to Eve, as one may suppose that a 
stranger might do, seeking information. He feigns to 
be one who has just heard a rumour that has greatly 
surprised hira, — a rumour which he cannot credit, so 
insulting does he deem it to God's cJiaracter, so injurious 
and unkind to man.' It is evident that he had heard 
God's prohibition. How, we know not; but we see 
here that he has access to learn what is taking place 
amongst us. He can hear and see the things that we 
hear and see I He is on the watch to gather them up, 
— ever listening, ever looking, ever following us, that 
he may discover alike what we say to God, and what 
God says to us. At one time he is the beguiling serpent, 
at another the devouring lion, but always 'walking about,' 
— 'walking to and fro throughout the earth,' — to learn 
what may serve his purpose of malice towards man and 
revenge against God {Job i. 7 ; 2 Cor. xi. 3 ; i Pet. v. 8). 

1 arl'iifo'Tipsy sKaes, — wealter than tte tasixx., — less capable of resist- 
ance. 'Imbecilla res est fcemina,' says Quintilian; and Hilary 
speaJtsof 'senns moUioris.' — Comment. BnMattktza. 

' For striking illustrations of this, see The Secret Instrmtums of 
llie yesuits, and Michelet's Priests, Womsn, and Families. Satan, 
through the priest, does now to the daughtei's of Eve what, through 
the serpent, he did to Eve herself. 

' ' The devil feigneth that he believeth God had wholly forbidden 
them the use of the fruits of the garden, to make way to talk with 
the woman, and to induce her to pve ear to him. ' — pJOnATr. 
VOL. VI. H 



I ..Google 



114 THOUGHTS 0J7 GENESIS. 

With well - feigned surprise and incredulity he puts 
the question, ' Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of 
every tree of the garden?' meaning thereby to insinuate 
the harshness of the injunction which he pretended 
hardly to believe' Is it possible that God can have 
said so? Is it conceivable that He who has just made 
you, and provided you with such abundance, should 
grudge you a little fragment of that plenty, and debar 
yoK from the garden's choicest fruits ; making you lords 
of creation, yet not allowing you to put forth your lord- 
ship ; nay, refiising you access to that tree, the fruit of 
which would bl j u n htly t e e c se w se domi- 
nion?^ In tl 1 obj t w t calu ^.te God; at 
least, oinn n ly t t d a vh ch o Id mis- 

represent HI t t m He keej o t of sight 
all that God hddef m lltle proofs of love, 
so manifold, so vast; he fixes on one thing which seemed 
inconsistent with tliis ; he brings up this before man in 
the way most likely to awaken evil thoughts of God.' 

' The Jew sh r^bbi iftirm that tliia i but the conclusion of a long 
conversation held between the woman and the serpent. Bush re- 
marks, 'The piobability is, that this was not the commencement of 
his discourse but that somethn g which the historian does not re- 
coid, had been previously said The words are literally, 'Yea, 
surely, has God said? Mercer tianslates them, 'Itane vemm est 
eura duisse, ' Calvm, ' Etiamne Aait Dens ? ' 

^ Some have thought that Satan really began with a lie : insinuat- 
ing tliat God had forbidden them the use of aieiy tree of the garden. 
The woman's answer does seem to confirm this ; only it is more 
likely that Satan took advantage of a Irutk, in order to miscon- 
strue it, than that he fi'amed a lie, which could he at once denied and 
disproved. 

" ' He begins by calling in question the truth of God. Is it true 



I ..Google 



GE^/ESIS m. I. irs 

Not as if ke wished to say one word against God, nor 
even as if he needed to say anything; but as if the thing 
itself were too plain to be mistaken ; as if, on the sup- 
position of its being true, it could admit but of one 
interpretation. He leaves the fact to speai for itself. 
His object is to isolate the one fact, and so to sepa- 
rate it from all God's acts of love as to make it ap- 
pear an instance of harsh and unreasonable severity.^ 
Man had hitherto known the prohibition ; but he had put 
no such construction on it; he had not imagined it 
capable of being so interpreted. Now Satan brings it 
up, and sets it out in an aspect likely to suggest snch 
constructions as these :— ' God is not your friend after 
all; He but pretends to care for you. He is a hard 
master, interfering with your liberty, not leaving you a 
free agent, but constraining you, nay, fettering you. He 
mocks you, making you creation's head, yet setting 
arbitrary limits to your rule ; placing you ia a fair gardeUj 

tliat God has prohibited the use of any tree? For what was it 
created ? Such are the Inquiries of wicked men to this day. " For 
what are the objects of pleasure made," say they, "but to be en- 
joyed?" "We might answer, arooijg other things, "to trythem that 
dwell on the earth'" (Fuller Oh Gaiesis). Calvin suggests the 
same idea : ' Mulieri. scmpulum injicere voluit ut verbum Dei non 
esse crederet, cujus non palam extabat plansibilis ratio.' He hints 
also at another shade of meaning : ' Can your eating or not eating of 
a tree be of any concern to God ? do you think He would talte the 
tronble of forbidding you ? ' 

ezi^y tree, he might as well eat of none. Thus discontent overlooks 
the good, and pores upon the one thmg wanting. " All this availeth 
me nothing, so long as Mordecai is at the gate." ' — Fuller On 
Genesis. 



jiGoogle 



ii6 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

yet debarring you from its fruits. He grudges you His 
gifts, making a show of liberality, while withholding what 
is really valuable.' 

Thus Satan sought to calumniate God, to malign His 
character, to represent Him as the enemy, not the friend, 
of man. If he can succeed in this, then man will begin 
to entertain hard thoughts of God, — then he will become 
alienated from Him ; then he will disobey ; and then 
come the fall, the ruin, the guilt, the doom, the woe ! 
Man is lost ! Hell gets another inmate. The devil gets 
another companion. God's second work is marred, and 
He Himself is .left to grieve over His new-made child 
torn from His embrace. In this way Satan thrusts in 
the wedge between man and God,- — breaks the link be- 
tween the creature and the Cieator How simple, yet how 
successful the process ! * A suigle question is put God's 
character is maligned. The lie is beheved Man sus- 
pects God and perishes ! Such is the dark process still 
by which Satan seeks to hinder our return to God His 

' ' Fallax diabolus et ad tvaduceiidum artifex eahdissimns,' says 
HUary (on Matt.J ; and agaui (on Ps cxli ), ' Quicqnid iniqiatatum 
hommes gerunt a diibolo suggeiitui ' Thns it is tiat the Fitheis 
speak of Satan, They always seem to see him and to contend with 
him hand to hand. He is always personal to them, — their great 
enemy ; no mete figure or personification of the evil piinciple, but a 
living agent of perilous power and crift In their days men calhng 
themselves Christians had not learned to speak of 'extinct Sitans ' 
Chrysologus has a singular passage, ^ettm^ forth the evil agency of 
Satan. We ean only quote part — 'Diabolus mail auctor, neqniti^ 
origo, rerum hosds, secundi homims semper mimicito , ille laqueos 
tendit, lapsus parat, foveas fodit, aptat lumas, stimuHt corpora, 
pui^t animas,' etc — Serm, xi., on Chnsis Ensfmg ani Tt,mpta- 



I ..Google 



CEJVESIS III. 2, 3. 



aim is to misrepresent God to man; to prove God to 
be unkind in what He has prohibited, and a liar in what 
He has declared. The gospel is the full representation 
of God's gracious character made known by God Him- 
self that the sinner may be induced to return. Satan 
perverts it or says it is untrue. Man believes the tempter, 
stands afai off, and dies ! 



Vers. 2, 3. ' And the inomatt said unto the serfmt. We may eai {or 
we shall eal) of thefmii af tAe tras of the ^rdm : 3. But of the fruit 
of the tree ■mhich is in the midst of the garden, God hath said. Ye shall 
not eal of it, neither shall ye letieh it, lest ye die. ' 

Had the woman fully understood the wicked sugges- 
tion of the serpent, or had she seen who it was that was 
speaking to her under the guise of the serpent, she would 
perhaps have fled at once. But not fully realizing 
either, and wishing perhaps to vindicate God for imposing, 
and herself for submitting to, such a restriction, she 
stood still to reason with the tempter. To a certain 
extent she was not so inexcusably guilty in this thing 
as we are in parleying with Satan instead of resisting 
him at once, and placing God's armour between us and 
his assaults ; still there was enough to leave her without 
excuse. Even though she might not fathom the malig- 
nity of the suggestion, still it touched the question of 
obedience or disobedience to God, and this she ought 
at once to have resented and flung off with abhorrence. 

Yet she does not yield at once. On the contrary, 
she defends her position. She makes ready mention 
of God's kindness and wide liberality, reminding the 



I ..Google 



118 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

tempter that there was but one tree forbidden, and that 
all the rest were free for use. 

Still she alters the words of the prohibition, and in 
this we see her beginning to waver. The change may 
be a slight one, yet we cannot help thinking that there 
is a meaning in it. She adds to it, for God had not 
said, 'Neither shall ye touch it;' she takes from it, for 
she greatly softens the tlureat, making it not ' thou shalt 
surely die,' but 'lest ye die.'^ She thus exaggerates 
the restriction, as if wishing to prove it to be a hardship, 
and she dilutes the penalty, or at least the awfuhiess of 
its certainty, as if trying to persuade herself that it was 
not quite such a certainty as she had once thought it. 
Thus does sin work still. It magnifies God's prohibi- 
tions into hardships, in order to iind an excuse for dis- 
obedience, and then it tries to underrate both the 
certainty and the greatness of the penalty. Simple 
obedience is what man does not like. Simple acquies- 
cence in God's commands is what he is slow to learn. 
He altered God's words in order to get an excuse for 
departing from God, and so he still alters 'the word of 
the truth of the gospel' for the purpose of excusing 
himself for not returning at once to God, and taking 
advantage of the free welcome of His abundant grace. 

• Calvin does not admit the former alteration to be an indication 
of apostasy already begun, but contends for the latter being bo. He 
thinks that she was overlooking the penalty, or at least its certain in- 
fliction ; ' Mortis periculum procul et fi-igide sentire se demonstrat. ' 
Bemaid has brought out the same sense ; ' Ista (Eva) sub dubio sup- 
ponit, ne forte, inquiens, si comederimus moriamur. ' And again ! 
' Dens affirmat, mulier dubitat, Satan negat,' — Seriiiones. 



jiGoogle 



Vers. 4, 5. ' And the serpent said tinio the ■woman. Ye shall not 
sarely die : ' 5. For God doth knirw, that in the day ye eat thereof, thai 
your eyes shall be opened ; and yc shall bs as gods {pi as God), knowing 
good and emV 

The tempter immediately catches up the words of 
the woman, in which she had spoken of death as being 
the penalty of eating. Professing to act as her friend,^ 
he speaks as one attempting to undeceive her as to a 
mistake under which she was labouring. 'You speak 
of the tree as dangerous to eat, or even to touch ; nay, 
as involving the penalty of death to the eater. You 
have been quite deceived in this matter; there is no 
such deadly penalty; it is a mere threat on the part of 
God to prevent you eating of a tree which He knows 
would open your eyes and make you as Himself, know- 
ing good and evil,'^ 

Thus he proceeds with his design of calumniating God, 
and questioning His veracity as well as His goodness. 
He goes a step further than in his former suggestion. 
He openly denies the certainty of the threatened penalty ; 

' Cuverdale's translation is very expressive : ' Tush, ye sliall not 
die the death,' An old writer notices tliat file devil saysjfs, not thou, 
having his eye on Adam as well as Eve, 

^ One of the Fatliers remarks : ' Diabolus plures deciplt blanditiis 
qiiam terroribns,' 

" ' Knowing good and evil.' To Itnow good and evil is aomeUmes 
a general expression for knowing everylMng, just as not to know good 
or eml is the expression for total ignorance, — the ignorance of iniancy. 
(Deut. i. 39,) Or the expression may refer to 'sitting in judgment on 
good and evil ; ' as in Ecdes. viii. 5, ' A wise man's heart diacerneth 
(knoweth) both time and judgment;' and in 2 Sam, xiv, 17, 'As 
an angel of God, so is my Lord the king, to discem good and bad ;' 
and I lOngs iii, 5, Solomon prays for a heart to 'discern Ijetween 



jiGoogle 



120 THOUGHTS OM GENESIS. 

he questions its reality, and casts suspicion on God's 
intention in announcing it. Nay, more than this, he 
goes on to affirm that God knew well that, instead of a 
curse, there would come a blessing from the tasting of 
the tree ; and that it was because He was jealous of man, 
and envious of the blessing thus to be reached, that He 
had shut him out from the tree. Thus he insinuates 
that God was a being of mere craft and falsehood, bear- 
ing no kmdiy feehng towards man, standing between him 
and a treasure house of boundlcis blessing 

In this answer to the womm he speiks as one con 
scions that he was making way He sees from ht 
answtr thit he has made an impression by his indirect 
suggestion , and he now follows it up by something 
bolder -ind more direct' 'Ye shiH not "(uiely diei' 
God neither cin not will evecutt His threat Do not 
be alarmed. Do not let a mere fancy hinder yon reach- 
ing out after such blessings as lie before you. So says 
Satan to the sinner still. ' There is no hell ; the second 

good and bad.' The temptation then would be that they should be as 
God m judging, sitting on His judgment-seat. In the world as it 
stood, they were only to be mlers of what God had pronounced 
' good : ' they are tempted to seelt to be judges of ' evil ' — to enter 
on a new domain both of rule and of judgment. Into this new region 
they sought to be introduced, not in God's time or way ; and hence 
they found it only a region of shame and darkness. Bnt the time is 
coming when we shall possess it in a different way, the way of faith 
and obedience ; the obedience of Him who 'grew in wisdom,' waiting 
God's time for filling Him with knowledge ; not like the first Adam, 
snatching at it impatiently. Then we shalt 'judge all things;' 
we shall 'judge the world ;' we shall 'judge angels.' 

' 'Nemo cum serpente securns tudit, nemo cum diabolo jocatur 
impnne.'— Chrysologus, Serm. 155. 



I ..Google 



!.5- 



death is a mere dream ; eat, drink, and be merry ; sin. 
as you like, and don't fear punishment.' Thus he beguiles 
the soul, and leads it onward to the second death. 
Strange that men should beheve him ; that they should 
listen to his voice in preference to God's, They want 
to be persuaded, and so they are persuaded ; they want 
to be deceived, and so they are deceived ! Yet can all 
this deception quench the flame of the burning lake, or 
set aside death, or make the wrath of God less true or 
terrible? Let him say there are no diseases, no pains, 
no sicknesses, now, would men believe hira? No. And 
will they believe him when he tells them, there is no 
death hereafieri 

'Your eyes shall be opened.' They shall be opened 
by that very act which you so much shrink from. It is 
God who is keeping them closed. He is drawing a 
curtain round you, excluding you from visions of bright- 
ness on every side. What a prospect spreads round you ! 
A little boldness in disobedience, and all this fair region 
shall be yours, as it is already mine. 

'Ye shall be as God, knowing good and evil.' No 
lower level than that of God Himself shall you rise to. 
All His heiglit of honour shall be yours. Nay more, all 
His knowledge. Ye shall know, and judge, and see, even 
as He knows, judges, and sees. From all this wide circle 
of knowledge God is shutting you out. He wants the 
throne wholly to Himself; He cannot bear a rival. 

Thus Satan sowed the seeds of mistrust, unbelief, 
atheism, hatred of God. Thus the 'evil he^t of 
unbelief was produced, and separation from God was 



I ..Google 



122 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

the immediate result. It is thus that he still keeps the 
sinner at a distance from God, and prevents his 'sub- 
reitting to the righteousness of God.' He sows and 
\vaters the seed of dark distrust in the sinner's soul, by 
persuading him that God is not sincere either in His 
wrath or in His grace. He leads the sinner to exalt, 
nay, to deify himself; to think so highly of himself, that 
he will not consent to God's terms at all. And hence 
the first thing that the Spirit does to a man is to make 
him stoop, by convincing him of sin, and bringing him 
to iorget all his ideas of self-deiiication. Then he is 
glad of another's righteousness, and takes it eagerly. 
But till then, he wiU not take even heaven itself on 
God's terras. He looks on God as his enemy; or at 
least as not so entirely his friend that He will at once 
receive him and bless him as he is. Strange that it 
should be so now! Whatever our first parents might 
plead in excuse, we are inexcusable. God's gift of His 
Son, — the cross, the death, the grave of that Son, — have 
all unfolded in its fullest breadth the love of God, proving 
that He is the sinner's true and rea! friend. Yet who 
believes this? How few take God's word concerning 
this, and enter into peace and friendship 1 

Nay, more than this, Satan tells us that sin is a 
blessing, not a curse ; that its consequences are good, 
not evil ; and under tMs aspect the sinner pursues it. 
He sees in the command not to sin a restriction of his 
liberty, and he spurns it ! He sees in sin itself the 
attainment of what is pleasant, and he pursues it. What 
is sweet in sin is present, what is bitter is future; so he 



I ..Google 



drinks the cop, and bids the future care for itself. Yet 
that future involves in it the favour of Jehovah Himself, 
and the joys of an eternal heaven. Is he prepared to 
say that that favour is a mere dream, and the loss of it 
a trifle? Is he prepared to say that there is no heaven 
as well as no hell, — no joy as well as no sorrow for 
eternity ? 

Ver. 6. ' And Taken {"Vfhta" knot iafbeHebitwii^e^oma?! saw 
that the tree was good for food, and thai it was pleasant to the eyes (Heb. 
o desire to the eyes), and a tree to be desired ta ?nake one wise ' (Heb. to 
cause to andersta-nd), she took of the frait ikereof, and did eat; and 
gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat.' 

The tempter has now thrown a new and peculiar 
interest round the tree. He has riveted the woman's 
eye upon it, and what shall hinder her heart from fol- 
lowing her eye ? She had stood still to reason with him. 
This was her iirst false step. She now .stood still to 
gaze upon the object reasoned about, and to wonder 
why she should be shut off from it. He had thus 
succeeded in fixing her eye on the tree; he had suc- 
ceeded in shaking her belief as to the penalty; and 
now what remained but that she should wholly yield? 
Nay, is she not already overcome ? The fascination 

' ' Pleijant to the eye= ' — Vulg pulchrum oculis Sept ifutit 

^e p. ; C t)u esThwd means 

digit pas d. h m uig h lie eye 

dlgUn Tbdesed mk w T laa still 

t ger word flagra pp E be This 

athdvea wd mkwi fim gniV ig ' '<■ 

p rnipl ing h h mea rng u li p p £ is 'to 



I ..Google 



124 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

becomes stronger aad stronger. She lets it carry her 
unresistingly along. She consults neither her husband 
nor her God. She hurries into the commission of the 
sin.' 
There wore three things that wrought upon her. 

1, The tree was good for food. A strong reason, had 
she been famishing, but none when surrounded with the 
plenty of the rich garden. Strange that she should have 
cared for it on such an account ! She is in no need of 
food, yet it is on this account that she covets it 1 She 
is without excuse in her sin. It was the lust of the 
flesh that was at work (Eph. ii. 3 ; 1 John h. 16). She 
saw in the tree the gratification of that lust, and in God 
a hinderer of it Thus she fell. 

2. It was a desire of the eyes. And had she no other 
objects of beauty to gaze upon? Yes; thousands. Yet 
this forbidden one engrossed her, as if it had acquired 
new beauty 'by having been prohibited. Or can she 
not be satisfied with lookitigt Must she covet 1 Must 
she touch and taste? It is plain that hers was no 
longer the natural and lawful admiration of a fair object, 
but an unlawful desire to possess what she admired.* 

* Thougli it is evident that she consulted not witli Adam, yet 
the words 'with her' would lead us to suppose that he was present, 
or within sight. Calvin gives reasons against this, but they are 
very slight. The Jewish writers seem to have believed that he was 
with her at the time. 

^ Jerome will have it, that we are not even to gaze upon what we 
may not desire : ' TntueH mm debet quod non licit coitcupisci ' (on 
Jerem.). This is too much ; it is ascetic rijjdity, making restrictions 
where God has made none. Admiriitg and ceveHng are two very 
different things. When reading sitch remarks, we cannot help 



jiGoogle 



It was 'the lust of the eye.' Job understood this, and 
'made a covenant with his eyes' (xsxi. i) ; the Psalmist 
knew it and prayed, ' Turn away mine eyes from hehold- 



1 d h 
G d 



dd 



PP 



la uld b h h -d 

good, that she would get all knowklgt m due time, 
and in God's own way ; but her confi lence in God had 
waveied; she could no longer trust Him for this she 
■ 1 t t b ■ d tl t all d m as 



d ( 

T thr 

d d 



) 



d (E h. 



n al 

h san 



I ..Google 



126 THOUGHTS ON^ GEMESIS. 

Let us mark here sucli lessons as the following: — 
I. The danger of trifling witii objects of temptation. 
To linger near tliem; to hesitate about leaving them; 
to think of them as harmless, — these are the sure fore- 
runners of a fall. Beware of remaining within sight. Get 
beyond the circle of tlie spell, 'Flee youthful lusts.' 
'Look not on the wine when it is red' (Prov. xxiii. 31). 
Your only safety is in instant flight. If the tempter can 
get jon to look, he has secured his \ictory 

2 The three sources of temptation the lust of the 
flesh, of the eye, of the mind Stnctly speaking, they 
are not m themselves sinful, but in their excess, or dis- 
ordeily indulgence There is no sm in reli&hing food, 
nor m loolmg at a fur object, nor m desiring know- 
ledge, yet through these channels our temptations come. 
Things lawfid in themsehes aie our most subtle seducers.' 
There is nothing to taint th d 

sweet sounds;' and yet ho d m 

OUT wiliest tempter ! Then, b d fi 

the eye in the fairest iraitat n tu h h 

ever flung upon her canvas has n p g b 

too frequently ensnared th d d 

from the Creator to the c tu th n 

the widest range of scienc b b d d 

evil? yet do we not see it in h p d p 

the knowledge of God Hii If nd u d b S n 
his mightiest instrument for d g p h 

will? Is not poetry the m w d and 



I ..Google 



GENESIS rri. 6. 127 

thought? yet man has corrupted it into the utterance 
of his own wild passions, or the idle breathings of his 
fond affections. In the scenes of nature there is nought 
but what is good, and fair, and bright; yet these has 
man made use of to shut out God, either saying, with 
the Atheist, 'There is no God in nature;' or maintaining, 
with the Pantheist, that nature itself is divine. 

3. The swift progress of temptation. She listened, 
looked, took, ate ! ^ These were the steps. All linked 
together, and swiftly following each other. The begin- 
ning how small and simple ; the end how terrible ! 
'When lust (desire) hath conceived, it bringeth forth 
sin; and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death' 
{Jas, i. 15). And therefore, adds the apostle, 'Do not 
ERR,^ my beloved brethren;' that is, do not turn aside 
one step out of the right way, as you know not where 
you may end. You begin with a ^ook, you end in 
apostasy from God. You begin with a touch, you .end 
in woe and shame. You begin with a thought, you end 
in the second death. Yet of all these steps God protests 
solemnly that He is not the Author (Jas. i. 13). It is 
man that is his own ensnarer and destroyer. Even 
Satan cannot succeed unless seconded by man himself. 

4. The tendency of sin to propagate itself. No sooner 
has the tempted one yielded than he seeks to draw others 



' ' Creditua est serpens, contemptus est Deus ; tactum est vetihim, 
mortuus est homo.' — Augustine on Ps. Ixxiv. 

^ foi vi-xiZirSi, 'do not go astray;' do not let temptation allure 
you one step out of the way. This word is used eight times in 
the Apocalypse in connection with Satan and his seductions. 



jiGoogle 



128 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

into the snare. He must drag down his fellows with 
him. There seems an awful vitality about sin ; a fertihty 
in reproduction, nay, a horrid necessity of nature for self- 
diffusion. It never lies dormant. It never loses its 
power of propagation. Let it be the smallest conceiv- 
able, it possesses tlie same terrific diffusiveness. Like 
the invisible seeds that float through our atmosphere, it 
. takes wing the moment it comes into being, flying abroad, 
and striking root everywhere, and becoming the parent 
of ten thousand others. 

Ver. 7. ' And the eyes 0/ them iolh n 
theyaiere naked ; and they sewed fig-lam 

Their eyes were opened ! They in that moment saw 
tilings which they saw not and could not have seen 
before. They saw into a new region, but that region 
was a sad and dark one. Their eyes were opened, and 
they seemed as if suddenly placed before a mirror, for 
the first object that met their view was, — themselves.^ 
And the first thing that struck and startled them about 
themselves, was their nakedness! They were naked 
before, but nakedness had brought with it no sense of 
shame. But the moment they disobeyed, the conscious- 

' ' Sewed' is too strong and definite a word ; it is simply 'wroiigiit 
or fastened together. ' 

' We all know something of tWs 'opening of tlie eye' iramedialely 
on the commission of an act of sin. Up to the moment of the com- 
mission we are blind to the sin and its conseqnences. The moment 
it is done a strange feeling seizes ns, we become aware of the sin, 
conscience stirs, and we wish the deed undone. In addition to 
this, however, there might be something in the actnal tree affecting 
the moral nature, and stimidating ei 



I ..Google 



ness of being unfit to be seen arose within them. Formerly, 
all parts of their body were 'comely j' now certain parts 
became 'uncomely' (i Cor. sii. 23). Just as certain 
animals were afterwards set aside as unclean, SO were 
certain parts of man's body, that there might be about 
man the perpetual token and remembrance of sin. It 
would seem as if, when Adam, ate of the fruit, the grosser 
passions of his nature were let loose, and rose into 
mastery. All parts of his nature had hitherto been in- 
equal and harmonious proportions ; now the flesh rose, 
up, and sin revealed shame. As, in the case of bodily 
disease, the general virus which may be pervading the: 
whole frame fastens or settles down upon some special 
part, so was it in the case of the moral poison which 
now shot through the whole man, in consequence of 
that fatal act of disobedience. 

A sense of shame either in regard tO' soul or body is 
not natural. It does not belong to the unfallen. It is 
the fruit of sin. The sinner's first feeling is, ' I am not 
fit for God, or man, or angels to look upon.' Hence 
the essence of confession is, being ashamed of ourselves, 
We are made to fee! two things ; first, a sense of con- 
demnation ; and secondly, a sense of shame; we are 
unfit to receive God's favour, and unfit to appear in 
His presence. Hence Job said, 'I am vile;' and hence 
Ezra said, ' I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face 
to Thee, my God' (ix. 6). Hence also Jeremiah de- 
scribes the stout-hearted Jews, ' They were not at all 
ashamed, neither could they blush' {vi. rs). Hence 
Solomon's reference to the ' impudent face ' of the strange 



I ..Google 



I30 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

woman. (Prov. vii. 13), and Jeremiah's description of 
Israel, 'Thou hadst a whore's forehead, thou refusedst 
to be ashamed' (iii. 3). It was the shame of our sin 
that Christ bore upon the cross; and therefore it is 
said of Him that He 'despised the shame,' It was laid 
upon Him, and He shrank not from it. He felt it, yet 
He hid not His face from it. He was the well-beloved 
of the Father, yet He hung upon the tree as one unfit 
for God to look upon ; fit only to be cast out firom His 
presence. He took our place of shame that we might 
be permitted to take His place of honour. In giving 
credit to God's record concerning Him we are identified 
with Him as our representative; our shame passes over 
to Him, and His glory becomes ours for ever. 

It was this sense of shame that led Adam and Eve to 
have recourse to fig-leaves for a covering. Suddenly 
possessed with the awful thought that they were unfit to 
be seen, even by each other, they eagerly betook them- 
selves to the first thing that lay within their reach, glad 
to get hold of anything which would hide them firom 
each other's eyes, or prevent that strange feeling of 
shame which had thus arisen. 

It is to the eye that the sense of shame appeals, and it 
is only in the light that its appeal can be made good. 
To prevent this appeal the sinner seeks the darkness, and 
hence it is that deeds of shame and deeds of darkness 
are the same in import. Hence it is also that our Lord 
speaks of men hating the light and loving the darkness 
because their deeds are evil. But whether it is to fig- 
leaves or to darkness that the sinner betakes himself, the 



I ..Google 



feeling that leads to the act is the same. His object is 
to get where no eye can see him. He forgets the eye 
above, that can look through every human covering ; and 
hence, as Adam tried his fig-leaves, so he tries his good 
deeds, his prayers, and his repentance ; forgetful that the 
eye of flame {Re\ u i8) can look throUf,h them Ihe 
covering he needs is one which will h de his shame fiom 
the eye that is /^tvm<, He learns this when the Holj 
Spirit begins His woik of con\iction m him F r then E 
is as if God s e)e of awful holiness were piercmj, throu£,h 
his covennj,s and flashing through the darkness m which 
he had wript himself Then he learns that the covering 
he needs must be ini^e It must be as divme as that 
eye which is looking into him from ibove It m st be 
something which will hide h s shame even fiom. the eje 
of God something th^t will do tor him not metel} in 
the darknebs or the twilip,ht but undei the bull inc.. of 
a cloudless noon 

What IS it but tl IS same conscio sness of si ime that 
leads man to resort to otnwienfsi These are intended 
by them to compensite for the shame or the deformity 
imder which mei are l>ing They feel that shame 
belongs to them , nay confusion ot lice They fed 
that thq ire not now perfect in beintj, ^ oi ce thej 
were Hence thej resort to ori'iment m order to make 
up for this They deck tl emsehes with jewels that their 
deformity may be turned into beautj But there ib 
danger hae, — duger ag'unst which the ipoitle wirns 
us, specnlly the female sex (i Pet m. 3, 4) Thcie ii 
nothmg indeed innately s nful m the |, old, or the siher, 



I ..Google 



132 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

or the gems which have been wrought by the skill of 
men into such forms of hriglitness. But in our present 
state they do not suit us. They are unmeet for sinners. 
They speak of pride, and they also minister to pride. 
They are for the kingdom, not for the desert. They are 
for the city of the glorified, not for the tent of the stranger. 
They will come in due time, and they will be briUiant 
enough to compensate for the shame of earth. But we 
cannot be trusted with them now.^ 

' We add the following extract from a work already quoted, wMcli 
1 dp t ill t t th hi pass g which we have gone :— 

Th wh ar t dm t the figurative language 

f S pt p zzl d t m ly t ccount for the vehicle of 

S t n fi t t mpt t — erfi t Let such writers and readers 
as f 1 di p d mus th m 1 w th answering the cavils of 
ti and th rs i fools this bject ; it shall be our pro- 

m t tt mpt pi d pt I investigation of it. We 

have already stated that it appears the situation of Adam in paradise 
corresponds with our situation now ; he lived by a commandment, 
as we do ; for "this is His commandment, that we should believe 
on the name of the cmly-begotten Son of God," who is the true tret 
/If I 1 1 m b er th t th IS th g mm 

thmg t -a y t h t daily p ed in th t rst t mpt t 

Ih rwise Pul wrgts-y Btif It by y an 

t! rp t b guded E thr ugh hi btilty y mi d 
1 Id be niipted f m th mpl city th t Chn t ( C 

3) A th rp t h t ist f gu 1 btilty d d £ 
hfrmw mdbyStn, h h t daily by tl 

t pt rrupt g th Uti h f tl g pel God h d ] 1 ed 

fi t p 1 p ndis setUii„ bef tl m lif f th tr f 
I f and d th i tl f k 1 dg Th p f 

tl d as dd d miply th Z" Mi t th t 

Stanbyth pt. i. dth md tftlblff 

th pi truth Gdhd thf thm Adhgrlllyp 

ddth t lythtthyl 11 1 A frm tngtht 

f 1 Id b t lb t th b ght t h n ' t j f t 



I ..Google 



Vcr. 8. 'And they ktardihs voice of iks Lord God {yskmiak-Elohan) 
walking (or who taas ■walking) in the garden in the cool (Heb. Ihe 
wind) of tie d^ : tatd Adam (Heb. the man) and iii isife kid them- 
selves from the presence {Heb. the face) of the Lord God amongst (Heb. 
in the ?nidst) the trees of the garden.' 

Scarce had the transgressors twisted their girdles, and 
thus completed the hasty covering which was to hide 
their shame from each other's eyes, when they heanl 
the voice of the Lord God, and trembled as they were 
thus reminded that there was another eye to hide from. 
It was not, indeed, a long-known, but still it was a 
well-known voice. They had heard it before, and they 
recognised it at once. ' It is the voice of Jehovah 1 He 
is coming,— whither shall we flee?' It was no mere 
sound ; no casual blast or rush of the meeting streams ; it 
was a living voice, — the voice of a being as true and per- 
sonal as themselves. To them God ivas a real being, — ■ 
a person ; and His voice a real voice, i 

attainments wotild infallibly ensue. So is it at this hour; tlie 
gospel sets the tree of life before us, as connected with present 
and future bliss ; tlie tempter sets this world, and assures us' that 
everything gratifying to man is to be found in it, while certain death 
is by no ineans the penalty. In every age and nation, Satan's temp- 
tation has had the same object — we had almost said, the same lan- 
guage. • Believing this father of liars, as we are all most prone to 
do, — persuading herself that every gratification would follow, — Eve ate 
and gave her husband, who partook in her transgression, and became 
subject to the same penalty. Their conduct under the impressions 
of guilt was the same as in all future ages : their eyes were opened ; 
they found themselves naked and exposed to shame and everlasting 
disgrace ; they therefore betoolt themselves to the only frail covering 
they could devise — fig-leaves.' — Morrison's Key to Ihe Pentaieuch. 
' ' We conclude that the Logos did not only appear in a visible 



jiGoogle 



134 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

Whether any form were seen we know not. There 
might be; for God did always, in after ages, as to Abraham, 
reveal Himself in a form. But this matters not. A 
distinct and intelligible voice addressed them; and they 
recognised it as the voice of Jehovah- El ohim,—' the Lord 
God.' They 'heard' it, and they knew it. They had 
'heard' it before, and they are now to hear it again, 
though in circumstances far different. 

When the Lord God thus uttered His voice, He was 
' walking in the garden,' for it seems not to be the voice 
that was moving or walking (is some thmk), but Jehovah 
Himself Elsewhere He is spoken of in the same way. 
When speatuig to Israel of Canaan, as their promised 
dwelling. He not only sa)S, I will stt my tabernacle 

manner, but conversed also with Adam and Ei e audibly and by an 
articulate voice,' — Fleming's CSni/o/dij' vol u p 249. The word 
' voice ' is used in several senses in Sciipture. Sometimes it denotes 
a distinct articulate sound (Deut. iv 12 36 v 22 Ezek. L 24, 25, 
28, K. 5) ; sometimes a comraaiidment (&e th ng proclaimed by the 
voice) (Ps. xcv. 7) ; sometimes thunder (the sound accompanying 
the voice) (Ej:. ix. 23, 28, 29 ; Job ixxvu S) H ^™s this voice 
that spoke to Cain (Gen. iv. 9), to Noah (Gen. vi 13), to Abraham 
(Gen. XV. i). It is said {Ex. xix 19) (hat Moses spake, and the 
Lord answered him by a voice.'' It was God s voice that shook Sinai 
and its wilderness that shook the posts of Che temple (Isa. vi. 4). 
It IS by this volte that the Assymn is to be beaten down ' (Isa. 
XXX. jl) It was this voice that Isaiah heard (vi. 4), and Ezekiel 
(1 a4 X S 9) and Daniel (x. 6) It wis this same voice that was 
heard at the baptism of Ch 1st (Matt ui 17) at H s transfiguration 
(Matt xvu S) It IS mterestmg to trace this voice' throughout 
Scripture so generally in conne tion with the cloud,' or 'glory' 
(2 Pet 1 17) It is son etunes teiniic as the th mder ; sometimes a 
' still small vo ce somehmes as the 10 se of a multitude ; ' some- 
times like m-tny waters — by all these figures setting forth 'the 
maje tic melod ou mi£.hty vo Le of God 



jiGoogle 



among you,' but ' I will walk among you ' (Lev. xxvi. i a). 
Or, when referring to their desert-sojonm, He gives, as 
a motive to entire purity in their habits, 'The Lord thy 
God walkeih in the midst of thy camp, therefore shall thy 
camp be holy' (Deut. xxiii. 14). As the reference here 
is obviously to God's presence, as manifested in the She- 
Idnah, or visible glory, so it might have been in Eden by 
some such visible form that the Lord revealed Himself 
and 'walked' in paradise. 

It was ' in the wind of the day ' that Jehovah was heard. 
Meaning thereby, either at the time that the breeze was 
blowing, or in the breeze ; or, more probably, both. It is 
generally in connection with the wind, or whirlwind, that 
Jehovah is said to appear (Ezek. i. 4). In 2 Sam. xxii. 11, 
we read, ' He was seen upon the wings of the -mind; ' in 
Ps. xviii. 10 we read, ' He did fly upon the wings of the 
wind;' in Ps. civ. 3 we read, 'Who walketh upon the 
wings of the wind.' In these passages we note the differ- 
ence of expression, yet the identity of the general idea, — 
He was seen upon the wind ; He did J^y upon the wind ; 
He did wa//i upon the wind; tvhich last is the very 
expression in the passage before us.' 

As soon as Jehovah appeared and His voice was heard, 

' Yet, as in our passage it is P and in others pjf, and as the former 
is the usual exptession for al, or at iie time of, we must take ' at the 
breeze of the day ' as the primary sense. (See Gen. xlix. 27 ; Josh. x. 
27,etc.) The Vulgate gives it, 'adaurampostmendieni;' theSeptrJ 
Sfiiiyiv, ue. the evening. Symmachiis renders it, Sii vniivctiii ki/ifft ; 
Theodotion, Ji t^ wnifut-ri n-pij xara-^i^v ris ifiifsLi. Jecome para- 
phrases it 'declinsjite sole.' {Works, vol. v. p. 269.) Calvin thinks 
that, after their sin, they slept all night, and that it was in the morn- 
ing tliat the voice awoke them. So also Diodatj. (See Morrison's 



I ..Google 



136 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

the transgressors fled. Terror took hold of thetn, atid 
shame covered them.' Fig-leaves might hide them from 
each other's eyes, but when God comes nigh they must 
try something more effectual. They Jlee. That is their 
first effort. Their object is to get as far from Him as 
possible. But they need something else. They flee to 
the thickets, that there the gloom may render them 
invisible. 

It was from the 'presence,' or 'face,' of God that they 
fled. It is evident that something was seen by them, 

Inlrodnctory Key to fke Scriptures on this passage.) The following 
passage from a writer formerly quoted may interest the reader : — 

' It is evident from Scripture Iliat Jehovah the Son, the only 
visible God, appeared to Adam so soon as he was created, and on 
many after occasions. Adam heard His voice, and held familiar 
conversation with Him, as a man does witli his friend. Then and 
ever afterwards, in all the ages previous to His incarnation, Jehovah 
seems to have made the sound or mshing of wind the visible symbol 
of His appearance. Thus He announced His approach to Job 
(xxxviii. I). So He appeared to Ezekiel (i. 4). This also was the 
sign by which David knew that Jehovah was gone out before him to 
smite the host of the Philistines (i Chion. Av. 15). And, as this 
bad always been the sign of the divine approach, the coming of the 
Holy Ghost upon the apostles was announced in Ihe sound of a rush- 
uig mighty wind {Acts ii. a). Hence God is said to wallt on the 
" wings of the wind." Now, as this was (he usual token whereby 
Adam knew the approach of his Maker, so soon as he heard the 
sound of wind issuing from a cloud, walking among the trees of Eden, 
he was apprized of the approach of the offended Jehovah ; and, 
alarmed by his fears, he ran to hide himself from the divine presence 
among the thickets of the garden.'— ii>-«V Works, vol. iiL p. 68. 

' Our readers will perhaps remember Spenser's line — 

Most tnie ! No ' amends of shame,' but through Him who tool; our 
shame upon Himself. 



I ..Google 



here and elsewhere called by this name. It was from this 
' face' of God that they turned away. Just as the wicked 
are said hereafter to be 'punished with everlasting de- 
struction from the presence of the Lord.' ^ This name 
seems to be given because the manifestation (whatever it 
might be) was that which, in God, corresponded to the 
face of man, — the part which reveals most of the man 
himself! It was a visible glory indicative of a personal 
presence,- — the presence of the second Person of the God- 
head, who, from eternity, was the brightness of Jehovah's 

1 s.-tl sfosusiu ToS sff.'iw. This, of coiiise, refers 1o the presence of 
Christ. But it was to this 'presence' that all former 'presences' 
pointed. AH these were but prefigurations of His glory,— the liright 
raiment which was to invest the person of the God-man in the fulness 
of time. It is to this 'presence,' or 'glory,' or 'Shektaah,' that 
reference is made in such passages as the following ; — Gen. iv, 14, i5, 
xviii. 32, xix. 13 J Ex. xxvii. 21, Mviii. la, 30; Lev. !. 3, 5, 11. 
It is to the second Person of the Godhead that ' presence,' or ' &:e,' 
refers. He is essentially and eternally the '-off-shining,' or radiance, 
of Jehovah's glory (.airaiyar^B tbi Si^ss), and the express im^e of 
His person {;);"^'"'V ''"s umrTBo-saij kutoS, the impression or stamp 
of His person). He is also the ' Word,' as being the utterance or 
expression of the mind of Godhead,- — the communication between the 
invisible and the visible. Thus Owen caJls Him 'the essential 
image of the Father,' and says, ' were He not the essmdal iniage of 
the Father in His own divine Person, He could not be the rtpresen- 
tathie image of God to US, as He is incarnate ' (on the Person of 
Christ). Thus the voice that spoke in Eden was 6ie voice of the 
Word ; and tlie presence that was seen was the presence of Him 
who is the radiance of Jeliovah's glory. 'The Logos,' says Flemuig, 
' according to the agreement of the sacred Trinity, was He that 
acted even to created intelligent beings as their immediate Head, in 
the name of God, essentially considered. The Logos, being infinite 
in regard of essence, could never be seen or known, even by the most 
glorious created spirits, had He not condescended to assume some 
created form, — such as that which the Jews called the Shekinah, or 



I ..Google 



138 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

glory and the express image of His person. This visible 
glory (like the Shekinah in the wilderness pursuing the 
rebels) seems to have advanced towards them ; and as it 
advanced they retreated, — the voice and the glory from 
which the voice issued combining to terrify them, for they 
were the voice and the glory of that God whom they had 
disobeyed. Their own refuge is the trees of the garden ; 
yet what shelter could they be from a glory so bright, or 
from a voice which makes the mountains to shake ? 
(Ps. xsix.) 

That voice ! It pierces the sinner's ear in a moment. 
It forces its way into the conscience. Nothing can with- 
stand it. It is specially to the conscience that it speaks, 
alarming, convincing, overpowering. When it speaks in 
the law, then the commandment comes (Rom. vii. 9) ; the 
sinner is smitten, he flees before it or falls under it. It 

the glory of God ; and it seems plain to me, Ihat Ihe Ixigos appeared 
thus in heaven to the aiigels. And I look upon it to be more than 
probable, that this assumed image was not barely light, or something 
like a luminous cloud, but was something likewise of a determined 
shape, appearing as a» animated being. And I believe, from what 
I can judge by laying things together, that it whs the esact repre- 
sentation of a man clothed with, a most glorious garment of wonderful 
light. And I roalte no question b t £h;s t m g th ry 

same with that wherein Christ appea w m gl ly pti g th C 

He has now a real aiiim»(ed body f h m flesh wh as b f H 
had an ethereal one only, or on f m h rt f mp t 
But, excepting this, I mate no q t b t th t tl f tuies ai d 
lineaments of the one body and th th Uy d m 

exactly, the same, than ever any p t was lik al A d 

when Christ was transfigured, I bel H pp ir d th ry m 

to Moses that lie appeared to be t 1 m f rra ly wl h 1 tl 
elders of Israel, as well as the a g Is th p f w Hun p 
Mount Sinai (Ex. xxiv. 1, ctc.y—C/ I gy 1 P 55 



I ..Google 



sweeps through him and lays him in the dust His mouth 
is stopped ; he is compelled to plead guilty. ' By the law 
is the knowledge of sin.' 

And then, that glory ! It terrifies the transgressor. He 
cannot bear it, even afar off. Its approach overwhelms 
him. Even the saints have trembled at it, — ^Job (xlii. 5), 
Isaiah (vi. 5), and Daniel (x. 7, 8), — how much more the 
sinner I The ' presence ' of Jehovah is light, and that he 
cannot bear, for he loves the darkness, Israel got a 
glimpse of it on Sinai, and trembled ; the ungodly shall 
see it in the day of wrath, and flee to the rocks for shelter. 

And then the insufficiency of human coverings. Till 
God came nigh, the fig-leaves seemed safe enough ; but 
He shows Himself, and then the covering is found 
' narrower than a man can wrap himself in it ' {Isa. 
xwiii. 20). He flees, and tries another covering (for 
leaves will not do; he must have the whole trees), still 
' making lies his refuge, and under falsehood hiding him- 
self (IsEL xxviii. 15). For whither can he flee firom- 
God's 'presence'? (Ps. cxxxix. 7.) Neither fig-leaves nor 
thickets will do. It is God that is the sinner's terror; and 
the nearer that He comes the greater is that terror.' No 
human coverings can avail. Darkness will not do. Dis- 
tance will not do. The wrappings of man's merits will 



■n the first verse of tlic Sad Psalm,—' God 
IS he has it, ' Deussletit,' — has a curious passage, in which 
he attempts to show the difference of the expressions, 'God stands,' 
' God walks,' ' God sits ; ' referring the first to His posture in refer- 
ence to man innocent ; the second to God's posture in reference to man 
guilty, as if He were moved out of His place to come to hira ; and the 
thud in reference to God's posture to men before the judgment- seat. 



jiGoogle 



140 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

not do. To be nakei before God is what he shrinks 
from ; and none of these can h\de his nakedness That 
which alone can remote his terror and his ahime is a 
shelter that is divine, — a covering that is mfinitt, — the 
righteousness of the Son ot God 

In the day of wrath this scene of Eden will be repeated, 
— man fleeing from the presence of God. In the absence 
of thickets he will betake himself to the rocks and hills 
(Hos. X. 8; Rev. vi. 15, 16). But what will these do? 
Can His eye not pierce these ? Can His hand not pluck 
them thence? For thus the Lord has spoken, 'Though 
they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them; 
though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them 
down; and though they hide themselves in the top of 
Carmel, I will search and take tliem out thence' (Amos 

Ver. 9, ' And Ihe Lord God (Heb. JeJsovah-Elohim') called unto 
Adam (Heb. the man), mid said imio Mm, Wksre art thou ! ' 

The voice which had been heard was no inarticulate 
noise such as tempest or thunder. It spoke explicitly 
and articulately. It addressed itself to Adam, — to 'the 
man.' The words are not ' He said to,' but ' He called to,' 
Adam. And there could be no mistake as to who was 
meant. He proceeds by making inquiry after him, that, 
step by step, He may make sin unveil itself, and draw 
confession from the sinner. He does not at once lay 
hold of the offender and extort a confession by terror. 
Neither does He proceed upon His omniscience and say, 
'Thou art the man,' His object is so to spealt to the 



I ..Google 



conscience that the man may confess, and be led without 
conipulsion to survey his own devious steps. ' Where art 
thou?' was the question. Simple, yef, like the Lord's words 
to the woman of Sychar {John iv.), effectual for bringing 
all to light. As if He would say, 'I expected to find 
thee at the appointed meeting-place, but I find thee not. 
How is it so? What has led thee away? Where art 
thou ? ' Thus He goes in quest of the sinner.' 



Ver. 10. 'And he said, I ktard Thyvoki in the gardai, and I -was 
afraid, because I was -nak^d ; and I hid myself.' 

The man replies immediately. God has met him face 
to face, and he cannot evade Him or decline an answer. 
He had heard the voice. He had known it at once. It 
was 'in the garden' that he heard it, and terror took hold 
of him. He admits that he had fled fi-om God, and that 
he was not where he ought to have been found. He 
excuses himself for fleeing because, being naked, he was 
afraid of the majesty of God ; and feeling that he was un- 
fit to stand before Him, he had hid himself.^ In so speak- 

' ' Graciously cdling him to return, who would otlierwise liave eter- 
nally lied from God.' — y. Wesley's Sermons, vol. ii. p. 25. 

^ Fleming supposes that man, before he sinned, had a sort of 
' luminous vestment,' whieh disappeared tlxe moment he sinned 
(Christology, book iii. chap. 3) ; and adds, 'Adam turning apostate, 
was no way fit that he should wear tlie livery of the Shekinah any 
longer, and therefore the luminous garment with which he and Eve 
were clothed is taken away, and they are left naked.' Mede has a 
somewhat similar idea, when he speaks of thdc ' nakedness ' as being 
on 'obscuration ol that glorious and celestial beauty which he had 
before his sin ; the difference whereof was so great, that he could not 
endure afterwards to behold himself any more, but sought for a cover- 
ing, even to hide himself from himself.' — Works (folio), p. 233. 



I ..Google 



142 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

ing, he seems to taie credit to himself for having fied, 
and rather suggests that the blame lay with God, who had 
made him naked. In this there is no confession of sin ; . 
there is fear and shame ; but that is all. Instead of 
'declaring his transgression,' he first attempts to hide it 
by hiding himself; and when that is vain, he shifts the 
blame from himself to God. It seems to be to this that 
Job refers, when he says, ' If I covered my transgression 
as Adam, \iy hiding mine iniquity in my bosom' (Job 
xxxi. 33). Covering sin in any such way avails not. 
There is but one covering which is effectual,— the cover- 
ing of the blood. It is by blood alone that sin can be 
'covered.' Man, however, knew not this. He thought 
he could cover it himself. He had yet to learn that the 
only thing that can cover sin is that which can absorb it 
and make it to be as though it had never been. God had 
yet to unfold His own method, and to teach man the 
efficacy of the blood as a covering ; so that when he came 
to understand this he would feel that, in order to cover 
sin, it is not necessary to flee from God or to resort to 
thickets, but that, receiving God's testimony to the covering 
efficacy of the blood, he may meet God face to face with- 
out shame or fear, reversing the words of his first father, 
and saying, 'I heard Thy voice, and was not afraid, for I 
had found a covering; and, instead of hiding myself, I 
returned to Thee.' 

Ver. II. ^And He said. Who told thee (or declared to tkii) that 
tkou wast {oT art) izaked ? Hast thou eaten of the tree, -wJtereqf 1 co/n- 
maiided thee thai thou shouldest not eat ? ' 

God pursues the inquiry. His object is to make man 



I ..Google 



GENESIS I 



143 



convict himself. He has touch d h n n al eady 
and He now sends the arrow d 1 Th p k f 

bemg 'naked' How is this? Th dd n f 1 1 
at first. Hitherto thy naked lb n b 

between thee and me. Who, h h f, d 1 

thought that it is so? Who 1 1 m 1 1 

afraid or ashamed to come? Wh h^s 1 g 1 

knowledge, by means of whicl h tl j If f m 

drawing near to me, and pall h mx\ n fl 

from me? Man is silent, H w d N 

one has told him. The though 1 d p f 1 m 

A strange but irresistible feeling has taken possession of 
him, — 'I am naked; I cannot look upon God; God 
cannot look upon me.' Without noticing man's silence, 
God proceeds with His inquiry. ' Hast thou eaten of the 
tree which I prohibited?' This is the only thing that 
could have done it. Is it possible that thou hast already 
transgressed ? Thus, by question after question, he leads 
man to the acknowledgment of his sin, making him feel 
that his sin is already known, that the true cause of his 
fear is no secret, and ' that all things are naked and open 
unto the eyes of Him with whom he has to do.' 



Ver. 12. ' And the man said, The woman iiilioin tluiu gavesl to ie 
■aiith me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. ' 

He feels that God has had His eye upon him, and 
that what He says is true. It is the tree that has given 
him this knowledge of 'evil.' Had he waited God's 
time, the eating of it would have given him the know- 
ledge of only good ; but he has refused to wait ; he has 



I ..Google 



144 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

disobejed God, he has made haste to he wise, ind 
it has opened his eyes only to the ril Still, however 
he will take no hlime to himself for doing, what he has 
done He makes no direct ind honest answer to God 
m freely confessing that he had eaten, jct he cinnct 
deny the deed, and therefore, m the ver) act of id 
initting (not confessing), he casts the blame upon the 
noman, — nay, upon God, for giving him such a tempter^ 
Here let us mark such truths as these 

1 The difference beHveen admitting sin and confessing 
it Adam admits it, — slowly and sullenly, — but he does 
not confess it He is conhonted with a Being in whose 
iresence it would be \ain to deny what he hid done, 
but he will go no further th'ui he can help He will 
ticitly concede when concession is extorted from him, 
but he will make no frank acknowledgment It is so 
with the smner still He does precisely what Adam 
did, no mere, till the Holy Spmt liys His hand upon 
his conscience and touches all the springs of his bemg 
Up till that lime he may utter extorted and reluctant 
concessions, but he will not confess sm He will not de'il 
frankly with God He is sullen, and admits that he is 
a sinner because otliers do it,— because it would be 

* Jerome ha= an ingen ous comment on Lam ui 6$ ' Give them 
soiruw of heiit is our traiislaUoii, the margm giiing 'obstinacy 
and Jerome tianskting it 'scutum cordis, as the test had given 
u^ifas^ ff^ov He lepresents Adam as holdmg up this shield wh n 
Ijod came u gh, flmging bick the blame not only upon the woman, 
but upon God : ' Ut quasi reatum suum obhqce in auctorem re- 
dideret.' Eve also holds up the shield ; ' Hoc scutum etiam requisita 
mulier tenuit. ■ . . ut ipsa quoque rcatum suum oblique iu creatorera 
duceret.' — Wcrlis, vol iv. p. 323, 



jiGoogle 



GSN^ESIS II 



I4S 



thought pride in hJm not to do it, — because he cannot 
help it, — because he is conscious there is something 
wrong ; but stiD there is no open-hearted confession. If 
there is not actually the 'keeping silence' (Ps. xxxii. 3}, 
or the 'covering of sin' (Prov. xxviii. 13), there is no- 
thing of the ready spirit : ' I acknowledged my sin unto 
Thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will 
confess my transgressions to the Lord.; and Thou for- 
gavest the iniquity of my sin' (Ps. xxxii. g ; Prov. xxviii. 
13 ; Luke xv. 18-21 ; i John i. g). 

2. The artfulness of an unhumbled sinner. Even 
while admitting sin, he shakes himself free from blame ; 
nay, he thrusts forward the name of another, even before 
the admission comes forth, as if to neutralize it before 
it is made. How artful I yet how common still ! Men 
do not only give a mere reluctant admission, — they do 
not merely in so doing try to shift the blame from them- 
selves, but they attempt, by introducing the name of 
another, before the admission is made, to give the impres- 
sion most cunningly that this other is the really guilty 
person. Thus, by mentioning another first, they hope 
to draw away all the attention from themselves to him, 
so that, before their own guilt has been conceded, at- 
tention has been directed to him as the guilty one ; and 
thus not only is there a bare admission of guilt instead 
of an honest confession, but there is a most cunning 
endeavour to undo that very admission by the peculiar 
way in which it is made. It is difficult to say whether 
such a method be more cunning or cowardly. It is 
certainly the procedure of a man who is, on the one 



I ..Google 



146 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

hand, afraid to confess ; and, on the other hand, afraid 
not to confess, and who compromises these two op- 
posite fears by a most artful declaration, which shows 
how sorely he shrinks from the consequences of his 
own poor admission. Ah! where do we find honest, 
unreserved acknowledgment of sin? Nowhere, save in 
connection with pardon. Up till the moment that we 
learn the 'forgiveness that there is with God,' there will 
always be reserve,— a cowardly reluctance to confess, 
an unmanly shifting of tlie guilt from off ourselves, a 
desire to palliate our sins, or lessen their number. There 
will always be 'guile,' for there will always be a motive 
to hide our sins; but when the free pardon comes, it 
takes away all reserve, it renders us 'guileless.' We 
confess freely, for the reasons for restraint are done 
away. And in coming to receive the pardon we put 
forward the name of our Surety first, before even men- 
tioning OUT sins, that, like Adam, though not with his 
guile, we may call attention to Him on whom we cast 
our guilt : ' For Thy name's sake, O Lord, pardon 
mine iniquity, for it is great' (Ps. xxv. 11). 

3. The self justifying pride of the sinner.^ He admits 
as much of his guilt as cannot be denied, and then 
talces credit to himself for what he has done. He is 
resolved to take no more blame than he can help. Even 
in the blame tliat he takes, he finds not only an exttnua- 

' The contrast between [Iiis and David's feeling in Ps. li. 4. is very 
striltirg. Adam's object was to justify ^sb«^^,' David's was to justify 
God ' Tliat Thou miglitest be justified wlien Tliou speatest, and be 
clear when Tliou judgest,' 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS n 



tion, but a virtue, a merit ; for he fled, because it was 
not seemly for him to stand before God nalced ! Nay, 
even m so much of the blame as he takes, he must 
divide it with another, thus, leivmg on himself but little 
^uilt and some considerable degree of merit. Had it 
not bt.en for another, he would not have had to admit 
even the small mcisure of blame that he does ! There 
lb pride here, but no godly sorrow ; nothing of the 
'broken spint,' nay, not even de pair His selfright 
eousneas elites hun, buojs him up and makes him think 
his case not so bad as to be hopeless Till the smner 
';ees the cross it will be alw i}s bo Law will not himblc 
hmi The \oice of God will not humble though it 
may ahrm him He must see the utter condemnation 
of himself in the cross, and at the same time Gods 
provision for meeting hia case and re noting the con 
demnition, ere he will throw iw ly his confidences It 
)s only the knowledge of the Dnine nj,hteousness that 
can remote either lus pnde cr h s shame, just as it is 
only the knowledge of the 'peifect love' that can cast 
out fear 

4 The hardened SLlfishntss of the sinner. He ac- 
cuses others to screen himself He does not hesitate 
to inculpate the dearest, he spares not the wife of his 
bosom Rather than bear the blame, he will fling it 
anyivhere, whoever ma\ sufler And all this in a 
moment i How mstintaneous are the results of sin ! 
Already it has rooted out affection, and broken the 
.nearest tie, and made man a being of dark selfishness. 
He has ceased to ' love his neighbour as himself.' Self 



I ..Google 



I4S THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

has now risen uppermost within him. He is steeled 
against his dearest of kin. He does not hesitate to 
expose them to the wrath of God; he cares not what 
their doom may be, provided he escape ! ' Hateful, and 
hating one another,' is the inscription on the forehead 
of our fallen race. It is this that we here read upon 
the brow of Adam. 

5. The sinner's blasphemy and ingratitude to God. 
'The woman whom Thou gavest me,' said Adam. God's 
love in giving him a help meet is overlooked, and the 
gift itself is mocked at. God's earnest pains in pro- 
viding for him a companion so suitable are forgotten, 
nay, turned into an occasion for casting the blame of 
his fall upon Him, Had it not been for Thee, I should 
not have sinned ;^she whom Thou gavest me has become 
my seducer. Thou didst it, in giving me such a com- 
panion. Thus it is that Israel taunted God with being 
the author of their sins and woes (Ezek. xxxiii. 10) : 'If 
our transgressions be upon us, and we pine away in 
them, how should we then live ? ' That is, ' If we die, 
we must just die ; we cannot help it ; and God is only 
mocking us with broken promises, speaking to us of life, 
yet sending only death.' And, in reference to tliis it was 
that God cleared Himself upon oath, refusing to lie under 
the imputation, or to take the blame of man's death : 
'As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in 
the death of the wicked.' Thus it is that scoffers in 
these last days Pervert the gifts of God into an excuse 
for sinning, or into reasons for believing that there is no 
such thing as sin at ail. When we speak of their sin 



I ..Google 



GENESIS III. 12. 149 

in following their lusts, they ask, 'What sin can there 
be in the indulgence of those desires that God has 
given? or if there be sin in these things, who is to blame 
but He who gave them?' 

6. The sinner's attempt to smooth over his deed. 'The 
woman gave me the fruit, and I ate of it; that was all. 
Giving, receiving, and eating a little fruit ; that was all I 
What more simple, natural, innocent? How could I 
do otherwise?' Thus he glosses over the sin. He 
speaks smooth things to himself regarding it, and would 
fain make God think as little of it as he does himself. 
And so men still trifle with sin. What harm is there in 
it? What harm is there in the song, the dance, the 
laugh, tlie gaiety, the glitter ? Are not these amusements 
harmless ? Ah ! it was thus that the first sinner tried 
to reason with his God. But did he succeed ? Did 
God accept his plea of harmlessness ? Did He turn away 
His wrath, or dilute the curse, or justify the transgressor? 
So long as man persists in smoothing down his sin, and 
trying to make God think as lightly of it as he does 
himself, he must fail in finding favour. It is not till he 
acquiesces in God's verdict, and, accepting condemna- 
tion as his due, takes tlie sinner's place before God, that 
he can hope at all. For all hope to a sinner begins in 
the acknowledgment of his hopelessness, and in con- 
senting to talce his hope, not from the idea that wrath 
is'nothis due, but from the knowledge of that wondrous 
grace that has stretched its blessed circle far beyond the 
uttermost limits of human sin. 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



Ver. 13. 'Aitd tke Lord God said unto the woman. What is this 
that thou hast done ? And the ■woman said. The serpent beguiled''- ml, 
and I did eat. ' 

The trial proceeds, and the investigation is carried 
on with all judicial calmness, Adam's sullen answer 
a-vvakes no- wrath, and calls forth no remark. The Lord 
God now passes on to the woman. She had been ac- 
cused by the man, and He turns to her to see how the 
man's accusation stands. He takes him at his word, 
and proceeds with the inquiry: 'What is this that thou 
hast done?' Is it really true that thou hast done this 
thing with which thy husband charges thee? 

In Eve we mark the same self-justifying spirit. She 
does not, indeed, retaliate upon tlie man, and say, ' How 
am I to blame for Ais sin, seeing he need not have eaten 
unless he had pleased ?' She admits that she had done 
the deed, though, like her husband, she does so most 
sullenly, and not by a direct or frank confession. She 
does not deny the deed, but she will not take the blame. 

' It is the same word as is used in Ps. Iv. 15 ; 'Let death seize 
npon them ; ' literally, 'Let death beguile them ; ' that is, stealthily 
and craftily lay hold of them, as did he who has the power of death, 
of oar first parents. Robertson {Clams, p. 44) refers also to Ps. 
hixxix. 23, ' The enemy shall not seduce liim, ' as he did Eye. In 
2 Cor. xi. 3 we read, ' As the serpent beguiled Eve through his 
fiubtilty,' i|i)ir.iTariv b t^ ^mu^j-,'* ; and in 1 Tim. ii, 14, 'Adam was 
not deceived {ivtriS'i) ; but tlie woman, being deceived {iva-TiiStiira), 
■was in the transgression.' In Eph. vi. n, the apostle speaks of 
'the wiles (rir f^iMslaf) of the devil.' Of the Lord Jesus (the 
woman's seed, and therefore the opposite of the serpent's seed) it is 
said, 'Neither was guile (SiJ-at) found in His mouth ' (l Pet. ii. 22) ; 
and of His seed it is written that they were like Him : ' In their 
mouth was found no guile' {Hxm} (Rev. xiv. 5). 



I ..Google 



It was the Serpent that beguiled her ! How could she 
help it? As if she would thus indirectly cast back the 
blame on God. 'It was Thine own creature, the Serpent; 
he is the real cause ; blame kim, not me; why was he 
allowed to beguile me?' 

Thus it is that the sinner refuses to accept the guilt, 
even when he admits the deed. He dares not say, I 
did not do the deed ; but he does not hesitate to affirm, 
' I was not to blame in doing it.' ^ He affirms, either 
' the sin was not a very great one,' or, ' there were many 
excuses for me;' and the greatest of all is this, that 'it 
was a creature of food's own making that seduced me.' 
See how fatally sini works. It makes him a liar, — a liar 
to his own conscience, to his fellows, to his God. It 
makes htm a coward. It makes him an accuser of others. 
It makes him a blasphemer of God Himself To own 
himself totally a sinner, — made o no by God no by 
any fellow-creature, nor by ed o o by c n 
stances, but solely by himse — ha h o oop 

to. Yet on any other terms Cod en o d n 

.As a confessed sinner, he y a anj nom o o 

God, assured of finding favo an! p on on ny 

other footing, approach to God be w y n a 



will te 



process of inquiry h 
;r flies from God, u f 
■ do aught tint driv 



ivill e- 



h be 



n&od N 



1 h n 



repentance, Nothini; but grace can do this. Besides, terror only 
appeals to the coarser feelings of our nature ; grace touches the finer 
chords. Terror contracts the spirit, grace enlarges it. Terror drives 
man into the thicket, only grace can draw him out. 



jiGoogle 



152 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

Half-confessions will not do ; concealments will not do ; 
extenuations will not do ; there must be the full acknow- 
ledgment of entire guilt, othermse God can have no 
dealings with liim at all 

And here again, let us maik the forbearance of our 
God. Even before grace is directly announced to man, 
we can observe the dawnings of it in the way in which 
God approaches man, and in the difference between His 
dealings with man and His dealings with the serpent. 
How slow to anger ! How loth to find the woman guilty ! 
How anxious to hear all that she has to say for herself 
before pronouncing sentence 1 How condescending, too, 
in all this; for He Comes Himself in person to make the 
inquiry, not trusting it to another; and comes most 
graciously to seek after man, when man. was fleeing from 
Him; not hastily putting a liarsh consti'uction upon his 
flight, but waiting to hear his excuse and defence ; not 
threatening nor upbraiding, but, in tlie words of calm 
and friendly inquiry, asking, 'What is this that thou hast 
done ? ' 

Such is the God with whom we have to do, — ' the God 
of all grace ; ' not hating, but loving ; not cursing, but 
blessing; not hasty, but slow to anger; not upbraiding, 
but dealuig tenderly; not condemning, but pardoning. 
How manifestly is this the same God who so loved the 
world as to give His only-begotten Son ! How perfect 
the harmony oi character in this God, from these first 
words, spoken to fallen man, to the last which His book 
contains !" How blessed to learn that this God, who 
sought out Adam when he fied from Him, is seeking the 



I ..Google 



sinner still, unprovoked by his wanderings and resistances 
and self-excuses ; waiting, with rnidiroinished patience and 
forbearing love, to receive, and to love, and to bless ! 



Vers. 14,15. ' And Ihe Lord God (liHi. yehovah-Elohim) said utitB 
the serpent. Because thmi hast done this, ihou ari cursed aiove all cattle, 
and above every beast of the field : upon thy beSy shall thou go, and 
dnst shall thou eat all the days of thy life, l%.' And I ■will put enmity 
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed : it shall 
Imise thy head, and thou shall bruise his hed ' 

Though both of these two verses refei, m a measure, 
to Sitin himself, jet they do embrace separate subjects, 
the fuimer pointing more e'^pecnlly to the curse upon the 

I teral seipcnt, the htter predicting the curse upon the 
great Tempter^ They seem but one prophecj, ^nd yet 
ihey take m two objects, the near and the distant, the 
hteral and the figurative Commencing, like all double 
piophecies, with the neir and the literal, the) end m the 
distant and the figurative As m the 72d Psalm, the 
singer begms with the actual Solomon and ends with the 
gieater Solomon, and as in several burdens the prophet 
Isaiah begins with the Bibjlon then in being upon the 
pkin of bhinar, and ends with Bibjlon the great, upon 
the seven hills , so is it here He begins with the ser 
pent. He ends with Satan The figure used is taken from 

' See L si er s Si.d} uf Dwinttv, cimp h , wheie, after giving an 
exposition siuilar to the above, he says, 'If God did punish a poor 

II orm, wh ch hid no reason nor will to choose or refuse sin, how 
much less will He spare ns, which have both 1 ' ' As an argument of 
the deteslableness of the sin, and a constant memorial of it, the abused 
beast is curaed. Cpmpare Ex. xxi. z8, xsiii. 20 ; Lev. xx. 15 ; Gen. 
ix. 5.' — Eishop Kidder Ob the Pent. vol. i.p. 15. 



I ..Google 



154 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

the serpent; but the prophetic picture thus given con- 
cerns a far greater personage. For it is evident that one 
main object gained by eniploying such a figure in such 
a way as is done here, is to bring before us 'Cos. personality 
of that being who is here introduced to us. The words, 
no doubt, axQ figures, but they are figures of what is literal, 
—precise and personal. They are not figures of abstrac- 
tions or principles or truths, but of a person. They do 
not set forth God's condemnation of error or of evil, but 
His judgment upon ^person. They do not denote the 
mere conflict between evil and good, with the triumph 
of the latter after a brief depression, but they foretell the 
battle between two persons. The nature of the combat 
is not declared, but the personality and literality of tlie 
combatants is vividly, and beyond mistake, set forth.^ 

This much is plain. Let us now look at the words 
themselves. 

God had, in His dealing with our first parents, pro- 
ceeded in the way of judicial inquiry, step by step. He 
had taken nothing for granted, but had calmly questioned 
them, allowing them full opportunity of defending them- 
selves ; loth to 1 ondemn, nay, giving out His accusations 

' German rationalists denying the personality of Satan, make this 
a conflict between the good and evil principles in man I See Dr. 
S. F. N. Monis' Cammenf Exeg. Hist. vol. L pp. 417-419. The 
literary scoffers of the age. who set aside the truths of Scripture as 
overdated and obsolete, — unsuited to an era of intellectual progress, 
—mock at the personahty of the Evil One, talk of 'estinct Satans,' 
and treat the ancient belief in the devil's true being as a.n old fable. 
If the Bible testimony to a God and a Christ be plain, eq^ually plain 
is that testimony to the being and personality of Satan. ' No God ' 
and ' no ddvil generally go together, 



jiGoogle 



simpU ^s questions no more' But i\licn He comes to 
deal Mith the serpent and with Satan we find nothing of 
this They were dealt with as aheady condemned, and 
onl) woitinE; their sentence Suth is His grace to man, 
and such the intimation of His purpose to deal with him 
in grace, not in judgment Wondrous contrast between 
the two races of creatures and His purposes concerning 
them I With the one all is grace with the other all is 
righteousne'is and wrath' E^en in the lower creation 
this difference is shown That animal that had sided 
with Satan, and become his instrument m ruining man, 
IS ruised with Satan s curse, and for Satans sin- while 
the other animals are cursed with a less beavj and less 
abiding curse, and thit for mans sin ' As li God would 
thus Irom the beginning proclaim the pre emment guilt 

ia nee ejus ptenitentia qurere- 

He yonclisafes not to ask him 

should say for himsdf ; imt 

th ds to judgment against him.' 

M 

lu wi IS a subject of great difficulty. 

rpe m unt oi Satan's sin, not man's 

H nrs cu not only heavier in itself, but 

millennial days, when blessing 

th V. 25). Dust shall slill be the 

m D m r£B integrEe ac bene constitute 



ul m rp pa tumm sse.' — Calvin. We think it 

ma th animal creation at large weis 

rse No doubt they were involved 

in the former, but still was it not for their participation in the latter, 
through their representative the serpent, the wisest of them all, that 
they have fallen under the cnrse ? Is not this implied in the words, 
'Thou art cursed above ail cattle'? etc. The ground is said to be 



I ..Google 



I5S THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

of every ally of the Evil One ; and the swift doom of all 
that, in the day of doom, shall be found upon his side. 
The serpent was but the involuntary agent, yet he was 
cursed; how much more they who have 'yielded their 
members instruments of unrighteousness unto sin ' (Rom. 
vi, 13),^ nay, ' run greedily ' in. the way of the Evil One I 

Though the serpent was but the instrument, yet he is 
cursed.^ And the words, 'above all cattle,' imply that 
the rest of the ai imal aeation were made to share the 
curse which lad Lome doi^n upon, it is Sat-ms special 
agent in the plot agamst man And why this unnersal 
curse? 

1. To show ihe sptexdm^ mid conlaminating nature of 
sin.— One sm is enough to spiead over -i world. There 
is something in the ^ cry nature of sin tl it infects and 
defiles. It is not hke a stone dropped m a wilderness, 

cursed for man s sal e as it was by eatmg its fruit that he fell ; bat 
the animals seem cur ed on Satan s ccou it as they were connected 
willi his temp tat on Yet 1 the e d they 1 e seiaratel fto n him 
and his doom, and made to share the grace in store for man, their 
head and king. 

' The word ' yield ' poorly expresses tlie Greek trxflimifci, which 
forcibly implies the willing, nay eager, preseiilaiion of our members to 
be the instiuments of sin. 

' ' Shrank from its erect and probably lofty stature ; deprived of its 
limbs ; reduced to grovel on the earth and seek its food in the dust ; 
■ mute henceforth, and abject; the baneful serpent sunk beneath this 
awful curse, mid glided away to hide itself out of sight ; and from that 
day the miserable reptile has ever slunk from the eye of man, ' — Head's 
World and Us Creator, p. 124. In these figures of the hamU'mtioit 
of the serpent, we read the -utter kumUlatkn of the tempter himself. 
Tlie ^ojiare and the,;^wrfof the serpent most aptly set forth the present 
degmdation ot the Evil One, just as the remaining words denote his 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS III. 14, 15. 157 

upon the sand, there to lie motionless and powerless. 
It is like that same stone cast into a vast waveless lake, 
which raises ripple upon ripple, and sends its disturbing 
influence abroad, in circle after circle, for miles on every 
side, till the whole lake is in motion. We do not under- 
stand the activities and energies of sin. We are slow to 
credit them. Still less do we understand or believe the 
strange connection between one sinning creature and 
another; so that it seems unrighteous to us that one 
should involve another in evil. Vet it is evident that 
there is such a thing as a union, not only of nature, but. 
of responsibility. I do not profess to explain this. But 
God proceeds upon it as a law of bei/ig. The passage 
before us takes it for granted ; nay, the whole Bible 
assumes it. It is not some casual or some arbitrary pro- 
ceeding. It is the law, the lighteoui law of creaturehood, 
which unfolding itself first m the curse, has consummated 
its development in the blessing, when ' He was made sin 
for us, who knew no sin, tliat we might be made the 
rigliteousness of God in Him.' ' 

' We cnnnot in this place discuss the doctrine of the imputation of 
sill or righteousness. This much we may say, that uot only docs tlie 
Bible assume them, but tbey are evidently wrapt up in the history of 
man. Why is disease transmitted? Why does woman suffer in child- 
birth? Why do infants die ? Because sin has been imputed. There 
has been previous guilt Eomewhere. Many admit the transmission of 
evil, but deny the transference of guilt. Now we may ask, could 
there be the transmissioa of evil, if there were not a transmission 
of guilt? Would the one be a righteous tiling without the other? 
However difficult it may be to demonstrate die justice of making 
guilt transmissible, yet it is much more difficult to prove the 
justice of transmitting suffering, if the transmission of guilt be un- 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



2. To show how all the manifold parts of creation hang 
together and defend upon each other. — One being displaced, 
all are ruined. There is a unity in creation which we 
have not yet learned to understand, — a unity of the 
closest kind, yet quite compatible with individual re- 
sponsibility and separate action. The arch is not more 
dependent on the keystone than are the different parts 
, of creaturehood dependent on each other for stability and 
perfection. It is as if the unity of the Godhead had its 
counterpart in the unity of creation. And, strange to 
say, it is the fall that has so fiilly discovered this oneness, 
and made us acquainted with its manifold relations. 

.3. To be a monument of the evil of sin} Sin needs 
something visible, something palpable, to make known 

righteous. That law of being whicii transmits suffering or death can 
only be just upon the supposition of a previous law of being, trans- 
mitting guilt Hence it is not the compensation afforded us in Christ's 

ght us th t mak th mp t t f Ad sin an equitable 
thing Bttisthgt gllwf t hood, as to the 
t ansmis f m al d 1 gil li b 1 ti th t m kes both of these 

ti tly and t ul} ght 

Bee us tl 11 y d sag ty f th rpent had been the 

occos fm nfi. ii,bybngni3th lying counterfeit of 

th d 1 11^ S '""^ "•^ m, d th k whereby he so 

d h 1 tl t tl m t k h m t to be as he was 

md dthf Gd Hwdmth ught g od to change the 
py dh frthtll ddf tht h ppy physiognomical 

letter, and, by abasing the serpent Jor the time to u>nie, to make him 
an everlasting emblem and monument wherdn man might hietoglyphi- 
cally read the malice, vileness, and execrable baseness of that wicked 
spirit that had beguiled him ; to hate him (as now we do the serpent) 
with mortal hatred, and by his unlucky iortune to expect the devil's 
deadly destiny. In a word, that which was once used for a mask to 
cover the devil's knavery, should lor the future be a glass wherein to 
behold his vjlJany,' — Mede, p. 229, 



I ..Google 



both its existence and its 'exceeding sinfulness.' It 
must exhibit itself to our senses. It must stand forth to 
view, branded with the stroke of God's judgment, as the 
abominable thing which He hates. Thus He has strewn 
the memorials of sin all over the earth. He has aiBxed 
them to things aoimate and inanimate, that we may see 
and hear and feel the vileness and the bitterness of the 
accursed thing. Before God can proceed to unfold His 
purpose of pardon, He must rear upon the soil of earth 
an enduring monument of sin, that thereafter there may 
be no mistake on the part of man ; that it may never be 
supposed that in being gracious to the sinner He was 
trifling with the sin. 

Wliile the serpent is thus cursed above all the rest of 
creation, he is made to understand the reason why he 
is so dealt with. ' Because thou hast done this.' God 
talces care that there shall be no mistake. The curse 
is no accidental and no arbitrary evil ; it is traceable to 
one distinct cause, The serpent has beguiled man, and 
therefore judgment lights upon it. ' The curse causeless 
sjiall not come.' ' Because thou hast done this,' is God's 
preface to His sentence on the serpent. It is His pre- 
face to the judgment pronounced upon the sinner. ' Be- 
cause thou hast done this,' are the awful words with which 
he will be sent into the everlasting fire. 

Such is the visible curse on the serpent. Let us now 
mark {ver. 15) the invisible cm'se on Satan, There was 
to be, from that moment, war between Satan and the 
woman, enmity between his seed gnd her seed. Nay, 
there was to be warfare, — open warfare. This warfare 



I ..Google 



l6o THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

would consist of two great parts, or stages. In the first, 
the woman's seed would be wounded; in the second, 
the serpent would be destroyed. The length of his 
warfare is not stated, or how near its two great parts 
might be to each other, They might be near, or they 
might be far off, we are not told, for it was not needful 
that we should learn tliis at first. Simply the two things 
are presented to us, but the question of time is kept 
out of view, that, from the very first, there might be not 
merely a looking for the arrival of the woman's seed, 
but Edso a waiching for Him. We get here but the far-off 
glimpse ot a great mountam range Its lofly peaks seem 
all clustered together, ^g if there weie not a step between 
yet, when we reach them, as now m their last da}s we 
have done, we find thi.m separated from each other bj 
valleys, and pla ns, and precipices of va';t extent and 
height We could not gather from the brief nords of 
this verse whether the bittle was to be the conflitt of 
a day or of ten thousand years Aftei ages were to 
unroll the detail to reveal to us tlie sullermg and the 
triumph, the shime ind the |,lorj So closely are the 
first and second Lomm^s of the Lord heie brought to 
gether, that we should ha\e supposed that there was no 
interval between them 

But though the times and seasons were not gi\en, and 
therefore much was hidden from man, jet enough w-is 
told to let him know that God had taken his part agamst 
his enemy , that Divme love had interposed and pledged 
itself to the final discomfiture of Satan, and the final 
blessedness of the victim which he had counted on as 



I ..Google 



GENESIS II 



I. IS- 



i5i 



his ov,a Hue sounds the first note of £,ladne'is in the 
eir of mm It so mds m maQy respects indistinctly ind 
morticuhtel} but m th s respect at least is it most 
d stinct and articulate, that it announces the free love 
of God, ind th^t free loie not simply as di^rlajed m 
the sending of a deh^crer but as making for itself a 
righteous ajpioach to man thro igh the suiter ngs of that 
deliverer H mself I^Ott the gieat thouj,ht of Gods 
heait the idea oi grace bcj,in to be unfolded, not only 
to man, but to the univeise Bit ohl what a mght) 
apparatus requires to be constr cttd ere th^t one dca 
ran be made plun, and man trusted with it Whit -m. 
arparatus m st be raised (and that graduallj aj,e after 
age) for cany ng out as ^^ ell as for exhib ting the whole 
aljustment of nj^hteousi ess andgrace holmess md grace 
nrith and grace ]_unshmtiit and giace ere the snner 
can be made to comprehend the new, the strange idea, 
or to distinguish it from mere indifference to sin, or 'be 
trusted with the application of it to himself! This was 
the first step to the unfolding of ' the mystery which was 
hid in God, who created ali things by Jesus Christ; that 
now uato the principalities and powers in heavenly places 
might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom 
of God, according to the eternal purpose which He 
■ purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord' (Eph. iii. 9-ir). 
And it is in reference to this that the epistle thus 
concludes : ' Unto Him be glory m the Church, 
throughout all ages, world without end. Amen' (Eph. 
iii, 21), And at the consummation of the glorious 
mystery shall this song be sung : ' Oh the depth of tlie 



I ..Google 



iSa THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!' 
(Rom. xi. 33.) 

Having briefly sketched the meaning of these two 
verseSj let us now look at them more in detail They 
are too important to be slightly passed over. They 
contain the root of all redemption-truth. 

1. Let us mark how God proceeds in His inquiries after 
sin. — He first traces it out step by step, tracks it in all 
its windings, ere He utters one word of judgment His 
dealings hitherto had been with Adam, as tlie head of 
creation. Therefore He speaks first to him. Then from 
Adam sin is traced to the woman, then from the woman 
to the serpent. By this process, it was brought solemnly 
before the conscience of the transgressors, that they might 
see what they had done. In this process God takes no 
of the sinner. He does not make use of 
: omnipotence to convict or overaive 
the sinner, or to extort confession from him. He proves 
all by the sinner's own admission, that his mouth may 
be stopped, and that the Judge may be acknowledged 
as righteous in all He does ; that He may not only be 
the just God, but that He may be seen to be so by His 
creatures (see Job xxxiv. 23 ; Ps. li. 4 ; Rom. iii. 4). 
And as is the process of inquiry, so is the judgment. 
The sentence is judicially announced, not in anger, but 
in righteousness. Having traced the sin to its source, 
God begins with the serpent, the source of the evil, or 
rather with Satan and the serpent jointly, as tlie twofold 
source. He began with the transgressor in His inquiry. 
He begins with the tempter in His judgment; for the 



I ..Google 



GBJ^SSIS HI, 14, 15, 163 

first word of condemnation must be directed against the 
originator of sin, the first stroke of wrath must falJ on 
the prime mover of the deed. Thus, even in the minutest 
things, showing His truth and justice! Even in the 
order of judgment, how careful to mark His sense of the 
different kinds of criminality I Such is a specimen of 
the way in which He will judge the world in righteous- 

2. Let Its mark the drmmstances in which tkesenteme was 
given. — It was given in the hearing erf our parents. It 
was not specially directed to them. They were but 
hearers. Vet the scene was designed for them. This 
curse on the serpent was spoken in their ears, because 
it contained in it God's purpose of grace towards them. 
God's design was, that they should learn His gracious 
intentions without delay and thus their fears be quieted 
and their confidence m God restored but ^it 11 that they 
should leirn them m a way which shoild completely 
humble them and make them fed thit the grace did 
not arse from anythmg m themsehes They learn this 
grace of God m ■i sort of side way -is it God turned 
away His face ivhen mikng it known They get it 
in the form of a cuise against tl e serpei t for the evil 
done by him thereby leaiiug that the e\il done must 
all le undone b foie m-m c-m be blest This awful 
curie against the bei g that had lumed them intimated 
such things as these {i ) That God meant to save them, 
and not to gi\e thtm up to the snares of their enemy ; 
(2 ) That they could only be saved by thtir enemy being 
destroyed ; (3.) That this destruction would be attended 



I ..Google 



i64 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

with toil, and conflict, and wounds ; (4.) That it was 
easy to riiin a world, but hard to save and restore. 
How affecting the thought, that God could not preach 
the gospel directly to Adam, but that he must be left 
to gather it from the curse against the Evil One, — as if 
he could not be trusted with the full glad tidings of 
grace till he had learned the exceeding sinfulness of 
sin ! How different now with us ! God preaches that 
gospel directly to tlie sinner ia all its largeness; saying 
to each of us. There is grace enough for thee, come thou 
and be reconciled, come thou and be saved ! 

3, Let us mark how God hated that which Satan had 
done. — 'Because thou hast done this,' are the words of 
awful preface to the sentence. God had no pleasure in 
the snare or the ruin it had wrought. He had no satis- 
faction in the marring of His handiwork, no pleasure in 
the death of the sinner, no joy in the desolation of His 
world. His words are the expression of deep displeasure 
against him who had done the horrid deed, and at the 
deed which had been done. And let us not forget how 
much of that which Satan has since then been doomed 
to suffer, as well as of that which he shall hereafter suffer, 
has its origin here. ' Because thou hast done this I ' No 
doubt be was ruined and doomed before, for his own trans- 
gression; but now he is to be sunk to a lower level of con- 
demnation, and loaded witli a weightier curse, for being 
the tempter of man, the destroyer of a world. This is the 
brand upon his burning forehead; this is the millstone 
round his neck. God will have him understand how 
He abhorred that which he had done. And when here- 



I ..Google 



GENESIS m. 14, ig. 



16S 



tt h a d t d d h t p by tl t 

1 t! b3 h t h dm h 

h tlmtdmtldll^fdk B 

th 1 t d th ? H bj m f 

I 1 h d d t man t f Ed 1 11 

I th by wh h h h m If 1 11 b ca t h lly t 

f irtl t d th t 

4./ d the I G d b t t m — Tl 

dyn pfth trimwll td th mt 

b 1 d If m t b d t 11 t t b 

by tl If d f t b m d 

G d t b t tl ) t Tl m t b 

pi t d f tl 1 —an d wl h h 11 

t 1} p tf tl t 1 th t d It 

b t 1 I ! 11 t k t tl ry UT f t if 

Th G 1 h tr 1 f th f d t f th 

d 1 d d 1 ai I 

p tftf Idi tl Gdip 

i <n d ttrt as llttl bt 

fimt I 1 h m t b m t t t fi t p 

y wl h ly I rightly m t h t th 

G t f th t th 

t tl tl tt d t f th Th 

b t 1 t th 1 h d t ir| 

and utterly make away with the sm. Sm was the real 
enemy, and love to the sinner must proceed at once against 
this enemy, not resting till it is utterly destroyed. 

5. God shows that Satan shall not be allaiDsd to 
triumph. — He has gained a mighty advantage, but his 
victory is only temporary and partial God is seen 



I ..Google 



i66 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

interposing and setting His face against the adversary. 
God is taking the sinner's side; and this is the assur- 
ance that Satan's victory shall be reversed I His doom 
D g d m nm h n 
hh bn dnhh n n 
h n k n b h 



dddhmThStan nndh nn 
d n bdp hi dtry 

hkso d hS Gd 

ny dtrh hhdhpw 

dea h n d Adwn nh dy 

k hH HhdnHnh 

work. He has led captivity captive. 

6. God Himself undertakes man's cause. — 'I will put 
enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy 
seed and her seed.' It is not, 'there shall be enmity;' 
but 'I will put it.' God Himself will now proceed to 
work for man. The serpent's malice and success have 
but drawn forth the deeper love and more direct inter- 
position in man's behalf, 

7. God promises a seed to the ■woman.'^ — All that this 
' How Ikirelly was this fulfilled in the Son of Mary ! He was tlie 



jiGoogle 



i57 



implied she could not know at the time. But it is 
evidently declared, that she wm not to die immediately. 
The sentence, 'In the day thou eatest thou shalt die,' 
was to be suspended in so far as death temporal was 
concerned. She was to have a seed, and that said, 
Thou art not to die immediately.' This suspension 
was, of itself, an intimation of grace. The seed of the 
woman miglit be supposed to be three. First, there is 
the whole race of man. Secondly, there is the Church. 
Thirdly, there is the Messiah, To this last, more espe- 
cially, does the promise point. On Him, as the woman's 
seed, He sought to fix man's eye from the beginning. 
Through Him deliverance was to come. For whatever 
might be the mystery hanging over this, still it was in- 
dicated that it was in this way, and through this seed, 
that sin was to be undone. The woman's seed was to 
be God's instrument in destroying Satan, and avenging 
the wrong he had done to man. Here let us mark, 
(i.) The honour put upon the woman, even though she 
was first in transgression,* This is grace indeed,— grace 
in its largeness. And thus, while the woman is taught 
not to be overmuch cast down, the man is hindered 
from triumphing over her. (s.) The confounding of 
Satan. It is the seed of his victim that is to be his 
destroyer. It is thus that he is put to shame, and the 

• Hence to Messiah Himself the promise was, ' He shall see His 
seed. He shall prolong His days,' Isa. liii. lO. 

' May we not say, that thus the man was ripravsd for casting blame 
upon the woman ? He was prevented from boasting. If the woman 
had the dishonour of being the chief transgressor, she had the honour 
of bang the instiument of deliverance. 



jiGoogle 



i68 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

success of his wiles made the means of his own ruin. 
His triumph is his dratruction. (3.) The directing of 
the Church's eye to a person as ,the instrument of bless- 
ing ; nay, to a man, — very flesh and blood. The 
salvation was to come Jrom God, and yet it was to come 



S. God is to ptd enmity between, the serpcftt and the 
woman, and between the serpent's seed and the woman's 
seed. — The woman and the serpent had joined together 
in rebellion ; and so long as this friendship lasted, there 
could be no hope for her or for the race. But God 
stops in to break this bond. This ' covenant with death 
shall be disannulled, and this agreement with hell shall 
not stand.' The woman and the serpent had been 
fellow-accomplices; but henceforth this league was to 
be broken. As if God had said to the tempter, 'Thou 
hast beguiled her to be an accomplice with thee against 
me, and thou thinkest to get her seed to join thee ; but 
it shall not be so, I will break the alliance^ I will not 
only separate "between thee and her, but I will raise up 
deadly hatred.' Let us notice here such things as these : 
(i.) The enmity between Satan and the Church. There 
can be no friendship with him, and no sympathy with 
his works. Thus the distinction between the Church 
and the world is as old as Eden; and it is not merely 
distinction, it is hostility. (z.) The enmity between 
Christ and Satan ; between Him who is the representative 
of heaven and him who is the representative of hell ; 
between Him who is the friend and him who is the 
enemy of man. {3.) The name given to the ungodly, — 



I ..Google 



GENESIS III. 14, IS- 



'the seed of the serpent' And it was this expression 
that Christ took up when He spoke of the 'generation 
of vipers,' and said to the unbelieving Jews, ' Ye are of 
your father the devil.' By birth we are the serpent's 
brood, till grace transforms us, and we become the 
woman's seed; then our friendship with the accursed 
race is for ever broken. (4.) The name of the Church, 
— 'the seed of the woman.' Yes, the geed of her who 
sinned, who ' was in the transgression,' — offspring of Eve, 
— of her who was first in apostasy. What tender favour 
is thus shown to her ! (5.) The name of Christ. The 
same as the Church's, the 'seed of the woman.' Yes, 
He was indeed 'born of a woman,' — the Son of Mary, 
— the Son of Eve, — the Son of her that had transgressed. 
We sometimes wonder that Jesus should have allowed 
such names as Tamar, and Rahab, and Bathsheba to 
be in the roll of His ancestors ; but is not all this implied 
in His being called at the outset the seed of the woman ? 
What grace is there in His taking to Himself such a 
name ! What oneness with us does such a name imply ; 
oneness with all the redeemed ! Ah, surely He is not 
ashamed to call us brethren ! Truly the Son of man 
did come to seek and to save that which was lost. 

9. There is not only to be enmity, but conflict. — That 
these two parties should keep aloof from each other was 
not enough. There must be more than this. There 
must be ahenation and hatred ; nay, there must be war- 
fare, and tiiat of the most desperate kind. Satan and 
the Church must ever be at open warfare. The world 
and the Church, must ever be foes to each other. It 



I ..Google 



I70 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

cannot be otherwise. No concession, no compromise, 
can ever make it otherwise, or alter the declared purpose 
of Jehovah. Neither Satan nor the world can change. 
They may hide their vileness, they may mask their hate- 
fulness, and seek to win us with flattery, or beguile us 
with lies; but they change not. They are still 'from 
beneath,' not 'from above;' and woe be to us, if by 
silence, or unfaithfulness, or compliance, we dishonour 
our Lord before them, and act unworthy of our calling, 
and name, and hope I 

The beginning of this warfare we see in Cain and 
Abel. Its progress we find in the history of succeeding 
ages. In Christ Himself we see that warfare at its height. 
Since then it has still proceeded, and perhaps more 
than before, in the open field. Babylon was Satan's 
citadel at first, round which his armies were gathered, 
and from which, as fi"om a centre, he assailed the Church 
. in her citadel, whicli, in former days, was exclusively 
Jerusalem. In each of the seats of the four successive 
monarchies Satan found a citadel. These were his four 
great encampments, from which he launched his squad- 
rons against the army of the living God. Especially in 
the last of these empires has he found at once a city and 
a fortress, from which he assails the hated followers of 
the Lamb, and 'wears out the saints of the Most High;' 
shedding their blood like water, and scattering their 
bones upon the earth. In a threefold form docs tliis 
great anti-Christian armament take the field, — as Pagan- 
ism, as Popery, as Infidelity, — the last the most terrible 
of all, as the product and combination of the others, — 



I ..Google 



the concentration and embodiment of all the various 
forms of evil from the beginning. In its ranks will be 
foimd 'the seed of the serpent' in fullest development, — 
the truest offspring of the Evil One to which earth has 
given birth. This conflict is made up of two great parts, 
— two events, each of which is the crisis of a long series 
preceding, and the commencement of another series 
arising out of it. They are widely different in their 
nature, tliough forming part of one great development 
They are thus referred to by our Lord, ' Ought not Christ 
to have suffered these things, and to enter into His glory? ' 
(Luke xxiv. 26) ; and by the Apostle Peter, when he 
speaks of 'the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that 
should follow' (i Pet. i. 11); and again, when he speaks 
of himself as a 'witness of the sufferings of Christ, and 
also a partaker of the glory that shall be revesiled ' (i Pet. 
v. 1). They form the two mighty events, known to us 
as the first and second comings of the Lord, — the first 
coming embracing that part of the conflict which consists 
in His 'suffering,' the second coming embracing that 
which is consummated in His 'glory.' Let us notice 
the two divisions. 

r. The bruisipg of the keel of the woman's seed? — It is 
not the woman's heel that is to be bruised, but the heel 
of her seed; neither is it the woman that is to bruise the 

^ The serpent, as it were, cunningly steals behind and seizes the 
keel. (See Gen. xlix. 17.) ' The serpent,' says Tuirettine, 'can only 
lay hold on and bile the heel, that is, the hnmanity and flesh of Christ, 
by which He trod the earth ; and by means of temptations, persecu- 
tions, and death, afflict Him,' etc ' Thus it is 'also,' he adds, 'with 
believers. Tlie old serpent bites tlieir heels.' — (Vol. ii. p. 242.) 



I ..Google 



i-ji THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

serpent's head, but her seed; — 'it shall bruise thy head, 
and thou shalt bruise his heel." It was an inferior part 
that was to be wounded, not a vital one. Yet still there 
was to be a wound. The serpent's seed was to have a 
temporary trivunph, and this was fulfilled when Jesus 
hung on the cross. Then the heel was bruised. Then 
Satan seemed to conquer. That was the hour and power 
of darkness. Then ' He was wounded for our transgres- 
sions, He was bruised for our iniquities.' Then that 
wound was given which defeated him who gave it, and 
began our victory. Thus it was that the Church was 
taught to look forward to the 'bruised heel,' and out of 
that symbol to gather the great truth which alone can 
heal the conscience, that God had provided a sttbs/itute, 
by the shedding of whose blood there was to be deliver- 
ance. It was not salvation by mere love that was taught; 
it was not salvation by mere incarnation ; it was salvation 
by sacrificial suhs/ilute, salvation by ■vicarious hloodsked- 
ding, salvation by a surety's endurance and exhaustion 
of the penalty which was oui due. In no other way 
could love find its way to us, and in no other could our 
consciences have been pacified. The ' bruised heel ' 
was not the mere display of love ; it was ihe judicial 
removal of ihe righteous harrier, which would otherwise 
have for ever hindered that love from reaching the sinner. 
In the man with the 'bruised heel' we see the sinner's 
substitute, and, at the same time, the sinner's pattern,-^ 

' It is not, ^ shs shall liruise thy head,' but ' it ' or 'he,' WPI. It 
was not to be Eve lierself, or any daugliter of Eve. And this was 
perfectly understood all along from the beginning. 



jiGoogle 



GEJVESIS II 



15- 



•73 



his 'leader and commander,' We are followers of the 
Man with the bruised heel ! Let us not be ashamed of 
Him or of His cross ! Let us not expect for ourselves 
anything better than He had to pass through. Tribulation 
was His entrance into the kingdom. It must also be 
ours. The servant is not greater than his Lord, 

3. The bruising of the serpent's head} — It was Ws most 
vital as well as his most honourable part that was to be 
bruised. An intimation this of utter defeat and .ruin. 
He has received many a stroke. His deadly wound 
was given upon the cross, in that very stroke by which 
he bruised the heel of the woman's seed. So that from 
that moment our victory was secure. But the final blow 
is reserved for the Lord's second coming. Then it is 
that the great dragon, that old serpent, is to be bound 
in chains, and shut up in the abyss. And it is to that 
day of triumph that the apostle's words specially refer, 
'The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet 
shortly.' 

Such was the curse upon the tempter; such the glad 
tidings to man which it contained; such the grace it 

' There is evident reference to this not only in Rom. xvi. zo, bnt 
in the promise to Messiah (Ps. xci. 13), ' Thou shalt tread upon the 
adder . . . the dragon shalt Thou trample under feet i ' and in the 
promises to the apostles, ' They shall take up serpsnts,' etc. (Mark xvi. 
18) ; and especially in Luke x. 18, 19, where, after saying, ' I beheld 
Satan as lightning iall from heaven,' our Lord adds, ' Behold, I give 
yon power to tread on SERPENTS AND SCORPIONS, AND ovBR ALL 
THE POWER OF THE ENEMY ;' as if He would Say, 'I, the seed of tlio 
woman, the bruiser of the serpent's head, delegate this power of mine 
to you ; I, who am specially appointed to carry on the enmity between 
the two seeds, / give you power over the enemy,' 



jiGoogle 



174 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

manifested; such the \ictory which it pledged; and such 
the process through which that triumph was to be reached. 
It was this display of an infinite but most unexpected 
grace that made Adam throw aside his fig-leaves, leave 
his thicket, and draw nigh to God. He could have 
expected only avenging wrath; he meets with pardoning 
love; love that would not rest till it had undone all 
the evil that had been brought into the world by man's 
sin ; that would spare no cost, not even the blood of 
the Only-begotten of the Father, in accomplishing this 
end ; and would press forward through every enemy 
and every barrier, till it had taken the spoil from the 
m^hty, and delivered the lawful captive; till it had 
overthrown the adversary in righteous battle ; till it had 
won back man and man's forfeited inheritance ; till it 
had compensated for all the dishonours done to God by 
Satan's victory ; nay, till it had secured glory to God in 
the highest, peace on earth, and good-will to man,* 

Ver. l6. ' Unto the imman. He said, I mill greatly muliifi!y thy 
sorrow and thy fottCfpHon : in serrow thou skalt Irmg forth children ; 
and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and hs shall rule truer thee. ' 

In the sentence on the woman there are no words of 
preface, serving as a hnk to connect the special sin with 
the special penalty. In the case of the serpent, the 
preface was, 'because thou hast done this,' In the case 

' In this first piomise, which so fully contains the gospel, not one 
word is said of anything being done by man. He is set aside, and 
God does everything for Mm. 'Salvation is of the Lord.' Man 
stands still and beholds if. The gospel is no command enjoining us 
to do anything ; it is God's declaration that He has done all for us. 



I ..Google 



of Adam, it was, 'because thou hast hearkened to the 
voice of thy wife ; ' but in the case of the woman, it is 
not, as might have been expected, 'because thou hast 
hearkened to the serpent;' but, without any such intro- 
duction, the sentence goes forth at once, ' I will greatly 
multiply thy sorrow.' The want of this introduction, 
taken in connection with the peculiar sentence, seems to 
show that the woman's punishment was something special, 
superadded to her share in the punishment of the race, 
because of her leading her husband into the transgression. 
As one with the man, she was to partake of his sentence ; 
but, as havmg misled the man, she was to have i penalty 
that would ilways remmd her of this Adam, as the re- 
piesentati\e of the rice, is made to beir the %tii'ral 
penalty, and m this the woman, ■is one of the rice, has 
her pirt But, apart from this, as the beguiler of her 
husband, when given him as his help-meet, she is to have 
her sorrows multiplied ' Yet though her sentence implies 
this, God, in His tender love to her, does not actually 

' Mav Shere not te in tlie words ' I w 11 greatly multipl),' i re- 
feiencc to the well known physical law, that adverse circumstances, 
suLh as hardship or feebleness m the human race, or a poor soil in the 
case of plants, tend to increase the propagative power, and niiiltiply, 
instead of diminishing, the numbers produced ; aa if nature, inwardly 
conscious of more precarious life, ajid anticipating a speedier end, were 
putting forth every effort to prevent the cutting off of the peculiar race 
or kind, by hastening the process of propagation, and multipl^ng the 
numbers produced? In that case, it would be as if God, when inflict- 
ing the sentence which gave weakness and hardship to woman as her 
lot, threw around her, as an amelioration and compensation, the pro- 
tection of a new law — the law which was to regulate her (ruitfiilness, 
not by the extent of her healthfulness, and ease, and comfort, but by 
the amount of her feebleness, and hardship, aiid oppression ; a law 



I ..Google 



176 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

announce this with a, ' because,' lest the man should think 
that God was confirming his accusation against her (ver. 
12), and thereby lessening his guilt. Thus she gets 
something which the man does not, because she was first 
in transgression, and because she was both the deceived 
and the deceiver. 'Adam,' says the apostle (1 Tim. ii. 
14), ' was not deceived (by the serpent) ; but the woman, 
being deceived, was in the transgression. Notwithstand- 
ing, she (even she !) shall be saved (no less than Adam) 
through her child-bearing (by means of that very child- 
bearing which contamed her sentence and her sorrow), 
if she continue in faith, and love, and holiness, with 
sobriety;' for without hoHness no rnan shall see the 
Lord. 

Thus it was made manifest, (i.) That God looked upon 
the serpent as the great origin of the sin and the evil in 
both woman and man. (2.) That God treated Addm as the 
representative of the race, through whom sin entered, and 
passed over to posterity, so that it was not Eve's sin that 
effected our ruin (though it brought woe upon herself), 
but that (if we can suppose the case), had Eve sinned 
alone, no evil would have followed to mankind (Rom. v. 
13, 14; I Cor. XV. 22), (3.)That the very penalty inflicted 
was connected with grace; * the child-bearing in sorrow, 
which was the penalty, being the channel through which 

which, while it multiplied her grief, multiplied her joys also, giving 
her ten children, though in sorrow, for one witiiout it, and compress- 
ing within the brief period of shortened life on earth the whole strange 
story of a woman's heart, and a mother's tears. 

' 'A promise of mercy, and forgiveness of sin, and great afflictions, 
or rebukes for the same, may and shall attend the same soul ; " I 



jiGoogle 



GEJ^ESIS n 



i6. 



the seed was to come by whom dehveraiice was to be 
wrought. (4.) That God wished it to be known that this 
sentence of evil, as well as the previous sentence of bless- 
ing, came directly _;5-(wi Himself. He is the Almighty, the 
Sovereign doer as well as purposer of all. ' I will greatly 
multiply.' 

This sentence takes for granted the previous promise of 
' the seed.' As if God were saying to the woman, ' Yes, 
thou shalt have a seed, and from it deliverance shall 
come, and come through ikee, the introducer of the evil ; 
but the bringing forth of that seed shall be a perpetual 
memorial of thy sin, so that thou shalt be continually 
humbled, and solemnized, and saddened, by the very 
thing which seemed fitted only to lift thee up, and make 
thee rejoice; with thy joy shall grief be mingled, so that 
thou shalt not be allowed to forget thy sin, but be per- 
petually reminded of it; and if at any time thou shouldst 
exult unduly, and say, " I am the deliverer," thou shalt 
hear a voice saying in thine ears, "But thou wast the 
transgressor." ' Thus the memorial of the deliverance 
and of the sin is one. The two things arc kept before 
our eyes by the same token ; and we are taught that. 



■will greatly multiply thy sorrow " comes after the promise of grace, ' 
— "Bvs-mn'B Expasitieit of the first ten chapters of Genesis. 

'Goddaesnotcast Eyeoff, or curseher as He had done the serpent. 
All this was fatherly chastisement, rather than a satisfactory punish- 
ment. God might have inflicted the mulct of sudden death upon her, 
which she, had merited; He might have taken away the blessing of 
fruitfidness before promised, but He only mingleth it with dolours.' — 
Christopher Ness, ^ffiti'Drj' onif Mystery of the Old and New Testa- 
ment, vol. i. p. 52. 

VOL. vr. M 



I ..Google 



ijS THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

whilst there is a redemption and a Redeemer, it was an 
awful sin that needed such a redemption and such a 
Redeemer. On each portion and fragment of this ruined 
world has God written the evil of sin.^ 

His sentence on the woman is, in part, a reversal of the 
first blessing: ' Multiply, and replenish the earth.' God's 
blessing alone went out at first with tlie command to 
multiply; but now some drops of the curse are to be 
infused into it, in remembrance of sin. The race was stUl 
. to go on increasing ; but henceforth it was to be in sorrow. 
The very perpetuation of the species was to be accom- 
panied with marks of the displeasure of God. The dark 
cloud of sorrow was to take up its station above each man 
as he came into the world. There was henceforth to be 
pain and danger, fear and trembling, the shrinking of 
woman's feeble nature from the greatness of the conflict 
which lay before her, ere the desir« of her eyes was at- 
tained ; and that which was meant to have been an un- 
mingled joy, became the sorest trial of humanity ; one of 
Nature's sharpest struggles; one of the bittertst ills tint 
flesh is heir to. And, kindred to these pings of her 
corporeal frame, are the other varied sorrows which over 
shadow her lot — the weakness, the dependence, the fear, 
the rising and sinking of heart, the bitterness of disap- 

' Bernard, in alluding to tliis passage, notices on the one hand the 
pains of child-bearing, and on the other, tlie disgrai-e that w as 
attached to barrenness, as if woman were now plated m a atrait 
. betwixt the two. After speaking of the 'harl neaess ty and heavy 
yoke laid on the daughters of Eve,' he adds, 'Et sipanunt c: 
el si noa pariant tnaledicuntur. Et dolor prohibet parere e 
paiere, maledictio.' — Homil. III. deAdvmlu 



I ..Google 



GENESIS u 



i6. 



179 



pointed hope, the wounds of unrequited affection ; — all 
these, as drops of the sad cup now put into her hands, 
woman has, from the beginning, been made to taste. 

The sentence falls on her specially as woman, not as 
one with the man, and part of the human race, but as 
woman. The thitigs which mark her out as woman are 
the things which the sentence selects. It is as the 
■mother and as the wife that she is to feel the weight of the 
sen ence now pronounced. A mother's pangs (which 
1; 1 er se vould 1 a e been unknown) ; a wife's depend- 
e ce {v ch n all save Christian countries, is utter de- 
grad t on) so ro v not joy, in that appointed process 
through wh ci tl e promised seed is to be bom into tlie 
voil 1 nfe or ty istead of equality, in that relationship 
n referc ce to wl ch it had been said by her husband, 
Bo e of J bo e and flesh of my flesh ; ' not hence- 
torth tl e 1 si a d cleaving to the wife,' as at the first 
( 24) b t t e w fe cleaving to the husband, and the 
1 sband rulmg over the wife. Such are the sad results of 



j St ng ba 






f the 



p p t f lie temp I 11 f h fi 
of the ete nal ruin of sa many of th se 
eon m qu gene ant pan sunt el tl 
etp'e a peqeppt e rum fla tia ■ete n si ppl s 

dtstmati. —Vol. L p. 67S of a Commsnlaiy on Genesis, in foui quaito 
volumes, by Benediclus Pererius Valentiniis, a.d. 1599. This may 
be somewhat strained ; yet it is a solemn thought for either roan or 

' ' She must pay the penalty of her sin. before she can rejoice in her 
child,' says Chrjsologus ; and then adds, ' Wliat must be the end of 
that of which the beginnmg is penal ? Shall joy be the life-portion of 
the man who begins that life in. sorrow ? '^—Sermoms in Fs. i. 



jiGoogle 



l8o THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

In tlie helplessness of clinging dependence, as well as 
in the fondness of blind attachment ; in the consciousness 
of needing an ami to lean upon, as well as in the irrepres- 
sible overflow of passionate and unreasoning love, ' thy 
desire shall be to thy husband.' Nay, more, ' he shall 
rule over thee.' His the lordship, thine the submission ; 
his the rule, thine the obedience. Such, henceforth, is 
to be thy condition ; such the principle on which the 
domestic constitution is to be reared. ^ So God has 
ordamed it ; not only as the penalty of woman's sin, but 
as that which best suits a fallen world, and which best 
carries out His design in regard to the families and king- 
doms of the cliildren of men. And what can that family 
expect where this divine ordinance is overlooked, nay, 
perhaps reversed? Hence the apostle utters the com- 
mand so strongly, ' Wives, be in subjection to your own 
husbands ' (i Pet. iii. i) ; ' Submit yourselves unto your 
own husbands in everything. Let the wife see that she 
reverence her husband' (Eph. v. 2z, 24, 33).^ 

' The 'nittnral Eiibordinatlon in innocency," as Fuller calls it in his 
Exposition of Genesis, was to be greatly increased, so as to become 
afterwards a yoke. It is cot merely that she who had thus ' gone' 
beyond her bounds ' shonld be ' forced back into her own proper rank ' 
(in ordinem suum cogitur), as Calvin lemarks, but she was henceforth, 
to occupy a still lower place than before ; not necessarily ' bondage,' 
as he says, but still such a position as would eventually lead to bond- 
age, unless coimteracted by higher principles. Yet it is to be 
noticed (says Trapp), that though the apostle bids wives anbmit them- 
selves to their busliands, he does not say. Husbands, rule over your 
wives.-— TsAPP On Genesis, A.D. 165a 

' ' A just law unto her, who, having given way to her own inordinate 
phantasie and appetite, had undone both herself and husband. And 
yet a rule given her for her own good and safety, who, having by 



jiGoogle 



Yet, as if to comfort her spirit under this heavy pro- 
spect ; as if to elevate woroan's lowly lot, and to sanctify 
a mother's pangs, God has taken this very fact concerning 
her as the groundwork of figures wherein He sets forth 
the world's coming deliverance and the Church's pro- 
mised glory. To this He refers when He speaks of 
creation's groans and travail-pains (Rom. viii. 22) ; and 
of His people's Joy when the day of present sorrow shall 
have passed away (John xvi. 21, 22). Again, as if to 
dignify woman's humbling dependence on another, the 
figure of the wife is made use of in illustrating the relation- 
ship between Christ and His redeemed (Eph. v. 23—32). 
He, the lover ; she, the loved one ; he, gazing on her 
beauty (Song vi. 4, vii. 1—6) ; she, leaning on his strength , 

experience found how ill she was able to moderate her own desires, 
must needs be the more secured, by haying a moderator set over her.' 
— White Oh the first three chapters of Gmesis, 1656. A tolerably 
thick folio, containing abundance of practical instruction deduced from 
these chapters. Poole thus paraplicases the words : ' Seeing, for 
want of thy husband's rule and conduct, thou wast seduced by the 
serpent, and didst abuse that power I gave thee, together with thy 
husband, to draw him into sin, thou shalt now be brought down to a 
lower degree ; for he sliall rule thee, not with that sweet and gentle 
hand which he formerly used, as a guide and coimsellor only, but by a 
higher and harder hand, as a lord and governor, to whom 1 have now 
given a greater power and authority over thee than he had before.' 
Jaclcson remarks : ' That is, thy desire shall be subject to thy husband. 
Upon his will and pleasure all thy desire must depend. For in this 
sense the same phrase is used (Gen. iv. 7) concerning Abel's subjection 
to Cain as the first-born. It is true, by the law of creation, the 
woman should have hved io subordination nnder her husband, and 
should have been governed by him ; but being here denounced as a 
chastisement forsinne, it implieth a further degree of subjection than 
that which should have been by the law of nature and creation,'^ 
Jackson On the Pentateuch, a.d. 1646. 



I ..Google 



l82 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

(Song ii. 6, viii. 5) ; he, decking her with jewels, as the 
partner of his tlirone and heart ; she, ' sick with love,' yet 
reverently looking up to and rejoicing in the strength and 
honour of her husband-king ; he, putting on his royal 
state and raiment of glory, to win her eye yet more ; she, 
though conscious of the infinite inequality, not saying, 
as human love in such circumstances is represented as 
doing : 

' It were all one 
That I should love a bright particular star, 
And think to wed it ; he is so above me, 
InhJsbri^l d' d llatetaJ light 

Miist I be m is sphere ; ' 



but saying, in the c 
tion, ' My beloved i m 
Under the figure f 
creation is described 
forwards with eager 1 g 

lies before it, in th d y 
too, is spoken of nnd h 
wondrous birth in th 
7, 8) ; and the Ch 1 1 
pangs and groanin 1 
blessing (Rev. xii. 2) 



^ Now be it observed, (here is not in nature such an image as 
woman's travail for expressing that event which, looking to the 
substance of it, is the bringing agiun of the Son ont of the womb of 
the invisible into the visible world, for ever to abide therein ; which, 
looking to the circumstances of it, is, with long-deferred hope, growing 
towards tlie consummation into longing desire, and accomplished with 
rending pangs, yet issuing in joy, transport ol joy, that the Man-child 



' of well-proved aifec- 

1 his,' 
b rth-pangs, the whole 
g nd groaning, pressing 
he glorious birth which 

regeneration.' Israel, 
figure, as anticipating a 
f restitution' (Isa. Ixvi. 

resented as, with like 
'. her expected hour of 



I ..Google 



GEI^ESIS 



(. i6. 



1S3 



And as this sentence on woman as a mother is thus 
made use of to set forth the process of bitter grief and 
anguish through which the coming glory Is to be reached, 
so the sentence on her as the wife is referred to in con- 
nection with the Church's relationship to Christ; for 
though she is spoken of as the Bride, the Lamb's wife, 
spouse of the second Adam, yet to her it is said, as if to 
keep her in mind of her subject condition, 'He is thy 
Lord, worship thou Him' (Ps. xlv, ri); so that, though 
in one sense she seems raised to an equality with Him, 
and placed upon His throne, yet she is ever to keep in 
mind her inferiority to Him who is ' God over all.' 

Church of God ! Bride of the Lamb ! keep in remem- 
brance thy heavenly calling, thy relationship to the Son 

is bom into tlie world ; which, again, for Ihe time of it, is fixed and 
definite, but as it approaches, all uncertain to the very hour, inducing 
continual preparation and readiness, yea, and longing, until the fietce 
trial be overpast, and the joy be come. By this most expressive 
similitude, dignifying and sanctifymg that sorest trial of humanity, 
having expressed the condition of the parturient Church, and the 
weakness to which at length she is brought, and her own lamentation 
over her own nnprofitableness in the earth, — ' We have, as it were, 
brought forth wind ; we have not wrought any deliverance In the 
earth ; ' the Holy Spirit comforteth the Church with these words, 
spoken in the person of the Christ : ' Thy dead shall hve ; my dead 
body shall they arise ;' which words, without any gloss whatever of 
an interpreter, convey their own meaning to be, that the deliverance 
which the Church lamented she had not wrought upon the earth, 
should be wrought by the rising of her dead men, who are promised 
this, among other things, that they should rule the nations wltli a rod 
oi uron, and break them in pieces lite a potter's vessel. These dead 
men of the Church He honours by [he name of His dead body, accord- 
ing to the universal symbol of the Apostle Paul, which representeth 
-the Church as the body of Christ, the fulness of Him that hlleth all 
in all. 



I ..Google 



i84 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

of God, that thou mayest be cheered, and gladdened, and 
quickened; yet keep in mind thy lowly origin, thy «n- 
worthiness of character, thy unlikeness to the Holy One 
who has bethrothed thee to Himself, that thou mayest be 
humbled and abased. He is thy Lord, worship thou 
Him ; forget not the adoration that is due to Him for 
His high majesty and condescending love. He is thy 
Lord, let thy desire be to Him. Love Him as He hath 
loved thee, and let His name be written on thy heart. 
He is thy Lord, let Him rule over thee i Serve Him as 
He liath served thee, when for thee He took on Him the 
form of a servant Rejoice in being reigned over by one 
whose sceptre is love. He is thy Lord, look for His ap- 
pearing, for He comes to complete the espousals. Long 
for that marriage-day ; the day of nearness, and union, 
and vision, when the bridal-blessing, the bridal-glory, the 
bridal-crown, shall all be thine. In spite of the ' much 
tribulation ' tliat lies before thee, be of good cheer, for 
thus He Himself has spoken : ' A woman when she is in 
travail liath sorrow, because her hour is come ; but as 
soon as she is delivered of the child, she rememberetli no 
more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the 
wprld. And ye now therefore have sorrow; but I will 
see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy 
no man taketh from you' yohn xvi, ai, 22). 



Veis. 17-19. ' And unto Adam He said, Beeimse tliim hast liearksnid 
unto tAe voic^ of thy imfe, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I lom- 
manded thee, saying, Thau shall not lal of it : cursed is the ground for 
thy sake {or o» thy account) ; in sorrmti (ot with pain) shalt thou eat of 
it all the days of thy life: 18. Thorns also and tiiilUs siail it bring 



I ..Google 



forth to ihge (Heb. and thorns and thistles shall it ccatsi to hud to Ihie) ; 
and Ihoa shall eat the heri of the field. 19. In the siueat of thy face shall 
thoa eat bread, nil thoa return unto the groand ; for out of it mast thou 
taken: for dusi thou art, and unto dusi shall Ihou return.' 

God now turns to Adam, to pronounce sentence upon 
IiiiD. In his case, as in that of the serpent, He begins 
with 'because,' making liim feel the special point on 
which his punishment is made to turn. Adam had cast 
the blame of his sin on the woman, as if to palliate his 
own guilt, or at least to divide it with another. God 
begins at that very point, and takes up tlie Excuse thus 
made as the very aggravation of the sin. Had the case 
been that of the woman hearkening to the man, there 
would have been some excuse for her, for she was under 
him ; but it was Adam, the head, hearkening to the voice 
of her whom he ought to have led, instead of suffering 
himself to be led by her. God had made him the head 
of the woman as well as the head of creation, and there- 
fore Ms sin was aggravated, not extenuated, by its being 
done at the woman's suggestion. For thus Adam left his 
place of rule ; he forgot his headship, he overlooked his 
responsibility both to his wife and to his posterity; he 
set his wife's voice above the voice of God. Thus he 
made h^te to sin ; and, as he aggravated the sin by 
doing it at the suggestion of her whom he ought to have 
restrained, and guided, and watched over, so he aggra- 
vated it still more by trying to make tliat a palliation 
which was an increase of heinousness. 

The sentence then follows : ' Cursed is the ground for 
thy sake.' It is not a direct one, as in the case of the 



I ..Google 



iS5 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

serpent and of the woman, but a sentence in the form of 
a curse upon the earth. The king is punished by a curse 
upon his kingdom, in addition to the personal woe fall- 
ing on himself, just as Pharaoh was cursed in the plagues 
inflicted on his people. 

The ground, out of which he was taken, is cursed on 
his account, as if all pertaining to him had become evil. 
It is not he that suffers on account of his connection with 
the soil, but it is the soil that suffers on account of its 
connection with him, affording proof that it is not from 
matter that evil Sows into spirit, but that it is from spirit 
that evil flows into matter. That soil from which he had 
sprung, that soil which God had just been strewing with 
verdure and flowers, that soil whose fruitfulness had pro- 
duced the tree whose beauty and desirableness had been 
the woman's beguilement and his own ruin, that soil must 
now be scourged and sterilized on his account ; as if God 
had thus addressed him : ' I can no longer trust thee with 
a fruitful soil, nor allow the blessing with which I have 
blessed the earth to abide upon it; thou art to remain 
here for a season, but it shall not be the same earth ; in 
mercy I will still leave it such an earth as thou canst 
inherit, not a wilderness nor a chaos as at first, but still 
with enough of gloom, and desolation, and barrenness, as 
to remind thee of thy sin, to say to thee continually, O 
man, thou hast ruined tlie earth over which I had set 
thee as king.' God's blessing on the soil at first pro- 
claimed the commencement of an age of holiness on 
earth ; His curse proclaimed the entrance of sin; and, in 
the latter day. His blessing shall again descend, restoring 



I ..Google 



GENESIS 11 



17-19. 



187 



it to former excellence and beauty. It was for man's 
sake that it was made a blessed earth at first ; it was for 
man's sake that it was transformed into a cursed one; 
and for man's sake it shall be restored to a blessed world 
again. The first Adam's connection with it (being made 
of dust) drew on it all evil when he fell ; but the second 
Adam's connection with it — for He also has a body formed 
out of it — shall undo the evil, cancel the curse, and per- 
fect it again.' 

Let us mark the details of the curse. 

I. The earth is to bring forth the thorn and the thistle. 
Whether these existed before, we do not undertake to 
say, nor whether they are given here merely as the repre- 
sentatives of all noxious plants or weeds, nor whether 
the object of the curse, in so far as they were concerned, 
was to turn them into abortions, which they really are. 
Taking the words as they lie before us, we find that the 
essence of the curse was the multiplication of these 
prickly abortions, till they should become noxious to man, 
and beast, and herb of the field ; mere nuisances on the 
face of the ground. -Elsewhere in Scripture they are re- 
ferred to as calamities. As the effects of judgments, Job 
refers to them, xxxi. 40, and Jeremiah, xii. 13. As the 



1 See Ps. xcvi. n-13, xcviii. 7-9 ; Isa. xi. 6-9, xkix. 17, xxaii. 15, 
XXXV. r, Ixv. 17, Ixvi. 22; Esek. xlvii. S-12. It is to Ih is period 
that pur Lord refers when Hespeiks of ' the regeneration ' (Matt. xis. 
zS), and Peter when he speaks of ' the restitution of all tilings ' (Acts 
iii. 21), and Paul when he refers to tlie deliverance of the ' reluctant ' 
(six !»»"»") creation (Rom. viii. 19-Z3), and Peter when he speaks of 
the new heavens and earth (a Pet. iii. 13), and John when he describes 
the same (Rev. xx. i). 



I ..Google 



188 THOUGHTS ON' GENESIS. 

true offspring of a bairen soil, the apostle speats of them, 
Heb. vi. 8. As injurious to all around, our Lord Himself 
alludes to them, Matt. xiii. 7-22. And it is evident that 
all these passages connect themselves with the original 
curse, and are to be interpreted by a leference to it^ 
They are tokens of God's original displeasure against 
man's sin, so that the sight of them should recall us to 
this awful scene in Eden, and make us feel how truly 
God hates sin, and how impossible it is for Him to change 
in His hatred of it. These tokens of His anger have not 
been rooted up, neither have they withered away. They 
have survived the changes of six tliousand years. They 
are God's monuments of sin, and must stand till He who 
erected them shall take them down, and that come to 
pass which is written, 'Instead of the thorn shall come up 
the fir-tree, and instead of the briar shall come up the 
myrtle-tree : and it shall be to tlie Lord for a name, for 
an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off' (Isa. Iv. r3). 
Christ, in bearing our sins, was ' made a curse for us ' 

1 Thorns are always spoken of in conneclion with evil. Tiie word 
occurs twelve times in the Old Tesfameiit. We have such an expres- 
sion as 'thorns of the wilderness,' as if the two things were congenial. 
We have the coming up of the 'thorn, and brier,' which is spoken of 
in connection with the desohitiou of Judea (Isa. xxxii, 13) ; and the 
' grieving thorn ' is iised as the iigure for Israel's enemies (Eiek. 
sxviii. 24), as Paul speaks of the 'thorn in the flesh.' The anti- 
Christian confederacy is to be 'as thorns thrust away ' (2 Sam. xxiiL 
6). And as Jeremiah had said, ' Sow not among thorns' (iv. 7}, so 
our Lord had spoken of the good seed being choked by tliorns. The 
word ' thistle ' only occurs once elsewhere (IIos. i, 8), and Gesenius 
makes it to mean some 'luxuriantly growing but useless plant.' If 
thorns be really, as is said, abortive branches, the curs 
appears in them more remarkably. 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS u 



(Gal. iii. 13). He took our curse upon Him in all its 
parts. He was treated as the accursed One. In token of 
this He sorrowed, and was crucified, and died, and went 
down into the grave. It was our curse that wrought all 
these evils for the sinless One. And it was in token that 
He was truly the curse-bearer that He allowed Himself to 
be crowned with thorns. In wearing a ' crown/ He was 
saying, 'I am a King — earth's King, as the first Adam 
was ; ' and His enemies, in crowning Him, were uncon- 
sciously owning His royalty and dominion j in wearing a 
crown of thorns, He was announcing Himself as the will- 
ing sufferer of the sentence which attached not only to 
Adam, but to His inheritance, the earth ; He was saying, 
' Lo, I have come to stand in the first Adam's place, to 
bear the first Adam's penalty, to endure the first Adam's 
curse, to redeem the first Adam's forfeited kingdom, and 
in token thereof I accept this crown of thorns.' 

2. Man is to eat the herb of the field. Originally, the 
fruit of the various trees was to have been man's food ; 
the 'herb'. was for the lower creation, if not exclusively, 
at least chiefly.^ But now he is degraded. He is still, 
of course, to eat fruit, but in this he is to be restricted. 

^ ' When the curse, tlie heavy curse, passed upon him, he had to 
betake himself to the herb, which heretofore was the property of the 
lower creatures for browsing on, to which they were created prone, 
and bowed down. Now, he is truly of the earth earthy, his origin 
dust, his food gathered from the dust, liis eye cast upon the dust, and 
his bed at length made in the lap of dust ; his life a circle from dust 
to dust, a secies of sensations, of animal impulses, of animal gratifica- 
tions, of animal actions, until, like the animals, he yield up the animal 
life whidi, with sore toil and labour, he hath been endeavouring to 
* ■— Irvikg On the Curse as to Bodily Labour. 



I ..Google 



190 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

Whether it were that, the eartii being less productive in 
fruit, he must betake himself to inferior sustenance ; or 
whether it might also be from a change in bodily constitu- 
tion, requiring something else than fruit, we cannot say. 
The sentence is, ' Thou shall eat the herb of the field, 
not the pleasant fruits of paradise.' In the ages to come, 
when the better paradise arrives, every vestige of this is 
swept away, and we ' eat of the tree of life which is in the 
midst of the paradise of God ' (Rev. ii. 7). • 

3. He is to eat in sorrow. There was to be no glad 
feasting, but a bitter eating, or, if there might be feasting, 
it should be like Israel's, 'with bitter herbs,'^ — the sweet 
and the bitter mingling. A cloud of sorrow was to hang 
not only over his dwelling, but especially over his table ; 
and perhaps to tliis we may trace the divinely instituted 
practice oifasUng, as if not only man's eating was to be in 
sorrow, but as if at certain times he was specially to con- 
nect his common food with the remembrance of sin, and 
to put it away from him altogether, as if not worthy to be 
sustamed bj God at all 

Does not man mock all this b) his feastmg<i, making 
them to be special seasons of merriment and pleasure, 
and foTgettmg that God had thrown over them a dark 
shadow, as the memorial of sm 1 Yet the time is coming 
when joy shall take the place of sorrow The great 
festival IS at hand , the feast of fat thing? for Israel (Isa 
isv 6), the mirnage suj per foi the t-huich (Rev mx 9), 
and the great feast of tabernacles at Jerusalem for the 
nations of the earth (Zech. xiv. 16). Of this day of 
happy festival — this time of the removal of the curse — we 



I ..Google 



have an earnest in the supper of the Lord, when we show 
His death till He come ; nay, more, we may be said to 
have an earnest of it eacli time that, like the early be- 
lievers, we eat our bread with gladness and singleness of 
heart {Acts ii. 46}, as men who by faith have aheady 
tasted their deliverance from the curse. 

4. He is to eat it with toil. He is to wring a stinted 
subsistence out of the reluctant earth with sore labour 
and weariness ; and the ' sweat of his face ' is to attest 
the hardness of the conflict' The earth will not yield 
even the herb of the field without heavy tod, toil in every 
department of the preparation of his food — tdling, sowmg, 
reaping, grinding. He cannot live but m a way which 
reminds him of his primal sin. Each day he ht^ia the 



' Is not the following a true picture of man's toiP — ' I! jou ati. up 
by times, you will hear, in the grey of the moniing, the footsteps of 
the labourer beneath your casement pacing heavily on to the scene of 
his daily labour. As the dawn makes progress upon the rear of night, 
the din slowly increases, and ascends until the first watdi of the day. 
One constant volume of sound inspheres the cily lilie the noise of the 
neighbouring ocean, through which the rattling sound of chariot- 
wheels, and the rolling din of heavy vans, and the slirill discord of 
oaths and angry men, break incessantly like waves which dash upon 
the sliore. It ceaseth not the livelong day. It ascendetli into your 
ears, a ceaseless tide of sound, in which no instant of silence is to be' 
discovered. A voice of men and cattle, and of the instruments of 
their toils, which ace all day long employed in bearing burdens from 
place to place, and in reiurning to bear more, until the shades of 
evening come to loose tliem from their harness, and allow them to 
rest their weary limbs. And these burdens which tliey bear are not 
the enjoyments of men, but the subject-matter of their toil, as you will 
discover if you follow them to their landing-places.' — Irving On tin 
Ctirse as to Bodily Labour. The whole book of Ecclesiastes is an 
illustration of this part of the curse. 



jiGoogle 



igj THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

original sentence ringing in his ears. And yet all this 
hard toil serves barely to sustain a ' dying life ; ' and even 
that only for a little, until he return to the dust. This is 
the end of his earthly toil ! 

5. He is to die. Grace does not remit the whole 
penalty. It leaves a fragment behind it, in pain, weak- 
ness, sickness, death, though at the same time it extracts 
blessing out of all Ihese relics of the curse. Besides, in 
thus leaving men subject to death, it leaves open the 
door by whicJi the great Deliverer was to go in and rob 
the spoiler of his prey. By death is death to be de- 
stroyed, Man must die ! He came from the dust, and 
he must return to it.' The grave must be his portion. 
Yet, like everything else in the great purpose of grace, 
this is but the occasion for bringing in larger blessing — 
that is, resurrection, and all that resurrection comprises. 
Far beyond our original possessions, are those which Sow 
to us through this channel. Resurrection-hfe and resur- 
rection-glory are things higher far than that whidi Adam 
knew ere he fell. 

Thus has sin degraded man ; bringing him down to a 
lower level ; introducing toil, and sweat, and weariness ; 

' Had we room, we miglit find ail interesting subject in tbe various 
connections in wliich the word ' dust ' occurs. Abraham speaks of 
himself as dust and aslies (Gen. xviii. 27). It was ' dust ' tiiat was to 
be mingled with the wafer in the trial of jealousy (Num. v. 1 7). It 
was ' dust ' that was sprinlded upon the head in the time of sorrow 
Qobii. 12). It is in the 'dust' that we are stud to 'rest' Qoh xvii, 
16), to ' lie down ' (xni. 26), and it is out of the ditst that we are to 
awake and arise when He who is our Life appears (Isa, xxvi. 19 ; 
Dan. xli. a). 



I ..Google 



GENESIS 111. 17-19. 193 

intbsing sorrow into every part of our lot ; nay, making 
us to be ' bom to trouble as the sparks fly upward ' {Job 
V. 7, xiv. i) ; making our very food to be the memorial of 
the curse, and existence only to be maintained by a daily 
warfare with it ; bringing in death, preparing the grave, 
tearing asunder soul and body ; ruining this globe itself, 
and making its very soil the abode of evil 

Where the actual seat of the curse lies we cannot say. 
Whether it is in the ground itself, from which noxious in- 
fluences ascend ; or whether it is from the air, in conse- 
quence of its being the abode of ' the prince of the power 
of the air,' so that the soil is impregnated with evil by 
these ever-descending influences, we cannot say. The 
subtle processes of atmospheric action are only half dis- 
covered, and even science itself is not prepared to say 
what is the cause of earth's strange firuitfulness in evil and 
barrenness in good. But the disease is there, though 
man may not detect the seat. God's purpose subjected 
the creation to ' vanity.' We know this. We know also 
that it is subjected ' in hope ' (Rom. viii. 20), and that 
that hope will ere long become a reality. 

What efforts man makes to shake off the curse, both 
from himself and creation ! — by means of science healing 
his own body, alleviating his sufferings, lessening his toil, 
and fertilizing the earth. To a large extent has he suc- 
ceeded.' Marvellous discoveries have been made, by 

' One cannot fail to notice that the various discoveries of the pre- 
sent day all tend in tliese directions. Qiloroform in one direction, 
agricultural cliemistrj in another, and Liebig's investigations on the 
subject of diet in anotter. Compare the words of the curse, and mark 
the resemblance. 

VOL. VI. N 



I ..Google 



194 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

means of which, for a season, the body may be made 
insensible to suffering, so that the severest operations 
may be performed — nay, even woman's travail passed 
through, without the consciousness of a pang. Marvellous 
progress has been made in tillage, so that with less toil 
the soil is made more fruitful ; in producing the various 
articles needed for subsistence or clothing, mechanical 
power has been brought in, to lighten or supersede the 
toil of man. In many such ways has man succeeded in 
lightening the curse. Nor in any of these efforts is there 
sin. It is not sinful to endeavour to heal disease, or 
alleviate pain, or ease labour, or wipe the sweat from the 
brow. No. Man is to use all those facilities and advan- 
tages which God has given, and to be thankful that any 
part of the burden can be thus relieved. 

If man, indeed, were in these endeavours defying God, 
and proclaiming his purpose of effacing what God has 
written so legibly upon creation, then it would be sin; 
it would be rebellion. But it is evident that God has 
allowed man to seek alleviations of the curse ; He has 
allowed him to seek to prolong life by medicine ; and, in 
doing so, He has told him that there is no sin in these 
endeavours, so long as God is recognised. When Paul 
said to Timothy, ' Drink no longer water, but use a little 
wine for thy stomach's sake and thine often infirmities,' 
he was seeking to lighten the curse. And so, when we 
take measures either for healing disease or relieving pain, 
we are only acting in the spirit of that grace which has 
been dealing with our world since sin intruded, and show- 
ing us that God has not wholly given it over to the evil 



I ..Google 



one ; nay, we are acting in the spirit of Him who came 
not to destroy men's lives, but to save; who was anointed 
by the Holy Spirit for the very purpose of healing diseases, 
as well as of preaching the gospel to the poor. 

But what then becomes of tlie curse ? Is it to be dis- 
regarded wholly ? Alas ! after man has done his utmost, 
how very little of it has he removed ! How much remains 
behind ! And if those who sometimes are startled at the 
progress which man is making in soothing pain and heal- 
ing disease, and who are at times afraid to make use of 
his remedies, would but consider how very little is, after 
all, effected ; how in most cases it is a mere transient 
suspension of pain, a mere shifting of the burden from one 
shoulder to another, a mere relief such as that which rest 
gives to the body when it is weary j they would not be 
under any serious apprehension of man's interfering mth 
the curse. That curse is too sore and deep for any to 
remove save He who laid it on. He will, in His own way 
and time, remove creation's curse, and stay its groans ; 
He will bring to an end man's toil and woman's travail ; 
He will swallow up death in victory. For that glorious 
day of hope let us wait in faith, knowing that not till then 
will the ' regeneration. ' come ; not till then will aH things 
be restored, Man may wipe otf the tear, but he cannot 
dry up its source. He may hide himself from the billow 
and the blast, but he cannot say to either, ' Peace, be 
still.' 



I ..Google 



ige THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

Ver. 20. 'And Adam (Heb. t&e Man) called Ms -wife's name Evi 
(Heb. Chavah); hcame she -was tke mother of all living.' ^ 

The sentence has now been pronounced the crim'nals 
have heard it and ha\e left the place of judgment each 
doubtli-ss occupied ^ith his own thoughts aid pursing 
hii) own wa) Satan ^jOes out tiom the fiesenct of the 
Lord to beoin hi, \fi'i^Z to ai d fro in the eaith (Job 1 
7) to laj h s snares to prepare his wiles to for^e his fiery 
daxtij w th do ble malign tj because 1 l ha? been fo led 
in his purpose ittcrly to mm the race The woman 
retires to trood over coming grief yet to minole I iipier 
thoughts wifh her dwker musings in the anti ipation of 
the promised offsprni, \ 1 ch was to be tl e iss c of her 
pan lid travail The min dei irts to look round u|on 
a bl ghted paradise ai d a ru led earth to brood o\ ei the 
dajs and n ghts of t 1 that awaited tun til tl 1 bnef 
day here be done ; yet to cheer himself with the thought 
that there was love even now for him, and the undoing of 
the evil in the end. 

What space may have intervened between the an- 
nouncement of the sentence and the scene in this 20th 

• Was this lier first name ? or was she called IsH before, and now, 
like Abraham, had her name altered to express her new circumstances 
as mother not of the dead, as she might have been, but of the liiing 1 
The Septuagint translate the Hebrew name and call her T.sii. Perhaps 
it would have been as well had we done the same ; for surely to an 
English reader the meaning of the passage would have been better 
eipiessed thus, ' And the man called his wife's name life, because slie 
was the mother of all living.' Tliere seems no reason for De Sola's 
change of tense here, into 'jiow the man had called ;' nay, it appears 
from the way in which the statement is introduced, that he had nr}l 
called her so before. 



I ..Google 



^erse, we know not Wl. maj suppose it to have taken 
fhce Allien Adam and hib wife letiied from the present 
vision of Jehovih They talked or silently mused to- 
gether over what had just befallen them, — over the evil 
and tht good, the falling and the n&mg, the condemnation 
and the pardon, the cuisc and the blessing, the past, the 
present, the future of their lile Then the man, as if 
catching up the notes of grice which were just dying away 
amid the trees of the garden, adds his Amen, and em- 
bodies them in the name of her who was now doubly knit 
to him, doubly one with himself. 

The fact that it was not God but Adam that gave the 
name to the woman, teaches us much. Why did not God 
give Eve her name, as He had done to Adam ? God did 
not allow Adam to name himself, even in his innocence ; yet 
now in his fall He permits him to name the woman, nay, 
sanctions his so doing. This was for such reasons as the 
following: — (i.) To show His grace. What grace, what 
tender love is displayed in allowing man to give a name 
to his wife, — and such a name, — Eve, — Life ! (z.) To 
show that Adam was not to be deprived of his headship. 
He was still to be ' head of the woman,' even in his fall, 
and as such he names her. (3.) To show, that though 
Adam had so cruelly flung blame upon her before God, 
yet no estrangement had followed. She was still bone of 
his bone. They had been companions in guilt, they were 
to be companions in sorrow, and they were fellow-heirs of 
the hope just held out to them. Thus they were reunited 
in new bonds of mingled sadness and joy. (4.) To show 
the direction in which Adam's thoughts were runnmg, that 



I ..Google 



jgS THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

from this manifestation of the current of his thoughts we 
might learn how the promise had taken hold of him. This 
verse gives us unequivocal insight into the state of Adam's 
feelings. It exhibits him to us as one who understood, 
believed, prized, rested on the divine promise which he 
had just heard. He stands before us as a believing man ; 
and we might say of him, ' By faith Adam called his wife's 
name Eve.' It is the voice of a believing man that speaks. 
One cannot mistake either the word or tone. Unbelief 
could not have spoken thus ; none but a believer could 
have thought on such a name ; a name that takes all its 
significancy from the promise, — Life, or the Living One, — 
doomed, and yet living; nay, dead by law, yet living; 
mother of the living ; mother of a spared race ; mother 
of one who is the Pnnce of life, 'the resurrection and the 
life , mother of i famdy of men, Eilive from the dead ! 
He takes the piomise, he ponders it, he receives it as a 
faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation ; and, on thus 
receiving it, he gives vent to his feeling, and utterance to 
his faith, in tins expressive name. What can this verse be 
but the solemn utterance of Adam's faith in the divine 
promise i* Surely this is one of the most simple and child- 
like, yet one of the most expressive ways of proclaiming 
his faith, and is 'Vtrjihim expressed his faith by calling 
his son Isa i , 'the child of gladness,' so did Adam by 
naming his wife £(.£, 'the mother of the living.' He 
looks at her and says, ' I see in thee the divine promise 
all realized — life not death, coming from thee; God 
carrying uut His purpose of grace in thy seed, though afar 
off; I see in thee the pledge and erabodiraent of divine 



I ..Google 



GENESIS III. 20. 199 

forgiveness and love, and I proclaim my faith in all this 
before God and before posteritj', by naming thee Eve.'''^ 
This name is not the mere burst of feeling or a vague 
expression of acquiescence or wonder; it is the exphcit 
confession of his faith. It is as a believing man that he 
speaks ; a man strong in faith, and wishing to hand down 
to posterity a declaration of his confidence in the promise 
of a gracious God. 

How simple is his faith ! He has just been listening to 
the voice of God announcing grace, and life through grace ; 
and forthwith he beheves. He cavils not, questions not. 
A dark cloud had come between him and God ; but now 
that cloTid has passed, and the true light is shining again. 
He has just for a moment tasted the bitter cup of separa- 
tion from his God (and who can tell the agony of that 
interval?), and straightway he is brought back to his 
father's love and bosom. The child has but wandered a 
few steps from the parental door, when it is snatched up 
by the fond mother's arm and replaced beneath the happy 
roof, never more to stray. The sheep has but gone a little 
way from the fold, enough to let it feel the bleakness and 
famine of the desert, when it is seized by the shepherd's 
strong hand and carried back in joy. 

How immediately and how simply he believes 1 ' Faith 
comes hy hearing ; ' he heard and believed, taking God at 
His word, and giving Him credit for speaking nothing but 
the truth, though no sign \vas given. God had spoken ; 

' ' He manifests his faith in the promise of the Messiah by whom he 
was delivered from death, and In whom he and his posterity siiould 
live for ever. '—White On Gsiiaa. 



jiGoogle 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



who was he, that he should doubt or hesitate, or reckon it 
presumption to return to God at once ? He has spoken 
but dimly, no doubt j it is a very brief word of promise; 
yet he sees in these few words the free love of a forgiving 
God, and that is enough. He tastes that the Lord is 
gracious ; and how sweet must that cup of grace have 
been to the parched lips of Adam ] God has spoken once; 
but that once suffices, for He with whom he has to do is 
the God that cannot lie. We, with a thousand promises 
and assurances of love, doubt and tremble ; Adam, with 
but one word, unratified by sign or token, believes. 

If any one might have needed a sign, it was Adam. If 
any one might have said, ' I am too great a sinner, I dare 
not at once believe,' it was Adam. For his was deep 
guilt indeed ; he had ruined a world ; he had let in the 
flood of evil upon the earth ; he had banished God from 
it; he had helped God's enemy to triumph; he had 
known what holiness was, and therefore knew what sin 
was. If any might liave shrunk from trusting at once, it 
was Adam. Yet he believed, and it was counted unto 
him for righteousness. Nay, he not only believed, but he 
' confessed with his mouth ; ' he testified his faith ; he pro- 
claimed his sure hope of everlasting life. 

Go, sinner, and do likewise ! Go, and like a child 
receive the simple word of God, speaking to you in love. 
Go and take forgiveness at His hands, and sonship, and 
the kingdom, and the glory. Do not, in the pride and pre- 
sumption of your heart, speak of your unfitness and un- 
worthiness, as if you would fain be fitter or worthier of the 
favour of Jehovah, Go, and as you are by birth a child 



I ..Google 



of Adam, rebelling and departing from God, become by 
the second birth a child of Adam returning and reconciled. 
Take God's promise of life,— life through the living one, — 
the seed of the woman ; talte it and be saved, take it and 
be blest ; and when thou hast thus received God's record, 
confess with thy mouth, as thy first father did. Make it 
manifest thou art a believing man ; not a doubting, dis- 
trusting, wavering man, but a hUsDiiig man. 



Ver. 21. ' Unto Adam also (Heb. and utriB Adam), and to Ms -wife, 
did the Lord God make coats o/skins,^ and clothed them.' 

Adam's faith, so far as it went, was true and firm, but it 
was dim. The extent of his own wants he knew not. 
The kind of remedy which his case required he understood 
not. The way in which the promised deliverance was to 
come he could not foresee. All that as yet he knew 
was, that God had revealed Himself as gracious, and had 
pledged His love ; therefore he could trust Him entirely, 
not merely for showing favour to the sinner, but for pro- 
viding a way in which grace and righteousness might be 
reconciled. 

Adam, however, having now made solemn confession of 
his faith, God proceeds to take another step by which 
some furtlier insight into the process of deliverance was 
to be given. Adam had believed at once, without sign or 

^-i\]l nijna, coats of stln. Tunicas pelliceas, Vulg.; X,™,«( 
liif/ia^iioii!. Sept, The word denotes properly, under-gaiments, fitting 
closely to the body. Thus there are three points of contrast ; (l) sKn 
contrasted with fig-leaves ; (2) close-fitting garments with the loose 
fig-leaves ; (3) the self-made fig-leaf clothing with the God-made skin- 
clothing. 



jiGoogle 



202 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

pledge exhibited, and God honours his faith by a further 
revelation of His purpose, making him to know that 
'blessed is he that hath not seen, and yet hath believed;' 
that 'to him that hath shall be given;' that 'if any man 
is willing to do the will of God, he shall know of the 
doctrine.' 

In Adam's first estate no shame was felt, but as soon as 
he sinned shame covered his face. He showed this by 
his fleeing to the thickets, and he showed it by the fig- 
leaves with which he covered himself. God now deals 
with him as one ashamed, and who has just cause of 
shame. He takes for granted that Adam's shame and 
sense of sin were right things, and He proceeds to deepen 
them, to make him fed his sin more bitterly, to unfold the 
evil of sin, to spread out before him the infinite wants 
wliich sin had occasioned, to make him understand how 
largely as well as how entirely he must be indebted to 
God, and to teach him how great that redemption must 
be, and that Redeemer who was to accomplish his de- 
liverance. 

He begins by taking off their fig-leaves^for, doubtless, 
this act was His — and then giving them coats made by 
His own hand, coats of skin for their covering.^ In so 

'The utter blindness of most of the Fathers lo the real meaning of 
this, is one of the many proofs that might be given that they neither 
prized nor knew the truth of salvation by another's righteousness, and 
life by the death of a substitute. Some of them affirm that the gar- 
ments were made of ' skins of trees ; ' others, such as Origen, that it 
is Adam.'s bodv that is meant, as haying become fleshly by his sin. 
This absurdity Epiphanius refutes in a letter, which Jerome has trans- 
lated, and left among his own woiks, calling x'l. frivolam expositionein 



jiGoogle 



doing was He not saying, 'Look at your sin; it is far 
deeper and darker than you reckon, so deep and dark 
that no fig-leaves can cover it or hide your shame ; there 
must be something else even for your bodies than cover- 
ings derived from the trees of the garden ; something 
which I only can provide and put on ; not the growth of 
the fields like these fig-leaves, but obtained by the death 
of the being from which it is taken ; something which 
costs life, which points to blood and death ; something 
which will continually remind you that a sinner's covering 
must be a thing planned by God, provided h^ God, made 
by God, put on by God, yet a thing of earth, not of heaven, 
a thing not outwardly comely or bright, yet costly, so 
costly that even God can obtain it only by taking that 
which is more precious than gold or gems, the life of the 
creature which He has made'?^ 

Thus was man taught that one great point in his coming 
deliverance would be the covering. He needed to be 
covered, else he could not look up to God, nor could God 
look upon him; nay, he could not look upon himself 

(Jerome's Works, vol. i. p. 210). Theodoret and Atlranasius come 
nearer the trnth, maintaining the garments to be really from slain 
animals, and to teinteniied to point out to man his sin^and its penalty, 
death. But tlie idea of sacriiice does not seem to have occurred to 
them ; j-u^jSoJ-oi oiTut, -ni hi rhr iftafriiu riifatiai aliT^ vfifyiteiiKiJii. 
Athan. Oh ike Cross and Passion. Works, vol. i. p. loi z. 

' Man was not left to provide this clothing, for the right to use 
animals for such a purpose could come only from God, and because 
' God would teach man that it belongethonlyto God to cover sin with 
the clothing of the Redeemer's righteousness.' — DloriATl. Some 
suggest that Adam was thus to be humbled and made to feel how 
low he had fallen when the beasts of the field cnust furnish him 
with clothing.— Fag IDS, 



I ..Google 



204 THOLCrHTS Oi\ GBNE'^IS 

without shame. One aviful feehng oi the smner is, that 
he is naked before God, and this feehng is met by the 
clothing provided by God But as this feehng of shame 
is the rcsuh of sin and a consciousness of guilt, the cover- 
ing must be one which will assure him of forf,ivcness , for 
if the covering does not of it'itlf proclaim pardon, it will 
not remove the sense of shime It did this even in 
symbol when Adam was clothed with the sl^ms, it does 
so more truly when we see in it the righteousness of Him 
who was delivered for our offences, and raised again for 
our justification.^ Man's raiment will do nothing; his 
goodness, his repentance, his prayers, his feelings, these 
cannot cover sin, nor hide shame, nor pui^e the con- 
science; it must be through death that all this is to be 
done. 

God Himself must do it all. He selects the victim, He 
slays it. He makes the clothing, He puts it on.^ From 
first to last, salvation is of Jehovah ! It is salvation by 
death, by sacrifice, by the substitution of life for life. Nor 
could 4d m ai h n b t; the 

slaj h m m h n h g was 

mad d h mis h w n n eed, 

" tH g g rments, 

vem be H ui adise 

to p g whi h A am out ' 

(iVo ks p if hr m m ely our 

sham as w m H m 

>A th m ifi CO were 

the skins of the slain victims. Adam would at once connect these 
tilings together, the woman's seed, the bruised heel, the sacrifice, the 
clothing ; and how much of Christ would be learn from this ! That 
sacrifice should originate with man, or be a device of his for appeasing 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS 11 



1, 23. 






That slain Lan b and th t b 
mysterious w y 1 k d t g th 
connection ; h 1 th m 

as he looka p h 1 tl g 
was obtained 



d heel were in some 

? le would evolve the 

) iders it in his heart 

emembers whence it 



Vers. 22, 23. ' And tlie Lord God said. Behold, the man has hicome 
asoneof us, tu knc-iii good and evil: and now, lest he pit forth his hand, 
and take also of the tree of life {^t\>. the life), ami eat, and live for easy: 
23. Therefore (Heb. and) the Lard God sent Mm forth from the garden 
of Eden, to till the ground from whence hs iiias taken.' 

Adam has now been clothed with the God-provided 
raiment ; not raiment such as he would have devised or 
felt himself at liberty to propose,— raiment which re- 
minded him of his sin, yet exhibited the way of forgiveness 
and life through the death of a substitute. He stands 
before God as an accepted man, covered with a garment 
which removes his sense of shame, and enables him to 
look up to God without blushing or wishing to be hidden 
from His face ; teaching us that God's first dealings with 
the sinner are always about the matter of acceptance, and 
that this tiierefore ought to be our first point in dealing 
with God. 

But the question of acceptance being settled, that of 

God, is incredible. How couM man suppose tliat God would be 
pleased with tlie slaughter of one of His own creatures, or what con- 
nection could man discover between the death of one of fliese and 
pardon? Besides, what right had man to take away life? Could lie 
have dared to do so without a command from God? Those who 
speak of there being a rooted idea m (he minds oi all men as to the 
connection between the suffering or death of a creature and the ap- 
peasing of God's wrath, have yet to tell us how and when and where 
such an idee came into their mind. 



I ..Google 



206 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

discipline begins. On this Adam is now to enter. He 
had much to unleajn as well as much to learn. He had 
to be taught that, though forgiven, he stood now on a 
different footing from that on which he stood when a holy 
being, and that therefore a new line of treatment must 
be adopted- He might suppose that, being restored to 
favour, he would be reinstated in his former privileges, 
remain in Eden, and have access to the tree of life just as 
before. This, however, cannot be. He is not to be at 
once placed upon his former footing ; he is not to go on 
eating the tree of life, thus prolonging his days and enjoy- 
ing an immortality on earth. He has sinned the very sin 
against which God had warned him ; he has gotten ' for- 
bidden knowledge by forbidden means,' and thus far he 
has gained his end ; he has become as God, by eating of 
the tree of knowledge. God has forgiven him freely and 
without reserve, yet between his past and his future con- 
dition a great gulf must be fixed. He is indeed to 'live 
for ever,' but not the same kind of life, nor in the same 
way as heretofore The immortality for which he is now 
dcstmed is to be obtained, not by eating of the tree of 
life but throi.t,h death It is to be reached only by 
res urection Such was God's purpose respecting him and 
h s posterity It was to a more glorious immortality than 
that which he had !obt that he was now to be led, but its 
entrance was the giatei Meanwhile he must leave 
parad se an I be shut out from the tree of life. 

God b lesson now to Adam was, that he must still return 
to dust This pirt ot the doom was to remain, not so 
much as a remnait of the original sentence, as a chastise- 



I ..Google 



GEJV'ES/S u 



3, 23, 



rnent, a needed piece of discipline, and as the necessary 
passage to the new immortality that lay beyond. Had 
God allowed Adam to have access to the tree of life, it 
would have just been saying to him. Thou shalt not return 
to dust ; eat of the tree of life and preserve your immor- 
tality here, such as it is od this now blighted earth. To 
prevent him from entertaining any thought of this kind, 
and to fix his eye on resurrection, he was sent forth from 
paradise to till the ground from which he was taken, that 
is, Eden^ He was to be cast out of the inner circle which 
had been his home, and whose special fertility would have 
made his toil in keeping it a source of pleasure ; but he 
was still allowed to reniain within the outer and less fruitful 
circle, there to remain a toiling man all the days of his life. 
Such seems to be the true meaning of the above passage. 
There is no ground for believing it to be spoken as an 
interrogation, far less in irony. What more unlike God, 
than thus to be mocking His creatures at the very mo- 
ment that He is bending over them in such deep true 
love ? Is this like Him that ' upbraideth not ' ? Is it like 
Him who was 'grieved at His heart' because of man's 
iniquity? It is only once or twice that Scripture speaks 
ironically, and it is to the daringly ungodly, as to the priests 
of Baal. But does irony befit a scene like this? Stand- 
ing on the wreck of a newly-made, newly-ruined world, 
having just proclaimed to man His grace, and pointed 
him to the coming Redeemer, is it possible that He can 
utter irony, and wound without a cause His weeping 

' Formerly lie had but to ' keep and dress,' now he is to ' till ; ' 
formerly it was paradise, now it is the enter region. 



I ..Google 



208 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

children? Besides, what follows is so solemnly expressed 
('lest he put fo'rth his hand, and eat, and live for ever'), 
even in its very abruptness so like the solemn oath of 
God against Israel's entrance on the land ('lest they 
should enter into my rest '), that we cannot admit of 
irony in the case at all. There is so much of deep love 
on the one hand, and of stem judgment on the other, 
that the introduction of irony here would be quite out of 
place. Nor will there appear any necessity for such a 
supposition, if our previous exposition of the tree of life 
be remembered. 



Ver. 24. 'So (Heb. and) He drove oul the man ,-' and Hi placed at 
Ike east of the garden of Eden ckemiims ' and a flaming sword ■ailiick 
turned esery way, to keep the way to the tree of life.' 

Man, however reluctant, must leave paradise. Neither 
God's purpose, nor His honour, can allow him to remain. 

^ j^-i3_ It is tlie same word as is used for 'driving out' the nations 
of Canaan, Ex. xxxiv. 1 1 ; for ' divorcing ' a wife. Lev. ixL 7 ; for 
' casting out ' the bondwoman, Gen. xxi. 10 ; for the ' thrusting out ' 
of Israel from Egypt, Ex. xii. 39. The Sept give sJiBiJ-j ; the 
Vulgate, gecit ; Tremellius, expiilit; Orion paraphrases it, 'He 
drove out the man by iriolence. ' The Jews say that God led Adam 
gently by the hand till he came to the entrance, and then, as he hting 
back, He thrust him out by force. ' The double expression of the 
driving of man out of paradise seems to imply, that God would have 
special notice taken of that judgment of His upon him. '—White, 

' The Sept. render the passage, 'He cast out Adam and made Iiim 
to dwell in front of paradise, and stationed the cherubim, ' etc. They 
most have had ajiother reading before them. But the word 'He 
placed,' in our translation, does not bring out the full sense. It is 
literally, ' He made the cherjbim to dwell at the east, ' etc. It is the 
same word as in Josh, xviii. I, 'He setup the tabernacle;' Ei. xkv. 8, 



jiGoogle 



Whether ejected by force we cannot say, but his unwilUng- 
ness to quit seems implied. 

His expulsion is not to be viewed, as is generally done, 
as mere ejection from a happy dwelling, his own special 
home, as if this were his punishment. No, it is banish- 
ment from God and from His presence, that is the true 
idea which the passage presents to us.^ Paradise was 
not so much Adam's home as Jehovah's dwelling. It 
corresponded to the holy of holies ; it was the chamber 
of the presence of the great King. And Adam's being, 
cast out of this, corresponded to Israel's being kept out- 
side the holiest, and not allowed to enter into the im- 
mediate presence of God, where He dwelt between the 
cherubim.^ Though Adam's banishment was in some 

• that I may dwell among them ; ' Fs. Ixxxv.. 9, ' tbat gloty may liiudl 
in our land ;' Ex. xxiv. 16, 'the glory of the Lord abode,' — expressions 
ivhicli call to mind similar ones in the New Testament : ' the Word 
was made flesh, and dwell among us,' 'that Christ may aiorf/ in youc 
hearts by iaxih,' etc Faber remarks : 'The force of the original 
Hebrew is, that God placed these cherubim in a tabernaale.' — Hor/s 
Mosaics, vol. ii. p. 34, 

' Hence Cain, usmg the same word, says, ' Thou hast driven me- 
out ' (Gen. iv. 14) ; and Jonah says, ' I am cast out of Thy sight ' 
(ii, 4), hoth of them referring to being banished from the presence of 



h 






d h ru 
VOL. VI. 





dered 




m The 




T sta. 




gra e, so, 



jiGoogle 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



e of the nature of z. punishment, yet its chief object 
was to announce that truth which it took ages to unfold, 
that there was a hindrance to man's drawing near to God, 
that ' the way into the holiest of all was not yet made 
manifest.' 

Man is banished from paradise, yet he is left within 
sight of it ; he is allowed to remain in Eden.' He is not 
driven into some desert, as if there were nothing for him 
but wrath. There is favour for him in spite of his sin ; 
and the expulsion does not cancel the pardon he has 
received, or intimate that God has begun to frown. It 
merely showed that before the full consequences of that 
favour could reach man, time must elapse, and barriers 
be thrown down. It is not the ' outer darkness,' neither 
is it the full sunshine, into which he is brought It is the 
twilight that surrounds him ; and .that twilight assures him 
of the coming noon. 

He is left to linger at the gate, or wander round the 
sacred fences of that forbidden ground. For paradise is 
not swept off nor swaDowed up.^ It is left as God's 
temple, now shut up aad empty, bnt stiU within sight of 

that it would thus mean the ' sculptures ' or symbols. We need not 
■enter into the fancies either of the Rabbis or of the Fathers on this 

' Adam was formed in Eden, outside of paradise, and then taken 
into paradise, which was the dwelling of God, where God ' walked,' 
and where the ' voice ' was heard. Now, after his sin, he is cast out 
of the temple and replaced in Eden. 

' White takes up the pomt of God's leaving parsuiise, as a monu- 
ment both of God's judgment and mercy, and shows how thereby He 
'justified Himself, and convinced men of their unworthy carriage 
towards Him,' — On the first thrm chapters of Geimk. 



I ..Google 



man. Probably it shared the common blight of creation ; 
though, like primeval man, it took long to wither; till, 
having waxed old and being ready to vanish away, the 
deluge came and swept it from the earth.^ It remained 
as a specimen of God's original handiwork, reminding 
man of the glory which he had lost. It stood as a monu- 
ment of what sin had done in blighting God's perfect 
creation, and turning man into an exile. It showed how 
God estimates the material creation, and that matter is 
not the defiling and hateful thing which some conceive it 
to be. It proclaimed that God had not wholly left the 
earth, and that in His own set time He would return to 
it; nay, that man, though for a season dethroned and 
banished, should yet repossess, earth as king and lord. 
Thus God, in preserving paradise for a season, with man 
a wanderer outside its gates, announced these truths to 
the ages to come, — truths which were afterwards embodied 
in types and promises, and unfolded at length to us by 
His holy prophets. For the prophecies of after ages are 
but the translation into words of the facts which these 
primeval scenes presented to the eye. 

Within the sacred enclosure, towards its eastern ex- 
tremity, God placed, or made to dwell, 'the cherubim.''' 

' Speaking of the cherubim and paradise, Faber says : ' As no hint 
is given that the paradisaical cherubim were ever withdrawn before 
the flood, and as the same reason which first caused them to be 
stationed before the garden still subsisted until the very time of the 
deluge, we have ample ground for concluding that their manifestation 
)t temporary, but permanent.'— fiors Mosaics, vol, ii. p, 35- 

" " " "" Jiave 

It the 



I ..Google 



212 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

Of this word no explanation is here given ; but from the 
way in which it is introduced, and from the article 'the' 
prefixed, we conclude that it was quite familiar to Moses, 
and that the children of Israel would at once understand it 
as denoting the same thing which they were commanded 
to place in the holy of holies. No Israelite would under- 
stand it of certain living beings moving to and fro, but 
of a symbolic figure or statue, such as that in their own 
tabernacle. Just as 'the cherubim' were afterwards set 
in 'the holiest,' and for the same symbolical ends, so were 
they placed in paradise. There is nothing more to lead 
us to suppose that they were living beings (such as angels) 
in their former abode in the garden, than in their latter 
in the wilderness. In both they were symbols} 

Of what, then, were they the symbols ? There is no 
proof of their being representatives of angels, still less of 

east of the garden of Eden, the fire unfolding itself to preserve in- 
violate the way of the tree of life ; ' or, as Mr. Morison [Key to the 
Scrifilures) interprets it, ' to point out the way to Jesus Christ, tlie 
true tree of life.' This would bring the scene to a still nearer resem- 
blance of that within the tahemaele ; for thus, ' He who was wor- 
shipped, dwelling between the cherubim in the temple ajid tabernacle, 
was worshipped also at the east of Eden, between the cherubim also, 
and that accompanied by the visible emblem, the Shekinah or ilame 
of fire.' — MoEisoN's A'g", p. 15. 

' After showing that \hejerm of the cherubim must have been well 
known to Israel, inasmuch as no special directions ore given to Moses 
or to Besaleel as to their construction, and after eypressing his judg- 
ment that tbey were not withdrawn tOl the deluge, Mr. Paber adds ; 
' We can scarcely aroid concluding, when we reflect upon the close 
analogical cesemblance in every particular, that they bore the very 
same relation to the stated worship of patr jarchism as the cherubim of 
the Levitical tabernacle did to the stated woisliip of the law.'— //iwis 
Mosaics, vol, ii. p. 36. 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS II 



the Trinity, as some have thought ; there are nc 
connecting the cherubim with either of these. They are 
always introduced in connection with man, and man's 
redemption.^ They are referred to about a hundred 
times in the Old Testament, but only in the above con- 
nection. In Ezekiel (i. 5, 8, ro) it is s d ti ey '1 d he 
likeness of a man,' and the 'liands of a nu -i d tl e 
'face of a man.' In Isaiah, also (vi, a 6) they have f e 
and feet, and hands, — being eviden ly the same as n 
Ezekiel, though called seraphim. Tl en fur 1 er we fi d 
them connected with the lower orders of creat on tl 
the Hon, and the ox, and the eagle, — tl e reprcse 1 es of 
the different orders of animals (EzeL 10) Then we 
find them associated witia the vege able ere t on — tl e 
' palm-tree ' (Ezek. xli. 18, 20, 25), tie re^rese tat e of 
that order of creation, and the welll.no i sjmbol of 
triumph and joy, not only in the case of lb ael (Jer i\ 
40), but of the redeemed multitude (Re 9) Tl e 1 

we observe them in connection with CI t H mself {Ex 
XXV, 19, xxxvii. 8), being ' made out of the mercy eat 
or, as the apostle expounds it, ' He that sanctif etl -uid 
they that are sanctified, are all of one 1 erally out of 
one> made or taken out of one being or one p ce -id 
in Ezekiel's description {i. 26, 27) we 1 sco er a m 
evidently the incarnate Son Himself, upon the throne that 

' See, in reference to the whole sutiject of the clienibiin, Mr. Smith's 
admirable worli, The Doctrine of the CJierubim ['Loagraan, 1850) ; also, 
thongh with less satisfaction, such worlts as the following :—Faber's 
Jlor^ Mosaics, and Origin of Pagan Idolatry ; Ih-. Sharp's Discourses 
in answer to Hutchison, where the etymology of the name cherub is 
well investigated, pp. 397-407. 



jiGoogle 



214 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

was over the cherubim. Further, we find them in closest 
relationship to the symbols of redemption (Ex. xxxvii. i, 
9). They were part of tlie mercy-scat ; they stood upon 
the mercy-seat, their feet were upon the blood with which 
it was sprinkled (Lev. xvi. 14), and, of course, they 
themselves would share the sprinkhng; their abode was 
a chamber, every part of which vras sprinkled with blood ; 
they were enveloped in the incense which went up from 
tiie high priest's censer on the day of atonement (Lev. 
xvi. 12, 13); their eyes, bending downwards, were ever 
fixed upon the blood of the mercy-seat And then, in 
Revelation, where these same symbols reappear, only as 
in Isaiah and Ezekiel, instinct with life, there can be no 
mistake as to the beings represented, for they sing the 
song of redemption {Rev. v. 9), 'Thou hast redeemed us 
to God by Thy blood.' The whole scene carries us back 
to the Old Testament emblems as given by Moses, by 
Isaiah, and by Ezekiel. These are the wings, the mystic 
faces, the incense, the blood, the throne, and, last of all, 
the glorious triumph of which the palm-trees were the 
symbol, 'We shall reign on the earth' (v. 10). 

That the cherubim were the symbols of a coming re- 
demption, and foreshadowed re-entrance into that very 
presence of Jehovah from which man had just been cast 
out, seems evident.^ But the peculiar forms and various 

' Athana^us, though not inteipreting the cherubim as we have done, 
yet notices rather strikingly the Lord's promise to the thief, ' To-day 
shall thou be with me in paradise,' as showing that Clirist has re- 
opened its gates, so that Adam, in the person of the thief, enters his 
lost habitation. See his Exposition of the Pailh. It is as if now the 



I ..Google 



CEN^ESTS II 



24- 



appendages belonging to them intimate that more than 
man are concerned in this restitution. The figures of the 
lion, and the eagle, and tlie palm-tree indicate that the 
whole creation is to share in the blessing. The symbol 
is not merely one of redeemed man, but of a redeemed 
creation, from man, the head, down to the lowest foima 
of being. All that God created ' good ' is thus symbolized 
as awaiting deliverance in the day of tlie manifestation of 
the sons of God ; and thus the three concluding psalms, 
so minute in their details of piaise, so prophetic of the 
glory of creation in all its parts, and so often sung befoie 
that God who ' inhabited the cherubim,' with their com- 
mencing and closing hallelujalis, shall be found most 
wondrously to harmonize with that burst of universal 
praise from ' every creature in heaven, and on the earth, 
and under the earth, and in the sea' (Rev. v, 13), — to 
' Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb 
for ever and ever,' 

But while the symbols of redemption are thus set up in 
paradise, they are not to be too nearly approached.^ In 
front of them there is placed 'a flaming sword which 
turned every way;' or, more exactly, 'the flame of the 



gates of paradise were thrown open, and the second Adam enters witli 
the chief of sinners at His ^de, leading the way. Who is there on 
this sinftil earth that may not follow ? 

La tant is, in his book on the Origin of Error, alluding to man's 

expul n ays ! ' Paradise itself He surrounded with fire (igiie circunt' 

11 t) that man might not approach till the time when He shall set 

J dgn t n the eartli, and recall tlie righteous who serve Him to that 

s me p t (paradise), when deajh has been taken away.' — Book ii. 



jiGoogle 



Zl6 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

sword which turned itself.' Tliis self-revolving flame was 
the symbol of Him who is 'a coasammg Jire ;' of Him 
who appeared as 'devouring _;fra' on Sinai (Ex. xxiv. 17); 
of Him who sent forth to Israel His 'fiery law' (Deut. 
jixxiii. 3) ; of Him whose throne is like the fiery flame, 
and His wheels like burning fire (Dan, vii. 9); of Him 
who is to be 'revealed from heaven in flaming fire' 
(2 Thess, i. 8). That this fiery sword was part of, or at 
least connected with, the Shekinah, is evident from the 
first chapter of Ezekiel, which is a description of the 
Shekinah,' 

This fiery sword took up its position at the gate of 
paradise, to bar all entrance to man. It not only, like 
the veil in the tabernacle, hindered his entrance, but 
threatened him with death should he attempt it. It was 
God's awful prohibition of man's entrance into the pre- 
sence of God until the hindrances which existed should 
be taken out of the way. Till the woman's seed should 
arise, and by the blood of His 'bruised heel' remove 
that flaming barrier, man ^ must remain outside.^ From 
that flame came the fire which consumed the sacrifice on 
the altar, which was doubtless erected in front of paradise, 
teachmg min that it was thiou^h the iltir, and the 
sacritice and the blood that the way was at length to 

1 Eseljel 3 expression (chap 1 ') a Qre unfoU ng itself,' bears 
man test refe cnce to this express 01 n Genesis The self-linking 
flamei of Ezekiel and the self wh ring lire of Moses are slriltlngly 
amlar 

° Jerome speaks ibout Christ removing tl at flaming wheel and 
fiery s vord 1 ich w ere at the gates of paradise and entering in with 
tie thef — ff-or^ vol v f 10 



I ..Google 



GENESIS II 



be opened up, and paradise repossessed in greater 
blessedness and glory than before. But not till the true 
altar had been reared, and the true sacrifice slain, and the 
true blood shed, could there be boldness to enter into 
the holiest. Not till then would it be said, 'Let us draw 
near with a true heart, in the full assurance of faith' 
<Heb. X. 19-22). 

The 'tree of life' was not at once uprooted. It re- 
mained where it had first been planted. But man was 
not to touch it yet. He mi^ht see it afar off, with the 
fiery sword between, bnt access is prohibited. Its fruit 
is no longer to be tasted. He is to live, not to die ; he 
is to be made heir of a more glorious life than he had 
possessed before, but not by means of that tree of life. 
His new life is to come in another way, and through 
anodier channel, of which that tree was but the symbol ; 
through Him who is the resurrection and the life. So 
that it was as if that now prohibited tree were pointing 
his eye to something beyond and above itself, saying, 
Look not at me, but at Him of whom I am but the 
shadow. 

Man is now to worship outside of paradise. The 
favour of God is freely given ; but intercourse, though not 
denied, is restricted. Man must now worship in the 
outer court. The hope of re-admission is vouchsafed, 
but the time is indefinitely deferred. The tree of life is 
to be again thrown open to him in far more blessed 
circumstances (Rev. ii. 7, xxii. 2), but no intimation is 
made of what lies between, 

Man's altar is reared before the gate of paradise, in 



I ..Google 



2iS THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

front of the flaming sword ; and there he lays his sacrifice, 
at once pleading for re-admission, and preparing the way 
for it The cherubim are at the eastern extremity; the 
tree of life in ' the midst ; ' the flame at the gate ; outside, 
the altar ! Such was God's first outline of a temple ; an 
outline which, though often, altered in the course of ages, 
still preserved its main features throughout.' From that 
day to this we have been worshippers outside paradise. 
Faith takes us into the holiest of all : and in that sense 
we have been already re-admitted, for the veil has been 
rent, and the fiery sword withdrawn, or rather quenched — 
quenched in the blood of the sacrifice. But still we have 
not yet been actually admitted. We still wait the re- 
appearance of the woman's seed, and then shall not only 
our first father Adam, but all the saved seed', a mighty 
multitude, in one glorious band, re-enter with songs and 
everlasting joy upon their heads, with no dread before of a 
second ejection and a second exile: 

Then we shall have unhindered access into a better 
paradise than the first, and be privileged to eat of the tree 
of life, which is in the midst of it Then shall the re- 
deemed from among men, the true cherubim, of which all 

' One of these changes we may notice, though not able to aceovmt 
foe it. Paradise lay at the eastern eKtremity of Eden, and the cherubim 
at the eastern extremity of paradise (though some tMnIt that the words 
' at the east ' ought to be rendered ' before, ' or ' in front of ' — Fades). 
In the tabernacle this was altered, as it was placed east and west, with 
its gate to the east, and the holy of holies to the weaL On the other 
hand, the temple was placed on the east side of Jemsalem, as 
paradise lay east of Eden. EzekEel's temple is represented as situated 
on the south side of the momitain (xl, 2), though its position is the 
same as' the tabernacle, the main gate being towards the east. 



jiGoogle 



that have been seen hitherto have been but the shadows, 
take up their residence in the true tabernacle which the 
Lord hath pitched for them, where they shall abide in 
nearest communion, seeing face to face, and knowing 
even as they are known. 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Ver, 1, 'And Adam knew Eve Ms ■mifi ;'^ and she conaived, and 
bare Cain, and said, Ihtwegolkn a inanfrom the Lord.' 

IT is no longer paradise that stands before us. We leave 
it and its fair scenes behind us, not to see them again 
till the visions of Patmos bring them before us in more 
than primal glory. The guarded gate, the sword of fire, 
the cherubim, the tree of life, — all these are to be lost sight 
of for a season, and our eye to be directed to the won- 
drous process by which the lost heritage Is to be redeemed, 
and man put in possession of a home fairer than that 
which he had lost, yet bearing still the unforgotten name, 
the paradise of God, It is as if a cloud or veil were flung 
over Eden, that all concerning it might henceforth be 

' In miuiitaming that this was after they had quitted paradise (and 
not before, as some Jewish and even Christian ivriters supposed), 
Augustine reasons, tliat the temptation and fall occurred imiiiediatdy 
after tKe creation of woman, which seems likely. Jerome reasons, in 
liis own ascetic way, that paradise was ' non nup^s sed vii^nitati 
destinatnm. ' Musculus infers that it must haie been so, as the fruit 
of the conception was Cain, showing that he had been shapen in iniquity 
and conceived in sin. This first clause is to show us, that though 
Adam iiad been forrned from the ground, and Eve from Adam's side, 
yet now there was the commencement of God's system for the propaga- 
tion of the race, in virtue of which each one was to be connected with 
Adam. ' Memorat neque ex terra neque quovis alio modo hominem 
nasci sed ex conjunetione maris et fceminse, quS per unum hominem 
peccatum in omnem postetitatem trans fuiiditur.' — RUNOIUS, p. 220. 



jiGoogle 



things of faith to man. That cloud still wraps it; but the 
fulness of time shall come ; the cloud shall part asunder, 
and, rising upwards, disclose to view not merely paradise 
regained, but something more excellent and divine, — ' the 
inheritance which is incorruptible, undefiled, and that 
fadeth not away.' The last glimpse we had of paradise 
was when the first Adam, with his sorrow-stricken partner, 
left its gates, which closed behind them ; the next is, when 
the second Adam and His triumphant Bride are entering 
its unfolded gates, with songs and everlasting joy upon 
their heads. 

We quit paradise, then, and follow Adam to his new 
home outside its gate, yet not far off from its still visible 
glory. We have seen him as the first husband : we now 
see him as the first father. We get a glimpse, too, of Eve, 
the wife and mother, now first experiencing the bitterness 
of the curse that sin has drawn down on her. We learn 
also the first result of the Command, ' Be fruitful and 
multiply ; ' and we see that, thus far at least, the curse 
has been repealed or suspended, for the original blessing, 
' Be fruitful,' is still in force. Sin has not prevailed to 
cancel the blessing, though it has embittered and sad- 
dened it. 

Months, of course, have passed on ere she brings forth 
Gain; and during these she would be led to meditate 
much upon tlie promise. Though she has never yet 
looked upon the face of infancy, and has only seen the 
connection between mother and offspring in the animal 
creation around her, bringing forth their young after their 
kind ; yet she could not but have some idea of what was 



I ..Google 



222 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

about to take place, and could not but be anticipating, 
not only the threatened pings, but the gladness that 
follows, making her forget all tliese in the joy thit \ 
man is born into the woild 

In tlie expected fruit of her womb, what could she 
see but the promised seed? Unless the contriry hid 
been revealed to her, it seems impossible thit she could 
have counted on anything else, if she believed the 
promise ; and, no doubt, with anxious longings did she 
look forward to the day when the child of promise should 
be bora What months of solemn thought, -md self- 
humiliation, and earnest hope, and minj,led grief and lov, 
must these have been ' The day cime at list, and ra 
the hour that she became a mother, her f-iitJi, resting on 
the promise, yet but dimlj seeing how it was to be 
fulfilled, broke forth m the exulting cry, 'I have gotten 
a man from the Lord,' calling his name Cain, which 
signifies a possession.;' as if she said, 'Jehovah has 
fulfilled His promise; I have gotten the deliverer: I 
will call him the gotten one, — die possession.' 

Thus did her faith and hope declare themselves. She 
recognises Jehovah in this. It is He who has given her 
joy in the midst of grief; so that, though burdened vvith 
the awful consciousness of having ruined a world, she 
now rejoices in the thought of giving birth to the world's 
deliverer. She sees how Jehovah has remembered His 

' The often suggested translation, 'I have gotten a man, even 
Jehovah,' is not an unlikely one, Jehovah was in reality Messiah's 
original name ; ' He was to be ' the ' comii^ one.' Enoch knew that 
name as Messiah's : ' Behold, the Lord cometh ' (Jude 14). 



jiGoogle 



promise, and she rejoices, as if now the effects of her sin 
were to be at once effaced. Her light must, indee<3, have 
been dim. She had little to rest upon ; just one brief 
promise. Yet faith, when simple, makes much of little 
things ; and so did Eve's. The promise had been like a 
seed sown in the eaith. She had been watching its up- 
springing; and now, when the first traces of it appear, 
she gives utterance to her joy. She views it, too, as 
favour shown to herself. Not foreseeing the sword that 
was to pierce through her own heart, she rejoices that 
God has thus visited her in her low estate, and manifested 
His love. She had felt His frown when He proclaimed 
to her the sorrows awaitmg her as a mother; and now 
she tastes His smile, and receives from His gracious 
hand the gift of fitheily love ; — love that had freely for- 
given her, and was now pounng down on her the blessings 
of its free bountifulness. 

We saw Adam's faith showing itself in the naming of 
his wife ; we now see Eve's in the naming of her son. 
In calling his wife Eve, Adam spake as a believing man ; 
and in naming her first-bom Cain, Eve speaks as a believ- 
ing woman ; as one who knows Jehovah, knows Him as 
her God, and finds in His grace and faithfulness her rest 
and joy ; as one who has understood the promise, and sets 
her seal to the sure word of the great Promiser. No 
doubt she spoke in much ignorance ; but still it was faith 
speaking; and though, in after years, when she found 
her sad mistake, she might mourn over disappointed 
hopes, yet, looking back on the day when she remem- 
bered her grief no more for joy that a man was born, 



I ..Google 



224 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

she could still say, 'I believed, therefore I s| lii. She 
had been watLhui;^ tbe first spnogiiig of the seed, and, 
to her unpractised eye, it seemed no« to hi\e sprung up 
111 Its first upburstin^, she could not discern the difference 
between the seed of the ^lomin ind the seed ot the 
serpent She deemed it the former, but it proved the 
latter btill her faith i,^as called out, she belie\ed and 
spal-e , ind though soon undeceived, yet not the less 
was It liith in her, though it failed to discern the differ 
ence at first between that which was from beneith and 
that which ■v\ is from above 

Ihus simple ought our faith to be, — lookmg straight 
to God, ind itsting on His promises It will mike roiny 
mistakes and meet with many disappointments, yet m 
the end it will not lose its reward, for He on whom it 
rests shdl come at length, though He seem to tarry long 
It IS not a filth free fiom mistakes thit God expects of 
us, but a faith which, m spite of mistakes and deli>s, 
rests on Himself and His sure woid knowing that all 
He has spoken will soona or later come most surelj to 



Ver. 2. 'And she again bare Ms brother Abel. And Abel was a 
keip^ of skiip, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.' 

There is no proof that the brothers were twins, though 
some have thought so. The narrative seems to warrant 
the common idea, that there was an interval; how long, 
we know not It was long enough to let Eve feel what 
a world of vanity and sorrow she dwelt in ; to show that 
she was a stranger on the earth; and, accordingly, she 



I ..Google 



GENESIS r 



225 



gave vent to the sorrowful feelings of her heart (as did 
aftenvards the mother of Jabez, i Chron. iv. 4) in calling 
him Abel, that is, vanity. In the name of her first-born, 
we see her up-springing joy of heart, as if now the wrong 
she had wrought were to fae repaired; in the name of 
her second-born, we trace the utterance of hope deferred, 
making the heart sick, yet raising it up^vards to something 
above the vanities of this vain earth. It was the second 
time that a mother's pangs had been upon her, and in 
passing through them she is made to feel that this is not 
her rest. 

The boys grew up, and Cain followed the calling of his 
father Adam, feeling, doubtless, the weight of the curse 
in the toil and sweat which the tilling of the ground cost 
him.^ So that he especially ought to have known the 
evil of sin, seeing that he was made, more than his 
brother, to endure the curse. That he did not, only 
shows how despeiatcly he had hardened his heart against 
the dealings of God, and refused the teachings by which 
the Holy bpuit sought to convince him of sin. How 
much might a man's earthly lot teach him, if he would 
but hsten to God s voice in it ! But he will not, and so 
his conscience becomes seared by that very discipline 

^ 'By lliis, it seems tiiat Cain was the man in favour, even him that 



shoi 




h ve been heir. He was nurtured up 


inh 




b Abd was set in the lower rank. '— 


JOH 




I first two chapters aj G«ims. An 


old 




h t Abel chose the shepherd's life as 


the 










eas Cain took to the latter, as not heeding 


the< 






Vui.. .1. 




5' 



jiGoogle 



225 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

which was meant to make it tender. Abel was a keeper 
of sheep ; finding in this occupation something more 
congenial to his spirit. He had thus a less rugged and 
toilsome life, as well as one which left him more of leisure 
and of solitude, in which he might often anticipate the 
feelings and song of David, 'The Lord is my shepherd.' 
And if Cain's employment ever reminded him of the curse, 
and spoke to him of sin, Abel's showed him the Lamb 
of God, by whom the curse was to be borne, and brought 
continually into view the ' no condemnation ' in which he 
had learnt to rejoice. 

Vers. 3, 4. ' Andin pnxas of time (Heb. at the dhHsion t^ days) ii 
cante Is pass, that Cain dmug-M of the fruit of the ground an offering 
unto th^ Lord. 4. And Aid, kt also Irougkt of the firstlings of his 
flock, and of the fat thereof .' 

Each brought his offering to Jehovah; and this was 
done at what is called ' the division of days,' very pro- 
bably the Sabbath. The act mentioned here is evidently 
not one, but a series of acts, as if it had been said, ' they 
were in the habit of bringing.'* Here let us mark such 
things as the following : — 

1. Both worship professedly the same Jehovah. They 
acknowledge Him as Jehovah, their God. 

2. Both worship Him at the same place. In all Hkeli- 
hood they worshipped at the gate of paradise, and 
brought their offerings to the altar at which tlieir father 
worshipped. They frequent the same temple (if we may 
say so), and bow at the same altar. 



I ..Google 



'- 3, A 



3. Both come at the same appointed times and s 
Tliey observe all these outward parts of worship alike. 

4. Both bring an offering in their hands, thereby ac- 
knowledging the allegiance which was due to Jehovah. 

Thus far they are alike. But here the likeness ends, 
and the dilference begins. How great is that difference ! 
In man's eye, the likeness is great, and the difference 
small ; in God's eye, it is the opposite. 

1. Abel comes as a sinner, having no claim upon God, 
and feeling that it is only as a sinner that God can deal 
with him. Cain approaches as a creature only ; not 
owning sin, though willing to acknowledge the obligations 
of creaturehood. 

2. Abel comes acknowledging tfeai/t to be his due ; for 
he brings a Iamb, and slays it before the Lord, as a 
substitute for himself. Cain recognises no sentence of 
death ; he brings only his fruits, as if his grapes or his 
figs were all that he deemed God entitled to. His offer- 
ing might cost him more toil than his brother's, but it 
spoke not of death. It was meant to repudiate the ideas 
of sin and death, and salvation by a substitute.^ 

3. Abel comes with the blood in his hand, feeling that 
he dared not appear before God without it ; that it would 
not be safe for him to venture nigh, nor honourable for 
God to receive him otherwise. Nothing but the blood 

' See Smith's Sit^^. Test, to Messiah, s.nd.'ilLa.gee On the Atonsmsnt. 
Abel brought 'amore excellent sacrifise than Cain' (Heb. xL 4), 
!rj,i;o»os (asMt — which the Vulgate curiously renders 'plurimam hos- 
tiam.' It seems to mean, not merdy a more excdlent sacrifice, but 
a fuller one; something that had in it much more of a sacrifice llian 



I ..Google 



228 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

upon his conscience can give him confidence before God. 
Cain brings no blood, — doubtless scorning his brother's 
religion as ' the religion of the shambles ; ' a religion 
which increased instead of removing creation's pangs. 

4. Abel comes resting on the promise, — the promise 
which revealed and pledged the rich grace of God. Cain 
comes as one that needs no promise and no grace. His 
is what men call 'the religion of nature;' and in that 
religion there is no room, no need for these. 

In Cain's v^orship we see the germ of maris religion ; 
a religion which has taken a thousand various and 
subtle forms; a religion which, in these last days, is 
assuming yet more varied and subtle forms. In what- 
ever form we find it, we see at least two things invariably 
absent, — the recognition of the mere grace of God, and 
of the blood of the substitute as bringing that grace 
nigh. These are the two elements which Cain's religion 
sets aside; and these are still the two elements which 
man's religion abhors. 

God's religion turns on these two things; and these 
have ever been the joy and confidence of those who, 
like Abel, have learned to worship Him who is a Spirit 
in spirit and in truth. 



Vers. 4, 5. 'And the Lord had respect wnio Abel, and to Ms sffer- 
ing:^ 5- Butunto Cain, and- to kis offering. He had not respect.' 

Jehovah accepts the one brother and rejects the other. 

^ 'Herein are the true footsteps of grace discovered, viz. t]ie/»™« 
must be,;^;^ in &voi:ir with God ; the person first, the performance 
afterwards. ' — Bun yaw . 



I ..Google 



GENESIS IV. S. 229 

He intimated in some explicit way, — such as, perhaps, 
the coming down of iire from the Shekinah that rested 
between the cherubim, or the flaming sword that waved 
at the gate of paradise, — His weli-pleasedness with Abel. 
Of Cain He took no notice, marking most visibly His 
thoughts regarding the brothers. This -well-pkasedness 
and dispkasedness were, of course, marked things — things 
which Abel knew and which Cain knew, and which their 
parents knew. Abel knew that he was accepted ; Cain 
knew that he was rejected ; — God, from the beginning, 
thus showing us that He means us to know even here 
when we are accepted, and when we are not accepted. 
There was no uncertainty about either the one or the 
other, 'By faith, Abel offered to God a more excel- 
lent sacrifice than Cain ; ' and God left him in no doubt 
as to the acceptance of that offering. He obtained wit- 
ness that he was justified (Heb. xi. 4), 'God testifying 
of his gifts' — that is, giving some open testimony re- 
specting their acceptableness, by means of which all 
men knew that the favour of Jehovah was resting on 
him. He came to the altar each day, with the blood 
in his hand, as a believing man, and he was accepted. 
God made no secret of His love to him ; he left him in 
no doubt as to his acceptance, 

Ver. 5. 'And Cain -was i!ery wrvtk, and his ceuntenams fell.' 

Anger took possession of his bosom, and rested there 

{Eccles. vii. 9). He was ' very wroth : ' this was the first 

effect Then his ' countenance fell.' It was not the 

sudden flash of anger that lighted it up, but the gloom 



I ..Google 



33° TB OUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

of sullen, silent, deep-seated malignity that overshadowed 
it Its lines bent downwards ; he went hanging his head ; 
he will not look upward to heaven, for God has thwarted 
him ; he will not look around upon his brother, for he 
hates him, as one who has supplanted him in the favour 
of God.' He broods over his fancied wrong Eind insult, 
meditating revenge, not merely against Abel, but against 
God. He is not led to repentance, or heart-searchmg 
as to the reason of God's making such a difference. 
He is too proud to admit the thought that the fault 
can be with himself. He cannot bear the thought that 
God should prefer another, and that one his own brother. 
Instead of saying, Well, I am glad that Abel is to be 
blest if I am not, he quenches all natural affection, 
and scowls upon him in bitter wrath. Nor can he 
endure to think that another should be preferred on 
such grounds, — the difference between the fruits of the 
field and the firstlings of the flock I Had the preference 
turned upon any other point, it would not have seemed 
so irritating ; had it been because Cain was immoral and 
Abel moral, it would not have been felt as so insulting ; 
but that it should turn upon the difference between a 
cluster of grapes and a lamb of the flock, this was in- 
tolerable. Such are still the feelings of Cain's successors, 
the men of this world. They are angry at others being 

' Yet why be so angry, if he did not care for God's favour ? It 
seems as if no being, however evil, can erase from his mind the idea 
of God's favour being desirable. Hence the first exhibition of envy 
and malice was not on account of man's fi-iendship or woman's love, 
but for the favour of God. 



jiGoogle 



accepted ; envious of tlie peace of believing men ; unable 
■ to bear the idea of assurance of pardon ; enraged at God 
for bestowing favour on a friend, or neighbor, or brother. 
heart of man! what art thou? the seat of every evil 
passion, the fountain of enmity both against man and 
God. 

Ver. 6. ' And tke Lord said unto Cam, Why art thou mrsth f and 
why is thy aaatimcmce faUen ? If thou dstst wdl, shall thou not he 
acceptedf- and if thou doesl not wdl, sin lidh^ al the door.' Andunto 
thee shall be his desire, and thou shali rule over him.' 

Jehovah now speaks to Cain.* He had given visible 
indications of the non-acceptance of Cain's fruit-offering ; 
and this had been followed by anger and sullen defiance 

' The word means lifting up, exaltation, for^veness, acceptance. 

^ The word signifies either sin or siu - offering, hardly ever the 
punishment or penalty. It occurs upwards of a hundred times as 
'sin-offering,' which seems to be its meaning here. 

' 'The door' — the door of the paradise, in front of which they 
worshipped, and where the sin-offering slighted by Cain is pointed to 
as lying. 'The door of the tabernacle, ' and 'the door of the temple,' 
were in afler ages well-ltnown expressions. 

' The divine voice no doubt came from ' the excellent glory,' the 
Shekinah, the presence of the Lord, before which our first parents 
worshipped. ' Enough has been already said in the preceding volumes 
of this work to warrant the conclusion that the worship of the Israelites 
"was no other Ihan patriarchism, by various additions and special 
institutions, adapted to the pecoliar sitnation of a people which had 
been selected by Jehovah." There was therefore a special place 
where God was worshipped by sacrifice before the cherabim. Of 
the nature and character of the rites performed in this primitive 
worship it is difficult to speak with any precision ; but it js evident 
that there must have been a person (in those days generally the fiithef 
of the family) to offer (he sacrifice ; and in all probability there was, 
in the pure patriarchal period, some visible fire or glory representing 
the presence of Deity.' — Smith's Sacred Annals, vol L p, 9. 



I ..Google 



233 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

on the part of the rejected worsliipper. He now audibly 
addresses him, just as he spoke afterwards to Abraham, 
and to Moses, and to Israel. The words spoken are in 
the form of a gentle expostulation. There is no wrath in 
them, as we might have expected. It is the voice of long- 
suffering and compassion. It is ^ace that is dealing with 
the sinner ; grace like that which dealt with Judas when 
the ' sop ' was given, the last token of friendly forbearance, 
'Why hast thou become thus angry? and why has thy 
countenance fallen ? ' Art thou not acting most unreason- 
ably as well as sinfully, showing anger against thy God, — 
anger without a cause ? Am I to blame ? May I not do 
■Bhat I will with mine own? Besides, hast thou not 
brought thi'! upon thyself? Must I do as thou desirest? 
Must I show mjself ^s lo\mg and favourable to the man 
that regards my ordinances, as to the man that sets them 
at nought, and chooses ordinances of his own? If thou 
doest well, is there not acceptance for thee ? » and if 
thou doest not well, there is a remedy ; the sin-offering 
lieth at the door;^ so that whatever has been thy past 
guilt and rejection of the way of approaching me, thou 
mayest yet enjoy my favour, and the birthright belonging 
to thee as the elder brother shall not be affected. To 



' The ' doing well ' liere seems to refer to the offering, not to well- 
doing in general. If thou compliest with my ordinances, and bringest 
a lamb like thy brother, shall there not be acceptance (lifting up, 
fevonr, forgiveness) for thee ? The expression is similar to that in 
Mic vi. S, ' He hath showed thee, O man, what is goad ;' the good 
thing ; the thing in wliieh God delights ; the way of approaching Him 
by sacriiice. 

2 Lies or couches like an animal. 



I ..Google 



GENMSIS IV. 6. 233 

thee shall thy brother's desire still be; to thee he shall 
look up as his superior; and thou shalt still have the 
rule over him.i 

This is God's last appeal to Cain regarding the birth- 
right As it was the threatened loss of this and its con- 
veyance to Abel that had so troubled him, so God makes 
his appeal to turn upon this point. He is slow to anger 
and plenteous in mercy, and He shows this in His dealings 
with this sullen unbeliever. He will not cast off at once. 
He has long patience, and would fain bring the rebel 
to repentance. The birthright was Cain's as the eldest- 
bora. Such was God's law; for the law of primogeniture 
is no mere human fiction nor modem invention. Nor 
will God depart from this law without a reason, what- 
ever His own eternal purpose may be. Before trans- 
ferring the prerogative to die younger brother. He will 
make manifest the righteousness of the alteration. Cain 
is rejected because he rejects God's appointed way of 
approach. To the last we see bow God makes Cain's 
acceptance to turn upon this, — 'Wilt thou take my way 
or thine own? If thou wilt take my way, then even 
yet all shall be well. Thy privileges shall not be taken 
from thee. Thy rights as the elder-born shall stand' 
This is God's appeal to unbelief. How that unbelief 
met the appeal, the next verses show us. As Esau 
despised the birthright, so did Cain. It was the same 

' inplE'n — desire or longing, occurs only three times. Chap. iii. 
16, 'Thy desire shall be to thy husband. ' Cant. vi!. 10, ' His desire 
is toward me.' The verb signifies to run, run after, long for. See 
Gesenius ; also Patrick on the passage. 



I ..Google 



334 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

unbelief in both.; the same rejection of Messiah and of 
God's way of acceptance by His blood. 

Ver, 8. ' And Cain talked with AM his brother : and it came to 
pass, when they were in the field, thai Cain rose up against Abel his 
brother, and slim Mm.' ' 

Love is lost upon him. Kind words are in vain. 
God's appeal fails. It may be tliat the appeal recorded 
was made, not once, but many times ; all without effect. 
He will not listen. His angrj' suUenness increases. He 
resolves to revenge himself both upon God and upon 
AbeL He cannot get at God directly, and therefore he 
takes his revenge on Him by slaying His beloved child, 
thus venting his impotent malignity against God. He 
hopes to frustrate God's purpose of love to Abel, and 
to prevent him enjoying the divine favour or the birth- 
right. It is the same feeling as drew out the cry of after 
ages, 'This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the 
inheritance shall be burs;' he hoped by this means to 
seize on the inheritance when Abel was gone. Blind 
revenge indeed, whether as regards God, or Abel, or 
himself! And not only revenge, but hatred of the good. 
Wherefore slew he him? asks the apostle. Because his 
own deeds were evil, and his brother's righteous. He 
was a hater, not a lover of the good.^ Here is the enmity 

' The Sept. read, ' And Cain stud to Abel his brother, Let us go 
into the field.' The words according to the Hebrew run literally thus ; 
' And Cain spoke unto Abel his brother. And it (u^ Ihb) was when 
they were in the field. And Cain rose against Abel,' etc. 

' One of the characteristics of the last days is, tliat men are to be 
af-\dyxff>i. Here we have tiie first trace of the sad feature, — 'not 
lovers of good.' 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS IV. 9. 235 

of the seed of the serpent to the seed of the woman, — an 
enmity which nothing will satisfy but death. Hatred to 
Christ, hatred to the Father, hatred to the Church, — these 
are the world's deep and unchangeable feelings, modified 
or restrained by circumstances, but still unaltered. The 
root of all is hatred of Christ Himself; dissatisfaction 
with God's purpose of making him the one way, and his 
sacrifice the one ground of acceptance. It was thus that 
Cain's hatred was stirred up, and so is it in every son of 
Cain, 'If they have hated me, they will also hate you.' 
And then rnark the amning as well as the malignity of 
the serpent By fair speeches Cain leads Abel away into 
a solitary field, and there murders him. He has for- 
gotten the all-seeing Jehovah above, or is resolved to 
defy Him. AH that he cares for is to be away from the 
ej'e of man. How near to the atheist he has come in 
his heart already, saying 'There is no God,' or at least 
God will not see t 



God does not allow blood to be spilt like water on 
the earth, without inquiring after it He ' makes in- 
quisition for blood' (Ps. ix. T2), specially for 'innocent 
blood.' It is precious in His eyes (Ps. Isxii. 11).^ 

The murderer's conscience was not hkely to be silent. 
It would burn like a furnace. It would sting like an 

' In the day of Babylon's judgment, we find tliat it is ' the blood of 
.the saints' that weighs her down and consummates her ruin. God comes 
and finds in her the blood of all His Abels (Rev. xviii. 24). She is the 
true Cain,— the murderer in full stature, grown old in wickedness. 



jiGoogle 



336 THOUGHTS ON GENSSIS. 



adder. It is not, however, to this that our eyes are 
directed, but to something more awful, — to the Judge 
Himself; to Him 'whose eyes are as a flame of fire.' 
God comes down, as He had done in paradise to Adam 
after his sin. Probably it was soon after the event, at 
the next time of sacrifice, and to the usual place of offer- 
ing that Jehovah came. Cain was there as usual, with 
his grapes and pomegranates. But Abel was awanting ! 
A voice conies forth from ' the glory.' It is the voice of 
Jehovah. He speaks as one that missed a worshipper ; 
nay, a favourite child ■ and He speaks to Cain as to the 
elder brothe ho have care for the younger. 

'Where is Ab 1 h b 1 ?' A question fitted to go 
straight to tl n u d onscience, and no less fitted 

to rouse hi 1 1 lousy, as showing how truly 

Abel was tl b 1 d e 'Where is Abel, — where is 
thy brother, — he who is bone of thy bone? I miss him, 
dost not thou miss him too ? ' 

The question only draws from Cain a bold and reckless 
lie ; sin leading on to sin, — murder, falsehood, effrontery, 
profanity. ' I know not,' he says to the All-seeing One. 
He can look up into the face of God and say, ' I know not.' 
As if he would add, ' You may know, for he is your 
favourite, and you ought to look after him.' He is like 
the wicked one spoken of in the roth Psalm, who says, 
'God hath forgotten. He hideth His face; He will not 
see." Nay, more, he 'foams out his own shame' before 

' Ps. X. II. The whole tone and pleadings in tliis psalm carry us 
back to Cain and liis brother. It sets fotfli very fully and awfully ' the 
way of Cain.' 



jiGoogle 



God. He is not afraid to be insolent even to God. 'Am 
I my brother's keeper ? ' He rejects the natural claims 
of kindred and affection ; even while afraid to own the 
dark deed, he is not afraid to speak as one who had cast 
off all natural affection. Strange inconsistency ! He 
mocks God, he utters lies in His presence, he flings off 
the bonds of brotherhood, yet he will not own the murder 1 
'Thou canst not say I did it' How unsearchable man's 
heart in its evil ! ' It is deceitful above all things, and 
desperately wicked.' Cain will go on heaping sin upon 
sin, but his pride will not allow him to confess the charge. 
'Am I my brother's keeper?' as if he would say, 'What 
have I to do with him ? Thou art his keeper ; he is Thy 
favourite ; Thou shouldst know more about him than I ; 
why ask such a question of me ? ' He speaks as one who 
would not allow himself to be q^uestioned even by God ; 
as one who denied God's right to question him, who was 
enraged at the suspicion thus cast upon him, — a suspicion 
to which his conscience at once responded, while his hps 
rejected it What will man not do to God ? Is there any 
length of pride, or deceit, or insolence to which he will 
not go? Many things may restrain him, yet he is ever 
ready to break loose, and to defy Jehovah. He will 
crouch to a poor mortal superior, but he will insult the 
God that made him,^ 

1 The Chflldee paraphnist makes Cain to say, ' There is no justice, 
there is no judge, there is no world to come, there are no rewards 
for the just,' How applicable hece the words ol Ps. xxxvi. r, 'Tlie 
tcansgressiott of the wicked saith within my heart, There is no fear of 
God before his eyes. ' 



jiGoogle 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

iaqfthy 

The divine reply is calm, yet awfully piercing. There 
is no outburst of vengeance, nor sudden stroke of wrath. 
'What is this dreadful deed which thou hast done, and 
which thou art trying to conceal from me? The voice of 
thy brother's blood cries to me from the ground,' ^ In llie 
first part of the answer, God brings home the charge to 
the sinnei'ij conscience, and makes him feel how vain was 
his attempt to evade it, or to conceal the deed. In the 
second part, He adduces ■witnesses. The voice of Abel's 
blood. That blood crieth to me, says Jehovah. It makes 
no vague or random sound, but appeals directly to me. 
Cain had shed that blood, and perhaps had hidden the 
body m the ground. The voice was silenced; there 
could be no witnesses ; the murderer seemed safe. Who 
could accuse him ? But from that very ground, in which 

' The apostle's words {Heb. xii. 24) seem pldnly to refer to this : 
' The blood of sprinkling, which speaketh better things than that of 
Abel. ' There seems no reason for referring this, as some do, to the 
blood of Abel's sacrifice. His blood cried for vengeance, Christ's for 
mercy. Abel's blood spoke of the curse, Christ's of the blessing. 
Abel's spoke of wrath, Christ's of grace. Abel's spoke of condemna- 
tion, Christ's of pardon. Abel's spoke of terror, Christ's of comfort 
and peace. Abel's spoke of death, Christ's of life. Abel's spoke of 
hatred, Christ's of love. Abel's spoke of earth become the dwelling- 
place of sin, Christ's was the pledge of earth yet to become the abode 
of holmess. It onght to be noticed here that the word ' blood ' in the 
Hebrew is 'bloods,' and the verb 'crieth' is literally 'cry,' in the 
plural, agreeing not with 'voice,' but with 'bloods.' In the plural 
the word generally refers to murder. Ps. v. 7, ' Men of bloods.' 
The Targum gives a curious meaning ; ' The voice of the bloods of the 
generations or multitudes of just men who should have proceeded from 



jiGoogle 



he had buried the bleeding body, there came up a voice 
in the ears of God, accusing the murderer, and pleading 
for vengeance. Out of that very place of secrecy where 
he had hoped for ever to conceal his crime from every 
eye, the voice came up to God. The blood had made 
its appeal to Jehovah, and He had now come down 
to answer that appeal, and to show how precious was 
that blood in His sight. As yet there was no human 
judge to take cognizance of the crime. God Himself 
must do it. 

Thus from the days of Abel has pleaded the blood of 
the saints: — 'How 3ong, O Lord, wilt Thou not judge 
and avei^e our blood?' Thus the voice has been going 
up for ages from the ground, from the cell, from the cave, 
from the rock, from the glen, from the moorland, from the 
flood, from the flame, from the scaffold. What spot of 
Europe, not to take in more, is there from which this cry 

thy brother," etc. The reader will remember the well-known passage 
of Shakespeare— 



A brother's muider,' 

We ought to refer the reader to Dr. Kennicott's Dissertation on 
The Oblations of Cain and Abel. It is on some points strained and 
over-ingenious, but able and interesting. He thinks that ' I have 
gotten a man from the Lord ' means, ' I have gotten a man according 
to the promise of the Lord' (p. 115). He thinks that Abel's name 
was given not at his birth, but afterwards, as expressive of his mother's 
feelings at his death [p. \Vj\. He strongly and irresistib])' argues 
out these tvro points : (r) that sacrifice was of divine institution ; (2) 
that the Sabbath was observed by the patriarchs, and that it was on 
the Sabbath that the brothers brought their ofieiings. 



jiGoogle 



240 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

is not ascending? From the plains of Italy, from the 
valleys of Piedmont, from the dungeons of Spain, from the 
streets of Paris, from the stones of Smithfield, from the . 
fields of Ireland, from the moors of Scotland ; from all 
these has been ascending for ages the cry, ' How long ! ' 
a cry imsilenced and unsatisfied ; deepening and swelling 
as tlie ages roll on ; a cry which will ere long be fully 
answered by the coming of Him who is the great avenger 
of blood and rewarder of His saints. 



Ver. II. ' And now art thou €urs£d front the earth {J^^. ground'), 
■which hath opeiud her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy 

This is the first direct curse on man. The serpent and 
the ground had been cursed before; but neither Adam 
nor Eve had been so. But now God, addressing a man ; 
the son of a man ; a creature of His own ; says, ' Cursed 
art THOU.' Fearful words, coming straight from the lips 
of God into the very ear of man, standing in the presence 
of God. No lightning bursting on him from the clouds 
could be half so terrible. The blessing is revoked, and 
the curse goes forth. It is a curse because of innocent 
Mood, as if foreshowing the curses which the shedding of 
innocent blood was yet to bring upon men. This curse 
is represented as coming up from the ground, as if the 
ground which had been moistened with the blood were 
to be the instrument of inflicting the curse.^ In Ezekiel 

' Why our translators in the previous verse rendered the word 
'ground,' and here 'eartli,' is not easy to say; perhaps for the same 
reason that the Sept. in the former verse renders [0 by i*, and in the 



I ..Google 



we read of the 'mountains devouring men' (xxxvi. 12-14), 
and elsewhere of the land 'spewing out' (Lev. xviii. 28, 
XX. 22) ; so here the very ground is impregnated with evil 
to Cain, and sends up its curses on him. The soil is 
to cast hira off; the earth is to loathe him; inanimate 
nature, more tender-hearted than he (inasmuch as it 
drank in the blood), is to set its face against him. It 
had received the innocent blood into its bosom, and it 
was to send up unceasingly on the murderer an endless 
curse.' 

Ver. 12. ' IVAeii tkmi Ullesi {or shalt mi) the ground, it shall not 
henceforth yitld unto thee her itrenglh {Heb. it shall not add to give her 
strength to thee). A/ngitive and a vagabond shall thou be in the earth ' 
(Heb. moving and wandering shall thou lie on the 'earth ' — not 'the 
ground '). 

This curse is a twofold one ; it was to affect the^ ground, 
and it was to affect himself. It was to inflict barrenness 
on the soil, so that it was not to continue to yield its 
strength as it had hitherto done to his tillage ; ^ the 

latter by iti ; both veraloniats seeming to understand the latter as if 
God meant to say, 'Thou art cursed, and driven out from the carlli.' 
This idea, however, is afterwards (ver. 14) expressed by ^pa, ' Jroni 
upon,' which the Sept. render i*i, and the Vnlg. super, by which 
preposition they also render the passage before hs. Patrick, however, 
makes 'cursed from the earth' to mean, 'thou art banished Eden.' 

' Augustine dwells on the contrast between C^n and the ground, 
the one siiedding the blood, the other receiving it into its bosom r 
'Illefudit sanguinem, non excepit lite fiidit, alia terra excepit ; et 
ab eS terri quse os aperuit et excepit, ille maledictus est.' 

' The curse was specially suited to Cain as a ' tiller of the ground,' 

and as one who brought of the fruit of the ground' as his offering to 

God. Now God rebukes both his tillage and bis offering ; marring 

the former, and drying up the source of the latter. His occupation 

VOL. VI. Q 



I ..Google 



243 TIIOUCHTS ON' GEN'ESIS. 

innocent blood had sterilized it Adam's sin drew dowo 
on the soil tlie curse of fruitfulness in evil (chap, iii, i8); 
Cain's draws down on it the curse of barrenness in good. 
But the curse affected himself as well as the ground. It 
was to afford him no settled dwelling, as well as no return 
for his labour ; sustenance and settlement were to be 
denied. He was to be rooted up from the soil and flung 
off, to be carried to and fro, like the withered leaf. 
Driven out from the presence of Jehovah, from the place 
where the glory dwelt, and where the altar was erected, 
he was to become a wanderer over earth ; his sm, like 
a malignant demon, pursuing him, and allowing him no 
rest for the sole of his foot. As Israel, in after days, were 
made wanderers among the nations for the bloodshedding 
of the Lord of glory, so was Cain. Tortured within and 
cursed without, he was to bear the weight of a brother's 
blood whithersoever he went. Impelled by envy, he had 
murdered his holy brother, and now something more 
terrible and more unquenchable takes possession of him, 
— remorse of soul, — the undying sling of conscience. He 
had slain his brother to prevent his inheriting the birth- 
right, and to secure the blessing for himself; and now he 
finds that he has called up against himself a curse which 
is to track his footsteps throughout earth, and render his 
very life a burden and a sorrow. Such is sin 1 So terrible, 

woitld thus tecome 3. perpefnal witness against him ; and hence, 
perhaps, it was, that he and his descendants betook themselves to the 
mechanical arts and city-building. Fraltfiihiess of soil being denied, 
they dug for gold, and alver, and iron. Thus was the memory of 
Cain's sin perpetuated. 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS V 



13, '4- 



=43 



SO ruinoLts, so relentless, so armed with the curse of God. 
Such are the fruits of envy. Burden upon burden, stroke 
upon stroke, sorrow upon sorrow ! From above, from 
beneath, and from around, the torment, and the terror^ 
and tlie bitterness pour in. There is no peace to the 
wicked, no rest, no settlement. How sin uproots and 
unsettles, making a man to flee hither and thither, in order 
to get away from himself ! How vain ! O sin, sin ! what 
horrid things are all \vrapt up even in its smallest indul- 
gence ! An unkind thought, a harsh word, an envioiis 
feeling, — then sullenness, anger, murder — a brother's 
murder! How little do we know sin, or reckon on its 
results, or calculate the fruits that come forth from its 
womb ! ^ 



Vers. 13, 14. 'And Coin said unia IJie Lard, My punishment is 
greala- than I can bear. ' 14. Behald, Thou hast driven me this day 
from the face b/ the earth ; and from Thy face shall I be kid; and I 
shall be a fugitive and a vagaiond' in the earth : and it shall comets 
^ass, that every one that Ji-iidith vie shall slay me.' 

Up to this point the murderer has lifted up a bold front 

> How like the curse on Cain has been that on Israel for ages I 
And both for the same crime, — a brother's blood I Israel is the true 
Cain, a wanderer among the nations ; see Lev. xxvi. 36 ; Deut. xxviii. 
25, 65. Augustine speaks thus of the Jewish nation, Com. on Ps. xl. 
and lix. ; but he dwells faocifiilly on the signs which God has given to 
them that they shall not be destroyed, such as the sign of circumcision, 
unleavened bread, etc. 

' The marginal rendering seems the true one here : ' Mine iniquity 
is greater than that it may be foi^ven. ' Harernick remarks, ' The 
unbloody offering of Cain stands in a remarkable agreement with the 
expression, My sin is greater than can be taken away.' — Introi. to 
the Pent. p. IQ3. 

s 'A fugitive and a vagabond.' The old English translations. 



I ..Google 



244 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

before Jehovah. But the sentence from God's own lips 
has overwhelmed him. It has smitten him like a tliunder- 
bolt. He can no longer defy God, nor brave His anger, 
nor trifle with His omniscience. He is not, indeed, 
humbled ; repentance is far from liim ; but he is silenced, 
convicted, crushed. Like Ahab, in an after age, he bows 
before a power with which he can no longer trifle ; but 
that is all. Like Judas, he is stung with remorse, as when 
the betrayer cried out, ' I liave sinned, in that I have be- 
trayed tlie innocent blood.' He now, for the first time, 
confesses sin; yet it is only this sin, — no more,— that he 
avows. In the sharp bitterness of remorse, he passes from 
callousness to despair. For there is no right sense of sm 
here, but the mere agony of blind remorse, arismg fiom 
the reaction and revulsion of his furious passions, and the 
terrible thought that he is in the hands of an angiy God. 
, what does this avail? Remorse is not 



T^dale, CoTerdale, and tlie 'Bishops,' give 'a vagabond and r 
runnagate ;' the Vulgate, 'vagus et profugus ;' TremellLus and Junius 
'vagus etinfestusBgitationibns.' How the Sept. got o-riirsn xm rft/i^y 
groaning and trembling, one hardly sees. Homer speaks of aXx/isn 
atifii, ' wandering men.' — (Odyssey, Book xix. 74.) Horace uses Ihi 
expression, 'fugitivus et erro.' — (Sat. Book ii. 7, line 113.) Eyron, ii 
his sad misanthropy, exclaims. 



And Montgomery, even more beautifully, and in a far notler ; 
speaks of 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS r 



245 



repentance. Ten'or is not repentance. Despair is not 
repentance. The revenge which an outraged conscience 
takes on man for some dark deed is not repentance. 
These are but Cain's sullen ravings, or Ahab's alarm, or 
Judas' despair. There are outcries such as these in hell, 
with weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; but 
where is godly sorrow, the tears of a broken heart ? 

Cain enumerates the causes of his despair. These are 
three, — the three articles of the sentence pronounced ; 
and then he sums up with a conclusion of his own ; ' It 
shall come to pass that every' one that findeth me shall 
slay me.' 

(i.) Behold, Thou hast cast me out this day from (or 
from upon) the face of the ground. Thou hast driven 
me I He sees it to be Jehovah's own doing. He who 
drove Adam out of paradise, now drives Cain out of 
Eden, Adam's sin brought expulsion from the inner 
circle, Cain's from the outer. He is to be cast out from 
the land where he had been bom, where was his home ; 
from the ground which he had tilled. He was now doubly 
banished ; compelled to go forth into an unknown region, 
without a guide, or a promise, or a hope. 

(2.) From Thy face I shall be hid. God's face means, 
doubtless, the Shekinah or manifested glory of Jehovah 
at the gate of Eden, where Adam and Eve, and their 
children, had worshipped ; where God was seen by them, 
where He met them, and spake to them as from His 
mercy-seat From this place of Jehovah's presence Cain 
was to go out And this depresses him. Not that he 
really cared for the favour of God, as one ' in whose favour 



I ..Google 






THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



was life ; ' but still he could not afford to lose it, especiaDy 
when others were left behind to enjoy it. And all his 
religious feelings, such as they were, were associated with 
that spot. 

{3.) I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth.^ 
Unchained from his primeval home, he was now to drift 
to and fro, he knew not whither. He was to be a leaf 
driven to and fro, a man without a settlement, and without 
a home. Poor, desolate sinner ! And all this is thine 
own doing! Thy sin has found thee out. Thine own 
iniquities have taken thee, and thou art holden with the 
cords of thy sins (Prov. v. as). 

Cain now sums up all by drawing his own sad inference. 
He is sure to be slain by the first that meets him. There 
was nothing of this in the sentence ; but a guilty 'con- 
science suggested it. He sees himself a marked man. 
Death surrounds him. What else can a murderer expect ? 
What else can a murderer's conscience forbode? 



Ver. IJ. ' And the Lord said unto him. Therefore, whosoever slayelh 
Cain, aen^mnce shall hs taken en Mm sevenfold. And the Lord set a 
Mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should Mil him. ' 

Jl Kn h d dpwihwdnd 



d tl p n 1 
d N > H 



vagabond,' a 'wanderer,' having ni 



jiGoogle 



■ GENESIS Vf. ij. 247 

Cain's cup than He Himself decrees,' And Cain must 
know this, and must be assured that nothing beyond the 
awarded penalty shall be permitted to come upon him. 
Grace meets the murderer, and gives him tliis assurance 
on die part of God. God will not allow any Save Him- 
self to deal with Cain. 'Vengeance is mine, I will 
recompense, saith Jehovah.' If any shall attempt to take 
his life, vengeance shall fall on him sevenfold. Of this 
God gives Cain a sign,'— a sign for himself, that he would 
be preserved safe from all attempts against his life, thus 
relieving bis apprehensions, and in this respect delivering 
him from the terrors which surrounded him ; terrors not 
confined to the time then present, but terrors of what 
might be in the ages which lay before him ere he returned 

' God's time had not yet come for tlie enactment, 'Whoso slieddeth 
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. ' Till that enactment 
was made, no man had a. right to slay even a murderer. 

' Not 'set a mark upon,' but ' gaye a sign to, ' Dathe and Rosen- 
mtiller very decidedly adopt this as the true rendering, both remark- 
ing that DIB' is often used in the same sense as pj ; yet there must be 
some reason why the former word is used. The nature of the sign, or 
its position, required the iiseof 'placed,' not' 'gave.' De Sola renders 
it, 'appointed a sign to Cain,' and shows that the preposition \l does 
not mean upeii, but far or to. — See also Hamilton's Peiaaieuck and 
its Assailants, p. 1 74. We may notice also, that the word n^j{ 
occurs seventy-six times in the Old Testament, and, save in the place 
before us, has always been ti'anslated a sign or token, not a mark. 

' The world by this tune (about 130) would be beginning to increase 
in population. But besides, Cain lived on for several generations, and 
needed to be assured that at no future time should vengeance be taken 
on him. Some may count it strange that in the first part of the verse 
God should provide for the possibility of his being killed, by appoint- 
ii^ vengeance 011 the slayer, and m the hxtter should assure Cain that 



jiGoogle 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



But why is God so anxious to preserve Cain from death., 
and to give him the assurance of this security? Some 
reasons are obvious, besides those which run us tip directly 
to the sovereignty of God. (i.) God's desire is to manifest 
the riches of His grace, and the extent of His forbearance, 
and that He has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, 
but wishes hy His long-suffeiing to lead him to repentance. 
(2.) Death would not have answered God's end at all. 
It was needful that Cain should be preserved alive as an 
awful monument of sin, a warning against the shedding 
of man's blood. We find that this proved ineffectual ; for 
in after ages we read that the earth was 'filled with 
violence,' which compelled God to interfere, with the 
Deluge; and we find also, that after the Deluge, God 
enacted the statute referred to above for the repression of 
murder, putting into man's hands the very power which 
before that He had kept wholly in His own. (3.) Cain 
was spared too, because of this partial repentance. God 
accepted Ahab's repentance (i Kings xxi. 29); poor and 
hollow as it was, so does He Cain's; for He is gracious 
and merciful, looking for the first and faintest sign of a 
sinner's turning to Himself, willing to meet him at once 
without upbraiding, and putting the best possible con- 
struction on all he says and does. To what length is not 
the grace of our God able to go ! Sin abounds, but grace 
superabounds. How desirous is Jehovah not to curse, 

he should not be killed. But tliis is God's way of suiting Himself to 
man ; as, for instance, when He spealis of tho possibility of a saint 
falling away or being a castaway, and yet assures him that he shall 
not fall nor come short of the kingdom. 



jiGoogle 



but to bless; not to smite, but to heal; not to destroy, 

Ver. l6. 'And Cain tumt out from ihe presence of the Lord (Heb. 
from the face of Jehovah), and dwelt in the land o] Nod, on the east of 

He must tarry no longer within the bounds of Eden. 
Willing or unwilling, he must go. Like Judas from the 
presence of Jesus, so does Cain go out from the face of 
God, from the place where the visible glory of God, the 
Shekinah. had its abode. Partly troubled at his banish- 
ment, and partly relieved at getting away from the near 
presence of the Holy One, he goes forth, a banished 
criminal, whose foot must no longer be permitted to pro- 
fane the sacred circle of Eden ; an excommunicated man, 
who must no longer worship with the Church of God, round 
the primeval altar. He goes out, not like Abraham to the 
land of promise, the land flowing with milk and honey, 
but to the land of the threatening, the land where no 
divine presence was seen, and on which no glory shone, 
and where no bright cherubim foreshadowed redemption, 
and proclaimed restoration to paradise, and the tree of 
life. He goes out to an unknown and untrodden land ; a 
land which, from his own character as 'the wanderer,' 
received in after days the name of Nod. He goes out, 
the flaming sword behind him, driving him out of his 
native seat, and forbidding his return. 

A banished man, an excommunicated worshipper (the 
sentence of excommunication pronounced by God Him- 
self) — one 'delivered over to Satan' (t Tim. i. an), he 



I ..Google 



250 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

takes up his abode in the land of Nod. There he ' sits 
down,' not as if at rest, for what had he to do with rest? 
Can the cloud rest ? Can the sea rest ? Can the guilty 
conscience rest ? He sits down in Nod, but not to rest, 
only to drown liis restlessness in schemes of labour. He 
went towards tlie rising sun.^ He and his posterity spread 
eastward, just as Seth and his posterity spread westward. 
The two great families separated, only to meet again in after 
ages, when overflowing wickedness had erased the line of 
separation, and a common ungodliness had made them one.^ 

'The way of Cain'— what is it? (Jude ii.) The 
apostle speaks of it as something terrible, and something 
which will be specially exhibited in the last days. ' Woe 
unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain ! ' That 
way began in unbelief, in the rejection of God's way of 
'salvation through the shedding of blood.' ^ It ended in ■ 
utter worldliness and infidelity; in the unrestrained in- 

' MiMitgomety thus paints tJie fugitive — 

' Eastward ot Eden's early peopled plain, 
Whse Abel perished by the hand of Cain, 
The murderer from his Judge's presence Bed ; 
Thence to the ridng sun his elTspnng spread. 

Forsook the haunts he chose, the homes he built ; 
WhilE hlial nations hailed htm siie and chief, 

Be found where'er he roamed, uncheer'd, 'unhiest. 



* If tlus be the separation between the seed of the woman and tlie 
seed of the serpent, is Gen. vi. a the scene of their accomplished 
reunion ? The sons of God and the daughters of men (as Israel and 
Moab) allying themselves together. 

' See Mr. Faber's Eight Disserlalkns, vol. ii., appendix, for an 
article on Cain. 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS IV. i6. 351 

dulgeiice of the lust of the flesh, the eye, and the pride 
of life. It was a way very much marked by the Apostle 
Paul's characteristics of the perilous times of the last days 
(2 Tim. iii. i). In it we find selfishness, envy, hatred, 
murder, hypocrisy, lying, pride, independence, rebellious- 
ness, ambition, all coupled or covered over with tlie ' form 
of godliness.' Rejection of the woman's seed, and of 
God's way of acceptance through that seed — this is the 
main feature, that which influences all the rest. No Christ 
for him 1 No bruised heel for him ! No shedding of 
blood for the remission of sins ! No righteousness of a 
substitute in which he may stand before God ! ' The 
W(j_j' of Cain!' It still exists. It has not been ploughed 
up so as to become imperceptible. It is still visible, and 
it is coming more and more into admiration as man's 
conscience gets blunted, and as his prond self-sufiiciency 
exhibits itself. No sacrifice, no substitute, no imputed 
righteousness, 00 blood-shedding, no ' religion of the 
shambles ' for us ! 

And is such a way the way of holiness? Will such a 
religion lead men to love and gentleness, and brotherly 
kindness ? Will such a faith make a happy kingdom and 
a blessed earth, introducing the reign of peace and glad- 
ness ? So say its exulting votaries, emancipated, as they 
suppose, from the trammels of old creeds, and from the 
brutalizing influence of altars besmeared with blood. So 
says tlie philosophic theology of the day. So says the 
poetry of the age.' 

^ ' Christian Socialism,' as it is called, is, not less than the infidel's 
Socialism, ' the way ot Cain,' 



I ..Google 



253 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

But look at Cain. That was his way. He rejectLd 
the expiatory blood, turning away from the ' rthgion ot 
the shambles,' to the mild gentleness of a worship m which 
no life was taken, and no blood was spilt, and no suflenng 
inflicted. Did this mild and genial religion of his lead to 
a loving, gentle life ? No, He who had so maay scruples 
about shedding the blood of an innocent lamb, has none 
about taking the life of a holy and unoffending brother. 
He who is too pure and refined in his ideas of religion to 
profane his altar by turning it into 'shambles,' is all the 
while busied in preparing ' shambles' of his own, where, 
for the gratification of malice, hatred, envy, and revenge, 
and every hellish passion, he may, with his own hand, 
butcher a brother for being more righteous than he. 



Ver. 17. 'And Cain knew his tvife; and she soiicehied, and iare 
Enoch : ami hs builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the 
name of his son, Enoch.' 

Cain had probably been married before his crime, yet 
had no family. His wife goes forth with him from Eden, 
and in the land of his b^iishment brings forth a son, who 
gets the name of Enoch ; the same in name as the holy 
son of Seth in an after age, but in character unlike. Cain 
was himself born within the primeval region where Adam 
dwelt; but his children are not to be bom there. Their 
native region is to be that of the banished wanderer, as if 
God, even in this thing, would draw the separating line 
between the seed of the woman and the seed of the 
serpent. 

In his new country he had set himself to build a city, 



I ..Google 



and as his son was born while he was engaged in building 
it, he calls it by the name of his son. He does not call 
it by his own name He deems it better that tliat should 
be hid, not published — forgotten not perpetuated But 
he seeks to connect the city with a familj name, though 
not with his own How like the un^odlj spoken of by 
David, 'They c-ill then- lands b) their own nimcs (Ps, 
xlix. 11.)^ He IS now settling down m woildhuess, and 
trying to foigct God amid stir, and movement, and 
pleasure. He is ambitious of bemg remembeied m the 
earth. Posthumous fame is his desire He is desurous to 
be not merely the founder of a famil}, but the builder of 
a city. He seeks thus to soothe his guilt} con cience, to 
drown remorse, to bury out of '; ght and out of memory 
the dreadful past He is the true picture of a s nner 
trying to flee from himself and to escipe from God But 
it cannot be' The \oid withm still reraams mihlled ! 
Conscience still stmgs The pist, like a black ';pectre, 
frowns or moins behind h m ind the future flings its cold 
shadow ovei him pointing onwards to the endless sorrow. 
What can the smncr do? Return to God is his only 
' chance,' as men speik , oi, as the j^ospel tella hrni, his 
certain andjoyful hope. 

Ver. IS. ' And -unlo Enoch -mas born Irad: and Trad hegai Meha- 
Joel: and Mehujad begat Meth-usael : and Methusad begat Lanisclt.' 

Thus son after son is bom. The world runs on. Its 

^ Tiie whole of this psalm is appropriate. It loots like a sketch of 
Cain and his children. It shows us the ' seed of tlie serpent ' in their 
aspect ot utter worldliness. See also Job xxi. 7-21. 



jiGoogle 



254 TIIQUGBTS ON GENESIS. 

families multiply ; and name is added to name. Abel is 
forgotten, and the voice of his blood is silenced, — at least 
it ceases to disturb these generations of the prosperous 
sons of Cain. Enoch loses sight of his holy uncle's 
murder in the triumph of having a city called by his 
name. Cain's sin passes out of mind. God's curse upon 
the murderer is made light of. To lay aside the stranger's 
tent, and build the city for ages, as if they would dwell 
here for ever, is now the aim of these Cainites. The 
'world' is now rapidly developing itself as 'the world.' 
There is 'eating and drinking, marrying and giving in 
marriage;' and the chorus of after ages begms to be 
adopted, 'To-morrow shall be as this day, and much 
more abundant.' 



Here begins the brief story of Lamech the polygamist, 
—a story of lust, bloodshed, and defiant haidihood. He 
is die first to violate God's primeval law of marriage ; and 
the violation of this soon leads to other sins. In Cam we 
have seen the man of violence. In Lamech we see the 
man of lust. From these two fountainheads of evil, what 
wickedness has flowed out upon earth ! And, as in the 
last days we find men returning to 'the way of Cain," 
so do we find them returning to the way of Lamech, — 
' walking after the flesh, m the lust of uncleanness, and 
despising government, presumptuous, self-willed' (a Pet. 
ii, iq). All the old world's sins repeated and intensified 



I ..Google 



GENESIS IV. 2 



in the last generation, just before the arrival of Him of 
whom Enoch prophesied (Jude r4). 



Vers. 20-2Z. 'And Adah bareJabcJ: ke was ilie jathey of stuh as 
dwell in tents, and of such as kavi cattle. 21. And his brotka's name 
■was yuhal: hi tnas the /alAer of all lUcA as handle the harp and 
organ. 22. And Zillah, she also bare Tubal-cain, an instructor of 
every artificer- in brass and iron : and the sister of Tubal-cain was 
Naamah.' 

Still the world goes on, God allows men to take their 
course. Forgetting Him in whom they live, they proceed 
onwards, each one in his own way and in the gratification 
of his own tastes. All kinds of professions, and occupa- 
tions, and arts are introduced. The natural man is fertile 
in all things pertaining to this present evil world ; and 
Satan, the god of this world, sharpens and quickens his 
ingenuity and skill, 

I. Pastoral pursuits make progress. Jabal was the 
father of such as dwell in tents, and have cattle (ver. 20). 
Jabal takes the lead as the great shepherd of his day, — 
gentler, perhaps, and more peaceful in his nature, — more 
like Abel in his dispositions. The Spirit of God does not 
here cast censure on such employments, as if there were 
sin in them. He simply points out these children of Cain 
as sitting down contented with earth, and engrossed with 
its pursuits. It is the spirit of earnest and absorbing 
worldliness which is meant to be exhibited; the spirit 
that pursues lawful employments to such an extreme of 
engrossment, that by excess they become unlawful. These 
children of Cain seem to have shrunk from tillage. They 
would have had to till a cursed soil, — a soil cursed for 



I ..Google 



256 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

their father's sin (ver. 12). They woild Is e lad to 
labour on with their father's guilt ov rl anf n^ hem — 
their sweating brow, and weary limbs, a d bafHed scheme 
reminding them that they were labo r ^ o ti der 1 
double curse — the curse of Cain adde i to t] e c rse of 
Adam; that they were tilling ground wh ch C u had sle il 
ized with a brother's blood, — blood which was st 1 crj g 
from every clod and furrow. Hence they seem to h-i e 
given up their father's original occupation and beco e 
keepers of cattle, not tillers of the gro d T e oil was 
too full of terror, as well as of toil, for 1 e n f o a en pt ts 
tillage. How a man's sin finds him out Ho v t trace 
him out wherever he sets his foot ! How t haunts h s 
days and nights, standing in his way 1 kc the ^ ^ ''^^^° ^ 
Balaam, to turn him out of his road, nd to compel h n 
to seek other paths, and other occupat o s 1 ere 1 e n ay 
not be so perseveringly pursued by th t d k s do r 
rather that living spectre ! 

2, The Fine Arts. — Jabal had a brother by name Jubal, 
who betakes himself to the harp and the organ. ^ Yes, — 
music, — the world must soothe its sorrows or drown its 
cares with music ! The world must cheat its hours away 
with music ! The world must set its lusts to music ! 
The harp and the organ, —these must be employed to lull 
the conscience asleep, to minister to pleasure, to drown 
the sorrows of earth, to cheat the soul out of its eternal 

' Without entering upon the inquiry what was tlie "lijs, Kinncr, 
and what was the 3J1JJ, Uifai, we may say that the former seems to 
comprehend all stringed instruments, the latter all -ui 



jiGoogle 



birthright ! Thus Job describes these families of Cain ;— 
' Their children dance: they take the timbrel and harp, 
and rejoice at the sound of the organ' Qob xxi. 12). 
Yet, sweet sounds are not unholy. There is no sin in the 
richest strains of music. And God, by bringing into His 
own temple all the varied instmraents of melody, and 
employing them in His praises, showed this. But these 
Cainites make music of the siren kind. God is not in all 
their melodies. It is to shut Him out that they devise the 
harp and the organ. Yet these inventions He makes use 
of for Himself afterwards ; employing these men as the 
hewers of wood and the drawers of water for His temple. 
They devise and fashion the instruments for their own 
pleasure and mirth ; and God takes them out of their 
hands, and putting them into the hands of His servants, 
brings out of them divine music, for the service of His 
temple, and ior the praise of His glory. When we are 
told, 'Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant 
of the Lord with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, 
and with trumpets, and with cymbals, making a noise witli 
psalteries and harps' (i Chron. xv. 28), we are earned 
back to Jubal, and made to see how God can turn to His. 
own ends the wisdom of this world, the natural skill and 
science which the men of earth pursue for the gratification 
of their own carnal desires. 

3. The Mechanical Arts. — ZillaJi bare Tubal-cain to 
Lamech ; and this Tubal-cain was an instructor of every 
artificer in brass and iron. The arts flourish under Cain's 
posterity. They can prosper without God, and among 
those in whose hearts His fear is not. God suffers them. 

VOL. vr. It 



I ..Google 



25S THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

to. go on forgetting Himself, and occupying themselves 
with these engrossing employments. He permits them to 
put forth their skill and genius to the uttermost, fashion- 
ing for themselves all manner of curious or useful instru- 
ments for ornament, for tillage, for war, for all those 
various ends for which brass and iron are moulded by tlie 
artificers of ancient or of modem times. He does not in- 
terfere; and this not only because He is long-suffering, but 
because one of His great purposes is, that man shaU have 
full scope to develope himself mentally, morally, and 
physically. Man has torn himself off from God; and 
God will let it be seen how tlie branch can unfold its 
leaves and fruit, or rather what kind of leaves and fruit 
it can put forth when thus severed from Himself. God 
will let the world roll on its own way, that it may be seen 
what a world it is. He will let sin come out in all its 
various manifestations, that its true character may be ex- 
hibited, as well as the true character of that fountainhead 
where it had now concentrated itself,— a human heart 
There is no sin in working in brass and iron, or in at- 
taining to the highest skill in so doing ; but there is sin 
in the worldliness, the selfishness, the foi^etfulness of 
God, springing out of the exercise of that skill in these 
Cainites. 

Men are trying so to fit up and adorn the world, that 
they shall be able to do without God in it at all. The 
experiment is making, whether they may not be quite as 
comfortable and as safe in a world where God is not, as in 
a world where He is all in all. They till the soil ; they 
clothe it with fair verdure in hill and dale ; they cover it 



I ..Google 



with tlie living creatures which God has made for it ; and 
the cattle upon a thousand hills exhibit tlie life and the 
plenty with which they have made it to abound ; they dig 
into its very bowels for the iron and the brass, out of 
which to construct instruments to fill its air with melody, 
or implements with which to cultivate its varied growth, 
or weapons with which to defend themselves against evil, 
or ornaments with which to beautify their dwelling; they 
call in the aid, too, of woman's attractions ; for Naamah, 
Zillah's daughter, and Tubal-cain's sister, seems mentioned 
for the very purpose of suggesting this ; ' eiII that skill, and 
art, and ornament, and brilliancy, and harmony, and female 
grace can do to make earth a paradise is attempted. Poor 
man ! What efforts he has made to undo the curse with 
which his own sin had smitten creation ! What pains he 
has taken to render this world habitable and pleasant ; 
to make himself and his children independent of God for 
happiness, or health, or safety, or blessing ! But in vain ; 
it wiO not do. The fashion of this world passeth away ; 
its beauty fades, and its loveliest forms are but sunset- 
rainbows, brightening those vapours, that in an hour will 
vanish or grow dark. 

What is earth without the God that made it, or the 
Christ by whom it is yet to be made new? What are 
the arts and sciences; music, painting, statuary? What 
are the wisdom, skill, energy, power, genius of the race, 
developed to the full? What are the mind's resources, 
the heart's fulness, the body's pliant power, man's strength 



:o 1)6 the healhen V^us; as Tubal-cain 



jiGoogle 



26o TffOUGSTS ON GENESIS. 

or womaJi's beantyj youth's fervour or age's grey-haired 
. wisdom? What are all these in a world from which its 
Creator has been banished ; a world whose wisdom is not 
the knowledge of Christ, and whose sunshine is not the 
love of God ? 

Vers. 33, 24. ' And Lamech said unto his wkiis, Adah and Zillah, 
hear my voice; ye wives of Lameck, hearken anio my speech : fir I 
have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt : 
24. Jf Cain shall be avenged sevenfM, truly Lameck seventy and 
sevenfold: 

The substance of this abrupt and smgular narrative may 
be set down as follows : Lamech had been engaged in 
some deed of blood, — to which, perhaps, his polygamy 
had led. From this murder Jiis family apprehend the 
worst consequences to himself. To soothe their fears, he 
addresses his wives, — 

' Adah and Zillah, hear my voice ; 
Ye wives of Lamech, hearken to my speecli ! 
' Surely I have slain a man to my wounding, 



As if he had said, ' It is true that I have slain a man, but 
it was in self-defence, and in so doing I have been 
wounded J I have slain a young man, and in so doing 
have been bruised ; but surely I have less cause to fear 
than Cain : if he was to be avenged sevenfold, then I 
may count upon being avenged seventy-sevenfold.' ^ 

' Marbachius suggests that his wives were endeavouring to restrdn 
hislerocity, especially representing' the consequences of its indulgence, 



I ..Google 



GENESIS r 



n. 24- 



261 



Such was tlie argument by which L^mech sought to 
allay the alarms of his wives And in thia we &ee the 
man. We get a knowledge of his character iJid no less 
so of the state of the times. It seems to ha\e been an 
age of lust and bloodshed. Lamech is lis type It was 
the introduction to that darker time, when wickedness 
having swelled to its utmost, God was constrained to m 
terpose and sweep the transgres'^ors Irom the earth The 
scene in Lamech's house -was a specimen of the times, — 
times like those depicted in Psalms xi and hi , or m Isaiih 
V. (especially ver. 18), like those predicted by Paul (2 
Tim. iii. i ; z Pet. ii. 2, iii. i, a), and by Jude throughout 
Ms epistle. It is the dark p cture of a dirk time , men 
rushing headlong in the way of Cam breaking asunder all 
ties of brotherhood, defying God and making account of 
no interests save their own. It is a scene which shall 
yet be expanded to far larger dimensions in tne last 
days, when evil shall cover the earth, and when 'the 
wicked one,' more cruel than Cam, ■viler than Lamech, 



and that this speech is the answer to these lemonstrances — Erasmi 
Marbachii, Comm. in Feiii. vol. i p 63 The aboi e is 1 br ef but 
dear and shrewd commentaiy, of date 1597 Dr Wtlls (also Juhxis 
Bates) renders the words interrogatively, 'Have I slain?' etc., 
thereby not involving Lamech in the crime of murder, but of bigamy. 
It is of this that he is thus supposed to spealt ; as if he would show 
that his marrying two wives was not so heinous a sin as Cain's murder 
of his brother (p. 40}. This is forced, though '3 might be used in- 
teriogitively, as in I Sam. xxiv. 20 ; 2 Kings xviii. 34, etc. On the 
whole p-isaoge, see Lowth's 4th Lecture on Hebrew Poetry. He 
t-ikes the simple and natural view. His ' Annotators ' are more in- 
genious than satisfying. ScMegel maintains from this passage that 
Lamech was the originatDr of human sacrifices.— /fc/, 0/ Bisl., 
BohnaEd, n. 201. 



I ..Google 



z62' THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

and more ambitious tlian Nimrod, shall shed man's blood 
in torrents, and impiously reckon on impunity at the 
hands of God. 

But let us look more narrowly at Lamech, He stands 
before us in such aspects as the following : — 

I. As the fast violator of God's primeval lain of marriage. 
— That law most strictly enjoined o?ie wife ; and doubtless 
had been observed till Lamech's time. Ife sets it at de- 
fiance. That law was the very foundation of society. It 
was the foundation of family peace, of true religion, of 
social order, of right government in the state. Take away 
this foundation, or place two instead of one, and the whole 
fabric shakes, the nation crumbles to pieces.^ It is not 
merely the ftimily hearth that is destroyed, but the throne 
of the King is undermined. Bonds the most sacred and 
needful Lamech breaks. The most ancient and venerable 
law of earth he tramples on. Lust has gotten the mastery 
in him. He is the true type of those 'filthy dreamers' 
who ' defile the flesh' (Jude 8) ; of those who in the last 
days are to 'walk after the flesh, in the lust of unc]eanness, 
having eyes full of adultery' (2 Pet. ii.). And as Lamech's 
sin threw open the floodgates of lasciviousness, so may the 
sins of those who in our day are walking in his steps be 

1 In Mai. ji. 15, God tells as that His special reason for this law 
was, that thereby He miglit raise up a godly offspring. He had 
' the residue of the Spirit, ' and. He might have produced not one Eve 
but many ; yet He wisely ordered it otherwise. How much of god- 
liness depends on unity and order in a household ; and how much is 
it in the power ot the ivoman either to promote or to mar this unity ! 
See on this whole subject, the Rev. Christopher Anderson's most 
admirable work upon the Domsstic Consliiiition, 



jiGoogle 



GENSSIS IV, 23, 24. 263 

throwing open these same floodgates, and ripening the 
world for the judgment of the great day. 

2. As a murderer. — Lust had led to adultery, ajid 
adultery had led to violence and murder. We are not 
told the name of him whom 'he slew.^ It matters not 
He is a murderer, — true follower of Cam, — true offspring 
of the serpent, of him who was ' a murderer from the 
beginning' (John viii. 44). Abhor Lamech's spirit as we 
would that of Satan. Flee anger, passion, revenge, — of 
all that would lead, however remotely, to bloodshedding. 
In Cain, it was envy ; in Lamech, lust. Flee both. 

3. As a boaster of kis evil deeds. — He does the deed of 
blood, and he is not ashamed of it ; nay, he glories in it, 
— nay, glories in it to his own wives. There is no con- 
fession of sin here, no repentance, not even Cain's partial 
humbling. Thus iniquity lifts up its head and waxes bold 
in countenance,^ defying God and vaunting before men, 
as if the deed had been one of honour and not of shame. 
' Boasters ' are to rise up in the last days (z Tim. iii. 2), 
specially boasters of evil, like Lamech. Men are to 
'boast themselves in mischief (Ps. Iii. 7). The wicked 
is to 'boast of his heart's desire' (Ps. x, 3). 

4. As one taking refuge in the crimes of others. — He 
makes Cain not a warning, but an example. He perverts 
God's purpose in sparing Cain, and takes courage in evil 
from Cain's example. He 'goes in the way of Cain' 
(Jude 11), and makes no account of God's awful monu- 

' The Jews say it was Cain ; others, his own son ; others, a younger 
brother. 

^ Froniemqiii a crimini samii. , 



jiGoogle 



TBOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



ments of indignation against sin. He sins because Cain 
sinned ! He thinks he has a right to sin, because Cain 
sinned ! Oh, desperate perversity of man's heart ! What 
will it not make an excuse for sinning? And yet it 
always tries to find an excuse or an example, as if afraid 
and ashamed to sin unless for some reason, or with some 
example before it ! 

5. As one perverting God' s forbearance. — He trifles with 
sin, because God showed mercy to another.^ He tramples 
on righteousness, because it is tempered with grace. He 
:sets vengeance at nought, because God is long-suffering. 
Instead of saying, ' God is so loving that I dare not sin ; ' 
he says, ' God is so loving that I will go on in sin without 
limit.' Divine compassion hsis no effect in softening his 
obstinacy; but 'after his hardness and impenitent heart, 
he treasures up to himself wrath against the day of wrath 
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God' (Rom, 
ii. 5). Thus men still turn God's grace into lasciviousness, 
and make Christ the minister of sin ! 

6, As a scorer, — He believes in no judgment, and 
makes light of sin's recompense. His words are evidently 
the words of a scoffer, and of one who believed in no 
mrath of God against the workers of iniquity. He speaks 
like the scoffers of the last days, ' Where is the promise of 
his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things 

' 111 the 52d Psiiim, God meets this tendency of man to ' continue 
in sin because grace abounds,' and asliS most touchingly and graciously, 
' Why boastest tliou thyself in mischief O mighty man ? .The good- 
ness of God endureth continually ; ' tliat is, ' Ought not this goodness 
. to stop thy boastings and 'melt thy heart, and lead thee to repent- 
ance?' 



I ..Google 



25. 



26s 



^continue as they were from the begiiming of the creation ' 
(2 Pet. iii. 1-3). Is not this the mocking that we heai on 
every side? No day of judgment, no righteous vengeance 
against sin, no condemnation of the transgressor ! God 
has borne long with the world. He wOl bear longer with it 
still I He may do something to dry up the running sore of 
its miseries; but as for its ^uUt, He will make no account 
of that, for ' God is love ' I But what then becomes of 
law, or of righteousness, or of the difference between good 
Eind evil ? And what becomes of God's past proclama- 
tions of law, His manifestations of righteousness, His 
declarat ons of abhorrence of all sin? Was Adam's ejec- 
tion fiom parad s.e the mere attempt to cure 1 disease, and 
not the condemnation of his guilt? Was the deluge the 
mere drjing up of the worlds lunning sore of wretched- 
ness, thit it might st\rt healthy and vigorous on a new 
course, mstead of bemg tJie tJ.pre'ision of God's estimate 
of human gmlt, and His detcrmmation to prevent men 
fiom im'igining that He was indifferent to the evil of sin, 
and, as the God of love, that He could only treat it as a 
sad mtsfoftime, but not as an infinite ^nd unalterable 
ittme agimst love, and majestj, and truth, and govern- 
ment, and holiness? 



Ver. 25. ' Aiid Admii htwoi Ms sjife again ; and shs bare a son, and 
callai Rii name Seth (that is, set or appoinied) -. for God, said she, hath 
apfoiniid me analker seed instead of Abel, ■whom Cain slew. ' 

With Lamech's history ends the inspired record of the 
line of Cain. They pass away, and are seen no more. 
Their memory rots, and their names are forgotten. No 



I ..Google 



266 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

man writes tlieir sto y b il 1 1 

Lamech's murderou g ^ Is f I p I 

ungodliness die aw y H 1 L 

that we hear of th h 1 1 f C Cai 1 fi 

Lamech the last, ar h p f 1 — 

alpha and its omeg B f b f 1 mm y 1 

world's enmity to G d 1 b II ag 1 j d 

seed! Enough toh hh dfh p 

is ; what man's hear hi 11 tl 1 

art, and science, and I dy d b y I I d 

evil its good ; it has 11 d d k 1 gl h fisl d 

for its own worship gdfth 11 gdf 

the flesh, to whom 1 b d d h 

true God, rejecting 11 11 Hm b h H 

from earth, and seeking m k f If 1 

surface without Hi — If j y 

without His love. 

But now the scene changes. A vision, bright though 
brief, passes before us, like a sudden burst of sunshine on 
a dark troubled sea. We get a glimpse of the holy family, 
the household of the redeemed and separated ones, who, 
in the midst of a world where evil is overflowing, are still 
faithful to God, and believers in the promised seed. 

We are carried back to Abel and his bloody grave. 
He, — the Isaac of Adam's house, the hope of his father 
and the joy of his mother, in whom the promise of re- 
demption seemed about to be fulfilled, — he was cut down, 
like a flower at dawn. It might seem as if, with him, his 
parents' hopes lay buried, and the prospects of the race 
blighted. It was not merely their feelings that were torn, 



I ..Google 



but it was their faith, that, like Abraham's, was tried to 
the uttermost. Now, however, God is to visit them in 
tender love. He not only fills up the void in the family 
circle, and pours consolation into their wounded spirits, 
but He lifts up their drooping faith and gives it a new 
foundation to rest on. To Eve is bora a third son ; and 
he comes to them as the gift of love and the pledge of 
hope. Eve names him Seth, which means 'set' or 
' placed ' or ' appointed,' as being expressly given to her 
in room of Abel whom Cain slew. In this her faith 
shows itself again ; for in the case of her three sons, it is 
she herself who gives the names, and in them displays her 
faith. In Cain, it was simple and triumphant faith, that 
had not yet entered into conflict, nor known what trials 
and crosses are. In Abel's, it was the utterance of hope 
deferred, making the heart sick, and realizing strangership 
on earth and 'vanity' in creation. And now, in Seth, 
it is faith reassured and comforted, brought to rest in 
God, as able to fulfil to the uttermost all that He had 
promised. 

(i.) She recognises God in this. It is not the mere 
' law of nature ; ' it is the Lord. It is in the fulfilment of 
his Sovereign purpose that He is doing this. 

(2.) She gives a name expressive of her faith. She 
calls her infant the appointed one, the substituted one. 
She saw God making up her loss, filling up the void, pro- 
viding a seed, through which the promised deliverer was 
to come. 

{3.) She fondly calls to mind her martyred son. The 
way in which she does this, shows the yearning of her 



I ..Google 



2S8 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

heart over him who was taken away, as if his place was 
one which needed to be supplied, as if there were a blank 
ill her bosom which God only knew how to supply, . She 
had learned, doubtless, that 'blessed arc the dead that 
die in the Lord ; ' but still her heart went out fondly after 
the beloved child, and she could not be comforted till 
she had one hke him to fiil up his room. It is not senti- 
mentalism ; it is faith. It is not mere maternal love ; it 
is faith, faith that clung to the memory of her holy son, 
as one not merely beloved of herself, but beloved of her 
God. 



Ver. 26, 


' And io Sail, to Mm also tlisre tiias horn a sou ; and he 


called his 1 


ame Ems ■ i&^n h-gan men to call upon the name 0/ the 


Lord' 





We are yet to ha^e another glimpse of the holy seed, 
the heavenly family, not merelj pT^smg onwards as 
strangers, but shining as lights m the world. Gkid has 
reserved for Himself not one family, but many, in this age 
— and these are letting theur light shine. God's witnesses 
seem not few, but many. To Seth a son is bom, and 
though his name imports nothing great in so far as the 
flesh is concerned ; ' yet it seems that he was not only of 
the seed of the godly, but himself a man of faith; nay, a 
man mighty in word and deed for God. For in his days, 
and probably through his influence, a mighty and blessed 
work seems to have been accomplished, and men now 
publicly united together to worship Jehovah, gathering 

'£noj,^weak mortal, or dying man, ■lowing how truly believers 
were beginning to feel that ' all flesh is grass."" 



jiGoogle 



CSMES/S IV. 26. 






round the primeval altar at the gate of paradise, and there, 
over the bleeding sacrifice, calling upon the name of the 
Lcrd.^ 

In Enos — the 'feeble mortal,' as his name imports, the 
bruised reed, the man who has no confidence in the flesh 
— we see a faithful witness for God, — one who gathers 
into one the scattered families of believers, and unites 
them in the worship of the living God. 

Thus ebbs and flows the tide of heavenly life on earth. 



' For the meaning of ' calling on the name of tlie Lord,' see Gen, 
sii. S, xiii. 4, xsi. 33. It means generally the worship of tlie Lord, 
and the form of enpresslon implies that it was public or general, — 
men gathering together in solemn assembly. This was the first 
gathering of the samts in the name of Jesus, — the anticipation of the 
Master's words, ' Where two ov three are gathered in my name.' ' The 
Lord' or 'Jehovah' is properly Messiah's name: He who 'was, and is 



Eve linew Him hy this n 



ie(ch.iv. I); 
gyof 



and is to come,'— the I A 
Enoch also k 
the Old Testi 

worthy of bei m g tu ed O y m wia 

wrest thi Scrip h d h n g m nd r the 

Presidency of h H G d th am Jesu thus 

framii^ a pro ph wn aside 

the scriptural rm th m J w h ill aints 

have met from the beginning. That tlie Holy Ghost is Peesident 
of a congregation^ or gathering, or church, thus superseding Christ 
the head, is a fiction got np in order to form a new sect, which under 
professions of superior spirituality would get vent to its supercilious 
assumptions over other bodies, dividing Christians, splitting churches, 
compassing sea and land to ma'Ke one proselyte, and doing what in 
them lies to grieve the Holy Spirit, to whom they have assigned the 
unscviptaral designation of President of the Church. Such are the 
sayings and doings of the ' last days,' when men 'ci'eep into houses,' 
lead captive the unwary, and beguile unstable souls, who have been 
running about from church to churchy from minister to minister, 
fmdiijg no rest for their souls. 



jiGoogle 



270 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

Thus has the cause of God been carried on, — not steadily 
progressing, but often cast back, and the saints reduced to 
a handful ; then once more reviving, and believers added 
to the Church in numbers. Onwards from Seth's day the 
work has proceeded in this way, and is to do so till the 
Lord come. Let us not be discouraged ; yet let tis not 
seek great things for ourselves ; but simply to do the 
Lord's work in our day, and to reach the reward. 



I ..Google 



GENESIS V 



CHAPTER V. 

Vers. I, z. 'TkisistkihoBhofthigemratioiisofAdam.'^ Intheday 
that God created man, in the likeness of Gad mads He Mm ; 2. Male 
and female created lie them ; and blessed ihem, and called their name 
Adam, in the day viken Ihey were created ' 

THIS chapter stands by itself It is one of names 
and dates; a -chapter of genealogy, a jjige of 
early chronology. It does fill a larger space than we 
should have expected ; yet of ita importance w e are not 
competent judges. The Holy Spint has written it, and 
placed it in His volume, for all ages to read It must 
therefore contain important truth, both for the world and 
for the Church, though we may not quite see or appreciate 
it. It has served mighty ends in ages past, for it has 
furnished history with the main stem of its chronolo|,iLal 
tree ; and it may yet serve no less gre^t ends m the ages 
to come; for in the world's /iw/ days men will be more 
thrown back upon its _;?«/ days than thej aie wiUmg to 
believe. We should have preferred a lecord of the siy 
ings and doings of the patriarchs to such lists of nimes 
and years ; and we may not be able to enter fully into 



1 De Sola renders this, ' This is the enumenfion of the de cendai ts 
of Adam;' and remarks that ^^D■ which s here used s^nfe. 
radically to count or number, and properly means enumeration 
'This is the list or catalogue' (PooLl;). It is the same ii ord that is 
translated ' register ' in Neh. vii. J. 



I ..Google 



272 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS.. 

God's reasons for giving us such barren verses, as we are 
apt to think them. But what we know not now we shall 
know hereafter. Bible history is written on the principle 
of abridgment and selection. God Himself is tlie abridger 
and selecter. He has written the story of His own world 
in His own way, and according to His own plan, keeping 
such things as these in view — (i) what would most 
glorify Himself; (a) what would most benefit the Church 
upon the whole; {3) what would mark distinctly the 
stages leading, on to the Incarnation of His Son; (4) 
what would prove the true humanity of Messiah as the 
seed of the woman, and so the embodiment of the grace 
and truth wrapt up in the first promise to man. The first 
verse carries us back to the earlier chapters, and repeats 
the statement already given as to man's creation in the 
divine image. It is plain from it that God desires us 
to look at and ponder such things as these — (i) man's 
creation by God; (2) his creation in the likeness of 
God ; ' (3) his creation, male and female ; (4) his being 
'blessed' by Godj. and that he enters this world as a 
blessed being, not under the curse at all ; {5) his receiv- 
ing the name of Adam, or man, from God Himself, as if 
God specially claimed the right of nomenclature to Him- 
self How much importance must God attach to tliese 

' While Luke traces Christ's genealogy to Adam (as Matthew does 
to Abraham), he traces Adam's parentage to God. How solemnly 
do his last words fell on our ears, ' Whicli was the son ot God ; ' or, 
as it stands in its simplicity, just tsD eiou. ' Our generation,' says 
Philo, ' is from man, but him (the first man) God made ' (fSa^siyfj-Bci). 
Alid again, ' But of him (Adam) no mortal was the father or catise, 
but God;' quoted in- the Hellenistic Testament, on Luke iii. 38. 



I ..Google 



GENESIS V. 3-5. 



273 



things when He thus repeats them at so brief an interval ! 
He does not repeat in vain. Every word of God is 
' pure,' and it is full of meaning, even though we may not 
now see it all. It is not a mere grain or atom ; it is a 
seed, — a root. 



Vers. 3-5. 'And Adam lived an hundred and CMrly years, anif iegat 
a son in. his awn likeness, after his iniagxj and called his )iame Selh?- 
4. And the days of Adam, afta- he had begottat Seth, were eight hundred 
years; and he begat sens and daughters. 5. AttJ all the dajis that 
Adam lived wers nine hundred and thirty years : and he died' 

This is the sum of Adam's life ! He lived, he begat 
a son, he died ! How brief and bare 1 Vet such is the 
outline of man's life as seen by the eye of God, and from 
that point of view which God occupies. Our memoirs 
of a man of threescore and ten fill volumes; God's 
memoirs of a man of nine hundred and thirty occupy but 
three verses. What desires have we to get some glimpse 
into Adam's life, to know something of his words and 
deeds ! But not one is left on record I 

In the third verse, we are told of Adam's age when he 
begat Seth, — one hundred and thirty years, — showing 
us how deliberately God proceeds in carrying out His 
promises. He does not ' make haste,' yet they are all 
sure. The woman's seed shall come forth in due time. 
Delay may occur, obstacles may intervene, Abel may 
be cut down, Seth may be long of coming; yet the pro- 
mise shall not fail.^ 



' De Sola renders it, ' that begat a son,' 1 

ore defmite. 

' Adam is here said to give Seth iiis n 



c, making the meaning 
ne, as elsewhere Eve is 



jiGoogle 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



But this son is in Adam's own likeness and image. 
Adam was made in God's image, Setli in Adam's ; but 
Adam was no longer what he once was. It is the image 
of a fallen man, wrinkled and distorted with sin. 'That 
which is bom of the flesh is flesh,' The thorn cannot 
produce the grape, nor the briar the fig ; neither can a 
bitter fountain send forth sweet waters. 

After Seth's birth, Adam lived 800 years, begetting 
sons and daughters ; thus living on with all the patriarchs 
of the early age, till the goStli year of Enoch, and the 
57th before his translation; almost to the very days of 
Noah ; 930 years in all. Such was the long age of Adana, 
— an age which, though gradually diminished till it came 
to the threescore years and ten, is yet to be revived in 
millennial days, when, as it is written, ' the days of my 
people shall be as the days of a tree' (Isa. Ixv. 22). 

Then he died ! He by whom death came in at last 
fell under it. He returned to dust. His sin found hira 
out, after a long pursuit of 930 years, and laid him low. 
The first Adam dies ! The tallest, goodliest palm-tree of 
the primeval paradise is laid low. The first Adam dies ; 
neither in life nor in death transmitting to us aught of 
blessing. He dies as our forerunner ; he who led the 
way to the tomb. The first Adam dies, and we die in 
him ; but the second Adam dies, and we live in him ! 
The first Adam's grave proclaims only death ; the second 
Adam's grave announces life, — ' I am the resurrection and 
the life.' We look into the grave of the one, and we see 



siiid to have done {chap, h 
pressing in it their .common 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS V. 6-8. 275 

only darkness, corruption, and death ; we look into the 
grave of the other, and we find there only light, incorrup- 
tion, and hfe. We look into the grave of the one, and we 
find that he is still there, his dust still mingling with its 
fellow-dust about it ; we look into the grave of the other, 
and find that He is not there, He is risen, — risen as our 
forerunner into the heavenly paradise, the home of the 
risen and redeemed. We look into the grave of the first 
Adam, and see in him the first-fruits of them that have 
died, the millions that have gone down to that prison- 
house whose gales he opened ; we look into the tomb 
of the second Adam, and we see in Him the first-fruits 
of them that are to rise ; the first-fruits of that bright 
multitude, that glorified band, who are to come forth from 
that cell, triumphing over death, and rising to the im- 
mortal life ; not through the tree which grew in the earthly 
paradise, but through Him whom that tree prefigured— 
through Him who was dead and is alive, and who liveth 
for evermore, and who has the keys of hell and death. 

Vers. 6-S, ' A?!ii Sdk lived an hundred and Jive years, and begat 
Enos, 7. And Sdh lived, after he begat Mnos, sight kundrsd and 
seven years, and begat sons and daughters. S. And all the days of 
Sak were nine hundred and twelve years : and he died.' 

The first link in the great chain of incarnation was 
Adam. The second link seemed at first to be Cain. 
At least so Eve thought; but it was soon seen that he 
was the first link of another chain,:— the serpent's seed, 
whose last link is, not Christ, but Antichrist. Then it 
might seem as if the second link were to be Abel ; but 
suddenly it was snapped asunder, and the promise looked 



I ..Google 



376 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

as if ready to fail But when thus the Lord had tried 
Adam's faith, as He did Abraham's, He stepped in and 
produced another link, which was neither to fail nor to 
be broken. Seth stands before us as the second great 
link of the wondrous chain. In him the promise was to 
be made sure. He was truly ' Seth ' — the substituted one, 
brought in to supply a brother's place and to perform 
a brother's part, both to the smitten family and to the 
Church of God, whose hope seemed to he cut off. He 
was not, like Abel, suffered to be the victim of Cain's 
envy, but rose up to manhood, primeval manhood, — the 
manhood of an entire century. In his 105th year he , 
begat Enos, thus making sure another link, Eind raising 
up another witness, besides being himself a noble witness 
for God. Thereafter he lived 807 years, and begat sons 
and daughters, of whom, however, we know notliing. 
They might be followers of their father, or they might be 
like their uncle Cain ; we know not. God names but 
one, leaving the rest unheard of till the great day that 
shall give up all names. Seth lived altogether 912 years, 
— a shorter life by 18 than Adam, yet surviving him iis 
years ; nay, surviving Enoch, and perhaps witnessing his 
translation. 

Then he died ! He too, like Adam, paid the penally, 
and gave up the forfeited life. It was not the debt of 
nature, as men idly speak, that he paid ; it was the penalty 
of the righteous law. He died. The dust returned to 
dust, and the spirit to the God that gave it He through 
whom the Prince of life was to come, died; and for now 
well-nigh 5000 years he has been resting in the tomb. 



I ..Google 



GENESIS V. 9-II. 277 

He, and Adam, and Abel have had a long sleeping time. 
Ours will be shorter; for the Lord is at hand; and, 
instead of 5000 years, it may be less than five. When 
Seth went doivn into the tomb, it had received few 
tenants ; but now they are beyond number ; and it is just 
when earth is overfilled, overcrowded with occupants, as if 
it could hold no more, that the gates of the grave burst 
open, and the ransomed ones arise.^ 

Vers. 9-11. 'And Enos livid itinety years, and itgat Cainan. 
10. And Enos lived, after he 6egal Cainan, eight hundred and fifteen 
years, and begat sens and daughters. Ii. And ail the days of Enos 
taerenint hundred and five years : and he died.' 

Three verses contain the biography of SetL God 



' Suidas, upon the word Sdh, has the folio iving piece of information, 
deiived from Jewish tradition :— ' The men of that age called Seth 
a god, because he invented the Hebrew letters and the nomenclature 
of the stars ; and besides, they gave him the name of God in admira- 
tion ofhis great piety' (t«>.>.b» ilirifiuxt xinS trtuaamniTt;). He then, 
referring to Symmachus, affirms that the sons of Setli, Enos, and 
Enoch, were called by the name, ' Sons of God ; ' and that afterwards 
these Sethites, or Sons of God, intermarried with the daughters of 
men, or Caiiules (see Lexicon, vol. lil. pp. 305, 306). The Popish 
fabulists, however, have a mucli more wonderfiil story than the Jewish 
rabbis. One of their historians, Joannes Gerbrandus, thus relates 
it ! — 'In the year 1374, when the Christians and Saracens were 
digging in the valley of Jehoshaphat, they found a tumulus of bricks ; 
and opening it, tliey found a body of wonderfiil size, entire, with 
flowing beard and long hair, wrapped in sheep-skins, and above Ms 
head this inscription, carved in Hebrew — I am Seth, [he third son of 
Adam ; I believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God, and in Mary the 
Virgin, His mother, who are to come out of my loins.' No wonder 
that the old author who quotes this, though a Romanist, should add, 

' fides penes auctorem sit ' (Adagia ex Sanetomm Fairum Monumeniis 
pronipta, etc. , p. 377, by Aloysius TJovarinus — a folio, full of curious 

extracts, A.D. 1637), 



I ..Google 



273 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

eounts this enough, and passes on Eiios comes next, 
and other three verses sum up his hfe He 11 the third 
hnk of tiie ■wondrous chain through which the promise 
descends He is ^ sinful miii, hke the rest, nay, as 
his name signifies, a wealc, poor, mortal man, jet still 
one of the blessed succession through whom the bmless 
One uas to come, God showmg thereby that He still 
reserves to Himself to bring the clean thing out of the 
unclean. Enos lives ninety years, and begets Cainan. 
thus fastening another link of the glorious chain. After- 
wards he lives 815 years, begetting children; in all, 905 ; 
thus passing into Noah's days, and approaching towards 
the flood. Then dust returns to dust. He is seen to 
be not ' the Living One,' but an heir of mortality, a true 
child of him through whom death came into the world 
How true is God to His threatenings ! Not a jot of one 
of them shall fail. The oft-repeated phrase in this chapter, 
'and he died,' is the testimony to God's truthfulness in 
His sentence upon Adam, and the proclamation of Satan's 
falsehood, when he said, ' Ye shall not surely die.'' 
' And he died ' is the solemn toll of the patriarchal 
funeral bell, How it makes us long for the ' trump of 
God,' when all this shall be reversed, and it shall be said 
of each, 'he liveth,' to die no more! What a contrast 
between this chapter and the 15th of First Corinthians! 
In the one, it is death swallowing up life ; in the other, 

' See PereHus ValaiHiiui, voL i. p. 775. He takes up the ques- 
tion why ' he died ' occurs so often, but says little to the point, save 
showing that God thus manifested His own veracity, and the shortness 
of life, in comparison with the eternity that lies beyond. 



jiGoogle 



it is life swallowing up death ; nay, it is death swallowed 
up of victory. Genesis is truly the book of death. 

Vers. 12-zo. 'And Cainanlitied levtnly years, a?td bsgnl Mahalaleel. 
13. And Cainaa lived, after he begat Makaialed, eight hundred and 
forty years, and begat sans and daughters. 14, And all the days of 
Cainan were nine hundred and ten years : and he died. 15. A?id 
Mahalaled lived sixty and five years, and begai ybred. 16. And 
MahalaleH Iraed, after he begat yared, eight hundred and thirty years, 
and begat sons and daughters. 17. And all the days of Jilahalaleel 
were eight hundrM ninety and fvl years: and he died, 18. And 
^red lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begai Enoch. 
19. And Jared lived, after he begat Enoch, eight hundred years, and 
begat sons and daughters. 20. And all the days of yared -were nine 
hundred sixty and tiuo years : and he died. ' 

The fourlh link of the mighty chain is Cainan. His 
seems to have been an earlier manhood than the others, 
ior at 70 he begat Mahalaleel. Thereafter he lived 840 
years; in all, 910. Then he returned to dust, and went 
to the grave of his fathers. The sentence still remained 
in force. Death still prevailed, even over those through 
whom the Prince of life was to come. 

The fifth link is Mahalaleel. His is yet an earher 
ripened manhood. At 65 he begets Jared, thereafter 
living 830 years; in ali, 895 ; then, like his fathers, he 
died. The patriarchal bell has tolled again ; yet he had 
lived far on into Noah's days ; a witness, doubtless, 
against the increasing ungodliness of the world, and a 
protester against the intermixture of the heavenly and 
the eirthly, the sons of God and the daughters of men. 

The sixth link is Jared. He ripens not so soon, yet 
the result of his late maturity is a wondrous birth. At 
the age of 163 he begets Enoch. Perhaps his faith was 



I ..Google 



2So THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

tried, like Abraham's ; it was so long before this son of 
the promise came ; yet, when he came, what an Isaac 
was he ! What a child of gladness ! And how must his 
father have rejoiced in such a son, — rejoiced even when 
bidding him farewell, as he went up to a home above, 
through the first opening that had been made in these 
heavens to admit ascending man.^ Yet, after a long 
life, — 962, — the second longest on record, 'he died.' 
Again the bell tolls, and again God's truth is proved 
against the lie of the devil. The sentence takes its due 
course, and he, the father of one who was not to taste 
of death, himself must die. 

Vers. 21-24. ' ^nd Enoch lived sixty and fiue years, and begat 
Methusdah. 22. And Enoch umlked with. God, after he begat 
Melhusdak, three hundred years, and begat ions and daughters. 23. 
Anit ail the days of Enoch luere three hundred sixty and five years. 
24. And Enoch viaikedxmth God ; and he was not : for God took him.' 

Enoch's manhood is an early one, as if the early ripe 
are the early taken. He begets Methuselah when 6g. 
This singularly holy man has sons and daughters, as if 
to show us that there is no special sanctity in the un- 
married state. 'Forbidding to marry' was unknown in 
Enoch's days. He 'walked with God' as a husband 
and a father. He 'walked with God' as one loved and 
loving; as one who knew Jehovah, and who had got so 
intimate with Him, that he is described as 'the man that 
walked with God.' It was faith, as the apostle tells us 

' He survived Enoch's translation 435 years. It must have seemed 
a maivellous thing to him, that his soc should be singled out for going 
■upwards, when all others were going downwards. 



jiGoogle 



(Heb. XL s, 6), that began this walk, and it was feitli that 
maintained it. ■ It was this tiiat first brought him nigh, 
and that afterwards kept him nigh. It was thus that 
his close, confidential, happy intercourse with God was 
commenced and carried on. For 300 years he thus 
walked with God, as husband and father, before his 
family, setting an example to his children ; an example 
to the age. 

He pleased God. God delighted in him. He was 
among the patriarchs what Daniel was among the pro- 
phets, and what John was among the disciples. He was 
the greatly-beloved one. And God had made no secret 
of His delight in him. He had, in some way not told, 
given clear indications of this, for ' before his translation 
he had this testimony, that he pleased God ' (Heb. xi, g). 

God took him. At the age of 365 he went up to be 
with his God, not tasting that death which was laying low 
all around him. He did not wither down like the rest 
of those primeval trees. He was at once transplanted 
from the desert below to the paradise above. He had 
lived and worshipped within sight of the paradise below, 
and he is caught up at once into the better paradise. 
And there he has been for nearly 5000 years already. 
Not merely in soul, like other saints, but in body ; glorified 
and incorruptible, like the children of the resurrection, or 
like those who shall be alive when the Lord returns. 
Such was God's love to Enoch ; such was His desne to 
take him out of a world of sin, to snatch him away 
from the evil to come; such His desire to reward and 
bless him with the nearer vision of his glory; such His 



I ..Google 



283 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

desire to have liim neai Himself, as if He could not bear 
his absence any longer, nor wait the appointed period of 
death ; but carried him off in His fatherly arms, to be 
with Him in His glory. 

Thus God showed that, while death was the law, still 
He could raake exceptions; and these exceptions indicated 
the nature and extent of the deliverance which God was 
preparing for man. It would not rest till it had glorified 
even man's body, and given him a home above, an inherit- 
ance in the heavens, sometliing better and more glorious 
than the earthly Eden. Hitherto man had looked up 
from earth to heaven ; he was taught that ere long he 
should look down from heaven to earth. The link 
between him and his native earth was not to be broken, 
but to be established on a new footing, according to the 
distinction afterwards brought more fully out, betiveen 
the earthly and the heavenly, the 'things terrestrial ' and 
the ' things celestial.' 

Other patriai'chs are taken away by death from the evil 
to come, and 'hidden in the grave,' while wrath is passing 
over earth; but he is lifted up, and hidden in Jehovah's 
own pavilion. Even Noah, who also ' walked with God,' 
is but carried through the storm, sheltered in the ark, 
where he hears its violence beating on every side; but 
Enoch is caught up out of it, — transfigured and trans- 
lated, — type of those who shall be caught up out of the 
fiery judgments of the last days, and brought into the 
royal chambers, there to consummate their espousals with 
the Lamb ; and thence to issue forth, ' when the Lord 
comes WITH ten thousand of His saints to execute ven- 



I ..Google 



GEMESIS V 



25-27. 



geance' on an ungodly world. For it is remarkable that 
Enoch's prediction, as preserved for us by Jude, is not of 
the Lord's coming/r>r His saints, but of His coming wtfA 
them, Enoch speaks in the name of those who have 
been caught up by him already, and who come along with 
Him to 'judge angels,' to 'judge the world,' to share the 
awful honour of accomplishing the Father's purpose of 
righteous recompense upon a world that has disowned 
His Son, and set at nought His grace (Ps. cxlix. 9). 

Yet in Enoch's removal there is nothing said to indicate 
that it was striking or terrible to the world. No token 
was given,^no trumpet summoned the world to witness 
his ascent 'He was not;' 'he was not found.' This 
is all we learn. He disappeared from among the children 
of men. He walked with God for three centuries ; and 
in the midst of this calm walk he passed upward, as by 
an invisible ladder, into the presence of his God ! How 
blessed, how congenial, this termination of a lifetime's 
walk with God ! How natural the transition from the 
fellowship below to the nearer communion above ! As in 
the case of Elijah, they might seek him, but 'he was not 
found.' Without a sick-bed, or a death-bed ; without the 
pains or weaknesses of decaying age, in the full maturity 
of primeval manhood, he went up to the inheritance 
above. Such shall be the blessed lot of the waiting 
saints when the Lord returns. Let us watch with girded 
loins. Let our life be Enoch's walk with God. 

Vers. 25-27. 'j]nd Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seveit 
yean, ana begat Lameck. 36. And Mtthuselah lined, after he begat 
Laauch, seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sotu and 



jiGoogle 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



The eighth link of the chain is .Methuselah. His man- ' 
hood ripens slowly, and he lives long. It was not till he 
^was 187 that he begat Lamech. Sprung of a parent that 
had passed into the skies, and himself the longest liver 
upon earth, he is certainly no common, man. Yet, though 
Enoch is his father, and though he resists death till the 
age of 969, still he yields at last. The last enemy con- 
quers. The man of a thousand years dies. He seems 
given us as the type of the race in millennial times, when 
their 'days shall be as the days of a tree' (Isa. Ixv. 22), 
as his father is the type of the glorified Church, The 
two classes are separate, yet closely connected together ; 
the one, as it were, the offspring of the other,— the earthly 
the offspring of the heavenly. 

Vera. 38-32. ^ And Lamech livtd an kuiidnd dghiy and two yeca-s, 
and begat a son ; 29. And he coiled his name Noah^ saying. This 
same shall comfort us canceniing (or ^Jar' or 'Jrffm') our iBork and 
teU of our hands, because of (or 'from') the ground vihich the Lord 
hstk cursed. 3a And Lantech lived, after lit begat Noah, five hundred 
ninety and f/ve years, and begai seas and daughters. 31. And all the 
days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and sevea years : and he 
died. 32. And Noah vias five hundred years old: and Noah begat 
Shem, Ham, and yaphsth. ' 

The ninth link is Lamech. He begets Noah at the 

I Noah signifies 'lesL' The word is not unlzlte Qnj, to comfort, 
and seems used because of its expressive similarity. ' Work ' denotes 

the lighter labour ; ' ' ' ' ' 

arose from the curs 
' because of.' 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS V 



age of 182, but lives a shorter life than most of the 
others, — only 777. Then he died. The sentence took 
its course on him. Dust returned to dust It would 
seem that the original curse upon the ground began to 
be felt heavier. The population increased, and the. 
means of subsistence grew more difficult to men, who 
knew but little about the tillage of the ground, and who 
probably shrank from such tUlage of an accursed soil, 
laying out their labour the more on pastoral employ- 
ments. Besides, probably, they had been, age after age, 
expecting -the Deliverer, and He had not come. Hope 
deferred had made their heart sick, and their toil sorer. 
.Enoch's prophecy, too, of the coming Deliverer would 
rouse up their sinking hope, and make them sanguine 
that the day of rest from their labour was at hand. 
Hence Lamech, in full expectation that such was the case, 
called his son Noah, — anticipating rest in his day, if not 
from him, as the expected seed of the woman. He did 
not read the signs of the times aright, He did not see that 
evil, and not good, was at the door. He was disappointed. 
Yet still we see in him the man of faith, looking for 
rest, and realizing it as coming in some way or other from 
the woman's seed. How much man felt his need of rest 
and comfort 1 How deeply did he sympathize with the 
groans of a travailing creation ! How earnestly did he 
long for deliverance from the heavy curse 1 That deli- 
verance came not in his day, yet he did not wait and 
hope in vain. And though the Lord should not come 
in our day, yet if we look for Him, we shall not lose our 
reward. 



I ..Google 



285 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

Just five years before the flood Lamech dies. He 
must have been a fellow-preacher of righteousness along 
with his son, — a fellow-witness during the rao years of 
testimony, — a fellow-builder of the ark ; father and son 
.fighting the battles of the Lord together, and encouraging 
each other in their toil and suffering, — and then the 
aged saint is taken away from the evil to come, after 
having seen the ark all ready, and heard the assurances 
given by God to his son, that all should be well with 
him, though the looked-for rest was not to come in his 
day. 

The tmth link is Noah. Of him we learn nothing at 
present, save that he was 500 years old ere he begat 
his three sons. What befell him and them we shall 
learn subsequently. This last verse of the chapter seems 
a sort of introduction to what follows in the next. 

Such are the ten antediluvian links in the great chain, 
whose last link is the Son of God. Such are the ten 
early witnesses for God. They lived, and testiiied, and 
died. A single chapter contains ten biographies. Such 
is God's estimate of man, and man's importance ! How 
unlike man's estimate of himself ! How unlike are the 
biographies contained in this chapter to those volumes 
of biography over which are spread the story of a single 
life ! Is not this man-worship, hero-worship ? And was 
it not to prevent this that God has hid from us the 
details of primitive history, — everything that would 
magnify man and man's doings? Just as He has taken 
pains to prevent the grosser idolatries of sun-worship 
and star-worship, by exhibiting these orbs in the first 



I ..Google 



GENESIS V. 28-32. 2S7 

chapter as Hib oun handinork, so in this fifth chipter 
Ht has sought to anticipate and present the more reSned 
idolatij not only of past ages, T^hen man openly and 
grossly deified man, but ot thtse last days, when man 
IS worshipping man m the most subtle of all ways, and 
multiplymg the stones of min's wisdom, or prowess, or 
goodnebi, so is to hide God from our eyes, and gne to 
man an inde])cndent position and importance, from 
which God has been so careiul to exclude him We 
might say, too, that this chapter is God's protest agarast 
that speciil development of hero worship, which is to 
be exhibited in the last Antichrist, when God shall be 
set aside, and man be set up as all. 

The importance attached to these recorded names 
is just this, that they belong to the line of the woman's 
seed. It was this that made them worthy of memory. 
The chain to which some precious jewel is attached, 
is chiefly noticeable because of the gem that it suspends. 
The steps, which led up to the temple were mainly im- 
portant because of the temple to which they led. So 
it was the connection of these ten worthies of the world's 
first age with the great Coming One, that gave them 
their importance. Standing where we now do, far down 
the ages, and looking back on the men of early days, 
we are like one tracing some great river back to its 
distant source amid the lonely hills. The varied beauties 
of its banks, however great, yet derive their chief attrac- 
tion and interest from the mighty city reared upon its 
margin, at some turn of its far downward course, and 
from the mighty ones which that city has given birth 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



to. It is Bethlehem that gives all its interest to the 
river whose beginnings this chapter traces ; or rather, 
it is He who was there born of a woman, — Jesus the 
son of Abraham, the son of Adam. Save in tlieir bearing 
upon Him, how unmeaning do these names appear ! 
It is not in sacrifices alone, or promises, or types, that 
we are to look for Jesus, but even in such bare genea- 
logies as those before us. It is He who gives fulness 
and interest to them all. It is from Him that they 
derive aU that brightness which, to tlie natural eye, is 
quite invisible. And from them we rejoice to learn, 
that Jesus of Bethlehem is as truly the Son of Adam as 
He is the Son of God. 

These all died. They died. And death has been 
passing upon all men since, godly or ungodly. We are 
carried to the same house to which the patriarchs, one 
after the other, descended. We are laid side by side ■ 
with Adam, and Seth, and Lamech, and Noah. But 
our hope burns brighter now. We shall not have so long 
to sleep as they have had They weie hid to sleep lust 
when the night wis falhng, and they have hid to sleep 
through the whole hours of diikne'iS But the morn is 
near. The day will soon break We shall not ha\e 
long to sleep It may be that some of us shall scarcely 
have laid down our weaned heads and limbs, till the 
voice of the archangel shall awake us Then it shall 
not be written of us, 'he died,' but of each of us, as 
we awake, it shall be said, 'he rose again.' 



I ..Google 



CHAPTER VI. 

Vers. I, 2.' ' Audit cameto pass, whm mm began to multiply ok 
{o-cover) the face of tke earth CKeh. iAs ground ot soil), and daughieft 
were bant unto them, 2. Thai the sons of God saw the daughters of 
men that they were fair j and they took them wives of all which ih^ 

THE original law of increase is still in force. Sin 
has not cancelled nor weakened it The sentence 
of death against man does not interfere with it; nay, 
rather seems to give it new impulse,— as if creation, 
threatened with death, urged forward all the processes 

' The Septuagint makes this chapter to 'begin with the last verse of 
the pri-ceding, as if the statement respei-ting Noah ind his sons (ver. 
3") were the mlroduction to what follows The 1 here, like the 
Greek nxi, is not so much a Imk Viith what goes before as an inlro- 
duction to what follows, and ccrresponds with our particle ' now.' 
The ej.pi ession, ' on the fece of the earth, ' might be more literally 
rendered ' over ("i];) the surface of the giound,' — alluding to (he 
population spieadifz^ ttStlf out as well as increasing We Ought to 
notice, too, that the word translated nttn is singular, yet it is s^d 
' bom to them ' The passage might mn thus — ' Now it came to 
pass thit men began to multiply over the ground, and daughters were 
bom to them ' There ought to be a period at thia verse. Havemick 

m k — W m t pass over the genealogies in chap, v., which 

t rr pt th h t ry and join the passage with iv. 26. Here it is 
tl p g y of S th that is spoken of, and the worship of Jehovah 
wl h th y p t d by which the narrator has evidently made 

fii t p p *at n f " sons of God," especially when, in ver. 25, 
th y desgiated a, a whole, a seed (comp. Deut. xiv. i ; Ex. 
) 



I ..Google 



290 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

of life to prevent its own extinction ; or rather, as if God, 
who loves not to see His works destroyed, and who has 
a glorious purpose in view, were hastening on the different 
steps, that so the days of evil may be shortened. 

Men multiply over the earth, though, perhaps, at a 
slower rate than now. The whole race now has become 
evil, so that the name 'man' has become, as the word 
' world ' did in later days, an expression for the tmgodly. 
Earth is becoming what David afterwards felt it to 
be, when he saw the faithful failing 'from among the 
children of men' (Ps. xii. i), so that there were hardly 
any lefi on earth save 'the children of men;' or when, 
seeing himself surrounded with an evil generation, he 
said, ' How great is Thv goodness, which Thou hast laid 
up for then th t f Th e ; which Thou hast wrought 
for them th 1 1 Uit Thee before the sons of men ! ' (Ps. 
xxxi. 19); hen he peaks of 'the works of men' 

(Ps. xviL 4) o hen I e speaks of his ' soul being 
among lion e n a ong the sons of men ' (Ps. Ivii. 4). 
Thus we find (even in this chapter) that the words 
'man,' and 'flesh,' and 'world,' which are not in them- 
selves names of evil, are becoming synonymous with un- 
godliness. 

To 'men' daughters are bom. Sons, of course, as 
well as daughters are bom; but daughters are specially 
mentioned, because of the part they act in the scene that 
follows. It is a scene which is the natural summing 
up and result of what began in Lamech, when woman's 
beauty took the lead in seducing man from God. It 
is in the region of the beautiful that Satan lays his most 



I ..Google 



GENESIS V 






subtle snares. He combines in one tbe lust of the flesh 
and the lust of the eye. It is the comeliness of woman 
that gives new impulse to the ungodliness of earth. 

The earth is a scene of gaiety and lust. 'Man' and 
his daughters overspread it. To the eye of the flesh, 
it is a bright display of earth's perfection. The song 
and the dance, and the fair attire, and the rich gem, 
and the ringing mirth, — these make up the sum of this 
' magic of bliss,' in which the world was revelling. ' 

The fame of these 'daughters of beauty' spreads. 
Eyes are attracted to them that should not have looked 
on them; and hearts are beguiled by them that should 
have repelled their advances. But as it was the beauty 
of the daughters of Moab that ensnared Israel, and 
led on to wickedness which drew down God's stroke of 
judgment, so did the attractions of these daughters of 
men entangle those who stood, in reference to God 
before the flood,' as Israel did in later days. 

For there were still some that ' dwelt alone,' and 
were not mingled with the ungodly. They were few, 
but age after age they held fast to the early faith, 
Adam was their head ; for long did he dwell among 
them ; and he was known as the son of God {Liike iii. 
38).^ Seth and Enos, and the band of patriarchs, were 

' See Milton's description, of the time and the scene in Paradise 
Last, Look xi. 581-592 — 

' A b*vy of fair women richly gay, 

^ If Luke drew his catalogue from the tegular and legal genealogical 
tables, as doubtless he did, then it is plain that Adam's name had 
been entered in these tables as ' son of God. ' 



jiGoogle 



293 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

called by Adam's name; and even after his death they 
and their children clung to Adam's faith, and worshipped 
Adam's God. When Cain and his posterity spread over 
the earth, Adam and Seth, and their offspring, still 
clustered round the primeval home, and worshipped at 
the gate of paradise, within sight of the ilaming sword 
and the cherubim within. This region was to them 
what Canaan was to Israel ; and as Israel in after days 
got the name of sons of God, so did these in the earlier 
age; for the name of the redeemed has been one 
throughout — 'sons of God.' Identified with Him who 
is the Son of God, and washed in His blood, they get 
His name."^ 

These sons of God, though for ages dwelling alone, 
at length came into contact with the ungodly. The 



^ It is said that in tlie Old Testament none but angels arc called 
' sons of God. ' In proof of this, Job i. 6 and ii. I are adduced ; but 
these are at least doubtful. The only apparently undoubted one is 
Job KXKVJii. 7, ' The sons of God shouted for joy ; ' where, howeyer, 
we may notice that the article is awanting in the Hebrew before 'God,' 
so that tbis passage stands alone. But admitting that angels are called 
SODS of God, we do not need to concede that men may not be called 
the same. In Luke iiL 38, Adam is called the son of God. In Ex. 
iv. 22, 23, God calls Israel His ' son ; ' and that this is not in any 
inferior sense, is proved by Hos. iti. I, which, referring originally to 
Israel, is applied by Matthew to Christ. In Isa. xlv. II, God calls 
them His 'sons ;' and in Jer. xxxi. 21, He calls Ephraim His 'dear 
son ; ' and in the same chapter, at the ninth verse, God says, ' I am a 
father unto Israel, and Ephraim is my first-bom,' — the veiy words 
which are used in reference to Messiah, Ps. Ixxnix. 27. See also 
Hos. i ic^ ' Ye are the sons of the living God ; ' Deut. liv. i, ' Ye 
are the sons of Jehovah, your God.' And one of the apostle's objects 
in the 3d and 4th of Galatians is to show that we are brought into the 
participation o( sonsliip, such as Abraham had, long before tlie' law 



I ..Google 



tide of the world's population gradually swelled till it 
reached the confines of Eden, and there it flung ashore 
its glittering gems, which soon attracted the eyes of 
the inhabitants of the sacred region. They picked them 
up, adorned themselves with them, and soon the separat- 
ing line between the two regions disappeared. The 
sons of God were captivated with the beauty of these 
daughters of men, and entered into marriage affinity 
with them.i Thus the godly are entangled and corrupted. 
Thus the ungodly became more ungodly stilL The 
barrier is quite broken down between the seed of the 
woman and the seed of the serpent. Thus is not merely 
an individual ruined, as in the case of Samson; not 
merely a nation, as in the case of Israel; but a whole 
world is destroyed. Such are the evils flowing from 

was given by faith in Christ,—' Ye are all the sons of Goil {„U: «!»&— 
just as the patriarchs were) by faith in Christ Jesus ' {Gal. iii, 26). 
The Church's privilege is to be brought into that standing and relation- 
ship towards God which Abraham had enjoyed, and which had been 
known from the beginning, but which the introduction of the law had 
narrowed or curtailed. TTie verse above cited means, ' Ve all, who 
believe in Jesus Cliiist, Abraham's true seed, are placed on Abraham's 
footing, and get Abraliam's name, vlis SiaS,'— a name which appears 
to have been much better known in patriarchal times than we imagine. 
Philo writes : ' Ye who have knowledge are rightfully addressed as 
the sons of the one God, as Moses says, "Ye are the sons of Jeliovab, 
your God." '—{Zle Confuskne Linguarum, sec 28.) 

' There is no proof of unlawful violence here. The expiession is 
a common one to intimate the lawful maniage union — 'tliey took 
themselves wives ; ' as the Lord expressed it, ' they married and were 
given ill marriage. ' The words, however, probably intimate that, like 
Lamech and the Cainites, they took as many wives as they pleased. 
Mark the contrast between the words 'whom Ikey chose,' and 'a 
prudent wife isfivm the Lord. ' 



jiGoogle 



294 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

the lust of the flesh aiid of the eye ! We have seen 
it in Latnech's case ; we see it in the case before us on 
a lai^er scale ; we see it in after ages in Sodom, in Israel, 
in Samson, in David, in Solomon. What endless evils 
have flowed from impure desires I What corruption 
of piety; what strifes, and hatred, and wars! One of 
the marks of the last days is 'incontinence;' and both 
Peter and Jude have left warnings for the Church as to 
these special sins. Let us mark, too, the danger of 
unequal marriages. ' Only in the Lord ' is the apostle's 
rule ; and when this is wilfully neglected, — when beauty 
and wealth, instead of piety, are preferred, — then what 
sin is there, what peril, to the individual soul, to the 
family, to the Church, to the land! See Gen. xxxvi. 35 ; 
I Kings xi. 1-6; Ezra ix. 13 ; Nch. xiit. 23-28 ; Mai, ii. 
II ; I Cor. vii. 39 ; 2 Cor. vi. i4.> 



Ver. 3. ' And the Lord said. My Spirit shall not always strive with 
man, for that he also isjlesh ; yel his days shall be an hundred and 
faenty years.' 

Perhaps these words were spoken by the lips of Noah, 
It was thus that, as Gods preacher of righteousness, he 
condemned the world (Heb. xi, 11), speaking to that 
generation, in the n^me of Jehovah, both of grace and 
nghteousness, both of His long-suffering to the sinner, 
and of His hatred of the sin. It is of the Holy Spirit 

^ How expressiye these wocds of the prophet Malachi, ' Judah hath 
married, the danghter of a strange god ; ' Jndah, of whom, in the pre- 
vious verse, he had called God the father,^ — distinguishing him thereby 
from the heathen, as if Jiidah only could be called the son of God 1 



jiGoogle 



that he speaks; of Him who 'moved upon the face of 
the waters' at the first, and who now is seen moving upon 
the more turbid waters of the ungodly world It is He 
whom God calls here, as elsewhere (P ov 3 Isa 

xlii. i; Ezek. xxxix. 29; Joel ii. 28 Ha^ 5 Zed 
iy. 6; Matt xii 18), 'My Spirit j' — le n oppos t on 
to man's spirit, to Satan, to the flesh The stn. n^ 
here spoken of implies conflict bet cen God in 1 tl e 
sinner, nay 'judgment' also, as the ord eens to d 
cate, — God contending with man n r ^1 teo love — 
sitting in judgment on his sins, yet seek ^ to v n h n 
self. But all this love is vain. The str v g la Is M 
like Israel, resists and vexes the Holj Ghost He refuses 
to be won. He accomplishes this awful ctory o er 
God, — the victory, of which the t ophy s h s o t 
perdition. God's name for man's corrupt is flesh — 
that 'flesh' in which 'dwelleth no ^'^od th ng The 
words ' man,' and ' world,' and ' flc h h orij, nally 
no bad meaning. But when ove flow " ung dl e s 
has filled man, and the world, and tl e fle 1 tl s n 
then these words become synonymo s th j ure -va 1 
unmixed evil. God's Spirit had beea str ng lo g tl 
man ; but there must be a limit to th s at d wl en m n 
has reached this limit, — when he has becon e a nas of 
utter sin,— then God's Spirit withdra s and he s ^ en 
up to a reprobate mind. Yet in le ol ng to let man 
alone, that he may ripen for judgment, God j, es 1 tm e 
of respite, — an hundred and twentj years \ lo g d y 
of grace indeed ! God will not take a I antio of man 
in any way. He gives him full tin e to tu He s 



I ..Google 



295 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

loDg-suffering to the uttermost. How vast His compas- 
sions ! How great is His unwiilingness to smite ! How 
infinite His patient love ! 

Ver. 4. ' Thtre were giants itt the earth in those days (Heb. the 
Nepheelim ■mere en the earth in those days) ; astd also after that, nihea 
the sons of God came in unto the daughters of mm, and they bare 
chiidrea to them, the same Became mighty men which viere of old, men 



where the word occurs. The latter clause of the verse is more literally 
tendered by t!ie SeptaagUit ; lxi7\si «o-ay w" yiyaim 01 ««' alSms, 01 
atifonTti t! Snfixmi — 'these were (or are) Uie giants who were of 



jiGoogle 



above from the waters beneath was removed, then the 
tides mingled, the flood of sin swelled up, 'the wicked 
one ' was revealed, whom the Lord swept away with 
the stroke of His overwhelmmg sword, leaving righteous 
Noah lord of the earth in room of those who had so 
long usurped the sway.'^ 



•Ver, 5. ' And God saw that the ■mkkednets of -man was grsai in the 
earth, and that every imasinatioa of the thoughts of his heart was only 
evil eontinuallji. ' 

This scene is represented as coming specially under 
the eye of God. He looked down from heaven, and 
saw! (Gen. xviii. 21; Ps. xiv. 2.) What further need 
of witnesses ? Here is one better than a thousand human 
witnesses. He saw, and could not be mistaken. He 
saw, and would not misrepresent. Five chapters before, 
we are told that God saw that all was good ; now He 
sees that all is evil. Nothing but evil meets His eye, 
in the outer or the inner world of man. He had made 
this world not fifteen hundred years before ; it was then 
holy and blessed, fit dwelling for Himself and all holy 
beings. Now not a trace of its excellency remains. 
All is evil. There was 'wickedness:' it was 'in the 
earth,' His own earth j it was the wickedness of 'man,' 
the very being whom He had formed in His own image ; 
it was 'great' And surely that which God calls 'great 

' TJiis is only one of the many points in which the days of Noah 
resemble the day of the Son of man. One of the best books on this 
subject, thoHEli it does not bring out the above parallel, is the volume 
of Mr. Maitland, Discourses on the History of Nook's Bay, 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



wickedness' must be great indeed. But it is not the 
outer world alone that is evil. The inner world is "*oTse. 
The fountain has become thorotighly polluted, Man's 
'heart is evil;' the 'thoughts' of his heart are evil; the 
' imaginations ' of the thoughts of his heart are evil ; 
nay, ' every imagination ' of the thoughts of his heart is 
evil ; nay, ' only evil,' and that ' continually.' Such is 
God's picture of a human heart 1 What difference now 
between a man and a devil? Is earth now any fairer 
than hell ? Such is the race of man when ripe for 
judgment Is not, then, that judgment righteous? Is 
it strange that God should sweep such a race away? 
Nay, is it not strange that He should bear with it so 
long, and be so unwilling to destroy it, as to suspend 
His stroke for a hundred and twenty years, and all this 
while deal with it in patient pity, yearning over it with 
un quenched love ? 

i» thi earth. 

While thus describing man's guilt, God still owns him 
as His handiwork We here read, not that man ' had 
been made,' but that ' He had made man.' God does 
not keep out of view the fact, that the being who had 
become so thoroughly evil was the very man whom He 
had made. There is no hiding of this apparent failure 
of His plans. It is said that He ' repented ' that He 
had made man; and though in one sense God cannot 
'repent' (Num. xxiii. 19), yet in another He does re- 
pent ; nor does He hesitate to speak of His ' repentings ' 



I ..Google 



GENESIS VI. 6. 



(Hos. xi. 8).' For though He is unchangeable, yet that 
unchaiigeableness is no arbitrary or unreasonable thing, 
as if no altered circumstances could lead God to change 
His mind. That would be the undiangeableness of 
folly, not of wisdom. Besides, let us remember that it 
is undiangeableness of purpose that we ascribe to God 
as His perfection, not unchaiigeableness of procedure. 
Nay, it is tlirough the very variation of His procedure 
that He carries out His unchangeable purpose. But 
it is added, 'it grieved Him at His heart.' The expres- 
sion is so strong as to be startling. It makes us ask, 
Is it right to speak thus of God ? Is it right to speak 
so ; for it is God who thus speaks of Himself. And how 
deep the insight which He thus gives us into His heart; 
how marvellous the discovery which He thus makes to 
us of His yearnings over rebellions man 1 It is the 
same word that He uses in Ps. Ixxviii. 40, when He 
speaks of Israel ' grieving Him in the desert ; ' and in 
Isa, Ixiii. 10, when He speaks of their vexing His Holy 
Spirit. Only it is stronger than these, for it is, ' it 
grieved (or afflicted) Him at His heart.' 

' The word fini is, as RoTjertson gives the meaning in this place, 
' to express deep sotrow, to repent.' It occurs frequently, sometimes 
in reference to God, and sometimes in reference to man. For the 
former, see Ex. xxxii. 14; Deut. xxxii. 36; Judg. ii. iS ; Ps. cvi. 
45 ; Jofil iL 13 ; Jonah iii. 10; in all which passages, while it is true 
that God speaks after the manner of men, yet He also shows us this, 
that change of mind, when circtimstances change, is not inconsistent 
with His unchangeable character ; as, for example, when the sinner 
is brought to repent, then God changes His mind and procedure 
towards. him. The parfon of the sinner is the result of this change 
on the part of God. 



jiGoogle 



300 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

It was not that an unexpected crisis had arisen. It 
was not tbat God's purpose was frustrated. It was not 
that God is subject to like passions as we. It was not 
that He had at length ceased to care for the worts of 
His hands, and to wish that they had never been. But 
God is here speaking after the manner of men. He is 
looking at facts simply as they are, without reference to 
past or future. He isolates or separates them, and looking 
at them as they stand alone. He declares what He thinks 
and feels. Nor do God's eternal purposes alter His 
estimate of events. It was God's purpose that Christ 
1 Idbdl dp dl jttltdd t alter 
G d t t f tl m E 1 t f is in 

p t ry 1 k C 1 j,hty \ \ e, yet 

h m t b w h d d d by If God is 

1 km t tl J t m Id 1 k t t and 

p H If l-my g I Id have 

d 1 ta H 11 th I esent 

yd wl h tl p t d tl y truly 

affect Him according to their nature ; and as they affect 
Him, so does He speak in the words of man. The scene 
affects God just as it woiold have affected a wise and just 
but most tender-hearted parent ; and His words corre- 
spond to this. The feelings implanted in raan must, to 
some extent, be the same as those existing in God. For 
man was made in God's image in respect to his feelings 
as truly as in respect to his intellect. The human heart 
is the counterpart of the divine. Hence it is that God 
so often uses the language of human feeling when refer- 
ring to Himself. God's love, hatred, wrath, pity, grief, are 



I ..Google 



GJSNESIS VI. 7. 



301 



all real; and they correspond to those feelings which He 
has implanted in man ; with only this difference, that in 
God there is no admixture of sin. 

Yes, God is 'grieved at His heart.' These are His own 
words. Let us not explain them away. He is grieved at 
the cliange which sin has made in the works of His hands. 
He is grieved at the dishonour thus brought upon Himself 
He is grieved at man's misery and ruin, — so fearful, so 
eternal ! He is grieved because He must Himself be the 
pronouncer of man's sentence, the inflicter of man's doom. 
How unutterably gracious must this God be with whom 
we have to do ! How unwilling to destroy, how willing to 
bless and to save ! With what a yearning love docs He 
bend over rebellious man I 

Vcr. 7. ' And the Lord said, I will destroy man, whom I have 
created, from the face of the earth ; both man and beast, and the creep- 
ing thing, and the fowls of the air : for if repealeth me that I have 
made them.'' 

Probably these words were spoken to Noah, 'the 
preacher of righteousness,' or to some of the other of the 
ngl teous i atxiarchs then on the earth, that they might 
p oclam the message of judgment. Not without special 
I ean n^ are the commencing words, 'And Jehovah said.' 
He 1 fls I His voice and makes public declaration of His 
purpose of judgment, that man may be fully warned ; that 



' ' I will destroy man, — even that very rnan whom I created, not 
regarding the work of my hands, — from that very earth which I made 
lor him, — man and all these living features which I made for his 
beneSt.' Thus the words may be paraphrased, Tlie reader may 
remember Ovid's words ; ' Perdendum mortale genus. ' — Mefam.i. 1S8. 



jiGoogle 



302 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

he may know when ruin comes that it is no sudden out- 
burst of vengeance, but the coming forth or carrying out 
of a calm and deliberate purpose.' 

God's declaration is, ' I will destroy man ! ' He has 
purposed, and who shall gainsay Him, or disannul His 
purpose? He will 'blot out' man, — He will sweep him 
away as men do what they loathe.^ When He ' blots out ' 
our sins, on our believing the record of His grace, He 
blots them out entirely, removing them from us as far as 
the east is from the west ; so He will ' destroy ' man as 
completely as He will remove sin; He will ' blot out' 
these sinners of an unbelieving world as thoroughly as He 
' blots out ' the sins of believing Noah and his children. 

It is the man whom He has created that He is thus to 
' blot out.' As He blots out the sin that He has not 
made, so He blots out the sinner whom He has made. 
He spares not the work of His own hands. Words of 
deep dread, truly ! ' I will destroy man whom I have 
created.' Solemn warning and rebuke to those who flip- 
pantly taunt us with beHeving in the eternal doom of the 
ungodly, and say, 'Oh ! . God did not make man to de- 
stroy him.' True, He did not make him to destroy him ; 
but He will do it ! He did not make him for the dark- 

' ' Before weird {doom) there's word,' says the Northern proverb. 

" The word is nHO, the same as is used for the washing away of 
filth. Deut. xxix. 20 ; Ps. li. r ; Isa. xUv. 22. Sept. kt^Kt'i-^a ; 
Vulg. dtleho. The word translated 'destroy' in the 13th verse is 
nn^ 'lie same word as ' corrupted,' ver. 12 : as if God would say, 
' They have corrupted themselves ; I will corrupt them | I will make 
them reap the fruit of what they have sown.' The Septuagint gives 
jutTa^liifu ; the Vulgate, disperdaia. 



jiGoogle 



GEJVES/S VI, 7. 303 

ness, but for the light; yet the everlasting darkness shall 
be his lot He desires not the death of the sinner, yet 
he shall die. He did not make man for hell, nor hell for 
man, yet the wicked shall be turned into hell. ' I will 
destroy man whom I have created.' He will do it Him- 
self; with His own hands will He destroy His own work- 
manship. He will not leave him to fall to pieces himself, 
nor merely make his own' conscience his tormentor, as 
some men speak ; He will execute judgment Himself. 
And all this- because He is tlie ' righteous God that loveth 
righteousness.' 

He will destroy him 'from the face of the earth.' The 
earth is not to be destroyed in this ruin. It is not to 
receive any further curse on account of man's sin ; nay, 
it is to be delivered from a burden, an intolerable load of 
defilement that had been accumulating for fifteen cen- 
turies. Though God had cursed the earth, yet He always 
makes it appear that it is for man's sake, not its own. 
'The creation was made subject to vanity, not willingly' 
(Rom. viii, 20). Nay, we might say that here there is a 
purpose of grai:€ intimated respecting the earth, when 
judgment is proclaimed against its dwellers. God's object 
by the flood of waters was to cleanse the earth of its 
pollution, just as hereafter He shall purge it by fire, re- 
moving on that day not merely the incumbent wicked- 
ness, but burning out the curse from its veins. Water can 
do the former; but fire is needed for the latter. 

But though the earth itself is not to share man's ruin, 
the beasts and fowls and creeping things must be swept 
away along with hira. They must share his doom, as 



I ..Google 



304 THOUGHTS ON' GENESIS. 

being more closely linked to him than the material earth.. 
What, then, must sin be in the sight of the Holy One, 
when it draws after it such boundless ruin? Whatever is 
most intimately connected with man, the sinner, must 
perish with him. Man's first sin introduced the curse, 
but it did not destroy the creatures ; now, however, sin 
has so swelled, so ri^en and overflowed creation, that 
God's righteousness insists upon execution being done 
even upon the uniiicelligent creation, that He might thus 
publish before the universe, by the voice of an all-devour- 
ing flood, how terribly He hated tliat which man. had done. 
Then the statement of the sixth verse is repeated ; ' For 
it repenteth me tliat I have made them.' How solemnly 
does this reiteration of God's mind iall upon our ears ! 
How deeply does He feel the sin, the wrong, the dis- 
honour that man had done ! How profound the com- 
passion for those very sinners whom, in His righteousness. 
He was tlius compelled to sweep awayl^ How awful 
must have been the scene presented to His view, when, 
after surveying it. He was constrained to say, in reference 
to the creatures which He had made, ' It repenteth me 
that I have made tliem ' ! Can any ignorance — can any 
madness exceed theirs who would make light of sin, who 
would treat it as a mere transient disease, which is in the 
course of ages working itself out of the system, and will 
soon pass away? Terrible will be thy position, O man, 
when God comes to say this of thee ! It will be terrible 

' Ovid's vei'se is very striking, as if borrowed from this ; 



jiGoogle 



enough when thou art brought to feel, ' Oh that I had 
never been madel' hut it will be more overwhelming 
still when God comes and says, 'Oh that I had never 
created thee ! ' ^ 

^ The Fathers speculated much and often on the nature and feelings. 
f God ' ing all manner of questions as to. His snger, love, hatred, 
p ta tc. Tlieie is much more, however, of philosophy than 

in their disquisitions; and Cicero, Plato, etc, are 
q d than Paul or John. Minucius Felix has some good 
marks h s OciavUis, p. 144, Ouzel's edition. Lactantius, besides 
g al references to the subject, has a long dlscomse, I?^ ira 
Z> m h there are good statements and well-pointed arguments ;. 
but a woful lack of Scripture. He quotes Plato's remark, ' Nemo 
prudens punit quiapeccatum est, sed nepeccetur,' iVa nn aifeaSnao-B ; 
a remark which, though lauded In our day,, is but a one-sided axiom,, 
which, if accepted as the whole truth, would set aside moral guilt, and 
do away witli all necessity for a judgment.. His treatise throws no 
light upon the subject. It merely affirms the truth, that if anger be 
denied to God, so must love, etc— 'si non ira est in eo nee gratia est,' 
sec. 4. It is curious to notice the opposite sentiments of the ancients 
on this point. Ovidi referring to the world's wretchedness, speaks of 
the great Father as ' groaning,' ingemens ; whereas Epicurus is repre- 
sented as saying, respecting the nature of God — 

' S=mDta,a nostris rebus, sejunctaqii* longe, 
Ipsa Auis polLens opibua, nil indiga DO£tii 



Augustine's rcMavks are more satisfactory ; ' The anger of God ia no. 
perturbation of His mind,, but a judgment assigning suv its punishment. 
His revolving and re-revolving (Augustine follows the Sept. liilnfmen, 

"He pondered"),is hut the unchangeable ordering of changeable things 
("MutandaiTim rerum immutabilis ratio "). For God repents not of 
what He does, like a man; for His opuiion ("sententia") of everything 
is as fixed as His foreknowledge is certain. But Scripture without 

such expressions cannot insinuate itself faroiliarly into all kinds of men. 

. . . This it could not do if it did not bend itself towards us, nay 

stoop to us sometimes, when lying prostrate. '~-Z)s Civ. Z)ei, book xv,. 

chap. 25. 



»Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS, 



Ver. 8. ' But Noah found grace in tlie eyes cfihe Lord.' 
There is one exception. The race is not to be wholly 
swept away. There is a remnant according to the election 
of grace. God has mercy on whom He will have mercy 
(Rom. ix. 15). God's purpose shall stand, in spite of 
the world's sin. Not by nature above the level of an 
unbelieving world, Noah by grace stands fast. 'Not of 
works, but of Him that calloth.' He rises when others 
fall. He rises higher, the lower the rest sink. For 
Jehovah has laid hold on him ; and Jehovah upholds 
him. Nor was it because he was better than the rest 
that God's choice fell on him ; but he was made better 
in consequence of that choice. And where is the be- 
lieving man tliat cannot trace his faith, his love, his whole 
change, to the same eternal fountainhead ? 

God's description of a saint, then, is otie that has found 
favour in His sight. And this is the saint's own account 
of himself — 'Then was I in His eyes as one that found 
favour' {Cant. viii. 10). This is all he can say for him- 
self, — all the account he can give of the origin of his 
sonship, the cause of his spiritual change. How blessed 
to be able thus simply to trace all that is good in us 
directly to the sovereign will and love of Jehovah ! 

Ver. 9, ' These are the ^neraluins'* of Noah: Noah was a just man, 
and perfect in his generations, and Noah loalksd with God. ' 

The general testimony to Noah was, that he ' had found 

1 'Generations.' This word occnrs about forty times in the Old 
Testament, and is always translated in our version by the same word : 



I ..Google 



favour with God.' The fuller and particular testimony 
now follows. It is God's own opinion of His saint. It 
takes up three features. 

1. He was a Just man, — a man whom God accounted 
righteous. It seems to be with reference to this expres- 
sion that llie apostle calls him ' an heir of tlie righteous- 
ness which is' by faith ' (Heb. xi. 7). There is righteous- 
ness on him and in him ; and God recognises both. The 
surety-righteousness of the Son of God places him in 
the state of a just man ; and the inward righteousness of 
the Spirit gives him the character of a just man. He 
stands out before us, holy in a generation of the unholy, 
justified in a world of the condemned, 

2. Us VI3.S perfect ja'hhs.gt} He stood out 'complete' 
as a man of God, in all the various features which con- 
stitute tliat character; as the apostle speaks when he 
tells of the fitness of the divine word to make 'the man of 

Gen. V. 7, xi. ro, XKSvi. i, etc. Calvin, followed by Rosenmiiller, 
Dathe, etc., extends its meaning, and gives as its signification, ' Tota 
vitas historia.' Paulus Fagius renders it, ' These are the things wliich 
befell Noah and his family.' Our version in lliis same verse gives 
generation as the sense of ih, which occurs about Jjo times ; atid 
almost always in the sense of age, or men of a particular age ; Ps, scv. 
10 ; Ecdes. i. 4. The Septuagint translates the former word by yUifis, 
the latter by j-iiia. Calvin remarks that the plural (generations) is 
used to show that it was not in one age, but several, tlmt he kept his 
integrity. 

' The words are literally, ' Noah, a just man, was perfect in his 
time.' The word means whole, complete — ' a full year ' (Lev. xxv. 
2a); 'pinhole day ' (Josh. x. 13). It occurs about fifty times in the 
sense of ' without blemish ' as applied to sacrifices. Noah is 'without 
spot,' — a complete sacrifice, — body, soul, and spirit, — and so accepted 
of the Lord. Gesenius makes it refer simply to moral int^rity. 
Scripture connects it with sacrifice and priesthood. 



I ..Google 



3oS THOUGHTS ON" GEI^ESIS. 

God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works' {2 
Tim. iii. 1 7). He was not a man without sin ; for ' there 
is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good and sinneth 
not' (i Kings viii. 46; 2 Chron. vi. 36; Eccles. vii, zo) ; 
but he was perfect as pertaining to the conscience, aud 
in all the parts of his character and life he bore the 
stamp of righteousness, — as is written of Zacharias and 
Elizabeth, ' They were both righteous before God, walk- 
ing in all the commandments and ordinances of God 
blameless' {Luke i. 6). Yes, he was 'perfect in his 
generation.' He stood alone; yet he stood. He held 
aloof from the evil aroimd. He had taken on nothing 
of the pollution which abounded. He held fast in an 
age of matchless sin, when he had none to side with him 
but God. 

3, He walked with God. The word is strong and 
peculiar, denoting the repetition and eneigy of the act. 
He walked and walked ; yea, walked with fervent and 
untiring energy.^ Through centuries he lived on, walk- 
ing with God, as Enoch had done before him; nay, 
during part of the time, with Enoch at his side; for 
only of these two is the expression used. It is as if 



' Both in this verse and b chap. v. 23, 24, it is tlie Hithpad that 
is used ; in the former the Hithpael preterite, in the latter the Hilhpael 
future (with the \ conversive). It is this that makes it so expressive. 
See Job i 7 ; Zech. L 10, vi. 7 ; Eiek. i. 13. The Septuagint makes 
it impifran rS »if. Rungius has some excellent remarks on Noah's 
standing alone, and preseiidng a testimony to the 'woman's seed,' 
also on the reproaches he must have endured from these 'giants.' 
He calls him the martyr of martyrs : ' Vere fuit martyr martyrum 
Noah,' p. 295. 



I ..Google 



GENESIS Yi. 10. 309 

God had come down to earth and walked through it, 
with Enoch on one side, and Noah on the other. Of 
Abraham it is said, ' Walk before me, and be thou per- 
fect;' but it would almost seem as if this walk of Enoch 
and Noah were something nearer and more blessed than 

Ver, 10. ' And Noah iigat three sons, Shem, Ham, andjafkdh.'' 
This holy man is a husband and a father. For the 
marriage bond is holy, nay, 'honourable in all' (Heb. 
xiii. 2), and the paternal relationship excellent and 
blessed. To the members of Noah's family the whole 
human race was ere long to be reduced. Such is the 
narrow isthmus between the old world and the new; 
such is the remnant to which the Church of God is 
brought. How will Satan triumph at the prospect of chit- 
ting off the seed of the woman ; nay, of compelling God 
(let the expression be pardoned) to cut off that seed 
Himself, and so to break His first promise, as well as 
destroy the world's one hope ! The seed of the woman 
was fast becoming extinct The promise hung upon a 
thread. The Church's hope was narrowed to a single 
samt. Thus God lets matters go to a crisis,— an ex- 
tremity, —that His own wisdom and power may be 
brought out, and pride hidden from man. It is all of 
God. 

Shem is named _;?rj^ in this list, though Japheth was the 
elder (x. 21). Like Judah, he was to have the pre- 
eminence, — the birthright; and this not by any natural 
right, but solely by the choice of God. How often 



I ..Google 



310 THOUGHTS ON GENE::IS. 

does God teach us in His word that all honour is of 
Him, and that the highest pre-eminence which He could 
confer on a man was to make him a link in Messiah's 
line. Connection with Christ, even before He came, was 
God's badge of nobility — His star of honour. It is so 
still. Connection with Christ, through belief of the 
Father's testimony to Him, is man's truest, highest honour, 
either now on earth or hereafter in the kingdom. 



Vers. II, 12. ' The eatth also (Heb. And, or Naw, ike eartK) was 
corrupt be/ere God; and tht earth was fiUed with violence. 12. And 
God looked upon the earih, and, behold, it was corrupt: for all fissh had 
corrupts his way upon (he earth. ' 

It was 'corrupt.'' It had become a decaying and 
abominable carcase ; defiled and hateful ; the very oppo- 
site of that which God had made it. For though it was 
not made, like the future inheritance, 'incorruptible,' 
still it was 'incorrupt.' There was no blemish on it; no 
sin; no taint; no stain. 

It was corrupt ' before God.' Full in His sight and 
under His eye, it revelled in its vileness. Its wickedness 
was daring, and dark in its defiance of God. He declares 
this not as one relating a thing from report, but narrating 
what had come under His own eye. Yes, He looked on 
it. He hated the sin ; yet He bore long with it Such 
are His compassions ! 

'The earth was filled with violence.' Injustice, cruelty, 
rapine, wrong, — these formed the sum of its story. Like 

' The Jews refer this specially to licentiousness, and lo (he strange 
intermarriages previously spoken of. 



jiGoogle 



a mighty sea, violence liad swelled up, till every plain and 
valley were overflowed It was drenched in sin ere it 
was drowned in water ^ 

Such was earth ' Trinsformed from paiadise into 
worse than a wilderness , from bcinj, the seit of God to 
be like Babylon, the abode of devils, giants, murderers, 
and all unclean and hateful things What has sm done ' 
What can it not do ' How quickly can it empty a soul 
or a world, of all good, and fill them mth all e\jl I The 
frosts of winter do not so destioy the tender phnt as 
sin does the soul or the woild mto which it finds its 
way. 

But the awful description is repeated in the next verse, 
and God Himself is declared to be tlie witness of the 
evil. God looked at the earth. He surveyed it, so that 
there might be no mistake ; and that no man might say 
that He judged hastily or untruly. He will not misjudge 
His creatures; nor will He allow them to suppose that 
He is doing so. Behold, it was corrupt. There could be 
no mistake. The divine eye could not be deceived. All 



' Montgomery thus describes the scene ! — 

EmboldcQ'd by Iheii elder brother's crime. 
They spurn'd obedience to the pBtriarch'a yolte ; 
The bonds of nature's fellowship they broke j 



Du Eartas Ihus describes the scene ; — 



I ..Google 



313 . THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

fltsh All cirnipted ds way upon the etrtl ' The whole 
r'jce had gone astra), and become vile Outwardly as 
well as mvurdly all -vv^s evil Thus sm spreads and 
■widens as well as deepens It his no end. It never 
dies out nor loses its hatefuJness God bears long 
with it He allows evd a? well as good to ripen. He 
Will not pluck the unripe evd any more than the unripe 
good It is not till the grapes are fully ripe' that the 
dusters of earth's vine are gathered (Rev. xiv. i8). Every 
sin is rendering earth riper for the last vengeance, and 
preparing it for the flood of fire." 

Ver. 13. ^And God said unto Noali, The end of all flesh is come 
iefore me; for the earlh is filed viilh violence through them : and, 
behold, I wili destroy theia with the earth.' ' 

It is to Noah, face to face, that God now speaks. The 

' We may just notice here the use othis, where we sliould have iis. 
Attention to this wtU help to clear up several diliiculties in Scripture. 

' It may be worth while to throw together in a note some of the 
classical allusions to the events recorded in this chapter. It would 
be impossible to cite Hesiod, as, both m his Works and Days and 
Theogony, the passages are too long and too numerous to come 
within our limits But their restiublance to the divme narrative is 
striking Homer has st.vi.ral allusions to the early giants, a»if4SfMiiri 
yiyattifffi (Odyss. vii. 59) ; and Sophocles speaks of the ynyitii ^Tfarif 
yiyi.irm. Vii^I refers to their ' immania corpora ' {jEneid, vi. 582) ; 
and Ovid to the 'gigantas, immania monstra' (Fast. v. 35). De- 
scribing the mckedness of this age of giants, Ovid writes, — 



Eiviolentaluit; Bclres e Baneuine nates.'— JWB/nw. L 160. 
s The LXX. give »aJ,wf as the rendering of Vp ; while Aquik, 



I ..Google 



GENESIS V 



13- 



313 



preceding utterances, tliougli probably spoken through 
Him, were general proclamations, meant for all He tells 
him that now at length His long-suffering is exhausted, 
and that the end of all flesh has come up before him. It 
had been long delayed, but it comes at last ; — the end of 
all flesh ;— the end of their day on earth ; and with the 
end of that day, the end of grace, the end of hope, the 
beguining of wrath and everlasting woe ! How simply, but 
how solemnly, God speaks ! Not in anger, yet with awful 
decision ! Such shall be the judgment of the great day, 
God does not judge hastily, or in a spirit of revenge, 

more correctly, gives rixw, and Symmaclius a-ips. The following 
passages will show that our translafors haye rendered it correctly by 
' an end : ' — Gen, yjii, 6, xli, I ; Jer. li. 13 ; Lard. iv. 8 ; Ezek, vii. 2 ; 
Amos viii. 2. The last of these passages resembles the one before us 
clearly— ' The md is come upon my people.' 'AH flesh,' a very 
universal term, including man and beast See chap. viii. 17; Num. 
xviii. 15. Most critics interpret the clause thus ; ' The end (or destruc- 
tion) of all flesli has been determined by me ' (see Gesenius, Eosen- 
roiiller, Dathe, etc.) ; and perhaps this is substantially correct. But 
may it not be as if God were looking on the earth (ver. 12), and after 

n the iirst to the last, has presented itself to His view, 
see the end of all flesh' ? Philo has a cm'ious passage 

1 the clause, understandmg the words of tile Sept. as if 

, ' The time of mankind has come against me' (liavr/ov). 

'jw and Solutions. ' Through them ' — lit. Heb. before 
their face, !>. coming forth from them; see Ex. viii. 24, 'the land 
was corrupted by reason of (Heb. from the face of) ' the swarm of 
flies;' Judg. vi. 6, 'by reason of;' Heb. 'from the^e of; ' Jer. xv. 
17 ; Eiek. xiv. I J. We may notice that the word D«3S occurs above 
aaoo times in various applications. ' With the earth.' That this is 
the proper rendering of nS 's evident from chap. ix. ir, where the 
destruction of the earth is spoken of. That this is a literal meaning 
is plain from chap, xxxvii. 2, xliii. 16 ; Judg. i. ifi ; Jer. 11, 59. The 
Sept. has xai tS> ^', which is the same meaning. Is it not to this 
that the Apostle Peter alludes {% Pet. iii. 6), J xSfffioj ^viiXtnJ 



He speaks— 
of mysticism 
they had me: 
See his (^i^esl 



jiGoogle 



314 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

against poor sinning man. He has reasons for what He 
does, and they are worthy of Himself. No stroke comes 
at random. All is calmly spoken, and calmly done. 
And will not this, O sinner, be the aggravation of your 
endless sorrow? You cannot soothe yourself with the 
idea that you are suffering unjustly, or are the victim of 
a hasty sentence. The wisdom and the justice of the 
proceeding will be clear even to yourself. This, too, 
makes your case so hopeless. Were the reasons for your 
condemnation weak or partial, you might hope for a re- 
versal of the decision; but they are so wise, so good, so 
holy, that reversal is eternally impossible. In the case 
before us, God's reasons are man's total corruption of 
his ways, and his filling the earth with violence. He has 
not only let in evil, but he has made it overflow; he 
\\3s filled "Cos: earth with it 'The earth is defiled under 
the inhabitants thereof ' (Isa. xxiv, 5). It is not one sin 
that brings down the judgment; no, nor many. It is 
the persisting in sin till others are corrupted, and the 
earth polluted, and the Spirit grieved away. God hates 
even one sin ; but He is slow to punish. Not till sin 
has become an overflowing flood, does He smite, But 
when He does judge, how terrible the stroke ! Thus 
God waits now in His patient love. Earth is full of sin, 
but He waits. He will not cast it into the winepress of 
His wrath till its grapes be fully ripe {Rev. xiv, r8}. The 
flood of waters waited till iniquity had filled the earth. 
So is it with the flood of fire ; it waits tOl the wickedness 
of the last days has reached its height. Tiien the judg- 
ment sits; and it is seen that sin was no mere disease 



I ..Google 



GE^TESIS VI. 14-16. 315 

which needed healing, but guill, which could only be 
dealt with at a seat of justice by the great Judge of all. 
For the inflicter of the sentence is Cod Himself: 'I will 
destroy them with the earth.' They have corrupted the 
earth ; I will corrupt them with that earth which they have 
corrupted. They and their earth shall be destroyed to- 
gether; for the sentence comes forth against botli.' This 
destruction does not infer the annihilation of either man 
or the earth. Nor does the Apostle Peter, when he 
speaks of the old world 'perishing,' mean annihilation. 
So, when this earth is spoken of as consumed by fire, we 
are not to understand annihilation. It passes through 
fire, only in order to be purified ; and thus, purged from 
its dross by the Refiner's fire, it comes forth a more 
glorious world than before. 

Vers. 14-16. ' Make thee aa arkof gopher-^mod; rooms shall thou 
make in the ark, and shall pitch it within and wilheut ■aiitk pitoh. 
\$. And this is the fashion which thou shalt make itof; tAelength of 
the ark shall be three hundred eubits, the hreadth of it fifty cuiits, and 
the keighi of it thirty cabits. 16. A window shell thou make to the 
ark, and in a cuMt shall thou finish it above ; and the door of the ark 
shall thim set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stores 
shall thou -make it.' ' 

' How shall any escape ? ' would he Noah's feeling, on 
hearing God's sentence against the world. Without 

' The word In. the original is the same in both dauses : 'They have 
corrupted the earth ; I will corrupt them,' etc. The Sept. has pre- 
served the identity of phrase. Trapp paraphrases it, ' I will punish 
them in kind, pay them in their own coin. ' 

" There is no need for minute criticism on the words of these three 
verses. Gesenins, Robertson's Claois, and Moses Stuart's Chresto- 
vtathy (p. 133), will give the radical meanings and common uses of 



jiGoogle 



3i6 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

delay, God reveals the provision to be made for the 
deliverance of the few. That deliverance was to be of 
God as directly as was the destruction. Yet man was 
to make the vessel of deliverance. 'Make for thyself,' 
is the express and urgent command. Deliverance was 
secured and provided by God, yet everything was made 
to depend on man's using the appointed means, just as 
in the case of Paul's deliverance from shipwreck. 

The ark was well planned, well proportioned ; ad- 
mirably adapted for its end ; not for sailing, but floating, 
not for ornament, but safety. God knows how to deliver 
His own, yet He does so by means, though these means 
are sometimes apparently slender enough. His providing 
means, and placing them at our disposal, implies the 
promise that in using them we shall attain what they 

the terms, wMch our translators have rendered with sufficient accuracy. 
The word used for ' ark ' occurs only in connection with Noah's vessel 
and Moses' basket, — a pvoof that the word is a general term applied 
to any sort of chest, great or small, made to float on the water. The 
word is not the same as that used for the ' ark of the covenant. ' 
Gopher-wood, a resinous tree, such as the pine or cypress, probably 
the iatter, from the likeness of the letters, — xordftrtss. The word 
translated pitch (both noun and verb) means properly ' cover' — 'cover 
inside aad outade with a covering ; ' the word nowhere else means 
pitch. It always means 'covering,' or 'ransom,' or 'atonement,' save 
in Canticles, where it is translated 'camphire* {chap. i. 14, iv. 14). 
We ought to add, that in i Sam. vi. iS it means village, giving origin 
to Cii/wiiaum, or Cap&era&am, and similar prefixes. The ark was 
divided into chambers, or lusls, or rotiTiis (see Num. xxiy. at ; Job 
xxix. 18 ; Hab. ii. 9). It had a windcw, or transparency, or clear 
ligAt, It was finished or sloped to a cabit above. Its door was in 
the side. It had a threefold division (which the Fathers greatly loved 
to mystify). It was 300 cubits long, 50 broad, 30 high ; a measure- 
ment in which Augustine finds profound signification. 



jiGoogle 



GEJVESTS V 



3'7 



were meant to lead to. God does not mock us. He 
does not place a ladder up to heaven, without meaning 
us to ascend. He does not provide a Saviour merely 
to tantalize or mock. He provides an Ark, and He 
opens a door in it, that we may go in and be saved. 
He provides comfort as well as safety ; light in this Ark, 
that we may not go blindfold to heaven, or in the dark ; 
not merely safely lodged, but carried through with 
comfort and gladness. And just as the Church's de- 
liverance is sure, so is the destruction of the world. The 
flood of fire will spare none. Vet the open door of our 
Ark bids welcome to all. And we know that our Ark 
is as sufficient as it is suitable. Christ is just such a 
deliverer as we need. And we must receive Him as such, 
not iashioning an ark of our own, or making a Christ of 
our own; but taking just the very Christ whom the 
Father here pro'v^des.^ 

Ver. 17. ' And, behold, /, cvm I, do bring (or am bringing) a flood 
of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of lift, 
from under heasen ; and every thing that is in the earth shall die. ' 

Now, for the first time, the nature of the coming de- 
struction is announced. It is to be a flood of waters; 



1 The references to the ark in the Fathers would furnish matter for 
a loEg Excuntis, which might be curious, but certainly would not be 
profitable, more especially as they make the ark a type not of Christ, 
irat of the Church. It was to them a favourite and prolific sub- 
ject for allegory. — See Oriueti in his Homilies on Genesis. Iren^ua 
has a few brief allusions to the suhjecf. Ambrose, di Noe et Area. 
Chrysostom, Homilies on Genesis. Augustme, lie Ciint. Dei, book xv. 
chap. 26 and 27, in which that Father gives full vent to his fancy. 
Lactantius merely gives the narrative, De Orig. Erroris, book ii. 



I ..Google 



3lS THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

and it is to be no accidental outburst, but brought upon 
the earth by God Himself. He Himself is to be the 
doer of the whole. His object is to destroy all fiesh 
wherein is the breath of life,^ ' from under heaven,' that 
these blue heavens may no longer bend over such a mass 
of wickedness, and that sun no longer look down on such 
crimes. And then, to show how terribly complete this 
destructioa is to be, it is said, ' Every thing on the earth 
shall perish.' What a sweep of judgment God makes 
when He begins! How like these words to those an- 
nouncing the terror of the last day, 'They shall not 
escape !' (i Thess. v. 3 ; Jer. xi. 11.) Noah's day, and 
the day of the Son of man, are like each other not merely 
in their suddenness, but in the fierceness of the judgment. 

sec. 13. The some may be said of Prosper, Di Vocat. Gent, book ii. 
chap. 13 and 14. Jerome, Adversiu yoviniamtm, etc., chap. 9; 
more largely Adversus Lntiferkmos, chap. S ; Commentary an EaeMd, 
chap. 42. Atlianasius makes a fine use of the subject, in his brief tract 
agamst Ihose who judged of tcuth by the multitude of adherents ; 
' Prefer, if you please, the multitude drowned by the flood to Noah 
saved ; yet allow rae to betake myself to the ark which contained 

the few ' — IfLoi Si Buyx^fTisov T^ robs o^J^otf? l;^BUffit xtilarof •ffiff^^afiiTv. 
Gregory Naaianzen, on referring to the si-lt, speaks of Noah ' preserv- 
ing the seeds of the second world in a small vessel of wood ' — nif/iea 
litnifss nrifiixra. Twentieth Oration. Fulgentius, De Trin. chap, 
xii ; De Remiss. Feuat. chap. xx. We might multiply such citations, 
but these are snffident. — See Pererias Valeaiiims, vol. ii. book x., 
where, however, the references are not full or complete. See also 
G/OTJffi Zi&ra/sj i» Gbifww, by the Jesuit Del-Rio (p. 158), a. d. 1608. 
Christopher Ness, however, while equally ingenious, is more satisfac- 
tory than these ancient mystics. See his History and Mystery of tie 
Oldand New Testament, chap. ix. pp. 99-129. 

' The clause might be rendered more emphatically, ' To destroy 
all flesh which is in it (the earth) ; and to destroy the breath of life 
from wider the heavens ; everything tiiat is in the earth shall perish. ' 



jiGoogle 



GENESIS VI. 18-21. 



3'9 



It is written, 'The flood came and destroyed them all' 
(Luke xvii 27); and again, 'Even thus shall it be in 
the day when the Son of man is revealed' (Luke xvii, 30). 
Increasing ungodliness ended by overflowing judgment 
in both. 



Vers. lS-2r. ' But laiththes will I establish my cauenant: and thou 
shall come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy Tinfi, and thy sans' 
reives with. thee. 19. And cf esery living thing of all JUsh, two of 
every sort shall thou bring into the ark, to heep them alive with thee ; 
they shall de male and fenuUs. 20. 0/ fowls after their kind, and of 
cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind; 
tmo of every sort shall coine imlo thee, to keep them alive. 31. And 
lake thoa unto thee cf all food that is eaten, and thou shall gather 
itfothee; and it shall be food for thee, and for them.' 

There is an exception to this destruction ; Noah, and 
all those whom God was to treat as one with him, and 
to spare for his sake. This exception is to be made on 
the footing of a covenant, or rather the covenant.^ The 
reference seems to be to a previous covenant, well known 
and recognised. This covenant had 'fallen down,' and 
seemed as if about wholly to fail. If all flesh is to be ' 
cut olT, how is the covenant to be carried out? God 
sets apart Noah, making him the link by which the chain 
is to be kept unbroken. AH the previous promises are 
to be centred in him. Through him the race of man 
is to be perpetuated, that in this way ' the Seed of the 



• ' With Ihee I will establish my covenant,' or set up my covenant. 
It is the same word as in Gen. xvii. 7 ; Ex. vi. 4, xxvi. 30 ; Deut. 
xxviL 2 ; r Sam. ii. 35 ; Eiek. xvL 60. ' AM I will raise up that 
■which is fallen down.' That such is its sense in the Hiphil, see 
GeseniUE, who gives as instances, Deut. sxii. 4, Job iv, 4, Ps. xli. 61. 



jiGoogle 



320 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

woman' may at lecgth come. Though the covenant thus 
' set up ' with Noah is in substance the old promise made 
to Adam, yet it comes before us in a new aspect, and 
with new appendages. It connects Noah personally with 
itself, and his preservation with its ultimate acconaplish- 
ment It is cast as the life-preserver to Noah in the 
, midst of tlie rushing flood. It is made to encircle the 
ark with its sure girdle, that so the assurance may be 
given that all shall yet be well, in spite of man's desperate 
ungodliness. Evil may abound, hatred may assail the 
chosen one, the waters may compass him about, the fire 
may wrap him round, but the covenant holds him fast- 
surer than any anchor. He cannot sink or drift away, or 
be destroyed, for God's everlasting purpose has taken up 
its abode in him, and that purpose must faO ere he can be 
overthrown. 

The covenant provides not only that there shall be an 
ark, but that some shall enter it ; nay, it fixes on those 
who are to enter it. So, in regard to Christ and His 
salvation, love planned a covenant, love provided an ark ; 
but love did more than this — it secured the entrance of 
at least some. It saw that none would enter if left to 
tliemselves, and it laid hold of some and drew them in. 

God provides for the beasts of the field and the fowls 
of the air. They are to be saved; and, in order to this, 
they are to be made to enter. In the one verse it is said, 
'Thou shalt bring,' and in another, 'They shall enter,' 
showing Noah's part and God's part in the matter Noah 
makes ready the ark ; God inclines them to go in. But 
more, — God must have all these fed as well as sheltered; 



I ..Google 



GENESIS II 



321 



and Noah is instructed to take provisions with him for 
man and beast God overlooks nothing. He cares for 
all His work ; He clothes the lilies, He feeds the rivers. 
He watches the falling sparrow, He counts the hairs 
of our head. Truth and grace are with Him. His tender 
mercies are over all His works. What a gospel does the 
ark preach to us !— glad tidings of grace, the reception of 
which at once links «s to the God of all grace. 

Thus has Jehovah His time and His way for inflicting 
His judgment, as well as His time and His way for provid- 
ing deliverance. He is altogether sovereign in His dealings 
with earth and its dwellers ; sovereign in grace, sovereign 
in judgment. He establishes His covenant with whomso- 
ever it pleases Him ; blessing Noah in His free love, and 
for his sake saving his family ; nay, saving the brute crea- 
tion and sparing the earth, which had, for well-nigh sixteen 
centuries, been polluted with the crimes of man. 



Ver. 22. ' Thus did Noah ; accordhig to all that God comn 


anded 


Mm, so did he: 




He listened to God d b } d n f h 1 


kng 


nothing, just as we d & n g d 


1 


tabernacle (Ex. xl. 6) H g d 1 


gl 


unbelief, but gave God h d f k h 


w 


to be done far better hi F 1 1 d b d 




the simpler faith is, h m p p d ^1 


1 


obedience. Much a f h n d d m 


m-ly 


obedience is no less is h day f / ^ 


ence 


as well as of unbelief { If !i no It h a of 




and fnistrust. 




VOL. VI. s 





jiGoogle 



jiGoogle 



NOTES. 



THE SABBATH. 

GOD, at the very outset of tlie world's history, draws the 
distinction between ■work and rest. Even in regard to 
Himself, this difference is to be noticed. Work is not rest, 
and rest is not work, even to Omnipotence. 

In both His own work and His own rest He is glorified, 
though each has its own kind of glory. He expects both kinds 
from us ; and hence He set us the example at the beginning. 
In working we glorify Him, and in resting we glorify Him ; 
but still the glory which He gets from, our work is one thing, 
and the glory which He gets from our rest is another. 

Nor must these two things be confounded. They are dis- 
tinct in themselves, and distinct in their bearings upon our 
deportment and service here in this dispensation. 

There are some that confound these two things, and overlook 
not only their seiarableness in themselves, but their actual and 
explicit sepa 'hat 

God has sui 3od 

whether woi the 

working and 



t of n 

injured and 
He desires 
should get . 






I ..Google 



324 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

from resting ; and who are we that we should, by any theories 
of our own, seek to thwart the purpose of Jehovah, or rob Him 
of the twofold glory which. He is looking for at our hands ? 

It was not for nothing that He laid down so expressly, in the 
beginning of His vohime. His own twofold line or method of 
action, if we may so speak ; the active and the passive, the 
work and the cessation from work. Nor was it without a 
purpose that, when in the course of ages the distinction might 
be undergoing a process of obliteration. He took it up and 
proclaimed it to Israel. For what He did, both in paradise 
and in the wilderness, was not merely to give forth, an arbitrary 
appointment as to a certain day ; but it was to bring out a 
mighty distinction, on which very much was to depend in after 
ages, both as to His own glory and man's proper service. 

If this be the case, thenit is plain that the distinction between 
the six days and the seventh day lies much deeper than we 
generally conceive. It is not a distinction founded upon ike 
seventh day or the first day of the week. The actual day is of 
comparatively small importance, and only comes before us in 
its connection with the past events to which it is linked by way 
of memorial, or in connection with future events, to which it is 
linked by way of type or earnest. It is a distinction founded 
on the difference between working and resting, and upon the 
peculiar glory which God is to obtain from the one and from 
the other. Whether we can fully comprehend the reason of 
this distinction, it matters not. There it is. There are the 
original facts in the very forefront of the Bible. There are 
God's own actings, and there are His declarations and injunc- 
tions as to the manner in which He expects us to act ; in which 
He expects every one to act who, with the Bible in his hands, 
believes that ' God created the heavens and the earth,' and 
that 'on the seventh day He rested from all His works which 
He had created and made.* 

Among those who look upon the Sabbath as a mere limita- 
tion of man's liberty, an abridgment of his pleasures, we can- 
not expect to find any sympathy with the above distinction. 
They deny the Sabbath because it is a weariness, and because 
the Lord of the Sabbath is not their Lord. 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 325 

But there is anotlier class with whom we may expect some 
s>mpatly, even though they have rejected the Sabbath as a 
div ne ordinance. There is a class which holds that every day 
sho lid be a Sabbath, and tKat, therefore, there ought to be no 
such diversity as we hold to be obligatory. They differ from 
the others in this respect. These others get rid of the Sahbath 
by lo ven ig it to the level of every other day ; whereas Ihsy set 
it aside by raising every day to the level of a Sabbath. Now, 
even granting that this latter were possible, — which, according 
to the present construction of God's world, it is not, — it would 
not be carrying out God's original intention. It looks very 
well ; it sounds very lofty ; it bears the stamp of superior 
spirituality ; so that when we hear a man say, ' Oh, I make 
every day a Sabbath I ' we may be led to think him a very holy 
man, and his life a very angelic one, and his whole system a 
very elevated and enlarged one. 

But what if this very holy man gets all his holiness from 
being wiser than God ? This is a serious question. 

God knows what is best for us. He knew what was best for 
■unfalhn man, and He did not tell him that every day should 
be a Sabbath. If Adam had reasoned as many do in our day, 
■ and resolved to make every day a Sabbath, would not God 
have condemned this piece of will-worship ? and would Adam, 
in devising it, have been less guilty of a disregard to the divine 
purpose, than if he had rejected the Sabbath altogether? God 
knew what is best for fallen man, and nowhere, from Genesis 
to Revelation, does He hint at the desirableness, or propriety, 
or profit of making every day a Sabbath. 

In thus trying to be wiser than God, and striking out a more 
elevated walk than He has pointed out, we are sure to fall into 
an unhealthy religion ; not necessarily a religion of gloom, but 
certainly, if not one of gloom, at least one of sentiment, and 
sickliness, and unmanly bearing. No religion can be healthy 
or vigorous which departs from the divine arrangements, and 
tries to elevate itself by altering the proportions of time which 
God has established. What has Romanism gained by its 
endless saints' days, or High Churchmen by their ' Christian 
year'? Attempts, whether made by Protestant or Papist, to 



I ..Google 



3'26 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

raise our week-days into Sabbaths can only end, as they have 
alwaj^ done, in subverting the Sabbath, and defeating God's 
gracious design in giving it. 

The original distiaction, made by God Himself, and founded 
both upon His nature and ours, between working and resting, 
must be kept in mind ; and we must not attempt to confound 
these, or suppose that, provided we try to glorify God in every- 
thing, it matters little whether we set the two different things 
distinctly before us ; viz, the glory which we are to give Him 
in working, and the glory which we are to give Him in rest- 
ing. In trying to make every day a Sabbath, we are doing 
what we can to efface this divine distinction. And can it 
be effaced without sin, without injury to the soul, without 
harm both to the Church and to the world, both to Jew 
and Gentile P It cannot; for thus God does not get the 
glory which He desires. He does not get the separate glories 
of which we have been speaking, but a mere human com- 
pound of both,— vague, indefmite, diluted, — something that 
neither glorifies Him nor benefits His saints, nor bears 
witness to the world. 

When God entered on His rest, He erected a memorial of 
. it; a memorial both of His work and of His rest, for rest was 
to he a memorial of work. This memorial, suitable even to 
iinfallen man, was especially needful to fallen man in a fallen 
world. God erected this pillar of testimony ; nor has He taken 
it down. It was first set up in paradise, then in the wilder- 
, ness, then transplanted to Calvary, and there it remaineth to 
this day. 

In one thing only was there a d ff Th th d 

having become a blank, by the S G d d 

under the power of death, its s al P d h 

next, so that the first day of k h g 11 

earlier meanings, is presented m mp 

memorial of the past,— creatio k d — d 

at the same time a more perfect prefiguration of resurrection 
work and resurrection-rest. 

Thus much we can say as to the general principles on which 
the Sabbath- Institute is founded. Let us iook at the question 



I ..Google 



NOTES. ' 3Z7 

a little more minutely ; for, if these principles are correct, the 
subject is one of deep moment. 

No one thinks of denying that the law of tte Sabbath is 
written broadly and legibly enough in the Old Testament ; so 
that up to the coming of Christ it could not be disputed. God 
laid His hand upon the seventh portion of man's time, and 
claimed it as His own. It was provided that, in one day out 
of seven, the sun should go forth to shine upon a world at rest ; 
memorial of what it was intended to be ; relic of what it 
once had been ; type of what it is yet to be hereafter, when all 
things are made new. 

Now, there has been no repeal of this law. The fourth 
commandment was carefully inserted in the Decalogue by 
God's own finger, and it behoved to be as distinctly taken out 
and erased by the same finger that placed it there. Has it 
been so? Have the commandments been reduced from ten to 
nine? DidChristcome to destroy, not to fulfil the law? Those 
who deny the authority of the Sabbath now must undertake to 
prove the following things ; — 

t. That the Decalogue, or law, is no longer binding; or at 
least that one out of the Ten Commandments is no longer 
binding. And if one man cancels the fourth, has not another, 
— viz. the Romanist, — a right to cancel the second ? !f this 
man is at liberty to erase this jot or tittle, another man rnay do 
the same with another, till the whole has been abrogated,—' 
abrogated by man, not by God, — abrogated simply because its 
observance was an inconvenience and a weariness. 

2. That Christ came to dtmitdsk our store of blessings during 
the present dispensation j — that He has narrowed instead of 
enlai^ing our privileges : as if He had made the announce- 
ment, ' Israel was blessed with a Sabbath, but I cancel that 
blessing ; Israel had Sabbath privileges and Sabbath joys, 1 
blot them out ; Israel was called on to give the seventh of 
his time to God, but I set you free from all such restraint, to 
do with your time just as you please.' Thus we have, accord- 
ing to these men, fewer privileges, fewer blessings than Israel. 
And is this what Christ came to do ? Was it for this that the 
Son of God took flesh and died? 



I ..Google 



323 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

3. If they shrink from this, then ikey must maintain thai the 
Sabbath is uot a blessing; — tliat it is an unwholesome, unnatural, 
intolerable restraint ;^-a weariness, a bondage, a curse. And, 
indeed, this is the basis and drift of their reasonings, if they 
have any meaning ataU. These men evidently have the secret 
feeling, that the Sabbath is not a blessing, that it is a restraint, 
—a. restraint upon tlieir worldliness, their follies, their gains, 
their business. Hence their eagerness to prove its non-exist- 
ence, its abolition. The wish is father to the thought, the 
desire is father to the conclusion. They wish no Sabbath, and, 
with daring blasphemy, they ascribe its abolition to Him who 
came not to destroy the law, but to fulfil it, So that one of 
the chief benefits, according to them, which Christianity has 
conferred on our race is, that it has effaced the Sabbath. It 
did virtually eighteen hundred years ago exactly what the 
French Revolution did eighty years ago, — it effaced the Sab- 
bath. Thus the chief thing for which the world has to praise 
the Saviour is, that He first struck off its Sabbath chains, and 
bid it go free from Sabbath obligations ; — nay, perhaps the 
only thing for which some of these men think they have to 
thank the Lord of the Sabbath is, that He abolished it 1 Will 
they maintain this ? Yet this they must, if they will honestly 
and consistently carry out their argument. To what extremity 
will not the hatred of the Sabbath drive a man ? 

4. That the Sabbath luas a Jewish institution exclusively^ 
and therefore fell when yudaism. fell. Now, that there were 
several Jewish observances connected with the Sabbath in 
Israel, we do not doubt. But when these fell, did the Sabbath 
fall with them ? Did their passing away bring the Sabbath 
to the ground ? No. Wlien the veil was rent, and Judaism 
crumbled to pieces, the Sabbath stood erect and untouched 
anud these ruins. It had not risen with Judaism, and it did 
not fall with Jud^sm. It was made for man, not for the Jew. 
It was an ordinance as old as creation, and therefore, strictly 
speaking, had nothing to do with Judaism. It was an ordi- 
nance evidently known to Israel before proclaimed from Sinai ; 
for as soon as they had entered the wilderness, and long ere 
they reached Sinai, the manna fell, and thus the Lord spake 



I ..Google 



to them : ' To-morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the 
Lord. Six days ye shall gather it ; but on the seventh day, 
which is the Sabbath, in it there shall be none' (Ex. xvi. 23, 
id). From which it is plain that Israel knew the Sabbath well 
before its proclamation from Sinai, and that when called on 
to 'remember' it, they were called to remember something 
which they and their fathers knew ; something older than 
Moses, older than Abraham, older than Noah, as old as Adam 
and paradise. 

J. That every day should be a Sabbath, and that, therefore, 
there is no need 0/ a Sabbath. When this argument comes 
from the lips of a worldly man ; — a man who never spent an 
hour upon his knees, and who knows nothing of communion 
with the Father and the Son, it is profanity ;— it is hypocrisy. 
But even when it comes from the lips of one who seems to be 
hving above the world, and to prize fellowship with God, we 
confess it appears strange and suspicious.. Should not every 
day have been a Sabbath to Adam f Yet he was commanded 
even in paradise to keep a Sabbath to the Lord. Was not 
every day a Sabbath to the Lord Jesus when on earth? Yet 
He kept the Sabbath, and always made known His reverence 
foritbyvindicating Himself from the charge of Sabbath-break- 
ing, and showing that works of mercy might be done upon that 
day. But, apart from this, we dislike and suspect this senti- 
ment even from the lips of religious men. They profess to 
bring up every day to the level of a Sabbath ; but it is invari- 
ably found that, in reality, they bring down the Sabbath to the 
level of every day. We have heard of individuals, some years 
ago devout and spiritual. They were placed in the midst of 
worldliness, exposed to Sabbath gaiety. Sabbath parties. Sab- 
bath dinners, Sabbath pleasure, from week to week. Their 
souls were burdened, and each Sabbath evening they retired 
to rest with a wounded conscience and a heavy heart. After 
a while they ceased to be thus vexed in spirit, and were quite 
at ease. Had they got quit of their worldly company ? No. 
Had they boldly testified for Christ and for His Sabbath in 
the midst of them ? No. They had been led to see that ' to a 
Christian every day should be a Sabbath.' Therefore their 



I ..Google 



33° THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

conscience no longer smote them, even when mixing all day 
long in the society of the world. Alas ! they were deluding 
themselves with the dogma that every day should bea Sabbath. 
Yet they had not brought up each day to the elevation of a 
Sabbath. Nay, they had evidently brought down the Sabbath 
to the level of the day of commonest worldliness and folly. 

6. That the reasons for the observance of a Sabbath no longer 
exist. These reasons aie: (i) Man's need of rest. Is this 
reason gone? Does man. need rest no longer? Is the world 
now so calm a scene, and earth so serene a region, that no 
seventh day's rest is needed? If not, if the reason still exist, 
must not the day still remain ? Can the institution be erased 
when the reason for it stUl remains, not only as strong as ever, 
but stronger than ever, in these days of earnest worldliness, 
and excitement, and hurrying to and fro ? (2) Time for 
unhindered fellowship with God. Is there no longer need for 
this ? Is there not more than ever, in this age of business and 
enterprise ? Adam in paradise, Israel in the wilderness, when 
there was no bustle, no tempting world around, needed a 
Sabbath for fellowship and worship. And do we not in tliese 
busy days? And if the reason remains, the ordinance must. 

(3) A memorial of creation. For four thousand years God 
kept up this memorial of creation as a thing that was needed ; 
and where is His declarati.on that creation needs no memorial 
now ? Ah ! do we not feel how needful it is to uphold the 
Sabbath in these days, when men are undertaking to prove 
from science that the world created itself? Ought we not to 
prize the Sabbath as God's standing testimony against atheism, 
— God's own loving voice proclaiming, ' I created all this out 
of nothing,' — God's appointed witness to a universe created by 
Himself, against the atheistic theory of a self-creating universe? 

(4) A memorial of resurrection. The Sabbath has now become 
a double memorial, viz. of creation and resurrection. If, then, 
it was sacred before, it is doubly sacred now. And to say that 
the Sabbath has ceased because Christianity has risen, is just 
saying this, that so long as we had but one reason for this 
memorial, we kept it up ; but now that we have twoj we must 
level and eflace it. (5) A type of the rest or Sabbath which 



I ..Google 



33' 



remaineth for the people of God. Now a type must stand till 
it be succeeded by the antitype. That antitype, that rest, has 
not yet come. And till it arrive, the Sabbath must be main- 
tained. So that, whether you look backward to the old creation 
or forward to the new, — backward to resurrection, or forward to 
the restitution of all things,— you see how entirely untouched, 
nay, how thoroughly immoveable, are the reasons for its sacred- 
ness and perpetuity. Till these reasons be swept away, the 
Sabbath must stand. Unless you can say that man has do 
need for rest, no need fer communion with God,— unless you 
can sweep away creation, resurrection, and the hope of the 
coming rest, you cannot cancel the Sabbath, nor dispose of 
its obligation and authority. 

The character of a cause is generally known by the charac- 
ter of its friends and its enemies. No one will deny that the 
great mass of the rehgious-minded men is in favour of the 
Sabbath, and the great mass of the ungodly against it. Popery 
is an' enemy to the Sabbath ; and wherever Popery flourishes, 
there the Sabbath goes down. Infidelity is an enemy to the 
Sabbath ; and wherever infidelity flourishes, there the Sabbath 
goes down. Popish Spain has no Sabbaths, infidel France 
has no Sabbaths ; Protestant England, Protestant America, 
and Protestant Scotland, have their Sabbaths still. And may 
we not conclude favourably of that cause against which Popery 
and infidelity are confederated as one man? May we not 
conclude well of that ordinance which takes root deepest, and 
spreads its branches widest, in the most religious and God- 
fearing nations of the earth ? 

They who oppose the Sabbath are standing in the position 
of men who are enemies to one of the brightest blessings and 
best birthrights that a nation can possess. They need not 
wonder that we should feel strongly the robbery which they 
are seeking to perpetrate. They are robbing us and our 
children of that which is worth more than a kingdom's riches, 
and which we will not part with without a struggle. And they 
themselves, were they men in earnest, should feel the serious- 
ness of the position they assume. If they are in earnest, it 
niust have cost them much pain before they could bring 



I ..Google 



332 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

themselves to the conclusion that there is no Sabbatli. Ju 
arguing with the atheist, who denies a God, we can appeal to 
him and say, If you are in earnest, it must have been with the 
profoimdest grief that you have come to the conclusion that 
there is no God, no infinite good, no being of infinite love. In 
reasoning with the infidel, who sets aside the Scriptures, we 
can say. If you be in earnest, it must have cost you unutterable 
pMn to come to the conclusion, there is no Bible, no book 
of divine wisdom and truth. And you, of all others, ought to 
be serious, solemn men, weighed down with the conviction of 
such an infinite blank. And so, in reasoning with the opposers 
of the Sabbath, we appeal to them, and say, If you are men in 
earnest, it must have been with hittcrest grief that you have 
brought yourself to the conclusion that there is no Sabbath, — 
CO day of holy rest, no day of fellowship with God, no ynemorial 
of creation, no pledge of coming glory. You must have weighed 
the evidence well before coming to so sad a conclusion, and 
you must be most willing to hear evidence in favour of that 
which, if we can prove it, should be good and grateful news. 
Would you but listen in such a spirit to our reasonings, would 
you but believe us when we tell you how much your own 
temporal comforts, your own immortal interests, are bound up 
in the observance of this day, — a day that of itself preaches to 
you the glad tidings of Him who died, and rose, and ascended, 
and lives, and intercedes, and will come again in glory,— you 
would hesitate before you tried to obliterate the most ancient 
of all distinctions between day and day ; you would try rather 
to preserve and perpetuate its testimony to creation, to re- 
demption, to resurrection, to the glory of the Kingdom, and 
the security of tlie rest which remaineth for the people of Cod.' 

^ An old critic thinks that the number seven was called inTiit, or 
more anciently rurirai, from ti^wSai, to worship, — the worshipping 



I ..Google 



SATAN. 



OF Satan's creation we know nothing. Tliat he was 
created holy we cannot doubt, for God is not the 
author of imholiness, but of hohness. 

Of the time when he was created nothing is revealed ; nor 
of how long he stood ; nor of how he fell. For aught that 
we know, he might not have stood longer than Adam, or he 
niight have done so for ages. This only would we say, that 
it seems impossible for a creature, standing alone, simply in 
creature strength, to stand any length of time, however short. 

Wliatled to his fall we know not. He 'kept not his first 
estate, but left his own habitation.' This is all that we are 
told, — as if he had become dissatisfied with (hat estate, and 
gone in quest of another habitation. 

How he came to be connected with this earth is wholly 
nnrevealed. Whether this were his ' first estate,'— his realm, 
— and he had become dissatisfied with it, or whether some 
. other planet were his kingdom, and he having become dis- 
satisfied with it, had come in quest of another abode to this 
earth, — these are questions which we may ask, but cannot 
answer. Certainly his connection with our world is a mys- 
terious fact. How he should be found here, — and found here 
just at die time of man's creation, — is quite inexplicable. 
We are so accustomed to consider him as connected with 
earth and its history, that we lose sight of the mystery of the 
commeftcemenioiihis connection. Why,out of all the millions 
of stars, should this be the place where he appears ? How 
did he find his way to this orb if he were not here before ? 
What brought him to it ? Was it solely as a tempter that 
God allowed him to come ? or is he wandering about like a 
dethroned monarch, seeking to regain his lost sceptre, and 
once more to be sovereign of this his lost planet? 

We are not concerned to account for his sudden appearance 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



on this globe at the time of man's creation, nor to answer any 
of the above questions. We are satisfied to take the simple 
facts of Scripture, and to ieain from them Ms character and 
actings. 

He is brought before us under several characters, or rather, 
we might say, his character is broi^ht before us under several 
aspects, — all of them dark, repulsive, horrid. There is nothing 
in any of them of that grandeur and nobleness which Milton 
has ascribed to him. He tells us that 

' His form had not yet lost 
All her originBl brightness, nor appeared 
Less than archangel ruined, and the excess 
Of glory obscured.' 

Scripture attributes to him nothing save evil, — tmmingled 
evil, enmity to God and man, special enmity to Christ and 
to His Church. 

We find him set forth to us under such names or aspects as 
the following ; — 

1, The Tempter (i Thess- iii. S).— It is under this character 
that he first appears before us in paradise, — tempting the 
woman, and persuading her to disbelieve, to distrust, and to 
rebel. 

2, Tke Deceiver (i Tim. ii. 14 ; Eev. xx. 3, 8, 10).— He is 
not merely a tempter, but a deceiver. He beguiled Eve with 
his subtlety, and his object has been, ever since, to practise 
deceits upon the children of men,— nay, to transform himself 
into an angel of light, — and by his cunning to deceive, if it 
were possible, the very elect. ■ 

3. A Liar (John viii, 44). — He tempted Eve by a liej he 
deceived her by a lie ; he carries on his temptations and 
deceptions still by a lie ! He has lied from the beginning ; 
he lieth still ; he is a bar ; he is the father of lies, and with 
his lies is he seeking to cover the whole earth, 

4. A Murderer (John viii. 44).-— His whole aim from the 
beginning has been to slay men, both soul and body. He 
has delighted to torment men's bodies, as we see in the case 
of Job, and in the case of the demoniacs in the time of our 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 



335 



Lord. He bears deadly malice against the whole race, and 
specially against the woman's seed, which he has heea carry- 
ing out in persecution and murder, age after age ; so that his 
name is. truly Abaddon, or Apollyon, 'the destroyer.' It is 
he who has so often unsheathed the sword against the godly, 
and shed the blood of saints. It was he who entered into 
Judas, and led him to hand over his Master to His murderers. 
It is to be he who is to muster the great Armageddon host, 
to fight against Jehovah in the last days. 

5. An Executioner (Heb. ii. 14), — He is said to have the 
' power of death,' as if he were God's executioner ; as if it 
were through him that disease smites us, and death is at last 
inflicted. He is the angel of death 1 Terrible name I How 
he came to have the power of death, or when the sword of 
death was put into his hands, we know not. But there he 
stands, executing that very sentence which he so cunningly 
declared to the woman would not take place, — ' Ye shall not 
surely die,' At the time he uttered the words he had the 
sword in his hand ; he stood waiting for his prey, ready to 
seize his victim as soon as, by disobedience, she should put 
herself into his power. 

6. An Adversary (i Pet. v. 8). — He is the Church's great 
enemy, watching to destroy, like a beast of prey prowling 
round the fold in order to seize his victims. This enmity is 
what the first promise predicts t enmity between th d f 
tlie woman and the seed of the serpent ; yet h d nn 
enmity which God restrains, and which can g h 
than the heel, either in the case of Christ or His Ch h 

7. He is an Accuser (Rev. xii. 10).— His n n d 1 
Si«(3o?ios-, signifies this, just as Satan signifies ad N 
doubt, after deceiving our first parents, he wen h nd 
accused them to God, which he seems always to have had the 
power of doing, and hence he is called 'the accuser of the 
brethren.' Awftilly true to his name has he proved himself 
to be 1 What evil reports has he not set on foot against the 
saints I what lies has he not invented ! what slanders has he 
not heaped upon them ! Doth before God and man he has 
proved the truth pf his nain^ ' the accuser of the brethren.' 



I ..Google 



335 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

8. He is the god of this -world (2 Cor. iv, 4).— This name 
seems to correspond with that which om' Lord gives him, 
'the prince of tliis world' (John xiv. 30), and to that which 
the apostle gives to the principalities and powers, 'the rulers 
of the darkness of this world.' He has got dominion over the 
earth. The world obeys him. He has covered it with dark- 
ness, a.nd that darkness he rules or wields at pleasure. And 
hereafter he will induce the whole world to wonder after his 
representative, ' the beast ; ' nay, to have its name stamped 
upon their forehead ; nay, to fall down and worship it. 

Other similar names he has, such as Beeliebub, that old 
serpent, the dragon, the wicked one. All these indicate the 
same characteristics of utter wickedness and rebellion against 
God and His Christ 

These characteristics have been exemplified in each age 
and clime of this world. To trace his workings in the earli, 
would lead us into a larger field than we can at present occupy; 
this, however, we may say, that he has, without cessation, 
been working in our world from the beginning hitherto. By 
his legions of evil angels he carries on his schemes in every 
kingdom and in every heart. He leaves no place unassailed, 
no heart untempted, in so far as he is permitted of Jehovah. 
For let us remember that he is not omnipotent, nor is he at 
liberty to do all he desires or plans, unrestrained. But in so 
far as this divine permission allows him, he works without 
ceasing everywhere. 

Nor does he work at random. He has evidently had a 
regular and consistent plan all along to carry out. Possessed 
of vast wisdom, he does not fling away his efforts uselessly. 
He works out a consistent and considered scheme. He does 
not allow wrath to blind or malice to mislead him. He plans 
and he executes with all the superhuman skill with which he 
is gifted, as originally an angel of light, excelling in wisdom 
as in strength. All error comes fi-om him, all apostasy, all 
idolatry, all denial of Christ. He is ever on the watch to 
ensnare and lead captive the unwary. 

His greatest device is that of Antichrist. This he has been 
building up and maturing during past centuries ; and this he 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 



337 



is still occupied with in these last days, This is his main 
central scheme, on which he expends his utmost cunning and 
strength. And for a time he succeeds. He has led men 
into the entanglements and abominations of Popery ; and he 
is yet to have more universal success in other ways, when 
he deceives the whole world, and makes it to wonder after 
and to worship the beast. (See Rev. xiii.) 

Instead of losing, he gains ground in the course of ages. 
He comes down, having great wrath, because he knows he 
has but a short time. He persecutes the saints ; he slays the 
witnesses ; he makes war with the Lamb ; he sets Antichrist 
upon the throne, and brings all the world to worship him. 
For just as he tempted Christ by offering Him all the world's 
kingdoms, so does he tempt Antichrist, and prevail. Anti- 
christ worships him, and he in turn brings the whole world to 
worship Antichrist. Up to the last he is seen maintaining his 
old characteristics. He is the deceiver, the liar, the murderer, 
the god of this world, and the prince of the air, to the very 
last. His enmity to the seed of the woman has lost none of 
its intensity or ferocity. His warfare continues as unrelenting 
and murderous as when he stirred up Cain to slay his brother. 
The battle of Armageddon is wholly of his organization. And 
the following passages describe his last act of enmity. Rev. 
xvii. 14, xix. 19. 

And what follows this last outburst of Sat 
the Lamb and His followers ? Does he m 
forces for another conflict, and come forth for a second and 
more terrible Armageddon ! No ; the 20th chapter gives 
the result. He is not merely overpowered and his legions 
scattered, but he is seized and bound. A mighty angd de- 
scends, and his reign is over ; the spoiler is spoiled ; ■ the 
destroyer is destroyed ; he that led into captivity has gone 
into captivity ; the imprisoner of the saints is led to prison, 
and bound in chains too strong for all hell to break. 

And what follows this binding of Satan? The saints take 
their seats upon their long-promised thrones ; the righteous 
reign of Christ begins ; the earth is swept clean of its long 
pollution ; the times of the restitution of all things now rua 

VOL. VI. Y 



c rage against 



jiGoogle 



33S THOUGHTS ON" GENESIS. 

their course; the 'darkness of this world' is exchanged for 
the light of the world to come ; for the ruler of the long dark- 
ness has been expelled from his seat, and the glory of the Son 
of God takes possession of that air where Satan had dwelt, and 
where he had exercised his power on earth. 

And what is the great event which ends the reign of Satan 
and begins the reign of the saints ? The coming of the Lord ! 
In proof of this, we have only to look at the concluding part 
of the preceding chapter. At the nth verse a new scene un- 
folds itself. The saints have been caught up to the clouds 
to meet their Lord, and the marriage-supper of the Lamb is 
described as then taking place. Then the heaven opens ; the 
Lord Himself appears. The beast is taken, and the false 
prophet, and cast into the lake of fire. Then follows the 
scene in the 20th chapter, of Satan's binding, and the reign 
of the saints during the period of his binding. 

It is plain that, up till this period, Satan has had dominion 
on the earth. During that dominion there could be no mil- 
lennium. To end this dorninion of the Evil One, by destroy- 
ing the beast whom Satan had set up, and binding Satan 
himself, the Lord comes in person. And now the glory is 
manifested. There can be no millennium before Christ comes. 
Immediately on His coming it commences. 

Into the momentous question of Satan's po-wer we have not 
entered. It is one which demands our most solemn attention, 
and it is one which wiU necessarily force itself upon the notice 
of the Church as the last days draw on. It must be evident 
to every reader of Scripture, that he has far greater power 
than we have usually ascribed to him, at least of late years. 
Our forefathers came much nearer the t?utt on this point than 
we do. Modem enlightenment has exploded the ancient ideas 
of Satanic. operation. How far thb enlightenment can claim 
to be scriptural, we do not now say. 

A recently published work of Mr. Smith takes up the sub- 
ject in a way such as few historians have ventured to do. The 
work is entitled The Gentile Nations, published some years 
ago, and forms the conclusion of his Sacred Annals. We 
cannot better conclude our remarks than by giving a few 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 339 

extracts, which may help our readers to pursue the subject at 
greater length. 

The origin of idolatry is thus traced to Satan by Mr. 

' The origin of idolatry will never be understood while the 

investigation is confined to the character of the human mind 

or the history of the human race, without a distinct recogni- 

n in's exposure to Satanic influence and aggression. 

I gh as reasonably be attempted to write a history of 

Eng d whilst ignoring the Norman Conquest, or a system 

ph without reference to gravitation, as to give a con- 

and rational account of the origin of idolatry in the 

b e f all reference to Satan, its real author and object. 

m b said, " This is unscieatific and unphilosophical." 

L not in perfect accordance with the purest science, 

d h soundest philosophy, to apply all truth to useful 

p p and by the judicious adaptation of ascertained 

p n p to cognate subjects, to solve apparent mysteries, 

un difficulties, and make that clear and plain which was 

be fused and obscure ? Why, then, should this mode 

p ding be prohibited in respect of the truths of the 

H S ptwes by those who admit their divine origin? 

p nd infidels may decline such a method : it is thrir 

n habit so to do. But why should those who make 

h d bted verity of God's Holy Word the basis of their 

gh h pes and dearest interests, hesitate to apply its teach- 

g h great problems presented by all the aspects of the 

MOilds idigion.' 

' In the investigation of the origin and character of idolatry, 
this aid is essential. The moment we enter on this study, we 
are met by such questions as these : " What were the origin 
and design of bloody sacrifices ? Why were they universal, 
when the most profound sages were ignorant of their origin 
and object? Why was the form of the serpent, above every 
other, consecrated to supreme elevation and honour ? " These 
and many other queries cannot be solved by any study of 
human nature or human history. No recondite researches into 
ancient mythology, no laboured exploration into the poetry or 



I ..Google 



340 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

religion of the pnt ntn llffoda satisfactory 

answer. To imd ta d the o g n obj t and character of 
idolatry, we nust p beyond tl e t 1 ^tt of mere human 
intelhgence and ndu t n and tand n n the full glory of 
revealed truth ontemplat the p n t e dition and early 
history of mani nd. He el arn ou gl ous origin, and 
the mighty agencies with which our nature, in the outset of 
its career, was brought into contact ; mark the fearful change 
wrought in man's moral nature, and watch its terrible results 
until we see him tium away from the God of his life, and bow 
in profane adoration before the most filthy impersonations of 
his foul destroyer. 

' In this light we see that the relentless foe of God and man 
did not quit Ms prey, when covered with guilt, and involved 
in condemnation. It may be fairly questioned whether any 
crisis in the aff^rs of the human race stands invested with 
more terrible grandeur than this. Here we see, that as divine 
mercy interposed the scheme of redemption for the salvation 
of man, the arch-foe not only opposed its principles and its 
progress by a wide range of malignant effort j but, in a manner 
at once daring and insidious, he devised idolatry, and suc- 
ceeded in introducing it into the world, as a means of wresting 
the spiritual dominion of mankind from the Mediator- Deity, 
and establishing himself as "the god of this world." This was 
the agency under which idolatry was introduced, and rose into 
influence and power ; and throughout its almost infinite range 
of developraent, the evil and debasing character of its author 
is legibly imprinted upon all its numerous'deities, doctrines, 
rites, and religious observances.' 

The origination of idolatry, in ihts perversion of divine tniih 
by Satan, is thus stated : — 

' Having thus ascertained by undoubted induction, con- 
firmed as it is by Scripture proof, the period and place 
whence idolatry originated, we may proceed another step, 
and elicit from the great and common principles of all 
heathen mythology some notion of the ruling elements of 
unhallowed feeling and corrupt imagination, which generated 
the evil of which we speak. In this effort it will be of conse- 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 341 

quence for us to recognise the important fact, that in all ages 
Satanic error hns been most successful when presented to the 
human mind as a perversion of truth. Faber justly observes, 
" The human mind rarely tolerates any great changes if they 
be violent and sudden, particularly in matters of religion. It 
seems natural to suppose that this great apostasy was not a 
violent and abrupt setting aside of true religion ; that it was 
not a sudden plunge from the worship of Jehovaih, into the 
grossness of rank idolatry, I should rather apprehend, that 
it must have commenced with a specious perversion of sound 
doctrine, and with an affectedly devout adoption of authorized 
rites, and ceremonies, and phraseology." This judgment of 
an experienced and learned writer, who ha<^ carefully investi- 
gated the subject, may be safely admitted as a sound principle, 
of important use in the prosecution of this inquiry.' 

Satan's object in these idolatrous systems — to defeat God's 
scheme of redemption — is then briefly noticed, along with the 
general overlooking of this awful fact in studying heathen 
mythology. Our youth, are taught mythology, but not as they 
ought to be. They are not taught to look on it with abhor- 
rence, as Satan's scheme for opposing redemption ; they are 
rather made to regard it as a beautiful and wonderful exhibi- 
tion of human intellect ! 

Then Satan's efforts to get himself worshipped under the 
form of a serpent, are thus sketched : — 

'That the malign foe sliould repeat his assault on human 
happiness after the promise of redemption, is not wonderful. 
That he should have persevered in his aggression, might be 
inferred from his subtlety and malice. But it will scarcely be 
believed, that even Satan should not only have aimed so high 
as to supplant the adorable and eternal God as the object of 
human worship, but should also have aspired to put himself 
fortli as the object of supreme worship, and challenge the 
adoration of the world under the precise form in which he 
bad succeeded in effecting the ruin of the race. Yet so it 
was. The serpent form has in all probability approached 
nearer to universal adoration than any other. 

' A learned author, wlio has investigated this subject with 



I ..Google 



343 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

great labour and research, assures us that he has "traced the 
worship of the serpent from Babylonia, east and west, through 
Persia, Hindustan, China, Mexico, Britain, Scandinavia, Italy, 
Illyricum, Thrace, Greece, Asia Minor, and Phcenicia. Again, 
we have observed the same idolatry prevailing north and south, 
through Scythia on the one hand, and Africa on the other. 
The worship of the serpent was therefore universal. 
For not only did the sacred serpent enter into the symbolical 
and ritual service of every religion which recognised the sun, 
but we even find him in countries where solar worship was 
altogether unknown, as in Sarmatia, Scandinavia, and in the 
Gold Coast of Africa. In e\ ery known country of the ancient 
world, the serpent foimed a prominent feature in the ordinary 
worship, and made no m considerable figure in their Hagio- 
grapha, entermg ahLe mto legendary and astronomical my- 
thology. 

' " Whence, then, did this only universal idolatry origi- 
nate? That it preceded polytheism, is indicated by the 
attribution of the title OPS, and the consecration of the 
symbolical serpent, to so many of the heathen deities. The 
title Ops was conferred upon Terra, Vesta, Rhea, Cybele, 
Juno, Diana ; and even Vulcan is called by Cicero, Opas. 

' " in Grecian mythology, the symbolical serpent was sacred 
to Saturn, Jupiter, Apollo, Bacchus, Mars, .^sculapius, Rhea, 
Juno, Minerva, Diana, Ceres, and Proserpine ; that is, the 
serpent was a sacred emblem a/ nearly all the gods and 

' " The same remark may be extended to the theogonies of 
Egypt, Hindustan, and Mexico, in all of which we find the 
serpent emblematic, not of one deity, but of many. 

' " What, then, is the inference ? TAat the serpent was the 
most ancient of the heathen gods."' 

How curiously this serpent-worship, or rather, Satan-wor- 
ship, was developed in different places, is thus adverted to : — 

' So the great and terrible truth stands dearly attested, not 
only by the Word of God, but by authentic records of every 
ancient nation, that the old serpent the devil, who seduced our 
first parents from their allegiance, succeeded in establishing 



I ..Google 



343 



himself, under the very figure in which he wrought his first 
fatal triumph, as the almost universal object of human worship 
— " the god of this world." Yes, and as the corrupt fancy and 
vild dp d versified modes of w h p ind 

m p d m d ts of adoration, this n gn p 

1 supremacy, and p p u h 
m d he wide world of m ire 

mp d rp on every deity, and h rp n 

m T use the eloquent 1 g g the 

h Ir d d The mystic serpent en d h 

m y consecrated almost every temple ; 

nb il ry d ty ; was imagined in the heavens, 

an p d p h art d ruled in the realms of everlasting 
rr w H d him into an emblem of •wisdom; 

h h p d upon the Eegis of Minerva, and 

■n d h Tk knowledge of futurity which he 

displayed m paradise exalted him into a symbol of vaticina- 
> tion ; he was therefore oracular, and reigned at Delphi, The 
^ opening of the ^yes' of our deluded first parents obtained 
him an altar in the temple of the god of healing; he is there- 
fore the constant companion of jEsculapius. In the distribu- 
tion of his qualities, the genius of mythology did not even gloss 
over his malignant attributes. The fascination with which he 
intoxicated the souls of the first sinners, depriving them at 
once of purity and immortality, of the image of God and of 
the life of angels, was symbolically remembered and fatally 
celebrated in the orgies of Bacchus, where serpents crowned 
the heads of the Bacchantes, and the poculum boni dmmonis 
circulated under the auspices of the ophite hierogram, chased 
upon the rim. But the most remarkable remembrance of the 
paradisaical serpent is displayed in the position which he 
retains in Tartarus. A cunodracontic Cerberus guards the 
gates ; serpents are coiled about the chariot wheels of Proser- 
pine; serpents pave the abyss of torment; and even serpents 
constitute the caduceus of Mercury, the talisman which he 
holds when he conveys the soul to Tartarus, The image of 
the serpent is stamped upon every mythological fable con- 
nected with the realms of Pluto." 



I ..Google 



344 THOUGHTS ON' GENESIS. 

' To such a fearful extent is tte presence and image of Satan 
the destroyer impressed on. the wide range of idolatry 1 Nor 
' is the character with which he has imbued it less dubious than 
the symbolism under whicli it is exhibited to the world. The 
genius of heathen idolatry is throughout diabolicaL' 

In a subsequent page he comes to the question of how far 
Satan was really at work in the heathen oracles, and how far 
he was permitted to communicate supernatural knowledge to 
mankind : — 

' The important question is then suggested, What was the 
real character of these oracles ? Were they the result of com- 
bined fraud and ingenious contrivance ? Or did they in any 
measure emanate from, and were sustained by, Satanic influ- 
ence ? In the solution of this question, the learned of our own 
as well as of other countries are much at variance with each 
other. Bishop Sherlock is so confident of the Satanic cha- 
racter of the heathen oracles, that he does not hesitate to state 
that he regards those who deny that the devil gave out the 
oracles to the heathen world, as evincing a "degree of unbelief" 
which deprives them of all right to debate questions of this 
kind ; while, on the other hand. Dr. Middleton pleads guilty 
of this degree of unbelief, and maintains that these oracles 
were " all mere impostures, wholly invented and supported by 
human craft, without any supernatural aid or interposition 
whatever." When such divines stand thus opposed to each 
other, nothing can be hoped for in respect of authority. Our 
only resource is, therefore, to investigate the subject for our- 
selves, under the guidance of such aids as its nature affords. 

' It may be observed, in limine, that an objection has been 
taken to supernatural interposition in respect of oracles, which 
appears to be most unsound and unreasonable. It has been 
asserted that numerous proofs exist of fraud, deceit, and 
corruption, in the agency by which they were administered : 
and hence it is ai^ued, that they could not have emanated 
from diabolical influence. It is difficult to conceive of a more 
inconsequential conclusion. If it had been alleged that these 
oracles were the result of divine prescience, then the proof of 
positive guile and wickedness in the agents might be held 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 



345 



sufficient to disprove the claim. But surely there is no such 
obvious antagonism between Satanic influence, and fraud, 
guile, and wickedness, that the presence of the one must 
necessarily prove the absence of the other. On the other 
hand, I am free to confess, that this asserted guile and fraud, 
instead of disproving the presence of Satanic influence, rather 
inclines me to infer the operation of such agency.' 

Mr. Smith next conies to historical examples confirmatory of 
his statements. He adduces the following from Scripture : — 

' Passing by other and more doubtful cases, I call attention 
here to a clear and indubitable instance of the communication 
of superhuman knowledge by diabolical agency. The case I 
refer to has been noticed for another purpose in a note ; it is 
that of the Pythoness of Philippi, We have here (Acts xvi. 
16-19) ^" unquestionable proof of such a communication of 
superhuman knowledge. It may be first observed, that the 
term used by the sacred writer to describe this woman's occu- 
pation, ftaptivofiai, and which our translators have rendered 
"soothsaying," signifies ^^Va foretell, divine, prapResy, deliver 
AN ORACLE." It Is precisely the same word which is used by 
Herodotus when referring to the divination of the Scythians, and 
which is also employed by him when speaking of the famous 
oracle at Delphi. The case is therefore strictly in point. 

' In this instance, then, it is clear that an evil spirit gave to 
the woman the power of making superhuman, or oracular 
""h this spirit were 






eled 



ul 



hat this y 

supposed that 

d m such a case. The 

ct. Whatever fraud or 

"ed in connection with 

nowledged truth by every 

answers communicating 

hi case given by diabolical 



I ..Google 



345 THOUGHTS OIV GENESIS. 

He then treats specially of the heathen, oracles, taking up 
the question as to possibility of fraud and imposture : — 

' It is important to consider the fact, that these oracles were 
sustained in high credit, and trusted with implicit confidence, 
by the wisest statesmen and sovereigns of the nations of 
antiquity most celebrated for their high state of civilisation. 
Not only did this continue under particular circumstances, and 
for a season or an age, but it lasted throughout successive 
centuries. This is an argument which all candid minds have 
felt. Hence the learned Banier asks, "Is it then credible, 
that if the oracles had heen nothing but the offspring of priest- 
craft, whatever artful methods they may be thought to have 
used, and however successful in pumping out the secrets and 
schemes of those who came to consult them ; is it credible, I 
say, that those oracles would have lasted so long, and sup- 
ported themselves with so much splendour and reputation, had 
they been merely owing to thefoi^ery of the priests? Imposture 
betrays itself,, falsehood never holds out. Besides, tliere were 
too many witnesses, too many curious spies, too many people 
whose interest it was not to be deluded. One may put a cheat 
for a time upon a few private persons, who are overrun with 
crecluhty, but by no means upon whole nations for several ages. 
Some princes who had been played upon by ambiguous 
responses,^ — a trick once discovered, — the bare curiosity of a 
freethinker, — any of these, in short, was sufficient to blow up 
the whole mystery, and at once to make the credit of the oracles 
fall to the ground. How many people, deluded by hateful 
responses, were concerned to examine, if it was really the priests 
by whom they were seduced!' But why? Was it so hard a 
matter to find one of the priests themselves, capable of being 
bribed to betray the cause of his accomplices, by the fair pro- 
mises and more substantial gifts of those who omitted no means 
of being thoroughly informed in a subject of such concern ? " 

' LempriSre echoes the same argument, and says, " Imposture 
and forgery cannot long flourish, and falsehood becomes its 
own destroyer." Yet it is an undeniable fact that, "during the 
best period of their history, the Greeks, generally speaking, 
had undoubtedly a sincere faith in the oiacle, its counsels and 



I ..Google 



347 



directions." Hence Lucan, who wrote his Pharsalia scarcely 
thirty years after our Lord's crucifixion, laments, as one of the 
greatest evils of the age, that the Delphic oracle was become 
silent. From the general credit which the oracles maintained 
in an enlightened age, and during a very lengthened period, it 
is extremely improbahle that they should have been nothing 
more than the base results of fraud and fiction.' 

The following instance from heathen history is given as 
illustrative of the author's statements : — 

' I refer to the case of Crtesus, king of Lydia, and the Pythian 
oracle. Herodotss informs lis that this sovereign, alarmed at 
the growing power of Cyrus, king of Persia, and meditating an 
attack on his dominions, was anxious first to consult the most 
celebrated oracles as to the issue of such an important enter- 
prise, before he committed himself to it. Prior, however, to 
his submitting to the oracle the important question upon 
which his fate depended, he was determined to propound one 
which should enable him, as he thought, to test the prescience 
of the oracle. He accordingly sent messengers to Delphi ; and 
having carefully considered the period required for the journey, 
and allowed them ample time, he commanded them at the ap- 
pointed hour to present themselves before the Pythoness, and 
propose this question ; " What is Crcesus, son of Alyattes, now 
doing?" They were to write the answer carefully down, and 
send it to him. The answer was to this eiTect : — 

" I count the sand, I measure out tho sea ; 
The silent and the dumb are heard by me. 
E'en now the odours to my sense that rise, 
' A tortoise boiling with a lamb supplies, 

Where brass below and brass above it lies." 

'The fact was, that Crcesus, determined to be occupied in 
the most unlikely and unkingly manner, was engaged at that 
time in boiling the flesh of a tortoise and a lamb together in a 
covered vessel of brass.' 

The following conclusions are then deduced from the pre- 
ceding statements. They are worth pondering : — 

' First, then, it cannot be denied that the first answer, which 



I ..Google 



34S THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

referred to the strange occupation of Crcesus at the time, ex- 
hibits remarkable accuracy. We may think ourselves very 
wise in dismissing such a case with tte cry of "jugglery and 
cheating ; " but it is doubtful whether hy such conduct we do 
not evince great folly. The king of Lydia was a man of great 
energy and intellectual power ; he was therefore competent to 
judge of the chances of imposition, and to guard against them, 
much better than we can now imagine. Yet he, by the pre- 
sentation of gifts to the value of nearly one million sterling, 
gave ample proof that he regarded the whole as a bona fide 
transaction. Is it not, then, reasonable to ask, "By what 
means could the Pythoness have given such a reply? By what 
means could the priestess at Delphi have ascertained what the 
king of Lydia was doing at a given hour, in his, palace at 
Sardis, hundreds of miles away, when he had determined to 
exercise his utmost care and ingenuity in order to test her 
ability?" Neither captious querulousness nor unmeaning 
sneering will meet the case. Here is an undoubted historical 
incident, which, I am bold to say, admits of no satisfactory 
solution, except on the principle of diabolical agency. But on 
this principle all is plain : the difSculty, otherwise insurmount- 
able, immediately vanishes, 

'But then it is asked in the most triumphant tone, "Why 
were not all the responses given in language equally distinct 
and intelligible ? Why the double meaning and equivocation 
of the other replies?" It is truly astonishing to see the confi- 
dence with which this objection is urged, when it is open to a 
very simple and rational solution. It is easy to conceive that 
diabolical agency might enable the Pythoness to give a clear 
and distinct answer as to what was transpiring at the moment 
in a distant place, which to all merely human intelligence would 
have been wholly inscrutable. But it is far from certain that 
this agency could unravel the mystery of future contingent 
events. This is the exclusive attribute of Jehovah : He chal- 
lenges this power to Himself alone : " I am God, and there is 
none else ; I am God, and there is none like me, declaring 
the end from the beginning" (Isa. xlvi. 9, 10) ; whilst to the 
idols and their worshippers He says, "Produce your cause, s^th 



I ..Google 



349 



the Lord; bring forth your strong reasons, sailli the King of 
Jacob. Let them bring tlicni forth, and show us what shall 
happen ; !et tliera show the former things what they be, that we 
may consider them, and know the latter end of them; or declare 
us things for to come. Show the things that are to come here- 
after, that we may know that ye are gods" (Isa. xli. 21-Z3). 
Diabolical aid, therefore, although it might give superhuman, 
knowledge in respect of passing events, and afford a means 
of conjecture beyond all human wisdom as to the future, could 
not communicate the power of foretelling future contingencies. 
Obscure, conjectural, and enigmatical expressions, in the com- 
munication of oracles, would consequently be as necessary 
imder this agency as without it. 

' The result of our inquiry then is, — 

' I. That we find the heathen oracles maintaining a high 
character and general confidence, to an extent, and for a 
period, beyond that which would be likely to result from con- 
tinued and unaided, human fraud and falsehood. 

'2, The accredited declarations of these oracles exhibit a 
measure of knowledge respecting passing events, and a 
sagacity in respect of futurity far above all that merely haman 



ingenuity o 

' 3. Yet all tl 
wickedness, f d 
superhuman ki 
must have b d 

'It is 



f 



Idp 



1 f 



f N V 



1 



u 



i h 



1 



owmg 



times, for tl p p 
responses. 

' From all h p m 
general credit of heathen oracles n 
to diabolical agency.' 

The whole subject of the personality and agency of Satan 
demands our most solemn study. It has been far too much 
overlooked, — in many cases evaded and denied. The Church's 
prospects in these last days call on her to weigh the matter. 
There is far more in it that concerns her than she seems aware 



I ..Google 



350 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

of. Individually, we have a superhuman adversary to face ; 
and so, collectively, has the Church. Let us know what God 
has revealed concerning his craft and power, that we may 
know with what weapons to contend, and in what strength we 



The tendency of the age is to ignore the supernatural. The 
wisdom of this world rejects the idea of another race of beings, 
either good or evil, by which things are done for man and 
man's world, which man could not have done for himself or 
by his own power. This desire to throw out of the circle of 
agency all beings save man himself, and all laws save those of 
natm-e, is very startling. To centraUze all action in himself, 
and all power of action in the visible and tangible instrumen- 
talities which science has revealed, — -this is man's aim. Thus 
God is shut out as a direct power, and all invisible beings are 
set aside as agents. Of these, and such as these, man refuses 
to know anything. In his wisdom, he is fast becoming either 
an atheist or a Sadducee, or both. Most imperative, then, is 
the duty, most urgent the necessity, for giving emphatic pro- 
minence to the revelations of Scripture concerning the beings 
and agencies belonging to that outer circle, which, surround- 
ing man on every side and touching him at every point, do 
operate most influentially, though unseen and unheard, upon' 
his physical constitution and his spiritual life- The Bible recog- 
nises, with awful explicitness, him who is 'the prince of the 
power of the air;' and it does indicate most sadly the self- 
sufficiency, the vain philosophy, the hardihood, the flippant 
Sadduceelsm of the age, to scorn, or even to overlook, the 
revelations which God has made regarding the personality and 
the actings of a being whose malignant enmity against the 
Church is only equalled by his mysterious power ; and whose 
strange proximity and presence in the midst of us render him 
the most successful of seducers, no less than the most dan- 
gerous of foes.^ 

' Is it in allusion to Satan, as ' Prince of the power of the air,' 
that Shakespeare writes ? — 

' Some alty ctevil hover! in Ihs sky. 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 



351 



The annals of our world are the records of sin and its mani- 
fold developments. Our earth is not, in its spiritual aspects, 
like the sun, all over luminous, with a few dark spots, but 
rather a body all over dark, with a few broken streaks of light 
here and there. 

But in this dark story there is a twofoldness, a duality 
throughout, which strikes us with a strange awe. It is not 
two sins or two sinners that are presented to us, but two kinds 
of sin and two kinds of sinners ; one visible, the other invisible; 
one human, the other superhuman ; the two acting mysteriously 
together, yet without open compact ; the invisible and the 
superhuman operating upon the visible and the human, and 
both together working against God. 

It would seem to be God's purpose to bring out the whole 
evil of sin in these two wajs, and to develope it ftom these two 
centres,— to unroU the dark web of evil from these two in 
strumentalities, thereby indicatmg to us that without huch a 
duality and such a combination or alliance, the whole fraiity 
and corruptibility of creatuiehood could not be brought out 
For God's purpose during the piesent dispensation evidently 
is to evolve and exhibit, once for all, creature unpotencj for 
good, creature-potency for evil He takes the two orders of 
inteOigent creaturehood, fiist successively and then conjunctly, 
and places them in circumstances in «hich all the goodness 
and power and stability that are in them may be allowed full 
scope for development ; and in which, on the other hand, also 
all the evil and feebleness and instabiUty may be brought out. 

The angels are created and placed in a condition the likeliest 
of all to draw out and to maintain all the ^ood that was in 
them, and that their finite nature could conta n Thev kept 
not their first estate, but left their own habitation and that 
which should have been a manifestation of goodi esi became 
an unfolding of evil ; not simply of non goodness but of posi- 
tive evil, transgression, rebellion, hatred of God 

Man was next created and set here in a holy paradise, in 
circumstances best fitted to evolve and to mature all the 
excellences which had been deposited in his finite nature, 
with the fewest possible temptations, and the greatest amount 



I ..Google 



353 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

of strength which his being was capable of. He let go his hold 
of God and His love, falling from, his perfection, and bringing 
forth evil — only evil, from that hour to this ; — evil which has 
deluged earth with crimes and horrors for six thousand years, 
and is to fill hell for eternity with weeping and wailing and 
woe. 

But these two fonns of creaturehood (and we know no third) 
successively and singly could not exhibit all the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin, and the power of the creature for evil. They 
must be brought together and permitted to work in combina- 
tion. And it is this confederacy of evil, and revolt, and 
lawlessness, and enmity to the Creator, that has been exhibit- 
ing itself on earth during the whole period of its dark history. 
Not single evil, but double ; not the evil of one sinner, but of 
millions ; not the evil of millions merely, but the evil of two 
classes of sinners in alliance ; each of these composed of 
millions ; each bringing out the pecuUar evil proper to his 
class and kind ; yet also the still worse evil produced by their 
combination. This, all this, has been exhibited incite world's 
past history, and is to be exhibited yet more terribly in the 
closing scenes of its career of wickedness, when the alliance 
of the two classes will yet be closer and more intimate, and 
the fruits ol that alliance, the darkest form or forms of evil 
. that creaturehood has yet exhibited, or the world ever seen. 

At the head of what I may call invisible or immaterial 
creaturehood is Satan, and behind him a host of fallen spirits, 
all of them mmibters of evil. Scripture speaks of them as 
' Satan and his angels.' It is chiefly, however, of Satan, 
himself that we have now to speak. And first of all let us 
read his names as they are written in the word of God. 

I. Satan (Job i. 6 ; i Chron. xxi. i ; Zech. iii. i ; Matt. iv. 
lo, xii. 26). This means the Adversary. It is a name no doubt 
given by God ; for who could name him rightly but God. It 
is as the adversary of man and God that he first appears. 

3. The Devil (Matt. iv. i, xxv. 41 ; Jude 9). The Greek 
word signifies accuser, and it is as such that he acts out his 
character. 

■3. Abaddon (Rev. ix. 11). The Destroyer. In the Hebrew 



I ..Google 



353 



it is Abaddon ; in the Greek Apollyon, but having the same 
meaning. He is the destroyer, the slaughterer of Ijie race, the 
persecutor of the Church. 

4. The Old Serpent (z Cor. xi. 3 ; Rev. xii. 9, xx. 2). That 
he is signified by tie old serpent, is evident from the Wbrds of 
the last two passages, ' that old serpent, which is the devD. and 
Satan.' And this name connects him with the first temptation 
of man in paradise, 

5. The Dragon (^^v.yi\i.T,%^.7.). This was si 
mystic animal of the serpent kind, supposed by the a 
to be endued with destructive power. Thus the serpent and 
the dragon are distinguished ; the former the emblem of 
cunning, the latter of power. 

6. Belial (z Cor. vi. 15), This means worthlessness and 
malignity, but it came to be used as a name of Satan, as in the 
above passage, from his being the personification of all evil. 

7. Beehebub (Matt. xii. Z4). The name of a heathen god, 
but applied by the Jews to Satan, and recognised by our Lord 
as one of his names, when He asks. How can Satan cast out 

8. Thegodof lMstvorld{'2Co-c.'w.4). He whom this pre- 
sent world (age) worships and obeys ; believing his temptation 
and his promise, 'All these things will I give Thee if Thou 
wilt fall down and worship me.' 

<). Ruler of ths darkness of this world (¥.-^.y\. 12). He who 
inhabits the darkness ; who produces the darkness ; who sits 
as king over it ; ruling it for his own ends, in opposition to 
Him who is the light of the world. 

10. Prince of ike power of the air (Eph. ii. 2). He is the 
dweller in high places, and as such he is the prince who has 
authority in the air, and who, from that seat of authority, works 
upon the inhabitants of earth. 

11. The prince of this world (John xiv. 30). He who rules 
over this world (xoiifiiis), and is acknowledged by it as prince, 
in opposition to Him whft is Prince of the kings of the earth, 
King of kings. 

Ill addition to these great outstanding names, he is desig- 
nated 'the wicked one' (Matt. xiii. 38) ;- a ' murderer ' (John. 



I ..Google 



3S4 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

viii. 44); a 'liar,' the 'father of lies; 'a persecutor, for it is 
written, 'The devil shall cast some of you into prison' (Rev. ii. 
10); a tempter; a deceiver; an accuser; the inflicter of disease 
(Job ii. 7 ; Luke iv. 6) ; he who has the power of death [Heb. 
ii. 14).' We read, too, of the seat or throne of Satan ; the 
' synagogue of Satan. ; ' the dwelling of Satan ; the ' depths of 
Satan' (Rev. ii. 24); the 'wiles of the devil' (Eph. vi. 11); the 
'snare of the devil' (2 Tim. ii. 26) ; 'the worlis of the devil' 
(I John iii. 8).i 
These various names and designations show the following 

1. His personality. He is no mere ideal of sin, nor principle 
of evil, nor figure of human wickedness ; as when we some- 
times, for effect ia writing or speaking, personify sin, or lust, 
or pride. He is thoroughly real and personal ; as much so as 
we are. Men may scoff at him, and take their jest out of his 
doings, or point their oaths with his name, or mock at his hell, 
but he is real in spite of all their mockery. 

2. His malignity against God, and Christ, and the saints. 
He hates these utterly, and takes revenge upon them. He 
bruises the woman's seed in. the heel, and he is doing the same 
to all the saints. For cruelty he has no equal. 

3. His cunning. He is the serpent, the liar, the tempter, 
the deceiver ; and as such, with his angels, he is doing his 
daily work amongst the sons of men. He is the master of all 
spells and wiles. There are no snares Uke his for subtlety and 

How fearful is the battle of the Church ; with such power, 
such malignity, such cunning, arrayed against her ! What 
strength, what wisdom, what watchfulness do we need ! — 
strength, wisdom, watchfiilness, beyond what we ourselves 

' The word devil occurs tliirty-eight times in the New Testament. 
In all tlieee cases, with three exceptions, it is synonymous with Satan. 
The three exceptions are striking ; 2 Tim. iii, 3, ' Men shall be truce- 
breakers, false accusers (devils), incontinent ; ' Tit. ii. 3, ' The aged 
women, that they he not fcdse accusers' (devils)! i Tim. iii. ii, 
'Their wives be grave, not slanderers' (devils). 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 355 

possess. For we are but human, he siiperhuinan. ; and how 
can feeble, fallen, humanity do battle with the superhuman, the 
invisible; with angelic power and wisdom; save by the posses- 
sion of that which, is beyond the human and the superhuman, — 
beyond the angelic and the created, — tie uncreated and the 
divine? 'Be strongintheLord, and in the power of His might.' 
' Be Med with the Spirit.' 

But let us proceed now more directly to his history. 

What he was originally, where his first habitation was, when 
and how he fell, we do not know. All that is revealed con- 
cerning these points is contained in the following passages : — 
' He abode not in the truth' (John viii. 44), implying that he 
once stood in the truth (vers, 32 and 36) ; 'the angels which 
kept not their first estate (or prhicipality, lordship, «px^)i t"' 
left their own (proper or original) habitation ' (Jude 6) ; ' God 
spared not the angels that sinned ' (2 Pet. ii. 4), or when they 
sinned, though what their sin was is not said. These passages 
refer (i) to an originally perfect state, both for Satan and these 
angels ; (3) to a time when they fell ; (3) to their fall as being 
from a rejection of ' the truth ; ' (4) to their loss of dignity and 
power — i.e. of that which constituted them the principalities 
and powers in heavenly places ; (5) to their being cast down to 
hell (literally, Tartarus), in chains and darkness. 

It lias been supposed by some that there are two classes of 
fallen angels ; the one headed by Satan, roaming widely over 
the earth and peopling the air ; the other bound in chains, 
in the darkness of Tartarus. But though there is nothing 
positively adverse to this opinion in. Scripture, it does not 
seem borne out by the passages cited in support of it. They 
may be chained, or restrained, in comparison with the former 
liberty of their unfallen estate, and yet go to and fro on the 
earth ; or the words may mean not reserved in (present) 
chains, but for future chains, — the chains or chain spoken of 
in the 20th of Revelation ; and the darkness referred to may 
be the future darkness of the bottomless pit, or it may be that 
alluded to by the apostle when he speaks of ' the ruler of the 
darkness of this world.' We do not take up the question of 
there being two classes ; but certainly, as to the opinion that 



I ..Google 



3s6 THOUGHTS OM GEN^ESIS. 

one of these sections is referred to in tlie 6th of Genesis as 
'the sons of God,' we may say this, that while on the one 
hand it is quite unproved, on the other it is connected with 
very great improbabilities. 

In connection with Satan's early history we read the story 
of the temptation in paradise. We ask natijrally, How came 
Satan to be ttere at all ? and how came he to be ttere at the 
very time that man was created? We should not wonder at 
a good angel ,being there, sent on some errand of goodness 
to the new-created dweller ; but Satan's presence is not so 
easily accoimted for. We ask, with musing wonder. Was this 
Satan's world once ? Was he its guardian angel or its sove- 
reign? And do we find him, like Marius, sitting among the 
ruins of his former palace, or, like a beast of prey, prowling 
round the habitation of its new possessor? Is it because of 
his original connection with our earth that he is still prince of 
the power of the air ; disenthroned, dispossessed, yet still 
allowed to work and plot here against God, against His Christ, 
— the second Adam, — against His Church, and to ally him- 
self with man for carrying out his purposes of evil? Is it to 
him that reference is made in that marvellous and mysterious 
prediction of Ezekiel concerning Tyre, and ' the prince of 
Tyre,' 'the king of Tyre' ? for certainly the personage here 
spoken of seems more than mortal ; looks like a spirit or fallen 
angel, of which Tyre was the incarnation and habitation. The 
allusions in that pass^e to ' wisdom ' indicates that he who is 
spoken of is the genius, or spirit, or possessor of all earthly wis- 
dom ; he who tempted man with the bait of proffered wisdom, 
with the hope of being wise as God ; he who took posses- 
sion of the serpent as the wisest ov most subtle of creatures. 
' Say nnto the prince of Tyriis, Thou art wiser than Daniel : 
. . . With thy wisdom thou hast gotten thee riches. . . . Thou 
hast set thine heart as the heart of God. . . , Thou sealest up 
the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty. Thou hast 
been in Eden, the garden of God ; every precious stone was 
thy covering : the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the bery!, 
the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, the car- 
buncle, and gold. . . . Thou art the anointed cherub that 



I ..Google 



covereth ; and I have set thee so ; thou wast upon the holy 
mountain of God ; thou hast walked up and down in the 
midst of the stones of fire. Thou wast perfect in thy ways 
from the day that thou wast cieated, till iniquity was found m 
thee ' (Ezek. \xvili , where the visible Tyre and some invisible 
being are mixed up together) 

But whatevei may be the cause of Satan's pie--ence m 
paradise, or the hnk of his connection with Eden, we hnd 
him there at man's cieation He is there to plot against 
man. To act upon man, he requires to tdke possession of 

. some fleshly being whose organs he can use in. addressing 
man. He enters into the serpent as the wisest and most 
subtle of all the beasts of the field , and thiough him he 
commences his terrible woik, as the muideier, the har, the 
deceiver, the slanderer. He baits the hook of hell with ' wis- 
dom,' and he succeeds. Ye shall be as 'God,' he says toman, 
and man believes him. He had begun by shaking his con- 

. iidence in the goodness and truthfulness of God ; and having 
succeeded in this, the rest followed inevitably. The promise 
of knowledge, — knowledge like God's, — was irresistible. For 
what will not man give for knowledge ? Power, empire, fame, 
miUtary glory, pomp, gold, lust, the beauty and love of woman, 
— all these have been the objects which man has coveted, and 
for which he has flung away the favour of God. But, beyond 
all these, knaivledge has been his ambition. — the ambition of 
his ambitions ! What has he not given, what has he not 
ventured, what has he not flung away, in order to win know- 
ledge ? What mountain has he not climbed ; into what cavern 
has he not penetrated ; to the bottom of what sea has he not 
dived, in order to win knowledge? Through toil, through 
danger, through sin, and braving hell itself, he has pursued it. 
And it is the knowledge of evil as well as good on which he 
has set his heart. The range and region of evil is to him 
strangely attractive, partly because it is so various and bound- 
less, and partly because it is forbidden. To know beyond 
what man knows, or ought to know j what God knows ; and, 
in pursuit of this, to beat down the barriers of goodness, or 
law, or benevolence, this has been his aim. To stand upon 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 



the highest pinnacle of earth, and gaze around on the bound- 
lessness of the universe, this has been his ambition. The 



poison of the tree of knowledge is still in his veins, impelling 
him restlessly onward in the pursuit of knowledge, knowledge 
without God. 

' The wish to>now, that endless thirst, 

Whieli e^en by quenching is awaked. 
And which becomes or blest or cursed 

As is the fount whereat 'lis slsdced. 
Still urged me onward, with desire 
Insatiate to explore, inquire 
Wbate'er the wondrous things might be 
That waked each new idolatry — 
Their cause, aim, source, from whence tliey sprung'. 
Their inmost powers, as though for me 
Existence on that knowledge hung.' 

Of this knowledge Satan is the prince, the high priest, the 
archangel. As such he makes his first appearance to man, — 
his friend, his counsellor,.— an angel of Ught, offering to lead 
him into light and freedom, and taking a profound and affec- 
tionate interest in his welfare. But as Judas betrayed the 
second Adam, so he the first, witli a kiss. He is permitted 
to succeed ; man becomes his victim ; there is a holiday in hell 

The next glimpse ive have of Satan's history is when we see 
him standing, along with the man and woman, to receive his 
sentence. He is silent now. His flatteries have ceased. His 
Ih b db TlLdGdd unto the ser- 

p B h h d h h sed above all 

1 d dl p urn b w 

man d b 



dl p m 


b w thee and the 


h d 


d h d It shall bruise 


I I bru 


hi Th s is his con- 


m f h 


1 cu and of 'the 


d 1 d h 


is the divine 


d h 


g I d i vil, as well as 


G d h 


rp d b een man and 


h ly 


d d part, and that 



jiGoogle 



N'OTES. 359 



his success will be his final ruin. It is the good news to man 
of God's free love ; the good news of a coming dehverer, of 
one who is to bruise Satan under His feet, who is to cast out 
the prince of this world. 

The third glimpse we have of Satan, is in the history of Job, 
in tlie age of the patriarchs. Doubtless he was working in 
the world before this. It was he who, as the murderer, drew 
on Cain to murder. It was he who led on the old world in 
their sin, and lust, and vanity, and defiance of God, swelling 
the flood of evil till the flood of waters swept thera away. But, 
in the beginning of the book of Job, God has given us a fuller 
insight into the doings of Satan than we had before. He is 
seen there, as permitted, in some mysterious way, to appear 
before God. He is seen as going to and fro in the earth, 
watching the saints, inflicting disease, and, if permitted, death ; 
but all under restraint of God, and simply as one allowed by 
God, for a purpose and a season, to do on earth a little of the 
work of hell, specially against the Church of God. 

For ages after this we hear nothing of him till, in the reign 
of David, we suddenlymeet with him as the tempter. Indeed, 
it is only thus in glimpses that we see anything of him in the 
Bible. He unexpectedly appears at some particular juncture, 
then disappears for ages ; then reappears, brandishing the 
sword or spreading the snare of hell, and showing himself as 
the murderer, the liar, the deceiver, tlie tempter; then vanishes 
from our sight for a season to carry on his work in secret. 
We read (i Chron. xxi. i), 'And Satan stood up against Israel, 
and provoked David to number Israel' It was in God's anger 
that he was permitted to do so (2 Sam. xxiv. i), yet none the 
less was it truly Satan's work ; his work as the murderer, his 
work as the enemy of Israel and of the Church. 

An"i.In he appears before us in the remarkable scene, similar 
to th t n Job, given us by Micaiah in the history of Ahab (2 
CI on xviii. i8-2z). Jehovah is seen on His throne, and His 
hosts a e all around Him ; and the question is put, Who shall 
entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at 
Ran oth Gilead ? One speaks, and another, till at length one 
steps fo ward with the proposal, I will entice him. I will be a 



I ..Google 



THOUGHTS ON GEAESIS 



lying spirit in the mouth of -ill his prophets And «ho can 
this be but Satan, ? — he, the hir and the murderer from the 
beginning. Thus he nses up again, ind then diaippears 
for a season. 

Again, in the remarkible scene depicted by Zechari-Ji he 
reappears. Joshua the high piiest stands befoie the angel of 
the Lord, and Satan stands at his light hand to teaist him 
(Zech. iii. i). Here it is Satan contending against a saint 
to tempt or oppose ; but elsewhere it is against the traitor to 
destroy. Ps, cix. 6, ' Let Satan stand at his r ght hand 

Perhaps the most mysterious glimpse into Satan's position 
and operations is that in the book of Daniel. A comer of the 
veil that hides the world of the invisible is drawn aside, and 
we see him and his angels, or ' princes,' at work, in connection 
vrith-Xht kingdoms of ihs earth. In the passage already quoted 
from Ezekid, we have seen some ground for thinking that it is 
Satan, or one of his ' powers,' that is referred to as the prince 
of Tyre. Daniel, in the following passage, uses the same word 
prince in connection with Persia and Greece; — 'Ths prince 
of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty days ; 
but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me ; 
and I remained there with the kings of Persia. . . . Knowest 
thou wherefore I come unto thee ? and now will I return to 
fight with the prince of Persia : and when I am gone forth, lo, 
the prince of Grecia shall come. But I will show thee that 
which is noted in the Scripture of truth ; and there is none 
that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael your prince. 
... At that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince 
which standeth for the children of Thy people' (Dan. x. 13-20, 
xii. l). From which passages we learn that Michael the arch- 
angel was the guardian angel of judea and of the Jews ; ' and 
that another, called the prince of Persia, is the guardian or 
presiding angel of that country ; and that another, called the 
prince of Greece, is the presiding angel of that kingdom. 
These two latter, being opposed to and lighting with Michael, 



It Christ (as some say) is evident from i Thess. 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 3G1 

must be evil sjigtls, some of the principalities and powers, the 
rulers of the darkness of this world. This is a solemn subject, 
of whicli little is revealed, and therefore I speak cautiously and 
reverently ; but it would appear that not only are there good 
angels as ministering spirits for individual heirs of salvation, 
but some also, such as Michael, set over kingdoms ; and who 
knows but that now, since his ministry in Judea has ceased for 
a season, it may have been transferred to Britain? It would 
appear also, that as there are evil spirits which possess indi- 
viduals, so are there some of these (the greater and higher) 
which preside over, n&y, possess kingdoms. And are not the 
four great empires of earth depicted by Daniel specially so 
ruled and inspired, so 'possessed ;' the reins of empire in them 
held by invisible hands ; the power, the genius, the literature, 
the art, the commerce of these nations wielded by infernal 
energies ; the laws, the morals, the religion inspired by the 
agents of him who was a murderer, a liar, a deceiver from the 
beginning, and who boasted even to the Prince of the kings of 
the earth Himself, that he was lord of earth's kingdoms ? And 
may we not truly spealc of the devil-possessed empires of 
Babylon, and Persia, and Greece, and Rome ? And need we 
wonder at their idolatries, and blasphemies, and persecutions j 
hatredofthelight, and resistance to the cross? Need we read 
with incredulity the terrific picture which, in the ist chapter 
of Romans, the apostle draws of heathendom, — its true name 
is Satan-dom, — when we learn that the inspiration which guides 
it is from beneath ; and that the invisible rulers and instructors 
of its peoples, the secret prompters and presidents of its courts 
and cabinets, are the princes of the blood-royal of hell? 

These are the chief references to Satan in the Old Testa- 
ment. The glimpses of his history and doings are brief and 
few ; but they al! bear testimony to his character as the 
Wicked one, the enemy of Christ and of the Church. 

The notices of Satan in the New Testament are more fre- 
quent ; and they grow darker and darker as the great crisis 
and close draw on. We meet with him, first of all, in the 
temptation of the Lord, where three times over he assails the 
Son of God, tempting Him to doubt His Father's love and His 



I ..Google 



352 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

own Sonship ; and three times over he is repelled hy the 
sword of the Spirit, though ivith every advantage on his part, 
and every disadvantage on the part of this Second Adam, 
whom he sought to seduce in the wilderness as he had seduced 
the first in the garden. But what were wiles or fiery darts to 
One who knew so well how to wield the sword of the Spirit 
and the shield of Faith? 

Again we meet him ; — and now not alone, but with his 
legions ; — dwelling in the bodies of men, and tormenting them 
with his hellish cruelty. We find him possessing some directly ; 
we find him bowing down one with infirmity ; we find him 
rending another ; we find him with seven spirits in Mary 
Magdalene ; we find him in the herd of swine ; we find him 
wishing to sift Peter ; we find him entering the heart of Judas. 
All these are proofs that the days of our Lord's ministry on 
earth were busy days with Satan, days of visible manifestation 
and more direct possession : the seed of the woman and that 
of the serpent being now brought face to face with each other ; 
the armies of heaven and of hell being gathered, under their 
respective captains, to wage desperate battle. How frequent 
is the reference to Satan in the history of Christ on earth 1 and 
how striking are Christ's own words, spoken either to him or 
concerningyaa 1 ' Get thee hence, Satan' (Matt iv. lo) ; 'If 
Satan cast out Satan, how shall then his kingdom stand?' (xii, 
26) ; ' Get thee behind me, Satan' (xvi. 23) ; 'Then cometh 
Satan, and taketh away the word' (Mark iv. 15) ; 'I beheld 
Satan as lightning fall from heaven' (Luke x. 18) ; 'Whom 
Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years' (Luke xiii. 16); 
' Simon, Simon, Satan hath desired to have thee, that he may 
sift thee as wheat ' (Luke xxii. 31) ; ' The devi! taketh Him up 
to the holy city ' (Matt. iv. 5) ; ' The devil taketh Him up to an 
high mountain' (iv. 8) ; 'The enemy that soweth them is the 
devil' (xi. 39); 'Jesus rebuked the devil' (xvii. rS). From 
these allusions we learn how completely Satan was on the alert 
in the days of Christ ; what large range was allowed him ; and 
what striking opportunities he had of showing himself; what 
power to inflict disease ; to take possession of men's bodies ; 
to operate upon their minds ; to make use of their organs of 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 3(^3 

speech ; to inflame their passions ; to carry on.his purposes of 
evil through theni,and in conjunction with, them; inwayswhict, 
by himself, he could not have accomplished. We may not be 
very decided in affirming that he was allowed access to our 
Lord during His last hours, and that his ' messengers ' were let 
loose to ' buffet ' Him ; but there are expressions in the psalms 
which seem to imply this. He surely is the roaring lion, and 
his legions the bulls of Bashan, of which the iiA Psalm speaks ; 
' Many bulls have compassed me ; strong bulls of Bashan have 
beset me round ; they gaped upon me with their mouths, as a 
ravening and a roaring lion. . . . Save me from the lion's 
mouth' (Ps. xxii. 12, 13, 21). If so, then it was not merely 
the rage of earth that surrounded His cross, but also that of 
heU ; it was not only the shouts of the multitude that fell on 
His dying ear, and disturbed His dying hour ; but the voice 
of the roaring lion, as he sprang upon his prey, and accom- 
plished the last piece of malignity which the restraining 
purpose of God permitted him, — 'Thou shaft bmise his 
heel.' ' 

In the early Church we find Satan working. He filled the 
heart of Ananias to he to the Holy Ghost ; he gets power to 
chastise saints that are delivered by the Church to him for their 
sin (1 Cor. v. 5). ' Whom I have delivered unto Satan, that 
they may learn not to blaspheme ' (i Tim. 1. 20). He tempts 
the saints for incontinency (i Cor. vii. 5) ; he gets advantage 
over them (2 Cor. ii. 11) ; he is transformed into an angel of 
light (2 Cor. xi. 14) ; he sends messengers to buffet even 
apostles (2 Cor. xii 7) ; he has a synagogue upon earth (Rev. 
ii. 9) ; he has a seat, or throne (Rev. ii. 13) ; he 
wiles, and shoots his fiery darts (Eph. vi. 11); 

' Perhaps it is into the life of Christ tliat we should fit in the scene 
referred to by Jude (9) — Michael contending with the devil about the 
body of Moses. Michael tlie archangel is sent to rdse Moses, that 
he may appear with Elijah on the transfiguration hill (as it is with the 
voice of the archangel that the dead in Christ are to be raised at His 
coming). Satan, who has the power of death and the grave, disputes 
and contends with him. Michael overcomes with 'The Lord rebuke 
thee.' 



I ..Google 



364 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

and assails us (2 Tim. ii. 26 ; Jas. iv. 7) ; he casts into prison 
(Rev. ii. 10) ; he deceives the nations (Rev. xxii. 2). It is 
against his principahties and powers that we are to wrestle. 

Such were his operations in and against the Churcli in 
apostolic times ; sucli are his operations still. It is he who 
fought against the Son of God, that fights against the Church 
of God. Sometimes he is a persecutor and murderer ; some- 
times a deceiver and heguUer ; sometimes a tempter into open 
sin ; sometimes an allurer into fair-seeming vanities ; some- 
times a persuader into error ; sometimes an angel of light ; 
sometimes the prince of darkness ; — the prince of the power of 
the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of dis- 
obedience. 

Our Lord speaks of Satan fallingfrom heaven like lightning; 
and, in the Revelation, we have the description of the great 
battle between the devil and his angels and Michael and his 
angels. Into the details of this battie we do not enter ; but 
there is something awfully solemn about it, and something 
appalling about its results ; the devil being cast down to eartli, 
and brought into closer proximity with its nations ; nay, and 
having great wrath because he knoweth that he has but a short 

Then comes the great event to which the Church looks 
forward so eagerly,— the binding of Satan, at the second 
coming oftLdFa hhd ghhi k 

of evil again th Ch h h h d d h 

of earth ;hhd dp hgr en ajid 

instrument, h ru p Ai hhd 

animated thb dthal ph hhd 

himseif inB thg B walh 

The Mighty Addhhh bd 

casts him i h b m p h d 

years, to dec h m hhd 

are done. 

Then the earth has lest , die old serpent is cast out , Anti 
Christ has perished; Messiah reigns; the glory of the Lord 
covers the earth ; — all things are made new. But earth is not 
done with Satan, nor Satan with earth. The thousand years 



I ..Google 



36s 



roll by. Satan is loosed, and goes forth once more to deceive. 
He musters the nations, he brings them up as a cloud against 
the camp of the saints and the beloved city. But fire descends 
out of heaven, and devours the hosts of Satan. He himself is 
cast no longer into the bottomless pit, but into the more terrible 
place of torment, the lake of fire, where the beast and false 
prophet have been already a thousand years. 

Thus ends the history of Satan as given in the Scripture ; a 
history not given us for speculation or curiosity, but for warn- 
ing. What watchfidness, what solemnity, what holy fear be- 
come us, with such an enemy on every side ! We wrestle not 
against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, 
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual 
wickedness in high places. 

Let us mark how, :fl these days of ours, he works, and 
tempts, and rages ; — 

He conies as an angel of light, to mislead, yet pretending to 
lead ; to blind, yet professing to open the eye ; to obscure 
and bewilder, yet professing to illuminate and guide. He ap- 
proaches us with fair words upon his lips : liberality, progress, 
culture, freedom, expansion, elevation, science, literature, be- 
nevolence, — nay, and religion too. He seeks to make his 
own out of all these; to give the world as much of these as 
suits his purpose, as much as will make them content without 
God, and without Christ, and without the Holy Ghost. Nay, 
he makes use of these, — even of rehgion itself,— to separate 
men from the living Jehovah. Nor is it merely images, 
crucifixes, pictures, statues, altars, and such like, which he 
substitutes for God, seducing the heart and intoxicating the 
senses ; but the true creed, and the true theology, and the 
true gospel, he makes use of to gratify the intellect, soothe the 
;, while the soul remains all the while a stranger to 
i.nd His Christ. For he does not care how near a man 
Christ, provided he is not one with Him and in 
It matters not to him howmuch of truth a man possess, 
n only make that truth a screen to separate, not a link 
10 unite him and God ; a non-conductor, not a conductor of 
the heavenly life. He knows how to employ the dim religious 



Godai 

Him, 
if he c: 



I ..Google 



366 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

light of ritualism, the cold frosty rays of rationalism, yes, and 
even the bright warm light of evangelical sunshine, for drawing 
off the eye and heart from Him. who is the Ught of the world, 
the bright and morning Star. 

He sets himself against God and the things of God in every 
way. He can deny the gospel ; or he can dilute die gospel ; 
or he can obscure the gospel; or he can neutralize the gospel; 
— just as suits his purpose, or the persons with whom he has 
to do. His object in regard to the gospel is to take out of it 
all chat makes it glad tidings to the sinner ; and oftentimes 
this modified or mutilated gospel, which looks so like the real, 
serves his end best ; for it throws men off their guard, making 
them suppose that they have received Christ's gospel, even 
though they have not found in it the good news which it 



He rages against the true God, — sometimes openly and 
coarsely, at other times calmly and politely, — making men 
believe that he is the friend of the truth, but an enemy to its 
perversion. Progress, progress, progress, is his watchword 
now, by means of which he hopes to allure men away from the 
old anchorages, under the pretext of giving them, wider, fuller, 
more genial teachings. He bids them soar above creeds, 
catechisms, dogmas, as the dregs of an inferior age, and a 
lower mental status. He distinguishes, too, between theology 
and religion, warmly advocating the latter in order to induce 
men to abandon the former. He rages against the divine 
accuracy of the Bible, and cunningly subverts its inspiration by 
elevating every true poet and philosopher to the same inspired 
position. So successfully has he wrought in disintegrating 
and undermining the truth, that there is hardly a portion of it 
left firm. The ground underneath us is hollow; and the crust 
en which we tread ready to give way, and precipitate us into 
the abyss of unbelief. 

He rages against the Cross of Christ, yet with exceeding 
suhtlety and persuasiveness, seeking to blind men to its true 
meaning and use. In his enmity against it he instigates some 
to cut it down, others so to bedaub it with such superstitious 
It that it is the genuine cross no longer. He assails the 



I ..Google 



gospel too, mixing up grace and merit ; adding to it or taking 
from it ; persuading some that it is not free, and others that it 
is so free that none will be lost. He attacks propitiation and 
sacrifice, propagating the lie that sacrifice is merely self-denial, 
and that the death of Christ is a sacrifice solely hecause the 
highest example of self-abnegation ever exhibited. Thus we 
find him everywhere assailing truth and vitalising error, work- 
ing against the true religion, and inspiring and enei^lzing the 
false. He is the very life and soul of all anti-Christian unbelief 
and lawlessness, raising up the many antichrists, and ripening 
the world for the last great Antichrist about to be revealed in 
the height of rebellion and pride ; as if he would make good 
to man his promise to the first Adam, ' Ye shall be as God,' 
and to the second Adam, ' All these things will I give Thee if 
Thou wilt fall down and worship me ; ' for the Antichrist ac- 
cepts what the Christ refused, and is crowned as Satan's king 
and vicegerent upon earth. 

But his time approaches and his day is short. The nations 
shall muster on Armageddon. ; the kings of the earth shall 
combine ; all shall worship the beast- But the triumphing of 
the wicked is short. His doom is sealed ; first, in the bottom- 
less pit, and then in the lake of fire. 

And what a history ! wliat a career 1 He comes to his end, 
and none shall help him. He passes away into captivity, and 
there is none to sympathize with the captive, mighty and 
majestic though he be in his chains. 

' When Nero perish'd by the justesb doom 

That ever the destroyer yet destroyed, 
Amid the roar of liberated Rome, 

Of nations freed and of a world o'erjoyed ; 
Some hands unseen slreVd flowers upon his tomb ; 

Perhaps the weakness of a heart not void 
Of feeling, for some kindness done when power 
Had left the wretch one uncorrupted hour.' 

But over the downfall of this mightiest of princes,- — the prince 
of the power of die air, the god of this world, — not a note of 
lamentation shall be heard. The heavens shall rejoice and the 



I ..Google 



368 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

earth be glad. The saints shall smg Allelujah, as tlie smoke 
riscth up for ever and ever. 

And yet there is something unspeakably solemn in his down- 
fall. For what history has been like his, so stupendous, so 
triumphant, so terrible ? 

Nor can we deem him devoid of feeling. A being of such 
mighty intellect and power cannot be insensible. He is no 
stock nor stone. His capacities for joy and sorrow are vast ; 
but it is only with the latter that he has aught to do. We 
picture him to ourselves as a being all pride, malignity, revenge, 
and cunning ; so much so, that we forget that he was made 
with capacity of feeling. But the heart that is capable of 
these things must be capable of being profoundly wretched. 
He has not, indeed, human tears to weep. Our sorrows, our 
burdens, our feais, our anguish, are not his. But he has 
somethmg of his own, no less bitter than ours. Ours are 
human his are superhuman ; for no intelhgent being can be 
passne, he must be happy or miserable according to the 
capacities ot his being As truly as the unfallen angels are 
happy so truly aie the fallen wretched. 'The fire prepared 
for the de\il and his angels' is something terrible beyond con- 
ception. What it amounts to I know not ; but in the case of 
Satan it must be pre-eminent torment, unutterable woe ; such 
as groans cannot express, and to which tears would afford no 
relief ; and it may not be without use ; it may help to 
solenmlze us, — to reflect on the great and eternal misery of 
this great enemy of God and man. It is the misery of an un- 
holy but majestic nature ; the torment that springs from 
hellish hatred of all good. And, in addit on to this it s the 
misery of disappointment, failure, mortificat on m sfortune 
remorse ; the misery of reflection on 6000 years of constant 
persevering malignity against God and H s Christ lelieved 
by not one deed of goodness ; yet at la'Jt his plans all ru ned 
his work undone ; his Babels and Romes all m the dust 
his Nimrods, his Sennacheribs, his Ilerods his Neios his 
Napoleons, his Antichrists, his false prophet his fo gers of 
lies, all passed away ; every fragment of his laborious hindi 
work broken in pieces, and earth, in sp te of all his efforts, a 



I ..Google 



happy, holy, glorious paradise, with the seed of die woman, 
the last Adam, for its King. All this will be to him the bitter- 
ness ofbittemess, the torment of torment. 

Yet in all this misery, vast though it be, one source of 
anguish can never be his, — a rejected Christ. Certainly, not 
to have loved the most lovable of all beings must of itself be 
wretchedness, especially , to an intellect like his, that can 
understand worth ; but still there is no stinging remembrance 
of a rejected Saviour. This, the very woe of woes, the gall and 
wormwood of the eternal cup, is the portion of the lost sons of 
Adam, who had salvation within their reach, but madly flung 
it away. Terrible as is the doom of the fallen Archangel, this, 
at least, will form no part of his awful helL 



THE SONS OF GOD. 

ELSEWHERE we have given our interpretation of the 
passage in Genesis where the expression is found.' 
But there is room for some investigation both into the words ■ 
themselves, and also into the history of the expositions which 
have been given of them. It may be worth our while to 
make a little further inquiry into this passage, as Dr. Maitland 
in his Erwvin, and Dr. Kitto in his Daily Bible Illustrations, 
have revived the patristic exposition, and affirmed that sons 
of God must mean angels. The latter writes diffidently, but 
the former abates nothing of his usual dogmatism, even in 
treating of a passage confessedly peculiar.' 

Dr. Maitland asks. How could the intermarriage of the seed 
of Seth and the seed of Cain produce giants ? We might as 

1 Gen. vi, 2. 

' What would Dr. Maitland say to HSvemick, who denounces the 
'angeUc' theory as one of the silhest whims ol' the Alexandrian 
Gnostics and cabalistic Rabbins? 

VOL. VI. 2 A 



I ..Google 



370 THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

well ask, How could the intermarriage of angels and men pro- 
duce giants ? When angels have taken man's form, (as to 
Abraham, etc.), they have not indicated any superior statm'e. 
If Dr. Maitland will tell us how the one class of marriages 
produces giants, we will satisfy him as to the other. Nor can 
we think it an unsupported affirmation in us to say, that from 
all tliat God has made known to us in His word regarding 
angels, good or bad, their nature, their history, their doings, 
etc., such intermarriages are impossible. Or, arguing physio- 
logically, might we not say that in all the various parts of 
animal and vegetable nature, the intermixture of genera is 
impossible ; so, & fortiori, the intermixture of two races who 
differ more from, each other than genus does from species is 
impossible.^ 

But the intermixture of the Sethites and the Cainites was 
very likely to produce a race of superior bodily constitution. 
For these two races, continuing separate, and intermarrying 
themselves with very near kindred, must have greatly degene- 
rated ; and the intermixture of the two was very likely to 
generate a stronger race. Nor is it at all unlikely that such 
was the result also in after years, wKen Israel intermarried 
with the Moabites. About this time we read of giants again. 
And this is one of the things in which Dr. Maitland's theory 
halts. If intermarriage with angels was required to produce 
giants in the time of Noah, it must have been needed again 
afterwards to produce them in the time of Israel, It is not a 
little curious that the same word, ' Nepheelim,' is used in 
both cases (Nmn, xiii. 33), 'There we saw the Nepheelim, the 
sons of Anak, who come of the Nepheelim.' ^ As all the ante- 
diluvian ' NepheeUm' must have been swept off at the flood, 
there must have been in after ages the recurrence of the same 
scenes as before (intermarriages with angels). If Dr. Mait- 

' Besides, as Hengstenbei^ ri 
angels as holy ones, includes i: 
given in marriage ' (Matt, xx. 30 

^ The word 'Nepheelim' occ 
and Numbers. 



jiGoogle 



NOTES. 371 

land's theory be tenable, Anak must have married an angel, 
and his sons AMman, Sheshai, and Tahnai, who are called 
' Nepheelim,' must have heen semi-angels. Nay, some of 
Anak's ancestors must have also married angels, seeing it is 
not only said that the ' Nepheelim' were sons of Anak, but he 
himself came of the same race, being half an angel and half a 
man. Anak's wife must have been 3,/emale angel, whereas in 
former times the angels that came down must have been all 
male. To use the language ot patristic demonology, the ante- 
diluvian angels must have been incubi, and the postdiluvian 
angels succubi?- 

We are told more thaa once, in the 6th of Genesis, that it 
was man's sin that was so great in. the earth ; that it was on 
account of man's sin that the deluge came. But if the old 
Jewish and patristic theory, revived by Drs. Kitto and Mait- 
land, be true, then it was not maris sin that wrought the evil, 
but the sin of angels. For it is clear that they were the guilty 
parties in this transaction, if they were parties at all. It is 
against the ' sons of God ' that the accusations are manifestly 
pointed. It was their superior guiltiness tliat brought the 
world's criminality to its crisis.* If they were not men, what 
does the judgment that fell upon the world so specially for 
their sin, mean ? Is earth to be punished for the sin of angels? 
Is man to be swept away because aiigels have corrupted them- 
selves? On the other hand, how natural the whole scene, if 
the sons of God were the Sethites, the representatives of the 
patriarchal Church ! They were the salt of the earth ; and the 
moment that the salt lost its iivour, corruption shot through 
the mass, and earth ripened for the wrath of God. 

Nor can anything be more natural and likely in, another 
way. For ages the two great sections of the race had kept 

' Pope Innocent VIII., in a decretal against witches, gives warning 
to all who abuse themselves in such ways, — ' d^monibus incubis et 
soccubis abuti.' Tostatua slates the two kmd=, and relates the history 
of Merlin, ' yatem in Anglia celebrem,' who was produced by means 
of a succttius. 

' ' The genesis of human corruption, and its ascent to the highest 
point, are deseed to be represented.' — Hengstenberg. 



jiGoogle 



372' THOUGHTS ON GENESIS. 

separate. Adam, Seth, and their posterity, retained the 
primeval seat of man. They still dwelt in Eden, though out- 
side of paradise, and worshipped at the well-known altar, 
within sight of tte flaming sword and the symbolic cherubim, 
Eden was to them what Canaan was to Israel. There they 
dwelt alone, and were not mingled with the nations. There 
these sons of God, headed by the patriarchs (for Seth must 
have lived to the days of Noah), maintained the true feith and 
the honoured name. But as ages went on, the population 
increased, and the two races, spreading out, approached each 
other. From the statement of Moses, it would appear that the 
Cainites had been specially fruitful in daughters. These, by 
reason of proximity of place, tad at length come into con- 
tact with the sons of God. Like the Moabitish women in 
the case of Israel, like the ' outlandish women' in the case 
of Solomon, they tempted the Sethites by their beauty. The 
races mingled, and a new and peculiar progeny was the result 
But more than this, the boundary between the seed of the 
woman and the seed of the serpent was now broken down, 
defection became general, wickedness increased, and the 
world was ripe for judgment. 

Against all this Noah and his fellows (for he was the eighth 
preacher of righteousness) protested, 'condemning the world ;' 
but in vain. They went on intermingling. They went on 
' eating' and drinking, marryin-g and giving m marriage, till 
the day that Noah entered the ark.' The seed of the woman, 
called here the sons of God, dwindled down into two or three ; 
the seed of the serpent covered the whole peopled earth. 

Whilst, however, it is stated that the intermarriages of the 
sons of God and the daughters of men produced ' Nepheelim,' 
it seems also implied that there were Nepheelim on the earth 
before, which completely upsets one of Dr. Maitland's argu- 
ments. ' The Nepheelim were in the earth in those days, and 
also after that,' etc. Havernick goes further, and maintains 
that the Nepheelim are not said at any time to be the fruit of 
the intermixture. ' There is nothing in vi. 4. of a race of 
giants springing from this union. " In those days were the 
well-known Nepheelim in die earth" cannot without violence 



I ..Google 



NOTES. 373 

receive such a reference, specially when what follows is taken 
into connection — "also after that, the sons of God went in unto 
the daughters of men," i.e. at that time there were men of that 
kind, and they continued even till a later period.' Calvin, 
also, ttough he does not go so far, yet puts the matter thus : 
' The giants had a prior origin, but afterwards those who were 
bom of the promiscuous marriages imitated their example.' 
Ho confirms this by the expression 'and also^ as if it were 
implied that not only were these Nepheelim found previously 
in tlie race of Cain, but also afterwards in that race which 
resulted from the mixture of the two races. 

An old writer has well asked, ' What sort of creatures could 
the offspring of men and angels be?' Would they be men, or 
would they bo angels? How far would they partake of the 
one nature, and how far of the other? And could these semi- 
angels semi-men produce offspring? la Genesis and Numbers 
it is implied that this was done, whereas we know that, accord- 
ing to physical laws, intermixtures of genera can go no further 
than the first generation. But granting that the intermixture 
goes on from one generation to another, what sort of race is it 
that is produced? And in what relation do they stand to Adam 
as a head ? If they are either serai-angels or semi-demons, 33 
the theory of Dr. Maitland and Dr. Kitto must concede, then 
they are but half-descended from Adam, and so cannot be 
represented by him, or partake of the corruption that flows 
from him. Nay, further, in what relation can these semi-angels 
stand in reference to salvation ? Are they capable of salva- 
tion by Christ ? Could they believe on Him who took not on 
Him the nature of angels, but who took on Him the seed of 
Abraham ? Could they be washed in His blood, or made one 
with Him who is not bone of their bone, nor flesh of their 
flesh ? And for what shall they be condemned ? For reject- 
ing Christ ? For refusing Noah's message about the promised 
seed of the woman ? Yet what was the seed of the woman to 
those who did not belong to the human race ? 

The Jewish rabbis were the originators of the fable. From 
them the Fathers took it, as they did many other Jewish tradi- 
tions, preserving and decorating them, as they would the relics 



I ..Google 



jiGoogle 



