



HAETH’S 

EAELIEST AGES, 

AND THEIB 

LESSONS FOE US: 

INOLDDINa A 

TREATISE ON SPIRITUALISM 


BY 

G. H. PEMBER, M.A. 


’E7pa07/ Se npbs vovdeiTiau fls o^y ra T€\rj twv almoav 

KaT^VTr}K€V. 



Multo terrioolis lioguse, oceleBtibufl una. 


LONDON: 

SAMUEL BAGSTER AND SONS, 

15, PATERKOSTEB ROW. 




130NTENT8. 


, PA.GB 

Peepace. ..... i 

Chapter I. Introduction. — BibKcal Interpretation. 

Importance of the Prophetic 
Scriptures ... 1 

II. The Creation . . 11 

III. The Interval . .19 

IV. The Six Days ... 49 

Y. The Creation of Man . . 62 

VI. The Fall of Man . . 71 

VII. The Trial and Sentence . . 83 

VIII. The Age of Freedom . . 100 

IX. The Days of Noah . . .122 

X. As it was in the Days of Noah.” 133 

XI. Spiritualism, Part I. — The Testimony 

of the Bible . . 146 

XU. Spiritualism, Part II. — The Testi- 
mony of History . . 172 

XIII. Spiritualism, Part III. — The 

Modern Outburst . . 192 

XIV. Conclusion. — The Lord is at hand. 241 



ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


Page 106. “ This last fact gives us a clue to the most we know,” &c. 
Only, of course, if we admit the received text, which is very uncertain. 
The in verse 9 has, however, considerable authority, though it does 
not appear either in a or 

Page 188. Literally, “ with the final addition of a letter,” that is, of the 
letter D. A friend suggests the removal of the comma after postrema^ in 
which case we might translate, “ When the ring had spelt out the two 
syllables THEO, instantly on the addition of the last letter, viz. 0, some 
one cried out,” etc. But since in the versions of this story given by the 
Byzantine historians Socrates (iv. 19) and Sozomenus (vi. 35), and by the 
epitomist of Philostorgius (ix. 15), the letter D is said to have been also 
indicated by the tripod, it is, perhaps, better to retain the first rendering. 


ERRATA. 


Page 41. For Millenial, read Millennial. 

Pages 41, 47, 119. For Millenium, read Millennium. 

Page 120. For neither of which events were, read neither of which events was. 
Page 101. For Suleiman-ben-Juma, read Suleiman-hin-Juma. 

Page 191. For Thisti, read Thirti. 



PREFACE. 


This little book is the first part of an attempt to trace the 
line of God’s dealings with the inhabitants of our planet and 
its surroundings from creation till the time when earth shall 
take her place among the sinless and perfect worlds of the 
Almighty. Vast, indeed, is the subject; nor will it ever be 
fully comprehended by fallen men. Nevertheless, it is not 
on that account to be neglected : the partial knowledge 
which God has vouchsafed must be diligently investigated, 
and, if studied with prayerful humility, will be found to 
throw light on many a difficulty, will open our eyes to the 
depths of Satan, preserve us from much error, and help us 
to hold fast that which we have till the Lord come. 

We are, however, precluded from searching out the 
beginning of the matter : there is no possibility of fathoming 
the abyss of our present condition. It is vain to inquire 
into the origin of sin, or to speculate on those many kindred 
questions which force themselves upon thoughtful minds. 
We have not even sufficient data to justify a single dog- 
matic opinion of our own in regard either to what we are or 



ii 


PEEFACE. 


to our predicted destiny ; but must simply believe wbat God 
has been pleased to declare, and know of surety that the 
Judge of all the earth will do right. 

For nothing less than a further revelation could enable us 
to understand the full significance of the circumstances by 
which we are surrounded. Perplexing, indeed, are the 
apparently unequal distributions of joy and miseiyi^ health 
and sickness, riches and poverty ; the different grades of 
susceptibility to the things of God, from the heart which 
opens at the first message of the Gospel to that which is 
steeled against the most urgent and frequent appeals ; and, 
lastly, the bewildering allotment of opportunities, which 
appear to be lavished upon some men, while others rarely or 
never hear of the Saviour of the world. 

Yet all these seeming anomalies, which are doubtless the 
orderly results of an unknown cause, will shortly come to 
their end : for in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, 
when he shall begin to sound, the MYSTERY of God shall 
be finished. Then it may, perhaps, be the pleasure of the 
great Father to unravel the mystery, that He may show us 
the marvels of His wisdom and love : and till then we must 
wait with patience, and stay our souls upon Him Who, 
having delivered up His own Son for us, will certainly with 
Him also freely give us all things. 

But, meanwhile, we must not regard our inability to 
discover ultimate causes as an excuse for neglecting the 
revelation which has been given to us, and which — apart 



PBEFAOS. 


m 


from the fact that it is the only guiding light for those who 
are journeying thjough dark places to the golden city — ^may 
be considered as a preparation for that further knowledge 
which God will hereafter bestow. And, beside what is fully 
revealed, we shall find in Scripture many hints which, when 
compared with more plainly declared truths, disclose the 
existenflie of a vast region, as it were, of history and pro- 
phecy, stretching behind us into the remote past and before 
us into the far future — a region dim, indeed, and misty at 
present, but soon to be illumined by the risen sun, and 
made to testify to the glory of the Supreme God. 

In the present volume we propose to attempt a sketch of 
God’s dealings in connection with our earth from creation to 
the flood; and, still further, to draw from the inspired 
history a few of the many lessons suitable to our age with 
which it seems to abound. And should the writer receive 
encouragement, the subject may, perhaps, be continued in a 
second volume. 

The space devoted to Spiritualism will not be thought too 
great by those who admit as possible the theory connecting 
it with the antediluvian sin.^ And, whatever be the view 
taken of this modern heresy, its rapid dissemination among 
men of all creeds and philosophies has invested it with a 

' In Blackwoods Magazine for the present month (March 1876) there 
is a remarkable article on Spiritualism entitled “Powers of the Air.” 
The writer suggests an interpretation of Gen. vi. 2 similar — so far as it 
goes—to that which we have adopted, and explains 1 Cor. xi. 10 in con- 
nection with it. 



IV 


PBEFJLOE. 


startling and extraordinary interest — an interest which is not 
diminished by the fact that thrice already in the world’s 
history a more open and general intercourse between men 
and demons appears to have been the precursor of desolating 
judgment. 

Many are inclined to look upon modern Spiritualism as a 
mere vulgar imposture : but the importance with wbich it is 
invested by thpse who are acquainted with its workings may 
be seen in the subjoined extracts, which are taken from two 
very opposite sources. The first is from an article in the 
Westminster Review (Oct. 1875), the writer of which 
assails, not merely Christianity, but Deism itself. After 
stating his reasons for disbelieving the very existence of 
God, and remarking that the theory of a future life is an 
altogether distinct question, he goes on to show that men 
will have some kind of religion, and thus expresses himself 
in regard to the creed of the future. 

“ For let none imagine that by such speculations as the 
foregoing he is building up the religion of the future, or that 
Comte and Strauss will be the prophets of the coming age. 
Religions are not made, they grow. Their progress is not 
from the enlightened to the vulgar, but from the vulgar to 
the enlightened. They are not mere products of the in- 
tellect, but manifest themselves as physical forces too. The 
religion of the future is in our midst already, working like 
potent yeast in the mind of the people. It is in our midst 
to-day with signs and wonders, uprising like a swollen tide, 



PBEtAOE. 


V 


and scorning the barriers of Nature’s laws. Yet however 
irresistible its effects, they are not declared on the surface. 
It comes veiling its destined splendours beneath an exterior 
that invites contempt. Hidden from the prudent, its truths 
are revealed to babes. Once more the weak will confound 
the mighty, the foolish the wise, and base things and things 
despise^ it may be even things that are not, bring to nought ' 
things that are ; for it seems certain that, whether truly or 
whether falsely, Spiritualism will re-establish, on what pro- 
fesses to be the ground of positive evidence, the fading 
belief in a future life — not such a future as is dear to the 
reigning theology, but a future developed from the present, 
a continuation under improved conditions of the scheme of 
things around us. Further than this it is impossible to 
predict the precise development which Spiritualism may take 
in the future, just as it would have been impossible at the 
birth of Christianity to have predicted its actual subsequent 
development ; but from the unexampled power possessed by 
this new religious force of fusing with other creeds, it seems 
likely in the end to bring about a greater uniformity of 
belief than has ever yet been known,” 

On the other hand, Mr. Moody, the American evan- 
gelist, made the following remarks in one of his English 
addresses. 

“ I wish to refer to-day to a class of people who are led 
away from the Gospel by evil spirits. A woman came to 
me lately saying that a spirit had told her to come, and 



Vi 


PBEFAOE. 


asked if it must not have been a good spirit which sent her. 
But this Spiritualism is of the Devil. If you want to know 
the baneful effects of it, go to America and see the blight it 
has brought there. Any land had better be visited by 
cholera than by this Spiritualism. The idea that it is a 
better Gospel comes from the very pit of hell. I have 
noticed that people who are brought under the influence of 
these spirits soon begin to talk against the Bible.’’ 

Many others of widely diverse creeds have attached a 
similar importance to Spiritualism, each from his own 
standpoint : but the movement does not attract as much 
general attention as might have been anticipated. The 
reason of this is, perhaps, threefold. 

In the first place, the spirit of the age is materialistic, and, 
consequently, those who have had no personal experience of 
the supernatural are inclined to deny and deride any alleged 
manifestation of it. 

Secondly ; the popular conception of Spiritualism is very 
inadequate. Many imagine that it consists altogether of 
table-rapping and such other exhibitions as are professedly 
exposed by London experts. Were this the case, there 
would still remain the fact that mediums will effect without 
apparatus and in strange houses that which their imitators 
can only do with appliances and much preparation. Yet the 
most complete exposure of the physical manifestations would 
scarcely touch the real question at issue. For it is not so 
much movements of tables, levitations, and apparitions, which 



7BEEX0B. 


TU 


mark Spiritualism as supernatural ; but rather that un- 
accountable kno^Jedge of past and future which is often 
displayed by the communicating spirits. 

Thirdly ; the occasional exposure of impostors, who are 
often regarded by the uninitiated as real Spiritualists, gives 
a general impression that the new religion is a soriy jugglery 
quite uifworthy of investigation. But such exposures do not 
shake the minds of believers ; since they are well aware that 
their faith is founded, not on the performances of public 
mediums, but on their own personal experience. 

In the chapter on modern Spiritualism we have been 
careful to quote particulars of physical manifestations and 
doctrines from well-known Spiritualistic sources, hoping by 
this course to avoid misrepresentation. And while our 
view of Scripture compels us to speak of demonism with 
severity, we would by no means be regarded as similarly 
disposed towards those who practise it. For many of them 
are still loyal to the Word of God, and ready to give up 
whatever of their own opinion is shown to be contrary to its 
teachings. Such we invite to consider the statements of this 
book with unbiased mind, to prove all things by the in- 
spired revelation, and to hold fast that which they and to be 
good. And, though we assume the truth of our conclusions, 
we yet cannot, from our standpoint as fellow mortals, 
regard even those who have gone on to an utter shipwreck 
of faith as being worse than deceived. For to what extent 
their blindness is the result of guilt, or how far their refusal 



FBEFACE. 


viii 

A 

to letain God in their hearts has involved them in the 
belief of not ours.4;o decide. IJhe great Searcher 

of hearts alone has the potifer and the right to do this, and 
most assuredly wil^ 'do it in the approaching day of His 
judgment. 

Since the greater portion of the following pages was 
delivered in lectures, the writer is under many obligations 
which it would be difficult to acknowledge. He is, how- 
ever, specially indebted, in the second and fourth chapters, 
to Kurtz’s Bible and Astronomy. In quotations from 
Scripture the authorised version has been altered whenever 
it seemed to fail in expressing the sense of the original. 



EARTH’S EARLIEST AGES. 


CHAPTEE I. 

INTRODUCTION. 


Biblical Interpretation, Importance of the Brophetic Scriptures. 


Modern ohjeetione to Befoee we proceed to examine and 
qimn^d%ontL (w" attempt to explain a most important sub- 
Bihiwai »n<^»yrc. ject of revelation, it will be well to offer 
“ a few general remarks on the interpreta- 

tion of the Bible. For in our days Christianity is vehemently 
assailed with arguments based upon the diversities of opinion 
among its professors. Men point with sharp sarcasm to the 
many sects of Christendom, and to the numerous and serious 
disagreements of those sects, not in questions of 

church government and discipline, bu^^^4ipon vital points 
of doctrine. They impugn the Divine origin of writings 
which admit of such variety of interpretation, and can be 
made Jhe basis of so many differing, and even conflicting 
systems. 

Nor is this sentiment confined to those who live in pro- 
fessedly Christian countries. It is beginning to Spread even 
among the heathen : it has already supplied them with a 

9 



2 


EABTH S EAJLL1E8T AGES. 


powerful weapon against the worshippers of the Triune 
Jehovah, and is presenting a new and formidable barrier to 
missionary success. 

The qfdwentty Now the fact that there are countless 
diversities in the nominal church cannot 
vouchsafsd be denied. Nay, we must go still further, 
and confess that the mischief may be de- 
tected even among those who call upon the name of the 
Lord Jesus in sincerity, and march to meet the future with 
unfaltering step through faith in His once offered /Sacrifice 
for sin : for they, too, have differences of opinion and certain 
oppoai«if doctrines all claiming to be derived from the 
Gbd. 

Vlro-t, th^ shall we reply to our assailants ? Are the 
Scriptuipes re||ly so inconsistent, or so vague, that a multitude 
of conflij^linif^ opinions and doctrines can be fairly deduced 
from them? Were they so, the fact would indeed be a 
strong argument against their Divine origin. But we are by 
no means forced upon such an admission : nay, as soon as we 
begin to consider the enigma an obvious and certain solution 
presents itself. For not the revelation of God, but the ex- 
pounders of that revelation are responsible for the diversities 
of Christendom ; the fault rests with the fallen and corrupt 
nature of man, which so affects him that he cannot clearly 
discern truth even when it is set before his eyes. 

Proqf qf this from the Do we doubt this ? Let US, then, glance 
church. at the history of the first reception of the 

Gospel as recorded in the New Testament. Do we not find 
error mingling wdth truth from the very beginning ? Does it 
not seem to have been the first jaxiety of an apostle, after 
planting a church, to check the simultaneous upgrowth of 
rank weeds whicj^ soon to choke it? Need we 

instance Corintl^r^ll^Mrtia, Colossse ; the strange doctrines 
taught at Ephesus and Crete, which are mentioned in the 
letters to Jimothy and Titus ; the warnings against existing 
heresies in the Epistles of Peter, John, and Jude? And if 
we pass on to examine the uninspired writings of the early 
church, we shall be still more impressed with the same sad 
fact, that the messages of God were not from the very first 
received as they should have been. 



BIBLICAL IKTEBFBETATION. 


3 


Th0r« were at Ua$t three For men brought Bot the SHiooth and 

unmarked tablets of their hearts to take a 
nnc^e Ckrtsttane, first grand impression from the revealed 

mtndt were not entirely .-t’, ^ 

freed from the tnjiuence Will and purposes of thcir Creator : but 

of a pagan education. came filled with myths, philosophies, and 
prejudices, which they could not altogether throw off, but 
retained, in part at least, and mingled, quite unwittingly, 
perhaps, with the truth of God. As time went on the in- 
congruity of this human admixture became more and more 
apparent and yet men clung to it, because they felt that it 
softened the corrective severity of revelation, and forced it 
into some kind of sympathy with the lusts of fallAlWure. 

And so they soon found themselves constrained to a 

means of blunting the sword of the Spirit, which iflbuld 
otherwise have quickly severed the spurious fr(»n the genuine. 
This, too, was done. Those portions of Scd^^tipre which 
were most determinedly antagonistic to the hopes and feel- 
ings of men were allegorised, or, as by a sad misnomer it 
was called, spiritualised, out of their literal and proper 
meaning ; and, being thus deprived of the power which God 
had placed in them, were no longer able to present insur- 
mountable obstacles to the entrance 'of false doctrine. And 
yet, so far, we are speaking only of the mischief done by 
those who may, perhaps, have been sincere Christians, but 
who corrupted the Word of God through short-sightedness 
and lack of wisdom, and, above all, through that inability to 
clear the mind of fixed ideas which is common to all mortals. 

The eecond, qf those who B ut there was another class of corrupters 
Sm. fftnUrilT' described by Paul as “ many unruly and 
vain talkers and deceivers . . . who subvert whole 
houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy 
lucre’s sake ” ; ^ men who, whenjJ^ saw Christianity 
rapidly spreading, when they percei^i|H|W hold it had upon 
the minds of those who were affected by it, desired, for their 
own ambitious or covetous ends, to become leader^^ a party 
which promised to be so influential, which bid m fair for 
power. These had no scruple in introducing fulm doctrines 
as suited themselves, and mightily helped to establish a 

. 1 Tit. i. 10, 11. 

2 * 



4 


earth's earliest ages. 


practice which has been ruinously prevalent in all subsequent 
time, that use of the Bible which virtually regards it as a 
book by the aid of which one may justify o/ie*s own opinions. 

The third, qf those who And lastly ; there was yet a third class 
men devoted to the higher and more 
corrupting chruttanxty. intellectual forms of pagan worship, ini- 
tiates of the mysteries, those secret societies which had then 
woven thbir nets over the whole of the civilised world. 
These crept into the fold unawares, as true wolves in sheep's 
clothing, with deliberate intent to worry and destroy the 
flock. For from the first, with an instinct of Satan, they 
marked the Christian as their mortal foe, and perceiving with 
everj^creasing alarm the failure of persecution after perse- 
cutimi, ftom Nero to Galerius, to suppress the new sect, felt 
that it could not be exterminated by open warfare, and must, 
therefore, be seduced and corrupted by craft. This plan was 
far more successful than the violence of persecution. Where 
the sword of the world failed its flatteries were victorious. 
The astonished church beheld the frown of her cruel op- 
pressor softening into a friendly smile ; was bewildered with 
ofiers of peace and union from those who had hitherto 
breathed out threatenings and slaughter; and, becoming 
elated with the sudden change, was not indisposed for com- 
promise. And thus the world became nominally Christian, 
and vast crowds of idolaters passed within the pale of the 
visible church, bringing with them their old gods and god- 
desses under new names, as well as their incessant sacrifices, 
their rites, their vestments, their incense, and all the para- 
ohemalia of their impious worship. Nor did the philosophers 
fail to contribute their share to the perplexing confusion 
which speedily obscured every vital doctrine of Christianity. 
For, by skilfully bl^^g their own systems with the truths 
of Scripture, the^ a^Bewildered the minds of the multitude 
that but few retained the power of distinguishing the reve- 
lation of God from the craftily interwoven teachings of men. 

Thu earip corruption, So Complete, then, even in early times, 
the coreuption of the Wbrd of God. 
purged, u a extent ex- Nor has the church ever succeeded in 
freeing herself from it, though she did 
eaiuuerpretauon, make a strenuous effort to do so at the 



BIBLICAL IKTEBFBETATION. 


5 


epoch of the Reformation. From the tim5 when the Adver- 
sary first sowed them, the tares have been ever mingled with 
the wheat, and sQwnust they continue until the harvest. And 
thus interpretations, inconsistent and unsound, were handed 
down from generation to generation, and received as if in- 
tegral parts of the Scriptures themselves'; while any texts 
which seemed violently opposed were allegorised, sphitualised, 
or explained away, till they ceased to be troublesome, or, 
perchance, were even made subservient. From time to time, 
too, systems and sects were formed more or less pure than 
the main body, but into which the Adversary never failed to 
foist some error ; and men, trained to look upon their own 
church as the only perfect one, contended fiercely for all its 
tenets, and freely, though often unconsciously, perverted 
Scripture in maintaining the struggle. 

Weighing, then, all these causes, we surely need not accuse 
the Bible of vagueness or inconsistency in order to explain 
the diversities of its interpretation. For, if we be observant 
and honest, we must often ourselves feel the difficulty of 
approaching the sacred writings without bias, seeing that 
we bring with us a number of stereotyped ideas, which we 
have received as absolutely certain, and never think of testing, 
but only seek to confirm. And yet, could we but fearlessly 
and impartially investigate, we might find that some of these 
ideas are not in the Bible at all, while others are plainly con- 
tradicted by it. For the tracks' of many a popular doctrine 
*may be followed through the long range of church history, 
till at length we start with affright at the discovery that we 
have traced them back to the very entrance of the enemy’s 


camp. 

We mutt, ther^ore, be We will not Stay now to illustrate this 
fact : for proofs of it will come before us 
/?»•. guidance in the course of our subject. But it is a 
matter which every Christian should care- 
fully test for himself, if he be really desirous to seek first, in 
preference to any other consideration, the kingdom of God 
and His' righteousness. For he need be in no perplexity 

as to the mode of procedure, and God will grant him the 
reqmsite wisdom if he ask it. Let him but believe that the 
Bible is the infallible word of the great Creator, and that all 



6 


EABTh’s EABLIEST AGES. 


men are, and ever have been, prone to error, and he will 
easily see that to discover the truth of any doctrine he must 
first divest himself of preconceived notion?, of all that he has 
ever heard about it, and of all feeling either for or against it. 
And then, with earnest prayer for the Spirit’s aid, let him 
examine every portion of Scripture which bears upon it, 
noting the simple and obvious teaching of each, and observing 
how the various texts interpret and corroborate one another. 
So will he by God’s help arrive at the truth. But yet another 
precaution will be necessary : he must mark the dagree of 
prominence assigned to it in Scripture, and give it, as nearly 
as possible, the same in his own teaching. For even true 
doctrines may sometimes be mischievous if unduly pressed to 
the exclusion of other matters, to which, as we may see by 
their more frequent mention, the Spirit of God attaches 
greater importance. 

Suehacourgg.if gener- Were this course generally pursued, 
afd there would soon be an end of diversities 
iu^imer to the in the real church : the true followers of 

^ ^ ^ ' Christ would present an unbroken phalanx 

to the world ; the greatest obstacle to the spread of the 
Gospel would be removed ; and very different would be the 
result both of our preaching at home and of our missionary 
work abroad. For the sword of the Spirit, if drawn forth 
keen and glittering from its own scabbard, and not merely 
picked up from the ground where it has been left, blunted 
and dulled perchance, by some former warrior, is irresistible, 
and pierces through body and soul to the inmost shrine of 
the God-conscious spirit. 

Ths tubject prapoted. We propose now to investigate a very 
prominent subj ect of revelation, the history, 
past, present, and future, of the ages of the world ; to en- 
deavour to learn what we may of the dealings and purposes 
of God in regard to our earth and its inhabitants. 

And may the Holy Spirit guide us with a wisdom not our 
own ; keep us from handling the Word of God deceitfully ; 
enable us to consider it without bias, and to discern the 


meaning which He who gave it would convey. 

Now the greater part of our investigation will be concerned 
with prophecy, a subject to which, after more than fifteen 



IMFOfiTAKCE OF iHIp SCEIPTUBES. 7 

centuries of neglect, the Spirit of <Sod is again directin^the 
minds of many of His people* "^For another long age ii| 
drawing to its the time to set seal to vision and mophef 
is at hand, and the Lord will not hide from His o'vm what 
He is about to do, k 

The objeetum qf a be- Still, howover, tl^ll^ lingers ii| the 
uunr!^abu minds of many Oiristians a strong objec- 
tion to prophetic study. But surely a little honest conrideration 
would convince these of their error. For more than a fourth 
part of the Bible is prophetic : and if God chooses to say so 
much, dare we refuse to listen ? If He has called our 
attention to these truths, shall we turn away almost con- 
temptuously, and say, “ It profits th not?^^ Certainly if we 
do not give earnest heed to His voice, we are setting up our 
will in opposition to Him, and would do well to inquire 
whether we really be in the faith or not. For “if any 
man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His.’^ ^ 
If, then, the Spirit loves to dwell on the future purposes of 
God, will not also the mind of every one that has that Spirit 
exhibit a similar desire ? Must there not be identity of feel- 
ing ? If the Spirit of God be really influencing us, should 
He not be accompanied in His testimony by our spirit ? 

That etudy tmvotoee In the commencement of the last of the 
Tkr!t; ^T*gr^^!h sacrcd books we find a special blessing 
aivaye follow* ^dtence, promised to him that readeth, and to them 
that hear the words of the prophecy.* This promise is not 
merely for him that readeth and is able to explain, nor only 
for them that hear and fully understand : but for all who 
read or hear with earnest attention, whether they be able to 
penetrate into the depths of the meaning or not. Nor is it 
difl&cult to see some of the channels through which the 
blessing flows. We will mention three of them. 

First, then, the study of prophecy is commanded,® and we 
know generally that the grace of God follows every act of 
direct obedience on our part. If we search out even the 
most minute commands of His law, and do them ; if we show 
that we would not have a word uttered by Him fall to the 
ground, we testify both to ourselves and to others that we do 


^ Bom. vui. 9. 


3 Bev. i. 3. 


3 2 Pet. i. 19. 



8 


in* ery deed, and n6t 'bnly, re(X)gnise Him as our 

l|God and our King, tW Ri^tful Disposer of our every 
tbou^t, word, and action# ^ % 

Nor will He on His part he slow in ndwNrledging us as 
subjects, as ^^e who have a claim upon His aid and 
pr^lction. H^pRi give us grace to help in every time of 
need i His covering shield Will be quickly interposed when 
the black air begins to Im^tle with the darts of the enemy : 
His strength, by which the worlds are sustained, will uphold 
us when our flesh and our heart are failing : His ^mighty 
hand will clasp and guide us when the last impenetrable 
gloom begins to thicken around us, and a darkness that can 
indeed be felt veils the place on which we next must set o* ^ 
foot. Nor will His grc^p slacken *^ill He has drawn us 
through the night, and our eyes are ^ zzled as we behold 
that for which He had caused us to hope, th^ i^olden gate' 
of the Paradise of God. 

Secondly; prophecy Secondly; if a man road aua believe 
^h,ns^riZ^i prophecy, though he may not altogether 
are Been; and eopreparee understand it, he canuot at least avoid a 

%u for a chance, and atds . ... r 

ut to Ox our hope$ on the conviction of the transitormess of 

world to come, the present order of things, and is thus 

mightily helped in his efforts to look beyond are all 

by nature inclined to Positi^ibrn, and for the part act 

practically, if we do not theoretically, upon the hypothesis 
that things always ha\ e been and always will be as they are ; 
that no changes will ever take place, except such as t^y be 
brought about in an ordinary way by agencies alrei^iy at 
work. , 

And the fact that prophecy instantly dispels this illse 
security is the secret reason why, when God draws back the 
curtain of futurity, men either shudder and turn sullenly 
away, or else explain what they see as no literal picture of 
that which must shortly come to pass, but as a figurative 
foreshadowing of something which they are caieful to show 
is by no means alarming, and indeed nothing more than a 
natural result of existing influences. For they find it difficult 
to conceive a violent change such as they themselves have 
never experienced. They are quite willing to talk of de- 
velopment : they love to speak of the time when preachers 



IMPOJftTANOE^Or 

will be more successful, anif etm^ive to persuade 

the whole human race out (p its prido, m selfishness, and ^ 
its general ungo^l^ess : they delight to in<^a#e the m%ience 
of their own pdisi^feiT sect^^houch in doing this they fre- 
quently confuse political power |vith the of the Spirit, 

and are apt to forget who is the r8igl3|ng pHpe of this world 
and present dispenser of its brief gwy. 

Or, perhaps, they are cosmopolitan in their views, and 
affect to despise the narrow-minded restrictions of sect; 
while thoy altogether ignore the fact that they hold sufficiently* 
defined opinions of their own, and are unyieldingly tenacious 
01 them. And so, floating with the stream of a torrent which 
IS icw daily increasing in volume and impetuosity, they 
^ .each peace and good will towards all men from a beneficent 
^od who has no idea of ever troubling us about sin, and 
prsd'^t a golden age of liberty, equality, and fraternity. 
Am yel if you test in their own case the first absolutely 
* ' .i^^'ons^ble cond’^^ion of their Millennium, they will pro- 
h'^yy fpi’ 111 worst fashion than did the young lawyer, to 
prc that they love +heir neighbours as themselves by going 
t ay iiot merely in sorrow but in wrath. 

f>vc\ id^as, then, man w*’l readily adopt : for they are all 
c.msiPvcnt with a continuance of ihe present order of things: 
ihey can all come to their ’lerfection — so he imagines — 
without a violent shock, without any supernatural in- 
terference. 

But he who with earnestness and faith looks down the 
greats vista of futurity which God has opened is quickly 
pqi^fftrated by very different thoughts. He beholds the con- 
fliCT between good and evil intensifying, until that which is 
good seems overcome and well nigh annihilated : then he feels 
the firm ground shaking and giving way beneath him : he 
looks, and, lo, all the cities of the nations are tottering in 
ruins upon the trembling earth : the sun is withdrawing its 
wonted light, the moon becomes as blood : the once solid 
objects around him wave and reel in confusion like the break- 
ing up and evanescence of a vivid dream. A sudden flash 
speeds through the gloom, and he sees the Son of man 
coming in the clouds of heaven ; he starts with affright as 
His red lightnings strike the earth : he gazes with awe upon 



10 


XjIBTH’s BiLBI.X£ST AGES. 


the many slain the Lord. And then at length a change 
passes over the scene : the thunders cease to roll, the flash 
of the lightning is stayed : and forth from smoke and ruin 
comes the earth, purified and fair as the garden of Eden: 
the towers and ^iwaacles of a noble city appear at the foot of 
Mount Zion, from the summit of the mountain rises 
majestically the wondrous temple described by Ezekiel, before 
which all flesh shall come to worship the Lord. 

For by the outstretched hand, and by the strong arm of 
the Almighty, and not by preaching, will the world d)e taught 
to acknowledge her Creator, and at last find rest from her 
feverish toil. The preaching of the Gospel in this present 
time is but for the calling out of an election according to the 
purpose of God, and for a witness to the rest of mankind. 
It is only, as Isaiah tells us, when the judgments of the Lord 
are in the earth that the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness.' 

These outlines, at least, the devout reader of prophecy will 
be able to trace : and so when the close of this present age 
comes like a snare upon all them that dwell upon the face of 
the whole earth,^ it will find him prepared and undismayed. 

lAutiy; aicnowiedgeqf Lastly; the study of prophecy reveals 
tJuntt will of God. Seems 

Will to ifw, and tg profit- this a light thing ? Do we indeed despise 
the confidence of our Almighty Creator r 
Let us fear lest we so insult Him ; lest, like swine, we 
trample on the pearls ofiered to us. And, regarding them in 
this light, how great is the practical value of the prophetic 
Scriptures ! For if we are already justified by Christ, we 
still have need of daily progress in sanctification, we should 
be ever becoming more and more transformed to the image 
of God- And to that end what greater help could we have 
than a revelation of His mind and purposes in regard to 
ourselves, our fellow creatures, and the earth in which we 
dwell ; an estimate by Him of all temporal things, of those 
visible surroundings by which we are continually afiected, 
and His declaration of their speedy judgment and destruction? 

Is it not a duty to become minutely acquainted with all 


^ Isa. xxvi. 9. 


* Luke XXI. 35 



THE CKEATION. 


11 


this : to meditate on it continually : to shape our wishes, 
hopes, and aspirations from it : to bring our whole mind into 
accordance with it to use our every endeavour to spread the 
knowledge of it among men : and so to prepare ourselves 
and others for that new order of things, into which we either 
must enter individually at the unknown time of death, or 
may enter simultaneously at any moment by the long expected 
return of our Lord and Saviour ? 


CHAPTEE IL 

The Creation, 

The popular error in At the Very outset of our inquiry we have 
7flZfgfrJt%h?‘p«T‘^n^o encounter a deeply-rooted popular 
doctrine of Chaos. fallacy in regard to the creation of the 
world ; a fallacy which can boast of long antiquity, and 
which seems originally to have sprung from a sort of com- 
promise between revelation and the legends of pagan 
cosmogony. 

The ancient poet Hesiod tells us that the first thing in 
existence was Chaos ; that is, according to its etymology, 
“ the yawning and void receptacle for created matter.” But 
the word soon lost its strict meaning, and was used for the 
crude and shapeless mass of material out of which the 
heavens and the earth were supposed to have been formed. 
Ovid thus describes it : “ There was but one appearance of 
nature throughout tlie whole world ; this they called Chaos, 
an unformed and confused bulk.”' And in his “ Fasti ” he 
makes Janus, whom he identifies with Chaos, speak as 
follows : 

“ The ancients used to call me Chaos : for a primeval being 
am 1. See of how remote an age I shall recount the events ! 
This air, full of light, and the three remaining elements, fire, 
water, and earth, were a confused heap. As soon as this mass 


' Metam. i. 6, 7. 



12 


EAETH’s EABLIEST AGES. 


was separated through the discord of its component parts, 
and had dissolved and passed away into new positions, the 
flame ascended upwards ; a nearer placa — that is, nearer to 
earth— received the air; the earth and sea settled down to 
the bottom. Then I, who had been but a mass and shape- 
less bulk, passed into a form and limbs worthy of a god.”^ 
Thus, according to the cosmogonies of Greece and Rome, 
the universe sprang from Chaos. Uranus, or Heaven, was 
supposed to have been the first supreme god. But he was 
driven from power by his son Cronos or Saturn, *vho after- 
wards received the same treatment at the hands of his son 
Zeus or Jupiter. Chaos was the first thing in existence, and 
the transient series of gods came subsequently into being. 

Misleading influence qf q^his doctrine, ancient and wide-spread 
Christian world. US it w^as IP the time of our Lord, did not 

fail to infiuence the real as well as the spurious Christians. 
The most important sects of the latter, the Gnostics, believed 
in the eternity and intrinsic evil of matter ; but, unlike the 
heathen, they taught that the Supreme Being also existed 
from eternity. I'he orthodox Christians escaped the greater 
error altogether ; but, nevertheless, gave clear testimony to 
the influence of the popular belief in their interpretation of 
the commencing chapter of Genesis. For they made the 
first verse signify the creation of a confused mass of elements, 
out of which the heavens and earth were formed during the 
six days, and understood the next sentence to be a description 
of the crude matter before God shaped it. And this ppinion 
has descended to our days. But it does not appear to be 
substantiated by Scripture, as we shall presently see, and the 
guile of the serpent may be detected in its results. For how 
great a contest has it provoked between the church and the 
world ! How ready a handle do the geological difficulties 
involved in it present to the assailants of Scripture ! With 
what perplexity do we behold earth gloomy with the shadow 
of pain and death ages before the sin of Adam ! How many 
young minds have been turned aside by the absolute impossi- 
bility of defending what they have been taught to regard as 
Biblical statements ! And lastly, in carrying on the dispute. 


1 Fasti i. 103-112. 



THE CEEATIOH. 


13 


how much precious time has been wasted by able servants 
of God, who would otherwise have been more profitably 
employed ! , 

Examination of the Let US, then, tum to the Mosaic account, 
^e^^nningr'^^' ^nd endeavour to elicit its plain and ob- 

vious meaning. “ In the beginning,’^ we read, “God created 
the heaven and the earth.”^ The beginning refers, of course, 
to the first existence of that with which the history is concerned, 
the heaven and the earth.^ Here, then, is at once an end to 
speculation in regard to the eternity of matter ; for God was 
before the things that are seen, and by His supreme volition 
called them into being. And again ; this short sentence 
strikes a mortal blow at all pantheistic identification of God 
and nature : for nature is but one of His many creatures : one 
of the works of His hands : her years can be numbered, the 
day of her birth is known ; but from everlasting to everlasting 
He is God. 


The earth and ite enr. Now in the inspired description of 
what took place in the beginning the 
beginning ; vrhiie in the heaveu and earth are not said to have 
^^mtder ^^eaningoffhe been moulded, fashioned, or made out of 
material, but to have been created. For, 
^ ' whatever may have been the original 

meaning of the word hara^ it seems certain that in this and 
similar passages it is used of calling into being without the 
aid of pre-existing material. The Hebrew writers give it 
this sense, and Rabbi Nackman declares that there is no 
other word to express production out of nothing. But it is, 
of course, easy to understand that a language might not 
possess a verb originally confined to such a meaning : for the 
idea would scarcely have been conceived by men without the 
assistance of revelation. The development theories so popu- 
lar in our days, coupled as they almost invariably are with 
more or less of scepticism, indicate the natural bent of human 
minds on this point: and the philosophic poet Lucretius 


^ Gen. i. 1. 

2 Therefore the expression has in this case a sense very different from 
that which it bears in the first verse of J ohn. For it is here need of the 
beginning of time ; but there of the countless ages of eternity before time 
was* The third verse of John, “ All things were made by Him,” brings us 
down to the period of the first of Genesis. 



14 


eabth’s eabliest ages. 


was an exponent of it when he declared the first principle of 
nature to be, “ Nothing is ever gotten out of nothing by 
Divine power. 

Hence we can readily understand that the word selected by 
the Holy Spirit to express creation may have previously 
signified the forming out of material. But its use is suffi- 
ciently defined in this and other similar passages. For we 
are told that in the beginning God created the heaven and 
the earth ; but the Scriptures never affirm that He did this 
in the six days. The work of those days was, a§^we shall 
presently see, quite a different thing from original creation : 
they were times of restoration, and the word a^ah is gener- 
ally used in connection with them. 

Now asah signifies to make, fashion, or prepare out of 
existing material ; as, for instance, to build a ship, erect a 
house, or prepare a meal. 

There are, however, two acts of creation mentioned in the 
history of the six days. First ; God is said to have created 
the inhabitants of the waters and the fowls of heaven: 
because these do not consist merely of the material mould of 
their bodies, but have a life principle within which could be 
conferred only by a direct act of creation.^ Hence the 
change of word in this place is quite intelligible. Just in 
the same way man is said to have been created, though in 
the second chapter we are expressly told that his body was 
formed from the dust.* For the real man is the soul and 
spirit: the body, which is naturally changed every seven 
years, and must ultimately moulder in the grave, is regarded 
merely as the outward casing which gives him the power of 
dealing with his present surroundings, and the materials of 
which were appropriately taken from that earth in contact 
with which he was destined to live. 

In the detailed account of man’s origin a third word is 
l^sed to signify the forming of his body. This is yatzar^ 
which means to shape or mould as a potter does the clay.* 

A passage in Isaiah well illustrates the meaning and con- 
nection of all three verbs : “I have created him for my 
glory; I have formed him; yea, I have made him.’'* On 

1 De Her. Nat i. 150. « e^en. i. 21. » Gen. i. 27 j ii. 7. 

^ Gen. ii. 7. * Isa. xliii. 7. 



THE CEBATION. 


15 


this verse Kimchi remarks : “ I have created him, that is,, 
produced him out of nothing ; I have formed him, that is,^ 
caused him to exist^in a shape or form appointed ; I have 
made him, that is, made the final dispositions and arrange- 
ments respecting him/’ 

A faint rfjiectton of the God, then, in the beginning created the 
heaven and the earth, not merely the 
materials out of which they were after- 
wards formed. How this wonderful work was accomplished 
we are noj; told : but it may be that the creative power of 
God has a very dim analogy in the beings who were made 
after His image, an analogy which would well illustrate the 
distance between the creature and the Creator. We know 
that by force of imagination wc can not only place before our 
eyes scenes in which we were long ago interested, spots 
which we would fain revisit in the body, departed forms dear 
to us as our own lives, but are even able to paint in fancy 
future events as we would wish them to be. The vision is, 
however, shadowy, fleeting, and alas ! too often unholy. 
Somewhat, then, perhaps, as we produce this dim and quickly 
fading picture, the thoughts of God, issuing from the depths 
of His holiness and love, take instant shape, and become, 
not an unsubstantial and evanescent dream, but a beautiful 


reality, established for ever unless He choose to alter or 
remove it. Hence it may be that a great part, or, perhaps, 
the whole host of innumerable suns and planets which make 
up the universe, flashed into being simultaneously at His 
will, and, in a moment, illumined the black realm of space 
with their many-hued glories. 

The fret verse of The heaven mentioned in the first verse 
tfZ^YoUo:::ZiZoi Genesis is the starry heaven, not the 
record of the frsi qf a firmament immediately surrounding our 
senes qf events. earth I and sincc its history is not further 

unfolded, it may, for aught we know, have remained, de- 
veloping, perhaps, but without violent change from the time 
of its creation until now. Not so, however, the earth, as the 
next verse goes on to show : “ And the earth was without 
form, and void ; and darkness was upon the face of the deep.” 

Now the “ and,” according to Hebrew usage — as well as 
that of most other languages — proves that the first verse 



16 


EAKTH’s EAELIEST AGES. 


is not a compendium of what follows, but a statement of the 
first event in the record. For if it were a mere summary, 
the second verse would be the actual cc^mmencement of the 
history, and certainly would not begin with a copulative. A 
good illustration of this may be found in the fifth chapter of 
Genesis.^ There the opening words, “ This is the book of 
the generations of Adam,’’ are a compendium of the chapter, 
and, consequently, the next sentence begins without a copula- 
tive. We have, therefore, in the second verse of Genesis no 
first detail of a general statement in the preceding^ sentence, 
but the record of an altogether distinct and subsequent event, 
which did not affect the sidereal heaven, but only the earth 
and its immediate surroundings. And what that event was 
we must now endeavour to discover. 

The trords traneiated, Accordiug to our version, the earth was 
Vkt r without form, and void.” This, however, 
rtghtijf u7ider$(ood, de~ is not the sensc of the Hebrew, but a 
‘^u tC^lTrtht^tme glaring illustration of the influence of the 
after tt$ creation, chaos- legend. Fuerst gives “ruin’^ or 

“desolation’^ as the proper meaning of the noun rendered 
“ without form.” The second word signifies “ emptiness,^’ 
then, “ that which is empty ; ” so that i^ this case the 
authorised translation is admissible. Now these words are 
found together only in two other passages, in both of which 
they are clearly used to express the ruin caused by an out- 
pouring of the wrath of God. 

In a prophecy of Isaiah, after a fearful description of the 
fall of Idumea in the day of God’s vengeance, we find the 
expression, “ He shall stretch out upon it the line of con- 
fusion, and the stones — or, as it should be translated, the 
plummet — of emptiness.”^ Now “confusion” and “empti- 
ness ” are in the Hebrew, the same words as those rendered 
“ without form, and void.” And the sense is, that just as 
the architect makes careful use of line and plummet, in order 
to raise the building in perfection, so will the Lord to make 
the ruin complete. 

There is, then, no possibility of mistaking the meaning of 
the words in this place, and the second passage is even more 


1 Gen. V. 1. 


2 Isa. xxxiv. 11. 



THE CEEiLTION. 


17 


conclusive. For, in describing the devastation of Judah and 
Jerusalem, Jeremiah likens it to the preadamite destruction, 
and exclaims, “ beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without 
form, and void ; and the heavens, and they had no light. I 
beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills 
moved lightly. I beheld, and, lo, there was no man, and all 
the birds of the heavens were fled. I beheld, and, lo, the 
fruitful place was a wilderness, and all the cities thereof were 
broken down at the presence of the Lord, and by His fierce 
anger. JPor thus hath the Lord said, The whole land shall be 
desolate ; yet will I not make a full end.’^^ 

We see, therefore, that the Hebrew word tohu signifies 
desolation, or that which is desolate ; and hohu emptiness, or 
that which is empty, probably with reference to the absence 
of all life (“I beheld, and, lo, there was no man, etc.”). And 
again ; the verb translated “ was is occasionally used with a 
simple accusative in the sense of “ to be made,’^ or “ to 
become.” An instance of this may be found in the history 
of Lot’s wife, of whom we are told, that “ she became a pillar 
of salt.” ^ Such a meaning is by far the best for our context : 
we may therefore adopt it, and render, “ And the earth 
became desolate and void ; and darkness was upon the face 
of the deep.” 

But if any further evidence be needed to prove that our 
verse does not describe a chaotic mass which God first created 
and afterwards fashioned into shape, we have a direct and 
positive assertion to that effect in the forty-fifth chapter of 
Isaiah ; for we are there told that God did not create the 
earth a tohu} This word, therefore, whatever meaning be 
assigned to it, cannot at least be descriptive of the earliest 
condition of earth. But our translators have obscured the 
fact by rendering tohu “ in vain ;” they can hardly have com- 
pared the passages in which it occurs, or they would surely 
have seen the propriety of translating it in Isaiah’s manifest 
reference to creation by the same word as in Genesis. 

There ie, ther^ore. It is thus dear that the second verse of 
Genesis describes the earth as a ruin ; but 
&enemforaii the geolo- there is no hint of the time which elapsed 
however, alluded to in between Creation and this ruin. Age 

* Jer. iv. 23-27. * Gen. xix. 26. ® Isa, ilv. 18. 

8 



18 


eakth’s earliest ages. 


Soripiure. Beaton qf the after age may have rolled away, and it 
omMtton, probably during their course that the 

strata of the earth’s crust were gradually^eveloped. Hence 
we see that geological attacks upon the Scriptures are alto- 
gether wide of the mark, are a mere beating of the air. 
There is room for any length of time between the first and 
second verses of the Bible. And again ; since we have no 
inspired account of the geological formations, we are at 
liberty to believe that they were developed just in the order 
in which we find them. The whole process tool^ place in 
preadamite times, in connection, perhaps, with another race 
of beings, and, consequently, does not * at present con- 
cern us. 

And it is to be observed that God never in this life reveals 
anything to gratify a mere thirst for knowledge ; but only 
such matters as may sufficiently illustrate His everlasting 
power and Godhead ; our own fallen condition with its remedy 
of unfathomable love ; and the promise of a speedy deliver- 
ance from sin, a complete restoration to His favour, and a 
never-ending life of perfect obedience and perfect joy. 

In our present condi- Knowledge in this life is a gift fraught 

tion knowledge u a dan- ^ n . ^ i i 

gerous possession. With peril to man : tor our great task here 
is to learn the lesson of absolute dependence upon God, and 
entire submission to His will. His dealings with us now are 
to the end that He may withdraw us from our own purpose, 
and hide pride from us.^ But knowledge, unless it be accom- 
panied by a mighty outpouring of grace, causes undue elation. 
It was the vision of knowledge which filled the breast of our 
first parent with impious aspirations, and made her follow the 
tempter in hoping to be as God. And it is an ominous fact, 
that, after the fall, the first inventors of the arts and sciences 
were the descendants, not of the believing Seth, but of the 
deist and murderer Cain. 

So in our own days the leaders of science are too often the 
leaders of infidelity, the despisers of God and of prayer. 
Except by special grace, man seems incapable of bearing the 
slightest weight of power upon his shoulders without losing 
his balance. 

And hence the Scriptures take up just the attitude we 
^ Job xxxiii. 17. 



THE INTEKTAL. 


19 


should expect. They altogether, as in the verses before us, 
avoid contact with the science of men. God does not forbid 
us to search so far ^s we can into the laws of His universe ; 
but He utterly refuses to aid or accelerate our studies by 
revelation. For the present He would have us rather atten- 
tive to the moral renovation of ourselves and our fellow 
creatures : but after a short season He will open vast stores 
of His wisdom to those who love and trust Him, and delight 
their souls with the secrets of His creative power. 


CHAPTER III. 

The Interval. 

Sinwaiihe canaeofthe^^ gee, then, that God Created the 
^ heavens and the earth in their beginning, 

and that at some subsequent period, how remote we cannot 
tell, the earth was in a state of utter desolation, and void of 
all life. Not merely had its fruitful places become a wilder- 
ness, and all its cities been broken down ; but the very light 
of its sun had been withdrawn ; all the moisture of its 
atmosphere had sunk upon its surface ; and the vast deep, to 
which God has set bounds that are never transgressed, save 
when wrath has gone forth from Him, had burst those limits ; 
so that the ruined planet, covered above its very mountain 
tops with the black floods of destruction, was rolling through 
space in a horror of great daikness. 

But what could have occasioned so terrific a catastrophe ? 
Wherefore had God thus destroyed the work of His hands ? 
If we may draw any inference from the history of our own 
race, sin must have been the cause of this hideous ruin : sin, 
too, which would seem to have been patiently borne with 
through long ages, until at length its cry increased to heaven, 
and brought down utter destruction. 

The fog$ii remaim in- For, as the fossil remains clearly show, 

disease and death— insepar- 
proved to he the relics able Companions of sin — then prevalent 

not of the SIX days, but of .it- . r* A. xi. 

far earlier creations. among the living creatures of the earth, 

3 ^ 



20 


earth’s earliest ages. 


but even ferocity and slaughter. And the fact proves that 
these remains have nothing to do with our world ; since 
the Bible declares that all things made^by God during the 
six days were very good, and that no evil was in them till 
Adam sinned. Through his fall the ground was cursed, and 
it was doubtless at the same time that the whole creation 
was subjected to that vanity of fruitless toil, of never-ceasing 
unrest, and of perpetual decay, in which it has since groaned 
and travailed in pain together until now.^ When thorns and 
thistles sprang out of the earth, and its fertility was r^^strained, 
then a curse affected the animal kingdom also. There ap- 
peared in it a depraved and even savage nature which 
ultimately, though not perhaps in antediluvian times, reached 
its climax in a cruel thirst for blood, and completely changed 
the organisation of some species at least. How this change 
was brought about, it is of course useless to speculate : for 
the hand of God was in it. But that it did take place, and 
that the beasts of the earth were not always as they now are, 
we have proof in the following facts. 

On the sixth day God pronounced every thing which He 
had made to be very good, a declaration which would seem 
altogether inconsistent with the present condition of the 
animal as well as the vegetable kingdom.^ Again ; He gave 
the green herb alone for food “ to every beast of the field, 
and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth 
upon the earth.”® There were, therefore, no carnivora in the 
sinless world. 

Lastly ; in a great prophecy of the times of restitution we 
read, “ The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the 
leopard shall lie down with the kid ; and the calf and the 
young lion and the fatling together ; and a little child shall 
lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their 
young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat 
straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall play upon 
the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand 
on the cockatrice’ den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in 
all my holy mountain : for the earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord, as the w^aters cover the sea.”^ That 
is, that, when sin has been suppressed by the return of the 
' Eom. viii. 22 . ^ Gen. i. 31, ^ j 30 ^ 4 jg^. xi. 6-9. 



THE INTEEVAL. 


21 


second Adam, the curse shall lose its power, the savage 
nature of the beasts of the field shall disappear, the carnivora 
shall become graminivora, the poisonous shall lay aside their 
venom ; all shall be restored to their first condition, and be 
again as when God pronounced the primal blessing. 

Since, then, the fossil remains are those of creatures anterior 
to Adam, and yet show evident tokens of disease, death, and 
mutual destruction, they must have belonged to another 
world, and have a sin-stained history of their own, a history 
which e»ded in the ruin of themselves and their habitation. 

Probable existence of And since a lord and vicegerent was set 
TaVn over the animal kingdom of our world, 

the first cause of sin and through whose fall deterioration, disease, 
the subject. and death obtained irresistible power over 

every living creature, so we should naturally conclude that 
superior beings inhabited and ruled that former world, and, 
like Adam, transgressed the laws of their Creator. But who 
were these ancient possessors of the lands now given to us? 
Whence came they, and whither have they gone ? What 
fearful sin caused their own disappearance, and involved in 
one confused ruin their earth and its aerial surroundings ? 

We have no records left to us: the numerous remains in 
primeval rocks are only those of the lower forms of creation. 
Yet, as we peer hopelessly into the night, a faint and unsteady 
gleam seems to emanate from the Scriptures in our hand, a 
very diflferent light from that which they pour upon other 
subjects, scarcely more than sufficient to make darkness 
visible, but just enough to reveal the outline of a shadowy 
form seated on high above the desolation, and looking 
sullenly down upon his ruined realm. It is our own great 
enemy, the prince of this world and of the power of the air. 

Let us, then, consider the scanty hints which the Bible 
seems to offer in regard to this great mystery. But we must 
tread lightly and rapidly over the bridge which we are about 
to throw across the foaming torrent : for we cannot be sure 
of its foundation : nay, in the darkness of the night there 
may also be serious defects in its construction. Yet the 
revelation to which we shall refer was given for our learning, 
and, like all Scripture, is profitable, even if we fail to grasp 
the secret contained in it, provided we handle it with 



22 


eaeth’s earliest ages. 


reverence and fear for the contemplation of such a theme 
gives us some idea of the ineffable magnitude of the events, 
past and future, by which time is bounded, and of the countless 
millions of actors concerned in them : it calls off our minds 
which are prone to dwell so complacently, and yet so irra- 
tionally, upon this present brief age and our still more 
insignificant selves : it strikes us with inconceivable awe : it 
makes us tremblingly anxious to be safe in the only refuge 
before the next great storm of God’s wrath comes thundering 
over our doomed world : it urges us to fulfil our minute duty 
in the stupendous drama which the great Supreme is rapidly 
hastening to its close. 

Sources of inf ormation. Now there are, perhaps, two sources 
from which we may extract some information respecting the 
former condition of the world. First, from any passage 
which seems to refer directly to it ; and secondly, from the 
account given to us of “ the times of restitution of all 
things,’’^ the very name of which suggests that God’s original 
purpose will not be frustrated by sin, but that every thing 
will be restored even as it was before the earliest rebellion of 
the fallen angels. 

The titles prince qf then, we glance at the few particulars 
thisager of Satan s history which have been re- 

vealed to us, we cannot fail to observe that, besides the actual 
power attributed to him, he manifestly holds the legitimate 
title of “ prince of this world ; ” or, in other words, that this 
dignity, together with the royal prerogatives which of right 
pertain to it, was conferred upon him by God Himself.® For 
there is no other way of explaining the fact that the Lord 
Jesus not only spoke of the Adversary by this title,* but 
plainly recognised his delegated authority in that He did not 
dispute the Tempter’s claim to the present disposal of the 
kingdoms of the world and their glory.® 

And again ; it is only by the knowledge of this fact that 
we can understand a passage of Jude, in which the conduct 
of the archangel Michael towards Satan is adduced as an 

1 2 Tim. iii. 16. ^ ^cts iii. 21. 

3 Previously of course to bis fall. See the exposition of Eze. xxviiL 
11-19 in the subsequent part of this chapter. 

^ John xiv. 30. 


® Luke iv. 6*8. 



THE INTERVAL. 


23 


example of due respect for authority, even though it be in the 
hands of the wicked.^ 

The meaning of^“ world’’ is somewhat ambiguous: for 
while the signification of the Greek word may be confined to 
our earth and its inhabitants, it may also extend to the totality 
of the universe, and in the case before us possibly does com- 
prehend all the spheres of our solar system. At least if 
there be truth in the accounts given by astronomers of the 
ruined condition of the moon, which is described as “ an arid 
and lifel§88 wilderness,” it would seem likely that Satan’s 
power extends so far. And it may be also that the cata- 
strophe in the sun, which was remedied on the fourth day, 
testifies to his connection with that glorious luminary. 

In one passage Paul, according to our version, styles him 
“the god of this world. But the Greek for “world” is 
there a different word, and should be translated “ age.” 
Satan is indeed the legitimate prince of this world ; but it is 
only by abusing his power, and blinding the eyes of men, 
that he induces them to worship him as their god. Hfe will, 
however, be deprived of his princedom at the close of the 
present age ; and, the basis of real power being thus re- 
moved, his impious superstructure will immediately fall to 
the ground. 

But, even at the risk of interrupting the argument, we 
cannot refrain from pausing for a moment to glance at the 
solemn warning contained in the title “ god of this age.” 
There is indeed reason to believe that the Devil has received ^ 
far more directly personal worship than those who are not 
accustomed to investigate such matters would imagine. But 
it is to something more general that Paul refers. His own 
words in another place will best explain his meaning : “ Know 
ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, 
his servants ye are to whom ye obey ? ”® There are two laws 
set before us, that of God and that of Satan : and whose law 
we keep, his servants and worshippers we are. Profession, 
however vehement, goes for nothing in the other world. 
We may profess the worship of the Supreme God, we may 
be very sedulous in the outward part of it ; but if at the 
same time we are obeying the law of Satan, his subjects we 
^ Jude 9. 2 2 Cor. iv. 4. ^ Bom. vL 16. 



24 


EABTH^B EARLIEST AGES. 


are reckoned to be, and to him our prayers and praises 
ascend. And the law of Satan is this ; that we seek all our 
pleasures in, and fix all our heartfelt^, hopes upon, this 
present age over which he presides : and that we use our best 
endeavours, by means of various sensuous and intellectual 
occupations and delights and countless ways of killing time 
which he has provided, to keep our thoughts from ever 
wandering into that age to come, which will see him a fettered 
captive instead of a prince and a god. 

The princedom of the But he is also Called “ the pripjCe of the 
power of the air. power of the air.^^^ This principality 

would seem to be the same as “the heavenly places’^ — our 
version incorrectly translates “ high places ” ^ — which, as Paul 
tells us, swarm with the spiritual hosts of wickedness. It is 
by no means necessary to restrict it to the eighty or a hundred 
miles of atmosphere supposed to surround the earth : for if 
Satan’s power extends to the sun, as we suggested above, and 
so to the whole of our solar system, the kingdom of the air 
would include the immense space in which the planets of our 
centre revolve ; and in such a case it seems not unlikely that 
the throne of its prince may be situated in the photosphere 
of the sun. We should thus find a deep underlying signi- 
ficance in the fact that idolatry has always commenced with, 
and in no small degree consisted of, the worship of the sun- 
god, whether he be called San, Shamas, Bel, Ka, Baal, 
Molech, Milcom, Hadad, Adrammelech and Anamelech, 
Mithras, Apollo, Sheikh Shems, or by any other of his in- 
numerable names. 

There is, perhaps, a significance in the word used to 
describe this kingdom : for it means thick and misty in 
contrast to bright and clear air. Hence it may have been 
selected to indicate the polluted and sin-defiled condition of 
Satan’s heaven. And this view appears to be confirmed by 
a passage in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where we read: 

“ It was, therefore, necessary that the patterns of things in 
the heavens should be purified with these ; but the heavenly 
things themselves with better sacrifices than these.”® This 
purification will probably be accomplished at the return of 
the Lord, after the expulsion of Satan and his angels from 
1 Eph. ii. . 2 Epb. vi. 12. 3 Heb. ix. 23. 



THE IHTEEYAL. 


25 


heaven. We shall, however, need to mention it again in its 
proper place, and will, therefore, for the present, only further 
notice the beautiful agreement between this idea of the 
existing impurity of the first heaven and the prophecy of 
Isaiah that, in the age to come, “ the light of the moon shall 
be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be 
sevenfold, as the light of seven days.”^ 

The spiritual powers qf What, then, is the nature of the power 
the world, indicated by these titles of Satan? To 

understand it we must glance at the general hints of Scrip- 
ture concerning spiritual agencies. For, though unseen and 
little suspected by the rulers of earth, there are also spiritual 
powers,^ all originally appointed by God, whether they be 
loyal to Him now or not. Rank above rank these watchers 
stand, each passing on his account to a superior until it 
reaches the Most High at the apex of the pyramid. So in 
Zechariah^s first vision, those whom the Lord had sent to 
walk to and fro upon the earth are represented as delivering 
their report to the Angel of the Lord, who then appeals to 
the Almighty Himself.® 

And hence we read of thrones, dominions, principalities, 
powers,* archangels,® and angels. Nor can we know much of 
Scripture without discovering that vast numbers of these 
invisible beings, who supervise the afiairs of men and their 
world, are in open rebellion against the Almighty ; that 
there are principalities, powers, and world-rulers, of darkness, 
with whom, as Paul tells us, we have to wage a fearful 
warfare.® These all render account to Satan, their prince, 
who, in his reports to the Most High, makes use of their 
intelligence to accuse ourselves and our brethren before God 
day and night.^ 

It is, therefore, plainly revealed that spiritual as well as 
human powers are concerned in the administration of our 

^ Isa. XXX. 26. 2 Eccles. v, 8. ^ ^jea. i. 11, 12. ^ Col. i. 16. 

^ But we ought not, perhaps, to speak of archangels in the plural ; since 
Michael, called the archangel, is the only one mentioned m Scripture. 
Probably, however, there may be other beings of the same rank connected 
with other worlds. For Michael appears to bear the title because he is 
the appointed ruler of all faithful angels in the heaven of our earth. And 
hence we find him standing as the prince of God’s chosen people and the 
great opponent of Satan (Jude 9 j Itev. xii. 7). 

® Eph. vi. 12. 


7 Eev. xii. 10. 



EABTH'S EABLIE8T AGES. 


earth. And these diverse agencies are mentioned as making 
up the totality of its government in a verse of Isaiah, where 
we are told that the Lord at His coming will depose and 
punish two distinct governing bodies, “ the high ones that 
are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. 
Of these the former are manifestly identical with Satan and 
his angels ; the latter with the antichristian world-powers.^ 
Nor will Christ alter the form of government, though He 
change the rulers. For Himself and His church will then 
take the place of the high ones that are on high, awhile the 
first rank among the kings of the earth upon the earth will 
be given to the seed of Abraham according to the flesh. 

The re(juiar principaii- Now it is a Startling fact that the 
*^thi^rexoTpL'n^^tTbe present disposal of the regular spiritual 
under the ttway of Satan, powcrs of the world sccms to be entirely 
in the hands of Satan. This is evident from the passage 
just quoted, in which the high ones on high are stigmatised 
without any reserve as rebels against God. And in the 
tenth chapter of Daniel we read of the Satanic prince of 
Persia, and also of the prince of Grecia : but the angel of the 
Lord who opposes the former does not take a similar title. 
Nay, from his own words we may see that his post is no 
permanency : he is merely sent down for a special purpose, 
and retires when it is accomplished, leaving the prince of 
Grecia unassailed. And how deeply significant, how worthy 
of our most solemn thought, is his complaint that, upon his 
entrance into the heaven of our earth, he found, with a 
solitary exception, all its principalities either hostile or in- 
difierent!® From the whole region of the vast rebel empire 
there came forth but one loyal prince of God to aid him in 
his conflict with the powers of darkness. This faithful arch- 
angel was Michael: nor is it difficult to account for his 
presence in the regions of air. For he is described to Daniel 
as “ your prince,” and afterwards as “ the great prince which 
standeth for the children of thy people.” ^ It appears, then, 

1 Isa. xxiv. 21. 

2 That is, with. the Gentile powers of Christendom. For after Israel’s 
temporary rejection the dominion of earth was formally transferred to the 
Gentiles in the person of Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. ii. 37, 38). 

Dan. X. 21. Dan. x. 21 ; xii. 1. 



THE INTERTAL. 


27 


that he is the spiritual ruler of Israel ; and so, that when 
God chose a people upon earth for Himself He took them 
out of the jurisdiction (c^ovcrta') of Satan, and appointed one 
of His own princes to govern and protect them. Hence 
with fierce enmity the prince of darkness seems to have 
matched himself against Michael, and to have directed in 
person his desperate assaults upon the alienated principality. 
One of his victories is recorded in the book of Chronicles, 


where we are told how he “ stood up against Israel, and 
provoked David to number Israel/’ ^ 

In the third chapter of Zechariah we seem to have a 
typical representation of the whole conflict, with a glance at 
its final result. For the angel of the Lord before whom 
Joshua the high priest is seen standing, would naturally be 
Michael, the protector of Israel ; Satan himself is present to 
accuse ; and the Lord is introduced as Judge, deciding 
against the Adversary, and in favour of Joshua and Jeru- 
salem. But this sentence has not yet taken effect : for 
Satan, by the vigour and pertinacity of his attacks, after- 
wards caused the ruin and dispersion of the Jewish people, 
thus apparently defeating the purpose of God, and com- 
pletely recovering his lost province. Michael’s rule seems, 
therefore, for the present to be almost in abeyance ; but, as we 
find from the prophetic Scriptures, he will shortly resume 
the battle, and gain a decisive and final victory.* 


Therefore the prince of From all this we may surely infer that, 
ZtJe although Satan is a rebel, he has not yet 
the fearful reahty oj the been deprived either of his title or his 

Christian conflict. * xt • , 1 . -l • -l 

power. He is still the great high one on 


^ Acts xxvi. 18 ; Col. i. 13. 

2 1 Chr. xxi. 1. Dan. x. 13, 20 will show us that this was probably effected 
by a victory over Michael and the consequent suspension of the archangel’s 
protecting influence. A remarkable hint of the spiritual conflicts which 
seem to be connected with every earthly event may also be found in 
2 Kings VI. 16. For when the trembling servant of Eiisha told his master 
that Dothan was surrounded by the Syrians, the propliet seems to have 
immediately glanced at the spiritual forces on both nden., and then, satisfied 
with wiiat he had seen, replied, “Fear not; for they that he with us are 
more than they that be with themf The subsequent blinding of the 
hostile army was doubtless effected at God’s command by the fiery liost 
which protected Elisha, and the miracle certainly seems to imply a 
previous defeat of those who were with the Syrians. 

3 Dan. xii. 1 ; Kev. lii. 7-9. 



28 


EAETH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


high, who divides the world into different provinces accord- 
ing to its nationalities, appointing a powerful angel, assisted 
by countless subordinates, as viceroy over each kingdom, to 
direct its energies and bend them to his will. And so we 
get some idea of the terrible reality of Paul’s meaning, when 
he affirms that our great conflict is not with flesh and blood, 
but has to be carried on against principalities, against 
powers, against the world-rulers of this age of darkness, 
against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly 
places.^ o 

But who is sufficient for these things ? For the whole 
aerial surroundings of our planet are densely peopled with a 
hostile race of beings unutterably superior in wisdom and 
power to ourselves ; having had during a vast number of 
years every conceivable experience of the weak points of 
humanity ; possessing the incalculable advantage of being 
themselves invisible, though as spiritual intelligences they 
are probably able, not merely to judge of us by our words 
and outward expression of countenance, but even to read the 
innermost thoughts of our heart ; co-operating with the most 
perfect and never-failing organisation ; and lastly, directed 
by a leader of consummate wisdom and skill, who is assisted 
by powerful princes, and finds his subjects so numerous, that, 
if we are to lay any stress on the word “ legion ” in the 
memorable narrative of Luke, he is able to spare some six 
thousand of them to guard one miserable captive.^ 
jBjif the Lord h mindful Truly, with such facts as these before 
have them unprotected. US, we might Well faint for fear did we 
not know that there is a mightier Power above all the hosts 
of the prince of darkness. One who regards us with feelings 
of wondrous love. Who is not only able, but yearning, to 
shield US from the destroyer now, and Who purposes shortly 
to deliver us altogether from the anxiety, the terror, and the 
danger of his assaults. For although the Lord has not yet 
formally deposed the rebel, and arranged a new government, 
He does not leave the world entirely to Satan’s mercy. 
Angels of God penetrate the realms of air, encamp round 
about them that fear Him, and protect them from the malig- 
nant foes to whom they would otherwise fall an easy prey.® 
^ Eph. vi. 12. “ Luke viii. 30. ^ pg^. xxxiv. 7. 



THE INTEETAL. 


29 


Nor are their numbers insufficient : for did not the servant 
of Elisha behold the mountain full of horses and chariots of 
fire round about his jnaster Angels of God are appointed 
to take the charge of whole churches, as we find from the 
first three chapters of the Apocalypse. Nay, the reins of 
government are sometimes wrested even from the hands of 
Satan’s most powerful princes, and a great kingdom is for a 
while ruled by an angel of God. This, as we found just 
now, was the case with the empire of Persia when the Lord 
would hg^e the world-power favourable to His exiled 
people.^ 

The motions of the ele- It might also at first seem that the 

menu are probably di- y . x i lx j.'l • 

reded by Satan. elements are not left altogether in the 

hands of the rebels. For the voice of the angel of the waters 
sounded not like that of an apostate, when John heard him 
saying, “ Thou art righteous, O Lord, Which art, and wast, 
and shalt be, because Thou hast judged thus. For they have 
shed the blood of saints and prophets, and Thou hast given 
them blood to drink ; for they are worthy.”* These are 
indeed the words of one who has long sighed and groaned 
for the wickedness which his eyes have seen, and at last 
recognises the righteous judgment that overtakes it. And 
again ; the angel “ which had power over fire ” is evidently 
one of the princes of God.** 

But since these two, as well as those whom John saw 
holding the four winds of the earth,* are only introduced in 
connection with the time of the end, it is probable that they 
are the appointed successors of Satan’s ministers, who will 
hereafter take possession of the elements to use them in the 
execution of the wrath to come. For until the Devil be 
deposed from the throne of the air, it is likely that he will 
exercise control, to a great extent at least, over atmospheric 
phenomena. In the book of Job we find him even wielding 
the lightning : for at his bidding the fire of God fell from 
heaven, and consumed both the flocks and servants of the 
patriarch.® And when, many centuries afterwards, our Lord 
arose from His sleep and “ rebuked ” the winds and the sea,^ 

^ 2 Xings vi. 17. ^ Dan. x. 13. ^ Ugy, ^vi. 5, 6. Rev. xiv. 18. 

* Rev. vii. 1. ® Job i. 16. 7 Matt. viii. 26. 



30 


earth's earliest ages. 


it cannot be supposed that He was chiding the mere rush of 
the blast, or the senseless waves ; but rather, those malignant 
spirits of air and water which had coijibined to excite the 
storm. 

General condition qf the Such, then, is the picture Set before US 

in the Word of God-the whole earth 
rulers and the partial in- divided into provinces by the prince of 
terference of God. world, and Systematically governed 

and administered under his direction by his viceroys with 
their officers and subordinates countless in nungiber ; this 
organisation, perfect in itself, but continually disturbed by 
interferences from a mightier Power for the protection of 
individuals, of churches, and occasionally of whole nations. 
And the product of these two influences gives us the exact 
state of the world as it is at present : a state generally and 
systematically evil and godless, but with many individual 
exceptions, and subject at times to partial changes on a more 
extensive scale, which we call reformations or revivals : a 
thick darkness, illumined, however, here and there by burn- 
ing and shining lamps ; an arid desert, but not without its 
oases : an ever-restless sea, on the surface of which the broad 
stream of the spirit that now worketh in the children of dis- 
obedience is the prominent feature, but with some under- 
currents setting in an opposite direction. 

Ezekiel’s prophecy con^ Let US now tum to the twenty-eighth 
chapter of Ezekiel, from which we may, 
titles are vot to he re- perhaps, extract a little more information 

ferred to the same person. . mi n ^ 

on this mysterious subject. Ihe nrst 
nineteen verses of the chapter contain a very remarkable but 
somewhat obscure prophecy, consisting of two distinct parts, 
an address to the prince of Tyrus, and a lamentation upon 
the king of Tyrus. Now there can be no doubt that these 
titles refer to two persons, and are not merely different 
appellations of the same. For in the address to the prince 
there is nothing which could not be said to a human poten- 
tate ; but the king is manifestly a superhuman being. Of 
the prince it is said that he will be slain by the hand of 
strangers, and the word translated “ slain ” means “ thrust 
through ” with sword or spear : but the king is to be 
devoured by fire, and brought to ashes upon the earth. 



THE INTBEVAL. 


31 


Interpretation of the With regard, therefore, to the first ten 
^yrm! ^ verses, there is no reason why we should 

not apply them to the ^hen reigning prince of Tyre, whose name, 
as we learn from Josephus, was Ittiobalus. Now Tyre was 
built on a rocky island about half a mile from the mainland, 
and was strongly fortified. Hence Ittiobalus is represented 
as exulting in the strength of his sea-girt city, and likening 
himself, in proud reliance upon his inaccessible dwelling, to 
the God that sitteth above the heavens : he is ironically told 
that he i§ wiser than Daniel, whose fame was evidently 
world- wide at the time : his presumption is ascribed to his 
wisdom, his success in commerce, and the vast riches he had 
acquired. But because he had set his heart as the heart of 
the Most High, therefore the terrible of the nations, that is, 
the Chaldeans, should come against him ; and, when about to 
be slain by a man, he should at length discover that he was 
no god. 

Thus far the prophecy is easily intelligible ; “and we know 
that a short time after its delivery Tyre was besieged by 
Nebuchadnezzar. It is curious, too, to find the Tyrians in 
later times flattering Herod by exclaiming that his voice was 
the voice of a god, and not of a man, and so bringing upon 
him a punishment far more signal than that which befell 
their own ancient prince.^ 

The remainder of the But the lamentation upon the king of 
Xyrus^does not so readily_ yield its mean- 
for this mpposition. ing : for there are expressions in it which 
cannot be applied to any mortal. Now to adopt the too 
common plan of explaining these away as mere figures of 
speech, is to trifle with the Word of God. We have no right 
to use so dishonest a method of extricating ourselves from 
difficulties, a method which opens the way for deducing 
almost any desired meaning from a passage, and makes the 
whole Bible an enigma instead of a revelation. We must 
rather confess, if it be necessary, that we have no clue what- 
ever to an interpretation. 

But there is a kind of prophecy, especially frequent in the 
Psalms, in which the prophet, speaking first of a cotem- 
porary matter, is then borne on by the Spirit to some 
^ Acts xii. 20*23. 2 jjze. xxviiL 11-19. 



.32 


eakth’s earliest ages . 


stupendous event of the last times, of which the incident in his 
own days is a faint type. And if we apply this principle to 
the passage before us we are at once struck, upon considering 
the type, by the similarity of the pretensions of Ittiobalus to 
those of Paul’s man of sin, “ who opposeth and exalteth 
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped ; 
so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing him- 
self that he is God.”^ Can, then, the king of Tyrus, as dis- 
tinguished from his type the prince, be the great final Anti- 
christ? Let us try the key, and see if the wards, fit. 

And first ; is there any reason why Antichrist should be 
called the king of Tyre ? It would seem so. For Tyre is in 
Palestine, and in the second verse of this chapter is said to 
be “ in the midst of the seas.” Now if we turn to Daniel’s 
prophecy of the wilful king, we shall find it predicted of that 
destroyer, that he will enter into the glorious land, and plant 
the tabernacles of his palace “between the seas.”*^ This in 
other words seems to mean that he will invade Palestine and 
fix his abode at Tyre. 

But there is a significant change in the expression for 
Tyre. In Ezekiel’s address to the prince it is said to be “ in 
the midst,” or, more literally, “ in the heart of the seas,” that 
is, surrounded on all sides by water.^ And it is a well-known 
fact, that in former times, up to the date of Alexander’s siege 
at least, Tyre was an island. But it is now a peninsula, and 
is, therefore, likely to be so in the still future days of Anti- 
christ : hence the expression in the original of Daniel is 
merely, “between the seas.”^ And so, perhaps, we may 
explain the connection of Antichrist with Tyre. 

Some egressions in the But what shall we say of the lamen- 
To tation itself? For there are assertions in 
Satan. But Antichrist which could be tiue of no mortal, not 

will be Satanincarnate. />ai n ^ A^ 

even oi Adam. Certainly our first father 
was in Eden, and in the garden of God ; but we are not told 
that every precious stone was his covering : we know not 
how he could be called the anointed cherub : we do not hear 
that he was upon the holy mountain of God, and walked up 
and down in the midst of the stones of fire. Indeed, so far 
as we can see, there is but one being of whom some of the 

1 2 These, ii. 4. 2 p^n. xi. 41-45. Eze. xxviii. 2, * Dan. xi. 45, 



THE INTEBVAL. 


33 


expressions in this passage could be used, and that is Satan : 
the whole of the remainder may be explained of Antichrist. 

But why this strange confusion ? Why should these two 
mysterious wonders ' be thus apostrophized as though the 
history and personality of both were merged in one being } 
It is not difficult to find an explanation. For it needs but 
little study of Scripture to learn that all human energy is 
raised and directed by spiritual influences. Upon the 
children of God comes the Spirit of God, and they are then 
able to do His will. But if they lose their feeling of de- 
pendence upon Him, and grow remiss in prayer, they are 
liable to be seized and misdirected by spirits of evil, and 
fearful consequences may ensue. So David was once moved 
by Satan to the cost of himself and his people,^ though not to 
his final ruin : for the Devil cannot compass that even in the 
case of the weakest of God’s saints. But the wicked are 
altogether subject to the spirit that now worketh in the 
children of disobedience.^ 

Now while evil angels and demons are doubtless appointed 
for the ordinary work of influencing mankind, yet we can 
easily imagine that, whenever there is any transcendently 
mighty issue at stake, their great leader, who excels them all 
in wisdom and power, would himself undertake the more 
arduous labour. And accordingly at our Lord’s first advent, 
when the hour of the prince of darkness had come, Satan 
himself entered into Judas, and directed him to his fearful 
crime.* So when that last great master-piece of the Adver- 
sary shall appear, the Antichrist, whose coming, as Paul tells 
us, is after the working of Satan,^ and to whom the dragon shall 
give his power, and his throne, and great authority,® it is but 
reasonable to suppose that he will be possessed and energised 
by the Devil in person. And thus he will be a compound 
being, partly human, partly superhuman ; at once the king 
of Tyre and the anointed cherub that covereth; a travesty by 
Satan of the incarnation of our Lord. Hence the great diffi- 
culties of this prophecy vanish : the tangled web of the 
lamentation is unravelled. For it is easily intelligible if 

^ 1 Chr. xxi. 2 Eph. ii. 2. ^ John xiii. 27. 

* 2 Thess. ii. 9. ® Rev. xiii. 2. 


4 



34 


earth’s earliest ages. 


understood to be spoken sometimes to the human, sometimes 
to the Satanic part of Antichrist. 

Nor need this twofold address seem strange to us : for 
we have a similar one in connection with the very earliest 
mention of Satan in the Bible. At his first introduction to 
us we find him commencing his work of ruin through the 
mediuiti of a serpent's body. And the just sentence of God, 
though nominally pronounced upon the serpent alone, com- 
prises both the punishment of the beast energised and that of 
the Devil within it. Thus the parallelism with our passage 
is complete. 

Detaih of the lamenta- With this general clue to the lamenta- 
tion let us now proceed to its details. 
The first sentence seems to apply, primarily at least, to Satan, 
who is said to have sealed up the sum, being perfect in 
wisdom and beauty.' His vast empire is often alluded to in 
Scripture, and, as we have already seen, may not improbably 
comprehend the whole of our solar system. Certainly no 
other angelic power of greater or even equal dignity has been 
revealed to us. The archangel Michael himself is quoted by 
Jude as preserving towards the prince of darkness the respect 
due to a superior, however wicked he may be, until God has 
formally commanded his deposition.^ If, then, he be a being 
of such high degree, he would also in God’s perfect kingdom, 
where there are no anomalies as with us, excel his sub- 
ordinates in wisdom and beauty as much as he does in rank. 

He was placed tn an The next clausc speaks of him as having 
been in Eden the garden of God.» Now 
of Adam; hut rather to S3ita.n was indeed in Adam’s Eden: he 
scribed in the Apocalypse, did not, howcver, appear there as a 
minister of God, but as an apostate and malignant spirit 
eager for the ruin of the new creation. Hence the Eden of 
this passage must have been of a far earlier date. Nor did it 
at all resemble the garden in which Adam was placed. For 
we read nothing of trees pleasant to the sight and good for 
food : but the prominent feature is the covering, that is, 
probably, the pavilion or palace, of Satan, which is described 
as being made of gold and of every precious stone. 

Yet, while this description does not in any way remind us 
1 Eze. xxviii. 12. 2 Jude 9. ^ Eze. xxviii, 13. 



THE INTERVAL. 


35 


of Paradise, we cannot but be struck by its resemblance to 
that of the New Jerusalem with its buildings of pure gold as 
it were transparent glass, its foundations garnished with all 
manner of precious stones, its jasper wall, and its gates of 
pearl. And that city, be it remembered, is the destined 
habitation of the church of the firstborn^ who will then be 
spiritual beings of a higher order, equal to the angels,^ and, 
with Christ at their head, will have succeeded to that very 
power which Satan and his angels are now so fearfully 
abusing.^ • 

He was a mighty privre The remainder of the verse should be 
‘{^Zatifn. translated, “ The service of thy tablets 

and of thy pipes was prepared with thee on the day when 
thou wast created.’^ ^ Now music is one of the necessary 
attendants of royal state. In the third chapter of Daniel we 
have an enumeration of the various instruments which were 


to signal the time of the king^s pleasure : ^ and in the four- 
teenth of Isaiah the pomp of the king of Babylon and the 
noise of his viols arc said to be brought down to the grave 
with him.*^ Nay, the blast of a trumpet accompanied the 
manifestation of God Himself upon Mount Sinai ; ° and the 
trump of the archangel will sound at the return in glory of 
the King of the whole earth. 

The meaning, then, of this clause seems to be that Satan 
was from the moment of his creation surrounded by the 
insignia of royalty ; that he awoke to consciousness to find 
the air filled with the rejoicing music of those whom God 
had appointed to stand before him. 


He was also a priest of In the ncxt versc wc sccm to pass from 
fLcfwt Zli’e/Ziriooi the royalty of Satan to his priestly dig- 


oj the throne of &od. 


He is said to have been, by God’s 


appointment, the anointed cherub that covereth. Anointed 


doubtless means consecrated by the oil of anointing ; while 
the cherubim appear to be the highest rank of heavenly 
beings, sitting nearest to the throne of God, and leading the 


worship of the universe.® Possibly they are identical with 
the thrones of which Paul speaks in the first chapter of his 


^ Luke XX. 36. 2 y jq 3 xxviii. 13. * Dan. iii. 5. 

* Isa. xiv. 11. 6 Ex. xix. 16. ' Eze. xxviii. 14. 

3 Bev. iv. 9, 10; v. 11-14. 



36 


EAKTH S EARLIEST AGES. 


epistle to the Colossians.^ The words “ that covereth ” 
indicate an allusion to the cherubim that overshadowed the 
ark ; but we cannot, of course, define tbe precise nature of 
this ofifice of Satan. The general idea seems to be that he 
directed and led the worship of his subjects. 

He is also said to have been upon the holy mountain of 
God, and to have walked up and down in the midst of the 
stones of fire.‘^ The mountain of God is the place of His 
presence in visible glory, where His high priest would, of 
course, stand before Him to minister. The stones pf fire may, 
perhaps, be explained as follows. We know that the station 
of the cherubim is just beneath the glory at the footstool of 
the throne.^ Now when Moses took Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, 
and seventy of the elders of Israel, up the mountain of Sinai 
to see the God of Israel, “there was under His feet as it 
were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the 

body of heaven in his clearness And the sight of the 

glory of the Lord was like devouring fire upon the top of the 
mount. This paved work of sapphire glowing with devour- 
ing fire, is, })erhaps, the same as the stones of fire : and if so, 
Satan’s presence in the midst of them would indicate his 
enjoyment of the full cherubic privilege of nearness to the 
throne of God. 

At hui creation Satan ^he ncxt veise shows that God is not 
ways. the author of evil.*^ For even the prince 

of darkness was by creation perfect in all his ways, and so 
continued until iniquity was found in him and he fell. 

Interpretation of the That which follows is more difficult. 
qfthy merchandise." Ly the multitude of thy merchandise 
they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast 
sinned : therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the 
mountain of God : and I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, 
out of the midst of the stones of fire.”® 

The first clause of this verse may refer solely to the human 
aspect of Antichrist : for there are prophetic intimations that 
commerce will be a prominent feature in the perilous times 
of the end.^ In the past history of the world we have many 
instances of its demoralising effects upon nations wholly 

Col. i. 16. 2 j; 2 e. xxviii. 14. 3 Eze. i. 26. ^ Ex. xxiv. 10, 17. 

3 Eze. xxviii. 15. ® Eze. xxviii. 16. ' Eev. xviii. 11-19. 



THE INTEKVAL. 


37 


given to it, of the luxury, fraud, and violence, which ever 
seem to develop with its growth. 

Froponed new render- Nevertheless the clause may apply to 
interpretation. Satan in somc mystcnous way which we 

cannot yet explain : for we are only able to discern the 
dimmest outlines of these spiritual matters. Certainly such 
an application seems to be required by the context, and if the 
authorised version seems obscure, an admissible change in 
the rendering will suggest a very suitable interpretation. 
For the word translated “merchandise” may also (as an 
investigation of the root will show) ^ signify “ detraction ” 
or “ slander ; ” and we know that the very name “ Devil 
means “the slanderer,” or “false accuser.” 

Now that Satan does carry to God slanderous reports of 
the actions and motives of men we learn from the book of 
Job. And the life of the same patriarch also supplies us with 
an instance of the cruel violence which seems to follow 
these accusations so invariably that the whole princedom of 
Satan has become a realm of injustice, in which the servants 
of God suffer affliction, while the wicked, as a rule, flourish. 
For the present the Lord permits this state of things because 
His own children need the furnace to purge away their dross; 
but hereafter He will assuredly require all their sorrows and 
all their tears at the hands of their malignant persecutor. 

From the twelfth chapter of the Apocalypse we learn that 
He will at length put an end to the slanders of Satan by 
sending Michael to drive him down from his throne on high, 
and expel him altogether from the heavenly places. And at 
the instant of his fall from his aerial dominions a loud voice 
is heard saying in heaven, “ Now is come salvation, and 
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of His 
Christ : for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which 
accused them before our God day and night. 

This expulsion is probably identical with the one men- 
tioned in our text. For, if we adopt the rendering “ slander ” 
or “ false accusation,” the cause assigned for the casting out 

' to go about— -(1) in order to traffic, (2) for the purpose of slandering 
Hence a merchant, and 7*3*3 slander, the word used by Ezekie 
might, therefore, incline to either meaning. 

- Rev. xii. 10. 



38 


eakth’s earliest ages. 


in Ezekiel exactly corresponds to the proclaimed result of it 
in the Apocalypse. 

Satan fell through The next verse presents no difficu.ty,^ For 
^***‘^^‘ that the heart of Satan was lifted up be- 

cause of his beauty, and that he corrupted hie wisdom by 
reason of his brightness, we may infer especially from Paul’s 
warning, “ Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he 
fall into the condemnation of the Devil.” ^ 

Pride in his own superiority seems to have prompted this 
wondrous being to turn to himself that worship' wjp.ich it was 
his office to direct to his Almighty Creator. But already the 
ruin of God has fallen upon his realm : he finds his power 
checked and cut short by angels who are irresistible because 
they come in the strength of the Most High : he sees, per- 
chance, the gathering armies of Michael preparing for the 
fatal onslaught which will drive him from heaven : and 
knows that they will be quickly followed by the Son of God 
Who will cast his blasted and helpless form even lower than 
earth, into the depths of the abyss. Then will he at length 
both feel and show to all the universe the ineffable distance 
between the loftiest wisest and fairest of created beings and 
the great and ever blessed Creator, Who alone is worthy to 
receive glory and honour and power. 

With the latter part of the prophecy, referring as it does 
to the joint downfall of Satan and Antichrist, we have at 
present no concern, since we are not yet occupied with the 
future, but with the past. 

Summary of the history It, therefore, ouly remains to put to- 
tained tn the lamentation, gcther the inlormation which, if our inter- 
pretation be correct, this passage contains. The outline will 
be somewhat as follows. 

God created Satan the fairest and wisest of all His 
creatures in this part of His universe, and made him prince 
of the world and of the power of the air. Since his wisdom 
would be chiefly used in expounding the will and ways of 
God, we can probably discern in its mention his office of 
prophet. He was placed in an Eden, or region of delight, 
which was both far anterior to the Eden of Genesis, — for he 
was perfect in all his ways when he entered it — and also, 
^ Eze. xxviii. 17. ^ iii, 6. 



THE INTEKVAL. 


39 


apparently, of an altogether different and more substantial 
character, resembling the New Jerusalem as described in the 
Apocalypse. 

In the scanty account given to us of this Eden we may, 
perhaps, trace the lineaments of the heavenly tabernacle. 
For from the second chapter of Genesis we find that Eden 
was a district, and the garden an enclosure within it.^ Fol- 
lowing this analogy we discover in Satan’s habitation three 
enclosures, Eden, the garden of God, and the holy mountain 
of God, corresponding, possibly, to the outer court of the 
tabernacle, the holy place, and the holy of holies, respectively. 
And this idea is strengthened by the fact that Satan is said 
to have been upon the holy mountain of God as the anointed 
cherub that covereth ; just as the covering cherubim were 
placed in the holy of holies. 

He, therefore, appears to have been the great high priest 
of his realm, dwelling in a splendid palace of gold and 
precious stones near to the place of God’s presence ; just as 
the Israelitish high priest resided at Jerusalem in the vicinity 
of the temple. 

He was also its king, having been placed upon this summit 
of honour at his creation, and not subsequently raised to it 
from a lower rank. Finally ; he was perfect in all his ways, 
and apparently continued so for a length of time. 

Now all this evidently took place before his fall and the 
preparation of the present world. And so we can only 
conclude that he is closely connected with bur earth, and 
that a large portion of his history extends back into times far 
anterior to those of Adam. 

It thu» appears that Now the analogy between Satan’s office 

Sata 7 i teas appointed pro- tjt. i J 

phet, priest a7id king, of tkat which our Lord has already 
the world : but he proved upou Himsclf in part, and will 

himself a rebel. There- i ^ n • - *1 • ^ 

fore the Lord Jesm came shortly exercise in full, IS SO Striking that 

forth from the Godhead, jg aVoid the following 

to assume the abused dig- . Z i i i • n 

nities, and restore the inference. Ifiat Satan abused his high 
confusion. office of prophet, priest, and king, and 

thus involved the w'hole of his province in sin, and the 
earthly part of it, at least, in a ruin to which allusion is made 
in the second verse of Genesis. That, when his return to 
^ Gen. ii. 8. 



40 


earth’s earliest ages. 


obedience bad been proved an impossibility — perhaps by his 
conduct towards the new creation, which may have been 
intended to give him an opportunity of repentance — and 
when no other created being could be found able to restore 
the confusion, the Lord Jesus Himself came forth from the 
Godhead to take the misused power into His own hands, and 
to hold it until the rebellion be altogether suppressed, and 
every trace of it obliterated. 

The offices of prophet and priest He is already exercising, 
but not that of king. For had He at once assumed the 
sceptre, the result would have been utter destruction to all 
living, since all have sinned, and whatsoever is sinful must 
be cast out of His kingdom into unquenchable fire. It was, 
therefore, necessary first to put away the iniquity of those 
who should be saved. This He came into the world to do 
by the sacrifice of Himself : and now, having given us 
instructions as to our conduct during His absence, and many 
exhortations to be ever watching for His return. He has 
departed with the blood into the heavenly holy of holies, 
there to appear in the presence of God for us. This done, 
He will come to earth a second time, to wrest the power 
from the hands of Satan, and, after destroying that which 
cannot be healed, bring back the residue to purity and 
order. 

'^en He In* fulfilled Hcnce we See that our Lord even in 
S tlifthe the regeneration, when He shall sit upon 

Godhead. the throne of His glory, will yet, as Son 

of man, be holding a position far inferior to His own rank : 
for He will be acting as king of one province only of His 
vast empire. And so we read that, when He has completed 
the restoration of our fallen world and its surrounding 
heaven. He will deliver up the kingdom to His Father, and 
be subject as Son of man to Him that subjected all things 
unto Him, that God may be all in all.^ That is, perhaps, 
that, after He has swept away every vestige of rebellion, and 
destroyed the last great enemy, death, He will do homage to 
the Father at the head of all the restored and loyal subjects 
of His realm ; and then, relinquishing His special sovereignty 


‘ 1 Cor. XV. 24-28. 



THE INTERVAL. 


41 


over this world, for which there will no longer be any need, 
retire again into the Godhead, so that God — not the Father, 
but God, that is. Father, Son, and Spirit — may be all in all. 

Therefore from the pro- Seeing, then, that the government 
Christ will shortly take upon His 
jecure the nature of shoulders appears to be exactly identical 
king, was once Committed to 

Satan, and that God^s first arrangements were of necessity 
perfection, does it not seem likely that, when the times of 
restitutioi» arrive, the original order of things will begin to be 
restored in Christ’s Millenial kingdom ? 

If so, we can easily discover the outline of Satan’s pre- 
adamite world. For in the Millenium Christ and His church, 
the members of which will then have been made like unto 
Himself, are to reign in the heavenly places over earth and 
its inhabitants. So, probably, in remote ages, before the 
first whisper of rebellion against God, Satan, as the great 
governing head and the viceroy of the Almighty, assisted by 
glorious beings of his own nature, ruled over the sinless 
dwellers upon earth. At the same time he directed the 
worship of his subjects, and expounded to them the oracles 
of the all-wise Creator. 

But his weight of glory was more than he could bear : 
pride lifted up his heart, and he fell from his obedience. 
Then, doubtless, corruption appeared among his angels, and 
so descended to those who were in the flesh. How long 
God bore with this ; what warnings and opportunities He 
gave ; whether any availed themselves of His mercy, and are 
now holy angels who from time to time revisit the place of 
their ancient habitation — all such questions as these we can 
only answer by conjecture from the analogy of our own race. 
But the fact that we can ask them shows how rightly all our 
vaunted wisdom in this life is said to be at best but a know- 


ledge in part, and how wonderful a supplement may, in the 
world to come, be added to our present scanty information 
even in regard to the history of our own planet. 


The two order* of Sa- 
tan's subject* mau be 
traced in the New Testa- 


We are, however, apparently able to 
discern in the New Testament clear traces 


ment. Use and meo 
qfthe name Devil. 


of the two orders of Satan’s subjects, the 
spiritual, and those who were in the flesh. 



42 


earth’s earliest ages. 


For there are three distinctive terms applied to the dwellers 
in the kingdom of darkness. 

The first is 6 Sta^oXo?, the Devil proper, a word which in 
this sense is never used in the plural, and is always a desig- 
nation of Satan himself. Its literal meaning is “ the one 
who sets at variance,” “ the slanderer,” or “ false accuser.” 
And how apt a name is this for him who began to slander 
God to man when he corrupted our first parents, and has 
since continued to do so by the stream of hard thoughts and 
evil suggestions which he is ceaselessly pouring into human 
hearts ! Nor does he stop at this : for in giving in his reports 
of the inhabitants of earth he also slanders man to God. So 
we find him declaring that self-interest was the sole motive 
of Job’s righteousness so we hear him desiring to have 
Peter that he may sift him as wheat so we read that he 
accuses ourselves and our brethren before our God day and 
night.^ The name Devil is, then, applied to Satan alone : 
for he appears to be the only evil power who reports the 
actions of men directly to God. 

The angeh of the Devil. In the second place we find mention of 
the angels of Satan,^ who are doubtless the spiritual intelli- 
gences which God appointed to assist him in his government, 
and who chose to follow him into sin. These probably con- 
stitute the principalities, powers, and world-rulers of this 
darkness.'^ 


The demotiM, which are But another class of Satan’ 8 subjects is 
fpiriu. much more irequently brought beiore us. 

These are the 8atp,dvta or demons, and great confusion is 
introduced into our version by the erroneous translation 
‘‘ devils.” We may, however, in some measure avoid this 
confusion by remembering that the proper word for Devil 
has, as we have just said, no plural, and is only applied to 
Satan himself. Whenever, therefore, we meet the plural in 
the English Testament we may be sure that the Greek is 
Sat/xoVta, which ought to be rendered “ demons.” 

Now these demons are the same as evil and unclean spirits, 
as we may see by the following passages. “ When the even 
was come they brought unto him many that were possessed 


^ Job i. 9-11. 2 Luke xxii. 31. 

^ Matt. XXV. 41. 


3 Rev. xii. 10. 
« Eph. vi. 12. 



THE INTEEVAL. 


43 


with demons ; and He cast out the spirits with His word.” ' 
Again ; in Luke’s Gospel we read, “ And the seventy re- 
turned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the demons are 
subject unto us through Thy name.” To which the Lord 
responds: “Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the 
spirits are subject unto you.”^ So in Matthew’s account of 
the lunatic boy, the demon is said to come forth from him 
but in Mark’s Gospel this same demon is called a foul spirit^ 
and also a deaf and dumb spirit} And Luke gives us a list 
of “ certaigi women which had been healed of evil spirits and 
infirmities,” of whom the first mentioned is “ Mary called 
Magdalene, out of whom went seven demons}' ^ Demons and 
evil spirits are, therefore, synonymous terms. 

But they must be carefully distinguished from angels bad 
as well as good. For angels are not mere disembodied 
spirits, but — as we may learn from our Lord’s declaration 
that the children of the resurrection shall be equal to the 
angels — are clothed with spiritual bodies, such as are pro- 
mised to us if we “ shall be accounted worthy to obtain that 
world and the resurrection from the dead.” ® 

This distinction was clearly understood by the Jews: for 
in the Acts of the Apostles we read that the Pharisees cried 
out concerning Paul, “We find no evil in this man : but if 
a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight 
against God.”^ And in the preceding verse we are told of 
their opponents, the Sadducees, that they denied the existence 
of angels and spirits. 


The classical meaning What then is the meaning of the term 

gf the term demon. “ dcmon ?” PlatO dcriveS it from 

an adjective formed from Sdio, and signifying “ knowing,” 
“intelligent”; most modern scholars refer it to Sam, to 
divide, as though it meant a divider or distributor of 
destiny. 

Its classical use is as follows. By Homer it is applied to 
the gods ; but we must remember that Homer’s gods are 
merely supernatural men. It was afterwards used of a sort 
of intermediate and inferior divinity. “ The deity,” says 
Plato, “ has no intercourse with man ; but all the inter- 


^ Matt. viii. 16. 2 Luke x. 17, 20. ^ Matt. xvii. 18. 

* Mark ix. 25. ® Luke vni. 2, 3. ® Luke xx. 35. 7 Acts xxiii. 9. 



44 


EA.KTH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


course and conversation between gods and men is carried on 
by the mediation of demons/’ And he further explains that 
“ the demon is an interpreter and carrier from men to gods 
and from gods to men of the prayers and sacrifices of the 
one, and of the injunctions and rewards of sacrifices from the 
other.” 

If we inquire whence these demons came, we shall be told 
that they are the spirits of men of the golden age acting as 
tutelary deities ; canonised heroes, precisely similar both in 
their origin and functions to the Romish saints. lu Hesiod’s 
curious description of the ages of the human race we find 
the following account.^ 

“ First of all the immortals, who possess the mansions of 
Olympus, made a golden race of articulate-speaking men. 
These lived in the time of Cronos, when he ruled in heaven. 
Like gods they spent their lives, with hearts void of care, 
apart and altogether free from toils and trouble. Nor did 
miserable old age threaten them : but ever alike strong in 
hands and feet they rejoiced in festal pleasures far from the 
reach of all ills. And they died as if overcome by sleep. 
All blessings were theirs. And spontaneously the fruitful 
soil would bear crops great and abundant. And so they 
occupied their cultivated lands in tranquillity and peace with 
many goods, being rich in flocks and dear to the blessed 
gods. But after that earth had covered this generation, they 
indeed by the counsels of mighty Zeus became demons, 
kindly ones, haunting the earth, being guardians of mortal 
men. These I ween, shrouded in mist, and going to and fro 
everywhere upon the earth, watch both the decisions of 
justice and harsh deeds, and are dispensers of riches. Such 
a royal prerogative is theirs.” 

Now if we remember that according to Bible teaching the 
heathen gods were really evil angels and demons who 
inspired oracles and received worship, we shall easily under- 
stand that the golden age of which ancient bards so rap- 
turously sang was no reminiscence of Paradise, but of the 
times of that former world when Satan’s power was still 
intact. A change in the heavenly dynasty, the expulsion of 
Cronos or Saturn, is always mentioned as having brought to a 
^ Works and Days, 109-126. 



THE INTEETAL. 


45 


close this age of unmingled joy. Nor need we be startled at 
the good influence attributed by Hesiod to demons. For in 
a heathen poem we can only expect to learn what the prince 
of this world may choose to say, and have no cause for 
wonder if he commend his own agents. 

The ijividenu recorded Such, then, are the demons of the 
\LTS’t7!i''th7mTT7Ha. classical writers. Nor does there appear 
mevt meaning with the to be any reason for changing the mean- 
ing of the term in the New Testament. 
For may yot these demons be the spirits of those who trod 
this earth in the flesh before the ruin described in the second 
verse of Genesis, and who, at the time of that great destruc- 
tion, were disembodied by God, and left still under the 
power, and ultimately to share the fate, of the leader in 
whose sin they acquiesced ? Certainly one oft recorded fact 
seems to confirm such a theory : for we read that these 
demons are continually seizing upon the bodies of men, and 
endeavouring to use them as their own. And may not this 
propensity indicate a wearisome lack of ease, a wandering 
unrest, arising from a sense of incompleteness ; a longing to 
escape the intolerable condition of being unclothed — for 
which they were not created — so intense that, if they can 
satisfy its cravings in no other way, they will even enter into 
the filthy bodies of swine?' 

We find no such propensity on the part of Satan and 
his angels. They, doubtless, still retain their ethereal bodies 
— for otherwise how could they carry on their conflicts with 
the angels of God ? — and would be likely to regard with high 
disdain the gloss and unwieldy tabernacles of men. They 
may, indeed, possibly enter human frames ; not, however, 
from inclination, but only because such a course is absolutely 
necessary for the furtherance of some great conspiracy of 
evil. 

We may aUo distinguish Thus in the New Testament the spiritual 

«'hXi»''rn‘th€^idTe,ta. subjects of Satan are plainly divided into 
two classes ; nor would it be difficult to 
prove a similar distinction in the Old. Such angels as the 
princes of Persia and Grecia, of which we have already 
spoken, would of course belong to the first order ; while the 
' Matt. viii. 31. 



46 


earth’s earliest ages. 


familiar spirits, and probably also the Shedim^ Setrtm, Lilith, 
Tsiim, and /m, would be identical with the demons. 

The aheence of human But here a question naturally arises. 

why. if a preadamlte race really existed 
non-exi8fenre of preariom- upon earth in the flcsh, do we not find 
some indications of it among the fossil 
remains ? Certainly no human bones have been as yet 
detected in primeval rocks ; though if any should be hereafter 
discovered, we need find no contradiction to Scripture in the 
fact. • 

But the absence in the fossiliferous strata of any vestige of 
preadamite man is no real obstacle to the view we have 
taken. For we are totally unacquainted with the conditions 
of life in that pristine world, which may not have been, and 
indeed probably were not, the same as in our own. For 
Adam was created after, and apparently, as we shall presently 
see, in full view of a previous failure. Hence it may be that 
death did not touch those primeval men until the final 
destruction, and that the decaying and dying state of the 
animal and vegetable kingdoms was a warning ever before 
their eyes of the wrath that would at length reach their own 
persons except they repented. It may be that their bodies 
were resolved into primal elements, leaving the spirit naked, 
instead of the spirit departing and giving up the body to 
decay as with us. It may be that they were smitten, with 
some consuming plague of the I^ord which changed their 
comely forms into indistinguishable masses of corruption,’^ 
or reduced them in a moment to ashes upon the earth.^ It 
may be that they all perished in what is now to us the deep, 
and that their remains are covered by the deposit at the 
bottom of ocean. Evidently our habitable land was once the 
floor of the sea, theirs may be now. 

The aea ie fhe vrieon of Indeed we are not without hints of a 
mysterious connection between these dis- 
habitation The absence embodied spirits and the sea ; and may 
of sea in the new eart , infer, not merely that some of 

them are already confined there, but, still further, that fresh 
captives are from time to time placed under the same re- 
straint, whenever an outrage of more than ordinary daring 
1 Zecli. liv. 12. 2 E^e. xxviii. 18; Mai. iv. 3. 



THE INTERVAL. 


47 


calls forth the righteous indignation of God, and causes Him 
to bring the mischievous career of its perpetrators to a 
sudden and final close. 

Certainly the knowledge of some such fact seems to have 
terrified the legion of demons from which our Lord delivered 
the Gadarene ; for otherwise what meaning can we find in 
their agonising entreaty that He would not command them 
to go out into the deep ? ’ In Matthew’s account their words 
are different, and they fear lest they should be tormented 
before the^ time.^ But the latter expression is doubtless 
identical in meaning with the former : and hence we learn 
that at the commencement of the Millenium the whole host 
of unclean spirits will be consigned to the abyss.® Nor 
should we omit to notice that the word rendered “ the 
bottomless pit ” in the twentieth chapter of the Apocalypse ♦ 
is, in the Greek, the same as that which is translated ‘‘ the 
deep ” ® in the narration of Luke.® 

It seems, then, that the sea is the prison of demons ; and 
is it not possible that the Almighty made it so because its 
place was the scene of their sins in the flesh and of the just 
punishment by which they were at last overtaken ? 

We have another instance of God’s use of water for the 
confinement of rebellious spiritual beings in the case of the 
four angels “ which are bound in the great river Euphrates.”^ 
And if the deep be a vast prison-house, how pregnant with 
meaning is the declaration that after the judgment there shall 
be no more sea in the renovated earth.® 


Prohahle menninq of the 
icorde "And the eea gave 
up the dead which were tn 
it” 


We may now, perhaps, be helped to the 
exposition of a passage which does not 
seem to have hitherto received an adequate 


interpretation. In the account of the last great judgment we 


read : “ And the sea gave up the dead which were in it ; and 


death and hades — that is the unseen world : for the trans- 


* Luke viii, 31. 2 Matt. viii. 29. 

^ Compare also Isa. xxiv, 21, 22. Rev. xx. 3. 

^ a/Suo-o-o? is usually derived from a privative aiid SvWos — akin to /3u0o?, 
SeV^os, depth,” and especially the deep w’aters of the sea. But 

this would make it rnean“tlie aepthles8,”“ the shallow,” rather tl)an “the 
bottomless.” It is better, then, to derive it Irom a intensive and /SvWos, in 
which case it will signify “ the great deep,” “the ab 5 8B.” 

® Luke viii. 31. 7 Rev. ix. 14. 


Rev. xxi. 1. 



48 


eakth’s eakliest ages. 


lation “hell” is incorrect — delivered up the dead which were 
in them ; and they were judged every man according to their 
works/^ ' Now the sea is commonly supposed to be men- 
tioned as giving up the bodily germs of those who have been 
drowned or buried in it. But if the meaning goes no further 
than that, why do we not also hear of earth giving up the far 
more numerous dead which lie beneath its sods? Instead, 
however, of sea being coupled with land, we find it mys- 
teriously connected with death and the unseen world : that 
is, it is mentioned in a list of places filled, not with the 
remains of material forms, but with disembodied spirits. 

This is certainly a fatal objection to the common inter- 
pretation : but if the sea be the prison of demons, all diffi- 
culties vanish, and in that case we can well understand why 
it is the Jirst to give up its dead. For every one will be 
judged in his order, and, therefore, these preadamite beings 
will have an awful precedence of the prisoners of death and 
hades, whose innumerable cells are, perhaps, filled exclusively 
with criminals from our present world. 

ConfiuHion and Tprac- But we must now pass on from this 
Heal apphcahoti stupendous subject : for enough has been 

said to exhibit the hints of Scripture in regard to former ages 
and the preadamite destruction. And since that which is set 
before us is but a shadowy form, we must not persuade our- 
selves that we see a sharply defined outline. To be wise 
above that which is written is to entangle oneself in a net of 
3atan from which it is all but impossible to escape. 

Let us not, however, fail to learn one lesson from the 
wondrous things we have been contemplating. Rebellion is 
ruin, no matter how noble, or wise, or fair, its leader may be. 
For even Lucifer, the bright son of the morning, the loftiest 
of the angels of God, has fallen low from his high estate, and 
ere long, shorn of all his wisdom, and might, and beauty, 
will be plunged into the perpetual night of the abyss. There 
is but one attitude natural or possible for a created being, and 
that is entire submission and unreserved obedience to the 
will of Him Who created and sustains him. 

Let the proud of the earth consider this, those who madly 
turn against God the very abilities and advantages which they 
1 Rev. XX. 13. 



THE SIX DA.YS. 


49 


owe to His bounty, those wilful ones who walk defiantly in 
the ways of their own heart. But if any deny the law, 
destruction must follow, or the whole universe would soon be 
disintegrating in anarchy. For the sake of the remainder of 
His creation the mercy of God is restricted to a fixed limit ; 
and except the rebel repent in time, blasted by the thunder- 
bolts of the Omnipotent, and deprived of all that lifted up his 
heart, he must sink into the horrible silence of the everlasting 
darkness.^ 


CHAPTEE IV. 


The Six Days. 

The deBtruction of the We must now return to the ruined earth, 

preadamite world seems to -r j*..* /» l. • r ^ 

haiie been caused by tre- the COndltlOU of whlch We CaU Only COU- 

mendous convulsions, and jectiire from what we are told of the six 

also by a glacial period*^. _ ^ . 

consequent on the extinc- days of restoration. Violent convulsions 
tion^thcsun. must have taken place upon it, for it was 

inundated with the ocean waters : its sun had been extin- 
guished : its clouds and atmosphere, having no attractive 
force to keep them in suspension, had descended in moisture 
upon its surface : there was not a living being to be found in 
the whole planet.^ 

Now the withdrawal of the sun’s influence had probably 
occasioned that glacial period the vestiges of which, as 
geologists tell us, are plainly distinguishable at the close of 
the tertiary age. And the same cause will also account for 
the mingling of the waters that were above the firmament 
with those that were below it. Both effects are well illus- 
trated by the following extract from one of HerscheFs 
“ Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects.’* 

“ In three days from the extinction of the sun there would, 
in all probability, not be a vestige of animal or vegetable life 
on the globe ; unless it were among deep-sea fishes and the 
subterranean inhabitants of the great limestone caves. The 
^ 1 Sam. ii. 9. ^ Gen. ii. 5. 


5 



60 


earth’s earliest ages. 


first forty- eight hours would suffice to precipitate every atom 
of moisture from the air in deluges of rain and piles of snow, 
and from that moment would set in a universal frost such as 
Siberia or the highest peak of the Himalayas never felt — a 
temperature of between two or three hundred degrees below 

the zero of our thermometers No animal or vegetable 

could resist such a frost for an hour, any more than it could 
live for an hour in boiling water.” 

From this description we may form some idea of the ruin 
which befell the preadamite world. How long ^ the glacial 
period continued it is impossible even to conjecture ; but in 
the scene which the second verse of Genesis places before 
us we must suppose the ice to have broken up — perhaps 
through some development of the earth’s internal heat, which 
in its convulsive struggles may also have displaced the bed of 
ocean. Thus the whole globe was covered with water, on 
the surface of which the Spirit was already brooding and 
infusing the germs of life. 

The frnt day of rei^tora- Then, Startling the deep silence, and 
Z‘fZwlfJr, pealing over the black floods of ruin, was 
connected utth the nwi , heard the thunder of the voice of God, 
the Command went forth “Light be.” 
the Aurora Borealis Instantly it flashed from the womb of 
darkness, and illumined the rolling globe ; but only to reveal 
an overspreading waste of waters. 

We must carefully observe the word used for “ light,” 
which signifies light diffused as distinguished from the light- 
holders of the fourth day. Yet, though diffused, this light 
must have been confined to one side of the planet ; for we 
are told that God at once divided between the light and the 
darkness, and that the alternation of day and night imme- 
diately commenced. 

In past times infidels have scoffed at the idea of light being 
called into existence independently of the sun. And cer- 
tainly it does seem diflScult to conceive that Moses could have 
anticipated science by so many centuries except upon the one 
supposition that he was instructed by the Spirit of God, Who, 
knowing all truth, spoke it simply without being circum- 
scribed by the limits of human knowledge. But now science 
also has discovered that the sun is not the only source of 



THE SIX DAYS. 


51 


light ; but that the earth itself, and at least one other planet 
in our system, may under certain conditions become self- 
luminous. 

The light of the first day may, perhaps, have been mag- 
netic, like the Aurora Borealis which seems to be powerful 
only when the sun is weak: for its most brilliant displays are 
restricted to the long nights of the cold north. In more 
southern climes its appearance is rare, and its development 
comparatively incomplete : but it is more frequent and vivid 
at those pofiods, recurring every eleventh year, when the 
spots on the sun are larger and more numerous, and the solar 
power is consequently diminished. It would thus almost 
seem that the sun absorbs this light and afterwards diffuses 
it in a modified form. On the purely terrestrial origin of the 
Aurora Borealis Humboldt makes the following interesting 
remarks. 

“ This phenomenon derives the greater part of its import- 
ance from the fact that the earth becomes self-luminous, and 
that as a planet, besides the light which it receives from the 
central body, the sun, it shows itself capable in itself of 
developing light. The intensity of the terrestrial light, or 
rather the luminosity which is diffused, exceeds, in cases of 
the brightest coloured radiation towards the zenith, the light 
of the moon in its first quarter. Occasionally, as on the 7th 
of January, 1831, printed characters could be read without 
difficulty. This almost uninterrupted development of light 
in the earth leads us by analogy to the remarkable process 
exhibited in Venus. The portion of this planet which is not 
illumined by the sun often shines with a phosphorescent light 
of its own. It is not improbable that the moon, Jupiter, and 
the comets, shine with an independent light, besides the 
reflected solar light visible through the polariscope. Without 
speaking of the problematical but yet ordinary mode in which 
the sky is illuminated, when a low cloud may be seen to 
shine with an uninterrupted flickering light for many minutes 
together, we still meet with other instances of terrestrial 
development of light in our atmosphere. In this category we 
may reckon the celebrated luminous mists seen in 1783 and 
1831 ; the steady luminous appearance exhibited without any 
flickering in great clouds observed by Rozier and Beccaria ; 

6 ^ 



62 


earth’s earliest ages. 


and lastly, as Arago well remarks, the faint diffused light 
which guides the steps of the traveller in cloudy, starless, 
and moonless nights in autumn and winter, even when there 
is no snow on the ground.” 

The rec^d of the exist. The fact, then, that, at a time when 
«r.« terrestrial luminosity was probably un- 

Divine origin of the Scrip. MoSeS Spoke of the CXistcnce of 

tures. Memorable antici. ^ it ^ ^ j* i* 

pation of science in the light Without the suu, IS a stroug proof 01 
book of Job, thg Divine source of his knowledge. For 

though the Bible gives no information by whic]? science is 
likely to be advanced, yet it does here and there drop mys- 
terious utterances the truth of one after another of which is 
discovered as scientific men become better acquainted with 
the laws of the universe. 

Perhaps the most memorable instance of this is the familiar 
passage in which God demands of the patriarch, “ Canst 
thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades ?”^ Through the 
long lapse of centuries since the writing of the book of Job, 
which probably dates back into the past as far as three 
thousand three hundred years, no adequate sense was found 
for these words. But now a meaning seems to be assuming 
shape, and gradually becoming more defined and vivid, a 
meaning worthy of the great God Whose lips first uttered the 
mysterious sentence. For in 1748 the astronomer Bradley 
gave a hint, which others have subsequently developed and 
confirmed, that our solar system, together with the whole of 
the sidereal heavens within range of our vision and tele- 
scopes, is but a portion of an inconceivably vast circle of stars 
revolving around one centre. And that centre, the pivot of 
the universe, is now supposed to be among the Pleiades. If 
this be the case, wonderful indeed are “ the sweet influences 
of Pleiades ” which keep the whole of the starry heavens in 
orderly motion. 

The six days were not We are next told that God called the 
timty^urTours^^^'^ light day and the darkness night, and that 
the evening and the morning were the first day. Now in 
order to verify certain systems of interpretation attempts have 
been made to show that in this chapter a day must be under- 
stood to signify an age. 


^ Job xxiTiii. 31. 



THE SIX DAYS. 


53 


And doubtless the word “ day is sometimes used of pro- 
longed periods, as in the expression “ the day of temptation 
in the wilderness,’* and many others. But whenever a 
numeral is connected with it, the meaning is at once re- 
stricted thereby, and it can only be used in its literal 
acceptation of the time which the earth takes to make one 
revolution upon its axis. It is, therefore, clear that we must 
understand the six days to be six periods of twenty-four 
hours each. 

But still further ; these days are mentioned as comprising 
an evening and a morning, as being made up of day and 
night. Here, then, is another warning against the figurative 
interpretation which we must carefully avoid lest we expose 
ourselves to such attacks as the following. 

“ It is evident that the bare theory that a day means an 
age or immense geological period might be made to yield 
some rather strange results. What becomes of the evening 
and morning of which each day is said to have consisted ? 
Was each geologic age divided into two long intervals, one 
all darkness, the other all light ? And if so, what became of 
the plants and trees created in the third day or period, when 
the evening of the fourth day — the evenings, be it observed, 
precede the mornings — set in? They must have passed 
through half a seculum of total darkness, not even cheered 
by that dim light which the sun, not yet completely mani- 
fested, supplied on the morning of the third day. Such an 
ordeal would have completely destroyed the whole vegetable 
creation, and yet we find that it survived, and was appointed 
on the sixth day as the food of man and animals. In fact we 
need only substitute the word period for day in the Mosaic 
narrative to make it very apparent that the writer at least 
had no such meaning, nor could he have conveyed any such 
meaning to those who first heard his account read.” ^ 

Now the justice of these remarks cannot be denied, and 
the lesson to be learnt from them is this: that, if believers 
would but keep to the plain statements of the Bible, there 
would be very little for infidels to cavil at ; but that as soon as 
they begin to form theories, and twist revelation into agree- 


' Essays and Jteviews^ p. 240. 



54 


earth’s earliest ages. 


ment with them, they expose themselves, and, still worse, the 
Scriptures, to ridicule. 

Second day. Thejirma- On the next day a second command 
ZltrfMtLt^ZZnfed Went forth, and in obedience to it a move- 
good. ment commenced among the waters. At 

the word of God the firmament, or atmosphere which we 
breathe, was formed : and by its insertion the waters which 
float above the earth were again raised to their own place, 
and separated from those which are upon the earth. 

There is, however, in the account of this day’s work an 
omission which is evidently significant: for the concluding 
words, “ And God saw that it was good,” are in this case left 
out. And since the reasons usually given for the omission 
are unsatisfactory, we venture to suggest the following 
explanation. May not the withholding of God’s approval be 
a hint of the immediate occupation of the firmament by 
demons, those, indeed, which are its present inhabitants ? 
They must have speedily appeared in the newly-formed 
atmosphere : for we cannot but suppose them to have been 
concerned in the fall of man. And if the air was teeming 
with them before the close of the second day, we need not 
wonder that God refused to pronounce their kingdom good. 

Third day. The uaters In twcnty-four hours the firmament was 
“w bound“’^ae7r)Lnd Completed, and then the voice of the Lord 
IS again xecn and brings again heard, and in quick response 

forth grass, herbs, and ^ i i 

trees. ' Grand description the whoie planet rcsounded with the roar 
inthehooko/Fsaims. Qf rushing floods as they hastened from 
the dry land into the receptacles prepared for them, and 
revealed the mountains and valleys of the earth. This grand 
movement is thus described in the hundred and fourth 
Psalm. ^ 

“ He established the earth upon the foundations thereof, 
That it should not be moved for ever and ever. 

With the deep as with a garment Thou didst cover it, 
Above the mountains did the waters stand. 

At Thy rebuke they fled. 

At the voice of Thy thunder they hasted away — 

The mountains rose, the valleys sank — 

To the place which Thou hadst established for them. 

^ P«a. civ. 5-9. 



THE SIX DAYS. 


55 


Thou hast set them a bound which they cannot pass, 

That they turn not again to cover the earth.” 

In this passage we may remark a strong confirmation of 
the view we have adopted. For while the deep is repre- 
sented as spread over everything, the mountains, together, of 
course, with all their tossil inclosures, are mentioned as 
already existing beneath it. They had evidently been formed 
long before the third day. And in strict accordance with 
this fact is God’s command, “ Let the dry land appear,” or 
more literf},lly, “ be seen” ; not “ Let it come into existence.” 
The words “ The mountains rose, the valleys sank ” are a 
parenthesis, and describe, of course — or they would conflict 
with the statement in the sixth verse — the general eflect of the 
scene to a spectator as the waters subsided to their proper level. 

On the same day the word of God went forth a second 
time, and the now liberated soil began to cover itself with a 
garment of vegetation, the fresh verdure of which was 
diversified with the hues of countless flowers. 

Fourth day. prepara- Thus the earth itself was completely 
Or and Maor. restored, and again fitted lor the support 

and enjoyment of life : it only remained to establish its 
relations with the heavenly bodies. This God did upon the 
fourth day by concentrating the light-material, which He had 
previously created, into light-holders. For the word used of 
the light of the first day is Or, and of that of the fourth Maor, 
And this last is the same as the first, but with a locative 
prefix which makes it signify a place where light is stored, or 
a light-holder. 

Now we must carefully observe that God is not said to 
have created these light-holders on the fourth day, but 
merely to have made or prepared them. They were created, 
as we have seen, in the beginning : and, since the sun 
appears to be a dark body enveloped by luminous clouds, it 
was doubtless around its mass that the earth was revolving 
from the first. Probably, too, the great luminary of our 
world was also the light of the preadamites : but its lamp 
had been extinguished, and on the fourth day God gave or 
restored to it the capacity of attracting and diffusing the light- 
material, by the exercise of which pgwer its photosphere was 
quickly formed. 



66 


EARTH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


And 80 the solar rays, as they hastened through space, 
struck upon the moon, and lighted up its silver orb in the 
firmament of night. 

Appearance qf the stars We are next told that God made or 
indeheaven of Created— the stars also; 

that is, so altered or modified the firmament, perhaps by the 
concentration of light into the sun, that the stars then first 
appeared, or re-appeared, in it. For that they had been 
previously created we have positive proof. At the close of 
the third day earth was finished and ready for the reception 
of life, while the stars are not mentioned till the fourth day. 
But in a passage of Job we are told that the morning stars 
were admiring witnesses when God laid the foundation stone 
of tfte earth, and sang together for joy at its completion.^ 
They must, therefore, have been pre-existent. And so God’s 
preparation of them on the fourth day must have had refer- 
ence only to their appearance in our firmament, to the 
purpose which they were to serve in regard to our earth. 

Fifth day. Creation of Thus the fourth day Came to its close: 
mistake in our version, all was now ready ; the work of restora- 
tion was finished, and the habitation prepared. Then the 
creative power of God was put forth, and the waters, which 
had hitherto been void of living beings, were commanded to 
swarm with the creature that hath life. Our version “ Let 
the waters bring forth ” is incorrect : the literal rendering is 
“ Let the waters swarm with swarms, with living creatures”; 
but the text does not tell us that these creatures were pro- 
duced from the waters. 

The following clause is still more grievously mistranslated, 
since the English is made to imply that even birds were 
formed from the same element. This would be a direct con- 
tradiction of the nineteenth verse of the second chapter, 
where they are said to have been moulded of earth. But the 
contradiction does not exist in the Hebrew, the exact sense 
of which is, “ And let fowl fly above the earth in the face 
of the Armament of heaven.” Hence in this verse both 
fish and fowl are merely commanded to appear in their 
respective elements without any hint as to their origin. 


* Job XXXV iii. 4-7. 



THE SIX DAYS. 


57 


Sixth day. Creation of Sea and ait Were thus filled with life. 

Then, last of all, on the sixth day, God 
all of which were gram- proceeded to people the earth, which was 
%mvorou8. Commanded to bring forth — and here the 

translation is correct — three classes of living creatures, cattle 
or domesticated animals, creeping things or land reptiles 
insects and worms, and beasts of the field or wild roamipg 
animals. 

But, as was shown above, all these creatures were gram- 
inivorous for in the thirtieth verse the green herb alone is 
given them for meat. Nor, of course, was man allowed to 
feed upon animal flesh ; for in the twenty-ninth verse his 
diet is also restricted to the seed-bearing herb and the fruit 
of trees. The present state of things, in which animal food 
is allowed and necessary to man and carnivorous beasts 
birds and fishes abound, testifies to a wofully disorganised 
and unnatural condition ; such a one as would be impossible 
save in a world at variance with the God of order, peace, 
love, and perfection. 

Further proof that the We have before seen that neither the 
^not°!^re£rd\fgeoil^^^^^ plants of the third nor the creatures of 
the fifth and sixth days have anything to 
do with the fossilised remains found in the earth^s crust: 
because that crust is assumed to have been formed before the 
great preadamite catastrophe. For the mountains with all 
their contents are described as already existing beneath the 
floods of the deep, and as having appeared, without need of 
creation or preparation, as soon as the waters retreated to 
their bounds. We are now able to add other cogent reasons 
in confirmation of this view. 

During the six days there were three distinct acts of 
creation, that of vegetation, of fish and birds, and of land 
animals and man. And we are clearly given to understand 
that all the plants of our world were created on the third day, 
while no moving creature that has life was called into being 
until the fifth day. If, then, the theory which makes each 
day a geological period were correct, the remains of plants 
only would be found in the lowest fossiliferous strata. These 
would fill the formations of their own and the following age ; 
^iifter which they would be mingled with fossil birds and 



58 


earth’s earliest ages. 


fishes : then, in the rocks of a yet later period, the remains of 
land animals would also appear. And such a sequence would 
form the only possible agreement with the account in Genesis. 

But what is the result of an examination of the strata ? 
The lowest fossiliferous system is the silurian : do we find in 
it nothing but vegetable petrifactions ? Quite the contrary. 
The lower and middle silurian rocks contain a few sea-weeds 
indeed, but no land plants whatever. Yet they abound in 
creatures belonging to three of the four sections of the animal 
kingdom, in mollusca, articulata, and radiata. It is only when 
we get to the highest strata of the upper silurian rocks that 
land plants begin to appear, and together with them some 
specimens of vertebrata, the remaining section of the animal 
kingdom. If, then, in this oldest fossiliferous system we find 
plants rare and yet every division of the animal kingdom 
represented, how can Ve attempt to force such a fact into 
accordance with the Mosaic narrative ! 

Again ; the history of Genesis mentions, as we have seen, 
but three distinct creations — of plants, of birds and fish, and 
of land animals. But in the eight classifications of strata, 
from the tertiary down to the silurian, there would appear to 
have been at least as many creations as there are systems, 
each creation including a very large proportion of animals 
and plants peculiar to itself. Agassiz goes still further, as 
the following quotation will show. 

“ 1 hold it to be demonstrated that the totality of organic 
beings was renewed, not only in the intervals of those great 
periods which we designate as formations, but also in the 
stratification of each separate division of every formation. 
Nor do I believe in the genetic descent of the living species 
from the difierent tertiary divisions which have been regarded 
as identical, but which 1 hold to be specifically different ; so 
that I cannot adopt the idea of a transformation of the 
species of one formation into that of another. In enunciating 
these conclusions, let it be understood that they are not 
inductions derived from the study of one particular class of 
animals — such as fishes — and applied to other classes, but 
the results of direct comparison of very considerable col- 
lections of petrifactions of different formations and classes of 
animals.” 



THE SIX DATS. 


59 


Thus the crust of our earth appears to be a vast mound 
which God has heaped over the remains of many creations. 
And geology shows us that the creatures of these ancient 
worlds either perished by painful disease and mutual destruc- 
tion, or were overwhelmed in an instant by the most terrific 
convulsions of nature. 

Lastly ; it is recorded ^ that all the living creatures and 
plants created during the six days were given to man. It is 
reasonable, therefore, to suppose that they were intended to 
remain with him throughout the whole course of his world. 
And hence again the certainty that the fossil plants and 
animals, nearly all of which were extinct before the creation 
of Adam, have nothing to do with the creatures of the third, 
fifth, and sixth days. 

Creation of man. Ood The Creation of the humbler inhabitants 
of earth having been thus accomplished 
the seventh day. but one Other work remained to be done. 

All was ready for the introduction of those who were to be 
set over the world as the vicegerents of the Almighty. Ac- 
cordingly God proceeded to make them in His own image 
and after His likeness. But in the first chapter of Genesis 
the calling into being of man, male and female, is simply 
mentioned to signify his place in creation. Further details 
are reserved for the present, and the history goes on to say 
that God saw all that He had made that it was very good. 

For no evil ever came from His hands. Let this truth be 
fixed in our hearts : and whenever we are troubled with the 
thorn or the thistle, with the poisonous or useless weed, with 
the noxious beast, with the extreme of heat or cold, or with 
any of the other countless inconveniences and pains of our 
present condition ; whenever we feel ready to faint by reason 
of fightings without and fears within, let us remember that 
God made all things good, and avoiding hard thoughts of 
Him, say. An enemy hath done this. 

Then follows the institution of the Sabbath on the seventh 
day : and the fact of its introduction in this connection is 
sufficient to show that it was no special ordinance for the 
Israelite, but a law of God for all the dwellers upon earth 
from the days of Adam till time shall cease. 

1 Gen. i. 26, 29. 



60 


earth’s earliest ages. 


Summary and introduce And SO the first Section of this WOR- 
0 / droiis history closes with a summary of 
meanings of the expres- the subject and an introduction to the 

sions the heaven and the j. i. • xt. j tt rm. av 

earth” and the ^ext part ID the words : “ 1 hese are the 

and the heaven ” generations of the heavens and the earth 

when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made 
the earth and the heavens, and every plant of the field before 
it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it 
grew : for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the 
earth, and there was not a man to till the ground. . But there 
went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face 
of the ground.” 

Here the creation of the heavens and earth, that is, of the 
whole universe, refers, of course, to the creation in the begin- 
ning. But the making or preparing of the earth and the 
heavens points to the six days of restoration. And this is 
indicated not only by changing the verb, but also by the 
inverted order “ the earth and the heavens ” which is only 
found in one other passage, and is plainly significant. For 
the Hebrew word for ‘‘ heavens ” has no singular, and it was 
thus impossible to make in the Old Testament a distinction 
such as we often find in the New, where the singular of the 
Greek word is generally used for the first heaven or firma- 
ment of our earth, while the plural comprises the starry 
realms and the heaven of heavens. Hence some other device 
was necessary, and the fact that “ the heavens” in the second 
clause of this verse means the firmament of earth is indicated 
by the inverted order. And this order is also the historical 
one : for the firmament was not made perfect, so that sun, 
moon, and stars, could be seen in it, until after the entire 
restoration of the earth. The same sequence in the hundred 
and forty- eighth Psalm is explained by the seventh verse, 
“ Praise the Lord from the earth.” For this Psalm is divided 
into two parts : in the first six verses praise to God is 
invoked from the starry vault and the heaven of heavens, in 
the last eight from the earth and its atmosphere. Hence in 
the thirteenth verse the glory of the Lord is appropriately 
said to be above “ the earth and the heaven,” earth being 
first mentioned because here also by heaven is meant the 
firmament which belongs and is, therefore, subordinate to it. 



THE SIX BATS. 


61 


The plaids and herbs of In the next verse, if we retain the 
Authorised Version, which follows the 
third day and did not Septuaffint, we must of course Understand 
^ a former creation. the Verb “make or “prepare as applying 
not only to earth and heaven, but also to “ every plant of the 
field,” etc. The sense will then be that God prepared the 
seeds and placed them in the ground ; so that the plants and 
herbs of our w^orld did not spring from the relics of former 
creations or grow up spontaneously, but were newly intro- 
duced by God at that time. And this is corroborated by the 
fact that since the withdrawal of the salt and barren waters 
of the deep He had not as yet caused it to rain upon the 
earth, nor was there any preadamite spared from the 
previous destruction to cultivate the soil. All our verdure 
and plants grew up, therefore, from new germs placed in the 
ground by God and afterwards developed and nourished by a 
mist which went up from the earth. 

Such appears to be the meaning of the passage, and this 
special allusion to the work of the third day seems to be 
inserted as an introduction to the following account of Eden 
and its garden. 

There is no real dis- In closing our remarks on this section 
’‘and of the history we may observe that many 
second chapters ^'Genesis, discrepancies have been alleged to exist 
between the first and second chapters of Genesis. Some of 
these we have already explained : none of them have any 
real foundation. We have only to bear in mind the different 
objects of the two records and all difficulty will vanish : for 
while the one chapter gives a continuous history of the week 
of restoration, the other is evidently a supplement, adding 
details of man’s creation that we may better understand his 
nature and his fall. Hence in this second account reference 
is made to other works of the six days only when they 
happen to be immediately connected with the main subject, 
and without any regard to the order in which they were 
performed. 



62 


EAKTH S EABLIE8T AGES. 


CHAPTER V. 


The Creation of Man. 


Swp'pUmentary history The detailed account of the creation of 
<if the creation of man. which now presents itself for our 

consideration is a subject of the deepest interest : for it forms 
the only possible basis of true doctrine in regard to the origin 
and nature of our race. We must, therefore, carefully 
examine it : but the labour will not be tedious, for the whole 
revelation is contained in the following brief record. “ And 
the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and 
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life ; and man became 
a living soul.” ^ We have thus three points to consider ; the 
formation of the body, the infusion of the breath of life, and 
the result that man awoke to consciousness a living soul. 

The moulding of the First, then, we are told that the Lord 
God formed man, that is, moulded his 
bodily shape as the potter does the clay. Indeed the mean- 
ing of the Hebrew verb is so decided that its present par- 
ticiple, used as a substantive, is the ordinary word for a 
potter. To this first act of God Job refers when he says, 
“ Remember, I beseech Thee, that Thou hast made me as 
the clay ; and wilt Thou bring me into dust again For 
the material moulded was the dust of the ground which had 
just been moistened by a mist ; and hence it is afterwards 
said “ Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.” ® 

The word translated “ ground ” is adamah^ which properly 
means red earth, and from which the name Adam seems 
to be derived. This corresponds to the natural colour of 
human skin, which is red on white, and in accordance with 
which Solomon^s description of ideal beauty begins with the 
words : “ My beloved is white and ruddy.” * 

irfmion of the The Spirit of man had nothing to do 
with the formation of its sheath. God 
first moulded the senseless frame, and then breathed into it 
the breath of lives : for the original of the last word is in the 
plural. This may, however, be nothing more than the well 


Gen. ii. 7. 


2 Job X. 9. 


® Gen. iii. 19. 


* Cant. V. 10. 



THE CREATION OE MAN. 


63 


known Hebrew plural of excellence ; since the word, which 
is the common term for life, is rarely found in the singular. 
But if we wish to give significance to the number, it may 
refer to the fact that the inbreathing of God produced a two- 
fold life, the distinct existence of each part of which we may 
often detect within ourselves by their antagonism. 

This breath of lives became the spirit of man, the principle 
of life within him — for, as the Lord tells us, “ it is the spirit 
that quickeneth ” — and by the manner of its introduction we 
are taught that it was a direct emanation from the Creator, 
We must, of course, carefully avoid confusing it with the 
Spirit of God from Whom the Scriptures plainly distinguish 
it, and Who is represented as bearing witness with our 
spirit.^ 

Theonqinofthesoui. Man was thus made up of only two 
independent elements, the corporeal and the spiritual : but 
when God placed the spirit within the casing of earth the 
combination of these produced a third part, and man became 
a living soul. For direct communication between spirit and 
flesh is impossible : their intercourse can only be carried on 
by means of a medium, and the instant production of one was 
the result of their contact in Adam. 

Man became a living soul in the sense that spirit and body 
were completely merged in this third part ; so that in his 
unfallen state he knew nothing of those ceaseless strivings of 
spirit and flesh which are matters of daily experience to us. 
There was a perfect blending of his three natures into one, 
and the soul as the uniting medium became the cause of his 
individuality, of his existence as a distinct being. It was 
also to serve the spirit as a covering, and as a means of using 
the body ; nor does Tertullian seem to have erred when he 
affirmed that the flesh is the body of the soul, the soul that 
of the spirit. 

But it is interesting to notice that, while the soul is the 
meeting point of the elements of our being in this present 
life, the spirit will be so in our resurrection state. For the 
first man Adam was made a living soul, but the last Adam a 
quickening spirit and that which is sown a psychic body is 
raised a spiritual body.® 

^ Rom. viii. 16. 


2 1 Cor. IV, 45. 


^ 1 Oor. XV. 44. 



64 


earth's earliest ages. 


The doctrine of man'e 
threefold nature is, with 
one or two exceptions, 
much obscured by the in- 
adequacy of our version. 


Thus in the very beginning of Scripture 
we are warned against the popular phrase- 
ology of soul and body which has long 
sustained an erroneous belief that man 


consists of but two parts. This idea has, indeed, taken such 
firm root among us that it has caused a deficiency in our lan- 
guage. For though we possess the nouns “spirit ” and “ souF' 
— which are, however, too commonly treated as synonyms — 
we have no adjective derived from the latter, and are thus 
unable to express connection with soul except by a para- 
phrase. Certainly an attempt is being made to Anglicize the 
Greek “ psychic” ; but the unwonted form and sound of the 
word seem likely to prevent its adoption into ordinary lan- 
guage. Yet the need of such an adjective has almost con- 
cealed the doctrine of man’s tripartite nature in our version of 
the Scriptures ; and English readers are carried away from 
the sense by mistranslations of a Greek word which sig- 
nifies “ pertaining to the soul,” but is sometimes rendered 
“ natural,” sometimes “ sensual.”^ 

There are, however, one or two passages in which a 
reference to the threefold composition of our being could not 
be obscured. Such is the very remarkable verse in the 
epistle to the Hebrews : “ For the Word of God is quick, 
and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing 
even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the 
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and 
intents of the heart. Here Paul plainly speaks of the im- 
material part of man as consisting of two separable elements, 
soul and spirit ; while he describes the material portion 
as made up of joints and marrow, organs of motion and 
sensation. Hence he claims for the Word of God the power 
of separating, and, as it were, taking to pieces the whole 
being of man, spiritual, psychic, and corporeal, even as the 
priest flayed and divided limb from limb the animal for the 
burnt offering, in order to lay bare every part, and discover if 
there were any hidden spot or blemish. 

Another obvious passage is the well known intercession of 
Paul for the Thessalonians : “ And I pray God your whole 


^ 1 Cor. ii. 14 i James iii. 15 ; Jude l^. 


2 Heb. iv. 12. 



THE CBEATION OF MAN. 


65 


spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless untp the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.’’^ 

Bespective func^M of Now the body we may term the sense- 
body, Boul, and spirit, consciousncss, the soul the self-conscious- 
ness, and the spirit the God-consciousness. For the body 
gives us the use of the five senses ; the soul comprises the 
intellect and the emotions ; while the spirit is our noblest 
part, which came directly from God, and by which alone we 
are able to apprehend and worship Him. 

This last, as we remarked above, can only act upon the 
body through the medium of the soul : and we have a good 
illustration of the fact in the words of Mary, “ My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my 
Saviour.*’^ For the change in tense shows that the spirit 
first conceived joy in God, and then, communicating with the 
soul, roused it to give expression to the feeling by means of 
the bodily organs. 

But in the unconverted the spirit is lifeless, and, conse- 
quently, they are unable to hold intercourse with God until 
it be quickened. Over such the soul, manifested sometimes 
in intellectuality, sometimes in sensuality, often in both, 
reigns with undisputed sway. This is what Jude wishes to 
set forth in his nineteenth verse, which should be rendered 
“ These be they who separate, men governed by soul, not 
having spirit.” And even in the case of the converted the 
powers of the spirit are at present in great part suppressed, 
their place being supplied, though most inadequately, by the 
faculties of soul and body. 

How inadequately which of us does not feel ? For when 
at length we awake from the dream of this world ; when our 
eyes are opened to a contemplation of realities, and a startling 
conviction of the ever decaying and quickly passing nature of 
all that is visible flashes upon our mind, from that moment 
we are possessed by one desire, that of attaining to life 
eternal. But to this end what guidance can we expect from 
the bodily senses whose ceaseless march is ever to the grave 
Nay, even the soul, however intelligent, however diligent in 
its search, cannot by any pains find out the path of wisdom. 
Often indeed it essays to do so : but how absolutely untrust- 

^ 1 Thess. V. 23. ^ Luke i. 46, 47. 

6 



66 


eabth’s eabliest ages. 


worthy its conclusions are we may see in the difficulty of 
discovering even two men of the highest order of intellect 
with an identity of opinion. Reason is but an uncertain and 
deceitful instrument at the best, and the blinding pride of 
man makes matters still worse. For when one has set his 
heart upon an idea — which is, perhaps, nothing but the 
creation of his own fancy, as unsubstantial as the castle of a 
dream — his powers are thenceforth used for the single purpose 
of making the picture of his imagination stand out as vividly 
and as like reality as possible. 
jtea$on it fallible and And thus we may easily see that in- 
tellect is not merely fallible, but the most 
instinctive and unerring dangerous of all gifts, unless it be guided 
perception of truth. Spirit of God. For it can call evil 

good, and good evil : it can put darkness for light, and light 
for darkness ; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Nay, the 
wave of its magic wand can fill not only this life, but even 
the region beyond the river of death, with sunny landscapes 
and fair scenes, aye, and growing fairer in proportion as they 
appear in the more distant future. And to all these it is able 
to give the semblance of firm reality until the fatal moment 
which separates spirit and body, when in an instant the 
brilliant vista is blotted out for ever by the fiery darkness of 
the lost. 

And even in the case of those who have been born again, 
who have received power to become sons of God, the intel- 
lectual faculty is still so incompetent that, though they 
possess truth in the Divine revelation, they are nevertheless, 
as Paul tells us, only able for the present to know and under- 
stand it in part. But when hereafter the spirit, our real life, 
shall be released and restored to its throne, we shall imme- 
diately become conscious of powers which we can now neither 
apprehend nor even imagine ; we shall no longer people 
darkness with the phantoms of reason^ s dim and ever- 
changing dreams, but find ourselves in a world where there 
is no night, and endowed with a piercing and unerring vision 
which God shall give to all His redeemed. For in the place 
of the uncertain and deceptive logic of the soul, we shall be 
gifted with that instinctive perception of truth which is the 
prerogative of untainted spirits. 



THE CREATION OF MAN. 


67 


Adam it placed in the ' Thus, then, the Lord created man in 
His own image ; and we can picture the 
menoe*. joy with which Adam awoke to conscious- 

ness in the midst of the beautiful world prepared for his 
habitation and possession. But fair as earth then was, the 
inexhaustible kindness of his Creator would still further 
ravish his heart by arranging for his abode a scene of pre- 
eminent beauty and superabounding delights. For the Lord 
planted a garden eastward in Eden, and enriched it with 
every tree which is pleasant to the sight and good for food, 
including among them the tree of life and that of the know- 
ledge of good and evil. He then took the man whom He 
had made, and put him into this paradise to dress, and, as 
our version reads, to keep it. But the Hebrew of the latter 
verb has the meaning of watching over or guarding, and 
evidently points to an enemy and possible assailant. 

And now commenced the first age or dispensation of our 
world, man’s first trial to determine whether when in posses- 
sion of innocence he is able to retain it. Earth by the work 
of the six days was filled with unmingled blessings, all that 
it contained was very good ; supreme dominion was given to 
Adam, and he was a pure and sinless being. Moreover, there 
was but one commandment ; and, therefore, sin was circum- 
scribed, and but one transgression possible. Of all the 
numerous trees of the garden man might freely eat, even the 
tree of life was open to him : but he was commanded to do 
homage to the great God Who had given him all things, to 
pay a tithe in acknowledgment of the exhaustless bounty 
bestowed upon him, by abstaining from one tree, that of the 
knowledge of good and evil. Of this he was not to eat, or he 
would prove himself a rebel, and lose his kingdom and his 
life. 

In regard to the hostile denizens of the air he seems to 
have received no distinct warning, but only that which was 
implied in the injunction to dress and watch over the garden. 
And he needed nothing more : for knowing well the single 
prohibition of his God, he could at once detect a foe in any 
being who should tempt him to disobey it. 

The two names Elohim There is no mention of this covenant 
and Jehovah. Adam in the first chapter of Genesis : 

C* 



68 


EABTH S EABLIEST A^GES. 


for there we have merely a record of creation and restoration, 
while in the supplementary account we are concerned with 
the moral responsibility of man. And hence a change in the 
appellation of God, Who when regarded oAly as the Creator 
and Ruler is called Elohim or the Mighty One, but Who takes 
the title of Jehovah — usually translated “the Lord in our 
version — as soon as He appears in covenant relation with 
man. At its first introduction the name Jehovah is joined 
with Elohim to obviate ail doubt as to the identity of the 
Being designated by both wwds. 

Now it is evident that, while either of these names will 
suit some passages, there must, nevertheless, be many cases 
in which the one would be appropriate and the other not. 
Of this the sacred writers are always mindful, and in the 
course of our history we shall have to point out several 
instances of their careful discrimination. It will thus appear 
that the very fact adduced by rationalists as a proof that the 
Scriptures are a clumsy compilation of diverse and incon- 
gruous documents, which they call Elohistic and Jehovistic — 
that this very fact beautifully exhibits the unity and con- 
sistency of the whole volume. 

Adam gives names to Adam thus Commenced his life in cove- 
Mr^LTet^^fMwUh nant relalion with God : and his benign 
speech from the day qfhis Creator, knowing that it was not good for 
him to be alone, determined to bestow 
upon him a companion and partner of his joy. But first He 
brought to him the beasts of the field and the fowls of the 
air to see what he would call them : that is, to see if he 
would claim any of them as bone of his bones and flesh of 
his flesh. Adam gave names to all, but to none that of 
woman ; a result which had, of course, been anticipated by 
God : indeed it seems not improbable that He made the trial to 
stimulate in His creature a desire which He intended to gratify. 

And if the first man was able on the very day of his 
creation to give names — founded, doubtless, on their peculi- 
arities — to beasts and fowls, it is evident that language was 
a gift bestowed upon him by God at 'the time when the breath 
of lives was breathed into his nostrils. Christians, therefore, 
cannot countenance the speculations of modern philosophers 
in regard to the gradual development of speech. 



THE CREATION OF MAN. 


69 


Creation qf woman. Bv naming the animal kingdom Adam 
Christ and Hie church, took possession of his dominion before the 
appearance of the woman ; so that she shared his lordship over 
creation, not in her own right, but as being bone of his bones 
and flesh of his flesh. And herein we may discern an evident 
type of the second Adam and His bride. For the church, 
though all things are her’s, will possess them through no 
merit or right of her own, but only as the bride of Him Who 
is the Heir of all things.^ 

In the history of the creation of woman we should observe 
the close connection between male and female, and the 
responsibilities of mutual love which it involves ; the pro- 
tection due on the one side, the subjection on the other. 
Each particular is so suggestive of the great mystery of Christ 
and His church that it will be well to notice some of the 
points of comparison. 

A coneideration of tome First, then, the Lord began His final 
qfthe detaiii of the type. casting Adam into a deep sleep. 

And so did the second Adam lie three days in the sleep of 
death before the creation of His bride could be commenced. 

While the first Adam slept God opened his side and took 
out the rib wherewith He made the woman. And while the 
second Adam slept in death upon the cross a soldier pierced 
His side, so that there came forth blood and water ; and by 
means of that blood, without the shedding of which there 
could never have been remission of sins, the church is now in 
process of formation. Thou “ hast redeemed us to God by 
Thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and 
nation is the cry of the elders when the bride is at length 
brought into the presence of her Lord. 

After the rib had been withdrawn God closed up the flesh 
instead thereof. No second rib was to be taken : only one 
woman was made for Adam, though many were afterwards 
born of him. So also will it be with the second Adam : He, 
too, will have but one bride, the church of the first-born, they 
that are His at His coming. This body will be complete on 
His return to the air or first heaven, and His marriage will 
take place before the terrible destruction which is to precede 
the millennial reign, as may be seen by the order of events 
^ 1 Oor. iii. 21-23. ^ Kev. v. 9. 



70 


eaeth’s earliest ages. 


given in the nineteenth and twentieth chapters of the 
Apocalypse. Multitudes will be afterwards saved by Him ; 
kings^ daughters will be among His honourable women ; but 
upon His right hand will stand the queen in gold of Ophir.^ 
We next read, “ the rib which the Lord God had taken 
from man made He a woman.’’ But the last'words are by no 
means an adequate rendering of the original, which should be 
translated “builded He into a woman.” And there is a 
a remarkable coincidence in the use of such a term and the 
frequent application of the words “ build ” and “ edify ” to 
the church in the New Testament. 

When God had made the woman He brought her unto 
Adam. So is God now bringing the elect in spirit to the 
heavenly Bridegroom, and no man can come unto Christ 
except the Father draw him.^ And so will He presently 
bring the completed bride in person to the second Adam, and 
at length answer that prayer, “ Father, I will that they also, 
whom Thou hast given Me, be with Me where I am ; that 
they may behold My glory, which Thou hast given Me.” * 
Upon receiving his wife Adam exclaimed, “ This is now 
bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.” So the second 
Adam tells us that He is the vine and we are the branches 
while His apostle still more plainly affirms, “ For we are 
members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones.” ^ 
Adam then proceeds, “ She shall be called woman, because 
she was taken out of man.” Ish is the Hebrew for man, isha 
for woman. She partook of Adam’s nature, therefore she 
should be called after his name. And at His coming Christ, 
having changed the bodies of His waiting people into the 
likeness of His glorious body and made them partakers of 
His nature, will then fulfil His promise to the overcomer, “ I 
will write upon him My new name.”® 

Lastly ; the words “ Therefore shall a man leave his father 
and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they 
shall be one flesh ” are, in their application to the woman, 
paralleled by the Lord’s saying, “ He that loveth father or 
mother more than Me is not worthy of Me.” ^ And yet again 
by the exhortation to the mystic bride ; “ Hearken, O 

* Psa. xlv. 9. 2 John vi. 44. ^ John xvii. 24. * John xv. 6. 

® Eph. V. 30. ® Bev. iii. 12. 7 Matt. x. 37. 



THE FALL OF MAN. 


71 


daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear ; forget also 
thine own people and thy father’s house ; so shall the King 
greatly desire thy beauty : for He is thy Lord ; and worship 
thou Him.”^ These words have far greater force if we 
remember that those who are saved by Christ but do not 
belong to the church of the first-born will probably inhabit 
the earth from which they sprang, and not be called away 
from their ancient dwelling into the heavenly places. 

We may thus see how evidently the history of Adam and 
Eve foreshadows wondrous things to come, and sets forth 
the mystery of marriage in its reference to Christ and His 
church. 


CHAPTEE VI. 

The Fall of Man, 

The mercy of Ood teem» Thus the man and the woman were 

created on the same day; so that Adam 
the hea/H of man, that he could only have been in existence a few 

might he afterwards re- ^ i i * -p tvt • 

et^ed to an immortal houTs before his Wife. Nothing was 

purity and a more excel- wanting to Complete their ioy save the 
certainty that it would be lasting : and on 
this point they probably felt no fear. For what suspicion 
had they of the power of evil : how could they read in all 
that surrounded them the destruction of mightier creations \ 
They knew not the secrets of the ground on which they trod : 
they rejoiced in the flowery verdure, and saw not the ruins of 
world beneath world reaching deep into the bowels of the 
earth. They dreamt not that the blue sea was rippling over 
a vast prison-house of sin ; that the very atmosphere above 
them was swarming with fallen angels and the disembodied 
spirits of those who had rebelled against the Most High. 

And they, too, were destined to be overcome of evil ; they 
were soon to experience the meaning of that awful word 
^ Psa. xIt. 10, 11. 



72 earth’s earliest ages. 

death which the lips of their Creator had uttered ; to feel the 
terrors of His wrath, the desolation of ruin, the horrors of 
corruption. For the all-wise God well knew the great 
obstacle to perfection in the creature, and that, until it could 
be removed. He was unable to show forth His love and pour 
out His bounty to the full. He could not endow men with 
great power and wisdom : He could not make them excellent 
in majesty and glorious in might, swift as the winds or the 
lightning to do His will, until they had passed the danger of 
abusing His gifts, and so falling as the sinful angels had done 
before them. 

Therefore they should not be perfect from the day of their 
creation ; but, by a painful yet most salutary experience, 
should learn their own creature weakness : they should be 
imprisoned in bodies of humiliation they should be left to 
try what their own strength could do, to endeavour to save 
themselves by their own arm amid the hostile powers of 
darkness, which should not, therefore, be at once consigned 
to the doom of the obstinately rebellious : they should fall, 
but by the merciful prearrangement of God not an eternally 
fatal, not a hopeless fall : they should know what it is to 
abide in sin, and so to be consumed by His anger, to be 
troubled by His wrath, to be subjected to vanity, wasting, 
and decay : with shuddering awe they should enter into the 
thickening darkness which enshrouds the dread portals of 
death : all their beauty should turn to corruption, their 
bodies, however majestic or fair, become repulsive and loath- 
some. 

And through and out of all this they should be saved by a 
power not their own: benighted, helpless, distraught, not 
knowing whither to turn, they should be led by the hand of 
Another : their sin, which they would be utterly unable to 
expiate, should be punished in the person of a Substitute : 
the only begotten Son of their loving Creator should die in 
their stead. Thus should they be taught the absolute de- 
pendence of the creature upon the love and power of the 
Almighty God. 

And if they could humble themselves under His almighty 
hand : if they could trust Him in the time of their darkness ; 

1 Phil. iii. 21. 



THE FALL OF MAN. 


78 


believe that He was causing all things to work together for 
their good ; and thankfully accept His way of peace and 
salvation : then, after a little space, the days of their mourn- 
ing should be ended. He would wash away every stain of 
sin or tears : instead of the garment of corruption He would 
invest them with the robes of immortality : He would place 
the crown of life upon their head : everlasting joy should 
break forth upon them without the possibility of an inter- 
vening cloud : nay, many of them, gifted by His favour with 
a more complete submission, with a stronger faith, should 
even be exalted to sit down upon the throne of His Son, and, 
under Him, to rule in glory over that very earth which had 
been the scene of their hopes and fears, of their gloomy and 
toilsome wanderings, while they bore about with them the 
body of this present condition of death.^ 

Satan wot created in Such secms to be an Outline of God’s 
&finifa{ilteofTeak. purposcs in regard to man as indicated 
nees and muery, and does in the Scriptures : such the Teason of 
mfhTr'^auJi-ectu^^^ sojoum here in weakness, continual 

liability to misery, and certain progress to 
decay. Satan first awoke to consciousness in the dazzling 
light of God’s glory, to find himself a mighty prince, perfect 
in wisdom and beauty.^ But, having known no other con- 
dition, he thought that his power and his splendour proceeded 
from himself, lost his sense of dependence, and fell without 
hope. In our case God’s foresight and mercy prevented this 
irremediable ruin. 

Therefore our being begins in darkness, far from the light 
and joy of His presence : we are no princes, but slaves to 
those horrible despots sin and corruption : our beauty is 
faulty and evanescent : our wisdom is foolishness : our pur- 
poses are continually broken oflf: our bodies date their 
tendency to dissolution from the day of our birth. Yet there 
is a hand stretched out to lead us through the night : and if 
we grasp it, giving up our own ideas of the right way, it will 
guide us along a road, rough toilsome and perilous indeed, 
but which will at length bring us safely to the home of 
our Father. 

And then, when this corruptible shall have put on in- 
^ Rom. vii. 24. ^ Ezek. xxviii. 12-16. 



74 


EABTH S EAELIE8T AGES. 


corruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality : 
when, after having borne the image of the earthly, we shall 
also bear the image of the heavenly : when we shall rest, no 
longer in hope, but in abundant and never failing satisfaction 
after awaking in God’s likeness : then at length shall we have 
attained the goal of our being, the position for which He 
created us, nay, to which He ordained us before the founda- 
tion of the world. Then shall we know why He bade us 
consider ourselves strangers and pilgrims upon earth : then 
shall we feel His meaning when He told us that while in the 
flesh we are but in a state of death, our real life being hid 
with Christ in God : ^ then, when the heavenly treasure is 
unlocked before our wondering gaze, shall we understand to 
the full His dark saying, “ And if ye have not been faithful 
in that which is Another’s, who shall give you that which is 
your own ? ”^ 

A powerful effect must Nor, after having been thus led through 
darkness and perils to God, shall we feel 
this life after we have left any wish to stray out into the night again. 

With such a retrospect we shall not be 
tempted to think that our glory and beauty are an inseparable 
part of ourselves. And not only shall we have learnt by a 
fearful experience the dependence of creatures, but our whole 
being will be penetrated with a burning and unquenchable 
love of our Creator. 

For even in this life how great do His mercies seem ! But 
when once we find ourselves safe in the Paradise of God, 
freed for ever from the assaults of the world the flesh and 
the devil, the first backward glance at the dangers we have 
just escaped will probably act upon us with greater power 
than the whole course of discipline through which we may 
have previously passed. For we shall then see our fearful 
accumulation of sin, understand its appalling nature, and be 
lost in amazement at the love which bore with us while we 
went on day after day repeating and multiplying trans- 
gression. We shall look back upon the many thousand perils 
ont of which we were from time to time delivered, and only 
a very few of which we had even suspected. We shall behold 
the horrid and innumerable hosts of darkness, from whose 
^ Col. iii. 3. 2 Luke ivi. 12. 



THE FALL OF MAN. 


76 


malignant power we were defended for so many years, and at 
length finally rescued, by a Mightier than they. We shall 
gaze upon the pit prepared for them, into which we also must 
needs have descended had not a ransom been found, even the 
most precious blood of the Lord Jesus. 

And as we turn away from these dark and painful scenes — 
during the whole time of our connection with which there is 
but a step betwixt us and death — to the bright smile of our 
reconciled God, to the glory given to us, to the golden city 
prepared for our habitation, to the eternity of ever deepening 
joy before us, shall we not, emptied at last of pride and self- 
will, and overpowered with humble gratitude, cry aloud, with 
a strength of love and devotion unknown to this world, 
“ Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto Him 
That sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and 
ever’’ ? 

And with such thoughts as these should we comfort one 
another whenever we are in sorrow and heaviness during our 
present brief season of trial. 

Probable reatton qf the We must now retum to Adam and Eve 
angeie. Their cunning, whom we left enjoying in mnocence the 
pleasures which God had provided for them. But short, 
indeed, was their time of happiness : for the powers of evil 
were already setting the fatal snare. And they were, perhaps, 
stimulated to their fell purpose not only by pure malignity 
and the wish to oppose God whenever they could do so 
indirectly, but also by a desire to prolong their own reign. 
For, knowing themselves to be rebels, they were probably well 
aware that the Almighty never intended sinless man to be 
subject to them, and that in Adam He was raising up a seed, 
not merely to inhabit the earth, but also to take possession of 
the realms of air. Hence we can easily understand their 
sanxiety to retard, at least, the counsel of God by reducing the 
new creation to their own level of sin and ruin. And, per- 
chance, they may have known from experience that the result 
would be a delay of long ages, during which the mercy of the 
Supreme would grant His creatures time for repentance and 
recovery. 

The plan of Satan showed that God had not yet deprived 
him of his wisdom ; though, alas ! it had been changed by 



76 


earth’s earliest ages. 


his fall from the noble power of a prince of the Most High to 
the cunning of a deceitful intriguer ! He would not make his 
assault with power and terror : for that would drive the 
assailed into the arms of their Protector instead of drawing 
them away from Him, and their earnest cries for help would 
quickly call down hot lightnings upon their daring foe. But 
he would present himself in the form of an inferior and 
subject animal, from which they would never suspect harm. 
For, like all his children of this world, Satan, though proud 
even to destruction, can yet degrade himself to the very dust 
in order to carry out his purposes. 

Reagona which aeem to He would not essay the man and the 
together: for combined they might 
^oe. uphold one another in the obedience and 

love of God. And he well knew that, if he were once 
detected and baffled, a second attempt would be attended 
with far more serious difficulties ; nay, might by some appeal 
of Adam to God be rendered altogether impracticable. 

Again ; two reasons seem to have deterred him from 
tempting Adam alone. For had he commenced by over- 
coming the man, and then through him worked the fall of 
the woman, her ruin would have been incomplete : she would 
not have been wholly without excuse before God, since she 
would have acted under the orders or influence of the one 
whom He had set over her. 

And secondly ; man, as we have before seen, consists of 
three parts, spirit, soul, and body ; and of these the soul is 
predominant in consequence of its power over the body. 
Now it is just in this point that the weakness of man lies, in 
the fact that his body is psychic and not spiritual. But 
Adam was created directly from the image of God, Eve only 
mediately so. If, then, the man was an imperfect image 
through the predominance of his soul, this defect would na- 
turally be increased in the woman, who would, therefore, be 
the more susceptible of outward form and beauty, and of all 
emotions connected with the sense- and self-consciousness, 
while the influence of her spirit would be proportionally 
diminished. On this second account also Satan would 
seem to have chosen her as the fittest object for his first 
attack. 



THE FALI, OF MAN. 


77 


jtSptf it enticed to the Having thus determined upon their plan 
qf the forbidden powers of evil hastened to carry it out. 
They either watched till Adam was absent, or, perhaps, by 
that mysterious power which we often feel but cannot explain, 
drew him away from his wife, and, when she was left alone, 
enticed her through the garden towards the tree in its midst. 
It may be that their suggestions set her iriusing on the 
strangeness of God’s prohibition. Wherefore did He plant 
the tree in their garden if they were not to enjoy it ? What 
so great difference could there be between it and the other 
trees of which they might eat at pleasure ? And so, perhaps, 
a foolish curiosity may have moved her to examine the 
forbidden object, in order to see if she could detect its 
peculiarity. 

But, however it happened, she at any rate suffered herself 
to be allured to the fatal spot, and so gave opportunity to the 
Devil. For we should keep as far as possible from that 
which is prohibited, nor ever tempt God by unnecessarily 
approaching it either through curiosity or any other impelling 
cause. Had Eve avoided the vicinity of the tree she could 
never have cast upon it that look which ruined herself and 
her world. And how many of her descendants have worked 
their own woe in the same way by lingering on the borders 
of wrong, by too curiously examining, by wishing to under- 
stand too well, that which they knew to be evil. 

The Tempter appears in While Eve was Standing near the tree 
a serpent approached and addressed her. 
probably the moat attrac- The fact that she was not Startled by 

tive, a 8 well as the moat . a • ^ .t-i 

inteiiwent,qf the beaaiaqf snch an occurrence seems to point to the 
the field. existence of an intelligent communication 

between man and the inferior creatures before the fall. But 
we must not, of course, think of the serpent as the repulsive 
and venomous reptile to which we now feel an instinctive 
antipathy. For it had not then been cursed, but held itself 
upright, the most intelligent and, probably, the most beautiful 
of all the beasts of the field. It is an interesting fact that in 
that remarkable sculpture — the oldest surviving representa- 
tion of the fall —which was found in the temple of Osiris at 
Phylee, Eve is seen offering the fruit to Adam, the tree is 
between them, and the serpent stands by in an erect posture. 



78 


eaeth’s babliest ages. 


Perhaps it sustained itself by wings ; and indeed the epithet 
flying is applied to the saraph or fiery species in a passage 
of Isaiah.^ The creature was, then, free from venom, and 
not improbably winged, while its scales glittered in the sun 
like burnished gold. Perhaps, too, it was known to Eve as 
the most intelligent and most companionable of all animals : 
and thus in every way it would be the most fitted for pleasing 
her eye and attracting her attention. 

Little did she suspect that a powerful enemy lurked 
beneath that beautiful and apparently innocent form : as little 
as did the disciples imagine that their own and their Master^s 
bitter foe was sitting at meat with them in the body of Judas 
Iscariot. Nor can we at any time be sure of our safety from 
similar ambuscades. But there is one test always possible 
which, like Ithuriel’s spear, compels Satan to assume his true 
form, and which might have saved Eve. We should surmise 
the worst and act accordingly as soon as we hear one sug- 
gestion opposed to God’s will and laws : and we should be 
so much the more on our guard in proportion as it comes 
from an unlikely source, and is craftily mingled with truth. 

The flrttword$ of Satan “ Can it be true that God has forbidden 
you to eat of any tree of the garden?^’ 
began the serpent. Perhaps the fact that Eve was casting a 
longing eye upon the tree and yet abstained from touching it 
suggested this crafty question. Simple as it may at first 
appear, it was wondrously full of fascinating guile, marvel- 
lously adapted to the purpose of disturbing the moral being 
of Eve, and so preparing the way for its complete subversion. 
The tempter afiects to think that she abstains because God 
has harshly forbidden herself and her husband to touch any 
of the beautiful fruit around them. And so by his brief, but 
most skilful, interrogation he begins to envelop her in the 
mists of error from at least five outspringing suggestions. 
First ; he throws her ofi* her guard by his assumed ignorance. 
Secondly; he stirs up vanity from the depths of her self- 
consciousness by giving her an opportunity to correct and 
instruct him. Thirdly; he uses the term Elohim, and not the 
covenant name Jehovah, to represent the Creator as far 
distant, and as having but little concern with His creatures. 

I Isa. xiv. 29. 



THE FAEL OF MAN. 


79 


Fourthly ; he puts in a doubt as to whether God had uttered 
the prohibition, and hints - at the possibility of a mistake. 
And lastly; he insinuates the blasphemous thought that 
harshness and caprice on God’s part are not inconceivable, 
but may sometimes be expected. 

Ser answer shows that The blinding effccts of this question are 
immediately evident in Eve’s answer. She 
the snare. replies that they may eat of the other trees 

of the garden, and are only warned off from the one in its 
midst. Of this alone God had said, “Ye shall not eat of it, 
neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.^’ But God had not pro- 
hibited them to touch it : and hence we seem to see in the 
exaggeration of this added clause a secret discontent and an 
inclination to set the command of the Almighty in as harsh a 
light as possible. 

Nor is this all : not only does she increase the stringency 
of the law, but she also weakens the penalty. God had said 
“ Thou shalt surely die,^^ which she alters into “ lest ye die.’’ 
Doubt was already doing its work in her mind, she was now 
prepared to hear the truth of God openly denied. 

And yet again she follows Satan’s lead into the dark, and 
speaks of her Creator and Benefactor as Elohim, the Power, 
mighty indeed, but to men vague, distant, and almost 
unknown, instead of Jehovah, the God in covenant with her 
husband and herself. Satan wished to banish from her heart 
all thought of a near and closely connected God, and she 
accepts his suggestion and co-operates with him. For the 
image of Jehovah is rapidly fading from her mind, and self 
and sin are beginning to take its place. 

Solemn is the warning which the analysis of her thoughts 
affords to her descendants, to the offspring by whom her own 
sad path is ceaselessly trodden. For how often, when we 
are perfectly aware of some direct command of God which we 
do not wish to obey, are we seduced into an exaggeration of 
its magnitude and its inconvenience, till at length, by the 
continual play of evil imaginings, we almost arrive at its 
impossibility. At the same time we strive to diminish its 
importance, and the penalty which its neglect is likely to 
involve, not perceiving that, while we are thus working out 
our own will in defiance of the will of God, His Holy Spirit 



80 


eakth’s eakliest ages. 


is gradually withdrawing from us, and that our God-con- 
sciousness — or, as it would be ordinarily termed, religious 
feeling — is becoming weaker and weaker. Not so, however, 
the sin within us, which is proportionally growing and 
acquiring strength ; till at last, when our eyes are again 
opened, we find it like some horrible tumour, which, loath- 
some and painful as it is to bear, has been so long neglected 
that it will scarce leave life in us if it be removed. 

Satan follows up his Satan quickly perceived the state of 
Eve’s mind: his plan was succeeding: 
appeal to Eve's vanity, she had begun to doubt. He instantly 
pressed on his attack by a bold lie combined with a truth, 
indeed, so far as it went, but one presented in charac- 
teristically Satanic fashion, so that the woman might miss its 
real import, and interpret it in accordance with her own rising 
vanity. “Ye shall not surely die,’^ said this liar from the 
beginning, thus daring to place his own assertion in opposi- 
tion to the Almighty. 

And Eve believed him ; believed this beast of the field, as 
she supposed him to be, rather than the great Creator of all 
things ! Earth laden with her countless tombs is ever sigh- 
ing for the credulity : Ocean, as his chasing waves roll over 
the bones of multitudes lying amid their unheeded treasures, 
moans in response ; and Hades, while his vast realms are 
being daily peopled by fresh colonies of unclothed spirits, 
solemnly proclaims that God is true. 

“ For God doth know,^^ pursued the tempter, “ that in the 
day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye 
shall be as God — for so we ought to translate — knowing good 
and evil.^’ Truly Jehovah did know this : but why did it not 
occur to Eve that He must also have known more ; that this 
opening of their eyes would be no addition to their happiness, 
but harmful and destructive ? Could she not by a moment’s 
reflection perceive the fearful responsibility which the know- 
ledge of evil would necessarily involve, and bless the Lord 
Who had spared her from its perils ? Or could she not at 
least trust Him Who had called her into being, and of Whose 
hands from that time she had received nothing but good, and 
turn with horror from the blasphemous impiety which sug- 
gested to her the possibility of in any way raising herself to 



THE PAIiL OF MAN. 


81 


His height. She could not, for she was deceived ; her reason 
was perverted by desire ; the vision of self- exaltation had 
intoxicated her. There was no error in Satan’s judgment : 
he had detected the weakest point when he appealed to 
her vanity and suggested the idea of her becoming as 
God'. 

Does not the readiness with which she received the daring 
thought show the necessity of our present state of weakness ; 
does it not sufficiently explain the fact that a broken and a 
contrite heart is the first indispensable condition of entering 
into the kingdom of heaven ? * And do we not continually 
perceive both in ourselves and others the workings of that 
feeling upon which Satan played in the case of our first 
parent ? Does it not appear in self-will, which is the deter- 
mination to be obeyed as God instead of obeying ? Is it not 
evident in pride and conceit, whether arising from birth, 
ability, beauty, wealth, or any other source ? May it not be 
traced in that boundless self-confidence which puts forth its 
own wisdom and opinions as alone worthy of notice, and 
expects them to be received with gratitude and deferred to by 
all } And, perhaps, its very worst aspect is seen in the com- 
placency with which men listen to reproof and correction 
richly deserved by themselves, but which they forthwith 
apply only to others. 

The temptation of Eoe Carried away, then, by the new feeling 

compared with that of our j j ^ 

Lord. aroused in her, Eve turned and gazed upon 

the tree, while Satan plied her with the three temptations 
which from that time he has ever employed to ruin the 
human race, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the 
pride of life. 

She saw that the tree was good for food. That was the 
lust of the flesh, and corresponded to the Lord’s temptation 
to turn stones into bread. But how different the circum- 
stances and the result ! Eve was surrounded with plenty, 
every other tree in the garden was hers : yet she must needs 
cast a longing eye upon that which had not been given ; her 
pride and self-will make that one seem more desirable than 
all the rest. But the Lord was in the midst of a desert and 
faint from hunger : yet He would not break through the 
^ Matt. V. 3. 


7 



82 


earth’s earliest ages. 


limits of His manhood, but submissively waited till His 
Father sent relief. 

Again ; Eve saw that the tree was pleasant to the eye. That 
was the lust of the eyes, and corresponded to the offer of all 
the kingdoms of this world and their glory to Christ. And 
though the whole garden was filled with objects of beauty on 
which she might have gazed with lawful pleasure, Eve, never- 
theless, discarded them all for that which God had forbidden. 
The Lord, on the other hand, as man possessed nothing, 
and yet refused with indignation the accumulated beauties 
glories and pleasures of the whole world spread out in one 
view before His gaze. 

Lastly ; Eve saw that the tree was a tree to be desired to 
make one wise. That was the pride of life, and corresponded 
to our Lord’s temptation to throw Himself from the pinnacle 
of the temple. Eve wished to raise her condition, and yet 
there was none greater than herself upon earth save her 
husband. But the Lord, though despised and rejected of 
men and known only as the carpenter’s son of Nazareth, 
refused to descend from the pinnacle of the temple, and be at 
once hailed by the assembled multitude below as the long 
expected sign from heaven, as the royal Messiah. 

Tnumphof the tempter. Eve had thus first given way to doubt, 
but sinned deliberately, afterwards submitted to hear direct con- 
tradiction of God, and lastly turned to gaze upon the for- 
bidden tree. Then the torrent of her desire arose with such 
impetuous violence that it carried away every barrier ; and 
without waiting to consult her husband, without pausing to 
think of her God, she put forth her hand, and in a moment 
the fatal deed, which nearly six thousand years have not 
sufficed to obliterate, was accomplished. The days of Eve's 
innocence were ended : and shortly afterwards, upon the 
arrival of her husband, she afforded another sad instance of 
that selfishness of sin, of that insatiable and reckless desire 
on the part of the fallen to involve others in their own 
miserable ruin, which had been previously exhibited by 
Satan. For the tempted immediately became the tempter. 

Now Paul expressly tells us that Adam was not deceived, 
but only the woman.^ For she, when Satan made known to 
^ 1 Tim. ii. 14. 



THE TKIAL AND SENTENCE. 


83 


her the qualities of the fruit, at once admitted as the only 
possible explanation of God’s prohibition that He was either 
ungracious or feared rivals. But Adam probably saw both 
the impiety and the utter folly of such an imagination, knew 
that the command was undoubtedly given in God’s wisdom 
for their good, and was, perhaps, not a little confirmed in 
this view by the condition in which he found his wife. We 
seem, therefore, to be driven upon the supposition that 
excessive love bent him to her entreaties, and made him 
determine to share her fate. And herein we see his unfit- 
ness to receive such a gift from God : for though he had done 
well to love her better than himself, he was hopelessly en- 
tangled in the snare of sinful foolishness when he so idolised 
her as to be willing to break the law of her Creator. 

Thus did the prince of this world prevail. I'he new 
creation had been seduced to rebellion : there was no longer 
any bar to the resumption of his dominion. Forth from the 
ground he rose triumphant, and expanded his shadowy 
wings over the recovered territory, impeding the pure rays of 
God’s sun, and dropping thick the poisonous mists of sin, 
under which earth’s flowers faded, her fruits withered, her 
plenty was restrained, and she brought forth evil as well as 
good. 


CHAPTER VIL 


The Trial and Sentence. 

The nature of the cover, gin was irrevocabW Committed: the 
tempter had triumphed. But what of the 
affirmation “ Your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as 
God, knowing good and evil” ? Alas ! it had indeed proved 
true ; but in a fashion widely difiering from Eve’s expecta- 
tion. For in the impetuosity of her pride she had not tarried 
to reflect that the knowledge of God must needs be fraught 
with destructive peril to those who have neither the wisdom 



84 


earth’s earliest ages. 


nor the power of God. Her eyes and those of her husband 
were indeed opened, but only to see themselves, to behold 
their own sad condition of nakedness and shame. For now 
they became suddenly conscious of the vileness of that flesh 
which had been the medium of their transgression ; they were 
bewildered with the painful sense of a fall from the eminence 
on which God had placed them, of their resemblance to the 
brutes around them, nay, even of their unfitness to be seen. 

And these feelings seem to have been intensified in no 
small degree by an instant and visible change in their out- 
ward appearance. For while they remained in obedience the 
spirit which God had breathed into them retained its full 
power and vigour. Its pervading influence defended their 
whole being from the inroads of corruption and death ; while 
at the same time its brightness, shining through the covering 
of flesh, shed a lustrous halo around them ; so that the grosser 
element of their bodies was concealed within a veil of radiant 


glory. And thus, as the rulers of creation, they were 
strikingly distinguished from all the creatures which were 
placed under them. 

But their sin was only made possible by a league of soul 
and body which destroyed the balance of their being. The 
overborne spirit was reduced to the condition of a powerless 
and almost silent prisoner, and, consequently, its light faded 
and disappeared. Its influence was gone : it could no longer 
either preserve their bodies from decay, or clothe them in its 
glory as with a garment. The threat of God was an accom- 
plished fact : the reign of death had commenced. 


At the coming of Ckriet 
the eons of God will he 
manfested by the restora- 
tion of the lost covering. 


Nor is it difficult to prove that the 
recovery of a visible glory will be the 
instant result of the restoration of spirit 


soul and body to perfect order and harmony, the sign of our 


manifestation as the sons of God. But it will then shine 


with far more intense brilliancy than it did in Adam : for, as 
we have before seen, the body of unfallen man was not a 
spiritual body. The spirit did indeed exercise a mighty and 
vigorous influence, but the soul was the ruling power, even as 
it continues to be : for the first man became a living soul.^ 
But when the resurrection, or the change consequent upon 


^ 1 Cor. XV. 46. 



THE TBIAL AND SENTENCE. 


85 


our Lord^s return, takes place, our bodies will become 
spiritual the God-consciousness will be supreme in us, 
holding both soul and body in absolute control, and shedding 
forth the full power of its glory without let or hindrance. 

Hence in speaking of that time Daniel says, “And they 
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament ; 
and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for 
ever and ever.”^ So, too, the Lord Himself declares, “ Then 
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of 
their Father.”* 

And yet again ; both John and Paul tell us that, when we 
are summoned into the presence of God, we shall be like 
Him : for that He will change the body of our humiliation 
into the likeness of the body of His glory.'* Nor are we left 
in ignorance as regards the nature of the body of His glory ; 
for upon the mount of transfiguration He permitted the chosen 
three to behold the Son of man as He will appear when He 
comes in His kingdom. Then His Spirit, ever restrained and 
hidden during His earthly sojourn, was suddenly freed, and 
in an instant He was covered with splendour; so that His 
face did shine as the sun, and His raiment was white as the 
light.* 

Attempt of Adam and The man and his wife were ashamed : 

and that fact was the one gleam of hope 
mean». in their horizon. For had they been dead 

to the shame of guilt, they would have differed in nothing 
from evil spirits ; their salvation would have been impossible. 
But the existence of this feeling showed that the God- 
consciousness within them, though overwhelmed, was not 
altogether extinct. The blaze had dimmed, but the flax was 
still smoking, and might even yet be fanned into flame again 
by the Spirit of God. 

Bewildered by their altered condition they immediately 
tried to supply the lost covering artificially, even as their 
descendants have ever since been doing. For every living 
creature, whether of earth, air, or sea, has its own proper 
covering, not put on from without, but developed naturally 
from within : man alone is destitute and compelled to have 

* 1 Cor. XV. 44. 2 Dan. xii. 3. * Matt. xiii. 43. 

* I Jolm iii. 2 ; Phil. hi. 21. * Matt. xvii. 2. 



86 


earth’s earliest ages. 


recourse to artificial aids, because through sin he has lost his 
natural power of shedding forth a most glorious raiment of 
light. And hence we may see why our Lord preferred the 
robe of the humble lily to all the magnificence of Solomon.' 
For Solomon’s splendid array was foreign, and put on from 
without ; whereas the beauty of the lily is developed from 
within, and is the simple result of its natural growth. 

The inquisition. Scarcely had the fallen pair arranged their 
miserable garments when they heard the voice of the Lord 
God, that voice w'hich had hitherto been their greatest 
joy. But how different did it now seem, though its tones 
were as yet unaltered ! They fled in terror to the shrubs of 
the garden, and endeavoured to hide themselves. Vain 
attempt! While we are committing sin we may, perhaps, 
succeed in putting away all thought of God, and persuade 
ourselves that, because we have forgotten Him, therefore He 
neither sees nor regards us. But when He comes forth for 
judgment this delusion is no longer possible : there is no 
escape : there may not even be delay : we must, however 
unprepared, meet Him face to face. At the call of God 
Adam is forced to leave his hiding place. With trembling 
steps he creeps into the presence of his Maker, and is first 
constrained to acknowledge that he had fled through shame, 
and then that the shame arose from his having broken the 
only commandment imposed upon him. But his confession 
is not a frank one, and he gives a miserable proof of his 
fallen condition, of the loss of all the royalty of his original 
nature, in his attempt to cast the blame upon his wife, nay, 
even to censure God Himself. “ The woman,” he said, 
“ whom Thou^gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, 
and I did eat.” 

Nor, when the Lord turns to her, is the answer of Eve 


more satisfactory than that of her husband. For she does 
not plead guilty, and throw herself upon God’s mercy ; but 
would lay all the fault upon the serpent, as though she were 
not a responsible agent. 

The judgment qf the The Lord hears what the two culprits 
cauie*’“ have to say, and patiently gives them 
every opportunity of defending themselves : but when He 


* Matt. vi. 29. 



THE TEIAL AND SENTENCE. 


87 


turns to the serpent His manner changes. He asks the 
tempter no questions, gives him no chance of defence, but, 
treating him as already condemned, immediately pronounces 
sentence. What deep thoughts are suggested by this change 
of procedure ; what fearful antecedents of rebellion seem to 
float like spectres in the gloom of this instant and hopeless 
judgment! 

“ Because thou hast done this.” There is to be no 
mistake as to the reason of the curse : it is no accident, no 
merely natural misfortune, but the deeply-burnt brand which 
testifies to God’s abhorrence of him who brought sin into the 
new world. The first part of the sentence has immediate and 
literal reference to the serpent which co-operated with Satan, 
but there is in it a wondrous type of the degradation of the 
son of the morning himself. 

The words “ Thou art cursed above all cattle ” seem to 
imply a general curse upon the animal kingdom which is not 
elsewhere mentioned. Possibly it fell upon that part of 
creation, not through Adam’s sin, but because the serpent, 
the head and representative of the beasts of the field, yielded 
itself as an instrument of evil. And that the curse should 
thus extend to every animal is not more marvellous than the 
transmission of sin through Adam to the whole human race. 
The cause of the fact in either case has not been revealed to 
us : the secret is one of those deep things which we cannot 
know now, but may understand hereafter when the mystery 
of God shall be finished. 

Certainly, however, there is some strange bond connecting 
together the creatures of our world, so that all are mys- 
teriously aflected by, and in a measure respqnsible for, the 
conduct of each. This seems to be a great law of creation, 
and is, perhaps, intended, in part at least, as a means of pre- 
serving unity. At any rate Paul, when treating of its application 
to the church, puts forth as its object “ that there should be 
no schism in the body.”' And how welcome will be its ful- 
filment when, just as we have been born into sin through the 
transgression of Adam, we shall all be made the righteousness 
of God in Christ. 


^ 1 Cor. xii. 25. 



88 


EABTh’s EABIiIEST ages. 


The original form qf From the first clause of the sentence 
changed hy the curse. ^pon the Serpent it IS Clear that the 
creature did not originally crawl upon its belly. Its structure 
must, therefore, have been entirely changed, and one who is 
not biased by any wish to prove the inspiration of Scripture 
remarks : 

“It is agreed that the organism of the serpents is one of 
extreme degradation ; their bodies are lengthened out by the 
mere vegetative repetitions of the vertebrae ; like the worms, 
they advance only by the ring-like scutes of the abdomen, 
without fore or hinder limbs ; though they belong to the 
latest creatures of the animal kingdom, they represent a 
decided retrogression in the scale of beings.” ^ 

Signification of the By the words “ Dust shalt thou eat ” 

words Dust shalt thou . , . jj.jij.rj. 

eat.” we are not, perhaps, to understand that 

dust should be the serpent’s only food ; but that, having no 
organs wherewith to handle its prey, it would be compelled 
to eat it from the ground, and so to swallow dust with it. 
“All its food has the flavour of dust” says a Jewish com- 
mentary. 

And since in undergoing this visible punishment the 
serpent is a type of Satan, with whom it directly co-operated, 
its condition is hopeless, and will not be improved when the 
remainder of creation is delivered from the bondage of cor- 
ruption. Even in Millennial times dust will still be the 
serpent’s meat, and then, perhaps, its only food.^ The sight 
of its degradation, and the more frightful spectacle of the 
carcases in the valley of Jehoshaphat,® will serve as warnings 
against sin during the Millennial age. 

The enmity between the So far the Sentence seems to have no 
serpent and the woman. ^ ^ reference to Satan. 

But in the following clauses the serpent begins to recede from 
view, and the great adversary, who had been concealed 
within it, is dragged forth to judgment, and hears of the 
frustration of his hopes, of the brevity of his triumph, and of 
his terrible and inevitable doom. Wonderfully pregnant with 
meaning are the few words of this first of prophecies : for 
they contain the germ of all that has since been revealed, 
and afford a remarkable proof of the consistency of God’s 

^ Kalischs Genesis^ p. 126. ^ Ixv. 26. ^ Isa. IxvL 24. 



THE TBIAL AND SENTENCE. 


89 


purposes, of His perfect knowledge of the end from the 
beginning. 

Satan had deluded Eve into an alliance with himself 
against the Creator; but God would break up the con- 
federation : the covenant with death should be disannulled : 
the agreement with hell should not stand. “ I will put 
enmity between thee and the woman ” were His almighty 
words to the abashed and speechless serpent. Nor was it 
difficult for Satan to divine the meaning of this separation : 
he was cast out to perdition, but Eve the Lord would save. 

Henceforth, therefore, deprived of her beautiful home, 
driven into the accursed and uncultivated earth, and sub- 
jected to toil, pain, and a gradual decay which should at last 
terminate in complete dissolution, she should know that her 
false friend was the cause of all her misery, and so regard 
him as her bitterest foe. 

On the other hand, the mere fact that the woman would no 
longer be willing to subserve his purposes would have sufficed 
to provoke the anger of the fallen angel. Yet God presently 
gave him a far sharper incentive to hatred, when He declared 
that the seed of the deceived woman should ultimately 
destroy her deceiver. 

The seed of the terpent, For the enmity should not be confined 
to the serpent and the woman, but should also extend to 
their seed. Who, then, are the seed of the serpent ? They 
are those who manifest that spirit of independent pride by 
which their father the Devil fell; those who will not 
acknowledge their own hopeless condition, and submit to be 
saved by the merits of the Son of God : but will either them- 
selves do what is to be done, or else proudly deny the 
necessity of any doing at all, and clamour against God — if 
they have any belief in His existence — because He does not 
at once gratify all their wishes without any reference to His 
broken law. For blinded and maddened by self-conceit they 
believe the lie of the serpent, and, considering themselves as 
God, have, consequently, no reverence for Him, nor hesitate 
to defy His will if their own inclination prompts them to do 
so. Such are the serpent’s seed, distinguished by the spirit 
which animates their father and federal head, and doomed at 
length to share with him the lake of fire and brimstone. 



90 


earth’s earliest ages. 


Nor was it long before this seed appeared in the person of 
Cain “ who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother.” ^ 
And what an illustration of the curse of God is found in the 
remark which John adds to this declaration! “And where- 
fore slew he him ? Because his own works were evil, and his 
brother’s righteous.” In other words the predicted enmity 
was the sole cause of the murder. 

Our Lord when on earth did not fail to recognise the 
seed of the serpent in those sinners whose contradiction He 
endured. “ O generation of vipers,”" He cries, using a phrase 
which had already issued from the lips of His forerunner, 
“ how can ye, being evil, speak good things ?” By these 
words He clearly designates the Pharisees as a brood of “that 
old serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which deceiveth the 
whole world. Yet again He exclaims, “ Ye serpents, ye 
generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of 
hell?”^ For being the serpent’s seed they must share the 
serpent’s fate. 

The reference in both passages is obvious : but, if there 
could be any doubt, it would be entirely dispelled by a third 
utterance, in which, throwing aside all figure, the Lord 
plainly says, “Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts 
of your father ye will do.” 

The need of the woman Thus far there is no difficulty ; but the 
born of a virgin. Significance 01 the term “seed oi the 

woman ’’ is not so immediately apparent. The whole human 
race cannot be meant, as the previous remarks show. Nor 
would mankind in general be called the seed of the woman, 
but of the man ; and God is here speaking of the seed of the 
woman exclusively. For she first sinned, and was the cause 
of sin to her husband and ruin to her world. Therefore she 
had a double punishment; but lest the blame should rest too 
heavily upon her, lest she should be swallowed up by over- 
much sorrow, she was by God’s mercy appointed to be the 
sole human agent in bringing the Deliverer into the world. 

Nor is it difficult to discover that Deliverer : for there is 
none but Christ who could in a strictly literal sense be called 
the seed of the woman. Here, then, we have a wonderful 

^ 1 John iii. 12 . " Matt. xii. 34. ^ 9 , 

^ Mutt, xxiii. 33. ® John viii. 44. 



THE TKIAIi AND SENTENCE. 


91 


example of the consistency of Scripture ; since in this primeval 
prophecy, uttered four thousand years before its accomplish- 
ment, we find it declared that the Lord J esus should be born 
of a virgin. Had our translators perceived this they might 
have avoided a mistake. For in the well-known prediction 
of Isaiah,^ as also in the quotation from it in the first chapter 
of Matthew,^ they have adopted the rendering “ a virgin ” in 
defiance of the original which has “ the virgin ” in both 
passages. They did not understand the meaning of the 
definite article, and, therefore, cut the knot of the difiiculty 
by omitting it from their version. But Isaiah is evidently 
referring to the sentence passed upon the serpent, and speaks 
of the particular virgin who should be chosen as the human 
instrument for the fulfilment of God’s purpose. 

The predicted enmity Thus Christ is the literal seed of the 
woman. But just as all those who wil- 
conjilct of the church a^id fully deny the truth in ungodliness are the 
^ * seed of the serpent, so there is also a seed 

that serves the Lord,^ is accounted to Him for a generation, 
and reckoned as one with Him. He and His church are one, 
He is the Head and they are the body : He and they together 
make up the mystical Christ. 

And hence we see the enmity of which God spoke in the 
long vista of estrangement and bitter conflict between the 
church and the world. We behold on the one side the 
alternations of malignant persecution and treacherous flattery ; 
on the other a patient endurance, and a rendering of blessing 
for cursing. Yet the part of the church is not altogether 
confined to suffering, but is also continually aggressive. For 
the children of light are first found wandering among those 
that dwell in darkness : the lost sheep are ever straying into 
the midst of the wolves, and must be boldly sought and led 
out of danger by those who have been themselves rescued 
from similar perils. 

Theimieofthe conjiict. But was there no hope: should the 
The two ad cents. painful and ever-varying struggle go on 

for ever } No, it should find its end at last ; it should be 
decided after many years by a deadly conflict between the 
seed of the woman and the old serpent himself. Christ should 
^ Tsa. vii. 14. ^ Matt. i. 23. ^ Pg^. xxii. 30. 



92 


EAETH^S EAELIEST AGES. 


bruise the serpent’s head, should deal a mortal blow : not, 
however, before the serpent had bruised His heel, had 
wounded Him sore, but not fatally, not in a vital part. 

Here, then, we have the germ of all prophecy respecting 
the two advents of Christ. In the bruising of the heel we 
recognise His first coming to suffer what appeared to be an 
utter defeat; to find that His own would not receive Him; 
to endure the contradiction and insults of the serpent’s seed ; 
to be rejected of His generation ; and finally, to lay down His 
life and pass for a short season under the dominion of him 
that hath the power of death. And the bruising of the 
serpent’s head is in after prophecies developed into the 
second coming of Christ, with power and great glory, to drive 
the false king from air and earth, and cast him bound into 
the abyss. Nay, it even looks beyond this and the post- 
Millennial rebellion to the final destruction of Satan and his 
consignment for ever to the lake of fire and brimstone. 

So far as God’s words to the serpent are concerned the 
two great events which they foreshadow might have been 
almost simultaneous. And, indeed, throughout the Old 
Testament the advents are generally treated as if there were 
no interval between them. The Israelitish prophets beheld 
them in the remote future just as we might look upon some 
far-off mountain peaks, each more distant than the other, 
which from our first standpoint seem, indeed, to be very near 
together, but disclose as we journey on an ever widening 
breadth of valley between them. 

The judgment of the Such was the curse pronounced upon 
*^Qod’7merc/Z^faiie!i the Serpent. And here we cannot but 
pause in amazement and render thanks for 
the great mercy vouchsafed to the fallen parents of our race. 
God could not, indeed, give Adam a direct promise at a time 
when the man was waiting as a condemned criminal to 
receive sentence. Therefore His loving kindness devised the 
plan of first pronouncing judgment upon the serpent, and 
therein implying that the fallen should not sink hopelessly to 
the, condition of their deceiver, but be set in sharp opposition 
to him ; until, after a painful struggle, the woman’s conquering 
seed should bruise him under their feet, and make both the 
death from which they shrank, but must now undergo, and 



THE TRIA^L AND SENTENCE. 


93 


Hades the dread place of unclothed spirits, to pass away for 
ever.^ And so a bright ray of hope broke in through their 
despair, and they were strengthened to hear their own doom 
of woe. 

The eentence upon the Having thus passed Sentence upon the 
**’°*"®”* tempter the Lord next turned to the 

woman, who was the first to yield to temptation. For the 
general sin she was judged in her husband as being one with 
him ; but, because she enticed him to transgress, she was to 
bear a special curse superadded to that which affected the 
whole human race. This is signified in the words “ I will 
greatly multiply thy sorrow’* ; the force of which will be seen 
if we notice that Adam also is afterwards doomed to sorrow, 
the same Hebrew word being used in both cases. 

The sentence upon the Lastly; the Lord decrees the punishment 
of the man. Adam had excused himself 
on the ground that Eve was his tempter ; and God begins by 
showing that this very fact increased the heinousness of his 
guilt. Had Eve sinned through the influence of her husband 
she would have had a plea; for God had made her subject to 
him. But that Adam, whose duty as appointed head was to 
watch over, to restrain, to guide, and to rule, his wife — that 
he should so far forget his responsibilities as to follow her 
sinful suggestion, to obey her voice rather than God’s, was a 
serious aggravation of his offence. Therefore the reason of 
the curse is “ Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of 
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded 
thee, saying. Thou shalt not eat of it.” 

The sentence itself is not in the main a direct one, as in 
the case of the serpent, but strikes Adam through his sur- 
roundings. The earth, his dominion, is cursed ; and in that 
fact we see a refutation of all those theories respecting the 
inherent evil of matter which figure so prominently in the 
early history of the nominal church, and are now being 
revived by the sects of so-called Spiritualists. Evil pro- 
ceeded, not from matter to spirit, but from spirit to matter. 
Adam was not cursed on account of the earth, which God had 
declared to be in itself very good ; but the earth was cursed 
because of the sin of Adam, which again originated in the 
* Eev. XX. 14. 



94 


£a.iith’s earliest ages. 


spirit of the evil one. As a punishment for man’s trans- 
gression the soil should be henceforth comparatively barren. 
It should no longer yield spontaneous abundance, but he 
should be compelled to force out of it, with heavy toil and in 
the sweat of his face, even the bare necessaries of life. 

Thorns and thistles. Nor would this be the end of the 
trouble. Earth should now be the parent 
^barrenness. of evil as wcll as good, and, teeming with 

thorns and thistles, should baffle and protract the labour of 
its tillers. 

These noxious plants probably existed, though in very 
different condition, before the curse was pronounced ; and 
then, owing to the sterility of the blighted earth, were no 
longer able to attain to their proper development and 
luxuriance, and so became what they are now found to be, 
abortions. The following remarks of Professor Balfour will 
illustrate this. 

“ In looking at the vegetable world in a scientific point of 
view, we see many evidences of the great plan upon which 
the all-wise Creator seems to have formed that portion of His 
works. At the same time there are many marks of what we 
may call, with reverence, incompleteness. Thus we see that 
there is in all plants a tendency to a spiral arrangement of 
leaves and branches, etc., but we rarely see this carried out 
fully, in consequence of numerous interruptions to growth 
and abnormalities in development. When branches are 
arrested in growth they often appear in the form of thorns or 
spines, and thus thorns may be taken as an indication of an 
imperfection in the branch. 

“ The curse which has been pronounced on the vegetable 
creation may thus be seen in the production of thorns in 
place of branches — thorns which, while they are leafless, are 
at the same time the cause of injury to man. That thorns 
are abortive branches is well seen in cases where, by culti- 
vation, they disappear. In such cases they are transformed 
into branches. The wild apple is a thorny plant, but on 
cultivation it is not so. These changes are the result of a 
constant high state of cultivation, and may show us what 
might take place were the curse removed. 

“ Again ; thistles are troublesome and injurious in conse- 



THE TRIAL AND SENTENCE. 


95 


quence of the pappus and hairs appended to their fruit, which 
waft it about in all directions, and injure the work of man so 
far as agricultural operations are concerned. Now it is 
interesting to remark that this pappus is shown to be an 
abortive state of the calyx, which is not developed as in 
ordinary instances, but becomes changed into hairs. Here, 
then, we see an alteration in the calyx which makes the 
thistle a source of labour and trouble to man. We could 
conceive the calyx otherwise developed, and thus preventing 
the injurious consequences which result to the fields from tjie 
presence of thistles. 

“ I have thus very hurriedly stated to you what occurred 
to my mind as to the curse of thorns and thistles, and I have 
endeavoured to show that the spines and hairs are abortive, 
and, so to speak, imperfect portions of plants. The parts are 
not developed in full perfection like what may have been the 
case in Eden, and like what will take place when the curse 
is removed.” 

Fit objects, then, are the thorn and the thistle to remind 
man of the curse. And keeping their origin in view we can 
see a deep significance in that awful scene when our Lord 
sufiered Himself to be crowned with thorns, so that even His 
enemies set Him forth as the great Curse-bearer ; when He 
wore on His bleeding brow that which owed its very exist- 
ence to, and was the sign of, the sin He had come to 
expiate. 

Man mmt return unto Lastly I man should no longer eat of the 

the dust Jrotn whefice he o t i . i n 

cwiiae. ITUltS ot x uUt sllOVlld rlBUCClOTtjtl 

find the staff* of his fleeting life in the bread-producing herbs 
of the field, till he himself descended into that dust out of 
which he obtained his food : for dust he was, and unto dust 
he should return. 

How did the impious vision raised by Satan vanish into 
blackness at these last words of terror, words which have 
sunk deeply into the heart of man, and ever rise to the 
surface when he finds himself in the presence of his God, or 
when he is brought low and his hopes perish ! “ Behold 

now,” says Abraham, “ I have taken upon me to speak unto 
the Lord, which am but dust and ashes. 

^ Gen. XTiiL 27. 



96 


earth’s earliest ages. 


Hence, doubtless, the custom of bowing to the earth, and 
the feeling which prompted the casting of dust on the head 
in time of bitter affliction as a sign of broken pride and 
humble acknowledgment of the truth of the Creator’s words. 
So Jeremiah says of the man who bears the yoke in his youth 
that “ he putteth his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be 
hope.” ^ And in regard to the actual return to the dust, Job 
mournfully declares of his hopes, “ They shall go down to the 
bars of the pit, when our rest together is in the dust.”^ Yet 
again he says of the prosperous and the miserable, “ They 
shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover 
them.” ® 

But as it is to the dust that we go down at death, so it is 
from the dust that we arise at the resurrection. “ Thy dead 
men shall live,” is the wondrous proclamation by Isaiah, 
“ together with My dead body shall they arise. Awake and 
sing, ye that dwell in the dust : for thy dew is as the dew of 
herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.”'* And Daniel 
also tells us that, at the first resurrection, “ many of them that 
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake.”® So, then, even 
the dust is a resting-place of hope for the people of God. 

The beginning of the Thus was Sentence pronounced. Upon 
the serpent the judgment was eternal; 
while the man and his wife were doomed to degradation 
and anguish, but not for ever. God then seems to have 
departed, the serpent probably slunk away, and Adam and 
Eve were left alone like those who have just awakened from 
a dream of peace to find themselves pressed down and over- 
whelmed by every kind of misery and fear. 

All around them, beyond the precincts of the garden at 
least, was changing. Earth was reeling under the first 
stroke of the curse : its flowers were fading, its fruits were 
blighted ; the former luxuriance of its vegetation could not 
be supported by the now sterile soil and vitiated atmosphere ; 
the living creatures that passed by no longer did homage to 
their appointed lord, but wore in their eyes the wild look of 
incipient savagery. Nay, the very sun — as we may, perhaps, 
infer from a previously quoted passage of Isaiah® — seems to 

^ Lam. iii. 29. 2 JqI^ 16 ^ 8 job xxi. 26. 

* Isa. xxvi. 19. ^ Ban. xii. 2. ® Isa. xxx. 26. 



THE TEIAL AND SENTENCE. 


97 


have withdrawn six- sevenths of its light ; so that, although 
its beams may still have been as bright as ever they are to 
us, the distraught pair must have felt that the shadow of 
death had fallen upon their sickening world. 

The darkness, literal and spiritual, of which Scripture so 
often speaks had set in ; that dread season during which the 
principalities and powers of evil are the world-rulers : that 
gross darkness which is only illumined by a few light-holders 
placed here and there in the gloom, whose spirits have been 
kindled by the Holy Spirit, so that they have become lamps 
of the Lord : that night of blackness and horror during which 
weeping must endure till joy return with the morning : that 
night in regard to which Paul cheered those of his time with 
the assurance that it was even then far spent, the four 
thousand years which had already elapsed being much the 
greater part of it : that night into the breaking dawn of 
which the wise and faithful servants are now earnestly gazing 
in expectation of the appearing of their Lord as the bright 
and morning Star, before He rises in all His glory as the Sun 
of righteousness, and restores light and life to the beclouded 
and death-stricken earth. 

The faith of Adam as Bewildered by these new sensations the 

displayed in the name on .j i n i-i 

which he gave to his wife, fallen ones remained, perhaps, for a while 
mute in the torpor of deep and overwhelming sorrow. At 
length Adam broke the silence. Faith suddenly lighted up 
and changed his anguished countenance : he had laid hold of 
the implied promise : he had perceived God’s mercy mingled 
with His judgment, had caught a glimpse of light beyond the 
darkness, and felt that there was yet hope in his end. 

And so, taking up again the function of naming which God 
had bestowed upon him, he called his wife Eve, that is. Life ; 
because without cavil or doubt he frankly took God at His 
word, and believed that by the promised seed of the woman 
he and his posterity should be delivered from the death to 
which they had become liable, and live for ever. Thus, if 
any feeling of estrangement had arisen between the man 
and his wife, it was now removed; and being through the 
marvellous ways of the great Peacemaker again united in 
heart, they were better prepared to face the troubles before 
them. 


8 



98 


eabth’s earliest ages. 



gtnnersfor a covering. Loid returning to the 


mourners, and rewarding their faith by further merc)^ and 
further knowledge. He took away their coverings of fig 
leaves, and clothed them with coats of skins. Most sig- 
nificant was the action : for by it He testified that their 
shame was not groundless, that there was need of a covering, 
but that the best the sinners could make for themselves was 
of no avail. They had not as yet seen corruption and decay, 
and knew not that the fig leaves would quickly wither and 
fall off, an apt emblem of every device which man has ever 
contrived to cover his shame and fit himself for the presence 
of his Maker. And beyond this, they must learn that only by 
life can life be redeemed ; that if the sinner die not, there 
must be a substitute ; that the Most High is holiness and 
justice as well as love, and can by no means clear the 
guilty. 

Now sacrifice as an expiation must have been ordained by 
God Himself. Man could never have thought of such a 
thing, or have dared in his worship to take the life of one of 
God’s creatures, unless he had been commanded to do so. 
Probably, then, it was at this most appropriate time that the 
Lord instituted the rite as a type of the great sacrifice to 
come. He slew the victims, and as He shed their life-blood 
Adam and Eve for the first time gazed upon death with 
affrighted eyes. Then He showed them how to lay the, 
carcases upon the altar that they might be an offering made 
by fire unto the Lord. Finally He took the skins of the 
slain beasts, and made with them the coats with which He 
clothed the trembling pair. 

And thus the Gospel was preached from the beginning : 
the Lamb of God slain from the foundation of the world was 
revealed as soon as sin had made His death necessary : the 
robe of His righteousness, which may be put on by every 
sinner for whom He has died, was shown to be the only 
garment which will effectually cover the shame of fallen man. 
And, by comparing the promise of the woman’s Seed and the 
bruising of His heel with the slain sacrifice and the coats 



THE TRIAL AND SENTENCE. 


99 


made from the skins of the victims, Adam may have been 
at once able to discern the outline of the great plan of 
salvation. 

Adam and Eve are ex- But a precaution was now necessarv. 

had obtained the knowledge of good 
and evil without the power of resisting evil. Therefore he 
must no longer remain in the beautiful garden, lest he should 
put forth his hand, take of the tree of life, and so render his 
state of sin everlasting. For to be immortal in his fallen 
condition would be the greatest of all calamities : to continue 
in sin for ever would be nothing less than the second death. 
And it was only by passing through the first death that man 
could be restored to spotless innocence again. 

Hence, after another solemn consultation of the Blessed 
Trinity, the sorrowful, but no longer hopeless, pair were 
expelled from the garden of beauty, and driven into the cold 
world to seek another home. With heavy hearts they 
wended their way amid the towering pyramids of green 
brilliant with ruddy fruit or sprinkled with thick blossom, 
through the bright maze of flowers and verdure, until they 
had passed the great gate, which immediately closed behind 
them. 

They stood without, exiled from their home, under a com- 
paratively chilling climate, looking upon a vegetation which 
to them must have seemed stunted and deformed, no longer 
expecting their food directly from the bounteous hand of God, 
but doomed to labour for it with wearisome care and toil. 
Nor was there any hope of deliverance until they had returned 
to the dust from whence they came, until they had rendered 
up their spirits unto Him Who gave them, and left their 
mortal frames motionless and inanimate, even as the slain 
victims upon whose carcases they had lately gazed with 
shuddering awe. 

And now the garden of Eden disappears from view, and is 
scarcely ever mentioned again until we come to the last book 
of the wonderful revelation w^e are considering. But in the 
Apocalypse it rises before us once more in all its pristine 
beauty, and we see the sons of Adam walking on the banks 
of the crystal stream, and no longer excluded from the tree of 
life, 

8 * 



100 


eaeth’s eakliest ages. 


How this happy restoration shall be effected is the subject 
of the whole Bible, which treats — as the significant fact just 
noticed indicates — solely of the dealings by which God 
conducts men round the painful circle from Paradise lost to 
Paradise regained. 


CHAPTER VIIL 

The Age of Freedom. 

In the tecond age men Thus the first dispensation ended in 

were reifratned neither by * 11 * o t 

government nor law. failure, yielding as its result a mournful 
proof that man is a being too weak to retain his innocence 
even in the most favourable circumstances. It now remained 
to be seen whether after the experience of the fall, after 
tasting the bitter consequences of sin, he could recover his 
position and become again obedient and holy. Of this God 
made trial in several ways. 

And first in what we may term the age of freedom, during 
the lapse of which He left Adam and his descendants almost 
entirely to their own devices. Marriage had indeed been 
instituted ; and they were instructed to approach God by 
means of typical sacrifices, and commanded to toil for their 
bread by tilling the earth. But beyond this God would 
neither Himself issue laws nor suffer men to do so. The 
sword of the magistrate might not be used for the repression 
of crime : even the murderer should be unpunished, as we 
may see by the case of Cain. No government was permitted : 
every man should go in his own way, and do that which was 
right in his own eyes. 

Thus the fitness of man for a condition of extreme liberty, 
and the worth of a trust in the innate justice supposed to lie 
at the bottom of the human heart, have been already tested 
by the great Creator. Modern philosophers are urging a 
repetition of the experiment ; but the history of the times of 
old proves the fallacy of their views. For the wickedness of 



THE AGE OF FEEEDOM. 


101 


man became great : all flesh corrupted its Avay upon the 
earth, and the earth was filled with violence. And as it was 
in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the 
Son of man.^ 

Hence a consideration of the second age should be pecu- 
liarly interesting to us : for it will help us to understand our 
own times, and, by the course of events before the deluge, 
give us some idea of what may be expected in the present 
dispensation, the closing scenes of which seem to be already 
projecting their dark shadows before them. 

The gtagea of our journey After the expulsion of Adam from 

Paradise God does not appear to have 
Tcheruacie. removed the beautiful garden : but its 

gates were inexorably closed, and at the east end of it were 
placed the cherubim, and the flaming sword which turned 
itself to and fro and guarded every access to the tree of life. 
And so we seem to find here also the rudiments of a taber- 
nacle, just as we found them in the Eden of Satan. The 
tree of life, with the cherubim underneath it and the shechinah 
or glory around it, is the holy of holies ; Paradise the holy 
place; and Eden, the district in which the garden was 
planted, the court of the tabernacle. 

And both in Paradise and in the tabernacle we, perhaps, 
discern an outline of our way to God. For as the district of 
Eden was to Adam, so to us is this earth, which was once like 
Eden a realm of delight, but is now blasted with the curse of 
sin. The fallen Adam prayed and ofiered up sacrifices before 
the closed gates of Paradise, in sight of the tree of life and 
the glory: and so do we with the eye of faith behold the 
throne of grace beyond the limits of this present world, and 
casting ourselves before it plead the once offered sacrifice of 
Christ. 

But at death the Paradise of God will be thrown open to 
us : for the very word is used in the New Testament of the 
place in which we abide during the intermediate state. 
“To day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise ^ said our Lord 
to the dying thief. 

Now the word is of Persian origin, and had a well-defined 
meaning which the Saviour surely intended to suggest when 
^ Luke xvii. 26. - Luke xxiii. 43. 



102 


EABTH’s EABLIEST AGES. 


He used it. For the Persian kings and nobles were accus- 
tomed to surround their palaces with parks of vast magnitude, 
planted with beautiful trees and shrubs, and stocked with 
beasts wild and tame. Some suppose these parks to have 
been reminiscences of a tradition of Eden : at any rate a place 
of the sort was called a paradise. And so, by adopting the 
word, Christ appears to indicate that at death we pass, as it 
were, into the wondrous garden that surrounds the Father’s 
house, but not into the house itself. 

For He declared to His disciples that He was going to 
prepare abodes for them in that glorious palace, and would 
shortly return to fetch them return, as angels subsequently 
announced, in like manner as He went up,^ in actual bodily 
presence. At death, therefore, we shall enter into the 
garden : but only at the return of Christ and the resurrection 
can we obtain access to the tree of life which is in the midst 
of the Paradise of God,* and which seems to correspond to 
the actual place of the presence. 

So also the court of the tabernacle seems to represent this 
present world, during our stay in which we must offer up the 
slain victim on the brazen altar by thankfully believing in the 
sacrifice of Christ, and must afterwards be cleansed and 
sanctified in the laver with the washing of water by the 
word.^ 

Then, being clad in the white robes of Christ’s righteous- 
ness, we shall, in the intermediate state, enter into the holy 
place, where the implements of our service will be no longer 
of the baser metals — which are continually subject to the rust 
of sin — but only of pure gold. 

Lastly ; at the resurrection we shall be admitted into the 
holy of holies, the dwelling-place of the glory, into the 
mansions prepared for us in the Father’s house. 

The cherubim. Deriva- Of the cherubim we must Speak as 
*^fiJ^PaZLeJert briefly as the subject will allow ; for they 
symbolical etatues, and not gj:Q enveloped in a mystery which has 
tvtng eings. uever yet been completely penetrated, 

and, perhaps, never will be until our present knowledge in 
part is succeeded by the clear sunlight of future revelation. 

We have no certainty even in regard to the meaning of 
' John xiy. 2, 3. 2 ^^ts i. 11. ^ ^ 7^ 4 jjph. v. 26. 



THE AGE OF FREEDOM. 


103 


the name : for all the proposed derivations are unsatisfactory. 
It would, therefore, be useless to enumerate them, and we 
will mention but one, of which we can say little more than 
that it seems at least as likely to be true as any of the others. 
Perhaps, then, the word may be formed from a Syriac and 
Arabic root — charahh — signifying to plough or cut into, and 
then to carve. Hence cherub would mean “ that which is 
carved, “an image.” And it may be that the cherubim were 
so called as being the images or statues which God made and 
placed in the garden of Eden : for symbolical figures they 
most probably were, and not living beings. 

Certainly this would be the idea conveyed to the mind of 
an Israelite, who would at once connect them with the 
images on the mercy-seat. Indeed such a connection seems 
to have been intentionally suggested : for the Hebrew text 
has “ the cherubim,” ^ and not merely “ cherubim ” as our 
version carelessly translates. And by the use of the article 
Moses evidently indicates that the symbols were well known 
to those for whom he was writing. Nor is there any obstacle 
to our view in the common, but absolutely incorrect, notion 
that the cherubim wielded the fiaming sword : for the 
original expressly mentions that the sword turned itself : it 
was a revolving fire corresponding to the glory which ap- 
peared above the cherubim in the tabernacle. In both cases 
the position of the images in regard to the glory was doubt- 
less significant of the nearness to God of the real cherubim, 
or rather, of the actual existences represented by the 
symbols. 

Ezekiel’s description qf The most detailed accouut of the 
the cherubim. cherubim in Scripture is that of Ezekiel,^ 

which we will now briefiy consider. The prophet tells us 
that he was among the Hebrew captives on the banks of the 
Chebar, when the heavens were opened to him, and he beheld 
visions of God. He saw a storm coming from the north, a 
mighty cloud having an infolding fire within it and a hashing 
brightness round about it. In the midst of the fire there was 
as it were the glancing of furbished brass : and as he gazed 
upon this glittering splendour with its terrific surroundings, 
it drew nearer to him, and he began to distinguish glorious 
1 Gen. ui. 24. 2 y.taV. i. 3-28. 



104 


earth’s earliest ages. 


forms. There were four living creatures, each standing 
beside a wheel dreadful in height. Stretched over the heads 
of these wondrous beings was the likeness of the firmament 
of the colour of the terrible crystal. Above the firmament 
was a sapphire throne, and upon the throne the likeness of a 
man radiant with heavenly glory and surrounded with the 
appearance of a rainbow. It was the chariot of the Lord : it 
was Jehovah borne upon the cherubim, and coming forth to 
judgment. 

Each cherub was in the form of a man, that is, displayed 
the body and upright position of a man. But every one had 
four faces : the first face was that of a man, the second that 
of a lion, the third that of an ox, and the fourth that of an 
eagle. Now the lion, the ox, and the eagle, are the repre- 
sentatives of the beasts of the field, of cattle, and of the fowls 
of the air. And from this vision doubtless arose the Jewish 
saying, “ Four are the highest in creation : the lion among 
the beasts, the ox among cattle, the eagle among the fowls, 
and man above these ; but God is the highest of all.” 

In the temple of EzekieF the cherubim are associated 
with palm trees, in that of Solomon‘S with palm trees and 
flowers. Now the palm was considered to be the king of 
trees. Humboldt calls it “ the noblest of plants to which the 
nations ever assign the prize of beauty.” And the flower is 
the glory of the herb of the field. 

Hence the cherubim and the accessories with which they 
were surrounded seem to have been made up of the highest 
forms of the animal and vegetable kingdoms, and to have been 
representatives of creature life in its perfection, and in 
obedience to and union with its Creator. No part of the 
symbol points to the fish of the sea : these may be included 
in the higher forms of life. Or, perhaps, their omission is to 
be explained by the announcement that in the final condition 
of earth, after the Millennium, there shall be no more sea.^ 

Each cherub had also four sides, and, apparently, six wings, 
though four only are mentioned at first.* Of these we are 
told that two were spread out and joined to the wings of 
those on either side, while with another pair the cherubim 
covered their bodies in reverence. But it quickly becomes 

^ Ezek. xli. 18-20. ^ j Kings vi. 29. ^ Rev. xxi. 1. Ezek. i. 6. 



THE AGE OP PBEEDOM. 


105 


evident that in the commencement of the description Ezekiel 
is speaking only of their appearance from one point of view : 
for a little later he tells us that “ every one had two (wings), 
which covered on this side, and every one had two, which 
covered on that side, their bodies.”' Underneath their 
wings were the hands of a man, and their feet were straight 
feet, sparkling like the colour of burnished brass, and the 
soles of their feet were as the sole of a calf s foot. Lastly ; 
their whole body, their backs, their hands, and their wings, 
as well as the wheels beside which they stood, were full of 
eyes, indicative, perhaps, of intense vigilance and intelli- 
gence. 

DescripUon and possible Each of the wheels was as it were a 

sxqnijicayice of the wheels, within a wheel, that is, One wheel 

passing transversely through the centre of another, so that 
the chariot might go in the direction of either of the four 
faces without turning. In appearance the wheels were like 
to the colour of beryl, or rather of chrysolite : their rings or 
felloes were full of eyes : and the spirit of life, or, perhaps, 
of the living creature, was in them. Wherever the Spirit of 
God willed to go, thither would the chariot of the cherubim 
speed and return as the flashing of lightning. 

Since the cherubim appear to be symbols of creature life, 
it is not improbable that the wheels represent the forces of 
nature : “ Fire, and hail ; snow, and vapours ; stormy wind 
fulfilling His word.”^ 

The cherubim are tden- Such wcve the cherubim as Seen by 

heal with the living creu- i i a j xi. i. xi_ 

tures in the Apocalypse Ezekicl. And though there are some 
differences of detail — owing, probably, to differences in the 
circumstances — there can be no doubt that they are identical 
with the living creatures which John saw at the foot of the 
throne.* The word used in the Apocalypse is a literal trans- 
lation of Ezekiel’s “living creature,^’ being indeed the very 
word by which the Hebrew is rendered in that passage of the 
Septuagint. But unfortunately in our version of the New 
Testament it is translated “ beast,” though it simply means a 
living being. It is quite a different term from that used of 
the ten-horned, and also of the two-horned, beast of the 
later chapters. 

1 Ezek. i. 23. 


2 Psa. cxlviii. 8. 


3 Rev. iv. 6. 



106 


£ABTH*S EABLIEST AGES. 


And probably also with A^ain ; the six-winged seraphim of 
ih, Seraphim qf I, aiak. ig^iah' seem also to be the same as the 
cherubim. For the number of their wings corresponds, and 
they hold the same position in the glory, just beneath the 
throne. And again ; their cry “ Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord 
of hosts is similar to that of the living creatures which John 
saw. 

The word seraphim appears to signify the burning ones, 
and perhaps the cherubim were so called from the fervour of 
their worship. Or it may be that the change of name 
indicates a different function. For the cherubim are repre- 
sented as taking up coals of fire for the execution of the 
wrath of God but a seraph brings a live coal from the altar, 
and by applying it to Isaiah’s lips purifies him from his 
iniquity and sin.’^ Thus the former name is perhaps used 
when God appears as a consuming fire ; the latter when He 
is acting as a purifying flame. 

They are not angeit. That the cherubim are not angels we might 
infer from their evident connection with the animal and 
vegetable kingdoms, which, if they were angels, would 
have no parallel in Scripture. But the question is absolutely 
settled by two passages of the Apocalypse^; in the first of 
which we read of “ many angels,” and in the second of “ all 
the angels,”^ standing round about tbe throne and the living 
creatures and the elders. In both cases angels are evidently 
distinguished from the living creatures and the elders. And 
yet again ; we find the living creatures and the elders giving 
thanks to the Lamb for having redeemed them to God by 
His blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and 
nation.® 

But eeem to represent This last fact gives US a clue to the 
we know of the cherubim. They 
Christ in glory. are uot augels, but represent some part of 

the redeemed church in glory. They are always found in 
the immediate presence of God, and in connection with the 
shechinah ; and are hence styled by Paul “ the cherubim of 
the glory.”® They seem to be ever with the Lord when He 
is engaged in the government of this world ; they act as His 

1 Isa. vi. 2. 2 Ezek. x. 7. ® Isa. vi. 6, 7. 

^ Rev. V. 11 ; vii. 11. ® Rev. v. 8, 9. ® Heb. ix. 5. 



.THE AGE OF FREEDOM. 


107 


higher executive, calling forth the powers which inflict His 
judgments, and furnishing angels with the means of carrying 
out His will. 

Thus, at the successive breaking of the first four seals,' 
each of the living creatures in turn cries. Come ! and instantly 
the horses and their riders appear. Our version has “ Come 
and see,” as though the cry were addressed to John : but it 
is now generally admitted that the words “ and see ” are a 
gloss entirely destructive of the sense. Again ; in Ezekiel’s 
vision of the departure of the glory from the temple, one of 
the cherubim gives to the man clothed in linen coals of fire 
to scatter over Jerusalem.^ Lastly; it is one of the living 
creatures who brings to the seven angels the seven golden 
bowls full of the wrath of God.* 

Putting, then, together, the composite forms of the 
cherubim, apparently representing glorified man in con- 
nection with redeemed creation, their position underneath 
the throne, their association with Christ in His government 
of the world, and the fact that they confess themselves to 
have been redeemed by His blood, it seems to follow that 
they are symbols of the church of the first-born reigning 
with Christ, and acting as His executive in bringing about 
the restitution of all things. 

And so Isaiah hears them singing in glad anticipation, 
“ Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts : the whole earth is 
full of His glory.” ^ So, too, in the great redemption scene 
of the Apocalypse they end their thanksgiving to the Lamb 
with the triumphant words, “ And hast made us unto our 
God kings and priests : and we shall reign upon the earth.” * 
And then, most appropriately, the strain is taken up with a 
mighty ascription of praise, not only by ten thousand times 
ten thousand angels and thousands of thousands, but also by 
“ every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and 
under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are 
in them.” ® 

Significance qf the Heuce the appearance of the cherubim in 
cherubim to Adam, paradise was a glorious prophecy of hope 

to Adam. For it told him that, though the crown had 

1 Rev. vi. 1, 3, 5, 7. ^ Ezek. x. 2, 7. ^ Rev. xv. 7. 

* Isa. vi. 3. fi'Rev. v. 10. ® Rev. v. 13. 



108 


ea.bth’s earliest ages. 


fallen from his head, and himself and all creation were now 
subjected to decay and corruption, yet the time would come 
when he should again have access to the tree of life, again 
draw near to God, and be reinstated in his sovereignty over 
the world, which should also be brought back to its original 
perfection and beauty. Thus did the mercy of God support 
him in his present trouble by glimpses of future restoration. 

The jiaming sword. But, though the emblems of hope were 
ever before him, there was also a revolving sword of flame, 
ceaselessly turning with lightning flashes to guard the tree of 
immortality, a fiery circle which kept him from his God and 
from life. For Jehovah is a consuming fire to those who are 
in sin : He dwells in the light unto which no fallen man can 
approach.^ 

That the sword was connected with the shechinah we can 
see from its counterpart, the fire infolding itself, in EzekieFs 
vision of the glory. Doubtless this was the fire which came 
out from the Lord at the consecration of the tabernacle and 
consumed the burnt-ofifering upon the altar this was the 
fire that burst forth upon Nadab and Abihu and devoured 
them, so that they died before the Lord.® 

Henceforth, therefore, man’s whole attention was to be 
concentrated upon the means provided by God for the 
removal of the flaming barrier, that he might at length 
regain his natural position, and be at rest. 

Birth qf Cain and Adam now Commenced his labour of tilling 
the ground, the toil of which, owing to 
the want of implements and experience, must have been 
doubly distressing. But after a while the first infant was 
bom into the world : and we can imagine the joy of Eve 
at the thought that the promise was now realised, that the 
delivering Seed had appeared. In happy exultation she 
called his name Cain, that is, “ acquisition” or “ possession,” 
exclaiming “ I have gotten a man with the aid of Jehovah !” 
The grammar of this sentence admits the rendering “ I have 
gotten a man, even Jehovah!” but it is, to say the least, 
uncertain whether this could have been Eve’s meaning. For 
we have no intimation that the great mystery of godliness, 
God manifest in the flesh, had as yet been revealed. At any 
^ 1 Tim. vi. 16. 2 24. 8 L^v. x. 2. 



THE AGE OF FREEDOM. 


109 


rate, however, she believed that the promise had been ful- 
filled : she thought she had gotten the Deliverer ; she would 
call her son the possession of that which was promised. 

Alas ! how little did she know of the bitter disappoint- 
ments, the heart-sickening succession of hopes deferred, 
which were henceforth to be the lot of herself and of all her 
descendants. For she was not merely mistaken in supposing 
Cain to be the Deliverer : nay, the son whom she loved, of 
whom she hoped so much, was actually the first of the 
serpent’s hostile seed, the first link of a chain which would 
end, not in Christ, but in Antichrist. By the time of her 
second son’s birth she seems to have had some apprehension 
of the truth : for her joy had then given way to depression, 
and she called his name Abel, that is, “ a breath,” or “ that 
which passes as a breath ” — thus showing her consciousness 
of the speedy mortality of her offspring and the fall of all her 
high hopes. 

Thetr wives. Now since the birth of Seth must have 
followed quickly upon the death of Abel, and we are told 
that Seth was born when Adam was a hundred and thirty 
years old,^ there was, probably, a lapse of some hundred and 
twenty-nine years between the birth of Cain and the death of 
Abel. During this time Adam doubtless had many other 
sons and daughters, and Cain and Abel seem to have been 
directed to take them wives of their sisters. Such marriages 
could not be avoided in the beginning of man^s history, since 
the whole race was to be united in descent from a single pair : 
and it must be remembered that the children of Adam were 
not merely a family, but the whole human family. As soon, 
however, as the necessity had disappeared such connec- 
tions were discountenanced, and afterwards rigorously pro- 
hibited.^ 

Their pursuits. As they grew to manhood the brothers 
adopted different pursuits. Cain became a tiller of the 
ground, and, therefore, had reason to feel the curse in all its 
bitterness : but Abel was a keeper of sheep. And, since 
men were not at that time allowed to touch animal food, 
these sheep must have been kept for sacrificial purposes and 
for the manufacture of garments. Hence Cain assisted in the 
^ Gen. v. 3. ^ Lev. xviii. 9. 



110 


EAKTH’s EAKLIE8T AGES. 


production of food for the primeval family, while Abel’s duties 
were concerned with their religious services and clothing. 

Their sacrificea. Reaaon In process of time the brothers brought 
of Ca.n 8 rejection. otfering uuto the Lord, presenting 

it, probably, at the gate of Paradise. And God had respect 
unto Abel and to his offering ; but unto Cain and to his 
offering He had not respect. 

The reason of this difference is fraught with the deepest 
interest to us : for there are many in these latter days who, 
according to the prophecy of Jude,^ have gone in the way of 
Cain : the theology of the first murderer is that of a large 
and perpetually increasing school of our times. He neither 
denied the existence of God, nor refused to worship Him. 
Nay, he recognised Him as the Giver of all good things, and 
brought an offering of the fruits of the ground as an acknow- 
ledgment of His bounty. But he went no further than this ; 
and, therefore, though he may have passed among his fellows 
as a good and religious man, he failed to satisfy God. For 
being yet in his sins he presumed to approach the Holy One 
without the shedding of blood : he was willing to take the 
place of a dependent creature, but would not confess himself 
a sinner guilty of death, and only to be saved by the life of a 
substitute. 


He is a type of the many in these times who will descant 
upon the benevolence and love of the Creator, and are ever 
ready to laud Him for those attributes, and claim the benefit 
of them, without any reference to their own unworthiness 
and sinful condition, without a thought of that perfect 
holiness and justice which are as much elements of the mind 
of God as love itself. But the Most High did not accept the 
sacrifice of Cain : for none may approach to worship Him 
except through the shedding of blood, even the blood of the 
Lamb which He has provided : the sin-offering must come 
first, then the thank-offering : we can enter into the holy of 
holies and cast ourselves before the mercy-seat only by 
passing through the rent veil of Christ’s flesh. 

Abel knew something of this, and confessed it : therefore 
he brought of the firstlings of his flock, and poured out their 
life-blood in humble avowal of his own deserts. And God at 


^ Jude 11. 



THE AGE OF FREEDOM. 


Ill 


once accepted his offering ; perhaps — as many have thought 
— by sending forth fire from the shechinah to consume it, and 
thus showing in a type that His wrath in regard to Abel 
would be satiated upon a substitute. 

God't unavailing re~ At the sight of this Cain^s countsnauce 
^hTm!l!^der. fclU sLud he was angry : he committed the 

appalling sin of judging his Creator, and stirring up human 
wrath at His just dealings. Nevertheless God would not at 
once abandon the sinner to his fate. He patiently reasoned 
with Cain, as with a wilful child : He sought to bring him 
back to a right mind, pointing out his evil condition, and 
that a dire sin was crouching at his door ready to spring 
upon him like some ravenous beast upon its prey. Nor did 
He cease without promising that, if the offender would 
repent and do well, he also should be accepted, and preserve 
that ascendency over his brother to which, as being chosen 
by his Creator for the position of firstborn, he was lawfully 
entitled. 

But the gracious expostulation was wasted : Cain took his 
opportunity, and the germ of sin which had been planted in 
Adam ripened into murder in his eldest son. 

The conviction and the It was not long before God made 
sentence. inquisition for blood. “ Where, He 

asked of Cain, “ is Abel thy brother And so again, as in 
the case of Adam, He inquired, though He had full know- 
ledge, to give the transgressor an opportunity of judging 
himself and confessing his guilt. Had Cain done so he 
would yet have found hope. But he branded himself a 
second time with the mark of the serpent by adding lying to 
murder. “I know not;’^ he replied, “am I my brother’s 
keeper?” So hardened had he become that he would fain 
deny the truth even in the presence of the omniscient God. 
Therefore he was instantly dragged forth to judgment : his 
covering of lies was torn away, and his crime in all its black- 
ness laid bare by the piercing words “ What hast thou done ? 
The voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto Me from the 
ground.” 

Cain was speechless : he could offer neither defence nor 
excuse, and God went on to pronounce sentence. The earth, 
which had drunk up his brother’s blood, should be laid under 



112 


EABTH’s EABLIEST AGES. 


a second curse, and should no longer yield its strength even 
in response to the severest toil. Nor should the murderer 
remain with his parents in Eden : he should be banished 
from the presence of the Lord, from the sight of the cherubim 
and the glory, and go forth as a fugitive and wanderer upon 
the earth. But no human hand should touch him. Neither 
the other members of his family, nor the descendants of Abel, 
if there were any, might avenge the crime upon pain of a 
sevenfold punishment : for magisterial power was not yet 
entrusted to man. 

Adam and Eve are com. Thus Were our first parents deprived of 
forted by the birth of Seth, their sons in one day. How appalled 

must they now have been with the progress of the mischief 
which their transgression had brought into the world ! But 
the God of all consolation was merciful, and about this time 
gave them another son whom Eve called Seth, that is, 
“ appointed.” “ For God,” she said, “ hath appointed me 
another seed instead of Abel whom Cain slew.” It is curious 
to notice that she here attributes the gift to Elohim and not 
to Jehovah, which is probably an indication that her hope 
had given place to despondency. After expecting the pro- 
mised seed for a hundred and thirty years she had at length 
lapsed into despair, and, seeing in Seth nothing more than a 
natural son, pours forth her thanks to Elohim and not to the 
covenant-keeping Jehovah. But she was again mistaken. 
Long and weary had been the time of waiting and bitter the 
disappointments, but she had at last obtained the first link of 
the chain that was to end in the promised seed: from the 
line of Seth Christ was to spring. 

Characierii^tice <f the Henceforth we find a twofold develop- 
‘^ment in the human race: the Sethites and 
the banished Cainites remain separated for a while, and 
represent the church and the world. The Cainites, with the 
restlessness of men alienated from God, were ever striving to 
make the land of their exile a pleasant land ; to reproduce 
Paradise artificially, instead of longing for the real garden of 
delight ; were ceaselessly trying by every means to palliate 
the curse, instead of patiently following God^s directions for 
getting rid of it altogether. Cain himself, who had been 
condemned to wander, was the first to build a city, which he 



THE AGE OF FKEEDOM. 


113 


called Enoch, after the name of his son ; the first to attempt 
to settle comfortably upon the blasted earth. 

Some have wondered where he found inhabitants for his city. 
But they forget that, for aught we know, he may have built it 
centuries after his flight from Eden, and do not take into 
account the prodigious increase of population in an age when 
an Ordinary life extended through eight or nine hundred years, 
and a man was cotemporary with seven or eight generations 
of his descendants. Besides which, the city of Cain may 
have been at first nothing more than a fixed and substantial 
habitation for himself and his family. 

Lamech and his sons. Beyond a mere enumeration of names, 

Mention of women among i .i j p > 

the descendants of Cam. we have no further record of Cam s pos- 
terity till we come to his descendant of the fifth generation. 
But the few particulars concerning Lamech and his family 
present a vivid picture of human corruption, of the way of 
the children of this world. We see it beginning in a sensu- 
ous life that involves the loss of the God-consciousness, and 


of all fear of breaking the Divine laws : we trace it as it goes 
on to make present circumstances as comfortable and as in- 
dulgent as possible, substituting arts sciences and intellectual 
pursuits for spiritual aspirations, and, with the aid of divers 
amusements and pleasures, banishing thought by excitement : 
and at last we find it ending in a thorough concentration upon 
self, and a hardened defiance of God. 


Lamech broke the primeval law of marriage, and was the 
first polygamist, thus giving proof of the utter godlessness 
into which the Cainites had lapsed. The mention and names 
of his wives are perhaps suggestive of the state of society in 
his circle. Adah signifies “ ornament,’’ or “ beauty while 
Zillah means “ shade,” in reference, probably, to her rich and, 
as it were, overshadowing tresses. His daughter also was 
called Naamah, that is, “ lovely.” Now in the genealogy of 
Seth’s family there is no mention of either wives or daughters 
by name. Here, therefore, we, perhaps, have an intimation 
that the women among the Cainites were unduly prominent, 
and that personal beauty and sensuous attractions were the 
only valued qualities. 

Of the sons of Lamech, Jabal was remarkable as being the 
first man who accumulated cattle in large numbers and led a 


9 



114 


eakth’s earliest ages. 


nomad life. Probably, in defiance of God’s injunction, he in- 
troduced animal flesh and milk as food, with the view of 
escaping the. labour of tilling the accursed ground. Jubal 
invented music, and Tubal-cain the mechanical arts. 
pifMcVi addre$e to hi* The last piece of information which we 
possess concerning Lamech is contained in 
his address to his wives. This appears to be a kind of song, 
which may have been popular among the antediluvians. But 
it breathes a boasting spirit of self-reliance — arising, perhaps, 
from the weapons which Tubal-cain had forged — and of proud 
revenge, which quite prepares us to hear that the earth was 
shortly afterwards filled with violence. Literally translated 
it runs as follows : 

“ Adah and Zillah, hear my voice ; 

Ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech : 

For I have slain a man in return for my wound, 

And a young man in return for my bruise. 

For sevenfold shall Cain be avenged, 

But Lamech seventy and sevenfold.” 

The meaning of which appears to be that he had quarrelled 
with a young man, and, having been wounded and bruised by 
him, had slain him in revenge. That God chose to proclaim 
a sevenfold vengeance upon the one who should kill Cain : 
but let all know that, if any one injure Lamech, the vengeance 
will be seventy and sevenfold : if any one merely wound or 
bruise him, he will surely take his life as a recompense. 

And this is the last we hear of the family of Cain as sepa- 
rated from the rest of the world. Its first ancestor was a 
murderer : and it disappeared in the person of a polygamist, 
murderer, and open worshipper of the god of forces. 

8 when we turn to Seth’s posterity 

‘ the scene changes. Envying, strifes, and 

deeds of license and violence, are no longer before us : our 
ears cease to be assailed with the lowing of herds, the strains 
of soft music used for the soothing of uneasy consciences, 
the clatter of the anvil, the vauntings of proud boasters, and 
all the mingled din which arises from a world living without 
God and struggling to overpower His curse. 

But we see a people poor and afflicted ; toiling day after 
day to procure food from the ungenial soil, according to their 



THE AGE OP FREEDOM. 


115 


God’s appointment ; patiently waiting till He should be 
gracious, and humbly acknowledging His chastening hand 
upon them. They have no share in earth’s history : that is 
entirely made up by the Cainites. As strangers and pilgrims 
in the world they abstain from fleshly lusts : they build no 
cities : they invent no arts : they devise no amusements. For 
they are not mindful of the country in which they live, but 
seek a better, that is, a heavenly. Lastly ; as we may see by 
the allusion to it in the name of Noah,^ they keep the curse 
which God laid upon the earth continually before them. 

Meayiing of the expres- Jn contrast to the boastings of the 

eion “ to cull upon the t i Oxi 

name of Jehovah." Lainite Lamcch, Seth named ms nrst son 

Enos, that is, “ weakness ” — a humble confession of the 
feebleness and helplessness of man, which is naturally followed 
by the next sentence, “ Then began men to call upon the 
name of Jehovah.” 

But in what sense are we to understand this phrase, which 
is henceforth frequently used in Scripture? Jehovah, as we 
have previously seen, is the name by which God has revealed 
Himself to those with whom He has made a covenant, to 
whom He has given promises. When Moses asks what 
answer he shall return to the Israelites if they inquire the 
name of the God Who sent him, the Lord replies, “ I am That 
I am ” : “ Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I 
am hath sent me unto you.”^ Now in the Hebrew, not the 
present, but the future of the verb “ to be ” is used : and 
from the future the name Jehovah is derived. But the 
Hebrew future has a peculiar signification : it is often used 
to express a permanent state, that which exists and always 
will exist. Hence the words rendered “ I am That I am ” 
might be more intelligently translated “ I ever shall be That 
Which I am.” And thus “Jehovah ” signifies the immutable 
God, the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, Whose purpose 
no circumstances can affect. Whose promises can in no wise fail. 

Whenever, therefore, we read of Abraham pitching his 
tent in some new place, rearing an altar there, and calling 
upon the name of Jehovah,® we must regard him as appealing 
to God for protection and aid in his apparently aimless 
wanderings on the ground of the promises made to him. 

^ Gen. V. 29. 2 jjx. iii. 14. ^ Gen. xii. 8. 



116 


eakth’s eaeliest ages. 


Again ; “ What,” asks the Psalmist, “ shall I render unto 
Jehovah for all His benefits toward me ? ” And the answer 
is, “ I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name 
of Jehovah.”^ That is, I will thankfully accept the deliver- 
ance which God has wrought for me, and, calling upon Him 
by His name Jehovah, will thereby glorify Him as the im- 
mutable One Who never fails to redeem His promises. 

Lastly; Joel tells us that in that dread time, immediately 
before the appearing of Christ and His church in glory, when 
the world is affrighted with signs in the heavens and on the 
earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke ; when the sun is 
withdrawing its light, and the silver moon is reddening to a 
bloody hue — that, in that awful hour, whosoever shall call 
upon the name of Jehovah shall be saved. ^ The reference, 
as the context plainly shows, is to the Jewish remnant ; and the 
meaning that, if any man warned by the fearful sights around 
him shall bethink himself of the promises to Israel, and appeal 
to his Maker by the covenant name on the ground of those 
promises, he shall be saved. 

It is easy, therefore, to see the meaning of the phrase as 
applied to the Sethites. The descendants of Cain, worship- 
ping nothing more than the creating and ruling Elohim, and, 
eonsequently, having no promises on which to rest, settled 
themselves as well as they could in the world, and used their 
best endeavours to do away with the inconveniences of the 
curse. The Sethites, on the other hand, made no attempt to 
kick against the pricks, to avoid the chastisement of God, but 
looked to Him for relief, relied upon His prediction of the 
delivering Seed, and began to address Him by His covenant 
name Jehovah, to keep alive their hope, and to express their 
trust in His promise. 

Hence they seem to have shown somewhat of the spirit 
which, many centuries later, actuated the Thessalonian Chris- 
tians they made no idols for themselves upon earth, but 
served the living and true God, and waited for His Son from 
heaven. 

Enoch the jir»f of the A curious coincidence strikes us here. 
propheu. account of the Cainites we have a 

few particulars of Cain’s history just intimating the direction 

^ Psa. cxvi. 12, 13. - Joel ii. 32. ^ \ These, i. 9, 10. 



THE AGE OF FREEDOM. 


117 


in which he guided his posterity, and afterwards a mere list 
of names till we come to Lamech the seventh from Adam. 
Then we have a momentary glimpse of the first murderer's 
city, and find lawlessness and violence developing in it, while 
its inhabitants are making strenuous efforts to attain to happi- 
ness without God. 

In the same manner we hear of Seth’s humble confession 
of weakness, and that his community then began to call upon 
the name of Jehovah. And this is followed by a bare register 
of births and deaths till we come to Enoch, the seventh from 
Adam in Seth’s line. Then the chronicle halts for a moment, 
and in a few words records an event of surpassing importance. 

As evil had culminated in Lamech, so had godliness in 
Enoch : for he walked with God, and had this testimony that 
he pleased Him.^ But the dark shadow of the end was 
already beginning to fall upon the world. Wickedness had 
increased to such an extent that not only was the inability of 
man to recover himself demonstrated, but even the necessity 
of bringing the trial to a speedy close. The Lord, therefore, 
bestowed a new power upon Enoch, and sent him forth as 
the first prophet to testify against the sin of the world, and 
to proclaim that the times of forbearance would soon have 
run their course. 

Filled with the Spirit of God he moved among men preach- 
ing of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, and 
doubtless caused many to tremble. But there was very little 
permanent result : for none save the prophet himself was 
thought worthy to escape the things which were coming on 
the earth : he alone was caught up to heaven before the 
perilous times of the great antediluvian tribulation com- 
menced. He was taken out of the world about six hundred 
and sixty-nine years before the flood. These intervening 
centuries may seem a long respite ; but we must remember 
that, owing to the length of life in those days, the time would 
not be equivalent to more than fifty or sixty years with us. 

The eincjie extant sped- The Only Utterance of this primeval 
T/’'co{c^ntfwMZ%7t seer which has come down to us is pre- 
future event. Served in the epistle of Jude. It runs as 

follows : “ Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of His 
^ Heb. XL 6. 



118 


eabth’s earliest ages. 


saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that 
are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which 
they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches 
which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him,”^ 

These words do not refer, finally at least, to the deluge, 
hut concern our times, and point to the appearing of our Lord 
in glory with His church. Had the prophecy descended to 
us without an inspired comment, it would doubtless have 
been made subservient to the “spiritualising” theory. An 
exclusive reference to the flood would have been assumed, 
and we should have been admonished to observe that the 
coming of the Lord is merely a figurative expression for a 
mighty judgment, and does not signify a personal advent. 
But such a perversion of meaning is impossible ; for Jude 
tells us that in his time, after the ascension of Christ to the 
Father, the prediction was still awaiting its fulfilment. Hence, 
therefore, the reason of its preservation, because it refers to 
the personal appearing of the Saviour to close the present 
dispensation. And Enoch^s knowledge of this appearing, so 
many long ages before it was to take place, shows us that the 
secrets of God are ever with them that fear Him ; while at the 
same time it testifies to the vast importance of that event, 
the first stage of which we should now be hourly expecting. 

Doubtless, too, the prophecy was fraught with peculiar 
consolation to the godly part of Seth’s posterity, toiling as 
they were beneath the curse, and longing for the promised 
deliverance. For it is at the Lord’s appearing that the battle 
shall at last be turned to the disaster of the serpent and his 
seed : it is then that the redemption of all creation from sin 
and death — the price of which was paid to the full upon the 
cross — shall be at length commenced after all the weary 
centuries of delay. 

E7ioch'8 framiation is a Enoch, then, Continued walking with 
‘^thfc)m/cht7mZ*The God, and testifying to the world, until his 
Lord in the atr. three hundred and sixty-fifth year, when 

he suddenly vanished : he was not : he had gone, and none 
could find him. For he had been caught up to the throne of 
the Most High, a first hint of the great secret that, although 
God made the earth for men and intends them to inhabit it 
1 Jude 14, 15. 



THE AGE OF FEEEDOM. 


119 


for ever, He, nevertheless, purposes to exalt an election from 
among them to a higher destiny, even to dwell with Christ in 
the heavenly places. 

And in this translation of Enoch before the terrible times 
of Noah we have a type of the manner in which God will 
shortly summon the waiting church to meet Christ in the air, 
and so to be ever with Him, before the corruption of the 
world comes to its worst, before the judgments of the day of 
the Lord commence. For the world heard no sound of a 
trumpet, saw no lightning flash, when Enoch was suddenly 
removed : he merely disappeared, and his companions, perhaps, 
knew not at first whither he had gone. Nay, it may be that 
they vainly sought him, even as the sons of the prophets 
sought Elijah for three days amid the mountains and valleys 
of J ericho. And so will it be at the translation of the church ; 
the Saviour will come unexpectedly, as a thief in the night, 
and steal away His own from the unsuspecting world. Their 
beds will be found vacant in the morning, or they will vanish 
from their customary places in the day ; there will be no 
farewells to those whom they love, but have been unable to 
entice into their own paths : all that may be recorded of their 
end will be as the record of Enoch’s departure. They were 
not ; for God took them. 

Thin vieio appears to he Perhaps it may be objected to this 
parallel that in Paul’s description of the 
rapture of the church the Lord is said to descend from the 
high heavens with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, 
and with the trump of God.^ This, at first sight, seems to 
intimate that there will be at least a momentary proclamation 
of what is going on. But we must remember that Paul is 
writing, not to mankind in general, but only to the waiting 
church. It does not, therefore, follow that the whole earth 
will be disturbed by the summons ; but only, of necessity, that 
those who are concerned will hear. 

That this will be the case among the dead is certain ; for 
our Lord Himself tells us that, when He gives the signal for 
the first resurrection, all those who hear shall live.^ But the 
rest of the dead will not hear, and, therefore, will not live until 
the thousand years of the Millenium are ended. And as with 
^ 1 These, iv. 16. ^ John v. 25. 



120 


eabth’s earliest ages. 


the dead, so will it probably be with the living. For although, 
as we shall see in the proper place, there is ample scriptural 
proof that the church will be removed from earth before the 
close of the age, there is, nevertheless, no trace in prophetic 
passages of the world being suddenly alarmed at that time by 
the voice of Christ and the trump of God. The Lord’s 
own declarations that, although unmistakable signs and 
wonders shall herald His glorious appearing to the world. He 
will come for His own as unexpectedly and noiselessly as a 
thief in the night, evidently point in the same direction. So 
does the fact that the details of the church’s translation seem 
to correspond to that of Enoch, of Elijah, and of the Lord 
Himself ; neither of w'hich events were seen by, or in any 
way immediately affected, the world. 

It may be that those who are believers in Christ, and, there- 
fore, a part of His redeemed ; who have offered up the sacrifice 
on the brazen altar, but have not yet been sufiftciently cleansed 
and sanctified in the laver, and are thus not ready to pass into 
the heavenly tabernacle — it may be that these will have some 
intimation of the summons only to feel their own inability to 
obey it for the present. They will be as Elisha witnessing 
the departure of Elijah : or as the disciples on the mount of 
Olives when they beheld the cloud receiving their Master out 
of their sight, but were not yet prepared to follow Him. 

Real meaning of KiXev- It is, however, worth while before we 
havemad^quate^^ pass OR to notice that the shout, with which 
**ashoutr Paul describes the Lord as descending, is 

no mere sound uttered to be heard generally. For the Greek 
word Ktkevarixa properly means a “bidding,^’ and was then 
used technically for the word of command given by either a 
naval or military officer. 

The idea, therefore, to be conveyed is that the church 
resembles an army which has already received orders to pre- 
pare for marching, has already been bidden to fall into rank, 
and to stand with girded loins and attentive ears ready to move 
simultaneously the instant the word of command is uttered by 
its great Leader. But there are some who, although they 
belong to the host, have neglected the first orders to be ready 
and watch, and are not expecting the second. These will be 
thrown into confusion by the sudden signal to march, and, 



THE AGE OE FBEEDOM. 


121 


being unable to follow at once, will have to rejoin their com- 
rades by a circuitous and perilous route, the greater part of 
which will be disputed by powerful bands of the then 
assembled and doubly malignant foe. 


The prophecy of Lantech 
and iU fulfilment. 


The first prophet thus passed away in a 
moment from the toils of life into the 


presence of God, and left behind him his son Methuselah and 
his grandson Lamech, which last was the father of Noah. 
The name Noah signifies “ rest,” and Lamech bestowed it 
upon his son with the words, “ This same shall comfort us 
concerning our work and toil of our bands, because of the 
ground which the Lord hath cursed.” ^ Now this utterance 
cannot be a mere vague expression of joy at the birth of the 
child : for if so, it would scarcely have been recorded. But 
we know that Lamech’s grandfather and son were prophets ; 
and, perhaps, the gift, wlien once bestowed, was transmitted to 
each head of the family, so that Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, 
and Noah, were a line of witnesses appointed by God to testify 
against the wickedness of the world, and to declare His 
purpose of judgment. 

Hence the words of Lamech were probably prophetic, and 
found their accomplishment in some alleviation of the curse 
after the fiood. For from the blessing of God when He 
accepted Noah’s sacrifice we may, perhaps, infer that the con- 
dition of earth before the deluge was worse than at any 
subsequent time,^ The seasons would seem to have been 
irregular and altogether uncertain there was no rain, and 
the mists, by which the earth was watered, may have been 
scanty and infrequent, so that the antediluvians often spent 
their strength in vain : their land did not yield its increase ; 
neither did the trees yield their fruit. Dense fogs, too, or 
other unknown causes, may have interfered with the alterna- 
tions of day and night. The curse was fresh and in full 
vigour : or, perhaps, these disasters arose from premonitory 
disturbances of nature similar to those which will precede 
the great judgment of our own age.' 

But when after Noah’s sacrifice the Lord smelled a sweet 


savour. He said, “ I will not again curse the ground any more 
for man’s sake .... While the earth remaineth, seedtime 


' Gen. V. 29. 


2 Gen. viii. 21, 22. 



122 


EAKTH’s EABLIEST AGES. 


and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and 
day and night, shall not cease.” ^ Man should still toil and 
struggle against many difficulties ; but God would henceforth 
give him fixed seasons, would allow him, as a rule, to be 
always sure of some fruit of his labours. And it is not un- 
likely that the gift of rain contributed still further to mitigate 
the intense hardship of the curse ; while the permission to eat 
animal food provided an altogether easier way of obtaining a 
large portion of the necessary sustenance. 


CHAPTER IX. 

The Days of Noah. 

The hiitory of Nouh'x Xhe sixth chapter of Genesis contains 

.times ts a subject of qrent ^ i r tvt i i 

practical import ance'to us. account 01 the days 01 iNoah, a descrip- 
tion of momentous interest to us ; for our Lord has declared 
that a similar epoch of worldliness will at length exhaust the 
forbearance of God towards the present dwellers upon earth, 
and cause Him to come with fire, and with His chariots like 
a whirlwind, to render His anger with fury, and His rebuke 
with flames of fire ; to plead with all flesh by fire and by His 
sword.^ 

It becomes, therefore, an obvious duty to consider the 
progress of wickedness and corruption among the ante- 
diluvians, so far as it has pleased God to inform us of it : to 
acquaint ourselves, not merely with the sowing, but also with 
the watering, the growth, and the ripening, of that hideous 
erop against which the gleaming sickle of the Almighty at 
length flashed forth from heaven ; to note the various incen- 
tives to evil as they successively appeared, and to observe the 
particular influence of each upon the rapidly decomposing 
masses of society. For by so doing w^e shall arm ourselves 
against the errors and temptations which are now daily 
thickening before us, and be enabled to discern the threaten- 
ing signs of our own times. 

^ Gen. viii. 21, 22. 


Isa. IxvL 15, 16. 



THE DAYS OF NOAH. 


123 


The characteHetice of Now the first mentioned characteristic 
population. of those former days of wickedness and 

peril is the rapid increase of population ; ^ a circumstance 
which in itself has ever proved a cause, not merely of the 
wider diffusion, but also of the intensifying, of sin. For every 
form of evil which exists in thinly populated countries, will 
also be found where men have multiplied ; while there are 
countless vices peculiar to crowded districts. And, if they 
are numerous, men support each other in rebellion, and are 
prone to become far more daring and defiant of God. Among 
ourselves, the strongholds of rationalism and atheism are ever 
first erected in large cities. 

Rapid advance incivilu But while the families of the earth were 

jsafion, art, and science. ^ i • • • i. ..i. j. 

thus increasing in number, they were at 
the same time making vast progress in civilization and know- 
ledge. Cain had taught them to settle in communities and 
build cities : ^ and the sons of Lamech — speedily followed, no 
doubt, by many others — had introduced the mechanical and 
fine arts, and had devised unlawful means of evading the 
labour imposed by the curse.^ And in that age when, instead 
of being cut off at three score and ten or four score, men 
lived on for nearly a thousand years, their immense accumula- 
tion of knowledge, experience, and skill, must have advanced 
science, art, and the invention and manufacture of all the 
appliances of a luxurious civilization, with a rapidity to us 
almost inconceivable. 

The one recorded specimen of antediluvian industry, the 
ark, was built by a Sethite ; and yet it equalled in size the 
Great Eastern, the ship which but a few years ago afforded 
such marvel to ourselves, and which has not since been 
surpassed. 

'And doubtless many of the mighty labours accomplished 
by the earlier descendants of Noah may be considered to have 
sprung from reminiscence^ of pristine grandeur, and fragments 
of lore, handed down by forefathers who had passed a portion 
of their existence in the previous age of human glory and 
depravity. Such may have been the daring conception of a 
literally cloud-capped tower ; the stupendous and splendidly 
decorated edifices of Babylon and Nineveh ; and the wondrous 
^ G-en. vi. 1 . 2 Qen. iv. 17. ® Gen. iv. 20-22. 



124 


EAETH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


Structure of the first pyramid, involving, as it apparently does, 
an accurate knowledge of astronomical truth which would 
seem to have been at least on a level with the vaunted 
advances of modern science. For all these great efforts, be 
it remembered, were in progress during the lifetime of Shem, 
and probably in that of his brothers also. 

If, then, we give but their fair weight to these considera- 
tions, we seem compelled to admit that the antediluvians must 
have attained to a perfection in civilization and high culture 
which has scarcely yet been recovered, much as we pride our- 
selves upon our own times. 

Union of the families of Sincc wc have no further mention of the 

Cam and Sf III . . . n i • x* 

Camites as a separate tribe, and since oi 
the Sethites — who must also have increased in numbers — but 
one person was translated to God from the evil to come, and 
only eight were saved through that evil, it is clear that the 
two families had at length mingled and intermarried. Seduced, 
probably, by the intellectual pursuits, the gay society, and the 
easy life of the wicked, the Sethites first found a pleasure in 
their company, their luxuries, and their many skilful and 
ingenious inventions ; were then enticed to yoke themselves 
unequally with unbelievers ; and so, being drawn into the 
vortex of sin, disappeared as a separate people. 

Sad and instructive was the result of this amalgamation : 
for when the time of dividing came, no true worshippers of 
Jehovah were to be found save in the single family of Noah. 
Men seem to have so prized their own wisdom, to have thought 
so little of God, that their religion had dwindled to a mere 
hero-worship of their own famous leaders,^ those who, 
Prometheus-like, brought to them by their inventions the 
necessaries and comforts of life, and so enabled them for the 


time to foil the purposes of the Supreme Power. 

Irruption of fallen Then a new and startling event burst 

angels into the world of -i, 

men. Upon the world, and leariully accelerated 

the already rapid progress of evil. “ The sons of God saw 
the daughters of men that they were fair ; and they took them 
wives of all which they chose.” ^ These words are often ex- 
plained to signify nothing more than the intermarriage of the 


^ Gen. vi. 4. 


2 Gen. vi. 2. 



THE DAYS OF NOAH. 


125 


descendants of Cain and Seth : but a careful examination of 
the passage will elicit a far deeper meaning. 

When men^ we are told, began to multiply on the face of 
the earth, and daughters were born unto them, the sons of 
God saw the daughters of men} Now by men in each case 
the whole human race is evidently signified, the descendants 
of Cain and Seth alike. Hence the “ sons of God ” are plainly 
distinguished from the generation of Adam. 

Meaning of^ the term Again *, the expression “ sons of God 
sons of God. (Elohim) ” occurs but four times in other 

parts of the Old Testament, and is in each of these cases 
indisputably used of angelic beings. 

Twice in the beginning of the book of Job we read of the 
sons of God presenting themselves before Him at stated times, 
and Satan also comes with them as being himself a son of God, 
though a fallen and rebellious one.^ 

For the term sons of Elohim, the creating God, seems to be 
used of those who were directly created by the Divine hand, 
and not born of other beings of their own order. Hence, in 
Luke’s genealogy of our Lord, Adam is called a son of God.® 
And so also Christ is said to give to them that receive Him 
power to become the sons of God.'* For these are born again 
of the Spirit of God as to their inner man even in this life. 
And at the resurrection they will be clothed with a spiritual 
body, a building of God : ® so that they will then be in 
every respect equal to the angels, being altogether a new 
creation.® 

The third repetition of the phrase occurs in a later chapter 
of Job, where the morning stars are represented as singing 
together, and the sons of God as shouting for joy, over the 
creation of our earth.^ 

And lastly ; the same expression is found in the book of 
Daniel but in the singular number, and with the necessary 
difference that bar is the word used for son instead of hen, 
the singular of the latter being unknown in Chaldee. Nebu- 
chadnezzar exclaims that he sees four men walking in the 
midst of the fire, and that the form of the fourth is like a son 


^ Gen. vi. 1, 2. 2 Job i. 6 ; ii. 1. ^ Luke iii. 38. “* John i. 12. 

® 2 Cor. V. 1. 6 Luke icx. 36. 7 Job xxxviii. 7. ® Dan. iii. 25. 



126 


EARTH 8 EARLIEST AGES. 


of God,^ by which he evidently means a supernatural or angelic 
being, distinct as such from the others. 

It appears, therefore, that in the Old Testament the title 
“ sons of God ” is restricted to angels. Several passages are 
indeed adduced to prove its application to men : but upon 
examination they will all be found wide of the mark, either 
as being indirect, or as implying, not sons of God (Elohim), 
but sons of Jehovah. This last is a very different expression, 
and would probably have been used by the inspired historian 
in the verse under our consideration if he had wished to 
distinguish the godly descendants of Seth from the Cainites. 
For, while it forms a true description of all saints upon earth, 
it would have been in this place peculiarly appropriate to the 
Sethites just after the mention of the fact that they had been 
wont from the birth of Enos to call upon the name of 
Jehovah. 

The of CM here The SOUS of God are thus angelic beings: 

Zm'flZgH, and the mysterious statement respecting 
them in the sixth chapter of Genesis 
“ seems to refer to a second and deeper 

apostacy on the part of some of the high ones on high. But 
these more daring rebels are no longer to be found among the 
spirits of darkness which haunt the air ; they no longer retain 
their position as principalities and powers of the world, or 
even their liberty. For they may be evidently identified with 
those imprisoned angels of whom Peter tells us that after 
they had sinned God spared them not, “ but cast them down 
to hell,‘^ and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be 
reserved unto judgment.’’® Jude also mentions their present 
condition in similar terms,'* and the context of either passage 
indicates with sufficient clearness the nature of their sin. They 
chose to leave their own world and break through God’s 
limits into another : therefore He dashed them down at once 
to the lowest hell as an instant punishment of their impious 

1 For there is no definite article in the original. 

2 TopTapcjo-as. The rendering “ cast them down to hell ” may, perhaps, be 
justified. For in the Greek mythology Tartarus was a dark abode as far 
beneath Hades as earth is below heaven (Horn. II. viii. 16). Very sig- 
nificant, too, is the fact that it was thought to be the prison of Cronos 
and the rebel Titans. 

3 2 Pet. ii. 4. 


* J ude 6. 



THE DAYS OF NOAH. 


127 


outrage, and to deprive them for ever of the power of pro- 
ducing further confusion. 


The Lord looks down 
upon the world. 


The verse following the announcement 
of the angels’ sin is a parenthesis of solemn 


import ; ^ the scene is for a moment shifted from the fearfully 


increasing wickedness of earth, and transferred to the heaven 


of heavens. There the invisible God sits enthroned, and. 


looking down upon the rebellion and sin beneath Him, pro- 
nounces sentence of doom upon the unconscious world. The 
end must come : His spirit shall not always strive with men, 
seeing that they are irrecoverably overpowered by the desires 
of the flesh : yet they shall have a further respite of one 
hundred and twenty years. 

Meaning of the word Then the history is resumed with a brief 
Nephiiim. cause which led to inter- 


marriages between the sons of God and the daughters of men 
both before and after the flood. ^ Our translators have again 
omitted a deflnite article in the beginning of this verse, which 
should be rendered The Ncphilim — or fallen ones — were on 
the earth in those days, and also afterwards, when the sons of 
God came in unto the daughters of men.’' 

But the English version, following the Septuagint, gives the 
meaning of ‘‘ giants ” to Nephilim. This interpretation 
probably owes its origin to the passage in Numbers, where 
the sons of Anak which came of the Nephilim are described 
as giants.^ But the form of the Hebrew word indicates that 
it is a noun of passive or neuter signification from naphal^ to 
fall. Hence it must mean “ the fallen ones,” that is, probably, 
the fallen angels. 

The residence cf the Now in Speaking of the sin of some of 
these Jude^ tells us that, despising the posi- 
their alliances with the tion of dignity and responsibility in which 
daughters of men. placed them, they voluntarily left 

their own home in the kingdom of the air, prompted it would 
seem by earthward desires, and began to exercise an un- 
lawful influence over the human race. And, perhaps, as a 
punishment their return was prohibited : they were banished 
altogether from heaven, and confined to the limits of earth, 
just as Satan and the remainder of his angels will be here- 


^ Gen. vi. 3. 2 Gen. vi. 4. ^ Num. xiii. 33. ♦ Jude 6. 



128 


earth’s earliest ages. 


after, a short time before the appearing of Christ to cast them 
into the still lower abyss. 

But, however this may be, they were from some cause 
dwelling upon earth at the time, and the fact is apparently 
mentioned to account for their intermarriages with the 
daughters of men. If, then, their continued residence below 
was voluntary, they ?oon passed on to a far more frightful 
sin : if, on the contrary, it was penal, instead of humbling 
themselves under the mighty hand of God, and patiently 
enduring until He remitted His just punishment, they did 
not hesitate to defy Him still more daringly, and to violate 
the law of their being. 

The assertion of a similar occurrence after the deluge agrees 
with the passage in Numbers where the sons of Anak are 
said to have been Nephilim, or of the Nephilim ; ^ and seems 
also to account for God’s command that the whole race of the 
Canaanites should be extirpated. For immediately after the 
eommission of the antediluvian sin the doom of the world 
was pronounced : and prophecy intimates that the future 
confinement of the angels of darkness to earth will be the 
proximate cause of the great rebellion which will call forth 
the Lord Jesus in flaming fire to take vengeance.^ 

The children of these unlawful connections before the flood 
were the renowned heroes of old : the repetition of the crime 
afterwards doubtless gave rise to the countless legends of the 
loves of the gods, and explains the numerous passages in the 
Glassies, as well as in the ancient literature of other languages, 
in which human families are traced to a half divine origin. 

The earth becomes cor. The foundations being thus destroyed 
’s£i’t^feom”’prolmrqf the whole world was out of course : the 
luxury and refivement. earth became corrupt : its morals were 

Historical parallels. • i nir i *1 

inverted. Men no longer recognised a 
Ood to Whom personally all obedience and worship is first 
due, and Whose equal relation to all men as their Creator 
imperatively demands from each a love for his neighbour as 
great as that which he bears to himself. But they judged 
that whatsoever was pleasant to any man was also right for 
him ; and after thus bursting the bands of God asunder and 
casting His cords from them, it was not long before they went 
^ Num. xiii. 33. ^ xii . 



THE DAYS OP NOAH. 


129 


on to believe that the attainment of a desired end justified 
every means, that the coveted possession must be secured even 
if it were necessary to use deceit or violence. Blinded by 
the selfishness of the flesh, which can see nothing beyond 
itself, they pursued their several objects without consideration 
or even thought of their fellows, except when any either 
stood in the way or might be made subservient. And hence 
there sprang up a thick crop of frauds and assassinations, of 
open quarrels and violence, till the whole earth was filled with 
corruption and bloodshed. 

And yet 'll! this seems to have existed side by side with 
luxury, a refined culture, and a love of art and music. Such 
minglings of things apparently incongruous have not been 
infrequent in postdiluvial times. The profligacy, immorality, 
and sensuous intellectuality, of Athens is an example. 

A parallel might also be sought in the descriptions given 
by Tacitus, Juvenal, and others, of the times of the Caesars. 
For then the whole body of society was corrupted, and even 
the streets of Home were accustomed to violence. And yet 
the worst of vices, the most absolute immorality the most 
profligate gluttony, the most wanton cruelty, prevailed in 
company with a splendid magrxificence, a high appreciation of 
music, sculpture, and art generall)', a taste for literature, and 
especially for poetry, so great that recitations and readings 
were a common amusement. A most characteristic produc- 
tion of this age was the philosopher Seneca, who has been 
lately termed a seeker after God oa account of his books on 
morals, but who did not find tne writing of beautiful senti- 
ments any hindrance to a life of shocking depravity, and who 
presented to the world, as the fruit of his combined teaching 
and example, the proverbial monster Nero. 

Nor were the times of Leo the tenth without resemblance 
to the days of Noah : when that famous pontiff*, seated amid 
every possible sensuous and intellectual refinement, and sur- 
rounded by the most brilliant cluster of stars that has ever 
adorned the firmament of art, exclaimed, “This Christianity! 
how profitable a farce it has proved to us ! When, in a time 
which produced paintings, sculpture, and architecture, still 
marvels to the world, the sun as it rose day by day would 
expose the floating corpses of the assassinated in the Tiber ; 

10 



130 


eaeth's earliest ages. 


and infidelity and lawlessness kept such rapid pace with the 
culture of the beautiful that even Machiavelli, who will not 
be accused of too tender a conscience, declared that Italy had 
lost all principles of piety, and all religious feeling ; that the 
Italians had become a nation of impious cut-throats. 

God looks doKn a second Such, though on a far greater scale, was 
His fw- the wickedness of the antediluvian world. 
pose to destroy aiijiesh. But the end was approaching. God looked 
down a second time upon the spreading demoralisation beneath 
Him,^ and saw that it would be necessary, at the close of the 
years of respite, to sweep man and beast, creeping thing and 
fowl, from the face of the earth. 

Yet a third time the Creator beheld, and lo ! evil had made 
such fearful progress that all flesh had corrupted its way upon 
the earth. ^ Then He foretold the impending ruin to Noah, 
who alone found grace in His sight, and instructed him how 
he might avoid the universal doom. The commands laid 
upon the patriarch were a strong trial of his faith. He was 
to proclaim the speedy coming of a catastrophe which to un- 
believers would appear simply irrational, of an overwhelming 
flood which should sweep away all life from the face of the 
whole earth. 

Vnavaiiing preaching of It maybe that men felt a momentary 
‘ uneasiness at the first utterance of this 

prophecy of woe. Discussions may have taken place similar 
to those among ourselves a few years ago, when the con- 
jectured possibility of a collision between the earth and 
Donati’s comet caused a brief anxiety to those who believed 
in it. But, this qualm over, we can readily picture to our- 
selves the contempt and derision which must have been 
poured upon the prophet. Our own times will teach us how 
the men of science soon proved that such a thing as a universal 
flood was an absolute impossibility, contrary to all the known 
laws of nature. And since Noah persisted, the world doubt- 
less settled down into a belief that he was a weak-minded 
fanatic, void of intellect, and altogether unworthy of notice. 

Noah builds the <wh and But Noah was uot Only directed to 
« <0 foretell the approaching doom : he was 

behind him. also bidden to make open preparations 

^ Gen. vi. 5-7. ^ Gen. vi. 12-21. 



THE DAYS OF NOAH. 


181 


for avoiding it, preparations, too, of vast magnitude, and such 
as must have attracted general attention. And a grievous 
burden it undoubtedly was to endure the scoffs and deridings 
with which he must have been continually assailed while 
building his immense ship on the dry land, far, it may be, 
from any water ; but by faith he persevered, and at last the 
days of his trial drew on to their close. 

None had listened to his warnings : not one beyond the 
inner circle of his own family was accounted worthy to be 
saved. But the ark was now completed, and he was instructed 
to enter it with his wife, his sons and their wives, and all the 
creatures which were impelled by God to go with him. He 
was at no loss to understand the significance of the command ; 
he knew well that the wrath of God was being restrained 
only till that which should be saved could be taken out of the 
way ; and we can imagine his feelings as he w^atched the long 
procession slowly filing into the ark, and at length followed 
in its rear, leaving the unconscious world, friends and foes 
alike, in the inexorable grasp of destruction. 

It may be that after entering he returned to the door, 
appalled at the thought of what was about to happen, and 
impelled to make one more effort, one last impassioned appeal, 
if perchance he might constrain some few at least to flee to 
the shelter. But, if he did, he found the entrance to the ark 
closed : God had shut it : there was none that could open. 
Affrighted crowds might gather around imploring admittance ; 
but Noah had no longer the power to aid them : the separa- 
tion had been made : eight persons were safe within the ark, 
the whole remainder of mankind was shut out for judgment : 
the acceptable year had passed by, the days of vengeance 
were come. 

The world continues un- And yet, aS OUT Lord Himself tells US, 
conscious to the imt. doomed multitudes knew it not. They 

had often heard, but had refused to listen : the voice of the 
prophet had seemed to them as the voice of one that mocked. 
Even on the morning of the fatal day earth resounded with 
the noise of revelry and merriment: men were eating and 
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage : they were absorbed 
in the pleasures of the moment, and discerned not the slowly 
rising spectre of death amid the gathering clouds, the destroyer, 



132 


earth’s earliest ages. 


with uplifted scythe, about to mow down all flesh at one fell 
stroke. 

Q-od withdraws His re- But their dream of security was at 
length rudely dispelled: the shouts of 
ensues. riotous j oy and laughter were first softened 

into whispers of breathless anxiety, and then exchanged for 
shrieks of despair. For on the day in which Noah entered 
into the ark the windows of heaven were opened, and the 
waters that were above the firmament began to descend. The 
world wondered ; and then, remembering the words of Noah, 
trembled at the fast falling raindrops, the first they had ever 
beheld. 


Nor was this all. A fearful roaring from the sea announced 
that some mighty convulsion, equally beyond the calculation of 
the scientific men of the day, was going on in the great deep. 
All its sealed fountains were bursting up : God had removed 
the bounds of ocean : its proud waves were no longer stayed, 
but were rising with prodigious tumult, and beginning to 
advance again upon the dry land. 

What scenes of horror must have been presented beneath 
the dismal rainfall at this awful time ! What affrighted 
groups ! What countenances of dismay ! What shrieks of 
terror ! What faintings for fear ! What headlong flights to 
any place which appeared to offer safety for the moment ! 

Mercy mingled with judg. Yet the mcrcy of God seems even then 
prison.’* to have been mingled with His judgment. 

Ordinary means had failed with these sinners. They had 
received warning after warning ; but their eyes were so 
immovably fixed upon the world and its amusements that 
they could not be induced to look off to God. Therefore He 
was compelled to destroy the life which they were abusing : 
He was constrained to overwhelm before their eyes all their 
palaces and fair gardens and places of delight, and to hurry 
the rebels themselves into the prison of disembodied spirits. 
Yet his mercy devised a doom which, though inexorable and 
complete, was nevertheless not instantaneous, but gave time 
for repentance before death, that by the destruction of the 
flesh the spirits of many might be saved. 

And, perhaps, this consideration may assist us to understand 
that mysterious utterance of Peter, in which the Spirit of the 



AS IT WAS IN THE DAYS OP NOAH. 


133 


Lord Jesus is said to have descended into Hades, and to have 
preached there to the imprisoned spirits of the disobedient 
antediluvians.^ For after the removal of Noah there was no 
preacher left in the lost world: there was none who could 
authoritatively declare to the dying thousands that God is 
willing to save the repentant even to the uttermost. They 
had despised their privileges in the time of visitation ; and 
in the day of trouble they were deprived of them. And so 
it may be that the spirits of those who truly repented were 
led down to the dark cells of Hades there to be confined in 
suspense, as a further discipline, until the Saviour should 
descend to their gloomy abode, and proclaim the mighty 
salvation which He had wrought for them. 

:Earth in again covered The watcrs Continued to increase : the 

with the waters of destruc^ , •. i • 

tion. ark was upborne upon them : and it may 

be that for a time its inmates ever and anon heard, mingling 
with the roar of the elements, the cries and prayers of some 
still surviving crowd of miserable ones who had taken refuge 
upon a height near to which they were floating. But this 
was soon over, and earth was again almost as it had been 
before the six days of restoration, covered above its highest 
mountain tops with a shoreless ocean, on the surface of which 
were drifting the dead bodies of the men who had trans- 
gressed against God, and the carcases of the beasts and 
creeping things and fowls which had been involved in their ruin. 

Woful was the proof that man, if unrestrained, if left to his 
own devices, is not merely incapable of recovering his 
innocence, but will rush madly down the steep of sensuous- 
ness and impious self-will until he finds himself engulphed in 
the abyss of perdition. The trial of freedom had failed : the 
second of the ages was ended. 


CHAPTEK X. 

As it was in the Days of Noah'* 

Retrospect. q have thus endeavoured to trace the flow of 
history from its source to the great catastrophe which swept 
^ 1 Pet. iii. 18-20. 



184 


eabth’s eabliest ages. 


corruption and violence from the earth. We have seen its 
clear spring proceeding from the throne of the Everlasting 
God, and have then lost sight of it as it wound its way 
through vast regions that may not be trodden by mortal foot. 
Once or twice we have climbed an accessible height, and from 
the far distance gazed with strained eyes upon something 
which sparkled in the rays of God’s Word, and which we 
supposed to be the waters of the river we were seeking : but 
we could obtain no certain knowledge of the mysterious 
stream, until we saw its turbid and foaming torrent emerging 
in fearful cataract from between the dark mountains which 
concealed its previous course. 

We have followed it into a land of delight, in which it 
gradually calmed and brightened again, while its banks teemed 
with all that is beautiful and lovely : we have traced it as it 
passed the limits of the joyous realm, and hurried through 
dry and barren tracts with ever increasing volume and 
rapidity, till at length its agitated waters were violently en- 
gulphed in the great ocean of the flood. 

The warning of Chritt. We must not, however, dismiss the 

SouitapplytoourUmoi 

considering without some reflections on the solemn warning 
drawn from it by the Saviour. “But as the days of Noah were,” 
is His awful declaration, “ so shall also the coming of the Son 
of man be. For as in the days that were before the flood they 
were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, 
until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and knew not 
until the flood came, and took them all away ; so shall also 
the coming of the Son of man be.” ^ Thus the closing scenes 
of this present age will be a reproduction of the days of Noah : 
the same intense worldliness, and at last positive inability to 
care for the things of God, which was displayed by the ante- 
diluvians, will also be characteristic of our world when Christ 
begins the judgments that will quickly culminate in the glory 
of His appearing. 

It seems fair, then, to infer that this second manifestation 
of the spirit that worked in them which were disobedient 
before the flood will be effected by a conjunction of causes 
similar to that which formerly produced it. And hence, as 
1 Matt. xxiv. 37-39. 



AS IT WAS IN THE DAYS OF NOAH. 


135 


we have already remarked, it becomes a matter of the greatest 
practical importance to comprehend those causes : for when- 
ever they are again found to be simultaneously affecting the 
masses of the world’s population, the fact will afford a strong 
presumption that we are drifting rapidly to the great consumma- 
tion of wickedness ; that the avenging glory of the Lord is 
about to be revealed, so that all flesh shall see it together. 

For us, therefore, the great question is, Are these fatal 
influences now in operation ? Are they more universally 
characteristic of this epoch than of any other ? Mature con- 
sideration has impelled many to return an affirmative answer : 
let us see whether facts warrant us in holding the same view. 
It is impossible to exaggerate our interest in the investigation : 
for if the present times are only beginning to take the 
complexion of those of Noah, they send forth a piercing cry 
of warning, admonishing us to stand with our loins girded 
about and our lamps burning, waiting for the summons of the 
Lord. For He will remove His church, as He removed 
Enoch, before the wickedness of man has come to its worst. 
He will take away that which He Himself called the salt of 
the earth, and then the corruption of all flesh will go on un- 
checked, and the world speedily ripen for its doom. 

The teuen causes qf The seven great causes of the ante- 
*ArftheTlii ""iVprhZi diluvian apostacy have been already noticed, 
operation? and may be summed up as follows. The 

first : a tendency to worship God as Elohim, that is, merely 
as the Creator and Benefactor, and not as Jehovah the covenant 
God of mercy dealing with transgressors and patiently work- 
ing out their salvation. The second ; an undue prominence 
of the female sex, and a disregard pf God’s law of marriage. 
The third : a rapid progress in the mechanical arts, and the 
invention of many devices by which the curse was mitigated, 
and life rendered more easy and indulgent. Also a proficiency 
in the fine arts, which often captivate the minds of men to such 
an extent as to induce an entire oblivion of God. The fourth ; 
an alliance between the nominal church and the world, which 
speedily resulted in a complete amalgamation. The fifth : a 
vast increase of population. The sixth : the rejection of the 
preaching of Enoch, whose warnings thus became a savour of 
death unto the world, and hardened men beyond recovery. 



136 


EABTH's EABLIEST AGES. 


And the seventh : the appearance of beings from the princi- 
pality of the air, and their unlawful intercourse with the 
human race. 

These causes concurred to envelop the world in a sensuous 
mist which no ray of truth could penetrate. They brought 
about a total forgetfulness of God and disregard of His will ; 
and thus, by removing the great Centre Who alone is able to 
attract men from themselves, rendered the dwellers upon earth 
so selfish and unscrupulous that the world was presently filled 
with lewdness, injustice, oppression, and bloodshed. It re- 
mains, therefore, for us to consider whether similar influences 
are now acting upon society. 

m first cause may he certainly we cannot but confess 

detected %n the unioersai • • ,, 

spread of Deism that the hrst mentioned cause is eminently 

characteristic of our times. For in all the professing churches 
of Christendom, as well as among Jews, Mahometans, and 
Pagans, there are countless and ever-increasing multitudes 
who go in the way of Cain,' acknowledging the Supreme Being, 
but not recognising His holiness and their own depravity, and 
so denying all necessity of a Mediator between God and man. 
Many of these are willing to look upon Christ as some great 
one, and will talk of His wise philosophy and exemplary 
life : but they neither confess Him to be the Only Begotten 
Son of the Father, nor feel the need of His atonement. 
Consequently, they reject His revelation, as an absolute 
authority at least, trusting rather to the darkness within them 
which they call light ; and thus, closing their eyes to the true 
relations of man with his Creator, form their own conceptions 
both of the Deity and of themselves. This is nothing less 
than a claim on their part to supreme wisdom and authority : 
it is moulding an idol out of their own imagination before 
which to fall down and worship. Nor need we wonder that 
it leads to a virUial deification of men of transcendent intellect 
or great renown. Who has not detected the working of this 
leaven in his own circle.^ Who has not observed this “pure 
theism,” as it is called, rising to the surface in all the sects of 
Christendom ? 

Nor can those be acquitted of the blame and consequence 
of this fearful sin who, while they profess to acknowledge the 
' Jude 11. 



AS IT WAS IN THE HAYS OF NOAH. 


137 


covenant God, are wont to set aside the revealed covenant, 
and to frame another according to their own minds ; who 
worship by means of various forms, rites, and mediators, 
which God has not appointed. For their error has an equal 
tendency to make man and not God the judge of what is right. 
And their worship is equally useless ; for the Lord Himself, 
although He was acquainted with the zeal of the Pharisees 
in compassing sea and land to make one proselyte, and knew 
that the system to which they professed to belong came from 
God, nevertheless declared, “ But in vain they do worship Me, 
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.’’ ^ 

Second cause. Change If the sccond cause be lightly inferred 
from the scanty hints given to us, it is also 
law qf marriage, in Operation at the present time : for the 

female sex has certainl” commenced a migration into a new 
sphere and more prominent position. And the looseness in 
regard to the marriage tie, which has long obtained on the 
continent, is now spreading in England also, as we may s^e 
from the records of our recently established divorce conns 
Nay, there are not wanting those who, instead of fearing to 
put asunder that which God has joined, openly affirm that 
wedlock should be a contract, not for life, but only for so long 
a time as may be agreeable. 

At the close of the previous dispensation the same sin was 
frequent among the Pharisees, who held that divorce is per- 
missible for any reason ; even, as Kabbi Akibah shamelessly 
says, “ if a man sees a woman handsomer than his own wife.” 
Hence the Lord’s continual mention of adultery when de- 
nouncing the sins of the Pharisees : for the marriage after 
divorce which they legalised, He declared to be criminal. In 
the wonderful sermon contained in the fifteenth sixteenth and 
seventeenth chapters of Luke He brings it forward with a 
startling abruptness, as a most open and undeniable sin, which 
would at once convict His hearers of having proved as dis- 
obedient to the law and the prophets as they were to the 
gospel.^ We know the punishment which quickly overtook 
them for this and their many other transgressions. In a few 
short years their lusts were extinguished in their blood : the 
fair walls and streets of their city were levelled with the 
^ Matt. XV. 9. 2 Luke xvi. 18. 



138 


£A.BTk’s eabliest ages. 


ground : their beautiful temple in which they trusted perished 
in the flames, and the idolatrous shrine of Jupiter rose 
insultingly upon its ruins. 

The third cauM. Science, Of the third cause, the Spread of science 
art, and iweurjf. j luxury, it is Unnecessary to speak : 

for none will deny that this is a great characteristic of our 
dfeys : nay, the fact is a common subject of boasting. And 
alas ! how many instances have we of the self-deifying 
arrogance which frequently arises from a little knowledge of 
the laws of nature, or a marked success in those arts sciences 
and philosophies which are the delight of cultivated and 
refined intellects With what confidence, too, and carelessness 
do men settle themselves amid the comforts and indulgences 
of this luxurious age ! Seeing good only in the present life, 
how little thought do they give to God, how deaf are they to 
any mention of the world to come ! How incredulous, even 
if their mouths be not filled with mocking, when they hear 
but a whisper of that tempest of God’s fury which will 
shortly burst upon the apathetic world, and hurry multitudes 
away from all that they love into the dungeons of His wrath ! 

“ For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one 
that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up ; 
and he shall be brought low ; and upon all the cedars of 
Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks 
of Bashan, and upon all the high mountains, and upon all 
the hills that are lifted up, and upon every high tower, and 
upon every fenced wall, and upon all the ships of Tarshish, 
and upon all pleasant pictures. And the loftiness of man 
shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be 
made low : and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.^’* 
“ Tremble, ye women that are at ease ; be troubled, ye care- 
less ones : strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth 
upon your loins.”® “ I will send a fire on Magog, and among 
them that dwell carelessly in the isles : and they shall know 
that I am the Lord.”* 

* For let it not be supposed that these remarks are directed absolutely 
against the pursuit of science and art. They are only intended to refer 
to the insubordinate and atheistical spirit which seems too commonly to 
arise from it. 

2 Isa. ii. 12-17. ® Isa. ixiii. 11. * Ezek. xxxii. 6. 



AS IT WAS IN THE DAYS OF NOAH. 


139 


Thefourth eaMe. Frater^ To reproduce the fourth cause the prince 

nisatton of the nominal ui i -l j 

church and the world, of this world has long been striving, and 
certainly now seems near to his victory. It is the natural 
result of the first error, the denial of our position as sinners 
before God, as doomed to destruction unless a ransom be 
found. For remove that fact, and what reason is there for 
hatred between the church and the world ? If the practical 
teaching of religion be that God is fairly satisfied with our 
conduct, troubles but little about our sins, highly appreciates 
our works of virtue, even though pride be their mainspring, 
and looks with pleasure upon bold deeds and intellectual 
displays, why should such a theology clash with the cravings 
of fallen men? How could they hate a deity so like to 
themselves ? 

And have we not been describing the creed of vast numbers 
in the professing church ? Are not the walls of the city of 
God thus continually broken down before our eyes, so that the 
stranger may enter at will ? Men do indeed frequent their 
churches and chapels in crowds : they excite a feeling, which 
they term religious, by grand buildings, by painted windows, 
by splendid vestments, by gorgeous ceremonies, by beautiful 
music, by sentimental or intellectual discourses, and by strong 
sectarian or political convictions. But if they clothe them- 
selves with the semblance of devotion in their worship, they 
altogether lose this outward distinction in the world, and 
bewilder those who are honestly asking what they shall do to 
be saved by plunging into all the gaities, frivolities, pursuits, 
and business, of this life, as if they were to remain among 
them for ever. They act as though God had promised that 
they at least should not be hurried out of the world as so 
many of their fellows are, but should have due warning and 
ample space and inclination for repentance.^ They seem to 
be assured that they will never be unexpectedly startled by 
the dread sentence “ Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be 
required of thee,”* nor suddenly appalled by the blast of the 
archangel’s trumpet, and the thunder of the voice of God. 
They have conceded that it is rational to seek contentment 
and pleasure in an existence of awful brevity, which was only 
granted to them for the decision of one stupendous question, 
^ John vi. 44. ^ Luke xii. 20. 



140 


earth’s earliest ages. 


whether it shall be followed by the joys of heaven or by the 
flames of hell. The powers of the world to come have lost 
their hold upon them, they are even as other men : so many 
points have been yielded, amusements permitted, and vices 
condoned, that it is almost impossible to distinguish them from 
non-professors unless they recite their creed. Nay, some 
appear to be holding a doctrine of the ancient Gnostics who, 
denying the resurrection, affirmed that, their spirits being 
saved, they were at liberty to do what they would with the 
body, inasmuch as after death they would have no further 
concern either with it or its deeds. And although many are 
ready to confess that the Christian must take up his cross, 
yet, being thoroughly satisfied that in these modern times the 
unwearied zeal of Christ and His apostles would be quite out 
of place, they can by no means find a cross to bear. If, how- 
ever, God in His anger smite them with sickness, bereavement, 
disappointment, or loss, they talk of their trials, and comfort 
themselves with the thought that they are imitating the Lord 
by enduring those troubles which they cannot in any way avoid. 

O that those who are thus blinded by Satan would consider 
while there is yet time ; would earnestly and prayerfully 
meditate upon the words of Jesus, and interpret them by 
His most holy life ! Then would they see the inconsistency 
of their position, and keenly feel that they have been fulfilling 
to the letter the prophecy of the last times, that men should 
have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof.^ For 
the world will allow the mere statement of any doctrine, 
provided no attempt be made to put it into practice. It is 
only when faith begins to produce works that the Christian is 
confronted with bitter antagonism ; when he feels that he 
must redeem the time because the days are evil ; when, being 
conscious of a dispensation committed to him, he is impelled 
to preach the Word in season and out of season, to* speak as 
a dying man to dying men ; when he can no longer take part 
in frivolous gaities or time-killing pleasures, knowing that 
they are but as a painted curtain used by the Devil to hide 
from men the brink of death on which they are walking, until 
the time comes to tear it away and thrust them over the 
precipice. 


» 2 Tim. iii. 5. 



AS IT WAS IN THE DAYS OF NOAH. 


141 


If any be thus earnestly minded, they will have no difficulty 
in regard to the line of separation : they will quickly find the 
cross they have to bear : they will feel that, like their Master, 
they are not of this world, and will indeed have tribulation in 
it. But let them be of good cheer : for the Lord is at hand, 
and great will be their joy at His coming. 

Nor are the concessions of the nominal church in point of 
doctrine less deplorable than those which concern conduct. 
We have before seen that from the first men have ever been 
prone to soften and corrupt those parts of God’s Word which 
are most opposed to their own thoughts and aspirations. But 
a strange and impious idea now prevalent is destroying the 
last vestiges of Biblical authority, and sweeping away every 
remaining barrier to peace between the professing church and 
the world. This is a rapidly growing objection to wha^ is 
called dogma. Now did the objection apply only to the too 
positive assertion by men of their own opinions, the sentiment 
would be wholesome : but upon inquiry we discover that 
“ dogma is practically a conventional term for the revelations 
and commandments of the Most High God. And many who 
profess a belief in the Bible, instead of strengthening “ the 
things which remain, that are ready to die,^’' are never weary 
of admonishing us to be charitable in regard to those who 
reject every vital doctrine of Scripture, and even deny the 
Lord who bought them. We are told that provided men be 
“honest’^ all will be well with them at last: that we must 
not be narrow-minded : that there are other entrances into 
the fold besides the door:^ that those are not necessarily 
thieves and robbers who climb over the wall ; but, it may be, 
bolder and more manly spirits than their fellows. 

It is easy to see that by such a line of reasoning all power 
is extracted from the Scriptures. Instead of being recognized 
as the living Word of Him Who shall hereafter judge the quick 
and the dead by the things which are written in them, they 
are regarded merely as an ordinary volume of advice to man, 
who, in assuming the right to accept or reject them at will, 
arrogantly places the crown of deity upon his own head. And 
thus the great means which God has appointed for the separa- 
tion of His church from the world is destroyed : the light 
^ Eev. iii. 2. ^ John x. 7. 



142 


earth’s earliest ages. 


which reveals the continual peril and the fearful termination 
of the broad road is put out, and men go heedlessly on, 
amused with the trifles of the moment, until they fall head- 
long into the jaws of the pit. 

Thejifth cause, increate Upon the fifth cause there is no need to 
qfthe world 8 population, without troubling the census 

papers, almost every Englishman could speak of the rapid 
growth of his own neighbourhood. Nor has the world ever 
previously beheld so vast an aggregation of human life as that 
which our metropolis now exhibits. Yet at the same time 
crowds of emigrants are leaving the country, and filling 
the solitary places of the earth. And statistics show that 
the population of almost every part of the world is also 
increasing. 

But, in addition to this, there is a phenomenon of gloomy 
portent. For, while they multiply, men are also beginning to 
exhibit impatience of restraint : and, since they are learning 
to act together, and seem to be growing inflated with reliance 
on their fancied power, they will probably soon go on to 
deeds of impious daring. Large organisations, which are no 
longer confined to the frontiers of one people, forbode a second 
rebellion of Babel. The time of the shaking of all nations is 
approaching, and the hearts of many are already failing them 
for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming 
on the earth. Let us beware : for the Lord will shortly 
descend to see what the children of men are doing. 

The sixth cause. In- Whenever the Word of God is faithfully 
Z^ifcoZiqueMupti preached it cannot return unto Him void : 
rejection of Enoch' s testi- it will accomplish that which He pleases, 
and prosper in the thing whereto He sent 
it some efiect it must produce upon all who hear. It 
separates the wheat from the chaff : it either draws men nearer 
to God, or renders them more callous than before, and pre- 
pares them for speedy judgment. “ For we are unto God,” 
says Paul, “ a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, 
and in them that perish. To the one we are the savour of 
death unto death ; and to the other the savoul* of life unto 
life.” 2 

And so the powerful appeals of Enoch, his loud calls to 
1 Isa. Iv. 11. 2 2 Cor. ii. 15, 16. 



AS IT WAS IN THE DAYS OF NOAH. 


143 


repentance and threatenings of judgment to come, since they 
were slighted by the world, must have mightily hardened the 
hearts of men, and caused the Spirit of God to cease striving 
with them. Very probably many were at first impressed and 
alarmed : but after a while, when they saw day following day 
without any sign of the predicted vengeance, they lost their 
fear : they went back to their favourite sins as the dog to his 
vomit : they could no longer be roused as before : they began 
to be scofiers, and mocked at the most solemn warnings : the 
demon, who had been for a brief space expelled, returned with 
seven others more wicked than himself ; so that their last state 
was worse than the first.' 

In this case also history appears to be repeating itself. For 
some fifty years God has supplied an unbroken stream of 
evangelical testimony which has been gradually increasing in 
power ; and there is now sounding forth such a proclamation 
of the Gospel as the world has never, perhaps, heard since 
the days of the apostles. The Spirit has fallen upon the 
church with pentecostal vigour: revivals, missions at home 
and abroad, and the efibrts of many individuals, have caused 
the conversion of thousands. Those who are really Christ’s, 
seem to be strenuously urged by a sense of their responsibilities : 
they are going out into the streets and lanes, into the high- 
ways and hedges, constraining men to come in : the wedding- 
hall is rapidly filling with guests. 

And amid the calls to repentance and ofiers of grace, amid 
the mutual exhortations to walk as children of the light, there 
peals forth, waxing ever louder and louder, the solemn cry, 
“ Behold, the Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet Him.”’*^ 
The testimony of the faithful to the world is assuming its 
last form ; “ Fear God, and give glory to Him, for the hour 
of His judgment is come.’^® Indications of this new epoch 
have been apparent from the year 1820, since which time 
several papers and periodicals have been devoted to the 
resuscitation of the long neglected truth so prominently set 
forth by our Lord and His apostles. Hundreds of books and 
pamphlets have been written on the same subject ; while the 
majority of the later revival preachers, and a daily increasing 
number in the church, have promulgated it to such an extent 
1 Luke xi. 24-26. ^ Matt. xxv. 6. ^ 7^ 



144 


EAKTH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


that it would now be difficult to find a moderately intelligent 
Christian who is ignorant of the great hope, even if he does 
not accept it as his own. 

There is also a significant change passing over this testi- 
mony, and rendering it far more consistent and powerful. 
For although but a short time has elapsed since the disagree- 
ment of prophetic writers was almost proverbial, the great 
body of them are now beginning to exhibit a wonderful 
harmony on .all main points, and to proclaim the removal of 
the church to heaven as the first solemn event to be expected. 
We may, therefore, in several particulars find a remarkable 
analogy between the preaching of God’s people in the present 
time and the prophesying of Enoch before the days of Noah. 

But the masses of the world are again rejecting God’s more 
urgent appeals, and, as a natural consequence, llis Spirit is 
ceasing to strive with them : infidelity and superstition are 
beginning to overshadow even the most favoured countries of 
Christendom. In our own land how great an excitement was 
caused some fourteen years ago by the publication of Essays 
and Reviews : but that book, though hailed with such 
delight by those who were unwilling to submit to the Divine 
revelation, has now been almost swept out of memory by the 
flood of more daring infidel literature which has since been 
continually issuing from the press. How few of our news- 
papers, reviews, and periodicals, have escaped the contagion ! 
How great a multitude of propagating secularists does our 
country contain, from the bold blasphemer coarsely inveighing 
against the Word of God, and either denying His existence or 
charging Him with injustice, to the refined and subtle reasoner 
who would fain make the ineffable light of his Creator pale 
before the flickering lamp of human intellect ! It is, however, 
needless to enlarge on so obvious a matter, or to waste time 
in proving the simultaneous spread of ritualism and popery, 
which is now sufficiently evident even to the most careless 
observer ; while in regard to the prevalence of sorcery we 
shall have more to say anon. 

Have we not, then, reason to infer both from these 
apostacies, and from the general resemblance of our days 
to the perilous times of the end as described by Paul,^that 
1 2 Tim. iii. 1-9. 



AS IT WAS IN THE DAYS OF NOAH. 


145 


Christendom, as the inevitable punishment of its rejection 
of the Gospel, is being judicially blinded and irremediably 
hardened ? 

The seventh cause. Un- The Seventh and most fearful chaiacter- 

ihedenizensof theavr. istic ot the days of Noah was the un- 
lawful appearance among men of beings from another sphere. 
This, many would quickly reply, is certainly an event which 
has not yet startled our age, strange as our experiences may 
be : we have still something at least to wait for before the 
completion of that fatal circle of influences which ruined the 
old world. But a diligent comparison of Scripture with the 
things that are now taking place among us will give a very 
different impression, and induce a strong conviction that the 
advanced posts of this last terrible foe have already crossed 
our borders. For it is no longer possible to deny the super- 
natural character of the apostacy called Spiritualism, which 
is spreading through the world with unexampled rapidity, and 
which attracts its votaries, and retains them within its grasp, 
solely by continual exhibitions of the miraculous. It is vain 
to speak of that power as mere jugglery which has convinced 
some of the elite of the literary world, which has caught in 
its meshes many scientific men, who at first only troubled to 
investigate for the purpose of refutation. Nor indeed can 
anything be more dangerous than utter incredulity : for the 
wholly incredulous, if suddenly brought face to face with the 
supernatural, is of all men the most likely to yield entire 
submission to the priests of the new wonder. Better far is it 
to prayerfully inquire whether these things are possible, and 
if so, in what light the Bible teaches us to regard them. We 
shall thus be armed against all the wiles of the Devil. 

But an exposition of the nature and history of Spiritualism 
of sufficient length to exhibit its apparent identity with the 
antediluvian sin is a serious matter, and must not be 
commenced at the end of a chapter. 


11 



146 


earth’s earliest ages. 


CHAPTEK XL 
Spiritualism. Part I. 


The Testimony of the Bible. 


The open inf erference qr The mere mention of the supernatural 
often received with a smile of in- 
pected. credulous contempt. And there are not 

a few professing Christians who manifest great anxiety to 
limit the number and extent of past miracles, and to obscure 
the possibility of their recurrence in the present time, though 
they do not venture upon an absolute denial of God’s power 
to suspend or change His own laws. But that Satan can 
work wonders they will never allow : nay, in many cases 
they even refuse him a personal existence. 

Surely such a state of mind must proceed either from 
ignorance or unbelief. For does not Paul speak of the 
working of Satan as being with all power and signs and 
wonders wrought in support of a lie?^ And the simple 
assertion of Scripture that the ait which envelopes our earth 
swarms with reoellious spirits ought at least to prepare us 
for their occasional manifestation and open interference. 
Undoubtedly God has forbidden them either to communicate 
directly with man or to influence him for evil. Yet, since 
they are disobedient, and are not at present restrained by 
force, it is reasonable to believe that they sometimes break 
the former commandment even as they are continually 
defying the latter. And this supposition is confirmed by 
Scripture : for we find numerous allusions to dealings 
between men and demons in the Old Testament, while in the 
New witchcraft is treated as one of the manifest works of the 
flesh. ^ 


The Momir laws agaimt “ ThoU shalt nOt Sufler a witch tO 

tZ live was the injunction of the Lord by 
actual connection with Moscs. And that this law is not con- 
faiien spirits. cemcd with mere superstition or deception, 


2 Gal. V. 20. Ex. xxii. 18. \ 


2 Thess. ii. 9. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART I. 


147 


but points to a wilful fellowship with the powers of evil, we 
may learn from the severity of the punishment. Yet many 
would persuade us that the numerous Biblical terms applied 
to the practisers of forbidden arts are merely intended to 
indicate different forms of imposture. One example will 
suffice to prove the folly of such an opinion. 

In the twentieth chapter of Leviticus we find the following 
enactment: A man also or woman that hath a familiar 

spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death : they 
shall stone them with stones : their blood shall be upon 
them.”^ How, then, could an Israelitish judge decide in the 
case of a person arraigned under this law } Would not the 
whole issue depend upon the proof that the accused really 
had an attendant spirit? And is not the law an express 
declaration, not merely of the possibility, but also of the 
actual occurrence of such connections ? 

Scripture n<vir dentes Indeed the ifiblc, as we have already 
heathen god*,. secn, mentions many things which have 

no place in modern philosophies, and among them cue 
which is of the utmost importance to our subject. lor it 
plainly recognises spiritual existences behind the idols o^ 
heathenism, and affirms that these existences are demons. 
An attempt has been made to disprove this statement n the 
ground that two Hebrew words, the oiie signifying 
“ nothings and the other “ vanities,’^ are used as appella- 
tions of the pagan gods, and that by such terms their non- 
existence is necessarily implied. But the fallacy of this 
inference may be exposed by a glance at the same words in 
other connections. 

“ Woe to the shepherd of nothing that forsaketh the 
flock exclaims Zechariah. And certainly he does not 
speak of a purely imaginary shepherd, but of a worthless one, 
who is not what he pretends to be. Similarly Job when he 
calls his friends “ physicians of nothing^’® does not mean to 
tell them that they are non-existent, but merely, as our 
version has expressed it, that they are “ physicians of no 
value. The Jewish idea of the word as applied to heathen 
deities may be seen in the Septuagint version of the ninety- 
sixth Psalm, where it is rendered by Sat/xovta. Hence the 
^ Lev. XX. 27. ^ Zech. xi. 17. ^ Job xiii. 4. 

11 * 



148 


earth’s earliest aoes. 


fifth verse is made to mean, “ For all the gods of the nations 
are demons ; but the Lord made the heavens.”^ 

Again ; the singular of the word for “ vanities ” is Abel, 
the name which Eve gave to her second son. But she had 
no intention of thereby denying the reality of his being. 
Nor when the preacher cries “Vanity of vanities; all is 
vanity,”^ can we understand him to be affirming the non- 
existence of the universe. 

It is, therefore, evident that these terms when applied to 
the heathen gods do not dispute the fact of their being, but 
the truth of their pretensions. Real powers they are, but 
only finite ones ; and hence they have no just claim to the 
title of gods. 

On the contrary the Old Scripture, then, contains nothing to 

Testament freaU them as j* ^ p i j i 

real potencies. disprove the existence ot lalse gods, but, 

on the contrary, asserts and assumes it as a fact. For 
instance when foretelling the death of the first-born of both 
man and beast, the Lord signified His intention of also 
punishing the gods of Egypt.® And in reference to the same 
event Moses subsequently wrote : “ For the Egyptians 
buried all their first-born, which the Lord had smitten 
among them : upon their gods also the Lord executed 
judgments.”^ 

Again ; in the tenth chapter of Deuteronomy we have the 
expression “ For Jehovah your God is the God of gods and 
the Lord of lords.”® And numerous are the Scriptural 
assertions that Jehovah is highly exalted above all gods, to 
be feared above all gods, and so on. 

If, then, He executed judgment upon the gods of Egypt, 
they must have been living beings : if He is contrasted with 
other gods, they must be real existences. 

And plainly indicates Nor does the Old Testamciit omit to 

Beinm ^t the nature of these so-called deities, 

as the following verses will show. 

“ And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto demons 
(Hebi Beirim), after whom they have gone a whoring.”® 

“ They sacrificed unto demons (Heb. shedim)^ not to God ; 

1 Psa. xevi. 5. ^ Eccles. i. 2. ^ Ex. xii. 12. 

^ Num. xxxiii. 4. ® Deut. x. 17. ® Lev. xvii. 7. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART I. 


149 


to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly 
up, whom your fathers feared not.’’ ^ 

“ And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for 
the demons (Heb. seirim)^ and for the calves which he had 
made.” ^ 

“ Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto 
demons (Heb. shedim)J'^ 

In the place of the word seirim — which originally signified 
goats, and was afterwards used of wood-demons or satyrs — 
the Septuagint has rots /Aaratot?, that is, “ vanities ” : but in 
two passages of Isaiah it translates the same noun by 
Sat/Aovta “ demons.” ^ And this latter rendering is autho- 
ritatively confirmed in the New lestament by the passage in 
the eighteenth chapter of the Apocalypse which is parallel to 
that in the thirteenth of Isaiah.^ Shedim — literally “ mighty 
ones,” “ lords ” — is invariably interpreted in the Septuagint 
by Sat/Aoi/ta. Thus of the two words, the first appears to have 
been applied either to the heathen idols or to the spiritual 
powers behind them, the second only to the demons 
themselves. 

The teaching of the The tcstimony of the Greek Scriptures 
mZ i® to the Same effect as that of the Hebrew, 

qf two remarkahie pan- and we cannot better illustrate this than 
by examining two statements in the first 
epistle to the Corinthians. In the eighth chapter we read 
as follows : “We know that there is no idol in the world, 
and that there is none other god but One. P^or even 
supposing that beings called gods exist, whether in heaven 
or upon earth — as there actually (wo-Trep) are gods many and 
lords many — yet to us there is one God the P'ather, of 
Whom are all things, and we for Him; and one Lord Jesus 
Christ, by Whom are all things, and we by Him.”® 

Now the word idol (ctScoAov) signifies a creation of the 
fancy, an idea of the mind. Therefore by the words “ there 
is no idol in the world ” Paul means that there are no such 
beings as Jupiter, Mars, or Venus, exactly as they are 
represented in heathen mythology : such are not to be found 
in the universe, but are merely the creatures of man’s 

^ Deut. xxxii. 17. 2 2 Chron. xi. 15. ^ pga. cvi. 37. 

Isa. xiii. 21 , xxxiv. 14. ® Kev. xviii. 2. ® 1 Cor. viii. 4*6. 



150 


EARTH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


imagination. Yet, he goes on to say, the gods whom the 
heathen worship do exist, and are, moreover, real potencies, 
though differing altogether in their attributes and character- 
istics from the ideals of men. But they are falsely called 
gods : they are not uncreated and self-existent beings : 
their power, though often great, is finite and subordinate : 
and, however they may delude the heathen, we at least know 
that there is only one God. 

The second passage is in the tenth chapter. “ What, 
then, am I to say ? That a thing sacrificed to an idol is 
anything — that is, any real sacrifice — or that an idol is 
anything } Nay, but that the things which the Gentiles 
sacrifice they sacrifice to demons, and not to God : but I do 
not wish you to become partakers with demons. Ye cannot 
drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of demons : ye cannot 
partake of the table of the Lord, and of the table of 
demons.” ^ 

This quotation involves the same doctrine. An idol, the 
creation of man^s fancy, is nothing : but it is not possible 
that men could be moved to worship nothing : there is a real 
power behind. The heathen think that they are sacrificing 
to Deity ; but their offerings ascend to demons, and by their 
sacrificial feasts they establish a fellowship with unclean 
spirits similar to that which exists between Christ and His 
church. 

Conclusion of the argu- It is plain, therefore, that the dis- 
mentjrom Scripture. embodied Spirits which haunt the air are 
the beings whom the heathen worship, the inspirers of 
oracles and soothsayers, the originators of all idolatry, 
whether pagan or popish, the powers that are ever striving 
by divers means to subjugate the human race to their sway. 

Hence we may obtain the important deduction that 
paganism, from its most intellectual phase down to the 
lowest fetichism, is not the mere worship of stocks and 
stones, but the cultus, whether conscious or unconscious, 
whether direct or through various mediums, of rebellious 
spirits. Nor can the converse of the proposition be denied 
that the cultus of any such spirits is pure paganism. 


1 1 Cor. X. 19-21. 



SPIKITTJALISM. PART I. 


151 


The great aim qf Satan NoW all idolatlOUS WOrship is 
is not the spread qf ahso- . j . .-i . j 

lute scepticism, hut the Connected with magic and the 

subjugation of the world supernatural powei. For it is only by a 
to demoniacal power . ^ -i t i , 

continual display or such power, or at any 
rate by a fixed belief in it, that the human race can be held 
in the grievous bondage of demon- service. The instant a 
man loses faith in the possibility of the supernatural he 
becomes, in spite of any vague ideas of divine rule, a virtual 
sceptic. In the opinion of many such a result would satisfy 
every desire of the evil one : but the following considerations 
deter us from assenting to their conclusion. 

Whenever Scripture lifts the veil, and allows us a 
momentary glimpse of the kingdom of darkness, we behold a 
community, malignant indeed, but perfect in order and 
government, and thirsting for the subjugation of the human 
race. For the empire of Satan cannot be completely 
organised till men be as obedient to demons as demons are 
to the rebel principalities and powers, and these last again to 
their great prince» And so, the denizens of the air are not 
merely stirring up an aimless revolt against God, but would 
fain annex the whole of our world to their own orderly 
dominion. 

Therefore, although for the present Satan will allure men 
from God by any bait which pleases them, he, nevertheless, 
fosters absolute scepticism only as J esuitical emissaries 
encourage revolution and anarchy in order to break down the 
barriers which withstand the advance of their own system. 
His real plan must be sought in the various false religions, 
by comparing which the thoughtful student may detect many 
strange and unsuspected points of contact. Differences 
indeed they have arising from peculiarities of race or dis- 
position: they resemble the fragments of a marble block, 
some of which display more of one coloured vein, some of 
another : but if the pieces be fitted together again, line 
meets line, and the variegated pattern appears perfect. 
Originally they all issued from one centre — Babylon has 
been the golden cup to make every nation drunk ^ — and 
around one centre will they be reunited when the time for its 
revelation arrives. 


inseparably 
exercise of 


1 Jer. U. 7. 



152 


earth’s earliest ages. 


The grand aim, then, of Satanic miracles is to bring men 
under the influence of demons. The Devil would by no 
means destroy, but rather increase, a belief in the super- 
natural : he would, however, point out Satan, and not 
Christ, as the head of thrones, dominions, principalities, and 
powers, and hasten the time when one shall sit as God in 
the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.^ To this 
end is all the teaching of his signs and wonders directed, 
however carefully they may be disguised, and whether they 
be appearances of aerial forms ; visions ; oracles, which 
seldom aflbrd real help, and often lure men on to destruction 
by the ambiguity of their response ; soothsayings, sometimes 
strikingly verified, but never reliable ; spirit- writing ; voices 
of the unseen ; magnetic healings ; or any other exhibition 
of his power. Nor can we examine the many superstitions 
confirmed by these miracles vd.hoat astonishment at the 
skill with which they are adapted to the pnrpose of 
enthralling mankind. For is not tLis the obv’ous intent of 
spirit-communications, augirieo, omens, tokens, lucky and 
unlucky days and seasons, purifications, holy water, spells, 
potions, amulets, charms, fetiches, relics, images, pictures, 
crosses, crucifixes, and all the countless prescriptions of 
demoniacal systems. 

There are two uays by Now the falsc signs are usually 

exhibited through human mediums 
jird by an intelligent selected by the demons, who perceive, 

intercourse with demons. i i 

it may be, some amnity to themselves in 
the objects of their choice. And it appears that men can 
obtain possession of unlawful power in two different ways. 
First ; by a no longer unconscious but intelligent fellowship 
with demons, whereby they are enabled to receive and 
impart all the knowledge which their attendant spirits 
possess or can acquire in regard to past present and future. 
This power is now called mediumistic. And it may by 
cultivation be greatly increased: for, as the fellowship 
progresses and men become more enamoured of their aerial 
visitants, the demons seem permitted to do various wonders 
at fheir request, and finally to reveal themselves to sight, 
hearing, and touch. 


^ 2 Thess. ii. 4. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART I. 


153 


The second hy an un^ The second wav is bv educiiiff, doubt- 

lawful excitation of their i , •.! a.i •j j’i. x* j* 

own dormant powers. l^ss Hot Without the aid and instruction of 
evil spirits, those latent powers which certainly exist in all 
men, but are as certainly forbidden by God to be used, or 
even sought out, in this world. For it is every man’s duty 
for the present to preserve a clear and undisturbed conscious- 
ness of those material surroundings with which God intends 
him now to deal. And accordingly 3ur spiritual independence 
of time and space, and superhuman power of knowing, doing, 
and influencing, are suppressed by the nature of our bodies. 
Man is a spirit in prison, and so he must be content to abide 
until God unlocks the door of his cell. 

But if he will have instant enjoyment by a premature 
excitation of those potentialities, wh’^h are undoubtedly 
reserved for future developmer ., he can only do so by 
feloniously breaking th ongh hi- uangeon bars, by so 
shattering the harmony .Is present being that the spirit 
can escape for a while uito a ^ rbidden sp^ 're, abandoning 
soul and body to a temporary iinconsciousness of outward 
things. And this haj been and is efiP^'cicd in many ways — 
whether by such e cu)^ of poisonous drugs ‘^s that which 
enabled the Chaldean initiate to behold the glittering form 
of the great goddess passing by at the k p c f the cave ; or by 
a mephitic vapour, like that of the Delphic oracle ; or by the 
whirling dance of the dervise ; or by the long fasting and 
watching of the Ojibbeway Indian; or by gazing fixedly 
upon a metal plate or crystal held in the hand ; or by that 
fascinating power of a fellow creature which in modern times 
is called mesmerism. 

By such and other means the activity of the outward senses 
is diminished or altogether checked, and the consciousness 
passes into another sphere, where the spirit gazes upon 
wondrous visions ; is able to hold intercourse with super- 
natural beings, to reveal secrets, and in some degree to 
foretell ; can travel in a moment to any part of the world, 
and accurately describe places, houses, and the condition and 
actions of those who are living in them ; has the power of 
seeing the internal mechanism of its own body or those of 
others ; and will give a diagnosis of disease and prescribe for 
it. Indeed the spirit seems to leave the body just as at 



154 


EAKTH^S EABLIEST AGES. 


■death — save that some silver cord is not yet snapped — and 
often, as in the case of trance mediums, another spirit enters 
it, and speaks with a different voice and with different 
knowledge. 

All spiriie which hold But since all such proceedings as these 
“ are a transgression of the limits of 
^hoa^^ down by the Creator, it 

communication ha once follows that all supernatural beings who 
opened, it ia difficult to sanction them and hold intercourse with 

escape. . ^ • o 

the transgressor must be spirits oi evil. 
And the unlawful confusion brings its own immediate 
punishment in addition to the fearful judgment to come. 
For our body appears to be not only a prison, but also a 
fortress, and is, not improbably, devised for the very purpose 
-of sheltering us in some degree from the corrupting influence 
of demons. In its normal condition it effectually repels the 
more open and violent assaults of foreign spiritual agencies : 
but if we once suffer the fence to be broken down, we are no 


longer able to restore it, and are henceforth altogether 
exposed to the attacks of malignant enemies. 

It is but seldom that a person can be mesmerised for the 
first time without his own consent : and when such cases do 


occur they are probably to be referred to some special sin. 
But if submission be once yielded it is hard to withdraw it : 
and every fresh exercise of the power upon the same patient 
increases its influence. 


So, in the case of fellowship with demons, there are but 
few who can become mediums without perseverance : but 
when a communication has been once established the spirits 
are loath to relinquish it, and are wont to persecute those 
who, having become conscious of their sin, are determined by 
the grace of God to transgress no more. 

Examination qf Old We will now procced to examine the 
Scriptural terms used to describe those 
who practise supernatural arts, giving in each case the 
Hebrew word with an attempted explanation. 

Chartummin “ The sacred scribes.”^ This is 

a name given to the magicians of Egypt in the times of 


^ Gen. ili. 8. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART I. 


155 


Joseph and Moses, ^ and also to those of Babylon in the days 
of Daniel. It seems to be a word of Hebrew origin connected 
with cheret ^ style or pen, and to signify those 

members of the priestly caste, who, although they also 
practised other kinds of magic, were mainly concerned with 
writing. Perhaps they were identical with the writing 
mediums of our days, who, according to the author of 
Glimpses of a Brighter Land^ are divided into five classes as 
follows. Those whose passive hand is moved by the demon 
without any mental volition on their own part : those into 
whose mind each word is separately insinuated instantaneously 
with its automatic inscription on the paper : those who 
write from the dictation of spirit-voices : those who copy 
words and sentences which they are made to see written 
upon the air, or upon some suitable object, in letters of light : 
and lastly ; those in whose presence spirit-hands, sometimes 
visible, sometimes invisible, will take up the pen and write 
the communication. 

Chakhamim (D'pDt!)* “ Wise men.^’^ But since this 

word is joined to chartummim^ and since it appears that tha * 
chakhamim turned their rods into serpents, it follows that 
they were so called, not as mere philosophers or men of 
experience, but as having intercourse with supernatural ’ 
beings, by whose assistance they displayed a greater than 
human wisdom, and could exhibit miraculous power. 

In the eighteenth chapter of Deuteronomy there is a 
remarkable passage which in the English version reads as 
follows : “ There shall not be found among you any one that 
maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or 
that uselh divination, or an observer of tirhes, or an enchanter, 
or a witch, or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, 
or a wizard, or a necromancer. For all that do these things 
are an abomination unto the Lord.’^® 

This list of abominations begins with him that maketh 
his son or his daughter to pass through the fire,^^ a phrase 
which must not be understood of the burning of children as 
a sacrifice to Moloch, but of a sort of purification by fire, or 
fire-baptism, by which they were consecrated to the god, and 


^ Ex. vii. 11. 


2 Ex. vii. 11. 


3 Deut. xviii. 10-12. 



156 


earth’s earliest ages. 


supposed to be freed from the fear of a violent death.^ This, 
as being a kind of charm or spell, is of course classed among 
sorceries. We will now examine the remaining terms in the 
order in which they stand. 

Qosem (DPp). A diviner, one who discovers the hidden 
things of past present or future time by supernatural means. 
This appears to be a comprehensive term, being used of a 
diviner by omens and tokens or by direct spirit-com- 
munication. 

Meonen is derived by some from a root which 

would supply a choice of significations : for the word might 
either mean a practiser of hidden arts, or a diviner by 
clouds. But a connection with ayin (I!3^), the eye, is much 
more probable, and we may then deduee the meaning of a 
fascinator with the eyes, or, in modern language, a mesmerist, 
who throwing another into a magnetic sleep obtains oracular 
sayings from him. Many, however, prefer the signification 
of an observer, that is, one who makes minute inspection of 
the entrails so as to deduce the omens, in contradistinction 
to the augur who divined by tokens requiring the use of the 
ear as well as that of the eye. 

Menachesh This word is connected with nachash 

(^nj) a serpent, and is usually explained to mean a hisser 
or whisperer, and then a mutterer of enchantments. But the 
use of the verb of which it is the Piel participle seems to 
point in a difterent direction. In the thirtieth chapter of 
Genesis Laban entreats Jacob to stay with him : “ for,” says 
he, “ I divine — or, more literally, perceive by observation — 
that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake.”^ And again ; 
when to the pleading of Ben-hadad’s servants Ahab replied. 


1 That this practice is still kept up in many parts of Christendom by 
the Midsummer fires of Ht. John’s Eve is a fact too well known to need 
illustration. We may, however, mention that a copy of the Hereford 
Times is now before us containing a report of a lecture on “B.ome 
Heathenism,” just delivered at Wolverhampton by Mr. Gibson, a Wesleyan 
minister, in which the following statement occurs. “ They had heard of 
the fire-worshippers of Persia, little thinking, perhaps, that they had fire- 
worshippers within a distance of sixty or seventy miles. At Midsummer 
on many of the hills of Herefordshire fires were burning wliile tlie 
peasantry danced around tliem, and the ceremony was not completed until 
some of the young people liad passed through the fire.” 

2 Gen. XXX. 27. 



SPIBITUALISM. PART I. 


157 


“ Is he yet alive ? He is my brother,”^ we are told that the 
men “ divined,” “ took an omen,” from what he had said. 
Hence the verb seems to have been used primarily of drawing 
an inference from rapid observation, and then of divining. 
From the first meaning comes nachash a serpent, on account 
of its quick intelligence : from the second menachesh an 
augur, one who divines by observing signs and tokens, such 
as the singing and flight of birds, aerial phenomena, and 
other sights and sounds. 

Mekhashsheph The root of this word signifies “ to 

pray,” but only to false gods or demons. Hence it is, 
perhaps, applied to those who use incantations or magical 
formulas. 

Chohher chehher Literally, a binder of a band 

or spell. That is, either a fabricator of material charms and 
amulets ; or, much more probably, one who by incantations 
and spells brings demons into association with himself, so as 
to obtain aid or information from them. 

Shoel ohh A consulter of demons. That is, 

one who has established such a fellowship that he can com- 
municate with them directly, and neither needs to do so 
mediately by means of signs or omens, nor even requires the 
aid of spells to draw them to himself. 

An ohh is a soothsaying demon : but by an earlier use the 
word is also applied to the person connected with such a 
demon. Originally it signified a skin bottle, and its transition 
from this first meaning to its second may be clearly detected 
in the following exclamation of Elihu : “For I am full of 
matter, the spirit within me constraineth me. Behold, my 
belly is as wine which hath no vent ; it is ready to burst like 
new bottles.”'^ The word appears, then, to have been used 
of those into whom an unclean spirit had entered, because 
demons, when about to deliver oracular responses, caused 
the bodies of the possessed to grow tumid and inflated. We 
may, perhaps, compare Virgil’s description of the soothsaying 
Sybil for he tells us that her breast began to swell with 
frenzy, and her stature appeared to increase, as the spirit of 
the god drew nearer. According to some, however, the 
medium was called an ohh merely as being the vessel or 

' 1 Kings XX. 32, 33. ^ Job xxxii. 18, 19. ^ vi. 48-51. 



158 


EARTH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


sheath of the spirit : but in either case the term was after- 
wards applied to the demon itself. 

That the spirit actually dwells within the person who 
divines by it we may see from a previously quoted passage of 
Leviticus, the literal rendering of which is, “ A man or a 
woman when a demon is in them,’^ etc.^ And in strict 
accordance with this is the account of the Philippian damsel 
who had a Pythonic spirit.^ For Paul compelled the spirit 
to come out of her, and she instantly lost all her supernatural 
power. 

From the stories of medieval witches, and from what we 
hear of modern mediums, it seems likely that a connection 
with an ohh is frequently, if not always, the result of a 
compact, whereby the spirit in return for its services enjoys 
the use of the medium’s body. Indeed there is reason to 
believe that a medium differs from a demoniac, in the ordinary 
sense of the term, merely because in the one case a covenant 
exists between the demon and the possessed ; whereas the 
frightful duality and confusion in the other arise from the 
refusal of the human spirit to yield a passive submission 
and acquiesce in a league with the intruder. 

And let us not suppose that the age of demoniacs is past: 
the lapse of a few centuries has not reconciled demons to the 
disembodied state, they are still as eager as ever to clothe 
themselves with bodies. In the course of an interesting 
conversation which the writer had with the late Dr. Forbes 
Winslow, the latter expressed his conviction that a large 
proportion of the patients in our lunatic asylums are cases of 
possession, and not of madness. He distinguished the 
demoniac by a strange duality, and by the fact that, when 
temporarily released from the oppression of the demon, he 
is often able to describe the force which seizes upon his 
limbs, and compels him to acts or words of shame against 
his will. 

Yidoni A knowing one : that is, a person who is 

able to supply required information by means of the spirits 
with which he is associated. 

1 Lev. XX. 27. 

2 The reason for this deviation from our version will be found in a note 
towards the close of the chapter. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART I. 


159 


Doresh el hammethim (D'nsn ^8 A seeker unto the 

dead, a necromancer, one who consults the dead for advice 
or information. The familiar was supposed to summon the 
spirit required, just as in modern Spiritualism ; but, as we 
shall presently see, in many cases at least, and possibly in 
all, it is probable that the ohh itself personated the dead. 

Ittim (D'lpX). This word occurs in Isaiah it seems to 
mean whisperers or mutterers, that is, those who repeat 
spells or charms. 

In Isaiah’s description of the downfall of Babylon, the city 
so famed for its astrologers, we find mention of 

Hohhre shamayim that is, dividers of the 

heavens, astrologers who divide the heavens into houses for 
the convenience of their prognostications. The same persons 
are then described as 

Chozim hakkoliliahliim D'’Tn), star-gazers, those 

who study the stars for the purpose of taking horoscopes. 
Lastly : they are said to be . 

Modiim lechodashim D'ynto), deliverers of monthly 

predictions from their observations. 

In Daniel we have two other terms applied to those who 
were conversant with forbidden arts. 

Ashshaph A sorcerer. Properly, a practiser of 

hidden arts : for the word is connected with ashpah a 

quiver, that in which arrows are hidden. 

Gazrin Deciders, determiners, practisers of the 

art of casting nativities. Used of astrologers who, from a 
knowledge of the hour of birth, determined the fate of men 
by the position of the stars and by various arts of computation 
and divining. 

MemarH on words ex- In the New Testament the following 

pressioe of sorreru in the n p i • i . i 

New Testament, names, all 01 which appear to be compre- 

hensive and general, are applied to those who deal with the 
powers of darkness. 

Mayoi. Originally the Magi were a Persian religious 
caste ; but their influence was subsequently extended to 
many countries. They acted as priests, prescribed sacrifices, 
were soothsayers, and interpreted dreams and omens. 


‘ Is. xix, 3. 


2 Is. xlvii. 13. 


3 Dun. i. 20. 


4 Dan. ii. 27. 



160 


EARTH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


Origen^ affirms that they were in communication with evil 
spirits, and could consequently do whatever lay within the 
power of their invisible allies. Certainly — if we may trust 
the statements of early Christian writers — they were well 
acquainted with mesmerism and every practice of modern 
Spiritualism. 

^apjjiaKevs. One who uses drugs, whether for the purpose 
of poisoning, or for magic potions or spells — significations 
which are carefully distinguished by Plato in his De Legihus. 
In the Nuhes of Aristophanes Strepsiades suggests the 
hiring of a Thessalian witch (<^app,aKts) to draw the moon 
down, and the verb <fiapfxaK€V€Lv is used by Herodotus in 
reference to the sacrifice of white horses whereby the Magi 
sought to charm the Strymon. Again <^ap/>taKaa is employed 
in the Septuagint to express those arts by which the magicians 
of Egypt imitated the miracles of Moses. These examples 
are sufficient to show that the word soon became a general 
term for a sorcerer ; and in tracing its meaning we must not 
forget that drugs were often administered by the ancients for 
the purpose of producing an effect similar to that of 
mesmerism. 

Twice in the New Testament sorcery (<;^apjaaK€ta) and 
idolatry are coupled together : and in commenting upon the 
first passage Lightfoot well remarks that idolatry signifies the 
open recognition of false gods, and sorcery the secret 
tampering with the powers of evil. 

ol Ta TTcptepya Trpa^avTcs.® Those who had practised 
curious, that is, magical arts. Perhaps, among other things, 
they trafficked in the celebrated amulets called Ephesian 
letters, which were said to be copies of the mystic words 
inscribed on the image of Artemis, and to have the property 
of preserving their wearers from all harm. The books which 
they destroyed may have contained astrological computations, 
the “ Babylonios numeros of Horace. 

The pr a cttces of sorcery FrOm this Hst of tcrins it will be 

cidises. observed that demoniacal arts tall readily 

into three classes. The first comprises all kinds of divination 
by omens, tokens, and forbidden sciences : the second the 
uses of spells and incantations as a means of accomplishing 

1 Contra Celsum^ I. 60. 2 Qal. v. 20 ; Rev. xxi. 8. ^ Acts xix. 19. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART I. 


161 


what is desired : and the third every method of direct and 
intelligent communication and co-operation with demons. 

With regard to the first class, the signs and omens were 
doubtless arranged by demons, who, after inducing a belief 
in their reliability by presenting them before the occurrence 
of certain events, could thenceforth easily act upon human 
minds, and, by simple appearances, either deter men from their 
purpose or urge them on to enormities of evil. 

As to forbidden sciences, there may be a foundation of 
truth in them — indeed Scripture perhaps hints that there is 
in the case of astrology — for doubtless every thing in nature 
affects us in some way. But such lore is for the present 
positively interdicted by God : nor is it difficult to discover 
reasons for His prohibition. For the mind of man is 
altogether unable to grasp and handle knowledge so profound 
and so complicated : with his present powers he would waste 
a whole life, and gain nothing but a miserably imperfect and 
altogether unreliable acquaintance with the mysterious law. 
Nor in his fallen condition could he be trusted with such 
tremendous secrets, even if he could comprehend them : for 
his pride and independence would swell, nothing would be 
withheld from him, and his wickedness would devise crimes 
which can now find no place even in his fancy. 

The spells and incantations may either be mere arrange- 
ments of the demons, who, by bringing about the desired 
effect when they could, have established a faith in them : or, 
perhaps, they are in some cases grounded upon a real potency 
in the means employed, which has thus been unlawfully 
disclosed by rebellious spirits. 

Direct communication with demons, whether by writing, 
clairvoyance, clairaudience, or in other ways, is now becoming 
universally prevalent. It is sustained by what is called 
mediumistic power, a faculty which, as we have before 
remarked, some seem to develop instinctively, but which in 
many cases can only be obtained by a sedulous and 
persevering use of the means prescribed. 

Jiutoricai noticet qf Having thus examined the Scriptural 
fhl'^aphim. terms applied to dealers with demons, let 

us now glance at the historical facts illustrative of the subject. 
Upon the antediluvian sin we have already commented, and 

12 



162 


earth’s earliest ages. 


observed that its repetition in postdiluvian times seems to 
have originated all heathen systems and mythology. We will, 
therefore, now proceed to the next indication of demonism, 
which appears in the mention of teraphim. 

The derivation of this word has caused much trouble : but 
the conjecture of R. S. Poole in Smith’s Dictionary of the 
Bible is worth consideration, and brings the teraphim into 
very close connection with Spiritualism. Their use appears 
to have commenced in Chaldea ; bu" the affinity between 
that country and ancient Egypt in language as well as 
religion is well known, and hence Mr. Poole traces the name 
to an Egyptian root, and explains it as follows : 

“ I’he Egyptian word ter signifies ‘ a shape, type, 
transformation,’ and has for its determinative a mummy : it 
is used in the Ritual, where the various transformations of 
the deceased in Hades are described. The small mummy- 
shaped figure, Shehtee^ usually made of baked clay covered 
with a blue vitreous varnish, representing the Egyptian as 
deceased, is of a nature connecting it with magic, since it 
was made with the idea that it secured benefits in Hades ; 
and it is connected with the word ter, for it represents a 
mummy, the determinative of that word, and was considered 
to be of use in the state in which the deceased passed 
through transformations, teru. The difficulty which forbids 
our doing more than conjecture a relation between ter and 
teraphim is the want in the former of the third radical of the 
latter ; and in our present state of ignorance respecting the 
ancient Eg5ptian and the primitive language of Chaldea in 
their verbal relations to the Semitic family it is impossible to 
say whether it is likely to be explained. The possible 
connection with the Egyptian religious magic is, however, 
not to be slighted, especially as it is not improbable that the 
household idolatry of the Hebrews was ancestral worship, 
and the Shehtee was the image of a deceased man or woman, 
as a mummy, and therefore as an Osiris, bearing the insignia 
of that divinity, and so in a manner as a deified dead person, 
although we do not know that it was used in the ancestral 
worship of the Egyptians.’^ 

If there be any truth in this idea, the use of teraphim was 
precisely analogous to the consultation of the dead by modern 



SPIRITUALISM. PART I. 


163 


Spiritualists. And, whatever be the derivation of the word, 
the fact at least remains that the images signified by it were 
kept for the unlawful purpose of divination. But this fact is 
sometimes obscured in our version by the substitution of 
“idols” or “idolatry” for “ teraphim.” The well known 
words of Samuel to Saul should be rendered : “For rebellion 
is as the sin of divination, and stubbornness is as idolatry and 
teraphim.”^ And Zechariah should be made to say: “For 
the teraphim have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen 
a lie, and have told false di earns.” ^ 

But those who used teraphim, though they broke the law 
of Jehovah by seeking unto the dead and establishing a 
fellowship with demons, do not seem to have openly denied 
Him. This we may see by the cases of Laban, Michal the 
wife of David, and the heretical Israelites of later times. 
And here we may discover another point of resemblance 
between the less advanced of modern Spiritualists and the 
ancient diviners by teraphim. 

The cup which wa,8 Wehavealreadynoticedtheappeara.ee 
* of dream-interpreting mediums in Josephus 
time. An incident of the same period discloses the prevalence 
of another supernatural art. For the steward, when he 
accused Josephus brethren of stealing his master’s cup, 
exclaimed, “ Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and 
whereby indeed he divineth?”* Now we are not for a 
moment to suppose that Joseph followed the magical 
practices of Egypt : the words were merely devised by the 
steward, in reference to a universal custom of the country, to 
enhance the value of the cup. For when interpreting the 
dreams of the chief butler and chief baker, as well as when 
summoned into the presence of Pharaoh, Joseph disclaimed 
all intercourse with demons, and declared that the revelation 
he was about to make had come directly from God. When, 
therefore, he afterwards says to his brethren, “ Wot ye not 
that such a man as I can certainly divine ? ”^ we must under- ^ 
stand him to be disguising himself by an affectation of the 
customs of Egypt. He is not, however, referring to the 
previous words of the steward : for he could not have divined 
by a cup which was not at the time in his possession. 

1 1 Sam. XV. 23. 2 2ech. x. 2. ^ Qen. xliv. 5. G-en. xliv. 15. 

12 ^ 



164 


earth’s earliest ages. 


The practice to which the steward alluded was probably 
the same as that which is still in vogue among Egyptian 
magicians, and consists in pouring something into a cup, by 
gazing fixedly at which a person is mesmerised and enabled 
to see in the fluid whatever may be desired. Lane, in his 
Modern Egyptians^ gives a remarkable and well known 
account of a sheikh who divined in this way : but with the 
immaterial difference that the boy who was to be mesmerised 
looked into a black liquid poured upon his hand. 

Conjiict of the Egyptian When Moses began to exhibit the 

^ marvels of God before Pharaoh, the 

Egyptian mediums were immediately summoned, as being 
themselves also accustomed to work wonders. And up to a 
certain point they did succeed in imitating the Hebrew 
prophet, though they were utterly unable to counteract his 
miracles and give relief to their countrymen. They caused 
their rods to become serpents : they turned water into blood : 
they brought frogs out of the river Nile : but there the 
power of their lord ceased, for, great as it was, it was finite. 
When Jehovah went on to vivify the dust of the earth, the 
magicians were constrained to acknowledge their inability to 
cope with the Almighty. 

Meason of the frequent We may now understand the frequent 
reference in the law of Sinai to practisers 
destroyed by Saul. of all kinds of sorcery. It was necessary 
both to destroy the influence of the Egyptian magicians, and 
to prepare the people of God for the, perhaps, worse dangers 
which awaited them in the land of promise. For Canaan 
contained many descendants of the Nephilim,^ and con- 
sequently teemed with mediums, through whose influence, 
since the law was not put in force against them, the Israelites 
were seduced to idolatry and involved in bitter troubles. 

Saul, probably at the instigation of Samuel, destroyed 
these evil doers with such vigour that the few who survived 
could only practise their wicked arts in secret, and a long 
time elapsed before sorcerers and false prophets recovered 
their power in Judah. 

Yet most strangely did the destroyer become the suitor of 
one who had escaped the edge of his sword. And thus were 
1 Num. xiii. 33. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART I. 


165 


fulfilled the prophetic words of Samuel uttered long before, 
when he declared that rebellion is as the sin of divination, 
and that stubborn self-will is as idolatry and teraphim.' For 
Saul had then been guilty of rebellion and stubbornness : he 
was, therefore, also capable of the crimes of divination 
idolatry and the consultation of teraphim, heinous as they at 
that time appeared to him. Let our heart but be estranged 
from God, and there is nothing so great, so outrageous, as to 
be impossible to us. The close of Saul’s history is a mournful 
proof of this, and shows how easy a prey man becomes to 
the powers of evil when the multitude of his provocations 
has at length caused the Spirit of the Most High to depart 
from him, and he stands alone amid the ruins of his broken 


purposes, while the gathering of his fears portends a pitiless 
storm upon his unsheltered head. 

The hiHtort/ of Saul and The dark shadow of approaching death 

the witch ofEn-dor. beginning to steal over the wayward 

king : he saw the glittering helms and spears of the invading 
army, and his heart trembled with gloomy forebodings.^ The 
Spirit of the Lord no longer came upon him as in the day 
when he sent forth the bloody tokens, and indignantly 
summoned all Israel to march with him to Jabesh-gilead.® 
Nay, the phantoms of past sins, and, perchance, the gory 
forms of the slaughtered priests,^ floated continually before 
his eyes, and took away all rest, all stedfastness of purpose. 
The prophet who had so long borne with him, so often 
entreated for him, was dead. He essayed to pray, but found 
that if any regard iniquity in his heart the Lord will not hear 
him. For Jehovah, Who had pleaded with him so patiently, 
forgiven him so many times, had at last turned away, and 
would answer him no more, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, 
nor by prophets. The gates of salvation, which had remained 
open all the day in vain, were suddenly closed at nightfall, 
and there was neither form seen nor voice heard in response 
to his now despairing cry. 

Then he yielded to an evil thought : he remembered the 
dealers with familiar spirits and the wizards whom, in 
obedience to the law, he had destroyed from the land : he 
knew that they were reputed able to call up the dead, and, 


^ 1 Sam. XV. 23. ^ j xxviii. ^ 1 Sam. xi. 7. '*1 Sam. xxii. 18. 



166 


earth’s earliest ages. 


perhaps stifling his conscience with the plea that it was a 
prophet of the Lord with whom he would converse, 
determined, since God would not hear him, to appeal to the 
powers of darkness. 

O that he had said with Job, “ Though He slay me, yet 
will I trust in Him,”^ that he might have found mercy even 
at the last ! But faith is rarely given at the close of life to 
those who have spurned repeated off’ers of grace : experience 
teaches the general rule that as a man lives so does he die ; 
and thus it was with Saul. Turning to his companions he 
asked if they knew of any surviving dealer with demons. 
The question must have filled them with astonishment : for 
could Saul, who had so mercilessly destroyed the mediums in 
the name of the Lord, be about to stultify himself by inquiring 
of them ! But the king was evidently in earnest, and sore 
troubled : they, therefore, told him of a witch who was at 
that time concealed in one of the caves of En-dor, not more 
than seven or eight miles from the camp. En-dor ! There 
seemed to be a good omen in the name : for was it not there 
that two great enemies of Israel, Jabin and Sisera, perished, 
and became as dung for the earth 

Saul waited for the shelter of night, and then, with two 
companions, went forth to fill up the measure of his iniquities. 
He arrived at the north-eastern slope of the Little Hermon, 
and the dexterity with which his attendants found out the 
witch’s cave in the darkness and amid the numerous perfora- 
tions of the mountain seems to prove their frequent habit of 
resorting to it. Passing into the recess of the cavern, dimly 
lighted, perhaps, by a fire of wood, the king accosted the 
woman with words which show the absolute identity of her 
craft with that of the modern medium. “ I pray thee,” he 
said, “ divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring me 
him up whom I shall name unto thee.” The witch was at 
first suspicious : but Saul reassured her by a strange oath, 
and swore by the name of Jehovah that no harm should 
befall her for breaking the law of Jehovah. Thereupon she 
inquired with what spirit he would communicate, and being 
requested to call up Samuel commenced her preparations. 

Now the ohh was supposed to have the power of summoning 
1 Job xiii. 15. 2 pg^ Ixxxiii. 9, 10. 



8PIEITUALI8M. PART I. 


167 


the dead ; but, since we cannot admit that this power 
extended to the spirits of the just, the familiar must, in many 
cases at least, have personated the spirit required. Any 
necessary information could of course have been procured 
with lightning speed from the demons who had watched the 
life of the person invoked.^ And so the woman’s familiar 
would doubtless have presented itself as Samuel, and perhaps 
have uttered soothing words to the king. But the usual 
procedure was cut short by a sudden interference, and the 
medium shrieked with terror as she perceived, probably 
through her familiar, that the inquirer was her great enemy 
king Saul, and, still worse, that all her powers were held in 
abeyance, and her Satanic accomplice paralysed, by the 
apparition of a being with whom she felt that she had neither 
part nor lot. For since Saul would seek unto the dead, God 
had in anger sent up the real Samuel as the bearer of a 
fearful message of doom. 

We need follow the history no further : the dread utterance 
of Samuel, the despair of Saul, his return to the camp, and 
his miserable end on the next day, are matters with which 
we are not at present concerned. We have only to remark 
that the woman was evidently well known to the officers of 
Saul ; that she was assisted by an attendant spirit ; that she 
was confident in her power of producing a supernatural voice, 
as well as an apparition which she at least could see and 
describe ; that she recognised Saul by supernatural informa- 
tion ; and that she was terrified at the appearance of the real 
Samuel in place of the counterfeit one whom she had 
expected. Lastly ; we are expressly told that the crime of con- 
sulting a medium sealed the doom of the first king of Israel.^ 

^ This seems the most probable way of accounting for that accurate 
knowledge of the past winch is often displayed by mediums : but how 
shall we explain their still more wonderful, though altogether unreliable, 
predictions of the future ? Perhaps somewhat as follows. The dealings 
of God with man, and the different stages of human probation, are doubt- 
less both systematic and consequential; and, therefore, evil spirits, 
acquainted, it may be, with laws hidden to us, and taught by an experi- 
ence of six thousand years, would be likely to have a general prescience 
of coming events. But they are by no means able to penetrate the deep 
counsels of the Almighty, and hence their calculations must be of ten baffled 
by an unexpected fiat of His will. We may thus understand why their 
predictions are often strikingly verified, while at times they as signaUy fail. 

2 1 Cliron. X. 13. 



168 


earth's earliest ages. 


Spiritualism in ths From this time there is no mention of 
hvitory of Judah, mediums in the history of Judah until the 

days of Isaiah. Then the streams of wickedness were 
returning upon the land from the surrounding heathen 
nations, and idolatry and sorcery were rapidly overspreading 
it. And accordingly the prophet exclaims, “ Thou hast 
forsaken Thy people, the house of Jacob, because they are 
replenished from the east, and are mesmerisers like the 
Philistines, and abound with the children of strangers."^ It 
is clear from this verse that demonism was again beginning 
to prevail, and strong are the words of Isaiah against it, and 
especially against those practices which have now reappeared 
in modern Spiritualism.^ 

Upon the accession of Manasseh, the wicked son of 
Hezekiah, the revolt was openly headed by the king : for of 
him we are told that he did evil in the sight of the Lord 
after the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord cast 
out before the children of Israel.® It will be instructive to 
mark the details of that evil as showing the connection of 
Spiritualism with idolatry, and, therefore, with Romanism 
which, owing to the discoveries of Layard, Rawlinson, and 
others, now stands clearly convicted of descent from the 
system of Babylon, and the Baal- worship of old. For the 
following is the explanation of the term “ abominations of 
the heathen “ He built up again the high places which 
Hezekiah his father had destroyed ; and he reared up altars 
for Baal, and made an Ashtaroth-symbol, as did Ahab king 
of Israel ; and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served 
them. And he built altars in the house of the Lord, of which 
the Lord said. In Jerusalem will I put My name. And he 
built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the 
house of the Lord. And he made his son pass through the 
fire, and divined by mesmerism and augury, and set in office 
one who had a familiar spirit and wizards : he wrought 
much wickedness in the sight of the Lord, to provoke Him 
to anger.” 

The consequence of these abominable practices was a 
fearful threatening of woe from the Lord.® He would send 

1 Isa. ii. 6. 2 Isa. viii. 19 ; xix. 3 ; xxix. 4 ; xlvii. 12-14. 

^ 2 Kings xxi. 2. ^2 Kings xxi. 3-t). ® 2 Kings xxi. 12, 13. 



SPIEITTJALISM. PABT I* 


169 


a judgment so terrible that both the ears of him who heard of 
it should tingle : He would level Jerusalem with the ground, 
even as He had destroyed Samaria : He would treat the holy 
city as a man does a dish, when, after wiping away the 
moisture, he turns it over lest a single drop should remain. 

The next king, Josiah, did indeed put away the abomina- 
tions and remove the mediums from the land : but they soon 
returned, as we may see by the complaints and denunciations 
of Jeremiah. To the very last the infatuated nation trusted 
in them, and turned a,way from the servant of Jehovah when 
he cried, “Hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your 
diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your mesmerisers, nor 
to your enchanters, which speak unto you, saying. Ye shall 
not serve the king of Babylon : for they prophesy a lie unto 
you, to remove you far from your land ; and that I should 
drive you out, and ye should perish. ^ 

Thus the effects of Josiah^s reformation were transient, 
and, therefore, the threatened judgment and overthrow of 
Jerusalem quickly followed. And this is the third instance 
which has presented itself to us of speedy destruction 
consequent on a more open and general intercourse with the 
rebel inhabitants of the air. 

Traces of Spiritualism In the kingdom of Israel the spread of 
m the history qf Israel, gorccry was of coui'se a natural result of 
Baal-worship. The false prophets, as well as those who were 
active in the last days of the kingdom of Judah, were doubt- 
less mediums inspired by the agents of Satan. And awful 
yet instructive is the scene in which a lying spirit receives 
permission to enter into the prophets of Baal, the mediums of 
the royal household, in order that by their influence the 
miserable Ahab may be led away to meet his death.^ 

A little later we have an unmistakable hint of the prevalence 
of mesmerism in Syria. For when Naaman heard the 
message of Elisha he was indignant that the prophet did not 
appear, and angrily exclaimed, “ Behold, I thought. He will 
surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of 
the Lord his God, and move his hand up and down over the 
place, and recover the leper.*’® It will be observed that we 
have adopted the marginal rendering, which alone expresses 

^ Jer.xxvii. 9, 10 . 2 i Kings xxii. 21-23. 8 2 Kings v. 11. 



170 


eaeth’s earliest ages. 


the correct meaning of nuph in the Hiphil. For that verb 
signifies to wave up and down, and is the root of ienuphah 
the wave offering. 

Now Naaman well knew the mode of mesmeric healing as 
practised by the priests of Rimmon and the false prophets of 
his own land, and, therefore, expected Elisha to make passes 
over him in the same way. Hence we can understand the 
treatment he received. For had Elisha himself come forth 
and lifted his hand over the leprous spots, Naaman would 
doubtless have ascribed his recovery to the mesmeric 
influence of the prophet, who was, therefore, directed not 
to see him, but to send him to wash in the waters of 
Jordan. 

“ What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother 
Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many ? ’’ was the indignant 
reply of Jehu to Jehoram.^ And the teachings of some 
modern Spiritualists seem likely to remind us of the close 
connection of the two crimes. 

A prophecy qf Zecha- Of the references to mediums in the 
prophetical books we have already noticed 
so many that we will only further mention a remarkable 
promise by the mouth of Zechariah. “ And it shall come to 
pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts, that I will cut off 
the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no 
more be remembered : and also I will cause the prophets and 
the unclean spirit to pass out of the land.”^ A consideration 
of this passage with its context makes it apparent that 
Spiritualism will be prevalent among the Jews when they 
return in unbelief to their own land : but that, upon the 
advent of their King, they will be for ever freed from that 
curse which was the cause of their former expulsion. 

Spirtiuaiu n in the New In the New Testament there are hints 
eetament. Same sin, and the later inspired 

witers take the same view of it. We have already mentioned 
the Philippian damsel who had a Pythonic spirit, by which 
we are probably to understand that her familiar was a 
subordinate of the great power worshipped under the name 
of Apollo, the sun-god and the inspirer of the Delphic 


1 2 Kings ix. 22. 


2 Zech. xiii. 2. 



SPIKITUALISM. PART I. 


171 


oracle.^ But this inference is entirely obscured in our 
version by the inaccurate substitution of a spirit of 
divination” for “a Pythonic spirit ” : and, consequently, the 
hint that the being called Apollo really had to some extent 
the attributes assigned to him is veiled to English readers. 
Such should, however, be no longer the case : for the 
authoritative connection of Spiritualism with the ancient 
gods is of peculiar importance at a time when Apollo is 
reappearing as a mighty angelic existence in poems which 
claim to be demoniacally inspired. 

We have also previously noticed Paul’s inclusion of 
witchcraft among the manifest works of the flesh, and the 
conversion at Ephesus of those who had practised magical 
arts, and will only add that sorcerers are twice mentioned in 
the closing chapters of the Apocalypse. For they are found 
in the fearful catalogue of those who shall have their part in 
the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone,^ and are told 
that they shall never walk in the streets of the golden city.® 
The prophetical passage in the first epistle to Timothy we 
designedly pass by for the present. 

Thus the testimony of the Bible is everywhere consistent : 
nor could it be better expressed than in the emphatic words 
of Moses, that all practisers of demoniacal arts “ are an 
abomination unto the Lord.” * 

1 Such would certainly be the idea conveyed to the mind of a Greek 
or [Roman by the eignmcant adoption of this pa^an term. Python was 
originally the name of the great soothsaying serpent of Delphi which was 
slam by Apollo. Hence the god took his title of Pythius and became the 
inspirer of oracles and soothsayers. His priestess at Delphi was called 
Pythia or Pythonissa, and latterly tlie term Python was transferred to 
any soothsaying demon which gave responses in the name of Apollo. 

in Acts xvi. 16 the reading nv0uva is preferable to llvflwm, and the 
literal rendering will be “ a spirit a Python ” that is, a Pythonic spirit. 

Tertullian (De xxviii.) divides the demons who are connected 

with magic into three classes ; (1) parabolic spirits which throw men on 
tlie ground; (2) paredral spirits which keep ever at their side; and 
(3) Pythonic spirits which cast them into trances. If this be a true 
classification the Philippian damsel must have been a clairvoyant or 
trance-medium. 

2 Rev. xxi. 8. 


^ Rev. xxii. 15. 


^ Deut. xviii. 12. 



172 


EAETH*8 EAKLIE8T AGES. 


CHAPTEE XII. 
Spieitualism. Paet II. 


The Testimony of History. 

Introduction. Jtepeti- In passing from the infallible utterances 

tions of the antediluvian r • • j ‘l. 

ein in postdiluvian timee. of inspired wTiters to the countless 
multitudes who, by floating their stored knowledge down the 
stream of time, have united to furnish us with records of the 
past, we must premise that we are far from attempting an 
exhaustive treatise. We shall merely adduce a few plain 
indications of the existence in ancient times of what is now 
called Spiritualism, and leave further investigation to the 
curious, whose task, if they are competent to examine the 
monuments of antiquity, will be sufficiently easy. 

Nor do we wish to dwell upon the fearful culmination of 
sorcery, by which it is identified with the sin of the ante- 
diluvians. Such a matter is no subject for ordinary discussion. 
But, seeing that the danger is again threatening Christendom, 
it is well that the leaders of religious opinion should consider 
that which has been, that they may be stimulated to check 
with all the strength of their influence the first symptoms of 
its return. 

Let, then, those whose duty it is ponder the statement of 
Herodotus in regard to the chamber on the summit of the 
tower of Belus, with its richly adorned couch, its golden 
table, and its solitary inmate.^ Let them, by the light of 
modern Spiritualism, consider whether the assertion of the 
Chaldean priests, that the god visited this chamber, may not 
have been something more than a mere myth or figure.^ 
Let them weigh the fact that such things were said to take 
place at other temples also, as, for instance, at that of the 
Theban Jupiter, and at the Patarean oracle of Apollo. Let 
them read the strange history of Paulina, as narrated by 
Josephus,® and say if the priests of Isis must not have felt 
themselves supported by an ancient and universally recognised 
custom when they ventured to demand a chaste and noble 

^ Herod, i. 181. 2 Herod, i. 182. 3 Joseph. Antiq. xviii. 3, 4. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART II. 


173 


Roman matron from her husband for the god Anubis. Let 
them reflect upon the story of Cassandra, and other similar 
tales of classical mythology, and upon the numerous claims 
to descent from the gods put forth by the heroes of Greece 
and Rome. To this let them add the many legends of the 
same kind which may be found in the ancient records of 
almost every nation, the case of the incubi and succubse, 
the price reported to have been paid by medieval witches for 
their supernatural power. And then, if with these hints of 
past time they compare the information which may be 
gathered from current Spiritualistic literature, they will not 
fail to find grave matter for thought. 

But we hasten to examples of the more avowed practices 
of Spiritualism. Nor are they diflicult to discover : for 
demons, Pythonesses, sybils, nymphs, augurs, and sooth- 
saying men and women, are continually before us in the 
secular annals of early history. 

Aatroiogersand oracieH. The astrologers of ancieut nations, and 
above all those of the Chaldeans, are too well known to need 
more than a simple mention : nor can the impartial student 
fail to recognise a superhuman foresight and wisdom in 
many answers of the famous oracles. This is especially 
true of those said to have been inspired by Apollo, whose 
ability to confer powers of divination is, as we have just 
seen, distinctly asserted in Scripture.' We will adduce one 
instance as a specimen, the celebrated history of Croesus 
and the Delphic oracle, as related by Herodotus.^ For, 
unless we absolutely refuse credence to the supernatural, 
there is no reason for disbelieving the story, and the splendid 
presents of Croesus were to be seen at Delphi in the days of 
the historian. 

The famous test applied A little more than five centuries and a 
to “ half before Christ the king of Lydia, 

becoming alarmed at the spread of Persian power, was 
considering how to check the growth of the rival state. 
Naturally his mind turned to the oracles as the only sources 
of Divine guidance : but to which of them should he give 
the preference; for the world was filled with soothsaying 
shrines, all of which claimed to be inspired. He determined 
* Acts xvi. 16. ^ Herod, i. 46-61. 



174 


earth’s earliest ages. 


to make trial of those that were in highest repute, and to let 
the result decide his choice. Accordingly he sent out 
messengers in different directions ; some to Ahae in Phocis ; 
some to the speaking oaks and doves of Jupiter at Dodona ; 
some to test the wondrous prophetic dreams which, after due 
purification, might be experienced at the tomb of the deified 
Amphiaraus; some to the dread cave of Trophonius, into 
which whosoever entered came forth pale and trembling 
with affright ; some to Branchidae in Milesia ; some to the 
famous temple of Jupiter Ammon, which stood in solitary 
grandeur amid the desert wastes of Libya. 

But we are at present concerned only with one of these 
embassies, that which was despatched to the great oracle of 
Apollo, and which was thus instructed. The messengers 
were to reckon a hundred days from the date of their 
departure, and were then to enquire of the god what 
Croesus the son of Alyattes, king of Lydia, was doing at 
that moment. 

At the appointed time, after due preparation, they bound 
their heads with the mystic bay, and entered the precincts of 
the sanctuary. Then, as soon as the customary sacrifice had 
been offered and the lots drawn, they moved forward, gazing 
in wonder at the monuments and sculptures which lined the 
road, until they came to the steps of the noble shrine itself. 
But what followed, and the awe-inspiring circumstances of 
consultation, could not be better described than in the 
subjoined extract from the Arnold Prize Essay for 1859. 

“ And now the jubilant trumpets of the priests pealed out, 
wdth notes that rang round the valley, and up among the 
windings of the Hyampeian cliff. Awed into silence by the 
sound, he crossed the garlanded threshold : he sprinkled on 
his head the holy water from the fonts of gold, and entered 
the outer court. New statues, fresh fonts, craters, and 
goblets, the gifts of many an Eastern king, met his eye : 
walls emblazoned with dark sayings rose about him as he 
crossed towards the inner adytum. Then the music grew 
more loud : the interest deepened ; his heart beat faster. 
With a sound as .of many thunders, that penetrated to the 
crowd without, the subterranean door rolled back : the earth 
trembled : the laurels nodded : smoke and vapour broke 



8PIKITUALISM. PART II. 


175 


commingled forth : and, railed below within a hollow of the 
rock, perchance he caught one glimpse of the marble effigies 
of Zeus and the dread sisters, one gleam of sacred arms ; 
for one moment saw a steaming chasm, a shaking tripod, 
above all, a Figure with fever on her cheek and foam upon 
her lips, who, fixing a wild eye upon space, tossed her arms 
aloft in the agony of her soul, and, with a shriek that never 
left his ear for days, chanted high and quick the dark 
utterances of the will of heaven. 

When the ambassadors of Croesus approached the shrine 
the Pythoness gave them no time to put their question, but 
immediately accosted them as follows : 

“ I can count the sands, and know the measures of 
ocean ; 

I understand the dumb, and hear him that speaketh not. 

On my sense there stole the savour of a strong-shelled 
tortoise 

Boiling in a cauldron with the flesh of a lamb : 

Brass is the couch underneath it, and brass the robe 
laid upon it.” 

They hastened to convey the strange response to Sardis, 
and the king, when he heard it, performed an act of adoration, 
and declared that the Delphic oracle was indeed worthy of 
confidence. For on the appointed day, wishing to do a most 
inconceivable thing, he had with his own hands cut to pieces 
a tortoise and a lamb, and boiled them together in a brazen 
cauldron covered with a lid of the same metal. Croesus 
sent magnificent presents to Delphi, and was thenceforth 
completely under the influence of the oracle, which shortly 
afterwards, by an ambiguously worded response, lured him 
on to destruction. 0 that those who are now giving heed to 
wandering spirits and teachings of demons would accept the 
warning afforded by his fate ! 

Egyptian Spirituaiiam. Mesmetism was evidently practised in 
Egypt from the earliest times, as we may see by the pictures 
of priests making passes and patients under manipulation 
which are found among the temple-paintings. There are 
also many historical hints of the same fact, some of which 
have been already mentioned in the previous chapter. We 
may now add the strange history of Rhampsinitus, the 



176 


earth’s earliest ages. 


predecessor of Cheops, as narrated by Herodotus.^ For that 
king is said to have descended alive into Hades, and, after 
playing at dice with Demeter, to have returned unhurt — a 
story which is, probably, to be explained as describing the 
experience of a mesmeric trance. 

Indeed all the mysterious wisdom of Egypt appears to 
have been connected with forbidden arts, and how continually 
her priests were employed in practising them we may 
further infer from their diet, which was such as mesmerists 
and clairvoyants find necessary. For Clement of Alexandria 
tells us that they were not permitted to feed on flesh.^ 

Cures effected at the The shrines of Isis and Serapis had 
^sTrapi*. a world-wide reputation for ^the magnetic 

cures performed in them, and for prescriptions which appear 
to have been dictated by clairvoyants precisely as they are in 
our days. And the frequently mentioned temple-sleep was 
undoubtedly a mesmeric trance induced sometimes by 
making passes, sometimes by the fumes of a particular kind 
of incense accompanied by the music of the lyre. 

Strabo^ mentions the temple of Serapis at Canopus as 
^ affording such startling instances of supernatural cures that 
the moat famous men believed in them, and were willing to 
be entranced either for their own benefit or for that of others. 
Persons were appointed to keep a register of the cures 
effected, and also of the oracular answers which had proved 
true. But what struck the geographer most of all was the 
vast number of pilgrims who kept coming to the shrine by 
the canal from Alexandria, and made the air resound with the 
noise of their flute-playing and dancing as they floated by. 

Fiigrima^es and pro- Herodotus^ supposcs that “ pilgrimages, 

ceeswne qf the Egyptians. p^QCeSSionS, and introductions (TTpOtr- 

aywytts),^' originated with the Egyptians. The technical 
meaning of the last of the three terms is uncertain : but it 
probably refers to the admission of pilgrims into a sanctuary 
where some sacred relic, or the statue itself of the deity, was 
exhibited by the hierophant.® 

^ Herod, ii. 122. 2 Clem. Strom, vii. 6. ^ Strab. xvii. 1. ^ Herod, ii. 58. 

5 It would not be difficult to apply these terms to modern pilgrimages. 
The first would express the journey to the locality of a shrine ; the second 
the processional march from the railway station to the sacred place ; and 
the third the admission into the church or grotto. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART II. 


177 


The historian goes on to mention five annual pilgrimages 
of the Egyptians to various shrines,^ and gives a vivid account 
of the one to Bubastis, describing the long train of boats 
crowded with men and women, some of whom were piping 
and striking castanets, while the others sang and clapped 
their hands. The natives affirmed that about seven hundred 
thousand persons, exclusive of children, were usually present 
at this festival. 

Another place of great resort was the ^mple of Isis at 
Busiris where the pilgrims, both male Imd female, were 
wont, after offering a strange sacrifice, to beat themselves 
before the shrine. The marvellous popularity of this goddess 
is partly exj^ained by the following extract from Diodorus 
Siculus. 

Account of the healing “ Now the Egyptians Say that Isis was 
S the discoverer of many potions for the 

preservation of health, and is very skilful in the art of 
medicine ; and that, having by this means attained to 
immortality, her greatest pleasure is to heal mortals. For 
to those who beg her help she dictates remedies during 
sleep, openly manifesting both her own apparition and her 
beneficence toward her suppliants. And they add that they 
offer in proof of this no fables, such as the Greeks tell, but 
self-evident facts. For almost the whole world supports 
their testimony by the zeal with which men worship Isis 
because of her visible appearance when she is performing 
cures. For she stands over the sick in their sleep, and 
prescribes remedies for their diseases : and those who obey 
her directions are most unaccountably healed. Numbers are 
thus cured after they have, through the malignancy of their 
disease, been given up by physicians ; and many persons 
who have been absolutely deprived of sight, or disabled in 
any other part of the body, are restored to their previous 
soundness as soon as they have recourse to this goddess.’^ * 

We see, then, that the dictation of prescriptions by clair- 
voyants is not peculiar to the modern phase of Spiritualism. 
And it is difficult to read of the apparition of Isis and the 
pilgrimages to her shrines without being reminded of what is 

^ Herod, ii. 59, 60. “ Herod, ii. 61. ^ Diod. Sic. i. 25. 

IS 



178 


eabth’s eakliest ages. 


now said and done in connection with the “ holy mountain 
of La Salette, Lourdes, and other places. 

The influence of Isis afterwards spread to Rome, where, 
in the depraved times of the early emperors, the goddess 
became the favourite deity. But the abominable impurity 
which characterised lier worship provoked several attempts 
to abolish it, and caused repeated destructions of her 
temples : indeed, upon one occasion, Tiberius went so far as 
to crucify the priests and throw the statues of the goddess 
into the river. All, however, was in vain : Isis retained her 
power in the great city until, as time went on, it was 
deemed advisable to change her name and worship her, 
with some modifications, under the title of the Virgin Mary. 

Ve^pmianand the fern- We will add but onc more instance of 
Spiritualism in Egypt, the well known 
story of Vespasian’s visit to the temple of Serapis in Alex- 
andria. It is recorded in the histories of Tacitus and 
Suetonius, and afibrds an early example of what is now said 
to be of frequent occurrence, the apparition of a living 
person at a great distance from the place of his bodily 
presence. 

Tacitus ^ relates that two men, the one blind and the other 
suffering from a diseased hand, were directed by the oracle 
of Serapis to apply to Vespasian, who was then in 
Alexandria, They were promised that, if the Roman consul 
would consent to anoint the eyes of the one with saliva, and 
to step upon the hand of the other, both of them should be 
restored. Vespasian at first hesitated to comply with their 
strange requests : but at length, yielding to the importunity 
of the sufferers and the persuasion of his courtiers, he did 
what was required in the presence of a great multitude. 
Immediately the blind man recovered his sight, and the 
diseased hand was healed. 

After remarking that these cures were well attested by 
eye-witnesses, who could have no object in supporting a lie 
seeing that the family of Vespasian was then extinct, Tacitus 
proceeds as follows : ^ 

“ These miracles strongly inclined Vespasian to visit the 
shrine, and consult the god in regard to the fortunes of the 
^ Tacit. Hist. iv. 81 . ^ Tacit. Hist. iv. 82 . 



SPIRITUALISM. PART II. 


179 


empire. Accordingly he ordered the temple to be cleared, 
and entered it alone. Then, while he was worshipping the 
deity, he saw standing behind him one of the nobles of 
Egypt named Basilides, whom he knew to be at that moment 
detained by sickness at a distance of some days’ journey 
from Alexandria. He inquired of the priests whether 
Basilides had entered the temple that day : he asked those 
whom he met if the man had been seen in the city. Lastly ^ 
by despatching some horsemen, he discovered that at the 
moment when he had seen the apparition the invalid was 
eighty miles distant from Alexandria. Then he concluded 
that the vision was divine, and inferred the answer conveyed 
by it from the name Basilides.” 

That is to say, that, since the word Basilides signifies 
“royal,” Vespasian regarded the apparition as a prophecy of 
his succession to the throne of the world. And Suetonius,’ 
in his version of the story, adds that shortly afterwards 
letters arrived announcing the ruin and death of Vitellius. 

Me»meri»m alluded to The subjoined Sentence from the 
tatoree. Amphitryon ot Flautus appears to be an 

allusion to mesmerism, and since it is introduced incidentally 
bears the stronger testimony to the prevalence of the art 
about two centuries before the Christian era. 

“ Quid si ego ilium tractim tangam ut dormiat ?” 

“ What if I stroke him to put him to sleep ?” ^ 

Probably, too, the well known tractatores exercised a kind 
of mesmeric power : nor are they without modern imitators. 
For in a late number of the Christian Spiritualist a lady 
advertises herself as a “ Curative Mesmerist and Rubber, 
and Medical Clairvoyant.” 

But the specimens we have given are sufficient to show 
that the classical authors abound with allusions to Spiritualism, 
and we must now descend to later writers. 

Semarkabie passagee in And first we will glance at the Re- 

thl Bornean cie^u.^ cognitions of Clement and the Clementine 
Homilies, works which at any rate do not seem to have 
appeared later than the third century, and may be of a much 
earlier date, and which contain many passages worthy of 
consideration. In the beginning of each book the author 
^ Suet. Vesp. vii. ^ Plaut. Amph. I. i. 160 . 

13 * 



180 


earth’s earliest ages. 


tells us that while a heathen he was much perplexed with 
doubts respecting the immortality of the soul. How he 
proposed to resolve those doubts we will leave him to 
describe in his own words. 

“ What, then, should I do, but this ? I will go to Egypt, 
and cultivate the friendship of the hierophants and prophets 
of the shrines. Then I will inquire for a magician, and, 
when I have found one, induce him by the offer of a large 
sum of money to call up a soul from Hades, by the art 
which is termed necromancy, as though I wished to consult 
it upon some ordinary matter. But my inquiring shall be to 
learn whether the soul is immortal. And I shall not care to 
know the reply of the soul, that it is immortal, from its 
speaking or my own hearing, but simply by its becoming 
visible ; that, after seeing it with my very eyes, I may have 
a sufficient and reliable proof of its existence from the mere 
fact of its appearing. And so the doubtful words which the 
ears hear will no longer be able to overturn that which the 
eyes have made their own.” ^ 

This proposition strangely corresponds with the oft- 
repeated argument of Spiritualists that the existence of 
another world is best proved by intercourse with the demons 
which are living in it. Shortly afterwards Simon Magus is 
introduced, and relates a story closely resembling the 
countless narrations of spirit-help which crowd the literature 
of the new religion.^ 

“ Once when my mother Rachel ordered me to go to the 


^ Clem. Som i. 5. 

As a specimen take the following statements made last year at a 
meeting of the British National Association of Spiritualists. 

“ Mr. Morse said he had been informed that miners had manifestations 
in their pit workings, and that a little boy, employed in a coal mine near 
Glasgow, was in the habit when tired of calling upon a spirit to help him 
to push his truck, whjch it generally did. On one occasion the spirit, it 
was said, used such violence as to damage the truck considerably.” 

“ Mr. Latham mentioned an instance in which spirits had manufactured 
pills that were afterwards taken, with marked benefit, by a lady of his 
acquaintance.” 

Dr. Gully said that “in his house it was no uncommon thing for spirits 
to appear to members of the family, to remove articles from one room to 
another while aU the doors were locked, to make his bed at night, and to 
walk up and down the stairs with a tread as heavy as that of an ordinary 
man.” 



SPIRITUALISM. PART II. 


181 


field to reap, and I saw a sickle l3dng, I ordered it to go and 
reap ; and it reaped ten times more than the others.” ^ 
LntofSimo7i'8mircwies The following enumeration of Simon’s 
So- found in the second of 

the Clementine Homilies. 

“And they told me that he makes statues walk about; 
rolls himself upon fire, and is not burnt ; and that sometimes 
he even flies. And he turns stones into loaves ; he becomes 
a serpent ; changes himself into a goat ; becomes two-faced ; 
and transforms himself into gold. He opens fastened doors, 
melts iron, and at banquets produces phantoms of every 
conceivable shape. And lastly ; he causes the vessels in his 
house to be seen moving about, as if spontaneously, to wait 
upon him, those who are bearing them not being visible. I 
wondered to hear them speak thus ; but they assured me 
that they had seen many such things done in their 
presence.” ^ 

If we may believe Spiritualists, some of these wonders are 
now matters of daily occurrence. They are probably 
exaggerated ; but we may, nevertheless, infer from the mere 
mention of them that powerful mediums were not unknown 
at the time when the Clementines were written. 

stori/ which appears to Another reported deed of Simon bears 
i7sZr.fm7nd pr°- Striking rcsemblance to modern prac- 

duction of spirit-foi'ms. ticCS. 

“ And he even began to commit murder, as he himself 
revealed to us while we were yet friends. For by abominable 
incantations he separated the soul of a child from its own 
body that it might become his assistant for the production of 
whatever apparition he might require. And he drew a 
likeness of the boy, and keeps it set up in the inner chamber 
where he sleeps, affirming that he once formed him of air by 
transformations such as the gods cause, and, after painting his 
likeness, gave him back again to the air. And he explains 
what he did in the following manner. He affirms that, in 
the first place, the spirit of a man, after it had been changed 
into, a hot condition, drew to itself and sucked in the 
surrounding air, just like a gourd; and that he thereupon 


^ Clem. Recogn, ii. 9. 


2 Clem. Horn. ii. 32. 



182 


EA^BTH^S EAKLIEST AGES. 


converted this air, after it was enclosed in the form of the 
spirit, into water. And he added that, since, owing to the 
consistency of the spirit, this enclosed air could not escape, 
he changed it into the nature of blood ; and that he afterwards 
solidified the blood, and made flesh of it. Then that, the 
flesh being thus solidified, he exhibited a man made, not of 
earth, but of air. And so, when he had thus convinced 
himself of his power to produce a new kind of man, he said 
that he reversed the changes, and restored him to the air.*' ^ 

By the light of the nineteenth century we may interpret 
this passage without much difficulty. It would seem that by 
mesmerism Simon had drawn out the spirit of a boy into the 
higher magnetic state, and then omitted to recall it, so that 
the spirit had been finally separated from the body ; and 
that he had done this for the purpose of procuring a familiar. 
The latter part of the passage, which describes the production 
of a temporary spirit-form, exactly accords, in its results at 
least, with the practices of modern mediums. This we shall 
show in the next chapter. And Simon appears to have 
denied the murder of the boy by asserting that he had 
merely resolved a spirit-form which he had himself 
produced. 

Rema/rkabie description We will add oue more story of this 
founTin ke AposfoUcal renowned magician taken from the Apos- 
Constitutions. toUcol Constitutions. It proves that what 

is now called “ levitation " is no new thing ; but has been a 
conception of men’s minds, at least, for many centuries. 
Perhaps, too, the explanation given by the author of the 
Constitutions may help us to understand the mystery of 
Mr. Home. Nor is the statement that Simon's miracles 
were used as credentials of a false religion altogether 
unworthy of consideration. The story is supposed to be 
related by the apostle Peter, who is represented as thus 
speaking. 

“Now when he came to Rome he greatly harassed the 
church by subverting many persons, and winning them over 
to his own party. And he astonished the Gentiles by a 
display of magic and the operation of demons, insomuch that 


^ Clem. Horn. ii. 26 . 



SPIBITUALISM. PART II. 


183 


once he came forward in the middle of the day, and, bidding 
the people drag me also into their theatre, promised that he 
would then fly through the air. But, while all the multitude 
was in a state of suspense at this bold offer, I kept secretly 
praying. And verily he was raised up by demons, and 
began to fly aloft into the air, crying out, as he rose higher, 
that he was returning to the heavens, and would bestow 
blessings upon them from thence. Then, while the people 
were glorifying him as a god, I lifted up my hands toward 
heaven with my heart, and entreated God that, for the sake 
of Jesus our Lord, He would cast down the injurious 
deceiver, and cut short the power of the demons, since they 
had used it to mislead and ruin men ; that He would smite 
Simon to the ground, and yet not kill, but only bruise, him. 
And so, fixing my eyes upon him, I said in answer to his 
words, ‘ If 1 be a man of God, a true apostle of Jesus Christ, 
a teacher of piety, and no deceiver such as thou art, Simon, 
I command the wicked powers of the apostate from piety, by 
whom Simon the magician is now being supported and borne 
along, to let go their hold, that he may be thrown down 
from on high, and be exposed to the ridicule of those whom 
he has beguiled.’ As soon as I had thus spoken Simon was 
deprived of his powers and cast down with a great noise. 
And, being dashed violently upon the ground, he had his 
hip and the flats of his feet broken. Then the multitude 
cried out saying ‘ There is one God Whom Peter justly 
declares to be in very truth the only One.’ And many of 
Simon’s disciples left him : but some, who were deserving of 
perdition with him, continued in his evil doctrine. And in 
this manner the most atheistical sect of the Simonites was 
first introduced at Rome, and the Devil went on working by 
means of the rest of the false apostles.” ' 

The Neopiatonisu were Jf we examine the writings of the 
Alexandrian Neoplatonists, whose impor- 
tant School was founded in the early part of the third 
century upon doctrines derived from the ancient sages of the 
East, we discover that they were pronounced Spiritualists. 
Ammonius Sacchas, Plotinus, lamblicus, and others, were 


^ Apost. Const, vi, 9. 



184 


eabth’s earliest ages. 


famed for their clairvoyance, mesmeric healings, and general 
mediumistic power. But since we have not time to prove 
this, and can only give a concise assertion of the fact, we will 
do so in the words of another whose opinion will be less 
suspected of bias than our own. The following extracts are 
taken from the late Canon Kingsley’s Alexandria and her 
Schools, 

“ So they set to work to perform wonders ; and succeeded, 
I suppose, more or less. For now one enters into a whole 
fairy land of those very phenomena which are puzzling us so 
now-a-days — ecstasy, clairvoyance, insensibility to pain, 
cures produced by the effects of what we now call mesmerism. 
They are all there, these modern puzzles, in those old books 
of the long bygone seekers for wisdom. It makes us love 
them, while it saddens us to see that their difficulties were 
the same as ours, and that there is nothing new under the 
sun.” 

“ But again. These ecstasies, cures, and so forth, brought 
them rapidly back to the old priestcrafts. The Egyptian 
priests, the Babylonian and Jewish sorcerers, had practised 
all this as a trade for ages, and reduced it to an art. It was 
by sleeping in the temples of the deities, after due mesmeric 
manipulations, that cures were even then effected. Surely 
the old priests were the people to whom to go for informa- 
tion. The old philosophers of Greece were venerable. How 
much more those of the East, in comparison with whom the 
Greeks were children ? Besides, if these demons and deities 
were so near them, might it not be possible to behold them ? 
They seemed to have given up caring much for the world 
and its course — 

“ Effugerant adytis templisque relictis 
Di quibus imperium steterat.” 

The old priests used to make them appear — perhaps they 
might do it again.” 

These remarks strikingly illustrate the tendency of 
Spiritualism to induce idolatry. And how could it do other- 
wise, seeing that it is an establishment of intelligent 
communication with the very demons which have ever been 
worshipped by the pagan world. However, in the case of 
the Neoplatonists the influence of Christianity had waxed too 



SPIRITUALISM. PART II. 


185 


strong to admit of a return to avowed heathenism. If the 
worship of countless demons, the magnetic cures, the 
ecstasies, and the apparitions, were to be continued, this 
could only be effected by a profession of Christianity and the 
adoption of a Christian nomenclature. So the wolves put on 
sheep’s clothing, and in course of time the Papal system was 
developed. 

Remarkable aiiunon to Let US now Consider a passage ^n the 
Apology of Tertullian which may be thus 

rendered. 

“ Moreover, if even magicians produce apparitions, and 
bring into evil repute the spirits of men who are now dead ; 
if they mesmerise boys to obtain an oracular response ; ^ if 
they perform many wonders in sport by their conjuring 
illusions ; if they even send dreams by the aiding power of 

^ How common tliis practice was may be seen by tlie subjoined extract 
from the Defence of Apuleius. That distinguished orator romancer and 
philosopher had been accused of sorcery, and the proof first adduced was 
that he had a habit of purchasing various kinds of fish presumably for 
magical purposes. This charge he disposes of as altogether novel and 
absurd, and then, after affirming that his accusers were well aware that 
it must break down, proceeds as follows : — 

“They found it necessary to concoct a more plausible clmrge in con- 
nection with things which are better known and are already matters of 
ordinary belief. And so, in accordance with generally received opinions 
and common report, they invented the story that, with a little altar and 
lamp, and in a sequestered spot from which spectators had been removed, 
1 had with magic spells bewitched a certain boy ; and that, a few witnesses 
being privy to it, the boy had, wlien bewitched, fallen to the ground, and 
had afterwards awakened in such a condition that he did not know him- 
self. They have not, however, dared to go further than this in their lying 
fabrication. For, to complete the tale, they should have added that the 
boy became prescient and uttered many predictions, inasmuch as that is 
the advantage which we obtain from the use of spells. Nor is tins won- 
derful power of boys certified merely by the opinion of the multitude, but 
also by the authority of the learned. I remember that in the books of 
Yarro the philosopher— a most accurate and polished scholar — 1 read, 
among other things of the same kind, the following account. When the 
inhabitants of Tralles were making inquiries by a magical process in re- 
gard to the issue of the Mithridatic war, a boy, who was gazing upon the 
reflection of a statue of Mercury in the water, uttered a prophecy of the 
future in a hundred and sixty rhythmical lines. Yarro also relates that 
Fabius having lost five hundred denarii went to consult Nigridius about 
it. The latter so inspired boys by his spells that they pointed out the 
spot in which the purse had been buried with purt of the money, and 
intimated that the remainder of it had been distributed, nay, even that 
one denarius had come into the possession of Cato the philosopher. And 
Cato afterwards admitted that he had received the coin from an attendant 
as a contribution for Apollo.” Apul. De Magia, xlii. 



186 


earth’s earliest ages. 


angels and demons whom they have once for all summoned 
to their assistance, through w'hose influence also goats and 
tables have been made to divine; how much more will that 
Satanic power be zealous to do with all its strength of its 
own will and for its own purposes that which it does to serve 
the ends of others.” ^ 

Now there is no reason why the apparitions here men- 
tioned should not have been produced in precisely the same 
way as the spirit-forms of our own days. Nor need we feel 
any astonishment at the next clause, which evidently refers 
to necromancers resembling modern mediums. For it 
appears that spirits of the dead were evoked, and that either 
they themselves, if they obeyed the summons, or, otherwise, 
the demons which personated them, were guilty of unworthy 
and disgraceful utterances. 

In the succeeding sentence there are two readings. The 
first is elidunt ; that is, they “ strangle boys, put them to 
death either as a sacrifice, or to take omens from their 
motions or entrails. But the second, eliciunt, is much more 
probable, and will give the sense of drawing out the spirit 
by mesmerism, putting the patient into a clairvoyant state so 
that he is able to utter oracular responses.^ The “ many 
wonders ” could scarcely be more numerous than those of 


^ Tert. ApoLy xxiii. 

2 “ And yet I agree with Plato that there are certain divine powers — 
intermediate both in their nature and locality — stationed between the 
gods and men, and that these powers preside over all kinds of divination 
and the wonders which are exliibited by magicians. Moreover, I consider 
that a human mind, and especially tlie artless mind of a boy, can, either 
by the allurement of spells or by the soothing influence of odours, be 
lulled to sleep and calmed into a forgetfulness of the things before it ; and 
that, becoming for a little time unconscious of the body, it can be restored 
and return to its own nature, which is undoubtedly immortal and divine ; 
and so, that it is able, while apparently in a kind of trance, to perceive 
beforehand what is about to happen. But — be this as it may — if we are 
to give any credit to sucli matters, the boy who is to foresee ought, so far 
as I understand, to be selected for the beauty and soundness oi his body, 
the intelligence of his mind, and the fluency of his speech ; so that either 
the divine power may becomingly lodge in him as in a fitting habitation— 
if indeed it ever is enclosed in the body of a boy — or that his mind itself 
as soon as it has been awakened, may be quickly restored to its own power 
of divination which, being so implanted in it as to be readily called forth 
and being neither injured nor dulled by forgetfulness, can thus be easily 
resumed. For, as Pythagoras says, one ought not to carve a Mercury out 
of any log of wood.” Apul. De Magia^ xliii. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART II. 


187 


which we are now continually hearing, and to the genuineness 
of which competent persons bear their testimony. 

What we are to understand by “ goats and tables ” has 
always been a mystery : but we would suggest the following 
as a solution. We have already mentioned the seirim^ and 
explained that, while usually signifying “ goats,” the word 
also denoted “ satyrs,’’ or some order of demons. May not 
Tertullian, for lack of a distinctive term, have rendered the 
Hebrew by its literal equivalent in Latin ? And in this 
case the divination by demons and tables, that is, by tables 
which demons cause to move, will find its exact counterpart 
in modern table-rapping. 

Instance of spirit-com- And that such is the meaning of the 
uT'XhaM’' reUM fy African apologist a strange story from the 
Ammianm Marceiiinus. history of Ammianus Marcellinus will go 
far to prove. For that writer tells us that, in the reign of 
Valens, certain Spiritualists were arrested at Antioch upon 
the charge of having endeavoured to ascertain the name of 
the emperor’s successor by means of magical arts. The 
table which they had used was brought into court and 
placed before the judges : and after two of the accused, 
Hilarius and Patricias, had been subjected to the torture, 
Hilarius made the following confession. 

“ Under dire auspices, most noble judges, we constructed 
of laurel twigs, and according to the pattern of the Delphic 
tripod, this ill-omened little table which is now before you. 
Then, after we had consecrated it in due form by invocations 
of mystic spells and by many and protracted manipulations, 
we at length succeeded in getting it to move. 

And, whenever we were wishing to obtain answers 
respecting things unknown, the process connected with 
making it move was as follows. It was placed in the middle 
of a house which had been ceremonially purged on all sides 
with Arabian incense ; and upon it was set a round dish, 
composed of various metallic substances, and duly purified. 
On the circular rim of this dish the twenty four letters of the 
alphabet had been cut with great skill, and were separated 
by carefully measured intervals. 

Now after the deity who gives the responses has been 
propitiated by means of prescribed invocations, according to 



188 


earth’s earliest ages. 


the laws of ceremonial science, a person clad in white linen, 
shod likewise with slippers of the same material, with a 
turban twisted about his head, and the boughs of an 
auspicious tree in his hand, stands over the tripod and 
balances a ring suspended by a very fine piece of Carpathian 
thread. The ring, which has been previously subjected to 
an initiation of mystic rites, darts forth at distinct intervals, 
and strikes upon each particular letter which attracts it. In 
this manner it spells out heroic verses, which return a 
suitable answer to the questions proposed, and are quite 
perfect as regards number and rythm, being similar, indeed, 
to those which are uttered by the Pythoness or at the oracle 
of Branchidae. 

In this house, then, at the time referred to, we were 
inquiring who should be the successor of the present 
emperor — a question which was suggested by a prior 
announcement that he would be in all points a finished 
character. The ring darted to the rim of the dish, and had 
already touched the two syllables THEO with the final 
addition of the letter D, when one of those present exclaimed 
that Theodorus was indicated by the decree of fate. Nor 
did we make further inquiry into the matter, since it was' 
sufficiently clear to all of us that Theodorus was the man for 
whom we were asking.’’ ^ 

Hilarius generously added that Theodorus himself knew 
nothing of this seance : but the latter was, nevertheless, 
quickly seized and despatched. Nor did his death suffice to 
allay the suspicions of Valens : many innocent persons were 
afterwards executed solely because they had the misfortune 
to bear names commencing with the fatal syllables THEOD. 
But the prediction of the ring and table was not falsified : 
for upon the death of Valens, after his defeat by the Goths 
at Hadrianople, the celebrated Theodosius was proclaimed 
emperor of the East. 

This remarkable story seems to prove that the tripod so 
often mentioned in Classical writers was not merely connected 
with divination, but with divination of a kind similar to that 
which is now in vogue : for it appears to have been necessary 


^ Amm. Marc., xxix. 1, 29. 



8PIKITUALI8M. PAKT II. 


189 


to impregnate the table with something which communicated 
motion before consultations could be held. And this motion 
was in all probability produced much in the same manner as 
by modern Spiritualists. From the details of the subsequent 
proceedings we may learn that the use of the alphabet for 
spirit-communication, which is generally supposed to be of 
so recent a date, was well known to the initiated fifteen 
centuries ago. Lastly ; the issue of the story in the suc- 
cession of Theodosius is another instance of the marvellous, 
though unreliable, foreknowledge of demons. 

Opinions qf Auffuatine. Passing by about half a century of the 
world’s annals we come to Augustine, by whom the inspiration 
of the Roman oracles and soothsayers, nay, the very 
administration of their government, is again and again 
ascribed to demons. The numerous gods he treats as evil 
spirits, and powerfully exposes the utterly corrupting 
influence of their well known history and of the lewd 
ceremonies of their public worship, although they did 
hypocritically put forth certain obscure teachings of morality. 
He recounts with indignation that demons had predicted 
success to the monster Sylla, accompanying their predictions 
with miraculous signs ; but had never cried, Forbear thy 
villanies, Sylla ! He descants upon the declaration of Hermes 
Trismegistus “ that visible and tangible images are, as it 
were, only the bodies of the gods, and that there dwell in 
them certain spirits which have been invited to come into 
them, and which have power to inflict harm, or to fulfil the 
desires of those by whom divine honours and services are 
rendered to them.” He believes these evil spirits to be 
capable of producing appearances and visions at will, and 
concludes his story of the sacred bull of the Egyptians with 
the remark, “ For what men can do with real colours and 
substances the demons can very easily effect by showing 
unreal forms.” 

Further illustration is Rut it is ueedless to Spend longer time 
object of this work. proving a fact SO obvious as the continual 

intercourse between the spirits of evil and the sons of men. 
The instances we have adduced are amply sufficient for our 
purpose, and have already exceeded their proper limits. We 
must, therefore, pass by the magicians, enchanters, astro- 



190 


earth’s earliest ages. 


logers, wizards, and witches, of medieval times ; ^ the 
levitations, apparitions, and miraculous cures, of Popery; 
the demon-stories of the East ; the ohi men of Africa, who 
seem even to have retained the Hebrew name ; and ttie vast 
multitude of persons and incidents which would have claimed 
notice had we undertaken an exhaustive history of demon- 
intercourse. 

Tahie-iurning practised Too curious, however, to be Omitted is 

the following extract from a Jewish writer 
of the early part of the seventeenth century quoted by 
Delitzsch in his Biblical Psychology. 

“We make the table turn in playful times by magic, and 
whisper into one another’s ears, Schemoth, Schel, Schedim 
(names of demons), and then the table springs up, even 
when laden with many hundred-weight.” 

In the year 1615 Zalman Zebi defended this table-turning 
as being effected, not by means of magic, but by the power 
of God. The ground of his argument is that they sang 

^ But the following extract from Eamusio’s edition of Marco Polo is 
interesting, showing as it does the prevalence of Spiritualistic practices at 
the court of the mightiest monarch of the East in the latter half of the 
thirteenth century. 

*‘But the Great Kaan (Cublay) lot it be seen well enough that he held 
the Christian faith to be the truest and best— formas be says, it commands 
nothing that is not perfectly good and holy. But he will not allow the 
Christians to carry the cross before them, because on it was scourged and 
put to death a person so great and exalted as Christ. 

“ Some one may say : ‘ Since he holds the Christian faith to be best, why 
does he not attacli himself to it, and beeome a Christian ? ’ Well, this is 
the reason that he gave to Messer Nieolo and Messer MafFeo, when he 
sent them as his envoys to the Pope, and wlien they sometimes took 
occasion to speak to him about the faith of Christ. He said: ‘How 
would you have me to become a Christian ? You see that tlie Christians 
of these parts are so ignorant that they achieve nothing, whilst you see 
the idolaters can do anything they please, insomuch that when 1 sit at 
table the cups from the middle of the hall come to me full of wine or 
other liquor without being touched by anybody, and I drink from them. 
They control storms, causing them to pass in whatever direction they 
please, and do many other marvels ; whilst, as you know, their idols 
speak, and give them predictions on whatever subjects they clioose. But 
it I were to turn to the faith of Christ and become a Christian, then my 
barons and others yyho are not converted would say : ‘ What has moved 
you to be baptised and to take up the faith of Christ ? What powers or 
miracles have you witnessed on His part?’ (You know the idolaters 
here say that their wonders are performed by the sanctity and power of 
their idols.) Well, I should not know what answer to make ; so they 
would only be confirmed in their errors, and the idolaters, who are adepts in 
such surprising arts, would easily compass my death.’ ’’—"Yule’s Marco Polo. 



8PIEITUALI8M. PABT II. 


191 


excellent songs while manipulating, as, for instance, “ The 
Lord of the world be exalted/^ There could not, he urges, 
be any work of the Devil going on when God is remembered. 
This is very like the reasoning of certain modern table- 
turners : but history will supply an endless array of proofs 
that men are ever profaning the name of God by thrusting it 
into connection with nefarious deeds. Nor is it always clear 
who they mean when they invoke God : for they cannot be 
appealing to Him Who made the heavens and the earth if 
they call upon one to assist them in carrying out their own 
will and breaking the laws of their Creator. And there are 
yet two Lords of the world, though the reign of one of them 
is all but ended. 

Spiritmii»m i$ well We have merely to add that the 

known beyond the houn- . « 

darter qf Christendom, accounts 01 modem travellers prove- 
Spiritualism, and especially the cultus of demons supposed to- 
be the spirits of ancestors or relations, to be almost universal 
among pagans and barbarous tribes, whether in the heart of 
Africa,^ in the remote countries of Asia, or among the Indians 
of America. A few years ago such ideas were nearly con- 
fined to the more unenlightened parts of the earth : but now 
the tide of demonism has again set in, and is rapidly 
overfiowing Christendom. The evil spirit is returning with 
seven others worse than himself, and the result will be a far 
darker heathenism than the world has yet experienced, seeing 
that it will be heathenism received back after a trial and 
deliberate rejection of the Lord Jesus Christ. And “if we 
sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the 
truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which 
shall devour the adversaries.^’ 

^ Ample proof of this may be found in the works of recent travellers 
such as Livingstone and Schweinfurth. The following extract is taken 
from Livingstone’s 

“Suleiman-ben-Juma lived on the main-land, Mosessame, opposite 
Zanzibar. It is impossible to deny his power of foresight, except by 
rejecting all evidence, for he frequently foretold the deaths of great men 
among tlie Arabs, and he was pre-eminently a good man, upright and 
sincere— “ Thisti,” none like him now for goodness and skill. He said 
that two middle-sized white men, with straight noses and flowing hair 
down to the girdle behind, came at times and told him things to comd* 
He died twdve years ago, and left no successor ; he foretold his own 
decease, three days befor^aud, by cholera.” 



192 


EARTH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
Spiritualism. Part III. 


The Modern Otithurst. 

Scriptural ^ntimaiwuH. The Scriptures Contain many prophetic 
propTJ/r intimations that in the latter days 

epiitfie to Timothy. dcmoniacal influence will mightily in- 

crease, and at last culminate in an open manifestation of 
Satanic power. One of these ])redictions, perhaps the most 
remarkable of all, we propose now to consider. It occurs in 
the first epistle to Timothy, and has been usually applied by 
Protestant interpreters to the Papal heresy, which, however, 
bad as it has been, cannot as yet be said to have fulfilled the 
requirements of this prophecy. We will first give a literal 
translation of the passage, following the most simple and 
natural construction of the Greek, and then endeavour to 
ascertain its import. 

“ And confessedly great is the mystery of godliness ; Who 
was manifested in flesh, justified in spirit, seen of angels, 
preached among nations, believed on in the world, received 
up in glory. Nevertheless the Spirit expressly declares that 
in latter times some shall fall away from the faith, giving 
heed to deceiving spirits and teachings of demons who speak 
lies in hypocrisy, though they have been branded in their 
own conscience, forbid to marry, and command to abstain 
from meats which God created for them that believe and 
have full knowledge of the truth to partake of with thanks- 
giving. For every creature of God is good, and nothing is 
to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving ; for it is 
sanctified by the word of God and supplication.^’ ^ 

The verb translated “ fall away ” must be noticed : for 
from it is derived the noun which expresses “ the falling 
away ” — there is a definite article in the original — mentioned 
in the second chapter of the second epistle to the Thessa- 
lonians. Both passages evidently refer to the same event, 
and from the latter we learn that out of this apostacy will be 
1 1 Tim. iii. 16-iv. 5. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART III. 


193 


developed the man of sin, the lawless one. Its first symptom,, 
as Paul tells us, will be a decline of faith in the great 
mystery of godliness ; that is, in the mystery the apprehension 
of which is at once the source and support of all real 
godliness. And this is explained to be the Lord Jesus 
manifested in flesh, justified in spirit, seen of angels, preached 
among nations, believed on in the world, and received up in 
glory. 

The apostacy will, therefore, commence with a waning of 
faith in Christ, not necessarily amounting to a total denial of 
Him, but beginning with incredulity in regard to the 
miraculous circumstances of His past advent, and so gradually 
obscuring the only source and centre of every godly 
aspiration. 

The word rendered “ deceiving is more commonly used 
in the signification of wandering or roaming, a sense very 
suitable to this passage. For with it we may compare 
Satan’s account of himself as going to and fro in the earth, 
and walking up and down in it his name Beelzebub given 
to him as prince of the demons,^ and probably meaning 
“ the lord of unrest” ; and Christ’s description of the ejected 
spirit wandering in dry places, and vainly seeking rest.* 

The succeeding clauses probably refer to the demons, and 
not to those whom they deceive : for this is certainly the 
simplest construction of the original. 

What, then, is the plain meaning of the prophecy ? That 
in the latter days there will be a great defection of faith in 
the fundamental truths connected with the incarnation of 
Christ. That this defection will be brought about by the 
direct teaching of unclean spirits or demons, who, though 
bearing a brand on their own conscience — that is, having 
their own inward nature defaced by sin as indelibly as a 
criminal is disfigured by branding — nevertheless pretend to 
goodness and sanctity that they may gain credence for the 
lies which they propagate. And lastly ; that two prominent 
features of their doctrine will be a prohibition of marriage, 
and a commandment to abstain from certain kinds of food. 

This prophecy ha$ never From these last particulars many have 
^apaiapoat^i^^ endcavoured to fasten the prophecy upon 
Wob i. 7 ; ii. 2. 2 M!att. lii. 24. ^ Matt, xii, 43. 

14 



194 


earth’s earliest ages. 


the church of Rome, in that she forbids her priests to marry, 
and has set apart days for fasting. But the utterance of 
Paul seems to require that those of whom he speaks should 
openly and avowedly receive their doctrines from wandering 
spirits, which is not the case with Papists. Nor does the 
enforced celibacy of the Roman clergy by any means satisfy 
the words “ forbidding to marry/’ which evidently point to 
something far more general, nothing less, indeed, than an 
entire repudiation of God’s first ordinance. So, too, the 
command with regard to meats does not appear to refer to 
particular fast-days, but to a total abstinence from certain 
kinds of food. 

But its conditions are There is, however, a delusion now 

heqinninq to appear in j. • • j . n 

SpiHfiwiism. Origin o/ rapidly Spreading in the midst of us 
/om fulfil all the conditions 

of the prophecy, and to become its un- 
doubted mate in history. And that delusion is Spiritualism, 
the strange origin of which, in its modern phase, dates only 
from the forty eighth year of the present century. Then, 
while the storm of democracy was beating fiercely upon the 
thrones of Europe, and the demons of anarchy were breaking 
their chains, an apparently trivial occurrence was commencing 
a mighty revolution in America. 

On the night of the thirty first of March some seventy or 
eighty persons were assembled in the house of one Fox, a 
farmer of Hydesville in the state of New York. They had 
come together for the purpose of investigating certain 
unaccountable rappings and disturbances which were alleged 
to take place in the sleeping room of Margaret and Kate Fox, 
girls of twelve and nine years of age. These children had 
devised a means of intelligent communication with the author 
of the noises, who would reply by a correct number of raps 
to numerical questions, and would answer other interrogations 
by a rap for an affirmative and silence for a negative. The 
younger Fox had also discovered that she could obtain a 
response to dumb signs ; so that the spirit could see as well 
as hear. 

Proceeding upon this experience the crowd of neighbours 
elicited the following communication. That the mysterious 
existence was the spirit of a pedler who had been murdered 



SPIRITUALISM. PART III. 


195 


in the house some five years previously by the tenant of that 
time, a blacksmith named Bell; and that his bodily remains 
might be found, where they were buried, in the middle of the 
cellar, ten feet below the surface. With some difficulty an 
excavation was subsequently made in the place indicated, 
and, after passing through a plank at a depth of five feet, the 
investigators found pieces of crockery, charcoal, quicklime, 
and finally some human hair and bones. 

Unparalleled rapidity This result Stimulated curiosity, and, 

of its dtgsemination. It$ i.* 

organs and chief sup. every effort to detect imposture having 
porters. failed, many became interested ; com- 

mittees of inquiry were formed ; it was soon discovered that 
the power of mediumship was not confined to the Foxes, 
and that other spirits were ready to communicate as well as 
that of the pedler ; and so the new excitement spread 
throughout the whole of the United States. In 1871 it was 
estimated that there were from eight to eleven millions of 
Spiritualists in the Union, and there is every reason to 
believe that their numbers are still increasing. The move- 
ment quickly spread to other countries, and already counts 
its millions in England and on the continent. Multitudes of 
books have been written in its favour, and it has organs in 
almost every part of the world. The subjoined statement is 
taken from a Spiritualistic tract quoted by Dr. Maurice 
Davies. 

“ At the present time, in addition to these volumes, the 
periodical literature on the subject indicates a widespread 
interest in it. In the United States, The Banner of Light 
(Boston), a weekly paper, has been established for upwards 
of a dozen years, and enjoys a very large circulation. The 
Iteligio -Philosophical Journal (Chicago) is also a weekly 
paper, established some years ago, having an extensive cir- 
culation. Britain's Journal of Spiritual Science is a high 
class quarterly, emanating from New York. In England we 
have The Spiritual Magazine., Human Nature^ The Christian 
Spiritualist (monthly). The Spiritualist (bi-monthly), I'he 
Medium (weekly). In the following countries Spiritualism 
is represented by 47 periodicals ; — France, 3 ; Belgium, 3 ; 
Holland, 2 ; Denmark, 1 ; Russia, 1 ; Germany, 1 ; 
Austria, 3; Bohemia, 1; Spain, 15; Italy, 6; Greece, 1 ; 



196 


EAUTH'S EARLIEST AGES. 


Egypt, 1 ; Turkey, 1 ; Brazil, 2 ; Uruguay, 1 ; La Plata, 2 ; 
Peru, 1 ; Chili, 1 ; Mexico, 1/’ 

“ In the Australian colonies and in South Africa this work 
has taken deep root, though in the latter colonies no 
periodicals exist. In Melbourne The Harbinger of Light is 
published monthly, and a powerful local association exists. 
The Echo of Dunedin^ New Zealand, advocates Spiritualism, 
and several other papers admit of its free discussion. 
Spiritualism is also making steady progress in India and the 
colonial possessions of various European countries. 

It is a notable fact, too, that many well-known men and 
women with a good repute for learning, science, and sense, 
have been and are among the number of those who at least 
accept the “ facts,’’ whatever use they make of them. 
We may name as “ believers ” — the late President Lincoln ; 
W. Lloyd Garrison ; the poet Longfellow ; Mrs. H. B. Stowe ; 
Bayard Taylor ; the late Dr. Kane, Arctic explorer ; the late 
Rev. J. Pierpoint ; Lord Lindsay ; the late Lord Dunraven ; 
Lord Adare ; C. F. Varley, F.R.S. ; the late Dr. Robert 
Chambers ; Dr. Gully ; Dr. J. G. Wilkinson ; Dr. Ashburner ; 
the late Dr. Elliotson ; the late Professor De Morgan ; H. 
G. Atkinson, F.G.S. ; William and Mary Howitt ; Mr. and 
Mrs. S. C. Hall ; Gerald Massey ; Dr. Seaton ; the late W. 
M. Thackeray; the late Elizabeth Barrett Browning; 
Sergeant Cox; W. Crookes, F.R.S. ; A. R. Wallace, F.Z.S. ; 
etc., etc.” 

The above is fair proof that, although dishonest imitations 
are often exposed, Spiritualism itself can be no longer 
regarded as a mere vulgar imposture ; while the confidence 
and expectations of its supporters are well illustrated in the 
following remarks of Gerald Massey. 

“ I cannot help laughing to myself at times as I think of 
what this much-maligned and despised Spiritualism is about 
to accomplish. Here are our clergy asserting Sunday after 
Sunday, in the name of God, any number of things which 
any number of listeners do not believe, only they have heard 
them repeated till past all power of impinging — things which 
they themselves do not believe if they ever come to*question 
their own souls. And here is this new thing in our midSt 
that is destined to put a new soul into belief, and usher in a 



SPIRITTTALISM. PAET III. 


197 


resurrection day. It is like watching the grim hlack thunder- 
clouds mounting the dead calm sky with a deliberate haste 
that makes you hold your breath till they touch the sharp 
edge of each other.’’ ^ 

Threrfoid division qf There seems, then, to he little doubt as 
our investigation. rapidity with which the new re- 

ligion — for such it is — is spreading, and the claim which it 
consequently has upon our serious consideration. We will, 
therefore, endeavour to investigate its pretensions and tenets, 
searching for them in the writings of those who appear to be 
leaders of the movement. And our inquiry will naturally 
divide itself into three parts, the first of which will be con- 
cerned with the miraculous phenomena which Spiritualism 
puts forth as its credentials ; the second with the doctrines 
which prove it to be an apostacy of a most fearful kind, 
indeed, in all probability, the commencement of the last 
great falling away ; the third with the inference that it is 
likely to result, if it be not already resulting, in a re- 
appearance of the worst feature of the days of Noah. 

Mr. Wallace’s sum- Now, in regard to the first point, to 
give a Comprehensive vievir of the 
Spiritualism. miraculous phenomena, we cannot do 

better than quote “ a summary of the more important 
manifestations, physical and menial ” from the very able and 
remarkable articles on Spiritualism contained in the Fort- 
nightly Review for the May and June of 1874. These were 
written by Mr. A. R. Wallace — one of the foremost English 
Spiritualists, and apparently a man of calm and logical 
mind — and seem to give a fair and reliable account of 
Spiritualism in its present phase. 

The following is the summary, beginning with physical 
phenomena. 

“ 1. Simple Physical Phenomena. — Producing sounds of 
all kinds, from a delicate tick to blows like that of a heavy 
sledge-hammer. Altering the weight of bodies. Moving 
bodies without human agency. Raising bodies into the air. 
Conveying bodies to a distance out of and into closed rooms. 


^ See also an extract from the Westminster Review quoted in the 
preface of this book. 



198 


earth’s earliest ages. 


Releasing mediums from every description of bonds, even 
from welded iron rings, as has happened in America. 

2. Chemical. — Preserving from the effects of fire, as 
already detailed. 

3. Direct Writing and Drawing. — Producing writing or 
drawing on marked papers placed in such positions that no 
human hand (or focft) can touch them. Sometimes, visibly 
to the spectators, a pencil rising up and writing or drawing 
apparently by itself. Some of the drawings in many colours 
have been produced on marked paper in from ten to twenty 
seconds, and the colours found wet. (See Mr. Coleman’s 
evidence in Dialectical Report^ p. 143, confirmed by Lord 
Borthwick, p. 150.) Mr. Thomas Slater of 136 Euston 
Road is now obtaining communications in the following 
manner : — A bit of slate pencil an eighth of an inch long is 
laid on a table ; a clean slate is laid over this, in a well 
lighted room ; the sound of writing is then heard, and in a 
few minutes a communication of considerable length is found 
distinctly written. At other times the slate is held between 
himself and another person, their other hands being joined. 
Some of these communications are philosophical discussions 
on the nature of spirit and matter, supporting the usual 
spiritual theory on this subject. 

4. Musical Phenomena. — Musical instruments, of various 
kinds, played without human agency, from a hand-bell to a 
closed piano. With some mediums, and where ’the con- 
ditions are favourable, original musical compositions of a 
very high character are produced. This occurs with 
Mr. Home. 

5. Spiritual Forms. — These are either luminous appear- 
ances, sparks, stars, globes of light, luminous clouds, etc. ; 
or hands, faces, or entire human figures, generally covered 
with flowing drapery, except a portion of the face and han^s. 
The human forms are often capable of moving solid objects, 
and are both visible and tangible to all present. In other 
cases they are only visible to seers, but when this is the case 
it sometimes happens that the seer describes the figure as 
lifting a flower or a pen, and others present see the flower or 
the pen apparently move by itself. In some cases they 
speak distinctly ; in others the noise is heard by all, the 



SPIBITUALISM. PART III. 


199 


form only seen by the medium. The flowing robes of these 
forms have in some cases been examined and pieces cut oflf^ 
which have in a short time melted away. Flowers are also 
brought, some of which fade away and vanish ; others are 
real, and can be kept indefinitely. It must not be concluded 
that any of these forms are actual spirits ; they are probably 
only temporary forms produced by spirits for purposes of 
test, or of recognition by their friends. This is the account 
invariably given of them by communications obtained in 
various ways ; so that the objection once thought to be so 
crushing — that there can he no “ ghosts ’’ of clothes, armour, 
or walking-sticks — ceases to have any weight. 

6. Spiritual Photographs. — These, as just detailed, 
demonstrate by a purely physical experiment the trust- 
worthiness of the preceding class of observations.^ 

^ In the March of 1872 Mrs. Guppy, a well-known medium, sat for her 
portrait, atid when the picture was developed there appeared also a spirit- 
form upon the plate. Curiosity was aroused, many experiments were 
made, especially by Mr. Hudson, of London, and Mr. Beattie, of Clifton, 
and it is now asserted that, if a powerful medium be present, recognisable 
portraits of dead friends may be readily obtained. The subjoined is an 
extract from a letter of Mr. William Ho wit t published in the Spiritual 
Magazine for October 1872. 

“Huring my recent short and hurried visit to London, I and my 
daughter paid a visit to Mr. Hudson’s studio, and through the mediumship 
of Mr. llerne — and, perhaps, of Mr. Hudson himself— obtained two 
photographs, perCect and unmistakable, of sons of mine, who passed into 
the spirit-world years ago. They liad promised to thus show themselves, 
if possible. 

These portraits were obtained unde^ circumstances which did not admit 
of deception. Neither Mr. Hudson nor Mr. Herne knew who we were. 
Mr. Herne I never saw before. I shut him up in the recess at the back 
of the studio, and secured tiie door on the outside, so that he did not — 
and could not— appear on the scene. Mr. Benjamin Coleman, who was 
with us, and myself took the plates at hap-hazard from a dusty heap of 
such ; and Mr. Coleman went into the dark ciiamber with the photographer, 
and took every precaution that no tricks were played there. But the 
greatest security was, that, not knowing us, and our visit being without 
any previous announcement or arrangement, the photographer could by 
no means know what or whom we might be expecting. Mr. Colemtin 
himself did not know of the existence of one oi these children. Still 
further, there was no existing likeness of one of them. 

On sending these photographs to Mrs. Howitt in Eome, she instantly 
and with the greatest deliglit recognised the truth of the portraits. The 
same was the case with a lady who had known these boys most intimately 
for years. A celebrated and most reliable lady-medium, whom they had 
spiritually visited many times, at once recognised them perfectly, and as 
resembling a spirit-sister, whom they told her had , died in infancy long 
before themselves, and which is a fact.” 



200 


EAETH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


We now come to the mental phenomena of which the 
following are the chief: — 

1. Automatic Writing. — The medium writes involuntarily ; 
often matter which he is not thinking about, does not expect, 
and does not like. Occasionally definite and correct informa- 
tion is given of facts of which the medium has not, nor ever 
had, any knowledge. Sometimes future events are accurately 
predicted. The writing takes place either by the hand or 
through a planchette. Often the hand-writing changes. 
Sometimes it is written backwards ; sometimes in languages 
the medium does not understand. 

2. Seeing, or Clairvoyance, and Clairaudience. — This is of 

various kinds. Some mediums see the forms of deceased 
persons unknown to them, and describe their peculiarities so 
minutely that their friends at once recognise them. They 
often hear voices, through which they obtain names, dates, 
and places, connected with the individuals so described. 
Others read sealed letters in any language, and write 
appropriate answers. n 

3. Trance-speaking. — The medium goes into a more or 
less unconscious state, and then speaks, often on matters and 
in a style far beyond his own capacities. Thus Serjeant Cox 
— no mean judge in a matter of literary style — says, ‘ I have 
heard an uneducated barman, when in a state of trance, 
maintain a dialogue with a party of philosophers on Reason 
and Foreknowledge, Will and Fate, and hold his own against 
them. I have put to him the most difficult questions in 
psychology, and received answers always thoughtful, often 
full of wisdom, and invariably conveyed in choice and elegant 
language. Nevertheless a quarter of an hour afterwards, 
when released from the trance, he was unable to answer the 
simplest query on a philosophical subject, and was even at a 
^oss for sufficient language to express a commonplace idea’ 
(What am I? Vol. IL p. 242). That this is not overstated 
I can myself testify from repeated observation of the same 
medium. And from other trance-speakers — such as Mrs. 
Hardinge, Mrs. Tappan, and Mr. Peebles — I have heard 
discourses which, for high and sustained eloquence, noble 
thoughts, and high moral purpose, surpassed the best efforts 
of any preacher or lecturer within my experience. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART III. 


201 


4. 'Impersonation. — This occurs during trance. The 
medium seems taken possession of another being ; speaks, 
looks, and acts the character in a most marvellous manner ; 
in some cases speaks foreign languages never even heard in 
the normal state ; as in the case of Miss Edmonds already 
given. When the influence is violent or painful, the effects 
are such as have been in all ages imputed to possession by 
evil spirits. 

5. Healing. — There are various forms of this. Sometimes 
by mere laying on of hands, an exalted form of simple 
mesmeric healing. Sometimes, in the trance state, the 
medium at once discovers the hidden malady, and prescribes 
for it, often describing very accurately the morbid appearance 
of internal organs.” 

Such, then, are the miraculous phenomena at present 
exhibited by Spiritualism. And those who are intimately 
acquainted with the subject will feel compelled to admit the 
truth of Mr. Wallace’s conclusion ; “ My postion, therefore, 
is that the phenomena of Spiritualism in their entirety do not 
require further confirmation. They are proved quite as well 
as any facts are proved in other sciences.” 

Tmtances of the ap~ Since, however, the fifth class of physical 

pearance of tangible , .i r 1 *1,1 

epirit-forme, phenomena, the appearance of tangible 

spiritual forms, is most important to our argument, a few 
illustrations are in this case necessary. We will, therefore, 
quote from another part of Mr. Wallace’s essay his notice of 
the seances of Miss Fox with Mr. Livermore, a well known 
New York banker, and an utter sceptic before commencing 
the experiments. 

“ These sittings were more than three hundred in number, 
extending over five years. They took place in four different 
houses — Mr. Livermore’s and the medium’s being both 
changed during this period — under tests of the most rigid 
description. The chief phenomenon was the appearance of 
a tangible visible and audible figure of Mr. Livermore’s 
deceased wife, sometimes accompanied by a male figure 
purporting to be Dr. Franklin. The former figure was often 
most distinct and absolutely life-like. It moved various 
objects in the room. It wrote messages on cards. It was 
sometimes formed out of a luminous cloud, and again 



202 


eaeth’s eabliest ages. 


vanished before the eyes of the witnesses. It allowed a 
portion of its dress to be cut off, which, though at first of 
strong and apparently material gauzy texture, yet in a short 
time melted away and became invisible. Flowers which 
melted away were also given.’’ 

Mr. Wallace likewise mentions the production in London 
of a visible tangible and audible female figure just after his 
first article had gone to the press. This spirit-form, clad in 
white robes, was walking and talking with the company for 
more than an hour, and suffered itself to be clasped by 
Mr. Crookes, who found it to be, apparently, a real living 
woman. The experiment was repeated in Mr. Crookes’ own 
house, and the efforts made by ^himself and Mr. Varley to 
detect imposture simply confirmed the belief of those scientific 
gentlemen in the reality and superhuman nature of the 
appearance. 

In the Spiritual Magazine for the February of 1875 Mr. 
Barkas, F.G.S., describes a seance lately held at Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne. Four materialized figures were produced one 
after another, and, at the unexpressed wish of Mr. Barkas, 
the second of them raised the curtain which concealed the 
medium, and exhibited her lying in the customary trance as 
a proof of her separate identity. The first spirit-form, tall 
white and unveiled, stepped across the room, and shook 
hands with one of those present. The second, which was 
stouter and shorter, wrote on a piece of marked paper which 
had been previously placed upon a chair, and then “ moved 
gracefully about the room.” The third, tall and slender, but 
with a deep brown skin, approached some of the company, 
and patted and stroked their faces, exposing itself meanwhile 
to the full blaze of the lamp. The fourth was “ a small 
psychic form, three feet nine inches high, known as Sarah.” 
This last, probably the familiar of the medium, walked about 
and conversed freely with all present. 

Mr. Barkas describes the very severe tests to which he 
has subjected the medium, and affirms that under these tests 
he has seen, spoken to, and touched, at least nine supernatural 
figures, men, women, and children, black and white. On 
three different occasions he has seen the medium and the 
materialized spirit* form at the same moment. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART £11. 


203 


These instances will serve as specimens of what is now 
going on in many private families, as well as at the seances of 
professed mediums. 

Explanation of the aj). In a book entitled An AnqeVs Mes- 
^ ■ sage — of wmich we shall have more to 

say presently — the appearance of spirit-hands is thus 
explained. The “ angel affirms that a spirit can “ take of 
the effluvia from the person of the medium, or from the 
various members of the circle present, and, by condensing it, 
can form a temporary covering for his spirit-hand, which 
shall be quite solid and tangible, so that it can be grasped by 
you, and can convey external objects from one part of the 
room to another. These hands can take hold of any thing 
just as well as you can ; but if you retain them long in your 
hand, they will melt or dissolve away. They can be seen by 
all present. It does not require any spiritual preparation to 
see them, for they are quite material during the time of their 
existence.’^ 

Complete figures are If this be true of spirit-hands, it will 
Vamfwaf^iTuuraUou^ naturally follow that the entire forms ex- 
hibited by spirits are simply material coverings manufactured 
for themselves by these disembodied rebels. Perchance 
invention and progress are not confined to our world : it may 
be that just as men have sought out many devices for alle- 
viating the sorrows of the curse, so demons have at length 
discovered a means of temporary relief to the cravings of their 
bodiless spirits, or at any rate a way by which they may 
increase their influence over mankind. Perhaps, however, 
they have had the knowledge before, but, save in a few 
instances, lacked the impious daring to use it. 

The following is a good example of the formation of an 
entire figure. The medium was a Miss Showers, of Teign- 
mouth ; the narrator a Mr. Charles Blackburn, of Parkfield, 
Manchester, whose letter appears in the Spiritual Magazine 
for October 1874. On the occasion referred to three ex- 
periments were made; spirit- voices being produced in the 
first, and spirit-faces in the second. The third is thus 
described. 

“The same little dressing-room and curtained door was 
used, but the curtain was nailed to the top of the moulding 



204 


earth’s earliest ages. 


of the door to shut out all light, and a couch was placed 
inside. Now in this important test I took her left earring 
out, and passed a threaded needle through the aperture, with 
five j^ards of thread. Miss Showers lay down on the couch, 
and I threaded the two ends of the strings through where the 
door hinges, and fastened them to a nail driven by a gentleman 
into the door casing, and visible to all ; thus she had a single 
thread through her ear in her dark room, and we had the two 
ends in the light room. She was quickly entranced, and 
very shortly a spirit named “ Lenore ” came forth amongst us 
perfectly destitute of any thread fastening. We all felt her 
ears ; she had no boring whatever through her ears, and the 
lobes were very thin and far smaller than Miss Showers’s. 
She had only one large toe to each foot ; the other four toes 
were ossifications, and not toes at all. We all examined 
her very small fe‘=‘t with our hands and eyes ; nor are we in 
the slightest degree mistaken. She told us her feet would 
have been perfected had there been more power. When 
this figure retired, we all went into the cabinet with faint 
light, and awoke Miss Showers. She had the thread through 
her ear just as when she first lay down on the couch.* We 
cut the thread close to her ear, and traced it direct to the 
nail without a knot or piecing in it. Miss Showers’s feet, I 
scarcely need say, are perfect, and were examined.” 

The death-like trance of the mediums seems no unnatural 
concomitant of their large contribution to the spirit-form. 
Their weariness and exhaustion when restored to conscious- 
ness is often described. 

Spirit-faces. Appear- The Well known Spirit- faces, which are 
pZdentfy o^°Tedmm'uhc formed by the demon with the help of the 
medium, do not seem to be regarded as 
any thing more than quickly vanishing pictures. They are 
said to be condensed from the effluvia of those present, and 
animated with the life of the medium, who, of course, in this 
case also lies in a deep trance. 

If material forms ever appear without the aid of a medium, 
these cannot be demons, but must be angels of Satan, who, 
as we have before shown, are not unclothed spirits, but 
possess spiritual bodies which they can render visible and 
tangible at will. 



SPIEITUALISM. PART III. 


205 


The reader will now have a better comprehension of 
Mr. Wallace’s fifth class of physical phenomena. But a 
grave reflection presents itself: for if lost spirits are thus 
openly active in the midst of us, to what times of confusion 
do we seem to be helplessly drifting ! Who can wonder at 
the general excitement which is already beginning to unsettle 
the world ; the rapid and unexpected succession of events ; 
the threatening growth of armies and fleets ; the vastly 
increased mental activity of men ; the strange philosophies 
and creeds which are springing up on every side ; the spread 
of discontent, insubordination and lawlessness; the selfishness, 
dishonesty, unscrupulousness, immorality, and other signs of 
evil energy, which are daily multiplying around us ! 

The miraculous vhe- But thcsc exhibitions of Supernatural 

nomena are put forth by "U xi. x* 

demons as credentials power. Wild as they sometiines are — for 

authorising their teach- seances are often described as scenes of 
truly demoniacal riot — have a definite 
aim in view. They are intended to disturb the minds of 
men, and to bring them back from scepticism to superstition ; 
to shake their faith in old creeds ; and so, by reducing all 
diversities of opinion to one dead level, to forward a more 
rapid propagation of the teachings which the prince of this 
world would now specially press upon his human subjects* 
And lastly; the signs and wonders are made to serve as 
credentials to these teachings. 

Examination of Spirit- Wc ROW pass on to the second divisiou 
"^urse wUhlhe’ de^ild%^^ of our subjcct, and proceed to examine the 


absolutely forbidden by doctrines which are avowedly put forth as 
the Scriptures, 


“ teachings of demons.” 


And first ; we notice that the very foundation of the new 


faith is laid in direct defiance of the law of God. For the 


Scriptures emphatically forbid all inquiry of the spirits of 
the dead and every kind of intercourse with them. And the 
exceeding sinfulness of such practices is thus set forth by 
Isaiah : “ But whereas they will say unto you. Inquire of 
them that have familiar spirits and of the wizards that chirp 
and mutter : should not a people inquire of their God? For 
the living should they inquire of the dead?”^ The great 
abomination of Spiritualism, whether ancient or modern, is 


1 Isa. viii. 19. 



■206 


eaeth’s earliest ages. 


that it is based upon an idolatrous substitution of spirits of 
the dead for the Everlasting God. 

Hence nothing could be stronger than the Biblical re- 
pudiation of the whole system. For the Old Testament, as 
we have already seen, commands that wizards, witches, 
dealers with familiar spirits, necromancers, and sorcerers of 
•every kind, should be inexorably destroyed. Nor is a 
milder fate assigned to them in the New ; for “ the fearful, 
•and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and 
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, 
shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and 
brimstone : which is the second death.” 

ChrUf did not set aside A Strange attempt has indeed been 

thin prohibition on the i 

mount of transfiguration, made to show that our Lord abrogated 
the statute against seeking to the dead when He spoke with 
Moses and Elijah on the mount of transfiguration. It has 
been said that He broke the law before the very face of the 
lawgiver, “ and by His example taught His disciples, the 
future proclaimers of His new law to the world, to do the 
same.” Moreover, that “ the disciples, admitted to a con- 
vocation which would have brought the penalty of death 
upon their ancestors, found it so good for them, that they 
desired to build tabernacles, and remain with those illustrious 
dead.”i 

But this argument is put forth in utter disregard of the 
context and other passages which refer to it ; nay, even 
without attention to the plain facts of the history. For it is 
evident that the transfiguration was intended, not to furnish 
a precedent for necromancy, but as a fulfilment of the Lord’s 
promise that He would reveal Himself in the glory of His 
kingdom to some of His disciples while they were yet in the 
flesh. 

It also taught that He was exalted far above Moses and 
Elijah, the representatives of the law and the prophets ; that 
they were but servants, while He was the beloved Son, 
Such at least was the lesson which the apostles drew from it. 
For John is manifestly referring to the transfiguration when 
he says, And we beheld His glory, the glory as of the only 
Begotten of the Father.”^ And Peter proves that he had not 

^ Howitt’s History of the Supematwral^ Vol. 1. 197. ^ John i 14. 



SPIEITUALI8M. PABT III. 


207 


followed cunningly devised fables by declaring that he had 
been an eye-witness of the majesty of the Lord Jesus when 
he was with Him on the holy mount, and had heard the 
voice of the Father acknowledging Him as His beloved Son.^ 

But the disciples, we are told, found it so good to be in 
the company of the “illustrious dead^’ that they wished to 
remain with them. If they did, we have many Scriptural 
proofs that the Twelve were not infallible judges of what is 
right. Peter may have had feelings akin to those of modern 
Spiritualists when he said, “ Master it is good for us to be 
here : and let us make three tabernacles ; one for Thee, and 
one for Moses, and one for Elias.” But what was the 
answer? In a moment the glorious vision was swept from 
his sight by a cloud, out of which there pealed the cry, 
“ This is My beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased : hear 
ye Him.*’ And when he looked up to see Who was thus 
indicated, he saw no man, save Jesus only. Could there be 
a plainer warning against seeking to any other than the Son 
of God ? 

Lastly ; the expression “ illustrious dead ” is altogether 
inappropriate : for it does not appear that any unclothed 
spirit was present at the transfiguration. Certainly Elijah 
was not one ; for he had never died : and in all probability 
Moses also was in the body. For wherefore was his corpse 
wrested from Satan by the archangel Michael ? Why was 
not he who had the power of death permitted to reduce to 
corruption, and to deal with it as he did with all other 
bodies ? Is it not likely that God preserved it for this very 
occasion ? And thus the Lord did indeed exhibit the fashion 
of His kingdom : for Moses and Elijah represented His 
raised and changed saints, while both of them were clad in 
glorified bodies like unto His own. 

Many evil agencies are It is, then, impossible to find in Scrip- 

merdioned in Scripture, , C 

hut all good spiritual in- ture any sanction for the consultation oi 

iiuence is ascribed to the the dead. And let the following state- 
ment be well weighed by those who are 
still open to conviction. We hear of the unlawful association 
of men with demons in the Old Testament : we have 
miserable beings possessed with unclean spirits, and the 
1 2 Peh.i. 16-18. 



208 


EAETH^S EARLIEST AGES. 


Philippian damsel inspired by a Pythonic spirit, in the New : 
we are told of the spirit that now worketh in the children of 
disobedience, of wandering spirits and demons that teach 
lies in hypocrisy, and of the three unclean spirits like frogs, 
the spirits of demons, which shall hereafter go forth and 
incite the haters of God to their last great effort. But 
throughout the whole Bible there is no instance of a spirit 
influencing men for good save the Spirit of God alone. 
This significant fact must be carefully remembered : for 
Spiritualists are wont to confuse the minds of the unwary by 
ignoring it, and to argue that Scripture sanctions demoniacal 
manifestations because it records operations of the Holy 
Spirit and speaks of angelic messengers. But the point at 
issue is the lawfulness of communication with spirits of the 
dead, and that question can neither be solved, nor in any way 
afiected, by revelations concerning the Spirit of God and the 
missions of angels. 

Utterly irrelevant, therefore, are the frequently quoted 
words of David in reference to the building of the temple : 
“ All this, even all the works of the pattern, has He taught 
by writing from the hand of Jehovah which came upon me.”^ 
For though it is sufficiently clear that the plans of the temple 
were communicated to David in some supernatural way, and 
though the mode of communication may possibly have re- 
sembled that of modern spirit-writing, yet the influence is 
expressly said to have come from Jehovah Himself, and not 
from spirits of the dead. 

The case of the writing which came to Jehoram from 
Elijah the Tishbite also falls without the limits of this con- 
troversy. For even if we admit the assumption that Elijah 
had previously departed from earth, and that he had not left 
the writing behind him, but had returned to communicate it, 
there remains, nevertheless, the fact that he had never 
passed the threshold of death. It would, therefore, be 
absurd to draw any inference as to the condition of the dead 
from what is recorded of a translated prophet. 

But it is probable that Elijah was still living upon earth 
at the time when the writing came to Jehoram. For the 
date of his translation cannot be fixed, and the incident 
' 1 Ohron. xxviii. 19. 



8PIKITUALISM. PART III. 


209 


which is supposed to prove that it must have taken place 
before the expedition of the Israelitish Jehoram against 
Moab is hardly conclusive. The servant of the king of 
Israel did indeed say “ Here is Elisha the son of Shaphat 
which poured water on the hands of Elijah but it does 
not necessarily follow that he meant to speak of Elijah as no 
longer on earth. It may be that he was merely thinking of 
some past occasion — perhaps an appearance of the prophet at 
court — on which he had seen Elisha ministering to him. 

We may, therefore, assert that the peremptory law against 
seeking to the dead was never cancelled or even suspended. 

Angeh are, inde i,fre~ Of the ministry of angels Scripture 
frequently speaks ; but these, as we have 
before seen, are not disembodied spirits. 
Nor are they the glorified forms of any who have lived in 
the flesh during our age. For the Lord Himself marks 
them out as a distinct creation, and tells us plainly that we 
cannot be like them until the first resurrection, which is to 
take place upon His return to the precincts of our world.' 

Spiritualists do indeed strive to evade this difficulty by 
teaching, in defiance of Scripture, that the resurrection takes 
place at death, and is, therefore, accomplished in the case of 
all the dead. But we can only reply by including them in 
the same category as Hymenoeus and Philetus, of whom 
Paul affirmed that they erred concerning the truth in saying 
that the resurrection is past already, and were overthrowing 
the faith of some.^ 

2Vbr do their mestagea And yet again ; angels bring messages 
tZLZlUnroffl of God, infallible words, which must be 
mom. received implicitly as absolute truth. 

But how difierent is this from the confessedly uncertain 
utterances of demons at a seance : for Spiritualists admit 
that their familiars can, as a rule, only give opinions. In a 
standard work entitled Where are the Dead., or Spiritualism 
Explained, the following is the doctrine laid down. “ That 
communications from the spirit-world, whether by mental 
impression, inspiration, or any other mode of transmission, 
are not necessarily infallible truth ; but, on the contrary, 
partake unavoidably of the imperfections of the minds from 
1 Luke XX. 35, 36. - 2 Tim. ii. 17, 18. 

15 



210 


eakth’s earliest ages. 


which they emanate, and of the channels through which they 
come, and are, moreover, liable to misrepresentation by those 
to whom they are addressed.” ^ 

And, since Spiritualists tell us that the writers of the 
Bible were much the same as modern mediums, it is easy to 
see that their doctrine of uncertainty not merely proves the 
worthlessness of their own oracles, but also undermines the 
authority of Scripture. Nor can it fail to unite its sup- 
porters with rationalists and infidel philosophers, tending as 
it does to refer every thing to the discretion of human 
reason. 

Scripture testimony t« We may now push our argument still 

against the possibility ^ r 

communication with the further I foi, if we except the case of 
blessed dead. Samuel, who was sent up in God’s anger, 

there is not in Scripture a single hint of the possibility of 
communication between the departed in the Lord and those 
who still remain on earth. Nay, the whole weight of 
evidence is opposed to such an idea. “ When a few years 
are come,” exclaims Job, “ then I shall go the way whence I 
shall not return.” ^ “I shall go to him, but he shall not 
return to me,” said David of his lost son. And Paul consoles 
the Thessalonians in their bereavement, not by suggesting 
communications with disembodied spirits, but by bidding 
them look forward to the return of their Lord and the 
resurrection, when dead and living shall be again united 
never more to part. 

^ We add a further illustration of this uncertainty from the pen of the 
well known inspirational writer T. L. Harris. “ There is no dependence 
to be placed on the mere verbal statements of spirits as to their real 
belief. One class deceives purposely ; they are simply flowing into your 
general thought, and coinciding with your most devout convictions, for 
the purpose of obtaining a supreme and ruinous dominion over your mind 
and body. Anotlier class are simply parasites, negatives, drawn into the 
personal sphere of the medium, and seeking to sun themselves in its light 
and heat by absorbing the vital forces, on which they feed, and by means 
of which they, for a time, revive their faded intelligence and apathetic 
sense. To the Mohammedan they confirm the Koran ; to the Pantheist 
they deify nature; to the believer in the Divine Humanity they glorify 
the Word. Fighting, as every upward powing man is, to obtain deliver- 
ance from the self-hood, with its dead obstructions, its faltering limita- 
tions, it is most dangerous to become interlocked with the deadly self- 
hoods of sects, of inversine human society, or of clans, hordes, tribes, and 
wandering banditti, of the Spiritual world.” The SpiritualisU^WDLQ 25th, 
1875. 

* Job xvi. 22. 



8PIEITUALISM. PAEX III. 


211 


The usual objections to Nor need Spiritualists expatiate on the 
difficulty involved in a belief of the re- 
surrection, and on the inextricable mixture of atoms, any 
one of which may have helped to form the material portion 
of many men and animals. Did the difficulty exist, it would 
be sufficient for those who believe in God, that is, in a real 
God, and not a mere deification of their finite selves — it 
would be sufficient for such to know that He had undertaken 
the solution. But the Scriptures never affirm that we shall 
rise in the actual flesh in which we lived : and to him who 
suggests such a resurrection Paul replies with asperity, 
“ Thou fool, that which thou so west is not quickened, 
except it die : and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not 
that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of 
wheat, or of some other grain ; but God giveth it a body as 
it hath pleased Him, and to every seed his own body.” ^ 

So will each of God’s people receive his own body on the 
great day : a body, not identical with that in which he lived 
on earth, but as intimately connected with it — though in 
what mysterious way God alone knows — as the stalk of 
wheat is with the decayed grain out of which it sprang. 
And of flesh and bones will our immortal dwelling be com- 
posed, even as our Lord’s resurrection body, by which, as 
His own mouth declared,^ He was distinguished from an 
unclothed spirit, from that which He had Himself been 
during His intermediate state, when, being put to death in 
the flesh but quickened in the spirit, He had descended to 
the darkness of Hades. 

Meaning of John's We must not, however, pass by another 
%iHtP frequently quoted verse which is supposed 

to imply communication with disembodied spirits. “Be- 
loved,” says John, “ believe not every spirit, but try the 
spirits whether they are of God.” ® It is argued that such a 
precept not only proves the existence of Spiritualism in the 
barly church, but even gives positive apostolic sanction to 
intercourse with the dead in Christ. 

Now from the way in which John speaks we can see that 
he is referring to the exercise of some familiar and lawful 
* 1 Cor. XV. 36-38. ^ Luke xxiv. 39. 

15 * 


3 1 John iv. 1. 



212 


EARTH 8 EARLIEST AGES. 


gift, of which we may, therefore, justly expect to find notice 
in other parts of the New Testament. And such notice we 
do find : for the apostle is clearly legislating for those cases 
of prophetic utterance and speaking with tongues which 
were then common in the church, and of which Paul treats 
at length in the first epistle to the Corinthians. 

But by what power were these manifestations produced ? 
Not by spirits of the dead, but by the direct action of the 
Spirit of God. Paul is at great pains to set forth this fact 
in his preliminary enumeration of spiritual gifts, and not 
content with having six times mentioned it, he concludes 
with the emphatic words, “ But all these worketh that one 
and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as 
He will.*’' In perfect accordance, too, is the narrative of 
the day of Pentecost : for we are told that the disciples 
“ were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak 
with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.**^ 
Since, then, there is only one Spirit working in the children 
of God, it is evident that the command to try the spirits 
refers, not to the inspiring cause, but to the spirits of those 
who claimed to be prompted by the Holy Ghost, the plural 
being used as it is by Paul when he affirms that “ the 
spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.*’ ® And 
this interpretation will be found to suit the whole context. 

Nor was the apostolic warning superfluous : for, as might 
have been anticipated, Satan quickly began to counterfeit the 
manifestations of the Spirit by introducing false and demon- 
inspired prophets among the true believers. Unmistakable 
traces of this mischief may be detected in Paul’s affectionate 
entreaty to the Thessalonians, “ That ye be not soon shaken 
in mind, or be troubled, neither iy spirit, nor by word, nor by 
letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is present.” ^ The 
demon-teachers were already abroad ; the mystery of law- 
lessness was even then working. 

Therefore the duty inculcated by John is that of testing 
the spirits of prophets, to discover whether they are influenced 
by the Spirit of God or by the powers of error. And the 
Ephesians seem to have obeyed the precept when they tried 

' 1 Cor. xii. 11. 2 Acts ii. 4. ^ 1 Cor. xiv. 32. 

* 2 Thess. ii. 2. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART III. 


213 


those who said they were apostles, but were not, and found 
them liars. ^ Had, however, any one presented himself as an 
avowed dealer with spirits of the dead, he would have been 
at once rejected without any trial : for the apostles recog- 
nised only the influence of “ that one and the selfsame 
Spirit ” on the Lord’s side, and knew that every necromancer 
was an abomination to Him. 

The spirits of the dead Finally ; the Bible gives us no reason 

in Christ are prohahly , aI. x j ^ j • j. 

unable even to nee what is to suppose that departed saints can even 
taking place on earth. gee what is going on in this world. In- 
deed in one instance it seems to be assumed that they cannot. 
For the good Shepherd, after finding the lost sheep, calls His 
friends and neighbours, tells them that He has recovered His 
own, and bids them rejoice with Him.^ Now His neighbours 
are probably the angels, for they dwell where He is : and is 
it not likely that the spirits in Paradise are His friends ? 
“ Henceforth,” He said to His disciples, “ I call you not 
servants : for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth : 
but I have called you friends ; for all things that I have 
heard of My Father I have made known unto you.” ® It 
would seem, then, that, whenever any poor wanderer is 
brought back to the fold, the Lord calls the spirits of his 
relations or friends who have already entered into rest, tells 
them that the lost is found, and xejoices with them in the 
knowledge that His beloved and theirs is reconciled to the 
Father, and will soon join their happy and never-ending 
fellowship. But if it be necessary for Christ to announce 
this good news to the blessed spirits, it is clear that they 
cannot be watching their friends who are still in the flesh. 

The cloud of wit. There is, however, a passage in the 
TeZ^lrX’odf£i$m, epistle to the Hebrews which is often ex- 
and not of spectators. plained as implying that they are so 
employed. “ Wher^^fore,” says Paul, “ seeing we also are 
compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us 
lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily 
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set 
before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of 
our faith.” ^ 

Now even if we admit that the spirits of those who died 

^ Rev. ii. 2. ^ Luke xv. 6. ® John xv. 15. ^ Heb. xii. 1. 



214 


EAKTH S EARLIEST AGES. 


in faith are here represented as beholding our actions upon 
earth, there is, nevertheless, no hint of either lawful or 
possible communication with them, much less of any help to 
be obtained from them. To Jesus alone are we directed to 
look : the dead can but testify by the record of their past 
lives to His power and love. If, therefore. Spiritualists be 
allowed to interpret the passage in their own way, they can 
find no support for their fundamental doctrine. But such an 
explanation, although it sets a perfect metaphor before us, 
does not appear to suit the context. 

For in the treatise upon faith, of which this verse com- 
mences the practical application, the verb of the same root as 
the word translated “ witnesses is used five times, occurring 
finally, indeed, in the very sentence preceding the one under 
our consideration.^ In each case it has the sense of “ testify- 
ing to,’^ and not of “witnessing’’ a spectacle: nor does it 
seem likely that Paul in drawing an inference from his 
argument would suddenly change the meaning of so 
important a word. 

In all probability, therefore, the witnesses are not spec- 
tators of our faith ; but witnesses to faith in the abstract, to 
what could be accomplished by it even before the unfolding 
of that love of God, which, being now known, should act as 
a far more powerful stimulant upon us. Such a sense both 
falls in with the line of thought, and removes the necessity 
of finding in this place a doctrine which cannot be elsewhere 
discovered in Scripture. 

The spirits of the lott The case of the wicked may be difterent. 

p^er^of’'ci«JuZaitp Coming by death more completely under 
wUh earth: hut even this the sway of him that hath the power of 

U7icer am. death, it may be that in certain circum- 

stances they have the range of his principality of the air. 
And if so, it is by no means improbable that they com- 
municate at times with congenial spirits still in the flesh. 
But even this cannot be proved, and indeed seems unlikely. 
For the rich man in Hades, when troubled in regard to his 
brothers, speaks of them as far away, feels his own inability 
to help them, and, hoping that the condition of the blessed 
may be different, entreats that Lazarus may be sent to them. 

^ Heb. xi. 39. 



SPIBITUAIilSM. PABT III, 


215 


What follows is striking, and again casts the dark shadow of 
God’s reprobation over the whole system of Spiritualism. 
For Abraham answers that they have Moses and the 
prophets, and should hear them. And when the rich man, 
with the sentiment of a modern Spiritualist, urges that if one 
could but go to them from the dead they would repent, he is 
finally told that the God of mercy has devised a message to 
fallen men containing all that can be really effectual in 
turning them from their sins, and that, if they are hardened 
against His words, nothing will save them, not even the 
return of one from the dead. 

If, therefore, the spirits of the lost who have lived in our 
world are able to communicate with their friends at all, it can 
only be in exceptional cases : unless indeed the powers of 
darkness are already hastening the end by breaking down 
the barriers within which God would have them confined. 
It may be, however, as we Kave before pointed out, that the 
beings who inspire mediums and work wonders to establish a 
lie are the blasted relics of some former world. 

While this subject is before us we may mention that 
Spiritualists represent good and bad spirits as mingling 
together. Existences supposed to be good often complain at 
seances of the presence and counteracting influence of evil 
beings. A picture given in Mra. De Morgan’s book From 
Matter to Spirit, and said to have been drawn by a demon, 
exhibits a good and a bad spirit busily engaged at the same 
time upon the same person : the former is mesmerising the 
top of the head, the latter similarly influencing its base. 
Such spirits, then, cannot be those of the saved and lost from 
our race : for in the Lord’s description of the unseen world 
a great and impassable gulf is fixed between these two 
•classes. 

Spintuaiism subverts Thus the whole Weight of Biblical evi- 
dence pronounces against communication 
with the dead, even if it admits its possibility. But the 
demons retaliate : for their teachings are openly and 
daringly subversive of all the doctrines of revelation, and 
will, if they prevail, quickly obliterate the very names of 
Father Son and Holy Spirit, substituting a worship of deified 
humanity. And this we will now endeavour to prove by 



216 


ea^rth’s earliest ages. 


exhibiting the opinions of some Spiritualists of mark upon 
the great fundamental truths of Christianity. 

m doctHnes concern- First, then, we would ask, What think 
they of Christ? Very little apparently: 
for even by those writers who still profess to regard Him as 
the Son of God He is either explained away as a mere 
Divine efflux, or almost lost amid a cloud of benevolent 
demons. But the majority of Spiritualists regard Him 
merely as a powerful medium, and compare Him as a teacher 
with Buddha, Confucius, or Socrates. Others, again, adopt 
a kind of Unitarianism, similar to that of Swedenborg, 
making Christ and the Father the same person, and, in some 
cases, adding an explanation of the Trinity which is simply 
appalling in its blasphemy. 

Chrint represented as a Amongst those who Speak reverently is 
mere efflux. Mis. De Morgan : but what can we say of 

the following exposition in her book entitled From Matter to 
Spirit ? 

“ The Word of God, then, is the phrase used in Scripture 
to express the outpouring efflux from our heavenly Father in 
its creating, life-giving, and inspiring energy, and in its 
redeeming and sanctifying power ; and the Bible is the 
history of the Word in all its degrees of action and modes of 
manifestation, from the simple processes of magnetic healing 
and clairvoyance to its full and perfect manifestation in the 
person of the Saviour the Word made flesh.” 

Christ regarded as a The prevailing doctrine is, however, 
^oxosr. that which regards Christ as nothing 

more than a powerful medium : and great stress is laid upon 
the verse, “ He that believeth on Me, the works that I do he 
shall do also ; and greater works than these shall he do.” ^ 
The remainder of the sentence, “ because I go unto My 
Father,” is usually suppressed; since it too strongly urges 
the fact that the works can only be done in and through 
Christ. Nor is it found expedient to quote the promise 
which follows : for in what way could the Lord more 
emphatically proclaim Himself to be God than by the words 
“ Whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that will I do, that 


^ John xiv. 12. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART III. 


217 


the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any 
thing in My name, I will do it.'*^ 

Yet the first part of this passage is most unfairly adduced 
as a proof that the miracles of Christ were no miracles at all, 
but simply the results of a natural law* of which His 
mediumistic power enabled Him to avail Himself; and that 
it is, therefore, open to modern mediums to display similar 
marvels. 

Agreement of s^piritunU Now, apart ffom our immediate subiect, 
tracU from R. B.O wen's SUOuld UOt Omit tO nOtlCe hoW thlS 

Debatable Land. Qf argument spans with a wide bridge 

the gulf which separates Spiritualists from the modern phase 
of infidelity called Positivism. There is no difficulty in 
accounting for the favour with which the London Dialectical 
Society has recently regarded Spiritualism. For the Posi- 
tivist will no longer object to recognise wonders if he can be 
convinced that they are the result of natural laws. Nay, the 
new religion will even enable him to profess a belief in the 
miracles of Christ without at all giving up his fundamental 
doctrine that, since the fathers fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.” 

But such an explanation of Christ’s power of course reduces 
Him to the level of an ordinary mortal, and, as may be seen 
by the following remark extracted from Owen’s Debatable 
Land^ is allowed to override all Scriptural opposition. 

“If beyond a claim to be the promised Messiah — the 
Anointed Prophet of God, commissioned by Him to redeem 
the world from spiritual darkness — there be any reasonable 
ground for belief that Christ declared Himself, or regarded 
Himself, to be One of the Persons of the Godhead, I confess 
my inability to find it.” 

Texts without number may rise to the mouth of the 
Christian who hears such an assertion ; but how useless it is to 
quote them against this author may be seen by the subjoined. 

“ There are sundry passages in John’s Gospel which must 
be taken as asserting this dogma ; but John wrote thirty or 
forty years later than the other evangelists, in his old age, 
and at a period when speculative doctrine was already 
beginning to obscure the noble candour of Christ’s words.” 

^ John xiv. 13, 14. ^ 2 Pet. iii. 4. 



218 


earth’s earliest ages. 


It is the old story. That which a man likes, and which 
suits his particular theory, is the Word of God, and must be 
received : that of which he does not approve is to be rejected 
for no other reason than because he hates it. “Ye shall be 
as God, knowing good and evil,” was Satan’s first temptation ; 
and how wonderfully had he probed our nature to its lowest 
depths ! 

Inspirational address In his Heterodox London Dr. Maurice 
qfMrs. Cora Tappan. reports an inspirational address by 

Mrs. Cora Tappan, a noted trance-speaker. The subject was 
chosen by a committee of five selected from the audience 
after the commencement of the meeting, and including three 
non-spiritualists. It was “What Great Teacher has pro- 
duced the most Potent Effect upon Society, and Why ” In 
a speech of considerable power, in the course of which she 
threw much doubt upon the miraculous circumstances of our 
Lord’s birth, the speaker contended that the palm was due to 
Him in preference to Buddha, Zoroaster, Confucius, Socrates, 
or Aristotle. 

When she had finished her oration she offered, being still 
under the infiuence of the demon, to answer any questions 
put to her by the audience, and was immediately asked “ Do 
you regard Christ as really God, or merely as a human 
teacher?” To which she evasively replied, “ We were not 
asked for our theological views ; we were only requested to 
state what great teacher had had the greatest inffuence upon 
human society.” 

Another person expressed his surprise that she had not 
assigned Christ’s superior power to the fact that He was 
God. Upon which she made the following remarks. “ For 
ourselves, we believe that all truth is of God, and that Christ 
embodied in His form as much of Deity as the truth He 
expressed ; that He was the Son of God, and that He 
represented the possible of man, inasmuch as He promised 
the same gifts to others that He Himself possessed. But we 
certainly decline entering into any discussion on the creed of 
the Trinitarian or Unitarian, or any form of theological con- 
troversy. Christ’s words when He says, ‘ I and My 
Father are One,’ did not mean that He was God ; if He and 
His Father were One, it merely signified that they were One 



8PIKITUALI8M. PART III. 


219 


in spirit ; and the promise given to earth’s children, the 
same as to Christ, is a proof that Christ could not have been 
a greater embodiment of Deity than the Divine and perfect 
humanity He represented.” 

Comment would be superfluous : for the voice of the 
dragon is easily detected in this answer. 

Gerald M^sey's But that OUT readers may fully understand 
opinion qf hnst demon-teaching on this important point, 
and the subtlety with which the Divinity of the Lord Jesus 
is denied, we will quote once more, and this time from a 
pamphlet entitled Concerning Spiritualism by Gerald Massey 
the poet. 

“ The special characteristic of Christ, above that of all 
other delegates of God, was the infinite largeness of soul 
with which He represented that which is universal : the 
common fatherhood of God — the common brotheihood of 
man. It was on this He founded His spiritual kingdom. 

I do not find that Chi is t claimed for Himself more than 
He held out as possible for others. When He identified 
Himself with the Father, it was in the oneness of medium- 
ship — He was the great Medium or Mediator. His character 
and life afforded the best portraiture of a God of Love ever 
made visible in humanity ; but this was not as a mocking 
mirage, a trick of the unattainable, but a prophecy of what 
humanity may become.” 

Third heresy in regard The third heresy in regard to Christ is 
that which speaks of Him as the Father, 
the blasphemous expost- ignoring the Other Persons of the Trinity 
iion of the Tnniiy. revealed in Scripture. 

“ Jesus, God-Messiah, Who 
Is Mediator, Father too,” 

says the inspirational poem A Lyric of the Martyr Age, 
And the author afterwards reveals what he terms the true 
doctrine of the Trinity, that Jesus is the Father, and that 
man and woman in the everlasting condition of marriage are 
the Son and Spirit. This poem contains many grand and 
beautiful passages, but the blasphemy of its sentiments 
exceeds all we have read. On the page fronting its com- 
mencement are the lines. 



220 


EARTH 8 EARLIEST AGES. 


“ It bears no date of place or time 
This poem from the Spirit-clime ; 

Nor may the outward reader claim 
To know the fountain whence it came.’’ 


But if the reader believe and trust it, he may hereafter meet 
the author stripped of all disguise, and start back with worse 
affright than did the victim of Khorassan’s veiled prophet, 
when at length she caught a glimpse of the visage she had so 


long desired. 

Doctrines concerning 
the Holy Spirit. 


The horrible doctrine to which we have 
just referred shows that the Spirit of God 


is not always regarded as a Person of the Trinity. We now 


subjoin a daringly explicit statement from Owen’s Debatable 


Land, 


“ One scruples to write ‘ Holy Breath,’ instead of ‘ Holy 
Ghost ’ (from Anglo-Saxon for breath or spirit) ; yet 

the terms are strictly synonymous. Peter, speaking of Jesus 
as a man * Whom God anointed with the Holy Ghost and 
with power,’ certainly employed the term in some such 
sense. Christ Himself, when He spoke of the Holy Ghost 
as the ‘ Spirit of Truth,’ Which ‘ shall not speak of Himself, 
but whatsoever He shall hear that shall He speak,’ as 
certainly did not intend thereby to designate one of the 
Persons of the Godhead.” 


It is scarcely necessary to remark that Mr. Owen is not 
responsible for some of the capitals in this extract. Does he 
mean to imply that “ ghost ” and “ spirit ” are not ordinarily 
used in any sense but that of “ breath ” ? Are they not far 
more frequently understood to signify distinct and intelligent, 
though immaterial, existences ? To carry out his argument 
will he, who has so laboured to prove the power and wisdom 
of spirits, now deny them their very individuality ? And, in 
the passage from which he has quoted, can he tell why the 
Lord emphatically speaks of the Spirit as “ He (ckcivos),”^ 
although the word for Spirit (to Uvevfjia) is neuter But 
Gerald Massey goes still further. 

“We talk of believing in the communion of the Holy 
Spirit, in a vague general way, but what communion could 


^ John xvi. 13. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART III. 


221 


be holier than that betwixt the child on earth and the spirit 
of the parent gone before ? What form more natural than 
that could be assumed by the Holy Spirit of God Himself? 
“ I will send you the Comforter,” said Jesus Christ, and why 
should not the promise be realized by the bereaved mother 
through the spirit of that child which she thinks lost to her 
because she lost sight of the beloved face as it entered the 
cloud ? What more natural than that its presence should 
brood down on the aching heart, fill the void of its loss, and 
still the troubled thoughts till the vanished hand can be 
clasped once more in spiritual unition ?” 

It is painful to quote these teachings of demons : but 
multitudes, who have at present no idea of denying either 
the Son or the Spirit, are trifling with Spiritualism, and it 
seems a duty to sound a note of alarm. 

Tendency qf Spiritual- A Very little reading will show that the 
We majority of Spiritualistic writers agree 
<^od. with the sentiment in the last extract 

respecting natural affection. They seem ever to regard it 
as the most holy thing, while God occupies, at best, but the 
second place in their thoughts. Thus they completely re- 
verse the Scriptural order, which sets the Creator before us 
as the great Centre, For although the Bible does indeed 
enjoin the tenderest love to .our kinsmen and friends, it, 
nevertheless, teaches that the spring of our affection should 
be the fact that God has united the loved ones to us, and 
that Christ died for them. 

It eeema to he gradually But there are not Wanting indications 
toTXnJr’XlaS that Spiritualists will be likely ere long to 
tion of conscience. to deny the Father Himself, as well as the 
Son and Spirit, and openly ascribe everything to their 
demons. Is there not a strong tendency to this in the 
following remarks of the great naturalist Louis Figuier ? 

“ In our belief conscience is the impression transmitted to 
us by a beloved being, snatched from us by death. It is a 
relative, a friend, who has left the earth, and who deigns to 
reveal himself to us, that he may guide us in our actions, 
trace out the path of safety for us, and labour for our good. 
Cowardly, perverse, base, and lying men exist, of whom we 
say that they have no conscience. I'hey do not know how to 



222 


earth’s earliest ages. 


distinguish good from evil ; they are entirely wanting in 
moral sense. It is because they have never loved any one, 
and their souls, base and vile, are not worthy to be visited by 
any of those superior beings, who only manifest themselves 
to men who resemble them, or who have loved them. A 
man without a conscience is, then, one who is rendered un- 
worthy, by the vicious essence of his soul, of the lofty 
counsels and the protection of those who are no more.” 

So is one great witness to the presence and power of God 
in our midst taken away. Conscience is to be regarded, no 
longer as the fear of the Almighty and of His judgment to 
come, but as an impression transmitted to us by some dead 
friend ! 

Rih theory of procuring Nor is this all. Wc are told that dis- 
dead. embodied spirits can also give us advice 

and guidance, and to them we are directed to look in every 
perplexity. And to what an extent this idea has ripened 
into practice among the educated and intellectual we may 
conjecture by the following extract from The Day after 
Death. 

“ The moral phenomenon of the impressions made by the 
dead on the mind of the living who have loved them, and 
who keep up the cultus of their memory, is one of those 
truths which every one holds by intuition, and whose entire 
verity he acknowledges when he finds it curtly formulated 
and put forward. We will not give our readers second-hand 
information by invoking facts of this kind which they may 
know ; we can only recall a few which came under our 
observation, briefly, as follows : 

One of our friends, an Italian Count, B — , lost his mother 
nearly forty years ago. He has assured us that he has been 
in communication with her every day since, without inter- 
mission. He adds that he owes the wise ordering of his life, 
his labours, his career, and the good fortune which has 
always accompanied his enterprizes, to the constant influence 
and secret counsels of his mother. 

Dr. V — , a professed materialist, one who, according to the 
popular phrase, believes in nothing, believes, nevertheless, in 
his mother. Like Count B — , he lost her early, and has 
never ceased to feel her presence. He told us that he is 



SPIBITUALISM. PART III. 


228 


more frequently with his mother now that she is dead, than 
he used to be when she was living. This professed apostle 
of medical materialism has, without being aware of it, con- 
versations with an emancipated soul. 

A celebrated journalist, M. R — , lost a son, twenty years 
of age, a charming, gentle youth, a \vriter, and a poet. 
Every day M. R — has an intimate conversation with this son. 
A quarter of an hour of solitary recollection admits him to 
direct communication with the beloved being snatched away 
from his love. 

M. L — , a barrister, maintains constant relations with a 
sister who, when living, possessed, according to him, every 
human perfection, and who never fails to guide her brother 
in every difficulty of his life, great or small. 

Another consideration suggests itself in support of the idea 
which occupies us at present. It has been remarked that 
artists, writers, and thinkers, after the loss of one beloved, 
have found their faculties, talents, and inspirations increased. 
We might surmise that the intellectual faculties of those 
whom they have loved have been added to their own. I 
know a financier who is remarkable for his business 
capacities. When he finds himself in a difficulty, he stops, 
without troubling himself to seek for its solution. He 
waits, knowing that the missing idea will come to him 
spontaneously, and, sometimes after days, sometimes after 
hours, the idea comes, just as he has expected. This happy 
and successful man has experienced one of the deepest 
sorrows the heart can know ; he has lost an only son, aged 
eighteen years, and endowed with all the qualities of 
maturity, combined with the graces of youth. Our readers 
may draw the conclusion for themselves.” 

Can these instances be described as any thing but that 
seeking to the dead which the Lord hates ? And if blessings 
are thus obtained from the spirits of lost friends, to what 
purpose do we worship God ? Among those who believe in 
it, will not the cultus of the dead speedily absorb every other 
kind of devotion ? 

Mr. Wallace's expia- But in Mr. Wallace’s essay on modem 
Spiritualism we find a statement yet more 
startling, since it seems to imply that even those prayers 



224 


eakth’s earliest ages. 


which are presented to the Most High in the name of the 
Lord Jesus depend, sometimes at least, for their answer upon 
the good will of the spirits of the air. 

“ The recently discussed question of the efficacy of prayer 
receives a perfect solution by Spiritualism. Prayer may be 
often answered, though not directly by the Deity. Nor does 
the answer depend wholly on the morality or the religion of 
the petitioner ; but as men who are both moral and religious, 
and are firm believers in a Divine response to prayer, will 
pray more frequently, more earnestly, and more disinterestedly, 
they will attract towards them a number of spiritual beings 
who sympathise with them, and who, when the necessary 
mediumistic power is present, will be able, as they are often 
willing, to answer the prayer. A striking case is that of 
Mr. George Muller of Bristol, who has now for forty years 
depended wholly for his own support and that of his 
wonderful charities on answer to prayer. * The Spiritualist 
explains all this as a personal influence. The perfect sim- 
plicity, faith, boundless charity, and goodness of George 
Muller, have enlisted in his cause beings of a like nature ; 
and his mediumistic powers have enabled them to work for 
him by influencing others to send him money, food, clothes, 
etc., all arriving, as we should say, just in the ‘nick of 
time.’ ’’ 

Open denial of the ex- Finally; a Spiritualistic writer' in the 
istence qf Ood. Westmimter Review (Oct. 1875) argues 

strongly against the very existence of God, and does not 
hesitate to express himself as follows. 

“ Furthermore, the conception of the Reign of Law 
harmonises with the mental fabric of the age, whereas that 
which it supplants does not. We have ceased to embody 
the conception of the State in a person, and it is time that 
we should cease similarly to embody the conception of the 
universe. Loyalty to a personal ruler is an anachronism in 
the nineteenth century, but the sentiment which inspired it 
may find ample satisfaction in disinterested devotion to the 
welfare of the community. 

In like manner loyalty to a Divine Person will some day 
become extinct as a manifestation of the feeling which ought 
* Or, at any rate, a writer with a strong Spiritualistic tendency. 



SPIRITUALISM. PART III. 


225 


to sway us in our relations to that whole whereof we form so 
insignificant a part, but its place will he taken by a conscious 
and cheerful accordance with the laws which make for the 
well-being of the universe. We shall transfer to the com- 
monwealth of things that loving allegiance which we were 
wont to render to the Great King.’^ 

“This is the Antichrist, says John, “who denieth the 
Father and the Son.” And what apostacy has ever ap- 
peared so likely to evolve that terrible being as Spiritualism ? 

Bemon-uachings are We must now dcvote a few momcnts to 
general subject of spirit-communica- 
after death. tions. A great part of these are either 

absolute nonsense or such commonplaces as we may easily 
hear in our own world. When, however, they affect to be 
didactic, they often propound views bearing a striking re- 
semblance to certain rationalistic theories ; but are for the 
most part descriptive of the spirit-land, and of the state after 
death. 

And here again we detect the utterance of rebels : for God 
has altogether withheld this kind of knowledge. The Bible 
never enters into particulars of the intermediate state : it does 
not, like the Koran, group together all that is pleasing to the 
gross earthly senses, and hold up the picture as the prize for 
him that overcometh ; it does not unfold the nature of that 
which is provided for us between death and resurrection : 
nay, it even seems, as we shall presently show, to give a con- 
clusive reason for its reserve. It merely tells us that we 
shall have rest, comfort, and the presence of Him Whom our 
soul loves : it just lets us know that on the very day of death 
we shall find ourselves in Paradise, the beautiful garden of 
the Lord, and then its direct information ceases. 

The lessons to he de- But though it ncver enters into details, 
describes to us the effect produced upon 
Faradise qf God. the Only man — SO far as we know — who 
has been permitted to view the condition of the dead in 
Christ and return in full consciousness to earth ; while at the 
same time it gives us a partial reason, at least, for the absence 
of further revelation. For those who were raised from the 
dead by our Lord and His apostles have nothing to tell us : 
and, since God intended from the first that they should live 

16 



226 


EAETH 8 EAKLIE8T AGES. 


again in the bodies they had left, it may be that their spirits 
were held in a state of unconsciousness. Or, if they did for 
a while tarry in the abode of the departed, impenetrable 
forgetfulness fell upon them when they returned to this life, 
and the great secret was still preserved. 

But Paul knew something of it : for he was caught up 
alive into the third heaven, and into Paradise.^ Yet instead 
of satisfying our curiosity, he tells us that it would be 
impossible to do so, for that he heard unspeakable words 
which it is not lawful for a man to utter. We are thus 
positively forbidden to pry into the matter : but we are at 
least permitted to infer that what Paul saw was transcendently 
beautiful, full of such ravishing joy as we cannot now con- 
ceive. For when he returned to earth he was so elated 
by what he had experienced, so thoroughly unstrung for this 
lower life by his short taste of that which is to come, that he 
would have been incapacitated for further service in this 
world had not God brought him down to his former level by 
a painful affliction, a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of 
Satan sent to buffet him. It was, therefore, no purgatory 
which Paul saw : he would not have needed a thorn in the 
flesh to keep him from elation after such a sight as that : 
but a Paradise of beauty and joy far beyond the com- 
prehension of man. 

Two reasons for the mention of this vision seem obvious. 
And first ; from PauFs experience we may at least feel sure 
that we should even now, while still in the flesh, heartily 
appreciate what God has in store for us could we but see and 
understand it. 

Secondly ; we may learn why we must be satisfied with 
generalities for the present. A full knowledge of the bliss 
which will soon be ours would so occupy our mind, and 
unfit us for our daily duties, that God would be compelled to 
visit us with far more heavy and painful affliction than is 
necessary now. In mercy, then, this knowledge is withheld 
from us. And into which of the great Father’s arrange- 
ments can we ever penetrate far without discovering that He 
is love ? 

But those communications which God has denied, and 
1 2 Cor. xii. 1-7. 



SPIKITUALISM. PABT III. 


227 


through Paul pronounced unlawful, demons are ever willing 
to impart. And hence, if we look upon the Bible as a 
revelation of the mind of the Almighty, we have another 
proof that the wisdom of Spiritualists is not that which 
comes down from above. 

Specimens of demon- The forbidden teachings are usually 
state after death. givcu by demous professing to be spirits 

of the departed who are commissioned to describe their ex- 
periences to their friends. They often commence by giving 
an account of their own death and their feelings immediately 
after dissolution : but the bliss they enjoy seems to be 
invariably ascribed, not to the atoning sacrifice of Christ, but 
to their own works and virtues. In Glimpses of a Brighter 
Land., an inspirational book, a spirit gives the following as 
the words addressed to her by an angel after her emancipation 
from the body. 

“ The threads that connected you with the frail clay were 
easily severed. God hath ever dwelt in your mind ; sincerely 
did you seek to do His will and pleasure while yet on earth ; 
tenderly did you give a cup of cold water to the thirsty, and 
bind up the wounds of the sick ; gladly did you pour balm 
and oil into troubled minds, and now will you reap your 
reward. Happiness is in store for you far greater than any 
of which you have ever conceived. Pure as a lily, such shall 
be your spirit-name. Pearls are the fit emblem of your 
spirit-mind.^^ 

The descriptions of the realm of air consist of fairy land- 
scapes, rich foliage, gorgeous temples, and stately private 
mansions ; they are such, indeed, as might be ascribed to the 
shade of De Quincey, or that of the author of the Arabian 
Nights. The forms of ihe inhabitants float about, clad in 
loose robes of the purest white or the most brilliant colours, 
with girdles of gems and crowns of glory. Conversations are 
often given in which the spirits of the great dead, and 
especially that of Swedenborg, are frequently prominent. 
The following, from Glimpses of a Brighter Land., may serve 
as a specimen of the scenes presented. 

“ Here I found other companions, who kindly welcomed 
me to a more beautiful mansion and garden. The flowers 
were more brilliant, their perfume more delicious, and the 

16 * 



228 


earth’s earliest ages. 


trees and shrubs more luxuriant. The mansion in which I 
now dwelt was spacious, and I could entertain and receive 
my friends therein. We often met together, and endeavoured 
in sweet converse to instruct one another by imparting all 
the knowledge we had each separately attained. Sometimes 
one of our guardian angels would invite us to a feast of 
wisdom. We then met in a spacious temple, the walls of 
which were of crystal, pure and transparent, emblematic of 
the purity of heavenly wisdom and truth, the dome was of 
pure gold, and the pillars that supported it. The pavement 
was white with a pattern in crimson upon it. Our seats 
were around the building. In the centre was a slightly 
raised platform, on which our instructors stood when they 
imparted knowledge to us. Ever and anon while they spoke 
light played above and around them. Roseate clouds filled 
the edifice, and from time to time words of divine love and 
wisdom would appear, as if written in letters of fire, around 
the building.” 

A well-known pamphlet, called Heaven Opened, consists of 
a series of messages alleged to have come from the spirits of 
young members of the author’s family, including some who had 
died in infancy. These describe their new existence, and the 
children’s sphere in spirit-land. One of them, a girl of 
sixteen, found herself immediately after death on a “ couch of 
flowery essence,” and “ the most beautiful horse, with a 
bright shining star over his eyes,” presented himself to carry 
her through the surrounding gardens. The little spirits sit 
on the flowers : “ the big clever spirits ” form all sorts of 
couches and carriages of the flowers, and carry the little ones 
about in them. Lastly ; when the air moves the flowers 
sing, while the little birds take the prayers of the spirits 
upon their wings. An aunt is described as having several 
mansions, one in the City of Zion, another a beautiful retreat 
in the country, and so on. 

The demons who personate these children also urge that 
they are constantly present with their friends in the flesh, 
and are their natural advisers and protectors. The influence 
which results is of course enormous : nor will those who 
have established it fail to take full advantage of their 
power. 



SPIEITUALISM. PART III. 


229 


Spintuaiism teaches But such puerilities are by no means 
their salvation in this tuB ufiost serious 01 demon -deceptions* 
Ijfe, they may, never- For the Bible doctrine that now is the 

theless, repair the mis- i-i n t 

chief in the life to come, accepted time and the only day of sal- 
The seven spheres. vation is entirely set aside by these false 
messengers. Our Lord^s warning that even in the inter- 
mediate state the destiny of man is fixed, and that he is 
either in the Paradise of God awaiting the resurrection of the 
just, or in the prisons of the lost dreading the judgment of 
the great white throne, is altogether rejected. The demons 
remove this terror of the Lord, which has been the beginning 
of wisdom to so many, and substitute the old Babylonian 
doctrine of the seven spheres. But, since we prefer that 
Spiritualists should expound their own creed, we subjoin 
Miss Houghton’s statement on this point. 

“ The spirits dwell in various regions. The unhappy 
spirits in places of darkness and misery beyond the power of 
man^s imagination to conceive. There they remain until 
repentance for sin begins to awaken ; they then desire light, 
which is immediately vouchsafed to them, and the blackness 
with which they are surrounded becomes rather less dense. 
Spirits of a higher grade may then be listened to when they 
strive by teaching to strengthen the repentant feelings ; but 
alas ! their companions in misery are often unwilling to 
witness an improvement in which they are not inclined to 
share, and endeavour to detain them from an upward pro- 
gress. Many are the trials to which they must be subjected 
as they rise through the different degrees into the next 
sphere, there being seven spheres, and seven degrees in 

each Those spirits who still remain in the lower 

spheres have but little power of locomotion, but in the 
higher ones they can travel through infinite space, the limits 
being only according to their own onward progress ; for as 
they become more etherealized by their own ever increasing 
sense of happiness in their advance through the various 
degrees of the different spheres, they can rise to more rarified 
regions, so as ever to be approaching nearer to the perfect 
light of heaven itself. A radiancy surrounds each spirit, of 
more or less brilliancy, according to the sphere they have 
reached. This radiance is of certain hues for each sphere, 



230 


earth’s earliest ages. 


gradually increasing ir^ size, and altering somewhat in form 
for each degree. Spirits in the two lower spheres have no 
radiance, the only difference being in rather less of blackness. 
In the third and fourth it may scarcely be called such, but it 
is, at any rate, a kind of light : thus in the third it is brown, 
gradually becoming lighter, and in the fourth it is grey. In 
the fifth the green hue of hope is seen, in the sixth violet ; 
and in the entrance to the seventh a bright blue light, 
gradually acquiring vivid rainbow tints, which then fade off 
to a light so vivid that scarcely any colour is to be seen, all 
being so gloriously mingled.’’ 

The above is taken from Gillingham’s Eight days with the 
Spiritualists. The author gives other information which 
he obtained from a spirit at the time possessing the body 
of Mr. Morse, a trance-medium: but it is much to the same 
effect. 

In many communications spirits representing themselves as 
denizens of the higher spheres narrate their descents into the 
lower to awaken and help the irrepentant. The Gospel 
which they preach is not, however, that of the Lord Jesus; 
but, so far as we have read, merely consists of admonitions 
to the sinful to repent, to look to God, in which case they 
will be drawn upwards to Him, and to do what they can for 
those around them. We have never met with a single re- 
ported instance of a spirit entering the lower spheres with the 
glad tidings, “ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou 
shalt be saved.” 

Tendency of Spiritual^ But there are many fooHsh stories of the 

Mm to amalgamate with 

Popery and absorb all appearance to the repentant of lights 
and which gradually take the shape of crosses : 
p t o8op tea. instructing angels are often introduced 

with flaming crosses in their hands. In the pamphlet 
Heaven Opened^ referred to above, some of the communica- 
tions are interspersed with crosses, upon which the writer 
thus remarks ; “ I have been told by my spirit-guides that 
the crosses as given in the messages are a sign of the truth of 
the message and the holiness of the spirit. An evil spirit 
cannot give the sign of the cross.” Truly this last sentence 
contains a wonderful piece of information, but one which it 
is difficult to reconcile with the world’s history. 



SPIKITITALISM, PABT III. 


231 


We have, however, in the use of the emblem of the cross 
an indication — and there are many such — of a tendency in 
the new faith to coalesce with Romanism. Doubtless, too, 
the reader will have observed that the doctrine of the seven 
spheres is all but identical with that of Purgatory. And 
since Spiritualism is merely a revival of the influence which 
first produced Paganism, while Popery is nothing but 
Paganism under a changed name, and covered with a gauzy 
veil of Christianity, it seems likely that these two systems 
will presently find no serious obstacle to their amalgamation. 

The striking agreement of Spiritualism with the method of 
Positivism we have already noticed : nor is there much 
difficulty in discerning its points of affinity with other creeds, 
and especially with Buddhism. In fine, it appears more 
likely than any previous movement to result in the establish- 
ment of that universal religion which has already been 
suggested in some of our papers and periodicals. That this 
is the design of its members we may see from Mr. Herbert 
Noyes’ enumeration of the missions of Spiritualism, the 
seventeenth of which he declares to be : “To winnow the 
wheat of truth from the chafi‘ of theology, and reconcile 
antagonistic creeds by eliminating their errors, and making 
manifest the spiritual truths which underlie all systems of 
religious belief in the world.” 

Specimen of the method A remarkable passage in Mr. Wallace’s 

essay aptly illuBtrates the destructive 
opposes it in other creeds, power which Spiritualism is already exer- 
cising upon other creeds, and the method by which it seems 
to be reducing the various religions to that dead level which 
must be effected before the great apostacy can tower without 
a rival over Christendom and the world. 

“ The mediums have, almost all, been brought up in some 
of the usual orthodox beliefs. How is it, then, that the 
usual orthodox notions of heaven are never confirmed through 
them ? In the scores of volumes and pamphlets of spiritual 
literature I have read, I have found no statement of a spirit 
describing “ winged angels,” or “ golden harps,” or “ the 
throne of God ” — to which the humblest orthodox Christian 
thinks he will be . introduced if he goes to heaven at all. 
There is no more startling and radical opposition to be found 



232 eabth’s eaeliest ages. 

between the most diverse religious creeds, than that between 
the beliefs in which the majority of mediums have been 
brought up and the doctrines as to a future life that are 
delivered through them ; there is nothing more marvellous in 
the history of the human mind than the fact that, whether in 
the back-woods of America or in country towns in England, 
ignorant men and women having been almost all brought up 
in the usual sectarian notions of heaven and hell, should, the 
moment they become seized by the strange power of medium- 
ship, give forth teachings on this subject which are philo- 
sophical rather than religious, and which differ wholly from 
what had been so deeply ingrained into their minds. And 
this statement is not affected by the fact that communications 
purport to come from Catholic or Protestant, Mahometan or 
Hindoo spirits. Because, while such communications main- 
tain special dogmas and doctrines, yet they confirm the very 
facts which really constitute the spiritual theory, and which 
in themselves contradict the theory of the sectarian spirits. 
The Roman Catholic spirit, for instance, does not describe 
himself as being in either the orthodox purgatory, heaven, or 
hell ; the Evangelical Dissenter who died in the firm con- 
viction that he should certainly “ go to Jesus ’’ never describes 
himself as being with Christ, or as ever having seen Him, 
and so on throughout. Nothing is more common than for 
religious people at seances to ask questions about God and 
Christ. In reply they never get more than opinions, or more 
frequently the statement that they, the spirits, have no more 
actual knowledge of these subjects than they had while on 
earth. 

The general tendency of this paragraph is manifest. In 
regard to particulars we may remark that a change in the 
opinions of those who have just been possessed by demons is 
by no means marvellous: for the alleged cause is quite 
sufficient to explain the effect. And seeing that mediums 
are influenced by organised spirit-bands from the kingdom of 
Satan — in which, though love be wanting, there is no lack of 
unity — we should reasonably expect the teachings of all to 
point in the same direction. 

The fact that demons present themselves as Protestants, 
Papists, Mahometans, Hindoos, and so on, merely proves 



SPIRITUALISM. PART III. 


233 


that the order of Jesuits is not the only society which finds 
advantage in professing the creed of others for the purpose of 
propagating its own. That none of the communicating 
spirits speak of being with Christ seems any thing but strange 
to us. Yet the rule laid down by Mr. Wallace is not 
altogether without exception : for in Heaven Opened there is 
a description of Christ, and He is represented as nursing the 
infant spirits ! 

Lastly ; if demons can only give opinions, or are com- 
pelled to confess that they know no more than we do, of 
what use is it to waste time in consulting them ? And if it 
be urged that they have information upon other points, and 
are only deficient in that which concerns God and His re- 
demption of mankind, we reply that we more than suspect 
those who would substitute vain philosophies for the positive 
assertions of Scripture, and for the glorious and free salvation 
purchased by the blood of Christ. 

Conciunon of general We must now bring our remarks on the 
remark, on Subject of demou-teaching to a 

close. So far as they go, we believe that the quotations 
given above form a fair statement of the doctrinal develop- 
ment of Spiritualism. Qf course want of space compels us 
to omit many other points which demonstrate its extreme 
antagonism to Scripture : but surely what has been said is 
sufficient to set the most unwary Christian on his guard, to 
show that the great falling away may have commenced, that 
the deceiving spirits are perhaps already engaged in their 
final mission of delusion. 

The tuo specially men- But two prominent features of the last 
apostacy are to be a forbidding to marry, 
of certain hinds qf food, and a Commanding to abstain from meats, 
that is, from certain kinds of food — what kinds we are not 
told. Nor, if we attentively consider the new religion, can 
we fail to discern in it the rising lineaments of these charac- 
teristics. 

With regard to the latter of them, certain Spiritualistic 
sects have already prohibited animal food. And indeed in 
every age abstinence from flesh has been recognised as an 
indispensable condition of great mediumistic power, and 
must, therefore, naturally become a law among those who 



234 


earth's earliest ages. 


would have much direct communication with demons. But 
there are, moreover, indications in Spiritualistic literature 
that such an abstinence may hereafter be prescribed by an 
assumed refinement and unwillingness to destroy life, nay, 
even for reasons identical with those which influence the 
Buddhist. 

Possibly the permission to eat flesh, given as it was imme- 
diately after the angel-transgression, may have been intended 
to render man less capable of intercourse with supernatural 
beings, and so less exposed to their wiles. And if so, the 
desire on the part of the demons to withdraw it is easily 
understood. But for the development of this sign of the 
apostacy we must wait : for, though clearly distinguishable, 
it is not yet so prominent as it will be if our interpretation is 
correct. 

Ftguier'n theory qf Meanwhile we add a quotation from 
irammigratwn. Figuier’s Day after Death stating his theory 

of transmigration, which seems in the main to be held by 
many of the more intellectual Spiritualists, and which, if it 
becomes an article of faith, will certainly induce a horror of 
any food that involves a sacrifice of life, while at the same 
time it will remove a great obstacle to the union of Spiritual- 
ism and Buddhism. For what man could destroy or devour 
the body of an existence destined perhaps ere long to be his 
own child ? Or who would violently strip the spirit of a 
peccant and retrogressive ancestor ? 

“ Let us think of the emanations from souls dwelling in 
the sun descending upon the earth in solar rays. Light 
gives existence to plants, and produces vegetable life, accom- 
panied by sensibility. Plants, having received this sensible 
germ from the sun, communicate it, aided by heat likewise 
emanating from the sun, to animals. Let us think of the 
germs of souls, placed in the breasts of animals, developing 
themselves, becoming perfected by degrees, from one animal 
to another, and finishing by becoming incarnate in a human 
body. Let us think, then, of the superhuman being suc- 
ceeding to man, springing up into the vast plains of ether, 
and beginning the series of numerous transmigrations which, 
from one step to another, will lead him to the sun]imit of the 
scale of spiritual perfection, from which every material 



SPIKITUAIilSM. PAKT III. 


235 


substance has been eliminated, and where the soul, thus 
exalted to the purest degree of its essence, penetrates into the 
supreme abode of happiness, and of intellectual and moral 
power — the sun. 

Such may be this endless circle, such this unbroken chain, 
binding together all beings in nature, and passing from the 
visible to the invisible world.’’ 

The other epeciaiiy The Other predicted feature of demon- 

'mentioned docirme. Spt- v • ,-i v*r*.* o 

ritualistic theorien threat- I'he prohibition of marriage, is 
en a total abolition of already assuming a threatening prominence. 
marriage. stijnge doctrines regarding elec- 

tive affinities, free love, and spiritual alliance, not only tend 
to an utter rejection of marriage as ordained by God — which 
is the only contract recognised before Him — but also seem 
to be preparing the way for a repetition of the daring trans- 
gression of the antediluvians. 

Almost every inspirational book tampers with this subject; 
trance-mediums are continually declaiming upon it ; while its 
frequent discussion seems to exercise a wonderfully fas- 
cinating power, and to win many supporters for the demon- 
system. In spite of our Lord’s express declaration to the 
contrary, Spiritualists teach that the marriage of male and 
female is the great institution of the next life, and that every 
person has an affinity who will be his or her spouse for eternity ; 
but that in this present time there are frequent mistakes, and 
that, consequently, those who are not spiritual affinities being 
joined together are unable to agree and live in union. This 
they affirm to be the cause of all misfortune in wedded life. 

In some of the less advanced of their books the victim of 
an unsuitable marriage is exhorted to bear his calamity, and 
to comfort himself with the certainty of receiving his own 
spouse in the next world. But, apart from its opposition to 
Scripture, how unlikely is such an idea to soothe the irrita- 
tion of ill-assorted couples ! Many Spiritualists, however, 
go much further : the doctrine of free love is becoming 
popular among them : they declare that marriage should last 
only so long as the contracting parties may be disposed to 
live together : in short that God’s first ordinance, like every 
other restraint, is to be snapped asunder as soon as it becomes 
wearisome. 



236 


earth’s earliest ages. 


Mr, Herbert Noyes' Let the reader ludffe what is likely to 
marriage. rcsult if the Subjoined opinions become 

prevalent. The extracts are taken from a paper on Matri- 
monial Relations and Social Reforms read by Mr. Herbert 
Noyes before the London Dialectical Society. 

“ I entirely believe that divorce should be prompt and free 
whenever mutually desired ; but if it be only desired by one 
of the pair, it is a question on what conditions and under 
what safeguards it should be conceded. The main obstacle 
to divorce consists of untenable ecclesiastical fallacies.” 

“ I agree with those who ho\d that it is far more prejudicial 
to children to witness the divided counsels of their parents 
than to be finally parted from one or other of them ; and I 
agree that it is far more prejudicial to society that a dis- 
cordant pair should be compelled to live together than that 
they should be allowed to sever the artificial bonds which 
alone unite them.” 

“ Monogamy seems to be the intent of Nature, else she 
would not so nearly equalize the male and female birth-rates. 
But polygamy, whether legalized or clandestine, does seem to 
have prevailed from the earliest times all over the world ; 
and it is certainly a question whether it would not be better 
to legalize and regulate it after the fashion of the Ma- 
hometans, than to encourage its clandestine adoption, under 
the most lawless conditions, by faithless and Pharisaical 
monogamists.” 

“ Of all the mischievous inventions blasphemously ascribed 
to the Almighty, and published as His Word, I doubt if 
there be one more mischievous and mistaken than the text 
which asserts that there is no marriage in Heaven.” 

“ I maintain that the churches are entirely in the right in 
aflSrming true marriage to be indissoluble ; entirely in the 
wrong in asserting that their own rites are sufficient to con- 
stitute a true marriage. It is my firm conviction that 
affection and affinity are indispensable to an indissoluble 
marriage, and that animal passions temporarily excited are 
not reliable indications of these indispensable elements of the 
true matrimonial relations, I am disposed to think that in a 
true marriage man and wife are not so much one fiesh as 
virtually one spirit and one soul — one in time and one for 



SPIRITUALISM. PART III. 


237 


eternity ; and I believe that when we begin to elevate the art 
of mesmerism into the status of a science — the science of 
soul — we shall begin to understand mysteries of which but 
the faintest glimmer is now dawning on our intelligence.” 

“ The adventitious sanctity of marriage derived from 
ecclesiastical ceremonies is doomed to be ignored by coming 
generations. The true sanctity of marriage relations, based 
on the Divine laws of human nature, must come to be 
recognised in its place, when the future race are fully 
initiated in the mysteries of Will.”' 

Direct opponition of It would|J)e worse than useless to mul- 
thel quotations upon so painful a subject. 

v/nion between Spiritual- What we have given will sufficc as a 

ists and Secularists. . « . i • i i i 

specimen ol opinions which have been for 
some time spreading and developing. We will only add 
that American Spiritualists are even more advanced than 
their English brethren. 

The awful opposition of such views to Bible doctrine needs 
no demonstration. For the law of God enacts that man and 
woman when joined together are one flesh, not one spirit,^ 
and that neither of them may leave the other, save for the 
single cause of faithlessness,*’^ till death severs the bond, 
when the survivor is free. But the whole paper from which 
we have quoted, and especially the clause respecting “ the 
mysteries of Will,” is gravely portentous of an approaching 
wave of lawlessness, which may, for the time, almost sweep 
the primal institution of the Creator from the face of the 
earth. 

And in their ideas of marriage and of the Divine right of 
human will Spiritualists are strongly supported by numbers 
of Secularists, from whose ranks they are receiving continual 
accessions. Strange that they who scoff at the miracles of 
God should give heed to those of Satan ! How do the words 
of our Lord seem again to apply ; “ I am come in My Father's 
name, and ye receive Me not : if another shall come in his 
own name, him ye will receive” Ye would not trust the 
incarnate Son of God, therefore ye shall be abandoned to the 

' These extracts are copied from the report in Pr. Davies’ Seterodox 
London. 

2 Gen. ii. 24. ^ Matt. v. 32. 


^ John V. 43. 



1238 


eabth’s eabliest ages. 


«pells of Satan : ye did not like to retain God in your heart, 
And would not believe the truth ; therefore shall He send 
upon you the in working of delusion, so that ye shall believe 
the lie.' 

Marriage of thoae atilt But from the false theory which we 
the have been considering there emanates a 

still more fearful doctrine, one indeed which seems specially 
designed to prepare the way for a repetition of the ante- 
diluvian sin. For, as we have before seen. Spiritualists 
teach that all will marry in the next world if they do not in 
this, and that true marriage# lasts through eternity. The 
natural inference is that the true spouses of some are already 
in the spirit-land. And to such an extent is this inference 
followed out that many are reported to be receiving visits and 
communications from those spiritual beings with whom they 
are to be united for ever. An inspirational poem by T. L. 
Harris, entirely devoted to the subject of spirit-marriage, 
contains these lines. 

“ Day passes on. The purple twilight ends, 

Each forest tree grows radiant to behold ; 

A skyey Paradise above extends. 

Angels descend, their Loves below to fold 
In sweet embrace. With amethyst and gold 
Their deathless forms are clad. At last ascends 
That heavenly landscape ; but ’tis Eden still. 

And the heart takes of love divine its liquid fill.” 

The ceremonious marriage of a woman to a demon is a 
thing not unknown in the United States : whether it has ever 
taken place in England we cannot say. 

Account of a hook en- But there is before us a book called An 
flftge. Angel s Message, and claiming to be com- 

munications from a spirit — who affirms that he has become 
an angel— to an English lady, his destined bride for eternity. 
This awfully blasphemous composition might deceive many 
by its apparent sanctity, and by the frequent truths with 
which the strange doctrine is mingled. But let us call to 
mind the prediction that the deceiving demons should speak 
lies in hypocrisy : let us remember that he who would press 

^ 2 Thess. ii. 10-12. 



spibittjalism;. paet hi. 


239 ' 


the poisoned cup takes care that the vehicle of his deadly 
drug shall be good wine. A few extracts from the coim. 
munications will reveal the abyss to the brink of which the 
votaries of Spiritualism are apparently hastening, and will 
force upon us an awful inference. 

The communicating demon describes himself as the spirit 
of a man of deep religious feeling, who, during his sojourn in 
the flesh, was accustomed to visit the house of the medium’s 
father, though at that time he found no attraction in the 
medium herself. In course of years he died, as did also the 
mother of the lady. Soon afty the decease of the latter her 
daughter began to receive communications understood to 
come from her, and among them the following with which we 
are at present concerned. 

Extracts from the “I havc Seen how happy I have made you 
communicahons. Written. Love and bless 

Him Who has shown you, dear J — , that you have some one 
that loves you here. Dear W — sees that you love his 
memory. He sees that before I told you of his love for you, 
my dear child had always thought him a very high spirit, but 
now that I have been permitted to tell her, she will be sure 
to believe it is indeed true,” 

“ 1 shall now tell you more about W — . I see that this 
opens your heart to him who loves you more than I can tell 
you. Eor he is your own W — , he is your conjugial partner, 
the one heaven has intended for you from all eternity. I see 
that you are now thankful that you never formed any con- 
nection in the world.” 

“ I will now tell you what will give you great confidence. 
W — himself will write through you in his own hand.” 

“ I see that I have given you great happiness. I have no 
more to say. When you begin again W — will write through 
you.” 

Henceforth the demon-lover inspired the medium, and, 
after a little hypocritical talk about her faults and their 
remedy, got rid of the difficulty of our Lord’s declaration 
that in heaven they neither marry nor are given in marriage 
by remarking that the Sadducees asked their question in a 
natural sense, and that the Lord answered them in the same 
way. 



240 


earth’s earliest ages. 


“ For in the world a woman may have seven husbands, 
and yet not one of them may be spiritually united to her. 
There may have been no union of the soul with any of the 
seven, or there may have been with one, but with one only ; 
and she shall surely be his wife in heaven, and none other. 
‘ They twain shall be one flesh, and let no man put them 
asunder.’ ” 

The reader will not fail to notice the daring misapplication 
of the texts quoted, as well as the inference which is thereby 
suggested. So are God’s barriers of morality being broken 
down that the flood of corruption may rush in. 

“ She who writes these lines is my wife more than may be 
thought possible by those who have not had a similar state 
opened in themselves. She is not so as to her natural body, 
but she is so as to her spiritual body. For ‘there is a 
natural body, and there is a spiritual body.’ The one is 
within the other as a kernel within a shell. 

But this state can come to the outward perception of those 
only who are open to spirit- intercourse. No others can per- 
ceive, during their life in the world of nature, that which 
belongs to the spirit alone. This state constitutes medium- 
ship ; for she who is mine is not only a writing medium, but 
she is also susceptible of very palpable impressions of my 
presence with her. We are one ; and she has received the 
assurance of that truth by other means than the merely being 
told so in these writings.” 

There is much more to the same efiect ; but that which we 
have quoted is sufficient to unveil the danger which is 
threatening many. We will only further show what form 
manifestations often take by extracting the subjoined account 
of intercourse between the medium and the demon repre- 
sented to be the spirit of her mother. 

“ She has received the ardent caresses of her loved spirit- 
mother when in a state for open communion ; but this was 
also before her writing mediumship commenced. On one 
occasion the visitation was preceded by the appearance of a 
white dove of a very brilliant aspect, sitting on an eminence 
and looking towards her. She calmly contemplated this 
vision and remarked to herself how beautiful it was ; being 
perfectly awake — yet her bodily eyes were sealed, so that she 



CONCLUSION. THE LORD IS AT HAND. 


241 


could not open them, though earnestly desiring to do so. 
On the disappearance of the dove she was palpably 
embraced, but she saw no form; her spirit-eye could see 
the dove, but not the angelic being who then approached 
her. Well did she know it was the spirit of her she loved, 
for I was then unknown to her. Plainly did she perceive 
that ardent sphere of love ; palpably did she feel the living 
breath ; clearly did she hear the whispering voice — but could 
not catch the words it uttered, for her spirit-ear was not 
sufficiently opened — rapidly did that angel form pass over 
her passive frame, and she opr^ied her eyes to the world of 
nature, filled with the tears of joy, for well she knew that it 
was an angelic visitation. She has also received kisses on 
her forehead, when so fully awake that she has asked if they 
might be repeated, and they were repeated as plainly as 
before ; the feeling being precisely as though her brow were 
pressed by human lips, though none were in the room with 
her. She has felt drops of crystal water fall on her forehead, 
and has also asked if it might be repeated, which was done. 
These latter cases occurred when she was perfectly awake, 
for in the last instance she was about to rise, as the morning 
sun warned her it was already day.’’ 


CHAPTEK XIY. 

Conclusion. The Lord is at hand. 

Inference from the ex- What, then, shall we say to thesc 
tracts,^ (he ia.t<.i,apter. ^^ings ? There is nothing new under 

the sun. Are the so-called myths of Leda, of Europa, and 
of Ilia, actual history after all ! Is it literally true that an 
evil spirit loved Sara the daughter of Raguel ! Had Pope 
Innocent the Eighth a real insight of the truth when he 
fulminated his decretal against intercourse with the incubi 
and succubae ! And are the Nephilim again threatening a 
general descent upon our world and a repetition of the great 

17 



242 


earth’s earliest ages. 


sin of the days of old 1 Unless we are prepared to stigmatize 
large numbers of our fellow creatures as deliberate impostors, 
we seem almost forced to such a conclusion. 

Frophetio intimation In the twelfth chapter of the Apo- 
fallen angels will again calypse it IS plainly announced that, 
appear among men. before the development of Antichrist and 
the unparalleled woes of the end, Satan and his angels will 
be driven out of heaven, swept down from their aerial 
abodes, and confined to the narrow bounds of earth. Then 
will all the Nephilim, who are yet at liberty, be among men, 
and will quickly make them j^f^el the meaning of that awful 
utterance, “Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the 
sea! for the Devil is come down unto you, having great 
wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.” 
Then, not merely the demons, but the great angels of 
darkness, the principalities, the powers, and the world- 
rulers, maddened by the thought that they have lost their 
fair realms for ever, and that the Lord is at hand to 
complete their destruction, will in their rage break through 
every restraint, and recklessly gratify their own evil desires. 
And so, in the most appalling sense, the earth will again 
become corrupt and filled with violence. 

Spiritualism seems to he For this terrible inroad Spiritualism 
a preparation for this , -i • mv 

event. appears to be preparing the way. ihe 

army of demons has been sent forth in advance to bring 
about a universal apostacy from God and denial of Christ, 
and to establish a general communication between the 
powers of darkness and the children of disobedience. Years 
ago these demons predicted the future appearance upon 
earth of spiritual beings in material bodies : what has been 
their aim but to open men’s hearts for the reception of the 
banished angels ? Manifestations are continually increasing 
in power ; tangible forms are beginning to appear ; women 
are being taught that they are the wives of angels ; the 
world is becoming accustomed to supernatural visitants ! 
Surely the prince of the air must have heard that the legions 
of Michael are marching, and is hastily preparing his place 
of retreat. 

In the following chapter of the Apocalypse^ we see the 
^ Eev. xiii. 



CONCLTTSION. THE LOED IS AT HAND. 


243 


result of his flight to earth : for out of the troubled sea of 
anarchy and perplexity of nations there arises, in far greater 
majesty and power than it ever before possessed, the resus- 
citated empire of Rome under the immediate direction and 
government of Satan incarnate. 

The waiting church will Rut of far greater interest to those who 
love the Lord Jesus and long for His 
down to earth. appearing is that which is signified as 

taking place just previously to the expulsion of the Devil 
and his angels from heaven.^ For without going into details, 
which we hope to consider hereafter, we may anticipate our 
conclusion that the birth and rapture of the man child refers 
to the completion of the mystic Christ — of which the personal 
Christ is the Head and His church the body — as manifested 
by the sudden translation of all waiting saints, whether dead 
or alive, to meet their Lord in the air. 

It thus appears that this long expected event will precede 
Satan’s banishment from heaven, and, therefore, also its 
results, the revival of the Roman empire, and the revelation 
of the man of sin. Like Enoch, the church of Chiist will be 
called away before earth is for a time abandoned to the 
Nephilim, before the fearful woes of the end. 

Therefore, in all pro- Jf^ then, the fallen angels appear to be 
jiand. already preparing lor their descent ; it 

the great apostacy, which will at last evolve the lawless one, 
be even now spreading ; who can be sure of a day or an 
hour ? Who of Christ’s watching people can tell, when he 
rises in the morning, whether he will not have left the scenes 
of earth before close of day? Who, when he retires to rest, 
know's whether he will be awakened by the returning light, 
or by the summons of the Master, the voice of the archangel, 
and the trump of God ? Are we not living in solemn times : 
is not the air full of warnings : does it not behove every 
believer to arise, gird up his loins, and trim his lamp ? Is it 
not the sound of the King’s chariot which we hear : should 
not every sleeping servant rouse himself and prepare to meet 
the Lord with joy ? 

It may be that His voice will be heard in the morning, 
when the sun is high and men are hurrying to their various 
^ Rev. xii. 1-6. 



244 


eabth’s earliest ages. 


occupations : it may be that He will call at even, when the 
west is crimson with the setting sun, and the weary are 
seeking their homes after the toil and excitement of the day : 
it may be that His summons will startle the midnight air, 
and bring forth His own from the darkness of their chambers 
or their graves into the dazzling glory of His presence : it 
may be that at early dawn He will speak the word, and in 
an instant be surrounded by the myriads of his elect, 
countless as the dew drops that spring from the womb of the 
morning and glisten in the reddening beams of the sun. 
“ Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day, nor the hour, 
wherein the Son of man comdth.’^ ^ 

“ Surely I come quickly” ^ was His last message to His 
widowed church : let no man think that he has the Spirit of 
Christ till he can fervently respond, “ Amen. Even so, 
come, Lord Jesus.” 

^ Matt. XXV. 13. 2 xxii. 20. 






