I,...  >^^ 


tito      ■**';   ■,  S^-i 


'"^^fkm 


:^'-^' 


mw-^-^:. 


^*'„^--.'^ 


•2f^- 


*X,:. 


%, ,   ^=w 


U^' 


.^'^'t' 


■y^^*!^H 


^T 


!^\ 


^ 


:r.  s,. 


SMrlsfon 


SCC- 


E  I  G  H  T»E  E  N 


S    E    R    Ml  O   N   S 


Preached  by  die  late 

Rev.  GEORGE  WHITE  FIELD,  A.M 


On    the    followi 

Sermon 

I.  A  Faithful  Minifter's  part- 
ing Blefnn^. 

II.  Christ,  the  Believer's  Re- 
fuge. 

III.  Soul  Profperity, 

IV.  The  Gofpel,  a  dying 
Saint's  Triumph. 

V«  Repentance  and  Converflon. 

VI.  Glorifying  God  in  the 
Fire,  or  the  right  Improve- 
ment of  AiHiclion. 

VII.  The  Beloved  of  God. 

VIII.  The  Furnace  of  Afniccion. 


ng   Subjects: 

Sermon 

IX.  The  I.0R.D  our  Light.' 

X.  Self- Enquiry    concerning 
the  Work  of  Goo. 

XI.  Tlie  burning  Bufh. 

XII.  Soul  Dejeaion.  '^' 

XIII.  Spiritual  Baptifm. 

XLV.  Neglect  of  Christ  the 

killing  Sin. 
XV.  All  Mens  Place. 
XVT.  GcD,  a  Believer's  Glcry. 

XVII.  Jacob's  Ladder. 

XVIII.  The  Good  Shepherd. 


Taken  verbatim  in  Short- Hand,    and  faithfully  Tr.anfcribed 
by    Joseph    G  u  r  n  e  y. 


Revifed   by    ANDREW    GIFFORD,    D.  D. 


<-Mti.aamamv>**vr^tmt 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  and  fold  by  Joseph  Gukney,  Eookflfter,  N' 54, 
in  Hoiborn,    oppofite  Katton-S:reet. 


M.DCC.LXXX. 


[  Price  Five  Shillings  in  Boards.  ] 


1^  O      THE 


RIGHT      HONOURABLE 


S     E     L     I     N     A 


COUNTESS    DOWAGER    OF 


HUNTINGDON 


THESE      SERMONS 


ARE    MOST    HUMBLY    INSCRIBED 


BY     HER     LADYSHIP'S 


MOST    DEVOTED 


AND    OBEDIENT 


HUMBLE  SEAVANT 


JOSEPH      GURNEY.      ' 


TO     THE 

READER 


POfthumous  publications  generally  need 
an  apology.  This  poor  Orphan's  plea 
is,  that  it  attempts  to  preferve  the  ge- 
nuine  remains  of  One  who  has  inconteftibly 
proved  himfelf  the  deftitute  hclplefs  Orphan's 
friend  yet  fpeaking  to  a  ferious  auditory 
hanging  on  his  lips  for  infl:ru6tion,  and  com- 
fort, though  in  a  fainter  light,  as  the  glo- 
rious luminary  of  the  heavens,  the  ruler  of 
the  day,  feems  vifible,  even  after  it  is  fet, 
by  the  refradlion  of  its  refplendent  rays.  As 
to  its  fpots,  if  fuch  there  are,  let  them  be  put 
dovv'n  to  the  account  of  the  editor. 

A.     G. 


Errata. 

Page  51,  line  24,  for  to  read  for 

-    S2>     •     II  and  16,  for  needy  read  ttaughtf 
•  xzOt  "    10  and  ii«  for  y^rzr^  read  l>almt 


T 


THE 

CONTENTS. 

SERMON    I. 

A  Faithful  Minifter's  parting  Bleflipg. 

A  Farewell  Sermon,  February  23,   1763; 

Revel,  xxii.  21. 

HE  grace  of  010^  Lord  Jefus  Chrtjl  be  with 
you  alL     Amen.  page  i 

SERMON     II. 

Christ,   the  Believer's  Refuge. 
On  the  Death  of  Mr.  Beckman. 

Psalm  xlvl.   i — 6. 

God  is  our  refuge  and  flreizgthy  a  very  prefent 
help  in  trouble  j  therefore  "will  we  not  fear^ 
though  the  earth  be  removed^  and  the  moun- 
tains  be  carried  into  the  midjl  of  the  fea, 
though  the  waters  thereof  roar ^  and  be  troubled^ 
though  the  mountains  fimke-  with  the  fwelling 
thereof^  Selah.  Inhere  is  a  river y  the fr earns 
whereof  foall  make  glad  the  city  of  God^  the 
holy  place  of  the  tabernacles  'of  the  Mojl-High : 
God  is  in  the  midJl  of  hcr^  f:c  J}:all  not  be 
b  moved 'y 


the  contents; 

moved  \   God  f jail  help  her^    and  that  right 
early,  ^6 

SERMON    III. 
Soul  Profperity, 

3  Ep.  John  ver,  2, 
Beloved^    I  wijlj   above   all   thi?igs    that    thou 
mayfi  profper^    and  be  in  healthy  even  as  thy 
foul  profpereth.  54 

SERMON    IV. 

The  Gofpel  a  dying  Saint's  Triumph. 
A  Funeral  Sermon. 

Mark  xvi.  15,  16. 
And  he  faid  unto   them.   Go  ye   into  all  the 
worlds   and  preach  the  gofpel  to  every  crea- 
ture.    He   that    believethy    and   is    baptifedy 
fiall  befavedy  but  he  that  believeth  not^  fhall 
be  damned.  78 

SERMON    V. 

Repentance  and  Converlion. 

Acts  iii.  19. 
Repent  ye  therefore  and  be  converted^  that  your' 
fins    may  be  blotted  out^    when    the  times    of 
refrefdng  f:all  come  from  the  prejence  of  the 
Lord.  io3 

SEP- 


The    CONTENTS. 

SERMON     VI. 
dorifying  God  in  the  Fire  ;  or,  the  right  Im- 
provement of  Afflidion. 

Isaiah  xxiv.  15. 

Wherefore  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  fires,      134 

SERMON    VII. 

The  Beloved  of  God. 

Deut.  xxxiii.  12. 

'And  of  Benjamin    he  faid,    The  beloved  of  the 

Lord  fiall  dwell  in  Jajety  by  him  ;    and  the 

LordJJjall  cover  him  all  the  day  long^  and  he 

Jl:all  dwell  between  his  Jlmdders.  155 

SERMON    VIII. 

The  Furnace  of  Afflidlion. 
On  the  Death  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Middleton. 

Isaiah  xlviii.  10. 
Ihavechofen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  Affii^ion,  179 

SERMON     IX. 
The  Lord  our  Light. 

Isaiah  Ix.  19,  20. 
^he  fun  fiall  be  710  more  thy  light  by  day,  nci- 
ther  for  brightnefs  fiall  the  moon  give  light 
unto   thee,  but  the  Lord  Jlmll  be  unto  thee  a}\ 

everlajling 


The    CONTENTS. 

everlafting  light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory.  Thy 
fun  fiall  no  more  go  down,  neither  JJjall  thy 
moon  withdraw  itfelfy  for  the  Lord  Jhall  be 
thine  everlafting  light,  and  the  days  of  thy 
mourning  Jloall  he  ended.  202 

SERMON    X. 

Self-Enquiry  concerning  the  Work  of  God. 

Numb,  xxiii.  23. 
According  to  this  time  it  fiall  be  f aid  of  Jacobs 
and  oflfrael.  What  hath  God  wrought !    225 

SERMON    XL 

The  burning  Bufb; 

ExoD.  iii.  2,  3. 

And  he  looked,  and  behold  the  hujh  burned  with 
fire,  and  the  bujh  was  not  confumed  -,  and  Mofes 
faid,  I  will  now  turn  afide,  and  fee  this  great 
fight ^  why  the  buflj  is  not  burnt.  250 

SERMON    XII. 

Soul  Dejedtion. 

Psalm  xlii.  5. 
Why  art  thou  cajl  down,  0  my  foul?   and  why 
art  thou  difquieted  within  me?    hope  thou  in 
God,  for  Ifoall  yet  fraife  him  for  the  help  of 
his  countenance.  272 


The     CONTENTS. 

SERMON     XIII. 
Spiritual  Baptifm. 

Rom.  vi.  3,  4. 
Kjtow  ye  not^  that  Jo  many  of  us  as  were  lap^ 
tized  into  Jefus  Chrijiy  were  baptized  into 
his  death  ?  Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him 
by  baptifm  into  death  :  that  like  as  Chri/i  was 
raijed  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  even  fo  we  alfo  Jhould  walk  in  ncw^ 
nefs  of  life,  293 

SERMON    XIV. 

Negledt  of  Christ  the  killing  Sin. 

John  v.  40. 

And  ye  will  7iot  come  to  me  that  ye  may  have 
life.  317 

SERMON    XV. 

All  Men's  Place. 

EccLES.  vi.  6. 
T>o  not  all  go  to  one  place  ?  2\S 

SERMON    XVI. 

God  a  Believer's  Glorv. 

Isaiah  Ix.   19. 
A?id  thy  God  thy  Glory.  373 


The    CONTENTS. 

SERMON    XVII. 

Jacob's  Ladder. 

A  Farewell  Sermon  at  Tottenham-Court-Road 

Chapel,  Sunday,  Auguft  27,  1769. 

Gen.  xxviii.   12,  &c. 
Ji}id  he  dreamed,  and  behold,  a  ladder  fet  upon 
the  earth,  and  the  fop  of  it  reached  to  hea- 
'ven:    and  behold,  the  angels  of  God  afcending 
and  defending  on  it.     And  behold,  the  Lord 
food  abo've  it,  and  faid,  I  am  the  Lord  God 
of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the  God  of  Ifaac : 
the  land  whereon  thou  Heft,  to  thee  will  I  give 
it  and  to  thy  feed.     And  thy  feed  foall  be  as 
the  dii/l  of  the  earth  -,    and  thou  fmlt  fpread 
abroad  to  the  wefi,  and  to  the  eaji,  and  to  the 
north,  and  to  the  fouth :  and  in  thee,  and  in 
thy  feed,  Jl:all  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be 
hlefjed.     And  behold,  I  am  with  thee,  and  will 
keep  thee  in  all  places,  whither  thou  goeft,  and 
will  bring  thee  again  into  this  land :  for  I  will 
not  leave  thee,  until  I  have  done  that  which  I 
havefpoken  to  thee  of  397 

SERMON    XVIII. 

The  Good  Shepherd. 

A    Farewell     Sermon     at     the    Tabernacle, 
Wednefday,  Auguft  30,   1769. 

John  x.  27,  28. 

My  Jljeep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and 

they  follow  me.    And  I  give  unto  them  eternal 

life,  and  they  foall  never  per  if?,  neither  fiall 

any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand,  427 


;js(    Hii-Ji{-^-4"«-     X"'"°*$'°^'X     •■^••^•••^•••jij-^-    ';0^ 


SERMON      I. 


A  Faithful  Minifter's  Parting  Bleffino;. 


Revelations  xxii.  21.      ^^^^^^OP^^"^^  Oi 
7S^  ^;7zr^    of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrijl    be    ivith 

you  all     Amen.         irHSOLOGI 

)s(^^)eC  T  is  very  remarkable   that   the  *6ltl ,  v . . ' 

^  I  v^  teftament  ends  with  the  word  curfe  ; 
J^^'^M  vi^hereby  we  are  taught,  that  the'  law 
made  nothing  perfed  :  but  blefled  be  God,  the 
new  teftament  ends  otherwife,  even  a  precious 
bleffing,  that  glorious  grace  put  into  the  heart, 
and  dropt  by  the  pen  of  the  dilciple  whom 
Jefus  loved. 

My  brethren,  as  the  providence  of  God  calls 
us  now  to  bid  each  other  a  long  farewel,  can 
I  part  from  you  better  than  in  enlarging  a  little 
upon  this  fliort  but  glorious  prayer  3  can  I  wifh 

B  you. 


2  A  Faithful  Minijters  Ser.  L 

you,  or  you  me,  better  in  time  and  eternity, 
than  that  the  words  of  our  text  may  be  fulfil- 
led in  our  hearts,  the  grace  of  cur  Lord  Jejiis 
Chrijl  be  ivith you  ally  Amen,  In  opening  which, 

Firft,  it  will  be  proper  to  explain  what  we 
are  to  underftand  by  the  w^ord  grace. 

Secondly,  what  by  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift,  and  its  being  with  us  all ;  and 
then  to  obferve  upon  the  word  Amen  :  fhew- 
Ing  you  why  it  is  that  every  one  of  us  may  wiili, 
that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrifl  may 
be  with  us  all. 

Perhaps,  there  is  not  a  word  in  the  book 
of  God  that  has  a  greater  variety  of  inter- 
pretations put  upon  it  than  this  little,  this 
great  word  grace  :  I  don't  intend  to  fpin 
out,  or  wafte  the  time  by  giving  you  all.  It 
will  be  enough  in  general  to  obferve,  that  the 
word  grace  fignifies  favour,  or  may  imply  the 
general  kindnefs  that  God  bears  to  the  world; 
but  it  fignifies  that  here  which  I  pray  God  we 
may  all  experience,  I  mean  the  grace,  the  fpe- 
cial  grace  of  the  blefled  God  communicated 
to  his  people ;  not  only  his  favour  difplayed  to 
us  outwardly,  but  the  work  of  the  blefled  Spi- 
rit imparted  and  conveyed  inwardly  and  moft 
powerfully  to  our  fouls^  and  tliis  is  what  our 

church 


Ser.  I.  Parting  Blefmg.  j 

church  in  the   catechifm  calls  fpecial  grace; 
for  though  Jefus  Chrift  in  one  refpedt  is  the 
Saviour  of  all,    and  we   are  to  offer  *  Jefus 
Chrift  univerfally   to   all,    yet  he  is  faid  in  a 
fpecial  manner  to  be  the  faviour  of  them  that 
believe  ;  fo  that  the  word  grace  is  a  very  com- 
plex word,  and  takes  in  all  that  the  blefled 
Spirit  of  God  does  for  a  poor  finner,  from  the 
moment  he  firft  draws  his  breath,  and  brines 
him  to  Jefus  Chrift,  till  he  is  pleafed  to  call 
him  by  death  -,  and  as  it  is  begun  in  grace,  it 
will  be  fwallovved  up  in  an  endlefs  eternity  of 
glory  hereafter  ;  this  is  called  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift  :  why  fo  ?  becaufe  it  is  pur- 
chafed  \  for  us  by  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  :  the 
law  was  given  by  Mofes,  but  grace  and  truth^ 
in  the  moft  emphatical  manner,  came  by  Jefus 
Chrift  the  Son  of  God,     If  it  was  not  for  the 
purchafe  of  a  Mediator's  blood,  if  it  was  not 
that  Jefus  Chrift  had  bought  us  with  a  price, 
even  with  the  price  of  his  ow^n  blood,  you  and 
I  Ihould  never  have  had,  you  and  I  could  never 
have  had  the  grace  of  God  manifefted  at  all  to 
our  fouls.     The  covenant  of  works  being  bro- 
ken, our   firft  parents  ftood  convidcd  before 
God;  they  were  criminals,  though   they  did 
B  2  not 

*  Preach.         f  Procured, 


4  A  Faithful  Minijiers  Ser,  I. 

not  care  to  own  it;  condemned  before  God, 
and  in  themfelves,  lb  that  like  their  children 
they  made  excufes  for  their  fin.  Man  by  na- 
ture had  but  one  neck,  and  if  God  had  pleafed 
to  have  done  it,  he  might  juftly  have  cut  it  off 
at  one  blow  ;  but  no  fooner  had  man  incurred 
the  curfe  of  the  law,  but  behold  a  Mediator  is 
provided  under  the  charadter  of  the  feed  of  the 
woman,  which  fliould  bruife  the  ferpent's 
head ;  implying  what  the  Redeemer  was  firft 
to  do  without,  and  afterwards  to  do  in  the 
hearts  of  all  his  people  :  well  therefore  are  we 
taught  in  our  church  coUeds  to  end  all  our 
prayers  with  the  words,  through  Jefus  Chriji 
our  Lord, 

Moreover,  brethren,  this  grace  may  be  call- 
ed the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  be- 
caufe  it  is  not  only  purchafed  ^^  by  him,  but 
it  is  conveyed  into  our  hearts  through  Chrift  5 
the  federal  head  of  his  glorious  body,  is  a  head 
of  influence  to  thofe  for  whom  he  flied  his 
blood :  thus  his  difciples  laid,  he  was  full  of 
grace  and  truth,  and  out  of  his  fulnefs  we, 
all  that  are  true  believers,  receive  grace  for 
grace  -,  grace  upon  grace,  fays  Mr.  Blackwall, 
in  his  Sacred  Clafficks :  grace  for  grace,  that 

is, 
*  Procured. 


Ser.  I.  Farting  Bleffing.  j 

Is,  fays  Luther,  every  grace  that  is  in  Chrift 
jefus,  will  be  by  his  bleffed  Spirit  tranfcribed 
into  every  believer's  heart,  even  as  the  warm 
wax  receives  the  imprefs  of  the  feal  upon  it ; 
as  there  is  line  upon  line  upon  the  feal  left 
upon  the  wax,  fo  in  a  degree,  though  we  come 
greatly  fl:iort  of  what  the  law  requires,  the 
grac3  that  is  in  Jefus  Chriil:  is,  in  a  meafure, 
implanted  in  our  fouls;  but  the  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  blefled  be  God,  has  our  ftock  in  his 
hands.  God  trufted  man  once,  but  never  will 
more;  he  fet  Adam  up,  gave  him  a  bleffed 
ftock,  placed  him  in  a  paradife  of  love,  and  he 
fbon  became  a  bankrupt,  fome  think  in  twenty- 
four  hours,  however,  all  agree  it  was  in  fix  or 
feven  days,  and  that  he  never  had  but  one  fab- 
bath  ;  but  now,  bleffed  be  God,  w^e  are  un-- 
der  a  better  difpenfation,  our  ftock  is  put  into 
Chrift's  hands,  he  knows  how  to  keep  it,  and 
us  too;  fo  this  grace  may  be  faid  to  be  the 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  fecured  by 
his  blood,  and  conveyed  to  our  fouls  by  his 
being  the  head  of  his  church  and  people. 

This  grace  has  a  variety  of  epithets  put  to  it, 
and  I  queftion  whether  there  is  any  kind  of 
grace  but  what  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  exercifes 
towards  his  people  fome  way  or  other,  every 
hour^  every  moment  of  the  day.  Firft, 


6  A  Faithful  MtnzJIers  Ser.  L 

Firfl,  His  reftraining  graces  why,  if itw2S 
not  for  this,  God's  people  would  be  juft  as 
weak  and  wicked  as  other  folks  are :  remem- 
ber what  David  faid  when  Abigail  came  to 
him}  he  was  going  to  kill  a  neighbour  for 
afti'onting  him,  forgot  that  he  was  a  Pfalmift, 
and  was  only  ad:ing  as  a  creature :  bleffed  be 
God,  faya  he,  that  has  fent  thee  to  meet  and 
keep  me  :  My  brethren,  we  may  talk  what  wc 
pleaie,  and  build  upon  our  own  flock  y  we 
are  juft  like  little  children  that  will  walk  by 
themfelves ;  well,  fays  the  father,  walk  alone 
then,  they  tumble  down,  get  a  broken  brow, 
and  then  are  glad  to  take  hold  of  the  father : 
thus  Jefus  Chrift  is  always  ading  in  a  reftrain- 
mg  way  to  his  people  y  if  it  was  not  fo,  by  the 
blindnefs  of  their  underftandings,  the  corrup- 
tiQn&  of  their  hearts  and  affedions,  together 
with  the  perverfenefs  of  their  will,  alas !  alas  ! 
there  is  not  a  child  of  God  that  would  not  run 
away  every  day,  if  Chrift  did  not  reftrain 
him  ! 

Secondly,  There  is  convidting  grace,  which 
from  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  ads  every  day  and 
hour.  Oh !  it  is  a  blefled  thing  to  be  under 
the  Redeemer's  conviding  grace !  a  man  may 
fpeak  to  the  ear,  but  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God 

alone 


£er.  L  Parting  Blefmg.  j 

alone  can  fpeak  to  the  heart :  I  am  not  fpeak- 
ing  of  convidling  grace  that  wounds  before 
converfion,  and  gives  us  a  fenfe  of  our  fin  and 
mifery ;  no,  I  mean  convISing  grace  that  fol- 
lows the  believer  from  time  to  time.  If  a  hea- 
then Socrates  could  fay,  that  he  had  always  -^ 
monitor  witl?  him  to  check  him  when  he  did 
amifs,  and  dired:  him  when  he  went  right, 
furely  the  Chriflian  may  fay,  and  bieffed  be 
God  for  it,  that  he  has  got  a  JefuG  that  kindly 
fliews  him  when  he  goes  aftray,  and  by  his 
grace  puts  him  into  the  way  of  righteoufnefs, 
that  his  feet  may  not  flip ;  this  is  what  the 
iJiepherd  does  to  his  fheep  when  they  have 
wandered  ;  what  does  the  fiiepherd  do,  but 
fends  fome  little  cur,  his  dog,  after  them,  tr> 
bring  them  to  the  fold  again  ?  what  does  Jefug' 
Chrift  do  in  temptations,  trials,  and  afflidions  ? 
he  fetches  his  people  home,  and  convinces- 
them  that  they  have  done  amiis.  ^'.* 

Then,  thirdly.  There  is  the  converting  grace 
of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrid:.  Oh!  what  poor 
unhappy  creatures  are  they,  that  think  th^y 
can  turn  to  God  when  they  pleafe,  to  which 
abominable  principle  it  is  ov/ing,  that  they 
leave  it  till  they  cannot  turn  in  their  beds  :• 
Satan  tells  them  then^  it  Is  too  late,  their  co^^ 

fciences 


b'  A  Faithful  Minijlers  Ser.  I, 

fciences  are  filled  with  horror,  and  they  go 
off  in  a  whirlwind  j  may  this  be  the  cafe  of 
none  here  !  That  is  a  moft  excellent  prayer  in 
our  Communion  Office,  Turn  us^  O  good  Lord, 
a?id  Tje  Jhall  be  turned 'y  we  can  no  more  turn 
our  hearts  than  we  can  turn  the  world  upiide 
down  y  it  is  the  Redeemer,  by  his  Spirit,  muft 
take  away  the  heart  of  ftone,  and  by  the  in- 
fluence of  the  holy  Spirit  give  us  a  heart  of 
flefli.  I  might  as  well  attempt  to  reach  the 
heavens  with  my  hand  -,  I  might  as  well  go 
to  fome  church-yard  and  command  the  dead 
to  rife;  I  might  as  foon  fliake  my  handker- 
chief and  bid  the  ftreams  divide,  and  they  give 
way,  as  to  expedl  a  foul  to  turn  to  God  with- 
out the  grace  of  the  Mediator.  Come,  my 
dear  hearers,  1  am  of  a  good  man's  opinion, 
that  prayed  he  might  be  converted  every  day. 
In  the  divine  life,  not  to  go  forwards  is  to  go 
backwards ;  and  it  is  one  great  part  of  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  convert  the  foul 
from  fomething  that  is  wrong  to  fomething  that 
is  right,  every  day,  hour,  and  moment  of  the 
believer's  life,  fo  that  in  fliort  his  life  is  one 
continued  ad  of  converting  grace  :  there  is  not 
a  day  but  there  is  fomething  wrong ;  there  is 
fomething  we  want  to  have  taken  away ;  we. 

want 


Ser.  I.  Farting  Blejjing.  9 

want  to  get  rid  of  the  old  man,  and  to  get  more 
of  the  new  man,  and  fo  the  Spirit  of  God  works 
every  day :  •  O !  my  brethren,  God  give  us 
more  of  this  converting  grace  ! 

Then    there    is  eftabhiiliing   grace.      David 
prays.  Create  in  me  a  new  hearty  and  renew  a 
right  fpirit  within  me  3  in  the  margin,  it  is  con- 
ftant  fpiritj    and  you  hear   of  fome   that  are 
rooted  and  grounded  in  the  love  of  God,  and 
the  apoftle  prays,  that  they  may  always  abound 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord :  again,  it  is  good  to 
have  the  heart  eftabliflied  with  grace  \  there  is 
a  good    many    people    have  fome    religion   in 
them,  but  they  are  not  eftabliflied  \  hence  they 
are  mere  weather-cocks,  turned  about  by  every 
wind  of  dodlrine  5  and  you  may  as  foon  mea- 
fure  the  moon  for  a  fuit  of  clothes,  as  fome 
people  that  are  always  changing ;  this  is  for 
want  of  more  grace^  more  of  the  Spirit  of  God  > 
and  as  children  grow  that  are  got  ftronger  and 
riper,  fo  as  people  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  they  will 
be  more  fettled,  more  confirmed :  on  firfl  fet* 
ting  out  they  prattle,  but  they  will  be  mors 
manly,  more  firm,  more  fteady  :  young  Clirif- 
tians  are  like  little  rivulets  that  make  a  larg« 
noife,  and    have    Ihaliow    \\'ater;    old    Qirif- 
<^  tians 


10  A  Faithful  Minljicrs  Ser.  I, 

tians  are  like  deep  water  that  makes  little  noifc, 
carries  a  good  load,  and  gives  not  way. 

What  think  you,  my  brethren,  of  the  Re- 
deemer's comforting  grace  ?  O  !   what  can  you 
do  without  it  ?  In  the  multitude  of  my  thoughts 
within  me,  fays  the  Pfalmifl:,  thy  comforts  have 
refrejhed  my  foul,     I  believe  you  will   all  find 
what  lord  Bolinbrooke,  in  fpite  of  all  his  fine 
learning,  and  deiftical  principles,  found  when 
under  afflidion ;  he  fent  a  letter  which  I  faw 
and  heard  read  to  me,  at  leaft  that  part  of  it  in  ' 
which  he  fays :  Now  I  atn  under    this   affile- 
tion,  I  find  my  phllofophy  fails  me.     With  all 
our  philofophy  and  flriving,  it  is  too  hard  to 
work  ourfelves  into ■  a  pafTive  ftate:  alas!  it  is 
commendable  to  ftrive,  but  we  ihall  never  be 
content,  we  fliail  never  be  chearful  under  fuf- 
ferings,  but  through  the  afTiftance  of  the  Re- 
deemer.    Even  now,  in  refpcdl  of  parting  from 
one  another,  what  can  comfort  friends  when 
feparated  but  the  Spirit  of  God.    Paul,  when 
going  away  for  Jerufalem,  faid,  What  mean  ye 
to  weep  and  to  break  my  heart  ?  he  alfo  fays,  / 
am  ready  not  to  he  bound  only,  but  alfo  to  die  at 
jerujalem,  for    the   nc.me   of  the  Lord  Jejus, 
which  he   could    not  have  faid,  had  he   not 
felt  the   comforting    grace    of  Jefus    Chrift. 

Our 


Ser.  I.  Parting  Blejjmg.  1 1 

Our  Lord,  when  going  away,  fays,  I  will  fend 
the  Comforter ;  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortlcfs 
and  helplefs,  I  will  come  again  :  the  Lord 
helps  the  believer  from  time  to  time.  We 
can  eafily,  my  brethren,  talk  when  not  under 
the  rod  ourfelvcs  ;  there  is  not  a  phyfician  or 
apothecary  in  London  but  can  give  good  ad- 
vice, but  when  they  are  fick  themfelves,  poor 
fouls !  they  are  juft  like  their  patients,  and 
many  times  are  more  impatient  than  thofe 
they  ufed  to  preach  patience  to  -,  fo  it  is  with 
the  greateft  Chriflian,  we  are  all  men  of  like 
paffions,  there  is  not  one  of  us  when  under  the 
rod,  if  left  to  ourfelves,  but  would  curfe  God, 
and,  Ephraim  like,  be  as  a  bollock  imaccuflomed 
to  the  yoke 'y  and  there  are  many  here,  I  do  not 
doubt,  that  have  faid  to  the  Redeemer,  What 
dojl  thou'?  or,  perhaps,  with  Jonah,  We  do 
ipell  to  be  angry  -,  if  the  Lord  does  but  take 
away  his  goard  from  us,  if  he  is  pleafed  to 
baulk  us  in  regard  to  the  creatures,  how  un- 
comfortable are  we?  and  there  are  fo  many 
afHidions  and  trials,  that  if  it  was  not  for  the 
Lord  Jefus  ChriiVs  comfortings,  no  flefh  could 
bear  them. 

In  a  word,  what  think  you,    my  brethren, 
of  the    quickning    grace   of  cur  Lord    Jefus 

C  2  Chriftr 


J  2  A  Faithful  Minijler's  Ser.  I, 

Chrift?  Remember  David  fays,  ^icken  me 
according  to  thy  ivord,  quicken  me  in  thy  isjay^ 
quicken  me  in  thy  righteoufnefs  :  God's  people 
want  quickening  every  day  >  this  is  trimming 
our  lamps,  girding  up  the  loins  of  our  minds, 
ftirring  up  tiie  gift  of  God  that  is  in  us.  It 
is  juft  with  a  foul  as  it  is  with  the  plants  and 
trees ;  how  would  it  be  with  them  if  the  Lord 
did  not  command  quickening  life  to  them  after 
the  winter  ?  the  believer  has  his  frofty  and  win- 
ter days,  and  wo  be  to  them  that  think  they 
have  always  a  fummer^  the  believer  at  times 
can  fay,  The  winter  is  paji^  the  rain  is  over  and 
gone^  the  flowers  appear  on  the  earthy  the  tifne  of 
the  finging  of  birds  is  C07ne^  and  the  voice  of  the 
turtle  is  heard  in  our  land^  the  fg-tree  putteth 
forth  her  green  figs ^  ajid  the  vines  with  the  tender 
grapes  give  a  good  fmelly  Cant.  ii.  I2.  What 
is  all  this  but  God's  quickening  grace,  reftorlng 
the  believer  to  his  bleffcd  joy.  Oh  !  my  bre- 
thren, I  have  not  time  to  fhow  you  in  how 
many  ways  the  Redeemers  grace  is  difplayed  5 
but  wherever  this  grace  is,  what  reafon  have 
you  that  are  partakers  of  it,  and  I,  to  pray  that 
it  may  be  with  us  all;  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrifly  fays  John  here,  be  with  you  all: 
it  is  not  faid  all  ii^inifters,  it  is  not  faid  all  of 

this 


Ser.  I.  Parting  Blepig,  1 3 

this  or  that  particular  people,  but  with  all  be- 
lievers. O  !  my  friends,  remember  what  Mr. 
Henry  faid,  he  defined  to  be  a  Catholic,  but 
not  a  Roman  Cathohc.  I  have  often  thought 
fince  I  went  to  fee  the  water-works,  that  it 
was  an  emblem  of  Chrif: ;  there  is  a  great 
rcfervoir  of  water  from  which  this  great  city 
is  fupplied;  but  how  is  it  fupphed  from  that 
rcfervoir  ?  why  by  hundreds  and  hundreds  of 
pipes  :  but  where  does  this  water  go,  does  it 
go  only  to  the  diffenters  or  to  the  church  peo- 
ple, only  to  this  or  that  people  ?  no,  the  pipes 
convey  the  water  to  all  ^  and  I  remember  when 
I  faw  it,  it  put  me  in  mind  of  the  great  rcfer- 
voir of  grace,  that  living  water  that  is  in  Chrift 
Jefus,  and  the  pipes  are  the  ordinances  by 
which  his  grace  is  conveyed  to  all  believing 
fouls,  God  grant  we  may  be  of  that  happy 
number.  O  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  Chrift  has 
faid,  /  nvill  be  with  you  always  even  to  the  end  of 
the  worlds  Matt,  xxviii.  20.  and  therefore  we 
muft  look  upon  this  prayer  to  be  as  efficacious 
now,  as  it  was  the  moment  the  words  dropt 
from  the  apoftle's  pen,  1  believe  the  mod 
minute  philofophers,  and  thofe  t  at  have  the 
greateft  ikill  in  aftronomy,  cannot  perceive 
there  has  been  any  abacerncnt  in  ihe  heat  of  the 

lull 


I^^  A  Faithful  Minifiers  Ser.  I* 

fun.fince  God  firft  commanded  it  to  rule  the 
day,  then  furely,  if  my  God  can  make  a  fun 
that  for  fo  many  thoufands  of  years  iliall  irradi- 
ate, enlighten,  and  warm  the  world,  without 
loiing  any  of  its  light  and  heat,  fo  does  the  fun 
of  righteoufnefs,  the  Son  of  God,  arife  upon 
the  children  of  God  with  healing  under  his 
wings ;  he  raifes,  warms,  nourifhes,  and  com- 
forts his  people,  and  we  have  the  gofpel  on 
the  ends  of  the  earth,-  as  well  as  thofe  who  had 
the  honour  of  converfing  with  him  in  the  days, 
of  his  flefh.  I  mention  this  in  anfwer  to  all 
thofe  who  have  wrote  againft  the  Methodifts, 
and  reprefented  them  as  fanatics  j  there  is  no 
other  way  of  talking  againft  the  divine  influence, 
but  by  allowing  it  was  fo  formerly,  but  that  it 
is  not  io  now  5  they  fay  the  primitive  Chrif- 
tians  had  it,  but  it  is  not  to  be  fo  with  us  now 
as  it  was  formerly.  O  my  brethren,  what  fools, 
thefe  great  men  are  when  they  talk  about  things 
they  knov/  nothing  of;  give  them  a  polyglot, 
give  them  a  lexicon,  give  them  a  geographical 
text,  or  the  chronological  part  of  the  fcripture, 
they  have  fomething  to  fay;  but  v/hen  they 
come  to  talk  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  fee  the 
w^ord  Spirit,  and  they  read  ths  word  grace,  but 
while  tliey  read   it   their  hearts  cry,    becaufe 

their 


S^r.  I.  Parting  Blejjing,  15 

their  knowledge  pufFs  them  up,  furely  if  it 
wasfo,  we  gteat  men  that  have  been  in  the 
wniverfity  (hould  have  it,  Gcd  would  give  it 
us ;  and  becaufe  they  find  it  not  in  themfelves, 
their  abominable  pride  will  not  own  It  may  be 
in  any.  Pray  what  was  Peter,  James,  and 
John,  I  don't  mean  to  fpeak  difrefpeftfully  of 
them,  they  were  as  weak,  as  blind,  as  cbfti^ 
nate,  and  worldly-minded  as  others,  till  Jefus 
Chrift  changed  their  hearts ;  and  that  fame 
grace  th^t  changed  their  hearts,  changes  now 
the  hearts  of  God's  people ;  and  bleffed  be 
God,  that  fame  grace  is  with  all  his  people. 

It  is  fo  in  his  ordinances.     Here  is  the  dif- 
ference between  a  Formalift  and  a  Chriftlan  ; 
the  Formalift  goes  to  ordinances,  but  then  he 
does  not  feel  the  God  of  ordinances,  and  that 
is  the  reafon  moft  formal  people  don't  care  to 
go  to  church  very  often  :  who  cares  to  go  to 
the  houfe  of  a  pcrfon  he  does  not  love  ?  they 
Avill  only  juft  knock  at  the  door,  and  afic  if 
fiich  a  perfon  is  at  home,  and  are  very  glad  to 
hear  the  fervants  fay  their  mafter  or  miilrefs  is 
not  at  home  5  the  vifit  is  paid  ,  fo  it  is  with 
many  people  that  go  to  church  and  m.ccting ; 
and  I  do  not  doubt  but  there  are  many  Metho- 
difts,  hundreds  and  hundreds,  that  have  been 


1 6  A  Faithful  Minijlers  Ser.  I. 

at  the  ordinances,  who  never  felt  the  God  of 
ordinances  converting  them  to  this  day. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  is  with 
his  people  in  prayer.     Who  can  pray  without 
grace  ?  they  may  laugh  at  it  as  will,  but  God 
give  you  and  I  a  fpirit  of  prayer ;  let  them 
laugh  as  they  pleafe  -,  what  profit  will  it  be  to 
us  to  read  this  book  without  the  grace  of  God* 
What  a  horrid  blunder  has  the  bifliop  of  G — r 
been  guilty  of  ?  What  do  you  think  his  lord- 
fhip  fays,  in  order  to  expofe  the  fanaticifm  of 
the  Methodifts  ?  Why,  fays  he,  they  fay  they 
cannot   underftand  the  fcriptures  without  the 
^  Spirit  of  God.     Can  any  man  underftand  the 
fcriptures  without  the  Spirit  of  God  helps  him  ? 
Jefus  Chrift  muft  open  our  underftanding  to 
underftand  the  fcriptures,  and  the  Spirit  of  God 
muft  take  of  the  things  of  Chrift  and  (how  them 
unto  us  y  as  we  are  taught  to  pray,    0  Lord^ 
thou  haft  caufed  thy  holy  fcriptures  to  be  written^ 
&c.  as  in  the  fecond  Sunday  in  Adventj  and  here 
the  b — p  pretends  to  tell  us,  there  is  no  need 

of  it ;  here  our  collefl;  and  b p  difagree  very 

much.  So  with  refped  to  all  ordinances  it  is 
the  fame :  what  fignlfies  my  preaching,  and 
your  hearing,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not 
enlighten  r    Formal  minifters  can  fteal  a  fer- 

mon. 


Scr.  I.  Parting  BleJJing.  17 

mon,  and  add  a  little  out  of  their  own  heads,  but 
a  minifter  of  the  gofpel  cannot  preach  to  purpofv^ 
without  the  afliftance  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  no 
more  than  a  fhip  can  fail  without  wind.  As 
for  a  carnal  man  he  may  take  his  fermon  in 
his  pocket,  and  you  will  find  his  fermon s  al- 
ways the  fame ;  but  fpiritual  preachers  are 
feldom  fo  s  fometimes  they  are  in  dark- 
nefs,  fo  as  to  fpeak  to  thofe  that  are  in  dark- 
nefs;  fometimes  they  are  tempted,  fo  as  to 
fpeak  to  thofe  that  are  tempted ,  fometimes 
they  have  a  full  gale,  and  go  before  the  wind, 
and  this  is  all  by  the  afliftance  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  without  this  a  man  may  preach  like 
an  angel,  and  do  no  good  at  all.  So  in  refpecft 
to  hearing  the  word  of  God,  I  declare  I  would 
not  preach  again,  if  I  did  not  think  that  God 
would  accompany  the  word  by  his  Spirit :  what 
are  we  but  founding  brafs  and  tiiikling  cymbals  ? 
If  the  word  is  preached  in  the  ftrength  of  the 
Spirit,  it  will  be  attended  with  convidions, 
and  converfions,  and  the  grace  of  God  will  be 
both  with  preacher  and  hearer. 

^he  grace  of  God  is  with  his  people  in  his 
providence.  Oh  1  fays  biQiop  Hall,  a  little  aid 
is  not  enough  for  me.  My  going  on  the 
waters  puts  me  in  mind  of  what  I  have  feen 

D  mqmy 


j^  A  Faithfid  Mimjltrs  Ser.  I.- 

many  times :  if  the  failors  perceive  a  ftorm  s 
comings  they  do  not  chufe  to  fpeak  to  the 
pafTengers  for  fear  of  frightening  them,  they 
will  go  quietly  on  deck,  and  give  orders  for 
proper  care  to  be  taken  \  and  if  a  failor  can  tell 
of  ftorms  approaching  by  the  clouds,  why 
can't  God's  people  tell  why  God  does  fo  and 
fo  with  them  ?  The  people  of  God  eye  hirrv 
in  his  providence  y  the  very  hairs  of  their  heads- 
are  all  numbered,  and  the  grace  of  God  is= 
with  them  in  the  common  bufinefs  of  life. 
Some  people  think  that  the  Methodifts  preach 
io  and  fo  to  make  them  negled:  their  bufinefsy 
and  we  preach  at  unfeafonable  times :  we  would 
not  preach  at  this  time,  but  that  we  are  going 
to  part  from  one  another ;  no,  we  preach  that 
the  grace  of  God  may  attend  them  in  their 
countingJioufes,  and  wo  be  to  thofe  perfcns 
that  do  not  take  the  grace  of  God  with  them 
into  their  eounting-houfes,  and  in  their  com- 
mon bufinefs.  O  what  bleffed  times  would  it 
be  if  every  one  made  the  grace  of  God  their 
employ,  that  when  the  Lord  comes  he  may- 
fay,  Lord,  here  I  am  waiting  for  thee. 

"The  grace  of  the  Lord  jcjiis  Chrtji  is  with  his 
people  vA\zr\Jick  and  when  dyi?2g,  O  my  dear 
fouls,  what  rtiall  we  do  when  death  comes  ? 
^  What 


Ser.  I,  Parting  Blejjing.  ^xg 

What  -a  mercy  it  is  that  we  have  got  a  good 
mafter  to  carry  us  through  that  time  !  As  a  poor 
converted  Negro  that  faw  a  believer  who  wa3 
dying  in  comfort,  faid,  Mader  don't  fear,  Je- 
fus  Chrift  will  carry  you  fafe  through  the  dark 
valley  of  the  ihadow  of  death. — But  the  time 
would  fail,  if  I  was  to  (how  you  in  how  many 
refpeds  tbe  grace  of  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrijl  helps 
us ;  but  what  I  have  faid  will  fliow,  that  we 
need  all  join  in  a  hearty  Amen  j  Amen,  I  pray 
God  it  may  be  fo,  fo  it  is,  fo  may  it  be !  May 
be  what  ?  why  that  the  grace  of  the  Lord  "Jefm 
Chrijiy  conviSing^  re/irainiiigy  convertings  ejla- 
hlifhing  and  comforting  grace ^  may  be  with  us 
in  his  ordinances,  in  his  providences,  in  fick- 
nefs,  and  when  dying  :  then,  blefTed  be  God, 
we  fhall  carry  it  v/ith  us  after  time.  And 
now,  my  dear  hearers,  by  the  help  of  my  God, 
in  whofe  flrength  I  defire  once  more  to  go  up- 
on the  waters,  I  fhall  pray  wherever  1  am, 
that  this  grace  of  the  Lord  jfiis  Chrif  may  be 
with  'iou  all. 

To  whom  fhall  I  fpeak  firfl  by  way  of  im- 
provement ?  Are  there  any  of  you  here  uncon- 
verted ?  no  doubt  too  many.  Are  there  any  of 
you  here  this  morning  come  out  of  curiofiry  to 
hear  what  the  babler  has  to  fay  ?  Many,  per- 
D  2  hnps 


20  A  Faithful  Minijlers  Ser.  I. 

haps,  are  glad  it  is  my  laft  fermon,  and  that 
London   is    to   be   rid  of  fuch  a  monfler :  I 
don't  doubt  but  it  has  been  a  pleafant  para- 
graph for  many  to  read  -,  but  whoever  there 
are  of  you  that  are  unconverted,  or  whatever 
you  may  think,  fure  you  cannot  be  angry  for 
my  v/ifhing  that  the  grace  of  God  may  be  with 
yozL     O  that  it  may  be  with  every  unconverted 
foul.     O  pray  for  me,    my  dear  friends,  that 
the  Lord  may  blefs  me  to  fome  unconverted 
foul  y  what  wilt  thou  do  if  the  grace  of  God  is 
not  with  thee  ?    what  wilt  thou  do  \Ni\h  the 
favour  of  man  if  thou  haft  not  got  the  grace  of 
God  ?  you  will  find,  iTiy  brethren,  it  will  not 
do,  you  cannot  do  without  the  grace  of  God 
when  you  come  to  die.     There  was  a  noble- 
man that  kept  a  deiftical  chaplain,    and  his 
lady  a  chriftian  one  -,  when  he  was  dying,  he 
fays  to  his  chaplain,  I  liked  you  very  well  when 
I  was  in  health,  but  it  is  my  lady's  chaplain  I 
muft  have  when  I  am   fick.     Do  you  know 
that  you  are  nothing  but  devils  incarnate  ?  Do 
you  know  that  every  moment  you  are  liable  to 
eternal  pains  ?  The  Lord  help  thee  to  awake  O 
fmner,  awake,   awake  thou  ftupid  foul,  if  the 
grace  of  God  was  never  with  thee  before,  God 
grant  it  may  now,    Don't  fay  I  part  with  you  in 

an 


Ser.  L  Parting  BleJJing.  ix 

an  ill  humour ;  don't  fay  that  a  madman  left  yoa 
with  a  curfe.  BleiTed  be  God  that  when  firft  1  en- 
tered into  the  field,  (and  bleffed  be  God  that  ho- 
noured me  with  being  a  field-preacher)  I  pro- 
claimed the  grace  of  God  to  the  worft  of  fin- 
ners,  and  I  proclaim  it  now  to  the  vileft  finner 
under  heaven  -,  could  I  fpeak  fo  loud  as  that 
the  whole  world  mij^ht  hear  me,  I  would  declare 
that  the  grace  of  God  is  free  for  all  poor  fouls 
that  are  willing  to  accept  of  it  by  Chrift ; 
God  make  you  all  willing  this  day. 

There  are  many  of  you,  I  doubt  not,  but 
have  got  this  grace,  and  I  believe  there  are 
many  of  you  that  can  fay  that  this  poor  de- 
fpifed  place  was  that  which  God  honoured  firft 
with  giving  it  you  :  but  v/hether  you  were 
converted  here,  or  elfe where,  if  you  have  got 
the  grace  of  God,  the  Lord  grant  you  more 
grace  ;  grace,  mercy  and  peace  be  multiplied  unto 
you  alL  My  brethren,  they  that  have  got 
Chrift  never  have  enough  of  him  ;  you  want 
more  grace  every  day,  and  hour,  and  moment ; 
I  fee  for  my  part  more  of  my  v/ant  of  grace  than 
I  did  ten  or  twenty  years  ago;  may  be  that  is 
becaufe  I  don't  grov/  in  grace ;  but  tbofe  th  it 
grow  in  grace  will  grov/  every  day  more  fenii-' 
ble  of  their  want  of  grace,  they  will  feel  their 

weak«» 


22  A  Faithful  Miniflers  Ser.  I. 

weaknefs  more  and  more  every  day.  Some  who 
are  called  Chriftians  are  a  moft  foul-mouth  peo- 
ple, they  abufe  their  neighbours,  but  real  be- 
lievers abufe  themfelves  moft,  and  call  them- 
felveS;,  /.  e,  v^hat  is  in  themfelves,  the  worfl  of 
'  neighbours.  O  my  brethren,  may  the  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift's  grace  be  with  you  more  and  more, 
that  you  may  be  transformed  into  the  divine 
likenefs,  and  pafs  from  glory  to  glory  by  the  Spi- 
rit of  the  Lord.  May  God  grant  that  this  grace 
may  be  with  you  all,  particularly  thofe  young 
men  that  have  given  up  their  fouls  to  Chriil.  It 
delights  my  foul  when  I  go  round  the  commu- 
nion table,  to  fee  how  many  young  fouls  have 
given  themfelves  to  Chrift,  the  Lord  grant  that 
you  may  not  return  again  to  folly.  O  young 
men,  flee  youthful  lufts  -,  O  young  women,  the 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift  grant  that  grace  may  be  with 
you  all,  that  you  may  ftudy  the  beauties  of  the 
mind,  fliine  in  the  beauties  of  holinels,  and  be 
wife  to  everlafting  falvation. 

May  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrijl  be 
with  ycu  all  that  are  in  the  marriage  ftate.  It 
needs  much  grace  to  bear  with  heavy  trials, 
much  grace  to  deal  with  fervants,  children, 
and  under  difappointments  in  trade  ^  to  walk 
with  God  with  a  pure  heart.     Some  people 

think 


Ser.  I.  'Parting  Blejfmg.  2% 

think  it  clever  to  have  wives  and  children, 
but  they  want  a  thoufand  times  more  grace 
than  they  had  when  they  were  fingle;  you 
have  need  of  much  grace  to  honor  God  in 
your  houfes,  much  grace  to  teach  you  to  be 
prophets,  much  grace  to  teach  you  to  be  kingij 
in  the  family  5  to  know,  wher  to  be  pleafed  j 
to  knoWi  v/hen  to  be  lilent ;  to  know,  when 
to  be  angry :  but  the  greateft  grace  is  to  be 
angry  when  called  to  it,  to  be  angry  with- 
out fin.  O  !  may  the  grace  of  God  be  with 
you  all  in  your  clofets,  every  tim.e  you  prav, 
every  time  you  come  to  an  ordinance  5  O? 
may  the  grace  of  God  be  v/ith  you  all  when 
you  frequent  this  defpifed  place  !  blefled  be 
God  fome  may  fay,  that  ever  it  was  built  5 
though  as  foon  ..as  it  was  built  I  was  called 
away.  As  foon  alfo  as  the  chapel  was  built 
J  was  then  called  away,  and  fo  am  now  3  and 
when  I  came  out  of  my  chamber,  I  could 
hardly  fupport  it.  I  would  as  lieve  go  to  an 
execution,  if  my  way  was  not  very  clear  ^ 
what  is  dying  ?  that  is  but  for  a  moment.  O 
may  the  grace  of  God  be  with  all,  that  preach 
the  gofpel  here.  Blefled  be  God  his  grace  has 
been  with  them  ;  don't  let  the  world  fay,  he 
is  gone,  and  all  the  people  are  gone  now; 

don't 


24  -^  Faithjtd  Minijler's  Ser.  L 

don't   weaken  the  hands  of  thofe  that   fhall 
labour   here ;    I  fliould  not  mention  fuch   a 
word  if  I  was  not  going  away.     The  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift  grant  that  you  may  keep  fteady, 
and  honor  the  preachers  more  and  more;  there 
will  be  good    Mr.   Adams,  bleffed  be  God, 
from  time  to  time,  with  Mr.  Beridge,  and  fo 
there  will  be  a  bleffed  change  :  may  the  Spirit 
of  God  be  with  them,  and  you,    more  and 
more !  and  O  my  dear  friends,  if  the  Lord 
God  has  vouchfafed  to  own  thefe  labours  to 
any  of  you,  do  remember  me  in  a  particular 
manner,  when   gone;    for  though   my  body 
has   been   weak,  yet  I   thank  God   that  he 
has  enabled  me  to  fpeak  when  called  to  it. 

And  fo  I  muft  go,  whether  well  or  illj 
pray,  that  if  it  fliould  pleafe  God  to  fpare  me, 
that  I  may  fpeak  more  effedlually  to  you, 
-when  I  come  back  again ;  pray,  that  the  grace 
of  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  may  be  with  me 
in  a  reftraining,  comforting,  fupporting,  and 
transforming  way,  that  it  may  be  with  me 
when  I  am  fick,  and  when  I  die.  O  my 
brethren,  I  fee  I  want  the  grace  of  the  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift,  in  every  one  of  thefe  refpedls, 
every  moment;  O  may  the  Lord  God  blefs 
you  all  that  have  been  kind  to  me,  and  for- 
give 


Ser.  L  Parthig  BhJJing.  ^^ 

give  every  thing  that  I  have  done  amifs, 
i  am  afhamed  of  myfelf,  fo  much  of  the  mail 
comes  up  with  me,  though  I  humbly  hope, 
and  dare  to  fay,  that  at  the  bottom  my  heart 
is  upright  towards  God;  I  would  employ  it 
to  his  praife,  but  there  is  fo  much  fin  mixed 
with  all  I  do,  that  was  not  the  blood  of  Chrift 
conftantly  applied  to  my  foul,  and  the  grace 
of  God  continually  manifefted  to  me,  I  could 
not  preach  any  more.  You  may  fee  a  thoufind 
things  wrong  in  me,  but  I  fee  ten  thoufand 
more,  O  may  the  Grace  of  God  he  ivith  you 
all.  Now,  dear  friends,  farewel !  dear  taber- 
nacle, farewel !  if  I  never  preach  here  any 
more  j  O  that  we  may  meet  in  a  better  ta- 
bernacle, when  thefe  tabernacles  are  taken 
down,  when  thefe  bodies  fhall  drop,  when  we 
fliall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  I  mufl  have 
done,  I  can't  bear  it;  the  Lord  blefi you,  the 
Lord  God*  caufe  his  face  to  fiine  upon  you,  I 
cannot  fay  more,  I  dare  not :  The  Grace  of 
our  Lord  jefus  be  'with  you  ally  Amen. 


SERMON 


26  Chriji  the  Believers  Refuge.      Ser. II, 

SERMON     IL 

Christ    the  Believer's  Refuge. 


Psalm  xlvi.  i — 6. 
God  is  our  refuge  andflrength^  a  very  prefeni 
help  in  trouble -^  tberejore  ivill  ive  not  fear, 
though  the  eaj'th  he  re?7toved^  and  the  moun- 
tains  be  carried  into  the  midjl  of  the  fea^ 
though  the  ^i^aters  thereof  roar ^  and  be  troubled^ 
though  the  mountai?2S  fiake  with  the  fwelling 
thereof,  Selah.  There  is  a  river,  the  Jlreams 
whereof  fiall  make  glad  the  city  of  God,  the 
holy  place  of  the  tabernacles  of  the  Mojl  High : 
God  is  in  the  midf  of  her,  fie  fjall  not  be 
?noved',  God  fiall  help  her^  and  that  right 
early, 

THERE  was  a   tradition  among  the 
ancient  Jews,  that  the  manna  which 
came  down  from  heaven,  though  it 
was    a   little   grain    like    coriander-feed,   yet 
faited  every  tafle  y  as   milk  unto  babes,   and 

ftrong 


6'er.  11.     Chrijl  the  Belien^ers  Refuge,  27 

flrong  meat  to  grown  perfons.  Whether  this 
fuppofition  be  founded  on  fadl  or  not,  the  ob~ 
fervation  will  hold  good  in  a  great  meafure 
refpeding  the  fayings  of  David  ^  for  if  we 
have  eyes  to  fee,  and  ears  to  hear,  if  God  has 
been  pleafed  to  take  away  the  veil  from  our 
hearts,  we  fiiall  jfind,  by  happy  experience, 
that  let  our  circumftances  be  what  they  will, 
the  book  of  Pfalms  may  ferve  as  a  fpiritual 
magazine,  out  of  which  we  may  draw  fpiri- 
tual weapons  in  the  time  of  the  hottefl  fight, 
efpecially  thofe  that  are  under  trouble,  'when 
the  hand,  of  the  Lord  is  gone  ktmxn^y  forth 
againjl  them ;  when  unbelief  is  apt  to  make 
them  fay,  all  thefe  things  are  againjl  tne !  if 
we  can  have  the  prefence  of  mind  to  turn  to 
the  book  of  Pfalms,  we  may  find  fomething 
there  faitable  to  our  cafe,  a  word  to  refrefh 
us  in  purfuing  our  fpiritual  enemy.  This  is 
true  of  the  46th  Pfalm  in  particular,  part  of 
which  I  have  juft  now  read  to  you.  and  which 
I  pmy  the  blefied  Spirit  of  God  to  apply  to 
every  one  of  our  hearts.  It  is  uncertain  at 
what  time,  or  upon  what  occafion,  David 
wrote  it>  probably  under  fome  fharp  afflic- 
tion, which  made  him  eloquent;  or  when  the 
afflidion  was  over,  when  his  heart  was  fwim- 


E   2  ing 


28  Cljriji  the  Believers  Refuge.     Ser.  II. 

ing  with  gratitude  and  love,  and  when  out  of 
the  fulnefs  of  it  his  pen  was  made  the  pen  of  a 
ready  writer.     It  was  a  favourite  Pfalrrj  with 
Luther;  for  whenever  Melandthon,  who  w^as 
of  a  melancholy  turn,    or  any   other  of  his 
friends,  told  him  fome  fad  news,  he  ufed  to 
fay,  come,  come,  let  us  ling  the  46th  Pfalm ; 
and  when  he  had  fung  that,    his  heart  was 
quiet.     May  every  true    mourner  here,    and 
afflided  perfon,  experience  the  fame !  I  know 
not  when  I  read  it  v^^hich  to  admire  moft,  the 
piety,  or  the  poetry  3  the  matter,  or  the  man- 
ner 5    and  I  believe    I  may  venture   to  defy 
all  the  criticks  on  earth  to  fhew  me  any  com- 
pofition  of  Pindar,  or  Horace,  that  any  way 
comes  up  to  the  didion  of  this   Pfahii  con- 
fidered  only  as  human  :  he  that  hath  an  ear 
to  hear,  let  him  hear,  God  is  our  refuge  and 
Jlrength^  a  very  prejent  help  in  trouble.     Stop 
here,  my  friends,  let  us  paufe  a  while,   and 
before  we  go  further,  may  the  Lord  help  us 
to   draw  fome   comfort    from  this  very  firil 
verfe:  for  obferve,  it  is  not  faid,  God  is  my 
refuge 'y  David  fays  fo  in  another  Pfalm,  but 
he  fays  here,  God  is  our  refuge  :  he  fpeaks  in 
the  plural  number,  implying,  that  this  Pfalm 
was  of  no  private  interpretation,  but  was  in-^ 

tended 


Ser.  II.     Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge.  29 

tended  for  the  comfort  and  encouragement  of 
all  believers,  till  time  fhall  be  no  more.  Obferve 
the  climax,  God  is  our  refuge^  is  one  degree  ; 
God  is  our  [irengthy  another  3  God  is  our  help^  and 
not  only  io^  but  is  a  prefenf  help^  yea,  is  a  very 
prefent  help^  and  at  a  time  when  we  want  it  moft, 
in  the  time  of  trouble.  It  is  here  fuppofed,  that  all 
God's  people  will  have  their  troubles,  man  is 
born  to  trouble ,  as  the  /parks  fly  upward  *,  and 
if  we  are  born  to  trouble  as  men,  we  are  much 
more  fo  as  chriftians.  We  forget  ourfelves, 
and  the  ftation  in  which  God  has  placed  us, 
when  wx  fo  much  as  begin  to  dream  of  having 
much  refpite  from  trouble  while  we  are  here 
belov/.  The  decree  is  gone  forth  like  the  laws 
of  the  Medes  and  Perfians,  it  alters  not  j  through 
tribulation,  through  much  tribulation,  we  muft 
all  go  3  but  blefled  be  God  we  are  to  be  carried 
through  it  ^  and  blefled  be  God,  glory  is  to  be 
the  end  of  it :  may  God  give  us  to  know  this 
by  happy  experience !  in  the  worlds  fays  our 
bleffed  Lord,  ye  Jloall  have  tribulation^  tribu- 
lation and  trouble  of  different  kinds ;  and  in 
another  place,  if  any  man  will  come  ajter 
mey  fays  he,  let  him  take  up  his  crofs  dai^y^ 
and  follow  me -y  fo  that  the  day,  when  we 
take  up  no  crofs,  vvx  may  fay  as  Ti^us  did, 

wnea 


30  Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge,     Ser.  11. 

when  he  refleded  that  he  had  done  no  good 
that  day,  I  have  loft  a  day!  But  then  what 
ihall  we  do,  my  dear  hearers,  when  trouble 
comes,  when  one  trouble  comes  after  another, 
and  afflidions  feem  to  purfue  us  wherever 
we  go,  feem  to  arife  up  out  of  the  ground, 
meet  us  as  we  are  walking  along  ?  why  bleffed 
be  God,  if  we  have  an  intereft  in  Chrift, 
mind  that,  if  we  have  an  intereft  in  Chrift, 
God  is  our  help,  God  is  our  afylum,  our  city 
of  refuge,  a  place  appointed  by  God  himfelf, 
to  which  the  purfued  faints  may  fly  by  faith, 
and  be  fafe.  The  wicked  have  no  notion  of 
this ;  when  they  are  in  trouble,  what  is  their 
refuge  ?  let  a  foul  be  under  fpiritual  trouble, 
and  cry  out  what  Jl^ all  I  do  to  be  faved"^  let 
him  g-o  to  a  carnal  minifter,  an  unconverted 
wretch  that  knows  nothing  about  the  matter, 
he  fhall  be  told,  oh!  go,  and  play  an  innocent 
game  at  cards,  and  divert  yourfelf ;  that  is  to 
fay,  the  devil  muft  be  your  refuge.  Wordly 
people  have  worldly  refuges ;  and  Cain  would 
feem  as  if  he  was  in  earneft  when  he  faid,  my 
pmiJJmient  is  greater  than  I  can  bear ;  what 
does  he  do,  he  goes  and  diverts  himfelf  by 
building  a  city,  goes  and  amufes  himfelf  by 
building.    The  devil,  my  brethren,  will  give 

you 


Ser.  II.      Chriji  the  Believer  s  Refuge,  - 1 

you  leave  to  amufe  yourfelves  5  you  may  have 
your  choice  of  diverfions,  only  take  care  to 
be   diverted  from  God,   and  the  devil  is  fure 
of  you;  but  the  believer  has  fomething  better: 
faith  fweeps  aucay  the  refuge  of  Ites^  and  the 
believer   turns  to   his   God,    and  fliys    O  my 
Gody  thou  fialt  be  my  refuge.     The  devil  pur- 
fues  me,  my  falfe  friends  have  defigns  againft 
me,  my  own  wicked  heart  itfelf  molefts  me, 
my  foes  are  thofe  of  my  O'jon   houfe ;  but   do 
thou,  O  God,  be  my  refuge  I  will  fly  there 3 
by  thefe  it  may  be  faid,  God  is  our  refuge.   The 
qaeftion  is,  what  fhall  I  do  to  make  him  my 
refuge  ?  how  fhall  I  be  helped  to  do  fo  ?  you 
bid  me  fly;    you  fay,  I  may  fly   there,  but 
where  fhall  I  get  wings  ?  how  fhall  I  be  fup- 
ported  ?  Here  is  a  blefled  word,  God  fhall  net 
only  be  our  refuge^  hntGodJloallbe  our  ftrength 
alfo.     Strength,  what  is  flrength  ?    why,  my 
brethren,  to  make  every  day  of  trouble  fo  eafy 
to  us  by  his  power,  as  to  carry  us  through  it  ^ 
God  has  faid,  and  will  fland  to  it,  ^i   thy  day 
isy  fo  Jhall  thy  ftrength  be,     AfHiflions  even  at 
a  diftance  will  appear  very  formidable,   when 
viewed  by  unbelief.     Our  fears  fay,     O  iny 
God,  if  I  come  to  be  tried  this  or  that  way, 
how  fhall  I  bear  it  ?  but  we  don't  know  what 


.   32  Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge.     Ser.  IL 

we  can  bear  till  the  trial  comes,  and  we  do  not 
know  what  ilrength  God  can  give  us,  or  what 
a  ftrong  God  he  will  be,  till  he  is  pleafed  to 
put  us  into  a  furnace  of  afflidion;  and  there- 
fore it  is  faid,  not  only  that  God  is  our  refuge 
and  ourjirengthy  but  that  God  is  our  help  alfo. 
What  help?  why,  my  dear  friends,  h^elp  to 
fupport  us  under  the  trouble  j  help  fo  as  to 
comfort  us  as  long  as  the  trouble  lafts ;  and 
blelTed  be  God,  that  the  help  will  never  leave 
us,  till  we  are  helped  quite  over  and  quite 
through  it.  But  what  kind  of  an  help  is  it  ? 
O  bleffed  be  God,  he  is  a  very  prefent  help. 
We  may  have  an  helper,  but  he  may  be  afar 
off;  I  may  be  fick,  I  may  want  a  phyfician, 
and  may  be  obliged  to  fend  miles  for  one ;  he 
might  be  a  help  if  he  was  here^  but  what 
fhall  I  do  now  he  is  at  a  diftance.  This  can- 
not be  faid  of  God,  he  is  not  only  a  help,  but 
he  is  a  prefent  help  :  the  gates  of  the  new  Jeru- 
falem  are  open  flight  and  day.  We  need  not 
be  afraid  to  cry  unto  God  3  we  cannot  fay 
of  our  God  as  Elijah  does  of  Baal,  perhaps  he' 
is  afeepy  or  talking ^  or  gone  a  journey :  it  is 
not  fo  with  our  God,  he  is  a  prefnt  help  3  he 
is  likewife  a  fufficient  help,  that  is,  a  very 
prefent  help ^  and  that  ioo  in  the  time  of  trouble. 

It 


Ser.  11.       Chrijl  the  Believer' i  Refuge.        33 

It  IS  but  to  fend  a  fliort  letter,  I  mean  a  fhort 
prayer,  upon   the    wings   of  faith  and   love, 
and  God,  my  brethren,  will  come  down  and 
help  us.  Now  to  this  David  affixes  his  proha- 
turn  efly  David  proves  it  by  his  own  experience, 
and  therefore  if  God  is  our  refuge^  therefore  if 
Ged  is  our  Jlre?7gthy  if  God  is  our  help,  if  God 
is  a  prefeiit  help,  if  God  is  a  very  frefent  helpy 
and  that  too  in  a  time  of  trouble,  w^hat  then  ? 
therefore  will  we  not  fear. — Therefore,  is  an 
inference,  and  it  is  a  very  natural  one,  a  con- 
clufion   naturally  drawn    from  the  foregoing 
premifies ;  for  Paul  fays,  if  God  be  for  us,  who 
can  be  againjl  us?  There  is  not  a  greater  enemy 
to  faith  than  fervile  fear  and  unbeHef.     Mv 
brethren,  the  devil  has  got  an  advantage  over 
us  when  he  has  brought  us  into  a  ftate  of  fear ; 
indeed  in  one  fenfe  we  fhould  always  fear,  I 
mean  with  a  filial  fear ;  ble/fed  is  the  7nan,  in 
this  fenfe,  that  feareth  always :  but,  my  bre- 
thren, have  we  ftrong  faith  in  a  God  of  refuge  ? 
this  forbids  us  to  fear ;  fays  Nehemiah,  JJoall 
fuch  a  man  as  Iflee  ?  and  the  Chriftian  may 
fay,  fhall  a  believer  in  Jefus  Chrifl  fear  ?  fliall 
I  fear  that  my  God  will  leave  me  ?  fhall  I  fear 
that  my  God  will  not  fuccour  me  ?  no,  fays 
Davidj  we  will  not  fear  j  how  fo  ?  why  though 
F  ths 


34  Cbrijl  the  Believers  Refuge.     Ser.  IL 

the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midfi  of  thefeay 
though  the  ^waters  thereof  roar  and  be  troubled^, 
though  the  mouv.taijis  JJoake  with  the  fwelling 
thereof  Where  is  Horace,  where  is  Pindar,, 
now  ?  let  them  come  here  and  throw  their 
palms  down  before  the  fweet  finger  of  Ifrael. 
There  is  not  fuch  a  bold  piece  of  imagery  in 
any  human  compofition  in  the  world.  Can 
any  thing  appear  more  great,  more  confider- 
able  than  this  ?  Imagine  how  it  was  with  us 
fome  years  ago,  when  an  enthuliaftic  fool 
threatened  us  with  a  third  earthquake  ;  imagine 
how  it  was  with  us  when  God  fent  us  the 
fame  year  two  dreadful  earthquakes  5  had  the 
earth  been  at  that  tim.e  not  only  fhook,  but 
removed,  had  the  fountains  of  the  fea  been 
permitted  to  break  in  upon  us,  and  carry  all 
the  mountains  of  England  before  it,  what  a 
dreadful  tremor  mull:  we  all  unavoidably  have 
been  in  ?  David  fuppofes  that  this  may  be  the 
cafe,  and  I  believe  at  the  great  day  it  will  be 
fomething  hke  it:  the  earth  and  all  things 
therein,  are  to  be  burnt  up  ^  and,  my  brethren, 
what  fliall  we  do  then  if  God  is  not  our  refuge, 
if  God  is  not  our  ftrength  ? 

We   may  apply   it   to   civil   commotions : 
David  had  lately  been  befet  with  the  Philif- 

tines,. 


Ser.  II.      Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge.  ^ 5 

tines,  and  other  enemies,  that  threatened  to 
deprive  him  of  his  Hfe  5  and  there  are  certain 
times  when  we  fliall  be  left  alone.  This  alfo, 
my  brethren,  may  be  applied  to  creature- 
comforts :  fometimes  the  earth  feems  to  be  re- 
moved, what  then  ?  why  all  the  friends  we 
take  delight  in,  our  moft  familiar  friends,  our 
foul-friends,  friends  by  nature,  and  friends  by 
grace,  may  be  removed  from  us  by  the  ftroke 
of  death  5  we  know  not  how  foon  that  ftroke 
may  come,  it  may  come  at  an  hour  we  thought 
not  of;  the  mountains  themfelves,  all  the 
things  that  feem  to  furround  and  promife  us  a 
lafting  fcene  of  comfort,  they  themfelves  may 
foon  be  removed  out  of  cur  fight,  what  then 
fhall  we  do  ?  they  may  be  carried  into  the  ?nidji 
ofthefea-,  what  is  that?  our  friends  may  be 
laid  in  the  filent  grave,  and  the  places  that  k?2ew 
them  may  know  the?n  no  more.  It  is  cafy  talk- 
ing, but  it  is  not  fo  eafy  to  bear  up  under  thefe 
things :  but  faith,  my  brethren,  teaches  us  to 
fay,  though  all  friends  are  gone,  bleffed  be 
God,  God  is  not  gone.  As  a  noble  lady's 
daughter  told  her  mother,  when  fhe  was 
weeping  for  the  death  of  one  of  her  little  chil- 
dren, a  daughter  four  years  old  faid,  Dear 
mamma,  is  God  Almighty  dead,  that  you  cry 

F  2  fo 


I 


36  Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge.      Ser.  II. 

fo  long  after  my  fifter  ?  No,  he  is  not  dead, 
neither  does  he  lleep.  But  here  the  imagery 
grows  bolder,  the  painting  ftronger,  and  the 
refemblance  more  ftriking,  though  the  waters 
thereof  roar  and  be  troubled^  though  the  inoim- 
tains  fhake  with  the  fwelling  thereof  ^^  what 
won't  this  make  us  fearful  ?  will  not  this  fhake 
us  off  our  bottom,  our  foundation,  and  take 
up  the  roots  ?  No,  no,  even  then  the  believer 
need  not  fear;  why,  God  is  in  the  midfl  of  her. 
Don't  you  remember  God  fpoke  to  Mofes  out 
of  the  bufli  ?  did  he  ftand  at  a  diftance,  and 
call  to  him  at  a  diftance  from  the  bufh  ?  no, 
the  voice  came  out  of  the  bufh,  Mofes  I  Mo- 
fes !  as  Mr.  Ainfworth,  who  was  a  fpiritual 
critic,  fays. 

Learn  from  hence,  that  in  all  our  afflictions 
God  is  afflicted'^  he  is  in  the  midft  of  the  bufh-^ 
and  oh !  it  is  a  fweet  time  with  the  foul  when 
God  fpeaks  to  him  out  of  the  bufh,  when  he 
is  under  afHidion,  and  talks  to  him  all  the 
while.  Though  it  was  threatened  by  the  fire 
which  furrounded  it  with  immediate  and  total 
defolation  3  yet  the  bufj  burned^  and  was  7iot 
cojijumed,  I  do  not  know  whether  I  told  you, 
but  I  believe  I  told  them  at  Tottenham-court, 
and  perhaps  here,  that  every  chriftian  has  got 

a 


Sa*.  II.      Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge.  37 

a  coat  of  arms,  and  I  will  give  it  you  out  of 
Chrift*s  heraldry,  that  is  the  burning  bii/h-, 
every  chriftian  is  burned,  but  not  confumed* 
But  hov^  is  it  the  faint  is  held  up,  whence 
does  he  get  this  ftrength  5  or  how  is  this 
ftrength,  this  fupporting,  comforting  ftrength, 
conveyed  to  his  heart  ?  read  a  little  further, 
you  fliall  find  David  fay,  there  is  a  river^ 
mind  that,  there  is  a  river  the  ftreams  where- 
of make  glad  the  city  of  God^  the  holy  place  of 
the  tabernacles  of  the  Moji  High  ^  need  I  tell 
you,  that  probably  here  is  an  allufion  to  the 
fituation  of  Jerufalem,  and  the  waters  of 
Shiloah,  that  flowed  gently  through  the  city 
of  Jerufalem,  which  the  people  found  fweet 
and  refrefliing  in  the  time  of  its  being  befieged. 
So  the  rivers  run  through  moft  of  the  cities  in 
Holland,  and  bring  their  commodities  even  to 
the  doors  of  the  inhabitants.  Pray,  what  do 
you  think  this  river  is?  why,  I  believe  it 
means  the  covenant  of  grace ;  O  that  is  a 
river,  the  fprings  of  which  firfl  burft  out  in 
Paradife,  when  God  faid,  the  feed  of  the  woman 
pall  bruife  the  ferpenfs  head  ;  then  God  made 
this  river  vifit  the  habitation  of  man,  as  the 
firft  opening  of  his  everlafting  covenant. 


No 


2 8  Chrifl  the  Believers  Refuge,      Ser. II. 

No  fooner  had  the  devil  betrayed  man,  and 
thought  he  was  fure  to  get  him  into  the  pit, 
even  when  he  was  laughing  at  man's  mifery, 
and  thinking  he  was  revenged  of  God  for 
driving  him  out  of  heaven  5  at  that  very  time 
did  the  great  God  open  this  river,  and  made 
it  flow  down  in  that  bleffed  ilream  to  man- 
kind, implyed  in  thofe  words,  //  JJoall  bruife 
thy  head,  O  this  is  a  ftream  which,  I  pray, 
may  this  night  make  glad  this  part  of  the  city 
of  God.  If  by  the  river  we  underiland  the 
covenant  of  grace,  then,  my  brethren,  the 
frojnifes  of  God  are  the  ftreams  that  flow  from 
it.  There  is  no  promife  in  the  Bible  made 
to  an  unbeliever,  but  to  a  believer  5  all  the 
promifes  of  God  are  his,  and  no  one  knows, 
but  the  poor  believer  that  experiences  it,  how 
glad  it  makes  his  heart.  God  only  fpeaks  one 
fingle  word,  or  applies  one  fingle  promife  s  for 
if  when  one's  heart  is  overwhelmed  with 
forrow,  we  find  relief  by  unfolding  ourfelves 
to  a  faithful  difinterefted  friend ;  if  a  word  of 
comfort  fometimes  gives  us  fuch  fupport  from 
a  minifl:er  of  Chrift,  O !  my  friends,  what 
fupport  mufl:  a  promife  from  God  applied  to 
the  foul  give?  and  this  made  a  good  v/oman 
fay,  I  have  oft  had  a  blelTed  meal  on  the  pro- 
mifes 


Ser.II.      Chrijl  the  Believer  s  Refuge,  39 

mifes,  when  I  have  had  no  bread  to  make  a 
meal  for  my  body. 

But  by  the  river  we  may  likewlfe  under- 
ftand,  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God.  If  you 
remember,  Jefus  Chrifl:  declared  at  the  great 
day  of  the  feaft,  if  any  man  believe  on  jne^  out 
of  his  belly  JJ^all  flow  rivers  of  living  wafer ; 
thisy  faith  the  beloved  difciple,  /pake  he  of  the 
Spirit^  which  they  that  believe  on  him  fi:ould 
receive.  My  brethren,  the  divine  influences 
are  not  only  a  conduit,  but  a  deep  river,  a 
river  of  broad  waters.  Here  is  room  for  the 
babes  to  walk,  and  for  the  man  of  God  to 
bathe  and  fwim  in  from  time  to  time  5  and 
fuppoling  that  the  river  means  the  Spirit  of 
God,  as  I  believe  really  it  does,  why  then  the 
ftreams  that  flow  from  this  river  are  the  means 
of  grace,  the  ordinances  of  God,  which  God 
makes  ufe  of  as  channels,  whereby  to  convey 
his  bleffed  Spirit  to  the  foul.  Nay,  by  the 
river  we  may  underftand,  Godhimfelf'^Aio  is  the 
believer's  river,  the  Three-one,  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghofl.  This  river  is  in  the  midft  of 
the  city,  not  at  the  court-end  of  the  tov/n 
only,  or  one  corner,  or  end,  but  quite  through, 
in  a  variety  of  ftreams,  fo  that  high  and  low 
may  come  to  it  for  fupply ;  and  not  only  be 

fupported;, 


40  Chrtft  the  Believers  Refuge.      Ser.  IL 

fupported,  but  have  their  hearts  made  glad 
daily  thereby  -,  God  help  us  to  drink  afrefh  of 
this  river.  If  this  be  the  cafe,  well  may  David 
triumph  and  fay,  glorious  things  are  fpoken  of 
the  city  of  God-,  are  fpoken  of  her^  in  the 
feminine  gender.  The  church  is  fpoken  of  in 
that  fenfe,  becaufe  Eve,  the  firfl:  v^oman,  was 
the  mother  of  all  believers ;  we  may  apply  this 
to  a  fingle  faint,  as  well  as  to  a  community, 
under  trouble,  fl.^e  JJ:all  7iot  be  moved-,  not 
moved  ?  pray,  would  you  have  them  ftupid  ? 
do  you  love  when  you  ftrike  a  child,  to  fee 
it  hardened  and  regardlefs?  do  you  not  hke 
the  child  fhould  fmart  under  it  and  cry,  and 
when  it  is  a  little  penitent,  you  almoft  wifli 
you  had  not  ftruck  it  at  all.  God  expeds, 
when  he  flrikes,  that  we  fhould  be  moved  ; 
and  there  is  not  a  greater  iign  in  a  reprobate 
heart  of  a  foul  given  over  by  God,  to  have 
afflI(Sion  upon  afftidion,  and  yet  come  out  like 
a  Jool  brayed  in  a  mortar,  unmoved  and  har- 
dened. My  brethren,  this  is  the  worft  fign 
of  a  man  or  woman's  being  given  over  by 
God.  Jefus  was  moved,  w^hen  he  was  under 
the  rod  ;  he  cries,  father  !  if  it  be  foffible,  let 
this  Clip  pafs  from  me  I  he  was  moved  fo  as  to 
fhed  tears,  tears  of  blood,  falling  to  the  ground. 

Wo 


Ser.  IL        Chrij}  the  Believer's  Refuge.        ^j 

Woe,  woe,  woe  be  to  us,  if  when  God  knocks 
at  the  door  by  fome  Ihocking  domeftic  or  fo-* 
reign   trial,  we  don't  fayj  my  God  !  my  God  I 
wherefore   doft  thou  ftrike  ?    When  we  arc 
lick    we  allow    phyficians  to  feel  our  pulfe, 
whether  it  be  high  or  languid  3  and  when  we 
are  fick,  and  tried  with  affliction,  it  is  time  to 
feel  our  pulfe,  to  fee  if  we  were  not  going  into 
a  high  fever,  and  do  not  want  fome  faiutary 
purge.     It  is  expeded  therefore  that  we  fhould 
be  moved  y  we  may  fpeak^  but  not  in  a  mur- 
muring way  :  Job  was  moved^  and  God  knows 
w^hen  we  are  under  the  rod,   we  are  all  moved 
more  than  we  ought  to  be  in  a  wrong  way  ^ 
but  when  it  is  fiid  here,  Jl:e  Jloall  not  be  movcd^ 
it  implies,    not   totally    removed;   perplexed^ 
fays  the  apoflle,  but  not  in  defpair  i  perjecuted^ 
but  7iotJorfaken ;  caft  down,  but  not  deployed  1 
therefore  removal  means  deflrudion  :  when  the 
earth  is  moved^   the  moimtainsfiake^  and  the 
waters  roar^  where  can  we  flee  ?  what  can  we 
fee  but   deflrudlion   all  round  us  ?    But,    mv 
brethren,   fmce   there  is   a  river  the  Jlr earns 
whereof  make  glad  the  city  of  God ^  fince  God 
is  our  refuge^  fince  God  is  our  firength^  iinca 
God  is  our  help^  fince  God  is  a  prefent  help^ 
fince  God  is  a  very  prefent  help  in  the  time  cf 

G  trouble^ 


42  Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge,     Ser.  II. 

trouble^  fince  God  is  in  the  midjl  of  her^  fince 
God  caufes  the  Jlr earns  to  make  her  glady  blefled 
be  God,  we  fliall  not,  my  brethren,  be  totally 
moved  -,  nay,  though  death  itfelf  does  remove 
our  bodies,  though  the  king  of  terrors,  that 
grifly  king,  fhould  come  armed  w^ith  all  his 
Hiafts,  yet  in  the  rnidft  of  death  we  are  in  lije^ 
even  then  we  Jloall  not  be  moved ^  even  though 
the  body  is  removed  in  fleep,  the  foul  is  gone 
where   it  Ihall  be  forrowful  no  more.     One 
would   have   imagined   that   David  had    faid 
enough,  but  pray  obferve  how  he  goes   on, 
he  repeats  it  again,  for  when  we  are  in  an  un- 
believing frame  we  have  need  of  line  upon  line^ 
words   upon   words,  God  JJmll  help  her  5  ah  ! 
but  when  ?  v/hen  ?  when   will  he   help  her  ? 
when  will  he  help  her?    why,  right  early-y 
God  fdall  help  ber^  and  that  7'ight  early.  Why 
fometimes  we  knock  for  a  friend,  but  he  will 
not  get  up  early  in  the  morning,  but  God  fliall 
help  us^  and  that  right  early,  in  the  mornings 
Ah  !   but,  fay  you,  I  have  been  under  trouble 
a  long  while  ;  why  God's  morning  is  not  come : 
'you  faid  right  early  j  yes^  but  you  are  not  yet 
prepared  for  it,  you  muft  wait  till  the  precious 
right  moment  comes,  and  you  may  be  affured 
of  it.     God  never  gives  you  one  doubt  more 

than 


Ser.  II.      Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge.  43 

than  you  want,  or  even  defers  help  one  mo- 
ment longer  than  it  ought  to  be. 

Now,  my  dear  hearers,  if  thefe  things  are 
fo,  who  dares  call  the  Chriilian  a  madman  ? 
If  thefe  things  are  fo,  who  would  but  be  a 
believer  ?  who  would  not  be  a  faithful  fol- 
lower of  the  fon  of  God  ?  My  brethren,  did 
you  ever  hear  any  of  the  devil's  children  com- 
pofe  an  ode,  that  the  devil  is  our  refuge ;  the 
God  of  this  world,  whom  we  have  ferved  fo 
heartily,  we  have  found  to  be  a  prefent  help 
in  time  of  trouble  ?  ah  !  a  prefent  help  to  help 
us  after  the  devil :  or  did  you  ever  hear,  fince 
the  creation,  of  one  fingle  man  that  dared  to 
fay,  that  all  the  forty-fixth  pfalm  was  founded 
on  a  lie  ?  No,  it  is  founded  on  matters  of  fact, 
and  therefore  believer,  believer,  I  wifh  you 
joy,  although  it  is  a  tautology.  l'  pray  God, 
that  from  this  time  forth  till  we  die,  you  and 
I,  when  under  trouble,  may  fay  with  Luther, 
jcome  let  us  iing  the  forty-fixth  pfalm. 

As  for  you  that  are  wicked,  what  fliall  I  fay 
to  you  ?  are  you  in  high  fpirits  to  night ;  has 
curiofity  brought  you  here  to  hear  what  the 
babler  has  to  fay  on  a  funeral  occafion  ?  well, 
I  am  glad  to  fee  you  here,  though  I  have 
fcarce  strength  to  fpeak  for  the  violence  of 
G  2  the 


44  Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge.      Ser.  II. 

the  heat,    yet  I   pray   God  to    magnify  his 
flrength  in  my  weaknefs  5  and  may  the  God 
of  all  mercy  over-rule  curiofity  for  good  to 
you.     I  intend  to  fpeak  about  this  death  to 
the  furviving  friends ;  but,  my  dear  hearers, 
the  grand  intention  of  having  the  funeral  fer- 
mon  to  night,  is  to  teach  the  living  how  to  die. 
Give  me  leave  to  tell  you,  that  however  brifk 
you  may  be  now,  there  will  a  time  come  when 
you  will  v/ant  God  to   be  your  help.     Some 
pulpit  may  e'er  long  be  hung  in  mourning  for 
you ;    the  black,    the  dreary   appendages   of 
death    may   e'er   long  be    brought   to   your 
home  ',  and  if  you  move  in  a  high  fphere,  fome 
fdch  efcutcheon  as  this,    fome  atchievement 
may  be  placed  at  your  door,  and  woe,  woe, 
woe  be  to  thofe  who  in  an  hour  of  death  can- 
not fay,  God  is  my  refuge.     You  may  form 
fchemes  as  you  pleafe;  after  you  have  been 
driven  out  of  one  fool's  paradife,  you  may  re- 
treat into  another;   you  may  fay,   now  I  will 
iing  a  requiem  to  my  heart,  and  now  I  fhall 
have  fome  pleafant   feafon ;  but  if  God  loves 
you  he  will  knock  oft  your  hands  from  that, 
you  fhall  have  thorns  even  in  rofes,  and  it  will 
imbitter  your  comforts.     O  what  will  you  do 
wh^a  the   dements  (hall   melt  with  fervent 

heats 


S^r.  II.      Chrijl  the  Believer's  P^cfuge.  4^ 

heat ;  when  this  earth,  with  all  its  fine  furni- 
ture, fhall  be  burnt  up ;  when  the  archangel 
fliall  cry,  tiTiie Jhall be  no  more!  whither  then, 
ye  wicked  ones,  ye  unconverted  ones,  will  ye 
flee  for  refuge  ?  O,  fays  one,  I  will  fly  to  the 
mountains :  O  filly  fool,  O  Ally  fool,  fly  to  the 
mountains,  that  are  themfelves  to  be  burnt  up 
and  moved.  O,  fays  you,  I  will  flee  to  the 
fea;  O  you  fool,  that  will  be  boiling  like  a 
pot :  O  then  I  will  flee  to  the  elements ;  they 
will  be  melting  with  fervent  heat.  I  can  fcarce 
bear  this  hot  day,  and  how  can  you  bear  a  hot 
element  ?  there  is  no  fan  there,  not  a  drop  of 
water  to  cool  your  tongue.  Will  you  fly  to 
the  moon  ?  that  will  be  turned  into  blood  :  will 
you  fl:and  by  one  of  the  fl:ars  ?  they  will  fall 
away  :  I  know  but  of  one  place  you  can  go 
to,  that  is  to  the  devil  5  God  keep  you  from 
that!  Happy  they  that  draw  this  inference; 
fince  every  thing  elfe  will  be  a  refuge  of  lies, 
God  help  me  from  this  moment,  God  help 
me  to  m.ake  God  my  refuge !  here  you  can 
never  fail  j  your  expedations  here  can  never 
be  raifed  too  high  5  but  if  you  fl;op  fliort  of 
this,  as  the  Lord  liveth^  in  whofe  name  I 
fpeak,  you  will  only  be  a  fport  for  devils ;  a 
day  of  judgment  will  be  no  day  of  refuge  to 


46  Chrijl  the  Believer  s  Refuge,      Ser.  IL 

you,  you  will  only  be  fummoned  like  a  cri- 
minal that  lias  been  caft  already,  to  the  bar  to 
receive  the  dreadful  fentence,  Depart^  ye 
ciirfedy  into  everla/ling  fire^  prepared  for  the 
devil  and  his  angels.  There  is  no  river  to  make 
glad  the  inhabitants  of  hell,  no  ftreams  to 
cool  them  in  that  fcorching  element :  were 
thofe  who  are  in  hell  to  have  fuch  an  offer  of 
mercy  as  you  have,  how  would  their  chains 
rattle  !  how  would  they  come  with  the  flames 
of  hell  about  their  ears !  how  would  they  re- 
joice even  there,  if  a  minifter  was  to  tell  them. 
Come,  come,  after  you  have  been  here  mil- 
lions and  millions  of  years,  there  fhall  come  a 
river  here  to  make  you  glad.  But  the  day  is 
over  \  God  help  us  to  take  warning  :  and  oh  ! 
with  vv^hat  gratitude  ihould  we  approach  him 
to  night,  for  bearing  with,  and  for  for-bear- 
ing  us  io  long ;  let  each  fay  to  night,  why  am 
I  out  of  hell  ?  how  came  I  not  to  be  damned, 
when  I  have  made  every  thing  elfe  my  God, 
my  refuge,  for  fo  many  years  ?  May  goodnefs 
lead  every  unconverted  foul  to  repentance,  and 
may  love  conftrain  us  to  obedience :  fly,  fly, 
God  help  thee  to  fly,  flnner  •  hark  !  hear  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  fee  the  world  confumed,  the 
avenger  of  blood,  thisgrirn  death,  is  juft  at  thy 

heels. 


SiM".  II.      Chrijl  the  Bat  ever  s  Refuge.  47 

heels,  and  if  thou  doft  not  this  moment  take 
refuge  in  God,  to-night  before  to-morrow,  you 
may  be  damned  for  ever ;  the  arms  of  Jefus 
yet  lie  open,  his  loving  heart  yet  ftreams  with 
love,  and  bids  a  hearty  welcome  to  every  poor 
foul  that  is  feeking  happinefs  in  God.  May 
God  grant  that  every  unconverted  i'oul  may 
be  of  the  happy  number. 

But,  my  brethren,  the  mofl:  heavy  tafk  of 
this  night  yet  lies  unperformed ;  indeed,  if 
my  friendfliip  for  the  deceafed  did  not  lead  me 
to  it,  I  fhould  pray  to  be  excufed  j  my  body 
is  fo  weak,  my  nerves  fo  unftrung,  and  the 
heat  beats  too  intenfely  on  this  tottering  frame, 
for  me  to  give  fuch  a  vent  to  my  affedions  as 
I  am  fure  I  fliould  give  if  I  was  in  vigorous 
health ;  you  may  eafily  fee,  though  I  have 
not  made  that  application,  with  what  defign  I 
have  chofe  this  Pfalm ;  you  may  eafily  fee  by 
the  turn,  I  hope  no  unnatural  one,  that  has 
been  given  to  the  text  as  we  have  pafled  along, 
that  I  have  had  in  my  view  a  mournful  wid^ov/ 
here  before  me.  Did  I  think  when  this  bkck 
furniture  was  taken  from  the  pulpit  when  two 
branches  were  lopt  off"  within  about  a  year  one 
after  another,  both  lopt  off  from  on  earth,  I 
hope  and  believe  to  be  planted  for  ever   in 


48  Chrijl  the  Believers  Refuge.      Ser.  IL 

heaven,  little  did  I  think  that  the  axe  was  in 
a  few  months  time  to  be  laid  to  the  root  of  the 
father ;  little  did  I  think  that  this  pulpit  was 
then  to  be  hung  in  mourning  for  the  dear,  the 
generous,  the  valuable,  the  univerfally  bene- 
volent, Mr.  Beckman ;  a  benefadtor  to  every 
body,  a  benefactor  to  the  Tabernacle  ;  he  has 
largely  contributed  both  to  the  Chapel  and  Ta- 
bernacle, and,  my  dear  hearers,  now  his 
works  follow  him,  for  he  is  gone  beyond  the 
grave.  Such  a  fingular  circumftance  I  believe 
rarely  happens,  that  though  I  was  laft  night 
at  near  eleven  o'clock  dead  almoft  with  heat, 
I  thought  if  death  was  the  confequence,  I 
would  go  to  the  grave  and  have  the  laft  look 
at  my  dear  departed  friend  ;  to  fee  a  new  vault 
opened ;  to  fee  a  place  of  which  he  has  been, 
in  a  great  meafure,  the  founder  5  to  fee  a  place 
which  he  was  enlarging  at  the  very  time  he 
died  'y  to  fee  a  nev/  vault  there  firfl:  inhabited 
by  the  father,  and  two  only  fons,  and  all  put 
there  in  the  fpace  of  two  years  time.  Oh  !  it 
was  almoft  too  much  for  me,  it  weighed  me 
down,  it  kept  me  in  my  bed  all  this  day  3  and 
now  I  have  rifen,  God  grant  it  may  be  to  give 
a  feafonable  word  to  your  fouls.  Oh  !  my 
friends,  put  yourfelves  in  the  ftate  of  a  furvi- 


vmg 


Ser.  II.     Chrtjl  the- Believer's  Refuge.  49 

ving  widow,  and  then  fee  who  is  fecure  from 
cutting  providences.  The  very  children  when 
they  are  young  are  a  trial  5  but  the  young 
man  for  whom  a  handiome  fortune  awaited  5 
for  a  tender  loving  fluher  to  have  his  fon  taken 
away;  for  the  widow  to  have  the  hufband 
taken  away  foon  after ;  indeed,  dear  madam, 
you  had  need  read  the  forty-fixth  Pfalm  ^  you 
may  well  fay,  call  me  no  more  Nao??ii^  that 
fignifies  pleafant,  but  call  me  Marah^  for  the 
Lord  hath  dealt  bitterly  with  7ne,  Thefe  are 
flrokes  that  are  not  always  given  to  the  great- 
eft  faints.  Such  fudden  ftrokes,  fuch  blow 
upon  blow,  Oh  !  if  God  is  not  a  ftrength  and 
refuge,  how  can  the  believer  fupport  under  it  ? 
but  bleffed  be  the  living  God,  I  am  a  witncfs 
God  has  been  your  ftrength,  I  am  witnefs 
that  God  has  been  your  refuge ;  you  have 
found,  I  know  you  have,  already,  that  there 
is  a  river ^  a  river  in  which  you  have  fwam 
now  for  fome  years,  thejlrea?ns  whereof  make 
glad  your  waiting  heart.  Surely  I  ftiall  never 
forget  the  mom.ent  in  which  I  viiited  your 
deceafed  huft)and,  when  the  hiccoughs  came, 
and  death  was  fuppofed  to  be  really  come,  to 
fee  the  difconfolate  v/idow  flying  out  of  the. 
room,    unable  to  bear  the  fight  of  a  departing 

H  hufband  : 


5a  Ckriji  the  BeUever''s  Refuge,     Ser.  IL 

hufband  :  I  know  that  God  was  then  your 
refuge,  and  God  will  continue  to  be  your  re- 
fuge. You  are  now  God's  peeuliar  care,  and 
as  a  proof  that  you  will  make  God  your  refuge, 
you  have  chofen  to  make  your  firft  appear- 
ance in  the  houfe  of  God,  in  the  Tabernacle^ 
where  I  hope  God  delights  to  dwell,  and 
where  you  met  with  God,  and  which  I  hope 
you  will  never  leave  till  God  removes  you 
hence.  V/hatever  trials  may  yet  await  you, 
remember  you  are  now  become  God's  pecu- 
liar care.  You  had  before  a  hufband  to  plead 
for  you  ;  he  is  gone,  but  your  pleader  is  not 
dead,  he  lives,  and  will  plead  your  caufe^ 
may  you  fiad  him  better  to  you  than  ten  thou- 
fand  hufbands  >  may  he  make  up  the  awful 
chafm  that  dea.th  has  made,  and  may  the 
Lord  God  be  your  refuge  in  time,  and  your 
portion  to  all  eternity  y  and  then  you  will  have 
a  bleiTed  change.  You  are  properly  a  Naofni  ^ 
I  would  humbly  hope  that  your  daughter-in- 
law,  which  fo  lately  met  with  a  ftroke  of  the 
£ime  nature,  will  prove  a  Ruth  to  you,  and 
though  young,  and  having  a  fortune,  fhe  may 
be  tempted  to  take  a  walk  in-  the  world,  yet 
1  hope  file  will  fay,  where  thou  goe/Iy  I  will 
go  y  where  thou  lodgejl^  I  will  lodge  y.  thy  peo- 

pie 


Ser.  II.     Chrijl  the  Believer^ s  Refuge,  51 

pie  Jhall  be  my  people y  a7id  thy  God  my  God ; 
where  thou  diejl^  will  1  die^  and  there  rSill  I 
he  buried  ^y  the  Lord  do  fo  tomey  and  more  alfo^ 
if  ought  but  death  part  thee  and  me.  It  is  to 
your  honour,  madam,  and  I  think  it  right  to 
fpeakofit,  you  had  the  fmiles  of  your  depart- 
ing father-in-law,  you  had  behaved  with  de- 
ference and  love  ;  he  was  very  fond  of  you  ; 
God  make  you  a  comfort  to  your  furviving 
mother^  who  has  adopted  you,  and  may  the 
Lord  Jefus  Chrifl  enable  you  to  take  God  to 
be  your  portion. 

As  for  you  that  are  the  relations  of  the  de- 
ceafed,  there  is  one  of  you  that  has  been  ho- 
nourably called  to  the  fervice  of  the  m.iniflry : 
you,  fir,  was  fent  for  over  by  an  endearing 
uncle,  you  have  been  a  ftranger  in  a  flrange 
land:  the  Palatines  will  blefs  your  man iftryj 
God  has,  I  hope,  blefied  it,  and  provided  you 
a  place  to  preach  in.  May  God  grant  that 
that  church  may  be  filled  with  his  prefence 
and  his  glory ;  and  you,  madam,  be  made 
the  inftrument  of  fending  the  news  to  heaven 
^  -to  your  hufoand,  that  this  and  that  man  was 
born  oj  God  there.  As  for  you,  the  other 
friends  of  the  deceafed,  may  God  grant  that 
when  you  die,  and  when  you  are  buried,  the 
H  2  peo- 


52  Chrijl  the  Believer's  Refuge^     Ser.  II. 

people  may  follow  you  with  tears  as  they  did 
dear  Mr.  Beckman  lail  night.  I  was  told  by 
one  this  morning  that  walked  along  with  the 
funeral,  that  it  was  delightful  to  hear  what 
the  people  faid  when  the  coffin  pafled  by ; 
they  bleffed  the  perfon  contained  therein,  Oh  ! 
he  was  a  father  to  the  poor.  The  poor  have 
indeed  loft  a  friend ;  and  I  believe  there  has 
not  been  a  man,  a  tradesman  in  London,  for 
thefe  many  years,  that  has  been  more  lamented 
than  the  dear  man  who  now,  I  hope,  is  at  reft. 
You  well  know  how  mindful  he  has  been  of 
you,  and  that  foon  after  the  deceafe  of  his  dif- 
confolate  widow,  his  fubftance  will  be  divi- 
ded among  fome  of  you.  Give  me  leave  to 
charge  and  intreat  you,  by  the  mercies  of  God 
in  Jefus  Chrift,  to  be  kind  to  the  honoured 
widow.  Don't  fay,  Mr.  Beckman  my  uncle 
i?  dead,  come  pluck  up,  let  us  plague  her  now 
ihe  is  living,  we  fliall  have  all  when  flie  is 
dead.  The  plague  of  God  will  follow  you  if 
you  do  :  if  you  valued  your  dear  uncle,  do  all 
you  can  to  make  her  life  eafy ;  pay  her  that 
refpedl  which  you  would  pay  the  deceafed  was 
be  now  living  3  this  will  fhew  your  love  is 
genuine,  and  not  counterfeit,  and  do  not  lay  up 
wrath  againft  the  (jay  cj  ivrath.     Follow  the 

ex- 


Ser.  11.     Chrijl  the  Believer's  Refuge.  53 

example  of  your  dear  deceafed  uncle;  the 
gentleman  was  vifible  in  him  as  well  as  the 
chriftian ;  he  would  be  in  his  warehoufe  early 
in  the  morning,  that  he  might  come  foon  to 
his  country-houfe,  and  there  employ  himfelf 
in  his  friendly  life,  and  open  the  door  to  the 
difciples  of  Jefus.  It  is  time  to  draw  to  an  end, 
but  I  will  fpeak  a  word  to  the  fervants  of  the 
family,  who  have  loft  a  good  and  a  dear  maf- 
tcr.  May  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  be  your 
mailer  for  ever,  that  you  may  be  the  Lord's 
fervants,  however  you  may  be  difpofed  of  in 
this  world  ;  that  you  may  meet  your  mafter, 
your  miftrefs,  and  all  the  family,  in  the  king- 
dom of  the  living  God,  then  we  fhall  have  a 
whole  eternity  to  refled  upon  the  goodnefs  of 
a  gracious  God.  O  may  God  help  us  to  fing 
the  forty-fixth  Pfalm ;  may  v/e  find  him  to  be 
our  Jlrength  and  our  refuge^  a  very  prefent  help 
in  the  time  of  trouble ;  may  the  river  of  the 
living  God  make  glad  your  hearts,  and  may 
you  be  with  God  to  all  eternity;  even  fo^ 
Lord  Jefus,  Amen  and  Amen, 


SERMON 


[    54    ] 

SERMON     III. 

Soul  Profperity. 


3  Epiftle  John  ii. 

Beiovedy   I  iioijh  above   all  things   that  thou 
mayjl  profper^  and  be  in  healthy  even  as  thy 
foul  profperetb. 

WHAT  a  horrid  blunder  has  one  of 
the  famous,  or  rather  infamous,  de- 
iftical  writers  made,  when  he  fays, 
that  the  gofpel  cannot  be  of  God,  becaufe 
there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  friendship  mentioned 
in  it.  Surely  if  he  ever  read  the  gofpel,  hav- 
ing eyes  he  Jaw  not^  having  ears  he  heard  not ; 
but  I  believe  the  chief  reafon  is,  his  heart  being 
waxen  grofs,  he  could  not  underftand;  for 
this  is  fo  far  from  being  the  cafe,  that  the  world 
never  yet  faw  fuch  a  fpecimen  of  fteady  and 
difinterefted  friendfhip,  as  was  difplayed  in  the 
life,  example,  and  conduft  of  Jefus  of  Naza- 
reth. 

John, 


Sfer.  III.  Soul  Profperit)\        .  5^ 

John,  the  writer  of  this  epiftle,  had  the 
honour  of  leaning  on  his  bofom,  and  of  being 
called,  by  way  of  emphafis,  the  difdple  'who?n 
Jefiis  loved ',  and  that  very  difclple,  which  is 
very  remarkable  concerning  him,  though  he 
was  one  of  thofe  whom  the  Lord  himfelf  named 
Sons  of  Thunder,  Mark  iv.  17.  and  was  fo  fud- 
denly,  as  bifliop  Hall  obferves,  turned  into  a 
fon  of  lightning,  that  he  would  have  called 
down  fire  from  heaven  to  confume  his  Maf- 
ter's  enemies;  confequently,  though  he  was 
of  a  natural  fiery  temper,  yet  the  change  in 
his  heart  was  fo  remarkable,  that  if  a  judgment 
may  be  formed  by  his  writings^  he  feems  as 
fall  of  lovcy  if  not  fuller,  than  any  of  his  fel- 
low apoftle?.  He  learned  pity  and  benevo- 
lence of  the  father  of  mercies  >  and  to  fliovv 
how  chriflian  friendfliip  is  to  be  cultivated,  h^ 
not  only  wrote  letters  to  churches  in  genei-al^ 
even  to  thofe  he  never  faw  in  the  ftefh,  but 
private  letters  to  particular  faints,,  friends  to 
whom  he  was  attached,  and  wealthy  rich 
friends,  whom  God  had,  by  his  Spirit,  raifed 
up  to  be  helpers  of  the  diftreffed.  Happy 
would  it  be  for  us,  if  we  could  all  learn  that 
fimplicity  of  heart  which  is  difplayed  in  thefe 
particular  words  >  happy  if  we  could  learn  i\m 

one 


5^  Soul  Profperify,  Ser.  III. 

one  rule,  never  to  write  a  letter  without  fome- 
thingof  Jefus  Chrift  in  it;  for,  as  Mr.  Henry 
obferves,  if  we  are  to  anfwer  for  idle  words, 
much  more  for  idle  letters;  and  if  God  has 
given  us  our  pens,  efpecially  if  he  has  given  us 
the  pen  of  a  ready  writer^  it  will  be  happy  if 
we  can  improve  our  literary  correfpondence 
for  his  glory  and  one  another's  good.  But 
what  an  unfafliionable  ftile,  if  compared  to 
our  modern  ones,  is  that  of  the  apoftle  to 
Gains.  The  fuperfcription  from  the  elder  to 
the  well-beloved  Gaius^  who??i  I  love  in  the 
truth ;  there  is  fine  language  for  you !  Many 
who  call  themfelves  Chrift's  difciples,  would 
be  afhamed  to  write  fo  now.  I  fend  this,  and 
that^  and  the  other  ^y  I  fend  my  compliment s» 
Obferve  what  he  fliles  himfelf,  not  as  the 
pope  ;*  but  he  fliles  himfelf  the  elder.  A  ju- 
dicious expofitor  is  of  opinion,  that  all  the 
other  apoftles  were  dead,  and  only  poor  John 
left  behind.  I  remember  a  remark  of  his, 
*'  the  taller  we  grow,  the  lower  we  fliall 
*^  (loop."  The  apoftle  puts  himfelf  upon  a 
level  with  the  common  elders  of  a  church, 

that 

*  Whether  Univerfal  BIfhop,  or  Vicar  of  Chrift,  Supreme 
Hefid,  Lord  or  Governor  of  the  World,  or  a  more  blafphe- 
3noiis  title,  is  uncertain,  the  writer  not  hearing  dillinftly  the 
Latin  words  in  which  it  was  expreficd. 


Sen  III.  Sold  Profpcj^ity.  vj 

that  he  might  not  feem  to  take  ftaceupon  him, 
not  to  rule  as  a  lion,  but  with  a  rod  of  love; 
the  elder  to  the  well-beloved  Gains y  'whom  1  love 
in  the  truth.  This  Gaius  feems  to  be  in  our 
modern  language,  what  we  call  a  gentleman, 
particularly  remarkable  for  his  hofpitality,  Gaius 
mi7ie  hoji 'y  and  this  Gaius  was  well-beloved, 
not  only  beloved,  but  well-beloved  -,  that  is, 
one  who  I  greatly  efteem  and  am  fond  of;  but 
then  he  fhows  us  likev/ife  upon  what  this  fond- 
nefs  is  founded,  whom  I  love  in  the  truth. 
There  are  a  great  many  people  in  waiting  fliy, 
dear  fir  y  ox  good  fir  ^  and  fubfcribe  _)Wt'r  humble 
jervant^  fir  \  and  not  one  word  of  truth  either 
in  the  beginning  or  end  3  but  John  and  Gaius's 
love  was  in  truth,  not  only  in  words,  but  in 
deed  and  in  truth  ;  as  if  he  had  faid,  my  heart 
goes  along  with  my  hand  while  I  am  writing, 
and  it  gives  me  pleafure  in  fuch  a  correfpon- 
dence  as  this,  or  whom  I  love  for  the  truth's 
fake^  that  is,  whom  I  love  for  being  particu- 
larly attached  to  the  truth ;  and  then  our 
friendfliip  has  a  proper  foundation,  when  the 
love  of  God,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  Jefu% 
is  the  bafis  and  bond  of  it.  One  would  think 
this  was  enough  now;  the  epiftles  originally 
were  not  divided  into  verfes  as  now  that  pco- 

I  pie 


58  Soul  Profperity.  Ser.  III. 

pie  may  the  better  find  out  particular  places, 

though  perhaps  not  altogether  fo  properly  as 

they  might.     The  apoftle's  faying  beloved  is 

not  neediefs  tautology,  but  proves  the  ftrength 

of  his  afFeftion  ;  I  wiflj  that  thou  mayft  pro/per  y 

end  be  in  healthy   even  as  thy  foul  profperefh, 

Gaius,  it  feems,  at  this  time  felt  a  weak  qdfn- 

ilitution,  or  a  bad  habit  of  body  ^  this  may 

fhow,  that  the  moft  ufeful  perfons,  the  choiceft 

favourites  of  heaven,  muft  not  expeft  to  be 

without  the  common  infirmities  of  the  human 

frame  5  fo  far  from  this,  that  it  is  often  found 

that  a  thoufand  ufeful  Chriftians  have  weakly 

.  conftitutions.     That  great  and  fweet  finger  of 

Ifrael,  Dr.  Watts,  I  remember  about  two  and 

'  thirty  years  ago  told  me  that  he  had  got  no 

I  fleep  for  three  months,  but  what  was  procured 

I  by  the  moft  exquifite  art  of  the  moft  eminent 

phyficians;    and,  my  dear  hearers,  none  but 

thofe  that  have  fuch  habits  of  body  can  fym- 

pathize    with   thofe    that    are    under    them. 

When  we  are  in  high  fpirits  we  think  people 

might  do  if  they  would,  but  when   brought 

down  ourfelves  we  cannot ;  but  notwithftand- 

ing  his  body  was  in  this  condition,  his  foul 

profpered  fo  eminently,  fo  very  eminently^  that 

the  apoftle  could  not  think  it  a  greater  mercy, 

or 


Ser.  III.  ^oul  Profperify.  59 

or  the  church  a  greater  bleffing,  than  that  his 
bodily  health  might  be  as  vigorous  as  the 
health  of  his  foul.  I  remember  the  great  colo- 
nel Gardiner,  who  had  the  honour  of  being 
killed  in  his  country's  caufe,  clofes  one  of  his 
laft  letters  to  me,  with  wifliing  I  might  enjoy 
a  thriving  foul  in  a  healthy  body ;  but  this  is 
peculiar  to  the  followers  of  Jsfus,  they  find 
the  foul  profpers  mod:  when  the  body  is  worft ; 
and  obferve,  he  wifhes  him  a  profpering  body 
above  all  things,  that  he  might  have  joy  and 
health  with  a  profperous  foul  -,  for  if  we  have 
a  good  heart,  and  good  health  at  the  fame 
time,  and  our  hearts  are  alive  to  God,  we  go 
on  with  a  frefli  gale.  I  obferve,  that  the  foul 
of  man  in  general  muft  be  made  a  partaker  of 
a  divine  life  before  it  can  be  faid  to  profper  at 
all.  The  words  of  our  text  are  particularly 
applicable  to  a  renewed  heart,  to  one  that  is 
really  alive  to  God.  When  a  tree  is  dead  we 
don't  fo  much  as  expedl  leaves  from  it,  nor  to 
fee  any  beauty  at  all  in  a  plant  or  flower  that 
we  know  is  abfolutely  dead  •  and  therefore  the 
foundation  of  the  apoflle's  wifli  lies  here,  that 
the  foul  of  Gains,  and  confequently  the  fouls 
of  all  true  believers,  have  life  communicated 
to  them  from  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God. 
I  2  Such 


to  Soul  Profperity.  Ser.  III. 

Such  a  life  may  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  im- 
part to  each  of  us !  and  I  think,  if  I  am  not 
miftaken,  and  I  beheve  I  may  venture  to  fay 
that  I  am  not,  that  where  the  divine  life  is 
implanted  by  the  Spirit  of  the  hving  God,  that 
life  admits  of  decreafe  and  increafe,  admits  of 
dreadful  decays,  and  alfo  of  fome  blelTed  re- 
vivings.  The  rays  of  the  divine  life  being 
once  implanted,  it  will  grow  up  to  eternal 
life  ',  the  new  creation  is  juft  like  the  old 
when  God  faid  let  there  he  lights  there  was 
light,  which  never  ceafed  fince  the  univerfe 
was  made,  and  the  favourite  creature  man  was 
born.  Upon  a  furvey  of  his  ov^n  works,  God 
pronounced  every  thing  g^od,  and  entered  into 
his  refi ;  fo  it  will  be  with  all  thofe  who  are 
made  partiukets  of  the  divine  nature,  'The 
icatcr  that  I  f jail  give  him,  JJjall  be  a  well  of 
water  [fringing  up  into  everlajling  life. 

My  brethren,  from  our  firft  coming  into 
the  world,  till  our  pafling  out  of  it  to  the  fpi- 
rits  of  jiif  men  made  perjeB,  all  the  Lord's 
Children  have  found,  fome  more,  and  others 
lefs,  that  they  have  had  dreadful  as  well  as 
bleffed  times,  and  all  has  been  over-ruled  to 
bring  them  nearer  unto  God :  but  I  believe,  I 
am  fure,  I  fpeak  to  fome  this  night,  that  if  it 

was 


Ser.III.  Soul  Profperity.  6i 

was  put  to  their  choice,  had  rather  know  that 
their  fouls  profpered,  than  to  have  ten  thoufand 
pounds  left  them  :  and  it  is  fuppofed  that  we 
may  not  only  know  it  ourfelves,  but  that  others 
may  know  it,  that  their  profiting^  as  Paul 
fays,  may  appear  to  all.  Becaufe  John  fays, 
/  wifl:)  above  all  thiiigs^  that  thy  body  may  be  in 
healthy  as  thy  fitd  profpers.  O  may  all  that 
converfe  with  us  fee  it  in  us !  We  may  fre- 
quently fit  under  the  gofpel,  but  if  we  don't 
take  a  great  deal  of  care,  however  orthodox 
we  are,  we  fhall  fall  into  pradtical  Antinomi- 
anifm,  and  be  contented  that  we  were  con- 
verted twenty  or  thirty  years  ago,  and  learn, 
as  fome  Antinomians,  to  live  by  faith.  Thank 
God,  fay  fome,  we  met  with  God  fo  many 
months  ago,  but  are  not  at  all  folicitous  whe-j 
ther  they  meet  with  him  any  more ;  and  therd 
is  not  a  fingle  individual  here  that  is  favingly 
acquainted  with  Jefus  Chrift,  but  wifhes  his 
foul  profpered  more  than  his  body. 

The  great  queftion  is,  how  fliall  I  know 
that  my  foul  profpers  ?  I  have  been  told  that 
there  is  fuch  a  thing  as  knowing  this,  and 
that  I  can  be  confcious  of  it  myfelf,  and  others 
too.  It  may  not  be  mifpending  an  hour,  to 
lay  down  fome  marks  whereby  we  may  know 

whe- 


6z  Soul  Trofperity.  Sen  III. 

whether  our  fouls  profper  or  no.  If  there  be 
any  of  you  of  an  Antinomian  turn  of  mind, 
(I  don't  know  there  are  any  of  you)  I  don't 
know  but  you  will  be  of  the  fame  mind  of  the 
man  that  came  to  me  in  Leadenhall  twenty- 
five  years  ago :  Sir,  fays  he,  you  preached 
upon  the  marks  of  the  new  birth.  Marks, 
fays  I,  yes,  fir :  O  thank  God,  fays  he,  I  am 
above  marks,  I  don't  mind  marks  at  all :  and 
you  may  be  aflured  perfons  are  upon  the  brink 
of  Aniinomianifm,  that  fay  away  with  your 
legal  preaching.  I  wonder  they  don't  fay  as 
they  go  along  the  ftreets,  away  with  your 
dials,  away  with  your  dials,  we  don't  want 
marks,  we  know  what  it  is  o'clock  without 
any.  If  the  marks  upon  the  foul  of  a  believer 
are  like  the  fun-dial,  there  are  marks  to  prove 
that  we  are  upon  the  right  foundation :  if  the 
jfun  does  not  fhine  on  the  fun-dial,  there  is 
'  no  knowing  what  o'clock  it  is ;  but  let  it 
fhine,  and  inftantaneoufly  you  know  the  time 
of  the  day  %  this  is  not  known  when  it  is 
cloudy  i  and  who  dare  to  fay  but  that  a  child 
of  God,  for  want  of  the  fun  of  righteoufnefs 
fhining  upon  his  heart,  may  write  bitter  things 
againft  himfelf.  A  good  man  may  have  the 
vapours,  as  one  Mr.  Brown  had,  that  wrote 

a  book 


Ser.  III.  Soul  Profperity.  63 

a  book  of  good  hymns,  who  was  fo  vapour- 
ifli,  that  no  body  could  make  him  believe  he 
had  a  foul  at  all.  Let  the  fun  fhine,  the  be- 
liever can  fee  whether  the  fun  is  in  the  meri- 
dian at  the  fixth,  ninth,  or  twelfth  hour.  O 
that  there  might  be  great  fearching  of  heart. 
I  have  been  looking  up  to  God  for  diredion  j 
I  hope  the  preaching  of  this  may  be  to  awa- 
ken fome,  to  call  back  fome  backlliders,  to 
awaken  fome  fmners  that  don't  care  whether 
their  fouls  profper  or  no.  I  don't  mean  the 
Tabernacle  comers,  or  the  Foundery  comers, 
or  the  church,  or  diffenters,  but  I  fpeak  to  ail 
of  you,  of  whatever  denomination  you  are ; 
God  of  his  infinite  mercy  give  you  his  Spirit. 
You  that  are  believers,  come,  let  us  have  that 
common  name  among  us  all;  if  we  have  got 
it,  we  go  off  well.  If  you  want  to  know 
whether  your  fouls  profper,  that  is,  whether 
they  are  healthy;  you  know  what  a  perfon 
means  when  he  wifhes  your  body  to  profper ; 
let  me  alk  you  how  it  is  between  you  and 
God,  with  refped  to  fecret  prayer  ?  Good  Mr. 
Bunyan  fays,  if  we  are  prayerlefs,  we  are 
Chriftlefs.  None  of  God's  people,  fays  he,; 
come  into  the  world  ftill-born.  Good  Mr. 
Birket  (whofe  commentary  has  gone  througk 

five 


64  ^^^^  Profperity.  Ser.  Iir, 

five  or  fix-and-twenty  editions  3  and  yet  I  think 
if  he  was  now  alive,  and  to  preach  once  or 
twice  a  day,  they  would  cry.  Away  with  his 
commentary,    and   preaching  and  all)  fpeaks 
to  the  fame  purpofe.     Cojne  into  the  world JiilU 
born  !  what  language  is  that  in  a  preacher's 
mouth  ?  but  it  will  do  for  thofe  that  hke  to    ♦. 
ufe  marks  and  figns.    /  will  pour  out  a  Spirit  of 
grace  and  fiippli cation^  fays  the  Lord  ^  and  I 
will  venture  to  fay,  if  the  Spirit  of  grace  re- 
fides  m  the  heart,  the  Spirit  of  fupplication  will 
not  be  wanting.     Perfons  under  their  firft  love 
dare  not  go  without  God  3  they  go  to  God, 
not  as  the  formalift  does,  not  for  fear  of  going 
to  hell,  or  being  damned.     It  is  a  mercy  any 
thing  drives  to  prayer ;  and  a  perfon  under  the 
fpirit  of  bondage,  that  has  been  juft  brought 
to  the  liberty  of  the  fons  of  God,  goes  freely  to 
his  heavenly  father,  under  the  difcoveries  and 
conftraints  of  divine  love.     Come,  I  will  ap- 
peal to  yourfelves  3  did  not  you,  like  a  dear 
fond  mother,  if  the  child,  the  beloved  child, 
made  but  the  leafl  noife  in  the  world,  O,  fays 
the  mother,  the  dear  child  crys,  I  muft  go  and 
hufh  it:  fo  time  was,  when  many  hearkened 
to  the  call  of  God,  and  could  no  more  keep 
from  the  prefence  of  God  in  fecret,  than  a 

fond 


S&r.  III.  Soul  Trofperity.  6$ 

fond   mother  from  the  prefence  of  her  dear 
child;     Now.  if  your    fouls    do    profpcr,  this 
connexion  between  you  and  God  will  be  kept 
up ;    I  don't  fay  that  you  will   always  have 
the  fame  fervour  as  when  you  firft  fet  out ;  I 
don't  fay  you   will  always  be  carried  up  into 
the  third  heavens  5  the  animal  fpirits  poffibly 
will  not  admit  of  fuch  folace  -,  but  you  fliould 
enquire  with  yourfelves,  whether  you  would 
be  eafy  to  be  out  of  God's  company?  Steal 
from  behind  your  counter,  and  go  and  con- 
verfe  with   God,     Sir  Thomas   Abney,  who 
was  obfervable  for  keeping  up  conftant  prayer 
in  his  family,  being  afked  how  he  kept  up 
prayer   that   night   he    was  fworn    in   Lord- 
Mayor  ?  Very  wellj  fays  he,  I  got  the  com-  / 
pany  into   my  room,  and   entertained   them, 
and  when  the  time  came,  I  told  them  I  mufl 
leave  them  a  litde,  while  I  went  and  prayed  f 
with  my   family,    and  returned  again.     God  . 
grant  we  may  have  many  fuch  Lord-Mayors*  1 
If  our  fouls  profperj  the  fame   principle  v»^ill 
reign  in  us,  and  make  us  confcientioufly  attend 
on  the  means  of  grace.     It  is  a  moft  dreadful 
mark  of  an  enthufiaflic  turn  of  mind,  when 
perfons  think  they  are  fo  high  in  grace,  that 
they  thank  God  they  have  no  need  of  ordi- 

K  nances. 


66  Soul  Profperity.  Ser.  Ill, 

nances.  Our  being  the  children  of  God,  is  fo 
far  from  being  the  caufe  of  our  wanting  no 
ordinances,  that,  properly  fpeaking,  the  ordi- 
nances are  intended  for  the  nourifliing  of  the 
children  of  God  5  not  only  for  the  awaking  the 
foul  at  firft,  but  for  the  feeding  the  foul  after- 
wards. If  the  fame  nourifliment  the  child  re- 
ceives before,  feeds  it  after  it  is  born  ;  and  as 
the  manna  never  failed,  but  the  children  of 
Ifrael  partook  of  it  daily  white  in  the  wilder- 
nefs,  till  they  came  to  Canaan,  fo  we  fliall 
want  our  daily  bread,  we  fhall  Want  the  God 
of  grace  and  mercy  to  convey  his  divine  life 
into  our  hearts,  till  we  get  into  the  heavenly 
Canaan.  There  faith  will  be  turned  into  vifion, 
and  then  we  fhall  not  want  ordinances ;  and 
let  people  fay  what  they  will,  if  our  fouls 
profper  we  fhall  be  glad  of  ordinances,  we 
ihall  love  the  place  where  God  dwells^  we 
fliall  not  fay,  fuch  a  one  preaches  and  I  luill  not 
go^  but  If  we  are  among  them  we  fliall  be  glad 
of  a  good  plain  country  difli,  as  well  as  a  fine 
garniflied  defert^  and  if  our  fouls  profper,  wc 
fliall  be  fond  of  the  mefiengers  as  well  as  the 
meffage:  we  fliall  admire  as  much  to  hear  a 
good  ram's- horn,  fuch  as  blov/ed  down  the 
w^alls  of  Jericho,  as  a  fine  filvcr  trumpet.     So 

in 


Ser.  III.  Sou]  Profperity  67 

in  all  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord,  that  of  the 
Lord's-fuppcr  for  example ;  if  the  foul  does 
not  attend  thereon,  it  is  an  evidence  that  it 
does  not  profper.  It  is  a  wonder  if  that  foul 
has  not  done  fomething  to  make  it  afraid  to 
meet  God  at  his  table.  Adcvn^  u^here  art 
tboii  ?  fays  the  eternal  Logos  to  his  fallen  crea- 
ture ;  and  every  time  we  mifs,  whether  we 
think  of  it  or  no,  the  Redeemer  puts  It  down  j 
but  if  our  fouls  profper,  how  fhall  we  run  to 
the  table  of  the  Lord,  and  be  glad  to  come 
often  to  the  commemoration  of  his  death. 

I  will  venture  to  affirm  farther,  that  if  your 
fouls  profper,  yoa  will  grow  downwards. 
What  is  that?  why  you  will  grow  in  the 
knowledge  of  yourfelves.  I  heard,  when  I 
v/as  at  Liibon,  that  fome  people  tlxere  began 
at  the  top  of  the  houfe  firft.  It  is  odd  kind  of  I 
preaching  that  will  do  for  the  Papifts,  refting  \ 
merely  in  externals.  The  knowledge  of  our- 
felves  is  the  firfi;  thing  God  implants.  LorJ, 
let  me  know  myfelj\  was  a  prayer  that  one  of 
the  Fathers  put  up  for  fixteen  years  together ; 
and  if  you  have  high  thoughts  of  yourfelves, 
you  may  knov/  you  are  light-headed,  you  for- 
get what  poor  filly  creatures  you  are.  As  oar 
fouls  profper  we  fliall  be  more  and  more  fenli- 
K  2  ble, 


68  Soul  Profferify.  Sen  III. 

ble,  not  only  of  the  outfide,  but  of  the  infide ; 
we  firfl:  battle  with  the  outward  man,  but  as 
we  advance  in  the  divine  life,  we  have  nearer 
views  of  the  chambers  of  imagery  that  are  in 
our  hearts  3  and  one  day  after  another  we  fhall 
find  more  and  more  abominations  there,  and 
confequently  we  fliall  fee  more  of  the  glory  of 
Jefus  Chrift,  the  wonders  of  that  Immanuel, 
who  daily  delivers  us  from  this  body  of  fin  and 
death ;  and  I  mention  this,  becaufe  there  is 
nothing  more  common,  efpecially  with  young 
Chriftians.     I  ufed  formerly  to  have  at  leaft  a 
hundred  or  two  hundred  in  a  day,  who  would 
come  and  fay,  O  dear,  I  am  fo  and  fo,  I  met 
with  God  3  ah !   that  is  quite   well ;   a  week 
after  they  would  come  and  fay,  O,  fir,  it  is  all 
delufion,  there  was  nothing  in  it  3  what  is  the 
matter?  O  never  was  fuch  a  wretch  as  I  am, 
I  never  thought  I  had  fuch  a  wicked  heart. 
Oh  !   God  cannot  love  me  5  now,  fir,  all  my 
fervour,  and  all  that  I  felt  is  gone  3  and  what 
then?  does  a   tree  never  grow  but  when  it 
grows   upward  ?    fome   trees   I    fancy   grow 
flownward  3  and  the  deeper  you  grow  in  the 
knowledge  of  yourfelf,  the  deeper  you  grow 
in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  his  grace,  that 
dilcov^rs  the  corruptions  of  ypur  hearts.     Do 

not 


Ser.  III.  Soul  Profperify.  69 

not  you  find   that  aged  men  look  back  upon 
fome   former  ftates.     I    know    fome    people 
can't  look  back  to  fee  hov/  many  fins  they  have 
been  guilty  of  5  but  if  grace  helps  us  to  a  fight 
of  our  inherent  corruptions,  it  will  make  us 
weary  of  it,  and  lead  us  to  the  blood  of  Chrifl 
to  cleanfe  us  from  it;    confequently,  if  your 
fouls  profper,  the  more  you  will  fall  in  love 
with    the  glorious  Redeemer,    and  with   his 
righteoufnefs.     I  never  knew  a  perfon  in  my 
life  that  diligently  ufed  the  word,  and  other 
means,  but  as  they   improved  in   grace,  faw 
more   and  more  the  neceffity    of  depending 
upon   a  better  righteoufnefs  than  their  own. 
Generally  when  we  firft  fet  out,  we  have  got 
better  hearts  than  heads ;  but  if  we  grow  in 
the  divine  life,  our  heads  will  grow  as  well  as 
our  hearts,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  leads  out  of 
abominable  felf,  and   caufes  us  to  flee  more 
and  more  to  that  glorious  and  com  pleat  righ^ 
teoufnefs  that  Jefus  Chrifl:  wrought  out. 

The  more  your  fouls  profper,  the  more  you 
will  fee  of  the  freenefs  and  difl:inguiihing  na- 
ture of  God's  grace,  that  all  is  of  grace.  We 
are  all  naturally  free-willers,  and  generally 
young  ones  fay,  O  we  have  found  the  Meffiah, 
of  whom    Mofes   and   the   prophets   fpoke ; 

which 


yo  Soul  Frofperlty.  Ser.  III. 

v/hich  is  right,  except  that  word  ive  have 
found  %  for  the  believer  a  Httie  after  learns, 
that  the  Mejftah  had  found  him.  I  mention, 
this,  becaufe  we  ought  not  to  make  perfons 
offenders  for  a  word  ;  we  fliould  bear  with 
young  Chriftians,  and  not  knock  a  young 
child's  brains  out,  becaufe  he  cannot  fpeak  in 
blank  verfe. 

Let  it  not  be  forgotton  alfo,  that  the  more 
your  fouls  profper,  the  more  you  will  get 
above  the  world.  You  cannot  think  that  I 
mean  you  fhonld  be  negligent  2bout  the  things 
of  this  life.  Nothing  tries  my  temper  more, 
than  to  fee  any  about  me  idle  ^  an  idle  perfon 
tempts  the  devil  to  tempt  him.  In  the  ftate 
of  paradife  Adam  and  Eve  were  to  drefs  the 
garden,  and  not  to  be  idle  there;  after  the 
fall  they  were  to  till  the  ground :  but  if  any 
body  fays  that  the  Methoditls  think  to  be 
idle,  they  injure  them.  We  tell  people  to 
rife  and  be  at  their  work  early  and  late,  that 
they  may  redeem  time  to  attend  the  word. 
If  all  tlut  fpeak  againfl  the  Methodifts  were 
as  diligent,  it  would  be  better  for  their  wives 
and  families.  What  do  you  think  a  true  Me- 
thodift  will  be  idle  ?  no,  he  will  be  bufy  with 
his  hands,  he  knows   time  is   precious,    and 


there- 


Ser.  III.  Soul  Profperity.  f^t 

therefore  he  will  work  hard  that  he  may  have 
to  give  to  them  that  need,  and  at  the  fame 
time  he  will  hve  above  the  world ;  and  you 
know  the  earth  is  under  your  feet,  io  is  the 
world.     When  he  goes  to  fleep  he  will  fay, 
I  care  not  whether  I  wake  more.     I  can  look 
back,  and  tell  you  of  hundreds  and  hundreds 
t-hat  once  feemed  alive  to  God,  and  have  been 
drawn  away  with  a  little  fi/thy,    nafty  dirt. 
How  many  places  are  there  erhpty  here,  that 
have  been  filled  with  perfons  that  once  were 
zealous  in  their  attendance?  As  a  perfon  the 
other  day,  to   whofe  having  a  place  it  was 
objeded,  that  he  was  'u  Methodift ;  no,  f^iys  , 
he,  I  have  not  been  a  Methodifl  thefe  twd  j 
years.     I  do  not,   for  my   partj  wifli  people  \ 
joy  when   they  get  •  money  3  only  take  care  k 
does  not  get  into,  and   put  your  eyes  out  ;  it ' 
your  money  ihcreaies,  let  your  zeal  for  good  ; 
works  increafe.     Perhaps  fome  ftranger  will 
fay,  I  thought  you  was  againft  good  works, 
I  tell  you  the  truth,  I  am  againft  good  vi'orks, 
don't  run  away  before  I  have  finished  my  {en- 
tence ;  we  are  againft  good  works  being  put  f 
in  the  room  of  Chrill,  as  the  ground  of  our; 
acceptance  J  but  w^e  look  upon  it,  if  we  have 
a  right  faith,   our  faith   vvHl    work  by  love. 

Ever 


7*  Svul  Profperify,  Sen  III^ 

Ever  fince  I  was  a  boy,  I  remember  to  have 
heard  a  ftory  of  a  poor  indigent  beggar,  who 
alked  a  clergyman  to  give  him  his  alm^, 
which  being  refufed,  he  faid,  will  you  pleafe, 
xlir,  to  give  me  your  bJeffing ;  fays  he,  God 
Iblefs  you :  O,  replied  the  beggar,  you  would 
■not  give  me  that  if  it  was  worth  any  thing. 
There  are  many  who  will  talk  very  friend- 
ly to  you,  but  if  they  fuppofe  you  are  come 
for  any  thing,  they  will  run  away  as  from  a 
pick-pocket;  whereas,  if  our  fouls  profpered, 
we  fhould  count  it  more  blefed  to  give  than  to 
receive.  When  we  rife  from  our  beds  this 
would  be  our  queftion  to  ourfelve?,  what  can 
I  do  for  God  to  day  ?  what  can  I  do  for  the 
poor?  have  I  two,  or  five,  or  ten  talents? 
God  help  me  to  do  for  the  poor  as  much  as 
if  I  knew  I  was  to  live  only  this  day. 

In  a  word,  if  your  fouls  profper,  my  dear 
hearers,  you  will  grow  in  love.  There  are 
fome  good  fouls,  but  very  narrow  fouls ;  they 
are  fo  afraid  of  loving  people  that  differ  from 
them,  that  it  makes  me  uneafy  to  fee  it. 
Party  fpirits  creep  in  among  Chriftians,  and 
whereas  it  was  formerly  faid,  fee  how  theje 
Chrijiians  love  one  another  !  now  it  may  be 
faid,  Jee  how  thefe  Chrijliafis  hate  one  a?iother  I 

Ide- 


Ser.  III.  Soul  Profperify,  73 

I  declare  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  that 
I  am  more  and  more  convinced  that  the  prin- 
ciples I  have  preached  are  the  v^ord  of  God, 
Pray  u^hat  do  you  do  at  Change  5  is  there  fuch 
a  thing  as  a  Prefbyterian,  or  Independent,  or 
Church- walk  there  ?    is  there  any  chambers 
there  for  the  Prelbyterian?,  and  Independents, ; 
and    Churchmen   to   deal  in  ?    People   may] 
boaft  of  their  wildfire-zeal  for  God,  till  theyl 
can*t  bear  the  fight  of  a  perfon  that  differs 
from  them.     The  apoftle   commends   Gaius 
for  his  catholic  love,  for  his  love  to  ftrangers. 
That  was  a  glorious  faying  of  a  good  woman 
in  Scotland,  Come  in^  fays  fhe,  ye  blejfed  of 
the  Lord ;  I  have  a  houfe  that  will  hold  a  hun- 
dred, and  a  heart  that  will  hold  ten  thoufand. 
God  give  us  fuch  a  heart  5  he  that  dwelleth  in 
lovey  dwelleth  in  God,    I  could  mention  twen- 
ty marks,  and  fo  go  on  wire-drawing  till  nine 
or  ten  o'clock ;  but  it  is  befi  to  deal  with  our 
fouls  as  with  our  bodies,  to  eat  but  little  at  a 
time.     It  is  fo  with  preaching;  though  I  don't 
proce;ed  any  farther  in  my  difcourfe,  God  blefs 
what  has  been  faid. 

But  is  there  a  child  of  God  here  that  can  go 
away  without  a  drooping  heart  ?  I  don't  fpeak 
that  you  may  thiak  me  humble :  I  love  fin- 

L  ceritv, 


74  ^0^^  Prcfperity.  Ser.  Ill, 

cerity,  inward  and  outward,  and  hate  guile. 
When  I  think  what  God  has  done  to  me, 
how  often  he  has  pruned  me,  and  dug  and 
dung'd  about  me,  and  when  I  think  how  little 
I  have  done  for  God,  it  makes  me  weep  if 
poffible  tears  of  blood  3  it  makes  me  cry,  O 
niy  leannefsy  my  leannefsy  as  I  exprelTed  myfelf 
with  my  friend  to  day.     This  makes  me  long, 
if  my  Itrength  of  body  would  permit,  to  be- 
gin to  be  in  earned  for  my  Lord.     What  fay 
you,  my  dear  friends,  have  all  of  you  got  the 
fame  temper  ?  have  you  made  the  progrcfs  you 
ought   to  have  done?   O  London!  London! 
highly  favoured  London!  what  would  fomc 
people  give  for  thy  privileges  ?    what  would 
the  people  I  was  called  to  preach  to  but  this 
day  fe'ennight  ?  A  good,  a  right  honourable 
lady,  about  three-and-twenty  miles  off,    has 
brought  the  gofpel  there.     The  people  that  I 
preached  to  longed  and  thirfted  after  the  fame 
meffage;  they  faid,  they  thought  they  never 
heard  the  truth  before.     You  have  the  manna 
poured  out  round  the  camp,  and  I  am  afraid 
you  are  calling  it  light  bread  y  at  leaft,  I  am 
afraid  you  have  had  a  bad  digeftion.    Conlider 
of  it,  and  for  Jefus  Chrift's  fake  tremble  for 
fear  God  fiould  remove  his  candlefiick  from 

atnong 


Ser.  III.  Soul  Profpenty.  75 

among  you.  Labourers  are  fick ;  thofe  that 
did  once  labour  are  almoft  worn  out,  and 
others  they  only  bring  thenifelves  into  a  nar- 
row fphere,  and  fo  confine  their  ufefulnefs. 
There  are  few  that  like  to  go  out  in  the  fields ; 
broken  heads  and  dead  cats  are  no  more  the 
ornaments  of  a  Methodift,  but  fiik  fcarves. 
Thofe  honourable  badges  are  now  no  more : 
the  langour  has  got  from  the  minifters  to  the 
people,  and  if  you  don't  take  care,  we  fliall 
all  fall  dead  together.  The  Lord  Jefus  roufe 
us,  the  Son  of  God  roufe  us  all.  Ye  fhould 
fliow  the  world  the  way,  and  ye  that  have 
been  Methodifts  of  many  years  (landing,  (how 
the  young  ones  that  have  not  the  crofs  to  bear 
as  we  once  had,  what  ancient  Methodilm  was. 
As  for  you  who  are  quite  negligent  about 
the  profpericy  of  your  fouls,  who  only  mind 
your  bodies,  who  are  more  afraid  of  a  pimple 
in  your  faces,  than  of  the  rottennefs  of  your 
hearts ;  that  will  fay,  O  give  me  a  good  bot- 
tle and  a  fowl,  and  keep  the  profperity  of  you^ 
fouls  to  yourfelves.  You  had  better  take  care 
what  you  fay,  for  fear  God  Hiould  take  you 
at  your  word.  I  knew  fome  trade(men  and 
farmers,  and  one  had  got  a  wife  perhaps  with 
a  fortune  too,  who  prayed  they  might  be 
L  2  excufed. 


76  Soul  Profperity.  Ser.  III. 

excufedj  they  never  came  to  the  fupper,  and 
God  fent  them  to  hell  for  it  too  j  this  may  be 
your  cafe.  I  was  told  to-day  of  a  young  wo- 
man, that  was  very  well  on  Sunday  when  fhe 
left  her  friends,  when  fhe  came  home  was 
racked  with  pain,  had  an  inflammation  in  her 
bowels,  aiid  is  now  a  breathlefs  corpfe.  Ano- 
ther that  I  heard  of,  a  Chriftlefs  preacher,  that 
always  minded  his  body,  when  he  was  near 
death  he  faid  to  his  wife,  I  fee  hell  opened  for 
me,  I  fee  the  damned  tormented,  I  fee  fuch  a 
one  in  hell  that  I  debauched  ^  in  the  midft  of 
his  agony  he  faid,  I  am  coming  to  thee,  I  am 
coming,  I  muft  be  damned,  God  will  damn 
my  foul,  and  died.  Taxke  care  of  jefting  with 
God  ;  there  is  room  enough  in  hell,  and  if  you 
negled:  the  profperity  of  your  fouls  what  will 
become  of  you  ?  what  will  you  give  for  a  grain 
of  hope  when  God  requires  your  fouls?  awake 
then  thatjleepeji',  hark  !  hark  !  hark  !  hear  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  the  living  God.  Help  me, 
O  ye  children  of  God :  I  am  come  with  a 
warrant  from  Jefus  of  Nazareth  to  night.  Ye 
rninifters  of  Chrift  that  are  here,  help  me  with 
your  prayers :  ye  fervants  of  the  living  God, 
Jielp  me  with  your  prayers.  O  with  what 
iuccefs  did  I  preach  in  Mooriields  when  I  had 

ten 


Ser.  III.  Soul  Profperity.  yy 

ten  thoufand  of  God's  people  praying  for  me ; 
pray  to  God  to  ftrengthen  my  body :  don't  be 
afraid  I  fhall  hurt  myfelf  to-night :  I  don't 
care  what  hurt  I  do  myfelf  if  God  may  blefs 
it^  I  can  preach  but  little,  but  may  God  blef^ 
that  little.  I  weep  and  cry  and  humble  myfelf 
before  God  daily  for  being  laid  afide  5  I  would 
not  give  others  the  trouble  if  I  could  preach 
myfelf.  You  have  had  the  firft  of  me,  and 
you  will  have  the  laft  of  me :  the  angels  of 
God  waited  for  your  converfion,  and  are  now 
ready  to  take  care  of  the  foul  when  it  leaves 
the  rotten  carcafe.  The  worft  creature  under 
heaven,  that  has  not  a  penny  in  the  world, 
may  be  welcome  unto  God.  However  it  has 
been  with  us  in  times  paft,  may  our  fouls  prof- 
per  in  time  to  come  5  which  God  grant  of  his 
infinite  mercy,     Amen. 


SERMOr 


[    78    ] 


^ 


S  E  R  M  O  N     IV. 

The  Gofpel  a  dying  Saint's  Triumph. 
A    Funeral    Sermon. 


Mark  xvi.  ver.  15,  16. 

jind  he  [aid  unto  them^    Go  ye   into  all  the. 

worldy   and  preach  the  gofpel  to  every  crea-- 

ture.     He   that    believeth   and  is  baptized 

JJjallbefaved^  but  he  that  believeth  not  Jhall 

be  damned. 

I  A  M  perfuaded  I  need  not  inform  this 
auditory,  that  when  ambaffadors  are  fent 
to  a  prince,  or  when  judges  go  their  re- 
fpedtlve  circuits,  it  is  always  cuftomary  for 
them  to  fhow  their  credentials,  to  open  and 
read  their  commiflions,  by  which  they  adl  in 
]ns  Majefty's  name.  The  fame  is  abfolutely 
neceflary  for  thofe  who  are  ambaiTadors  of  the 
Son  of  God,  as  they  would  be  faithful  to  their 
Lord  \  fince  they  are  to  fit  with  him  on  the 

throne. 


i 


Ser.  IV.  The  Go/pel  a  Saint* s  Triumph.         yg 

throne,  when  he  fhall  come  the  fecond  time 
to  judge  both  evil  angels  and  men.  If  any 
ll:iould  aik  me,  where  is  their  commiflion  ?  it 
has  been  jufl  now  read  unto  you.  Here  it  is 
in  my  hand,  it  is  written  with  the  King's  own 
hand,  by  the  finger  of  the  ever-blefled  God, 
and  fealed  with  the  fignet  of  his  eternal  Spirit, 
with  his  broad  feal  annexed  to  it.  The  com- 
miffion  is  fhort,  but  v;3ry  extenfive;  and  it  is 
remarkable,  it  was  given  out  jull  before  the 
Redeemer  went  to  heaven ;  he  referved  it  in 
infinite  wifdom  for  his  laft  blefling,  to  appoint 
and  employ  vicegerents  to  carry  on  his  work 
on  earth.  He  that  bath  an  ear^to  hear^  let 
him  hear  what  the  Son  of  God  fays  to  a  com- 
pany of  poor  fifhermen.  There  was  not  one 
fcholar  among  them  all.  What  does  he  fay; 
Go  ye  into  all  the  worldy  and  preach  the  gofpel 
to  every  creature.  Let  us  paufe  a  while,  and 
before  we  go  further  let  us  fee  what  mercy, 
what  love,  and  yet  withal,  what  equal  ma- 
jefty  are  blended  in  this  expreflion  or  com- 
miflion.  Go  yc^  ye  poor  filliermen,  ye  that 
the  letter-learned  dodlors  will  look  upon  as 
illiterate  men  ;  Go  ye^  that  have  hitherto  been 
dreaming  of  temporal  preferments,  quarrelling 
'who  fiouldfit  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left 

hand 


8o  The  Gofpd  a  Scr.  IV. 

hand  in  my  kingdom  5  Go  ye^  not  flay  till  the 
people  come  to  you,  but  imitate  the  condudt 
of  your  Mafter  5  Go  ye^  remembring  that  the 
devil  will  not  permit  fouls  to  be  fond  of  hear- 
ing you :  Go  therefore  5  where  ?  into  all  the 
world y  there  is  a  commiffion  for  you;  there 
never  was  fuch  a  commiffion  on  the  earth  5 
there  never  was  any  like  this  ^  Go  into  all  the 
worlds  that  is,  into  the  Gentile  as  well  as  the, 
Jewifh  world.  Hitherto  my  gofpel  has  been 
confined  to  the  Jews ;  I  once  told  you,  you 
muft  not  go  to  the  Gentiles ;  I  once  told  a 
poor  woman  that  came  to  me,  //  is  not  meet 
to  take  the^childrem  breads  and  give  it  unto 
dogs :  but  the  partition  wall  being  now  broke 
down,  the  veil  of  the  tem.pic  being  now  rent 
in  twain,  he  gave  them  a  univerfal  commif- 
fion 'y  Go  ye,  therefore,  into  all  the  world  \ 
how  1  what  go  into  other  minifters  parifhes  ? 
for  there  was  not  a  diftrict  then  but  what  was 
fettled  with  fhepherds,  fuch  as  they  were; 
yes,  yes.  Go  into  all  the  world-,  and  though 
I  will  not  pretend  to  fay,  that  this  enjoins  mi- 
nifters to  go  into  every  part  of  the  world  ;  yet 
I  infift  upon  it,  and  by  the  grace  of  God,  if  i 
was  to  die  for  it,  I  will  fay,  that  no  power  on 
earth  has   power   to   reflrain   minifters   from 

preach* 


Ser.  IV»      dying  Saint's  Triumph.  8i 

preaching  where  a  company  of  people  are 
willing  to  hear  ^  and  if  minifters  were  of  a 
right  temper,  they  would  fay  as  a  mlnifler  did 
at  Oxford,  that  ufed  to  vifit  the  prifoners 
there ;  I  remember  once  I  went  to  afk  him 
whether  I  might  go  and  vifit  fome  of  his  pa- 
rifh,  whether  he  was  offended  at  our  going  to 
vifit  the  prifoners?  No,  no,  fays  he,  I  am 
glad  I  have  any  fuch  young  curates  as  you. 
And  if  minifters  were  of  fuch  a  temper  now,  O 
dear  the  devil  would  fly  before  us.  As  good 
Mr.  Philip  Henry  faid  to  the  minifter  of  Broad 
Oaks,  from  whence  he  was  ejedted,  but 
preached  afterwards  in  a  barn,  and  meeting , 
the  minifter  after  fermon  was  over;  Sir,  fays.' 
Mr.  Henry,  I  have  been  mailing  bold  to  throw 
a  handful  oj  feed  into  your  ground.  Thank 
you,  fir,  fays  he,  God  blefs  it,  there  is  work 
enough  for  us  both.  We  may  talk  of  what  we 
will,  fearch  into  the  bottom,  it  is  not  for 
want  of  light,  but  of  more  zeal  and  love  to 
the  Son  of  God  :  if  we  were  as  warm,  and  full 
of  the  love  of  God  as  we  ought  to  be,  thefe 
pretty  excufes  we  urge  to  fave  our  bones, 
would  not  be  fo  much  as  mentioned  5  we  fhould 
go  out  and  leave  thefe  carcafes  to  the  grace  of 
God.  I  don*t  fee  how  we  can  adt  as  priefts 
M  o| 


82  The  Go/pel  a  Ser.  IV. 

of  the  church  of  England  without  doing  it. 
Be  fo  kind  as  read  the  Ordination  Service  as 
foori  as  you  go  home  ;  for  the  office  of  ordi- 
nation and  confecration  of  bifhops,  priefls, 
and  deacons,  is  left  out  of  moft  of  the  com- 
mon prayer  books,  fo  that  people  are  as  igno- 
rant of  it  as  if  it  was  not.  The  office  of  a 
prieft  is  this :  he  is  not  to  confine  himfelf  to 
his  place,  no ;  what  then  ?  why  he  is  to  go 
forth^  andfeek  after  the  children  oj  God  that 

*"-/-i^^    i/r^  difperfed  in  this  needy  world -y  thefe  are  the 

'    very  words  that  the  bifhop  fpeaks  to  us  when 

we  are  ordained  j  but  if  we  are  confined  to  one 

particular  place,  and  are  to  be  fliut  up  in  one 

corner,  pray  how  do  we  feek  the  children  of 

g^'^'  I  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  difperfed  in  this  needy  world  ? 
Pariffies  and  fettled  minifters  there  muft  be, 
but  we  are  not,  I  infifl:  on  it,  to  be  hindered 
from  preaching  Chrift  any  where,  becaufe  he 
bids  us  go  into  all  the  world -,  here  is  our  li- 
cence. I  acknowledge  the  Chapel  is  licenfed  ; 
here  is  my  licence,  and  wherever  I  go  I  Will 
produce  my  licence  ;  where  ?  why  out  of  the 
1 6th  of  Mark ;  Go  ye^  and  preach  the  go  [pel 
to  all  the  world:  there  is  the  licence,  and  the 
Spirit  oi  Chrift  helping  us  to  preach  by  that 
licence,    will  make   all  the   devirs  children 

cowards 


Ser.  IV.        dyifjg  Saint's  Triumph.  83 

cowards  before  us.     We  have  tried  them  thefe 
thirty  years,  would  to  God  we   fet  about  it 
now  y  if  I  had  ftrength  I  would  fet  about  it 
to-morrow ;  I  only  grieve  that  my  body  will 
not  hold  out  for  field-preaching,    elfe  Ken- 
nington-Common   fliould   be  my   pulpit,  for 
any  place  is  confecrated  where  Chrifl;  is  pre- 
fent.     Well,  what  muft  we  go  forth  to  do  ? 
Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  -,  preach ! 
what   is  that?    why   the   original   w^ord   for 
preach  is  to  fpeak  out,  as  a  crier  does  that  cries 
goods  that  are  loft;  proclaim  it.     And  Ifaiah 
would  be  reckoned  a  dreadful    enthufiaft    if 
now  alive.    How  does  he  preach  ?  he  preaches 
in  the  King's  chapels  fuch  language  and  elo- 
quence as  would  carry  all  before  it ;  and  yet 
how   does   he   preach?    Ho^    every   one   that 
thirfteth.     O,  he  lijts  up  his  voice  like  atriim-' 
pet.     And  the  word  preach  fignifies  to  pro- 
claim; to  cry  aloud,  and  [pare  not.     How  do 
you  like  one  that  cries  your  loft  goods  if  he 
only  whifpers  ?  would  you  chufe  to  employ  a 
man  that  you  could  not  hear  two  yards?  O, 
fay  you,  I  fhall  never  find  my  goods :  and  if 
perfons  have  what  qualifications  they  may,  if 
they  cannot  be  heard  at  all ;  they  need  not  < 
preach  at  all.     I  knov/  a  prebend  in  the  cathe- 

M  2  dral 


S4  ^^^  Go/pel  a  Ser.  IV. 

dral  of  York,  who  fpoke  fo  very  low  nobody 
heard  him  ^  fomebody  faid,  they  never  heard 
fuch  a  moving  fermon  in  all  their  lives  in  that 
cathedral,  for  it  made  all  the  people  move  outy 
becaufe  they  could  not  hear.     The  matter  of 
the  miniftry  of  the  gofpel  is  of  infinite  impor- 
tance:   unlefs,    my  brethren,    we  could   be 
heard,   what  do   we  preach  for  ?   It  implies 
earneftnefs  in  the  preaching,  and  the  preacher. 
You  expecft  a  perfon,    like  one  that  is  crying 
your  goods,  to  be  in  earneft  \  and  if  we  preach, 
and  make  the  King's  proclamation,  we  ihould 
jbe  in  earneft.     It   is  faid,    Chrijl  opened  his 
mouth  and   taught.      Now   a   modern    critic 
would  laugh    at   that;    open  his  mouth,  fay 
they,  how  could  he  fpeak  without  opening  his 
mouth?    Would  it  not  be  better  to  fay,  he 
taught  them  ?  No,  no,  there  is  no  idle  word 
in  God's  book.     It  is  faid,    the  Lord  Je/us 
opened  his  mouth :  what  for  ?  why,  to  get  in 
breach  that  he  might  fpeak  loud  to  the  people, 
when  the  heavens  were  Lis  founding  board  j 
then  did  he  open  his  mouth,  and  taught  them 
in  earneft,  powerfully  -,  and  therefore  the  peo^ 
pie  make  this  obfervation  when  he  had  done  , 
fpenking,  that  he  fpoke  as  one  having  authority^ 
^na  not  fs  the  Scribes^.     There  is  no  difpenfa? 

tion 


Ser.  IV.      dying  Saint's  Triumph.  85 

tion  from  preaching,  but  ficknefs  or  want  of 
abilities,  to  thofe  that  are  ordained  to  preach ; 
and  therefore  it  was  a  proverb  in  the  primitive 
church,  fbat  it  Becomes  a  bijhop  to  die  preach^ 
ing,    Bifliop  Jewell,  that  blefled  minifter  of 
the  church  of  England,  gave  that  anfwer  to  a 
perfon  that  met  his  lordfhip  walking  on  foot 
in  the  dirt,  going  to  preach  to  a  few  people. 
Why  does  your  lordfhip,  weak  as  you  are, 
cxpofe  yourfelf  thus  ?  fays   he,  it  becomes  a 
bifhop  to  die  preaching.     Lord  fend  all  the 
world  that  have  bifliops  fuch  jewels  as  he  was ! 
Pray  what  are  they  to  preach  ?  not  themfelves. 
What  are  they  to  preach  ?  why  they  are  to 
preach  not   morality :    not   morality  !   come, 
don't  be  frightened,  any  of  you  that  are  afraid 
of  good  works  don't  be  frightened  this  morn- 
ing :  I  fay  not  morality ;  that  is,  morality  is 
not  to  be  the  grand  point  of  their  preaching ; 
they  are  not  to  preach  as  an  heathen  philofo- 
pher  would,     A  late  bifhop  of  Lincoln,  who 
has  not  been  dead  a  long  while,  faid  to  his 
chaplain,  You  are  not  a  minifter  of  Cicero,  or 
any  of  the  heathen  philofophers ;  you  are  not 
to  entertain  your  people  with  dry  morality,  but  ^ 
remember  you  are  a  minifter  of  Chrift  ^  you/ 
are,  therefore,  to  preach   the   gofpel  3  and  if 

you 


86  lie  Gofpel  a  Ser.  IV. 

\  you  will  not  preach  the  gofpel  in  the  church, 

'  I  you  muft  not  be  angry  for  the  poor  people's 

Igoing  out  into  the  fields  where  they  hear  the 

/  gofpel ;  that  is  to  be  your  grand  theme,  Go 

''  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gofpeL 

Now  the  gofpel  fignifies  good  news,  glad 
tidings :  Behold  I  bring  yoUy  faid  the  angel, 
glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  Mean  and  con- 
temptible as  the  ofHce  of  a  preacher  may  be 
thought  now,  the  angels  were  glad  of  the 
commiffion  to  preach  this  gofpel:  and  Dr. 
Goodwin,  that  learned  pious  foul,  fays  in  his 
familiar  way,  and  that  is  the  beft  way  of  wri- 
ting, God  had  but  one  Son,  and  he  made  a 
minifter  of  him  5  and  I  add,  he  made  an  iti- 
nerant minifter  of  him  too.  Well,  and  fome 
fay,  you  muft  not  preach  the  law  5  you  can-, 
not  preach  the  gofpel  without  preaching  the 
law  ;  for  you  fhall  find  by  and  by,  we  are  to 
preach  fomething  that  the  people  muft  be  £ved 
by :  it  is  impoffible  to  tell  them  how  they  are 
to  be  faved,  unlefs  we  tell  them  what  they  are 
to  be  faved  fi'om.  The  way  the  Spirit  of  God 
takes,  is  like  that  we  take  in  preparing  the 
ground  :  do  you  think  any  farmer  would  have 
a  crop  of  corn  next  year  unlefs  they  plow  now  j 
and  you  may  as  well  exped;  a  crop  of  corn  on 

un- 


Ser.  IV.      dying  Saint's  Triumph.  87 

unplowed  ground,  as  a  crop  of  grace,  until 
the  foul  is  convinced  of  its  being  undone  with- 
out a  Saviour.  That  is  the  reafon  we  have  fo 
many  mufhroom  converts,  fo  many  perfons 
that  are  always  happy !  happy  !  happy !  and 
never  were  miferable ;  why  ?  becaufe  their 
ftony  ground  is  not  plowed  up  3  they  have  not 
got  a  convicftion  of  the  law ;  they  are  ftony- 
ground  hearers  -,  they  hear  the  word  with  ioy^ 
and  in  a  time  of  temptation^  which  will  foon 
come  after  a  feeming  or  real  converfion,  they 
fall  away.  They  ferve  Chrift  as  the  young 
man  ferved  the  Jews  that  laid  hold  of  him, 
who,  when  he  found  he  was  like  to  be  a  pri- 
foner  for  following  Chrift,  left  his  garments; 
and  fo  fome  people  leave  their  profeffion.  That 
makes  me  fo  cautious  now,  which  I  w^as  not 
thirty  years  ago,  of  dubbing  people  converts  la 
foon.  I  love  now  to  wait  a  little,  and  fee  if  ^ 
people  bring  forth  fruit ;  for  there  are  fo  many  \ 
bloflbms  which  March  winds  vou  know  blow  I 
away,  that  I  cannot  believe  they  are  converts' 
till  1  fee  fruit  brought  forth.  It  wiii  do  con- 
verts no  harm  to  keep  them  a  little  back ;  it 
will  never  do  a  fincere  foul  any  harm. 

We  are  to  preach  the  gofpel :  to  whom  ?  to 
every  creature :  here  is  the  commiffion,   every 

crea- 


88  The  Gofpel  a  Ser.  IV. 

creature.  I  fuppofe  the  apoftles  were  not  to 
fee  every  creature;  they  did  not  go  into  all 
nations ;  they  had  particular  diftrids  j  but 
wherever  they  did  go,  they  preached.  Did 
you  ever  hear  Paul,  or  any  of  the  apoftles, 
fent  away  a  congregation  without  a  fermon  ? 
No,  no  :  when  turned  out  of  the  temple  they 
preached  in  the  highways,  hedges,  ftreets,  and 
lanes  of  the  city  :  they  went  to  the  water-fide  j 
there  Lydia  was  catched.  My  brethren,  we 
have  got  a  commiffion  here  from  Chrift ;  and 
not  only  a  commiffion,  but  we  have  a  com- 
mand to  preach  to  every  creature  ;  all  that  are 
willing  to  hear.  He  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear^ 
let  him  hear ;  and  if  fome  Ihall  fay,  they  will 
not  come  if  we  do  preach,  would  to  God  we 
tried  them:  where  the  car  cafe  is  there  will  the 
eagles  be  gathered  together.  We  are  to  preach 
glad  tidings  of  falvation;  to  tell  a  poor  be- 
nighted world,  lying  in  the  wicked  one  the 
devil,  their  ftate  and  condition  :  we  are  to  tell 
them,  God  is  love-,  to  tell  them,  that  God 
loves  them  better  than  they  do  themfelves. 
We  muft  preach  the  law,  but  not  leave  the 
people  there.  We  muft  tell  them  how  Mofes 
brings  them  to  the  borders  of  Canaan,  and  then 
tell  them  of  a  glorious  Jofhua  that  will  carry 

them 


Ser.  IV.       dying  Sainfs  T^riumphT  89 

them  over  Jordan ;  firft,  to  fhew  them  their 
wants;  and  then  point  out  to  them  a  Jefus  that 
can  fupply,  and  more  than  iupply,  all  their 
wants.  This  we  are  to  tell  e'very  creature  \ 
and  it  is  for  this  that  people  ftone  gofpel  preach- 
ers. I  don't  think  the  prifoners  would  be 
angry  with  us  if  we  were  to  tell  them,  the 
king  commiflions  us  to  declare  to  them  that 
they  might  come  out  of  their  prifon,  that  their 
chains  may  be  knocked  off.  If  you  was  to  go 
to  one  of  them  and  fay,  Here  you  have  your 
chains ;  and  he  was  to  fay,  I  have  no  chains 
on  at  alii  you  would  think  that  man*s  brains 
turned  -,  and  fo  are  every  man's  that  does  not 
fee  himfelf  to  be  in  the  chains  of  fin  and  de- 
ceit. We  are  to  preach  liberty  to  the  captives^ 
to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  -, 
foimd  the  jubilee  trumpet^  and  tell  them  the  year 
oj  releafe  is  come  3  that  Jefus  can  make  them 
happy. 

But,  pray,  if  we  are  to  preach,  what  are 
the  creatures  to  do  that  fee  their  ne^d  of  this 
falvation  ?  I  will  tell  you  ;  they  are  to  believe. 
He  that  believeth^  and  is  baptized^  &c.  The 
grand  topics  Chrift's  minrfters  are  to  preach, 
are  repentance  towards  God,  and  faith  in  our 
Lo?:d  je/us  Chrijl,     The  men  oi  the  world 

N^^  fancy 


go  7he  Go/pel  a  Sef.  IV. 

fancy  they  have  believed  already,  and  fome  of 
them  lift  up  their  heads  and  fay,  Thank  God^ 
we  have  believed  ever  fince  we  were  born  3 
and  in  one  fenfe  many  people  believe,  but  in 
what  fenfe  ?  juft  as  the  devil  believes ;  they 
believe,  and  ftill  continue  devils  in  their  carnal 
ftate  5  that  is,  they  alTent  to  the  gofpel,  they 
aflent  to  it  as  a  thing  that  is  credible.  This  is 
our  fchool  definition  of  faith ;  and  I  believe 
there  are  thoufands  that  call  themfelves  Chrlf- 
tians,  that  don't  believe  a  thoufandth  part  of 
what  the  devil  does.  The  devil  believes  more 
than  an  Arian,  for  he  does  not  believe  Chrift 
to  be  God  j  the  devil  faysj  /  know  whom  thou 
art^  the  Holy  One  of  God.  The  devil  will  r:fe 
up  in  judgment  againft  him.  He  believes 
more  than  a  Socinian,  who  beheves  Jcfus 
Chrift  to  be  no  more  than  an  extraordinary 
man;  and  he  believes  more  of  Jefus  Chrifl 
than  thoufands  of  profeffors  do,  who  are  nei- 
ther Arians  or  Socinians.  There  are  a  thou- 
fand  things  in  this  book  *  that  many  people, 
if  you  come  to  clofe- quarters  with  them,  will 
fay  they  do  not  believe,  though  they  are 
afl:iamed  to  own  it.  The  furtheft  that  they 
go,  is  to  affent  to  the  Creed,  to  the  Lord's- 

prayer^ 

'♦'  Holding  oat  his  bible* 


Sen  IV.       dying  Saint's  Iriumph.  91 

prayer,  and  Ten  Commandments ;  and  if  a 
perfon  can  fay  thefe  in  their  mother  tongue, 
and  have  been  baptized  by  the  prieft,  and 
confirmed  by  the  bi/hop,  and  go  to  church 
once  a  week,  and  now  and  then  on  holidays, 
they  think  they  are  not  only  believers,  but 
ftrong  believers.  I  am  not  againft  going  to 
church,  nor  againft  the  Creed,  the  Lord's- 
prayer,  and  the  Commandments ;  I  love  and 
honour  them,  and  I  pray  God  we  may  always 
have  them  ;  and  I  would  not  have  our  liturgy 
or  articles  departed  from  for  ten  thoufand 
worlds.  Many  would  have  them  altered,  be- 
.caufe  there  are  fome  faults  in  them  3  but  if  our 
modern  people  were  to  alter  them,  they  would 
make  them  ten  thoufand  times  worfe  than  they 
are.  But  believing  is  fomething  more  \  it  is  a 
coming  to  Jefus  Chrift,  receiving  Jefus,  rolling 
ourfelves  on  Jefus  j  it  is  a  trufting  in  the  Lord 
Jefus.  I  do  not  know  any  one  fingle  thing 
more  varioufly  expreffed  in  the  fcriptures  than 
believing ;  why  ?  becaufe  it  is  the  marrow  of 
the  gofpel.  Without  faith  we  cannot  be  juC- 
tified,  either  in  our  perfons  or  performances ; 
and  therefore  the  Holy  Ghofl  has  varioufly 
expreflcd  it,  to  let  us  fee  the  importance  of 
the  point.  It  is  expreffed  by  a  coming,  truft* 
N  2  ing. 


./ 


9^  "J^ht  Gefpel  a  Ser.  IV. 

ing^  receiving,  and  relying,  (all  which  amounts 
to  the  fame  thing)  under  a  felt  conviftion  that 
we  are  loft,  undone,  condemned  without  him  2 
for,  as  a  good  old  Puritan  obferves,    Chrift  is 
beholden  to  none  of  us  for  our  hearts ;  we 
never    fhould    come    to    Jefus    Chrift,     the 
finner's  laft   ftiift,  till  we  feel  we  cannot  do 
without  him.     We  are  like  the  woman  with 
the  bloody  illlie  ^  flie  fpent  a  great  deal  of  mo- 
ney upon  phyficians ;  if  fhe  had  had  the  funi 
of  one  half-guinea  more,  till   that  was   gone 
fhe  never  would  have  come    to  Chrift;  but 
having  fpent  all,  and  then  hearing  that  Jefus 
was  to  come  that  way,  a  fenfe  of  her  need,  a 
feeling  fenfe  of  her  impotence,  and  infufficiency 
of  all  other  applications^  made  her  come  to 
Chrift;  faying   in   her  heart.  If  I  could  but 
touch  the  hem  of  his  garment  IJJjould  be  whole ; 
jefus^  the  fon  of  Davidy  would  have  mercy  on 
me ;  or  words  to  that  purpofe*     She  did  not 
go  about  and  fay,  pray  lend  me  a  common- 
prayer  book ;  it  was  not  in  print  then.  Where 
muft  fhe  borrow  one  ?  her  heart,  touched  by 
God,  was  the  beft  common-prayer  5  and  a  few 
words,  uttered  from  a  i^wic  of  her   weaknefs 
and   mifery,    was   more    rhetoric,   v^as   more 
mufic  in  the  ears  of  God,  than  an  extempore 

prayer 


Scr.  IVv       dying  Saint's  Triwnpbl  93 

prayer  by  a  gifted  man,  admiring  himfelf  for 
an  hour  and  half..    As  a  perfon  told  me  but 
yefterday>    of  a    poor  outlandifli  Papift   that 
was  condemned   to  die,    held  out  for  a  long 
whiles  he  would  not   fpeak  to  a  Proteftant 
minifter,  but  a  night  or  two  before  he  fufFered, 
comes  out  to  him,  and  fays,  Me  now  fee  the  ne^  , 
cejjity  of  a  greater  abfohition  than  a  priefl  can. 
give  me ;  and  then,  in  his  broken  language,  cries  \ 
out^  Dear  Lord  Jefus^  fidow  thy  charity  to  thy ; 
poor  [inner  !  There  is  language  !  there   is  rhe-»-  j 
toric  for  you  !  and  we  ourfelves  like  fuch  lan- 
guage.    You  don't  like  fawning  people  that 
come  into  your  room,  and  by  their  very  man- 
ner of  coming  prove  they  are  not  fincere  ;  but 
a  poor  creature  that  comes  to  pour  out  two  or 
three  words  you  fee  is  honeft^  you  will  not  fay 
to  fuch  a  one,  Why  do  you  come  to  me,  and 
not  fpeak  blank  verfe  ?  why\do  you  come  to 
me,  and  not  fpeak  fine  language  ?  No  ;  fince- 
rity  is  the  things  fnicerity  is  all  in  all.     When 
we  are  once  convinced  of  our  need  and  help- 
lefsnefs^    and    of  Jefus's  being   a   Redeemer, 
that  is  mighty  and  willing  to  fave,  a  poor  foul 
then  throws   himfelf  upon  this  Jefus,  receives 
this  Jefus,  ventures  upon  this  Jefus,  believes 
the  word,  and  by  thus  venturing  on  the  pro- 

mife. 


94  T;^^  GofpeJ  a  Ser.  IV. 

mlfe,  receives  from  Jefus  the  thing  promifed. 
Faith  comes  by  hearings  and  hearing  by  the 
'word  of  God.  But  then  where  there  is  true 
faith,  that  will,  my  dear  hearers,  be  attended 
with  what  ?  why,  with  falvation.  He  that 
believcth,  and  is  baptized^  faith  our  Lord, 
Jhall  be  faved :  faved  from  what  ?  why,  from 
every  thing  that  he  wants  to  be  faved  from,  and 
receives  every  thing  that  God  can  give  to  com- 
fpleat  his  whole  falvation.  What  is  It  a  poor 
finner  wants  to  be  faved  from?  O,  fin,  fin, 
the  guilt  of  fin.  The  firft  convidion  brings 
the  creatures  to  God  by  force  ^  there  are  very- 
few  that  are  drawn  by  love  intirely :  and  I  fei- 
dom  find  any  of  thofe  that  have  been  drawn  by 
love,  but  have  had  dreadful  conflids  after- 
w^ards:  for  either  before  or  after  converfion, 
our  hearts  mufi:  be  plowed  up,  or  we  fhall 
never  be  prepared  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

Ye  fliall  be  faved  from  the  painful  guilt  of 
fin :  what  is  that  ?  why,  the  common-prayer 
book  will  tell  you,  in  the  communion  office; 
the  remembrance  of  our  Jins  is  grievous  unto  us^ 
and  the  burden  of  them  is  intolerable.  There 
is  methodiftical  language.  Cranmer,  Latimer, 
or  Hooper,  were,  my  brethren,  what  ?  v/hy, 
they  were  Methodift  preachers ;  and  they  ufed 

to 


Ser.  IV.       dying  Saint's  "Triumph.  g^ 

to  preach  in  Paurs-Crofs,  a  pulpit  faid  to  be 
made  in  the  fliape  of  a  crofs,  near  St.  Paul's 
church  i  and  a  falary  given  for  that  very  pur- 
pofe,  I  believe,  to  this  day.  No  matter  where 
we  preach,  fo  that  finners  feel  Chrift's  pov^'er 
in  delivering  them  from  this,  which  certainly 
implies  a  confcioufnefs  of  pardon.  I  don't 
think  the  poor  creature  that  was  refpited  the 
other  day,  would  have  believed  it,  had  he  not 
feen  the  king's  warrant  juft  before  the  others 
were  carried  out.  Why,  fay  they,  here  is  his 
majefty's  pardon  j  he  takes  and  receives  it  with 
joy,  and  is  now  freed  from  the  gallows.  And 
if  perlbns  can  give  this  credence  to  an  earthly 
king,  why  cannot  a  believer  have  a  kn(c  of  the 
pardon  of  his  fins  from  God  ?  If  a  perfon's 
reading  this  to  me,  telling  me  the  king  has 
pardoned  me,  has  fuch  an  effedl,  why  may 
not  God's  word,  backed  by  his  Soirit,  be 
brought  home  with  fuch  power  on  my  heart, 
that  I  may  be  allured  God  has  pardoned  me, 
as  well  as  a  criminal  that  his  king  has  faved  ? 
If  this  is  gofpel  away  with  it,  fay  lome,  who 
think  we  are  not  to  be  juftifitd  till  we  come  to 
judgment.  O  bleifed  creatures  1  this  is  modern 
divinity  !  our  reformers  knew  nothing  about  it. 
We  are  to  be  declared,  if  you  pleafe,  jiulified, 

in 


96  "The  Gofpel  a  Ser.  IV. 

in  the  day  of  JefasChrift,  who  w  HI  pronounce 
it  before  all  mankind.  But,  my  brethren,  we 
are  to  be  married  to  Jefus  Chrift  in  this  world, 
and  the  marriage  is  to  be  declared  in  another  ; 
and  I  will  infift  upon  it,  though  I  will  not  pre- 
!  tend  to  fay  that  all  that  have  not  full  affurance 
are  not  Chriftians,  yet  I  will  fay,  that  affurance 
is  neceflary  for  the  well-being  of  a  Chriftian  ; 
the  comfortable  being,  though  not  for  his  very 
exiflence :  and  I  will  venture  to  fay,  that  a 
foul  was  never  brought  to  Chrift,  but  what 
had  fome  ground  of  affurance  of  pardon  ;  tho', 
for  want  of  knowing  better,  he  put  it  by,  and 
did  not  know  the  gift  of  God  when  it  came. 
But,  my  brethren,  we  Jhall  be  favedjrom  all 
ourfms.  Here  is  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  now 
come:  fatan  may  hear  that)  and  any  of  you 
here  that  are  coming  into  the  Chapel  as  you 
pafs  along.  I  am  glad  to  fee  poor  creatures 
come,  that  I  may  tell  them.,  God  is  love.  Be- 
lievers, you  (hall  be  faved  from  all  your  fins, 
every  one  of  them ;  they  fhall  all  be  blotted 
out.  Generally,  when  perfons  are  convinced, 
the  devil  preaches  defpair  5  fome  great  fin  lies 
upon  them  5  and,  fays  the  poor  finner,  I  fliall 
be  faved  from  all  but  that  5  had  I  not  been 
guilty  of  fach  a  cringe  I  mii>ht  have  hope,  but 

I  am 


Ser.  IV.       dying  Saint's  Triumph,  gy 

I  am  guilty  of  fuch  a  fin,  which  is  fo  awful, 
with  fuch  dreadful  aggravations,  I  am  afraid  I 
fhall  never  be  pardoned.  But,  my  dear  fouls, 
Chrifl  is  love ;  and  when  he  loves  to  forgive, 
he  forgives  like  a  God ;  /  will  blot  out  your 
iniquities^  tranfgrejjions^  and  fins.  Come  noWy 
faith  the  Lord,  let  us  reafon  together  3  though 
your  fins  are  as  fcarlet^  yet  they  J  hall  be  as  white 
as /now.  I  am  fo  far  from  being  unwilling  to 
fave  or  pardon,  that  the  angels,  every  time  the 
gofpel  is  preached,  are  ready  to  tune  their 
harps,  and  long  to  fing  an  anthem  to  fome 
poor  finner's  converiion. 

They  fliall  be  faved  from  the  power  of  fin. 
Don't  you  remember  that  when  Jofliua  was 
going  on  with  his  conquefts,  that  there  were 
fome  kings  in  a  cave ;  and  when  he  returned, 
he  ordered  them  to  bring  the  kings  out  for 
God's  people  to  tread  upon  them.  When  I 
read  that  pallage,  I  ufed  to  think  thefe  kings 
were  like  our  corruptions  hid  in  the  cave  of 
our  hearts,  and  the  ftone  of  unbelief  rolled  to 
keep  them  in :  but  when  we  receive  Chrifl 
by  faith,  and  have  pardon  in  him,  our  great 
Jofhua  takes  away  the  ftone,  and  fays,  bring 
out  thefe  kingSy  thefe  corruptions,  that  have 
reigned   over   my   people^   and    by   faith    let^ 

O  them 


98  The  Go/pel  a  Ser.  IV. 

them  tread  on  the  necks  of  them.  Oar  great 
Mafter,  when  he  gave  the  command  in  the 
text,  fays,  tbefe  figns  Jhall  follow  them  that 
believe^  in  7?iy  name  they  Jl: all  caji  out  devils^ 
they  fiall  [peak  with  new  tongues^  they  Jloall 
take  up  Jerpe72tSy  and  if  they  drink  any  deadly 
thing  it  f'jall  not  hurt  them.  Thefe  were 
things  peculiar,  in  one  fenfe,  to  the  apoilles  5 
but  in  the  power  of  faith,  and  as  brought  home 
to  every  believer,  he  cafts  out  devilifli  lufts  3 
and  if  they  had  drank  any  deadly  thing,  as  God 
knows  we  have,  they  may  do  by  them  as  Paul 
did  by  the  viper,  through  die  power  of  faith 
caft  them  off,  and  by  this  means  prove  that 
Chrifl  is  God. 

This  is,  my  dear  hearers,  a  prefent  falva- 
tion.  The  wickedeft  wretch  in  the  world 
will  cry,  I  hope  to  be  faved,  though  they 
have  no  notion  of  being  ilwed  but  after  their 
death  5  as  a  woman  in  Virginia  told  me  once, 
when  I  faid  flie  muft  be  born  again  5  I  believe 
you,  fir,  but  that  muft  be  after  I  am  dead. 
And  by  peoples  living  as  they  do,  one  would 
fuppofe  that  they  think  they  are  not  to  be 
faved  till  they  die^  becaule  they  live  fo.  But 
as  I  have  told  you,  I  teh  you  again,  Chiiri^s 
faivation    is   a  great   falvation}    and   '^xii   that 

Chnft 


Ser.  IV*.       dying  Saififs  Triumph,  99 

Chrlfl  does  for  his  people  on  earth,  is  but  an 
earneft  of  good  things  to  come,  an  anticipa- 
tion of  what  he  is  to  do  for  them  in  heaven. 
Our  Lord  fays,  the  kingdoi7i  of  God  is  within 
you  J  the  kingdom  is  come  nigh  unto  you.  You 
muft  not  only  believe  on  Chrift,  but  believe 
in  him :  we  are  not  only  to  be  baptized  in  the 
name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghoft, 
but  we  are  to  be  baptized  into  the  nature  of 
the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghoft  5  this  is  the 
baptifm  of  the  Spirit,  and  this  is  that  falvation 
which  God  grant  we  may  all  partake  of. 

We  are  to  be  fived,  my  brethren,  from 
what?  why,  from  the  fear  of  death.  He  came 
to  deliver  them  whoy  through  the  J  ear  of  deaths 
were  all  their  life  time  fubje^i  to  bondage.  What 
are  there  no  children  of  God  but  thofe  that 
have  full  afTurance  I  you  never  heard  me  fay 
fo  \  yet  I  am  apt  to  fpeak  a  litde  faft,  but  at 
the  fame  time  I  would  chufe  not  to  fpeak  fo 
fafl  as  to  fpeak  contrary  to  the  word  of  God. 
There  are  a  great  many  good  fouls,  that  at 
times  may  doubt  of  the  reality  of  this  work 
upon  their  fouls:  a  relaxed  habit  of  body,  a 
nervous  diforder,  you  may  fay  what  you  pleafe, 
will  make  a  weak  child  of  God  doubt  of  what 
God  has  done  in  them,  and  that  hurts  the 
O  2  mind 


'lOo  7he  Gofpei  a  Ser.  IV. 

mind  as  It  has  fuch  a  clofe  connexion  with 
the  body;  but  then  a  believer  is  low  :  God's 
people  are  low  perfons  :  as  the  greateft  ge- 
iiuiffes  are  moft  liable  to  lownefs  of  fpirit,  for 
the  fcabbard  is  not  ftrong  enough  for  the  fword, 
and  perfons  that  talk  much  muft  wear  out  in 
time ;  but  this  I  ftand  to,  it  is  our  privilege  to 
live  above  the  fears  of  cleath.  We  do  not  live 
up  to  our  dignity  till  every  day  we  are  wait- 
ing for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  from  heaven  j 
and  I  am  perfuaded  of  this,  though  I  believe 
there  may  be  fome  exceptions,  that  the  reafon 
why  we  do  not  live  more  above  the  fear  of 
death  is,  becaufe  we  keep  in  fo  much  with 
thefe  nafty  earthly  things.  You  may  have  the 
beft  eyes  in  the  world,  and  only  put  your 
hands  before  them,  you  will  find  the  fun  hid 
from  you  j  and  fo  you  may  have  a  large  fire, 
but  throw  fome  earth  upon  the  fire  that  is  in 
your  parlour,  or  drawing  rooms,  and  you  will 
find  the  fire  damped.  And  how  can  people 
have  much  of  God  or  heaven,  when  they  have 
fo  much  of  the  earth  in  their  hearts  ?  It  is  our 
privilege  to  hve  above  the  fear  of  death,  though 
we  are  not  to  be  faved  from  dyings  and  I  am 
fure  a  believer  would  not  be  faved  from  dying 
for  a  million  of  worlds  5  it  would  be  death  to 

him 


Ser.  IV.       dyhtg  Smnfs  I'rhwiph.  loi 

him  not  to  die ;  but  a  foul  touched  with  the 
love  of  God,  even  in  ficknefs,  in  the  midft  of 
a  burning  fever,  in  the  midft  of  a  fire  that 
will  burn  a  thoufand  bodies  up,  convulfed 
with  tortures  and  pains  in  every  limb  ;  a  be- 
liever is  enabled  fometimes  to  fay,   O  my  God^ 

0  my  Gody  thou  art  love ;  1  am  ready  to  come 
to  thee  in  the  midfi  of  all.  Blefled  be  God,  I 
need  not  go  far  for  example ;  yonder,  under 
the  gallery,  lies  the  remains,  the  carcafe  of  a 
dear  faint,  who  was  for  twenty-five  days  toge- 
ther burned  with  a  fever,  enough  to  fcorch. 
any  creature  up;  yet,  one  filled  with  love 
and  power  divine,  bleflTcd  the  Lord  Jefus; 
though  fhe  cried  out,  If  I  was  not  fupported, 
the  agony  of  my  body  would  make  me  impa- 
tient i  yet  never  faid  a  murmuring  word,  but 
in  the  midft  of  all  cried  out  to  thofe  about  her, 
God  is  love  !  O  my  joys  !  O  the  comforts  that  I 

feel !  and  in  her  very  laft  moments  cried  out, 

1  am  a  coming ;  dear  Lord,  I  am  a  coming ; 
and  fo  fweetly  flept  in  Jefus.  If  this  is  enthu- 
fiafm,  God  give  us  a  good  fhare  of  it  when  we 
come  to  die !  Thefe  are  dying  and  yet  living 
witneffes  that  God  is  love  !  She  was  in  raptures 
when  Mr.  Sheppard  went  to  vifit  her:  flie 
defired  me  to  tell  you,  that  God  is  love :  de- 
fired 


102  rhe  Gojpel  a  Ser.  IV. 

iired  me  to  tell  you  in  the  Chapel  pulpit,  that 
fhe  was  called  about  four  years  ago.  I  think 
Mr.  Lee  was  the  inftrument  of  her  converfion. 
Now  her  body  is  to  be  put  to  bed  at  noon ; 
but  her  foul  is  crying,  O  the  joys !  the  joys ! 
the  joys !  of  being  faved  by  a  bleffed  Emanuel ! 
Now  will  any  one  dare  to  deny  this  evidence  ? 
Do  you  fee  worldly  people  work  themfelves 
up  into  that  frame  when  they  die  ?  Vifit  them 
when  they  are  near  death :  ah  dear  !  they  are 
in  the  vapours ;  they  are  fo  afraid  of  dying, 
that  the  dodor  will  not  fuffer  us  to  come  near 
them ;  no,  not  common  clergymen,  for  fear 
we  fhould  damp  their  fpirits :  till  they  find  they 
are  juft  gone,  and  then  they  give  us  leave  to 
fay  the  farewel  prayer  to  them  :  but  they  that 
are  born  from  above,  that  are  made  new  crea- 
tures in  Chrift,  feel  fomething  that  fmiles  upon 
them  in  death.  She  told  them,  fie  believed 
God  would  let  her  go  over  Jordan  dry  Jhod-y 
that  was  her  expreffion.  If  this  is  falvation  on 
earth,  what  muft  it  be  in  heaven  ?  If  in  the 
midftof  the  tortures  of  a  burning  fever  a  rap- 
tured foul  can  cry,  O  the  joys !  O  the  com- 
forts !  Lord,  I  am  coming  !  I  am  coming ! 
what  muft  that  be  when  enclofed  in  a  Re- 
deemer's arms  ?  in  order  to  which,  the  glorious 

angels 


Sen  IV.      dying  Sainfs  Triumph,  103 

angels  ftand  at  the  top  of  the  ladder  to  take  a 
poor  wearied  pilgrim  home.  Lord,  give  us 
not  only  fuch  a  frame  when  v/e  are  dying,  but 
while  we  are  living  ^  for  if  it  is  comfortable  to 
die  in  fuch  a  frame,  why  not  to  live  in  it? 
to  live  in  heaven  on  earth,  O,  fay  you,  I 
thank  God  I  walk  by  faith  j  I  have  got  the 
promife.  Well,  thank  God  you  have  the  pro- 
mife  3  but  with  the  promife,  learn  to  walk  by 
ihdX  faith  which  is  the  evidence  of  things  notfeen^ 
which  brings  God  down,  brings  heaven  near, 
and  gives  the  foul  a  heart-felt  experience,  that 
God  is  love.  Here  is  a  falvation  worthy  of  a 
God  !  here  is  a  falvation  worthy  of  the  Medi- 
ator's blood  !  for  this  he  groaned,  for  this  he 
bled,  for  this  he  died,  for  this  he  arofe,  for  this 
he  afcended,  for  this  he  fent  the  Holy  Gho/1:, 
and  for  this  purpofe  he  now  fends  him  into  the 
hearts  of  his  people. 

My  brethren,  what  fay  you  to  this?  I  hope, 
it  is  enough  to  make  you  cry  out,  Lordy  let 
my  latter  end  be  like  hers.  This  may  comfort 
you  that  are  mourners  about  her  corpfe,  this 
may  comfort  a  fond  hufband,  whole  beloved 
is  now  taken  away  by  a  ftroke.  What  a 
mercy  is  it,  fir,  that  you  was.  inftrumental  to 
bring  her  uoder  the  word  ?  llie  was  onceaverfe 

to 


104  ^he  Gofpel  a  Scr.  IV. 

to  coming  here :  "wkaty  leave  my  parijh  church  ! 
laid  fhe  ^  what^  go  to  a  conventicle^  to  a  taber- 
nacle of  JMethodiJls  !  he  advifed  her  again  and 
again  to  come  :  at  laft,  one  day  as  they  were  go- 
ing to  St.  Giles's,  fhe  fays,  Well,  come  put  up 
your  walking-flick,  if  it  falls  towards  St.  Gileses  I 
will  go  there  3  if  to  the  Chapel,  I  will  go  there  j 
the  ftick  fell  towards  the  Chapel,  (he  came, 
and  was  converted  to  God.  O  with  what  joy 
muft  her  huiband  meet  her  again  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  !  and  O  happy  day,  in  which  fhe 
was  encouraged  to  feek  after  God.  Laft  week, 
another  was  buried  in  the  like  circumftances ; 
and,  bleffed  be  God,  in  yonder  burying-ground 
are  the  remains  of  many  precious  fouls,  that  in  the 
day  of  judgment  will  let  the  world  know  whe- 
ther this  Chapel  was  built  for  God  or  not. 

O  what  an  awful  word  is  that  in  the 
latter  claufe  of  the  text,  he  that  believeth 
notfiall  be  datnned,  Paufe, — I  will  give  you 
time  to  think  a  little  -,  if  you  would  have  Chrifl 
as  good  as  his  word  of  prom  ife,  remember  he 
will  be  as  good  as  his  word  of  threatning.  You 
hear  the  necefTity  of  preaching  the  gofpel,  be- 
caufe  upon  believing  or  non-believing,  our  fal- 
vation  or  damnation  will  turn.  What  will  you 
laugh  at  the  minifler  that  cries  out.  Lord  help 

you 


Set.  IV*      dying  Saint's  Triumph,  105 

you  to  come  5  come,  come,  do  you  think  that 
we  have  nothing  elfe  to  fay,  and  are  at  a  lofs 
for  words,  when  we  cry  come,  come,  come, 
to  fill  up  our  fermons?  no,  it  is  part  of  our 
commiffion,  it  is  one   great  part.    And,    my 
fellow-finners,  we  are   come  to  tell  you,  that 
our  Mafter  has  a  two-edged  fword  as  well  as  a 
golden  fcepter ;  and  if  you  will  not  come  under 
the  found  of  the  word,  and  do  not  feel  the  con- 
verting power  of  it,  yoii  muft  feel  the  confound- 
ing weight  of  It.  I  repeat  it  again  to  you,  he  that 
believe th  not  Jhallbe  damned  -^  the  very  word  is 
terrible,  God  grant  you  may  never  know  how 
terrible  it  is.     You  are  condemned  already; 
he  that  believeth  not  is  fo,  "John  iii.  18.  why  ? 
becaufe  he  hath  not  believed  on  the  name  of  the 
Son  of  God.     It  is  not  his  being  a  whore-mon- 
ger or  adulterer  that  will  damn  him,  but  his 
unbelief  is  the  damning  fin  j  for  this  he  wilt 
be  condemned  ;  for  ever  banifhed  from  the  pre- 
fence  of  the  ever-blelTed  God  :  and  how  will 
you  rave,  how  will  you  tear,  and  how  will 
you   wring  your   hands,    when  you  fee  your 
relations,  your  friends,  thofe  whom  you  de- 
fpifed,  and  were  glad  they  were  dead  out  of 
your  way,  fee  them  in  Abraha^n's  bofom,  and 
y our f elves  lifting  up  your  eyes  in  tormmt  !  O 


jc6  The  Gofpel  a  Ser.  IV. 

my  dear  hearers,    do  let  me  plead,  let  me  in- 
treat  you;   if  that  would  do,  I  would  down 
on  my  knees ;  if  that  would  do,  I  would  come 
down  from  the  pulpit,  I  would  hang  on  your 
necks,    I  would  not  let  you  go,  I  would  offer 
myfelf  to  be  trodden  under  your  feet  j  I  have 
known  what  it  is  to  be  trodden  under  the  foot 
of  men  thirty  years  ago,  and  I  am  of  the  fame 
temper  ftill :  ufe  me  as  you  will,  I  am  a  poor 
linner ;  and  if  I  was  to  be  killed  a  thoufand 
ways,  I  fuffer  no  more  than  my  reward  as  an 
unprofitable  fervant  of  God :  but  don't  tram* 
pie  the  dear  Jefus  under  foot ;  what  has  he 
done  to  you  ?  was  it  any  harm  to  leave  his  fa- 
therms  bofom,  come  down  and  die,  and  plead 
for  linners  ?  See  him  yonder  hang  on  the  tree ! 
behold  him  with  his  arm  ftretched  out!  fee 
him  all  of  a  bloody  gore,  and  in  his  lafi:  agony 
preaching  love !  Would  you  give  him  a  frefh 
ftab  ?  Are  there  any  of  you  here  that  think  the 
fword  did  not  pierce  him  enough ;  that  they 
did  not  knock  the  briers  and  thorns  into  his 
head  deep  enough?  and  will  you  give  him 
the  other  flafh,  the  other  thorns  ?   and  will 
you  pierce  him  afrefh,  and  go  away  without 
believing  he  is  love  ?  I  cannot  help  it ;  I  am 
free  from  the  blood  of  you  alh     Oh  that  you 

may 


Ser.  IV.       dying  Sai?2t's  Triuf7jph.  T07 

may  not  damn  your  own  fouls!  Don't  be 
murderers ;  nor,  like  Efau,  fell  your  birth- 
right for  a  mcfs  of  pottage.  God  convince 
you 5  God  convert  you;  God  help  thofe  that 
never  believed  to  believe  ;  God  help  thofe  that 
have  believed  to  believe  more  ;  that  they  may 
experience  more  and  more  this  falvation,  till 
faith  is  turned  into  vifion,  and  hope  into 
fruition ;  till  we  have  all,  with  yonder  faint, 
and  all  that  have  gone  before  us,  experienced 
complcat  falvation  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven : 
even  fo,  Lord  Jefus,     Amen  and  Amen. 


SERMON 


t     io8     ] 

S  E  R  M  O  N     V. 

Repentance  and  Converfion. 


Acts  lii,   ver.  19. 

Repent  ye  therefore  and  be  converted^  that 
your  fins  may  be  blotted  out,  when  the  times 
of  rejreJJnng  Jhall  come  from  the  prefence  of 
the  Lord, 

WH  A  T  a  pity  is  it  that  moderi^ 
preachers  attend  no  more  to  the 
niethod  thofe  took  who  were  firft 
infpired  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  in  preaching 
Jefus  Chrift !  the  fuccefs  they  were  honoured 
with,  gave  a  fandtion  to  their  manner  of  preach- 
ing, and  the  divine  authority  of  their  difcourfe?, 
and  energy  of  their  elocution,  one  w^ould  think, 
fhould  have  more  weight  with  thofe  that  are 
called  to  difpenfe  the  golpe!,  than  all  modern 
ichemes  whatever.  If  this  was  the  cafe,  mi- 
nifters  would  then  learn  firft  to  fow,  and  then 
to  reap  5  they  would  endeavour  to  plow  up 

the 


Ser.  V.     Repentance  and  Converfion.         109 

the  fallow  ground,  and  thereby  prepare  the 
people  for  God's  raining  down  bleffings  upon 
them.     Thus  Peter  preached  when  under  a 
divine  influence,  as  I  mentioned  laft  Wcdnef- 
day  night:    he  charged  the  audience  home, 
though  many  of  them  were  learned  and  high 
and  great,  with  having  been  the  murderers  of 
the  Son  of  God.     No  doubt  but  the  charge 
entered  deep  into  their  confcience,  and   that 
faithful  monitor  beginning  to  give  them  a  pro- 
per fenfe  of  themfelves,  the  apoftle  lets  them 
know  that  great  as  their  fin  was,  it  was  not 
unpardonable  5  that  though  they  had  been  con- 
cerned in  the  horrid  crime  of  murdering  the 
Lord  of  Life,  notwithftanding  they  had  there- 
by incurred  the  penalty  of  eternal  death,  yet 
there  was  a  mercy  for  them,  the  way  to  which 
he  points  out  in  the  text ;  Repent  ye  therefore^ 
fays  he,  and  be  converted^  and  adds,  that  your 
Jins  may  be  blotted  out.     Though  they  are  but 
few  words,  they  are  weighty  -,  a  (hort  fentence 
this,  but  fweet :  may  God  make  it  a  blcffed 
fweetnefs  to  every  ono.  of  your  hearts ! 

But  muft  we  preach  converfion  to  a  profet- 
iing  people  ?  Son:ic  of  you,  perhaps,  are  ready 
to  fay,  go  to  America  3  go  among  the  favages 
and  preach  repentance  and  converfion  tliere; 


^'^ 


X I  o         Repent a77ce  and  Con'VerJion.      Ser.  V. 

or,  if  you  muft  be  a  field-preacher,  go  to  the 
highways  and  hedges;  go  to  the  colhers ;  go 
ramble  up  and  down,  as  you  ufed  to  do,  preach 
converiion  to  the  drunkards:  would  to  God 
my  commiffion  might  be  renev/ed,  that  I 
might  have  ftrength  and  fpirit  to  take  the 
advice  1 

Poflibly  others  will  fay,  do  not  preach  it  to 
us ;  pray  who  are  you  ?  I  anfwer,  one  fent  to 
call  you  to  repentance  ;  and  although  I  might, 
yet  I  will  not  come  fo  clofe  to  you  at  prefent, 
as  to  inquire  in  my  turn,  who  are  you  ?  yet 
permit  me  to  pray,  that  while  I  am  preaching 
God's  Spirit  may  find  you  out  3  and  not  only 
let  you  know  who  you  are,  but  what  you 
are  3  and  then  you  will  not  be  eafy  with  your^ 
felves,  nor  angry  with  a  minifter  of  Jefus 
Chrift  for  preaching  converfion  to  your  fouls. 

Repentance  and  converfion  are  nearly  the 
fame.  The  exprefiion  in  the  text  is  complex, 
and  feems  to  include  both  what  goes  before 
and  follows  turning  to  God:  and  if  the  Lord 
is  pleafed  to  honour  me  fo  far  to  night  to  be 
ufeful  to  finners,  as  well  as  faints,  I  will  en- 
deavour to  fhew  you, 

Firft,  what  it  is  not  to  be  converted  %  fe- 
condly,  w^hat  it  is  to  be  trulv  converted  :  third- 


Scr.  V.     Repentance  and  Converfcon.  i  \  i 

ly,  offer  fome  motives  why  you  fliould  repent 
and  be  converted  :  and,  fourthly,  anfwer  fome 
objedlions  that  have  been  madki  againfl  perfons 
repenting  and  being  converted  5  and  may  God 
fo  blefs  my  preaching,  and  your  hearing,  that 
every  one  may  go  away  and  fay,  Lord,  con- 
vert me  more  and  more. 

Firft,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fliow  you  v/hat 
it  is  not  to  be  converted ;  for  I  do  verily  be- 
lieve there  are  thoufands,  and  ten  thoufands, 
that  think  themfeives  converted,  and  yet  at 
the  fame  time,  if  you  come  and  examine  them, 
they  know  not  fo  much  as  fpeculatively  what 
real  converfion  is :  the  general  notion  many 
have  of  it  is,  a  perfon's  being  a  convert  from 
the  church  of  Rome  to  the  church  of  Eno;- 
land.  There  is  a  particular  office  in  the  large 
prayer  book,  to  be  ufed  when  any  one  publicly 
renounces  popery  in  the  great  congregation. 
When  this  is  done,  that  prayer  read,  and  the 
perfon  faid  Amen  to  the  colleds  upon  the; 
occafion,  every  body  wifhes  him  joy,  and 
thanks  God  he  is  converted ;  whereas,  if  this 
is  all,  he  is  as  much  unconverted  to  God  as 
ever  5  he  has  in  words  renounced  popery,  but 
never  took  leave  of  the  fins  of  his  heart.  Well;, 
after  this  he  looks  into  the  church,  and  does 

not 


1 1  i         Repentance  and  Converfion.     Ser.  V* 

not  like  that  white  thing  called  a  furplice  ;  he 
looks,  and  thinks  there  are  (bme  rags  of  the 
whore  of  Babylon  left  ftill :  now,  fays  he^  I 
will  be  converted  ^  how  ?  I  will  turn  Diffen- 
ter :  fo  after  he  is  converted  from  the  churcli 
of  Rome  to  the  church  of  England,  he  goes 
to  the  diffenting  church :  may  be,  curiofity 
\may  bring  him  to  the  Methodifts,  thofemon- 
TOous  troublefome  creatures,  and,  perhaps,  he 
may  then  be  converted  a  third  time,  like  their 
preaching,  like  their  finging  j  O  dear,  I  muft 
have  a  Tabernacle-ticket,  I  muft  have  a  Pfalm- 
book,  I  will  come  as  often  as  there  is  preach- 
ing, or  at  leaft  as  often  as  I  can  ;  and  there  he 
fits  down,  and  becomes  an  outfide  converted 
Methodift,  as  demure  as  poflible.  :  this  is 
going  a  prodigious  way^  and  yet  all  this  is  con- 
verfion  from  one  party  only  to  another.  If 
the  minifter  gives  a  rub  or  two  he  will  take 
mifF  perhaps,  and  be  converted  to  fome  other 
perfuafion,  and  all  the  while  Jefus  Chrift  is 
left  unthought  of  5  but  this  is  converfion  only 
from  party  to  party,  not  real,  and  that  which 
will  bring  a  foul  to  heaven.  Poffibly,  a  per- 
fon  may  go  further,  and  be  converted  from 
one  fet  of  principfes  to  another ;  he  may,  for 
inftance,  be  born  an  Arminian,  which  all  men 

naturally 


Ser.  V.     Repentance  and  Converfion.  113 

naturally  are;  and  one  reafon  why  I  think 
Calvinifm  right  is,  becaufe  proud  nature  \vill 
not  ftoop  to  be  faved  by  grace.  You  that  are 
brought  up  in  an  orthodox  belief,  under  an 
orthodox  miniftry,  caiindt  eafily  make  an  al- 
lowance for  thoufands  that  have  nothing  ring- 
ing in  their  ears  but  Arminianifm ;  yoii  have 
fuck'd  in  orthodoxy  with  your  mother's  milk^ 
and  that  makes  fo  many  four  and  fevere  pro- 
feifors.  I  knew  a  risfid  man  that  would  beat 
Chriftianity  into  his  wife ;  and  fo  many  beat 
people  with  their  bibles,  that  they  are  likely, 
by  their  bitter  proceeding,  to  hinder  them 
from  attending  to  the  means  God  has  defigned 
for  converfion.  What  is  this  but  being  con- 
verted from  one  fet  of  principles  to  another  ? 
and  I  may  be  very  zealous  for  them,  without 
being  transformed  by  them  into  the  Image  of 
God.  But  fome  go  further,  they  think  they 
are  converted  becaufe  they  are  reformed  :  they  j 
fay,  a  reformed  rake  makes  a  gcodhujband^  but^ 
I  think  a  renewed  rake  will  make  a  bettefir 
Reformation  is  not  renovation :  I  may  have: 
the  outfide  of  the  platter  wafhed ;  I  may  be 
turned  from  prophanenefs  to  a  regard  for  mo- 
lality ;  and  becaufe  I  do  not  fwear,  nor  go  ta 
the  play  as  I  ufed  to  do  ^  have  left  off  cards^ 
Q^  and 


114         Repentance  and  Converjton,     Ser.  V. 

and  perhaps  put  on  a  plain  drefs  3  and  fo  be- 
lieve, or  rather  fancy,  that  I  am  converted; 
yet  the  old  man  remains  unmortiiied,  and  the 
heart  is  unrenewed  ftill.  Comparing  myfelf 
with  what  I  once  wa?,  and  looking  on  my 
companions  with  difdain,  I  may  there  (lick 
fafter  in  felf,  and  get  into  a  worfe  and  more 
dangerous  ftate  than  I  was  before.  If  any  of 
you  think  me  too  fevere,  remember  you  are 
the  perfon  I  mean  y  for  you  think  me  fo  only 
becaufe  I  touch  your  cafe.  The  drunkards 
and  fabbath-breakers,  curfers  and  fwearers, 
fay  to  us,  you  can  never  preach  but  you 
preach  againft  us :  as  a  good  man  once  replied 
to  a  perfon,  who  complained  againft  us  mini- 
fters  for  this  preaching;  I  will  put  you  in  a 
way,  faid  he,  that  we  fhall  never  preach  againft 
you ;  how  is  that  ?  why,  leave  off  curfing  and 
fwearing,  &c.  then  your  confciences  will  be 
clear,  and  the  minifter  will  look  over  your 
heads :  happy  they  that  are  convinced  of  it ! 
Ycu  have  not  heard  me,  I  hope,  fpeak  a  word 
againft  reformation  5  you  have  not  heard  me 
fpeak  a  word  againft  being  converted  from  the 
church  of  Rome  3  againft  being  converted  to 
the  church  of  England  ;  or,  againft  being  good  : 
no  ^  all  tkefe  are  riglu  in  their  place  ;  but  all 

thefe 


Ser,  V.      Repentance  and  Converjion.         \  i  r 

thefe  converfions  you  may  have,  and  yet  never 
be  truly  converted  at  all.     What  is  converfion 
then  ?  I  will  not  keep  you  longer  in  fufpenfe, 
my  brethren :  man  muft  be  a  new  creature, 
and  converted  from  his  own  righteoufnefs  to 
the  righteoufnefs  of  the  Lord  Jefas  Chrift  ;  con- 
vidion  will  always  preceed  fpiritual  conver- 
fion ;  and  therefore  the  Proteftant  divines  make 
this  diftindion,  you    may  be  convinced    and 
not  converted,  but  you  cannot  be  converted 
without  being  convinced  5  and  if  v^^e  are  truly 
converted,  Vv'e  lliall   not  only  be  turned   and 
converted  from  fmful  felf,  but  we  {hall  be  con- 
verted from  righteous  felf;  that  is  the  devil  of 
devils:  for  righteous  felf  can  run  and  hide  itielf 
in  its  own  doings,  which   is  the  reafon  feif- 
righteous   people    are   fo   angry   with   gofpel 
preachers ;  there  are  no  fuch  enemies  to  the 
gofpel  as  thefe  :  there  ivere  Jcivs  who  trufted  in 
themfelves  that  they  were  righteous,  that  fet  all 
in  an  uproar,  and  raifed  the  mob  on  the  apof- 
t!es.       Our    Lord    denounced   dreadful    woes 
againft  the  felf-righteous  Pharifees :  fo  minifters 
muft  cut  and  hack  them,  and  not  fpare;    but 
fay  wo,  wo,  wo  to  all  thofe  that  will  not  fub- 
mit  to  the  righteoufnefs  of  Jefjs   Chrifl !    I 
could  almoft  fay,  this   is  the  lafi:  flroke  the 
CL2  Lord 


1:^6         Repejitance  and  Converjion,      Ser.  V, 

Lord  Jefus  gave  Paul,  I  mean  in  turning  him 
to  real  Chriftianity ;  for  having  given  him  a 
blow  as  a  perfecutor  and  injurious,  he  then 
brought  him  out  of  himfeif  by  revealing  his 
perfon  and  office  as  a  Saviour.  1  am  Jefus. — 
Hence  fays  the  apoftle,  /  count  all  thmgs  but 
lofs — that  I  may  'win  Chrift^  and  be  jcund 
in  him  \  not  having  my  own  righteoiijncls^ 
which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  through 
the  faith  of  Chri/i ;  the  rigkteoufnefs  which  is 
of  God  by  faith.  You  hear  him  not  only  fpeak 
of  himfeif  as  injurious,  as  a  blafphem.er,  but 
alfo  as  a  Pharifee  5  and  in  vain  v/e  may  talk 
of  being  converted  till  we  are  brought  out  of 
ourfelves  -,  to  come  as  poor  loft,  undone  fin- 
ners,  to  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift^  to  be  waflied 
in  his  blood  ;  to  be  cloathed  in  his  glorious 
imputed  righteoufnefs :  the  confequence  of  this 
imputation,  or  application  of  a  Mediator's 
righteoufnefs  to  the  foul,  will  be  a  converfion 
from  fin  to  holinefs.  I  am  almoft  tempted  to 
fay,  it  is  perverfenefs  in  people  to  preach  againffc 
the  dodrine  of  imputed  righteoufnefs,  becaufe 
they  love  holinefs,  and  charge  the  Calvinifts 
with  being  enemies  to  it  :  how  can  they  be 
charged  with  being  enemies  to  Sandification, 
vvho  fo  ftrenuoully  infift  on  its  being  thjf  ge- 
nuine 


Ser.  V.     Repentance  and  Co7iverJion.  117 

nuine  fruit,  and  unqueftionable  proof  of  the 
imputation  of  the  righteoufnefs  ot  Chrift,  and 
application  of  it  by  the  Spirit  of  grace  ?  They 
that  are  truly  converted  to  Jefus,  and  are  juf- 
tified  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  will  take 
care  to  evidence  their  converlion,  not  only  by 
the.  having  grace  implanted  in  their  hearts, 
but  by  that  grace  diffuiing  itfelf  through  every 
faculty  pf  the  foul,  and  making  a  univerfal 
change  in  the  whole  man.  I  am  preaching 
from  a  bible  that  faith,  He  that  is  in  Chrijl  is 
a  new  creature^  old  things^  not  will  be  but, 
are  pajfed  away ^  all  things y  not  only  w/7/ but, 
are  becojjie  new.  As  a  child  when  born  has 
all  the  feveral  parts  of  a  man,  it  will  have  no 
more  limbs  than  it  has  now,  if  it  lives  to  four- 
fcore  years  and  ten  ^  fo  Vv^hen  a  perfon  is 
converted  to  God,  there  are  all  the  features  of 
the  new  creature  and  growth,  till  he  becomes 
a  young  man  and  a  father  in  Chrift ;  till  he 
becomes  ripe  in  grace,  and  God  tranflates  him 
to  glory.  Any  thing  fhort  of  this  is  but  the 
fliadow  inftead  of  the  fubftance  ;  and  however 
perfons.may  charge  us  with  being  enthufiafts, 
yet  we  need  not  be  moved  either  to  anger  or 
forrow,  fince  St.  Paul  fays,  /  travel  in  birth 
till  Chrijl  be  formed  in  your  hearts^ 

The 


J 1 8  Repentance  and  Con'verfion.     Ser.  V, 

The  author  of  this  converiion  is  the  Holy 
Ghofl :  it  is  not  their  own  free  will ;  it  is  not 
moral  fvvafion ;  nothing  fliort  of  the  influence 
of  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  can  effefl:  this 
change  in  our  hearts  3  therefore  we  are  faid  to 
be  born  again^    born   oj  God,    of  the  Spirit^ 
not  of  water  only^  but  of  the  Holy  Ghoji  -,  that 
which  is   born   of  the  flefto   is  flefh,  but  that 
which  is  bar 71  of  the  Spirit  is  Jpirit :  and  tho' 
there  is  and  will  be  a  conteft  between   thefe 
two  oppofites,  flefh  and  fpirit,  yet  if  we  are 
truly  converted,  the  fpirlt  will  get  the  afcen- 
dency;  and  though  for  a  while  nature   and 
grace  may  llruggle  in  the  womb  of  a  con- 
verted foul,  like  Jacob  and  Efau,  yet  the  elder 
fliall  ferve  the  younger,  Jacob  (liall  fupplant  and 
turn  outEfau,  or  atleaftkeep  him  under:  God 
grant  we  may  al!  thus  prove  that  we  are  converg- 
ed. This  converiion,  however  it  begins  at  home, 
will  foon  walk  abroad;  as  the  Virgin  Mary 
v/as  fbon  found  out  to  be  with  child,  fo  it  will 
be  foon  found  out  whether  Chrift  is  formed  in 
the  heart.     There  will  be  new  principles,  new 
ways,  new  company,  nev^  works ;  there  will 
be  a  thorough  change  in  the  heart  and  life  ^ 
this  is  converfion  :  at  iirfl:  it  begins  with  terror 
and  legal  forrow,  afterwards  it  leads  to  joyful- 

nefs  3 


Ser.  V.      Repent a?ice  and  Converfion.         1 1 9 

nefs ;  firft  we  work  for  fpirltual  life,  afterwards 
from  it :  firft  we  are  in  bondage,  afterwards 
we  receive  the  Spirit  of  adoption  to  long  and 
thii-ft  for  God,  becaufe  he  has  been  pleafed  to 
let  us  know  that  he  will  take  us  to  heaven. 
Converfion  means  a  being  turned  from  hell  to 
heaven,  from  the  world  to  God.  We  have 
not  fo  much  as  alked  a  pcrfon  to  fell  his  all,  to 
leave  his  lliop,  to  lay  any  thing  at  our  feet: 
when  we  talk  of  being  converted  from  the 
world,  we  mean  being  converted  from  the  love 
of  it:  the  heart  once  touched  with  the  mag- 
net of  divine  love,  ever  after  turns  to  the  pole, 
I  think  it  is  faid  of  a  fun-flower,  though  I  ques- 
tion whether  it  will  alv/ays  hold  true,  that  it 
turns  to  the  fun  ;  I  am  fure  it  is  true  of  the 
Redeemer's  flowers  that  grow  in  his  garden, 
they  not  only  look  to  the  fun,  but  they  find 
fi'efh  life,  warmth,  and  transforming  influence 
from  him  who  is  their  all  in  all.  Here  Chrif- 
tianity  appears  in  its  glory;  here  the  work 
done  is  worthy  the  Son  of  God.  To  be  con- 
verted only  to  a  party,  is  that  v/orth  ChriiVs 
coming  from  heaven  to  earth  for;  that  we 
might  have  a  fet  of  principles  v/ichout  having 

them  affedt  the  heart  ?  for  to  be  baotized  when 

i. 

young,  or  as  fome  to  come  out  of  the  water  at 

age. 


I20         Repentance  and  Converfion.     Scr.  Y^ 

age,  and  turn  out  as  bad  as  ever,  is  a  plain 
proof  of  the  neceffity  of  being  baptized  by  the 
Holy  Ghoft. 

What  fay  you  to  this  change,  my  dear  fouls  ? 
is  it  not  god-like,  is  it  not  divine,  is  it  not  hea- 
ven brought  down  to  the  foul  j  have  you  felt 
it,  have  you  experienced  it  ?  I  begin  to  cate-^ 
chize  you  already,  for  I  could  fpend  a  v^hole 
fermon  in  fpeaking  of  converfion ;  but  I  am 
afraid  thofe  that  fit  under  the  gofpel  have  more 
need  of  heat  than  light :  v^ould  to  God  we 
had  as  much  warmth  in  our  hearts,  as  light  ia 
our  underftandings !  But  if  there  be  any  of  you 
here  that  are  not  yet  converted,  upon  what 
grounds  do  you  hope  for  converfion  ?  give  me 
leave  to  fay,  that  you  ought  to  repent  and  be 
converted,  for  till  then  you  never  can,  never 
will,  never  fhall  find  true  reft  for  your  fouls.- 
What  wrong  notions  have  people  got  of  con- 
verfion !  they  think  it  is  a  wretched  thing,  and 
dread  being  converted  ;  not  knowing  v/hat  it 
is,  they  think  it  is  a  frightful  thing.  I  knew 
one  fometime  ago  that  came  to  fome  Metho- 
difis  5  dear,  fays  the  perfon,  you  are  ehearful, 
I  could  be  glad  if  I  was  a  Method ift  too,  if 
there  was  a  majority  of  them  in  the  land  :  but 
God  help  us  to  go  to  heaven  with  the  minority. 


Ser,  V.     Repentance  and  Con^oerfion.         \  2 1 

if  the  majority  will  not  follow.  But,  my 
dear  hearers,  there  is  not  a  fingle  foul  of  you 
all  that  are  fatisfied  in  your  ftations :  is  not  the 
language  of  your  hearts  when  apprentices,  we 
think  we  fhall  do  very  well  when  journeymen  ; 
when  journeymen,  that  we  fliould  do  very 
well  when  mafters :  when  fingle,  that  we  fhall 
do  well  when  married  ^  and  to  be  fure  you 
think  you  fhall  do  well  when  you  keep  a  car- 
riage. I  have  heard  of  one  who  began  low ; 
he  firft  wanted  a  houfe,  then,  fays  he,  I  want 
two,  then  four,  then  fix  ;  and  when  he  had 
them,  he  faid,  I  think  I  want  nothing  elfe ; 
yes,  fays  his  friend,  you  will  foon  v/ant  ano- 
ther thing,  that  is,  a  hearfe  and  fix  to  carry 
you  to  your  grave ;  and  that  made  him  trem- 
ble. O  if  you  are  Chriftians,  if  the  Lord  loves 
you,  he  will  put  a  thorn  in  your  flefli.  I  have 
often  thought  of  what  a  good  man  fays  in  his 
Diary,  the  Lord  put  a  thorn  in  my  flefli. 
Among  politicians,  when  they  find  a  man 
ambitious,  they  fay,  kick  him  up,  that  he 
may  fall  and  break  his  neck :  fo  it  is  in  every 
condition ;  there  is  not  one  of  you  fifty  years 
old,  but  have  had  many  changes:  have  not 
you  found  thorns  even  on  the  rofe  that  fmelt  fo 
fweet,  and  thorns  perhaps  that  pricked  you  (o 

R  clofely, 


122  Repentance  and  Converfion.     Ser.  V. 

clofcly,  that  you  have  forgot  the  fcent  of  the 
rofe  by  it  ?  and  what  Is  all  this  for,  but  to  teach 
you  that  happinefs  is  only  to  be  found  in  the 
Lord.  If  a  foul  is  truly  converted,  there  v^ill 
be  a  battle,  and  an  awful  chafm  that  will  never 
be  filled  up  but  with  the  love  of  God ;  and 
therefore  when  we  fay.  Repent  and  be  con- 
verted, it  is  no  more  than  faying,  repent  and 
be  happy.  Indeed  we  fhall  never  be  com- 
pleatly  happy  till  we  get  to  heaven.  O  that 
every  man  could  fee  the  good  of  every  thing 
of  a  fublunary  nature  drop  off  like  leaves  in 
autumn :  God  grant  this  may  be  known  by 
every  one  of  you. 

If  it  is  afked,  why  you  (hould  repent  and 
be  converted  ?  I  anfwer,  becaufe  elfe  you  can 
never  be  happy  hereafter.  What  do  you  think 
heaven  is?  why,  fays  the  covetous  man,  I 
think  it  is  a  place  full  of  gold  ;  fo  you  think  to 
ileal  fome  of  the  gold,  do  you  ?  Others  would 
like  heaven  very  well  if  there  was, a  good 
gaming-table  in  heaven;  if  there  was  card- 
playing  in  heaven.  I  have  heard  of  a  lady 
that  was  fo  fond  of  gaming,  that  though  fhe 
had  the  pang?  of  death  upon  her,  yet  when  in 
the  midil  of  her  fits,  or  juft  coming  out  of 
one,  inftead  of  afking  after  Jefus,  v/here  he 

was 


Ser.  V.      Repentance  and  Converfwn.         123 

was  to  be  found,  fhe  aflied,  what  is  trumps  ? 
So  the  gamefter  will  afk,  where  is  the  back- 
gammon table  ?  where  is  the  box  ?  he  will 
want  to  fhake  his  ungodly  hand  in  heaven  ;  he 
will  fay,  let  us  have  a  gaming-table  in  heaven, 
where,  as  he  will  find,  he  has  loft  the  game  ; 
that  God  has  damned  him  without  an  intereft 
in  Chrift.  Can  two  walk  together  unlefs  they 
are  agreed  ?  If  you  die  and  do  not  love  God 
here,  if  you  cannot  love  praying  to  God  here, 
and  cannot  watch  one  hour,  fuppofe  you  wa? 
to  be  ftruck  by  death  and  be  taken  to  heaven, 
there  is  no  fuch  language  and  amufement 
there,  what  would  you  do  ?  Why,  fay  you, 
thefe  Methodifts  are  prefumptuous  people,  they 
can  tell  us  whether  we  are  to  go  to  heaven  or 
no.  Good.  Mr.  Rogers,  a  Welfh  Boanerges, 
preaching  in  the  mountains,  faid,  Chrift  is  hea- 
ven, if  I  worfhip  God  here,  and  do  all  to  God, 
and  for  God,  without  any  hopes  of  reward 
upon  the  earth.  My  dear  brethren,  the  de- 
vils would  never  be  troubled  with  fuch  a  wretch 
in  hell,  he  would  fet  all  hell  in  an  uproar  ^  if 
a  true  Methodift  was  to  go  to  hell,  the  devil 
would  fay,  turn  that  Methodift  out,  be  is  come 
to  torment  us :  therefore,,  you  muft  be  con- 
verted if  you  will  go  to  heaven.  Dr.  Scott 
R  z  faysj^ 


124         Repentance  and  Converfion.      Ser.  V. 

fays,  if  a  natural  man  was  to  be  put  into  hea- 
ven, it  would  be  fuch  a  hell  to  him,  that  he 
would  be  glad  to  go  to  hell  for  fhelter :  angels 
they  hate,  God  they  hate  \  and  as  Adam  was 
afraid  to  meet  with  God  when  he  firfl;  fell  from 
him,  fo  his  fons  hate  God  and  flee  away. 

I  mention  one  thing  more,  which  is,  that 
you  muft  be  converted,  or  be  damned,  and 
that  is  plain  Englifli,  but  not  plainer  than  my 

.Mafler  made  ufe  of,   He  that  believeth  not  Jloall 

be  dajnned,  I  did  not  fpeak  that  word  ftrong 
enough  that  fays.  He  that  believeth  mtfiall  be 
damned  -,  that  is  the  language  of  our  Lord  ^  and 
it  is  faidofone  of  the  primitive  preachers,  that 
ijfed  to  fpeak  the  word  damned  fo  that  it  ftruck 
all  his  auditory.  We  are  afraid  of  fpeaking 
the  word  damned  for  fear  of  offending  fuch 
and  fuch  a  one  \  at  the  fame  time  they  defpife 
the  minifter  for  not  being  honeft  to  his  mafter. 
Some  have  (aid,  and  fland  to  it,  that  hell  is 
cnly  a  temporary  puniihment :  Who  told  them 
fo  ?  A  temporary  punifliment !  nothing  but  a 
guilty  confcience.  O  go  to  Bedlam  !  Do  afk 
^  child  of  God  what  he  feels  when  his  Lord  is 
abfent  ?  Aik  the  fpoufe  what  fhe  felt  when  fhe 
cries,  Saw  ye  him  "JDhom  my  foul  lovetb  ?  Afk 
a  child  of  God  when  he  is  ufmg  this  plaintive 

language^ 


Ser.  V.     Repentance  and  ConverJio?i.  125 

language.  Why  flandeft  thou  afar  off^  O  Lord'? 
and  he  will  tell  you,  it  is  hell  to  my  foul  to  be 
but  one  moment  without  the  prefence  of  my 
beloved.     And  if  his  abfence  for  a  quarter  of 
an  hour  can  fcarce  be  bore  by  a  child  of  God, 
what  muft  that   foul   undergo  that  is   com- 
manded to  depart  from  him  for  ever  ?  and  yet 
thefe  very  words  were  faid  to  thofe  that  thought 
they  bid  fair  for  heaven ;  to  thefe  Jefus  fays, 
I  hiow  ye  not.     God    grant  you   may   never 
know  the  meaning  of  thefe   words  by  awful 
experience  !    Now,   what    fay  you  ?    I  could 
make  a  hundred  heads  more,  but  I  chufe  to 
make  as  few  as  poffible,  that  you  may  remem- 
ber them.     I  fay,  converfion  makes  you  happy 
hereafter,  and  without  it  you  are  dan:ined  for 
ever. 

Are  thefe  things  fo  ?  why  then,  my  dear 
hearers,  do  you  think  there  can  be  any  objec- 
tion raifed  againft  converfion,  do  you  think 
there  can  be  any  argument  raifed  againft  turn- 
ing to  God  direcftly  ?  is  there  any  pcrfon  here 
that  will  give  himfelf  time  to  confider  a  mo- 
ment that  will  not  fay,  though  you  fpeak  in  a 
rough,  incoherent  manner,  yet  there  is  fome 
truth  in  what  you  fay ;  I  believe  men  ouzat 
to  be  converted^  but  the  common  faying  is,   I 


J  26  Repentance  and  Converjion.     Ser.  V. 

don't  care  to  be  converted  yet;  we  think  it  is- 
time  enough  to  he  converted.  Is  not  this  a6t- 
ing  like  the  cardinal,  v^hen  told  he  waseledted 
pope,  and  defired  to  come  that  night  and  have 
the  honour  of  pope  conferred  on  him  ^  becaufe 
it  was  pretty  late  faid,  it  is  not  a  work  of  dark- 
nefs,  I  will  put  it  offtill  the  morning;  before 
which  they  chofe  another  pope,  and  he  loft 
his  triple  crown.  You  may  think  to  put  it  oiF 
till  the  morning,  though  before  the  morning 
you  may  be  damned.  Pray  why  will  you  not 
be  converted  now?  if  you  was  in  prifon,  and 
a  perfon  would  take  you  out,  you  would  chufe 
to  be  let  out  to-night  before  morning,  thatjou 
jriight  fleep  the  better ;  why  will  you  not  do 
that  for  your  foul  you  would  for  your  body  ? 
Well,  I  would  be  converted  but  I  fliall  be 
laughed  at :  fuppofe  you  was  to  have  it  pro* 
mifed,  you  fhould  have  a  ten  thoufand  pound 
lottery  ticket,  but  you  muft  be  laughed  at  all 
your  life-time ;  there  is  none  but  v/ould  fay^ 
g^ive  me  the  ten  thoufand  pounds,  and  call  me 
Method  ift  as  long  as  I  live:  fo  if  you  loved 
God  and  your  fouls,  you  would  fay,  give  me 
God  and  call  me  what  you  will.  You  are 
afraid  of  being  laughed  at  and  nick- named,, 
and  ikulk  into  this  and  that  placcj,  becaufe  is 

does 


Ser.  V.      "Repentance  and  Converfwn]  12*7 

does  not  ftink  io  much  of  Methodifm  as  this. 
Put  your  cockades  in  your  hats,  and  let  the 
world  fee  that  you  are  not  afhamed  of  God*9 
badge :  let  the  devil  and  his  agents  preach  to 
you  ;  they  can  proclaim  their  fin  like  Sodom  ; 
they  are  not  afhamed  of  going  to  balls  and 
affemblies,  to  parties  of  pleafure,  and  fub- 
fcribing  to  horfe-races.  Is  the  gofpel  the  glo- 
ry of  the  land,  and  are  you  afliamed  of  the 
gofpel  ?  What  think  you,  if  you  had  given  an 
hundred  pounds  to  learn  fuch  a  trade,  would 
you  fay,  I  fhall  never  attain  it !  no,  you  will 
perfevere,  and  by  giving  diligence  make  an 
excellent  mechanic,  an  admirable  tradefman> 
and  do  you  think  to  go  to  heaven  v/ithout  fomc 
trouble  ?  do  you  think  the  leopard  can  change 
his  fpots,  the  Ethiopian  put  his  fkin  intirely 
off?  can  we  have  any  thing  to  nourifh  our  bo- 
dies without  the  labour  of  particular  perfons  ? 
and  therefore  we  are  commanded  to  work  out 
our  falvatton  with  jear  a7id  tre?nbling.  Re- 
member our  Redeemer  will  7iot  quench  the 
fmoaking  faXy  nor  break  the  briiijed  reed  >  he 
will  gently  lead  thofe  that  are  with  young,  V/e 
are  like  poor  fwimmers ;  fome  people  will  put 
one  foot  in  and  cry  oh  !  and  then  another, 
but  a  good  fwimmer  plunges  in  at  once,  and 

comes 


128  Repentance  and  Converfwn.     Ser.  V* 

comes  out  braced  up :  would  to  God  we  could 
do  fo,  plunge  into  God  at  once,  and  God  will 
bear  up  our  fouls  indeed. 

But  fay  you,  all  in  good  time,  I  do  not  chufe 
to  be  converted  yet ;  why,  what  age  are  you 
now?  I  will  come  down  to  a  pretty  mode- 
rate age;  fuppofe  you  are  fourteen:  and  do 
not  you  think  it  time  to  be  converted?  and 
yet  there  are  a  great  many  here,  I  dare  fay, 
twenty  years  old,  and  not  converted.  Some 
are  of  opinion,  that  moft  people  that  are  con- 
verted, are  fo  before  thirty.  There  was  a 
young  man  buried  laft  night  at  Tottenham 
Court  but  feventeen,  an  early  monument  of 
free  grace !  Are  you  forty,  or  fifty,  is  not 
that  time  ?  Is  it  time  for  the  poor  prifoners 
to  be  converted  that  are  to  be  hanged  to- 
morrow morning  ?  if  it  is  time  for  them,  it 
is  time  for  you,  for  you  may  be  dead  before 
them.  There  was  a  poor  woman,  but  two  or 
three  days  ago,  that  was  damning  and  curfing 
moft  fhockingly,  now  fhe  is  a  dead  corpfe, 
was  taken  fuddenly,  and  died  away.  God 
grant,  that  may  not  be  the  cafe  with  any 
of  you ;  the  only  way  to  prevent  it  is,  to  be 
enabled  to  think  that  now  is  an  accepted  timCy 
that  now  is  the  day  of  Jalvation.   Let  me  look 

round. 


Ser.  V*      Repentance  and  Converfwn.         129 

roundj  and  what  do  you  fiippofe  I  was  think- 
ing ?  why,  that  It  is  a  mercy  we  have  not 
been  in  hell  a  thoufand  times.  How  many 
are  there  in  hell  that  ufed  to  fay,  Lord  con- 
vert me,  but  not  now  ?  One  of  the  good  old 
Puritans  fays^  Hell  is  paved  with  good  inten- 
tions. Now  can  you  blame  me,  can  you 
blame  the  minifters  of  Chrift  if  this  is  the  cafe, 
can  you  blame  us  for  calling  after  you^  for 
fpending  and  being  fpent  for  your  fouls  ?  it  is 
eafy  for  you  to  come  to  hear  the  gofpel,  but 
you  do  not  know  what  nights  and  days  we 
have  ;  what  pangs  we  have  in  our  hearts,  and 
how  we  travel  in  birth  till  J  ejus  Chi'ijl  be  form- 
ed in  your  fouls ^  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers, 
hearken,  God  help  you,  fave,  fave,  fave  your- 
fehjes  from  an  untoward  ge?ieratio?i.  To-night 
fomebody  fits  up  with  the  prifoners;  if  they 
find  any  of  them  aileep,  or  no  fign  of  their 
being  awake,  they  knock  and  call,  and  the 
keepers  cry,  awake !  and  I  have  heard  that 
the  prefent  ordinary  fits  up  with  them  all  the 
night  before  their  execution :  therefore,  don't 
be  angry  'with  me  if  I  knock  at  your  door?^ 
and  cry,  poor  finners,  awake !  awake  !  asd 
God  help  thee  to  take  care  thou  doft  not  lleep 
in  an  unconverted  ftate  to-night.     The  court 

S  is 


130         Repentance  and  Converfion.      Ser.  V. 

is  juft  fitting,  the  executioner  ftands  ready, 
and  before  to-morrow,  long  before  to-morrow, 
Jefus  may  fay  of  fome  of  you,  Bind  them  hand 
and  foot,  Theprifoners  to-morrow  will  have 
their  hands  tied  behind  them,  their  thumb- 
ftrings  muil  be  put  on,  and  their  fetters  knock- 
ed off;  they  muft  be  tied  faft  to  the  cart,  the 
cap  put  over  their  faces,  and  the  dreadful  fignal 
given  5  if  you  were  their  relations  would  not 
you  weep  ?  don't  be  angry  then  with  a  poor 
minifter  for  weeping  over  them  that  will  not 
weep  for  themfelves.  If  you  laugh  at  me,  I 
know  Jefus  fmiles.  I  cannot  force  a  cry  when 
I  will ;  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrlfl  be  praifed,  I  am 
free  jro7n  the  blood  of  you  all :  if  you  are 
damned  for  want  of  converfion,  remember 
you  are  not  damned  for  want  of  warning. 
Thoufands  that  have  no  gofpel  preached  to 
them,  may  fay.  Lord,  we  never  heard  what 
converfion  is  ^  but  you  are  gofpel-proof ;  and 
if  there  is  any  deeper  place  in  hell  than  other^ 
God  -will  order  a  gofpel  defpifing-Methodift  to 
be  put  in  there.  You  w^ill  have  dreadful  tor- 
ments; to  whom  fo  much  is  given,  much 
will  be  required.  How  dreadful  to  have  mi- 
nifter after  minifter,  preacher  after  preacher, 
fa3%  Lord  Gody  I  preached  but  they  would  not 
hear.  Think  of  this,  profeflorS;,  and  God  make 
you  poirefibrs!  '  Yoa 


Ser.  V.      Repentance  and  Converfion.         131 

You  that  do  pofTefs  a  little,  and  are  really 
converted,  God  convert  you  and  ine  every 
hour  in  the  day  5  for  there  is  not  a  believer  in 
the  world,  but  has  got  fomething  in  him  that 
he  fliould  be  converted  from  3  the  pulling  down 
of  the  old  houfe,  and  building  up  the  new  one, 
will  be  a  work  till  death.  Do  not  think  I 
am  fpeaking  to  the  unconverted  only,  but  to 
you  that  are  converted.  God  convert  you 
from  lying  a-bed  in  the  mornings  God  con- 
vert you  from  your  conformity  to  the  world  ; 
God  convert  you  from  lukewarmnefs;  God 
convert  us  from  ten  thoufand  things  which  our 
own  hearts  muft  fay  we  want  to  be  converted 
from  ;  then  you  will  have  the  Spirit  of  the  liv- 
ing God.  Do  not  get  into  a  curfcd  Antino- 
mian  way  of  thinking,  and  lay,  I  thank  God, 
I  have  the  root  of  the  matter  in  me :  I  thank 
God,  that  I  w^as  converted  twenty  or  thirty 
years  ago  ;  and  once  in  Chrift  always  in  Chrift  ; 
and  though  I  can  go  to  a  public-houle  and  play 
at  cards,  or  the  like,  yet,  I  blefs  God,  I  am 
converted.  Whether  you  was  converted  for- 
merly or  not,  you  are  perverted  now;  and 
may  God  convert  you  all  to  clofe  Chriftianity 
with  God ! 

S  a  Yoa 


132         Repentance  and  Converpon.     Ser.  V. 

You  that  are  old  profeflbrs,  don't  draw 
young  ones  back  from  God,  by  faying,  ah! 
you  will  come  down  from  the  mount  by  and 
by  5  you  will  not  always  be  fo  hot  5  and  in- 
ftead  of  encouraging  poor  fouls,  you  will  pull 
them  down,  becaufe  you  have  left  your  firft 
love :  would  you  have  Jefus  Chrill:  catch  you 
napping,  with  your  lamps  untrimmed  ? 

O  ye  fervants  of  the  mofi:  high  God,  if  any 
of  you  are  here  to-^night,  though  I  am  the 
chief  of  finners,  and  the  leaft  of  all  faints, 
fuffer  the  word  of  exhortation,  I  am  fure  I 
preach  feelingly  now^  God  knows  I  feldom 
Ileep  after  three  in  the  morning  3  I  pray  every 
morning,  Lord,  convert  me,  and  make  me 
more  a  new  creature  to  day.  I  knov/  I  want 
to  be  converted  from  a  thoufand  things,  and 
£om  ten  thoufand  more :  Lord  God,  confirm 
me ;   Lord  God,  revive  his  work. 

You  young  people,  I  charge  you  to  con- 
iider  j  God  help  you  to  repent  and  be  con-^ 
verted,  who  woo's  and  invites  you.  You 
middle-aged  people,  O  that  you  would  re- 
pent and  be  converted.  You  old  grey-headed 
people.  Lord  make  you  repent  and  be  con- 
verted, that  you  may  thereby  prove  that  your 
fnis  are  blotted  out,     O  I  could  preach  till  I 

preachc4 


Ser.  V.     Repentance  and  Converfwn.  133 

pre.ached  myfelf  dead ;  I  could  be  glad  tp 
preach  myfelf  dead,  if  God  would  convert 
you  1  O  God  blefs  his  work  on  you,  thaf  you 
inay  bloflbm  and  bring  forth  fruits  unto  Godp 
4:men  gnd  Ame^i, 


SERMON 


SERMON     VI. 

Glorifying  God  in  the   Fire  ;  or,  the 
right  Improvement  of  Affliction^ 


Isaiah  xxiv.    ver.  15. 
Wherefore  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  tbejires, 

YO  U  have  oft,  my  dear  hearers,  let  me 
tell  yau>  met  with  afflidtion  ^  and  I 
believe  you  may  perfuade  yourfelves 
afflidion  is  at  hand,  vi^hich  makes  fuch  deep 
impreffions,  when  fent  and  bleffed  by  heaven, 
as  to  thaw  the  very  heart.  Faith,  like  fomeglaffes 
to  view  objeds  near  us,  fets  them  in  fo  ftrong 
a  light,  that  we  cannot  help  being  affedted 
with  the  weight  of  the  impreffion^  hence  the 
prophets',  when  under  a  divine  impulfe,  fore- 
faw  things  at  a  diftance ;  fpoke  and  wrote  of 
them  as  though  adually  prefent.  They  fimg 
both  oj  judgment  and  mercy ^  in  fuch  ftrong 
and  perfuafive  ftraihs,  as  to  convince  of  the 
reality  of  their  exiftence.     Ifaiah,  who  had  a 

courtly 


Ser.  VI.     Improvement  of  AffliBlons.         13^ 

courtly  education,  being  probably  brother  to 
a  king,  feems  to  excel  in  this  kind  of  fpeak- 
ing ;  a  perfon  of  good  natural,  as  well  as  ac- 
quired abilities,  which  being  tempered  by  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  made  him  a  kind  of  an  angel  of 
an  orator,  of  a  writer,  and  a  prophet*  When 
he  penned  this  chapter,  he  probably  forcfaw 
the  dreadful  calamities  coming  on  the  land ; 
and  fo  ftrong  was  his  perfuafion,  that  he  writes 
as  though  he  faw  the  things  taking  place. 
Behold^  fays  he,  the  Lord  maketh  the  earth 
empty ^  maketh  it  wajle^  and  tiirneth  it  upfide 
down^  and  fcattereth  abroad  the  inhabitants 
thereof.  How  much  is  exprefTed  in  a  few 
words !  As  with  the  people  fo  with  the  priejisy 
who  perhaps,  on  account  of  their  lituation  in 
the  church,  might  think  they  fhould  be  ex- 
empted ^  but  if  the  priefts  fin  with  the  people, 
they  fhali  be  punifhed  with  the  people.  As 
with  the  fervant^  fo  with  his  majier  3  as  with 
the  maidy  fo  with  her  mijirefs-,  as  with  the 
buyer ^  fo  with  the  feller  -,  as  with  the  lender ^ 
fo  with  the  borrower -^  as  with  the  taker  of 
ufury^  fo  with  the  giver  of  iijury  to  him.  So 
yc^u  fee  that  the  vifitation  would  be  univerfal; 
that  it  iliould  fall  on  all  forts  of  people.  Ver. 
3.  T.he  land  fmll  be  utterly  emptied  and  utterly 

fpoiled'. 


;136         Improvement  of  Affiiciions.     Se'r.  Vt 

fpoiled 'y  probably,  by  a  foreign  foe  taking  ad- 
vantage of  the  domeftic  eonfufions,  who  fliall 
deflroy  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  Some  may 
think,  perhaps,  that  this  will  never  come  to 
pafs  'y  butj  faith  Ifaiah,  the  Lord  hath  fpoken 
it.  It  pleafed  God  the  nation  fhould  be  de-^ 
voted  to  a  dreadful  flroke :  The  earth  moiirn^ 
eth  and  fadeth  away^  the  world  languijheth  and 
fadeth  awa)\  the  haughty  people  of  the  earth  do 
languifldy  whofe  crimes,  one  would  think, 
would  never  be  brought  to  puniihment,  on 
account  of  the  eminence  of  their  flations  ^  they 
thought  themfelves  out  of  danger,  but  they  fhall 
feel  the  common  fcourge :  For  the  earth  alfoy 
as  in  the  fifth  verfe,  is  defiled  under  the  inhabi- 
tants thereof  y  becaufe  they  have  tranfgreffed  the 
lawSy  changed  the  ordinances^  broken  the  ever^ 
lafling  coveiiant.  God  did  not  flrike  without 
a  caufe  5  for  the  earth  groaned,  as  it  were, 
under  the  fins  of  the  inhabitants  for  their  ne- 
gledt  of  religion,  for  difowning  God,  for  turn- 
ing their  back  on  the  Mofl  High.  Therefore 
hath  the  cur fe  devoured  the  earthy  (ver.  6.)  and 
they  that  dwell  therein  are  defolate.  He  does 
not  fay  it  fhall  be,  but  it  is  done.  The  i?iha-- 
bit  ants  of  the  earth  are  burned y  with  dreadful 
lire  of  confuming  vengeance,  and  few  men  left. 

All 


Ser.  VI.     Improvement  of  Affliciiom.         137 

All  the  merry  hearted,  that  minded  nothing 
but  jollity  and  mirth,  even  they  dofigb,     'The 
joy  of  the  harp  ceafeth-^  they  (loall  not  drink 
wine  with  a  fong^  firong  drink  fiall  be  bitter 
to  them  that   drink   it.     The  very  great  city^ 
tlie  metropolis,  is  broken  down  5  every  hoife  is 
fjiit  lip,  becaufe  deflation  is  left  in  it.     The 
inhabitants  forfake   it,    their  houles   are  left, 
fhct  up,  becaufe  they  are  afraid  fome  foreign 
powder  fhould  come  to  their  deftrudion.  There 
is  a  crying  for  wine  in  the  freets^  all  joy  is 
darkened^  the  mirth  of  the  land  is  gone :  no 
plays,  no  routs,  no  allemblies  now ;  the  city  is 
left  dejolate-,  the  court  not  excepted  5  defola- 
tion  herfelf  takes  her  feat  and   ravages  there. 
The  earth  Poall  reel  to  and  fro  like  a  drunkard^ 
a7id foall  be  removed  like  a  cottage-^  and  the 
tranfgrejjions  thereof  fiall  be  heavy  upon  it^  a?2d 
it  foall  fall y  and  not  rife  again.     What  an 
amazing  fcene  is  this !  enough  to  fill  us  vv^ith 
horror  even  at  this  diftance  of  time  and  place  ! 
But  is  there  no  way  for  efcape  ?  is  there  no 
light  breaking  through  this  dark  (hade  ?  bleiTed 
be  God,    there  isj  look  at  ver,  13,  you  u^ill 
find  in  the  midft  of  dangers,   God  fhall   lend 
his  prefence.    When  thus  it  fall  be  ^  pray  mind 
that,  in  the  midf  of  the  land  among  the  people ^ 
T  what 


138         Improvefnenf  of  Afflict iom,     Ser.  VI. 

what  follows?  there fiall  be  as  the  JJ:aking  of 
{171  clrce  treey  and  as  the  gleaning  grapes  when 
the  vintage  is  do7ie  5  there  (hall  be  a  few  godly 
people  left,  let  the  devil  do  what  he  will  ^  but 
there  will  be  but  few.  You  know,  after  the 
people  have  gathered  the  fruits  from  the  tree, 
they  fhake  it  to  bring  down  the  remainder ; 
and  after  reaping  of  corn  there  are  a  few  glean- 
ings,  fo  the  Lord  fays,  it  fliall  deflroy  moll 
people,  yet  in  fo  difcriminating  a  way,  that 
God's  people  fliould  be  fafe, 

I  cannot  well  recolledt  how  archbiflioD 
Ufher  applies  this  5  but  this  I  am  fure  he  fays, 
there  will  certainly  come  a  time  when  the 
world  will  undergo  the  greatefl  Icourge  that 
€ver  it  felt,  which  ihall  chiefly  fall  on  the 
outward-court  woriliippers,  upon  thofe  that 
know  not  God ;  God  will  take  particular  care 
of  fecuring  his  own ;  and  when  the  wicked 
are  all  deftroyed,  the  Chriftians  ihai!  go  to  a 
little  city,  and  there  fhall  dwell  in  Goihen,  till 
God  fhall  call  home  his  ancient  people  the 
Jews.  So  God  will  take  care  of  his  people, 
that  they  fliall  be  fafe :  pray  look  to  ver.  14, 
they  PmU  lift  up  their  voice  >  what,  to  cry  ? 
no,  they  have  done  with  prayers,  they  have 
done  with  fafting  3  they   have  lifted  up  their 


Ser.  VI.     Improvement  of  AjfjUBlom.         159 

voice,  and  often  exhorted  their  neighbours  to 
flee  from  the  wrath  to  come ;  but  now  tliev 
fhall  fing  for  the  majefty  of  God ;  when  all 
people  are  mourning,  they  (hall  rejoice.  And 
at  the  great  day,  when  Jefus  Chrill  pronoun- 
ces the  wicked  damned,  depart  ye  curfcd^ 
God's  people  will  then  lift  up  their  voices  with 
majefty  and  triumph ;  which  made  a  good 
man  fay  to  his  fon,  juft  before  he  died,  I  am 
afraid  I  ftall  never  fee  thee  any  more  till  I  liear 
Jefus  Chrift  fay  unto  thee,  depart  thou  cur  fed  !  1 
Some  years  ago,  being  prefent  at  the  trial  of  a  ] 
very  vile  perfon  at  the  Old-Bailey,  and  being  \ 
in  fufpenfe  whether  he  would  be  brought  in  | 
guilty  or  no,  when  the  w^ord  guilty  came,  and 
the  people  heard  of  it,  they  ^id  in  effedt  give 
an  eclat  to  i: ;  whether  juft  or  unjuft,  I  thought 
it  was  an  emblem  of  that  av/ful  day,  when 
all  the  angels  of  God,  and  his  fliints,  fliall  fay 
Amen  ;  when  God  configns  the  wicked  to 
hell:  God  grant  this  may  not  be  any  of  your 
cafe.  Says  the  prophet,  they  Jhall  cry  aloud 
Jrom  the  fea ;  fome  of  them  may  be  on  the 
other  fide  of  the  water,  gone  abroad  while 
others  flay  at  home ;  but  whether  at  home  or 
abroad,  though  they  have  been  banif]:ied  by 
perfecution,  though  they  have  been  driven  to 
T  2  the 


140         Improvement  of  AffiiSlions.     Ser.  VI. 

the  other  fide  of  the  water,  which  has  been 
the  cafe  of  many  perfons  before  now,  yet  they 
JJmll  cry  aloud-,  they  fliall  find  the  fame  God 
abroad  as  they  did  at  home.  A  judge  laid  to 
a  good  old  Chriftian  that  was  perfecuted  ia 
Charles  II/s  time,  I  will  banifh  you  to  Ame- 
rica ^  fays  fhe.  Very  well,  you  cannot  fend 
me  out  of  m,y  Father's  country.  They  fhall 
cry  aloud  from  the  fea,  wberejore  glorijy  ye 
the  Lord  in  the  fires ;  if  this  is  the  cafe,  the 
prophet  draws  the  inference  ;  what  mufl  they 
do  under  tnefe  circumftances  ^  why,  they  mufl 
ftudy  how  to  glorify  God  in  the  fires,  not  how 
to  efcape  or  run  away  from  him,  but  how  to 
glorify  him ;  wherefore,  faith  he,  glorijy  me, 
glorify  me  the  Lord,  in  the  fire*  -,  not  the 
lire,  in  the  lingular  number,  but  in  the  plural 
number,  fires.  We  are,  my  brethren,  very 
much  miftaken,  if  we  think  we  have  but  one 
fire  to  go  through. 

The  words  imply,  in  order  to  bring  thera 
home  to  ourfelves,  that  all  God's  people  mufl 
be  put  into  the  fires.  Fire  fcm.etimes  denotes 
the  love  of  God,  fometimes  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghoff,  and  very  often  it  denotes  afflic- 
tion ;  therefore,  the  apoftle  talks  ot  a  fiery 
trials  and  let  it  be  of  whatever  kind  it  will> 

let 


Ser.  VI.     Improvement  of  Jjli5fio7is,         141 

let  it  be  upon  mind,  body,  or  eftate  -,  whe- 
ther it  comes  from  friend  or  foe,  or  whether 
it  comes  immediately  from  the  hand  of  God 
himfelf  upon  the  foul,  it  may  well  be  com- 
pared to  fire,  for  you  all  know  that  fire  fcorches ; 
God  expeds  when  he  ftrikes,  that  we  fhould 
feel.  Of  all  things  in  the  world  to  be  avoided, 
a  ftony  heart,  or  a  flupidity  under  God's 
afflicting  hand,  is  mod  to  be  deprecated.  I 
fuppofe  you  have  heard  of  the  Stoics  *,  with 
whom  the  apoftle  Paul  difputed  in  the  place  of 
public  traffic  in  Athens.  Paul  did  not  take  a  walk 
to  Change  to  talk  on  trade,  he  went  to  talk  about 
Jeius  Chriil,  if  he  could  meet  with  one  to  talk 
with :  I  wifh  the  clergy  took  no  other  walks 
but  thefe.  Every  thing  is  to  be  tried  by  fire ; 
we  may  talk  what  we  pleafe,  but  we  (hall  ne- 
ver know  what  metal  we  are  made  of,,  till 
God  puts  us  into  the  fire.  It  is  very  eafy  talk- 
ing what  w^e  can  bear,  and  what  wx  can  do, 
but  let  God  lay  his  hand  on  us,  and  we  fhall 
fee  what  we  are.  We  are  apt  to  find  fault, 
and  be  peevifh  v/ith  our  friends  and  relations 
under  fuch  circumftances  5  they  are  apt  to  fay, 

you 

*  They  taught  that  a  v/ife  man  fhould  be  free  from  all 
afFei^ions  and  paliions  whatloever. 


142         Improvement  of  Affliciio72s.     Ser.  VI. 

you  fhould  be  patient,  and  patient,  and  pa- 
tient ;  ah  !  put  thefe  reprovers  into  the  fame 
furnace,  and  fee  how  patient  they  will  be : 
they  fiy,  there  is  no  putting  old  mens  heads 
upon  young  mens  fhoulders  ^  and  there  is  no 
putting  old  heads  upon  fouls  young  in  expe- 
rience. The  devil  knew  very  well  how  it  was 
when  he  faid,  Haji  thou  not  made  an  hedge 
cboiit  Joby  and  about  his  hoiife^  and  about  all 
that  he  hath  on  every  fide  j  thou  hajt  bleffed  the 
work  of  his  hands ^  and  his  fubftance  is  increafed 
in  the  land-y  but  put  forth  thy  hand  now,  and 
touch  all  that  he  hath,  and  he  will  curfe  thee 
to  thy  face 'y  fo  we  fhould  all  do  if  God  was 
to  leave  us  to  ourfelves,  and  our  faith  is  not 
of  the  right  fort. 

How  fliall  we  know  if  our  faith  is  good  ? 
we  often  pray.  Lord,  give  us  Abraham's  faith, 
but  never  pray,  give  us  Abraham's  trial  at  the 
fame  time.  I  was  once  in  Scotland,  at  a  great 
man's  houfe,  where  feveral  rich  people  were 
that  knew  Jefus  Chrift  ^  God  having  bleffed 
my  labours  at  a  former  vifit,  I  was  defired  by 
the  nobleman  to  pray  5  and  I  remember  I  pray- 
ed the  Lord  to  give  us  great  faith  and  patience  ; 
— O  faid  Satan,  as  ftrong  as  if  he  had  fpoke 
to  me,  don't  pray  for  that,  for  thou  fhalt  have 

great 


Ser,  VI.     Improve7nent  of  AffiiBions.         143 

great  trials.  O,  faid  I,  if  that  be  the  cafe,  I 
will  turn  the  devil's  prayer  againft  himfelf; 
and  I  prayed,  O  Lord^  give  us  great  grace^ 
end  never  mind  what  trials.  Often  when  we 
are  under  temptations,  God  takes  us  at  our 
words :  O,  fays  one,  what  a  prayer  I  had,  I 
prayed  for  faith  and  patience ;  I  was  upon  the 
mount,  and  never  thought  of  coming  down, 
and  feeling  a  ftorm  again. 

Fire,  my  brethren,  not  only  burns  and 
purges,  but  you  know  it  feparates  one  thing 
from  another,  and  is  made  ufe  of  in  chy- 
millry  and  mechanical  bufmefles.  What  could 
we  do  without  fire  ?  it  tries  metal  to  purge  it : 
God  Almighty  knows,  we  are  often  purged 
more  in  one  hour  by  a  good  found  trial,  than 
by  a  thoufand  manifeftations  of  his  love.  It  is 
a  fine  thing  to  come  purified,  to  come  par- 
doned oat  of  the  furnace  of  afHidtion  j  it  is  in- 
tended to  purge  us,  to  feparate  the  precious 
from  the  vile^  the  chaff'  from  the  wheat ;  and 
God,  in  order  to  do  this,  is  pleafed  to  put  us 
into  one  fire  after  another,  which  makes  me 
love  to  fee  a  good  man  under  afflictions,  be- 
caufe  it  teaches  fomething  of  the  work  of  God 
in  the  heart.  I  remember  fome  years  ago, 
when  I  firft  preached  in  the  north  of  England, 

at 


144         Improvement  of  AffliBions.     Ser.  VI. 

at  Shields  near  Newcaftle,  I  went  into  a  glafs- 
houfe,  and  {landing  very  attentive,  I  faw  feve- 
ral  maffes  of  burning  glafs  of  various  forms : 
the  workman  took  one  piece  of  glafs  and  put 
it  into  one  furnace,  then  he  put  it  into  a  fe- 
cond,  and  then  into  a  third :  when  I  afked 
him,  why  do  you  put  this  into  fo  many  fires  ? 
he  anfwered,  O,  fir,  the  firft  was  not  hot 
enough,  nor  the  fecond,  and  therefore  we  put 
it  into  the  third,  and  that  will  make  it  tranf- 
parent.  Taking  leave  of  him  in  a  proper 
manner,  it  occurred  to  me,  this  would  make 
a  good  fermon :  O,  thought  I,  does  this  man 
put  this  glafs  into  one  furnace  after  another, 
that  we  may  fee  through  it  3  O  may  God  put 
I  me  into  one  furnace  after  another,  that  my 
I  foul  may  be  tranfparent  3  that  I  may  fee  God 
'as  he  is.  My  brethren,  we  need  to  be  purged  ; 
how  apt  are  we  to  want  to  go  to  heaven  upon 
a  feather-bed  5  many  go  lying  upon  beds  of 
pain  and  languilTiing,  which  is  the  King's 
highway  thither.  You  know  there  are  fome 
v/ays  in  London  called  the  king's  road,  and 
they  are  finely  gravelled,  but  the  King's  road 
to  heaven  is  ftrowed  with  croflfes  and  afHidlions, 
We  are  all  apt  to  think  well  of  being  Chrif- 
tians  3  it  is  very  pretty  talking  oi  being  Chrif- 

jians^. 


S'ef.  Vli    Imptovemoit  of  Affllcliom,         145 

tians,  till  we  are  put  into  one  furnace  after 
another  ;  think  it  notjirange^  faith  the  apofllc, 
concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try  you. 
What  muft  1  do  ?  why^  lince  I  muft  be  in  the 
fire,  I  muft  thank  my  corruptions  for  it  5  God 
will  not  put  you  or  me  into  the  fire  if  there  was 
not  fomething  to  be  purged  away  ;  the  grand 
thing  is  to  learn  to  glorify  God  in  the  fire. 
Wherej ore  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  fires. 

When  do  we  glorify  him  ?  when  we  endea- 
vour to  get  fuch  grace  from  the  Lord,  that  we 
may  not  diihonour  him  when  we  are  under 
the  crofs,  and  therefore  we  glorify  God  in 
the  fire  when  we  quietly  endure  it  as  a  chaf- 
tifement  for  our  fins :  if  you  keep  watch  now, 
and  live  near  to  God,  you  will  never  find  that 
you  are  put  into  a  fire,  but  you  firft  brought 
yourfelves  into  it ;  and  I  do  verily  believe  from 
my  heart,  that  our  fin  is  always  to  be  feen  in  our 
punifliment.  If  any  of  you  part  from  a  child  that 
he  loves  dearly,  upon  examination  he  will  fay, 
I  find  now  the  creature's  gone,  that  the  ivy 
twined  too  much  about  the  oak ;  and  then  he 
turns  off  5  ah !  fays  he,  God  has  met  with 
me  now.  And  you  will  find  in  all  the  Old 
and  New  Teftament,  that  the  affiidions  of 
God's  people  were  fuitablc  to  their  fliults :  Ja- 
U  cob 


146        Improvement  of  Afflictiom.    Ser.  VI* 

cob  was  over-perfdaded  by  his  mother  to  get 
the  bleffing  by  a  lie ;    but  he  was  a  fimple^ 
hearted  poor  creature.     Some  perfons  think 
nothing  of  a  lie ;  if  they  can  but  get  by  it, 
they  do  not  mind  it ;  but  an  honeft  man  will 
iliun  it.     Jacob  argues  with  his  mother  againft 
it ;  O,  fays  fhe,  the   curfe  be  o?i  fne^  my  fon  ! 
O  dreadful !    for  a  good  woman  to  fay  fo. 
Doubtlefs,  flie  was  perfuaded  God  would  give 
Jacob  the  bleffing,  but  fhe  took  a  wrong  way 
to  obtain  it ;  flie  might  have  waited  for  the 
bleffing  to  come  with  a  bleffing.     How  did 
God  punifh  Jacob  ?    why,  in  a  night  after- 
wards poor  Jacob  v/as  impofed  upon  by   a 
wrong  wife,  he  got  a  Leah  inflead  of  a  Ra- 
chel^ the  poor  creature   was   impofed  upon 
there,  and  fo  all  along  almoft  to  the  end  of  his 
life;  he  bad  a  furnace  of  afflidion.     Happy 
they  who  pray  in  the  furnace.  Lord,  let  me 
know  why  thou  doft  contend  with  me.   There- 
fore God  fends  this  meffage  to  Ely  by  Samuel, 
the  thing  that  thou  kjioisoeji^  feems  to  me  to 
refer  to  his  too  great  lenity  to  his  fons ;  the 
thing  that  thou  hio%z:eft ;  thou  doft  not  ad  like 
a  magiftrate.     Thefe  fons  were  the  means  of 
bringing  a  judgment  on  his  houfe,  and  break- 
ing tlieir  fither's  neck :  God  Almighty  keep 

us  from  bringing  a  rod  upon  ourfelves. 

Wc 


Ser.  VL     Improvement  of  AffliSimis.         j^y 

We  glorify  God  in  the  fire  when  we  bear 
it  patiently.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  when  we 
are  faying  with  Cain,  MypuniJIment  is  greater 
than  1  can  bear  5  but  the  language  of  a  foul 
that  glorifies  God  in  the  fire  is  this,  fhall  I, 
Lord,  fhall  I  a  finful  man,  complain  for  the 
punifhment  of  my  fins  ?  It  is  a  glorious  thing 
when  we  can  fay  with  a  good  man,  one  of 
whofe  particular  friends  told  me  more  than 
•once,  that  when  he  was  racked  with  pain,  and 
groaning  all  night  with  trouble,  he  would 
often  fay.  Lord,  I  groan  ;  Lord,  I  groan  j 
Lord,  I  groan ;  but,  Lord  Jefus,  I  appeal  to 
thee,  thou  knoweft  I  do  not  grumble.  Then 
we  glorify  God  in  the  fire,  when,  though 
we  feel  pain  and  anguifh,  we  at  the  fame  time 
fay.  Lord,  we  deferve  this  and  ten  thoufand 
times  more. 

We  glorify  God  in  the  fire  alfo,  when  we 
are  really  and  fully  perfuaded,  God  will  not 
put  us  in  the  fire  but  for  our  good,  and  his 
own  glory.  I  am  afraid  fome  people  think 
God  does  as  fome  cheating  apothecaries,  that 
bring  five  things  when  they  need  not  bring  but 
one,  efpecially  when  they  have  fome  filly  pa- 
tients that  love  to  be  taking  phyfic ;  they  fend 
one  after   another,    when,  perhaps,  the    beft 

U  2  thing 


148         Improvement  of  Afflictions  \Ser.VL 

thing  would  be  to  throw  them  all  away;  fo 
we  think  of  God,  but  it  is  a  miftake;  he  ne- 
ver fends  one  but  what  Is  necelTary,  and  feme- 
thing  to  be  purged  away. 

We  glorify  God  in  the  fire  when  we  fay. 
Lord,  don't  let  the  fire  go  out  till  it  has 
purged  away  all  my  drofs.  Then  we  glorify 
God  when  we  wifh  for  the  good  of  the  fire, 
and  not  to  have  it  extingulfhed ;  when  the 
foul  can  fay,  Here  I  am^  my  Gody  do  with  me 
as  feemeth  good  in  thy  fight  \  I  know  I  (hall 
not  have  one  ftroke  but  thou  will  give  me  a 
plaifter,  and  let  me  know  wherefore  thou 
contendeft  with  me. 

We  glorify  God  in  the  fire  when  we  are 
content  to  fay,  /  kno'm  not  what  God  does  with 
me  7ioWy  but  I  JJoall  know  hereafter.  Do  yoi^ 
tell  your  children  that  are  five  years  old  the 
reafon  oi  things,  no;  and  do  you  think  God 
will  tell  us  ?  What  Jkall  this  man  do  T  faith 
the  difciples;  what  is  that  to  thee?  faith 
Chrift,  follow  thou  me.  You  glorify  God  \x\ 
the  fire,  v/hen  you  are  content  to  walk  by 
faith  and  not  by  fight. 

You  glorify  God  in  the  fire  when  you  ar^ 
not  grumbling,  but  humbly  fubmitting  to  his 
will  3  a  humble  fpirit  walks  not  in   fulkinels 


Scr.  VL     Improvement  of  Afflidionu         149 

and  ftubbornnefs:  there  are  fome  fpirlts  too 
ilout,  they  will  not  fpeak.  When  that  awful 
meflage  was  brought  to  Ely,  what  does  he 
fay  ?  It  is  the  Lord^  let  him  do  what  fcemeth 
him  good',  let  my  children  be  killed,  whatever 
be  done  it  is  the  Lord's  doing  ^  only.  Lord, 
fave  my  foul  at  laft. 

We  glorify  God  in  the  fire,  when  in  the 
midftof  the  fire  we  can  fing  God's  high  praifes. 
Thqs  the  children  of  Ifrael  glorified  the  Lord  ; 
the  fong  of  the  three  children  in  the  fiery  fur- 
nace is  a  fweet  fong ;  as  are  all  that  are  made 
in  the  fire.  O  all  the  works  of  the  Lord^  praife 
and  magnify  him  for  ever  /  Then  we  glorify 
God  in  the  fire  when  we  rejoice  in  him,  when 
we  not  only  think,  but  know  it  bed,  and  caa 
thank  God  for  flriking  us ;  can  thank  God  for 
whipping  us ;  can  blefs  God  for  pot  letting  us 
alone  3  thank  God  for  not  faying,  Let  him 
alone :  this  is  to  glorify  God  in  the  fire.  Not 
only  foy  faith  the  apoftle,  Sut  we  glory  in  tri- 
JpiilatioUy  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh 
patience. 

In  a  word,  we  glorify  the  Lord  in  the  fire 
when  we  have  in  exercife,  patience,  meek- 
nefs,  humility  3  learning  more  to  diilruft  our- 
iejve?,  having  a  deeper  knowledge  of  our  own 

weakr 


150         Improvement  of  AffliBions.     Ser.  VI, 

weaknefs,  and  of  God's  omnipotence  and  grace. 
Happy  when  we  can  look  back  and  fay,  thus 
have  I  been  enabled  to  glorify  God  in  the  fire. 
Who  can  put  his  hand  to  his  heart  and  fay, 
I  have  glorified  God  in  the  fire  as  I  ought  ? 
inftead  of  that  I  am  afraid  the  foul  muft  fay, 
that  inftead  of  being  thankful  and  refigned,  I 
have  been  fretful ;  and  becaufe  I  will  not  find 
fault  with  myfelf,  nor  let  the  world  know  I 
find  fault  with  God,  I  find  fault  with  all  about 
me.  Did  you  never  find  yourfelf  in  fuch  a 
humour  when  your  fpirits  were  low  ?  I  heard 
a  good  man  once  fpeak  on  thofe  words,  they 
Jhall  briijg  forth  fruit  in  old  age :  O  the  fruit, 
faid  he,  is  peviihnefs  ^  I  thought  it  was  the 
infirmity  of  old  age,  the  fruit  of  which  ought 
to  be  heavenly-mindednefs,  deadnefs  to  the 
world,  and  a  livelinefs  to  God. 

My  brethren,  let  us  humble  ourfelves  to-* 
night,  and  let  us  be  afhamed  and  abafhed  be- 
fore God,  and  wonder  he  hath  not  ftruck  us 
into  hell  when  we  have  been  complaining  the 
fire  was  too  hot,  that  God  fent  us  not  to  the 
devil.  Let  us  weep,  let  us  weep,  let  us  weep 
for  our  ilubbornnefs.  Happy  they  who  are 
ufed  to  be  put  into  the  fire  betimes !  It  is  good 
jC7'  a  7nan  to  bear  the  yoke  in  hi ^ youth.     Some 

years 


Ser.  VI.    Improvement  of  j^ffli^iGns.         151 

years  ago,  when  I  was  at  the  Orphan-houfe, 
they  told  me  they  were  going  to  yoke  two 
fteers  together,  one  fturdy  and  old,  the  other 
a  little  one,  on  which  they  no  fooner  put  the 
yoke,  but  he  kicked  once  or  twice,  and  then 
bore  it  very  well :  O,  thought  I,  it  is  a  good 
thing  to  have  the  yoke  betimes. 

Are  any  of  you  now  in  the  furnace,  are  any 
of  you  troubled,  or  can  any  of  you  fay,  I  have 
no  trouble ;  a  calm  is  fometimes  the  fore-run- 
ner of  a  ftorm  ^  thank  God,  you  are  not  in  the 
fire  3  furely  you  have  been  in  the  fire.  There 
is  the  deviPs  fire ;  the  fires  of  the  luji  of  the 
fiefht  the  liift  of  the  eye^  and  the  pride  of  life  : 
God  help  you  to  come  out  of  thefe  fires,  left 
they  damn  your  fouls  for  ever.  You  muft  be 
put  eiiiher  in  the  deviFs  fire  or  God's  fire,  and 
the  devil's  fires  are  hotteft,  becaufe  there  is  no 
God  to  fupport  under  the  trouble  they  bring 
upon  the  foul.  O  v\^hat  a  dreadful  thing  it  is 
to  be  in  the  devil's  fire  continually,  and  to  go 
out  of  the  fire  of  the  devil  here  to  burn  with 
the  devil  in  hell  hereafter !  If  there  are  any  of 
you  in  this  cafe,  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  fhorten 
them,  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  fandify  his  afiliftions 
to  his  people,  as  he  did  to  one  of  the  prifon- 
ers  laft  Wedncfday  :  how  fwcetly  he  behaved  ! 


while 


152         Improvement  of  AffliBtbns.     Sef.VL 

while  the  others  were  curfing  and  fwearing^ 
toffing  up  who  fhould  fit  on  the  right  hand  in 
the  cart,  he  was  glorifying  God,  thanking 
God  he  was  fent  there,  and  going  to  be  exe-^ 
cutcd  :  God,  faith  he,  hath  ftopt  mey  I  might 
have  gone  on  in  fin  to  ruin.  O  fend  to  my 
father,  go  to  him,  warn  him  to  flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come :  fomebody  went  to  his  parent, 
and  the  father  fent  back  xkiv^  loving  meflage) 
tell  him  to  mind  his  own  foul,  and  be  damn*d  ! 
O,  dear  Lord,  what  lengths  has  man  gone  I 
never  was  fuch  a  meflTage  fent  to  a  fon  before ; 
he  bid  him  mind  his  own  foul  and  be  damn*d  ! 
God  grant  none  of  you  may  ever  have  fuch  a 
frame  of  mind  as  that !  O  remember  fire  har- 
dens as  well  as  foftens  5  and  if  you  are  not 
better  by  afflictions  you  will  be  worfe:  and 
/  indeed  you  will  know  you  cannot  come  out  of 
the  furnace  as  you  went  in,  you  will  either  be 
hardened  or  elfe  be  purified ;  and  if  this  be 
the  cafe,* the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  help  you  to 
bear  the  fire  noWj  that  you  may  never  be  caft 
into  the  fire  of  hell.  God  hafle  you,  haften 
you  that  are  out  of  the  devil's  fire  to  flee,  flee, 
ye  weary  fouls,  to  Jefus  Chrift  3  fly  to  the 
Lamb  of  God,  from  hell  to  heaven,  as  far  as 
you  can  from  thcfe  hellifli  fires,  to  the  fire  of 

his  bleiL^d  merit  and  love. 

Happy 


Sen  VI.     hnproveinejit  of  AffliBions,         153 

Happy  you  that  have  got  into  Chrift's  fire  ! 
happy  you  that  have  found  his  fires  in  your 
fouls !  I  believe  many  fouls  have :  O  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift  help  you  to  glorify  him  in  what- 
ever fires  he  fliall  be  pleafed  to  fend  you,  and 
into  v^hatever  furnaces  he  fhall  be  pleafed  to 
put  you  :  we  fhall  then  fing  **  the  church  tri- 
umphant^''  much  better  than  we  fing  to-niglu  j 
we  fhall  fee  Jefus  Chrift  ready  to  help  us  when 
we  are  in  the  furnace  :  O  that  this  thought 
may  make  every  poor  finner  fay,  by  the  help 
of  God  I  will  be  a  Chriftian ;  by  the  lielp  of 
God,  if  I  muft  burn,  it  fhall  be  burning  with 
the  love  of  Chrift,  I  will  fay  then,  O  Lord, 
glorify  thyfelf  by  fjiatching  me  as  a  brand  from 
the  devil's  fire.  O  that  this  might  be  the 
cry  of  every  heart ! 

I  am  going  to  afk  a  favour  of  you  to-night 
which  I  never  did  before,  and,  perhaps,  may 
not  again  for  fome  time :  I  have  had  com- 
plaints made  to  me  by  the  perfons  that  take 
care  of  the  poor,  that  the  poor's  ftock  js 
very  low  j  though  I  cannot  fpeak  on  Sunday 
night,  yet  I  will  fpeak  a  word  to  the  po  )i  on 
Wednefday  evening.  There  are  numbers  of 
poor  that  are  ready  to  perifh,  and  if  ycu  drop 
Something  to  them  in  love,  God  will  take 
X  care 


1 54         hnpro'oement  of  AffiiBions^    Ser.  VI. 

care  to  repay  you  when  you  come  to  judg- 
ment. We  fhall  not  only  glorify  God  by  a 
fubmilTion  to  his  will,  when  he  is  putting  us 
in  the  fire,  but  in  doing  any  good,  when  we 
lay  all  the  glory  at  the  foot  of  Jefus  5  which 
God  grant  for  Chrift's  fake.     Amen, 


SERMON 


[    '55    ] 

SERMON     VIL 

The  Beloved  of  God. 

Deut.  xxxiii.    ver.   12. 

And  of  Benjamin,  he  faid^  'The  beloved  of  the 
Lord  Jhall  dwell  infafety,  by  him  ;  and  the 
Lord  Jhall  cover  him  all  the  day  long^  and 
he  JJdall  dwell  between  his  fmdders. 

OH !   what  a  difmal  fight  is  it,  to  fee  an 
old  man  with  his  hoary  head  grown 
grey  in  fin,  and  hardened  in  iniquity. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  believe  to  all  that  con- 
fider  rightly,  there  is  no  grander  fight  almofl 
under  the  fun,  than  to  fee  an  old  grey-headed 
man  keeping  up  a  confident  charader;  and 
proving,  by  his   condudl,   that  his  path,  like 
that  of  the  jufl:,  is  as  the  fining  lights  that 
fineth  more  and  ?nore  to  the  perfe^  day  ;  efpe- 
cially  when  perfons  have  been  called  to  a6t  in 
a   public   charader ;    when    they    have   been 
eminent  either  for  the  highnefs  of  their  ftation, 
X  2  or 


1^6  7'he  Beloved  of  God.      Ser.  Vll. 

or  for  the  largenefs  of  their  income.  It  is  on 
this  account  that  I  admire  old  Jacob  \  hoW 
grand  he  looked  when  leaning  on  his  ftafF, 
with  all  the  compofufe  iri  the  world,  under  a 
divine  influence,  bleffing  his  children  ftanding 
round  him.  But,  methirlks,  there  is  one  who 
was  called  to  adt  a  more  public  part,  namely, 
Mofes,  who  was  honoured  of  God  to  be  a  great 
legiflator,  king  in  Jefhurun,  a  lawgiver  be- 
tween Judah's  feet,  as  pupils  ufed  to  be  at  the 
feet  of  their  teachers,  to  receive  their  inftruc- 
tion  ;  if  you  have  a  mind  to  fee  how  bright  he 
fhines,  you  mufl:  read  Deut.  xxxii.  indeed  you 
mufl  read  all  Deuteronomy,  which  is  nothing 
but  a  fermon  that  Mofes,  at  various  times, 
preached  to  the  children  of  Ifrael ;  and  having 
done  preaching,  he  fang  a  hymn  of  his  own 
compofing,  and  that  too  at  a  time  when  he 
knew,  at  the  very  finiflung  the  fong,  he  fiiould 
immediately  have  his  foul  kiffed  away,  and 
be  called  to  fing  a  better  fong  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  A  perfon  would  need  a  good  deal 
of  compofure,  a  good  deal  of  the  Spirit's  in- 
fluences^  a  large  meafure  of  it,  chearfully  thus 
tofland  in  view  of  death,  juft  on  the  very  bor- 
ders of  the  grave;  you  fee  this  in  chap,  xxxii. 
and  here  in  chap,  xxxiii.     One  would  have 

thought 


Sen  VII.       ne  Beloved  of  God,  157 

thought  he  had  faid  enough,  yet  he  feems  as 
it  were  not  to  know  how  to  leave  off;  he 
parted  from  the  people  bleffing  them  ^  they 
had  ufed  him  ill,  they  provoked  him  in  the 
wildernefs;  he  had  bore  with  them  many, 
many  long  years  3  fure  you  would  have  thought 
he  would  have  went  away  in  a  huff 3  no,  that 
eminent  fun  by  no  means  goes  down  in  wrath ; 
his  eyes  did  not  fo  much  as  wax  dim,  nor 
his  intelledlual  powers  impair  in  all  that  time : 
he  fweetly  gives  them  all  a  bleffing  before  he 
goes.  If  you  read  this  chap,  xxxiii.  you  will 
find  how  various,  yet  fpecial,  are  the  bleffings 
which,  in  a  prophetic  ffrain,  he  foretels  fliould 
attend  particular  perfons,  or  tribes.  I  have  been 
reading  them  over,  and  though  I  admire  them 
all,  I  was  at  a  lofs  which  to  fpeak  from,  till 
the  bleffing  of  Benjamin  fixed  my  attention, 
not  only  as  fweet,  but  inftru6ting.  ^he  be-^ 
loved  of  the  Lord  Jhall  dwell  infafety^  by  him  5 
and  the  Lord  fiall  cover  him  all  the  day  longy 
he  Jhall  dwell  between  his  Jhoulders,  This  is  a 
bleffing  indeed,  if  we  look  only  to  the  literal 
interpretation  of  the  Words,  and  a  literal  com- 
mentator can  go  no  further  ;  he  muft  confine 
them  to  Benjamin ;  and  will  tell  us,  that  this 
fcripture  was  fulfilled  at  the  building  of  the 

Temple, 


158  The  Beloved  of  God.      Ser.  VII. 

Temple.  The  Temple  was  built  upon  two 
hills,  one  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  the  other 
in  the  tribe  of  Judah  3  the  Temple  being  built 
there,  and  Benjamin  being  placed  near  it,  then 
Benjamin  dwells  in  fafety  by  the  Lord,  by 
having  his  lot  caft  near  the  Temple.  How 
often,  alas !  is  it  the  cafe,  I  am  fure  it  is  very 
often  the  cafe  in  London,  the  nearer  the  church 
the  further  from  God  3  but  fome  make  good 
ufe  of  it,  and  are  glad  to  get  near  the  church 
that  they  may  be  nearer  God.  The  Temple 
being  placed  between  two  hills,  fo  Benjamin 
as  it  were  dwells  between  God*s  flioulders;  fo 
far  a  literal  commentator  can  go,  here  he  ftops ; 
a  fpiritual  commentator,  and  a  fpiritual  reader, 
go  further  j  O,  fays  he,  this  is  true,  but  at  the 
fame  time  this  is  not  the  whole  truth ;  and  I 
am  perfuaded,  when  a  perfon  is  helped  by 
the  Spirit  to  read  the  fcriptures,  the  declara- 
tions that  are  made,  and  thofe  particular  pro- 
mifes,  the  true  believer  applies  with  great  pro- 
priety to  himfelf  5  and  therefore  I  think  I  may 
venture  to  aver,  that  the  bleffing  w^hich  Mofes 
here  pronounces  upon  him  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  belongs  to  God's  people  in  all  ages 
whatever  >  God,  in  his  infinite  mercy,  grant 
that  this  bleffing  may  defcend   upon  us  and 

ours. 


Ser.  VII.       The  Beloved  of  God.  159 

ours,  that  it  may  defcend  to  your  lateft  pot. 
terity. 

.  Obferve  how  wonderfully  the  pcrfons,  to 
whom  the  blefling  is  given,  are  characterized  : 
of  Benjamin  it  is  faid,  the  beloved  of  the  Lord  -^ 
the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  pray  who  are  they  ? 
why,  the  men  that  the  fcriptures  always  fpeak 
of,  whofe  conftant  uniform  charadter  is,  they 
love  God  in  all  ages.  It  is  not  faid,  the  Prejf- 
byterians  fhall  dwell  in  fafety  ;  Mofes  never 
heard  of  a  Preibyterian  in  his  life  5  he  never 
heard  of  the  name ;  nor  it  is  faid  the  Inde- 
pendents fliall  dwell  in  fafety  ^  he  never  heard 
of  that  word ;  nor  is  it  faid  the  Papifls  fhall 
dwell  in  fafety  5  he  never  heard  of  Papifls, 
nor  of  the  pope  ;  nor  is  it  faid  that  the  Church 
of  England  fliall  dwell  in  fafety,  no^  neither 
is  it  faid  that  the  Methodifls  fliall  dwell  in  fafe- 
ty, though  I  trufl  there  are  a  great  many  good 
people  among  thefe  mongrels  of  the  church ; 
but  it  is  fpoken  of  all  the  people  of  God  5 
God  help  us  all  to  apply  it  to  ourfelves. 

Here  is  a  difpute  between  the  Arminians 
and  the  Calvinifts:  afk  an  Arminian  what  is 
meant  by  the  beloved  of  the  Lord  -,  O,  fay  they 
that  are  for  general  redemption,  the  beloved  of 
the  Lord  figniSes,  all  the  men  that  were  ever 

born 


i6o  "The  Beloved  of  God.       Ser.  VII. 

born  into  the  world  3  that  is  a  good  broad  bridge 
to  take  them  in ;  but  broad  bridges  are  not 
always  the  ftrongeft  bridges  in  the  world. 
The  Arminians  will  aflert  it,  that  Judas  was 
as  much  beloved  of  God  as  Peter,  or  any  other 
of  the  apoftles ;  and  thofe  that  are  not  Armi- 
nians, but  are  what  you  call  Quakers,  and 
there  are  a  good  many,  I  believe,  amoiig  them, 
that  have  better  hearts  than  heads,  they  fay, 
that  we  are  all  alike,  that  we  all  come  into  the 
world  with  a  feed  of  grace,  and  fhall  be  hap- 
py according  to  the  improvement  of  that  grace  j 
hence  they  talk  nothing  of  a  Chrift  withoiit 
but  loithiti;  happy  they  that  experience  a 
Chrift  within !  God's  mercy  is  fure,  and  over 
all  his  works ;  and  in  one  knk,  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  that  is,  of  all 
forts  of  men  3  even  the  wicked  are  beholden 
to  Jefus  Chrift,  whom  they  defpife,  for  every 
worldly  comfort  they  enjoy ;  in  this  fenfe  we 
fliould  learn  to  love  as  our  Lord,  we  are  told, 
loved  the  young  n>an  when  he  faw  he  had 
been  a  harmlefs  and  good  liver :  but  we  muft 
go  more  to  what  we  call  Calvinifm,  what  I 
call  fcriptural  truth.  The  love  which  Jefus 
Chrift  bore  for  the  youngv  man,  quite  differed 
Ironi  that  love  with  which  he  loved  Martha, 

Mary, 


Sen  Vli.       Ihe  Beloved  of  God.  i6i 

Mary,  and  their  brother^  there  was  a  cargo 
for  you !  three  in  one  family  3  God  grant  it 
may  be  your  happy  lot  and  mine  !  two  fifters 
and  one  brother,  three  to  entertain  Jefus  Chrifl:, 
all  in  a  peculiar  manner  beloved  of  the  Lord, 
It  is  not  faid  of  Benjamin,  they  (hall,  that  is, 
they  that  love  the  Lord,  they  fliall  dwell  in 
fafety,  no  5  it  would  not  be  fo  (Irong  to  them, 
as  to  fay  the  beloved  of  the  Lord  3  for  God 
knows  our  love  is  not  worth  a  ihilling  5  all 
the  fnth  of  God's  people,  fays  bifhop  Hall, 
is  but  meer  infidelity  3  and  all  the  love  of  the 
people  of  God  is  but  meer  hatred,  compared 
with  God's  love,  or  that  which  his  law  juftly 
requires  3  therefore  it  is  faid,  beloved  of  the 
Lordy  and  that  becaufe  if  ever  we  love  God, 
he  firft  loved  us,  which  is  what  Mofes's  very 
fexpreffion  means  3  as  ftreams  flow  from  the 
fountain,  fo  they  fhall  return  to  it.  Hence 
the  apoflle  fays.  Knowing  your  elecfion^  bre^ 
thretty  beloved  of  God.  1  know  very  well  the 
Myfticks  talk  of  loving  God  with  a  love  for 
himfelf  only,  without  any  refpedt  to  the  crea- 
ture at  all  3  that  is,  we  muft  love  God  without 
any  regard  at  all  for  what  God  has  done  for 
us  3  nay,  fome  go  fo  far  as  to  fay,  that  if  we 
do  not  fo  love  God,  v^e   are  not  converted, 

Y  though 


1 62  "The  Beloved  of  God.       Scr.  VI I^ 

though  we  have  as  much  grace  as  we  can  have ; 
that  we  do  not  love  God  properly  till  we  love 
him  for  what  he  is,  not  what  he  has  done  for 
us:  I  verily  believe,  the  angels  do  not  love 
God  in  that  manner  ;  and  we  cannot  love  God 
till  we  are  made  partakers  of  a  divine  nature, 
and  have  eyes  given  us  to  fee  his  glory. 

The  grand  enquiry  is  then,  how  fhall  I 
know  that  I  am  one  of  the  beloved  of  the 
Lord  ?  The  natural  man  never  minds  the  love 
of  God  ^  he  flatters  himfelf  he  loves  God  natu- 
rally, that  the  love  of  God  is  a  plant  that 
grows  in  nature's  garden  ^  but  a  fpiritual  per- 
fon  does  not  fo.  What  does  the  king  take 
notice  of  me  ?  does  the  king  look  pleafant 
upon  me  in  a  drawing-room  ?  am  I  called  to 
wait  upon  him  ?  am  I  beloved  of  this,  and  that, 
and  the  other  perfon  ?  if  I  am,  let  God  go,  I 
care  not ;  if  1  have  but  the  love  of  this  and  that 
courtier,  I  care  not  whether  God  loves  me  or 
no  5  this  will  not  do  for  an  awakened  loul ; 
and  therefore  the  grand  enquiry,  and  one  proof 
of  a  perfon 's  being  awakened  is,  how  fliall  I 
know  whether  God  loves  me  or  not  ?  why 
try;  I  am  perfuaded  of  it,  that  we  may  as 
well  know  that  God  loves  us,  and  we  love 
God,  as  we  may  know  that  the  fun  fliines  at 

noon-. 


Set.  Vll.       The  Beloved  of  God,  163 

noon-day  i  how   fhall  I  know   it  but  by  the 
effeds  of  this  love,   by  the  fruits  of  it  ?  That 
great   man,    Dr.  Watts,  who  was  called  the 
fweet   finger  of  Ifrael,  fay?,  "  we  fhould  go 
iirft  to  the  grammar- fchool  of  faith  and  repen- 
tance, before  we  go  to  the  univerfity  of  predef- 
tination  :''  whereas,  the  devil  would  have  them 
go  firft  to  the  univerfity,  to  examine  whether 
they  were  eledled    or  rejected,    or  no :    they 
fhould  do  as  a  good  woman  once  did,    when 
fatan  tempted  her,    and  wanted  to  diftrefs  her, 
that  there  were  but  few  to  be  faved ;  ihe  faid, 
if  there  were  but  two  to  be  faved,   flie  would 
flrive  to  be  one  of  them.     Surely  I  am  beloved 
of  the  Lord,    if  my  r^atural  enmity  againll  the 
Lord  is  flain.     How  do  I  know  I  love  a  per- 
fon  ?  how  can  you  prove  that  you  love  me  ? 
why,    fay  you,  I  hated  you   the  ether  day  : 
how  many  people  met  I  with  the  other  day, 
that  could  a  fev/  weeks  ago  have  pulled  me 
out  of  Tottenham-court,  but  God  has  over- 
come their  hearts.     The  perfon  now  confeiTcs 
his  former  enmity,   and  v/hen  that  enmity  is 
removed,    and   you   are   reconciled   to  them, 
cannot  you  know  that  you  love  them  ?  and  if 
God  has  removed  that  enmity  to  Chrift  out  of 
your  hearts,  furely  you  are  one  of  the  beloved 
of  the  Lord. 

Y  2  We 


1 64  *Ihe  Beloved  of  God.      Ser.  VII. 

^  We  are  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  if  we  are 
brought  to  abhor  and  renounce  that  which  ftands 
between  us  and  the  Lord;  I  mean,  our  curfed 
felf-righteoufnefs.  Can  I  prove  that  I  have 
renounced  my  own  duties,  that  I  arn  fick  of 
my  duties  as  well  as  my  (ins ;  none  but  the 
beloved  of  the  Lord  fee  this :  an  enemy  to  the 
Lord  may  have  this  in  his  head,  but  it  is  only 
a  friend  of  the  Lord  that  has  this  in  his  heart : 
a  talkative  profeffor  can  fpeak  of  it ;  you  may 
teach,  perhaps,  a  parrot  to  pray,  but  it  is  odds 
to  talk  like  a  parrot,  and  experience  hke  a 
Chriftian.  Now  if  I  have  renounced  my  own 
righteoufnefs,  and  been  helped  to  truft  to 
Chrifl's,  to  believe  on  the  Son  of  God,  let  fa- 
tan  fay  what  he  will,  I  ana  fure  I  am  the  be- 
loved of  the  Lord,  for  none  but  thofe  that  are 
beloved  by  him  with  an  everlafting  love,  are 
brought  to  believe  on  him. 

I  may  know  \  am  beloved  of  the  Lord, 
from  what  ?  why,  experiencing  his  love  Jhed 
ebroad  in  my  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghojl.  Jona- 
than loved  David  as  his  own  foul.  Moft  of 
you  know  what  love  is  in  a  carnal  itn^t ;  and 
if  there  be  a  union  of  fouls  between  creature 
and  creature,  furely  there  muft  be  a  union  of 
fouls  between  the  Creator  and   the   creature 

belovec} 


Ser.  Vir,      7he  Beloved  of  God.  i6^ 

beloved  of  God  -,  it  cannot  be  otherwife ;  this 
love  will  have  its  efFeds. 

If  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  If  having  his 
love  in  my  heart,  I  fliow  it  by  loving  tliofe  he 
has  loved.     Some  people  may  fay,  I  love  you, 
but  I  do  not  love  thofe  about  you,  your  friends ; 
why   you  are  not  bound  to  love  all  alike,  but 
it  may  teach  you  to  be  civil  to  that  perfon's 
beloved.     As  foon  as  ever  we  hear  of  a  Chrif- 
tian,  as  foon  as  ever  we  hear  of  a  believer,  as 
foon  as  ever  we  hear  of  a  finner  turning  to  God, 
O  it  will  rejoice  us  ^  and  we  fhall  be  like  the 
angels  in  heaven,  who  rejoice  over  one  fivjiers 
repeiitaJice^  more  than  over  ninety-nine  ju/i  per^ 
Jons  that  need  no  repejitance.     Some   people 
inay  fay,  I  love  dearly  to  hear  of  a  perfon's 
being   converted  by  fuch   a  minifterj  I  love 
dearly  to  hear  of  perfons  converted  by  a  dif- 
fenter ;  I  love  dearly  to  hear  of  perfons  con- 
verted by  a  churchman,  but  I  do  not  like  peo- 
ple fliould  be  converted  by  this  and  that  perfon  | 
why  I  believe  there  are  a  great  many  people 
whofe  hearts  are  thus  narrow,  but  this  mixture 
is  not  of  God  \  and  I  pray  God  they  may  know 
it  by  experience;  that  they   may  kaocv  they 
are   beloved  of  God,  then  they  will   rejoice 
when  other  people  are  brought  to  believe  on 

him^ 


1 66  "The  Beloved  of  God      Ser.  VII. 

him,  whoever  is  made  the  inftrument.  Grace 
and  mercy  be  with  all  them  that  love  the  Lord 
Jefus  Chriji  in  fmcerity.  What  would  have 
become  of  poor  Paul  if  he  had  only  loved  his 
own  followers :  the  Romans  he  never  faw  till 
he  was  taken  there  a  prifoner,  but  he  loved  all 
the  reft  of  the  apoftles,  writ  letters  to  all  forts,  ^<  2-^ 
not  to  their  particular  parties  or  churches,  but 
to  all  thofe  that  loved  the  Lord  Jefiis  infmce^ 
rity  'y  and  if  we  do  love  in  this  manner,  we 
may  be  afTured  we  are  beloved  of  the  Lord, 
for  none  but  the  Lord  could  beget  fuch  love 
in  us. 

If  we  are  beloved  of  the  Lord,  we  (hall  be 
hated  by  the  world.     If  you  were  of  the  worlds 
the  world  would  love  you^  but  becaufe  you  are 
not  of  the  worlds  but  I  have  chofen  you  out  of 
the   worlds    therefore    the    world  hateth  you. 
Will  you  make  me  believe  that  any  of  you 
are   beloved    of    the    Lord,    that   never   loft 
your  good  charadter  by  it  5  why  you  may  as 
well  make  me  believe  that  you  are  emperors  of 
the  world :  where  is  the  bleffing  the  fermon  on 
the  mount  fpeaks  of  5  where  is  the  bleffing  of 
perfecuticn  ^    where    is   the  bleffing  of  being 
hated  of  all  men  5  where  is  the  bleffing  of  be- 
ing hated  for  the  crois  ?  you  love  the  Lord, 

and 


Ser.  VII.       The  Beloved  of  Go.l  167 

and  not  carry  the  crofs  after  you ;  you  love  the 
Lord,  and  not  be  hated  as  your  Lord  was  ?  I 
don't  fay  all  are  hated  alike  5  poor  minifters 
are  fet  in  the  front  of  the  battle  ;  in  proportion 
to  our  fuccefles  we  fhall  be  hated.  There  are 
numbers  of  minifters  now  fleep  in  whole  fkins, 
that  were  formerly  in  a  worfe  plight  j  the  de- 
vil difturbs  them  not  becaufe  they  are  quite 
civil,  and  do  not  trouble  and  contradidt  him ; 
but  if  you  oppofe  the  world  and  the  devil,  the 
world  will  hate  you  ^  and  no  greater  proof  of 
being  beloved  of  the  Lord,  than  the  world 
hating  you,  but  it  muft  be  for  Chrift*s  fake. 
So  Ahab  faid  of  the  prophet,  all  his  prophcfy^ 
iitg  is  againft  vie ;  I  hate  him  ;  the  world  hated 
him  ;  the  world  hated  me^  fays  our  Lord,  before 
it  hated  you  j  and  the  apoftles,  when  they  be- 
gan to  fpeak  for  God  too,  they  were  hated 
like  their  Lord  3  and  glory  to  God  for  it,  for 
it  is  a  bleffed  mark  of  their  belonging  to  God, 
when  they  are  honoured  to  fufFer  for  him,  and 
we  are  never  right  till  we  are  bearing  the  crofs  r 
to  fee  men  or  women  fleeping  under  the  crofs, 
fculk/ing  and  hiding  from  it,  is  this  love  ?  give 
me  a  profeffor  that  will  wear  a  cockade  in  his 
hat,  and  is  never  eafier  than  when  he  is  com- 
bating the  enemies  of  his  King, 

If 


1 68  ^he  BeionHed  of  God.       Sef.  Vlt, 

If  I  am  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  I  really 
Ihall  live  above  the  vi^orldi     You  may  fay  what 
you  willj  and  you  may  bring  the  fcriptures  as 
low  as  you  think  proper,^  but  the  friendjhip  of 
the  world  is  hatred  to  God-,  and  if  any  man  love 
the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him. 
Now  by  not  loving  the  world,  I  don't  meari 
that  you  (hould  Ihut  up  your  fhops,  and  run 
into  a  convent:  how  idle  for  perfons  to  fay 
they  love  God,  and  hide  themfelves  from  the 
worlds  that   is   no  religion  at  all.     But  the 
greateft  proof  of  a  Chriftian's  loving  God  is^ 
I  am  in  the  worlds  but  not  of  it;    I  work 
with  my  hands  all  the  day,  but  my  heart  is 
from  it.     I  remember  a  dear  friend  once  fent 
me  word,  many  years  agOj  how  bufy  he  was 
morning  and  night,  up  early  and  latej  per- 
haps,  fays  he,  you  will  think  by  this  accountji 
1  am  worldly;  he  faid,  no,  fir,  I  thank  God 
that  my  heart  is  above  the  world  :  God  grant 
we  may  thus  prove  we  love  God  !  I  don't  fayy 
but  many  that  love  the  Lord  may  be  in  another 
fituation ;  but  when  perfons   are  enabled    to 
leave  all  for  Chrift,  it  is  a  great  mercy :  God 
.  be  praifed,  we  have  fome  fuch  ^  God  add  to 
their  happinefs. 

They 


Ser.  VII.       Ihe  Beloved  of  God.  i6g 

They  that  love  the  Lord,  will  ftudy  to 
keepffom  ofFending  God,  not  for  fear  of  being 
damned,  bat  becaufe  fin  murdered  his  dear 
Son  3  there  are  a  great  many  people  abftain 
from  fin  for  fear  of  puniihment;  but  hear  what 
Jofeph  faid.  My  772a ft er  has  do7ie  thus  and  thus 
by  i7ie^  how  caTi  I  therefore  do  this  great  wick^ 
ednefs  a72dfm  agai7ift  God?  my  God  that  loves 
me  'y  fo  they  would  not  flab  him,  becaufe  he 
has  been  wounded  enough  already. 

If  we  are  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  we  fhall 
be  willing  to  work  for  the  Lord ;  faith  with- 
out works  is  the  religion  of  every  carnal  man ; 
make  an  end  of  one  good  work  and  then  be- 
gin another,  and  lay  it  down  and  wonder  that 
Jefus  Chrifl  fhould  accept  any  thing  at  your 
hands.  I  knew  a  lady  fometime  ago,  that 
wanted  ilill  more  to  be  employed  for  God  -,  fays 
fhe,  if  Jefus  Chrift  w^ould  but  help  me  to  do 
fuch  and  fuch  a  thing  I  have  in  view,  O  I 
would  kifs  his  feet,  and  dedicate  myfelf  more 
and  more  to  his  honour  2  a  true  Chriftian  loves 
to  be  thus  employed,  but  above  all  he  is  glad 
he  has  the  blood  of  Chrift  to  wafh  his  duties  in. 

I  fliall  mention  but  one  thing  more,  though 
I  might  mention  twenty ;  if  we  have  the  love 
of  God  in  our  hearts,  though  we  cannot  get 

Z  over 


s;o  Ihe  Bek'ved  of  God.       Ser.  VIL 

over  the  fears  of  death  at  all  times^  yet  I  think 
the  bent  of  the  mind  of  fuch  a  perfon  will  be, 
when  fhall  I  fee  the  objeft  of  my  love,  him 
whom  my  foul  loves  ?   they  fit  at  ordinances, 
and  long  to  be  led  to  the  fountain  head.     lam 
in  a  (irait  between  twOy  fays  Paul  %  the  word 
fignifies  a  ftrong,    an  intenfe  defire  to  be  with 
Chrift :  he  does  not  fay  to  be  in  heaven,  but 
to  be  with  Chrijiy  which  is  far  better ;  but  to 
ftay  here  is  better  for  you,  therefore  you  fliould 
be  content  to  ftay,  not  becaufe  you  love  the 
world,  but  as  willing  to  wait  your  Matter's 
call.     I  could  not  help  admiring  while  I  was 
reading  it>  that  when  Chrift  afcended  to  hea- 
ven, one  angel^  one  particular  angel,  it  muft 
have  been  a  blefled  one,  left  thofe  that  were 
attending  Chrift   into  glory,    ftopped  in  the 
way,   for  what  ?  why,  to  preach  to  the  apot* 
ties :  Why  ftand  ye  thus  gaxing  into  heaven  ? 
I  am  afhamed  of  you,  fays  he ;  here  is  an  an- 
gel, one  of  the  convoy,  waiting  upon  them ; 
he  does  not  fay,  let  me  go  to  heaven  with  thee, 
and  let  me  come  down  again  and  preach,  no  y 
he  ftays  down  thus  to  preach  to  a  few  pooir 
fifliermen.     Lord  fearch  us,  Lord  try  us,  Lord 
God  Almighty  help  us  to  examine  ourfelves^ 
that  we  may  know  whether  we  are  beloved  of 
the  Lord  or  not.  So 


Sen  VII.       'The  Beloved  of  God.  171 

So  that  fome  may  fay,  I  think  I  can  apply 
all  the  marks,  though  I  don't  depend  upon 
marks.  I  have  a  number  of  bills  here  to-night ; 
one  fays,  if  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  why 
am  I  fo  poor  ?  another  fays,  if  I  am  beloved  of 
tlie  Lord,  why  am  I  fo  afflidled  ?  fays  another, 
if  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  why  am  I  left  to 
ftarve ;  can  I  think  God  loves  me,  when  I  fee 
thoufands  and  thoufands  fquandered  away  every 
day,  and  yet  my  poor  babes  groaning,  my  poor 
children  quite  emaciated,  for  want  only  of  a 
little  bread  that  I  fee  in  the  baker's  fliop  as  I 
go  along  'y  if  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  how 
is  it  that  my  poor  children  are  ready  to  cry  for 
bread,  and  I  have  none  to  give  them ;  that 
others  are  adorned  with  diamonds,  but  I  have 
not  fo  much  as  a  rag  to  put  on  my  little  one's 
back.  If  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  how  is 
it  that  my  friends  are  againft  me;  my  children, 
inflead  of  being  a  bleffing,  are  a  curfe,  and 
break  my  heart.  If  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord, 
how  is  it  that  I  have  fo  many  domeflic  trials 
that  caufe  me  to  cry  out.  Wo  is  me  that  I  Jo- 
journ  i?i  Mejljecky  and  dwell  i?i  the  tents  of 
Kedar.  If  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  how  is 
it  that  I  am  harraffed  with  blafphemous  thoughts 
fhus;  the  trials  I  meet  with  ii)  bringing  down 
Z  2  the 


172  The  Beloved  of  God.       Ser.  VII. 

the  outward  man.  If  I  am  beloved  of  the 
Lord,  how  is  it  that  in  (lead  of  living  in  plenty, 
I  now  want  bread  to  eat,  and  fhould  be  glad 
to  have  it  from  thofe  /  once  /corned  to  fet  with 
the  dogs  of  my  flock  ?  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he 
chafleneth^  and  fcourgeth  every  /on  whom  he 
receiveth.  Our  dear  Jefus  was  never  more  be^ 
loved  of  his  father  than  when  he  cried  out. 
My  God !  my  God !  why  haji  thou  forfaken 
me?  never  more  beloved  of  his  father  than 
when  he  was  fweating  great  drops  of  blood, 
when  he  cried.  Father^  ij  it  be  pojjible  let  this 
Clip  pafs  jrom  me,  I  remember  a  dear  mini- 
fler  of  Chrifl",  now  in  Suffolk,  told  me,  when 
he  was  in  Scotland,  going  to  receive  the  facra- 
ment,  he  was  fo  dry  and  dark,  and  benumbed 
and  tempted,  that  he  thought  he  would  go 
away  ;  as  he  was  going  this  word  came  to  his 
mind,  when  was  Jefus  Chrift  moft  acceptable 
to  his  Father  ?  when  did  he  give  the  greateft 
trial  of  his  love  ?  when  he  cried  out,  My  God  ! 
my  God !  why  hajl  thou  forfaken  me  f  Why 
then,  fays  he,  upon  this  I  will  venture  ^  if  I 
perifh,  I  perilli  at  Chrift's  feet ;  and  he  came 
away  filled  with  comfort  from  his  bleff^d  God 
and  Father  in  Chrift, 

Well 


Ser.  VII.       The  Beloved  of  God.  173 

Well  then,  what  is  to  be  done  to  thofe  that 
are  beloved  of  the  Lord  ?  here's  for  you,  they 
JI:all  dwell  in  jafety  3  why  ?  they  Jhall  dwell 
between  his  Jhoidders  5  obferve  the  expreflion 
the  prophet  fays  they  JJ:all dwell  in  love.  Will 
God  indeed  dwell  on  earth  ^^  fays  Solomon  •  ves 
God,  fays  he,  dwells  in  my  earthly  heart, 
made  heavenly  by  the  grace  of  God.  Did  ever 
any  hear  fuch  an  expreflion  from  the  mouth  of 
God,  J  will  be  thy  God-,  I  am  thy  Jhield^  ajid 
thy  exceeding  great  reward  ?  He  does  not  fay 
an  angel  fhall  go  3  if  God  had  only  faid  in  his 
word,  that  I  was  to  be  kept  by  angels,  I  am 
fure  my  wicked  heart  would  defpair,  becaufe 
it  would  deceive  all  the  angels  in  heaven :  but 
God  faith,  /  will  be  thy  keeper ;  io  they  that 
would  hurt  his  people,  muft  go  through  God 
himfelf.  They  pall  dwell  on  high-,  bread  jlall 
he  given  to  them,  and  their  waters  Jloall  be  fure. 
They  are  kept  by  the  mighty  power  of  God  through 
faith,  to  everlafling  fahation.  It  is  faid,  they 
fall  dwell  between  his  f milder  s :  the  govern- 
ment of  the  church,  and  the  wprld,  and  all 
^re  upon  the  Redeemer's  flioulders,  and  the 
Lord's  evcrlafting  arms  are  under  his  people. 
Obferve  it  is  faid,  they  dwell  in  fafcty,  and 
very  often  we  are  fafefl  wh^n  we  think  wc  are 
mo  ft  in  danger, 

^hey 


174       ^        "^^^  Beloved  of  God.      Ser.  VIL 

7hey  Jloall  dwell  in  fafety  ;  thofe  that  are 
lovers  of  the  Lord  Jefus  Ihall  dwell  fafely 
with  God  on  earth,  and  eternally  with  him 
in  heaven,  O  may  God  blefs  this  foolifhnefs 
of  preaching  to  fome  of  God*s  poor,  and,  per- 
haps, doubting  beloved  ones.  Come  you  poor 
fouls,  I  often  think  that  \K\sJield  preaching  is 
particularly  comfortable  to  the  poor;  when- 
ever jf^/*/  preaching  is  flopped,  farewel  to  the 
power  of  religion.  When  poor  people  have 
been  working  hard  all  day,  how  fweet  muft 
it  be  for  them  to  come  to  a  place  of  worfhip, 
and  get  a  lift  for  to-morrow :  may  the  Lord 
God  blefs  this  barley-bread !  If  you  can  wrap 
yourfelves  in  God,  let  the  world  hate  you^ 
God's  children  are  the  greateft  plagues  and 
trials  one  to  another,  but  God  loves  them,  God 
fmiles  upon  them,  and  therefore  they  fhall 
dwell  in  fafety.  The  devil  told  me  I  fhould 
not  dwell  in  fafety,  but  I  bid  him  defiance, 
and  turned  him  to  Deut.  xxxiii.  and  told  hini 
Benjamin's  lot  was  mine ;  the  beloved  of  the 
Lord  Jf:all  dwell  in  fafety  by  him. 

Wo,  wo,  wo  be  to  you  that  have  no  marks 
of  being  beloved  of  the  Lord.  Have  we  any 
prophane  Efaus  here  to-night,  that  are  faying, 
do  not  tell  me  of  your  being  beloved  of  the 

Lord  5 


Ser.  VIL       rhe  Beloved  of  God.  jj^ 

Lord  ;  if  I  can  have  the  love  of  fuch  a  perfon^ 
I  don't  care  whether  God  loves  me  or  not  5 
you  may  tell  me  God  loves  people  v^hen  they 
are  afflidted,  I  want  none  of  thefe  marks,  I 
think  God  loves  me  becaufe  I  am  in  a  good 
frame  ;  I  think  God  loves  me  becaufe  I  prof- 
per ;  I  think  God  loves  me  becaufe  I  am  very 
healthy  and  ftrong  5  I  do  not  care  whether  I 
wait  upon  God  or  not,  or  give  to  the  poor  or 
not.  I  will  not  foftcn  the  matter,  there  is  no 
going  to  heaven  without  wearing  a  fool's  coat« 
O,  you  may  fay,  that  is  owing  to  your  impru- 
dence 5  you  make  people  uneafy,  and  fet  them 
upon  a  falfe  fcent,  and  make  them  their  own 
perfecutors  5  thank  God,  I  can  go  into  a  hun- 
dred companies,  and  not  give  them  reafon  io 
fay  I  am  a  Methodift: :  I  can  go  into  company 
and  fing  an  innocent  fong,  I  don't  tell  them  I 
have  a  Tabernacle  hymn-book  in  my  pocket. 
There  are  few  have  the  courage  that  the  gen- 
tleman had  who  loved  God^  and  went  to  fee 
fome  carnal  relations  after  he  became  a  fool 
for  Chrift's  fake  :  fays  one  of  the  relations,  it 
is  always  our  cuflom  after  dinner  to  fing  a  fong, 
and  afked  him  to  fing  ^  he  faid,  he  would  in 
his  turn  ;  two  of  them  fung  5  his  relation  faid 
to  him,  come,  coufin,  fing  j  fays  he,  I  have 

not 


176  The  Beloved  of  God.       Ser.  VIL 

not  fung  a  fong  a  good  while,  but,  if  you 
pleafe,  I  will  fing  a  hymn :  he  fung  it  out, 
but  they  never  afked  him  to  fing  again,  nor 
did  they  fing  afterwards.  How  fweet  it  is  to 
go  through  boldly  with  a  thing  for  Chrifl !  Do 
not  you  think  you  are  a  coward  ?  are  you  not 
afhamed  ?  are  any  of  you  fuch  cowards  as  to 
plead  your  prudence:  God  help  you  to  be 
unmalked  to-night.  I  do  not  know  whether 
you  go  to  a  mafquerade,  but  you  have  a  dread- 
ful mafque  upon  your  fouls,  a  dreadful  reli- 
gious vifage.  I  heard  fomebody  appeared  the 
other  night,  in  order  to  bring  contempt  upon 
US)  in  a  Methodift  drefs,  that  was  one  of  the 
dreffes.  O  how  can  they  do  fo?  fay  you; 
how  canft  thou  do  fo  ?  pretend  to  be  a  Me^ 
thodift  among  God's  people,  and  behave  light 
and  foolilli  among  the  children  of  the  devil ; 
for  fhame  unmafk  yourfelves,  for  God  will, 
by  death,  unmafk  your  foul,  and  fliow  your 
hypocrify.  The  word  hypocrite  is  taken  from 
a  flage- player,  who  ad:s  that  part  he  is  not: 
God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  keep  all  here  from 
ftopping  fhort.  ^ 

If  any  of  you  are  awakened  and  convinced, 
the  Lord  grant  you   may  never  reft  till  you 
>know  you  are  the  beloved  of  the  Lord.     Ah ! 

fays 


^ 


Sen  VII.       Ibe  Beloved  QJ  God.  177 

fay  you,  I  fliall  never  know  that,  that  I  am 
the  beloved  of  the  Lord :  I  am  that  old  grey- 
headed wretch  you  mentioned  at  the  beginning 
of  your  fermon  \  can  God  love  me  a  drunkard, 
fabbath-breaker,  a  whoremonger,  an  adulterer, 
an  unclean  wretch  as  ever  trod  on  the  ground ! 
Pray  what  was   Paul  ?  what  was  the  jailor  ? 
what  were  all  the  three  thoufand  that  were 
converted  at  once  ;  what  was  their  cafe  ?  nay, 
what  was  Adam  the  firft  finner  ?  and  yet  Adam 
and  Eve  both,    I  believe,  received  mercy  of 
God  y  flie  is  therefore  called  the  mother  of  all 
livings  becaufe  fhe  is  the  mother  of  all  be- 
lievers.    Come  then  at  a  venture,  come  then, 
throw  thyfclf  upon  Chrifl  ^  do  not  lay,  Par- 
don my  iniquities  becaufe  they  are  fmall,  but 
fay,  Lo7'dy  pardon  my  iniquities  for  they  are 
great.     One  that  was  executed  to-day  for  forg- 
ing fomething  to  rob  his  father  \  what  a  father 
deal  thus  with  his  fon  ?  well,  faid  I,  it  is  fo 
with  a  man,  but  our  heavenly  father  will  par- 
don i  and  though  the  law  is  called  a  fiery  law, 
yet  there  is,  bleifed  be  God,  a  new  and  living 
way.     Oh  finners !  oh  fmners !  God  help  you 
to  come  and  venture,  and  flrive,  though  you 
have  none  of  the  marks  that  have  been  men- 
tioned,   yet   fay,    God    can    put  thele  marks 
A  a  U|:on 


178  ^be  Beloved  of  God.      Ser.  VII, 

upon  me,  I  have  been  courting  this  and  that 
perfon's  love;  nay,  I  made  no  other  ufe  of 
coming  to  worfhip,  but  to  look  out  for  fome- 
tbing  to  advance  myfelf.  I  have  been  look- 
ing out  for  nothing  but  beauty ;  I  have  been 
looking  out  for  nothing  but  money,  or  fome- 
thing  or  other  to  make  my  fortune ;  but  now 
begone,  vain  V70rld ;  now,  Lord,  I  would 
look  after  thee.  That  you  may  know  you  are 
the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  dwell  in  fafety  on 
earth,  and  after  death  be  conveyed  to  dwell 
with,  and  love  him  to  all  eternity,  God  grant 
for  Chrifl's  fake.     Amen,    . 


SERMON 


r  179  3 

SERMON     VIII. 

The  Furnace  of  Afflidion. 

-       ■   -r 

Isaiah  xlvlii.    ver.  10. 
/  have  chofen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affiiElioft. 

GRACIOUS  words  indeed!  words 
worthy  of  a  God  !  who  has  promifed 
that  he  "will  not  qlways  chajiife^  that 
he  will  not  keep  his  anger  for  ever  3  but,  on 
the  contrary,  will  take  care  in  the  midft  of 
judgment  to  remember  mercy  ;  and  if  he  ftrikes 
with  one  hand,  will  uphold  with  the  other. 

I  hope  I  need  not  tell  you,  my  dear  hear- 
ers, that  thefe  words  were  fpoken  to  comfort, 
the  captives  in  Babylon,  who,  for  their  various 
fins  and  great  backflidings,  conftrained  the  God 
of  love,  the  God  of  mercy,  their  covenant 
God,  to  fend  them  captives  into  a  foreign  foil; 
upon  this  their  enemies  take  occafion  to  infult 
them,  ii'here  are  7iow  your  fongs  ?  fay  they; 
give  us  one  of  your  Temple  fongs,  with  which 
A  a  2  you 


I  So         7 he  Furnace  of  Jffii^iiGiu    S  er.  VIII. 

you  ufed  to  pour  out  your  allelujahs ;  let  us 
fee  now  whether  you  can  praife  him  in  a 
flrange  land<  The  enemy  of  fouls  joining  in- 
wardly with  them  without,  makes  fome  that 
can  fing,  even  afraid  that  God  hath  forgotten  to 
be  graciouSy  that  he  hath  flmt  up  his  loving 
kindjiefs  in  difpleafure^  that  the  darknefs  in- 
which  they  were  now  involved  would  not  be 
a  temporary,  but  a  perpetual  one  \  and  not- 
withftanding  the  prophets  v/ere  fent  in  mercy 
of  God  to  comfort  them  in  their  trouble,  yet 
many  of  them  were  tempted  to  fay,  all  men^ 
yea  the  prophets,  were  liars  3  it  is  very  well 
if  they  flopped  there,  and  did  not  fay,  God  is 
a  liar  too.  The  enemy  being  thus  fuffered  to 
break  in  upon  them  like  a  flood,  it  was  high 
time  for  the  blefled  God  to  lift  up  a  ftandard 
againft  him  5  and  therefore  the  great  Re- 
deemer, the  angel  of  the  everlafling  covenant, 
lets  them  know  that  he  would  fome  time  or 
other,  nay,  very  fpeedily,  appear  to  relieve 
his  afllifted  people :  he  affures  them,  that 
however  for  a  while  he  might  fuficr  them  ta 
be  tried,  he  would  caufe  a  fpeedy  deliverance, 
that  ihould  make  them  look  upon  him  as  their 
God  5  and  this  not  for  any  merit  found  in  this^ 
people,  not  for  any  good  forefeen,  but  he  fays, 

for 


Set-.  Vlli.    7he  Furnace  of  Affiidiion,  i  g  i 

for  my  own  name's  fake-,  that  the  heathen 
might  not  fay  God  had  utterly  forfaken  them, 
he  will  appear  for  their  relief,  and  make  them 
more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  locoed 
them  3  that  however  dark  the  feafon  of  afHic- 
tion  might  be,  yet  he  would  let  his  own  peo- 
ple know  that  all  that  happened,  happened 
out  of  love;  that  it  was  fo  far  from  being 
true,  that  they  were  really  caft  off  from  God, 
that,  on  the  contrary,  he  intended  to  over-rule 
thcfe  troubles,  both  foreign  and  domeftic,  to 
bring  them  nearer  to,  and  at  lafi:  to  lodge 
them  fafe  in  the  world  above:  well  therefore 
for  their  comfort  might  it  be  ulhcred  in  thu?, 
for  my  name's  fake  will  I  defer  7ny  anger ^  and 
for  my  praife  "will  1  refrain  for  thee^  that  I 
cut  thee  not  off\  And  to  fix  their  attention 
and  gratitude,  'tis  added,  behold  1  have  refined 
thee^  but  not  with  filver ;  for  this  is  fo  far  from 
being  contrary  to  the  everlafting  decree,  or  pur- 
pofe,  hid  in  my  bofom,  that,  on  the  contrary, 
it  is  the  fulfilling  it ;  for,  faith  God  in  the 
words  of  our  text,  1  have  chofen  thee  in  the 
furnace  of  affiiBion. 

Though  the  words  are  ipoken  in  the  Angu- 
lar number,  yet  they  are  of  a  complex  and 
large  import ;  the  great  God  ngt  only  fpeaks 

to 


1 82         7he  Furnace  of  Afflidiion.    Ser.  VlII. 

to  them  as  a  people  colledively  confidered,  but 
particularizes  them  in  this  manner;  not  I  have 
chofen  you,  but  I  ha^ve  chofen  thee  5  for  the 
word  of  God  itfelf  will  never,  never,  never  do 
us  goodj  if  it  is  not  applied  by  the  blefled 
Spirit  of  God  to  you  and  L  The  wifdom  and 
kindnefs  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  deferves  our  no- 
tice ;  had  the  prophet  gone  on  and  faid,  1  have 
chofen  you,  unbelief  might  have  faid,  ah,  this 
prophefy  belongs  only  to  the  people  of  Ifrael> 
the  words  were  addrefled  to  thofe  who  were 
under  the  Jewifh  difpenfation,  what  have  I  to 
do  with  them  ?  or  unbelief  would  perfuade  us 
to  fay  fo  of  fuch  a  general  promife  as  this  ^ 
but  when  it  is  faid  I  have  chofen  thee,  and 
we  know  that  no  fcripture  is  of  private  inter- 
pretation, but,  like  its  bleffed  author,  is  the 
fame  yejierday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  there  is 
no  loop-hole,  as  it  were,  for  unbelief  to  creep 
out  at;  but  every  believer  may,  in  all  ages, 
in  the  words  of  the  text,  fay  to  himfelf,  God 
has  chofen  me  in  the  jurnace  of  affliBion^ 
Perhaps,  there  is  not  a  more  comfortable  paf- 
fage  in  the  whole  book  of  God  ;  I  do  not  know 
of  one  that  has  a  greater  tendency  to  filence  a 
complaining  child  of  God,  or  to  make  a  poor 
fuffering   believer   happy,  and   to  reft  under 

the 


Ser.  VIII.    The  Furndce  of  Jffii5lion.  183 

the  promife,  to  kifs  the  rod  of  God  that  ftrikes 
the  blow. 

Where  ihall  I  begin,  where  fhall  I  end? 
the  very  firft  words  open  fuch  a  field,  that  eter- 
nity itfelf  will  be  but  juft  long  enough  for  us 
to  take  a  view  of  it ;  the  time  is  come  that  even 
fome  good  people  that  have  the  grace  of  God 
in  their  hearts,   have  fuc4i  muddy  heads  as  to 
kick  at  the  dodtrine  of  eledtion,  and  look  up- 
on it  as  having  a  tendency  to  make  us  bad  in 
our  heads,  or  Antinomians  in  our  hearts  3  but 
if  we  have  eyes  to  fee,  and  ears  to  hear,  and  if 
our  hearts  are  really  informed  by  the  Spirit ; 
if  we  have  been  anointed  with  his  eye-falve, 
O  then  elefting,  fovereign,  diftinguifhing  love 
flows  in  fuch  a  fcene,  fuch  a  tranlporting  fcene, 
as  will  make  a  believer's  heart  leap  for  joy. 
For  my  own  part,  I  know  no  other  dodtrine 
that  can  truly  humble  the  nlan  5  for  either  God 
mufl  chufe  us,  or  we  muft  chufe  God ;  either 
God  muft  be  the  firft  mover,   or  man  muft  be 
the  firft  mover;  either  God  muft  chufe  them 
on  account  of  fome  goodnefs,  on  account  of 
fome  purity, .  or  ads  of  piety,  or  God  muft 
chufe  them  merely  -of  his  grace,  for  his  own 
name's  fake,  and  to  let  us  know  that  we  have 
pot  chofen  hiin,  but  he  has  chofen  us.  I  verily 

believe^ 


1 84         ^"he  Furnace  of  AffiiEilm.    S^r>  VUL 

believe,  that  the  grand  reafon  why  fuch  doc- 
trine is  fo  fpurned  at,  and  hated  by  carnal  peo- 
ple, is,  that  it  ftrikes  at  the  very  root  of  hu- 
man pride,  cuts  the  linev^s  of  free-v^rill  all  to 
pieces,  and  brings  the  poor  finner  to  lie  down 
at  the  foot  of  fovereign  grace  5  and,  let  his  at- 
tainments in  the  fchool  of  Chrift  be  ever  fo 
great,  it  conftrains  him  to  cry  out.  Lord,  why 
me !  why  me !  Our  Mafter,  and  I  think  we 
fhould  not  attempt  to  be  wifer  than  our  Mailer 
was,  fpeaks  particularly  of  and  to  his  own 
fchool,  his  little  college  of  apoftles :  T^hine 
they  were^  and  thou  gavefi  them  me-y  1  have 
chofenyoUy  but  ye  have  not  chofen  me, — Becauje  I 
have  chofen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the 
world  hateth  you.  Before  they  were  fully 
enlightened,  though  they  were  afterwards 
brought  more  to  the  light,  two  of  them  at  firfl 
faid,  we  have  found  the  Meffiah ;  yet  when 
they  were  funk  deeper  in  the  knowledge  of 
themfelves,  they  changed  their  note,  and  faid, 
the  Meffiah  has  found  us.  Obferve  the  man- 
ner of  the  Redeemer's  addreffing  our  firft  pa- 
rent, when  their  guilt  had  caufed  them  to  hide 
themfelves,  jidam,  where  art  thou  ?  Pray  who 
called  firfl:,  did  Adam  call  after  Chrifl:,  or  did 
Chrifl  call  after  him  5  or  do  you  think  there  is 

any 


Ser.  VIII.  T^he  Furnace  of  AffliEiion,  ig^ 

any  difference  between  us  and  Adam,  or  that 
we  have  got  better  hearts  than  Adam  had ; 
do  you  think  we  are  wifcr  and  better  now  ? 
Adam  run  away  from  God,  and  {o  fliould  we 
to  this  very  day,  unlefs  Jefus  Chrift  had  called 
us  to  himfelf. 

Some  perfons,  perhaps,    may  {d,y^  Well,  I 
like  your  dodrine  very  well;  God  chufes  us, 
you  fay,  when  we  have  no  regard  to  any  good 
works  at  all,  therefore  I  will  go  on  finnino-, 
becaufe  the  fitter  I  fhall  be  for  God's  grace  j 
and  the  fitter  thou  mayft  be  for  hell. — Grace 
does  not  deftroy  the  ufe  of  the  law  3  an  honeft 
heart  will  draw   that  inference  from  it,  as  a 
good  woman  once  did  when  the  devil  told  her, 
that  either  God  had  chofen  her  and  fhe  fhould 
be  faved,  or  if  fhe  was  rejeded  fhe  fliould  be 
damned,  fo,  faid  he,  you  need  not  flrlve ;  flie 
anfwered,  if  there  were  but  two  to  be  faved, 
I  would  ftrive  to  be  one  of  them :  God  help 
us  to  draw  that  inference. 

Now  this  word  chofen^  refers  us  to  God's 
eternal  eleflion ;  it  comprehends,  and  is  the 
fource  of  all  that  God  has  done  for  believers, 
for  every  individual  believer  in  particular  when 
Jefus  bowed  his  head  and  gave  up  the  ghoil. 
Hence  the  apoftle,  in  the  eighth  of  the  Ro- 
B  b  mans. 


t86  lie  Furnace  of  Affliction.   Ser.  VI IL 

mans,  mentioning  this  dodlrine  in  the  cleareft 
manner,  triumphs  over  the  accufer  by  afking, 
Whojhall  lay  any  tbi?ig  to  the  charge  oj  God's 
eledi  1  and  in  the  fame  chapter  declares,  that 
it  is  God  that  glorifies  :   for  though  glorifica- 
tion is  the  laft  thing  done  to  us,  yet  it  is  the 
firft  thing  God  defigns  for  us.     What  is  the 
great  thing  for  a  natural  man  to  hear  ?  what 
is  it  ?  why^  not  only  that  God  has  chofen  us,; 
but  ehojcn  us  in  the  furnace  of  affiiBion :  O 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  vouchfafe  to  tran* 
fcribe  thefe  words  into  our  hearts  1  God  help 
thee  to  take  it  to  thyfelf,  O  man ;  to  take  it 
to  thyfelf,    O  woman  ^  to  take  it    ta  thyfelf 
whoever  thou  art  that  art  either  a  Chriftian 
now,  or  defires  or  hopes  to  be  a  Chriftian  be- 
fore thou  dieft,  /  have  chofen  thee  in  the  fur- 
mce  of  affliBion. 

What  can  be  the  meaning  of  the  words? 
why,  'tis  very  plain  that  the  import  of  them 
muft  be  this  j  I  have  chofen  thee,  and  it  is 
my  determination  from  everlafting  to  the  end 
of  time,  and  for  ever.  I  have  chofen  thee 
with  this  determination,  that  the  v/ay  to  hea- 
ven fhould  be  through  the  road  of  afilidlion : 
this  is  the  believer's  way,  efpecially  the  mini- 
fters  of  Chrift,     When  Paul  was  converted,. 


Ser,  VIII.    The  Furnace  of  u4ffli5lion.  187 

pray  what  preferment  did  God  promife  him  ? 
was  it  to  be  a  great  dignitary  in  the  church? 
no,  nothing  about  the  church  ?  was  it  any 
more  eafe,  was  it  to  wear  a  triple  crown,  were 
perfons  to  come  and  kifs  his  toe,  what  pre- 
ferment did  God  chufe  him  to?  what?  fays 
God,  I  willJJjow  him  what  great  thi?igs  he  mujl 
fiiffer  for  my  name*s  fake,  I  verily  believe, 
that  if  we  were  to  have  no  other  preferment 
than  this  of  Paul,  there  is  not  one  in  a  thou- 
fand  of  the  minifters  that  would  afk  for  a  liv- 
ing, if  they  knew  they  were  to  have  fuch  poor 
wages  as  Paul  had.  Minifters  that  hold  the 
ftandard  up,  muft  expedt  the  enemy  will  fire 
on  them  from  every  quarter ;  and  if  they  hap- 
pen to  be  inftrumental  in  comforting  others, 
*with  the  fame  comforts  wherewith  they  therK- 
[elves  are  comforted  of  God^  they  muft  expeft 
to  bear  their  part,  not  only  for  their  own  puri- 
fication, but  for  the  benefit  of  thofe  to  whom 
they  minifter;  and  I  believe  audiences  find 
that  minifters  minifter  beft,  and  the  bread 
comes  beft,  when  it  comes  out  of  the  furnace  j 
of  a  minifter's  afflidlion. 

The  word  afiliftion  is  of  a  very  complex 

kind  J  it  is  like  the  word  tribulation,  which 

comes   from   the   latin   tribidus^    fignifying  a 

B  b  2  pricking 


i88  The  Furnace  of  AffliBion.   Ser.VIII. 

pricking  thorn,  a  fcratching  briar,  or  wound- 
ing fpikes  concealed  in  the  way  ;  and  the  word 
afflidion  arifes  from  a  word  that  figniiies  fome- 
thing  that  beats  down,  preffes  fore,  and  is 
very  grievous  and  tormenting  3  it  is  a  word  of 
fo  general  import,  that  it  takes  in  all  the  trou- 
ble we  meet  with  from  men,  all  the  wounds 
we  receive  from  enemies,  as  well  as  in  the 
houfe  of  our  friends  •  it  takes  in  all  our  domef- 
tic  trials,  all  our  inw^ard  ftruggles  and  dreadful 
temptations  occafioned  by  the  fiery  darts  of  a 
watchful  devil;  and  if  I  am  not  miftaken, 
when  the  great  God  faid,  1  have  chofen  thee 
in  the  furnace  of  affiiBion^  it  implys,  that  this 
is  really  to  continue  with  us  even  to  the  very 
end  of  cur  days :  this  is  what  young  converts, 
in  the  time  of  their  firft  love,  do  not  fee  ;  that 
is,  do  not  wholly  fee  it;  for  if  young  Chrif- 
tians  were  to  know  all  they  have  to  fuffer,  it 
would  dreaafuUy  difcourage  them.  God  fays, 
his  people  fhall  not  do  fo  and  fo,  becaufe  at 
their  firll  fetting  out  they  would  be  difheart- 
ned,  and  think  of  going  back.  It  is  our  hap- 
pinefs  God  lets  us  know  our  trials  but  very 
little  before-hand,  very  little  notice  of  them 
have  we  before  the  time,  and  then,  perhaps, 
gives  us   but  little  refpite  5  but  O  when  one 

trial 


Ser.  VIII.  The  Furnace  of  Jffliaion.  189 

trial  IS  gone,  God  does  with  us  as  maflers  do 
with  their  Icholars,  turns  over  a  new  leaf  with 
us ;  and  when  one  trial  is  over,  teaches  us  ano- 
ther ;  hence  our  trials  are  not  only  new,  but 
conftant ;  hence  many  a  believer  is  apt  to  fay. 
My  trials  rife  out  of  the  ground-^  and  many 
believers  are  faying,  who  would  have  thought 
fuch  a  trial  would  have  befallen  me  at  fuch  a 
time,  from  fuch  a  hand  ?  this  may,  perhaps, 
open  to  us  a  gloomy  fcene;  it  would  be 
gloomy  indeed,  if  we  were  not  living  in  a  flate 
of  preparation ;  it  would  be  gloomy  indeed,  if 
God  was  to  afflid:  without  a  caufe ;  but  there 
is  fo  much  corruption,  fuch  remainders  of  in- 
dwelling fin,  even  in  God's  own  children  that 
are  to  ftand  neareft  to  him  in  glory,  that  are 
the  deareft  to  him,  and  who  are  to  be  blefled 
with  being  in  his  bofom,  that  if  God  was  not 
to  fend  them  afflidlions,  there  is  not  a  child  of 
God  but  would  overfet  even  with  the  comforts 
God  vouchfafes  to  them.  We  find  it  fo  with 
our  bodies,  that  if  we  live  without  exercife 
we  are  liable  to  have  a  variety  of  difeafes,  we 
therefore  fubmit  to  various  ways  and  means 
that  a  phyfician  can  prefcribe  ;  and  if  the  dif- 
orders  to  which  we  are  expofed  in  our  bodies, 
make  us  willing  to  fubmit  to  a  regimen  pre- 

fcribed 


f  9©  Jhe  Furnace  of  AffliBion,  Ser.  VIII, 

fcribed  by  a  fkilful  phyfician,  does  it  not  fol- 
low by  a  parity  of  realoning,  that  we  for  our 
fouls  want  fometimes  lenitives,  and  corrofives^ 
and  foniething  like  a  caaftic  to  eat  off  the 
proud  flefh  that  cleaves  to  us  ?  and  it  vindicates 
God's  ways  to  man,  that  there  is  an  hereafter 
appointed  for  us,  that  there  is  another  world, 
to  which,  perhaps,  v/e  fhall  be  called  to  go 
before  the  morning,  'where  the  inhabitant ij}:)all 
no  more  fay^  I  amfick.  Believers  know  this, 
and  if  they  cannot  keep  a  ledger  book,  if  they 
cannot  pofl  a  merchant's  book,  they  may  learn 
fo  much  of  divine  arithmetic,  as  to  know  that 
the  light  afflictions  "which  are  but  for  a  moment^ 
work  for  us  afar  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory.  The  way  to  heaven,  good 
bifhop  Beveridge  fays,  is  narrow,  but  it  is  not 
long;  the  gates  are  ftrait,  but  open  to  ever- 
lafting  life  ;  and  therefore  God  has  chofen  us  in 
the  fur?iace  of  affli^tiouy  becaufe  if  we  were 
not  afflidled,  we  Ihould  never  know  what  we 
were  made  of  Mr.  Bohem,  who  was  chap- 
Iain  to  the  prince  of  Denmark,  that  was  mar- 
ried to  queen  Anne,  in  one  of  his  excellent 
fermons  upon  affliflion,  has  this  obfervation, 
'^^  Affliftions  and  temptations  are  like  fun- 
beams  falling  upon  a  dunghill  5  they  do  not 

bring 


Sen  VIII.  ne  Fumace  of  JffliBion.  191 

bring  vapours  into  the  dunghill,  but  they  ex- 
hale the  vapours."  So  afflidtions  do  not  bring 
the  corruptions  into  us  3  v^e  blame  fuch  and 
fuch  a  one  for  ftirring  up  fuch  and  fuch  cor- 
ruptions in  us,  but  thefe  tend  to  drav^  out  the 
vapours,  and  prepare  us  for  the  more  lafting 
funfhine  of  a  fmiling  God.  God  does  not  in- 
tend to  deftroy  thee,  but  to  refine  thee,  and 
to  humble  thee  by  it.  The  devil  wants  to 
fift  thee  as  wheat  >  he  thinks  to  let  the  grain 
go  through  the  fieve,  but  Chrifl:  will  only  let 
the  chaff  fall  through,  and  the  fooner  that  is 
gone  the  better:  fo  it  is  no  ways  derogatory  to 
the  honour  of  Chrift,  but  agreeable  to  the  ftate 
in  which  we  are,  agreeable  to  the  ftate  and 
the  preparations  to  be  made  for  eternity,  agree- 
able to  the  militant  difpofition  that  our  graces 
muft  retain.  Hence  our  Lord  was  content  to 
be  called  God's  fervant.  Behold  my  fervant 
"whom  1  have  chofeny  mine  ele5i  in  ivhom  myfoul 
delight eth. — Though  he  was  a  fon,  he  learned 
obedience  by  the  things  that  hefuffered-,  he  Vi^as- 
made  perfedl  by  his  fufferings.  We  cannot 
avoid  trouble  as  men,  as  Chriftians  we  ihould 
not  attempt  it :  man  is  bor7t  to  trouble  as  the 
jparks  jiy  upwards -y  and  Chriftians,  efpecially 
the  man  new-born,     Jf  thefe  things  were  done 

to 


192  "The  FurJiace  of  Affliction,  Ser.  VII L 

to  the  green  tree^  what  JJ:all  be  done  to  the  dry  ? 
The  crofs  is  the  high-road  to  heaven,  and  fo 
the  king's  highway  ;  you  know  there  is  always 
a  bar  upon  the  king's  road,  the  king  has  a 
particular  road  for  himfelf ;  but  the  King  of 
kings  will  make  all  bars  to  be  removed,  and 
then  his  people  go  the  fame  road  he  himfelf 
went :  this  was  the  road  of  all  the  children  of 
God  ;  there  is  not  an  heir  of  God  in  heaven, 
but  is  now  thanking  God  for  his  fufferings  here 
below  'y  there  is  not  a  child  of  God  ever  re- 
ceived into  glory,  but,  I  believe,  as  foon  as 
he  comes  there,  is  made  to  know  why  he  met 
with  fuch  a  trial,  and  from  fuch  a  quarter ; 
why  he  was  under  fuch  a  rod,  why  under  it 
fo  long ;  why  it  was  fhifted,  why  it  was  chan- 
ged, why  the  whip  fometimes  was  turned  to  a 
fcorpion,  and  the  furnace  heated  kv^n  times 
hotter  5  then  the  believer  fees  the  need  of  it : 
in  heaven,  it  makes  him  wonder  he  was  not 
afflidted  fevcn  times  more  on  earth.  I  remem- 
ber Virgil  makes  his  hero  in  the  iEneid  to 
fay,  'twould  all  end  well  ^.  He  comforts  him- 
felf with  this  confideration  under  his  trouble, 
that  the  difcharge  from  it  would  be  the  better  ^ 

and 

*  Babit   Deus  his   quoque  finem, 

Forfan  et  hsec  olrm  meminiffe  juvabit. 
Per  vaiios  cafus,  per  tot  difcrimina  rerum, 
Tendimus  in  Latium. 


Ser.  VIII.    TXf  Furnace  of  AfjIiBion,  195 

and  if  a  child  of  God  would  think  of  that, 
hereafter  he  will  look  with  pleafure  on  what 
he  fuffered  here ;  much  more  a  Chriftian  en- 
riched with  the  grace  of  God,  will  be  willing 
to  die  when  he  confiders  he  is  hereafter  to  fit 
in  Abraham's  bofom,  and  God  fays  to  him. 
Remember  thou  in  thy  life-time  received  thy 
evil  things.  O  my  brethren,  a  fine  fchool  is 
the  fchool  of  Chrift  !  I  never  knew  any  one  of 
my  acquaintance  that  v/ere  believers,  and  I 
have  been  acquainted  with  fome  thefe  twenty- 
eight  years  lafl:  pal!:,  but  what  flourifhed  moil 
under  the  affliding  hand  of  God,  I  believe  if 
the  devil  had  his  will,  he  would  bid  too  high 
for  every  believer ;  he  does  not  love  money ;  a 
covetous  man  is  worfe  than  the  devil,  he  loves 
that  which  the  devil  fquanders  away  ;  but  fay 
they,  we  think  we  fhould  be  very  good  if  we 
had  a  coach  and  fix  5  fo  when  they  have  it, 
they  think  they  are  too  good  to  go  to  that  cha- 
pel or  foundery;  it  was  a  good  place  when 
we  walked  a-foot,  but  now  we  have  a  coach 
we  will  drive  by.  Happy  is  it  for  us  that  we 
are  chofen  in  the  furnace  of  afflidlion;  that  is 
a  glorious  petition  in  our  litany,  T^hat  in  all 
time  of  our  tribulation^  good  Lord  deliver  us  ! 
You  may  very  well  excufe  me  for  preaching 
C  c  from 


194         ^^-^^  Furnace  of  Ajlitlion.    Ser.  VIII. 

from  fuch  a  text  as  this,  becaufe  I  have  been 
in  the  furnace,  and  I  find  it  Is  very  fweet ;  it 
is  very  fweet  walking  in  a  burning  fiery  fur- 
nace when  the  Son  of  God  leads  by  the  arm. 
In  the  account  we  have  of  the  three  children 
being  in  the  fiery  furnace,  the  king  could  fay, 
I  fee  one  walking  with  them :  v^hat  an  emblem 
of  the  children  of  God !  O,  fay  you,  does  the 
Son  of  God  walk  with  you  in  the  furnace  ?  I 
anfwer,  yes ;  make  the  worft  of  it,  tell  them 
the  enthufiaft,    the  babler  fays,    God    walks 
with  his  people  in  the  furnace  ;  he  walks  with 
all  that  walk  with  him,  and  never  walks  clofer 
with  them  than  when  they  are  in  the  furnace. 
Daniel  is  generally  painted  young,  but  he  was 
four-fcore  years   old  when  he  was  thrown  in 
among  the  lions,  there  he^  fits  as  fweet  and 
eafy,  and  no   lion  dare  to  touch  one  of  his 
grey  hairs.    Nothing  proves  the  truth  of  grace, 
and  fhows  the  love  of  God  more,  and  you 
may  be  aflured  of  it  as  you  are  of  being  in 
this  place  alive,  that  fanftified  afHixftions  are 
the  greateft  evidence  God  can  give  you  of  his 
love  5  fo  that  if  we  are  chofen  in  the  furnace 
of  afHiftion,  we  are  to  exped:  it  5  and  k  it  not 
a  great  fliame  for  us,  that  the  heathens  out-^ 
do  us  ?  when  one  came  and  told  one  of  the 

-heathens 


Scr.  VIIL    "The  Furnace  of  Affli5llo.  ig^ 

heathens  that  his  fon,  a  darling  fon,  wl^  dead, 
he  faid,  "  I  know  that  I  begot  him  mortal.'* 
So  Job  faid,  The  Lord  hath  given^  and  the 
Lord  hath  taken  away,  O  that  God  may  blefs 
this  poor  preaching  to  the  raifing  up  fome 
drooping  foul.  Underneath  thee;^  O  believer, 
O  fufferer,  are  God's  everlafting  arms ;  there* 
fore  the  beloved  of  the  Lord Jlo all  dwell  infafety^ 
becaufe  they  dwell  near  him,  and  he  that 
toiicheth  thenty  toucheth  the  apple  of  God's  eye.^ 

This  may  teach  us,  when  one  trouble  is 
over  to  expedl  another  \  none  of  your  re- 
quiems here.  Abraham,  I  believe,  thought 
when  he  had  got  his  Ifaac,  he  was  to  be  tried 
no  more  ^  but  after  thefe  things  God  did  te?npt 
Abrahain.  We  know  not  what  trials  we  are 
to  have,  but  remember  they  are  marks  of  oar 
adoption :  not  that  all  afflictions  do  prove  us 
children  of  God,  becaufe  there  are  fome  afflic- 
tions that  are  not  fandlified :  God  give  us  all 
to  have  fandified  afflidlions  1 

If  this  is  the  cafe,  let  young  believers  know 
what  they  are  to  meet  with ;  God  forgive 
thofe,  and  vifible  churches  are  too  much  pef- 
tered  with  them,  that  daub  with  untempered 
mortar :  formerly,  when  the  church  was  un- 
der perfecution,  they  would  forfake  father, 
C  c  2  mother, 


ig6         dthe  Furnace  of  ^ffliBion*   Ser.  VIII. 

motlier.  and  all  3  but  noWy  ble/fed  be  GoJ,  we 
arr  for  beco?ni7tg  Chrijiians  5  we  live  in  Lon- 
don,  we  live  where  the  church  is  fmiled  iipon^ 
we  may  live  where  we  are  at  eaje, — My  dear 
hearers,  do  you  think  that  all  the  Londoners 
are  converted  ?  do  you  think  they  all  bring 
forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  ^  or  have  you  heard 
that  the  devil  is  converted  ?  can  any  body 
prove  to  me  that  the  devil  is  not  the  fame  j 
can  you  prove  that  God  is  not  the  fame  ;  can 
you  prove  that  the  v^orld  is  not  the  fame,  that 
the  human  heart  is  not  the  fame  ?  if  you  can 
prove  that  neither  of  thefe  are  what  they  were 
when  Chrift  came  into  the  world,  I  will  give 
up  the  pointy  but  if  they  are  the  fame,  we 
mull  expecfl  the  fame  trials  our  forefathers 
met  with,  if  ever  we  hope  to  meet  with  them 
in  glory  ;  God  forbid  Ifiouldglory,  fave  in  the 
crofs  oj  Jefus  Chrift,  Therefore,  if  any  of  us 
have  a  mind  to  fe.t  out  for  heaven,  expedl  trou- 
ble. Indeed,  if  we  have  enlifted  under  the 
devil's  banner,  he  fhows  you  the  kingdoms  of 
the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them.  When 
Peter  faid  to  our  Lord,  concerning  his  fufirr- 
ings,  far  be  that  jrom  thee  5  after  having  ihown 
his  difpleafure  at  it,  as  a  fuggeiiion  of  fatan's, 
he  fays  to  all  his  difciples.  If  any  man  will 

come 


;Ser.  VIIL     Ihe  Furnace  of  AffliEllon.         197 

come  after  mCy  let  him  take  up  his  crofs  and 
Jollow  me.  And  I  remember  Mr.  Law,  who 
was  a  great  man,  notwithftanding  fome  great 
blunders  and  miftakes,  told  me  thirty-two 
years  n2;o,  all  principles,  all  dodlrines,  are  com- 
prehended in  thefe  few  words.  If  any  ma?i 
will  come  after  me^  let  him  deny  hi?nfelf  and 
take  up  his  crofs  and  follow  me.  And  if  you 
do  not  chufe  the  furnace  of  afflidlion,  if  you 
are  too  nice  to  enter  in,  you  forfake  the  Lord, 
^nd  are  only  preparing  to  be  company  for  the 
damned  in  hell.  This  was  the  cafe  with 
Dives  5  Son^  thcu  in  thy  life^tim.e  received  thy 
good  things :  and  for  a  man  that  fares  fump- 
tuous  every  day ;  for  a  man  that  is  cloathed 
in  fine  linen,  to  be  tormented  by  the  devil ; 
to  fee  God,  Chrift,  heaven,  with  all  he  had, 
loft  3  and  the  torments  muft  never  ceafe.  One 
moments  thought  of  this  is  very  awful !  God 
grant  this  may  not  be  the  lot  of  any  ot  us ! 
Come,  my  dear  hearers,  may  God  of  his  in- 
finite mercy  grant  this  night,  that  fome  poor 
foul  may  be  refcued  from  the  devil,  and  en- 
lift  under  Chrift's  banner!  I  have  bore  the 
crofs  thirty-four  years ;  I  never  wore  it  long, 
but  I  found  to  my  great  comfort  it  was  lined 
with  the  love  of  God.     My  yoke  is  eaf)\  my 


burden 


198  T%e  Furnace  of  AffliBion.    Ser.  VIII. 

burden  is  light,  faith  our  blefled  Lord.  Suf- 
fering grace  is  given  for  fuffering  times  3  the 
reafon  we  have  not  more  comfort  is,  becaufe 
we  have  not  more  crofTes :  happy  they  that 
fay  in  this  vifitation,  my  Jefus,  my  Lord,  I 
give  up  all  for  thee  ;  my  life,  and  all  things, 
I  caft  behind. 

A  heart  that  no  dejire  will  move, 
Bict  Jim  to  adore y  obey,   and  love. 
Give  me,  7ny  Lor  J,  my  life,  my  all, 
I  wifh  you  joy  that  run  this  courfe ;  don't 
be  weary  of  it,  don't  think  hard  of  God,  don't 
lay,  never  was  any  body  tried  as  I  am,  never 
was  any  body  tempted  as  I  am,  for  if  you  was 
to  go  and  tell  your  crofs,  there  are  a  thoufand 
in  the  congregation  would,  perhaps,  fay,  dear 
I  have  had  that  and  ten  times  worfe.     One 
Mr.  Buchanan,  a  Scotchman,  who  died  the 
other  day,  having  lofl  his  laft  child,  faid,  "  I 
am  now  childlefs,  but,  blefled  be  God,  I  am 
not  Chriftlefs."     A  noble  lady  told  me  herfelf, 
that  when  flie  was  crying  on  account  of  one  of 
her  children's  death,  her  little  daughter  came 
innocently  to  her  one  day  and  faid,  '*  Mamma, 
is  God  Almighty  dead,  you  cry  lo  ?  the  lady 
blufhing,  faid,  no  -,  flie  replied,  Madam,  will 
you  lend  me  your  glove  ?  flic  let  her  take  it, 

and 


Ser.  VIII.    'The  Furnace  of  Affli^ion.  199 

and  after  that  afked  for  it  again;  upon  which 
the  child  faid.  Now  you  have  taken  the  glove 
from  me,  fhali  I  cry  becaufe  you  have  taken 
away  your  own  glove  ?  and  fhall  you  cry  be- 
caufe God  has  taken  away  my  fifter.''  Out  of 
the  mouths  of  babes  has  God  perfected  praife^ 
and  will  for  ever,  O  glorify  God  in  the  fur- 
nace ! 

If  any  of  you  are  faying,  don't  tell  me  of 
your  ^fflidlons,  I  will  live,  I  will  drink,  to^ 
morrow  Jhall  be  as  to-day^  and  Jo  much  the 
more.  If  there  be  any  of  you  that  fay  fo,  take 
care,  take  care,  God  himfelf  can't  iflue  out  a 
worfe  fentence  againft  you  than  this,  Let  him 
(iloney  let  him  alone  5  whom  the  Lord  loves  he 
chaftens.  What  a  pretty  creature  would  you 
make  in  heaven,  if  you  was  to  go  there,  with- 
out one  of  Chrift's  crofles  on  your  back,  you 
would  be  turned  out ;  no,  there  are  none  fuch 
there. 

Chrifliians  endure  the  crofs  -,  happy  ye  that 
are  tried,  and  happy  they  that  are  gone  to 
glory.  Where  is  Mr.  Middleton  now  ?  where 
is  my  dear  feliow-labourer,  that  honeft,  that 
fteady  man  of  God  ?  Oh !  he  was  thanking 
God  for  the  gout  in  his  head,  in  his  feet,  in 
his  ftomach,    all  decays  >    thanking  God  for 

that 


200         The  Furnace  of  AffiiBion*    Ser.  VIII. 

that  laft  trouble  that  cut  the  thread  of  life,  and 
gave  the  foul  a  paiTage  for  heaven  5  if,  in  the 
midfl:  of  that  torture,  he  could  anfwer  his 
daughter  and  fay,  heaven  upon  earthy  heaven 
upon  earthy  and  went  to  heaven  but  a  little 
after  3  now  furely  he  muft  fay,  heaven  in  hea-^ 
ven  3  muft  he  not  now  he  fees  God,  and  fees 
Chrift  ?  and  by  his  comfort,  though  in  fuch 
great  pain,  it  fhows  that  God  was  kiffing  away 
his  foul,  he  died  at  the  very  mouth  of  God. 
O  may  the  bleffed  God  blefs  his  parents  and 
children  that  are  here  to-night  5  I  believe  you 
may  be  glad  that  God  has  chofen  him  in  the 
furnace  of  affliftion.  I  am  glad  to  hear  that 
fo  many  are  defirous  that  fomething  may  be 
done  for  his  family,  and  Mr.  — -,   and  Mr, 

. ,  and  Mr. ,  are  willing  to  take  in  the 

fubfcri'ptions  that  any  may  be  inclined  to  fend 
them.  May  God  blefs  the  family,  and  grant 
that  his  children  may  not  difgrace  the  memory 
of  their  father;  that  they  may  live  as  followers 
of  his  faith,  who  is  now  gone  to  inherit  the 
promifes  of  God.  You  know  not  how  your 
children  may  be  left  by  you,  though  there  is 
not  one  of  you  here  but  may  be  called  that 
have  children,  to  fay,  by  and  by  my  children 
muft  be  left  to  the  goodnefs  of  God ;  and  it  is 


a  great 


Ser.  Vlth   The  Furnace  of  AffliBion.  201 

a  great  happinefs  to  fee  fo  many  fatberlefs 
children  provided  for  of  late:  there  was  never 
a  time  when  perfons  were  more  beneficent  to 
the  drftrelied  ;  let  it  riot  be  faid  that  betlevers 
in  London  live  on  bread  alone,  but  may  they 
be  continuing  to  lay  Up  tfeafure  in  heaven  \ 
when  we  plead,  not  by  way  of  merit,  remem- 
ber me,  O  Lord,  I  did  fo  and  fo  when  others 
were  in  trouble.  Lord  Jefus,  I  plead  thy 
promifes,  if  thou  haft  chofen  me  in  the  fur- 
nace of  afBidion ;  O  Lord,  help  me  to  lay 
hold  on  thee :  O  that  this  may  be  your  arid 
my  lot.  I  am  haftning  to  the  grave ;  I  am 
aftonifhcd  that  I  have  again  an  opportunity  to 
preach  the  word  of  God.  May  God  prepare 
us  to  follow  thofe  that  have  gone  before 
us,  where  the  wicked  ceafe  from  troubling^ 
and  the  weary  foul  enjoys  everlafting  reft  with 
thee,  O  Father,  with  thee,  O  Son,  and  with 
the  Holy  Ghoft  5  to  whom,  three  perfons  but 
one  God,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  now  and 
for  evermore.     Amen. 


D  d  SERMON' 


[      202      ] 

SERMON     IX. 


The  Lord  our  Light, 


Isaiah  !x.  ver.  19,  20. 

The  fun  fiall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  day^  nei- 
ther jor  brightne  J  s  Jhall  the  mooji  give  light 
tinto  thee^  hut  the  Lordjhall  be  unto  thee  an 
everlafling  lights  and  thy  God  thy  glory. 
Thy  fun  Jhall  no  more  go  down,  neither  Jh all 
thy  moon  ivithdraw  itfelf  for  the  Lord  fmll 
be  thine  everlafling  lights  and  the  days  of 
thy  inourningfhall  be  ended, 

UPON  reading  thefe  wards,  I  cannot 
help  thinking  of  what  the  royal 
Pfalmifl  faid,  Glorious  things  are  fpo^ 
ken  of  thee y  O  city  of  God.  Selah.  I  am  afraid^ 
my  dear  hearers^  fhat  even  behevers  them- 
felves,  who  have  tailed  of  the  grace  of  God, 
refleft  not  and  meditate  as  they  ought,  on 
the  glorious    and  amazing   felicity   they  are 

called 


Ser.  IX.        T.l:)e  Lord  our  Light.  203 

called  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  experience  in 
this  life.  We  content  ourfelves  too  much  with 
our  hopes,  and  if  we  attain  to  a  good  hope 
through  grace,  we  are  ready  to  think  we  have 
got  up  to  the  laft  ftep  of  the  gofpel  ladder,  and 
have  nothing  more  to  do  but  to  reft  in  that 
hope,  without  ever  attaining  to  an  abiding, 
full  aiTarance  of  faith.  If  we  would  examine 
the  fcriptures,  and  not  chufe  to  bring  them 
down  to  us,  but  beg  of  God  to  raife  our  hearts 
up  to  them,  we  fhall  find  the  believer  is  made 
partaker  of  the  grace  of  life,  as  well  as  an  heir 
of  it;  the  one  is  on  earth,  the  other  in  hea- 
ven, and  one  is  only  a  prelibation  of  the 
other.  This  bleffed  prophet  Ifaiah,  fpeaking 
of  the  privileges  of  the  children  of  God,  faith. 
Eye  hath  not  feen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath 
it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  the 
things  that  God  hath  prepared  (and  that  even 
here  below)  for  thofe  that  love  him :  God  grant 
that  we  may  be  of  that  happy  number !  Hence, 
like  an  evangelift,  the  prophet  draws  afidc 
the  veil,  and  as  one  infpired  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  filled  with  the  rays  of  divine  light, 
gives  us  a  tranfporting  view  of  the  gofpel  ftate, 
and  the  glory  which  the  church  militant  en- 
joys below,  befjre  its  triumphant  ftate  above. 
D  d  2  The 


204  ^he  Lord  our  Light.       Ser.  IX. 

The   text,    probably,    refers   to   the   great 
change  that  fhould  be  made  in  the  affairs  of 
the  Jews  after  their  captivity,  how  wonder- 
fully God  would  appear  for  them,  after  their 
harps  had  been  long  hanging  on  the  willows, 
and  they  could  make  no  other  anfwer  to  their 
infulting    foes  than  this   mournful  one.  How 
can  njoe  fing  the  Lord*s  fong  i?i  ajirange  land^ 
The  gofpel  is,  doubtlefs,  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy  J  and  hov/ever  the  people  of  God  might 
be  encouraged  to  ^hope  that  the  time  w^ould 
come,   when  they  fhould  tread  on  the  necks 
of  their  enemies,  the  prophet  teaches  them  to 
look  further,  and  lets  them  know  that  their  hap- 
pinefs  was  not  to  confifl  in  any  external  created 
good,  but  in  a  larger  pofTeflion  of  the  graces 
and  comforts  of  the   Holy  Ghofl.     So  that 
this  chapter   fpeaks   not   only  of  a  temporal 
deliverance  and  refl,  which  they  fhould  enjoy 
after  their  trouble,  but  a  fpiritual  refl,  which, 
by  faith,  they  fhould  enter  into  here,  as  the 
earneft  and  pledge  of  the  refl  and  enjoyment 
of  the  better  world  hereafter.     As  we  know 
no  more  of  heaven  than  is  difcovered  by  the 
eye  of  faith,  for  even  St.  Paul  acknowledges, 
that  the  things  he  faw  were  unutterable,  'tis 
obferv^ble  that  heave*^  in  fcripture  is  defcribed 

tQ 


Ser.  IX.        Ihe  Lord  our  Light.  205 

to  us  more  by  what  it  is  not,  than  by  what  it 
is.     So  in  the  words  of  the  text,    Ihy  fimJJjall 
no  more  go  down^  neither  jh all  thy  moon  ivith- 
draw  itfelf^  for  the  Lord  fkall  be  thine  ever* 
lafling   light y  and  the  days  of  thy    mourning 
fJoall  be  ended.     Here  are  three  negatives,  and 
but  one  pofitive,    namely,   the  Lord  f jail  be 
thy  everlafiing  lights  which  is  a  beautiful  allu- 
fion  to  the  fun,  that  fhould  teach   us  to  fpi- 
ritualize  natural  things ;  and  if  we  feared  God, 
and  lived  near  to  him  as  we  ought,  there  is 
no  objed:  of  our  bodily  eyes  but  might  im- 
prove our  fpiritual  fight.     You  cannot  fuppofe 
the  prophet  meant  a  time  fliould  come,  when 
the   fun   fliould  not  literally   go  down,    that 
there  fhould  not  be  night  and  day  as  now  ; 
God  indeed  permitted  a  man  once  to  fay,  fun^ 
(land  thouflill^  and  it  was  done )  but,  perhaps, 
there  never  will  be  any  fuch  thing  again  till 
the  fun  is  removed  from  its  ftation,  and  the 
moon   forfake  her  orbit,    and  be  turned  into 
blood.     The  word  muft  therefore  be  under-' 
flood  in  a  figurative  fenfe  3  and  then  comparing 
fpiritual  things  with  fpiritual,  it  muft  certainly 
import,  that  Jefus  Chrift,  the  Sun  of  Righ- 
teoufnefs,  fhall  be  what  the  fun  is  to  the  vifible 
world,   that  is,  the  light  and  life  of  all  liis 

people  ^ 


2o6  ^he  Lord  cur  Light.        Se'r.  IX. 

people  y  I  fay,  all  the  people  of  God,  You 
fee  now,  the  fun  fhines  on  us  all:  I  never 
heard  that  the  fun  faid.  Lord,  I  will  not  {hine 
on  the  Prefbyterians,  I  will  not  fhine  on  the 
Independants,  I  will  not  fliine  on  the  people 
called  Methodifts,  thofe  great  enthufiafts ;  the 
fun  never  faid  yet,  I  will  not  fliine  on  the  Pa- 
pifts  5  the  fun  fliines  on  all,  which  fliows  that 
Jefus  Chrift's  love  is  open  to  all  that  are  made 
willing  by  the  Holy  Ghoft  to  accept  of  him  j 
tind  therefore  it  is  fiid,  the  fun  of  righteoufnejs 
fiall  arife  with  healing  under  his  wings.  If 
you  were  all  up  this  morning  before  the  fun 
arofe  at  five  o'clock,  how  beautiful  was  his 
firfl  appearance  !  how  pleafant  to  behold  the 
flowers  opening  to  the  riiing  fun !  I  appeal  to 
you  yourfelves,  vthen  you  were  looking  out  at 
window,  or  walking  about,  or  opening  your 
fhop,  if  in  a  fpiritual  frame,  whether  you  did 
not  fay,  Arife  thou  fun  of  righteoufnefs  with 
healing  under  thy  wings,  on  me.  All  that  the 
natural  fun  is  to  the  world,  Jefus  Chrill:  is,  and 
more,  to  his  people  \  without  the  fun  we 
fliould  have  no  corn,  or  fruit  of  any  kind: 
what  a  dark  place  would  the  wcrld  be  with- 
out the  fun,  and  how  dark  would  the  world 
b^  without  Jefqs  Chrift  y  and  as  the  fun  does 

really 


Ser.  IX.        7he  Lord  cur  Light.  2oy 

really  communicate  its  rays  to  the  earth,  the 
plants,  and  to  all  this  lower  creation,  fo  the  Son  of 
God  does  really  communicate  his  life  and  power 
to  every  new  created  foul,  otherwife  Chrift  is 
but  a  painted  fun  -,  and  is  Chrift  nothing  but  a 
painted  Chrift  to  us,  while  we  receive  heat 
and  benefit  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  on  account  of 
the  virtue  of  his  blood  ?  Sometimes  the  fun 
fhines  brighter  than  at  other  times,  and  does 
not  always  appear  alike  3  clouds  intervene  and 
interrupt  its  rays  5  fo  it  is  between  a  renewed 
foul  and  the  Lord  Jefus,  the  fun  of  righteouf- 
nefs^  O  my  brethren,  I  believe  you  know  it 
by  fatal  experience :  hold  but  )^our  hand  now, 
w^hen  the  fun  fhines  in  its  meridian,  between 
it  and  you,  and  if  by  the  breadth  of  that  you 
can  keep  the  fun  from  you,  ah  !  how  very 
little  earth  will  keep  off  thy  heart  from  Jefus 
Chrift !  It  was  a  very  excellent  faying  of  one 
of  the  antientSj  that  God  never  leaves  a  perfoii 
till  he  firft  leaves  him.  Some  people  think 
God  does  fo  of  his  fovereignty,  but  I  am  apt 
to  think  when  the  fun  fhines,  we  fhall  find 
fome  people  have  taken  up  with  fomething 
fhort  of  the  fun  of  righteoufnefs ;  and  I  believe 
there  are  times,  when  the  poor  believer  thinks 
his  fun  will  quite  go  down,  and  rife  no  more  : 

he 


coB  7he  Lord  our  Light.       Set.  IX^ 

he  lofcs  his  relifh,  his  tafte  and  evidence  of 
divine  things  >  not  only  are  the  rays  intercepted 
for  a  while,  but  doubts  and  fears,  a  dreadful 
cloud  of  them,  come  on.  Though  I  hold 
with  a  full  affurance  of  faith,  yet  I  am  of  opi- 
nion that  'tis  not  always  in  a  like  exercife; 
and  therefore  pray  that  doubting  people  will 
not  take  hold  of  that,  and  fay,  Bleffed  be  God, 
I  am  in  a  doubting  ftate,  and  I  am  content. 
The  Lord  deliver  you  from  a  mind  to  flay  in 
prifon,  and  prevent  the  devil  from  locking  the 
door  upon  you,  and  keeping  you  there  as  long 
98  he  can.  The  Lord  help  you  to  come^ 
come,  come,  and  break  out  of  prifon,  that 
you  may  know  how  pleafant  it  is  to  behold 
the  Sun,  and  praife  his  name. 

Sometimes,  inftead  of  the  fun  there  is  only 
moon-light,  which  fhews  the  difference  a  be- 
liever feels  in  his  foul,  both  in  relation  to  grace 
and  comfort.  Both  fun  and  moon  give  light, 
but  O  how  far  fuperior  is  the  one  to  the  other : 
the  moon  gives  a  very  faint,  uncertain  lights 
waxes  and  wanes,  and  at  befl  is  almofl  no- 
thing when  compared  with  the  light->  and  the 
bleffed  reviving  heat  of  the  fun.  Hence,  my 
brethren,  this  world  fometimes  is  a  world  of 
mourners :    it   is  faid,   that  the   days   of  our 

mourn- 


Ser.  IX,        The  Lord  our  Light.  2op 

mourning  fiall  be  ended:,  for  if  the  text  refers 
to  the  future  flate,  as  no  doubt  it  does,  it 
means  that  the  days  of  believers  here  below 
are  very  often  mournful,  trying,  and  afflidling, 
though  they  end  in  joy,  as  our  Lord  intimates 
in  his  opening  his  gofpel-fermon  almoft  with 
thefe  very  words,  Blejfed  are  they  that  mourUy 
for  they  Jhall  be  comjorted.  Some,  perhaps, 
may  think  it  is  an  odd  kind  of  blefling  5  and 
though  worldly  people  are  fond  of  the  fifth  of 
Matthew,  and  wonder  that  Methodifts  and 
gofpel-minifters  do  not  preach  oftner  on  that 
chapter,  I  am  apt  to  believe,  when  you  come 
to  preach  and  open  that  word,  they  will  not 
like  that  chapter  any  more  than  any  other, 
becaufe  they  are  for  a  joyful  Chrift,  and  not 
for  any  mourning  at  all.  Do  you  know  God 
in  Chrift  ?  let  me  tell  you,  the  more  you  are 
acquainted  with  him,  the  more  your  fouls  will 
Se  kept  in  a  mourning  ftate.  A  mournful 
ftate  ! — O,  fay  you,  people  will  mourn  before 
they  are  converted. — x^h,  that  they  will. — I 
don't  love  to  hear  of  converfions  without  any 
fecret  mourning  \  I  feldom  fee  fuch  fouls  efta- 
blifhed.  I  have  heard  of  a  perfon  who  was  iii 
company  once  with  fourteen  minifters  of  the 
gofpel,  fome  of  whom  were  eminent  fervants 
E  e  of 


2IO  7he  Lord  cur  Light,       Sen  IX, 

of  Chrift,  and  yet  not  one  of  them  could  tell 
the  time  God  firft  manifefted  himfelf  to  their 
foul.  Zaccheus's  was  a  very  quick  conver- 
fion,  perhaps  not  a  quarter  of  an  hour*s  con- 
vldtion  :  this  I  mention,  that  we  may  not  con- 

r  demn  one  another.     We  do  not  love  the  pope, 
becaufe  we  love  to  be  popes  ourfelves,  and  kt 

I  up  our  own  experience  as  a  ilandard  to  others. 
Thofe  that  had  fuch  a  converfion  as  the  jay- 
lor,  or  the  Jews:  O,  fay  you,  we  do  not  like 
to  hear  you  talk  of  fhaking  over  hell,  we  love 
to  hear  of  converfion  by  the  love  of  God  v 
while  others  that  were  fo  fhaken,  as  Mr.  Bol- 
ton and  other  eminent  men  were,  may  fay, 
you  are  not  Chriftians  becaufe  you  had  not  the 
like  terrible  experience.  You  may  as  well 
.  fay  to  your  neighbour,  you  have  not  had  a  child, 
for  you  were  not  in  labour  all  night.  The 
queftion  is,  whether  a  real  child  is  born,  not 
how  long  was  the  preceding  pain,  but  whether 
it  was  produdive  of  a  new  birth,  and  whether 
Chrift  has  been  formed  in  your  hearts  -,  it  is 
the  birth  proves  the  reality  of  the  thing. 

Some  allow  that  there  is  mourning  before, 
but  no  mourning  after  converfion ;  pray  who 
fays  fo  ?  none  but  an  Antinomian,  a  rank  An- 
tinomian  j  and  when  you  hear  a  perfon  fay, 

that 


Ser.  IX.        The  Lord  our  Light.  211 

that  after  converfion  you  will  have  no  mou' fl- 
ing, you  may  be  afliired  that  perfon  is  at  bed 
walking  by  moon-light ;  he  does  not  walk  by 
the  fun,  he  has  got  feme  dodrine  in  his  head, 
but  very  little  grace,  I  am  afraid,  in  his  heart. 
How  !  how !  my  brethren,  not  mourn  after 
we  are  converted  j  why,  till  then  there  is  no 
true  mourning  at  all.  The  damned  in  hell  are 
mourning  now,  they  put  on  their  mourning 
as  foon  as  they  get  there.  How  am  I  tormen- 
ted in  this  flame,  fays  Dives ;  and  Cain,  my 
punifliment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear.  How 
many  worldly  people  break  their  hearts  for 
the  lofs  of  the  world :  they  cannot  keep  their 
ufual  equipage,  nor  do  as  they  would  5  and 
come  not  to  worfhip  on  Sunday,  becaufe  they 
cannot  appear  fo  fine  as  formerly  they  did: 
this  is  a  forrow  of  the  world  that  worketh 
death;  but  there  is  a  bleffed,  a  more  evan- 
gelical mourning,  which  is  the  habitual,  bleiTcd 
ftate  and  frame  of  a  converted  foul.  Kow 
ftrong  the  expreffion,  They  Jhall  look  on  him 
whom  they  have  pierced^  and  Jhall  mourn  :  how 
fliall  they  mourn  ?  as  one  mourneth  jor  afirft" 
born^  an  only  child.  Have  you  ever  been 
called  to  bury  a  child  ?  is  there  any  tender 
mother  here  ?  were  you  merry  diredly  after 
E  z  the 


212  ^he  Lord  our  Light.        Ser.  IX. 

the  child  was  dead  ?  no,  perhaps  till  this  very 
day,  you  continually  call  to  remembrance  your 
little  one  and  fhed  a  tear ;  every  thing  relating 
to  it,  caufes  the  repetition  of  your  forrow. 
When  a  poor  believer  is  acquainted  with  Je- 
fus  Chrift,  he  mourns  for  having  crucified  the 
Son  of  God,  and  you  will  mourn  for  the  fame 
fin  after  converfion  as  before.  Surely,  fays 
feme,  I  mourn  for  my  fins  I  committed  before 
my  converfion.  I  do  not  know  whether  you 
do  or  no,  but  I  know  you  fliould.  O,  fays 
David,  Remember  not  againjl  me  thefim  of  my 
youth^  in  a  Pfalm  which  was  wrote  when  he 
was  an  old  man  ;  and  Paul  fays,  I  was  a  blaf-- 
fhemer  and  injurious^  and  therefore  not  worthy 
to  be  called  an  apojlle^  becauje  I  perfecuted  the 
church  oj  God-^  and  this  after  he  had  been 
wrapped  up  to  the  third  heaven.  See  Mary 
rufhing  into  the  houfe,  wafhing  her  Lord's 
feet  with  her  tears,  and  wiping  them  with  her 
hair:  I  don't  fuppofe  fhe  was  drefl^ed  as  our 
ladies  are  now  j  they  did  not  make  fuch  apes 
of  themfelves  3  but  her  hair  was  very  fine  in 
an  honeft  way :  though  fhe  breaks  the  allibafter 
box  of  ointment  given  her,  perhaps  by  fome 
poor  filly  creature  that  would  die  by  her  frowns, 
^nd  live  upon  her  fmiles,  fee  her  at  the  feet  of 

he? 


Sen  IX.        The  Lord  our  Light.  213 

her  Saviour ;  and  Jefus  Chrifl:  anfwers  for  her, 
fome  having  thought  fhe  was  profufe,  that 
having  had  much  forgiven,  flie  loved  much. 
The  more  the  love  of  God  is  manifefted,  the 
more  it  will  melt  the  foul  down :  I  appeal  to 
you  Chriilians,  whether  the  fweeteft  times  you 
ever  enjoyed,  were  not  thofe  when  you  were 
much  melted  at  the  fight  of  a  crucified  Saviour ; 
when  you  could  fay.  Lord,  thou  forgavefl 
me,  I  feel  it,  I  know  it,  but  I  cannot  forgive 
myfelf ;  this  will  always  be  the  efFe<fl  of  an 
ingenuous  mind ;  and  a  perfon  that  is  really  con- 
verted will  thus  mourn,  and  if  you  do  not 
know  this,  you  may  be  afTured  you  know  no- 
thing favingly  of  Jefus  Chrifl.  You  may  go 
and  hear  this  and  that  warning,  and  you  are 
right  to  gather  honey  from  every  Tdower,  but 
you  have  not  got  within  the  inner  court,  but 
are  yet  without.  God  give  you  to  fee  your 
folly  herein. 

A  true  believer  will  mourn  over  his  cor- 
ruptions :  I  wonder  what  they  can  think,  who 
fuppofe  they  have  no  corruptions.  I  remem- 
ber a  poor  creature  of  Rhode-Ifland,  who 
looked  the  mofl  like  the  old  Puritans  I  ever 
faw,  when  I  was  talking  with  him,  and  faid^ 
fome  people  fay  there  are  fome  men  that  have 

np 


214  ^^^  Lord  our  Light.       Ser.  IX, 

no  fin  5  he  faid,  if  you  fend  fuch  a  man  to 
me,  I  will  pay  his  charges  even  from  England 
and  back  again.  I  have  often  learned  fome- 
thing  from  the  difference  of  glalTes :  you  look 
into  the  common  glaifes,  and  fee  yourfelves 
there  fo  fine,  and  admire  your  perfon,  drefs, 
&c,  but  when  you  view  yourfelves  through  a 
microfcope,  how  many  worms  are  difcovered 
in  that  fine  fkin  of  yours,  enough  to  make  you 
afliamed  of  the  vermin  and  filth  that  is  feated 
there :  fo  it  is  in  faith,  that  glafs  would  fhow 
you  fo  much  corruption  cleaving  to  every  ac- 
tion  of  your  lives,  that  would  make  you  fin- 
Cck,  and  mourn  that  you  have  known  God  fo 
long,  and  are  like  him  fo  little.  What  fays 
Paul  ?  Who  Jhall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of 
this  death  ?  Notwithftanding  he  knew  that 
there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in 
Chrijl  JefuSy  yet  cries  out,  O  wretched  man 
that  I  am!  I  fhould  have  thought,  O  happy 
man  that  thou  art  \  formerly  a  perfecutor,  and 
no  w  a  preacher  5  a  man  that  has  been  honoured 
fo  much  above  every  man  in  planting  churches, 
which  is  the  higheft  honour  a  man  can  have 
under  heaven ;  here  is  a  man  that  hath  been 
wrapt  up  to  the  third  heaven, — what  of  him? 
0  wretched  man  that  1  am^  who^fiall  deliver 


Sen  IX.        I'he  Lord  our  Light.  21^ 

me  from  this  body  of  Jin  and  death  ?  Do  you 
think  that  it  was  only  a  little  qualm  of  con- 
fcience  ?  no,  it  was  the  habitual  temper  of  his 
heart.  Some  people  are  much  humbled  by 
fits  and  flarts,  but  Paul  felt  this  daily :  many 
things  that  we  are  not  concerned  about,  Paul 
looked  upon  them  as  fuch  that  made  his  heart 
ach,  becaufe  he  thought  he  could  not  live  near 
enough  to  God.  He  not  only  watched  to  do 
good,  but  he  watched  how  he  did  that  good ; 
and  nature  was  fo  mixed  with  it,  that  he  faid, 
I  cannot  do  as  I  would  do,  I  would  have 
ferved  God  like  an  angel,  but  I  find  myfeif  ta 
be  a  poor  finncr  after  all ;  and  if  we  are  like* 
minded  with  Paul,  we  fliL.ll  mourn  over  our 
corruptions,  we  fhall  mourn  over  our  hidden 
fins  that  none  know  but  God  and  ourfelveSr 
It  is  a  very  dangerous  thing  to  truft  gofpel^ 
goflips,  who  being  flrangers  to  themfelves, 
hear  with  wonder  and  contempt,  and  often 
betray  ;  however,  a  judicious  friend,  mto 
whole  bofom  we  can  pour  out  our  fouls,  and 
tell  our  corruptions  as  well  as  our  comforts,  is 
a  very  great  privilege.  When  our  corruptions 
do  not  drive  us  from  Chrift,  but  drive  us  to 
him,  it  is  the  greateft  bleffing  to  commune 
with  Chrift  on   this  fide  heaven :    and,  my 

brethren, 


-i.^ 


2x6  "The  Lord  our  Light.       Ser.  IX* 

brethren,  if  your  hearts  arc  right  with  God, 
you  will  fee  fuch  t|;iings  as  nobody  elfe  could 
think  of.  A  good  woman,  who  was  charmed 
with  Dr.  Manton,  faid,  O,  fir,  you  have  made 
an  excellent  fermon  to-day,  I  wifh  I  had  your 
heart ;  do  you  fo,  faid  he,  good  woman,  you 
had  better  not  wifli  for  it,  for  if  you  had  it, 
you  would  wifh  for  your  own  again.  The 
beft  of  men  fee  themfelves  in  the  worft  light. 

How  many  thoufand  things  are  there  that 
make  you  mourn  here  below  !  who  can  tell 
the  tears  that  godly  parents  (hed  for  ungodly 
children !  O  you  young  folks,  you  don't  know 
what  plague  your  children  may  be  to  you  !  O 
they  are  pretty  things  while  young,  like  rattle- 
fnakes  and  alligators,  which  I  have  feen  when 
little,  but  put  them  in  your  bofom  and  you 
will  find  they  are  dangerous.  How  many  are 
there  in  the  world  that  would  wifh,  if  it  were 
lawful,  that  God  had  written  them  childlefs : 
there  is  many  a  poor  creature  that  makes  his 
father's  heart  ach,  I  once  afked  a  godly  wi- 
dow, madam,  how  is  your  fon^  fhe  turned 
afide  with  tears,  and  faid,  fir,  he  is  no  fon  to 
me  now.  What  in  the  world  can  come  up  to 
that  1  here,  fays  one,  I  have  bred  up  my  chil- 
dren, I  cannot  charge  myielf  with  educating 

them 


Seh  IX.        l!he  Lord  our  Light,  2Vy 

them  wrong,  though  few  parents  can  fay  that, 
for   many  parents  lead  them  into  the  paths  of 
death,   and  fo  are  murderers  of  their  own  chiU 
dren,  and  by  their  manner  of  education  help 
to  damn  them  for  ever  ;  but  if  you  can  fay, 
I  have  done  all  I  could,  and  yet,  O  my  God^ 
my  children  are  worfe  than  any  other  peoples  ^ 
this  is  a  dreadful  flate  indeed  -,  and  the  more 
you  mourn,  the  more  they  laugh  at  you  ^  O 
thefe  are  my  godly   parents.     They  increafd 
their   trouble,   like  Dr.  Horneck's  fon,  who 
faid,  I'here  is  not  a  poji  in  my  father's  houfe  but 
Jii?iks  of  piety.     I  once  faw  a  man  that  was 
awakened  at  the  Orphan-houfe,  fall  down  and 
throw  himfelf  on  one  of  their  beds,  crying 
out^    O,  iir,   what  will  become    of  my  poor 
grey-headed  father,    who  knows   nothing  of 
this  birth  !  It  is  a  difficulty  with  fome  to  know 
how  to  behave  towards  unconverted  relations ; 
if  you  don't  go  to  them,    they  will  fay  you 
are  precife;  if  you  do,  and  are  faithful,  they 
will  foon  fliow  you  they  have  enough  of  your 
company :    this   fends  a  godly   perfon   home 
mournings  and  then  there  comes  a  thought^ 
Hiall  I  fpeak  to  them  any  more,  or  let  them 
go  to  the  devil.     This  is  not  like  parting  from 
your  friends  by  death,  but  burying  them  alive : 
F  f  when 


A 


:2iS  *rhe  Lord  our  Light.        Ser.  IX.> 

when  dead,  we  know  we  mud  ilibmit,  but  to 
part  from  friends,  thofe  we  loved,  and  thought 
to  have  hved  with  till  we  came  to  heaven,  is 
mournful  indeed. 

Moreover^  the  poor  ftate  of  the  church 
makes  many  a  minifter  and  clofe-walker  with 
God  to  weep  over  the  defolations  of  the  fanc- 
tuary,  and  to  mourn  for  thofe  that  will  not 
mourn  for  thjemfelves:  thus  our  Lord  wept 
over  Jerufalem,  O  Jerufalem^  Jeriifaie??t,  how 
often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children y  as  a 
hen  gatheretb  her  chickens^  but  it  is  over  with 
thee  now  j  the  decree  is  gone  forth,  and  Je- 
rufalem fliall  fufFer. 

Brethren,  the  time  will  fail,  and  therefore 
I  leave  it  to  you  to  fupply  more  cafes ;  for  if 
I  was  to  preach  till  to-morroyv  morning,  I 
doubt  not  but  a  thoufand  here  would  fay, 
there  are  many  things  you  have  not  mentioned 
yet.  You  know  the  ftate  of  your  own  hearts, 
and  the  many  particular  trials  in  your  own 
cafe  'y  and  you  may  alfo  know,  though  your 
trial  feems  over,  it  is  only  changed:  but  let  it 
be  obferved,  the  day  of  your  mourning  fhall 
be  ended  5  mind,  it  is  but  days,  though  fome- 
times  made  very  fad  ones  indeed,  by  the  neg-^ 
lect  and  ingratitude  of  thofe  \y ho.  have  made 

the 


Ser.  IX.        Jbe  Lord  our  Light.  219 

the  people  of  God  ferve  them  with  rigour,  as 
though  all  the  world  was  made  for  them,  as 
well  as  their  incapacity  to  help  themfelves,  by 
poverty,  pain,  fore  fickneffes,  and  of  long  con- 
tinuance. This  has  been,  and  is  the  lot  of  ma- 
ny a  child  of  God  ;  ble/Ted  be  fovereign  mercy, 
'tis  but  a  few  days.  An  end  fhall  arrive,  and 
that  end  fliall  be  happy,  when  death,  the  be- 
liever's friend,  fhall  come  with  an  angel's  face, 
to  difmifs  them  from  all  their  fin  and  forrow. 
When  I  was  laft  at  Briflol,  I  could  not  help 
remembring  good  Mr,  Middleton,  who  ufed 
you  know  to  have  the  gout  very  much,  and 
in  that  clofet  were  kept  his  crutches:  now, 
thought  I,  he  needs  them  no  more,  the  days 
of  his  mourning  are  ended,  and  fo  fliall  ours 
by  and  by  too,  when  we  fliall  no  longer  want 
our  fpiritual  crutches  or  armour,  but  fliall  fay 
to  the  helmet  of  hope,  the  fliield  of  faith,  I 
have  no  more  need  of  thee ;  and  the  all-pre- 
vailing weapon  of  prayer  be  changed  into 
fongs  of  endlefs  praife  5  when  God  himfelf 
ihall  be  our  everlafting  light,  a  fun  that  fliall 
pever  go  down  more,  but  fliall  beam  forth 
his  infinite  and  eternal  love  in  a  beatific  flate 
for  ever.  The  profped:  of  this  made  one  of 
the  fathers  cry  out,  O  glory  !  how  great !  how 

F  f  a  great ! 


220  T^e  Lord  our  Light.        Ser.  IX. 

great !    what  art   thou  ?   a  friend  alking  him 
what    he  faw  ?  he  anfwered,  I  fee  the  glory 
of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God.     And  if  a 
fight  of  Chrift  on  earth  is  fo  great,  as  could 
make  good  Mr.  Wardrobe,  an  excellent  Scotch 
minifter  fay,  after  he  was  given  over,  ftarting 
up  in  the  arms  of  an  excellent  friend  who  told 
it  me,  in  a  rapture  of  joy,  crowns  !  crowns ! 
crowns  of  glory  fhall  adorn  this  head  of  mine   ; 
e're  long!    and  ftretching    up,    added,  ftarsl^i)^ 
^ftars !  ftars  (hall  e're  long  fill  thefe  hands  of 
mine !    and  fo   fweetly    fell    afieep  in   Jefus : 
what   a    pleafing,  awful   trial   is  that  for  aa 
affedionate  friend  !  So  our  dear  fifter,  who  is 
to  be  buried  to-morrow  night  at  Tottenham- 
court,  talked  with  her  friends  for  an  hour  or 
two,  and  took  leave  of  her  hulband  and  chil- 
dren, and  faid.  Now  come,  ye  heavenly  cha- 
riots !  We  (hall  thank  God  then  for  all  our 
lofTes,  croffes,  and  difappointments ;  and  I  be- 
lieve thofe  things  which  we  mourn  for  moft, 
and  put$  us  moft  to  the  trial,  will  give  us  moft 
comfort  when  we  come  to  die:  God  fliall  be 
our  everlafting   light,  as  well  as  the  days  of 
our  mourning  fhall  be  ended. 

Take    care,    don't   be    fecure,   pray   don't 
think  the  day  of  your  mourning  to  be  ended 

yet; 


Scr.  IX.        The  Lord  our  Light.  $21 

yet :  you  may  put  off  mourning  for  your 
friends,  but  may  have  frefli  caufe  of  mourning 
for  your  fouls  3  whilft  you  remember  that  holy 
mourning  is  confident  with  holy  walking,  fol- 
lowing the  Lord  in  all  his  ways.  You  have 
often  heard  me  fpeak  of  one  of  our  minifters, 
who  was  not  one  of  your  fine  velvet  mouths, 
that  faid  once  in  the  pulpit,  As  fure  as  you  fee 
the  fun  fhine  on  my  breaft,  which  at  that  time 
it  did,  fo  fure  does  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in 
the  fouls  of  true  believers.  How  often  has  he 
told  you,  I  am  for  halving  you  have  godly  for^ 
roWy  I  wiJJj  your  hearts  were  full  of  ity  becaufe 
it  will  end  in  everlajling  joy.  Comfort,  my 
brethren,  one  another  with  thefe  things,  the 
day  of  your  mourning  fhall  foon  be  ended  for 
ever. 

But  what  am  I  to  fay  ?  I  apprehend  I  fliall 
grow  forgetful  to-night j—» I  have  fpoken  fo 
much  to  faints,  I  am  afraid  I  fhall  have  but 
little  time  to  fpeak  to  finners :  I  mean,  I  have 
taken  fo  much  time  up  in  fpeaking  to  you  that 
know  God,  that  I  have  but  little  to  fpeak  to 
•you  that  know  him  not.  How  different  your 
ftate,  poor  hearts  !  poor  hearts  !  my  foul 
mourns  for  you  ;  my  blood,  whilft  I  am  fpeak- 
Jng,  is  ready  to  curdle  in  my  veins.     The  fe- 

raphig 


%2%  ^he  Lord  our  Light*       Sen  IX, 

raphic  Mr,  Hervey,  when  he  did  me  that 
honour  to  fojourn  under  my  roof,  faid.  My 
dear  friend,  it  is  an  awful  thing  when  we  fee 
an  unconverted  man  die,  and  his  eyes  clofed, 
to  think  that  that  poor  foul  will  never  fee  one 
gleam  of  comfort  or  life  more  5  to  have  a  fight 
of  God,  of  Chrift,  and  the  heavenly  angels 
and  faints;  but  to  fee  what  the  rich  man  favv, 
a  God  they  want ;  to  fee  Lazarus,  whom  he 
would  not  permit  to  be  it&n  at  his  door,  now 
taken  particular  notice  of  in  heaven  5  and  to 
fee  himfelf  now  a  beggar  in  helK  The  Lord 
help  you  to  think  !  O  think  how  foon  your 
gl&m  will  go  down,  and  even  your  bodies  will 
feel  damnation,  not  only  in  refpedl  to  pain,  but 
lofs. 

Bifhop  Ufher's  opinion^  was,  and  I  heartily 
concur  in  it,  that  thofe  who  value  themfelves 
mofl  on  their  beauty  and  drefs,  and  do  not 
love  God  on  earth,  will  be  moft  deformed  in 
hell,  and  their  bodies  fuifer  proportionally 
there.  There  is  no  drefling  in  hell,  nothing 
tut  fire  and  brimflonc  there,  and  the  wrath  of 
God  always  awaiting  on  thee,  O  finner,  who- 
ever thou  art,  man  or  woman.  It  was  a  fine 
laying  of  Maclane,  who  was  executed  fome 
years  ago,  when  the  cap  was  pulling  over  his 

eyes. 


Set.  IX.        "The  Lord  our  Light.  22;^ 

eyes,  Muft  I  never  fee  the  light  of  yon  fun 
any  morei  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  thou  fun  of 
righteoufnefs,  arife  wkh  healing  under  thy 
wings  on  my  departing  foul !  May  the  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift  do  that  for  us  all !  When  you  are 
damned,  the  days  of  your  mourning  will  be 
but  at  their  beginning;  there  is  no  end  of 
your  mourning  in  hell.  There  is  bat  one 
fong,  if  it  may  be  called  fo,  in  hell,  to  wit, 
that  of  Dives,  which  will  be  always  repeating. 
How  am  I  tormented  in  this  flame  I  Confider 
this,  ye  that  forget  God;  and  O  that  God 
may  blefs  you  to-night  with  godly  forrow* 
Believers,  pray  for  them :  Lord  help  you,, 
finners,  to  pray  for  your  vile  felvcs.  Soma 
may  think,  what  do  you  cry  for?  whyi  1 
cry  for  you.  Perhaps  you  will  fey  as  a, 
wicked  one  did  to  a  poor  woman  in  Scotland, 
when  thoufands  were  awakened  there ;  feeing 
her  weep,  he  faid,  what  do  you  weep  for  ? 
for  this  people,  fays  fhe ;  wxep  for  yourfelf^ 
fays  he ;  fhe  replied,  I  do ;  but  what  is  my 
foul,  to  all  thefe  poor  fouls !  O  that  minifters 
may  never  rife  up  in  judgment  againft  you : 
O  may  Mofes,  in  the  hand  of  the  Spirit,  make 
you  mourn !  may  the  love  of  God  make  you 
cry !  may  you  not  go  home  to-night  without 

an 


2^4  ^'^^  Lord  our  Light,        Ser.  IX, 

an  arrow  fteeped  in  the  blood  of  Chrift.  It 
Was  wonderful  what  a  good  woman  awaking 
thought  flie  faw  written  over  her  head,  O  earthy 
earthy  earthy  bear  the  ivord  of  the  Lord  !  May 
every  earthly  foul  be  made  to  hear  it ;  to  awake, 
arife  from  their  lleep  in  iin.  The  fun  is  going 
down,  and  death  may  put  an  end  to  all  to- 
night :  the  Lord  help  you  to  come,  though  it 
is  the  eleventh  hour:  O  that  you  would  fly, 
fly  this  night  to  Chrifl:,  lefl:  Giod  defl:roy  you 
for  ever,  Jefus  fl:ands  ready  with  open  arms 
to  receive  you  whom  he  has  firfl:  pricked  to 
the  heart,  and  made  you  cry  out,  IVhat  JImll 
1  do  to  be  faved !  he  will  then  make  you  be- 
lieve in  his  name,  that  you  may  be  faved  : 
God  grant  this  may  be  the  cafe  of  all  here 
to-night.    Amen, 


SERMON 


[      225      ] 


SERMON     X. 

Self- Enquiry  concerning    the    Work 
of  God. 


Numbers  xxiii.  ver.  23. 

jic  cor  ding  to  this  time  it  Jl.^all  be  faid  of  Jacob 
and  of  Ifrael^  what  hath  God  wrought  ? 

f  H  E  N  I  read  you,  my  dear  hearers, 
thele  words  5  when  I  confider  what 
occafion,  and  by  whom  they  were 
originally  fpoke,  I  can't  help  thinking  of  that 
triumphant  expreffion  of  the  royal  Pfalmift, 
Why  do  the  Heathen  rage?  When  Pontius 
Pilate  and  the  Jews  confpire  to  deftroy  the 
caufe  of  God,  he  that  fit  teth  in  heaven  laughs 
them  to  fcorn-y  the  Lord  not  only  has  them  in 
derijion^  but  over-rules  even  their  malice  and 
violence  (no  thanks  to  them)  to  promote  that 
very  caufe  they  attempted  to  deilroy  5  fo  that 
'tis  a  very  wrong  maxim,  and  argues  great 
ignorance  in  us,  to  imagine  that  God  never 
G  g  brings 


226  Self-Enquiry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

brings  about  his  defigns  by  the  means  and  in- 
ftrumentality   of  wicked    men.     This   is   the 
Papifts  objedtion  againft  the  reformation  :  great 
pains  have  been  taken  to  blacken  the  reformers, 
and   to  make  it  believed  that  a   reformation 
could  not  be  good  that  was  begun  by  people 
of  bad  charader,  and  a  king  of  an  immoral 
life.     But  fo  far  is  this  from  eclipfmg,  that  it 
illuftrates  the  wifdom  and  goodnefs  of  divine 
Providence,  in  obliging  the  wicked  to  do  what 
they    never    defigned,    and    over-ruling   their 
ccunfels   for   the   fulfilling  God's  holy,  wife, 
and  fovereign  decree.     This  obfervation  natu- 
rally arifes  from  the  words  of  our  text,  which 
were  fpoken  by,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  one  of 
the  vilefi:  men  upon  the  earth,  you  doubtlefs 
know  his  name,  Balaam,  who,  though  florid 
in  his  exprefiions,  and  high  in  profeffion  of  in- 
tercourfe  with  God,  and  puts  on  a  fine  face  of 
religion,  was  but  a  rotten-hearted  hypocrite, 
for   he   divined  for  money,  made  a  trade   of 
religion  i   and   fo  loved  the  wages  oi  unrigh- 
.teoufnefs,  as  to  have  wiflied  to  curfe  even  thofe 
whom  God   had   bleffed.     1  need  not  n;iform 
you,  that  this  was  the  end  for  which  balak 
fent  for  him  \  and  no  wonder  he  was  fo  wil- 
ling to  go,  when  he  knew  he  was  to  be  well 

paid 


Ser.  X.  the  Work  of  God.  227 

paid  for  his  journey.  Achilles,  the  Graccian 
hero,  is  faid  to  be  capable  of  being  wounded 
only  in  the  heel,  but  bad  priefts,  minifters, 
and  people,  have  a  great  deal  more  dangerous 
part  to  be  wounded  in,  that  is,  the  palm  of 
the  hand  3  if  you  can  keep  that  fecure  from 
being  wounded  with  gold,  never  fear  3  the 
devil  can*t  have  his  end.  Balak  promifed  him 
great  preferment,  if  he  would  but  come  and 
curfe  the  people  of  God.  A  prophet,  or 
foothfayer,  is  one  that  pretends  to  have  inter- 
courfe  with  God  or  the  devil,  and  Balak  did 
not  care  by  which  of  them  it  was,  fo  that  he 
could  but  get  the  Ifraeliles  curfed  3  Balaam 
catches  at  the  golden  bait,  pretends  to  aflc 
counfel  of  God;  and  what  feems  ftrange,  God 
bids  him  go,  and  yet  fends  an  angel  to  meet 
him  in  the  way,  who  ftands  ready  to  flay  him 
for  going.  Does  it  not  feem  very  ftrange,  that 
God  fhould  bid  a  man  go,  and  then  offer  to 
flay  him  for  going  ;  but  people'  that  read  this 
pafl^age,  fliould  carefully  mind  the  particulars 
of  it.  God  faid,  if  the  men  come  and  call 
thee,  go ;  but  he  did  not  wait  for  that,  but 
faddles  his  afs  and  goes :  this  is  called  by  St, 
Peter,  the  madnefs  of  the  prophet :  witnefs 
his  rifing  early  in  the  morning,  not  waiting  for 

G  g  2    '  the 


228  Self-Enquiry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

the  call  of  the  princes,  which  fhewed  how 
eager  he  was  to  be  gone  5  and  though  this  fo- 
lution  fhould  not  be  allowed,  God  was  juftly 
angry  for  his  going  with  an  ill  defign,  that  is, 
malicioufly  to  curfe  a  people  whom  he  knew 
God  refoived  fhould  be  bleffed,  and  that  for 
the  fake  of  the  wages  of  unrighteoufnefs  *• 
The  king  and  his  nobles  wait  upon  him,  in 
hopes  this  foothfayer  will  anfwer  their  pur- 
pofe ;  but  after  all  he  can  do  nothing  without 
God's  leave :  however,  no  coft  is  fpared  to 
obtain  the  end ;  fo  true  is  it,  that  the  devil's 
children  are  ten  thoufand  times  more  expeniive 
in  perfecuting  the  people  of  God,  than  God's 
people  are  in  promoting  his  glory.  This  footh- 
faying  prieft  pretends  to  go  to  God,  which  is 
permitted,  but  forced  to  fpeak  what  God 
would  have  him  ^  once  and  again  his  mouth 
is  flopped,  or  rather  his  curfes  are  flopped, 
and  turned  into  a  blefiing.  Balak,  enraged 
at  his  repeated  difappointment,  bids  him  nei- 
ther to  curfe  or  blefs  them  at  all ;  and  thinking, 
perhaps,  that  the  fight  of  the  people  affeded 

him, 

.  *  It  is  110  unufual  thing  in  holy  writ,  foF  heaven  to  refent 
and  punifii  even  thofe  adions  that  it  has  permitted.     Witnefs. 

Deut.  i.  2c — 35.  comp.  with  Numb.  xiii.  2. — Hof.  xiii.  11. 
comp..  witli  I  Samt  viiL  7.  cap.  xv.  23.  cap.  xvi.  i.  PCaL 
Si,  II,  12.  &c,  &c. 


Ser*  X.  the  Work  of  God.  229 

him,  carries  him  to  a  place  where  he  would 
fee  but  a  fmall  part  of  them ;  he  goes,  and 
there  God  made  him  confirm  the  bleffing  in- 
fteadof  the  curfe,  more  abundantly  than  be- 
fore. Oratory  is  beautiful,  thougli  out  of  the 
mouth  of  the  worfl:  of  men,  Surely^  faid  he, 
there  is  no  enchantment  againjl  Jacoby  7ieither 
is  there  any  divination  againjl  IfraeL  Behold^ 
the  people  Jhall  rife  up  as  a  great  lion^  and  lijt 
up  hi  mf elf  as  a  young  lion ;  he  jJoall  not  lie  down 
witil  he  eat  of  the  prey^  and  drijik  the  blood  of 
the  fain 'y  having^'-faid  juft  before.  According 
to  this  time  itfiallbefaidofjacobandlfraely 
what  hath  God  wrought  ! 

What  words  are  here  out  of  the  mouth  of  a 
wicked  man !  and  yet  I  hope  it  will  do  no 
hurt  to  chufe  them  as  a  proper  fubjedl  for  an 
evening  meditation.  Let  us  leave  this  prophane 
diviner,  and  the  king  his  employer,  vexed 
that  they  could  not  get  their  end  of  the  people 
of  God :  let  us  fnatch  the  words  out  of  the  vile 
prophet's  mouth,  and  fee  if  we  can  ferve  him 
as  David  did  Goliah,  take  his  fword  and  cut 
off  his  head.  Some  people  run  to  extreams, 
and  becaufe  fome  have  abufed  religion,  there- 
fore they  think  there  is  no  religion  at  alL 
Perhaps    it   is   for   this   reafon,  that  fo  many 

offences 


230"  SelJ-Ejiqinry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

offences  are  permitted  to  happen  in  the  churches, 
that  one  of  the  twelve  fhould  be  a  traitor,  and 
that  the  devil  iliould  come  with  his  bible  un- 
der his  arm  to  tempt  us  to  dilbelieve  or  abufe 
it,  by  which  God  flirs  up  the  people  of  God 
to  watch,  fight,   and  pray. 

How  fhould  we  take  the  words  of  our  text  ? 
by  way  of  interrogation  ?  or  admiration  ?  as 
fpeaking  in  a  prophetic  ftrain  how  God  had 
wrought,  and  did  then  work,  and  would  after- 
wards work  for  the  profperity  of  his  faithful 
Jacob  and  his  pofterity,  the  Ifrael  of  God. 

Suppofe  we  take  them  in  the  way  of  quef- 
tion,  which,  perhaps,  is  moft  agreeable  to 
the  context,  and  it  may  be  moft  feryiceable  to 
you  and  to  me ;  and  in  order  that  I  may  not 
run  into  too  great  a  field  to-night,  I  will  con- 
fine myfelf  to  Vv'hat  Balaam  confines  himfelf, 
jrom  this  ti?ne  it  fiall  be  /aid  of  Jacob  and 
Ifraely  in  a  way  of  enquiry,  "jvhat  hath  God 
ivrought  t 

If  we  look  round  the  world  and  furvey  the 
works  of  creation,  the  heavens  declare  God's 
glory:  and  the  firmament  jheweth  his  handy 
ivork.  If  we  look  further,  my  brethren,  down 
upon  thefe  bodies  of  ours,  if  we  confider  the 
curious   form  of  them,    we  may   cry,  ivhat 

hath 


Ser.  X.  the  Work  of  God.  231 

bath  God  ^iirought  !  furely  I  am  fearfully  and 
wonderfully  made  ;  and  when  we  confider  that 
we  are  made  up  of  the  four  elements  ^  when 
we  confider  to  what  cafualties  we  are  expofed, 
how  wonderfully  thefe  bodies  have  been  kept 
up,  when  thou  lands  have  dropped  into  the 
grave  before  us,  we  may  well  lay,  what  hath 
God  wrought !  but  I  rather  chufe  to  confine 
myfelf  to  that  better  part ;  and  I  am  perfuaded 
of  it,  we  fhall  never  go  to  heaven  unlefs  God 
works  powerfully  on  our  fouls :  fuppoiing  you 
and  I  now  were  to  forget  all  created  beings, 
fuppofing  we  were  to  forget  our  neighbours 
to-night,  and  to  hear  only  for  ourfelves,  as  the 
ihades  of  the  evening  are  coming  on,  and  as 
we  are  going  fhortly  to  reft,  may  be  to  rife 
no  more  in  this  lower  world,  what  if  we  fhould 
fteal  a  little  time  from  our  ihop,  a  litde  time 
from  our  worldly  bufinefs,  as  we  know  not 
but  we  maybe  called  to  judgment  to-morrow, 
and  afk  and  fay,  O  my  foul,  what  hath  God 
wrought  in  thy  heart  ?  I  am  glad  to  hear  you 
are  fo  inquifitive.  Obferve,  what  hath  God 
wrought  J  now  whatever  is  done  in  us,  is  all 
done  by  God  -,  it  is  all  done  by  an  Almighty 
povv-er,  and  it  is  all  the  eiFedl  of  infinite  vvif- 
dom  3  fuppofing  then  you  and  I  are  new  crea- 
tures. 


232  Self 'Enquiry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

tures,  hath  God,  O  my  foul,  wrought  in  thee 
a  deep,  a  penitent,  a  humbling  fenfe  of  thy 
tranfgreflions  againft  his  holy  law;  this  is  a 
moft  important  queftion,  this  is  the  very  be- 
ginning of  religion,  this  is  the  very  iirft  letter 
of  the  Chriftian's  alphabet,  the  firft  line  in  his 
book  3  with  this  Chrift  himfelf  began  to  teach 
fallen  man.  Adam^  where  art  thou ^  was  the 
firft  queftion  that  the  Son  of  God  put  to  his 
fallen  creatures  5  what  condition  art  thou  in  ? 
how  art  thou  fallen,  thou  fon  of  the  morn- 
ing !  and  when  he  came  to  the  woman,  he 
took  the  fame  way,  he  preached,  and  mini- 
fters  fliould  preach  convidtion  firft  5  what  is 
thisy  faith  God,  that  thou  haji  done?  to  break 
thy  hufband,  and  bring  all  thy  pofterity  unto 
ruin  5  and  it  feems  to  me  that  there  was  a 
confcioufnefs  in  this  3  and  I  wonder  fometimes, 
the  Deifts  have  not  run  fo  far  as  to  do  it  in  jeft» 
I  don't  know  that  I  ever  heard  of  a  female 
child's  name  called  Eve ;  probably,  we  are 
afliamed  to  call  a  child  by  that  name,  becaufe 
of  the  guilt  of  our  mother  Eve,  that  brought 
us  all  into  fin.  Now  hath  God  wrought  in 
you  ?  hath  he  even  given  this  conviction  to 
you ;  not  a  little  flight  now  and  then,  or  a 
qualm  of  thy  confcience  3  the  devil  and  natural 

coa- 


Ser.  X.  the  Work  of  God.  233 

confcience  may  do  this ;  but  when  it  is  wrought 
in  thy  heart  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  goes  to 
the  bottom,  the  arrow  flicks  faft,  and  a  poor 
foul  fometimes  endeavours  to  pray,  endeavours 
to  pull  it  out,  but  in  vain.  Hath  God  wrought 
this  in  thy  foul  ?  now  when  God  works  this 
change  in  the  foul,  the  devil  is  always  bufy  in 
tempting  the  poor  convicted  finner  to  defpond, 
if  not  defpair.  Ignorant  formahfls,  who  are 
fome  of  the  worft  people  under  heaven,  when 
a  perfon  is  under  conviftion,  think  the  devil 
is  got  into  them,  whereas  the  devil  is  in 
themfelves ;  for  the  devil  hoodwinks  people, 
and  he  endeavours  to  perfuade  them,  that  there 
is  no  harm  done  to  God  -by  finning  againft 
him.  It  is  God  wounds  the  foul,  and  it  is  he 
that  heals  it ;  has  he  wrought  in  thee  not  only 
a  deep  and  humbling  fenfe  of  the  outward 
adts  of  fin,  but  a  humbling  fenfe  of  the  inward 
corruptions  of  thy  heart?  has  he  led  thee  be- 
yond the  fl:reams,  through  the  powerful  opera- 
tions of  his  Spirit,  to  the  fountain-head  ?  when 
he  has  done  fo,  then  are  we  Chrifl:ians  indeed  ; 
and  this  cannot  be  the  work  of  the  devil,  who 
never  did,  nor  do  I  know  whether  he  can, 
fhow  a  perfon  the  inward  corruptions  of  his 
heart  3  it  muft  be  the  Spirit  of  God  i  the  devil 

H  h  may 


234  Self  "Enquiry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

may  frighten  a  perfon,  as  to  outward  things, 
but  I  very  much  queftion  whether  it  is  in  the 
power  or  will  of  the  devil  to  fhow  a  perfon 
that  he  is  totally  depraved,  that  the  whole 
fountain  is  corrupt  3  this  cannot  be,  becaufe 
this  would  make  the  devil  omnipotent,  of 
equal  power  with  the  Holy  Ghoft,  who  alone 
fliows  thee  the  guilt  and  corruption  of  thy 
heart.  This  I  have  found  to  be  the  fad:,  from 
thirty  years  obfervation  and  experience  of 
thoufands,  thoufands,  thoufands,  w^th  whom 
I  have  fpoken  about  their  hearts.  So  it  was^ 
I  remember,  when  I  went  firll  to  Georgia, 
when  I  was  about  twenty-five  years  old,  I  had 
them  day  after  day,  week  after  week,  and 
night  after  night,  faying,  JVhat'JJjall  I  do  to 
ie  faved?  O  my  wicked  heart,  my  deceitful 
heart,  from  morning  to  night.  Hath  God 
wrought  this  in  any  of  you  ?  are  you  com- 
plaining of  your  wicked  heart  and  corrupt 
nature  ?  have  you  found  out  that  your  hearts 
are  cages  of  unclean  birds,  only  a  lodging  for 
vain  thoughts  to  dwell  in  ?  O  my  friends,  my 
dear  hearers,  O  may  you  turn  the  queftion 
into  a  note  of  admiration,  and  fay,  what  hatb 
God  wrought !  he  has  not  only  convinced  me 
of  my  outward  fins,  but  powerfully  convinced 

me 


Ser.  X.  the  Work  'of  GoL  235 

me  of  the  corruptions  of  my  heart.  Do  afk 
yourfelves  this  queftion,  has  God  wrought  in 
me  a  view  of  the  fpirituality  of  his  holy  law  ? 
till  this  is  done,  you  are  as  faft  in  the  devil's 
arms  as  he  can  clafp  you.  Of  all  the  children 
the  devil  has  in  the  v/orid,  I  believe  he  moll- 
]y  loves  his  Pharifaical  children:  I  was  talking 
with  one  of  them  fome  time  ago,  and  fomc- 
body  very  innocently  afked  me  where  the 
Pharifees  lived,  -O,  faid  I,  they  live  every 
where.  Some  people  think  that  they  only 
lived  in  the  times  of  the  apoftles.  Do  you 
know,  vipers  and  toads  have  the  moft  eggs 
and  moft  numerous  progeny  ?  if  you  was  to 
fee  the  eggs  of  a  toad  through  a  microlcope, 
you  would  wonder  at  the  innumerable  mul- 
titude; and  the  Pharifees  are  an  increafing 
generation  of  vipers,  which  hatch  and  fpread 
all  over  the  world  :  if  you  want  to  know  what 
a  Pharifee  is,  he  is  one  who  pretends  to  en- 
deavour, and  talks  about  keeping  the  law  of 
God,  and  does  not  know  its  fpirituality  3  they 
are  fome  of  them  very  great  men  in  their  own 
opinion,  and  always  made  the  greateft  figure 
in  the  church  :  one  of  them,  a  gentleman's 
fon,  becaufe  he  had  not  broke  the  letter  of 
the  law,  thought  he  was  right  and  without 

H  h  2  fm^. 


236  Self 'Enquiry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

fin  5  O,  fays  he,  if  I  have  nothing  elfe  to  do 
but  to  keep  the  commandments,  I  am  fafe ;  I 
have  honoured  my  father  and  mother  ;  I  never 
ftole ;  what  need  he  fteal  that  had  fo  good  an 
eftate  ?  I  never  committed  adultery  ;  no,  no, 
he  loved  his  charafter  too  well:  but  our 
Lord  opens  to  him  the  law,  this  one  thing  thou 
)  lackejiy  go  fell  all  thou  hajl ;  he  loved  his  mo- 
ney more  than  his  God :  Chrift  brought  him 
back  to  the  firft  commandment,  though  he 
catechized  him  firft  in  the  fifth.  So  Paul  was 
a  Pharifee ;  he  fays,  /  was  alive  without  the 
law  once  -,  I  was^  touching  the  law^  blamelefs  j 
how  can  that  be,  can  a  man  be  without  the 
lav^,  and  yet,  touching  the  law,  blamelefs  j 
fays  he,  /  was  without  the  law  ;  that  is,  I  was 
not  brought  to  fee  the  fpirituality  of  it ;  I 
thought  myfelf  a  very  good  man,  no  man 
could  fay  of  Paul,  black  is  his  eye ;  but,  faith 
he,  when  God  brought  the  commandment 
with  power  upon  my  foul,  then  I  faw  my 
fpecks,  and  do  now.  Pray  mind  and  fay  the 
commandments,  if  you  go  to  church  you  fee 
them,  and  if  you  go  to  meeting  I  hope  yoa 
have  not  forgot  them  ;  thoufhalt  not  bear  falfe 
witnefs  againji  thy  neighbour ^  thou  fJmlt  not 
(ovei  i  from  repeating  the  laft  commandment, 

we 


Ser.  X.  the  Work  of  God.  237 

we  are  taught  that  God's  law  is  fpiritual,  1 
Jhould  not  have  known  fin^  as  the  apoftle  faid, 
if  the  law  had  not  Jaidy  thou  J}:alt  not  covet ; 
now  has  God  wrought  in  you  thefe  things  ? 
haft  thou  really  ktn  his  law  that  it  is  fpiritual  ? 
have  you  been  made  to  fee  that  the  law  of  God 
requires  perfed:,  finlefs  obedience  ?  have  you 
been  made  to  fee  that  you  are  under  the  curfe, 
becaufe  you  have  finned,  by  the  inward  teach- 
ing of  the  bleffed  Spirit  of  God  ?  for  then  be 
aiTured,  as  fure  as  thou  art  in  this  place,  God 
has  wrought  this  in  thy  foul,  and  thou  mayft 
turn  the  queftion  to  admiration,  and  fay,  what 
hds  God  wrought !  has  he  wrought  in  thee  a 
fenfe  of  unbelief,  that  thou  can  ft  no  more 
believe  than  thou  canft  create  a  world  ?  I  men- 
tion this,  becaufe  I  have  told  you  often,  and 
I  am  in  the  fame  mind  -,  yet  there  are  very 
few  books  that  talk  about  unbelief,  there  is  a 
long  catalogue  of  fins,  but  not  one  word  about 
unbelief;  why?  O  becaufe  thefe  good  folks, 
that  have  wrote  communion  books,  take  it  for 
granted,  allfolks  that  go  to  church  are  believers  -, 
I  take  it  there  are  more  unbelievers  in  the 
church  than  out  of  it ;  why,  fay  you,  do  not 
they  aifent  to  the  gofpel?  fo  does  the  devil ; 
do  not  they  affent  tq  all  the  articles  of  the 

Chriftian 


238  Self'Efiquiry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

Chriftian  faith  ?  fo  does  the  devil ;  the  devil  is 
a  ftronger  believer  than  an  Arianj  the  devilis 
a  ftronger  believer  than  a  Socinian,  he  believes 
Chrift  is  God,  for  he  has  felt  his  pov^er  by  his 
damning  him  to  hell ;  we  know  thee  who  thou 
art^    the   holy    one  of  God*     But    remember 
Chrift  fays,  when  he  is  gone  the  Spirit  of  God 
fliall  come  to  reprove  the  world,  in  the  mar- 
gin it  is,  convince,  and  not  a  tranfient  convic- 
tion,  but  a  convidlion  that  faftens,  that  brings 
falvation  with  it ;  if  conviction  brings  its  own 
evidence,  furely  faith  muft  bring  its  own  evi- 
dence along  with  it  too;   now  he  Jhall  convince 
I  the  worlds  faith  our  Lord,    of  Jin  3  what  fin  ? 
I  the  fin  of  unbelief,  bccaufe  they  believe  not  in 
\  me.     It  is  mentioned  by  the  dear  Mr.  Hervey, 
I  hy  the  dear  Mr.  Marfhall  himfelf,   and  alfo 
by   fomebody    elfe,    that   when   complaining 
to  a  minifter  that  he  could  get  no  eafe  to  his 
foul,  and  told  the  minifter  he  confefiTed  his  fins 
every   day,  he  put  them  all  down,    (a  man 
muft  have  a  good  memory  that  can  do  that) 
the  minifter  faid  to  him,  I  think  your  cata-^ 
logue  is  worth  nothing  at  all,  the  grand  fin  is 
not  mentioned ;  what  is  that  ?  fir,  faid  he,  the 
\       I  fin  of  unbelief,  a  fin  the  poor  creature  thought 
he    had    never    been    guilty    of.     Has   God 


wrought 


Ser»  X.  the  Work  of  God.  239 

wrought  in  thee  a  fenfe  of  thy  unbelief?  what 
bleffed  times  have  I  feen  in  New,  as  well  as 
Old  England  and  Scotland,  when  thoufands 
were  awakened  at  Edinburgh,  at  Glafgow, 
and  many  other  places,  when  I  have  feen  them 
taken  out  of  the  congregation  by  fcores,  and 
aiked  what  is  the  matter  ?  what  do  you  want  ? 
I  can't  believe  !  I  can't  believe !  I  can*t  be- 
lieve !  We  think  we  can  believe  when  we  will, 
but  the  Spirit  alone  can  convince  us  we  have 
no  faith,  the  Spirit  alone  can  convince  us  of 
our  want  of  faith,  and  can  alone  impart  it  to 
the  poor  awakened  finner  j  confequently,  you 
may  aik  yourfelves  whether  God  has  wrought 
in  you,  not  only  a  fenfe  of  your  own  mifery, 
but  alfo  a  fenfe  of  your  remedy  ^  fet  you  up- 
on hungering  and  thirfting,  fuch  a  hungering 
and  thirfting  as  has  never  been  fatisfied  but  by 
an  application  of  the  blood  of  Chrift  imputed 
to  you.  I  do  not  want  to  difpute  upon  the 
fcriptures  with  any  body  :  there  are  a  great 
many  good  men  have  been  prejudiced  by  An- 
tinomian  principles  and  practices,  and  becaufe 
fome  people  have  run  to  a  dangerous  extream, 
and  have  not  thought  proper  to  make  ufe  of 
the  word  imputed  at  all.  The  beft  truth  may 
be  fpoiled  by  bad  books ;  but,  for  my  part,  I 

am 


i- 


240  Self^Enquiry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

am  more  than  ever  convinced,  that  the  doc- 
trine of  imputed  righteoufnefs  is  a  dodlrine  of 
the  gofpel  3  and  that  as  Adam's  fin  is  imputed 
to  me,   fo  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl  muft  be 
imputed  alfo :  I  fland  not  only  as  a  pardoned 
finner,   but  as  a  juftified  finner  -,  I  ftand  before 
God  juftified,  and  fo  do  all  whom  Jefus  Chrifl 
has  purchafed.     Now  has  God  wrought  this  in 
thee,  O  man  -,  in  thee,  O  woman  ?  I  am  not 
going  to  aflc,  whether  it  was  wrought  in  thee 
by  hearing  a  fermon  or  reading  a  book,  God 
may  make  ufe  of  a  minifl:er,    or  of  a  book  j 
and  I  don't  like  people  to  get  above  minifl:ers 
and   books,    faying,  we   do   not  want  thefe. 
God  draws  with  the  cords  of  a  man,  and  gene- 
rally draws  us  with  cords  by  men  fuch  as  our- 
felvcs.     Canfl:  thou  fay,  there  is  a  book,  there 
is  the  minifter,  in  reading  or  hearing  which, 
Chrift's  blood  was  applied,  and  the  Spirit  of 
God  witneflTed  with  my  fpirit  that  I  was  one 
of  his  children?  no  V7  this  is  all  God  *s  working, 
indeed  it  is,  the  devil  can't  do  this,  it  is  out 
of  his  power;    he  may  attempt  to  perfuade 
them  that  he  has  done  it,  when  he  has  not, 
and  cannot.     The  magicians  turned  their  rods 
into  ferpents,   but  the  rod  of  Jehovah  fvval- 
lowed  them  all  up.  Has  the  Lord  God  wrought 

a  change 


Ser.  X.  '  the  Work  of  Godi  341 

a  change  of  heart  in  theej  and  a  change  of  life 
as  a-confequence  of  that  5  I  mention  this,  but 
I  would  have  every  body  that  flands  up  for 
Chrift's  imputed  righteoufnefs,  efpecially  as 
fome  good  people  are  apt  to  fpeak  of  it  and 
Garry  it  very  high,  to  be  careful  in  the  fame 
difcourfe  to  fpeak  as  highly  of  obedience  too, 
to  Chrift's  commandments.  I  don*t  like  only 
to  mention  the  w^ord  promifes  5  when  people 
tell  me  they  hang  upon  the  promifes,  I  always 
afk  them  how  do  you  hang  upon  them  ?  have 
you  got  the  thing  promtfed  ?  the  promife  is, 
that  the  Promifer  fhould  come  to  my  foul  5 
the  promife  is, .  what,  my  brethren  ?  the  pro- 
mife is,  for  this  and  that  good  thing  ;  have  I 
got  it  ?  How  would  you  do  if  you  was  to  take 
falfe  bank  notes,  if  you  was  to  take  falfe  bills  ? 
the  people  generally  afk,  is  the  man  that  has 
given  me  this  note  worth  any  thing  ?  if  you 
have  a  bad  note  you  go  to  the  notary  and  note 
it,  you  fay,  I  was  to  have  had  this  note  paid 
ten,  twenty,  thirty  days  after  fight,  or  upon  1 
fight ;  where  is  the  notary  ?  they  hote  it  and 
proteft  it :  let  us  be  careful  then  to  fee  that 
God  pays  his  notes,  as  we  are  that  man  does. 
Hafl:  thou  got  the  thing  promifed  ?  the  thing 
promifed  is,  all  peace  and  ail  joy  3  the  thing 
I  i  promifed 


242  Self-Enquiry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

promifed  is,  a  new  heart ;  the  thing  promifed 
is,  a  new  nature ;  and  therefore  David  goes  to 
God  for  the  thing  promifed,  and  fays,  Create 
in  me  a  clean  hearty  0  Gody  and  renew  a 
right  fpirit  within  me.  Now  is  this  the  cafe 
of  thy  heart  ?  the  devil  never  can  make  a  new 
creature ;  I  am  fure  nothing  but  an  Almighty 
power  can  take  away  the  heart  of  ftone,  and 
give  a  heart  of  flefh :  has  God  wrought  this 
in  thee  ?  if  he  has,  though  it  is  not  come  to 
fuch  a  heighth  as  thou  would  wifli,  yet  be 
thankful  for  what  he  has  done,  and  fay,  what 
has  God  wrought  in  me  !  Attend  to  the  word, 
I  do  not  mean  lazily,  there  is  not  a  thing  upon 
the  face  of  the  earth  that  I  abhor  fo  much  as 
idlenefs  or  idle  people  ;  I  am  fo  far  from  hav- 
ing a  love  to  people  that  are  lazy,  that  if  I  had 
the  dealing  with  a  number  that  are  called 
Chriftians,  they  fhould  go  to  bed  fooner,  and 
~|v  get  up  fooner  5  there  is  one  thing  that  will 
make  people  rife  fooner  in  the  morning  in  Lon« 
don,  and  that  is,  for  merchants  to  agree  to 
have  the  'Change  opened  at  fix,  and  that  will 
make  people  as  much  alive  in  the  morning,  as 
the  markets  are  after  people  have  been  travel- 
ling all  night  to  prepare  for  them. 


Has 


Ser.  X.  the  Work  of  God.  243 

Has  God  wrought  in  you  a  fpirit  of  zeal  and 
love?  has  he  wrought  in  you  a  love  to  his 
name,  a  zeal  for  his  caufe  ?  has  he  wrought  in 
thy  heart  a  deadnefs  to  the  world,  that  you 
can  live  above  it  from  morning  to  night,  hav- 
ing your  converfation  in  heaven  ?  has  he 
wrought  in  thee  a  love  to  his  people,  not  peo- 
ple that  are  Calvinifls  only  ^  not  people  that 
hold  univerfal  redemption  only;  O  be  careful 
as  to  that  -,  O  what  nonfenfe  is  that,  for  people 
to  hold  univerfal  redemption,  and  yet  not  love 
all  mankind ;  what  nonfenfe  is  it  to  hold  elec- 
tion, and  not  as  the  eleSi  of  God  to  put  on  boweh 
of  mercy ^  kindnefs^  humblenefs  of  uiind^  meek- 
726 fs  and  long'juffering  ;  as  the  woman  faid,  I 
have  a  hpufe  will  hold  a  hundred,  a  heart  i^w 
thoufand.  Has  he  wrought  in  thee  a  love  to 
thy  enemies,  fo  that  thou  dofl  not  only  love 
them  that  love  thee,  but  them  that  hate  thee  ? 
what  fay  you  ?  muft  I  put  a  fnake  in  my  bo- 
fom,  no,  no  ;  I  may  hate  the  condudl,  and  at 
the  fame  time  pray  to  God  for  them.  Enmity 
is,  an  eye  for  an  eye^  a  tooth  for  a  tooth.  Love 
as  archbifhop  Cranmer  did,  that  it  became  a 
proverb  concerning  him,  that  if  any  man  would 
make  him  his  friend,  he  muft  do  him  an  in- 
jury.    Has  he  wrought  in  thee  a  defire  to  go* 

I  i  2  to 


244  Self-Enquiry  concerning       Ser.  X. 

to  heaven  ?  has  he  wrought  in  thee  fuch  a  love 
to  Jefus,  that  you  prefer  him  to  the  heaven 
he  dw^ells  in  ?  We  count  heaven  a  fine  place, 
and  wx  may  fay,  I  am  glad  to  fee  the  departed 
faints  and  the  angels,  but  all  that  will  be  nothing 
unlefs  I  fee  the  Lamb  in  the  midft  of  the 
throne.  Has  God  wrought  in  thee  a  defirc  to 
promote  his  glory,  to  be  upon  the  ftretch  for 
God,  to  deny  thyfelf,  to  take  up  the  crofs 
daily  and  follow  him  ?  if  God  has  wrought 
this  in  thee,  and  I  verily  believe  from  my  foul 
he  has  wrought  it  in  feme  degree  in  many  of 
you,  O  you  may  well  fay,  what  has  God 
wrought !  efpecially  if  you  confider  the  man- 
ner, and  the  time  in  which  he  wrought  it  -^  if 
you  confider  the  inftruments  he  made  ufe  of, 
when,  and  by  which  he  wrought  it  5  and  if 
you  confider  the  ineftimable  price  that  was 
paid  for  it,  and  the  Spirit  taking  poffeffion  of 
your  hearts.  One  part  of  our  entertaintment 
in  heaven  will  be,  to  count  the  fteps  of  the 
ladder  by  which  God  brought  us  there  3  one 
will  fay,  God  wrought  in  me  when  I  was 
young  3  another,  when  I  had  grey  hairs.  Mary 
Magdalen  will  fay,  God  wrought  in  me  when 
I  was  a  finner ;  the  expiring  criminal  will  fay, 
God  wrought  it  in  n^e  juft  as  I  was  turned  oiF, 

I  was 


Ser.  X.  the  Work  of  Go  J.  245 

I  was  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  burning. 
The  anthem,  as  good  Mr.  Erfkine  obferves, 
will  be  in  heaven,   what  has  God  wrought  I 
Curiofity  led   me  to  hear  the   preacher,  and 
God  touched  my  heart;  there  was  a  young 
fellow,  called  emphatically  wicked  Will  oj  Ply- 
mouth ^  who  came,  as  he  faid,    to  pick  a  hole 
in  the  preacher's  coat,   and  the  Holy  Ghoft 
picked  a  hole  in  his  heart.     What  has  God 
wrought,  to  work  it  in  you,  and  not  in   your 
father ;  you,  and  not  your  children ;   work  it 
in  -^j^y  and  not  a  fellow-fervant ;  work  it  in 
one  brother  and  not  in  another ;  all  thefe  things 
will  make  us   cry,    what  has  God  wrought! 
Well,  I  do  not  want  you  to  reft  in  this  by  no 
means ;  I  do  not  like  to  hear  people  talk,  and 
fpeak  againft  inward  frames  and  inward  works, 
nor  do  I  like  to  hear  people  legal,  let  every 
thing  have  its  proper  place.     It  is  about  thirty- 
three  years  ago,  or  very  near,  when  a  man  came 
to  me,  after  I  had  preached  upon  marks  and 
evidences,    at    Whitechapel   I  think   it   was, 
and  faid,  I  am  come  to  tell  you,  that  I  don't 
chufe  any  marks  at  all ;  then,  faid  I,  you  muft 
be  content  with  the  marks  of  the  devil,  for 
jpu  muft  have  the  one  or  the  other. 

Now, 


246  Self-Enquiry  concerning       Sen  X, 

Now,  my  brethren,  if  God  has  wrought 
this  in  us,  what  ihall  I  fay  ?  why,  I  pray  the 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift  that  your  Hfe  and  mine  may 
be  a  Hfe  of  praife.  I  would  have  you  not  only 
dwell  upon  particular  words  of  God  fet  home 
upon  your  hearts,  but  his  various  providences, 
the  numerous  trials  he  has  brought  you  through: 
O  think  how  often  you  have  been  kept,  think 
how  often  you  would  have  run  away  from  God 
if  he  had  not  flopped  you  5  what  has  God 
wrought,  by  preventing  me  from  fin;  what 
has  God  wrought,  by  dehvering  me  from 
blafphemous  thoughts  ^  what  has  God  wrought, 
in  fnatching  me  out  of  the  jaws  of  ruin  ;  even 
after  conveiiion,  when  I  was  damning  my  own 
foul,  his  grace  arrefted  me.  Have  we  brought 
ourfelves  into  trials,  how  has  he  made  thefe 
very  trials  work  for  good  ;  made  our  fcolding 
hufbands  and  wives,  perfecuting  fathers,  friends 
and  relations,  that  you  have  thought  would 
devour  you,  made  the  bulls  of  Bafhan  inftru- 
ments  of  bringing  you  nearer  to  God;  and 
eternity  will  be  too  fhcrt  to  cry  perpetually, 
what  hath  God  wrought ! 

And  if  God  has  not  wrought  this  in  any  of 
you  that  are  here,  which,  perhaps,  may  be 
the  cafe,  though  I  cannot  think  what  fhould 

bring 


Ser.  X.  the  Work  of  God.  2^y 

bring  any  body  here  if  they  had  not  a  defire 
of  the  falvation  of  their  fouls ;  if  God  hath  not 
wrought  it  in  you  yet,  O  that  this  may  be  the 
time;  O  that  God  may  give  us  fome  parting 
bleffing;  that  fome  poor  creatures  that  have 
nothing  but  the  devil's  work  in  them  yet,  may 
now  feek  after  the  blefled  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft.  If  we  may  afk  what  God  has  wrought, 
let  me  afk  you  what  the  devil  hath  wrought  in 
you ;  O  thou  unconverted  foul,  fin  has  made 
thee  a  beaft,  made  thy  body,  which  ought  to 
be  the  temple  of  the  living  God,  a  cage  of 
every  unclean  bird ;  what  hath  fatan  v/i-ought 
in  thee  ?  but  made  thee  a  nefl  of  vile  flinkin'z 

o 

fwinc ;  and  what  will  he  give  thee  ?  hell,  hell, 
hell.  The  wages  the  devil  gives  no  man  can 
live  by ;  the  wages  ojfin  is  death :  and  here  I 
come  to  bring  you  good  news,  glad  tidings  of 
great  joy ;  O  that  God  may  now  counter- work 
the  devil,  and  take  thee  into  his  own  work- 
manfhip,  create  thee  anew  in  Chrift  Jefus, 
give  thee  to  feel  a  little  of  his  Spirit's  work 
on  thy  heart,  and  make  thee,  of  a  child  of  the 
devil,  a  child  of  God  !  Say  not,  it  cannot  be  ; 
fay  not,  it  fhall  not  be ;  fay  not,  it  is  too  late  ; 
fay  not,  it  is  for  others  but  not  for  me  ;  my 
brethren,  God  help  you  to  cry,   and  to  try 

to-night. 


248  Self-Enquiry  cmcerning       Ser,  X^ 

to-night,  if  thou  canfl:  turn  the  text  into  a 
prayer.  Lord  God,  I  have  felt  the  devil  v^ork 
in  me,  now,  good  God,  Jet  me  know  what  it 
is  for  thee  to  work  in  me ;  make  me  a  new 
creature,  create  a  new  fpirit  within  me,  that  I 
may  join  with  thy  dear  people  in  finging, 
iiuhat  hath  God  wrought !  O  remember,  if  this 
is  not  the  cafe  with  you,  you  muft  have  a 
dreadful  different  ditty  in  hell ;  the  note  there 
will  be,  what  hath  the  devil  wrought !  what 
hath  fin  wrought !  how  am  I  come  to  this 
place  of  torment !  I  fold  my  birthright  for  a 
mefs  of  pottage !  Heaven  or  hell  is  fet  before 
you  to-night ;  Jefus  grant,  that  the  terrors 
of  the  Lord  may  awaken  you  to-night,  and 
that  you  may  not  reft  till  you  have  comfort 
and  fupport  from  God. 

You  that  have  this  work  begun  in  you,  look 
ftlll  for  better  things  to  come,  even  after  deaths 
when  our  bodies  are  made  like  Chrift*s  glorious 
body,  and  our  fouls  filled  with  the  fulnefs  of 
God,  we  fliall  then  cry.  Churchmen  and  Dif- 
fenters,  Methodifts  and  Foundery-men,  and" 
the  Lock  too,  we  fliall  all  then  join  without 
any  bickerings,  faying,  what  has  God  wrought ! 

I  could  enlarge,  but   I    am  afraid   I  have 
been  too  long  already ,  yet  as  I  ^hink  the  pro- 
vidence 


Ser.  X.  the  Work  of  God.  249 

vidence  of  God  calls  me,  and  I  fhall  give  a 
particular  account  of  my  call  to-morrow  even- 
ing, at  the  other  end  of  the  town,  I  think  if 
I  fhould  keep  you  a  few  minutes  longer,  it 
might  be  excufed.  I  begin  to  feel  already  it 
muft  be  executed  in  a  few  days ;  I  feel  already 
that  I  fhall  foon  part  from  you,  and  O  that 
God  may  awaken  many  of  you  poor  unawak- 
ned  fouls  ^  my  heart  bleeds  for  you ;  O  may 
the  oil  of  the  blefled  Spirit  foften  every  hard, 
unconverted  heart,  that  we  may  go  away 
praifing  and  bleffing  God  that  we  fhall  at 
lafh  meet,  whether  we  go  by  land  or  by  water, 
before  the  throne,  where  we  fliall  afcribe 
glory,  and  honour,  and  power,  to  him  for 
evermore.     Amen. 


K  k  SERMON 


[      250      ] 


SERMON     XI. 

The    Burning   Bufli. 


Exodus  iii.  ver.  2,  3. 

Aud  he  looked^  and  behold  the  lujh  burned  with 
Jire^    and  the  biijh  was  not  conjumed-^  and 
Mofes  faidy  I  will  now  turn  afide^  and  fee 
this  great  fight ^  why  the  bufd  is  not  burnt. 

IT  is  a  common  faying,  and  common  fay- 
ings  are  generally  founded  on  matter  of 
fadt,  that  it  is  always  darkeft  before  break 
of  day  I  and  I  am  perfuaded,  that  if  we  do 
juftice  to  our  own  experience,  as  well  as 
confider  God's  dealings  with  his  people  in  pre- 
ceding ages,  we  fhall  find  that  man's  extremity 
has  been  ufually  made  God's  opportunity,  and 
that  when  the  enemy  has  broke  in  like  a  floods  the 
Spirit  and  providence  of  God  has  lifted  up  a 
flandard  againjl  him  :  and  I  believe  at  the 
lame  time,  that  however  wc  may  dream  of  a 

con- 


Ser.  XI.  'I'he  Burnuig  BuJIj.  2 «;  i 

continued  fcene  of  profperity  in  church  or  ftate, 
either  in  refped:  to  our  bodies,  fouls,  or 
temporal  affairs,  we  fhall  find  this  Hfe  to  be 
chequered,  that  the  cloud^r^turn  after  the  rain, 
and  the  mofi:' profperous  ftate  attended  with  fuch 
cloiidy  days,  ^s  may  make  even  the  people  of 
God  fometimes  cry,  all  men  are  liar 5^  and  God 
has  forgciten  to  be  gracious. 

The  chapter  in  which  is  our  text,  is  an  in- 
ftarice  of  this.  What  a  glorious  day  of  the  fon 
of  mail  was  that  when  Jofeph  fent  for  his 
father  to  jEgypt  s  and  the  good  old  patriarch, 
after  he  had  thought  his  fon  had  been  dead 
many  years,  agreeably  furprized  by  a  meffage 
from  him  to  come  to  liim,  with  all  his  family, 
and  are  by  him  comfortably  fettled  in  Gofhen ; 
where  the  good  old  patriarch,  after  many  a 
ftormy  day,  died  in  peace,  and  was  highly 
honoured  at  hii.  funeral  by  Pharaoh  and  his  fer- 
vants,  and  attenacd  to  the  fepulchre  of  his  fa- 
thers in  Canaan  by  all  his  fons.  Aftfcr  which, 
Jofeph  continued  to  live  in  fplendor,  lord  of 
all  the  land  gf  Egypt ;  and  his  brethren,  doubt- 
lefs,  in  the  height  of  profperity :  but  how  fad- 
ly  did  the  fcene  change  at  Pharaoh's  death, 
foon  after  which,  another  king  arofe  that  knew 
not  "Jofeph^  verifyin;^  the  obfervation.  New 
K  k  2  lords. 


252  T^he  Burning  Bujh.         Ser.  XI. 

lords,  new  laws,  by  whom  the  defcendants 
of  Jacob,  inftead  of  reigning  in  Gofhen,  were 
made  bond-flaves;  many,  many  long  years, 
employed  in  making  bricks,  and,  in  all  pro- 
bability, had  what  we  call  their  bibles  taken 
from  them,  by  being  forced  to  conform  to  the 
idolatry  of  Egypt,  and  fo  were  in  a  worfe  ftate 
than  the  unhappy  Negroes  in  America  are  at 
this  day.  No  doubt,  numbers  of  them  either 
wondered  that  ever  they  had  been  profpered  at 
all,  or  that  God  had  forgot  them  now;  but 
what  a  mercy  it  is  that  a  thoufand  years  in 
God's  f.ght  are  but  as  one  day^  and  therefore 
when  God*s  time  is  come,  the  fet  time  that 
he  has  appointed,  he  will,  maugre  all  the  oppo- 
fition  of  men  and  devils,  he  will  come  down 
and  deliver  his  people,  and  in  fuch  a  manner, 
that  the  enemy  fhall  know,  as  well  as  friends, 
it  is  the  Lord's  doing.  A  deliverer  is  born  and 
bred  in  Pharaoh's  court,  a  Mofes  is  brought 
up  in  all  the  learning  of  the  Egyptians,  for 
Pharaoh  intended  him  for  a  high  and  exalted 
poft :  but  when  offers  of  the  higheft  prefer- 
ment are  made  to  him,  he  did  not  catch  at 
them  as  fome  folks  now  do,  who  are  very 
good  and  humble  till  fomething  occurs  to  take 
them  from  God.     Young  as  he  was,  he  re- 

fufed 


Ser.  XL  ^he  Burning  Bujh.  253 

fufed  the  higheft  dignity,  and  fpurned  at  it 
with  an  holy  contempt  \  and  chufes  rather  to 
fufFer  afflidion  with  the  people  of  God,  than 
enjoy  all  the  grandeur  and  pleafures  of,  perhaps, 
one  of  the  greateft  courts  on  earth.  Forty  years 
continued  he  in  this  ftate  of  obfcurity,  in  which 
time  he  acquired  fuch  a  competent  degree, 
and  variety  of  knowledge,  as  qualified  him  for 
every  thing  God  intended  him  for :  the  occa- 
iion  of  this,  was  his  kind  attempt  to  compofe 
a  difference  between  two  of  his  brethren,  one 
of  whom  accufed  him  of  murder,  on  which 
he  that  was  to  be  king  in  Jefhurun,  is  forced 
to  fly  into  a  ftrange  land  ;  there  he  fubmits  to 
the  humble  office  of  a  fervant,  marries,  and 
lives  in  a  ftate  of  fubje^lion  for  forty  years,  as 
was  faid  before.  At  length,  when  he  was 
eighty  years  old,  dreaming  of  no  fuch  thing, 
behold  God  calls,  and  commands  him  to  go 
and  deliver  his  people ;  as  he  himfelf  informs 
us,  who  is  the  author  of  this  book,  ver.  i. 
'Now  Mofes  kept  the  foe  k  of  Je  thro  his  father- 
in-law^  prieft  of  Midian:  he  might  have  faid, 
what  fuch  a  fcholar  as  I  keep  a  parcel  of  fheep  ! 
fuch  a  learned  man  as  I  am  employed  in  fuch 
a  menial  fervice  !  fome  proud  hearts  would 
break  firft,    but  you  never  knew  a  truly  great 

man 


2  54  ^^^  Burning  Bitjh.  Sen  XI. 

man  but  would  ftoop ;  fome  that  are  called 
great  men,  fwell  till  they  burft  5  like  ftiirdy 
oak^i  they  think  they  can  fiand  every  wind, 
till  iome  dreadful  ftorm  comes  and  blows  them 
up  by  the  roots,  while  the  humble  reed  bends 
and  rifes  again .  Mofes  Was  one  of  the  lattery 
he  keeps  the  flock  of  Jethro  his  father-in-law; 
and  leads  them  to  the  mountain  of  God,  even 
to  Horeb.  This  fliows  how  perfons  ought  to 
methodize  their  time ;  but  however  the  name 
of  a  rvlethodifl:  is  defpifed,  they  will  never  be 
bad  fervants  and  rnaflers  ^  you  would  be  only 
weathercocks,  unlefs  you  took  care  to  order 
things  in  proper  feafons:  the  devotion  and 
bufinefs  of  a  Methodift  go  hand  in  hand ;  I 
Vidll  affure  you,  Mofes  was  a  Methodift,  a  very 
fine  one,  a  very  ftrong  one  too  ;  he  kept  his 
flock,  but  that  did  not  hinder  his  going  to 
Horeb,  he  took  them  to  the  defert,  and  be- 
ing thus  employed  in  his  lav/iul  buiinefs,  God 
met  him.  Some  fay,  we  encourage  people 
in  idlenefs  5  I  deny  it ;  we  fay,  people  ought 
to  be  induftrious  5  and  I  defy  any  one  to  fay, 
a-  perfon  is  called  by  God  that  is  negligent  in 
his  calling,  '^he  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to 
him  in  a  fame  of  fre  out  of  the  buJJj :  fome 
think  this  angel  was  Gabriel,  but  moft  agree, 

and 


Ser.  Xr.         .7he  Burning  Bufi.  25c 

and  I  believe  with   the    greateft   probability, 
that  it  \yas  Jefus  Chrift,  the  angel  of  the  ever^ 
lajiing  covenant ;  and  an   expofitor  tells  yon, 
that   the   eternal  Logos^    longing    to   become 
man,  often  viiited  this  earth  in  that  form,  as 
an  evidence  of  his   coming  by  and  by,  and 
dying  a  curfed  death  for  man.     The  manner 
of  this  angel's   appearing  is  taken  particular 
notice  of,  it  was  to  Mofes  when  nobody  was. 
with  him ;  I  do  not  hear  he  had  fo  much  as 
a  boy,  or  one  companion  3  and  I  mention  this, 
becaufe  I  believe  we  have  often  found  that  we 
are  never  lefs  alone  than  when  with  God  ;  we 
often  want  this  and  that  companion,  but  happy 
they  that   can   fay,    Lord,    thy   company  is 
enough.     Mofes  was  ftartled  at  the  fight,  and 
I  don't  know  that  he  is  to  be  difcommended 
for  it,  it  was  not  to  gratify  a  bare  curioflty, 
but  feeing  a  bufli  burning  it  engaged  his  atten- 
tion,  and  made  him  think  that  fomething  was 
uncommon  j  the  btiJJj  burned  withjire  and  yet 
was  not  conjU7ned\  this  flartled  him,  as  it  was 
intended  to  do  ^   for   where   God    defigns  to 
fpeak,  he  will  firft  gain  attention  from  the  pcr- 
fon  fpoken  to  5  Mofes  therefore   fays,  /  li/// 
now  tur7iafide  and  fee  this  great  fight ^  why  the 
btiJJj  is  not  burned'^  he  did  not,  know  but  the 

bufh 


256  ne  Burnifig  BuJI:).         Ser.  XI. 

bufli  might  take  fire  by  fome  accident  ^  he 
faw  no  fire  come  from  above,  he  faw  no  fire 
round  the  bufh,  yet  that  did  not  fo  much 
flartle  him,  as  to  fee,  though  it  did  burn,  it  was 
not  confumed,  or  in  the  leafl  diminifhed  5  it 
was  a  ftrange  fight,  but  it  was,  my  brethren, 
a  glorious  one;  a  fight  which,  I  pray  God, 
you  and  I  may  behold  with  faith  and  comfort 
this  evening )  for,  my  dear  hearers,  this  bufh, 
and  the  account  of  it,  was  given  for  our  learn- 
ing ;  and  I  will  venture  to  fay,  could  Mofes 
arife  from  the  dead,  he  would  not  be  angry 
with  me  for  telling  you,  this  is  of  no  private 
interpretation,  but  is  intended  as  a  flanding 
leflbn,  as  a  fignificant  emblem  of  the  church, 
and  every  individual  child  of  God,  till  time 
it  felf  fhall  be  no  more.  I  would  therefore 
obferve  to  you,  that  this  bufh, 

In  the  firfl  place,  is  typical  of  the  church 
of  God  in  all  ages ;  the  bufh  was  burning, 
why  might  it  not  be  a  tall  cedar,  why  might 
it  not  be  fome  large  or  fome  glorious  tree,  why 
fhould  the  great  God  chufe  a  bufh,  a  little  bufh 
of  briars  and  thorns,  above  any  other  thing  ? 
but  becaufe  the  church  of  Chrifl  generally  con- 
fifls  of  poor,  mean,  defpicable  creatures :  tho' 
it  is  all  glorious  within,  yet  it  is  all  defpicable 

without. 


Ser.  XL  'The  Bur?iing  Btijl^  ±^y 

without.      It  is    obfervable,    that    when    the 
church  came  to   profper,    when  Conftantine 
fmiled  on  it,  it  was  foon   hugged  to  death; 
and  that   great  poet,    Milton,  obferves,    that 
when  that  emperor  gave  minifters  rich  veft^ 
ments,  high  honours,  great  livings,  and  golden 
pulpits,  there  was  a  voice  heard  from  heaven, 
faying,  this  day  there  is  poifon  come  into  the 
church  5    and   I  have  fometimes  faid  in   dif- 
courfe,  I  don't  doubt  but  if  any  one  made  an 
experiment,  and  left   100,000/.  or  200,00c/.  ! 
only  among  the  Methodifls,  there  would  be 
hundreds    and   thoufands  that  would  not   be  j 
reckoned    Methodifls   now,   that  would  turn  I 
Methodifls  prefently,  that  would  buy  an  hymn-  * 
book,  becaufe  a  part  of  the  legacy  would  pay 
for  the  hymn-book,    and  would  wiflb  to  have 
a  living  into  the  bargain  ;  but  though  not  many 
mighty  men^  not  many  noble  are  called^  yet  fome 
are ;  if  any  of  you  are  rich   here,    and   are 
Chriftians,  thank  God  for  it,  you  ought  to  be 
doubly   thankful  for  it ;  God's  people  are  but 
like  a  little  bramble  bufh.     I  remember   an 
eminent  minifter  faid  once,  when  I  heard  him 
preach  upon  Chriftmas-day,  Chrijl  perfonal  is 
'very  richy  but  Chriji  myjlical  is  ijcry  poor  -,  and 
Jefus  Chrift  does  this  on  purpofe  to  confound 
L  I  the 


258  The  Burning  Bufh.         Sex,  XI. 

the  world.  When  he  conies  to  judgment, 
millions  that  have  their  thoufands  now,  will  be 
damned  and  burn  to  all  eternity,  and  Chrift's 
church  will  be  rich  to  all  eternity,  that  is  now 
like  a  bramble  all  on  fire. 

The  bu[h  burned,  what  is  that  for  ?  it  fhewed 
^^ihat  Chrift's  church  while  in  this  world,  will 
|be  a  bu(h  burning 'with  fiery  trials  and  afflic- 
Uions  of  various  kinds  s  this  was  a  lively  em- 
jblem  of  the  ftate  of  religion,  and  liberty  of 
Ifrael  at  that  time :  they  were  bufy  making  of 
brick,  and  there  confequently    were  burning 
continually  5  as  though  the  Lord  had  faid,  this 
buih  is  burning   with  fire,  fo  my  people  are 
burning  with  flavery.     Ah  but,  fay  you,  that 
was  only  the  cafe  of  the  Ifraelites  when  they 
were  under  Pharaoh  >  pray  is  not  that  the  cafe 
of  the  church  in  all  ages  ?  yes,  it  has  been  > 
read  your  bibles,  and   you   may  inftantly  fee 
that  it  is  little  elfc  than  an  hiftorical  account  of 
a  burning  bufh ;  and  though  there  might  be 
fome  periods  wherein  the  church  had  reft,  yet 
thefe  periods  have  been  of  a  fhort  date  y  and  if 
God's  people  have  ^walked  in  the  comjorts  of 
the  Holy  Ghoft^  it  is  only  like  a  calm  that  pre- 
ceeds  an  earthquake.     If  you  remember,  be- 
fore the  laft  earthquake  it  was  a  fine  morning, 

and 


Ser.  XL          Tie  Burnhig  Bujh.  259 

and  who,  when  they  arofe  in  the  morning, 
would  have  thought  the  earth  fhould  fhake 
under  them  before  night;  and  fo  with  the 
church  when  they  are  in  a  calm,  and  all  feems 
fafe  there,  then  comes  a  ftorm :  God  prepare 
us  for  it. 

But  this  is  not  only  the  cafe  with  the  church 
of  Chrifl  colled:ed,  but  alfo  it  is  fo  with  indi- 
vidual believers,  efpecially  thofe  that  God  in- 
tends to  make  great  ufe  of  ^s  prophets  in  his 
church.  I  know  very  well  that  'tis  faid,  that 
now  the  caf&  is  altered :  modern  commentators 
therefore,  and  our  great  Dr.  Young,  calls  them 
downy  Dodors ;  they  tell  us,  now  we  have 
got  a  Chriftian  king  and  governor,  and  are 
under  the  toleration  adl:,  we  fhall  have  no 
perfecution^  and,  bleffed  be  God,  we  have 
had  none  fince  this  family  has  been  on  the 
throne  :  may  God  continue  it  till  time  ftiall 
be  no  more.  Yet,  my  dear  hearers,  we  fliall 
find,  if  God's  word  is  true,  whether  we  are  | 
born  under  a  defpotic  power,  or  a  free  go- 
vernment, that  they  that  will  live  godly  in 
Chrift  Jefus  muft  fufFer  perfecution.  You 
have  heard  of  that  faying,  Wonder  not  at  the 
Jiery  trial  whereu/ith  you  are  to  be  tried  \  and 
God  faith,  /  have  chofen  tbee^  which  is  appli- 
L  1  2  cable 


26  o  The  Burning  Biijh.  Scr.  XI, 

cable  to  every  believer,  in  the  fiirnace  of 
affiiBion,  Now  the  furnace  is  a  hot  place, 
and  they  that  are  tried  in  the  furnace  muft  be 
burnt  furely.  Now  what  muft  the  Chriftian 
\burn  with  ?  with  tribulation  and  perfecution, 
J  heard  a  perfon  not  long  ago  fay,  I  have  no 
enemies.  Bifhop  Latimer  came  to  a  houfe 
one  day,  and  the  man  of  the  houfe  faid,  he 
had  not  met  with  a  crofs  in  all  his  life ;  give 
me  my  horfe,  fays  the  good  bifliop,  I  am  fure 
God  is  not  here  where  no  crofs  is.  But  fup- 
pofe  we  are  not  perfecuted  by  the  world,  is 
there  one  Chriftian  but  is  perfecuted  by  his 
friends  \  if  there  is  an  Ifaac  in  the  family,  I 
warrant  there  is  an  Ifhmael  to  mock  at  him, 
Woe  is  me^  fays  David,  that  1  muft  dwell  with 
Mejl:eck^  and  in  Kedar :  and  in  one's  own 
family,  one's  own  brothers  and  ftfters,  one's 
own  dependants,  though  they  wait  for  our 
death,  and,  perhaps,  long  to  have  us  gone, 
that  they  may  run  away  with  our  fubftance, 
to  have  thefe  perfons  piock  at  us,  and  if  they 
dare  not  fpeak  put,  yet  let  us  fee  they  hate 
the  God  we  worfhip ;  if  this  is  fhy  cafe,  why, 
God  knows,  poor  foul,  thou  art  a  burning 
bufh ;  but  if  we  have  no  fuch  thing  as  mock^ 
ing,  yet  if  we  are  furrpunded  with  afflidions, 

domeftic 


Ser.  XI.  tbe  Burning  BuJJ,\  261 

domeftic  trials,  the  lofs  of  dear  and  near 
friends,  the  bad  condudl  of  our  children,  the 
dreadful  mifconduft  ofthofe  that  are  dependant 
upon  us ;  O  there  is  many  a  parent  here  that 
is  a  burning  bufh ;  burning  with  what  ?  with 
family  afHidions ;  feme  don't  care  what  be- 
comes of  their  children ;  O,  I  thank  God,  I 
havp  left  my  bpy  io  much,  and  my  daughter 
a  coach,  perhaps;  ah!  well  your  fon  and 
daughter  may  ride  in  that  coach  poft  to  the 
devil :  but  the  godly  man  fays,  1  want  an 
eternal  inheritance  for  my  fon  ;  I  wapt  God's 
bleffing  for  him  -,  this  is  the  poor  man's  prayer, 
while  the  poor  deluded  youth  mocks  him  :  or, 
liippofing  this  is  not  the  cafe,  a  perfon  may 
burn  with  inward  temptation  5  you  have  heard 
of  the  fiery  darts  of  the  devil,  and  was  you  to 
feel  them,  I  believe  you  would  find  them  fiery 
darts  indeed  I  and  you  have  great  reafon  to  fuC- 
p^dt  your  experience,  your  having  any  interefl 
in  the  love  of  the  Son  of  God  at  all,  if  you 
i^ever  found  the  fiery  darts  of  the  devil.  O, 
fays  one,  I  never  felt  the  devil ;  I  am  fure  thou 
mayft  fed  him  nows  thou  art  dadda's  own 
child ;  thou  art  fpeaking  the  very  language  of 
the  devil,  and  he  is  teaching  thee  to  deny  thy 
pyvn  father  ^  therefore,  gracelefs  child  of  the 

devil, 


26  a  ^he  Burning  BuJIj.         Ser.  XI. 

devil,  you  never  felt  the  devil's  fiery  darts,  it 
is  beeaufe  the  devil  is  fure  of  thee  ;  he  has  got 
thee  into  a  damnable  llumber  5  may  the  God 
of  love  wake  thee  before  real  damnation  comes  ! 
The   fiery  darts   of  fatan  are  poifoned,   and 
wherever  they  ftick  they  fill  the  perfon  with 
tormenting  pain  hke  fire  5  this  I  mention,  be- 
eaufe there  are  fome  poor  fouls  perhaps  here 
to-night,  whom  the  devil  tells,  thou  haft  com- 
mitted the  unpardonable  fin ;  you  are  afraid  to 
come  to  facrament,  you   are  afraid  to  go  to 
prayer,  beeaufe  at  thefe  feafons  the  devil  dif- 
turbs  thee  moft,  and  tempts  you  to  leave  thefe 
feafons  5  and  there  are  fome  go  on  thus  burn- 
ing a  great  while.      My  brethren,  the  time 
would  fail,   and  I  fhall  draw  this  difcourfe  to 
too  great  a  length,  and  hinder  you  from  your 
families,  if  I  was  to  mention  but  a  few  more 
of  thofe  thoufands  that  the  believer  burns  with, 
the  trials  without,  and,  what  is   ftill  worfe, 
their  trials  within.     Why,  fays  one,  it  is  very 
ftrange  you  talk  thus  to-night  3  I  am  forry  it 
is  ftrange  to  any   of  you ;    fure  you  are  not 
much  acquainted  with  your  bibles,  and  lefs 
with  your  hearts,  if  you  know  not  this.     Why 
fure,  fay  fome,  you  make  God  a  tyrant ;  no, 
but  having  made  ourfelves  devil's   incarnate, 

we 


Ser.  XL  The  Burning  BuJI:.  263 

we  are  now  in  a  ftate  of  preparation,  and  thefe 
various  trials  are  intended  by  the  great  God  to 
train  us  up  for  heaven  5  and  therefore,  that 
you  may  not  think  I  am  drawing  a  pidurc 
without  any  life,  give  me  leave  to  obferve, 
that  it  is  particularly  remarkable,  that  though 
the  bujh  burned  J  it  was  not  confiimed :  it  was 
this  ftruck  Mofes,  he  looked  to  fee  why  the 
bufh  was  not  confumed.  But  the  burning  I 
have  been  here  painting  forth  to  you,  is  not 
a  confuming,  but  a  purifying  fire  ;  is  not  that ; 
enough  to  anfwer  :the  fhade  that  has  been  al- 
ready drawn  j  it  is  true  the  bufli  burns,  the 
Chrifiian  is  perfecuted,  the  Chriftian  is  op- 
prefTed,  the  Chrifiian  is  burned  v/ith  inward 
trials,  he  is  perplexed  at  times,  he  is  caji 
down-,  buty  blelled  be  God,  he  is  not  dejiroyed^ 
he  is  not  in  defpair.  Who  is  that,  that  fays 
he  has  got  into  fuch  an  eftate  that  nothing  dif- 
turbs  him  ?  vain  man  !  he  difcovers  an  igno- 
rance of  Chrift  5  are  you  greater  then  than  the 
apoftle  Paul  ?  fome  people  think  that  the  apof- 
tles  had  no  trials  5  fo  they  think,  perhaps,  of 
fome  minifters,  that  they  are  always  on  the 
mount,  while,  perhaps,  they  have  been  in  the 
burning  to  get  that  fermon  for  theili.  We 
that  are  to  fpeak  for  others,  muft  exped;  to 

be 


s64  7 he  Burning  Btijb.  Sen  XL 

be  tempted  in  all  things  like  to  our  brethren, 
or  we  fliould  be  only  poor  whip-fyllabub 
preachers,  and  not  reach  mens  hearts.  But 
whether  minifters  or  people  burn,  the  great 
God,  the  angel  of  the  everlafting  covenant, 
fpoke  to  Mofes  out  of  the  bufli )  he  did  not 
iVand  at  a  diftance  from  the  bufh,  he  did  not 
ipeak  to  him  fo  much  as  one  yard  or  foot  from 
the  buflj,  but  he  fpoke  to  him  out  of  the  bufh  % 
lie  faid,  Moles,  Mofes,  my  people  ihall  burn 
in  this  bufli  to  the  end  of  time,  but  be  not 
afraid,  I  will  fuccour  them ;  when  they  burn^ 
I  will  burn  too.  There  is  a  fcripture  vaftly 
ftrong  to  this  purpofe,  in  which  it  is  not  faid> 
the  good  will  of  him  that  was  in  the  buj};)^  but 
the  good  will  oj  him  that  dwelt  ifi  the  bujh^ 
Amazing !  I  thought  God  dwelt  in  heaven  y 
but  as  a  poor  woman  who  was  once  in  dark-^ 
nefs  fourteen  years,  before  fhe  was  brought 
out  of  it,  faid,  God  has  two  homes,  one  in 
heaven,  the  other  in  the  loweft  heart.  He 
dwells  in  the  bufli,  and  I  am  fure  if  he  did 
not,  the  devil  and  their  own  curfed  hearts 
would  burn  th*e  bufli  to  aflies.  How  is  it  that 
it  is  not  confumed  ?  why,  it  is  becaufe  God 
has  declared  it  fliall  not  be  confumed;  he  has 
made  an  everlafting  covenant,  and  I  pity  thofe 

that 


Ser.  XI.         ^he  Burning  Bujh.  265 

that  are  not  acquainted  with  an  interefl  in 
God's  covenant ;  and  it  would  be  better  that 
people  would  pity  them,  than  dilpute  with 
them:  I  really  believe  a  difputing  devil  is  one 
of  the  worfl  devils  that  can  be  brought  into 
God's  church,  for  he  comes  with  his  gown 
and  book  in  his  hand,  and  I  fhould  always 
fufpedl  the  devil  when  he  comes  in  his  gown 
and  band,  and  this  is  the  caufc  they  agree  and 
difagree.  Some,  who  it's  to  be  hoped  are  God's 
children,  if  you  tell  them  that  God  has  loved 
them  with  an  everlafting  love,  they  are  afraid 
to  fuck  it  in,  and  efpecially  it  you  pop  out  the 
word  eleftion,  or  that  hard  word  predeflina- 
tion,  they  will  be  quite  frightned  3  but  talk 
to  them  in  another  way,  their  dear  hearts  will 
rejoice.  God  hasfaid,  ^s  the  waters  of  Noah 
f:all  ceafe  for  ever^  fo  he  will  not  j or  get  the 
covenant  of  his  peace  ;  nothing  flM II  pluck  them 
out  of  his  hand.  Ah !  fay  fome,  the  apoflle 
has  faid,  that  neither  things  prefent^  nor  things 
to  comCy  fhall  feparate  us  from  the  love  of 
Cbrijl  J  but  he  has  not  faid  an  evil  heart  Hiali 
not ;  I  fancy  that  is  one  of  the  prefent  things. 
The  bufh  is  not  confumed,  becaufe  if  the  devil 
is  in  the  bufh,  God  is  in  the  bufh  too  -,  if  the 
devil  afts  one  way,  the  Lord,  the  Spirit,  adts 
M  m  another 


266  The  Burning  Bufi.         Ser.  XT. 

another  to  balance  it,  and  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  engaged  to  train  up  the  fouls  of  his  people ; 
and  God  has  determined  the  bufh  fhall  not  be 
confumed  3  his  Spirit  ftands  near  believers  to 
fupport  and  guide,  and  make  them  more  than 
conquerors :  all  that  are  given  to  Jefus  Chrift 
fliall  come,  he  v^^ill  not  lofe  one  of  them  ;  this 
is  food  for  the  children  of  God ;  a  bad  mind 
will  turn  every  thing  to  poifon  ;  and  if  it  was 
not  for  this,  that  God  had  promifed  to  keep 
them,  my  foul  within  thefe  thirty  years  would 
have  funk  a  thoufand  times  over.  Come  then, 
O  faifering  faints,  to  you  the  word  of  this 
falvation  is  fent,  I  don't  know  who  of  you 
are  the  followers  of  the  Lamb  j  may  the  Spirit 
of  the  living  God  point  them  out,  may  every 
one  be  enabled  to  fay,  I  am  the  man.  O, 
fays  one,  I  have  been  watching  and  very  at- 
tentive to-night,  but  you  have  not  mentioned 
my  burnings ;  what  do  you  think  of  my  burn-i' 
ing  lufts  ?  what  do  you  think  of  my  burning 
corruptions?  what  do  you  think  of  my  burn-^ 
ing  pride  ?  O,  perhaps  fome  of  you  will  fay, 
thank  God,  I  have  no  pride  at  all ;  like  the 
bifhop  of  Cambray,  as  mentioned  by  Dr. 
Watts,  who  faid,  he  had  received  many  iins 
from  his  lather  Adam,  but;,  thank  God,   he 

had 


Ser.  XI.  ^he  Burning  BifJI.\  267 

had  no  pride.  Alas !  alas !  we  are  all  as 
proud  as  the  devil.  Pray  v/hat  do  you  think 
of  paffion,  that  burns  not  only  themfelves  but 
all  around  them  ?  what  do  you  think  of  en- 
mity ?  what  do  you  think  of  jealoufy,  is  not 
this  fomething  that  burns  the  bufn  ?  and  thire 
are  fome  people  that  pride  themfelves,  they 
have  not  got  fo  much  of  the  beaft  about  them, 
they  never  got  drunk,  fcorn  to  commit  mur- 
der, and  at  the  fame  time  are  as  full  of  enmity, 
of  envy,  malice,  and  pride,  as  the  devil :  the 
Lord  God  help  fuch  to  fee  their  condition. 
Happy  is  it  Chrift  can  dwell  in  the  bufh  when 
we  cannot  dwell  ourfelves  there  :  there  are  few 
Chriilians  can  live  together,  very  few  relations 
can  live  together  under  one  roof  j  we  can  take 
that  from  other  people  that  we  can't  bear  from 
our  own  flefh  and  blood  -,  and  if  God  did  not 
bear  with  us  more  than  we  bear  with  one  ano- 
ther, we  fhould  all  have  been  dcftroyed  every 
day.  Does  the  devil  make  you  fay,  that  you 
will  give  all  up  -,  I  will  go  to  the  Tabernacle 
no  more  j  I  will  lay  upon  my  couch  and  take 
my  eafe  -,  Oh  !  if  this  is  the  cafe  of  any  to- 
night, thus  tempted  by  fatan,  may  God  refcue 
their  fouls.  O  poor  dear  foul,  you  never  will 
bave  fuch  fweet  words  from  God  as  w^hen  you 
M  m  2  are 


268  Ihe  Burning  Bujh.         Ser.  XI. 

are  in  the  bufli ;  our  fuffering  times  will  be 
our  beft  times.  I  know  we  had  more  comfort 
in  Moorfield?,  on  Kennington-Common,  and 
•  efpecially  when  the  rotten  eggs,  the  cats  and 
\dogs  were  thrown  upon  me,  and  my  gown 
jwas  filled  with  clods  of  dirt  that  I  could  fcarce 
move  it ;  I  have  had  more  comfort  Jn  this 
burning  bu{h  than  when  I  have  been  in  eafe. 
I  remember  when  I  was  preaching  at  Exeter, 
a  ftone  came  and  m^ade  my  forehead  bleed,  I 
found  at  that  very  time  the  word  came  with 
double  power  to  a  labourer  that  was  gazing  at 
me,  who  was  wounded  at  the  fame  time  by 
another  ftone,  I  felt  for  the  lad  more  than  for 
myfelf,  went  to  a  friend,  and  the  lad  came  to 
me.  Sir,  fays  he,  the  man  gave  me  a  wound, 

(but  Jefus  healed  me ;  I  never  had  my  bonds 
broke  till  I  had  my  head  broke.  I  appeal  to 
you,  whether  you  v^ere  not  better  when  it  was 
colder  than  now,  becaufe  your  nerves  were 
braced  up  5  you  have  a  day  like  a  dog-day, 
now  you  are  weak,  and  arc  obliged  to  fan 
yourfelves :  thus  it  is  profperity  lulls  the  foul, 
and  I  fear  Chriftians  are  fpoiled  by  it. 

Whatever  your  trials  arc,  let  this  be  your 
prayer.  Lord,  though  the  bufli  is  burning, 
let  it  not  be  confumed.     I  think  that  is  too 

loWj 


Ser.  XL  The  Burm?7g  Bujh,  269 

low,  let  it  be  thus ;  Lord,  when  the  bufli  is 
burning,  let  me  not  burn  lower  as  the  fire  does, 
but  let  me  burn  higher  and  higher :  I  thank 
thee,  my  God,  for  trouble  ;  I  thank  thee,  my 
God,  for  putting  me  into  thefe  affliftions  one 
after  another ;  I  thought  I  could  fing  a  requiem 
to  myfelf,  that  I  fhould  have  a  little  reft,  but 
trouble  came  from  that  very  quarter  where  I 
might  reafonably  expedl  the  greateft  comfort : 
I  thank  thee  for  knocking  my  hands  off  from 
the  creature  >  Lord,  I  believe,  help  my  un- 
belief 5  and  thus  you  will  go  on  blefling  God 
to  all  eternity :  by  and  by  the  bufh  fiiall  be 
tranflated  to  the  paradife  of  God  ;  no  burning 
bufli  in  heaven,  except  the  fire  of  love,  won- 
der, and  gratitude  ;  no  trials  there,  troubles 
are  limited  to  this  earth,  above  our  enemies 
can't  reach  u?. 

Perhaps  there  are  fome  of  you  here  are  fay- 
ing, burning  bujld^  a  buJJo  burnt  and  not  con^ 
Jumcdl  I  don't  know  what  to  make  of  this 
nonfenfe:  come,  come,  go  on,  I  am  ufed  to 
it,  and  I  guefs  what  are  the  thoughts  of  your 
hearts :  I  pray  God,  that  every  one  of  you 
here  may  be  afraid  of  comfort,  left  they  fliould 
be  toffed  about  by  the  devil.  What  is  it  I  have 
faid  ?  hov.'  have  I  talked  in  fuch  an  unintelli- 

i  gible 


270  72>^  Btirntng  Eufm.  Ser.  XI. 

gible  manner?    why,   fay  you,  what  do  you 
mean  by  a  burning  bufh  ?  why,  thou  art  the 
very   man,   how  fo?  why,   you  are  burning 
with  the  devil  in  your  hearts  5  you  are  burning 
with  foppery,   with  nonfenfe,  with  the  luji  of 
the  fle(}.\  with  the  luji  of  the  eye^  and  pride  of 
life  \  and  if  you  do  not  get  out  of  this  ftate,  as 
Lot  faid  to  his  fons-in-law,  e're  long  you  fhall 
be  burning  in    hell,  and  not  Gonfumed :  the 
fame  angel  of  the  covenant  who  fpake  to  Mofes 
out  of  the  bufh,  he  fhall  eVe  long  dcfcend, 
furrounded  with  millions  of  the  heavenly  hofts, 
and  fentence  you  to  everlafling  burnings.     O 
you  frighten  me !  did  you  think  I  did  not  in- 
tend to  frighten  you  ?  would  to  God  I  might 
frighten  you  enough  !   I  believe  it  will  be  no 
harm  for  you  to  be  frightned  out  of  hell,  to 
be  frightned  out  of  an  unconverted  ftate  :  O  go 
and   tell   your  companions  that  the  madman 
faid,  that  wicked  men  are  as  firebrands  of  hell : 
God  pluck  you  as  brands  out  of  that  burning. 
BlefTed  be  God,  that  there  is  yet  a  day  of  grace  > 
Ohl  that  this  might  prove  the  accepted  time  y 
Oh !  that  this  might  prove  the  day  of  fahation ; 
Oh !  angel  of  the  everlafling  covenant,  come 
down  5    thou   bleffed,    dear    comforter,  have 
mercy,  mercy,  mercy  upon  the  unconverted, 

upon 


Ser.  XI.  The  Burning  Bufi.  271 

upon  our  unconverted  friends,  upon  the  un- 
converted part  of  this  auditory  -,  fpeak^  and  it 
fiall  be  done-y  command^  O  Lordy  and  it  Pdall 
cotne  to  pafs  j  turn  the  burning  bufhes  of  the 
devil  into  burning  bu(hes  of  the  Son  of  God  : 
who  knows  but  God  may  hear  our  prayer, 
who  knows  but  God  may  hear  this  cry,  1  hav^ 
feen^  1  have  feen  the  affii^iom  of  ?ny  people  -, 
the  cry  of  the  children  of  Ifrael  is  come  up  to 
incy  and  I  am  come  down  to  deliver  them  :  God 
grant  this  may  be  his  word  to  you  under  all 
your  trouble ;  God  grant  he  may  be  your 
comforter.  The  Lord  awaken  you  that  are 
dead  in  lin,  and  though  on  the  precipice  of 
hell,  God  keep  you  from  tumbling  in :  and 
you  that  are  God's  burning  ^bufhes,  God  help 
you  to  ftand  to  keep  this  coat  of  arms,  to  fay 
when  you  go  home,  bleifed  be  God,'  the  bujh 
is  burnings  but  not  confumcd.  Amen !  even  iOy 
Lord  Jefus.     Amen  ! 


SERMON 


[  272   ] 
SERMON     Xir. 

Soul    Dejedion. 


Psalm  xlii.  ver.  5. 

Why  art  thou  cajl  down,  O  my  fouly  and  why 
art  thou  di [quieted  within  me  ?  hope  thou  in 
God,  for  IJhall  yet  praife  him^  for  the  help 
of  his  countenance. 

I  HAVE  often  told  you,  in  my  plain  way 
of  fpeaking,  that  grace  is  very  frequently 
grafted  on  a  crab-ftock;  that  the  Lord 
Jefus  picks  out  perfbns  of  the  moft  peevifh, 
churlifh  difpolition,  and  imparts  to  them  the 
largeft  meafure  of  grace,  but  for  want  of  a 
better  natural  temper,  a  great  deal  of  grace 
does  not  fhine'  fo  bright  in  them,  as  a  fmall 
degree  in  thofe  that  are  conftitutionally  good^ 
natured :  perfons  of  this  difpofition  are  gene- 
rally complaining,  and  are  not  only  tormen- 
tors of  themfelves,  but  are  great  plagues  to  thofe 
that  are   about  them;    you  will  hear   them 

always 


Sen  XII.  Soul  D(je5lion.  273 

always  complaining  fomething  or  other  is  the 
matter.     What  a  pity  it  is  we  cannot  all  agree 
in  one .  thing,    to  leave  ofF  chiding  others  to 
chide  our  own  felves,  till  we  can  find  nothing 
in  ourfelves  to  chide  for  5  this   we  fhall  find 
will  be  a  good  way  to  grow  in  the  divine  life> 
when,    by  conftant  application  to  the  Lamb 
of  God,  we   get  a   maftery  over  thofe  things 
which  hitherto  have  had  the  maftery  over  us  j 
but  are  thefe  the  only  people  that  complain  ? 
are  people  of  a  melancholy  difpofition  only  fub- 
jed:  to  a  difquietude  of  heart  ?  I  will  venture 
to  affirm,   that  the  greateft,  the  deareft  chil- 
dren of  God,  have  got  their  complaining,  and 
their   dreary  hours.     Thofe  who  have  been 
favoured  with  large  meafures  of  grace,  even 
thofe  that  have  been  wrapped  up  as  it  were  to 
the  third  heavens,  bafklng  on    the  mount  in 
the  funfhine  of  redeeming  grace,  and  in  raptures 
of  love  crying  out,  It  is  goodjor  us  to  be  here^ 
even  thefe  muft  go  down  to  Gethfemane  ;  and 
if  they  would  not   be  fcorched  v/ith  a  ftrong 
burning  fever  from  the  fun  of  profperity,  fhall 
find  clouds  from  time   to  time  overihadowing 
them,  not  to  burn,  but  to  keep  them  low.     It 
is  on  this  account,  that  you  fee  good  men  in 
difFcTcnt  frames  at  different  times  t  our  Lord 
N  n  himfelf 


274  '^^^^  Dejeciion.   -'  SenXiT, 

himfelf  was  fo,  he  rejoiced  fometlmes  in^  fpi- 
rit,  but  at  other  times  you  jSndhim,  efpecially 
near  the  iaft,  crying  out,  My  foul  is  exceeding 
forrowfid  eve^i  unto  deaths  tarry  you  here  and 
watch.  And  I  am  going  to  tell  you  of  one  to- 
night, who  had  the  honour  of  being  called,. 
the  man  after  God's  own  heart ;  and  who, 
though  an  Old  Teftament  faint,  was  greatly 
bleffed  with  a  New~  Teftament  fpirit,  and  had 
the  honour  of  compofing  Pfalms,  which  in 
all  pafl  ages  of  the  church  have  been,  and  in 
future  ones  will  be  a  rich  magazine,  and  ftore- 
hcufe  of  fpiritual  experience,  from  which  the 
children  of  God  may  draw  fpiritual  armour 
for  fighting  the  good  fight  of  faith^,  until  God 
fliall  call  them  to  life  eternal :  may  this  be 
your  happy  lot.  What  frame  was  this  good 
man  in  when  he  compofed  this  forty- fecond 
Pfalm?  the  Plalm  itfelf  can  beft  tell.  It 
feems  compofed  when  he  w^as  either  perfe- 
cted by  Saul,  or  driven  from  his  own  court 
by  his  fondling,  beloved  fon,  Abfalom ;  then 
David  appeared  truly  greats  I  honour  him 
when  I  fee  him  yonder,  attending  a  few 
flieepj  but  I  admire  the  young  ftripling,  when 
I  fee  him  come  out  with  his  fling  and  ftone, 
and  aiming  it  at  the  head  of  Goliah,  the  ene- 
my 


Sen  XII.  Soul  DejeBion.  275 

my  of  God ;  or,  when  exalted  and  filling  the 
feat  of  juftice ;  but  to  me  he  never  appears 
greater,  than  when  he  is  bowed  down  in  low 
circumftances,  befet  on  every  fide,  flruggling 
between  fenfe  and  faith  \  and,  as  the  fun  after 
an  eclipfe,  breaking  forth  with  greater  luftre 
to  all  the  fpedtators.  In  this  view  we  mud 
confider  this  great,  this  good  man,  David^ 
when  he  cries  out,  Why.  art  thou  cajl  dow?2y 
0  my  foul,  why  art  thou  dif quieted  "within  me  ? 
hope  thou  in  God, 

Suppofing  you  underftand  the  words  as  a 
queftion.  Why  art  thou  caji  down^  O  my  foul ^ 
though  thou  art  in  fuch  circumftances  ?    pray 
now  what  is  the  caufe  of  thy  being  fo  dejected  ? 
The  word  implies,    that  he  was  finking  under 
the  weight  of  his  prefent  burden,  hke  a  perfon 
fiooping  under  a  lead  that  lies  upon  his  flioul- 
ders;    and   the    confequence   of  this  prefllire 
without    was     difquietude,    uneauncr;s      and 
anxiety  within ;    for,  fay  what  yoa  will  tc  the 
contrary,  there  is  fuch  a  connexion   between 
foul  and  body,  that  when  one  is  difordered, 
the  other  muft  fympathize  with  its  ever-loving 
friend. 

Or,  you  may  underfl:and  it  as  chiding  Kim- 

felf,  Why  art  thou  caJi  down^  0  my  foul ^  ivhy 

N  n  2  art 


276  Soul  DejeBion.  Ser.XII. 

art  thou  difquieted  within  me^  how  foolifh  Is 
it  to  be  thus  drooping  and  dejefted ;  how 
improper  for  one  favoured  of  God  with  fo 
many  providences,  and  fpecial  particular  pri- 
vileges, for  fuch  a  one  as  thou  art  thus  to 
ftoop,  and  be  made  fubjedl  to  every  tempta- 
tion ;  why  dofl  thou  give  thy  enemies  fuch 
room  to  find  fault  with  thy  religion  on  ac- 
count of  thy  gloomy  looks,  and  the  difqui- 
etude  of  thy  heart  ?  a  yoke  which  thou  wilt 
find  to  be  lined  with  love,  and  God  will  keep 
it  from  galling  thy  ihoulders.  You  fee,  he 
fpeaks  not  to  others  but  to  himfelf  j  would  to 
God  we  did  thus  learn  that  charity  begins  at 
home.  Then  he  goes  to  God  with  his  cafe, 
O  my  God,  fays  he,  my  foul  is  cajl  down  within 
me.  O  that  we  could  learn,  when  in  thefe 
moods  to  go  more  to  God,  and  lefs  to  man, 
we  fhould  find  more  relief,  and  religion  would 
be  lefs  difhonoured.  But  fee  how  faith  tri* 
umphs  in  the  midft  of  all,  no  fooner  does 
unbelief  pop  up  its  head,  but  faith  immediately 
knocks  it  down.  A  never-failing  maxim  is 
here  propofed,  hope  thou  in  Gody  truft  in  God, 
believe  in  Godj  for  I  am  fure,  and  all  of  you 
that  know  Jefus  Chrift  are  perfuaded  of  it 
too,  that  all  our  troubles  arife  from  our  un- 
belief; 


Ser.  XII.  Soul  Deje5tion.  277 

belief:  O  unbelief,  injurious  bar  to  comfort, 
fource  of  tormenting  fear !  on  the  contrary, 
faith  bears  every  thing.  Put  thy  trujl  in  God^ 
as  in  the  old  tranflation  ^  hope  in  God^  as  in  the 
new,  /  Jloall  yet  praije  him.  The  devil  tells 
me  my  trouble  is  fo  great,  I  fhall  never  lift  up 
my  head  again  ^  but  unbelief  and  the  devi!  are 
liars  3  I  Jhall  yet  praife  him  3  my  God  will 
carry  me  through  all  -,  I  flVall  yet  praife  him, 
even  for  cafting  me  down ;  I  fhall  praife  him 
even  for  that  which  is  the  caufe  of  all  my  dis- 
quietude;  he  will  be  the  health  of  my  counte- 
nance 3  though  my  afflidlions  have  now  made 
my  body  low,  fuck  up  my  fpirits,  and  hurt  my 
animal  frame,  he  wilt  be  the  help  of  iny  coufite- 
nance  3  I  fhall  by  and  by  fee  him  again,  and 
be  favoured  with  thofe  transforming  vievv^s, 
which  my  God  has  favoured  me  with  in  times 
paft3  he  is  the  health  of  my  count enance^  and 
my  God :  though  the  devil  tempts  me,  and  my 
evil  neighbours  fay,  where  is  now  thy  God^ 
Doft  thou  think  thou  art  a  child  of  God,  and 
thy  Father  fuffers  thee  to  be  caft  down  ?  I  tell 
thee,  I  tell  thee,  O  fatan,  that  God  who  I 
have  been  fo  vilely  tempted  as  to  believe  has 
forfaken  me,  will  come  over  the  mountains  of 
my  guilt,  will  forgive  my  backflidings  againfl 

himfelf, 


278  Soul  DejeSlion.  Ser.  XII. 

himfelf,  my  unbelief  fhall  not  make  his  pro- 
mifes  of  none  efFecfl  5  I  fhall  praife  him  even 
while  I  live,  I  fhall  praife  him  before  I  die,  I 
iliall  praife  him  for  ever  in  heaven,  where  he 
will  be,  after  death,  the  health  of  my  counte- 
nance^ and  my  God  \  thus  faith  will  get  the 
better  in  a  faint.  David  was  fomelimes  left  to 
fay,  in  efFedl,  all  things  are  againfl  me;  yet 
ftill  in  mofl  of  the  Pfalms,  in  this,  the  next, 
the  cxiiith,  and  many  of  the  refl,  he  triumphs 
in  God  ;  and  he  compofed  but  very  few  with- 
out praifing  at  the  end,  though  he  complains 
at  the  beginning :  God  help  us  thus  to  do ! 

But  it  is  time  to  leave  off  fpeaking  particu- 
larly of  David,  and  to  turn  to  you  to  whom 
thefe  words,  I  pray  God,  may  prove  falutary 
and  ufeful.  I  have  had  a  great  flruggle  in  my 
mind  this  afternoon  what  I  Ihould  preach  from  ; 
I  have  been  praying  and  looking  up  to  God, 
and  could  not  preach  for  my  life  on  any  other 
text,  which  has  often  been  the  cafe  before, 
and  v/henever  it  was,  fome  poor  foul  has  been 
■comforted  and  raifed  up ;  and  among  fuch  a 
mixed  multitude,  there  are  fome,  no  doubt, 
come  to  this  poor  defpifed  place  caft  down  and 
difquieted  within  \  I  fliall  endeavour  to  enquire 
what  you  are  caft  down  for,  and  then  I  fhall 

propofe 


Ser.  XII.  Scul  DejeBion.  279 

propofe  a  great  cure  for  you^  namely,  trufl  in 
God;  and  I  pray,  that  what  was  David's 
comfort  may  be  yours.  Why  fhould  not  we 
expecSt  an  anfwer  when  we  pray,  that  God 
before  you  go  home  may  make  you  whether 
you  will  or  no,  leave  your  burdens  behind 
you  ?  and  God  keep  you  from  taking  them 
up  as  you  go  home. 

Probably,  there  may  be  fome  of  you  that 
are  real  believers ;    perhaps,    I  ought   to  afk 
your  pardon :  where  am  I  preaching,    in  the 
Tabernacle !  the  moft  defpifed  place  in  Lon-j 
don!    fo  fcandalous  a  place,  that  many  of  the 
children  of  God  would   rather  go  elfewhere  \ 
God  help  us  to  keep  up  our  fcandal !    But  yet 
I    believe  there   are  many    King's    daughters 
here,  many  of  you  w^hom  God  enabled  in  this 
place   firft   to   fay,    My  Lordy    and  my  God, 
When  you  put  your  fingers,  as  it  were,  on  the 
print   of  Chrift's  nails,  and  put  your   hands 
into  his  fide,  and  were  no  longer  faithlefs,  but 
believing,  you  thought  you  fhould  never  be 
caft  down  any  more,  but  now  you  have  found 
yourfelves  miibken  ;  and  I  (hall  endeavour,  in 
the  profecution  of  this  text,  to  fpeak  to  all  that 
are   caft  down,   whether  before  or,  after  con- 
verfion,   and  then  to  fuch  that  v/ere  never  caft 

-  down 


28o  Soul  DejeBion.  Sef.  XII. 

down  at  all  ^  and  if  you  was  never  caft  down 
before,  God  call:  you  down  now. 

What  are  perfons  caft  down  for  ?  what  are 
fome  of  you  difquieted  within  for  ?  I  have  rea- 
fon  to  believe,  from  the  notes  put  up  at  both 
ends  of  the  town,  that  there  are  many  of  you 
that  have  arrows  of  convidtion  ftuck  faft  in 
your  fouls  j  I  have  taken  in  near  two  hundred 
at  the  other  end  of  the  town,  within  a  fort- 
night; if  this  be  the  cafe,  that  God  is  thus  at 
work,  let  the  devil  roar,  and  we  will  go  on  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord.  And  what  are  you 
caft  down  for  ?  fome  poor  foul  will  fay,  with 
a  fenfe  of  fin,  the  guilt  of  it,  the  enmity  of 
it,  the  very  aggravated  circumftances  that  at- 
tend it,  appear  and  fet  themfelves  as  in  battle- 
array  before  me  :  once  I  thought  I  had  no  fin, 
at  leaft,  I  thought  that  fin  was  not  fo  exceed- 
ing finful ;  but  I  now  find  it  fuch  a  burden,  I 
could  almoft  fay  with  Cain,  it  is  greater  than 
I  can  bear.  And,  perhaps,  fome  of  you  are 
fo  caft  down,  as  in  your  hafte  to  fay  as  colo- 
nel Gardiner,  that  great  man  of  God,  told  me 
himfelf  had  faid  when  under  convidion,  "  I 
*'  believe  God  cannot  be  juft,  unlefs  he  damns 
"  my  wicked  foul."  Is  this  thy  cafe  ?  art 
thou  wicked,  art  thou  fo  caft  down,  fo  dif- 
quieted. 


Ser.  XII.  Soul  DejeSiion,  281 

quieted,  thit  thou  canfl  not  reft  night  nor  day, 

fhall  I  fend  thee  away  without  any  comfort  ? 

fhall  I  fend  thee  away  as   the  legal  preachers 

do  ?  as  a  minifter  fome  time  ago  did,  when  a 

man  told  him  how  wicked  he  had  been  3  O, 

fays  he,  if  you  are  fo  wicked  you  are  damn'd 

to  befure>  I  fhall  not  trouble  myfelf  with  you. 

When  a  poor  negro  was  taken  up  for  thieving, 

another  went  to  him  and  faid,  you  are  fo  bad 

I  muft  turn  my  back  to  you  ^  that  is  the  law, 

but  the  gofpel  is  turn  thy  face  to  God  j  think 

not  that  God  is  dealing  with  thee  as  an  abfolute 

God,   a  God  out  of  Chrift.     I   would  have 

nothing  to  do,  fays  Luther,    with  an  abfolute 

God  ;    as  fuch  he  is  a  confuming  fire.     Truft 

God    in    Chrift,    throw  thyfelf   upon    him, 

throw  thyfelf  on  the  Son  of  God  ^  cry  with 

thy  brother,  and  now  thou  art  in  that  temper, 

thou  wilt  not  be  afhamed  to  call  the  thief  thy 

brother  >    fay  with  him,  Lord^  remember  7?ie 

when  thou  art  in  thy  kingdom :  thou  fhalt  yet 

praife  him,  thou  flialt  yet  have  the  forgivenefs 

of  thy  fins  ^  thy  pardon  fhall  not  only  be  fealed 

in  heaven,   but  thou  fhalt  have  it  in  thy  heart : 

thefe  are  only  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth,  the 

firft  ftrugglings  of  the  foul  immerfing  into  the 

divine  life  j  he  flmll  yet  be  the  health  of  thy 

O  o  coun- 


2Sz  Soul  DejeBion.  Ser.  XII. 

countenance:  theie  poor  cheeks,  though  be- 
dewed with  tears,  fhall  by  and  by  have  a  fine 
blufli,  when  a  pardoning  God  comes  with  his 
love  'y  it  fliall  even  make  a  change  in  thy 
countenance,  for  as  a  heavy  heart  makes  a 
man's  countenance  fad,  fo  a  chearful  heart 
makes  the  countenance  pleafant :  thou  ihait 
know  him  to  be  thy  God,  thou  flialt  fay,  my 
Lordy  and  my  God:  Lord  Jefus  grant  this  may 
be  the  happy  moment.  Was  Jefus  here,  was 
the  Redeemer  now  in  this  metropolis,  I  am 
fure  he  would  go  about  the  ftreets,  he  would 
be  a  field-preacher,  he  would  go  out  into  the 
highways  and  hedges,  he  w^ould  invite,  he 
would  run  after  them  y  Lord  Jefus,  take  the 
veil  from  our  hearts,  and  let  us  fee  to-night 
thy  loving  heart  as  the  Son  of  God  1  Truft  in 
God,  you  will  fay,  it  is  very  eafy  for  you  to  fay 
fo,  but  I  cannot  truft  in  God  ^  can't  you,  who 
told  you  that ?  that  is  the  work  of  God,  you 
are  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  Who 
convinced  thee  of  thy  inability  to  believe,  do 
you  think  the  devil  did  ?  no,  it  was  the  Spirit 
of  God  procured  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
that  was  to  come  to  convince  the  world  of  fin. 
If  thou  canft  not  truft  as  thou  wouldft,  fay> 
Lord^  I  believe^  help  my  unbelief'^  ftretch  out 

thy 


•Ser.  XII.  Soul  BejeBion.  283 

thy  poor  hand.  I  am  thinking  of  Sunday  !aft, 
when  I  was  giving  the  facrament,  I  obferved 
there  was  one  blind  communicant  that  could 
not  fee,  but  he  thruft  out  his  hand;  I  obferved 
feveral  lame  perfons,  but  there  were  enough 
to  give  it  to  them;  I  faw  alfo  a  poor  barrow- 
woman,  and  I  took  particular  care  to  give  the 
cup  to  her ;  fo  I  put  it  up  to  the  mouth  of 
the  poor  blind  man :  if  that  is  the  cafe,  what 
love  muft  there  be  in  God  to  the  poor  foul ! 

But,  methinks,   I  hear  fome  poor  foul  fay, 
that  is  not  my  cafe,  I  am  not  caft  down  for 
that,  but  I  am  caft  down    becaufe    after  that 
I  knew  God  to  be  my  God,  after  I  knew  Je- 
ius  to  be  my  King,  and  after  I  had  mounted 
upon  my  high  places,    the  devil  and  my  un- 
believing heart  threw  me  down  again ;   would 
you  not  have  me  caft  down  ?  would  you  not 
have  me  difquieted  ?  a  perfon  of  an  Antino- 
mian  fpirit  would  fay,  don't  tell  me  ot  your 
frames,    I  have  learned  to  live  by  faith,  I  don't 
care    whether  Chrift  manifefts  himfelf  to  me 
or  no,    I  have  got  the  word  and  the  promife, 
I  am  content  with  a  promife  now ;   fo  thefe 
poor  creatures  go  on  without  any  frame,  be- 
caufe they  will  not  live  in  it :  from  fuch  An- 
tinomianilm,  good  God,  deliver  me.     liow  ! 
O  o  2  how  ! 


284  Soul  Dejection.  Ser.  XII. 

how !  how  !  not  call  down  at  an  abfent  God, 
not  difquieted  when  God  withdraws?  where 
are  yon  gone  ?  you  are  gone  far  from  your  fa^ 
ther's  houfe  3  if  nothing  elfe  will  do,  may  your 
father   whip    you   home    again.     But   tender 
hearts  when  they  refledl  how  it  was  once,  are 
caft  down;  David   fays,  My  fears  have  been 
my  meat  day  and  nighty  for  1  had  gone  'with  a 
multitude  to  the  houje  of  God.     Here  he  looks 
back  upon  his  former  enjoyments,  his  fpiritual 
profperity,  (as  Job  looks  back  upon  his  tempo- 
ral) and  fays.  Why  art  thou  caft  down^  0  my 
foul;  it  is  becaufe  I  don't  meet  God  in    his 
ordinances    as   I   ufed  to   do;  poor  deferted, 
panting  foul !  poor  difquieted  foul !  he  muft 
be  the  help  of  thy  countenance,    be  will  yet 
be  thy  God.     Who  was  it  fought  Jefus  for- 
rowing  ?  what  would  you  have  thought  of  the 
Virgin  Mary  if  fhe  had  faid,  I  don't  care  whe- 
ther I  fee  my  fon  or  not ;  ilie  fought  him,  and 
found  him  in  the  temple:   God  grant  every 
poor  deferted  foul  may  find  him  to-night  ^  I 
mean,  in  the  temple  of  his  heart.     And  in  the 
cafe  of  Mary,  fhe  fays,  They  have  taken  away 
my  Lord,  and  I  know  not  where  they  have  laid 
him  5  if  they  had  not  taken  away  her  Lord, 
Mary  would  have  been  rich :  fo  you  may  fay 

your 


Ser.  XIL  Soul  BejeBio?u  285 

your  corruptions,  your  backflidings  and  ingra- 
titude, have  taken  away  your  Lord:  Lord 
grant  thou  may  ft  find  him  to-night.  He  that 
faid,  Mary,  can  call  thee  to-night,  and  can 
make  thee  fay.  My  dear  Lord,  I  come  to- 
night j  he  can  call  thee  by  thy  name. 

But,  fay  you,  I  am  caft  down  becaufe  I  am 
wearied  with  temptation  ;  not  only  my  God  is 
departed  from  me,  but  an  evil  fpirit  is  come 
upon  me  to  torment  me ;  I  am  haunted  with 
this  and  that  evil  fuggeftion,  that  I  am  a  terror 
to  myfelf.  Come,  come,  hear  what  David  faith 
in  the  beginning  of  the  Pfalm,  jis  the  kart 
panteth  after  the  ^water-brooks^Jo  panteth  jny  joul 
after  thee^  O  God.  What  fay  you  to  that? 
if  you  have  a  mind  to  fee  the  beauty  of 
this  verfe,  read  Mr.  Hervey's  Theron  and 
Afpafio,  which  will  live  when  its  defplfers 
are  dead  ;  and  thofe  that  have  endeavoured 
to  difparage  him  will  be  obliged  to  own, 
that  he  was  one  of  the  greateft  luminaries 
we  ever  had,  and  one  that  has  laid  down 
the  doftrines  of  the  gofpel,  in  a  manner  to 
charm  and  allure  the  great  and  noble.  Well, 
is  it  thy  cafe  that  unbelief  dogs  thee  go  where 
thou  will  ?  well,  ftill  truft  in  God,  thou  fbalt 
yet  praife  him  for  the  help  of  his  countenance  ^ 
be  will  command  his  loving^kindnejs  in  the  day^ 

and 


2 86  Soul  DejeBion.  Ser.  XIL 

and  his  fo?2g  fball  be  with  thee  in  the  night. 
Though  it  be  night,  there  is  fome  moon, 
bleffed  be  God,  or  fome  ftars ;  and  if  there  is 
a  fog  that  you  cannot  fee,  God  can  quiet  his 
people  in  the  dark,  he  will  make  the  enemy 
flee;  fear  him  not,  God  will  comfort  thee, 
and  puniih  the  devil  for  tempting  thee,  if  thou 
truft  in  him. 

But,  fay  you,  I  am  caft  down  and  difqui- 
eted  within  me ;  why  ?  becaufe  I  have  one 
afflidion  after  another,  no  fooner  is  one  trial 
gone,  but  another  fucceeds  j  now  I  think  I 
Ihall  have  a  little  refl,  the  tormentor  will  not 
come  nigh  me  to-day,  but  no  fooner  has  the 
Chriftian  fo  faid,  but  another  ftorm  comes, 
and  the  clouds  return  after  the  rain  ;  then  we 
think  we  muft  be  call  down,  and  that  we 
ought  to  be  difquieted  ;  this  Was  David's  cafe ; 
what  does  he  fay  ?  All  thy  waves  and  thy  biU 
lows  are  gone  over  me,  I  believe  he  found 
after  that,  there  were  more  waves  to  come 
than  he  had  yet  felt ;  why  ?  fays  a  poor  dif- 
treffed  foul,  becaufe  I  have  been  fo  long  in 
Chrift,  and  have  got  thefe  curfed  corruptions 
yet  within.  I  thought  to  have  been  rid  of 
them  all  long  ago  ;  I  thought  I  had  no  cor- 
ruptions left  thirty- three  years  ago,  and  that 

the 


Ser*  XIL  Soul  BejeBlon.  287 

the  Canaanites  were  all  rooted  out  of  the  land, 
that  Pharaoh  and  his  hoft  were  all  drowned  in 
the  red-fea  j  but  I  find  the  old  man  is  ftrong 
in  me,  1  look  upon  myfelf  to  be  lefs  than  the 
lead  of  all  faints,  God  knows  ^  and  you  that 
walk  near  God,  and  have  made  greater  advan- 
ces in  the  divine  life,  if  you  are  honeft  muft 
fay,  O  this  body  of  fin  and  death,  if  I  fhut 
this  old  man  out  at  the  fore-door,  he  comes  in 
at  the  back-door.  Come,  come,  come  foul, 
truft  in  God,  he  will  give  power  to  the  faint, 
he  will  give  flrcngth,  and  in  due  time  deliver 
thee  :  go  to  God,  tell  him  of  them  3  beg  thy 
Redeemer  to  take  his  whip  into  his  hand, 
either  of  fmall  or  large  cords,  and  ufe  it,  ra- 
ther than  your  corruptions  fhould  get  head 
again. 

Time  would  fail  to  mention  all  that  are  call 
down  on  thefe  accounts,  but  I  mufl  mention 
one  more  5  perhaps,  fome  of  you  may  be  cafl 
down  with  the  fear  not  of  death  only,  but  of 
judgment.  I  believe  there  are  thoufands  of 
people  die  a  thoufand  times,  for  fear  of  dying 
once.  Dr.  Mather  and  Mr.  Pemberton,  oi 
New-England,  were  always  afraid  of  dying, 
but  when  they  came  to  die;  one  or  both  of 
them  faid  to  fome  that  were  intimate   with 

them. 


^88  Soul  DejeBion.  Sef.  XIL 

them,  Is  this  all^  I  can  bear  this  'very  well: 
and  I  have  generally  found  that  a  poor  foul, 
that  cannot  adt  that  faith  on  God  it  once  did, 
or  in  old  age  when  the  body  grows  infirm,  as 
they  ufed  to  do,  yet  they  go  off  rejoicing  in 
God,  as  a  good  foul  that  was  buried  at  the 
Chapel  the  other  day,  faid,  I  am  going  over 
Jordan,  Therefore,  O  poor  foul,  leave  this 
to  God,  he  will  take  care  of  thy  dying  hour. 
If  any  of  you  are  poor  here,  and  I  was  to 
promife  to  give  you  a  coffin  and  a  fhroud  you 
would  be  eafy ;  now  can  you  trufl  the  word 
of  a  man,  and  not  that  of  a  God  ?  Well,  the 
Lord  help  you  to  truft  in  him ;  having  loved 
his  own^  he  loves  them  to  the  end ;  he  is  a  faith- 
ful, unchangeable  friend,  that  fticketh  clofer 
than  a  brother. 

Who  would  not  be  a  Chrifiian,  who  would 
but  be  a  believer,  my  brethren ;  fee  the  pre- 
cioufnefs  of  a  believer's  faith  ;  the  quacks  will 
fay,  here  buy  this  packet,  which  is  good  for 
all  difeafes,  and  is  really  worth  nothing ;  but 
this  will  never  fail  the  foul.  Now  I  wifh  I 
could  make  you  all  angry ;  I  am  a  fad  mlf- 
chief-maker  j  but  I  will  afTure  you,  I  don't 
want  to  make  you  angry  with  one  another : 
fome  people  that  profefs  to  have  grace  in  their 

hearts^ 


£er.  XIL  Sozil  jD ejection.  289 

hearts,  feem  refolved  to  fet  all  God*s  people  at 
variance;  they  are  like  Sampfon's  foxes  with 
firebrands  in  their  tails,  fetting  fire  to  all  about 
them.  Are  any  of  you  come  ft-om  the  Foun- 
dery,  or  any  other  place  to-night  ?  I  do  not 
care  where  you  come  fi-om,  I  pray  God  you 
may  all  quarrel  to-night ;  I  want  you  to  fall 
out  with  your  own  hearts;  if  we  were  em- 
ployed as  we  ought  to  be,  we  fhould  have  lefs 
time  to  talk  about  the  vain  things  that  are  the 
fubjefts  of  converfation  :  God  grant  your  crofles 
may  be  left  at  the  crofs  of  the  Lamb  of  God 
this  night. 

And  if  there  be  any  of  you  here,  as  no  doubt 
there  are  many,  that  are  crying  what  nonfenfe 
he  is  preaching  to-night,  [  fhould  not  won- 
der if  they  were  to  mimick  me  when  they 
go  home  3  if  they  fliould  fay,  I  thank  God,  I 
was  never  caft  down ;  you  take  God's  name 
in  vain  ;  you  thank  God  you  was  never  caft 
down,  the  very  anfvver  ycu  have  given  makes 
me  caft  down  for  you ;  why  fo  ?  why,  as 
the  Lord  liveth,  I  fpeak  out  of  ccmpaflion, 
there  is  but  one  ftep  between  thee  and  death. 
Don't  you  know  the  feflions  began  at  the  Old- 
Bailey  to-day,  if  there  were  any  capitally  con- 
vided,  what  would  you  think  to  fee  them 
P  p  playing 


290  Soul  DejeSlion,  Ser.  XII. 

p'aying  at  cardr,  o  go  on  rattling  and  drink- 
ing, and  fwearing  ?  would  not  you  yourfelf 
cry,  and  if  it  were  a  child  of  your  ov;n,  would 
it  not  break  your  heart  ?  but  yet  thou  art  that 
wretch  5  1  muft  weep  for  thee,  my  brother^ 
finner;  we  ba4  both  01^  &ther  and  mother, 
Adam  and  Eve ;  ^hi^  was'our  £id  original. 

Dear  Chiiitians,  pr^y  for  me  to-nfght.  I 
remember  once  I  was  preaching  in  Scotland^ 
and  law  ten  thoufand  aifedled  in  a  moment, 
fome  with  iov,  others cryino;  I  cannot  believer 
Others,  God  has  given  me  faith,  fome  faint-, 
ing  in  their  friends  arms:  feeing  two  ftout 
creatures  upon  a  tomb-ftone,  hardened  indeed, 
1 1  cried  out,  you  rebels  come  down,  and  down 
Ithey  fell  direftly,  and  cried  before  they  went 
away,  What  Jhall  we  do  to  he  faved  ?  Have 
any  of  you  got  apprentices,  whom  you  have 
brought  from  time  to  time  to  the  Tabernacle, 
but  now  will  not  let  them  come,  becaufe  yoa 
think  they  grow  worfe  and  worfe,  and  you 
will  be  tempted  to  leave  off  praying  for  them  ? 
don't  do  that  ^  who  knows  but  this  may  be  the 
happy  time.  Children  of  godly  parents,  ap-. 
prentices  of  godly  people,  fervants  of  people 
who  fear  the  Lord,  that  hear  gofpei-preachers, 
that  are  on  the  watch  for  every  iniirmity,  that 


g^ 


Sen  XII.  Soul  D€Je5lion.  291 

goto  their  fellow-fervants  and  fay,  thefc  faints 
love  good  eating  and  drinking,  they  arc  only 
gofpel-goffips  3  is  this  the  cafe  of  any  of  you, 
if  it  is,  you  are  in  a  deplorable  condition,  un- 
der the  gofpel  and  not  convinced  thereby :  O 
may  God  bring  down  you  rebels  to-night; 
may  this  be  the  happy  hour  you  may  be  call 
down  and  difquieted  within  you.  What  can 
I  fay  more  ?  I  would  fpeak  till  I  burft,  I  would 
fpeak  till  I  could  fay  no  more.  O  poor  foul, 
that  haft  been  never  yet  caft  down,  I  v/ill  tell 
you,  if  you  die  without  being  caft  down,  how- 
ever you  may  die  and  have  no  pangs  in  your 
death,  and  your  -carnal  relations  may  thank 
God  that  you  died  like  lambs,  but  no  fooner 
will  your  fouls  be  out  of  your  bodies,  but  God 
will  caft  you  down  to  hell,  you  v*^ill  be  lifting 
up  your  eyes  in  yonder  place  of  torment,  you 
will  be  difquieted,  but  there  will  be  nobody 
there  to  fay,  hope  thou  in  God-,  for  I Jloall  yet 
praife  him^  &c.  O  my  God,  when  I  think 
of  this,  I  could  go  to  the  very  gates  of  hell  to 
preach.  I  thought  the  other  day,  O  if  I  had 
my  health,  I  would  ftand  on  the  top  of  every 
hackney  coach,  and  preach  Chrift  to  thofe 
poor  creatures.  Unconverted  old  people,  un- 
converted young  people,  will  you  have  no 
P  p  2  com- 


292  Soul  DejeBion.  Ser.  XII. 

compaflion  on  your  own  fouls:  if  you  will 
damn  youifelves,  remember  I  am  free  from  the 
blood  of  you  all.  O  if  it  be  thy  blefled  will. 
Lord  moil  holy,  O  God  moft  mighty,  take 
the  hearts  of  thefe  fmners  into  thy  hand.  Me- 
thinks  I  fee  the  heavens  opened,  the  Judge  fit- 
ting on  his  throne,  the  fea  boiling  like  a  pot, 
and  the  Lord  Jefus  coming  to  judge  the  world  ; 
well,  if  you  are  damned,  it  fhall  not  be  for 
want  of  calling  after.  O  come,  come,  God 
help  you  to  come,  whilffc  Jefus  is  ftanding 
ready  to  receive  you.  O  fly  to  the  Saviour 
this  night  for  refuge ;  remember  if  you  die  in 
an  unconverted  flate  you  mufl  be  damned  for 

ever. 

O  that  I  could  but  perfuade  one  poor  foul 

to  fiy  to  Jefus  Chrift,   make  him  your  refuge  5 

and  then,   however   you    may  be  cafl  down, 

hope  in  God^  and youjljall yet  praife  hm,    God 

help  thole  that  have  believed,   to  hope  more 

and  more  in  his  falvation,  till  faith  be  turned 

into  vifion,  and  hope  into  fruition.     Even  fo. 

Lord  Jefus.     Amen  and  Amen. 


SERMON 


[    293     ] 

S  E  R  M  O  N     XIII. 

Spiritual  Baptifm. 


Romans  vI.  ver.  3,  4. 

Know  ye  nofy  that  fo  777any  of  us  as  were  bap^ 
tized  into  Jefus  Chriji^  were  baptized  into 
his  death  ?  Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him 
by  baptifm  into  death  :  that  like  as  Chrift  was 
raifed  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the 
Father^  even  fo  we  afo  fhould  walk  in  nsw- 
nefs  of  life. 

IBELEIVE,  my  dear  hearers,  I  may  ven- 
ture to  tell  you,  that  the  longer  you  live, 
the  more  you  will  find  that  the  royal 
preacher  fpoke  truth  when  he  faid,  There  is 
nothing  new  under  the  fun  %  for  as  God  is  al- 
ways the  fame,  fo  the  world,  the  flefh,  and 
the  devil  will  be  always  the  fame,  frail,  vile, 
inimical  and  deceitful.  New  fcenes  furprize 
us,  not  becaufe  they  are  really  new,  but  be- 

caufe 


294  Spiritual  Baptiftn.        Ser.  XIII. 

caufe  they  are  new  to  us :  our  lives  are  moftly 
taken  up  with  viewing  only  the  prefent  appear- 
ance of  things  'y  we  have  neither  time  or  leifure 
to  look  back  as  we  ought,   or  might,   upon 
the  events  of  Providence,  or  the  efFeds  of  the 
dodtrines  of  grace.    I  will  not  fay,  my  thoughts 
always  run  in  a  religious  channel,  but  I  will 
fay,  I  wifh  they  did.     The  words  in  our  text, 
as  conneded  with  what  preceeds  and  follows, 
contain  the  unchangeable  truths  of  God  :  nor 
am  I  any  ways  ftaggered  by  oppofition  to  the 
vindication  of  what  the  good  old  Puritans,  and 
the  Diffenters  of  the  prefent  age,  call  evangeli- 
cal docftrine.     I  do  not  know  a  man  that  has 
wrote  in  a  legal  ftrain,  or  that  reads,  or  talks 
in  common  converfation  in  a  legal  ftrain,  but 
difcovers  his  ignorance  of,  if  not  his  enmity 
'  to  the  dodrine  of  juflification  by  faith  alone, 
by  charging  it  with   very  bad  confequences, 
and  endeavouring  to  explode  it  as  a  dangerous 
.dodrine,   deftrudive  of  holinefs,  which  they 
would  feem  to  patronize  ;  though  if  one  were 
always  to  judge  of  them  by  their  calumniating 
pradice,  one  would  imagine  they  had  never 
read  with  proper  attention,  either  the  preceed- 
ing  or  following  chapters,  nor  that  wherein  is 
our   text,  which  proves   it   to  be  a  dodrine 

according 


Ser.  XIII.         Spiritual  Bapfifm,  295 

according  to  godiinefs,  and  therefore  properly 
begins.  What  Jhall  we  fay  then^  Jhall  we  conti^ 
7iiie  in  fm  that  grace  may  abound  ?  You  will 
fay,  I  have  been  iniifting  upon  the  univerfal 
depravity  of  nature,  I  have  been  bringing  all 
down  upon  an  equal  level ;  that  1  have  not 
only  mentioned  the  dreadful  ftate  of  Heathens, 
but  the  equally  dreadful  'ftate  of  the' haughty 
Jews,  and  ignorant  Gentiles,  one  only  finning 
againft  the  light  of  nature,  and  the  other  fin- 
ning againft  the  light  of  revelation,  by  which 
both,  in  one  fenfe,  ftand  on  an  equal  footing, 
though-  the  laft,  who  thinks  he  ftands  upon 
higher  ground,  appears  to  be  only  fuperior  in 
fin ;  why  then,  how  mufl  either  or  both  be 
faved,  fince  they  have  nothing  to  recommend 
them,  nothing  to  plead  as  an  atonement  for 
their  fins  ?  Here  comes  in  the  bleffed  dodrine 
of  juftiflcation,  by  the  glorious  imputed  righ- 
teoufnefs  of  Jefus  Chrift,  to  be  received  by 
faith  as  an  inftrument  by  the  poor  convided 
finner;  If  this  be  the  cafe,  pall  we  Jin  that 
grace  may  abound  t  this  ferves  as  a  foil,  to  fet 
off  the  riches  of  grace  with  a  greater  luftre. 
Is  it  not  a  very  unfair  dedudion,  to  fay  never 
mind  holinefs,  but  fin  that  grace  may  abound, 
that  God's  grace  may  be  more  confpicuous  ? 

Prav 


296  spiritual  Baptifm.        Ser.  XIII, 

Pray  how  does  the  apoftle  treat  this?  with 
the  utmoft  abhorrence  5  God  forbid^  fays  he  j 
how  dare  you  charge  the  doftrine  of  grace 
with  fuch  a  horrid  confequence  ?  God  forbid 
that  it  fhould  enter  into  our  hearts ;  for  how 
Jkall  we  that  are  dead  to  fin  live  any  longer 
therein  ?  Know  ye  not,  faith  he,  that  as  many 
of  lis  as  were  baptized  into  Chrifi^  are  baptized 
into  his  death  :  therefore,  faith  he,  fo  far  from 
finning  that  grace  may  abound,  we  look  upon 
ourfelves  as  beiiig  buried  with  Chrifi  by  baptifm 
into  deaths  that  like  as  Chriji  was  raijed  from 
the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father ^  evenfo  we 
alfo  fI:ould  walk  in  newnefs  of  lije.  This  I 
thought  a  proper  fupplement  to  fome  difcourfes 
I  have  endeavoured  to  deliver  you  for  fome  days 
laft  part,  when  treating  on  the  credibility  and 
authenticity  ofourblefled  Lord's  refurredtion. 

I  cannot  make  fport  for  the  devil  by  railing 
againfl infant  or  adult  baptifm^  it  is  a  ftrange 
thing  how  bigots  can  fet  the  world  on  fire  by 
throv/ing  water  at  one  another,  and  that  peo- 
ple cannot  be  baptized,  or  fprinkled,  as  the 
others  call  it,  without  befpattering  one  ano- 
ther, and  fhow  that  the  chief  thing  they  have 
been  baptized  into,  are  the  waters  of  ftrife^ 
this  is  catching  at  fhadows,  and  making  fport 

for 


S«er.  Xllli        Spiritual  Baptifrni  297 

for  the  devil,  while  the  combatants  on  both 
fides,  being  thus  engaged  in  throwing  the  fha- 
dowy  water  at  one  another,  lofc  the  fubftan- 
tials  of  religion,  while  they  are  defending  the 
outfide  of  it.  For  my  part,  I  do  not  enter 
into  the  debate  about  infant  or  adult  baptifm; 
there  has  been  a  difpute  about  the  mode,  as 
well  as  the  fubjeds  ofbaptifm  5  perfons  equally 
fkilled  in  language,  pretend  to  bring,  various 
texts  from  the  original,  to  prove  that  the  word 
baptizOy  fignifies  either  fprinkling  or  plunging  j 
and  I  believe  you  and  I  might  as  well  attempt 
to  draw  tv/o  parallel  lines,  and  bring  them  to 
meet  at  fome  certain  place,  as  to  bring  thefe 
learned  combatants  together ;  for  of  all  difpu- 
tant?,  religious  difputants  are  the  moil  fiery 
and  obftinate  5  therefore,  I  am  for  thofe  that 
have  learned  to  throw  water  upon  bigotted 
fire,  to  think y  and  let  think y  about  the  mode, 
and  confider  what  it  imports. 

It  is  certain,  that  in  the  words  of  our  text, 
there  is  an  allufion  to  the  manner  of  baptifm, 
vvhich  was  by  immerfion,  which  our  own 
church  allows,  and  infifts  upon  it,  that  chil- 
dren ihould  be  immerfed  in  water,  unlefs  thafe 
that  bring  the  children  to  be  baptized  afTure 
*he  minifter  that  they  cannot  bear  the  plunging. 
CLq  We 


29S     *    .      spiritual  Baptifm.       Ser.  XIII. 

We  will  allow  this  then,  that  one  was  plunged 
when  he  was  young,  another  plunged  when 
he  was   old  5   and,  in  fad:,-  when   adults  are 
plunged   as   they  ought,    it  is   backwards   at 
once :  but  whether  I  am  plunged  in  a  great 
deal,  or  buried  with  a  little  water,  as  a  body 
is  when  it  is  faid.  Earth  to  earth,  aJJjes  to  ajhes^ 
dujl  to  duft,  what  fignifies  it,  if  I  go  in  and 
come  out,  and  continue  juft  the  fame  as  before, 
unlefs  you  can  fay,  in  Heathen  and  out  Chrif- 
tian ',  but  we  fee  very  often  they  are  not  one 
bit  the  better,    they  have   not  one    grain   of 
Chriflianity  more.     Suppofing  a   child  when 
young  grov/s  up  to  a  man,  is  fprinkled,   or 
dipped  as  the  children  I  faw  at  Lifbon,    or  in 
our  font,  as  they  are  made  large  enough  to 
dip  in,   though  now    they  fprinkle^  fuppofe 
one  of  thefe  grows  up  a  child  of  the  devil,  and 
fays,  I  don't  look  upon  what  was  done  in  my 
infancy  to  be  baptifm,  I  will  be  baptized  really  ^ 
and  yet  fuppofe  alfo,  that  perfon  takes  up  only 
the  outward  fign,  and  both  of  them  die  and  go 
to  the  devil,    would  it   give  either   of  them 
fatisfadion  to  fay,  I  am  in  hell,  but  I  was  bap- 
tized when  an  infant,  or  adult  ?  both  of  them 
would  have  to  lament  they  were  tormented  in 
the  flame.     Would  it  not  be  better  for  us  to 

take 


Ser.  XIII.  ■       Spiritual  Eaptifm^  r^pc) 

take  care  not  to  offend  our  brethren,  not  to 
raife  one  anothers  fpirits  and  corruptions,  bat 
rather,  when  we  come  together,  talk  of  the 
heart,  and  enquire  whether,  when  we  received 
the  outward  lign  by  fprinkling  or  dipping,  we 
really  received  the  thing  fignified  in  our  hearts, 
and  exemplify  that  thing  fignified,  in  our  lives. 

Now  pray  what  is  the  thing  fignified  ?  we 
need  not  go  farther  for  an  anfwer  than  our 
text,  uis  many  of  them  as  were  baptized  into 
yefus  Chrijl^  were  baptized  into  his  death  :  and 
it  is  worthy  remarking,  that  our  Lord  told  his 
difciples,  that  they  were  to  baptize  all  nations 
in  the  name  of  the  Father^  and  of  the  Son^  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghojl,  Now  I  believe  all  perfons 
that  have  but  a  httle  Ikill  in  fcripture  interpre- 
tation, muft  allow  that  the  word  name  figni- 
fies  Chrifl ;  my  name  is  in  him,  fpeaking  in 
the  Old  Teftament  of  Chrift's  name  3  and 
when  we  fay,  in  or  by  the  7tanie^  it  has  a  pecu- 
har  reference  to  every  thing  that  bebngs  to 
God :  and  I  verily  believe  that  when  the  Re- 
deemer faid,  baptize  them  in  the  iiame  of  Pa- 
ther^  Son^  and  Holy  Gho/l^  he  not  only  inten- 
ded to  eftablifh  the  dodrine  of  three  perfons  in 
one  God,  but  alfo  to  point  out  the  nature  of 
true  baptifm,  namely,  to  be  baptized  into  the 
Q^q  2"  nature 


300  Spiritual  Baptifm.        Ser.  XIII. 

pature  of  the  Father,  into  the  nature  of  the 
Son,  and  into  the  nature  of  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
and  this  feems  to  be  the  meaning  of  our  text^ 
Know  ye  not  that  fo  many  as  were  baptia  ed  \ 
if  we  have  been  baptized  aright,  have  been 
baptized  not  only  in  the  name  of  Chrift,  but 
have  been  baptized  into  Chrift;  that  is,  v^e 
have  not  only  put  on  Chrift  in  an  outward  pro- 
feffion,  but  have  been  fo  baptized  by  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  as  to  be  made  members  of  Chrift's 
myftical  body,  united  to  him  by  the  bleffed 
Spirit  y  fo  that  in  a  degree,  though  not  in  every 
fenfe,  we  are  one  with  Chrift,  and  the  Father, 
through  him.  This  is  religion  common  to  all, 
whether  we  are  Baptift  or  Foedo-baptift^  for 
w^e  may  call  one  another  by  this  and  that  name, 
it  is  no  matter  what  we  are  called,  the  grand 
matter  is,  what  God  looks  upon  us  to  be  5 
whether  we  are  become  by  baptifm,  and  with 
the  powerful  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
accompanying  that  ordinance,  branches  of 
Jefus  Chrift,  the  true  vine.  It  has  been  always 
an  argument  with  me,  and  I  may  plead  for 
the  fame  liberty  that  I  give,  that  I  think  in- 
fant-baptifm  is  an  ordinance  of  Chrift,  becaufe 
if  our  children  are  not  to  be  baptized,  they  are 
|eft  inferior  in   their  privilegfss  to  the  Jews, 

their 


Ser.  XIII.        Spiritual  Baptifm.  30 1 

their  children  were  circumcifed  to  God,  and 
why  fliould  not  our  children  be  as  foon  initiated 
into  Chrift  as  they  ?  The  apoftle  faith,  He  is 
not  a  Jew  that  is  one  outwardly y  neither  is  that 
circumcifion  which  is  outwardly  in  the  Jlejh^ 
but  circumcifion  is  that  of  the  heart  and  of  the 
Jpirit,  wbofe  praife  is  not  of  men  but  of  God*, 
fo  it  may  be  faid  of  outward  baptifm,  he  is 
not  a  Chriftian  who  is  baptized  only  outward- 
ly, but  he  that  is  baptized  inwardly  of  the 
Spirit,  whofe  praife  is  not  of  men  but  of  God, 
When  we  get  a  profelite,  we  are  fo  fond  of 
them  that  we  hug  them  to  death  :  I  have  got 
the  praife  of  men  efpecially  when  religion 
walks  in  filver  flippers ;  when  a  perfon  fays,  I 
may  get  bufinefs  if  I  get  into  fuch  a  church, 
into  fuch  a  fociety  5  a  man  may  become  reli- 
gious as  he  may  go  to  'Change  for  trade,  but 
he  is  a  Chriftian  who  is  one  inwardly,  who 
has  no  worldly  views,  no  defigns  but  what  are 
fubordinate  to  the  glory  of  God.  The  primi- 
tive Chriflians  gave  great  proof  of  their  fincerity, 
they  were  baptized  over  the  dead  ;  what  Jloall 
they  do  who  are  baptized  for  ^  or  over,  the  dead? 
notwithftanding  they  faw  their  fellow- creatures 
murdered,  they  dared  to  go  openly  to  be  bap^ 
dzed  5  though  they  knew  very  wel|  foon  after, 

that 


302  spiritual  Baptifin.        Ser.  XIII. 

that  for  their  baptlfm  with  water,  they  fhould 
be  baptized  with  fire,  and  yet  they  dared 
openly  to  avow  their  profeffion  of  Chrift. 
This  is  being  baptized  into  Chrift ;  well,  what 
then  ?  why,  then  we  are  baptized  into  his 
death.  Can  you  tell  me  what  that  is  ?  I  can- 
not fully,  I  don't  know  that  myfelf ;  and  we 
fhould  preach  according  to  our  experience,  (a 
man  of  little  true  grace,  he  will  give  you  a  Ht- 
tle,  little,  little  practical  application  5  very  lit- 
tle, becaufe  he  has  but  little  himfelf  j  a  man 
that  has  a  good  deal  of  it  in  his  heart,  he  will 
not  negied  his  principles,  but  he  will  give  the 
people  a  good  found  meal  of  praftical  religion) 
though  I  am  but  a  babe  in  Chrift,  though  I 
have  been  in  Chrift  four  or  five  and  thirty 
years,  and  know  but  little  of  Chrift,  yet  I 
think  I  can  tell  you  a  little  what  it  is  to  be 
baptized  into  Chrift,  to  be  baptized  into  his 
death.  Am  I  immediately  to  die  in  the  body  ? 
that  does  not  always  follow,  but  we  are  to  dief 
daily,  we  are  to  be  conformed  to  Chrift's 
death,  which  we  never  can  till  we  have  been 
baptized  into  Chrift ;  we  can  never  die  till  we 
have  been  enabled  by  his  power  to  die.  When 
we  talk  of  dying  the  death  of  Chrift,  we 
mean  being  crucified  to  the  world  with  him. 

I  livey 


Ser.XIII.        Spiritual  Baptifm.  303 

I  live,  fays  Paul,  yet  not  7,  hut  Chrifl  li-ces  in 
me ;  and  the  world  is  crucified  to  me,  and  I 
unto  the  world.     Now  we  all  come  into  the 
world  alive  to  the  world,    the  flefli,  and  the 
devil.     Some  people  fay,   a  child  muft  cry  in 
order  to  prove  itfelf  an   heir ;  what  do  you 
think  it  cries  for  ?  I  believe  fome  people  think 
'tis  becaufe  it  is  in  pain,   but  I  am  afraid  the 
child  cries  becaufe  he  is  hurt  y  I  believe  he  finds 
the  air  too  cool  for  him  ;  and  thefirft  thing  he 
does,  is  giving  a  proof  of  original  fin  to  his 
parents,    and   all   the  attendants   about  him : 
this  is  called  in  fcripture,   the  old  man ;  and 
however  fome  may  find  fault  with  the  Church 
of  England,  and  its  forms  (perhaps  they  may 
be  mended,  but  I  queftion  whether  we  have 
men  capable  of  mending  them   now-a-days, 
cither  for  zeal  or  fpiritual  knowledge)  yet  I 
am  fure  there  is  fomething  in  it  very  good, 
particularly  there  is  that  prayer  to  be  put  up 
by  a  child,   deferves  to  be  written  in    letters 
of  gold.  Grants  O  Lord,   that  all  things  be- 
longing  to  the  old  man  may  die  in  me-,  and  then 
follows  (what  I  (hall  fpeak  of  by  and  byj  and 
all  belonging  to  the  new  man  may  live  and  grow 
in  me.     There  is  the  whole  fum  and  fubftance 
of  religion,    the  Alpha   and  Omega,  the  be- 
ginning, 


304  Spiritual  Baptifm^       Ser.  XnL> 

ginning,    the   middle,    and   the  end,   as  Mn 
Ambrofe's  works  are  intitled.     We  want  no- 
thing but  all  things  belonging  to  the  old  man 
to  die  in  us,  and  all  things  belonging  to  the 
new  to  live,  to  make  us  fit  for  the  kingdom 
of  Chrift  y  and  if  we  ean  find  this  in  us,  God 
grant  we  may  not  quarrel  one  with  another^ 
though  I  verily  believe  young  men  think  the 
old  man  is  very  troublefome.     There  is  one 
does  not  live  very  far  from  hence,  who  is  a 
very   worthy  man,    I  remember  a  few  years 
ago  he  came  in,  in  his  firfl  love,  faying,  "  he 
had  got  on  the  mount  ^  the  fire  burnt  upwards, 
though  there  was  a  good  deal  of  fmoak.     Pray^ 
fays  I,  is  the  old  man  dead  yet?  no,  faid  he, 
he  is  not  quite  dead,  but  fpoke  as  if  he  thought 
he  was  expiring  j  fays  I,  I  will  fpeak  to  you 
three  or  four  years  hence.     Some  time  after 
that,  meeting  him,    I  afked  him  concerning 
the  old  man,  he  faid,  he  thought  he  was  alive 
and  worfe  than  ever,  and  that  he  was  a  fly 
creature,  would  lie  down  as  if  he  was  afleep, 
that  he  may  attack  you  when  off  your  guard 
the  better/*  I  heard  of  a  good  man  in  the  coun- 
try, who  faid,  he  found  his  corruptions  were 
a  monfter  of  a  thoufand  heads ;  now  this  is 

called  a  crucifixion,   which  is  a  painful  and  a 

gradual 


Ser.  XIII,        Spiritual  Baptiftn.  30^ 

gradual  death,  but  a  certain  death :  Gcd  for- 
bid any  of  you  now  fhould  turn  the  food  into 
poifon,  faying,  this  is  a  very  good  dodtrine,  I 
like  it  5  the  minifter  fays  the  old  man  dies  flow, 
fo  I  will  not  crucify  him  ^   they  tell  me  he  will 
die  by  and  by,   but  not  yet,  fo  I  will  not  trou- 
ble myfelf  much  about  him ;  why  then,  my 
dear  hearer,  whoever  thou  art,  thou  talked 
like  a  (linking  hypocrite,  or  a  rank,  vile  An-  j 
tinomian ;  how,  how,  is  the  old  man  fuch  a 
pleafant  companion,  that  you  love  to  have  him 
dwelling  under  your  roof?  would  you  chufe 
to  have  a  parcel  of  whores  and  rogues  to  live 
in  your  houfes  ?  would  you  hke,  if  you  lived 
by  letting   of  lodgings,  two  or  three  rooms 
fuppofe,  to  have  a  parcel  of  thieves  and  rob- 
berSi    and   pickpockets,   come    and  tell   you 
their  profeffion,   would  it  not  be  foolifh  for 
you  to  let  fuch  people  in,  would  it  not  ?  and 
juft   fuch   fools  you  are    to  let   pickpockets, 
ftreet-robbers,  God-robbers,  vile  proftitutes  in  • 
your  wicked  hearts,  the  lufts  of  the  flefh,  the 
lufts  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,  flay  not 
only  till  quarter-day,    but  long  after :  before 
you  turn  them  out,  you  rnay  be  dead;  no, 
no,  it  is  not  an  inilantaneous,  but  a  gradual, 

progreffive  work. 

R  r  Then 


'306  spiritual  Baptifm.        Ser.  XIII. 

Then  we  are  baptized  into  Chrift,  when  we 
ftudy  to  glorify  Chrift;  that  is  the  reafon  that 
God  Almighty  fends  you  fo  many  trials,  that 
you  may  be  baptized  into  his  death  5  and  ge- 
nerally you  will  find,  when  you  have  had 
moft  communications  from  God,  that  fome 
crofs  trials  foon  foUovr.  Haft  thou  been  pray- 
ing for  refignation  ?  perhaps  God  •  takes  away 
a  beloved  child ;  you  have  been  praying  for 
great  patience,  perhaps  a  crofs  wife,  a  Naba! 
of  a  hufband,  bad  fervants,  undutiiul  children, 
or  fomething  or  other,  and  the  devil  at  the 
head  of  them,  making  you  uneafy,  fo  that 
you  find  you  have  not  fo  much  patience  as 
you  thought  you  had  5  you  never  w^as  upon 
the  mount  in  ypur  lives,  but  when  you  came 
down,  you  were  tempted  to  break  the  tables : 
was  it  not  fo  with  Mofes  after  forty  days  com- 
munion with  God  ?  down  he  came,  and  fee- 
ing the  people  dancing  round  the  calf,  down 
he  throws  the  tables,  and  breaks  them  all  ta 
pieces  3  and  if  God  was  not  to  keep  us,  after 
all  our  communion  with  him,  we  fhould  break 
the  tables  to  pieces  and  be-  damned.  After 
all  that  perfon  then  is  dying  evei-y  day,, 
who  looks  upon  himfelf  every  morning  as  one 
that  is  to  be  crucified  afrefh,  that  looks  for 

crolTes^j 


Sen  XIII.       Spiritual  Baptifm,  307 

croffe$,.  and  at  the.fame  time  waljvS.fQ  jnof- 
fenfivgly.  as  to.  bring  no  profs  vipoa  liimfelf.  I 
fpoke  to  a  perfon  ycfterclay  .aboi;t.  the:  crofs ; 
piay  fir,  fays  he,  would  you  have,  me  bring  a 
crqfs  upon  myfclf ;  no,  faid  |,  only  behoueft, 
and  you  will  find  crofles  enough.,   * 

Then  we  mufl:  be  raifed  to  newne(s  of  life, 
as  Chrift  was  raifed  from  the  dead  by  the  glory 
of  the  Father;  this,  points  out  to  us  in -what 
fenfe  Jefus  Chriil  is  the  refurrcdion  and  the 
life,  and  fliews  us  that,  every  thing  Jefus  Chri.ft 
did  and  fuftered,  mufl  be  fpirituahy  experi- 
enced in  our  hearts.  You  have  often  heard 
me  fay,  as  he  was  born  in  the  Virgin's  womb, 
he.mufc  be  born  in  our  hearts,  and  as  he  died 
for  fin,  we  muil  die  to  fin,  as  lie  rofe  again, 
we  mufl:  rife  to  newnefs  of  heart  and  life. 
What  is  the  new  birth  ?  fays  a  great  doctor : 
fuppofe  any  of  thefe  dodors  were  to  come  to 
any  woman  Vv'hen  her  travelling  pains  were 
upon  her,  and  flie  was  crying  cut,  and.  labour 
pains  came  on  fafl:er  and  fafl:er,  and  they  Ihould 
ftand  preaching  at  the  door,  and  fay,  good 
woman,  thefe  are  only  metaphorical  pains, 
this  is  only  a  bold  exprefiion  of  the  Eafteras, 
it  is  only  metaphorical,  I  quefl;ion  whether  the 
woman  would  not  wifh  the  doflors  fome  of 
R  r  2  thefe 


3o8  Spiritual  Baptifm.       Ser.  XIII. 

thefe  metaphorical  pains  for  talking  fo,  which 
they  would  find  real  ones  5  though  fhe  could 
not  read  fhe  might  feel.     But  notwithftanding 
the  reality  of  the  new  birth,  and  the  pains  that 
attend  it,  yet  they  fay  it  is  only  a  metaphorical 
thing.     I  am  of  an  odd  temper,  and  of  fuch  a 
temper,  that  I  heartily  wifh  they  may  be  put 
under  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth,   and  know 
what  it  is  by  their  own  experience,  know  there 
is  nothing  in  nature  more  real  than  the  new 
birth.     The   apoftle    Paul   faid,   /  travel  in 
birth  till  Chrift  be  formed  in  you :  now  don't 
you  think  the  apoftle  had  this  metaphorical 
expreffion  of  fomething    real  5    the  apoftle's 
travelling  in  birth  muft  be  fomething  analogous 
to  the  natural  birth ;  muft  I  fay  there  is  no 
fuch  thing  as  pangs  becaufe  I  don't  feel  them : 
I  am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  that  my 
foul  knows  right   well  ^  and  in  refpedt  to  the 
new  birth  we  may  fay,  I  am   fearfully  and 
wonderfully  redeemed  by  Chrift,  and  renewed 
by  the  Holy  Ghoft  ;  the  new  life  imparts  new 
principles,  a  new  underftanding,  a  new   will 
and  new  afFedions,  a  renewed  confcience,  a 
renewed  memory,  nay,  a  renewed  body,  by 
making  it  the  temple  of  the  living  God,  an 
habitation  of  God   through  the  Spirit,   tnd 

walking 


Ser.  XIII.        Spiritual  Baptifnu  309 

walking  in  newnefs  of  life;  if  I  am  not  mifta- 
ken,  it  implies  a  progreffivc  motion,  going 
from  ftrength  to  ftrength,  from  one  degree  of 
grace  to  another,  pafling  from  glory  to  glory, 
for  grace  is  only  glory  in  the  bud,  till  grace  is 
fwallowed  up  in  endlefs  glory.  A  perfon  that 
walks,  though  he  may  not  walk  equally  fall 
as  others,  yet  may  get  ground  :  hence,  not  t^ 
go  forward  is  to  go  backward,  Enoch  walked 
with  God ;  it  befpoke  the  habitual  tendency 
of  his  heart,  the  actual  exercife  of  grace,  that 
he  was  kept  in  a  lively  frame,  walked  with 
God  among  a  very  wicked  generation,  dared 
to  be  good  when  all  were  wicked  around  him, 
and  he  was  fo  favoured,  as  to  be  tranllated  to 
heaven  ;  this  was  the  cafe  with  Elijah.  Mofes^ 
fays  the  Lord,  go  up  to  the  mount  and  die : 
God  made  him  undrefs  himfelf,  and  put  on 
his  own  grave  cloaths,  gives  him  a  fight  of 
Canaan,  but  to  let  him  know  that  he  even  to 
the  very  laft  would  chaftife  his  people,  when 
he  is  even  taking  them  to  heaven  ;  tells  him, 
thou  fhalt  not  go  into  the  earthly  Canaan,  but 
I  will  take  thee  to  the  heavenly  one,  which  is 
far  better.  Being  baptized  into  the  death  of 
Chrift,  befpeaks  the  habitual  tendency  and 
practice  of  the  heart  and  life  5  the  old  man  muft 

die. 


3IO  Spiritual  Bapfifm.        Ser.  XIII. 

die,  hence  the  new  man  mufl:  Hve ;  it  mufl 
be  emptied  of  felf,  that  there  may  be  more 
and  more  room  for  God:  now  I  appeal  to 
your   hearts,  how   far   you  have  experienced 
this.     I  believe  the  world  pretty  well  knows, 
the  temper  of  my  mind,  both  in  refpedl  to, 
politics  and  church-government,  and  church- 
principles :  i  am  a  profelTed  avower  of  mode- 
ration, and  I  heartily  wifli  that  ail  who.  a^Q 
concerned  in  church  and  Hate,  may  particularly 
take  care  to  let  their  moderation  be  known  to 
aU  men,  for  if  we  quarrel  with  one  another, 
we  fhall  only  make  fport  for  the '  devil,   and 
cccafion.  deftrudlion.     I  don't   care    whether 
you  go  to  church  or  meeting ;  I  am,  I  pro- 
fefs,  a  member  of  the  church  of  England,  and 
if  they  will  not  let  me  preach  in  the  churcJi, 
I  will  preach  any  where ;  all  the  world  is  my 
parifh,  and  I  will  preach  wherever  God  gives 
xne  an  opportunity,  but  you  will  never  find  me 
difputing  about   the   outv/ard   appendages   of 
rj  religion  3  don't  tell  me  you  are  a  Baptift,  an 
;  ilndependant,  a  Preibyterian, ,  a  Diffenter,  tell 
/  I  me  you  are  a  Chriflian,  that  is  all  I  want ;  this 
'is  the  religion  of  heaven,-  and  mufl:  be  ours 
upon  earth  3  I  fay,  are  there  any  of  you  under 
the  gallery,  or  in  the  green-feat,  or  any  where, 

I  will 


Ser.  XIII.       Spiritual  Baptlfml  3 1 1 

I  will  try  to  find  you  out  before  I  have  done 
my  fermon,  though  you  are  come  in  the  dark. 

But  I  will  juft  at  prefent  fpeak  to  you  who 
underftand  the  gofpel,  to  you  that  are  my  bx^e^ 
thren,  though,  in  all  probability,  rriy  elder  bre- 
thren in  the  gofpel.  Methinks  there  is  fome- 
thing  folemn  in  meeting  in  the  evening,  fome- 
thing  folemn  in  coming  to  wor/hip  after  we 
have  been  in  the  labours  of  the  day;  and  I 
verily  believe,  that  when  weekly  preaching  is 
banifhed  from  London,  that  all  Chriftianity 
will  be  baniflied,  it  cannot  be  very  long  after 
it,  there  have  been  fuch  inftances,  you  may 
die  before  to-morrow.  I  think  a  good  tradef- 
man,  whether  he  deals  largely  or  not,  will 
take  care  to  keep  his  day-book  well  -,  if  a  man 
will  not  keep  his  day-book  well,  it  is  ten  to 
one  but  he  lofes  a  good  deal  when  he  comes 
to  count  up  his  things  at  Chriftmas;  no^v  I 
take  it  for  granted,  a  good  fpiritual  tradefman. 
will  keep  his  fpiritual  day-book  well :  can 
you  fay,  this  day  I  hope  I  have  died  a  little 
more  to  the  world  than  yefterd^y,  this  day  I 
hope  1  have  been  a  little  m^ore  alive  to  God 
than  I  was  yefterday ;  and  yet  when  I  look 
upon  my  family,  whether  a  man  trades  whdle- 
fale  or  retail,  when  he  finds  he  has  done  but 

little 


312;  Spiritual  Baptifm.       Ser.  Xllt 

little  bufinefs  that  day,  great  going  out,  and 
little  coming  in.  I  hope  when  you  die  but 
little  daily,  that  you  go  to  bed  begging  pardon, 
and  begging  grace,  that  you  may  die  more  to 
yourfelves  and  the  world,  and  live  more  to 
God  to-morrow  j  for  I  am  fure  I  can  call  you 
to  witnefs,  that  you  never  lived  fo  comfortably 
as  when  you  lived  near  to  God  3  you  may  as 
well  pretend  to  fay,  that  a  perfon  in  a  cold 
winter's  day  is  warmefl  when  he  keeps  from 
the  fire,  as  to  fay,  a  foul  can  live  near  to  God 
when  he  does  not  die  daily  to  fin,  O,  fays 
one,  don't  tell  me  of  your  frames,  don't  mind 
them  5  I  will  tell  you  of  them,  don' t  mind  your 
frames^  I  don't  in  refped  to  juflification,  but 
I  will  to  the  well-being  and  comfort  of  my 
foul :  a  man  that  has  got  but  very  little  fpirits 
may  be  alive,  but  there  is  a  wide  difference 
between  having  a  diforder  that  one  can  hardly 
fpeak,  having  no  fpirits  at  all,  or  but  very  few^ 
and  having  folid  health :  God  grant  we  may 
be  healthy  Chriflianss  the  more  you  live  to 
God,  the  more  you  will  have  health ;  be  not 
angry  with  me ;  affure  yourfelves  a  lukewarm 
Chriftian  does  more  hurt  to  religion,  than  all 
the  open  infidels  in  the  kingdom;  we  have 
God  himfelf  afferting  this,  T^kou  art  neither 

hot 


Set,  XIIL        Spiritual  Baptifm.  313 

hot  nor  colJ^  1  would  thou  wajl  either  cold  or 
Jooty  but  becaufe  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hoty 
but  lukewarm^  Iwilljpew  thee  out  of  my  mouth  j 
what  an  expreflion  is  that !  what  a  naufeous 
thing  is  lukewarm  water  to  a  fick  flomach ! 
I  will  come  ajid  remove  my  candlejlick  from  you. 
Therefore,  I  believe,  it  is  the  opinion  of  all 
judicious  men,  that  if  we  fhould  have  a  fevere 
rod  of  correftion  to  ftir  us  up,  it  is  becaufe  of 
the  lukewarmnefs  of  mofl:  Chrifiians :  my  bre- 
thren, God  make  us  all  alive  to  Chrifl  to- 
night; come,  come,  if  your  foul  is  for  Chrift, 
to  arms,  to  arms,  put  on  your  cockades,  you 
that  have  them  in  your  pockets,  for  fear  you 
fliould  be  known  to  be  Chrift's.  O  you  cow- 
ards; many  foldiers  put  of5f  their  cockades,  as 
if  they  were  not  foldiers ;  as  many  of  our  cler- 
gy affed:  to  drefs  like  the  laity,  that  they  may 
go  to  the  plays,  that  the  orange-women  may 
not  know  them,  and  they  don't  care  whether 
God  fees  them  or  no.  I  deiire  you  will  all 
appear  in  your  proper  drefles,  let  us  fee  it  is 
painted  on  the  breaft- plates  of  your  hearts,  by 
the  blelTed  monitor,  the  eternal  Spirit  of  God; 
1  don't  want  you  to  wear  them  as  the  Papifts, 
upon  your  faces,  no ;  you  that  are  for  infant- 
baptifm,   were   figned   with  the  fign   of  the 

S  f  crofs, 


314  Spiritual  Baptifm.         Ser.  XIII. 

crofs,  for  what  ?  that  you  might,  when  you 
came  of  age,  prove  Chrijl's  Jaithful  Joldiers  to 
the  e7id:  God  grant,  the  nearer  we  come  to 
the  end  the  bolder  we  may  be  for   Chrift. 

If  there  be  any  of  you  here  that  are  formalifts, 
that  have  a  natne  to  live  and  are  dead,  the 
Lord  grant,  that  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  who 
was  raifed  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  his 
Father,  caufe  a  ftirring  among  thefe  dry  bones. 
Think  what  it  will  be  to  go  to  hell  to-night, 
to  want  a  drop  of  water,  wherewith  you  was 
fprinkled,  to  cool  your  tongues  in  hell  >  think 
what  it  will  be  to  go  to  hell  by  the  way  of 
heaven,  which  is  the  worft  way  you  can  take  j 
think  what  it  will  be  to  bejuftat  the  threlliold, 
and  not  have  religion  enough  to  take  you  over ; 
my  heart  bleeds  for  you.  '  Had  you  a  fon,  a 
father,  a  mother,  a  relation,  to  be  tried  at  the 
Old-Bailey  this  feffions,  how  would  you  be 
concerned,  how  carefully  would  you  enquire 
when  your  relation  would  be  tried,  iiow  anxious 
would  you  be  to  hear  whether  he  is  conderrned 
or  no  \  and  if  fomebody  was  to  qqhx  to  tell 
you,  now  he  is  about  to  be  tried  ahd  caft,  aiid 
now  the  judge  is  going  to  put  his  cap  on,  to 
pafs  fentence  on  him^  how  would  you  bear  it? 
I  believe  lom^  ol  you  would  aiop  a  tear,  ^nd 


5er,  Xin.        Spiritual  Baptifm.  315 

fay,  O  that  this  poor  creature  fhould  be  born 
for  this  i  and  can  you  blame  a  poor  minifter  of 
Chrift,    a  poor  finner  that  has  been  redeemed 
by  the  blood  of  Chrifl,  and  I  humbly  believe 
and  hope,  has  been  made  a  partaker  of  the 
Spirit,   will  you  blame  me  for  being  concerned 
for  you,  my  brethren  and  my  fifters,   for  you 
and  I  fprung  from  one  father   and   mother, 
Adam  and  Eve,  the  common  parents  of  us  all  j 
can  you  blame  me  for  pouring  out  my  foul, 
can  you  blame  me  for  fpeaking  a  little  home, 
v^'hen  the  Judge  is  juft  ready  to  mount  the 
throne,  when  the  books  are  open,  when  I  fee 
the  elenients  melting  with  fervent  heat,  when 
I  fee  all  nature  concurring  to  uilier  in  the  awful 
coming  of  the  Son  of  God.    Sinners  in  Zion, 
baptized  heathens,  profeiTors  but  not  poiTelTors, 
formalifts,    believing   unbelievers,    talking   of 
Chrift,    talking   of  grace,    orthodox  in  your 
creeds,  but  heterodox  in  your  lives,  turn  yc, 
turn  ye.  Lord  help  you  to  turn  to  him,  turn 
ye  to  Jefus  Chrift,    and   may  God  turn  you 
infide  out  to-night;  may  the   power  of  the 
higheft  overfhadow  you,  and  may  that  glorious 
Father  that  raifed  Chrift  from  the  dead,  raife 
your  dead  fouls.     Turn  the  text  into  a  prayer, 
go  home  and  fay,  for  what  purpofe  have  I 
S  f  2  lived? 


3i6  Spiritual  Baptifm.       Ser.  XIIT. 

lived  ?  into  what  have  I  been  baptized  ?  I 
have  not  fo  much  as  yet  been  baptized  into. 
Jordan  j  I  have  never  led  a  life  one  day  of  re- 
formation but  when  I  was  obliged  to  it :  blefs 
God  that  you  are  not  now  among  the  damned  ; 
blefs  God  that  you  are  not  now  howling  in 
hell  'y  blefs  the  Lord  that  Jefus  ftands  with 
pitying  eyes,  and  outftretched  arms  to  receive 
you  now  ^  will  you  go  with  the  man  ?  will 
you  accept  of  Chrift  ?  will  you  begin  to  live 
now  ?  may  God  fay,  Amen ;  may  God  pafs 
by,  not  in  anger  but  in  love ;  may  he,  as  he 
hath  hitherto  feen  you  in  your  blood,  has  faid 
to  you,  live,  and  has  preferved  you  in  your 
natural  ftate,  may  that  fame  God  of  love,  mer- 
cy, and  life,  pafs  by  you,  and  caft  the  ikirts 
of  his  love  over  you,  and  fay  to  you  dead  fin- 
ners,  come  forth,  live  a  life  of  faith  on  earth, 
live  a  life  of  viiion  in  heaven  3  even  fo.  Lord 
Jefus.     Amen. 


SERMON 


[    31?    ] 


ss'.^mi^^^It^gg 


SERMON     XIV. 

Neglea  of  Chrift  the  killing  Sin. 

John  V,  ver.  40. 
And  ye  will  not  come  to  me  that  ye  may  haix  life. 

THE  great  apoftle  of  the  Gentiles,  after 
he  had  fet  before  the  Hebrews  the 
great  cloud  of  witneffes  of  Old  Tefla- 
nient  believers,  exhorts  them  to  look  higher, 
even  to  Jefus  the  common  Saviour,  and  that 
not  tranfiently,  but  earneftly  and  conftantly, 
in  his  mediatorial  chara(fter  of  humiliation,  as 
enduring  unheard  of,  unparallelled  contradic- 
tion of  finners  againft  himfelf  ^  leajiy  fays  he, 
ye  be  weary ^  and  faint  in  your  minds.  If  ure 
had  not  fuch  an  example  fet  before  us,  and 
brought  to  us  by  the  Holy  Ghoft  in  a  faifering 
hour,  we  fhould  never  hold  out  to  the  end : 
this  was  not  the  contradidion  of  the  openly 
profape  ^nd  fcandalous,  thofe  that  were  with- 
out. 


3 1 8  Negm  of  Chrijl        Sen  XIV. 

out,  fo  much  as  from  thofe  that  were  within 
the  pale  of  the  church,  even  thofe  to  whom 
were  committed  the  Hvely  oracles  of  God,  who 
had  not  only  the  very  bible  in  their  own  hands, 
but  were  fet  apart  to  explain  it  to  others.  That 
the  words  of  our  text  were  fpoken  to  them, 
appears  from  the  preceeding  verfe,  in  which 
he  bids  thtm  fearch  the  fcriptures  -^  as  a  perfon 
digs  for  a  mine,  or  fearches  for  fome  hidden 
treafure.  The  word  bible,  or  book  which 
I  have  in  my  hand,  is  well  applied  to  the  holy 
fcriptures,  becaufe  it  is  the  book  of  God,  writ- 
ten by  him,  that  is,  by  his  order,  and  by  thofe 
who  were  infpired  by  him  for  that  end;  and 
yet,  of  all  writings  in  the  world,  thefe  are  moffc 
negleded!  God  has  condefcended  to  become 
an  author,  and  yet  people  will  not  read  his 
writings.  There  are  very  few  that  ever  gave 
this  book  of  God,  the  grand  charter  of  falva- 
tion,  one  fair  reading  through  :  though  we 
profefs  to  have  affented  to  the  truth  of  fcripture, 
as  our  Lord  faid,  in  them  we  think  we  have 
eternal  lifey  yet  moil  read  them  as  they  would 
a  proclamation,  a  romance,  a  play,  or  novels, 
that  help  only  to  bring  them  to  the  devil,  but 
chufe^  not  to  read  God's  book,  which  is  to  be 
our  guide  to  glory ;  the^  are  they^  fays  Chrift, 

which 


Ser.  XIV.         the  killing  Sin.  ^{^ 

which  tejlify  of  me :  Lord   God  convert  and 
change  our  hearts. 

However,  this  was  fpoken  in  reference  to 
the  Old  Teftament,  and  certainly  fhows  us, 
that  Chrift  is  the  treafure  hid  in  that  field,  yet 
as  there  are  equal  proofs  of  the  divinity  of  the 
New  Teftament,  the  word  Holy  Scriptures 
include  both,  efpecially  as  Chrift  is  the  anti- 
type of  all  the  types,  the  Alpha  and  Omega, 
the  beginning  and  the  end  of  all  divine  revela-* 
tion :  would  to  God  he  was  your  Alpha  and 
Omega  too  !  Now,  faith  Chrift,  you  pretend 
to  reverence  the  fcriptures  3  you  that  are  fet 
apart  as  perfons  learned  in  the  fcriptures,  ye 
Scribes,  ye  lawyers,  fuch  as  were  mentioned 
in  the  gofpel  to-day.  I  fancy  feme  people 
think,  that  when  we  read  of  lawyers  in  the 
fcriptures,  that  we  mean  fuch  lawyers  as  ours, 
who  deal  only  in  the  civil  and  common  law, 
but  they  were  thofe  that  opened  and  explained 
the  law  to  the  people;  thefe  were  the  perfons 
who  thought  and  profeffed,  that  in  them  they 
had  eternal  life,  that  they  teftify  of  Chrift  the 
great  Prophet  that  was  promifed  in  the  fcrip- 
tures to  come  into  the  world  ^  yet,  faith  our 
divine  mafter,  to  thefe  very  profelTors,  thefe 
mafters  in  Ifrael,  ye  will  not  come  to  me  that 

ye 


320  Negk£t  of  Chrtjl       Sen  XIV. 

ye  may  have  life :  though  I  am  now  prefent 
with  you,  though  I  am  now  come  to  explain 
the  fcriptures,  and  fulfil  them,  am  now  come 
to  proclaim  to  you  that  life,  that  eternal  life, 
which  the  fcriptures  declare  were  to  be  pub- 
liflied  and  proclaimed  by  me,  yet  ye  will  not 
come  unto  7ne  that  ye  may  have  life. 

By  eternal  life  we  are  to  underftand,  all  the 
bleffings  of  a  converted  ftate,  particularly  the 
pardon  of  lins,  not  only  before  converfion  but 
after.  It  is  impoffible  but  there  fliould  be  fin 
every  day  and  every  hour  in  every  profeffing 
perfon.  My  dear  hearers,  as  I  {hall  not  have 
an  opportunity  for  fome  time  to  fpeak  to  you, 
I  don*t  chufe,  efpecially  when  I  am  about  to 
take  my  leave  of  you,  to  fpeak  any  thing  that 
is  fevere,  but  I  aflure  you  without  attempting 
to  offend,  with  a  broken  heart  I  affure  you, 
i  that  this  was  the  treatment  Jefus  Chrifl  met 
with  of  old,  and,  God  knows,  this  is  the  treat- 
ment Jefus  Chrift  meets  with  now  :  ye  will  n&t 
come  to  me  that  ye  ma)  have  eternal  life. 

If  I  am  not  miftaken,  and  I  think  I  am  not, 
the  words  fuppofe,  that  they  and  we  are  all 
dead  in  fm,  for  if  we  are  not,  I  do  not  know 
why  we  need  come  to  have  life  ^  and  I  mentioa 
this,  becaufc  for  want  of  believing  and  know- 
ing 


Self.  XIV.  fhe  killing  Sin.  .        321 

ing  this,  fome  that  pretend  to  know  Chrifl 
Stnd  to  preach  him,  forget  to  lay  the  proper 
foundation,  original  fin  5  and  that  there  is  no 
ability  or  inclination  in  the  heart  of  a  natural 
man,  fo  much  as  to  do  any  thing  fpiritual; 
he  is  ftupid  and  dead.  But  if  we  have  eyes 
to  fee,  if  we  have  ears  to  hear,  and  if  our 
hearts  are  not  waxed  hard,  doubtlefs  it  would 
appear  as  clear  to  us  as  the  fun  fhining  in  its 
meridian  brightnefs,  that  man  was  dead  till 
God  breathed  into  him  the  breath  of  life,  and 
then  he  became  a  living  foul.  I  know  fome 
people  believe  that  the  words  mean  this,  that 
God  breathed  into  man,  and  he  became  a  natu- 
ral living  foul,  like  other  animals  ,  but  then 
they  don't  confider  what  a  life  God  did  breath 
into  the  foul,  he  breathed  into  it  the  life  of 
Godj  a  fpiritual  life  was  breathed  into  the  foul ; 
it  is  expreffed  in  the  ftrongeft,  but  at  the  fame 
time  in  the  moft  concife  terms  that  is  poffible, 
none  but  God,  none  but  a  man  infpired  by 
God,  could  fay  fo  much  in  fo  few  words*  it 
fliows  great  fkill  in  men  to  fay  fo  much  in  a 
httle  5  what  uninfpired  nqian  ever  wrote  fo  as 
Mofes  did  ?  Now  Mofes  when  he  penned  the 
fcriptures,  faid,  God  made  man  after  his  owrf 
image^  and  you  know  ten  thoufand  volumes 
T  t  could 


322  Negle^  of  Chriji         Ser.  XIV. 

could  not  have  faid  more  than  that.  How 
long  do  you  think  it  was  that  man  continued  in 
his  original  purity  ?  I  don't  know  that  I  ever 
yet  heard,  that  any  one  thought  he  continued 
in  his  bleffed  ftate  (o  long  as  from  Saturday  to 
Saturday.  Mr.  Bofton,  who,  perhaps,  is  one 
of  the  bed  writers  that  ever  Scotland  produced, 
fays,  that  there  is  an  allufion  in  one  of  the 
Pfalms  to  man's  fudden  fall,  Man  bei?2g  born 
in  honour y  continued  not  -,  i.  e.  but  a  night  be- 
fore he  fell.  O  much  good  may  do  thofe  that 
boaft  of  their  free-will,  that  think  they  can 
ftand  by  a  power  of  their  own,  when  father 
Adam,  who  had  no  corruption,  did  not  ftand 
a  week,  perhaps  not  two  days  ^  and  how  can 
we  pretend  to  ftand,  let  us  have  what  grace 
we  will,  when  that  grace  has  fo  much  cor- 
ruption to  oppofe  it  ?  if  Jefus  Chrift  did  not 
take  care  to  fecure  our  ftanding,  we  fhould 
fall  to  our  ruin.  Adam  fell,  and  being  our 
federal  head,  v^e  fell  in  him.  Why,  fays  a 
Deift,  and  too  many  profefTors  alfo,  pray  what 
bufinefs  had  God  Almighty  to  make  our  fall 
or  our  ftanding  depend  on  another  ?  you  will 
not  objedl  to  this  you  church  of  England  men, 
will  you  ?  then  why  have  you  god- fathers  and 
god-mothers  to  promife  for  you?  why  have 

we 


Ser.  XIV.  the  killing  Sin.  323 

we  members  of  parliament  to  be  the  heads  of 
the  people,  and  what  the  parliament  does,  the 
people  do,  you  have  conftituted  them  your 
heads  and  reprefentatives,  you  muft  ftand  and 
fall  by  them  5  fo  if  you  are  bound  for  a  pcrfon, 
you  muft  ftand  and  fall  with  him,  muft  not 
you?  I  remember  one  of  the  minifters  that 
preached  the  morning  exercifes,  when  moft, 
if  not  ail  the  churches  in  this  city,  were  filled 
with  gofpcl-preachers,  till  on  Bartholomew- 
day  near  2,500  of  them  in  the  whole  were 
turned  out,  and  the  other  minifters  that  did 
not  preach  the  gofpel  continued  till  the  plague 
came,  and  then  they  ran  away,  and  left  the 
pulpits  to  thofe  that  were  turned  out,  who 
were  willing  to  go  into  them,  though  they 
expeded  the  plague  would  feize  them  in 
preaching  Chrift  there ;  one  of  thofe  minifters 
fays,  fuppofe  God  had  chofe  all  that  were  to 
be  created,  and  to  proceed  from  the  loins  of 
Adam,  had  been  prefent,  and  that  he  ftiould 
have  faid  to  them,  I  have  been  feven  days  em- 
ployed in  preparing  the  whole  creation;  I 
have  made  a  garden,  and  will  have  one  chofe 
by  you  to  dwell  in  it,  as  my  vicegerent  and 
your  reprefentative  here  below ;  here  is  Adam, 
the  father  of  you  all,  whom  I  have  bleflcd 
T  t  2  with 


3-24  l^egka  of  Chriji        Seh  XIV. 

witha  partner,  that  is  bone  of  his  bone,  and 
flefh  of  his  flefh,   a  creature  like  himfelf ;  all 
that  I  define  of  your  head  and  reprefentative  is, 
that  he  abftains  from  yonder   tree,  of  every 
other  tree  in  the  garden  he  n>ay  freely  eat 
except  that;  this  1  ordain  as  a  teft  of  his  obe- 
dience, to  fee  whether  it  is  fulfilled,  and  you 
iliall  all  ftand  or  fdlby  this;  who fhall  be  the 
man  ?   would  they  not  all  fay,  our  firft  parent 
to  be  fure.     O  there  is  not  a  fingle  man  but 
would  have  chofen  Adam  to  be  their  repre- 
fentative, they  would  rather  ftand  and  fall  by 
him  "than  by  any  body  elfe ;  now  pray  why 
fhould  we  quarrel  with  him  for  ading  in  the 
manner  we  ourfelves  fhould  have  done,  had 
we  been  in  his  fituation  ?  God^  faith  the  apof- 
tle,  included  all  under  fin.     What  is  fin  but  a 
breach,  that  is,  a  tranfgreffion  of  the  law  ;  the 
wages  of  fm  is  death  >  every  tranfgreffion  of  the 
law  incurs  damnation.     Have  we  eaten  of  the 
forbidden  fruit  ?  \vq  muft  die,  we  are  legally 
dead;  and  there  is  not  a  little  child  in  the 
world  that  is  not.     It  is  enough  ,to  make  the 
parents  pray  night  and  day  for  their  children  ; 
there  is  not  a  child  borli  but,  to  ufe  the  words 
of  our  own  church,    brings  in  with  it'^corrup- 
tion,  which  renders  it  liable  to  the  wrath  of 

Cod 


•Ser.  XIV.         '  the  hlltjig  Sin.  325 

God  forever.  Then,  fay  feme,  it  is  true  what 
I  have  heard  fay  of  you,  that  there  are  little 
children  in  hell  a  fpan  long ;  I  never  hadfuch 
a  thought  in  my  life ;  I  never  believed  that  any 
infants,  black  or  white,  were  damned  in  hell. 
I  think  a  poor  child,  though  it  is  born  in  a  ftate 
of  original  fin,  and  I  have  ofren  thought  that 
is  thereafon  why  little  children  are  feized  with 
fuch  terrible  diforders  as  often  carry  them 
out  of  the  world,  with  ten  times  more  agony 
than  parents  feel  5  a  great  proof  of  man's 
offence.  We  fee  a  poor  little  infant  foon  after 
it  is  born,  in  two  or  three  months  taken  with 
fits^  lie .  fcreaming  and  ftruggling,  while  the 
diftreffed  parents  arc  breaking  their  hearts,  and 
wifhing,  though  they  love  it  dearly,  that  God 
Would  take  it  out  of  its  pain.  Is  not  this  a 
ftrong  proof  that  man  is  fallen  from  God?  elfe 
who  can  tell  what  God  defigns  hereby  :  hov/- 
ever,  I  verily  believe  that  by  his  grace  he  fits 
them  for  heaven.  We  have  broken  Gods 
law,  and  are  liable  to  eternal  condemna^!on, 
w^e  are  therefore  legally  dead,  every  one  of  us 
without  diftindion  -,  we  are  all  upon  a  level, 
frcm  the  greatefl  king  in  the  world,  who  has 
it  in  his  power  to  write  death  or  life  upon  the 
poor  condemned  malefaftors;    bring  him   to 

the 


3  26  Negle6l  of  Cbriji         Ser.  XIV. 

the  bar  of  God's  holy  law,  and  it  will  tell 
him  there,  thou  art  the  malefador  in  the 
fight  of  God,  thou  thyfelf,  and  thus  God  is 
glorified.  It  is  not  greatnefs  of  flation,  nor 
external  differences,  that  make  a  difference  in 
the  internal  ftate  of  the  foul.  A  nobleman 
may  come  with  his  ftar  and  garter  to  the  king's 
bar,  and  be  tried  by  his  peers  at  Weftminfter- 
hall,  and  may  be  attended  from  the  Tower  by 
fome  of  the  king's  officers,  but  whether  a  no- 
bleman be  tried  at  Weftminfter-hall,  or  a  cri- 
minal in  rags  at  the  Old-Bailey,  the  law  muft 
be  executed  upon  both :  this  is  our  ftate  to- 
wards God,  we  have  lived  in  trefpafles  and 
fins,  are  legally  dead  now  5  is  that  all  ?  Dr. 
Taylor,  of  Norwich,  fays,  that  all  the  lofs 
we  have  had  by  the  fall  is,  that  our  mifery  is 
temporary.  Alas !  alas !  when  Arminians  talk 
of  the  fall,  you  will  find  very  few  of  them  have 
courage  enough  to  ftab  themfelves.  Confcience 
makes  them  cowards;  they  have  loft  all  by 
Adam's  fall.  What  death  have  we  fuffered, 
not  only  legally  but  fpiritually  dead;  what 
do  I  mean  by  that  ?  why,  that  we  are  deprived 
of  that  life  of  God  in  which  we  originally 
ftood.  Have  you  ever  feen  any  body  die  ?  I 
have.    Have  you  ever  feen  one  of  your  friends 

die? 


Sen  XIV.  the  killing  Sin.  327 

die?  have  you  ever  ftole  into  the  room,  and 
looked  but  once  at  the  dear  objed:  of  your  love, 
the  partner  of  your  life,  but  wait  till  the  next 
day,  and  efpecially  in  the  fummer  feafon,  and 
fee  how  changed !  the  laft  objeft  I  faw,  put 
me  in  mind  of  the  fall  I  faw  nature  in.  O  what 
a  change  !  the  glory  is  departed  ! 

But  belides  this  legal  death,  there  is  a  fpi- 
rltual  death,  and  the  confequence  of  that  13 
eternal  death ;  if  I  die  in  that  ftate  I  muft  die 
for  ever ;  that  is,  I  muft  be  a  creature  living 
eternally  banifhed  from  God :  if  I  be  annihi- 
lated when  I  die,  then,  indeed,  temporal  death 
is  all  'y  but  it  is  not  fo,  I  am  to  live  in  another 
world  5  the  wifeft  man  upon  earth  tells  us, 
that  there  is  a  future  ftate ;  and  therefore  by 
legal  and  fpirituai  death,  I  am  liable  to  death 
eternal.  I  have  the  longer  inlifted  on  this, 
becaufe  it  is  impoffible  to  know,  or  to  value 
that  life  that  Jefus  Chrift  came  into  the  world 
to  impart  to  us  and  procure  for  us,  without 
coniidering  the  nature  of  the  death  he  delivers 
us  from. 

Now  let  us  attend  to  what  our  Lord  fays, 
Te  will  not  come  to  me  that  ye  may  have  life ; 
in  the  tenth  chapter  he  fays,  /  am  come  that 
they  might  have  life^  and  that  they  might  have  it 

more 


328  Negkei  of  Chrifl      .Sen  Xm 

more  abundantly \  now  what  life  is  that?  to 
be  fure,  the  life  which  a  malefador  wants, 
who  is  tried  by  a  Jury  5  why,  he  wants  to  have 
the  chain  taken  ofFj  what  do  you  and  I  want  ? 
for  we  may  want  to  eternity  if  we  plead  our 
innocence 5  there  Is  not  one  of  us  but  muft  plead 
guilty  before  God;   well,   what  muft  I  do  ? 
why,  if  ever  I  have  life,  I  muft  be  acquitted, 
fomething  muft  pronounce  me  not  guilty  j  my 
confcience  fays,  guilty  3  why,  then  Jefus  Chrift 
came  that  we  might  have  a  legal  life,  that  we 
might  be  acquitted  from  all  that  condemna- 
tion which  we  are  under  by  our  breaking  his 
law  5  fo  far  the  remedy  anfwers  to  the  difeafe  % 
but  the  remedy  would  not  be  extenfive  enough 
if  that  was  all  5  therefore,  it  was  an  excellent 
anfwer  a  poor  woman  made  at  the  Old-Bailey, 
I  heard  of  it  twenty  years  ago  :  fhe  was  brought 
fick  to  the  bar  to  receive  a  pardon  ;  the  judge 
faid.    Woman,    his  majefty  has  given  you  a 
pardon :  My  lord,  fays  flie,  I  thank  his  ma- 
jefty for  a  pardon,  and  you  for  pronouncing 
it,  but  that  is  not  all  I  want  3  what  my  poor 
foul   wants  is,  a   pardon  from  Jefus  Chrift; 
what  fignifies  a  pardon  from  a  judge,  if  I  have 
a  difeafe  in  me  that  will  kill  me  ?  whether  I 
am  pardoned  or  not,  I  muft  have  my  difeafe 

cured, 


Ser.  XIV.  the  killing  Sin.  329 

cured,  that  the  pardon  may  do  me  good.     I 
thought  it  a  ftrange  plea  of  a  man,  a  captain 
of  a  fliip,  that  I  heard  tried  fome  years  ago 
for   throwing    a    poor   negro    overboard  ^  he 
afkedthe  furgeon,  do  you  think  that  the  child 
will  die  ?  Sir,  faid  he,  it  will  not  live  above 
an  hour;  then,   fays  he,  you  may  let  it  down 
now:  O,  fays  the  judge,  you  have  murdered 
the  child.     I   muft  have  a  pardon  from  my 
God,  or  I  am  damned ;  and  if  I  have  loft  the 
divine  image,  which  was  the  original   dignity 
of  man,  I  fliall  never  get  to  glory  without  the  j 
reftoration  of  that  image  I  have  loft  by  my/ 
fin.     Spiritual  life  in  the  heart,  is  that  which' 
comes  from  Jefus  Chrift,  and  this  is  the  life  of 
God  in  the  fool  of  man ;   it  is  not  a  meta- 
phorical but   a  real  thing,    a   refurredion  to 
life  by  the  power  of  Chrift,  who  is  the  rejur- 
reclion  and  the  lifey  fo  there  is  a  connexion 
between  a  legal  and  a  fpiritual  life  5  the  type 
and  antitype  anfwers  as  face  anfwers  to  face  in 
water:  thus  as  all  in  Adam  have  died,  fo  all 
in  Jefus  Chrift,  the  fecond  Adam,   are  made 
alive.     We  are  apt  to  think  that  fuch  a  one, 
and  fuch  a  one,  were  found  Chriftians  and  gone 
to  heaven,    but  there  is  a  great  deal  of  falfe 
charity  in  the  world ;  without  this  life  we  are 
all  undone.  U  u  Now, 


330  Negledt  of  Chrijt        Sen  XIV. 

Now,  my  brethren,  if  this  is  the  cafe,  how 
muft  I  have  my  life  in  glory  ?  how  muft  a 
dead  creature  be  a  Chriftian  ?  how  muft  a  fin- 
ner  that  is  fpiritually  dead  have  divine  life  ? 
and  how  muft  a  creature,  every  moment  liable 
to  death  eternal,  be  made  eternally  alive  ?  can 
any  body  anfwer  that  queftion  ?  will  reafon 
tell  me  ?  no ;  will  philofophy  help  me  ?  no  ; 
for  if  the  world  by  wifdom  knew  not  G-od^  furely, 
the  world  by  wifdom  knows  not  how  to  turn 
to  God  y  therefore,  you  will  find  the  greateft 
fcholars  the  greateft  fools,  proudeft  deifts,  and 
moft  fcornful  atheifts  ^  for  knov/ledge  puffeth 
up ;  and  if  bare  knowledge  makes  a  Chriftian,. 
the  devil  muft  be  very  good,  he  is  the  moft 
knowing,  and  yet  the  moft  wicked.  The  only 
way  to  get  this  life  reftored,  is  to  come  to  Jefus 
Chrift  'y  ye  will  riot  come  unto  me^  faith  our  text, 
that  ye  may  have  life-y  implying,  that  without 
coming  to  him  they  cannot  have  life  :  there  is 
no  other  name  given  under  heaven  whereby  we 
can  be  favedy  but  that  of  Jeftts  Chrijl.  I  am 
the  wayy  the  truths  and  the  life.  1  am  the  re^- 
jurreBion  and  the  life ^  faith  the  Lord.  In  order 
to  have  this  life,  we  muft  come  to  Chrift  for 
it:  I  hope  you  don't  think  coming  to  Chrift^ 
means  coming  to  fee  bi$  perfon,  that  can  never 

•  bei 


Ser.  XIV.  the  killing  Sin.  331 

be :  for  our  Lord  talks  of  coming  to  him 
when  he  himfelf  was  the  preacher,  and  they 
were  all  about  him;  though  fo  many  round 
him,  yet  there  was  but  one  that  touched  him. 
A  great  many  people  fay,  dear,  if  Chrift  was 
here,  how  would  I  carefs  him  !  I  would  let 
him  in !  when,  perhaps,  at  the  fame  time 
turn  out  one  of  his  members.  Would  you 
like  to  fee  Jefus  Chrift  with  a  parcel  of  boys 
and  girls  running  before  him,  a  parcel  of  poor 
fifliermen  with  him,  and  Mary  Magdalen, 
wdth  a  mob  of  poor  people  and  publicans  fol- 
lowing him  ?  we  have  got  the  fame  fpirit  the 
people  had  then,  we  fliould  hoot  at  him  and 
defpife  him,  as  the  Pharifees  did.  A  great 
many  people  think  coming  to  Chrift  is  to  come 
to  the  facrament ;  you  know  very  well  I  love 
that  privilege;  and  one  of  the  greateft  afflic- 
tions I  have  is,  that  my  health  will  not  permit 
me  to  attend  all  the  ordinances ;  but  thoufands 
come  to  ordinances,  that  have  no  view  of  the 
God  of  ordinances  in  them,  therefore  you  will 
find,  that  in  all  our  public  places  it  is  as  much 
the  faftiicn  to  go  to  public  worfliip  about  eleven 
o'clock,  as  any  where  elfe.  They  are  not  up 
time  enough  to  their  mattins ;  they  go  and 
fay,  we  thank  God,  who  has  brought  us  to 
U  u  2  the 


332  Negkdi  of  Chrijl         Sen  XIV. 

the  beginning  of  this  day,  and  that  when  per- 
haps the  clock  ftrikes  twelve,   and  they  juft 
up;  thus  people  go  to  church  as  to  a  play,  ' 
to  fee  and  be  ktn,  and  as  foon  as  they  go  out 
of  church,  they   aflc    where    they  are  to  go 
to  next,    and  what  party  ?   Thoufands  go  to 
church,  or   to   meeting,    and  facrament,  and 
don't  corTiC   to   Chrift :    come   and   like  this 
preaching,  and  numbers  who  are  called  fools 
for  following  us,  eat  the  fragments  that   are 
left,  that  hear  preaching,  eat  the  fifli  and  the 
loaves,   and  are  only   feafling    upon   fhadows 
and   not   upon  Chrift  :  this  ihould  make  us 
extremely  careful  to  examine  whether  we  ever 
came  to  Chrift  or  no.     A  great  moral  preacher 
fays  of  our  preaching,  when  all  their  ftock  is 
out,  then  they  cry  come,   come,   come,  and 
that  is  the  burden  of  their  fong,  fay  they  •  and 
I  hope  that  will  be  the  burden  of  our  fong  till 
Chrift    fays.  Come  ye    blejfed  of   my   Fathe?^-, 
what  would  you  have  us  fay  ?  O,   fay  you,  bid 
a  man  do  and  live,  fo  we  will ;  and  in  the  fame 
fenfe  Chrift  in  the  gofpel  fays,  thou  art  dead  5 
what  fhall  I  do,  fays  the  man,  to  inherit  eter- 
nal life  ?  thou  knoweft  our  Lord  faid  to  him. 
Keep  the  law.     Our  Lord  always  fpoke  to  the 
people  in  their  own  language  ^  that  is,   thou 

fcak 


Sen  XIV.  the  killing  Sim  -  333 

/halt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart ; 
he  began  with  morality  at  the  right  place,  wc 
begin  at  the  fifth  commandment.  The  great 
morality,  fays  Dr.  Young,  is  beginning  .with  ; 
the  love  of  God.  Thoujhalt  love  thy  neighbour  \ 
as  thyfelf ;  thou  haft  anjwered  rights  fays  he, 
do  thisy  and  thou  jhalt  live.  Whoever  loves 
the  Lord  God  as  he  ought  to  do,  with  all  his 
foul  and  ftrength,  fliall  certainly  live  ;  but  our 
Lord  takes  pains  to  convince  him  of  his  igno- 
rance and  folly ;  fays  he,  *who  is  my  neighbour  ? 
as  to  the  love  of  God,  he  had  no  thought  of 
that.  Thus  we  deceive  our  own  fouls,  till 
Jefus  Chrifl  opens  our  eyes.  What  muft  we 
come  to  Chriftfor?  to  be  acquitted;  come  to 
his  blood  to  be  pardoned  j  yoii  muft  believe  on 
him,  not  only  with  a  bare  fpeculative  belief^ 
that  the  devil  has,  and  all  the  damned  in  hell, 
but  to  have  his  blood  applied  and  brought  home 
to  the  foul ;  we  muft  come  to  him  as  the  au- 
thor and  finidier  of  our  faith.  Did  not  you 
juft  now  fay,  I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
the  Lord  and  giver  of  life;  and  the  form  of 
baptifm  is  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghoft  ;  it  means,  baptize  them  into  the 
nature  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghoft : 
and  I  remember  about  three  or  four  and  thirty 

years 


334  ISlegka  of  Chriji         Ser.  XIV, 

years  ago,  a  friend  mentioned  that  word  in 
private  converfation  to  me,  we  tranflate  it,  we 
believe  in  God  5  faid  he,  we  fhould  tranflate 
it,  we  believe  it  i?i  Gody  for  we  never  do  till 
God  has  put  his  faith  in  us,  then  we  have  in 
our  fouls  a  new  life  in  Chrift,  then  we  live  a 
life  of  faith ;  the  life  I  now  live  is  by  faith  in 
the  Son  of  God,  I  live^  yet  not  7,  but  ChriJI 
Jiveth  in  me.  In  order  to.  this  I  muftcome  to 
Jefus  Chrift,  and  believe  on  him  for  life  eter- 
nal, the  earneft  of  which  eternal  life  I  muft 
have  in  my  heart  before  I  can  be  affured  I  do 
believe  on  him.  O,  my  dear  hearers,  do  we 
think  of  this,  this  is  no  new  docSrine  5  I  fet 
out,  bleffed  be  God,  with  this  dodtrine.  The 
fecond  fermon  I  ever  made,  the  fecond  fermon 
I  ever  preached,  wks  on  thefe  words.  He  that 
is  in  Chriji  is  a  new  creature  :  I  was  then  about 
twenty  years  and  a  half  old.  The  next  fer- 
mon I  preached  was  upon,  Te  are  juflifiedi 
the  next  fermon,  Te  are  glorified -y  which 
(hows,  that  though  I  am  near  fifty-five  years 
old,  yet,  I  thank  my  God,  I  am  fo  far  from 
changing  my  principles,  v/hich  I  am  fure  I 
was  taught  by  God's  word  and  Spirit,  that  I 
am  more  and  more  confirmed,  that  if  I  was 
to   die   this  m.oment,  I  hope  I   fhould   have 

2r        ftrength 


Sen  XIV.  the  killing  Sin.  335 

ftrength  and  courage  given  me  to  fay,  I  am 
more  convinced  of  the  efficacy  and  the  power 
of  thofe  truths  which  I  preached  when  I  was 
twenty  years  old,  when  1  firft  preached  them. 

Now,  my  dear  hearers,  what  could  enter 
into  the  heart  of  any  perfon  in  the  world,  to 
reject  fuch  a  falvation  as  this  ?  can  you  think 
that  when  a  king  faith  to  a  prifoner,  let  him 
go,  he  would  refufe  it  ?  there  are  fome  per- 
ibns  that  refufe  Chrifl.  I  remember  when,  by 
the  bounty  of  the  people  here,  we  begged  for 
the  poor,  one  man  went  to  the  turnpike  and 
faid,  this  is  Dr.  Whitefield's  bread  and  be 
damned.  Human  nature,  what  is  it  without 
Chrift,  the  bread  of  life!  We  will  not  come 
to  him  that  we  may  have  life,  though  we 
may  have  it  for  afking  ^  no,  not  for  life  eter- 
nal, as  a  free  gift :  we  will  not  come  to  Chrift 
and  accept  it  at  his  hand  3  we  will  not :  it  is 
not  faid,  \NQ  Jljall  not  J  but  we 'zc'/// not.  Pray 
why  will  not  people  come  to  Chrift  to  have 
life  ?  becaufe  they  do  not  think  that  they  are 
dead,  and  do  not  want  it ;  remember  when 
you  fay,  you  are  rich  and  increafed  in  goods^ 
that  you  know  not,  faith  Chrift,  that  ye  are 
poor  and  mijerable,  and  blind  and  naked.  We 
do  not   fee  ourfelves  fallen   creatures,  we  do 

not 


336  NeglcEi  of  Chrifl        Ser.  XIV. 

not  know  that :  God  give  thee  to  know  and 
feel,  that  there  is  710  name  gt'ven  under  heaven 
whereby  we  can  be  favedy  but  Jefus  Chriji. 
What,  faith  one,  muft  I  have  inward  feeling  ? 
what  would  the  polite  world  do  without  feel- 
ing? do  you  think  they  would  go  to  the  play- 
houfe  and  places  of  public  diverfion  without 
feeling  ?  if  I  can  feel  other  things  that  do  not 
concern  religion,  how  can  I  come  to  God  till 
I  feel  a  need  of  him.  We  don't  chufe  to  come 
to  Chrift,  becaufe  we  don't  chufe  to  have  him 
as  a  free  gift  ^  we  don't  like  to  come  to  him  as 
poor  and  needy,  I  remember  I  heard  an  ex- 
cellent minifler  of  Chrifl  in  Scotland,  one  Mr. 
Wallis,  of  Dundee,  preaching  upon  thefe  words. 
Behold  1  ft  and  at  the  door  and  knocks  fays  he. 
Chrift  comes  knocking  at  the  door  to  come 
into  your  houfes,  but  you  will  not  come 
down  to  accept  of  his  mercy.  When 
the  prodigal  faid,  /  will  arife  and  go  to 
my  Father^  and  will  fay  unto  him^  I  have  finned 
againji  heaven  and  in  thy  fght^  ajid  ajnno  more 
worthy  to  be  called  thy  fon^  make  me  as  one  of 
thy  hired  fervants  :  now  you  think  that  it  was 
very  humble  in  him,  he  who  was  a  fon  of  the 
head  of  the  houfe,  to  be  wiUing  to  be  a  fer- 
vant.  'Tis  true  he  fays,  I  will  go  to  rny  fa- 
ther's 


1 


Ser.  XIV.  the  killhig  Sin.  337 

ther's  houfe,  but  at  the  fame  time  he  fays,  I 
will  work  for  my  living,  he  fliall  not  maintain 
me  for  nothing ;  but  v/hen  he  comes  to  his 
father,  he  is  quite  brought  down,  he  fays,  I 
have  finned  againU  heaven  and  in  thy  fight  \  the 
joyful  father  clafps  him  in  his  withered  arms, 
and  takes  the  poor  ragged  wanderer  home. 
The  lawyers  and  other  Jews  thought  they 
were  righteous,  and  therefore  they  would  not 
come  to  Jefus  Chrift,  Our  Lord  fpoke  of  the 
Pharifees,  who  trufted  in  themfelves  that  they 
were  righteous,  and  would  not  come  to  him 
that  they  might  have  life  -,  and  if  we  truft  in 
ourfelves,  neither  fliall  we.  Our  Lord  fays, 
I  receive  not  honour  from  men.  How  canyon 
come  to  him,  that  receive  honour  one  of  another? 
Honour  to  whom  honour  is  due.  To  fuch  as 
are  in  pov/er,  whether  in  church  or  ftate, 
refpedt  is  due  to  their  outward  fituation.  I  am 
for  no  levelling  principles  at  all ;  but,  my  bre- 
thren, at  the  fime  time  there  is  a  fault,  that 
we  love  to  be  applauded.  There  is  no  going 
to  heaven,  faith  Mr.  Gurnal,  without  wear- 
ing a  fool's  cap  and  a  fool's  coat,  and  there  is 
no  going  to  heaven  without  being  accounted 
fools:  fo  you  fee  many  profeflbrs  follow  the 
world,  they  have  not  courage  enough  to  live 
X  X  'in 


338  NegJeB  of  Chrijl  Ser.  XIV. 

in  holy  non-conformity  to    the   world;    and 
many  people  are  frightned  from  Chrift,  becaufe 
they  would  not  be  counted  Methodifts;  the 
fear  of  man  has  damned  thoufands.     You  will 
not  come  to  him,  becaufe  you  cannot  truft 
God,  and  then  we  love  the  world  more  than 
Chriil.     If  any  man  love  the  worlds  the  love 
of  the  Father  is720t  in  him.     If  I  had  the  ma- 
nagement of  people,  their  fliops  would  be  open 
three  or  four  hours  before  they  are  now ;  I  do 
not  want  to  hinder  mens  bufinefs ;  thofe  that 
have  mofl   money   and  moft  power,  if  they 
adted  as  they  ought  to  do,  would  be  the  greateft 
flaves  to  their  fellow-creatures.     When  I  talk 
of  loving  the   world,    I  mean   an  inordinate 
love:  I  may  hve  in  the  world,  and  not  live 
upon  it ;    my    heart    may   be  towards   God  : 
the  love  of  the  world  is  to  be  renounced,  and 
therefore  they  will  not  come  to  Jefus  Chrift 
they   think,    till  they  are   going    out  of  the 
world.     If  you  are    one  of  thofe  who  hate 
Chrift,   why  you   are  the  man  that  will  not 
come  to  him  2  why,  fay  you,  does  any  body 
hrtte  Chrift  ?  pray  hold  your  tongue,   for  fear 
of  difcovering  your   ignorance  :    O,  fay  you, 
God  forbid  I  ftiould  hate  him.     But,  my  dear 
foul,  learn  from  this  time  forward,  that  every 

one 


Ser.  XIV.  the  killing  Sin\  239 

one  of  us  by  nature  hates  Jefus  Chrifl :  we  fent 
this  mefTage  to  him  ;  we  will  not  have  this 
man  to  reign  over  us,  we  hate  him  becaufe  he 
is  defpifed,  we  hate  him  becaufe  of  the  appear- 
ance of  the  people  that  are  his  followers,  we 
hate  him  becaufe  of  the  narrownefs  of  the  way 
we  are  to  pais  in  to  him,  becaufe  we  muft  part 
with  our  lufts  3  we  hate  him  becaufe  we  muft 
be  non-conformifts:  I  hate  that  rag  of  the 
whore  of  Babylon,  O  that  form  of  prayer,  O 
all  that  fluff,  I  thank  God  I  was  born  a  Dif- 
fenter,  I  love  to  be  a  Puritan,  I  don't  love 
rites  and  ceremonies,  no  not  in  the  church, 
and  yet,  perhaps,  are  more  conformed  to  the 
world  than  numbers  of  the  church,  and  have 
nothing  but  rites  and  ceremonies  about  their 
houfes  and  families.  What  do  we  more  than 
others?  a  churchman  fliould  prove  himfelf  a 
churchman,  by  having  his  articles,  and  keep- 
ing up  the  practice  of  religion  3  and  a  Diffenter 
fhould  prove  hinifclf  one,  not  by  diffenting 
from  the  church,  but  from  the  liifts  of  the 
flcjh^  the  liijt  of,  the  eye^  and  the  pride  of  life, 
and  then  we  fliall  agree  very  weh  together, 
though  one  went  to  a  place  called  a  church, 
and  another  to  a  place  called  a  meeting.:  would 
to  God  every  foul  now  pref;nt  would  put  this 
X  X  2  queftion 


340  Negka  of  Chrijl.         Ser.  XIV. 

queflion  to  himfelf,  Am  I  come  to  Chrift,  or 
am  I  ijot  ?  There  is  a  great  number  of  perfons 
here,  you  have  heard  of  Providence  calling  me 
abroad,  no  doubt  curiofity  brings  many  of  you 
here,  to  hear  what  the  poor  babler  fays :  I 
tell  you  what  I  will  fay  to  you,  that  without 
you  have  an  intereft  in  the  Son  of  God,  you 
mufl:  be  damned.  Examine  your f elves  whether 
you  are  in  the  jaith^  whether  your  religion 
reaches  any  further  than  the  church-door,  whe- 
ther you  are  the  inward  court  worfhippers : 
confcience,  confcience,  confcience,  thou  faith- 
ful monitor,  God  help  thee  to  give  a  proper 
verdidl.  When  I  had  the  honour  of  opening 
lady  Huntingdon's  chapel,  as  I  turned  about  I 
obferved  over  my  head  were  thefe  words, 
'Earthy  earthy  earthy  hear  the  "word  oj  the 
Lord:  O  that  every  earthly  foul  may  hear 
God's  word  this  day.  Don't  be  angry  with 
me,  I  am  now  upon  the  decline  of  life,  going 
toward  threcfcore,  farely  now  I  may  claim 
leave  to  fpeak  to  you  freely;  after  next  Sun- 
day, perhaps,  you  may  never  hear  me  any 
more,  though  I  do  not  intend  to  live  abroad, 
but  return,  if  pleafe  God,  in  a  proper  time, 
but  long  before  that  thou  maylt  be  in  hel!  oi* 
heaven.     As  the  Lord  live?,  in  whofe  name  I 

fpeakj 


Sen  XIV.  the  killing  Sin.  341 

fpeak,  if  you  will  not  come  to  Chrift  to  have 
life,  you  muft  come  to  his  bar  to  hear  him  pro- 
nounce you  damned  to  all  eternity.  If  you 
come  to  him  that  you  may  have  life,  Come,  ye 
blejfed,  v^ill  be  the  fentence  there,  but  if  you 
refufe  now.  Depart^  ye  ciirfed,  will  be  your 
fentence  then  from  the  Lord,  for  in  a  little 
while  he  that  fhall  come  will  come,  and  will 
not  tarry.  Hark !  hark  !  don't  you  hear  him, 
don't  you  hear  him,  don't  you  hear  him  yon- 
der ;  hark !  methinks  I  hear  him,  what  does 
he  fay  ?  fee  yonder,  don't  you  fee,  good  peo- 
ple, that  yonder  fun  is  darkened,  and  the  moon 
turned  into  blood.  0,  who  can  abide  the  day 
of  his  coming^  O,  to  think  of  his  coming, 
may  the  finner  fay,  when  I  know  his  coming 
is  only  to  damn  my  foul !  How  do  the  mur- 
derers dread  the  affizes,  but  pardoned  finners, 
pardoned  criminals,  are  glad  when  they  hear 
the  high-fheriff  coming  :  O,  fay  they,  I  lon^^ 
to  go  to  the  bar,  becaufe  I  am  going  there 
only  to  plead  the  king's  pardon.  Kappy, 
happy,  happy  you,  that  have  come  to  this  Je,- 
fus  Chrift  that  you  might  have  life,  that  you 
might  walk  becoming  him  in  your  life  and 
converfation.  O,'. Chrift  will  come,  and  come 
to  you  as  his  cliildren  5  but  God  grant  th:j  life: 


may 


342  NegleB  of  Chrijl         Ser.  XIV. 

may  be  difplayed  in  you  and  me  more  and 
more!  If  we  are  helped  to  know  that  Chrift 
came  that  we  might  have  life,  and  might 
have  it  more  abundantly,  O,  pray  that  others 
may  come,  bring  your  children  to  Chrift.  I 
was  pleafed  one  day  after  I  had  been  preaching 
on  Mofes  lifting  up  the  ferpent  in  the  wilder^ 
nefsy  I  think  it  was  in  New-England,  I  was 
taken  up  into  a  room  to  repofe  myfelf,  there 
was  a  mantle-piece,  reprefenting  the  children 
brought  in  the  arms  of  their  parents  to  look  at 
the  brazen  ferpent :  O  may  God  help  you  to 
bring  your  children  and  your  relations  to  view 
Chrift.  O  Lord  help  my  mother,  my  fither, 
my  child,  my  fervant,  to  come  to  Jelus  Chrift 
that  they  may  have  life.  The  Lord  help  you 
to  come,  come  young  people.  O  I  was 
charmed  this  morning,  and  every  morning  I 
give  the  facrament,  to  fee  fo  many  young  men 
there  crouding  to  the  table ;  may  the  Spirit  of 
God  keep  you  near  to  Jefus  Chrift  -,  and  you 
young  women,  may  God  draw  you  nearer  un- 
to Chrift.  I  remember  when  God  touched 
my  heart,  and  fent  me  down  to  fee  my  friends 
in  the  country,  I  prayed  God  to  blefs  me  to 
thofe  to  whom  I  was  called  to  dance  and  to 
pl^y  at  cards  with,  and,  bleffed  be  God,  he 

bleffed 


Ser.  XIV.  the  killing  Sin.  343 

bkffed  me  to  them  all  before  I  was  twenty 
years  of  age,  and  after  that  he  fent  me  to  a 
prifon,  I  there  preached  to  a  murderer,  and 
fome  others,  and,  bleffed  be  God,  they  came 
to  JeiusChrifl,  and  one  of  them  went  offmoft 
triumphantly.    A  poor  creature,  fourfcore  years 
of  age,  who  has  made  it  a  pradlice  to  go  and 
read   to  poor  people,    and   to  the   prifoners, 
faid,  "  Sir,  I  began  late,  but,  by  the  help  of 
God,  I  now  work  the  harder  for  Jefus  Chrift." 
May  he  incline  you  to  come,    O  young  wo- 
men and  young  men.     There  was  a  good  wo- 
man who  died  fometime  ago,  whofe  laft  word 
I  think  was,  I  now  go  to  my  God.     Will  you 
come  and  go  too,  you  old  grey-headed  iinners, 
that  have  one  foot  in  the  grave,  God  help  you 
to-  go,  God  remove  every  obftacle  -,  God  grant 
that  every  mountain  may  be  brought  low,  and 
a  highway  made  into   your  hearts  for  Jefus 
Chrifl.     Don't  be  angry  with  me  5  in  a  week 
or  two  I  fliall  be  tolling  on  the  ocean^  while 
you  are  hearing  God's  word  here  ^  while  I  am 
amidft  ftorms  and  tempefts,  you  will  be  upon 
the  earth.     Paul  could  ftand    the  whipping, 
but  it  is  not  a  whipping,   but  weeping,  that 
breaks  my  heart ;  my  greatell:  trial  is,  what  if 
this  fermon  iLould  help  to   fink  thefe  people 

deeper 


344-         JNegM  of  Chrijl,   &c.       Ser.  XIV. 

deeper  in  the  pit,  that  makes  my  blood  run 
cold.  O  that  my  fermon  may  never  rife  in 
judgment  againft  you,  my  poor  dear  fouls.  I 
believe  you  find  it  hard  when  any  of  you  are 
forced  to  be  witneffes  againft  your  own  chil- 
dren, your  own  friends,  and  whoever  deals 
with  the  word  with  a  difmterefted  fpirit,  muft 
do  it  s  the  only  way  to  prevent  it,  is  to  come 
to  Chrift ;  and  if  you  cannot  come,  if  you  are 
fenfible  of  it,  God  be  praifed ;  he  will  come 
to  you  if  you  cannot  come  to  Chrift,  he  will 
come  and  make  you  willing  in  the  day  of  his 
power;  that  this  may  be  the  happy  cafe,  God 
grant  to  us  all,  for  his  name's  lake.     Amen. 


SERMON 


[    345    ] 

SERMON     XV. 

All    Mens     Place. 

EccLE,siASTES  vi.  ver.  6. 
Do  not  all  go   to  one  place  ? 

I  Remember  an  ingenious  writer,  who  had 
been  very  copious  in  his  publications,  ob- 
ferved,  that  the  beft  and  moft  profitable 
were  written  after  he  was  fifty  years  of  age  :  it 
is  fuppofed,  then  the  judgment  is  ripened,  and 
the  genius  is  as  it  were  advanced  to  maturity 
and  knowledge  -,  and  experiences  gathered 
when  young,  will  be  more  ufeful  in  the  de-- 
cline  of  life,  when  grey  hairs  are  it^n  here  and 
there  upon  them.  It  is  faid  indeed,  that  old 
men  are  twice  children ;  but  there  are  feme 
whofe  geniuffes  are  fo  very  low  that  they  can- 
not be  twice  children,  becaufe  they  are  no  bet- 
ter than  children  from  their  cradle  to  their 
grave  i  but  this  is  not  the  cafe  with  God's 
Y  y  children, 


346  Jil  Mens  Place.  Ser.  XV. 

children,  for  upon  a  refledion  of  the  wrong 
fteps  they  have  taken,  if  it  proceeds  from  the 
fandilied  fenie  of  afflidions,  they  ferve  to  make 
them  more  infLrudive  in  their  latter  day.    This 
was  the  cafe  of  Solomon,  though  highly  fa- 
voured when  young,  for  the  Lord  appeared 
unto  him  twice,  yet  he  fell  moft  awfully,  and 
had  we  not  read  of  his   recovery  again,  the 
dodrine  of  the  final  perfeverance  of  the  faints,. 
muft  feem  to  fall  to  the  ground,  but  we  have 
reafon  to  think  that  he  was  reftored,  and  gave 
evidence  of  his  recovery  by  writing  in  fuch  a 
manner,  that  none  could  but  one  that  knew 
much  of  God  and  himfelf  >  Vv^itnefs  the  book 
ofEcclefiaftes,  which  in  all  ages  of  the  church 
has  been  received  with  a  peculiar  refped.   Ec-^ 
clefiaftes  fignifies  a    preacher,   fuch   Solomon 
^was  from  his  own  experience,  and  exceeded 
!  by  none  but  him  who /pake  as  no  man  ever  did. 
The  chapter  in  which  is  the  text,  defcribes 
the  vanity  and  mifery  of  our  prefent  ftate,  if 
unfandified.     7 here  is  an  evily  faith  he,  that 
I  have  feen  under  the  fun^  and  it  is  common 
among  men :  though  he  is  going  about   to  de- 
fcribe  a  monfter,  yet  it  is  a  monfter  that  walks 
and  flaiks  abroad,  a  man  to  whom  God  hath 
given  riches,  wealth,  and  honour,  fo  that  he 

wanteth 


Scr.  XV.  All  Mens  Place.  347 

wanteth  nothing  for  his  foul  of  all  that  he  de- 
fireth,  though  God  gives  him  not  power  to 
eat,  this  is  vanity  and  a  great  difeafe.     Was 
there  ever  a  more  ftriking  defcription  of  an 
old  covetous  mifer,  who  leaves  his  wealth  to 
fome  perfon  that  fpends  it  fafler  than  the  poor 
wretch  got  it  ?   He  goes  on  and  fays,  If  a  jfian 
beget  an  hundred  children y  and  live  many  years^ 
Jo  that  the  days  of  his  years  he  ma?iyy  and  his 
foul  be  not  filled  with  goody  and  alfo  that  be  have 
no  burial y  Ifay^  that  an  untimely  birth  is  bet- 
ter  than  he^  for  he  cometh  in  with  njanityy  and 
depart eth  in  darknefSy  and  his  namejl^all  be  co- 
ijered  with  darknefs.     Moreover^  he  hath  ?iot 
feen  the  jun^  ?2or  k?20wn  any  things  this  hath 
more  re/l  than  the  other.     And   then  though 
this  creature  fhould  be  fuppofed  to  live  a  thou- 
fand  years  twice  told,  why,  faith  he,  yet  hath 
he  feen  no  good,  he  has  never  been  poflelled 
of  real  good  to  make  him  happy  here  or  here- 
after, for,  adds  he,  do    not   all  go,,  both  the 
abortive  and  the  aged,  young  and   old,  high 
and  low,  rich  and  poor,  whether  bleffed  with 
children,  or  have  no  children,  whether  like 
Lazarus,    that    beg    their    bread,    or    Dives, 
cloathed  in  purple  and   fine  linen,    and  fire 
fumptuoully  every  day.   Do   not  all  go  Jo  one 
place  ?  Y  y  2  An 


34^  '-^/^  Mens  Place.  Scr.  XV. 

An  important  queflion  !  ihail  I   propofe  it 
to  you  to-night  ?   do  you  know  what  the  wife 
man.  means  when  he  offers  this  queftion  to 
your  confideration,  Do  not  all  go  to  one  place  "^ 
v/hat  can  be  the  defign  of  this  ?  the  thing,   no 
doubt,  here  fpoken  of  is  death,  the  place  here 
fpoken  of,  no  doubt,  is  the  grave.     An  ama- 
zing confideration  !  part  of  the  firft  fentence 
that   the  great  and  holy  God  ever  denounced 
againft  fallen  man,  to  one  and  all,  Dtijl  thou 
art^  and  unto  ditjl  ihou  JJoalt  return.     On  ac- 
count of  our  firft  parentis   tranfgrefllon,  it  is 
appointed  unto  all  men,  all  forts  of  men,  all 
the  inhabitants    under  heaven,    once  to  die; 
and  therefore  the    apoftle   faith,    Death  hath- 
fafjed  upon  all  nien^  even  upon  thofe  ivbo  have 
not  fmned  after  ike  fimilitude  of  the  tranfgref- 
Jion  of  Adam^    that   is,    who  have    not  been 
guilty  of  adual  fin.     Can  there  be  a  flronger 
proof  of  the  imputr^uon  of  Adam's  guilt,  of 
original  fin,  or  a  more  cutting  trial  that  a  ten- 
der father  and  nurfing  mother  can  undergo, 
than  to  fee  a  dear  little  child  juft  born,  or  but 
lent  to  the  loving  parents  for  a  few  months, 
taken  away  often  in  the  greateft  agonies  that 
we  can  conceive  ?  and  if  God,  m.y  dear  hear- 
ers, has  ever  fuffered  your  dear  children  fud- 

denly 


Ser.  XV,  M  Mem  Place.  349 

denly  to  be  feized  with  convulfions,  and  con- 
tinue in  anguifli  and  agonizing  pains  for  many 
days  together,  you  have  had  fufficient  proof 
of  it.  A  friend  of  mine  in  London,  about 
thirty-two  years  ago,  that  was  dotingly  foncj 
of  every  child  he  had,  to  whom  I  wrote  a  let- 
ter from  Georgia,  beginning  with  thefe  words. 
Is  your  idol  dead  yet  ?  for  I  thought  it  was 
fuch  an  idol  that  would  foon  go.  The  account 
he  gave  me  the  firft  time  I  faw  him  was,  that 
the  day  before  my  letter  was  received,  the 
child  died  In  fuch  agony  and  torture,  that 
its  excrements  came  out  of  its  mou  th,  v^hic 
made  the  fond  and  too  indulgent  parent  wifh 
to  have  rather  died  a  thoufand  deaths  himfelf, 
than  that  his  child  fhould  die  in  fuch  a  way  > 
and  added,  I  was  obliged  to  go  to  God,  and 
defire  him  to  take  my  darling  away.  What 
an  awful  proof  are  their  fufferings,  that  chil- 
dren come  into  the  world  with  a  corruption 
that  renders  them  liable  to  God's  wrath  and 
damnation,  but  the  blood,  the  precious  blood 
of  Jefus  Chrirt,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  cleanfes  them 
from  the  guilt  and  filth  of  fin.  So  any  of  you. 
that  have  got  children  dead  in  infancy,  O  may 
you  improve  what  1  fliall  fay  by  and  by  from 
the  text,  and  pray  and  endeavour  to  go  to  that 

place, 


2  so  All  Mens  Tiace.  Scr.  XV. 

place,  where  I  hope  you  will  fee  your  children 
making  a  bleiTed  conilellation  in  the  firmament 
cf  heaven :  in  this  refped:  all  go  to  the  fame 
place,  fome  at  the  beginning  of  life,  fome  at 
the  middle,  and  fome  at  the  decline ;  and 
happy,  happy  they  who  go  to  bed  foonefl,  if 
their  fouls  are  fived  ! 

But,  my  dear  hearers,  in  another  cafe  wc 
may  venture  to  contradidl  even  Solomon ;  for 
if  wc  confider  the  words  of  our  text  in  ano- 
ther view,  all  do  not  go  to  one  place ;  it  is 
true,  all  are  buried  in  the  grave  either  of  earth 
or  water,  but  then  after  death  comes  judg- 
ment 5  death  gives  the  decifive,  the  feparating 
blow.  Suppofe  then  in  our  enlarging  on  the 
text,  we  fhould  confine  the  word  all  to  the 
unregenerate,  and  to  thofe  who  are  not  born 
of  God,  thefe  indeed,  die  when  they  will,  all 
go  to  one  place.  If  you  fhould  afk  me,  for  I 
love  dearly  to  have  an  inquifitive  auditory,  who 
I  mean  by  unregenerate  ?  who  I  mean  by  thofe 
that  are  not  born  of  God  ?  I  anfvver,  I  do  not 
mean  all  that  only  bear  the  name  of  Jefus 
Chrift  3  I  mention  this,  becaufe  a  great  many 
people  think  that  all  that  are  baptized,  either 
when  they  are  adult  or  when  they  are  young, 
whether  fprinkled  or  put  under  water,  I  be- 
lieve 


Ser.  XV.  All  Mens  Place.  -ci 

lieve  a  great  many  people  think  that  all  thcfe 
go  to  heaven.  I  remember  when  1  began  to 
ipeak  againft  baptifmal  regeneration  in  my  fii  il 
fermon,  printed  when  I  was  about  twenty- 
two  years  old,  or  a  little  iix)re  5  the  firft  quar- 
rel many  had  with  me  was,  becaufe  I  did  not 
fay  that  all  people  who  were  baptized  were 
born  again  3  I  would  as  foon  believe  the  doc- 
trine of  tranfubftantiation.  Can  I  believe  that 
a  perfon  who  gives  no  evidence  of  being  a 
faint,  from  the  time  of  his  baptifm  to  the  time 
perhaps  of  his  death,  that  never  fights  againft 
the  world,  the  flefh,  and  the  devil,  and  never 
minds  one  word  of  w^hat  his  god-fathers  and 
god-mothers  promifed  for  him,  can  I  believe 
that  perfon  is  a  real  Chriflian  ?  no,  I  can  as 
foon  believe,  that  a  little  wafer  in  the  prielVs 
hand,  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  long,  is  the 
very  blood  and  bones  of  Jefjs  Chrift,  who  was 
hung  upon  the  crofs  without  the  gates  of  Jei-u- 
falem.  I  do  believe  baptifm  to  be  an  ordi- 
nance of  Chrift,  but  at  the  fame  time,  no  can- 
did perfon  can  be  angry  for  my  aflerting,  that 
there  are  numbers  that  have  been  baptized 
when  grovv^n  up,  or  when  very  young,  that 
are  not  regenerated  by  God's  Spirit,  who 
will  all  go  to  one  place,  and  that  place  is  where 

there 


3  $2  Ail  Mens  Place.  Ser.  XV. 

there  will  be  no  water  to  quench  that  dreadful 
lire  that  will  parch  them   with  thirft*     I  am 
fpeaking   out  of  a  book   which   contains  the 
lively  oracles  of  God,  and  in  the  name  of  one 
who  is   truth  itfelf,   who  knowing    very  well 
what  he  fpoke,  is  plea  fed  in  the  moft  folemn 
and  avv'ful  manner  to  fay,  and  that  to  a  mailer 
in  Ifrael,  that  if  a  man  be  not  horn  again  of 
ivater  aJid  the  Spirit^  he  cannot  fee  the  king- 
dom of  God ;  he  can  have  no  idea,  no  proper, 
no  adequate  notion  of  it,   much  lefs  is  he  to 
exped:  to  be  happy  eternally  with  God  here- 
after ;  and  therefore  as  our  Lord  fpoke  to  this 
man,  give  me  leave  to  obferve  to  you.  I  don't 
\  mean  the  Deifts  only  by  unregenerate  linners  -, 
ll  don't  m.ean  the  profane  mocker,  who  is  ad- 
vanced to  the  fcorner's  chair,  nor  your  open 
profligate,    adulterers,   fornicators,    abufers    of 
themfelves  with  mankind,  thefe  have  damna- 
tion as  it  were  written  upon  their  foreheads 
wdth  a  fun-beam ;  and  they  may  know  that 
God  is  not  mocked,  for  if  they   die   without 
repenting  of  thele  things,  they  fhow  they  arc 
in  an  unregenerate  flate,  and  will  all  go  to  one 
place :  if  any  of  you  are  going  thither,  may 
God  ilop  you  this  night.     But,  my  brethren, 
1  will  come  clofer ;  there  are  more  unbelievers 

within 


Ser.  XV.  All  Mem  Place.  353 

within  the  pale  than  without  the  p\le  of  the 
church  ;  let  me  repeat  it  again,  you  may  ♦hink 
of  it  when  I  am  tofiing  upon  the  mighty  wa^ 
ters,  there  are  move  unbelievers  within  the  ■ 
pale  of  the  church  than  without:  all  are  not 
pofTeflbrs  that  are  profcfTors,  ail  have  not  got 
the  thing  promifcd,  ai!  are  not  partakers  of  the 
pror'-jfe,  that  talk  and  blefs  God  they  have  got 
the  promifcd  Saviour  ;  I  may  have  him  in  my 
mouth  and  upon  my  tongue,  without  having 
the  thing  promifed,  or  tlie  blcfled  promile  in 
my  heart,  Jr\  mora!  man  that  can  walk 
touching  the  law  biameiels,  a  perfon  that  thinks 
he  i  righteous,  b-^caale  he  does  not  knov/  why 
a  perfon  wiio  has  got  no  other  religion  but  to 
go  to  a  particular  place  of  v/orfhip,  values 
himfelf  upon  being  a  churchman  or  a  diff^^n-  - 
ter  5  he  is  fuch  a  bigot,  that  he  thinks  no  man 
will  go  to  heaven  but  himfcif;  thefe,  however 
they  may  think  themfelves  fafe,  will  e'er  long 
go  to  one  place,  whether  they  think  fo  or  no  ^ 
they  will  be  foon  fummoned  to  one  bar,  and 
the  voice  of  the  archangel  founding,  Arife^  ye 
dead^  and  come  to  judgment^  will  be  the  great 
alarm  ^  the  dead  fliall  arife  and  appear  before 
the  Son  of  God,  as  Judge  of  all  mankind ; 
thefe,  as  well  as  the  infidels,  would  gladly  be 

Z  z  txcufeilj 


excufed  3  and  as  they  once  faid,  I  pray  to  have 
me  excufed  from  coming  to  Chrift,  fo  they 
I  will  fain  be  excufed  from  appearing  before,  and 
being  condemned  by  him,  but  they  mufl:  all 
go  to  one  place :  and  as  they  know  not  God, 
and  are  unacquainted  with  the  divine  life,  they 
mufl  hear  and  fuiFer  the  dreadiul  fentence. 
Depart^  ye  curfedy  info  everlafltiig  firc^  pre- 
fared  jor  the  devil  and  his  angels.  This  is  a 
thought,  that  if  cur  hearts,  my  cear  hearers, 
w^ere  properly  awakened,  would  make  our 
blood  run  cold  :  to  be  in  a  place  of  abfence 
from  God,  a  place  where  damned  fouls  will  be 
for  ever  curfing  God  and  one  another :  give  me 
leave  to  dwell  upon  it  a  little,  and  may  it  be 
blefled,  under  God,  to  awaken  fome  carelefs 
perfon,  who,  perhaps,  may  be  taking  a  walk 
to-night,  and  juft  ftep  in  to  hear  what  the 
babler  has  to  fay  wliile  he  is  about  to  take 
his  leave  of  the  people.  When  I  faw  you 
from  my  fludy  crowding  to  come  in,  when  I 
faw  you  pudiing  forward,  fome  to  go  up  to 
the  Tabernacle,  or  into  the  veftry,  fome  to  fill 
the  area,  and  others  to  ftand  at  the  door,  I 
thought  hew  fliall  I  manage  with  myfelf  to- 
night, fhail  I  endeavour  to  make  thefe  weep 
and  cry,    fhail  I  not  earneflly  addrefs  fo  many 

precious 


Ser.  XV.  'All  Mens  Pkce.  355 

precious  fouls  in  a  pradical  way,  to  bring 
them  not  to  the  preacher,  but  the  preacher's 
mafler^  knowing  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  we 
would  fain  perfuade  all  to  fl^^e  from  this  wrath 
to  come.  O  awful  thought !  and  yet  it  is  a 
certain  truth,  all  on  earth  muft  go  to  one 
place;  if  we  live  like,  and  are  devils  here^ 
we  muft  go  to  and  be  with  them  when  we  die 
for  ever !  A  blefled  minifter  of  Chrift,  in 
Scotland,  told  me  a  ftory  he  knew  for  truth,  of 
a  dreadful  anfwer  a  poor  creature  gave  on  her 
death-bed,  for  the  Scotch,  except  the  people 
of  New-England,  are  the  moft  knowing  people 
in  religious  matters,  perhaps  any  where  ^  this 
perfon  when  dying  was  aiked  by  a  minifter, 
where  do  you  hope  to  go  when  you  die  I  fays 
fhe,  I  don't  care  where  I  go  3  what,  fays  he, 
don't  you  care  whether  you  go  to  heaven  or 
hell  ?  no,  fays  (lie,  I  don't  care  whither  I  go  j 
but,  fays  he,  if  you  was  put  to  your  choice 
where  would  you  go  ?  fiys  flie,  to  hell ;  to 
that  he  replied,  are  you  mad,  will  you  go  to 
hell  ?  yes,  fays  flie,  I  will ;  v^hy  fo  ?  fays 
he  ',  why,  fays  flie,  all  my  relations  are  there. 
The  dear  minifter  of  Chtift  preached  after  her 
death,  told  the  ftory,  and  afked,  is  it  not 
fliocking  to  hear  a  woman  fay  ftie  would  go 
Z  z  2  to 


356  Jh  Mem  Place.         Sen  XV. 

to  hell  becaufe  her  relations  were  there :  why, 
you  that  are  uniegenerate  mufl  go  to  hell  tor 
all  ycur  unregenen<te  relations  are  there  ;  your 
father  the  devil  is  there,  all  damned  angels  and 
damned  fpirit*^  y  your  brothers  and  fifiers  are 
there  j  as  they  went  one  way  here,  fo  they 
muft  be  banifhed  from  Jelus  Chrift  to  one 
place  hereafter. 

But  I  mufi;  clofe  this  mournful  theme,  it  is 
too  gloomy  to  dwell  upon  5  bleffed  be  God,  I 
have  another  place  to  tell  you  of,  and  another 
fort  of  people  to  fpeak  of,  who  fliall  all,  as 
well  as  thofe  I  have  fpoken  of,  go  to  one  place  > 
perhaps,  here  are  fome  of  them  ;  bleffed  ijs 
it  to  live  in  God.  When  death  clofes  the  eye's 
ail  adlual  feparation  is  made,  and  inftead  of 
hearing,  Depart,  ye  curfed^  they  will  hear. 
Come,  ye  bleffed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  king" 
dom  prepared  for  yoii  jrom  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  Our  bleffed  maflcr,  and  who  fpeaks 
like  him,  gives  us  an  awful  view  of  Dives  and 
Lazarus,  the  one  feafting  and  fattening  his  body 
to  the  grave,  not  keeping  one  faft-day  in  a 
year,  and  the  other  ftarving  at  his  gate,  per- 
haps buried  in  the  ditch,  denied  a  grave  by 
the  parifli,  while  this  vile  wretch,  who  died 
alfo,  had  a  pompous  funeral  ^    there^  he  was 

carried 


Ser.  XV.  .Aii  Mens  Place  i^^y 

carried  to  one  place;  he  was,  perhaps,  laid 
in  ftate,  two  mutes  attending  round  the  coffin, 
while  damned  devils  Were  gnawing  his  foul  • 
he  lift  up  his  eyes  in  torment.  Hark !  don't 
you  hear  him,  I  will  flop  a  little  that  you 
may  :  you  ungodly  ones,  do  not  you  hear  your 
brother  cry  ?  he  would  not  pray  while  alive, 
but  hell  makes  him  pray,  not  to  God  but  to 
Abraham ;  Father  j^braham^  fays  he,  [end 
Lazarus  to  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water, 
and  cool  yny  tongue  3  and  I  verily  believe,  the 
damned  will  have  a  fight  of  thofe  that  are  in 
heaven,  to  let  them  know  what  a  heaven, 
what  a  Chrift,  what  a  glory  they  have  lofl : 
God  grant  this  may  be  none  of  your  cafe,  it 
will  not  be  if  you  are  of  the  number  of  thofe 
who  are  born  from  above,  that  are  made  new 
creatures  in  Chrift  Jefus  ^  for  by  being  boni 
again  from  above,  1  mean  receiving  a  principle 
of  new  life,  im  parted  to  our  hearts  by  the 
Holy  Ghofl,  changing  you,  giving  you  new 
thoughts,  new  words,  new  adions,  new  views, 
fo  that  old  things  pafs  aWay,  and  all  things 
become  new  in  our  fouls.  I  know  very  well, 
that  the  dodrine  of  a  divine  influence  is  ex- 
ploded :  I  have  often  told  you,  and  I  tell  yoa 
again,  now  I  am  about  going  to  another  clime 

for 


358  ^All  Mens  Place.  Ser.  XV* 

for  a-while,  that  the  grand  quarrel  that  our 
Lord  Jefus  Ciirift  has  with  England,  and  I  do 
not  foQ^k  it  as  a  prophet,  or  the  fon  of  a  pro- 
phet, but  as  the  Lord  God  liveth,  in  whofe 
name  I  fpeak,  for  whofe  glory  I  am  going, 
abroad,  and  in  whofe  fear  I  defire  to  die,  if 
the  Spirit  of  God  and  his  divine  influence  is 
not  more  regarded  in  this  land  than  it  has 
been,  wo,  wo,  wo  to  thofe  that  defpife  it, 
they  may  by  and  by,  one  day  or  other,  won- 
der and  perifh.  BlefTed  be  God,  there  are  a 
happy  few  who  do  regard  it  -,  and  I  am  per- 
fuaded  in  my  very  foul,  that  the  number  in 
England,  in  Scotland,  in  Ireland,  in  Wales, 
and  in  i\merica,  does,  and  I  pray  It  may,  ftill 
greurly  increafe.  Yet,  notwithftanding  the 
Word  of  God  does  run  and  is  glorified,  how 
many  are  there  at  this  day,  that  wilfully  do 
defpite  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  hate  the 
doctrine  of  the  Spirit's  divine  influences ;  that 
if  it  were  in  their  power,  but  we  live  under 
revolution  principles,  and  are  bleiled  with  tole- 
ration, which  is  the  bulwark  of  liberty  of 
conicience,  otherv/ife  the  ftreet  would  run 
with  the  blood  of  both  churchmen  and  diifcn- 
ters^  but  whether  the  world  will  hear  or  for- 
bear, bkiTeJ  be  God,  when  v/e  fpeak  of  tiie 

new 


Ser.  XV.  All  Mens  Place]  3^9 

new  birth,  we  do  not  fpeak  of  a  cunningly 
devifed  fable ;  what  our  eyes  have  feen,  what 
our  hands  have  handled,  and  what  our  hearts 
havje  felt  of  the  word  of  h*fe,  that  declare  we 
unto  you.  When  I  was  fixteen  years  of  age 
I  began  to  faft  twice  a  week  for  thirty-fix 
hours  together,  prayed  many  tim^es  a-day, 
received  the  facrament  every  Lord's-day,  fall- 
ing myfelf  almoft  to  death  all  the  forty  days 
of  Lent,  during  which,  I  made  it  a  point  of 
duty  never  to  go  lefs  than  three  times  a-day 
to  public  worfliip,  befides  itv^n  times  a-day 
to  my  private  prayers,  yet  I  knew  no  more 
that  I  was  to  be  born  again  in  God,  born  a 
new  creature  in  Chrift  Jefus,  than  if  I  was 
never  born  at  all.  I  had  a  mind  to  be  upon 
the  ftage,  but  then  1  had  a  qualm  of  con- 
fcience  3  I  ufed  to  afk  people,  pray  can  I  be 
a  player,  and  yet  go  to  the  facrament  and  be  a 
Chriftian  ?  O,  fay  they,  fuch  a  one,  who  is  a 
player,  goes  to  the  facrament  5  though,  ac- 
cording to  the  law  of  the  knd,  no  player 
fijQuld  receive  the  facrament,  unlefs  they  give 
proof  that  they  repent ;  that  was  archbifhop 
Tillotfon's  doctrine  :  well  then,  if  that  be  the 
cafe,  fiid  I,  I  will  be  a  player,  and  I  thought 
to   aft  my  part  for  the  devil  as  well  as  any 

body  I 


360  All  Mens  Place.  Ser.  XV. 

body;  bijt,  blefled  be  God,  he  flopped  me 
ip  my  journey.  I  muft  bear  teftimony  to  my 
old  friend,  Mr.  Charles  Wefley,  he  put  a  book 
into  my  hands,  called,  the  Life  of  God  in 
the  Soul  of  Man,  whereby  God  fhewed  me, 
that  I  muft  be  born  again  or  be  damned.  I 
know  the  place ;  it  may  be  luperftitious,  per- 
haps, but  whenever  I  go  to  Oxford,  I  cannot 
help  running  to  that  place  where  Jefus  Chrift 
fii  ft  revealed  himfelf  to  me,  and  gave  me  the 
new  birth.  As  a  good  writer  fays,  a  man 
may  go  to  church,  fay  his  prayers,  receive  the 
facrament,  and  yet,  my  brethren,  not  be  2, 
Chriftian.  How  did  my  heart  rife,  how  did 
my  heart  fliudder,  like  a  poor  man  that  is 
afraid  to  look  into  his  account-books,  left  he 
fliould  find  himfelf  a  bankrupt;  yet  fhall  I 
burn  that  book,  fliall  I  throw  it  down,  fhall 
I  put  it  by,  or  fhall  I  fearch  into  it  ?  I  did, 
and  holding  the  book  in  my  hand,  thus  adr 
dreffcd  the  Godof  heaveji  and  earth:  Lord,  if 
I  am  not  a  Chriftian,  if  I  am  not  a  real  one, 
God,  tor  Jefus  Chiift's  fake,  fhow  me  what 
Chriftianity  is,  that  I  may  not  be  damned  at 
laft.  I  read  a  little  further,  and  the  cheat  w^as 
difcovered ;  O,  fays  the  author,  they  that 
Icnov^  any  thing  of  religion^    know  it  is  a.  vital 

tinioa 


Ser.  XV.  All  Mens  Place.  361 

union  with  the  Son  of  God,  Chrifl:  formed  in 
the  heart  5  O  what  a  ray  of  divine  lite  did 
then  break  in  upon  my  poor  foul,  I  fell  a  wri- 
ting to  all  my  brethren,  to  my  fifters,  talked 
to  the  fludents  as  they  came  in  my  room,  put 
off  all  trifling  converfation,  put  all  trifling 
books  away,  and  was  determined  to  ftudy  to 
be  a  flint,  and  then  to  be  a  fcholar ;  and  from 
that  moment  God  has  been  carrying  on  his 
blefled  work  in  my  foul  3  and  as  1  am  now 
fifty-five  years  of  age,  going  towards  fixty,  I 
tell  you,  my  brethren,  as  I  fhall  leave  you  in 
a  few  days,  I  am  more  and  more  convinced 
that  this  is  the  truth  of  God,  and  without  it 
you  never  can  be  faved  by  Jefus  Chrifl: :  all 
thofe  born  of  God,  whether  when  young  or 
old,  at  the  fixth,  ninth,  or  eleventh  hour, 
however  feparated  from  one  another,  through 
the  grace  of  God,  they  fhdll  ail  go  to  one 
place. 

If  you  aflc  where  that  place  is  ?  I  anfwer, 
blcfl^ed  be  God,  to  heaven  ^  if  you  aflc  to 
whom  they  fhall  go  ?  I  anfwer,  to  the  fpirits 
of  jufl:  men  made  perfed*  -^  and,  what  will  be 
befl:  of  all,  to  Jefus  Chrifl,  the  heavenly  inhe- 
ritance. If  we  were  not  to  go  to  him,  what 
would  heaven  be  ?  if  we  were  not  to  fee  him, 
A  a  a  wlut 


362  All  Mens  Place.  Ser.  XV. 

what  would  glory  be?  I  know  fome  people 
think  heaven  is  a  fine  place,  foitis;  but  what 
makes  it  fo,  but  the  prefence  and  joy  of  the 
God  of  glory  ?  I  would  rather  die  a  thoufand 
deaths,  than  facriiice  my  aifedlions  as  I  have 
done :  after  I  had  taken  leave  of  all  my  friends 
fon^e  years  ago  at  Deptford,  I  burft  out  into 
tears  and  faid,  Lord,  I  would  not  fuiFer  all  I 
feel  for  my  friends  but  for  thee,  then  returned 
to  my  friends  and  faid,  Now  the  bitternefs  of 
death  is  paffed,  I  am  going  to  be  executed, 
God*s  will  be  done.  Bleffed  be  God,  after 
death  there  are  no  feparations,  we  fhall  all  go 
to  one  place  >  miniflers  that  could  not  preach 
in  one  pulpit,  and  Chriftians  that  could  not 
agree  with  one  another,  bleifled  be  God,  fhall 
by  and  by  go  to  one  heaven ;  whether  they 
go  to  one  place  or  no  in  this  world,  does  not 
fignify :  fays  one,  I  go  to  the  DilTenters ;  ano- 
ther, I  go  to  church  j  and  a  great  many  Chrif- 
tians judge  of  one  another  as  infidels,  bccaufe 
they  are  not  of  one  fcntiment.  A  good  wo- 
man came  to  me  fome  years  ago  jufl  as  I  had 
done  preaching,  fome  people  love  to  be  im- , 
pertinent,  what  do  you  think,  fays  fhe,  of 
Cotton  Mather  and  another  minifter,  one  faid, 
I  ought  to  receive  the  facrament  before  my 

expe- 


Sen  XV.  All  Mens  Place.  363 

experience  was  given  in,  the  other  faid  not,  and 
I  believe  the  angels  were  glad  to  carry  them 
both  to  heaven.  I  faid,  good  woman,  I  believe 
they  have  not  talked  about  it  fince,  for  they 
will  no  more  talk  about  thefe  things.  We  have 
but  one  Father,  one  Holy  Ghoft,  we  have 
lived  in  one  communion  of  faith ;  bleffed  be 
the  living  God,  e'er  long  the  angels  Ihall  come 
and  call  the  eleil  from  the  eaft,  the  weft,  the 
north,  and  the  fouth,  to  be  at  home  with  the 
Lord. 

If  this  be  the  cafe,  my  brethren,  it  may 
fupport  us  under  all  the  changes  and  partings 
of  this  mortal  ftate.  As  1  have  been  in  a  pub- 
Jic  charader,  I  fuppofe  1  may  venture  to  lay, 
that  no  one  has  been  called  to  fuch  trequent 
partings  from  God*s  people  as  I  have :  I  am 
going  now  the  thirteenth  time  over  the  water ; 
ye^,  I  find  what  is  faid  of  St,  Paul  i^  true,  he 
could  bear  a  whipping,  not  a  weeping :  what 
mean  you,  fays  he,  to  weep  and  break  my 
heart  i  he  never  faid,  whip  me  and  break  my 
back,  no,  no.  All  get  to  one  place :  what  a 
bleffed  ftate !  to  fee  one's  fpintual  father,  to 
fee  one's  fpiritual  children,  and  hear  them  fay, 
fuch  and  fuch  a  time  God  begat  me  to  hira- 
felf  by  your  miniltry  !  what  a  bleffing  will  it 
A  a  a  2  bf 


364  'M  Mens  Place.  Ser.  XV. 

be  to  hear  them  fay,  bleffed  be  God,  next  to 
the  Spirit  I  owe  my  coming  here  to  that  fer- 
vant  of  thine  !  and  with  what  ravifhment  will 
the  minifter  fay,  behold  me  and  the  children 
thou  haft  given  me  !  with  what  holy  triumph 
will  they  all  then  caft  their  crowns  at  the  foot 
of  the  Lamb !  with  what  joy  wiil  they  cry, 
grace,  grace,  when  the  top-ftone  is  brought 
forth,  and  how  will  they  then  try  who  fhall 
praife  redeeming  love  and  rich  free  grace  in 
the  higheft  ftrain !  The  difference  here  is  you 
know,  that  we  fing  in  parts,  fome  fing  treble, 
fome  tenor,  and  fome  bafe  -,  what  then  ?  each 
part  helps  the  other,  were  all  to  ling  alike  the 
harmony  would  not  be  compleat;  however 
Ihocking  it  is  in  this  world,  all  the  differences 
that  have  been  among  the  people  of  God,  will 
only  make  us  fing  and  unite  us  the  better  in  a 
future  ftate. 

Well,  my  dear  hearers,  by  this  time  then  I 
hope  you  have  began  to  afk,  to  what  place 
am  I  going  ?  Suppofe  now  you  reafon  thus ; 
I  have  heard  to-night  that  all  unregenerate 
perfons  go  to  hell,  and  dwell  among  the 
damned  ^  I  have  heard  that  all  that  are  born 
again  of  God,  and  all  that  believe  in  Jefus 
Chrift,    whether  Jew    or    Gentile,    whether 

bp^4 


Ser.  XV^         'All  Mens  Place.  365 

bond  or  free,  all  go  to  dwell  with  God,  with 
angels,  and  the  fpirits  of  juft  men  made  per- 
fed ;  I  •  have  heard  the  minifter  fiy,  though 
'he  feems  fometimes  to  ramble  in  his  difcourfe, 
"that  we  all  go  to  one  place,  that  is,  the  grave : 
•^I  am  haftening  there,  autamn  is  coming  on, 
the  fall  of  the  leaf  is  approaching,  a  blaft, 
occafioned  by  the  fudden  change  of  weather, 
or  a  furfeit,  by  fealling  too  Ickuriantly  on  the 
'fruits  of- God's  bounty  5  another  illnefs  may 
take  me  to  my  long  home.  I  hear  of  fjch-a- 
one's  dying,  and  of  fuch-a-one,  perhaps  in  an 
apopledic,  perhaps  in  a  paralytic  lit :  I  am 
lufty  and  ftrbng,  I  am  glorying  in  my  ftrength, 
but  who  knows  but  that  may  be  only  making 
me  food  for  a  fever  ^  one'would  ftand  it  better 
that  was  more  emaciated  than  I  am.  If  I 
fhould  be  taken  this  night,  am  I  going  the 
way  to  hell,  or  the  way  to  heaven.  Adrian, 
the  emperor,  cried  out  upon  a  time.  My  trem- 
blingy  dear  departing  Joiil^  ^whither  art  thou 
goi72g?  thefe  were  his  words.  Won't  you 
hear  an  emperor  preach,  preach  on  his  dying 
bed,  when  the  filver  cords  of  life  are  loofed  ? 
Confcience,  confcience,  confcience,  thou  can- 
dle of  the  Lord,  may  he  help  thee  to  light  a 
poor  finner  into  a  knowledge  of  himfelf     I 

charge 


3^6  '^//  Mens  Place]  Ser.  XV, 

charge  ''fitt  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  in  the  name  of  that  Saviour,  in  whofe 
n:.me  3nd  by  whofe  power,  1  truft,  I  now 
preach  ;  O  confciencc  !  thou  Litliful  monitor, 
kt  every  one  hear  their  own.  Come,  if  con- 
fcience  was  to  (peak  what  would  it  fay  ?  why, 
that  if  you  are  not  acquainted  with  yourfelfand 
Chrift,  you  are  lofl:  for  ever.  The  Ameri- 
\  cans  are  the  moft  hofpitable  people  under 
heaven,  they  love  to  entertain  ftrangers,  who 
may  be  hereby  kindly  provided  for  without 
going  to  an  inn :  I  always  endeavoured  to 
drop  a  word  for  Chrift  when  I  came  to  their 
houfes.  I  remember  Mr.  Seeward,  and  fome 
other  good  friends  were  v/ith  me  ;  when  I  firft 
got  into  the  houfe,  1  began  to  talk  of  Chrift  j 
the  mafter  of  it  faid,  Sir,  I  believe  you  are 
right  J  I  can't  open  a  leaf  in  my  bible,  but  I 
find  I  am  no  Chriftian  :  would  to  God  all  here 
minded  the  fame  leaf !  May  be,  many  here 
fay,  fir,  I  fcorn  your  words  ;  well,  don't  I  ? 
don't  God  tell  you  that  won  t  do  ?  you  are 
,  a  moral  man,  but  don't  love  God  5  you  don't 
1  get  drunk,  becaufe  it  will  make  your  head 
ach ;  you  don't  commit  fornication  and  adul- 
tery, which  is  common  among  the  great,  and 
therefore  they  think  God  will  not  punifh  them 

for 


Ser,  XV.  M  Mens  Placel  367 

for  it ;  perhaps  you  are  not  a  fornicator,  left 
yoa  {hould  ftand  in  a  fheet,  though  we  have 
no  diTcipline  among  us  now  5  you  don't  do 
thefe  things  for  fear  of  maintaining  the  baftard^ 
or  being  taken  up  3  but  does  your  obedience 
proceed  from  love  to  God,  to  Chrift  i  if  not, 
may  God  convince  you  of  your  mifcrable  ftate 
before  you  go  hence. 

But,  blefled  be  God,  there  are  numbers  of 
dear  fouls  here,  that  I  hope  e'er  long  to  live 
in  one  place  and  to  eternal  ages  with.  All 
hail,  my  fellow  Chriftians;  all  hail,  my  dear 
brethren  and  friends ;  all  hail,  ye  that  are  chil- 
dren of  one  parent,  born  of  one  Spirit,  and 
bring  forth  the  Iruits  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  in 
your  converfation  >  yet  a  little  while,  and 
we  muft  part;  whether  I  die,  or  you  die, 
blefled  be  God,  one  place  fliall  e'er  long  hold 
us ;  in  yonder  blefled  world  we  fhall  e'er  long 
meet,  and  praife  free  grace  -,  my  brethren,  we 
fhall  be  then  for  ever  with  the  Lord,  for  ever 
one  with  Chrift ;  and  if  this  be  the  cafe,  let 
tis  comfort  one  another  with  thefe  things ; 
and  if  we  are  all  going  to  one  place,  God,  of 
his  infinite  mercy,  keep  us  from  falling  out 
by  the  way.  Don't  fay,  I  am  of  the  Foun- 
dery;  dont  fay,  I  am  of  the  Tabernacle ;  don't 

fpend 


368  All  Mens  Place.         Ser.  XV. 

ipend  your  time  in  talking  againft  John  Wiefley 
and  George  Whitefieldj  don  t  fay,  you  go  to 
the  Tabernacle,  Til  go  to  the  chapel  5  no, 
don't  fpeak  of  Paul  and  Cephas ;  God  unite 
us  more  and  more  to  Jefus  Chrifl: ;  and  if  you 
are  going  to  heaven,  God  help  you  to  travel  a 
little  fafter  than  v^e  do.  My  brethren,  let  us 
prefs  forward  tovi^ard  the  mark  of  the  prize  of 
our  high  calling  in  Chrift  Jefus.  O  that  the 
God  of  love  may  fill  us  with  fuch  peace  and 
fuch  joy,  that  every  ftorm,  every  trial,  every 
temptation  we  meet  with,  may  be  over-ruled 
to  good  for  US;  all  our  afflidlions,  all  our 
temptations,  are  to  make  heaven  more  defi- 
table,  and  earth  more  loathfome. 

If  this  is  not  the  cafe  with  fome  of  you,  God 
convert  you  to-night.  Help  me,  my  dear 
Tabernacle  and  London  hearers,  help  me^ 
help  me,  help  me  for  Jefus  ChrilVs  fake. 
You  was  once  going  to  hell  yourfelves,  for 
God's  fake  endeavour  to  flop  thofe  that  are 
going  there  :  pray  for  your  unconverted  friends. 
Young  people,  young  people,  that  are  going  to 
hell  giddily,  may  God  flop  you  this  night : 
w^as  I  to  talk  to  you  ferioufly,  you  would  fay 
as  a  young  gentleman  did,  when  I  defired  he 
would  not  fwear;  he  turned  to  me  and  faid, 

Dodor. 


Ser.  XV.  All  Mem  Place.  369 

Dodlor,  (I  was  no  more  a  dodior  then  than 
now,  and  but  young  too)  it  is  very  hard  you 
will  not  let  a  man  go  to  hell  his  own  way  ;  if 
any  of  you  are  of  this  ftamp,  God  grant  he 
may  not  let  you  go  to  hell  your  own  way, 
but  go  to  heaven  in  God's  way,   in  Chrifl's 
way.     I  am  fure  you  are  not  happy ;  the  de- 
vil  never  had  a  happy  child  in  the  world :  O 
that  God  may  turn  your  feet  into  the  way  of 
peace  to-night :  O  that  it  may  be  with  you 
as  with  a  young  man  one  night  formerly :  I 
remember   I  had   about   two   hundred  notes 
then  5  I  came  into  mooriields  this  morning  at 
fix  o'clock,  fays  he,  to  meet  my  fweetheart, 
but,  blefied  be  God,  I  met  with  Jefus  Chrift, 
my  fweetheart :   would  to  God  you  may  do  lo, 
young  men,  to-night:  when  you  have  gone 
on  to  that  place,  O  that  it  may  be  with  you 
as  it  was  with  good  Mr.  Crane,  who  is  ap- 
pointed fteward  of  the  Orphan-houle  5  he  went 
once  to  fee  a  play  at  Drury-lane,  but  tliat  being 
full  he  went  to  Covent-garden,  and  that  was 
fo  full  he  could  not  put  his  head  in;  well, 
fays  he,  he  told  it  me  himfelf^  and  he  is  aa 
Ifraelite  indeed,  one  of  the  moft  honeft  men, 
perhaps,  in   the   world,  I   will   go   and 'hear 
d^^flor   Whitefield ;    there   God   reached  his 
B  b  b  heart, 


3^0  All  Mens  Place.  Scr.  XV. 

heart,  and  now  he  (hines.  I  had  letters  yefter* 
day  or  the  day  before  from  Georgia,  that 
made  my  heart  leap  for  joy  ;  honeft  Mr. 
Wright,  that  ingenious,  indefatigable  man, 
and  Mr.  Crane,  have  gone  on  fo  well,  and 
have  managed  the  Orphan-houfe  fo  well,  that 
all  letters  from  all  parts  give  me  a  pleafure : 
would  to  God,  one  fays,  you  could  fend  ten 
thoufand  fucb  people  as  Mr.  Wright  and  Mr. 
Crane ;  would  to  God  you  could  fend  a  thou- 
fand fuch  over,  and  an  hundred  preachers 
to  preach  Chrift  among  us.  O  that  curiofity 
may  be  over-ruled  for  good  to  fome  of  you 
to-night :  but  I  forgot  myfelf,  and  can  you 
blame  me  if  I  fliould  detain  you  a  little,  tho* 
I  am  really  afraid  of  unfitting  myfelf  for  my 
voyage,  if  I  tire  myfelf  before  I  go :  to-mor- 
row I  am  to  go  to  fee  where  I  am  to  ikep.  I 
intend,  God  willing,  to  have  a  facrament  here 
to-morrow,  and  another  next  Sabbath-day 
morning.  I  intend,  God  willing,  to  give 
you  a  parting  word  on  Sunday  evening,  and 
give  you  notice  of  taking  my  laft  tarewel  in 
the  week,  for  I  muft  get  a  day  or  two  to  dif- 
patch  my  private  bufinefs,  and  be  ready  to- 
ga where  my  God  calieth  me. 

IfhalL 


Ser.  XV.  ^//  Mens  Place.  371 

I  fliall,  I  think,  be  called  to  do  fomething 
which  I  would,  if  poffible,  have  avoided,  and 
that  is,  as  this  place  has  been  repaired,  you 
fee  'tis  frefli  done,  which  is  expenfive,  and  I 
am  willing  to  leave  every  thing  clear  before  I 
go,  a  collection  muft  be  made  for  defraying 
the  charge.  The  world  thinks  I  am  very  rich  ; 
a  man,  the  other  day,  was  fo  perfuaded  of 
my  riches,  that  he  fent  me  word,  if  I  did  not 
lay  thirty  pounds  in  fuch  a  place,  I  fliould  be 
killed  as  fure  as  I  am  alive;  but,  blcffed  be 
God,  I  am  alive  yet ;  I  do  not  fear  dying  fud- 
denly,  or  being  difpatched  by  a  poignard,  or  a 
piftol  to  make  a  paffage  for  my  foul  to  flee 
to  God.  You  may  think,  perhaps,  I  get  a 
great  deal  by  preaching  here ;  and  now  I  am 
going  away,  what  do  you  think  my  ftated 
allowance  is  for  preaching  at  the  Tabernacle  ? 
I  have  no  more  from  this  place  than  one  hun- 
dred pounds  a  year  ;  and  I  afked  but  laft  night 
how  it  flood,  andinfteadofhavinga  fingle  lix- 
pence,  I  was  told  there  were  fifty  pounds 
arrears ;  well,  faid  I,  ungrateful  as  it  is  to  me, 
I  will  make  a  coUedtion  to-night  that  all  may 
be  left  free ;  and  if  others  are  left  to  make  an 
advantage  of  it,  may  God  make  it  a  bleiiing. 
There  are  not  fix  people  in  this  place  that  I 
B  b  b  2  have 


372  All  Mens  Place.  Ser,  XV. 

have  had  the  value  of  a  guinea  of  from  Janu- 
ary to  Auguft  ;  nor  have  I  had  a  guinea  from 
all  thefe  ordinances  towards  bearing  the  expen- 
ces  of  my  voyage.  When  I  come,  my  bre- 
thren, to  heaven,  you  fhall  then  know  with 
what  a  fpirit  I  have  ferved  youj  you  fhall 
then  know  that  all  I  have  done  is  to  build 
places  for  others,  where  I  hope  God  will 
meet  you  and  your  children  when  I  am  dead 
and  gone.  O  that  we  may  meet  in  one  place, 
when  God  calls  me  hence  :  the  Lord  quicken 
you,  the  Lord  ftrengthen  you,  the  Lord  Je- 
fus  Chrift  be  with  you,  and  grant  that  e'er 
long  we  may  be  where  there  fhall  be  no  more 
forrow,  but  we  fhall  dwell  with  God  and  one 
another  for  ever  5  even  f©.  Lord  Jefus  Chrift, 
Aincn, 


SERMON 


[    373     ] 


SERMON     XVI. 

God  a  Believer's  Glory. 

Isaiah  Ix.  ver.  19, 

^nci  thy  God  thy  Glory. 

I  LATELY  had  occafion  to  Ipeak  on  the 
verfe  immediately  following  that  of  our 
text  J  but  when  I  am  reading  God's 
word,  I  often  find  it  is  like  being  in  a  tempt- 
ing garden,  when  we  pluck  a  little  fruit  and 
find  it  good,  we  are  apt  to  look  after  and 
pluck  a  little  more,  only  with  this  difference, 
the  fruit  we  gather  below  often  hurts  the  body 
at  the  fame  time  that  it  pleafes  the  appetite,  but 
when  we  walk  in  God's  garden,  when  we  ga- 
ther fruit  of  the  Redeemer's  plants,  the  more 
we  eat  the  more  we  are  delighted,  and  the 
freer  we  are  the  more  welcome  5  if  any  chap- 
ter in  the  bible  deferves  this  character  and  de- 

fcription  of  an  evangelical  Eden,  this  does. 

It 


374  ^^^  ^  Believer^ s  Glory.     Ser.  XVI. 

It  is  very  remarkable,  and  I  have  often  told 
you  of  it,  that  all  the  apoftlcs  preach  firft  the 
law,  and  then  the  gofpcl,  v^^hich  finds  man  in 
a  ftatc  of  death,  points  out  to  him  how  he  is 
to  get  life,  and  then  fweetly  condufts  him  to 
it.  Great  and  glorious  things  are  fpoken  of 
the  church  of  God  in  this  chapter ;  and  it  ftruck 
me  very  much  this  evening  ever  fince  I  came 
into  the  pulpit,  that  the  great  God  fpeaks  of 
the  church  in  the  Angular  number :  how  can 
that  be,  when  the  church  is  compofed  of  fo 
many  millions  gathered  out  of  all  nations, 
languages,  and  tongues  ?  how  is  it,  that  God 
fays  thy  maker  and  not  your  maker,  that  he 
fpeaks  of  the  church  as  though  it  confifted 
only  of  one  individual  perfon  ?  the  reafon  of  it 
IS  this,  and  is  very  obvious,  that  though  the 
church  is  compofed  of  many  members,  they 
have  but  one  Head,  and  they  are  united  by  the 
bond  of  one  Spirit,  by  whom  they  have  the 
fame  vital  union  of  the  foul  with  God ;  and 
therefore  it  teaches  Chriftians  not  to  fay  to  one 
another,  /  am  of  Paul^  I  am  of  Apollos^  or 
Cephas^  but  to  behave  and  live  fo,  that  the 
world  may  know  that  we  all  belong  to  one 
common  Chrift:  God  revive,  continue,  and 
increafe  this  true  Chriftian   love  among  us! 

Qi 


Ser,  XVI.    God  a  Believer's  Glory.  ^75 

Of  this  church,  thus  coUeftively  confidered, 
united  under  one  head,  the  bleffed  evangeli- 
cal prophet  thus  fpcaks,  Violence  Jloall  no  more 
be  heard  in  thy  land,  isjafting  nor  deJiruBion 
'within  thy  borders,  but  thou  Jhalt  call  thy  walls 
fahationy  and  thy  gates,  where  the  magif- 
trates  affemble,  and  the  people  go  in  and  out, 
praife.  From  this  text,  a  great  many  good 
and  great  men  have  gathered  what  they  call 
the  Millenium,  that  Jefus  Chrift  is  to  come 
and  reign  a  thouiand  years  on  earth,  but  I 
mull  acknowledge  that  I  have  always  rejedted 
a  great  many  good  mens  poiitive  opinion  about 
the  feafon  when  this  ftate  commences,  and  I 
would  w  arn  you  all  againft  fixing  aoy  time  j 
for  what  fignifies  whether  Chrift  comes  to 
reign  a  thoufand  years,  or  when  he  comes, 
fince  you  and  I  are  to  die  very  foon;  and 
therefore  inftead  of  puzzling  our  heads  about 
it,  God  grant  we  may  live  fo  that  we  may 
reign  with  him  for  ever ;  and  it  feems  to  me, 
that  whatfoever  is  faid  of  this  ftate  on  earth, 
that  the  millenium  is  to  be  underftood  in  a 
fpiritual  fenfe,  as  an  emblem  of  a  glorious, 
eternal,  beatific  ftate  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
The  funJhaU  no  more  be  thy  light  by  day,  nor  j or 
brightnefs  Jhall  the  moon  give  light  unto  thee, 

but 


376  God  a  BeHeijers  Glory.     Ser.  XVL 

iut  the  Lord  Jhall  be  unto  thee  an  everlajling 
light 'y  and  in  order  to  prepare  us  for  that 
light,  and  fliow  us  the  nature  of  it,  while  we 
Ipeak  of  it  may  it  come  with  light  and  power 
to  our  fouls.  He  adds  in  our  text,  and  thy 
God  Jhall  be  thy  glory :  this  is  fpoken  to  all 
believers  in  general,  but  it  is  fpoken  to  all 
fearful  believers  in  particular  ;  and  I  don't 
know  that  I  can  poffibly  clofe  my  poor,  fee- 
ble miniftration  among  you  here,  better  than 
with  thefe  words;  though,  God  willing,  I 
intend,  if  he  fhall  ftrengthen  me  this  week,  to 
give  you  a  parting  word  next  Wednefday 
morning  j  and  O  that  what  has  been  my  com- 
fort this  day  in  the  meditation  on  this  paflage, 
may  be  yours  and  mine  to  all  eternity.  He 
that  hath  an  ear  to  hear  let  him  hear  what  the 
evangelic  prophet  faith,  thy  God  thy  glory. 

The  Holy  Ghofl  feems,  as  it  were,  parti- 
cularly fond  of  this  expreffion ;  when  God 
publifhed  the  ten  commandments  upon  mount 
Sinai,  he  prefaced  it  thus,  /  a?n  the  Lord^ 
and  not  content  with  that,  he  adds,  thy  God; 
and  the  frequency  of  it,  I  fuppofe,  made 
Luther  fay,  that  the  gqfpel  dcah  much  in  pro^ 
nouns y  in  "which  confijis  a  believer's  cojrjort  \ 
but  if  there  were  no  other  argument  than  this, 

it 


Ser.  XVI.     God  a  Believer's  Glory.  ^77 

it  would  cut  up  that  deflrudlive  principle  by 
the  very  root  that  pretends  to  tell  us  that  there 
is  no  fuch  thing  as  appropriation  in  the  Bible ; 
that  our  faith  is  only  to  be  a  rational  aflent  to 
the  word  of  God,  without  a  particular  appli- 
cation of  that  word  made  to  our  fouls :  this  is 
as  contrary  to  the  gofpel,  and  to  experience  of 
every  real  faint,  as  light  is  contrary  to  darknefs 
and  heaven  to  helK  My  brethren,  I  appeal  to 
any  of  you,  what  good  would  it  do  you,  if  you 
had  ten  thoufand  notes  wrote  in  large  charaders 
by  the  fineft  hand  that  can  write  in  London  -, 
fuppofc  you  have  got  them,  as  many  men  have, 
and  it  is  a  very  convenient  way,  that  they  were 
put  into  your  little  pockets  made  on  the  infide 
of  your  coat  j  fuppofe  you  fliould  fay,  my  coat 
is  buttoned,  I  have  all  thefe  here  next  my 
heart :  v/hen  I  come  to  look  at  them,  I  find 
there  is  not  one  note  payable  to  me,  they  are 
all  either  forged,  or  payable  to  fome  body  elfe; 
and  therefore  are  good  for  nothing  to  me.  All 
the  promifes  of  the  gofpel,  all  that  is  faid  of 
God  and  Chrift,  can  do  us  no  good,  except 
that  God  and  Chriil  is  ours.  The  great  queftion 
therefore  is,  v/hether  the  God  we  profefs  to 
believe  in,  is  our  God  ?  not  only,  whether  he 
is  fo  in  general,  that  the  devils  may  fay  5  but 
C  c  c  Vf'hether 


378  Ocd  a  Believer's  Glory.     Ser.  XVI. 

whether  he  Is  our  God  in  particular.  The  devils 
can  fay,  O  God ;  but  the  devils  cannot  fay, 
my  G^.d  :  that  is  a  privilege  peculiar  to  God's 
chofen  people,  vi^ho  really  believe  on  the  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift:  and  therefore,  my  brethren,  a 
deift  cannot  fay,  my  God,  my  Chrift,  becaufe 
he  does  not  believe  on  that  medium  by  which 
God  becomes  our  God.  That  was  a  noble 
faying  of  Luther,  "  I  will  have  nothing  to  do 
with  ati  abfolute  God  ;  *'  that  is,  I  will  have 
nothing  to  do  with  a  God  out  of  Chrift.  Now 
this  is  a  deift's  glory :  Lord  Bolingbroke  va- 
\  lues  himfelf  upon  if,  I  am  aftonifhed  at  that 
1  man's  infidelity  and  cowardice.  I  don't  like 
thofe  men  that  leave  their  writings  to  be  pub* 
lifhed  after  their  death  :  I  love  to  fee  men  bold 
in  their  writings :  I  like  an  honeft  man  that 
will  put  out  his  writings  while  alive,  that  he 
may  fee  what  men  can  fay  againft  him,  and 
then  anfwer  them  j  but  it  is  meer  cowardice 
to  leave  it  to  the  world  to  anfwer  for  it,  to 
fet  us  a  cavelling  after  they  are  got  into  the 
grave :  fays  he,  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with 
the  God  of  Mofes;  and  I  fuppole  the  prin- 
ciples of  that  deift  made  one  pretty  near  to 
him  afk  as  foon  as  his  breath  was  out  of  his 
body,  where  do  you  think  he  is  gone  to  ?  an- 
other 


Scr.  XVL     God  a  Believer's  Glory.  379 

other  replies,  where  do  you  think,  bat  to  hell. 
God  grant  that  may  not  be  the  portion  of  any 
here ! 

The  queftion  then  is,  how  God  is  our  God  j 
thy  God.  My  brethren,  our  all  depends  upon 
it;  what  fignifies  faying,  this  is  mine,  and  that 
is  mine,  ii  you  cannot  fay,  God  is  mine.  The 
beft  thing  that  God  has  left  in  the  New  Tefta- 
ment,  is  himfeif :  1  will  be  their  God^  that  is 
one  of  the  legacies  \  and  a  new  heart  aljo  will 
I  give  the?ny  that  is  another ;  1  will  put  my 
laws  in  their  mind^  and  write  them  in  their 
hearts^  that  is  another  :  but  all  that  is  good  for 
nothing,  comparatively  fpeaking,  unlefs  God 
has  faid  at  the  fame  time,  for  they  are  all  in- 
feparable,  I  will  be  their  God^  and  they  JJ:all 
be  my  people.  Now  how  fhall  I  know  that 
God  is  my  God  ?  I  am  afraid,  fome  people 
think  there  is  no  knowing;  well  then,  if  you 
think  fo,  you  fet  up  a  worfhip,  and  go  and 
ered:  an  altar,  and  inftead  of  receiving  God  in 
the  facrament  as  yours,  go  and  worfhip  an  un- 
known God.  I  am  fo  far  from  believing,  that 
we  cannot  know  that  God  is  ours,  that  I  am 
fully  perluaded  of  it,  and  would  fpeak  it  with 
huniility,  and  I  would  not  chufe  to  leave  you 
with  a  lie  in  my  m  uth,  that  1  have  kn^wn 
C  c  c  2  \X 


3  So  God  a  Believer's  Glory.     Scr.  XVI. 

it  for  about  thirty-five  years  as  clear  as  the  fun 
is  in  the  meridian^  that  God  is  my  God.  And 
how  ihall  I  know  it,  my  brethren  ?  I  would 
afk  you  this  queftion,  didft  thou  ever  feel  the 
want  of  God  to  be  thy  God  ?  No  body  knows 
God  to  be  their  God  that  did  not  feel  him  to 
be  his  God  in  Chrift :  out  of  Chrift,  God  is  a 
confuming  fire.  I  know  there  are  a  great  va- 
riety of  ways  in  peoples  converfions,  but  ftill, 
my  brethren,  we  muft  all  feel  our  mifery, 
we  muft  all  feel  our  diftance  from  God,  all 
feel  that  we  are  eftranged  from  God,  that  we 
bring  into  the  world  with  us  a  nature  that  is 
not  agreeable  to  the  law  of  God,  nor  poflibly 
can  be  ^  we  cannot  be  faid  to  believe  that  God 
is  our  God,  till  we  are  brought  to  be  recon- 
ciled to  him  through  his  Son.  Can  I  fay,  a 
perfon  is  my  friend,  till  I  am  reconciled  to 
him?  and  therefore  the  gofpel  only  is  the 
miniftration"  of  reconciliation.  Paul  faith.  We 
befeech  you  as  ambajfadors  of  Chrijly  that  you 
'would  be  reconciled  unto  God :  this  is  to  be  the 
grand  topic  of  our  preaching  ;  we  are  to  be- 
feech them,  and  God  himfelf  turns  beggar  to 
his  own  creatures  to  be  reconciled  to  him : 
now  this  reconciliation  is  brought  about  by  a 
poor  finner's  being  brought  to  Jefus  Chrift; 

and 


Ser.  XVI.     God  a  Believer's  Glory.  3 Si 

and  when  once  he  fees  his  enmity  and  hatred 
to  God,  feeling  the  mifery  of  departing  from 
him,  and  being  confcious  that  he  is  obnoxious 
to  eternal  wrath,  flies  to  Jefus  as  to  a  place  of 
refuge,  and  expeds  only  a  reconciliation  thro' 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb ;  without  this,  neither 
you  nor  I  can  fay,  God  is  my  God  :    there  is 
no  peace ^  faith  my  Gody  to  the  wicked.     The 
miniflers  of  Chrift  mufi:  take  care  they  don't 
preach  an  unknown  God,  and  we  mufl  take 
care  we  don't  pretend   to  live  upon  an  un- 
known God,  a  God  that  is  not  appropriated 
and  brought  home  to  our  fouls  by  the  efficacy 
of  the  Spirit.  But,  my  brethren,  we  cannot  fay, 
God  is  our  God,  unlefs  we  are  in  Jefus  Chrift. 
Can  you  fay,  fuch  a  one  is  your  father,  unlefs 
you  can  give  proof  of  it  ?  You  may  be  baftards, 
there  are  many  baftards  laid  at  Chrift's  door. 
Now,  God  cannot  be  my  God,  at  leaft  I  can- 
not know  him  to  be  fo,  unlefs  he  is  pleafed  to 
fend  into  my  heart  the  fpirit  of  adoption,  and 
to  admit  me  to  enjoy  familiarity  with  Chrift, 

My  brethren,  1  told  you  the  other  night 
that  the  grand  controverfy  God  has  with  Eng- 
land is  for  the  flight  put  on  the  Holy  Ghoft.  As 
fcon  as  a  perfon  begins  to  talk  of  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghoft,  they  cry,  you  are  a  methodift : 


382  God  a  Believers  Glory.     Ser.  XVI. 

as  foon  as  you  fpeak  about  the  divine  influences 
of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  O !  fay  they,  you  are  an 
enthufiaft.  May  the  Lord  keep  thefe  metho- 
diftical  enthufiafts  amongfl:  us  to  the  lateft 
poflerity.  Ignatius,  fuppofed  to  have  been  one 
of  the  children  that  Jefus  took  up  in  his  arms, 
in  his  firfl  Epiftle  (pray  read  it)  v^^rote  loon 
after  St.  John's  death,  and  we  value  nothing  fo 
authentic  as  what  was  wrote  in  the  three  firfl 
centuries,  bears  a  noble  teflimony  to  this  truth. 
When  I  was  performing  my  firfl  exercifes  at 
Oxford,  I  ufed  to  take  delight  to  walk  and 
read  it,  and  could  not  help  noting  and  putting 
down  from  time  to  time  fcveral  remarkable 
pafTages,  In  the  fuperfcription  of  all  his 
Epiflles,  I  remember,  he  fliles  himfelf  Tbeo- 
fhorosy  i.  e.  Bearer  of  God  *,  and  believed 
that  thofe  he  wrote  to,  were  fo  too.  Some 
body  went  and  told  Trajan,  that  one  Ignatius 
was  an  enthufiafl,  that  he  carried  God  about 
him  :  being  brought  before  the  emperor,  who, 
though  in  other  refpefts  ^  good  prince,  was 
a  cruel  enemy  to  the  Chriflians :  but  many  a 
good  prince  does  bad  things  by.  the  influence 
of  wicked  counfellors,  like  our  king  Henry  the 
Vthj  who  was  brought  in  to  perfecute  the  pour 

Lollards^ 

*  Deum  ferens,  mfp'reJy  iikine^  holy. 


Ser.XVI.     God  a  Believer's  Glory.  383 

Lollards,  for  affembllng  in  St.  Giles's  fields  to 
hear  the  pure  gofpel,  by  falfe  accufation  o£ 
being  rebels  againfl  him.  Before  fuch  a  prince 
was  Ignatius  brought ;  fays  Trajan,  who  is  this 
that  calls  himfelf  a  bearer  of  God  ?  lays  Igna- 
tius, I  am  he,  for  v^rhich  he  quotes  this  paf- 
fage,  I  will  dwell  in  them^  and  will  walk  in 
them  J  and  they  Jhall  be  my  fons  and  daughters^ 
fayi  the  Lord  almighty.  The  emperor  was  fo 
enraged  that,  in  order  to  cure  him  of  his  en- 
thufiafm,  he  ordered  him  to  be  devoured  by 
lions  'y  at  which  Ignatius  laughed  for  joy  :  O ! 
fays  he,  am  I  going  to  be  devoured  ?  and  when 
his  friends  came  about  him,  he  almoft  danced 
for  gladnefs ;  when  they  carried  him  to  execu- 
tion he  fmiled,  and  turning  about,  faid,  now  I 
begin  to  be  a  martyr  of  Jefus  Chrift!  I  have 
heard  that  the  lions  have  leaped  from  the  mar- 
tyrs, but  when  they  come  to  me,  I  will  en- 
courage them  to  fall  on  me  with  all  their  vio- 
lence. God  give  you  fuch  enthufiafm  in  a 
trying  hour  !  This  is  to  have  God  for  our  God : 
he  that  belicveth  hath  the  witnefs  in  himfelf]  as 
it  is  written  in  this  blellcd  word  of  God,  and 
I  hope  it  will  be  the  laft  book  that  I  fhall 
read.  Farewel  father,  fareu^el  mother,  farewel 
fun,  moon,  and  ftars !  was  the  language  of  one 

of 


384  God  a  Believer's  Glory.     Ser.  XVI. 

of  the  Scotch  martyrs  in  king  Charles's  time, 
and  it  is  amazing  to  me  that  even  Mr.  Hume 
(I  believe)  a  profelTed  deift,  in  his  Hiftory  of 
England  mentions  this  as  a  grand  exit,  and 
alfo  that  feraphic  foul  Mr.  Hervey,  now  with 
God,  that  the  laft  words  of  the  martyr  were, 
Farewel  thou  precious  Bible,  thou  blefled  book 
of  God.  This  is  my  rock,  this  is  my  founda- 
tion, it  is  now  about  thirty-five  years  fince  I 
have  begun  to  read  the  Bible  upon  my  pillow. 
I  love  to  read  this  book,  but  the  book  is  no- 
thing but  an  account  of  the  promifes  which  it 
contains,  and  almoft  every  word  firom  the  be- 
ginning to  the  end  of  it  fpeaks  of  a  fpiritual 
difpenfation,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  that  unites 
our  fouls  to  God,  and  helps  a  believer  to  fay, 
my  Lord  and  my  God !  If  you  content  your- 
felves  with  that,  the  devil  will  let  you  talk  of 
dodrines  enough  :  O  you  fhall  turn  from  Armi- 
nianifm  to  Calvinifm  ;  O  you  fliall  be  orthodox 
enough,  if  you  will  be  content  to  live  without 
Chrift's  living  in  you.  Now  when  you  have 
got  the  Spirit,  then  you  may  fay,  God  is  mine. 
O  this  is  very  fine,  fay  fome,  every  body  pre- 
tends to  the  Spirit :  and  then  you  may  go  on 
as  a  bifhop  once  told  a  nobleman.  My  Lord, 
thefe  methodifts,  fay  they,  do  all  by  the  Spirit, 

fo 


Ser.  XVI.     God  a  Believer's  Glory,  385 

fo  if  the  devil  bids  them  murder  any  body, 
ihey  will  fay,  the  Spirit  bid  them  do  it;  and 
that  very  bifhop  died,  how  ?  why  horrid  !  the 
laft  words  he  fpoke  w.  re  thefe,  7he  battle  is 
fought,  the  battle  is  fought,  the  battle  is  fought^ 
but  the  viBory  is  loft  for  ever.  God  grant,  you 
and  I  may  not  die  with  fuch  words  as  thefe. 
I  hope  you  and  I  fhall  die  and  fay,  T^he  battle 
is  fought,  the  battle  is  fought,  the  battle  is 
fought,  J  have  fought  the  good  fight  ^  and  the 
victory  is  gained  for  ever.  Thus  died  Mr. 
Ralph  Erfkine,  his  laft  words  were,  Vidtory^ 
vidory,  vidlory  !  and  they  that  can  call  God 
their  God,  fhall  by  and  by  cry,  Vidory,  vido- 
ry  1  and  that  for  ever.  God  grant,  we  may 
all  be  of  that  happy  number. 

If  we  can  call  God  our  God,  we  ihall  en- 
deavour by  the  Holy  Ghoft  to  be  like  God,  we 
fhall  have  his  divine  image  ftamped  upon  our 
fouls,  and  endeavour  to  be  followers  of  that 
God  who  is  our  Father  :  and  this  brings  in  the 
other  part  of  the  text,  thy  God,  thy  Glory,  What 
is  that  ?  The  greateft  honor  that  a  poor  believer 
thinks  he  can  have  on  earth,  is  to  boaft  that 
God  is  his  God.  When  it  was  propofed  to 
David,  that  if  he  killed  an  hundred  Philiftines, 
he  (hould  have  the  king's  daughter  for  his 
D  d  d  wife, 


386  God  a  Believers  Glory.     Ser.  XVI. 

wife,  and  a  very  forry  wife  fhe  was,  no  great 
gain  turned  out  to  him  :  fays  he,  do  you  think 
it  is  a  jmall  thing  to  be  the  fon-in-Iaw  to  a 
king  ?  a  poor  ftrippling  as  I  am  here  come 
with  my  fhepherd*s  crook,  what !  to  be  mar- 
ried to  a  king's  daughter,  do  you  think  that  is  a 
fmall  thing  ?  and  it  David  thought  it  no  fmall 
thing  to  be  allied  to  a  king  by  his  daughter, 
what  a  great  thing  muft  it  be  to  be  allied  to 
the  Lord  by  one*  Spirit  ?  I  am  afraid  there  are 
fome  people  that  were  once  poor  that  are 
now  rich,  that  think  it  a  great  thing,  that  wifli, 
O  that  my  family  had  a  coat  of  arms ;  fomc 
people  would  give  a  thoufand  pounds,  I  believe^ 
for  one.  Coats  of  arms  are  very  proper  to  make 
diftindion  in  Ufe,  a  great  many  people  wear 
coats  of  arms  that  their  anceftors  got  honour- 
ably, but  they  are  a  difgrace  to  them  as  they 
wear  them  on  their  coaches.  But  this  is  out- 
glory,  whether  we  walk  or  ride,  whatever  our 
pedigree  may  be  in  life,  this  is  our  honor  that 
our  God  may  be  our  glory,  O  what  manner 
of  love  is  thisy  faith  one,  that  the  Lord  doth 
be  flow  on  us^  that  we  Jhould  be  called  the  fons  oj 
God !  born  not  ot  the  will  of  man,  born  not 
of  flcflh,  but  born  from  above.  O  God  grant 
that  this  may  be  your  glory  and  mine ! 

My 


r 


Ser.  XVI.     God  a  Believer's  Glory.  387 

My  brethren,  if  God  is  our  God  and  our 
glory,  ril  tell  you  what  we  fliaH  prove  it  by: 
whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  wiiatevtr  we  do, 
we  fliould  do  all  to  the  glory  oi  God.  Reli- 
gion, as  I  have  often  told  you,  turns  our  whole 
life  into  one  continued  facrifice  of  love  to  God. 
As  a  needle,  when  once  touched  by  a  lodd- 
ftone,  turns  to  a  particular  pole,  fo  the  heart 
that  is  touched  by  the  love  of  God,  turns  to 
his  God  agam.  I  fhall  have  occafion  to  take 
notice  of  it  by  and  by,  w^hen  I  am  aboard  a 
fliip :  for  as  foon  as  I  get  on  board,  I  generally 
place  mylelf  in  one  particular  place  under  the 
compais  that  hangs  over  my  head,  I  often  look 
at  it  by  night  and  by  day  5  when  I  rife  the 
needle  turns  to  one  point,  when  1  go  to  bed  I 
find  it  turns  to  the  fame  point  ;  and  often, 
while  I  have  been  looking  at  it,  my  heart  has 
been  turned  to  God,  faying,  Lord  Jefu",  as  that 
needle  touched  by  the  loadftone,  turns  to  one 
point,  O  may  my  heart  touched  by  the  magnet 
of  God's  love,  turn  to  him!  A  great  many 
people  think,  they  never  worfliip  God  but 
when  at  church ;  and  a  great  many  are  very 
demure  on  Lord's  days,  though  many  begin  to 
leave  that  off.  I  know  of  no  place  upon  the 
face  of  the  earth  where  the  Sabbath  is  kept 

as 


388  God  a  Believer's  Glory.     Ser.  XVL 

as  it  is  at  Bofton :  if  a  fingle  perfon  was  to 
walk  in  Bofton  ftreets  in  time  of  worfhip,  ha 
would  be  taken  up  5  it  is  not  trufted  to  poor 
infignificant  men,  but  the  juftices  go  out  in 
time  of  worfhip,  they  walk  with  a  white  wand, 
and  if  they  catch  any  perfon  walking  in  the 
ftreets,  they  put  them  under  a  black  rod.  O ! 
the  great  mifchiefs  the  poor  pious  people  have 
fuffered  lately  thro'  the  town's  being  difturbed 
by  the  foldiers  !  When  the  drums  were 
beating  before  the  houfe  of  Dr.  Sawell,  one  of 
the  holieft  men  that  ever  was,  when  he  was  fick 
and  dying,  on  the  fabbath  day,  by  his  meeting, 
where  the  noife  of  a  fingle  perfon  was  never 
heard  before,  and  he  begged  that  for  Ghrift's 
fake  they  would  not  beat  the  drum;  they 
damned  and  faid,  that  they  would  beat  to 
make  him  worfe :  this  is  not  ading  for  the 
glory  of  God  5  but  when  a  foul  is  turned  to 
God,  every  day  is  a  fabbath,  every  meal  is  a 
fpiritual  refrefhment,  and  every  fentcnce  hq 
fpeaks,  fhould  be  a  fermon  5  and  whether  he 
ftays  abroad  or  at  home,  v^hether  he  is  on  th? 
exchange,  or  locked  up  in  a  clofet,  he  can  fay, 
O  God,  thou  art  my  God  ! 

Now,  my  dear  friends,  can  you,  dare  you 
fay,  that  your  God  is  your  glory,  and  do  you 

aim 


Ser.  XVI.     God  a  Believer's  Glory.  389 

aim  at  glorifying  the  Lord  your  God  :  if  your 
God  is  your  glory,  then  fay,  O  God  forbid  that 
I  JJjould  glory  fave  in  the  crofs  of  our  Lord  Je^ 
fus  Chrijl^  by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  to 
me^    and  1  am  crucified  to  the  world.     What 
fay  you  to  that  now  ?  don't  talk  of  God's  be- 
ing your  glory,    if  you  don't  love  his  crofs. 
If  God  is  our  glory,  we  fhall  glory  not  only 
in  doing,  but  in  fuffering  for  him  3    we  fhall 
glory  in  tribulation,  and  count  ourfelvcs  moft 
highly  honoured   when  we  are  called  to  fuffer 
moft  for  his  great  name  fake.  I  might  enlarge, 
but  you  may  eafily  judge  by  my  poor  feeble 
voice  this  laft  week,  that  neither  my  flrength 
of  voice,  or  body,  will  permit  me  to  be  long 
to-night,  and  yet  I  will  venture  to  give  you 
your  laft  parting  falutation  3  and  though  I  have 
been  difluaded  from  getting  up  to  preach  this 
night,  yet  I  thought  as  my  God  was  my  glor- 
ry,    I  fhould  glory  in    preaching   till   I  died. 
O  that  God   may  be  all  our  glory  !    Ail  our 
own  glory  fades  away,  there  is  nothing  will  be 
valuable  at  the  great  day  but  this,  Thou  art 
my  God,  and  thou  art  my  glory.    It  was  a  glo^ 
fious  turn  that  good  Mr,  Shepherd  of  Bradford 
mentions  in  one  of  his  fermons,  where  he  repre- 
sents JefusChrift  as  coming  to  judgment  feated 

tipoi^ 


3  90  God  a  Believer* s  Glory.     Sen  XVI. 

upon  his  throne,  in  a  fermon  preached  before 
fome  minifters.  Chrifl:  calls  one  minifter  to 
him,  Pray  what  brought  you  into  the  church  ? 
O,  fays  he,  Lord,  there  was  a  living  in  the 
family,  and  I  was  prefented  to  it  becaufe  it  was 
a  family  living :  Hand  thou  by,  fays  Chrifl.  A 
fecond  comes.  What  didfl  thou  enter  into  the 
church  for  ?  O  Lord,  fays  he,  I  had  a  fine 
elocution,  I  had  pretty  parts,  and  I  went  into 
the  church  to  fhew  my  oratory  and  my  parts : 
fland  thou  by,  thou  haft  thy  reward.  A  third 
was  called,  And  what  brought  you  into  the 
church  ?  Lord,  fays  he,  thou  knoweft  all  things, 
thou  knoweft  that  I  am  a  poor  creature,  vile 
and  miferable,  and  unworthy,  and  helplefs,  but 
I  appeal  to  thee  my  glory,  thou  fitteft  upon 
the  throne,  that  thy  glory  and  the  good  of 
fouls  brought  me  there:  "^Chrift  immediately 
fays.  Make  room,  men,  make  room,  angels, 
and  bring  up  that  foul  to  fit  near  me  on  my 
throne.  Thus  fhall  it  be  done  to  all  that 
make  God  their  glory  here  below.  Glorify  God 
on  earth,  and  he  will  glorify  you  in  heaven. 
Come,  ye  hie  [fed  of  my  Father,  receive  the  king- 
dom, prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of 
the  *world,  fhall  be  your  portion :  and  if  fo. 
Lord  God  almighty  make  us  content   to  be 

vilified 


Ser.  XVI.     God  a  Believer's  Glory.  391 

vilified  whllft  here,  make  us  content  to  be 
defpifed  while  below,  make  us  content  to  have 
evil  things  fpoken  of  us,  all  for  Chrifl's  fake, 
yet  a  little  while,  and  Chrifl:  will  roll  away  the 
flone :  and  the  more  we  are  honoured  by  his 
grace  to  fuffer,  the  more  we  fliall  be  honoured 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  O  that  thought! 
O  that  blcffed  thought !  O  that  foul  tranfport- 
ing  thought  1  it  is  enough  to  make  us  leap  into 
a  fiery  furnace ;  in  this  fpirit,  in  this  temper, 
may  God  put  every  one  of  us. 

If  there  be  any  of  you  that  have  not  yet 
called  God  your  God,  m.ay  God  help  you  to 
do  fo  to-night.  When  I  was  reafoning  within 
myfelf,  whether  I  fliould  come  up,  or  whether 
it  was  my  duty  or  not  ?  I  could  not  help 
thinking,  who  knows  but  God  will  blefs  a 
poor  feeble  worm  to-night.  I  remember,  a 
dear  friend  fent  me  word  after  I  was  gone  to 
Georgia,  "  Your  Jaft  fermon  at  the  Tabernacle 
**  was  blefled  to  a  particular  perfon;"  I  heard 
from  that  peifon  to-day :  and  who  knows  but 
fome  may  come  to-day,  and  fay,  I  will  go 
and  hear  what  the  babler  has  to  fay  ?  who 
knows  but  curiolity  may  be  over-ruled  for 
good  ?  who  knows  but  thofe  that  have  ierved 
the  lull  of  the  fle(h  and  the  pride  of  life  iot 

their 


2gz  God  a  Believer's  Glory,     Scr.  XVL 

their  god,  may  now  take  the  Lord  to  be  their 
God  ?  O  !  if  I  could  but  fee  this,  I  think  I 
could  drop  down  dead  for  you. 

My  dear  Chriftians,  will  you  not  help  me 
to-night^  you  that  can  go  and  call  God  your 
God?  go  and  beg  of  God  for  me,  pray  td 
heaven  for  me^  do  pray  for  thofe  that  are  in 
the  gall  of  bitternefs,  that  have  no  God,  no 
Chrift  to  go  to,  and  if  they  w^ere  to  die  to- 
night, would  be  damned  for  ever.  O  poor 
iinner,  where  is  your  glory  then  ?  where  is 
your  purple  and  fine  linnen  then  ?  your  purple 
robes  will  be  turned  into  purple  fire,  and  in- 
ftead  of  calling  God  your  God,  will  be  damn'd 
with  the  devil  :  O  think  of  your  danger  !  O 
earthy  earthy  earthy  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  ! 
If  you  never  was  awakened  before,  may  the 
arrows  of  God,  fteep'd  in  the  blood  of  Jefus 
Chriftj  reach  your  hearts  now  !  Think  how 
you  live  at  enmity  with  God,  think  of  your 
danger  every  day  and  every  hour,  your  danger 
of  dropping  into  hell ;  think  how  your  friends 
in  glory  will  leave  you,  and  may  this  confide- 
ration,  under  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghofty 
excite  you  to  chufe  God  for  your  God !  Tho' 
the  fun  is  going  down,  tho*  the  fliadow  of  the* 
evening  is  coming  on,  God  is  willing,  O  man, 

God 


Ser.  XVI.     God  a  Believer's  Glory.  393 

God  is  willing,  O  woman,  to  be  a  iinner's  God^ 
he  has  found  out  a  way  whereby  he  can  be 
reconciled  to  you.  I  remember,  when  I  faw  a 
nobleman  condemned  to  be  hanged,  the  Lord 
High  Steward  told  him,  that  however  he  w*as 
obliged  to  pafs  fentence  on  him,  and  did  not 
know  that  juftice  would  be  fatisfied  but  by  the 
execution  of  the  law  in  this  world,  yet  there 
might  be  a  way  whereby  juftice  might  be  fa- 
tisfied and  mercy  take  place  in  another :  when 
I  heard  his  Lordihip  fpeak,  I  wifhed  that  he  had 
not  only  faid,  there  might  be  a  way,  but  that 
he  had  found  out  the  way  wherein  God  could 
be  juft,  and  yet  a  poor  murderer  coming  to 
Jefus  Chrift  fhould  be  pardoned. 

You  that  can  call  God  yours,  God  help  you 
from  this  moment  to  glorify  him  more  and 
more :  and  if  God  be  your  God  and  your  glo- 
ry, I  am  perfuaded,  if  the  love  of  God  abounds 
in  your  hearts,  you  will  be  willing  on  every 
occafion  to  do  every  thing  to  promote  his  ho- 
nor and  glory,  and  therefore  ycu  will  be  willing 
at  all  times  to  affift  and  help  as  far  as  lies  in 
your  power  to  keep  up  places  of  worfhip,  to 
promote  his  glory  in  the  falvation  and  conver- 
fion  of  finners  5  and  I  mention  this  becaufe 
there  is  to  be  a  coUedion  this  night  -,  I  would 

E  e  e  have 


394  God  a  Believer  s  Glory.     Ser.XVL 

have  chofe,    if  poffible,   to  have   evaded  this 
point,  but  as  this  Tabernacle  has  been  repaired, 
and  as  the  expence   is -pretty  large,  and   as  I 
would  chufe  to  leave  every  thing  unincumbered, 
I  told  my  friends,  1  would  undertake  to  make 
a  colledion,   that  every  thing  might  be  left 
quite  clear :    remember,  it  is  not  ior  me,  but 
for  yourfelves,  I  told  you  on  Wednefday  how 
matters  were ;    I  am  now  going  a  thirteenth 
time  over  the  water  on  my  own  expence,  and 
you  fhall  know  at  the  great  day  what  little, 
very  little  affiftance  I  have  had  from  thofe  who 
owed,  under  God,   their  fouls  to   my  being 
here :  but  this  is  for  the  place  where  you  are 
to  meet,,  and  where  I  hope  God  will  meet 
you,    when  I  am  tofiing  on  the  water,  when 
I  am  in  a  foreign  clime.    I  think  I  can  fay  thy 
glory,  O  God,   calls  me  away,  and  as  I  am 
going  towards  fixty  years  of  age,  I  fhall  make 
what  difpatch  I  can,  and  I  hope,  if  I  am  fpared 
to  come  back,  that  I  fhall  hear  that  fome  of 
you  are  gone  to  heaven,  or  are  nearer  heaven 
than  you  were.     I  find  there  is  near  70I,  ar- 
rears 'y  I  hope  you  will  not  run  away,   if  you 
can  fay  God  is  my  glory,  you  will  not  pufh 
one  upon  another,   as  though  you  w^ould  loofe 
yourfelves  in  the  croud,  and  fay  no  body  fees 

me; 


Ser.  XVI.     God  a  Belt  ever' s  Giory,  39  r 

me;  but  does  not  God  Almighty  fee  you  ?     I 
hope  you  will  be  ready  to  communicate,  and 
when  I  am  gone  that  God  will  be  with  you ; 
as  many  of  you  will  not  hear  me  on  Wednef- 
day  morning.     O  may  this  be  your  prayer,  O 
for  Jefus  Chrift's  fake,  in  whofe  name  I  preach, 
in  whofe  flrength  I  deiire  to  come  up,  and  for 
whofe  honor  I  defire  to  be  fpent,  O  do  put  up 
a  word  for  me,    it   will  not  coft  you   much 
time,  it  will  not  keep  you  a  moment  from  your 
bufinefs  ;  G  Lord  Jefus  Chrift   thou   art   his 
God  1  and,   Lord  Jefus  Chrift  let  him  be  thy 
glory !    If  I  die  in  the  waters,  I  fliall  go  by 
water  to  heaven  ;    if  I  land  at  the  Orphan 
Houfe,  I  hope  it  will  be  a  means  to  fettle  a 
foundation  for  ten  thoufand  perfons  to  be  in- 
ilrudted ;    and  if  I  go  by   the  continent,  as  I 
intend  to  do,  I  hope   God  will  enable  me  to 
preach  Chrift  ^  and  if  I  return  again,  my  life 
will  be  devoted  to  your  fervice.     You  muft 
excufe  me,  I  cannot  fay  much  more,  afFecftion 
works  5    and  I  could  heartily  wifh,  and  I  beg 
it  as  a  favour,  when  I  come  to  leave  you,  that 
you  will  excufe  me  from  a  particular  parting 
with  you;    take  my  public  farewell;    I  will 
pray  for  you  when  in  the  cabin,  I  will  pray 
for  you  when  ftorms  and  tempefts  are  about 
E  e  e  2  me ; 


396  God  a  Believer's  Glory.     Ser.  XVL 

me  5  and  this  fhall  be  my  prayer  for  the  dear 
people  of  the  Tabernale,  for  the  dear  people 
of  the  Chapel,  for  the  dear  people  of  London, 
O  God,  be  thou  their  God !  and  grant,  that 
their  God  may  be  their  glory.  Even  fo,  Lord 
Jefus !     Amen. 


SERMON 


[    397    ] 


SERMON     XVII. 

Jacob's     Ladder. 
A    Farewel    Sermon. 

Genesis  xxviii.  ver.    12,  &c. 

ji72d  he  dreamed^  and  behold^  a  ladder  fet  upon 
the  earthy  and  the  top  of  it  reached  to  hea^ 
ven :  and  behold^  the  angels  of  God  afcending 
and  defending  on  it.     And  behold^  the  Lord 

,  flood  above  it^  and  faid,  I  am  the  Lord  God 
of  Abraham  thy  father^  and  the  God  of  Ifaac  : 
the  land  whereon  thou  lieft^  to  thee  will  I  give 
it^  and  to  thy  Jeed.  And  thy  feedflmll  be  as 
the  dufl  of  the  earth ;  a7id  thou  fjalt fpread 
abroad  to  the  wefl^  and  to  the  eajt^  and  to  the 
norths  and  to  thefouth:  and  in  thee ^  and  in 
thy  feed  fJoall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  he 
blejTcd,  And  behold,  I  am  with  thee,  and 
will  keep  thee  in  all  places^  whither  then 
goefi,  and  will  bring  thee  again  into  this 

land : 


398  ^acob'i  Ladder.       Ser.  XVII. 

land:  for  1  will  not  leave  theCy  until  I 
have  done  that  which  I  have  fpoken  to,  thee 
of. 

TH  E  wife   man  obferves,  that  in  the 
rniiltitiide  of  dreams  there  is  many  va^ 
77itieSy    being    often    the    effedts   of  a 
peculiar  diforder  of  body,  or  owing  to  fome 
difturbance  of  the  mind.  They  whofe  nervous 
fyftem'  has  been  long  relaxed,  who  have  had 
fevere  domeftic   trials,    or   have  been  greatly 
affefted   by   extraordinary  occurrences,  know 
this  to  be  true  by  their  own  experience  ;  but 
however  this  may  be,  there  have  been,  and 
poffibly   may  be  ftill,  dreams   that   have   no 
manner  of  dependance  on  the  indifpofition  of 
the  body,  or  other  natural  caufe,  but  feem  to 
bring  a  divine  fandlion  with  them,  and  make 
peculiar  impreffions  on  the  party,  though  this 
was  more  frequent  before  the  canon  ot  fcrip- 
ture  was  clofed,    than   now.     God  fpoke  to 
his  people  in  a  dream,  in  avifion  of  the  night  j 
witnefs,   the  fubje6t  of  our  prefent  meditation, 
a  dream  of  the  patriarch  Jacob's,  when  going 
forth  as  a    poor  pilgrim  with  a  ftaff  in  his 
hand,  from  his  father's  houfe,  deprived  of  his 
mother's  company  and  inftrudlion,  perfecuted 
by  an  elaer  brother,  without  attendants  or  ne- 

ceflaries. 


Ser.  XVII.       'Jacob's  Ladder.  399 

ceflaries,  only  leaning  on  an  invlfible  power, 

I  need  not  inform  you  in  how  extraordinary 

a  way  he  got  the  bleffing,  which  provoked 

his  brother  to    fuch  a  degree,    as  determined 

him  to  be  the  death  of  Jacob,  as  foon  as  ever 

his  aged  father  dropped  :  to  what  a  height  did 

this  wicked  man's  envy  rife  when  he  faid,  the 

days  of  mourning  for  my  father  will  foon  conic , 

and  what  then  ?    why,  though  I  have  fome 

compaffion    for  the  old  man,    and   therefore 

will  not  lay   violent  hands  upon  my  brother 

while  my  father  is  alive,  yet  I   am  refolved  to 

kill  him  before  my  father  is  cold  in  his  grave. 

This  is  the  very  fpirit  of  Cain,  who  talked  to 

his  brother,  and  then  flew  him :  this  coming 

to  the  ears  of  his  mother,  fhe  tells  the  good 

old  patriarch  her  huiband,  who   loving  peace 

and  quietnefs,  takes   the  good  advice   of  the 

weaker  vefiel,  and  orders  Jacob  to  go  to  his 

mother's  brother,  Laban,  and  ftay  a  Uttle  while 

out  of  Efau's  fight,  (perhaps  out  of  fight  out 

of  mind)  and  by  and  by   probably,  faid  he, 

thou  mayft  come  to  thy  father  and  mother 

again   in  peace  and   fafety.      Jacob,    though 

fure  of  the  bleffing  in  the  end,  by  his  father's 

confirmation  of  it,  yet   prudently  makes  ufc 

oi  proper  means  ^    therefore   he   obeyed  bis 

parents : 


^oo  "Jacob's  Ladder.        Sen  XVIL 

parents :  and  wo,  wo  be  to  thofe  who  think 
a  parent's  bleffing  not  worth  their  alking  for  ! 
Having  had  his  mother's  bleffing,  as  well  as 
his  father's,  without  faying,  I  will  try  it  out 
with  my  brother^  I  will  let  him  know  that  I 
am  not  afraid  of  him,  he  views  it  as  the  call 
of  God,  and  like  an  honeft,  fimple  pilgrim, 
went  out  from  Beerflieba  towards  Haran.  Was 
it  not  a  little  unkind  in  his  parents  not  to  fur- 
nifh  him  with  fome  neceffaries  and  conveni- 
encies  ?  When  the  fervant  was  fent  to  fetch  a 
wife  for  Ifaac,  he  had  a  great  deal  of  atten- 
dance, why  fhould  not  Jacob  have  it  now; 
his  father  might  have  fent  him  away  with 
great  parade ;  but  I  am  apt  to  believe  this  did 
not  fuit  Jacobus  real,  pilgrim  fpirit ;  he  was  a 
plain  man,  and  dwelt  in  tents,  when,  perhaps, 
he  might  have  dwelt  under  cedar  roofs ;  he 
chofe  a  pilgrim's  life,  and  prudence  direded 
him  to  go  thus  in  a  private  manner,  to  pre- 
vent increafing  Efau's  envy,  and  giving  the 
fatal  blow. 

Methinks,  I  fee  the  young  pilgrim  weeping 
when  he  took  his  leave  of  his  father  and  mo- 
ther \  he  went  on  foot,  and  they  that  are  ac- 
quainted with  the  geography  of  the  place, 
fay,  that  the  firft  day  of  his  journey  he  walked 

not 


Ser.  XVII.        "Jacob" i  Ladder^,  401 

not  lefs  than  forty  Englifli  miles ;  what  exer- 
dfe  muft  he  have  had  all  that  way !  no  won- 
der, therefore,  that  by  the  time  the  fwn  was 
going  down,  poor  Jacob  felt  himfelf  very 
weary,  for  we  are  told,  ver.  ii,  that  he  lighted 
GH  a  certain  place^  and  tarried  there  all  nighty 
becaufe  the  jitn  was  fet.  There  is  a  particular 
cmphafis  to  be  put  upon  this  term,  a  certain 
place  "y  he  faw  the  fun  going  down,  he  was 
a  ftranger  in  a  ftrange  land.  (You  that  are  born: 
in  England  can  have  very  little  idea  of  it,  but) 
perfons  that  travel  in  the  American  woods  can 
form  a  more  proper  idea,  for  you  may  there, 
travel  a  hundred  and  a  thoufand  miles,  an4 
go  through  one  continued  tradl  of  tall  green 
trees,  like  the  tall  cedars  of  Lebanon  5  and 
the  gentlemen  of  America,  from  one  end  to 
the  other,  are  of  fuch  an  hofpitable  temper, 
as  I  have  not  only  been  told,  but  have  found 
among  them  upwards  of  thirty  years,  that  they 
would  not  let  public  houfes  be  licenfed,  that 
they  may  have  an  opportunity  of  entertaining 
Engiifli  friends  :  may  God,  of  his  infinite 
mercy,  grant  this  union  may  never  be  dillol- 
ved.) 

Well,   Jacob  got  to  a   certain   place,    and 

perhaps  he  faw  a  good  tree  that  Would  ferve 

Fff  hioi 


402  .         jfacob's  Ladder.        Ser.  XViL 

him  for  a  canopy ;  however,  this  we  are  told, 
he  tairied  there  all  night  becaufe  the  fun  was 
iet,  and  he  took  of  the  ftones  of  that  place 
and  put  them  for  his  pillow,  and  laid  down  in 
that  place  to  lleep  •  hard  lodgings  for  him  wha 
was  ufed  to  lie  otherwife  at  home:  I  don't 
hear  him  fay,  I  wifli  I  was  got  back  to  my 
mother  again,   I  wifh  I  had  not  fet  out  5    but 
upon  the  hard  ground  and  hard  pillow  he  lies 
down  3  I  believe  never  poor  man  flept  fweeter 
in  his  life>  for  it  is  certainly  fweet  fleep  when 
God   is   near  us  3  he  did  not   know   but  his 
brother  might  follow  and  kill  him  while  be  was 
afleep,  or  that  the  wild  beafts  might  devour 
him ;    (in   America,  when  they  fleep  in  the 
woods,  and  I  expedl  to  have  fome  fuch  fleep- 
ing  times  in  them  before   a  twelvemonth   is 
over,  we  are  obliged  to  make  a  fire  to  keep  the 
beafts  from  us :  I  have  often  faid  then,  and  I 
hope  I  fhall  never  forget  it,  when  I  rife  in  the 
morning,  this  fire  in  the  woods  that  keeps  the 
wild  beafts  from  hurting  us,  is  like  the  fire  of 
God's  love  that  keeps  the  devil  from  hurting 
us:)  thus  weary  and  folitary  he  falls  afleep, 
and  fweetly  dreams,  and  behold  5  I  don't  remem- 
ber many  paflTages  offcripture  where  the  word, 
heboid y  is -repeated  fo  many  times  in  fo  fhort 

a  fpace 


Ser.  XVII.        Jacob* s  Ladder,  ^  403 

a  fpace  as  in  the  pafTage  before  us,  doubtlefs, 
Ithe  Lord  would  have  us  particularly  take  no- 
tice of  it,  even  us  upon  whom  the  ends  of 
the  world  are  come :   Behold,  a  ladder  fet  upon 
the  earthy  and  the  top  reached  to  heaven ;  and 
behold,    the  angels  of  God   a fc ending  and  dc- 
Jcenciing  upon  it ;  and  behold,  the  Lord  jlaod 
above  it ;  fo  here  are  three  beholds  in  a  very 
few  lines.     Was  there  any  thing  very  extraor- 
dinary in  that  ?  perhaps  the  Deifls  would  fay, 
your  patriarch  was  tired,  and  dreamed  among 
other  things  of  a  ladder  5  yes,  he  did,  but  this 
dream  was  of  God,  and  how  kind  was  he  to 
meet  him  at  the  end  of  the  firft  day's  journey, 
to  ftrengthen  and  animate  him  to  go  forward  in 
this  lonefome  pilgrimage  ! 
[IW^'V-  '^^^^  ladder  is  reckoned  by  fome  to  denote 
the  providence  of  God :  it  was  let  down  as  it 
were  from  heaven,  particularly  at  this  time  to 
poor  Jacob,  that  he  might  know  that  howpver 
he  was  become  a  pilgrim,  and  left  his  all,  all 
for  God's  glory,  that  God  would  take  care  for 
his  comfort,  and  give  his   angels  charge  over 
him  to  keep  him  in  all  his  ways,  which  was 
denoted  by  the  angels  afcending  and  defcending 
upon  the  ladder.     Some  think  that  particular 
faints  and  countries  have  particular  guardian 
F  f  f  2  angels. 


404  Jacob's  Ladder.        Ser.  XVIL 

angels,  and  therefore  that  the  angels  that 
afcended  were  thofe  that  had  the  particular 
charge  of  that  place,  fo  far  as  Jacob  had  come; 
that  the  angels  that  dcfcended  were  another 
fet  of  angels,  iept  down  from  heaven  to  guard 
him  in  his  fixture  journey  5  perhaps,  this  is  more 
a  fancy  than  the  word  of  God.  However,  1 
very  much  like  the  obfervation  of  good  Mr. 
Burket,  "  Why  fhould  y^e  dilpute  whether 
"  every  individual  believer  has  got  a  particu- 
"  lar  angel,  when  there  is  not  one  believer 
"  but  has  got  guards  of  angels  to  attend  him,*' 
which  are  a  great  deal  better  than  a  great 
many  fervants,  that  prove  oar  plagues,  and 
inftead  of  waiting  upon  us  make  us  wait 
upon  them. 

But,  my  dear  hearers,  I  don't  know  one 
fpiritual  commentator,  but  agrees  that  this 
1  ladder  was  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift; 
and  that  as  Jacob  was  now  banifhed  from  his 
father's  hcufe,  and  while  fleeping  upon  a  hard, 
cold  ftone,  God  was  pleafed  not  only  to  give 
him  an  aPlirance  that  he  would  be  with  him 
in  the  way,  but  gave  him  a  blcffcd  fight  of 
Jefus  Chrifl,  in  whom  Jacob  believed.  ^  \vb  \ 
A  ladder  you  know  is  fomeiiiing  by  which 
we  climb  from  one  place  to  another  3  hence, 

in 


Ser.  XVH.         "^Jacob's  Ladder.  405 

in  condefcenlion  to  our  weak  capacities,  God 
ordered  a  ladder  to  be  let  down,  to  fhew  us 
that  Chrift  is  the  way  to  heaven :  /  am  the 
wa)\  the  truth y  and  the  life ;  /  am  the  door^ 
fays  he;  neither  is  there  falvation  in  any  other, 
for  there  is  no  other  name  given  under  heaven 
whereby  we  muft  be  faved.  The  Deifts, 
who  own  a  God  but  deny  his  Son,  dare  go 
to  a  God  out  of  Ghrift;  but  Jacob  is  here 
taught  better :  how  foon  does  God  reveal  the 
golpel  unto  him ;  here  is  a  ladder,  by  which 
God  preaches  to  us  5  if  you  have  a  mind  to 
climb  from  earth  to  heaven,  you  muft  get  up 
by  the  Son  of  God ;  no  one  ever  pointed  out 
a  proper  way  to  heaven  for  us  but  himfelfl 
When  Adam  and  Eve  fell  from  God,  a  flaming 
fword  turned  every  way  to  keep  them  from 
the  tree  of  life;  but  Jefus  alone  is  a  new  and 
living  way,  not  only  to  the  Holy  of  Holies 
below,  but  into  the  immediate  prefence  of 
God  ;  and  that  we  might  know  that  he  was 
a  proper  Saviour,  the  top  of  it  reached  to 
heaven  ;  if  it  had  flopped  fhort  Jacob  might 
have  faid,  ah  !  the  ladder  is  within  a  little  way 
of  heaven,  but  does  not  quite  reach  it  3  if  I 
climb  up  to  the  top  I  fliall  not  get  there  after 
all ;  but  the  top  reached  to  heaven,  to  point 

^  out 


406  'Jacob's  Ladder.         Ser,  XVII, 

out  the  divinity  and  exaltation  of  the  Son  of 
God  5  fuch  a  Saviour  became  xis  who  was 
God,  God  over  all,  bleffed  for  evermore :  and 
therefore  the  Arian  fcheme  is  moft  uncomfort- 
able and  deftrud:ive  5  to  talk  of  Chrift  as  a  Sa- 
viour that  is  not  God,  is  no  Chrift  at  all.  I 
would  turn  Deift  to-morrow  if  I  did  not  know 
that  Chrift  was  God  j  but  curfed  is  the  man 
that  builds  his  faith  upon  an  arm  ofjiejh.  If 
Chrift  is  God,  the  Arians  and  Socinians,  by 
their  own  principles,  are  undone  for  ever  j  but 
Jefus  Chrift  is  very  God  and  very  man,  be-f 
gotten  (and  not  made)  of  the  Father :  God^ 
of  his  infinite  mercy,  write  his  divinity  deep 
in  our  hearts ! 

The  bottom  of  the  ladder  reached  to  the 
earth  ;  this  points  cut  to  us  the  humiliation  of 
the  blcfled  Lord  5  for  us  men  he  came  down 
from  heaven ;  we  pray  to  and  for  a  defcending 
God.  All  the  fufFerings  which  our  Lord  vo- 
luntarily expoied  himfelf  to,  were  that  he 
might  become  a  ladder  for  you  andj^to  climb 
up  to  heaven  by.  Come  down  from  the 
crofs,  fay  they,  and  we  will  believe  thee  \  if 
he  had,  v/hat  would  have  become  of  us?  did 
they  believe  on  him  when  he  was  dead,  bu- 
ried, and  rifen  again  ?  no.     Some  people  fay,^ 

if 


Ser.XVlI.         "Jacob's  Ladder.  407 

if  Chrift  was  here,  O  dear  we  fhould  love 
him;  juft  as  much  as  they  did  when  they 
turned  him  out  of  doors,  when  he  came  down 
before*  If  he  had  come  down  from  the  crofs, 
they  would  have  hung  him  up  again  :  O  that 
you  and  I  might  make  his  crofs  a  ftep  to 
glory ! 

As  the  top  of  the  ladder  pointed  out  his  ex- 
altation, the  bottom  his  humiliation,  the  two 
fides  of  the  ladder  being  joined  together,  point 
out  the  union  of  the  Deity  and  manhood  in 
the  perfon  of  Chrift  5  and  that  as  this  ladder 
had  fteps  to  it,  fo,  bleffed  be  God,  Jefus 
Ghrift  has  found  out  a  way  whereby  we  may 
go,  ftep  after  ftep,  to  glory.  The  firft  ftep  is 
the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  the  active  and 
paffive  obedience  of  the  Redeemer ;  no  fetting 
one  foot  upon  this  ladder  without  coming  out 
of  ourfelves,  and  relying  wholly  upon  a  better 
righteoufnefs  than  our  own.  Again,  all  the 
other  fteps  are  the  graces  of  the  blefled  Spirit  5 
therefore,  you  need  not  be  afraid  of  our  de- 
ftroying  inward  holinefs,  by  preaching  the 
dodlrine  of  the  imputation  of  Chrift 's  righte- 
oufnefs, that  one  is  the  foundation,  the  other 
the  fuperftru6ture ;  to  talk  of  my  having  the 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  imputed   to  my  foul, 

without 


4o9  Jacol^'s  LdddeK        Sdr.  XVIIJ 

without  my  having  the  holinefs  of  Chrifl  im- 
parted to  it,  and  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit  as  an  evidence  of  it,  is  only  deceiving 
ourfelves.  I  would  never  preach  upon  im- 
puted righteoufnefs,  without  fpeaking  of  in- 
ward holinefs,  for  if  you  don't  take  a  great  deal 
of  care,  you  will  unawares,  under  a  pretence 
of  exalting  Chrift,  run  into  Antinomianifm, 
depths  that  Calvin  never  went  into  j  probably, 
you  will  imbitter  others  fpirits  that  don*t  agree 
with  you,  and  at  the  fame  time  hurt  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit :  may  God  give  you  clear 
heads,  and  at  the  fame  time  warm  hearts. 

On  the  ladder  Jacob  faw  the  angels  of  God 
afcending  and  defcending  5  what  is  that  for  ? 
to  fhow  that  they  are  miniftring  fpirits,  fent 
forth  to  minifter  to  them  that  fhall  be  heirs  of 
falvation ;  therefore  we  find  them  attending 
upon  Chrift.  We  do  rrot  hear  much  of  them 
after  the  canon  of  fcripture  was  clofed,  but  as 
foon  as  ever  Chrift  was  born,  the  angels  fang,- 
till  then  we  never  hear  of  their  finging  below,- 
as  far  as  I  can  judge,  finee  the  creation  ;  then 
the  fons  of  God  fliouted  for  joy ;  but  when 
Eve  reached  out  her  hand  to  pluck  the  fatal 
apple,  and  gave  to  Adam,  earth  groaned,  and' 
the  angels  hung,  as  it  were,  their  harps  upon 

the 


Ser.  XVII.        Jacob's  Ladder.  409 

the  willows;  but  when  Chrift,  the  fecond 
Adam,  was  born,  the  angels  fang  at  midnight, 
Glory  to  God  iii  the  hi^heji.  I  pray  to  God 
we  may  all  die  finging  that  anthem,  and  fmg 
it  to  all  eternity.  After  his  temptations,  they 
came  and  miniftred  to  him,  as  fome  think, 
food  for  his  body,  and  wiflied  him  joy  and 
comfort  in  his  foul ;  and  in  his  agonies  in  the 
garden,  an  angel  ftrengthned  him.  After  his 
refurredlion  two  appeared  again,  one  at  the 
head  and  another  at  the  foot  of  his  fcpulchre, 
to  let  thofe  that  looked  into  the  fepulchre 
know,  that  they  would  not  only  wait  upon  the 
head  but  the  foot  3  and  the  angels  are  glad  to 
wait  upon  the  meaneft  of  the  children  of  God. 
When  our  Lord  departed,  a  cloud  received 
him  out  of  their  fight,  which  probably  was  a 
cloud  of  angels :  having  led  his  dilciples  out 
of  the  city,  he  bleffed  them,  and  then  away 
he  went  to  heaven  :  may  that  bleffing  reft  up- 
on you  and  your  children !  This  intimates 
that  God  makes  u(e  of  angels  to  attend  his 
people,  efpecially  when  they  are  departing 
into  eternity  :  perhaps,  part  of  our  entertain- 
ment in  heaven  will  be,  to  hear  the  angels 
declare  how  many  millions  of  times  they  have 
affifted  and  helped  us.  Our  Lord  fays,  an- 
G  g  g  gels 


410  "Jacob' i  Ladder.        Ser.  XVII. 

gels  do  there  behold  the  face  of  the  Father  of 
his  little  ones  ;  and  therefore  I  love  to  talk 
to  the  lambs  of  the  flock,  and  why  fhould  I 
not  talk  to  them  whom  angels  think  it  their 
honour  to  guard  ;  and  if  it  was  not  for  this, 
how  w^ould  any  children  efcape  the  dangers 
they  are  expofed  to  in  their  tender  age  ?  it  is 
owing  to  the  particular  providence  of  God, 
that  any  one  child  is  brought  to  manhood  ; 
therefore  I  can't  help  admiring  that  part  of  the 
Litany,  in  which  we  pray,  that  God  would 
take  care  not  only  of  the  grown  people,  but  of 
children  alfo  :  God  take  care  of  yours  both  in 
body  and  foul. 

But  what  gave  the  greateft  comfort  to  Ja- 
cob was,  that  the  Lord  was  on  the  top  of 
the  ladder,  which  I  do  not  know  whether  it 
would  have  been  fo,  if  Jacob  had  not  it^n 
God  there.  It  com.forts  me,  I  afllire  you,  to 
think,  that  whenever  God  fliall  call  for  me,  I 
Ihall  be  carried  by  angels  into  Abraham's  bo- 
fom )  and  I  have  often  thought  that  whenever 
that  time  comes,  that  blefled,  long  longed-for 
moment  comes,-'  as  foon  as  ever  they  have 
called  upon  me,  my  firft  queftion  will  be  to 
them,  where  is  my  dear  mafler  ?  where  is 
Jefus  ?  where  is  that  dear  Emanuel,  who  has 

loved 


1 


Ser.  XVIL         "jdeob's  Ladder.  411 

loved  me  with  an  everlafting  love,  and  has 
called  me  by  his  grace,  and  have  fent  you  to 
fetch  me  home  to  fee  his  face  ?  But  I  believe 
you  and  I  fhall  have  no  occafion  to  afk  where 
he  is,  for  he  will  come  to  meet  us,  he  will 
ftand  at  the  top  of  his  ladder  to  take  his  piU 
grims  in  ;  fo  God  was  at  the  top  of  the  ladder, 
pray  mind  that.  He  appears  not  fitting,  as 
he  is  often  reprefented  in  heaven,  but  (landing ; 
as  much  as  to  fay,  here,  here,  Jacob,  thy  bro- 
ther wants  to  kill  thee  5  here  thou  art  come 
out  without  a  fervant,  art  lying  upon  a  hard 
bed,  but  here  I  am  ready  in  order  to  preferve 
thee;  I  ftand  above,  and  I  fee  thy  wearinefs, 
I  fee  the  fatigue  and  hardfliips  thou  haft  yet 
to  undergo,  though  thou  doft  not  fee  it  thy- 
felfj  thou  haft  thrown  thyfelf  upon  my  pro- 
vidence and  protection,  and  I  will  give  thee 
the  word  of  a  God  that  I  will  ftand  by  thee; 
the  Lord  flood  above ;  if  he  had  faid  nothing, 
that  would  have  been  enough  to  have  fhewa 
his  readinefs  to  help. 

But  God  fpeaks,  behold  :  well  might  this 
be  ufhered  in  with  the  word  behold ;  a  ladder 
fet  on  the  earth,  and  behold  the  angels  of  God 
afcending  and  defcending  on  it;  and,  above 
all,  behold  God  fpeaking  from  it !  what  doth 
G  g  g  2  he 


412  Jacob's  Ladder.         Ser.XVII. 

he  fay  ?  /  am  the  Lord  God  cf  Abraham  thy 
Jather.     Oh!    happy  they  that  can  fay,  the 
Lord  God  of  my  father  ;  happy  you  that  have 
got  fathers  and  mothers  in  heaven,     I  remem- 
ber, about  twenty-five  years  ago  as  I  v^as  tra- 
velling from  Briftol,  I  met  with  a  man  on  the 
road,  and  being  defirous  to  know  whether  he 
was  ferious  or  not,  I  began  to  put  in  a  word 
for  Chrift,  (and   God  forbid    I    fhould  travel 
with  any  body  a  quarter  of  an  hour  without 
fpeaking  of  Chrift  to  them)  he  told  me  what 
a  wicked  creature  he  had  been ;  but,  fir,  fays 
he,  in   the  midft   of  my  wickednefs   people 
ufed  to  tell   me,  you  have  got  a  good  many 
prayers  upon  the  file  for  you,   your  godly  fa- 
ther and  mother  have  prayed  very  often   for 
you ;  and  it  was  the  pleafure  of  God  he  w\is 
wrought  upon,  and   brought    to  Chrift.     Lay 
in  a  good  ftock  for  your  children,  get  a  good 
many  prayers  in  for  them,  they  may   be  an- 
fwered  when  you  are  dead  and  gone.     I  ajit 
the  God  oj  Abraham  thy  father^  not  thy  grand- 
father 5   to  puc  him  in  mind  what  an  honour 
God  would  put  upon  him,  to  make  him  as  it 
were  the  father  of  the  church.     Though  you 
have    many   inftrudtors,    fays  Paul,  you  have 
but  one  Father :  and  the  God  of  IfaaCy  the  land 

^whereon 


Ser.  XVII.         "Jacob' i  Ladder.  41  j 

'whereon  thou  lieft^  to  thee  will  I  give  if^  and  to 
thy  feed.  Amazing  !  amazing !  you  know  very 
well  when  perfons  buy  or  come  to  an  eftate,  they 
ufually  take  pofleflion  of  it  by  fome  ceremony, 
fuch  as  receiving  or  taking  up  a  piece  of  dirt, 
or  twig,  in  their  hand,  as  a  fign  of  their  title. 
Now,  fays  God,  poor  Jacob,  thou  doft  little 
think  that  this  very  fpot  of  ground  that  thou 
lieft  on  to-night,  cold  and  ftifF,  I  intend  to 
give  to  thee,  and  thy  pofterity,  for  an  inhe- 
ritance, O  my  brethren,  live  all  to  God,  and 
God  will  give  all  to  you :  who  would  have 
thought  of  this,  probably  Jacob  did  not :  it  is 
as  if  God  took  a  pleafure  in  feeing  his  dear 
children  lie  on  fuch  hard  ground  3  if  he  had 
been  on  a  feather-bed,  he  might  not  have  had 
fuch  a  vifit :  thou  fhalt  have  now  a  God  to  lean 
upon,  to  thee  will  I  give  it^  and  to  thy  fced^ 
which  Jljall  be  as  the  dufl  of  the  earth,  a7id  thou 
fl^alt  fpread  abroad  to  the  wefl,  and  to  the  eaft^ 
and  to  the  north,  and  to  the  f out h  ;  and  in  theCy 
and  in  thy  feed,  fl:all  all  the  families  cf  the 
earth  be  blejfed.  Thus  did  heaven  balance  the 
lois  of  the  comforts  of  his  father's  houfe,  by 
the  difcovery  of  his  and  his  oftspring's  profpe- 
lity,  by  an  intereft  in  the  promifed  feed. 


My 


414  Jacob's  Ladder.        Ser.  XVII, 

My  particular  circumftances  call  me  to  ob- 
ferve,  and  I  believe  God  has  done  it  on  pur- 
pofe  to  encourage  me,  that  faith,  refting  on 
the  promife,  is  eafily  religned  to  the  lofs  of 
prefent  good,  whereas  worldly  hearts  confider 
profperity  as  a  portion,  they  don't  care  if  the 
devil  takes  them  hereafter,  fo  they  have  it 
now^  and  that  makes  carnal  people  wonder 
how  we  can  give  up  things  in  this  world,  for 
the  fake  of  thofe  not  yet  born  ^  but  it  is  to 
glorify  God,  and  lay  a  foundation  for  others 
happinefs.  Here  God  gives  Jacob  to  know, 
that  hereafter  his  feed  fhould  fpread  on  the 
eaft,  weft,  north,  and  fouth,  his  branches 
Ihould  multipl}^,  and  at  laft  from  his  loins 
fhould  Jefus  Chrift  come  ;  what  for  ?  in  whom 
all  the  families  oj  the  earth  Jhould  be  blejfed  : 
God  Almighty  grant  we  may  be  bleiled  in 
him. 

Then  if  Jacob  (hould  fay  in  his  heart,  haft 
thou  no  promife  for  me  ?  here  is  another 
beheld  comes  in  5  Behold^  1  am  with  thee^  and 
^ill  keep  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goejl^ 
WhdX  a  word  is  this !  thou  haft  nobody  with 
thee,  nothing  but  a  ftaff,  (he  could  not  carry 
much  upon  his  back,  like  a  poor  foldier  with 
a  napfack  behind,  and  a   little   bread    in  his 

pocket)    J 


Ser.XVII.        Jacob's  Ladder.  415 

pocket)  well,  faith  God,  I  do  not  dcfpife 
thee  becaufe  thou  art  deftitute,  but  I  love 
thee  the  better  for  it ;  thy  brother  Efiu  longs 
to  kill  thee,  but  if  Efau  ftabs  thee  he  fliall  flab 
thy  God  firft  -,  I  will  not  only  be  with  thee 
now,  but  I  will  watch  every  ftep  thou  takeft, 
1  will  be  with  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou 
goejl :  as  much  as  to  fay,  Jacob,  thou  art  a 
pilgrim,  thy  life  is  to  be  a  moving  life,  I 
don't  intend  thou  fiialt  fettle  and  keep  in  one 
place  J  thy  life  is  to  be  a  life  of  changes,  thou 
art  to  move  from  place  to  place,  but  1  will 
be  with  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goejl, 
and  thereby  it  fhail  be  known  that  I  am  Ja- 
cob's God,  and  alfo  by  my  bringing  thee  again 
into  this  land.  He  not  only  aifures  him  of  a 
fuccefsful  journey,  whither  he  was  now  go- 
ing, but  promifes  to  bring  him  back  ones 
more  to  fee  his  dear  father  and  mother,  and 
relations  again ;  /  will  bring  thee  back  to  this 
'land  ;  and  to  confirm  his  faith  and  hope,  the 
great  God  adds,  1  will  not  leave  thee  till  I  have 
done  that  I  have  Jpoken  to  thee  of  5  that  is,  all 
the  good  he  had  jufl  now  promifed.  Some 
people  promife,  but  they  cannot  do  it  to-day, 
and  they  will  not  do  it  to-morrow.  I  have 
known  the  world,    and  have  rung  the  changes 

of 


41 6  Jacob's  Ladder.       Ser.  XVIL 

of  it  ever  iince  I  have  been  here  3  but,  bleffed 
be  God,  an  unchangeable  Chrift  having  loved 
his  own,  he  loved  them  to  the  end  ;  /  will 
not  leave  you  till  I  have  performed  all  thi?2gs  I 
have  promijed  you :  may  this  promife  come 
upon  you  and  your  children,  and  ail  that  God 
fhall  call. 

Thus  fpake  the  great  Jehovah  to  poor  Ja- 
cob, juft  letting  out  to  a  ftrange  land,  know- 
ing not  whiiher  he  went  y  but  now  God  fpeaks 
not  only  to  Jacob,  but  he  fpeaks  to  you  >  and, 
blefTed  be  the  living  God,  he  fpeaks  to  me 
alfo,  lefs  than  the  leaft  of  all ;  and  as  my  de- 
fign  is  (though  I  cannot  tell  but  this  may  be 
the  laft  opportunity)  to  fpeak  fomething  to 
you  about  my  departure;  yet,  brethren,  my 
grand  delign  in  preaching  to  you  is,  to  recom» 
mend  the  Lord  Jefus  Chriil  to  your  fouls  ^ 
and,  before  I  go,  to  make  a  particular,  per- 
fonal  application.  Give  me  leave,  therefore, 
to  afli  you,  it  may  be  the  lail  time  1  may  afk 
many  of  you,  whether  you  have  ever  fet  your 
foot  upon  this  blefTed  ladder,  the  Son  of 
God  ?  I  aik  you  in  t;he  name  of  the  Lord  Jelus 
Chrift,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghoft,  did  you  ever  fet  your  foot,  I 
fay,  upon  this   ladder?  tha^i^^did  you  ever 

"t  '         yet 


Ser.  XVII.         "Jacob'i  Ladder.  417 

yet  believe  on  Jefus  Chrift,  and  come  to  him 
as  poor  loft  jfinners,  relying  upon  no  other 
righteoufnefs  than  that  of  the  Son  of  God  ? 
perhaps,  if  you  was  to  fpeak,  fome  of  you 
would  fay,  away  with  your  ladder;  and  what 
will  you  do  then  ?  why,  fay  you,  I  will  climb 
to  heaven  without  it ;  what  ladder  will  you 
climb  upon  ?  O,  I  think  to  go  to  heaven  be- 
caufe  I  have  been  baptized,  that  ladder  will 
break  under  you ;  what,  a  ladder  made  of 
water,  what  are  you  dreaming  of  ?  no  ;  O,  I 
think  I  fliall  go  to  heaven  btcaufe  I  have  done 
nobody  any  harm ;  what,  a  ladder  made  of 
negative  goodnefs,  no  ;  I  think  to  go,  you'll 
fay,  by  good  works;  a  ladder  made  of  good 
works,  that  has  not  Chrift  for  its  bottom, 
what  is  that  ?  I  think,  fay  you,  to  go  to  hea- 
ven by  my  prayers  and  faftings ;  all  thefe  are 
good  in  their  place :  but,  my  brethren,  don't 
think  to  climb  to  heaven  by  thefe  ropes  of 
fand.  If  you  never  before  fet  your  foot  on 
Chrift,  this  bleffed  ladder,  God  grant  this  may 
be  the  happy  time. 

I  have  been  praying  before  moft  of  you 
were  up  I  believe^  that  God  would  give  me  a 
parting  bleffing.  I  remember,  foon  after  I 
left  England  laft,  that  a  dear  ChA-^iftian  friend 

Hhh  told 


41 8  "Jacob's  Ladder.       Ser.  XVIL 

told  me,  that  there  was  one  woman,  who 
came  only  out  of  curiofity,  that  dated  her 
converflon  from  hearing  my  lafl:  fermon  5  and, 
I  blefs  God,  I  never  once  left  England,  but 
fome  poor  foul  has  dated  their  converflon  from 
my  lall:  fermon.  When  I  put  on  my  furplice, 
to  come  out  to  read  the  fecond  fervice,  I 
thought  it  was  juft  like  a  perfon's  being  de=* 
cently  dreffed  to  go  out  to  be  executed  ^  I 
would  rather,  was  it  the  will  of  God,  it  fhould 
be  io^  than  to  feel  what  I  do  in  parting  from- 
you,  then  death  would  put  an  end  to  all  y  but 
I  iim  to  be  executed  again  and  again,  and  no- 
thing will  fupport  me  under  the  torture,  but 
the  confideration  of  God's  bleffing  me  to  fome 
poor  fouls.  Do  pray  for  me,  ye  children  of 
God,  that  God  would  give  us  a  parting  blef-* 
fing.  God  help  you,  young  people,  to  put 
your  foot  on  this  ladder  ^  don't  climb  wrong : 
the  devil  has  got  a  ladder,  but  it  reaches  down 
to  hell ;  all  the  devil's  children  go  down,  not 
up  J  the  bottom  of  the  devil's  ladder  reaches 
to  the  depchs  of  the  damned,  the  top  of  it 
reaches  to  the  earth  5  and  when  death  comes,, 
then  up  comes  the  devil's  ladder  to  let  you 
dovn;  for  God's  fake  come  away  Irom  the 
devil's  ladder  3  climb,  cliUibv  dear  young  men^ 

Q  it 


Ser.  XVII.         "Jacob's  Ladder.  419 

0  it  delighted  me  on  Friday  night  at  the  Ta- 
bernacle, when  we  had  a  melting  parting  fa- 
crament^  and  it  delighted  me  this  morning  to 
fee  fo  many  young  men  at  the  table  5  God 
add  to  the  bleffed  number !  Young  women, 
put  your  feet  upon  this  ladder;  God  lets  one 
ladder  down  from  heaven,  and  the  devil  brings 
another  up  from  hell.  O,  fay  you,  I  would 
climb  up  God*s  ladder,  I  think  it  is  right,  but 

1  fhall  be  laughed  at ;  do  you  think  to  go  to 
heaven  v/ithout  being  laughed  at  ?  the  Lord 
Jefus  Chrifl  help  you  to  climb  to  heaven; 
come,  climb  till  you  get  out  of  the  hearing  of 
their  laughter.  O  truft  not  to  your  own  righ- 
teoufnefs,  your  vows,  and  good  refolutions. 

Some  of  you,  bleffed  be  God,  have  climbed 
up  this  ladder,  at  leaft  are  cHmbing ;  well,  I 
wiili  you  joy,  God  be  praifed  for  fetting  your 
feet  on  this  ladder,  God  be  praifed  for  letting 
down  this  ladder:  I  have  only  one  word  to 
fay  to  you,  for  Jefus  Chrifl's  fake,  and  your 
own  too,  climb  a  little  fafler ;  take  care  the 
world  does  not  get  hold  of  your  heels.  It  is  a 
fliame  the  children  of  God  don't  climb  fafter ; 
you  may  talk  what  you  pleale,  but  God's 
people's  lukewarmnefs  is  more  provoking  to 
\Xm  than  all  the  fins  of  the  nation.  We  cry 
H  h  h  2  out 


420  Jacob's  Ladder.        Ser.  XVII. 

out  againfl  the  fins  of  the  land,  would  to  God 
we  did  cry  out  more  of  the  fins  of  the  faints; 
I  will  fpue  you  out  of  7?iy  mouthy  becaufe  you 
are  lukewa7'm,  fays  Chrift  ;  and  if  any  of  you 
fay  you  cannot  climb  becaufe  you  are  lame- 
footed,  look  to  Jefus  Chrifl:,  my  dear  friends, 
and  your  afflidion  fhall  make  you  climb  j 
and  if  any  of  you  are  coming  down  the  ladder 
again,  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  blefs  the  foolifh- 
nefs  of  preaching  to  help  you  up  again.  O, 
fay  you,  I  am  giddy,  I  (hall  fall ;  here,  I  will 
give  you  a  rope,  be  fure  lay  hold  of  it;  juft 
as  the  failors  do  when  you  go  aboard  a  fhip, 
they  let  down  a  rope,  fo  God  lets  down  a 
promife:  climb,  climb,  then,  till  you  have 
got  higher  into  a  better  climate,  and  God  fhall 
put  his  hand  out  by  and  by  when  you  get  to 
the  top  of  the  ladder  to  receive  you  to  himfelf. 
BleflTed  be  the  living  God,  I  hope  and  believe 
I  fhall  meet  many  of  you  by  and  by. 

*  And  now,  my  brethren,  it  is  time  for  me 
to  preach  m.y  own  funeral  fermon ;  and  I 
would  humbly  hope  that,  as  a  poor  finner,  I 
may  put  in  my  claim  for  what  God  promifed 
Jacob  ;  and  I  do  put  in,  with  full  afliirance 
of  faith  that  God  will  be  with  me.  I  am  now 
going,  for  the  thirteenth   time,   to   crofs  the 

n  ^^  Atlantic : 


Ser.  XVII.        Jacob's  Ladder.  421 

Atlantic :  when  I  came  from  America  laft,  I 
took  my  leave  of  all  the  Continent,  from  the 
one  end  of  the  provinces  to  the  other,  except 
fome  places  w^hich  vv^e  had  not  then  taken ; 
I  took  my  leave  for  life,   without  the  leall  de- 
fign  of  returning  there  again,  my  health  was 
{o  bad  ;  and  the  profped:  of  getting  the  orphan- 
houfe  into  other  hands  made  me  fay  when  I 
iirft  came  over,  I  have  no   other  river  to  go 
over  than  the  river  Jordan.     I  thought  then 
of  retiring,  for  Ididnotchufe  to  appear  when 
my  nerves  were  fo  relaxed  that  I  could  not 
ferve  God  as  I  could   wiih    to  do  ^  but  as  it 
hath   pleafed  God  to  reftore  my  health  much, 
and  has  fo  ordered  it   by  his  providence,  that 
I  intend  to  give  up  the  orphan-houfe,   and  all 
the  land  adjoining,  for   a   public   college.     I 
wiflied  to  have  had  a  public  fanCtion,    but  his 
grace  the  late  archbifliop  of  Canterbury  put  a 
flop  to  it;  they    would  give    me   a   charter, 
which  was  all  I  defired,  but  they  infifled  upon, 
at  leaft  his  grace  and  another  did,  that  I  fhould 
confine  it  totally  to  the  Church  of  England,  . 
and  thdt  no  extempore  prayer  fliould  be  ufed  j 
in  a  public  way  in  that  houfe,  though  Diffen- 
ters,  and  all  forts  of  people,  had  contributed 
to  it :  I  would  fooner  cut  my  head  off  than 

betray 


42«  Jacob's  Ladder,         Scr.  XVII, 

betray  my  Iruft,  by  confining  it  to  a  narrow 
bottom ;  I  always  meant  it  Ihould  be  kept  upon 
a  broad  bottom,  for  people  of  all  denomina- 
tions, that  their  children  might  be  brought  up 
in  the  fear  of  God  :  by  this  means  the  orphan- 
houfe  reverted  into  my  hands  j  I  have  once 
more,  as  my  health  was  reftored,  determined 
to  purfue  the  plan  I  had  fixed  on  \  and,  thro' 
the  tender  mercies  of  God,  Georgia,  (which 
I  iabout  thirty-two  years  ago  was  a  total  defolate 
'  place  5  and  when  the  land,  as  it  was  given 
me  by  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  would  have 
been  totally  deferted,  and  the  colony  have  quite 
i  ceafed,  had  it  not  been  for  the  money  I  have 
j  laid  out  for  the  orpKan-houfe,  to  keep  the  poor 
people  together)  that  colony  is  rifing  to  a  moft 
amazing  height,  by  the  fchemes  now  going 
on,  public  buildings  are  eredling.  I  had  news 
laft  week  of  the  great  profperity  of  the  negroes  -^ 
and  I  hope  by  the  twenty-fifth  of  March, 
which  is  the  day,  the  anniverfary  day,  I  laid 
«»wr^  ^^^the  firil  brick,  in  the  year  1739  ;  I  fay,  I  hope 
by  that'time  all  things  will  be  finifhed,  and  a 
blcfled  provinon  will  be  made  for  orphans  and 
poor  ftudents  that  will  be  brought  up  there ;  it 
will  be  a  bl.fT.d  fource  of  provifion  for  the 
f  hildrpn  of  God  la  another  part  of  the  world, 

This 


Ser.XVII.         ';jacohU  Ladder.  423 

This  is  the  grand  defign  I  am  going  upon  ; 
this  is  my  vifible  caufe  ;  but  I  never  yet  went 
to  them,  but  God  has  been  pleafed  to  blefs 
my  miniftration  among  them- ;  and  therefore 
after  I  have  finiHiedthe  orphan-houfe  affair,  I 
intend  to  go  all  along  the  Continent  by  land^ 
(which  will  keep  me  all  the  v/inter  and 
fpring)  and  when  I  come  to  the  end  of  it, 
which  will  be  Canada  and  New-England,  then 
I  hope  to  return  again  to  this  place  3  for,  let 
people  fay  what  they  will,  I  have  not  fo 
much  as  a  iingle  thought  of  fettling  abroad  on| 
this  fide  eternity  ;  and  I  am  going  in  no  pub-' 
lie  capacity,  I  fhali  fet  out  like  a  poor  pilgrim,. 
at  my  own  expence,  trufting  upon  God  to  take 
care  01  me,  and  to  bear  my  charges  3.  and  I 
call  God  to  witnefs,  and  I  muft  be  a  curfed 
devil  and  hypocrite,  to  ftand  here  in  the  pul- 
pit and  provoke  God  to  ftrike  me  dead  for 
lying,  I  never  had  the  love  of  the  world,  nor  | 
never  felt  it  one  quarter  of  an  hour  in  my  heartJ 
fince  I  was  twenty  years  old.  I  might  have 
been  rich  :  but  though  the  Chapel  is  built,  and 
I  have  a  comfortable  room  to  lie  in,  I  allure 
you  I  built  it  at  my  own  expence,  it  cofl  no- 
body buv  myfelf  any  thing.  I  have  a  watch- ) 
coat  made  me,  and  in  that  I  fhall  lie  everv 


night 


424  "Jacob's  Ladder.        Sen  XVII. 

night  on  the  ground,  and  may  Jacob's  God 
blefs  me.  I  will  not  fay  much  of  myfelf,  bat 
when  I  have  been  preaching,  I  have  read  and 
thought  of  thofe  words  v.'ith  pleafure,  Surely 
this  is  the  houje  of  God.  And  1  will  bring  thee 
again  to  this  land.  Whether  that  will  be  my 
experience  or  not,  blefled  be  God,  I  have  a 
better  land  in  view  ^  and,  my  dear  brethren,  I 
do  not  look  upon  myfelf  at  home  till  I  land  in 
my  Father's  kingdom  ;  and  if  I  am  to  die  in 
the  way,  if  I  am  to  die  in  the  fhip,  it  com- 
forts me  that  I  know  I  am  as  clear  as  the  fun, 
that  I  go  by  the  will  of  God ;  and  though 
people  may  fay,  will  you  leave  the  world  ? 
will  you  leave  the  Chapel  ?  O,  I  am  aftonifhed 
that  we  cannot  leave  every  thing  for  Chriil ; 
my  greateft  trial  is,  to  part  with  thofe  who  are 
as  dear  to  me  as  my  own  foul  %  and  however 
others  may  forget  me,  as  thoufands  have,  and 
do  forget  me,  yet  I  cannot  forget  them:  and 
now  may  Jacob's  God  be  with  you;  O  keep 
clofe  to  God,  my  dear  London  friends  5  I  do 
not  bid  you  keep  clofe  to  Chapel,  you  have  , 
done  fo  always:  I  fl:iall  endeavour  to  keep  up 
the  word  of  God  among  you  in  my  abfence  ; 
I  fhall  have  the  fame  perfons  that  managed 
for  me  when  I  was  out  lad,  and  they   fent 

me 


Ser.  XVIL         'Jacob's  Ladder.  425 

me  word  again  and  again,  by  letter,  that  it 
was  remarkable,  that  the  Tottenham-court 
people  were  always  prefent  when  ordinances 
were  there. 

You  fee  I  went  upon  a  fair  bottom ;  I 
might  have  had  a  thoufand  a  year  out  of  this 
place  if  I  had  chofe  it  3  when  I  am  gone  to 
heaven  you  will  fee  what  I  have  got  on  earth  *  ; 
I  do  not  like  to  fpeak  now,  becaufe  it  may  be 
thought  boafting ;  but  I  am  lure  there  are 
numbers  of  people  here,  if  they  knsw  what  I 
have,  would  love  me  as  much  as  they  now 
hate  me.  When  we  come  before  the  great 
Judge  ot  quick  and  dead,  while  I  ftand  before 
him,  God  grant  you  may  not  part  w^ith  me 
then,  it  will  be  a  dreadtul  parting  then,  it 
will  be  worfe  then  to  go  into  the  fire,  to  be 
among  the  devil  and  his  angels ;  God  forbid 
it !  God  forbid  it !  God  forbid  it !  O  remem- 
ber that  my  lall:  words  were,  come,  come  to 
Chrift  'y  the  Lord  help  you  to  come  to  Chi  id  ; 
come  to  Chrift,  come  10  Jacob's  God  3  God 
give  you  faith  like  Jacob's  faith. 

You  that  have  been  kind  to  me,  that  have 
helped  me  when  i  was  fick,  fome  of  whom 

I  i  i  are 

*  The  greateft  part  of  the  fubilance  this  mm  of  G^d  left 
behind  him,  vvhicti  was  not  much,  was  utqueachcd  to  him  by 
ficceafed  friends. 


426  "Jacob's  Ladder.         Sen  XVII. 

are  here  that  have  been  very  kind  to  me  j 
may  God  reward  you,  my  friends,  and  God 
forgive  my  enemies  ;  God,  of  his  infinite 
mercy,  blefs  you  all  ^  you  will  be  amply 
provided  for,  I  believe,  here ;  may  God  fpread 
the  gefpel  every  where;  and  may  God  never 
leave  you,  nor  forlake  you.  Even  fo^  Lord 
Jefiis.     Amen  and  Amen. 


SERMON 


[    427    ] 

SERMON     XVIII. 

The  Good  Shepherd. 
A    Farewel    Sermon. 


John  x.  ver.  27,  28. 

MyJJjeep  hear  my  voice ^  and  I  know  them^  and 
they  follow  me.     And  I  give  unto  them  eter- 
nal  lifcy  and  they  fiall  never  perijh^  neither 
Jloall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand, 

IT  is  a  common,  and,  I  believe,  generally 
fpeaking,  my  dear  hearers,  a  true  faying, 
that  bad  manners  beget  good  lav/s.  Whe- 
ther this  will  hold  good  in  every  particular,  in 
refpedl:  to  the  affairs  of  this  world,  I  am  per- 
fuaded  the  obfervation  is  very  pertinent  in  re- 
fpecS  to  the  things  of  another ;  I  mean  bad 
manners,  bad  treatment,  bad  words,  have  been 
over-ruled  by  the  fovereign  grace  of  God,  to 
produce  and  to  be  the  caufe  of  the  bell:  fcr- 
mons  that  were  ever  delivered  from  the  mouth 
of  the  God-man,    Chrift  Jefus. 

I  i  i  2  One 


42  8  The  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIII. 

V"^    One  would  have  imagined,  that  as  he  came 
cloathed    with  divine   efficience,  as  he  came 
with  divine  credentials,  as  he  fpake  as  never 
mati  fpake,  that  no  one  fhould  have  been  able 
to  have   refifled  the  wifdom  with  which  he 
'  fpake  ',  one  would  imagine  they  fliould  have 
been  fo  ftruck  with  the  demonftration  of  the 
Spirit,  that  with  one  confent  they  fhould  all 
own,  that  he  was  that  prophet  that  was  to  be 
raifed  up  like  unto  Mofes.     But  you   feldom 
find  our  Lord  preaching  a  fermon,    but  fome- 
thing  or  other   that  he  faid  was  cavilled  at , 
nay,  their  enmity  frequently  broke  through  all 
good  manners  3    they  often,  therefore,    inter- 
rupted him  whilfh  he  was  preaching,  which 
fhows  the  enmity  of  their  hearts  long  before 
God  permitted  it  to  be  in  their  power  to  fhed 
his  innocent  blood.    If  we  lock  no  farther  than 
this  chapter,    where  he  reprefents  himfelf  as  a 
good  fhepherd,  one  that  laid  down  his  life  for 
his  fheep ;  we  fee  the  beft  return  he  had,  was 
to  be  looked  upon  as  pofleffed  or  diftraded  ; 
for  we  are  told  that  there  was  a  divifion  there- 
fore again  among  the  Jews  for  thefe  fayings, 
and  many  of  them  faid,  he  hath  a  de%il  and 
is  rnad^  why  hear  ye  him?  If  the  mailer  of 
the  houfe  was  ferved  fo,  pray  what  are  the 

fer- 


Ser.  XVIII.    The  Good  Shepherd.  429 

fervants  to  exped  ?  Others,  a  little  more  fober- 
minded,  faid,  thefe  are  not  the  words  of  him 
that  hath  a  devil-,  the  devil  never  ufed  to 
preach  or  aft  in  this  way.  Can  a  devil  ope?! 
the  eyes  of  the  blind?  So  he  had  feme  friends 
among  thefe  rabble.  This  did  not  difcourage 
our  Lord,  he  goes  on  in  his,  work ;  and  we 
fhali  never,  never  go  on  with  the  work  of 
God,  till,  like  our  mafter,  we  are  willing  to 
go  through  good  and  through  evil  report ;  and 
let  the  devil  fee  we  are  not  fo  complaifant  as 
to  flop  one  moment  for  his  barking  at  us  as 
we  go  along. 

We  are  told,  that  our  Lord  was  at  Jerufa- 
km  at  the  feaft  of  the  dedication,  and  it  was 
winter  3  the  feaft  of  dedication  held,  I  think, 
feven  or  eight  days  for  the  commemoration  of 
the  reftoration  of  the  Temple  and  Altar  after 
its  profanation  by  Antiochus :  now  this  was 
certainly  a  mere  human  inftitution,  and  had 
no  divine  image,  had  no  divine  fuperfcription 
upon  it ;  and  yet  I  don't  find  that  our  bleffed 
Lord  and  Matter  preached  againft  it  ;  I  don't 
find  that  he  fpent  his  time  about  this  -,  his 
heart  was  too  big  with  fuperior  things  3  and 
I  believe  when  we,  like  him,  are  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghoft,  we  fhall  not  entertain  our 

audi- 


430  "The  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIII. 

audiences  with  difputes  about  rites  and  cere- 
monies, but  (hail  treat  upon  the  effentials  of 
the  gofpeK  and  then  rites  and  ceremonies  will 
appear  with  more  indifference.  Our  Lord  does 
not  fay,  that  he  would  not  go  up  to  the  feaft, 
for,  on  the  contrary,  he  did  go  there,  not  fo 
much  to  keep  the  feaft,  as  to  have  an  oppor- 
tunity to  fpread  the  gofpel-net,  and  that  ihould 
be  our  method  not  to  follow  difputing  j  and 
k  is  the  glory  of  the  Methodifts,  that  we  have 
been  now  forty  years,  and,  I  thank  God, 
there  has  not  been  one  fingle  pamphlet  v^rote 
by  any  of  our  preachers  about  the  non-elTen- 
tials  of  religion. 

Our  Lord  always  made  the  befl  of  every 
opportunity ;  and  we  are  told,  he  ^walked  in 
the  temple  in  Solomon's  porch.  One  would 
have  thought  the  Scribes  and  Pharifees  would 
have  put  him  in  one  of  their  flails,  and  have 
complimented  him  with  deiiring  him  to  preach, 
no,  they  let  him  walk  in  Solomon's  porch ; 
fome  think  he  walked  by  himfelf,  nobody 
choofing  to  keep  company  with  him.  Me- 
thinks,  I  fee  him  walking  and  looking  at  the 
temple,  and  forefeelng  v/ithin  himfelf  how 
foon  it  would  be  deflroyed ;  he  walked  pen- 
five,  to  fee  the  dreadful  calamities  that  would 

come 


I 


Ser.  XVIII.    The  Good  Shepherd.  431 

come  upon  the  land,  for  not  knowing  the  day 
of  its  vifiiation  j  and  it  was  to  let  the  world 
fee  he  was  not  afraid  to  appear  in  public :  he 
walked,  as  much  as  to  fay,  have  any  of  you 
any  thing  to  fay  to  me  ?  and  he  put  himlelf 
in  their  way,  that  if  they  had  any  thing  to 
alk  him,  he  was  ready  to  refolve  them  ;  and 
to  fhew  them,  that  though  they  had  treated 
him  fo  ill,  yet  he  was  ready  to  preach  falva- 
tion  to  them. 

In  the  twenty-fourth  verfe  we  are  told, 
J  hen  came  the  Jews  round  about  him^  and  [aid 
unto  hiniy  how  lojig  dojl  thou  make  us  to  doubt  ^ 
They  came  round  about  him  when  they  faw 
him  Vv^alking  in  Solomon's  porch ;  now,  fay 
they,  we  will  have  him,  now  we  will  attack 
him.  And  now  was  fulfilled  that  paiTage  in 
the  Pjfalms,  they  compared  me  about  like  bees 
to  fling  me,  or  rather  like  wafps.  Now,  fay 
they,  we  wilPget  him  in  the  middle  of  us, 
and  fee  what  fort  of  a  man  he  is;  we  will  fee 
whether  we  can't  conquer  him ;  they  came  to 
liim  and  they  fay,  how  long  doft  thou  make  us 
to  doubt  ?  Now  this  feems  a  plaufible  queflion, 
how  long  doji  thou  make  us  to  doubt  ?  Pray  how 
long,  fir,  do  you  intend  to  keep  us  in  fuC- 
ptjill*  ?  Some  think  the  words  will  bear  this 

inter- 


432  The  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIII. 

interpretation ;  pray,  fir,  how  long  do  you 
intend  thus  to  ileal  away  our  hearts?  they 
would  reprefent  him  to  be  a  defigning  man, 
like  Abfalom,  to  get  the  people  on  his  fide, 
and  then  fet  up  himfelf  for  the  Meffiah  ;  thus 
carnal  minds  always  interpret  good  mens  ac- 
tions. But  the  meaning  feems  to  be  this, 
they  were  doubting  concerning  Chrift  y  doubt- 
ing Chriftians  may  think  it  is  God's  fault  that 
they  doubt,  but  God  knows  it  is  all  their 
own.  How  long  doji  thou  make  us  to  doubt? 
I  wifh  you  would  fpeak  a  littie  plainer,  fir, 
and  not  let  us  have  any  more  of  your  parables ; 
pray  let  us  know  w^ho  you  are,  let  us  have  it 
from  your  own  mouth;  if  thou  be  the  Chriji 
tell  us  plainly  y  and  I  don't  doubt  but  they  put 
en  a  very  fanclified  face  and  looked  very  de- 
mure; if  thou  be  the  Chrift  tell  us  plainly^ 
intending  to  catch  him  :  if  he  does  not  fay  he 
is  the  Chrift,  we  will  fay  he  is  afliamed  of 
his  own  caufe ;  if  he  does  tell  us  plainly  that 
he  is  the  Chrift,  then  we  will  impeach  him 
to  the  governor,  we  will  go  and  tell  the  go^ 
vernor  that  this  man  fays  he  is  the  Meffiah ; 
ncvv  we  know  of  no  Meffiah  but  what  is  to 
joftle  Cxfar  out  of  his  throne.  The  devil 
always  wants  to  make  it  beljeved  that  God^s 

people^ 


Ser.  XVIII.    The  Gcod  Shepherd.  43  j 

people,  who  are  the  mofl  loyal  people  In  the 
world,  are  rebels  to  the  government  under 
which  they  live  ^  if  thou  be  the  Chrijl  tell  us 
plainly.  Our  Lord  does  not  let  them  wait  long 
for  an  anfwer ;  honefly  can  foon  fpeak :  / 
told  you  and  ye  believed  not :  the  works  that  I 
do  in  my  Father^ s  name^  they  bear  witnefs  of 
me.  Had  our  Lord  faid,  I  am  the  Meffiah, 
they  would  have  taken  him  up  ;  he  knew  that, 
and  therefore  he  joined  the  wifdom  of  the  fer^ 
pent  with  the  innocence  of  the  dove ;  fays  he, 
I  appeal  to  my  works  and  dodrine,  and  if 
you  will  not  infer  from  them  that  I  am  the 
Meffiah,  I  have  no  further  argument.  But^ 
he  adds,  ye  believe  mfy  becauje  ye  are  not  of 
my  fieep.  He  complains  twice  ,  for  their  un- 
belief was  the  greateft  grief  of  heart  to  Chrift  : 
then  he  goes  on  in  the  words  of  our  text.  My 
fheep  hear  my  voice ^  and  I  hiow  them^  and 
they  follow  me.  And  I  give  unto  the?7i  eieriial 
lifcy  and  they  fall  never  perify  ?ieither 
fall  a?2y  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand.  My 
flieep  hear  my  voice  >  you  think  to  puzzle 
me,  you  think  to  chagrin  me  with  this  kind 
of  conducSi  but  you  are  miftaken  3  you  don't 
believe  on  me,  becaufe  you  are  not  of  my 
(heep.  The  great  Mr.  Stodart,  of  New-Eng- 
K  k  k  land. 


!| 


^34  The  Good  Shepherd.    Sen  XVIIJ. 

land,  (2nd  no  place  under  heaven  produces 
greater  divines  than  New  Englind)  preached 
once  from  thefe  words,  hut  yc  believe  noty  be^ 
caiije  ye  are  7iot  of  my-fieep ;  a  very  ftrange 
text  to  preach  upon  to  convince  a  congrega- 
tion, yet  God  fo  bleffed  it,  that  two  or  three 
hundred  fouls  were  awakened  by  that  fermon  : 
God  grant  fuch  fuccefs  to  attend  the  labours 
of  all  his  faithful  minifters. 

Myfieep  hear  my  I'oice,  and  they  follow  me. 
It  is  very  remarkable,  there  are  but  two  forts 
of  people  mentioned  in  fcripture^  it  does  not 
fay  the  Baptifls  and  Independents,  nor  the 
Methodifls  and  Prefbyterians  ^  no,  Jefus  Chrift 
I  divides  the  whole  world  into  but  two  clafTes, 
ilieep  and  goate :  the  Lord  give  us  to  fee  this 
morning  to  which  of  thefe  claffes  we  belong. 

But  it  is  obfervable,  believers  are  always 
compared  to  fomething  that  is  good  aod  pro- 
fitable, and  unbelievers  are  always  defcribed 
by  fomething  that  is  bad,  and  good  for  little 
or  nothiiag. 

If  you  aik  me  v/hy  Chrifl's  people  are 
called  flieep  ?  as  God  (hall  enable  me,  I  will 
give  you  a  fliort^  and  I  hope  it  will  be  to  you 
an  anfwer  of  *peace.  Sheep,  you  know,  ge- 
Kerally  love  to  be  together  j  we  fay  a  flock  of 

flieep. 


Ser.  XVIII.    rioe  Good  Shepherd.  435 

fheep,  we  don't  fay  a  herd  of  flieep  ;  flieep 
are  little  creatures,  and  Chrift's  peopL  may  be 
called  fheep,  becaufe  they  are  little  in  the 
eyes  of  the  world,  and  they  are  yec  lelb  In  tlieir 
own  eyes.  O  fome  people  think  if  the  great 
men  were  on  our  fide,  it  we  had  ki:ig,  lords, 
and  commons  on  our  fide,  I  medn  if  they 
were  all  true  believers,  O  if  v/e  had  all  t  )e 
kings  upon  the  earth  on  our  fide,  fuppofe  you 
had;  alas!  alas!  do  you  think  the  church 
would  go  on  the  better  ?  why,  if  it  was  fadiion- 
able  to  be  a  Methodift  at  court,  if  it  was 
fafhionable  to  be  a  Methodift  abroad,  they 
would  go  with  a  bible  or  a  hymn-book  in- 
ilead  of  a  novel;  but  religion  ne\er  thrives 
under  too  much  fun-fliine.  Not  many  mighty^ 
not  many  noble  are  called^  but  God  hath  chojen 
the  jooliJJd  things  of  the  "joorld  to  conjoiind  the 
wife^  and  God  hath  chojen  the  iveak  things  of 
the  world  to  confound  the  things  which  are 
mighty.  Dr.  Watts  fays,  here  and  there  I  fee 
a  king,  and  here  and  there  a  great  man  in 
heaven,  but  their  number  is  but  finall. 

Sheep   are   looked  upon    to    be    the   mofl 

harmleis,  quiet  creatures  that  God  hath  made  : 

O  may  God,  of  his   infinite  mercy,    give  us 

to  know  that  we  are  his  flieep,  by  our  inving 

K  k  k  2  this 


'436  The  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIII. 

this  blefled  temper  infufed  into  our  hearts  by 
the  Holy  Ghoft,  Learn  of  me^  faith  our  blef- 
fed  Lord ;  what  to  do,  to  work  miracles  ?  no  5 
Learn  oj  nie^  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in 
heart.  A  very  good  man,  now  living,  faid 
once,  if  there  is  any  one  particular  temper  I 
defire  more  than  another,  it  is  the  grace  of 
meeknefs,  quietly  to  bear  bad  treatment,  to 
forget  and  to  forgive ;  and  at  the  fame  time 
that  I  am  fenfible  I  am  injured,  not  to  be 
overcome  of  evil,  but  to  have  grace  given  me 
to  overcome  evil  with  good.  To  the  honour 
of  Mofes  it  is  declared,  that  he  was  the  meek- 
eft  man  upon  earth.  Meeknefs  is  neceffary 
for  people  in  pov/er  -,  a  man  that  is  paffionate 
is  dangerous  3  every  governor  fhould  have  a 
warm  temper,  but  a  man  of  an  unrelenting, 
unforgiving  temper,  is  no  more  fit  for  govern- 
ment than  Phaeton  to  drive  the  chariot  of  the 
fun,  he  only  fets  the  world  on  fire. 

You  all  know,  that  flieep  of  all  creatures  in 
the  world  are  the  mod  apt  to  ftray  and  be 
lofts  Chrift's  people  may  juftly,  in  that  re- 
fpeft,  be  compared  to  fheep  ^  therefore,  in 
the  introdudion  to  our  morning  fervice,  we 
fay,  E'\'  have  erred  and  ftray  ed  from  thy  ways 
like  loft  Jl:eep,     Turn  out  a  horfe,   or  a  dog, 

and 


Sen  XVIII.    rhe  Good  Shepherd.  437 

and  they  will  find  their  way  home,  but  a 
fiieep  wanders  about,  he  bleats  here  and  there, 
as  much  as  to  fay,  dear  flranger,  fhew  me  my 
way  home  again  :  thus  Chrifl^s  fheep  are  too 
apt  to  wander  from  the  fold  3  having  their 
eye  off  the  great  fhepherd,  they  go  into  this 
field,  and  that  field,  over  this  hedge  and  that, 
and  often  return  home  with  the  lofs  of  their 
wool. 

But  at  the  fame  time  fheep  are  the  moft  ufe* 
fui  creatures  in  the  world ;  they  manure  the 
land,  and  thereby  prepare  it  for  the  feed ;  they 
clothe  our  bodies  with  wool,  and  there  is  not 
the  leaf];  part  of  a  fheep  but  is  ufeful  to  man : 
O  my  brethren,  God  grant  that  you  and  I  may, 
in  this  refpecSl,  anfwer  the  charadler  of  fheep. 
The  world  fays,  becaufe  we  preach  faith  we 
deny  good  works ;  this  is  the  ufual  objeftion 
againfl  the  dodrine  of  imputed  righteoufnefs, 
but  it  is  a  flander,  an  impudent  flander.  It 
was  a  maxim  in  the  firft  reformers  time,  that 
tho'  the  Arminians  preached  up  good  works,  \ 
you  muft  go  to  the  Cakinifls  for  them. 
Chrift's  fheep  ftudy  to  be  ufeful,  and  to  clothe 
all  they  can  ^  we  fhould  labour  w^ith  our  hands, 
that  we  may  have  to  give  to  all  thofe  that 
need. 

Believers 


438  The  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIIL 

Believers  confider  Chrift's  property  in  them  > 
he  fays,  My  peep :  O  bleffed  be  God  for  that 
little,  dear,  great  word  My.  We  are  his  by 
eternal  eleclion  :  the  Jheep  which  thou  haji  given 
me^  fays  Chrill.  They  were  given  by  God 
the  Father  to  Chrift  Jefus,  in  the  covenant 
made  between  the  Father  and  the  Son  from  all 
eternity.  They  that  are  not  led  to  fee  this,  I 
wifli  them  better  heads ;  though^  I  beheve, 
numbers  that  are  againft  it  have  got  better 
hearts:  the  Lord  help  us  to  bear  with  one 
another  where  there  is  an  honeft  heart. 

He  calls  them  my  fheep,  they  are  his  by 
purchafe.  O  fmner,  finner,  you  are  come 
this  morning  to  hear  a  poor  creature  take  his 
lajl  farewel 'y  but  I  want  you  to  iorget  the 
creature  that  is  preaching,  I  want  to  lead  you 
farther  than  the  Tabernacle  5  where  do  you 
want  to  lead  us?  why,  to  Mount  Calvary, 
there  to  fee  at  what  an  expence  of  blood  Chrift 
purchafed  thofe  whom  he  calls  his  own ;  he 
redeemed  them  with  his  own  blood,  fo  that 
they  are  not  only  his  by  eternal  eleftion,  but 
alfo  by  adual  redemption  in  time  ^  and  they 
wc:re  given  to  him  by  the  Father,  upon  con- 
dition that  he  iliould  redeem  them  by  his 
heart's   blood.     It   was   a  hard    bargain,    but 

Chrift 


Ser.  XVIII.    Ihe  Good  Shepherd.  439 

Chrift  was  willing  to  ftrike  the  bargain,  that 
you  and  I  might  not  be  damned  for  ever. 

They  are  his,  becaufe  they  are  enabled  in  a 
day  of  God's  power  voluntarily  to  give  them- 
felves  up  unto  him  ;  Chrift  fays  of  thefe  flieep 
efpecially,  that  they  hear  his  voice,  and  that 
they  follow  him.  Wilt  "y (311  te  {o  good  as  to 
-mind  that  ?  here  is  an  allufion  to  a  fliepherd  : 
^ow  in  fome  places  in  fcripture,  the  fliepherd 
is  reprefented  as  going  after  his  fheep  *  ^  that 
is  our  way  in  England^  but  in  the  Eaftern 
nations,  the  fhepherds  generally  went  before ; 
they  held  up  their  crook,  and  they  had  a  par- 
ticular a\ll  that  the  flieep  underftood.  Now, 
fays  Chrift,  My  fheep  hear  my  voice,  This  is 
my  beloved  Son,  faith  God,  hear  ye  him.  And 
again,  the  dead  Jloall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son 
oj  God,  and  live :  now  the  queftion  is,  what 
do  we  underftand  by  hearing  Chrift's  voice  ? 

Firft,  v/e  hear  Mofes'  voice,  we  hear  the 
voice  of  the  law  >  there  is  no  going  to  Mount 
Zion  but  by  the  way  of  Mount  Sinai,  that  is 
the  right  ftraight  road.  I  know  fome  fay, 
they  don't  know  when  they  were  converted  ^ 
thofe  are,  I  believe,  very  few  :  generally,  nay  I 
may  fay  almoft  always,  God  deals  otherwife. 

Some 

*  2  Sam.  vii.  8.  Pfal.  Ixxviii.  71. 


440  The  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIII. 

Some  are,  indeed,  called  fooner  by  the  Lord 
than  others,  but  before  they  are  made  to  fee 
the  glory  of  God,  they  muft  hear  the  voice 
of  the  law ;  fo  you  muft  hear  the  voice  of 
the  law,  before  ever  you  will  be  favingly 
called  unto  God.  You  never  throw  off  your 
cloak  in  a  ftorm  but  you  hug  it  the  clofer,  fo 
the  law  makes  a  man  hug  ciofe  his  corrup- 
tions *  ',  but  when  the  gofpel  of  the  Son  of 
God  fhines  into  their  fouls,  then  they  throw 
off  the  corruptions  which  they  have  hugged 
fo  clofely;  they  hear  his  voice  faying.  Son, 
dau2;hter,  be  of  good  cheer,  thy  fms,  which 
are  many,  are  all  forgiven  thee.  They  hear  his 
'voice-,  that  befpeaks  the  habitual  temper  of 
their  minds :  the  wicked  hear  the  voice  of  the 
devil,  the  lufts  of  the  flelli,  the  lufls  of  the 
eye,  and  the  pride  of  life  j  and  Cbrifl's  flieep 
themfelves  attended  to  them  before  converiion; 
but  when  called  afterwards  by  God,  they  hear 
the  voice  of  a  Redeemer's  blood  fpeaking  peace 
unto  them,  they  hear  the  voice  of  his  word 
and  of  his  Spirit. 

The  confequence  of  hearing  his  voice,  and 
the  proof  that  we  do  hear  his  voice,  will  be 
to  follow  him.     Jefus  fiiid  unto  his  difciple.% 

If 

*  Rom.  vli,  7,  8,  9,^ 


S^r.  XVIIL    Ihe  Good  Shepherd.  441 

If  any  man  will  come  after  me^  let  him  deny 
himfelf^  and  take  up  his  crofs  and  follow  me. 
And  it  is  faid  of  the  faints  in  glory,  that  they 
followed  the  Lamb  whither foever  he  went. 
Wherever  the  fhephcrd  turns  his  crook,  and 
the  flieep  hear  his  voice,  they  follow  him ; 
they  often  tread  upon  one  another,  and  hurt 
one  another,  they  are  in  fuch  hafte  in  their 
way  to  heaven.  Following  Chrift,  means 
following  him  through  life,  following  him  in 
every  word  and  gellure,  following  him  out  of/ 
one  clime  into  another.  Bid  me  come  to  thee  \ 
upon  the  water ^  faid  Peter :  and  if  we  are  com- 
manded to  go  over  the  water  for  Chrift,  God, 
of  his  infinite  mercy,  follow  us  1  We  muil 
firft  be  fure  that  the  Great  Shepherd  points  his 
crook  for  us:  but  this  is  the  chara(5ter  of  a 
true  fervant  of  Chrift,  that  he  endeavours  to 
follow  Chrift  in  thought,  word,  and  work. 

Now,  my  brethren,  before  we  go  farther, 
as  this  is  the  laft  opportunity  I  fliall  have  of 
fpeaking  to  you  for  fome  months  if  we  live  j 
fome  of  you,  I  fuppofe,  don't  chufe  in  gene- 
ral to  rife  fo  foon  as  you  have  this  morning ; 
now  I  hope  the  world  did  not  get  into  your 
hearts  before  you  left  your  beds ;  now  you 
are  here^  do  let  me  intreat  you  to  enquire 
L  1 1  whether 


44^  "The  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIII. 

whether  you  belong  to  Chrift's  Iheep  or  no. 
Man,  woman,  finner,  put  thy  hand  to  thy 
heart  and  anfwer  me,  didft  thou  ever  hear 
Chrift's  voice  fo  as  to  follow  him,  to  give  up 
thyfelf  without  referve  to  him?  I  verily  do 
believe  from  my  inmoft  foul,  and  that  is  my 
comfort  now  I  am  about  to  take  my  leave  of 
you,  that  I  am  preaching  to  a  vaft  body,  a 
multitude  of  dear,  precious  fouls,  who,  if  it 
was  proper  for  you  to  fpeak,  would  fay. 
Thanks  be  unto  God,  that  we  can  follow  Je- 
fus  in  the  charafter  of  fheep,  though  we  are 
afhamed  to  think  how  often  we  wander  from 
thee,  and  what  little  fruit  we  bring  unto  thee ; 
if  that  is  the  language  of  your  hearts,  I  wifh 
you  joy ;  welcome,  welcome,  dear  foul,  to 
Chrill.  O  blefied  be  God  for  his  rich  grace, 
his  diflinguiihing,  fovereign,  electing  love,  by 
which  he  has  diftinguiflied  you  and  me.  And 
if  he  has  been  pleafed  to  let  you  hear  his  voice, 
through  the  miniftration  of  a  poor,..miferable 
finner;  a  poor,  but  happy  pilgrim,  may  the 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift  have  all  the  glory. 

If  you  belong  to  Jefus  Chrift,  he  is  fpeaking 

of  you  J    for,  fays  he,    1  know  my  j beep,    i 

kiK>w  them,  what  does  that  mean  ?  why,  he 

knows  vheir  number,    he  knows  th^ir  names, 

^    ..      ■■  be 


Ser.  XVIII.    rhe  Good  Shepherd.  443 

he  knows  every  one  for  whom  he  died  -,  and 
if  there  was  to  be  one  miffing  for  whom  Chriil 
died,  God  the  Father  would  fend  him  down 
again  from  heaven  to  fetch  him.     Of  all,  faith 
he,  that  thou  haji  given  me^  have  I  loft  no7ie^ 
Chrift  knows  his  fheep ;  he  not  only  knows 
their  number,    but  the  words  fpeak  the  pecu- 
liar knowledge  and  notice  he  takes  of  them  ; 
he  takes  as  much  care  of  each  of  them,    as  if 
there   was  but  that    one  fingle  fheep  in  the 
world.     To  the  hypocrite  he  faith,  Verily^   I 
know  you  not ;  but  he  knows  his  faints,    he  is 
acquainted  with  all  their  forrows,    their  trials 
and  temptations  -,  he  bottles  up  all  their  tears, 
he  knows  their  domeftic  trials,  he  knows  their 
inward  corruptions,  he  knows  all  their  wan- 
derings,  and  he  takes  care  to  fetch  them  back  ^</ 
again,  j   I  remember  I  heard  good  Dr.  Mar- 
ryat,  who  was  a  good  market- language  preach- 
er,   once  fay   at   PinnerVhall,    (I   hope  that 
pulpit  will  be  always  filled  with  fuch  preach- 
ers) God  has  got  a  great  dog  to  fetch  his  f deep 
back,  fays  he.     Don't  you  know   that  when 
the  (heep  wander,  the  fliepherd  fends  his  dog 
after  them  to  fetch  them  back  again  ?  fo  when 
Chrift's  fheep  wander,  he   lets    the   devil    go  ( 
after  them,  ^d  fuifers  him  to  bark  at  them, 
L  U  3  v/ho. 


444  5r/j^  Good  Shepherd.    Scr.  XVIII. 

.  who,  inftead  of  driving  them  farther  off,  is 
'  made  a  means  to  bring  them  back  again  to 
Chrifl's  fold. 

There  is  a  precious  word  I  would  have  you 
take  notice  of,  1  know  them ;  that  may  com- 
fort you  under  all  your  trials.  We  fometimes 
think  that  Chrift  does  not  hear  our  prayers, 
that  he  does  not  know  us  ^  we  are  ready  to 
fufpedt  that  he  has  forgotten  to  be  gracious  j 
but  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  he  does  know  us. 
We  accufe  one  another,  we  turn  devils  to  one 
another,  are  accufers  of  the  brethren,  and 
what  will  fupport  tvi^o  of  God's  people  when 
judged  by  one  another  but  this,  Lord,  thou 
knovs^eft  my  integrity,  thou  knoweft  how  mat- 
ters are  with  me  ? 

But,  my  brethren,  here  is  fomething  bet- 
ter, here  is  good  news  for  you  ^  what  is  that  ? 
fay  you ;  why,  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life^ 
and  they  Jljall  never  periJI:,  neither  Jldall  any 
pluck  them  out  of  my  hand,  O  that  the  words 
may  come  to  your  hearts  with  as  much  warmth 
and  powder  as  they  did  to  mine  thirty-five  years 
ago.  I  never  prayed  againft  any  corruption  I 
had  in  my  life,  fo  much  as  I  did  againft  going 
into  holy  orders,  fo  foon  as  my  friends  were 
for  having  me  go^    and  biihop  Benfon  was 

pleafed 


Scr.  XVIII.    Ihe  Good  Shepherd.  445 

pleafed  to  honour  me  with  peculiar  friendfhip, 
fo  as  to  offer  me  preferment,  or  do  any  thing 
for  me :  my  friends  wanted  me  to  mount  the 
church  betimes,  they  wanted  me  to  knock  my 
head  againft  the  pulpit  too  young ;  but  how 
fome  young  men  ftand  up  here  and  there  and 
preach,  I  don't  know  how  it  may  be  to 
them  3  but  God  knows  how  deep  a  concern 
entering  into  the  miniftry  and  preaching  was  to 
me  3  I  have  prayed  a  thoufand  times  till  the 
fweat  has  dropped  from  my  face  like  rain, 
that  God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  would  not  let 
me  enter  the  church  before  he  called  me  to, 
and  thruft  me  forth  in  his  work.  I  remember 
once  in  Gloucefter,  I  know  the  room,  I  look 
up  at  the  window  when  I  am  there  and  walk 
along  the  flreet ;  I  know  the  window,  the 
bedfide,  and  the  floor  upon  which  I  have 
laid  proftrate:  I  faid.  Lord,  I  cannot  go,  I 
fhall  be  puffed  up  with  pride,  and  fall  into 
the  condemnation  of  the  devil ;  Lord,  don't 
let  me  go  yet  3  I  pleaded  to  be  at  Oxford  two 
or  three  years  more ;  I  intended  to  make  an 
hundred  and  fifty  fermons,  and  thought  I  would 
fet  up  with  a  good  flock  in  trade  however  5 
but  I  remember  praying,  wreflling,  and  flri- 
ving  with  God  5  I  faid,  I  am  undone,  I  am 

unfit 


< 


446  The  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIII. 

unfit  to  preach  in  thy  great  name,  fend  me 
not,  pray,  Lord,  fend  me   not  yet.     I  wrote 

Ito  all  my  friends  in  town  and  country,  to 
pray  againft  the  bifhop's  folicitation,  but  they 
inlifted  I  fliould  go  into  orders  before  I  was 
twenty-two.  After  all  their  folicitation  thefe 
words  came  into  my  mind,  nothing  Jhall  pluck 
you  out  of  my  hand,  O  may  the  words  be 
bleifed  to  you,  my  dear  friends,  that  I  am 
parting  with,  as  they  were  to  me  when  they 
came  warm  upon   my  heart ;  then,  and  not 

\  till  then,  I  faid,  Lord,  I  will  go,  fend  me 
when  thou  wik.  I  remember  when  I  was  in 
a  place  called  Dover-lfland,  near  Georgia,  we 
put  in  with  bad  winds  5  I  had  an  hundred  and 
[fifty  in  family  to  maintain,  and  not  a  fingle 

'farthing  to  do  it  with,  in  the  deareft  part  of 
the  king's  dominions  ^  I  remember,  I  told  a 
minifter  of  Chrift  now  in  heaven,  I  had  thefe 
words  once,  fir,  Nothing  JJoalt  pluck  you  out  of 
my  hand,  O,  fays  he,  take  comfort  from 
them,  you  may  be  fure  God  will  be  as  good  as 
his  word,  if  he  never  tells  you  fo  again.  And 
our  Lord  knew  his  poor  Iheep  would  be  al- 
ways doubting  they  ihould  never  reach  heaven, 
therefore,  fays  he,  I  give  to  them  eternal  life^ 
end  tbeyf^all  never  perijb* 

Here 


Ser.  XVill.    The  Good  Shepherd.  447 

Here  are  in  our  text  three  blcfled  declara- 
tions, or  promiffes : 

Firft.     /  know  them. 

Second.  "They  (Imll  never  perijl: ;  though 
they  often  think  they  Ihall  perifli  by  the  hand 
of  their  lufts  and  corruptions  ^  they  think  they 
fhall  perifli  by  the  deceitfulnefs  of  their  hearts  5 
but  Chrift  fays,  they  fiall  never  periJJj,  I  have 
brought  them  out  of  the  world  to  myfelf,  and 
do  you  think  I  will  let  them  go  to  hell  after 
that.  I  give  to  them  eternal  life  -,  pray  mind 
that ;  not  I  will,  but  I  do.  Some  talk  of  be- 
ing juftified  at  the  day  of  judgment,  that  is 
nonfenfe;  if  we  are  not  juftified  here,  wefhull 
not  be  juftified  there.  He  give^  them  eternal 
life,  that  is,  the  earneft,  the  pledge,  and  aflii- 
ranee  of  it  j  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  here,  is  the  earneft  of  glory  hereafter. 

Third.  IS  either  fhall  any  pluck  them  out  of 
my  hand.  He  holds  them  in  his  hand,  that  is, 
he  holds  them  by  his  power,  none  ftiall  pluck 
them  thence  ^  there  is  always  fomething  pluck* 
ing  at  Chrift's  ftieep,  the  devil,  the  iufts  of 
the  flefli,  the  lufts  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride 
of  life,  all  try  to  pluck  them  out  of  Chrift's 
hand.  O  my  brethren,  they  need  not  pluck 
us,  for  we  help  all  three  to  pluck  ouriclvt^ 

cut 


^. 


<-% 


K 


443  ne  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIIL 

out  of  the  hand  of  Jefus  j  but  none  Jloall  pluck 
them  out  of  my  handy  fays  Chrift.  /  give  to 
them  eternal  life,  I  am  goi7ig  to  heaven  to 
f  rep  are  a  place  for  them^  and  there  they  Jhall 
be.  O  my  brethren,  if  it  was  not  for  keep- 
ing you  too  long,  and  too  much  exhaufling 
my  own  fpirits,  I  could  call  upon  you  to  leap 
for  joy  y  there  is  not  a  more  blefled  text  to 
fupport  the  final  perfeverance  of  the  faints  j 
and  I  am  aftonifhed  any  poor  foul,  and  good 
people  I  hope  too,  can  fight  againft  the  doc- 
trine of  the  perfeverance  of  the  faints  5  what 
if  a  perfon  fay  they  ihould  perfevere  in  wick- 
ednefs  ?  ah  !  that  is  an  abufe  of  the  doftrine ; 
what,  becaufe  fome  people  fpoii  good  food, 
are  we  never  to  eat  it?  But,  my  brethren, 
upon  this  text  I  can  leave  my  cares,  all  my 
friends,  and  all  Chrifl's  fheep  to  the  protection 
of  Chrifl  Jefus's  never-failing  love. 

1  thought  this  morning,  when  I  came  here 
j  riding  from  the  other  end  of  the  town,  it  was 
I  to  me  like  coming  to  be  executed  publicly ; 
and  when  the  carriage  turned  juft  at  the  end 
of  the  walk,  and  I  faw  you  running  here,  O 
thinks  I,  it  is  like  a  perfon  now  coming  juft  to 
the  place  where  he  is  to  be  executed :  when 
I  went  up  to  put  on  my  gown,  I  thought  it 

was 


Ser.  XVIII.    rhe  Good  Shepherd.  449 

was  juft  like  drefling  myfelf  to  be  macle  a  pub- 
lic fpedlacle  to  fhed  my  blood  for  Chrift  ;  and 
I  take  all  heaven  and  earth  to  witnefs,  and 
God  and  the  holy  angels  to  witnefs,  that  tho' 
I  had  preferment  enough  offered  me,  that  tho* 
the  bifliop  took  me  in  his  arms,  and  offered 
me  two  parifhes  when  I  was  but  twenty-two 
years  old,  and  always  took  me  to  his  table ; 
though  I  had  preferment  enough  offered  me 
when  I  was  ordained,  thou,  O  God,  knoweft, 
that  when  the  bifhop  put  his  hand  upon  my 
head,  I  looked  for  no  other  preferment  than 
publickly  to  fuffer  for  the  Lamb  of  God :  in 
this  fpirit  I  came  out,  in  this  fpirit  I  cams 
up  to  this  metropolis.  I  was  thinking  v/hen 
I  read  of  Jacob's  going  over  the  brook  with  a 
ftaff,  that  I  would  not  fay  fo  much,  but  I 
came  up  without  a  friend,  I  went  to  Oxford 
without  a  friend,  I  had  not  a  fervant,  I  had 
not  any  one  to  introduce  me ;  but  God,  by 
his  Holy  Spirit,  was  pleafed  to  raife  m.e  up 
to  preach  for  his  great  name's  fake :  through 
his  Divine  Spirit  I  continue  to  this  day,  and 
feel  my  affedions  are  as  ftrong  as  ever  towards 
the  work,  and  the  people  of  the  living  God. 
The  congregations  at  both  ends  of  the  town 
Jire  dear  to  me :  God  has  hcnouced  me  to 
M  m  m  build 


450  The  Good  Shepherd.    Ser.  XVIII. 

build  this  and  the  other  place  -,  and,  bieff^d  be 
his  name,  as  he  called  me  to  Georgia  at  firft, 
and  I  left  all  London  affairs  to  God's  care, 
when  I  had  moft  of  the  churches  in  London 
open  for  me,  and  had  twelve  or  fourteen  con- 
ftables  to  keep  the  doors,  that  people  might 
I  not  crowd  too  much  5  I  had  offers  of  hundreds 
i  then  to  fettle  in  London,  yet  I  gave  it  up  for 
God,  to  go  into  a  foreign  clime  5  and  I  hope 
with  that  fame  fingle  intention  I  am  going 
jiow. 

When  I  came  frorn  Arnerica  laft^  I  thought 
I  had  no  other  river  to  pafs  over  but  the  ri- 
ver Jordan,  I  remember  I  told  you  fo ;  and 
as  the  orphan-houfe  was  then  to  be  given,  I 
thought,  out  of  my  hands,  I  then  intended  to 
retire  into  fome  little  corner,  and  pray  when 
I  could  not  preach,  my  fpirits  were  fo  low, 
and  my  nerves  and  animal  frame  fo  weak,  but 
God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  has  renewed  my 
ftrength,  and  is  pleafed  to  raife  my  fpirits,  fo 
that  I  find  my  heart  is  willing  to  go  here  or 
there,  wherever  God  fhall  call. 

The  orphan-houfe  being  turned  into  a  col- 
lege is  a  matter  of  great  confequence ;  you 
that  have  not  been  in  America  can't  tell,  but 
I  heartily  wifh,  I  am  neither  a  prophet,  nor 

the 


Ser.  XVIII.    Tbe  Good  Shepherd.  451 

the  fon  of  a  prophet,  and  I  hope  none  of  us 
will  ever  be  driven  to  America  for  an  afylum, 
where  God's  people  were  driven  from  this  land 
an  hundt-ed  years  ago :  clouds  are  growing 
thick,  and  if  a  fpirit  of  moderation  does  not 
prevail  among  governors  and  governed,  what  • 
but  confufion  muft  happen  to  perfons  who 
jftrive  one  with  another,  and  are  making  fport 
for  the  devil  by  deftroying  one  another  ?  may 
the  great  and  gracious  God  avert  every  im- 
pending ftorm^  and  by  diflfufing  a  fpirit  of 
moderation  and  of  a  found  mind,  and  by- 
keeping  his  people  clofe  to  himfelf,  avert 
thofe  liorms,  thofe  terrible  judgments,  that 
we  have  reafon  to  exped  from  our  repeated 
provocations.  I  am  going  now  to  fettle  the 
orphttn-houfe  upon  a  proper  bafis ;  I  go  now 
in  the  fall,  that  I  may  be  in  Georgia  in  the 
winter,  which  is  fine  weather  there.  The 
twenty-fifth  of  March  is  the  anniverfary  of  the  j 
day  on  which  I  laid  the  firft  brick  of  the  ' 
orphan-houfe  -,  by  that  time,  I  hope,  all  the 
buildings  will  be  finiihed,  and  the  plantation 
fettled ;  and  then  I  hope  to  go  and  preach 
along  the  continent  to  New-England,  and 
from  thence  I  intend,  if  God  permit  me,  to 
M  m  m  2  return 


452  "the  Good  Shepherd.    Sef.  XVIII. 

return  to  my  dear  London  and  Englifh  friends 
again. 

I  have  blefled  news  from  the  orphan-houfe ; 
one  writes  me  word,  Would  to  God  you 
could  fend  a  thoufand  fuch  as  you  have  fent, 
Mr.  Dixon,  and  his  wife,  that  have  been  old 
fervants  there  5  Mr.  Wright,  Mr.  Crayne, 
and  Mr.  Wright's  brother,  and  thofe  that 
have  been  employed  with  them  to  carry  on 
the  work  of  the  Lord ;  and  I  cannot  think  but 
God  intends  to  lay  a  foundation  for  a  blefled 
feminary  for  Chrifl :  Lord  Jefus,  hear  our 
prayers  upon  that  account. 

Now  I  muft  come  to  the  hardeft  part  I 
have  to  adt :  I  was  afraid  when  I  came  out 
from  home,  that  I  could  not  bear  the  fhock, 
but  I  hope  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrifl  will  help 
me  to  bear  it,  and  help  you  to  give  me  up  to 
the  bleffed  God,  let  him  do  with  me  what 
he  will.  This  is  the  thirteenth  time  of  my 
croffing  the  mighty  waters;  it  is  a  little  difB- 
cult  at  this  time  of  life ,  and  though  my  fpi- 
rits  are  improved  in  fome  degree,  yet  weak- 
nefs  is  the  befl  of  my  ilrength :  but  I  delight 
in  the  caufe,  and  God  fills  me  with  a  peace 
that  is  unutterable,  which  nobody  knows, 
and  a  ilranger  intermeddles  not   with  :    into 

his 


Sen  XVIIL    The  Good  Shepherd.  453 

his  hands  I  commend  my    fpirit  3  and  I  beg 
that  this  may  be  the  language  of  your   hearts. 
Lord,  keep  him,  let  nothing  pluck  him  out 
of  thy   hands.     I  expedl  many  a  trial  while  I 
am  on  board,  fatan  always   meets  me  there ; 
but  that  God   which  has  kept  me,  1  believe 
will  keep  me.     I  thank  God,  I  have  the  ho- 
nour of  leaving   every  thing  quite   well  and 
eafy  at  both  ends  of  the  town^  and,  my  dear 
hearers,  my  prayers  to  God  fhall  be,  that  no- 
thing may  pluck  you  out  of  Chrift's  hands. 
Witnefs  againft  me,  if  I  ever  fet  up  a  party 
for  myfelf;  did  ever  any  minifler,  or  could 
any   niinifter  in   the  world  fay,    that  I  ever 
fpoke  againft  any  one  going  to  any  dear  mi- ' 
nifter  ?  I  thank  God,  that  he  has  enabled  me 
to  be  always  ftrengthning   the  hands  of  all, 
though  fome  have  afterwards  been  afhamed  to 
own  me.     I  declare   to  you,  that   I    believe 
God  will  be   with    me,   and  will    ftrengthen 
me;    and    I    believe  it  is  in  anfwer  to  your 
prayers,    that  God   is  pleafed   to    revive    my 
fpirits:  may    th^  Lord  help  you   to  pray  on. 
If  I    am  drowned  in  the  waves  I  will   fay. 
Lord,   take  care  of  my  London,  take  care  of 
my  Eoglifli   friends,   let  notliing  pluck  them 
out  of   thy  hands. 

And 


454  ^^^  ^^^^  Shepherd.    Ser.  t.Vllt 

Arid  as  Chrifl  has  given  us  eternal  life,  O 
my  brethren,  fome  of  you,  I  doubt  not,  will 
be  gone  to  him  before  my  return;  but,  my 
dear  brethren,  my  dear  hearers,  never  mind 
that;  we  fhall  part,  but  it  will  be  to  meet 
again  forever.  I  dare  not  meet  you  now,  i 
can't  bear  your  coming  to  me  to  part  from  me, 
it  cuts  me  to  the  heart  and  quite  overcomes 
me,  but  by  and  by  all  parting  will  be  over, 
and  all  tears  {hall  be  wiped  a  Way  from  our 
eyes.  God  grant  that  none  that  weep  now 
at  my  parting,  may  weep  at  our  meeting  at 
\  the  day  of  judgment ;  and  if  you  never  were 
I  among  Chrift*s  fheep  before,  may  Chrift  Je- 
■  fus  bring  you  now.  O  come,  come,  fee  what 
it  is  to  have  eternal  life  ^  don't  refufe  it  5^ 
hafte,  finner,  hafte  away :  may  the  great,  the 
good  iliepherd,  draw  your  fouls.  Oh!  if  you' 
never  heard  his  voice  before,  God  grant  you 
may  hear  it  now  5  that  I  may  have  this  com- 
fort when  I  am  gone  that  I  had  laft,  that 
fome  fouls  are  avv^akened  at  the  parting  fcr- 
mon.  O  that  it  may  be  a  farewel  fermon  to' 
you ;  that  it  may  be  a  means  of  your  taking 
a  farewel  of  the  world,  the  lulls  of  the  flefhy 
the  lulls  of  the  eye,    and   the  pride  of  life. 

G  comcj 


Sen  XVIII.    'The  Oood  Shepherd.  455 

O  come,   come,    come,    to    the  Lord    Jefu$ 
Chrifl ;  to  him  I  leave  you. 

And  you,  dear  fheep,  that  are  ah-eady  in 
his  hands,  O  may  God  keep  you  from  wan- 
dering ;  God  keep  you  near  Chrift's  feet ;  I 
don't  care  what  (liepherds  keep  you,  fo  as  you 
are  kept  near  the  great  iliepherd  and  bi/hop 
of  fouls.  The  Lord  God  keep  you,  Hft  up 
the  light  of  his  countenance  upon  you,  and 
give  you  pe^ce.     Amen. 


P      J     N      J      S. 


g::5=  Thefe  Sermons  being  entered  in  the 
Hall-Book  of  the  Company  of  Stationers, 
whoever  ^  prefumes  to  pirate  them  will  be 
profecuted. 


Date  Due 

k^  ■■■ 

—^ 

^^?  ,  '*^ 

M 1 6  *S 

» 

r.,'^ 

V 

MV3i'5^ 

^  / 

1 

:h, .-    ' 

f 

t 

tfR23'51 

^ 

fiv'  '   ,v. 


j-vsv 


