NYPL  RESEARCH  LIBRARIES 


3  3433  07994625  1 


21.IC  T 


'7 


ELEMENTS  OF 
RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 


A  Course  in 
Sunday  School    fEACHER-TRAiNiNG 

By 

FRED    LEWIS    PATTEE 


Professor    of    the     English     Language    and 
Literatuie  in  the  Pennsylvania  State  College 


Approved  as  an  Advanced  Standard  Course  by  the  Committee 
on     Education,    International      Sunday     School     Association 


New  York:    EATON  &  MAINS 
Cincinnati:   lENNINGS  &  GRAHAM 


"the  mfw  vukk 
l?UB.  ^^"^ 


Copyright,  1909,  by 
EATON  &   MAINS. 


CONTENTS 


PART  I 

Child  STt^nv 


CHAPTER 


PA  on: 
I.    Introduction 1 1 

II.    The  Physical  Basis i6 

III.  Child  Activity  AND  Imitation 22 

IV.  The  Play  Instinct 27 

V.    The  Story  Age 3  ^ 

VI.  The  Child's  Standpoint 39 

VII.  Individuality 44 

VIII.  The  Beginnings  of  Religion 49 

IX.  The  Preadolescent  Period 54 

X.  The  Early  Adolescent  Period 61 

XI.  Later  Adolescence 72 

XII.  The  Graded  Curriculum 77 

PART  II 
Some  Elements  of  Psychology 

XIII.  Preliminary  Vii:\v 89 

XIV.  Attention 93 

XV.    Perception 99 

XVI.    The  Memory 104 

XVII.    Imagination no 

XVIII.    Thought 116 

XIX.    The  Wili 122 

XX.    Habit 12S 

XXI.    Suggestion  and  Imitation 134 

XXII.    The  Emotions 138 

XXIII.  Morality  and  Religion 144 

XXIV.  The  Mind  and  the  Body 1  50 

3 


4  CONTENTS 

PART  III 
The  Art  of  Teaching 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XXV.    The  Teacher's  Preparation 159 

XXVI.    Aim  AND  Method 165 

XXVII.    The  Teaching  Process 171 

XXVIII.    Illustration 175 

XXIX.    Blackboard  Work 187 

XXX.    The  Application  of  the  Lesson 193 

XXXI.    The  Art  of  Questioning 198 

XXXII.    The  Teaching  of  Geography 208 

XXXIII.    The  Teaching  of  Missions 213 

XXXIV.   The  Use  OF  Review. 220 


BOOKS  FOR  SUPPLEMENTARY  READING  AND 
REFERENCE 

(Those  marked  with  a  *  are  especially  heliiful.) 

Child  Study 

♦Fundamentals  of  Child  Study.     Edwin  A.  Kirkpatrick. 

Child  Study  for  Teacher-Training.     Dr.  Charles  Roads. 

Children's  Ways.     Dr.  James  Sully. 

A  Study  of  Child  Nature.     Elizabeth  Harrison. 

Some  Fundamental  Principles  of  Sunday  and  Bible  Teach- 
ing.    Dr.  Hall,  Pedagogical  Seminary,  vol.  viii. 

Children's  Interest  in  the  Bible.     George  E.  Dawson,  Peda- 
gogical Seminary,  vol.  vii. 

The   Child  and  the   Imaginative  Life.      McCrady,   Atlantic 
Monthly,  vol.  c. 

The  Contents  of  Children's  Minds  on  Entering  School.     Dr. 
Hall,  Pedagogical  Seminary,  vol.  i. 
*The  Teacher  and  the  Child.     H.  Thistleton  Mark. 

Religious   Periods    of    Child    Growth.      Christman,    Educa- 
tional Review,  vol.  xvi. 

The  Spiritual  Life.     Dr.  Coe. 

Sunday   School   Work   and   Bible   Study   in   the   Light   of 
Modern  Pedagogy.     Pedagogical  Seminary,  vol.  iii. 

The  Religious  Content  of  the  Child  Mind.     Dr.  Hall,  Prin- 
ciples of  Religious  Education,  chap.  vii. 

Preservation  Versus   the    Rescue  of   the  Child.      J.   T.  Mc- 
Farland. 

The  Book  and  the  Child.     J.  T.  McFarland. 

Letters  to  a  Mother.     Blow. 

The  Child  and  the  Bible.     Hubbell. 
*The  Boy  Problem.     Forbu.sh. 

A  Study  of  Child  Ideals.    Popular  Science  Monthly,  vol.  liii. 

The    Religion   of   Boys.      Association   Outlook,   Springfield. 
Massachusetts. 

Children's  Collections.    Pedagogical  Seminary,  vol.  i. 

5 


6  BOOKS  I'OR  Rl'-I'l'.KKN'CE 

Religious  Periods  of  Child  Growth.     Educational   Review, 
vol.  xvi. 

Chums.     Pedagogical  Seminary,  vol.  ix. 

Adolescence.     Dr.  Hall. 

A  Study  of  Adolescence.     Pedagogical  Seminary,  vol.  i. 
♦The  Unfolding  Life.     A.  A.  Lamoreaux. 

The  Psychology  of  Religion.     Starbuck. 
♦The  Study  of  the  Child.    Taylor. 

Psychology 
*Talks  to  Teachers  on  Psychology.     Dr.  William  James. 
♦Psychology  and  Psychic  Culture.     Halleck. 

A  Primer  of  Psychology.     Titchener. 

The  Art  of  Securing  Attention.     Fitch. 

Psychological  Princi])les  of  Education.     Home. 

How  to  Hold  Attention.     Hughes. 

Thinking  and  Learning  to  Think.     Schaeffer. 

How  to  Strengthen  the  Memory.     Holbrook. 
♦Mental  Gro\vth  and  Control.    Dr.  Oppenheim. 

The  Art  of  Teaching 
♦The  Seven  Laws  of  Teaching.     Gregory. 
♦The  Point  of  Contact.     Du  Bois. 
♦Primer  on  Teaching.     Adams. 

Method  of  the  Recitation.     McMurry. 

Herbart  and  the  Herbartians.     DeGarmo. 

The  Teaching  of  Bible  Classes.    Lee. 

The  Art  of  Questioning.     Fitch. 

The  Art  of  Questioning.     Home. 

The  Use  of  Biogra])hy  in  Religious  Instruction.     McMurry. 

Manual  of  Biblical  Geograi)hy.     Hurlbut. 

Pnnci])lcs    of    Religiovis    Instruction.      Kent's    Cha])ter    on 
Geography. 
♦A  Manual  of  Mclliods  for  Sunday  School  Workers.    Trull. 

Missifms  in  the  Sunday  School.     Hixon. 

Holding  the  Roi)es.     Brain. 

How  to  Interest  Children  in  Missions.     CroweU. 

Gknkr.m,  Hi; LPS 
♦The  Pedagogical  Bible  School.     S.  B.  Haslett. 
Sunday  School  Teaching.     W.  W.  Smith. 


BOOKS  FOR  REFERENCE  7 

Grading  the  Sunday  School.     Axtell. 
Sunday  School  Organization  and  Methods.     Roads. 
How  to  Condtict  a  Sunday  School.     Lawrance. 
The  Principles  of  Religious  Education. 
♦Principles  and  Ideals  for  the  Sunday  School.     Burton  and 
Mathews. 
Modern  Methods  in  the  Sunday  School.    Mead. 

Illustrative  Work 

Henry  Ward  Beecher's  Yale  Lectures  on  Preaching  has  a 
very  helpful  chapter  on  "Rhetorical  Illustrations";  C.  H. 
Spurgeon's  The  Art  of  Illustration  is  exceedingly  suggestive. 
*  Hervey's  Picture  Work,  Maltby's  Map  Modeling,  and 
Hurlbut's  The  Bible  Atlas  are  valuable  helps.  The  Perry 
Picture  Company,  of  Maiden,  Massachusetts,  and  the  W.  A. 
Wilde  Publishing  Company,  of  Boston,  furnish  excellent 
copies  of  standard  pictures  at  one  cent  each.  The  Globe 
Bible  Publishing  Company,  of  Philadelphia,  furnishes  photo- 
graphs of  the  Holy  Land  at  ten  cents  each,  and  Underwood 
&  Underwood,  of  New  York,  are  headquarters  for  stereopticon 


PART  I 
CHILD  STUDY 


CHAPTER  I 

INTRODUCTION 

Sunday  School  and  Secular  School.  The  Sunday  school 
occupies  a  field  very  different  from  that  covered  by  the 
secular  school.  In  many  ways  the  two  cannot  be  compared 
at  all.  (i)  The  whole  atmosphere  is  different.  The  Sunday 
school  is  held  in  the  church  and  on  Sunday,  and  all  wear 
their  best  clothes — facts  in  themselves  enough  to  put  the 
two  institutions  into  different  classes.  (2)  The  object  is 
"not  so  much  to  impart  knowledge  as  to  mold  character." 
(3)  Viewed  as  a  school  from  the  merely  secular  standpoint, 
it  is  subject  to  limitations  that  are  well-nigh  fatal.  It  is 
restricted  to  a  single  hour  on  a  single  day  of  the  week,  and 
half  of  this  time  is  taken  up  with  what  the  secular  teacher 
would  call  preliminaries.  The  teachers  are  not  paid,  and 
with  some  exceptions  have  not  been  trained  for  their  work. 
Attendance  is  purely  voluntary  on  the  part  of  both  teacher 
and  pupil.  The  state  compels;  the  church  can  only  invite. 
If  the  home  is  careless,  the  pupil  may  play  truant  with 
impunity.  Methods  of  discipline  highly  successful  in  public 
schools  fail  utterly:  the  slightest  word  may  cause  the  pupil 
to  come  no  more.  But  there  is  no  need  of  comparing  the 
two;  they  are  on  different  planes. 

The  Object  of  the  Sunday  School.  The  Sunday  school 
worker  must  realize  at  the  outset  that  he  is  not  a  teacher  in 
the  merely  secular  sense,  but  that  he  is,  rather,  a  teacher  in 
the  sense  that  Jestis  was  a  teacher:  he  is  a  molder  of  human 
souls.  The  object  of  the  Sunday  school  is  to  impart  the 
great  truths  of  morality  and  religion  and  to  translate  them 
into  action  and  character.  To  teach  well  in  the  Sunday 
school  requires  skill  and  experience.  Trained  teachers  are 
as  imperatively  needed  as  in  the  secular  school.  Indeed, 
the  need  is  greater.  In  the  Sunday  school  everything  de- 
pends upon  the  teacher.  If  he  is  skillful  and  magnetic  the 
limitations   that   we   have   mentioned   will   disappear.      At- 

II 


ij  ELEMENTS  OE  RELIT.IOUS  PEDAGOGY 

tendance  can  be  won  without  compulsion;  discipline  is  a 
matter  of  symjjathy  and  of  knowledge  of  one's  pupils;  the 
hour  is  merely  an  opportunity,  and  if  it  is  used  rightly  it  is 
ample.  The  Sunday  school  teacher  must  realize  that  for 
the  moment  he  is  like  his  Master,  who  "went  uj)  into  a 
mountain,  and  when  he  was  set,  his  discii)les  came  to  him." 
His  attitude  .should  he  constantly  this:  These  souls  have 
come  to  me  of  their  own  accord  for  an  hour;  I  may  do  with 
them  what  I  will;  I  must  hold  and  mold  them;  I  must  use 
every  moment  of  this  jirecious  time  as  if  it  were  pure  gold. 

Secular  School  Methods.  Widely  as  the  Sunday  school 
and  the  public  school  ma}^  differ  in  object  and  in  methods  of 
work,  there  are  fundamental  matters  where  they  coincide. 
The  most  important  consideration  is  that  they  work  upon 
the  .same  material — little  children,  adolescents,  and  young 
men  and  women.  The  public  schools  are  beginning  to  realize 
that  the  first  rec(uisite  of  the  teacher  is  a  knowledge  of  the 
])U]iils  he  is  to  teach.  If  he  does  not  fiiUy  imderstand  them 
— their  point  of  view,  their  capacities,  their  limitations,  their 
ways  of  thought,  their  physical  peculiarities — he  is  a  failure 
from  the  outset.  Hence  the  schools  of  pedagogy,  and  the 
attention  that  is  now  being  given  to  child  study,  to  psy- 
chology, to  methods,  to  educational  science.  All  this  is  ex- 
ceedingly ])ractical.  "The  science  of  ediication,"  says  Bishop 
Vincent,  "is  only  a  systematized  knowledge  of  human  nature," 
and  it  is  needed  j:)recisely  as  much  by  the  Sunday  school 
teacher  as  it  is  by  the  teacher  in  the  ])til)lic  schools.. 

Sunday  School  Classification.  Psychologists  reclj^nize  four 
great  stages  in  the  jveriod  (>i  a  child's  ])hysical  and  mental 
development:  (i)  The  Primary  stage  of  childhood,  succeed- 
ing infancy,  and  reaching  from  about  the  age  of  three  to  the 
age  of  five  or  six;  (2)  the  Secondary,  covering  the  years  from 
six  or  seven  to  eight;  (3)  the  Preadole.scent  stage,  those  from 
nine  to  twelve;  and  (4)  the  Early  Adolescent,  reaching  from 
thirteen  to  sixteen.  To  these  successive  stages  in  natural 
develoj)ment  we  .shall  hereafter  give  closer  attention.  They 
are  mentioned  here  because  our  ])ublic  schools  generally  are 
as  closely  as  j)racticaV)le  graded  in  accordance  with  them. 
They  have  to  he  thus  graded,  not  because  any  school  axithori- 
ties  have  sf)  decided,  but  because  of  the  profound  changes 


INTRODUCTION  13 

that  nature  makes  in  the  growing  child.  It  is  as  important 
in  the  Sunday  school  as  in  the  secular  school  to  recognize 
this  natural  classification.  Two  or  three  conditions  supply- 
appropriate  names  for  the  Sunday  school  departments: 
(i)  The  Cradle  Roll,  which  cares  for  infants  during  the  first 
three  years  of  their  lives;  (2)  the  Beginners'  Department, 
which  includes  children  of  three,  four,  and  five  years;  (3)  the 
Primary  Department,  for  children  aged  six,  seven,  and  eight; 
(4)  the  Junior  Department,  for  children  of  nine,  ten,  eleven, 
and  twelve;  and  (5)  the  Intermediate  Department,  for  youths 
from  thirteen  to  sixteen.  Beyond  these  come  (6)  the  Senior 
Department,  (7)  the  Teacher-Training  Department,  and 
(8)  the  Adult  Bible  Class. 

The  Elementary  Departments.  "First  and  chiefly,"  says 
Dr.  Forbush,  "it  [the  Sunday  school]  is  the  agency,  supple- 
mental to  the  home,  where  children  and  young  people  are 
taught."  The  most  important  work  in  any  Sunday  school 
is  that  done  with  its  boys  and  girls.  All  plans  for  bettering 
the  school  should  begin  with  them,  and  all  plans  for  retrench- 
ment and  economy  should  reach  them  last  of  all.  No  other 
departments  so  imperatively  demand  trained  workers;  the 
material  is  plastic  as  no  other,  and  the  molding  of  it  requires 
the  very  highest  skill.  The  study  of  childhood  and  the 
methods  of  molding  it  is  regarded  now  by  all  educators  as 
the  most  important  branch  of  the  teaching  profession.  It 
is  obvious,  therefore,  that  every  complete  course  in  teacher- 
training  must  begin  with  a  study  of  the  elementary  depart- 
ments. The  center  of  our  Sunday  school  system  is  the  child. 
If  we  can  reach  him  as  we  should,  we  can  reach  all  the  rest, 
but  to  reach  him  we  mtist  understand  him  completely. 

Child  Study.  Much  has  been  written  during  the  past  ten 
or  fifteen  years  of  what  some  would  call  the  new  science  of 
child  study.  Under  the  leadership  of  Dr.  G.  Stanley  Hall 
every  phase  of  child  life  has  been  investigated  with  modem 
scientific  thoroughness,  and  that  the  results  arrived  at  have 
very  largely  influenced  educational  methods  no  one  can  deny. 
Dr.  Hall  has  himself  summed  up  the  matter  in  this  way:  "It 
has  almost  re-created  the  department  of  juvenile  criminology; 
has  revolutionized  and  almost  re-created  school  hygiene; 
made  adolescence,  a  strange  word  ten  years  ago,  one  of  the 


14  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

most  pregnant  and  suggestive  for  both  science  and  educa- 
tion; given  us  the  basis  of  a  new  religious  psychology,  and 
laid  the  foundation  of  a  new  and  larger  philosophy  and 
psychology." 

The  basis  of  the  science  is  the  fact  that  children  are  not 
merely  adults  in  miniature;  that  they  are  not  merely  little 
men  and  little  women ;  but  that  physically  and  mentally  they 
are  peculiar  to  themselves.  There  are  certain  well-defined 
stages  in  their  lives:  the  child  of  four  is  vastly  different  from 
the  same  child  at  ten,  and  almost  totally  different  from  the 
same  child  at  fifteen.  There  are  certain  periods  of  rapid 
growth  that  affect  the  whole  nature  of  the  child;  there  are 
periods  when  memory  is  peculiarly  active,  periods  when  read- 
ing matter  is  especially  demanded,  when  the  imagination  is 
dominant,  and  when  jilay  is  the  ruling  force.  There  are  the 
chum  period,  the  awkward  age,  the  bashful  time,  the  smart 
age,  and  the  show-off  period.  "Child  study,"  says  Kirk- 
l)atrick,  "is  properly  concerned  with  all  the  changes  that 
usually  take  place  in  human  beings  before  they  reach  ma- 
turity. Most  of  these  changes  occur  before  the  age  of  twenty, 
but  some  may  not  appear  until  ten  or  fifteen  years  later." 

Teachers  "Who  Do  Not  Understand  Children.  Most  failures 
in  the  elementary  dci)artments  arise  from  the  mistaken 
notion  that  children  are  merely  adtdts  in  miniature.  Men 
and  women  sit  j^erfectly  still  during  the  Sunday  school  hour, 
therefore  children  should  be  comjielled  to  do  the  same;  good 
results  are  obtained  by  lecturing  and  preaching  to  adults, 
therefore  the  same  methods  should  be  used  with  children. 
Many  seem  to  consider  that  the  position  of  the  teacher  is  a 
fixed  one  in  front  of  the  class,  never  to  be  varied  during  the 
hour  save  as  it  becomes  necessary  to  reach  over  and  shake 
some  incorrigible  wriggler.  I  have  personally  been  in  many 
schools  where  the  j^rimary  teacher  has  been  so  constant  an 
object  of  commiseration  that  she  has  come  to  look  ujion 
herself  as  a  kind  of  martyr.  Many  times,  indeed,  she  is  such 
from  the  fact  that  she  is  reqiiired  alone  to  do  work  that 
should  be  divided  into  eight  or  ten  parts,  but  more  often 
she  is  the  victim  of  false  methods  and  mistaken  ideas.  Al- 
most the  whf>le  energy  of  some  elementary  teachers  is  ex- 
pended in  the  attempt  to  maintain  order.     I  have  seen  good. 


INTRODUCTION  15 

faithful,  conscientious  workers  come  from  their  hour  of 
teaching  almost  exhausted.  "The  children  were  awful 
to-day,"  they  would  sigh;  "what  shall  I  do  with  them?" 

The  Difficulty  is  to  be  traced  to  lack  of  organization  and 
of  method.  Nothing  of  the  kind  may  be  found  in  our  best 
public  schools,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  schools  are 
carefully  graded,  and  the  teachers  are  compelled  to  under- 
stand children  and  school  organization  and  methods  before 
they  are  intrusted  with  the  charge  of  a  room.  They  under- 
stand perfectly  that  "children  cannot  be  kept  in  order  by 
force,"  that  they  cannot  be  reached  in  the  same  way  as 
adults,  and  that  they  cannot  be  allowed  to  govern  them- 
selves. The  teacher  who  understands  children  knows  that 
there  must  be  constant  variety,  a  careful  grouping  of  ages, 
a  constant  appeal  on  the  level  of  the  child's  knowledge. 

The  Object  of  the  Coarse.  Naturally,  therefore,  we 
shall  begin  with  a  study  of  the  Sunday  school  child 
between  the  ages  of  three  and  sixteen.  With  that  mar- 
velous world  of  infancy  before  the  age  of  three,  that  pe- 
riod on  which  a  whole  library  of  books  and  articles  has 
been  written,  we  shall  do  nothing.  From  the  standpoint 
of  the  Sunday  school  it  is  the  Cradle  Roll  period,  the  period 
during  which  the  mother  is  supreme  in  the  child's  life,  or, 
in  the  words  of  Dr.  Hall,  the  time  when  the  mother  stands 
for  the  child  "in  the  place  of  God."  Then,  too,  we  shall 
omit  some  things  which  are  regarded  as  fundamental  in  the 
science  of  child  study.  Our  problem  is  to  make  use  only  of 
those  principles  and  discoveries  which  will  be  of  practical 
value  to  the  Sunday  school  worker.  With  child  study  and 
pedagogical  psychology  and  the  like  as  mere  fads  or  educa- 
tional hobbies  we  have  no  sympathy.  We  shall  seek  only 
those  things  that  are  supremely  practical  and  founded  on 
hard  common  sense. 


CHAPTER  11 
THE  PHYSICAL  BASIS 

Physical  Elements.  All  child  training  begins  with  the 
element  of  the  physical.  The  object  of  the  Sunday  school 
is  primarily  spiritual;  its  chief  aim  is  the  molding  of  char- 
acter; yet  like  everything  else  in  human  life  its  foundations 
rest  upon  the  earth.  It  must  begin  with  the  physical;  success 
or  failure  may  depend  wholly  upon  physical  elements.  The 
school,  for  instance,  which  perches  a  four-year-old  boy  on  a 
high  pew  with  his  legs  dangling,  his  heels  knocking  against 
a  board,  boys  to  the  left  and  right  of  him,  and  tries  to  compel 
him  to  sit  perfectly  still  and  be  preached  to  for  an  hour  may 
be  highly  spiritual  and  deejjly  in  earnest,  yet  it  is  flying  in 
the  face  of  nature,  and,  so  far  as  the  boy  is  concerned,  the 
result  of  the  work  must  be  called  failure  when  compared  with 
the  results  which  might  have  been  accomplished  with  right 
methods.  In  many  Sunday  schools  teachers  are  placed  at 
great  disadvantage  when  comjjared  with  teachers  in  the 
secular  schools,  because  of  inadequate  quarters  provided 
with  uncomfortable  and  unhealthful  furnishings.  One  in- 
evitable result  of  the  adequate  training  of  teachers  will  be 
a  concerted  eflfort  to  secure  for  the  ]ju]jils  the  most  favorable 
physical  conditions. 

A  Separate  Room  for  the  Elementary  Departments.  The 
work  of  the  average  Sunday  school  must  be  done  in  quarters 
far  from  ideal.  In  most  cases  this  cannot  be  avoided.  The 
Sunday  .school  exists  usually  as  a  dej^artment  of  a  church, 
and  it  is  com])elled  to  be  content  with  what  the  church  is  able 
to  furnish.  In  the  smallest  churches,  which  have  only  the 
audience  room  to  offer,  the  Beginners',  Primary,  and  Junior 
Departments  are  of  necessity  seriously  handicajijied.  But 
no  matter  what  the  condition  of  the  church  may  be,  one 
thing  must  be  understood:  the  little  children  must  have  a 
room  to  themselves.  This  is  imperative.  It  should  be  the 
first  work  of  every  Beginners',  Primary,  and  Junior  teacher 

i6 


THE  PHYSICAL  BASIS  \^ 

who  has  not  such  a  room  to  secure  it  as  soon  as  possible. 
The  church  must  do  its  best  to  supply  this  need  in  some 
way. 

Common-Sense  Requirements.  As  to  the  location  and 
arrangement  and  care  of  the  room,  much  may  be  learned 
from  the  public  schools.  The  room  should  be  located,  if 
possible,  on  the  ground  floor;  the  entrance  should  be  from 
the  side  or  the  rear;  it  should  be  bright  and  cheerful,  and  so 
arranged  that  no  pupil  will  be  compelled  to  face  a  window. 
The  heating  arrangement  should  be  adequate;  the  tempera- 
ture should  be  from  sixty-five  to  seventy  degrees.  Those 
who  find  this  too  cold  should  wear  heavier  clothing;  Amer- 
icans as  a  general  thing  keep  their  houses  and  pubhc  rooms 
too  warm. 

Furnishings.  The  indispensable  things  in  a  primary  room 
are  small  chairs,  an  organ  or  other  musical  instrument  suit? 
able  for  accompaniments,  a  blackboard,  a  table  for  the 
teacher,  and  charts  and  pictures  suitable  to  illustrate  the 
work  in  hand.  The  iniquity  of  placing  children  for  an  hour 
on  seats  where  their  feet  dangle  need  not  be  dwelt  upon. 
Good  primary  chairs  may  be  bought  for  five  dollars  a  dozen. 
In  case  the  class  must  use  the  pews  in  the  audience  room, 
low  benches  may  be  secured  at  a  nominal  sum  to  be  used  as 
foot  rests.  The  worst  possible  room  is  one  with  a  tier  "gal- 
lery." Mrs.  Sara  J.  Crafts  has  thus  described  an  attractive 
primary  room : 

"The  floor  of  my  ideal  room  is  level,  and  covered  with  a 
bright,  cheery  carpet.  By  my  side  stands  my  little  table, 
useful  in  many  ways.  My  bell  is  not  on  it,  for  I  lost  that 
[purposely]  some  time  ago. 

"I  am  sure  you  never  saw  anything  more  comfortable  or 
cunning  than  those  little  cane-seated  chairs  without  arms, 
and  with  seats  only  twelve  inches  high.  During  the  intro- 
ductory and  closing  exercises  the  little  chairs  are  arranged 
in  straight  rows  in  front  of  me,  but  when  I  give  the  lesson 
to  my  assistant  teachers  they  are  clustered  in  groups  about 
each  teacher,  who  also  sits  in  one  of  the  little  chairs,  so  that 
she  may  literally  become  as  a  little  child. 

"There  is  plenty  of  light  and  fresh  air  in  my  room,  abun- 
dance of  sunshine  coming  in  and  making  us  glad. 


i8  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

"There  are  pictures  and  mottoes  on  the  wall,  brought  by 
the  children  to  decorate  their  Sunday  home.  There  are  plants 
and  vines  at  the  windows  which  require  a  little  of  my  atten- 
tion through  the  week.  They  add  much  to  that  element  of 
'at-homeativeness'  which  I  would  have  pervade  everything. 

"Over  in  a  corner  is  a  small  cabinet  which  has  in  it  treasures 
for  illustrating  the  lesson,  such  as  my  picture  scrapbook, 
maps,  blackboard  outlines,  etc. 

"My  blackboard  is  not  very  large,  and  stands  on  a  light 
easel,  so  that  I  can  move  it  to  the  most  advantageous 
positions. 

"The  organ  is  placed  at  my  right  hand.  Its  sweet  and 
svtre  tones  enable  me  always  to  give  the  children  the  right 
pitch,  and  in  other  ways  it  is  a  great  help  to  us  all."  ' 

Organization  of  Beginners'  and  Primary  Departments. 
The  ideal  Sunday  school  is  made  up  of  small  classes  through- 
out. Many  teachers  seem  to  consider  a  class  of  three  or  four 
hardly  worth  the  while,  but  in  many  ways  such  a  class  is 
ideal.  The  best  teaching  is  ever  that  where  the  teacher  can 
get  close  to  the  hearts  of  the  taught.  Where  it  is  possible  to 
have  a  separate  room  for  the  beginners,  a  superintendent  and 
one  or  two  assistants  can  do  the  work  in  the  way  that  teach- 
ing is  done  in  the  secular  kindergartens.  But  when  the 
children  are  six  years  old  and  enter  the  primary,  there  must 
be  classes  in  order  that  the  grade  work  may  be  done.  The 
classes  here  should  if  possible  be  limited  to  six  pupils  each. 
The  superintendent  conducts  all  the  general  exercises,  and 
teaches  the  International  Lesson  to  all  the  children,  the 
class  teachers  having  fifteen  minutes  of  the  hour  for  the  sup- 
plemental lesson.  In  the  Beginners'  Department  the  In- 
ternational Beginners'  Course  prepared  specially  for  children 
three,  four,  and  five  years  old  is  taught;  and  the  supplemental 
verses  are  woven  into  the  o])cning  talk  and  ]irogram.  Now, 
however,  the  new  Internatif)nal  Graded  Lessons  are  ready 
for  use,  and  their  use  will  render  supplemental  lessons  un- 
necessary. 

The  Preliminary  Record.  The  room  properly  fitted  and  the 
classes  organized,  it  is  time  to  become  acquainted  with  those 


'Open  Letters  to  Primary  Teachers. 


THE  PHYSICAL  BASIS  19 

who  are  to  be  taught.  In  the  pubhc  schools  it  is  being  insisted 
upon  more  and  more  that  each  pupil  shall  be  thoroughly  ex- 
amined for  physical  weaknesses  and  for  significant  facts  in 
his  life  history.  The  Sunday  school  teacher  has  the  child 
for  so  short  a  period  that  it  will  be  impossible  to  go  far  with 
such  work;  but  there  are  certain  things  that  the  Sunday 
school  teacher  should  know  if  she  is  to  take  full  advantage 
of  her  opportunity.  The  teacher  who  has  been  given  a  new 
class  or  division  should  begin  her  work  by  making  a  careful 
study  of  every  child  under  her  care.  She  should  consult 
the  public  school  teachers  who  have  her  division  during  the 
week,  and  she  should  also  visit  the  mothers  and  gain  if 
possible  their  sympathy  and  cooperation.  If  this  work  is 
divided,  and  each  teacher  in  the  primary  room  is  made  re- 
sponsible only  for  those  in  her  class  the  task  will  not  be  a 
hard  one.  The  teachers  can  then  have  frequent  conferences, 
and  each  can  feel  that  she  knows  all  the  class. 

The  Home  Life  of  the  Pupil.  To  know  the  child's  home 
environment  is  very  important.  In  small  country  schools 
there  will  be  no  difficulty;  the  community  is  almost  a  great 
family  where  each  knows  intimately  all  the  others.  In  the 
larger  schools,  however,  it  is  very  different.  The  teacher  is 
appointed  to  a  class;  it  is  merely  a  mass  of  children  each 
externally  much  like  all  the  others.  If  she  is  versed  in  the 
knowledge  of  human  nature,  she  may  make  shrewd  deduc- 
tions as  to  the  homes  and  the  training  of  the  individual 
pupils;  but  only  a  personal  visit,  and  perhaps  many  personal 
visits,  will  give  her  all  that  she  should  know.  What  is  the 
race  of  the  parents?  What  is  the  father's  occupation?  Is 
the  home  religious?  Is  the  child  sympathized  with  in  its 
Sunday  school  eflforts?  Can  the  home  be  depended  upon  for 
cooperation?  What  has  the  child  been  taught  of  the  Bible 
or  of  religion?  How  do  the  parents  sjjend  the  Sablnith? 
What  methods  of  discipline  is  the  child  accustomed  to? 
Has  he  been  taught  to  obey?  Is  he  the  only  child  in  the 
family?  These  are  important  questions.  Knowing  a  child's 
home  life,  one  knows  instinctively  the  plane  upon  which  to 
meet  him  and  the  appeal  that  will  be  effective.  The  best 
teaching  concerns  itself  not  with  the  mass — that  is,  the  class 
as  a  whole — but  with  the  individual  learner.    It  is  soul  to  soul. 


20  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

The  Physical  Senses.  Is  the  child  defective  in  any  way? 
Can  he  fn>m  where  he  sits  see  the  bhickboard  i)erfectly?  Is 
he  near-sighted  or  defective  in  his  vision  in  any  way?  Is  his 
hearing  impaired?  If  he  is  dull  or  inattentive,  may  it  not  be 
caused  by  failure  to  hear  the  teacher?  Dr.  Kirkpatnck  is 
authority  for  the  statement  that  "a  large  proportion  of  the 
children  classed  as  peculiar  or  inattentive  by  the  teacher, 
especially  if  they  have  a  dull  or  heavy  look,  are  usually  found 
to  be  defective  in  hearing.  .  .  .  The  moral  effects  are  often 
worse  when  children  are  defective  in  one  ear  only,  or  a  part 
of  the  time  only,  for  they  are  much  more  likely  to  be  mis- 
understood by  teachers  and  unjustly  blamed  for  not  ixiying 
attention  or  not  doing  as  directed,  since  the  teacher  knows 
that  they  have  done  better,  and  thinks  they  can  do  better 
now  if  they  will." 

Delay  and  Precocity  in  Development.  Children  cannot  be 
classified  by  a  mere  age  division.  The  city  boy  is  more  pre- 
cocious than  the  country  boy,  though  less  developed  in  body. 
Scores  of  elements  come  in  to  influence  or  retard  develop- 
ment, ])hysical  or  mental.  He  may  be  at  a  growth  period 
when  everything  is  subservient  to  the  merely  i)hysical.  Says 
Dr.  Forbush :  "This  boy  comes  of  a  slow,  stolid,  substantial 
stock  and  matures  slowly.  Here  is  one  of  a  tropical  tem- 
perament, who  is  jjrecocious.  Sickness,  lack  of  nutrition  or 
care,  an  accident,  a  sorrow,  may  have  kept  that  one  back. 
This  shows  how  necessary  it  is  to  know  the  exact  home  con- 
ditions and  the  life  history  in  order  to  know  the  boy."  ' 

The  Need  of  Sach  Work.  No  one  who  has  made  such  a 
study  of  a  child  will  ever  be  skeptical  as  to  its  value.  I  have 
known  teachers  to  take  a  new  interest  in  their  work  after 
once  they  had  bee^  led  to  get  intimately  acquainted  with 
their  pupils.  A  mere  class  of  "young-ims,"  to  be  met  and 
wrestled  with  once  a  week,  was  transformed  into  needy, 
lovalile  human  souls,  that  ap])ealed  to  all  the  mothcrhot)d 
in  the  teacher's  nature.  Freddie  is  diffident  and  woefully 
inattentive;  he  is  su])])osed  to  be  stupid;  his  former  teacher 
declares  that  it  is  useless  to  try  to  do  anything  with  him. 
But  his  stujndity  is  in  reality   due  to  defective  hearing  or 


J  The  Boy  Problciii. 


THE  PHYSICAL  BASIS  21 

other  phj^sical  cause,  often  easily  removed  by  a  physician, 
such  as  adenoids.  He  has  never  been  understood  and  has 
never  had  jiroper  symjiathy  or  training.  He  nearly  died  with 
.scarlet  fever  at  six,  and  the  attack  left  him  puny  and  nerv- 
ous. His  home  is  one  of  poverty;  the  father  is  lazy  and 
drunken  and  the  mother  with  her  six  children  is  doing  her 
best,  but  is  discouraged.  Knowing  this,  how  your  heart 
warms  up  to  the  unfortunate  little  boy !  how  different  will  be 
your  teaching  from  what  it  was  before  you  knew!  And  it 
will  be  so  v/ith  all  the  class.  Each  is  a  little  huinan  soul 
with  a  point  of  approach  that  is  easy  and  natural  if  only 
once  you  can  find  it.  It  is  only  by  knowing  all  that  one  can 
teach  jierfectly  the  things  that  are  for  the  child's  temporal 
and  eternal  good. 


CHAPTER  III 

CHILD  ACTIVITY  AXD  IMITATION 

Child  Activity.  The  most  characteristic  feature  of  child- 
hood is  its  restlessness.  The  healthy  child  is  a  miracle  of 
activity ;  one  can  never  cease  marveling  at  the  tireless  energy 
of  a  four-year-old  boy ;  he  is  never  still  a  moment  save  when 
he  is  asleep.  He  slips  rapidly  from  one  thing  to  another; 
one  can  no  more  keep  him  still  than  one  can  still  the  wind. 
He  is  incapable  of  sustained  attention;  the  world  is  a  great 
wonderland  to  him,  as  marvelous  as  that  which  Alice  entered 
through  the  rabbit  hole,  and  he  lives  in  a  state  of  continual 
excitement.  Everything  is  new  and  perfect;  marvels  so 
swarm  on  every  hand  that  he  must  jump  rapidly  from  wonder 
to  wonder.  His  feeble  power  of  sustained  attention  is  not  a 
defect;  it  is  nature's  safeguard  against  a  one-sided  develop- 
ment. The  teacher  who  compels  attention  to  books  for  long 
periods  is  working  against  nature;  he  is  making  the  child 
lopsided.  The  activities  of  child  life  should  not  be  repressed 
by  the  schoolroom,  they  should  be  directed.  The  weak  power 
of  sustained  attention  should  not  be  treated  as  a  defect,  it 
should  be  recognized  as  a  source  of  power,  and  used.  There 
should  be  frequent  changes  of  program;  the  school  should 
be  ruled  by  "Do"  rather  than  "Don't";  there  should  be 
expression  rather  than  repression.  It  is  the  work  of  the 
teacher  to  enlist  the  superabundant  activities  of  the  child  and 
turn  them  from  prankish  channels  into  useful  work.  The  old 
method  was  to  compel  order;  the  new  method  is  to  win  it. 

Lack  of  Discipline  in  any  schoolroom  is  merely  the  teacher's 
lack  of  knowledge  of  her  pupils.  If  the  school  goes  wrong, 
seek  the  cause  not  in  the  school  but  in  yourself.  Have  you 
lost  the  attention  of  the  class?  Are  the  boys  at  the  back 
sticking  pins  into  each  other  and  squabbling  over  caps.'' 
Perhai)S  you  have  been  too  long  at  one  point.  Vary  your 
program  suddenly.  Say  with  a  change  of  tone,  "I  have 
something  here  that  I  want  to  show  you."  Every  eye  will 
instantly  be  turned  in  your  direction.     Is  the  school  restless 

22 


CHILD  ACTIVITY  AND  IMITATION  23 

and  growing  unruly?  Perhaps  you  have  kept  it  sitting  still 
too  long.  Have  it  arise  for  a  motion  song  or  a  march  about 
the  room.  The  position  of  the  pupils  should  be  changed 
constantly.  At  the  repeating  of  one  verse  they  should  arise; 
for  another  exercise  they  should  face  the  rear,  then  they 
should  sit,  then  arise  and  march  about  the  room.  The 
teacher  may  sometimes  stop  with  profit  and  put  them 
through  a  short  gymnastic  exercise.  The  key  to  child  life  is 
action.  The  child  must  have  something  to  do  continually; 
he  demands  employment,  and  if  nothing  is  given  him,  he 
will  find  something  himself.  The  expert  teacher  keeps 
everyone  in  the  room  busy. 

Scolding.  Is  the  school  cross  and  incorrigible?  Examine 
yourself.  Have  you  been  cheerful  and  sunny?  Children 
reflect  the  teacher  like  a  mirror.  Have  you  been  scolding? 
That  would  be  a  great  mistake.  Scolding  does  no  good 
anywhere.  There  are  hundreds  of  ways  to  correct  and  to 
restrain  and  to  rule  children  without  scolding  them.  The 
whole  atmosphere  of  the  Sunday  school  room  should  be  one 
of  love  and  cheerfulness  and  mutual  helpfulness. 

Expert  teachers  handle  disorder  withotit  calling  attention 
to  it.  The  mischievous  boy  in  the  rear  may  be  called  out 
to  help  assist  in  the  work,  or  a  group  of  restless,  playing  ones 
may,  on  one  pretext  or  another,  be  separated  and  located 
in  other  seats,  the  teacher  meanwhile  not  changing  at  all 
the  tone  of  her  voice  and  not  interrupting  the  course  of  the 
lesson.  The  ideal  teacher  disciplines  her  school  without  its 
suspecting  her  action  for  a  moment. 

Children  Misanderstocd.  Much  that  children  are  scolded 
and  punished  for  is  not  intentional  mischief  at  all.  The 
child  who  in  her  mother's  absence  painted  the  parlor  chairs 
red  honestly  expected  to  be  praised  for  her  work.  I  have 
known  a  child  to  be  scolded  and  even  shaken  because  he 
was  sleepy  in  Sunday  school,  and  another  violently  threat- 
ened because  he  pounded  with  his  heels.  Professor  Marks 
makes  this  very  clear: 

"In  good  sooth,  many  of  the  things  we  call  'naughty'  are 
not  naughty.  Many  a  time  when  a  child  is  made  unhappy 
in  a  railroad  carriage,  to  the  discomfort  of  all  the  passengers, 
it  is  somebody  else  who  is  restless  and  fidgety  and  causes 


24  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

all  the  trouble,  not  the  child;  it  is  the  grandmother  or  mother 
who  can't  sit  still,  some  'fixed  idea'  of  childish  naughtiness 
seeming  to  haunt  her  like  an  evil  influence — a  veritable  bee 
in  the  bonnet.  Think  of  the  little  mortal,  every  nerve  in  his 
body  twitching  with  desire  for  activity — a  desire  which  he 
cannot  helj),  but  which  sim])ly  means  that  he  is  alive — his 
blood  coursing  uneasily  in  limbs  doomed  by  the  fiat  of  his 
elders  to  be  still!  Moreover,  children's  movements  are  some- 
times misvmderstood.  Some  kind  little  impulse  may  be 
swaying  the  child,  and  he  starts  to  perform  the  service. 
Small  enough  it  may  be,  perhaps,  even  mistaken;  but  it  was 
a  genuinely  good  im]>ulse,  and  the  service  the  best  the  child 
knew  how  to  render.  Especially  should  we  remember  that 
physical  movements,  something  to  be  done,  even  though  it 
may  at  times  be  contrary  to  the  present  mood  or  wish  of 
the  adult  who  is  with  the  child,  is  the  one  way  the  child  has 
of  expressing  moral  impulse.  He  has  not  yet  learned  to  talk 
his  morals;  he  can  but  try,  act,  and  make  mistakes."  ' 

Gentleness,  patience,  kindly  explanation,  tact,  and,  above 
all,  sympathy  must  he  have  who  would  mold  childhood. 
There  must  be  no  unnecessary  harshness.  The  child  that 
refrains  because  of  fear  of  a  whipping  has  not  been  morally 
benefited  at  all. 

Activity  Enlisted,  "Activity  is  the  watchword  of  modern 
pedagogy."  "Keeji  the  scholar  bu.sy  and  he  will  not  be  dis- 
orderlv."  "Young  children,"  .says  Dr.  Hall,  "cannot  exer- 
cise their  minds  to  good  effect  when  sitting  still."  How  to 
keej*  the  child  em])loycd  in  Sunday  school  is  a  question  that 
requires  much  careful  study.  Each  teacher  must  think  it 
out  in  view  of  his  own  conditions.  A  few  general  suggestions 
may  be  made,  however.  If  you  are  to  show  a  picture,  call  a 
boy  to  hold  it  before  the  class.  Vary  the  exercises  continually. 
Use  the  blackboard  con.stantly,  if  it  is  only  to  print  words  on. 
Get  a  boy  to  erase  it.  Have  it  moved  into  the  light.  Bring 
interesting  things — nests,  flowers,  pictures — and  ask  qxies- 
tions.  If  a  pupil  is  inattentive,  call  upon  him  frequently. 
Use  praise  freely.  If  there  is  disorder,  go  and  stand  by  the 
disorderly  ones,   all   the   time   continuing   the   lesson.      If   a 


»The  Teacher  and  the  Child. 


CHILD  ACTIVITY  AND  IMITATION  25 

child  must  be  dealt  with,  retain  him  after  the  class  is  dis- 
missed and  try  to  make  a  friend  of  him. 

Imitation.  This  brings  us  to  the  next  great  characteristic 
of  childhood — imitation.  The  child  is  a  mirror  held  up  for 
those  about  it  to  see  themselves.  Whatever  he  sees  he 
imitates:  the  boy  goes  to  church,  and  thereupon  plays  church 
for  a  week ;  his  father  is  a  carpenter,  and  he  must  play  build- 
ing house?;  he  imitates  a  horse,  an  engine,  an  automobile. 
There  is  also  a  reflex  imitation.  'T  once  laughed,"  says  a 
teacher,  "and  instantly  the  whole  school  laughed,  though 
they  knew  nothing  of  the  cause  of  my  laughing."  This  is  an 
exceedingly  potent  element  in  Sunday  school  work.  Like 
teacher  like  school.  The  joyous,  laughing  teacher  has  a 
cheerful,  eager  class;  the  irritable  teacher  has  a  class  that 
acts  as  she  feels.  The  best  criticism  of  one's  teaching  comes 
always  from  watching  the  inoods  mirrored  by  one's  class. 

The  Teacher  is  the  First  Lesson.  It  is  therefore  highly 
important  that  the  teacher  watch  herself.  One  has  testified 
that  after  sixty  years  he  remembers  his  first  teacher  as  the 
sweetest  and  most  beautiful  woman  of  his  whole  life;  that 
he  can  remember,  as  if  it  were  yesterday,  the  exquisite  neat- 
ness of  the  dress  she  wore  and  the  flowers  she  always  brought 
for  the  desk.  This  he  reckoned  as  one  of  the  most  potent 
influences  that  ever  totiched  his  life.  "The  first  requisite 
that  should  be  required  of  the  teacher,"  says  a  wise  observer, 
"is  that  she  should  make  herself  personally  attractive  so 
far  as  may  be  to  the  children.  The  teacher,  whether  he  will 
or  not,  is  the  first  object  lesson  the  pupil  ever  receives  in 
school."  The  children  should  never  see  their  teacher  other 
than  serene,  and  cheery,  and  radiant  with  sympathy. 

The  Reflex  of  the  Home.  The  element  of  imitation  enables 
us  to  detect  weak  places  in  the  child's  training  and  environ- 
ment. Here  is  an  example  quoted  by  Russell:  "Boy,  Irish, 
age  seven.  Stood  drinking  water  at  a  sink  with  his  back  to 
other  people.  Was  making  believe  to  be  drinking  in  a  saloon 
with  his  feet  cros.sed  and  remarking  on  the  quality  of  the 
drink  to  the  imaginary  barkeeper.  Paid  imaginary  money 
and  received  imaginary  change."  * 


'  Child  Observations. 


26  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

The  little  fellow  needed  help  such  as  only  the  most  careful 
Christian  worker  could  give.  Preaching  and  mere  precept 
would  benefit  him  very  little.  He  needed  to  be  appealed  to 
on  the  motor  side.  He  needed  better  objects  for  imitation. 
The  ideal  is  that  "the  atmosphere  of  the  child's  life  should 
be  one  of  happiness,  pleasure,  joy,  beauty,  and  occupation," 
and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Sunday  school  to  supply  these  ele- 
ments as  far  as  it  is  possible  within  the  time  given  it. 

Varieties  of  Imitation.  Those  who  have  studied  children 
have  diflercntiated  several  varieties  of  imitation  in  them,  btit 
for  our  purpose  we  need  study  only  two:  dramatic  imitation 
and  idealistic  imitation.  In  the  first  the  child  "makes  be- 
lieve" that  he  is  a  bear,  or  a  dog,  or  a  horse,  and  acts  out 
the  part  sometimes  so  intensely  as  to  forget  for  the  time  his 
own  identity.  The  teacher  may  often  direct  this  instinct 
very  profitably.  "For  example,  some  sixth-grade  children, 
who  were  taught  geography  in  such  a  way  that  with  very 
little  help  and  suggestion  they  eagerly  ])resented  in  character 
the  different  races,  in  costumes  which  they  had  made,  gained 
more  of  real  development  than  in  a  term  of  formal  meinor- 
izing."  Children  for  diversion  may  be  led  to  imagine  for  a 
moment  that  they  are  birds  and  flap  their  wings  vigorously. 
In  idealistic  imitation  the  child  tries  to  imitate  some  person 
or  act  that  has  appealed  to  him  as  peculiarly  ideal.  "A  little 
girl  of  four,"  says  Kirkpatrick,  "who  admired  a  little  girl  in 
a  story  who  always  walked  and  talked  quietly  and  nicely, 
imitated  her,  and  apparently  thought  of  her  as  an  ideal.  In 
a  similar  way  a  boy  of  three  seemed  to  have  a  pretty  good 
idea  of  'papa's  jolly  boy,'  and  sometimes  when  not  feeling 
well  made  considerable  effort  to  smile  and  look  pleasant  tin- 
der the  inspiration  of  that  ideal.  Such  idealistic  imitation 
is,  however,  largely  a  matter  of  training  till  the  teens  are 
reached."  It  is  the  privilege  of  the  Sunday  school  to  insist 
upon  high  ideals,  and  thus,  even  though  the  time  is  short, 
furnish  subjects  for  imitation  that  shall  leave  a  lasting  im- 
pression upon  the  child. 


CHAPTER  IV 
THE  PLAY  INSTINCT 

The  Nature  of  Play.  There  are  several  theories  as  to  play, 
Spencer  considered  it  simply  as  the  outlet  of  surplus  energy. 
Young  puppies  frisk  and  leap  and  chase  and  tumble  over 
each  other  in  sheer  excess  of  animal  life.  The  fountain  of 
energy  is  so  full  that  it  bubbles  over;  the  boy  must  shout  or 
he  will  burst.  But  later  investigators  have  added  to  this 
interpretation.  Play  is  instinctive  in  its  nature.  "The  form 
of  the  play  is  related  to  the  instincts  of  the  animal,"  says 
Kirkpatrick.  "In  general,  the  animal  uses  the  same  powers 
that  his  ancestors  have  used  in  gaining  food,  and  avoiding 
enemies,  and  thus  exercises  the  powers  he  will  himself  need 
to  use  when  no  longer  protected  by  paternal  care.  Each 
instinct  as  it  appears  is  thus  developed  and  perfected  by 
playful  activity  before  it  needs  to  be  tised  seriously." 

The  Play  of  Children  differs  from  that  of  the  lower  animals, 
just  as  the  child  himself  differs  from  the  animals.  The  kitten 
in  play  may  steal  softly  upon  a  bit  of  cloth,  pounce  upon  it, 
and  toss  and  worry  it  precisely  as  if  it  were  a  mouse,  but  in 
all  his  play  he  will  never  rise  one  step  above  the  small  round 
of  cat  life.  He  originates  nothing;  he  learns  nothing  from 
imitation.  But  child  play  not  only  imitates  the  manifold 
activities  of  human  life,  but  it  adapts  and  varies;  it  is  gov- 
erned by  rules;  and  it  requires  even  from  the  first  something 
of  self-control.  Starting  at  first  as  mere  activity,  it  becomes 
more  and  more  complex  until  it  shades  off  into  work  so 
naturally  that  one  may  not  detect  the  dividing  line.  The 
plays  of  boys  are  more  than  half  work.  The  children  who 
prepare  and  furnish  a  packing  box  so  that  they  may  play 
keeping  house,  or  who  construct  a  ring  and  tent  and  apparatus 
for  playing  circus  are  in  reality  working  just  as  hard  as  the 
adult  who  builds  the  "real"  house  or  makes  the  "real"  circus. 

The  Enjoyment  of  Play.  It  is  needless  to  dwell  upon  the 
universality  of  play  in  childhood  or  upon  the  zest  and  vigor 

27 


28  ELEMENTS  OE  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

with  which  every  healthy  child  abandons  himself  to  it  during 
all  of  his  waking  hours.  If  the  child  does  not  want  to  play, 
the  mother  becomes  alarmed ;  if  he  refuses  to  play,  she  thinks 
of  sending  for  the  doctor.  He  plays  everything:  now  he  is 
astride  a  stick  and  galloping  hard,  now  he  is  a  bear  roaring 
most  ferociously,  now  he  is  a  mason  building  a  tall  chimney. 
Into  it  all  he  enters  with  intense  earnestness;  nothing  in  all 
his  later  life  will  ever  be  more  real  to  him  or  be  entered  into 
with  more  intense  delight.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  getting  a 
healthy  child  to  i)lay.  To  repress  the  play  instinct  is  to  work 
against  nature,  and  to  cripple  and  to  deform  the  life. 

The  Directing  of  Play.  The  function  of  play,  then,  is  to 
prepare  the  animal  for  his  adult  activities.  He  is  serving  his 
apprenticeship;  he  is  gaining  physical  and  intellectual  control 
of  himself.  The  child  who  has  played  the  best  will  succeed 
the  most  surely  in  life.  The  boy  who  leads  on  the  playground 
may  lead  in  business  and  affairs.  The  child  should  be  allowed, 
indeed,  encouraged  to  play,  but  his  plays  should  be  carefully 
watched  and  directed.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  educa- 
tion is  merely  the  wise  direction  of  the  child's  plays.  Parents 
and  teachers,  therefore,  should  not  regard  play  as  a  necessary 
evil;  they  should  regard  it  as  a  necessity  as  much  as  food  and 
drink  and  should  ])rovide  for  it  and  cultivate  it  with  pains- 
taking care.  The  Sunday  school  teacher  should  know  what 
her  boys  and  girls  are  playing,  and  should  advise  them  and 
direct  them  in  their  games. 

Social  Plays.  Play  is  of  two  kinds:  the  solitary  and  the 
social.  In  the  former  the  child  amuse=  himself:  the  little 
girl  plays  with  her  doll;  the  little  boy  plays  with  his  "horse." 
But  it  is  incomplete  playing  unless  there  is  a  witness.  "See, 
mamma,  how  the  hossie  goes."  Children  are  by  nature  social 
in  their  instincts,  and  the  most  ideal  play  is  that  where 
several  play  together,  directed  wisely  now  and  then  by  an 
adult.  Here  we  have  the  most  potent  source  of  education. 
In  the  group  the  fittest  leads;  the  best  informed  lays  down 
the  laws.  The  boy  who  has  never  even  heard  of  a  zoological 
garden  will  have  a  lively  realization  of  one  after  a  day  of 
l)lay  with  boys  who  have  actually  visited  such  a  place,  a  far 
livelier  realization  than  could  have  come  from  any  reading 
or  descrijjtion  by  elders,  for  he  has  acted  it,  and  felt  it,  and 


THE  PLAY  INSTINCT  29 

indeed  for  a  time  has  been  it.  Thus  children  educate  each 
other,  not  through  precept  and  book,  but  through  that  most 
vital  of  all  sources  of  knowledge  and  power — actual  contact 
with  the  concrete,  observation  of  the  very  object. 

Imagination.  For  indeed  it  is  the  very  object  as  far  as 
educating  power  is  concerned.  It  is  not,  perhaps,  an  actual 
circus  that  the  boy  takes  part  in,  but  his  imagination  supplies 
all  deficiencies.  Given  a  few  lines  and  the  child  constructs 
the  picture.  To  the  boy  riding  the  broomstick  it  is  a  real 
horse  that  he  is  guiding,  to  be  governed  carefully  by  all  the 
rules  that  he  knows.  "So  vivid  is  this  early  imagination  that 
it  sometimes  interferes  with  the  conception  of  truth.  In  the 
very  early  years  of  childhood  it  is  difficult  to  say  that  a  child 
is  lying,  even  when  he  is  not  speaking  the  truth."  This  vivid 
power  of  imagination  helps  the  teacher  greatly  in  directing 
the  child's  play.  One  can  do  much  with  very  little  material 
to  work  with. 

The  Enlistment  of  Play.  And  this  brings  us  to  the  great 
practical  question  that  has  so  long  engaged  the  minds  of 
educators:  Can  we  make  use  of  this  play  instinct  in  the 
training  of  childhood?  Plato  declared  that  "Play  has  the 
mightiest  influence  on  the  maintenance  and  non-maintenance 
of  laws;  and  if  children's  plays  are  conducted  according  to 
laws  and  rules,  and  they  always  pursue  their  amusements 
in  conformity  with  order,  while  finding  pleasure  therein,  it 
need  not  be  feared  that  when  they  are  grown  up  they  will 
break  laws  whose  objects  are  more  serious."  Herbert  Spencer 
maintained  that  teaching  should  bring  pleasure.  "The 
inonotonous  drill  of  the  olden  times  was  uninteresting,  if  not 
painful.  It  implied  that  the  true  end  of  education  was  to 
reform,  to  recast  the  evil  nature  of  the  child  into  a  goodly 
mold.  The  school,  then,  became  a  place  of  torture,  and  not 
a  place  of  play." 

Frocbel.  But  the  one  whose  name  will  always  be  connected 
with  the  practical  enlistment  of  play  for  educational  ends  is 
Wilhelm  August  Froebel,  1 782-1852,  who  devoted  his  whole 
life  to  a  study  of  children  and  the  methods  of  training 
them.  It  was  Froebel's  firm  conviction  that  the  first  six  or 
seven  years  of  a  child's  life  are  all-important.  He  took  as 
his  motto,   "Come,  let  us  live  with  our  children,"  and  he 


30 


ELEMENTS  OE  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 


sought  to  direct  with  care  every  instinct  and  activity  from 
the  first.  He  dwelt  constantly  on  "the  importance  of  rightly 
comi)rehending  the  child  even  from  his  first  appearance  on 
earth  and  in  the  course  of  his  cultivation,  as  well  as  in  his 
nature  and  in  his  relations  to  his  surroundings,  especially  in 
his  relation  to  the  world  and  to  God;  and  it  is  by  no  means 
imimportant  for  parents  and  child,  and  first  of  all  for  child  and 
mother,  to  see  in  what  relation  the  child's  plaything  and  play 
appears  to  himself,  to  his  nearest  surroundings,  to  nature, 
and  to  God — to  all  life. 

"Peace  and  joy,  health  and  fullness  of  life  accrue  to  the 
child  when  his  play,  like  his  general  development,  is  in 
hannony  with  the  all-life.   .   .   . 

"It  has  indeed  been  stated,  even  at  the  beginning  of  this 
undertaking,  as  a  fundamental  truth,  that  the  plays  and 
occupations  of  children  should  by  no  means  be  treated  as 
offering  merely  means  for  passing  the  time  (we  might  say, 
for  consuming  time),  hence  only  as  outside  activity,  but 
rather  that,  by  means  of  such  plays  and  employments  the 
child's  innermost  nature  must  be  satisfied.  ...  In  the  self- 
occupation  and  play  of  the  child,  especially  in  the  first  years, 
is  formed  (in  union  with  the  surroundings  of  the  child  and 
imder  their  silent,  imremarked  influence)  not  only  the  germ, 
but  also  the  core,  of  his  whole  future  life,  in  respect  to  all 
which  we  must  recognize  as  already  contained  in  a  germ 
and  vital  center — individuality,  selfhood,  future  personality. 
From  the  first  voluntary  employment,  therefore,  proceeds  not 
merely  exercise  and  strengthening  of  the  body,  the  limbs,  and 
the  exterior  organs  of  the  senses,  but  especially  also  develop- 
ment of  the  heart  and  training  of  the  intellect,  as  well  as  the 
awakening  of  the  inner  sense  and  sotmd  judgment."^ 

The  result  of  Froebel's  studies  and  observations  was  the 
kindergarten,  whose  general  methods  and  aims  are  now  so 
Wfll  known. 

The  Kindergarten  Idea.  The  kindergarten  age  is  from 
three  to  six  or  seven.  This  is  the  object-period  in  the  child's 
life.  The  range  of  experience  is  exceedingly  narrow,  but 
every  door  stands  wide  open   and  the  world   is  enlarging 


*Pedat'Oiiics  of  the  Kindergarten. 


THE  PLAY  INSTINCT  31 

rapidly.  The  ruling  senses  now  are  touch  and  sight;  the 
child  must  handle  and  see,  and  if  there  is  color  and  motion 
he  is  all  the  more  interested.  General  precepts,  golden  texts 
— the  abstract  generally — interest  him  very  little;  they  are 
beyond  his  comprehension.  He  knows  and  can  appreciate 
only  the  concrete.  He  wants  to  play.  The  teacher  to  hold 
his  interest  must  play  with  him,  must  show  him  something 
or  do  something  or  tell  a  story  on  the  plane  of  his  experience. 
Froebel  began  by  giving  playthings,  "gifts"  he  called  them — 
first  soft  balls  of  various  colors,  then  a  cube,  and  so  on.  The 
child  while  he  played  was  taught  color  and  form  and  move- 
ment and  harmony.  He  was  given  many  little  songs  and 
exercises  all  arranged  in  the  order  of  his  development.  Many 
have  criticised  this  system,  as  expecting  too  much  of  the 
child,  and  it  is  true  that  some  of  Froebel's  followers  have 
done  ridiculous  things  in  his  name,  but  his  underlying  prin- 
ciple was  sound.     He  has  shown  the  only  logical  way. 

The  Sunday  School  Kindergarten.  Children  begin  to  come 
to  Sunday  school  at  three  and  even  before,  and  they  should 
be  encouraged  to  do  so.  What  shall  be  done  with  them? 
Between  these  "beginners"  and  the  children  between  seven 
and  nine  there  is  a  great  gulf,  how  great  only  the  experienced 
primary  worker  knows.  There  must  be  a  separation.  Shall 
we  use  Froebel's  methods,  and  play  with  "gifts,"  and  sew 
cards,  and  model  in  clay,  and  work  with  the  sand  table? 
Many  of  these  methods  are  impracticable  in  Sunday  school. 
A  kindergarten  hour  for  children  while  their  parents  were  at 
church  has  been  found  helpful;  and  a  church  kindergarten 
that  met  five  days  every  week  has  had  a  most  gratifying 
success,  but  a  distinctly  Sunday  school  kindergarten  de- 
partment has  not  yet  succeeded.  Froebel's  motto,  quoted 
above,  is  sound,  but  the  Sunday  school  can  give  them 
only  one  hour  each  week.  We  can,  however,  make  use 
of  the  kindergarten  idea.  Nature  has  commanded  that  he 
who  would  teach  children  must  appeal  to  them  as  nature 
intended.  Dr.  Haslett  has  given  as  the  object  of  the 
Beginners'  Department  of  the  Sunday  school,  first,  "A  kind, 
active,  obedient,  and  cheerful  child,"  and  second,  "A  sense 
of  God's  power,  nearness,  and  kindness."  He  declares  that 
the  media  through,  which  the  yotmg  child  can  be  reached 


32  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

are  only  six:  "Sense-perception,  memory,  imitation,  sugges- 
tion, genenil  intelligence,  and  imagination."  This  gives  at 
once  the  key.  The  Sunday  school  Beginners'  Department 
(kindergarten)  should  train  the  child  in  kindness,  activity, 
obedience,  and  cheerfulness,  and  on  the  religious  side  should 
dwell  only  on  God's  power,  nearness,  and  kindness.  Religion 
at  this  period  should  not  be  taught  in  its  doctrinal  bearings. 
It  should  be  made  a  Hving,  active,  practical  thing;  it  should 
be  the  religion  of  doing. 

Method.  Froebel  opened  and  closed  his  kindergarten  with 
prayer,  all  taking  part.  He  taught  much  through  simple 
songs.  Thus  far  we  are  on  firm  ground;  the  Sunday  school 
kindergartner's  first  duty  is  to  find  simple  prayers  to  teach 
her  class,  and  simple  little  songs  which  dwell  upon  the  power 
and  nearness  and  kindness  of  God.  As  to  the  materials  and 
objects  used  to  bring  home  lessons,  much  will  depend  upon 
the  tact  and  common  sense  of  the  teacher.  A  nest  or  a 
flower  or  a  leaf  can  be  made  to  arouse  all  the  curiosity  and 
wonder  in  a  child,  and  can  lead  him  very  near  to  the  loving 
God.  Pictures  there  should  be  in  abundance,  as  good  as  can 
be  procured,  and  there  should  be  constant  recourse  to  the 
blackboard.  Every  Sunday's  lesson  will  suggest  some  object 
to  be  brought  in — a  flower,  a  seed,  or  the  picture  of  an  animal. 
Happily  teachers  in  this  department  now  have  in  the 
new  Graded  Lessons  for  Beginners  admirable  guidance  and 
fine  illustrations  of  right  methods.  The  teacher  must  learn 
by  experience  and  must  adapt  herself  to  circumstance  and 
to  the  actual  conditions  in  her  own  class.  Book  rules  are  to 
be  studied  only  for  their  suggestiveness.  She  must  keep  her- 
self from  fads  and  hobbies  and  be  governed  by  stern  common 
sense. 

Happy,  then,  the  teacher  who  can  i)lay  with  her  scholars 
and  at  the  same  time  teach  them  eternal  truths;  happy 
the  teacher  who  can  make  work  play.  The  ideal  beginners' 
class  is  that  where  the  teacher  is  surrounded  by  a  little  circle 
of  eager  questioners  and  answerers,  who  are  learning  some- 
thing new  and  good  every  moment,  and  who  are  having  a 
good  time  because  they  are  playing  and  not  working.  This 
is  the  true  kindergarten  idea,  the  enlistment  of  play  for  the 
building  of  character. 


CHAPTER  V 
THE  STORY  AGE 

The  Child's  Imagination.  We  have  already  seen  how  the 
child's  play  is  directed  and  made  real  by  his  imagination,  so 
real  indeed  that  the  line  which  divides  fact  from  fancy  is 
often  lost  entirely.  The  child,  like  the  poet,  is  indeed  of 
imagination  all  compact.  There  are  no  such  things  as  mir- 
acles to  him,  for  in  order  to  recognize  a  miracle  one  must 
have  had  much  experience  and  must  know  the  laws  of  nature 
that  have  been  transcended.  The  child,  however,  knows 
almost  nothing  of  the  world  and  its  organization.  He  is 
surrounded  with  mysteries;  every  waking  hour  brings  some 
new  marvel.  It  is  no  more  unreasonable  to  him  that  there 
should  be  fairies,  and  Santa  Claus  with  flying  reindeer,  and 
Jack  the  Giant  Killer  with  sky-reaching  beanstalk,  than  it 
is  that  there  shoiild  be  birds  and  bears  and  a  thousand 
varieties  of  men  and  women.  The  very  little  child  believes 
everything,  and  why  should  he  not?  He  has  no  standards 
yet  of  measurement.  Everything  to  him  is  marvelous,  but 
everything  is  possible;  he  lives  in  constant  wonder  in  a 
borderland  of  mystery.  He  deals  solely  with  objects;  the 
immaterial  is  incomprehensible  to  him.  His  mind  as  yet 
can  work  only  by  making  combinations  of  what  he  has 
seen  and  heard — ^kaleidoscopic  pictures,  but  all  the  com- 
binations seem  real  to  him  however  grotesqtie  they  may  be 
to  the  mature  mind.  The  great,  shapeless  cloud  in  the  west 
is  the  giant  that  Jack  killed,  or  it  is  a  flock  of  lambs;  the 
moon  has  a  real  man  in  it,  put  there  because  he  has  been 
naughty;  snowflakes  are  caused  by  God  sweeping  heaven; 
and  toadstools  are  really  seats  for  the  toads  and  the  fairies. 

The  Realm  of  Fancy.  Children  differ  widely  in  this  power 
of  imagmation,  but  the  child  is  rare  indeed  who  does  not 
project  himself  more  or  less  into  the  realm  of  the  unreai. 
It  IS  from  this  side  of  his  nature  that  many  child  fears  arise. 
The  whistling  of  the  wind,  the  moving  of  shadows,  the  roll- 

33 


34  F.T.E:\TENTS  of  RETJGIOUS  rEDAGOGV 

in<^  f)f  dark  clcnids,  and  such  like  often  cause  real  terror. 
The  child  is  standing  j^recisely  where  the  race  once  stood. 
The  savage  is  a  child  of  fears;  his  imagination  supplies  what 
his  ignorance  cannot,  and  he  therefore  stands  in  terror  before 
many  of  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  nature.  Superstition 
IS  but  another  name  for  the  fancies  and  fears  of  the  child- 
hood of  the  race  carried  down  to  us  by  tradition.  It  is  for 
this  reason  that  the  child  absorbs  so  eagerly  all  of  his  parents' 
sujierstitions;  they  are  natural  to  his  stage  of  development 
and  they  soon  become  laws  not  to  be  questioned.  At  first 
the  child's  fancy  is  lawless  and  wild.  It  simply  interprets 
the  unknown  in  terms  of  the  little  round  of  facts  and  objects 
that  are  known,  and  the  results  are  therefore  often  startling. 
The  stars  are  the  eyes  of  angels,  the  butterfly  is  a  live  pansy, 
ice  is  water  gone  to  sleep,  rain  is  God  taking  a  shower  bath. 
Everything  is  minutely  objective;  it  is  given  local  habitation 
and  color  and  form.  In  my  childhood  every  story  that  I 
read  was  located  in  actual  jjlaces  about  my  home,  and  the 
characters  were  real  per.sons  whom  I  knew. 

As  the  child  grows  older  his  imagination  becomes  more 
and  more  orderly  and  creative.  He  now  indulges  in  day- 
dreams. He  is  himself  Robinson  Crusoe  on  a  desert  island, 
or  Alice  in  Wonderland,  or  Cinderella  surrounded  by  fairy 
godmothers  and  princes  and  enchanters. 

The  Story  "World,  This  power  of  childhood  to  ])roject  itself 
with  reality  into  the  realm  of  the  unreal  has  produced  much 
of  the  world's  poetry  and  romance.  Myth  and  folklore 
beUjng  to  the  childhood  of  races,  as  does  al.so  much  of  poetry. 
"The  light  that  never  was  on  .sea  or  land"  is  the  natural 
atmosjihere  of  childhood.  Every  child  is  measurably  a  poet; 
he  sees  things  with  poetic  eyes.  "If  we  let  the  child  alone," 
says  Compayrd,  "and  if  education  did  not  come  in  to  put 
reason  into  his  fancies,  we  should  see  him  creating  a  new 
and  com])lete  mythology."  But  the  child  is  not  let  alone, 
and  for  that  reason  his  actual  creation  of  fanciful  things 
ceases  early,  but  not  so  his  intense  enjoyment  of  the  mj^ths 
and  marvels  created  by  others.  "Childhood,"  declares  E. 
1^.  Bryan,  "is  the  time  to  use  myth  and  narrative  history. 
.  .  .  Myth  offers  a  splendid  oi)])ortuntty  to  introduce  the 
child  to  many  of  the  f(jrces  and  passions,  hopes  and  fears, 


THE  STORY  AGE  35 

victories  and  defeats  that  have  made  the  world  what  it  is." 
Childhood,  then,  whether  it  be  of  a  race  or  of  an  individual, 
is  the  story  age,  the  period  when  fancy  dominates  reason. 
The  imagination  in  this  golden  time  plays  with  iridescent 
hues  about  every  episode,  and  then  adds  it  with  vivid  dis- 
tinctness to  the  gallery  of  memory.  The  story  thus  becomes 
one  of  the  most  important  aids  in  the  education  of  children. 

Teaching  by  Stories.  The  theory  that  the  child  repeats 
during  his  development  all  the  various  stages  in  the  evolution 
of  the  race  is  now  generally  admitted,  and  as  a  result  the 
courses  in  the  public  schools  have  of  late  years  been  much 
modified.  If  we  are  to  follow  the  paths  laid  out  by  nature, 
we  shall  educate  the  young  child  largely  through  the  imagina- 
tion by  means  of  carefully  selected  story  material.  More 
and  more  are  intelligent  school  boards  introducing  myth 
and  folklore  into  the  primary  courses.  It  is  the  natural 
food  for  infancy.  Nothing  else  so  gains  the  attention  of  the 
child.  During  the  story  hour  the  discipline  of  the  school 
maintains  itself;  the  hearers  hang  breathless  upon  the  words 
of  the  teacher,  and  the  impression  made  is  deep  and  lasting. 
The  story  enlarges  the  child's  world;  it  gives  new  images  for 
his  fancy;  it  is  realistic — a  section  from  life  dealt  with  ob- 
jectively; it  presents  wholes  and  not  unrelated  parts;  it 
goes  directly  home;  and  if  it  has  been  well  chosen  it  em- 
phasizes some  high  ideal.  It  was  the  favorite  method  of 
Jesus,  the  greatest  teacher  who  ever  lived.  His  discourses 
were  made  up  almost  wholly  of  simple  stories;  the  prodigal 
son,  the  man  who  went  on  a  journey,  the  good  Samaritan, 
are  perfect  stories,  judge  them  by  whatever  laws  you  may. 
There  is  very  little  of  comment  or  of  moralizing  attached  to 
them,  but  they  were  listened  to  eagerly,  they  were  under- 
stood, and  they  carried  their  moral  lessons.  The  primary 
teacher  of  to-day  can  do  no  better  than  to  study  the  stories 
of  Jesiis. 

"With  the  Beginners'  Department  of  the  Sunday  school  the 
story  is  all-important.  One  can  do  little  with  any  other 
method.  The  memorizing  of  unrelated  texts  which  the 
children  do  not  understand  is  pernicious  in  the  extreme. 
Expounding  or  moralizing  to  young  children  is  waste  of 
time;  the  story  indeed  is  the  only  avenue  of  approach  through 


36  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

which  truth  can  be  brought  with  any  degree  of  accuracy  to 
their  minds. 

The  stories  best  adapted  for  teUing  to  children  under  six 
are  those  which  have  to  do  with  infancy  and  early  life,  such 
as  stories  of  the  child  Jesus,  the  baby  Moses,  Jesus  blessing 
little  children,  the  boy  Jesus  in  the  temple,  the  boy  Samuel, 
the  boyhood  of  Joseph,  and  the  youth  of  David. 

Old  Testament  Stories.  Fortunately,  the  question  as  to 
what  stories  to  tell  need  never  trouble  the  Sunday  school 
teacher.  In  the  Bible  we  have  the  most  wonderful  storehotise 
of  effective  stories  to  be  found  in  the  whole  literature  of  the 
world.  Secular  writings  have  been  ransacked  in  vain  to 
find  for  the  public  schools  anything  which  is  better.  The 
narratives  of  the  Old  Testament  are  peculiarly  fitted  for 
childhood;  they  have  the  mythlike  element  and  even  the 
folklore  which  childhood  can  so  easily  appreciate.  The  child 
is  interested  chiefly  in  life — most  of  all  human  life  presented 
objectively.  He  follows  with  absorbed  interest  the  adven- 
tures of  others,  and  as  he  grows  older  he  projects  himself 
into  the  lives  of  those  about  whom  he  reads  or  hears.  Hence 
his  stories  must  be  carefully  chosen;  they  will  color  his  life. 
Dr.  Dawson  has  summed  the  matter  up  in  this  way : 

"The  Old  Testament  abounds  with  spectacular  scenes, 
such  as  the  fight  between  David  and  Goliath,  and  Daniel  in 
the  lion's  den;  thrilling  stories,  such  as  those  associated  with 
the  lives  of  Moses  and  Joseph;  and  heroic  characters,  such  as 
Abraham  and  David.  There  is  throughout  a  combination  of 
scenic  splendor,  striking  episodes,  and  unique  personalities 
that  im])resses  the  senses  most  vividly  and  appeals  to  the 
love  of  dramatic  action.  The  method  is  that  of  the  primitive 
mind,  which  seizes  upon  the  sensuous  and  the  drainatic, 
rather  than  the  rational  and  reflective  elements  of  life  and 
religion.  Here,  therefore,  we  find  a  parallelism  between  the 
development  of  the  child  and  the  development  of  the  Bible." 

Simply  to  mention  the  leading  characters  of  the  Bible  is 
to  call  to  mind  stories  of  absorbing  interest:  Esther,  Rtith, 
Peter,  Paul  in  shipwreck  and  prison,  Elijah,  John  the  Bap- 
tist, Solomon,  Noah — no  other  teacher  has  such  a  fascinating 
treasure-house  to  draw  upon  as  he  who  unfolds  the  Word  of 
God.      The   primary    department    should    have    the    simple 


THE  STORY  AGE  Z7 

biographies  of  these  Old  Testament  worthies  told  as  interest- 
ingly as  possible;  the  preadolescent  classes  should  be  given 
the  adventure  and  the  heroism  stories,  but  from  a  little  before 
the  age  of  thirteen  on  until  the  dawn  of  maturity  the  utmost 
emphasis  should  be  placed  upon  those  stories  of  love,  of 
sacrifice,  of  divine  heroism,  of  temptation  resisted  through 
inward  power,  which  are  the  soul  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  stories  of  the  earlier  periods  are  but  preparatory  to  this 
culminating  era  ^'n  the  child's  moral  life. 

Stories  Enlarge  the  Child's  Moral  Horizon.  The  story 
takes  the  child  into  the  lives  of  others;  it  teaches  him  to  see 
life  from  another  person's  standpoint.  The  boy,  for  instance, 
who  has  read  any  of  Thompson-Seton's  stories  will  be  less 
cruel  to  the  smaller  animals.  He  has  seen  life  from  their 
point  of  view.  It  is  only  by  using  the  imagination  rightly 
that  one  learns  unselfishness.  Then,  again,  from  carefully 
presented  story  material  comes  reverence — a  thing  that 
seems  woefully  neglected  in  these  latter  days — respect  for 
law,  for  the  aged,  for  the  noble,  and  for  the  good.  If  the 
child  is  told  rightly  the  old  Bible  stories,  and  is  told  them 
often  enough,  he  cannot  fail  to  reach  in  time  the  very  highest 
levels  of  loyalty  and  love  and  reverence. 

"To  any  children  brought  up  in  the  atmosphere  of  such 
stories  as  the  Round  Table  legends,  or  Scott's  novels  or 
poetry,  the  word  'loyalty'  does  not  have  to  be  explained.  A 
train  of  pages,  squires,  knights,  and  nobles  honoring  their 
king  makes  a  vivid  picture  full  of  life  and  color  that  glow 
in  Abbey's  frescoes  of  the  Holy  Grail.  .  .  .  Children  love 
stories,  and  there  are  just  as  many  stories  of  loyalty  as  there 
are  heroes,  martyrs,  and  saints  in  history — inen  who  first 
grasped  the  idea  of  allegiance  to  some  large  truth,  having 
recognized  this  truth  in  its  relation,  and  by  symjjathetic 
understanding  have  entered  into  the  spirit  of  this  truth  to 
hold  it  sacred  and,  if  necessary,  die  for  it."' 

The  child  who  has  appreciated  aright  the  call  of  Samuel, 
the  bravery  of  David,  the  fearlessness  of  Daniel,  the  loyalty 
of  Jonathan,  has  received  ideals  that  must  inevitably  have 
some  bearing  upon  the  formation  of  his  character. 


>  Louisa  Lane  McCrady. 


38  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

The  Art  of  Story-Telling  at  its  best  is  indeed  rare.  Not 
all  can  present  a  story  to  children  so  that  it  will  not  fall 
either  below  them  or  above  them,  but  the  fruits  which  faith- 
ful effort  may  bear  make  it  richly  worth  the  while  to  try  to 
learn.  The  story  should  be  made  very  much  of  in  Sunday 
school  teaching,  especially  with  the  younger  classes.  There 
is  no  more  inspiring  scene  anywhere  than  a  little  circle  of 
learners,  their  heads  close  to  their  teacher's,  listening  with 
all  their  souls  to  one  of  the  old  stories  of  lofty  ideals  from 
the  pages  of  the  Bible.    To  quote  again  from  Dr.  Hall : 

"I  plead  for  a  new  {profession — that  of  the  story-teller 
in  the  Sunday  school,  who  has  j^racticed  on  the  standard 
tales,  told  them  to  various  grades,  and  had  them  told  back 
again,  until  they  are  as  well  developed  in  his  or  her  mind  as 
the  role  of  an  actor  in  a  play  with  a  long  run,  who  never 
loses  rapport  for  an  instant  with  his  audience  and  can  pre- 
estimate  the  value  of  every  point  or  even  'gag*  in  it.  Can 
we  not  have  in  the  Sunday  school  these  Bible  bards,  though 
each  have  only  a  small  kit  of  stories,  which  they  can  tell 
from  long  practice  better  than  anyone  else?  Rein  makes, 
I  think,  thirty-six  Old  Testament  stories  about  which  he 
would  have  the  third  year  of  secular  school  life  focus.  Others 
make  many  more.  The  best  test  I  know  of  in  the  teacher  of 
young  children  is  a  power  thus  to  catch  and  hold  the  atten- 
tion of  her  restless  group,  well  compared  to  scores  of  corks 
in  a  wash  tub  to  be  kept  under  water  by  a  teacher  who  has 
but  ten  fingers.  A  good  narrator  can  do  almost  anything 
with  children.  He  can  repeat  the  magic  of  the  Pied  Piper 
of  Hamelin,  who  charmed  them  all  from  their  homes  by  the 
incantation  of  his  magic  flute.  Such  a  teacher  has  recovered 
for  a  world  to  which  it  was  lost  the  true  pipe  of  Pan."' 


*Tlm  Sunday  School  and  Bible  Teaching. 


CHAPTER  VI 
THE  CHILD'S  STANDPOINT 

The  Plane  of  the  Learner.  Dr.  Gregory,  in  his  admirable 
book,  The  Seven  Laws  of  Teaching,  gives  as  his  third  and 
fourth  laws,  "The  langtiage  used  in  teaching  must  be  com- 
mon to  teacher  and  learner,"  and  "The  truth  to  be  taught 
must  be  learned  through  truth  already  known."  In  other 
words,  we  must  adapt  ourselves  to  the  one  taught;  we  must 
not  work  above  the  plane  of  his  experience  and  attainments 
— "we  must  begin  where  we  find  the  child."  This  seems 
axiomatic  and  easy,  yet  nothing  in  the  teacher's  art  is  more 
difficult.  How  are  we  to  put  ourselves  in  the  child's  place 
and  look  at  the  lesson  through  his  eyes?  To  succeed  per- 
fectly is  to  be  a  Froebel  or  a  Pestalozzi.  The  child  is  limited 
on  every  side — vocabulary,  experience,  knowledge  of  things, 
thinking  capacity,  power  to  deal  with  anything  at  all  ab- 
stract. How  are  we  to  know  when  we  are  on  the  plane  of 
his  powers  and  attainments?  He  may  look  intelligent  as  we 
explain,  he  may  follow  with  seeming  eagerness,  he  may 
nod  when  asked  if  he  imderstands,  and  yet  he  may  not  have 
caught  a  single  idea  that  was  intended.  A  knowledge  of  tlie 
child's  capacities  comes  only  through  actual  study  of  chil- 
dren, through  long  experience,  through  careful  watching  of 
individuals. 

Saxon  "Words  and  Latin  "Words.  To  be  on  the  same  plane 
as  the  child  one  must  first  use  the  language  that  is  "common 
to  teacher  and  learner."  The  child's  vocabulary  is  largely 
Saxon.  It  is  well  known  to  all  that  the  English  language 
contains  two  principal  elements — the  siinple,  original  Saxon 
and  the  more  learned  Latin  that  came  in  after  the  Norman 
Conquest.  During  the  two  or  three  centuries  when  the 
two  languages  were  blending  into  one,  the  Saxons  were 
largely  uneducated  peasantry,  and  the  Normans  were  the 
ruling  class — the  statesmen  and  lawyers  and  x^riests.  Hence 
the  language  of  the  humble  home,  of  the  farm,  of  the  shop, 

39 


40  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

and  of  common  life  generally,  is  to  this  day  prevailingly 
Saxon,  and  the  language  of  thought,  of  scholarship,  of  the 
professions,  of  the  church,  is  full  of  the  long  Latin  derivatives. 
The  language  of  the  child  is  almost  exclusively  Saxon.  The 
objects  about  the  home  and  the  nursery,  the  few  simple 
nouns  and  verbs  and  adjectives  and  connecting  words  that 
are  needed  about  the  fireside,  have  come  down  almost  all  of 
them  from  the  Saxon  peasant.  It  is  only  as  the  child  gains 
in  education  and  in  inental  power  that  he  acquires  the  other 
element.  The  language  of  the  church  is  saturated  with 
Latin.  Imagine  children  under  ten  listening  to  the  average 
sermon — atonement,  intercession,  holiness,  charity,  reverence, 
justification,  transgressor,  reconciled,  righteousness — no  won- 
der many  children  detest  preaching.  What  will  the  primary 
class  get  from  even  such  simple  texts  as  these:  "The  just 
shall  live  by  faith,"  "Whosoever  shall  exalt  himself 
shall  be  abased,"  "An  inheritance  incorruptible  and 
undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away"?  He  who  would  teach 
children  in  the  Sunday  school  must  strip  himself  of  his 
churchly  vocabulary  and  come  down  to  the  simple  Saxon 
of  the  home  and  the  fireside. 

The  Child's  Vocabulary.  Many  studies  have  been  made 
to  determine  the  extent  of  the  vocabularies  of  children,  and 
the  conclusions  reached  have  varied  all  the  way  from  the 
statement  of  Dr.  Laurie  that  the  child  of  eight  uses  in  ordi- 
nary conversation  not  more  than  150  words,  to  that  of  Mr. 
Salisbury,  who  found  a  boy  of  five  and  one  half  years  with  a 
vocabulary  of  1,528  words.  Such  studies  are  not  of  much 
jiractical  value,  but  many  of  them  are  suggestive.  For  in- 
stance, the  vocabularies  of  the  three  children  of  Professor 
West,  given  entire  in  The  Pedagogical  Seminary  (vol.  ix), 
are  found  to  be  composed  of  60  per  cent  of  nouns  and  20 
])er  cent  of  simple  verbs,  with  practically  no  Latin  deriva- 
tives. It  is  useless,  however,  to  generalize  about  such  mat- 
ters. The  vocabulary  depends  largely  on  the  home  and  the 
mother.  Then,  too,  it  does  not  always  follow  that  because 
a  child  uses  a  certain  word  correctly  he  therefore  understands 
it.  It  is  safe  to  say  only  that  the  average  child's  vocabulary 
is  small;  that  it  is  comjjosed  almost  wholly  of  those  simple, 
concrete  objects  and  actions  that  make  up  the  narrow  world 


THE  CHILD'S  STANDPOINT  41 

of  childhood,  and  that  the  abstract,  that  is,  the  mental  and 
spiritual,  will  be  almost  entirely  wanting.  Failure  to  appre- 
ciate this  has  been  one  of  the  greatest  faults  of  the  primary 
teaching  of  the  past.  The  grotesque  misconceptions  brought 
by  children  from  Sunday  school  have  furnished  amusement 
in  many  a  home.  One  little  fellow  reported  that  his  class  had 
sung  "Bringing  in  the  Sheets."  "O,  no,"  expostulated  his 
mother,  "it  was  sheaves."  "  'Deed  it  wasn't;  it  was  'Bringing 
in  the  Sheets.'  They  sewed  in  the  morning  and  they  sewed 
at  noon  and  they  brought  in  the  sheets  at  night."  Miss 
Baldwin  tells  of  a  child  who  with  perfect  simplicity  sang, 
"When  we  come  from  Jersey,  bringing  in  the  thieves." 
Another  little  boy  when  asked  the  Golden  Text  replied, 
"He  that  bumbles  himself  shall  be  a  halter." 

From  the  Known  to  the  Unknown.  Not  only  must  we 
adapt  ourselves  to  the  child's  vocabulary  but  we  must  con- 
sider carefully  the  plane  of  his  experience.  Truth  can  be 
acquired  only  through  truth  already  attained.  We  proceed 
always  from  the  known  to  the  unknown.  It  is  useless  to 
attempt  to  draw  lessons  from  material  about  which  the 
learner  knows  nothing.  If  the  child  has  no  knowledge  of 
the  processes  of  agriculture,  the  moral  of  the  parable  of  the 
sower  will  be  wholly  lost  upon  him.  The  lesson  must  be 
interpreted  into  images  and  ideas  taken  from  his  own  ex- 
perience. Jesus  in  his  parables  never  once  arose  above  the 
plane  of  his  hearers.  He  taught  them  the  truth  about  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  in  terms  of  sheep,  wheat,  tares,  house- 
holders, vineyards,  vines,  branches,  wedding  feasts,  wine 
in  old  bottles,  pearls,  and  such  common  things.  There  is  no 
other  way  to  teach.  First,  know  your  pupils,  find  common 
ground,  then  present  the  new  in  terms  of  the  old. 

The  Child's  World.  Only  those  who  have  investigated  the 
matter  can  appreciate  how  small  the  child's  world  is.  Dr. 
Hall  some  years  ago  conducted  a  series  of  experiments  with 
Boston  school  children  of  about  the  age  of  six.  His  report 
is  most  suggestive.  Thirty-five  per  cent  had  never  seen  the 
country;  47  per  cent  had  never  seen  a  pig;  18  per  cent  thought 
a  cow  was  no  larger  than  its  picture;  20  per  cent  did  not  know 
where  milk  came  from;  55  per  cent  did  not  know  that  wooden 
things  are  made  from  trees;  very  many  had  not  seen  any  of 


42  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  TEDAGOGY 

the  various  classes  of  laborers  at  work,  or  j^rain  growing; 
13  per  cent  did  not  even  know  their  cheek,  and  jaw,  and 
throat.  The  country  child's  range  of  experience  necessarily 
will  be  very  different  from  that  of  these  city  children,  but 
the  gai^s  in  his  round  of  experience  will  be  none  the  less 
wide.  The  experienced  teacher  must  therefore  continually 
be  asking  her  class  questions  beginning  with   "How  many 

of  j'^ou  have  ever ?"      She  must  scrutinize  every  word 

and  idea  from  the  standpoint  of  the  little  minds  that  are  to 
receive  it.  At  this  point  mitch  of  the  blackboard  work  in- 
troduced into  priinary  classes  should  be  condemned.  Lesson 
"helps"  of  the  past  have  furnished  many  elaborate  diagrams 
composed  of  crosses,  crowns,  hearts,  ladders,  stars,  doves, 
and  towers  with  alliterative  words  and  rebuslike  combina- 
tions. I  have  sometimes  wished  that  for  a  moment  I  might 
V)ecome  literally  a  child  again  and  view  these  elaborations 
with  the  child's  eye;  they  would  become,  I  am  sure,  intricate 
combinations  of  color  and  object  that  could  be  interpreted 
by  nothing  in  the  content  of  my  experience.  But  by  intelli- 
gent symjjathy  and  constant  observation  any  teacher  may 
soon  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  projecting  facts  in  the 
"world"  of  the  children  she  loves;  and  she  should  use  these 
— all  of  them:  spoons,  corks,  medicine,  buttons,  pinpricks, 
books,  slates,  dolls — to  help  them  in  their  thinking  and  their 
loving,  as  the  Master  tised  the  terms  familiar  to  his  hearers. 
The  Difficulty  of  Adaptation.  There  is  even  more  danger 
of  the  misuse  of  material  than  there  is  of  the  misuse  of  words. 
We  feel  instinctively  that  hard  words  will  not  do  for  children, 
and  half,  automatically  we  avoid  them,  but  the  round  of  life 
with  its  common  objects  and  activities  has  become  so  ele- 
mentary to  us  that  we  are  always  forgetting  ourselves  before 
the  children.  It  is  indeed  a  rare  soul  who  can  make  himself 
as  a  little  child,  who  can  see  the  lesson  from  the  child's 
stand] )oint,  and  who  can  begin  with  the  images  and  ideas  in 
the  child's  mind  and  lead  up  to  new  images  and  ideas  at  a 
higher  level.  We  must  remember  always  that  the  only  things 
the  child  vitally  knows  he  knows  through  his  experiences; 
only  by  starting  on  the  plane  of  the  child's  actual  life  can  we 
giiide  him  into  an  understanding  of  new  truth.  To  do  this 
is  indeed  to  educate  in  the  noblest  way. 


THE  CHILD'S  STANDPOINT  43 

Below  the  Child's  Level.  It  is  as  harmful  to  be  too  ele- 
mentary with  the  child  as  it  is  to  be  too  abstruse.  Children 
above  the  age  of  seven  or  eight  will  not  be  patronized.  It 
is  here  that  many  preachers  fail  in  their  sermons  to  children; 
they  insult  the  child's  intelligence.  The  experience  of  a 
certain  teacher  who  had  been  impressed  with  the  limited 
world  of  childhood  and  who  had  begun  to  teach  a  class  of 
boys  as  if  they  were  infants  is  typical.  "Chestnuts!"  piped  a 
voice,  and  there  was  bedlam  at  once.  The  teacher,  however, 
saved  the  day  by  pulling  from  his  pocket  a  chestnut  that  a 
kind  Providence  had  placed  there,  and,  with  what  was  well- 
nigh  genius,  proceeded  to  establish  a  point  of  contact  with 
it,  by  asking  how  it  grew,  etc.  No  pupils  in  the  Sunday  school 
resent  patronage  more  than  do  boys  and  girls  from  nine  to 
twelve — where  the  whole  nature  is  filled  with  an  intense 
admiration  for  adult  life  and  a  desire  to  be  considered 
"grown-up." 

Some  Final  Suggestions.  Study,  then,  your  pupil  and 
learn  the  extent  of  his  vocabulary  and,  as  far  as  possible, 
the  content  of  his  mind.  Express  your  thoughts  when  you 
can  in  his  own  words.  Be  simple  and  natural.  Avoid  all 
Bil)le  figures  of  speech  that  are  expressed  in  images  foreign 
to  the  child's  world,  and  it  is  not  always  safe  to  vise  them 
even  when  every  image  is  perfectly  simple.  Heaping  coals 
of  fire  on  an  enemy's  head  has  but  one  meaning  to  child- 
hood. Use  short,  uninvolved  sentences  with  Saxon  words 
as  far  as  is  possible,  and  if  not  instantly  understood  repeat 
in  another  way.  When  it  is  practicable  supplement  the  story 
with  good  pictures,  iet  the  work  be  cumulative;  build  on 
last  Sunday's  lesson.  Break  away  from  text-book  and  lesson 
leaf  and  adapt  the  work  directly  to  the  individual  child, 
interpreting  it  in  images  which  he  knows.  Make  him  restate 
it  in  his  own  words.  Review,  and  evermore  review.  Finally, 
keep  on  the  plane  of  the  learner:  descend  not  below  it,  lest 
you  insult  his  intelligence:  work  not  above  it,  lest  you 
throw  your  labor  away 


CHAPTER  VII 

IXDI VI  DUALITY 

The  Dangers  of  Generalization.  At  this  point  it  is  well, 
perhaps,  to  pause  a  moment  and  consider  a  real  source  of 
danger  to  the  young  teacher.  It  is  fatally  easy  to  generalize 
and  lay  down  sweeping  laws.  Pedagogical  books  and  maga- 
zines are  liable  to  create  in  the  mind  of  the  beginner  the 
impression  that  the  child  can  be  analyzed  and  classified 
and  tabulated  like  a  flower  by  a  botanist;  that  all  children 
pass  through  certain  well-defined  stages,  have  certain  in- 
stincts, manifest  certain  survivals  of  primitive  characteris- 
tics, and  so  on.  One  must,  however,  work  with  caution. 
"The  pedagogic  phantom  called  'the  child'  "  may  be  real 
if  one  works  by  averages;  but  if  one  teaches  an  actual  class 
of  actual  children  he  will  find  himself  at  once  in  the  presence 
of  concrete  individuals,  each  of  which  seems  to  be  an  excep- 
tion to  all  laws.  The  voice  of  experience  is  always  cautious. 
"Twenty  years  of  more  or  less  constant  companionshiji  with 
children,"  writes  a  very  successful  worker,  "have  made  me 
realize  that  their  widely  differing  natures  are  not  easy  to 
understand,  and  that  generalizations  about  their  training 
and  growth  are  not  likely  to  be  of  practical  value;  but  so 
many  years  of  wonderful  friendship  make  me  watch  each 
new  child  with  the  interest  one  feels  in  the  well-known  char- 
acters of  a  familiar  story.  The  child  life  repeats  itself,  only 
with  the  changes  that  come  from  changed  conditions  and 
surroundings."  A  study  of  the  great  laws  of  childhood  is  of 
the  greatest  value,  nay,  it  is  imperative  if  one  is  to  become 
a  well-equipped  teacher;  but  one  must  guard  himself  against 
becoming  a  mere  theorist  or  gaining  the  imjjression  that 
teaching  may  be  reduced  to  a  matter  of  formulas.  Child 
study  from  books  is  valuable,  but  it  is  only  to  be  used  as  an 
introduction  to  the  actual  contact  with  actual  children. 
Knowing  the  characteristics  of  the  average  child,  one  is 
prepared  tu  deal  intelligently  with  tlic  iiuli\idual. 

44 


INDIVIDUALITY  45 

Exceptions  fo  the  Rule,  For  instance,  we  shall  later  show 
how  childhood  falls  into  certain  periods,  each  with  its  own 
characteristics,  but  it  must  constantly  be  remembered  that 
there  are  as  yet  no  absolute  laws  concerning  the  matter.  Says 
Dr.  Ellis,  one  of  the  most  careful  of  child  observers:  "There 
can  be  found  no  hard-and-fast  lines  in  these  stages  of  develop- 
ment; organisms  do  not  grow  in  that  way.  A  certain  child 
may  be  partly  in  two  or  three  of  these  stages  at  one  time, 
skip  some  of  them,  even  take  others  backward,  or  vary  the 
sequence  in  many  ways;  yet  this  is  the  nearest  we  can  now 
get  to  the  normal  order  of  development  of  a  child.  We 
need  more  and  better  study  of  children." 

The  Individaal  Child.  For  the  Sunday  school  teacher, 
however,  the  way  is  clear.  He  is  to  focus  himself  upon  the 
individual  child,  not  upon  the  child  in  the  abstract.  He  is  to 
totich  and  influence  the  individual  soul,  and  not  simply  to 
stand  before  the  mass  and  "shoot  truth  into  it  at  long  range, 
never  knowing  or  seeing  the  unit."  Each  pupil  is  to  be  a 
problem  by  himself.  A  group  of  children  is  not  like  a  flock 
of  sparrows,  each  member  of  which  is  precisely  like  all  the 
others.  The  individual  child  is  unique;  he  has  that  inde- 
finable something  that  we  call  personality ;  he  is  not  like  even 
his  own  twin  brother.  That  two  boys  are  each  ten  years 
old  does  not  necessarily  associate  thein  together.  One  of  them 
may  be  morbidly  self-conscious,  the  other  may  be  totally 
self-unconscious;  one  may  be  quiet  and  dreamy,  the  other 
headlong  and  boisterous;  one  may  spend  every  possible 
moment  in  reading,  the  other  may  detest  books.  Children 
may  be  of  the  same  age,  yet  may  be  years  apart  in  their 
powers  to  grasp  moral  lessons,  and,  indeed,  in  all  of  their 
capacities.     Hence  the  need  of  personal  adaptation. 

Types  of  Children.  To  some  teachers  there  are  only  two 
tyjies  of  children:  the  good  and  the  bad;  to  others  there  are 
three:  the  stupid,  the  inattentive,  and  the  mischievous.  The 
classifications,  indeed,  are  almost  as  many  as  the  classifiers. 

Were  it  not  for  this  dissimilarity  in  individuals  a  class  of 
twenty  learning  like  one  would  be  the  usual  thing.  But  there 
are  bright;  alert  pupils  on  one  end,  and  stupid,  sleepy  ones 
on  the  other,  and  inattentive  ones  between.  Shall  the  class 
keep  at  the  pace  of  the  slowest?     If  so,  the  bright  ones  are 


46  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

invited  to  mischief.  But  can  we  neglect  the  slow  ones? 
"Strike  an  average,"  says  the  wise  teacher;  but  that  is  not 
an  easy  thing  to  do.  "The  ideal  of  class  management,"  says 
one,  "and  of  collective  teaching  is  to  use  the  stronger  pupils 
to  help  the  weaker,"  but  this  must  be  done  with  tact.  There 
are  other  elements.  There  is  the  timid  child,  the  bashful 
child,  the  self-conscious  child,  the  awkward  child.  There  is 
the  boy  who  is  "smart,"  the  boy  who  poses  as  a  wag,  the  boy 
who  "shows  oflf."  There  is  the  perverse  type  and  the  sullen 
type,  the  asker  of  irrelevant  questions  and  the  voluble  talker 
whose  tongue  seems  to  be  set  on  a  hair  trigger.  There  is  the 
bashful  country  child  and  the  glib  city  child.  There  is  the 
girl  with  her  "chum,"  the  girl  with  her  new  ring,  and  the  girl 
who  giggles  and  cannot  stop.  And  all  these  may  be  in  the 
same  class.  "Child  study"  learned  from  a  book  begins  to 
seem  like  a  broken  reed  to  the  new  teacher.  He  is  in  the 
presence  of  the  concrete  individual,  and  not  of  that  shadowy 
phantom  "the  child,"  and  he  must  fall  back  upon  his  own 
resources.  His  success  will  depend  largely  upon  himself  and 
his  own  observations. 

The  Small  Class.  It  is  on  this  account  that  the  small  class 
is  of  such  importance.  Children  must  be  taught  not  in  large 
masses  but  individually,  so  as  to  take  advantage  of  per-, 
sonality  and  type  peculiarity.  The  Primary  Department 
is  to  be  divided  into  sections  of  about  six,  and  each  section 
'"s  to  be  given  to  an  individual  teacher.  In  no  other  way  can 
the  pupil  be  adequately  reached.  The  teacher  of  such  a 
division  can  know  each  of  her  six  like  a  mother.  She  can 
visit  them  in  their  homes,  learn  their  life,  talk  with  their 
teacher  in  the  public  school,  get  acquainted  with  their 
enthusiasms,  and  can  adapt  herself  as  she  could  under  no 
other  conditions.  Most  classes  are  too  large.  When  they 
are  all  together  there  is  present  a  mass  spirit  that  is  not 
to  be  fotmd  in  any  one  of  the  individuals  when  alone. 
One  practical  teacher  observed  that  when  he  had  ten  boys 
in  his  class  he  could  not  get  one  of  them  to  answer  a  question 
properly,  but  when  only  two  were  present  they  entered  en- 
thusiastically into  the  sjiirit  of  the  lesson.  Boys  especially 
are  afraid  of  each  other;  they  are  afraid  some  one  will  laugh 
and  taunt  them  when  they  get  outside.     The  best  way  to 


INDIVIDUALITY  47 

counteract  this  is  to  make  the  class  small.  Each  member 
must  be  studied  personally.  It  is  not  for  the  teacher  to  cram 
education  into  their  heads,  but  to  start  correct  habits  of 
doing  and  thinking.  Here  is  a  child  who  needs  most  of 
all  proper  supervision  of  his  reading;  here  is  another  who 
needs  sympathy;  here  is  still  another  who  must  be  taught 
lessons  to  counteract  his  cruelty  or  irregularity  or  heedless- 
ness. We  are  to  take  the  personality  of  the  child  and  direct 
it  aright.  If  a  boy  in  a  whole  year  learns  nothing  save  that 
the  Sunday  school  is  the  place  for  clean  hands,  the  year  has 
done  some  good.  With  the  small  class  the  teacher  can  suit 
every  word  to  the  need  of  the  individual.  He  can  enter 
into  the  very  life  of  his  pu])il.  Two  little  girls  may  be 
"chums,"  the  boy  may  be  making  a  collection  of  stamps, 
another  may  have  parents  who  would  be  glad  to  cooperate, 
the  little  girl  may  have  a  new  doll  that  is  to  her  as  her  very 
soul,  there  may  be  a  new  baby  brother,  or  God  may  have 
entered  the  home  and  taken  the  baby  away,  and  the  little 
heart  may  be  breaking.  The  teacher  of  thirty  children  could 
not  know  these  things,  but  the  teacher  of  six  knows  them 
and  she  uses  her  opportunity.  And  the  results  of  such  heart- 
to-heart  teaching  who  may  estimate? 

Sympathy  the  Keynote.  After  all,  sympathy  is  the  secret 
of  success  with  children.  The  need  of  sympathy  is  ingrained 
into  the  child's  life.  "See,  mamma,  how  I  do  it,"  cries  the 
child  many  times  a  day.  What  are  new  toys  and  new 
shoes  if  they  cannot  be  shown  with  glee  to  everyone  who 
comes  in?  "Listen,"  says  Herbert  Spencer,  "to  the  eager 
volubility  with  which  every  urchin  describes  any  novelty  he 
has  been  to  see,  if  only  he  can  find  some  one  who  will  attend 
with  any  interest."  It  is  sympathy  that  draws  children  to- 
gether. It  is  the  secret  of  "chum"  friend,ships.  "Symjni- 
thizing  with  each  other,  confiding  in  each  other,  coming  int(j 
the  closest  touch  with  each  other's  inmost  nature,  chums 
exert  a  profound  interest  upon  the  whole  life  and  character 
of  each  other."  It  binds  boys  together  into  unions  and  teams. 
It  is  the  natural  atmosphere  of  childhood.  It  dies,  if  it  ever 
does  die,  only  through  repeated  rebuffs  and  betrayals  of 
confidence,  and  constant  living  in  the  narrow  world  of  .self- 
ishness.     The  parent  too  often  repels  the  child.     He  is  too 


48  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

busy  to  heed  the  boy's  simple  projects.  The  mother  may 
at  times  pay  no  attention  to  the  repeated  calls  for  admira- 
tion of  some  exploit,  and  at  last  look  up  to  speak  harshly. 
Such  things  wound  more  deeply  than  we  realize.  The  true 
teacher  will  give  from  his  whole  heart  the  sympathy  re- 
quired. He  will  try  to  put  himself  into  the  child's  place 
mentally  and  emotionally,  and  will  thus  gain  in  the  sim])lest 
way  real  power  over  the  little  life.  And  he  will  receive  sym- 
])athy  in  return,  for  children  are  little  mirrors  that  reflect 
even  more  than  they  receive. 

Making  the  Lesson  Practical.  And,  finally,  it  is  by  coming 
into  close  contact  with  the  individual  child,  by  sympathizing 
with  him  and  gaining  his  confidence,  and  by  studying  his 
nature  and  surroundings  and  development,  that  one  may 
inculcate  in  him  at  last  the  great  principles  of  unselfishness 
and  service  to  others  and  love  in  the  divine  sense.  But  the 
work  must  be  ever  with  the  individual  rather  than  with  the 
group.  By  story  and  precept  and  practical  example  the 
child  may  be  taught  to  do  for  others  because  it  is  blessed  so 
to  do.  Froebel  taught  us  that  the  life^of  faith  and  love  comes 
only  through  personal  activity.  No  one  sitting  passive  is 
ever  talked  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven;  there  miist  be  doing. 
The  teacher  must  suggest  little  deeds  to  be  done  during  the 
week.  Birthdays  and  holidays  are  to  be  made  glad  occasions 
for  doing  for  others.  Without  moralizing  or  preaching  the 
teacher  should  tell  sim])le  stories  of  unselfish  lives:  of  the 
monks  of  Saint  Bernard,  of  the  life-savers  on  the  coast,  of 
simple  little  episodes  in  the  child's  own  world.  "Children," 
says  Mrs.  Harrison,  "delight  to  be  told  that  their  hands  and 
feet  and  bodies  can  tell  their  love  as  well  as  their  tongues. 
A  little  girl  came  to  me  one  morning  saying,  'My  hands  loved 
you  yesterday.'  'Did  they?'  I  said.  'Tell  me  about  it.' 
'Our  baby  tore  my  mat,  and  I  was  just  going  to  slap  her,  but 
I  thought  of  you  and  I  didn't.'  This  explaniition  was  given 
without  the  slightest  thought  of  commendation  for  the  self- 
control  exercised,  and  was  passed  over  by  me  as  a  thing  of 
course  in  one  of  my  children  who  really  loved  me."  This  is 
practical  teaching;  this  is  training  which  turns  the  life  into  the 
proper  channels,  and  prepares  the  ground  for  that  vital  period 
when  awakening  comes  and  the  new  life  of  the  spirit  begins. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

THE  BEGIXXIXGS  OF  RELIGION 

The  Child  "World.  As  we  have  already  shown,  the  child 
before  the  "storm  and  stress  period"  which  begins  at  about 
the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  year  lives  a  life  that  is  very  near 
to  the  material  world.  He  looks  not  in  but  out.  He  ques- 
tions not  of  the  future;  the  present  is  all-absorbing.  He  has 
not  yet  thought  to  ask  why  he  is  in  the  world,  or  whence  he 
came,  or  whither  he  is  bound. 

A  simple  child, 
That  lightly  draws  his  breath, 
And  feels  his  life  in  every  limb, 
What  should  he  know  of  death? 

Life  is  sufficient  for  him,  without  a  thought  of  its  imper- 
fections. He  is  in  a  great  wonderland,  asking  questions 
about  all  that  he  sees,  getting  acquainted  with  his  environ- 
ment, testing  with  glee  his  indefatigable  limbs,  and  taking  for 
granted  as  absolute  truth  everything  that  he  sees  and  hears. 
The  material  present  surroundings,  parents,  brothers,  sisters, 
home,  school,  chums,  animals,  things,  absorb  him.  All  is 
tremendously  vivid  and  real;  its  richness  and  wonder  stimu- 
late his  imagination  and  fancy;  life  is  a  swift  maze  of  moving 
pictures.  Everything  is  intense:  there  are  no  joys  and  no 
griefs  like  those  of  childhood.  Everything,  even  God,  must 
be  settled  in  terms  of  the  known.  There  are  no  spiritual 
compensations;  right  and  wrong  are  understood  only  as 
they  are  connected  with  things  that  must  and  that  must 
not  be  done.  There  is  no  far  in  the  world;  it  is  all  near. 
There  is  no  by  and  by;  it  is  all  now.  There  is  no  abstract; 
it  is  all  concrete.  Practical  ethics,  duty,  restraint,  law, 
obedience,  and  the  like,  he  may  learn  something  of,  since 
they  touch  the  plane  of  his  experience,  but  everything  con- 
nected with  the  real  Hfe  of  the  spirit  is  for  the  next  stage 
of  his  development. 

49 


50  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

The  God  of  Childhood.  Mankind  has  a  spiritual  nature 
as  real  and  definite  as  is  the  inental  or  the  physical  nature. 
Something  within  the  human  soul  cries  out  for  a  God  to 
worship.  Every  child  comes  into  this  world  with  needs 
which  soon  develop  into  spiritual  htmger.  Children  every- 
where take  naturally  to  the  idea  of  God.  God  is  a  thing,  of 
course,  though  the  thought  of  God  must  be  grasped,  like 
every  other  thought,  in  the  concrete.  He  must  visvializc 
his  idea  of  God  as  he  does  his  image  of  the  President,  and  of 
Santa  Claus.  Sometimes  he  is  a  great  man  like  papa  or 
grandpapa,  only  greater;  but  often  the  conception  is  very 
vague. 

In  many  older  people  there  is  the  survival  of  an  image  of 
God  more  or  less  dim  which  they  call  up  when  they  close 
their  eyes  and  pray.  It  comes  from  the  childhood  period. 
God  and  heaven  are  for  most  of  us  above  our  heads  in  the 
skies.  Professor  Street,  who  made  a  careful  study  to  deter- 
mine at  what  age  children  began  to  think  of  God  not  as  a 
great  man  but  as  a  spirit,  conchided  that  the  average  age 
was  fifteen  for  boys  and  fourteen  for  girls.  This  concrete 
God  of  childhood  is  far  different  from  that  of  later  years. 
He  is  looked  vi])on  without  awe;  and  is  sometimes  addressed 
familiarly  without  any  conscious  irreverence,  and  is  even 
"teased"  to  grant  desired  requests.  It  is  as  easy  for  the 
child  to  be  taught  to  pray  to  God  as  it  is  for  him  to  be  taught 
to  ask  his  father  and  mother  for  what  he  needs.  The  Love 
and  Fatherhood  of  God  may  be  brought  very  near  to  the 
little  one;  the  idea  lies  completely  within  his  world.  He  will 
not,  of  course,  understand  God  in  the  spiritual  sense  until 
he  reaches  adolescence,  and  may;  therefore,  miss  the  very 
essence  of  God,  yet  he  should  be  taught  to  pray  regularly 
to  him,  for  this  is  the  period  of  habit  forming,  and  prayer 
should  be  a  habit.  Moreover^  the  child  who  prays  regularly 
for  papa  and  mamma  and  sister  is  learning  the  elements  of 
the  unselfish  life.  Habitual  prayer  to  God  is  the  starting 
point  of  s]nritual  religion. 

Where  Religion  Begins.  It  is  natural  for  childhood  to  take 
things  at  face  value  and  to  have  confidence  "n  everybody  and 
everything.  The  child  is  o]>en,  frank,  unsuspicious.  He  is 
an  optimist;  he  is  full  of  the  purest  faith  and  love:  and  he  is 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RELIGION  51 

an  honest  seeker  after  truth.  The  sweetness  and  beauty  of 
the  Christ  are  in  the  little  child — "of  such  's  the  kingdom  of 
God."  And  he  keeps  to  a  large  degree  this  childhood  inno- 
cence until  adolescence  comes  with  its  storms  which  bring 
doubt  and  fear  and  suspicion  and  turmoil.  Hence  in  the 
child's  very  nature  we  find  hints  as  to  how  to  deal  with  him. 
He  seeks  truth;  give  him  truth,  but  bring  it  in  terms  that 
he  can  understand.  If  he  asks  for  what  is  unknown,  tell  him 
honestly  that  it  is  unknown.  Dogmas  and  creeds  and  gen- 
eralizations about  the  spiritual  life  are  utterly  beyond  him; 
tell  him  of  the  simple  things  of  God's  world  and  the  love 
which  is  written  large  in  them  all.  Feed  his  optimism  with 
the  spirit  of  Browning's  "God's  in  his  heaven;  all's  right  with 
the  world."  Use  Christ  constantly  as  the  model.  All  "Be 
good-and-you-will-be-happy"  moralizing  cast  away  as  worse 
than  useless.  It  will  only  furnish  food  for  doubt  when  the 
adolescent  period  comes.  Do  not  preach;  teach.  Show  how 
God  expects  positive  action;  obedience,  love,  self-restraint, 
unselfishness.  Use  the  Bible  constantly.  Tell  its  simple 
stories  over  and  over.  Bring  out  the  sense  of  reverence,  and 
the  mysterious  feeling  of  "something  deep  in  the  soul,  of 
which  our  intelligence  alone  can  give  no  adequate  expres- 
sion."    Even  childhood  may  feel  this. 

"Froebel  looked  back  to  the  early  days  of  humanity  to 
find  out  how  religion  began,  and  in  what  it  consisted.  He 
used  what  he  found  as  a  guide  for  the  earliest  years  of  the 
child.  He  did  not.  of  course,  find  any  catechisms  and  dog- 
mas. It  seemed  to  him  that  the  beginnings  of  all  true  and 
ever-progressive  religion  lay  in  the  feeling  of  community,  in 
love  and  wonder,  the  religion  of  fear  having,  on  the  whole, 
steadily  dwindled  and  lost  ground.  He  begins,  then,  with 
love  in  the  family,  which  is  to  be  gradually  widened  more 
and  more.  'The  child's  worship,'  he  said,  'is  the  feeling  and 
practice  of  love.'  .  .  .  Froebel  delights  in  leading  the  child 
back  step  by  step  till  he  is  face  to  face  with  some  wonder 
or  mystery  of  nature  or  life.  Who  makes  the  corn  grow? 
Who  taught  the  bird  to  build  its  nest?  What  causes  the  wind 
to  blow?" 

The  Child  and  the  Spiritual  Life.  Beyond  these  .simple 
steps  of  Froebel  the  child  is  not  prepared  to  go.     His  views 


52  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

of  life  are  primitive.  He  is  ignorant,  incapable  of  making 
distinctions  credulous.  He  has  little  power  to  generalize 
or  to  deal  v/ith  anything  abstract.  "To  him,"  says  Oppen- 
heim,  "there  is  no  inherent  and  reasonable  distinction  be- 
tween falsehood  and  truth.  He  naturally  inclines  to  super- 
stition because  its  beliefs  titillate  his  wonder-loving  cast  of 
mind.  Without  the  restraints  which  mental  maturity  in- 
sures, he  is  bound  to  fall  into  errors  that  his  untried  powers 
are  sure  to  cause."  We  should  work  steadily  toward  the 
attaininent  at  the  earliest  possible  age  of  experimental 
religion;  bvit  as  a  rule  it  is  hazardous  to  call  for  "professions" 
before  the  twelfth  year.  Inculcate  habits,  teach  obedience 
to  law,  dwell  on  the  father-love  of  God  and  the  brother-love 
of  Christ,  foster  the  spirit  of  reverent  inquiry  which  most 
children  have  at  this  age,  give  object  lessons;  but  never  force 
experiences.  The  conversion  period  is  ordained  by  God 
himself.  The  great  majority  of  all  conversions,  as  will  be 
shown  in  a  future  lesson,  come  during  adolescence,  not 
very  far  from  the  age  of  fourteen.  To  force  conversions 
before  ten  or  twelve  is  as  unnatural  as  to  force  a  child  into 
the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  maturity. 

Nevertheless,  many  individual  children  do  make  decisions 
before  twelve — a  fact  that  illustrates  how  dangerous  a  thing 
it  is  to  attempt  to  teach  en  masse.  Each  individual  soul, 
like  each  indiv  dual  mind  and  body,  develops  in  its  own  way: 
may  we  not  say,  in  God's  way?  We  should  keep  in  mind,  also, 
that  Ml  the  charts  which  record  for  us  the  results  of  the  most 
careful  observations  on  religious  development  in  childhood, 
there  is  at  the  age  of  twelve  a  decided  curve.  That  is  the 
first  great  year  of  sjiiritual  awakening,  althovigh,  as  we  have 
just  said,  the  climax  seems  in  most  cases  not  to  be  reached 
until  about  fourteen. 

Seed-Sowing  and  Nurture.  In  the  earlier  grades  of  the 
Sunday  school,  then — up,  indeed,  to  the  adolescent  age — 
the  true  work  of  the  teacher  is  seed-sowing  and  nurture. 
The  child  in  these  grades,  taught  simple  les.sons  in  goodness 
adapted  to  his  age^  properly  guarded  and  trained,  carefully 
exercised  in  love  and  obedience,  is  trtily  religious.  The  great 
duty  of  the  teacher  is  to  cultivate  the  tender  soil,  to  keep 
removed  (so  far  as  possible)  the  weeds  of  error,  to  strengthen 


THE  BEGINNIXGS   OF   RELIGION  53 

good  habits  and  check  bad  ones,  to  dwell  ever  on  doing  good, 
on  acting  lovingly  and  rightly,  to  show  that  mere  words  are 
nothing  without  deeds;  in  short,  to  incvilcate  practical  Chris- 
tian ethics,  and  to  be  ready  constantly  with  new  ideas  along 
the  plane  of  the  child's  experience. 

It  is  a  serious  mistake  to  measure  the  success  of  the  re- 
ligious teaching  of  children  by  their  early  "profession  of 
religion,"  especially  as  early  as  between  the  ages  of  seven 
and  ten.  Dr.  McFarland  tells  of  a  primary  teacher  who 
confessed  to  him  that  her  greatest  trouble  was  from  good 
people  who  came  to  her  asking,  "Have  these  little  children 
had  any  change  of  heart?"  He  replied,  "The  next  time  peo- 
ple come  to  you  asking,  'Have  these  little  children  had  any 
change  of  heart?'  do  you  say  to  them  that  you  are  laboring 
and  praying  seven  days  in  the  week  to  prevent  them  from 
having  any  change  of  heart."  The  truth  he  sought  to  ex- 
press had  been  uttered  centuries  before  by  the  Master,  "Let 
the  little  ones  come  unto  me,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  Jesus  did  not  mean  that  they  were  perfect,  or 
that  they  had  what  would  pass  in  some  modern  churches  as 
a  "religious  experience";  he  meant  that  the  one  thing  needed 
for  them  was  the  removal  by  older  Christians  of  everything 
that  might  keep  the  children  from  him.  To  train  children 
in  practical  goodness  and  to  keep  open  the  way  to  God — - 
this  is  to  nurture  true  religion;  this  is  to  get  ready  for  what 
surely  is  coming.  For  every  child  the  breaking  period  is  at 
hand;  it  is  written  in  the  child's  very  life;  he  cannot  escape 
it;  and  the  outcome  will  depend  very  largely  upon  the  early 
years  of  preparation. 


CHAPTER  IX 
THE  PRE-ADOLESCEXT  PERIOD 

The  Subdivisions  of  Childhood.  Most  child  students  agree 
that  the  period  called  "childhood"  falls  into  what  are 
really  four  distinct  subdivisions/  each  with  its  own  pe- 
culiar characteristics:  (i)  infancy,  which  extends  to  about 
the  eighth  year;  (2)  boyhood  and  girlhood,  the  pre-adolescent 
period,  which  extends  to  about  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth 
year;  (3)  youth,  the  early  adolescent  period,  which  extends 
to  the  seventeenth  or  eighteenth  year;  (4)  young  manhood 
and  womanhood,  later  adolescence,  which  ends  about  the 
twenty-fifth  year.  So  great  are  the  changes  during  these 
periods  that  the  child  seems  to  pass  through  transforma- 
tions almost  as  marked  as  those  in  the  life  of  the  butterfly. 
His  entire  nature  seems  to  be  re-created  two  or  three  times. 
More  than  once  his  whole  horizon  changes.  The  infant  is  in 
the  age  of  myth  and  story;  the  boy  and  girl  are  in  the  era  of 
biography  and  hi.story;  the  youth  has  reached  the  stage  of 
literature  and  morals;  the  young  man  and  woman  are  on 
the  ])lane  of  religion  and  ethics.  These  are  the  four  stages  in 
the  history  not  only  of  each  individual,  but  also  of  mankind. 

The  Age  of  Infancy.  We  have  already  devoted  to  the 
study  of  the  earlier  years  of  childhood  all  that  is  necessary. 
In  the  Simday  school  it  is  the  age  of  the  Beginners'  Depart- 
ment {up  to  the  age  of  six)  and  of  the  Primary  Department 
(which  includes  the  ages  of  six,  seven,  and  eight).  It  is  the 
age  of  the  object-lesson  and  the  simple  old  story  told  to 
illustrate  the  goodness  and  the  nearness  and  the  love  of  God, 
or  of  the  beauty  of  the  man  Jesus  who  loved  little  children, 
of  the  impressing  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  reverence 
and  truth  and  obedience  and  self-control.     It  is  the  golden 


'  These  are  the  divisions  on  which  the  pradinK  of  the  Sunday  school  is 
based.  The  first  includes  the  BeKinncrs'  and  Primary;  the  second  repre- 
sents the  Junior;  the  third  the  Intermediate;  and  the  fourth  the  Senior; 
beyond  this  the  Adult. 

54 


THE  PRE-ADOLESCENT  PERIOD  55 

period  for  making  deep  impressions.  It  is  the  joyous  spring- 
time, the  season  for  sowing  seed.  There  is  no  more  fascinat- 
ing field  ojien  to  human  endeavor  than  that  which  hes  along 
the  wonder-haunted  meadows  and  the  sweet  viplands  of 
this  ever  new  world  of  infancy.  The  young  child  is  a  being 
forever  new  and  forever  wonderful.     He 

Cometh  from  afar, 

Not  in  entire  forgetfulness, 

And  not  in  utter  nakedness, 
But  trailing  clouds  of  glory,  do  "we  come 
From  God,  who  is  our  home. 

The  child  is  indeed  a  bit  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  He  is 
artless  and  unaffected;  he  is  willingly  de]iendent;  he  thinketh 
no  evil;  he  has  faith  in  all  things;  he  loves  as  the  sun  shines 
and  he  tells  his  love  with  perfect  unconsciousness;  he  is 
spontaneous  and  enthusiastically  optimistic.  It  is  the  child 
alone  that  keeps  the  world  sweet  and  hopeful.  Without 
childhood  the  race  would  drift  into  pessimism  and  hatred 
and  despair. 

The  Second  Stage.  Although  infancy  and  adolescence 
have  of  late  years  been  studied  carefully  in  all  their  phases 
by  psychologists  and  child  students,  the  transition  between 
the  two,  those  important  years  between  seven  or  eight  and 
twelve,  has  received  comparatively  little  attention.  It  is 
the  age  that  knows  nothing  of  nerves,  that  tracks  mud  over 
clean  floors,  that  litters  rooms,  that  ignores  the  proprieties 
and  neighbors'  rights,  and  that  seems  to  exist  but  for  the 
single  purpose  of  having  "fun"  and  making  noise  and  mis- 
chief. The  small  bad  boy  of  fiction,  the  boy  who  hides  under 
the  sofa  to  appear  at  critical  moments,  who  disclo.ses  em- 
barrassing facts,  and  perpetrates  startling  practical  jokes, 
belongs  to  this  age.  He  is  regarded  by  his  own  parents  very 
often  with  impatience,  and  he  is  more  than  likely  rated  by 
some  neighbors  as  a  nuisance.  Even  at  the  Sunday  school 
he  has  been  neglected.  In  the  primary  room  he  had,  as  a 
general  thing,  the  best  teachers  the  school  could  afford;  he 
had  chairs  which  fitted  him,  and  he  had  quiet.  The  room, 
too,  was  beautiful  and  was  sux)plied  with  pictures  and 
charts    and    blackboards    and    materials    for    object-lessons. 


56  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

But  at  nine  comes  a  total  change.  In  very  many  schools  he 
is  thrust  out  into  the  hum  and  distraction  of  the  large  room. 
He  is  perched  on  a  pew  with  his  feet  dangling,  he  is  given, 
in  place  of  the  primary  stories  and  the  object-lessons  which 
he  enjoyed,  a  lesson  paper  which  he  does  not  fully  under- 
stand, and  in  almost  every  case  he  is  given  a  teacher  inferior 
to  the  one  he  has  left,  often,  indeed,  one  who  has  been 
dragged  into  the  work  knowing  very  little  of  boys  except  that 
they  are  "always  bad."  Hence  his  class  is  liable  to  be  the 
most  wriggling  and  whispering  and  giggling  and  irresponsible 
class  in  the  large  room,  to  be  frowned  upon  and  lectured  and 
threatened. 

Physical  Changes.  The  pre-adolescent  age  begins  during 
the  first  period  of  accelerated  growth.  For  a  year  or  two 
the  boy  and  girl  shoot  up  rapidly;  they  are  growing  too  fast 
to  do  much  of  anything  else.  Then  the  period  of  the  second 
dentition  brings  a  change.  There  is  an  arrest  in  the  rate  of 
growth  and  often  a  disturbance  of  the  general  health.  Nu- 
trition is  often  disturbed;  the  child  may  be  lacking  four  or 
five  teeth  at  one  time.  For  nervous,  delicate  children  it  is 
often  a  period  of  crisis.  "Physical  fatigue  and  mental  fatigue, 
heart  trouble,  and  nervous  symptoms  of  various  kinds  are 
likely  to  occur  at  the  stage  in  child  life  marked  by  the  seventh 
and  the  ninth  years."  Such  children  must  not  be  over- 
tasked at  home  or  at  school.  In  many  ways  the  child  of  this 
period  is  unbalanced :  the  brain  at  eight  has  almost  reached 
its  full  size,  though  the  body  is  scarcely  one  third  of  what 
it  is  to  be.  It  mu.st  not  be  gathered,  however,  that  pre- 
adolescent  children  are  all  delicate.  Girls  during  the  grow- 
ing period  are  often  healthier  than  ever  before  or  after  in 
their  lives,  and  boys  are  often  more  robust  than  some  people 
wish  they  were. 

Boys  and  Girls.  At  about  the  age  of  nine  there  is  a  change 
in  the  attitude  of  the  sexes  toward  each  other.  In  the 
primary  room  boys  and  girls  were  practically  the  same; 
it  was  the  period  of  perfect  sex-unconsciousness.  Now,  how- 
ever, the  two  elements  tend  to  separate.  The  boy  has  a 
growing  contempt  for  girls:  "She's  only  a  girl,"  "She  can't 
do  anything."  The  girls  in  turn  Viegin  to  look  on  the  boys  as 
"Horrid  things,"  "Those  awful,  nnigh  boys!"  Pre-adolescence 


THE  PRE-ADOLESCENT  PERIOD  57 

is  sex-repellent.  Boys  often  seem  to  take  a  malicious  delight 
in  teasing  girls  and  pulling  their  hair  and  taunting  them  with 
nicknames.  It  is  never  wise  to  send  a  mixed  class  from  the 
primary  room.  From  nine  years  of  age  and  upward  the 
sexes  should  be  taught  in  separate  classes.  There  can  never 
be  unity  of  work  with  boys  and  girls  in  the  same  class.  The 
teacher  to  make  any  impression  must  devote  himself  to  one 
and  neglect  the  other.  A  few  years  later  the  sexes  will  be- 
come too  conscious  of  each  other's  presence  to  do  really  good 
work  in  the  same  class. 

The  Enlarging  World.  The  infant  is  dependent  and  home- 
centered  ;  the  growing  boy  and  girl  are  increasingly  inde- 
pendent. The  youngster  is  no  longer  content  to  be  led; 
he  draws  away  his  hand  instinctively.  There  are  absorbing 
interests  now  outside  of  the  home  circle.  The  boy  begins 
to  hear  of  "mollycoddles,"  and  babies  "tied  to  their  mothers' 
apron  strings."  Play  to  be  enjoyed  to  the  full  must  now  be 
cooperative.  Boys  and  girls  gather  into  groups  for  their 
games  as  inevitably  as  sheep  gather  into  flocks.  The  group 
more  and  more  dominates  the  child's  thought.  He  is 
impatient  until  he  is  out  with  the  others.  Friendships  begin, 
and  strong  attachments  caused  by  propinquity  and  by  mu- 
tual interests  and  sympathies.  It  is  the  age  of  "chums." 
Two  girls  or  two  boys  after  playing  much  together  tend  to 
become  almost  inseparable.  They  share  each  other's  thoughts 
and  secrets  and  ideals;  they  understand  each  other;  they 
sacrifice  many  things  for  each  other.  With  the  enlarging 
of  the  horizon  there  comes  also  a  keen  desire  to  know  more 
of  the  world,  to  own  things,  to  secure  samples,  and  label 
them  and  arrange  them.  It  is  the  collecting  period.  Be- 
tween the  years  of  eight  and  twelve  "collections  reach  their 
height  in  quantity  and  genuineness."  The  objects  collected 
are  most  commonly  stamps,  butterflies  and  beetles,  marbles, 
postmarks,  postcards,  cigar  tags,  shells,  buttons,  silks,  and 
birds'  eggs.  The  instinct  should  not.  be  frowned  upon;  it 
should  be  directed.  Collections  for  a  Sunday  school  cabinet 
may  be  made;  a  collection  of  pictures  really  valuable  may 
be  secured,  and  various  other  Bible  illustrative  material.  The 
teacher  too  may  draw  constantly  for  illustrative  material 
upon  the  child's  collections  at  home. 


58  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

The  Beginning  of  Group  Games.  The  closing  years  of  in- 
fancy are  marked  by  the  beginnings  of  what  may  be  called 
the  "group  games."  The  girl  seeks  companions  with  whom 
to  play  housekeeping  or  doll  nursing.  ("The  doll  passion 
seems  to  be  strongest  between  seven  and  ten  and  to  reach 
its  climax  between  eight  and  nine.")  The  boy  between  seven 
and  twelve  plays  various  imitative  games  which  require 
cooperation,  like  storekee]nng  or  church,  but  his  chief  delight 
is  in  tliose  group  plays  which  demand  action,  like  tag,  horse, 
ball,  prisoner's  base,  "stumps,"  and  the  like,  all  compara- 
tively simi)le.  There  is  no  permanent  organization — the 
ball  team  is  improvised  for  the  occasion,  and  disbanded  as 
easily  as  formed.  The  play  is  individual;  each  one  is  for 
himself.  Team  play,  permanent  gang  organization,  sacrifice 
plays,  and  the  like  are  for  the  next  period  in  the  boy's  life. 
The  game  must  be  played  rightly,  however;  the  rules  are 
like  the  laws  of  nature,  and  there  must  be  honesty  and  fair- 
ness and  certainty.  The  boy  throws  his  whole  body  and  soul 
into  the  play,  and  he  reveals  himself  coinpletely.  Often  a 
teacher  may  learn  more  of  her  pupil  by  watching  him  play 
in  the  yard  for  ten  minutes  than  she  could  have  learned  by 
studying  him  in  the  school  for  ten  days.  So  large  a  part  in 
the  boy's  life  cannot  be  passed  over  unnoticed  by  the  teacher. 
Play  and  fun  are  not  necessarily  things  to  be  disciplined  out 
of  the  Sunday  school  boy.  They  are  to  be  directed  to  useful 
ends.  Whenever  it  is  possible  work  should  be  made  to  seem 
like  play.  He  was  a  wise  father  who,  when  he  wanted  his 
boys  to  help  him  throw  in  the  wood,  said,  "That  post  is  a 
bear;  let's  see  who  can  hit  him  the  most  times."  Play  in  its 
usual  forms  is  manifestly  impossible  in  the  Sunday  school 
room,  but  the  spirit  of  play  is  not.  There  may  be  rivalry  in 
finding  books  of  the  Bible  or  s])ecified  verses;  there  may  be 
c<imi)etition  as  to  who  shall  tell  the  story  most  accurately; 
and  there  may  be  constant  drawing  ujjon  the  details  of  ]>lay 
to  illustrate  points  in  the  lesson  and  to  teach  fundamental 
ideals  of  jvistice  and  obedience  and  love. 

Child  Ideals.  From  the  grouj)  and  the  play  instincts  it  is 
but  a  step  to  the  hero-worship  side  of  childhood.  There  is 
an  increasing  demand  now  for  history  and  biography.  The 
stories  that  please  the  child  now  are  no  longer  myths  and 


THE  PRE-ADOLESCENT  PERIOD  59 

wonders,  but  the  adventures  of  actual  heroes.  Stories  of  peril 
and  rescue,  of  action,  and  of  heroism  hold  the  boy  and  the 
girl  fascinated.  The  hero  is  the  center  of  interest  to  be 
.idealized  and  imitated  and  dreamed  over.  At  first  the 
child's  ideal  is  some  one  who  has  come  into  his  little  world : 
when  he  grows  up  he  will  be  a  stagedriver,  or  a  policeman, 
or  a  drum  major.  In  a  college  town  the  small  boy's  hero  is 
the  football  captain  or  some  favorite  athlete.  Barnes  found 
that  "half  the  children  in  the  London  Board  schools  at  eight 
years  old  find  their  ideals  in  soine  local  person  in  the  home, 
in  the  school,  or  in  the  neighborhood."  From  this  age  on  the 
child's  reading  more  and  more  influences  his  choice  of  heroes. 
"Historic  ideals,"  says  Chainbers,  "increase  in  popularity  up 
to  the  age  of  eleven  or  twelve  and  then  gradually  decline." 
This  is  a  golden  period  for  the  Sunday  school  teacher.  It  is 
the  time  for  impressing  Bible  biography.  The  Bible  is  full  of 
heroes  after  the  boy's  own  ideal,  and  they  can  be  made  to 
influence  the  young  life.  Says  Dr.  Gulick,  "The  boy  whose 
life  cannot  be  dominated  by  some  hero,  real  or  false,  of  a 
vigorous  kind,  seems  to  be  the  exception."  Several  studies 
tend  to  show  that  girls  are  impressed  by  heroes  even  as 
much  as  are  boys.  The  teacher  should  dwell  constantly  on 
the  nobler  qualities  of  the  heroes:  their  self-sacrifice,  their 
trust  in  God,  their  honor  and  honesty  and  obedience,  but 
he  should  not  preach  or  mopalize.  He  should  tell  the  story  of 
Samson,  for  instance,  as  if  the  failure  of  his  life  was  a  matter 
of  course — as  if  any  life  that  followed  such  ideals  would  be 
worthless;  but  he  should  not  generalize  or  try  to  make  per- 
sonal applications.     The  story  should  apjjly  itself. 

The  Reading  Age.  Most  children  derive  their  later  ideals 
largely  from  their  reading.  The  average  girl  has  read  Louise 
Alcott  and  the  "Elsie"  Books  and  others  like  them  long  before 
the  age  of  twelve,  and  these  have  given  her  a  whole  scheme 
of  life.  The  reading  age  begins  about  the  eighth  year.  Dr. 
Lancaster  found  that  "of  523  mature  individuals  453  have 
had  what  might  be  called  a  craze  for  reading  at  some  time 
in  the  adolescent  period."  And  he  goes  on  to  remark:  "It  is 
the  golden  opportunity  to  cultivate  the  taste  and  inoculate 
against  the  worst  forms  of  the  reading  habit.  The  curve  of 
this  intense  desire  to  read  begins  at  eight,  rises  tu  eleven, 


6o  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

and  then  rapidly  from  eleven  to  fourteen,  culminates  at 
fifteen,  then  falls  rapidly,  nearly  reaching  the  base  line  at 
eighteen."  The  teacher  should  watch  the  reading  of  his  class 
with  the  greatest  care.  A  wise  use  of  a  well-selected  Sunday 
school  library  may  turn  the  whole  life  of  a  boy  or  a  girl. 

Memory.  Finally,  the  pre-adolescent  period  is  the  golden 
age  of  the  memory.  The  years  from  eight  to  fourteen  are 
the  storehouse  years.  Language,  poetry,  facts,  details,  verbal 
forms — all  are  gathered  now  with  an  ease  which  the  adult 
may  well  envy.  "The  best  period  for  learning  a  foreign 
language  ends  before  fourteen."  This  early  memory,  how- 
ever, is  haphazard;  it  needs  careful  watching.  The  child, 
if  he  is  let  alone,  will  cram  his  memory  as  he  crams  his 
pocket.  It  should  be  the  aim  of  the  Sunday  school  teacher 
to  furnish  as  far  as  is  possible  proper  material  for  memorizing. 
Now  is  the  time  for  filling  the  storehouse  with  the  parts  of 
the  Bible  that  are  within  the  child's  comprehension:  psalms 
like  the  first  and  the  twenty-third,  certain  of  the  parables, 
the  Ten  Commandments,  and  the  like.  Hymns  and  poems 
are  now  to  be  memorized  and  frequently  reviewed.  Too 
much  cannot  be  made  of  this  precious  seedtime;  it  comes 
but  once  in  life.  Teaching,  however,  must  not  be  a  mere 
memory  cram  and  nothing  else.  There  must  be  object- 
lessons  and  concrete  applications,  and  much  illustrative 
material.  In  another  lesson  we  shall  treat  the  memory, 
its  use  and  abuse,  with  more  detail. 


CHAPTER  X 
THE  EARLY  ADOLESCENT  PERIOD 

Adolescence.  To  quote  the  words  of  Dr.  Thorndike, 
"There  is,  beginning  at  eleven  or  twelve  in  girls,  thirteen  or 
fourteen  in  boys,  a  period  of  abrupt  transition  both  bodily 
and  mental."  "We  are. born  twice,"  said  Rousseau,  "once 
to  exist  and  again  to  live;  once  as  to  species  and  again  as 
regard  to  sex."  The  change  sometimes  comes  with  sudden- 
ness. Yesterday  the  parent  smiled  at  the  child  who  spoke 
as  a  child  and  thought  as  a  child;  to-day  he  looks  into  the 
eyes  of  another  being,  one  who  has  put  away  childish  things. 
Not  only  is  there  great  physical  change — the  voice,  the 
powers,  the  strength  of  manhood  and  womanhood — ^but 
there  is  still  greater  mental  and  moral  change.  There  is  a 
breaking  away  and  a  readjustment;  there  is  a  hardening 
now  of  the  plastic  material  of  the  earlier  years.  Acts  and 
attitudes  of  mind  have  begun  to  petrify  into  habits.  Where 
the  tree  falls  now,  there  it  will  lie. 

The  New  Life.  This  change  is  so  great  that  it  may  truly 
be  called  a  revolution.  The  whole  point  of  view  of  the  life 
is  shifted.  The  boy  and  the  girl  lived  largely  in  the  objective 
world;  they  were  absorbed  in  their  games;  life  was  taken  as 
the  animals  take  it,  as  a  matter  of  course.  It  was  intensely 
real.  Its  griefs  were  tempestuous;  its  joys  were  whole- 
souled;  its  plans  and  enthusiasm  reached  not  far  beyond  the 
bounds  of  the  day;  its  absorption  in  the  present  was  almost 
complete.  But  with  adolescence  comes  the  breaking  away. 
The  youth  begins  to  be  conscious  of  new  powers.  He  feels 
"two  natures  struggling  within"  him.  He  catches  glimpses 
now  of  the  great  abstract  ideals  of  altruism,  sacrifice,  purity, 
holiness,  faith,  hope,  love.  He  begins  to  ask  the  great  ques- 
tions of  what  he  really  is  and  what  he  is  to  be.  Ambition 
awakes.  He  begins  to  idealize  life  and  to  dream  over  it. 
It  is  the  time  of  halos,  of  visions,  of  unbounded  possibilities, 
of  angels  in  disguise. 

6i 


62  ELI' MI- NTS  OK  RICLIC.IOUS  rEDAGOGV 

The  Gang  and  the  Set.  The  incomprehensible  longings, 
the  dreamings,  the  emotions  of  this  period  are  very  often 
shared  !>>'  chums.  "There  is  a  demand  for  sympathy  that 
parents  know  nothing  of."  The  friendship  made  in  the 
earlier  period  deepens  and  broadens.  Chums  often  .share  their 
most  secret  thovights;  they  can  give  the  mutual  sympathy 
of  comprehension  and  enter  portals  no  one  else  may  know. 
And  the  friendship  is  often  real  and  lasting.  Bonser  foxind 
that  of  the  "756  boys  and  1,179  girls  reporting,  but  12.4 
per  cent  of  the  former  and  16.6  per  cent  of  the  latter  state 
that  the  friendship  with  their  chums  was  broken."  The 
longing  for  sympathy  has  a  broader  effect:  it  draws  the  boys 
into  groups  or  "gangs"  and  the  girls  into  "sets."  "Birds  of  a 
feather  flock  together."  Misunderstood  by  their  elders,  they 
seek  the  society  of  those  who  look  at  life  from  their  own 
viewpoint.  It  is  no  longer  the  haphazard  group  of  boyhood; 
it  is  the  organized  gang.  This  has  its  origin  always  in  the 
purpo.se  to  do  something:  to  play  games,  to  have  fun,  to 
oppose  another  gang,  or  even  to  commit  mischief  and  theft. 
It  is  often  a  secret  organization  with  most  awful  vows  and 
initiation  ceremonies.  "Of  1,034  responses  of  boys  from  ten 
to  sixteen,  851  were  members  of  stich  societies."  The  clan 
instinct  seems  natural  to  youth.  It  is  often  be.st  for  the 
Sunday  school  teacher  to  organize  his  class  into  a  society  after 
the  youthful  ideal.  In  many  cases  it  is  the  only  way  that  boys 
can  be  held  in  the  school.  There  must,  however,  be  week-day 
meetings  as  well  as  Sunday  meetings,  and  there  must  be  enough 
of  ceremony  to  impress  and  satisfy  the  youthful  mind. 

Team  Play.  There  is  a  change,  too,  in  the  matter  of  games. 
The  simple,  jirimitive  tag  games  no  longer  satisfy.  The  im- 
provised game  of  ball  has  lost  its  charm.  There  must  be 
permanent  organization;  the  team  must  have  a  name — "the 
Reds,"  "the  Browns,"  "the  West-Enders" — and  there  must 
be  a  captain  and,  if  possible,  a  uniform.  The  boy  no  longer 
plays  for  himself  alone;  he  plays  for  the  team.  He  is  willing 
to  sacrifice  himself,  to  take  an  inconspicuous  place  for  the 
good  of  the  whole.  "Team  work,"  "sacrifice  jilays,"  "inter- 
ference" are  the  topics  of  conversation.  The  youth  is  learn- 
ing the  great  lessons  of  self-control,  of  self-effacement,  of 
altruism,  (jf  loyalty  to  others. 


THE  EARLY  ADOLESCENT  PERIOD  Cy^ 

The  Migratory  Instinct.  With  the  lofty  aspirations  and 
ambitions  there  conies  a  longing  to  go  and  to  do.  The  hori- 
zon is  tinged  with  violet;  everything  is  possible.  The  books 
which  have  been  read  in  the  previous  period  have  created 
a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  for  the  young  dreamer,  and 
he  longs  to  leave  his  narrow,  humdrum  environment  and 
explore  the  wonderland  beyond  the  hills.  Especially  is 
this  true  of  girls,  for  the  reason,  perhaps,  that  being  less 
active  they  brood  more  and  build  air  castles  and  daydreams. 
Then,  too,  on  the  average,  they  read  more  than  boys.  The 
proportion  of  young  boys  and  girls  to  whom  has  come  a 
suggestion  to  run  away  from  home  is  very  large.  Lancaster 
found  that  "of  403  adolescents,  253  (153  males,  100  females) 
had  a  desire  to  leave  home  and  strike  out  for  themselves, 
or,  at  least,  found  home  less  attractive"  during  this  period. 
It  is  the  age  of  truants.  "Thirteen  is  the  age  when  truancy 
is  at  its  worst,  fourteen  being  the  average  time  in  the  United 
States  when  children  quit  school."  "The  desire  to  leave 
school,"  declares  Lancaster,  "together  with  a  desire  to  leave 
home,  is  a  true  and  natural  imptilse  to  adjust  himself  to  the 
life  which  he  is  already  living  in  his  imagination  in  company 
with  his  ideals."  The  remedy  is  sympathy,  not  punishment. 
The  Sunday  school  teacher  must  understand  his  boys  and 
girls;  must  work  from  their  point  of  view;  and  must  give 
them,  instead  of  the  chiding  and  the  hvimdrum  advice  they 
are  so  often  given,  real  sympathy  and  love  and  help.  And 
especially  must  he  deal  with  them  as  individuals,  each 
different  from  every  other  young  person  who  ever  lived. 
He  must  never  permit  the  "average  youth,"  whose  qualities 
are  set  down  in  these  lessons,  to  steal  into  the  place  in  his 
mind  and  heart  that  should  be  occupied  by  the  real  John  or 
Jennie  of  his  class. 

Combativeness.  The  period  of  early  adolescence  is  the 
fighting  age.  The  boy  must  contest  his  pathway  at  every 
step.  The  young  male  is  apt  to  smell  the  battle  from  afar; 
he  threatens  to  "lick"  the  new  boy  as  naturally  as  he  breathes. 
If  he  is  strong  and  robust,  he  fights  at  the  slightest  pretext 
or  at  no  pretext  at  all.  He  bullies  and  teases  those  who  are 
smaller  than  he  and  is  regarded  by  his  elders  as  a  "terror." 
It  is  simply  the  demand  of  his  nature  iov  activity,  for  mas- 


64  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

tcry,  for  aii]>laiise:  it  is  the  animal  within  him.  He  is  intoxi- 
cated with  the  new  life,  and  the  sense  of  power  that  pulses 
within  him.  A  little  later  he  will  fight  the  boy  who  comes 
in  any  way  between  him  and  the  girl  he  is  "going  with." 
The  instinct  is  as  primitive  as  the  race  itself.  "In  girls," 
says  Haslett,  "coquetry,  enchantment,  coyness,  replace  the 
combative  and  bravado  spirit  of  the  males  in  the  struggle 
for  a  ])lace  in  the  affections  of  the  opposite  sex.  At  about 
fourteen,  girls  begin  to  make  themselves  interesting  and 
attractive."  This  combativeness  of  the  boy  needs  not 
repression  but  guidance.  Says  Dr.  Balliet:  "If  you  crush  the 
fighting  instinct,  you  ])roduce  the  coward;  if  you  let  it  grow 
wild,  the  brute.  But  if  you  link  it  with  the  higher  instincts 
you  get  the  man  of  executive  ability  and  affairs." 

Self-Consciousness.  But  the  terror  of  the  playground  is 
more  than  likely  to  be  pitifully  ill  at  ease  at  any  social  gath- 
ering when  he  feels  that  the  eyes  of  others  are  upon  him. 
He  is  at  the  awkward  age,  when  he  is  all  hands  and  feet. 
In  everything  that  he  does  he  is  self-conscious;  he  stammers 
and  blushes.  The  child  until  he  is  ten  or  twelve  takes  part 
in  the  Children's  Day  exercises  with  delightful  self-uncon- 
sciousness, but  the  youth  had  generally  rather  be  whipped 
than  appear  on  the  program.  It  is  cruelty  to  force  him  to 
take  part.  He  is  peculiarly  sensitive  to  praise  or  blame. 
Dress  and  appearance  begin  to  mean  more  and  more  to  him. 
Boys  and  girls  are  much  alike  in  this  trait  of  self-conscious- 
ness. "At  fourteen,"  says  Katherine  Dolbear,  "a  girl  is  large, 
awkward,  restless,  afraid  to  talk,  esjiecially  with  older  people, 
desirous  of  dressing  prettily,  much  affected  by  what  her 
friends  think  and  say,  easily  pleased  and  easily  hurt,  and  is 
ha])])y  and  sad  at  almost  the  same  moments.  She  rebels  at 
T)cing  kei)t  at  one  thing  too  long,  is  quickly  interested  but 
just  as  quickly  turned  aside.  .  .  .  At  fifteen  she  is  more  at 
ease."  Some  boys  lose  their  awkwardness  in  the  presence  of 
girls  very  quickly.  Girls  do  not  like  bashful  boys;  hence 
there  is  every  reasf>n  for  the  boy  to  overcome  his  shyness. 

The  Period  of  Doubt.  Up  to  twelve  the  child  was  con- 
tinually asking  questions  and  believing  all  he  heard.  He 
took  everything  for  granted :  the  rules  of  the  ball  game  were 
as  absolute  as  the  laws  of  nature.    But  new  the  mind  begins 


THE  EARLY  ADOLESCENT  PERIOD  65 

to  work  for  itself;  it  begins  to  question  the  why  and  the 
wherefore  of  that  which  until  now  has  been  taken  for  granted. 
In  its  new  independence  it  thinks  its  own  way  quite  as  good 
as  the  old.  The  yoixth  is  very  liable  to  refuse  to  be  led  longer. 
"He  knows  as  much  as  his  father  and  far  more  than  his 
grandfather."  He  doubts  the  wisdom  of  the  ages.  He  is  an 
exception  to  all  rules.  He  can  touch  pitch  and  not  be  defiled. 
"Benjamin  Franklin  doubted  everything  at  fifteen."  It  is 
a  period  of  peculiar  danger,  for  the  youth  is  bored  by  advice 
and  he  refuses  to  be  led.  It  is  now  that  the  sowing  of  the 
earlier  periods  must  be  depended  upon  to  bear  its  fruit.  If 
the  work  of  the  home  and  the  church  and  the  Sunday  school 
has  been  faithftiUy  done,  the  danger  is  not  great,  but  there 
is  no  period  in  life  that  is  so  full  of  hazard.  "If  the  life  is 
to  be  righteous,"  says  Gulick,  "or  if  it  is  to  be  wicked,  it  is 
usually  settled  during  this  period."  Says  the  Rev.  William 
Smith : 

"This  age,  particularly  that  from  twelve  to  sixteen,  is  the 
most  critical  and  difficult  to  deal  with  in  all  childhood.  It 
is  so  because  the  boy  now  becomes  secretive,  he  neither  can 
nor  will  utter  himself,  and  the  very  sensitiveness,  the  longing 
and  overpowering  sense  of  the  new  life,  is  often  so  con- 
cealed by  inconsistent  ■  and  even  barbarous  behavior  that 
one  quite  loses  comprehension  and  patience. 

"The  very  apparent  self-sufficiency  of  the  boy  at  this  period 
causes  the  parents  to  discontinue  many  means  of  amusements 
and  tokens  of  affection  which  were  retained  until  now.  The 
twelve-months-old  infant  is  submerged  in  toys,  but  the 
twelve-year-old  boy  has  nothing  at  home  to  play  with.  The 
infant  is  caressed  until  he  is  pulplike  and  breathless,  but 
the  lad,  who  is  hungry  for  love  and  understanding,  is  held 
at  arm's  length.  This  is  the  time  when  most  parents  are 
found  wanting."^ 

The  Tendency  to  Crime  is  very  great  at  this  period. 
Truancy  is  generally  the  first  step,  and  the  gang  is  the 
second.  Many  boys  look  upon  fruit  orchards  and  water- 
melon patches  as  legitimate  prey.  Often  in  this  period  are 
sown  seeds  of  lawlessness  which  yield  a  sad  harvest  in  the 


•  Sunday  School  Teaching. 


66  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

next.  Running  with  the  crowd  or  the  "gang,"  boys  often 
learn  to  smoke  cigarettes,  to  disobey  parents,  to  break  the 
Sabbath,  to  swear,  to  make  fun  of  good  things,  and  even 
to  drink  and  steal.  The  strongest  will  and  the  most  powerfxil 
body  in  the  gang  is  the  leader,  and  his  influence  if  bad  is  ex- 
ceedingly demoralizing  to  his  young  follower.  Not  many 
who  have  been  properly  trained  in  the  earlier  period  of  their 
lives  will  drift  into  actual  crime,  but  the  tendency  is  gen- 
erall}'^  present.  The  years  from  twelve  to  eighteen  are  the 
school  years  of  crime,  just  as  the  years  from  eighteen  to 
twenty-five  are  the  years  when  crime  produces  its  fruit. 
The  Sunday  school  teacher  who  has  a  class  of  adolescents 
has  indeed  a  grave  responsibility  upon  him.  To  lead  them 
aright  will  require  all  the  tact  and  wisdom  and  religion  that 
he  may  possess. 

The  Sunday  School  Teacher.  The  adolescent  classes  should 
be  given  the  wisest  and  most  sympathetic  teachers  in  the 
school.  It  is  often  sujjposed  that  the  man  or  the  woman 
with  commanding  personality  and  with  a  deep  knowledge 
of  the  Bible  belongs,  as  a  matter  of  course,  to  the  senior 
classes,  but  it  is  a  wrong  idea.  The  school  should  save  its 
boys  and  girls  if  it  has  to  lower  the  grade  of  every  class  in  the 
Senior  Department.  The  adolescent  classes  should  have 
nothing  short  of  the  best.  The  teacher  should  be  one  who 
imderstands  boys  and  girls,  one  who  can  win  their  respect, 
one  who  for  the  time  can  be  a  boy  or  a  girl  himself.  An 
athletic,  tactful,  energetic,  consecrated  mqn  should  teach 
the  boys,  and  a  strong,  thoroughly  alive,  consecrated, 
womanly  woman  the  girls.  The  classes  should  be  small, 
and  the  boys  and  girls  should  be  taught  in  separate  classes. 
The  teacher  who  will  do  the  best  work  will  not  confine  him- 
self, as  so  many  do,  to  the  theories  of  teaching,  and  when  the 
boys  do  not  fit  the  theories  lay  it  to  the  boys;  he  will  l:>ecome 
acquainted  with  each  of  his  pupils  individually;  he  will 
study  their  lives,  their  ideals,  their  needs;  and  he  will  do  as 
mvich  work  on  week  days  as  on  Sundays.  If  a  boy  is  absent, 
he  will  call  on  him  or  write  him  a  letter;  if  he  is  sick,  he  will 
visit  him;  if  he  has  a  birthday,  he  will  remember  it.  He 
will  visit  the  playground,  will  organize  walks  and  picnics, 
will  invite  the  whole  class  sometimes  to  his  liome,  and  will 


THE  EARLY  ADOLESCENT  PERIOD  67 

devise  activities  and  relief  expeditions  and  charities  into 
which  all  may  fall  with  enthusiasm.  Such  work  requires 
effort  and  consecrated  determination,  but  it  pays.  Many 
precious  young  souls  have  been  lost  because  Sunday  school 
teachers  have  not  had  the  time  to  save  them. 

The  Demand  for  Activity.  The  boy  of  thirteen  is  a  dy- 
namo fairly  spluttering  with  pent-up  possibiHties.  Ten  or 
twelve  boys  together  make  a  veritable  power  house.  They 
are  called  bad  when  often  they  are  not  really  bad  at  all. 
They  want  to  do  something;  they  want  something  objective 
to  conquer  or  demolish.  They  care  little  for  rest  for  the 
weary,  or  peace,  or  resignation,  or  the  hope  of  heaven,  and 
the  like;  they  want  not  the  religious  life  of  old  men  and 
women,  but  the  life  of  action.  "The  instant  response  that 
young  men  give  to  occasions  of  objective  need  is  superb." 
The  church  is  too  much  in  danger  of  emphasizing  feminine 
rather  than  masculine  characteristics.  The  boy  should  be 
given  something  specific  to  do.  The  class,  perhaps,  should 
be  organized  as  a  club,  with  a  constitution  and  a  president. 
If  possible,  a  room  in  the  church  shovild  be  fitted  up  com- 
fortably, with  the  right  kind  of  games,  magazines,  and  pic- 
tures and  books.  There  should  be  frequent  phonographic 
entertainments  and  magic  lantern  exhibitions  and  debates. 
The  teachers,  one  or  more  of  them,  should  be  present,  and 
they  should  make  the  boys  feel  at  home.  They  should  take 
the  boy  where  they  find  him,  even  talk  of  ball  games  and 
hockey,  and  speculate  on  the  chances  of  the  team.  There  is 
real  religion  in  a  squarely  played  game,  and  in  a  sacrifice  hit, 
or  a  burst  of  temper  controlled  in  order  to  win  the  champion- 
ship. The  energies  of  such  a  club  may  be  directed  into  many 
channels.    Says  Cornelius  Loder,  a  practical  worker  with  boys : 

"A  full  assortment  of  indoor  games,  frequent  socials,  brief 
practical  talks  by  business  men,  and  other  interesting  events, 
can  be  arranged;  stamp,  coin,  and  curio  committees  should 
be  appointed ;  scrapbooks  on  various  subjects  will  keep  others 
busy;  a  camera  club  for  those  interested  in  photography; 
outside  games,  stich  as  baseball,  basket  ball,  football,  tennis, 
bicycle  runs,  tramping,  and  athletic  features,  will  satisfy 
others,  and  es]>ecially  hold  the  older  fellows.  A  uniformed 
baseball   nine   gives   prominence   to   the   work.      A    summer 


68  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIC.IOrS  PEnAGOGY 

camii  can  be  maintained,  and  if  the  club  is  small  the  re- 
qxiired  number  can  be  secured  by  inviting  in  outside  boys. 
Manual  training  along  simj)le  lines  is  good,  and  work  should 
be  undertaken  in  printing,  basket  weaving,  burnt  wood, 
scroll  sawing,  turning  lathe,  etc." 

All  this  is  only  suggestive.  Most  schools  must  be  content 
with  very  sim])le  things,  l)ut  anything  that  will  keep  the 
bcjys  in  the  Sunday  school  and  give  them  a  wholesome  place 
where  on  week  evenings  they  may  spend  their  spare  time 
imder  right  fnfluences  is  a  long  step  toward  the  highest 
religious  life. 

Sympathy.  Here,  as  at  every  step  in  Sunday  school  work 
with  children,  sympathy  is  the  keynote.  It  is  the  easiest 
thing  in  the  world  to  lose  patience  with  the  conceited  boy 
and  the  frivolous  girl.  Labor  often  seems  thrown  away. 
The  boys  will  fight  and  bully  and  play  truant  and  disregard 
all  advice,  they  will  know  more  than  all  their  teachers  can 
tell  them,  and  they  will  treat  the  best  efforts  in  their  behalf 
often  with  seeming  contempt;  but  for  all  that  they  may  not 
really  be  to  blame.  They  are  passing  in  their  development 
"through  a  stage  in  the  evolution  of  the  race."  There  are 
certain  instincts  in  their  lives  that  they  must  obey.  "We 
must  remember,"  says  Dr.  Huestis,  "that  instinct  is  a  holy 
thing;  that  it  is  the  voice  of  the  remote  past  making  itself 
heard  in  the  present;  that  it  exists  for  a  purpose — and  that 
to  give  rise  to  something  evdn  nobler  than  itself.  Boys  love 
to  tease.  Often  they  are  cruel,  with  but  little  or  no  sense  of 
the  wickedness  of  their  acts.  Boys  fight.  They  do  these 
things  not  because  they  are  depraved  by  nature,  but  because 
in  this  way  they  unconsciously  cultivate  that  sense  of  power 
without  which  they  could  not  make  their  way  in  later  life." 
He  who  would  win  boys  mvist  know  boys,  must  sympathize 
with  boys,  must  be  able  to  look  at  life  from  the  boy's  point 
of  view. 

The  Religion  of  Youth  is  exceedingly  active  and  practical. 
It  contains  very  little  of  reminiscence;  rare  indeed  it  is  when 
a  boy  can  spontaneously  arise  and  give  his  Christian  ex- 
perience. He  wants  something  to  do,  not  an  opporttmity 
to  talk  about  doing.  Appoint  him  on  a  committee  to  carry 
flowers  to  the  sick,  or  to  gather  materials  for  an  entertain- 


THE  EARLY  ADOLESCENT  PERIOD  69 

ment,  or  to  take  a  Sunday  school  census,  or  to  distribute 
Home  Department  literature,  and  he  will  work  with  vigor. 
As  long  as  he  is  doing  something  he  is  easy  to  manage.  The 
discipline  o£  the  class  is  very  often  made  easy  by  enlisting 
the  activities  of  all  present.  They  can  be  set  to  drawing 
maps  to  illustrate  the  lesson,  they  can  plan  blackboard 
exercises  for  possible  use  in  the  primary  room,  they  can  be 
given  outside  work  in  a  book  of  reference  and  can  report 
upon  it  to  the  class,  they  can  gather  pictures  and  illustrative 
materials.  If  one  but  studies  his  class  thoughtfully  he  can 
find  ample  work  to  keep  them  busy.  The  boy  and  the  girl 
shotxld  feel  that  they  are  helping  in  the  work,  that  the  work 
would  hobble  a  little  if  they  were  absent.  The  teacher  must 
not  talk  all  the  time,  and  he  must  not  monopolize  the  hour 
in  any  way.  He  should  simply  direct  the  activities  of  his 
pupils,  for  activities  constittite  the  religion  of  youth. 

The  New  Testament  Period.  Dr.  Dawson  after  a  study  of 
a  large  number  of  children  gives  as  his  conclusion  that  "chil- 
dren in  the  adolescent  period  show  a  decided  interest  in  the 
New  Testament,  especially  in  the  four  Gospels  and  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  They  also  show  a  very  special  interest  in 
Jesus  and  the  principal  disciples.  The  interest  in  John  the 
disciple  is  an  early  adolescent  interest,  while  the  interest  in 
Jesus  culminates  soinewhat  later,  and  is  sustained  through- 
out. This  suggests  that  the  material  of  instruction  for 
adolescence  should  be  derived  largely  from  the  New  Testa- 
ment." Before  adolescence  children  almost  without  excep- 
tion prefer  the  Old  Testament.  Now  that  the  view  of  the 
larger  life  has  come  to  them  they  are  eager  to  know  more  of 
it.  They  long  to  "get  adjvisted  to  the  largest  and  best  ideals. 
The  quickening  of  the  sense  of  life,  as  lived  through  others 
and  for  others,  awakens  the  impulse  to  become  a  part  of  the 
great  cosmic  struggle  for  more  complete  existence."  The 
youth  needs  above  all  things  a  philosophy  of  life,  a  guide,  a 
moral  code,  and  he  finds  it  all  in  the  teachings  of  Jesus. 
The  ideals  of  Christianity — its  purity,  its  sacrifice,  its  holi- 
ness, its  loyalty  to  a  great,  ideal,  manly  man,  purer  than  Sir 
Galahad,  nobler  than  Arthur,  tenderer  than  their  mother — ■ 
all  this  appeals  powerfully  to  adolescence.  Every  lesson 
should  center  now  about  the  life  of  Jesus  and  the  story  of  his 


70  ELExMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

disciples.  There  is  to  be  no  preaching,  only  a  bringing  out 
most  vividly  of  the  love,  the  heroism,  the  courage,  the  in- 
tense activity,  the  manliness,  the  sacrifice,  the  message  of 
the  Christ,  and  the  loyalty  and  love  of  his  disciples.  The 
lives  of  the  great  heroes  of  the  race  may  be  dwelt  upon  at 
times — men  like  Gordon,  Livingstone,  Dr.  Grenfell,  Saint 
Francis,  King  Alfred,  William  of  Orange — but  the  center  of 
all  must  be  the  Man  of  tlie  Gospels. 

Conversion.  It  is  the  natural  period  for  conversion,  but 
tliere  should  be  no  unnatural  forcing.  If  the  seed  has  been 
well  sown  in  the  earlier  periods  the  deep  religious  conviction 
will  come,  if  not  now,  then  at  a  storm  and  stress  period  later. 
Every  normal  boy  and  girl  comes  inevitably  to  the  moment 
when  the  matter  of  taking  an  outsjjoken  stand  for  the  Chris- 
tian life  presents  itself  with  tremendous  force.  Nature  has 
ordered  it.  There  comes  the  feeling  that  the  crisis  of  life 
has  arrived,  and  that  the  decision  is  for  all  eternity.  If 
parents  and  pastor  and  Sunday  school  teacher  have  all  done 
their  duty  there  is  little  doubt  as  to  what  the  result  will  be. 
"Conversion,"  says  Coe,  "or  some  equivalent  personalizing 
of  religion,  is  a  normal  part  of  adolescent  growth." 

The  Personal  Touch.  The  surest  results  are  those  which 
come  from  personal  contact,  heart  to  heart.  The  teacher 
must  use  tact.  "Abruptly  to  ask  a  boy  to  speak  in  meeting, 
or  to  quiz  him  before  the  class  about  his  religious  life,  is 
sometimes  either  to  alienate  him  altogether  or  to  inoculate 
him  against  deeper  religious  impressions  later  in  life."  But 
there  will  come  the  time  when  the  word  can  be  sjjoken,  and 
the  teacher  must  be  ready  to  speak  it.  Dr.  Starbuck  has 
admirably  summed  up  the  matter:  "One  can  scarcely  think 
of  a  single  pedagogical  rule  in  regard  to  religious  training 
after  the  end  of  childhood  which  might  not  violate  the 
deepest  needs  of  the  person  whom  it  is  the  ])uqjose  to  help. 
The  first  demand  is  that  the  teacher  or  spiritiud  leader  shall 
know  something  of  the  case  he  is  to  deal  with — his  training, 
his  temperament,  and  the  present  trend  of  his  life.  It  re- 
quires careful  reading  into  human  nature  to  know  what  a 
person  needs  and. is  ri])e  for — the  magic  stroke  which  is  to 
change  a  child  into  a  man." 

A  Comparative  View.     The  Rev.  William  Smith,  following 


THE  EARLY  ADOLESCENT  PERIOD 


7r 


Roads,  has  comi)iled  a  very  helpful  comijarative  view  of  the 
first  three  periods: 


Primal y  Age 
1—6  Years 
Restlessness 
Activity 
Frankness 
Faith  and  Trust 
Dependent 
Concrete 
Imagination  Age 
Imitates  Parents 
Sex-  Unconscious 
No  Time  Thought 
Timidity 


Childhood 
7-12  Years 

Less  Restlessness 
Still  Active 
Shyness 
Independence 
Group  Age 
Hero  Age 
Memory  Age 
Imitates  Companions 
Sex-Repellent 
Lives  in  To  day 
Courage 


Youth  of  Adolescence 
13-18  Years 
Storm  and  Stress 
Less  Active 
Diplomatic 
Confidence 

"Gang"  or  "Set"  Age 
Abstract  Age 
Philosophic  Age 
Imitates  Noble  Deeds 
Sex-Attracted 
Ideals 

Recklessness 
Doubts 
On  "Fool's  Hill" 


CHAPTER  XI 
LATER  ADOLESCENXE 

The  Vital  Years  between  seventeen  or  eighteen  and  twenty- 
five  are  the  time  of  adjustment  and  self-discovery.  The  yovith 
finds  himself.  It  is  the  college  age,  the  age  of  apprenticeshij), 
of  preparation  for  life,  of  far  hopes  and  ambitions.  The 
youth  more  and  more  is  learning  to  concentrate  his  energies 
upon  one  thing.  He  talks  much  now  of  specialties.  Paul's 
text,  "This  one  thing  I  do,"  appeals  to  him.  He  throws  him- 
self with  tremendous  energy  into  whatever  he  does.  The 
college  athlete  works  at  his  training  for  months  and  even 
years  with  an  intensity  that  one  may  look  for  in  vain  else- 
where. Men  like  Galileo,  Weber,  Beethoven,  Wilberforce, 
Michael  Angelo  did  much  of  their  best  work  before  they 
were  twenty.  It  is  the  age  of  tremendous  activity,  both 
physical  and  mental.  If  the  activity  be  turned  to  good  ends, 
it  enriches  the  world;  many  of  the  most  significant  additions 
ever  made  to  art,  science,  literature,  philosophy,  religion 
have  come  from  young  lives  scarcely  out  of  their  teens.  If 
this  activity  be  malign,  the  evil  is  not  to  be  measured;  the 
greater  part  of  the  crimes  of  the  world  are  committed  by 
those  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  twenty-five.  Indeed, 
the  period  has  been  denominated  the  age  of  crime,  or,  in  softer 
words,  "the  wild  oats  period."  In  reality  it  is  not  the  sowing 
period  at  all;  in  most  cases  it  will  be  found  that  the  wild  oats 
were  sown  during  early  adolescence.  In  this  later  period 
they  spring  up  into  deeds  which  are  harvested  in  shame 
and  disgrace.  The  boy  of  thirteen  who  runs  with  a  "gang," 
who  neglects  Sunday  school,  who  learns  to  smoke  cigarettes, 
to  run  the  streets  nights,  to  pilfer  from  orchards,  and  play 
truant  from  school,  is  sowing  the  seed  which  he  may  harvest 
in  crime  before  he  is  twenty-one. 

Doubt.  The  doubtings  and  qticstionings  which  began  in 
c.irly  adolescence  culminate  during  this  later  ]>eriod.  Says 
Ilaslctt:   "Doubt  begins  to  reveal  itself  in  females  at  about 

72 


LATER  ADOLESCENCE  7^ 

the  age  of  eleven  or  twelve,  is  at  its  height  at  fifteen  and  six- 
teen, '  disappearing  almost  entirely  at  about  twenty-one. 
Doubt  appears  in  males  at  twelve  or  thirteen,  is  highest  at 
seventeen  to  nineteen  or  twenty,  strong  again  at  twenty- 
three,  and  remains  in  varying  force  throughout  adolescence." 
The  doubt  in  most  cases  centers  about  religious  questions, 
and  it  is  often  the  most  pronounced  in  those  who  have  had 
the  most  rigorous  early  training.  The  narrower  the  religious 
ideals  of  the  home,  the  greater  the  storm  and  stress  of  the 
reconstruction  period.  But  religious  doubting  is  not  a  thing 
really  to  be  deplored.  He  who  confesses  that  he  has  never 
had  doubts  confesses  that  he  has  never  thought  at  all  for 
himself.  For  the  young  mind  to  doubt  is  usually  a  per- 
fectly normal  phenomenon.  The  keen  young  intellect  must 
try  everything  for  itself.  Its  doubting  is  in  reality  a  process 
of  evolution  rather  than  revolution.  If  the  foundations  have 
been  carefully  laid,  and  if  the  doubtings  are  met  with  sym- 
pathy and  argued  as  man  to  man,  the  period  will  leave  the 
youth  stronger  and  better.  If,  however,  nothing  but  nar- 
row dogma  and  creed  and  system  has  been  given  the  youth 
in  his  earlier  years,  he  may  be  obliged  to  throw  it  all  over- 
board and  begin  anew,  perhaps  after  dangerous  models. 

Storm  and  Stress.  But  doubt  is  only  one  of  many  emo- 
tional ex]>eriences  in  the  "upheaval  of  youth."  Starbuck 
fotmd  that  of  those  whom  he  questioned  three  fourths  of 
the  women  and  half  of  the  men  had  passed  through  a  period 
of  storm  and  stress.  "The  average  ages  for  the  beginning 
and  ending  of  the  storm  and  stress  experience  were  found 
to  be  13.6  and  16.7  for  women,  and  16.5  and  22  for  men." 
Bumham  cites  the  journal  of  Marie  Bashkirtsefif  to  illustrate 
this  phenomenon  so  common  in  young  life:  "All  the  char- 
acteristics of  her  sex  at  the  period  of  adolescence  are  de- 
scribed. Self-conscious,  vain,  imaginative,  self-deprecatory, 
dreaming  by  day  and  by  night,  demanding  unbounded  love, 
hating  moderation  in  everything,  .sometimes  pathetically 
religious,  making  God  her  confidant  in  the  ideal  love  aff"air 
with  the  Duke  whom  she  had  never  met,  tortured  by  jeal- 
ousy, love,  envy,  deceit,  wounded  vanity,  by  every  hideous 
feeling  in  the  world,  when  the  Duke  marries,  working  with 
mad  intensity  for  her  ideals — it  is  no  wonder  that  so  intense 


74  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

a  flame  soon  burned  ovit,  and  that  she  died  at  the  close  of  the 
period  of  adolescence."  This  is  an  extreme,  but  many  ado- 
lescents feel  some  phase  of  this  storm.  Fiction  is  full  of  this 
phenomenon:  Maggie  Tulliver,  David  Grieve,  Robert  Els- 
mere,  Waldo  in  "The  Story  of  an  African  Farm,"  are  good 
examples.  "The  experience,"  says  Dr.  Murray,  "takes 
various  forms:  a  sense  of  sin,  sense  of  imperfection,  fear  of 
death,  brooding  depression,  morbid  introspection,  distress 
over  doubts,  efforts  to  control  passion,  and  friction  against 
surroundings."  Dr.  Starbuck  has  explained  the  causes: 
"The  storm  and  stress  is  due  to  the  functioning  of  new 
powers,  which  have  no  specific  outlet,  and  are  driven  to 
force  for  themselves  an  expression  in  one  way  or  another. 
If  there  is  no  channel  open  for  the  free  expression  of  this 
new  energy,  it  wastes  itself  against  unyielding  and  unde- 
veloped faculties,  and  is  recognized  by  its  pain  accompani- 
ment, distress,  unrest,  anxiety,  heat  of  passion,  groping  after 
something,  brooding  self-condemnation;  but  if  there  be  no 
resistance,  there  results  a  burst  of  new  life,  fresh  conscious- 
ness, appreciation  of  truth,  a  personal  hold  on  virtue,  joy, 
and  sense  of  well-being." 

Conversion.  The  period  of  storm  and  stress  has  been 
called  the  natural  period  for  conversion.  The  experience 
comes  to  the  average  life  at  about  fifteen.  Coe  found  that 
in  1,784  cases  of  conversion  of  which  he  had  the  records  the 
average  was  16.4  years,  and  that  women  on  the  average  are 
converted  two  or  three  years  younger  than  men.  From  the 
statistics  available  there  seem  to  be  two  periods  of  conver- 
sion: one  about  twelve  and  one  about  twenty.  The  curve 
at  twelve  in  almost  every  instance  is  higher  than  the  curve 
at  twenty.  Says  Dr.  Coe:  "Let  us  interpret  the  facts  as 
follows:  The  mental  condition  during  adolescence  is  par- 
ticularly favorable  to  deep  religious  impressions.  This  is  the 
time  when  the  child  becomes  competent  to  make  a  deeply 
personal  life  choice;  such  a  choice  is  easier  than  either  before 
or  after;  this  is,  accordingly,  the  time  at  which  a  wise  church 
will  expect  to  reap  its  chief  harvest  of  members." 

It  must  not  be  gathered,  however,  that  all  youth  pass 
through  this  storm  period,  or  that  there  is  no  other  way  of 
entering  the  church  save  throtigh  this  tumultuous  exjjeri- 


LATER  ADOLESCENCE  75 

ence  of  adolescent  conversion.  Three  facts  should  be  rec- 
ognized :  I .  A  large  minority  of  human  beings  never  pass 
through  any  experience  of  stonn  and  stress;  perhaps  a 
quarter  of  all  women  and  fully  half  of  all  men.  2.  Very 
many  people  have  no  tunmltuovis  experience  in  their  con- 
version, and  there  are  some  who  never  lose  a  conscious  com- 
munion with  God,  whose  Christian  experience  may  be  said 
to  be  unbroken  from  their  earliest  lisping  of  prayers  in  in- 
fancy. 3.  There  are  many,  and  there  might  with  wise  manage- 
ment be  many  more,  converted  years  before  the  period  called 
that  of  storm  and  stress  begins.  Says  Dr.  E.  S.  Lewis  very 
wisely:  "A  pious  mother  may  hold  her  child  to  God  from  his 
birth.  Dr.  Rishell  reminds  us  that  'many  of  the  noblest 
specimens  of  Christian  manhood  and  womanhood  are  found 
among  those  who  were  trained  in  the  habits  and  dispositions 
of  religion  from  infancy.'  .  .  .  Some  years  ago  The  Golden 
Rule  sent  out  a  circular  letter  to  a  large  number  of  repre- 
sentative ministers.  In  answer,  two  thirds  of  them  declared 
that  they  could  not  definitely  fix  a  day  when  they  came 
from  darkness  into  light." 

In  the  Sanday  School.  It  has  been  very  difficult  to  keep 
the  young  men  and  women  of  this  period  in  the  Sunday 
school.  They  have  felt  too  often  that  the  school  had  very 
little  to  offer  them.  To  come  without  much  preparation, 
to  be  given  a  lesson  leaf,  to  listen  for  half  an  hour  to  a  teacher 
who  is  droning  interminable  platitudes  to  his  class,  has  not 
attracted  them.  They  are  in  the  intellectual  age;  they  de- 
mand that  things  shall  be  new  and  up  to  date;  they  want  to 
explore  new  territory  and  depart  from  the  conventional, 
humdrum  ways.  Precisely  the  same  problem  is  before  the 
Sunday  school  as  before  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Associa- 
tion in  the  colleges.  The  Christian  Association  has  partly 
solved  it  by  organizing  classes  under  trained  leaders  to 
pursue  special  topics:  "The  Life  of  Paul,"  "The  Apostolic  Age 
of  the  Church,"  "The  Life  of  Jesus,"  "The  Minor  Prophets 
and  Their  Times,"  "The  Social  Teaching  of  Jesus,"  "Old 
Testament  Biography,"  and  such  like.  It  is  a  hint  for  the 
Sunday  school.  The  young  men  and  the  young  women 
must  be  given  special  work,  something  that  they  can  enter 
upon  with  enthusiasm.     If  a  teacher  were  to  go  to  a  dozen 


76  ELE^tENTS  OE  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

young  men  one  at  a  time  and  say,  "We  are  going  to  com- 
mence a  study  of  the  life  of  Paul,  using  Stalker's  book  as  a 
basis.  We  are  going  into  it  thoroughly  and  systematically. 
I  think  you  can  help  us.  We  mean  business.  We  shall  have 
somebody  in  once  in  a  while  to  give  us  special  talks,  and  we 
are  going  to  make  it  profitable  in  many  ways.  I  know  where 
we  can  get  a  dozen  good  books  on  the  subject  and  a  good 
map.  Come  and  help  us  " — if  a  teacher  were  to  go  at  it  "in 
this  way,  he  would  quickly  have  a  class  and  keep  it.  The 
good  teacher  is  elastic  in  his  plans. 

Teacher-Training  Class.  It  is  from  this  period  of  life  that 
the  young  men  and  women  of  the  teacher-training  class 
are  to  come.  It  is  the  golden  period  to  train  one's  self  for 
usefulness  to  others.  Under  a  careful  teacher's  direction 
the  course  of  studies  can  be  made  not  only  interesting  but 
vitally  heli)ful  in  very  many  different  ways.  There  is  op- 
portimity  offered  here  for  enlargement  both  mental  and 
spiritual. 


CHAPTER  XII 
THE  GRADED  CURRICULUM 

The  Basis  of  Grading.  The  most  imvctical  contribution 
which  the  science  of  child  study  has  made  to  practical  edu- 
cational work  has  been  the  graded  curriculum.  It  is  now 
realized  that  grading  is  based  not  alone  on  the  fact  that  the 
mind  of  the  child  becomes  gradually  stronger  and  more 
mature,  but  upon  the  fact  that  it  develops  irregularly,  that 
there  are  periods  of  special  aptitudes  and  of  culmination  and 
crisis.  Children,  we  have  seen,  are  not  little  men  and  little 
women  to  be  given  the  saine  tasks  as  their  elders,  only  in 
simpler  form;  they  have  adaptations  and  instincts  and  pe- 
culiarities which  are  so  distinct  and  so  removed  from  adult 
traits  that  sometimes  it  seems  as  if  they  belonged  to  another 
species.  It  is  the  aim  of  modern  pedagogy  to  take  advan- 
tage of  this  fact  and  to  give  to  the  pupil  at  each  stage  of  his 
development  the  sttidies  peculiarly  fitted  to  that  stage. 
There  is  one  period,  for  instance,  when  play  must  be  a 
dominating  element  in  all  studies,  another  when  memory  is 
at  its  strongest,  another  when  bi()gra])hy  is  best  taught,  and 
still  another  when  chivalric  ideals  and  the  great  altruistic 
principles  of  Christianity  ajJiieal  with  almost  irresistible  force. 
Secular  education  has  recognized  this  fact  and  has  arranged 
with  care  the  sec^uence  and  the  grouping  of  studies  in  its 
curriculum. 

Uniform  Lessons.  The  uniform  Sunday  school  lesson 
series  has  beyt^nd  question  accom])lished  a  marvelous  work. 
It  is  not  to  be  lightly  abandoned;  but  that  it  cannot  furnish 
the  whole  curriculum  of  the  Simday  school  is  evident  to 
anyone  who  has  made  a  study  of  the  science  of  education. 
To  keep  an  adolescent  class  for  months  in  Genesis  and 
Exodus  or  the  Chronicles,  when  at  the  very  crisis  of  their 
spiritual  lives  they  should  be  studying  intensively  the  life 
of  Jesus,  is  a  sad  mistake.  It  is  equally  sad  to  see  little  chil- 
dren struggling  with  the  minor  jirophets.     It  is  being  recog- 

77 


78  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

nized  everywhere  that  the  Uniform  lesson  must  be  abandoned 
by  the  younger  classes  and  must  be  largely  supplemented  if 
used  in  the  higher  grades.  The  ideal  curriculum  is  graded 
in  its  material  to  the  various  stages  of  development  repre- 
sented by  the  pupils.  Supplemental  lessons  would  be  un- 
necessary with  such  a  curriculum. 

The  Need  of  Grading.  For  the  Sunday  school  is  a  school, 
to  be  graded  according  to  scientific  principles  like  other 
schools.  The  pupil  at  each  stage  of  his  career  is  to  be  given 
that  for  which  he  is  adapted.  The  great  text-book  of  the 
school  is,  of  course,  the  Bible,  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  the  Bible  is  a  library  in  itself.  It  could  furnish  a  univer- 
sity with  subjects  for  study.  If,  as  seems  inevitable,  the 
Sunday  school  is  to  furnish  the  religious  education  of  the 
coming  generation,  it  must  be  made  scientific  in  its  methods. 
It  must  be  made  broad  in  its  foundations.  "It  is  something 
more  than  a  Bible  school.  It  is  a  school  of  Christian  knowl- 
edge, and  must  gather  into  its  course  of  study  more  than  the 
content  of  the  Bible.  So  far  as  may  be,  this  course  must 
give  to  childhood  and  youth  the  largest  possible  knowledge 
of  the  principles  of  religion."  To  reach  this  ideal  will  de- 
mand great  changes;  but  the  Graded  Lessons  prepared  under 
the  direction  of  the  International  Sunday  School  Association, 
the  courses  for  the  Elementary  grades  being  ready  for  intro- 
duction at  time  of  this  writing,  give  promise  of  a  better  era. 

The  AcquJsitional  Period.  We  have  seen  that  until  about 
the  age  of  twelve  or  thirteen  the  acquisitional  powers  of  the 
child  predominate.  There  is  little  reflection  and  little  ability 
for  ex])ression  in  action  of  the  fruits  of  reflection.  The  child 
is  adjusting  himself;  he  is  getting  acquainted  with  his  sur- 
roundings. The  material  present  is  all-absorbing.  To  reach 
him  now  one  must  appeal  to  him  through  the  concrete.  We 
have  found  three  well-defined  stages  in  this  period,  giving 
rise  in  Sunday  school  parlance  to  three  departments:  (i)  the 
Beginners'  Department,  including  the  ages  of  three,  four, 
and  five;  (2)  the  Primary  Dei)artnient,  six,  seven,  and 
eight;  (3)  the  Junior  Department,  nine,  ten,  eleven,  and 
twelve.  Let  tis  i)rescribe  a  curriculum  for  these  various 
grades,  looking  only  to  the  a])titudes  of  the  pupils  as  we 
have  determined  them  in  our  study  of  child  life. 


THE  GRADED  CURRICULUM  79 

The  Beginners'  Department.  The  kindergarten  age  cor- 
responds to  the  age  of  myth  and  story  in  the  development 
of  the  race.  The  course  at  this  stage  must  appeal  to  sense- 
perception,  with  its  objects  from  nature  and  art,  pictures, 
models,  etc.,  to  imitation  and  suggestion,  to  imagination 
with  its  simjjle  stories  from  the  Bible  and  from  secular 
literature,  to  the  memory,  and  to  motor  activity  with  its 
action  exercises,  its  transitions,  its  marching  to  music.  The 
stories  told  the  child  should  be  vital  and  true  to  the  funda- 
mentals of  right  and  truth,  and  they  should  be  simple  and 
unstilted.  Every  story  should  center  about  a  person  and 
should  bring  that  person  out  with  realistic  intensity. 

The  Primary  Department.  Here  the  instruction  is  still 
largely  by  means  of  the  story,  but  this  instruction  may  now 
be  supplemented  in  many  ways.  The  stories  now  may  be 
grouped  about  moral  truths.  For  a  month  or  more  there 
may  be  stories  illustrating  truth;  then  may  come  obedience, 
love,  the  goodness  of  God,  and  the  like.  Pictures  now  are 
of  great  importance.  Nature  study  may  be  taught  with 
great  profit  to  illustrate  God's  love  and  care.  To  the  Old 
Testament  stories  may  be  added  now  simple  incidents  from 
the  life  of  Christ,  like  the  Bethlehem  story  and  the  blessing 
of  little  children.  There  is  to  be  no  attempt  at  chronology. 
The  stories  must  still  be  kept  "out  of  place,  out  of  time." 
Masterpieces  of  secular  fiction  for  childhood  may  be  read 
now  to  the  children,  and  condensed  biographies  may  be  given. 
The  motor  activities  of  the  child  may  still  be  controlled  by 
variations  of  position,  marching  to  music,  and  by  the  use 
of  simple  manual  work  related  to  the  lesson  of  the  day. 
Memory  is  now  active,  and  simple  sections,  wholly  within 
the  comprehension  of  the  child,  like  the  twenty-third  psalm, 
may  be  memorized,  and  also  little  verses  and  simple  hymns. 

The  Junior  Department.  The  course  of  study  in  the 
Junior  Department  is  much  different  from  anything  the 
child  has  previously  taken.  This  is  the  dreaded  pre-adolescent 
period,  when  the  motor  activities  are  so  vitally  predominant. 
The  pupil  must  do  something.  The  story  now  must  have 
action  intense  and  dramatic  if  it  is  to  hold  the  attention. 
The  boy  delights  to  read  of  hunting  and  trai)ping  and  ad- 
venture, and  his  games  reflect  his  reading.     The  gang  spirit 


8o  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

begins  to  rule.  The  teacher  who  tries  to  preach  to  such 
a  class,  to  moraUze  or  to  teach  abstract  reUgious  truth,  will 
get  small  hearing.  The  material  now  must  be  hero  biography 
both  from  the  Bible  and  from  general  Uterature.  Illustra- 
tions should  be  drawn  from  the  world  of  science  and  action. 
The  pupils'  reading  should  be  wisely  directed.  It  would  be 
well  to  spend  several  minutes  of  each  period  discussing 
books  and  reading.  Geography  should  be  commenced  in 
earnest,  about  a  year  after  the  studies  of  the  day  school  have 
made  the  jnipils  familiar  with  the  general  outlines  of  the 
continents;  and  this  will  generally  be  about  the  middle  of 
the  junior  period.  Maps  should  be  drawn  in  the  class,  and 
models  of  the  geography  of  the  Holy  Land  should  be  made. 
The  element  of  chronology  may  now  to  a  limited  extent  be 
introduced.  The  stories  of  the  history  of  Israel  may  be  taken 
up  in  chronological  order  and  outlines  of  the  lives  of  Old 
Testament  characters,  like  Joseph  or  Moses  or  David,  may 
be  made.  The  order  should  be,  first,  geography,  then  history 
that  makes  use  of  the  geography.  The  teacher  should  re- 
member also  that  this  is  the  golden  age  of  the  memory.  The 
])Uinl  may  now  learn  the  books  of  the  Bible,  the  Ten  Com- 
mandments, a  few  of  the  psalms,  and  such  other  portions 
of  Scrii)ture  as  will  be  most  heljiful  to  him  for  the  truth  they 
embody.  Above  all,  the  teaching  should  keep  the  pupil 
active.  He  should  have  a  notebook,  or  colors,  or  a  model 
to  work  with  at  frequent  intervals,  or  he  should  be  set  to 
looking  up  stories  in  the  Bible,  or  be  put  to  some  other  exer- 
cise that  will  keep  his  hands  as  active  as  his  brain.  The 
studies  of  this  period,  therefore,  are  elementary  history  and 
biography,  memory  work,  reading,  nature  study,  and  manual 
work. 

Biography.  The  framer  of  the  Sunday  school  curriculum 
will  have  it  impressed  upon  him  constantly  that  biograjihy 
during  the  actiuisitional  and  assiinilative  periods  is  of  su- 
])reme  imj^ortance.  Large  ])ortions  of  the  Bible  are  history, 
but  it  is  history  told  by  means  of  the  biographies  of  rej^re- 
sentative  lives.  It  is  as  if  one  were  to  write  the  history  of  the 
United  States  by  simply  telling  the  story  of  the  lives  of 
Washington  and  the  succeeding  iiresidents,  with  short 
sketches  of  men   like   Channing,   Beecher,   Emerson,   Long- 


THE  GRADED  CURRICULUM  8i 

fellow,  Freinont,  Astor,  and  Edison.  This  is  the  most  primi- 
tive type  of  history  and  the  one  most  easily  understood. 
First  of  all,  it  is  concrete.  Even  the  smallest  child  can  under- 
stand the  life  of  Joseijh.  It  is  the  simple  story  of  one  life 
told  in  images  that  for  the  most  part  are  familiar  to  the 
experience  of  the  youngest,  yet  it  may  be  studied  by  savants 
as  a  document  upon  the  civilization  and  the  annals  of  ancient 
Egypt.  There  should  be  biography  from  the  beginning  of 
the  course  to  the  beginning  of  the  expressional  period  at 
sixteen  when  formal  history  is  best  given.  First  it  should  be 
the  simple  myth  stories,  then  the  lives  of  the  great  hero 
leaders:  the  i)atriarchs,  Moses,  Joshua,  Samson  and  the  other 
judges,  with  Samuel,  Elijah,  ancj  the  })rophets.  Then  should 
come  more  systematic  biography,  biography  with  geography 
and  history  in  the  background :  the  lives  of  Paul,  of  Peter,  of 
David,  of  Daniel,  of  the  patriarchs;  indeed,  of  all  in  the  fore- 
going list,  told  now  with  the  added  element  of  historical 
chronolog}^  and  geographical  background.  The  life  of  Jesus 
studied  from  various  standpoints  should  be  reserved  for  the 
great  religious  crisis  period  of  adolescence.  The  tyjiical  lives 
of  the  Bible  are  not  exhausted  with  one  study  of  them.  They 
may  be  approached  again  and  again,  each  time  with  a 
broadened  outlook  and  from  a  new  standpoint.  Children 
should  be  led  to  feel  the  story.  For  them  it  should  be  made 
dramatic,  vivid,  real.  Adults  will  demand  the  philosophy 
of  events.  They  will  want  historical  perspective,  cause  and 
effect,  sources  and  results.  A  graded  curriculum  might  be 
made,  using  biography  alone. 

The  Intermediate  Department.  The  early  adolescent 
period  needs  the  most  careful  supervision  as  to  its  curric- 
ulum. According  to  psychology,  at  twelve  or  thirteen  the 
child  enters  upon  the  assimilational  period  of  his  education. 
Up  to  this  point  he  has  been  gaining  percepts;  now  he  begins 
to  see  the  relation  of  percepts  and  to  combine  them  of  his 
own  volition  into  concepts.  He  reflects  now  tij)on  the  rela- 
tion of  things.  He  begins  the  i>rocess  of  self-building,  and 
so  begins  the  formation  of  character.  To  use  a  common 
illustration,  the  child  u])  to  twelve  is  like  one  who  is  eating 
a  hearty  dinner  of  many  things;  after  twelve  he  begins  to 
digest  and  assimilate  the  food  which  he  has  taken.     Into  the 


82  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

Intermediate  Department,  therefore,  should  be  introduced 
thought  studies.  It  is  the  high-school  period,  with  its  litera- 
ture and  history  and  science  and  college  preparatory  work 
generally.  The  pupil  is  ready  for  a  systematic  study  of 
biblical  epochs,  but  the  rehgious  crisis  which  is  now  upon 
him  makes  it  imperative  that  the  great  altruistic  heroes  of 
the  race  be  presented  with  force.  Now  is  the  time  for  a 
careful  biography  of  Christ.  The  pupil  might  write  his  own 
life  of  the  Master,  directed  week  by  week  by  his  teacher. 
He  might  illustrate  it  with  maps  and  drawings,  and  with  pic- 
tures from  periodicals.  Then  a  study  of  the  life  of  Paul  may 
be  attempted,  and  a  life  also  of  David.  The  outlines  of 
church  history  and  of  denominational  government,  and  par- 
ticularly the  fundamental  Christian  and  denominational 
doctrines,  should  be  clearly  taught.  Poetry  now,  and,  in- 
deed, culture  material  of  all  varieties,  is  appreciated  as  never 
before.  The  truth  should  be  so  presented  that  the  moral 
will  enforce  itself — ^but  the  spiritual  truth  should  be  ever 
present.  The  teacher  should  recognize  fully  the  pupil's 
tendency  to  doubt,  and  should  help  him  in  every  possible 
way,  though  not  obtrusively.  The  organization  of  clubs, 
study  circles,  and  guilds  is  often  helpful.  The  studies  of 
this  period,  therefore,  should  be:  geography  and  map- 
drawing;  history  taken  up  now  systematically;  biography, 
especially  of  Christ;  literature,  especially  that  centering 
about  the  great  chivalric  heroes;  church  history,  doctrines, 
and  government;  consecutive  notebook  work  with  illustra- 
tions; carefully  directed  reading,  and  as  far  as  possible  the 
making  of  models  and  illustrative  apparatus. 

Expression.  With  later  adolescence  comes  the  last  opera- 
tion of  the  mind,  reproduction,  or,  as  it  is  better  termed, 
perhaps,  expression.  This  has  been  defined  as  "the  operation 
wliich  involves  the  creation  of  thought,  and  the  exj^ression 
of  thought  and  feeling  in  language  and  action."  After  the 
taking  and  assimilating  of  food  there  should  come  physical 
vigor  and  the  capacity  for  muscular  work.  After  the  assimi- 
lation of  mental  food — a  problem  or  a  course  of  action  care- 
fully thought  out — there  should  come  an  intellectual  creation. 
In  the  same  way  the  results  of  moral  training  should  be 
action — character  which  will  yield  what  the  Bible  designates 


THE  GRADED  CURRICULUM  83 

as  "fruits."  "Psychology  plainly  shows,"  declares  Roark, 
"that  in  the  moral  education  of  the  young  the  here,  and  not 
the  hereafter,  deeds,  and  not  creeds,  should  receive  the  em- 
phasis." If  they  are  given  the  emphasis,  and  long  enough, 
the  results  will  be  deeds — habits  of  reverence,  honesty, 
unselfishness,  godliness  in  the  life  of  the  pupil;  and  such  a 
result  should  be  the  ultimate  aim  of  Sunday  school  work. 

The  Senior  Class.  Expressional  power  comes  at  about  the 
sixteenth  or  seventeenth  year,  the  age  in  America  when  young 
men  start  for  college.  The  mental  powers  are  now  mature 
and  very  active.  "There  are  now  enlarged  conceptions  and 
deeper  realizations  of  religion,  more  serious  views  of  life  and 
duty,  developed  and  settled  condition  of  character,  and  a 
growing  desire  for  leadership."  The  course  now  should 
consist  of  exhaustive  studies  of  subjects:  single  books  of  the 
Bible  studied  with  thoroughness,  the  book  of  Acts,  for  ex- 
ample; periods  of  biblical  history;  studies  of  ancient  geog- 
raphy, like  a  careful  exploration  of  old  Jerusalem;  studies 
of  the  literary  forms  of  the  Bible  and  kindred  subjects. 
Such  a  class  does  not  relish  fragments,  a  lesson  here,  then  a 
jump  of  several  chapters;  it  wants  the  whole  of  a  subject 
studied  thoroughly.  It  is  with  this  class  that  teacher-training 
work  can  best  be  carried  on.  The  later  adolescent  is  full  of 
zeal  and  courage.  He  delights  in  breaking  into  new  fields. 
The  child  study  and  psychology  and  educational  science  will 
appeal  to  him.  The  life  of  Jesus  may  now  be  studied  from 
the  ethical  and  religious  standpoints.  The  epistles  of  Paul 
can  now  be  appreciated.  Studies  should  draw  the  class 
strongly  toward  the  Christian  life.  Its  doubts  and  storm 
and  stress  should  be  cared  for,  and  everything  should  be  so 
ordered  that  when  the  crisis  is  past  the  pupil  shall  find  him- 
self at  peace  with  himself  and  man  and  God. 

The  Adult  Classes.  The  adult  work  corresponds  to  uni- 
versity and  professional  school  courses.  There  is  no  end  to 
the  subjects  that  may  be  pursued.  The  Bible  may  be  studied 
book  by  book  by  the  seminar  method.  Each  student  may 
be  given  one  phase  of  the  work  to  write  out,  then  the  work 
of  all  inay  be  combined  into  one  exhaustive  commentary 
of  the  class's  own  making.  There  may  be  studies  of  doctrine, 
of  the  history  of  monotheism,  of  the  development  of  the 


84  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

canon,  and  so  on  indefinitely.  The  history  of  the  church 
and  of  missions  and  of  the  Sunday  school  may  be  taken  up. 
No  one  ever  graduates  from  the  Sunday  school.  The  course 
is  endless,  for  it  is  drawn  from  the  great  reservoir  of  religious 
truth. 

Promotions.  With  a  graded  school  and  a  graded  cvirric- 
uliun  there  must  be  a  constant  advancement  of  classes. 
Each  year  the  puj^il  is  promoted  into  new  studies.  Shiill  the 
teacher  go  with  the  class  or,  as  in  the  secular  schools,  remain 
teaching  the  same  grade  year  after  year  while  class  after 
class  comes  and  goes?  In  many  schools  this  is  a  hard  ques- 
tion. The  movement  of  classes  from  teacher  to  teacher  docs 
away  with  the  beautiful  old  custom  of  the  teacher's  growing 
old  with  her  class,  living  year  after  year  with  the  same  pupils 
until  they  grow  to  be  like  members  of  her  own  family.  How- 
ever, despite  this  bit  of  sentiment,  it  is  far  better  from  the 
standpoint  of  educational  science  for  the  class  to  advance 
and  the  teacher  remain.  He  who,  for  instance,  has  made  a 
study  of  adolescent  boys  until  he  understands  them  and  can 
lead  and  mold  them  had  better  remain  his  whole  life  long  in 
charge  of  this  work.  Then,  too,  it  is  better  for  the  ptipil  to 
change  teachers  periodically.  He  gets  a  variety  of  teachers 
and  the  fact  stimulates  his  interest.  He  gets  in  the  strong 
school  the  teacher  always  .best  fitted  for  him.  It  is  one  of 
the  great  causes  of  leaks  in  the  Sunday  schools  of  the  old 
type  that  a  class  grows  away  from  its  teacher,  or  that  a 
group  of  boys  or  girls  is  condemned  to  sit  year  after  year 
with  no  hoj^e  of  change  under  the  preaching  of  a  droning 
moralizer  who  knows  little  of  the  science  of  teaching. 

Knowing  and  Doing.  And  now  the  final  word:  there  is 
always  a  danger  that  Sunday  school  teaching  will  become 
merely  academic,  that  it  will  feed  the  intellect  and  nothing 
else.  There  is  danger,  on  the  other  hand,  of  too  much  goody- 
goody  moralizing,  of  too  much  piotis  preaching,  too  much 
pressing  home  of  the  central  trtith,  too  much  searching  and 
probing  of  the  soil  to  see  if  the  seed  has  begun  to  germinate. 
Against  both  of  these  extremes  the  teacher  must  guard  him- 
self. He  must  keep  before  him,  however,  the  great  truth 
that  every  life  sooner  or  later  will  ex])ress  itself,  that  if  food 
of  any  kind  is  taken  and  assimilated  it  will  result  in  capacity 


THE  GRADED  CURRICULUM  S5 

for  action,  and  he  shotild  see  to  it  that  he  is  supplying  the 
proper  food.  The  one  great  aim  of  all  religious  teaching  is 
character,  and  if  character  is  not  forming  in  the  right  direc- 
tion, something  is  wrong  with  curriculum  or  teacher.  This 
is  a  high  ideal,  but  no  other  is  safe. 


PART  II 
SOME    ELEMENTS   OF   PSYCHOLOGY 


CHAPTER  XIII 
PRELIMINARY  VIEW 

Definitions.  Psychology — from  the  Greek  words  psyche, 
"soul"  or  "mind,"  and  logos,  "words  about"  or  "the  science 
of" — has  been  defined  as  "a  scientific  study  of  the  inind," 
or  "the  science  of  inental  processes."  There  is,  perhaps, 
little  need  in  a  study  like  this  to  define  carefully  the  term 
"mental  processes."  The  word  "mental"  may  be  taken  to 
cover  all  of  the  phenomena  of  consciousness;  it  embraces 
all  that  comes  into  our  sensible  experience.  A  "process"  is 
something  that  is  going  forward.  Other  sciences  may  deal 
with  things;  psychology  deals  with  processes — with  the 
moving  stream  of  consciousness.  "It  is  a  continuous  opera- 
tion, a  progressive  change,  which  the  scientific  observer  can 
trace  throughout  its  course.  It  melts  into  and  blends  with 
operations  which  follow  and  precede  it."  It  is  not  a  thing. 
To  investigate  the  mind  as  a  thing  would  be  to  dissect  the 
dead  brain  and  nerve  systems,  and  this  is  anatomy.  Psy- 
chology deals,  rather,  with  the  tiow — now — now — Jiow  of 
conscious  life. 

We  have  already  made  large  drafts  upon  the  science  of 
psychology  in  our  lessons  devoted  to  child  study.  Where 
we  dealt  with  temperament,  with  the  primal  instincts  like 
play  and  imitation  and  collecting,  with  imagination  and 
memory  and  religious  feeling,  we  were  within  this  domain. 
It  is  impossible  to  draw  any  hard-and-fast  lines  of  separa- 
tion. The  great  changes  of  adolescence  are  as  much  psy- 
chological as  they  are  physiological.  It  remains  to  pick  up 
these  scattered  threads  and  to  study  more  carefully  the 
processes  of  the  human  mind  that  we  may  know  more  fully 
how  to  take  advantage  of  its  laws. 

Psychology  for  the  S«nday  School.  We  can  make  no  at- 
temjit  at  a  systematic  study  of  ])sychology.  Whole  sections 
of  the  subject  must  of  necessity  be  omitted,  and  :nany  im- 
portant phases  must  be  passed  over  with  a  mere  paragraph. 

89 


90  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

The  aim  will  be  to  select  only  those  things  that  will  be  of 
value  to  the  practical  teacher,  and  to  apply  them  to  actual 
needs  in  as  sensible  a  manner  as  possible.  The  subject  will 
therefore  be  as  much  pedagogy  as  it  is  psychology;  the  first 
step  in  each  case  will  be  to  elucidate  the  psychological  prin- 
ciple or  law  and  then  to  give  hints  as  to  how  it  may  be  ap- 
plied to  Sunday  school  conditions.  In  other  words,  some 
materials  are  to  be  selected  from  the  science  of  psychology 
for  the  building  up  of  an  art  of  Sunday  school  pedagogy.  Or, 
better  still,  the  principles  of  the  science  are  to  be  discussed 
in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  to  the  teacher  methods  and 
material  for  his  work.  That  such  a  thing  is  demanded  need 
not  be  debated.  The  Sunday  school  deals,  first  of  all,  with 
the  human  mind.  He  who  would  teach  must  make  use  of 
mental  processes.  Even  the  spiritual  life  of  the  pupil  can  be 
approached  only  through  this  channel.  The  teacher  must 
know  the  best  methods  of  approach;  he  must  be  able  to 
select  the  proper  material  and  adapt  it  to  his  class;  he  must 
know  where  to  start,  how  to  gain  attention  and  hold  it,  how 
to  train  the  memory  and  the  imagination  and  the  will ;  he  must 
be  able,  moreov^er,  to  judge  accurately  the  condition  of  his 
class  and  its  point  of  view.  Materials  and  methods  that  will 
succeed  with  one  group  of  learners  will  fail  utterly  with 
another.  The  teacher,  then,  should  sttidy  psychology  to 
su])]ilement  his  knowledge  of  htunan  nature. 

Not  a  Dry  Study,  Psychology  is  the  most  vital  and  vivid 
of  all  the  sciences.  It  deals  with  human  life  and  the  habits 
and  the  workings  of  the  human  soul.  The  veriest  ignoramus 
makes  use  of  it  every  day  of  his  life.  We  all  know  and  use 
great  volumes  of  material  about  mental  processes.  We  have 
devices  to  aid  the  memory,  we  know  how  to  gain  the  atten- 
tion of  others,  we  realize  much  about  the  nature  of  habits, 
of  the  will,  and  the  imagination.  The  study  of  habit,  of 
automatism,  of  memory,  of  observation,  of  the  emotions, 
of  religious  ])sychology  is  in  reality  most  fascinating  if  one 
goes  about  it  aright.  It  opens  up  whole  fields  of  interesting 
material. 

Nothing  is  more  absorbing  than  the  study  of  human  life. 
We  read  novels  with  breathless  interest;  but  the  novel,  if 
it  is  worthy  of  our  time,  must  be  psychologically  true.     It  is 


PRELIMINARY  VIEW  91 

a  study  by  a  master  of  the  workings  of  some  human  soul. 
What  will  be  the  mental  processes  of  Hester  Prynne  with 
the  scarlet  letter  on  her  breast  and  of  Arthur  Dimmesdale 
when  he  sees  it  there?  It  is  the  business  of  the  novelist  to 
tell  us.  Maggie  Tulliver,  in  The  Mill  on  the  Floss,  is  one  of  the 
best  studies  of  adolescence  that  we  can  find.  Why  did 
Gwendolin  feel  her  whole  life  change  when  she  looked  up 
from  the  gaming  table  into  the  eyes  of  Daniel  Deronda? 
Why  in  the  Marble  Faun  did  Hilda,  burdened  with  the 
secret  of  murder,  feel  an  irresistible  impulse  to  pour  out  her 
story  when  she  caught  sight  of  the  confessional  box?  Why 
did  Clifford,  in  The  House  of  the  Seven  Gables,  when  he  was 
fleeing  from  the  dead  man  in  the  old  house,  talk  so  volubly 
to  the  stranger  on  the  car?  These  are  problems' in  psychology, 
and  they  suggest  only  feebly  the  fascinating  interest  of  the 
subject.  The  science  deals  with  the  very  heart  and  soul 
of  human  life. 

The  Physiological  Basis.  Like  everything  else,  the  science 
has  its  roots  deep  in  the  physical.  It  begins  with  the  body. 
The  dependence  of  the  mind  upon  the  nervous  system  is  as 
complete  as  is  the  dejjendence  of  the  central  telegraph  office 
upon  the  wires  and  the  outlying  stations.  Without  them 
there  would  be  almost  total  isolation  and  total  ineffective- 
ness. The  nervous  system  and  the  five  senses  are,  therefore, 
the  natural  starting  point  for  a  systematic  study  of  psy- 
chology. For  our  purpose,  however,  it  will  be  useless  to 
discuss  to  any  extent  this  physiological  basis.  The  Sunday 
school  teacher  need  not  study  the  nervous  system,  or  the 
eye  and  the  ear,  or  the  reactions  of  touch  and  smell  and  taste; 
he  needs  to  consider  only  a  few  of  the  more  common  mental 
processes;  he  need  choose  only  those  facts  which  lie  at  the 
basis  of  pedagogical  method. 

Sensation.  One  phase  of  sensation,  however,  is  important 
to  the  practical  teacher.  Since  the  materials  for  mental 
processes  must  come  altogether  from  sensation;  since,  in- 
deed, we  know  the  outside  world  only  as  it  is  interpreted  by 
bodily  organs,  it  is  obvious  that  our  mental  action  may  be 
influenced  by  the  imjierfections  or  the  temporary  disarrange- 
ment of  these  organs.  It  will  be  well,  then,  for  us  to  consider 
briefly  such  possible  defects.     The  teacher  may  find  a  pupil 


92  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

whose  defective  hearing  makes  him  appear  stupid;  he  may 
find  another  whose  awkwardness  is  caused  by  the  state  of 
his  eyes.  Dyspepsia,  as  all  know,  may  change  the  whole 
color  of  one's  thinking.  "The  loss  of  a  single  sense  deprives 
a  human  life  of  a  whole  kingdom  of  facts."  As  the  first 
step  in  the  mental  process  is  the  entrance  of  the  sensation 
into  consciousness,  it  is  therefore  well  to  examine  the  nature 
of  the  sensation;  or,  in  other  words,  to  find  if 'the  sense  is 
giving  a  true  report.  In  pedagogical  terms,  the  teacher 
should  study  the  sense  life  of  his  pupils,  and  if  there  are 
defects,  they  should  influence  his  teaching. 

Consciousness.  The  fact  that  during  all  of  our  waking 
hours  and,  indeed,  during  many  of  our  sleeping  hours, 
something  which  we  call  consciousness  is  alive  within  us,  is 
one  of  the  miracles  of  human  life.  We  know  not  what  it  is; 
we  cannot  define  it.  "How  it  is,"  says  Huxley,  "that  any- 
thing so  remarkable  as  a  state  of  consciousness  comes  about 
by  the  result  of  irritating  nervous  tissue,  is  just  as  unac- 
countable as  the  appearance  of  the  jinnee  when  Aladdin 
rubbed  his  lamjx"  And  Professor  James  declares  that  "it 
must  be  frankly  confessed  that  in  no  fundamental  sense  do 
we  know  where  our  successive  fields  of  consciotisness  come 
from,  or  why  they  have  the  precise  inner  constitution  which 
they  do  have.  They  certainly  follow  or  accompany  our 
brain  states;  but  if  we  ask  how  the  brain  conditions  them, 
we  have  not  the  remotest  inkling  of  an  answer  to  give." 
We  can  only  start  with  the  general  assertion  that  there  is 
a  field  of  consciousness  and  that  it  is  aflfected  by  sensations 
which  come  through  the  nervous  system.  This  conscious- 
ness is  a  continuous  stream.  Now  it  is  memory,  now  anger, 
now  pain,  now  will.  Sometimes  it  subsides  to  a  mere  trickle; 
sometimes  it  is  a  roaring  torrent.  It  may  contain  but  a  single 
element  or  it  inay  have  a  blend  of  many.  While  we  must 
take  this  stream  for  granted  without  explanation  or  satis- 
factory definition,  we  may  study  the  laws  that  govern  it. 
Dr.  Judd  defines  psychology  as  "the  science  of  consciousness." 


CHAPTER  XIV 

ATTENTION 

Attention.  In  the  foregoing  lesson  we  found  that  psy- 
chology may  be  defined  as  the  science  of  mental  processes, 
and  that  mental  processes  is  but  another  name  for  the  various 
phenomena  of  consciousness.  We  found  also  that  con- 
sciousness, which  is  thus  at  the  very  foundation  of  the 
science,  is  undefinable  and  unexplainable,  and  that  we  must 
simply  take  it  for  granted.  We  found  also  that  nothing  can 
come  into  this  field  of  consciousness  except  sensations  borne 
in  by  some  part  of  the  nervovis  system.  But  not  all  sensa- 
tions can  come  into  the  field  of  consciousness.  There  are 
millions  of  them  that  strike  every  day  upon  our  senses  and 
affect  us  not  at  all.  '  Consciousness  is  like  an  exceedingly 
busy  man  who  can  admit  into  his  inner  office  only  a  very 
few  from  the  throng  of  seekers  without.  It  cannot  attend 
to  every  sensation  that  comes  along.  There  must  be  atten- 
tion, and  attention,  in  the  words  of  Professor  Halleck,  is  "the 
focusing  of  consciousness."  I  am  sitting  by  the  open  win- 
dow on  a  perfect  June  morning  reading  an  absorbingly  in- 
teresting book.  At  length  I  finish  it  and  look  out.  Now  I 
note  the  twitter  of  birds,  the  distant  crowing  of  cocks,  the 
rumble  of  wheels,  the  babble  of  playing  children.  The 
mtiltitudinous  odors  of  the  June  morning  salute  me;  the 
soft  air  fans  my  cheek;  the  hard  chair  is  uncomfortable,  and 
I  arise.  All  of  this  I  now  perceive  for  the  first  time,  but  it 
was  all  present  every  moment  while  I  was  absorbed  in  my 
book.  The  reason  it  comes  to  me  now  is  that  I  remove  the 
focus  of  consciousness  from  the  reading  and  transfer  it  to 
my  surroundings.  This  centering  of  consciousness  upon  a 
single  thing  may  be  carried  to  extremes:  men  have  become 
so  absorbed  in  their  work  as  to  forget  their  meals  and  for  a 
time  even  their  personalities.  Attention,  then,  is  the  cen- 
tralization of  consciousness  upon  one  thing  or  one  group 
of  things. 

93 


94  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

Voluntary  and  Involuntary.  Attention  is  of  two  kinds: 
the  involuntary,  or  spontaneous,  and  the  voluntary,  or 
forced.  The  first  is  the  natural  kind  possessed  in  varj'ing 
degrees  by  all  the  higher  animals.  One  saunters  along  the 
rural  highway  in  perfect  mental  relaxation.  A  dog  barks,  a 
partridge  booms  up  from  the  brakes,  a  brooklet  gurgles  along 
under  the  bridge,  a  load  of  hay  crawls  up  from  the  meadow, 
the  rays  of  the  .sun  beat  down  fiercely,  a  gun  is  discharged 
near.  All  of  this  in  due  order  comes  spontaneously  into 
consciousness  and  is  focused.  But  the  man  is  a  botanist  and 
all  at  once  his  eyes  light  upon  a  new  plant.  Instantly  there 
springs  up  a  new  kind  of  attention — the  voluntary  kind. 
The  mind  does  not  simply  take  note  of  the  fact  and  then 
bound  away  to  other  things.  The  man  seats  himself  and 
begins  to  study  the  flower  intently;  he  draws  forth  a  hand- 
book and  hunts  through  its  pages;  he  applies  the  microscope; 
he  makes  notes  and  measurements  and  drawings;  for  an 
hour  he  may  pore  over  the  little  object  to  the  exclusion  of 
everything  else;  indeed,  he  may  arouse  himself  to  find  a 
thunder  shower  falling  upon  him. 

The  Attention  of  Children  is  of  the  involuntary  kind. 
The  younger  the  child,  the  more  difficult  it  is  for  him  to 
focus  attention.  Every  butterfly  sailing  across  his  field  of 
vision  attracts  him;  every  loud  noise;  every  new  appeal  to 
any  of  his  senses  puts  all  earlier  sensations  out  of  the  field  of 
consciousness.  He  drifts  from  :noment  to  moment  at  the 
mercy  of  the  haphazard  stream  of  sensations  which  touch 
his  life.  Many  never  outgrow  this  inability  to  concentrate. 
I  know  a  college  student  who  cannot  look  up  a  word  in  the 
dictionary  in  less  than  five  minutes.  Every  picture  detains 
him.  All  of  us  must  plead  guilty  to  some  extent.  It  is  easy 
to  drift.  It  is  only  the  philosopher  who  can  refrain  from 
leaving  his  work  and  going  to  the  window  when  the  band 
begins  suddenly  to  play. 

Let  but  a  dancing  bear  arrive, 

A  pig  that  counts  you  four  or  five. 

And  Cato  with  his  moral  strain 

May  strive  to  mend  the  world  in  vain. 

Voluntary  Attention  has  its  roots  in  some  previous  ex- 
perience.   The  botanist's  absorption  in  the  flower  was  caused 


ATTENTION  95 

by  his  previous  studies.  A  geologist  becomes  greatly  excited 
by  finding  a  piece  of  coal  in  the  unexplored  forest;  by  the 
child  or  the  savage  it  would  be  given  but  a  passing  glance. 
Voluntary  attention  is  at  the  very  basis  of  education.  The 
child  who  has  had  little  of  experience  can  find  no  reason  for 
holding  attention  concentrated  on  one  thing  for  a  length  of 
time.  The  more  organized  interests  there  are,  the  more  the 
voluntary  attention.  Two  persons  may  go  over  the  same 
path  and  come  back  with  widely  differing  reports  of  what 
they  saw.  The  botanist  sees  plants,  the  lumberman  trees, 
the  geologist  stones,  the  hunter  animals,  the  artist  colors 
and  landscape.  To  a  Newton  a  falling  apple  is  an  intensely 
interesting  phenomenon,  for  he  brings  a  full-stored  mind 
to  the  observation;  to  a  child  it  is  an  incident  not  worth 
paying  attention  to,  for  he  has  no  materials  with  which  to 
work.  An  ordinary  person  will  be  unable  to  study  a  burn- 
ing candle  for  more  than  one  minute.  To  be  compelled  to 
contemplate  it  long  would  bring  nothing  but  annoyance  and 
fatigue.  Faraday,  however,  undertook  the  study  with 
fascinated  interest,  and  wrote  a  book  about  it.  It  is  the 
province  of  education  to  make  long-continued  attention 
possible.  The  imedvicated  mind  is  a  wandering  mind,  and 
it  is  wandering  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  has  no  stores 
with  which  to  feed  attention. 

Laws  of  Attention.  The  first  general  law  of  attention  is 
that  it  cannot  be  continuously  sustained.  "It  comes  in 
beats."  It  is  like  trying  to  photograph  a  moving  body 
which  is  constantly  getting  out  of  focus.  It  is  like  trying  to 
keep  a  small  insect  in  the  field  of  vision  of  a  microscope. 
The  mind  must  continually  be  brought  back  into  focus,  for, 
says  Professor  James,  even  "voluntary  attention  is  only  a 
momentary  afTair."  In  order  that  attention  may  be  con- 
tinuously fixed  upon  any  subject  the  subject  must  con- 
tinuously show  new  aspects,  must  stimulate  new  curiosity, 
must  bring  up  new  questions,  must  change  at  every  moment. 
How  often  in  our  reading  or  in  our  listening  to  sermons  do 
we  find  suddenly  that  we  are  thinking  of  something  else! 

Then,  again,  to  gain  and  hold  our  attention  a  subject 
must  be  interesting.  It  must  in  some  way  be  connected 
with  the  vital  things  of  our  life.     A  mere  track  in  the  sand 


g6  ELEMENTS  OF  RFXICIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

is  usually  too  trivial  a  thing  to  look  at  twice,  but  what  if  it 
be  the  track  of  our  lost  baby?  Nothing  could  be  more  dull 
reading  than  a  time-table,  but  what  if  we  have  missed  our 
train  home  and  suspect  that  there  is  no  other  train  before 
next  day?  Then,  too,  attention,  even  when  it  can  be  held 
for  a  time  to  one  thing,  rapidly  declines  in  vigor.  The  first 
effect  of  Niagara  is  to  astound  the  senses,  but  after  a  while 
it  puts  one  to  sleep.  Sharp  scolding  may  at  first  win  atten-" 
tion  for  a  teacher,  but  if  it  be  continued  long  enough,  it  will 
have  no  more  effect  than  ordinary  words.  There  must  be 
variety  of  stimulus. 

Pedagogical  Application.  It  was  the  o])inion  of  Dr.  Rosen- 
krantz  tliat  "to  educati<m  the  conce])tion  of  attention  is  the 
most  imjiortant  of  all  those  derived  from  psychology." 
Manifestly,  there  can  be  no  education  unless  there  is  atten- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  learners.  One  who  has  ever  stood 
before  a  Sunday  school  class  of  children  needs  not  to  be  told 
of  the  futility  of  teaching  where  there  is  no  attention.  Each 
little  mind  is  engrossed  with  some  affair  of  the  moment; 
the  teacher  calls  sharply  for  attention,  and  for  an  instant 
all  face  her;  she  begins  her  explanation  and  the  door 
opens  to  admit  the  librarian  or  some  late  comer,  and  instantly 
she  has  lost  everything.  She  begins  with  another  bid  for 
order,  but  nature  has  decreed  that  attention  shall  be  a 
matter  of  moments.  One  little  fellow  drops  his  penny,  or 
snatches  a  hat,  or  makes  some  curious  noise,  and  the  teacher 
has  lost  her  class  again.  Teachers,  then,  must  first  learn  the 
laws  that  govern  attention,  for  without  attention  from  those 
they  are  to  instruct  they  might  as  well  talk  to  the  empty  chairs. 

Some  Practical  Methods.  The  teacher,  as  we  have  already 
shown,  mxist  constantly  change  his  program,  especially  with 
children.  With  adults  also  there  must  be  constant  change 
of  api)eal.  Avoid  monotony.  Vary  the  work  as  much  as 
possible.  Have  a  short  extract  read,  then  show  a  map,  then 
explain  a  point,  then  have  an  illustrative  story  given,  then 
call  for  discus.sion,  then  cite  authority.  There  is  nothing 
that  will  kill  a  class  more  quickly  than  to  have  the  teacher 
explain  in  the  same  tone  throughout  the  whole  hour.  Many 
classes  have  been  droned  to  death.  How  many  in  an  audience 
ever  listen  to  the    whole  sermon  without  mind-wandering? 


ATTENTION  97 

Then,  again,  to  quote  Professor  James:  "Begin  with  the 
line  of  his  [the  pupil's]  native  interests,  and  offer  him  objects 
that  have  some  immediate  connection  with  these."  Objects 
from  nature  will  often  gain  for  a  long  time  the  absorbed  at- 
tention of  a  class  of  children.  I  heard  some  fifty  sermons  one 
year  during  my  early  childhood  and  the  only  thing  I  remember 
of  them  all  is  this  beginning  of  one  of  them:  "I  picked  up  this 
little  geranium  flower  as  I  came  into  the  church  this  evening. 
Somebody  had  dropped  it  or  thrown  it  away."  It  caught 
my  attention.  An  idol,  a  rare  book,  a  model  of  an  ancient 
manuscript,  a  book  of  pressed  wild  flowers  from  Palestine, 
a  bit  of  olive  wood,  a  set  of  copies  of  good  pictures,  and  the 
like  will  awaken  attention  in  any  class.  A  class  of  farmers 
will  listen  attentively  to  descriptions  of  Oriental  farming 
methods;  a  class  of  workmen  will  be  greatly  interested  in 
pictures  and  descriptions  of  tools  or  in  discussions  of  ancient 
labor  problems.  The  teacher  must  study  his  class  for  their 
native  interests. 

Mind-Wandering.  The  tendency  to  let  oneself  get  into  a 
dreamy,  wool-gathering  state  of  mind  should  constantly  be 
combated.  There  is  no  power  of  the  intellect  so  precious 
as  that  of  being  able  to  bring  one's  whole  mental  being  to  a 
focus  upon  a  task  and  to  hold  it  there  until  the  work  is  done. 
Mind-wandering,  as  we  shall  find  later,  is  one  of  the  reasons 
for  poor  memory,  for  memory  is  largely  a  matter  of  attention. 
One  should  cultivate  the  habit  of  mental  singleness  of  aim. 
If  one  finds  his  mind  wandering  during  the  sermon,  it  may  be 
a  help  to  articulate  the  words  silently  to  oneself.  When  one 
sets  himself  a  mental  task  he  should  never  allow  himself  to 
be  attracted  even  for  a  moment  to  the  contemplation  of  other 
things.  Attention  to  some  degree  can  become  a  habit.  One 
should  drill  himself  to  study  even  in  a  room  where  there  are 
playing  children.  If  one  is  teaching  mental  control  to  a 
child,  the  aim  should  be  to  arouse  some  sense  of  personal 
interest,  or  curiosity,  or  higher  motive.  A  child  may  be 
brought  to  learn  to  read  by  explaining  to  him  the  rich  treasures 
locked  up  from  him  in  print;  he  may  go  through  the  drudgery 
of  musical  practice  because  when  he  is  ready  he  will  be  per- 
mitted to  play  in  a  children's  concert;  he  may  learn  a  psalm 
because  it  will  please  mamma  when  he  gets  home. 


98       klI':mi':nts  of  religious  tedagogv 

Fatigue.  The  teacher  of  children  should  be  constantly  on 
the  watch  for  fatigue  in  her  pupils,  for  nothing  is  more  tire- 
some to  little  ones  than  the  strain  of  attention.  In  many- 
city  schools  the  teacher  gets  pupils  who  have  been  under 
strain  in  the  public  schools  during  all  the  week.  There  is  a 
limit  beyond  which  it  is  unsafe  to  try  to  compel  attention. 
Small  children  shoiild  not  be  taught  over  fifteen  minutes, 
and  even  during  this  period  there  should  be  constant  change 
of  subject.  Larger  children  may  be  kept  for  half  an  hotir, 
Imt  the  bowstring  of  attention  must  not  be  kept  too  taut. 
Change  of  method  is  the  very  soul  of  teaching.  Now  ques- 
tions are  to  be  asked  singly,  now  in  concert;  now  the  pui:)ils 
are  to  sit,  now  to  rise;  now  it  is  to  be  a  story,  now  it  is  to  be 
the  story  retold  by  a  child;  now  it  is  to  be  a  concrete  illus- 
tration, a  nest  or  a  flower;  now  it  is  a  song.  Even  adtilt 
classes  should  not  be  required  to  give  attention  for  over  forty- 
five  minutes.  He  is  indeed  a  .skillful  teacher  who  can  hold 
the  attention  of  his  class  profitably  for  a  longer  period. 

Comenius,  the  great  Slavic  educator  (1592-1671),  sunuiied 
up  with  great  wisdoin  the  methods  of  gaining  attention,  and 
in  all  the  years  since  he  has  not  been  improved  upon.  He 
maintained  that  one  should  gain  the  attention  of  a  class : 

1 .  By  always  bringing  before  his  pupils  something  pleasing 
and  ]>rofitable. 

2.  By  introducing  the  subject  of  instruction  in  such  a  way 
as  to  commend  it  to  them,  or  by  stirring  their  intelligences 
into  activity  by  inciting  questions  regarding  it. 

3.  By  standing  in  a  place  elevated  above  the  class,  and 
requiring  all  eyes  to  be  fixed  on  him. 

4.  By  aiding  attention  through  the  representation  of 
everything  to  the  senses  as  far  as  possible. 

5.  By  interrupting  his  instruction  by  frequent  and  per- 
tinent questions — for  example:  "What  have  I  just  said?" 

6.  If  the  boy  who  has  been  asked  a  question  .should  fail  to 
answer,  by  leaping  to  the  second,  third,  tenth,  thirtieth,  and 
asking  the  answer,  without  repeating  the  question. 

7.  By  occasionally  demanding  an  answer  from  anyone  in 
the  whole  class,  and  thus  stirring  uj)  wholesome  rivalry. 

8.  By  giving  an  op])ortunity  to  anyone  to  ask  questions 
when  the  lesson  is  finished. 


CHAPTER  XV 
PERCEPTION 

Perception.  We  have  seen  how  the  great  throbbing,  seeth- 
ing, miiltitudinotxs  world  outside  of  us  beats  at  the  doors  of 
our  senses  and  is  conveyed  in  ten  thousand  sensations  to  that 
something  called  consciousness,  and  we  have  seen  how  veiy 
few  of  these  sensations  are  admitted  to  the  inner  sanctum. 
The  doorkeeper  is  very  discreet  and  careful.  Once  admitted 
to  consciousness,  however,  the  sensation  must  be  recognized 
and  accounted  for.  The  process,  of  doing  this  we  call  per- 
ception. A  loud  boom,  vibrating  keenly  upon  my  ear  drums, 
impinges  upon  consciotisness.  Attention  is  spontaneous. 
Instantly  there  is  a  call  for  interpretation :  what  was  it  ?  To 
the  little  child  it  would  be  sensation  and  nothing  else.  He 
has  no  experience,  no  testimony  from  any  of  his  faculties  to 
guide  him.  But  I  perceive  instantly  that  a  gun  has  been 
discharged.  The  sound  has  occvirred  before  in  my  experience. 
Several  of  my  faculties  unite  in  their  testimony  and  the  matter 
is  settled  in  a  flash.  "Perception,"  then,  to  qtiote  the  defini- 
tion of  Professor  Halleck,  "is  that  power  which  interprets  the 
raw  materials  given  by  sensations." 

Sense  Perceptions  Come  First.  One  finds  an  unknown 
stibstance  and  seeks  to  identify  it.  The  first  jirocess  is  to 
telegraph  to  headquarters,  as  it  were,  as  mtich  sense  infonna- 
tion  as  is  possible:  feeling,  odor,  sound,  ap])earance,  taste. 
This  done,  the  next  thing  is  to  let  the  mental  powers  struggle 
with  it.  The  fineness  of  the  sense-report  is  often  the  most 
important  part.  Two  varieties  of  fine  flour  are  brought  to  a 
miller  to  determine  which  is  which.  After  applying  perhaps 
sight  and  taste  and  smell  and  touch  he  decides  without  hesita- 
tion, but  his  decision  depends  upon  the  delicacy  of  his  senses. 
Should  disea.se  blunt  them,  his  power  to  perceive  would  be 
gone.  The  proper  use  of  the  senses  comes  only  from  long 
experience.  To  a  blind  man  whose  sight  has  been  restored 
objects  at  a  distance  seem  to  be  near  enough  to  grasp.     The 

99 


loo        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

sense  is  undeveloped.  His  sense  of  touch,  however,  may  be 
so  delicate  that  he  can  feel  out  the  inscription  on  a  coin.  The 
more  finely  trained  our  senses,  then,  the  larger  our  world — 
the  more  we  can  perceive.  It  should  be  one  of  the  most 
important  parts  of  education  to  develop  the  senses  of  the 
child.  We  shall  speak  of  this  more  fully  ur^der  the  head  of 
Observation. 

The  Limits  of  Perception.  Perception  comes  only  through 
ideas  that  we  already  possess.  The  savage  who  has  never 
heard  a  gun  will  call  the  report  thunder.  It  is  impossible  for 
him  to  perceive  the  true  cause  of  the  sound,  for  there  is  no 
previous  idea  to  interpret  it  for  him.  Each  perception  is 
ba^ed  on  an  earlier  perception.  The  struggle  of  young  chil- 
dren with  the  new  world  about  them  illustrates  perfectly  this 
law  of  the  mind.  "See,  mamma,  the  pansy  has  wings,"  said 
the  little  girl  when  first  she  saw  a  butterfly,  and  a  little  fellow 
seeing  a  snowstorm  for  the  first  time  came  in  greatly  excited 
to  report  that  God  was  shaking  out  his  feather  beds.  With 
each  of  these  children  perception  had  to  be  in  terms  of  previous 
experience.  All  of  us  are  limited  in  this  way.  It  is  the  duty 
of  perception  to  reduce  the  universe  from  confusion  to  order, 
but  we  must  remember  that  "Mind  is  never  fully  able  to  cope 
with  the  world."  The  ear  can  detect  vibrations  only  within 
a  certain  limited  range,  and  so  with  the  eye.  There  is  a  whole 
world  of  sensation  on  either  side  of  this  which  our  senses  are 
too  gross  to  perceive. 

There's  not  the  smallest  orb  which  thou  bchold'st 
But  in  his  motion  like  an  angel  sings, 
Still  quiring  to  the  young-eyed  chembins; 
Such  harmony  is  in  immortal  souls; 
But  whilst  this  muddy  vesture  of  decay 
Doth  grossly  close  it  in,  we  cannot  hear  it. 

We  can  interpret  the  world  only  through  the  testimony  of 
five  very  limited  .senses.  "  If  we  had  three  or  four  new  senses 
added,  this  might  seem  like  a  new  world  to  us." 

"Words  and  Ideas.  If  the  mind  has  such  difficulty  to  inter- 
]:)ret  and  classify  when  the  new  object  itself  is  actually  before 
it,  how  much  greater  will  be  the  difficulty  when  only  the  word 
denoting  that  object  is  presented.      What  does  a  young  child 


PERCEPTION  101 

know  of  a  mile,  or  a  hundred  dollars,  or  two  thirds?  One 
trouble  with  the  older  education  has  been  its  insistence  upon 
learning  by  means  of  words  to  the  exclusion  of  everything 
else.  Chemistry  and  physics  were  once  taught  as  mere  book 
subjects  without  a  single  experiment.  The  boy  who  knows 
nothing  of  a  cow  or  a  squirrel  or  a  tiger  except  what  he  has 
gathered  from  the  pictures  in  his  book  has  very  vague  ideas. 
One  small  boy  declared  that  a  camel  was  just  the  length  of  his 
thumb  nail,  for  he  had  measured  one  in  the  book,  and  a  little 
girl  supjiosed  a  squirrel  was  three  feet  high. 

The  Plane  of  the  Learner.  We  have  in  our  lessons  in  child 
study  already  discussed  pretty  fully  the  pedagogical  bearings 
of  this  phase  of  psychology.  We  found,  to  quote  Dr.  Gregory, 
that  "the  language  used  in  teaching  must  be  common  to 
teacher  and  learner,"  and  that  "the  truth  to  be  taught  must 
be  learned  through  truth  already  known."  Put  into  psy- 
chological terms  this  means  simply  that  sensations  may  be 
admitted  to  the  field  of  consciousness,  but  there  will  be  no 
correct  perception  unless  there  is  material  already  in  this 
field  by  which  to  interpret  them.  This  applies  to  adults  just 
as  much  as  to  children.  The  teacher,  the  lecturer,  the  preacher, 
the  writer,  must  constantly  adapt  himself  to  those  with  whom 
he  is  working.  He  who  is  teaching  a  Bible  selection  to  a 
class  of  college  men  must  use  different  methods  from  what  he 
would  use  were  it  a  class  of  uneducated  laborers.  One  would 
not  write  the  same  article  for  the  Youth's  Companion  as  for 
the  Psychological  Journal.  There  is  no  real  teacher  who  has 
not  at  some  time  awakened  suddenly  to  a  realization  that  the 
lesson  is  simply  words,  words,  words  to  the  pupil.  '  A  student 
once  recited  glibly  to  me  that  the  War  of  Independence  was 
"divided  into  three  periods:  remonstrance,  resistance,  recon- 
struction"; but  when  I  asked  him  what  these  three  words 
meant  he  was  silent.  Students  in  English  composition  some- 
times speak  of  "infinitives,"  "substantives,"  "demonstra- 
tives," "coordinate  conjunctions,"  voicing  their  text-books 
like  parrots,  but  they  may  not  respond  when  the  teacher  asks, 
"What  do  you  mean  by  that?"  It  should  be  the  aim  of 
every  good  teacher  to  find  the  level  of  his  class  and  to  allow 
nothing  to  enter  into  the  recitation  which  the  learner  cannot 
perceive. 


102        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

Importance  of  Early  Training.  Some  one  has  said  that  we 
receive  no  new  ideas  after  we  are  thirty.  Certain  it  is  that 
what  we  learn  in  childhood  influences  our  whole  after  life. 
If  the  father  is  a  Democrat  or  a  Methodist  or  an  outspoken 
disbehever  in  the  tariff  or  Calvinism  or  Walt  Whitman  or 
anything  else,  it  will  have  its  effect  on  the  son's  later  thinking. 
In  the  words  of  Professor  James:  "  Hardly  ever  is  a  language 
learned  after  twenty  spoken  without  a  foreign  accent;  hardly 
ever  can  a  youth  transferred  to  the  society  of  his  betters 
unlearn  the  nasality  and  other  vices  of  speech  bred  in  him  by 
the  associations  of  his  growing  years."  "Whatever,"  de- 
clares Halleck,  "we  learn  early  in  life  will  influence  us  for  all 
future  time.  .  .  .  We  may  as  well  expect  our  bodies  to  escape 
the  force  of  gravity  as  our  minds  to  elude  the  deflecting  power 
of  all  former  associations  and  experience."  Thus  the  teacher 
of  children  has  upon  him  an  enormous  responsibility.  What 
he  puts  into  the  life  is  to  color  and  influence  all  of  the  later 
thinking. 

Observation.  The  Sunday  school  teacher  who  has  his 
pupils  but  one  hour  a  week  cannot  hope  to  train  their  powers 
of  observation  as  can  the  teacher  in  the  public  school,  but  he 
can  do  something.  In  the  first  place,  there  should  be  a  con- 
stant effort  to  inculcate  accuracy.  Superficiality  is  the  bane 
of  the  present  age.  It  is  easy  for  the  learner  to  get  but  half 
the  idea  and  so  get  nothing  at  all.  Any  practical  teacher 
will  tell  how  hard  it  is  to  make  even  a  simple  announcement 
and  have  it  understood  by  all  in  the  class  in  precisely  the  same 
way.  The  half  observations  of  children  are  accountable  for 
many  seeming  lies.  The  child  did  not  mean  to  tell  an  untruth; 
the  trouble  was  that  he  did  not  observe  accurately.  And, 
after  all,  there  will  be  as  many  interpretations  as  there  are 
observers.  Suppose  I  say  to  my  class:  "Once  a  little  speckled 
fawn  came  out  of  a  wood  and  lay  down  iv  a  bed  of  daisies. 
Soon  a  wolf  came  by  and  fixed  his  eyes  right  upon  the  fawn, 
but  he  did  not  see  it  because  it  looked  just  like  the  bed  of 
•daisies."  Each  child  will  get  a  different  conception  of  the 
story,  for  each  can  take  away  only  what  he  brings.  The 
words,  "fawn,"  "wood,"  "bed,"  "daisies,"  "wolf,"  bring  to 
each  some  ])articular  image,  but  one  can  have  little  idea  what 
it  is.     If  all  ]iresent  had  seen  a  fawn  and  a  bed  of  daisies  and 


PERCEPTION  103 

a  wolf,  and  had  been  shown  how  to  observe  them  carefully, 
the  difference  in  the  mental  images  of  the  children  would  be 
far  less.  To  understand  exactly  what  happened,  therefore, 
requires  experience  and  information.  There  should  be  much 
of  nature  study  at  first  hand  even  in  the  Sunday  school.  The 
children  should  be  encouraged  to  bring  various  objects  for  a 
little  museum;  they  should  be  taught  the  ways  of  birds  and 
insects  and  the  nature  of  flowers.  They  are  studying  the 
handiwork  of  God. 

The  Cultivation  of  Perception.  The  student  should  be  led 
whenever  it  is  possible  to  learn  facts  from  the  testimony  of  his 
own  senses.  Certain  observation  games  are  excellent.  A 
number  of  objects  are  placed  for  a  moment  before  the  pupil 
and  then  withdrawn.  He  is  then  asked  to  tell  what  he  saw. 
The  younger  Houdin  could  take  a  single  glance  into  a  shop 
window  and  then  write  a  list  of  forty  articles  displayed  there. 
Children  should  be  made  to  see  the  beauty  of  poetry  and  of 
biblical  selections;  they  should  be  taught  to  read  slowly  and 
carefully  in  a  few  good  books  rather  than  to  rush  pell  mell 
through  many  books,  getting  only  a  glimpse  here  and  there. 
Above  all,  they  should  be  given  the  correct  point  of  view  • 
everything  should  have  about  it  an  air  of  first-hand  knowledge 
and  of  absolute  accuracy. 

From  the  Known  to  the  Unknown  is  the  law  of  all  teaching. 
The  teacher  who  does  not  understand  this  must  learn  it. 
Every  illustration  must  be  made  after  careful  consideration 
of  the  ones  who  are  to  hear  it.  For  country  people  one  must 
use  one  point  of  approach;  for  city  people,  another.  If  you 
know  a  man's  business  or  trade,  you'  know  better  how  to 
explain  a  matter  to  him.  We  must  begin  to  build  where  the 
learner's  knowledge  leaves  off,  and  we  mtist  give  him  material 
which  can  be  interpreted  in  terms  of  that  which  he  already 
knows.     Otherwise  there  will  be  no  complete  perception. 


CHAPTER  XVI 
THE  MEMORY 

Definition.  Perhaps  the  most  simple  definition  of  memory 
is  that  given  by  Professor  James:  "Memory  is  the  knowledge 
of  a  former  state  of  mind  after  it  has  already  once  dropped 
out  of  consciousness."  The  fundamental  fact  about  memory 
seems  to  be  that  when  sensations  are  brought  into  the  field  of 
attention  they  make  some  sort  of  impression  upon  brain  cells, 
or  mental  substance,  so  that  when  the  same  sensation  comes 
again  we  recognize  it  as  familiar.  This  fact  is  the  basis  of 
perception.  We  found  that  the  present  sensation  in  the 
field  of  consciousness  is  interpreted  in  the  light  of  previous 
sensations  of  the  same  kind.  This  could  not  be  unless  those 
previous  sensations  had  made  some  permanent  impress.  In 
other  words,  "Perception  is  the  child  of  memory." 

The  Chief  Requisites  of  Memory  may  be  reduced  to  two: 
(i)  retention,  and  (2)  reproduction.  The  first  should  not  be 
misunderstood.  The  old  idea  that  memory  is  a  kind  of  filing 
case  or  marvelous  card  index  where  impressions  are  stowed 
away  carefully  assorted  for  instant  use  is  no  longer  held  by 
psychologists.  Rather  is  it  believed  that  "every  organ, 
every  nerve  cell,  has  its  own  memory.  There  is  a  memory  of 
the  eye,  a  memory  of  the  ear,  a  memory  of  the  skin  (for  touch , 
temperature,  etc.),  a  memory  of  the  muscles,  and  so  on  in- 
definitely." It  is  as  if  the  sensation  left  its  mark  in  the 
proper  cells  like  a  fold  in  a  piece  of  paper,  and  when  the  same 
sensation  came  again  the  paper  under  exactly  the  same  con- 
dition tended  to  fold  in  the  same  place.  The  deepness  of  the 
impression  would  depend  upon  the  amount  of  attention  given 
the  sensation.  A  man  walks  by  me  on  the  street  and  I 
scarcely  admit  the  fact  to  the  field  of  consciousness.  The 
episode  is  swiftly  forgotten;  it  has  made  little  impress  any- 
where. But  suppose  I  know  that  the  man  is  the  President.  I 
am  all  attention,  and  as  a  rcstilt  I  remember  even  the  slightest 
detail  of  the  episode.     Memory,  therefore,  is  the  revival  of  a 

104 


THE  MEMORY  105 

past  experience,  and  the  more  strongly  that  experience  is  im- 
pressed upon  consciousness  the  more  easily  will  it  be  revived. 

Association.  But  it  is  not  enough  that  the  impressions  be 
retained;  there  must  be  power  to  reproduce  them  at  will. 
This  seems  to  be  intimately  connected  with  the  process  of 
association.  Our  ideas  go  not  singly  but  in  groups.  The 
mind  is  exceedingly  sensitive  to  the  law  of  habit.  It  tends 
always  to  do  again  just  what  it  did  at  the  previous  occasion. 
Two  men  are  introduced  to  me  at  the  same  time.  When 
next  I  see  one  of  them  I  think  involuntarily  of  the  other. 
One  thing  always  calls  up  another,  like  cause  and  effect, 
means  and  end.  Santa  Claus,  Johnstown,  Valley  Forge, 
Admiral  Dewey,  Mount  Nebo,  Red  Sea — not  one  of  these 
exists  alone.  Instantly  another  idea  is  associated.  One  may 
suddenly  find  himself  thinking  of  something  a  thousand  miles 
from  his  immediate  environment.  What  brought  it  up? 
Often  a  companion  will  say,  "How  did  you  happen  to  be 
thinking  of  that?"  Sometimes  it  is  exceedingly  interesting 
to  go  back  step  by  step  and  trace  out  the  history  of  a  thought 
now  in  our  consciousness.  A  friend  tries  to  make  me  recall 
a  man  whom  I  have  apparently  forgotten,  and  to  do  so  men- 
tions various  situations  in  which  I  have  seen  him.  I  at  length 
remember  the  man  by  associating  him  with  a  place  or  an 
event  or  a  peculiarity.  Reproduction,  then,  depends  largely 
upon  association. 

The  Education  of  the  Memory.  There  is  no  need  for  our 
purpose  of  going  more  fully  into  the  analysis  of  the  process  of 
memory.  The  two  facts  already  noted  give  us  the  main  key 
to  all  memory  training.  We  may  deduce  three  laws:  the 
memory  may  be  educated  by  "intensifying  the  image  by 
attention,  by  keeping  it  ready  by  conscious  repetition,"  and 
by  a  judicious  use  of  association. 

(i)  Intensifying  the  Image.  Many  poor  memories  are  the 
results  of  hazy  perception.  There  is  a  lazy  habit  of  mind  that 
never  observes  closely,  that  jumps  at  conclusions,  that  reads 
hastily  and  superficially,  and  as  a  result  has  no  deep  im- 
pressions of  anything.  The  cultivation  of  attention  and 
perception  is  at  the  same  time  a  cultivation  of  memory.  We 
remember  what  we  are  interested  in.  The  college  "Varsity 
man"  can  remember  every  score  of  all  the  football  games  for 


io6        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

three  years  back  and,  l)e.side.s,  can  give  the  record  of  every 
])ro!ninent  football  man  in  the  country.  At  the  same  time 
he  may  find  it  almost  impossible  to  remember  a  few  simple 
formulas  in  his  mathematics.  We  remember  what  we  are 
intensely  interested  in;  hence  to  remember  a  subject  get 
interested  in  it.  There  are  other  ways  of  intensifying  the 
image :  advertisers  often  associate  some  ridiculous  image  with 
their  wares;  or  make  the  matter  striking  by  means  of  rhyme 
or  alliteration.  We  all  remember  the  phrase,  "  Rum,  Roman- 
ism, and  Rebellion."  Another  method  is  the  cultivation  of 
the  power  to  visualize.  Art  teachers  have  their  pupils  look 
intently  at  a  vase  for  a  time,  and  then,  removing  the  object, 
have  the  drawing  made  from  the  visual  image.  One  should 
in  his  reading  frequently  shut  his  eyes  and  try  to  reproduce 
the  landscape  described.  The  intensifying  of  the  image  will 
help  the  memory. 

(2)  Repetition.  Weak  impressions  may  often  be  strength- 
ened by  repetition — not  mere  rote  repetition  without  atten- 
tion, but  by  a  conscious  and  careful  review.  A  child  may 
write  a  word  automatically  fifty  times  and  even  then  miss])ell 
it.  Review,  however,  is  necessary  if  we  are  to  retain.  If  we 
did  not  S])eak  our  own  language  for  ten  years,  we  should  find 
that  we  had  forgotten  much  of  it,  and  would  have  to  go  over 
it  again  with  attention.-  Hence  the  value  of  the  review  at  the 
close  of  the  term  or  of  the  quarter's  lessons.  It  refreshes  the 
memory.  Since,  then,  it  is  the  tendency  of  the  mind  for  im- 
pressions to  lose  sharpness  with  age,  frequent  repetition  of  im- 
])ortant  things  should  be  the  rule  governing  our  mental  habits. 

(3)  Gsrrelation.  We  have  seen  how  ideas  tend  to  flock 
together.  As  far  as  possible  we  should  take  advantage  of 
this  fact  both  when  we  are  memorizing  and  when  we  are  trying 
to  recall.  If  we  can  bind  new  facts  to  old,  we  are  more  sure 
of  retaining  them.  A  study  of  Latin  and  French  will  enable 
us  to  remember  many  English  words.  We  may  remember 
the  size  and  shape  of  Palestine  by  as.sociating  it  with  the  state 
of  New  Hampshire,  which  it  resembles  in  those  particulars. 
It  will  help  a  class  to  remember  that  Bethlehem  is  six  miles 

froin  Jerusalem  by  saying,  "  It  is  as  far  as  from  here  to ," 

su]i])lying  some  town  six  mile,s  away.  Association  is  the 
basis  of  many  elaborate  systcins  for  strengthening  the  memory, 


THE  MEMORY  107 

as,  for  example.  Pick's  and  Loisette's.  To  illustrate:  Sup- 
pose we  were  to  remember  the  capital  of  Nebraska;  we  might 
say:  "Nebraska — Ne  brass  key — chain — link — Lincoln." 
We  may  sometimes  use  an  alphabetical  order  to  aid  memory; 
for  instance,  the  chronological  order  of  the  novels  in  the 
Leather  Stocking  Series  is  Deerslayer,  Last  of  the  Mohicans, 
Pathfinder,  Pioneers,  Prairie.  This  is  also  the  alphabetical 
order.  A  small  boy  sent  to  the  grocery  store  for  tea,  sugar, 
apples,  lemons,  eggs,  found  that  by  arrangement  the  first 
letters  could  be  made  to  spell  s-t-e-a-1.  He  was  able  then 
to  trust  his  memory.  With  most  of  these  "memory  cures"  it 
requires  considerable  memory  simply  to  master  the  system. 
The  whole  power  is  required  to  run  the  machine.  The  prin- 
ciple, however,  may  often  be  used  to  great  advantage.  One 
man  who  had  a  remarkable  memory  for  faces  said  that  he  had 
gained  the  power  by  pronouncing  distinctly  to  himself  the 
name  of  each  person  introduced  to  him,  and  then  carefully 
associating  the  person  with  something  or  with  some  one  else. 
A  college  professor  of  my  acquaintance  always  says  when  he 
meets  an  old  graduate,  "Let's  see — your  seat  was  in  the 
second  row  near  the  end — O,  you  are  Mr.  Smith,  of  '97." 
Association  is  the  secret  of  the  string  tied  around  the  finger, 
of  the  bit  of  paper  pasted  to  the  watch  face,  or  the  unusual 
object  placed  on  the  dinner  table  or  the  desk. 

The  Verbal  and  the  Logical  Memory.  There  are  two  ways 
of  learning  a  lesson  from  a  text-book:  the  one  is  to  commit 
the  words  parrot-like,  and  the  other  is  to  follow  the  logical 
thought  of  the  page  and  to  recite  the  contents  in  one's  own 
words.  In  almost  all  cases  the  latter  method  is  the  only 
practical  one.  There  is  no  better  way  of  spoiling  one's  think- 
ing power  than  to  commit  the  propositions  of  geometry  to 
memory  and  then  recite  them  mechanically.  This  rote 
method  is  the  basis  of  the  Chinese  educational  system,  and 
it  explains  in  a  great  degree  the  singular  lack  of  progress 
in  the  history  of  China.  There  are,  however,  many  things 
that  must  be  learned  by  rote.  Dr.  Schaeffer  gives  eight 
classes  of  things  that  should  be  lodged  in  the  mechanical 
memory : 

1.  A  reasonable  vocabulary  of  words  in  the  mother  tongue. 

2.  A  working  vocabulary  of  words  in  the  foreign  languages 


io8        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

which  the  circumstances  or  occupation  of  a  student  will  com- 
pel him  to  use. 

3.  The  combinations  of  addition  up  to  one  hundred,  the 
multiplication  table,  and  the  tables  of  weights  and  measures. 

4.  Algebraic  and  other  formttlas  which  constantly  recur  in 
the  higher  mathematics. 

5.  The  fundamental  formulas  in  chemistry,  })hysics,  and 
other  sciences. 

6.  Declensions,  conjugations,  comparison,  and  genders  of 
words  in  such  foreign  languages  as  the  pui)il  expects  to  read, 
write,  and  speak. 

7.  The  most  necessary  fact-lore  of  history  and  geography. 

8.  Choice  selections  from  the  best  literature,  and  such 
definitions  as  mark  a  triumph  of  intellect  in  the  history  of 
hitman  thought. 

For  the  Sunday  school  teacher  the  "choice  selections"  of 
the  eighth  class  will  resolve  themselves  into  memory  passages 
from  the  most  vital  jiarts  of  the  Bible,  choice  poems  from  the 
best  poets,  and  the  great  hymns  of  the  church.  During  the 
memory  period  of  childhood  the  greatest  care  should  be  taken 
to  stock  the  memory  with  Scripture  and  hymn  and  poem,  but 
care  should  be  taken  to  do  this  wisely.  Material  should  not 
be  poured  in  in  haphazard  manner,  and  it  should  not  be  of  such 
a  nature  that  the  child  cannot  understand  it.  Then  it  should 
he  reviewed  and  rereviewed  until  it  becomes  a  part  of  his 
very  life. 

The  Abuse  of  the  Memory.  Disastrous  effects  bi  overload- 
ing the  verbal  memory  at  the  expense  of  the  logical  we  have 
already  dwelt  upon;  we  have  also  touched  upon  the  mental 
havoc  wrought  by  superficial  habits  of  reading  and  of  thought. 
Of  the  latter  too  much  cannot  be  said.  Pupils  should  be 
taught  constantly  to  attend,  to  observe,  to  form  definite 
visualized  images,  and  to  cure  their  mind-wandering  as 
quickly  as  they  can.  They  shotild  be  taught  to  read  with 
attention.  After  they  have  finished  a  page  they  should  look 
away  from  it  and  try  to  re])eat  the  substance  of  it.  They 
should  not  skip  and  skim,  but  should  read  every  word  with 
care;  otherwise  they  will  destroy  their  memories  as  well  as 
their  powers  of  attention.  One  who  confesses  that  he  has  a 
poor  memory  is  often  confessing  at  the  same  time  slovenly 


THE  MEMORY  109 

mental  habits  and  a  superficial,  wandering  inind.  "I  can't 
remember  my  lesson,"  is  equivalent  to  saying,  "I  am  not 
interested  in  my  lesson."  Another  abuse  of  memory  is  the 
cramming  system  often  found  in  schools  and  colleges.  Mate- 
rial gathered  in  so  hasty  a  way  cannot  be  permanent.  It 
goes  as  quickly  as  it  comes.  Finally,  to  abuse  one's  health  is 
to  abuse  one's  memory,  for  body  and  mind  are  so  closely 
woven  together  that  to  iinpair  one  is  to  impair  the  othcr_ 
No  part  of  the  mind  seems  more  susceptible  to  bodily  in- 
fluence than  the  memory. 


CHAPTER  XVII 
IMAGINATION 

Definitions.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  material  in 
cmr  minds  has  come  through  the  gateway  of  jjerceptit^n.  It 
has  all  made  an  impress  somewhere  in  the  mental  substance 
so  that  it  can  be  brought  back  again  into  the  field  of  con- 
sciousness; or,  to  express  it  in  the  words  of  Professor  James, 
' '  Sensations  once  experienced  modify  the  nervous  organiza- 
tion so  that  copies  of  them  arise  again  in  the  mind  after  the 
original  outward  stimulus  is  gone."  These  copies  are  gener- 
ally known  as  images.  We  may  define  the  term  "image"  as 
"a  picture  produced  in  the  mind  by  the  representative  or 
imaging  power  and  without  the  aid  of  direct  perception."  It 
is  not  alone  a  visual  picture,  for  other  senses  than  sight 
may  ])roduce  images.  One  may  call  up  images  of  sound  or 
smell  or  taste  or  touch.  Imagination,  then,  is  "the  act  or 
faculty  of  forming  a  mental  image  of  an  object;  the  act  or 
power  of  presenting  to  consciousness  objects  other  than 
those  directly  and  at  that  time  produced  by  the  action  of  the 
senses." 

The  Scope  of  the  Imagination.  Anything  that  has  been 
once  perceived  by  the  inind  may  be  brought  up  again  as  an 
image,  either  as  a  whole  or  in  part.  Memory  simply  recalls 
some  previous  sensation  with  more  or  less  accuracy,  "and  the 
self  must  recognize  it  as  having  been  an  experience  of  its  own 
in  a  more  or  less  definite  time  or  place."  Imagination,  how- 
ever, is  unlimited.  The  image  may  not  be  recognized  at  all; 
we  may  declare  that  no  such  thing  ever  has  come  into  our 
experience ;  it  may  be  one  isolated  phase  of  some  previous 
perception  or  it  may  be  a  coinbination  of  isolated  jihases  from 
a  dozen  ]iercei^tions.  Thus  we  may  imagine  a  creatxire  with 
the  head  of  a  lion,  the  body  of  a  .sheep,  the  feet  of  a  bird,  and 
the  tail  of  a  lizard.  Clas.sical  literature  is  full  of  imaginary 
crcattircs  like  centaurs  and  satyrs  and  liar|nes.  We  inay 
construct  a  new  world  like  that  which  Alice  found  in  Wonder- 

IIO 


IMAGINATION  in 

land.  As  in  a  kaleidoscope,  the  materials  may  fall  into 
millions  of  patterns.  There  is,  however,  one  imperative 
limit  to  imagination:  it  can  furnish  no  materials  which  are 
not  already  in  the  mind.  We  can  imagine  a  creature  the  like 
of  which  never  was  and  never  will  be,  but  all  the  various  parts 
of  it  will  be  recognizable.  The  most  original  monsters  of  the 
ancient  mythology  were  made  up  simply  by  combining  the 
parts  of  well-known  animals.  The  dragon  was  a  magnified 
combination  of  lizard,  bat,  crocodile,  and  snake.  The  mon- 
sters mentioned  in  the  book  of  Daniel  were  all  made  from 
earthly  components.  We  can  picture  heaven  only  in  terms 
of  this  earth.  The  most  rapt  visions  of  the  book  of  Revela- 
tion bring  in  no  materials  but  those  which  had  come  into 
the  earthly  experience  of  the  writer:  heaven  has  streets  of 
gold,  and  gates  of  precious  stones,  and  there  is  no  night.  In 
other  words,  the  imagination  of  man  is  powerless  to  work 
with  any  other  materials  than  those  furnished  by  the  realm  of 
experience;  and  even  if  some  heavenly  revelation  should  be 
made,  the  imagination  of  man  could  not  grasp  it.  With  our 
present  sense-materials,  however,  new  combinations  may  be 
made  infinite  in  form  and  variety. 

Passive  Imagination.  It  is  customary  to  divide  imagina- 
tion into  two  classes:  the  [jassive  (or  reproductive)  and  the 
active  (or  creative).  The  first  simply  reproduces  images 
which  have  been  stored  in  the  memory.  When  the  old  man 
says,  "I  can  shut  my  eyes  and  see  how  every  man  in  that 
room  looked,  though  it  was  fifty  years  ago,"  he  is  making 
use  of  memory  and  passive  imagination.  I  say,  "Capitol 
at  Washington,"  and  instantly  an  image  comes  before 
your  consciousness.  When  the  mind  wanders,  a  succes- 
sion of  unrelated  images  may  come  to  us.  When  the  little 
child  sees  his  mother  get  his  coat  and  hat  he  is  all  animation, 
for  association  brings  up  the  image  of  his  last  walk  out 
of  doors. 

Creative  Imagination.  But  the  most  imiwrtant  variety  of 
imagination  is  the  creative,  which  deliberately  recombines 
former  experiences  into  new  images.  Children  exhibit  this  in  a 
thousand  different  ways.  It  is  one  of  the  chief  things  which 
separate  man  from  the  lower  animals.  The  child  has  before 
him  a  shapeless  pile  of  blocks,  and  he  cries:  "See,  mamma. 


112        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

I'm  going  to  build  a  church."  Before  he  touches  a  single 
block  some  sort  of  image  is  before  his  mind.  He  may  alter 
his  plan  a  dozen  times  before  he  finishes,  but  he  is  working 
always  from  a  pattern  furnished  by  imagination.  Sir  Chris- 
topher Wren  did  no  more  when  he  built  Saint  Paul's.  Con- 
structive imagination  has  been  at  the  basis  of  all  industrial 
progress.  The  inventor  must  have  a  mental  image  of  what 
he  seeks  and  must  combine  and  recombine  until  he  reaches 
the  consummation  of  his  dream.  He  must  see  the  machine 
in  the  raw  iron  just  as  the  sculptor  must  see  the  perfect  statue 
in  the  marble  block. 

Literary  Creation.  The  poet  must  be  "of  imagination  all 
compact."  So  indeed  must  be  the  creative  artist  in  every  line 
of  literary  art.  The  writer  who  told  the  story  of  David  and 
Goliath  must  have  had  a  lively  mental  picture  of  it  before  his 
mind ;  Scott  when  he  wrote  the  description  of  the  siege  of  the 
castle  of  Front  de  Bceuf  must  have  had  before  him  an  image 
almost  as  sharp  as  if  it  were  reality;  Dickens  saw  his  scenes  so 
vividly  that  he  would  burst  into  hilarious  laughter  or  violent 
weeping  as  he  recorded  what  his  imagination  "bodied  forth." 
The  great  writer  must  necessarily  have  a  great  fund  of  experi- 
ence from  which  to  draw.  The  more  he  has  seen  of  nature 
and  man,  the  more  combinations  will  his  imagination  be  able 
to  make  and  the  richer  will  they  be  in  quality.  So  full  of 
human  life  was  Shakespeare  that  half  a  dozen  professions 
have  claimed  him.  His  sense-perception  was  so  fully  trained 
that  there  is  hardly  a  flower  or  a  bird  or  an  odor  or  an  aspect 
of  nature  in  his  native  Warwick  which  he  has  not  noted, 
and  he  knew  human  life  no  less  well.  He  was  the  greatest 
English  master  of  literary  art  because  of  all  Englishmen  he 
had  filled  himself  the  most  completely  with  the  materials  for 
imagination. 

Literary  Interpretation.  To  read  literature  requires  con- 
structive imagination.  How  can  one  who  knows  nothing 
of  the  marigold  get  the  full  bearing  of  these  lines  of  Shakes- 
peare? 

The  marigold,  that  goes  to  bed  wi'  the  sun 

And  with  him  rises  weeping. 

If  I  say,  "A  little  forest-bound  lake  in  New  Hampshire  with 
the    mountains   fir-coated    and    hoary-headed     arising   sheer 


IMAGINATION  113 

almost  from  the  waters,"  everyone  will  get  some  sort  of  picture, 
but  he  who  knows  only  the  Alps  will  have  an  Alpine  image, 
and  the  dweller  in  the  Sierras  will  have  one  far  different.  The 
more  experience  one  has  had  with  life,  the  more  intelligently 
can  he  read,  for  he  has  more  material  withwhich  to  interpret 
the  imaginations  of  others. 

The  Culture  of  the  Imagination.  And  this  leads  to  the  first 
suggestion  to  the  Sunday  school  teacher :  Add  to  the  materials 
which  the  pupil  has  for  the  interpretation  of  literature.  A 
little  girl  who  was  hearing  the  story  of  Joseph  supposed  that 
when  the  money  was  hidden  in  the  sack  it  was  concealed  in  a 
garment.  With  her  "sack"  meant  only  a  coat.  Children 
who  know  nothing  of  camels,  or  caravans,  or  shepherds,  or 
altars,  and  the  like,  will  image  the  story  in  a  very  vague  and 
inaccurate  way.  There  should  be  a  true  image  for  every  term 
in  the  story.  It  will  be  helpful  if  the  teacher  of  small  children 
carefully  explains  certain  things  before  the  story  begins. 
When  once  started,  however,  with  the  telling  there  should  be 
no  halt  for  explanation. 

Pictures  are  of  great  value  as  aids  to  the  imagination. 
Most  of  us  can  call  up  a  mental  image  of  the  pyramids,  but 
few  of  us  have  seen  them.  Pictures  of  Oriental  costume  and 
life  should  be  used  freely  in  all  classes.  A  set  of  Tissot's 
drawings  is  valuable  for  Sunday  school  work.  All  of  the 
houses  which  deal  in  Sunday  school  requisites  furnish  plenty 
of  picture  material  at  little  cost.  Only  the  best  should  be 
used. 

The  Culture  of  the  Visualizing  Power.  Even  the  poorest 
Sunday  school,  however,  may  have  pictures.  The  teacher 
may  paint  them  himself — upon  the  imaginations  of  his  pupils. 
He  should  often  say,  "Use  your  imagination  a  moment  now 
and  try  to  see  this  scene  just  as  it  happened."  Then  he 
should  reproduce  it  as  vividly  as  he  can,  bringing  it  home  to 
their  imaginations  by  using  materials  with  which  they  are 
perfectly  familiar.  Illustrations  and  comparisons  help  the 
imagination.  In  teaching  the  life  of  Christ  look  up  distances 
carefully,  then  say,  "Why,  it  is  as  if  they  went  from  here 
to — ."  The  more  you  compare  with  known  things  the 
more  you  help  the  imagination. 

Various  Helps.     When  the  story  is  told  to  children  they 


114        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

should  be  questioned  about  it  and  set  aright  if  they  have  in 
any  way  misapprehended.  They  should  be  taught  to  tell  the 
story  back  again  in  their  own  words.  A  story  can  be  half 
told  and  the  children  may  be  asked  to  finish  it.  Original 
work  is  of  the  greatest  aid  in  the  culture  of  the  imagination. 
It  is  sometimes  advisable  to  have  one  of  the  members  of  an 
adult  class  write  a  careful  description  of  the  places  mentioned 
in  the  lesson  and  read  it  to  the  class.  Farrar's  Life  of  Christ 
abounds  in  grajjliic  descriptions  of  the  localities  and  life  of  the 
New  Testament.  There  can  be  no  better  variation  at  times 
than  to  have  short  extracts  read  from  this  most  vivid  of  all 
the  lives  of  Jesus.  Above  all,  the  teacher  should  strive 
earnestly  to  translate  the  lesson  into  mental  images.  The 
boy  who  said  he  had  studied  about  Moses  until  he  thought  he 
should  know  him  if  he  met  him  on  the  street  mvist  have  had  an 
exceptionally  good  teacher.  What  mental  picture  comes  to 
you  when  you  think  of  David  or  Jacob  or  Paul  or  Peter? 
Sharpen  this  impression  and  stamj)  it  upon  your  pupils  until 
it  becomes  a  part  of  their  lives. 

Finally,  do  not  give  children  insipid,  stilted  literature. 
"Those  painfully  didactic,  namby-pamby,  goody-goody 
stories  in  little  green  books  with  chromo  covers,"  says  Dr. 
Krohn,  "such  as  used  to  be  presented  to  us  as  a  'Reward  of 
merit'  by  our  Sunday  school  teachers  in  olden  times,  never 
succeeded  in  gaining  the  attention  of  the  average  child,  be- 
cause they  were  not  pro])erly  gauged  to  fit  his  experiences  or 
evoke  his  interest."  They  were  outside  his  world.  The 
book  for  the  child  should  give  free  play  to  the  imagination; 
it  should  be  free  from  materials  and  allusions  that  are  beyond 
his  grasp;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  should  not  be  too  sim- 
ple; and  it  should  leave  behind  it  something  of  permanent 
value. 

Sympathy  and  Imagination.  Withotit  imagination  one 
cannot  have  true  sympathy  and  altrviism.  The  ability  to 
look  at  life  from  the  standpoint  of  one's  neighbor  is  largely  a 
matter  of  imagination.  "An  unimaginative  ])erson,"  says 
Ruskin,  "can  neither  be  reverent  nor  kind."  Boys  are  cruel 
to  the  birds  and  small  animals  simply  becau.se  they  have  not 
been  taught  to  realize  that  they  suffer  just  as  people  suffer 
under  the  same  circumstances.     It  should  be  the  duty  of  the 


IMAGINATION  115 

Sunday  school  teacher  to  awaken  the  feeHngs  of  pity  for  all 
animal  life.  She  should  impress  the  fact  that  the  bird  robbed 
of  its  young  feels  as  his  parents  would  feel  if  their  children  were 
cruelly  taken  away.  The  proper  training  of  the  imaginati<jn, 
then,  is  a  training  of  the  elements  of  i>ity  and  sympathy  and 
love  for  neighbors  and  for  all  mankind. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 
THOUGHT 

The  Mind  a  Unit.  We  have  now,  in  the  briefest  and  most 
general  way,  shown  how  sensations  are  admitted  by  attention 
to  that  something  which  we  call  consciousness,  and  we  have 
seen  how  perception  acts  as  interpreter,  how  memory  preserves 
for  future  use,  and  how  im.agination  recalls  this  recorded 
matter  in  the  form  of  images.  It  must  not  be  gathered, 
however,  that  the  mind  moves  only  by  mechanical  steps.  A 
thought  is  not  manufactured  like  a  shoe,  which  must  go 
through  the  hands  of  twenty  men  in  regular  order  and  receive 
something  from  each.  All  of  these  functions  of  the  mind  may 
be  in  operation  at  the  same  instant.  The  process  is  infinitely 
complicated.  The  material  which  comes  in  every  moment 
is  of  a  thousand  different  kinds,  and  the  whole  mental  being 
must  act  upon  it  all  simultaneously.  Perception,  for  instance, 
involves  almost  all  of  the  faculties,  and  so  do  memory  and 
imagination.  The  mind  is  not  divided  into  departments  like 
a  business  house,  each  one  to  take  charge  independently  of  a 
single  phase  of  the  work.  It  is  rather  a  marvelous  unit,  and 
we  study  its  different  functions  separately  simply  for  our 
convenience.  It  is  like  studying  a  great  man's  character:  it 
is  a  whole,  and  not  a  thing  made  up  of  consecutive  steps  or  of 
isolated  parts,  yet  we  conprehend  it  better  by  looking  at  its 
different  phases,  such  as  honesty,  conscientiousness,  stead- 
fastness, etc. 

Thought.  A  library  into  which  books  and  pictures  and  all 
kinds  of  printed  matter  were  gathered  in  haphazard  confusion 
would  be  a  very  poor  kind  of  library.  There  would  be  needed 
a  -skilled  librarian  to  classify  and  arrange  and  compare  and  to 
make  cross  references  and  all  kinds  of  helps  for  assiinilation. 
To  arrange  the  materials  of  the  intellect,  to  select  from  the 
mass  this  and  that  and  put  them  together  for  comparison  and 
classification — this  is  the  duty  of  thought.  Without  this  fac- 
ulty there  would  be  no  assimilation  of  the  materials  gathered 

ii6 


THOUGHT  117 

by  perception.  Thought  is  to  the  intellectual  life  what  diges- 
tion is  to  the  physical :  out  of  the  miscellaneous  mass  of  food 
furnished  it,  it  re-creates  new  material  and  new  life. 

Steps  in  the  Process.  It  will  be  needless  for  our  purpose  to 
trace  at  length  the  steps  in  the  process  of  thought.  We  need 
to  treat  only  of  judgment  and  reasoning.  Judgment  is  "the 
faculty  by  which  relations  are  perceived  and  formulated." 
Certain  materials  in  the  intellect  are  brought  into  the  field  of 
attention  and  compared  with  other  materials  there.  A  like- 
ness is  found,  or  a  dissimilarity,  or  an  association  of  some  kind, 
and  as  a  result  a  new  idea  may  be  created.  This  is  a  judg- 
ment. For  example,  some  meat  has  been  stolen;  there  are 
dog's  tracks  near — the  meat  was  stolen  by  a  dog.  The  high 
tides  come  about  an  hour  later  each  day;  the  moon  rises  about 
an  hour  later  each  day — the  tides  must  be  connected  in  some 
way  with  the  moon.  "It  is  seldom,  however,  that  the  mate- 
rial is  exhausted  by  a  single  judgment.  As  a  rule,  the  forming 
of  one  judgment  suggests  the  forming  of  another;  so  that  we 
have  a  train  of  judgments,  or  reasoning."  For  example, 
after  careful  observation  I  form  these  judgments: This  stone  is 
flint ;  it  shows  signs  of  human  workmanship ;  it  was  found  in  a 
stratum  belonging  to  the  Tertiar}'  Period ;  the  strata  had  not 
been  disttirbed  before  I  began  my  investigations;  therefore 
man  existed  on  earth  during  the  Tertiary  Period. 

The  Syllogism.  In  the  terms  of  logic,  reasoning  proceeds 
by  means  of  syllogisms.  There  must  first  be  a  major  premise, 
which  is  a  judgment  of  a  general  nature  stated  in  the  form  of  a 
general  law.  For  example,  All  animals  having  cloven  hoofs 
chew  the  cud.  Then  follows  the  minor  premise,  which  is  a  judg- 
ment concerning  a  particular  case:  This  animal  has  cloven 
hoofs.  The  third  term  is  the  conclusion:  Therefore  this  ani- 
mal chews  the  cud.  Not  often  do  we  consciously  take  these 
three  steps,  yet  they  are  really  present  in  all  our  reasoning. 
The  farmer  looks  at  the  sky  and  says,  "It  will  rain  to-morrow." 
He  is  not  conscious  of  having  made  use  of  any  premises,  yet, 
nevertheless,  his  thinking  took  something  like  the  following 
form :  "When  clouds  stream  up  in  the  west  in  dull,  ragged  cat- 
tails it  will  rain  soon.     These  clouds,"  etc. 

It  will  be  seen  at  once  that  the  value  of  the  syllogism  de- 
pends wholly  upon  the  truth  of  the  premises.     Manifestly  one 


ii8        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

cannot  invent  a  general  law  offhand  and  then  use  it  as  a  major 
premise  for  the  finding  of  other  laws.  Modern  science  rests 
upon  induction,  and  by  induction  we  mean  the  making  of  a 
general  law  only  after  thousands  of  observations.  Before  the 
chemist  can  say,  "Gold  is  soluble  only  in  aqiui  rcgia,"  he  must 
know  that  every  possible  solvent  has  been  tried.  Hence  the 
value  of  one's  reasoning  dei)ends  upon  his  general  knowledge, 
for  from  his  general  knowledge  comes  his  ability  to  form 
accurate  judgments. 

Errors  in  Reasoning  arise  chiefly  from  lack  of  care  with  the 
premises.  Children  and  even  adults  often  generalize  from  a 
single  experience.  A  little  boy  cautioned  me  at  one  time  to 
keep  a  safe  distance  from  a  certain  horse,  for  "white  horses 
always  kick."  An  old  Pennsylvania  farmer  laid  down  the 
law  that  shingles  laid  during  the  increase  of  the  moon  always 
curl  up.  He  had  tried  it  once  and  had  found  out.  A  friend 
will  advise  you  to  take  Quack's  Bitters:  "I  took  a  bottle  one 
spring  and  felt  much  better;  they  always  cure."  Physi- 
cians base  their  knowledge  of  medicines  upon  the  obser- 
vations of  thousands  of  trained  observers  through  many 
years,  and  not  upon  a  single  experience.  Most  people  are 
prone  to  judge  their  neighbors  from  too  slight  experience. 
If  a  man  is  late  at  an  appointment  twice  in  succession,  some 
one  is  sure  to  say,  "O,  he's  always  late."  This  is  poor  think- 
ing because  it  is  bad  judgment.  Judgments  should  be  made 
with  care  and  from  fullness  of  experience.  There  are  excep- 
tions even  to  the  mo.st  sweeping  laws.  For  instance,  all  cloven 
hoofed  animals  do  not  chew  the  ctid.  There  are  two  excep- 
tions: the  x^ig  and  the  tapir.  The  teacher  should  constantly 
be  on  the  watch  for  hasty  generalizations,  and  should  correct 
them  with  care.  He  should  not  allow  jumping  at  conclusions 
and  the  offhand  manufacture  of  sweeping  general  laws.  Chil- 
dren especially  should  be  taught  to  think  twice  before  speak- 
ing, to  be  careful  about  letting  personal  considerations  and 
prejudices  influence  judgment,  and,  finally,  to  weigh  both 
sides  and  try  if  possible  to  see  the  standpoint  of  those  against 
whom  the  jxidgment  is  to  be  made.  By  a  careful  supervision 
a  habit  of  mind  may  be  thus  inculcated  in  young  pupils  which 
will  be  of  benefit  to  all  of  their  futtire  thinking. 

For  the  Teacher  no  function  of  the  intellect  is  of  more  value 


THOUGHT  119 

than  is  that  of  thought.  All  teaching  appeals  directly  to  the 
thinking  powers.  The  little  child  is  incapable  of  much  reason- 
ing, yet  even  he  is  continually  forming  judgments  and  making 
use  of  the  syllogism.  Owing  to  his  lack  of  experience,  how- 
ever, his  judgments  are  very  often  worthless.  "White  cows 
give  white  milk";  when  it  thtmders  "God  is  putting  in  his 
coal";  "This  man  is  the  best  man  in  town  because  he  gives 
me  more  candy  than  any  other,"  are  typical  childish  judg- 
ments. To  train  such  children  to  think  correctly  it  is  neces- 
sary to  add  to  their  stock  of  knowledge.  The  first  training, 
then,  should  be  in  the  formation  of  proper  judgments.  The 
pupil  should  be  stimulated  constantly  to  think,  but  at  every 
step  he  should  be  given  the  materials  with  which  to  think. 
There  should  be  little  mere  rote  teaching,  mere  memorizing  of 
material  which  the  ptipil  does  not  understand.  The  memory 
cannot  do  the  work  of  the  reflective  powers.  There  should  be 
avoidance,  too,  of  the  pouring-in  process.  To  talk  all  the 
time  is  to  paralyze  the  thinking  powers  of  the  learner.  The 
teacher,  on  the  contrary,  should  stimulate  the  pupil  to  think 
for  himself.  By  adroit  hints  and  skillful  questioning  he 
should  suggest  comparisons  which  will  bring  the  new  idea, 
and  he  should  at  the  same  time  furnish  such  thought-material 
that  the  pupil  will  be  eager  to  think  the  matter  out  and  reach 
the  conclusion  desired.  For  instance,  one  might  talk  five 
minutes  to  a  class  of  children  about  the  seed  of  the  maple  tree 
and  make  very  little  impression.  If,  however,  he  were  to  hold 
a  seed  up  and  ask,  "What  do  these  two  projections  look  like?" 
some  one  would  be  sure  to  say  "  Little  wings."  Then  the  con- 
versation could  be  carried  on  something  like  this : 

"Why  should  the  seed  have  little  wings?" 

"To  fly  away." 

"Why  should  the  seed  want  to  fly  away?" 

After  the  teacher  had  selected  the  best  answer  he  could  then 
say:  "  I  saw  once  a  maple  tree  all  by  itself  on  a  hillside  miles 
from  any  other  maple  tree.  Who  do  you  suppose  planted  it  ?" 
This  is  the  so-called  ".Socratic  method"  of  teaching,  which  we 
shall  discuss  at  length  in  the  section  to  be  devoted  to  methods 
of-  teaching.  When  it  is  skillfully  used  there  is  no  more  eflfect- 
ive  stimulus  to  thought. 

Thought  Culture.    Since  the  materials  of  thought  come,  all 


I20        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

of  them,  from  attention  and  perception,  it  is  obvious  that  one 
may  increase  the  thinking  power  by  training  these  two  facul- 
ties. To  give  attention  one  must  be  interested.  No  boy  ever 
had  to  be  drilled  to  give  attention  to  a  ball  game.  Boys  will 
build  in  trees  houses  the  construction  of  which  requires  much 
careful  thought  and  much  labor;  they  will  devise  traps  and 
games  and  solve  puzzles  all  with  the  greatest  eagerness.  There 
is  no  need  to  train  the  boy  to  think  along  these  lines.  There  is 
no  need,  indeed,  to  train  the  boy  along  any  line  in  which  his 
interest  can  be  fully  aroused.  All  he  needs  is  information  and 
skill.  The  teacher,  then,  whether  it  be  on  we&k  day  or  Sunday, 
should  be  seeking  constantly  to  arouse  some  dominating 
interest  in  the  pupil's  life.  First  interest,  then  attention,  then 
thought,  is  the  rule  of  teaching.  When  the  pupil  is  interested 
fully  he  will  think — indeed,  it  will  be  impossible  for  him  not 
to  think.  The  teacher  needs  only  to  furnish  the  right  ma- 
terials and  to  lead  in  the  right  direction.  For  instance,  one 
teacher  of  a  class  of  men  began  the  study  of  the  book  of  Luke. 
He  asked  one  of  the  class  to  read  the  book  through  and  to 
mark  all  passages  illustrating  Christ's  lack  of  race  prejudice; 
another  was  to  bring  in  passages  illustrating  his  attitude  toward 
government;  another,  his  treatment  of  women.  Each  pupil 
was  assigned  a  topic,  and  after  careful  study  of  the  marked 
passages  was  to  write  a  short  generalization  about  it,  backing 
up  every  statement  by  references.  As  a  result  the  class  soon 
had  a  comprehensive  introduction  to  the  book  of  Luke  all  of 
their  own  composition,  and  the  teacher  had  done  nothing  btit 
guide  and  question  and  direct.  The  class  was  thinking  for 
itself,  and  a  half  dozen  of  its  exercises  were  of  more  worth  than 
would  have  been  a  whole  winter  devoted  to  inere  lecturing. 
Beckoning  to  Wider  Fields.  The  inferior  teacher  tells  every- 
thing, sometimes  twice  and  thrice  over.  He  tries  to  smooth 
away  every  difficulty;  he  goes  over  every  point  volubly,  and 
talks  and  talks  and  talks.  The  mind  of  the  learner  is  borne 
along  on  a  stream  of  words  until  dreaminess  and  drowsiness 
come  from  the  smooth-gliding  motion.  The  true  teacher, 
however,  tells  only  what  he  must.  He  arouses  the  interest 
of  the  learner  and  then  lets  him  complete  the  matter  himself. 
He  invites  ever  to  difficulties,  but  he  shows  how  the  difficulty 
is  simply  a  barrier  which  sejiarates  the  learner  from  delightful 


THOUGHT  121 

prospects,  a  barrier  which  he  must  leap  himself.  The  true 
teacher,  therefore,  beckons  on  and  on,  and  as  the  learner 
follows  it  is  always  to  larger  horizons.  No  teacher  should 
slavishly  follow  the  text-book.  He  should  draw  all  the  time 
upon  the  experiences  of  everyday  life.  He  should  never  go 
before  his  class  without  having  thought  out  a  line  of  work, 
one  that  shall  arouse  the  eager  interest  of  his  pupils  and  stimu- 
late them  to  think  for  themselves.  Such  teaching  counts. 
It  keeps  the  pupil  active  in  both  mind  and  body.  It  rcsvilts 
in  thought  and  a  constantly  increasing  growth  of  the  thinking 
power.  It  should  be  the  aim  of  every  teacher  to  lead  his 
pupils  to  think. 


CHAPTER  XIX 
THE  WILL 

Will,  the  Executive.  In  every  human  organization  where 
conscious  Ufa  is  concerned  there  must  be  some  kind  of  execu- 
tive authority.  There  must  be  some  one  whose  duty  it  is  to 
see  that  certain  things  are  done  and  that  certain  other  things 
are  left  undone.  In  the  intellectual  organization  this  func- 
tion is  performed  by  the  will.  The  other  powers  of  the  mind 
would  be  useless  without  this  strong  directing  agency.  Per- 
ception and  attention  would  be  mere  haphazard  affairs; 
imagination  would  run  wild ;  and  thought  would  be  governed 
only  by  impulse  and  chance.  A  man  without  any  will  at  all 
would  be  a  maniac;  he  would  obey  every  impulse;  he  would 
be  like  an  automobile  running  at  full  speed  without  any  driver. 

The  Nature  of  the  "Will.  If  the  will  were  a  distinct  organ, 
like  the  heart  or  the  stomach,  and  if  we  entered  into  life  with 
this  organ  large  and  active  or  small  and  sluggish,  as  chance 
might  decree,  then  would  we  all  be  fatalists.  We  often  say, 
"This  man  has  a  strong  will,"  or,  "This  man  is  sure  to  fail, 
for  he  has  no  will  power,"  just  about  as  we  would  say,  "This 
man  can  never  be  an  athlete,  because  he  has  a  clubfoot." 
But  the  will  is  not  a  mere  organ;  it  is  not,  as  some  picture  it, 
a  sort  of  living  creature  within  us  which  says  "Yes"  and  "No." 
The  will,  in  a  broad  and  general  way,  is  nothing  more  than  the 
voice  of  previous  experience.  It  is  one  of  the  fundamental 
laws  of  the  intellect  that  "all  manifestations  of  conscious  life 
have  an  inevitable  tendency  to  express  themselves  in  some 
sort  of  action."  Nothing  comes  into  our  consciousness  with- 
out arousing  an  imj^ulse  to  do  something.  When  we  see  a 
beautiful  object  we  have  an  impulse  to  possess  it;  when  we 
feel  a  draught  of  air  we  have  an  impulse  to  shut  the  door; 
when  we  hear  inspiring  music  we  have  an  impulse  to  go  out 
and  do  a  noble  deed.  In  the  very  young  child  there  is  nothing 
to  control  the  thousands  of  spontaneous  imjiulses  that  arise 
with  every  hour.     The  baby  finds  a  red-hot  coal  and  instantly 

122 


THE  WILL  123 

seizes  it.  The  next  time  he  sees  a  coal  he  has  the  same  desire 
to  possess  the  brilUant  thing,  but  something  within  him  says, 
"Xo."  "The  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire."  He  checks  the 
impulse  with  his  new-found  will.  Thus  experience  builds  up 
a  system  of  inhibitions  or  vetoes.  As  he  grows  older  the  child 
learns  to  control  his  impulses  more  and  more,  because  he  learns 
more  and  more  what  he  may  not  do.  But  there  is  a  positive 
side  to  the  matter  of  will.  The  child  naturally  shrinks  from 
disagreeable  tasks,  but  he  may  compel  himself  to  do  them 
because  he  has  learned  that  it  pays  to  do  so  either  in  satis- 
faction or  bodily  comfort  or  pecuniary  result,  or  something 
else.  He  may  even  overrule  the  veto  of  sense  experience: 
he  may,  for  instance,  thrust  his  hand  into  the  fire  to  save  his 
ball.  Thus  any  addition  to  one's  sense  of  duty,  or  love,  or 
aspiration,  or  beauty,  or,  indeed,  any  other  good  thing,  is  an 
addition  by  so  much  to  the  will  power.  Create  in  a  child  a 
lively  sense  of  duty,  and  he  will  drive  himself  to  do  very  dis- 
agreeable things  in  order  to  be  true  to  it.  Much  of  the  un- 
pleasant work  of  the  world  is  done  because  men  have  caught 
the  true  idea  of  lofty  things,  and,  having  it,  they  must  will  to 
be  true  to  the  heavenly  vision. 

Attention  and  the  Will.  We  have  learned  that  attention  is 
divided  into  two  divisions — voluntary  and  involuntary,  or 
forced  and  spontaneous.  Forced  attention,  however,  is 
simply  attention  held  fixed  to  one  thing  for  a  length  of  time 
by  the  exercise  of  the  will.  Professor  James  would  include 
most  of  the  functions  of  the  will  in  the  faculty  of  attention. 
He  declares  that  "the  essential  achievement  of  will  is  to 
attend  to  a  difficult  object,  and  hold  it  fast  before  the  mind. 
.  .  .  Effort  of  attention  is  thus  the  essential  phenomenon  of 
will."  There  must  be,  j^erhaps,  the  further  act  of  carrying 
into  effect  the  proposition  which  has  been  held  before  the 
mind,  bitt,  on  the  whole,  the  position  of  Professor  James  has 
been  generally  accepted.  It  follows,  then,  that  all  advice 
as  to  the  training  of  attention  is  advice  as  to  the  training  of 
the  will. 

Many  are  feeble  in  will  power  simply  because  they  arc 
feeble  in  their  powers  of  attention.  Dr.  Oppenheim  has 
made  this  very  clear:  "The  criminal  knows  that  his  career 
will  be  short  and  hard;  he  knows  that  the  same  amount  of 


124        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

energy  and  ability  which  he  uses  in  his  illegitimate  purstiits 
could,  if  rightly  directed,  make  for  him  a  comfortable  and 
honorable  position  in  the  world.  He  knows  this  fully  as  well 
as  you  and  I,  and  possibly  better.  But  he  cannot  keep  his 
attention  fixed  upon  the  idea;  he  is  constantly  benig  led  astray 
by  dancing  thoughts  of  pleasurable  excitement,  ease,  bravado; 
his  inhibitions  are  too  few  and  too  weak."  This  is  the  testi- 
mony of  men  who  have  preached  in  jails  and  prisons.  Often 
a  preacher  in  such  a  place  has  asked  all  who  wish  to  lead  a 
better  life  to  arise,  and  has  been  amazed  that  nearly  all  arose, 
many  of  them  with  eyes  streaming  with  tears.  The  same 
prisoners,  however,  if  released  the  next  day  would  go  straight 
on  in  their  career  of  crime.  They  have  never  trained  their 
will  power;  it  is  impossible  for  them  long  to  hold  the  image  of 
a  better  life  before  their  attention. 

Will  Calturc.  The  chief  stimulants  to  the  will  are  pleasure 
and  pain.  The  boy  will  work  unremittingly  at  his  boat  under 
the  most  disagreeable  conditions  because  he  has  before  him  a 
vision  of  the  pleasure  he  is  to  have  from  the  sailing  of  it.  Am- 
bition will  lead  a  man  "to  scorn  delights  and  live  laborious 
days,"  for  he  foresees  that  the  time  will  come  at  length  when 
he  will  have  the  rewards  of  his  labor.  Duty,  love,  religion — 
indeed,  all  of  the  calls  of  the  higher  life — give  visions  of  pleas- 
ure that  make  the  present  suffering  appear  as  nothing.  There 
are  lower  incentives.  A  man  may  work  for  mere  money;  a 
student  may  work  only  for  the  prize.  Under  the  second  head 
one  may  drive  himself  to  do  disagreeable  things  on  account  of 
fear  of  consequences.  Many  a  boy  works  when  he  would 
rather  play  simply  because  he  has  before  him  a  vision  of  his 
father's  wrath  if  he  neglects  the  task.  These  being  the  stimu- 
lants, it  is  easy  to  deduce  the  general  principles  of  will  culture. 
Supply  the  proper  motive.  The  prompt  doing  of  unpleasant 
things  when  reason  shows  that  they  are  right  will,  if  persisted 
in,  create  at  length  a  habit  which  will  anchor  the  life  securely 
to  safe  foundations.  Children  should  not  be  allowed  to  pro- 
crastinate when  once  it  has  been  made  clear  to  them  that  the 
deed  is  necessary.  They  should  be  taught  not  to  slirink  from 
disagreeable  things  simply  because  they  are  disagreeable. 
It  should,  liowevcr,  be  made  jicrfectly  clear  to  them  that  the 
reward  for  their  eflort  is  adequate  and  reasonable,  and  that  it 


THE  WILL  125 

is  one  that  is  worthy  of  their  highest  endeavor.  No  base 
motives  shotild  be  appealed  to,  and  no  mere  fear  of  punish- 
ment should  be  used  as  the  incentive  to  effort. 

The  Use  of  Prizes.  Should  rewards  be  given  to  stimulate 
the  will?  Should  the  mind  be  led  to  study  by  a  system  of 
pleasant  attractions  of  a  mere  material  nature?  There  are 
many  who  are  doubtful  of  the  expediency  of  giving  prizes 
even  in  the  secular  schools.  Says  Colonel  Parker:  "Bought 
at  home,  bought  at  school,  with  merits,  percentages,  and 
prizes,  bought  in  college  and  university  by  the  offer  of  high 
places,  the  young  man  with  a  finished  education  stands  in  the 
world's  market  place  and  cries,  'I'm  for  sale;  what  will  you 
give  for  me?'  .  .  .  Prize-giving  is  the  rewarding  of  an  ances- 
tor; rewarding  a  child  for  the  virtues  and  mental  power  of  his 
great-great-grandfather."  But  there  is  no  question  as  to 
whether  prizes  and  merits  should  be  given  in  the  Sunday  school. 
Here,  indeed,  they  are  entirely  out  of  place.  They  put  the 
emphasis  upon  the  wrong  motive.  They  appeal  to  selfishness 
and  cupidity  and  egotism.  The  Sunday  school  is  of  all  places 
the  training  ground  of  the  higher  motives;  it  is  the  place 
where  unselfishness,  generosity,  and  lofty  ideals  of  all  kinds 
are  continually  to  be  held  before  the  eyes  of  learners.  To 
stimtilate  giving  by  creating  rivalry  between  classes,  to  urge 
to  hard  study  by  offering  a  prize  for  the  most  Bible  texts  com- 
mitted to  memory,  or,  indeed,  to  bid  for  excellence  in  any- 
thing through  an  appeal  to  mere  selfishness,  is  not  the  prov- 
ince of  the  Sunday  school.  There  are  enough  stimulants  to 
the  will  withovit  appealing  to  the  lower  passions  and  ideals. 

Will  Breaking.  Then  there  is  the  training  of  the  stubborn 
variety  of  will.  It  was  one  of  the  theories  of  the  older  school 
of  moralists  that  the  child's  will  should  be  "broken,"  cost 
what  the  effort  might.  "Break  your  child's  will,  in  order  that 
it  may  not  perish,"  said  a  saintly  old  divine.  "  Break  its  will 
as  soon  as  it  can  sj^eak  plainly,  or  even  before  it  can  speak 
at  all.  It  should  be  forced  to  do  as  it  is  told,  even  if  you  have 
to  whip  it  ten  times  running.  Break  its  will,  in  order  that  its 
soul  may  live."  Modern  educators,  however,  denounce  such 
will-breaking.  It  is  better  to  lead  than  to  drive;  it  is  better 
to  train  the  will  than  to  destroy  it.  "The  will,"  cries  Dr. 
Forbush,   "shall   we  pull  it  up  and  throw  it  away?    What? 


126        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

and  leave  him  a  weakling  child  throtigh  life?  Shall  we  bind 
it  down?  What!  and  maim  him  forever?  Let  it  grow,  but 
let  it  grow  properly.  This  will  is  dangerous,  but  needful. 
You  can't  have  births  without  some  risks.  If  this  boy  is  ever 
to  be  a  man,  it  will  depend  upon  what  is  done  with  his  will. " 
It  is  not  easy  to  be  patient  and  loving  and  wise  with  stubborn 
children,  but  it  is  comparatively  easy  to  bluster  and  threaten 
and  puni.sh.  He,  indeed,  is  a  poor  parent  who  takes  the 
easier  way.  And  as  to  actual  stubbornness — there  are  chil- 
dren, and  many  of  them,  who  have  wills  like  balky  horses. 
They  are  abnormal,  and  it  is  really  impossible  for  them  to  be 
otherwise  without  the  most  carefvil  training.  Many  a  parent 
and  many  a  teacher  has  found  a  child  that  would  not  yield,  do 
with  it  what  he  might.     Says  Professor  James: 

"When  a  situation  of  the  kind  is  once  fairly  developed,  and 
the  child  is  all  tense  and  excited  inwardly,  nineteen  times  out 
of  twenty  it  is  best  for  the  teacher  to  apperceive  the  case  as 
one  of  neural  pathology  rather  than  one  of  moral  culpability. 
So  long  as  the  inhibiting  sense  of  impossibility  remains  in  the 
child's  mind,  he  will  continue  to  get  beyond  the  obstacle. 
The  aim  of  the  teacher  should,  then,  be  to  make  him  simply 
forget.  Drop  the  subject  for  the  time,  divert  the  mind  to  some- 
thing else;  then,  leading  the  pupil  back  by  some  circuitous 
line  of  association,  spring  it  upon  him  again  before  he  has  time 
to  recognze  it,  and  as  likely  as  not  he  will  go  over  it  now  with- 
out any  difficulty.  It  is  in  no  other  way  that  we  overcome 
balkiness  in  a  horse:  we  divert  his  attention,  do  something  to 
his  nose  or  ear,  lead  him  around  in  a  circle,  and  thus  get  him 
over  a  place  where  flogging  would  only  have  made  him  more 
invincible.  A  tactful  teacher  will  never  let  these  strained 
situations  come  up  at  all."' 

Punishment.  Shall  jjunishment  of  ajiy  kind  be  used  to 
stimulate  the  will?  In  the  Sunday  school  only  with  great  tact 
and  care.  "The  ties  which  hold  a  boy  or  girl  to  a  Sunday 
school,"  declare  Burton  and  Mathews,  "are  so  voluntary  and 
weak,  as  compared  with  the  coinjnilsion  which  keejis  pu])ils 
in  the  jjublic  school,  that  any  large  or  general  appeal  to  fear 
is  likely  to  drive  the  pupil  from  the  class  altogether.     Above 


1  Talks  to  Teachers. 


THE  WILL  127 

all,  scolding  is  the  most  sviccessful  means  yet  invented  of 
depopulating  a  Sunday  school  class."  The  teacher  has 
always  the  appeal  to  duty,  to  interest,  to  fair  play,  to  love, 
to  make  use  of,  and  the  lesson  may  be  made  so  interesting 
that  there  will  be  no  need  for  discipline.  Order  is  not  neces- 
sarily perfect  stillness;  it  is  interest  in  the  work  at  hand;  it 
is  attention  not  won  through  fear  of  punishment  or  hope  of 
reward,  but  spontaneous  and  joyous  and  natural.  A  true 
teacher  can  lead  the  wills  of  his  pupils  anywhere  he  pleases; 
he  who  bullies  and  drives  and  scolds  is  unfit  to  be  a  teacher. 
The  Will  and  Character.  A  cultivated  will  is  only  another 
name  for  a  strong  character.  "Stability  is  founded  upon 
will."  To  be  honest,  to  be  punctual,  to  be  diligent,  to  be 
truthful — these  are  at  first  largely  matters  of  will,  and  they 
are  to  be  learned  in  the  ])lastic  years  of  youth.  "The  educa- 
tion of  the  will,"  says  Taylor,  "the  development  of  control  in 
its  many-sided  senses,  is  the  real  end  and  aim  of  all  education. 
The  will  of  the  child  may  be  influenced  in  a  purely  infectious 
way  or  by  intelligent  counsel  and  assistance.  It  cannot  be 
accomplished  by  a  few  spasmodic  efforts  from  time  to  timei 
but  only  by  that  slow  and  regular  process  by  which  nature 
produces  all  of  her  rarest  creations."  But  our  willing  hardens 
swiftly  into  habit.  The  thing  that  once  took  all  the  deter- 
mination we  possessed  becomes  in  due  time  an  automatic 
process  of  which  we  are  scarcely  conscious.  It  was  so  with 
our  learning  to  read  and  write  and  play  the  piano.  It  took 
persistence  and  long-continued  practice  to  ride  the  bicycle, 
Tjut  at  length  riding  became  as  easy  as  walking.  Every 
movement  of  our  muscles  is  either  automatic  or  voluntary, 
and  the  automatic  part  increases  m  amount  as  we  grow  older. 
Culture,  training,  skill,  dexterity,  and  the  like  are  only  differ- 
ent names  for  will  power  exerted  in  one  direction  until  a  habit 
has  been  formed.  Our  lives  are  but  the  sum  total  of  our  past 
willing.  We  are  "bundles  of  habits"  which  we  have  formed 
ourselves  by  our  past  volition.  And  this  brings  us  to  our 
next  lesson. 


CHAPTER  XX 
HABIT 

The  Law  of  Habit.  Habit  is  "the  tendency  of  a  thing  to  be 
or  to  do  what  it  was  or  did  on  some  previous  occasion."  A 
stream  of  water  descends  upon  a  newly  plowed  meadow;  in 
rtmning  off  it  takes  the  course  of  least  resistance  and  cuts  for 
itself  a  channel.  Henceforth  every  stream  of  water  that 
comes  upon  this  meadow  will  run  away  in  this  channel,  which 
will  ever  grow  deeper  and  deeper.  It  is  a  law  written  over  all 
nature  that  action  when  repeated  shall  follow,  if  possible, 
already  established  paths.  Habit  is  only  a  synonym  of 
repetition.  The  little  child  is  almost  powerless  in  every  re- 
spect. He  cannot  even  direct  his  hands  or  his  eyes.  It  is 
only  through  painful  effort  many  times  repeated  that  he 
learns  to  grasp  the  near  object,  and  later  to  walk,  and  to  use 
the  various  implements  and  objects  which  enter  his  life.  At 
first  every  act  must  be  the  result  of  careful  attention,  bxit  soon 
repetition  of  the  act  establishes,  as  it  were,  a  channel,  and  at 
length  the  stream  of  action  follows  this  channel  without  any 
effort  of  the  attention.  The  action  becomes  automatic. 
The  small  boy  walks  and  runs  without  a  thought  of  what  he  is 
doing;  he  balances  ana  turns  and  swings  himself  about  with 
the  utmost  skill  without  paying  the  slightest  attention  to  the 
act.  It  has  become  a  spontaneous  matter.  So  with  every 
act  of  our  muscles  and  of  our  minds;  at  first  there  must  be 
]minful  attention,  then,  after  repetition  again  and  again,  aiito- 
matic  action.  Habit  is  past  attention.  "Ninety-nine  one- 
hundredths,"  says  Powell,  "of  all  a  man  does  he  does  auto- 
matically," and  Professor  James  would  multiply  this  number 
by  ten.  And  automatic  action,  with  the  exce]ition  of  some 
instinctive  reactions  (instinct  is  born  with  the  individual; 
habit  is  acquired,  inherited  from  ancestors  perhaps),  is  only 
another  name  for  repeated  acts  or  states. 

Habit  Not  an  Evil.  With  many  the  word  "habit"  has  an 
evil  meaning.     To  say  that  a   man  is  a  "slave  of  habit"  is 

128 


II  ABIT  129 

to  suggest  that  he  is  dominated  by  his  lower  impulses.  But 
we  are  all  slaves  of  habit,  and  were  we  not,  we  would  be  mere 
infants  in  attainment.  All  training  and  education  is  nothing 
more  or  less  than  the  systematic  forming  of  habits.  Take,  as 
an  example,  learning  to  j'lay  the  piano:  the  child  with  his 
clumsy  little  fingers  plays  over  and  over  the  difficult  scales 
until  by  constant  repetition  the  act  becomes  a  habit;  until 
later,  after  he  has  practiced  for  years,  he  plays  almost  auto- 
matically; he  can  run  his  fingers  over  the  keys  with  exquisite 
skill  and  talk  to  you  at  the  same  time.  Walking,  talking, 
reading — skill,  indeed,  in  any  direction — are  all  habits  which 
can  be  acquired  only  by  repetition  with  much  expenditure 
at  first  of  attention  held  firmly  in  place  by  will.  The  degree  of 
one's  culture  is  simply  the  degree  to  which  he  has  made  his 
life  automatic.  The  most  trained,  skilled,  cultured,  educated, 
well-bred,  strong-charactered  man  is  the  man  who  has  the 
greatest  variety  and  the  strongest  assortment  of  good  habits. 
Habit,  therefore,  should  not  have  solely  a  bad  implication; 
it  is  one  of  the  most  vakxable  processes  connected  with  human 
life. 

Childhood  and  Habit.  The  body  of  a  young  child — its 
nerves  and  tissue  and  brain — has  been  likened  to  wet  plaster 
of  Paris.  Every  experience  of  waking  hours  makes  its  groove 
in  the  plastic  material.  The  first  delicate  tracing  is  deepened 
with  the  repetition  of  the  act,  until  swiftly  it  becomes  a  rut. 
Paper  folded  once  always  folds  thereafter  in  the  sdme  groove, 
and  so  with  the  plastic  mind  of  childhood.  In  the  first  five 
or  six  years  the  child  has  become  to  a  large  degree  what  he  is 
to  be.  The  plaster  begins  to  harden,  and  by  middle  age  it  has 
set  forever,  a  fact  which  places  fearful  responsibilities  upon 
everyone  who  comes  into  contact  with  childhood.  It  is  as 
if  we  lived  our  lives  surrounded  on  every  side  by  sensitive 
phonograph  plates  on  which  our  every  word  and  act  must 
sink  and  be  treasured  for  us  or  against  us  for  eternity.  The 
chief  responsibility  is,  beyond  all  argument,  upon  the  home; 
the  child  is  there  more  than  anywhere  else.  Suppose  the 
father  swears,  or  is  indecent  in  language,  or  smokes,  or  lies, 
or  drinks;  suppose  the  mother  loses  her  temper,  or  says  un- 
kindly things,  or  judges  harshly  her  neighbors!  If  they 
realized  completely  what  first  trails  they  were  plowing  in  the 


I30         KT.KMKNTS  OF  RELIGIOliS  PI-DAGOCIV 

sensitive  material  of  their  children's  minds,  they  would  pause 
in  very  horror.  "  Habit"  comes  from  the  Latin  verb  Imbeo — 
"I  have  it";  swiftl}''  it  changes  to  the  third  person,  habct — 
"  It  has  me." 

Bad  Habits.  The  real  problem  connected  with  habit  is  the 
seeing  to  it  that  the  habits  are  of  the  right  kind.  Habits 
there  must  be,  Init  what  kind  of  habits?  The  answer  to  the 
ciuestion  determines  what  the  life  is  to  be.  After  all,  we  are 
to-day  simply  the  sum  of  our  yesterdays.  "In  every  act  of 
our  lives,  no  matter  how  trivial,  we  are  laying  the  foundation 
of  all  our  future  conduct."  "As  the  twig  is  bent  the  tree 
inclines."  A  rich  philanthropist,  struck  by  the  misery  and 
squalor  of  the  .slums  of  a  certain  city,  invited  some  of  the  most 
wretched  in  one  of  the  worst  sections  to  move  at  his  expense 
into  a  cleanly  and  respectable  part  of  the  suburbs,  but  not 
one  availed  himself  of  the  opportunity.  They  preferred  to 
stay  where  they  were,  where  the  habits  of  a  lifetime  had  fixed 
them.  Habit  is  second  nature;  and  if  the  habit  is  bad,  then 
badness  becomes  second  nature.  The  older  one  is  the  harder 
is  it  to  change.     The  best  work  is  that  done  with  childhood. 

Habit  and  Education,  No  other  chapter  in  psychology  is 
more  suggestive  and  helpful  to  the  teacher  than  this.  The 
teacher  has  as  almost  his  sole  business  the  forming  of  correct 
habits.  Education  is  habit-making.  Training,  drill  work, 
everything  connected  with  the  teacher's  jjrofession,  has  as  its 
end  ])roper  habits.  The  teacher  should  live  with  that  ideal  ever 
before  him.  His  office  is  not  to  amuse,  not  to  pack  into  the 
pupil's  brain  stores  of  facts,  not  to  lecture  and  pour  in,  not 
to  be  a  police  officer  and  keep  order,  not  to  be  a  convenient 
reference  authority  in  time  of  diffictilty :  he  is  to  be  a  molder 
of  correct  habits;  he  should  show  the  pupil  how  to  think,  how 
to  act,  how  to  feel,  how  to  help  himself.  If  he  has  his  pupils 
an  hour,  then  that  hour  is  to  be  made  a  sample  of  what  the 
ideal  life  shf)uld  be.  It  should,  as  it  were,  form  grooves  in  the 
learner's  mind  so  that  he  will  be  impelled  to  make  all  of  his 
hours  ccmform  to  this  standard  hour. 

In  the  Sunday  School.  But  the  Stmday  school  teacher 
labors  under  great  difficulties.  He  has  his  pupils  only  an 
hour  in  the  week,  and  during  all  of  the  other  one  hundred  and 
sixty-seven  hours  some  one  else  has  them — the  homo,  tlic 


HABIT  131 

street,  the  public  school.  To  make  a  perfect  impression  upon 
his  children  he  should  have  them  constantly  vinder  his  direc- 
tion; he  should  have  control  over  every  avenue  thi-ough  which 
bad  habits  might  come.  As  it  is,  his  chance  is  as  one  to  one 
hundred  and  sixty-seven.  The  chief  burden  is  uj^on  the 
home,  btit  unfortunately  there  are  thousands  and  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  homes  where  the  responsibility  is  not  in  any  real 
measure  felt.  What  can  he  do?  An  hour  a  week  is  better 
than  nothing.  In  the  fifty-two  hours  of  a  year  one  can  make 
impressions  on  the  plastic  young  soul  which  can  never  be 
effaced,  impressions  which  may  indeed  control  the  life.  The 
Sunday  school  teacher  should  strive,  if  possible,  to  come  in 
contact  with  the  pupil  during  the  week,  as  often  indeed  as  he 
can.  He  should  see  to  it  that  no  opportunity  is  wasted. 
There  are  many  habits  that  may  be  inculcated  even  in  one  hour 
a  week.  There  is  the  habit  of  punctuality.  An  experienced 
old  teacher  once  declared  to  me  that  an  eleventh  command- 
ment should  be  added  to  the  Decalogue :  Thou  shall  not  come 
late  to  the  house  of  God.  There  are  other  habits.  "Possibly 
one  of  the  finest  is  the  habit  of  thoroughness,  that  faculty  of 
doing  a  thing,  no  matter  what  its  nature  may  be,  in  a  complete 
and  conscientious  manner."  Then  there  is  the  habit  of 
truthfulness.  Reverence  for  God's  house,  honesty,  courtesy, 
obedience,  regularity,  order,  unselfishness — all  these  may  be 
cultivated  into  habits,  and  it  is  the  teacher's  duty  to  watch 
every  member  of  his  class  with  loving  care  in  order  to  incul- 
cate and  direct  these  great  principles. 

The  Breaking  of  Bad  Habits.  In  only  one  way  can  a  habit 
be  eradicated — by  making  a  deeper  channel  alongside  of  it. 
He  who  would  rid  himself  of  a  habit  must  concentrate  himself 
so  strongly  upon  the  new  habit  to  be  formed  that  it  will  banish 
the  old  idea.  The  new  action  must  be  repeated  as  often  as 
possible,  that  the  channel  may  deepen.  There  is  no  such 
thing  as  breaking  a  habit  by  "tapering  off,"  as  it  is  called. 
There  must  be  an  absolute  brea(k,  and  then  concentration  with 
all  of  one's  powers  upon  the  new  course.  The  teacher  who 
would  break  her  students  of  bad  habits  cannot  do  it  by  the 
mere  use  of  maxims.  "  Honesty  is  the  best  policy"  never  led 
anybody  to  an  upright  life.  It  must  be  brought  home  per- 
sonally to  the  learner;  appeal  must  be  made  to  self-respect. 


132        F.LEMENTS  OF  RFJJGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

and  duty,  and  unselfishness;  examples  of  upright  men  should 
be  shown,  and  there  can  be  no  ceasing  in  the  work.  The  more 
concrete  the  teaching  the  better.  To  ti"ust  a  boy  in  some  ac- 
tual transaction  is  worth  more  than  a  volume  of  mere  precept. 
The  Acquisition  of  Good  Habits.  Professor  James,  who  has 
written  more  helpfully  upon  habit  than  anyone  else  I  have 
ever  read,  has  said  that  "the  great  thing  in  all  education  is  to 
make  our  nervous  system  our  ally  instead  of  our  eneiny.  .  .  . 
We  must  make  automatic  and  habitvial,  as  early  as  possible, 
as  many  useful  actions  as  we  can."  For  the  training  of  one- 
self into  correct  habits  he  has  laid  down  several  maxims. 
First,  "  We  must  take  care  to  launch  ourselves  with  as  strong  and 
decided  an  initiative  as  possible."  We  should  see  to  it  that  we 
keep  ourselves  in  the  right  i)ath.  A  public  pledge  is  often  of 
help;  joining  the  church  has  given  stability  to  many  a  waver- 
ing Christian.  A  certain  man  once  advertised  that  he  would 
give  a  hundred  dollars  to  the  man  who  found  him  in  any 
saloon.  It  strengthened  him.  Put  good  incentives  ever  in 
your  own  way;  surround  yourself  with  those  things  which 
build  up.  Second,  "Never  suffer  an  exception  to  occur  till  the 
new  habit  is  securely  rooted  in  your  life."  Third,  "Seize  the 
first  possible  opportunity  to  act  on  every  resolution  yoti  make, 
and  on  every  emotional  prompting  you  may  experience  in  the 
direction  of  the  habits  yoji  aspire  to  gain."  At  a  concert  where 
a  great  singer  is  appealing  to  the  emotions,  at  church  under 
strong  ])reaching,  or  even  at  home  while  reading  a  good  book 
we  often  have  strong  impulses  to  do  better  and  higher  things. 
If  we  do  not  act  upon  these  impulses,  they  leave  us  j^oorer 
than  we  were  before.  Professor  James  would  have  us  do 
soinething,  if  it  be  nothing  more  than  to  s]ieak  a  kind  word  to 
the  first  soul  we  meet,  or  to  double  the  amount  we  usually 
place  in  the  collection.  If  we  do  not,  we  become  at  last  like 
the  Russian  lady  who  went  to  the  playhouse  and  sat  and  wept 
for  hours  over  the  stiflferings  of  the  heroine  while  her  own 
coachman  was  freezing  to  death  outside.  "There  is  no  moi-e 
contemptible  type  of  human  character  than  that  of  the  nerve- 
less sentimentalist  and  dreamer  who  spends  his  life  in  a  welter- 
ing sea  of  sensibility,  but  never  does  a  concrete,  manly  deed." 
Fourth,  "Don't  preach  too  nuich  to  your  pupils,  or  abound  i)t 
good  talk  in  the  abstract."     Finally,  "  Keep  tin-  faculty  of  effort 


HABIT  133 

alive  within  you  by  a  little  gratuitous  exercise  every  day."  When 
misfortune  or  suffering  or  temptation  coines  we  have  only  our 
past  accumulation  of  will  and  resolution  to  fall  back  upon. 
The  strength  of  the  oak  is  just  in  proportion  to  the  storms  it 
has  wrestled  with  continually  during  the  years  of  its  past. 
The  tree  that  has  never  exercised  itself  goes  down  before  the 
storm. 

Self- Activity.  Finally,  habit  comes  only  through  the  active 
exertion  of  our  own  selves.  No  one  can  talk  habits  into  us; 
the  teacher  who  simply  talks  will  inculcate  little  of  habit  in  her 
jmpils.  There  must  be  action  on  the  part  of  the  learner.  To 
learn  arithmetic,  or  the  piano,  or  skating,  or  composition 
there  must  be  a  continual  doing  on  the  part  of  the  one  who  is 
to  learn.  Thus  the  problem  before  the  Sunday  school  teacher 
is  an  intensely  practical  one.  Her  class  must  be,  as  it  were, 
a  seminary  where  the  active  virtues  are  practiced  actively. 
Manifestly,  the  teacher  cannot  say,  "During  this  hour  we  are 
all  going  to  be  honest,  so  as  to  learn  how  to  do  it."  The 
problem  is  more  like  that  of  the  football  coach  who  takes  his 
men  in  after  the  practice  game  and  discusses  with  a  diagram 
the  rules  and  the  points  of  failure  and  success.  The  teacher 
must  constantly  be  in  the  presence  of  the  pupil's  daily  life 
and  problems  and  must  make  applications.  If  the  class  is 
organized  as  a  boys'  club  with  midweek  meetings,  a  thousand 
lessons  of  a  practical  nature  may  be  taught  actively:  fairness, 
courtesy,  obedience,  self-control,  and  the  like;  and  these  may 
be  repeated  until  they  form  the  beginnings  of  real  habits  that 
will  at  length  dominate  the  life.  One  cannot  be  specific.  In 
work  like  this  the  teacher  must  make  his  own  plans.  We  can 
only  state  the  great  principles  and  leave  the  individual  worker 
to  make  his  applications  in  view  of  his  conditions  and  the 
material  with  which  he  is  to  work.  One  cannot  learn  t(} 
teach  by  memorizing  rules;  one  cannot  make  formulas  that 
shall  do  automatically  the  work  of  a  teacher. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

SUGGESTION  AND  IMITATION 

Suggestion.  By  this  time  it  must  be  clear  that  no  single 
function  of  the  intellect,  like  perception  or  attention  or  imagi- 
nation or  memory,  exists  alone  as  if  it  were  a  separate  organ. 
Each  is  a  composite  made  up  of  many  parts;  each  borrows 
from  the  others  and  lends  to  the  others;  all  are  working  at 
the  same  instant.  The  mind  is  a  unit  and  it  works  as  a  unit. 
We  dissect  it  and  name  different  functions,  but  this  is  only  for 
convenience.  The  more  we  know  of  the  mind  the  harder  it  is 
to  divide  it  up  into  parts  and  organs  and  processes.  We 
speak  of  perception,  for  instance,  and  define  it  as  the  power 
which  interprets  the  materials  given  by  sensation.  We  would 
thus  imply  that  our  intellects  are  stored  only  with  material 
that  has  come  in  through  the  senses  by  means  of  perception. 
But  "half  of  what  we  hear  and  see  never  comes  in  through  the 
senses  at  all."  The  child  excitedly  tells  its  mother  that  he 
has  seen  a  snake  as  long  as  the  table.  Investigation  shows 
that  it  was  a  dark  rope  coiled  in  the  grass.  A  picture  of  fierce 
spectacles  and  teeth  rampant  brings  up  instantly  the  image 
of  a  certain  strenuous  individual.  I  haven't  mentioned  his 
name,  but  you  have  it  none  the  less.  Your  hostess  makes  a 
perfectly  innocent  remark  about  her  work  to-morrow,  and 
you  depart  very  soon  afterward,  remarking  to  yourself,  "I 
was  boring  her;  she  hinted  that  it  was  time  to  go  home." 
We  do  not  need  the  whole  sensation;  we  get  a  fragment  and 
we  infer  the  rest.  Given  a  bit  of  arc,  we  have  the  circle.  The 
mind  leaps  swiftly  ahead  of  the  slow  movement  of  data  coming 
in  froin  perception  and  completes  the  picture  from  the  first 
details,  just  as  Poe  forecast  the  whole  plot  of  Barnaby  Rudge 
after  reading  the  first  installment.  This  is  suggestion.  It 
runs  through  all  of  the  functions  of  the  mind:  association, 
attention,  imagination,  and  the  rest.  Says  Baldwin :  "  By  the 
suggestion  we  mean  the  fact  that  all  sorts  of  hints  from  without 
disturb  and  modify  the  beliefs  and  actions  of  the  individual." 

134 


SUGGESTION  AND  IMITATION  135 

Suggestibility.  Some  minds  are  more  open  to  suggestion 
than  others.  Certain  sensitive  persons  are  always  looking 
for  hints,  "Where  more  is  meant  than  meets  the  ear." 
They  watch  narrowly  the  expression  upon  the  face  of  the 
talker  that  they  may  find  what  really  is  in  his  heart.  Say  to 
certain  people,  "Do  you  see  yonder  cloud,  that's  almost  in 
shape  of  a  camel?"  and  they  reply  instantly,  "By  the  mass, 
and  'tis  like  a  camel  indeed."  Say  to  them,  "It's  a  good  day 
for  fishing,"  and  they  are  ready  to  go  with  you  at  once.  We 
are  all  of  us  influenced  more  than  we  realize  by  chance  sug- 
gestions thrown  suddenly  into  our  lives.  The  whole  career 
of  a  young  man  in  college  has  often  been  turned  by  some 
remark  from  his  professor  like,  "  I  believe  you  have  gifts  that 
would  give  you  success  in  the  law."  John  B.  Gough  was 
saved  because  some  one  once  said  to  him,  "You  can  be  a  man 
yet."  A  man  fleeing  before  a  mob  suddenly  turns  and  says, 
"You  wouldn't  hang  me,  would  you?"  The  mob  had  not 
previously  thought  of  it,  but  now  they  can  think  of  nothing 
else.  An  inventor  gets  the  crowning  process  of  his  invention 
while  listening  to  a  sermon  on  "predestination."  A  poet  of 
my  acquaintance  got  the  theme  of  one  of  his  best  poems 
through  the  misreading  of  a  line  in  a  newspaper.  Suggestions 
are  pouring  in  upon  us  every  moment;  some  people  are  more 
suggestible  than  others,  but  all  are  turned  hither  and  thither 
by  these  chance  straws. 

The  Dangers  of  Suggestion,  Let  the  newspapers  tell  in 
detail  of  some  suicide  committed  in  an  unusual  manner  and 
there  will  be  a  number  of  others  just  like  it  within  a  week. 
Reading  about  crimes  produces  a  tendency  toward  crime. 
The  "Raffles"  stories  have  been  responsible  for  more  law- 
breaking  than  most  people  suspect.  Many  a  child  never 
thought  of  certain  kinds  of  mischief  until  his  parent  warned 
him  against  them.  A  certain  mother  had  occasion  to  leave 
her  small  children  alone  for  several  hours.  She  warned  them 
against  everything  she  covild  think  of.  Finally  as  she  was 
leaving  she  said,  "Now  don't  you  put  any  beans  in  your  ears." 
When  she  returned  every  child  had  a  bean  in  its  ear.  This  is 
the  weak  point  of  advice.  Many  an  old  Polonius  of  a  father 
has  followed  his  son  on  his  way  to  college  with  a  stream  of 
advice.      He   has  warned   specifically   against   every  evil   he 


136        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

could  imagine,  and  in  doing  so  has  really  suggested  forms  of 
evil  to  the  son.  "Don't  go  in  swimming  to-day,"  cautions  the 
mother.  The  boy  hadn't  thought  of  it  before;  but  now  his 
day  is  filled  with  an  irresistible  desire  to  go  into  the  water. 
A  certain  father  once  said  to  his  son,  "  You  say  you  are  going 
to  be  a  journalist,  but  I'll  wager  you'll  end  by  being  simply  a 
guide  with  John  Davis  up  in  the  Maine  woods."  With  that 
moment  came  the  impulse  in  the  boy  to  be  a  guide,  an  impulse 
that  he  had  not  definitely  formulated  before,  and  as  he  always 
had  been  a  great  reader  of  hunting  and  trapping  stories  he  had 
to  fight  it  for  some  years.  There  is  a  danger  connected  with 
the  teaching  of  temperance  in  the  Sunday  school.  A  boy 
once  told  one  of  my  teachers  that  after  a  temperance  lesson 
where  the  sparkle  and  glitter  of  the  wine  had  been  dwelt  upon, 
and  its  effects  upon  the  human  system,  he  often  had  an  im- 
pulse to  rush  out  and  drink  some  wine  to  find  how  it  tasted  and 
felt.  The  best  temperance  teaching  dwells  upon  the  lives  of 
temperate  men.  Hold  up  before  the  class  the  ideal  temperate 
man  rather  than  the  drunkard. 

Teaching  by  Suggestion.  There  are  two  ways  of  getting  a 
thing  done:  use  either  persuasion  or  suggestion.'  Of  the  first 
we  will  not  treat;  of  suggestion  there  are  many  uses.  "Every 
teacher,"  says  Oppenheim,  "uses  it,  in  proportion  to  his  skill, 
when  he  tries  to  lead  his  pupils  instead  of  driving  them. 
Every  time  he  begins  the  explanation  of  a  difficult  problem 
by  saying  that  it  is  easy,  that  it  has  a  bad  but  undeserved 
reputation,  that  a  very  little  thought  will  make  the  whole 
matter  clear,  he  is  using  suggestion  and  at  the  same  time  is 
skillfully  leading  his  jjupils  over  a  rough  road."  The  teacher 
may  drop  hints  as  to  behavior  or  as  to  future  work;  he  may 
skillfully  suggest  certain  ideals  and  standards;  he  may  inten- 
tionally, while  not  seeming  to  do  so,  express  his  opinion  of 
certain  acts  and  princijiles.  If  certain  suggestions  in  the  form 
of  prohibitions  are  like  bad  seeds  in  the  minds  of  children, 
then  certain  other  .suggestions  must  act  as  good  seeds.  Ever^' 
thing  should  be  examined  not  wholly  as  to  what  it  is  on  the 
face  of  it,  but  as  to  what  it  suggests.  For  instance,  a  draped 
feminine  statue  may  be  more  injurious  than  one  perfectly 
nude.     There  is  nothing  more  harmful  than  suggested  vice. 

Imitation.     Imitation  is  but  a  special  form  of  suggestion. 


SUGGESTION  AND  IMITATION  137 

Seeing  others  do  a  thing  suggests  unconsciously  to  us,  perhaps, 
that  we  do  the  same  thing.  We  involuntarily  fall  into  the 
ways  of  those  around  us.  We  make  a  wry  face  when  we  see 
another  eating  a  lemon.  We  see  the  people  on  the  street 
looking  up  at  a  housetop  and  before  we  know  it  we  are  doing 
the  same  thing.  Enterprising  advertisers  have  taken  advan- 
tage of  this.  They  have  hired  men  to  stand  all  day  and  look 
absorbedly  in  at  their  show  windows  or  up  at  their  signs. 
When  the  crowd  rushes  madly  down  the  street  we  have  an 
impulse  to  follow.  Suggestion  and  imitation  are  the  basis 
of  all  mob  action.  In  the  schoolroom  imitation  plays  a  large 
part.  Let  one  pupil  ask  for  a  drink  of  water  and  it  suggests 
thirst  to  all  the  others.  Let  one  yawn  and  all  will  yawn. 
A  child  with  Saint  Vitus's  dance  has  infected  a  whole  school 
with  nervous  reactions.  The  uses  of  imitation  with  children 
have  already  been  dwelt  upon  in  the  section  devoted  to  child 
study.  The  teacher  should  realize  fully  that  he  is  the  pupil's 
first  lesson;  his  ways,  his  peculiarities,  his  methods  of  work 
will  be  imitated  more  or  less  by  all  before  him. 

Books  and  Reading,  The  Sunday  school  should  use  every 
effort  to  carry  on  a  crusade  for  proper  reading  in  the  home. 
There  is  no  form  of  suggestion  more  insidious  than  that  which 
comes  from  books.  Many  a  life  has  been  turned  by  its  read- 
ing. The  boy  who  feads  the  cheap  novel  has  suggested  to 
him  an  environment  which  makes  him  discontented  with  his 
present  humdrum  lot.  He  is  led  sometimes  even  into  crime. 
The  girl  has  suggested  to  her  a  world  which  is  false  in  every 
particular.  She  becomes  as  a  result  romantic,  a  dreamer  and 
a  castle  builder.  From  suggestion  it  is  but  a  step  to  imitation. 
The  Sunday  school  library  should  be  one  of  the  most  thoroughly 
alive  parts  of  the  organization.  It  should  not  be  enough 
that  the  pupils  have  a  chance  to  take  books  if  they  will.  The 
teacher  should  discuss  books  with  the  class,  should  form  read- 
ing lists,  and  have,  if  possible,  a  reading  circle.  Control  coni- 
pletely  the  reading  of  a  boy  or  girl  and  you  have  gained  a  hold 
that  could  be  gained  in  no  other  way.  For  the  Sunday  school 
the  really  practical  part  of  the  subject  of  suggestion  and  imita- 
tion concerns  itself  with  the  subject  of  books  and  reading. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

THE  EMOTIONS 

Sensation  and  Feeling.  The  psychologist  makes  a  dis- 
tinction between  soisation  and  feeling.  Sensation  comes  to 
our  consciousness  through  one  of  the  sense  organs  of  the  body. 
It  comes  from  without,  and  fixes  our  attention,  upon  some- 
thing outside  of  ourselves.  It  is  thus  objective  in  its  eflfect. 
Feeling,  however,  is  from  within.  When  the  sensation  reaches 
consciovisness  it  arouses  feeling.  The  eye  brings  the  sensa- 
tion of  redness  and  of  form,  and  perception  says:  "This  is  a 
red  cloud."  The  red,  we  say,  is  in  the  cloud.  The  sight, 
however,  gives  us  pleasure,  but  this  pleastire  is  a  svibjective 
affair;  it  is  within  us.  It  is  easy  to  realize  the  difference  be- 
tween sensation  and  feeling,  for  there  is  no  one  who  cannot 
feel  the  difference  between  the  pain  from  a  burn  and  the  pain 
at  hearing  the  news  of  the  death  of  a  friend.  Many  sensations 
may  come  to  us  at  the  same  instant.  A  great  conflagration 
may  fill  the  whole  surroundings  with  '  a  deafening  roar,  a 
blinding  glare,  and  a  choking  odor.  There  can,  however, 
be  but  one  feeling  at  one  time.  The  frame  of  mind  must 
be  either  pleasant  or  unpleasant.  The  feeling  of  the  mo- 
ment dominates  the  whole  consciousness.  To  the  dys- 
j)eptic  the  whole  world  is  blue  and  everything  is  going  to 
ruin.  To  the  healthy  man  a  good  dinner  brightens  the 
whole  horizon. 

Emotion.  An  emotion  is  more  complex  than  a  feeling,  and 
it  is  stronger.  A  single  perception  may  restilt  in  a  feeling,  as, 
for  instance,  the  warmth  of  the  fire  may  give  the  feeling  of 
comfort,  the  filing  of  a  saw  the  feeling  of  discomfort,  the  i)lay- 
ing  of  soft  music  the  feeling  of  ]ieace.  For  emotion,  however, 
there  mvist  be  a  group  of  perceptions  or  ideas.  One  finds  in 
his  walk  a  tiny  necklace,  and  he  has  at  first  a  feeling  of  ciiri- 
osity  or  of  pleasure;  but  if  on  clf)scr  inspection  he  finds  it  to 
be  the  necklace  lost  by  his  little  girl  wlio  has  since  died,  the 

138 


THE  EMOTIONS  139 

feeling  will  swiftly  change  into  emotion.  The  feelings  and 
emotions  and  sentiments  belong  in  a  different  class  from  any- 
thing we  have  thus  far  investigated.  Perceptions  and  judg- 
ments and  images  belong  to  the  life  of  thought;  they  are 
movements  of  the  intellect  gra])pling  with  the  external  world 
about  it.  Feelings  and  emotions  are  subjective  and  personal. 
They  come  upon  us  suddenly,  and  master  us.  Sometimes 
they  dominate  us  completely,  to  the  exclusion  of  everything 
else.  The  insane  often  illustrate  what  the  extreme  of  emo- 
tional life  would  be.  Now  they  laugh  uproariously,  now  they 
flame  into  volcanic  anger,  now  they  burst  into  tempestuous 
weeping.  All  of  us  are  subject  more  or  less  to  the  power  of 
emotion.  Some  of  us  are  dominated  by  anger  or  by  jealousy 
or  by  melancholy  or  pride.  They  are  besetting  sins,  and 
unchecked  they  become  moods  ("A  mood  is  an  emotion  long 
drawn  out"),  and  at  length  take  possession  of  the  life. 

Instincts.  Feelings  and  emotions  are  very  closely  con- 
nected with  the  instincts.  Instinct  may  be  defined  as  "the 
faculty  of  acting  in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  certain  ends, 
without  foresight  of  the  ends,  and  without  previous  education 
in  the  performance."  Birds  build  their  nests  precisely  as  all 
their  species  have  built  thein  from  the  beginning,  and  that 
without  the  slightest  instruction.  The  yovmg  child  is  a  bundle 
of  instincts.  He  eats,  plays,  laughs,  cries,  stands,  walks  in- 
stinctively. And  with  every  instinct  there  goes  an  emotional 
excitement.  The  child  reaches  instinctively  for  the  bright 
object,  and  if  he  cannot  get  it,  he  cries,  then  kicks,  then 
screams  in  rage.  "Every  object  that  excites  an  instinct 
excites  an  emotion  as  well."  Among  the  instincts  may  be 
mentioned  play,  imitation,  rivalry,  pugnacity,  sympathy, 
fear,  fear  of  high  places  and  black  things,  curiosity,  and  the 
like,  but  from  instincts  they  quickly  change  to  habits.  Says 
Professor  James:  "Most  instincts  are  implanted  for  the  sake 
of  giving  rise  to  habits,  and,  this  purpose  once  accomplished, 
the  instincts  themselves,  as  such,  have  no  raison  d'etre  in  the 
physical  economy,  and  consequently  fade  away."  A  child 
left  to  do  as  it  pleases  becomes  speedily  a  creature  of  intense 
emotions.  He  is  selfish;  he  screams  and  falls  into  a  fury 
when  his  will  is  crossed.  Many  a  jiarent  has  laughed  at  the 
willfulness  of  the  baby,  or  at  the  first  little  lie,  or  at  the  first 


I40        F.LEMEXTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

symptom  of  pugnacity,  and  has  awakened  later  to  find  tliat 
the  baby  has  grown  into  a  boy  who  is  emotionally  un  a  level 
with  the  savage.  It  should  be  recognized  as  the  duty  of  every 
I)arent  and  teacher  to  see  to  it  that  the  instincts  of  the  child 
and  their  emotional  accompaniments  are  trained  into  the 
proper  channels.  The  moral  training  of  children  consists 
largely  in  the  control  and  direction  of  their  instincts  so  that 
they  will  harden  into  the  proper  habits. 

The  Expression  of  Emotion.  Every  emotion  is  expressed 
in  some  attitude  or  motion  of  the  body.  It  is  not  hard  to  tell 
when  a  man  is  angry  or  joyous  or  melancholy  or  disappointed. 
The  emotion  is  written  all  over  him.  It  is  safe  to  say  that 
emotion  entirely  without  some  physical  manifestation  is 
impossible.  This  fact  has  been  made  much  of  by  psycholo- 
gists. One  school  maintains  that  the  emotion  comes  because 
of  the  bodily  expression.  Instead  of  saying,  "We  lose  our 
fortune,  are  sorry  and  weep;  we  are  insulted  by  a  rival,  are 
angry  and  strike;  we  meet  a  bear,  are  frightened  and  run, 
.  .  .  the  more  rational  statement  is  that  we  feel  sorry  because 
we  cry,  angry  because  we  strike,  afraid  because  we  tremble." 
There  is  much  to  commend  this  theory.  One  could  not  re- 
main angry  long  if  he  were  lying  fiat  on  his  back  on  the  floor, 
his  arms  stretched  out.  The  niore  the  angry  man  flourishes 
his  fists  and  roars  his  threats  and  gnashes  his  teeth,  the  angrier 
he  gets.  "Imagine,  if  yovi  can,  Uriah  Heep  with  a  broad, 
exjianded  chest."  "In  Leonardo  da  Vinci's  great  picture  of 
the  Last  Su])per,  the  character  of  each  of  the  disciples  is  plainly 
shown  by  the  hands."  Emotion  can  thus  be  painted  on 
canvas.  One  cannot  remain  melancholy  long  if  he  stands 
erect,  throws  back  his  shoulders,  and  looks  at  the  sky.  To 
bow  oneself  over  with  the  face  in  the  hands  will  make  anyone 
melancholy.  Dr.  0]ipenheim  observes  how  people  sometiines 
go  to  funerals  merely  otit  of  sense  of  duty  or  respect  to  some  of 
the  mourners.  They  have  no  feeling  of  sorrow  when  they 
enter  the  house,  "but  as  the  service  jirogresses,  and  they  see 
the  unhappiness  of  the  true  mourners,  they  feel  bound  to 
show  sympathy.  They  assume  the  attitude  and  the  expression 
of  sorrow;  they  cast  down  their  eyes,  pull  down  the  corners 
of  their  mouths,  let  their  shoulders  droop.  The  women,  in 
the   same  fashion  of  symjiathy,  put  their  handkerchiefs  to 


THE  EMOTIONS  141 

their  eyes;  and  before  long  all  of  them  feel  thoroughly  un- 
happy and  sorrow-stricken." 

The  Calture  of  the  Emotions.  And  it  is  right  here  that  the 
Sunday  school  teacher  may  find  a  most  helpful  suggestion, 
one  that  will  give  real  life  to  his  work  before  his  class :  he  is  to 
create  in  himself  the  emotions  he  wishes  to  find  in  his  class, 
and  he  is  to  see  to  it  that  all  his  pupils  are  in  the  right  bodily 
condition  for  receptiveness.  If  he  has  come  to  school  on  Sun- 
day morning  feeling  dispirited,  impatient,  nervous,  it  will 
never  do  for  him  to  go  before  his  class  in  such  a  condition. 
Nothing  in  the  world  is  more  contagious  than  emotion.  Many 
a  teacher  has  gone  home  and  complained  that  the  class  was 
more  restless  and  mischievous  and  obstinate  than  he  had  ever 
known  before,  and  has  thereby  simply  confessed  that  he  was 
in  no  condition  that  morning  to  teach.  He  should  with  all  his 
will  power  have  put  on  the  bodily  expression  of  joyousness  and 
serenity  and  cheerfulness  and  mastery.  Turn  the  corners  of 
the  mouth  up  rather  than  down,  change  the  scowl  into  a 
smile,  stand  erect  instead  of  bending  into  a  melancholy  curve, 
turn  your  thoughts  from  your  ailments  into  pleasant  channels, 
see  to  it  that  all  in  the  room  do  likewise,  and  in  a  few  moments 
the  whole  horizon  will  brighten. 

The  teacher  should  preach  this  gospel  to  his  pupils,  and, 
while  they  are  in  his  presence  at  least,  he  should  see  to  it  that 
they  practice  it.  In  chtirch  and  Sunday  school  pupils  should 
be  reciuired  to  be  reverent  in  attitude;  they  should  bow  the 
head  while  prayer  is  offered  and  should  close  the  eyes,  and 
they  should  be  taught  always  to  act  in  the  church  as  if  it  were 
a  holy  place.  They  should  constantly  be  impressed  with  the 
fact  that  the  only  life  worth  living  is  the  cheerful  life,  that  it  is 
positively  wicked  to  be  pessimi.stic  or  miserable  or  angry  or 
jealous,  and  that  he  who  goes  about  scattering  these  emotions 
is  as  bad  as  he  who  goes  about  scattering  the  germs  of  disease. 
One  should  school  himself  always  to  be  cheerful  and  sunny, 
always  to  say  pleasant  things  of  neighbors  and  friends,  and 
always  to  look  on  the  bright  side.  To  do  this  is  an  art,  but  it 
is  an  art  that  everyone  can  acquire  if  he  will. 

The  Law  of  Habit  rules  here  as  elsewhere,  but  it  seems  as 
if  the  emotions  were  peculiarly  responsive  to  the  law.  If  one 
gives  way  to  anger  once,  he  will  give  way  more  easily  and 


142        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

more  violently  on  the  next  occasion.  If  one  begins  to  worry, 
the  miserable  habit  will  increase  with  geometric  strides.  One 
swiftly  becomes  a  slave  to  unchecked  emotions.  Indecision, 
timidity,  pride,  envy,  anger,  jealousy,  sensitiveness,  impa- 
tience, distrust — all  of  these  grow  by  exercise  until  they  domi- 
nate the  life.  One  can  easily  fancy  that  he  has  received  a 
slight  or  an  injury,  and  by  dwelling  upon  it  and  drawing  upon 
the  memory  for  previous  experiences  with  the  person  con- 
cerned, and  by  gathering  together  all  the  disagreeable  things 
that  can  be  recollected,  can  lash  himself  into  anger  and  even 
rage  and  hatred.  One  should  discipline  himself  to  throw 
away  the  materials  for  such  emotions;  he  should  fix  his  atten- 
tion on  the  good  side  of  the  person's  character,  and  construe 
always  in  favor  of  the  one  under  suspicion.  As  evil  emotions 
grow  by  what  they  feed  upon,  so  do  good  emotions. 

Emotionality.  Every  teacher  will  find  in  the  class  two 
types  of  pupil :  the  logical  and  reasoning  type  and  the  impul- 
sive and  emotional.  The  one  is  cold  and  undemonstrative; 
the  other  is  effusive  and  liable  to  be  ruled  by  the  imjiulse  of  the 
moment.  The  over-emotional  type  is  one  of  weakness.  The 
sensibilities  lie  on  the  surface,  and  there  is  apt  to  be  no  depth 
of  life.  Such  persons  are  mvich  in  evidence  during  revivals, 
but  they  quickly  "back-slide" ;  they  cry  over  tales  of  distress, 
but  they  seldom  are  found  ainong  the  workers  who  bring 
relief;  they  feel,  but  they  do  not  act.  The  teacher's  duty 
here  is  to  repress  the  emotions  and  to  direct  them  along  lines 
of  actual  accomplishment.  The  books  and  the  reading  of 
such  pupils  should  be  carefully  selected;  and  their  habits  of 
life  should  be  watched  with  diligence.  There  are  too  many 
who  are  merely  sentimental  and  mawkish  in  their  religious 
life,  and  it  is  so  chiefly  because  the  emotions  have  been  allowed 
to  run  wild. 

The  Work  with  Children.  The  normal  child  is  cheerful. 
He  comes  "with  smiling  morning  face"  to  school,  and  if  he 
does  not,  something  is  wrong.  He  may  be  sick,  or  there  may 
be  other  abnormal  conditions  to  account  for  the  lack  of  cheer- 
fulness; but  whatever  it  may  be,  there  can  be  no  effective 
work  on  the  child's  part  until  the  cause  is  removed.  The 
teacher  may  by  her  own  cheerfulness  remove  the  burden,  or 
she  may  induce  the  child  to  forget  his  trouble,  and  if  she  sue- 


THE  EMOTIONS  143 

ceeds,  she  has  administered  a  medicine  better  than  any  doctor 
could  give.  "Anxiety  and  indifference  are  more  frequently 
attributable  to  mental  than  to  physical  causes."  There  are 
many  emotions  that  the  teacher  may  appeal  to  with  certainty. 
Surprise  is  always  effective.  Vary  the  program;  lay  aside 
the  text-book  often,  and  give  something  new.  Arouse  ex- 
pectation. Send  the  class  home  speculating  as  to  what  is 
coming  next.  There  should  be,  however,  nothing  sensational 
or  grotesque.  Common  sense  should  reign  here  as  everywhere 
else.  Hope  may  also  be  appealed  to,  and  admiration.  Fear 
should  be  avoided  utterly,  though  shame  may  often  be  used 
with  advantage.  Sometimes  a  boy  may  be  made  ashamed  at 
being  rude  or  tardy  or  unprepared  in  his  work.  Mrs.  Harrison 
tells  how  she  once  punished  an  obstinate  boy  by  saying,  "Well, 
children,  we  shall  have  to  give  up  this  nice  exercise  because 
Charley  has  spoiled  it  for  us."  All  eyes  were  then  turned 
reproachfully  upon  Charley,  and  his  punishment  seemed 
greater  than  he  could  bear.  The  sense  of  humor  should  not 
be  overlooked.  Many  Sunday  school  teachers  frown  upon 
anything  that  in  the  least  tends  to  create  a  smile  while  the 
Bible  is  being  studied,  but  this  is  against  all  pedagogic  and 
even  spiritual  law.  There  are  times  when  a  good,  honest 
laugh  is  the  most  useful  thing  that  the  teacher  can  bring  to  his 
class.  Children  have  a  keen  appreciation  of  humor,  and  it 
should  be  cultivated.  The  sense  of  humor  is  the  regulator  of 
life;  indeed,  it  may  be  called  the  safety  valve.  Many  a 
puritanical  old  Sunday  school  teacher  has  seen  his  class  gradu- 
ally fade  away  because  he  was  utterly  destitute  of  the  sense 
of  humor.  Too  much  cannot  be  said  about  the  culture  of  the 
emotions.  We  too  often  think  that  if  we  train  the  intellect 
we  have  done  all  that  is  needful.  It  is  even  more  necessary 
that  we  train  those  volcanic  forces  that  arise  so  easily,  that 
scatter  such  destruction  at  times,  and  that  increase  in  force 
with  such  fearful  rapidity.  Many  a  life  has  been  ruined  be- 
cause the  emotions  were  neglected  in  youth.  The  greater 
percentage  of  crime  is  committed  in  moments  of  excitement 
or  depression  or  emotional  tension,  and  all  of  this  crime  is 
simply  the  result  of  early  emotion  allowed  to  run  wild. 


CHAPTER  XXIII 
MORALITY  AND  RELIGION 

The  Sentiments.  When  the  emotions  are  directed  by 
judgment  and  reason  we  have  as  a  result  scntimctit,  which, 
taken  in  its  psychological  sense,  is  the  highest  product  that 
the  human  intellect  may  evolve.  Sentiment  may  be  defined 
as  "that  form  of  feeling  in  which  the  soul  responds  to  the  good 
as  it  comes  to  man  directly  through  his  rational  nature."  It  is 
rational  emotion.  The  simple  emotions,  like  anger  or  jealousy 
or  sorrow  or  remorse,  are  irrational;  they  come  upon  us 
suddenly  and  master  us;  we  are  in  a  way  passive  and  they 
active.  The  higher  emotions  or  sentiments  are  controlled  and 
modified  and  elaborated  by  the  power  of  the  intellect;  they  are 
]iassive,  as  it  were,  and  we  active.  These  sentiments  are 
generally  divided  into  four  classes :  the  intellectual  sentiments 
which  include  all  of  those  sciences  which  rest  on  the  question, 
"Here  is  a  theory:  is  it  true  or  untrue?";  the  aesthetic  senti- 
ments, which  have  to  do  with  beauty  in  its  various  forms — 
architecture,  sculpture,  painting,  rhythm,  melody,  and  the 
like;  the  moral  and  social  sentinients,  which  deal  with  the 
relation  of  man  to  man  in  society;  and  the  religious  sentiments, 
which  deal  with  the  relations  of  man  to  God.  This  last  is  the 
supreme  achieveincnt  of  the  human  soul. 

The  .Esthetic.  Of  the  pxirely  intellectual  sentiments  we 
shall  say  nothing.  The  aesthetic  sentiments,  however,  must 
not  be  passed  over  by  the  Sunday  school  teacher.  It  should 
be  a  part  of  the  work  of  the  church  to  train  the  sense  of  beavity 
and  to  give  correct  testhetic  taste.  There  should  be  in  the 
Sunday  school  good  pictures,  good  literature,  and  good  music; 
nothing  less  than  the  best  should  be  tolerated.  Rxiskin  once 
observed  "that  religious  people  as  a  rule  care  little  for  pictures, 
and  that  when  they  do  care  for  them  they  generally  prefer  the 
worst  ones  to  the  best."  If  this  charge  be  true,  it  is  because 
the  church  has  not  taught  the  ajipreciation  of  art.  In  these 
days  of  postcard  rei^roductions  of  all  the  great  masterpieces 

144 


MORALITY  AND  RELIGION  145 

almost  in  the  original  colors,  of  Perry  pictures,  and  Tissot 
prints,  and  admirable  card  series  made  especially  for  Stmday 
school  work,  there  is  no  excuse  for  ignorance  of  the  best  in 
religious  art.  Then  there  is  the  domain  of  music.  America  is 
])eculiarly  unfortunate  in  respect  to  its  Sunday  school  songs. 
The  thousands  of  Christmas  and  Easter  andChildren's  Day  pro- 
grams ground  out  by  sheer  force  simply  to  sell,  the  hundreds 
of  Sunday  school  song  books  issued  merely  for  the  money  to  be 
made,  furnish,  indeed,  food  for  pessimism.  The  most  impor- 
tant thing  about  a  song  is  the  poetry,  for  singing,  after  all,  is 
but  another  way  of  saying  words,  yet  many  care  only  for  the 
lilt  and  the  jig  of  the  music.  There  are  songs  sung  in  some  of 
otir  schools  the  words  of  which  are  mere  twaddle  from  both  the 
l>oetic  and  the  religious  standpoints.  Happy  the  school  that 
has  a  sensible  and  well-trained  leader  of  its  mtisic.  Of  good 
literature  in  the  library  and  the  insistence  uj)on  the  best  we 
have  already  spoken.  There  is  no  way  in  which  the  pupil's 
higher  tastes  may  be  cultivated  to  more  advantage  than 
through  a  proper  supervision  of  his  books  and  reading.  But, 
after  all,  as  Dr.  Roark  has  well  said,  "Art  is  beautiful  only  as 
it  is  a  transcript  of  nature.  .  .  .  The  teacher  can  do  no  better 
thing  than  occasionally  to  take  his  class  or  school  for  an  after- 
noon walk  through  wood  and  field,  and  point  out  to  the  eager 
appreciation  of  boys  and  girls  the  beauties  of  tree  and  twig  and 
leaf,  of  hanging  vine  and  sturdy  weed,  of  ferny  bank  and 
lichened  stone  and  rail.  .  .  .  The  boys  and  girls  who,  having 
eyes,  have  learned  to  see,  and  can  keep  their  minds  and  hearts 
open  to  all  the  sweet  influences  that  nature  will  pour  in  u]5on 
them,  have  learned  to  walk  with  face  toward  God,  seeing  him 
in  all  his  world." 

The  Moral  Sentiments.  Man  is  a  social  animal.  He  is 
thrown  into  contact  with  others  at  every  step  of  his  progress 
through  life,  and  he  must  constantly  regulate  his  conduct  in 
view  of  these  neighbors  about  him.  Without  the  moral 
element  he  would  be  purely  selfish  like  the  animals.  The 
weasel  and  the  tiger  are  simply  embodied  selfishness;  their 
whole  life  is  a  struggle  for  self  at  the  expense  of  all  other  life 
about  them.  Bxit  man  has  evolved  the  idea  of  altruism,  that 
feeling  which  takes  account  of  the  woes  of  others  and  seeks 
even  at  personal  disadvantage  to  further  the  ends  of  another. 


146        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

He  has  made  this  into  a  science — ethics — "the  doctrine  of 
man's  duty  in  respect  to  himself  and  the  rights  of  others." 
This  moral  sentiment  is  composed  partly  of  emotion — sym- 
pathy, pity,  and  the  like;  partly  of  intellectual  process — 
comparison,  comprehension,  and  the  like.  It  is  needless, 
however,  for  our  purpose  to  analyze  it.  We  need  only  to 
consider  its  pedagogical  bearings  and  its  value  from  the  stand- 
point of  Sunday  school  work. 

The  Basis  of  Morality.  We  must  realize  at  the  outset  that 
no  two  pupils  are  alike  in  their  moral  de\'elopment.  Morality 
is  partly  inherited,  partly  acquired.  "All  men  are  not  born 
moral  equals.  We  cannot  expect  the  same  conduct  from  all." 
Then  in  addition  to  the  inherited  tendencies  there  are  the 
associations  and  training  of  early  years.  The  morals  of  a 
man  are  very  largely  what  the  first  decade  of  his  life  made 
them.  The  problem  of  moral  education  is  thus  a  very  per- 
plexing one.  To  take  pupils  with  widely  varying  instinctive 
tendencies,  with  widely  varying  powers  of  appreciation  of 
the  fundamentals  of  morals,  and  with  all  kinds  of  defective 
ideas  gained  during  the  early  years  in  the  home,  and  to  train 
these  pupils  to  a  high  standard  of  morals,  is  a  task  indeed.  It 
requires  great  knowledge  of  human  nature  to  know  where  to 
begin  with  each  individual  (for  moral  training  is  a  task  that 
must  deal  primarily  with  the  individual)  and  what  to  take  for 
granted.  We  talk  glibly  of  the  "honor  system"  in  colleges, 
but  there  are  as  many  ideas  as  to  what  honor  is  as  there  are 
students  in  the  college.  To  apply  the  system  to  a  class  of 
boys  below  fifteen  would  be  a  hazardous  experiment,  for  the 
simple  reason  that  many  of  them  have  not  yet  thought  out  a 
complete  working  definition  of  "honor."  A  discouragingly 
large  percentage  of  even  an  average  college  class  have  no 
very  clear  j:ierception  of  the  real  meaning  and  limits  of  the 
word.  Moral  training  often  must  deal  with  very  crude  mate- 
rials and  it  is  a  slow  process. 

Moral  Instraction.  The  teacher,  especially  if  he  works  with 
children,  must  strive  constantly  to  inculcate  correct  moral 
conceptions.  Morality  is  the  child's  religion.  He  should  bo 
taught  politeness,  which  is  external  good  behavior,  and,  what 
is  more  important,  good  manners,  which  is  s])ontaneous  good 
behavior.     The  first  will  result  always  from  the  second.     The 


MORALITY  AND  RELIGION  147 

child  shotild  be  shown  at  every  point  how  his  actions  affect 
other  people.  He  should  be  taught  how  to  be  considerate, 
and  gentle,  and  obedient,  and  he  should  be  shown  the  under- 
lying reasons  so  clearly  that  these  :noral  acts  will  become  at 
length  spontaneous.  It  is  worse  than  useless  to  try  to  teach 
morals  by  mere  scolding  and  paralyzing  command.  The 
child  should  feel  as  well  as  understand.  We  often  take  too 
much  for  granted;  we  treat  the  child  as  if  he  had  our  own 
conception  of  right  and  wrong.  But  does  the  child  compre- 
hend? "Words  miss  the  mark,"  says  Dr.  Marks,  "unless  they 
awaken  true  echoes  in  the  minds  of  those  who  hear  them." 
The  task  of  the  teacher  should  be  to  make  the  external  law, 
"Thou  shalt  not,"  become  an  internal  law.  It  should  become 
spontaneous.  He  who  refrains  from  stealing  simply  because 
he  is  afraid  of  the  law  is  not  a  moral  man.  Morality  refrains 
from  the  act  because  of  the  inner  law.  The  teacher,  however, 
should  be  sure  of  his  standard  before  he  holds  it  before  his 
pupils;  but  once  sure  of  it,  he  should  strive  to  make  it  seem  to 
them  the  only  reasonable  standard.  He  should  not  try  to 
force  the  rulings  of  his  own  conscience  upon  his  pupil,  but  he 
should,  rather,  seek  to  arouse  the  pupil's  conscience. 

Errors  in  Moral  Training.  Thorndike,  in  his  Elements  of 
Psychology,  has  noted  four  common  mistakes  in  moral  teach- 
ing. The  first  of  these  is  "To  fail  to  foster  the  desirable  in- 
stincts." He  notes  how  babies  are  often  neglected  when  they 
are  good  and  fondled  and  pampered  when  thgy  are  bad;  also 
how  the  self-will  of  the  child  is  often  at  first  thought  to  be 
"cute,"  and  is  laughed  at  until  the  parent  at  length  awakens 
to  find  that  he  has  a  spoiled  son.  The  second  error  is  "To 
inhibit  directly  by  resulting  discomfort  a  fully  formed  habit." 
The  boy  who  desists  through  fear  of  a  whijijiing  will  not  desist 
longer  when  there  is  no  longer  danger  of  jjunishment.  Estab- 
lished habits  cannot  be  removed  by  mere  threats  or  by  beat- 
ings. There  must  be  "heart-to-heart"  work.  The  third 
error  is  "To  value  the  feeling  of  effort  for  its  own  sake."  The 
idea,  "It  is  hard,  therefore  it  is  right,"  was  a  common  one 
with  the  Puritans.  "You  do  not  wish  to  do  this,  therefore 
you  ought,"  was  still  commoner.  It  is  an  Oriental  or  a 
monkish  idea  that  the  doing  of  the  hard  and  almost  unendur- 
able task,  even  though  nothing  come  of  it,  is  good  spiritual 


148        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

discipline.  The  fourth  error  is  "To  regard  quantity  of  action 
as  a  sign  of  energy."  The  one  who  makes  the  most  bustle 
and  commotion  often  gets  the  credit  for  doing  the  most 
work,  but  "in  well-directed  action  far  more  energy  is  con- 
sumed in  restraining  and  guiding  conduct  than  in  merely 
arousing  it." 

The  Conscience.  Psychologists  have  held  many  theories 
concerning  the  nature  of  the  conscience.  Some  have  ignored 
it  altogether;  others  have  analyzed  it  and  found  it  composed 
of  several  primary  elements;  others  have  treated  it  as  a  dis- 
tinct function  of  the  intellect.  For  our  pvirpose  there  is  no 
need  to  consider  the  various  theories.  We  can  say  with  Dr. 
Roark,  "It  is  enough  that  conscience  is  a  part  of  the  mental 
endowment  of  the  normal  human  being,  and  it  does  not  spe- 
cially matter  when  or  how  he  came  by  it."  Conscience  sits  as 
the  judge  in  the  moral  world.  It  weighs  moral  acts  and  both 
feels  and  forms  judgments.  It  says,  "That  was  wrong," 
"That  was  right,"  "Do  this  rather  than  that."  "The  inten- 
sified disapproval  of  conscience  mingled  with  moral  shame  is 
remorse."  Individuals  have  conscience  in  a  varying  degree. 
In  small  children  it  is  feeble,  just  as  all  the  other  powers  are 
feeble.  It  gains  with  experience  and  use;  it  decays  with 
disuse;  and,  like  everything  else,  if  exercised  rightly,  it  be- 
comes a  habit.  It  is  a  call  ever  toward  what  is  true  and  high 
and  right.  It  is  not,  as  many  have  sujiposed,  a  mere  lash  to 
make  one  feel  uncomfortable  after  a  wrong  act,  it  is  a  guide 
before  the  act;  it  points  ever  to  what  is  the  way  of  peace  and 
joy.  Dr.  Taylor  has  given  six  rules  for  the  training  of  the 
child's  conscience  and  the  moral  nature: 

1.  Use  negative  or  restrictive  motives  sparingly,  relying, 
rather,  upon  positive  motives  or  incentives. 

2.  Appeal  to  the  motive  that  the  child  can  understand. 

3.  Appeal  constantly  to  the  highest  motive  the  child  can 
appreciate. 

4.  Imjirove  each  vantage  gained  to  educate  the  cliild  to 
appreciate  a  higher  motive. 

3.  Eliininate  the  personal  or  selfish  clement  as  ra]>idly  as 
possible. 

6.  Be  ])atient  for  results.  Relax  vigilance  only  when  the 
impulse  to  the  good  dominates  the  child's  entire  being. 


MORALITY  AND  RELIGION  149 

The  Religious  Sentiments.  In  religion  there  are  two  ele- 
ments, as  in  all  the  sentiments:  an  emotional  element  which 
has  its  roots,  perhaps,  in  instinct,  and  an  intellectual  element. 
The  religion  which  makes  use  of  only  one  of  these  elements  is  a 
distorted  type.  The  religion  of  the  intellect,  with  no  mixture 
of  emotion,  is  mere  religious  philosophy;  the  religion  of  the 
feelings,  with  no  basis  of  reason,  is  superstition  and  mere  emo- 
tional intoxication.  The  command  to  love  God  with  the 
whole  heart  and  the  whole  mind  is  founded  on  good  psychol- 
ogy. There  is  no  need  for  us  to  analyze  and  define  and 
classify.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  find  the  pedagogic  bearings  of 
the  religious  sentiment,  and  these  we  have  already  sufficiently 
investigated  in  Part  i.  Briefly,  to  review,  the  religion  of 
early  childhood  is  largely  moral  in  its  nature.  The  teacher's 
duty  is  to  inculcate  habits  of  reverence,  obedience,  and  love. 
Example  counts  here  more  than  anywhere  else.  "If  anyone 
should  ask  me,"  says  Bishop  McCabe,  "what  most  impressed 
me  in  my  boyhood  days,  I  would  answer:  The  sight  of  my 
father  coming  out  from  the  secret  place  of  prayer  every  day 
at  noon."  The  child  should  be  taught  to  honor  his  father 
and  mother.  He  should  be  led  to  feel  the  presence  of  God 
in  nature  and  then  the  possibility  of  the  presence  of  God  in  the 
life.  "By  our  own  reverent  devotions,  by  look,  voice,  and 
every  attitude  of  real  worship  we  instill  reverence  into  the 
child."  There  should  be  no  effort  to  force  an  "experience" 
upon  the  child  until  he  is  ready  for  it,  but  there  should  be 
careful  nurture.  As  we  have  seen,  the  time  will  come  for 
religious  awakening.  It  is  one  of  the  laws  of  the  hviman 
organism  that  the  call  to  the  higher  life  shall  come  with  power 
to  the  soul  at  the  appointed  time. 

Soul  to  Soul.  Finally,  the  teacher  should  realize  com- 
pletely that  moral  and  religious  training  is  at  its  best  when 
the  teacher  can  touch  the  single  soul.  The  most  effective 
religions  training  is  a  matter  of  individual  working  with  in- 
dividual. The  teacher  should  study  his  pupils  one  by  one  and 
adapt  to  each  of  them  the  needed  lesson.  To  lecture  and 
preach  to  a  mass  has  its  value,  but  to  meet  heart  to  heart  each 
pui)il  at  the  proper  time  and  adapt  the  message  to  his  peculiar 
needs  is  religious  pedagogy  at  its  highest  point  of  efficiency. 


CHAPTER  XXIV 
THE  MIXD  AND  THE  BODY 

Physical  and  Mental.  As  one  reads  some  of  the  older  psy- 
chologies one  may  derive  the  idea  that  the  mental  life  is  solely 
a  matter  of  brain  and  nerve  substance.  Very  little  is  said  of 
the  body;  the  investigation  of  that  was  considered  to  be  the 
province  of  physiology,  not  of  psychology.  But  the  tendency 
now  more  and  more  is  to  consider  body  and  mind  together 
until  the  modern  psychologist  must  know  almost  as  much  of 
physiology  as  the  anatomist.  It  is  as  impossible  to  consider  the 
two  apart  as  it  would  be  to  study  optics  without  any  refer- 
ence to  the  eye.  Every  jiart  of  the  human  organism,  no  mat- 
ter how  minute,  is  linked  to  nerve  or  brain,  and  conversely 
nerve  and  brain  would  be  absolutely  nothing  were  it  not  for 
the  body.  Everything  that  affects  the  body  aflfects  the  mind, 
and  vice  versa.  In  the  words  of  Dr.  Stratton:  "Formerly  we 
believed  that  some  strong  emotional  excitement,  or  a  definite 
act  of  will,  must  be  present  if  there  was  to  be  any  manifest 
expression  of  the  mental  state.  But  it  is  now  generally 
accepted  that  the  body  reflects  every  shade  of  ps^^chic  opera- 
tion ;  that  in  all  manner  of  mental  action  there  is  some  phys- 
ical expression." 

The  Physical  Basis.  Thinking  is  largely  a  matter  of  blood 
supi)ly.  No  other  part  of  the  body  is  so  fully  supplied  with 
l)lood  as  the  brain,  and  the  flow  varies  with  the  intellectual 
effort.  During  mental  absorption  the  feet  become  cold  be- 
cause the  blood  currents  have  been  turned  with  such  strength 
ui)on  the  brain  that  other  parts  of  the  body  are  neglected. 
Then,  too,  the  quality  of  the  thought  and  the  power  to  con- 
centrate thought  depend  ujjon  the  qtuxlity  of  the  blood.  The 
thinker  should  be  well  nourished.  Poor,  ill-assimilated  food 
results  in  poor,  ill-assimilated  thinking.  Weak,  sickly  bodies, 
with  certain  notable  exceptions,  result  in  weak,  sickly  think- 
ing. There  must  be  at  least  a  vigorous  supply  of  good  blood 
if  there  is  to  be  vigorous  thinking.     The  body  affects  the 

150 


THR  MIND  AND  THE  BODY  151 

mental  action  at  every  point.  By  redvicing  the  sup])ly  of 
blood  to  the  brain  by  pressing  upon  the  main  arteries  of  the 
neck  one  may  totally  suspend  mental  action.  Disease,  violent 
pain,  or  any  other  bodily  disturbance  may  cause  thinking  to 
be  impossible.  "A  clot  of  blood  no  larger  than  a  wheat  grain 
pressing  upon  the  surface  of  the  brain  is  sufficient  to  change 
a  man  of  culture  into  an  ignoramus,  or  one  of  eminent  charac- 
ter into  a  moral  wreck."  Then,  too,  without  the  organs  of 
sense  there  could  be  no  mental  action.  The  quality  and  the 
quantity  of  the  thought  depend  upon  the  quality  of  the  organs 
of  sight  and  hearing,  etc.  Many  a  boy  has  been  called  stupid 
when  he  was  only  deaf.  The  difference  between  a  bright 
child  and  an  idiot  may  be  a  mere  physical  defect,  one  that 
could  perhaps  be  rectified  by  a  surgical  operation. 

Cultivation  of  the  Body.  The  old  idea  that  to  be  holy  one 
must  mortify  the  fiesh,  or,  in  other  words,  despise  the  body 
and  abuse  it,  was  founded  on  false  psychology.  The  older 
theology  spoke  much  of  our  "vile  bodies."  Shakespeare 
makes  the  body  a  "muddy  vesture  of  decay"  that  grossly 
hems  in  the  soul.  But  the  body  is  not  necessarily  the  seat  of 
vileness.  If  there  is  vileness  it  is  precisely  as  much  of  the 
mind  as  it  is  of  the  body.  The  two  cannot  be  considered 
apart;  in  the  larger  sense  they  are  one  and  the  same.  To 
build  up  a  healthy  body  is  to  build  up  a  healthy  mind,  and  it 
is  becoming  more  and  more  to  be  believed  that  the  converse 
is  also  true.  "Viewed  aright,  the  body  is  the  great  oppor- 
tunity for  the  mind ;  it  is  the  means  of  expression ;  it  must  be 
depended  upon  in  all  cases  where  we  act  either  for  ourselves 
or  for  others.  We  must  learn  to  respect  it  more,  but  to  re- 
spect it  only  for  what  it  can  do  for  us  in  our  higher  aims." 
Cultivation  of  the  body  merely  for  the  body's  sake  makes  one 
d  mere  animal.  The  body  is  simply  "the  servant  of  the  inner 
life,"  but  it  should  be  inade  as  effective  a  servant  as  is  possible. 

Abuse  of  the  Body.  Nowhere  is  the  connection  between 
body  and  mind  more  evident  than  in  the  results  that  come 
from  bodily  abuse.  The  effects  of  tobacco  and  alcohol  are  as 
much  mental  as  they  are  physical.  "He  who  drinks  beer 
thinks  beer,"  is  a  trite  old  saying,  but  it  is  still  true.  The  action 
of  tobacco  u])on  the  nerves,  especially  of  boys,  is  well  known. 
After  a  careful  investigation  for  some  years  of  the  students  of 


T52        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  rEDAGOGY 

Yale  College  it  was  found  beyond  the  ])ossibility  of  contra- 
diction that  "tobacco  inhibits  the  physical  growth,  and  causes 
a  loss  of  mental  power  in  those  addicted  to  its  vise."  Says 
Dr.  Krohn:  "The  vigorous  action  that  college  students  them- 
selves have  taken  in  this  matter  is  more  potent  for  good  re- 
sults than  anything  that  any  'old  fogy'  outsider  could  say  or 
do.  I  refer  to  the  well-known  fact  that  no  body  of  college 
students  will  give  a  place  on  any  of  the  athletic  teams,  be  it 
the  football  eleven,  the  baseball  nine,  the  boat  crew,  or  in  track 
athletics,  to  a  man  who  uses  tobacco  in  any  form.  And,  as 
any  observer  of  college  sports  will  tell  you,  this  is  not  because 
it  injures  muscle  alone."  Experiments  in  thd  laboratory  show 
that  alcohol,  even  in  small  amounts,  retards  brain  action; 
taken  until  it  becomes  a  habit,  it  destroys  all  of  the  finer 
faculties  of  the  mind.  Every  teacher  of  boys  should  use  all 
of  his  influence  and  all  of  his  tact  and  powers  of  persuasion  to 
prevent  his  pupils  from  becoming  addicted  to  cigarettes. 
The  deadly  effect  of  this  subtle  poison,  especially  upon  young 
boys,  cannot  be  too  strongly  painted.  Let  the  physician 
speak : 

"Cigarette  smoking  is  an  evil  that  deserves  attention  by 
itself.  It  tends  to  nervousness  of  the  physical  tyjie  and  to 
stupidity.  An  examination  made  in  Chicago  schools  reveals 
the  fact  that  it  took  the  children  who  smoked  longer  to  make 
a  grade  than  nonsmokers.  Twenty-five  principals  were  i)re- 
pared  to  affirm  that  it  took  two  years  or  longer,  and  twelve 
that  smokers  rarely  'inake  a  grade'   in  the  strict  sense."' 

This  much  on  the  mental  side.  The  teacher  should  try  to 
form  anticigarette  clubs,  and  should  bring  all  of  his  power  to 
bear  on  the  evil.  The  fact  that  an  increasingly  large  number 
of  the  most  prominent  btisiness  houses  now  refuse  to  employ 
boys  who  use  cigarettes  should  be  a  strong  influence. 

The  Law  of  Dissolution.  When  the  powers  of  the  mind  be- 
gin to  fail  from  disease,  alcoholism,  or  old  age,  they  fail  in  an 
order  which  is  the  reverse  of  that  in  which  they  were  acquired. 
The  last  powers  acquired  go  first.  The  finer  things  of  culture, 
the  skill,  the  tastes  of  later  life,  all  disappear  long  before  the 
acquirements  of  childhood  are  aflfected.     The  man  may  be 

»  Dr.  Rowe. 


THE  MIND  AND  THE  BODY  153 

addicted  to  liquor;  he  may  be  all  his  life  a  moderate  drinker; 
he  may  never  become  a  staggering  sot ;  but  his  indulgence  will 
attack  first  the  higher  sensibilities,  and  all  unconsciously  to 
him  the  finest  part  of  him  will  steadily  decline.  When  for  any 
reason  dissolution  begins,  "the  intelligence,"  says  Dr.  Baldwin, 
"and  moral  nature  are  first  affected,  then  memory,  associa- 
tion, and  acquired  actions  of  all  sorts,  while  there  remain, 
latest  of  all,  actions  of  the  imitative  kind,  most  of  the  deepset 
habits,  and  the  instinctive,  reflex,  and  automatic  functions." 
It  should  be  a  fearful  thought  to  every  man  who  drinks  even 
moderately  that  he  is  destroying  the  finest  thing  in  his 
life,  for  the  sensibilities  go  first,  and  often  they  begin  to 
die  out  years  before  the  foundations  of  the  physical  life 
have  been  affected. 

The  Emotions  and  Health,  The  connection  between  body 
and  mind  is  nowhere  more  manifest  than  in  the  effect  of  bodily 
condition  upon  the  emotions.  Everyone  knows  the  connection 
between  dyspepsia  and  irritability  and  melancholy.  Bile  in 
the  blood  leads  to  the  "blues,"  uric  acid  in  the  blood  causes 
irascible  temper,  alcohol  in  the  stomach  causes  hilarity  and 
violent  excitement,  indigestion  causes  headache  and  despond- 
ency. The  effect  of  bodily  position  upon  the  mind  we  have 
already  considered.  Many  of  the  emotions  affect  the  appetite 
and  banish  sleep ;  anger  will  impair  the  digestion  and  fear  will 
stop  the  secretion  of  saliva.  "You  will  find,"  says  Dr.  Taylor, 
"that  the  well-balanced  emotional  nature  is  usually  a  sign  of  a 
healthy,  well-balanced  physical  organism."  The  poets  are 
full  of  illustrations :  envy  is  "lean-faced,"  jealousy  is  "yellow- 
eved,"  cares  are  "eating,"  hate  is  "cold,"  and  murder  is 
"withered."  The  joyous  emotions,  however,  are  healthful. 
Cheerfulness  is  the  best  tonic.  "A  merry  heart  doeth  good 
like  a  medicine."  "Laugh  and  grow  fat."  One  should  keep 
a  cheerful  mind  and  not  worry;  it  will  save  doctor's  bills. 
Professor  Halleck  quotes  Dr.  Richardson  as  follows:  "The 
passions  which  act  most  .severely  on  the  physical  life  are  anger, 
fear,  hatred,  and  grief.  ...  Of  all  the  passions  I  have  enu- 
merated as  most  detrimental  to  life,  anger  stands  first.  He  is 
a  man  very  rich  indeed  in  physical  power  who  can  afford  to  be 
angry.  The  richest  cannot  afford  it  many  times  without  incur- 
ring the  penalty,  a  penalty  that  is  always  severe." 


154        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

Mind  and  Matter.  That  the  mind  dominates  the  body  and 
at  times  rises  superior  to  it  every  physician  well  knows. 
There  is  a  dynamic  power  in  faith,  no  matter  what  that  faith 
be  in,  that  is  beyond  all  estimate.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
many  of  the  cures  alleged  to  be  done  at  the  shrines  of  saints  in 
the  middle  ages  actually  took  place  as  described.  All  good 
physicians  use  this  principle  of  faith.  The  patient  who  has 
lost  his  faith  in  the  doctor  and  who  has  given  uj)  is  indeed  in  a 
precarious  condition.  An  old  soldier  once  declared  that  in 
the  prisons  during  the  war  the  sick  one  almost  invariably  died 
as  soon  as  he  gave  up  hope  Discouragement  and  worry  and 
homesickness  killed  more  than  disease.  Those  survived  wlio 
said  to  themselves,  "This  is  all  the  home  I  have  got,  and  I  am 
going  to  make  the  best  of  it."  The  inind  always  dominates 
the  body.  Worry  and  fret  and  trouble-borrowing  and  surren- 
der to  petty  vexations  are  what  make  people  grow  old.  One 
can  keep  young  if  one  has  a  mind  to. 

In  the  Sanday  School.  The  teacher,  first  of  all,  must  be 
sunny  and  cheerful  himself,  then  he  must  preach  the  gospel  of 
cheerfulness.  He  should  impress  it  upon  his  class  that  the 
emotions  of  anger,  hate,  grief,  envy,  jealousy,  and  fear  are 
wild  beasts  m  flimsy  cages,  and  that  they  may  burst  out  and 
destroy  all  about  them.  He  should  make  it  clear  that  it  is 
only  by  cultivating  cheerfulness,  and  sympathy,  and  content- 
ment, and  hope  that  we  are  assured  of  having  healthy  bodies 
and  sound  minds.  Then  there  should  come  the  great  lesson 
of  calmness  and  thoroughness  and  power  through  repose. 
Americans  need  more  time  for  meditation,  more  reverent 
consideration  of  the  highest  things,  and  more  poise  and  de- 
liberation. The  higher  life  is  not  a  strenuous  life  in  the  sense 
of  "hustle"  and  rush.  Elizabeth  Harrison  has  expressed  the 
matter  perfectly : 

"The  disease  that  is  fastening  itself  upon  the  Christians  of 
to-day  is  self-activity,  the  too  great  emi)hasis  of  what  we  must 
do,  too  little  of  what  God  has  done.  The  bustling  Sunday 
school  superintendent;  the  hurried,  impatient  inother  teach- 
ing her  child  his  catechism  while  tying  his  necktie  for  Sunday 
school,  are  but  modern  versions  of  the  story  of  Tantalus,  try- 
ing to  satisfy  infinite  longings  with  finite  activities.  Much 
of  the  well-intentioned  primary  Sunday  school  work  loses 


THE  MIND  AND  THE  BODY  155 

half  of  its  efficiency  from  the  teacher's  not  understanding  that 
the  child  must  be  in  gentle,  reverential  mood  before  he  can  be 
in  the  right  religious  attitude.  The  teacher  should  approach 
this  holiest  temple  of  God  with  reverence.  Is  there  a  holier 
place  than  the  soul  of  a  child  ?"^ 

The  Final  "Word.  Thus  psychology  lays  hold  of  the  funda- 
mental principles  of  human  life  and  conduct.  A  knowledge 
of  it  shotild  make  one  not  only  a  better  teacher  but  a  better 
controller  of  his  own  living.  Psychology  is  not  a  mere  theory 
to  be  studied  and  admired  and  then  dismissed;  it  leads  at 
every  point  to  action.  It  teaches  that  emotion  and  sentiment 
without  expression  are  as  dead  as  faith  without  works.  "The 
lessons  of  church  and  of  school,"  says  Dr.  Thorndike,  "are 
unfortunately  insufficient  and  even  misleading.  To  feel  love 
toward  God  and  righteousness,  to  thrill  with  admiration  for 
the  heroes  of  history  and  fiction,  to  say  fine  things  about 
truth  and  duty,  these  are  too  often  accepted  as  virtues  in  and 
of  themselves.  Psychology  teaches  us  that  they  are  worthy 
only  in  so  far  as  they  are  expressed  in  worthy  conduct."  If 
one  knows  that  he  can  make  himself  cheerful  and  agreeable 
by  the  proper  use  of  his  mind  and  body,  if  he  realizes  that 
worry  and  fret  are  as  easily  removed  as  any  other  curable 
disease,  if  he  knows  the  laws  of  habit  and  of  memory  ctilttire 
and  of  will  power — if  he  knows  all  these  things  and  does  not 
put  them  into  practice,  then  has  the  subject,  no  matter  how 
he  may  have  enjoyed  it,  been  a  profitless  one  to  him.  Psy- 
chology is  more  than  mere  theory,  more  than  a  mere  branch 
of  human  knowledge,  it  is  a  guide  to  correct  living.  The 
course  that  we  have  finished  has  been  but  a  meager  fragment 
of  the  great  science.  May  no  teacher  count  that  he  has  com- 
pleted the  subject,  but  continue  on  and  on  in  his  studies,  for  to 
learn  psychology  is  to  learn  to  know  oneself. 


'  Study  of  Child  Nature. 


PART  III 
THE  ART   OF   TEACHING 


157 


CHAPTER  XXV 
THE  TEACHER'S  PREPARATION 

Introductory.  Thus  far  we  have  been  considering  largely 
the  material  with  which  the  teacher  must  deal — boys  and 
girls,  men  and  women,  minds  that  work  always  in  obedience 
to  certain  laws.  It  remains  now  to  study  how  to  apply  this 
knowledge.  How  shall  the  teacher  present  the  lesson  ?  Most 
teaching  is  by  question  and  answer;  how  shall  he  ask  the 
questions?  What  shall  he  dwell  upon?  Shall  he  lecture  to 
his  class?  Shall  he  allow  them,  on  the  other  hand,  to  argue 
at  length?  What  work  shall  he  have  done  outside  the  class? 
What  will  be  the  best  way  to  prepare  a  lesson  in  order  to  teach 
it  effectively  ?  What  illustrations  will  be  effective  ?  All  these 
questions  have  to  do  with  the  art  of  teaching,  and  the  success- 
ful teacher  must  be  able  to  answer  them. 

In  a  general  way  this  art  is  learned  only  through  acttial 
experience.  Science,  theory,  may  be  learned  from  a  book, 
but  art  is  learned  only  through  doing.  Nevertheless,  there 
are  many  points  where  the  novice  may  be  helped  by  the 
experience  of  others,  and  it  is  these  bits  of  experience  sys- 
tematized for  his  convenience  that  we  call  the  Art  of  Teaching. 

Preparation  the  First  Law.  The  very  first  law  of  the 
teacher's  art  is  Preparation.  The  teacher  before  he  comes  to 
his  class  must  not  only  know  thoroughly  the  subject-matter 
of  the  lesson,  but  mtist  have  a  complete  and  careful  plan  for 
presenting  it. 

A  certain  professor  of  mathematics  made  it  a  riile  early  in 
his  teaching  life  never  to  take  a  text-book  into  his  class  room 
and  never  to  look  into  one  during  the  recitation  hour.  Even 
though  he  has  taught  the  subject  now  for  years,  he  studies 
the  lesson  far  more  than  does  any  one  of  his  students.  The 
results  have  been  worthy  of  his  pains :  he  wins  his  classes  com- 
pletely, and  students  count  it  a  rare  privilege  to  be  assigned 
to  his  divisions.  "He  knows  what  he  is  teaching,"  they  say; 
**he  knows  the  subject  as  well  as  the  book  does."     And  yet 

159 


\Ck)      kleaiexts  oe  religious  pedagogy 

the  man  is  by  no  means  a  great  scholar;  he  is,  rather,  a  great 
teacher,  and  his  strength  lies  in  his  careful  prejuiration.  It  is 
an  old  truism  that  knowledge  is  power,  and  it  applies  to  no  one 
more  than  to  the  teacher.  How  shall  one  lead  others  unless 
he  know  the  way  himself?  No  true  teacher  will  suffer  himself 
to  go  before  his  class  unless  he  is  completely  prepared. 

The  Nature  of  Preparation.  But  what  is  it  to  be  prepared  ? 
Is  it  to  be  alile  to  answer  any  question  that  may  arise  from 
the  class?  Is  it  to  have  gathered  enough  material  to  be  en- 
abled to  talk  for  half  an  hour?  Is  it  to  have  enough  questions 
to  ask  the  class?  It  is  far  more  than  these.  It  is,  first  of  all, 
a  determination  of  what  the  object  is  that  is  to  be  reached. 
Why  is  this  lesson  to  be  taught?  What  am  I  to  try  to  do? 
The  teacher  who  has  not  a  clear  answer  to  these  questions  is 
working  in  the  dark.  To  talk  in  an  aimless  way,  letting  the 
current  of  the  lesson  stray  whither  chance  may  bear  it,  is  poor 
teaching.  Many  a  teacher  has  said,  'T  didn't  get  further  than 
the  first  verse,"  or,  "We  got  switched  off  upon  methods  of 
baptism  and  didn't  touch  the  lesson  much."  In  other  words, 
the  teacher  was  not  really  prej)ared.  He  had  not  made  a 
plan  which  he  was  to  follow,  and  had  not  prepared  his  material 
in  accordance  with  any  plan.  Preparation  is,  first  of  all,  then, 
the  planning  of  the  campaign,  and,  secondly,  it  is  the  gather- 
ing of  material  to  be  used  in  the  carrying  out  of  the  plan. 

The  Study  of  Wholes.  I  would  advise  as  the  first  step  in  the 
making  of  the  ])lan  a  careftil  reading  of  all  the  Scripture  con- 
cerned. The  Bible  has  suffered  greatly  from  being  chopped 
up  into  small  parts  and  from  being  studied  in  isolated  sections. 
Doiibtless  the  majority  qf  Sxmday  school  pupils  read  no 
Scrijjture  during  either  preparation  or  recitation  of  the  lesson 
save  the  ten  or  fifteen  verses  printed  in  the  lesson  quarterly. 
Such  a  practice  is  utterly  wrong.  The  teacher  at  least 
should  read  the  whole  context.  For  instance,  one  les.son 
is  an  episode  from  the  book  of  Ruth.  The  teacher's  first 
step  in  preparation  should  be  a  careful  reading  of  the  whole 
book  of  Ruth.  If  the  lesson  is  taken  from  the  Gospels, 
one  should  read  from  a  good  harmony  the  account  as  it  is 
given  in  each  of  the  records,  noting  the  points  of  difference 
and  of  similarity.  He  should  then  read  the  Scripture  im- 
mediately i)receding  and  immediately  following  the  account. 


THE  TEACHER'S  PREPARATION  i6i 

If  there  is  a  gap  between  the  lesson  and  that  of  the  preceding 
Sabbath,  the  intervening  Scripture  should  be  carefully  read. 
The  Bible  study  required  to-day  is  broad  and  comprehensive. 
It  does  not  exhaust  itself  with  spinning  elaborate  theories 
from  single  isolated  texts;  it  takes  broad  views  over  the 
whole  record,  and  triangulates,  as  it  were,  wide  areas.  The 
teacher  who  knows  only  the  few  verses  assigned  as  the  basis 
of  the  single  Sunday  school  lesson  is  not  prepared  to  teach. 

The  Lesson  Setting.  The  next  step  in  the  making  of  the 
plan  is  the  determining  of  the  lesson  setting.  First,  what 
chronological  facts  are  necessary  ?  If  the  lessons  have  to  do, 
for  instance,  with  the  life  of  Christ,  it  is  important  to  follow 
the  story  in  order  of  time  and  to  know  as  precisely  as  possible 
just  when  the  episode  under  consideration  took  place.  Here 
again  a  good  harmony  of  the  Gospels  will  be  of  value.  In 
studying  many  other  parts  of  the  Bible  it  is  very  important 
that  the  element  of  time  be  carefully  considered.  Secondly, 
does  the  lesson  call  for  map  work?  The  Sixnday  school  stu- 
dent should  be  made  perfectly  familiar  with  the  geography 
of  the  ancient  world.  The  exodus  of  the  Israelites,  the  con- 
quest of  Canaan,  the  locations  of  captivity,  the  boundaries 
of  the  tribes,  the  homes  of  the  prophets,  the  journeys  of 
Christ,  the  mission  tours  of  the  apostles,  all  should  be  followed 
carefully  on  the  map.  Good  maps  are  published  in  most  of 
the  lesson  helps  and  in  many  of  the  better  editions  of  the 
Bible.  Thirdly,  there  should  be  an  attenipt  to  get  what  may 
be  called  the  local  color  of  the  lesson.  How  can  we  picture 
to  ourselves  the  wooing  of  Isaac  and  Rebecca,  for  instance,  or 
Paul  speaking  on  Mars'  Hill,  or  Jesus  at  the  well,  unless 
we  know  something  of  Oriental  life?  Good  pictures  like  the 
Tissot  series  help  greatly  here.  Then,  if  possible,  there  should 
be  readings  from  books  of  Eastern  travel — The  Land  and  the 
Book,  for  instance.  Farrar's  Life  of  Christ  presents  most 
vividly  the  Oriental  setting  of  the  Gospels.  A  good  Bible 
dictionary  should  always  be  at  hand  for  constant  reference. 

The  Lesson  Plan.  The  teacher  who  has  done  this  part  of 
the  work  well  will  have  no  difficulty  in  teaching  the  lesson. 
On  the  contrary,  another  and  greater  difficulty  will  confront 
him.  How  can  he  present  the  fascinating  settings  of  the 
lesson  and  not  take  too  much   time?     He  must  be    on  his 


i62        ELRMKNTS  OF  RELIGIOL^S  PEDAGOGY 

guard;  he  must  devDte  to  this  jjhase  of  the  work  not  over 
ten  minutes  at  the  most. 

He  must  next  determine  upon  the  central  tiaith  of  the 
lesson  and  study  how  to  make  it  clear  and  forcible.  It  must 
be  reinforced  with  the  central  truths  of  other  lessons  which 
have  been  studied,  and  then  it  must  be  applied  in  concrete 
form  to  the  needs  of  the  individuals  of  the  class.  The  lesson 
is  not  to  be  studied  merely  as  an  interesting  bit  of  history ;  it 
is  to  teach  the  student  the  great  laws  of  God  so  that  he  may 
be  able  to  live  his  life  more  richly  and  more  effectively.  The 
teacher  must  determine  how  much  time  he  can  give  to  each 
step  in  his  presentation.  Then  there  are  illustrations  to  be 
found  and  questions  to  be  planned.  If  he  does  all  of  this 
work  well  he  will  come  before  his  class  like  a  great  dynamo 
charged  with  power.  He  will  know  twenty  times  as  much 
about  the  lesson  as  he  can  possibly  impart;  he  will  be  like  a 
living  fountain,  abundant,  sparkling,  refreshing. 

Teaching  with  an  Object.  Thus  the  teacher  should  have 
not  only  a  subject  to  teach,  but  an  object.  He  should  prejiare 
himself  constantly  with  his  class  in  mind.  There  can  be  no 
really  effective  teaching  unless  the  teacher  knows  precisely 
what  he  is  aiming  to  do.  If  he  has  doubters  in  his  class  he 
must  plan  his  work  in  reference  to  their  needs;  if  he  has 
Christians  only  he  needs  to  build  them  into  a  serener  faith; 
if  he  has  a  class  of  unconverted  adolescents  the  fact  of  their 
need  of  conversion  will  be  continually  before  him  as  he  pre- 
j^ares  his  lesson.  His  thoughts  of  his  class  must  be  very 
concrete.  What  can  I  do  for  Charley  Brown?  How  can  I 
jiresent  this  so  as  to  help  James  Burns?  The  teacher  who 
])lans  his  lesson  with  his  class,  as  it  were,  before  him  will,  in 
the  long  run,  accomplish  to  the  full  his  every  purpose. 

The  Study  Habit.  But  where  shall  I  get  time  to  do  all 
this?  A  fair  question  indeed.  Many  teachers  are  over- 
burdened with  their  daily  round  of  duty  and  of  toil.  But  it 
must  be  remembered  that  the  very  best  Sunday  school  teachers 
are  oftenest  those  whose  time  is  almost  completely  taken  up 
during  the  week.  It  is  an  old  saying  that  "If  you  want  any- 
thing well  done  give  it  to  a  busy  man."  It  is  simply  because 
he  is  effective  that  he  is  busy.  There  can  be  no  rule  for  the 
amount  of  time  to  be  given  to  lesson  study  save  this:  take 


THE  TEACHER'S  PREPARATION  163 

all  the  time  that  you  can,  and  be  regular.  Miracles  can  be 
done  if  one  economizes  the  odds  and  ends  of  his  time.  The 
historian  Parkman  for  years  could  work  only  a  few  moments 
every  day.  "One  hour  a  day,"  says  Harden,  "withdrawn 
from  frivolous  pursuits  and  profitably  employed  would  en- 
able any  man  of  ordinary  capacity  to  master  a  complete 
science."  Half  an  hour  a  day  well  used  will  enable  any  Sun- 
day school  teacher  to  get  his  Sunday  school  lesson  well,  and 
in  a  few  years  will  make  him  a  notable  master  of  the  Bible. 
But  the  student  must  be  regular  in  his  work.  He  must  set 
apart  the  time  and  adhere  to  his  plan  without  exception  until 
Bible  study  becomes  a  habit. 

Study  and  Attention.  Many  teachers  find  it  hard  to  con- 
centrate their  attention.  They  begin  upon  their  study,  bvit 
after  a  few  moments  they  find  that  their  minds  are  wandering 
far  from  the  work  in  hand.  They  force  themselves  back  again 
and  again,  but  soon  drowsiness  comes  and  the  task  is  over. 
Especially  is  this  true  of  one  who  comes  from  a  hard  day's 
work.  To  combat  this  tendency  one  should  choose  the  time 
of  day  when  he  is  at  his  best,  and  should  discipline  himself 
by  patient  effort  to  give  his  whole  mind  to  the  task  at  hand. 
Some  men  can  get  more  from  an  hour  of  study  than  others 
can  from  an  entire  day.  There  are  those,  indeed,  who  main- 
tain that  genius  is  only  another  name  for  the  power  to  con- 
centrate the  attention.  If  it  be  true,  then  anyone  can  be  a 
genius  if  he  will,  for  the  powers  of  attention  can  be  cultivated 
as  truly  as  can  the  strength  of  the  muscular  system.  With 
perseverance  and  determination  one  can  do  what  he  will. 

Preparing  for  Primary  "Work  and  for  the  teaching  of  the 
lower  grades  is  far  different  from  the  preparing  of  adult  lessons. 
Here  originality  is  called  for  in  a  marked  degree.  Stories, 
object  material,  memory  passages,  movement  exercises,  and 
the  like  must  be  carefully  thought  out  in  advance.  The 
teacher  who  depends  for  her  program  upon  the  inspiration 
of  the  moment  will  have  a  hard  time  of  it,  but  she  who  knows 
how  every  moment  is  to  be  used,  who  can  pass  rapidly  from 
change  to  change,  has  her  class  in  hand  all  the  time,  and 
works  constantly  with  the  minimum  of  friction.  Especially 
should  the  teacher  of  the  preadolescent  class  give  attention  to 
his  ])reparation.      He  of  all  teachers  mtist  consider  his  pujjils 


i64        ELEMENTS  OE  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

and  adapt  himself  to  their  peculiarities.  He  must  study  how 
to  win  attention  and  retain  it.  He  must  be  ready  with  illus- 
trative material  and  with  devices  for  gaining  and  holding 
interest.  He  must  each  week  plan  his  campaign  like  a  general 
in  the  enemy's  country.  Boys  of  this  age  will  not  sit  still  and 
be  lectvired  to  for  half  an  hour;  they  will  pay  attention  to 
exposition  and  doctrinal  deduction.  The  teacher  must  find 
the  point  of  contact  and  bring  home  teachings  that  will  count 
for  character.  Every  lesson  presents  a  new  problem  requiring 
originality  for  its  solution  and  careful  planning  for  its  applica- 
tion. 

The  Lesson  Period.  Most  schools  give  not  over  half  an 
hour  to  the  study  of  the  lesson — a  time  all  too  short  when  one 
considers  the  work  that  should  be  done.  Some  teachers  get 
so  full  of  the  lesson  that  they  begin  to  teach  as  if  they  had  the 
whole  day  before  them,  and  are  awakened  by  the  superin- 
tendent's bell  to  find  that  the  time  has  elapsed  and  they  have 
barely  got  through  with  the  preliminaries.  The  plan  of 
every  teacher  should  include  a  time  limit  for  each  section  of 
the  work,  say  ten  minutes  for  introduction,  ten  for  exposition 
and  illustration,  and  ten  for  application,  and  he  should  hold 
himself  carefully  to  these  limits.  Most  teachers  use  up  their 
time  before  they  reach  the  application,  and  a  lesson  without 
application  is  only  half  taught.  There  should  be  a  clear 
understanding  between  superintendent  and  teachers  as  to 
the  precise  length  of  the  lesson  jieriod ;  and  the  superintendent 
should  never  cut  the  time  short. 

Assigning  the  Next  Lesson.  Finally,  the  teacher's  prepara- 
tion should  include  an  assignment  of  work  for  the  next  lesson. 
It  is  always  well  to  give  the  individuals  of  the  class  each  some- 
thing specific  to  do.  This  one  is  to  read  from  Farrar's  Life 
of  Christ  and  bring  in  a  brief  report;  another  is  to  trace  the 
journey  on  the  map  in  red;  all  are  to  read  the  connecting 
chapter  and  bring  in  a  summary.  These  reports  need  occupy 
but  little  time  at  the  next  lesson,  but  they  shotild  without 
fail  be  called  for.  Often  the  reason  why  jnipils  ])repare  no 
lesson  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  nothing  has  been  sug- 
gested for  them  to  do.  It  is  perhaps  not  too  much  to  say  that 
"a  very  good  estimate  of  a  teacher's  skill  can  be  based  on  the 
manner  in  which  he  assigns  lessons  or  tasks." 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

AIM  AND  METHOD 

The  Teacher's  Aim.  The  teacher  is  now  ready  to  stand 
before  his  class.  He  is  master  of  the  lesson;  he  has  studied 
its  details  with  care,  and  has  arranged  his  materials  in  an 
orderly  way.  How  shall  he  present  them?  By  what  method 
can  he  with  most  profit  conduct  the  recitation?  Before  he 
can  answer  this  he  must  know  what  his  aim  is  to  be.  What 
is  the  recitation  for?  Is  it  simply  to  impart  information? 
Undoubtedly  this  element  is  an  important  one.  The  teacher 
must  see  to  it  that  the  Scripture  story,  the  history,  and  the 
geography  are  known  by  his  pupils.  But  this  must  never  be 
the  whole  aim  of  the  teacher.  If  he  is  teaching  the  lesson 
of  the  Good  Shepherd,  for  instance,  shall  he  make  it  his  aim 
simply  to  impart  information  about  Oriental  shepherds  and 
sheep  and  sheei)folds  and  robbers?  He  can  easily  take  up  the 
lesson  hour  with  this,  but  will  he  be  teaching  the  lesson  in  its 
real  sense  if  he  does  so?  He  will  undoubtedly  entertain  his 
class.  Many  never  get  beyond  this  stage  of  teaching.  They 
aim  only  at  the  pupil's  head.  They  describe  minutely  coins 
and  customs  and  houses  and  costumes,  they  dwell  fully  upon 
the  background  and  the  history  and  the  geography,  but  they 
do  nothing  else.  They  are  teaching  simply  for  information. 
Then  there  are  those  who  maintain  that  the  aim  of  the  recita- 
tion is  to  awaken  interest  and  to  cultivate  right  methods  of 
study.  This  undoubtedly  should  be  a  large  element  in  teach- 
ing. The  pu])irs  intellect  must  be  awakened  and  his  self- 
activity  stimulated,  but  even  this  aim  should  be  joined  with 
one  that  is  higher.  All  teachers,  Sunday  school  teachers  mo.st 
of  all,  should  be  builders  of  character.  The  Sunday  school 
teacher  should  have  it  as  his  purpose  so  to  present  the  truth 
that  the  learner  shall  add  as  a  result  of  it  another  precept  to 
his  rules  for  living;  that  he  shall  understand  himself  and  the 
ways  of  God  and  the  principles  of  complete  living  better  at 
the  end  of   the  period   than  at  the  opening.     Many  teachers 

165 


i66        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

have  as  their  only  aim  the  conversion  of  the  class.  For  them 
the  Sunday  school  has  this  as  its  leading  function.  One 
teacher  went  to  his  superintendent  and  asked  for  another 
class.  "They  are  all  converted  now  and  there  is  nothing 
further  for  me  to  do.  I  want  an  unconverted  class."  "Ah, 
brother,"  replied  the  superintendent,  "your  work  has  only 
just  begun.  You  have  a  class  of  newborn  babes  in  Christ. 
The  nurture  of  them  will  require  your  most  careful  efforts." 
The  superintendent  was  right.  The  aim  of  the  teacher  should 
be  the  conversion  of  his  class,  but  it  should  also  be  to  feed  and 
strengthen  and  build  up  stalwart  Christian  characters.  The 
Sunday  school  is  for  Christian  nurture. 

The  Central  Truth.  The  teacher,  then,  should  have  as  his 
aim  to  bring  out  with  clearness  and  force  some  living  principle 
or  principles.  In  the  Sunday  school  lesson  this  is  generally 
embodied  in  a  Golden  Text.  At  every  step  of  his  progress  the 
teacher  should  have  this  in  view.  He  should  not  be  turned 
aside  by  any  irrelevant  question,  no  matter  how  attractive. 
Aimless  discussion  should  not  be  tolerated;  it  does  no  good. 
If  the  lesson  is  about  Daniel  and  the  lions,  the  teacher,  espe- 
cially if  he  has  a  junior  class,  may  explain  much  about  lions 
and  their  ways;  he  may  also  tell  much  about  Daniel;  and  if 
he  has  an  adult  class  he  may  dwell  upon  Babylon  and  the 
captivity  and  Daniel's  place  and  influence;  but  if  he  teaches 
the  lesson  as  it  should  be  taught,  every  pupil  will  leave  the 
recitation  understanding  as  he  never  did  before  that  God 
takes  care  of  his  own.  Everything  he  has  said  and  everything 
he  has  led  the  class  to  say  during  the  entire  period  has  cen- 
tered in  this  one  great  truth.  In  other  words,  the  teacher 
teaches  because  he  has  a  lesson  to  enforce. 

Concentration  of  Aim.  Sporadic  teaching — this  week  much 
information  about  lions,  next  week  the  facts  about  Oriental 
shepherd  life,  the  week  after  a  consideration  of  the  flora  of 
Palestine,  and  so  on  and  on — leads  to  no  definite  resiilts.  It  is 
unscientific  and  demoralizing.  Merely  to  study  the  facts 
about  Daniel  and  Babylon  does  no  good  except  to  entertain. 
The  history  of  the  past  is  of  no  use  to  us  to-day  save  as  it 
points  a  lesson  which  shall  be  of  value  for  the  present  hour  and 
for  the  future.  We  are  dealing  with  the  ]iast,  then,  simply 
to  gather  from  it  some  truth ;  therefore  there  must  be  a  well- 


AIM  AND  METHOD  167 

defined  central  truth  in  every  lesson.  But  another  step  is 
necessary:  the  central  truths  of  all  the  lessons  in  the  whole 
series  of  lessons  should  bear  upon  and  enforce  one  great  cul- 
minating central  truth.  Next  Sunday's  lesson  should  build 
upon  this  Sunday's  lesson,  and  so  on  and  on,  and  every  Sun- 
day's teaching  should  simply  make  clearer  the  central  teaching 
of  the  whole  quarter.  With  children  this  is  imperative.  The 
child  who  learns  of  God's  love  to-day,  and  the  necessity  of 
obedience  to  parents  the  next  week,  and  the  dangers  of  spirit- 
ual blindness  the  week  following,  is  getting  beads  with  no 
thread  to  string  them  on.  He  cannot  coordinate  his  material. 
It  becomes  at  length  a  mere  mass  of  unrelated  facts  in  no 
condition  to  use  or  to  serve  as  the  basis  for  the  gaining  of  other 
facts.  How  much  better,  especially  with  children,  to  dwell 
week  after  week  upon  some  single  truth :  obedience,  for  in- 
stance, Jacob's  obedience,  Joseph's  obedience,  Noah's  obedi- 
ence, and  so  on,  and  then  at  the  end  of  the  month  or  the 
quarter  to  sum  it  all  up  in  one  great  lesson  on  the  duty  of 
obedience  to  father  and  mother  and  teacher  and  God.  With 
such  a  systera  every  lesson  can  begin  with  a  review.  A  series 
of  studies  in  the  book  of  John  should  have  as  its  central  aim 
that  which  indeed  is  the  central  aim  of  the  book  itself :  "These 
things  are  written  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God."  Every  lesson  in  the  series  should  be  viewed 
from  the  standpoint  of  this  great  central  purpose.  Such 
teaching  is  scientific.  It  is  a  building  up  little  by  little  upon 
the  materials  already  acquired.  It  is  not  a  mere  touching  of 
the  subject  at  haphazard — here  to-day,  over  there  to-morrow, 
away  in  another  place  the  day  after;  it  observes  orderliness 
and  unity.  The  new  system  of  Graded  Lessons  will  make 
this  kind  of  teaching  natural  and  easy. 

The  Story  Method.  Having  determined  upon  his  aim,  the 
teacher  is  now  ready  to  select  the  method  by  which  he  shall 
present  his  material.  In  this  he  must  be  guided  largely  by 
the  nature  of  his  class.  With  children,  as  we  have  already 
seen,  the  story  method  is  the  most  effective.  There  is  little 
use  to  generalize  with  them  and  to  present  mere  abstract 
ti-uth;  the  lesson  must  be  tran.slated  into  the  concrete  and 
brought  carefijlly  within  the  realm  of  their  experience.  It 
may  perhaps  do  some  good  to  tell  a  boy  that  it  is  wrong  to 


i68        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

kill  birds  and  squirrels,  but  the  better  way  is  to  tell  a  little 
story  of  a  nest  full  of  baby  birds  left  to  die  because  the  niother 
has  been  wantonly  killed  by  a  boy.  There  need  be  no  moral 
mentioned.  The  boy  will  make  it  for  himself.  The  teacher 
of  the  restless  class  of  small  boys  must  continually  use  this 
device.  Hemust  start  from  concrete  things  that  all  will  under- 
stand, and  lead  up  to  his  point  step  by  step.  Hawthorne's 
story  of  Midas  and  the  golden  touch  has  no  moral  at  the  end, 
but  no  class  of  boys  can  hear  it  without  realizing  as  never  be- 
fore the  uselessness  of  mere  gold.  The  story  method  should 
be  used  even  with  the  adult  class.  First  tell  realistically  the 
lesson  story — Jesus  washing  the  disciples'  feet,  the  hand- 
writing on  the  wall,  the  selling  of  Joseph,  or  whatever  section 
of  Scripture  it  may  be.  Bring  forth  then  parallel  instances 
which  illustrate  the  same  point.  Show  by  concrete  example 
how  universal  the  thing  is,  and  how  it  enters  into  the  life  of 
the  present  day  and,  indeed,  into  the  life  of  each  individual, 
then  make  your  law.  This  requires  work  on  the  part  of  the 
teacher,  and  considerable  originality,  but  it  is  true  teaching. 
The  Lecture  Method.  Some  teachers  talk  during  the  entire 
period.  It  is  as  if  they  were  preaching  a  sermon  with  the 
lesson  Scripture  for  their  text.  There  are  some  classes  where 
this  is  of  value.  If  the  class  is  a  very  large  adult  class,  the 
teacher  will  be  compelled  to  do  very  much  of  the  talkmg,  espe- 
cially if  the  majority  of  the  pupils  have  made  no  preparation. 
Many  pupils,  especially  diffident  ones,  enjoy  being  members 
of  such  a  class,  and  will  attend  it  when  they  will  no  other. 
Says  one  writer:  "There  are  probably  few  Sunday  schools 
of  any  size  which  ought  not  to  have  at  least  one  class  con- 
ducted avowedly  on  the  lecture  method,  provided  only  a  com- 
petent teacher  can  be  obtained."  A  competent  teacher  of 
such  a  class  is,  however,  not  easy  to  obtain.  He  should  be 
good  at  explanation,  he  should  be  broad  and  sane,  an  easy 
sjjeaker,  and  he  should  know  the  Bil)le  jierfectly.  But  to  the 
greater  number  of  classes  in  the  Sunday  school  the  lecture 
method  does  not  apply  at  all.  To  educate  is  to  give  and  take. 
There  must  be  preparation  of  the  lesson  on  the  part  of  the 
pupil,  and  there  should  be  constant  cooperation.  Every 
teacher  should  ask  himself  frequently  this  question:  "Am  I 
really  teaching  or  am  I  ])reaching  to  my  class?" 


AIM  AND  METHOD  169 

The  Conversation  Method.  The  skillful  teacher  depends 
much  upon  the  suggestive  question.  He  stimulates  mental 
activity  among  his  pupils:  by  skillful  leading  he  gets  them  to 
discover  the  truth  for  themselves.  Then  after  they  have 
discovered  it  he  proceeds  to  emphasize  it  and  to  make  it 
clearer.  The  method  centers  upon  the  art  of  questioning, 
which  we  shall  discuss  fully  in  another  chapter,  but  we  may 
give  a  few  suggestions  here.  The  teacher  who  uses  it  may  jot 
down  during  his  preparation  some  such  plan  as  this  from 
Professor  Marks  for  the  teaching  of  the  lesson  about  David 
the  Shepherd  Boy:  "If  possible,  get  all  in  the  class  to  con- 
tribute something  to  the  lesson.  What  do  they  know  abotit 
shepherd  life?  Stories  they  have  read,  as  'Wolf!  Wolf!' 
The  difficult  places  David  had  to  climb.  The  enemies  of  the 
flock.  What  kind  of  boy  would  make  a  good  shepherd  boy? 
What  might  such  a  boy  do  in  the  long,  quiet  hours  of  watch- 
ing? Would  this  kind  of  life  be  good  training  for  a  soldier? 
Tell  of  praying  soldiers,  such  as  Havelock  and  Gordon.  Would 
such  a  man  make  a  good  king?  What  are  the  qualities  of  a 
king?  Illustrate  by  patriot  fighters,  in  whom  religion  was 
strong,  and  who  rose  to  kingly  position — Cromwell,  Washing- 
ton, Lincoln,  Garfield."  The  dangers  of  this  method  are 
that  it  does  not  lay  much  emphasis  on  the  students'  prepara- 
tion, and  unless  the  teacher  is  skillful  the  conversation  will 
degenerate  into  mere  desultory  talk.  The  teacher  at  length 
does  nothing  more  than  to  interest  the  pupils  and  to  skim 
entertainingly  over  the  surface  of  things. 

The  Recitation  Method.  By  this  method  the  pupil  is 
assigned  a  lesson  to  study  and  his  preparation  is  tested  by 
means  of  questions.  The  teacher  may  become  a  mere  task- 
master and  examiner.  Many  a  teacher,  especially  in  small 
rural  schools,  simply  asks  in  mechanical  rotation  the  questions 
printed  in  the  quarterly  and  stops  when  the  list  of  questions 
has  been  exhausted.  Often  he  accepts  without  comment  what- 
ever answer  may  come  and  passes  on  to  the  next  question. 
The  method  begets  carelessness  in  the  teacher.  He  is  not 
compelled  to  study  the  lesson.  Once  when  a  superintendent 
asked  a  substitute  teacher  to  take  the  place  of  one  who  was 
absent  the  man  re])lied,  "Well,  I  haven't  looked  at  the  lesson, 
but  I  guess  I  can  jjtit  out  the  questions."      The  fault  lies  not 


iya        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

sf)  much  in  the  method  as  in  the  ease  with  which  it  can  be 
abused.  It  is  generally  recognized  that  "The  recitation 
method,  either  alone  or  as  the  chief  element  of  a  combination 
of  methods,  is  the  best  yet  devised  for  pupils  between  the  ages 
of  eight  and  sixteen.  What  is  needed  is  intelligence,  enthu- 
siasm, conscientiousness  in  the  employment  of  it." 

The  Seminar  Method.  With  many  adult  classes,  notably 
with  a  class  of  edticated  young  men  or  women,  the  seminar 
plan  has  worked  admirably.  Each  pupil  is  assigned  to  pre- 
pare some  specific  phase  of  the  lesson  and  2omes  to  the  recita- 
tion able  to  add  his  part.  The  method  to  be  fully  effective 
requires  access  to  a  good  library.  With  a  small  class  of 
earnest  young  people  and  a  well-selected  collection  of  books 
within  easy  access  wonderful  results  may  be  accomplished. 
How  rich  the  fruits  that  may  come  from  a  full  year  devoted  to 
the  different  phases  of  the  life  of  Paul,  or  a  half  year  with  one 
of  the  Gospels,  or  the  Minor  Prophets;  such  work  long-con- 
tinued results  in  a  broad  education.  The  method  may  be 
used  in  a  modified  way  in  all  classes.  Boys  of  ten  and  twelve 
delight  in  having  something  assigned  to  them  upon  which 
they  are  to  report  next  Sunday.  Be  it  nothing  more  than  the 
finding  of  a  date  or  the  learning  of  a  verse  the  exercise  will  lie 
valuable. 

The  Combined  Method.  The  true  teacher  is  not  confined  to 
any  one  method.  He  combines  the  best  elements  of  all  sys- 
tems and  so  makes  a  method  of  his  own.  He  assigns  a  lesson 
for  study  and  sees  to  it  that  there  is  preparation;  he  asks  test 
qiiestions;  he  draws  out  opinions  and  illustrations  from  all 
his  pupils;  he  tells  illustrative  anecdotes;  he  assigns  work 
that  must  be  reported  upon;  and  he  sums  up  and  makes 
ai)i)lication  from  time  to  time  in  what  are  really  little  lectures. 
He  varies  his  method  from  Sunday  to  Sunday,  fitting  always 
the  method  to  the  subject  to  be  taught.  In  other  words,  he 
is  original  and  he  does  his  own  thinking.  After  all,  there  is 
no  set  of  rviles  that  can  be  applied  as  formulas  and  be  war- 
ranted to  produce  unvarying  results.  Rules  are  at  best  Init 
suggestions.     The  true  teacher  makes  his  own  rules. 


CHAPTER  XXVII 
THE  TEACHING  PROCESS 

The  Function  of  Teaching  is  to  convey  generalizations  from 
the  mind  of  the  teacher  to  that  of  the  learner.  Human  knowl- 
edge comes  through  experience,  and  this  experience  can  be 
communicated  to  others  only  in  the  form  of  laws,  or  general 
statements — in  other  words,  in  generalizations. 

The  Problem.  But  by  what  steps  shall  these  generaliza- 
tions be  conveyed  ?  To  plant  a  new  abstract  idea  in  the  mind 
of  a  child  is  no  easy  process.  Simply  to  repeat  the  generaliza- 
tion, "God  is  good,"  makes  very  little  impression.  The 
words  may  be  memorized  by  the  pupil,  but  the  idea  will  not 
be  completely  his  until  he  has  digested  it.  How  shall  the 
teacher  be  sure  that  this  is  accomplished?  How  shall  he 
begin?  What  steps  shall  he  take?  Shall  he  present  first 
the  generalization  and  then  carefully  explain  it,  or  shall  he  by 
illustration  and  application  lead  slowly  to  the  point  until  the 
learner  discovers  the  law  for  himself  ?  To  answer  these  ques- 
tions is  to  set  forth  the  art  of  teaching.  The  teaching  process 
concerns  itself  with  the  qviestion  of  how  to  transfer  generali- 
zations. 

Herbart.  Whoever  sttidies  the  steps  in  the  teaching  process 
comes  sooner  or  later  to  Herbart,  the  great  German  educator 
who  more  than  anyone  else  has  formulated  the  methods  of 
modern  pedagogy.  Herbart 's  name  is  associated  always  with 
that  of  Froebel,  and  the  two  und<;ubtedly  stand  as  the  greatest 
teachers  of  the  nineteenth  century.  "Froebel  magnified  the 
work  of  the  child;  Herbart  magnified  the  work  of  the  teacher." 
Froebel  lived  with  his  children  and  studied  them  as  a  gar- 
dener studies  his  plants;  Herbart  approached  the  teaching 
profession  from  the  standpoint  of  psychology,  and  made  a 
system  which  follows  the  workings  of  the  human  mind.  The 
work  of  Herbart  has  been  summed  up  in  three  phrases:  "The 
development  of  a  psychology  cajjable  of  immediate  bearing  on 
the  problems  of  teaching;  the  scientific  application  of  this 

171 


172        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

j^sychology  to  education;  and  the  revelation  of  the  possibility 
of  making  all  the  activities  of  the  schoolroom,  including  es- 
pecially instruction,  bear  directly  iipon  the  development  of 
moral  character." 

The  Herbartian  Method.  Herbart's  method  is  very  simple, 
so  simj)le,  indeed,  that  any  teacher  can  comprehend  its  stej^s 
at  once  and  make  practical  use  of  it.  It  is  simply  following 
the  natural  channels  of  the  pupil's  mind.  The  first  step  is 
]:)reparation  of  the  learner;  the  lesson  is  introduced  by  means 
of  a  preliminary  discussion;  what  the  learner  knows  is  care- 
fully ascertained  so  that  the  teacher  may  begin  at  the  point  of 
contact.  The  second  step  is  presentation :  the  new  lesson  is 
now  brought  forth  to  be  builded  upon  the  sure  foundation  of 
that  which  is  already  known.  The  third  step  is  association: 
the  new  is  compared  with  older  ideas  by  means  of  illustrations 
and  specific  examjjlec  easil}^  within  the  comprehension  of  the 
learner.  The  fourth  step  is  concentration :  everything  is  now 
gathered  up  into  one  central  thought.  The  fifth  step  is  a])])li- 
cation:  the  lesson  is  made  personal,  pvit  into  joractical  form 
for  use. 

The  First  Step.  Prepare  the  ground  for  the  reception  of  the 
new  lesson.  The  teacher  must  know  the  foundation  he  is  to 
build  upon,  for,  as  we  have  already  seen,  perception  comes 
onlv  through  ideas  that  we  already  possess.  If  one  were  asked 
to  take  the  adult  class  in  a  strange  school,  he  would  be  totally 
at  loss  as  to  how  to  teach  it.  Until  he  knew  something  of  the 
class  he  would  be  working  utterly  in  the  dark.  He  would 
have  to  ascertain  whether  this  class  was  well  educated  or  not, 
whether  it  was  made  up  of  artisans  or  professional  men  or 
stxidents.  In  other  words,  before  he  could  sow  he  would  have 
to  know  what  his  ground  was.  In  the  same  way  the  teacher 
of  younger  classes  must  realize  the  condition  of  the  pupils  to 
be  taught.  Are  they  city  children  or  country  children  ?  What 
things  in  the  lesson  can  they  be  expected  to  know  and  what 
things  wotxld  be  foreign  to  their  experience?  In  other  words, 
the  ])oint  of  contact  must  be  found. 

The  Second  Step.  The  pu])il  having  been  jirepared,  and 
the  point  of  contact  found,  the  next  step  is  to  present  the 
lesson  material.  If  the  subject  is  the  parable  of  the  lost 
sheep,  step  one  has  made  clear  what  the  pupils  know  about 


THE  TEACHING  PROCESS  173 

sheep  and  their  habits,  and,  moreover,  has  created  an- interest. 
Sympathy  and  interest  are  largely  matters  of  comprehension. 
The  child  is  interested  in  anything  that  appeals  to  his  past 
experience.  The  teacher  may  now  tell  the  lesson  story,  as 
simply  and  interestingly  as  possible.  The  second  step  in 
teaching  "consists  of  bringing  in  fresh  thought  or  knowledge 
to  lay  by  the  side  of  that  which  the  children  already  pos- 
sessed." If  the  class  is  an  adult  class  which  the  teacher  thor- 
oughly understands,  the  first  step  may  be  omitted.  The 
subject  may  be  introduced  at  once. 

The  Third  Step.  But  the  teaching  of  a  lesson  is  not  like 
] tutting  eggs  one  by  one  into  a  basket.  Knowledge  does  not 
lie  in  the  mind  like  unrelated  heaps  of  pebbles;  the  mind,  as 
we  have  seen,  does  not  work  that  way.  Its  materials  must 
be  bound  together  by  association.  Association,  indeed,  is 
the  very  soul  of  memory  and  of  comprehension.  We  under- 
stand only  as  we  compare  the  new  fact  with  others  that  we 
have  already  comprehended.  Therefore  the  third  step  of 
teaching  is  to  bring  forth  illustrations  and  comparisons  by 
which  to  make  the  new  idea  perfectly  clear.  From  a  lost 
sheep  it  is  easy  to  get  to  a  lost  coin,  a  lost  gem,  a  lost  child. 

The  Fourth  Step.  The  pupil  is  now  ready  for  generaliza- 
tion. The  specific  instances  which  have  been  so  carefully 
]iresented  can  now  be  drawn  ujton  for  a  general  law.  The 
central  trtith  can  now  be  set  forth  with  confidence,  for  the 
learner  is  ready  for  it.  If  the  pupil  can  be  led  to  do  this  for 
himself  it  will  come  with  tenfold  more  force.  "To  supply 
ready-made  morals  to  stories  is  bad  teaching,"  says  Professor 
Adams.  "The  pupil  must  work  out  the  moral  for  himself; 
but  when  once  the  moral  has  been  won  the  teacher  may  well 
devote  some  effort  to  give  that  moral  the  most  effective  ex- 
]iression."  A  few  carefully  asked  questions  will  generally 
win  the  central  truth  if  the  first  steps  have  been  wisely  taken. 
"The  wording  should  come  from  the  child  himself,  being  an 
immediate  outgrowth  from  the  data  which  he  has  at  hand." 
It  may  be  crude  and  even  grotesque,  but  if  it  shows  a  com- 
prehension of  the  main  thought,  it  will  be  sufficient.  The 
teacher  should,  however,  clothe  it  in  better  words. 

The  Fifth  Step.  The  pu])il  has  now  been  led  to  add  a  general- 
ization to  his  fund  of   knowledge.     It  has  been  so  founded 


T74        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

upon  the  related  facts  that  he  already  possessed,  and  has  been 
so  carefully  compared  and  associated  with  other  things  which 
he  knew,  that  he  now  possesses  it  as  his  own.  One  more  step 
remains :  he  should  not  merely  understand  it  and  assent  to  it 
or  consider  it  merely  as  an  interesting  fact,  he  should  be 
taught  to  use  it.  It  shotild  be  applied  to  his  own  individual 
life  so  as  to  lead  him  to  action.  Mere  knowledge  unused  is  a 
"dead   possession." 

We  shall  now  consider  with  more  detail  these  five  steps  of 
the  teaching  process. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 
ILLUSTRATION 

The  First  Step,  which  is  known  as  the  step  of  preparation, 
need  not  detain  us.  We  have  already  carefully  considered 
it  in  the  chapter  on  "The  Child's  Standpoint."  Most  teachers 
know  their  classes  so  thoroughly  that  the  step  need  not  be 
taken  at  all.  Even  with  such  classes,  however,  it  is  well  to 
jjrepare  to  some  extent  the  child's  mind.  Suppose  the  lesson 
is  about  the  sower  and  the  seed,  and  the  teacher  has  selected 
as  her  central  truth  the  loving  care  of  God.  It  would  be  well 
to  ask  many  questions  to  draw  out  what  the  children  really 
knew  of  seeds  and  sowing.  She  "should  endeavor  to  call  up 
as  many  related  ideas  as  possible,  especially  those  which  are 
closely  welded  to  the  personality  of  the  child." 

A  "Word  of  Caution  is  necessary  at  this  point.  Some  teach- 
ers in  their  eagerness  to  gain  the  attention  of  the  pupils  at  the 
start  and  to  commence  at  the  point  of  contact  have  given 
their  most  attractive  and  impressive  material  at  the  opening 
of  the  lesson.  Do  not  begin  by  firing  big  guns  and  then  spend 
the  rest  of  the  time  "in  a  painful  struggle  to  retain  the  atten- 
tion of  the  scholars."  Do  not  make  the  illustration  more 
interesting  than  the  lesson;  the  illustration  is  only  a  means 
to  an  end.  It  too  often  is  made  to  become  the  end  itself.  It 
is  well  with  children  to  begin  with  questions  to  determine 
what  their  experience  has  been.  They  should  be  made  to  talk 
freely  at  this  stage  and  should  be  led  skillfully  until  all  under- 
stand the  ground  from  which  the  start  is  to  be  made.  Says 
Marks:  "For  a  teacher,  as  sometimes  happens,  to  come  av/ay 
from  a  lesson  and  not  know  whether  the  children  had  ever 
had  a  lesson  on  that  subject  before,  or  whether  any  of  them 
had  ever  read  anything  about  it,  is,  in  all  probability,  to  have 
wasted  not  only  time  and  energy  but  a  golden  ojiportimity  of 
enlisting  the  pupils'  willing  cooperation.  Children  ought  to 
have  the  pleasure  of  .showing  what  they  know.  Telling  thcin 
what  they  know  already  is  not  teaching,  but  getting  tlicm  to 

175 


176        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

tell  it  to  you  is."  Prepare,  then,  the  way  for  the  new  by  call- 
ing up  and  freshening  the  older  ideas  that  bear  on  the  new. 
Says  De  Garmo:  "If  nothing  springs  forth  from  within  to 
greet  that  coming  from  without,  the  lesson  will  be  meaning- 
less and  the  pupil  unreceptive.  Things  new  and  strange  can 
only  be  appropriated  by  means  of  a  wealth  of  old  ideas,  and 
the  plan  of  recitation  must  see  to  the  preparation  of  these  old 
materials  during  the  first  step." 

The  Second  Step.  The  teacher  is  now  ready  for  the  presen- 
tation of  the  lesson  from  the  standpoint  which  the  first  step 
has  revealed.  With  children  this  is  usually  done  by  the  story 
method.  With  adult  classes  the  assigned  portion  of  Scripture 
is  rapidly  surveyed  and  the  portion  from  which  the  central 
truth  is  to  be  evolved  is  kept  prominent.  The  teacher  is 
now  presenting  his  new  material  which  it  is  his  purpose  to 
unite  with  the  old  material  in  the  child's  mind.  The  process 
is  psychologically  sound.  We  strive  in  the  first  step  to  find 
what  separate  ideas  the  mind  of  the  pupil  contains  and  which 
of  these  we  may  single  out  for  our  purpose.  In  the  second 
step  we  bring  out  new  single  ideas  which  we  wish  to  add  to 
the  pupil's  stock.  These  first  two  steps  are  therefore  per- 
ceptual— they  deal  with  single  particular  things,  percepts. 
The  third  step  consists  in  combining  the  two  into  concepts. 
It  considers  the  relation  between  things;  it  helps  the  learner 
to  pass  from  percepts  to  concepts,  which  is,  after  all,  the 
chief  province  of  teaching. 

Association.  Herbart's  third  step  in  the  teaching  process 
is  known  as  association,  and  under  it  is  included  all  that 
is  comprehended  under  the  term  "illustrative  material" — 
stories,  objects,  figures  of  speech,  allusions,  parallel  instances, 
contrasts,  and  the  like.  Having  found  what  the  learner  al- 
ready knows,  the  teacher  interjirets  the  new  idea  in  terms  of 
this  old  experience.  He  is  continually  illustrating.  If  he 
presents  only  unrelated  ideas,  he  is  making  no  progress,  for 
the  mind  works  by  association.  Ever}''  new  impression  or 
idea  must  be  interj^jreted  by  material  already  acquired.  A 
percept  is  recognized  only  as  it  is  coinbined  with  the  results 
of  other  percepts.  Concepts  are  grasped  only  as  they  are 
referred  to  other  conce])ts  already  mastered.  I  hear  a  sudden 
roar  in  the  distance  and    say,  "It   is  thunder."     A  soldier 


ILLUSTRATION  '  177 

might  say,  "It  is  artillery";  a  quarryman,  "It  is  a  blast";  a 
boilerman,  "It  is  an  explosion."  To  all  it  is  absolutely  unin- 
telligible save  as  it  is  referred  to  previous  experience.  "I  am 
a  part  of  all  that  I  have  seen,"  cried  the  epic  warrior  Ulysses, 
and  it  is  so  with  each  of  us;  we  are  the  sums  of  our  past  ex- 
perience, and  we  are  little  more.  A  party  of  Esquimaux  were 
once  taken  from  their  arctic  home  to  London.  It  was  sup- 
posed that  the  great  metropolis  would  fill  them  with  continual 
excitement  and  amazement.  Instead,  they  walked  along  the 
streets  in  stolid  apathy.  They  could  not  comprehend  it. 
There  was  nothing  in  their  previous  experience  with  which  to 
interpret  it.  The  only  things  that  attracted  them  were  a 
dog  and  the  window  of  a  furrier.  It  is  this  principle  that  is  at 
the  basis  of  the  proverb,  "The  pilgrim  to  other  lands  finds 
only  what  he  takes  with  him."  What  would  the  treasures  of 
the  Vatican  be  to  a  Georgia  field-hand?  What  is  Venice  to 
him  who  for  fifty  years  has  known  nothing  but  stocks  and 
bonds  and  accounts?  In  precisely  the  same  line  it  may  be 
asked,  What  would  heaven  be  to  him  who  has  given  his  whole 
life  to  selfish  gratification  and  vile  imaginings? 

Its  Importance.  The  art  of  illustration,  then,  is  the  very 
foundation  of  pedagogy.  The  power  to  use  it,  says  Dr.  Greg- 
ory, is  the  "chief  and  central  power  in  the  teacher's  art." 
There  can  be  no  real  teaching  without  it,  for  the  mind  works 
only  from  the  known  to  the  unknown,  from  percept  to  con- 
cept, from  concrete  to  abstract.  It  may  be  said  that  the 
mind  follows  the  same  laws  as  polite  society :  the  new  are  not 
admitted  unless  they  come  introduced  by  the  old.  The 
ability  to  bring  in  telling  illustrations  from  material  with 
which  the  pupil  is  familiar  is  a  rare  gift,  but  all  have  it  to  some 
degree  and  all  should  cultivate  it.  The  good  teacher  is  con- 
tinually studying  her  inipils.  She  watches  them  in  their  ]>lay, 
she  finds  out  their  little  interests  and  enthusiasms,  she  gets 
as  much  as  she  can  of  their  home  environment,  and  she  uses 
all  of  this  material  for  illustration  of  her  teaching.  There  can 
be  no  ready-made  book  of  illustrations;  each  teacher  must 
think  out  his  own  material  and  must  do  it  with  the  actual 
members  of  his  class  in  his  mind.  The  illustration  that 
illumines  is  the  one  which  is  taken  right  out  of  the  life  of  the 
person  who  is  being  taught. 


1/8        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

Attention.  But  illustration  has  yet  another  value:  by  the 
use  of  it  the  teacher  may  catch  and  hold  the  attention  of  her 
class.  Attention,  as  we  found  in  our  studies  in  psychology, 
depends  largely  ujion  interest.  Certain  interests  are  native 
to  childhood,  as  the  interest  in  play,  in  stories,  in  pets,  in 
novelties.  Illustrations  drawn  from  these  are  sure  to  gain 
attention.  Childhood  finds  little  in  sermons  save  the  illustra- 
tive material,  and,  indeed,  many  adults  have  gone  home 
from  the  preaching  service  remembering  nothing  save  some 
vivid  story  which  had  been  used  to  illustrate  a  point.  Then 
there  are  acquired  interests.  The  traveler  reads  absorbedly 
the  time-table,  the  mathematician  listens  eagerly  to  the  ex- 
jiosition  of  dry  formulas,  the  scholar  works  for  hours  over 
lifeless  etymologies.  To  arouse  a  pupil's  interest  one  inust 
touch  upon  some  enthusiasm,  some  past  experience  in  his 
life,  some  acquiremeat  or  cherished  wish.  One  boy  who  has 
spent  a  week  at  the  seashore  is  all  attention  whenever  the 
beach  and  its  phenomena  are  mentioned;  another  who  is 
dreaming  of  bitilding  a  boat  as  soon  as  he  has  money  enough 
will  prick  up  his  ears  at  any  hint  concerning  boat  building; 
another  who  has  constructed  a  miniature  electric  railroad 
that  will  "work"  will  listen  attentively  to  an  elementary  talk 
on  electricity  that  under  other  conditions  wotild  have  beared 
him  intolerably.  To  win  attention,  then,  bring  illustrations 
that  appeal  to  the  interests  of  the  class.  With  children  it  will 
be  an  appeal  almost  wholly  to  native  interests;  with  adults 
it  will  be  almost  wholly  to  acquired  interests.  The  teacher 
who  is  continually  illustrating  his  x^oints  within  the  realm  of 
his  ]ni] Ill's  interests  Avill  have  from  the  beginning  to  the  end 
their  undivided  attention. 

Imagination.  Again,  illustrations  ])roduce  correct  and 
vivid  images  in  the  minds  of  jiujiils.  Every  scene  and  action 
in  the  lesson  will  ine\'itably  be  imaged  in  scmie  way,  btit 
without  the  teacher's  helj)  it  will  be  a  false  image,  often  gro- 
tesqtiely  so,  and  it  will  be  dim  and  vague.  Supjjose  the  les.son 
is  about  Jesus  at  the  Pool  of  Bethesda.  "Now  there  is  in 
Jerusalem  by  the  sheep  gate  a  pool,  .  .  .  having  five  porches. 
In  these  lay  a  multitude  of  them  that  were  sick,"  etc.  The 
word  "pool"  is  vague  and  confusing;  calls  up  no  definite 
image.     The  teacher's  first  duty  is  to  illustrate  the  scene. 


ILLUSTRATION  179 

He  may  do  it  something  like  this:  "It  was  a  place,  the  walls 
made  of  stonework,  below  the  level  of  the  street,  about  as 
large  and  deep  as  this  room.  Let  us  imagine  that  we  are  in  it. 
The  floor  is  water.  On  this  side  the  entire  length  of  the  room 
is  a  flight  of  twenty-five  stone  steps  up  to  the  street  level. 
At  the  top  are  the  porches  [describe  them]  full  of  the  sick 
people."  Then  picture  the  scene  wheh  the  shout  rang  out, 
"The  water  is  moving" — the  great,  excited  throng  scrambling 
frantically  down  the  steps.  Cripples  would  be  hobbling  for 
dear  life,  paralyzed  people  fairly  rolling  down  the  steps,  etc. 
The  pupil  will  after  such  work  carry  home  a  correct  and  vivid 
picture  that  he  will  never  forget.  All  graphic  story-tellers 
make  large  use  of  ilKistrations.  Victor  Hugo  compares  the 
battlefield  of  Waterloo  to  an  enormous  letter  A.  In  one  of 
his  books  he  says;  "Imagine  Paris  taken  off  like  a  lid  and  be- 
hold the  sewers,  a  mighty  tree,"  etc.  The  Union  position 
at  Gettysburg  has  been  likened  to  a  fishhook  with  Round  Top 
the  ring  and  Gulp's  Hill  the  point.  The  teacher  should  con- 
stantly strive  to  translate  the  lesson  into  familiar  terms,  and 
see  to  it  that  each  pupil  carries  away  a  correct  and  vivid 
image. 

The  Conscience.  Often  an  illustration  is  the  only  appeal 
that  can  be  made  to  the  pupil's  conscience.  The  leader  of  a 
certain  gang  of  slum  boys  came  to  Sunday  school  one  morn- 
ing with  a  new  hat.  "He  stole  that  hat,"  one  of  the  others 
told  the  teacher,  looking  over  at  his  chief,  admiringly.  The 
leader  acknowledged  the  impeachment  with  pride.  He  had 
done  a  smart  thing  and  was  something  of  a  hero.  What  was 
the  teacher  to  do?  Any  kind  of  jireaching  about  the  sin  of 
stealing  would  have  been  greeted  with  expressions  of  derision. 
But  the  teacher  knew  her  class.  "What  would  you  do  if  any- 
one stole  your  hat?"  she  asked.  "Knock  the  stuffing  out  of 
him!"  was  the  prompt  reply.  "Why  would  you?"  she  asked. 
Then  l>y  skillful  questioning,  little  by  little,  .she  placed  the 
boy  in  the  attitude  of  the  one  who  had  lost  his  best  hat.  Then 
she  told  a  story  of  one  who  had  had  something  stolen,  and  the 
result  was  that  in  the  end  the  boy  said,  "I  guess  I  had  better 
return  the  hat,  don't  you?"  Xathan's  skillful  handling  of 
David  (2  Sam.  12.  1-14)  should  be  read  with  care  by  every 
teacher.     The    skillful    illustration    and    then    the   dramatic 


i8o        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

apjjlication — "Thou  art  the  man" — are  potent  quickeners  of 
the  conscience.  The  boy  who  kills  birds,  or  steals  water- 
melons, or  ]jlays  pranks  on  aged  people,  can  often  be  ap- 
jjroached  in  this  way  when  all  other  methods  fail. 

Varieties  of  Illustration.  Illustrative  work  may  be  divided 
into  two  classes :  i .  Verbal  illustration,  which  may  be  divided 
into  (a)  parallel  instances  and  contrasts,  and  (b)  figures  of 
speech.  2.  Material  illustration,  under  which  may  be  com- 
]jrised  all  teaching  by  means  of  objects,  pictures,  models, 
maps,  blackboards,  and  the  like.  With  adult  classes  and 
with  older  classes  of  boys  and  girls  verbal  illustration  is  used 
almost  entirely,  though  maps  and  models  and  pictures  are 
much  used  to  supplement  it;  with  smaller  classes  the  two 
are  almost  evenly  combined,  for  the  stories  told  to  children 
are  in  reality  illustrations. 

I.  Verbal  Illustration,  (a)  Under  the  head  of  parallel 
instances  and  contrasts  comes  all  story  material  used  for 
illustrative  purposes.  Such  material  may  consist  of  extracts 
f roin  standard  prose  and  poetry ;  but  if  such  be  used ,  it  should 
be  perfectly  simple  and  within  the  comprehension  of  all  the 
class,  and  it  should  really  illustrate.  It  would  be  well,  for 
example,  while  teaching  the  lesson  about  the  death  of  Moses 
to  have  some  one  of  the  class  read  the  old  poem,  "On  Xcbo's 
Lonely  Moimtain";  or,  if  the  lesson  is  about  the  widow  of 
Nain,  to  have  Willis's  well-known  poem  read.  But  such  work 
should  come  in  with  jjcrfect  spontaneousness ;  poems  should 
really  illustrate  and  should  never  be  brought  in  merely  be- 
cause they  are  pretty.  Dr.  Taylor  tells  of  an  architect  who 
was  consulted  about  certain  decorations  that  were  to  be  used 
for  mere  effect.  "That,"  said  the  architect,  "would  violate 
the  first  rule  of  iirchitecture.  We  must  never  construct 
ornament,  but  only  ornament  construction."  The  ])urpose  of 
the  illustration  is  to  make  ])erfcctly  clear  what  otherwise 
wovild  be  hard  to  understand. 

Sources  of  Illustration.  The  more  spontancotis  the  illus- 
tration the  more  effective  it  will  be.  The  trouble  with  books 
of  illustration  and  with  all  other  I'eady-made  illustrative 
matter  is  tliat  the  material  often  seems  to  be  dragged  in  de- 
liberately as  something  ovitside  of  the  teacher's  experience, 
and  is  therefore  wooden  and  lifeless.     Illustrations  so  far  as 


ILLUSTRATION  i8i 

possible  should  be  personal,  drawn  from  the  daily  life  of  the 
teacher  and  the  class.  The  good  teacher  is  constantly  on  the 
watch  for  material.  He  gets  it  while  watching  his  boys  at 
play,  while  talking  with  them  about  their  school  life  and 
games,  and  while  reading  the  newspapers.  He  puts  himself 
in  the  way  of  material  by  asking  questions  of  artisans  and 
professional  men  and  practical  workers  in  every  line.  A 
friend  of  mine  never  goes  away  on  the  train  without  coming 
back  with  a  fund  of  illustrative  matter  drawn  from  some  one 
with  whom  he  has  had  a  long  chat  about  his  occupation.  If 
one  is  awake  to  the  life  about  him  he  will  find  more  material 
than  he  can  possibly  make  use  of.  A  mere  line  in  a  magazine 
to  the  effect  that  it  took  five  hundred  tons  of  dynamite  to 
constrvict  a  certain  tunnel  furnished  one  teacher  with  a  fine 
illustration.  Siippose  it  had  all  been  exploded  at  once  in- 
stead of  being  doled  out  in  thousands  of  explosions  during 
several  years.  What  a  lesson  on  the  value  of  prudence  and 
])atience  and  persistent  effort!  Then  the  Bible  should  be 
drawn  upon  constantly  for  parallel  cases.  It  is  often  a  valu- 
able exercise  to  ask  members  of  the  class  to  bring  in  ilhistra- 
tive  material  from  other  parts  of  the  Bible.  A  good  reference 
Bible  will  make  this  work  very  easy.  But  the  best  material, 
especially  for  junior  classes,  comes  from  the  lives  and  occupa- 
tions of  those  actually  being  taiight.  There  are  few  ethical 
I)roblems  that  cannot  be  made  clear  to  boys  by  illustrations 
drawn  from  the  games  which  take  up  so  much  of  their  time 
and  enthusiasm. 

The  Number  of  Illustrations.  Some  teachers  illustrate 
too  much.  After  all,  the  illustration  is  only  the  scaffolding 
thrown  up  to  help  erect  the  main  truth.  When  once  the  truth 
has  been  fixed,  then  the  scaffolding  is  torn  down  and  forgotten. 
A  lesson  sometimes  degenerates  into  a  mere  series  of  stories 
with  little  aim.  The  pujjil  who  goes  home  remembering 
illustrations  and  nothing  else  has  been  badly  taught.  If 
more  than  one  example  is  given  to  prove  one  point  the  two 
are  liable  to  become  mixed  and  to  neutralize  each  other. 

The  Abuse  of  Illustrations.  Not  only  is  there  danger  of  the 
illustration's  dominating  the  lesson  and  obscuring  the  truth 
to  be  taught,  but  there  is  also  danger  of  its  being  pressed  too 
far.     Yotmg  children  very  often  reach  startling  conclusions  in 


i82        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  TEDAGOGY 

this  way.  Professor  Adams  has  brought  this  out  very  clearh' : 
"Our  Lord  is  not  the  least  like  a  vine,  though  he  holds  the 
same  relation  to  his  followers  as  the  vine  does  to  its  branches. 
Yet  there  is  a  strong  temptation  for  pupils  and  teachers  to 
carry  over  resemblances  of  the  things  compared  instead  of 
confining  their  attention  to  the  relations.  This  is  particularly 
objectionable  in  cases  where  God  is  com]:)ared  with  men. 
Our  Lord  himself  vises  parables  in  which  the  Father  is  repre- 
sented in  a  very  human  way.  But  there  is  a  broad  generality 
about  his  pictures  that  frees  the  mind  from  all  petty  detail. 
The  trouble  arises  when  these  parables  are  expounded  and 
worked  out  in  great  detail."  He  then  illustrates  how  the 
parable  of  the  man  who  went  at  midnight  to  borrow  three 
loaves  was  once  expounded.  The  neighbor  was  in  his  warm 
bed,  reluctant  to  arise  and  go  to  the  kitchen,  etc.  "Warm 
bed  and  the  kitchen  spoil  everything."  Especially  is  there 
danger  in  figurative  langviage.  "He  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted 
l)y  the  rivers  of  water,"  "My  cujj  runneth  over,"  "For  in  so 
doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head,"  should  be 
carefully  exjUained  to  children.  If  the  illustrations  of  the 
Bible  are  carefully  explained,  and  not  pressed  too  far,  and  if 
the  teacher  uses  simple  illustrations  easily  within  the  compre- 
hension of  his  class,  and  uses  only  just  enough  to  make  clear 
his  teaching,  there  will  be  no  danger. 

(b)  Figurative  Language.  The  greater  nimiber  of  verbal 
illustrations  are  figures  of  speech.  The  human  n^ind  natu- 
rally ex])resses  itself  in  figures.  The  greater  number  of  our 
nouns  are  of  figurative  origin.  The  eye  of  a  needle,  the  brow 
of  a  hill,  the  crest  of  the  ridge,  the  head  of  the  bay,  are  familiar 
examples.  Indeed,  Emerson  has  declared  that  language  is 
"fossil  poetry,"  since  each  word  and  phrase  was  originated  by 
some  one  who  in  a  moment  of  inspiration  saw  a  relation  be- 
tween two  or  more  things  and  gave  it  a  name.  We  speak  of  a 
tempest  of  grief,  a  svmny  disjwsition,  a  burst  of  wrath,  a  fiery 
debate.  The  Bible  is  full  of  figures;  the  teaching  of  Christ 
especially  abotmds  in  them.  "The  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
like"  occurs  again  and  again;  "I  will  liken  him  imto  a  wise 
man,  which  built  his  house  upon  a  rock";  "Go  to  the  lost 
sheep  of  the  hou.se  of  Israel";  indeed,  it  was  said,  "Without 
a  parable  [figure  of  speech]  spake  he  not  unto  them." 


ILLUSTRATION  183 

The  Use  of  Figares.  The  most  useful  figures  for  the  teacher 
are  the  simile,  where  the  comparison  is  directly  stated ;  "They 
that  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  as  Mount  Zion" ;  and  the  meta- 
phor, where  the  comparison  is  not  stated,  but  implied:  "Thy 
word  13  a  lamp  unto  my  feet."  It  is  almost  impossible  to 
explain  any  princij^le  or  to  describe  any  object  without  the 
simile.  A  man  wishes  to  explain  how  a  certain  chemical 
aflects  India  rubber.  "It  makes  it  tear  just  like  blotting 
paper,"  he  says,  and  instantly  it  is  clear  to  us.  The  stone 
before  the  tomb  of  Christ  was  like  a  large  grindstone.  It 
stood  up  against  the  rock  covering  the  tomb  opening,  and  it 
could  be  rolled  to  the  right  or  the  left.  Whenever  the  teacher 
can  translate  the  unknown  into  terms  of  the  known  by  means 
of  the  word  "like"  he  is  doing  real  teaching.  "A  like  is  the 
key  that  enables  us  to  unlock  and  to  enter  the  door  of  the 
unknown."  To  read  through  the  words  of  Jesus  underlining 
every  like  will  impress  anyone  wath  the  great  pedagogic  value 
of  this  simple  device.  The  metaphor  is  not  always  so  clear 
as  the  simile,  but  it  is  more  forcible :  "Judah  is  a  lion's  whelp," 
"Ye  generation  of  vipers,"  "Go  ye,  and  tell  that  fox,"  etc. 
Graphic  story-tellers  make  effective  use  of  the  metaphor. 
Kipling's  metaphors  are  always  fresh  and  striking.  The 
fog  blankets  the  sea — "Earth  and  sea  and  sky  are  milled  uji  in 
a  milky  fog."  He  speaks  of  a  "phonograph  voice,"  "the 
dead  dark."  "the  whirring  wheel. "^  Metaphors  must  not  be 
dragged  in  for  mere  effect;  they  must  be  spontaneous  and 
they  must  really  illustrate.  In  teaching  children  all  figures 
should  be  avoided  that  contain  elements  that  are  foreign  to 
the  child's  world,  and  all  figures  in  the  Bible  lesson  should  lie 
carefully  explained. 

2.  Material  Illustrations.  The  second  class  of  illustrations 
includes  everything  of  a  material  nature  that  may  be  used  for 
illustrative  i)urposes:  objects  like  flowers  and  nests  and  other 
things  from  nature,  maps,  pictures,  models  and  modeling 
ajjparatus,  blackboards,  and  the  like.  At  the  start  a  distinc- 
tion must  be  made  between  object  lessons  and  object-teaching. 
Object  lessons  are  lessons  about  objects;  object-teaching  is 
the  imparting  of  truth  by  means  of  objects.  Under  the  for- 
mer is  included  the  nature  study  of  the  secular  schools.  The 
pupil  is  taught  the  life  history  of  a  plant  or  an  in.sect;    he 


i84        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

studies  the  varieties  and  habit  of  birds  and  the  classification 
of  flowers.  The  only  object  is  the  increasing  of  the  pupil's 
fund  of  knowledge.  With  the  latter  the  chief  aim  is  to  impart 
some  moral  trtith.  Christ  tised  this  method  constantly.  "Be- 
hold the  fowls  of  the  air:  for  they  sow  not,  neither  do 
they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns;  yet  your  heavenly  Father 
feedeth  them.  Are  ye  not  much  better  than  they?"  (See 
also  Matt.  6.  28;  10.  29;  Mark  12.  15.)  Manifestly,  object 
lessons  as  they  are  given  in  the  secvilar  schools  cannot  be 
used  to  any  large  extent  in  the  Sunday  school;  there  is  not 
time  enough  for  such  work.  The  very  nature  of  the  Sunday 
school  demands  moral  teaching,  and  with  children  it  is  very 
difficult  to  give  this  without  appealing  to  the  senses  of  touch 
and  sight,  but  the  object-teaching  must  be  done  with  extreme 
care.  It  is  very  eas}'  by  bringing  in  plants  and  nests  and 
models  and  the  like  to  gain  and  keej)  the  absorbed  attention 
of  the  class,  btit  what  will  the  individual  child  carry  away 
from  the  exercise?  Too  often  it  is  a  mere  object  lesson  and 
nothing  else.  The  object  must  be  a  stepping-stone  to  be  for- 
gotten when  the  central  truth  has  been  reached.  The  teacher 
should  not  try  to  do  too  much.  Let  her  take  a  bud  to  the 
class  and  explain  how  the  loving  God  when  it  was  bedtime 
for  the  woods  and  fields  tucked  in  carefully  the  little  baby 
leaves.  Some  buds  can  be  unrolled  disclosing  the  tiny  forms. 
She  can  then  tell  other  things  that  God  does  in  his  love,  and 
so  make  it  clear  to  the  little  hearts  that  God  is  love;  that  he 
watches  over  even  the  smallest  things,  and  that  he  watches 
over  them.  The  teacher  who  has  accomplished  only  this 
has,  nevertheless,  accomplished  a  great  deal.  Let  the 
teacher  not  be  too  ambitious.  Let  her  object-teachings  be 
extremely  simple;  let  them  not  dominate  the  lesson  but  be 
merely  helps  toward  the  end  sought,  and  let  them  be  few  and 
carefully  planned. 

Pictares.  With  children  the  eye  is  more  active  than  the 
ear,  and  with  very  young  children  the  sense  of  touch  is 
more  trusted  than  either  of  the  other  two.  The  baby  is  not 
satisfied  until  he  gets  the  object  in  his  hands.  The  child's 
world  is  enlarged  by  means  of  pictures.  They  control  the 
imagination,  since  they  give  material  for  correct  images.  The 
teacher  in  the  ])rimary  and  intermediate  grades  should  con- 


ILLUSTRATION  185 

stantly  be  on  the  lookout  for  picture  material.  She  should 
have  not  only  the  leaf  clusters  and  the  lesson  cards  but  also 
miscellaneous  pictures  culled  from  many  sources.  "The 
Bible  is  a  great  picture  book" ;  its  background,  the  marvelous 
Orient,  with  its  color  and  picturesque  life,  offers  infinite  oppor- 
tunity for  the  artist,  and  this  opportunity  has  been  used  to 
the  full.  The  artists  of  centuries  and  of  the  whole  world  have 
vied  with  each  other  in  producing  biblical  pictures.  The 
number  of  masterpieces  with  biblical  subjects  is  beyond  num- 
ber, but  it  is  possible  now  to  get  really  excellent  copies  of  the 
more  famous  of  these  for  a  merely  nominal  price.  Series  like 
the  Perry  pictures  are  cheap  and  excellent.  It  is  now  possible 
in  this  country  to  get  beautifully  colored  post  cards  repro- 
ducing the  most  famous  pictures  in  continental  galleries. 
There  are  many  books  for  the  Sunday  school  library  full  of 
wonderful  pictures,  like  Farrar's  The  Life  of  Christ  Treated  in 
Art,  Van  Dyke's  The  Christ  Child  in  Art,  Jamieson's  Sacred 
and  Legendary  Art,  and  the  like.  There  are  photographs  of 
the  Holy  Land  to  be  had  for  ten  cents  per  copy,  blue  prints 
of  biblical  scenes  by  the  old  masters  at  one  cent  apiece,  and 
those  who  cannot  afford  even  these  can  get  much  material 
from  Christmas  catalogues  of  publishers  and  post  card  dealers 
and  picture  houses.  The  child  should  be  shown  always  the 
best.  He  should  be  brought  up  with  copies  of  the  great 
masters.  In  this  way  there  will  be  cultivated  in  him  not 
only  a  taste  for  the  best  in  art,  but  also  a  knowledge  of  biblical 
things  and  a  reverence  for  the  old  Bible  stories  such  as  nothing 
else  could  bring. 

Modeling  and  Sand  Pile  Work.  For  the  impressing  of  geo- 
graphical facts  there  is  nothing  like  the  sand  ]:)ile  and  the  pulp 
raised  map.  The  sand  pile  can  be  had  even  by  the  poorest 
school.  A  shallow  box  some  two  feet  by  four,  mounted  on 
legs,  and  several  quarts  of  damp  sand  are  all  that  are  needed. 
With  this  can  be  modeled  relief  maps  of  the  Holy  Land  and 
other  parts  of  the  biblical  world,  plans  of  the  temple  and  its 
environs,  diagrams  of  Eastern  houses,  sheepfolds,  and  similar 
things.  A  child  who  has  made  the  low  level  of  the  Jordan 
valley,  the  peak  of  Hermon,  the  projecting  hump  of  Carmel, 
the  plain  about  Xazareth,  the  mountains  round  about  Jeru- 
salem,   and    has    located    Bethlehem,  Xain,  Galilee,  Jericho, 


186        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

Jacob's  Well,  Hebron,  Lebanon  and  other  points,  has  a  grasp 
upon  the  subject  that  can  be  gained  in  no  other  way.  The 
sancJ  pile  inakes  the  stibject  more  real.  It  gives  the  elevations 
and  shows  why  certain  routes  of  travel  were  pursued  rather 
than  others.  Nearly  all  of  the  battles  of  the  Old  Testament 
were  fought  on  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  and  a  mere  glance  at 
the  raised  map  shows  why.  It  is  the  only  extended  place  in 
Palestine  where  chariots  could  be  driven.  The  rest  is  moun- 
tainous and  inaccessible.  The  mountains  round  about  Jen.i- 
salem  preserved  the  kingdom  of  Judah  long  after  the  northern 
tribes  had  disappeared.  Even  the  adult  classes  would  profit 
often  from  an  hour  with  the  sand  i^le.  For  the  Junior  De- 
l)artnient  pulp  modeling  is  a  valuable  exercise.  A  sheet  of 
ordinary  paperinaker's  pulp  is  torn  into  fine  bits  and  boiled 
vigorously  in  water  for  several  hours.  Each  of  the  class  is 
then  given  a  small  tray,  about  the  size  of  a  slate,  and  a  handful 
of  this  piilp.  The  material  is  then  worked  into  a  raised  map 
by  means  of  the  fingers  and  a  small  sponge.  After  the  ma]) 
has  been  thoroughly  dried  it  can  be  removed  from  the  tray 
and  mounted  on  a  blue  card — the  bhxe  representing  the  Great 
Sea  and  the  Jordan  valley.  If  wood  pulp  cannot  be  obtained, 
old  newspapers  torn  up  and  boiled  will  do  nearly  as  well. 


CHAPTER  XXIX 
BLACKBOARD  WORK 

False  Methods.  The  last  subject  tinder  the  head  of  material 
illustration  is  the  blackboard.  Perhaps  no  phase  of  Sunday 
school  work  has  been  dwelt  upon  more  in  conventions  or  in 
handbooks  of  methods,  and  it  may  not  be  too  much  to  say 
that  perhaps  no  phase  of  the  work  has  been  more  open  to 
criticism  from  the  standpoint  of  sound  pedagogy.  Too  often 
has  the  blackboard  been  filled  with  mere  puzzles  and  rebuses 
and  picturesque  combinations.  Symbols  of  all  kinds  have 
been  joined  with  alliterative  phrases  and  lists  of  words  be- 
ginning with  the  same  letter  or  arranged  in  a  series  so  that 
when  "beheaded"  the  first  letters  will  spell  a  certain  word, 
and  so  on  and  on  to  the  confusion  of  good  teaching.  Haslett 
describes  a  typical  device : 

"It  showed  a  small  picture  of  a  prison.  On  the  level  roof 
of  the  prison  was  the  word  'Tells,'  and  arched  at  the  top  of 
the  picture  were  the  words  'Be  of  Good  Cheer,'  while  immedi- 
ately under  the  arch  were  the  words  in  a  kind  of  puzzle  form, 
'God's  Promise  to  Paul  in  Prison.'  On  one  side  of  the  picture 
at  the  end  of  the  prison  was  a  puzzle  which  read,  'Brave  Boy,' 
and  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  prison  was  another  puzzle  thus : 
'40  plot  Against  Paul.'  I  translated  it,  after  some  study, 
thtis:  'Be  of  Good  Cheer.  God's  j^romise  to  Paul  in  prison 
tells  one  brave  boy  forty  plot  against  Paul.'  I  was  not  sure 
whether  the  'forty'  referred  to  boys  or  promises.  The  whole 
affair  was  quite  ingenious,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  peo- 
■l)le  want  to  obscure  the  teachings  of  the  lesson  in  any  such 
way." 

The  blackboard  is  a  valuable  device.  One  can  hardly  con- 
ceive of  a  secular  schoolroom  that  is  not  provided  with  ex- 
tensive blackboard  space,  but  one  will  look  in  vain  in  these 
schoolrooms  for  any  blackboard  teaching  of  the  type  found 
in  many  Sunday  schools.  In  the  lower  grades  the  board 
is  used  largely  for  the  pupil  to  practice  drawing  or  penmanship 

187 


i88        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

upon,  or  for  problems  in  arithmetic.  The  teacher  may  often 
supplement  her  object  lessons  with  a  simple  drawing,  but 
it  is  always  with  a  view  to  making  the  object  better  under- 
stood. Analogies  are  seldom  touched  upon  in  the  public 
schools. 

The  Primary  Room.  It  is  an  uncontested  fact  that  children 
learn  more  by  means  of  the  eye  than  by  means  of  the  ear. 
With  all  of  us  "seeing  is  believing."  The  eye  must  be  ap- 
])ealed  to  or  we  are  neglecting  one  great  means  for  education. 
But  carefully  chosen  pictures  skillfully  used  satisfy  largely 
this  deinand.  The  blackboard  may  supplement  these,  how- 
ever, but  in  the  use  of  it  certain  laws  are  imperative:  i.  Be 
sensible.  Keep  constantly  in  mind  the  child's  limitations  and 
his  standpoint.  What  impression  is  the  little  one  carrying 
away  from  the  blackboard  exercise  ?  The  teacher  who  makes 
a  large  heart  on  the  blackboard,  then  makes  a  door  to  it, 
and  shows  how  bad  things  may  enter  by  pinning  on  inside 
the  heart  pictures  of  various  animals — a  wolf  for  anger,  a 
monkey  for  vanity,  a  pig  for  gluttony,  and  the  like — then  has 
a  picture  of  Christ  come  and  knock  at  the  door,  and  then  enter 
and  displace  the  animals,  must  be  very  sure  of  his  ground  at 
every  step.  It  might  amaze  him  could  he  for  a  moment  look 
at  the  exercise  from  the  standpoint  of  one  of  the  children. 
Such  an  exercise  is  absurd  even  for  imtermediate  ]nii)ils,  or 
even  adults.  2.  Be  simple.  One  cannot  tise  complicated  de- 
vices in  the  primary  room.  There  should  be  but  one  idea  in 
the  illustration  and  that  should  be  made  perfectly  clear.  The 
word  "Obey"  placed  on  the  board  during  the  Sundays  when 
obedience  is  studied  is  blackboard  enough.  Even  those  who 
cannot  read  will  learn  it.  After  a  time  there  can  be  added 
"Obey  Mamma,"  "Obey  Papa,"  etc.  There  should  be  no 
attemj)t  at  elaborate  drawing.  Only  the  expert  should  at- 
temi)t  faces  or  animals  or  costumes.  In  telling  the  story  of 
the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  the  teacher  may  say,  "It  is 
the  story  of  the  boy  who  helped."  She  may  then  make  three 
curved  lines  for  the  mountains  in  the  background,  then  straight 
lines  representing  the  people,  and  then  a  short  straight  line 
representing  the  boy.  She  should  do  this  as  she  talks.  It  is 
all  that  is  needed.  3.  Make  the  illustration  a  means  and  not 
an  end.     The  pupil  who  goes  home  remembering  only  the 


BLACKBOARD  WORK  189 

picture  has  not  been  well  taught.  He  should  go  home  with  the 
idea,  "That  boy  helped,  and  I  should  like  to  help  too."  To 
make  sure  that  the  blackboard  does  not  dominate  the  lesson 
erase  the  design  as  soon  as  you  are  through  with  it  and  then 
have  one  of  the  pupils  tell  the  story  withotit  it.  4.  Don'l  use 
the  blackboard  every  Sunday.  Many  lessons  cannot  be  illus- 
trated, and  it  is  worse  than  useless  to  rack  one's  brain  for  far- 
fetched material  when  none  is  really  needed.  Unless  the 
ilkistration  springs  spontaneously  from  the  lesson  it  is  of 
little  use. 

The  Use  of  Symbolism.  To  what  extent  symbols,  like 
crowns  and  harps  and  crosses  and  anchors,  are  valuable  in 
teaching  is  an  open  question.  Secular  education,  which  is 
based  on  purely  practical  results,  makes  little  use  of  them.  To 
translate  a  lesson  into  symbols  may,  perhaps,  make  it  graphic 
to  adult  minds,  and  may,  perhaps,  aid  the  memory,  but  it  is  a 
doubtful  device  with  children.  The  lesson  should  be  made 
a  personal  matter;  it  should  add  to  the  pupil's  fund  of  infor- 
mation; it  should  urge  to  better  doing;  it  should  suggest  con- 
crete action  on  the  part  of  the  learner  and  not  be  a  mere  trans- 
lating of  it  into  an  intellectual  abstraction.  When  symbols 
are  used,  as,  for  instance,  a  heart  pierced  with  the  arrows  of 
sin,  they  should  be  made  a  mere  means  to  an  end,  and  this 
end  should  be  a  personal  application.  Too  often  blackboard 
illustrations  are  merely  ingenious ;  often  they  are  as  intricate 
and  as  original  as  sonnets.  They  hold  the  attention  of  the 
pupil,  but  too  often  they  have  no  other  effect  than  to  elicit 
the  admiration  of  the  adult  classes  and  amuse  the  chil- 
dren. True  teaching  should  strike  home  by  short  simple 
methods. 

Necessary  Blackboard  "Work.  For  certain  things  the  black- 
board is  imperatively  demanded.  In  teaching  biblical  geog- 
raphy to  junior  and  intermediate  classes  it  cannot  be  dis- 
pensed with.  The  teacher  who  is  explaining  the  geographical 
facts  about  Palestine  should  make  a  rough  map,  talking  as  he 
makes  it.  He  should  draw  the  western  coast  line,  then  the 
Jordan  with  the  Lake  of  Galilee  and  the  Dead  Sea,  then  make 
Hermon  and  Carmel  and  the  mountain  ranges.  Then  he  can 
indicate  positions  of  the  leading  cities  and  towns.  Anyone 
can  do  this  rapidly,  and  it  is  the  most  helpful  map  that  can  be 


TOO         FXEMKNTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

made.  The  superintendent  who  gives  to  his  schools  for  ten 
minutes  every  Sunday  a  talk  on  biblical  geography'  illustrated 
in  this  way  on  the  blackboard  is  doing  vital  work.  But  there 
should  be  no  mere  pouring-in  process.  Each  pupil  should 
have  a  notebook  or  a  pad  and  be  required  to  make  a  co]iy  of 
the  maps  from  Sunday  to  Sunday,  and  these  books  should  be 
examined  at  intervals.  The  blackboard  is  also  needed  for 
stimmaries  and  reviews,  for  ]ilans  of  btiildings,  like  the  taber- 
nacle or  the  temple  or  the  ordinary  Jewish  house.  When  the 
lesson  is  about  the  life  of  Christ,  or  the  journeys  of  Paul,  or 
the  patriarchs,  the  journeys  should  be  traced  from  Sabbath 
to  Sabbath  on  an  outline  may  be  of  the  pupil's  own  making. 
Sometimes  computations  can  be  made,  as,  for  instance,  the 
time  from  Solomon  to  the  second  temple.  A  calendar  can 
be  made  of  Christ's  last  week  on  earth,  and  a  list  of  his  dif- 
ferent api^earances  after  the  resurrection.  This  is  the  nat- 
ural tise  of  the  blackboard,  and  it  is  most  valuable  in  its 
results. 

Individual  Blackboards.  It  would  be  ideal  if  every  class, 
or,  at  least,  each  department,  could  be  in  a  room  by  itself 
with  its  own  apparatus,  but  this  in  most  schools  is  impossible. 
The  teacher  of  a  class  which  is  surrounded  on  all  sides  by 
other  working  classes  has,  it  would  seem,  small  chance  for 
blackboard  work.  But  the  diffictilty  has  been  obviated  by 
the  iise  of  individual  blackboards,  something  like  slates. 
Much  better,  however,  are  the  pencil  and  pad.  The  les.son, 
]ierhaps,  is  about  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  The  teacher 
makes  a  drawing  of  it  and  holds  it  up  for  each  of  the  class  to 
copy;  or  he  brings  out  a  central  truth  and  has  it  copied ;  or  he 
makes  an  outline  map  which  the  pupils  make  after  him.  In 
this  way  classes  of  juniors  are  often  kept  busy  to  their  own 
great  jirofit.  If  one  wishes  to  learn  the  outlines  of  anything, 
or  the  relative  positions  of  places,  there  is  no  surer  way  than  to 
make    a    drawing. 

The  Official  Blackboard.  Many  schools  find  it  profitable 
to  have  a  board  e.xclusively  for  announcements.  The  at- 
tendance is  posted  together  with  the  attendance  on  the  cor- 
responding date  for  several  years  back.  The  collection  is 
posted  in  the  same  way,  often  with  a  simj>le  word  of  encour- 
agement   or    warning.       Banner    classes    in    attendance    are 


BLACKBOARD  WORK  igr 

noted,  and  all  announcements  and  plans  for  new  work. 
Often  the'  songs  for  opening  and  closing  are  also  posted. 
Such  a  board  should  not  be  crowded,  and  everything  on  it 
should  be  written  so  legibly  that  all  parts  of  the  room  can 
read  it  with  ease. 

Special  Devices.  Many  teachers  believe  in  pictures  cut 
from  the  leaf  clusters  and  pinned  upon  the  board  to  supple- 
ment the  crayon  sketch.  For  example,  several  lines  are 
drawn  to  illustrate  mountains  in  the  background,  then  a  line 
is  drawn  to  represent  a  road.  On  this  road  is  pinned  the 
figure  of  a  kneeling  woman — the  Syrophoenician  woman — 
then  the  figure  of  Christ  with  arm  outstretched  to  her,  then 
behind  him  the  smaller  figures  of  the  disciples.  A  large  nuin- 
ber  of  stich  pictures  can  be  obtained  by  the  teacher  who  is 
watching  for  such  material.  Once  in  a  while  (the  value  of  an 
exercise  is  increased  when  it  comes  as  a  surprise)  a  special 
device  may  be  used.  The  Sunday  School  Times  has  a  picttire 
of  some  twenty  closed  doors,  on  each  the  name  of  some  great 
organization,  like  Wanamaker,  Marshall  Field  &  Co.,  U.  S. 
Army,  .Western  Union  Telegraph  Co.,  Union  Pacific,  Lehigh 
Valley,  etc.,  and  entitles  it  "Doors  Closed  to  Cigarette 
Smokers."     Mr.  Lawrance  tells  of  a  striking  exercise: 

"I  saw  Mr.  E.  A.  Fox,  of  Kentucky,  use  this  illustration 
on  one  occasion  with  good  effect.  He  was  trying  to  teach  that 
the  best  way  to  get  rid  of  a  bad  habit  was  to  get  rid  of  it  all 
at  once,  and  not  a  little  at  a  time.  He  wrote  the  word  habit 
on  the  board  thus : 

HABIT 

He  then  erased  the  H  and  said,  'You  have  A  BIT  left';  he 
then  erased  the  A  and  said,  'You  still  have  a  BIT';  he  then 
erased  the  B  and  said,  'You  still  have  IT';  then  putting  the 
whole  word  upon  the  board  again  he  erased  it  all  at  once. 
Those  who  saw  this  will  not  forget  its  lesson." 

A  Final  Word.  Those  who  have  ever  watched  in  public 
school  or  college  a  great  teacher  at  his  work  will  remember 
how  as  he  taught  he  was  constantly  turning  to  the  blackboard. 
The  crayon  is  constantly  in  his  hand.  Now  he  places  on  the 
board  the  Latin  word  from  which  he  has  traced  an  etymology, 
now  he  makes  a  rough  diagram,  now  he  puts  down  a  number 
that  your  eye  may  supplement  the  ear.      He  is  making  the 


192        FXEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

distinction  between  the  use  of  in  and  the  use  of  into  and  in- 
\'oluntarilv  he  makes  a  diagram : 


INTO 


This  is  the  true  spirit  in  which  the  blackboard  should  be  used. 
The  illustration  should  come  spontaneously  and  at  the  mo- 
ment when  it  is  needed.  Elaborate  work  made  at  leisure  dur- 
ing the  week  and  then  unveiled  at  the  proper  moment  before 
the  class  accomplishes  little.  The  teacher  should  talk,  chalk 
in  hand,  and  illustrate  as  he  goes.  ^lerely  to  stand  by  the 
board  as  if  about  to  use  it  will  hold  the  attention  of  a  class  to 
your  words  in  mere  expectancy.  There  is  no  need  of  elaborate 
design;  the  teacher  need  not  be  an  artist  or  even  be  good  at 
drawing;  anyone  who  can  make  a  mark  can  illustrate.  The 
child's  imagination  will  fill  all  gaps.  Merely  to  draw  a  paral- 
lelogram on  the  board  and  then  to  ask  the  children  to  imagine 
certain  specified  details  of  a  picture  within  it  is  often  enough. 
The  teacher  at  the  blackboard  should  ask  himself  constantly 
this  question :  How  can  I  while  I  am  giving  the  lesson  to  the 
ear  make  it  clear  at  the  same  time  to  the  eye,  not  by  elaborate 
work  but  by  a  simple  and  most  direct  appeal  to  the  things 
the  pupil  knows  best  ? 


CHAPTER  XXX 
THE  APPLICATION  OF  THE  LESSON 

The  Fourth  Step.  The  lesson  has  now  been  presented  and 
has  been  translated  in  terms  of  the  learner's  experience.  He 
has  understood  it,  and  digested  it.  He  is  now  ready  to  put 
it  into  portable  form  to  be  added  to  his  fund  of  knowledge. 
In  other  words,  the  lesson  must  be  condensed  into  a  generaliza- 
tion. This  arriving  at  general  statements  is,  as  we  have 
already  observed,  the  primary  aim  of  all  instruction. 

But  when  shall  the  generalization  be  presented?  Shall  it 
be  given  at  the  start  and  then  be  made  clear  with  explanations 
and  illustrations,  or  shall  the  process  be  reversed?  Before 
answering  the  question  it  will  be  well  to  explain  that  the 
arriving  at  generalizations  is  the  primary  aim  of  all  instruction. 
First  the  particular,  then  the  general,  is  the  law  of  the  mind. 
The  race  acquired  its  stores  of  knowledge  wholly  in  this  way. 
For  instance,  a  certain  tribe  of  Indians  placed  in  each  hill  of 
corn  a  fish  for  fertilizer.  Doubtless  some  prehistoric  Indian 
once  observed  a  particularly  fine  stalk  of  corn  growing  from 
where  a  fish  had  been  dropped.  That  was  a  particular  in- 
stance. Out  of  curiosity  he  planted  some  corn  with  a  fish 
near  it  and  found  this  also  to  spring  up  more  luxuriantly  than 
usually.  This  also  was  a  particular  instance.  He  may  have 
tried  it  yet  again.  Then  came  his  generalization:  Corn  al- 
ways grows  better  when  a  fish  is  dropped  with  it  in  the  hill. 
This  generalization  became  at  length  a  part  of  the  wisdom 
of  the  tribe,  or  wisdom,  which  is  the  end  and  aim  of  educa- 
tion, consists  of  a  body  of  generalizations  which  have  been 
learned  from  particular  instances.  The  child  does  not  have 
to  get  his  general  ideas  as  the  race  got  them,  but  nevertheless 
he  must  go  through  the  same  general  process.  Education 
must  proceed  from  the  particular  to  the  general.  Generaliza- 
tions come  last. 

The  Moral  Not  to  be  Forced.  But  this  does  not  mean  that 
every  story  must  end  with   a  moral,  nor  does  it  mean  that 

193 


194        KLEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  TEDAGOGY 

every  lesson  shall  be  translated  into  goody-goody  ]ilatitiides 
to  1)6  doled  out  at  the  end  of  the  hour,  as,  for  instance,  "Hon- 
esty is  the  best  policy,"  and  the  like.  It  means  simply  that 
every  lesson  shall  be  taught  with  a  purpose  in  view,  and  that 
this  purpose  shall  be  evident  to  the  class  at  the  end  of  the 
period.  The  object  of  the  teacher  is  not  simply  to  interest 
his  pupils  by  telling  good  stories,  nor  to  study  a  portion  of 
Scripture  merely  as  an  interesting  bit  of  history  or  literature ; 
it  is  to  enlarge  their  conceptions  of  life  and  to  help  them  to 
right  living.  The  class  of  children  that  has  been  taught 
aright  the  miracle  of  the  loaves  or  the  healing  of  Naaman  will 
go  home  not  rej)eating  some  copybook  phrase,  but  with  the 
new  thought  that  even  little  boys  and  girls  may  help  just  as 
much  as  big  people.  If  the  lesson  material  has  been  skillfully 
handled  they  have  discovered  the  truth  by  themselves,  and 
will  therefore  always  retain  it.  Truth  learned  by  rote  has  no 
associating  material  to  hold  it,  but  truth  learned  by  systematic 
steps,  even  if  forgotten,  can  be  regained  again,  the  material 
by  which  it  was  acquired  being  still  in  the  mind  and  requiring 
only  a  review  to  yield  the  same  result  as  at  first.  The  leader 
of  the  teachers'  meeting  should  see  to  it  that  his  class  of 
teachers  determines  upon  some  central  object  for  which  the 
lesson  is  to  be  taught,  and  that  a  large  part  of  the  hour  is 
taken  up  with  a  discussion  of  how  this  central  truth  can  most 
effectively  be  brought  out.  It  must  not  be  obtruded  upon  the 
class  in  such  a  way  as  to  miss  its  purpose  and  degenerate  into 
the  mere  preaching  of  a  perfunctory  generality,  but  it  must 
come  naturally  and  with  seeming  inevitableness. 

The  Last  Step.  Then  should  come  the  application — the 
most  im])ortant  part  of  all.  The  majority  of  teachers  seldom 
get  to  this  step.  The  superintendent's  bell  finds  them  in  the 
midst  of  the  lesson  describing  this  or  that  custom,  dwelling  on 
the  bearings  upon  church  doctrine  of  this  or  that  passage,  or 
finding  as  many  central  truths  as  possible  in  the  lesson  and 
explaining  at  length  in  useless  platitudes  why  they  are  central 
trviths.  To  stop  at  this  point  is  to  teach  the  lesson  simply  as 
an  intellectual  exercise.  The  purpose  of  the  Sunday  school  is 
to  mold  character,  and  the  molding  of  character  is  accom- 
plished only  through  the  actual  doing  of  things.  No  one  ever 
grew  into  a  Christian  or  a  moral  life  through  the  mere  study  of 


THE  APPLICATION  OF  THE  LESSON  195 

central  truths  or  moral  maxims.  One  must  exercise  oneself 
unto  godliness. 

Training  for  Habit.  In  our  study  of  psychology  we  found 
that  habit  grows  or  decreases  as  the  result  of  activities,  that  a 
mere  intellectual  assent  accomplishes  nothing  toward  charac- 
ter unless  it  be  accompanied  by  doing,  and  that  a  constant 
arousing  of  1.he  higher  emotions  through  music  or  preaching 
or  art,  unless  followed  up  always  by  actual  deeds,  results  at 
length  in  moral  impotency.  We  sometimes  hear  the  phrase 
"gospel-hardened"  applied  to  certain  congregations,  and 
there  is  a  real  psychological  basis  for  the  term.  The  Sunday 
school  pupil  who  year  after  year  is  shown  the  great  truths  of 
the  religious  life,  and  while  assenting  to  them  never  once  puts 
any  of  them  into  practice,  at  length  becomes  atrophied  in  his 
moral  nature,  just  as  the  doctor  or  the  nurse  through  long 
contact  with  suffering  becomes  at  last  hardened  and  unsym- 
pathetic. To  talk  glibly  of  unselfishness,  and  of  laying  "all 
upon  the  altar,"  and  of  going  where  Christ  wants  us  to  go  is 
one  thing,  but  actually  to  do  it  until  it  becomes  a  habit  is 
something  far  diflEerent.  We  are  the  results  of  the  things  that 
we  do  and  not  of  the  maxims  that  we  copy  into  our  notebooks. 

Theory  and  Practice.  It  is  hard  to  teach  children  even  in 
the  secular  schools  that  their  studies  are  for  immediate  appli- 
cation and  not  far-off  things  to  be  of  use,  perhaps,  when  they 
are  grown  up.  It  is  the  rare  teacher  who  can  teach  the  rules 
of  grammar,  for  instance,  so  that  they  will  be  seen  to  be  of 
immediate  use.  To  the  child  all  studies  are  mere  theoretical 
things  to  be  mastered  because  the  teacher  requires  it.  This 
explains  why  the  practically  educated  man  often  at  first  dis- 
tances the  man  from  the  schools.  The  boy  brought  up  on  the 
farm,  or  in  the  store,  or  in  a  practical  industry,  gets  his  knowl- 
edge for  no  other  purpose  than  to  apply  it  at  once.  He  has 
no  theory;  all  that  he  knows  he  got  with  a  definite  idea  of 
immediate  results.  The  Sunday  school  too  often  has  been  a 
place  for  the  teaching  of  mere  theory.  The  material  acquired 
was  not  so  much  for  immediate  use  as  for  a  sort  of  insurance 
against  future  need.  This  ideal  should  be  changed.  The 
pupil  should  be  taught  that  he  goes  to  Sunday  school  to  learn 
how  to  live  to-day,  and  that  the  principles  acquired  there  are 
for  immediate  application.      "It  has  been  said  over  and  over 


196        ELEMENTS  OE  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

again  by  the  best  teachers  and  writers  on  education  that 
principles  and  rules  are  never  safely  mastered  till  they  have 
settled  into  the  usual  practice  and  conduct  of  a  child." 

Self- Activity.  There  can  be  no  morals  apart  from  conduct. 
It  matters  not  how  beautiful  or  impressive  may  be  the  lesson, 
if  it  does  not  in  the  end  result  in  conduct  it  has  missed  its  aim. 
The  parable  of  the  talents  teaches  plainly  that  we  can  have 
only  what  we  use.  The  Sunday  school  should  be  a  constant 
inspiration  to  better  doing.  The  child  should  learn  to  obey, 
to  pray,  to  be  of  service,  to  control  his  temper,  to  be  honest, 
to  be  cheerful,  to  be  punctual  and  orderly.  Self-activity 
should  be  the  watchword;  let  the  ruling  word  be  Do  rather 
than  Don't.  Life  is  simply  a  place  for  applying  knowledge; 
and  the  Sunday  school  is  the  place  for  obtaining  moral  and 
religious  knowledge  for  immediate  application.  Every  lesson 
should  lead  to  doi)ig.  The  piipil  should  be  a  better  pupil  on 
Monday  because  he  went  to  Sunday  school  the  day  before. 
He  should  not  only  know  what  the  great  moral  virtues  are, 
but  he  should  be  already  practicing  them  because  he  has  been 
taught  to  do.  The  mother  must  do  much  of  this,  but  the 
Sunday  school  can  greatly  supplement  her  work.  "Religion," 
said  one  mother,  "is  representing  God  in  common  things. 
It  is  learning  to  forbear  to  be  impatient;  to  pick  up  your  toys 
and  obey."  The  side  of  actual  doing  constantly  dwelt  upon 
leads  at  length  to  the  doing  habit.  The  child  who  is  properly 
taught  in  the  Sunday  school  fifty-two  weeks  in  the  year,  and 
year  after  year,  acquires  at  length  a  habit  which  in  later  years 
he  will  prize  as  his  most  i:)recious  possession. 

Simplicity  of  Application.  The  teacher  should  not  try  to 
do  too  much.  One  simple  truth  derived  naturally  from  the 
lesson  is  better  than  a  half  dozen  forced  applications.  Often 
teachers  of  adult  classes  ask  each  person  in  turn  for  some 
teaching  of  the  lesson,  and  the  result  is  often  as  many  truths 
as  there  are  members  present.  It  is  better  to  settle  upon  one 
central  truth,  and  then  to  ask  each  member  for  ways  in  which 
it  may  be  applied  actively  to  daily  life.  There  should  be  no 
forced  application.  Better  have  no  moral  teaching  than  to 
drag  in  farfetched  and  unnatural  teachings. 

Methods.  To  make  telling  applications  of  the  moral  teaching 
of  a  lesson  requires  skill  and  tact  and  a  knowledge  of  one's 


THE  APPLICATION  OF  THE  LESSON  197 

class.  In  the  adult  department  it  is  usually  easy  to  arrive 
at  the  central  truth,  but  rather  difficult  to  make  the  personal 
application.  One  cannot  ask  each  member,  class-meeting 
fashion,  how  the  truth  applies  to  him.  He  can,  however, 
bring  out  the  lesson  in  concrete  terms.  If  it  is  about  honesty, 
he  can  show  how  farmers,  or  workmen,  or  tradesmen  are  to  be 
honest;  he  can  give  illustrations  of  honest  men,  and  dwell 
upon  the  thrill  of  pleasure  that  upright  dealing  brings  to  the 
dealer.  He  can  have  the  class  give  instances  and  end  the 
hour  with  a  symposium  of  testimony,  so  that  all  can  go  forth 
feeling  that  strict  honesty  henceforth  shall  govern  them. 
The  same  thing  can  be  done  with  intermediate  and  junior 
classes.  Strict  honesty  in  the  playing  of  games  and  in  school 
examinations  can  be  dwelt  upon.  A  skillful  teacher  can 
make  it  appear  such  a  mean  thing  for  a  boy  to  cheat  in  a  gam.e 
that  all  will  hang  their  heads  at  the  mere  thought  of  doing  it. 
With  the  lower  classes  the  story  must  be  trusted  to  bear  its 
own  moral.  Here  the  learner  may  be  told,  after  the  way  has 
been  sufficiently  prepared  by  story  and  illustration,  some 
specific  thing  that  the  good  child  loves  to  do.  Each  can  be 
told  some  particular  thing  he  is  to  guard  against  during  the 
week  and  can  be  asked  at  the  next  exercise  what  he  has  done. 
It  is  impossible  to  give  rules  for  procedure.  Each  teacher 
must  make  his  own  laws  and  must  apply  them  as  he  can. 

One  great  commandment  he  must,  however,  obey :  Let  not 
your  class  leave  you  at  the  end  of  the  hour  eqtiipped  merely 
with  a  little  more  knowledge,  but  see  to  it  that  they  have  also 
been  filled  with  the  desire  to  improve  in  some  degree  their  con- 
duct, and  thus  to  take  one  more  step  toward'  a  strong  Christian 
character. 


CHAPTER  XXXI 
THE  ART  OF  QUESTIOXIXG 

The  Use  of  Qaestions.  The  art  of  teaching  is  very  largely 
the  art  of  questioning.  One  may  impart  knowledge  in  two 
ways:  he  may  pour  it  in,  or  he  may  draw  it  out.  True  teach- 
ing is  not  a  mere  lifeless  dropping  of  potatoes  one  by  t^ne  into  a 
sack;  it  is,  as  it  were,  a  ball  game,  a  give-and-take,  a  contest 
with  life  and  zest  and  eager  interest,  where  the  pupil  is  as 
much  alive  as  the  teacher  and  does  his  full  share,  and  the 
game  is  played  very  largely  with  question  and  answer. 
There  can  be  very  little  true  teaching  without  questioning; 
and  skill  with  question  and  answer  is  the  measure  of  the 
teacher's  ability.  Tell  me  the  questions  which  a  teacher 
puts  to  his  class  and  I  will  tell  you  very  nearly  what  the 
teacher  is. 

Qasses  of  Questions.  From  the  pedagogical  standpoint 
questions  may  be  divided  into  three  classes:  (i)  The  pre- 
liminary question,  which  is  to  be  used  in  connection  with 
Herbart's  First  Step  (chap.  27) ;  (2)  the  developing  or  suggestive 
question,  the  design  of  which  is  to  stir  the  mental  activity  of 
the  pupil  and  entible  him  of  himself  to  arrive  at  the  conclusion 
which  the  teacher  desires;  and  (3)  the  test  question,  which 
is  designed  simply  to  find  out  what  the  puj)il  has  learned. 

The  Preliminary  Question.  The  jn-eliminary  question 
searches  f<jr  a  ])roper  foundation  upon  which  to  build.  The 
engineer  who  is  to  construct  a  railroad  in  an  unknown  region 
.sends  out  an  ex])loring  expedition  to  report  on  routes,  and 
grades,  and  inaterials,  and  methods  of  juncture  with  sources 
of  supplies,  and  work  already  done.  So  with  the  teacher. 
The  condition  of  the  puj^il's  mind  must  be  found  out;  the 
new  materials  must  be  joined  to  the  old;  there  must  be  com- 
jirehension  and  sympathy  and  interest.  The  point  of  con- 
tact is  found  most  easily  by  means  of  questions.  The  teacher 
who  has  been  long  with  her  class  does  not  need  to  grope 
about  much  for  this  point  of  contact,  yet  no  teacher  knows 

198 


THE  ART  OF  QUESTIONING  igg 

her  class  so  well  that  she  can  build  without  preliminary 
work.  Every  teacher,  no  matter  how  wide  her  experience,  is 
constantly  being  surprised  at  limitations  in  her  little  pupils. 
It  is  never  safe  to  take  much  for  granted.  The  pupil  may 
have  certain  words  like  Pharisee,  disciple,  prodigal,  Jews, 
Gentiles,  and  the  like,  at  his  tongue's  end,  and  yet  have 
very  hazy  notions  about  them.  It  is  safe  to  test  each  step 
and  to  build  with  full  knowledge  of  the  foundation. 

Preliminary  Work  Illustrated.  Let  us  take  for  an  illus- 
tration the  lesson  "Saul  Chosen  King"  (i  Sam.  lo.  17-27). 
The  teacher  of  the  teachers'  class  or  the  adult  Bible  class 
should  begin  by  asking  questions  the  answers  to  which  will 
give  the  substance  of  the  last  lesson  and  fill  up  the  gap  be- 
tween it  and  the  lesson  in  hand.  Without  this  preliininary 
work  the  lesson  becomes  a  mere  isolated  fragment.  Then 
may  come  questions  as  to  the  reasons  why  Israel  had  no 
king,  as  to  the  customs  of  the  nations  at  the  time,  and  as  to 
the  internal  condition  of  Israel  religiously  and  politically. 
Not  over  five  minutes  should  be  given  to  this  part  of  the 
lesson.  With  children  the  approach  must  be  very  different. 
The  teacher  has  selected,  perhaps,  as  the  central  truth  of 
the  lesson  the  words.  Each  one  of  us  is  a  ruler  over  something. 
The  preliminary  questions  will  be  about  kings  and  presidents 
and  rulers  generally.  The  story  may  then  be  told  of  Saul, 
who,  while  about  his  everyday  work,  faithful  in  little  things, 
ruling  himself,  found  a  kingdom.  Then  by  skillful  transition 
it  can  be  shown  that  God  has  chosen  each  one  of  us  to  be  a 
ruler:  a  ruler  of  his  tongue,  his  temper,  his  heart,  his  feet, 
his  hands.  With  older  boys  and  girls  the  teacher  may  call 
for  cases  of  apparent  accident  that  later  seemed  to  be  the 
ruling  of  God.  The  pupil's  knowledge  of  history  and  of  the 
Bible  may  be  drawn  upon.  Then  the  class  may  be  set  to 
finding  the  various  seeming  accidents  by  means  of  which 
Saul  came  to  his  kingship.  There  can  be  no  formula  for 
this  part  of  the  work.  The  teacher  must  study  each  lesson 
and  plan  his  own  approach.  Good  j)reliminary  questioning 
calls  for  information,  thought,  and  originality. 

The  Developing  Question.  Real  education  comes  only 
through  self-activity.  The  teacher's  aim  constantly  should 
be  to  get  his  pupil  to  think  for  himself.      The  teacher  in  the 


200        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

public  school  who  does  all  the  problems  for  his  pupils,  and 
explains  everything,  and  tells  everything  and  requires  his 
pupils  simply  to  watch  and  listen,  may  be  popular  with  his 
school,  but  he  is  not  a  teacher.  He  is  an  entertainer.  The 
lesson  should  be  developed  by  means  of  questions  which 
set  the  pupil  to  thinking.  Such  questions  as,  What  did  Saul 
do  next?  or  Was  God  pleased  because  they  wanted  a  king? 
suggest  nothing.  In  many  classes  they  are  answered  by 
the  mere  reading  of  a  passage  from  the  lesson  text.  Such  a 
question,  however,  as,  By  means  of  what  apparent  accidents 
did  Saul  become  king?  is  suggestive.  The  pupil  may  have 
read  the  whole  account  and  not  thought  of  any  accident 
connected  with  it.  Now  he  sees  it  in  a  new  light.  "Why, 
this  was  an  accident,"  he  says,  "and  that  was  surely  an 
accident.  And  here's  another."  The  teacher  has  set  him 
to  thinking.  I  know  of  a  group  of  teachers  who  assemble 
weekly  in  a  teachers'  meeting.  It  is  made  up  of  diverse 
elements.  There  are  ainong  others  a  clergyman,  a  farmer, 
an  old  soldier,  a  college  professor,  a  business  man,  a  public 
school  teacher,  and  an  artisan.  The  teacher  sometimes 
directs  his  questions  to  the  entire  class,  and  sometimes  to 
the  individual  best  adapted  to  answer  it.  His  suggestive 
questions  on  "Saul  Chosen  King"  would  be  something  like 
this:  To  the  soldier:  "What  baggage  would  there  be  likely 
to  be?"  To  the  professor:  "What  instances  in  history  of 
kings  who  were  physically  head  and  shoulders  above  their 
people?  What  was  Carlyle's  definition  of  a  king?"  To  the 
class:  "Have  there  been  mighty  kings  who  were  insignificant 
physically?"  To  the  teacher:  "Are  modesty  and  diffidence 
always  signs  of  merit  ? "  To  the  clergyman :  ' '  To  what  extent 
do  accident  and  chance  rule  our  lives?"  To  the  business 
man:  "Have  you  ever  known  of  a  case  where  sudden  re- 
sponsibility placed  upon  a  man  has  changed  his  whole  char- 
acter?" To  the  class:  "Does  God  call  all  men  to  their 
work?"  To  the  artisan:  "Is  a  king  in  God's  sight  greater 
than  a  laborer  ?  How  are  we  called  to  be  rulers  ? "  To  the 
farmer:  "Why  did  Samuel  Avrite  it  in  a  book?  "  To  the  class: 
"What  is  to  be  said  about  those  'worthless  fellows'?" 
Questions  like  these,  carefully  handled,  with  little  oppor- 
tunity given  for  extended  argument,  will  keep  a  class  busily 


THE  ART  OF  QUESTIONING  201 

thinking  throughovit  the  lesson  hour  and  will  send  them 
home  thinking. 

The  Method  of  Socrates.  The  greatest  master  of  the  stig- 
gestive  question  undoubtedly  was  Socrates,  the  Greek 
philosopher.  He  worked  almost  entirely  by  means  of  ques- 
tions. It  was  his  favorite  device  to  represent  that  he  himself 
knew  nothing,  but  that  he  was  earnestly  seeking  knowledge. 
According  to  his  theory  men  are  ignorant  because  they  will 
not  think.  They  suppose  they  know  all  about  a  certain  thing 
and  therefore  do  not  trouble  themselves  to  find  out  the  truth. 
Socrates,  therefore,  taught  them  by  means  of  three  steps. 
First,  by  questioning  them  he  made  them  aware  of  their 
own  ignorance;  then  by  further  questioning  he  made  them 
eager  to  know  the  truth;  then  by  still  further  questioning 
he  made  them  think  their  way  through  the  difficulty  until 
they  were  as  certain  of  the  right  solution  as  they  had  pre- 
viously been  of  the  wrong. 

There  is  no  better  example  of  this  so-called  Socratic  method 
than  that  used  by  Jesus  with  his  disciples  in  Mark  8:  "And 
they  reasoned  one  with  another,  saying.  We  have  no  bread. 
And  Jesus  perceiving  it  saith  unto  them.  Why  reason  ye, 
because  ye  have  no  bread?  do  ye  not  yet  perceive,  neither 
understand?  have  ye  your  heart  hardened?  Having  eyes, 
see  ye  not?  and  having  ears,  hear  ye  not?  and  do  ye  not 
remember?  When  I  brake  the  five  loaves  among  the  five 
thousand,  how  many  baskets  full  of  broken  pieces  took 
ye  up?  And  they  say  unto  him,  Twelve.  And  when  the 
seven  among  the  four  thousand,  how  many  basketfuls  of 
broken  pieces  took  ye  up?  And  they  say  unto  him,  Seven. 
And  he  said  unto  them.  Do  ye  not  yet  understand?" 

Limitations  of  the  Method.  The  weakness  of  the  Socratic 
method  was  its  insistence  upon  the  theory  that  nothing 
should  be  told  the  pupil,  but  that  everything  should  be 
drawn  out.  But  how  can  we  draw  out  that  which  is  not 
present?  Socrates  believed  that  we  come  from  another 
existence,  bringing  with  us  experiences  and  knowledge 
gained  there,  and  that  education  is  simply  an  awakening 
of  this  old  material  in  the  intellect.  But  no  one  believes 
this  to-day.  Hence  we  use  the  art  of  illustration  with  its 
parallel  cases,  its  object  lessons,  and  pictures,  and  stories 


202        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

to  give  the  child  material  with  wliicli  to  interpret  new 
material.  Within  certain  limits  the  Socratic  method  may 
be  used  even  with  small  children,  but  we  must  pause  often 
to  explain  and  illustrate.  The  suggestive  question  helps 
the  ptxpils  to  think  for  themselves,  and  thinking  for  oneself 
is  one  of  the  chief  objects  of  education. 

The  Test  Question.  Many  teachers  use  the  test  question 
to  the  exclusion  of  all  others;  with  them  every  recitation 
is  an  examination.  All  of  us  have  been  in  classes  where  the 
teacher  used  the  questions  printed  in  the  lesson  leaf,  ques- 
tions something  after  this  pattern:  Where  did  Samuel  call 
the  people  together?  (Verse  17.)  What  did  he  say  to  them? 
(Verse  18.)  What  did  he  command  them  to  do?  (Verse  19.) 
What  tribe  was  taken?  What  family  and  individual  were 
taken?  (Verse  21.)  Where  was  Saul  found?  What  did 
Samuel  say  concerning  him?  (Verse  24.)  What  did  the 
]ieoi)le  shout?  etc.  No  lesson  can  be  more  lifeless  than  one 
conducted  after  this  manner.  The  pupils  are  questioned 
in  turn,  and  each  when  the  turn  comes  to  him  responds  by 
reading  the  indicated  passage.  There  is  no  originality  and 
no  thought.  Now,  every  lesson  help  should  be  provided 
with  a  list  of  questions,  but  they  should  be  suggestive  ques- 
tions, and  they  should  be  used  by  the  teacher  only  to  help 
him  in  his  thinking.  The  test  question  is  of  value  in  reviews. 
Many  teachers  begin  their  work  with  a  few  questions  upon 
the  last  week's  lesson.  These  are  test  questions.  The 
quarterly  review  also  should  make  large  use  of  this  device, 
and  even  dviring  the  development  of  the  lesson  it  may  be 
used  with  profit  at  times;  but  the  teacher  must  not  forget 
that  true  teaching  is  not  a  mere  testing  of  the  memory,  but 
that  it  is  a  creative  exercise :  it  stirs  the  pupil  into  activity 
and  makes  him  think  for  himself. 

Class  Management.  He  who  is  skillful  at  questioning  will 
have  little  trouble  with  the  discipline  of  his  class.  There 
are  five  laws  for  the  securing  of  attention  by  means  of  ques- 
tioning: I.  Be  brisk  and  enthusiastic.  The  successful  teacher 
enters  upon  his  half  hour  with  his  whole  soul.  He  allows  no 
drags  and  no  tedious  pauses.  He  does  not  wait  long  for 
answers;  he  transfers  his  questions  from  pupil  to  pupil,  and, 
failing  of  an  answer,  he  asks  the  class.     Enthusiasm  is  always 


THE  ART  OF  QUESTIONING  203 

contagious;  businesslike  directness  and  vim  appeal  to  all 
classes.  It  is  impossible  for  pupils  to  dawdle  and  play  when 
the  teacher  is  really  teaching  with  unction.  2.  Ask  the 
question,  then  designate  the  one  who  is  to  answer.  There  should 
be  no  such  thing  as  calling  the  class  in  rotation.  The  teacher 
should  not  look  at  the  one  who  is  to  recite.  Each  pupil 
should  be  at  attention.  He  should  feel  that  the  next  ques- 
tion is  likely  to  come  straight  at  him.  3.  Seldom  repeat  a 
question.  If  the  pupil  first  asked  was  inattentive  and  re- 
qviests  a  restatement  of  the  question,  do  not  oblige  him. 
Call  upon  another  and  another,  but  without  repeating. 
4.  Constantly  direct  questions  to  those  who  are  inattentive  or 
mischievous.  Keep  them  bu,sy  every  moment.  Return  to 
them  again  and  again  with,  "What  do  you  think  of  that, 
Charlie?"  and  "Is  that  the  right  answer,  Willie?"  or  "You 
read  the  verse,  Charlie."  5.  Call  often  for  concert  work. 
With  young  classes  this  is  very  helpful.  When  one  has 
made  a  good  answer,  say,  "  Now  let  the  whole  class  say  that 
together."  "Now  Charlie,  Willie,  and  Francis."  "Now 
all  together  again."  The  teacher  should  play  upon  his  class 
as  upon  an  organ.  He  should  have  every  element  under 
control.  The  class  well  questioned  will  be  too  busy  for 
mischief.  The  slow,  deliberate  teacher  who  questions  in 
rotation,  reading  from  the  lesson  help — who  repeats  his 
question,  and  waits  for  each  answer,  then  answers  himself 
if  no  response  is  forthcoming — is  .sure  to  have  a  dawdling 
class,  and,  if  it  be  composed  of  junior  or  intermediate  pupils, 
a  mischievous  one. 

Elliptical  Qtiestions.  Many  teachers  make  use  of  what 
may  be  called  the  elliptical  form  of  question.  They  give 
a  part  of  the  sentence,  then  pause  interrogatively  for  the 
pupil  to  complete  it:  "Samuel  called  the  people  together 
at — ?"  "The  Golden  Text  is,  He  that  ruleth  over  men 
must  be — ?"  The  form  should  be  used  but  rarely.  It 
stimulates  no  thought  and  no  self-activity  on  the  part  of 
the  learner,  and  in  most  cases  is  an  insult  to  his  intelligence. 
It  may  be  used  profitably  sometimes  with  diffident  children. 
Dull  pupils  can  often  be  got  to  recite  in  no  other  way,  but 
the  method  is  to  be  used  sparingly. 

Yes  and  No  Questions.     The  same  thing  may  be  said  of 


204        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDy\GOGV 

questions  that  may  be  answered  by  Yes  or  No.  "Thg 
chances,"  says  Dr.  Home,  "are  too  great  in  favor  of  a  guess. 
Besides,  the  pupil  misses  by  such  an  abbreviated  answer 
training  in  connected  discourse  and  in  the  adequate  expres- 
sion of  religious  ideas."  Did  Saul  want  to  be  king?  Was 
the  Lord  pleased  that  Israel  wanted  a  king?  Was  Saul  a 
large  man?  are  poor  questions.  They  teach  nothing.  The 
Yes  and  No  question  is  not  always  out  of  ]ilace,  however. 
There  are  times  when  it  is  of  vital  importance  whether  the 
pupil  answers  Yes  or  No.  Questions  beginning,  "Do  you 
believe — ,"  or  "Would  you — ,"  etc.;  all  questions,  indeed, 
where  the  pupil  must  take  a  stand,  or  must  think  and  then 
range  himself  on  one  side  or  the  other,  are  of  real  value. 
The  form,  too,  is  often  of  service  to  draw  out  dull  or  diffident 
children. 

Leading  Questions.  The  questions  shotild  not  be  asked 
in  svich  a  way  that  the  pupil  must  answer  as  the  teacher 
wishes.  The  question  often  has  its  answer  written,  as  it 
were,  all  over  it.  "Was  not  this  wrong?"  and  "Wouldn't 
it  have  been  better  to  have  obeyed?"  are  examples.  The 
question  should  be  wholly  free  from  any  suggestion  as  to 
the  answer  desired.  Not  even  by  tone  or  inanner  should 
the  teacher  influence  the  answer.  "You  desire  to  lead  an 
unselfish  life,  do  you  not?"  will  be  answered  in  the  affirma- 
tive by  every  Sunday  school  pujMl,  but  the  answer  means 
nothing  at  all.  When  Decision  Day  results  are  based  on 
the  answers  to  questions  like  these  they  are  pretty  nearly 
worthless.  Often  a  pupil  will  say  he  does  not  understand 
the  question,  meaning  it  does  not  suggest  its  answer  to  his 
mind.  Do  not  injure  hiin  by  favoring  him.  Rather  be  sure 
the  question  is  intelligible,  and  then  let  him  give  the  answer. 
Remember  the  aphorism,  "The  telling  teacher  is  not  the 
iclling  teacher."  It  is  well,  too,  to  avoid  the  asking  of  ques- 
tions in  the  words  of  the  Scripttire  passage  on  which  the 
question  is  based.  The  pui)irs  fainiliarity  with  the  text 
makes  the  answer  inevitable.  For  instance,  a  teacher  ques- 
tioning upon  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son  might  j^roceed 
in  this  way: 

Q.  "What  did  the  younger  son  say  to  his  father?" 
A.  "Give  me  the  portion  of  goods  tJiat  falleth  to  me." 


THE  ART  OF  QUESTIONING  205 

Q.  "Where  did  he  then  take  his  journey?" 

A.  ''Into  afar  country." 
■     Q.  "What  did  he  do  with  his  substance?" 

A.  "Wasted  it  in  riotous  living." 

Q.  "Then  what  would  he  fain  have  done?" 

A.  "Filled  his  belly  with  the  husks,"  etc. 

The  question  should  throw  the  pupil  upon  his  own  re- 
sources. It  should  have  no  guideboards  in  it  pointing  the 
way  to  the  answer.  To  suggest  the  answers  to  questions 
is  to  foster  laziness  and  apathy. 

Simplicity  and  Clearness.  Long  questions  are  to  be 
avoided,  and  so  are  complicated  and  hazy  questions.  The 
pupil  will  need  all  of  his  mental  powers  to  expend  upon 
the  problem  presented,  and  should  not  be  required  to  wrestle 
with  obscureness  or  involved  abstruseness  in  the  structure 
of  the  question.  Make  the  question  clear,  short,  direct,  and 
concise.  Clearness  is  imperative.  It  should  be  definite, 
with  an  unmistakable  answer.  It  should  not  be  double,  as, 
"Where  did  he  go  next  and  what  did  he  do?"  or  "When  and 
for  what  reason  did  Paul  first  go  to  Rome?"  It  is  not  easy 
to  frame  questions  that  children  will  understand  and  answer 
quickly  and  correctly,  but  the  art  can  be  acquired  by  patient 
effort. 

The  Preparation  of  Questions.  And  this  suggests  the  im- 
])ortant  fact  that  no  teacher  can  do  justice  to  himself  and 
to  his  subject  if  he  depends  wholly  upon  extempore  ques- 
tions. The  margins  of  the  text-books  of  all  effective  teachers, 
whether  it  be  in  college,  secular  school,  or  Sunday  school, 
are  written  full  of  hints  for  questions.  The  mere  testing  of 
the  pupil's  knowledge  may  seem  to  some  to  be  an  easy  task, 
for  "even  a  fool  can  ask  questions."  It  is,  indeed,  a  favorite 
joke  with  unprepared  people  who  are  suddenly  called  u])()n 
to  take  the  places  of  absent  teachers  that  all  they  will  have  Uj 
do  will  be  to  ask  the  questions;  the  class  will  do  the  answer- 
ing. But  "a  wise  question,"  says  Lord  Bacon,  "is  the  half 
of  knowledge,"  and  he  who  would  ask  wise  questions  must 
make  wise  preparation.  No  subject  can  be  so  simple  and  no 
class  so  elementary  that  the  teacher  need  not  make  a  study 
of  his  questions.  According  to  Dr.  Trumbull,  "  It  is  a  matter 
of  history  that  when  Dr.  Chalmers  was  professor  of  moral 


2o6        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

philosophy  in  Saint  Andrew's  University,  he  had  a  Sunday 
school  of  the  poorer  class  of  children  in  his  neighborhood,  and 
that  he  was  accustomed  to  write  out  carefully  the  questions 
he  would  ask  those  children  on  the  Sunday's  lesson."  In 
using  such  prepared  work  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  be  con- 
fined closely  to  a  manuscript.  The  question  read  painfully 
from  book  or  paper  loses  half  of  its  force.  There  should  be 
seeming  spontaneousness  and  briskness  of  questioning,  but  the 
plan  should  have  been  made  carefully  beforehand.  The 
teacher  may  glance  at  his  lesson  leaf  often,  with  its  carefully 
interlined  questions,  but  he  is  not  slavishly  to  follow  it.  It 
has  been  wittily  said  that  the  best  extempore  work  is  always 
that  which  has  been  carefully  prepared  beforehand.  No 
evidences  of  the  preparation,  however,  must  be  in  sight. 

The  Questions  of  Pupils.  The  class  should  constantly  be 
in  an  inquiring  attitude.  Questions  on  the  part  of  the  pupils 
should  be  encouraged.  The  class  that  never  asks  a  question 
is  either  absorbed  in  other  things  than  the  lesson  or  else  it 
is  ]mralyzed.  Imagine  a  class  of  small  boys,  each  individual 
of  which  is  a  living  interrogation  point  fourteen  hours  out  of 
every  twenty-four,  sitting  for  a  mortal  hour  with  never  a 
question.  Something,  is  wrong  with  the  teacher  of  such  a 
class.  A  group  of  boys  and  girls  around  their  teacher  hard 
at  work  over  a  lesson  is  rather  noisy.  Each  is  doing  his  part; 
each  is  thoroughly  interested  and  wants  to  know  something. 
The  skill  of  the  teacher  is  tested  as  much  by  his  handling  of 
the  questions  which  are  put  to  hiin  as  by  the  questions  which 
he  puts  to  the  class.  Some  he  may  dismiss  with  a  word,  others 
he  may  refer  to  the  class  as  a  whole  or  to  some  individual 
member  of  the  class,  others  he  may  carefully  answer  himself. 
The  stream  must  always  be  within  perfect  control,  and  must 
be  wisely  directed,  but  it  should  never  be  checked.  The 
teacher  must  be  wise.  It  is  a  favorite  device  with  college 
boys  to  ask  questions  so  as  to  get  the  professor  started  and 
use  up  the  time  so  that  no  one  will  be  called  upon  to  recite. 
Small  boys  too  often  delight  in  asking  smart  questions  or 
even  impertinent  ones,  btit  this  matter  must  be  left  to  the 
wisdom  of  the  teacher. 

Jesus  as  a  Questioner.  Jesus  in  his  teaching  used  ques- 
tions constantly,  and  in  every  case  he  made  his  point  more 


THE  ART  OF  QUESTIONING  207 

effective  by  means  of  them.  His  questions,  like  those  oi 
every  true  teacher,  were  largely  suggestive.  They  set  people 
to  thinking  for  themselves.  "Whom  do  men  say  that  I  the 
Son  of  man  am?"  "Whom  say  ye  that  I  am?"  "Will  ye 
also  go  away?"  "Which  was  neighbor  unto  him  who  fell 
among  the  thieves?"  "What  think  ye  of  the  Christ?  whose 
son  is  he?"  "The  baptism  of  John,  whence  was  it?"  He 
examined  the  young  lawyer  in  true  Socratic  manner.  He  led 
his  enemies  into  pitfalls  with  all  the  skill  of  a  Sophist.  There 
are  no  better  examples  in  all  literature  of  the  dilemma  led 
up  to  by  means  of  questions  than  those  contained  in  Luke  20. 
1-8,  and  21-26.  His  questions  were  personal  and  searching. 
He  constantly  encouraged  his  disciples  to  ask  questions  that 
he  might  draw  them  out  and  make  clear  to  them  the  great 
lessons  which  he  wished  them  to  understand.  The  Sunday 
school  worker  should  study  with  care  the  questions  of  the 
great  Master  Teacher. 

Answers.  A  word  should  be  given  concerning  the  treat- 
ment of  answers.  First  of  all,  no  answer,  unless  it  was  in- 
tended to  be  impertinent,  should  be  made  light  of.  No 
matter  how  foolish  it  may  be  or  how  far  from  the  mark,  if 
it  was  honestly  given  entertain  it  kindly.  Very  gently  the 
answerer  may  be  led  to  see  that  there  is  a  better  solution, 
but  his  self-respect  must  never  be  violated.  To  hold  up  a 
foolish  answer  for  ridicule  is  often  to  silence  forever  the 
answerer.  A  good  answer  should  be  rej^eated  by  the  teacher, 
but  never  a  wrong  answer.  The  more  quickly  false  ideas  are 
passed  over  the  better  for  the  class.  Nothing  is  inore  con- 
tagious than  error;  therefore  emphasize  only  the  tinitli. 
Often  the  answer  may  disclose  the  weakness  of  the  question. 
To  the  qviestion,  "What  can  you  tell  about  the  Pharisees?" 
the  answer  came,  " Xoiliiiig" — a  correct  answer,  but  not  the 
one  expected.  Then,  too,  answers  may  disclose  the  mental 
condition  of  the  pupil,  or  his  wrong  methods  of  study.  The 
teacher  should  be  as  alert  for  wrong  answers  as  for  right  ones, 
and  should  not  leave  the  point  until  he  has  found  the  source 
of  the  error. 


CHAPTER  XXXit 
THE  TEACHING  OF  GEOGRAPHY 

Biblical  Geography.  It  is  not  possible  to  suggest  specific 
methods  for  the  teaching  of  each  separate  subject  required 
in  the  Sunday  school  curriculum.  One  or  two  subjects,  how- 
ever, need  special  attention.  The  subject  of  biblical  geog- 
raphy, so  vital  in  its  connection  with  Bible  study  work,  is 
more  often  neglected  than  any  other.  It  is  taught  ade- 
quately in  few  schools,  yet  no  subject  solves  so  many  diffi- 
culties as  this  and  none  furnishes  the  basis  of  more  valu- 
able training.  From  it  can  come  material  for  utilizing  the 
motor  activities  of  the  restless  boys'  and  girls'  classes,  and 
for  giving  interesting  variety  to  the  exercises  of  the  whole 
school. 

Without  systematic  courses  in  biblical  geography  the 
instruction  becomes  unreal  and  lifeless.  The  region  in  which 
the  Bible  stories  are  laid  is  in  many  minds  as  unreal  and 
vague  as  are  those  of  Jack  and  the  Beanstalk,  and  Alice  in 
Wonderland,  and  the  Arabian  Nights.  The  lessons  are  not 
alive  and  real;  the  stories  and  the  personalities  do  not  stand 
out  against  an  actual  physical  background.  Not  many,  for 
instance,  can  follow  the  life  of  David  on  the  map  of  Palestine, 
or  form  correct  mental  pictures  of  the  scenes  of  his  exploits. 
Such  a  result  is  to  be  deplored.  A  Sunday  school  pupil  who 
has  been  a  regular  attendant  for  several  years  should  at 
least  know  minutely  the  map  of  Palestine.  It  is  a  very  small 
territory,  but  a  full  knowledge  of  it  is  a  knowledge  at  the 
same  time  of  a  large  portion  of  the  Bible.  The  victory  of 
Deborah,  the  feeding  of  Elijah,  the  exploit  of  Jonathan,  the 
slaying  of  Goliath,  the  death  of  Saul,  the  deeds  of  Samson, 
and  the  like  should  suggest  instantly  to  the  pupil  places  upon 
the  map.  The  journeys  of  Jesus  and  of  Paul  should  be  so 
thoroughly  known  in  connection  with  the  map  that  they  will 
stand  out  vivid  and  real. 

Physical  Geography.  Geograjihy  should  be  begun  in  the 
208 


THE  TEACHING  OF  GEOGRAPHY  209 

Junior  Department  with  pupils  after  the  age  of  nine,  and 
the  first  teaching  should  concern  itself  with  the  physical 
contour,  the  elevations  and  general  outline  of  Palestine. 
This  is  the  time  to  begin  map  modeling  either  with  pulp,  clay, 
putty,  or  sand.  The  making  of  the  map  gives  the  child  some- 
thing to  do;  it  satisfies  nature's  demand  for  activity;  and  it 
brings  the  desired  knowledge  through  actual  contact  with 
concrete  things.  The  boy  or  girl  who  makes  mountains  and 
valleys  and  rivers  and  lakes  will  understand  the  region  he  is 
working  v.'ith  as  he  could  through  no  amount  of  mere  map 
study  or  even  map  drawing. 

A  little  study  of  Palestine  will  disclose  several  very  helpful 
facts.  The  great  landmarks  are  Mount  Carmel,  extending 
like  a  shoulder  into  the  Mediterranean;  Mount  Hermon  in  the 
extreme  north;  the  Sea  of  Galilee;  the  Dead  Sea;  Ebal  and 
Gerizim;  and  the  plain  of  Esdraelon.  Mount  Ebal  lies  al- 
most in  the  center;  Mount  Carmel  is  two  thirds  the  distance 
from  north  to  south  on  the  coast;  the  Sea  of  Galilee  is  directly 
opposite  Carmel;  from  the  southern  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  to 
Lake  Merom  on  the  north  is  three  times  the  length  of  the 
Dead  Sea;  from  the  head  of  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  foot  of  the 
Sea  of  Gi.lilee  is  one  and  one  half  times  the  length  of  the 
Dead  Sea.  The  Dead  Sea  can  thus  be  used  as  a  unit  of 
measure.  It  is  forty-six  miles  long  and  ten  wide.  The 
length  of  Palestine  is  about  one  hundred  and  eighty  miles. 
The  Jordan  is  twenty-five  miles  from  the  coast  of  Sidon.  The 
Jordan,  measuring  in  a  direct  line,  is  one  hundred  and  thirty- 
four  miles  long;  the  Sea  of  Galilee  is  fourteen  miles  long;  the 
Maritime  plain  is  from  eight  to  twenty  miles  wide;  the  Jordan 
valley  is  from  two  to  fourteen  miles  wide.  Distances  should 
be  carefully  given  in  local  equivalents  that  will  be  thoroughly 
understood.  Palestine  embraced  an  area  of  about  twelve 
thousand  square  miles,  which  is  about  the  area  of  Massa- 
chusetts and  Connecticut.  By  consulting  a  geography  one 
can  compare  this  with  other  States.  Distances,  like  the 
journey  of  Jesus  from  Nazareth  to  Jerusalem,  or  from  Jeru- 
salem to  Sychar,  should  be  made  concrete  by  being  trans- 
lated into  distances  near  the  pupil's  home.  The  time  that  it 
would  take  to  walk  the  distance  could  be  com[)Uted.  If  the 
pupil  is  taught  early  to  be  careful  of  his  distances,  he  will 


210        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

later  be  able  as  in  no  other  way  to  appreciate  the  journeys 
of  the  patriarchs  and  of  Jesus. 

Interpretation  of  the  Map.  Work  with  the  contour  map 
is  valuable  for  all  classes.  Not  until  one  realizes  fully  the 
]ihysical  condition  of  the  country  can  one  understand  fully 
much  of  biblical  history.  Why  were  the  northern  tribes  so 
early  swept  into  captivity  while  Judah  held  out?  One  has 
but  to  look  at  the  mountains  about  Jerusalem.  Why  was  the 
plain  of  Esdraelon  from  the  very  earliest  years  the  battle- 
field of  Palestine?  A  glance  at  the  raised  map  shows  that 
with  its  radiating  valleys  it  was  the  only  place  that  could  be 
approached  with  chariots  or  where  they  could  be  driven 
about  freely.  Why  was  Jericho  so  quickly  captured  and 
Hebron  so  long  in  the  taking?  One  has  but  to  look  at  the 
map.  Why  did  the  old  caravan  route  from  the  east  to  Egypt 
take  the  course  that  it  did?  Why  did  it  wind  so  far  to  the 
north?  One  has  but  to  glance  at  the  mountain  ranges  and 
the  fearful  depression  of  the  Jordan  valley.  A  look  at 
Hermon  and  Mount  Lebanon,  nine  and  ten  thousand  feet  in 
elevation  respectively,  will  give  a  new  idea  of  the  transfigura- 
tion. Mount  Washington,  the  highest  elevation  in  the  United 
States  east  of  the  Mississippi,  is  only  about  six  thousand  feet 
high.  What  did  it  mean  for  the  family  of  Jesus  to  go  from 
Nazareth  to  Jerusalem  on  foot?  Brought  up  at  Nazareth, 
with  what  physical  features  of  Palestine  would  Jesus  be 
intimately  familiar?  Why  was  Jesus  thirsty  when  he  arrived 
at  the  well  in  Samaria?  Why  did  Jesus  remove  from  isolated 
Nazareth  to  Capernaum  on  the  great  eastern  trade  route? 
Such  questions  bring  the  ]jupil  into  very  vivid  and  vital  con- 
tact with  the  Bible  story. 

Maps.  Every  Sunday  school  should  have  at  least  one  good 
wall  map,  and  it  should  be  used  constantly  by  the  teachers 
and  by  the  superintendent  in  his  review  of  the  lesson.  There 
should  be  smaller  maps  for  class  use,  and  outline  maps  to  be 
traced  and  filled  in  by  the  younger  pujiils.  How  can  one 
know,  for  instance,  the  book  of  Acts  without  a  map  con- 
stantly in  hand?  Most  of  the  older  members  of  the  school 
have  most  excellent  maps  in  their  Bibles,  and  these  should 
be  made  use  of.  It  would  be  well  if  each  class  had  a  small 
raised  map  of  its  own  into  which  pins  could  be  placed  each 


THE  TEACHING  OF  GEOGRAPHY  211 

Sabbath  to  indicate  the  place  studied  about.  The  move- 
ments of  David  or  Paul  or  Jesus  can  be  traced  in  this  way. 
Each  member  of  the  class  can  have  an  outline  map  upon 
which  the  progress  of  events  can  be  marked  from  Sabbath 
to  Sabbath.  A  little  review  of  this  map  at  the  opening  of 
the  hour  will  fix  the  lessons  in  mind  as  nothing  else  could  do. 

Advanced  Geography.  Adult  classes  can  carry  the  subject 
of  geography  into  many  fascinating  directions.  There  is 
geological  geography — a  study  of  rocks  and  soils  and  min- 
erals, their  distribution  and  their  influence  upon  the  ancient 
nations.  There  is  commercial  geography — a  study  of  the 
great  highways  of  Palestine,  the  great  arteries  between  the 
East  and  the  West.  "In  connection  with  the  missionary 
journeys  of  Saint  Paul,"  writes  Professor  Kent,  "note  how 
he  followed  the  lines  of  the  world's  commerce.  In  the  map 
of  his  journeys  you  have  the  map  of  commercial  enterprise 
on  the  eastern  Mediterranean.  "  There  is  racial  geography — 
the  tracing  of  the  original  habitats  of  peoples,  and  their 
migrations,  those  great  tides  of  humanity  which  have  ever 
swept  westward  and  left  their  deposits  over  the  whole  map 
of  the  westward  world.  And  there  is  historical  geography — 
the  changing  of  boundaries  and  locations  with  the  changing 
of  nations  and  of  governments.  The  biblical  student  should 
have  broad  views.  The  time  for  the  narrow,  unscientific 
study  of  the  Bible  as  a  storehouse  of  mere  texts  is  long  since 
gone  by.  "The  geography  of  the  lands  which  molded  the 
people  of  the  Bible,"  says  Kent,  "which  determined  to  a 
great  extent  their  character,  which  reveal  many  of  the  mo- 
tives and  forces  which,  in  the  end,  molded  their  life,  their 
history,  their  thought,  and  their  faith,  is  the  most  illuminating 
and  fascinating  commentary  upon  his  Word  which  God  has 
placed  in  our  hands.  " 

Missionary  Geography.  Sunday  schools  which  are  strong  in 
their  missionary  work  often  do  something  toward  teaching 
their  pupils  the  geography  of  missionary  lands.  There  is  no 
need  of  going  into  this  work  exhaustively.  It  is  a  subject  for 
the  secular  schools,  but  it  must  not  be  neglected.  Those 
schools  which  have  monthly  missionary  meetings,  as,  indeed, 
those  which  have  weekly  exercises,  should  set  aside  a  fraction 
of  the  time  for  a  study  of  the  map.     The  work  should  be 


212        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

made  a  concrete  reality.  Whenever  a  missionary  report  is 
read  it  should  always  be  in  connection  with  the  map.  Maps 
of  China,  India,  Africa,  the  Philippines,  and  other  missionary 
fields  should  be,  as  far  as  possible,  a  part  of  the  equipment 
of  every  school. 

The  Library.  Finally,  the  library  should  be  supplied  with 
good  books  of  geographical  reference.  Here  should  be  the 
source  of  the  superintendent's  information  for  his  weekly 
talks,  and  of  the  teacher's  equipment  for  map-making  and 
explanation.  The  pupils  should  become  acquainted  with  the 
best  and  most  recent  works  on  all  subjects  pertaining  to 
biblical  geography.  The  teachers  should  get  them  to  refer 
constantly  to  these  works,  should  have  them  take  the  books 
home  to  make  abstracts  from  them  and  to  copy  maps.  No 
Sunday  school  can  aflford  to  economize  at  this  point.  If 
possible,  each  library  should  have  as  a  nucleus  a  good  Bible 
dictionary,  G.  A.  Smith's  Historical  Geography  of  the  Holy 
Land,  Harper's  The  Bible  and  Modern  Discoveries,  Hender- 
son's Palestine  with  Maps,  Whitney's  Handbook  of  Bible 
Geography,  Hurlbut  and  Vincent's  Manual  of  Bible  Geog- 
raphy, MacCoun's  The  Holy  Land  in  Geography  and  History, 
and  Thomson's  The  Land  and  the  Book. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII 
THE  TEACHING  OF  MISSIONS 

The  Place  of  Missions.  Missions  are  the  seminar  work  of 
the  Sunday  school;  they  stand  for  the  doing  side  of  bibhcal 
education;  they  are  the  lesson  translated  into  daily  living. 
One  may  study  the  Scriptures  long  as  a  mere  branch  of 
knowledge ;  he  may  be  an  encyclopedia  of  biblical  names  and 
XJlaces  and  events;  he  may  be  a  perfect  geography  of  the  Ploly 
Land,  and  be  profound  in  doctrines,  in  ethics,  and  in  religious 
philosophy — yet  all  of  it  may  profit  him  really  nothing. 
Teaching,  as  we  have  seen,  is  valuable  only  as  it  leads  to 
action,  and  Sunday  school  teaching  translated  into  action 
becomes  missions — for  in  the  broadest  sense  a  missionary  is 
anyone  who  is  sent  out  anywhere  to  enlighten  others  concern- 
ing the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  It  may  be  the  little  boy  who 
is  sent  in  the  Master's  name  with  a  bouquet  of  flowers  for  a 
sick-room;  it  may  be  the  little  girl  who  goes  out  of  her  way 
to  bring  another  to  Sunday  school.  It  includes  also  the  send- 
ing out  of  pennies  and  dimes  and  dollars,  of  clothing  and 
other  necessaries  to  the  poor,  of  home  department  literature, 
and  the  like.  No  Sunday  school  is  truly  alive  unless  it  is  a 
missionary  school.  If  it  is  only  teaching  and  not  practicing, 
if  its  efforts  result  in  no  action  for  others,  it  is  merely  a  place 
for  bibhcal  scholasticism.  The  aim  of  the  Sunday  school 
should  be  to  teach  pupils  to  apply  the  Bible  to  their  everyday 
living,  and  to  go  to  others  or  to  send  to  others,  that  they  may 
share  the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel. 

The  Subject-Matter  of  Missions  is  fivefold.  First,  it  in- 
cludes a  study  of  the  missonary  parts  of  the  Bible.  The  book 
of  Acts  is  the  first  chapter  in  the  history  of  Christian  missions. 
There  must  be  studied,  too,  the  words  of  Jesus  concerning  the 
matter,  and  also  the  spirit  of  his  teaching.  Then  parts  of 
Paul's  letters  are  of  exceeding  value  as  showing  the  vinder- 
lying  purpose  of  the  life  that   he  led,  as,  for  example,  the 

213 


214        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

second  chapter  of  Ephesians.  The  Old  Testament,  too,  has 
its  missionary  lessons:  Psalins  121  and  135  encouraged  Living- 
stone, and  the  words  of  Psalm  62.  5-8  were  written  on  a  rock 
by  Gardiner  and  his  companions  just  before  they  died  of 
starvation  in  Patagonia.  Second,  the  study  of  missions  in- 
chides  a  study  of  the  underlying  principles  of  Christianity. 
Altruism,  unselfishness,  sacrifice  of  self  for  others,  the  desire 
to  make  others  hajipy — all  this  should  be  taught  constantly 
in  every  Sunday  school  class,  and  it  is  true  missionary  teach- 
ing. The  third  class  of  material  for  missionary  study  con- 
sists of  the  history  and  the  biography  of  the  subject.  There 
is  no  more  thrilling  and  inspiring  chapter  in  modern  history 
than  that  recounting  the  opening  of  the  sea  islands,  India, 
Africa,  Burma,  Japan,  China,  to  the  gospel.  Biographies  of 
such  heroes  as  Livingstone,  Judson,  Butler,  Paton,  Taylor, 
Carey,  Xeesima,  should  be  studied  in  the  Sunday  school. 
The  fourth  class  of  material  consists  of  everything  which  niay 
have  to  do  with  missionary  lands:  the  geographical  facts, 
customs  of  the  people,  methods  of  work  and  modes  of  living, 
the  religious  ideals  and  ceremonies  and  the  like.  The  fifth 
class  of  material  is  the  organization  and  administration  of  the 
various  missionary  bodies,  and  indeed  the  whole  practical  side 
of  modern  missionary  effort.  This  last  may  be  studied 
profitably  by  adult  classes. 

Methods  of  Study.  As  to  the  time  to  be  given  by  the 
Sunday  schot)l  to  missionary  study  there  are  many  opinions. 
Some  schools  give  the  subject  over  to  an  evening  class  of 
volunteers,  others  have  a  missionary  service  periodically, 
others  set  apart  a  few  moments  of  every  Sunday  school 
session  for  the  subject,  others  disregard  it  altogether.  There 
is  a  corresponding  variety  in  the  methods  of  presenting  the 
subject.  Some  teach  it  solely  by  means  of  addresses  de- 
livered to  the  whole  school,  others  teach  it  as  a  special  sub- 
ject to  a  special  class  organized  for  the  purpose,  others  have 
as  their  chief  object  an  arousing  of  interest  in  the  matter  in 
order  to  increase  the  missionary  collection.  One  thing,  how- 
ever, is  sure:  missions  in  their  manifold  phases  are  so  impor- 
tant a  part  of  Sunday  school  work  that  they  should  be 
studied  systematically  and  continually.  It  is  not  too  mtich 
to  insist  that  in  some  wr.y  they  should  form  a  part  of  every 


THE  TEACHING  OF  MISSIONS  215 

Sunday's  lesson.  Teachers  should  make  themselves  familiar 
with  missionary  literature  issued  by  the  Young  People's 
Missionary  Movement,  the  offices  of  which  are  at  156  Fifth 
Avenue,  New  York  City. 

Teaching  Missions  to  Children,  With  the  beginners  and 
with  the  Primary  Department  it  is  best  not  to  teach  much 
of  missions  directly.  Children  below  the  age  of  eight  have 
very  hazy  notions  about  geography  and  history  and  degrees 
of  civilization.  It  is  better  not  to  have  them  give  up  their 
regular  work  to  hear  missionary  addresses  and  reports  which 
are  given  to  the  whole  school.  For  the  child  proper  mission- 
ary training  consists  in  the  forming  of  attitudes  of  mind  and 
habits  of  thinking  and  doing.  During  the  golden  years  be- 
tween three  and  eight  the  child  should  be  taught  the  lesson 
of  unselfishness,  the  joy  of  giving  and  of  working  for  others, 
the  duty  of  service,  and  the  meaning  of  sympathy.  This  is 
the  foundation  of  all  mission  work.  The  doing  side  of  the 
work  must  constantly  be  dwelt  upon.  The  child,  as  we  have 
already  shown,  must  be  thoroughly  impressed  with  the  idea 
that  the  Sunday  school  leads  all  of  its  pupils  to  do  some- 
thing. When  they  go  home  they  are  to  be  more  kind,  more 
obedient,  more  helpful,  more  cheerful,  and  all  for  the  sake  of 
others.  They  are  to  try  to  get  others  to  come  that  they  in 
turn  may  be  made  more  useful  and  obedient.  They  are  to 
bring  what  money  they  can  that  it  may  be  sent  to  people  who 
have  no  Sunday  schools  to  go  to.  Simple  missionary  stories 
may  be  told  to  illustrate  helpfulness  in  all  its  phases,  giving, 
self-sacrifice,  and  the  like.  The  child  who  comes  from  the 
Primary  Department  should  have  a  real  missionary  habit  of 
mind,  though  he  may  know  almost  nothing  about  actual 
missions.  He  should  already  have  himself  done  consid- 
erable missionary  work,  inasmuch  as  he  has  been  sent  to 
bring  others  into  the  school,  has  carried  flowers  to  the 
sick,  has  tried  to  earn  his  own  missionary  money,  and  has 
sought  to  make  himself  helpful  in  many  ways  to  those 
about  him. 

The  Junior  Department.  Children  between  the  ages  of 
nine  and  twelve  are  ready  and  eager  to  learn  of  missionary 
lands  and  peoples.  Costumes,  .flags,  weapons,  customs, 
curios,    idols   interest   them    greatly.     They   are    ready    for 


2i6        ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

missionary  geography  and  history.  It  is  the  reading  age,  and 
the  teacher  should  see  to  it  that  such  books  as  are  given  on 
page  190  of  Trull's  Manual  of  Missionary  Methods  should  be 
furnished  in  abundance.  The  pre-adolescent  loves  action  and 
adventure.  Selections  from  the  lives  of  the  great  mission- 
aries like  Livingstone  and  Paton  should  be  read  to  him. 
His  motor  activities  should  be  brought  into  action.  He 
should  be  pennitted  to  do  for  others  all  that  is  in  his  power 
to  do.  His  is  the  messenger  service  of  the  school.  It  is  his 
duty  to  distribute  books  and  papers,  to  run  errands  for  the 
superintendent,  to  serve  as  guide  to  strangers,  to  carry 
flowers  and  baskets  to  the  sick,  and  always  he  should  feel 
that  he  is  helping  in  a  way  that  only  he  can  help.  He  should, 
in  other  words,  be  taught  to  feel  the  joy  of  helping  others. 
Some  schools  have  found  it  a  valuable  exercise  to  have  this 
class  prepare  scrapbooks  of  missionary  material.  The  making 
of  maps,  the  modeling  of  geographical  outlines  in  sand  or 
pulp,  are  also  valuable  exercises  for  this  grade.  Class  and 
race  prejudice  should  now  be  worked  against.  Then,  too,  the 
junior  should  know  thoroughly  what  becomes  of  his  mission- 
ary money,  and  should  have  a  pretty  accurate  idea  of  the 
portions  of  the  world  where  missionary  effort  is  now  being 
centered. 

The  Intermediate  Department.  With  the  adolescent  pu]nl 
the  first  strong  appeal  can  be  made  for  the  spiritual  side  of 
missionary  effort.  The  heroism  and  self-sacrifice  of  the  great 
missionaries  can  be  dwelt  upon  now  with  effect.  It  is  the 
hero  age.  A  life  like  that  of  Dr.  Grenfell  or  Dr.  Judson  is 
appreciated  now  at  its  true  value.  The  teacher  should  dwell 
vipon  the  Christ  love  within  these  men  that  impelled  them 
seemingly  to  sacrifice  every  worldly  advantage  in  order  that 
they  might  help  the  weak  and  degraded,  and  he  should  dwell 
upon  their  exceeding  great  reward.  Many  a  Sunday  school 
pupil  has  heard  within  his  soul  the  first  call  to  the  higher 
life  while  he  was  being  told  of  the  sacrifice  and  the  rewards 
of  the  great  heroes  of  the  cross.  The  teacher  should  see  to 
it  that  missionary  biography  of  the  most  inspiring  kind  is 
furnished  to  this  class.  Books  like  Uganda's  White  Man  of 
Work  and  the  biogra]ihy  of  Paton,  the  missionary  to  the  New 
Hebrides,  hold  adolescents  like  fiction.     Mission  bands  can  be 


THE  TEACHING  OF  MISSIONS  217 

organized  and  missionary  concerts  prepared  by  this  class. 
The  whole  emphasis  now  should  be  upon  the  character  side 
of  missions,  the  beauty,  the  sweetness,  the  joy  of  self-sur- 
render, and  the  devotion  to  the  service  of  others,  for  Christ's 
sake,  of  all  that  life  holds  dear. 

The  Senior  Department.  With  later  adolescence  comes  the 
climax  of  missionary  teaching.  Now  comes  the  final  flower 
of  Christian  altruism.  The  doing  of  this  period  should  take 
the  form  of  visits  to  the  sick  and  the  afflicted,  of  help  to  poor 
little  children,  of  practical  work  among  the  outcasts  and  the 
wretched.  The  call  can  be  made  now  for  volunteers  for  the 
mission  field.  The  teaching  should  dwell  on  the  sweetness 
and  beauty  of  the  Christ  life,  on  his  self-effacement,  his  pity 
and  tenderness,  on  the  beautiful  lives  of  the  heroes  who  have 
dwelt  for  their  Master's  sake  in  the  dark  lands.  Prayer 
circles  for  missions  may  now  be  organized,  and  study  classes 
where  the  field  may  be  examined  and  the  points  of  greatest 
need  determined.  If  the  school  is  organized  as  a  missionary 
society,  many  of  its  officers  and  committee  members  should 
be  drawn  from  this  department. 

The  Motor  Side  of  the  Sanday  School.  Thus  missions  are 
the  motor  side  of  the  Sunday  school.  They  are  indeed  the 
finished  product  which  the  school  was  established  to  turn 
out.  It  should  be  the  aim  of  every  teacher  .so  to  present  his 
work  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  that  each  member  of  his  class 
may  be  constantly  increasing  in  effectiveness  as  a  doer  of 
the  Word. 

Missions  as  a  Source  of  Illustration.  There  is  another 
valuable  side  to  the  study  of  missions:  they  increase  one's 
teaching  material.  There  is  no  field  outside  of  the  Bible 
where  one  can  gather  such  effective  illustrations.  Thousands 
of  passages  of  Scripture  are  associated  with  missionary  lives. 
It  comes  with  power  when  one  can  say,  "Neesima,  and  with 
him  Japan,  was  won  to  Christ  by  Gen.  i.  i  and  John  3.  16"; 
or,  "On  the  morning  Livingstone  left  Scotland  for  Africa 
Psalms  135  and  121  were  read  at  his  home  at  Blantyre. " 
Nowhere  in  all  literature  can  be  found  such  stories  of  God's 
providence  and  guidance  and  mercy  and  protection  and 
tender  helpfulness  as  in  the  lives  of  missionaries,  and  no- 
where can  be  found  more  moving  instances  of  self-surrender, 


2i8        ELEiMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

heroism,  courage,  character,  perseverance,  and  faithfulness 
unto  death. 

Missionary  Giving.  Once  teach  the  spirit  of  missions  and 
the  giving  will  take  care  of  itself.  There  is  no  need  of  devices 
and  sensational  appeals  for  money  if  a  school  has  been  put 
by  careful  and  long-continued  effort  into  the  right  missionary 
attitude.  Giving  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  Sunday  school 
effort;  indeed,  some  would  consider  it  almost  the  only  fruit. 
The  giving  of  money  is  only  one  phase  of  the  matter.  The 
pupil  is  to  be  taught  to  give  first  himself:  his  love,  his  time, 
his  activity,  his  best  behavior,  his  obedience,  his  gifts  that 
God  has  given  him;  then  he  is  to  give,  as  far  as  he  is  able, 
of  his  substance  which  God  has  loaned  to  him.  From  the 
earliest  primary  years  this  should  be  made  to  the  child  to 
appear  as  a  privilege.  He  should  not  be  taught  to  bring  a 
penny  merely  and  so  lay  the  foundation  of  the  j)enny  habit 
for  life,  but  he  should  be  taught  to  bring  all  that  he  can 
afford,  not  as  a  hard  duty  but  as  a  joyful  service.  He  should 
know  what  becomes  of  his  money.  The  primary  teacher,  by 
a  simple  story,  can  tell  of  the  poor  little  Chinese  girl  who  has 
no  beautiful  Sunday  school,  and  no  teacher,  but  who,  through 
the  money  of  the  primary  class,  now  can  have  them.  The 
habit  of  joyous  giving  of  money  for  the  good  of  others  is  one 
of  the  most  helpful  of  all  the  habits  which  can  be  formed  in 
the  Sunday  school. 

A  Missionary  Curricul«m.  In  the  lower  grades,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  aim  of  instruction  is  simply  "to  develop  missionary 
attitudes  and  habits."  In  the  Junior  Department  a  little 
text-book  may  be  introduced  for  supplementary  work.  The 
Missionary  Chain,  and  Japan  for  Juniors  are  excellent.  With 
only  five  minutes  a  week,  or  even  with  half  an  hour  each 
month,  much  may  be  done.  The  Intermediate  Department 
may  study  such  a  book  as  Bradner's  The  Kingdom  Growing, 
and  the  Senior  Department  may  be  given  a  short  course  in 
such  books  as  De  Forest's  Sunrise  in  the  Sunrise  Kingdom, 
and  Smith's  The  Uplift  of  China.  These  little  studies  need 
not  interfere  with  the  regular  Sunday  school  work.  They 
should  come  as  a  diversion.  They  should,  however,  form 
only  a  part  of  the  missionary  work  of  the  school.  Every 
International  Lesson  should  be  searched  for  its  missionary 


THE  TEACHING  OF  MISSIONS  219 

bearing,  and  the  whole  aim  of  the  teacher  should  be  to  create 
in  every  pupil  the  real  missionary  spirit,  the  desire  to  go 
out  and  be  helpful  to  others.  This  is  the  motor  side  of 
Sunday  school  work  and  it  is  the  really  vital  side.  In 
the  Graded  Lessons  we  are  to  have  systematic  instruction  in 
missions,  a  thing  not  possible  under  the  system  of  Uniform 
Lessons. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV 
THE  USE  OP  REVIEW 

The  Importance  of  Review.  By  many  Sunday  school 
teachers  the  quarterly  review  is  looked  forward  to  with 
apprehension.  They  would  far  rather  teach  a  regular  lesson. 
Some  turn  back  to  the  opening  of  the  quarter  and  teach  the 
lessons  over  again  (as  far  as  time  will  permit),  often  getting 
no  farther  than  the  third  or  fourth  lesson.  Some  schools 
expect  the  entire  teaching  period  to  be  taken  up  by  the 
superintendent,  who  is  supposed  to  preach  a  sermon  on  the 
series.  Some  quarterlies  have  an  optional  lesson  that  may  be 
taken  in  place  of  the  review,  and  some  schools  even  give 
over  the  period  to  the  missionary  superintendent  for  his 
monthly  service.  All  of  this  is  wrong.  The  review  lesson  is 
the  most  important  one  of  the  quarter,  and  it  is  the  one  that 
requires  the  most  careful  preparation  and  the  greatest  skill 
in  presentation.  This,  however,  does  not  mean  that  the 
quarterly  review  is  the  only  review  the  class  is  to  have- 
Every  Sunday  is  a  review  Sunday.  The  skillful  teacher  be- 
gins always  with  review.  One  eminent  authority  estimates 
that  one  third  of  every  lesson  period  should  be  devoted  to 
review;  another  would  use  even  one  half.  The  motto  of  the 
thorough  teacher  is,  Review,  rcviciv,  always  review. 

Reasons  for  Review.  Reviews  are  valuable  for  three 
reasons:  i.  The  process  of  repetition  aids  the  memory;  2. 
The  consideration  at  every  recitation  of  new  material  in 
connection  with  the  old  assures  always  a  firm  foundation  to 
build  upon  and  brings  a  more  complete  comprehension  both 
of  old  and  new;  and,  3.  A  final  reconsideration  of  the  whole 
subject  at  the  close  of  the  lessons  enables  the  student  to 
grasp  it  all  as  a  single  unit  rather  than  as  a  series  of  isolated 
parts. 

Repetition.  We  have  already  seen  how  memory  images 
arc  brightened  by  repetition.  The  schoolboy  learns  his 
declamation  by  going  over  it  again  and  again.     Jesus  im- 

220 


THE  USE  OF  REVIEW  221 

pressed  one  lesson  forever  upon  Peter's  mind  by  asking  him 
three  times  the  same  question:  "Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest 
thou  me  ? "  To  review  the  last  lesson  is  to  fix  it  in  the 
pupil's  memory.  He  may  have  been  inattentive  at  some 
point,  or  he  may  not  have  been  much  impressed  by  some  of 
the  details.  The  review  deepens  the  impression.  Repeti- 
tion, however,  does  not  mean  a  mere  lifeless  going  over  of 
the  same  words  and  phrases.  "A  machine,"  says  Gregory, 
"may  repeat  a  process,  but  only  an  intelligent  agent  can 
review  it.  The  repetition  done  by  a  machine  is  a  second 
movement  precisely  like  the  first;  a  repetition  by  the  mind 
is  the  rethinking  of  a  thought. "  It  is  often  i^helpful,  espe- 
cially with  younger  classes,  to  have  the  teacher  designate 
some  one  to  retell  the  story  of  the  preceding  lesson,  and 
then  to  have  others  in  turn  add  details  which  he  has  left 
out.  A  teacher  who  is  working  by  the  lecture  method  and 
requiring  his  class  to  take  notes  should  always  begin  by  hav- 
ing some  one  read  his  notes  of  the  last  lecture.  The  repe- 
tition fixes  the  material  in  the  minds  of  all  the  class.  This, 
however,  is  only  the  first  element  of  review. 

The  Lesson  Approach.  Herbart's  first  step  requires  that 
nothing  new  shall  be  given  unless  the  way  has  been  prepared 
for  it.  The  new  must  be  a  building  on  to  something  which 
the  pupil  has  previously  mastered.  In  Sunday  school  teach- 
ng,  as  indeed  in  all  kinds  of  teaching,  this  first  step  will 
involve  a  reconsideration  of  the  previous  lesson.  All  too 
imany  teachers  teach  each  lesson  as  an  unrelated  fragment, 
and  each  Sunday's  portion  as  if  it  were  complete  in  itself. 
But  lessons  are  cumulative.  A  whole  quarter,  for  instance, 
is  given  to  the  career  of  David.  A  whole  year  is  given  to 
the  book  of  Acts.  Each  lesson  builds  upon  the  last,  and 
therefore  the  last  lesson  should  be  revived.  There  will  be  no 
need  of  minute  treatment  now.  Only  main  heads  and  vital 
lessons  are  to  be  touched  upon,  but  the  trend  of  the  series 
should  be  marked,  and  the  points  should  be  selected  which 
will  make  clear  the  lesson  of  the  day.  It  is  often  a  valuable 
exercise  to  have  the  class  tell  briefly  the  essential  facts  of 
several  lessons  in  review.  Then  there  should  be  a  brief 
summing  up  at  the  close  of  the  lesson.  Especially  with 
younger  classes  it  is  a  valuable  exercise  to  have  one  pupil 


222        ELEMENTS  OE  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

do  this  in  his  own  words.  Thus  teaching  becomes  a  con- 
tinuous process  of  advancing  from  the  known  to  the  un- 
known, of  building  the  new  upon  foundations  already  laid 
and  then  tested. 

The  Quarterly  Review.  The  end  of  a  quarter  marks  the 
comjiletion  of  one  phase  of  the  subject.  The  lessons,  if  they 
have  been  well  chosen,  center  about  one  great  central  truth. 
The  class,  as  it  were,  has  been  examining  the  territory 
section  by  section;  now  it  is  lifted  up  to  where  it  can  see  all 
of  it  at  a  glance.  One  may  explore  an  intricate,  winding 
mountain  lake;  he  may  get  acquainted  with  this  little  bay, 
and  that  long  point,  and  that  irregular  island,  and  so  on,  and 
yet  he  may  have  little  conception  of  the  lake  as  a  whole 
until  he  ascends  a  near  mountain  from  which  it  is  seen  as 
a  unit.  One  quarter's  lessons  consisted  of  incidents  in  the 
life  of  Jesus  as  recorded  by  John.  The  central  truth  was  the 
central  truth  indeed  of  the  whole  book  of  John:  "These 
things  are  written  that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God. "  To  review  the  work,  every  lesson 
of  the  quarter  should  be  examined  in  the  light  of  this  text. 
The  material  will  then  become  not  a  mere  collection  of  parts, 
but  one  homogeneous  unit.  Then  should  come  the  con- 
centrated personal  application.  Why  have  three  months  of 
careful  study  been  given  to  prove  "that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God  "  ?  The  answer  is  in  the  completion  of  the 
text:  "That  believing  ye  might  have  life  through  his  name." 
The  quarterly  review  should  be  a  gathering  up  of  all  the 
lessons  into  one  concentrated  truth,  and  then  the  ay)])lication 
of  that  truth  with  power  to  every  individual  life  in  the  class. 
Review  day  shovild  be  the  most  dee])ly  s])iritual  day  of  the 
whole  quarter. 

"With  Chalk  and  Pencil.  The  blackboard  can  be  used  to 
advantage  as  an  aid  to  review.  The  eye  message  will  supple- 
ment the  ear  message  and  make  it  more  surely  remembered. 
The  eleven  or  twelve  lesson  titles  can  be  written  down  that 
the  quarter  may  be  seen  at  a  sweep  of  the  eye.  Then  the 
first  letters  of  the  various  Golden  Texts  may  be  added.  Each 
pui)il  of  a  junior  class  may  be  asked  to  bring  pencil  and 
pa])er,  and  all  may  be  required  to  write  the  names  of  the 
I)ersons   mentionoil   in   the   lessons,   then   of   the   ])laces.     A 


THE  USE  OE  REVIEW  22.3 

class  may  be  given  as  a  review  of  their  map  drawing  the 
task  of  making  a  map  illustrating  the  quarter's  lessons.  With 
the  younger  classes  there  should  always  be  variety  in  the 
matter  of  review.  Every  avenue  of  approach  to  the  child's 
heart  and  mind  should  be  made  use  of.  The  real  teacher  is 
original.  He  studies  his  pu])ils  as  much  as  he  does  his 
lesson,  and  he  makes  use  of  all  legitimate  devices. 

Written  Examinations.  Written  examinations  are  just  as 
valuable  in  the  Sunday  school  as  they  are  in  the  secular 
school.  A  class,  especially  a  mature  class,  that  has  done 
faithful  work  for  three  months  should  be  tested,  and  the  test 
should  be  a  far  more  thorough  one  than  can  be  given  orally. 
The  teacher  who  conducts  an  oral  review  is  always  in  danger 
of  talking  too  much.  Each  pupil  should  have  a  chance  to 
answer  all  the  questions.  The  average  class  will  welcome 
this  chance.  They  will  work  in  preparation  for  the  test  with 
a  zeal  that  nothing  else  could  bring.  They  should  have 
something  tangible  to  show  for  their  three  months'  study. 
The  papers  should  be  corrected  and  graded  and  handed  back. 
In  the  smaller  classes  certificates  should  be  given,  and  the 
examination  results  should  perhaps  be  made  the  basis  for 
promotion.  It  has  often  been  found  helpful  to  give  the  class 
a  list  of  questions  the  week  before  and  to  have  the  answers 
brought  in  in  as  complete  a  form  as  possible.  Questions  can 
be  asked  requiring  considerable  research,  and  the  best  paper 
can  be  determined  upon  and  later  read  to  the  class.  A 
teacher  who  has  never  tried  written  work  with  his  class  will 
be  surprised  at  the  interest  it  will  create  and  the  results  it 
will  bring  forth.  Everything,  however,  depends  upon  the 
class.  Some  pupils  would  not  go  were  examinations  re- 
quired, and  some  classes  would  resent  bitterly  anything  that 
would  throw  too  much  attention  upon  the  individual  student. 
The  teacher  must  study  his  class  and  be  guided  by  common 
sense. 

The  Test  of  Teaching.  Finally,  reviews  furnish  the  best 
possible  test  of  a  teacher's  work.  Says  Dr.  Trumbull,  "Most 
teachers  would  be  surprised  at  finding,  by  any  fair  testing  of 
their  work,  how  little,  comparatively,  has  been  gained  by 
their  scholars,  or  rather  how  much  which  they  su])i)osed  they 
had  made  clear  has  been  missed  bv  their  scholars,  in  any 


224       ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS  PEDAGOGY 

lesson,  or  in  any  series  of  lessons,  of  their  teaching.  "  Then 
he  tells  of  the  teacher  in  a  Junior  Departinent  who  was  deal- 
ing with  the  story  of  Elijah  and  Ahab.  "Graphically  and 
vividly  she  pictured  in  simple  language  the  appearance  of 
Ahab  and  Elijah,  explaining  at  every  point  the  characteristics 
and  relative  positions  and  circumstances  of  Ahab,  the  idol- 
atrous king  of  Israel,  and  of  Elijah,  the  rugged  and  cour- 
ageous prophet  of  Jehovah.  The  children  listened  as  for 
their  lives.  They  were  all  attention.  "  At  the  close,  address- 
ing the  most  intelligent  and  attentive  of  the  class,  she  asked, 
'"Now  to  see  what  you  remember  of  what  I  have  told  you. 
Who  was  this  Ahab  ?'  The  child's  answer  came  back  promptly, 
'God.'  "  Such  experiences  are  good  for  a  teacher.  He  who 
suspects  that  he  talks  too  much  when  he  gets  before  his 
class  should  pause  often  and  ask  questions  in  review.  The 
pupil's  attainment  is  marked  not  by  what  he  hears,  not  by 
what  he  has  had  given  to  him,  but  by  what  he  can  give  back. 
There  is  no  way  of  being  sure  of  what  he  is  receiving  but  by 
constant  testing.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the  teacher  studies 
his  class  and  at  the  same  time  studies  the  effectiveness  of 
his  own  methods.  As  we  have  already  said,  the  motto  of 
the  conscientious  and  thoroughgoing  teacher  is,  Review  ^ 
review,  evermore  review. 


THE   NEW  YORK  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 
REFERENCE   DEPARTMENT 


This  book  is  under  no  circumstances  to  be 
taken  from  the  Building 


■ju 

J,f;0   "  ^  '*U 

_  iflp  -  3  191 

I 

^t/G-4   j,,g 

AUf"'  -   3  '-  a. 

AUG-  S'lif-;^ 

Aua  -  e  -^ 

1 

or' 


