i  li 


!!I!1 


- 1 

1 

.  ^,lilij 

iV.  F.B.MEYER 


■ 


!H       t 


m 


wm 


r 


inHiiiiiiiiiiii; 


11 


liillL 

lllllllBlllfflp! 


By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer 


The  Shepherd  Psahn,  Illustrated.  Printed  in  two 
colors.  i2mo,  cloth,  gilt  top,  boxed,  $1.25;  full  gilt, 
$1.50. 

The  Bells  of  Is.  Fxhoes  from  my  early  pastorates. 
With  portrait.    i2mo,  cloth,  75  c. 

Prayers  for  Heart  and  Home.  8vo,  flex,  cloth,  75  c. 

Paul :  a  Servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  i2mo,  cloth,  $1 .00. 

Old  Testament  Heroes.  8  vols.,  i2mo,  cloth,  each, 
$1.00  ;  the  set,  boxed,  88.00. 

Abraham.  Elijah.  Jeremiah.  Joshua. 

David.  Israel.  Joseph.  Moses. 

The  Expository  Series.  lamo,  cloth,  each  $i.oo  ; 
the  set,  boxed,  $4.00. 

Tried  by  Fire.  The  Way  Into  the  Holiest. 

Christ  in  Isaiah.  The  Life  and  Light  of  Men. 

The  Christian  Life  Series.    iSmo,  cloth,  each,  30  c. 
The  Shepherd  Psalm       Through  Fire  and  Flood. 
Christian  Living.  The  Glorious  Lord. 

The  Present  Tenses         Calvary  to  Pentecost. 
The  Future  Tenses  Key  Words  to  the  Inner  Life. 

***  The  first  four  also  issued  in  flexible,  decorated  cloth, 
i5mo,  each,  50  c. ;  the  set,  boxed,  $2.00. 

Addresses.  lamo,  paper,  each,  15c.;  cloth,  each, 
net,  30c. 

Meet  for  the  Master's  Use       A  Castaway 
The  Secret  of  Guidance  Light  on  Life's  Duties 

Saved  and  Kept.     Long  i6mo,  cloth,  50  c. 

Cheer  for  Life's  Pilgrimage,  Long  i6mo,  cloth,  50  c. 

Peace,  Perfect  Peace.    iSmo,  cloth,  25  c. 

The  Psalms.  Notes  and  Readings,   i  Smo,  cloth,  60  c. 

Envelope  Series  of  Booklets.  Packets  Nos.  i  and  2, 
each  containing  12  Tracts,  assorted,  net,  zoc. 

Choice  Extracts.  24mo,  paper,  each,  5  c.  j  per  doz. 
net,  35  c,;  i6mo,  paper,  15  c. 


Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

New  York  :  158  Fifth  Ave.        Chicago  :  63  Washington  St. 
Toronto  :  154  Yonge  St. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  HEROES 


ELIJAH,  AND  THE  ^  ^ 
SECRET  OF  HIS  POWER 


BY  THE 

Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A. 

Author  of  "The  Shepherd  Psalm,"  "  Tried  by  Fire,"  "  Moses,' 
etc.,  etc. 


New  York       Chicago       Toronto 

Fleming    H.     Revell     Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


PREFACE. 

SOME  of  my  readers  may  be  disposed  to  charge 
me  with  rashness  in  attempting  to  delineate 
the  life  of  EHjah — this  Colossus  amongst  or- 
dinary men,  who  dwarfs  us,  whilst  his  own  noble 
proportions  defy  the  belittling  perspective  of  long 
distance.  But  my  excuse  will  be  found  in  the 
thought,  reiterated  on  many  a  succeeding  page, 
that  the  life  of  this  mighty  man  was  wrought  out 
through  the  indwelling  of  that  Holy  Spirit  which 
is  equally  within  reach  of  those  who  will  believe 
and  obey. 

There  is  nothing  the  Church  of  to-day  needs  so 
much  as  Spiritual  Power;  and  there  is  nothing 
which  we  can  have  so  easily,  if  only  we  are  pre- 
pared to  pay  the  price. 

It  is  of  no  use  to  exclaim,  in  despairing  tones, 
"Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah?"  He  is  here, 
waiting  to  do  as  much  now  as  for  the  illustrious 
saints  of  olden  times.  Be  it  ours  to  emulate  their 
faith;  and  to  stand  as  they  did  in  the  presence- 
chamber  of  God,  prepared  to  fulfill  His  least 
behest:  so  shall  we  be  followers  of  them  who, 
through  faith  and  patience,  inherit  the  promises. 

F,  B.  Meyer. 
5 


Digitized  by  tlie  Internet  Arcliive 

in  2008  witli  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


littp://www.arcli  ive.org/details/elijalisecretofliiOOmeyeuoft 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I.  ! 

The  Source  of  Elijah's  Strength 9              i 

\ 

CHAPTER  II.  ] 

Beside  the  Drying  Brook 21              ] 

CHAPTER  III. 

Ordered  to  Zarephath 33              i 

CHAPTER  IV.  j 

"  The  Spirit  AND  Power  OF  Elias  " 44              \ 

CHAPTER  V.  ] 

The  Test  of  the  Home-Life 56 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Obadiah — A  Contrast 70              ^ 

CHAPTER  VII.  '■ 

The  Plan  of  Campaign 84              , 

CHAPTER  Vni.  ' 

The  Conflict  on  the  Heights  of  Carmel 93             ) 

j 

CHAPTER  IX.  ' 

Rain  at  Last! 104 

7 


8  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  X. 
How  THE  Mighty  Fell 117 

CHAPTER  XI. 
Loving-kindness  Better  than  Life 128 

CHAPTER  XIL 
The  "Still  Small  Voice" 138 

CHAPTER  Xm. 
«'Go,  Return  ! " 148 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
Naboth's  Vineyard 157 

CHAPTER  XV. 
The  Old  Courage  Again 167 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
Evensong 178 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
The  Translation 187 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
A  Double  Portion  of  Elijah's  Spirit 196 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
The  Transfiguration 205 

CHAPTER  XX. 
"Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost" 214 


ELIJAH: 

AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POWER. 


I. 
xrbe  Source  of  Elljab's  Strengtb. 

(I  Kings  xvii.) 

THIS  chapter  begins  with  the  conjunction  "And:  " 
it  is,  therefore,  an  addition  to  what  has  gone 
before;  and  it  is  God's  addition.  When  we 
have  read  to  the  end  of  the  previous  chapter — 
which  tells  the  melancholy  story  of  the  rapid  spread 
and  universal  prevalence  of  idolatry  in  the  favored 
land  of  the  Ten  Tribes — we  might  suppose  that 
that  was  the  end  of  all;  and  that  the  worship  of 
Jehovah  would  never  again  acquire  its  lost  prestige 
and  power.  And,  no  doubt,  the  principal  actors  in 
the  story  thought  so  too.  Ahab  thought  so;  Jeze- 
bel thought  so;  the  false  prophets  thought  so;  the 
scattered  remnant  of  hidden  disciples  thought  so. 
But  they  had  made  an  unfortunate  omission  in 
heir  calculations — they  had  left  out  Jehovah  Him- 
self. He  must  have  something  to  say,  at  such  a 
crisis.     He   must   add  a  few    chapters    before    the 

9 


10         ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

— — V. 

history  is  closed.  When  men  have  done  their 
worst,  and  finished,  it  is  the  time  for  God  to  begin. 
And  when  God  begins,  He  is  likely,  with  one  blow, 
to  reverse  all  that  has  been  done  without  Him; 
and  to  write  some  pages  of  human  history  which 
will  be  a  lesson  and  an  inspiration  to  all  coming 
time.  That  "And"  is  ominous  enough  to  His  foes; 
but  it  is  full  of  hope  and  promise  to  His  friends. 

Things  were  dark  enough.  After  the  death  of 
Solomon,  his  kingdom  split  into  two  parts — the 
southern  under  Rehoboam,  his  son;  the  northern 
under  Jeroboam,  who  had  superintended  the  vast 
public  works.  Jeroboam  was  desperately  eager  to 
keep  his  hold  on  his  people;  but  he  feared  to  lose 
it,  if  they  continued  to  go,  two  or  three  times  in 
the  year,  to  the  annual  feasts  at  Jerusalem.  He 
thought  that  old  associations  might  overpower 
their  new-born  loyalty  to  himself.  He  resolved, 
therefore,  to  set  up  the  worship  of  Jehovah  in  his 
own  territories,  and  erected  two  temples,  one  at 
Dan,  in  the  extreme  north,  the  other  at  Bethel,  in 
the  extreme  south.  And  in  each  of  these  he 
placed  a  golden  calf,  that  the  God  of  Israel  might 
be  worshiped  "under  the  form  of  a  calf  that  eateth 
hay."  This  sin  broke  the  second  commandment — 
which  forbade  the  children  of  Israel  to  make  any 
graven  image,  or  to  bow  down  before  the  likeness 
of  anything  in  heaven  above,  or  in  the  earth  be- 
neath. So  weak  and  sinful  a  bid  for  popularity 
is  never  forgotten  in  Holy  Scripture.  Like  a 
funeral  knell,  the  words  ring  out  again  and  again: 
"Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to 
sin." 


THE  SOURCE  OF  ELIJAH'S  STRENGTH.  11 

After  many  revolutions  and  much  bloodshed,  the 
kingdom  passed  into  the  hands  of  a  military  ad- 
venturer, Omri.  The  son  of  this  man  was  Ahab,  of 
whom  it  is  said,  "He  did  more  to  provoke  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel  to  anger  than  all  the  kings  of  Israel 
that  were  before  him."  This  came  to  pass,  not  so 
much  because  his  character  was  more  depraved, 
but  because  he  was  a  weak  man,  the  tool  of  a 
crafty,  unscrupulous,  and  cruel  woman;  and  some 
of  the  worst  crimes  that  have  ever  been  committed 
have  been  wrought  by  weak  men,  at  the  instigation 
of  worse — but  stronger — spirits  than  themselves. 

When  the  young  and  beautiful  Jezebel  left  the 
ceiled  palaces  of  Tyre,  to  become  the  consort  of 
the  newly-crowned  king  of  Israel,  it  was  no  doubt 
regarded  as  a  splendid  match.  Tyre  at  that  time 
sat  as  queen  upon  the  seas,  in  the  zenith  of  her 
glory:  her  colonies  dotted  the  shores  of  the  Medi- 
terranean as  far  as  Spain;  her  ships  whitened  every 
sea  with  their  sails,  and  ventured  to  the  coasts  of 
our  own  Cornwall  for  tin;  her  daughter,  Carthage, 
nursed  the  lion-cub  Hannibal,  and  was  strong 
enough  to  make  Rome  tremble.  But,  like  many  a 
splendid  match,  it  was  fraught  with  misery  and 
disaster.  No  one  can  disobey  God's  plain  words 
against  intermarriage  with  the  ungodly  without 
suffering  for  it  at  last. 

As  she  left  her  palace-home,  Jezebel  would  be 
vehemently  urged  by  the  priests — beneath  whose 
influence  she  had  been  trained,  and  who,  therefore, 
exercised  an  irresistible  spell  over  her — to  do  her 
utmost  to  introduce  into  Israel  the  hideous  and 
cruel  rites  of  her  hereditary  religion.     Nor  was  she 


19  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

slow  to  obey.  First,  she  seems  to  have  erected  a 
temple  to  Astarte  in  the  neighborhood  of  Jezreel, 
the  Windsor  of  the  land,  and  to  have  supported 
its  four  hundred  and  fifty  priests  from  the  revenues 
of  her  private  purse.  Then  Ahab  and  she  built  a 
temple  for  Baal  in  Samaria,  the  capital  of  the 
kingdom,  large  enough  to  contain  immense  crowds 
of  worshipers  (2  Kings  x.  21).  Shrines  and  tem- 
ples then  began  to  rise  in  all  parts  of  the  land  in 
honor  of  these  false  deities;  whilst  the  altars  of 
Jehovah,  like  that  at  Carmel,  were  ruthlessly 
broken  down.  The  land  swarmed  with  the  priests 
of  Baal  and  of  the  groves — proud  of  Court  favor; 
glorying  in  their  sudden  rise  to  power;  insolent, 
greedy,  licentious,  and  debased.  The  fires  of  per- 
secution were  lit,  and  began  to  burn  with  fury.  The 
schools  of  the  prophets  were  shut  up;  grass  grew 
in  their  courts.  The  prophets  themselves  were 
hunted  down,  and  slain  by  the  sword.  "They 
wandered  about  in  sheep-skins  and  goat-skins,  being 
destitute,  afflicted,  tormented; "  so  much  so,  that 
the  pious  Obadiah  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in 
saving  a  few  of  them,  by  hiding  them  in  the  lime- 
stone caves  of  Carmel,  and  feeding  them  at  the 
risk  of  his  own  life. 

The  whole  land  seemed  apostate.  Of  all  the 
thousands  of  Israel,  only  seven  thousand  remained 
who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  or  kissed  the  hand  to 
Baal.  But  they  were  paralyzed  with  fear,  and 
kept  so  still  that  their  very  existence  was  un- 
known by  Elijah  in  the  hour  of  his  greatest  loneli- 
ness. Such  times  have  often  come,  fraught  with 
woe:    false  religions   have  gained  the  upper  hand) 


THE  SOURCE  OF  ELIJAH'S  STRENGTH.  13 

iniquity  has  abounded;  and  the  love  of  many  has 
waxed  cold.  So  was  it  when  the  Turk  swept  over 
the  Christian  communities  of  Asia  Minor,  and 
replaced  the  Cross  by  the  crescent.  So  was  it  when 
over  Europe  Roman  Catholicism  spread  as  a  pall 
of  darkness  that  grew  denser  as  the  dawn  of  the 
Reformation  was  on  the  point  of  breaking.  So  it 
was  in  the  last  century,  when  Moderatism  reigned 
in  Scotland,  and  apathy  in  England. 

But  God  is  never  at  a  loss.  The  land  may  be 
overrun  with  sin;  the  lamps  of  witness  may  seem 
all  extinguished;  the  whole  force  of  the  popular 
current  may  run  counter  to  His  truth;  and  the  plot 
may  threaten  to  be  within  a  hair's  breadth  of 
entire  success;  but  all  the  time  He  will  be  pre- 
paring a  weak  man  in  some  obscure  highland  vil- 
lage, and  in  the  moment  of  greatest  need  will  send 
him  forth,  as  His  all-sufficient  answer  to  the  worst 
plottings  of  His  foes.  "When  the  enemy  shall 
come  in  like  a  flood,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall 
lift  up  a  standard  against  him."  So  it  has  been, 
and  so  it  shall  be  again. 

Elijah  was  of  the  inhabitants  of  Gilead.  Gilead  lay 
east  of  the  Jordan;  it  was  wild  and  rugged;  its 
hills  were  covered  with  shaggy  forests;  its  awful 
solitudes  were  only  broken  by  the  dash  of  mountain 
streams;  its  valleys  were  the  haunt  of  fierce  wild 
beasts.  "What  the  highlands  of  Argyleshire  and 
Inverness  were  a  centur)'  ago  to  the  lowland  towns 
of  Scotland,  that  must  Gilead  have  been  to  the 
more  refined  and  civilized  people  of  Jerusalem  and 
Samaria."     The    inhabitants  of  Gilead  partook   of 


14  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

the  character  of  their  country — wild,  lawless,  and 
unkempt.  They  dwelt  in  rude  stone  villages,  and 
subsisted  by  keeping  flocks  of  sheep. 

Elijah  grew  up  like  the  other  lads  of  his  age. 
In  his  early  years  he  would  probably  do  the  work 
of  a  shepherd  on  those  wild  hills.  As  he  grew  to 
manhood,  his  erect  figure,  his  shaggy  locks,  his 
cloak  of  camel's  hair,  his  muscular,  sinewy  strength 
— which  could  outstrip  the  fiery  coursers  of  the 
royal  chariot,  and  endure  excessive  physical  fatigue 
— distinguished  him  from  the  dwellers  in  lowland 
valleys;  but  in  none  of  these  would  he  be  specially 
different  from  the  men  who  grew  up  with  him  in 
the  obscure  mountain  hamlet  of  Thisbe,  whence  he 
derived  the  name  of  Tishbite.  There  were  many 
amongst  them  as  lithe,  and  swift,  and  strong,  and 
capable  of  fatigue,  as  he.  We  must  not  look  to 
these  things  for  the  secret  of  his  strength. 

As  he  grew  in  years,  he  became  characterized  by 
an  intense  religious  earnestness.  He  was  "very 
jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts."  Deeply 
taught  in  Scripture,  especially  in  those  passages 
which  told  how  much  Jehovah  had  done  for  His 
people,  Elijah  yearned,  with  passionate  desire, 
that  they  should  give  Him  His  meed  of  honor. 
And  when  he  learnt  that  this  was  lacking — as  the 
dread  tidings  came,  by  broken  snatches,  of  what 
was  transpiring  across  the  Jordan;  as  messenger 
after  messenger  told  how  Jezebel  had  thrown  down 
God's  altars,  and  slain  His  prophets,  and  replaced 
them  by  the  impious  rites  of  her  Tyrian  deities — 
his  blood  ran  liquid  fire;  his  indignation  burst  all 
bounds;   he  was  "very  jealous  for  the  Lord   God  of 


THE  SOURCE  OF  ELIJAH'S  STRENGTH.  15 


hosts."  O  noble  heart!  would  that  we  could  be  as 
righteously  indignant,  amid  the  evils  of  our  time! 
Oh  for  a  coal  from  that  pure  flame  that  burnt  on 
thine  inner  hearth ! 

But  the  question  was,  How  should  he  act?  What 
could  he  do — a  wild,  untutored  child  of  the  desert? 
There  was  only  one  thing  he  could  do — the  re- 
source of  all  much-tried  souls — he  could  pray;  and 
he  did:  "He  prayed  earnestly"  (James  v.  17). 
And  in  his  prayer  he  seems  to  have  been  led  back 
to  a  denunciation  made  years  before  by  Moses  to 
the  people — that  if  they  turned  aside  and  served 
other  gods,  and  worshiped  them,  the  Lord's  wrath 
would  be  kindled  against  them;  and  He  would 
shut  up  the  heaven,  that  there  should  be  no  rain 
(Deut.  xi.  17).  Flowing  into  this  mold,  his  thoughts 
must  have  shaped  themselves  somewhat  thus:  "If 
my  God  does  not  fulfill  this  threat  the  people  will 
think  that  it  is  an  idle  tale,  or  that  He  is  a  myth  of 
the  past — a  dead  tradition.  This  must  not  be.  Bet- 
ter far  that  the  land  should  suffer  the  terrors  of  fam- 
ine, and  the  people  experience  the  bitterest  agonies 
of  thirst,  and  that  I  should  be  torn  limb  from 
limb.  It  were  better  that  we  should  suffer  the 
direst  physical  woes  that  can  blast  our  national 
prosperity,  than  that  we  should  come  to  think  that 
the  Jehovah  of  our  fathers  is  as  dead  as  the  idols 
of  the  heathen."  And  so  he  set  himself  to  pray 
that  the  terrible  threat  might  be  literally  fulfilled. 
'He  prayed  earnestly  that  it  might  not  rain." 

A  terrible  prayer  indeed!  Granted;  and  yet,  was 
it  not  more  terrible  for  the  people  to  forget  and 
ignore  the  God  of  their  fathers,  and  to  give    them- 


16         ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


selves  up  to  the  licentious  orgies  of  Baal  and 
Astarte?  Remember,  too,  what  a  wrong  construc- 
tion might  be  put  upon  the  utter  silence  of  God 
Himself.  Could  anything  be  more  disastrous  than 
that  the  statute-book  should  be  filled  with  laws 
which  the  Law-giver  could  not  or  would  not  en- 
force? Nothing  could  be  more  detrimental  to  the 
true  conception  of  God.  "These  things  hast  thou 
done,  and  I  kept  silence;  thou  thoughtest  that  I 
was  altogether  such  an  one  as  thyself:  but  I  will 
reprove  thee  and  set  them  in  order  before  thine 
eyes. " 

Physical  suffering  is  a  smaller  calamity  than 
moral  delinquency.  And  the  love  of  God  does  not 
shrink  from  inflicting  such  suffering,  if,  as  a  result, 
the  plague  of  sin  may  be  cut  out  as  a  cancer,  and 
stayed.  It  may  be,  reader,  that  this  is  why  there 
is  so  much  sorrow  in  thy  life.  Thou  art  suffering 
a  terrible  drought,  before  which  all  the  springs  of 
thy  prosperity  are  drying  up.  No  dews  of  grace  or 
rains  of  blessing  have  fallen  to  thy  lot  for  many 
days.  This  is  not  a  chance;  it  is  the  work  of  One 
who  loves  thee  too  well  to  permit  thee  to  forsake 
Himself  without  making  one  effort  to  arrest  and 
change  thee.  The  corn-field  is  fired  only  because 
He  wants  to  bring  thee  to  Himself  (2  Sam.  xiv.  30). 
The  drought  is  sent  only  to  enforce  the  rebuilding 
of  the  altar  on  Carmel's  height,  and  the  immola- 
tion of  the  false  priests  in  the  vale  beneath. 

And  as  Elijah  prayed,  the  conviction  was  wrought 
into  his  mind  that  it  should  be  even  as  he  prayed; 
and  that  he  should  go  to  acquaint  Ahab  with  the 
ifact.^^Whatever  might  be  the    hazard    to    himself, 


THE  SOURCE  OF  ELIJAH'S  POIVER  17 


both  king  and  people  must  be  made  to  connect 
their  calamities  with  the  true  cause.  And  this  they 
evidently  did,  as  we  shall  see  (i  Kings  xviii.  lo). 
That  the  drought  was  due  to  his  prayer  is  also  to 
be  inferred  from  the  express  words  with  which 
Elijah  announced  the  fact  to  the  king:  "There  shall 
not  be  dew  nor  rain  these  years,  but  according  to  my 
word. " 

What  a  meeting  was  that!  We  know  not  where 
it  took  place — whether  in  the  summer  palace,  when 
Jezebel  was  at  her  consort's  side,  or  when  Ahab 
was  surrounded  by  his  high  officers  of  state  in 
Samaria.  But  wherever  it  took  place,  it  was  a  sub- 
ject worthy  of  the  highest  art  and  genius.  The 
old  religion  against  the  new;  the  child  of  nature 
against  the  effeminate  child  of  courts;  camel's 
hair  against  soft  clothing;  moral  strength  against 
moral  weakness. 

This  interview  needed  no  ordinary  moral  strength. 
It  was  no  child's  play  for  the  untutored  child  of  the 
desert  to  go  on  such  an  errand  to  that  splendid 
court !  What  chance  was  there  of  his  escaping  with 
his  life?  Surely  he  would  not  fare  better  than 
the  prophets,  who  had  not  dared  so  much  as  he! 
Yet  he  went  and  came  unhurt,  in  the  panoply  of  a 
might  which  seemed  invulnerable. 

What  was  the  secret  of  that  strength?  If  it  can 
be  shown  that  it  was  due  to  something  inherent  in 
Elijah,  and  peculiar  to  himself;  some  force  of  nat- 
ure; some  special  quality  of  soul,  to  which  ordinary 
men  can  lay  no  claim — then  we  may  as  well  close 
our  inquiries,  and  turn  away  from  the  inaccessible 
heights  that  mock  us.     But  if  it  can  be   shown,  as 


18  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POWER. 

I  think  it  can,  that  this  splendid  life  was  lived  not 
by  its  inherent  qualities,  but  by  sources  of  strength 
which  are  within  the  reach  of  the  humblest  child  of 
God  who  reads  these  lines,  then  every  line  of  it  is 
an  inspiration,  beckoning  us  to  its  own  glorious 
level.  Courage,  brothers !  There  is  nothing  in 
this  man's  life  which  may  not  have  its  counterpart 
in  ours,  if  only  it  can  be  established  that  his  strength 
was  obtained  from  sources  which  are  accessible 
to  ourselves. 

Elijah's  strength  did  not  lie  in  himself  or  his 
surroundings.  He  was  of  humble  extraction.  He 
had  no  special  training.  He  is  expressly  said  to 
have  been  "a  man  of  like  passions"  with  ourselves. 
When,  through  failure  of  faith,  he  was  cut  off  from 
the  source  of  his  strength,  he  showed  more  craven- 
hearted  cowardice  than  most  men  would  have  done; 
he  lay  down  upon  the  desert  sands,  asking  to  die. 
When  the  natural  soil  of  his  nature  shows  itself, 
it  is  not  richer  than  that  of  the  majority  of  men; 
and,  if  anything,  it  is  the  reverse. 

Elijah  gives  us  three  indications  of  the  Source 
OF  his  strength. 

(i)  "As  Jehovah  liveih"  To  all  beside,  Jehovah 
might  seem  dead;  but  to  him  he  was  the  one  su- 
preme reality  of  life.  And  if  we  would  be  strong, 
we  too  must  be  able  to  say:  "I  know  that  my 
Redeemer  liveth;  He  ever  liveth  to  make  interces- 
sion for  us;  and  because  He  lives,  we  shall  live 
also."  The  death  of  the  Cross  was  bitter,  but  He 
liveth;     the   spear    made    fearful    havoc,    but    He 


THE  SOURCE  OF  ELIJAH'S  STRENGTH.  19 

liveth;  the  grave  was  fast  closed,  but  He  liveth; 
men  and  devils  did  their  worst,  but  He  liveth. 
The  man  who  has  heard  Jesus  say,  "I  am  He  that 
liveth,"  will  also  hear  Him  say,  "Fear  not!  be 
strong,  yea,  be  strong." 

(2)  "Before  whom  I  stand."  He  was  standing  in 
the  presence  of  Ahab;  but  he  was  conscious  of  the 
presence  of  a  greater  than  any  earthly  monarch, 
even  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  before  whom  angels 
bow  in  lowly  worship,  barkening  to  the  voice  of 
His  word.  Gabriel  himself  could  not  employ  a  loftier 
designation  (Luke  i.  19).  Let  us  cultivate  this 
habitual  recognition  of  the  presence  of  God;  it  will 
lift  us  above  all  other  fear.  Let  us  build  our  cot- 
tage so  that  every  window  may  look  out  on  the 
mighty  Alps  of  God's  presence;  and  that  we  may 
live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,  beneath  the 
constant  impression:  "Lo,  God  is  here."  Besides 
this,  a  conviction  had  been  borne  in  upon  his  mind 
that  he  was  chosen  by  God,  as  His  called  and  recog' 
nized  servant  and  messenger;  and  in  this  capacity 
he  stood  before  Him. 

(3)  The  word  "Elijah"  may  be  rendered — Jeho- 
vah is  my  God;  but  there  is  another  possible  trans- 
lation— Jehovah  is  my  Strength.  This  gives  the 
key  to  his  life.  God  was  the  strength  of  his  life; 
of  whom  should  he  be  afraid?  When  the  wicked, 
even  his  enemies  and  foes,  came  on  him  to  eat  up 
his  flesh,  they  stumbled  and  fell.  Though  an  host 
should  encamp  against  him,  his  heart  should  not 
fear.     What  a  revelation  is  given  us  in  this   name! 


30  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

Oh  that  it  were  true  of  each  of  us!  Yet,  why 
should  it  not  be?  Let  us  from  henceforth  cease 
from  our  own  strength,  which  at  the  best  is  weak- 
ness; and  let  us  appropriate  God's  by  daily,  hourly 
faith.  Then  this  shall  be  the  motto  of  our  future 
lives:  "In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness  and 
strength;  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which 
strengtheneth  me;  the  Lord  is  my  strength  and 
song,  and  He  is  become  my  salvation." 


BESIDE  THE  DRYING  BROOK.  21 


11. 

JSesiDe  tbe  Bj^tng  Brooft. 

(I  Kings  xvii.) 

WE  are  studying  the  life  of  a  man  of  like 
passions  with  ourselves — weak  where  we 
are  weak,  failing  where  we  would  fail;  but 
who  stood  single-handed  against  his  people,  and 
stemmed  the  tide  of  idolatry  and  sin,  and  turned  a 
nation  back  to  God.  And  he  did  it  by  the  use  of 
resources  which  are  within  reach  of  us  all.  This 
is  the  fascination  of  the  story.  Prove  to  us  that 
he  acted  by  the  spell  of  some  secret  which  is  hid- 
den from  us  meaner  men;  convince  us  that  he  was 
cast  in  an  heroic  mold  to  which  we  can  lay  no 
claim — then  we  must  lay  aside  the  story;  disap- 
pointment has  overcast  our  interest:  it  is  a  model 
we  cannot  copy,  an  ideal  we  cannot  realize;  a  vis- 
ion that  njocks  us  as  it  fades  into  the  azure  of  the 
past. 

But  this  is  not  the  case.  This  man,  by  whom 
God  threshed  the  mountains,  was  only  a  worm  at 
the  best.  This  pillar  in  God's  temple  was,  by 
nature,  a  reed  shaken  by  the  breath  of  the  slightest 
zephyr.  This  Prophet  of  Fire,  who  shone  like  a 
torch,  was  originally  but  a  piece  of  smoking  flax. 
Faith  made  him  all  he  became;  and  faith  will    do 


23  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

as  much  for  us,  if  only  we  can  exercise  it  as  he  did, 
to  appropriate  the  might  of  the  eternal  God.  All 
power  is  in  God;  and  it  hath  pleased  Him  to  store 
it  all  in  the  risen  Savior,  as  in  some  vast  reservoir; 
and  those  stores  are  brought  into  human  hearts  by 
the  Holy  Ghost;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given 
according  to  the  measure  of  our  receptivity  and 
faith.  Oh  for  Elijah's  receptiveness,  that  we  might 
be  as  full  of  Divine  power  as  he  was,  and  as 
able,  therefore,  to  do  exploits  for  God  and  truth! 
But,  before  this  can  happen,  we  must  pass  through 
the  same  education  as  he.  You  must  go  to  Cherith 
and  Zarephath  before  you  can  stand  on  Carmel. 
Even  the  faith  you  have  must  be  pruned,  and  edu- 
cated, and  matured,  that  it  may  become  strong 
enough  to  subdue  kingdoms,  work  righteousness, 
and  turn  to  flight  armies  of  aliens. 

Notice,  then,  the  successive  steps  in  God's  edu- 
cation of  His  servants. 

I.     God's  servants  must  learn  to  take  one  step 

AT  A  time. 

This  is  an  elementary  lesson;  but  it  is  hard  to 
learn.  No  doubt  Elijah  found  it  so.  Before  he 
left  Thisbe  for  Samaria,  to  deliver  the  message 
that  burdened  his  soul,  he  would  naturally  inquire 
what  he  should  do  when  he  had  delivered  it.  How 
would  he  be  received?  What  would  be  the  out- 
come? Whither  should  he  go  to  escape  the  ven- 
geance of  Jezebel,  who  had  not  shrunk  from  slaying 
with  the  sword  prophets  less  dauntless  than  him- 
self?    If  he  had  asked  those  questions  of  God,  and 


BESIDE  THE  DRYING  BROOK.  23 

waited  for  a  reply  before  he  left  his  highland 
home,  he  would  never  have  gone  at  all.  Our 
Father  never  treats  His  children  so.  He  only 
shows  us  one  step  at  a  time — and  that,  the  next; 
and  He  bids  us  take  it  in  faith.  U  we  look  up  into 
His  face  and  say:  "But  if  I  take  this  step,  which 
is  certain  to  involve  me  in  difficulty,  what  shall  I 
do  next?"  the  heavens  will  be  dumb,  save  with  the 
one  repeated  message,    "Take  it,  and  trust  Me." 

But  directly  God's  servant  took  the  step  to  which 
he  was  led,  and  delivered  the  message,  then  "the 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,  saying:  Get  thee 
hence,  hide  thyself  by  the  brook  Cherith. "  So  it  was 
afterwards;  it  was  only  when  the  brook  had  dried 
up,  and  the  stream  had  dwindled  to  pools,  and  the 
pools  to  drops,  and  the  drops  had  died  away  in 
the  sand — only  then  did  the  word  of  the  Lord  come 
to  him,  saying,  "Arise,  get  thee  to  Zarephath." 

I  like  that  phrase,  "the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
to  him."  He  did  not  need  to  go  to  search  for  it; 
it  came  to  him.  And  so  it  will  come  to  you.  It 
may  come  through  the  Word  of  God,  or  through  a 
distinct  impression  made  on  your  heart  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  or  through  circumstances;  but  it  will 
find  you  out,  and  tell  you  what  you  are  to  do. 
"Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?  And  the 
Lord  said  unto  him.  Arise  and  go  into  the  city, 
and  it  shall  be  told  thee  what  thou  must  do"  (Acts 
ix.  6). 

It  may  be  that  for  long  you  have  had  upon  your 
mind  some  strong  impression  of  duty;  but  you 
have  held  back,  because  you  could  not  see  what 
the  next  step  would  be.     Hesitate  no  longer.     Step 


U         ELIJAH:  yIND  TH^  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

out  upon  what  seems  to  be  the  impalpable  mist: 
you  will  find  a  slab  of  adamant  beneath  your  feet; 
and  every  time  you  put  your  foot  forward,  you  will 
find  that  God  has  prepared  a  stepping-stone,  and 
the  next,  and  the  next — each  as  you  come  to  it.  The 
bread  is  by  the  day.  The  manna  is  every  morning. 
The  strength  is  according  to  the  moment's  need. 
God  does  not  give  all  the  directions  at  once,  lest 
we  should  get  confused;  He  tells  us  just  as  much 
as  we  can  remember  and  do.  Then  we  must  look 
to  Him  for  more;  and  so  we  learn,  by  easy  stages, 
the  sublime  habits  of  obedience  and  trust. 

n.  God's  servants  must  be  taught  the  value 
OF  THE  Hidden  Life. 

"Get  thee  hence  and  turn  thee  eastward,  and  hide 
thyself  by  the  brook  Cherith. "  The  man  who  is  to 
take  a  high  place  before  his  fellows,  must  take  a 
low  place  before  his  God;  and  there  is  no  better 
manner  of  bringing  a  man  down  than  by  dropping 
him  suddenly  out  of  a  sphere  to  which  he  was  be- 
ginning to  think  himself  essential,  teaching  him 
that  he  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  God's  plan,  and 
compelling  him  to  consider  in  the  sequestered  vale 
of  some  Cherith  how  mixed  are  his  motives,  and 
how  insignificant  his  strength. 

So  the  Master  dealt  with  His  Apostles.  When, 
on  one  occasion,  they  returned  to  Him,  full  of 
themselves  and  flushed  with  success,  He  quietly 
said,  "Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert 
place."  We  are  too  strong,  too  full  of  self,  for 
God  to  use  us.     We  vainly    imagine    that    we    are 


BESIDE  THE  DRYING  BROOK.  25 

something,  and  that  God  cannot  dispense  with  us. 
How  urgently  we  need  that  God  should  bury  our 
self-life  in  the  darkness  of  a  Cherith  or  a  tomb,  so 
as  to  hide  it,  and  keep  it  in  the  place  of  death. 
We  must  not  be  surprised,  then,  if  sometimes 
our  Father  says:  "There,  child,  thou  hast  had 
enough  of  this  hurry,  and  publicity,  and  excite- 
ment; get  thee  hence,  and  hide  thyself  by  the  brook 
— hide  thyself  in  the  Cherith  of  the  sick  chamber, 
or  in  the  Cherith  of  bereavement,  or  in  some  soli- 
tude from  which  the  crowds  have  ebbed  away." 
Happy  is  he  who  can  reply,  "This  Thy  will  is  also 
mine;  I  flee  unto  Thee  to  hide  me.  Hide  me  in 
the  secret  of  Thy  tabernacle,  and  beneath  the  cov- 
ert of  Thy  wings!  " 

Every  saintly  soul  that  would  wield  great  power 
with  men  must  win  it  in  some  hidden  Cherith. 
A  Carmel  triumph  always  presupposes  a  Cherith; 
and  a  Cherith  always  leads  to  a  Carmel.  We  can- 
not give  out  unless  we  have  previously  taken  in. 
We  cannot  exorcise  the  devils  which  possess  men, 
unless  we  have  first  entered  into  our  closets  and 
shut  our  doors,  and  spent  hours  of  rapt  intercourse 
with  God.  The  acquisition  of  spiritual  power  is 
impossible,  unless  we  can  hide  ourselves  from  men 
and  from  ourselves  in  some  deep  gorge,  where  we 
may  absorb  the  power  of  the  eternal  God;  as  vegeta- 
tion through  long  ages  absorbed  these  qualities  of 
sunshine,  which  it  now  gives  back  through  burning 
coal. 

Bishop  Andrewes  had  his  Cherith,  in  which  he 
spent  five  hours  every  day  in  prayer  and  devotion, 
John  Welsh  had  it — who  thought  the  day    ill-spent 


26  EUJy4H:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POiVER. 

which  did  not  witness  eight  or  ten  hours  of  closet 
communion.  David  Brainard  had  it  in  the  woods  of 
North  America,  which  were  the  favorite  scene  of 
his  devotions.  Christmas  Evans  had  it  in  his 
long  and  lonely  journeys  amid  the  hills  of  Wales. 
Fletcher  of  Madeley  had  it — who  would  often  leave 
his  class-room  for  his  private  chamber,  and  spend 
hours  upon  his  knees  with  his  students,  pleading 
for  the  fullness  of  the  Spirit  till  they  could  kneel 
no  longer.  Or — passing  back  to  the  blessed  age 
from  which  we  date  the  centuries — Patmos,  the  se- 
clusion of  the  Roman  prisons,  the  Arabian  desert, 
the  hills  and  vales  of  Palestine,  are  forever  mem- 
orable as  the  Cheriths  of  those  who  have  made  our 
modern  world.  Our  Lord  found  His  Cherith  at 
Nazareth,  and  in  the  wilderness  of  Judea;  amid 
the  olives  of  Bethany,  and  the  solitudes  of  Gadara. 
Not  one  of  us,  therefore,  can  dispense  with  some 
Cherith,  where  the  sounds  of  earthly  toil  and  hu- 
man voices  are  exchanged  for  the  murmur  of  the 
waters  of  quietness  which  are  fed  from  the  throne; 
and  where  we  may  taste  the  sweets  and  im^bibe  the 
power  of  a  life  hidden  with  Christ  and  in  Christ 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Sometimes  a 
human  spirit,  intent  on  its  quest,  may  even  find 
its  Cherith  in  a  crowd;  of  such  an  one  God  is  its 
all-sufficient  abode,  and  the  secret  place  of  the 
Most  High  its  most  holy  place. 

III.    God's  servants  must  learn  to  trust   God 

ABSOLUTELY. 

We  yield  at  first  a  timid  obedience    to    a   com- 


BESIDE  THE  DRYING  BROOK.  27 

mand  which  seems  to  involve  manifest  impossi- 
bilities; but  when  we  find  that  God  is  even  better 
than  His  word,  our  faith  groweth  exceedingly,  and 
we  advance  to  further  feats  of  faith  and  service. 
This  is  how  God  trains  His  young  eaglets  to  fly. 
At  last  nothing  is  impossible.  This  is  the  key  to 
Elijah's  experience. 

How  strange  to  be  sent  to  a  brook,  which  would 
of  course  be  as  subject  to  the  drought  as  any  other! 
How  contrary  to  nature  to  suppose  that  ravens, 
which  feed  on  carrion,  would  find  such  food  as  man 
could  eat;  or,  having  found  it,  would  bring  it  reg- 
ularly morning  and  evening!  How  unlikely,  too, 
that  he  could  remain  secreted  from  the  search  of 
the  bloodhounds  of  Jezebel  anywhere  within  the 
limits  of  Israel!  But  God's  command  was  clear 
and  unmistakable.  It  left  him  no  alternative 
but  to  obey.  "So  he  went  and  did  according  to 
the  word  of  the  Lord." 

One  evening,  as  we  may  imagine,  Elijah  reached 
the  narrow  gorge,  down  which  the  brook  bounded 
with  musical  babble  toward  the  Jordan  On  either 
side  the  giant  cliffs  towered  up,  inclosing  a  little 
patch  of  blue  sky.  The  interlacing  boughs  of  the 
trees  made  a  natural  canopy  in  the  hottest  noon. 
All  along  the  streamlet's  course  the  moss  would 
make  a  carpet  of  richer  hue  and  softer  texture  than 
could  be  found  in  the  palaces  of  kings.  And, 
yonder,  came  the  young  ravens — "the  young  ravens 
that  lack  and  suffer  hunger'' — bringing  bread  and 
flesh.  What  a  lesson  was  this  of  God's  power  to 
provide  for  his  child!  In  after  days  Elijah  would 
often  recur  to  it,  as  dating  a  new  epoch  in  his  life. 


28  ELIJAH:  AhID  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

'I  can  never  doubt  God  again.  I  am  thankful  that 
He  shut  me  off  from  all  other  supplies,  and  threw 
me  back  on  Himself.  I  am  sure  that  He  will  never 
fail  me,  whatsoever  the  circumstances  of  strait  or 
trial  through  which  He  may  call  me  to  pass.' 

There  is  strong  emphasis  on  the  word  there — "I 
have  commanded  the  ravens  to  feed  thee  there." 
Elijah  might  have  preferred  many  hiding-places 
to  Cherith;  but  that  was  the  only  place  to  which 
the  ravens  would  bring  his  supplies;  and,  as  long 
as  he  was  there,  God  was  pledged  to  provide  for 
him.  Our  supreme  thought  should  be:  "Am  I 
where  God  wants  me  to  be?"  If  so,  God  will  work 
a  direct  miracle,  sooner  than  suffer  us  to  perish  for 
lack.  If  the  younger  son  chooses  to  go  to  the  far 
country  of  his  own  accord,  he  may  be  in  danger  of 
dying  of  starvation  among  his  swine;  but  if  the 
Father  send  him  there,  he  shall  have  enough  and 
to  spare.  God  sends  no  soldier  to  the  warfare  on 
his  own  charges.  He  does  not  expect  us  to  attend 
to  the  duties  of  the  field  and  the  commissariat. 
The  manna  always  accompanies  the  pillar  of  cloud. 
If  we  do  His  will  on  earth  as  in  heaven.  He  will 
give  us  daily  bread.  "Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom 
of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these  things 
shall  be  added  unto  you." 

We  will  not  stay  to  argue  the  probability  of  this 
story  being  true.  It  is  enough  ^that  it  is  written 
here.  And  the  presence  of  the  supernatural  pre- 
sents no  difficulties  to  those  who  can  say  "Our 
Father,"  and  who  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  out 
Lord  Jesus.  But  if  corroboration  were  needed,  it 
could  be  multiplied  an  hundred-fold  from  the  expe- 


BESIDE  THE  DRYING  BROOK.  29 


rience  of  living  people,  who  have  had  their  needs 
supplied  in  ways  quite  as  marvelous  as  the  coming 
of  ravens  to  the  lonely  prophet. 

A  little  boy,  having  read  this  incident  with  his 
widowed  mother  one  wintry  night,  as  they  sat  in 
a  fireless  room  beside  a  bare  table,  asked  her  if  he 
might  set  the  door  open  for  God's  ravens  to  come 
in;  he  was  so  sure  that  they  must  be  on  their  way. 
The  burgomaster  of  that  German  town,  passing 
by,  was  attracted  by  the  sight  of  the  open  door, 
and  entered,  inquiring  the  cause.  When  he  learned 
the  reason,  he  said,  "I  will  be  God's  raven;"  and 
relieved  their  need  then  and  afterward.  Ah,  reader, 
God  has  an  infinite  fertility  of  resource;  and  if 
thou  art  doing  His  work  where  He  would  have 
thee.  He  will  supply  thy  need,  though  the  heav- 
ens fall.     Only  trust  Him! 

IV.     God'  s  servants  are  often  called  to  sit  by 

DRYING   BROOKS. 

"It  came  to  pass  after  a  while  [niargm,  at  the 
end  of  days]  that  the  brook  dried  up."  Our  wild- 
est fancy  can  but  inadequately  realize  the  condi- 
tion to  which  the  Land  of  Promise  was  reduced  by 
the  first  few  months  of  drought.  The  mountain 
pastures  were  seared  as  by  the  passage  of  fire.  The 
woodlands  and  copses  were  scorched  and  silent. 
The  rivers  and  brooks  shrank  attenuated  in  their 
beds,  receding  continually,  and  becoming  daily 
more  shallow  and  still.  There  was  no  rain  to  re- 
vive vegetation,  or  replenish  the  supplies  of  water. 
The  sun  rose  and  set  for  months  in  a  sky,  the  blue 
of  which  was  unflecked  by  a  single    cloud.     There 


30  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

was  no  dew  to  sprinkle  the  parched,  cracked  earth 
with  refreshing  tears.  And  so  Cherith  began  to 
sing  less  cheerily.  Each  day  marked  a  visible 
diminution  of  its  stream.  Its  voice  grew  fainter 
and  fainter;  till  its  bed  became  a  course  of  stones, 
baking  in  the  scorching  heat.      It  dried  up. 

What  did  Elijah  think?  Did  he  think  that  God 
had  forgotten  him?  Did  he  begin  to  make  plans 
for  himself?  This  would  have  been  human;  but 
we  will  hope  that  he  waited  quietly  for  God,  qui- 
eting himself  as  a  weaned  child,  as  he  sang,  "My 
soul,  wait  thou  only  upon  God;  for  my  expectation 
is  from  Him." 

Many  of  us  have  had  to  sit  by  drying  brooks; 
perhaps  some  are  sitting  by  them  now — the  drying 
brook  of  popularity,  ebbing  away  as  from  John  the 
Baptist;  the  drying  brook  of  health,  sinking  un- 
der a  creeping  paralysis,  or  a  slow  consumption; 
the  drying  brook  of  money,  slowly  dwindling  be- 
fore the  demands  of  sickness,  bad  debts,  or  other 
people's  extravagance;  the  drying  brook  of  friend- 
ship, which  for  long  has  been  diminishing,  and 
threatens  soon  to  cease.  Ah,  it  is  hard  to  sit  be- 
side a  drying  brook — much  harder  than  to  face  the 
prophets  of  Baal  on  Carmel. 

Why  does  God  let  them  dry?  He  wants  to  teach 
us  not  to  trust  in  His  gifts,  but  in  Himself.  He 
wants  to  drain  us  of  self,  as  He  drained  the  apos- 
tles by  ten  days  of  waiting  before  Pentecost.  He 
wants  to  loosen  our  roots  ere  He  removes  us  to 
some  other  sphere  of  service  and  education.  He 
wants  to  put  in  stronger  contrast  the  river  of  throne- 
water  that  never  dries.     Let  us  learn  these  lessons. 


BESIDE  THE  DRYING  BROOK.  31 

and  turn  from  our  failing  Cheriths  to  our  unfail- 
ing Savior.  All  sufficiency  resides  in  Him^ 
unexhausted  by  the  flight  of  the  ages;  undimin- 
ished by  the  thirst  of  myriads  of  saints,  who  drink 
yonder  in  the  uplands,  near  its  source,  as  we  do 
in  these  lower  lands  of  earth  and  time.  "The 
river  of  God  is  full  of  water."  "He  that  drinketh 
of  this  water  shall  thirst  again:  but  he  that  drink- 
eth of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never 
thirst;  but  it  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water 
springing  up  into  everlasting  life.*'  "Drink  abun- 
dantly, O  beloved! " 


82  ELU/tH:  AhID  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POJVER. 


III. 

©rt)eret)  to  Zarepbatb. 

(I  Kings  xvii.) 

A  FRIEND  of  mine,  spending  a  few  days  in  the 
neighborhood  of  our  English  lakes,  came 
upon  the  most  beautiful  shrubs  he  had  ever 
seen.  Arrested  by  their  extraordinary  luxuriance,  he 
inquired  the  cause,  and  learned  that  it  was  due  to 
a  judicious  system  of  transplanting,  constantly 
pursued.  Whatever  may  be  the  effect  of  such  a 
process  in  nature,  it  is  certainly  true  that  our 
heavenly  Father  employs  similar  methods  to  secure 
the  highest  results  in  us.  He  is  constantly  trans- 
planting us.  And  though  these  changes  threaten  at 
times  to  hinder  all  steady  progress  in  the  Divine 
life,  yet,  if  they  are  rightly  borne,  they  result  in 
the  most  exquisite  manifestations  of  Christian 
character  and  experience. 

Another  illustration  of  the  same  truth  is  given 
by  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  when  he  says,  "Moab 
hath  been  at  ease  from  his  youth;  and  he  hath 
settled  on  his  lees;  and  hath  not  been  emptied  from 
vessel  to  vessel;  neither  hath  he  gone  into  captiv- 
ity: therefore  his  taste  remained  in  him,  and  his 
scent  is  not  changed"  (Jer.  xlviii.  ii).  Grape  juice, 
when   first    expressed    from    its    ruddy  chalice,    is 


ORDERED  TO  ZAREPHATH.  33 

impure  and  thick;  it  is  left  in  vessels  for  a  time, 
till  fermentation  has  done  its  work,  and  a  thick 
sediment,  called  lees,  has  been  precipitated  to  the 
bottom.  When  this  is  done,  the  liquid  is  carefully 
drawn  off  into  another  vessel,  so  that  all  the  pre- 
cipitated sediment  is  left  behind.  This  emptying 
process  is  repeated  again  and  again,  till  the  offen- 
sive odor  that  came  from  the  "must"  has  passed 
away,  and  the  liquid  has  become  clear  and  beauti- 
ful. In  the  case  of  Moab,  there  had  been  none  of 
this  unsettling  process;  "he  had  not  been  emptied 
from  vessel  to  vessel,"  and  in  consequence  the 
people  had  made  no  moral  or  spiritual  progress; 
"his  taste  remained  in  him,  and  his  scent  was  not 
changed."  The  quiet  life  is  by  no  means  the  great- 
est life.  Some  characters  can  only  reach  the  high- 
est standard  of  spirituality  by  the  disturbings  or 
displacings  in  the  order  of  God's  providence. 

Will  not  this  cast  light  upon  God's  dealings 
with  Elijah?  Once  he  stood  in  the  vessel  "Home;" 
then  emptied  into  the  vessel  "Jezreel;"  then  into 
the  vessel  "Cherith;"  and  now  into  the  fourth  ves- 
sel, "Zarephath:  "  and  all  that  he  might  not  settle 
upon  his  lees,  but  might  be  urged  toward  a  goal 
of  moral  greatness  which  otherwise  he  had  never 
reached,  but  which  qualified  him  to  take  his  stand 
in  after-days  on  the  Transfiguration  Mount,  the 
associate  of  Moses,  the  companion  of  Christ.  Take 
heart,  ye  who  are  compelled  to  be  constantly  on 
the  move — pitching  the  tent  to-night,  and  sum- 
moned by  the  moving  cloud  and  the  trumpet  call 
to  strike  it  to-morrow;  all  this  is  under  the  direc- 
tion of  a  wise  and  faithful  love,  which  is  educating 


34  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

you  for  a  glorious  destiny.  Believe  only  that  your 
circumstances  are  those  most  suited  to  develop 
your  character.  They  have  been  selected  out  of  all 
possible  combinations  of  events  and  conditions,  in 
order  to  effect  in  you  the  highest  finish  of  useful- 
ness and  beauty;  they  would  have  been  the  ones 
selected  by  you,  if  all  the  wide  range  of  omniscient 
knowledge  had  been  within  your  reach. 

And  yet,  when  a  human    spirit  is  entirely    taken 
up  with  God,  as  Elijah  was,  these  changes   become 
comparatively   harmless    and    trifling — as    a    gnat 
sting  to  a  soldier    in    the    heat  of  battle.     To    one 
who  lives    ever  in  the    presence  of  the    unchanging 
God,  and  who  can  say,  "Thus  saith  Jehovah,  before 
whom  I  stand,"  the  ever-varying    conditions  of  our 
lot    touch    only    the    outer    rim  of    life;    whatever 
they  take  away,  they   cannot  take  away  //la^;  what- 
ever they  bring,  they    cannot    give  more  than  ^/laL 
The    consciousness  of  that  Presence  is  the  one  all- 
mastering  thought — the  inspiration,  the  solace,  the 
comfort,  of  every   waking    hour.     And  as  we    have 
seen  a  far-spread    summer    landscape    through    the 
haze    of    intense    heat,     so    do    all    people    and 
things  and  events  show  themselves  through  the  all- 
enwrapping,    all-encompassing    presence   of    God. 
To  fulfill  His  plans;    to  obey  the   least  intimation 
of  His  will;    to  wait  on  His  hand;    to  dwell  in  the 
absorbing   vision  of  Himself;    to   be  satisfied  with 
the     fullness    of    joy    which    fills    His    presence- 
chamber  with    sweetest  perfume  and  with  celestial 
music — this  is  the  one  passion  of  the  happy  spirit, 
to  whom,  as  to  Elijah,    this    grace   is   given.     But 
such    grace  is  for  thee,  through    the    Holy    Ghost, 


ORDERED  TO  Z  A  REP  HATH.  35 

if  only    thou  wilt  open  to  it  all  the    capacities   of 
thy  heart  and  life.     Why  not  seek  it? 
There  are  several  lessons  here. 

I,     Faith  awaits  God's  plans. 

"It  came  to  pass,  after  a  while,  that  the  brook 
dried  up,  because  there  had  been  no  rain  in  the 
land."  Week  after  week,  with  unfaltering  and  stead- 
fast spirit,  Elijah  watched  that  dwindling  brook; 
often  tempted  to  stagger  through  unbelief,  but 
refusing  to  allow  his  circumstances  to  come  be- 
tween himself  and  God.  Unbelief  sees  God 
through  circumstances,  as  we  sometimes  see  the 
sun  shorn  of  his  rays  through  the  smoky  air;  but 
faith  puts  God  between  itself  and  circumstances, 
and  looks  at  them  through  Him.  And  so  the 
dwindling  brook  became  a  silver  thread;  and  the 
silver  thread  stood  presently  in  pools  at  the  foot 
of  the  largest  bowlders;  and  then  the  pools 
shrank.  The  birds  fled;  the  wild  creatures  of  field 
and  forest  came  no  more  to  drink;  the  brook  was 
dry.  Only  then,  to  his  patient  and  unwavering 
spirit,  "the  word  of  the  Lord  came,  saying.  Arise, 
get  thee  to  Zarephath. " 

Most  of  us  would  have  got  anxious  and  worn  with 
planning  long  before  that.  We  should  have  ceased 
our  songs  as  soon  as  the  streamlet  caroled  less 
musically  over  its  rocky  bed;  and  with  harps 
swinging  on  the  willows  we  should  have  paced  to 
and  fro  upon  the  withering  grass,  lost  in  pensive 
thought.  And  probably,  long  ere  the  brook  was 
dry,  we  should  have  devised  some  plan,  and  asking 


36  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

God's  blessing  on  it,  would  have  started  off  else- 
where. Alas!  we  are  all  too  full  of  our  own 
schemes,  and  plans,  and  contrivings.  And  if  Sam- 
uel does  not  come  just  when  we  expect,  we  force 
ourselves,  and  offer  the  burnt-offering  (i  Sam.  xiii. 
12).  This  is  the  source  of  untold  misery.  We 
sketch  out  our  programme,  and  rush  into  it;  and 
only  when  we  are  met  by  insuperable  obstacles 
do  we  begin  to  reflect  whether  it  was  God's  will, 
or  to  appeal  to  Him.  He  does  often  extricate  us, 
because  His  mercy  endureth  forever;  but  if  we 
had  only  waited  first  to  see  the  unfolding  of  His 
plans,  we  should  never  have  found  ourselves 
landed  in  such  an  inextricable  labyrinth;  and  we 
should  never  have  been  compelled  to  retrace  our 
steps  with  so  many  tears  of  shame. 

One  of  the  formative  words  for  all  human  lives, 
and  especially  for  God's  servants,  was  given  by 
God  to  Moses,  when  He  said:  "See  that  thou  make 
all  things  according  to  the  pattern  showed  to  thee 
in  the  mount"  (Heb.  viii.  5).  Moses  was  eager 
to  do  God's  work,  and  the  best  skill  amongst  the 
people  was  at  his  command;  but  he  must  not 
make  a  single  bell,  or  pomegranate,  or  tassel, 
or  fringe,  or  curtain,  or  vessel,  except  on  God's  pat- 
tern, and  after  God's  ideal.  And  so  he  was  taken 
up  into  the  mount,  and  God  opened  the  door  into 
his  own  mind,  where  the  tabernacle  stood  com- 
plete as  an  ideal;  and  Moses  was  permitted  to  see 
the  thing  as  it  lived  in  the  thought  and  heart  of 
God.  Forty  days  of  reverent  study  passed  by;  and 
when  he  returned  to  the  mountain-foot,  he  had  only 
to  transfer    into    the    region    of    actual    fact    that 


ORDERED  TO  Z/iREPHATH.  ST 

which  had   been  already    shown  to  him,  in  pattern, 
on  the  mount. 

Surely  some  such  thought  as  this  must  have  been 
in  the  mind  of  our  blessed  Lord,  when  He  said: 
"The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  Himself,  but  what  He 
seeth  the  Father  do"  (John  v.  19).  So  utterly 
had  He  emptied  Himself  that  He  had  abandoned 
even  His  own  schemes  and  plans;  He  lived  a 
planless  life,  accepting  each  moment  the  plan 
which  His  Father  unfolded  before  Him;  and  being 
confident  that  that  plan  would  lead  Him  on  to 
greater  and  ever  greater  works,  until  the  world 
should  marvel  at  the  splendor  of  the  results — rising 
from  Gethsemane  and  Calvary,  through  the  broken 
grave,  to  the  Ascension  Mount,  and  the  glory  of 
His  second  Advent.  Oh,  mystery  of  humiliation, 
that  He  who  planned  all  things  should  will  to 
live  a  life  of  such  absolute  dependence!  And  yet, 
if  He  lived  such  a  life,  how  much  more  will  it 
become  us;  how  much  anxiety  it  will  save  us;  and 
to  what  lengths  of  usefulness  and  heights  of  glory 
will  it  bring  us!  Would  that  we  were  content  to 
wait  for  God  to  unveil  His  plan,  so  that  our  life 
might  be  simply  the  working  out  of  His  thought, 
the  exemplification  of  His  ideal!  Let  this  be  the 
cry  of  our  hearts:  "Lord,  show  me  Thy  way; 
teach  me  to  do  Thy  will:  show  me  the  way  wherein 
I  should  walk,  for  unto  Thee  do  I  lift  up  my 
soul." 

n.     God's  plans  demand  implicit  obedience. 
"So  he  arose   and  went   to  Zarephath, "  as  before 


38  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

he  had  gone  to  Cherith,  and  as  presently  he  would 
go  to  show  himself  to  Ahab.  A  Christian  lady, 
who  had  learned  amongst  us  the  blessedness  of  a 
surrendered  life,  and  was  soon  after  obliged  to  find 
another  home  across  the  ocean,  came  back  quite 
recently,  over  thousands  of  miles  of  land  and 
water,  to  visit  the  scene  of  that  act,  in  the  hope 
that  she  would  find  again  her  former  joy,  which  had 
faded  like  the  hues  of  a  too  radiant  dawn.  But  to 
her  disappointment,  though  she  worshiped  on  the 
same  sacred  spot,  and  listened  to  the  sounds  of 
the  well-known  voice,  she  could  not  recover  the 
priceless  jewel  she  had  lost.  At  last  the  cause 
appeared.  She  had  been  living  in  conscious  dis- 
obedience to  the  will  of  Christ,  expressed  through 
her  conscience  and  His  Word.  The  motives  that 
prompted  the  disobedience  had  a  touch  of  nobility 
about  them;  but  it  was  disobedience  still,  and  it 
wrought  its  own  penalty. 

This  is  the  true  cause  of  failure  in  so  many 
Christian  lives.  We  catch  sight  of  God's  ideal; 
we  are  enamored  with  it;  we  vow  to  be  only  His; 
we  use  the  most  emphatic  words;  we  dedicate  our- 
selves upon  the  altar.  For  a  while  we  seem  to 
tread  another  world,  bathed  in  heavenly  light. 
Then  there  comes  a  command  clear  and  unmistaka- 
ble. We  must  leave  some  beloved  Cherith,  and  go 
to  some  unwelcome  Zarephath;  we  must  speak 
some  word,  take  some  step,  cut  off  some  habit: 
and  we  shrink  from  it — the  cost  is  too  great.  But, 
directly  we  refuse  obedience,  the  light  dies  off  the 
landscape  of  our  lives,  and  dark  clouds  fling  their 
shadows  far  and  near. 


ORDERED  TO  Z  A  RE  ^H ATM.  39 

We  do  not  win  salvation  by  our  obedience;  that 
is  altogether  the  gift  of  God,  to  be  received  by  faith 
in  the  finished  work  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
But,  being  saved,  we  must  obey.  Our  Savior  ad- 
jures us,  by  the  love  we  bear  to  Himself,  to  keep 
His  commandments.  And  He  does  so  because  He 
wants  us  to  taste  His  rarest  gifts,  and  because  He 
knows  that  in  the  keeping  of  His  commandments 
there  is  great  reward. 

Search  the  Bible  from  board  to  board,  and  see 
if  strict,  implicit,  and  instant  obedience  has  not 
been  the  secret  of  the  noblest  lives  that  ever  lit 
up  the  dull  monotony  of  the  world.  The  proudest 
title  of  our  King  was  the  Servant  of  Jehovah.  And 
none  of  us  can  seek  to  realize  a  nobler  aim  than 
that  which  was  the  inspiration  of  His  heart:  "I 
come  to  do  Thy  will,  O  my  God."  Mary,  the 
simple-hearted  mother,  uttered  a  word  which  is 
pertinent  to  every  age,  when,  at  the  marriage-feast, 
she  turned  to  the  servants  and  said,  "Whatsoever 
He  saith  unto  you,  do  it." 

HI.     Implicit  obedience  sometimes  brings  us  into 

A    SMELTING-FURNACE. 

"Zarephath"  means  a  smelting-furnace.  It  lay 
outside  the  Land  of  Canaan,  occupying  the  site  of 
the  modern  Surafend,  which  stands  on  a  long 
ridge,  backed  by  the  snow-clad  steeps  of  Hermon, 
and  overlooking  the  blue  waters  of  the  Mediterra- 
nean. Many  things  might  have  made  it  distaste- 
ful to  the  prophet.  It  belonged  to  the  land  from 
which  Jezebel  had  brought  her  impious  tribe.    It  was 


40         ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POfVER. 

' ~- — — —  r^ 

as  much  cursed  by  the  terrible  drought  as  Canaan. 
It  was  impossible  to  reach  it  save  by  a  weary  jour^ 
ney  of  one  hundred  miles  through  the  heart  of  the 
land,  where  his  name  was  execrated,  and  his  person 
proscribed.  And  then  to  be  sustained  by  a  widow 
woman  belonging  to  a  heathen  people!  He  would 
not  have  so  much  minded  to  have  sustained  her; 
but  it  was  not  pleasant  to  feel  that  he  must  be  depend- 
ent on  her  slender  earnings  or  meager  store.  Surely 
it  was  a  smelting-furnace  for  cleansing  out  any  alloy 
of  pride,  or  self-reliance,  or  independence  which 
might  be  lurking  in  the  recesses  of  his  heart. 

And  there  was  much  of  the  refining  fire  in  the 
character  of  his  reception.  When  he  reached  the 
straggling  town  it  was  probably  toward  nightfall; 
and  at  the  city  gate  a  widow  woman  was  gathering 
a  few  sticks  to  prepare  the  evening  meal.  To  some 
it  might  have  seemed  a  coincidence;  but  there  is 
no  such  word  in  faith's  vocabulary — that  which  to 
human  judgment  is  a  coincidence,  to  faith  is  a  Provi- 
dence. This  was  evidently  the  widow  of  whom 
God  had  spoken.  Faint  with  thirst,  and  weary  with 
long  travel,  but  never  doubting  that  his  needs 
would  be  amply  met,  he  asked  her  to  fetch  a  little 
water  in  a  vessel,  that  he  might  drink.  The 
widow  may  have  had  some  premonition  of  his  com- 
ing. There  would  seem  to  be  some  suggestion  of 
this  having  been  so,  in  the  words,  "/  /lave  commanded 
a  widow  woman  to  sustain  thee."  Her  character 
will  come  out  in  due  course;  but  there  must  have 
been  something  in  her  which  could  not  be  found  in 
the  many  widows  of  the  land  of  Israel  (Luke  iv.  25, 
26).     It  was  for  no  arbitrary  reason  that  God  passed 


ORDERED  TO  Z  A  REP  HATH.  41 

them  over,  and  went  so  far  afield.  She  must  have 
possessed  qualities  of  character,  germs  of  better 
things,  sparks  of  heroism  and  of  faith,  which  dis- 
tinguished her  from  all  her  sorrowing  sisterhood, 
and  made  her  the  befitting  hostess  of  the  prophet, 
and  the  glad  sharer  with  him  in  his  Father's  bounty. 
To  her  the  impression  was  probably  given  of 
the  coming  of  the  prophet — just  as  the  visions  to 
Saul  and  to  Ananias,  to  Cornelius  and  to  Peter, 
flashed  upon  them  in  duplicates. 

She  was  not,  therefore,  surprised  at  the  prophet's 
request,  and  silently  went  to  fetch  a  cup  of  cold 
water  (Matt.  x.  42).  Encouraged  by  her  willing- 
ness, Elijah  asked  her  to  bring  with  her  a  morsel 
of  bread.  It  was  a  modest  request;  but  it  unlocked 
the  silent  agony  of  her  soul.  She  had  not  a  cake, 
but  a  handful  of  meal  in  a  barrel,  and  a  little  oil 
in  a  crusej  and  she  was  about  to  make  one  last  re- 
past for  herself  and  her  son,  who  was  probably  too 
weak  through  long  privation  to  be  with  her;  and, 
having  eaten  it,  they  had  no  alternative  but  to  lie 
down  together  and  die.  It  was  very  depressing  for 
the  man  of  God,  after  his  long  and  weary  march. 

It  is  thus  that  God  leads  His  people  still.  "All 
that  abideth  not  the  fire,  ye  shall  make  go  through 
the  water;  "  i.  <?.,  He  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  tempted 
beyond  that  which  we  are  able  to  bear;  He  will 
not  thresh  vetches  with  a  sharp  threshing  instru- 
ment, nor  turn  a  cart-wheel  about  on  cummin.  But 
it  is  written,  "Everything  that  may  abide  the  fire, 
ye  shall  make  it  go  through  the  fire,  and  it  shall  be 
clean"  (Num.  xxxi.  23).  If,  then,  there  is  aught 
in  you  that  can    bear    the  ordeal,  be  sure  you  will 


42  ELIJAH:  AhID  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


be  put  into  the  furnace.  But  the  fire  shall  not  de- 
stroy; it  shall  only  cleanse  you.  You  will  be  put 
into  it  by  the  hand  of  Love;  and  kept  in  it  only 
till  patience  has  done  her  perfect  work.  The 
flames  shall  only  consume  the  bonds  that  bind 
you;  and,  as  you  walk  loose  in  the  fire,  bystanders 
shall  descry  at  your  side  the  form  of  one  like  unto 
the  Son  of  God. 

IV.     When  God  puts  His  people  into  the  fur- 
nace, He  will  supply  all  their  need. 

Circumstances  were  certainly  very  depressing;  but 
what  are  they  to  a  man  whose  inner  self  is  occupied 
with  the  presence  and  power  of  God?  God  had 
said  that  he  should  be  fed,  and  by  that  widow; 
and  so  it  should  be,  though  the  earth  and  heaven 
should  pass  away.  Difficulties  are  to  faith  what 
gymnastic  apparatus  are  to  boys,  means  of  strength- 
ening the  muscular  fiber.  Like  the  fabled  sala- 
mander, faith  feeds  on  fire.  And  so  with  heroic 
faith  Elijah  said:  "Fear  not;  go  and  do  as  thou 
hast  said:  for  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel. 
The  barrel  of  meal  shall  not  waste,  neither  shall 
the  cruse  of  oil  fail,  until  the  day  that  the  Lord 
sendeth  rain  upon  the  earth." 

Our  only  need  is  to  inquire  if  we  are  at  that 
point  in  God's  pattern  where  He  would  have  us 
be.  If  we  are,  though  it  seem  impossible  for  us  to 
be  maintained,  the  thing  impossible  shall  be  done. 
We  shall  be  sustained  by  a  miracle,  if  no  ordinary 
means  will  suffice.  "Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  His  righteousness,  and    all    these    things 


ORDERED  TO  Z  A  REP  HATH.  43 

shall  be  added  unto  you."  We  reserve  for  future 
thought  that  unfailing  meal  and  oil;  but,  ere  we 
close,  remark  with  what  different  meaning  different 
people  may  use  the  same  holy  words.  The  widow 
said,  as  Elijah  had  done,  "The  Lord  God  liveth" 
(i  Kings  xvii.  12).  But  to  her  those  words  brought 
no  comfort;  because  they  were  repeated  from  hear- 
say, and  not  from  a  living  experience  of  their  truth. 
God  forbid  that  they  should  be  a  parrot-speech 
upon  your  lips,  my  reader!  but,  rather,  may  they 
be  burned  into  your  inmost  being — so  that  you  may 
go  through  life  fearless  of  all  save  sin;  and  cheer- 
ing timid  hearts  with  the  assurance  of  an  unfalter- 
ing courage,  "Fear  not! "  (ver.   13.) 


44  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  FOIVER. 


IV. 

**Z\ic  Spirit  ant)  power  ot  JElias." 

(I  Kings  xvii.) 

WHO  that  have  traveled  in  Switzerland  can 
forget  the  early  mornings,  when  they  have 
been  summoned  from  sleep  to  await  the 
dawn?  A  weird  and  mysterious  hush  possesses 
nature — as  a  crowd  is  hushed  in  expectancy  of  a 
king's  approach.  Then  a  strange  light  spreads  out- 
ward from  the  eastern  sky;  at  last  one  of  the  loft- 
iest Alps  is  smitten  with  the  roseate  flush  of  dawn; 
then  another,  and  another,  and  yet  another,  till 
the  whole  sisterhood  of  peaks,  mantled  with 
untrodden  snow,  is  lit  up  and  transfigured  with 
burning  splendor.  But  during  all  this  time  the 
valleys  below  are  swathed  in  mist  and  veiled  in 
darkness.  And  it  is  only  after  hours  have  passed 
away,  and  the  monarch  of  the  day  has  climbed 
slowly  toward  his  throne,  that  the  blessed  sunlight 
penetrates  to  the  tiny  hamlets  and  scattered  chalets, 
or  sparkles  in  the  brooks,  or  casts  shadows  from  the 
stones  and  flowers. 

This  illustration  will  serve  to  show  the  difference 
between  the  dispensation  which  closed  with  the  first 
advent  of  our  Lord,  and  that  in  which  it  is  our 
bappiness  to  live,  and    which   is  to  close  with  His 


''THE  SPIRIT  AND  POIVER  OF  ELI  AS."  45 

glorious  Epiphany.  Each  has  been  blessed  with 
the  ministry  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  but  it  is  in  this 
age  alone,  dating  from  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  that 
He  has  been  poured  forth,  on  sons  and  daughters, 
on  servants  and  handmaidens  (Acts  ii.  17).  In  the 
previous  age  He  was  bestowed,  in  His  especial 
grace  and  fullness,  only  on  the  iliteoi  the  household 
of  faith.  Now  every  lowland  valley,  the  humblest 
and  the  weakest,  may  be  bathed  in  His  Divine  and 
sacred  influence;  but  in  Elijah's  time,  those  only 
who  were  Alpine  in  the  elevation  of  their  character 
knew  what  His  eternal  fullness  meant.  "Holy  men 
of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost."  "The  prophets  searched  what  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify."  "The 
Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given,  because  that  Jesus 
was  not  yet  glorified." 

Elijah  was  one  of  these  men  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  This  was  the  universal  testimony  of  those 
who  knew  him  best.  Elisha's  one  desire  was  that 
he  should  be  heir  to  the  Spirit  which  was  so  mani- 
festly upon  his  master  (2  Kings  ii.  9).  "The  spirit 
of  Elijah"  was  a  familiar  phrase  on  the  lips  of  the 
sons  of  the  prophets  (2  Kings  ii.  15).  And  years 
after,  when  the  angel  of  God  spake  to  Zacharias  in 
the  Temple,  he  could  find  no  better  illustration  of 
the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  his  promised 
child,  than  by  saying,  "He  shall  go  before  Him  in 
the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias"  (Luke  i.    15-17). 

The  glorious  ministry  of  Elijah  was  therefore  due, 
not  to  any  inherent  qualities  in  himself,  but  to  the 
extraordinary  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost — given 
to  him   as   to   other  holy  men  of  God,  in  the  old 


46  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

time — through  faith.  If  then  we  could  but  have 
that  same  Spirit  in  an  equal  measure,  we  should  be 
able  to  repeat  his  marvelous  deeds.  It  is  said  that 
it  would  be  possible  to  gather  up  the  mighty  force 
of  Niagara,  and,  transforming  it  into  electricity, 
carry  it  along  a  wire  to  drive  machinery  one  hundred 
miles  away:  if  this  should  ever  be  done,  it  would  be 
a  matter  of  almost  perfect  indifference  whether  the 
wire  were  slender  or  thick;  the  mighty  force  could 
as  well  travel  along  the  slender  thread,  and  as  well 
perform  its  marvels,  as  through  an  electric  cable. 
So  the  question  for  us  all  is,  whether  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  working  with  and  through  us  in  power;  if 
He  be,  then,  though  our  nature  be  paltry  and  weak, 
He  shall  effect  through  us  the  same  mighty  deeds 
as  through  men  vastly  our  superiors  in  mental  and 
moral  force.  Nay,  we  may  even  glory  in  our  infirmi- 
ties, that  this  Divine  power  may  rest  upon  us  more 
conspicuously,  and  that  the  glory  may  be  more  evi- 
dently God's. 

Now  the  question  arises:  May  we,  ordinary  Chris- 
tian people,  living  in  this  nineteenth  century,  hope 
to  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  in  that  extraordinary  and 
especial  measure  in  which  He  rested  upon  Elijah? 
Of  course  we  have  all  received  the  Holy  Spirit  to  a 
certain  extent,  or  we  could  never  have  come  to  Jesus. 
All  the  graces  of  the  Christian  character,  all  our 
comfort,  all  our  overcomings,  are  due  to  His  presence. 

"Every  virtue  we  possess, 
And  every  victory  won, 
And  every  thought  of  holiness, 
Are  His  alone." 

And  yei  it  is  clear  that  over  and  beyond  this  ordi« 


''THE  SPIRIT  AhID  POIVER  OF  ELI  AS."  47 

nary  grace,  which  all  believers  must  have,  there  is 
a  blessed  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  gives 
special  equipment  and  fitness  for  service.  Elijah 
had  it.  Our  blessed  Lord,  as  the  perfect  servant, 
had  it;  when,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  He 
returned  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  into  Gahlee,  and 
traced  His  marvelous  power  to  the  fact  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  being  upon  Him  (Luke  iv.  i,  14,  18).  The 
Apostles  had  it  from  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  when 
they  received  the  fullness  of  the  Spirit  for  witness- 
bearing;  although  they  must  have  possessed  Him 
before  for  personal  character  (compare  Acts  i.  8 
and  ii.  4  with  John  xx.  22).  The  Samaritan  be- 
lievers had  it;  but  only  after  Peter  and  John  had 
prayed  for  them,  "that  they  might  receive  the  Holy 
Ghost" — although  it  is  evident  that  their  previous 
conversion  and  joy  had  been  due  to  His  blessed 
work  (Acts  viii.  15,  16).  The  disciples  at  Ephesus 
had  it;  but  only  after  Paul  had  laid  his  hands  upon 
them. 

This  is  surely  what  we  want.  And  this  is  what 
we  may  have.  This  special  anointing  for  service  is 
not  only  for  men  like  Elijah,  or  Paul,  or  Peter, 
who  soar  far  beyond  us  into  the  azure  skies;  but  for 
us  all,  so  long  as  there  stands  upon  the  page  of 
revelation  these  priceless  words,  "The  promise  (re- 
ferring obviously  to  Acts  i.  4)  is  unto  you,  and 
to  your  children,  and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even 
as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call"  (Acts  ii. 
39).  We  are  amongst  the  far-off  ones;  and  there- 
fore we  may  claim  the  promise  for  ourselves,  and 
receive  the  fullness  of  the  Ho!y  Ghost,  to  equip  us 
for  our  life  and  ministry. 


48  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


But  there  are  three  conditions  with  which  we 
must  comply,  if  we  would  receive  and  keep  this 
blessed  gift. 

I.  We  must  be  emptied. 

God  cannot  fill  us  if  we  are  already  filled.  It  took 
ten  days  to  drain  the  Apostles,  even  though  they 
had  spent  three  years  under  the  immediate  tuition 
of  Christ  J  but  the  emptying  process  was  an  indis- 
pensable preliminary  to  the  Day  of  Pentecost. 
For  Elijah,  this  process  went  on  beside  the  drying 
brook,  and  during  the  long  and  dreary  march  to 
Zarephath,  and  throughout  his  sojourn  there.  It 
took  apparently  three  years  and  six  months.  It 
was  a  long  and  weary  waiting  time,  but  it  was 
well  spent;  for,  in  proportion  as  he  became  emp- 
tied of  self,  and  self-sufficiency,  and  self-depend- 
ence, he  became  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  Power: 
so  that  Carmel  itself,  with  all  its  heroic  deeds, 
was  gloriously  possible  to  him. 

Are  we  willing  to  pay  this  price?  Are  we  pre- 
pared for  God  to  empty  us  of  all  that  is  in  any- 
wise contrary  to  his  will?  Are  we  content  to  be 
empty  and  broken  vessels,  that  the  river,  in  whose 
bed  we  lie,  may  easily  flow  through  us?  If  not,  let 
us  ask  Him  to  work  in  us  to  will  His  own  good 
pleasure — plunging  the  cold,  stubborn  iron  into  the 
glowing  furnace  of  His  grace,  till  it  can  be  bent 
into  perfect  conformity  to  His  own  glorious  wilL 
But  if  we  are  willing,  let  us  present  our  emptied 
nature  to  the  Son  of  God,  that  He  may  fill  us  with 
the  fullness  of  the  Spirit.     Let  us  also  believe  that 


"THE  SPIRIT  AND  FOIVER  OF  ELI  AS."  49 

He  does  fill  us,  so  soon  as  we  yield  ourselves  to 
Him.  You  do  not  want  more  of  Him  more  urgently 
than  He  wants  more  of  you;  and  the  one  is  the  con- 
dition of  the  other  (James  iv.  5,  R  .V.).  Grace,  like 
nature,  abhors  a  vacuum;  and  just  as  the  cold  fresh 
air  will  rush  in  to  fill  an  exhausted  receiver  as 
soon  as  it  has  a  chance  to  enter,  so  does  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  enter  the  heart  that  can  boast  of 
nothing  but  an  aching  void.  There  may  be  no 
ecstasy,  no  rushing  wind,  no  fiery  baptism;  but, 
nevertheless,  "the  Lord,  whom  ye  seek,  shall  sud- 
denly come  to  His  Temple,"  in  floods  of  silent  and 
golden  light.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Make  this 
valley  full  of  ditches:  for  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Ye 
shall  not  see  wind,  neither  shall  ye  see  rain;  yet 
that  valley  shall  be  filled  with  water"  (2  Kings  iii. 
16,  17). 

Many  Christians,  seeking  this  blessed  fullness, 
make  the  same  mistake  as  is  so  constantly  made  by 
seekers  after  forgiveness  and  acceptance  with  God. 
They  look  within  for  evidences  of  the  reception  and 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  and  refuse  to  believe  in 
His  presence  unless  they  detect  certain  symptoms 
and  signs  which  they  consider  befitting.  This  is 
entirely  wrong.  The  reckoning  is  not  of  feeling, 
but  of  faith. 

If  we  have  complied  with  God's  directions,  we 
must  believe,  whether  we  feel  any  difference  or 
not,  that  God  has  done  His  part,  and  has  kept  His 
promise,  given  us  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord; 
and  that  He  has  not  been  slower  to  give  the  Holy 
Spirit  than  earthly  fathers  to  give  bread  to  their 
hungry  children  (Lukexi.  13).     When  we  leave  the 


50  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

chamber  where  we  have  solemnly  dedicated  our- 
selves to  God,  and  sought  to  be  filled  with  the 
Spirit,  we  must  not  examine  our  feelings  to  dis- 
cover whether  there  is  such  a  difference  in  us  as  we 
might  expect;  but  we  must  cry,  in  the  assurance  of 
faith:  "I  praise  Thee,  Blessed  One,  that  Thou  hast 
not  failed  to  perform  Thy  chosen  work;  Thou  hast 
entered  my  longing  heart;  Thou  hast  taken  up 
Thine  abode  in  me:  henceforth  Thou  shalt  have 
Thy  way  with  me,  to  will  and  do  Thine  own  good 
pleasure." 

We  should  not  seek  to  know  the  presence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  by  any  signs  pointing  to  Himself.  He 
reveals  not  Himself,  but  Christ.  He  glorifies  Him 
(John  xvi.  14).  And  the  surest  symptoms  that  He 
is  within  are:  sensitiveness  as  to  sin,  tenderness  of 
conscience,  and  the  growing  preciousness  of  Jesus, 
the  fragrance  of  His  name,  sympathy  with  His  pur- 
poses. Hast  thou  these  in  growing  measure?  Then 
dost  thou  know  somewhat  of  His  gracious  filling. 

A  little  child  was  once  asked  her  age;  and  she 
replied,  "I  don't  feel  like  seven.  I  feel  like  six; 
but  mother  says  I'm  seven."  Here  was  the  reckon- 
ing of  faith,  putting  her  mother's  word  before  her 
own  feeling.  And  thus  we  must  refuse  to  consider 
ourselves,  to  diagnose  our  symptoms,  or  feel  our 
pulse;  but  must  launch  out  upon  the  deep  of  God's 
truthfulness,  and  let  down  our  nets  for  a  draught 
of  power  and  blessing. 

II.  We  must  be  obedient. 

We  have  already  insisted  on  this;  but  it  is  so  in- 


''THE  SPIRIT  ^ND  POIVER  OF  ELI/iS."  51 

dispensable,  that  repeated  emphasis  must  be  laid 
upon  it.  Christ  reiterated  His  appeals  for  the  keep- 
ing of  His  commands  in  almost  every  sentence  of 
His  closing  discourses  with  His  disciples  (John  xiv. 
15,  21,  23,  24).  He  gives  the  secret  of  His  own 
abiding  in  His  Father's  love  in  these  striking  words: 
"As  the  Father  gave  Me  commandment,  even  so  I 
do.  If  ye  keep  My  commandments,  ye  shall  abide 
in  My  love;  even  as  I  have  kept  My  Father's  com- 
mandments, and  abide  in  His  love"  (John  xv,  10). 
Instant  and  implicit  obedience  to  the  teaching  of 
the  Word,  and  to  the  inner  promptings  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  is  an  absolute  condition  of  keeping,  or  increas- 
ing, the  store  of  sacred  influence.  On  the  contrary, 
one  little  item  of  disobedience  persisted  in  is  quite 
sufficient  to  check  all  further  bestowments,  and  even 
to  deprive  us  of  what  we  have.  "If  ye  be  willing 
and  obedient,  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land; 
but  if  ye  refuse  and  rebel,  ye  shall  be  devoured 
with  the  sword."  Nor  is  such  obedience  hard;  for  all 
God's  commands  are  enablings,  and  His  grace  is 
sufficient.  Look  out  for  it.  If  only  every  believer 
who  reads  these  lines  would  resolve  from  this  hour  to 
imitate  Elijah,  who  went  and  did  according  to  the 
word  of  the  Lord  (i  Kings  xvii.  5  and  10) — not 
with  the  thought  of  merit,  but  beneath  the  inspira- 
tion of  love;  not  in  the  weightier  matters  only,  but 
in  the  crossings  of  the  fs  and  in  the  dottings  of 
the  i's — they  would  find  at  once  that  there  would 
open  before  them  a  life  of  almost  inconceivable 
glory.  It  is  from  the  heights  of  unwavering  obedi- 
ence that  we  catch  sight  of  the  wide  and  open  sea 
of  blessedness.     The  exact  obedience  of  Elias  is  the 


52         ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

inviolable    condition    of  receiving  and  keeping  "the 
Spirit  and  Power  of  Elias. " 

III.     We  must  live  on  the  Word  of  God. 

Elijah,  the  widow,  and  her  son,  lived  on  their 
daily  replenished  stores;  but  the  prophet  had  other 
meat  to  eat  which  they  knew  not  of:  "Man  shall 
not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  pro- 
ceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  It  was  on  that 
word  that  Elijah  fed  during  those  long  and  slow- 
moving  days.  Sometimes  he  would  climb  the 
heights  behind  the  little  town,  in  deep  meditation 
upon  that  Word  which  is  like  the  great  mountains; 
and  sometimes  he  would  pace  the  sea-strand,  mus- 
ing on  those  judgments  which  are  a  great  deep. 
He  could  say  with  another:  "Thy  words  were  found, 
and  I  did  eat  them;  and  Thy  Word  was  unto  me 
the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  my  heart."  And  sitting 
with  the  widow  and  her  son,  he  would  make  that 
Word  the  topic  of  his  constant  talk;  so  that  she 
was  compelled  to  refer  to  it  in  these  significant 
terms:  "I  know  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  thy 
mouth  is  truth"   (i  Kings  xvii.   24). 

The  importance  of  feeding  on  the  Word  of  God 
is  affirmed  by  our  Lord,  when  He  says:  "As  the 
living  Father  hath  sent  Me,  and  I  live  by  the 
Father;  so  he  that  eateth  Me,  even  he  shall  live  by 
Me."  We  eat  our  Lord's  flesh  when  we  meditate 
lovingly  upon  His  Word.  The  Word  is  in  the  words. 
His  words  are  spirit  and  life. 

This  is  the  further  absolute  condition  of  becom- 
ing and  remaining    filled   with    the    Holy    Ghost. 


''THE  SPIRIT  AND  POIVER  OF  ELI  AS.''  53 

The  Spirit  works  with  and  through  the  Word,  What 
the  metal  is  to  the  locomotive;  what  the  wire  is  to 
the  electric  spark;  what  the  grammar  is  to  the 
teacher;  what  the  corn-grain  is  to  the  spirit  of  life 
—that  the  Word  of  God  is  to  the  Spirit  of  God.  If 
then  we  neglect  the  reverent  study  of  Scripture,  we 
cut  ourselves  off  from  the  very  vehicle  through 
which  God's  Spirit  enters  human  spirits.  And  this 
is  the  great  fault  of  our  times.  Christian  people 
will  attend  conventions,  plunge  into  all  kinds  of 
Christian  work,  read  many  good  books  about  the 
Bible  and  Christian  living;  but  they  give  the  Bible 
itself  the  most  cursory  and  superficial  heed.  And 
it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Bible  does  not  speak 
to  them. 

If  you  would  know  all  the  wondrous  beauty  of  a 
forest  glade,  you  must  not  be  satisfied  with  passing 
through  it  with  hasty  foot,  and  in  company  with  a 
troop  of  merry  children,  whose  ringing  laughter 
carries  panic  into  the  hearts  of  thousandsof  shy  liv- 
ing things  that,  with  trembling  hearts,  keep  still 
in  hole,  and  brake,  and  nest.  No;  you  must  go 
alone,  and  sit  quietly  down  on  the  log  of  some 
felled  tree,  and  wait.  Then  the  mystery  of  beauty 
will  begin  to  unfold  itself — the  fairy  bowers,  the 
mossy  glens,  the  interlacing  boughs.  Presently  a 
note  will  sound  from  yonder  bough,  as  the  signal  for 
the  outburst  of  many  sweet-voiced  choristers,  and 
the  woodland  will  ring  with  the  music  of  the  birds; 
whilst  the  squirrel  runs  up  some  neighboring  tree, 
and  the  rabbits  come  out  to  feed,  and  the  young 
foxes  play  about  their  holes.  All  this  is  hidden 
from  those  who  cannot  wait.    So  there  are  mysteries 


54  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POlVtR. 

of  glory  and  beauty  in  Scripture  hidden  from  the 
wise  and  prudent,  but  revealed  to  babes.  There  is 
no  book  that  will  so  repay  time  spent  over  its  pages 
as  the  Word  of  God. 

A  neglected  Bible  means  a  starved  and  strength- 
less  spirit;  a  comfortless  heart;  a  barren  life;  and 
a  grieved  Holy  Ghost.  If  the  people,  who  are  now 
perpetually  running  about  to  meetings  for  crumbs 
of  help  and  comfort,  would  only  stay  at  home  and 
search  their  Bibles,  there  would  be  more  happiness 
in  the  Church,  and  more  blessing  on  the  world.  It 
is  very  prosaic  counsel;  but  it  is  true. 

We  must  reserve  for  our  next  chapter  some  ac- 
count of  the  life  which  this  Spirit-filled  man  lived 
in  the  little  household  with  which  he  dwelt. 
Suffice  it  now  to  say  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
dwelt  in  him  so  largely,  revealed  Himself  in  those 
very  traits  which  must  always  be  His  fruits:  gen- 
tleness under  provocation;  steadfastness  in  trial; 
power  in  prayer;  life  victorious  over  death.  But 
we  may  note,  in  closing,  the  remarkable  admission 
of  the  widow:  "I  know  that  thou  art  a  man  of 
God"    (i  Kings  xvii.   24). 

We  talk  of  the  man  of  letters,  the  man  of  honor, 
the  man  of  mark;  but  how  infinitely  better  to  be 
known  as  a  man  of  God — one  of  God's  men,  a  man 
after  God's  own  heart!  And  how  splendid  the  trib- 
ute, when  we  are  so  addressed  by  those  with  whom 
we  have  been  wont  to  live!  That  "familiarity 
breeds  contempt"  is  one  of  the  world's  common- 
places; but  when  a  man  is  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  more  he  is  known,  the  more  clearly  he 
is  proved  to  be  a  man  of  God. 


"7//£  SPIRIT  AND  POUTER  OF  ELI  AS."  55 

And  the  power  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  evinced 
itself,  in  Elijah's  case,  in  the  marvelous  effect 
produced  on  that  widow  and  her  child.  The  widow 
was  convinced  of  sin,  and  led  to  the  truth  of  God. 
The  son  was  brought  back  from  death  into  a  resur- 
rection-life. And  such  result  shall  accrue  in  your 
experience,  if  you  will  only  seek  to  be  filled  with 
the  fullness  of  God.  "He  that  believeth  in  Me,  the 
works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also;  and  greater  works 
than  these  shall  he  do;  because  I  go  unto  my 
Father."  "Ye  shall  receive  power,  after  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you." 


56  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECkET  OF  HIS  POJVER. 


V. 

Ube  Uest  or  tbe  lbome«Xtfe. 

(i  Kings  xvii.) 

MANY  a  man  might  bear  himself  as  a  hero  and 
saint  in  the  solitudes  of  Cherith,  or  on  the 
heights  of  Carmel,  and  yet  wretchedly  fail 
in  the  home-life  of  Zarephath.  It  is  one  thing  to 
commune  with  God  in  the  solitudes  of  nature,  and 
to  perform  splendid  acts  of  devotion  and  zeal  for 
Him  in  the  presence  of  thousands;  but  it  is  quite 
another  to  walk  with  Him  day  by  day  in  the  midst 
of  a  home,  with  its  many  calls  for  the  constant 
forgetfulness  of  self.  Blessed,  indeed,  is  the 
home-life  on  whose  threshold  we  cast  aside  our 
reserve,  our  attitude  of  self-defense,  our  suspicions 
and  our  fears,  and  resign  ourselves  to  the  unques- 
tioning trust  of  those  whose  love  puts  the  tenderest 
construction  on  much  that  the  world  exaggerates 
and  distorts! 

And  yet  it  would  be  idle  to  deny  that  there  is 
much  to  try  and  test  us  just  where  the  flowers  bloom, 
and  the  voices  of  hate  and  passion  die  away  in 
distant  murmurs.  There  is  a  constant  need  for  the 
exercise  of  gentleness,  patience,  self-sacrifice,  self- 
restraint.  And  beneath  the  test  of  home,  with  its 
incessant  duties    and    demands,    many  men    break 


THE  TEST  OF  THE  HOME-LIFE.  57 

down,  whose  character  seems,  like  some  Alpine 
peak,  to  shoot  up  far  beyond  the  average  of  those 
with  whom  they  associate  in  the  busy  world. 

This  ought  not  so  to  be;  nor  need  it  be.  If  our 
religion  is  what  it  should  be,  it  will  resemble  the 
law  of  gravitation,  which  not  only  controls  the 
planets  in  their  spheres,  but  guides  the  course  of 
each  dust-grain  through  the  autumn  breeze,  and  de- 
termines the  fall  of  a  rose-leaf  fluttering  to  the 
path.  Everything  will  come  beneath  its  sway — 
each  look,  each  word,  each  trivial  act.  Indeed,  we 
shall  show  the  reality  and  thoroughness  of  our  re- 
ligion, when  it  is  no  longer  a  garment  to  be  put 
off  and  on  at  will,  but  when  it  pervades  us,  as  life 
does  the  organism  in  which  it  is  contained.  The 
truly  religious  man  will  be  as  sweet  in  irritating 
gnat-stings  as  in  crushing  calamities;  as  self-deny- 
ing for  a  child  as  for  a  crowd;  as  patient  over  a 
spoiled  or  late  meal  as  over  an  operation  which  sum- 
mons all  his  manhood  to  the  front.  "My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee,"  is  the  one  answer  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  all  inquiries;  the  one  reply  to  all  excuses 
and  complaints  about  trying  circumstances. 

Thy  home-life  was  chosen  for  thee  by  the  unerr- 
ing skill  of  One  who  knows  thee  better  than  thou 
knowest  thyself,  and  who  could  not  mistake.  It 
has  been  selected  as  the  best  school  of  grace  for  thee. 
Its  burdens  were  poised  on  the  hand  of  infinite 
love,  before  they  were  placed  on  thy  shoulders. 
Its  pressure  has  been  carefully  measured  by  scales 
more  delicate  than  those  which  chemists  use. 
And  now,  looking  down  upon  thee,  the  Master  says: 
"There    is  nothing   in  thy   life  that    may    not    be 


58         ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

lived  in  Me,  for  Me,  through  Me:  and  I  am  will- 
ing to  enable  thee  to  be  sweet,  and  noble,  and 
saint-like  in  it  all." 

In  our  last  chapter,  we  saw  something  of  the 
power  and  Spirit  with  which  Elijah  was  filled  and 
endued.  It  was  nothing  less  than  the  Holy  Ghost 
Himself;  and  we  learned  that  that  same  glorious 
gift  is  for  each  of  us.  Indeed,  it  is  our  bounden 
duty  never  to  rest  until  we  are  filled  with  that 
same  fullness,  and  clothed  in  that  same  robe.  But 
we  are  now  to  follow  him  into  a  home,  and  see  how 
he  bears  the  test  of  home  life;  and  we  shall  learn 
to  admire  and  love  him  the  more.  He  lived  a  truly 
human  life;  he  was  not 

"Too  great  or  good 
For  human  nature's  daily  food." 

He  was  the  same  man  in  the  widow's  house  as  on 
Carmel's  heights.  He  is  like  one  of  those  mount- 
ains to  which  we  have  referred,  piercing  the  heavens 
with  unscalable  heights;  but  clothed  about  the 
lower  parts  with  woodlands,  and  verdant  fields,  and 
smiling  bowers,  where  bees  gather  honey,  and  chil- 
dren play.  He  shows  that  when  a  man  is  full  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  it  will  be  evidenced  by  the  entire 
tenor  of  his  daily  walk  and  conversation.  In  this 
he  reminds  us  of  Luther,  the  Elijah  of  modern 
times,  who  stood  alone  against  the  apostasy  of  the 
Romish  church;  but  whose  family  life  was  a  model 
of  beauty — an  oasis  in  the  desert.  Let  those  who 
only  know  him  as  the  Reformer,  read  his  letters  to 
his  little  daughter,  and  they  will  be  captivated  by 
the  winsomeness  and  tenderness  of  that  great  and 
gentle  soul. 


THE  TEST  OF  THE  HOME -LIFE.  59 


I.  Elijah  teaches  us  contentment. 

The  fare  in  the  widow's  home  was  frugal  enough; 
and  there  was  only  just  sufficient  of  it  for  their  daily 
needs.  Human  nature,  which  was  as  strong  in  the 
prophet  as  in  the  rest  of  us,  would  have  preferred 
to  be  able  to  count  sacks  of  meal  and  barrels  of 
oil.  It  would  have  been  pleasant  to  go  into  some 
spacious  store-room,  and,  looking  around  on  the 
abundant  provision,  to  say:  "Soul,  thou  hast  goods 
enough  to  carry  thee  through  the  years  of  famine: 
take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry."  But 
this  is  not  God's  way;  nor  is  it  the  healthiest  dis- 
cipline for  our  better  life. 

God's  rule  is — day  by  day.  The  manna  fell  on 
the  desert  sands  day  by  day.  Our  bread  is  promised 
to  us  for  the  day.  As  our  day,  so  will  our  strength 
be.  And  they  who  live  like  this  are  constantly  re- 
minded of  their  blessed  dependence  on  their  Father's 
love;  they  are  led  back  again  to  the  life  of  the 
little  child ;  they  know  nothing  of  those  temptations 
to  self  sufficiency  which  work  ruin  to  the  rich — as 
the  growth  of  the  southern  seas  silently  eats  away 
the  bottoms  of  the  mighty  vessels  which  defy  the 
storms,  but  become  the  prey  of  myriads  of  minute 
insects,  working  always  out  of  sight. 

If  God  were  to  give  us  the  choice  between  seeing 
our  provision  and  keeping  it  ourselves,  or  not  seeing 
it  and  leaving  Him  to  deal  it  out,  day  by  day, 
most  of  us  would  be  almost  sure  to  choose  the  for- 
mer alternative.  It  gratifies  our  sense  of  importance 
to  count  up  our  stores,  our  barrels,  and  our  sacks; 
it  invests  us  with  so  much  superiority  to  ourneigh- 


60  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POWER. 

bors;  it  gives  such  a  sense  of  security.  But  we 
should  be  far  wiser  to  say:  "I  am  content  to  trust 
Thee,  Father,  the  living  God,  who  givest  us  all 
things  richly  to  enjoy.  Keep  Thou  the  stores 
under  Thine  own  hand;  they  will  give  me  less 
anxiety;  they  will  not  lead  me  into  temptation; 
they  will  not  expose  me  to  be  jealous  of  others  less 
favored  than  myself." 

And  those  who  live  thus  are  not  worse  off  than 
others;  nay,  in  the  truest  sense,  they  are  better 
off — better  off,  because  the  responsibility  of  main- 
taining them  rests  wholly  upon  God;  and  they  are 
delivered  from  the  fret  of  anxiety,  the  strain  of 
daily  care,  and  the  temptations  which  m.ake  it 
almost  impossible  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  the  king- 
dom of  God.  If  God  guarantees,  as  He  does,  our 
support,  does  it  much  matter  whether  we  can  see 
the  sources  from  which  He  will  obtain  it?  It  might 
gratify  our  curiosity;  but  it  would  not  make  them 
more  sure.  They  are  as  really  in  existence,  and 
beneath  His  eye;  and  they  will  as  really  come 
safely  to  our  hand.  The  main  thing  is  to  under- 
stand the  precious  promise,  "Seek  ye  first  the  king- 
dom of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these 
things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  Then  let  us  go 
on  doing  our  duty,  filling  our  time,  working  out 
the  plan  of  our  life.  We  may  be  as  free  from  care 
as  the  birds,  that  have  neither  storehouse  nor  barn. 
We  may  laugh  as  merrily  as  the  child,  who  comes 
in  from  school  to  eat,  and  goes  out  again  to  play, 
and  is  utterly  thoughtless  about  its  next  meal. 
We  may  be  entirely  destitute,  our  pantry  bare,  out 
money    exhausted,    our    means   of  livelihood  gone. 


THE  TEST  OF  THE  HOME- LIFE.  61 

But  our  Father  has  ample  resources:  His  are  the 
cattle  on  a  thousand  hills;  and  His  the  waving 
corn-fields,  and  the  myriad  fish  of  the  ocean  depths; 
His  hired  servants  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare; 
He  has  prepared  a  supply  for  our  need,  and  He 
will  deliver  it  to  time,  if  only  we  will  trust    Him. 

It  is  impossible  to  tell  whose  eyes  may  read 
these  words;  but  if  they  should  be  read  by  those 
whose  one  aim  it  is  to  be  independent,  let  them 
consider  what  they  mean.  Do  they  mean  to  be 
independent  of  God,  or  of  men?  In  point  of  fact, 
they  will  live  to  see  that  they  can  be  independent 
of  neither.  And  the  serious  question  presents 
itself,  Is  this  a  worthy  aim  for  those  who  are  the 
bought  slaves  of  Christ?  Surely  we  are  meant  to 
be  stewards;  not  storing  up  our  Lord's  money  for 
ourselves,  but  administering  for  Him  all  that  we 
do  not  need  for  the  maintenance  of  ourselves  and 
our  dear  ones,  in  the  position  of  life  in  which  God 
has  placed  us.  And  our  only  worldly  aim  should 
be  to  lay  out  our  Lord's  money  to  the  very  best 
advantage;  so  that  we  may  render  Him  an  account 
with  joy,  when  He  comes  to  reckon  with  us. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  these  words  are  read  by 
those  who  are  dependent  on  daily  supplies — with 
little  hope  of  ever  owning  more  than  the  daily 
handful  of  meal,  and  the  little  oil  at  the  bottom  of 
the  cruse — let  them  be  comforted  by  the  example 
of  Elijah.  "Be  content  with  such  things  as  ye 
have;  for  He  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee"  (Heb.  xiii.  5).  The  bottom  of'the 
barrel  may  have  been  scraped  to-day;  but  on  going 
to  it  to-morrow    there    will  be  just   enough   for  to- 


62         ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

morrow's  needs.  The  last  drop  of  oil  may  have 
been  drained  to-day;  but  there  will  be  more  to- 
morrow, and  enough.  Anxiety  will  not  do  you 
good;  but  the  prayer  of  faith  will.  "Your  Father 
knoweth  what  things  ye  have  need  of."  He  who 
lit  life's  flame  knows  how  much  fuel  is  required  to 
keep  it  burning.  Throw  all  responsibility  on  God. 
He  who  gave  His  own  Son  will  with  Him  freely 
give  all  things.  Do  not  listen  to  the  arch-liar, 
who  bids  you  distrust  and  despair:  he  has  never 
yet  been  justified  by  the  event;  his  prophecies  have 
always  proved  false;  his  insinuations  are  simply 
beds  of  rank  and  poisonous  stinging  nettles — do  not 
lie  down  in  them,  but  trample  them  beneath  your 
feet.  Oh  that  we  might  learn,  though  it  be  in  the 
school  of  privation,  in  whatsoever  state  we  are, 
therewith  to  be  content;  and  to  be  able  to  cry, 
with  one  of  Elijah's  compeers,  "I  can  do  all  things 
through  Christ,  which  strengtheneth  me."  "For 
thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel:  The  barrel  of 
meal  shall  not  waste,  neither  shall  the  cruse  of  oil 
fail,  until  the  day  that  the  Lord  sendeth  rain  upon 
the  earth." 

IL     Elijah  also  teaches  us  gentleness  under 

PROVOCATION. 

We  do  not  know  how  long  the  mother  hung  over 
her  dying  child.  He  may  have  been  struck  down 
like  the  little  fellow  who  cried,  "My  head!  my 
head!"  and  faded  in  one  summer's  afternoon;  or  he 
may  have  lingered  beneath  the  spell  of  a  wearying 
illness,    which    not   only   wore    out    his    life,    but 


THE  TEST  OF  THE  HOME-LIFE.  63 

overtaxed  his  mother's  nerves  so  that  she  spoke 
unadvisedly  and  cruelly  to  the  man  who  had 
brought  deliverance  to  her  home:  "Art  thou  come 
to  call  my  sin  to  remembrance,  and  to  slay  my 
son?" 

A  remark  so  uncalled-for  and  unjust  might  well 
have  stung  the  prophet  to  the  quick,  or  prompted  a 
bitter  reply.  And  it  would  doubtless  have  done 
so,  had  his  goodness  been  anything  less  than 
inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  one  of  the 
fruits  of  His  indwelling  is  Gentleness.  "The 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffer- 
ing, gentleness"  The  nature  breathed  into  the 
spirit  by  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God  is  identical 
with  His  own,  which  is  Love:  and  "Love  suffereth 
long  and  is  kind;  is  not  easily  provoked;  beareth 
all  things;  believeth  all  things;  hopeth  all  things; 
endureth  all  things."  Thus  it  happened,  that  with- 
out further  remark  Elijah  simply  said,  "Give  me 
thy  son."  If  there  were  a  momentary  uprising  of 
indignation,  it  was  immediately  quelled  by  the 
Dove  which  had  come  to  brood  in  the  nest  of  his 
heart. 

We  need  more  of  this  practical  godliness.  Many 
deceive  themselves.  They  go  to  fervid  meetings, 
and  profess  that  they  have  placed  all  upon  the 
altar;  they  speak  as  if  they  were  indeed  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  when  they  return  to 
their  homes,  the  least  friction,  or  interference  with 
their  plans,  or  mistake  on  the  part  of  others,  or 
angry  outburst,  arouses  a  sudden  and  violent  mani- 
festation of  temper.  Such  people  have  not  yet 
experienced  His  special  grace;  there  is  much  more 


64  ELIJAH:  AND 'THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

for  them  to  learn.  He  who  first  led  them  to  Jesus  is 
able  to  make  them  meek  with  His  meekness,  and 
gentle  with  His  gentleness;  He  can  give  them 
victory  over  their  natural  infirmities,  as  well  as  over 
all  conscious  sin;  He  can  work  so  great  a  transforma- 
tion within  them,  that  "instead  of  the  thorn  shall 
come  up  the  fir  tree,  and  instead  of  the  brier  shall 
come  up  the  myrtle  tree;  and  it  shall  be  to  the 
Lord  for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting  sign  that 
shall  not  be  cut  off." 

If  the  Holy  Spirit  is  really  filling  the  heart, 
there  will  come  over  the  rudest,  the  least  refined, 
the  most  selfish,  a  marvelous  change;  there  will  be 
a  gentleness  in  speech,  in  the  very  tones  of  the 
voice;  a  tender  thoughtfulness  in  the  smallest 
actions;  a  peace  passing  understanding  on  the  face; 
and  these  shall  be  the  evident  seal  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  mint-mark  of  heaven.  Are  they  evi- 
dent in  ourselves? 

"  Gentle  Spirit,  dwell  with  me, 
I  myself  would  gentle  be ; 
And  with  words  that  help  and  heal, 
Would  Thy  life  in  mine  reveal." 

HI.    Elijah  teaches  also  the  power  of  a  holy 

LIFE. 

Somewhere  in  the  background  of  this  woman's 
life  there  was  a  dark  deed,  which  dwarfed  all  other 
memories  of  wrong-doing,  and  stood  out  before  her 
mind  as  her  sin — "my  sin"  (i  Kings  xvii.  i8). 
What  it  was  we  do  not  know;  it  may  have  been 
connected  with  the  birth  of  that  very  son.     It  had 


THE  TEST  OF  THE  HOME-LIFE,  65 

probably  been  committed  long  years  before,  and 
had  then  filled  her  with  a  keen  agony  of  mind;  for 
conscience  is  not  inoperative  even  in  the  hearts  of 
the  children  of  idolatry  and  heathendom  (Rom.  ii. 
14,  15).  But  of  later  years,  the  keen  sense  of 
remorse  had  become  dulled;  conscience  long  out- 
raged had  grown  benumbed;  sometimes  she  even 
lost  all  recollection  of  her  sin  for  weeks  and 
months  together.  We  all  have  a  wonderful  faculty 
of  dismissing  from  us  an  unwelcome  thought;  just 
as  men  try  to  hide  from  themselves  the  too-evident 
symptoms  of  a  disease  which  is  sapping  the  forces 
of  life. 

There  is  a  wonderful  invention,  recently  per- 
fected, by  which  sound  can  be  fixed  pictorially; 
and  from  the  picture  it  may  be  produced  again, 
long  years  after  it  was  spoken.  Imagine  your  hear- 
ing once  again  the  voices  long  hushed  in  death! 
But  memory  is  like  this:  it  fixes  all  impressions 
and  retains  them;  it  never  permits  them  to  be 
destroyed,  though  it  may  not  always  be  able  to  pro- 
duce them  instantly  to  a  given  call.  Some  memo- 
ries are  like  well-classified  libraries,  in  which  you 
can  readily  discover  even  the  smallest  pamphlet; 
others  are  so  confused  that  they  are  useless  for  prac- 
tical purposes:  yet  even  in  these,  nothing  that 
ever  came  within  their  range  has  ever  been  lost; 
and  whenever  the  right  clue  is  presented,  there  is 
an  immediate  resurrection  and  recovery  of  sounds, 
and  sights,  and  trains  of  thought  long    buried. 

How  terrible  will  it  be,  when  the  lost  soul  is 
met  on  the  threshold  of  the  dark  world  to  which  it 
goes,  by  the  solemn  words,  "Son,  remember! "    And 


66  ELIJ/iH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVEK. 

what  more  fearful  punishment  could  we  imagine, 
than  being  compelled  to  meet  again  and  to  confront 
the  hideous  past,  summoned  by  an  inevitable  re- 
membrancer; whilst  conscience,  no  longer  stupefied 
and  drugged,  is  sensitive  enough  to  convince  of  the 
exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin. 

It  is  remarkable  how  different  is  the  mental 
stimulus  which  is  required  by  different  castes  of 
mind  to  awaken  dormant  memories.  In  the  case 
of  some,  the  handwriting  on  an  old  letter,  a  picture, 
a  scent  borne  on  the  breeze,  a  song,  will  be  enough. 
Their  own  sorrow  reminded  Joseph's  brethren  of 
their  disgraceful  behavior  to  their  brother  thirty 
years  before.  But  in  the  case  of  the  woman  of 
Zarephath  it  was  Elijah's  holy  life,  combined  with 
her  own  terrible  sorrow.  Beneath  the  spell  of  these 
two  voices  her  memory  gave  up  its  dead,  and  her 
conscience  was  quickened  into  vigorous  life.  "Art 
thou  come  unto  me  to  call  my  sin  to  remembrance?" 

Oh  to  live  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost!  Our 
looks  would  sometimes  then  convict  the  stoutest 
sinners  of  sin;  as  it  is  recorded  of  Finney,  whose 
grieved  face  brought  conviction  to  a  young  woman, 
and  through  her  to  a  whole  factory  of  operatives.  Our 
holy  walk  would  be  a  standing  rebuke;  a  mirror  in 
which  the  sin-pocked  might  see  the  ravages  wrought 
by  sin.  Our  words  would  then  be  sharp  two-edged 
swords,  piercing  to  the  dividing  of  the  joints  and 
marrow,  of  soul  and  spirit. 

And  if  any  reader  of  this  shall  be  conscious  of 
some  hidden  but  unforgiven  sin,  let  that  one  know 
that  all  efforts  to  forget  will  some  day  be  unavail- 
ing;  sickness  may  come,  or  bereavement,  or  bitter 


THE  TEST  OF  THE  HOME- LIFE.  67 

loss;  and  then  that  sin  will  spring  up,  as  if  only 
committed  yesterday,  in  all  its  horror  and  agony. 
It  is  said  that  the  spirit  of  the  victim  haunts  the 
murderer,  until  he  makes  reparation  by  confession 
and  surrender.  There  is  some  truth  in  it;  for  sin 
is  only  blotted  out  of  remembrance,  both  of  God 
and  the  soul,  when  it  has  been  confessed,  and  put 
beneath  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Confess  your  sin,  and 
claim  that  cleansing  now,  and  you  will  hear  the 
voice  of  God  saying,  "Your  sins  and  iniquities  will 
I  remember  no  more." 

IV.  Elijah  teaches,  lastly,  the  secret  of  giving 

LIFE. 

It  is  a  characteristic  of  those  who  are  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  that  they  carry  with  them  every- 
where the  spirit  of  life,  even  resurrection-life.  We 
shall  not  only  convince  men  of  sin,  but  we  shall 
become  channels  through  which  the  Divine  Life 
may  enter  them.  Thus  was  it  with  the  prophet. 
But  mark  the  conditions  under  which  alone  we 
shall  be  able  to  fulfill  this  glorious  function: 

(i)  Lonely  wrestlings.  "He  took  him  out  of  her 
bosom,  and  carried  him  up  into  a  loft,  where  he 
abode,  and  laid  him  upon  his  own  bed.  And  he 
cried  unto  the  Lord."  We  are  not  specific  enough 
in  prayer;  and  we  do  not  spend  enough  time  in 
intercession,  dwelling  with  holy  ardor  on  each  be- 
loved name,  and  on  each  heart-rending  case.  What 
wonder  that  we  achieve  so  little! 

(2)     Humility.     "He  measured  himself  upon  the 


68  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

child."  How  wonderful  that  so  great  a  man  should 
spend  so  much  time  and  thought  on  that  slender 
frame,  and  be  content  to  bring  himself  into  direct 
contact  with  that  which  might  be  thought  to  defile! 
It  is  a  touching  spectacle;  but  we  must  imitate  it 
in  some  measure.  We  must  seek  the  conversion  of 
children,  winning  them  ere  Satan  or  the  ^world 
attach  them.  But  to  do  so,  we  must  stoop  to  them ; 
becoming  as  little  children  to  win  little  children 
for  Jesus. 

(3)  Perseverance.  "He  measured  himself  three 
times,  and  cried  unto  the  Lord."  He  was  not  soon 
daunted.  It  is  thus  that  God  tests  the  genuineness 
of  our  desire.  These  deferred  answers  lead  us  to 
lengths  of  holy  boldness  and  pertinacity  of  which 
we  should  not  otherwise  have  dreamed,  but  from 
which  we  shall  never  go  back.  "Men  ought  always 
to  pray,  and  not  to  faint." 

And  his  supplication  met  with  the  favor  of  God. 
"The  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  Elijah;  and  the 
soul  of  the  child  came  into  him  again,  and  he 
revived."  And  as  the  prophet  presented  him  to 
the  grateful  and  rejoicing  mother,  he  must  have 
been  beyond  all  things  gratified  with  her  simple 
testimony  to  the  reality  and  power  of  the  life  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  had  begotten  within  him:  "Now 
by  this  I  know  that  thou  art  a  man  of  God,  and 
that  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  thy  mouth  is  truth." 
And  what  was  the  result  of  all?  Simply  this:  that 
woman  became  so  ennobled  and  changed  by  her 
contact  with  that  man  of  God,  that  our  Savior 
awarded  to    her  a  prophet's   reward    (Matt.  x.  41). 


THE  TEST  OF  THE  HOME- LIFE. 


Her  work  was  small,  her  conceptions  obscure,  her 
home  Gentile  and  heathen;  and  yet,  because  her 
motives  were  noble,  and  her  spirit  in  sympathy 
with  Elijah's,  it  was  announced  by  Him,  at  whose 
bar  we  must  all  stand  for  our  reward,  that  she  had 
done  what  she  could,  and  that  her  crown  should 
shine  as  brightly  as  that  placed  on  the  brow  of 
the  prophet  of  God.  We  are  rewarded,  not  accord- 
ing to  our  sphere,  or  the  results  of  our  work,  but 
according  to  the  sincerity  and  beauty  of  our  motives; 
and  these  may  be  as  lofty  in  an  obscure  widow  as 
in  Elijah  himself. 


70         ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


VI. 

©baDiab— H  Contrast. 

(I  Kings  xviii.) 

AFTER  many  days  the  word  of  the  Lord  again 
summoned  Elijah  to  be  on  the  move.  Months, 
and  even  years,  had  passed  in  the  retirement 
of  Zarephath;  the  viridow  and  her  son  had  become 
bound  to  him  by  the  most  sacred  ties;  the  humble 
home,  with  its  loft  and  barrel  of  meal  and  cruse 
of  oil,  was  hallowed  with  delightful  memories  of 
the  unfailing  carefulness  of  God. 

It  must  have  been  a  great  trial  for  him  to  go; 
and  how  great  was  the  contrast  that  awaited  him! 
He  had  probably  heard  of  Ahab's  search  for  him 
through  all  the  neighboring  countries.  There  was 
not  a  nation  or  kingdom  whither  the  incensed  mon- 
arch had  not  sent  to  seek  him,  demanding  an  oath 
from  the  rulers  that  he  was  not  in  hiding  there. 
It  was  not  likely,  therefore,  that  he  would  be  received 
with  much  courtesy.  Nay,  the  probability  was  that 
he  would  be  instantly  arrested,  and  perhaps  put 
to  torture  to  extort  a  revocation  of  the  words  which 
had  placed  the  realm  under  the  terrible  interdict 
of  drought.  And  as  he  contrasted  the  tumultuous 
roar  of  the  waves  foaming  outside  the  harbor-bar 
with  the  calm    peace  that    reigned  in  the  haven  of 


0B/1DIAH—/1  COhlTRAST.  71 

rest  which  had  sheltered  him  so  long,  he  might 
well  have  shrunk  back  in  dismay.  But  he  had  no 
alternative  but  to  go.  He  who  had  said,  "Go  hide 
thyself,"  now  said,  "Go  show  thyself."  What  was 
he  but  a  servant,  bound  to  obey?  And  so,  with 
the  implicit  obedience  which  has  arrested  our 
attention  more  than  once,  "Elijah  went  to  show 
himself  unto  Ahab," 

In  this  new  departure  the  prophet  evidently  en- 
couraged himself  by  the  words  on  which  he  had 
leaned  when  first  he  entered  the  monarch's  presence, 
"The  Lord  of  hosts  iiveth,  before  whom  I  stand" 
(i  Kings  xviii.  15).  And  there  may  have  rung 
through  his  spirit  a  refrain,  throbbing  with  heroic 
faith,  uttered  centuries  before  by  a  kindred  soul: 
"The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation:  whom 
shall  I  fear?  the  Lord  is  the  strength  of  my  life: 
of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid?  When  the  wicked, 
even  mine  enemies  and  my  foes,  came  upon  me  to 
eat  up  my  flesh,  they  stumbled  and  fell.  Though  an 
host  should  encamp  against  me,  my  heart  shall  not 
fear:  though  war  should  rise  against  me,  in  this 
will  I  be  confident." 

But,  though  Elijah's  spirit  was  thus  fortified 
against  fear,  it  must  have  been  very  bitter  to  him 
to  see  the  devastation  which  had  been  wrought  in 
the  land.  The  music  of  the  brooklets  was  still. 
No  green  pastures  carpeted  the  hills  or  vales.  There 
was  neither  blossom  on  the  fig  tree  nor  fruit  in  the 
vines;  and  the  labor  of  the  olive  failed.  The  ground 
was  chapped  and  barren.  The  hinds  calved  in 
the  field,  and  deserted  their  young  because  there 
was  no  grass;   and  the  wild   asses,  with   distended 


72  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

nostrils,  climbed  the  hills  to  snuff  up  the  least 
breath  of  air  that  might  allay  the  fever  of  their 
thirst.  And,  probably,  the  roads  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  the  villages  and  towns  were  dotted  by  the 
stiffened  corpses  of  the  abject  poor,  who  had  suc- 
cumbed to  the  severity  of  their  privations.  We 
have  no  idea,  in  these  temperate  regions,  of  the 
horrors  of  an  Eastern  drought.  All  this  had  been 
brought  about  instrumentally  by  the  prophet's 
prayer;  and  it  would  have  been  intolerable,  had  he 
not  eagerly  hoped  that  his  people  would  learn  the 
exceeding  sinfulness  and  evil  of  sin.  "Thine  own 
wickedness  shall  correct  thee,  and  thy  backslidings 
shall  reprove  thee;  know,  therefore,  and  see,  that 
it  is  an  evil  thing  and  bitter,  that  thou  hast  forsaken 
the  Lord  thy  God," 

Though  the  famine  was  sore  everywhere,  it  seems 
to  have  been  most  severe  in  Samaria.  "There  was 
a  sore  famine  in  Samaria."  And  it  was  this  famine 
that  brought  out  the  true  character  of  Ahab.  We 
might  have  supposed  that  he  would  set  himself  to 
alleviate  the  miseries  of  his  people;  and,  above 
all,  that  he  would  have  turned  back  to  God;  but 
no — his  one  thought  was  about  the  horses  and  mules 
of  his  stud;  and  his  only  care  was  to  save  some  of 
them  alive.  And  so  he  starts  on  a  mission — such 
as  is  still  undertaken  by  the  petty  chieftains  of  East- 
ern tribes — to  find  grass.  What  selfishness  is  here! 
Mules  and  asses  before  his  people!  Seeking  for 
grass  instead  of  seeking  for  God! 

And  yet  such  selfishness  is  as  rife  to-day  as  ever. 
Selfishness  like  this  prompts  the  great  ones  of  the 
earth  to  dash  myriads  of  men  against  each  other  in 


OBy4DI/IH—/l  CONTRAST.  73 

the  shock  of  battle,  for  the  gratification  of  a 
mere  personal  pique,  and  regardless  of  the  untold 
misery  inflicted  on  thousands  of  hearts  and  homes. 
Selfishness  like  this  makes  men  of  wealth  and  fashion 
loll  on  beds  of  down,  roll  in  luxurious  carriages, 
and  feast  sumptuously  every  day — indifferent  to  the 
hopeless  wretchedness  of  those  who  earn  their 
wealth,  and  are  paid  a  starvation  wage.  Selfishness 
like  this  still  spends  on  an  equipage,  a  horse,  a 
dog,  the  keeping  of  a  shooting-box,  the  round  of 
amusements,  more  than  it  can  afford  for  the  main- 
tenance of  God's  work,  or  for  the  relief  of  the  poor. 
Are  prof essing  Christians  clear  in  this  matter?  Are 
there  not  many  who  spend  as  much  on  a  single  din- 
ner-party as  they  do  on  the  needs  of  a  dying  world? 
And  what  is  this  but  a  repetition  of  the  sin  of  Ahab, 
who  went  out  to  find  grass  for  his  beasts,  whilst  his 
people  were  left  to  take  their  chance!  Oh  that 
this  spirit  of  selfishness  were  exorcised  by  the 
Spirit  of  Christ!  Then  missionary  societies  would 
not  be  hampered  in  their  operations  for  want  of 
funds;  then  the  coffers  of  charitable  institutions 
would  be  filled;  then  many  a  hard-working  toiler 
would  be  able  to  give  effect  to  schemes  now  blighted 
and  arrested  by  the  east  wind  of  want.  I  do  not  blame 
Christian  men  for  maintaining  themselves  in  that  posi- 
tion of  life  in  which  they  were  called;  it  is  their  ap- 
parent duty  to  retain  that  position  as  a  sacred  talent 
(i  Cor.  vii.  20,  24).  But  I  cannot  understand  a  man 
daring  to  call  himself  a  Christian  and  spending  more 
upon  the  accessories  and  luxuries  of  his  life  than  he 
does  upon  that  service  of  man  which  is  so  dear  to  our 
Lord.     This  is  surely  the  selfishness  of  Ahab. 


74  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POJVER. 

It  is  startling  to  find  such  a  man  as  Obadiah 
occupying  so  influential  a  position  at  Ahab's  court. 
"Obadiah  was  the  governor  (or  steward)  of  his 
house."  Now,  according  to  his  own  testimony, 
Obadiah  had  feared  the  Lord  from  his  youth 
(i  Kings  xviii.  12).  This  is  also  the  testimony  of 
the  sacred  historian  concerning  him:  "Obadiah 
feared  the  Lord  greatly"  (ver.  3).  And  he  had  given 
conspicuous  proof  of  his  piety;  for  when  Jezebel 
had  swept  the  land  with  the  besom  of  persecution, 
hunting  down  the  prophets  of  the  Lord,  and  consign- 
ing them  to  indiscriminate  slaughter,  he  had  rescued 
a  hundred  of  the  proscribed  men,  hiding  them  by  fifty 
in  a  cave,  and  had  fed  them  with  bread  and  water. 
But  though  a  good  man,  there  was  evidently  a  great 
lack  of  moral  strength,  of  backbone,  of  vigorous  life, 
in  his  character;  otherwise  he  could  never  have  held 
the  position  he  did  in  the  court  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel. 

There  is  no  possible  harm  in  a  Christian  man 
holding  a  position  of  influence  in  a  court  or  society 
where  he  can  do  so  at  no  cost  of  principle.  On  the 
contrary,  it  may  enable  him  to  render  priceless 
service  to  the  cause  of  God.  Where  would  Luther 
and  the  Reformation  have  been,  humanly  speaking, 
had  it  not  been  for  the  Elector  of  Saxony?  And 
what  would  have  been  the  fate  of  our  Wycliffe,  if 
John  o' Gaunt  had  not  constituted  him  his  ward? 
But  very  few  can  occupy  such  a  position,  without 
putting  kid  on  their  hands  and  velvet  on  their  lips; 
without  dropping  something  of  their  uncompromis- 
ing speech,  or  dipping  their  colors  to  the  flag  of 
expediency.  And  there  is  every  indication  that 
this  was  the  weak  point  with  Obadiah. 


OBADIAH—A  CONTRAST.  75 

Obadiah  did  not  believe  in  carrying  matters  too 
far.  Of  course,  he  could  not  fall  in  with  this  new 
order  of  things;  but  then  there  was  no  need  for  him 
to  force  his  religious  notions  on  everyone.  He  was 
often  shocked  at  what  he  saw  at  court,  and  found  it 
hard  to  keep  still;  but  then  it  was  no  business  of 
his;  and  it  would  not  do  to  throw  up  his  situation, 
for  he  would  be  sure  to  lose  it  if  he  spoke  out. 
He  was  often  sad  at  heart  to  witness  the  sufferings 
of  the  prophets  of  the  Lord,  and  half  inclined  to 
take  up  their  cause;  but  then  a  single  man  could 
not  do  much,  and  he  could,  perhaps,  help  them 
better  in  a  quiet  way  by  keeping  where  he  was, 
though  it  might  sometimes  be  a  little  strain  on 
his  principles.  The  poor  man  must  often  have  been 
in  a  great  strait  to  reconcile  his  duty  to  Jehovah 
with  his  duty  to  his  other  master,  Ahab.  And 
Elijah  shrewdly  hinted  at  it,  when  he  said,  "Go, 
tell  thy  lord,  Behold,  Elijah  is  here!"  Imagine  a 
courtier  of  Oliver  Cromwell  trying  to  be  true  to 
the  Commonwealth,  and  to  the  cause  of  the  exiled 
Stuarts!  The  life  of  policy  and  expediency  is  a 
species  of  rope-walking — it  needs  considerable 
practice  in  the  art  of  balancing. 

There  are  scores  of  Obadiahs  everywhere  around 
us,  and  in  the  professing  church.  They  know  the 
right,  and  are  secretly  trying  to  do  it;  but  they 
say  as  little  about  religion  as  they  can.  They  never 
rebuke  sin.  They  never  confess  their  true  colors. 
They  find  pretexts  and  excuses  to  satisfy  the 
remonstrances  of  an  uneasy  conscience.  They  are 
as  nervous  of  being  identified  by  declared  Christians 
as  Obadiah  was  when    Elijah    sent    him    to   Ahab. 


76  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

They  are  sorry  for  those  who  suffer  persecution  for 
righteousness'  sake;  but  it  never  occurs  to  them  to 
stand  in  the  pillory  by  their  side.  They  content 
themselves  with  administering  some  little  relief  to 
them,  as  Obadiah  did  to  the  harried  prophets; 
and,  whilst  they  conceal  that  relief  from  the  world, 
they  put  it  in  as  a  claim  to  the  people  of  God  for 
recognition  and  protection,  as  Obadiah  did.  "Was 
it  not  told  my  lord  what  I  did?"  (i  Kings  xviii. 
13).  They  sometimes  are  on  the  point  of  throwing 
up  all  to  take  up  an  uncompromising  attitude;  but 
they  find  it  hard  to  go  forth  to  suffer  affliction  with 
the  people  of  God,  so  long  as  they  are  well 
provided  for  within  the  palace  walls. 

What  a  contrast  between  Obadiah  and  Elijah! 
And  it  is  with  the  purpose  of  accentuating  that 
contrast,  and  of  bringing  out  into  fuller  relief  the 
noble  character  of  the  prophet,  that  we  have  sought 
to  elaborate  this  sketch  of  Ahab's  steward. 

I.     There  is  a  contrast  between  the  inside  and 

THE  OUTSIDE  OF   THE  CAMP  FOR  WITNESS-BEARING. 

There  is  much  said  on  both  sides  of  the  case. 
Many  amongst  us  advise  that  the  children  of  God 
should  stay  in  the  camp  of  the  world — joining  in 
its  festivities;  going  to  its  places  of  amusements; 
taking  the  lead  in  its  fashion  and  its  course.  In 
this  way  they  hope  to  temper  and  steady  it;  to 
level  it  up;  to  make  it  Christian.  It  is  a  fair 
dream,  exceedingly  congenial  to  our  natural  tastes; 
and  if  it  were  only  true,  it  would  save  a  world  of 
trouble.     The  poor  prophets   of    the   Lord    might 


OB/IDUH—A  CONTRAST.  77 

come  back  from  their  caves;  Elijah  might  become 
Ahab's  vizier;  and  Obadiah's  conscience  might 
settle  to  rest.  Indeed,  Elijah's  policy  would  be  a 
supreme  mistake;  and  we  had  better  all  become 
Obadiahs  at  once. 

But  there  are  two  insurmountable  diflficulties  in 
the  way  of  our  accepting  this  theory  of  leveling  up 
from  within. 

(i)  1/  is  in  direct  opposition  to  the  teaching  of 
Scripture.  "Come  out  from  her,  my  people,"  is  the 
one  summons  that  rings  like  a  clarion  note  from 
board  to  board.  "Come  out  from  among  them,  and 
be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord;  and  touch  not  the 
unclean  thing."  There  is  not  a  single  hero  or  saint, 
whose  name  sparkles  on  the  inspired  page,  who  moved 
his  times  from  within:  all,  without  exception,  have 
raised  the  cry,  "Let  us  go  forth  without  the  camp; " 
and  have  joined  the  constant  stream  of  martyrs, 
confessors,  prophets,  and  saints,  of  whom  the  world 
is  not  worthy,  but  who  can  trace  their  kinship  to 
Him  of  whom  it  is  written,  "He  suffered  without 
the  gate."  The  only  Scriptural  course  for  God's 
witness-bearers  is  to  go  out  to  Him  without  the 
camp;  in  the  world,  but  not  of  it;  wearing  the 
pilgrim  garb,  manifesting  the  pilgrim  spirit,  utter- 
ing the  pilgrim  confession. 

(2)  This  theory  will  not  work.  The  man  who  goes 
into  the  world  to  level  it  up  will  soon  find  himself 
leveled  down.  Was  not  this  the  case  with  Obadiah? 
Instead  of  getting  Ahab  to  think  with  himself, 
Ahab  sent  him  unto  all  fountains  of  water  and 
unto  all  brooks,  to  find  grass    for    his    horses    and 


78  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

mules.  Surely  this  was  a  miserable  errand  for  one 
who  feared  the  Lord  greatly!  But  this  is  only  a 
sample  of  the  kind  of  things  which  must  be  borne 
and  done  by  such  as  try  to  serve  two  masters.  Com- 
pare the  influence  exerted  on  the  behalf  of  Sodom  by 
Abraham,  on  the  heights  of  Mamre,  with  that  of 
Lot,  who,  not  content  with  pitching  his  tent  toward 
the  city  gate,  went  to  live  inside,  and  even  became 
one  of  the  aldermen  of  the  place  (Gen.  xix.  i). 
Remember  that  Lot  was  carried  captive  in  the  sack 
of  Sodom;  but  Abraham  rescued  him.  But  why 
need  we  multiply  instances?  This  matter  is  under- 
going daily  proof.  The  Christian  woman  who 
marries  an  ungodly  man  is  in  imminent  danger  of 
being  soon  dragged  down  to  his  level.  The  servant 
of  God  who  enters  into  partnership  with  a  man  of 
the  world  cannot  keep  the  business  from  drifting. 
The  church  which  admits  the  world  into  its  circle 
will  find  that  it  will  get  worldly  quicker  than  the 
world  will  become  Christian. 

The  safest  and  strongest  position  is  outside  the 
camp.  Archimedes  said  that  he  could  move  the 
world,  if  only  he  had  a  point  of  rest  given  him 
outside  it.  Thus,  too,  can  a  handful  of  God's  serv- 
ants influence  their  times,  if  only  they  resemble 
Elijah,  whose  life  was  spent  altogether  outside 
the  pale  of  the  court  and  the    world    of    his    time. 

II.    There  is  a  contrast  between  preventive  and 

AGGRESSIVE  GOODNESS. 

Obadiah  sought  simply  to  prevent  a  great  harm 
being  done.     He  shielded  the    prophets    from    the 


OBADIAH—A  CONTRAST.  79 

sword  of  Jezebel,  and  from  the  touch  of  famine. 
And  this  was  well.  Preventive  goodness  like  this 
serves  a  very  useful  purpose.  It  rears  Homes,  and 
Refuges,  and  bulwarks  of  defense,  behind  which 
persecuted  and  threatened  lives  may  thrive.  But, 
after  all,  the  world  needs  something  more.  It  is 
not  enough  to  deal  with  the  poisoned  streams;  a 
hand  is  needed  to  cast  the  healing  salt  into  the 
fountain-head.  There  is  an  urgent  demand  for  men 
like  Elijah  and  John  the  Baptist,  who  dare  oppose 
the  perpetrators  of  evil  deeds,  and  arraign  them 
before  the  bar  of  God,  and  compel  them  to  bow  be- 
fore the  offended  majesty  of  a  broken  law. 

For  this  there  is  needed  a  positive  enduement 
of  power,  which  cannot  be  had  by  the  half-hearted; 
but  is  the  glad  prerogative  of  those  who,  from  the 
crown  of  the  head  to  the  sole  of  the  foot,  are  serv- 
ants of  God.  Obadiah  had  no  power  of  this  kind. 
How  could  he  have?  On  the  other  hand,  Elijah 
was  full  of  it;  and,  because  he  was  so,  he  succeeded 
in  arresting  the  tides  of  sin  when  they  were  in  full 
flood. 

It  is  not  enough  to  shelter  the  prophets;  we  must 
go  and  show  ourselves  to  Ahab.  We  may  be  as  sugar; 
but  we  must  also  be  like  salt,  that  stays  the  prog- 
ress of  consumption.  The  preventive  and  amelio- 
rative, the  healing  agencies,  are  good;  but  the 
aggressive  are  better  still,  because  they  deal  with 
the  hidden  causes  of  things.  May  God  send  to  His 
Church  a  handful  of  lion-like  men,  like  Elijah,  of 
whom  this  is  the  majestic  record:  "Elijah  went  to 
show  himself  unto  Ahab;"  to  confront  the  royal 
culprit,  to  lay  the  king  under  arrest. 


80  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

III.  There  is  a  contrast  between  the  caution 
OF  expediency  and  the  fearlessness  of  faith. 

When  Elijah  told  Obadiah  to  tell  his  master  that 
he  was  awaiting  him,  the  astonished  courtier  was 
incredulous.  He  knew  how  irritated  and  incensed 
Ahab  had  been,  and  that  his  anger  was  at  white 
heat  still;  and  it  seemed  madness  for  the  prophet 
to  expose  himself  to  its  flames.  Indeed,  he  thought 
either  that  the  prophet  did  not  know  the  way  in 
which  the  king  had  sought  for  him,  or  that  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  would  carry  him  off  before  they 
could  meet.  It  never  occurred  to  him  that  Elijah 
dare  meet  the  king  if  he  really  knew  how  matters 
stood.  And  even  supposing  that  /le  were  fool- 
hardy enough  to  adventure  himself,  surely  God 
would  prevent  him  from  stepping  into  the  lion's 
lair.  In  any  case,  he  wished  to  have  nothing  to  do 
with  it.  He  was  more  anxious  for  himself  than 
for  the  work  of  God,  or  the  wishes  of  Elijah. 
Twice  over  he  repeated  the  words,  "He  shall  slay 
me."  And  it  was  only  when  Elijah  appealed  to 
God  as  the  witness  of  his  solemn  oath,  and  assured 
him  that  he  would  surely  show  himself  to  Ahab  ere 
the  sun  went  down,  that  he  reluctantly  went  to 
meet  Ahab,  and  told  him.  How  unable  he  was  to 
form  a  true  conception  of  the  fearlessness  of  Eli- 
jah! 

And  what  was  the  source  of  that  fearlessness? 
Surely  it  is  unfolded  to  us  in  the  words  of  Elijah's 
sublime  asseveration:  "The  Lord  of  hosts  liveth, 
before  whom  I  stand,"  God  was  more  real  to  Elijah 
than  Ahab.     He  was   a  courtier  in  the  throne-room 


OBADIAH—A  CONTRAST.  bi 

of  the  King  of  kings.  How  could  he  be  afraid  of  a 
man  that  should  die,  and  of  the  son  of  man  that 
should  become  as  the  grass  of  the  mower's  scythe 
withered  by  the  noontide  heat?  The  fear  of  God 
had  made  him  impervious  to  all  other  fear.  Faith 
sees  the  mountain  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire. 
Faith  can  hear  the  tread  of  twelve  legions  of  an- 
gels marshaling  for  its  defense.  Faith  can  detect 
the  outlines  of  those  Almighty  hands  which  hide 
the  children  of  God  in  their  hollow.  And  so,  with 
unblanched  face  and  undismayed  heart,  God's  Eli- 
jahs go  on  to  do  His  commands,  though  their  way 
is  blocked  by  as  many  devils  as  there  are  tiles 
upon  the  housetops.  The  Obadiahs  assert  that  they 
will  never  dare  to  carry  their  proposals  through; 
but  they  live  to  see  their  predictions  falsified  and 
their  mean  suggestions  shamed. 

IV.    There  is  a  contrast  between  the  reception 

GIVEN  to  these  two  TYPES  OF  CHARACTER  BY  THE  UN- 
GODLY. 

Ahab  could  tolerate  Obadiah,  because  he  never 
rebuked  him.  When  salt  has  lost  its  savor  it 
does  not  sting,  though  it  be  rubbed  into  an  open 
wound.  But  as  soon  as  Ahab  saw  Elijah,  he  ac- 
costed him  as  the  great  troubler  of  the  time.  "It 
came  to  pass,  when  Ahab  saw  Elijah,  that  Ahab 
said  unto  him.  Is  it  thou,  thou  troubler  of  Israel?" 
(Ver.  17,  R.  V.)  Years  after,  speaking  of  another 
devoted  servant  of  God,  whose  advice  was  de- 
manded by  Jehoshaphat,  this  same  Ahab  said,  "I 
hate  him;  for  he  doth  not  prophesy  good  concern- 
ing me,  but  evilo" 


83         ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POWER. 

There  is  no  higher  testimony  to  the  consistency 
of  our  life  than  the  hearty  hatred  of  the  Ahabs 
around  us.  One  of  the  most  scathing  condemna- 
tions that  could  be  pronounced  on  men  is  contained 
in  those  terrible  words  of  our  Lord:  "  T/ie  world 
cannot  hate  you;  but  Me  it  hateth,  because  I  testify 
of, it  that  the  works  thereof  are  evil."  Who  would 
not  undergo  all  the  hate  that  the  Ahabs  can  heap 
on  us,  rather  than  incur  that  sentence  from  the  lips 
of  Christ!  "Blessed  are  ye,  when  men  shall  revile 
you,  and  persecute  you,  and  shall  say  all  manner 
of  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  My  sake.  Rejoice, 
and  be  exceeding  glad."  If  all  men  speak  well  of 
you,  you  may  begin  to  question  whether  you  are 
not  becoming  mere  Obadiahs.  But  if  Ahab  accuses 
you  of  troubling  him,  rejoice;  and  tell  him  to  his 
face  that  his  trouble  is  due  to  a  broken  command- 
ment, and  to  the  idols  before  which  he  bows.  If 
there  should  read  these  lines  those  who  are  in 
trouble,  enduring  affliction,  their  life  smitten  with 
drought,  let  them  ask  whether  the  cause  is  not 
to  be  found  in  broken  vows,  in  desecrated  temples, 
in  forfeited  oaths.  If  so,  return  at  once,  with 
tears  of  penitence  and  words  of  confession,  unto  the 
Lord.  "He  hath  torn,  and  He  will  heal;  He  hath 
smitten,  and  He  will  bind  up." 

There,  face  to  face,  we  leave  Ahab  and  Elijah. 
We  need  not  ask  which  is  the  more  royal  of  the 
two;  nor  need  we  spend  our  time  in  looking  for 
Obadiah.  We  cannot  but  admire  the  noble  bear- 
ing of  the  prophet  of  God.  But  let  us  remember 
it  was  due,  not  to  his  inherent  character,  but  to  his 
faith.     "By  faith  he  quenched  the  violence  of  fire, 


OB  A  DI AH— A  CONTRAST. 


escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  out  of  weakness 
was  made  strong,  stopped  the  mouth  of  this  lion." 
And  if  we  will  acquire  a  similar  faith,  we  may  an- 
ticipate similar  results  on  the  meaner  platform  of 
our  own  lives. 


84  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER 


VII. 

Z\ic  plan  ot  Campaion* 

(I  Kings  xviii.) 

WHEN  Elijah  left  Zarephath,  it  is  more  than 
probable  that  his  mind  was  utterly  destitute 
of  any  fixed  plan  of  action.  He  knew  that 
he  must  show  himself  to  Ahab,  and  that  rain  was 
not  far  away;  for  these  were  his  definite  marching 
orders:  "Go,  show  thyself  unto  Ahab;  and  I  will  send 
rain  upon  the  earth."  But  more  than  that  he  knew 
not.  There  may  have  flitted  before  his  spirit  dim 
previsions  of  that  sublime  conflict  on  Carmel's 
heights,  but  he  knew  nothing  certainly;  his  one 
endeavor  was  to  quiet  his  eager  nature,  like  a 
weaned  child,  hushing  it  with  the  lullaby  of  an  old 
refrain:  "My  soul,  wait  thou  only  upon  God,  for 
my  expectation  is  from  Him." 

The  plan  of  this  great  campaign  for  God  against 
Baal,  for  truth  against  error,  may  have  been  re- 
vealed to  Elijah  on  his  journey  from  Zarephath  to 
find  Ahab,  and  at  a  sudden  glance,  as  when  a 
lightning-flash  reveals  to  a  benighted  traveler  the 
winding  pathway  he  must  follow  through  the  vale 
beneath.  But  it  is  quite  as  likely  that  it  was  re- 
vealed in  pieces,  like  the  separate  bits  of  a  chil- 
dren's puzzle — handed  out,  one  by    one,    from    the 


THE  PLy^N  OF  CAMPAIO^.  85 

parent  to  the  child,  who  might  be  confused  to  do 
with  more  than  one  at  a  time.  This  is  so  often 
God's  way;  and  they  who  trust  Him  utterly  are  quite 
pleased  to  have  it  so.  There  is  even  a  novelty 
and  beauty  in  life,  when  every  step  is  unforeseen 
and  unexpected,  and  opens  up  new  vistas  of  loveli- 
ness in  God's  management  and  in  Himself. 

If  we  seek  to  think  ourselves  into  Elijah's  atti- 
tude of  heart  and  mind,  as  he  left  the  shelter  of 
Zarephath,  and  began  to  pass  through  the  incidents 
that  culminated  in  Carmel,  it  seems  to  have  been 
three-fold.  And  surely  it  is  of  surpassing  interest 
to  learn  how  such  a  man  felt  as  he  approached  the 
sublime  crisis  of  b'S  life. 

I.    He  was  filled  with  a  consuming  passion  for 

THE   GLORY    OF    GOD. 

Let  it  be  known  that  Thou  art  God  in  Israel." 
This  prayer  is  the  key  to  his  heart.  He  neither 
knew  nor  cared  to  know  what  would  become  of 
himself;  but  his  soul  was  on  fire  with  a  holy 
jealousy  for  the  glory  of  God.  He  could  not  bear 
to  think  of  those  wrecked  altars  or  martyred  proph- 
ets. He  could  not  bear  to  think  how  the  Land  of 
Promise  was  groaning  beneath  the  obscene  and 
deadly  rites  of  Phoenician  idolatry.  He  could  not 
bear  to  think  that  his  people  were  beginning  to 
imagine  that  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of 
Israel  had  abdicated  in  favor  of  these  false  deities 
brought  newly  in.  And  when  he  was  compelled  to 
face  these  things,  his  spirit  was  stirred  to  its 
depths  with  indignation  and  sorrow. 


86  ELIJ/iH:  /IND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

Well  would  it  be  if  each  one  of  us  was  similarly 
inspired!  We  are  very  eager  for  the  success  of 
our  work,  our  church,  our  sect.  If  these  thrive,  we 
are  satisfied;  if  these  languish,  we  are  depressed. 
We  are  wholly  occupied  with  the  interests 
of  our  own  tiny  pools,  oblivious  of  the  great 
sea  of  Divine  glory  lying  near  by,  in  perpetual  sun- 
shine. Is  it  wonderful  that  we  have  so  small  a 
measure  of  success?  God  will  not  give  His  glory 
to  another,  nor  His  praise  to  the  graven  images 
of  our  own  conceit.  But  in  this,  also,  God  is  will- 
ing to  lift  our  daily  experience  to  the  level  of  our 
loftiest  ideals.  Only  trust  Him  to  do  it;  ask  and 
expect  Him  to  fill  you  with  the  fire  of  that  zeal 
which  burned  in  the  heart  of  Elijah,  consuming  all 
that  was  base,  corrupt,  and  selfish,  and  making  the 
whole  man  a  fit  agent  for  God.  This  was  no  in- 
digenous growth.  It  was  not  more  natural  to  him 
than  it  is  to  any  one  of  us.  It  was  simply  one  of 
the  fruits  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  is  equally  promised  to  the  most  ignoble  nature. 

II.     He  was  profoundly  convinced  that   he  was 

ONLY    A  SERVANT. 

'Let  it  be  known  that  Thou  art  God  in  Israel; 
and  that  I  am  Thy  servant  "  It  was  not  for  the  slave 
in  olden  times  to  originate,  or  scheme,  or  plan;  but 
to  be  pliant  to  the  least  expression  of  the  master's 

■will to  be  a  tool  in  his  hand,  a  chess-piece  on  the 

board  for  him  to  move  just  where  he  willed.  And 
this  was  the  attitude  of  Elijah's  spirit — surren- 
dered, yielded,  emptied;  plastic  to  the  hands  that 
reach  down  out  of  heaven  molding  men. 


THE  PLAhl  OF  CAMPAIGN.  87 

This  attitude  is  the  true  one  for  us  all.  Are  we 
not  too  fond  of  doing  things  for  God,  instead  of 
letting  God  do  what  He  chooses  through  us?  We 
say,  "We  will  go  yonder;  we  will  do  this  and  that; 
we  will  work  for  God  thus."  We  do  not  consider 
that  we  should  first  inquire  if  this  were  God's  will 
for  us.  We  do  not  recognize  His  absolute  owner- 
ship. We  often  miss  doing  what  He  sorely  wants 
to  do,  because  we  insist  on  carrying  out  some  little 
whim  of  our  own.  This  is  the  blight  on  much  of 
the  activity  of  Christian  people  at  the  present  time. 
They  are  not  satisfied  to  be  as  the  Apostle  Paul 
was,  "the  slave  of  Jesus  Christ"  (Rom.  i.  i,  marg.). 

HI.  Elijah  was  eagerly  desirous  to  know  and 
WORK  OUT  God's  plan. 

"Let  it  be  known  this  day  that  Thou  art  God  in 
Israel;  and  that  I  am  Thy  servant;  and  that  I 
have  done  all  these  things  according  to  Thy  word." 
When  once  a  man  feels  that  he  is  working  out  God's 
plan,  and  that  God  is  working  out  His  plan  through 
him,  he  is  invincible.  Men,  circumstances,  opposi- 
tion, are  of  no  more  account  than  the  chaff  of  the 
autumn  threshings.  God's  plan  is  His  purpose; 
and  God's  purpose  shall  be  accomplished,  though 
earth  and  heaven  pass  away.  And  this  was  doubt- 
less one  element  in  Elijah's  splendid  strength. 

This  question  as  to  our  relation  to  God's  plan  is 
most  important;  because  the  power  and  blessing 
of  God  are  only  to  be  enjoyed  in  all  their  fullness 
by  those  who  are  where  He  would  have  them  be. 
God  had  the  plan  of  the  desert  wanderings  in  His 


88         ELIJ/IH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


thought    long    before    Israel    left    Egypt;    and    He 
worked    out    that    plan    by    the  movements  of    the 
cloud  over  the  desert  sands.     The  manna  fell  on  any 
given  morning  only  where  the  cloud   was  brooding, 
shielding    the  host  by  its  fleecy  fold.     To    get  the 
manna  and  the  shade,  the   blood-redeemed  must  be 
just  where  God's  plan  required  them    to  be.     This 
is  a  parable  of    our  lives.     Would  we   have  Divine 
supplies?     We  must  keep  step  with  the  Divine  plan. 
The  fire  burns  only  when  we  erect  the  altar  accord- 
ing to  God's  word.      We    must  not  be    disobedient 
to  a  heavenly  vision.     We  must  not  spend  our  years 
in  day-dreams,  nor  in  seeking  comfort ;  but  must  be 
incessant    in    uttering    the  cry,  "What    wilt   Thou 
have  me  to  do?" 

There  are  many  ways  of  learning  God's  plan. 
Sometimes  it  is  revealed  in  circumstances— not 
alwa3^s  pleasant,  but  ever  acceptable,  because  re- 
vealing our  Father's  will.  No  circumstance  hap- 
pens outside  His  permission;  and  therefore  each  is 
a  King's  messenger  bearing  His  message,  though 
we  are  sometimes  puzzled  to  decipher  it.  Some- 
times God's  plan  is  revealed  by  strong  impressions 
of  duty,  which  increase  in  proportion  as  they  are 
prayed  over,  and  are  tested  by  the  Word  of  God. 

There  are  many  voices  by  which  God  can  speak 
His  will  to  the  truly  surrendered  spirit.  If  there 
is  any  confusion  as  to  what  it  is,  it  is  due  to  one 
of  these  two  causes:  either  the  will  is  not  fully 
yielded  to  do  God's  will  so  soon  as  known,  but 
there  is  some  film  between  the  two,  preventing  the 
entire  permeation  of  the  human  by  the  Divine;  or 
the  time  of  perfect  knowledge  has  not  arrived,  and 


THE  PL^N  OF  CAMPAIGN.  m 


we  must  be  content  quietly  to  wait  for  the  salva- 
tion of  God.  It  is  a  true  rule  for  us  all,  to  do 
nothing  so  long  as  we  are  in  any  uncertainty;  but 
to  examine  ourselves,  and  to  be  ready  to  act  so 
soon  as  we  know.  We  may  not  infrequently  have 
the  experience  of  the  Apostle  Peter  repeated  in 
our  own:  "While  Peter  doubted  in  himself  what 
this  vision,  which  he  had  seen,  should  mean,  be- 
hold, the  men  sent  from  Cornelius  stood  before  the 
gate"  (Acts  x.  17).  The  knocking  of  three  men  at 
a  gate  may  sometimes  indicate  God's  plan;  or  a 
dream  from  across  the  sea;  or  the  glimpse  of  a 
weary  face,  just  a  little  more  weary  than  others 
around  (Acts  xvi.  9,  10;   John  v.  6,  7). 

The  plan,  as  Elijah  unfolded  it  to  Ahab,  was 
eminently  adapted  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 
All  Israel  was  to  be  gathered  by  royal  summons 
to  Carmel,  which  reared  itself  above  the  plain  of 
Esdraelon,  a  noble  site  for  a  national  meeting- 
ground.  Special  care  was  to  be  taken  to  secure  the 
presence  of  the  representatives  of  the  systems  that 
had  dared  to  rival  the  worship  of  Jehovah:  "The 
prophets  of  Baal  four  hundred  and  fifty,  and  the 
prophets  of  the  Asherah  four  hundred,  which  eat  at 
Jezebel's  table."  A  test  was  then  to  be  imposed 
on  these  rival  systems,  which  the  adherents  of  Baal 
could  not  possibly  refuse;  for  he  was  the  Sun-god, 
and  this  was  a  trial  by  fire. 

Elijah  knew  that  the  altar  of  Baal  would  remain 
smokeless.  He  was  equally  sure  that  Jehovah 
would  answer  his  faith  by  fire,  as  He  had  done 
again  and  again  in  the  glorious  past.  He  felt  con- 
vinced  also  that  the   people,  unable  to  escape  the 


90  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

evidence  of  their  senses,  would  forever  disavow 
the  accursed  systems  of  Phoenicia,  and  would 
return  once  more  to  the  worship  of  the  God  of 
their  fathers. 

It  is  probable  that,  in  the  case  of  Ahab,  only  so 
much  of  this  plan  was  disclosed  as  was  necessary  to 
secure  the  gathering  of  the  people.  To  tell  him 
too  much  would  be  to  invite  criticism,  and  per- 
haps to  arouse  opposition.  It  is  not  likely  that 
he  would  have  been  so  pliant,  unless  allured  by  the 
bait  of  rain.  "So  Ahab  sent  unto  all  the  children 
of  Israel,  and  gathered  the  prophets  together  unto 
Mount  Carmel." 

We  do  not  know  how  this  was  done;  but  doubt- 
less the  royal  word  would  be  passed  through  the 
country  by  a  system  of  messengers,  like  those  which 
once  gave  warning  of  the  peril  of  Jabesh-Gilead;  or, 
in  later  times,  carried  through  the  Highlands  the 
fiery  cross.  But  in  any  case  this  summoning  of  the 
people  must  have  taken  a  few  days.  And  it  is  by 
that  interval  of  waiting  that  we  are  for  a  moment 
arrested.  It  was  like  the  sultry  hush  which  pre- 
cedes the  breaking  of  a  tropic  thunder-storm;  or  the 
momentary  pause  before  long  lines  of  armed  men 
are  launched  at  each  other  in  the  shock  of  battle. 

Where  and  how  did  Elijah  spend  that  interval? 
We  are  told  that  "he  cafne  unto  all  the  people," 
when  they  were  finally  assembled  on  the  appointed 
day.  We  may  not  press  the  word;  but  does  it  not 
suggest  that  he  came  from  the  contrary  direction 
to  that  from  which  the  people  gathered?  And  if 
the  people  came  from  the  whole  circumference  of 
the  land,  may  he  not  have  come  from  some  ancient 


THE  PLAN  OF  CAMPAIGN.  91 

cave  of  Carmel's  heights,  just  where  the  long  range 
of  hills  drops  suddenly  down  in  sheer  precipices 
on  the  sea? 

In  my  opinion,  Elijah  spent  those  memorable 
days  of  waiting  on  Carmel  itself;  sheltering  him- 
self and  the  lad  in  some  wild  cave  at  night,  and  by 
day  going  carefully  over  the  scene  of  the  approach- 
ing conflict.  How  mournfully  would  he  bend  over 
the  stones  of  that  altar,  which  was  broken  down ! — 
broken  down  not  by  the  wild  weather,  or  the  devastat- 
ing hand  of  time;  but  by  the  wicked  behest  of  Jezebel 
(i  Kings  xviii.  32).  How  eagerly  would  he  search 
out  the  original  twelve  stones,  strewn  recklessly 
afar,  and  covered  by  wild  undergrowth.  He  would 
need  them  soon!  How  constantly  would  he  stay 
himself  upon  his  God,  and  pour  out  litanies  of 
supplication  for  the  people,  and  gird  himself  for 
the  coming  conflict  by  effectual,  fervent  prayer. 
Would  he  not  learn  the  way  down  to  Kishon's  brook 
beneath,  and  visit  the  perennial  spring,  from  which 
he  would  fill  the  barrels  again  and  yet  again  with 
water? 

We  sometimes  seem  to  think  that  that  answer  of 
fire  was  probably  so  much  the  result  of  God's  deter- 
mination as  to  have  been  largely  independent  of 
any  special  exercise  of  the  prophet's  faith.  We  sup- 
pose that  more  faith  and  prayer  were  needed  to  bring 
the  rain  than  to  bring  the  leaping,  consuming  flame. 
We  consider  that  the  one  needed  the  intense  seven- 
fold prayer;  whilst  the  other  needed  only  the  few  sen- 
tences spoken  in  the  audience  of  the  amazed  people, 
at  the  moment  of  sacrifice.  But  this  is  a  very  su- 
perficial reading  of  the  story;   and  it  is  not  in  har- 


92  BLIJ/fH:  y4ND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POtVEk. 

mony  with  the  general  dealings  of  God.  "For  all 
these  things  I  will  be  inquired  of."  As  much  fer- 
vent, beheving  prayer  was  needed  for  the  fire  as  for  the 
rain;  and  the  answer  by  fire  would  never  have  come 
that  day,  if  the  previous  days  had  not  been  spent 
in  the  presence-chamber  of  God.  The  prayer  during 
ten  days  of  waiting,  in  the  upper  room,  must  pre- 
cede the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  a  baptism 
of  fire,  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost. 

It  is  a  sublime  spectacle — this  yielded,  surren- 
dered man,  awaiting  on  Carmel,  in  steadfast  faith, 
the  gathering  of  the  people,  and  the  unfolding  of 
the  purpose  of  God.  He  had  no  fear  about  the 
issue;  and  as  the  days  rolled  by,  his  soul  rose  in 
higher  and  ever  higher  joy.  He  expected  soon  to 
see  a  nation  at  the  feet  of  God. 

And  he  was  all  this,  not  because  he  was  of  a 
different  make  to  ourselves;  but  because  he  had  got 
into  the  blessed  habit  of  dealing  with  God  at  first 
hand,  as  a  Living  Reality,  in  whose  presence  it 
was  his  privilege  and  glory  always  to  stand. 


THE  CONFLICT  ON  THE  HEIGHTS  Of  CARMEL.      93 


VIII. 

xrbe  Contltct  on  tbe  IbeiGbts  of  Cajmel. 

(I  Kings  xviii.) 

IT  is  early  morning  upon  Mount  Carmel.  We 
are  standing  on  the  highest  point,  looking 
northward  to  where  Hermon,  on  the  extreme 
borders  of  the  land,  rears  its  snow-capped  head  to 
heaven.  Around  us  on  the  left  lies  the  Mediterra- 
nean Sea;  its  deep  blue  waters  flecked  here  and 
there  by  the  sails  of  the  Tyrian  mariners.  Imme- 
diately at  Carmel' s  base  winds  Kishon's  ancient 
brook,  once  choked  by  the  slaughter  of  Sisera's 
host;  and  beyond  it  stretches  the  plain  of  Es- 
draelon,  the  garden  of  Palestine,  but  now  sere  and 
barren  with  three  years'  drought.  Away  there  in 
the  distance  is  the  city  of  Jezreel,  with  the  royal 
palace  and  the  idol  temple  distinctly  visible. 

From  all  sides  the  crowds  are  making  their  way 
toward  this  spot,  which,  from  the  remotest  times, 
has  been  associated  with  worship.  No  work  is 
being  done  anywhere;  the  fires  are  dying  out  in  the 
smithy  and  the  forge;  the  instruments  of  labor  hang 
useless  on  the  walls;  and  the  whole  thought  of 
young  and  old  is  concentrated  on  that  mighty  con- 
vocation to  which  Ahab  has  summoned  them.  See 
how  the  many  thousands  of  Israel  are  slowly  gather- 


04  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


ing,  and  taking  up  every  spot  of  vantage  ground 
from  which  a  view  can  be  obtained  of  the  proceed- 
ings; and  prepared  for  any  extreme — from  the  im- 
pure rites  of  Baal  and  Astarte,  to  the  re-establish- 
ment of  their  fathers'  religion  on  the  dead  bodies 
of  the  false  priests! 

The  people  are  nearly  gathered,  and  there  is  the 
regular  tread  of  marshaled  men — four  hundred 
prophets  of  Baal,  conspicuous  with  the  sun-symbols 
flashing  on  their  brows;  but  the  prophets  of  Astarte 
are  absent:  the  queen,  at  whose  table  they  ate,  has 
overruled  the  summons  of  the  king.  And  now, 
through  the  crowd,  the  litter  of  the  king,  borne 
by  stalwart  carriers,  threads  its  way,  surrounded 
by  the  great  officers  of  state. 

But  our  thought  turns  from  the  natural  panorama, 
and  the  sea  of  upturned  faces,  and  the  flashing 
splendor  of  the  priests,  sure  of  court  favor,  and 
insolently  defiant.  And  we  fix  our  thought  with 
intense  interest  on  that  one  man,  of  sinewy  build 
and  flowing  hair,  who,  with  flashing  eye  and  com- 
pressed lip,  awaits  the  quiet  hush  which  will  pres- 
ently fall  upon  that  mighty  concourse.  One  man 
against  a  nation !  See,  with  what  malignant  glances 
his  every  movement  is  watched  by  the  priests. 
No  tiger  ever  watched  its  victim  more  fiercely!  If 
they  may  have  their  way,  he  will  never  touch 
yonder  plain  again. 

The  king  alternates  between  fear  and  hate;  but 
restrains  himself,  because  he  feels  that,  somehow, 
the  coming  of  the  rain  depends  on  this  one  man. 
And  through  the  crowd,  if  there  be  sympathizers, 
they  are  hushed  and  still.  Even  Obadiah  discreetly 


THE  CONFLICT  ON  THE  HEIGHTS  OF  CARMEL.      95 

keeps  out  of  the  way.  But  do  not  fear  for,  Elijah 
— he  needs  no  sympathy!  He  is  consciously  stand- 
ing in  the  presence  of  One  to  whom  the  nations  of 
men  are  as  grasshoppers.  All  heaven  is  at  his 
back.  Legions  of  angels  fill  the  mountain  with 
horses  and  chariots  of  fire.  He  is  only  a  man  of 
like  passions  with  ourselves,  but  he  is  full  of  faith 
and  spiritual  power;  he  has  learned  the  secret  of 
moving  God  Himself;  he  can  avail  himself  of  the 
very  resources  of  Deity,  as  a  slender  rod  may  draw 
lightning  from  the  cloud.  This  very  day,  by  faith 
— not  by  any  inherent  power,  but  by  faith — you 
shall  see  him  subdue  a  kingdom;  work  righteous- 
ness; escape  the  edge  of  the  sword;  wax  valiant  in 
the  fight;  and  turn  to  flight  armies  of  the  aliens. 
Nothing  shall  be  impossible  to  him.  Is  it  not 
written  that  "All  things  are  possible  to  him  that 
believeth?"  He  spoke  seven  times  during  the 
course  of  that  memorable  day;  and  his  words  are 
the  true  index  of  what  was  passing  in  his  heart. 

I.     Elijah  uttered  a  remonstrance. 

"Elijah  came  unto  all  the  people  and  said,  How 
long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions?  If  Jehovah  be 
God,  follow  Him;  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him." 
To  his  clear  faith,  which  was  almost  sight,  there 
was  no  "if."  He  did  not  doubt  for  a  moment  that 
Jehovah  was  God.  But  he  wanted  to  show  the 
people  the  absurdity  of  their  position.  Religions 
so  diametrically  opposed  could  not  both  be  right. 
One  of  them  must  be  wrong;  and  as  soon  as  the 
s  true  one  was  discovered,  the  other,  shown  to  be 
false,  must  be  cast  to  the  winds. 


96  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

At  present  their  position  was  illogical  and 
absurd.  Their  course  was  like  the  limp  of  a  man 
whose  legs  are  uneven;  or  like  the  device  of  a  serv- 
ant employed  to  serve  two  masters — doing  his  best 
for  both,  and  failing  to  please  either.  His  sincere 
and  simple  soul  had  no  patience  with  such 
egregious  folly.  No  doubt  they  had  drifted  into 
it,  as  men  often  do  into  absurd  and  wrong  posi- 
tions. We  are  all  liable  to  that  drift  of  the  stream. 
But  the  time  had  come  for  the  nation  to  be 
arrested  in  its  attempt  to  mingle  the  worship  of 
Jehovah  and  of  Baal,  and  compelled  to  choose 
between  the  two  issues  that  presented  themselves. 
Undoubtedly,  the  prophet  felt  that  if  once  his 
people  were  compelled  to  choose  between  the  two, 
and  to  say  whether  the  Jehovah  of  their  fathers,  or 
Baal,  should  be  God,  there  could  be  no  doubt  as 
to  their  verdict. 

The  people  seemed  to  have  been  stunned  and 
ashamed  that  such  alternatives  should  be  presented 
to  their  choice;  for  "they  answered  him  not  a 
word.'  Oh  for  the  clear-sightedness  of  that  faith 
which  shall  show  men  the  unreasonableness  of  their 
position — sweeping  away  the  cobwebs  of  sophistry 
with  a  single  movement  of  the  hand;  and  arraigning 
them  at  the  bar  of  their  own  consciences,  silent 
and  condemned.  It  is  needed  in  our  day  as  much 
as  ever.  Everywhere  men  are  trying  to  win  the 
smile  of  the  world  and  the  "well-done"  of  Christ. 
They  crowd  alike  the  temples  of  mammon  and  of 
God.  They  try  to  be  popular  in  the  court  of  Saul, 
and  to  stand  well  with  the  exiled  David. 


THE  CONFLICT  ON  THE  HEIGHTS  OF  C  ARM  EL.      97 

11.     Elijah  threw  down  a  challenge. 

"The  God  that  answereth  by  fire,  let  Him  be 
God."  It  was  a  fair  proposal;  because  Baal  was 
the  lord  of  the  sun,  and  the  god  of  those  produc- 
tive natural  forces  of  which  heat  is  the  element 
and  sign.  The  votaries  of  Baal  could  not  therefore 
refuse. 

And  every  Israelite  could  recall  many  an  occasion 
in  the  glorious  past  when  Jehovah  had  answered 
by  fire.  It  burnt  in  the  acacia  bush,  which  was  its 
own  fuel;  it  shone  like  a  beacon  light  in  the  van 
of  the  desert  march;  it  gleamed  on  the  brow  of 
Sinai;  it  smote  the  murmuring  crowds;  it  fell 
upon  the  sacrifices  which  awaited  it  on  the  brazen 
altar.  It  was  the  emblem  of  Jehovah,  and  the  sign 
of  His  acceptance  of  His  people's  service. 

When  Elijah,  therefore,  proposed  that  each  side 
should  offer  a  bullock,  and  await  an  answer  by  fire, 
he  secured  the  immediate  acquiescence  of  the 
people.  "All  the  people  answered  and  said.  It  is 
well  spoken." 

That  proposal  was  made  in  the  perfect  assurance 
that  God  would  not  fail  him.  Had  he  not  spent 
days  in  prayer?  Had  not  the  Divine  plan  been 
revealed  to  him?  Was  it  to  be  supposed  for  a 
moment  that  God  would  push  His  servant  into  the 
front  of  the  battle,  and  then  leave  him?  Granted 
that  a  miracle  must  be  wrought  ere  the  sun  set: 
there  was  no  difficulty  about'  that  to  a  man  who 
lived  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High.  Mira- 
cles are  only  the  results  of  the  higher  laws  of  His 
presence-chamber. 


98  ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POUTER 

God  will  never  fail  the  man  who  trusts  Him 
utterly.  He  may  keep  him  waiting  till  the  fourth 
watch  of  the  morning;  but  the  gray  dawn  will 
reveal  Him  stepping  across  the  billows'  crests  to 
His  servant's  help.  Be  sure  that  you  are  on  God's 
plan;  then  forward  in  God's  name! — the  very  ele- 
ments shall  obey  you,  and  fire  shall  leap  from 
heaven  at  your  command. 

HI.     Elijah  dealt  out  withering  sarcasm. 

For  the  first  time  in  their  existence,  the  false 
priests  were  unable  to  insert  the  secret  spark  of 
fire  among  the  fagots  that  lay  upon  their  altar. 
They  were  compelled,  therefore,  to  rely  on  a  direct 
appeal  to  their  patron  deity.  And  this  they  did 
with  might  and  main.  Round  and  round  the  altar 
they  went  in  the  mystic  choric  dance,  breaking  their 
rank  sometimes  by  an  excited  leap  up  and  down  at 
the  altar  which  was  made;  and  all  the  while  repeat- 
ing the  monotonous  chant,  "Baal,  hear  us!  Hear  us, 
Baal!"  But  there  was  no  voice,  nor  any  that  an- 
swered. "Their  idols  are  silver  and  gold,  the  work 
of  men's  hands.  They  have  mouths,  but  they 
speak  not;  eyes  have  they,  but  they  see  not;  they 
have  ears,  but  they  hear  not;  they  that  make  them 
are  like  them,  so  is  everyone  that  trustethin  them." 

Three  hours  passed  thus.  Their  deity  slowly 
drove  his  golden  car  up  the  steep  of  heaven,  and 
ascended  his  throne  in  the  zenith.  It  was  surely 
the  time  of  his  greatest  power,  and  he  must  help 
them  then,  if  ever.  But  all  he  did  was  to  bronze 
to  a  deeper  tint  the  eager,  upturned  faces  of  his 
priests. 


THE  CONFLICT  ON  THE  HEIGHTS  OF  CARMEL.      99 

Elijah  could  ill  conceal  his  delight  in  their 
defeat.  He  knew  it  would  be  so.  He  was  so  sure 
that  nothing  could  avert  their  utter  discomfiture, 
that  he  could  afford  to  mock  them,  by  suggesting 
a  cause  for  the  indifference  of  their  god:  "Cry 
aloud,  for  he  is  a  god;  either  he  is  talking,  or  he 
is  pursuing,  or  he  is  in  a  journey,  or  peradventure 
he  sleepeth,  and  must  be  awaked."  Sarcasm  is  an 
invaluable  weapon  when  it  is  used  to  expose  the 
ridiculous  pretensions  of  error,  and  to  convince 
men  of  the  folly  and  unreasonableness  of  their 
ways. 

"And  they  cried  aloud;  and  cut  themselves  after 
their  manner,  with  knives  and  lancets,  till  their 
blood  gushed  out  upon  them."  Surely  their  extrem- 
ity was  enough  to  touch  the  compassion  of  any 
deity,  however  hard  to  move!  And,  since  the 
heavens  still  continued  dumb,  did  it  not  prove  to 
the  people  that  their  religion  was  a  delusion  and  a 
sham? 

Thus  three  more  hours  passed  by,  till  the  hour 
had  come  when,  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  the 
priests  of  God  were  accustomed  to  offer  the  evening 
lamb.  "But  there  was  neither  voice,  nor  any  to 
answer,  nor  any  that  regarded."  The  altar  stood 
cold  and  smokeless    the  bullock  unconsumed. 

IV.     Elijah  issued  an  invitation. 

His  time  had  come  at  last;  and  his  first  act  was 
to  invite  the  people  nearer.  He  knew  what  his 
faith  and  prayer  had  won  from  God;  but  he  wanted 
the  answer  of  fire  to  be  beyond  dispute.    He  there- 


100        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

fore  invited  the  close  scrutiny  of  the  people,  as  he 
reared  the  broken  altar  of  the  Lord.  As  he  sought, 
with  reverent  care,  those  scattered  stones,  and 
built  them  together  so  that  the  twelve  stood  as 
one — meet  symbol  of  the  unity  of  the  ideal  Israel 
in  the  sight  of  God — the  keen  glances  of  the 
people  in  his  close  proximity  could  see  that  there 
was  no  inserted  torch  or  secret  spark. 

Do  we  not  want  a  few  more,  who,  amid  the  scat- 
terings of  the  present  day,  can  still  discern  the 
true  unity  of  the  Church,  the  body  of  Christ?  We 
may  never  see  that  unity  visibly  manifested  until 
we  see  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  v/ife,  descend  out 
of  heaven  from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God. 
But  nevertheless  we  can  enter  into  God's  ideal  of 
it  as  a  spiritual  unity,  existing  unbroken  in  His 
thought,  and  unaffected  by  the  divisions  of  our 
times.  Is  it  not  clear  that,  during  this  age,  the 
Church  of  Christ  was  never  meant  to  be  a  visible 
corporate  body,  but  to  be  a  great  spiritual  reality, 
consisting  of  all  faithful  and  loyal  spirits,  in  all 
communions,  who,  holding  the  Head,  are  neces- 
sarily one  with  each  other? 

V.     Elijah  gave  a  command. 

His  faith  was  exuberant.  He  was  so  sure  of  God, 
that  he  dared  to  heap  difficulties  in  his  way, 
knowing  that  there  is  no  real  difficulty  for  infinite 
power.  The  more  unlikely  the  answer  was,  the 
more  glory  would  there  be  to  God.  Oh,  match- 
less faith!  which  can  laugh  at  impossibilities,  and 
can  even  heap  them  one  upon    another,  to  have  the 


THE  CONFLICT  ON  THE  HEIGHTS  OF  CARMEL    lol 

pleasure  of  seeing  God  vanquish  them — as  a  steam 
hammer  cracks  a  nut-shell  placed  under  it  by  the 
wondering  child. 

The  altar  was  reared;  the  wood  laid  in  order;  the 
bullock  cut  in  pieces:  but  to  prevent  any  possibil- 
ity of  fraud,  and  to  make  the  coming  miracle  still 
more  wonderful,  Elijah  said,  "Fill  four  barrels 
with  water,  and  pour  it  on  the  sacrifice  and  on  the 
wood."  This  they  did  three  times,  till  the  wood 
was  drenched,  and  the  water  filled  the  trench^ 
making  it  impossible    for  a  spark  to  travel    across. 

Alas,  few  of  us  have  faith  like  this!  We  are  not 
so  sure  of  God  that  we  dare  to  pile  difficulties  in 
His  way.  We  all  try  our  best  to  make  it  easy  for 
Him  to  help  us.  Yet  what  this  man  had,  we  too 
may  have,  by  prayer  and  fasting. 

VI.     Elijah  offered  a  prayer. 

Such  a  prayer!  It  was  quiet  and  assured,  confi- 
dent of  an  answer.  Its  chief  burden  was  that  God 
should  vindicate  Himself  that  day,  in  showing 
Himself  to  be  God  indeed,  and  in  turning  the 
people's  heart  back  to  Himself. 

Whenever  we  can  so  lose  ourselves  in  prayer  as 
to  forget  personal  interests,  and  to  plead  for  the 
glory  of  God,  we  have  reached  a  vantage  ground 
from  which  we  can  win  anything  from  Him.  Our 
blessed  Lord,  in  His  earthly  life,  had  but  one  pas- 
sion— that  His  Father  might  be  glorified;  and  now 
He  cannot  resist  fulfilling  the  prayer  which  advances 
this  as  its  plea:  "Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the 
Father  in  My  name,  that  will  I  do;  that  the  Father 
may  be  glorified  in  the  Son." 


103        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER.- 

Is  it  wonderful  that  "the  fire  of  the  Lord  fell, 
and  consumed  the  burnt  sacrifice,  and  the  wood, 
and  the  stones,  and  the  dust,  and  licked  up  the 
water  that  was  in  the  trench?"  It  could  not  have 
been  otherwise !  And  let  us  not  think  that  this  is 
an  old-world  tale,  never  to  be  repeated.  The  fire 
still  waits  for  the  Promethean  faith  that  can  bring 
it  down.  If  there  were  the  same  need,  and  if  any 
one  of  us  exercised  the  same  faith,  we  might  again 
see  fire  descending.  Did  not  the  Holy  Ghost  in- 
augurate this  very  age  with  flames  of  fire?  Our 
God  is  a  consuming  fire;  and  when  once  the  unity 
of  His  people  is  recognized,  and  His  presence  is 
sought.  He  will  descend,  overcoming  all  obstacles, 
and  converting  a  drenched  and  dripping  sacrifice 
into  food  on  which  He  Himself  can  feed. 

VII.     Elijah  issued  an  order  for  execution. 

It  was  a  very  terrible  act;  and  yet  what  could  he 
do?  The  saints  of  those  times  knew  nothing  of 
our  false  notions  of  liberality.  Tell  Elijah  that 
those  men  might  be  sincere,  he  would  find  it  difficult 
to  believe  it;  and  he  would  assert  that  they  were 
none  the  less  dangerous  to  the  best  interests  of  his 
people.  To  let  them  escape  would  be  to  license 
them  as  the  agents  of  apostasy.  They  must  die. 
And  so  the  order  went  forth  from  those  stern  lips: 
"Take  the  prophets  of  Baal ;  let  not  one  of  them 
escape."  The  people  were  in  the  mood  to  obey. 
Only  a  moment  before  they  had  rent  the  air  with 
the  shout,  "Jehovah,  He  is  the  God!  Jehovah,  He 
is  the  God!  "  They  see  how  hideously  they  had  been 


THE  CONFLICT  ON  THE  HEIGHTS  OF  CARMEL     103 

deceived.  And  now  they  close  round  the  cowed 
and  vanquished  priests,  who  see  that  resistance  is 
in  vain,  and  that  their  hour  is  come. 

"And  they  took  them."  Some  took  one,  and 
some  another;  each  priest  was  hurried  down  the 
mountain-side  by  the  frenzied  and  determined  men 
who  were  beginning  to  see  in  them  the  cause  of 
the  long-continued  drought. 

"Elijah  brought  them  down  to  the  brook  Kishon, 
and  slew  them  there."  One  after  another  they  fell 
beneath  his  sword;  whilst  the  king  stood  by,  a 
helpless  spectator  of  their  doom,  and  Baal  did 
naught  to  save  them. 

And  when  the  last  was  dead,  the  prophet  knew 
that  rain  was  not  far  off.  He  could  almost  hear 
the  footfall  of  the  clouds  hurrying  up  toward  the 
land.  He  knew,  what  we  all  need  to  know,  that 
God  Himself  can  only  bless  the  land  or  heart 
which  no  longer  shelters  within  its  borders  rivals 
to  Himself.  May  God  clear  us  of  His  rivals,  and 
impart  to  us  Elijah's  faith,  that  we  may  also  be 
strong  and  do  exploits! 


104        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


IX. 

IRatn  at  Xaat  t 

(I  Kings  xviii.) 

WE  can  in  a  very  inadequate  degree  realize 
the  horrors  of  an  Eastern  drought.  And 
it  would  have  been  difficult  in  the  parched 
land  on  which  Elijah  gazed  from  .  Carmel,  to 
have  recognized  that  garden  of  the  Lord  of  which 
Moses  said:  "The  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  a  good 
land;  a  land  full  of  brooks  of  water,  of  rivers  and 
depths,  which  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hills;  a 
land  wherein  thou  shalt  eat  bread  without  scarce- 
ness, and  in  which  thou  shalt  not  lack  anything." 
But  beside  this  exquisite  delineation,  there  had 
been  given  to  Moses  a  description  of  the  certain 
calamities  that  would  ensue  if  Israel  went  aside 
from  any  of  the  words  which  God  commanded,  to 
the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  And  amongst  other 
items  of  misery,  it  was  expressly  stated  that  the 
heaven  overhead  should  be  brass,  and  the  earth  un- 
derfoot iron;  and  that  the  very  rain  should  be 
transformed  to  powder  and  dust  (Deut.  xxviii.  23, 
24).  This  terrible  prediction  had  now  been  literally 
fulfilled.  And  the  anguish  of  the  land  was  directly 
attributable  to  the  apostasy  of  its  people.     All  this 


R^IN  AT  LAST!  105 


was  the  result  of  sin.  The  iniquities  of  Israel  had 
separated  between  them  and  their  God,  and  Elijah 
knew  this  right  well ;  and  this  prompted  him  to 
act  the  part  of  executioner  to  the  priests  of 
Baal,  who  had  been  the  ringleaders  in  the  national 
revolt  from  God,  but  whose  bodies  now  lay  in 
ghastly  death  on  the  banks  of  the  Kishon,  or  were 
being  hurried  out  to  sea. 

Ahab  must  have  stood  by  Elijah  in  the  Kishon 
gorge,  and  been  an  unwilling  spectator  of  that 
fearful  deed  of  vengeance;  not  daring  to  resist  the 
outburst  of  popular  indignation,  or  to  attempt  to 
shield  the  men  whom  he  had  himself  encouraged 
and  introduced.  When  the  last  priest  had  bitten 
the  dust,  Elijah  turned  to  the  king  and  said,  "Get 
thee  up,  eat  and  drink;  for  there  is  a  sound  of 
abundance  of  rain."  It  was  as  if  he  said,  "Get  thee 
up  to  where  thy  tents  are  pitched  on  yon  broad  up- 
land sweep;  the  feast  is  spread  in  thy  gilded  pavil- 
ion; thy  lackeys  await  thee;  feast  thee  on  thy 
dainties;  but  be  quick!  for  now  that  the  land  is 
rid  of  these  traitor  priests,  and  God  is  once  more 
enthroned  in  His  rightful  place,  the  showers  of 
rain  cannot  be  longer  delayed.  Can  you  not  hear 
the  sough  of  the  western  breeze,  which  shall  soon 
become  a  rain-bearing  hurricane?  Be  quick!  or 
the  rain  may  interrupt  thy  carouse." 

What  a  contrast  between  these  two  men !  "Ahab 
went  up  to  eat  and  drink.  And  Elijah  went  up  to 
the  top  of  Carmel ;  and  he  cast  himself  down 
upon  the  earth,  and  put  his  face  between  his 
knees."  It  is  no  more  than  we  might  have  expected 
of  the  king.     When  his  people  were    suffering    the 


108        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

extremities  of  drought,  he  cared  only  to  find  grass 
enough  to  save  his  stud;  and  now,  though  his 
faithful  priests  had  died  by  hundreds,  he  thought 
only  of  the  banquet  that  awaited  him  in  his  pavil- 
ion. Cruel,  cowardly,  mean,  and  sensual,  are  the 
least  epithets  we  can  apply  to  this  worthless  man, 
clad  though  he  was  with  the  royal  robes  of  Israel. 
I  think  I  can  see  Ahab  and  Elijah  ascending  those 
heights  together:  no  sympathy,  no  common  joy, 
no  reciprocated  thanksgiving.  The  king  turns 
straight  off  to  his  tents;  whilst  the  servant  of  God 
climbs  steadily  up  to  the  highest  part  of  the 
mountain,  and  finds  an  oratory  at  the  base  of  a  yet 
higher  spur,  or  promontory,  from  which  a  marvelous 
view  could  be  obtained  of  the  broad  expanse  of  the 
Mediterranean,  which  slept  under  the  growing 
stillness  of  the  coming  night. 

Such  contrasts  still  reveal  themselves.  Crises 
reveal  the  secrets  of  men's  hearts,  and  show  of 
what  stuff  they  are  made.  The  children  of  this 
world  will  spend  their  days  in  feasting,  and  their 
nights  in  revelry,  though  a  world  is  rushing  down 
to  ruin.  If  only  they  can  eat  and  drink,  they  are 
regardless  of  the  needs  of  the  perishing  and  the 
judgments  of  God.  Such  feasted  with  Belshazzar 
when  the  foe  was  at  the  gates  of  Babylon;  and 
such  filled  with  their  frivolities  the  royal  apart- 
ments of  Whitehall  when  William  of  Orange  was 
landing  at  Tor  Bay.  And  woe  to  the  land  when 
such  men  rule !  The  sequence  between  the  sensual 
luxury  of  the  rulers  and  the  decadence  of  the 
nation  was  well  pointed  out  by  Isaiah  when  he  said: 
"Woe  unto  them  that  rise  up  early  in  the  morning, 


R/ilN  AT  LAST!  107 


that  they  may  follow  strong  drink;  that  tarry  late 
into  the  night,  till  wine  inflame  them!  And  the 
harp  and  the  lute,  the  tabret  and  the  pipe,  and 
wine  are  in  their  feasts:  but  they  regard  not  the 
work  of  the  Lord,  neither  have  they  considered  the 
operation  of  His  hands.  Therefore  my  people  are 
gone  into  captivity"  (Isaiah  v.  11-13,  R.  V.).  May 
our  beloved  country  be  preserved  from  having  such 
leaders  as  these !  And  xmy  our  youth  be  found,  not 
garlanded  and  scented  for  the  Ahab  feasts,  but  with 
Elijah  on  the  bleak  uplands;  where  there  may  be 
no  dainty  viands,  but  where  the  air  is  fresh,  and 
life  is  free,  and  the  spirit  is  braced  to  noble  deeds. 

There    are    certain   characteristics  in  Elijah's 

PRAYER,  which  WE  MUST  NOTICE  AS  WE  PASS,  BECAUSE 
THEY  SHOULD  FORM  PART  OF  ALL  TRUE  PRAYER. 

(i)  It  was  based  on  the  promise  of  God. 

When  Elijah  was  summoned  from  Zarephath  to 
resume  his  public  work,  his  marching  orders  were 
capped  by  the  specific  promise  of  rain:  "Go,  show 
thyself  unto  Ahab;  and  I  will  send  rain  on  the 
earth."  To  natural  reason  this  might  have  seemed 
to  render  prayer  unnecessary.  Would  not  God  ful- 
fill His  promise,  and  send  the  rain,  altogether  irre- 
spective of  further  prayer?  But  Elijah's  spiritual 
instincts  argued  otherwise,  and  more  truly.  Though 
he  had  never  heard  the  words,  yet  he  anticipated 
the  thought  of  a  later  prophet,  who,  after  enunciat- 
ing all  that  God  was  prepared  to  do  for  His 
people,  uttered  these  significant  words:  "Thus  saith 
the  Lord  God,  I  will  yet  for  this  be  inquired  of 
by  the  house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  them." 


108        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

God's  promises  are  given,  not  to  restrain,  but  to 
incite  to  prayer.  They  show  the  direction  in  which 
we  may  ask,  and  the  extent  to  which  we  may  ex- 
pect an  answer.  They  are  the  mold  into  which 
we  may  pour  our  fervid  spirits  without  fear.  They 
are  the  signed  check,  made  payable  to  order,  which 
we  must  indorse  and  present  for  payment.  Though 
the  Bible  be  crowded  with  golden  promises  from 
board  to  board,  yet  will  they  be  inoperative  until 
we  turn  them  into  prayer.  It  is  not  our  province  to 
argue  the  reasonableness  of  this;  it  is  enough  to 
accentuate  and  enforce  it.  Why  should  it  not  be 
sufficient  to  silence  all  questions  by  saying  that 
we  have  here  reached  one  of  the  primal  laws  of  the 
spiritual  world,  as  simple,  as  certain,  as  universal, 
as  any  that  obtain  in  the  world  of  nature?  Prom- 
ises of  abundant  harvest  smile  to  the  husbandman 
from  earth  and  sky;  but  he  knows  that  they  will  not 
be  realized  unless  he  puts  into  operation  the  laws 
and  processes  of  agriculture;  and  as  he  does  so,  it 
is  not  necessary  for  his  success  that  he  should  un- 
derstand the  why  and  wherefore;  it  is  enough  for 
him  to  do  his  little  part,  and  he  finds  that  every 
promise  is  fulfilled  in  the  produce  shed  at  his  feet 
from  Nature's  golden  horn. 

When,  therefore,  we  are  asked  why  men  should 
pray,  and  how  prayer  avails,  we  are  not  careful  to 
answer  more  than  this:  "Prayer  is  the  instinct  of 
the  religious  life;  it  is  one  of  the  first  principles 
of  the  spiritual  world."  It  is  clearly  taught  in  the 
Word  of  God  to  be  prevalent  with  the  Almighty. 
It  has  been  practiced  by  the  noblest  and  saintliest 
of  men,  who  have  testified  to  its  certain  efficacy.  Our 


RAIN  AT  LAST!  109 


Lord  Jesus  not  only  practiced  it,  but  proclaimed 
its  value  in  words  which  have  been  plunged 
a  myriad  times  into  the  crucible  of  experience,  and 
are  as  true  to-day  as  ever:  "Ask,  and  it  shall  be 
given  you;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find;  knock,  and  it 
shall  be  opened  unto  you."  We  are  content,  there 
fore,  to  pray,  though  we  are  as  ignorant  of  the  phi- 
losophy of  the  modus  operandi  of  prayer  as  we  are  of 
any  natural  law.  We  find  it  no  dreamy  reverie  or 
sweet  sentimentality;  but  a  practical,  living  force. 
Whenever  we  stand  by  the  altar  of  incense,  we  be- 
come aware  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord  standing  hard 
by,  and  saying,  "Fear  not,  O  man  greatly  beloved! 
thy  prayer  is  heard." 

When  your  child  was  a  toddling,  lisping  babe, 
it  asked  many  things  wholly  incompatible  with  your 
nature  and  its  own  welfare ;  but  as  the  years  have 
passed,  increasing  experience  has  molded  its  re- 
quests into  shapes  suggested  by  yourself.  So,  as 
we  know  more  of  God  through  His  promises,  we  are 
staid  from  asking  what  He  cannot  give;  and  are 
led  to  set  our  hearts  on  things  which  lie  on  His 
open  palm  waiting  to  be  taken  by  the  hand  of  an 
appropriating  faith.  This  is  why  all  prayer,  like 
Elijah's,  should  be  based  on  promise.  We  stand 
on  a  foundation  of  adamant,  and  have  an  irresisti- 
ble purchase  with  God,  when  we  can  put  our  finger 
on  His  own  promise  and  say,  "Do  as  Thou  hast 
said." 

(2)  //  TV  as  definite. 

This  is  where  so  many  prayers  fail.  They  are 
shot  like  arrows  into  the  air.     They  are    like    let- 


no        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

ters  which  require  no  answer,  because  they  ask  for 
nothing.  They  are  like  the  firing  by  artillery  in 
a  mimic  fight,  when  only  gunpowder  is  employed. 
This  is  why  they  are  so  wanting  in  power  and 
interest.  We  do  not  pray  with  any  expectation  of 
attaining  definite  and  practical  results.  We  wan- 
der out  like  Isaac  to  meditate  in  the  fields  at 
eventide:  but  we  fail  to  ascend  Carmel,  with  the 
compressed  lip  and  the  resolute  step  of  Elijah;  as 
determined,  if  we  may,  to  win  by  prayer  the  fulfill- 
ment of  some  blessed  promise,  as  he  was  to  bring 
the  longed-for  rain.  Let  us  amend  in  this  matter. 
Let  us  keep  a  list  of  petitions,  which  we  shall 
plead  before  God.  Let  us  direct  our  prayer,  as 
David  did  (Psalm  v.  3),  and  look  up  for  the  an- 
swer; and  we  shall  find  ourselves  obtaining  new 
and  unwonted  "blessings.     Be  definite! 

(3)  //  was  earnest. 

"Elijah  prayed  earnestly."  This  is  the  testimony 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  the  Apostle  James.  It 
was  the  effectual,  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous 
man,  which  availeth  much.  The  prayers  of  Script- 
ure all  glow  with  the  white  heat  of  intensity.  Re- 
member how  Jacob  wrestled,  and  David  panted  and 
poured  out  his  soul;  the  importunity  of  the  blind 
beggar,  and  the  persistency  of  the  distracted 
mother;  the  strong  crying  and  tears  of  our  Lord. 
In  each  case  the  whole  being  seemed  gathered  up, 
as  a  stone  into  a  catapult,  and  hurled  forth  in  vehe- 
ment entreaty.  Prayer  is  only  answered  for  the 
glory  of  Christ;  but  it  is  not  answered  unless  it  be 
accompanied  with  such  earnestness  as  will  prove 
that  the  blessing  squght  is  really  needed. 


R/lIN  AT  LAST!  Ill 


Ah,  what  earnestness  pants  and  throbs  on  every 
side!  No  listless  attention!  No  flagging  interest! 
No  drowsy  eye!  Oh  for  such  violence,  guided  by 
holiness,  to  take  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  force! 
Such  earnestness  is,  of  course,  to  be  dreaded  when 
we  seek  some  lower  boon  for  ourselves.  But  when, 
like  Elijah,  we  seek  the  fulfillment  of  the  Divine 
promise — not  for  ourselves,  but  for  the  glory  of 
God — then  it  is  impossible  to  be  too  much  in  ear- 
nest, or  too  full  of  the  energy  of  prayer. 

(4)  ElijaK s  prayer  was  humble. 

"He  cast  himself  down  on  the  ground,  and  put 
his  face  between  his  knees."  We  scarcely  recog- 
nize him,  he  seems  to  have  so  lost  his  identity. 
A  few  hours  before,  he  stood  erect  as  an  oak  of 
Bashan;  now,  he  is  bowed  as  a  bulrush.  Then  as 
God's  ambassador  he  pleaded  with  man;  now  as 
man's  intercessor  he  pleads  with  God.  Is  it  not 
always  so — that  the  men  who  stand  straightest  in 
the  presence  of  sin  bow  lowest  in  the  presence  of 
God?  And  is  it  not  also  true,  that  those  who  live 
nearest  God  are  the  most  reverent?  True,  thou  art 
a  child;  but  thou  art  also  a  subject.  True,  thou 
art  a  redeemed  man;  but  thou  canst  never  forget 
thine  original  name,  smner.  True,  thou  mayest 
come  with  boldness;  but  remember  the  majesty, 
might,  and  power  of  God,  and  take  thy  shoes  from  off 
thy  feet.  The  angels  of  His  presence  fly  with  veiled 
faces  to  do  His  bidding,  as  they  cry,  "Holy,  Holy, 
Holy!  "  The  most  tender  love,  which  casts  out  the 
fear  that  hath  torment,  begets  a  fear  that  is  as  del- 
icate and  sensitive  as  that  of    John;    who,    though 


113        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

he  lay  his  head  on  Jesus'  breast,  scrupled  too  has- 
tily to  intrude  upon  the  grave  where  He  had  slept. 
Our  only  plea  with  God  is  the  merit  and  blood  of 
our  great  High  Priest.  It  becomes  us  to  be  hum- 
ble. 

(5)  It  was  full  of  expectant  faith. 

"Whatsoever  things  ye  desire,  when  ye  pray,  be- 
lieve that  ye  receive  them:  and  ye  shall  have 
them."  Faith  is  the  indispensable  condition  of  all 
true  prayer.  It  is  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It 
thrives  by  exercise.  It  grows  strong  by  feeding 
on  the  promises:  the  Word  of  God  is  its  natural 
food.  It  beat  strongly  in  Elijah's  heart.  He  knew 
that  God  would  keep  His  word,  and  so  he  sent  the 
lad — possibly  the  widow's  son — up  to  the  highest 
point  of  Carmel,  and  bade  him  look  toward  the 
sea;  because  he  was  sure  that  ere  long  his  prayer 
would  be  answered,  and  God's  promise  would  be 
kept.  We  have  often  prayed,  and  failed  to  look 
out  for  the  blessings  we  have  sought.  The  stately 
ships  of  heaven  have  come  up  to  the  quays,  laden 
with  the  very  blessings  we  asked;  but  as  we  have 
not  been  there  to  welcome  and  unload  them,  the)^ 
have  put  out  again  to  sea.  The  messenger  pigeons 
have  come  back  again  to  their  cotes,  with  the  tiny 
messages  concealed  beneath  their  wings;  but  we  have 
not  been  there  to  search  for  them  and  take  them. 

Sometimes  we  have  to  exercise  faith  on  the  sim- 
ple warrant  of  God's  Word.  At  other  times,  God 
seems  to  give  us  special  faith  for  things  which  are 
not  directly  promised.  The  presence  or  absence  of 
faith  is  a  great  test  in  prayer.     Where  it   is  pres- 


RAIN  AT  LAST!  113 


ent,  we  are  so  sure  of  the  answer  as  to  turn  petition 
into  thanksgiving.  But  where  it  is  persistently 
absent,  and  where  continued  prayer  fails  to  light 
up  the  spirit  with  the  conviction  of  coming  answer, 
then  it  would  seem  as  if  the  Urim  and  Thummim 
stone  is  darkening  with  one  of  God's  loving  N'oes ; 
and  He  says,  "Ask  me  no  more  concerning  this 
matter." 

There  is  a  faith  which  God  cannot  refuse;  to 
which  all  things  are  possible;  which  laughs  at  im- 
possibility; which  can  move  mountains  and  plant 
them  in  the  sea.  May  such  faith  be  ours! — but  it 
can  be  ours  only  by  careful  and  eager  nurture. 
Such  faith  was  Elijah's. 

(6)  //  was  very  persevering. 

He  said  to  his  servant,  "Go  up  now,  look  toward 
the  sea."  And  he  went  up,  and  looked,  and  said, 
"There  is  nothing."  How  often  have  we  sent  the 
lad  of  eager  desire  to  scan  the  horizon! — and  how 
often  has  he  returned  with  the  answer,  There  is 
nothing!  There  is  no  tear  of  penitence  in  those 
hard  eyes.  There  is  no  symptom  of  amendment  in 
that  wild  life.  There  is  no  sign  of  deliverance  in 
these  sore  perplexities.  There  is  nothing.  And 
because  there  is  nothing  when  we  have  just  begun 
to  pray,  we  leave  off  praying.  We  leave  the  mount- 
ain brow.  We  do  not  know  that  God's  answer  is 
even  then  upon  the  way. 

Not  so  with  Elijah.  "And  he  said.  Go  again 
seven  times."  There  is  a  truer  rendering  of  this: 
"Then  said  he  seven  times,  Go  again."  It  is  not  that 
the  lad  was  told  to  run    to    and    fro    seven    times. 


114        ELIJ/iH:  AhID  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

without  interrupting  the  prophet  in  prayer;  but  it 
would  appear  that  again  and  again  the  lad  came 
back  to  his  master  with  the  same  message,  "There 
is  nothing; "  and,  after  an  interval,  he  was  bidden 
to  go  again. 

He  came  back  the  first  time,  saying,  "There  is 
nothing — no  sign  of  rain,  no  cloud  upon  the  clear 
sky;"  and  Elijah  said,  "Go  again."  And  that  was 
repeated  seven  times.  It  was  no  small  test  of  the 
prophet's  endurance;  but  he  was  not  tried  more 
than  he  could  endure,  and  with  the  ordeal  there 
came  suflficient  grace,  so  that  he  was  able  to  bear  it. 

Not  unfrequently  our  Father  grants  our  prayer, 
and  labels  the  answer  for  us;  but  He  keeps  it  back, 
that  we  may  be  led  on  to  a  point  of  intensity, 
which  shall  bless  our  spirits  forever,  and  from 
which  we  shall  never  recede.  "But  none  of  them 
i^hat  wait  on  Him  shall  be  ashamed."  Then  when 
We  have  outdone  ourselves.  He  lovingly  turns  to 
Us,  and  says,  "Great  is  thy  faith:  be  it  unto  thee 
even  as  thou  wilt! "  He  waits,  that  He  may  be 
gracious  unto  us. 

(7)  And  the  prayer  was  abundantly  answered. 

For  weeks  and  months  before,  the  sun  had  been 
gathering  up  from  lake  and  river,  from  sea  and 
ocean,  the  drops  of  mist,  drawing  them  as  clouds 
in  coronets  of  glory  around  himself;  and  now  the 
gale  was  bearing  them  rapidly  toward  the  thirsty 
land  of  Israel.  "Before  they  call  I  will  answer, 
and  whilst  they  are  yet  speaking  I  will  hear." 
The  answer  to  your  prayers  may  be  nearer  than 
you  think.     It    may    already   have    started  by    the 


RAIN  AT  LAST!  115 


down-line.  On  the  wings  of  every  moment  it  is 
hastening  toward  you.  God  shall  answer  you, 
and  that  right  early. 

Presently  the  lad,  from  his  tower  of  observation, 
beheld  on  the  horizon  a  tiny  cloud,  no  bigger  than 
a  man's  hand,  scudding  across  the  sky.  No  more 
was  needed  to  convince  an  Oriental  that  rain  was 
near.  It  was,  and  is,  the  certain  precursor  of  a 
sudden  hurricane  of  wind  and  rain.  The  lad  was 
sent  with  an  urgent  message  to  Ahab,  to  descend 
from  Carmel  to  his  chariot  in  the  plain  beneath, 
lest  Kishon,  swollen  by  the  rains,  should  stop  him 
in  his  homeward  career.  The  lad  had  barely  time 
to  reach  the  royal  pavilion  ere  the  heavens  were 
black  with  clouds  and  wind,  and  there  was  a  great 
rain. 

The  monarch  started  amid  the  pelting  storm;  but 
fleeter  than  his  swift  steeds  were  the  feet  of  the 
prophet,  energized  by  the  hand  of  God.  He 
snatched  up  his  streaming  mantle,  and  twisted  it 
around  his  loins;  and  amid  the  fury  of  the  elements, 
with  which  the  night  closed  in,  he  outstripped  the 
chariot,  and  ran  like  a  common  courier  before 
it  to  the  entrance  of  Jezreel,  some  eighteen  miles 
distant.  He  did  this  to  convince  the  king  that  in 
his  zeal  against  idolatry  he  was  actuated  by  no 
personal  disrespect  to  himself,  and  prompted  only 
by  jealousy  for  God. 

Thus  by  his  faith  and  prayer  this  solitary  man 
brought  back  the  rain  to  Israel.  "More  things  are 
wrought  by  prayer  than  this  world  wots  of."  Why 
shr/uid  not  we  learn  and  practice  his  secret?  It  is 
certainly  within  the  reach  of  us  all.     Then  we  too 


116        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

might  bring  from  heaven  spiritual  blessings,  which 
should  make  the  parched  places  of  the  church  and 
the  world  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose. 


HOIV  THE  MIGHTY  FELL  I  117 


X. 

Dow  tbe  /roigbts  ifelL 

(I.  Kings  xix.) 

AMID  the  drenching  storm  with  which  the 
AA  memorable  day  of  the  convocation  closed  in, 
the  king  and  the  prophet  reached  Jezreel. 
Probably  they  were  the  first  to  bring  tidings  of 
what  had  occurred,  Elijah  went  to  some  humble 
lodging  for  shelter  and  food;  whilst  Ahab  repaired 
to  the  palace,  where  Jezebel  awaited  him.  All  day 
long  the  queen  had  been  wondering  how  matters 
were  going  on  Mount  Carmel.  She  cherished  the 
feverish  hope  that  her  priests  had  won  the  day;  and 
when  she  saw  the  rain-clouds  steal  over  the  sky,  she 
attributed  the  welcome  change  to  some  great  inter- 
position of  Baal,  in  answer  to  their  pleadings. 
May  not  some  such  colloquy  as  this  have  taken 
place  between  the  royal  pair,  when  they  met  in  the 
palace  intetior? 

"How  have  things  gone  to-day?  No  doubt,  well; 
the  rain  has  anticipated  your  favorable  reply." 

"I  have  nothing  to  tell  you  that  will  give  you 
pleasure." 

"Why!  has  anything  happened?" 

"The  worst  has  happened." 

"What  do  you  mean?     Where  are  my  priests?" 

"You  will  never  see  them  again." 


118        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

"Never  see  them  again!  What  do  you  mean? 
Tell  me  quickly!" 

"They  are  all  dead;  by  this  time  their  bodies 
are  floating  out  to  sea." 

"Who  has  dared  to  do  this  thing?  Did  they  not 
defend  themselves?  Did  you  not  raise  your  hand? 
How  did  they  die?  Where  is  Elijah?  Have  the 
people  broken  into  revolt?" 

"Then  Ahab  told  Jezebel  all  that  Elijah  had  done; 
and  withal  how  he  had  slain  the  prophets  with  the 
sword." 

Jezebel's  indignation  knew  no  bounds.  She  was 
like  a  tigress  robbed  of  her  young.  Ahab's  tem- 
perament was  sensual  and  materialistic;  if  only  he 
had  enough  to  eat  and  drink,  and  the  horses  and 
mules  were  cared  for,  he  was  content.  He  could 
not  understand  people  becoming  so  enthusiastic 
about  religious  matters.  In  his  judgment  there 
was  not  much  to  choose  between  God  and  Baal. 
His  was  the  motto  of  the  Epicurean,  "Let  us  eat 
and  drink;  for  to-morrow  we  die."  Not  so  Jezebel. 
She  was  as  resolute  as  he  was  indifferent.  Crafty, 
unscrupulous,  and  intriguing,  she  molded  Ahab  to 
her  mind;  and,  in  doing  so,  anticipated  the  symbol 
of  the  Apocalypse,  in  which  the  scarlet-clad  woman 
rides  upon  the  beast. 

To  Jezebel  the  crisis  was  one  of  gravest  moment. 
Policy,  as  well  as  indignation,  prompted  her  to 
act  at  once.  If  this  national  reformation  were  per- 
mitted to  spread,  it  would  sweep  away  before  it 
all  that  she  had  been  laboring  at  for  years.  She 
must  strike,  and  strike  at  once;  and  where  would 
her  blow  tell  so  well  as  when  aimed  at  the  master- 


HOfV  THE  MIGHTY  FELL!  119 

spirit  of  the  day's  proceedings?  So  that  very  night, 
amid  the  violence  of  the  storm,  she  sent  a  mes- 
senger to  Elijah,  saying,  "So  let  the  gods  do  to 
me,  and  more  also,  if  I  make  not  thy  life  as  the 
life  of  one  of  them,  by  to-morrow  about  this  time." 
That  message  betrays  the  woman.  She  did  not 
dare  to  kill  him,  though  he  was  easily  within  her 
power;  and  so  she  mastered  her  wrath,  and  con- 
tented herself  with  threats.  Her  mind  was  set  on 
driving  him  from  the  country,  so  that  she  might 
be  left  free  to  repair  the  havoc  he  had  caused.  In 
this,  alas!    she  was  only  too  successful. 

Elijah's  presence  had  never  been  so  necessary  as 
now.  The  work  of  destruction  had  commenced, 
and  the  people  were  in  a  mood  to  carry  it  through 
to  the  bitter  end.  The  tide  had  turned,  and  was 
setting  in  toward  God;  and  he  was  needed  to  direct 
its  flow,  to  keep  the  people  true  to  the  choice 
which  they  had  made,  and  to  complete  the  work 
of  reformation  by  a  work  of  construction.  From 
what  we  have  seen  of  him,  we  should  have  ex- 
pected that  he  would  receive  the  message  with 
unruffled  composure;  laying  it  before  God  in  quiet 
confidence,  assured  that  He  would  hide  him  in  the 
secret  of  His  pavilion,  from  the  wrath  of  man,  and 
shield  him  from  the  strife  of  tongues.  Surely  he 
will  preserve  a  dignified  silence,  or  return  an  an- 
swer like  that  which  Chrysostom  sent  on  a  similar 
occasion  to  the  Empress  Eudoxia,  "Go  tell  her  I 
fear  nothing  but  sin."  But,  instead  of  this,  we  are 
told  (and  surely  the  sacred  historian  must  have 
heaved  a  deep  sigh  as  he  wrote  the  words),  "When 
he  saw  that,  he  arose,  and  went  for  his  life." 


120        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

"He  went  for  his  life!"  Accompanied  by  his 
servant,  and  under  covert  of  the  night,  he  hurried 
through  the  driving  storm,  across  the  hills  of 
Samaria,  and  directed  his  course,  with  true  Bed- 
ouin instinct,  toward  the  extreme  south  of  Judea, 
where  the  pasture  lands  of  Palestine  fade  into  the 
drear  expanse  of  the  Arabian  desert.  Nor  did  he 
slacken  his  speed  till  he  had  left  far  behind  him 
the  country  over  which  Jezebel's  scepter  swayed, 
and  had  reached  Beersheba,  the  town  that  clustered 
round  the  well  of  the  oath — where,  centuries  before, 
Abraham  had  planted  a  grove,  and  called  upon  the 
name  of  the  Lord.  He  was  safe  there;  but  even 
there  he  could  not  stay.  His  spirit  seems  to  have 
become  utterly  demoralized  and  panic-stricken.  He 
could  not  even  brook  the  company  of  his  servant; 
so,  leaving  him  in  Beersheba,  he  plunged  alone 
into  that  wild  desert  waste  that  stretches  south- 
ward to  Sinai. 

Through  the  weary  hours  he  plodded  on  beneath 
the  burning  sun,  his  feet  blistered  by  the  scorching 
sands;  no  ravens,  no  Cherith,  no  Zarephath  were 
there;  no  human  sympathy  lent  him  its  kindly  aid; 
the  very  presence  of  God  seemed  to  have  with- 
drawn itself  from  his  side.  At  last  the  fatigue  and 
anguish  overpowered  even  his  sinewy  strength,  and 
he  cast  himself  beneath  the  slight  shadow  of  a 
small  shrub  of  juniper,  and  asked  to  die.  "It  is 
enough  now,  O  Lord,  take  away  my  life;  for  I  am 
no  better  than  my  fathers.  Let  me  die  here  and 
now,  and  bury  me  with  Thine  own  hand,  as  Thou 
didst  Moses  in  the  valley  of  Bethpeor. " 

What  might  have  been!     If  only  Elijah  had  held 


MOPy  THE  MIGHTY  FELL  !  121 


his  ground — dwelling  in  the  secret  place  of  the 
Most  High,  and  hiding  under  the  shadow  of  the 
Almighty — he  might  have  saved  his  country;  and 
there  would  have  been  no  necessity  for  the  cap- 
tivity and  dispersion  of  his  people.  The  seven 
thousand  secret  disciples  would  have  dared  to  come 
forth  from  their  hiding-places,  and  avow  them- 
selves; and  would  have  constituted  a  nucleus  of 
loyal  hearts,  by  whom  Baal  had  been  replaced  by 
Jehovah.  Yes,  and  his  own  character  would  have 
escaped  a  stain  which  has  resisted  the  obliterating 
erasure  of  the  ages,  and  still  remains,  fraught  with 
shame  and  sorrow.  Elijah's  influence  in  Israel 
never  recovered  from  that  one  false  step.  He 
missed  a  chance,  which  never  came  again.  And 
though  God,  in  His  mercy,  treated  him  lovingly 
and  royally  as  a  child,  He  never  again  reinstated 
him  as  a  servant  in  just  the  position  which  he  so 
thoughtlessly  flung  away.  It  is  a  solemn  thought 
for  us  all!  If  for  one  moment  we  are  left  to  our- 
selves, we  may  take  a  step  which  may  shatter  our 
influence,  and  forever  after  put  us  into  a  very 
different  position  from  that  which  might  have  been 
ours  if  only  we  had  remained  true.  As  children, 
we  may  be  forgiven;  as  servants  we  are  never  re- 
instated, or  trusted  quite  as  we  were  once. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Bible  saints  often  fail 
just  where  we  should  have  expected  them  to  stand. 
Abraham  was  the  father  of  those  who  believe;  but 
his  faith  failed  him  when  he  went  down  to  Egypt, 
and  lied  to  Pharaoh  about  his  wife.  Moses  was 
the  meekest  of  men;  but  he  missed  Canaan,  be- 
cause he  spoke    unadvisedly  with    his    lips.     John 


122        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

was  the  apostle  of  love;  yet  in  a  moment  of  intol- 
erance he  wished  to  call  down  fire  out  of  heaven. 
So  Elijah,  who  might  have  been  supposed  to  be 
superior  to  all  human  weakness,  shows  himself  to 
be  indeed  "a  man  of  like  passions  with  ourselves." 

The  old  castle  which  from  its  hill  watches  over 
the  town  of  Edinburgh,  clustering  beneath,  was 
captured  only  once  in  the  whole  history  of  Scot- 
land; and  its  capture  happened  thus:  Its  defenders 
thought  that  on  one  side  the  steepness  of  the  rock 
made  it  inaccessible  and  impregnable;  and  they  put 
no  sentries  there.  And  so,  in  the  gray  mist  of  the 
early  morning,  a  little  party  crept  up  the  precip- 
itous slopes  and  surprised  the  garrison  into  sur- 
render. 

Is  there  not  a  warning  here  for  us  all?  It  may  be 
that  some  have  been  saying  boastfully  of  certain 
forms  of  vice,  "I  shall  never  yield  to  this  or  that. 
I  have  no  inclination  to  such  forms  of  sin.  This  is 
one  of  the  points  in  which  I  am  strong  to  resist." 
Beware ! — it  may  be  that  the  great  enemy  of  souls 
has  a  special  design  in  producing  in  you  a  sense 
of  false  security,  that  he  may  assail  and  vanquish 
you  in  the  very  point  in  which  you  deem  yourself 
impregnable,  and  so  forbear  to  watch. 

What  a  proof  is  here  of  the  veracity  of  the  Bible! 
Had  it  been  merely  a  human  composition,  its 
authors  would  have  shrunk  from  delineating  the 
failure  of  one  of  its  chief  heroes.  No  artist  would 
think  of  snapping  a  column  just  as  it  was  tapering 
to  its  coronal.  Men  sometimes  complain  against 
the  Bible  for  its  uncompromising  portraitures. 
Yet,  is  not  this  its  glory?     It  holds  the  mirror  up 


HOIV  THE  MIGHTY  FELL!  123 

to  human  nature,  that  we  may  learn  what  is  in 
man;  that  we  may  none  of  us  despair;  and  that  we 
may  infer  that,  if  God  were  able  to  fashion  his 
choicest  ware  out  of  such  common  earth,  it  is  pos- 
sible for  Him  to  do  as  much  again,  in  the  most 
ignorant  and  degraded  of  His  children.  Is  there 
not  even  a  gleam  of  comfort  to  be  had  out  of  the 
woeful  spectacle  of  Elijah's  fall?  If  it  had  not 
been  for  this,  we  should  always  have  thought  of 
him  as  being  too  far  removed  from  us  to  be  in  any 
sense  a  model.  We  should  have  looked  on  him  as 
we  do  at  the  memorials  of  a  race  of  giants,  with 
whom  we  have  nothing  in  common.  But  now,  as 
we  see  him  stretched  under  the  shade  of  the  juniper 
tree  asking  for  death,  behaving  himself  with  more 
pusillanimity  than  many  amongst  us  would  have 
manifested,  we  feel  that  he  was  what  he  was  only 
by  the  grace  of  God,  received  through  faith.  And 
by  a  similar  faith  we  may  appropriate  a  similar 
grace  to  ennoble  our  mean  lives. 
Several  causes  account  for  this  terrible  failure. 

(i)  His  physical  strength  and  nervous  energy  were 
completely  overtaxed. 

Consider  the  tremendous  strain  which  he  had 
undergone  since  leaving  the  shelter  of  the  quiet 
home  at  Zarephath.  The  long  excitement  of  the 
convocation,  the  slaughter  of  the  priests,  the  in- 
tensity of  his  prayer,  the  eighteen  miles  swift 
run  in  front  of  Ahab's  chariot,  succeeded  by  the 
rapid  flight,  which  had  hardly  been  relaxed  for  a 
single  moment  till  he  cast  himself  upon  the  desert 
sand,  had   resulted  in    sheer    exhaustion.     He   was 


124        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POlVER. 

suffering  keenly  from  reaction,  now  that  the  extreme 
tension  was  relaxed,  and  this  counted  largely  in 
the  unutterable  depression  under  which  he  was 
suffering. 

We  are  "fearfully  and  wonderfully  made; "  and 
our  inner  life  is  very  sensitive  to  our  outward  con- 
ditions. It  has  been  truly  said,  that  the  most 
trivial  causes — a  heated  room,  a  sunless  day,  want 
of  exercise,  or  a  northern  aspect — will  make  all 
the  difference  between  happiness  and  unhappiness, 
between  faith  and  doubt,  between  courage  and 
indecision.  Many  who  send  for  the  religious 
teacher  would  be  wiser  if  they  sent  for  their 
physician.  And  if  any  who  read  these  lines  are 
conscious  of  having  lost  the  sunny  gladness  and 
buoyant  faith  of  former  days,  before  they  speak  of 
the  mysterious  hidings  of  God's  face,  or  lament 
their  own  backslidings,  it  might  be  well  to  inquire 
if  there  may  not  be  some  physical  or  nervous  cause. 
And  if  there  be,  it  will  attract,  not  the  blame,  but 
the  compassionate  sympathy  of  Him  who  knoweth 
our  frame,  and  remembereth  that  we  are  but  dust. 
When  we  consider  the  speed  and  strain  of  our 
times,  it  is  marvelous  that  there  are  not  more 
amongst  us  suffering  from  the  intolerable  depres- 
sion beneath  which  Elijah  sank  on  the  desert  sand. 

(2)  He  was  keenly  sensitive  to  his  lonely  position. 

"I  only  am  left."  Some  men  are  born  to  loneli- 
ness. It  is  the  penalty  of  true  greatness.  At  such 
a  time  the  human  spirit  is  apt  to  falter,  unless  it 
is  sustained  by  an  heroic  purpose  and  by  an  unfal- 
tering faith.     The    shadow  of  that    loneliness    fell 


HOH^  THE  MIGHTY  FELL  !  135 

dark  on  the  spirit  of  our  Divine  Master  Himself 
when  he  said:  "Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is 
now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to 
his  own,  and  shall  leave  Me  alone;  and  yet  I  am 
not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  Me."  If 
our  Lord  shrank  in  the  penumbra  of  that  great 
eclipse,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  Elijah  cowered 
in  its  darksome  gloom.  You  remind  me  that  he 
might  have  had  the  company  of  his  lad.  But 
remember  there  is  company  which  is  not  compan- 
ionship. We  may  be  more  lonely  in  a  crowd  than 
in  a  desert.  We  need  something  more  than  human 
beings;  we  need  human  hearts,  and  sympathy,  and 
love. 

(3)     He   looked  away  from    God  to  circumstances. 

Up  to  that  moment  Elijah  had  been  animated  by 
a  most  splendid  faith,  because  he  had  never  lost 
sight  of  God.  "He  endured  as  seeing  Him  who  is 
invisible."  Faith  always  thrives  when  God  occu- 
pies the  whole  field  of  vision.  But  when  Jezebel's 
threats  reached  him,  we  are  told  most  significantly, 
"when  he  saw  that,  he  arose,  and  went  for  his  life." 
In  after  years,  Peter  walked  on  the  water  until  he 
looked  from  his  Master  to  the  seething  waves. 
"When  he  saw  the  wind  boisterous  he  was  afraid;  and, 
beginning  to  sink,  he  cried.  Lord  save  me!"  So 
here,  whilst  Elijah  set  the  Lord  always  before  his 
face,  he  did  not  fear,  though  an  host  encamped 
against  him.  But  when  he  looked  at  his  peril,  he 
thought  more  of  his  life  than  of  God's  cause;  and 
was  afraid  of  mkn  that  should  die,  and  of  the  son 
of  man    that    should  be  made   as  grass;  and  forgot 


126        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

the  Lord,  his  Maker,  which  made  heaven  and 
earth.  "  When  he  saw  that,  he  arose,  and  went  for 
his  life." 

Let  us  refuse  to  look  at  circumstances,  though 
they  roll  before  us  as  a  Red  Sea,  and  howl  around 
us  like  a  storm.  Circumstances,  natural  impossi- 
bilities, difficulties,  are  nothing  in  the  estimation 
of  the  soul  that  is  occupied  with  God.  They  are 
as  the  small  dust  that  settles  on  a  scale,  and  is 
not  considered  in  the  measurement  of  weight.  O 
men  of  God,  get  you  up  into  the  high  mountain, 
from  which  you  may  obtain  a  good  view  of  the 
glorious  Land  of  Promise,  and  refuse  to  have 
your  gaze  diverted  by  men  or  things  below! 

It  is  a  great  mistake  to  dictate  to  God.  Elijah 
wist  not  what  he  said  when  he  told  God  that  he 
had  had  enough  of  life,  and  asked  to  die.  If  God 
had  taken  him  at  his  word,  he  would  have  died 
under  a  cloud;  he  would  never  have  heard  the  still 
small  voice ;  he  would  never  have  founded  the  schools 
of  the  prophets,  or  commissioned  Elisha  for  his 
work;  he  would  never  have  swept  up  to  heaven  in 
an  equipage  of  flame. 

What  a  mercy  it  is  that  God  does  not  answer  all 
our  prayers!  How  gracious  He  is  in  reading  their 
inner  meaning,  and  answering  that!  This,  as  we 
shall  see,  is  what  He  did  for  His  tired  and  queru- 
lous servant. 

How  many  have  uttered  those  words,  "It  is 
enough!" — the  sufferer,  weary  of  long  and  wearing 
pain;  the  wife  tied  to  an  inhuman  husband;  the 
Christian  worker,  whose  efforts  seem  in  vain:  "It 
is  enough.     Let  me  come    home.     The    burden    is 


HOfV  THE  MIGHTY  FELL  !  137 

more  than  I  can  bear.  The  lessons  are  tiresome. 
School-life  is  tedious;  holidays  will  be  so  wel- 
come. I  cannot  see  that  anything  will  be  gained  by 
longer  delay.     It  is  enough!" 

O  silly,  silly  children!  little  do  we  know  how 
much  we  should  miss  if  God  were  to  do  as  we 
request.  To  die  now  would  be  to  forego  immeas- 
urable blessings  which  await  us  within  forty  days* 
journey  from  this;  and  to  die  like  a  dog,  instead 
of  sweeping,  honored  and  beloved,  through  the 
open  gates  of  heaven.  It  is  better  to  leave  it  all 
in  the  wise  and  tender  thought  of  God.  He  wants 
us  home;  but  will  not  let  us  come  till  we  have 
learned  the  last  lesson  and  done  the  last  stroke  of 
work.  And  we  shall  yet  live  to  thank  Him  that 
He  refused  to  gratify  our  wish,  when,  in  a  moment 
of  despondency,  we  cast  ourselves  upon  the  ground, 
and  said,  "Let  us  die.     It  is  enough!" 


138        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


XI. 

Xovln9*ftfnC)ne05  JSettej  tban  %\U. 

(i  Kings  xix.) 

THE  holy  Apostle,  whose  earliest  lessons  of  the 
love  of  God  were  conned  as  he  leaned  on 
the  bosom  of  Christ,  tells  us,  in  words  deep 
and  simple  as  some  translucent  lake,  that  "we  have 
known  and  believed  the  love  thai  God  hath  to  us.'' 
They  are  wonderful  words  for  mortal  to  utter.  A 
life-time  would  be  well  spent  if,  at  its  close,  we 
could  utter  them  without  exaggeration.  But  alas ! 
many  of  us  have  learned  some  of  our  deepest  lessons 
of  the  love  of  God  in  having  experienced  its  gentle 
kindness  amid  shortcoming  and  failure,  like  that 
which  marred  Elijah's  course. 

That  failure,  as  we  have  seen,  was  most  disas- 
trous. It  inflicted  lasting  disgrace  upon  Elijah's 
reputation.  It  arrested  one  of  the  most  hopeful 
movements  that  ever  visited  the  land  of  Israel.  It 
struck  panic  and  discouragement  into  thousands  of 
hearts  which  were  beginning  to  gather  courage  from 
his  splendid  zeal.  It  snapped  the  only  brake  by 
which  the  headlong  descent  of  Israel  downward  to 
destruction  could  have  been  prevented.  It  brought 
discredit  and  rebuke  on  the  cause  and  name  of  God. 


LOVING- KINDNESS  BETTER  TH/IN  LIFE.  129 

A  choir  of  angels  might  well  have  gathered  around 
the  truant  prophet  as  he  lay  upon  the  desert  sand, 
and  recited  some  such  mournful  words  as  those 
with  which  the  sweet  Psalmist  lamented  the  death 
of  Saul  and  Jonathan  onGilboa's  fatal  field:  "How 
are  the  mighty  fallen  in  the  midst  of  battle!  O 
man  of  God,  thou  hast  tripped  to  thy  fall  upon  thy 
high  places;  we  are  distressed  for  thee;  how  are 
the  mighty  fallen;  and  the  weapons  of  war  per- 
ished! " 

If  ever  it  were  befitting  for  a  man  to  reap  what 
he  had  sown,  and  to  suffer  the  consequences  of  his 
own  misdeeds,  it  would  have  been  so  in  the  case  of 
Elijah.  But  God's  thoughts  are  not  as  man's. 
He  knew  all  the  storms  of  disappointment  and 
broken  hope  which  were  sweeping  across  that  noble 
spirit,  as  gusts  of  wind  across  an  inland  sea.  His 
eye  followed  with  tender  pity  every  step  of  His 
servant's  flight  across  the  hills  of  Samaria.  He  did 
not  love  him  less  than  when  he  stood,  elate  with 
victory,  hard  by  the  burning  sacrifice.  And  His 
love  assumed,  if  possible,  a  tenderer,  gentler 
aspect,  as  He  stooped  over  him,  whilst  he  slept. 
As  a  shepherd  tracks  the  wandering  sheep  from  the 
fold  to  the  wild  mountain  pass,  where  eagles,  sail- 
ing in  narrowing  circles,  watch  its  faltering  steps, 
so  did  the  love  of  God  come  upon  Elijah,  as, 
worn  in  body  by  long  fatigue,  and  in  spirit  b}^  the 
fierce  war  of  passion,  he  lay  and  slept  under  the 
juniper  tree. 

And  God  did  more  than  love  him.  He  sought, 
by  tender  helpfulness,  to  heal  and  restore  His 
servant's  soul  to  its    former    health    and    joy.     At 


130        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


His  command  an  angel,  twice  over,  prepared  a 
meal  upon  the  desert  sand,  and  touched  him,  and 
bade  him  eat.  No  upbraiding  speeches;  no  word 
of  reproach;  no  threats  of  dismissal;  but  only  sleep 
and  food,  and  kindly  thoughtfulness  of  the  great 
journey  which  he  was  bent  on  making  to  Horeb, 
the  mount  of  God.  It  makes  us  think  of  Him 
who,  in  after  days,  prepared  in  the  early  morning, 
upon  the  shore  of  the  lake,  a  breakfast  such  as 
wet  and  weary  fishermen  would  love — there  was  a 
fire,  and  fish  laid  thereon,  and  bread.  And  He  did 
this  for  those  who,  following  the  impulsive  lead 
of  Peter,  had  apparently  determined  to  wait  no 
more  for  His  coming,  but  to  return  to  the  boats 
and  fishing-tackle,  from  which  He  had  called  them 
three  years  before. 

It  may  be  that  these  words  will  be  read  by  those 
who  have  failed.  You  once  avowed  yourselves  to 
be  the  Lord's,  and  lived  for  a  little  on  the  uplands, 
where  the  golden  light  ever  shines  upon  the  happy 
spirit;  or  you  professed  to  enter  the  blessed  life, 
and  you  did  taste  its  joys,  and  experience  its  liberty 
and  victory;  or  you  have  stood  up  to  teach  others, 
stirring  them  to  deeds  of  heroic  courage  and  dar- 
ing. But  all  that  is  over  now.  You  have  fallen, 
as  Milton's  Archangel,  from  heaven  to  hell.  We 
need  not  now  discuss  the  cause  of  your  failure:  you 
were  overtaken  in  some  sudden  temptation;  or  you 
neglected  communion  with  God;  or  you  refused  to 
live  up  to  your  light.  But  the  sad  fact  remains, 
that  you  have  failed;  and  perhaps  failed,  as  Elijah 
did,  where  everyone  expected  you  to  stand.  And 
you  are  ashamed;     you  want  to   hide  yourself  from 


LOl^ING-KINDNESS  BETTER  THAN  LIFE.  131 

all  who  knew  you  in  happier  days;  you  have  given 
up  heart  and  hope,  and  lie  dejected  and  dispirited 
on  the  desert  sands;  you  account  yourself  forsaken 
by  God  and  man.  But  remember,  though  forsaken 
by  man,  you  are  not  forgotten  of  God.  He  loves 
you  still,  and  pities  you,  and  yearns  over  you;  and 
waits  beside  you,  with  loving  tendance  and  proven- 
der, in  order  to  restore  your  soul,  and  give  you  back 
the  years  that  the  canker-worm  and  caterpillar  have 
eaten.  We  have  then,  in  this  incident,  four 
thoughts  of  the  love  of  God  which  must  be  a  com- 
fort to  us  all,  and  especially  to  those  who  have 
fallen  from  Carmel's  height  to  the  level  of  the 
desert  sands. 

I.     God's  love  in  its  constancy. 

It  is  a  fact  which  we  all  admit,  but  which  we 
seldom  realize  in  the  moments  of  depression  and 
darkness  to  which  we  are  all  exposed.  It  is  not 
difficult  to  believe  that  God  loves  us  when  we  go 
with  the  multitude  to  the  house  of  God,  with  the 
voice  of  joy  and  praise,  and  stand  in  the  inner 
sunlit  circle;  but  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  He 
feels  as  much  love  for  us  when,  exiled  by  our  sin 
to  the  land  of  Jordan  and  of  the  Hermonites,  our 
soul  is  cast  down  within  us,  and  deep  calls  to  deep, 
as  His  waves  and  billows  surge  around.  It  is  not 
difficult  to  believe  that  God  loves  us  when,  like 
Elijah  at  Cherith  and  on  Carmel,  we  do  His  com- 
mandments, hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  His  word; 
but  it  is  not  so  easy  when,  like  Elijah  in  the  desert, 
we  lie  stranded,  or,  as  dismasted  and  rudderless 
vessels,  roll  in  the  trough  of  the  waves.     It  is  not 


133        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

difficult  to  believe  in  God's  love  when  with  Peter 
we  stand  on  the  mount  of  glory,  and,  in  the  rapture 
of  joy,  propose  to  share  a  tabernacle  with  Christ 
evermore;  but  it  is  well-nigh  impossible  when, 
with  the  same  Apostle,  we  deny  our  Master  with 
oaths,  and  are  abashed  by  a  look  in  which  grief 
masters  reproach. 

Yet  we  must  learn  to  know  and  believe  the  con- 
stancy of  the  love  of  God.  We  may  not  feel  it.  We 
may  deem  it  shut  up  and  gone  forever.  We  may 
imagine  that  we  have  forfeited  all  claim  to  it.  We 
may  think  of  it  as  Arctic  travelers,  dying  in  the 
icy  darkness,  dream  of  the  summers  of  early  child- 
hood, which  they  shall  never  see  again.  But  never- 
theless, it  has  not  altered;  staunch  as  the  affec- 
tion of  a  friend,  true  as  the  love  of  a  mother,  the 
love  of  God  abides  unchangeable  as  Himself. 
Mists,  born  of  the  swamps  and  marshes  of  your  own 
sin,  obscure  the  light  of  that  sun:  but  it  is  shin- 
ing yet  as  brilliantly  as  ever;  and  will  shine  on 
till  it  has  dispelled  all  shrouding  veils,  and  bathes 
you  again  in  its  warm  and  blessed  glow. 

O  man  of  God,  lying  amid  the  wrecks  of  what 
might  have  been,  take  heart!  hope  thou  still  in  the 
love  of  God;  trust  in  it;  yield  to  it;  and  thou 
shalt  yet  praise  Him,  who  is  the  health  of  thy 
countenance  and  thy  God. 

II.  God's  love  manifested  in  special  tenderness 

BECAUSE  OF  SPECIAL  SIN. 

We  do  not  read  that  an  angel  ever  appeared  to 
Elijah  at  Cherith  or  Zarephath,  or  awakened  him 
with  a  touch  that   must   have  been  as   thrilling  as 


LOI^ING-KINDNESS  BETTER  THAh!  LIFE.  133 

it  was  tender.  Ravens  and  brooklets,  and  a  widow 
wornan,  had  ministered  to  him  before;  but  never 
an  angel.  He  had  drunk  of  the  water  of  Cherith; 
but  never  of  water  drawn  by  angel  hands  from  the 
river  of  God,  which  is  ever  full  of  water.  He  had 
eaten  of  bread  and  flesh  foraged  for  him  by  ravens, 
and  of  meal  multiplied  by  miracle;  but  never  of 
cakes  molded  by  angel  fingers.  Why  these  special 
proofs  of  tenderness?  Certainly  it  was  not  be- 
cause God  took  any  pleasure  in  His  servant's  sin, 
or  condoned  his  grave  offense;  but  because  a  special 
manifestation  of  love  was  needed  to  convince  the 
prophet  that  he  was  still  dearly  loved;  and  to 
soften  his  spirit;    and  to  lead  him  to  repentance. 

Where  ordinary  methods  will  not  avail,  God  will 
employ  extraordinary  ones.  There  is  one  mem- 
orable instance  of  this,  which  has  afforded  comfort 
and  hope  to  multitudes  who  have  sinned  as  Peter 
did,  and  who  will  bless  God  forever  for  the  record 
of  the  Master's  dealings  with  His  truant  servant. 
The  Lord  sent  a  general  message  to  all  His  dis- 
ciples to  meet  Him  in  Galilee.  But  He  felt  that 
Peter  would  hardly  dare  to  class  himself  with  the 
rest;  and  so  He  sent  to  him  a  special  message,  say- 
ing: "Go  tell  My  disciples,  and  Peter."  It  is  thus 
that  Jesus  is  working  still  throughout  the  circles  of 
His  disciples.  So  eager  is  He  to  convince  the 
fallen  of  His  unaltered  love,  that  He  will  go  out 
of  His  way  to  show  it.  He  will  invent  new  and 
unwonted  surprises.  He  will  employ  angels  with 
their  gentle  touch;  and  bake  special  cakes  on  desert 
stones.  He  will  send  special  messages,  entwined 
about    the    backslider's    name.     He    will  take    the 


134        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POM^'ER. 

wandering  sheep  on  His  shoulder  to  bring  it  home; 
He  will  kill  the  fatted  calf  and  call  on  the  angels 
of  His  presence-chamber  to  make  merry  and  be 
glad. 

It  may  be  that  you  are  sleeping  the  sleep  of  in- 
sensibility or  of  despair;  but  all  the  while  the  love 
of  God  is  inventing  some  unique  manifestation  of 
its  yearning  tenderness.  He  hates  your  sin,  as  only 
infinite  holiness  can.  He  yearns  over  you  as  only 
infinite  love  can.  He  wants  to  convince  you  of 
what  He  feels;  to  touch  you;  to  soften  you;  to 
win  you  back  to  Himself.  All  the  while  that  you 
are  grieving  Him,  and  wandering  from  Him,  He 
is  encompassing  you  with  blessings.  Be  conquered  ! 
Yield  to  Him !  Take  with  you  words,  and  turn 
again  unto  the  Lord.  He  will  receive  you  gra- 
ciously. 

HI.     God's  love  in  its  unwearied  care. 

It  is  most  likely  that  it  was  evening  when  the 
angel  came  the  first  time  and  touched  him,  and 
bade  him  arise  and  eat;  for  we  are  told  that  he 
went  a  day's  journey  into  the  wilderness  before 
he  sat  down  under  the  juniper  bush.  Night  was 
spreading  her  temporary  veil  over  the  scorched 
sands;  and  the  sun  was  sinking,  like  a  ball  of  fire, 
on  the  unbroken  rim  of  the  horizon.  And  when 
the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  the  second  time,  it 
would  probably  be  as  morning  was  breaking  over 
the  world.  And  thus,  through  the  intervening 
night,  the  angels  of  God  kept  watch  and  ward 
about  the  sleeping  prophet. 

None  of  us  can  measure  the  powers  of  endurance 


LOHNG-KINDNESS  BETTER  THAN  LIFE.  135 

in  the  love  of  God.  It  never  tires.  It  fainteth 
not,  neither  is  weary.  It  does  not  fail,  nor  is  it 
discouraged.  It  bears  all  things;  believes  all 
things;  hopes  all  things;  endures  all  things.  It 
clings  about  its  object  with  a  divine  tenacity  until 
the  darkness  and  wandering  are  succeeded  by  the 
blessedness  of  former  days.  It  watches  over  us  dur- 
ing the  hours  of  our  insensibility  to  its  presence; 
touching  us  ever  and  anon;  speaking  to  us;  and 
summoning  us  to  arise  to  a  nobler,  better  life,  more 
worthy  of  ourselves,  more  glorifying  to  Him. 

IV.     God's  love  anticipating  coming  need. 

This  always  stands  out  as  one  of  the  most  wonder- 
ful passages  in  the  prophet's  history.  We  can 
understand  God  giving  him,  instead  of  a  long  dis- 
course, a  good  meal  and  sleep,  as  the  best  means 
of  recruiting  his  spent  powers.  This  is  what  we 
should  have  expected  of  One  who  knows  our  frame 
and  remembers  that  we  are  dust,  and  who  pities 
us  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children.  But  it  is  very 
wonderful  that  God  should  provision  His  servant 
for  the  long  journey  that  lay  before  him:  "Arise 
and  eat;  because  the  journey  is  too  great  for  thee. " 

That  journey  was  undertaken  at  his  own  whim; 
it  was  one  long  flight  from  his  post  of  duty;  it  was 
destined  to  meet  with  a  grave  remonstrance  at  its 
close:  "What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah?"  And  yet 
the  Lord  graciously  gave  him  food,  in  the  strength 
of  which  he  could  endure  the  long  fatigue.  The 
explanation  must  be  again  sought  in  the  tender 
love  of  God.  Elijah's  nature  was  clearly  over- 
wrought.    Without  doubt  he  had  steadfastly  made 


1S6        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POlVER. 

up  his  mind  for  that  tedious  journey  to  the  Mount 
of  God.  Nothing  would  turn  him  from  his  fixed 
purpose.  And  therefore,  as  he  would  go,  God 
anticipated  his  needs,  though  they  were  the  needs 
of  a  truant  servant  and  a  rebellious  child.  In 
wrath  He  remembered  mercy,  and  prevented  him 
with  the  blessings  of  His  goodness,  and  imparted, 
through  a  single  meal,  sufficient  strength  for  a 
march  of  forty  days  and  forty  nights.  Let  us  pause 
here  for  a  moment  to  adore  the  wonderful  love  of 
God;  which  gives  men  life  and  breath  and  all 
things,  even  when  He  knows  that  they  will  be  used 
for  selfish  ends,  and  in  direct  opposition  to  His  re- 
vealed will. 

Surely  these  thoughts  of  the  love  of  God  will 
arrest  some  from  pursuing  any  longer  the  path  of 
the  backslider.  You  have  failed;  but  do  not  be 
afraid  of  God,  or  think  that  He  will  never  look 
on  you  again.  In  thinking  thus  of  Him,  you 
grieve  Him  more,  and  aggravate  your  ill-behavior. 
Rather  cast  yourself  upon  His  love,  as  a  swimmer 
flings  himself  upon  the  buoyant  waves,  which  im- 
mediately close  around  him,  and  bear  him  up,  and 
carry  him  upon  their  sunlit  bosom.  Tell  Him  how 
deeply  you  mourn  the  past;  ask  Him  to  restore 
you,  give  yourself  to  Him  again;  resume  the  for- 
saken work;  retake  the  abandoned  post;  and  be- 
lieve that  God  will  again  use  you  as  a  chosen  vessel, 
and  pour  through  you  His  tides  of  blessing,  as  an 
ocean  may  pour  its  flood  through  one  narrow  strait. 

And  as  we  close  this  precious  narrative,  may  we 
not  all  receive  instruction  concerning  those  meals 
which  Heaven   prepares  for  us,  each   evening   and 


LOyiNG-KINDNESS  BETTER  TH^N  LIFE.  137 

morning,  during  our  journey  across  the  sands  of 
time?  At  night,  when  we  come  home  wearied  with 
the  day's  toil,  before  we  fling  ourselves  into  deep 
slumber,  the  angels  bid  us  arise  and  partake  of 
that  living  Bread  and  Water,  on  which  alone  can 
spirits  become  strong.  And  morning  by  morning 
their  gentle  touches  awake  us  from  overdue  slum- 
bers, as  they  whisper:  "Arise  and  eat,  lest  the 
journey  be  too  great  for  thee."  Their  neglect  to 
obey  the  heavenly  summons  is  the  true  cause  of  so 
much  failure  in  the  lives  of  Christian  people. 
They  do  not  feed  enough  on  Christ.  They  slumber 
on,  heedless  and  insensate,  till  the  morning  sun  is 
high,  and  the  angels,  with  their  provisions,  have 
faded  away. 

May  we  be  amongst  the  happy  number  who  never 
need  twice  calling;  but  who  rise  each  morning,  as 
the  first  cadence  of  the  angel-voice  breaks  upon 
their  ears^  to  eat  of  that  flesh  which  is  meat  in- 
deed, and  to  drink  of  that  blood  which  is  drink 
indeed.  Then  shall  we  be  able  to  withstand  all 
assaults,  to  endure  all  fatigue,  and  to  abide  per- 
petually in  the  realized  presence  of  God.  "They 
that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength; 
they  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles;  they 
shall  run  and  not  be  weary;  and  they  shall  walk 
and  not  faint." 


1B8        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


XII. 

xrbe  **StiU  Small  IDotce/' 

{I  Kings  xix.) 

REFRESHED  by  sleep  and  food,  Elijah  resumed 
his  journey  across  the  desert  to  Horeb.  Per- 
haps no  spot  on  earth  is  more  associated 
with  the  manifested  presence  of  God  than  that 
sacred  mount.  There  the  bush  burned  with  fire; 
there  the  law  was  given;  there  Moses  spent  forty 
days  and  nights  alone  with  God.  It  was  a  natural 
instinct  that  led  the  prophet  thither,  and  all  the 
world  could  not  have  furnished  a  more  appropriate 
school.  Natural  scenery  and  holy  associations  lent 
all  their  powers  to  impress  and  elevate  the  soul. 
Forty  times  the  prophet  saw  the  sun  rise  and  set 
over  the  desert  waste.  I  do  not  know  that  anyone 
has  perfectly  explained  the  meaning  of  that  sym- 
bolic number  which  so  frequently  appears  upon  the 
page  of  Scripture,  and  is  so  often  associated  with 
failure  and  temptation.  In  passing,  I  can  only 
note  the  fact  of  its  frequent  repetition.  Thus,  at 
last,  the  prophet  came  to  Horeb,  the  mount  of  God. 
We  have  to  consider  how  God  dealt  with  His 
dispirited  and  truant  child. 

I.  God  spake  to  him. 


THE  '^STILL  SMALL  yOICE."  139 

In  some  darksome  cave,  among  those  rent  preci- 
pices, Elijah  lodged;  and,  as  he  waited,  in  lonely 
musings,  the  fire  burned  in  his  soul.  But  he  had 
not  long  to  wait.  "Behold,  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  unto  him." 

That  word  had  often  come  to  him  before.  It 
had  come  to  him  at  Thisbe.  It  had  come  to  him 
in  Samaria,  after  he  had  given  his  first  message  to 
Ahab.  It  had  come  to  him  when  Cherith  was  dry. 
It  had  come  to  summon  him  from  the  solitudes  of 
Zarephath  to  the  stir  of  active  life.  And  now  it 
found  him  out,  and  came  to  him  again.  There  is 
no  spot  on  earth  so  lonely,  no  cave  so  deep  and 
dark,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  cannot  discover 
and  come  to  us. 

But  though  God  had  often  spoken  to  him  before. 
He  had  never  spoken  in  quite  the  same  tone — 
"What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah?"  The  accent  was 
stern  and  reproachful:  "Thou  art  My  servant; 
thou  art  set  to  do  My  will;  if  ever  thou  wast  needed, 
it  is  now;  the  tide  is  on  the  turn;  a  great  reforma- 
tion is  almost  ripe.  Why  hast  thou  left  thy  post? 
How  camest  thou  hither  without  My  bidding  or 
My  leave?"  Elijah  shrank  from  a  direct  reply.  I£ 
he  had  answered  truly,  he  must  have  confessed  that 
he  was  utterly  in  the  wrong,  without  a  single  word 
of  extenuation  or  excuse.  He  had  done  wrong  in 
leaving  his  post;  and  that  first  wrong  step  had  been 
aggravated  by  every  one  which  he  had  taken  since, 
plunging  him  further  and  further  into  the  dark. 

If  the  prophet  had  answered  that  searching  ques- 
tion of  God  with  shame  and  sorrow;  if  he  had  con- 
fessed that  he  had  failed,  and  asked  for  forgiveness; 


140         ELIJ/iH:  AhlD  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

if  he  had  cast  himself  on  the  pitifulness  and  ten- 
derness of  his  Almighty  Friend — there  is  not  the 
least  doubt  that  he  would  have  been  forgiven  and 
restored.  The  past  would  never  have  been  named 
against  him;  and  the  results  of  his  fatal  flight 
would  have  been  repaired.  God  would  Himself 
have  stood  in  the  breach,  until  His  child  could 
hasten  back  again  to  his  post,  and  lead  on  the 
glorious  work  which  he  had  so  nobly  commenced. 
But  instead  of  this,  he  parried  the  Divine  ques- 
tion, and  evaded  it.  He  did  not  try  to  explain  how 
he  came  there,  or  what  he  was  doing.  He  chose 
rather  to  dwell  upon  his  own  loyalty  for  the  cause 
of  God;  and  to  bring  it  out  into  striking  relief  by 
contrasting  it  with  the  sinful  backslidings  of  his 
people.  "I  have  been  very  jealous  for  the  Lord 
God  of  Hosts:  for  the  children  of  Israel  have  for- 
saken Thy  covenant;  thrown  down  Thine  altars; 
and  slain  Thy  prophets  with  the  sword;  and  I, 
even  I  only,  am  left,  and  they  seek  my  life,  to  take 
it  away."  All  this  was  well  known  to  God;  and 
I  do  not  think  the  prophet  would  ever  have  alluded 
to  it,  unless  he  had  been  hard  pressed  to  find  an 
excuse  to  palliate  his  own  cowardice  and  neglect  of 
duty. 

In  point  of  fact,  he  was  thoroughly  demoralized 
with  unbelief  and  fear.  The  sky  of  his  soul  was 
covered  with  clouds  so  dense,  that  no  star  of  com- 
fort glimmered  through  their  murky  curtains. 
There  was  a  tinge  of  self-vindication  and  of  blame 
on  others,  which  was  scarcely  worthy  of  him.  He 
did  not  sufficiently  realize  that  the  fault  lay  with 
himself;   and  that  he,  equally  with  others,  was  to 


THE  "STILL  SMALL  VOICE."  141 

blame  for  the  pass  to  which  the  cause  of  God  had 
come.  His  was  a  noble  nature,  under  a  temporary 
cloud;  a  palace  in  ruins;  a  splendid  vessel  rolling 
rudderless  in  the  trough  of  the  waves.  There  was, 
no  doubt,  truth  in  what  he  said.  He  was  full  of 
zeal  and  holy  devotion  to  the  cause  of  God.  He 
had  often  mourned  over  the  national  degeneracy. 
He  keenly  felt  his  own  isolation  and  loneliness. 
But  these  were  not  the  reasons  why  at  that  moment 
he  was  hiding  in  the  cave;  nor  were  they  the  real 
answer  to  that  searching  question,  "What  doest 
thou  here,  Elijah?" 

How  often  is  that  question  put  still!  When  a 
Christian  worker,  sorely  needed,  deserts  his  post 
because  of  some  unforeseen  difficulty,  or  to  secure 
selfish  gratification  and  ease,  to  that  couch  of  in- 
dolence, or  to  that  forest  glade  where  soft  breezes 
blow,  the  question  comes,  "What  doest  thou  here?" 
When  a  child  of  God  is  found  in  the  theater,  the 
dancing  saloon,  or  the  place  of  evil  companionship, 
sitting  in  the  seat  of  scorners,  or  walking  in  the 
way  of  the  ungodly,  again  must  the  question  come 
as  a  thunderbolt  out  of  a  clear  sky,  "What  doest 
thou  here?"  When  one  endowed  with  great  facul- 
ties digs  a  hole  in  the  earth,  and  buries  the  God- 
intrusted  talent,  standing  idle  all  the  day  long 
among  the  loungers  in  the  market-place,  again  must 
the  inquiry  ring  out,  "What  doest  thou  here?" 

Life  is  the  time  for  doing.  The  world  is  a 
great  workshop,  in  which  there  is  no  room  for 
drones.  God  Himself  worketh  as  the  great  Master- 
builder,  All  creatures  fulfill  their  needful  func- 
tions, from  the  angel  that  hymns  God's    praise    to 


143        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POfVER. 

the  wasp  that  buries  a  corpse.  There  is  plenty  to 
do — evil  to  put  down;  good  to  build  up;  doubters 
to  be  directed;  prodigals  to  be  won  back;  sinners 
to  be  sought.  "What  doest  thou  here?"  Up, 
Christians,  leave  your  caves,  and  do!  Do  not  do 
in  order  to  be  saved;  but  being  saved,  do! 

II.  God  taught  him  by  a  beautiful  natural  par- 
able. 

He  was  bidden  to  stand  at  the  entrance  to  the 
cave;  but  this  he  hesitated  to  do,  until  afterward. 
Did  that  hesitancy  arise  from  a  guilty  conscience, 
reminding  him  that  all  was  not  right  between  him 
and  God? 

Presently  there  was  the  sound  of  the  rushing  of 
a  mighty  wind;  and  in  another  moment  a  violent 
tornado  was  sweeping  past.  Nothing  could  with- 
stand its  fury.  It  rent  the  mountains,  and  brake 
in  pieces  the  rocks  before  the  Lord;  the  valleys 
were  littered  with  splintered  fragments;  du^  the 
Lord  was  not  in  the  wind.  And  when  the  wind  had 
died  away,  there  was  an  earthquake.  The  mountain 
swayed  to  and  fro,  yawning  and  cracking;  the 
ground  heaved  as  if  an  Almighty  hand  were  pass- 
ing beneath  it;  but  the  Lord  was  not  tn  the  earthquake. 
And  when  the  earthquake  was  over,  there  was  a 
fire.  The  heavens  were  one  blaze  of  light,  each 
pinnacle  and  peak  glowed  in  the  kindling  flame; 
the  valley  beneath  looked  like  a  huge  smelting- 
furnace;    but  the  Lord  was  not  in  the  fire. 

How  strange!  Surely  these  were  the  appropriate 
natural  symbols  of  the  Divine  presence.  If  we 
had  been  asked    to    describe    it,    we    should   have 


THE  '^ STILL  SMALL  I^OICE:'  143 

used  these  first  of  all.  But  hark!  a  still  small 
whisper  is  in  the  air — very  still,  and  very  small, 
like  the  trembling  echoes  of  a  flute  which  is  being 
played  among  the  hills.  It  touched  the  listening 
heart  of  the  prophet.  If  the  more  tumultuous  out- 
burst of  power  had  expressed  the  storm  and  tumult 
of  his  nature,  this  elicited  and  interpreted  a 
sweeter,  nobler  self,  and  cast  a  softening  spell  over 
his  tempest-tossed  spirit,  and  seemed  to  be  the 
tender  cadence  of  the  love  and  pity  of  God  which 
had  come  in  search  of  him.  Its  music  drew  him 
from  the  cave,  into  the  innermost  recesses  of  which 
he  had  been  driven  by  the  terrible  convulsions  of 
nature.  "And  it  was  so,  when  Elijah  heard  it, 
that  he  wrapped  his  face  in  his  mantle,  and  went 
out,  and  stood  in  the  entering  in  of  the  cave." 

What  was  the  meaning  of  all  this?  It  is  not  diffi- 
cult to  understand.  Elijah  was  most  eager  that 
his  people  should  be  restored  to  their  allegiance  to 
God;  and  he  thought  that  it  could  only  be  done  by 
some  striking  and  wonderful  act.  He  may  have 
often  spoken  thus  with  himself;  "Those  idols  shall 
never  be  swept  from  our  land,  unless  God  sends  a 
movement  swift  and  irresistible  as  the  wind,  which 
hurries  the  clouds  before  it.  The  land  can  never 
be  awakened  except  by  a  moral  earthquake.  There 
must  be  a  baptism  of  fire."  And  when  he  stood  on 
Carmel,  and  beheld  the  panic  among  the  priests 
and  the  eagerness  among  the  people,  he  thought 
that  the  time — the  set  time — had  come.  But  all 
that  died  away.  That  was  not  God's  chosen 
way  of  saving  Israel.  And  because  He  did  not  go 
on  working  thus,  Elijah  thought  that    He  was   not 


144        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  Of  HIS  POIVER. 

working  at  all;  and  abandoned  himself  to  the 
depths  of  despondency. 

But  in  this  natural  parable  God  seemed  to  say: 
''My  child,  thou  hast  been  looking  for  Me  to 
answer  thy  prayers  with  striking  signs  and  won- 
ders; and  because  these  have  not  been  given  in  a 
marked  and  permanent  form,  thou  hast  thought  Me 
heedless  and  inactive.  But  I  am  not  always  to  be 
found  in  these  great  visible  movements;  I  love  to 
work  gently,  softly,  and  unperceived;  I  have  been 
working  so;  I  am  working  so  still;  and  there  are 
in  Israel,  as  the  results  of  My  quiet,  gentle  ministry, 
'seven  thousand,  all  the  knees  which  have  not  bowed 
unto  Baal,  and  every  mouth  which  hath  not  kissed 
him.'"  Yes,  and  was  not  the  gentle  ministry  of 
Elisha,  succeeding  the  stormy  career  of  his  great 
predecessor,  like  the  still  small  voice  after  the 
wind,  the  earthquake,  and  the  fire?  And  is  it  not 
probable  that  more  real  good  was  effected  by  his 
unobtrusive  life  and  miracles,  than  was  even 
wrought  by  the  splendid  deeds  of  Elijah? 

We  often  fall  into  similar  mistakes.  When  we 
wish  to  promote  a  revival,  we  seek  to  secure  large 
crowds,  much  evident  impression,  powerful  preach- 
ers; influences  comparable  to  the  wind,  the  earth- 
quake, and  the  fire.  When  these  are  present,  we 
account  that  we  are  secure  of  having  the  presence 
and  power  of  God.  But  surely  Nature  herself 
rebukes  us.  Who  hears  the  roll  of  the  planets? 
Who  can  detect  the  falling  of  the  dew?  Whose 
eye  has  ever  been  injured  by  the  breaking  of  the 
wavelets  of  daylight  on  the  shores  of  our  planet? 
"There  is  no  speech,   nor  language;  their  voice   is 


THE ''STILL  SMALL  VOICE."  145 

not  heard."  At  this  moment  the  mightiest  forces 
are  in  operation  around  usj  but  there  is  nothing  to 
betray  their  presence.  And  thus  was  it  with  the 
ministry  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  did  not  strive,  nor 
cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in 
the  streets.  Whilst  men  were  expecting  Him  at 
the  front  door,  with  blare  of  trumpet.  He  stepped 
into  His  destined  home  in  the  disguise  of  a 
peasant's  child.  His  going  forth  is  ever  prepared 
as  the  morning.  He  comes  down  as  showers  on 
the  mown  grass.  His  Spirit  descends  as  the  dove, 
whose  wings  make  no  tremor  in  the  still  air.  Let 
us  take  heart!  God  may  not  be  working  as  we 
expect;  but  He  is  working.  If  not  in  the  wind, 
yet  in  the  zephyr.  \i  not  in  the  earthquake,  yet 
in  the  heart-break.  If  not  in  the  fire,  yet  in  the 
warmth  of  summer.  If  not  in  thunder,  yet  in  the 
still  small  voice.  If  not  in  crowds,  yet  in  lonely 
hearts;  in  silent  tears;  in  the  broken  sobs  of  peni- 
tents; and  in  multitudes,  who,  like  the  seven 
thousand  of  Israel,  are  unknown  as  disciples. 

But  Elijah  refused  to  be  comforted.  It  seemed 
as  if  he  could  not  shake  off  the  mood  in  which 
he  was  ensnared.  And  so  when  God  asked  him 
the  second  time,  "What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah?" 
he  answered  in  the  self-same  words  with  which 
he  had  tried  to  justify  himself  before:  "And  he 
said  I  have  been  very  jealous  .   .  . 

It  is  pleasant  to  think  of  those  seven  thousand 
disciples,  known  only  to  God.  We  are  sometimes 
sad,  as  we  compare  the  scanty  number  of  professing 
Christians  with  the  masses  of  ungodly.  But  we 
may  take  heart:    there  are  other  Christians  besides. 


146        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

That  harsh-seeming  governor  is  a  Joseph  in  dis- 
guise. That  wealthy  owner  of  the  garden  in  Ari- 
mathea  is  a  lowly  follower  of  Jesus.  That  mem- 
ber of  the  Sanhed»"im  is  a  disciple,  but  secretly, 
for  fear  of  the  Jews.  For  every  one  entered  on 
our  rolls  of  communicants,  there  are  hundreds — 
perhaps  thousands — whom  God  shall  reckon  as 
His  when  He  makes  up  His  jewels.  But  if  you, 
dear  reader,  are  one  of  that  number,  I  entreat  you, 
do  not  remain  so:  it  puts  you  in  a  false  position; 
it  robs  the  cause  of  God  of  your  help  and  influence; 
it  is  an  act  of  treachery  to  Christ  Himself.  Be- 
ware lest,  if  you  are  ashamed  of  Him,  the  time  may 
come  when  He  shall  be  ashamed  of  you. 

It  is  quite  true  that  confession  means  martyrdom 
in  one  form  or  another;  and  sometimes  our  heart 
and  flesh  shrink  back  in  unutterable  anguish  as 
we  contemplate  the  possible  results  of  refusing  the 
act  of  obeisance  to  Baal.  But,  at  such  times,  let 
us  cheer  ourselves  by  anticipating  the  august 
moment  when  the  dear  Master  will  speak  our  names 
before  assembled  worlds,  and  own  us  as  His.  And 
let  us  also  ask  Him  in  us  and  through  us  to  speak 
out  and  witness  a  good  confession;  effecting  that 
in  us  and  by  us  which  we  are  totally  powerless 
to  effect  by  ourselves. 

We  are  all  doing  more  good  than  we  know. 
Elijah  thought  that  he  was  doing  nothing,  except 
when  battling  with  idolatry  and  sin.  He  never 
thought  how  ^often  he  was  helping  those  seven 
thousand,  by  the  indirect  influence  of  his  example. 
We,  perhaps,  accomplish  less  by  our  great  efforts 
than  we  effect  by  a  consistent  life,  a  holy  character, 


THE  ''STILL  SM^LL  FOlCEr  147 

a  daily  shining.  Light-house  keepers  never  know 
how  many  weary,  longing  eyes  turn  in  the  darkness 
to  the  silent  light  they  maintain  through  the  dark 
night.  Our  duty  is  to  shine,  not  asking  questions, 
not  eager  for  great  results;  but  content  to  do  the 
will  of  God,  consistently,  humbly,  and  constantly, 
sure  that  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  our  work 
of  faith  and  labor  of  love. 


148        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


XIII. 

**6o,  IRetutnl " 

(i  Kings  xix.) 

IT  is  a  very  solemn  thought,  that  one  sin  may  for- 
ever, so  far  as  this  world  is  concerned,  wreck 
our  usefulness.  It  is  not  always  so.  Some- 
times— as  in  the  case  of  the  Apostle  Peter — the 
Lord  graciously  restores,  and  re-commissions  for 
His  work,  the  one  who  might  have  been  counted 
unfit  ever  again  to  engage  in  it.  "Feed  my  sheep. 
Feed  my  lambs."  But  against  this  one  case  we 
may  put  three  others,  in  each  of  which  it  would 
seem  as  if  the  sentry  angel,  who  forbade  the  return 
of  our  first  parents  to  Paradise,  were  stationed 
with  strict  injunctions  to  forbid  any  return  to  the 
former  position  of  noble  service. 

The  first  case  is  that  of  Moses.  No  other  man 
has  ever  been  honored  as  was  he,  "with  whom  God 
spake  face  to  face" — the  meekest  of  men,  the 
servant  of  the  Lord,  the  foster-nurse  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  whose  intercessions  saved  them  again  and 
again  from  destruction.  Yet,  because  he  spake 
unadvisedly  with  his  lips,  and  smote  the  rock  twice, 
in  unbelief  and  passion,  he  was  compelled  to  bear 
the  awful  sentence,  "Because  ye  believed  Me  not, 
to  sanctify  Me  in  the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel, 


"GO,  RETURN!'*  149 


therefore  ye  shall  not  bring  this  congregation  into 
the  land  which  I  have  given  them."  Most  earnestly 
did  he  plead  for  a  revocation  of  that  terrible  prohi- 
bition. But  he  was  silenced  by  the  solemn  reply, 
against  which  there  was  no  appeal,  "Let  it  suffice 
thee;  speak  no  more  unto  Me  of  this  matter." 

The  second  case  is  that  of  Saul,  the  first,  ill-fated 
king  of  Israel,  whose  reign  opened  so  auspiciously, 
as  a  morning  without  clouds;  but  who  soon  brought 
upon  himself  the  sentence  of  deposition.  Yet  it 
was  only  for  one  single  act.  Alarmed  at  Samuel's 
long  delay,  and  at  the  scattering  of  the  people,  he 
intruded  rashly  into  a  province  from  which  he  was 
expressly  excluded,  and  offered  the  sacrifice  with 
which  the  Israelites  were  wont  to  prepare  for 
battle.  "And  it  came  to  pass  that,  as  soon  as  he  had 
made  an  end  of  offering  the  burnt-offering,  behold, 
Samuel  came.  And  Samuel  said,  What  hast  thou 
done?  .  .  .  Thou  hast  done  foolishly:  thou  hast  not 
kept  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  thy  God, 
which  He  commanded  thee:  for  now  would  the 
Lord  have  established  thy  kingdom  upon  Israel 
forever.  But  now  thy  kingdom  shall  not  con- 
tinue; .  .  .  because  thou  hast  not  kept  that  which 
the  Lord  commanded  thee."  Thus  early  in  his 
reign,  and  before  his  further  disobedience  in  the 
case  of  the  Amalekites — for  that  one  act  of  disobedi- 
ence, revealing,  as  it  did,  a  sad  state  of  moral 
decrepitude — Saul  was  rejected. 

The  third  case  is  that  of  Elijah.  He  was  never 
reinstated  in  quite  the  position  which  he  had  occu- 
pied before  his  fatal  flight.  True,  he  was  bidden 
to  return  on  his  way,  and  work  was    indicated    for 


150        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POI-I^ER. 

him  to  do.  But  that  work  was  the  anointing  of 
three  men,  who  were  to  share  amongst  them  the 
ministry  which  he  might  have  fulfilled  if  only  he 
had  been  true  to  his  opportunities,  and  faithful  to 
his  God.  God's  work  must  go  on;  if  not  by  us, 
then,  through  our  failures,  by  others  brought  in  to 
supply  our  place.  "Go,  return  on  thy  way  to  the 
wilderness  of  Damascus:  and  when  thou  comest, 
anoint  Hazael  to  be  king  over  Syria;  and  Jehu  the 
son  of  Nimshi  shaft  thou  anoint  to  be  king  over 
Israel;  and  Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat  of  Abel- 
meholah  shalt  thou  anoint  to  be  prophet  in  thy 
room."  Those  words  rang  out  the  death-knell  of 
Elijah's  fondest  dreams.  Evidently,  it  was  not  for 
him  to  be  the  deliverer  of  his  people  from  the 
thralldom  of  Baal.  Others  were  to  do  his  work; 
another  was  to  be  prophet  in  his  room. 

All  those  who  hold  prominent  positions  amongst 
us,  as  public  teachers  and  leaders,  may  well  take 
warning  by  these  solemn  examples  standing  on  the 
plains  of  time,  as  Lot's  wife  on  those  of  Sodom. 
We  may  not  all  be  tempted,  as  Elijah  was,  to 
unbelief  and  discouragement.  But  there  are  many 
other  snares  prepared  for  us  by  our  great  enemy, 
and  strewn  over  with  fair  appearances;  as  the 
hunter  strews  earth  and  grass  on  the  top  of  the 
pitfall  which  he  has  cunningly  dug  in  the  path- 
way between  the  river  and  the  lair  of  his  prey. 
There  is  the  adulation  given  to  the  successful  man, 
in  which  so  much  of  the  human  is  mingled  with 
thankfulness  for  the  help  or  comfort  given.  There 
is  the  desire  to  be  always  prominent — foremost  on 
every  platform,  and  first  in  every  enterprise,  to  the 


'GO,  RETURN!"  151 


utter  neglect  of  private  prayer.  There  are  the 
insidious  attacks  of  jealousy;  depreciation  of  others; 
comparison  of  their  standing  with  our  own.  And 
in  addition  to  these,  are  other  modes  of  failure, 
more  gross  and  evident  than  they,  to  which  we  are 
all  prone,  and  by  which,  alas!  too  many  have  been 
mastered.  Any  one  of  these  may  compel  God  to 
cast  us  away  from  His  glorious  service;  employing 
us  only  in  such  humbler  ministry,  or  to  anoint  our 
successors. 

As  children.  He  will  never  cast  us  away;  but  as 
His  servants  He  may.  Let  us  beware!  One  false 
step,  one  hurried  desertion  of  our  post,  one  act  of 
disobedience,  one  outburst  of  passion — any  one  of 
these  may  lead  our  heavenly  Father  to  throw  us 
aside,  as  Samson  did  the  jaw-bone  of  the  ass  with 
which  he  had  slain  heaps  upon  heaps.  We  shall 
not  forfeit  heaven;  that  is  guaranteed  to  us  by  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ.  We  may  even  be  favored 
by  a  glorious  and  triumphant  entrance  thither  in 
an  equipage  of  flame.  But  we  shall  never  again 
ride  on  the  crest  of  the  flowing  tide,  carrying  all 
before  us.  Others  shall  finish  our  uncompleted  task. 

But  with  the  danger  there  are  sufficient  safeguards. 
Let  God  prune  you  with  the  golden  pruning- 
knife  of  His  holy  Word.  Look  into  the  mirror  of 
revealed  truth,  to  see  if  there  is  any  trace  of  blem- 
ish stealing  over  the  face  of  the  soul.  Offer  your 
spirit  constantly  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  He  may 
detect  and  reveal  to  you  the  beginnings  of  idola- 
tries and  heart-sins.  Be  very  jealous  of  anything 
that  divides  your  heart  with  your  Lord.  "Watch 
and  pray,  lest  ye    enter    into    temptation."     Have 


152        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

perpetual  recourse  for  cleansing,  to  the  blood  shed 
for  the  remission  of  sin.  Trust  in  Him  who  is 
able  to  guard  you  from  stumbling,  and  to  set  you 
before  the  presence  of  His  glory  without  blemish, 
in  exceeding  joy." 

But  now,  turning  to  the  further  study  of  the 
words  with  which  God  dismissed  His  servant  from 
Horeb,  let  us  notice  three  distinct  thoughts. 

I.  The  variety  of  God's  instruments. 

Hazael,  king  of  Syria;  Jehu,  the  rude  captain; 
and  Elisha,  the  young  farmer.  Each  was  as  differ- 
ent as  possible  from  the  others;  and  yet  each  was 
needed  for  some  special  work  in  connection  with 
that  idolatrous  people.  Hazael  was  destined  to  be 
the  rod  of  divine  vengeance  to  Israel  at  large,  by 
whom  God  began  to  cut  them  short,  and  to  make 
them  like  the  dust  by  threshing.  Ah!  cruel  indeed 
was  his  treatment  of  them!  (2  Kings  viii.  12;  x. 
32;  xii.  3,  17).  Jehu  was  to  be  the  scourge  of  the 
house  of  Ahab,  extirpating  it  root  and  branch. 
Elisha' s  ministry  was  to  be  genial  and  gentle,  as 
summer  rain  and  evening  dew;  like  the  ministry 
of  our  Lord  Himself,  whom  he  prefigured,  and  of 
whom  his  name  significantly  spoke. 

It  is  remarkable  how  God  accomplishes  His  pur- 
poses through  men  who  only  think  of  working  their 
own  wild  way.  Their  sin  is  not  diminished  or 
condoned  because  they  are  executing  the  designs  of 
Heaven;  it  still  stands  out  in  all  its  malignant 
deformity.  And  yet,  though  they  are  held  accounta- 
ble for  the  evil,  it  is  none  the  less  evident  that 
they  do  whatsoever  God's  hand  and  God's  counsel 


'GO,  RETURN!"  153 


determined  before  to  be  done.  This  fact  is  often 
referred  to  in  Scripture.  Joseph  comforted  his 
brethren,  after  his  father's  death,  by  telling  them 
that  though  they  thought  evil  against  him,  God 
meant  it  unto  good,  to  save  much  people  alive. 
David  forbade  his  men  to  slay  Shimei,  because, 
though  the  cursing  of  the  king  was  a  foul  act  of 
treason,  yet  probably  "the  Lord  had  said  unto 
him.  Curse  David."  And  our  blessed  Lord,  when 
about  to  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  wicked 
men,  said  that  "the  Father"  was  putting  the  cup 
into  His  hands  (see  also  Acts  ii.   23). 

Men  may  do  evil  things  against  us,  for  which 
they  will  be  condemned;  and  yet  those  very  things, 
being  permitted  by  the  wisdom  and  love  of  God, 
are  His  messages  to  us.  Before  they  can  reach  us, 
they  must  pass  through  His  environing,  encompass- 
ing presence;  and  if  they  do,  then  they  are  God's 
will  for  us:  and  we  must  meekly  accept  our  Father's 
discipline,  saying,  "Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be 
done." 

IL  No  ONE  CAN  ENTIRELY  ESCAPE  FROM  GOD'S 
PERSONAL   DEALINGS. 

God's  nets  are  not  all  constructed  with  the  same 
meshes.  Men  may  escape  through  some  of  them; 
but  they  cannot  escape  through  all.  If  they  elude 
the  Gospel  ministry,  they  will  be  caught  by  some 
earnest  worker,  apt  at  personal  dealing.  If  they 
manage  to  evade  all  contact  with  the  living  voice, 
they  may  yet  be  reached  by  the  printed  page.  If 
they  evade  all  religious  literature,  they  may  still 
be   the    sudden    subjects    of    the    strivings    of    the 


154        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

Spirit.  "Him  that  escapeth  the  sword  of  Hazael 
shall  Jehu  slay;  and  him  that  escapeth  from  the 
sword  of  Jehu  shall  Elisha  slay." 

We  do  not  read  that  Elisha  ever  wielded  the 
sword;  and  yet  the  ministry  of  gentle  love  is  some- 
times more  potent  in  slaying  souls  than  the  more 
vigorous  ministry  of  an  Hazael  or  Jehu;  and  out  of 
such  slaying  comes  life. 

Let  us  not  compare  man  with  man.  Let  us  not 
despise  any  sect,  or  denomination,  or  body  of  Chris- 
tian workers.  What  is  inoperative  with  one,  is 
God's  voice  to  another.  We  are  totally  unable  to 
estimate  the  essential  use  of  men.  And  let  us  not 
envy  one  another;  because  each  of  us  has  some 
special  gift  which  qualifies  us  for  the  use  of  the 
dear  Master,  and  enables  us  to  touch  some  who 
would  be  unreached  if  it  were  not  for  us.  "Many 
members;  yet  but  one  body.  And  the  eye  cannot 
say  unto  the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of  thee;  nor 
again,  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  you. " 

And  as  we  look  around  on  the  entire  range  of 
ministry  by  which  the  world  is  filled,  we  may  be 
sure  that  everyone  has  at  least  one  chance,  and 
that  God  so  orders  the  lives  of  men  that  once  at 
least  during  their  course  they  are  encountered  by 
the  kind  of  argument  which  is  most  appropriate 
to  their  character  and  temperament,  if  only  they 
will  give  ear  and  yield. 

HL     God  never  overlooks  one  of  His  own. 

Elijah  thought  that  he  alone  was  left  as  a  lovei 
and  worshiper  of  God.  It  was  a  great  mistake.  God 
had  many  hidden  ones:     "Yet  I  have  left  Me  seven 


'GO,  RETURN!"  155 


thousand  in  Israel,  all  the  knees  which  have  not 
bowed  unto  Baal,  and  every  mouth  which  hath  not 
kissed  him."  We  know  nothing  of  their  names  or 
history.  They  were  probably  unknown  in  camp  or 
court;  obscure,  simple-hearted,  and  humble.  Their 
only  testimony  was  one  long  refusal  to  the  solicita- 
tions of  the  foul  rites  of  idolatry.  They  groaned 
and  wept  in  secret,  and  spake  often  one  to  another, 
while  the  Lord  hearkened  and  heard.  But  they 
were  all  known  to  God,  and  enrolled  amongst  His 
jewels,  and  counted  as  a  shepherd  tells  his  sheep. 
He  cared  for  them  with  an  infinite  solicitude;  and 
it  was  for  their  sake  that  He  raised  up  the  good 
and  gentle  Elisha  to  carry  on  the  nurture  and  dis- 
cipline of  their  souls. 

It  has  often  been  a  subject  of  wonder  to  me  how 
these  seven  thousand  secret  disciples  could  keep  so 
close  as  to  be  unknown  by  their  great  leader.  Attar 
of  roses  will  always  betray  its  presence,  hide  it 
as  we  may.  When  salt  has  not  lost  its  savor,  it 
cannot  be  hid.  And  the  work  of  God  in  human 
hearts  must,  sooner  or  later,  discover  itself.  It 
is  to  be  feared,  therefore,  that  the  godliness  of 
these  hidden  ones  was  very  vague  and  colorless, 
needing  the  eye  of  omniscience  to  detect  it.  But 
for  all  that,  God  did  detect  it;  and  He  prized  it. 
He  did  not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  but  fanned  it. 
He  did  not  despise  the  grain  of  mustard-seed;  He 
watched  its  growth  with  tender  love  and  care. 

You  may  be  very  weak  and  insignificant — not 
counted  in  the  numberings  of  God's  captains;  not 
deemed  worthy  of  a  name  or  place  amongst  His 
avowed  servants:  and  yet,  if  you  have  but  a    spark 


156        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER 

of  faith  and  love,  if  you  strive  to  keep  yourself 
untainted  by  the  world,  you  will  be  owned  by  Him 
whose  scepter  is  stretched  out  to  the  most  timid 
suppliant.  But  remember,  if  your  inner  life  be 
genuine,  it  will  not  remain  forever  secret — it  will 
break  out  as  a  long-hidden  fire;  it  will  force  its 
way  into  the  light  as  the  buried  seed  in  which 
there  is  the  spark  of  life. 

It  may  be  that  God,  by  these  lines,  will  speak  to 
some  backslider,  saying:  Go,  return!  Return  to 
Me,  from  whom  you  have  wandered.  Return  to  My 
work,  which  you  have  deserted.  Return  to  the 
posture  of  faith,  from  which  you  have  fallen.  Re- 
turn to  the  happy,  holy  childlikeness  of  former 
years.  "Return,  ye  backsliding  children;  and  I 
will  heal  your  backslidings. "  Oh  that  the  re- 
sponse may  be,  "Behold,  we  come  unto  Thee;  for 
Thou  art  the  Lord  our  God! " 


NABOTH'S  yiNEYJRD.  157 


XIV. 

IRalJotb's  lDfnesar&» 

(i  Kings  xxi.) 

IN  a  room  of  the  palace,  Ahab,  king  of  Israel, 
lies  upon  his  couch,  his  face  toward  the  wall, 
refusing  to  eat.  What  has  taken  place?  Has 
disaster  befallen  the  royal  arms?  Have  the  priests 
of  Baal  been  again  massacred?  Is  his  royal  con- 
sort dead?  No;  the  soldiers  are  still  flushed  with 
their  recent  victories  over  Syria.  The  worship  of 
Baal  has  quite  recovered  the  terrible  disaster 
of  Carmel;  Jezebel — resolute,  crafty,  cruel,  and 
beautiful — is  now  standing  by  his  side,  anxiously 
seeking  the  cause  of  this  sadness,  which  was,  per- 
haps, assumed  to  engage  her  sympathy,  and  to 
secure,  through  her  means,  ends  which  he  dared 
not  compass  for  himself. 

The  story  is  soon  told.  Jezreel  was  the  Wind- 
sor of  Israel;  and  there  stood  the  favorite  resi- 
dence of  the  royal  house.  On  a  certain  occasion, 
whilst  Ahab  was  engaged  there  in  superintending 
his  large  and  beautiful  pleasure-grounds,  his  eye 
lighted  on  a  neighboring  vineyard,  belonging  to 
Naboth  the  Jezreelite;  which  promised  to  be  so 
valuable  an  addition  to  his  property,  that  he  re- 
solved to  procure  it  at  all  hazards.     He    therefore 


158        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

sent  for  Naboth,  and  offered,  either  a  better  vine- 
yard in  exchange,  or  the  worth  of  it  in  money.  To 
his  surprise  and  indignation,  Naboth  refused  both. 
And  Naboth  said  to  Ahab,  "The  Lord  forbid  it 
me,  that  I  should  give  the  inheritance  of  my  fath- 
ers unto  thee." 

At  first  sight  this  refusal  seems  churlish  and 
uncourteous.  But  a  little  consideration  will  justify 
the  refusal  of  Naboth,  and  aggravate  the  subse- 
quent guilt  of  the  royal  pair.  By  the  law  of  Moses, 
Canaan  was  considered  as  being,  in  a  peculiar 
sense,  God's  land.  The  Israelites  were  His  ten- 
ants; and  one  of  the  conditions  of  their  tenure  was, 
that  they  should  not  alienate  that  which  fell  to 
their  lot,  except  in  cases  of  extreme  necessity,  and 
then  only  till  the  year  of  Jubilee.  The  transfer 
was  always  coupled  with  the  condition  that  the 
land  might  be  redeemed  at  any  moment,  before 
that  time,  by  the  payment  of  a  stipulated  price. 
If  these  two  conditions  had  remained  in  force, 
Naboth  would  have  felt  less  compunction  at  this 
temporary  alienation  of  his  paternal  inheritance; 
but  both  had  probably  fallen  into  disuse,  and  he 
anticipated  that  if  it  once  passed  out  of  his  hands, 
his  patrimony  would  become  merged  in  the  royal 
demesne,  never  to  be  disintegrated.  Taking  his 
stand  then  on  religious  grounds,  he  might  well 
say,  "The  Lord  forbid  it  me."  His  refusal  was  in 
part,  therefore,  a  religious  act. 

But  there  was,  without  doubt,  something  fur- 
ther. In  his  mention  of  "the  inheritance  of  his 
fathers,"  we  have  the  suggestion  of  another,  and 
most  natural  reason,    for    his    reluctance;    beneath 


NABOTH'S  yiNEYARD.  159 

those  vines  and  trees  his  fathers  had  for  genera- 
tions sat;  there  he  had  spent  the  sunny  years  of 
childhood.  Many  a  holy  memory  was  associated 
with  that  spot;  and  he  felt  that  all  the  juice  ever 
pressed  from  all  the  vineyards  in  the  neighbor- 
hood would  never  compensate  him  for  the  wrench 
from  those  clustered  memories. 

Naboth's  refusal  made  Ahab  leap  into  his  chariot 
and  drive  back  to  Samaria;  and,  like  a  spoiled 
child,  turn  his  face  to  the  wall  in  a  pet,  "heavy 
and  displeased."  At  the  close  of  the  previous 
chapter  we  learn  that  he  was  heavy  and  displeased 
with  God;  now  he  is  agitated  by  the  same  strong 
passions  toward  man.  In  a  few  more  days  the 
horrid  deed  of  murder  was  perpetrated,  which  at 
one  stroke  removed  Naboth,  his  sons  and  his 
heirs,  and  left  the  unclaimed  property  to  fall  nat- 
urally into  the  royal  hands.  There  are  many  les- 
sons here,  which  would  claim  our  notice,  if  we 
were  dealing  with  the  whole  story;  but  we  must 
pass  them  by,  to  bend  our  attention  exclusively  on 
the  part  played  by  Elijah  amid  these  terrible  trans- 
actions. 

I.     He  was  called  back  to  service. 

How  many  years  had  elapsed  since  last  the  word 
of  the  Lord  had  come  to  Elijah,  we  do  not  know; 
perhaps  five  or  six.  All  this  while  he  must  have 
waited  wistfully  for  the  well-known  accents  of 
that  voice,  longing  to  hear  it  once  again.  And  as 
the  weary  days,  passing  slowly  by,  prolonged  his 
deferred  hope  into  deep  and  yet  deeper  regret,  he 
must  have  been  driven  to  continued  soul-question- 


160        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POfVER. 

ings  and  searchings  of  heart;  to  bitter  repentarvce 
for  the  past,  and  to  renewed  consecration  for 
whatever  service  might  be  imposed  upon  him. 
Using  a  phrase  employed  of  another,  as  remarkable 
for  physical  force  as  Elijah  was  for  spiritual  power, 
we  may  say,  "the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow 
again." 

It  may  be  that  these  words  will  be  read  by  some, 
once  prominent  in  the  Christian  service,  who  have 
been  lately  cast  aside.  They  have  been  removed 
from  the  sphere  they  once  filled.  They  have  found 
audiences  slip  away  from  them,  and  opportunities 
close  up.  They  have  seen  younger  men  step  in  to 
fill  the  ranks  from  which  they  have  fallen.  This 
may  be  attributable  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  Great 
Master — who  has  a  perfect  right  to  do  as  He  will 
with  His  own,  and  who  takes  up  one  and  lays  down 
another.  But  before  we  lay  this  flattering  unction 
to  our  souls,  we  should  inquire  whether  the  reason 
may  not  lie  within  our  own  breasts — in  some  in- 
consistency or  sin,  which  needs  confession  and 
forgiveness  at  the  hands  of  our  faithful  and  mer- 
ciful High  Priest,  before  ever  again  the  word  of  the 
Lord  can  come  to  us. 

It  is  also  quite  possible  that  we  are  left  unused 
for  our  own  deeper  teaching  in  the  ways  of  God. 
Hours,  and  even  years,  of  silence  are  full  of  golden 
opportunities  for  the  servants  of  God.  In  such 
cases,  our  conscience  does  not  condemn  us  or  ac- 
cost us  with  any  sufficient  reason  arising  from  our- 
selves. Our  simple  duty,  then,  is  to  keep  clean, 
and  filled,  and  ready;  standing  on  the  shelf,  meet 
for  the  Master's  use;  sure  that  we  serve  if  we  only 


NABOTH'S  yiNEY/IRD.  161 

stand  and  wait;  and  knowing  that  He  will  accept, 
and  reward,  the  willingness  for  the  deed.  "Nev- 
ertheless, thou  didst  well,  in  that  it  was  in  thine 
heart." 

II.  Elijah  was  not  disobedient. 

Once  before,  when  his  presence  was  urgently  re- 
quired, he  had  arisen  to  flee  for  his  life.  But 
there  was  no  vacillation,  no  cowardice  now.  His 
old  heroic  faith  had  revived  in  him  again.  His 
spirit  had  regained  its  wonted  posture  in  the  pres- 
ence of  Jehovah.  His  nature  had  returned  to  its 
equipoise  in  the  will  of  God.  He  arose,  and  went 
down  to  the  vineyard  of  Naboth,  and  entered  it, 
and  strode  through  its  glades,  or  waited  at  the 
gates,  to  find  the  royal  criminal.  It  was  nothing 
to  him  that  there  rode  behind  Ahab's  chariot  two 
ruthless  captains,  Jehu  and  Bidkar  (2  Kings  ix. 
25).  He  did  not  for  a  moment  consider  that  the 
woman  who  had  threatened  his  life  before  might 
now  take  it,  maddened  as  she  was  with  her  recent 
draught  of  human  blood.  All  fear  was  but  as  the 
cobweb  swinging  across  the  garden  pathway,  and 
swept  before  the  child  rushing  resolutely  forward. 
Who  does  not  rejoice  that  Elijah  had  such  an 
opportunity  of  wiping  out  the  dark  stain  of  disgrace 
which  attached  to  him  from  the  moment  when  he 
had  forsaken,  so  faithlessly,  the  post  of  duty?  His 
time  of  waiting  had  not  been  lost  on  him! 

III.  He  was  acting  as  an  incarnate  conscience. 

Naboth  was  out  of  the  way;  and  Ahab  may  have 
solaced   himself,   as  weak  people  do  still,  with  the 


162        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

idea  that  he  was  not  his  murderer.  How  could  he 
be?  He  had  been  perfectly  quiescent.  He  had 
simply  put  his  face  to  the  wall  and  done  nothing. 
He  did  remember  that  Jezebel  had  asked  him  for 
his  royal  seal,  to  give  ralidity  to  some  letters  which 
she  had  written  in  his  name;  but,  then,  how  was 
he  to  know  what  she  had  written?  Of  course,  if 
she  had  given  instructions  for  Naboth's  death,  it 
was  a  great  pity;  but  it  could  not  now  be  helped; 
and  he  might  as  well  take  possession  of  the  inher- 
itance! With  such  palliatives  he  succeeded  in  still- 
ing the  fragment  of  conscience  which  alone  sur- 
vived in  his  heart.  And  it  was  then  that  he  was 
startled  by  a  voice  which  he  had  not  heard  for 
years,  saying,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Hast 
thou  killed,  and  also  taken  possession?"  He 
killed!  No;  it  was  Jezebel  that  had  killed.  Ah, 
it  was  in  vain  to  shift  the  responsibility  thus! 
"Hast  thou  killed?"  The  prophet,  guided  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  put  the  burden  on  the  right  shoulders. 

Often  a  man,  who  dares  not  do  a  disgraceful  act 
himself,  calls  a  subordinate  to  his  side,  and  says: 
"Such  a  thing  needs  doing;  I  wish  you  would 
see  to  it.  Use  any  of  my  appliances  you  will; 
only  do  not  trouble  me  further  about  it — and  of 
course  you  had  better  not  do  anything  wrong."  In 
God's  sight  that  man  is  held  responsible  for  what- 
ever evil  is  done  by  his  tool  in  the  execution  of  this 
commission.  The  blame  is  laid  on  the  shoulders 
of  the  principal;  and  it  will  be  more  tolerable  for 
the  subordinate  than  for  him,  in  the  Day  of  Judg- 
ment. 

Further    than  that,  but  on  the  line  of   the  same 


NABOTH'S  VINEYARD.  163 

principle,  if  an  employer  of  labor,  by  paying  an 
inadequate  and  unjust  wage,  tempts  his  employes 
to  supplement  their  scanty  pittance  by  dishonest 
or  unholy  methods,  he  is  held  responsible,  in  the 
sight  of  Heaven,  for  the  evil  which  he  might  have 
prevented,  if  he  had  not  been  willfully  and  crimi- 
nally indifferent. 

It  is  sometimes  the  duty  of  a  servant  of  God  fear- 
lessly to  rebuke  sinners  who  think  their  high  posi- 
tion a  license  to  evil-doing  and  a  screen  from  re- 
buke. And  let  all  such  remember  that  acts  of 
high-handed  sin  often  seem  at  first  to  prosper. 
Naboth  meekly  dies;  the  earth  sucks  in  his  blood; 
the  vineyard  passes  into  the  oppressor's  hands;  but 
there  is  One  who  sees  and  will  most  certainly 
avenge  the  cause  of  His  servants.  "Surely  I  have 
seen  yesterday  the  blood  of  Naboth,  and  the  blood 
of  his  sons,  saith"  the  Lord;  and  I  will  requite 
thee  in  this  plat"  (2  Kings  ix.  26).  That  vengeance 
may  tarry,  for  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly;  but 
it  will  come,  as  certainly  as  God  is  God.  And  in 
the  meanwhile,  in  Naboth' s  vineyard  stands  Elijah 
the  prophet;  and  in  the  criminal's  heart  stands 
conscience,  with  its  scourge  of  small  cords,  weighted 
with  jagged  metal.  This  lesson  is  enforced  again 
and  again  by  our  great  dramatist,  who  teaches  men 
who  will  not  read  their  Bibles  that  sin  does  not 
pay  in  the  end;  that,  however  successful  it  may 
seem  at  first,  in  the  end  it  has  to  reckon  with  an 
Elijah  as  conscience,  and  he  always  finds  out  the 
culprit;  and  with  God  as  an  avenger — and  He 
never  misses  His  mark. 

IV.     He  was  hated  for  the  truth's  sake. 


IGi        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  Of  HIS  POIVER. 

'And  Ahab  said  to  Elijah,  Hast  thou  found  me, 
O  mine  enemy?"  Though  the  king  knew  it  not, 
Elijah  was  his  best  friend;  Jezebel  his  direst  foe. 
But  sin  distorts  everything.  It  is  like  the  gray 
dawn  which  so  obscures  the  most  familiar  objects 
that  men  mistake  friends  for  foes,  and  foes  for 
friends:  as  in  the  old  story,  the  frenzied  king  of 
Wales  slew  the  faithful  hound  that  had  saved  his 
child  from  death.  Many  a  time  have  men  repeated 
the  error  of  the  disciples,  who  mistook  Jesus  for 
an  evil  spirit,  and  cried  out  for  fear. 

When  Christian  friends  remonstrate  with  evil- 
doers, and  rebuke  their  sins,  and  warn  them  of  their 
doom,  they  are  scouted,  hated,  and  denounced  as 
enemies.  The  Bible  is  detested,  because  it  so 
clearly  exposes  sin  and  its  consequences.  God 
Himself  is  viewed  with  dislike.  It  cannot  be  oth- 
erwise. The  Egyptians  hated  the  blessed  pillar  of 
cloud.  The  Philistines  sent  away  the  ark  of  the 
covenant.  Wounds  shrink  from  salt.  The  broken 
bone  dreads  the  gentle  touch  of  the  physician. 
The  thief  hates  the  detective's  lantern. 

Let  us  not  be  surprised  if  we  are  hated.  Let 
us  even  be  thankful  when  men  detest  us — not  for 
ourselves,  but  for  the  truths  we  speak.  Let  us 
"rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad."  When  bad  men 
think  thus  of  us,  it  is  an  indication  that  our  influ- 
ence is  at  the  very  antipodes  to  the  bent  and  tenor 
of  their  lives.  "What  evil  thing  have  I  done," 
said  a  philosopher,  "to  make  all  these  bad  men 
speak  well  of  me?"  "Blessed  are  ye,  when  men 
shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you,  and  shall  say 
all  manner    of    evil    against    you,  falsely,  for    My 


i^JBOTM'S  VWEYARD.  165 

sake.  Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad;  for  great  is 
your  reward  in  heaven;  for  so  persecuted  they  the 
prophets  which  were  before  you." 

Oh,  do  not  turn  from  the  surgeon's  knife,  or  the 
light-house  gieam,  or  the  red  warning  light,  or 
the  deep  baying  of  the  hound — as  if  these  were  your 
foes.  It  is  you  that  are  wrong;  not  they.  "Turn 
ye,  turn  ye!    for  why  will  ye  die?" 

V.     He  was  a  true  prophet. 

Each  of  the  woes  which  Elijah  foretold  came 
true.  Ahab  postponed  their  fulfillment,  by  a  par' 
tial  repentance,  for  some  three  years,  but  at  the  end 
of  that  time  he  went  back  to  his  evil  ways,  and 
every  item  was  literally  fulfilled.  He  was  wounded 
by  a  chance  arrow  at  Ramoth-gilead,  "and  the  blood 
ran  out  of  the  wound  into  the  midst  of  the  char- 
iot; "  and  as  they  washed  his  chariot  in  the  fount- 
ain of  Samaria,  the  dogs  licked  his  blood.  Twenty 
years  after,  when  Jehu  sent  out  to  see,  there  was 
nothing  of  Jezebel  left  for  burial;  only  her  skull, 
and  feet,  and  palms,  escaped  the  voracious  dogs 
as  she  lay  exposed  on  that  very  spot.  The  corpse 
of  Joram,  their  son,  was  cast  forth  unburied  on 
that  same  plot,  at  the  command  of  Jehu,  who 
never  forgot  those  memorable  words.  And  there, 
in  after  days,  the  armies  of  Israel  were  put  again 
and  again  to  the  rout,  saturating  the  soil  with 
richer  fluid  than  ever  flowed  from  the  crushed 
grapes  of  the  vine.  God  is  true,  not  only  to  His 
promises,  but  to  His  threats. 

Every  word  spoken  by  Elijah  was  literally  ful- 
filled.    Jehovah    put    His  own  seal  upon  His  serv- 


IGG        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

ant's  words.  The  passing  years  amply  vindicated 
him.  And  as  we  close  this  tragic  episode  in  his 
career,  we  rejoice  to  learn  that  he  was  reinstated 
in  the  favor  of  God,  and  stamped  again  with  the 
Divine    imprimatur  of  trustworthiness  and  truth. 


THE  OLD  COURAGE  AGAIN.  167 


XV. 

XTDe  ®ID  Couraae  Bgain. 

(2  Kings  i.) 

IN  order  to  understand  the  striking  episode  before 
us,  we  must  think  ourselves  out  of  this  dispen- 
sation, the  main  characteristic  of  which  is 
gentle  mercy;  and  we  must  imagine  ourselves  back 
in  the  age  that  ended  at  Calvary.  It  is  very  im- 
portant to  have  a  right  understanding  of  our  times. 
We  must  not  judge  the  past  ages  by  our  own  high 
standards  of  forgiveness  and  love,  learned  in  the  life 
and  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  last  and  supreme 
revelation  of  God.  And  we  must  not  import  into 
our  own  age  methods  of  thought  and  action  which 
were  once  permissible  and  necessary,  because  cog- 
nate to  the  spirit  of  their  times. 

This  lesson  was  once  impressively  taught  by  our 
Lord  to  His  disciples.  Fresh  from  the  Transfig- 
uration, He  was  on  His  way  to  the  cross.  For 
some  reason  He  did  not  take  the  usual  route  along 
the  eastern  bank  of  the  Jordan;  but  chose  the  more 
direct  course  through  Samaria.  Traveling  thus, 
they  had  probably  reached  the  spot,  of  which  we 
are  soon  to  speak,  which  was  once  scorched  and 
blackened  by  the  cinders  of  Ahaziah's  troops.     Be- 


168        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

low  them,  in  the  ravine  of  the  hills,  lay  a  village, 
to  which  they  sent  a  deputation,  asking  for  enter- 
tainment in  the  night  which  was  darkening  over 
them.  But  religious  bigotry  triumphed  over  natural 
feeling;  and  the  request  was  absolutely  refused. 
Oh,  if  they  had  known  that  He  was  about  to  pur- 
chase the  redemption  of  a  world,  and  to  institute 
a  religion  in  which  there  should  be  neither  Samari- 
tan nor  Jew,  but  one  great  brotherhood  in  Him- 
self— they  would  surely  have  bade  Him  welcome, 
and  have  pressed  Him  with  hospitality,  even  though 
the  mighty  transaction  was  to  take  place  within 
the  limits  of  their  hated  rival,  Jerusalem!  "And 
when  His  disciples  James  and  John  saw  this,  they 
said.  Lord,  wilt  not  Thou  that  we  command  fire  to 
come  down  from  heaven  and  consume  them,  even 
as  Elias  did?  But  He  turned  and  rebuked  them, 
and  said.  Ye  know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are 
of. "  It  was  as  if  He  had  said,  "Remember  that  in  Me 
you  have  passed  into  a  new  epoch;  the  affairs  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  will  be  managed  on  alto- 
gether different  lines  from  those  with  which  you 
are  familiar.  I  shall  not  destroy  the  law  and  the 
prophets;  but  I  am  introducing  a  code  which  shall 
fulfill  them  after  a  new  and  diviner  fashion.  The 
new  regime  of  mercy  is  already  begun." 

Let  us  clearly  define  to  ourselves  the  difference 
in  the  dispensations.  This  is  after  the  Spirit  of 
the  Son,  dwelling  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father;  that 
was  after  the  spirit  of  the  servant,  clad  in  ardent 
zeal  for  the  glory  of  God.  This  glows  with  the 
lambent  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  thai  with  the  de- 
vouring fire  of  destruction.    The  key-note  of  tkts  is 


THE  OLD  COURAGE  AGAIN.  169 

salvation;  of  that,  vindication.  The  Old  Testa- 
ment brims  with  striking  teaching  of  the  holiness 
and  righteousness  of  God.  God,  our  Father,  was 
as  merciful  and  long  suffering  then  as  now;  and 
there  were  given  many  sweet  glimpses  of  His  loving 
heart,  which  became  more  numerous  as  the  ages 
brought  nigh  the  incarnation  of  the  love  of  God. 
But  men  cannot  take  in  too  many  thoughts  at  once. 
Line  must  be  on  line,  precept  on  precept.  And  so 
each  preliminary  age  had  some  one  special  truth 
to  teach;  and  that  truth  was  accentuated  and 
brought  into  prominence  by  special  proofs  and  epi- 
sodes. The  age  of  the  Mosaic  Law,  which  shed 
its  empire  over  the  times  of  Elijah,  was  pre-emi- 
nently the  era  in  which  those  awful  and  splendid 
attributes  of  the  Divine  character — God's  holiness, 
justice,  righteousness,  and  severity  against  sin — 
stood  out  in  massive  prominence;  as  some  of  us, 
from  the  ancient  capital  of  Switzerland,  have  seen 
the  long  line  of  Bernese  Alps,  rising  above  the 
plain  in  distant  and  majestic  splendor,  cold  in 
the  gray  dawn,  or  flushed  with  the  light  of  morn 
and  eve.  It  was  only  when  those  lessons  had  been 
completely  learned,  that  mankind  was  able  to  appreci- 
ate the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 

Critics — who  insensibly  have  caught  their  con- 
ceptions of  infinite  love  from  the  Gospels  which  they 
affect  to  despise — find  fault  with  the  Old  Testament 
because  of  its  austere  tones  and  its  severe  enact- 
ments; they  point  out  many  things  inconsistent  with 
the  gentler  spirit  of  our  times.  There  is  nothing 
surprising  here.    It  could  not  have  been  otherwise. 


170        ELIJAH:  AhID  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

in  a  gradual  unfolding  of  the  nature  and  character 
of  God.  The  holy  men  who  lived  in  those  days 
had  never  heard  the  gentle  voice  of  the  Son  of  Man 
speaking  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  They  had, 
however,  very  definite  conceptions  of  the  righteous- 
ness and  holiness  of  God,  and  His  swift  indigna- 
tion on  sin.  This  inspired  many  of  the  Psalms  in 
the  hymnal  of  the  Old  Testament  saints.  This 
stimulated  them  to  do  deeds  from  which  our  gentler 
nature  shrinks.  But  for  this,  Levi  had  never  slain 
his  brethren,  or  Joshua  the  Canaanites;  Samuel  had 
never  hewed  Agag  in  pieces  before  the  Lord;  and 
Elijah  had  never  presumed  to  slay  the  priests 
of  Baal,  or  call  down  fire  from  heaven  to  destroy 
the  captains  and  their  men. 

And,  as  we  read  these  deeds,  we  may  well  sink 
into  quiet  self-questioning.  We  need  not  fall 
into  the  extreme  of  Cromwell  and  his  soldiers,  and 
introduce  the  speech  or  acts  of  those  by-gone  days 
into  our  dealings  with  the  enemies  of  truth  and 
God.  But  we  do  well  to  ask  whether,  granting 
that  we  forego  the  outward  manifestation,  there  is 
the  same  hatred  of  sin;  the  same  zeal  for  the  glory 
of  God;  the  same  inveterate  enthusiasm  for  right- 
eousness— as  there  was  in  those  days  of  force,  and 
decision,  and  unswerving  righteousness. 

These  considerations  will  help  us  to  understand  the 
narrative  that  awaits  us,  and  will  relieve  the  char- 
acter of  Elijah  from  the  charge  of  vindictiveness 
and  passion;  so  that  we  can  consider,  without  com- 
punction, the  rising  up  again  in  his  breast  of  some- 
thing of  his  old  undaunted  courage  and  heroic 
bearing. 


THE  OLD  COURAGE  AGAIN.  171 

The  story  is  as  follows:  Ahaziah,  the  son  of 
Ahab,  had  succeeded  to  his  father's  throne  and  his 
father's  sins.  He  shrank  in  cowardly  fear  from  the 
hardihood  of  the  camp  and  the  dangers  of  the 
field,  leaving  Moab  to  rebel,  without  attempting  its 
re-subjugation,  and  leading  a  self-indulgent  life 
in  his  palace.  But  the  shafts  of  death  can  find  us 
equally  in  apparent  security,  as  amid  threatening 
dangers.  He  was  leaning  on  the  balustrade  that 
fenced  the  fiat  roof  of  the  palace,  when  suddenly 
it  gave  way,  and  he  overbalanced  himself,  and  was 
flung  to  the  ground.  Many  are  the  balustrades  on 
which  we  lean  in  hours  of  peril,  which  fail  us  to 
our  hurt !  When  the  first  panic  was  over,  the  king 
was  seized  with  intense  longings  to  know  how  his 
illness  would  turn;  and,  in  a  strange  freak,  he  sent 
messengers  to  one  of  the  ancient  shrines  of  Canaan, 
dedicated  to  Baalzebub,  the  god  of  flies,  the  patron 
saint  of  medicine,  who  had  some  affinity  with  the 
Baal  of  his  parents.  This  was  a  deliberate  rejec- 
tion of  Jehovah;  a  daring  choice  of  those  ways 
vhich  had  brought  the  wrath  of  God  on  his  father's 
house.  It  could  not  pass  unnoticed;  and  Elijah  was 
sent  to  meet  his  messengers,  as  they  were  speeding 
across  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  with  the  announce- 
ment of  certain  death:  "Thus  saith  Jehovah,  thou 
shaft  not  come  down  from  that  bed  on  which  thou 
art  gone  up;   but  shalt  surely  die." 

The  servants  did  not  know  the  stranger.  They 
may  have  been  imported  Tyrians,  who  had  never 
mingled  in  the  life  of  the  nation,  and  who,  there- 
fore, were  ignorant  of  the  mighty  prophet  of  God. 
Years  also    had    probably    elapsed    since    his    last 


X73        ELlJyiH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

public  appearance.  However,  they  were  so  im- 
pressed by  that  commanding  figure  and  authoritative 
tone,  and  so  awed  by  that  terrible  reply,  that  they 
determined  to  return  at  once  to  the  king.  They 
found  him  lying  on  the  divan,  the  raised  platform, 
covered  with  cushions,  to  which  he  had  been 
carried  from  the  scene  of  his  accident.  And  they 
told  him  the  reason  of  their  speedy  return.  Ahaziah 
must  have  guessed  who  he  was  that  had  dared  to 
cross  their  path,  and  send  him  such  a  message. 
But,  to  make  assurance  surer,  he  asked  them  to 
describe  the  m5'sterious  stranger.  They  replied 
that  he  was  "a  man  of  hair."  Long  and  heavy 
tresses  of  unshorn  hair  hung  heavily  down  upon  his 
shoulders;  his  beard  covered  his  breast,  and 
mingled  with  the  unwrought  skins  that  formed  his 
only  dress.  It  was  enough;  the  king  recognized 
him  at  once,  and  said,  "It  is  Elijah  the  Tishbite. " 
Two  emotions  now  filled  his  heart.  He  wanted, 
in  exasperation,  to  get  Elijah  in  his  power,  to 
vent  on  him  his  wrath;  and  he,  perhaps,  cherished  a 
secret  hope  that  the  lips  which  had  announced  his 
death  might  be  induced  to  revoke  it.  He  there- 
fore resolved  to  capture  him;  and  for  that  purpose 
sent  a  captain  and  a  troop  of  fifty  soldiers;  and 
when  they  were  struck  down  in  death,  another  cap- 
tain and  his  band.  These  men  exceeded  their  duty; 
instead  of  simply  acting  as  the  tools  and  instru- 
ments of  the  royal  will,  they  spoke  with  an  unwar- 
rantable insolence.  "Thou  man  of  God,  the  king 
hath  said.  Come  down!"  Either  they  did  not  hold 
him  to  be  a  prophet,  or  they  gloried  inputting  the 
power  of  their  master  above    that  of    Jehovah.     In 


THE  OLD  COURAGE  AGAIN.  173 

any  case,  the  insult  was  less    against    Elijah    than 
Elijah's  God. 

There  was  no  personal  vindictiveness  in  the  terri- 
ble reply  of  the  old  prophet.  I  do  not  suppose  for 
a  moment  he  considered  the  indignity  done  to  him- 
self. I  believe  he  was  filled  with  consuming  zeal 
for  the  glory  of  God,  which  had  been  trodden  so 
rudely  under  foot,  and  which  he  must  vindicate  in 
the  eyes  of  Israel.  "If  I  be  a  man  of  God,  let  fire 
come  down  from  heaven  and  consume  thee  and  thy 
fifty."  And  in  a  moment  the  fire  leaped  from  its 
scabbard,  and  laid  the  impious  blasphemers  low. 
That  there  was  no  malice  in  Elijah  is  clear  from 
his  willingness  to  go  with  the  third  captain,  who 
spoke  with  reverence  and  humility.  "And  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  said,  Go  down  with  him;  be  not 
afraid  of  him.  And  Elijah  went  down  with  him 
unto  the  king." 

(i)  A  thought  is  suggested  here  of  the  meekness  and 
gentleness  of  Christ. 

How  wonderful  it  is  to  think  that  He  who  by  a 
single  word  could  have  brought  fire  from  heaven  to 
destroy  the  bands  that  came  to  take  Him  in  Geth- 
semane,  left  that  word  unspoken.  He  threw  them 
on  the  ground  for  a  moment,  to  show  them  how 
absolutely  they  were  in  His  power;  but  He  forbore 
to  hurt  one  hair  of  their  heads.  It  was  a  marvel- 
ous spectacle,  which  the  legions  of  harnessed 
angels,  who  in  mid-air  waited  for  a  word  to  bring 
them  to  His  rescue,  must  have  beheld  with  speech- 
less amazement.  The  explanation  is  of  course 
found  in  the  fact  that  He  was   under    the    compul- 


174        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

sion  of  a  higher  law — the  law  of  His  Father's  will; 
the  law  of  self-sacrificing  love;  the  law  of  a  cove- 
nant sealed  before  the  foundation  of  the  world. 

The  only  fire  He  sought  was  the  fire  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  "I  came  to  cast  fire  upon  the  earth;  and 
what  will  I  if  it  is  already  kindled."  He  strove 
not  to  avenge  Himself,  or  vindicate  the  majesty  of 
His  nature.  "He  endured  the  contradiction  of 
sinners  against  Himself."  "He  was  led  as  a  lamb 
to  the  slaughter;  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers 
is  dumb,  so  He  opened  not  His  mouth."  "When 
He  was  reviled,  He  reviled  not  again;  when  He 
suffered.  He  threatened  not;  but  committed  Him- 
self to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously. "  Oh,  match- 
less meekness!  Oh,  wondrous  self-control !  Oh, 
glorious  example  of  the  spirit  of  His  own  teach- 
ing! May  grace  be  given  to  each  of  us.  His  un- 
worthy followers,  to  walk  in  His  steps,  and  to 
emulate  His  spirit;  not  calling  for  the  fire  of  ven- 
geance, but  seeking  the  salvation  of  those  who 
would  do  us  hurt;  dealing  out  not  the  fire  of  heaven, 
but  those  coals  of  fire,  heaped  on  the  head  of  our 
adversaries,  which  shall  melt  them  into  sweetness, 
and  gentleness,  and  love. 

(2)  There  is  also  suggested  here  the  impossibility  of 
God  ever  condoning  defiant  and  blasphemous  sin. 

We  have  fallen  on  soft  and  degenerate  days  when, 
under  false  notions  of  charity  and  liberality,  men 
are  paring  down  their  conceptions  of  the  evil  of 
sin,  and  of  the  holy  wrath  of  God,  which  is  re- 
vealed from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and 
unrighteousness  of  men. 


THE  OLD  COURAGE  AGAIN.  175 

It  is  quite  true  that  God  yearns  over  men  with 
unutterable  pleading  tenderness.  "He  is  not  will- 
ing that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should 
come  to  repentance."  As  there  is  not  a  dying 
sparrow  in  the  recesses  of  the  deepest  woods  over 
whose  last  agonies  the  Almighty  does  not  bend 
with  sympathetic  interest  and  alleviating  tender- 
ness, so  there  is  not  one  waif  of  humanity  excluded 
from  the  warm  zone  of  His  infinite  compassionate- 
ness  and  tender  pity.  In  every  outbreak  of  human 
sin;  in  the  lot  of  every  lost  man  and  woman;  over 
every  street  fight;  at  every  public-house  doorstep; 
amid  the  blasphemous  orgies  of  every  den  of  im- 
purity and  shame — that  love  lingers,  full  of  tears, 
and  longings,  and  entreaties.  "God  so  loved  the 
world." 

And  yet,  side  by  side  with  this  love  to  the 
sinner,  there  is  God's  hatred  to  his  sin.  This  long- 
suffering  lasts  only  so  long  as  there  is  a  possible 
hope  of  the  transgressor  turning  from  his  evil  ways. 
"If  he  turn  not.  He  will  whet  His  sword."  The 
wrath  of  God  against  sinful  men,  who  have  defi- 
nitely elected  their  sin,  slumbereth  only;  it  is  not 
dead.  It  broods  over  them,  held  back  by  His 
desire  to  give  everyone  the  chance  of  salvation. 
They  may  be  thankful,  therefore,  that  their  lot 
has  fallen  in  this  parenthesis  of  mercy.  But 
"because  sentence  against  their  evil  work  is  not  exe- 
cuted speedily,  therefore  their  hearts  are  fully  set 
in  them  to  do  evil."  Yet  the  time  of  forbearance 
will  end  at  last,  as  the  waiting  did  in  the  days  of 
Noah.  Then  fire  will  fall,  of  which  the  material 
flame  that  fell  on  these  insolent  soldiers  is  a  sligh* 


176        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POiVER. 

and  imperfect  symbol.  And  it  shall  be  discovered 
how  bitter  a  thing  it  is  to  encounter  the  wrath  of 
the  Lamb,  "when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed 
from  heaven  with  His  mighty  angels,  in  flaming 
fire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God, 
and  obey  not  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

We  need  more  proclamation  of  this  side  of  the 
Gospel.  There  is  an  alarming  lack  amongst  us  of 
the  sense  of  sin.  Our  vast  populations  are  indiffer- 
ent to  the  message  of  mercy,  because  they  have  not 
been  aroused  with  the  message  of  the  holy  wrath  of 
God  against  sin.  We  need  again  that  one  should 
come,  in  the  power  of  Elijah,  to  do  the  work  of  John 
the  Baptist;  and  to  prepare  men  by  the  throes  of 
conviction  for  the  gentle  ministry  of  Jesus  Christ. 
The  crying  need  of  our  times  is  a  deeper  convic- 
tion of  sin.  And  if  this  shall  be  ever  brought 
about,  it  must  be  by  the  religious  teachers  being 
led  to  study  the  law  as  well  as  the  Gospel,  and  to 
realize  for  themselves,  as  they  can  only  do  through 
the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  exceeding  sin- 
fulness of  sin.  Then  when  Elijah's  fire  of  convic- 
tion has  smitten  human  confidences  low  in  the  dust, 
there  will  be  room  for  an  Elisha  to  bind  up  broken 
hearts  with  the  message  of  mercy. 

(3)  We  are  also  assured  of  Elijah' s  full  restoration 
to  the  exercise  of  a  glorious  faith. 

In  a  former  time,  the  message  of  Jezebel  was 
enough  to  make  him  flee.  But  in  this  case  he 
stood  his  ground,  though  an  armed  band  came  to 
capture  him.  It  was  as  if  he  were  able  to  repeat 
the  familiar  words  without  exaggeration--  "Though 
an  nost  shotiid  encamp  against  me,  my  heart  shall 


THE  OLD  COURAGE  AGAIN.  177 

not  fear;  though  wars  should  rise  against  me,  in 
this  will  I  be  confident."  And  when  he  was  bidden 
to  go  down  with  the  third  captain  to  the  king,  he 
did  not  hesitate;  though  it  was  to  go  through  the 
streets  of  a  crowded  capital,  and  into  the  very 
palace  of  his  foes.  We  are  reminded  of  the 
entrance  of  Luther  into  Worms;  and  of  the  remon- 
strance of  Ambrose  to  the  mightiest  emperor  of 
his  time.  Do  you  ask  the  secret,  and  why  he  was 
able  to  stand  so  calmly  beside  the  couch  of  the 
dying  monarch,  delivering  his  message,  and  retiring 
unharmed?  Ah,  the  answer  is  not  far  to  seek.  He 
was  again  dwelling  in  the  secret  of  the  Most  High, 
and  standing  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah.  His 
faith  was  in  lively  and  victorious  exercise.  He 
was  able  to  gird  himself  with  the  panoply  of  God's 
mail,  invulnerable  to  the  darts  of  men  and  devils. 
And  thus  might  he  have  spoken  with  himself,  as 
he  passed  through  the  threatening  perils  of  that 
crisis:  "By  Thee  have  I  run  through  a  troop;  and 
by  my  God  have  I  leaped  over  a  wall.  As  for  God, 
His  way  is  perfect.  He  is  a  buckler  to  all  those 
that  trust  in  Him." 

Is  it  not  beautiful  to  behold  this  glorious  out- 
burst of  the  faith  of  Cherith,  Zarephath,  and  Car- 
mel?  The  old  man,  nearing  his  reward,  was  as 
vigorous  in  this  as  in  his  first  challenge  to  Ahab.  He 
bore  fruit  in  old  age,  like  one  of  God's  evergreens 
which  are  full  of  sap.  Glory  be  to  Him  who  re- 
stores the  soul  of  His  faltering  saints;  and  brings 
them  up  from  the  grave;  and  sets  them  again  as 
stars  in  His  right  hand;  and  deigns  to  use  them 
once  more  in  His  glorious  service! 


178        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


XVI. 

b  Kings  ii  ) 

IT  was  the  cherished  wish  of  Dr.  Chalmers  that 
there  should  be  granted  to  him  a  Sabbatic  dec- 
ade, after  the  six  decades  of  work,  between  the 
sixtieth  and  seventieth  years  of  life,  so  completing 
its  entire  week.  And  it  was  surely  a  natural  de- 
sire  on  the  part  of  one  who  ranks  amongst  the  fore- 
most workers  of  our  time.  Whether  or  not  this 
had  been  a  specific  desire  of  Elijah,  in  God's 
gracious  providence  it  fell  to  his  lot.  And  after  a 
life  full  of  storm  and  tempest,  it  came  to  pass  that 
at  eventide  there  was  light  and  peace  and  a  paren- 
thesis of  rest;  as  if  the  spirit  of  the  world  which 
he  was  about  to  enter  were  already  shedding  its 
spell  over  his  path. 

There  is  always  something  beautiful  in  the  de- 
clining years  of  one  who  in  earlier  life  has  dared 
nobly  and  wrought  successfully.  Younger  men 
gather  round  the  veteran  to  whom  they  owe  the  in- 
spiration and  model  of  their  lives,  and  call  him 
"father,"  enwreathing  his  gray  locks  with  crowns 
in  which  love  is  entwined  with  reverence.  Seeds 
sown  years  before  and  almost  forgotten,  or  reckoned 
lost^  yield  their   golden   returns.    Memory    rescues 


EVENSONG.  179 


from  the  oblivion  of  the  past  many  priceless  rec- 
ords; whilst  hope,  standing  before  the  thinning 
veil,  tells  of  things  not  perfectly  seen  as  yet;  but 
growing  on  the  gaze  of  the  ripened  spirit.  The 
old  force  still  gleams  in  the  eye;  but  its  rays  are 
tempered  by  that  tenderness  for  human  frailty,  and 
that  deep  self-knowledge,  which  years  alone  can 
yield.  The  crudities  are  ripened;  the  harshnesses 
are  softened;  the  bitternesses  are  mellowed, 
Marah  waters  no  longer  forbid  the  thirsty  lips; 
but  an  Elim  invites  the  weary.  And  from  those 
revered  lips  flow  rivers  of  wise  and  loving  counsel 
to  the  younger  generations  grouped  around.  Such 
a  life-evening  seems  to  have  been  Elijah's.  He 
did  not  reach  a  great  old  age.  In  all  likelihood 
he  showed  no  signs  of  physical  decay.  His  eye 
was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force  abated.  He 
probably  betrayed  his  age  more  in  the  deeds  he 
had  done,  and  in  the  mellowness  of  his  spirit, 
than  in  the  infirmities  of  the  natural  man.  Still 
there  is  little  room  for  doubt  that  the  noon  of  his 
life  was  well  passed  when  he  prepared  himself  for 
his  final  journey.  And  it  must  have  been  very 
grateful  to  him,  as  it  was  most  fruitful  of  blessing 
to  his  country  and  to  the  cause  of  God,  that  there 
was  granted  a  time  of  comparative  calm  at  the 
close  of  his  tempestuous  career. 

For  those  years  of  retirement  were  valuable,  in 
the  highest  degree;  both  in  their  immediate  results 
upon  hundreds  of  young  lives,  and  in  their  far-off 
results  on  the  coming  times. 

I.     The  work  of  the  closing  years  of  Elijah's 

LIFE. 


180        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

His  life  has  been  called  a  "One-man  Ministry;" 
and  there  is  much  in  it  to  warrant  the  description. 
This  one  man  was,  as  Elisha  exclaimed,  "The 
chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen  thereof."  He 
made  his  age.  Towering  above  all  the  men  of  his 
time,  he  cleft  his  way  through  the  crowds  of  meaner 
souls,  and  withstood  the  onslaughts  of  evil;  as 
a  rock  shakes  off  the  waves  that  break  on  it  into 
volumes  of  spray.  By  heroic  exploits,  and  by  deeds 
of  superhuman  might,  he  strove  single-handed 
against  the  tides  of  idolatry  and  sin  that  were 
sweeping  over  the  land.  In  this  he  reminds 
us  perpetually  of  Martin  Luther  and  of  John  Knox; 
all  these  men  were  spiritual  giants  by  reason  of 
their  faith,  which  could  appropriate  the  power  of 
God,  as  the  lightning-conductor  can  rob  the  thun- 
der-cloud  of  its  electric  stores  and  bring  them 
to  the  earth. 

But  though  largely  successful  in  keeping  the 
cause  of  true  religion  from  dying  out,  Elijah  must 
often  have  realized  the  desirability  of  carrying  on 
the  work  more  systematically,  and  of  leavening  the 
country  more  thoroughly  with  the  influence  of  de- 
voted men.  So,  under  Divine  direction,  he  care- 
fully fostered,  if  he  did  not  altogether  inaugurate, 
an  institution  which  was  a  relic  of  former  tim.es, 
and  known  as  the  Schools  of  the  Prophets.  When 
we  use  the  word  "Prophet,"  we  think  of  it  as  in- 
dicating a  man  who  can  foretell  the  future,  and 
thus  much  confusion  is  introduced  into  our  reading 
of  Scripture.  It  includes  this  idea  as  a  fragment 
of  a  larger  meaning.  The  original  word  means 
'boiling  or  bubbling  over;"  and  so  a    prophet  was 


EVENSONG.  181 


one  whose  heart  was  bubbling  over  with  good  mat- 
ter, and  with  those  Divine  communications  which 
struggled  within  him  for  utterance.  He  was  a  spir- 
itual geyser,  the  mouth-piece  and  spokesman  of 
God.  "  God  spake  in  the  Prophets."  "Holy  men 
spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  So 
these  schools  of  the  prophets  were  colleges,  in 
which  a  number  of  young  men  gathered,  their 
hearts  open  to  receive,  and  their  tongues  to  utter, 
the  messages  of  God. 

The  Christian  traveler  among  the  Western  Isles 
of  Scotland  will  hardly  fail  to  visit  one  small, 
bare,  lone  spot  out  amid  the  roll  of  the  Atlantic 
waves.  It  is  thy  shore,  lona,  of  which  I  write!  No 
natural  beauties  arrest  the  eye  or  enchain  the  in- 
terest. There  is  but  one  poor  village,  with  its  two 
boats,  and  a  squalid  population.  Yet  who  can  visit 
that  low  shore,  and  stand  amid  those  crumbling 
ruins, without  intense  emotion? — since  it  was  there 
that  Columba  built  the  first  Christian  church,  to 
shed  its  gentle  rays  over  those  benighted  regions; 
and  to  shelter  the  young  apostles  who  carried  the 
Gospel  throughout  the  pagan  kingdoms  of  Northern 
Britain.  With  similar  emotions  should  we  stand 
amid  the  ruins  of  Bethel,  Gilgal,  and  Jericho;  where, 
in  his  declining  years,  Elijah  gathered  around  him 
the  flower  of  the  seven  thousand,  and  educated  them 
to  receive  and  transmit  something  of  his  own  spirit- 
ual force  and  fire.  These  were  the  missionary  semi- 
naries of  the  age;  the  repositories  of  sacred  truth 
and  learning;  and  beneath  his  influence,  an  Isaiah, 
a  Hosea,  an  Ezekiel,  may  have  first  received  im- 
pulses which  have  since  thrilled  through  the  world. 


182        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

These  young  men  were  formed  into  separate  com- 
panies of  fifty,  in  different  towns.  They  were 
called  "sons; "  the  chief  among  them,  like  the 
abbot  of  a  monastery,  was  called  "father."  Clad  in 
a  simple  dress,  they  had  their  food  in  common, 
and  dwelt  in  huts  slightly  made  of  the  branches  of 
trees.  They  were  well  versed  in  the  sacred  books, 
which  they  probably  transcribed  for  circulation, 
and  read  in  the  hearing  of  the  people.  They  were 
frequently  sent  forth  on  the  errands  of  God's 
Spirit — to  anoint  a  king;  to  upbraid  a  high-handed 
sinner;  or  to  take  the  part  of  oppressed  and  in- 
jured innocence.  It  was,  therefore,  no  small  work 
for  Elijah  to  put  these  schools  on  so  secure  a  basis 
that,  when  he  was  gone,  they  might  perpetuate  his 
influence  and  guard  the  flames  which  he  had  kin- 
dled. 

II.     The  attitude  of    his    spirit  in  anticipating 

HIS  TRANSLATION. 

The  old  man  clung  to  those  young  hearts,  and  felt 
that  his  last  days  could  not  be  better  spent  than  in 
seeing  them  once  more;  though  he  resolved  to  say 
nothing  of  his  approaching  departure,  or  of  the 
conspicuous  honor  that  was  shortly  to  be  conferred 
on  him.  Here  is  the  humility  of  true  greatness!  He 
foresaw  that  he  was  to  enjoy  an  exodus,  to  which, 
in  the  whole  history  of  the  race,  there  had  been  but 
one  parallel.  Yet  he  was  so  reticent  about  it  that, 
if  he  had  had  his  way,  no  mortal  eye  would  have 
beheld  it.  Any  one  less  great  would  have  let  the 
secret  out,  or  have  contrived  to  line  the  heights 
of  the  Jordan  with  expectant  crowds  of  witnesses. 
But,  instead  of  this,  he  kept  the  secret  well  locked 


El^ENSONG.  183 


up  within  him,  and  tried  to  dissuade  Elisha  from 
accompanying  him  a  single  step.  "Tarry  thou 
here."  Perhaps  that  loyal  heart  feared  attracting  to 
himself,  either  then  or  afterward,  honor  due  only  to 
God. 

Alas!  what  a  rebuke  is  here  for  ourselves!  The 
prophet's  evident  desire  to  die  alone  shames  us,  when 
we  remember  how  eager  we  are  to  tell  men,  by  every 
available  medium,  of  what  we  are  doing  for  the 
Lord.  There  is  not  a  talent  with  which  He  in- 
trusts us,  which  we  do  not  parade  as  a  matter  of 
self-laudation.  There  is  not  a  breath  of  success 
that  does  not  mightily  puff  us  up.  What  wonder 
that  our  Father  dare  not  give  us  much  marked  suc- 
cess, or  many  conspicuous  spiritual  endowments,  lest 
we  be  tempted  further  to  our  ruin!  Oh,  when 
shall  we  be  free  of  ourselves?  Would  that  we  could 
live  so  perpetually  facing  the  sun  that  we  might 
never  see  the  dark  shadow  of  self!  "I  could  not  see 
for  the  glory  of  that  light."  The  Holy  Spirit  of 
life  alone  can  set  us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and 
death.  Let  us  urge  Him  to  hasten  the  performance 
of  His  gracious  office,  and  to  give  us  the  sweet 
humility  of  this  man,  who  was  willing  to  efface 
himself,  that  men  might  think  only  of  his  Master 
and  Lord. 

We  are  also  deeply  impressed  by  the  calm  tenor  of 
the  prophet's  course  through  those  closing  days. 
He  knew  that  ere  many  suns  had  set  he  would  be 
standing  in  the  light  of  eternity,  mingling  with  his 
peers,  understanding  all  the  mysteries  that  had  puz- 
zled his  eager  spirit,  and  beholding  the  face  of 
God;   and  we  might  have  expected  him    to  fill  the 


184        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

preceding  hours  with  ecstatic  offices  of  devotion. 
But  instead,  he  spent  the  days,  as  he  had  often 
spent  them  before,  visiting  the  schools  of  the 
prophets,  and  quietly  conversing  with  his  friend, 
till  the  chariot  swept  him  from  his  side.  And,  as 
we  consider  that  spectacle,  we  learn  that  a  good 
man  should  so  live  that  he  need  make  no  extra  prep- 
aration when  death  suddenly  summons  him;  and 
that  our  best  method  of  awaiting  the  great  exchange 
of  worlds  is  to  go  on  doing  the  duties  of  daily  life. 
That  was  a  wise  and  true  reply  of  Wesley  to  the 
inquiry,  "What  would  you  do  if  you  knew  that  you 
would  have  to  die  within  three  days?"  "I  should 
just  do  the  work  which  I  have  already  planned  to 
do:  ministering  in  one  place;  meeting  my  preach- 
ers in  another;  lodging  in  yet  another,  till  the  mo- 
ment came  that  I  was  called  to  yield  my  spirit 
back  to  Him  who  gave  it."  When  our  summons 
comes,  we  should  wish  to  be  found,  not  in  the  place 
which  sentiment  or  a  false  sense  of  religious  pro- 
priety might  suggest;  but  just  doing  the  work 
which  we  have  been  appointed  to  do,  and  in  the 
place  where  duty  would  demand  our  presence  at 
that  very  hour.  The  workshop  and  the  factory  are 
as  near  heaven  as  the  sanctuary;  the  God-given 
task  as  fair  a  height  for  ascension  as  Olivet  or 
Pisgah. 

III.     The  affectionate  love  with   which  Elijah 

WAS    REGARDED. 

It  strongly  showed  itself  inElisha.  The  younger 
man  stood  with  his  revered  leader,  as  for  the  last 
time  he  surveyed  from  the  heights  of  Western  Gil- 


EVENSONG.  185 


gal  the  scene  of  his  former  ministry.  And,  in 
spite  of  many  persuasives  to  the  contrary,  he  went 
with  him  down  the  steep  descent  to  Bethel  and 
Jericho.  He  followed  him,  even  though  they  had 
to  cross  the  Jordan,  which  means  death  and  judg- 
ment. The  sacred  historian  accentuates  the  strength 
of  their  affection,  as  he  says  thrice  over,  i/iey  two 
went  on;  they  two  stood  by  Jordan;  they  two  went 
over.  And  again  the  strength  of  that  love,  which 
the  cold  waters  of  death  could  not  extinguish,  ap- 
proved itself  in  the  repeated  asseveration:  "As  the 
Lord  liveth,  and  as  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  leave 
thee."  It  is  sweet  to  think  that  there  were  in  the 
rugged,  strong  nature  of  Elijah  such  winsome  quali- 
ties as  could  elicit  so  deep  and  tenacious  an  affec- 
tion. We  catch  a  glimpse  of  a  tenderer  side,  for 
which  we  had  hardly  given  him  credit. 

Unusual  emotion  also  welled  up  in  the  hearts  of 
the  young  men,  whose  reverence  shared  the  empire 
with  their  love,  as  they  beheld  their  master  for  the 
last  time.  With  delicate  reticence  they  would  not 
speak  on  a  subject  which  he  did  not  mention;  but, 
drawing  Elisha  aside,  they  asked  him  whether  the 
moment  of  separation  had  not  come.  "Yes,"  said 
he  in  effect,  "but  do  not  speak  of  it.  Let  there  be 
no  parting  scene.  Give  and  receive  the  parting 
farewells  in  expressive  silence."  And  thus  the  old 
man  tore  himself  away  from  them. 

But  in  all  their  intercourse,  how  real  and  near 
the  Lord  seemed!  To  Elijah  it  was  the  Lord  who 
was  sending  him  from  place  to  place:  "the  Lord 
hath  sent  me."  To  Elisha  it  was  the  living  Lord 
to  whom  he  constantly  appealed:    "as  the  Lord  thy 


186        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

God  liveth" — living  on  the  other  side  of  the  great 
change  through  which  his  master  was  to  pass  to 
Him.  To  the  prophets,  it  was  the  Lord  who  was 
taking  their  head  and  leader  to  Himself.  Surely 
those  who  speak  thus  have  reached  a  position  in 
which  they  can  meet  death  without  a  tremor. 
And  what  is  death  but,  as  we  shall  see  in  our  next 
chapter,  a  translation! 

What  is  the  Lord  to  thee,  my  reader?  Is  He  a 
dear  and  familiar  friend,  of  whom  thou  canst  speak 
with  unwavering  confidence?  Then  thou  needest 
not  fear  to  tread  the  verge  of  Jordan.  Otherwise, 
it  becomes  thee  to  get  to  His  precious  blood,  and 
to  wash  thy  garments  white;  that  thou  mayest  have 
right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  mayest  enter  in 
through  the  gates  into  the  city. 


THE  TRANSLATION.  187 


XVII. 

XCbe  Xlranslatfon. 

(2  Kings  ii.) 

WE  have  reached  at  length  one  of  the  sub- 
limest  scenes  of  Old  Testament  story. 
We  should  have  been  glad  to  learn  the 
most  minute  particulars  concerning  it;  but  the  his- 
torian contents  himself  with  the  simplest  state- 
ments. Just  one  or  two  broad,  strong  outlines,  and 
all  is  told  that  we  may  know.  The  veil  of  dis- 
tance, or  the  elevation  of  the  hills,  was  enough  to 
hide  the  receding  figures  of  the  prophets  from  the 
eager  gaze  of  the  group  that  watched  them  from  the 
neighborhood  of  Jericho.  And  the  dazzling  glory 
of  the  celestial  cortege  made  the  only  spectator 
unable  to  scrutinize  it  too  narrowly.  What  wonder, 
then,  if  the  narrative  is  given  in  three  brief  sen- 
tences! "They  still  went  on,  and  talked;  and  it 
came  to  pass  that  there  appeared  a  chariot  of  fire, 
and  horses  of  fire,  and  parted  them  both  asunder; 
and  Elijah  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  heaven." 
But  there  was  one  symptom,  at  least,  of  the 
coming  wonder,  which  was  clearly  witnessed  by 
more  than  the  solitary  companion  who  had  so  faith- 
fully and  tenaciously  kept  by  Elijah's  side.  The 
two  friends    halted  for  a  moment  before  the    broad 


188        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

waters  of  the  Jordan,  which  threatened  to  bar  their 
onward  steps;  and  then  Elijah's  spirit  was  thrilled 
with  the  old  omnipotent  faith;  such  as  had  so 
often  enabled  him  to  overcome  the  working  of 
natural  laws,  by  the  introduction  of  the  laws  of 
that  higher  sphere  which  only  answer  the  summons 
of  a  mighty  faith. 

True,  he  took  off  his  well-worn  mantle,  and 
wrapped  it  together,  and  smote  the  waters.  But 
that,  at  the  best,  was  only  an  outward  and  signifi- 
cant sign.  At  that  same  moment  his  spirit  was 
grappling  the  power  of  the  Infinite  God,  and  was 
bringing  it  to  bear  on  the  hurrying  stream.  He 
knew  that  the  Lord  had  sent  him  thither,  and  that 
his  road  lay  further  into  the  country  on  the  other 
side.  He  saw  no  means  of  pursuing  the  God- 
marked  path.  He  was  sure  that,  since  his  way  led 
through  the  waters,  God  was  prepared  to  make  it 
possible  and  easy  for  him  to  tread  it.  And,  there- 
fore, he  dared  to  strike  the  waters,  believing  that 
Divine  power  was  working  in  every  stroke;  and  the 
waters  parted  hither  and  thither,  leaving  a  clear 
passage,  through  which  they  went. 

Child  of  God,  your  path  seems  sometimes  to  lie 
right  through  a  flowing  Jordan.  There  is  no  alterna- 
tive but  that  you  should  go  straight  on.  Forward 
moves  the  cloud.  Forward  points  the  sign-post  of 
circumstance.  Forward  bids  the  inward  prompting. 
But  how,  when  Jordan  rolls  in  front?  Now  is  the 
time  for  faith!  Where  God's  finger  points,  there 
God's  hand  will  make  the  way.  Believe  that  it 
shall  be  so!  Advance  in  unfaltering  faith!  Step 
down  the    shelving    bank,  and    the  wat^ers    cA.  d445- 


THE  TRANSLATION.  189 

culty  shall  part  before  you;  and  you  shall  find  a 
pathway  where  to  human  vision  there  was  none. 
So  through  parting  Jordans  you  shall  march  to  your 
reward. 

I.  The  fitness  of  this  translation. 

There  was  fitness  in  the  place.  Not  the  smiling 
plain  of  Esdraelon,  with  its  corn-fields  and  vine- 
yards and  dotted  hamlets,  speaking  of  the  toils  and 
homes  of  men.  Not  the  desert  of  Sinai,  so  closely 
allied  with  the  memory  of  his  fatal  fall.  Not  the 
schools  of  Gilgal,  Bethel,  or  Jericho.  None  of  these 
would  furnish  a  fit  setting  for  his  farewell  to  his 
earthly  ministry.  But,  away  from  all  these;  amid 
the  scenery  familiar  to  his  early  life;  in  view  of 
localities  forever  associated  with  the  most  mem- 
orable events  of  his  nation's  history;  surrounded 
by  the  lonely  grandeur  of  some  rocky  gorge — there 
God  chose  to  send  His  chariot  to  fetch  him  home. 

There  was  fitness  in  the  method.  He  had  himself 
been  as  the  whirlwind, that  falls  suddenly  on  the  un- 
suspecting world,  and  sweeps  all  before  it  in  its 
impetuous  course,  leaving  devastation  and  ruin  in 
its  track.  It  was  meet  that  a  whirlwind-man 
should  sweep  to  heaven  in  the  very  element  of  his 
life.  His  character  was  well  depicted  in  the  panorama 
of  the  desert,  with  its  shivering  wind  and  its  glow- 
ing fire.  And  nothing  could  be  more  appropriate 
than  that  the  stormy  energy  of  his  career  should  be 
set  forth  in  the  rush  of  the  whirlwind;  and  the  in- 
tensity of  his  spirit  by  the  fire  that  flashed  in  the 
harnessed  seraphim.  What  a  contrast  to  the  gen- 
tle upward  motion  of  the  ascending  Savior! 


190        ELIJ/iH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

There  was  fitness  i?i  the  exclamaiion  with  which 
Elisha  bade  him  farewell.  He  cried,  "My  father, 
my  father!  the  chariot  of  Israel  and  the  horsemen 
thereof! "  Doubtless,  amid  that  sudden  flash  of 
glory  he  hardly  wist  what  he  said.  Yet  he  closely 
hit  the  truth.  That  man,  whom  he  had  come  to 
love  as  a  father,  had  indeed  been  as  an  armed 
chariot  of  defense  to  Israel.  By  his  faith,  and 
prayers,  and  deeds,  he  had  often  warded  off  evil 
and  danger  with  more  certain  success  than  could 
have  been  effected  by  an  armed  troop.  Alas  that 
such  men  are  rare !  But  in  our  time  we  have 
known  them;  and  when  they  have  been  suddenly 
swept  from  our  side,  we  have  felt  as  if  the  Church 
had  been  deprived  of  one  main  source  of  security 
and  help. 

II.     The  reasons  for  this  translation. 

(i)  One  of  the  chief  reasons  was,  no  doubt,  as  a 
witness  to  his  times.  The  men  of  his  day  were  plunged 
in  sensuality,  and  had  little  thought  of  the  here- 
after. At  the  very  best,  the  Jews  had  but  vague 
notions  of  the  other  life;  and  those  notions  were 
probably  still  further  darkened  by  the  obscuring 
influences  of  idolatry  and  sin.  But  here  a  con- 
vincing evidence  was  given  that  there  was  a  spirit- 
ual world  into  which  the  righteous  entered;  and 
that,  when  the  body  sank  in  death,  the  spirit  did 
not  share  its  fate,  but  entered  into  a  state  of  being 
in  which  its  noblest  instincts  found  their  befitting 
environment  and  home — fire  to  fire;  spirit  to  spirit; 
the  man  of  God  to  God. 

A  similar  testimony  was  given  to  the  men  of  his 


THE  TRAhlSLATION.  191 

time  by  the  rapture  of  Enoch  before  the  Flood;  and 
by  the  ascension  of  our  Lord  from  the  brow  of 
Olivet.  Where  did  these  three  wondrous  journeys 
end,  unless  there  was  a  bourne  which  was  their 
befitting  terminus  and  goal?  And  as  the  tidings 
spread,  thrilling  all  listeners  with  mysterious  awe, 
and  as  they  heard  that  no  sign  of  the  rapt  ones 
could  be  discovered  by  the  most  diligent  search, 
would  there  not  break  upon  them  the  conviction 
that  they  likewise  would  have  to  take  that  won- 
drous journey  into  the  unseen,  soaring  beyond  all 
worlds,   or  sinking  into  the  bottomless  pit? 

(2)  Another  reason  was  evidently  the  desire  on 
the  part  of  God  to  give  a  striking  sanction  to  His  serv- 
ant's words.  How  easy  was  it  for  the  men  of 
that  time  to  evade  the  force  of  Elijah's  ministry, 
by  asserting  that  he  was  an  enthusiast,  an  alarmist, 
a  fire  brand!  It  would  be  convenient  for  them  to 
think  that  his  denunciations  and  threats  began  and 
finished  with  himself — the  workings  of  a  distem- 
pered brain.  And  if  he  had  passed  away  in  decrepit 
old  age,  they  would  have  been  still  further  encour- 
aged in  their  impious  conjecturings.  How  would 
they  have  known  that  he  spake  the  truth  of  God? 
But  the  mouths  of  blasphemers  and  gainsayers  were 
stopped,  when  God  put  such  a  conspicuous  seal 
upon  His  servant's  ministry.  It  was  as  if  Jehovah 
had  stepped  out  of  the  unseen  to  vindicate  him, 
and  to  affirm  that  he  was  His  chosen  ambassador, 
and  that  the  word  in  his  lips  was  true.  The  trans- 
lation was  to  the  life-work  of  Elijah  what  the  resur- 
rection was  to  that  of  Jesus — it  was  God's 
irrefragable  testimony  to  the  world. 


193        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

As  a  servant,  Elijah  had  failed  in  one  fatal 
moment;  and  by  that  moment's  failure  had  missed 
a  splendid  chance:  but  for  all  that,  the  general 
tenor  of  his  ministry  was  such  as  God  could  approve; 
and  concerning  it  He  could  bear  His  sanctioning 
testimony  to  men.  It  may  sometimes  happen  that 
our  Father  will  greatly  honor  His  servants  in  the 
eyes  of  men,  whilst  He  will  be  very  strict  in  His 
private  dealings  with  them  in  reference  to  certain 
failures  in  duty  of  which  only  He  and  they  are 
aware. 

HI.  The  lessons  of  this  translation  for  our- 
selves. 

(i)  Lei  us  take  care  not  to  dictate  to  God. 
This  was  the  man  who  lay  down  upon  the  ground, 
and  asked  to  die.  If  he  had  had  his  will,  he  would 
have  had  the  desert  sands  for  his  shroud,  and  the 
desert  winds  for  his  requiem.  How  good  it  was  of 
God  to  refuse  him  the  answer  he  craved!  Was  it 
not  better  to  pass  away,  missed  and  beloved,  in  the 
chariot  which  his  Father  had  sent  for  him,  and 
with  which  Ahab's,  though  he  had  run  before  it, 
could  bear  no  comparison? 

This  is  no  doubt  one  reason  why  our  prayers  go 
unanswered.  We  know  not  what  we  ask.  We  ask 
for  things  which  we  would  not  dream  of,  if  we  only 
knew  the  infinite  superiority  of  the  lot  which  our 
Father  has  planned  out  for  us.  We  shall  have  to 
bless  Him  forever,  more  for  the  prayers  He  refused 
than  for  those  He  granted.  When  next  your  request 
is  denied,  reflect  that  it  may  be  because  God  is 
preparing  something  for  you   as  much  better  than 


THE  TRANSLATION.  193 

your  request  as  the  translation  of  Elijah  was  better 
than  his  own  petition  for  himself. 

(2)  Let  us  learn  what  death  is.  It  is  simply 
a  translation:  not  a  state,  but  an  act;  not  a  con- 
dition, but  a  passage.  We  pass  through  a  doorway; 
we  cross  a  bridge  of  smiles;  we  flash  from  the 
dark  into  the  light.  There  is  no  interval  of  uncon- 
sciousness, no  parenthesis  of  suspended  animation. 
"Absent  from  the  body,"  we  are  instantly  "present 
with  the  Lord."  Oh,  do  not  think  of  death  as  the 
jailer  of  a  prison-house  in  which  he  is  collecting 
the  saints  against  some  final  order  for  their  liberty. 
It  is  nothing  of  the  sort.  It  is  but  the  grim  dis- 
guise of  one  of  the  angels  of  God's  presence- 
chamber,  specially  commissioned  to  bring  faithful 
souls  into  the  audience-room  of  the  King.  As  by 
the  single  act  of  birth  we  entered  into  this  lower 
life,  so  by  the  single  act — which  men  call  death, 
but  which  angels  call  birth  (for  Christ  is  the 
First  born  from  among  the  dead) — we  pass  into  the 
real  life.  The  fact  that  Elijah  appeared  on  the 
Transfiguration  Mount  in  holy  converse  with  Moses 
and  with  Christ  proves  that  the  blessed  dead  are 
really  the  living  ones,  sentient,  active,  intensely 
in  earnest;  and  they  entered  that  life  in  a  single 
moment,  the  moment  of  death.  Would  it  not  be 
truer  to  speak  of  them  not  as  the  dead,  but  as  those 
who  have  died,  and  are  alive  forever?  It  must  be  re- 
membered, however,  that  while  it  is  far  better  for 
the  emancipated  soul  and  spirit  to  be  with  Christ, 
present  with  the  Lord,  the  blessedness  will  not  be 
complete  until  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  which 
will  then  have  put  on  incorruption  and  immortality. 


194        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

(3)  Lef  us  see  here  a  type  of  the  rapture  of  the 
saints.  We  do  not  know  what  change  passed  over 
the  mortal  body  of  the  ascending  prophet.  This  is 
all  we  know,  that  "mortality  was  swallowed  up  of 
life."  There  was  wrought  on  him  a  change  like 
that  which  took  place  in  the  grave  of  Joseph,  when 
the  crucified  body  of  Jesus  became  transformed  into 
the  risen  body — which  was  largely  independent  of 
the  laws  of  nature,  but  which  was  so  like  the  body 
which  He  had  worn  for  thirty-three  years  that  it 
was  readily  and  universally  recognized.  Corruption 
put  on  incorruption.  The  mortal  put  on  immortal- 
ity. The  body  of  humiliation  was  exchanged  for 
the  body  of  glory. 

Such  a  change,  unless  Christ  tarry  longer  than 
the  term  of  our  natural  life,  shall  be  the  portion  of 
many  who  read  these  lines — "caught  up  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air."  It  becomes  us  then  to  walk  as 
Elijah  did,  with  alert  and  watchful  spirit;  talking 
only  on  themes  that  would  not  be  inconsistent  with 
an  instantaneous  flash  into  the  presence  of  God. 
Thus,  whenever  our  Father's  carriage  comes  for 
us,  and  wherever  it  overtakes  us — whether  in  the 
storm  at  sea,  or  in  the  railway  accident;  in  the 
tumult  of  a  catastrophe,  or  in  the  gradual  decay  of 
prolonged  illness — may  we  be  prepared  to  step  in, 
and  "sweep  through  the  gates,  washed  in  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb!  " 

Was  it  not  some  reference  to  this  august  event 
that  was  in  the  mind  of  the  great  Welsh  preacher, 
Christmas  Evans,  who,  when  dying,  majestically 
waved  his  hand  to  the  bystanders,  and  looked  upward 
with  a  smile,  and    uttered    these  last  words,  "Drive 


THE  TRANSLATION.  195 

on/"  "The  chariots  of  God  are  twenty  thousand." 
May  we  not  suppose  that  one  awaits  each  departing 
spirit,  standing  ready  at  hand  to  convey  it  into 
the  presence  of  the  King,  to  whom  be  glory  for 
ever  and  ever! 


196        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


XVIII. 

H  Double  iPottfon  ot  BUjab's  Spittt 

(2  Kings  ii.) 

THERE  is  one  incident  forever  associated  with 
the  translation  of  Elijah,  which,  though  it 
largely  concerns  his  friend  and  successor,  is  so 
characteristic  of  the  great  prophet  himself  that  we 
must  not  pass  it  over  without  some  notice.  It  is 
deeply  significant.  We  are  told  that,  after  they  had 
passed  the  Jordan,  the  two  friends  went  on  and  talked. 
What  sublime  themes  must  have  engaged  them, 
standing  as  they  did  on  the  very  confines  of  heaven, 
and  in  the  vestibule  of  eternity!  The  apostasy  of 
Israel  and  its  approaching  doom;  the  ministry  just 
closing,  with  its  solemn  warnings;  the  outlook  to- 
ward the  work  upon  which  Elisha  was  preparing 
to  enter — these  and  cognate  subjects  must  have 
occupied  them. 

It  was  in  the  course  of  this  conversation  that 
"Elijah  said  unto  Elisha,  Ask  what  I  shall  do  for 
thee,  before  I  be  taken  away  from  thee."  It  was  a 
very  wide  door  flung  open  by  the  elder  to  his 
younger  friend.  And  at  first  we  are  surprised  to 
think  that  Elijah  could  offer  to  supply  anything 
for  which  Elisha  asked.  Is  not  this  rather  the 
prerogative    of    God?     Surely    God    alone    can    do 


A  DOUBLE  PORTION  OF  ELIJAH'S  SPIRIT.         197 

whatsoever  we  desire  when  we  pray;  and  even  He 
is  limited  by  the  fulfillment,  on  our  part,  of  certain 
essential  conditions.  But  we  must  remember  that 
Elijah  was  intimately  familiar  with  the  mind  and 
heart  of  his  brother.  It  was  not  in  vain  that  they 
had  spent  those  years  of  ministry  together.  It  was 
with  the  object  of  testing  the  spirit  of  his  friend 
that  the  departing  seer  had  urged  him  again  and 
again  to  leave  him.  And  it  was  only  when  Elisha 
had  stood  the  test  with  such  unwavering  resolution 
that  Elijah  was  able  to  give  him  this  car/e  blanche. 
He  knew  that  that  faithful  soul  would  ask  nothing 
for  which  he  could  not  exercise  his  mighty  faith,  or 
which  God  could  not  and  would  not  bestow.  He 
was  only  "a  man  of  like  passions  with  ourselves," 
cast  in  the  ordinary  mold  of  human  nature;  but, 
by  close  and  intimate  communion  with  God,  he 
had  reached  such  a  pitch  of  holy  boldness  that  the 
very  keys  of  spiritual  blessing  seemed  put  into  his 
hand,  so  that  he  might  dispense  to  kindred  spirits 
the  priceless  gifts  of  God.  Why  should  not  we 
strive  after  and  attain  "like  precious  faith"? 

I.     Elisha' s  large  request. 

Elijah's  confidence  was  not  misplaced.  Elisha* s 
reply  wrought  along  those  lines  which  he  had  antici- 
pated. He  sought  neither  wealth,  nor  position, 
nor  worldly  power;  nor  a  share  in  those  advantages 
on  which  he  had  turned  his  back  forever  when  he 
said  farewell  to  home,  and  friends,  and  worldly 
prospects.  "And  Elisha  said,  I  pray  thee,  let  a 
double  portion  of  thy  spirit  be  upon  me." 

What  did  Elisha  mean  by  this  request?    I  do  not 


198        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS   POiVER. 

interpret  his  request  to  mean  that  he  should  have 
twice  as  much  of  the  faith  and  spiritual  force  as 
characterized  his  master.  What  he  intended  was 
to  ask  that  he  might  be  considered  as  Elijah's 
eldest  son,  the  heir  to  his  spirit,  the  successor  to 
his  work.  There  is  a  passage  in  the  law  of  Moses 
which  clearly  proves  that  "the  double  portion"  was 
the  right  of  the  first-born  and  heir  (Deut.  xxi.  17). 
This  the  prophet  sought,  and  this  he  certainly 
obtained. 

It  was  a  noble  request.  He  was  evidentlj'  called 
to  succeed  to  Elijah's  work;  but  he  felt  that  he 
dare  not  undertake  its  responsibilities,  or  face  its 
inevitable  perils,  unless  he  were  specially  equipped 
with  spiritual  power.  It  is  not  often  that  we  can 
count  an  Elijah  among  our  friends;  but  when  we 
may,  we  shall  do  well  to  invoke  his  intercessions 
on  our  behalf,  that  we  may  be  'endowed  with  a 
similar  spirit.  And  there  is  at  least  One  to  whom 
we  can  all  go  with  this  sublime  request,  sure  that 
He  is  more  eager  to  give  us  His  Holy  Spirit  than 
the  tenderest  earthly  father  to  satisfy  his  children's 
hunger  with  bread.  Oh  for  this  spiritual  hunger, 
insatiable  for  the  best  gifts!  Men  of  the  world 
hunger  for  name,  and  rank,  and  wealth;  and  they 
get  what  they  seek  because  they  will  take  no  Nay. 
Blessed  should  we  be  if  we  were  as  eager  after 
the  Spirit  of  God;  and  if,  instead  of  giving  up 
opportunities  of  usefulness  because  we  did  not  feel 
qualified  to  fill  them,  we  rather  sought  and  received 
a  new  baptism  of  power,  a  fresh  endowment  of 
the  Holy  Spirit. 

Who  need  shrink  from  attempting  Elijah's  work, 


A  DOUBLE  PORTION  OF  ELIJAH'S  SPIRIT.         199 

if  first  he  have  received  Elijah's  spirit?  Instead 
of  relinquishing  a  work  for  which  you  do  not  feel 
naturally  qualified,  wait  in  the  fervency  of  entreaty, 
and  in  the  expectancy  of  faith,  until  you  are  en- 
dued with  power  from  on  high.  There  is  no  work 
to  which  God  calls  you  for  which  He  is  not  pre- 
pared to  qualify  you.  Let  it  never  be  forgotten 
that  Elijah  himself  did  what  he  did,  not  by  inher- 
ent qualities,  but  because  through  faith  he  had 
received  such  copious  bestowments  of  the  Spirit  of 
God;  and  what  he  did  we  may  do  again — the  weak- 
est and  humblest  may  do — if  only  we  are  prepared 
to  wait,  and  watch,  and  pray,  until  our  Pentecost 
breaks  upon  us,  with  or  without  its  sound  of  rush- 
ing wind,  and  its  tongues  of  flaming  fire. 

II.  Let  us  clearly  understand  the  two  con- 
ditions IMPOSED  on  ElISHA. 

(i)    Tenacity  of  purpose. 

Elijah  tested  it  severely  at  every  step  of  that  fare- 
well journey.  Repeatedly  he  said,  "Tarry  here." 
But  he  might  as  well  have  tried  to  uproot  a  cedar 
of  Lebanon,  or  to  stir  Carmel  from  its  base. 
Neither  Gilgal,  with  its  panoramic  scenery;  nor 
Bethel,  with  its  memories  of  the  angel-haunted 
dream;  nor  Jericho,  the  border-town — were  able  to 
attract  or  retain  him.  And  though  their  course 
lay  through  the  Jordan-flood  of  death,  it  sufficed 
not  to  deter  that  eager  spirit.  Elisha  knew  what 
he  sought;  he  read  the  meaning  of  the  discipline 
to  which  he  was  being  exposed;  and  his  heroic  reso- 
lution grew  with  the  ordeal,    as    the    waters   of    a 


200        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POJVER. 

stream  grow  against  an  arresting  dam,  until  they 
overleap  it  and  rush  merrily  on  their  way.  It 
was  thus  that  the  Syro-Phoenician  woman  pre- 
vailed with  Christ.  It  was  thus  that  the  Apostles 
waited  for  the  promise  of  the  Father,  undaunted 
by  ten  days'  delay. 

Before  giving  us  the  Holy  Ghost,  our  Father 
will  certainly  try  us,  to  see  if  we  can  live  without 
Him.  If  we  can,  we  may.  And  it  is  only  when 
we  give  signs  of  a  resolution  which  will  take  no 
denial,  but  detains  the  Angel  with  its  imperative 
importunity,  and  vows  its  unalterable  determination 
to  be  blessed — it  is  only  then  that  God,  who  had 
never  been  really  reluctant,  and  had  only  been  test- 
ing us,  turns  to  us  with  a  smile,  and  says,  "O 
child,  great  is  thy  importunity;  be  it  unto  thee 
even  as  thou  wilt."  "The  kingdom  of  heaven  suf- 
fereth  violence;   and  the  violent  take  it    by  force." 

How  often  we  persuade  ourselves  that  we  can 
acquire  the  greatest  spiritual  blessings  without  pay- 
ing the  equivalent  price!  Thus  James  and  John 
thought  that  they  could  obtain  a  seat  each  on  the 
throne  for  the  asking.  They  did  not  realize  that 
the  cross  preceded  the  crown,  and  that  the  bitter 
cup  of  Gethsemane  lay  between  them  and  the  coro- 
nation anthem.  We  must  pass  through  the  Jordan; 
daily  must  we  take  up  the  cross  and  follow  Jesus; 
we  must  be  conformed  to  Him  in  the  likeness  of 
His  death,  and  in  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings; 
the  old  nature  must  be  crucified;  the  Divine  will 
must  be  lovingly  accepted,  though  it  cost  tears  of 
blood  and  bitter  sorrow.  Then,  having  evinced 
the  steadfastness  of  our  purpose,  we  shall    approve 


A  DOUBLE  PORTION  OF  ELIJAH'S  SPIRIT.         201 

ourselves  worthy    to    be    the    recipients    of    God's 
supreme  gift. 

(2)    Spiritual  insight, 

"If  thou  see  me  when  I  am  taken  from  thee,  it 
shall  be  so  unto  thee;  but  if  not,  it  shall  not  be 
so."  There  was  nothing  arbitrary  in  this  demand. 
And  it  would  have  been  hardly  possible  to  have 
devised  a  more  complete  criterion  of  the  spiritual 
condition  of  this  eager  aspirant.  To  see  the 
transactions  of  the  spirit-world  requires  a  spirit  of 
no  ordinary  purity,  and  of  no  ordinary  faith.  No 
mere  mortal  eye  could  have  beheld  that  fiery  cor- 
tege. To  senses  dulled  with  passion,  or  blinded 
by  materialism,  the  space  occupied  by  the  flaming 
seraphim  would  have  seemed  devoid  of  any  special 
interest,  and  bare  as  the  rest  of  the  surrounding 
scenery.  Perhaps  there  was  not  another  individual 
in  all  Israel  with  heart  pure  enough,  or  spiritual 
nature  keen  enough,  to  have  been  sensible  of  that 
glorious  visitation.  Had  we  been  there,  we  should 
probably  have  been  unconscious  of  anything,  save 
the  sudden  disappearance  of  the  prophet.  But 
since  Elisha  saw  it  all,  it  is  clear  that  his  passions 
were  under  control;  his  temper  refined;  his  spirit- 
ual life  in  healthy  exercise;  and  his  whole  being  of 
such  an  order  as  to  admit  him  into  the  foremost 
rank  of  the  spiritual  world,  without  risk.  Such 
must  we  be,  by  the  grace  of  God,  ere  we  can 
aspire  to  possess  or  wield  similar  powers.  Our 
reception  of  the  Spirit  will  be  in  exact  proportion 
to  the  subjection  of  the  flesh,  and  the  consequent 
vigor  of  our  inner  life. 


203        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

III.     The  answer. 

"He  took  up  also  the  mantle  of  Elijah  that  fell 
from  him."  Ah,  that  falling  mantle!  How  much 
it  meant!  It  is  said  that  the  bestowal  of  the  man- 
tle has  always  been  considered  by  Eastern  people 
an  indispensable  part  of  consecration  to  a  sacred 
office.  When,  therefore,  Elijah's  mantle  fluttered 
to  Elisha's  feet,  he  knew  at  once  that  Heaven 
itself  had  ratified  his  request.  He  knew  that  he  had 
Elijah's  post.  He  believed  that  he  was  anointed 
with  Elijah's  power.  I  do  not  for  a  moment 
think  that  there  was  any  emotional  or  sensible 
indication  of  the  mighty  change  which  had  been 
wrought  upon  him.  His  spirit  was  still.  There 
was  no  tremor  in  his  pulse;  no  thrill  of  consciously 
added  power  in  his  frame.  The  torrent  of  spiritual 
force  had  entered  him  as  quietly  as  light  enters 
the  world,  and  as  the  forces  of  spring  thrill 
through  the  woods. 

If,  in  patience  and  faith,  we  claim  of  our  Father 
the  filling  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  must  never  ask 
ourselves  if  we  feel  full.  We  must  believe  that  God 
has  kept  His  word  with  us,  and  that  we  are  filled, 
though  no  celestial  sign  accompanies  the  entering 
glory  of  that  power  "which  works  effectually  in  them 
that  believe."  But  others  will  become  aware  of 
the  presence  of  something  that  we  never  had  before, 
as  they  see  us  stand  by  some  tameless  Jordan,  and 
behold  the  turbulent  waters  part  hither  and  thither 
before  our  stroke. 

Directly  we  receive  some  great  spiritual  endow- 
ment, we  may  expect  to  have  it  tested.     It    was  so 


A  DOUBLE  PORTION  OF  ELIJAH'S  SPIRIT.         203 

with  Elisha.  "He  went  back,  and  stood  by  the 
bank  of  Jordan."  Did  he  hesitate?  If  so,  it  was 
but  for  a  moment.  He  had  seen  Elijah  go;  and  he 
believed,  though  probably  he  did  not  feel,  that 
therefore  the  double  portion  of  his  spirit  had  fallen 
to  his  lot.  He,  therefore,  acted  upon  the  assurance 
of  his  faith.  "He  took  the  mantle  of  Elijah  that 
fell  from  him,  and  smote  the  waters,  and  said, 
Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah?  and  when  he 
also  had  smitten  the  waters,  they  parted  hither  and 
thither:  and  Elisha  went  over.  And  when  the 
sons  of  the  prophets  which  were  to  view  at  Jericho 
saw  him,  they  said,  The  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest 
on  Elisha." 

As  soon  as  Jesus  had  been  anointed  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  He  was  led  into  the  wilderness  to  be 
tempted.  The  title  "Son  of  God,"  uttered  over 
the  waters  of  baptism,  was  made  the  subject  of 
Satan's  wildest  attacks:  "If  Thou  be  the  Son  of 
God,  ..."  So  must  it  be  ever.  But  difficulty,  temp- 
tation, and  trial,  avail  to  bring  into  greater  promi- 
nence, both  for  ourselves  and  others,  the  reality  and 
glory  of  the  blessing  we  have  received.  The  parted 
Jordan  proves  the  presence  of  the  Spirit. 

"Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah?"  That  cry 
has  often  been  raised  when  the  Church,  bereft  of 
its  leaders,  has  stood  face  to  face  with  some  great 
and  apparently  insuperable  difficulty.  And  some- 
times there  has  been  more  of  despair  than  hope  in 
the  cry.  But  though  Elijah  goes,  Elijah's  God 
remains.  He  takes  His  weary  workers  home;  but 
He  is  careful  to  supply  their  place,  and  to  anoint 
others  to  carry  on  their  work.     It  is  His  work,  not 


204        ELIJAH:  /IND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POWER. 

ours.  On  Him  is  the  responsibility,  as  to  Him 
shall  be  the  glory.  If  you  ask  where  He  is,  an 
answer  close  behind  you  whispers,  "I  am  here." 
Catch  up  the  mantle  of  the  departed.  Emulate 
their  lives.  Seek  their  spirit.  Smite  the  bitter 
waves  of  difficulty  in  unwavering  faith:  and  you 
shall  find  that  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  will  do  as 
much  for  you  as  for  the  saints  who  have  been  swept 
to  their  reward,  and  are  now  mingling  with  the 
great  cloud  of  witnesses  that  are  watching  your 
conflicts,  your  triumphs,  and  your  joys. 


THE  TRAhlSFIGURATiON.  im 


XIX. 

TTbe  XTsansfiouratton. 

(Luke  ix.) 

WORDSWORTH  and  all  his  followers  were 
students  in  the  school  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Never  breathed  a  more  enthusiastic  lover 
of  Nature  than  He.  Lilies  could  not  grow  at  His 
feet,  or  birds  wing  their  homeward  flight  over  His 
head,  without  attracting  His  swift  attention.  His 
daily  talk  was  of  wandering  sheep  and  whitening 
corn;  of  living  wells  and  summer  rain;  of  the 
changing  hues  of  morn  and  eve.  We  cannot  won- 
der, therefore,  at  His  snatching  brief  opportunities 
for  communion  with  the  scenes  of  natural  beauty; 
or  that  He  often  climbed  the  everlasting  hills — 
the  natural  altars  of  the  world — obviously  intended 
not  for  habitation,  but  for  worship. 

Such  an  occasion  is  the  one  referred  to  here. 
Wearied  with  His  toils,  and  requiring  time  for 
private  intercourse  with  His  friends,  to  prepare 
them  for  the  approaching  tragedy,  of  which  they 
were  strangely  unconscious.  He  traveled  northward 
with  His  disciples,  avoiding  the  larger  towns,  until 
they  reached  one  of  the  smaller  villages  nestling 
on  the  lower  slopes  of  Mount  Hermon,  which  towers 
into  the    clouds,  and  forms    a  majestic   barrier   on 


206        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POWER. 

the  northern  frontier  of  Palestine.  There  they 
seem  to  have  rested  for  about  a  week.  Think  how 
they  may  have  spent  those  days!  Watching  the 
snows  on  the  upper  peaks  flush  in  the  dawn,  and 
glow  in  the  sunset,  as  if  aflame.  Reveling  in  the 
fertility,  which  centuries  before  had  been  com- 
pared to  the  fragrant  oil  anointing  the  high  priest. 
Visiting  the  ancient  forest  of  cedars,  from  which 
Hiram's  servants  had  hewn  the  beams  of  Solomon's 
temple;  or  the  mountain  springs,  where  the  famil- 
iar Jordan  had  its  source.  A  week  would  quickly 
pass  amid  engagements  such  as  these,  blended,  as 
they  must  have  been,  with  intercourse  on  the  loftiest 
themes. 

After  eight  days,  Jesus  took  with  Him  His  three 
mighties — Peter,  James,  and  John;  and  as  the 
evening  shadows  darkened  over  the  world,  He  led 
them  up  to  some  neighboring  summit,  removed 
from  the  sight  and  sound  of  men.  He  went  to 
brace  Himself  for  the  coming  conflict  by  prayer; 
and  perhaps  for  the  earlier  part  of  the  night  the 
favored  three  bore  Him  fellowship.  But  they  soon 
grew  weary,  and  presently,  as  afterward  in  Geth- 
semane,  were  wrapt  in  heavy  sleep — though  dimly 
conscious  of  their  Master's  presence,  as  He  poured 
out  His  soul  with  strong  cryings  and  tears.  We 
know  not  how  many  hours  elapsed  ere  they  were 
suddenly  startled  from  their  slumbers — not  by  the 
gentle  touch  of  morning  light,  but  beneath  the 
stroke  of  the  unbearable  glory  which  streamed  from 
their  Master's  person.  The  fashion  of  His  counte- 
nance was  altered;  the  deep  lines  of  care  that  had 
seamed    it    were    obliterated;   the  look  of  pensive 


THE  TR/tNSFIGURATION.  307 

•badness  was  gone.  "His  face  did  shine  as  the  sun;" 
not  lit  up  as  that  of  Moses  was,  by  reflection  from 
without,  but  illumined  from  within,  as  if  the  hid- 
den glory  of  the  Shekinah,  too  long  concealed,  were 
bursting  through  the  frail  veil  of  flesh,  kindling  it 
to  radiance  as  it  passed.  "His  raiment" — the  com- 
mon homespun  of  the  country — "became  white  and 
dazzling;"  more  resplendent  than  the  glistening 
snow  above,  and  as  though  angels  had  woven  it  of 
light.  But  perhaps  the  greatest  marvel  of  all  was 
the  presence  of  the  august  pair;  "which  were 
Moses  and  Elijah,  who  appeared  in  glory,  and 
spake  of  His  decease  [His  exodus — out  of  death 
into  new  and  resurrection  life]  which  He  should 
accomplish  at  Jerusalem." 

I.     Consider   the    probable   reasons  why  these 

TWO,  AND  ESPECIALLY  ELIJAH,  WERE  CHOSEN  ON  THIS 
SUBLIME   OCCASION. 

The  first  reason  might  have  been  that  they  should 
afUst  the  digfiiiy  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  was  ap- 
proaching the  darkest  hour  of  His  career,  when 
His  sun  should  set  in  an  ocean  of  ignominy  and 
shame;  and  it  seemed  as  if  heaven  itself  were  astir, 
by  embassy,  or  delegation,  or  deputation,  to  assure 
His  friends,  and  to  convince  the  world,  of  His  in- 
trinsic worth.  Should  seraphs  be  commissioned? 
Nay;  for  men,  unable  to  realize  their  rank,  would 
be  simply  dazzled.  Better  far  to  send  back  some 
of  the  human  family,  who  had  passed  into  the  un- 
seen, but  whose  illustrious  deeds  still  lived  in  the 
memory  of  mankind,  giving  weight  to  their  wit- 
ness.    Yet  who  should  be  selected? 


208        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POiVER. 

There  might  have  been  a  fitness  in  sending  the 
first  Adam  to  attest  the  supreme  dignity  of  the 
second;  or  Abraham,  the  father  of  them  that  be- 
lieve. But  their  claims  were  waived  in  favor  of 
these  two,  who  might  have  more  weight  with  the 
men  of  that  time,  as  representing  the  two  great 
departments  of  Jewish  thought  and  Scripture: 
Moses,  the  founder  of  the  Law;  Elijah,  the  greatest 
of  the  Prophets. 

It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  prominence 
given  to  Elijah  in  the  Jewish  mind.  At  the  circum- 
cision of  a  child,  a  seat  was  always  placed  for  him; 
and  at  the  annual  celebration  of  the  Passover  in 
each  home,  wine  was  placed  for  him  to  drink — 
the  cup  for  which,  among  richer  Jews,  was  made  of 
gold,  set  with  jewels.  And  it  was  universally 
believed  that  he  was  to  come  again  to  announce 
the  advent  of  the  Messiah.  It  would,  [therefore, 
have  great  weight  with  these  disciples,  and  through 
them  with  after  ages,  to  feel  that  he  had  stood  beside 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  offering  Him  homage  and  help. 
And  it  was  partly  the  memory  of  the  allegiance 
rendered  by  Elijah  to  his  Master  that  led  Peter  to 
say,  in  after  years,  that  he  had  been  an  eye-witness 
of  His  majesty. 

Astronomers  tell  us  that  our  sun,  with  its  attend- 
ant worlds,  is  only  a  satellite  of  some  other  mightier 
star;  and  that  these  wondrous  orbs  are  circling 
round  some  far-distant  center,  known  as  Alcyone. 
If  this  be  so,  and  if  our  mighty  sun  is  only  a  satel- 
lite, what  must  not  be  the  glories  of  the  central 
body,  whose  majestic  progress  it  attends!  And  if 
Elijah  were  so  illustrious,  what    must    not    be  the 


THE  TRANSFIGURATION.  200 

glories  of  that  wondrous  Being,  to  whom  he  was 
only  a  servant  amongst  many! 

Another  reason  7nay  be  found  in  the  peculiar  circum- 
stances under  which  they  left  the  world.  Moses 
died,  not  by  disease  or  by  natural  decay,  but  be- 
neath the  kiss  of  God.  His  spirit  passed  pain- 
lessly and  mysteriously  to  glory,  whilst  God  buried 
his  body.  Elijah  did  not  die.  Disease  and  old 
age  had  nothing  to  do  in  taking  down  the  fabric  of 
his  being.  He  did  not  sleep;  but  he  was  "changed 
in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye."  We  may 
not  penetrate  into  the  secrets  of  that  mysterious  bor- 
der-land, which  these  two  passed  and  repassed,  in 
their  holy  ministry  to  the  Savior's  spirit;  but  we 
feel  that  there  was  something  in  the  method  of 
their  departure  from  our  world,  which  made  that 
passage  easier. 

Yet  another  reason  is  suggested  in  the  evident  ful- 
fillment of  their  mifiistry.  They  had  been  originally 
sent  to  prepare  for  Christ,  "We  have  found 
Him,"  said  Philip,  "of  whom  Moses  in  the  law 
and  the  prophets  did  write."  "Moses,"  said  Jesus, 
"wrote  of  Me."  "The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the 
spirit  of  prophecy."  But  the  Jews  were  in  danger 
of  forgetting  this,  and  of  attaching  more  importance 
to  the  messengers  than  was  justifiable.  They  clung 
to  the  stars  even  when  the  sun  was  steadily  climb- 
ing up  the  sky.  It  was  the  death-warrant  of  Stephen, 
that  he  seemed  to  them  to  slight  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, by  hinting  that  it  would  be  abrogated  and 
superseded  by  the  New.  Peter  himself  was  quite 
prepared  to  treat  Moses  and  Elijah  on  an  equality 
with  his    Master,  by    building   three    tabernacles — 


210        ELIJAH:  AhlD  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

one  for  each.  This  could  not  be;  and  therefore 
Moses  and  Elijah  were  swept  away  by  a  cloud,  and 
"Jesus  only"  was  left;  and  the  voice  of  God  was 
heard  insisting  that  Peter  and  the  two  other  dis- 
ciples should  listen  to  Him  alone.  It  was  as  though 
God  had  said — uttering  words  that  lifted  a  dispen- 
sation from  its  hinges:  "As  ye  have  listened  to  the 
Law  and  the  Prophets,  so  now  listen  to  My  Son. 
Do  not  put  yourselves  again  under  the  law,  or  rest 
content  with  the  prophets,  however  lofty  their  ideals 
and  burning  their  words;  but  give  to  Him  all  the 
veneration  and  attention  that  you  have  been  hitherto 
wont  to  reserve  for  them.  Pass  from  the  anticipa- 
tion to  the  reality;  from  the  type  to  the  perfect 
fulfillment.  They  are  taken;  but  all  that  made 
them  helpful  is  left." 

We  too  must  sometimes  climb  transfiguration 
mounts,  and  see  our  beloved  caught  away  from  our 
gaze,  and  then  return  toward  an  unkindly  and 
wrangling  world;  but  let  us  remember  that  our 
hearts  are  bereft  of  their  supports,  to  drive  us  to 
find  all,  and  more  than  all,  in  Jesus.  He  is  enough 
for  any  heart,  however  lonely  and  desolate.  He 
suffices  for  heaven,  and  surely  He  can  for  earth. 
All  that  is  good  in  anyone  was  first  in  Him,  and 
remains  in  Him  forever  without  alloy.  And  as  one 
after  another  is  caught  away,  we  are  still  rich  with 
unsearchable  wealth;  we  are  still  able  to  cope  with 
all  the  devils  that  await  us  in  the  vales  beneath, 
though  we  have  "no  man  save  Jesus  only." 

Such  may  have  been  some  of  the  reasons  that  led 
to  the  appearance  of  these  two  men  on  the  Trans- 
figuration   Mount:    standing    there    for  a    moment; 


THE  TRANSFIGURATION.  211 

and  then  receding  into  the  land  of  glory  from  which 
they  came;  attesting  His  dignity,  and  then  with- 
drawing— that  the  interest  excited  by  their  pres- 
ence might  not  be  focused  on  themselves,  but 
turned  at  once  and  more  intensely  on  the  person  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

II.     Consider  the  theme  on  which  they  spoke. 

They  spoke  not  of  the  latest  tidings  of  heaven; 
nor  of  their  own  wondrous  past;  nor  of  the  distant 
future:  but  of  the  decease  (lit.  the  exodus)  which 
He  was  to  accomplish  so  soon  at  Jerusalem. 

Great  men  love  great  thoughts.  And  where  could 
there  have  been  found  greater  subjects  than  this 
wondrous  death,  and  His  glorious  resurrection? — 
which  were  to  affect  all  worlds,  and  to  involve  the 
Son  of  God  in  shame  and  sorrow  so  unfathomable. 
Herein  Moses  and  Elijah  precede  the  greatest  think- 
ers of  mankind— Galileo,  Kepler,  Newton,  Milton, 
Faraday,  who  have  sought  in  the  Gospel  of  the  Cross 
the   sea-room  needed    by  their  leviathan  intellects. 

Heaven  was  full  of  this  theme.  Angels,  forsak- 
ing all  other  interests,  were  absorbed  in  wonder, 
awe,  and  love,  as  they  watched  each  step  toward 
the  destined  goal.  May  we  not  imagine  all  the 
life  of  heaven  arrested  and  pausing  before  that 
stupendous  tragedy?  It  was  natural,  then,  that 
these  latest  comers  from  those  shores  should  talk 
of  the  one  all -engrossing  topic  in  the  land  which 
they  had  left. 

Their  own  salvation  depended  on  the  issue  of 
that  wondrous  death.  If  ever  there  were  men  who 
might  have  stood  a  chance    of    being    accepted   on 


313        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

their  own  merits,  surely  these  were  such.  But  they 
would  have  been  most  particular  in  disclaiming  any 
such  distinction.  Looking  back  on  their  careers, 
they  were  deeply  sensible  of  their  imperfections 
and  their  sins.  Moses  remembered  the  petulance 
of  Massah.  Elijah  recalled  the  faithlessness  and 
fretfulness  of  the  desert.  And,  in  the  light  of 
eternity,  they  saw  evil  in  many  things  which  had 
seemed  passably  good  in  the  twilight  of  earth. 
They  had  no  merits  of  their  own.  Their  only  hope 
of  salvation  lay  where  ours  does — in  His  overcom- 
ing the  sharpness  of  death,  and  opening  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  to  all  believers. 

And  surely  our  Lord  would  lead  them  to  dwell 
on  a  theme  so  constantly  present  to  His  mind. 
He  had  always  anticipated  the  hour  of  His  death. 
It  was  for  this  that  He  had  been  born.  But  now 
it  seemed  very  near.  He  stood  within  the  shadow 
of  the  cross.  And  it  must  have  been  grateful  to 
Him  to  talk  with  these  lofty  spirits  of  the  various 
aspects  of  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him.  Moses 
might  remind  Him  that  if,  as  God's  Lamb,  He 
must  die,  yet  as  God's  Lamb  He  would  redeem 
countless  myriads.  Elijah  might  dwell  on  the 
glory  that  would  accrue  to  the  Father.  These 
thoughts  were  familiar  enough  to  the  mind  of  our 
blessed  Master;  yet  they  must  have  gladdened  and 
strengthened  Him,  as  they  fell  from  other  lips. 
The  more  so,  when  they  conversed  together  on  the 
certain  splendor  of  the  resurrection  morning  that 
should  follow  His  decease. 

Let  us  learn  how  men  view  the  work  of  Christ  in  the 
light  of  eternity. 


THE  TRANSFIGUR/ITION.  S13 

They  do  not  dwell  primarily  on  the  mystery  of 
the  holy  incarnation;  or  on  the  philanthropy  of 
His  life;  or  on  the  insight  of  His  teachings.  All 
these  things  are  dwarfed  by  comparison  with  His 
death.  That  is  His  masterpiece — the  Mont  Blanc 
of  the  glorious  range  of  His  achievements  in  our 
mortal  flesh.  Here  the  attributes  of  God  find  their 
most  complete  and  most  harmonious  exemplifica- 
tion. Here  the  problems  of  human  sin  and  salva- 
tion are  met  and  solved.  Here  the  travail  of  Cre- 
ation meets  with  its  answer  and  key.  Here  are 
sown  the  seeds  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth,  in 
which  shall  dwell  righteousness  and  peace.  Here 
is  the  point  of  unity  between  all  ages,  all  dispen- 
sations, all  beings,  all  worlds.  Here  blend  men 
and  angels;  departed  spirits  and  the  denizens  of 
other  spheres;  Peter,  James,  and  John,  with  Moses 
and  Elijah:  and  all  with  the  great  God  Himself 
whose  voice  is  heard  falling  in  benediction  from 
the  opened  heaven. 

The  nearer  we  get  to  the  Cross,  and  the  more  we 
meditate  on  the  decease  accomplished  at  Jerusalem, 
the  closer  we  shall  come  into  the  center  of  things; 
the  deeper  will  be  our  harmony  with  ourselves, 
and  all  other  noble  spirits,  and  God  Himself.  Climb 
that  mountain  often,  in  holy  reverie;  and  remem- 
ber that  in  all  the  universe  there  is  no  spirit  more 
deeply  interested  in  the  mysteries  and  meaning  of 
our  Savior's  death  than  that  noble  prophet  who  now 
seeks  no  higher  honor  than  to  stand  forever  as  near 
to  the  beloved  Master  as  he  did  for  one  brief 
space  on  the  Transfiguration  Mourvt. 


214        ELIJ/tH:  /fhlD  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 


XX. 

''jfttleO  witb  tbe  t>oli?  Obost" 

(Luke  i.  15,  17.) 

WHAT  may  not  one  man  do  in  one  brief  life, 
if  he  is  willing  to  be  simply  a  living 
conduit-pipe  through  which  the  power  of 
God  may  descend  to  men?  There  is  no  limit  to  the 
possible  usefulness  of  such  a  life.  There,  on  the 
one  hand,  is  the  oceanic  fullness  of  God;  here,  on 
the  other,  are  the  awful  need  and  desolation  of 
man,  guilty,  weak,  bankrupt,  diseased:  all  that  is 
required  is  a  channel  of  communication  between 
the  two;  and  when  that  channel  is  made  and 
opened,  and  kept  free  from  the  silting  sand,  there 
will  ensue  one  great,  plenteous,  and  equable  flow 
of  power  carrying  the  fullness  of  God  to  the  weary 
emptiness  of  man.  Why  shouldst  thou  not  be 
such  a  channel,  my  reader? 

There  is  a  splendid  illustration  of  this  in  the 
life  of  Elijah,  of  which  we  are  now  taking  our 
farewell.  For  more  than  a  hundred  years  the  tide 
had  been  running  strongly  against  the  truth  of  God. 
Idolatry  had  passed  from  the  worship  of  Jeroboam's 
calves  to  that  of  Baal  and  Astarte,  with  the  licen- 
tious orgies  and  hideous  rites  which  gathered  around 
the  ancient  worship   of  the  forces  of  Nature.     The 


^^FlLLfU  IVITH  THE  HOLY  GHOST."  215 

system  was  maintained  by  an  immense  organiza- 
tion of  wily  priests,  who  had  settled  down  upon 
the  national  life  like  a  fungous  growth,  striking  its 
roots  into  the  heart.  The  court  was  in  its  favor. 
The  throne  was  occupied  by  an  effeminate  man,  the 
weak  tool  of  his  unscrupulous  and  beautiful  wife — 
the  Lady  Macbeth  of  Jewish  history.  Jehovah's 
altars  were  thrown  down;  His  prophets  silenced 
and  in  hiding;  His  faithful  worshipers  a  mere 
handful,  whose  existence  was  so  secret  as  to  be 
known  only  to  Him.  The  lamp  of  truth  had  been 
overturned;  and  there  was  only  a  tiny  spark  of 
light  feebly  burning,  to  show  where  once  the  light 
of  true  religion  brightly  shone. 

Into  such  a  state  of  things  Elijah  came,  unarmed, 
from  his  native  trans-Jordanic  hills;  a  highlander, 
unkempt,  unpolished;  unaccustomed  to  the  man- 
ners of  a  court,  or  the  learning  of  the  schools. 
Withal,  a  man  weak  where  we  are  weak;  tempted 
where  we  are  tempted;  of  like  passions  with  our- 
selves. And  at  once  the  tide  began  to  turn.  The 
progress  of  idolatry  received  a  decisive  check.  The 
existence  and  power  of  Jehovah  were  vindicated. 
New  courage  was  infused  into  the  timid  remnant 
of  true-hearted  disciples.  Altars  were  rebuilt; 
colleges  were  opened  for  the  training  of  the  godly 
youth;  a  successor  was  appointed;  and  an  impetus 
given  to  the  cause  of  truth,  which  was  felt  for  many 
generations. 

Perhaps  the  greatest  tribute  to  Elijah's  power 
with  his  contemporaries  is  in  the  fact  that  his 
name  and  work  stood  out  in  bold  and  clear  outline 
for  nine  huadred  years  after  his   death;   surpassing 


21G        ELIJ/IH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

the  whole  school  of  Jewish  prophets,  as  the  Jungfrau 
rears  her  snow-clad  peaks  above  the  giants  of  her 
chain;  and  furnishing  a  model  with  which  to  set 
forth  the  power  and  courage  of  the  forerunner  of  our 
Lord.  The  Holy  Spirit,  speaking  in  Malachi,  the 
last  of  the  prophets,  could  find  no  better  symbol  of 
the  pioneer  of  the  Christ  than  to  compare  him  with 
the  famous  prophet  who,  centuries  before,  had 
swept  to  heaven  in  the  chariot  of  flame:  "Behold, 
I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet  before  the  great 
and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  come."  The  bright 
angel  Gabriel,  standing,  four  hundred  years  after, 
amid  the  ascending  incense  of  the  holy  place, 
found  no  easier  method  of  conveying  to  the  aged 
priest  the  type  of  the  wondrous  son  that  was  to 
gladden  his  old  age,  than  to  liken  him  to  Elijah: 
"He  shall  go  before  His  face  in  the  spirit  and 
power  of  Elijah." 

Whenever  a  notable  religious  movement  was  stir- 
ring through  the  land,  the  people  were  accustomed 
to  think  that  the  prophet  of  Carmel  had  again  re- 
turned to  earth;  and  thus  the  deputation  asked  John 
the  Baptist,  saying,  "Art  thou  Elijah?"  and  when 
a  mightier  than  John  had  set  all  men  musing  in 
their  hearts,  as  the  disciples  told  our  Lord,  many 
of  the  common  people  believed  that  the  long  ex- 
pectation of  centuries  was  realized,  and  that  Elijah 
was  risen  again.  It  was  commonly  believed  that  no 
other  of  woman  born  was  great  enough  to  precede  the 
Messiah,  and  that  he  would  anticipate  His  advent 
by  an  interval  of  three  days,  during  which  he 
should  proclaim,  in  a  voice  heard  over  all  the 
earth,  peace,  happiness,  and  salvation. 


"FILLED  IVITH  THE  HOLY  GHOST."  2Vi 

All  these  things  are  evidences  of  the  towering 
greatness  of  Elijah's  character  and  work.  With 
all  the  failures  and  mistakes  to  which  such  natures 
are  prone,  he  was  a  great  man,  and  did  a  noble 
work.  And  the  secret  of  all  was  to  be  found  not 
in  any  intrinsic  qualities,  but  in  the  fact  that  he 
was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Let  us  pause 
here,  and  ask  ourselves  if  we  can  give  our  thought- 
ful assent  to  this  statement.  If  we  cannot,  we  must 
count  much  of  our  time  and  labor  in  these  chap- 
ters wasted;  for  our  one  aim  has  been  to  establish 
this  point.  But  if  we  can,  then,  as  we  close  these 
chapters  of  stirring  sacred  biography,  we  may 
resolve  that  we  will  never  rest  until  we  too  are 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  will  not  rest  sat- 
isfied in  being  imitators  merely;  but  we  will  seek 
to  be  filled  with  the  same  Spirit,  that  He  may 
Work  again  through  us  the  marvels  of    the  past. 

If  I  may  venture  so  to  put  it,  God  is  in  extremity 
for  men  who,  thoughtless  for  themselves,  will  desire 
only  to  be  receivers  and  channels  of  His  power. 
He  will  take  young  men  and  women,  old  men  and 
children,  servants  and  handmaidens,  in  the  waning 
days  of  this  era,  and  will  fill  them  with  the  self- 
same Spirit  whose  power  was  once  reserved  for  a 
favored  few.  Besides  all  this,  the  positive  com- 
mand has  never  been  repealed  which  bids  us  be 
"filled  with  the  Spirit"  (Eph.  v.  i8).  And  we  cannot 
reiterate  too  often  that  those  who  feel  themselves 
bound  to  strict  temperance  in  respect  to  wine  by 
the  former  clause,  should  feel  the  latter  one  to  be 
equally  imperative.  Moreover,  what  God  com- 
mands, He  is  prepared  to  do  all  that  is  needful  on 


218        ELIJAH:  /tND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POUTER. 

His  side  to  effect.  Then  when,  like  John  the  Bap- 
tist, we  are  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  like  John 
the  Baptist  we  shall  go  "before  His  face  in  the 
spirit  and  power  of  Elijah;  to  turn  the  hearts  of 
the  fathers  to  the  children,  and  the  disobedient  to 
walk  in  the  wisdom  of  the  just;  to  make  ready  for 
the  Lord  a  people  prepared  for  Him." 

I.     This   filling   of  the   Holy  Ghost   was    the 

CHARACTERISTIC  OF   THE    ChURCH. 

On  the  day  of  Pentecost  they  were  a//  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost — women  as  well  as  men;  ob- 
scure disciples  as  well  as  illustrious  apostles;  and 
to  guard  against  the  leakage  which  is,  alas!  too 
common  to  us  all,  they  were  filled  and  filled  again; 
those  who  are  described  as  filled  in  Acts  ii.  4,  are 
spoken  of  as  filled  again  in  Acts  iv.  31.  New  con- 
verts, like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  were  bidden  to  expect 
this  blessed  filling.  Deacons  called  to  do  the 
secular  business  of  the  Church  must  be  men  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  he  was  a  good  man, 
full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  was  a  greater  recommenda- 
tion of  Barnabas  than  that  he  had  parted  with  his 
lands.  And  even  churches,  like  those  in  the  high- 
lands of  Galatia,  were  no  sooner  brought  into  exist- 
ence by  the  labors  of  the  Apostle  Paul  than  they  were 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  point  of  fact,  the 
Christians  of  the  first  age  were  taught  to  expect 
this  blessed  filling.  And  the  early  Church  was  a 
collection  of  Holy-Ghost-filled  people.  Probably 
it  was  the  exception,  rather  than  the  rule,  nof  to 
be  filled  with  the  blessed  presence  of  God  and  the 
Holy  Ghost. 


'^FILLED  IVnn  THE  HOLY  GHOST."  219 

There  is  no  formal  conclusion  to  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  because  God  meant  the  story  to  be  pro- 
longed through  the  ages,  after  the  same  manner. 
Let  us  not  think  that  God  resembles  some  who  put 
a  portico  of  marble  to  a  building  which  they  finish 
with  common  brick.  He  did  not  give  at  Pentecost 
an  experience  which  He  either  would  not  or  could 
not  maintain.  Pentecost  was  simply  meant  to  be 
the  specimen  and  type  of  all  the  days  of  all  the 
years  of  the  present  age.  And  if  our  times  seem 
to  have  fallen  far  below  this  blessed  level,  it  is 
not  because  of  any  failure  on  God's  part,  but 
because  the  Church  has  neglected  this  holy  doctrine. 
Christians  have  seemed  to  suppose  that  the  filling 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  the  prerogative  of  a  few; 
the  majority  of  them  have  never  thought  of  it  as 
within  their  reach;  and  the  Church  has  been  simply 
paralyzed  for  want  of  the  only  power  that  can 
avail  her  in  her  conflict  against  the  world — a  power 
which  was  distinctly  pledged  to  her  by  her  ascend- 
ing Lord.  We  never  can  regain  or  hold  our  true 
position  until  all  believers  see  that  the  filling  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  equally  for  them  as  for  the  first 
Christians;  and  that  the  barriers  are  broken  down 
which  once  limited  it  to  a  few.  We  do  not  seek 
the  sound  of  rushing  wind,  or  the  coronet  of  flame, 
or  the  special  gifts  which  were  conferred  for  a 
special  purpose:  these  are  the  minor  accessories  of 
this  filling,  with  which  we  can  dispense.  But  what 
we  cannot  dispense  with,  and  must  not  dream  of 
missing,  is,  the  distinct  filling  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
No  doubt  He  is  in  us  if  we  are  Christians;  but  we 
must  never  be  content    until  He  is  in  us  in  power 


220        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

— not  a  breath,  but  a  mighty  wind;  not  a  rill,  but 
a  torrent;  not  an  influence,  but  a  mighty,  energizing 
Person. 

II.     We  must  comply  with  certain  conditions,  if 

WE  WOULD  BE  FILLED. 

(i)  We  must  desire  to  be  filled  for  the  glory  of  God. 
A  lady  told  me  lately  that  she  had  long 
been  seeking  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  but  in  vain. 
She  could  not  understand  the  cause  of  her  failure, 
till  she  came  to  see  that  she  was  seeking  Him  for 
the  joy  that  He  would  bring,  rather  than  for  the 
glory  that  would  accrue  to  God.  Ah,  we  must  seek 
for  the  Spirit's  power,  not  for  our  happiness  or 
comfort,  nor  yet  for  the  good  that  we  may  be  the 
better  able  to  effect;  but  that  "Christ  may  be  mag- 
nified in  our  bodies,  whether  by  life  or  death." 

(2)  We  must  bring  cleansed  vessels.  God  will 
not  deposit  His  most  precious  gift  in  unclean  re- 
ceptacles. And  we  need  cleansing  in  the  precious 
blood,  ere  we  can  presume  to  expect  that  God  will 
give  us  what  we  seek.  We  cannot  expect  to  be 
free  from  indwelling  sin;  but  we  may  at  least  be 
washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ  from  all  conscious 
filthiness  and  stain. 

(3)  We  ?nusi  be  prepared  to  let  the  Holy  Spirit  do 
as  He  will  with  and  through  us.  There  must 
be  no  reserve,  no  holding  back,  no  contrariety  of 
purpose.  The  whole  nature  must  be  unbarred,  and 
every  part  yielded.  There  is  a  law  in  physics  that 
forces  work  in  the  direction  of  least  resistance. 
Let  us  present  no  resistance  whatever  to  the  work- 


"FILLED  IVITH  THE  HOLY  GHOST."  221 

ing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  who  resists  least  will 
possess  most.  God  gives  the  Holy  Ghost  to  them 
that  obey  Him  (Acts  v.   32). 

(4)  We  must  appropriate  Him  by  birth.  There 
is  no  need  for  us  to  wait  ten  days,  because  the 
Holy  Spirit  has  been  given  to  the  church.  This  is 
included  in  the  spiritual  blessings  with  which  our 
Father  hath  blessed  us  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  need 
not  struggle,  and  agonize,  and  convulse  ourselves 
in  the  vehemence  of  entreaty;  we  have  simply  to 
take  what  God  has  allotted  to  us,  and  is  waiting  to 
impart.  Open  your  mouth  wide,  and  He  will  fill 
it.  Dig  the  ditches,  and  though  you  can  discern 
no  evidences  of  the  entering  floods,  they  shall  be 
filled.  Ask  as  a  little  child  asks  for  its  breakfast 
already  on  the  table.  So  soon  as  you  ask,  you  do 
receive,  though  you  experience  no  rush  of  tran- 
scendent joy;  go  your  way  reckoning  yourself  filled, 
whether  you  feel  so  or  not;  and  as  the  days  go  on, 
you  will  find  that  you  have  been  filled,  and  are 
being  filled,  with  new  power,  and  joy,  and  wealth. 
You  will  not  long  be  left  to  the  reckoning  of  faith; 
for  you  will  be  made  aware  of  a  virtue  going  out 
from  you,  which  shall  heal  and  save. 

HI.     Time    would  fail   to    enumerate    all    the 

BLESSINGS   that  WILL  ENSUE. 

The  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  heart,  in 
all  His  glorious  fullness,  cannot  be  hid.  It  will 
surely  betray  itself,  as  the  presence  of  the  ever- 
burning fire  in  the  hothouse  is  indicated  by  the 
luxuriance  of  flower  and  fruit   within    its    tropical 


222        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POfVER. 

, ■ — — — ^ 

inclosure,  whilst  frost  and  snow  reign  in  the  world 
without.  There  will  be  no  effort,  no  striving  after 
great  effect,  no  ostentatious  show.  He  distills  as 
the  dew  upon  the  tender  herb,  and  descends  as  the 
summer  showers  upon  the  mown  grass.  This  con- 
ception of  His  work  is  clearly  taught  by  the  word 
selected  by  the  Apostle  to  describe  the  results  of 
His  indwelling.  He  speaks  of  them  as  the  "frm'^ 
of  the  Spirit,"  in  contrast  to  the  "works  of  the 
flesh; "  and  what  deep  suggestions  of  quiet  growth, 
and  exquisite  beauty,  and  spontaneousness  of  life 
lie  in  that  significant  phrase! 

In  passing,  we  can  do  no  more  than  enumerate 
some  of  the  results  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

T/iere  is  victory  over  sin.  The  law  of  the  Spirit 
of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  makes  us  free  from  the  law 
of  sin  and  death;  just  as  the  law  of  the  elasticity 
of  the  air  makes  the  bird  free  from  the  predomi- 
nating power  of  the  down-pull  of  gravitation. 

There  is  the  indwelling  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Christ 
dwells  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost;  so  that  there 
are  not  two  indwellings,  but  one.  And  this  not  fig- 
urative or  metaphorical,  but  a  literal  and  glorious 
reality. 

There  is  the  quickening  of  the  mortal  body.  An 
expression  which  certainly  points  to  the  Resurrec- 
tion; but  which  may  mean  some  special  strength 
and  health  imparted  to  our  present  mortal  bodies 
— the  tabernacles  and  temples  of  His  indwelling. 

There  are  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  which  come 
with  linked  hands;  so  that  it  is  impossible  to 
admit    one  of  the    golden    sisterhood    without    her 


"FILLED  IVITH  THE  HOLY  GHOST."  223 

introducing  all  the  radiant  band.  Love  brings  joy; 
and  joy  peace;  and  peace  long-suffering;  and  simi- 
larly through  the  whole  series:  so  that  the  heart 
becomes  at  length  tenanted,  as  was  the  grave  of 
Christ,  with  angels. 

There  is  also  power  for  service.  No  longer  timid 
and  frightened,  the  Apostles  give  their  witness 
with  great  power.  The  Gospel  comes  in  power 
and  demonstration  through  consecrated  lips  and 
lives.  The  very  devils  are  exorcised;  and  great 
crowds  are  brought  to  the  feet  of  Christ. 

This,  and  much  more,  is  awaiting  the  moment  in 
thy  life,  my  reader,  when  thou  shalt  definitely 
avail  thyself  of  thy  privilege  and  become  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Then,  as  time  rolls  on,  thou 
shalt  work  great  deliverances  among  men,  careless 
of  praise  or  blame.  Perhaps  thou  shalt  know  what 
it  is  to  pass  upward  to  meet  Christ  in  the  air. 
But  certainly  thou  shalt  stand  beside  Him  in  the 
regeneration  when  He  shall  appear  in  glory.  And 
then  in  all  the  radiant  throng  there  shall  be  naught 
to  divert  thy  gaze  from  "Jesus  only,"  or  thy  thought 
from  the  decease  (the  exodus)  which  He  accom- 
plished at  Jerusalem. 

And  amid  the  myriads  of  stars  that  shall  shine  for- 
ever in  the  firmament  of  heaven,  not  one  shall 
sparkle  with  more  brilliant  or  more  steady  glory 
than  Elijah;  a  man  of  like  passions  with  our- 
selves, who  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms, 
wrought  righteousness,  obtained  promises,  out  of 
weakness  was  made  strong,  waxed  valiant  in  fight, 


234        ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  HIS  POIVER. 

swept  to  heaven  unhurt  by  death,  and  stood  beside 
Christ  on  the  Transfiguration  Mount.  Prophet  of 
Fire,  till  then,  Farewell! 


y, 


• 

«•   o 

1 

j 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TOn.     \ 

«    £-• 

p 

i 

LIBRARY         1 

CM 

«> 
b 

Do    not  f   '^■ 

to 

•«4 

j 

6 
u 

o 

re  move  ll 
the   card 

- 

« 

\  1                  ^ 

\ 

a: 

4- 

t 

*      c 

from   this  \ 
Pocket.         ^ 

s 

m 

; 

^       si 
i     M 

5 

^ 

Acme   Library   Card   Pocket 

i 

Under  Pat.  "  Ref.  Index  File." 
Made  l^y  LIBRARY  BUREAU 

I 


