SRA SS Th eh 


SS = 
Sr ers cone SSS re ene a nr 
eae ee no ne en ee 
= ee 
: = —— - = = 


TE wate Smith Library 


of 


of the 
Congregational Conference 
(Washington 

=\ 


BV 4211 .M49 1912 
Meyer, F. B. 1847-1929 


Expository preaching plans 
and methods 


“rf 


EXPOSITORY PREACHING 
PLANS AND METHODS 


ReEsVio er ob. = MEY ER eB. w.- 


Expository Preaching 
Plans and Methods 


By 
REV. F. B. MEYER, B. A. 


HODDER & STOUGHTON 
NEW YORK 
GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY 


Copyright, 1910, 
By F. M. BARTON 


Copyright, 1912, 
By GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY 


Introductory Note 


A Famous teacher of Homiletics in an American 
school used to tell his students a generation ago 
that the one kind of preaching which always wore 
was the Expository. The experience of his stu- 
dents, now honored and wise leaders of their own 
generations, has many times confirmed this. It 
is not pulpit eloquence no matter how brilliant, 
nor topical preaching no matter how timely, wise, 
varied, or epigrammatic, which best resists the 
wear and tear of time in a long pastorate with its 
steady and unceasing demand for sermons, week 
in, week out, which feed and nourish and inspire 
the flock. 

No other style of preaching can so completely 
guarantee immunity from an indulgence in special 
crochets and fads. The Bible is an exceedingly 
broad book in its treatment of life and, he who 
successfully preaches through, feven one small 
section of it, will find a variety of subjects and 
principles and lessons—so great a variety that 
if he is fair with all he will be saved from the 


000593 


fi 


vi INTRODUCTORY NOTE 


error of over-emphasis and of neglecting certain 
broad tracts of truth. 

The strain of preaching which some complain 
of is due, perhaps, in no small measure to the 
fact that it is so seldom expository, and the effort 
of finding a topic is added to the labor of prepa- 
ration. And this may be one reason for the short 
pastorates, which disease is surely making inroads 
on the health of the Church. 

But many men cannot, or think they cannot, 
preach expository sermons. Exposition is an un- 
known art to them. The aim of this book is not 
only to demonstrate the value of expository 
preaching, but to show how. 


‘ Fee aty 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER. Paas. 
I. A Pura ror THE Exposirory Meruop, - 3 
II. Expository Preacuine: WuartiriIs, - 95 


III. Tue ApvantTaGes oF THE ExposiTory 
MeETHODs, - - - - - - 49 


IV. Tue Exampxie or Our Lorp: His Rev- 
ERENCE FOR AND USE OF SCRIPTURE, - 15 


V. Tue Expositor at Work, - - - an Od 


VI. Tue InexnavustiIBLe RicuEs or THE BIBLE: 
PERENNIAL INTEREST OF THE EXPOSITORY 
METHOD, - - - - - - 119 


A PLEA FOR THE EX- 
POSITORY METHOD 


CHAPTER ONE 


Expository Preaching, Plans and 
Methods 


I 


A PLEA FOR THE EXPOSITORY METHOD IN PREACHING 


THE one supreme object of the Christian ministry 
is to preach Christ, and Him crucified. The noble 
roads, by which the Romans bound the Iron Em- 
pire together, traveled from the ends of Europe 
to converge on the golden milestone in the City 
of the Seven Hills, and all sermons must culmi- 
nate and find their loftiest purpose in the Divine 
Redeemer. We must never forget that, as its 
ministers, we have been allowed of God to be 
trusted with the gospel, and to us has been com- 
mitted the ministry of Reconciliation; to wit, that 
God was in Christ reconciling the world to Him- 
self. In the letter which the late Principal Rainy 
wrote to the Madras College students he said: 
‘We possess nothing so precious, we value noth- 
ing so much; we have no source of good so full, 
fruitful, and enduring; we have nothing to com- 
pare with the Lord Jesus Christ. To Him we 
bear witness.’’? ‘‘Whom we proclaim,”’ cried the 
apostle, ‘‘admonishing every man, teaching every 
man in all wisdom, that we may present every man 
3 


4 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


perfect in Christ.’? Brethren, let us strive and 
labour towards the same end! Let our Lord Jesus 
be the one abiding reality with us, in our inner- 
most thought, our private devotions, our ministry, 
and our preaching! Let Him be first, and last, 
and midst, and all-in-all! Let us wake with Him 
in the morning, walk with Him all day, and lie 
down to sleep in the quiet sense of His presence! 
To present Him to men, by life and ministry and 
written or spoken speech, must be the thread on 
which are strung all the incidents of our varied 
experiences! 

Our ministry also must be cruciform. The 
thought that our Master was crucified must never 
be far from our thoughts. Not primarily as 
teacher, prophet, wonder-worker, or social re- 
former, but as having been slain from before the 
foundations of the everlasting hills! ‘‘Christ, and 
Him crucified,’’ the apostle said. 

All the great churches of Europe are cruci- 
form, and all our living and preaching must bear 
witness, first of all, to that which we also have 
received, ‘‘how that Christ died for our sins ac- 
cording to the Scriptures.’’ 

In this connection we may again and again re- 
turn to the memorable experience of Dr. Chalmers. 
If any man could have succeeded by the presenta- 
tion of the high morality and noble example of 
Christ in winning the hearts of men, it was he; 
who was so magnetic in his personality, a torrent 
of fire in eloquence, and great in every quality of 


PLEA FOR EXPOSITORY METHOD § 5 


manhood? But what things were gain to him, 
these he counted loss, when, after reading Wilber- 
force’s ‘‘Practical View,’’ he began to believe in 
and preach the great doctrines that center in the 
Cross. ‘‘I am not sensible,’’ he says, ‘‘that all 
the vehemence with which I urged the virtues and 
the proprieties of social life had the weight of a 
feather on the hearts of my parishioners. And 
it was not till I got impressed of the utter aliena- 
tion of the heart, in all its desires and affections, 
from God; and it was not till reconciliation to Him 
became the distinct and the prominent object of 
my ministerial exertions; it was not till I took the 
Scriptural way of laying the method of reconcilia- 
tion before them; it was not till the free offer of 
forgiveness through the blood of Christ was urged 
upon their acceptance, and the Holy Spirit given 
through Christ’s mediatorship to all who ask for 
Him was set before them as the unceasing object 
of their dependence and their prayers, that even 
those minor reformations began to appear.’’ 
This, then, is the conclusion of the whole matter. 
There is no way of preaching morality so effective 
as to set forth the kind of character which springs 
from the love of the redeemed to the Redeemer. 
What we need is the old, old story preached by 
new, new men! Ethics by all means; but the fair 
temple must have its foundations set deep in the 
death which destroyed Him that had the power of 
death, and delivered them who throughout their 
lives had been subject to bondage. 


6 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


One other point must be borne in mind: Our 
ministry is a partnership. We are called into the 
fellowship of the Holy Spirit, who is the gift of 
the risen Christ, with whom our Master still co- 
operates with His servants. ‘‘So when the Lord 
Jesus had spoken unto them, He was received up 
into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of 
God. And they went forth, and preached every- 
where, the Lord working with them and confirm- 
ing the word.’’ 

There are days in men’s lives that come un- 
heralded and unannounced, when the full signifi- 
cance of this majestic co-partnership first breaks 
on their view. No angel-faces look down from 
heaven, no angel-voices put us on the alert. But 
as they look back they realize that these were the 
-‘turning-points, the watershed of their history. 
It was thus with Moses. The sun rose as usual; 
the sheep browsed on the scant herbage or lay 
panting in the shadows of a great rock; the giant 
forms of red-sandstone mountains bared them- 
selves to the glare of the scorching heat; when 
suddenly right before him the Bush began to burn 
with a glow above the brightness of the sun, and 
a voice from out of its heart said: 

‘**Certainly I will be with thee.’’ 

Immediately he was transformed. He was no 
longer even an agent or instrument, but a com- 
panion and ally. He had simply to walk with 
God and do His will. He need no longer to be 
a servant, because henceforth he was permitted 


PLEA FOR EXPOSITORY METHOD 7 


as a friend to know the things that his Lord was 
doing. 

Passing to the extreme distance of time given 
that august theophany, and with the object of 
bringing such an experience within the reach of 
ourselves, whose dwarfed and stunted lives can 
hardly be compared with that of the great Law- 
giver, let us recall that memorable experience of 
Hudson Taylor, the honoured founder of the China 
Inland Mission. Whilst that mighty agency was 
but a seed, as he walked one Sunday morning on 
the Brighton sea-sands it seemed as though the 
Almighty said to him: 

‘Hudson Taylor, I am going to evangelize In- 
land China, and if you will walk with Me, I will 
do it through you.’’ 

Was it possible, after that, that any burden 
should seem heavy? God was with him, working 
out His own purposes, and making his poor barley 
loaves and small fish enough and to spare. 

Similarly, in preaching, there are two, not one, 
in every pulpit where the true ideal is realized. 
As in a saw-pit, the workman on the surface is 
in collusion with his companion in ile depth, and 
the two, with perfect rhythm, codperate, lifting 
and depressing the same saw; so the minister, 
on whom all eyes are fixed, codperates with One 
whom none can see, but who is certainly present. 

<‘Tt seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us!”’ 

‘‘T heard a voice saying . . .’’—and this is 
the voice of the preacher. ‘‘Amen, saith the 


8 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


Spirit. . .’’—this is the affirmative and co- 
witness of the Paraclete. Church members must 
walk, and ministers must preach, in the para- 
cletism of the Paraclete. 

Our mission to the world is only possible of 
fulfillment in so far as it represents the union of 
the human and Divine; of our flesh and blood with 
Him, who still needs our humanity, as He issues 
forth to achieve the great purposes of redemp- 
tion. To realise this copartnership makes us 
strong and confident, even when confronted by 
tasks, compared with which the supreme tasks of 
modern engineering are child’s play. 

Each month seems to witness some fresh 
achievement of human skill, which our fathers 
would have ridiculed as beyond the realms of 
reason. And why! Because we are learning to 
entrap and bridle the Titanic forces of nature. 
Our ancestors were content to ride a-pillion, or 
jog through the country in a coach or caravan, 
or allow the winds to dictate the speed of their 
sailing vessels. But with us, the roads are de- 
voured by the automobile; the aviator has char- 
tered the fields of air, and steers his aerial ship 
as he will, independently of currents; the electric 
train plunges through the subterranean tunnels 
of our cities, and we can read in Chicago or Lon- 
don messages borne by wireless telegraphy of 
events happening in mid-Atlantic. Nothing seems 
too great to attempt or too hard to conquer, The 
reason for all this lies, of course, in the fact that 


PLEA FOR EXPOSITORY METHOD 9 


man has, by patient observation, mastered the 
laws and conditions on which the great natural 
forces operate with undeviating precision; and 
having learnt them, has so suited his machinery 
that they must work through it to help him. 

These laws are, of course, only the statement 
of the way in which the power acts, but are not 
the power. In the ultimate analysis the power 
would be found to be the working of that mighty 
Being, who is over all, and through all, and in all. 
But the same power of the same God is at the 
disposal of every faithful minister of Christ’s 
gospel who will set himself to discover the laws 
and conditions on which it works. 

What ordinary men accomplish by allegiance 
with natural forces, through their intelligence, 
patience, and exact obedience, religious men can 
accomplish through their alliance with spiritual 
forces, through their obedience, patience and 
faith. The natural and spiritual are one. ‘‘How- 
beit that is not first which is spiritual, but that 
which is natural, and afterwards that which is 
spiritual.’’ The physical and spiritual are differ- 
ent manifestations of the Divine energy, working 
appropriately on different levels. 

As the same power which thunders with deaf- 
ening roar over Niagara shines with quiet glory 
in the streets of Buffalo, so the Divine power that 
throbs in the lower ranges in the steam-engine or 
electric flash can, in its higher ranges, move a con- 
tinent to repentance and change three thousand 


10 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


persons from unbelief to faith in the course of 
a single address. 

Now, it will be readily granted that the scien- 
tific man, intent on unravelling the secrets of 
nature and of the utilization of her resources, 
must study her processes with the utmost accu- 
racy and care, and must obey them in the small- 
est particular. 

Your machinery may be intricate and costly, 
ingenious and artistic; but if, in one small detail, 
you have failed to conform to the inexorable re- 
quirements of nature, it will refuse to act, and the 
cunning powers that you wish to catch and use 
will evade you. The machinery which was to 
utilize the power of Niagara seemed well-nigh 
perfect, but it wouldn’t move an inch, though 
coaxed and almost prayed to condescend to under- 
take its Herculean task. Finally a great scientist, 
summoned to the spot at considerable cost, after 
a ten-minute survey pointed out one trivial omis- 
sion. When that was adjusted and righted the 
whole machinery took up its assigned work and 
has carried its burden ever since. 

The same principle prevails for all who will 
cooperate with the Spirit of God. Men can com- 
mand Him concerning the work of His hands, if 
only they obey Him. If you would receive the co- 
operation of a Force, you must obey the Law of 
that force’s operation. But remember, it will 
not abate one jot or tittle of its exacting demands. 
Heaven and earth may pass away, but no least 


PLEA FOR EXPOSITORY METHOD 11 


detail can be surrendered to our ignorance or in- 
dolence. Our great Partner is particular to the 
minutest particulars. ‘‘Ye are my friends, if ye 
do whatsoever I command you.’’ Wherefore we 
cannot afford to be disobedient to the heavenly 
vision. 

There are, therefore, certain conditions which 
must be fulfilled, if a minister is to enjoy the 
helpful partnership of the Spirit. The apostle 
speaks of ‘‘the law of the Spirit of life.’? He acts 
on precise, regular and ascertainable principles. 
There is no variableness, nor shadow of turning 
in the putting forth of His energy. Certainly our 
Lord compares Him to the wind. But even the 
wind obeys an unalterable law. What can be 
more definite and regular than the steady current 
of the trade-winds, which sailors have trusted 
from the earliest days, when in their tiny craft 
they ventured to cross the deep! The weather 
forecast in the daily press, prognosticating the 
prevailing winds, attests the same fact. 

The apostles received what seemed to be a 
perfect gale of Pentecostal power because they 
absolutely and completely submitted to the Divine 
demands. So will it be in the church of to-day. 

But what are those conditions? They appear 
to be these: 

1. We must be spiritual men. The natural 
man—i. e., the man dominated by an excessive 
egotism, whether revealing itself in sensual pas- 
sion or in vanity, self-seeking and pride—cannot 


12 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


expect to be a sharer in spiritual power. The cen- 
turion could only issue commands with the cer- 
tainty of being obeyed because he was himself 
‘a man under authority.’’ The apostles always 
insisted that the Holy Spirit was given only to 
those who obeyed the risen and glorified Lord. 
We must receive the Holy Ghost as a breath from 
the lips of Jesus before we can know Him as a 
codperating gale. 

2. We must seek only the glory of Jesus. The 
main objective of the Holy Spirit in the present 
age is to glorify Christ. He withdraws Himself 
from observation with an infinite modesty (if we 
may use that word), but as light proceeding from 
an unseen source He easts its full radiance on 
the face of ‘‘the man, Christ Jesus.’’ It is not 
likely, therefore, that He will yield Himself to 
us unless we also are devoted absolutely and in 
all simplicity to the same end. There is a sense 
in which the Spirit is not given, because Jesus is 
not glorified. 

3. But—and this is the most pertinent point 
for our present purpose, the Holy Spirit’s power 
proceeds along the line of the Word of God, as 
the electric message along the wires. It is His 
sword; the life-giving seed which He has vital- 
ized; the word in which the Word is incarnated. 
Through long centuries He has been at work com- 
municating to prepared natures the thoughts of 
God, and naturally He avails Himself of His pre- 
rogative. The ministry, therefore, which is most 


aw 


PLEA FOR EXPOSITORY METHOD 13 


carefully based on Scripture and honours Scrip- 
ture and saturates itself with Scripture is the 
ministry which the Spirit of Truth can codperate 
with in the most perfect abandonment. It is in 
harmony with these thoughts that in the monu- 
ment of Bishop Phillips Brooks in Boston, which 
represents him standing in his pulpit with up- 
lifted right hand, his left hand is pointing to the 
open Bible, whilst behind him Christ is standing, 
in the same pulpit, His hand resting on His serv- 
ant’s shoulder. It must be always so,—the opened 
Scripture and the codperating Lord! 

We would not, of course, suggest, even for a 
moment, that only those who adopt the method of 
expository preaching can claim that codperating 
Presence, or that those who pose as expository 
preachers always enjoy it. God has put too great 
honour on men of the most diverse characteristics 
for us to dare to generalize or dogmatize after 
that fashion. All we are advancing now is, that 
the more carefully we keep to Scripture, the more 
of Scripture there is in our sermons, the more we 
deal with the whole tenor of the Word of God, 
the more probable it is that we shall supply the 
Holy Spirit with those arrows which He knows 
so well how to use, launching them into the hearts 
of sinners for their conviction, and the more we 
shall supply Him with the pure milk of the Word 
for the feeding of babes and the strong meat for 
the upbuilding of mature character. 

In the following papers we will define and 


14 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


illustrate what we conceive to be the true method 
of Expository Preaching, and then quote a num- 
ber of reasons why it should bulk-much more 
largely than it does in the ministry of the pres- 
ent day. 

The present writer claims some right to speak 
to his brethren on this theme, as his own method, 
for better or for worse, has been almost wholly 
built on this model. In early life, as assistant 
minister with Rev. C. M. Birrell, he was able to 
study this method in one of its noblest exponents, 
and though he has lagged far behind that notable 
example, he has never ceased to follow its guiding 
light. It has been his experience that for a rather 
slender equipment and talent or learning, nothing 
serves to give such variety and attractiveness to 
pulpit work as the unstinting unfolding of Scrip- 
ture in a series of discourses on a biography or 
a Book. The slender vine needs strong trellis- 
work (as the oak does not) to support her fragile 
stem and display her produce to the touch of sun 
and air! 


EXPOSITION OF EXODUS 17:1-15 


Kery-versE: ‘* Then came Amalek and fought with Is- 
rael in Rephidim . . .’’ 


On leaving the seashore, the march turned eastward 
towards the great Sinaitic mountains. The route is in- 
expressibly grand. On each side of the narrow pass rise 
peaks and precipices of every form and colour. Gray, 
red, brown, green, white, and black are the hues of those 


PLEA FOR EXPOSITORY METHOD 15 


entrance-gates of the most august temple in the world. 
From the earliest vestiges of history the Egyptian gov- 
ernment had worked, in this valley, mines of copper and 
turquoise by convict labour. It is not improbable that 
there were many Hebrews among those wretched beings; 
and if so, Moses may have taken this route in order to 
release them. 

On leaving Dophkah and entering the Wady Feiran, 
the whole camp began to suffer severely, owing to the 
failure of the water supply. The brook which waters the 
valley was dry, and the presence of vegetation which 
showed where it occasionally flowed, made the disap- 
pointment still more tantalizing. The word ‘‘Rephi- 
dim’”’ signifies resting-places, and every one had been 
buoyed up by the happy expectations thus suggested. 
Obviously the contrast between the hope of the last two 
days and the reality was the more exasperating. 

*“And the people thirsted there for water.’?’ Hunger 
is bad enough to bear, but it affects only one organ of 
the body, whereas thirst sets the whole being on fire. It 
mounts to the brain and burns like fever in the blood, 
The little children were drooping like flowers; and the 
cattle, on the verge of exhaustion, lay panting on the 
ground. The scouts, sent into all neighbouring valleys, 
returned with the one report that there was no water 
anywhere. 

1. The Tempting of Massah. First the people strove 
with Moses as having led them into this terrible position, 
ignoring the fact that their route was determined by the 
pillar of cloud. Their murmurings then became so 
threatening that Moses actually feared for his life, and 
finally they began to question whether Jehovah were 
among them or not. ‘‘They tempted the Lord;’’ 4. e., 
they questioned His providence, doubted His love and 


16 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


care, and suggested that He had deserted them—and 
all this because He did not act in the way they had 
expected. Ignoring the lessons of the plagues, the 
marvels of the Exodus, the triumphant passage of the 
Red Sea, they actually, questioned whether God were 
with them at all. 

The same mood betrays itself to-day. There are 
abundant evidences of the existence and providence of 
God written on the page of creation and the tablets of 
our moral nature; but turning from these, men point 
to the hunger and thirst, the poverty and misery, the 
impurity, cruelty and self-will, which are so patent in 
our civilization, and cry: ‘‘If there be a God, why does 
He permit such things?’’ Then, when the heavens are 
still silent, they infer that there is no God; that the sky 
is an empty eye-socket, and that there is nothing better 
than to eat and drink, because death is an eternal sleep. 

Has not something of that spirit infected our own 
peace? We have served God from our youth, have ever 
kept His Kingdom and honour before our eye, have de- 
nied ourselves for His sake, have reckoned that there was 
a special understanding and alliance between Him and us. 
Then suddenly we have been brought to our Rephidim, 
without one drop of water. We have come into some ter- 
rible situation of personal or relative suffering, have 
eried out for help, but there has been no evidence of a 
response. Then we have been inclined to doubt whether 
our religious life has not been one long deception. Does 
God care for me? Does He answer prayer? We ought 
to have said, God is with me; He is steering my boat; 
He is leading my pilgrimage; He is adequate for every 
emergency. It is sad indeed to hear the soul querulously 
plunged in complaint, instead of buoying itself up on 
victorious faith. Dare to say: God was with me in my 


PLEA FOR EXPOSITORY METHOD 17 


childhood, and He will never desert me, now that I am 
old and gray-headed; He was with me in six troubles, 
and cannot fail me in the seventh. He that spared not 
His own Son will in His own time and way certainly 
give me all things needed for this life and the next. 

2. Still the question arises, Why did God allow His 
people to suffer thus? Without doubt, as is suggested 
afterwards, it was necessary to reveal them to themselves, 
that they might know the evil of their own hearts. 
“Know therefore,’’ was the incontestable reproof of their 
leader in after days, ‘‘that the Lord thy God giveth thee 
not this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; 
for thou art a stiff-necked people. Remember, forget 
thou not, how thou provokest the Lord thy God to wrath 
in the wilderness, from the day that thou wentest forth 
out of the land of Egypt.’’ 

This stern discipline was also intended to make them 
rely on God rather than on Moses or circumstances. He 
suffered them to thirst, that He might make them know 
that man doth not live by rains and rivers only, but by 
God’s providence, however it may come. Take, for in- 
stance, the child of wealth, whose estates, stocks, shares 
and bank-balance are a fourfold wall of iron against the 
intrusion of want. For such the daily providence of 
God is a nonentity. It is when all these have ceased 
to be his, and he is compelled to hang on the daily care 
of God, with no obvious means of support, that he offers 
the fourth petition of the Lord’s Prayer with absolute 
sincerity. 

But there was a deeper reason than these. At the 
Exodus the Sinaitic peninsula was largely covered by the 
roving tribe of Amalek. This people was of great an- 
tiquity ; indeed, Balaam said, ‘‘ Amalek was the first of 
the nations.’’ Driven by Assyria from their early seat 


2 


18 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


by the Persian gulf, they had travelled southwards, until 
they held the fastnesses of the desert as their own. They 
did not challenge the hosts of Israel on their arrival from 
their Egyptian bondage because they understood their 
destination to be Canaan, the route to which would soon 
take them out of their territories, or because they had 
left the seabord for mountain pastures, clothed at that 
period in their most attractive dress. But when Israel 
marched southwards, their progress was eyed with the 
utmost jealousy and suspicion. It was extremely dis- 
tasteful to the Amalekite chieftains to learn that these 
aliens were enjoying the abundant pastures and palm- 
groves of an oasis like Elim. Probably a council of war 
was held, at which it was unanimously agreed that meas- 
ures must be concerted for the arrest and turning back 
of the march. After the manner of the East, messengers 
had been sent out far and wide to summon all the avail- 
able forces of the peninsula to the conflict, and until they 
assembled, orders were issued that light-armed troops 
should hang on the rear of the Israelites, cutting off its 
stragglers, pillaging its baggage and doing as much dam- 
age as possible. ‘‘Remember what Amalek did unto thee 
by. the way as ye came forth out of Egypt, and how he 
met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, 
all that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint 
and weary; and he feared not God.’’ 

As God looked down on the land through which His 
people were slowly wending their way, He beheld those 
gathering hosts. He saw them mustering from the rocky 
fastnesses of Petra, from the rich pasture-grounds of 
Kadesh, and from the rolling downs, in which the mighty 
roots of the Lebanon-range end. It may be that at the 
very hour when this murmuring was rife, these mar- 
Shalled hosts were within an hour’s march of the camp 


PLEA FOR EXPOSITORY METHOD 19 


of Israel. He knew it all and suffered them to thirst 
that on the background of their pain He might work a 
supreme miracle of power, which would be their fortress 
and stronghold in the day of Amalek’s attack. 

The composure with which Moses prepared to resist 
Amalek; the absolute confidence with which Israel fell 
in with his measures of resistance, and the courage with 
which these undisciplined troops fought their first fight 
—would all be inexplicable unless we had had the record 
of that marvelous interposition which supplied water 
from the rock on the very eve of their fight. 

Is not that the key to much of our own experience? 
Does not God lead us into sore straits, and deliver us 
out of them, that we may be prepared for greater trou- 
bles which He sees ahead. He smites rocks of granite, 
to touch which blisters our hands, and makes even these 
to yield supplies, that when presently we descry the 
troops of Amalek drawn up to dispute and arrest our 
progress, we may be of good courage and know that the 
Lord will fight for us. 

3. The Lesson of the Uplifted Rod. We are told that 
Joshua discomfited Amalek with the edge of the sword, 
but the edge of the sword would have been unavailing 
had it not been for that uplifted rod! 

At the opening of the battle the great leader was seen 
by the troops ascending a spur of rock, and first stand- 
ing, then sitting, with the rod of God in his hand. Hour 
after hour he remained there with the rod uplifted, and 
as the afternoon advanced in that long, hard-fought day, 
it was noticed that on either side a venerable man stayed 
up his hands until the going down of the sun. That 
attitude has always been interpreted as significant of 
intercessory prayer. There are many among us who 
cannot go down into the battle, but who can sit on their 


20 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


chair or lie on their couch and pray. But prayer is 
labour. We are told of Epaphras, when far from his 
people, that he laboured in prayer for the Colossian 
church. Without doubt prayer of the right kind means 
strenuous and exhausting labour. Like Moses, the soul 
that has learnt to travail in prayer needs up-bearing 
by stalwart friends. And such prayer makes all the dif- 
ference in our fight against principalities and powers. 
When the arms of the church are uplifted, her troops 
prevail; and when let down, they are defeated. Amalek 
could not connect the two, but Israel connected them. 
The outside world cannot understand just now why the 
church is losing her hold on the masses, and her addi- 
tions are so few; but we know—her arms are sunken to 
the ground. If only they could be uplifted again, as 
in the ancient days, the legions of the cross would quickly 
regain the ground that they have lost. 

Why do you fail in your conflict against sin? Be- 
cause you have ceased to pray. Why does that young 
Christian prevail? In the first place, he prays for him- 
self; but, also, there are those who love him in distant 
places, who would think that they sinned if they ceased 
to pray for him. 

This is all true, but there is a further truth. There 
is no word about prayer in the narrative, and sitting is 
not precisely the attitude of prayer. Were not that up- 
lifted hand and rod rather the symbols of the presence 
and help of God? Moses not only prayed that God 
would help, but affirmed by his attitude that He was 
helping, and that Amalek was being driven before the 
Lord and His host. This interpretation is confirmed by 
the subsequent action of Moses, in building an altar and 
calling it Jehovah-nissi; 7. ¢., ‘‘The Lord is my banner.”’ 


PLEA FOR EXPOSITORY METHOD 21 


The banner used of the ancients was only a pole, with 
a bright metal ornament at the top. Moses’ rod, there- 
fore, was a banner in the Oriental sense; but a banner 
for what? For the host of Israel? No; but for that 
other host, the host of God’s unseen embattled warriors. 
Well was it that this should be written in a book and 
rehearsed for Joshua. It was thus that he received the 
first inkling of the great truth which was fully revealed 
to him on the plains of Jericho, when the Angel of the 
Covenant said, ‘‘I am come as captain of another host, 
a third host—the Lord’s!’’ 

This is the key to victory. You may be peevish and 
petulant to-day because you look only to Moses; #. e., to 
human strength and help; but directly you look beyond 
Moses to God, you become strong and glad, and in Rephi- 
dim, the name of which you had changed to Meribah or 
Massah, you shall gain the victory of your life. 

4, There is a mystical side to all this. Of course, 
Israel stands for the church in her warfare against the 
wicked spirits that rule the darkness of this world. 
Amalek stands for all that opposes the Kingdom of our 
God, and which resists the deliverance of the world from 
the hand of its enemy. ‘‘We wrestle, not against flesh 
and blood, but against principalities and powers.’’ The 
Rock is obviously our Lord Jesus, who was smitten for 
us and bruised for our sins. Out of His side, pierced 
by one of the soldiers, issued forth blood and water. 
‘‘Rock of Ages cleft for me! Let the water and the 
blood from Thy riven side that flowed.’’ 

The church must drink of that Water. Israel drank 
of the spiritual Rock, and that Rock was Christ. We 
without stint may drink of His gift, which is the Holy 
Ghost. And then will we be able to cope with her spir- 


22 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


itual foes. Pentecost preceded the first sufferings and 
missionary efforts of the church; and it must always be 
so, both with the individual and the community. 

Drink deeply, O children of God, for Amalek will 
be upon you to-morrow; but he will have no power at 
all against those who have cleansed themselves in the 
healing stream of the blood, and have learned to drink 
of that Living Water. 


EXPOSITORY PREACH- 
ING—WHAT IT 15 


CHAPTER TWO 


% 
* 


IT 


EXPOSITORY PREACHING—WHAT IT IS 


THERE are many kinds of preaching, and he is the 
wise and successful man who knows how to vary 
them. As the husbandman rotates his crops, and 
adopts many methods to extract the utmost re- 
sponse from the soil, so in the spiritual realm 
‘‘the vetches are beaten out with a staff and the 
cummin with a rod.’’ (Isa. 38: 23.) 

Our Lord’s first sermon was an example of 
the topical method. He read out His text, inter- 
preted it, drew out the doctrine of it, illustrated 
it by Scripture examples, and was proceeding to 
apply it,-when He was interrupted by the mad 
fury of His audience. Biographical preaching has 
found a chief exponent in our day in the masterly 
analysis of character given by Dr. Whyte, of 
Edinburgh, laying hold of the salient features and 
characteristics, and enforcing them for imitation 
or warning. Doctrinal preaching used to be more 
in vogue than it is, and found noble examples es- 
pecially in the Scotch pulpits. It is a great treat 
to hear a sermon that gathers together various 
portions of Scripture and builds on their collation 
and comparison some sublime aspect of Divine 
truth, much as a scientist would from a number 
of isolated instances deduce the great natural law 

25 


26 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


which codrdinates them. It is well, sometimes, 
to have recourse to the hortatory method, in which 
the preacher exhorts his congregation to some neg- 
lected duty, to repent, to administer their prop- 
erty with more punctilious care for the claims of 
God, or to undertake some fresh field of activity. 
But among all these Expository Preaching should 
have a very conspicuous place. It should be the 
standing dish; nay, it is the table on which all 
the dishes are placed. From the point of view 
of this paper there is no reason why each of the 
foregoing should not find a place in the scheme 
of expository discourse. 

Probably the ideal is that followed by the late 
Dr. W. M. Taylor, of New York, who said: ‘‘My 
own practice has been, for many years, to give 
up one of the services of each Lord’s Day to the 
systematic exposition of some book of Scripture, 
leaving the other free for the presentation of such 
subjects as may be suggested by the occurrences 
of the times or the circumstances of my people. 
This division I have felt to be not only very con- 
venient, but also extremely serviceable.’’ 

It is necessary to indicate the mistakes that 
have been made in regard to the nature of the kind 
of preaching for which we plead—mistakes which 
have brought it into disrepute in many quarters. 
We do not mean, for instance, that the preacher 
should take a longer or shorter chapter and pref- 
ace his remarks by saying, ‘‘Dear brethren, I pro- 
pose to make a few remarks on this portion of 


WHAT IT IS” on 


Scripture,’’ and so proceed to utter a few pious 
platitudes about the successive verses. This is 
milk and water with a vengeance, especially water, 
and that not hot. If the man of the world were 
to drop into such a parody of preaching, he might 
fairly go off after the first five minutes, thinking 
that religion might do well enough for women and 
children, but had nothing for him. <A preacher 
of that sort, giving a lecture on the Minor Proph- 
ets, came finally to the Book of Amos. ‘‘We have 
now come to Amos,”’ he said; ‘‘what shall we do 
with him?’’?’ A man sitting in the rear of the 
house said, loud enough to be heard by his neigh- 
bours, ‘‘He can have my seat, for I’m going 
home.’’ This is one great advantage in open-air 
preaching; the audience departs unless there is 
enough honey to attract and keep the bees. 

Still less, by expository preaching, do we mean 
that the preacher should give an exhaustive and 
exhausting digest of all the commentaries to 
which he has access. Congregations want results, 
and not the process by which they are acquired. 
It is necessary, of course, that the expository 
preacher should regard his paragraph or chapter 
under all the varying lights flashed on it from 
different minds, but there is no need to marshal 
all these venerable and learned men in the pulpit 
and give them the opportunity of demolishing one 
another. When people want food they are impa- 
tient with learned discussions as to the most 
wholesome dietary. 


28 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


It is also a mistaken view of expository 
preaching which leads the minister to dwell mi- 
nutely and particularly on every point in the 
Scripture with which he is dealing. Pre-Rapha- 
elite painting has its merits, but in these hurrying 
days it is necessary to concentrate the mind on 
some one striking figure or conception. Men will 
not stop to count the number of petals in a daisy. 

It is also possible, when expository preaching 
is rightly practised, to combine the didactic with 
the passionate, teaching with intensity, and ex- 
planation with appeal. John Knox was a prince 
among expositors. Indeed, it is to him that 
Scotland owes the custom still observed by the 
majority of its ministers, of devoting at least one 
of their discourses on each Lord’s Day to the reg- 
ular and consecutive exposition of some book of 
Scripture. In the First Book of Discipline, which 
was drawn up mainly by hin, we have the follow- 
ing direction: ‘‘We think it most expedient that 
the Scriptures be read in order—that is, that some 
one book of the Old and the New Testaments be 
begun, and orderly read to the end. And the same 
we judge of preaching, where the minister for the 
most part remaineth in one place; for this skip- 
ping and divagation from place to place, be it in 
reading or be it in preaching, we judge not so 
profitable to edify the church.’’ But that expo- 
sition in his hands was no languid, lifeless or 
scholastic explanation of the passage under con- 
sideration is clear from this graphic description 


WHAT IT IS 29 


of him in his last days by James Melville: ‘I 
heard him teach the prophecies of Daniel that 
summer and the winter following. In the opening 
of his text he was moderate for the space of half 
an hour; but when he entered on the application 
he made me so to shiver (Scottice, ‘qrue’) and 
tremble that I could not hold my pen to write. 
He was very weak, but before he had done with 
his sermon he was so active and vigourous that it 
seemed as if he would knock the pulpit in pieces 
(Scottice, ‘ding the pulpit in blads’) and fly out 
of it.?? Wherever he laboured, his method was the 
same. The English Ambassador at the Court of 
Scotland described what he had himself seen, when 
he wrote to Cecil: ‘‘I assure you the voice of one 
man is able in an hour to put more life in us than 
six hundred trumpets blustering in our ears.’’ 
We are now able, in the light of these distinc- 
tions, to define Expository Preaching as the 
consecutive treatment of some book or extended 
portion of Scripture on which the preacher has 
concentrated head and heart, brain and brawn, 
over which he has thought and wept and prayed, 
until it has yielded up its inner secret, and the 
spirit of it has passed into his spirit. That pas- 
sion which we were just remarking in John Knox 
revealed itself in Rutherford and Chalmers, in 
Cairns and Caird. It is not an artifice nor a trick; 
it is probably the possession of a man’s nature 
by the Spirit which hides in true and sacred 
words, as sparks lie hid in flint. It is thus that 


30 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


the spirit of nature is concealed from all save her 
wooers, who wait patiently until she coyly drops 
her veil and shows her face. The highest point 
of sermon-utterance is when a preacher is ‘‘pos- 
sessed,’’ and certainly, in the judgment of the 
writer, such possession comes oftenest and easiest 
to a man who has lived, slept, walked and eaten 
in fellowship with a passage for the best part 
of a week. 

But let us consider more particularly the 
method adopted by the Expository Preacher. We 
will suppose that he had been led to choose either 
the Book of Exodus or the Epistle to the Hebrews. 
He will perhaps have made his selection for the 
coming autumn and winter before he starts on 
his summer vacation. With all his other prepa- 
rations for golf, or fishing, or camping out, he 
takes a handy pocket copy of the chosen Scripture. 
On the moor or in the hammock, within sound of 
the break of the waves or of the crunching of 
glaciers, he reads again and again, until the cen- 
tral lesson, the motif, begins to reveal itself. The 
next step is to roughly divide the matter under 
some general divisions, which will be broken up 
ultimately into smaller and yet smaller ones, the 
one condition being that each paragraph or chap- 
ter shall contain one complete thought. 

Tor instance, I am now at work with the Book 
of Exodus. Sometimes a few verses give me con- 
cisely and completely all that is needed for an 
effective sermon; as for example,’ 2: 23-25 or 


WHAT IT IS 31 


6:2-9. But at another time the whole chapter 
must be compressed into one discourse, as chap- 
ter 18, which could not be subdivided without se- 
rious detriment to the symmetry and force of the 
lesson it contains. The Epistle to the Hebrews 
is one of the easiest books in the Bible for di- 
vision and subdivision. The least intelligent after 
reading it once or twice can see the natural com- 
partments of this wonderful treatise; but the 
pieces of separate mosaic combine in a picture 
to which each is necessary, and none is complete 
without the rest. This earliest process of parcel- 
ling out the rich tract of land before us is one of 
the most fascinating experiments of the preach- 
er’s life; and he contrives, as far as possible, that 
in every portion there should be a tiny bit of 
mountain moorland with its heather, some granite 
rocks, some foothills, corn for the gleaners, and 
flowers for the children. 

When one has made one’s own divisions it is 
time to turn to see what others have done in the 
same directions. Often what seemed to be the 
best and most original of your findings will have 
been anticipated. Not unfrequently you will 
alight on the divisions of a Maclaren or a Storrs 
so perfect that you cannot but substitute it for 
your own. Generally the collision of another 
man’s brain with yours will strike out some fresh 
conception, which carries the likeness of the father 
and mother of its parentage. 

When this is settled a great deal is settled. 


32 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


The land has been divided among the tribes, and 
the tribes into families, and the families into in- 
dividual plots. It only remains to discover the 
pivot sentence in the next group of verses which 
you are proposing to treat. That phrase ‘‘pivot 
sentence’’ is absolutely important. There is in 
each paragraph one sentence on which it resolves, 
or a point on which it impinges, like the rocking 
stones left by the glacier period in balance, as 
though angels had been playing at a pastime of 
herculean feats. 

It is a mistake for the preacher to read out a 
whole long paragraph as the text of his sermon. 
Should he do so, the ordinary mind wearily an- 
ticipates a long discourse, and all the boys and 
girls, who are expected to repeat or write out 
the text as a Sunday task, wince. The text should 
be appetising, like the liquors which, I am told, 
are taken by bon-vivants before their meals. It 
should be terse and crisp, bright and short, easily 
remembered and quotable. In every chapter and 
paragraph there is one such. In that mentioned 
from the Book of Exodus, the chord or keynote 
is struck in ‘‘Be thou for the people God-ward.”’ 
If the preacher announces this as his text, atten- 
tion is awakened and interest excited. People 
wonder what he will make of it; and the stranger 
within the gates will not suppose that the sermon 
is one of a series. 

It is a profound mistake for the Expository 
Preacher to spend any time in recapitulation. He 


WHAT IT IS 33 


ought never to utter the phrase, ‘‘As I was say- 
ing last Sunday.’’ There is no need for it, and it 
only conveys an immediate sense of the incom- 
pleteness of the present address. Hach sermon 
should be complete in itself and should not re- 
quire to be propped up against another to make 
it stand. Equally unsuitable is it to talk of what 
you may have to say next Sunday, unless under 
special circumstances, such as the immensity of 
the theme, of which you could only give one aspect. 
But these tricks for catching audiences are not 
the best. Give the people something worth com- 
ing for, and they will come. At the same time it 
is undeniable that young regular hearers will be- 
come interested as soon as they see that their 
pastor is pursuing a regular line of study and 
teaching, and will make every endeavour not to. 
miss one link in the chain of thought. 

When the pivot-text is chosen, it is desirable, 
so far as possible to weave into the structure of 
the sermon all the main points of the surrounding 
paragraph. There is no absolute law in the mat- 
ter except one’s own sense of the fitness of things. 
Just as all the objects in the field of vision focus 
in the lens of the eye, and finally in the minute 
filament of the optic nerve, so the thoughts, im- 
ages and suggestions of the context should pass 
through the chosen motto to the heart of the 
people. 

The main burden of all our preaching, as we 
have seen, must be Jesus Christ, and the expositor 


3 


34 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


questions often how much of Christ there is pres- 
ent and how he can make Him known. He re- 
members that the Lord told His critics that Moses 
wrote of Him (John 5:46) and that He inter- 
preted to the two who walked to Emmaus in all 
the Scriptures the things concerning Himself 
(Luke 25:27). Did not the angel that showed the 
beloved apostle the crowding glories of the un- 
seen assure him that the testimony of Jesus was 
the spirit of prophecy? (Rev. 19:10.) 
Expository preachers have the two experiences 
set forth in our Lord’s parables. Sometimes 
when they start on the preparation of their ser- 
mon, seeking the goodly pearls of truth, they sud- 
denly come on one of great price, which so excels 
the others that they lose sight of all the rest and 
sell all for the excellency of the knowledge of 
Christ Jesus their Lord. The paragraph becomes 
a veritable transfiguration mountain, on which 
they lose sight even of Moses and Elijah and see 
no man but Jesus only. At other times they re- 
semble the ploughman represented in the alter- 
nate parable, who was ploughing over a hard and 
rather uninteresting field and suddenly heard his 
plough clink against metal. Immediately he 
dropped the ploughtail and ran forward to see 
what he had struck. He had alighted on a strong 
metal chest containing the savings of a life, which 
the owner had buried for safety, but had died 
suddenly without giving the clue of its where- 
abouts to his children. Many a track of Scrip- 


WHAT IT IS 35 


ture, when we first read it over, seems as though 
it were hardly worth considering, and then the 
hidden Christ is suddenly discovered; and to have 
found Him is to have come on a mine of treasure 
from which the whole congregation will be en- 
riched on the following Lord’s Day. 

It was said of Philip Henry that he did not 
shoot the arrow of the Word over the heads of his 
audience in affected rhetoric, nor under their feet 
by homely expressions, but to their hearts in 
close and lively application. Such should be our 
aim in dealing with any part of God’s Word; 
we must apply it to each individual in the 
audience. Each bearer must be as one who stands 
on the seashore on a moonlight night. The waves 
of Scriptural teaching must break at his feet, and 
the path of light over the waters must come to 
where he stands. We must preach to the people 
as well as before them. It has been well said that 
a good sermon should resemble a good portrait, 
in looking directly at each in the room and saying, 
I have a message for thee. It is not enough to 
expatiate lucidly or eloquently on a passage of 
Scripture; we must show each person that it 
has a message for him, that it belongs to him, 
that he must heed it and obey. 


36 ~ EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


THE ECONOMY OF FORCE—EXPOSITION OF 
EXODUS 18: 1-27 


There is a noteworthy parallel between the circum- 
stances narrated in this chapter and those of which we 
are informed in Acts 6. Here the Hebrew people, emerg- 
ing from centuries of slavery and oppression, which had 
almost obliterated the spirit of nationality, suddenly as- 
sumes a highly organized condition. Out of Jethro’s 
suggestion sprang an organization which laid the foun- 
dations of the national policy, and has existed with more 
or less permanence amid all the other changes that have 
swept over that remarkable race. In Acts 6 a similar 
movement was necessitated by the immense increase of 
converts. ‘‘In those days, when the number of the disci- 
ples was multiplying, there arose a murmuring of the 
Hellenists against the Hebrews, and The Twelve called 
the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said: ‘‘It is 
not fit that we should forsake the Word of God and serve 
tables. Look ye out, therefore, brethren, from among 
you seven men of good report, full of the Spirit and of 
wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.’’ 
(Acts 6:1-6.) 

In each ease the increased organization was a sign of 
vitality and led to the immediate strengthening and in- 
crease of the entire movement. It is a great forward 
step in evolution when the bony case which had been 
exterior, as in the crab, becomes interior, as in the mam- 
mal. Life always tends toward increased complexity in 
organization. 

There is little to detain us in the circumstances which 
led up to this great step of advance. Whether Jethro. 
was the father-in-law or brother-in-law of Moses is still 
undecided by the experts, and does not greatly concern 


WHAT IT IS 37 


us. The Hebrew word may mean either. He had given 
shelter to Zipporah and her two sons until he heard of 
the Exodus, and then he crossed the peninsula from the 
extreme east to the Mount of God, somewhere in the near 
_ neighbourhood of Horeb. First, he desired to renew the 
friendly relations, which had subsisted during the forty 
years of companionship in pastoral and tribal interests; 
and secondly, he desired to restore the wife and boys 
whom he had received as a sacred trust. 

The meeting was thoroughly Oriental. On the an- 
nouncement of his approach, Moses went out to meet 
him, knelt down, and touched the ground with his fore- 
head; then kissing his relative’s hand, he rose and kissed 
him on both cheeks. Each asked the other of his welfare 
with the minuteness and prolixity still characteristic of 
the sons of the desert, with whom time is a less precious 
commodity than with ourselves. The greetings of hus- 
band and wife, of father and children would probably 
be reserved for the privacy of the tent. 

As Moses told of the marvelous dealings of God with 
Israel, not only in delivering them from Pharaoh, but 
during all the travail of their journey, Jethro rejoiced 
for all the goodness which Jehovah had shown and 
burst out into an ascription of adoration and praise. 
Perhaps, up to that hour, like the generality of the 
heathen, he had believed in a plurality of gods and re- 
garded the God of Israel as only one among many equals. 
But under the marvelous recital given by Moses, he re- 
nounced that creed and declared his belief that Jehovah 
was supreme over all gods. How much might be done 
if only religious men to-day would recount their expe- 
riences! Many a wavering scale would be turned in 
favour of true religion, if only you would begin to tell 
of God’s dealings with your own life. ‘‘Go home to thy, 


38 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


friends,’’ said our Lord to the man from whom he had 
cast a legion of demons, ‘‘and tell them how great things 
the Lord hath done for thee.’’ 

It is remarkable that Jethro appears to have acted 
as priest in the sacrifice which followed. We have al- 
ready been told that the sheikh was also the priest of 
Midian (Ex. 3:1). Like Melchizedek he was the priest 
of the Most High God. The fact of Moses and Aaron 
and the elders of Israel participating in the sacred 
feast which followed, shows that they recognized orders 
of religious life and priestly administration outside the 
limits of their own race, and this confirms us in the view, 
which surely needs no arguing, and which Malachi so 
clearly teaches, ‘‘that from the rising of the sun even 
unto the going down of the same, God’s name is great 
among the Gentiles, and in every place incense is offered 
in his name, and a pure offering.’’ (Mal. 1:11.) 

The spectacle he witnessed on the following day was 
remarkable. From morning till evening he beheld 
Moses sitting in the midst of a great throng of people, 
slowly ploughing his way through an immense number 
of causes, which were submitted to his adjudication. 
Even if we pare down the numbers of the Exodus to 
half or a quarter of a million of people, it is easy to 
see that an overwhelming task lay on the lawgiver, who 
was called upon in his single person to combine the legis- 
lative and judicial functions. The difficulty lay not only 
in the quantity but the quality of the people. The He- 
brew character has always been stiff-necked and intract- 
able. But, in addition, they had just emerged from 
generations of slavery, with all its debasing and demor- 
alizing effects. There was as yet no Decalogue nor code 
of laws. The very effect of their recent emancipation 
was to induce the idea that they were free to do ag they 


WHAT IT IS 39 


chose. The first experiences of the French Revolution 
were bewildering and disappointing to all thoughtful 
souls. How Wordsworth laments it! It seemed as if 
all hope of Liberty, Equality and Brotherhood was to 
be drowned in a deluge of sensuality and bloodshed. So 
with Israel, they were no longer under the despotic rule 
of Pharaoh and his myrmidons. Their knowledge of 
Jehovah was extremely vague. There was no general 
standard of appeal. The very rebound from centuries 
of oppression was in the direction of self-assertion and 
lawlessness. In addition, the recent rout of Amalek may 
have left in the possession of the victors an immense 
amount of costly property, as in the experience of Gideon 
afterwards. (Judges 8:25, ete.) Disputes about the 
proper division of these may have greatly added to the 
weight of that day’s business. 

In any case, at the end of the day Moses was abso- 
lutely worn out, and even then the people were not satis- 
fied. There was therefore justice in Jethro’s remark: 
‘‘Wasting thou wilt waste away, both thou and this 
people that is with thee.’’ Jethro therefore suggested 
a division of labour, founded on the system still in vogue 
among the Arabs. Causes were in the first instance to 
be judged by rulers of tens, which recalls our own things, 
from which there was an appeal to the rulers of fifties, 
from them to the rulers of hundreds, and finally to the 
rulers of thousands. Difficult causes, which the rulers 
of thousands felt themselves incompetent to decide, were 
reserved for the judgment of Moses. After referring 
this to God (v. 23), as was his wont, Moses adopted this 
good advice, and by this arrangement the whole nation 
profited immensely. 

The advantages were obvious. Moses was henceforth 
able to concentrate himself on the higher branches of 


40 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


his great calling. He was for the people God-ward, as 
mediator, looking into the bosom of God, where, as 
Hooker says, ‘‘law hath her seat.’’ He had also time 
to bring the difficult causes to God. Then, turning to 
the people, he taught them the statutes of the laws, and 
showed them the way wherein they should walk, and the 
work they should do. 

Next, it immediately developed a large number of 
men, whose very existence had, up to that moment, been 
hardly realized. In every community there is an untold 
wealth of latent talent. To every man grace is given 
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. The 
King gives each of His servants the charge of talents, 
and none is absolutely destitute. It must have been 
rather surprising, however, to Moses to discover that 
there was a complete equipment for all the offices that 
had to be filled. ‘‘He chose able men out of all Israel.’’ 
These men might have developed into eritics and 
schemers, but from the moment that they were entrusted 
with responsibility they became staunch and useful allies. 
Not only were their talents saved from wastage and de- 
veloped in useful directions, but the men themselves were 
redeemed and purified, and their characters saved from 
that prostitution of the best which always becomes the 
worst. 

The congregation also profited greatly by the swift- 
ness with which disputes and quarrels were dealt with. 
Nothing is more hurtful to the individual or community 
than to leave a sore open. The longer a controversy re- 
mains unadjusted, the worse the tangle becomes; the 
more hot words are spoken, the more bystanders become 
involved. ‘‘Agree,’’ said our Lord, ‘‘with thine adver- 
sary quickly, while thou art in the way with him.’’ 


\it8s Woe Rad EA FS 41 


We may apply this subject to Church Administration 
and Christian Service. 

1. Church Administration. It is a mistake for any 
one person, be he minister or layman, to monopolize 
many offices. Some ministers insist on keeping every, 
department of church-life and church-work under con- 
trol. Some Sunday school superintendents have appar- 
ently never learned to educate their teachers to maintain 
the order of the school, or the children to feel that they 
may fill useful offices; and some church officials, in their 
desire to serve the church, prefer to undertake more 
duties than they can perform satisfactorily, instead of 
setting to work to educate and develop the younger men 
and women about them. Mr. Moody said, shrewdly: ‘‘It 
is better to set a hundred men to work than to do the 
work of a hundred men.’’ You do a service to a man 
when you evoke his latent faculty. It is no kindness to 
others or service to God to do more than your share in 
the sacred duties of church-life. For the hand to do the 
work of the foot, or the eye to intrude into the province 
of the ear, is to introduce anarchy and discord into body 
and soul. We are told that when Saul saw any mighty 
man or any valiant man he took him unto himself. 
(1 Sam. 14:52.) This is the law of church consolidation 
and expansion. 

We must have, in every Christian community, our 
Moses, Aaron, and Hur—men who give themselves to 
prayer and the ministry of the Word, men who are to 
us God-ward, men who can enquire of God, who can 
teach statutes and laws, who can show the way in which 
we should walk and the work we should do. In every 
Christian community we must have the men of affairs, 
whose character is admirably summed up in Jethro’s 


42 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


words, Men of Ability! Jethro evidently expected that 
there would be one man in ten who would commend him- 
self as exceptionally able, and though to-day’s standard 
of ability is higher than ever, the estimate is not too 
sanguine. They must be Men of Piety! ‘‘Such as fear 
God.’’ He who fears God will regard man; the unjust 
judge did neither. The apostles asked for seven men, 
‘of good report, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom.”’ 
Men of Truth! There can be no real piety without 
truthfulness, so that this qualification is, in fact, included 
in the last; and yet there is a semblance of piety, which 
is not over-scrupulous as to veracity. This, however, is 
a bastard growth. Men of Uncorruptible Honour! In 
the East it is rare to find the office of judge exercised 
without a strong susceptibility to bribes. Like the sons 
of Samuel, the judges turn aside after lucre, take bribes 
and pervert judgment. At whatever cost, let our nation 
preserve the great traditions which have always attached 
to our bench and legal profession. In all walks of life 
unbiased impartiality is of priceless worth to the com- 
munity which is thus endowed. 

We must also, in every church, have our warriors, 
who can encounter Amalak; our workers, whose deft 
fingers can build our tabernacle; our financiers, who 
will see that no part of the church finance suffers; our 
singers; our aged men and women, who can sustain the 
duties of perpetual intercession; our boys and girls, in- 
spiring us with their boundless hope and inexhaustible 
activity ; our sufferers, who teach us tenderness and pa- 
tience. Some must open the doors, some light the lamps, 
some lead the service of song, some preach, and others 
teach. There is no one who is not his neighbour’s su- 
perior in some respect. There is no one from whom his 
neighbour may not learn something. It was necessary 


WHAT IT IS 43 


for Jethro to cross the desert to give Moses the concep- 
tion of this organization, which, one would suppose, 
ought to have occurred to him during his own ponder- 
ings over his failure to discharge his enormous tasks. 
““The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; 
nor again, the head to the feet, I have no need of thee.’’ 
(1 Cor. 12: 14-31.) 

Some day we shall stand before our Lord, who at His 
own judgment seat, which must be distinguished from 
the Judgment of the Great White Throne, will allot our 
rewards. At such time He will pursue a far different 
method than that adopted amongst even the best of us. 
We applaud the man who reaps the results; but He will 
equally congratulate those who plouged and sowed to 
produce them. We allot the crown and palm to the 
pastor or evangelist whose fervent appeals win the larg- 
est number of accessions to the church; but Christ will 
not forget the verger and the charwoman, the treasurer 
and the secretary, the organ blower, and those who bring 
refreshment to the harvest field. The players on instru- 
ments shall be there as well as the singers; and he that 
sowed shall rejoice with him who reaped, To each the 
' rewards will be apportioned not according to the ap- 
parent results, but to the faithfulness with which each 
fulfilled his humble task. The smallest wheel in a big 
machine is able by its precision to promote or its inex- 
actitude to impair the entire movement, just as a dispute 
among a few girls or in one class of operatives may throw 
out of employment hundreds of thousands and affect a 
whole district. It is necessary, therefore, in adjusting 
the rewards, that none be overlooked who have contrib- 
uted, however slightly, to the general result. 

2. The same principle applies in the spreading of the 
knowledge of Christ. There is too strong a tendency in 


44 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


most congregations to leave the work of saving the lost 
to a salaried class. The plan of sending substitutes may 
have its advantages for heathen lands, but it cannot be- 
come universal without serious loss to individual be- 
lievers, as to the church and the world. Your personal 
witness for Christ is an imperative obligation. You 
cannot evade it by any excuse as to your temperament, 
your nervousness, or your circumstances. The King 
makes no exceptions. His command is decisive. If we 
belong to His church we are bound to proclaim His love 
and death to every creature within our reach. You must 
speak of Him to your brother, your neighbour, and your 
fellow-citizens, saying, ‘‘Know the Lord.’’ He that 
heareth must say, Come. In this respect the converts 
on the mission fields set us a notable example, as we 
gather from the reports handed in to the recent Edin- 
burgh Missionary Conference. 

Bishop Tucker, of Uganda, wrote: ‘‘The work of win- 
ning the souls of the people of this country to Christ 
is really being done by the natives themselves, under the 
supervision of the foreign missionaries. Dr. John Ross 
stated that of the twenty thousand church members in 
Manchuria less than one hundred had been led to Christ 
solely by the missionaries, and the remaining nineteen 
thousand nine hundred by the devoted labours of these 
newly converted souls. Dr. Moffet, of Korea, has stated 
that the Korean Christians for the last ten years have 
been bringing in the converts faster than the missiona- 
ries have been able to provide instruction for them. 

It is quite common, says Dr. Mott, in Korea, in Man- 
churia, and other parts of China, for Christians to pledge 
themselves to give a certain number of days to the work 
of public preaching, as well as to speaking to individuals 
one by one, subscribing their time just as we in the 


WHAT IT IS 45 


homelands subscribe our money. At one meeting one 
church member promised to devote to work of this kind 
during the following year one hundred and eighty days, 
and in reporting at the annual meeting a year later he 
apologised because he had been able to give only one 
hundred and sixty-nine days. 

In view of these facts, shall we not, each one, from 
to-day dedicate ourselves to Christ for this service? Is 
it impossible to promise our Lord that, if He will open 
the door of opportunity and give us a tongue and wis- 
dom which cannot be gainsaid, we are willing to speak 
to some one daily on His claims? We shall not, then, 
have to assume any yoke of mere legalism, nor shall we 
force the matter on unwilling ears; but as the opportu- 
nity offers we shall look for the uprising impulse and 
the needed message. It is not what we do for Him, but 
what He does for us, that really tells. 


THE ADVANTAGES OF THE 
EXPOSITORY METHODS 


CHAPTER THREE 


mitt a 


are AA) 


ri 


Py 
ia © 


Til 
THE ADVANTAGES OF THE EXPOSITORY METHODS 


THERE are many advantages in the Expository 
Method. 1. It saves the preacher from getting 
into ruts. One of the holiest and best informed 
ministers I ever knew died in comparatively 
young life, before he had won that position in the 
great city of his adoption which his powers mer- 
ited. His congregation was small, and his church 
weak. On enquiring the reason, I found that he 
was always dwelling on the one subject of sanc- 
tification, till the people wearied of it. He would 
return at the end of the week from a series of 
convention meetings, where his words had fallen 
on the hearts of the people like rain on newly- 
mown lawns, and repeated from his own pulpit, 
Sunday after Sunday, the discourses which had 
produced such evident and blessed results. The 
effect on a stated audience was, however, disap- 
pointing, simply because of the iteration of the 
same lessons, the retreading of the same paths. 

Every minister has his special aptitudes. We 
feel, each one, the drawing of certain subjects. 
Those which have been our own guiding stars 
and beacon lights naturally and frequently occur 
to us for public discourse. It is easy to talk of 

4 49 


50 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


the old time-worn themes which have become fitted 
to our hand. And the only hope for many of us 
is to be compelled to handle those new aspects 
of the old truths which are suggested by continu- 
ous exposition. 

It is related by Dr. John Dick, the well-known 
professor of theology in Scotland, that he went, 
in the early days of his ministry, to a neighbour- 
ing clergyman in the deepest distress, saying: 
‘‘What shall I do? I have preached all I know 
to the people, and have nothing else to give them. 
I have gone through the catechism; and what have 
I more?’’?’ To which his friend replied: ‘‘The 
catechism! Take the Bible, man. It will take you 
a long while to exhaust that.’’ 

To use Martin Luther’s simile, the Bible is 
like a fair and spacious orchard, in which all 
kinds of trees grow, and I quite agree with a 
friend of mine, that the preacher has no right 
to inflict nothing but his special fruit on his con- 
gregation. Granted that he prefers apples, there 
may be many in his congregation who prefer 
plums, pears, or cherries; and surely he is not 
justified to leave these wasting on the trees 
whilst he serves up only apples, apples, apples. 
He is sent into the Land of Promise to bring back 
specimens of the fruits that grow there, and 
should return with the grapes of Eschol, the pome- 
granates and melons, the golden oranges in bas- 
kets of silver filigree work, as well as the apples 
that seem to him the very quintessence of delight. 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 51 


2. Continuous exposition compels the preacher 
to handle big themes. We are all tempted to 
evade the greatest texts because of their tran- 
scendent glory and majesty. We assure ourselves 
that some day we shall have reached a plateau of 
such eminence, either of holiness or knowledge, 
that we shall be able to take a snapshot of the 
Himalaya ranges that stand as a wall against the 
sky, and for the present we will postpone the exe- 
cution of the intention we have formed of dealing 
with these stupendous themes. 

Take for instance the Prologue of the Fourth 
Gospel, or the high-priestly prayer of the seven- 
teenth chapter, or the opening verse of He- 
brews 1, or the closing verses of Romans 8; a min- 
ister puts these away, saying: ‘‘I am not able to 
handle themes like these, and I do not desire to 
announce them as my text, lest I excite hopes that — 
I cannot fulfil, and make myself a laughing-stock. 
Mine is the sparrow’s wing, and I have no pinions 
for these heaven-piercing peaks. I am not suffi- 
cient for these things.’’ Therefore some of us 
never preach on the greatest texts of the Bible. 
We choose little snippets but not great tracts of 
truth. It is a profound mistake. If you are con- 
scious of being the man with one talent, exercise 
it on a big text; the text will insensibly lift up 
yourself and your congregation. To announce it 
will appeal to the heightened imagination of your 
congregation, and this will telepathically react 
on you. 


52 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


But these reasonings do not arise or are 
deemed unworthy of consideration when the 
course of exposition brings you suddenly on one 
of these outstanding paragraphs. It is as when 
a ship that had been pursuing the tortuous wan- 
derings of some high-banked river suddenly 
emerges on the wide still waters of a lake, moun- 
tain-encircled. The passengers expect to be car- 
ried across the waters as they have been conducted 
along the stream; and as they congregate on deck, 
possibly they think less than ever of the skill 
which is guiding them than of the noble panorama 
unfolded to their gaze. 

It is a sad discovery to find the woeful igno- 
rance which prevails in congregations to-day of 
the great basic truths of religion, which should 
underpin the Christian experience. Probably we 
all shrink from preaching doctrinal sermons as 
such. The days are past when our people can 
stand chunks of doctrine piled on their plates for 
their digestion. They are not able to masticate or 
digest them. Minced meat—and minced small—is 
more to their mind. But if we deal systematically 
and continuously with the Word of God, we come 
on the classic passages, on which theology has 
been built. When the geologist stands with you 
at the foot of the chalk-cliffs it is both easy and 
natural for him to pass from the single fossil he 
is handling to discuss the age out of which it 
came, and its relative position with other ages 
that have registered themselves above or below 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 53 


the stratum to which it belongs. Your people 
might present it. But what can they say when 
you announce as your text 1 Peter 1: 1-5, because 
you have determined to take that epistle as the 
subject of your next Expository course! The ad- 
vantages are enormous in this direction; and the 
wise minister will alternate the various books of 
the Bible, following a book of the Old Testament 
with one of the New, or the story of our Lord 
or of His apostles with the study of the Epistle 
to the Hebrews or a letter of the Apostle Paul. 

3. The expositor will be led to handle sub- 
jects which would not otherwise occur to him. In 
every congregation there are touchy people, who 
need to be dealt with in regard to some duties 
they omit, or indiscretions or faults they commit. 
If the pastor were to select a text bearing on 
these points, they would almost certainly suppose 
that he was levelling his sermon on them and 
holding them up before the congregation for criti- 
cism and reproof. Men will stand a direct chal- 
lenge in private. David did not resent Nathan’s 
‘“<Thou art the man,’’ when they two met in the 
inner chamber of the palace. But when the un- 
named prophet from Judah rebuked Jeroboam 
before all the people that were gathered around 
the altar, he resented the impertinence bitterly, 
putting forth his hand from the altar, and crying, 
‘“‘Lay hold of him.’’ Men cannot endure being 
preached at. 

A continuous course of exposition, however, 


54 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


obviates any such imputation. If a passage seems 
unusually pertinent to some person in the audi- 
ence, he cannot resent the warning or appeal 
which the preacher bases upon it. If, for instance, 
there is a wealthy farmer in the congregation who 
is a notorious skinflint, and not too careful of the 
interests of his labourers or of the poor around 
him, he cannot accuse the minister of personali- 
ties if, in the regular course of teaching, the ser- 
mon is based on Amos 8:4-7. In the course of 
my ministry I have often found that the old He- 
brew prophets would say for me all that I wanted 
to say on Social Economics. Or suppose there is 
a family quarrel afoot, arising from the bitter 
disposition and caustic tongue of man or wife, 
the whole family cannot resent the plain instruc- 
tion of the pulpit, which in the ordinary course is 
dwelling on Colossians 3:18-21. Young women 
who overdress will not think that the pastor is 
hitting at them if he has come, in expounding 
Isaiah, to 3: 16-26. 

There is not a phase of character or experi- 
ence which is not touched on and treated in the 
contents of Scripture; and it is a profound loss 
to a congregation if it is not fed on the entire 
wheat of the Divine Word. Eliminate from our 
food-stuffs one ingredient, and the children 
around your board will pay dearly for your neg- 
lect. Similarly it is impossible to omit any of 
the teachings, reproofs, corrections, or instruc- 
tions of Scripture without leaving the man of God 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 85 


incomplete and inadequately furnished unto good 
works. ‘‘Every Scripture inspired of God is 
profitable.’’ 

This is why the short term of ministry, too 
much in vogue in the present day, is so greatly 
to be deplored. It does not give the minister the 
chance of unfolding the Bible to his people. He 
therefore wanders aimlessly over the entire sur- 
face of the boundless prairie, browsing here and 
there, according to his whim, instead of leading 
his flock systematically from one fenced-in portion 
to another, until in due time the whole has been 
covered and has yielded its contribution to their 
health and well-being. 

Continuous exposition not only saves a minis- 
ter from the imputation of personalities, but cre- 
ates a well-instructed congregation. It is sur- 
prising how low is the average of Bible knowledge 
among our people, which arises in part from the 
use of selected texts and passages. It will shock 
some people to hear it said, but I profoundly be- 
lieve it, that the widespread habit of using these 
booklets, in which tiny tit-bits are served up for 
consumption, is as hurtful spiritually as it would 
be physically were we always to stand at a quick- 
lunch bar to get our meals. They are very well if 
used with the Bible, but extremely harmful when 
used alone; and to the widespread habit of confin- 
‘ing our Bible study to these may be attributed the 
surprising ignorance of the Book which is ac- 
knowledged to be the Book of books, whose praises 


56 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


are on every tongue, but the real knowledge of 
which is less than of the standard works of fiction 
or poetry. 

An amusing instance of this ignorance oc- 
curred a generation ago in the British House of 
Commons. Mr. John Bright, a distinguished 
member of the Society of Friends, alluding to 
Mr. Robert Lowe and others, who rebelled against 
the Reform Bill of the Liberal leader, said that 
they had gone into a Cave of Adullam. Two 
members, leaving the House, were overheard dis- 
cussing the metaphor. One said to the other, ‘‘I 
say, where did Bright get that illustration of his 
to-night about the cave?’’? ‘‘Oh,’’ was the reply, 
‘“‘T see what you’re up to; do you suppose IL 
haven’t read the ‘Arabian Nights’??? These men 
were probably church-goers, for in those days 
most public men attended church, for appear- 
ances’ sake. But let us not smile at this mistake, 
lest we be liable to be held up for repeating it. 
There are parts of our Bible which we peruse 
pretty frequently, and they begin to show signs 
of wear and tear, but other and much more con- 
siderable portions are almost as fresh and new 
as when they came from the printer, twenty years 
ago. 

The expositor of Scripture occupies a field in 
which he has no rival. If we discuss politics, the 
professional politician or leader writer can easily 
distance us. If we deal with social questions, the 
pages of our monthly magazines will furnish bet- 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 57 


ter material, more up to date, and more highly 
spiced. We might go further and say that ques- 
tions of metaphysics or philosophy are more likely 
to be handled well by brilliant thinkers and writ- 
ers than by the majority of our hard-driven min- 
isters. But when we leave these subjects and 
bend ourselves to the careful and studied unfold- 
ing of the treasures hidden in Scripture, we are 
monarchs of all we survey, and our right there is 
none to dispute. What a mistake it is to vacate 
an unassailable position as the expositors of 
Scripture and descend into lower levels, where we 
expose ourselves to invidious comparisons! Our 
prerogative is to command ourselves to every 
man’s conscience in the sight of God by manifes- 
tations of the truth, and by this sign alone can 
we conquer. 

When Richard of England, on his way back 
from the Crusades, was waylaid by his enemies, 
and imprisoned in a remote castle in Austria, his 
bereaved subjects had no clue to his whereabouts. 
But in his household there was a French musician, 
Blondin, who resolved to discover his master. If 
he had used the methods which the statesmen of 
the realm were employing, he would have stood 
at a great disadvantage, because they were adepts 
in their business; but there was one art in which 
he stood alone. The king and he had spent long 
hours together as true troubadours, inventing 
lays and sonnets, with which they two were alone 
acquainted. This was his perquisite, his talisman, 


58 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


his clue; and singing these lays through Europe 
beneath the windows of each frowning fortress, 
he finally heard them repeated by a manly voice 
which he knew and loved, and in that repetition 
was assured that he had discovered the prison of 
his captured lord. This led to Richard’s emanci- 
pation by the payment of a heavy fine. So the 
minister of the gospel, like another troubadour, 
has to g0 through the world with one instrument 
in his hand—the Bible—the strains of which he 
must elicit with no uncertain touch, confident that 
they will secure a deep response from the heart 
of man. From each man’s conscience in God’s 
sight the answer comes back to the Word of the 
Eternal, which proves that the Creator of the one 
was the Author of the other. No one can vie with 
the minister in this special office, which has been 
entrusted to him by Christ when He said, througli 
the apostle, to all His Timothies: ‘‘I charge thee 
in the sight of God . . . preach the Word; be 
instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, 
exhort, with all long-suffering and teaching; for 
the time will come when they will not endure 
sound (2. e., healthful doctrine) ; but, having itch- 
ing ears, will heap to themselves teachers after 
their own lusts.’’ 

But the last argument that we will advance 
here for continuous exposition is that, while it 
honours the Word of God, it gives immense force 
to the ministry that is based upon it. We are 
so familiar with the spectacle that it fails to im- 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 59 


press us that during the delivery of a sermon the 
Bible lies open, as though the preacher were giv- 
ing it an utterance. In a sense we may apply to 
the gospel ministry statements originally made 
of our Lord. ‘‘The Word was made flesh, and 
dwelt among us, and we beheld its glory, the glory 
as of the Only Begotten of the Father.’’ 

This has been the stronghold of the Protestant 
Church. Before the Reformation the priest oc- 
cupied almost the entire space in the eye of his 
contemporaries. The sacraments became an un- 
intelligible mummery, the truths of the gospel 
receded further and further into the distance and 
were veiled by the grossest superstitions. The 
Bible was practically a lost Book, and it was the 
desire of the ecclesiastics of the age that it should 
remain so. 

Luther’s discovery of the Bible on the shelves 
of the monastery dated a new epoch in the history 
of Europe. True, Wyclif and Huss had striven 
to give it to the common people, but their efforts 
had been largely overborne by the opposition with 
which they were confounded. By the peculiar 
providence of God, and because the times were 
ripe, Luther not only survived all the plottings 
of the enemies of the Truth, but was able to trans- 
late and print the Scriptures in the tongue of his 
people. In addition he was a massive expositor 
and preacher of what he had discovered. His ex- 
positions remain to the present day as magnifi- 
cent contributions to expository literature. There 


60 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


is probably no more illuminating commentary ex- 
tant than his on the Galatians. 

Thus the Bible superseded the altar, and the 
expositor the priest. ‘‘No greater change,’’ says 
Green, the historian, ‘‘ever passed over England 
during the reign of Elizabeth. England became 
the people of one Book, and that Book the Bible. 
It was read at churches and read at home, and 
everywhere its words, as they fell on ears which 
custom had not deadened, kindled a startling en- 
thusiasm. When Bishop Bunner set up the first 
six Bibles in St. Paul’s, ‘many well-disposed per- 
sons used much to resort to the hearing thereof, 
especially when they could get any that had an 
audible voice to read to them.’ But the goodly 
exercise of readers, such as Porter, was soon su- 
perseded by the continual recitation, both of Old 
Testament and New, in the public services of the 
Chureh!’’? This recitation and exposition has 
been the glory and strength of an evangelical 
ministry from that time onwards. 

The expositor of the Bible is therefore in the 
line of a great succession. The Reformers, the 
Puritans, the pastors of the Pilgrim Fathers were 
essentially expositors. They did not announce 
their own particular opinions, which might be 
matters of private interpretation or doubtful dis- 
putation; but, taking their stand on Scripture, 
drove home their message with irresistible effect 
with ‘‘Thus saith the Lord.’’ 

Surely we may go beyond that great age 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 61 


through the centuries to Augustine and Ambrose, 
to Chrysostom and Athanasius, always their ap- 
peal was to Scripture, and their strength in its 
systematic unfolding. The sermons of the apos- 
tles were little else than quotations and applica- 
tions of Old Testament Scriptures, and our Lord’s 
own appeals were enforced by citations from the 
Law, the Psalms, and the Prophets. 

When the minister is always turning to the 
Word of God for his authority, when his finger 
falls naturally on the open page where the proof 
text awaits his appeal, when each argument is 
clenched by the endorsement of the Divine Word, 
he not only places himself on the highest vantage- 
ground possible, but compels his people to stand 
before the Supreme Tribunal. 

Of course we understand that things are true 
so far as they are so in the nature of things. 
Speaking of the ultimate sanctions of right and 
wrong, we may say that they are to be found in 
the moral constitution of the universe, which is 
necessarily what it is; but as the chart reveals 
the headlands and indentations of the coast, so 
does the Bible reveal the inexorable demands of 
God, which were established before the founda- 
tions of the earth were laid. Therefore, when the 
minister buttresses his words on Scripture, and 
shows that he is warranted in his assertions by 
the Word of God, he is bringing into court not 
only the sacred record of the experiences, revela- 
tions and meditations of the chosen channels of 


62 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


the Divine Spirit, but he is summoning the very 
foundations of the moral universe to affirm that 
what he says is true. This enables him ‘‘to speak 
with authority, and not as the scribes.”’ 

For the most of us it is unwise to enter into 
detailed defence of the Bible. The familiar hu- 
mourous story of the verger who said that he 
had heard all the Bampton lectures and was 
thankful to be still a believer, suggests that the 
effect of such sermons on ordinary people is 
rather in the direction of disturbing than of re- 
assuring them. Probably the Bible is better left 
to give its own witness to itself. We are not sent 
to defend the Bible, but to give it utterance, and 
it will defend itself and its expositor. Your con- 
gregations, seeing your deference to the authority 
of Scripture, will come to honour it as you do. 
They will regard it as the ultimate appeal, the 
judge that ends all strife. There is, of course, a 
gradation in its teachings, from the twilight of 
the earlier portions to the meridian of the Epistles 
of John, but it stands for evermore not only as 
the Illuminator and Comforter of the soul, but 
as the power-house from which the energy of God 
is passed into the sermons of the preacher and 
the resolutions of his congregation. 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 63 


RESTORED HARMONY—EXPOSITION OF 
PSALM 19:4 


“‘THEIR line is gone out through all the earth, and 
their words to the end of the world.’’ (Psalm 19: 4.) 


This word translated ‘‘line’’ is very interesting. In 
the first instance it means a measuring-cord, such as is 
used by an architect for purposes of surveying. Thence 
it derived the further idea of a cord tightly stretched 
which gives a musical sound. This is the interpretation 
taken by the Septuagint, and reproduced by the Apostle 
Paul when he quotes this verse in Romans 10:18: ‘‘Their 
sound went out into all the earth, and their words unto 
the ends of the world.’’ He uses the same word, indeed, 
in 1 Corinthians 14:7, of the sweet sounds of the pipe 
and harp. It is held also by an eminent commentator 
on the Psalter that the word really means chord or key- 
note; and this view is supported by Eusebius, who para- 
phrases the verse thus: ‘‘The voices of days and nights, 
to those who are able to perceive them, shout so loudly 
that their rehearsal reaches every ear. Accordingly the 
whole world of human beings is filled with their well- 
measured, alternate, choral singing.’’ In this regard the 
heavens maintain for all creation the time and rhythm 
in the great concert of songs without words; and is not 
this what the ancients taught, that there is music in the 
spheres? Addison sings: 


‘““What though, in solemn silence, all 
Move round this dark terrestrial ball? 
What though no real voice, nor sound, 
Amidst the radiant orbs be found? 


64 EXPOSITORY, PREACHING 


‘*In reason’s ear they all rejoice, 
And utter forth a glorious voice; 
For ever singing as they shine— 
The Hand that made us is Divine.’’ 


1. The Order and Harmony of Nature. The Highth 
Psalm begins with the words, ‘‘When I consider thy, 
heavens, the moon and stars;’’ so, clearly, it was com- 
posed under the aspect of night. Here the sun is de- 
picted as a bridegroom emerging from the glowing cham- 
bers of the east, which clearly stamps this psalm as hay- 
ing been composed under the aspect of the morning 
glory. There were three ideas in the psalmist’s mind: 

(1) The personality of the Creator. The azure blue, 
which to us speaks of infinite depth, to David appeared 
as a piece of blue tapestry which had been woven on the 
Divine hand-loom: ‘‘The firmament showeth his handi- 
work.’’? The materialist speaks of the eternity of matter, 
and argues that Nature contains, locked within herself, 
the plan and potency of her own existence. The idolator 
is disposed to believe that the sun and moon and heay- 
enly bodies are deities who determine the lot of human 
life, and need to be propitiated. But against each of 
these David put the conviction that the heavens declared 
the eternal power and Godhead of the Almighty. Comte, 
the philosopher, ventured to say that the heavens de- 
clared the glory of the astronomer, not of God; but, as 
has been truly said, wherever there is order there must 
be thought, and wherever there is thought there must 
be a thinker; and who is that thinker but God? He 
hath not left Himself without witness. His invisible 
things are clearly seen through the things that are made. 
Through the solar realms the anointed ear detects a voice 
saying, ‘‘God is; God made us; God is here.’’ 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 65 


(2) The silence with which the testimony is given. 
The Authorised Version rendering obscures the sense; 
e. g., ‘‘ There is no speech nor language, where their voice 
is not heard.’? How incomparably majestic is the 
original: ‘‘There is no speech, there are no words, all 
inaudible is their voice!’’ The silent splendour of the 
midnight sky, of sunrise smiting the Alps, of the Aurora 
at night, of the noiseless revolutions of the worlds, fill 
our hearts with awe. The contrast with the hubbub and 
storm of human life is so absolute, and yet the psalmist 
says one day ‘‘wells over’’ into the next with speech, 
and night signals on to night. This blending of speech 
with silence is the best restorative of the overwrought 
brain. It is only when we are still as to the physical ear 
that we can detect the harmonious voice of Nature. 
Alas for those who will not or dare not expose their souls 
to these eloquent and silent preachers! 

(3) The energy that thrills through nature. The 
sun is depicted as a strong man. Modern science has 
demonstrated the truth of this conception of strength as 
attributed to the sun. We know that the ultra-violet 
rays, or actinic rays, contain a virtue, an energy, which 
is probably the source of all power in the natural world. 
The coal of the mine, the electricity stored more or less 
in all substances, the power that drives our factories, 
locomotive and motors, the life-giving power in all vege- 
table and animal existence, are all variations of solar 
energy. 

But, after all, the supreme thought suggested by the 
heavens is their purity and order. One looks up into 
the blue of the mid-day sky, conscious that there at least 
is perfect purity. There is no discord between them and 
the Divine nature, no want of harmony in their relations 
to each other, no stain of impurity or evil.. Silently they 

5 


66 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


have witnessed scenes of outrageous crime upon our 
earth, but they have not been infected or inflamed. And 
as we look towards them our hearts condemn us. Here 
are the ninety and nine that have not gone astray; but 
woe is unto us that we are people of unclean lips and 
our dwelling is in a world of uncleanness. For us there 
is but one confession to the Shepherd of these hosts, who 
ealleth them all by their names, ‘‘We have gone astray 
like lost sheep.”’ 

2. The Order and Harmony of the Moral World. The 
psalmist in the second division of this sublime ode turns 
to the moral world, which underpins the physical, and 
which fashions the Scriptures. A German writer has 
said that the two things which struck him with the feel- 
ing of the sublime were the starry heavens outside and 
the moral sense within. Instead of the ‘‘moral sense’’ 
let us substitute ‘‘God’s Revealed World,’’ and you have 
the precise contrast of this psalm. 

We cannot stay to notice the affectionate terms in 
which he refers to it. Six different words are used: ‘‘the 
law,’’ ‘‘the testimony,’’ ‘‘the precepts,’’ ‘‘the command- 
ment,’’ ‘‘the fear,’’ and ‘‘the judgments’? of Jehovah. 
Note that whereas for the description of the book of 
Nature he uses the Hebrew EL for the Almighty, in 
this description of the Scriptures of Truth he employs 
the name Jehovah, which always describes the Redemp- 
tive aspect of the Divine Nature. 

‘We must concentrate our thought on the life which 
the moral law intends. If we were to obey the impulses 
and intentions of that silent moral world with the same 
precision as the worlds obey the motions impressed on 
them by their Creator, there would result the light, the 
music, and the order that are so evident in Creation. 
They are perfect—i. e., without flaw; and if we were 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 67 


ruled by them, our soul should be ‘‘converted’’—i. ¢., 
established and kept in the original divine ideals. They 
are sure—i. e., steady, not fitful or intermittent in their 
effect, communicating infallible wisdom to any soul that 
will open its windows and doors to receive their radiance. 
They are right—i. e., they prescribe the true and direct 
road towards man’s goal. They are pure—i. e., they 
have a radiance like the sun, only of a higher quality 
than this. They are clean—. e., absolutely free from the 
loathsome impurities of the human heart. They are true 
and wholly righteous—t. e., corresponding to the facts 
of God and of humanity. They rival the wealth of gold 
and the sweetness of honey. 

We may paraphrase the words of the psalmist thus: 
‘‘The Scriptures declare the glory of God, and inspira- 
tion shows his handiwork. Book unto book wells over 
with speech of him, mystery after mystery shows knowl- 
edge. There is no speech nor language which the un- 
godly can hear. Their voice is not heard, yet the music 
of their speech has gone forth into all the world, and 
their words to every nation under heaven. In them 
there is provided a tent for Jesus the Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness; and as the clouds of the Eastern sky 
glow with glory, when the sun emerges from the night 
to begin the labour of the day, so do the Scriptures glow 
in every line and verse with the reflected glory of the 
King of Glory. None are hidden from the heart of his 
heart, or the love that he hath towards the children of 
men.’’ 

3. The Disorder and Discord of the Inner World. 
What is this that we meet? What is this about errors and 
secret faults and presumptuous sins and the great trans- 
gression? Why does the psalmist appeal to J ehovah as 
his Rock, and notably as his Redeemer? Let Milton an- 


Swer: 


68 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


‘*Disproportioned sin 
Jarred against Nature’s chime, and with harsh din 
Broke the fair music that all creatures made 
To their great Lord, whose love their motion swayed.”’ 


There are four words here demanding careful 
thought. ‘‘Who can understand his errors?’’? The He- 
brew word indicates sins of ignorance or inadvertence; 
we might call them unsuspected sins. How well I re- 
member, years ago, my first lesson in elocution. Though 
I had no special conceit of myself, I had no idea how 
faulty my speech was till my master imitated it. It 
startled me as much as when first I heard my voice come 
back from the phonograph. Probably all of us are com- 
mitting sins daily of which we know nothing. Below 
our outward action there is a whole world of thoughts, 
impulses and emotions which we accept as ordinary and 
human, but would be the first to condemn if we saw them 
as God does. Traitors are in the camp! White ants are 
eating out the pith. Gray hairs are on our heads, though 
we know it not. We are unkempt and ill-dressed be- 
cause we have shaved and dressed in the dim morning 
twilight. We are perpetrating habits that are under- 
mining our spiritual health as certain other habits are 
sapping our physical. We have contracted disease which 
is at work in our nature, dragging it down impercep- 
tibly, though we wist it not. The Delilah razor is creep- 
ing over our locks of strength, though we are unaware. 
We call vices by euphonious names, as when we call 
anger “‘righteous indignation,’’ or passion ‘‘a warm na- 
ture,’’ or the love of money ‘‘a prudent care for our 
own.’’ David flared up when he heard the story of the 
rich man who took the poor man’s ewe lamb, but had 
no sort of idea that he was doing the same thing him- 


29 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS — 69 


self. If we were to take the poor daub of our character 
and place it alongside the perfect beauty of Christ, we 
should have very little to think or say of ourselves there- 
after. 

Cleanse Thou me from secret faults. We may take 
those as being the faults which we hide from the eyes 
which are closest and quickest. A little while ago the 
papers reported that the cloud by day and fire by night 
which hovers over Vesuvius has ceased, and that instead 
invisible vapours, full of poison, arise from the crater. 
Better the visible than the invisible emission of destruc- 
tive gases. So secret faults are more perilous than open 
ones. Dr. Watkinson has told us that elephantiasis may 
be occasioned by a mosquito bite. The worst diseases 
to which we are heir begin with infinitesimal bacilli. It 
is wise in physical health to watch for those secret warn- 
ings which portend coming disaster. Hide these, and 
the full power of some terrible disease will presently 
assert itself. Are any yielding to secret sins, sins which 
they dare not speak of, which their dearest would be 
paralyzed to know of, which they would be the first to 
judge, and judge harshly in others? Let such emulate 
the psalmist in his desire to regulate his life in its most 
secret springs. If you would deal successfully with a 
child’s character, says one, you must begin with its 
mother’s mother. And if you would be kept from a 
fall which will bring disgrace on your name and family, 
begin with David’s prayer. The oak would never fall 
before the gale had it not been the prey of the insidious 
insects which had eaten out its heart. 

Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins. The 
word ‘‘presumptuous”’ literally means that which boils 
and bubbles. This is a befitting term for the sins into 
which we are hurried by the agitation of excited im- 


70 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


pulses and passions in spite of the remonstrances of our 
conscience. They are sins that the doer, when he does 
them, knows to be wrong. Do we not all recall moments 
when we knew that a certain deed was wrong, but we 
have set our teeth to do it, and have done it? Now, of 
course, such sins may so frighten us that to have com- 
mitted them once will set us against them for ever. 
David’s agony over his sin with Bathsheba, like a prairie 
fire, burnt his heart bare, and no similar act could find 
aught to feed upon. And a man’s sin may prove his 
salvation, but it is not always so. Presumptuous sins 
may get dominion over us. The physiologist tells us that 
the repetition of the same action for but a few times 
deeply affects the particles, tissues, and nerves of the 
body, establishing a strong tendency in the same direc- 
tion. The track, once trodden, becomes more and more 
a path. The rill that trickles through the dyke will be- 
come the flood. The weed which is but a single plant to- 
day will become a mass of floating vegetation to-morrow. 
One pair of gray squirrels filled Regent’s Park with that 
species and drove out all the little brown ones that had 
held undisputed sway. ‘‘Look, therefore, carefully how 
ye walk, not as unwise, but as wise.’’ The collier who 
descends the pit and walks through the long galleries, 
guarding his lamp, has our profound sympathy; but 
what shall we say of him when he opens his lamp to 
light his pipe! Alfred Nobel, the great inventor of ex- 
plosives, faced the most tremendous perils in carrying 
out his experiments. On one occasion he crept up to 
a large cask of dynamite and cut out an explosive in the 
very nick of time. But how different such an attitude 
to the presumptuousness of the fools that would play 
with nitro-glycerine. This world of ours is by no means 
fool-proof, and we need to ask daily that we may not be 


ADVANTAGES OF THE METHODS 71 


led into temptation or may enter the fire with our pow- 
der saturated with moisture. 

So only shall we be preserved from great transgres- 
sion. This means rebellion and revolt. Here is the re- 
sult of tampering with temptation, that there is an en- 
tire casting off of all allegiance to God. This is the 
terrible sequel. He who toyed with evil becomes mas- 
tered by evil. ‘‘His servants ye are whom ye obey.”’ 
The secret obedience of the traitorous heart to the enemy 
of our Master prepares the way for His enthronement 
and crowning. First, unsuspected sin, unsuspected 
through unwatchfulness; then secret sin, known to the 
soul, but hidden from others; then presumptuous sin, 
impetuous and barefaced; lastly, the great transgression, 
when the soul disowns God. ‘‘Lust, when it hath con- 
ceived, beareth sin; and sin, when it is fullgrown, bring- 
eth forth death.’’ 

See, then, what has happened. Yonder is the Order 
and Beauty of the Physical World; within is the Order 
and Beauty of the Moral World. But now we are face 
to face with the Disorder and Discord of the Inner 
World of Man Soul. What can be done? Man cannot 
right himself. The forces of evil are too strong, be- 
cause generations of evildoers lie behind us. What, then, 
shall we do? To whom can we turn? To none save to 
our God. He is our Rock, the eternal ground of all 
Being, of all Truth and Right and Holiness; but He is 
also our Redeemer, our God, having tender pity for our 
fallen and sorrowful state. 

Rock stands for strength, and we need strength. Re- 
deemer means love, and we need love. Both are blended 
in Jesus Christ. Here is that of which Creation and 
the Moral Law cannot speak. In them there is appar- 
ently nothing but Law, swift to smite, merciless and un- 


72 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


sparing. But the missal of Gethsemane, Calvary, the 
open grave, declare the glory and handiwork of God 
as neither of the other books could do. Is there no 
speech, no language from those mute wounds, more elo- 
quent than all the speech of suns and worlds? 

But what will He do? First, He clears from guilt; 
and next He keeps back from presumptuous sin by the 
saving strength of His right hand; and next He brings 
us into At-one-ment with God, and so into accord with 
the fair music that all creatures make to their great 
Lord. 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD 


CHAPTER FOUR 


IV 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD —HIS REVERENCE FOR AND 
USE OF SCRIPTURE 


Ovr Lord’s attitude towards Scripture is really 
suggestive. His own life-course was determined 
by it. Not only at the great crises, but in smaller 
matters and minute details He was ruled by it. 
He affirmed that His reading of parables, His 
going up to Jerusalem, His working of miracles, 
betrayal of Judas, seizure of the Jews, violent 
death, and victorious resurrection were all in ac- 
cordance with Scripture. He found these and 
many minute points beside recorded on its pages. 
It was clear to Him that His whole career had 
been set down by the Divine Spirit in cypher on 
those sacred pages, with which He was so inti- 
mately familiar. He was guided in the jots and 
tittles of His life and ministry by His Father’s 
will as it was expressed through Scripture and 
mapped out there. 

When the disciples asked the reason of His 
clothing His teaching in those picture stories, 
which have enriched the thought and speech of 
men in every page, He told them that it was to 
fulfil what had been spoken of the Prophet (Matt. 
13: 13-15, 34, 35; John 12:38, 39). When He 
was bearing the griefs and sorrows of mankind 

75 


76 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


He found His justification again in Isaiah’s words 
(Matt. 8:16, 17). The wonder at His frequently 
repeated cautions that the healed should not make 
Him known was met by reference to Scripture 
predictions (Matt. 12:15-21). His triumphal en- 
trance into Jerusalem was justified by the require- 
ments of ancient prophecy. Many of the pathetic 
details of His last hours were, in a most literal 
and significant sense, the fulfillment of Scripture. 
The crowning with thorns, the scourging, the 
piercing of hands, feet and side, the vinegar, the 
mockery, the unbroken bones, the parted raiment, 
the broken heart, the burial in the rich man’s se- 
pulchre, the very words He used on the cross, 
all prove, in affecting detail, how saturated His 
soul was with Scripture, and how minutely He 
fulfilled it in countless particulars. From the 
beginning of His public ministry, when He re- 
pelled Satan by the thrice, ‘‘J¢t is written,’’ to the 
close, when He taught His disciples in all the 
Scriptures, ‘‘the things concerning himself,’’— 
the Word of God was His rod and His staff. 

It has been truly said that no disciples of 
Browning or Tennyson, Milton or Shakespeare, 
Goethe or Dante, Virgil or Homer, were ever so 
saturated with their master’s thoughts or so 
steeped in their spirit as Jesus was with Scrip- 
ture. He discovered unexpected truths in it, re- 
vealed Divine depths, disclosed hidden meanings, 
made unthought-of applications—unforeseen by 
the writers and unperceived by the readers. It 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD 17 


was its sustenance of His own soul’s life and the 
nourishment of His spiritual nature. His human 
character developed along its lines, whilst His 
moral and spiritual being was perfected by its 
indwelling up to the full stature of His glorious 
manhood. He performed His life-work under its 
inspiration, defended Himself by its examples, re- 
sisted His temptations in its strength, sustained 
His soul by its comfort, died with its blessed 
words upon His lips. To Him it was the true 
and faithful Word of God, which could not be 
broken, but was the foundation and pillar of truth. 
So we may readily suppose, therefore, He was 
The Prince of Expositors. We are told that ‘‘He 
expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things 
concerning himself.’’ 

One notable example of this occurred at Naza- 
reth. He had passed, on the way to the synagogue 
from Mary’s house, many a bent and aged elder 
whom He had known strong and stalwart years 
before. Many a voice He recognized in the clear 
sunny air as belonging to a girl or boy of His 
happy boyhood’s memories. The well-remem- 
bered little meeting-place was crowded by the 
friends and families of His early years. The an- 
cient Levite, who may have been the first to un- 
fold to Him the sacred mysteries of Scripture, 
may have been the minister of the sanctuary who 
handed to Him the sacred scroll and motioned 
Him to read. Mary was there behind the screen 
that hid the women from gaze, and His brother 


78 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


sat in the audience. What should be His subject 
on that memorable day, when beneath the pres- 
sure of the great tides that were pulsing through 
His spirit He stood up before the expectant 
audience? He turned to the lesson of the day, to 
the next in the course, and proceeded to expound 
Isaiah 60: 1-3. 

We cannot found an argument upon this single 
act, but it is at least significant that the Lord 
gave His sanction to the systematic reading and 
consideration of the inspired Word in His earli- 
est sermon. 

Our Lord was also careful to consider the text 
in relation to the context and the whole tenor and 
teaching of Scripture. The habit of taking a 
little snippet of a verse from any part of the Bible 
and making it the subject of discourse, exposes 
the preacher to the danger of an unbalanced state- 
ment of truth, which is very prejudicial. Nothing 
is more perilous than the partial knowledge of 
God’s truth, which is based on sentences torn 
from their rock-bed and viewed in isolation from 
their setting. 

When Satan was met by our Lord’s use of 
Scripture, he also quoted Scripture to his pur- 
pose, saying, ‘‘It is written that he shall give his 
angels charge over thee, to keep thee, lest thou 
dash thy foot against a stone.’? But there was 
a touch almost of sternness in our Lord’s reply, 
“‘It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the 
Lord thy God.’’ ‘*What is the meaning of that?”’ 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD 79 


asks Dr. Parker. It is that the Bible is not made 
to be of one text. The meaning is that you must 
compare Scripture with Scripture. It is possible 
to fasten the mind upon a single line, so as to 
miss the whole revelation of the Bible. We have 
to compare spiritual things with spiritual. It is 
written here, and it is written again; and the one 
passage must be read in the light of the other. 
You must have the whole Bible, and not an iso- 
lated text, to rest upon. There is a Biblical spirit 
as well as a Biblical letter. 

Surely this Biblical spirit is more certainly 
imbibed, and the whole tenor of truth more cer- 
tainly embraced, when a congregation is led 
consecutively through some noble argument like 
that of the Romans, or a series of ascents like 
those of the Hebrews, than would be possible if 
isolated topics were selected, apparently at hap- 
hazard. 

Our Lord always associated the Scriptures 
with the energy of Divine power. During the last 
week of His earthly ministry He was confronted 
by a series of questions carefully prepared to en- 
trap Him. ‘‘There came unto him Sadducees, 
which say that there is no resurrection: and they 
asked him,’’ ete. (Mark 12:19, etc.). 

Our Lord introduced His reply by the startling 
announcement that they erred greatly because 
“‘they knew not the Scriptures, nor the power of 
God.’’ They were not prepared to suppose that 
there was anything in the Hebrew Scriptures with 


80 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


which they were not already perfectly familiar. 
It was a novel experience to be taught by one 
who had not passed through their schools, and to 
find Him connecting in this wonderful manner 
the Scriptures and the power of God. 

Three things are worthy of notice: (1) Our 
Lord did not appeal, as Plato might have done, to 
arguments for the other life, based on the nature 
of the soul or the processes of nature, but to the 
Scriptures, which were ever His ultimate court 
of appeal. In His conflict with Satan and in His 
teachings His supreme appeal was always to the 
Word of God. (2) He discovered an argument 
for the future life in the present tense, as Jehovah 
used it, in His first conference with Moses. In 
this He shows His reverence for the very letter 
of the Word of God, and reminds us of Paul the 
Apostle, who founds an argument on the presence 
or absence of a single letter (Gal. 3:16). 

We should never have dreamed of the fathom- 
less depths that underlie those simple words, ‘‘I 
am,’’ unless He had taken us by the hand and 
bade us look into their profundity, blue with dis- 
tance. It was argument enough for our Lord that 
two hundred and fifty or three hundred years 
after the death of the youngest patriarch God 
described Himself as being the God of Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob; and from these words He, as 
man, arrived at the assurance and was warranted 
to affirm that all these souls must be in existence 
somewhere, since God could not be God of the 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD 81 


dead, but of the living. If God could still assert 
Himself as the God of Jacob two and a half cen- 
turies after he had been laid to sleep in Mach- 
pelah’s ancient cave, then Jacob must still be 
alive! What light this casts on the possibilities 
that sleep under the simplest texts! We pass and 
repass over them, like the prone gravestones of 
an old churchyard, which have become a well-worn 
pathway to hurrying feet, but we cannot exhaust 
the depths that lie under. From this instance, 
however, we may infer the mysteries of wonder 
and beauty that our Lord must have unfolded to 
His disciples during the forty days, when, as we 
have seen, He expounded to them in all the Scrip- 
tures the things concerning Himself. 

Why did our Lord so significantly combine the 
Scriptures with the power of God? If we can as- 
certain what the Scriptures are we may arrive 
somewhat nearer the truth. Perhaps we cannot 
put the matter better than in the words of Dr. 
Gordon, ‘‘Literature is the letter, Scripture is 
the letter inspired of the Spirit.’’ What our Lord 
said of the New Birth is equally applicable to the 
doctrine of inspiration, ‘‘That which is born of 
the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the 
Spirit is spirit.’’ 

You may educate, develop and refine the nat- 
ural man to the highest possible point, but he does 
not become a spiritual man till, through the new 
birth, the Holy Spirit renews and dwells in him, 
energizes and strengthens him with all might in 


82 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


the inner man. So of literature; however elevated 
its tone, lofty its thought, eloquent its expression, 
it is not Scripture, because it is not, in any spe- 
cial sense, the organ and weapon of the Divine 
Spirit. The absence of the quickening energy and 
vitalizing power of the Holy Spirit from any writ- 
ing constitutes an impassable gulf between it and 
Scripture. In short, the one fact which makes the 
Word of God a unique book, standing in solitary 
separateness from other writings, is that which 
also parts the man of God from common men—the 
indwelling of the Holy Spirit. 

We must not speak of Scripture as having 
been once inspired of the Spirit of God, as though 
it were not so now, but as still being inspired. 
The bush burns with fire. The voice of God 
speaks in it. The Word gives living force to 
the words. The words are, as our Lord affirmed, 
both Spirit and life. As the sun burns in our 
furnaces, its heat having been for millenniums 
bottled up in the coal, which has been described as 
fossilized sunlight; so the Holy Spirit is present 
in Scripture as in no other writing under heaven. 
Our Lord’s perception of this made the Scripture 
His constant meditation and final court of appeal. 
And in proportion as we use them, enforcing and 
applying, we also shall discover that to a super- 
excellent degree they contain not only oracles, but 
the power of God. 

Even the words of Scripture are not unim- 
portant, We may go too far in the further ex- 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD 83 


treme from the doctrine of verbal dictation. If 
they were not dictated, they have at least an- 
swered to the Divine thought as the coin to the 
die; and we are not at liberty to alter the lan- 
guage without imperilling the thought. The ex- 
positor, therefore, may be excused if he should 
linger lovingly over the very words of the para- 
graph which he is unfolding. Many of them are 
so apt, so picturesque, so laden with suggestive- 
ness that they well deserve to be held up to an 
audience as the connoisseur will hold up precious 
stones, dilating and expatiating on their beauty. 

Whatever God has promised in Scripture He 
is prepared to make good by His power. Not 
only is there power in the Word, but with it. We 
must know the Scriptures and the power of God. 
In the proper balancing of these two—in the study 
of Scripture on the one hand, and in the adoring 
contemplation of God’s power on the other—we 
shall find our best preservative against the errors 
of our age; and so we may await the hour when 
God will vindicate Himself. ‘‘What he has prom- 
ised he is able also to perform.”’ 

Not the Scriptures without the Power, or you 
will arrive at the dry-as-dust pedantries of Phari- 
see and scribe. Not the Power without the Scrip- 
tures, or you will drift into the ineptitudes of mys- 
ticism and fanaticism. Always combine the Scrip- 
tures and the Power of the living God, and you 
will establish the inspiration of Scriptures for all 
thoughtful hearers and readers, because they will 


84 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


become aware of a Divine energy working with 
them and through them, as by no other medium 
known amongst men. 

Our Lord’s profound reverence and love for 
the Scripture should make every minister desire 
that during his pastorate he should succeed in 
leading his people to a well-balanced and intimate 
acquaintance with the entire range of the Word 
of God, that they may be thoroughly furnished 
unto all good works. If he is not able to expound 
every book, as Dr. Parker did, he should see to 
it that his people have a thorough knowledge of 
some, and a competent knowledge of all. 

When I commenced my fifteen years’ pastorate 
at Christ Church, I began with the Old Testament 
in the morning and the New Testament in the 
evening, and went systematically on from Gene- 
sis 1 in the one case and Matthew 1 in the other. 
I had not completed either course, but had ad- 
vanced through two-thirds in each case. 

This systematic exposition of the Scripture 
places the Bible where our Lord put it, in the 
supreme place; and, though the inspiration of the 
Hpistles of John is different and deeper than of 
Judges or Samuel, yet all Scripture, given by the 
inbreathing of the Divine Spirit, is profitable. 
The late Dr. W. Robertson Smith left this con- 
clusion on record, which his scholarship and 
fidelity to truth make extremely valuable: ‘‘So 
long as we go to Scripture, only to find in it God 
and His redeeming love mirrored before the eyes 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD 85 


of faith, we may rest assured that we shall find 
living, self-evidencing, infallible truth in every 
part of it, and that we shall find nothing else.’’ 


THE EIGHT GATES INTO THE CITY OF 
BLESSEDNESS—AN EXPOSITION 
OF THE BEATITUDES 


There is a condition of soul which may be experi- 
enced and enjoyed by every child of our race, which the 
Master calls Blessedness. He uses the same word to de- 
scribe it as is employed to set forth the Being of God 
and the life of the saints who have passed beyond 
the veil. 

“‘Blessed are ye’’ (Matt. 5:11); ‘‘The glorious gos- 
pel of the blessed God’’ (1 Tim. 1:11); ‘‘Blessed are 
the dead which die in the Lord’’ (Rev. 14:13). This 
condition of soul, however, need not be postponed until 
we, too, in our turn, pass the Gate of the City and find 
ourselves amid ‘‘the solemn troops and sweet societies”’ 
of eternity. It may be entered here and now. The fra- 
grance of this garden steals through the crowded and 
noisy cities of our modern civilization like the morning 
air laden with the scent of new-mown grass. The gates 
of this city stand open night and day for lonely souls 
in country and sequestered places, where the noise of 
the city-life cannot reach; and at any moment they may 
tread its thronged streets, listen to its murmured speech, 
and join in its vast convocations, of which it is written: 
‘“Ye are come to Mount Sion, the City of the Living God, 
to myriads of angels, to the general assembly and church 
of the first-born.’’ 

Blessedness does not depend on outward possessions, 


86 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


such as worldly goods, or lands, or high birth, or erudite 
culture. Indeed, there are words of Christ which sug- 
gest that they who stand possessed of these things will 
find it harder to enter that Paradise which has not yet 
faded from our world, and to pass through the gates of 
that city which are before our eyes, if only they were 
opened to discern them. When he repeated this sermon 
of the mountain heights and of the dawn to the multi- 
tudes that stood breathless beneath its spell, He said: 
““Woe unto you that are rich. . . . Woe unto you that 
are full. . . . Woe unto you, ye that laugh.’’ He did 
not mean that such would be necessarily excluded, but 
that entrance into blessedness would be harder for them; 
as when, after dusk, a camel strives to get through the 
needle-eye gate placed in the city wall for belated pe- 
destrians. 

There is no soul of man so illiterate, so lonely, so 
poor in this world’s goods, so beset with hereditary sins 
and demoniacal temptations, that may not at this mo- 
ment step suddenly into this life of blessedness, begin to 
drink of the river which makes glad the city of God, the 
holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High. It is 
not necessary to ascend into heaven to bring it down, 
or to descend into the depth of the abyss to bring it up; 
it has not to be wrestled or wept for; it is not to be 
obtained by the merit of holy deeds or as the guerdon 
of devoted service; it is not a reward which comes after 
long years in the council chamber or on the tented field. 
We have not to do or feel or suffer, but only to be, to 
cultivate certain dispositions, to possess a nature, here 
carefully defined—and instantly blessedness begins, an 
unearthly light breaks on the soul, which is destined to 
increase into the full radiance of heaven’s high noon. 
“Come in, thou blessed of the Lord’’ (can you not hear 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD 87 


the angel voices?) ; ‘Wherefore standest thou without?’’ 

Our Master did not speak of this condition of soul 
by hearsay; for thirty years it had been His sweet and 
deep experience. During His life in Nazareth, had not 
the Lamb of God lain in His Father’s bosom? Had He 
not realized that He was wrapped around with the love 
which had been His before the worlds were made? Had 
He not been content to let the great ones of the world 
go on their way of pomp and pride because He was as- 
sured of a deeper joy, a more perfect peace, a more satis- 
fying happiness than Cesar’s smile or the imperial pur- 
ple could afford? The well of water was springing up 
in His own pure heart before He spoke of it to the 
woman at Sychar’s well. He knew the Father, loved the 
Father, fulfilled the Father’s behests, rested in the Fa- 
ther’s will, was encompassed with the perpetual sense of 
the Father’s presence, breathed the sunny air of the 
Father’s love. During His earthly life, as He confessed 
Himself, the Son of man was, therefore, already ‘‘in 
heaven’’ (John 3:13). He offers us what He was ex- 
periencing for Himself. ‘‘My peace I leave with you; 
my peace I give unto you.’’ ‘‘These things have I 
spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you.”’ 
‘‘That the love wherewith thou lovest me may be in 
them.’’ 

Not to the same degree, but after the same quality 
and kind, we may know in this life, amid difficult, tem- 
pestuous and sorrowful experiences, what the Lord felt 
when He said, ‘‘He that sent me is with me; the Father 
hath not left me alone, for I do always those things 
which please him.’’ 

The ingredients of this experience are enumerated 
thus: First, it is blessed to belong to that invisible King- 
dom which is already in our world, including within its 


88 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


ever-expanding circle all gracious souls of every race and 
age, breathing the ozone of heaven into'the stale and ex- 
hausted atmosphere of the world; its King, the En- 
throned Lamb; its subjects, the childlike, the forgiving, 
the gentle, and the pure; its laws, love; its advances, so 
soft, sweet, irresistible as the dawn; its duration, eternal. 
It is a blessed thing to know that one has the franchise 
and freedom of that Kingdom, that one need never go 
out from its holy and strong embrace, and that men like 
John the Divine may greet us thus: ‘‘ Your brother and 
partaker with you . . . in the Kingdom . . . which 
is in Jesus.’’ (Rev. 1:9, R. V.) 

Second, it is blessed to be comforted with the comfort 
which only God can give. When the eyes are wet with 
tears that refuse to be staunched, to feel a hand soft and 
strong wiping them away, and to discover that it is the 
Hand 


That can ruffle an evening calm, 
And bears Calvary’s mark on its pierced palm; 


when the face is buried amid the dried flowers and leaves 
of departed joys, to hear a whisper which thrills the 
sense, growing fuller and clearer, like a flute, and to 
detect in its syllables the assurances of the Comforter 
Himself; when the sepulchre seems to hold all that made 
life worth living, to become suddenly aware that there is 
a Presence near at hand, and to find that the Gardener 
Himself is at hand to lift the drooping plant of life, 
unfurling its petals again to the light; to be strong in 
God’s strength, comforted with the paracletism of the 
Paraclete, to drink of the brook by the way—here is 
blessedness which eye hath not seen, neither the ear of 
ordinary man heard, nor the unregenerate heart per- 
ceived, Even the bereaved and lonely heart, sitting amid 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD 89 


the wreckage of all its joys and hopes, may be aware 
of this. 

Third, it is blessed to inherit the earth. When that 
condition of soul is reached of which the Master is speak- 
ing, 

Heaven above is softer blue, 
Earth around is sweeter green; 

Something shines in every hue 
Christless eyes have never seen. 


There is a new rapture in common sights, a new mean- 
ing in common sounds; lilies are robed more gloriously 
than Solomon; the winged and furred denizens of the 
woodlands become, as St. Francis found them, ‘“‘little 
brothers and sisters.’” As Cowper said, such a man may 
be poor compared with those whose mansions glitter in 
his sight, but he calls the luxuriant prospect all his own. 
Every wind wafts him blessing; all things work together 
for his good. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or 
the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things 
to come—all things bring their tribute to the man who 
has learned Christ’s secret, which, like the fabled phi- 
losopher’s stone, turns everything to gold. What in- 
heriting the earth means is shown in the words of one 
of Christ’s most proficient pupils when he said, ‘‘I have 
learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be con- 
tent.’? You may own vast estates, and get nothing from 
them. You may have no rod or perch of land, and yet 
you may derive joy and delight from every scene, and 
extract nutriment from every incident. Newspapers, 
public events, journals, travels, pictures, architecture, 
literature, human life—all shall minister to your joys 
and perfecting. 

Fourth, it is blessed to be filled, In this life as well 


# 


90 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


as in the next it is possible to hunger no more, neither 
thirst any more. Not to hunger for the husks that the 
swine eat, because filled with the provisions of the Fa- 
ther’s table! Not to thirst for the heated pools at which 
the children of the world seek to quench their thirst, be- 
cause the well of water that springs up to eternal life 
is within. Not to clamour for the fleshpots of Egypt, 
because there is so plentiful a provision of manna. Oh, it 
is a blessed thing to be filled with the Spirit, to be full 
of joy and peace, to be filled with God’s grace and 
heavenly benediction, to be filled with the fruits of right- 
eousness, to be filled with the knowledge of His will, to 
be filled unto the fulness of God! Tennyson says that 
the babble of the Wye among the hills lasts until the 
tidal wave fills up its channels to the brim; and the heart 
is restless till it is full—but when it has realized this 
blessed fulness, dipped deep into the fulness of God, 
and lifted out dripping with flashing drops, ah, then 
evil has no lure to charm, the fear of man cannot in- 
trude, the fascination and blandishments of sense are 
neutralized. What more can the soul want than to be 
filled with Thee, O God, who didst make us for Thyself? 
Cannot a flower be satisfied which has a sun to shine 
on it, and a glacier-fed river to wash its roots? 

Fifth, it is blessed to be the recipient of mercy. 
There is never a moment of our life in which we do not 
stand in need of merey, both at the hands of our fellows 
and, above all, from the hand of God. There is no saint 
in the heavenly Kingdom who does not, at some time 
or other, need to appropriate the petitions of the man 
after God’s own heart and say, ‘‘Have mercy on me, 
O God, according to thy loving-kindness, according to 
the multitude of thy tender mercies,’? We need mercy 
from little children startled by our harsh tones; mercy 


THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD 91 


from our servants and employees hindered by our in- 
consistencies, our quick temper and imperious tones; 
mercy from husband or wife, brother or sister, neigh- 
bour or friend; above all, merey from the Most Merciful; 
and it is blessed to know that we have it in heaven’s 
own measure, full, pressed down, and running over. So 
far from making us lax in permitting sin, it predisposes 
us to more mercy toward the failings of others, more 
mercilessness to ourselves. 

Sixth, it is blessed to have the vision of God. Not 
to terrify, as when Moses hid his face, and Elijah went 
into the covert of the cave, and John fell at His feet 
as dead; but more after the fashion of Mr. Hewitson’s 
experience, when he says: ‘‘Our Redeemer is no mere 
abstraction, no ideality that has its being only in our 
shifting thoughts. He is the most personal of all per- 
sons, the most living of all who live. He is ‘the First 
and the Last, and the living One.’ He is so near us, 
as the Son of God, that we can feel His warm breath 
on our souls; and as the Son of man He has a heart 
like these hearts of ours—a human heart, meek and 
lowly, tender, kind, and sympathising. In the Word— 
the almost viva voce utterance of Himself—His arm of 
power is stretched forth beside you, that you may lean 
on it with all your weight; and in the Word, also, His 
love is revealed, that on the bosom of it you may lay 
your aching head and forget your sorrow in the abun- 
dance of His consolation. To the Living One who died 
we must look, that we may be weaned and won over to 
God, that we may be strengthened, spiritualized, and 
sanctified.’’? Who would not desire a life like this, in 
which God should be the one dear Presence, the one fa- 
miliar and everpresent Object of thought, the Friend 
with whom an increasing dialogue is maintained? A 


92 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


young girl employed in a shop told me that her conscious- 
ness of God and her converse with Him had now lasted 
for three years, and that difficult things had become easy, 
as though He arranged all and smoothed out the creases. 

Seventh, it is blessed to be recognised as the son of 
God. Some are undoubtedly children of God who are 
not like God. It would require a good deal of scrutiny 
to detect His image and superscription on their faces, or 
the tones of His voice in their speech. The manners of 
the heavenly court are not evident in their demeanor; 
the courtesy and thoughtfulness that characterised the 
Son of man are not characteristic of their behaviour 
to the poor and timid, to little children and helpless 
women. They too often break the bruised reed and 
quench the smoking flax; they strive and ery, and cause 
their voice to be heard in the street; they do not bear, 
believe, hope, and endure all things, or elicit the love 
of men to Him, whose name and nature they ought to 
bear in every lineament. Be it ours to be imitators of 
God as dear children, to be harmless and blameless, the 
sons of God, without rebuke—to be thus is to be blessed. 

Highth, we come back to the Kingdom of heaven. 
For blessedness is like a spiral staircase: we are always 
coming back to the same standpoint from a higher po- 
sition on the circling round. When we begin to live for 
God we find ourselves in the Kingdom, and are ravished 
with the beauty of the dawn; but after years have been 
spent in doing His will and walking in His fellowship, 
there is a new depth of loveliness and significance in 
its infinite and divine contents. 

O Christ, Thou King of Glory, uplift us above the 
common dusty road of mortal life; lift us into Thy life, 
above the heads of our enemies, above the weight of our 
flesh, above the glamour of the world, and make us 
most blessed for ever, and glad with joy in Thy presence! 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 


CHAPTER FIVE 


V. 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 


Tue benefit of the Expository Method to the 
preacher is immense. In the first place it saves 
him from the search for a subject or text, which 
is sometimes extremely tiresome and wasteful of 
his time. There are times when for hours nothing 
bites. The mind cannot settle. It visits flower 
after flower without extracting a drop of honey. 
But there is small danger of this when Exposi- 
tion is the preacher’s rule. 

Probably on Sunday night, when the family 
has dispersed, he will take his Bible in hand and 
turn to the paragraph next in order to that from 
which he has preached during the day. The emo- 
tions that have wrought within his soul have not 
died down. The sea still heaves with mighty bil- 
lows. If his sermons have failed, he sees where 
and why, and girds himself with desire to lay 
emphasis on the neglected truth; or if his sermons 
have succeeded, he is desirous of carrying forward 
the impression to further results, He can see his 
congregation still facing him, or can feel them 
tugging hard at his heart and brain. The reaction 
has not set in. The glow of the day still lingers 
on the mountain peak, and he is standing there, 
though he realizes already that to-morrow he may 

95 


96 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


be still descending into the valley beneath. This 
is the hour when, with the light of the Holy Spirit 
illumining the printed page and his soul, he cons 
the paragraph next in order, until probably its 
salient features, its lesson, or its pivotal sentence 
grips him. 

He has his scrap of writing paper at hand and 
makes a few rough notes. There is yet no co- 
herency or connection between those fragmentary 
jottings. In jumbling disorder they have tumbled 
from his hand, and lie there in confusion. A word, 
an anecdote, a reference to some recent reading; 
they are there as the hues of a gorgeous sunset, 
caught by a lover of nature’s most radiant hours, 
may lie hidden under the jottings of his notebook. 

Nothing more need be attempted that night. 
Let the tired brain have rest as soon as sleep will 
come, the subconscious soul may be left to elabo- 
rate upon its new-found theme. The ferment will 
begin to grow in its profound depths, as yeast 
in flour. Only let the preacher keep that paper 
handy, that he may fix on it the fugitive thoughts, 
with footstep light as a fairy’s, that may flit 
across the surface of the soul. They must be in- 
stantly snapshotted and fixed. The resolve to 
recall them will fail. It is almost impossible to 
recover the first fair form in which a thought 
visits you, unless it is instantly transfixed by the 
pen. 

As the week begins to wane the preacher will 
take an hour or two to develop his theme. First 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 97 


he investigates the original Hebrew or Greek. 
Happy man if he has each within easy call. It 
is the writer’s great regret that he ever allowed 
his Hebrew to get rusty; and he cannot be thank- 
ful enough to have kept his Greek in good and 
ready use. Though it is true that the results of 
expert learning in each language are within reach 
in some form or other for English readers; yet 
there is a peculiar freshness of interest in inter- 
rogating the very language employed by an Isaiah 
or a Paul until, like the carcass of Samson’s lion, 
it ylelds meat and sweetness. We have no right 
to put fancy interpretations on the sacred writ- 
ings. There is plenty of good metal within their 
eontent for those who will seek it. It is always 
better to mine into it than to bring extraneous 
matter to it or travel from it. Even an allegorical 
use of Scripture is to be made with caution. We 
must not convey the notion to our hearers or 
readers that the Bible, of all books, is to be taken 
in a non-natural sense, or that it cannot be under- 
stood and interpreted by the plain man who goes 
to it with a pure heart and an intelligent mind. 
The far-fetched lessons and instruction which 
some men delight in extorting from the Bible are 
the despair of wayfaring souls, who walk in the 
broad thoroughfares of Scripture, unable to make 
these excursions into realms of fancy or imagina- 
tion. 

Not only does the expositor ascertain the ex- 
act meaning of the text, but he considers it in the 

7 


98 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


light of the entire book. One of the greatest ex- 
positors of our time tells us that he will read a 
given book, which he has set himself to expound, 
some ten or twenty times through, that he may 
catch the spirit of the author and become steeped 
in his ruling motive and purpose. Every book 
in the Bible was written to effect some purpose, 
and it is only by steadfast attention that the mod- 
ern mind can be apprehended and possessed by 
that purpose. Just as the first glimpse at a noble 
picture or the first hearing of superb music is 
insufficient to acquaint one with the author’s en- 
tire conception or to show the harmony of the 
details with its main outline, so a piecemeal read- 
ing of any book of the Bible will fail to possess 
the soul with its full harmony and glory. It is 
not enough to read about the Bible, we must read 
the Bible itself. It is as necessary to be familiar 
with the atmosphere of the book you are expound- 
ing as for a painter to be acquainted with the 
profession and interests of a man before he at- 
tempts to portray him. The first aim should be 
to know what the original text exactly meant; the 
next is to place it in the perspective of the entire 
book. Who ean understand the mind of the Ro- 
man Forum, who is not acquainted with Roman 
history? Each author of the Bible books is a 
highly developed personality, as much so as Mo- 
zart or Beethoven, as Milton or Shakespeare, and 
needs, therefore, special understanding and han- 
dling. 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 99 


After we have got so far, we naturally turn 
to commentaries and sermons, that they may 
throw further light on our subject. The method 
adopted by Mr. Spurgeon was, I believe, as fol- 
lows: On Saturday evening at 6 P.M. he would 
retire from the sitting-room, in which he had been 
entertaining his guests with his wise and witty 
talk, announce his text to his secretary, who would 
open all commentaries and treatises bearing upon 
it, arranging them around his library on little 
ledges provided for the purpose. The great 
preacher would pass from one to another, note- 
book in hand, jotting down any characteristic or 
fresh view or side-light, and in this manner 
availed himself of a great variety of material 
which, becoming assimilated in his own mind, was 
reproduced in his own style. This is a great model. 
We must not appropriate a man’s expression of 
thought—this is his own—but thoughts, so far as 
we appropriate them, and allow them to grow in 
the soil of our own mind, and reproduce them- 
selves after their kind, become ours. We are free 
to use all truth which has germinated in ourselves 
and drawn on the resources of our soul. It is in 
this sense that commentators serve us—they set 
us thinking. 

It is, of course, most unwise for a preacher to 
trouble his hearers with the successive steps 
which have led up to the conclusions which he an- 
nounces. Still less is he justified to set before 
his congregation a number of varying:conclusions, 


100 EXPOSITORY, PREACHING 


leaving them to select the one that seems nearest 
the truth. He ought to have settled all this for 
himself and for them long before. It is his busi- 
ness to weigh up the worth of the various readings, 
arguments and suggestions with which the books 
of reference teem, and after he has winnowed 
away extraneous matter, to present the conclu- 
sions to which he has come in a form that his 
hearers can readily assimilate. We do not need 
to be informed of the various processes through 
which the wheat passes, and to be instructed as 
to the different varieties of wheat before par- 
taking of our morning meal. We pay others, who 
are experts, to do this for us, placing at our dis- 
posal the knowledge gained through study, train- 
ing and experience. 

There are five considerations that must be met 
in every successful sermon. There should be an 
appeal to the Reason, to the Conscience, to the 
Imagination, to the Emotions, and to the Will; 
and for each of these there is no method so serv- 
iceable as systematic exposition. 

The Reason. ‘‘Come, let us reason together,’’ 
is God’s own appeal to the soul. There are many 
things in religion which we should not have been 
able to reason out for ourselves, but which we 
can apprehend and accept when once they are re- 
vealed; but there is nothing to contradict our rea- 
son. It may be confidently affirmed that God does 
not require of us to accept anything which is 
clearly unreasonable. He who gave us the eye 


QLHE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 101 


of the body has contrived to adapt the light to 
it, and it to the light. Reason is the eye of the 
soul, and what light is to the eye, that truth is 
to the mind. Our Lord is the King of Truth, and 
His appeal is always to those who are of the 
truth. ‘‘He that is of the truth heareth my 
voice.”’ 

After the preacher has stated the main thesis 
of his sermon, there should be a little time spent 
in showing that it is consistent with reason. It 
may be above reason, but it is not contrary to 
reason. Our reason is founded on two great fac- 
ulties of our nature, the logical and the intuitive. 
The logical is the faculty of advancing from cer- 
tain premises to the conclusion; the intuitive, 
which is largely the storehouse of racial experi- 
ence, does not argue, but perceives. There is the 
flash of recognition as of something which needs 
no train of argument, because it is self-evident. 
It is most important that by one or other of these 
two processes the reason should be led to give its 
assent to the main theme of the discourse. By 
manifestation of the truth we must obtain the 
verdict of the inner court or tribunal. The 
speeches of great orators and preachers generally 
excel in the lucidity of their presentation of their 
valid claim to the assent and consent of the reason. 

The preacher who bases his sermon on a para- 
graph rather than a text is, on the whole, more 
likely to discover the grounds of this appeal to 
reason. The prophets, for instance, are greatly 


102 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


given to arguments borrowed from nature, as in 
Isaiah 40, or from the futility and unreasonable- 
ness of idol worship, as in Isaiah 44. The Epistles 
of Paul bristle with arguments addressed to the 
logical faculty, and those of John with appeals 
based on the intuitive. The discourse, then, 
which rests on a careful exegesis of a tract of 
Scripture resembles those mighty mountains or 
oaks whose roots and spurs go far afield, mooring 
them in immovable majesty in the earth. 

The Conscience. We are told in the majestic 
prologue to the Fourth Gospel that in every man 
there ig a beam of the light which shone in the 
character and ministry of our Lord and which is 
divine. That sense of right and wrong, that in- 
stant appreciation of rightness and wrongness 
which is the property of each moral being. When 
the question arises whether such and such a course 
is wise or unwise, expedient or inexpedient, con- 
science is silent, though it listens attentively to 
the debate; but so soon as the question is intro- 
duced whether a matter is right or wrong, con- 
science puts all other speakers aside and silences 
every other voice, and utters a verdict against 
which there can be no dispute. It is final and 
irrefutable. It cannot be argued with or eajoled. 
It is a miniature of the Great White Throne re- 
flected in the mirror of the soul. 

Conscience is the minister’s main ally. As 
Blondin, the minstrel, discovered the imprisoned 
King of England, entrapped on his way home 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 103 


from the Crusades, and incarcerated in an ob- 
scure castle in Austria, by playing beneath his 
prison windows a lay which only they two knew, 
so the preacher plays under the windows of the 
soul the external truths of revelation, certain of 
eliciting a favorable response. Deep down in the 
human soul there is an ally, an accomplice, a con- 
federate, who joins his forceful voice, which can- 
not be gagged or silenced, with the voice of truth, 
so that in the mouth of two witnesses every word 
is established. 

But again the expositor stands a better chance 
of awakening this response than the topical 
preacher, because there is necessarily more of 
Scriptural statement in his sermons. His preach- 
ing is the concentrated essence of Scripture. It 
might be called Bibline. The Spirit of truth finds 
a larger amount of that sword which He is ac- 
customed to wield, and of those arrows, which 
have always proved themselves to be sharp in the 
heart of the King’s enemies. 

The Imagination. In every sermon there 
should be a stained-glass window, through which 
the light should enter, dyed and saturated with 
the glow of colour. Some minds are naturally im- 
aginative and poetic. They love the pure white 
marble better when it is bathed with the rainbow 
hues of the noble eastern window. The gateway 
through which truth comes to them is made of 
pearls saturated in a very phantasmagoria of 
splendour. They cannot be comforted unless their 


104 EXPOSITORY: PREACHING 


stones are laid with fair colours, and their foun- 
dations with sapphires. Their windows must be 
of agates and their borders of precious stones. 
There ought to be a dash of colour in every ser- 
mon. The children will listen for it and recog- 
nise the happy moment; and people with vagrant 
fancies will find these winging their way back 
when the preacher turns off the moorland into 
the gardens gay with bloom and filled with the 
hum of bees. 

It was to win such that our Lord so often said, 
“‘The Kingdom of Heaven is like...” For 
these also the Song of Solomon was placed in the 
Old Testament and the Apocalypse in the New. 
For them also there are here and there sugges- 
tions and things which eye hath not seen, nor the 
ear heard. 

But the expositor who bends over each word 
and clause of his paragraph, endeavouring to pen- 
etrate to the heart, as a road-mender will go on 
his knees to break open the granite blocks heaped 
beside him, is more likely to find materials on 
which the imagination may feed. The imagina- 
tion must be called into play to reconstruct the 
historic past, to reproduce the characters and lives 
of those who compose the dramas of the Sacred 
Book, to rebuild before the modern world the 
stage on which redemption was wrought. The 
preacher-expositor clothes the persons of the pe- 
riod with which he is dealing in the costumes of 
their times, and makes them speak and act as 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 105 


they must have done in those far-away days. It 
is when his picture is complete, and his audience 
is absorbed in watching the development of the 
plot that he suddenly drops the style of the nar- 
rator and comes to close quarters with the dagger- 
thrust of ‘‘Thou art the man.’’ 

The Emotions. We must not forget these. 
Some can only be approached through the tears 
that wet the cheek and the sorrow or joy that 
moves the heart. You must call up the past, you 
must touch the chords that respond to the zephyr 
breath of tender and sacred memories, you must 
awaken sensibility, you must melt the arctic ice 
and snow which have gathered over the green 
pastures of the soul. In each sermon there should 
be some touch of that nature which makes the 
whole world kin. 

But where can such materials for these ap- 
peals be obtained so readily as in the great old 
stories of Scripture? Is there anything in lit- 
erature more moving than Judah’s appeal for 
Benjamin before the Egyptian Prime Minister, 
his brother, though he did not recognise him? Is 
there anything more pathetic than the appeals to 
the backsliding, based on Hosea’s trampled home 
and his desolate heart? Can words find anywhere 
more piteous language than the lamentations of 
Jeremiah? Is any scene more likely to strike 
rivers of waters from rocks than the story of the 
crucifixion or of Peter’s denial? With Shake- 
speare, the preacher may constantly be led to 


106 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


exclaim, as he comes to these and similar para- 
graphs in the course of his exposition, 


‘Ye that have tears, prepare to shed them now.”’ 


And who can complain when the minister comes 
on such scenes, not because of his arbitrary se- 
lection, but because they come in the ordinary 
course of exposition. He can hardly be charac- 
terised as ‘‘a weeping preacher’’ who again and 
again in the course of his ministry arrives at 
valleys of weeping, where the rains fill the pools. 

The Will. But the end of all preaching is to 
obtain the assent of the will. We are not what 
we think or feel or imagine, but what we will. 
The will is the keeper of the citadel. It is our 
innermost self. Until that yields, nothing is 
yielded. Until that is surrendered, nothing is 
really gained. If ministers would recognise this, 
how much more permanent the results of their 
ministry would become. The will is like the alpen- 
stock, which the climber drives into the ice-block 
above him, and to which he presently drags up 
the rest of his body. 

But, again, the expositor is in a better position 
than all others in his chance of capturing and 
compelling the will. He has a wider range of 
truth on which to base his appeals. In that one 
paragraph there will probably be contained the 
materials for access to the inner shrine from each 
of the gates of the soul. Like the New Jerusalem, 
the soul has twelve gates, some of which are al- 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 107 


ways open, if not all. He hardly can fail who at- 
tempts them all, and is more likely to succeed 
than if he marched up one avenue alone. 
“‘Blessed are they who sow beside all waters.”’ 


THE INTENTION OF THE SOUL—EXPOSITION 
OF MATTHEW 6:22 


The eye is the most striking and important feature 
of the face. Blue as the azure of heaven, brown as hazel, 
black as jet, it gives expression and beauty to the coun- 
tenance, fills with tears of pity, sparkles with the radi- 
ance of affection, and flashes with the fire of anger. By 
the eye we are able, therefore, to discern much of the 
thoughts and intents of the heart. The eye is also ur- 
gently needed to enable us to do the work of life. It is 
by the eye that we are lighted to our toils, discover the 
path in which we must tread, and look upon the faces 
of our friends or the beauty of God’s creation. Each 
time we see a blind person or pass institutions devoted 
for the recovery of sight, let us lift up our hearts to 
thank God for this priceless boon. 

It is interesting to notice the comparison which our 
Lord employs. He speaks of the eye as the ‘‘light of 
the body;’’ in other places the same Greek word is ren- 
dered ‘‘lamp,’’ or ‘‘candle.’’ In the fifth chapter of 
Matthew we discover the same expression: ‘‘ Neither do 
men light a lamp and put it under the bushel.’’ The 
same word is used in Luke 12: ‘‘Let your loins be girded 
about, and your lamps burning.’’ It is the word by 
which John the Baptist is designated in John 5—‘‘He 
was a burning and a shining light’’—in contradistinc- 


108 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


tion to the other term, applied to our Lord alone, ‘‘That 
was the true Light, which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world.’’ The ministry of John was 
the lamp that lighteth the steps of men until ‘‘the Sun 
of Righteousness arose with healing in his wings.’’ The 
eye, our Lord says, is the lamp of the house of the body. 
It is as though He thought of the eye as hanging in the 
vestibule of the palace of life, casting its rays outward 
to the busy thoroughfare, and inward to the recesses of 
the soul. 

It is obvious that there must be something in our 
inner life which corresponds to the eye, for our Lord 
adverts to the eye as the emblem and symbol of some- 
thing within. He is not speaking of the eye of the 
body only, but of its correlative, the eye of the soul. 
What is that inner eye? Some have supposed that it 
is the power of a concentrated affection, for truly love 
sheds a warm glow over all the furniture of the inner 
life, as well as upon the great world without. Others 
have affirmed that the intellect is the eye of the soul, by 
which we are able to behold the ordered process of the 
world and to consider the processes of thought within us. 
A truer conception of our Lord’s meaning, however, will 
lead to the conclusion that the eye of the body corre- 
sponds to the inward intention and purpose of the soul. 

Tf, for a moment, you will examine your inner life, 
descending to the profound depths that lie beneath the 
surface of your being, you will discover that there is 
one deep aim or purpose which is the real intention of 
your life. Deep down below the play of emotion and 
intellect, and of engagement in various interests, there 
is one strong stream or current running perpetually 
through the dark ravines of your nature. It may be 
that you are hardly aware of it; your nearest and dear- 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 109 


est friends do not realize it. You would be startled if 
it were stated in so many words, but it is none the less 
true that there is a unity in each human character which 
God perceives. In each of us He can read a unity of 
purpose and a unity of will. This is the intention of 
the soul and distinguishes each of us from every one be- 
side. 

The eye may, of course, be healthy or unhealthy. If 
healthy, a tiny curtain which hangs at the back of the 
organism is adjusted to receive the focused rays which 
come from the external objects. On this tiny curtain is 
formed an invested image of all things which are visible. 
If you look into the eye of another, and especially into 
the eye of a little babe, you will see the whole panorama 
of the world presented as in a cinematoscope. This cur- 
tain is perpetually being readjusted, so that the un- 
blurred image of the outer world may be cast upon it. 
When we are travelling in a railway train it is probable 
that in a single hour the focus is altered thousands of 
times, for at every jolt and oscillation of the vehicle 
there must be a readjustment of the lens. 

When the eye is in an unhealthy condition the image 
is doubled or blurred. There are two ways in which 
it may become evil. To use a common expression, there 
may be the obliquity, called a squint, such as disfigured 
the noble face of Edward Irving. Mrs. Oliphant tells 
us that, as a babe, he was laid in a wooden cradle, 
through a whole in which he was able to watch the light 
with one eye, whilst the other retained its usual straight- 
forward direction. His eyes, therefore, were not par- 
allel, and it was impossible to focus them upon a given 
object. The soul’s intention may be diverted from a 
single purpose in a double direction. We may pray 
with the object of gaining an answer from God, and 


110 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


att the same time of receiving credit from man. We may 
try to amass the treasures of this world, and at the same 
time to be rich toward God. We may endeavour to serve 
two masters—God and mammon, This is the counter- 
part in the spiritual life of a squint in the eye. An- 
other source of ill-health with the eye is when the little 
vesicles which supply blood for the tiny curtain be- 
come overcharged, so that it is impossible for the deli- 
cate nerves to adjust the lens, and the vision becomes 
blurred and indistinct. Yet another source of the evil 
eye is when a film forms over the surface of the pupil, 
so that the light cannot enter. 

In contradistinction to all these evils, how good it 
is to have a clear eye, with its distinct vision; and how 
much more good it is when the purpose and intention 
of the soul is so undivided that the whole of life is 
illumined by the glow of a clear and beautiful radiance! 
All through this chapter our Lord is arguing against 
this double vision. He says: ‘‘Do not profess to belong 
to the kingdom of heaven while your hearts are buried 
in the earth; do not have two masters; do not be di- 
vided by anxious care; seek first the kingdom of God.’’ 
All through this chapter He is, in fact, bidding us to 
make our constant prayer the ery of the psalmist, ‘‘ Unite 
my heart to fear thy name.’’ Our Lord sets His whole 
force against any duplication of character so inimitably 
described by John Bunyan in ‘‘Mr. Facing-both-ways,’’ 
who, with one eye on heaven and another on earth, sin- 
cerely professed one thing and sincerely did another, 
and, from the inveteracy of his unreality, was unable 
to see the contradition of his life. ‘‘He tried to cheat 
both God and the devil, and in reality he only cheated 
himself and his neighbours.’’ 

There are three kinds of men. First, those who have 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 111 


no intention; second, those who have a double intention; 
third, those whose intention is pure and simple. 

1. Some have no intention. They live day by day 
without purpose; the eye of the mind is fixed definitely 
and intently upon nothing. They take each day as it 
comes, getting from it anything it may bring, doing the 
duty it demands; but their existence is from hand to 
mouth, at haphazard, with no aim, no ambition, no godly 
purpose. They cannot say, with the apostle, that they 
are leaving the things which are behind, and pressing 
forward to the things which are before, or that one 
thing they are ever engaged in doing. It is quite true 
that in many cases there may be no great cause to be 
championed, no subjects to be explored, no object in 
making money, because already there is an ample com- 
petence. Some may read these words who are daughters 
in a wealthy home, or young men the heirs of a con- 
siderable fortune, or people in humble life who have 
no urgent need to look beyond the day or week with its 
ordinary routine; but even these should have a supreme 
purpose—to bring down the New Jerusalem out of 
heaven, to establish the Kingdom of God amongst men, 
to hasten the coming of the day of Christ, or to be 
themselves purer and holier. To become may always 
be the supreme purpose and intention of the soul; to 
be a little more like Christ; to know and love Him bet- 
ter; to be able to shed more of His sweetness and 
strength upon others. There is no life so contained 
within the high walls of circumstances, but it may reach 
up toward the profound light of the azure sky that 
arches above. 

Do not be content to drift through life; do not be 
satisfied to be a piece of flotsam, swept to and fro by 
the ebb and flow of the stream; do not be a creature of 


112 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


circumstance, because it is certain that if you are not 
living with a divine purpose for God and eternity you 
are certainly living for yourself, for your ease, for mere 
indolent enjoyment, or to get through the years with 
as little fret and friction as possible. This, at the heart 
of it, and in such a world as this so abject and needy, 
is undiluted selfishness. To have no purpose is to have 
the worst purpose; to have no ambition is to be living 
for self; to have no intention is to be drifting through 
the wide gate, in company with the many that go in 
thereat, to their own destruction. 

2. Some have a double intention. They have heard 
the call of Christ and have received the seed of the King- 
dom; but so soon as it reached their hearts two strong 
competitors endeavoured to share with it the nutriment 
of the soul. On the one hand, there were the cares of 
the world—these largely have place in the poor and 
struggling; on the other hand, was the deceitfulness of 
riches—these principally are found among the opulent 
and well-to-do. For a brief interval there was a strug- 
gle as to which of these should be master, but the strife 
soon ended in the victory of the sturdy thorn; those 
ruthless brigands seized for themselves all the sustenance 
that the soil of the heart could supply, and grew ranker 
and taller until the tiny grain withered and failed to 
bring forth fruit to perfection. 

Will you not examine yourself? You think that you 
are whole-hearted, whereas you may be double-hearted ; 
or, to use the apt simile of the prophet, baked on one 
side and not on the other; or, to use the simile of the 
great dreamer, looking one way and rowing another. 
You seem to be very earnest in Christian work, but are 
you quite sure that your apparent devotion does not 
arise from a masterfulness of disposition that likes to be 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 113 


independent and rule? May it not be due to a fussy 
activity, which must be engaged in many directions that 
the soul may escape from itself; or to a natural pity 
and sympathy for men, which would incite you to a 
similar deed, even though you had never heard of 
Christ? Of course, you say to yourself that your motive 
is pure and single, and that you only desire to glorify 
God; but in His sight it may be that you are really 
actuated by the natural propensities of your nature, by 
your desire to be first, or by your appetite for notoriety 
or money. The heart is so deceitful that it becomes us 
to examine ourselves with all carefulness, lest at the 
end of life we shall find that, whilst we appeared to be 
doing God’s work, we were really doing our own; and 
that, whilst our friends gave us credit for great religious 
devotion, we were really borne along by a vain, proud 
and unworthy purpose, which robbed our noblest service 
of all value in the sight of eternity. As the apostle says, 
the one supreme intention of every child of God should 
be to please Him. How few of us can say, with the 
apostle: ‘‘Whose I am and whom I serve!’”’ ‘“‘It is a 
very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of 
man’s judgment; he that judgeth me is the Lord.’’ 

3. Let us see to it that we have a pure and simple 
intention. Our aim should be to set our whole soul upon 
one thing only—to do the will of God, so that the whole 
of our religious life may be spent before the Father, who 
seeth in secret; that our alms, our prayers, our fastings, 
should be for His eye, and His alone; and that the 
whole of our life should emanate from hidden fountains 
where God’s Spirit broods, like those fountains of the 
Nile concealed in the heart of the great mountains, the 
secret of which for so long defied the research of the 
explorer. The lamp of a holy life is the pure intention 

8 


114 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


of the soul which seeks to gain nothing for itself, which 
has no desire to please men or to receive their commen- 
dation, which does not shirk adversity or court the sun- 
shine, but which sets before it as its all-sufficient goal 
that God may be well pleased and that at the close of 
life’s brief pilgrimage it may be said of each of us, as 
it was said of Enoch, ‘‘He had this testimony, that he 
pleased God.”’ 

How blessed such a life is! The light of the soul’s 
pure intention illuminates God, duty, human love, the 
glory of creation, and the significance of history, litera- 
ture and art. I remember once in my life, at a most 
important crisis, when for weeks I was torn between two 
strong, conflicting claims, that at last I was compelled 
to put aside all engagements and to go alone into the 
midst of nature, where I carefully examined my heart 
to its very depths. I found that the cause of the 
difficulty to ascertain God’s will arose because I | 
allowed so many personal considerations to conflict 
with the inner voice; and when I definitely put 
these aside, and stilled and quieted my life so that I be- 
came conscious of being impelled by one purpose only 
—to know and to do God’s will—then the lamp of a pure 
intention sheds its glow upon the path which I became 
assured was the chosen path for me. And since I dared 
from that moment to follow, all other things have been 
added. It was when Solomon asked that he might have 
a wise and understanding heart, that he might know 
God’s purpose, that God gave him honour, wealth and 
length of days. Again and again these words of Christ 
ring out as amongst the deepest that He ever spoke: 
““Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteous- 
ness, and all these things shall be added unto you.’’ 

If the lamp of the pure intention of the soul is not 


THE EXPOSITOR AT WORK 115 


kept pure and clean, ‘‘how great is the darkness!’ Our 
Lord alludes, of course, to the fact that when darkness 
settles upon the forest, the beasts steal forth, the glades 
resound to the roar of the lion, the ery of the jackal, 
the laugh of the hyena. Maultitudes of beasts that have 
lain quiet in their lairs whilst the sun was shining, creep 
forth; and our Lord says that when a man’s heart is 
set on doing God’s will the lower and baser passions of 
his nature—like so many beasts of prey—remain in 
their hiding places; but as soon as the blur comes, and 
the soul ceases to live for the one intense purpose of 
pleasing God, then darkness steals upon the house of 
life, and all manner of evil and unclean things, that 
otherwise would be shamed into silence and secrecy, 
begin to reveal themselves. ‘‘How great is that dark- 
ness!’’ If any are conscious that there is a darkness 
upon life; upon truth, upon the Word of God; if they 
are perplexed and plagued by the intrusion of evil things 
which fill them with misgiving—let me urge them to ask 
God to ‘‘cleanse the thoughts of their hearts by the in- 
spiration of his Holy Spirit, that they may perfectly 
love him and worthily magnify his holy name.’’ 


THE INEXHAUSTIBLE 
RICHES OF THE BIBLE 


CoH TA Pelco ls 


#e 


Cris 
aie 
yy 

Fs 
wi " 


“? 


VI 


INEXHAUSTIBLE RICHES OF THE BIBLE—PERENNIAL 
INTEREST OF THE EXPOSITORY METHOD 


In answer to this plea for Scripture exposition, 
it might be answered that the times need to be 
preached to, and that men must be up to date in 
their choice of themes. But such criticism ignores 
the fact that: 

Human life in its essential features does not 
vary from one age to another. Whether lived in 
the gray dawn of history or in the New York 
Broadway, the play of human passion, of love 
and hate, of jealousy and revenge, of hope or 
foreboding, is identical. The dress, speech, ac- 
cessories may differ, but all this is superficial and 
transitory; the woman that wore the jewels of an 
Egyptian sarcophagus was actuated by the same 
motives as her sister in the height of Parisian 
fashion. It is for this reason that the drama of 
every age retains its fascination for all succeed- 
ing ones. Neither Aristophanes, nor Moliere, nor 
Shakespeare can grow old. Drama possesses this 
quality because it holds the mirror to the heart 
and unveils its most secret passages. 

What is true of the drama is equally true of 
Scripture. Humanity retains with unerring pre- 
cision whatever is true of itself, whatever por- 


119 


120 _EXPOSIT ORY PREACHING 


trays the inner working of heart and mind, which 
no man could confess to his fellows, but every 
man recognises when set out before him. With 
infinite relish, therefore, generation repeated to 
generation the story of Abraham and Isaac, of 
Esau and Jacob, of Joseph and his brethren, of 
Moses and Aaron, and of all the other good men 
and bad, who pass before us in the ever-shifting 
panorama. These stories have been passed on 
from from lip to lip under the shadow of the pyra- 
mids and on the sands of the desert, by the Bed- 
ouin, the Mesopotamian, the Syrian, and the He- 
brew. The attrition of the ages has moulded, 
rounded and smoothed them as the ocean waters 
the pebbles or the brooks the swirling stones. The 
very ease with which they unfold, the elimination 
of all extraneous matter, the clear-cut sentences 
which reveal tracks of character as lightning at 
night reveals a landscape, all prove the charm, 
the spell, the attraction which these ancient rec- 
ords have wielded. To be unfamiliar with them 
is to be uneducated and miss the chief opportu- 
nity of becoming acquainted with the throbbing 
heart of humanity. The Bible is not only the 
Word of God, but the revelation of man. It is the 
university of the world. Therefore to unfold its 
story in successive discourses is to enchain the 
interest of one’s audience and procure a profound 
assent. The bad man recognises the workings 
of his own evil nature; the weak man sees the 
reflection of his own broken resolution and foiled 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 121 


purposes; the tempted perceives that other men 
have trodden the valley before him and encoun- 
tered the straddling form of Apollyon; whilst the 
tempest-tossed learn that the storms that sweep 
their sky have spent themselves on others, and 
have been succeeded by blue skies and clear shin- 
ing. ‘‘If there come in one unbelieving or un- 
learned, he is reproved of all, he is judged by all; 
the secrets of his heart are made manifest; and 
so he will fall down on his face, and worship God, 
declaring that God is in you and truth.’’ 
When Nathan desired to convict David of his 
sin he was too wise to approach the royal con- 
science by a direct attack. He would have found 
the gates closed, the portcullis down, and the 
drawbridge up. But he interested him in a nar- 
rative, perhaps drawn from real life, or at least 
quite likely to have happened. The scene of the 
story and its accompaniments were so dissimilar 
to those of the royal palace that the shy con- 
science of the criminal never suspected that it 
was being approached; and it was only when the 
royal judgments had been unhesitatingly ex- 
pressed that the veil was suddenly dropped and 
the rapier was thrust to the dividing of soul and 
spirit, of its joints and marrow. Deal with a 
man directly, and he resents the attack; deal with 
him implicitly and indirectly, and before he is 
aware he stands before the judgment seat and is 
speechless before its award. There is no man so 
likely to speak to his times as the conscientious 


122 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


expositor of Scripture. He is always up to date. 
In his congregation there is almost certainly a 
Peter with his impulse, a John with his fervour 
and imagination, a calculating Judas, a reflective 
and hesitating Thomas, a cool, practical Andrew. 
Pilate may be there, cruel, crafty, and calculating, 
which is the main and likeliest chance. Herodias 
is sitting next to Martha, and Mary of Magdala 
to Mary of Bethany. It is impossible to delineate 
the character, the salient feature, the beauty or 
blemish of any of these without compelling their 
modern counterparts to behold their faces in a 
mirror. 

The gist of much of the New Testament is also 
intended to prove that the attitude of the soul 
towards God is practically and essentially the 
same in every age. Paul, for instance, argues that 
when Abram believed God he exercised the same 
faith as we do when we ‘‘believe on him who 
raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was de- 
livered for our trespasses, and was raised for our 
justification.’’ And the imputation of righteous- 
ness, which reckons the sinner of to-day, justified 
and accepted, is not otherwise than that which 
operated in the case of the patriarch, of whom it 
is said that ‘‘Abraham believed God, and it was 
reckoned unto him for righteousness.’’ The ex- 
positor of Genesis will, therefore, find himself in 
the midst of New Testament truth. When ex- 
pounding the Book of Judges and retelling the 
stories of Gideon, Barak, Samson and Jephthah, 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 123 


he will be describing the faith which dwelt in its 
most developed form in Jesus, the Author and 
Finisher of Faith, ‘‘who for the joy that was set 
before him endured the cross, despising the 
shame.’’ 

It is instructive to consider how much of the 
New Testament is expository of the Old. We 
may without exaggeration describe Matthew’s 
Gospel as an exposition of the Royal Psalms and 
prophecies. Whilst Mark views our Lord as the 
Servant of God, and Luke in His human aspects, 
Matthew’s soul is filled with His supreme claim 
as ‘‘Son of David.’’ In his pages what Isaiah and 
Jeremiah, Zechariah and Daniel said about the 
King and His kingdom is carefully selected and 
set forth. He reads the secrets that psalmists set 
to harp-music, and shows their fulfilment in the 
Redeemer. As King He was to ride the ass’s 
colt; as Foundation-stone He was to be rejected 
of the builders; but as Lord He was to sit on 
the right hand of God, and, though born of a 
human mother, His goings forth were of old, even 
from everlasting. Here is the key for unlocking 
closed doors. Here is the die from which all those 
precious well-born coins were minted. Here is 
He of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets 
did write. 

But still more markedly the Epistle to the He- 
brews is an exposition of the old Book of Levit- 
icus. Those glowing paragraphs may have been 
originally given as expositions. It does not re- 


124 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


quire a great effort of the imagination to picture 
Apollos, who has often been credited with the 
authorship of this epistle, delivering it just as 
a series of expositions in the synagogue at Ephe- 
sus. He was mighty in the Scriptures, we are 
told. What more likely than that he should take 
up one of the most profound of its books for 
systematic treatment? He would be inclined 
thereto by his early training at Alexandria, where 
Hebrewism was strong, but the outward observ- 
ance of Levitical ritual was impossible. The germ 
of these discourses may have been suggested dur- 
ing his residence there, in the effort to reconcile 
the teaching of Jesus being the Lamb of God with 
the prescriptions of the ancient law. When he re- 
delivered his expositions at Ephesus, teaching the 
things concerning Jesus ‘‘with all carefulness,”’ 
Priscilla and Aquila were arrested and deeply in- 
terested in the young apostle, so fervent, so bold, 
so eloquent, and took him to lodge with them, and 
expounded the way of God more earefully. It 
may be, therefore, that in this epistle, which is 
characterized by so many of the qualities of the 
Alexandrian, bears the last touches of his devoted 
friends. Later critics have even credited Priscilla 
as the authoress. There may be truth in the older 
hypothesis which inscribed the name of Apollos 
on the title-page, and this more recent one. We 
may have a joint-production: the main argument 
elaborated by Apollos, while Priscilla contributed 
the annotations. The comment of Luke the his- 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 125 


torian is, therefore, hardly to be wondered at. 
‘‘When he was come, he helped them much which 
had believed through grace.’’ Such preaching as 
this could hardly fail to be helpful. 

The Book of Revelation may also be said to 
be an exposition of the Book of Daniel. The min- 
istry of the watcher-angels, their conflicts with 
strong resistance in the heavenly graces, their 
interest in our strifes and tears and prayers, are 
dwelt upon at length, expanded and expounded 
until we see their forms in rainbows and suns, 
and hear their trumpets sounding from star to 
star, and detect their resonant voices as they call 
to each other in the exercise of their patrol 
through the worlds. This great Babylon is ex- 
plained to mean not only the royal dwelling-place 
of Nebuchadnezzar, which he built by the might 
of his power and the glory of his majesty, but the 
spirit of human society which magnifies the crea- 
ture more than the Creator, and sets itself to 
persecute the saints. The witness borne by the 
Hebrew youths amid the luxuries of the palace 
and by their erectness amid the prostrate crowds, 
is shown to have its analogies in every age, and 
especially in the two witnesses who lie unburied 
in the street of the great city, which spiritually 
is called Sodom and Egypt, where also the Lord 
was crucified. But the breath of God entered unto 
them and they stood on their feet. The wild 
beasts of Daniel’s vision reappear in the Apoca- 
lypse as visions of great kingdoms which set them- 


126 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


selves against the Lord and against His Christ. 
The closing chapter of Daniel seems to lie at the 
heart of all those glimpses of the Resurrection 
which fill the latter pages of the Apocalypse, and 
the angel of Daniel 12:7 cries to the angel of 
Revelation 10:6. Of the many expositions of 
Daniel we have followed, John’s was the first. 

It is necessary, therefore, that no teacher or 
preacher should quote texts at random from any 
part of Scripture without staying to consider the 
stage in the progressive development of truth out 
of which that fragment was spoken. The hurling 
of texts by one school of theologians at another 
is, to say the least, unseemly; and it may be highly 
misleading, because in the heat of argument there 
may be little or no regard to the precise value 
that should be attached to this or the other pas- 
sage. All Scripture is given by inspiration of 
God and is profitable, but the Divine element was 
constantly affected by its human medium, pre- 
cisely as the expression of the nature of Jesus 
grew and gathered strength with the development 
of His soul and mind and body. There is a pre- 
cise analogy between the advancing expression of 
truth from Genesis to Revelation, and of the ut- 
terance of the Divine Word from the babblings 
of childhood to the teaching of the forty days 
during which He tarried after His resurrection. 
Luke tells us that He began to do and teach until 
the day that He was taken up. 

This progress is very remarkable when we 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 127 


study the Bible as a whole. We open it at the 
words, ‘‘In the beginning God created the heavens 
and the earth;’’ but how stately and entrancing 
is the steady sweep of the ascending stairway 
which lands us finally in the ery, ‘‘Even so, come, 
Lord Jesus.’’? To read through the Koran is to 
be oppressed by an unconnected, shapeless mass 
of statements, more or less incongruous; but to 
read the Bible is to become educated by an or- 
derly scheme of advancing doctrines. Take its 
teaching as to immorality, for instance. What a 
leaven of difference there is between the pessi- 
mism of Ecclesiastes and the trumpet note of 
1 Corinthians 15! 

The New Testament bears a striking testi- 
mony to the same law. We begin with the Person 
of Christ and the story of His manifestation in 
the flesh. We witness His miracles, wonder at 
His wonderful words, behold the expanding ful- 
ness of His program, and see His ministry ap- 
proaching its climax. Then suddenly a great 
change occurs; we pass from the Synoptic Gospels 
and come under the teaching of John, who draws 
aside the veil, and we behold His glory, the glory 
of the only-begotten Son of God. When we read 
the Synoptics we are walking with Christ along 
the road to Emmaus, with our hearts indeed burn- 
ing, but our eyes holden; but in the Fourth Gos- 
pel our eyes are opened, and we know Him for 
what He is. Is not this a distinct development 
of His character and glory? 


128 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


We close the Gospels and open the Acts of the 
Apostles, and again find ourselves in the midst 
of movement. We cannot see or touch the Lord, 
but He is as literally present as in the days of 
His flesh. He is there as a spiritual presence, 
providing for difficulties and perplexities, build- 
ing up the temple of God, succouring, comforting, 
moulding, shaping, directing, leading His people 
to new triumphs, experiences and participations 
of the divine life. There is surely movement here. 
The natural and physical has made way for the 
spiritual and eternal. ‘‘That is not first which 
is spiritual, but that which is natural; afterward 
that which is spiritual.’’ ‘‘The first man is of the 
earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord from 
heaven.”’ 

When we turn from the Acts of the Apostles 
to the Epistles, the movement is still more ap- 
parent. There were many things which our Lord 
desired to communicate during the days of His 
flesh, but His apostles could not bear them, though 
they were of the highest moment. But He prom- 
ised the Spirit of Truth to guide them unto all 
the truth. That word was carefully chosen to in- 
dicate the successive steps by which they were to 
be led forward and shewn plainly the truth as it 
is in Jesus. The earlier teaching had anticipated 
the coming of a day in which many things would 
be unfolded to them for communication to the 
world, and that happy day had now arrived. At 
first they were taught as those who were with 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 129 


Jesus, afterwards as being in Christ. They knew 
that He was in the Father, and they in Him, and 
He in them. 

To quote the Bampton lecturer of 1864: ‘‘Thus 
the great course of divine teaching reached its 
highest stage. After slowly moving on through 
the simple thoughts of patriarchal piety, through 
the system and covenant of the Law, and through 
the higher spirituality of the prophets, it rose 
suddenly to a lofty elevation when God spoke to 
us in His Son, and even higher yet when the Son 
ascended back unto glory and sent down His Holy 
Spirit to take up His unfinished Word and open 
the mysteries which had been hid from ages and 
generations. Each stage of progress based itself 
on the facts and instructions of that which went 
before. The law was given to the children of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; the prophets spake 
to those who were under the law; Jesus Christ 
came to those who had been taught by the proph- 
ets; the Holy Spirit instructed those who had 
received Christ.’’ 

In the Book of Revelation there is a still fur- 
ther advance. As we turn its pages we behold 
the war of the Lamb and His saints against all 
that opposes the reign of God amongst men, and 
the ultimate realization of a condition in which 
there is no sin nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, 
nor death. Here is the restoration not only of 
personal, but corporate life. The Temple of God 
will be built; the city will realize the corporate 


9 


130 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


existence of humanity, as members of each other; 
and the earth shall sing again in her motions as 
she did at her first creation. 

Of course the Divine Unity of the Bible is ap- 
parent to the eyes of all thoughtful students. 
The slow process of evolving the truth from its 
earliest incipiency to its supreme manifestation 
is acknowledged by all schools of thought. But 
even when this is granted it is clear that the 
gradations by which the Divine Author of Revela- 
tion proceeds will be more simply and accurately 
drawn as pastor and people turn slowly page by 
page, and linger not over the text, but the con- 
text, and extracting instruction not merely from 
one cluster of the Vine, but from the entire vint- 
age. It is difficult to conceive of any process, 
therefore, which will more magnify the Scrip- 
tures, more unfold their truth, more explain their 
method, more saturate our congregations with 
their essence and spirit, than the habit of con- 
tinuous exposition. It has been the practice of 
most of the preachers of the past, who have left 
their indelible impression both in speech and 
print on the life of the church, and it is still the 
secret of that freshness and fertility, which re- 
mind one of the River, that at every thousand 
cubits becomes deeper, and in the presence of 


whose life-giving waters the salt marshes were 
healed. 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 131 


THY BROTHER—EXPOSITION OF MATTHEW. 
5:23, 24 


‘““THEREFORE, if thou bringest thy gifts to the altar, 
and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought 
against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and 
go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then 
come and offer thy gift.’’ (Matt. 5:23, 24.) 


You can easily understand how great an effect the 
message of our Lord must have produced upon the truly 
religious Jews, of whom probably there were many at 
this time in Palestine. We can imagine how they would 
gather round His message whenever He preached, and 
it is not difficult for us to realize how great an impres- 
sion His pure and holy teaching must have had upon 
the Jewish church. We can easily imagine, also, how 
these very words, having been heard by a pious Jew, 
would influence him in some such way as this. On one 
occasion, in the afternoon, in the glory of the Eastern 
climate, he would enter the sanctuary of God, bearing 
a gift about to be placed in the hands of the priest 
waiting, white-vestured, beside the altar, as an offering 
to Jehovah. But suddenly, to the priest’s astonishment, 
he would place his gift at the foot of the altar; then, 
turning his back upon the sacrifice so placed, would 
hasten away; returning after two hours, with the morn- 
ing in his face, he would take the gift and place it in 
the hand of the priest, and so present it to God. If 
afterwards the priest accosted him, and asked how it 
was he delayed so long, the man might answer: ‘“‘A 
little while ago, standing upon one of the hills of Galilee, 
listening to Jesus of Nazareth—a truly holy man is He 
—I heard Him say, ‘When you are about to offer your 


132 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


gift at the altar, if you remember your brother has 
aught against you, you must defer your worship until 
you have made it right with him.’ And there suddenly 
flashed into my mind the memory of one man in Jeru- 
salem whom I could not look in the face, because I have 
wronged him, and I hastened to find him and make it 
right with him. I have received his full and frank for- 
giveness, and feel the more able to realize the forgiveness 
of the Almighty, who puts away your sins as far as the 
east is from the west.”’ 

All that has gone; the altar is razed to the ground, 
the long line of Levitical priests has passed away for 
ever, and the whole Levitical system is no longer in 
vogue or imperative. But the eternal truth that under- 
lies these great words of Christ is for every age and for 
every race. In these days there is nothing that needs to 
be brought home to the conscience and mind with more 
force than this, that man can never get right with the 
Eternal until he is right with his fellow, and it is abso- 
lutely impossible to enjoy the sunlight and forgiveness 
of the Almighty as long as there is a grievance which 
has not been made up between ourselves and any man, 
woman, or child under God’s sky. 

1. Remember. Each thoughtful person admits that 
the record of our life in its minutest incident is being 
recorded upon two books, each of which is sure to keep 
it secret. On the one hand we are recording upon the 
yielding ether every act we do, every word we speak, 
every scene in which we take part. If I raise my hand 
I produce a movement which has already passed beyond 
this church roof and is making its way into the infinite 
profound. If we could take the wings of the morning or, 
borne onward by a strong angel, pursue the retreating 
impressions of our life in some distant realm, we should 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 133 


desery there, imprinted upon the walls of Eternity, 
which for evermore will retain its impression, our cradle, 
our mother’s form, ourselves, our school days; and as 
we travelled nearer and nearer to this moment we should 
behold again all those scenes, for ever recorded, some 
of which we would fain obliterate and forget, but, though 
they may be forgiven, they can never, never be undone. 
O God! who seest these impressions, is there no power 
with Thee anywhere that shall blot out what has been 
wrought? Art Thou also impotent as Thou standest 
face to face with the past of Thy children? 

Everything is also recorded upon the convolutions 
of our brain. As when you add books to your library, 
you have to increase the shelves to hold them, so doubt- 
less the brain is constantly increasing in size, from the 
boy to the man, and from young manhood onward. The 
increasing convolutions of the brain receive the impres- 
sions of everything we say and do and hear and take 
part in. 

There is a great difference, we acknowledge, between 
memory and recollection. Memory holds everything, 
though recollection cannot always find anything. Mem- 
ory is like a great box into which a man puts all his 
letters, receipts, bills, manuscripts, scraps and para- 
graphs he cuts out of the newspapers; but the hand may 
dive into the box and turn over the mass of letters, and 
fail to discover any given paper for which it is making 
search. Memory holds everything; recollection cannot 
always remind us of everything just when we choose. 
But yet, when we go forth and wander through streets 
or woods, there may be the scent from wild flowers, the 
call from the birds, or the odour from the grass, for the 
sense of smell is the quickest to recover from the shrine 
of memory, which will remind us of something which 


134 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


we have failed to discover. Memory contains everything. 

There are moments when the imperishableness of 
memory’s rewards becomes apparent to most men. 

1. One of these is the moment of drowning. Those 
who have been recovered from the water will tell you 
how, when they sank for the third time, and it seemed 
as if all hope must be abandoned, the history of their 
past life stood out before them in its minutest detail, as 
the landscape stands out in the night under the flash of 
the lightning. 

2. Mental disease. It is recorded as a simple, illit- 
erate girl that, under the touch of some mental disease, 
she was able to speak in an unknown tongue. A learned 
man who heard her recognised it as one of the languages 
in which the Old Testament was written, and it was dis- 
covered that in early life she had been in the service of 
a clergyman who was accustomed to read the Hebrew 
version aloud. Without doubt she had heard and re- 
tained those impressions involuntarily. 

3. Under the touch of any great emotion—such as 
fear, hope, love, eestasy—any sudden stroke of emotion 
will make memory yield up its contents. Therefore, 
Jesus said, in your highest moments, when you come to 
the altar, when you stand in the Presence of the Infinite 
and Eternal, when you take the shoes from your feet, 
remembering the place on which you stand is holy 
ground, then you will remember. In the silence, in the 
loneliness, the awestricken wonder of the spirit, when 
the curtains are being drawn, and God is looking down 
upon your heart, then we remember. That is its lustre, 
that is its uplifting strain of solemn music. When we 
stand in the death chamber and our beloved is passing 
from us, then we remember. Probably the place where 
we remember most clearly the way in which our brother 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 135 


has been grieved at us is at that solemn hour when 
earth meets earth and dust touches dust, and the form 
we loved, or thought we loved, or professed to love, is 
forever taken from our sight. Then we remember. 

For us the altar is specially the Cross. And I want 
to ask myself and each of my hearers why it is, when 
we come near to the Cross of Christ (for ‘‘we have 
an altar whereof they have no right to eat who serve 
this tabernacle’’), why there we remember? Is it not 
because the cross reveals, as nothing else on this earth 
reveals, the eternal life of God? Will you forgive me 
if I say—I know the metaphor is not the most complete 
—that in some aspects the cross seems to be God’s tuning- 
fork set to the music of eternity, suddenly placed amid 
the discords of earth, and it is only when we hear that 
pure note that we know how dissonant our lives are. 

In yonder village a boy grew up, adored by all the 
villagers, who thought his voice would surpass that of 
the world’s greatest singers, though probably they had 
never heard one of them. A musician, anxious to recruit 
his choir, journeys to the village and finds the boy the 
center of an admiring group. Certainly, the boy has a 
strong, sweet voice; but there are many defects in it, 
and the quick ear of the musician detects them. He 
asks the boy if he will come to be trained. The parents 
consent, and the boy enters the musician’s house, where 
probably he will spend some months. On the first night 
after his arrival the choir boys who have been trained 
for three or five years are there to sing, and the country 
lad is placed within full view of the musician’s eye. 
At first his face bears the look of rapt expectancy; he 
had never heard anything like that; then it flushes, the 
tears flow down his cheeks, and the boy sobs until the 
professor, who desires to befriend him, exclaims: ‘‘ Why 


136 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


is this? Is it for mother or home you ery?’’ ‘‘No,”’ 
says the boy, ‘‘I never heard singing like that. I thought 
I could sing; they all told me that I could sing; but 
if that is singing, I can never sing. Let me go home; 
it is useless for me to stay.’’ It is only when he has 
heard the infinite beauty of perfect singing that he 
knows his own limitations; and it is only when you and 
I stand in the light and glory of Calvary that we know 
what love can do—for ‘‘Herein God commendeth his 
love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ 
died for us.’’? And to me the most wonderful thing in 
the love of God is that it leaves no stone unturned to 
win back those who are stolid and sullen. I can under- 
stand God forgiving the penitent. Human love will 
easily forgive those who sue for pardon; but our diffi- 
culty is to win back those whom we have grieved and 
offended, and driven by our hardness to enclose them- 
selves in the ice of strong resistance. That is the diffi- 
culty, and that is where God’s love surpasses ours. He 
is not simply good to those who are good, but to the un- 
thankful and evil, who shut themselves up in their cells. 

At the Cross, also, we remember that we have not 
done all we might to win others. It is the failure of 
our lives that hurts them most. It is not that we have 
been cruel or violent towards those who were dear, as 
men may be under the influence of drink, but that we 
have failed them. We have been shut up in our own 
self-consciousness; we have not responded, not carried 
a beaming face, not uplifted in our home-life. Multi- 
tudes have grievances against us because we have not 
been all we might have been in strong, chivalrous love. 
It is this that we remember. 

We should not be surprised, after a vision of the 
Cross, or after kneeling at the Lord’s table, to find some 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 137 


Christian matron get up between the bread and wine 
and leave the church. And when the pastor calls to in- 
quire the reason, fearing she might be ill, she replies: 
“Ah, no; but I had a little motherless sewing-maid in 
my house! I am sure I did not understand the child, 
and was always chiding her; she thought me unkind 
and left me. She drifted away. I felt I had not done 
all I could for that motherless girl. I went to seek her, 
I brought her back to my home and to church, and she 
is again sheltered under my eare.’’ 

I recall a story I heard recently of one converted by 
the grace of God after a wild life. They urged him 
to join the church and take the Lord’s Supper. ‘‘No, 
never,’’ he said; ‘‘at least not yet.’’ He left his home 
and sought through the slums of three great cities for 
the girl once pure and undefiled, upon whom he had laid 
his tainting touch, and who had drifted to the furthest 
lengths. He found her in a top attic, burning with a 
consumptive fever, on a straw pallet, with no one but 
the woman of the house to look in on her now and again 
and moisten her lips. He hastened away and procured 
what was necessary for her wants. Then, as a pure 
brother to a pure sister, he nursed her for three weeks 
until she died. But in that time he had won her back 
to Christ, and she blessed and forgave him with her 
dying breath. Then he came and took the Lord’s Sup- 
per. He had put it right with her and had been for- 
given, and her forgiveness opened the door for the flood- 
tide of Christ’s. Some of you will never get right with 
God till you have found the man, woman, or child who, 
if death intervened, would go to complain to God about 
you, not only because of what you did, but because 
of what you did not do. ‘‘I was hungered, and ye gave 
me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink ; 


138 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye 
clothed me not; sick and in prison, and ye visited me 
not. Then shall they answer him, saying, Lord, when 
saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or 
naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto 
thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say 
unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least 
of these men, women, and children, whom I put within 
your reach, ye did it not to me.”’ 

‘“Remember.’’? Through this church to-day may 
there pass a great quickening of memory, so that be- 
tween this morning and to-night or early to-morrow 
morning you will all put things right that are wrong; 
and not in this church only, for the time is coming 
when judgment must begin in the house of God, and 
He is demanding that His Church should arise and shine, 
because she cannot minister to the great needs of vast 
populations until every man and woman is utilizing their 
opportunities for the best interests of others; not till 
then will the revival for which we are longing visit us. 

2. Be Reconciled. We are not dealing with your 
forgiveness of people who kneel at your feet and ask 
your pardon; we are dealing with the eases of people 
from whom you have to extract pardon, which is a very 
different thing. I think it is in the Book of Proverbs 
that the Wisdom of the past says, ‘‘An offended brother 
is harder to win than a defensed city with bars.’’ 

Do you remember that poem, the dream of St. Geron- 
tius, which gives us that great hymn which was Mr. 
Gladstone’s favorite, ‘‘Praise to the Holiest in the 
Height?’’ Do you remember the time when the soul of 
St. Gerontius, having left its earthly body, is passing up- 
ward in immortal vesture, attended by an angel? There 
are some wonderful lines where the angel tries to ex- 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 139 


plain to the soul how he had disentangled it from the 
earthly coil. I am perfectly sure there are many people 
around whom a sort of coil is twisted which has been 
manufactured out of our fancied or literal ill-treatment 
of them. They have magnified, distorted, exaggerated ; 
they have shut themselves up against Christianity. ‘‘I 
have had one taste of it,’’ they say, ‘‘and am sick of it. 
Never again.’’ And they have proceeded to justify their 
position by saying, ‘‘There is no Christ, no religion, no 
God.’’ Many a soul has drifted into atheism, or at least 
agnosticism, in consequence. You have to disentwine all 
that. First there must be the honest purpose; then 
there must be confession and absolute reparation. Hil- 
debrand kept the emperor waiting at his gate for three 
days and nights, clad in the thinnest vesture in the icy 
wind, before he deigned to pardon him, and the out- 
raged soul will often keep us waiting. Only the love of 
God can sustain us in our quest. 

One of the most successful missions of my life orig- 
inated thus. On the first night of the mission my word 
was used of God until the soul of a certain man re- 
sponded, like King Richard, from this prison cell to 
his minstrel, Blondin. This man had been entrusted 
with a very wealthy ward, to whom he gave five per cent 
on her capital, which had been invested at seven and a 
half per cent. He had considered himself perfectly 
justified in appropriating the extra two and a half per 
cent, and had done this for many years. That hour he 
awoke to see that he had been unfaithful to his trust. 
He went home, knelt before God, and vowed that he 
would right the wrong. He wrote out a check for the 
whole amount he had purloined through the past, and 
with interest added; posted the note that night, so that 
he might not withdraw from his purpose, and in the 


140 EXPOSITORY PREACHING 


morning, when he awoke, the light of the Eternal was 
shining in his heart and face. That man’s conversion 
brought about a revival which is lingering to-day in its 
wonderful effect. 

Surely the brother who has the greatest grievance, 
though he never reproaches us, is Christ Himself. He 
does not complain; He does not break the silence; He 
carries our offense deep buried in His heart. It is diffi- 
cult to understand how heaven ean be a perfectly happy; 
place. To some of us, at least, the first entrance to 
it will be one of almost infinite heart-breaking regret, 
and we shall want to stand in the rear of the mighty 
multitude, so as to avoid the sight of His face, marred 
by the addition of our ingratitude. Have you not 
grieved Him? And will you not go to your great 
Brother, as the brothers went to Joseph, after Jacob’s 
death (thirty years after the time when they sold him 
into Egypt), and said, ‘‘Wilt thou forgive us for the 
way we treated thee?’’ He wept because they remem- 
bered it; and in the magnificent language of ancient 
Scripture we are told, ‘‘He nourished them, and spake 
to their heart.’? ‘Will you not also see that the failures 
and sins you have committed are forgiven by God and 
man? Then Jesus Christ shall nourish you also and 
speak to your hearts. 

3. Return, **Come again.’? ‘‘Then come.’’ Is 
it not tender? This Sermon on the Mount is full of the 
gospel. ‘‘Then come.’? ‘‘But, Lord, I called my 
brother ‘fool!’ May my lips speak to thee.’? ‘‘Then 
come.’’ ‘‘T called him ‘Raca,’ ‘Atheist.’ May I come??? 
“Then come.’’ But, Lord, the passion is hot upon me!’’ 
““Don’t delay, but come. Then come.’’ It seems as if 
all heaven is ringing with that message. Don’t stay 
out in the cold. Don’t count yourself to have sinned be- 


RICHES OF THE BIBLE 141 


yond hope. Don’t give up! Think of those intimate 
relations with God you once cherished. Come, back- 
slider! Cold-hearted Christian, come. Let the forgive- 
ness of men be the sacrament of the forgiveness of God. 
Again it says, ‘‘Come.’’ Come and thake that gift 
which thirty years ago you placed on the altar—that 
gift which then you meant to make so profusely to Him 
—the gift of yourself. Forget the long years that have 
passed, and which gape like a gulf between that moment 
and this. Take up your life where you dropped it be- 
fore you went astray, before you dropped the thread of 
obedience, became immersed in business and adopted 
schemes not of God. Come back to where you were in 
those happy, holy days, when you lived in the presence 
of God. You were a better man then, a nobler woman 
than you have been of late. This you know perfectly 
well. You know you have gone back; you have become 
materialistic, hard-fisted, worldly. Then come back. 
Take up the high purpose of your life where you 
dropped it, and then codperate with your Redeemer by 
going out to redeem the world by love. 


< 
bs 
4 
) * : 
Jy~ : 
, " 
at . 
: K ; 
ee: 
- 
5 / 
ar : 
in | 
a 
ft 
" 
, 
& 
ip 
> ' 


— 


Pe 


ve 


* 
ee Se 
A 

é 


— 
re 


a eee Te aT 


ie at 


int 


= DATE DUE 
| ee Fool s0o 
Due? B g/d | 


| GAYLORD 


-| BV 4211 .M49 1912 
Meyer, F. B. 1847-1929 


Expository preaching plans 
and methods 


